WHo would think that a God lay lurking under a gray cloak,
Silly Shepherds gray cloak, and armed with a paltery sheephooke?
And yet no pety God, no God that gads by the mountains,
But the triumphantst God that bears any sway in Olympus:
Which many times has made man-murdring Mars to be cursing
His blood-sucking blade; and prince of watery empire
Earth-shaking Neptune, his threeforckt mace to be leaving,
And Jove omnipotent, as a poor and humble obeissant,
His three-flak't lightnings and thunderbolts to abandon.
And I believe, thus shaped, and thus with a mantle adorned
Lady Venus will scarce find out her wily Cupido,
Mine own mother, I hope, will skarce take me for her own son.
She makes me run away, and thus compells me to hide me,
For that still she byds, and still commands as a mother
Boy, and bow, and all: and still persuades as a woeman
Proud-harted woeman, that I bend my bow to the Court still,
And, as a Lord, with Lords and Ladies still be a dwelling:
As for Parckes and woods, such wooden stuff she refers
Unto the wanton wagges that wait on Lordly Cupido.
But let a woman talk, let boys be afraid of a woeman,
Lord of love's no boy, although that he seem to be boylike:
I Will bestow myself, as best shall seem to my owneself;
Doves be my mothers byrds, but desteny gave to Cupido
All-inflaming lamp and golden bow for a weapon.
Oftentimes do I hide myself, and fly fro my mother
(Not that I owe any suite as a servile slave to my mother,
But that I can not abide to be daily desir'de by my mother
For to renounce Hoblobs, and aim at a King or a Kaisar)
Oftentimes do I fly, and shroude my self in a thicket,
Leaving Crystal throanes for bowres and rustical harbors:
But no sooner I can convey myself from Olympus,
But she begins to demand and ask for lovely Cupido,
Where Is that wandering boy, that vile boy, lovely Cupido?
Seek and search my boy, my wagg, my lovely Cupido:
Look for a curldpate boy, his wings will quickly bewray him,
Look for a boy with a lamp and bow and quiver about him:
Whosoever finds my boy, my joy, my lovely Cupido,
And brings back my boy, shall have for a friendly remembrance,
Either a sweet sweet kiss, or somewhat more than a sweet kiss:
As though Lovely Cupid to a fryend that love's to be sylent,
Neither could nor would allow for a fryendly remembrance
Either a sweet sweet kiss, or somewhat more than a sweet kiss.
And, I believe, my kiss, (if love intend to be lovely)
Will be a sweeter kiss to a less then Queen Cytheraeaes.
Thus, many times in vain she seeks for lovely Cupido,
Loving girls are loath to bewray their lovely Cupido.
Yet, to be more secure, my curledlocks I do curtall,
My wings are laid down, my bow and quiver abandond,
Weapons all set aside; and yet love stands not unarmed.
For this staff, that seems but a toy, that I bear for a fashyon,
Is Loves lamp indeed, and bears but a show of a sheephooke,
Lou'es transformed lamp, with most invincible ardor,
Most invisible heat, and secret ardor abounding,
Though in form but rude, and goldhead seems to be wanting,
Whosoever feele's his force shall find it not to be poyntles,
Where it lights it works, and leaves impression endless:
This blunt dart shall give that cureles wound to the hartroote
Of loueles damsel, most loueles damsel amongst all
Those loueles damsels that wait on mighty Diana.
Phillis (that is her name) disdainefulst wench of a thousand
Shall in her hardest heart conceive as mighty a loues-wound,
As was that, that I made in tender breast of Amyntas.
Now many pleasant springs are past, since young Lad Amyntas
And young gyrle Phillis, themselves were wont to be sporting,
Now to be gathering flowr's, and filberds now to be cracking,
Now to be laying gyns for byrds, and now to be anglyng:
And yet, that this blow may make more forcible entrance
And more speedily pierce, i will stay and look for a fit time:
When pyty moves her mind, and makes her breast to be tender,
Then will I stryke and wound; and that this lovely beginning
May as luckyly end, i will talk and walk as a heardsman,
And so insinuate my self to the company rural
Of these jolly Shepherds which hither now be repayring,
All in a brave meryment dame Flora'es wakes to be keeping,
With their garlands green, and boughs of Myrtle adorned.
Here, even here will I make that most incurable harts-wound
Which no mortal eye shall see: then lovely Cupido
Lovely Cupidoe's fame in these woods shall be resounding,
These woods then shall feel a triumphant power to be present,
And perceive that I woork by my self, and not by my servants:
Noble thoughts will I send, and high conceits will I breath forth
Into the lowli'est minds, and frame their voice to a sweeter
And more sugared tune: for wheresoever I harbor,
Wheresoever I keep, i will still be the lovely Cupido,
As Well in Hoblobs heart, as in heart of a King or a Kaisar,
And as I list, I do make an unequal mind to be aequall:
And this is only my joy, and herein most do I glory,
That by the quyckning heat, by the fire of lovely Cupido
Oaten pipe contends with learned Lute of a Lording.
Which if my Mother (who scorn's that I am thus a wandering
Here and there by the woods) can not conceive to be wondrous,
Then she is blind her self, and not sweet lovely Cupido,
Whom some blind fools have blind boy unworthily called.
WHat? Will Phillis then confume her youth as an anckresse,
Scorning dainty Venus? will Phillis still be a Modder,
And not care to be called by the deare-sweete name of a Mother?
Will not Phillis joy to behold her self in a Phillis,
And her trueloues face in a young boys face to be shining?
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.
Seek the delltes of love, who list, (if love be delightful)
This life is my love, my bow and shafts be my treasure,
Hunting is my joy; with stubburne beasts to be striving,
Until I fell them down, and fearful beasts to be chasing.
And, till woods want beasts, and quiver feathered arrows,
Phillis shall not want any sweet sports or pretty pastimes.

Fine sweet sports indeed for a girl, and wise pretty pastimes,
Still to be killing beasts, and still by the woods to be ranging.
This life, toylesome life, for a while does seem to be pleasant,
Only because as yet thou have not tri'de any other.
So those simple souls that lived when Jove was an infant,
Took for pleasant drink, and meat well worthy a man's mouth,
Streams of purling brooks, and nutbrowne kernel of accorne:
But now, streams of brooks, and nutbrowne kernel of accorne
Are contemn'de as drink and meat but fit for a beasts mouth,
Since that corn and grapes were once known how to be used.
If thou could, nay would (and who would not, but a fonkin?)
Only but one time taste, and but taste only the thousandst
Part of those pleasures and joys, which still be abounding
In true-louers soul, when he feels himself to be loved,
Thou would quickly repent, and quickly bewray thy repentance,
And say thus with tears; Each loueles life is a luckles
And accursed life: my best days vainly be ended,
Flowring time is gone, and age creepes hastily onwarde.
How-many fruyteles nights, poor fool, did I waste as a Wyddowe?
How-many ioyles days as a Nun did I draw to the eunyng?
Days, to be passed away with winged boys pretty pastymes,
Nights to be spent with toys and joys of lovely Cupido,
Pastimes, toys, and joys, which more ioy'de breed me the more joy.
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.

When that I seem to repent, or seem to bewray my repentance,
Or say so with tears; let floods run back to the fountains,
Let Woolues fly fro the Lamb, and trembling Hare to the Greyhounde,
Let Bears range by the sea, and Dolphin swymme by the deserte.

See what it is to be young; gyrles always use to be peevish:
So was I in times past, (Good time il past) when I wanted
Age and experience, and so did I trudg to the forest.
Golden locks, cherylips, red-white face, yuory fingers,
Proud as a praysd Peacock, and so did I trudg to the forest.
Netts were then my delight, and bended bow my rejoicing,
Poynted darts my joy, and slaughtred beasts my triumphing.
If that I saw myself (myself unluckily selfwilde)
But by a glaunce, one glaunce of a Lovers eye to be noted,
Down did I hang my head, and bow mine eyes to my bosom,
Sore displea'sd forsooth, and, God wot, greatly abashed
When my pleasing face to a loves look brought any pleasure,
As though to were some fault, or shame, or mock to my ownself,
For to be looked upon, to be loved, and sought for of others.
But what can not time effect? What can not a lovers
Continual wooing, long seruyng, daily deseruyng
Bring by degrees at length, at length, to a fortunat endyng?
Phillis, I must confess, at last I began to be yielding
Unto a Loves conquest: and these arms made me be yielding,
Long patience, kyndenes, sighs, tears, importunat askings.
Then did a night, one night, one short night teach me a lesson,
Which many thousand days would never let me be learning:
Then did I quyckly repent, and quickly bewray my repentance,
And say thus with tears: Now farewell mighty Diana,
Bows and shafts I renownce, and brutish life I abandon.
So, I do hope, one day, thy gentle-mynded Amyntas
Shall with abundant tears make thy hard heart to be tender;
And why should not I hope, when I see just matter of hoping?
Is not Amyntas fair? is he not loved of many Lasses?
Does not he love Phillis? yet Phillis love's not Amyntas:
And yet, alas, neither thy hate, nor love of an other
Can withdraw his love: And, if thou look to thy gentry,
As sweet Cydippe is known to be truly thy mother,
Cydippe daughter to the sacred God that abides
In this silver brook; so, father of haples Amyntas
Was good Syluanus, Syluanus son to the great Pan,
Pan the shepherds great God, that rul's and raign's by the forest.
And, if Phillis chance to behold her face in a fountain,
Phillis will not seem more fair then fair Amaryllis:
And Amaryllis fair lou's gentleminded Amyntas;
And Amaryllis love is still contemned of Amyntas,
For that, Phillis love still rests in soul of Amyntas,
Although Phillis alas hates her truelouer Amyntas.
Now suppose for a while (God grant it prove but a suppose)
That Phillis sour looks drive of this love of Amyntas,
And Amaryllis love draw on this love of Amyntas,
And that Amyntas kiss, kiss and embrace Amaryllis,
And laugh at Phillis: what then will Phillis imagine?

Well: let Amyntas deal as seems best to Amyntas,
And love somewhere else; his love has made me to hate him.

Love breed hate? Sweet Sire of a most unnatural offspring
And vile degenerate bastard: but when will a white swan
Hatch any coleblack crow? or meek sheep foster a Tiger?

Daphne leave this talk, or look noe more for an answer:
His love breeds my hate, when I hate to aford what he loves:
He Is not a fryend, but a foe, that my virgynyty seeks:

Why then, stifneckt bull is a foe, not a fryend to a heyfer,
And to a Turtledoue, not a fryend, but a foe is a Turtle.
Why then sweet springetyme breeds hate and works many mischifs,
Sweetesmyling spring-tyme, that wills each thing to be loving,
World and all in world; o see how sweetly the Pigeon
There with a murmur sweet his copsemate sweet is a wooing.
Mark that Nightingale, which hops fro the bry'r to the hawthorne,
Harck, how bravely she sings, I do love, and love to be lovely,
Nay even sell serpents with cursed poison abounding,
Strong and stoordy Lions, and Tigers fierce be a loving:
And yet Phillis alas Phillis more fierce than a Tiger,
Worse than a wild Lioness, and more vnkyn'de than a serpent,
Phillis lives still alone, and can not abide to be lovely.
But strong stoordy Lions, fierce Tigers, slippery serpents
Have sense and feeling, therefore noe wonder at all, if
Serpents, stoordy Lions, and Tigers fierce be a loving:
O then look to the trees, and learn of them to be lovely,
Look to the senceles trees, and mark how dearly the vinetree
Lou's her loving elm, and clipps him fast with a thousand
Thousand embracements, and beech-tree cleaues to the beech-tree,
And wil'de ash to the ash, and pine tree leane's to the pine tree.
Yea that broadebrauncht oak which stands so stoordyly pitched,
And seems rude and rough, not moved with a storm or a tempest,
Yields to a kind of love; and, if thou were but a little
Tutcht with love, thou mights perceive his lovely bewaylings,
And secreate groanyngs: and will thou then be for all this
Worse then a senceles tree, and never learn to be lovely?
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.

Well: when I see trees weep, and hear their lovely bewaylings
And secreate groanyngs, i will frame myself to be loving.

It Is but a folly I see, to be wasting wyn'de on a proud gyrle,
That knows naught her self, and will not learn of another.
Thou that make but a jest of love, hereafter, I doubt not,
Wilt full sore lament, and fyn'de all true that I tell thee:
When thou shall for shamesly back fro the watery fountayns,
Back fro the springs where now thou see thy face to be shynyng,
For very shame and grief to behold thy beauty decayed
And face all wrynckled: that is bad, but that is but a common
Myschief, look in time that a worse plague light not upon thee.
I Will say naught; but I woe what news were truly reported
By sage Elpinus last day, to the lovely Lycoris:
And he reported before Corydon and Alphesiboeus
Twooe greatest masters of loves laws, and he reported
In fair Auroraes great Cave, whose bewtiful entrance
Has these words engran'd by the hand of lovely Cupido,
(This place is sacred, for lovers only appointed)
There Elpinus said, and said that he heard it of old time
Of that great pastor, (great man, whose sweetly resoundyng
Pipe did pass fro the fyelds and sang of martial horrors,)
How that in hels deep pit, foul fyends have framed a dungeon,
All as black as pytch, and all as darck as an oven,
Hard by the ioyles bancks where smokes and foggs be arising
From wayling Acheron: and there these no-pyty-taking
Dames and scornful gyrles are all condemned to be plagued,
All tormented there in dungeons ougly for ever.
There fit place, fair walks for Phillis shall be prepared:
There shall fogs, and mystes, and smokes, and palpable horror
Wring out tears from her eyes, and force her still to be wayling,
Whom no lovers smart, no grief could make to be weeping.

Good sweet Daphne peace, and tell this again to Lycoris,
Terrify babes with bugs: its time to be gone to the huntyng
Solemn great hunting which this same day is appointed
In that pleasant parck, that sweetest parck of a thousand
Yuychurches parck, pretty Yuychurch, that on hill topp
Flowring hill topp sitts, and looks down to the valleys,
There, o there, I do hear (for so Philoueuia told me)
There that Nymph, brave Nymph, that peareles Pembrokiana
Yuychurches Nymph does mean herself to be present,
And with her own person give grace and life to the pastime.
I Will to my wonted well with Crystal water abounding,
There will I leave this dust and sweat that I gate by my toyling
Yesterday, when I made that lightfoote Do to be tumbling.

And i will hoame, for an hour or two: and then to the huntyng,
Then to the parck we will go: in mean time marck what I told thee
More than parcks and wells, and, if symplicity blind thee,
Know thy not knowing; so, may thou know of an other.

Hollow caves, ragd rocks, waste hills, green watery fountaynes
For pyty, sweetly reply, and aunswers make to my mournyng:
Strong oak, tall pinetree, green laurel, bewtiful Yuy
For pity, sweetly reply, and aunswers make to my mourning,
Shake their leaves for grief, and bend their bows to my groaning*
Only that one in whom my joys are only reposed
Yields no lovely reply, no answer mak's to my mourning,
Phillis fair and fierce; Phillis more fierce to Amyntas
Than strong oak, tall pine, green laurel, bewtiful yuy,
Hollow caves, ragd rocks, waste hills, green watery fountains.
When blackmantled night mak's every thing to be silent,
Every thing at rest, then wandreth restles Amyntas:
Silver moon, bright stars, you knew these heavy bewaylings,
And for grief your course and due revolution altered:
But she alas greeues not, tak's no compassion on me,
Whose hart-chearing face, and sweet illuminat eisight
Silver moon, bright stars, and all your bravery stained,
And made you for shame, your due revolution alter.
Harmeles sheep and lambs eat grass: and greedy devouring
Woolues eat harmeles sheep and lambs: but surly Cupido
Surly Cupido feeds himself on streams of abounding
Tears, and's never filled, and yet stands ever a feeding.

No, no, Thyrsis, alas: Love lacks no tears of Amyntas,
Surly Cupido's full, stuftfull with tears of Amyntas,
And thyrsts now for blood, seeks blood of woeful Amyntas,
And what he seeks, he shall have; I Will quench their thirst by my hartblood,
Blind boy's, proud gyrles thirst: and glut their eyes with abundant
Streams of purpled gore of too too wretched Amyntas.

O bloody word, foul word, o God forbid that Amyntas
Should or think, or woork any outrage unto Amyntas.
Cast of these fancies, leave these toys, pluck up a mans-hart:
If bony Phillis scorn, and make but a mock of Amyntas,
Yet shall Amyntas find as brave gyrls as bony Phillis.

Find brave gyrls? o grief: if Amyntas find not Amyntas,
How can he find others? o how shall he find bony Lasses,
If that he loose himself? o how shall I seek any other,
Since my settled soul and heart are like to an aged
And well grounded tree, which now is come to the full groath,
And will rather break, than bend, or yield to be turned.
Hate augments my love; her frowns give fire to my fancy,
As gentle spaniel, whom beating makes to be loving.

Fear in a fearful man frets more than plagues that he fears:
Hope, and have, in time any man may gain any woeman.
Long time mighty Lions at length has brought to the bridle,
And wyldest Tigers at length are tam'de in a long time.

Yea, but alas long tyme's too long for wretched Amyntas:
Death must speedely speed, noe wretch can abide any long time.

Stay but a while, noe doubt these things will mend in a short time:
Thou know that women by kind are mutable ever,
Soon hoate, and soon cold, like and mislike in a moment,
Change as a weathereock, and all as light as a feather.
But let Thyrsis now know more at large of Amyntas
His distressed state; for though thou touldst me a great while
Since, that Love gave first occasion unto thy torments,
And that proud Phillis gave fresh increase to thy sorrows,
Yet whence this love sprang, who was that Phillis I knew not.
And since soemany years w'haue lived so friendly together,
And applied ourselu's to the lores of learned Apollo,
There Is cause why Thyrsis should know those things of Amyntas,
Which his Amyntas knows, and will show only to Thyrsis.

Know o Thyrsis then, know this mine infinite anguish,
Which these hills well know, which these sweet watery wells know,
And yet no man knows: my fatal hour is aproaching,
My death draws so near, that now its time to provide some
Time to provide some friend, which may and will be reporter
Of death and deaths cause, which will for a friendly remembrance
Death and cause of death ingraue in barck of a beech tree,
Hard by the damned place, where corpse of murdered Amyntas
Bloodles corpse shall lie, that when that brave bony damsel
That pytiles Phillis shall chance that way to be passing,
Her proud foot, and yet sweet foot may joy to be treading
Treading and trampling these baleful boanes of Amyntas.
And that serpents tongue, thus take a delight to be vaunting,
This death is my triumph, these bruysed boanes my trophaeum;
That such strange trauelers as this way chance to be wandering,
And foreign Pastors that pass by the grave of Amyntas,
May know this conquest, and make it known to the country.
And perchance (o noe, that is too too good for Amyntas)
Yet perchance one day may once come, when bony Phillis
When bony sweet Phillis, now moved with a lovely repentance,
Lovely remorse, may take some small compassion on me,
And, when it is too-late, lament this loss of Amyntas,
Sheading some sweet tears for death of murdered Amyntas,
His death; whom when he lyu'd, herself did cause to be dying;
Saying, O that he were, that he were not a murdered Amyntas,
O that he lived now, and were my lover Amyntas.
But now harck and marck of cares and woe the beginning.

Say on then, for I harck and marck perchance to a better
End, than thou thyself can yet conceive or imagine.

When that I was but a wagg, young wagg, so young, that I could scarce
Reach mine outstretcht arm to the bending bows of a plumtree;
It Was my luck (ill luck) t'acquaint myself with a brave gyrle,
Brauest gyrle that spreades her golden locks to the tender
Wind, fair Phillis I mean, but alas what meant I to mean her?
Phillis a flame to the soul, and Phillis a flower to the forest,
Phillis a Townish gyrls disgrace, and grace to the country,
Phillis a fame to the Parck, and Phillis a shame to the Palace,
Phillis that first made Cydippe for to be mother,
Phillis that first made that rich Montanus a father:
With that Phillis I was (most woeful was, when I am not)
With that Phillis I lyu'd (o luckles lyu'd, when I live not)
Phillis a turtle dove, and faithful turtle Amyntas:
Both our bowres were nigh, which made us both to be neighbors,
Both our mynds more nigh, which causd us both to be fryendly:
Both our ages like, which first was cause of a lyking,
Both our lives more like, which still gave fire to a fancy.
If that Amyntas were disposed for to be fishing,
Phillis a fishing went: if Amyntas meant to be fowling,
Phillis a fowling went: if Phillis longd for a filberd,
Yonker Amyntas clymbde: if Phillis would be a hunting,
Who but Amyntas then, but greene-coate Huntsman Amyntas?
Eithers sport was like, and eythers portion aequall.
But when Amyntas thus bestowed himself on his angling,
Other bayts and hooks took secreate hold of Amyntas:
Whilst that Amyntas thus laid trapps and snares for a Redbrest,
White-brest laid new snares and hidden trapps for Amyntas:
Whilst that Amyntas I say ran pricking after a Pricket,
Far more poysned darts have pricked hart-roote of Amyntas.
For, by degrees there grew (as an herb that grows of her own self)
In my breast there grew, but I wist not whence, a desiring
Still to be with Phillis, poor fool, and still to be gazing
On those burning lamps, whence still still I sucked a sweetness,
Strange kind of sweetness which ended still with a sowrenes.
Oftentimes did I sigh, yet knew no cause of a sighing,
And was a lover before that I knew what it was to be loving:
But now Thyrsis, I know, and mark, I Will tell thee the manner.

Say on Amyntas then; this matter's worthy the marking.

Once on a day (o day, o dismallst day of a thousand)
Once on a summers day (o summer worse than a winter)
Under a beech (o beech of Amyntas woe the beginning)
Phillis sat her down, and down sat Cassiopoea,
And I between them both: when a Be that gathered honny
Here and there fro the flowers, conueys herself in a moment
Unto the red-rose cheek of smiling Cassiopoea,
And there bytes and bytes fair cheek of Cassiopoea,
Thinking sure, (as I think) her red-rose cheeks to be roses.
Be bytes, biting smarts, and smarting Cassiopoea
Wringeth her hands and cries: But, peace, quoth my bony Phillis,
Cassiopoea, be still, cry not sweet Cassiopoea:
I Will with a word or two soon cause thy pain to be ceasing,
I Will soon charm thy cheek; this secreate lately I learned
Of beldame Sagane, for an yuory comb that I gave her.
Then sh'applyes her lips (life-geeuing lips to a Lover,
And yet alas, yet alas life-taking lips from a Lover)
Unto the smarting cheek of whyning Cassiopoea,
And with a sweet sweet sound her spells she begins to be mumbling:
By and by (strange thing) her pain was past in a moment,
Whether charming words did woork so mighty a wonder,
Or that Phillis mouth (which rather may be believed)
Heales where it tutcheth by some great grace of Apollo.
Then then, whereas before I desired but to be seeing
Hart-inflaming eyes, I desired but to be hearing
Soul-inuading voice, sweet voice, and like to the purling
Streams of a silver brook that creepes with a lovely resounding
Murmur among small stones, or like to the dayntyly warbling
Noise of a gentle wind, that makes green leaves to be trembling,
Then then alas did I long and look and wish to be joining
This my mournful mouth to the mouth of my bony Phillis:
And in fine I deuisd (Love fynds out wyly devises)
How to obtain my desire: for I faind, that a wasp fro the bushes
Flew to my face in a rage, and poor lips all to be stinged;
And my doleful looks did look and crave to be charmed,
Though my tongue was afraid, and made no suit to the charmer,
Then simple Phillis, who took my tale for a Gospel,
Came of her own accord and joined her lips to my sore-lipp,
Sore-sick lip God knows: But alas, whilst Phillis a fained
Wound with sweet lips healed, her sweet lips gave me a true-wound,
Gave me a mortal wound that ran fro the lips to the liver,
Nay, immortal wound that pierst fro the mouth to the marrow.
No busy Be can suck more sweet and sugered honny
From sweet smelling flowrs, than was distild fro the roses
Of chery-lipt Phillis by the boiling breath of Amyntas;
Although bashful fear was somewhat a curb to my kisses,
And restraynd my joys: which made me the more to desire that
Poisned bitter-sweete, and feign yet again that I smarted,
That with Phillis lips my lips might freshly be charmed:
And so charmed I was, so sting'd, so deadly bewitched,
So sore inchaunted with spill-soule spells, that I must needs
Either break my heart, or break my love to my Phillis:
This breaking of love was a loues-breake; better it had been
Harts-breake or necks-breake to the sore hart-wounded Amyntas.
Once on a time when Nymphs and Pastors chaunc't to be sporting.
Standing all in a round, and each one whispred a secreat
Into an others ear, poor fool I began to be buzzing,
Phillis, I burn with love, o take compassion on me,
Help or I die Phillis: But Phillis straight with a lowering
Look and frowning face, and downe-cast eyes to the ground-ward,
Blushed for spite and shame, and gave not a word for an answer,
But couueyd her away, and flew fro the place in a fury.
From that time, no time would Phillis abide with Amyntas,
Lend no eyes to the tears, no ears to the playnts of Amyntas.
And now flaxen wheat his ripened stalk to the syckle
Has threetimes yielded, now cheareful spring, to the forest
Flowring bows has brought threetimes, and flowr's to the meddow,
And each thing but death long since was try'de by Amyntas
For to appease Phillis; my death now only remains
For to appease Phillis: which death should soon be procured,
So that I were once sure that I should by my deadly departure
Wring any tears from her eyes, or bring any joy to her hard heart,
Make her weep or laugh; and wheather should I be wishing?
Indeed Phillis tears and mind with mercy relenting
Were far better amends for death of murdered Amyntas,
And more friendly reward for luckles love of Amyntas,
But that I may not wish sweet Phillis mind to be grieved,
Nor Phillis fair face and eyes with tears to be blubbred.

And what man, madman, can think it possible, if that
Once she do hear these plaints, but that she will yield to be loving?

O good Thyrsis, I doubt, for I never gin to be speaking,
But she recoyls fro my words, as subtle snake fro the charmer.

Doubt not, I hope ere long, I Will cause her friendly to hear thee.

If thou get that I speak, then naught shall I get by my speaking.
Mopsus alas Mopsus foretold me my desteny long-since,
Soothsayer Mopsus that knows what mystery secreate
And hidden virtues in stones and herbs be abiding,
And by the flight and chirpe of byrds can tell many wonders.

What? that coosnyng squyre, that brokes and sells to the old wives
Pelting pills in a box, and so scrapes coin fro the country?
Hope yet Amyntas a while; for I know there is matter of hoping:
Only because Mopsus says there is no matter of hoping:
Hope, and meet me again in this same place: for I doubt not
But that in one half hour, I Will bring good news to Amyntas.

O Sweet age of gold, not sweet, for that by the pastures
Every brook and bush with mylk and honny abounded;
Nor that fertile ground untilled, vntutcht was afording
Fresh increase of fruit to the pooremans daily reioicing;
Nor that stingles snakes and harmeles slippery serpents
Slyded abroad by the fields and never breathed any poison;
Nor that clowdles skies seemed evermore to be smyling,
And aeternall Spring her springtime daily renewing;
Nor that noe pyne-trees as yet cut down fro the mountains
Ranged abroad by the rocks with salt waves all to be dashed:
But sweet age of gold, for that this name of a noething,
Idle name of naught, and daily deceauable Idol,
Which fools afterward, fine-fooles have made to be Honor,
Was nor named, nor known, nor brought new laws to the country
And poor countrymen, whose lives were only directed
By sweet Natures law, sweet Nature taught them a lesson,
If you will, you may: and strait-lac't rules did abandon.
Then by the greene-mantled pastures and watery fountains
Lou's young wanton waggs were always wont to be singing,
And had noe light lamps, and had no dangerus arrows.
Then brave jolly Shepherds and Nymphs sat sweetly together,
Tempring words with smyles; and every smyle with a kissing.
Nymphs were not so nyce, but that they yielded a full view
Of their bared breasts to the searching eyes of a lover.
Gyrles were not so coy, but that they would with a yonker
Friendly together wash, and bathe themselves in a river.
Honor first cou'red wel-spring of lovely Cupido,
Honor plucked water from scorched mouth of a Lover,
Honor taught fair eyes their glittring beams to be hyding,
And to the darckned soul their light unkindly denying.
Honor caught in netts those golden locks, that in old time
Were leaft loose to the wind dispersed along by the shoulders.
Honor marred our mirth, and louelayes turned to a silence,
And all our pastymes to a sollempne gravity changed.
Honor taught us first our mouths by art to be moving,
Looks by a looking glass, and gate with skill to be framing.
Honor called it a theft, which first was counted a free gift,
Honor made it a crime, which first was thought but a pastyme.
But thou supreme Lord of Love, thou only Monarcha,
Which rul'st mighty Monarchs, what do thou here in a corner,
For so great a Godhead o too too simple a corner?
Go to a proud Diadem, to a golden crown, to a scepter,
Break those great men's sleep; so shall thy fame be the greater:
Disgrace not thy-self with poor contemptible abiects,
But let Countrey-fooles live as they used to be living,
Let them live in love, whilst they have time to be loving.
Sun setts, and rises; goes down, and quickly reuiueth,
But man's light once out, aeternall darkness abides:
Then let Countrey-fooles live as they used to be living,
Let them live in love, whilst they have time to be loving.

THis same foolish Bee's but a Be, and Bee's but a small thing,
Yet this buzzing Be with a small mouth makes a great wound:
But what is less than Love, that lurketh in every corner,
Every small small nooke; and hides himself as a false-thiefe
Sometimes under an hair, and sometimes under an ey-lidd?
Yet this least least Love, when he smites, makes a great-wound,
Great great mortal wound, great cureles wound in a lover.
My flesh's naught but a mark all ouerprickt with her arrows,
My body naught but a wound, my bowels naught but a bleeding.
O Love, nay not Love, that love unlovely requiteth,
Love was as ill called Love, as this proud paltery Phillis
Was well called Phillis; (disdainful Phillis an ill is,
Ill to her owne-self first, and always ill to an other:)
As this Mountaine-byrd, Montanus daughter I should say,
'Was well called Phillis; since hill-borne Phillis a hill is:
Wild waste hills and woods and mountains serve for a harbor
Unto the rau'nous brood of woolues, bears, slippery serpents;
And hillish Phillis makes her fair breast, as a lodging
For foul pride, fell spite, and most implacable anger,
Worse beasts, far more worse, than woolues, bears, slippery serpents,
These with a pray are pleased, but she is not moved with a prayer.
If that I fetch her flowrs, fresh fragrant flowrs fro the forest,
My fresh fragrant flowrs, o spite, with a scorn she rejects,
For cause her fair cheeks with fairer flowrs be adorned.
If that I bring in a dish queene-apples unto my dear Queen,
Dish and queene-apples, o grief, with a mock she renounceth,
For cause her bosom with fruit far sweeter abounds.
If that I range by the woods and fyelds, and gather her honny,
Honn' and honnyes comb, o death, with a flout she refuses,
For cause her sweet mouth more sugered honny afordeth,
O then Phillis, alas, if my poor state can aford thee
Naught, but what thy self may have more lovely within thee,
Take myself for a guyft, i will give myself to my Phillis,
And why should Phillis disdain this gift that I give her?
My face is not foul, my looks are not to be loathed,
Yesterday I beheld myself when I walked by the seashore,
When seaes were calmed, when winds their rage had omytted
My sanguyne countenance with moisture lively replenisht,
Bristled breast, braund arms, and shoulders stoordyly squared
Are all signs of strength, and marks of manlynes only,
And if Phillis doubt, let Phillis try what is in me.
What should Phillis do with a curld-pate paltery cockney?
What with a smooth-fac't fool, with a carpet squyre, with a mylksop?
What with a pyping goose, with a whistling boy, with a mynstrell?
Gyrles indeed, and gyrles in show, effoeminat each way?
If perchance Phillis, (this chance may easyly happen)
Should encounter a Woolfe, or a fell she Bear, or a wild Boar,
Then farewell Mynyons, then bristled breasts be the best men.
O but alas, Phillis does know right well, that I want not
Man's face or man's heart; but gold and silver I have not,
Gold and silver I want, and this makes Phillis abhor me
Country learnes of town to be bought, and every Malkin
Looks for a purse of sylk, or a ring, no less than a Lady.
Here is an age of gold indeed, gold only triumphs,
Gold rul's and ore rul's from a mylkmayd unto an Empress.
Thou, thou wicked wight that first taughtst mayds to be Merchants,
'And made gyrles sell love; o let thy grave be a dungeon
For foul sprytes and snakes; o let thy damnable ashes
Feel both wind and rain, and bones ly all to be scattred
Here and there by the fyelds, bones bruysed of every footeman,
Troaden of every beast, accursed of all the beholders,
This wretch, noble love did abase, when he made it a hireling,
Made it a slave of gold, and made it a monsterus Hydra,
Monster of all monsters that land or water afordeth.
But what mean I to curse in vain? since every creature
Uses such weapons, as nature gave, to defend him?
Claws to the greedy Lions, and foaming tuske to the wild Boar,
Winged eggs to a heart, and pleasing face to a woeman,
Why doel not then deal according unto my nature?
Why do I not show force, since nature fram'es me to forcing?
I Will take by violence and rape those joys fro the proud gyrle
Which are due to my love, and Phillis stoutly denies.
When she begins herself in woonted well to be washing,
( Silen showed me the well, fair well, well worthy a fair less)
I Will rush out from a bush (where first i will lie as in ambush)
And take her napping, when I see occasion offered.
If that I once can roll my hand in her hair, let her hardly
Scratch and byte and whine, she will never escape fro my clutches,
Till, for a worthy reueng, her blood, my blade be a bathing.
Thyrsis, I know too well, that tender-mynded Amyntas
Has long loved this gyrle; and long may love her, I fear me.
And, as I told thee before, my helping hand did I always,
And will now much more for thy sake, lend to Amyntas.
But more soon may one make gentle a Bear or a Tiger,
And tame young wild Bulls, then learn young gyrls any reason,
Gyrls as fond as fair: whose rude symplycyty knows not,
How their eye-arrowes can pierce men's hearts in a moment.
Simple? I never yet could see so simple a woeman,
But was most expert, though but new crept fro the cradle,
In these cosn'ing tricks; and knew her face to be framyng,
Now with a smyle t'allure, and now to repel with a frownyng.

What skillful Mystres taught them this mystery, Thyrsis?

As though thou knewst not: that Mystres, which did in old time
Take young byrds fro the neast, and taught them for to be flying,
Bull to rebut with a horn, and skaled fish to be swymming,
And proudhart Peacock her painted train to be spreading.

What Is her name? Thy. Daphne. Dap. Fie, that is impossible. Thy. And why?
Is not dame Daphne trow you, to be deemed a Mystres
Sufficient t'enstruct ten thousand such bony lasses?
Though in truth they want noe skill, nor need any mystres,
Coy by kind, and proud by birth, and surly by nature.
Yet nource and mother contend this folly to further,
And so make in time young cockrell like to the old crow.

Well crow'd, gentle Cock: your song may chance be requyted:
But to the matter in hand, in truth, in truth I remember
One odd toy, Thyrsis, that makes me scarcely resolved,
Wheather Phillis feign and make but a show of a symplesse,
Or for a truth does mean as in outward show she pretends.
For, last day when I went to the green fyeld near to the cytty,
Phillis sat her down by the brook that runs by the green fyeld,
And so her countenance composd, as though she required
Counsel from that brook, and would, b'aduisd by the water,
How to be disposing, and how to be dayntyly ordring
Gold wyr'de hair on her head, and how with skill to be setting
Call on gold wyr'de hair, and how at last to be sticking
Flowers in a golden call, (her lap with flowrs was abounding)
And now takes up a Rose, and straight way takes up a Lylly:
And compares her cheeks to the Rose, and neck to the Lilly:
And then smyles for joy, seeing her louly triumphant
Cheeks more red than a Rose, and neck more white than a Lilly,
And disdaigns poor flowrs, and thus seems them to be scornyng,
Foolish paltery herbs, your pyde coat's naught to my countnance,
Your flowr's naught to my face, your bravery naught to my beauty,
Foolish paltery weeds, I do bear you often about me,
For your own disgrace, and not for a grace to my person,
That your fading flowrs may serve as a foil for a Phillis.
As she was all this while pruning herself by the water,
Princking and prancking, at last by chance she reflected
Her bright beams sydeward, and then saw well, that I saw her,
And was ashamed and blushed, and let fair Lilly be falling.
More that Daphne laughed, more Phillis still was a blushing,
More that Phillis blushed, more Daphne still was a laughing.
Buy yet, her hair half trest, half vntrest well she remembered,
And with a stealing eye to the waterglasse she repaired,
Spying whether I spyde; and see's herself to be undressed,
And yet lykes herself, seeing herself to be seemly
Though undressed, for I saw, yet would not seem to be seeing.

Peace, peace, good Daphne: this noe news, come to Amyntas.

Noe news? yes mary is it: for noe such matter in old time
Ever before was seen: When Daphne was but a Damsel
Dapne was not so: but world now waxes an old world,
Grows to be wayward now, and peevish like to an old man.

In those days, Townebyrds flewe not so fast to the country,
Nor country lasles did gad soemuch to the Cytty.
Now all is confounded, now fashyons all to be mingled
All to be mangled quyte, and every Madg is a Mystresse,
All Is turned vpsyde down. But may not, may not Amyntas,
And bonylasse Phillis yet talk once fryendly together
By Daphnes good means, and condescend to a parley?

Thyrsis, I am not sure; she is too too flatly denying.

And he, alas, poorefoole, is too too fondly desyring.

Then let him ask, entreat, importune, nay let him offer,
Yea offer violence, and take noe nay; for a woeman
Loves to be wooed of a man: thou know well, Thyrsis, a woeman
Runs, and yet so runs, as though she desyr'd to be orerun;
Says, noe, noe; yet so, as noe, noe, seems to be no noe;
Stryues, and yet so stryues as though she desyr'd to be vanquished.
Woeman's like to a shade, that flies, yet lies by the subject,
Like to a Be, that never strives, if sting be removed.
Thou se'st, Thyrsis, I talk as a plain wench unto a plain fryend.

Then good plain Daphne, its more then time to be plain now,
Help me to help our fryend poor helples fryendles Amyntas.

Well to be plain indeed, and end this matter in one word,
Phillis goes with me now by and by to the brave well,
Mighty Dianaes well, where largearm'd ash to the hunting
Nymphs giu's cooling shade; there Phillis shall be presented
Naked, starcknaked to the open view of Amyntas.

And what then? Daph. What then? then I thinck thusmuch to a wiseman
Will seem sufficient, and is toomuch for a fonkyn.

Now I do know thy mind: but I doubt least fearful Amyntas
Have not soemuch heart, as boldly to offer an onset.

Then let Amyntas stay, til an other seek to prevent him.

If that he were so serud, he deserud well so to be served.

But to thyself Thyrsis, wilt still be a boy or a batchler?
Were not far better to be husband or to be lover?

When that Thyrsis see's, that lou's not a plague to a lover,
Then shall Daphne see, that Thyrsis will be a lover.
But whilst hateful love with tears and fears is aboundyng,
Love who will for me: let another learn to be mournyng,
Thyrsis enough has mournd. Daph. But he has not ioyed enough yet.

Noe such joys I desire. Daph. But love can force the resister.

Noe force; i will keep back. Daph. And then love hasteneth onward.

I Will run. Daph. Love has wings. Thyrs. But short wings in the beginning.

Lovers feel not love, when love is first a beginning,
And when lou's once felt, its too late then to be runnyng.

But let my love rest, til again we chance to be meeting,
And let Amyntas now, for he most needs, first be relieved.
I Will seek him straight way* and bring, if I can, the retyring
Bear to the stake. Daph. I Will go, but this was far fro my meaning.

And, if I guess not amysse, lo yonder he coms, with a downecast
Look, and wandering pace, pace and look fit for Amyntas.

THyrsis gave good words: I Will see what is done for Amyntas;
And, if noe thing's done, then before that I seem to be undone,
Myself-murdring hand shall reaue this breath from Amyntas
Even in Phillis sight, that like as now she delyteth
Herself with this wound, loves wound, that cleaues to my heart root,
Wound of her own fair eyes: so may she be freshly triumphing
At this gaping wound with purpled gore that abounds
Wound of mine own hands, last wound of murdered Amyntas.
Leave of thy mourning: Thyrsis brings news to Amyntas.

What news? life, or death?

Life, love, bliss, joy to Amyntas,
If that Amyntas dare joy, bliss, love, life be a meeting.
But then he must be a man, not a mome, man fully resolved,
And not shrynck with a shower, as a feynt heart fool or a dastard.

And what great cowrrage, or what resolution is this?

If that thy Phillis should wander alone in a desert,
Desert walled about with rocks of monsterus hugenes,
Where sharpe-tusked Boares, and Tigers only resorted,
Would thou go to thy love by this so fearful a passage?

Yea, with a better will, than gyrles or boys to the stooleball.

If thy Phillis were with a theeuish company compast,
And saw naught but sweards and glistring armor about her,
Would thou go to thy love through this same company theeuish?

Yea, with a greater joy, than thirsting Heart to the fountain,

Yet for such exployt, more courage will be required.

I Will with a good will go through scorching flames of a furnace,
I Will through swelling streams increast with snow fro the mountains,
I Will through damnable hell, through loathsome Styx, to my Phillis,
If that can be a hell where heu'ns-ioy Phillis abides:
But say, show me all.

Harck then.

Tell speedyly, Thyrsis,

Thy love sits by a well, sits naked, alone, by a wellspring.
Phillis sitts by a well, and stays for gentle Amyntas,
Dare thou go to thy love, and will thou go to thy Phillis?

What? does my dear life, does my love sit by a wellspring?
What? does Phillis alone and naked stay for Amyntas?

None else but Daphne; and Daphne woorks for Amyntas,
Otherwise she alone, and naked stays for Amyntas,
Naked, but. Amynt. But what? this vile, But, murdreth Amyntas.

But Phillis knows not that Amyntas coms to the wellspring.

O wellspring of woe; this cold conclusion ends
All my hope conceau'd, and draws confusion onward;
O pytyles Thyrsis, was sowl-tormented Amyntas
Not yet plagued enough, but thou must heap on a new plague?

If thou mean to be ru'ld, thou may be a happy Amyntas.

How ru'ld? Thyr. Take that good, which opportunyty offreth.

God forbid, that I take such opportunyty offered
As t'attempt any thing displeasing unto my Phyills.
Yet did I never thing offensive unto my Phillis,
But that I loved her alas, yet alas she'enforc't me to love her,
That fault's hers, not mine, and beauty to blame, not Amyntas.

If thou could leave love, would thou leave of to be loving,
That by not loving, thou might please thy bony Phillis?

That, will I never say Thyrsis, nor never imagine,
Love will not consent, that I ever leave to be loving.

Thou will love her then, though in despyte of her own heart.

In despite? o noe, yet needs needs must I be loving.

What then? against her will. Amynt. Love wills so, if she be wilful.

Take then against her will that, which though in the beginning
Seems to be paineful a while, yet proves to be joyful in ending.

Thy long experience, o Thyrsis, maks the be talking,
Maks the be discoursing of love: but freshman Amyntas
Is possessed with love, and love must frame him an answer,
Love, that cloggs hartty'd and tongty'd lover Amyntas.

Why then, wilt not go? Amy. Yes. Thyr. Whether? Amy. Straight to my long home,
If noe help, but this, can bring any joy to Amyntas.

And is this nothing? would Daphne send for Amyntas,
Unless that Phillis seemed in some part to be willing?
And perchance Phillis does know herself, that Amyntas
Coms to the well indeed, but will not seem to be knowing.
Now if thou would have her full consent to be vttred,
And mind expressed, which every woman abhors,
Where is then thy desire, thy Phillis still to be pleasing?
And if Phillis will, that Amyntas joy, be Amyntas
Theft, not Phillis guyfte; what further seeks Amyntas?

O but alas who knows, that Phillis lyketh Amyntas?

And who knows for truth, that Phillis lyks not Amyntas?
And in an aequall doubt, that part is best to be taken,
Which to the parties mind is most conformable always;
Therefore come. Amy. Stay yet. Thyr. For what? time passes Amyntas.

O stay good Thyrsis, let us here consult for a while yet.

We Will consult by the way of things that seem to be needful.
Who so thincks many things* brings seaw to a fortunat ending.

O Heart-ennobling great love, where shall we be learning
These thy sacred laws? in what school must we be trained
Up to thy high conceits? or what so skilful a master
Possibly may unfold those supreme thoughts of a lover
Which his soul possess, whilst with thy wings in a moment
His mind mounts to the skies, and Christall-mantled Olympus?
Neither learned Athens, nor great fame-worthy Lycoeus.
Could loves force express, or loves perfection utter;
Neither Castalian Muses, nor great-God Apollo,
Nor rymewright singers could once aspyre to the thousandst
Part of those ioys, which in a lovers breast be abounding:
Their voice is not a voice of fire, they sing but a cold song,
Song and voice unfit for loves unspeakable ardor:
So then Loves own voice is a fittest voice for a loues-lay,
So then Love himself is best expressed by his owneself.
Love learnes rural wits, and base-borne breasts to be reading
Hart-burning secreats and woonders, dayntily written
In faire-flaming eyes, by the hand of lovely Cupido.
Love (o strange eloquence of Love) with a sigh, with an half-speach,
Interrupted speech, confused speech of a Lover,
Sooner a Tigers heart to a true compassion urges,
Better a secret smart and inward passion vttreth,
Than trope-turned tale, or ryming ditty, deryued
From foole-hardy Poets, or vaine-head Rhetoricasters.
Nay, those silent looks, and lovely regards of a Lover
More, than a thousand words, express those pangs of a Lover.
Let those famous Clercks with an endless toil be perusing
Socraticall writings; two fair eyes teach me my lesson:
And what I read in those, I do write in a barck of a beech-tree,
Beech-tree better book, than a thousand Dainty devises.

O Extreme disdaigne, o most unmerciful hard-hart,
O unthankful gyrle, o proud, and no-pity-taking
Women, cursed by kind, unkind kind, kyn to a Tiger,
Kyn to a poysned snake. O dame, nay rather a stepdame,
Bunglyng artificer Nature, which framed a woemans
External countnance, and outward parts to be cheerful,
But th'internall soul, and inward part to be spytefull.
O perchance, poor wretch, himself has murdered his ownself.
Every place do I seek and search out every corner,
Every bush, each cave, each banck, and every fountain
All these three hours long, by the well where lately I left him;
Yet noe sight can I get,, noe hearing, no not a footestepp
Wherein he troade of late, not a footestepp yet can I light on:
Sure he is killed, he is dead, himself has murdered his owneself.
I Will ask these Pastors, if they can show any tidings:
Good friends, have you seen, do ye know any news of Amyntas?
Some bad misfortune thy mind seems greatly to trouble:
What mean's this sweating and blowing? Fearst any mischif?

Mischif I fear indeed of Amyntas: show me Amyntas.

Nobody here saw him, since you two lately departed.
But what mischif fearst? Thyrs. That Amyntas murder Amyntas.

Murder Amyntas. Why? What works so desperate outrage?

Hate and Love. Chor. Two foes, the one the other deadly maligning*
Either sufficient, but both more mighty to murder:
Yet make this more plain. Thyrs. To be too too heartily loving,
And of a loved Less to be too too spytefuly hated.

But show all at large: this place is an ordinary through-fare:
Here some man may pass that may bring news of Amyntas,
And some wind himself may hither chance to be driving.

I Will show all indeed, for I should unjustly be dealing,
If that I blaze not abroad so shameful a fact to the whole world.
Wretched Amyntas knew, and knew by my only relating,
(Now I repent too late, that I was so fond a relator)
That Daphn' and Phillis would wash themselves in a wellspring:
Thither Amyntas went, but went very faintily thither,
All unwilling went, and backwards often he retired,
But that I still still drove him most unluckily forward.
Forward thus we went, and now came nere to Dianaes
Well, when alas we heard some doleful sound of a damsel,
That still cried, Alas; and saw how woefuly Daphne
Wringed her hands and wept, and seeing us to be coming,
Lifted her hands and voice; O run run quickly to Phillis,
Phillis alas is forced, o run run quickly to Phillis.
Lover Amyntas leapt, as a Rowe-buck pricked with an arrow,
At these words, and flew, and quickly I hastened after:
When we came, we saw fair Phillis bound to a willow,
Naked, stark-naked, bound head hand foot to a willow.
Her locks served for a cord, her gold-locks lapt in a thousand
Knotts, (noe true-loues knotts) were all ty'de fast to the willow:
Her brave Belt, which first that pure virginity guarded,
Bound both hands to to the trunck, and this foul villainy furthred:
And wynding willow, unwilling foe to be winding,
(And yet glad those legs with tender twiggs to be tutching)
Lends her slipps to be strings (each thing can further a mischif)
Strings those trembling legs (o rufull case) to be bynding.
And that beastly Satyr, which causd this monsterus outrage,
Stood with lusting rage, and raging fury before her,
And now, even just now had left of fully to bind her.
Phillis strove as much as Phillis might be a striving,
But for a naked gyrle with an armed foe to be striving,
Booteles it had been sure, if sharpened dart of Amyntas
Against that fleshly Satyr had not been tymely directed:
And I myself mean while my lapp with stones was a filling,
Which made lusting beast at last for fear to be flying.
When this flight gave leave to the loving eyes of Amyntas
For to behold his ioys, those lyms so dayntily trembling,
Trembling yet for fear; at last, at last he aproached
Unto the naked Nymph, and yet yet somewhat abashed:
Pardon, fair Phillis, quoth Amyntas, pardon I pray thee
This my too bold hand, which too too rashly presumes,
And to thy spotles lyms, lyms never tutcht yet, aprocheth,
Since so extreme need, so great a necessity forces
Forces Amyntas his hands fair Phillis her hands to be loosing*
Let not then this grace which fortune seems to aford them,
Seem any foul disgrace, or woork any woo to my Phillis.

Words well worthy to make any heart of flynt to be tender:
But what said Phillis? Thyrs. Not a word; but scornfuly blushing
Looks down, hyding all that bands would have to be hidden.
Gentle Amyntas coms, and golden locks he releaseth,
And as he vnknits knotts, thus golden-locks he beespeaketh,
Golden locks too good this senceles tree to be chayning,
What shall Lovers have, wherein they may be triumphing,
If loues-lace can abide to be stretched from a Nymph to a willow?
Paltery willow breaks with rude and boysterus handling,
Golden chain, which gave such grace to the paltery willow.
Then those hard-held hands in such odd manner he loosed,
As that he wished and feared hart-holding hands to be handling.
Lastly, to free her feet, himself he begins to be kneeling:
But when Phillis her hands from bands felt fully released,
His loving service with these proud words she refused,
Tutch me not, hence Pastor, mine own hands shall be my own legs
Freedom, tutch not a Nymph, that is consecrat unto Diana.

O graceles guerdon for service dutiful offered,
How can a Nymphs sweet breast harbor so fylthy a monster?

Gentle Amyntas straight with these words myldely retired,
And withdrew himself, not daring once to be lifting
Up those loue-sick eyes, himself unkindly denying
Joys to his own poor self, that he might ease his bony Phillis
Of that pain, small pain, of giving him the denial.
All this I heard and saw, whilst under an oak I did hide me,
All this I heard and saw, and once I began to be speaking
For very grief; yet I stayed: But marck yet, marck yet a wonder.
After long toyling her feet at last she released,
And scarce, scarce her feet from bands at last she released,
But those winged feet she bestyrs as fast as a young Hynde,
And to Amyntas gives noe not soemuch as a farewell:
Yet noe cause of flight, for Amyntas made not an offer.

What did he then poor man, when Phillis leaft him alone thus?

That can I noeway guess; for I was so mad to behold this
Scornful pride, that I ran to have brought her back to Amyntas,
Ran with might and main, in vain: for I feared her away still;
And when I came backward to the well, then I missed Amyntas.
Surely I fear he is dead, for I know that he fully resolved
Ere that he came to the well, himself to have speedily murdered.

That Is but an ordinary thing, for a lover death to be threatening,
But not an ordinary thing any man for love to be dying.

God grant it prove so in Amyntas. Chor. Doubt not. Thyrs. I fear it.
Yet to the Cave I Will go, where sage Elpinus abides:
There, if he live, its like, that Amyntas will be recounting
His forepassed pains to the rocks and watery fountains,
And with pleasant pipe, with voice so sweetly resounding
Make those rocks to resound, and wring out tears fro the fountains.

THy pity was pityles, Daphne, my dart to be plucking
From this doleful breast, my pains and pangs be redoubled
By differring death: what meanst thou thus to be turning,
Turning and wynding my troubled mind with a thousand
Fruytles discourses? thou thinckst perchance that Amyntas
Will dispatch himself: if he do, that is best for Amyntas.
Fie for shame: leave of these wicked words; for I know, that
Bashfulnes, not pride, made Phillis run from Amyntas.

Owretch; sole despair, that dryues all hope from Amyntas,
Is my sole comfort: fond hope first wounded Amyntas;
And fond hope, even now (o endless grief) is a budding
In my balefull breast, and only because that I live yet,
Which is of all others the deuouringst woorme to the wretched.

Live yet wretched a while, and keep thyself for a comfort;
Thinck thou see Phillis sit naked still by the welspring.

Had not fell fortune and lewd love plagued Amyntas
With pains sufficient, but wel-springs must be presented
Unto my eyes: and then to my scortched tongue be denied?

What? shall I then be the Crow, whose neuer-lucky resounding
Still brings baleful news? shall I first bring death to the aged
Father Montanus, whose gray-haires now be deprived
Of their chief comfort, fair Phillis, brave bony Phillis?
Old Father, chyldles Father, nay, now not a Father.

Some sad voice I do hear. Amynt. I do hear most dolefuly sounded
Phillis dearest name, which ears and heart is a wounding:
Whoe's that which name's her? Daph. Fair Fuluia, Fuluia dearest
Nymph to the high Huntresse of forests mighty Diana.

Know it he must* and shall, that he may with speed be procuring,
That those lovely relics of Phillis may be preserved;
If those lovely relics of Phillis yet be remaining,
Luckles Phillis. Amynt. Alas, what? yet more plagues for Amyntas?

O Daphne. Daph. What Is that? Say on, sweet Fuluia, what is that
Which thou spakst to thyself? What made fair Fuluia still still
After Phillis name our ears with sighs to be filling?

How can I choose but sigh, so ruful a sight to remember?

O that rueful sight makes my cold heart to be ruefull:
Is my Phillis alive? Daph. Good Fuluia kill not Amyntas
With so long suspense, let us know what may be the matter.

O God, why shall I tell such dead news? and yet I must tell.
Phillis came naked to my house, and told me the cause of
Her coming naked: new dressed, she desyr'd me of all loves
Loving gyrle, that I would accompany her to the pleasant
Yuychurches parck, and frame myself to the hunting.
Both content, both went, and met with a company gallant
Of flowring damsells waiting on Pembrokiana,
With bows and arrows on prince like Pembrokiana.
Much time with pastimes was past, sports drew to an ending,
And on a soddayne lo, where erst no woolf was abiding,
Rau'ning woolf runs forth with blood-red mouth fro the bushes,
And on a soddayne lo, whilst others bows be a bending,
Phillis sent her shaft from her own ear unto the woolus ear:
Soemuch wrought in her heart sweet sight of Pembrokiana,
Soemuch did she desire to be praysd of Pembrokiana.
Wounded woolf to the wood, stout Phillis runs to the wounded
Woolf with a dart in her hand. Amynt. O dreadful dart to Amyntas,
How can a pleasant end come from so deadly beginning?

And with an other dart to the self same place I repaired;
But Woolf and Phillis (grief spurd the one, glory the other)
Were quyte out of sight: yet I trac't them both to the thickest
And most desert place: there, (o dear dart to my Phillis)
There lay Phillis dart, and not far thence was a white lawne
Wherein Phillis locks enwrapped were by my own hands.
And as I turned about, seven other woolus by the naked
Bones of a mangled corse, gore blood were greedily licking:
And as chaunst (would God such chance had Phillis) I saw them,
Yet they saw not me, they were so greedily gorging,
And so bent to the pray: So thence for fear I retired:
And this is all that I know: and here is that lawne, that I spoke of.

And is this not enough? o lawne of my bony Phillis:
O bony Phillis blood, thou art dead my sweet bony Phillis.

O dooble deaths wound: dead Phillis murdreth Amyntas.

It Is but a swowne; for he breath's; and lo, he is quickly reuyued.

Grief, leave of lingering: make quick dispatch of Amyntas:
Grief, thou art too too slow; if death be reserved for Amyntas
Hand, he will take it in hand. For alas, if naught be a wanting
Unto the highest point of grief, if nought's to be added
Unto Amyntas woe, for what then stays Amyntas*
O Daphne, Daphne, was Amyntas lately repelled
From death, sweet deaths door by Daphnes means? Was Amyntas
Kept saulf for these joys? O, then, then I might in a good time
Have dischargd myself of a huge and horrible Aetna:
But Daphne would not, but cursed Desteny would not,
Least that I might by death those plagues have tymely prevented,
Which accursed Fates for Amyntas lately prepared.
But now, since my woes at last are come to a full groath,
Desteny and Daphne may well, well let me be dying.

Yet differ thy death til certain news be received
Wheather Phillis live or dye; and then be resolved.

Live or dye? who doubts? would God that were to be doubted.

And would God my tongue had clou'n to my roof, when I blabbed.

Geaue me the lawne, good Nymph, white lawne, which only remains
Of sweete-white Phillis, that I may in stead of a Phillis
Kiss my Phillis lawne, and so my joys be prolonging,
So my shortened days with contentation ending.

What? shall I give or keep? Lewd cause wherefore he desir's it
Wills me to keep it still, least it bring fancy to fury.

Nymph extremely cruel, that thincks it much to be geuuing
One poor piece of lawne, even at last gasp of Amyntas.
Well, then I yield to my death, and destiny noe-pity-taking:
Let lawne stay with you, and you stay here for Amyntas.

Harck, come back, here, take, o stay, and run not Amyntas.
And yet Amyntas runs, enraged, desperate, headlong.

Yea, and runs so fast, that he is not like to be outrun.
Therefore better I were to my iourneys end to be hasting:
And yet I grieve myself, Montanus mind to be greeuing,
Least these news inflict as deadly a wound in a father,
As they gave even now to the feynting heart of a Lover.

But what a dart was that, which mightily flew fro the fingers
Of brave Lady Regent of these woods, Pembrokiana,
Unto the foreign Bear, which came with greedy deuowring
Jaws to the harmeles game? Whose dying hour was a birthday
Unto her own young whelps, whose groans thus lastly resounded,
Deaths dart, (yet sweet dart, as thrown by Pembrokiana)
Make my wound more wide, give larger scope to my young ones,
Give them a free passage, herself has geu'n them a pasport.
Phillis, for your sports I do much joy, but yet a thousand
Times more for yourself, since you so quickly revived
Live yet safe and sound: for Fuluia lately reported
Strange news of your death: would God that Fuluia had been
Dumme, or an other deaf: one mischif draws on an other.

And in truth just cause had Fuluia for to believe so,
Since that I was not like from deaths door so to be scaping.

But yet noe just cause had Fuluia for to report so.
Now let us hear at large, thy dangers and thy delyu'ries.

Whyl'st I ran after a woolf, I was all inclosd on a soddayne
With darck dens and groves, and forced that chase to be leauyng:
But when I sought to retire and company lost to recover,
There did I see this woolf (for I knew this Woolf by an arrow
Which myself did shoot, and gave her a wound by the leaft care)
There did I see this Woolf and more Woolus greedyly praying
On some beasts carkas late slain by them, but I could not
Well discern what beast: this wounded Woolf in a fury
Coms with a gored mouth, (it seems my face she remembered)
And so makes onward, who had been worthyly welcomd,
Had not a tree by a chance my dart unworthily hindered.
My dart mislighting, fell Woolf more fiercely aproching
Drew so near, that I saw 'twas booteles now to be shooting,
And darts were all spent: Therefore at last I retired
And fled back for fear, but wyl'd Woolf hastened onward:
Now marck what chanced, my lawne hanged down to my shoulders
And stooke fast to a bush, and stayed my flight, but I plucked,
Yet bush held it fast; at last my lawne I relinquisht
For to reserve my life, and tore it away with a great part
Of my scattered hair* and fear so forcibly urged
Lightfooted Phillis, that a fearful death she avoided.
As to my house full glad for joy I repaired, I met thee
Daphne, there full sad by the way, and greatly amassed.

Phillis alas is alive, but an other's gone to be dying.

And what mean's this, Alas? am I now so lightly regarded,
That my life with, Alas, of Daphne must be remembered?

Phillis, I love thy life, but I like not a death of an other.

Whose death? Daph. Death of Amyntas. Phil. Alas how dyed Amyntas?

How? that I can not tell; nor yet well whether it is so:
But noe doubt, I believe; for it is most like that it is so.

What strange news do I hear? what causd that death of Amyntas?

Thy death. Phil. And I alive? Daph. Thy death was lately reported,
And he beleeus thy death, and therefore seeks his own death.

Fear of Phillis death proved vain, and fear of Amyntas
Death will prove vain too: life each thing lively procures.

O Phillis Phillis, thou know not what be the torments
Of truelouers heart, heart made of flesh as Amyntas,
Not flynte heart, as thine; else would thou love that Amyntas,
Which loved Phillis more than life or soul of Amyntas.
Phillis, I know, for I saw, then when thou fledst from Amyntas,
Fledst, when by reason thou should have kissed Amyntas:
Then did Amyntas turn his poynted dart to his own breast,
And thrust breast on dart: and vile dart pierst in a moment
Through his coat, skyn, flesh; and would have speedily pierced
That same heart, which thou had more unluckily pierced,
But that I grasped his arm, and stayed that desperate outrage.
And now that small wound perchance will serve for a first proof
Of cursed courage, and mind unkindly resolved,
And that dart make way, and passage show to a damned
Knife, or a balefull sword, with freer scope to be murdring.

Is this true? Daph. Noe doubt. Phil. But alas would noebody stay him?
O let us go, let us run, let us seek and search for Amyntas.
If that Amyntas died, when Phillis seemed to be dying,
Then, since Phillis lives, let Amyntas truly be living.

Yes yes, quyckly Iran; But who can deal with a madman?
Rage and grief fro my sight conveyed him away in a moment.
Therefore now too late, it is too late now to be runnyng,
And thanck thy running that it is too late to be running.

O, this fretts my soul Daphne, this deadly remembrance
Of my scornful pride, that I then my Chastyty called,
And it Chastyty was, but Chastyty noe-pyty-taking,
Now I repent it alas, but now too late I repentyt.

Good God, what do I hear? can Phillis now be repenting?
Can she relent or yield? What playnt, what passion is this?
Can proud Phillis love? Phil. Noe love, but yet pyty-taking.

When pyty runs before, love always hasteneth after:
And now Phillis loves, since Phillis now pyty-taketh.

But too late, Phillis, too late. O wretched Amyntas,
Thou (even like to a Be, that stings, yet dies as he stingeth,
And his wounding life does leave in place that he wounds)
Have by thy death at last pierst Phillis through to the hart-roote,
Whereas in all thy life thou could not possibly move her.
Now if Amyntas soul from flesh and blood be released,
And here wandreth abroad (as I thinck it for to be wandering)
Let that soul now see, and joy her pains to be seeing,
Soul, that living loved, and by death, bought, to be loved.

Price to the buyer dear, and shameful price to the seller.

O that my love might once purchase life for Amyntas,
O that Amyntas life with my life might be redeemed.

When steedes are stolen, then Phillis looks to the stable.

MY heart with pyty melts, my sowl's so drowned in anguish,
That noe sight, noe sound objects itself to my senses,
But draws tears fro my eyes, and horror brings to my hearing.
What Is this new man's news, that makes him look thus amassed?

News of Amyntas death. Phil. This deaths-newes brings me to deaths door.

Most noble Pastor, that these woods lately frequented,
Gentle, loved of all, to the Nymphs dear, dear to the Muses,
And but a stripling died, and what death?

O, let us hear it,
O, let us hear it alas, that we may all be a mournyng
His mischaunce, our grief. Phil. O dear God, I dare not aproach him,
Least that I hear these news, yet these news must I be hearing.
Heart of stone, hard heart, cursed heart, what maks thee be fearing?
Go and encounter these knives, these darts that he brings
In sowle-wounding tongue, there show thyself to be stony.
Pastor, I come for part of thease news rightly belonging
Unto my damnable heart, and due, more due to my hearing
Than thou can conceive; then spare not freely to give it.

Phillis, I surely believe, that I heard this wretched Amyntas
With thy name his life and lamentation ending.

Il news differring, is a plague as great as an ill news.

Late as I mended netts on a hill, foretroubled Amyntas,
Horribly vexed and chaft, in face and action altered,
Past by my side in a rage: but I stepped and hastened after,
And ouertook him; for I mused what might be the matter.
Good fryend Ergastus, quoth he then, now do me a pleasure,
Come with Amyntas now, and marck what he dooe's as a witness,
Stand as a witness by; but first swear, so to be standing,
And my deeds so marckt, in noe respect to be hindering.
Here I alas poor fool (for who would ever imagine
Such a detestable act, as he purposd then to be woorking?)
Rapt out horrible oaths straight way, and swear by the mighty
Nightwandring Hecate, Pallas, Pomona, Priapus,
And Pan Pastors God, that I would perform what he wild me.
Then did he lead me along to a steep and horrible hill topp,
All abrupt and rough, and made so fearful a downfall,
That my lyms all quakt, when I looked fro the hill to the valley.
Here did he pause for a while, and somewhat seemed to be smyling,
Which rather made me noe mischif for to be deemyng.
Then, quoth he, what thou see, that tell to the Nymphs, to the Pastors,
And at last, these words with a down cast look he resounded,
If that I could as well command those greedy devouring
Throats and teeth of Woolues, as I can soon leap from a hilltopp;
As my life did dye, o then so would I be dying;
Then should these my lyms and cursed corpse be dyuyded,
As those tender joints, o grief, were all to be mangled.
But since frownyng skies wil'd beasts now will not aford me,
(Which yet I know in time will come this flesh to be tearing)
This must serve, short death, though sharper death I deserved.
Phillis, I come straight way, I Will com to thy company, Phillis,
If thou do not yet disdain my company, Phillis.
If that I were but sure, that death brought end to thy anger,
And that my coming would give noe cause to molest thee,
Then should life with joy leave well contented Amyntas;
Phillis, I come, scorn not, scorn not my company, Phillis.
Thus said, lightly he leapt, and headlong fell to the valley;
My soul quakt for fear. Daph. O grief. Phil. O woeful Amyntas.

And why staydst him not? wast fear, thy oath to be breaking?

O noe, for when I saw his mind thus bent to that outrage,
Oaths (in such case vain) I began to be lightly regarding,
And cought hold (naught hold) cought hold by a paltery gyrdle;
Paltery gyrdle brake by the swing, and weight of Amyntas:
Part with Amyntas went, and the other part I reteigned.

O but where is that corpse, and bruysed bones of Amyntas?

God knows; for by the fall my senceles soul was amassed,
Neither durst I behold his corpse unluckily quashed.

O strange news indeed, breakneck, breakheart of Amyntas.

O pytyles Phillis, well may thy heart be a stony
Heart, if breakeneck news can not yet break it a sunder.
If false tales of death, her death, who hated Amyntas,
Took his life yet away; good reason then that Amyntas*
True death, too true death, who my hate lovely requyted,
Should take life from me; and so it shall, with an endless
Grief of troubled soul, or a too too slowly revenging
Stroke of a murdring hand, or this same piece of a gyrdle,
Piece of a gyrdle alas: that left his master Amyntas
For good cause, that so proud Phillis might be rewarded,
And his masters death with Phillis death be requyted.
Luckles gyrdle alas of too too luckles Amyntas,
Take noe scorn for a while in a bosom vile to be lodged,
Since to requyte, to reueng thou mean therein to be lodged.
Phillis should have been true turtle-doue to Amyntas
In this lightsome world, but Phillis prowdly denied;
Therefore by thy means Phillis shall meet with Amyntas
In those darcksome dens, as Phillis rightly deserved.

Poor distressed soul, forbear thyself to be plaguing:
His fact, not thy fault, drew his confusion onward.

Pastors, why do ye mourn? What mean these heavy bewaylings?
If you mourn Phillis; Phillis noe mercy deserves,
Since this merciles heart to Amyntas mercy denied:
If you mourn his death, who had noe cause to be dying,
Noe such mournyng can suffice for murdered Amyntas.
Dry those tears, Daphne, and wipe thy watery fountayns,
And come, yet come not for me, but come for Amyntas,
Help me to seek and find, t'entombe those bones of Amyntas;
For this I stay yet alive: this funeral obsequy only
Phillis can perform for balefull love of Amyntas.
And though murdring hand pollute so sacred an office,
Yet since Phillis her hand performs so sacred an office,
This will Amyntas take as a most acceptable office.

Phillis, I yield my help his scattred bones to be searching,
But so that Phillis make noe more talk of a dying.

All this while to myself did I live; but now to Amyntas,
Or to Amyntas bones, crushed bones so long will I live yet,
And live noe longer; my life, his funeral ending.
Pastors: But yet where is that way which leads to the downfall?

There: and t'hill stands thence but a little more than a furlong,

Come, let us go, and search: I Will guide thee; the place I remember.

Pastors al farewell; farewell fair Pembrokianaes
Yuy churches parck, and fountaynes watery, farewell.

This Nymph taks her leave, as though these so many farewells
Were her last farewell, which should cause deadly departure.

Lou's aeternall laws are most unworthily blamed,
Upright laws in deed, in show though somewhat unequal.
And great Lord of love his men with mercy protecteth,
And yet* with justice, with due moderation ordreth.
O by what strange means and wondrous ways, fro the dungeon
Of despair, to the bower of bliss does he bring in a moment
His loving subjects? lo, gentle-mynded Amyntas
Even to the highest point of joy has clymbd by a downfall,
Unto a loves Paradise, by a hell full of infynit horror.
Blessed Amyntas now; soemuch more blessed Amyntas
Now, by how much then more wretch more cursed Amyntas.
Now may Elpinus conceive some matter of hoping
By thine example, that he shall have fortunat ending
Of these loueles toils, and most vnluckly begynnyngs.
Sage Elpinus coms, and speaks strange words of Amyntas,
As, that he were yet alive; and thinks his state to be happy,
For that he died for love, and by death, bought to be loved.
Bitter bower of bliss, where monstrous murder abounds,
Loving fools Paradise, that leaves his life to be loved.
What means Elpinus so woeful an end to be wishing?

Fryends leave of mournyng: you heard false news of Amyntas.

What, did he not leap down? Elp. Yes down to his only desired
Joys, and past by the shade of a fearful death, to a heaven,
And now leans his head on breast of sweet bony Phillis,
Sweet bony Phillis now, more loving now by a thousand
Parts, then loueles before; and sucks those sweetly beseemyng
Tears from Phillis her eyes, with a mouth with Nectar abounding.
And now nothing else is wanting unto the full joy
Of thease loving sowls, but that Montanus is absent;
And Montanus I seake, whose word maks absolut ending.

Their years are aequall, and their affection aequall,
And both learned alyke: o, now Montanus is happy
Happy to have this stay and comfort unto his old age.
But show yet, what luck, what God so saved Amyntas.

Hear, o hear then that, whereof these eyes the beholders
Were, and whereof now this tongue may well be reporter.
By my cave did I sit with Thyrsis down by the downe-fall,
Talking of my love, loueles yet lovely Lycoris:
When from an high we saw some man fall down on a soddayn.
There was a heap of thorns and bows compact on a cluster
Somewhat above our heads; 'twas his hap there first to be lighting:
Which although by the swing and weight it bursted a sunder,
And all came tumbling, and fell down flatly before us,
Yet by this encounter that fall proved not to be mortal,
Though sore and painful, making him lie as amassed
One whole hour and more, as unable his eyes to be op'nyng.
We twooe, astonyed to behold so fearful an object,
Stood starck dumme for a while, although we knew it was Amyntas;
But perceauing that this fall seemed not to be mortal,
Our whole endeavors w'apply'de, his woe to be swaging,
And sent one forthwith, for cunnyng Alphesiboeus,
Alphesiboeus whom that great God learned Apollo
Made to be skilful in herbs, when he gave me the guyft to be singing.
But now in mean time, when Thyrsis began to rehearse me
All those secret woes and forepast pangs of Amyntas,
Daphne and Phillis did meet us there on a soddayne,
Daphne and Phillis, who sought bruysd bones of Amyntas
Whom they thought to be dead, as then was told me by Daphne.
But when Phillis saw her longlookt lover Amyntas,
Discolored, bruysed, sorewounded then with a raging
Voice, and beaten breast on Amyntas flatly she falls,
Face to Amyntas face, and mouth to the mouth of Amyntas:

Was not Phillis abasht, unseemly to ly on Amyntas?

Shame to a feynthart love does sometimes serve for a bridle;
But true love indeed contemns so basheful a bridle.
Afterward with tears his bloodles cheeks she bewashed,
And those tears so wrought that Amyntas quyckly reuyued,
Opened his eyes, and breathd; which breath so luckily vttred
Encountering Phillis sweet breath was lovely received.
With what an endless joy these twooe lay sweetly together,
Either in others arms, and either sure of an others
Life and love, lovers may thinck, none else can imagine.

Is then Amyntas saulfe, that he needs not fear any danger?

Saulfe and sound, but that those thorns have partly defaced
His fair cheeks, and sides did somewhat chance to be bruysed:
But that is just nothing, and woorks noe woe to Amyntas,
(Happy Amyntas now, that showed such sign of a loving
Heart, and so at last obteynd to be loved of a loving
Soul, his passed pains, make present joys to be greater)
As yourselues shall see: for Phillis coms with Amyntas
Hytherward hard by: myself must first to the lodging
Of rich Montanus, persuading him to be yielding
Unto the purposd match; and thither they be appointed
Shortly to com, this way: and now its time to be walking.

Dear life, when shall I once have full possession of you?
When time com's, I Will tell: fruit too-soone plucked, is a sowre-fruyte.

If too-late, rotten.

Then pluck when time is appointed.

Oyet, come sweet light of these mine eyes to the harbor,
And ten-thousand woes with a good-turne once be requyting.

What good-turne would you?

That which cost you not a dodkin,
And yet would content my mind much more than a treasure.

What Is that? I understand not yet what may be the meaning.

Harck in your ear then.

Fie, noe: is that but a tryfle?

Yet let us sleep for a while; for your sake long was I watching.

Content. Amynt. O sweet Nymphe.

But stay, and stir not a finger:
As you sleep, I Will tell, what flowrs I do keep for a brydes-wayne.

How can I hear in sleep? Phil. What pleasure then can Amyntas
Take, when he sleeps by my side, if he feel noething when he sleeps?
And yet I can not sleep, for joy, that I found my Amyntas.

Then let us kiss: kissed mouth is nothing worse for a kissing:
So Be sucks sweet flowrs, flowrs noething worse for a sucking;
And you kiss roses, then thinck my lips to be roses.

Well: but these roses so kissed, ask not to be kissed:
Then let Amyntas stay, till Phillis mean to be kissing.

If naught else, yet give me leave those eyes to be kissing,
Those fair eyes, and so shall I seem fair soul to be kissing.

You would kiss mine eyes: which ever before, with a thousand
Sighs and sobs you cursed, for throwing darts at Amyntas.

Now I desire your eyes of purpose for to be kissing,
Thereby so to declare by this so lovely a token,
That your murdring eyes, my cursing lips be for ever
Now made faithful fryends, and all contention ended.
And, if Phillis thinck herself not fully revenged,
Then let her own teethe byte these lying lips of Amyntas.

If that Amyntas cease mine eyes any more to be cursing,
Why should Phillis then for spyte his lips be a biting?

If noe kind of kiss from Phillis may be procured,
Yet let an embracement to Amyntas his arms be aforded.

With good will.

Most good; what better will to Amyntas?

But yet stay: Phillis must first get a boon of Amyntas.

O what guyft shall I grant? what boon seeks my bony Phillis?

Four or five apples fro the tree that grows by the hil-topp.

How can I come to the tree for bry'rs and soe-many bushes?

I Will bring you so near, as you may easily tutch it.

If that I may clasp it, then doubt not, Phillis, Amyntas
Will clymbe up to the tree, or shake down foemany apples.

Is It true? clypt Phillis must then look so to be served.

My life, give me the leave, this fair red rose to be putting
In this bosom, where my heart has made his abiding,

O so might you prick your heart with thorns of a red rose,
Or take it fro my breast perchance, and give it an other.

Grant me this one grace yet: this favor do me for all this,
Give me thy snowe-white hand, to be clypt and kissed of Amyntas.

So by the hard-gryping, hoate-kissing Lover Amyntas,
Phillis snowe-white hand may melt, or chance to be bruysed.

What kind of love's this, that Phillis bear's to Amyntas.

Discreate and sober. Amynt. Well, then this shall be my sober,
And yet lovely request; Sit down, that I may be beholding
That fair Phillis face, and hear her sweetly resounding,

Phillis must needs yield, when Amyntas duly demands.

They sing these Asclepiades.
Sweet face, why be the heu'ns so to the bountiful,
Making that radiant bewty of all the stars
Bright-burning, to be fair Phillis her ornament?
And yet seem to be so spytefuly partial,
As not for to aford Argus his eyes to me,
Eyes too feawe to behold Phillis her ornament?

First and lastly beloved, only my only joy,
Why has not thy beloved soemany lou'ly hearts
As those Partriches have of Paphlagonia?
One breast is not enough for to reteigne my joy,
More hearts would that I had for to receive my love,
As those Partriches have of Paphlagonia.

Let come fair Helene, Troys tribulation,
Or brave Endymions sweet speculation,
Or Nymph Idalian friendly to passion;
None but Phillis alone holds Amyntas hands:
None but Phillis alone pleases Amyntas eyes:
None but Phillis alone wounds Amyntas heart.

Let come that pretty Boy, fond of his own image,
Or goddess Mynion kylde by an ougly Boar,
Or youthful Ganymede rapt by the Thunderer:
Phillis stretches alone hands to Amyntas hands*
Phillis turns alone eyes to Amyntas eyes,
Phillis joins alone heart to Amyntas heart.
O, this Amyntas name enchaunts my soul, that I can not
Leave this Amyntas name: my tongue still runs on Amyntas,
And my heart, and mind, and soul still thincks on Amyntas:
And yet, Amyntas, I know, its more than time to be going:
Elpinus long since has made all known to my father,
And my father, I know, his new son longs to be knowing.

Let me help you up: your hand is in hand of Amyntas
Now at last surprysde: yet I ask but a kiss for a ransom.

IF that such sour sauce for sweetest meats be reserved;
If that Amyntas must serve, love, weep, die for a Phillis,
If those great pleasures with great payns must be procured,
Then, good love, geaue those great matters unto the greate-men.
Let my Love soon love; let a sawdrey lace, or a thymble,
Or young nightingale suffice my fancy to further:
Let not such torments and martyrdoms be required
My poor simple joys, and pleasures lowely to season:
But sweete-bitter words, but kind and lovely repulses,
And such falling out, as may be a speedy renewing
And fresh increasing of love: let such be the loving
Wars, and wars, as peace and truce may end in a moment.


