To scourge the crime of wicked Laius,
And vvrecke the foul Incest of Oedipus,
The angry Gods styrred up their sons, by strife
With blades embrevved to reaue each others life:
The wife, the mother, and the concubyne,
Whose fearful heart foredrad their fatal fine,
Her sons thus dead, disdayneth longer life,
And slayes hirself with selfsame bloody knyfe:
The daughter she, surprisde with childish dread
(That durst not dye) a loathsome life does lead,
Yet rather chose to guide her banysht sire,
Than cruel Creon should have his desire.
Creon is King, the type of Tyranny,
And Oedipus, myrrour of misery.
Fortunatus Infoelix.
FIrst, before the beginning of the first Act, did sound a doleful and
strange noise of violles, Cythren, Bandurion, and such like, during the
which, there came in upon the Stage a King with an Imperial Crown upon his
head, very richely apparelled, a Scepter in his right hand, a Mounde with a
Cross in his left hand, sitting in a Chariote very richely furnished, drawn
in by four kings in their Dublettes and Hosen, with Crowns also upon their
heads: Representing unto us Ambition, by the history of Sesostres king of
Egypt, who being in his time and reign a mighty Conqueror, yet not content
to have subdued many Princes, and taken from them their kingdoms and
dominions, did in like manner cause those Kings whom he had so overcome, to
draw in his Chariote like Beasts and Oxen, thereby to content his unbridled
ambitious desire. After he had been drawn twyce about the Stage, and retired,
the Music ceased, and Iocasta the Queen issued out of her house, beginning
the first Act, as follows

Iocasta the Queen issues out of her Palace, before her twelve Gentlemen
very bravely apparelled, following after her eight Gentlewomen, whereof four
be the Chorus that remain on the Stage after her departure. At her entrance
the Trumpettes sounded, and after she had gone once about the Stage, she
turns to one of her most trusty and esteemed servant, and unto him she
discloseth her grief, as follows

O Faithful servant of mine ancient sire,
Though unto thee, sufficiently be known
The whole discourse of my recurelesse grief
By seeing me from Princes royal state
Thus basely brought into so great contempt,
As mine own sons repine to hear my plaint,
Now of a Queen but barely bearing name,
Seeing this town, seeing my flesh and blood,
Against it self to levy threatening arms,
(Whereof to talk my heart it rendes in twain)
Yet once again, I must to thee recompte
The wailefull thing that is already spread,
Because I know, that pity will compel
Thy tender heart, more than my natural child,
With ruthful tears to moan my mourning case.
My gracious Queen, as no man might surmount
The constant faith I bear my souraine lord,
So do I think, for love and trusty zeal,
No son you have, does owe you more than I:
For hereunto I am by duty bound,
With service meet no less to honor you,
Than that renoumed prince your dear father.
And as my duties be most infinite,
So infinite, must also be my love:
Then if my life or spending of my blood
May be employed to do your highness good,
Command (O queen) command this carcass here.
In spite of death to satissie thy will,
So, though I die, yet shall my willing ghost
Contentedly forsake this withered corpse,
For joy to think I never shewde my self
Ungrateful once to such a worthy Queen.

Thou know what care my careful father took,
In wedlockes sacred state to settle me
With Laius, king of this unhappy Thebs,
That most unhappy now our City is:
Thou know, how he, desirous still to search
The hidden secrets of supernall powers,
Unto Divines did make his often recourse,
Of them to learn when he should have a son,
That in his Realm might after him succeed:
Of whom receiving answer sharp and sour,
That his own son should work his wailful end,
The wretched king (though all in vain) did seek
For to eschew that could not be eschewed:
And so, forgetting laws of natures love,
No sooner had this paynfull womb brought forth
His eldest son to this desired light,
But straight he chargde a trusty man of his
To bear the child into a desert wood,
And leave it there, for Tigers to deuo^re.

O lucklesse babe, begot in woeful hour.

His servant thus obedient to his hest,
Up by the heels did hang this faultlesse Impe,
And percing with a knife his tender feet,
Through both the wounds did draw the slender twigs,
Which being bound about his feeble limbs,
Were strong enough to hold the little soul.
Thus did he leave this infant scarcely borne,
That in short time must needs have lost his life,
If destenie (that for our greater greefes
Decreede before to keep it still alive)
Had not unto this child sent present help:
For so it chaunst, a shepherd passing by,
With pity moude, did stay his giltlesse death:
He took him home, and gave him to his wife,
With homely fare to feed and foster up:
Now harken how the heavens have wroughte the way
To Laius death, and to mine own decay.

"Experience proves, and daily is it seen,
"In vain, too vain man strives against the heavens.

Not far fro thence, the mighty Polibus,
Of Corinth King, did keep his princely court,
Unto whose woeful wife (lamenting much
She had no offspring by her noble pheere)
The courteous shepherd gave my little son:
Which grateful gift, the Queen did so accept,
As nothing seemde more precious in her sight:
Partly, for that, his faitures were so fine,
Partly, for that, he was so beautiful,
And partly, for because his comely grace
Gave great suspicion of his royal blood.
The infant grew, and many years was demd^
Polibus son, till time, that Oedipus
(For so he named was) did understand
That Polibus was not his sire in deed,
Whereby forsaking friends and country there,
He did return to seek his native stock:
And being come into Phocides land,
Took notice of the cursed oracle,
How first he should his father do to death,
And then become his mothers wedded mate.

O fierce aspecte of cruel planets all,
That can decree such seas of heinous faults.

Then Oedipus, freight full of chilling fear,
By all means sought t'auoyde this furious fate,
But whiles he weende to shun the shameful deed,
Unluckly guyded by his own mishappe,
He fell into the snare that most he feared:
For lo, in Phocides did Laius lie,
To end the broils that civil discord then
Had raised up in that unquiet land,
By means whereof my woeful Oedipus,
Affording aid unto the other side,
With murdring blade unawares his father slew.
Thus heavenly doom, thus fate, thus powers divine,
Thus wicked read of Prophets took effect:
Now only restes to end the bitter hap
Of me, of me his miserable mother.
Alas, how cold I feel the quaking blood
Pass too and fro within my trembling breast?
Oedipus, when this bloody deed was done,
Forced forth by fatal doom, to Thebes came,
Where as full soon with glory he atchieude
The crown and scepter of this noble land,
By conquering Sphinx that cruel monster lo,
That erst destroyde this goodly flouring soil:
And thus did I (O hateful thing to hear)
To my own son become a wretched wife.

No marvel, though the golden Sun withdrew
His glittering beams from such a sinful fact.

And so by him that from this belly sprang,
I brought to light (O cursed that I am)
As well two sons, as daughters also twain:
But when this monstrous marriage was disclosde,
So sore began the rage of boiling wrath
To swell within the furious breast of him,
As he him self by stresse of his own nails,
Out of his head did tear his griefull eyne,
Unworthy more to see the shining light.

How could it be, that knowing he had done
So foul a blot, he would remain alive?

"So deeply faulteth none, the which unawares
"Does fall into the crime he can not shun:
And he (alas) unto his greater grief,
Prolongs the date of his accursed days,
Knowing that life does more and more increase
The cruel plagues of his detested gilte,
"Where stroke of griesly death does set an end
"Unto the pangs of man's increasing pain.

Of others all, most cause have we to moan
Thy woeful smarte (O miserable Queen)
Such and so many are thy grievous harms.

Now to the end this blind outrageous sire.
Should reap no joy of his unnatural fruit,
His wretched sons, pricked forth by furious spite,
Adiudge their father to perpetual prison:
There buried in the depthe of dungeon dark,
(Alas) he leads his discontented life,
Accursing still his stony hearted sons,
And wishing all the infernal sprites of hell,
To breathe such poysned hate into their breasts,
As each with other fall to bloody wars,
And so with pricking point of piercing blade,
To rippe their bowels out, that each of them
With others blood might stayne his guilty hands,
And both at once by stroke of speedy death
Be forthwith thrown into the Stigia^ lake.

The mighty Gods prevent so foul a deed.

They to avoid the wicked blasphemies,
And sinful prayer of their angry sire,
Agreed thus, that of this noble realm,
Until the course of one full year was run,
Eteocles should sway the kingly mace,
And Polynice as exul should depart,
Till time expyrde: and then to Polynice
Eteocles should yield the scepter up:
Thus year by year the one succeeding other,
This royal crown should unto both remain.

Oh thunbridled minds of ambicious men.

Eteocles, thus plast in princely seat,
Drunk with the sugared taste of kingly reign,
Not only shut his brother from the crown,
But also from his native country soil.
Alas poor Polynice, what might he do,
Uniustly by his brother thus betrayed?
To Argos he, with sad and heavy cheer
Forthwith conuayde him self, on whom at length
With fauning face good fortune smyled so,
As with Adrastus king of Argiues there,
He found such favor and affinity,
As to restore my son unto his reign,
He has besedge this noble city Thebes.
And hence proceeds, my most extreme annoye:
For, of my sons, who ever do prevail,
The victory will turn unto my grief:
Alas, I fear (such is the chance of war)
That one, or both shall purchase death thereby.
Wherefore, to shun the worst that may befall,
Though comfortless, yet as a pitiful mother
Whom nature binds to love her loving sons,
And to provide the best for their avail,
I have thought good by prayers to entreat
The two brethren (nay rather cruel foes)
A while to stay their fierce and furious fight,
Till I have tried by means for to appease,
The swelling wrath of their outraging wills.
And so with much to do, at my request
They have forborne unto this only hour.

Small space god wot, to stint so great a strife.

And even right now, a trusty man of mine,
Returned from the camp, enforming me
That Polynice will straight to Thebes come,
Thus of my woe, this is the wailefull so^me.
And for because, in vain and bootelesse plainte
I have small need to spend this title time,
Here will I cease, in words more to bewray
The restless state of my afflicted mind,
Desiring thee, thou go to Eteocles,
Hartly on my behalf beseching him,
That out of hand according to his promise,
He will vouchsafe to come unto my court,
I know he loves thee well, and to thy words
I think thou know he will give willing ear.

(O noble Queen) since unto such affairs
My spedie diligence is requisite,
I will apply effectually to do
What so your highness has commanded me.

I will go in, and pray the Gods therwhile,
With tender pity to appease my grief.

"THe simple man, whose marvel is so great
"At stately courts, and princes regal seats,
"With gasing eye but only does regard
"The golden gloss that outwardly appears,
"The crowns bedeckt with pearl and precious stones,
"The rich attire imbost with beaten gold,
"The glittering mace, the pomp of swarming train,
"The mighty halles heapt full of flattering friends,
"The huge chambers, the goodly gorgeous beds,
"The gilted roofes, embowde with curious work,
"The sweet faces of fine disdayning dames,
"The vain suppose of wanton reign at lust:
"But never viewes with eye of inward thought,
"The painful toil, the great and grievous cares,
"The troubles still, the new increasing fears,
"That princes nourish in their jealous breasts:
"He wayeth not the charge that Jove has laid
"On princes, how for themselves they reign not:
"He weenes, the law must stoop to princely will,
"But princes frame there noble wills to law:
"He knows not, that as the boystrous wind
"Does shake the tops of highest reared towers,
"So does the force of froward fortune strike
"The wighte that highest sits in haughty state.
Lo Oedipus, that sometime reigned king
Of The^ane soil, that wonted to suppress
The mightiest Prince, and keep him under check,
That fearful was unto his foreign foes,
Now like a poor afflicted prisoner,
In dungeon dark, shut up from cheerful light,
In every part so plagued with annoy,
As he abhorres to lead a longer life,
By means whereof, the one against the other
His wrathful sons have planted all their force,
And Thebes here, this ancient worthy town,
With threatening siege girt in on every ^ide,
In danger lies to be subverted quite,
If help of heavenly Jove uphold it not,
But as dark night succedes the shining day,
So lowering grief comes after pleasant joy.
Well now the charge her highness did command
I must fulfill, though happily all in vain.

O Gentle daughter of King Oedipus,
O sister dear to that unhappy wight
Whom brothers rage has reaued of his right,
To whom, thou know, in young and tender years
I was a friend and faithful governor,
Come forth, since that her grace has granted leave,
And let me know what cause has moved now
So chaste a maid to set her dainty foot
Over the thresholde of her secret lodge?
Since that the town is furnishte euerywhere
With men of arms and warlike instruments,
Unto our ears there co^mes no other noise,
But sound of trumpe, and neigh of trampling stedes,
Which running up and down from place to place,
With hideous cries betoken blood and death:
The blasing sun ne shines half so brighte,
As it was wont to do al dawne of day:
The wretched dames throughout the woeful town,
Together clustring to the temples go,
Beseching Jove by way of humble plainte,
With tender ruthe to pity their distress.
The love I hear to my sweet Polynice,
My dear brother, is only cause hereof.

Why daughter, know thou any remedy
How to defend thy fathers city here
From that outrage and fierce repyning wrath,
Which he against it, justly has conceived?

Oh governor might this my faultlesse blood
Suffice to stay my brethrens dyre debate,
With glad consent I could afford my life
Betwixt them both to plant a perfect peace:
But since (alas) I cannot as I would,
A hot desire ins^ames my ^eruent mind
To have a sight of my sweet Pollynice.
Wherefore (good guide) vouchsafe to guide (...)
Into some tower about this hugie court,
From whence I may behold our enemies camp,
Thereby at least to feed my hungry eyes
But with the sight of my beloved brother:
Then if I die, contented shall I die.

O princely dame, the tender care thou takste
Of thy dear brother, deserves double praise:
Yet crau'st thou that, which cannot be obtainde,
By reason of the distance from the town
Unto the plain, where tharmie lies incampt:
And furthermore, besemeth not a maid
To show her self in such unseemly place,
Whereas among such young and lusty troops
Of harebrainde soldiers marching to and fro,
Both honest name and honor is empairde:
But yet rejoice, since this thy great desire,
Without long let, or yet without thy pain,
At wish and will shall shortly be fulfillde.
For Palynice forthwith will hither come,
Even I my self was lately at the camp,
Commanded by the Queen to bid him come,
Who labors still to link in friendly league,
Her iarring sons (which hap so hoped for,
Eftsoon I pray the gracious gods to grant)
And sure I am, that ere this hour pass,
Thou shall him here in person safely see.

O loving friend, do thou then warrant me,
That Polynice will come unto this court?

Ere thou be ware thou shall him here behold.

And who (alas) does warrant his adventure,
That of Eteocles he take no harm?

For constant pledge, he has his brothers faith,
He has also the truce that yet endures.

I fear alas, alas I greatly fear,
Some trustlesse snare his cruel brother lays
To trappe him in.

Daughter, god knows how willing I would be
With sweet relief to comfort thy distress,
But I cannot impart to thee, the good
Which I my self do not as yet enjoy.
The wailefull cause that moves Eteocles
With Pollinyce to enter civil wars
Is over great, and for this only cause
Full many men have broke the laws of truth,
And topsieturuie turned many towns.
"To gredie (daughter) too too gredie is
"Desire to rule and reign in kingly state.
Ne can he bide, that swaise a realm alone
To have another ioynde with him therein:
Yet must we hope for help of heavenly powers,
Since they be just, their mercy is at hand,
To help the weak when worldly force does fail.

As both my brethren ^e, so b^th I bear
As much goodwill as any sister may,
But yet the wrong that unto Pollinyce
This trothlesse tyrant has unjustly showed,
Does lead me more, to wish the prosperous life,
Of Pollinyce, than of that cruel wretch.
Besides that, Pollinyce whiles he remainde
In Thebes here, did ever love me more,
Than did Eteocles, whose swelling hate
Is toward me increased more and more:
Whereof I partly may assure my self,
Considering he disdaynes to visit me,
Yea, happly he intends to reaue my life,
And having power he will not stick to do it.
This therefore makes me earnestly desire
Oftymes to see him: yet ever as I think
For to discharge the duty of a sister,
The fear I have of hurt, does change as fast
My doubtful love into disdaynefull spite.

Yet daughter, must ye trust in mighty Jove,
His will is not, that for thoffence of one
So many suffer undeserved smarte:
I mean of thee, I mean of Polinyce,
Of Iocasta thy woeful aged mother,
And of Ismena thy beloved sister.
Who though for this she does not outwardly
From drearie eyes distill lamenting tears,
Yet do I think, no less afflicting grief
Does inwardly torment her tender breast.

Besides all this, a certain jealousy,
Lately conceyude (I know not whence it springes)
Of Creon, my mothers brother, appaules me much,
Him doubt I more than any danger else.

Dear daughter, leave this foolish ielous^e,
And seeing that thou shall here shortly find
Thy brother Polinyce, go in again.

O joyful would it be to me therwhile,
To understand the order of the host,
Whether it be such as have sufficient power
To overthrow this mighty town of Thebs.
What place suppl^es my brother Polynice?
Where found ye him? what answer did he give?
And though so great a care pertains not
Unto a maid of my unskillful years,
Yet, forbicause my self partaker am
Of good and evil with this my country soil,
I long to hear thee tell those fearful news,
Which otherwise I can not understand.

So noble a desire (O worthy dame)
I much commend: and briefly as I can,
Will satisfy thy hungry mind herein.
The power of men that Polinyce has brought,
(Whereof he, (being Adrastus son in law)
Takes chiefest charge) is even the flower of Greece,
Whose hugie train so mighty seems to be,
As I see not, how this our drouping town
Is able to withstand so strong a siege.
Entering the field their army did I find
So orderly in form of battle set,
As though they would forthwith have guien the charge:
In battles seven the host divided is,
To each of which, by order of the king,
A valiant knight for captain is assignde:
And as you know this city has seven gates,
So every captain has his gate prescribde,
With fierce assault to make his entry at.
And further, passing through our frouning foes
(That gave me countenance of a messanger)
Hard by the King I spied Pollinyce,
In golden glistring arms most richely cladde,
Whose person many a stately prince enpalde,
And many a comely crowned head enclosde:
At sight of me his color straight he chaungde
And like a loving child in clasped arms
He caught me up, and friendly kissed my cheke,
Then hearing what his mother did demaund^
With glad consent according to her hest
Gave me his hand, to come unto the court,
Of mutual truce desirous so he seemde,
He asked me of Antygone, and Ismena,
But chiefelie unto thee above the rest
He gave me charge most heartily to commend him.

The gods give grace he may at length possess
His kingly right and I his wished sight.

Daughter no more, it is time ye now return
It stands not with the honor of your state
Thus to be seen suspiciouslie abroad:
"For vulgar tongues are armed evermore
"With slanderous brute to bleamishe the renoum^
"Of virtues dames, which though at first it spring
"Of slender cause, yet does it swell to fast,
"As in short space it fills every ear
"With swifte report of undeserved blame:
"You cannot be too curious of your name,
"Fond show of evil (though still the mind be chaste)
"Decays the credit often, that Ladies had,
"Sometimes the place presumes a wanton mind:
"Repair sometimes of some, does hurt their honor:
"Sometimes the light and garishe proud attire
"Persuades a yelding bent of pleasing youths.
The voice that goes of your unspotted fame,
Is like a tender flower, that with the blast
Of every little wind does fade away.
Go in dear child, this way will I go see
If I can meet thy brother Pollinyce.

IF greedy lust of man's ambitious eye
(That thristeth so for swaye of earthly things)
Would eke foresee, what mischiefs grow thereby,
What careful toil to quiet state it brings,
What endless grief from such a fountain springs:
Then should he swim in seas of sweet delight,
That now complains of fortunes cruel spite.
For then he would so safely shield himself
With sacred rules of wisdoms sage advise,
As no alluring train of trustles pelf,
To fond affectes his fancy should entise,
Then wary heed would quickly make him wise:
Where contrary (such is our skillesse kind)
We most do seek, that most may hurt the mind.
Amid the troop of these unstable toys,
Some fancies lo to beauty most be bent,
Some hunt for wealth, and some set all their joys,
In regal power of princely government,
Yet none of these from care are clean exempt*
For either they be got with grievous toil,
Or in the end forgone with shameful fail.
This flitting world does firmly naught retain,
Wherein a man may boldly rest his trust,
Such fickle chance in fortune does remain,
As when she lust, she threatens whom she lust,
From high renoume to throw him in the dust:
Thus may we see that each triumphing joy
By fortunes froune is turned to annoye.
Those elder heads may well be thought to err,
The which for easy life and quiet days,
The vulgar sort would seem for to prefer.
If glorious Phoebe, with-holde his glistring rays,
From such a peer as crown and scepter swayes,
No me^uaile though he hide his heavenly face,
From us that come of less renounied race.
Selde shall you see the ruin of a Prince,
But that the people eke like brunt do bear,
And old records of ancient time long since,
From age to age, yea almost every where,
With proof hereof has glutted every ear:
Thus by the follies of the princes heart,
The bounden subject still receives smart.
Lo, how unbridled lust of private reign,
Has pricked both the brethren unto war:
Yet Pollinyce, with sign of less disdain,
Against this land has brought from countries far,
A foreign power, to end this cruel jar,
Forgetting quite the duty, love, and zeal,
He ought to bear unto this common weal.
But whosoever gets ^he victory,
We wretched dames, and thou O noble town,
Shall feel thereof the woeful misery*
Thy gorgeous pomp, thy glorious high renoume,
Thy stately towers, and all shall fall a down,
Since raging Ma^s will each of them assist
In others breast to bathe his bloody fist.
But (...) son of (...), and of Jove,
(That tamde the proud attempt of giaunts strong)
Do thou defend, even of thy tender love,
Thy humble thralls from this afflicting wrong,
Whom wast of war has now tormented long:
So shall we never fail ne day ne night
With reverence due thy praises to resight.

Done by F. Kinvvelmarshe.
BEfore the beginning of this second Act did sound a very doleful noise of
flutes, during the which there came (...) upon the stage two ^offines covered
with hearce clothes* and brought in by.viij. in mourning weed, and accompanied
with.viij. other mourners, and after they had carried the coffins about the
stage, there opened and appeared a Grave, wherein they buried the coffins and
put fire ^o them, but the flames did sever and part in twain, signifying
discord by the history of two brethren, whose discord in their life was not
only to be wondered at, but being buried both in one Tomb (as some writers
affirm) the flames of their funerals did yet part the one from the other in
like manner, and would in no wise join into one flame. After the Funerals were
ended and the fire consumed, the grave was closed up again, the mourners
withdrew the^ off the stage, and immediately by y^ gates Homoloydes entered
Pollinyces accompanied with vj. gentlemen and a page that carried his helmet
and Target, he and his men unarmed saving their gorgets, for that they were
permitted to come into the town in time of truce, to the end Iocasta might
bring the two brethren to a parle, and Pollinyces after good regard taken round
about him, spoke as follows

Lo here mine own city and native soil,
Lo here the (...) I ought to nestle in,
Yet being thus entrencht with mine own towers,
And that, from him the safe conduct is given
Which does enjoy as much as mine should be,
My feet can tread no step without suspect:
For where my brother bides, even there behoues
More wary scout than in an enemies camp.
Yet while I may within this right hand hold
This brond, this blade, (vnyelden ever yet)
My life shall not be left without revenge*
But here behold the holy sancturie,
Of Bacchus eke the worthy Image lo,
The aultars where the sacred flames have sho^^e*
And where of yore these giltlesse hands of mine
Full often have offered to our mighty gods.
I see also a worthy compani^
Of* Thibane dames, resembling unto me
The trai^d of Iocasta my dear mother:
Behold them clad in clothes of grie^ly black,
That hellishe hew that nay for other harms
So well besemed wretched wightes to wear:
For why, ere long their selves themselves shall see
(Gramer^y to there princes tyranny)
Some spoiled of their sweet and sucking babes,
Some lose their husband, other some their sire,
(...) some their friends that were to the^ full dear.
But now it is time to lay this sword aside,
And eke of them to know where is the Queen:
O worthy dames, hea^ie, unhappy ye,
Where rests now the restless queen of Thebes?
O worthy impe sprung out of worthy race,
Renoumed Prince, whom we have looked for long,
And now in happy hour art come to us,
Some quiet bring to this unquiet realm.
O queen, O queen, come forth and see thy son,
The gentle fruit of all thy joyful seed.

My faithful friends, my dear beloved maids,
I come at call, and at your words I move
My feebled feet with age and agony:
Where is my son? O tell me where is he,
For whom I sighed have so often sith,
For whom I spend both nights and days in tears?

Here noble mother, here, not as the king,
Nor as a Citizen of stately Thebes,
But as a stranger now, I thank my brother.

O son, O sweet and my desired son,
These eyes they see, these hands of mine thee touch,
Yet scarsly can this mind believe the same,
And scarsly can this bruised breast sustain
The sodeyne joy that is inclosde therein:
O gladsome glass, wherein I see my self.

So grant the Gods, that for our common good*
You freendly may your sons both friends behold.

At thy depart, O lovely child, thou left
My house in tears, and me thy wretched dame,
Myrrour of martyrdom, waymenting still
Th unworthy exile thy brother thee gave:
Ne was there ever son or friend far off,
Of his dear friends or mother so desired,
As thy return, in all the town of Thebes.
And of my self more than the rest to speak,
I have as thou may see, clean cast aside
My princely roabes, and thus in worfull weed,
Bewrapped have these lustlesse limbs of mine:
Naught else but tears have trickled from mine eyes,
And eke thy wretched blind and aged sire,
Since first he heard what war tweene you there was,
As one that did his bitter curse repent,
Or that he prayed to Jove for your decay,
With stretching string, or else with blouddie knyfe
Has sought full often to end his loathed life.
Thou this mean while my son, have lingered long
In far and forreyn coasts, and wedded eke,
By whom thou may, (when heavens appoyntes it so)
Strange issue have by one a stranger borne,
Which greeues me sore, and much the more dear child,
Because I was not present at the same,
There to perform thy loving mothers due.
But for I find thy noble match so meet,
And worthy both for thy degree and birth,
I seek to comfort thee by mine advise,
That thou return this city to inhabit,
Which best of all may seem to be the bower,
Both for thy self and for thy noble spouse.
Forget thou then thy brothers injuries,
And know dear child, the harm of all missehap,
That happes twixt you, must hap likewise to me:
Ne can the cruel swoorde so slightly touch
Your tender flesh, but that the self same wound
Shall deeply bruise this aged breast of mine.

"There is no love may be comparde to that*
"The tender mother bears unto her child:
"For even so much the more it does increase,
"As their grief grows, or contentations cease.

I know not mother, if I praise deserve,
(That you to please, whom I ought not displease)
Have trained my self among my trustlesse foes:
But Nature draws (whether he will or ^ill)
Each man to love his natue country soil:
And who should say, that otherwise it were,
His tongue should never with his heart agree.
This has me drawn beside my bounden due,
To set full light this lucklesse life of mine:
For of my brother, what may I else hope,
But traynes of treason, force and falshoode both?
Yet neither peril present, nor to come,
Can hold me from my due obedience:
I grant I can not grieflesse, well behold
My fathers palace, the holy aultars,
Ne lovely lodge wherein I fostred was:
From whence driven out, and chaste unworthily,
I have too long aboade in forreyn coasts:
And as the growing green and pleasant plant,
Does bear fresh branches one above an other,
Even so am^dde the huge heap of my woes,
Does grows one grudge more grievous than the rest,
To see my dear and doleful mother, cladde
In mournyng tire, to tire her mourning mind,
Wretched alonely for my wretchedness,
So lykes that enemy my brother best:
Soon shall you see that in this wandering world,
No enmity is equal unto that
That dark disdain (the cause of every evil)
Does breed full often in consangiunitie.
But Jove, he knows what dole I do endure,
For you and for my fathers wretched woe,
And eke how deeply I desire to know
What wearre life my loving sisters lead,
And what anoye mine absence them has given.

Alas, alas, how wrekefull wrath of Gods
Does still afflicte Oedipus progeny:
The first cause was thy fathers wicked bed,
And then (Oh why do I my plagues recompte?)
My burdein borne, and your unhappy birth:
"But needs we must with pacient hearts abide,
"What so from high the heavens do provide.
With thee my child, feign would I question yet
Of certain things: ne would I that my words
Might thee anoye, ne yet renew thy grief.

Say on, dear mother, say what so you please,
What pleases you, shall never me disease.

And seems it not a heavy hap my son,
To be deprived of thy country coasts?

So heavy hap as tongue can not express.

And what may most molest the mind of man
That is exiled from his native soil?

The liberty he with his country lost,
"And that he lacks freedom for to speak,
"What seems best, without control or check.

Why so? each servant lacks liberty
To speak his mind, without his masters leave.

"In exile, every man, or bond or free,
"Of noble race, or meaner parentage,
"Is not in this unlike unto the slave,
"That must of force obey to each man's will,
"And praise the peevishness of each man's pride.

And seemed this so grievous unto thee?

What grief can greater he, that so constraynde,
Slauelyke to serve gaynst right and reason both,
Yea much the more, to him that noble is,
By stately line, or yet by virtuous life,
And has a heart like to his noble mind.

What helps most in such adversity?

Hope helps most to comfort misery.

Hope to return from whence he first was driven?

Yea, hope that happens oftentimes to late,
And many die before such hap may fall.

And how did thou before thy marriage son,
Mainteyne thy life, a stranger so bestad?

Sometime I found (though seldom so it were)
Some gentle heart, that could for curtesye,
Content himself to succor mine estate.

Thy fathers friends and thine, did they not help
For to relieve that neked need of thine?

Mother, he has a foolish fantasy,
"That thinks to find a friend in misery.

Thou myghtst have help by thy nobility.

"Couerd alas, in cloak of pouerti^?

"Well ought we then that are but mortal here,
"Above all treasure count our country dear:
Yet let me know my son, what cause thee moved
To go to Greece?

The flying fame that thundered in mine ears,
How king Adrastus, governor of Greece,
Was ^^swered by Oracle, that he
Should knitte in linkes of lawful marriage,
His two fair daughters, and his only heirs,
One to a Lion, the other to a Boar:
An answer such as each man wondered at.

And how belongs this answer now to thee.

I took my guess even by this ensign here,
A Lion lo, which I did always bear:
Yet think I not, but Jove alonely brought
These hands of mine to such an high exploite.

And how yet came it to this strange effect?

The shining day had run his hasted course,
And deawie night bespread her mantell dark,
When I that wandered after weary toil,
To seek some harbrough for mine irked limbs,
Began find at last a little cabin, close
Adjoined fast unto the stately walls,
Where king Adrastus held his royal towers.
Scarce was I there in quiet well ycoucht,
But thither came an other exile eke,
Named Tydeus, who straue perforce to drive
Me from this sorry seat, and so at last,
We settled us to fell and blouddie fight,
Whereof the rumor grew so great forth with,
That straight the king informed was thereof,
Who seeing then the ensigns that we bare,
To be even such as were to him foresaid,
Chose each of us to be his son by law,
And since did solemnize eke the ^ame.

Yet would I know, if that thy wife be such
As thou can joy in her? or what she is?

O mother dear, fayrer ne wyser dame
Is none in Greece, Argia is her name.

How could thou to this doubtefull enterprise,
So many bring, thus armed all at once?

Adrastus swear, that he would sone (...)
Unto our right both Tydeus, and me:
And first for me, that had the greater need,
Whereby the best and bol^est bloods in Greece,
Have fellowed me unto this enterprise.
A thing both just and grievous unto me,
Grievous I say, for that I do lamente
To be constrained by such open wrong,
To war against mine own dear country feeres.
But unto you (O mother) does pertain
To stiute this strife, and both duliuer me*
From exile now, and eke the town from siege:
For otherwise, I swear you here by heavens,
Eteocles, who now does me disdain
For brother, shortly shall see me his lord.
I ask the seat, whereof I ought of right
Possess the half, I am Oedipus son,
And yours, so am I true son to you both.
Wherefore I hope that as in my defense
The world will weygh, so Jove will me assiste.

Behold O queen, behold O worthy queen,
Unwoorthie he, Eteocles here co^mes,
So, would the Gods, that in this noble realm
Should never long unnoble tyrant reign,
Or that with wrong the right and doubtless heir,
Should banished be out of his princely seat.
Yet thou O queen, so fyle thy sugared tongue,
And with such counsel deck thy mothers tale,
That peace may both the brothers hearts inflame*
And rancour yield, that erst possessed the same.

Mother, behold, your hestes for to obey,
In person now am I resorted hither:
In haste therefore, feign would I know what cause
With hasty speed, so moved has your mind
To call me now so causeless out of time,
When common wealth most craves my only aid:
Feign would I know, what queynt commodity
Persuades you thus to take a truce for time,
And yield the gates wide open to my foe,
The gates that might our stately state defend,
And now are made the path of our decay.

"Repress dear son, those reging storms of wrath,
"That so bedimme the eyes of thine intent,
"But when disdaynes shrunk, or set aside,
"And mind of man with l^ysure can discourse
"What seemly words his tale may best (...),
"And that the (...) vnfoldes without affectes
"Then may proceed^ an answer sage and grave,
"And every sentenc^ (...) with soberness:
Wherefore vnbende thine (...) brows de are ^hylde,
And cast thy rolling eyes none other way,
That here do not Medusaes face behold,
But him, even him, thy blood and brother dear.
And thou behold, my Polinices eke,
Thy brothers face, wherein when thou may see
Thine own image, remember therwithall,
That what offense thou woldst to him were done,
The blows thereof rebounde unto thy self.
And hereof eke, I would you both fore warn,
When friends or brethren, kinsfolk or allies,
(Whose hasty hearts some angry mood had moved)
Be face to face by some of pity brought,
Who seeks to end their discord and debate:
They only ought consider well the cause
For which they come, and cast out of their mind
For evermore the old offenses past:
So shall sweet peace drive pleading out of place
Wherefore the first shall Polinices be,
To tell what reason first his mind did rule,
That thus our walls with foreign foes enclosde
In sharp revenge of causeless wrongs received,
As he alleges by his brothers doom:
And of this wicked woe and dire debate,
Some god of pity be the equal judge,
Whom I beseech, to breath in both your breasts
A yelding heart to deep desire of peace.

"My worthy dame, I find that tried truth
"Does best beseem a simple naked tale,
"Ne needs to be with painted process pricked,
"That in her self has no diversity*
"But always shows one vndisguysed face,
"Where deep deceit and lies must seek the shade,
"And wrap their words in guilefull eloquence,
"As ever fraught with contrariety:
So have I often said, and say again,
That to avoid our fathers foul reproach
And bitter curse, I parted from this land
With right good will, yet thus with him agreed,
That while the whirling wyngs of flying time
Might roll one year about the heavenly sphere,
So long alone he might with peace possess
Our fathers seat in princely diadem,
And when the year should eke his course renew,
Might I succeed to rule again as long.
And that this law might still be kept for aye,
He bound him self by vow of solemn oath
By Gods, by men, by heaven, and eke by earth:
Yet that forgot, without all reverence
Unto the Gods, without respect to right,
Without respect that reason ought to rule,
His faith and troth both trodden under foot,
He still vsurps most tyrantlike with wrong
The right that does of right to me belong.
But if he can with equal doom consent,
That I return into my native soil
To sway with him alyke the kingly seat
And euenly bear the bridle both in hand,
Dear mother mine I swear by all the Gods
To raise with speed the siege from these our walls,
And send the soldiers home from whence they came:
Which if he grant me not, then must I do
(Though loath) as much as right and reason would,
To venge my cause that is both good and just.
Yet this in heaven the Gods my records be,
And here in earth each mortal man may know,
That never yet my giltlesse heart did fail
Brotherly duty to Eteocles,
And that causlesse he holds me from mine own,
Thus have I said O mother, even as much
As needful is, wherein I me assure,
That in the judgment both of good and badde,
My words may seem of reason to proceed,
Constrained thus in my defense to speak.

None may deny, O pere of princely race,
But that thy words are honest, good and just,
And such as well be seem that ^ong of thine.

"If what to some seems honest, good and just,
"Could seem even so in every doubtful mind,
"No dark debate nor quarrel could arise:
"But look, how many men so many minds,
"And that, that one man judges good and just,
"Some other deemes as deeply to be wrong.
To say the truth (mother) this mind of mine
Does fleet full far from that farfetch of his,
Ne will I longer cover my conceit:
If I could rule or reign in heaven above,
And eke command in depth of derksome hell,
No toil ne travel should my sprites abashe,
To make the way unto my restless will,
To climb aloft, nor down for to descend.
Then think you not, that I can yield consent
To yield a part of my possession,
Wherein I live and lead the monarchy.
"A witless fool may every man him guess,
"That leaves the more and takes him to the less.
With this, reproach might to my name redound,
If he, that has with foreign power spoilde
Our pleasant fields, might reaue from me perforce,
What so he list by force of arms demand.
No less reproof the citizens ensewes,
If I, for dread of Greekish hosts, should grant
That he might climb to height of his desire.
In fine, he ought not thus of me to crave
Accord or peace, with bloody sword in hand,
But with humility and prayer both.
For often is it seen^, and proof does teach,
"Sweet words prevail, where sword and fire fail.
Yet this, if here within these stately walls
He list to live, the son of Oedipus,
And not as king of Thebes, I stand content.
But let him think, since now I can command,
This neck of mine shall never yield to yoke
Of servitude: let bring his banners splaide,
Let spear and shield, sharp sword, and cyndring flame^
Procure the part that he so vainly claims:
As long as life within this breast does last,
I nill consent that he should reign with me.
If law of right may any way be broke,
"Desire of rule within a climbing breast
"To break a vow may bear the buckler best.

"Who once has past the bounds of honstie
"In ernest deeds, may pass it well in words.

O son, amongst so many miseries
This benefit has crooked age, I find,
That as the tracke of trustlesse time has taught,
"It sees much, and many things discernes,
"Which recklesse youth can never rightly judge.
Oh, cast aside that vain ambition,
That corosiue, that cruel pestilence,
That most infects the minds of mortal men:
"In princely palace and in stately towns
"It crepeth often, and close with it conuayes,
"To leave behind it damage and decays:
"By it be love and amity destroyde,
"It breaks the laws and common concord beats,
"Kingdoms and realms it topsie turuie turns,
And now, even thee, her gall so poisoned has,
That the weak eyes of thine affection
Are blinded quite, and see not to them self
But worthy child, drive from thy doubtful breast
This monstrous mate, in stead whereof embrace
"Equality, which stately states defends
"And binds the mind with true and trusty knots
"Of friendly faith which never can be broke,
"This, man of right should properly possess,
And who that other does the more embrace,
Shall purchase pain to be his just reward
By wrathful woe or else by cruel death.
"This, first divided all by equal bonds
"What so the earth did yield for our avail:
"This, did divide the nights and days alike,
"And that the veil of dark and dreadful night,
"Which shrowds in misty clouds the pleasant light,
"Ne yet the golden beams of Phoebus rays
"Which cleares the dimmed air with gladsome gleame^
"Can yet heap has in either of them both.
If then the days and nights to serve our turn
Content them selves to yield each other place,
Well ought thou with weighty doom to grant
Thy brothers right to rule the reign with thee
Which heavens ordained common to you both:
If so thou nill O son O cruel son,
"In whose high breast may justice build her boure
"When princes hearts wide open lie to wrong?
Why likes thee so the tipe of tyranny
With others loss to gather greedy gain?
"Alas how far he wanders from the truth
"That compts a pomp, all other to command,
"Yet can not rule his own unbridled will,
"A vain desire much riches to possess
"Whereby the breast is brusde and bettered still,
"With dread, with danger, care and cold suspecte,
"Who seeks to have the thing we call enough,
"Acquainte him first with contentation,
"For plenteousnesse is but a naked name.
"And what suffiseth use of mortal men,
"Shall best apaye the mean and modest hearts.
"These hoorded heaps of gold and worldly wealth
"Are not the proper goods of any one,
"But pawnes which Jove powers out abundantly
"That we likewise might use them equally,
"And as he seems to lend them for a time,
"Even so in time he takes them home again,
"And would that we acknowledge every hour,
"That from his hands we did the same receive:
"There nothing is so firm and stayde to man,
"But whyrles about with wheels of restless time.
Now if I should this one thing thee demand,
Which of these two thou would choose to keep,
The town quiet or unquiet tyranny?
And would thou say I choose my kingly cheer?
O witless answer sent from wicked heart,
For if so fall (which mighty Gods defend)
Thine enemies hand should overcome thy might,
And thou should see them sack the town of Thebes,
The chastest virgins ravished for wrecke,
The worthy children in captivity,
"Then should thou feel that scepter, crown, and wealth
"Yield deeper care to see them taken away,
"Than to possess them yeldeth deep content.
Now to conclude, my son, Ambition
Is it that most offendes thy thought,
Blame not thy brother, blame ambition
From whom if so thou not redeem thy self,
I fear to see thee buy repentance dear.

Yea dear, too dear when it shall come too late,

And now to thee my Polinices dear,
I say that silly was Adrastus read,
And thou God knows a simple silly soul,
He to be ruled by thy heady will,
And thou, to war against the Thebane walls,
These walls I say whose gates thy self should guard:
Tell me I pray thee, if the City yield,
Or thou it take by force in bloody fight,
(Which never grant the Gods I them beseeke)
What spoils? what Palms? what sign of victori^
Can thou set up to have thy country woonne?
What title worthy of immortal fam^,
Shall blased be in honor of thy name?
O son, dear son, believe thy trusty dame,
The name of glory shall thy name refuse,
And fly full far from all thy fond attemptes.
But if so fall thou should be overcome,
Then with what face can thou return to Greece,
That here have left so many Greeks on ground?
Each one shall curse and blame thee to thy face,
As him that only caused their decay,
And eke condemn Adrastus simple head,
That such a pheere had chosen for his child.
So may it fall, in one accursed hour,
That thou may loose thy wife and country both,
Both which thou may with little toil attain,
If thou can leave high mind and dark disdain.

O mighty Gods of goodness, never grant
Unto these evils, but set desired peace
Between the hearts of these two friendly foes.

The question that betwixt us two is grown,
Believe me mother, can not end with words:
You waste your breath, and I but loose my time,
And all your travel lost and spent in vain:
For this I swear, that peace you never get
Between us two, but with condition,
That whilst I live, I will be Lord of Thebes.
Then set aside these vain forewasted words,
And yield me leave to go where need does press:
And now good sir, get you out of these walls,
Unless you mean to buy abode with blood.

And who is he that seeks to have my blood,
And shall not shed his own as fast as mine?

By thee he stands, and thou standst him before,
Lo here the sword that shall perform his word.

And this shall eke maintain my rightful cause.

O sons, dear sons, away with glittring arms,
And first, before you touch each others flesh,
With doubled blows come pierce this breast of mi^e.

Ah wretch, thou art both vile and cowardlike,
Thy high estate esteems thy life too dear.

If with a wretch or cowarde should thou fight,
Oh dastarde villain, what first moved thee
With swarms of Greeks to take this enterprise?

For well I wist, that cancred heart of thine
Could sefely keep thy head within these walls,
And flee the field when combat should be callde.

This truce assured thee Polinices,
And makes thee bold to give such bosting words:
So be thou sure, that had this truce not been,
Then long ere this, these hands had been embrude,
And eke this soil besprinkled with thy blood.

Not one small drop of my blood shall thou spill,
But buy it dear against thy cancred will.

O sons, my sons, for pity yet refrain.

Good Gods, who ever saw so strange a sight?
True love and friendship both be put to flight.

Yield villein, yield my right which thou withholds*

Cut of thy hope to reign in Thebane walls,
Naught have thou here, nor naught shall ever have,
Away.

O aultars of my country soil.

Whom thou art come to spoil and to deface.

O Gods, give ear unto my honest cause.

With foreign power his country to invade.

O holy temples of the heavenly Gods.

That for thy wicked deeds do hate thy name.

Out of my kingdom am I driven by force.

Out of the which thou came me to drive.

Punish O Gods this wicked tyrant here.

Pray to the Gods in Greece and not in Thebes.

No savage beast so cruel nor unjust.

Not cruel to my country like to thee.

Since from my right I am with wrong deprived.

Eke from thy life if long thou tarry here.

O father hear what injuries I take.

As though thy diuelishe deeds were hid from him.

And you mother.

Have done thou not deseruest
With that false tongue thy mother once to name.

O dear City.

When thou ariuest in Greece,
Choose out thy dwelling in some mustie Moors.

I must depart, and parting must I prays^
Oh dear mother the depth of your good will.

O Son.

Away I say out of these walls.

I can not choose but must thy will obey,
Yet grant me once my father for to see.

I hear no prayers of my enemy.

Where be my sweet sisters.

And can thou yet
With shameless tongue once name thy noble race
That art become a common foe to Thebes?
Be sure thou shall them never see again,
Nor other friend that in these walls remain.

Rest you in peace, O worthy mother mine.

How can that be and thou my joy in war?

Hence forth n'am I your joy ne yet your son.

Alas the Heavens me whelme with all mishap.

Lo here the cause that stirs me by wrong.

Much more is that he profereth unto me.

Well, speak, dare thou come armed to the field?

So dare I come, wherefore do thou bemaunde?

For needs or thou must end this life of mind
Or quench my thirst with pouring out thy blood.

Ah wretch, my thirstis all as dry as thine.

Alas and welaway, what hear I sons?
How can it be? dear children can it be
That brethrens hearts such rancour should enrage?

And that right soon the proof shall plainly show.

Oh say not so, yet say not so dear sons.

O royal race of Thebes now take thine end.

God shield.

O slow and sluggish heart of mine,
Why do I stay to embrew these slothful hands?
But for his greater grief I will depart,
And at return if here I find my foe,
This hasty hand shall end our hot debate.

Dear Citizens, and you eternal Gods,
Bear witness with me here before the world,
How this my fierce and cruel enemy,
Whom causeless now my brother I do call,
With threats of death my lingering steps does drive
Both from my right and from my country soil,
Not as beseemes the son of Oedipus,
But as a slave, an abject, or a wretch:
And since you be both pitiful and just,
Uouchsafe O Gods, that as I part with grief,
So may I yet return with joyful spoil
Of this accursed tyrant, and he slain
I may recover quietly mine own.

O wretched wretch Iocasta, where is found
The misery that may compare to thine?
O would I had nor gasing eyes to see,
Nor listening ears to hear that now I dread:
But what remaynes, save only to entreat
That cruel dole would yet so courteous be
To reaue the breath out of this woeful breast,
Before I hearken to some woeful ^ewes.
Rest you here dames, and pray unto the Gods
For our redress, and I in that mean while
Will shut my self from sight of loathsome light.

O mighty God, the governor of Thebes,
Pity with speed the pain Iocasta bydes,
And eke our needs, O mighty Bacchus help,
Bend willing care unto our just complaynt:
Leave them not comfortless that trust in thee,
We have nor gold nor silver thee to give,
Ne sacrifice to those thine aulters due,
In steed whereof we confecrate our hearts
To serve thy will, and hestes for to obey.

SInce I have rid mine enmie out of sight,
The best shall be, for Creon now to send,
My mothers brother, that with him I may
Reason, consulte, confer, and counsel both,
What shall be best to use in our defense,
Before we venture forth into the field.
But of this travail, lo, he me acquites
That comes in haste toward these royal towers.
O mighty king, not causeless now I come,
To find, that long have sought your majesty.
So to discharge the duty that I owe
To you, by comfort and by counsel both.

No less desire this heart of mine did press,
To send for thee Creon, since that in vain
My mother has her words and travail spent,
To reconcile Pollinices and me:
For he (so dull was his capacity)
Did think, he could by dread of danger, win
My princely heart to yield to him this realm.

I understand, the army that he brings
Against these walls, is such, that I me doubt
Our cities force may scarce the same resist.
Yet true it is, that right and reason both
Are on our side, which bring the victory
Oftetimes: for we our country to defend,
They to subdue the same in arms are come.
But what I would unto your highness show,
Is of more weight, and more behoues to know.

And what is that? oh quickly tell it me.

A Greek prisner is come unto my hands.

And what says he that does so much importe?

That even already be their ranks in raye,
And straight will give assault to these our walls.

Then must I straight prepare our Citizens
In glittring arms to march into the field.

O Prince (and pardon me) thy youthful years
Nor see them self, ne let thee once discern,
What best behooves in this doubtful case.
"For Prudence, she that is the mighty queen
"Of all good works, grows by experience,
"Which is not found with few days seeking for.

And were not this both sound and wise advise,
Boldly to look our foemen in the face,
Before they spread our fields with hugie host,
And all the town beset bysiege at once?

We be but few; and they in number great.

Our men have yet more courage far than they.

That know I not, nor am I sure to say.

Those eyes of thine in little space shall see
How many I my self can bring to ground.

That would I like, but hard it is to do.

I nill pan up our men within the walls.

In counsel yet the victory consistes.

And will thou then I use some other read?

What else? be still awhile, fir haste makes wast.

By night I will the Camuassado give.

So may you do and take the overthrow.

The vauntage is to him that does assault.

Yet skirmishe given by night is perilous.

Let set upon them as they sit at meat.

Sudden assaults affray the mind no doubt,
But we had need to overcome.

So shall we do.

No sure, unless some other counsel help.

Amid their trenches shall we them invade?

As who should say, were none to make defense.

Should I then yield the City to my foes?

No, but advise you well if you be wise.

That were thy part, that know more than I.

Then shall I say that best does seem to me?

Yea Creon yea, thy counsel hold I dear.

Seven men of courage have they chosen out.

A slender number for so great emprise.

But they them chose for guides and capitaynes.

To such an host? why they may not suffice.

Nay, to assault the seven gates of the city.

What then behooves so bestad to done?

With equal number see you do them match.

And then commit our men in charge to them?

Choosing the best and boldest bloods in Thebes.

And how shall I the City then defend?

Well with the rest, for one man sees not all.

And shall I choose the boldest or the wisest?

Nay both, for one without that other fayles.

"Force without wisdom then is little worth.

That one must be fast to that other ioynde

Creon I will thy counsel follow still,
For why, I hold it wise and trusty both,
And out of hand for now I will depart
That I in time the better may provide
Before occasion slip out of my hands,
And that I may this Pollinices quell:
For well may I with bloody knife him ^le^
That commes in arms my country for to spoil,
But if so please to fortune and to fate
That other end than I do think may fall,
To thee my friend it rests to procure
The marriage twixt my sister Antygone
And thy dear son Haemone, to whom for dowre
At parting thus I promise to perform
As much as late I did beheste to thee:
My mothers blood and brother dear thou art,
Ne need I crave of thee to guard her well,
As for my father care I not, for if
So chance I dye, it may full well be said
His bitter curses brought me to my bane,

The Lord defend, for that unworthy were.

Of Thebes town the rule and scepter lo
I need nor ought it other wise dispose
Than unto thee, if I dye without heir.
Yet longs my lingering mind to understand
The doubtful end of this unhappy war:
Wherefore I will thou send thy son to seek
Tyresias the divine, and learn of him,
For at my call I know he will not come
That often have his arts and him reproude.

As you command, so ought I to perform.

And last, I thee and city both command,
If fortune friendly favor our attemptes,
And make our men triumphant victors al,
That none there be so hardy ne so bold
For Pollinices bones to give a grave:
And who presumes to break my heste berein,
Shall dye the death in penance of his pain,
For though I were by blood to him conioynde
I part it now, and justice goes with me
To guide my steps victoriously before.
Pray you to Jove he deigne for to defend,
Our City safe both now and evermore.

Gramercie worthy prince, for all thy love
And faithful trust thou do in me repose,
And if should hap, that I hope never shall,
I promise yet to do what best behoues,
But chiefly this I swear and make a vow,
For Pollinices now our cruel foe,
To hold the hest that thou do me command.

O Fierce and furious God, whose harmefull heart,
Rejoices most to shed the giltlesse blood,
Whose headie will does all the world subvert,
And does envy the pleasant merry mood,
Of our estate that erst in quiet stood,
Why do thou thus our harmless town annoye,
Which mighty Bacchus governed in joy?
Father of war and death, that do remove
With wrathful wrecke from woeful mothers breast,
The trusty pledges of their tender love,
So grant the Gods, that for our final rest,
Dame Uenus pleasant looks may please thee best,
Whereby when thou shall all amazed stand,
The sword may fall out of thy trembling hand.
And thou may prove some other way full well
The bloody prowess of thy mighty spear,
Wherewith thou raisest from the depth of hell,
The wrathful sprites of all the furies there,
Who when they wake, do wander every where,
And never rest to rang^ about the coasts,
T'enriche that pit with spoil of damned ghostes.
And when thou have our fields forsaken thus,
Let cruel discord bear thee company,
Engirt with snakes and serpents venomous,
Even she that can with red vermilion dye
The gladsome green that flourished pleasantly,
And make the greedy ground a drinking cup,
To suy the blood of murdered bodies up.
Yet thou return O joy and pleasant peace,
From whence thou did against our will depart,
Ne let thy worthy mind from travel cease,
To chase disdain out of the poisoned heart,
That raised war to all our pains and smarte,
Even from the breast of Oedipus his son,
Whose swelling pride has all this jar begone.
And thou great God, that does all things decree*
And sitst on high above the starrie skies,
Thou chiefest cause of causes all that be,
Regard not his offense but hear our cries,
And spedily redress our miseries,
For what can we poor woeful wretches do
But crave thy aid, and only cleave thereto?

Done by G. Gascoyg^e.
BEfore the beginning of this.iij. Act did sound a very doleful noise of
cornettes, during the which there opened and appeared in the stage a great
Gulf, immediately came in.vj. gentlemen in their dublets and hose bringing
upon their shulders baskets full of earth and threw them into the Gulf to
fill it up, but it would not so close up nor be filled. Then came the ladies
and dames that stood by, throwing in their chey^es and Jewels, so to cause it
stop up and close it self, but when it would not so be filled, came in a
kinghte with his sword drawn, armed at all points, who walking twice or
thrice about it, and perusing if, seeing that it would neither be filled with
earth nor with their Jewels and ornaments, after solemn reverence done to
the gods, and courteous leave taken of the Ladies and standers by, sodeinly
lepte into the Gulf the which did close up immediately, bet^kening unto us the
love that every worthy person owes unto his native country, by the historye
of Curtius, who for the like cause adventured the like in Rome. This done,
blind Tyresias the divine prophet led in by his daughter, and conducted by
Meneceus the son of Creon, enters by the gates Electrae, and says as
follows

THou trusty guide of my so trustlesse steps
Deer daughter mine go we, lead thou y^ way,
That since the day I first did leese this light
Thou only art the light of thsee mine eyes:
And for thou know I am both old and weak
And ever longing after lovely rest,
Derect my steps amyd the playnest paths,
That so my febled feet may feel lest pain.
Meneceus thou gentle child, tell me,
It is far hence, the place where we must go,
Where as thy father for my coming stays?
For like unto the slothful snayle I draw,
Dear s^nne, with pain these aged legs of mine,
And though my mind be quick, scarce can I move.
Comfort thy self divine, Creon thy friend
Lo stands here, and came to meet with thee
To ease the pain that thou might else sustain.
"For unto elde each travel yeldes annoy:
And thou his daughter and his faithful guide*
Lo rest him here, and rest thou there withal
Thy virgins hands, that in sustayning him
Do well acquit the duty of a child.
"For crooked age and hory silver hears
"Still craves help of lusty youthful years.

Gramercie Lord, what is your noble will?

What I would have of thee Tyresias
Is not a thing so soon for to be said,
But rest a while thy weak and weary limbs
And take some breath now after weary walk,
And tell I pray thee, what this crown does mean,
That sits so kingly on thy skillful head?

Know this, that for I did with grave advise,
Foretell the Citizens of Athens town,
How they might best with loss of little blood,
Have victories against their enemies,
Has been the cause why I do wear this Crown,
As right reward and not unmeet for me.

So take I then this thy victorious crown,
For our avail in token of good luck,
That know, how the discord and debat^
Which late is fallen between these brethren twain,
Has brought all Thebes in danger and in dread.
Eteocles our king, with threatening arms,
Is gone against his greekish enemies,
Commanding me to learn of thee (who art
A true divine of things that be to come)
What were for us the safest to be done,
From peril now our country to preserve.

Long have I been within the town of Thebes,
Since that I tied this trusty tongue of mine
From telling truth, fearing Eteocles:
Yet, since thou do in so great need desire
I should reveal things hidden unto thee,
For common cause of this our common weal,
I stand content to pleasure thee herein.
But first, that to this mighty God of yours
There might some worthy sacrifice be made,
Let kill the fairest goat that is in Thebes,
Within whose bowels when the Priest shall look,
And tell to me what he has there espied,
I trust t'aduyse thee what is best to done.

Lo here the temple, and ere long I look
To see the holy priest that hither co^mes,
Bringing with him the pure and fair offerings,
Which thou requirest, for not long since, I sent
For him, as one that am not ignorant
Of all your rytes and sacred ceremonies:
He went to choose amid our herd of goats,
The fattest there: and look where now he commes.

O famous Citizens, that hold full dear
Your quiet country: Lo where I do come
Most joyfully, with wonted sacrifice,
So to beseech the supreme Citizens,
To stay our state that staggringly do stand,
And plant us peace where war and discord grows:
Wherefore, with heart devout and humble cheer,
Whiles I break up the bowels of this beast,
That often thy vyneyarde Bacchus has destroyed,
Let every wight crave pardon for his faults,
With bending knee about his aultars here.

Take here the salt, and sprinckle therwithall
About the neck, that done, cast all the rest
Into the sacred fire, and then annoynte
The knife prepared for the sacrifice.
O mighty Jove, preserve the precious gift
That thou me gave, when first thine angry Queen,
For deep disdain did both mine eyes do out,
Grant me, I may foretell the truth in this,
For, but by thee, I know that I ne may,
Ne will ne can, out trusty sentence say,

This due is done.

With knife then stick y^ kid.

Thou daughter of divine Tyresias,
With those unspotted virgins hands of thine
Receive the blood within this vessel here,
And then devoutly it to Bacchus yield.

O holy God of Thebes, that do both praise
Sweet peace* and do in heart also disdain
The noisome noise, the furies and the fight
Of bloody Mars and of Bellona both:
O thou the giver both of joy and health,
Receive in gree and with well willing hand
These holy whole brunt offerings unto thee,
And as this town does wholly thee adore,
So by thy help do grant that it may stand
Safe from the enmyes outrage evermore.

Now in thy sacred name I bowell here
This sacrifice.

And what entralls has it?

Fair and welformed all in every point,
The liver clean, the heart is not inf^^t,
Save lo, I find but only one heart string
By which I find somewhat I woten^re what,
That seems corrupt, and were not only that,
In all the rest, they are both sound and hole.

Now cast at once into the holy flame
The sweet incense, and then advertise me
What hew it bears, and every other ryte
That ought may help the truth for to coniecte.

I see the flames do sundry colors cast,
Now bloody sanguine, straight way purple, blew,
Some parts seem black, some gray, and some be green.

Stay there, suffy^eth this for to have seen,
Know Creon, that these outward seemly signs
By that the Gods have let me understand
Who understands al and sees secret things,
Betokens that the City great of Thebes
Shall Uictor be against the Greekish host,
If so consent be given, but more than this
I list not say:

Alas for courtesy
Say on Tyresias, never have respect
To any living man, but tell the truth.

In this mean while I will return with speed
From whence I came, for lawful is it not,
That such as I should hear your secretnesse.

Contrary then to that which I have said,
The incest foul, and childbirth monstrous
Of Iocasta, so stirs the wrath of Jove,
This city shall with bloody channels swim,
And angry Mars shall overcome it all.
With famine, flame, rape, murder, dole and death:
These lusty towers shall have a headlong fall,
These houses burnde, and all the rest be rasde,
And soon be said, here whilome Thebes stood.
One only way I find for to escape,
Which both would thee displease to hear it told,
And me to tell percase were perilous.
Thee therefore with my travel I commend
To Jove, and with the rest I will endure,
What so shall chance for our adversity.

Yet stay a while.

Creon make me not stay
By force.

Why fleest thou?

Sir it is not from thee
I flee, but from this fortune foul and fell.

Yet tell me what behoues the city do?

Thou Creon seem now desirous still
It to preserve: but if as well as I
Thou knew that which is to thee unknown,
Then wouldste thou not so soon consent thereto.

And would not I with eagre mind desire
The thing that may for Thebes ought avail?

And do thou then so instantly request
To know which way thou may the same preserve?

For nothing else I sent my son of late
To seek for thee.

Then will I satisfy
Thy greedy mind in this: but first tell me,
Menetius where is he?

Not far from me.

I pray thee send him out some other where.

Why would thou that he should not be here?

I would not have him hear what I should say.

He is my son, ne will he it reveal.

And shall I then while he is present speak?

Yea, be thou sure that he no less than I,
Does wish full well unto this common weal.

Then Creon shall thou know: the mean to save
This City, is, that thou shall ^lea thy son,
And of his body make a sacrifice
For his Country: lo here is all you seek
So much to know, and since you have me forced
To tell the thing that I would not have told,
If I have you offended with my words,
Blame then your self, and eke your froward fate.

cruel words, oh, oh, what have thou said,
Thou cruel southsayer?

Even that, that heaven
Has ordained once, and needs it must ensue.

How many evils have thou knit up in one?

Though evil for thee, yet for thy country good.

And let my country perish, what care I?

"Above all things we ought to hold it dear.

Cruel were he, that would not love his child.

"For commonweal, were well, that one man wail.

To loose mine own, I list none other save.

"Best Citizens care least for private gain.

Depart, for now, with all thy prophecies.

"Lo, thus the truth does always hatred get.

Yet pray I thee by these thy silver hears,

"The harm that co^mes from heaven can not be escaped.

And by thy holy spirit of prophecy,

"What heaven has done, that can not I undo.

"That to no more this secret thou reueals.

And would thou have me learn to make a lie?

I pray thee hold thy peace.

That will I not:
But in thy woe to yield thee some relief,
I tell thee once, thou shall be Lord of Thebes.
Which hap of thine this string did well declare,
Which from the heart does out alonely grow.
So did the piece corrupted plainly show,
An argument most evident to prove
Thy son his death.

Well, yet be thou content
To keep full close this secret hidden grief.

I neither ought, ne will keep it so close.

Shall I be then the murderer of mine own?

Ne blame not me, but blame the stars for this.

Can heavens condemn but him alone to dye?

We ought believe the cause is good and just.

"Unjust is he condemns the innocent.

"A fool is he accuses heavens of wrongs.

"There can no ill thing come from heavens above.

Then this that heaven commands can not be ill.

I not believe that thou have talked with God.

Because I tell thee that does thee displease.

Out of my sight accursed lying wretch.

Go daughter go, oh what a fool is he
That puts in ure to publishe prophecies?
"For if he do foretell a froward fate,
"Though it be true, yet shall he purchase hate:
"And if he silence keep, or hide the truth,
"The heavy wrath of mighty Gods ensuth.
Apollo he might well tell things to come,
That had no dread the angry to offend:
But hye we daughter hence some other way.

OH my dear child, well have thou heard with ear
These weery news, or rather wicked tales
That this divine of thee deuined has:
Yet will thy father never be thy foe,
With cruel doom thy death for to consent.
You rather ought, O father, to consent
Unto my death, since that my death may bring
Unto this town both peace and victory.
"Ne can I purchase more prayseworthy death
"Than for my countries wealth to lose my breath.

I can not praise this witless will of thine.

"You know dear father, that this life of ours
"Is brittle, short, and nothing else in deed
"But tedious toil and pangs of endless pain:
"And death, whose darte to some men seems so fell,
"Brings quiet end to this unquiet life.
"Unto which end who soonest does arrive,
"Finds soonest rest of all his restless grief.
"And were it so, that here on earth we felt
"No prick of pain, nor that our flattring days
"Were never dashed by froward fortunes frown,
"Yet being borne (as all men are) to dye,
"Were not this worthy glory and renown,
"To yield the country soil where I was borne,
"For so long time, so short a time as mine?
I can not think that this can be denied.
Then if to shun this haughty high beh^st,
Mine only cause, O father, does you move,
Be sure, you seek to take from me your son,
The greatest honor that I can attain:
But if your own commodity you move,
So much the less you ought the same allow:
For look, how much the more you have in Thebes,
So much the more you ought to love the same:
Here have you Hemone, he that in my stead
(O my dear father) may with you remain,
So that, although you be deprived of me,
Yet shall you not be quite deprived of heirs.

I can not choose, dear son, but disalow^
This thy too hasty, hot desire of death:
For if thy life thou set all so light,
Yet ought thou thy father me respect,
Who as I draw the more to lumpishe age,
So much more need have I to crave thine aid:
Ne will I yet, with stubborn tongue deny,
"That for his common weal to spend his life,
"Does win the subject high renoumed name.
"But how? in armoure to defend the state,
"Not like a beast to bleed in sacrifice:
And therewithal, if any should consent
To such a death, then should the same be I,
That have prolonged life even long enough,
Ne many days have I now to draw on.
And more avail might to the country come,
Dear son, to hold that lusty life of thine
That art both young and eke of courage stout,
Than may by me that feeble am and old.
Then live dear son in high prosperity,
And give me leave that worthy am to dye.

Yet worthy were not that unworthy change.

If such a death bring glory, give it me,

Not you, but me, the heavens call to die.

We be but one in flesh and body both.

I father ought; so ought not you, to die.

If thou son die, think not that I can line:
Then let me die, and so shall he first die,
That ought to die, and yet but one shall die.

Although I, father, ought to obey your hestes,
Yet evil were not to this yield your will.

Thy wit is wily for to work this woe.

Oh, tender pity moves me thereto.

"A beast is he, that kills himself with knife,
"Of pity to preserve an others life.

"Yet wise is he, that does obey the Gods.

The Gods will not the death of any wight.

"Whose life they take, they give him life also.

But thou do strive to take thy life thy self.

Nay them to obey, that will I shall not live.

What fault, O son, condemns thee to death?

"Who lives (father) here without a fault?

I see no gylte in thee that death deserves.

But God it sees that every secret sees.

How should we know what is the will of God?

We know it then, when he reueales the same.

As though he would come down to tell it us.

By diverse means his secrets he discloseth.

Oh, fond is he, who thinks to understand
The mysteries of ^oue his secret mind:
And for to end this controversy here,
Lo thus I say, I will we both live yet:
Prepare thee then, my hestes to hold and keep,
And pull a down that stubborn heart of thine.

You may of me, as of your self dispose,
And since my life does seem so dear to you,
I will preserve the same to your avail,
That I may spend it always to your will.

Then* thee behoues out of this town to (...):
Before the bold and bl^ide Tyresias
Do publish this that is as yet unknown*

And where, or in what place shall I become?

Where thou may be hence furthest out of sight.

You may command, and I ought to obey.

Go to the land of Th^s^eotia.

Where Dodona does fit in sacred chair?

Even there my child.

And who shall guide my wandering steps?

high Jove.

Who shall give sustenance for my relief?

There will I send thee heaps of glistring gold.

But when shall I eft^soones my father see?

Cre long I hope: but now, for now depart,
For every lingering let or little stay,
May purchase pain and torment both to me.

First would I take my conge of the Queen,
That since the day my mother lost her life,
Has nourisht me as if I were her own.

Oh, tarry not my dear son, tarry not.

Behold father, I go. You dames o^ Thebes.
Pray to almighty Jove for my return,
You see how mine unhappy starr^s me drive
To go my country fro, and if so chance,
I end in woe my pryme and lusty years
Before the course of Nature do them call,
Honor my death yet with your drery plaints,
And I shall eke, where so this carkas come,
Pray to the Gods that they preserve this town.

WHen she that rules the rolling wheel of chance,
Does turn aside her angry frowning face,
On him, whom erst she deigned to advance,
She never leaves to galde him with disgrace,
T^ toss and turn his state in every place,
Till at the last she hurl him from on high
And yield him subject unto misery:
And as the branch that from the root is reft,
He never winnes like life to that he left:
Yea though he do, yet can no taste of joy
Compare with pangs that past in his annoy.
Well did the heavens ordeine for our behoof
Necessity, and fa^es by them allowde,
That when we see our high mishappes aloof
(As though our eyes were mufled with a cloud)
Our froward will does shrink it self and shrowde
From our avail, wherewith we run so far
As none a^ends can make that we do mar:
Then draws evil hap and strives to show his strength,
And such as yield unto his might, at length
He leads them by necessity the way
That destiny preparde for our decay.
The Mariner amidde the swelling seas
Who sees his bark with many a billowe beaten,
Now here, now there, as wind and waves best please,
When thundering Jove with tempest list to threaten,
And dreades in d^pest gulf for to be eaten,
Yet learnes a mean by mere necessity
To save him self in such extremity:
For when he sees no man has wit nor power
To fly from fate when fortune list to lowre,
His only hope on mighty Jove does cast,
Whereby he winnes the wished haven at last.
How fond is that man in his fantasy,
Who thinks that Jove the maker of us al,
And he that tempers all in heaven on high,
The sun, the moon, the stars celestial,
So that no leaf without his leave can fall,
Has not in him omnipotence also
To guide and govern all things here below?
O blinded eyes, O wretched mortal wights,
O subject sl^ues to every evil that lights,
To escape such woe, such pain, such shame and scorn,
Happy were he that never had bin borne.
Well might duke Creon driven by destiny,
If tr^^ it be that old Tyresias says,
Redeem our city from this misery,
By his consent unto Meneceus death,
Who of him self would feign have lost his breath,
"But every man is loath for to fulfill
"The heavenly hest that pleases not his will:
"That public weal must needs to ruin go
"Where private profit is preferred so.
Yet mighty God, thy only aid we crave,
This town from siege, and us from sorrow save.

BEfore the beginning of this fourth Act, the Trumpets sounded, the drums
and fifes, and a great peale of ordinance was shot of, in the which there
entered upon the stage.vj. knights armed at al points, whereof three came in by
the Gates Electrae, and the other four by the Gates Homoloides, either part
being accompanied with vij, other armed men: and after they had marched twice
or thrice about the Stage, the one party menacing the other by their furious
looks and gestures, the.vj. knights caused their other attendants to stand by,
and drawing their Swords, fell to cruel and courageous combat, continuing
therein, till two on the one side were slain: the third perceiving, that he
only remained to withstand the force of.iij. enemies, did politiquely run
aside, wherewith immediately one of the.iij. followed after him, and when he
had drawn his enemy thus from his company, he turned again and slew
him: Then the second also ran after him, whom he slew in like manner, and
consequently the third, and then triumphantly marched about the Stage with
his sword in his hand. Hereby was noted the incomparable force of concord
between brethren, who as long as they hold together may not easily by any
means be overcome, and being once disseuered by any means, are easily
overthrown. The history of the brethren Horatij and Curiatij, who agreed to
like combat and came to like end. After that the dead carcasses were carried
from the Stage by the armed men on both parties, and that the victor was
triumphantly accompanied out, also came in a messanger armed from the camp,
seeking the Queen, and to her spoke as follows

O Sage and sober dames, O shamefast maids,
O faithful servants of our aged Queen,
Come lead her forth, since unto her I bring
Such secret news as are of great importe.
Come forth, O Queen, furceasse thy woeful plainte,
And to my words vouchsafe a willing ear.
My servant dear, do thou yet bring me news
Of more mishappe? ah werie wretch, alas,
How does Eteocles? whom heretofore
In his increasing years, I wonted ay
From dangerous hap with favor to defend,
Does he yet live? or has untimely death
In cruel fight berefte his flowring life?

He lives (O Queen) hereof have ye no doubt,
From such suspecte my self will quite you soon.

The ve^trous Greeks have happily ta^^ the town*

The Gods forbid.

Our soldiers then, perchance,
Dispersed be^e and yelden to the sword.

Not so, they were at first in danger sure,
But in the end obtained victory.

Alas, what then beco^mes of Polinice?
Oh can thou tell? is he dead or alive?

You have (O Queen) yet both your sons alive.

Oh, how my heart is eased of this pain.
Well, then proceed, and briefly let me hear,
How ye rep^lst your proud presuming foes,
That thereby yet at least I may assuage
The swelling sorrows in my doleful breast,
In that the town is hitherto preserude:
And for the rest, I trust that mighty Jove
Will yield us aid.

No sooner had your worthy valiant son,
Seuerde the Dukes into seven several parts,
And set them to defense of several gates,
And brought in brave arraye his horssemen out,
First to encounter with their mighty foen,
And likewise pitched, the footmen face to face
Against the footmen of their enemies,
But fiercely straight, the armies did approach,
Swarming so thick, as couerde clean the field,
When dreadful blast of braying trumpets sound,
Of doleful drums, and thundering cannon shot,
Gave hideous sign of horror of the fight,
Then began the Greeks to give their sharp assault,
Then from the walls our stout courageous men,
With rolling stones, with paisse of hugie beame^,
With flying darts, with flakes of burning fire,
And deadly blows, did beat them back again:
Thus striving long, with stout and bloody fight,
Whereby full many thousand slaughtered were,
The hardy Greeks came underneath the walls,
Of whom, first Capaney (a lusty Knight)
Did scale the walls, and on the top thereof
Did vaunt himself, when many hundred more,
With fierce assaults did follow him as fast.
Then lo, the Captains seven bestirrde themselves,
(Whose names ye have already understood)
Some here, some there, naught dreading loss of life,
With new relief to feed thee fainting breach:
And Polinice, he ^ended all the force*
Of his whole charge, against the greatest (...),
When suddenly a flashe of lightning flame
From angry skies struck captain Capaney,
That there down dead he fell, at sight whereof
The gazers one were fraught with soden fear.
The rest, that strove to mount the walls so fast,
From ladders top did headlong tumble down.
Herewith our men encouragde by good hap,
Took hardy hearts, and so repulst the Greeks.
There was Eteocles and I with him,
Who setting first those soldiers to their charge,
Ran straight to the other gates, unto the weak
He manly comfort gave, unto the bold
His lusty words increased courage still,
In so much as th'amased Grecian king
When he did hear of Capaney his death,
Fearing thereby the Gods became his foen
Out from the trench withdrewe his weary host.
But rash Eteocles (presuming too too much
Upon their flight) did issue out of Thebes,
And forward straighte with strength of chivalry,
His flying foes courageously pursude.
To long it were to make recompt of all
That wounded been, or slain, or captive now,
The cloudy air was filled round about
With houling cries and woeful wayling plaints:
So great a slaughter (O renowned Queen)
Before this day I think was never seen.
Thus have we now cut of the fruitless hope
The Grecians had, to sack this noble town.
What joyful end will happen hereunto
Yet know I not: the gods turn all to good.
"To conquer, lo, is doubtless worthy praise,
"But wisely for to use the conquest got,
"Has ever won immortal sound of fame
Well, yet therewhile in this we may rejoice,
Since heaven and heavenly powers are pleased therewith.

This good success was luckie sure, and such,
As for my part I little looked for:
To save the town and eke to have my sons
(As you report) preserved yet alive.
But yet proceed, and further let me know
The final end that they agreed upon.

No more (O Queen) let this for now suffice,
Since hitherto your state is safe enough.

Those words of thine, do whelme my jealous mind
With great suspecte of other mischiefs hid.

What would ye more, already being sure
That both your sons in safety do remain?

I long to know the rest, or good or bad.

O let me now return to Eteocles,
That of my service greatly stands in need.

Right well* I see, thou do conceal the woorst.

Oh force me not, the good now being past,
To tell the ill.

Tell it I say, on pain of our displeasure.

Since thus ye seek to hear a doleful tale,
I will no longer stay: wit ye therefore,
Your desperate sons together be agreed
For to attempt a wicked enterprise,
To private ^^ght they have betroutht themselves,
Of which conflicte, the end mus^ needs be this,
That one do (...), that other die the death.

Alas, alas, this did I ever fear.

Now, since in sum I have revealed that,
Which you have heard with great remorse of mind,
I will proceed, at large to tell the wh^le.
When your victorious son, with valiant force
Had chaste his foes into their joining tents,
Even there he staide, and straight at sound of trumpe
With stretched voice the herault thus proclaimde:
You princely Greeks, that hither be arrived
To spoil the fruit of these our fertile fields,
And us to drive from this our Native soil,
O suffer not so many giltlesse souls
By this debate descend in Stigian lake,
For private cause of wicked Pollinice,
But rather let the brethren, hand to hand,
By mutual blows appease their furious rage,
And so to cease from sheding further blood:
And, to the end you all might understand
The profit that to every side may fall,
Thus much my Lord thought good to profer you,
This is his will, if he be overcome,
Then Polinice to rule this kingly realm:
If so it hap (as reason would it should)
Our rightful prince to conquer Polinice,
That then no one of you make more adoo,
But straight to Argos. I Will have home again.
This, thus pronounst unto the noble Greeks,
No sooner did the sound of trumpet cease,
But Polinice stepped forth before the host,
And to these words this answer did he make:
O thou, (not brother) but my mortal foe,
Thy profer here has pleased me so well,
As presently, without more long delay,
I yield my self prepared to the field.
Our noble King no sooner heard this vaunt,
But forth as fast he pressed his princely steps,
With eger mind, as hoouering falcon wonts
To make her stoop, when pray appears in fight:
At all assayes they both were bra^ely armed,
To eithers side his sword fast being girt,
In ^ithers hand was put a sturdy lance:
About Eteocles our soldiers cloong,
To comfort him, and put him then in mind,
He fought for safety of his country soil,
And that in him consisted all their hope.
To Polinice the king Adrastus swore,
If he escaped victor from the field,
As his retourn he would in Greece erecte
A golden Image unto mighty Jove
In sign of his triumphing victory:
But all this while seek you (O noble queen)
To hinder this your furious sons attempt.
Entreat that Gods it may not take effect,
Else must you needs ere long deprived be
Of both your sons, or of the one at least.

ANtigone my sweet daughter, come forth
Out of this house, that naught but woe retains,
Come forth I say, not for to sing or dance,
But to prevent (if in our powers it lie)
That thy malicious brethren (swollen with ire)
And I alas, their miserable mother,
Be not destroide by stroke of dreadful death.
Ah sweet mother, ah my beloved mother,
Alas alas what cause does move ye now
From trembling voice to send such careful cries?
What painful pang? what grief does gripe you now?

O dear daughter, thy most unhappy brethren
That sometimes lodgde within these wretched loins
Shall die this day, if Jove prevent it not.

Alas what say you? alas what do you say?
Can I (alas) endure to see him dead,
Whom I thus long have sought to see alive?

They both have vowde (I quake alas to tell)
With trenchant blade to spill each others blood.
O cruel Eteocles, ah ruthlesse wretch,
Of this outrage thou only art the cause,
Not Pollinice, whom thou with hateful spite
Have reaued first of crown and country soil,
And now do seek to reaue him of his life.

Daughter no more delay, lets go, lets go.

Ah my sweet mother, whither shall I go?

With me, dear daughter, to the greekish host,

Alas how can I go? unless I go
In danger of my life, or of good name?

Time serves not now (my well-beloved child)
To way the loss of life or honest name,
But rather to prevent (if so we may)
That wicked deed, which only but to think,
Does hale my heart out of my heavy breast.

Come then, lets go, good mother let us go,
But what shall we be able for to do,
You a weak old woman for worn with years,
And I God knows a silly simple maid?

Our woeful words, our prayers and our plaintes,
Pourde out with streams of ouerflowing tears,
(Where Nature rules) may happen to prevail,
When reason, power, and force of arms do fail,
But if the glowing heat of boiling wrath
So furious be, as it may not relent,
Then I atwixt them both will throw my self,
And this my breast shall bear the deadly blows
That otherwise should light upon my sons:
So shall they shead my blood and not their own.
Well now dear daughter, let us hasten hence,
For if in time we stay this raging strife,
Then happily may my life prolonged be:
If ere we come the bloody deed be done,
Then must my ghost forsake this feeble corpse:
And thou, dear child, with dolor shall bewail,
Thy brothers death and mothers all at once.

WHo so has ^elt, what fervent love
A mother bears unto her tender sons,
She and none other sure, can comprehend
The doleful grief, the pangs and secret pain,
That presently does pierce the princely breast
Of our afflicted Queen: alas, I think
No martyrdom might well compare with hirs.
So often as I record her restless state,
Alas me thinks I feel a shiuering fear
Flit to and fro along my flushing veins.
Alas for ruth, that thus two brethren should,
Enforce themselves to shed each others blood.
Where is the laws of nature now become?
Can flesh of flesh, alas, can blood of blood,
So far forget it self, as slaye it self?
O lowering stars, O dim and angry skies,
O guilty fate, such mischief set aside.
But if supernall powers decreed have,
That death must be the end of this debate,
Alas what floudes of tears shall then suffice,
To weep and wail the near approaching death:
I mean the death of sons and mother both,
And with their death the ruin and decay,
Of Oedipus and all his princely race?
But lo, here Creon co^mes with careful cheer.
It Is time that now I end my just complaint.

ALthough I straightly chargde my tender child
To fly from Thebes for safegarde of himself,
And that long since he parted from my (...),
Yet do I greatly hand in lingering doubt,
Least passing through the gates, the privy watch
Has stayed him by some suspect of treason.
And so therewhile, the prophets having skride
His hidden fate, he purchased have the death
Which I by all means sought he might eschew:
And this mischaunce so much I fear the more,
How much the wished conquest at the first,
Fell happily unto the town of Thebes.
"But wise men ought with patience to sustain
"The sundry haps that slipperie fortune frames.
Alas, who can direct my hasty steps
Unto the brother of our woeful Queen?
But lo where carefully he stands here.

If so the mind may dread his own mishap,
Then dread I much, this man that seeks me thus,
Has brought the death of my beloved son.

My Lord, the thing you fear is very true,
Your son Meneceus no longer lives.

Alas who can withstand the heavenly powers?
Well, it beseems not me, ne yet my years,
In bootelesse plaint to wast my wailefull tear^s:
Do thou recount to me his lucklesse death,
The order, form, and manner of the same.

Your son (my Lord) came to Eteocles,
And told him this in presence of the rest,
Renou^ed King, neither your victory,
Ne yet the safety of this princely Realm
In armor does consist, but in the death
Of me, of me, (O most victorious King)
So heavenly dome of mighty Jove commands,
I (knowing what avail my death should yield
Unto your grace, and unto native land)
Might well be ^^inde a most ungrateful son
Unto this worthy town, if I would shun
The sharpest death to do my country good,
In mourning weed now let the vestall Nymphs,
With fauning tunes commend my faultl^sse ghost
To highest heavens, while I despoyle my self,
That afterward (since ^oue will have it so)
To save your lives, I may receive my death.
Of you I crave, O courteous Citizens,
To shrine my corpse in tomb of marble stone,
Whereon grave this: Meneceus here does lie,
For countries cause that was content to die.
This said, alas, he made no more a do,
But drew his sword and sheathde it in his breast.

No more, I have enough, return ye now
From whence ye came.

Well, since the blood of my beloved son,
Must serve to s^ake the wrath of angry Jove,
And since his only death must bring to Thebes
A quiet end of her unquiet state,
Me thinks good reason would, that I henceforth,
Of Thebane soil should bear the kingly swaye,
Yea sure, and so I will ere it be long,
Either by right, or else by force of arms.
Of al mishap lo here the wicked brood,
My sister first espoused has her son
That slew his sire, of whose accursed seed
Two brethren sprang, whose raging hateful hearts,
By force of boiling ire are bolne so sore
As each do thyrst to suck the others blood:
But why do I sustain the smart hereof?
Why should my blood he spilte for others gilte?
Oh welcome were that messanger to me
That brought me word of both my nephews deaths,
Then should it soon be seen in every eye,
Twixt prince and prince what difference would appear*
Then should experience show what grief it is
To serve the humors of unbridled youth.
Now will I go for to prepare with speed
The funerals of my young giltlesse son,
The which perhaps may be accompanied
With thobsequies of proud Eteocles.
Finis Actus. 4.

O Blissfull concord, bredde in sacred breast
Of him that guides the restless rolling sky,
That to the earth for man's assured rest
From height of heavens vouchsafest down to fly,
In thee alone the mighty power does lie,
With sweet accord to keep the frouning stars
And every planet else from hurtful wars.
In thee, in thee such noble virtue bydes,
As may command the mightiest Gods to bend,
From thee alone such sugared friendship flydes
As mortal wightes can scarcely comprehend,
To greatest strife thou setst delightful end*
O holy peace, by thee are only found
The passing joys that every where abound.
Thou only thou, through thy celestial might,
Did first of all the heavenly pole divide,
From the old confused heap that Chao hight:
Thou ^adest the Sun, the Moon, and stars to glide,
With ordered course about this world so wide:
Thou have ordainde Dan Tytans shining ^ight,
By dawne of day to chase the darkesome night.
When tract of time returns the lusty Uer,
By thee alone, the buddes and blossoms spring,
The fields with flowers be garnisht every where,
The blooming trees, abundant fruit do bring,
The cherefull birds melodiously do sing,
Thou do appoint, the crop of summers seed
For man's relief, to serve the winters need.
Thou do inspire the hearts of princely peers
By providence, proceeding from above,
In flowring youth to choose their worthy feeres,
With whom they live in league of lasting love,
Till fearful death does flitting life remove:
And look how fast, to death man pays his due,
So fast again, do thou his stock renew.
By thee, the basest thing advanced is,
Thou every where, do graffe such golden peace,
As fills man, with more than earthly bliss,
The earth by thee, does yield her sweet increase
At beck of thee, all bloody discords cease,
And mightiest Realms in quiet do remain,
Whereas thy hand, does hold the royal reign.
But if thou fail, then all things gone to wrack,
The mother the^, does dread her natural child,
Then every town is subject to the sack,
Then spotless maids, then virgins be defilde,
Then rigor rules, then reason is exilde:
And this, thou woeful Thebes, to our great pain,
With present spoil, art likely to sustain.
Me think I hear the wailfull weeping cries
Of wretched dames, in every coast resound,
Me thinks I see, how up to heavenly skies
From battered walls, the thundering clappes rebound
Me think I hear, how all things go to ground,
Me think I see, how soldiers wounded lie
With gasping breath, and yet they can not dye.
By means whereof, oh sweet Meneceus he,
That gives for countries cause his guiltless life,
Of others all, most happy shall he be:
His ghost shall flit, from broiles of bloody strife,
To heavenly bliss, where pleasing joys be rife:
And would to God, that this his fatal end
From further plagues, our city might defend.
O sacred God, give ear unto thy thrall,
That humbly here upon thy name does call,
O let not now, our faultlesse blood be spilt,
For hot revenge of any others gilt.

Done by F. Kinvvelmarshe.
FIrst the Stillpipes sounded a very mournful melodye, in which time came upon
the Stage a woman clothed in a white garment, on her head a pillar, double
faced, the foremost face fair and smiling, the other behind black and
louring, muffled with a white laune about her eyes, her lap full of Iewelles,
sitting in a charyot, her legs naked, her fete set upon a great round ball,
and being drawn in by.iiij. noble personages, she led in a string on her
right hand.ij. kings crowned, and in her left hand.ij. poor slaves very
meanly attyred. After she was drawn about the stage, she stayed a little,
changing the kings unto the left hand and the slaves unto the right hand,
taking the crowns from the kings heads she crowned therewith the ij. slaves,
and casting the vile clothes of the slaves upon the kings, she despoyled the
kings of their robes, and therewith aparelled the slaves. This done, she was
drawn eftsoon about the stage in this order, and then departed, leaving unto
us a plain Type or figure of unstable fortune, who does oftentimes raise to
heigthe of dignity the vile and unnoble, and in like manner throws down
from the place of promotio^, even those who^ before she her self had thither
advanced: after her departure came in Duke Creon with four gentlemen waiting
upon him, and lamented the death of Menec^us his son in this manner

ALas what shall I do? bemone my self?
Or rue the ruin of my Native land,
About the which such clouds I see enclosde
As darker cannot cover dreadful hell.
With mine own eyes I saw my own dear son
All gorde with blood of his too bloody breast,
Which he has shed full like a friend, too dear
To his country, and yet a cruel foe
To me that was his friend and father both.
Thus to him self he gaynde a famous name,
And glory great, to me redoubted pain,
Whose hapless death in my afflicted house,
Has put such playnt, as I ne can epsy
What comfort might acquiet their distr^sse.
I hither come my sister for to seek,
Iocasta, she that might in woeful wise
Amid her high and ouerpining cares
Prepare the baynes for his so wretched corpse,
And eke for him that now is not in life,
May pay the due that to the dead pertaynes,
And for the honor he did well deserve,
The give some gifts unto infernal Gods.
My Lord, your sister is gone forth long since,
Into the camp, and with her Antigone
Her daughter dear.

Into the camp? alas and what to do?

She understood, that for this realm forthwith
Her sons were greed in combat for to join.

Alas, the funerals of my dear son
Dismayed me so, that I ne did receive,
Ne seek to know these new unwelcome news.
But lo, behold a plain apparent sign
Of further fears, the furious troubled looks
Of him that comes here so hastily.

ALas, alas what shall I do? alas,
What shriching voice may serve my woeful words?
O wretched I, ten thousand times a wretch,
The messanger of dread and cruel death.
Yet more mishappe? and what unhappy news?

My Lord, your nephues both have lost their lives.

Out and alas, to me and to this town
Thou do account great ruin and decay:
You royal family of Oedipus,
And hear you this? your liege and sovereign Lords
The brethren both are slain and done to death.

O cruel news, most cruel that can come,
O news that might these stony walls provoke
For tender ruthe to burst in bitter tears,
And so they would, had they the sense of man.

O worthy young Lords, that unworthy were
Of such unworthy death, O me most wretch.

More wretched shall ye deem your self, my lord,
When you shall hear of further misery.

And can there be more misery than this?

With her dear sons the queen her self is slain,

Bewail ladies, alas good ladies wail
This hard mischaunce, this cruel common evil,
Ne henceforth hope for ever to rejoice.

O Iocasta, miserable mother,
What hapless end thy life alas has he^t?
Percase the heavens purueyed had the same,
Moved thereto by the wicked wedlock
Of Oedipus thy son, yet might thy scuse
Be justly made, that knew not of the crime.
But tell me messanger, oh tell me yet
The death of these two brethren, driven thereto,
Not thus all only by their drearie fate,
But by the banning and the bitter curse
Of their cruel sire, borne for our annoy,
And here on earth the only soursse of evil.

Then know my Lord, the battle that begone
Under the walls, was brought to luckie end,
Eteocles had made his foemen flee
Within their trenches, to their foul reproach:
But herewithall the brethren streightway
Each other challenge forth into the field,
By combat so to stinte their cruel strife,
Who armed thus amid the field appeard.
First Pollinices turning toward Greece
His lovely looks, began Juno thus beseech:
O heavenly queen, thou see, that since the day
I first did wedde Adrastus daughter dear,
And stayde in Greece, thy servant have I been:
Then (be it not for mine unworthiness)
Grant me this grace, the victory to win,
Grant me, that I with high triumphant hand,
May bathe this blade within my brothers breast:
I know I crave unworthy victory,
Unworthy triumphs, and unworthy spoils,
Lo he the cause, my cruel enemy.
The people wept to hear the woeful words
Of Pollinice, foreseeing eke the end
Of this outrage and cruel combat taken,
Each man began look upon his drouping mate,
With minds amazde, and trembling hearts for dread,
Whom pity perced for these youthful knights.
Eteocles with eyes up cast to heaven.
Thus said:
O mighty love his daughter grant to me,
That this right hand with this sharp armed lance
Passing amid my brothers cankred breast,
It may eke pierce that cowarde heart of his,
And so him slay that thus unworthily
Disturbes the quiet of our common weal.
So said Eteocles, and trumpets blown,
To send the summens of their bloody fight,
That one the other fiercely did encounter,
Like Lions two yfraught with boiling wrath,
Both coucht their lances full against the face,
But heaven it nolde that there they should them teinte:
Upon the battred shields the mighty spears
Are both ybroke, and in a thousand shiuers
Amid the air flowne up into the heavens:
Behold again, with naked sword in hand,
Each one the other furiously assaults.
Here they of Thebes, there stood the Greeks in doubt,
Of whom does each man feel more chilling dread,
Least any of the twain should lose his life,
Than any of the twain did feel in fight.
Their angry looks, their deadly daunting blows,
Might witness well, that in their hearts remaynde
As cankred hate, disdain, and furious mood,
As ever bred in bear or tigers breast.
The first that hapt to hurt was Polinice,
Who smote the right thighe of Eteocles:
But as we deem, the blow was nothing deep,
Then cried the Greeks, and lepte with lightened hearts,
But straight again they held their peace, for he
Eteocles began thrust his wicked sword
In the left arm of unarmed Pollinice,
And let the blood from thin vnfence^ flesh
With falling drops distill upon the ground,
Ne long he stays, but with an other thrust
His brothers belly boweld with his blade,
Then wretched he, with bridle left at large,
From of his horse fell pale upon the ground,
Ne long it was, but down our duke dismountes
From of his startling steed, and runs in have,
His brothers hapless helm for to unlace,
And with such hungry mind desired spoil,
As one that thought the field already woonne:
That at unawares, his brothers dagger drawn,
And griped fast within the dying hand,
Under his side he recklesse does receive,
That made the way to his wide open heart:
Thus falls E^eocles his brother by,
From both whose breasts the bloudfast bubling, gave
A sorry show to Greeks and (...) both.

Oh wretched end of our unhappy Lords.

Oh Oedipus, I must be wail the death
Of thy dear sons, that were my nephews both,
But of these blows thou ought feel the smarte,
That with thy wonted prayers, thus have brought
Such noble bloods to this unnoble end.
But now tell on, what followed of the Queen?

When thus with pierced hearts, by there own hands
The brothers fell had wallowed in their blood,
Th one tumbling on the others gore,
Came their afflicted mother, then to late,
And eke with her, her chaste child Antygone,
Who saw no sooner how their fates had fa^ne,
But with the doub^ed echo of alas,
Sore dym^de the air with loud complaints and cries:
Oh sons (quod she) too (...) came all my help,
And all to late have I my succor sent:
And with these words, upon their carcas cold.
She shriched so, as might have stayed the Sun
To mourn with her, the woeful sister eke,
That both her chekes did bathe in flowing tears,
Out from the depth of her tormente^ breast,
With scalding sighs began draw these weary words:
O my dear brethren, why abandon ye
Our mother dear, when these her aged years,
That of themselves are weak and grown with grief,
Stood most in need of your sustaining help?
Why do you leave her thus disconsolate?
At sound of such her weeping long lament,
Eteocles our king held up his hand,
And sent from bottom of his woeful breast.
A doubled sighe, divided with his grief,
In faithful token of his feeble will
To recomfort his mother and sister both:
And in the stead of sweet contenting words,
The trickling tears raynde down his paled chekes:
Then claspt his hands, and shut his dying eyes.
But Pollinice that turned his rolling eyes
Unto his mother and his sister dear,
With hollow voice and fumbling tongue, thus spoke:
Mother, y^u see how I am now arrived
Unto the haven of mine unhappy end,
Now nothing does remain to me, but this,
That I lament my sisters life and yours
Left thus in everlasting woe and gri^fe:
So am I sorry for Eteocles,
Who though he were my cruel enemy,
He was your son, and brother yet to me:
But since these ghosts of curs must needs go down^
With staggering steps into the Stigian reign,
I you beseech, mother and sister both,
Of pity yet, that you will me procure
A royal tomb within my native realm,
And now shut up with those your tender hands,
These grie^full eyes of mine, whose daseled ^ight
Shadows of dreadful death b^ come to close,
Now rest in pe^ce, thus said, he yielded up
His fainting ghost, that ready was to part.
The mother thus beholding both her sons
Y^one to death, and overcome with dol^,
Drew out the dagger of her Pol^mces,
From brothers breast, and gorde her mothers throat
Falling between her sons,
Then with her feebled arms, she does en^old^
Their bodies both, as if for company
Her discontented corpse were yet content
To pass with them in Cha^ons ferrie boat.
When cruel fate had th^s with force berest
The woeful mother and her two dear sons,
All suddenly alarm alarm they cry,
And hot conflict began for to arise
Between our army and our e^emyes:
For either part would have the victory.
A while they did with equal force maintain
The bloody fight, at last the Greeks do fly,
Of whom could hardly any one escape,
For in such hugie heaps our men them slew,
The ground was couerde all with carcases:
And of our soldiers, some began spoil the dead,
Some other were that parted out the pray,
And some pursuing Antigone took up
The Queen locasta and the brethren both,
Whom in a chariot hither they will bring
Ere long: and thus, although we gotten have
The victory over our enemies,
Yet have we lost much more than we have won.

O hard mishap we do not only hear
The weary news of their vn^imely death,
But eke we must with wayling eyes behold
Their bodies dead, for look where they be brought.

MOst bitter plaint, O ladies, us behoues,
Behooves eke not only bitter plainte,
But that our hears dysheuylde from our heads
About our shoulders hang, and that our breasts
With bouncing blows be all be battered,
Our ghastly faces with our nails defaced:
Behold, your Queen twixt both her sons lies slain,
The Queen whom you di^ love and honor both,
The Queen that did so tend^rly bring up
And nourishe you, each one like to her own,
Now has she left you all (O cruel hap)
With her too cruel death in dying dread,
Pyning with pensi^enesse without all help.
O weary life, why bydst thou in my breast,
And I contented be that th^se mine eyes
Should see her dye that gave to me this life,
And I not venge her death by loss of life?
Who can me give a fountain made of moan,
That I may weep as much as is my will,
To sowsse this sorrow up in swelling tears?
What stony heart could leave for to lament?

O Polinice, now have thou with thy blood
Bought all too dear the title to this realm,
That cruel he Eteocles thee rest,
And now also has reft thee of thy life,
Alas, what wicked deed can wrath not do?
And out alas for me*
While thou yet liuedst I had a lively hope
To have some noble wight to be my pheere,
By whom I might be crownde a royal Queen:
But now, thy hasty death has done to dye
This dying hope of mine, that hope henceforth
None other wedlock, but tormenting woe,
If so these trembling hands for cowarde dread
Dare not presume to end this wretched life.

Alas dear dame, let not thy raging grief
Heap one mishap upon another head.

O doleful day, wherein my sorry sire
Was borne, and yet O more unhappy hour
When he was crowned king of sta^ely Thebes,
The Hymene^ in unhappy bed,
And wicked wedlock, wittingly did join
The giltlesse mother with her gil^^e son,
Out of which root we be the braunthes borne,
To bear the scourge of their so foul offense:
And thou, O father, thou that for this fact,
Haste torn chine eyes from thy tormented head,
Give ear to this, come forth, and bend th^^e ear
To bloody news, that can not them behold:
Happy in this, for if thine eyes could see
Thy sons both slain, and even between them both
Thy wife and mother dead, bathed and imbrude
All in one blood, then would thou dye for dole,
And so might end all our unlucky stock.
But most unhappy now, that lack of sight
Shall linger, life within thy lucklesse breast,
And still tormented in such misery,
Shall always dye, because thou can not dye.

WHy do thou call out of this darkesome den,
The lustleste lodge of my lamenting years,
O daughter dear, thy fathers blinded eyes,
Into the light I was not worthy of?
Or what such sight (O cruel destenie)
Without tormenting cares might I behold,
That image am of death and not of man?
O father mine, I bring unlucky news
Unto your ears, your sons are now both slain,
Ne does your wife, that wonted was to guide
So piteously your staylesse stumbling sleppes,
Now see this light, alas and welaway.

O heap of infinite calamities,
And can thou yet increase when I thought least
That any grief more great could grow in thee?
But tell me yet, what kind of cruel death
Had these three sorry souls?

Without offense to speak, dear father mine,
The lucklesse lotte, the froward frowning fate
That gave you life to end your fathers life,
Have led your sons to reaue each others life.

Of them I thought no less, but tell me yet
What causeless death has caught from me my dear,
(What shall I call her) mother or my wife?

When as my mother saw her dear sons dead,
As pensive pangs had pressed her tender heart,
With bloudlesse cheeks and ghastly looks she fell,
Drawing the dagger from Eteocles side,
She gorde hirselfe with wide recurelesse wound:
And thus, without mo words, gave up the ghost,
Embracing both her sons with both her arms.
In these affrightes this frosen heart of mine,
By fear of death maynteines my dying life.

This drearie day is cause of many evils,
Poor Oedipus, unto thy progeny.
The Gods yet grant it may become the cause
Of better hap to this afflicted realm.

GOod Ladies leave your bootelesse vain complaynt
Leave to lament, c^t of your woeful cries,
High time it is as now for to provide
The funerals for the renowned king:
And thou Oedipus hearken to my words,
And know thus much, that for thy daughters dower,
Antigo^^ with Hemone shall wedde.
Thy son our king not long before his death
Assigned has the kingdom should descend
To me, that am his mothers brother borne,
And so the same might to my son succeed.
Now I that am the lord and king of Thebes,
Will not permit that thou abide therein:
Ne marvel yet of this my heady will,
Ne blame thou me, for why, the heavens above,
Which only rule the rolling life of man,
Have so ordeynde, and that my words be true,
Tyresias he that knows things to come,
By trusty tokens has foretold the town,
That while thou did within the wal^es remain,
It should be plagued still with penury:
Wherefore depart, and think not that I speak
These woeful words for hate I bear to thee,
But for the weal of this afflicted realm.
O foul accursed fate, that have me bredde
To bear the burden of the misery
Of this cold death, which we account for life:
Before my birth my father understood
I should him slay, and scarcely was I borne,
When he me made a pray for savage bea^tes.
But what? I slew him yet, then caught the crown,
And last of all defilde my mothers bed,
By whom I have this wicked offspring got:
And to this heinous crime and filthy fact
The heavens have from high enforced me,
Against whose doom no counsel can prevail.
Thus has I now my life, and last of all,
Lo by the news of this so cruel death
Of both my sons and dear beloved wife,
Mine angry constellacion me rommaundes
Withouten eyes so wander in mine age,
When these my weery, weak, and crooked (...)
Have greatest need to crave their quiet rest.
O cruel ^reon, will thou slay me so,
For cruelly thou doste but murder me,
Out of my kingdom now to chase me thus:
Yet can I not with humble mind beseech
Thy courtesy, ne fall before thy feet.
Let fortune take from me these worldly gifts,
She can not conquer this courageous heart,
That never yet could well be overcome,
To force me yield for fear to villainy:
Do what thou can I will be Oedipus.
So have thou reason Oedipus, to say,
And for my part I would thee counsel eke,
Still to maynteine the high and hawtie mind,
That has dene even in thy noble heart:
For this be sure, if thou would kis^e these knees,
And practice eke by prayer to pr^^ayle,
No pity could persuade me to consent
That thou remain one only hour in Th^bes.
And now, prepare you worthy Citizens,
The funerals that duly do pertayne
Unto the Queen, and to Eteocles,
And eke for them provide their stately tombs.
But Pollynice, as common enemy
Unto his country, carry forth his corpse
Out of the walls, ne none so hardy be
On pain of death his body to engraue,
But in the fields let him unburied lie,
Without his honor, and without complaynte,
An open pray for savage beasts to spoil.
And thou Antigone, dry up thy tears,
Pluck up thy sprites, and cheer thy harmless heart.
To marriage: for ere these two days pass,
Thou shall espouse Hemone mine only heir.

Father, I see us wrapped in endless woe,
And now much more do I your state lamente,
Than these that now be dead, not that I think
Their great missehappes too little to bewail,
But this, that you, you only do surpass
All wretched wightes that in this world remain.
But you my Lord, why banishe you with wrong
My father thus out of his own perforce?
And why will you deny these guiltless bo^es
Of Polinice, their grave in country soil?

So would not I, so would Eteocles.

He cruel was, you fond to hold his hestes.

Is then a fault to do a kings command?

When his command is cruel and unjust.

Is it unjust that he unburied be?

He not deserved so cruel punishment.

He was his countries cruel enemy.

Or else was he that held him from his right.

Bare he not arms against his native land?

Offends he that sekes to win his own?

Perforce to thee he shall unburied be.

Perforce to thee these hands shall bury him.

And with him eke then will I bury thee.

So grant the gods, I get none other grave,
Then with my Polinices dear to rest.

Go sirs, lay hold on her, and take her in.

I will not leave this corpse unburied.

Can thou undo the thing that is decreed?

A wicked foul decree to wrong the dead.

The ground ne shall ne ought to cover him.

Creon, yet I beseech thee for the love.

Away I say, thy prayers not prevail.

That thou did bear Iocasta in her life,

Thou do but waste thy words amid the wind.

Yet grant me leave to wash his wounded corpse*

It can not be that I should grant thee so.

O my dear Polinice, this tirant yet
With all his wrongful force can not fordoe,
But I will kiss these cold pale lips of thine,
And wash thy wounds with my waymenting tears.

O simple wench, O fond and foolish girl,
Beware, beware, thy tears do not foretell
Some sign of hard mishap unto thy marriage.

No, no for Hemone will I never wed.

Do thou refuse the marriage of my son?

I will nor him, nor any other wed.

Against thy will then must I thee constrain.

If thou me force, I swear thou shall repent.

What can thou casue that I should once repent*

With bloody knife I can this knot unknit.

And what a fool were thou to kill thy self?

I will ensue some worthy woman's steps.

Speak out Antigone, that I may hear.

This hardy hand shall soon dispatche his life.

O simple fool, and dare thou be so bold?

Why should I dread to do so doughtie deed?

And wherefore do thou wedlock so despise?

In cruel exile for to follow him.

What others might befeme, besemes not thee.

If need require, with him eke will I dye.

Depart, depart, and with thy father dye,
Rather than kill my child with bloody knife:
Go hellishe monster, go out of the town.

Daughter, I must commend thy noble heart.

Father, I will never come in company
And you alone wander in wilderness.

O yes dear daughter, leave thou me alone
Amid my plagues: be merry while thou may.

And who shall guide these aged feet of yours,
That banished been, in blind necessity?

I will endure, as fatal lot me drives,
Resting these crooked sorry sides of mine
Where so the heavens shall lend me harborough.
And in exchange of rich and stately toures,
The woods, the wilderness, the darkesome dens
Shall Be the bower of mine unhappy bones.

O father, now where is your glory gone?

"One happy day did raise me to renoune,
"One hapless day has thrown mine honor down.

Yet will I bear a part of your mishappes.

That sits not amid thy pleasant years.

"Dear father yes, let youth give place to age.

Where is thy mother? let me touch her face,
That with these hands I may yet feel the harm
That these blind eyes forbid me to behold.

Here father, here her corpse, here put your hand.

O wife, O mother, O both woeful names,
O woeful mother, and O woeful wife,
O would to God, alas, O would to God
Thou nere had been my mother, nor my wife.
But where lie now the paled bodies two,
Of mine unlucky sons, Oh where be they?

Lo here* they lie one by an other dead.

Stretch out this hand, dear daughter, stretch this hand
Upon their faces.

Lo father, here, lo, now you touch them both.

O bodies dear, O bodies dearly boughte
Unto your father, bought with high missehap.

O lovely name of my dear Pollinice,
Why can I not of cruel Creon crave,
Ne with my death now purchase thee a grave?

Now commes Apollos oracle of pass,
That I in Athens town should end my days:
And since thou do, O daughter mine, desire
In this exile to be my woeful mate,
Lend me thy hand, and let us go together.

Lo, here all pressed my dear beloved father,
A feeble guide, and eke a simple skowte,
To pass the perils in a doubtful way.

Unto the wretched, be a wretched guide.

In this all only equal to my father.

And where shall I set forth my trembling feet?
O reach me yet some surer staff, to stay
My staggryng pace amidde these ways unknown.

Here father here, and here set forth your feet.

Now can I blame none other for my harms
But secret spite of foredecreed fate,
Thou art the cause, the crooked, old and blind,
I am exilde far from my country soil,
And suffer dole that I might not endure.

"O father, father, Justice lies on sleep,
"Ne does regard the wrongs of wretchedness,
"Ne princes swelling pride it does redress.

O careful caytife, how am I now changed
From that I was? I am that Oedipus,
That whylome had triumphant victory,
And was both dread and honored eke in Thebes:
But now (so pleases you my froward stars)
Down headlong hurlde in depth of myserie,
So that remaynes of Oedipus no more
As now in me, but even the naked name,
And lo, this image, that resembles more
Shadows of death, than shape of Oedipus.

O father, now forgette the pleasant days
And happy life that you did whylom lead,
The muse whereof redoubleth but your grief:
Sustain the smarte of these your present pains
With patience, that best may you preserve.
Lo where I come, to live and die with you,
Not (as sometimes) the daughter of a king,
But as an abject now in poverty,
That you, by presence of such faithful guide,
May better bear the wrack of misery.

O only comfort of my cruel hap.

Your daughters pity is but due to you:
Would God I might as well ingraue the corpse
Of my dear Pollinice, but I ne may,
And that I can not, doubleth all my dole.

This thy desire, that is both good and just,
Imparte to some that be thy trusty friends,
Who moude with pity, may procure the same.

"Believe me father, when dame fortune frowns,
"Be few that find trusty companions.

And of those few, yet one of those am I:
Wherefore, go we now daughter, lead the way
Into the stony rocks and highest hills,
Where fewest trackes our steppings may be spyde.
"Who once has sit in chair of dignity,
"May shame to show him self in misery.

From thee, O country, am I forced to part,
Despoyled thus in flower of my youth,
And yet I leave within mine enemies rule
Ismene my unfortunate sister.

Dear Citizens, behold your lord and king
That Thebes set in quiet government,
Now as you see, neglected of you all,
And in these ragged ruthful weeds bewrapt,
Ychased from his native country soil,
Betakes him self (for so this Tyrant will)
To everlasting banishment: but why
Do I lament my lucklesse lotte in vain?
"Since every man must bear with quiet mind,
"The fate that heavens have erst to him assignde.

EXample here, lo take by Oedipus,
You kings and princes in prosperity,
And every one that is desirous
To sway the seat of worldly dignity,
How fickle is to trust in fortunes wheel:
For him, whom now she hoyseth up on hye,
If so be chance on any side to reele,
She hurles him down in twinkling of an eye:
And him again, that grouleth now on ground,
And lies low in dungeon of despair,
Her whirling wheel can heave up at a bound,
And place aloft in stay of stately chair.
As from the Sun the Moon withdrawes her face,
So might of man does yield dame fortune place,

LO here the fruit of high aspiring mind,
Who weeues to mount above the moving skies:
Lo here the trappe that titles proud do find,
See, ruin grows when most we reach to rise:
Sweet is the name, and stately is the reign
Of kingly rule, and sway of royal seat,
But bitter is the taste of Princes gain,
When climbing heads do hunte for to be great.
Who would forecast the bank of restless toil,
Ambitious wightes do freight their breasts withal,
The growing cares, the fears of dreadful foil,
The evil success that on such flightes do fall,
He would not stayne his practice to atchiue
The largest limits of the mightiest states.
But oh, what fancies sweet do still relieve
The hungry humor of these swelling hates?
What poison sweet inflameth high desire?
How soon the hawty heart is puffed with pride?
How soon is thirst of scepter set on fire?
How soon in rising minds does mischief slide?
What bloody sturres does glut of honor breed?
Thambitious son does often surpresse his sire:
Where natures power unfeigned love should spread,
There malice raynes and reaches to be higher.
O blind unbridled search of Soueraintie,
O tickle train of evil attained state,
O fond desire of princely dignity,
Who climbs too soon, he often repents too late.
The golden mean the happy does suffice,
They leave the posting day in rare delight,
They fill (not feed) their vncontended eyes,
They reap such rest as does begile the might,
They not envy the pomp of haughty reign,
Ne dread the dinte of proud usurping swoorde,
But plaste allow, more sugared joys attain,
Than swaye of lofty Scepter can afoorde.
Cease to aspire then, cease to soar so high,
And shun the plague that pierces noble breasts:
To glittring courts what fondness is to flee,
When better state in baser Towers rests?
Done by Chr. Yeluerton.

