THis is the Countess Eugenias house I think, I can never hit of these same
English City howses, tho I were borne here: if I were in (...) City in
France, I could find any house there at midnight


These two strange hungry knights ( VVil) make the leanest trenchers that ever
I waited on


A plague on them Jack, they leave us no fees at all, for our attendance, I
think they use to set their b^nes in silver they pick them so clean, see,
see, see Jack what is that


A my word ( (...)) it is the great Baboone, that was to be seen in Southwarke.


Is this he? gods my life what beasts were we, tha^ we wood not ^ee him all
this while, never trust me if he look not somewhat like a man, see how
pretely he holds the torche in one of his forefeete, where is his keeper (...)
owe, is he broke loose


Have ever an Apple about thee ( Will) we will take him up sure, we shall get a
monstrous deal of money with him


That we shall yfath boy, and look thou here, here is a red cheekt apple to take
him up with


Excellent ^it a my credit, lets lay down our prouant, and to him.


I Will let them alone a while.


Give me the apple to take up Jack, because my name is Jack.


Hold thee Jack, take it.


Come Iack^, come Jack, come Jack.


I will come to your Sir, I Will Jack ye a my word, I Will Jack ye.


Gods me he speaks Jack, O pray pardon us Sir*


Out ye m^pede monckies can ye not know a man from a Marmasett, in these
Frenchified days of ours? na^ i will Iackefie you alittle better yet


Nay good Sir, good Sir, pardon us*


Pardon us, out ye homebred peasants, plain english, pardon us, if you had
parled, and not spoken, but said pardonne moy* I wood have pardoned you, but
since you speak, and not parley, I will cudgel ye better yet


O pardonne moy mounsieur.


Bien ie vous remercie, there is pardonne pour vous Sir now.


Why I thank ye for it Sir, you seem to be a Squire of our order Sir.


Whose page might you be Sir.


I am now the great French Traualers page*


Or rather the french Traualer^ great page. Sir, on, on


Hight Captain Fouleweather, alias Comendations; whose valors within here at
super with the Cou^^es Eugenia, whose propper eaters I take you two to be


You mistake us not Sir.


This captain Fouleweather, alias Co^mendations ( Will) is the galla^t that will
needs be a suitor to our Count


Faith and if Fouleweather be a welcome suitor to a ^aire Lady, has good luck.


O Sir, beware of one that can shower into the* lapps of Ladies, Captain
Fowleweather? why he is a Captinado, or C^ptaine of Captains, and will lie in
the^r io^ntes that give him cause to work v^pon them so heauylie, that he
will make their hearts ache I warrant him* Captain Fowleweather? why he will
make the cold stones sweat for fear of him, a day or two before he come at
them. Captain Fowleweather? why he does so dominere, and reign over women


A plague of Cap^aine Fowleweather I remember him now Jack, and know him to be
a dull moist braind Ass


A Southern man I think.


As fearful as a Hare, and a will lie like a Lapwing, and I know how he came
to be a Captain, and to have his Surname of Commendations


How I preethee Will?


Why Sir he served the great Lady Kingcob, and was yeoman of her wardroppe,
and because a cood brush up her silks lustely, she thought he would curry the
enemies coats as soundly, and so by her commendations, he was made Captain in
the low Countries


Then being made Captain only by his Ladies comme^dations, without any worth
also of his own, he was ever after surnamde Captain Commendations


Right.


I Sir right, but if he had not said right, my Captain should have taken no
wrong at his hands, nor yours neither I can tell ye


What are those two Knights names, that are thy captains Comrades, and within
at supper with our Lady


One of their names Sir, is, Sir Gyles Goosecappe, the others Sir Cut. Rudseby.


Sir Gyles Goosecappe what is he a gentleman?


I that he is at least if he be not a noble man, and his chief house is in
Essex


In Essex? did not his Ancestors come out of London


Yes that they did Sir, the best Gosecappes in England, comes out of London I
assure you


I but Sir these must come into it before they come out ont I hope, but what
countriman is ^ir Cut. Rudeby


A Northern man, or a VVesternma^ I take him, but my Captain is the
Emphaticall man; and by that pretty word Emphaticall ^ou shall partly know him;
for it is a very forcible word in troth, and yet he forces it too much by his
favor; mary no more then he does all the rest of his words; with whose
multiplicitie often times he travails himsele out of all good company


Like enough; he trauaild for nothing else.


But what qualities haunt Sir Gyles Goosecap now Sir?


Sir Gyles Goosecap has always a deaths head (as it were) in his mouth, ^or
his only one reason for ^uery thing is, because we are all mortal; and
therefore he is generally called the mortal knight; then has he another
pretty phrase too, and that is* he will tickle the vanity ant still in every
thing and this is your Summa totalis of both their virtues


It Is enough, it is enough, as long as they have land enough, but now muster your
third person before us I beseech you


The third person and second knight blunt Sir Cut. Rudesby, is indeed blunt
at a sharp wit, and sharp at a blun^ wit a good bustling gal^ant talks well
at Rouers; he is two parts soldier; as slovenly as a Switzer, and somewhat
like one in face too; for he wears a bush beard will dead a Cannon shot better
then a woolpacke: he will come in^o the presence like yor Frenchman ^n foul
boots* and dares eat garlik as a prep^atiue to his Cour^ship; you shall know
mo^e of hi^ h^reafter; but good wags let me win you now, for the
Geographicall parts of your Ladies in requital


That you shall Sir, and the Hydrographicall too and you will; first my Lady
the widow, and Countes ^ugenia, is in earnest, a most worthy Lady, and
indeed can do more then a thousand other Ladies can do I can tell ye


What Is that I pray thee?


Mary Sir, he means she can do more then sleep, and eat and drink; and play
at noddy, and help to make her self ready


Can she so?


She is the best scholar of any woman but one in England, she is wi^e and
virtuous


Nay she has one strange quality for a woman besides, tho these be strange
enough that he has rekoned


For Gods sake what is that?


She can love reaso^able constantly, for she loved her husband only, almost a
whole year together


That's strange indeed, but what is your fair Lady Sir?


My Lady Sir, the Lady Hippolita.


That is as chaste as ever was Hippolitus.


(True my pretty Parenthesis) is half a maid, half a wife, and hal^e a
widdowe


Strange tale to tell; how can thou make this good my good Assumpsit.


Thus Sir, ^he was betroathed to a gallant young gentleman that loud her with
such passion and admiration that he never thought he could be so blessed as to
en^oy her in sull marriage, till the minister was marrying them, and even then
when he was saying I Charles take thee Hippolita; with extreme joy he began to
look pale, then going forwards saying to my wedded wife, he looked paler, and,
then pronouncing, for richer for poorer as long as we both shall live, he looked
extreme pale; Now sir when she comes to speak her part, and said, I
Hippolota take thee Charles, he began to faint for joy, then saying to my
wedded husband, he began to sink, but then going forth too for better sor
wo^e, he could stand no longer but with very conceit it seemd, that she
whom he tendered as the best of all things, should pronounce the worst, and
for his sake too, he suncke down right, and died suddenly: And thus being
half married, and her half husband wholly dead, I hope I may with discretion
affirm her, half a maid, half a wife, and half a widdowe; do ye conceiu^
me Sir


O Lord Sir, I devour you quick; and now Sir I beseech you open unto me your
the other Lady, what is she


I Will answer for her, because I know her Ladyship to be a perfect maid indeed.


How can thou know that?


Passing perfectly I warrant ye.


By measuring her neck twice, and trying if it will come about her forehead,
and slyp over her nose


No Sir no, by a rule that will not slip so I warrant you, which for her honors
sake I will let slip unto you, gods so Jack* I think they have supt


Bir Lady we have waited well the while.


Well though they have lost their attendance, let not us lose our Suppers Jack.


I do not mean it, come Sir you shall go in and drink with us y faith.


Pardonne moy mounsieur.


^o pardoning in truth Sir,


Ie vous remercy de-bon Ceur.


A plague on you sweet Ladies, it is not so late, what needed you to have made
so short a supper


In truth Sir Cut. we might have tickled the vanity ant, an hour longer if
my watch be trustible


I but how should these bewties know that Sir Gyles? your watch is mortal,
and may err


T^ats ^ooth Captain, but do you hear hone^ (...) pray take a light, and see if
the mo^ne shine, I have a Sun dial will resolve presently


Howsoever believe it Ladies, it is unwholesome, vncourtlie, unpleasant to eat
hastily, and rise suddenly, a man can show no discourse, no wit, no stirring,
no variety, no pretty conceits, to make the meat go down emphaticaly


Wi^fred.


M^dam.


I prethie go to my uncle the Lord Momford, and entreat him to come quicken
our ears with some of his pleas^nt Spirit; This ^ame Fowleweather ^as made me
so melancholy, prethie make haste


I will madam.


We will bid our guests good night madam, this sa^e Fowleweather makes me so
fleepie


Fie upon it, for Gods sake shut the Casements, here is such a fulsome air
comes into this chamber; in good faith madame you must keep your house in
better reparations, this same Fowlweather beats in so filthily


I Will take order with the Porter for it Lady, good night gentlemen.


Why good night and be ha^gd, and you will needs be gone.


God give you good night madams, thank you for my good cheer, we will tickle
the vani^e ant, no longer with you at this time, but i will ind^te your La: to
supper at my lodging one of these mornings; and that ere long too, because we
are all mortal you know


Light the Lady Penelope, and the Lady Hippolita to their chambers, good
night fair Ladies


Good night madam, I wish you may sleep well after your light supper.


I warrant you Lady I shall never be troubled with dreaming of my French Suter.


Why how now my Fre^chified captain Fowlweather? by gods ludd thy Surname is
never thought upon here, I perceive heeres no body gives thee any
co^mendations


Why this is the vntrauaild rudnes of our gross English Ladies ^ow; would any
French Lady v^e a man thus think ye? be they any way so uncivil, and fulsome?
they say they wear foul smockes, and course smockes, I say they lie, and I
will die int


I, do so, pray thee, thou shall die in a very honorable cause, thy countries
general quarrel right


Their smockes quoth you? a my word you shall take them up so white, and so
pure, so sweet, so Emphaticall, so moving


I marry Sir, I think they be continually moving.


But if their smockes were Course or foul.


Nay I warrant thee thou ca rest not, ^o thou were: at them.


God's Death they put not all their virtues in their smockes, or in their mockes,
or in their stew de cocks as our Ladies do


But in their stewde pox, there is all their gentilitie.


Nay good Sir Cut. do not agrauate him no more.


Then are they so kind, so wise, so familiare so noble, so sweet in
entertainment, that when you shall, have cause to descourse or sometimes to come
nearer! them; if your breath be ill, your teeth ill, or any thing about you
ill why they will presently break with ye, in kind sort, good terms, pre^ty
experiments, and tell you plain this; thus it is with your breath Sir, thus it
is with your teeth Sir, this is your disease, and this is your medicine


As I am true mortal Knight, it is most superlatiuely good, this.


Why this is Courtly now, this is sweet, this plain, this is familiar, but by
the Court of France, our peuishe dames are so proud, so precise, so coy, so
disdain^full, and so subtle, as the Pomonean Serpent, mort dieu the Punck of
Babylon was never so subtle


Nay do not chafe so Captain.


Your Frenchman wood ever chase Sir Cut, being thus moude.


What? and play with his beard so.


I and bry^le, it does express that passion of anger very full and emphaticall.


Nay good knight if your French wood bry^le, let ^im alone, in troth our Ladies
are a little too coy and subtle Captain indeed


Subtle Sir Giles Goosecappe? I assure your Soul, they are as subtle with
their suitors, or loves, as the Latin Dialect where the nominative Case, and
the verb, the Sub^antiue, and the Adjective, the verb, and the verb, stand
as far a sunder, as if they were perfect strangers one to another; and you
shall hardly find them out, but then learn to Construe, and perse them, and
you shall find them prepared, and acquainted, and agree together, in Case,
gender, and number


I detest Sir Cut, I did not think he had bin half the quintissence of
a^choller he is


Slydd there is not one of them truly emphatical.


Yes I Will ensure you Captain, there are many of them truly Emphaticall but all
your French Ladies are not fatt? are they Sir


Fatt Sir, why do ye think Emphaticall is fatt Sir Giles?


Gods my life brother knight, did thou think so? heart I know not what it is
my self, but yet I never thought it was fatt, I Will be sworn to thee


Why if any true Courtly dame had had but this new fashioned suit, to
entertain any thing in differently stuffed, why you should have had her more
respective by far


Nay there is some reason for that Captain, me thinks a true woman should
perpetually doat upon a new fa^ion


Why you are i'thright Sir Cut. Innoua fert Ani^ mus m^tatas dicere-formas. it is
the mind of man, and woman to affect new fashions; but to our Mynsatiues for
sooth, if he come like to your Besognio, or your bore, so he be rich, or
emphaticall, they care not; would I might never excel a dutch Skipper in
Courtshippe if I did not put distaste into my carriage of purpose; I knew I
should not please them. Lacquay? allume le torche


Slydd, here is neither Torch, nor Lacquay me thinks.


O mon dew.


O do not swear Captain.


Your Frenchman ^uer swears Sir Cut, upon the lack of his Lacquay I assure
you


See here he comes, and my Ladies two pages, they have bin tickling the
vanity ont yfa^th


Captain ^owleweather, my Lady the Countes Eugenia commends her most kindly
to you, and is determined to morrow morning early if it be a frost to take
her Coach to Barnet to be nipt where if it please you, to meet her, and
accompany her homewarde, joining your wit with the frost, and help to nippe
her, She does not doubt but tho you had a sad supper, you will have a joyful
breakefast


I shall indeed my deeare youth.


Why Captain I abusd thee, I see: I said the Ladies respected thee not, and
n^w Iperceiue the widow is in love with thee


Sblood knight I knew I had struck her to the quick, I wondered she departed
in that extrauagant fashion: I am sure I past one Passado of Courtship upon
her, that has hertofore made a lane amongst the French Ladies like a Culuering
^hot, I Will be sworn; and I think Sir Gyles you saw how she fell under it


O as clear as can dlelight, by this daylight.


O good knight a the post, heel swear any thing.


The other two Ladies commend them no less kindly to you two knights too; and
desire your worships wood meet them at Barnet ith morning with the Captain


O. good Sir.


Our worships shall attend their Ladyships thither.


No Sir Giles by no means, they will go privately thither, but if you will
meet them there


Meet them, we will die fort, but we will meet them.


Lets go thither to night knights, and you be true gailants.


Content.


How greedely they take it in Sir.


No it is too far to go to night, we will be up betimes ith morning, and not
go to bed at all


Why its but ten miles, and a fine clear nightS. Gyles


But ten miles? what do ye talk Captain?


Why do think its any more?


I, ^elaie ten pounds its more then ten mile, or twelve either.


What to Barnet?


I, to Barnet?


Slidd, I Will lay a hundred pound with thee, if thou will.


I Will lay five hundred, to a hundred, Slight I will not be out borne with a
wager, in that I know, I am sure it was four years agon ten miles thither,
and I hope it is more now, Slidd do not miles grow think you, as well as other
Animals


O wise Knight!


I never Innd in the Town but once, and then they lodged me in a Chamber so
full of these Ridiculus Fleas, that I was feign to lie standing all night, and
yet I made my man rise, and put out the candle too, because they should not see
to bire me


A pretty project.


Intruth Captain if I might advise you, you should tarry, and take the morning
before you


How? O ^on Diew, how the villain poulltrou^e, dishonours his travail? you
Buffonly Mouchroun, are you so mere rude, and English to advise your Captain


Nay I prethie Fouleweather be not te^pesteous with thy poor Lacquay.


Te^pesteous Sir Cut, will your Frenchman think you, suffer his Lacquay to
adui^e him


O God you must take heed Lacquy how you advise your captain, your French
lacquay would not have donit


He would have bin poxt first: Allume le torche, sweet pages commend us to your
Ladies, say we kiss their white hands, and will not fail to meet them*
knights which of you leads


Not we Sir, you are a Captain, and a leader.


Besides, thou art commended for the better man, for thou art very
Commendations it self, and Captain Commendations


Why, what tho I be Captain Commendations?


Why and Captain comme ndations, is hearty? commendations, for Captains are
hearty I am sure, or else hang them


Why, what if I be hearty Commendations, come, come, sweet knights lead the
way


O Lord Sir, always after my hearty Commendations.


Nay then you conquer me with president, by the Autenticall form of all
Justice letters. Alloun


Here Is a most sweet Gudgeon swallowed, is there not?


I but how will they digest it think thou? when they shall find our Ladies
not there


I have a vaunt-Curriing devise shall make them digest it most healthfully.


Work on sweet love, I am not yet resolud
T'exhaust this troubled spring of vanities
And nurse of perturbations, my poor life,
And therefore since in every man that holds
This being dear, there must be some desire
Whose power to' enjoy his object may so mask
The Judging part that in her radyant eyes
His estimation of the world may seem
Upright, and worthy, I have chosen love
To blind my Reason with his mistie hands
And make my estimatiue power believe
I have a project worthy to employ
What worth so ever my whole man affordes:
Then sit at rest my Soul, thou now have found
The end of thy infusion, in the eyes
Of thy divine Eugenia look for heaven.

Thanks gentle friends is your good Lord and mine, gone up to bed yet?


I do assure ye not Sir, not yet, nor yet, my deep, and studious friend, not
yet musical Clarence


My Lord?


Nor yet, thou sole deuider of my Lordshippe.


That were a most unfit division
And far above the pitche of my low plumes
I am your bold and constant guest my Lord.

Far, far from bold, for thou have known me long
Almost these twenty years, and half those years
Have bin my bedfellow; long time before
This unseen thing, this thing of naught indeed
Or Atome called, my Lordshippe shinde in me,
And yet thou makst thy self as little bold
To take such kindness, as becomes the Age
And truth of our indissolable love
As our acquaintance sprung but yesterday
Such is thy gentle and too tender Spirit.

M^ Lord, my want of Courtship makes me fear
I should be rude, and this my mean estate
Mee^es with such envy, and detraction
Such misconstructions, and resolud misdoomes
Of my poor worth, that should I be aduaunc'd
Beyond my unseen lowen^s, but one hai^e
I should be torn in pieces with the Spirits
That fly in ill-lungd tempests through the world,
Tearing the head of virtue from her shoulders
If she but look out of the ground of glory.
Twixt, whom, and me and every worldly fortune
There fiights such sour, and Cursed Antipathy
So waspi^he, and so petulant a Star,
That a^l things tending to my grace or good
Are ravished from their object, as I were
A thing created for a wilderness
And must not think of any place with men.

O hark you Sir, this waiwarde mood of yours must syfted be, or rather rooted
out, you will no more music Sir


Not now my Lord,


Begone my masters then to bed, to bed.


I thank you honest fri^nds


Hence with this book and now Mou^sieur Clarence, methinks plain and prose
friendship would do excellent well betwixt us comethus Sir, or rather thus,
come Sir it is time I trow that we both lived like one body, thus, and that
both our sides were sli^, and Concorporat with Organs fit to effect an
individual passage even for out very thoughts; suppose we were one body now,
and I charge you believe it; where of I am the heart, and you the liver


Your Lordship might well make that division if you knew the plain song.


O Sir, and why so I pray?


First because the heart, is the more worthy entraile, being the first that is
borne, and moves, and the last that moves, and dies; and then being the
fountain of heat too, for wheresoever our heat does not flow directly from
the heart to the other Organs, there, their action must of necessity cease, and
so without you I nether would nor could live


Well Sir for these reasons I may be the heart* why may you be the liver now?.


I am more then ashamde, to tell you that my Lord.


Nay nay be not too suspicious of my judgment, in you I beseech you: ashamed
friend? if your love overcome not that shame, a shame take that love I say.
Come sir why may you be the li^er


The plain and short truth is (my Lord) because I am all liver, and tournd
lover


Lover?


Lover y faith my Lord.


Now I prithee let me leap out of my skin for joy why thou will not now reviue
the sociable mirth of thy sweet disposition? will thou shine in the world a
new? and make those that have fleighted thy love, with the Austeritie of thy
knowledge, doat on the again with thy commanding ^haft of their humors


A las my Lord they are all far out of my aims and only to fit my self a
little better to your friendship, have I given these wilful raygnes to my
affections


And y faith is my sower friend to all worldly desires overtaken with the heart
of the world? Love I shall be monstrous proud now, to hear she is every way a
most rare woman that I know thy spirit, and judgment has chosen, is she wise?
is she noble? is she capable of thy virtues? will she kiss this forehead with
judicial lips? where so much judgment and virtue deserves it? Come brother
Twinn, be short I charge you, and name me the woman


Since your Lordship will shorten the length of my follies relation, the woman
that I so passionateli^ love, is no worse Lady then your own Niece, the too
worthi^ Countess Euge^ia


Why so, so, so, you are a worthy friend are you not to conce^le this
loue-mine in your head, and would not open it to your heart, now beshrow my
heart, if my heart dance not for joy tho my hee^es do not, and they do not,
because I will not set that at my heels that my friends set at his heart,
what? friend and Nephew? both nephewis a far inferior title to friend I
confess, but I will prefer the backwards (as many friends do) and leave
their friends worse then they found them


But my noble Lo. it is almost a prodegie, that I being only a poor Gentleman
and far short of that state and wealth that a Lady of her greatnesses in
both will expect in her husband


Hold thy doubt friend, never fear any woman, unless thy self be made of
straw, or some such dry matter, and she of lightning, Audacitie prospers
above probability in all worldhe matters, do not thou know that Fortune
gouernes them without order, and therefore reason the mother of order is none
of her counsel, why should a man desiring to aspire an unreasonable creature
which is a woman? seek her fruition by reasonable means, because thy self
binds upon reason, will thou look for congruitie in a woman? why? there is
not one woman amongst one thousand, but will speak false Latin, and break
Priscians head, attempt nothing that you may with great reason doubt of, and
out of doubt you shall obtain nothing, I tell thee friend the enmine^t
confidence of strong spirits is the only wich-craft of this world, Spirits
wrestling with spirits, as bodies? with bodies? this were enough to make the
hope well, if she were one of these painted communities, that are ravished with
Coaches, and upper hands, and brave men of dirt: but thou know friend she is
a good scholar, and like enough to, bite at the rightest reason, and reason
evermore Ad optima hortetur: to like that which is best, not that which is
brauest, or rightest, or greatest, and so consequently worst, But prove what
she can, we will turn her, and wind her, and make her so plyant that we will
draw her through a wedding ring y faith


Would to god we might my Lord.


I Will warrant thee friend.


Where is mistress Winnyfred; for my Lady Eugenia desires to speak with your
Lordshippe


Marry enter mistress Winnifred even here I pray thee, from the Lady E^genia,
do you hear friend


Very easily on that side my Lord.


Let me feel? does not thy heart pant apace, by my heart well labored Cupid,
the field is yours sir God, and upon a very honorable composition, I am sent
for now I am sure, and must even trusse and to her

witty mistress Winnifred, nay come near woman I am sure this Gentleman
thinks his chamber the sweeter for your dear presence


My absence shall thank him my Lord.


What rude Mistress Winnifred? nay faith you shall come to him, and kiss him,
for his kindness


Nay good my Lord, I Will never go to the market for that ware I can have it
brought ho^e to my dor


O Winnifred, a man may know by the m^rket folks how the market goes.


So you may my Lord, but I know few Lords that think scorn to go to that
market themselves


To go to it Winnifred, nay to ride to it y faith.


That's more then I know my Lord.


You Will not believe it till you are then a horseback, will ye?


Come, come, I am sent of a message to you will you hear it?


Stop, stop fair Winnifred, would you have audience so soon, there were
no state in that y faith; this fair gentlewoman sir


Nuw we shall have a fiction I believe.


Had three Suitors at once.


You Will leave out none my Lord.


No more did you Winnifred you enterferde with them all in (...).


O Monstrous Lord by this light!


Now Sir (...) make my tale short I will do that which she did not; vz. leave
out the two first, the third coming the third night for his turn


My Lord, my Lord, my Lady does that, that no body else does, desires your
company and so fare you well


O stay a little sweet Winnifred, help me but to (...) my points again, and
have with you


Not I by my truth my Lord, I had rather see your hose about your heels, then
I would help you to trusse a point


O witty Winnifred? for that left, take thy pasport, and tell thy Ladies thou
leftst me with my hose about my heels


Well, well my Lord you shall sit till the moss grow a bout you^ he les, ere I
come at you again


She cannot abide to hear of her three Sui^; but is not this very fit my
sweet Clarence? Thou (...) my rare Niece cannot sleep without me; but forthy
company sake, she shall to night; and in the morning I will visit her early;
when do thou but stand in that place, and thou maie^t chance hear, (but art
sure to see) in what subtle, and farre-fetcht manner I Will solicit her about
thee


Thanks worthy Lord.


I That have studied with world-(...) thoughts the way of heaven, and how ^rew
heaven is reach

To know how mighty, and how many are
The strange affections of inchaunted number
How to distinguish all the motions
Of the Celestial bodies, and what power
does separate in such form this massy Rownd:
What is his Essence, Efficacies, Beams?
Footesteps, and Shadows? what Eternes^es is
The world, and Time, and Generation?
What Soul, the worlds Soul is? what the black Springes
And vnreueald Original of Things,
What their perse^erance* what is life and death,
And what our Certain Restoration?
Am with the staid*heads of this Time imployd
To watch withal my Nerves a Female shade.

VVitty Mistrisse Wynnefred, where is your (...) I pray?


Faith your Lordship is bold enough to ^eeke her out, i^ she were at her
vrinall


Then She Has done it seems, for here she comes to save me that labor, away
wenches, get you hence wenches


What, can you not abide my maids uncle?


I never ^ood abide a maid in my life Niece, but either I draw away the maid,
or the maidenhead with a wet finger


You love to make your self worse then you are still.


I know few mend in this world Madam, For the worse the better thought on, the
better the worse spoken on ever amongst women


I wonder where you have binne all this while with your sentences.


Faith where I must be again presently. I cannot stay long with you my dear
Niece


By my faith but you shall my Lord, Gods pity what will become of you
shortly, that you drive maids before you, and offer to leave widows behind you,
as mankindelie, as if you had taken a surfeit of our Sex lately, and our very
sight turned your stomach


Gods my life, She abuses her best uncle; never trust me if it were not a good
revenge to help her to the loss of her widowhead


That were a revenge and a half, indeed.


Nay twere but a whole revenge Niece, but such a revenge as would more then
observe the true rule of a revenge


I know your rule before you utter it, Vlciscere Inimico sed sine tuo incommodo.


O rare Niece, you may see, what it is to be a a scholar now, Learning in a
woman is like weight in gold, or Luster in Diamants, which in no other Stone is
so rich or refulgen


But say dear Uncle how could you find in your heart to stay so long from me.


Why alas Niece, you are so smeard with this willfull-widdowes three-yeeres
black weed, that I never come to you, but I dream of Courses, and
Sepulchers, and Epitaths, all the night after, and therefore adieu dear Niece


Beshrew my heart my Lord, if you go these three hours.


Three hours? nay Niece, if I dance attendance three hours (alone in her
chamber) with an Lady so near alide to me, I am very idle isaith, marie with
such an other; I would dance, one, two, three, four, and five, tho it cost
me ten shillings; and now I am in, have at it, my head must devise something
while my feet are pidling thus, that may bring her to some fit consideration of
my friend, who indeed is only a great scholar* and all his honors, and riches
lie in his mind.


Come, Come, pray tell me uncle, how does my cosen Momford?


Why, well, very well Niece, and so is my friend Clarence well too, and then
is there a worthy gentleman well as any is in England I can tell ye


But when did you see my Cosen?


And it is pity but he should do well, and he shall be well too, if all my
wealth will make him well


What means he by this tro ye, your Lo: is very dancitiue me thinks.


I, and I could tell you a thing would make your Ladyship very dancitiue, or
else it were very dunsatiue in faith. O how the skipping of this Christmas
block of ours moves the blockhead heart of a woman, and indeed any thing that
pleases the foolish eye which presently runs with a lying tale of Excellence
to the mind


But I pray tell me my Lord could you tell me of a thing would make me dance
say you


Well, farewell sweet Niece I must needs take my leave in earnest.


Lord bless us, here is such a stir with your farewels.


I will see you again within these two or three days a my word Niece.


Gods precious, two or three days? why this Lord is in a marualous strange
humor. Sit down sweet Uncle, in faith I have to talk with you about great
matters


Say then dear Niece, be short utter your mind quickly now.


But I pray tell me first, what is that would make me dance in faith?


Dance, what dance? hitherto your dauncers legs bow for-sooth, and Caper,
and Ierke, and Firke, and dandle the body above them, as it were their great
child, though the special Ierker be above this place I hope, here lies that
shudd fetch a perfect woman over the Coals in faith


Nay good Uncle say what is the thing you could tell me of.


No matter, no matter* But let me see a pass^g prosperous forchead of an
exceeding happy distance betwixt the eye brows; a cle^ lightning eye; a
temperate and ^eshe blood in both the cheeks; excellent m^arkes, most
excellent marks of good fortune


Why, how now Uncle did you never see me before!


Yes N^ce* but the state of these things at this instant must be specially
observed, and these outward signs being now in this clear elevation, show
your ^oubled mind is in an excellent power, to prefer them to act forth then
a little dear N^ce


This is excellent.


The Creses here are excellent good; The propor^ion of the chin good; the
little aptnes of it to stick out; good. And the wart above it most exceeding
good. Never trust me, if all things be not answerable to the predictio^ of a
most divine fortune toward her; uow if she have the grace to apprehend it in
the nicke; there is all


Well my Lord, since you will not tell me your secret, i will keep another from
you; with whose discovery, you may much pleasure me, and whose concealment
may hurt my es^ate. And if you be no ^inder then to see me so endangered; i will
be very patient of it I assure you


Nay then it must instantly forth. This kind con iuration even fires it out of
me; and (to be short) gather all your Judgment together, for here it comes.
Niece; Clarence Clarence, rather my Soul then my ^rie^d Clarence of too
substantial a worth, to have any figures cast about him, (notwithstanding, no
other woman with Empires could stir his affections) is with your vertue^ most
extremely in love; and without your requital dead. And with it ^ame shall
^ound this golden disticke through the world of you both

No^ illo melior quisquam nec amantior aequi
Vir fu^t, aut illa reuerentior vlla Dearum.

Ay me poor Dame, O you amase me Uncle,
Is this the wondrous fortune you presage?
What man may miserable women trust?

O peace good Lady, I come not to rauishe you to any thing. But now I see how
you accept my motion: I perceive (how upon true trial) you esteem me. Have I
ridd all this C^cuite to levy the powers of your Judgment, that I might not
prove their strength too suddenly with so violent a charge: And do they fight
it out in white blood. And show me their hearts in the soft Crystal of tear


O uncle you have wounded your self in charging me that I should shun
Judgment as a monster, if it would not weep; I place the poor felicity of
this world in a worthy friend, and to see him so unworthily revolted, I
shedd not the tears of my Brain, but the tears of my soul. And if ever
nature made tears theffects of any worthy cause, I am su^e I now shed them
worthelie


Her sensual powers are up in faith, I have thrust her soul quite from her
Tribunal. This is her Seeds vacans when her sub^ects are priueledged to libell
against her, and her friends. But weeps my kind Niece for the wounds of my
friendship? and I touched in friendship for wishing my friend doubled in her
singular happiness


How am I doubled? when my honor, and good name, two essential parts of me;
would be less, and lost


In whose Judgment?


In the judgment of the world.


Which is a fools boult. Nihil a vertute nec a viritate remotius quam Vulgaris
opi^: But my dear Niece, it is most true that your honor and good name
tendered (...) they are the species of truth are worthily two essential parts
of you; But as they consist only in ayrie titles and corrupteble blood (whose
bitterness sanitas et non nobilitas efficit) and care not how many base and exe
crable acts they commit, they touch you no more then they touch ^nitie. And yet
shall no nobility you have in either, be impaired neither


Not to marry a poor gentleman?


Respect him not so; for as he is a gentleman he is noble; as he is welthilie
furnished with true knowledge, he is rich and therein adorned with the exatest
complements belonging to everlasting nobleness


Which yet will not maintain him a week: Such kind of nobleness gives no
cotes of honor nor can scarce get a cote for necessiti


Then is it not substantial knoweledge (as it is in him) but verbal and
fantastical for Om^a in illa *ille. complexutenet


Why seeks he me then?


To make you joint partners with him in all things, and there is but a little
partial difference betwixt you, that hinders that universal ioynture: The
bigness of this ci^cle held too near our eye keeps it from the whole Sphere
of ^he Sun but; could we sustain it indifferently betwixt (...) and it, it
would then without check of one beam appear in his fulness


Good Uncle be content for now shall I never dream of contentment.


I have more then done Lady, and had rather have suffered an alteration of my
being then of your Judgment; but (dear niece) for your own honor sake
repair it instantly

See here comes the Ladies; make an April day one dear^ love and be suddenly
cheerful God save you more then fair Ladies, I am glad your come, for my
business will have me gone presently


Why my Lord Mo^ford I say? will you go before dinner?


No remedy sweet Bewties, for which rudene^e I lay my hands thus low for
your pardons


O Courteous Lord Momford!


Niece? Men's estquae sola qui^s. Sola facit claros meant emque honoribus ornat


Verus honos ^at at mendax infamia terret.


Mine own dear nephew?


What success my Lord?


Excellent; excellent; come I Will tell thee all.


Do you hear madam, how our youths h^re have guld our three suitors?


not I Lady, I hope our suitors are no fit meat for our Pages.


No madam, but they are fit sauce for any man's meat I Will warrant them.


What Is the matter Hippolita?


They have sent the knights to Barnet madam this frostie morning to meet us
their


Is It true youths, are knights fit subiec^ for your knaueries*


Pray pardon us madam, we would be glad to please any body.


I indeed madam and we were sure we pleas^d the^ highly to tell the^ you were
def^rous of their company


O it was good Eugenia, their livers were too hot, you know, and for temper sake
they must needs have a cooling card played upon them


And besides madam we wood have them know that your two little Pages, which
are less by hal^ ^hen two leaves, have more learning in them then is in all
their three volumnes


I faith Will, and putt their great pagicall index to them too.


But how will ye excuse your abuses wags?


We doubt not madam, but if it please your Ladyship to put up their abuses,


Trusting they are not so dear to you, but you may.


We shall make them gladly furnishe their pockets with them.


Well, children, and fowls, agree as you will, and let the world know now,
women have nothing to do with you


Come madam I think your dinner be almost ready,


And see, here are two honorable guestes for you, the Lord Tales, and Sir
Cutberd Kingcob


Lack you any guests madam?


I my Lord such guests as you.


There Is as common an answer, as yours was a question my Lord.


Why? al things shood be common betwixt Lords, and Ladies you know.


Indeed Sir Kuttberd Bingcob, I have heard, you are either of the family of
Love, or of no religion at all


He may well be said to be of the family of Love, he does so flow in the
loves of poor overthrown Ladies


You speak of that I wood do madam, but in earnest, I am now suing for a new
mistres; look in my hand sweet Lady, and tell me what fortune I shall have
with her


Do you think me a witch, Sir Cutberd?


Pardon me Madam, but I know you to be learnd in all ^hinges.


Come on lets see.


He does you a special favor Lady, to give you his open hand, for it is
commonly shut they say


What find you in it madam?


Shut it now and i will tell ye.


What now Ladi^?


You Have the worst hand that ever I saw knight have* when it is open, one can find
nothing in it, and when it is shutt one can get nothing out ont


The age of letting go is past madam, we must not now let go, but strike up
men's heels, and take am as they fall


A good Cornish principle believe it Sir Cuttberd.


But I pray tell me Lady Penelope, how entertain you the love of my Cosen Sir
Gyles Goosecappe


Are the Goosecaps a kin to you my Lord.


Even in the first degree madam. And Sir Gyles I can tell ye, tho he seem
something simple, is composd of as many good parts as any knight in England


He shood be put up for concealment then, for he shows none of them.


Are you able to reckon his good parts my Lord?


I Will do the best I can Lady, first, he daunces as comely and lightly as any
man, for upon my honor, I have seen him dance upon Eggs, and a has not
broken them


Nor cracked them neither.


That I know not, indeed I wood be loath, to lie though he be my kinsman, to
speak more then I know by him


Well forth my Lord.


He has an excele^t skill in all manner of perfumes, and if you bring him glones
fro forty pence, to forty Shillings a pair he will tell you the price of them
to two pence


A pretty sweet quality believe me.


Nay Lady he will perfume you gloves him self; most dilicately, and give
them the right Spanish Titillation

Titillation what is that my Lord?


Why Lady it is a pretty kind of term new come up in perfuming, which they
call a Titillation


Very well expounded my Lord; forth with your kinsmans parts I pray.


He is the best Sempster of any woman in England, and will work you needle
work edgings, and French purles from an Angel to four Angels a yearde


That's precious ware indeed.


He will work you any flower to the life, as like it as if it grew in the
very place, and being a delicate perfumer, he will give it you his perfect
and natural savor


This is wonderful; forth sweet Lord Tales.


He will make you flies and worms, of all sorts most lively, and is now
working a whole bed embrodred, with nothing but glowe worms; whose lights a
has so perfectly done, that you may go to bed in the chamber, do any thing in
the Chamber, without a Candle


Never trust me if it be not incredible; forth my good Lord.


He is a most excellent Turner, and will turn you wassel-bowles, and posset
Cups carved with Libberdes faces, and Lions heads with spoutes in their
mouths, to let out the posset Ale, most artificially


Forth good Lord Tales.


Nay good my Lord no more, you have spoken for him thoroughly I warrant you.


I lay my life Cupid has shot my sister in love with him out of your lips my
Lord


Well, come in my Lords, and take a bad dinner with me now, and we will all
go with you at night to a better supper with the Lord, and Lady Furnifall


We attend you honorable Ladies.


Bullaker.


I Sir.


Ride and catch the Captains horse.


So I do Sir.


I wonder Sir Gyles you wood let him go (...), and not ride after him.


VVood I might never be mortal Sir C^tt: if I ridd not aftter him, till my
horse sweat, so that he had nere a dry thread on him, and hollod and hollod to
him to stay him, till I had thought my fingers ends wood have gone off with
hollowings; I Will be sworn to ye and yet he ran his way like a Diogenes, and
would never stay for us


How shall we do to get the (...) Captain to London, now his horseis gone?


Why he is but a lame Jade neither Sir Meyle, we shall soon our'take him I
warrant ye


And yet thou say thou gallopst after him as fast as thou coodst, and coodst
not Catch him; I lay my life some Crabfishe has bitten thee by the tongue, thou
speak so backward still


But here is all the doubt Sir Cut: if nobodie shoold catch him now, when he
comes at London, some boy or other wood get up o^ him and ride him ^otte into
the water to wash him; I Will be sworn I followed one that ridd my horse into
the Thames, till I was up tooth knees hitherto; and if it had not been for
fear of going over shoes, because I am troubled with the rheum, I wood have
taught him to wash my horse when he wa

hott yfath; how now sweet Captain do feel any (...) in thy pain yet*


Ease in his pain quoth you, has good luck if he feel ease in pain I
think, but wood any ass in the world ride down such a hill as Highgate is,
in such a frost as this, and never ligh


Gods precious Sir Cut. your Frenchman never lights I tell ye.


Light Sir Cut, Slight and I had my horse again, there is nere a paltrie English
frost an them all shood make me light


Go too you French Zanies you, you will follow the french steps so long, till
you be notable to set one Sound Step oath ground all the days of your life


Why Sir Cut I care not if I be not sound so I be well but we were justly
plaugde, by this hill for following women thus


I and English weomen too sir Giles.


Thou arr still prating against English women I have seen none of the French
dames I confess, but your greatest gallants for men in France, were here
lately I am sure, and methinkes there should be no more difference bet^ixt our
Ladies and theirs, then there is betwixt our Lords and theirs, and our Lor^s
are as far beyond them in faith, for person, and Courtshippe, as they are beyond
ours for phantasticallitie


O Lord sir Cut, I am sure our Ladies hold our Lords tack for Courtshippe, and
yet the french Lodrs put them down, you noted it sir Gyles


O God sir, I stud and heard it, as I satith presence.


How did they put them down I pray thee?


Why for wit, and for Court-shippe Sir Moile.


As how good lefthandded Francois.


Why Sir when Meuusieur Lambois came to your mistress the Lady Hippolita as
she sat in the presence, sit down here good Sir Gyles Goosecappe, he kneeld
me by her thus Sir, and with a most queint French Art in his speech of ah
bellissime, I desire to die now sa^es he for in his speech of ah bellissime I
desire to die now says he for your love that I might be buried here


A good pick-thacht complement by my faith; but I prithee what answered she.


She, ^ scorn to note that I hope then did he vie it again with an other hah.


That was hah, hah, I wood have put the third hah to it, if I had been as my
mistress, and hah, hah, haht him out of the presence in faith


Hah says he, these fair eyes, I wood not for a million they were in France,
they wood renew all our ciuill-wars again


That was not so good me thinks captain.


Welliudgd in faith, there was a little wit in that I must confess, but she put
him down far, and au^swered him with aquestio^ and that was whether he wood
s^em a lover or a ie stter, if a lover a must tell her far more lykelier then
those, or else she was far from believing the^, if a Iester, she cood have much
more ridiculous jests then his of twenty fools that followed the court, and
told him she had as lieue be courted with a brush faggot as with a fre^chman,
that spent it self al in sparks, and would soonerfire ones chimney then warm
the house, and that such fparkes were good enough yet to set thatcht
dispositio^s a fire, but hers was tild with slight, and respected the^ as
slightly


Why so Captain, and yet you talk of your great frenchmen, to God little
England had never known them I may say


What Is the matter sir Giles, are you out of love with frenchmen now of a
sudden


Slydd captain VVood not make one, I Will be sworn, I Will be sworn, they took
away a mastie dog of mine by commission now, I think on it makes my tears
stand in my eyes with grief, I had rather lost the dearest friend that ever I
lay withal, in my life be this light, never stir if if he fought not with
great Sekerson four hours to one, foremoste take up hindmoste, and took so
many loaves from him, that he sterud him presently: So at last the dog cood
do no more then a Bear cood do, and the bear being heavy with hunger you
know, fell upon the dog, broke his back, and the dog never stird more


Why thou say the frenchmen took him away.


Frenchmen, I, so they did too, but yet and he had not bin killed, twood nere a
greeud me


O excellent unity of speech.


Save ye knights.


Save you Captain.


Pages, welcome my fine pages.


Welcome boys.


VVelcome sweet Will, good Jack.


But how chance you are so far from London now pages, is it not almost
dinner time


Yes indeed Sir, but we left our fellows to wait for once, and cood not choose
in pure love to your worships, but we must needs come and meet you, before you
met our Ladies, to tell you a secret


A secrett, what secret I pray thee?


If ever your worships say any thing* we are undone for ever.


Not for a world believe it.


Why then this it is; we oue^heard our Ladies as they were talking in private
say they refusde to meet you at Barnet this morning of purpose, because they
wood try which of you were most patient


And some said you, Sir Gyles, another you Sir and the third you Captain,


This was excellent.


Then did they swear one another not to excuse themselves to you by any
means, that they might try you the better, now if they shall see you say
nothing in the world to them, what may come of it, when Ladies begin to try
their suitors once, I hope your wisdoms can i^dge a little


O ho my little knave let us alone now in faith, wood I might be Casheird, if I
say any thing


Faith and I can forbear my Tongue as well as another I hope.


VVood I might be degraded if I speak a word, I Will tell them I care not for
loosing my labor


Come knights shall we not reward the pages?


Yes I prithee do, Sir Gyles give the boys something.


Never stir Sir Cut, if I have ever a groat about me but one three pence.


Well knights i will lay out fors all, here my fine pages.


No in deed ant please your worship.


O pages refuse a gentleman's bounty.


Cry you mercy Sir, thank you sweet Captain


And what other news is stirring my fine villiacos.


Marry Sir they are inui^ed to a great supper to night to your Lords house
Captain* the Lord Furnifall, and there will be your great cosen Sir Gyles
Goosecappe, the Lord Tales, and your uncle Sir Cut. Rudesby, Sir Cutbert
Kingcob


The Lord Tales, what countriman is he?


A kentish Lord Sir, his ancestors came forth off Canterbury.


Out of Canterbury.


I indeed Sir the best Ta^s in England are your Canterbury tales, I assure ye.


the boy tells thee true Captain.


He writes his name Sir, Tales, and he being the tenth son his father had;
his father Christ^d him December Tales, and so his whole name is the Lord December
Tal^s


A my mortallitie the boy knows more then I do of our house.


But is the Lady Furnif^ (Captain) still of the same drinking humor she was
wont to be


Still of the same knight, and is never in any sociable vain till she be
typsie, for in her sobriety she is madd, and fears my good little old Lord
out of all proportion


And therefore as I hear he will earnestly inuit guestes to his house, of
purpose to make his wife dronk, and then dotes on her humor most profanely


It Is very true knight; we will suppe with them to night; and you shall see
her; and now I think ont, i will tell you a thing knights, wherein perhaps you
may exceedinly pleasure me


What Is that good Captain.


I am desirous to help my Lord to a good merry Fool, and if I cood help him
to a good merry one, he might d^e me very much credit I assure ye


Sblood thou speak to us as if we cood serve thy turn.


O France Sir Cut: your Frenchman wood not have taken me so, for a world, but
because Fools come into your companies many times to make you merri


As thou do.


Nay good Sir Cut: you know fools do come into your companies.


I and thou know it too, no man better.


Bear with Choler Sir Gyles.


But wood you help your Lord to a good fool so feign Sir.


I my good page exceeding feign.


You mean a wench, do you not Sir, a foolish we^ch?


Nay I wood have a man fool, for his Lord: page*


Does hi^ Lord: love a fool, so well ^ pray.


Assure thy self page, my Lord loves afoole as he loves himself.


Of what degr^e wood you have your Fool Sir, for you may have of all manner o^
d^s


Faith I wood have him a good Emphaticall fool, one that wood make my Lord
laugh well, and I card not


Laugh well (vm) then we must know this Sir, is your Lord Costiue of
laughter, or laxatiue of laughter


Nay he is good merry little Lord, and indeed something Laxatiue of Laughter.


Why then Sir the less wit will serve his Lordships turn, marry if he had
bin Costiue of laughter, he must have had two or three drams of wit the more
in his fool, for we must ^inister according to the quantity of his Lord: humor
you know, and if he s^ood have as much Wit in his fool being Laxatiue of
laughter, as if he were Costiue of Laughter, why he might laugh himsele into
an Epilepsie, and fall down dead suddenly, as many have done with the
e^tremitie of that passion; and I know your Lord cares for nothing, but the
health of a fool


Thart ith right my notable good page.


Why, and for that health Sir we will w^rrant his Lordship, that if he should
have all Bacon de sanitate tu^da read to him, it shood not please his Lordship
so well as our fool shall


Remercy my more then English pages.


A my word I have not seen pages have so much wit, that have never bin in
France Captain


It Is true indeed Sir Gyles, well then my almost french Elixers* will you help
my Lord to a fool, so fit for him as you say


As fit, I Will warrant you Captain, as if he were made for him, and he shall
come this night to supper, and fool where his Lord: sits at table


Excellent ^rt, fail not now my sweet pages.


Not for a world sir, we will go both, and seek him presently.


Do so my good wagges


Save you knights.


Save you Captain.


Farewell my pretty knaves, come knights, shall we resolve to go to this
Supper


What else.


And let us provide torches for our men to sit at door with all captain.


That we will I warrant you sir Giles.


Torches? why the Moon will shine man.


The moon Sir Cut: I scorn the moon in faith, Slydd sometimes a man shall not
get her to shine and if he wood give her a couple of Capons, and one of them
must be white too, God forgive me I cud never abide her since yesterday, she
seru'de me such a trick the other night


What trick sir Gyles?


Why sir Cut: cause the days be mortal and short now you know, and I love
day light well; I thought it went a way faster then it needed, and run after
it into Finsburie-fieldes ith calm evening to see the wind mils go? and even
as I was going over a ditch the moon by this light of purpose runs me behind
a cloud, and lets me fall into the ditch by heaven


That was ill done in her in deed sir Giles.


Ill done sir Cut: Slydda man may bear, and bear, but and she have noe more
good manners, but to make every black slouenly cloud a pearl in her eye I
shall nere love English moon again, while I live I Will besworne to ye


come knights to London horse, horse, horse.


In what a case he is with the poor English moon, because the french moons
(their torches) will be the less in fashion, and I warrant you the Captain will
remember it too, tho he say no thing, he se^onds his resolute chaseso and
follows him, I Will lay my life you shall see them the next cold night, shut the
moon^shine out of their chambers, and make it lie without doors all night. I
discredit my wit with their companies now I think on it, plague a god on them;
I Will fall a beating on them presently


Sing good Horatio, while I sigh and write.
According to my master Platos mind
The Soul is music, and does therefore joy
In accents musical, which he that hates
With points of discord is together tied
And barks at Reason, Consonant in sense.
Divine Eugenia, bears the ^ular form
Of music and of Reason, and presents
The Soul exempt from flesh in flesh inflamed,
Who must not love her then, that loves his soul?
To her I write, my friend, the star^e of friends
VVil needs have my strange lines greet her strange eyes
And for his fake i will power my poor Soul forth
In floods of Ink; but did not his kind hand
Bar me with violent grace, I wood consume.
In the white flames of her impassionate Love
E^e my harsh lips shood vent the odorous blaze.
For I am despera^e of all worldly Joys
And there was never man so harsh to men,
When I am fullest of digested life
I seem a liuelesse Embrion to all
Each day rackt up in nightlike Funeral.
Sing good Horatio, whilst I sigh and write.

Suffer him to love that suffers not loving, my love is without passion and
therefore free from alteration


Prose is too harsh, and verse is poetry
Why shood I write then? merit clad in Ink
Is but a mourner, and as good as naked
I will not write my friend shall speak for me
Sing one staue more my good Horatio.
I must remember I know whom I love,
Adame of learning, and of life exemt
From all the Idle fancies of her sex,
And this that to an other dame wood seem
Perplex^ and foulded in a rudelesse veil
Will Be more clear then ballads to her eye
I Will write, if but to satisfy my friend.
Your third stauce sweet Horatio and no more.
How vainly do I offer my strange love?
I marry, and bid states, and entertain
Ladies with tales and jests, and Lords with news
And keep a house to feast Acteons hounds
That eat their master, and let ydell guests
Draw me from serious search of things divine
To bid them sit, and welcome, and take care
To sooth their pal ats with choice kytchin-stuff
As all must do that marry and keep house
And then look on the left sid of my yoke
Or on the right perhaps and see my wife
Draw in a quite repugnant course from me
Busied to starch her french purles, and her puffs
When I am in my Anima refiexa quid sit faelicitas quae origo rerum?
And make the^e beings that are known to be
The only serious objects of true men
Seem shadows, with substanti al^ stir she keeps
About her shadows, which if husbands love
They must believe, and thus my other self
Brings me another body to dispose
That have already much too much of one,
And must not look for any Soul of her
To help two rule to bodies.
Fie for shame.
I never heard of such an antedame.
Do women bring no help of soul to men?
Why friend they either are men's souls themselves
Or the most witty Imitatrix^s of them
Or prettiest sweet apes of human Souls,
That ever Nature framed; as I will prove.
For first they be Substantiae lucidae
And p^rer then men's bodies like their souls,
Which men's harsh hairs both of their breast and chinne
Occasiond by their gross and ^uder heat
Plainly demonstrates: Then like souls they do,
Mouere corpora, for no power on earth
Moves a man's body, as a woman does!
Then do they Dare formas corpori
Or add fair forms to men, as their souls do:
For but for women, who wood care for forms?
I vow I never wood wash face, nor hands
Nor care how ragg'd, or flouenlie I went
Were not for women, who of all men's pompes
Are the true final causes: Then they make
Men in their Seeds imortall like their Souls
That else wood perish in a spanne of time.
Oh they be Soulelike-Creatures, and my Niece
The Soul of twenty rare Souls stild in one.

That, that it is my Lord, that makes me love.


Oh are ye come Sir, welcome to my Niece
As I may say at midnight gentle friend
What have you wrott I pray?

Strange stuff my Lord.


Indeed the way to believe is to love
And the right way to love is to believe,
This I will carry now with pen and In^ke
For her to use in answer, see, sweet friend
She shall not stay to call, but while the steel
Of her affection is made soft and hott,
I Will strike and take occasion by the browe.
Blessed is the wooing that's not long a doing.

Had ever man so true, and noble friend?
Or wood men think this sharp worlds freezing Air
To all true honor and judicial love
VVood suffer such a flourishing pyne in both
To ouerlooke the boxe-trees of this time?
When the learnd mind has by impulsion wrought
Her eyes cl^re fire into a knowing flame.
No elementall smoke can darken it
Nor Northen cold^es nyppe her Daphnean flower,
O sacred friendship thanks to thy kind power
That being retired from all the faithles world
Appearst to me in my vnworldly friend,
And for thine own sake let his noble mind
By moving presedent to all his kind
(Like just Deucalion) of earths stony bones
Repair the world with humane blood and flesh
And dying virtue with new life refresh.

It Is time to leave your Chests Ladies it is too studious an exercise after dinner.


Why is it called Chests?


Because they lean upon their Chests that play at it.


I wood have it called the strife of wits, for it is ^ game so witti^, that with
strife for maisterie, we hunt it eagerly


Specially where the wit of the G^caps are in cha^ my Lord.


I am a Goosecappe by the mothers side madam, at least my mother was a
Goosecappe


And you were her white son, I warrant my Lord.


I was the youngest Lady, and therefore must be her white son ye know, the
youngest of ten I was


And the wisest of Fifteen.


And sweet Lady will ye cast a kind eye now upon my Cousin, Sir Gyles
Goosecappe


Pardon my Lord I have never a spare eye to cast away I assure ye.


I wonder you shood Countit cast away Lady upon him, do you remember those
few of his good parts I rehearst to you


Very perfectly my Lord, amongst which one of them was, that he is the best
Sempster of any woman in England, pray lets see some of his work


Sweet Lord lets see him sow a little.


You shall a mine honor Lady.


He Is a goodly great knight indeed; and a little needle in his hand will
become him prettelie


From the Spanish pike to the Spanish needle, he shall play with any knight ^n
England Lady


But not ^ c^erso, from the Spanish needle to the Spanish pike.


I think he be too wise for that indeed madam, for he has 20. miles length in
land lies together, and he wood be loath to bring it all to the length of ^
pike


But no man commends my blount Servant Sir Cut: Rudeshy methinks.


He is a kind gentleman Lady though he be blunt, and is of this humor, the
more you presume upon him without Ceremony, the more he lo^ you, if he know
you think him kind once and will say nothing but still use him, you may melt
him into any kindness you will; he is right like a woman, and had rather, you
shood bluntly take the greatest ^our you can of him, then shamefastly entreat
it


He says well to you Hippolita.


I madam, but they (...), he will beat one in Jest, and byte in kindness, and
tear ones ruffes in Cour^ippe


Some that he makes sport withal perhaps, but none that he respects
^assureye


And wha'ts his (...) C^beard?


Some two thousand a year Lady.


I pray do not tell him that I ask't, for I stand ^ot upon living.


O Good Lady who can live without living?


Still here Lordings? good companions in faith, I see you come not for vittles.


Vittles, my Lord, I hope we have vittles at home.


I but sweet Lord, there is a principle in the Poli^itians physic, ^at not
your meat upon other men's trenchers, and beware of surfits of your own cost
many good companions cannot abide to eat meat at home ye know. And how (...)
my noble Niece now, and her fair Lady Feeres


What wind blows you hither troe?


Hark you madam, the sweet gale of one Clarences breath, with this his paper
^ayle blows me hither


Aye me still, in that humor? beshrowe my heart it I take any Papers from him.


Kind bosom do thou take it then.


Nay then never trust me.


Let it ^all then, or cast it awa^e you were best, that every body may
discover your love suits, do; there is sombodie near if you note it, and how
have you spent the time since dinner nobles


At chests my Lords,


Read it niece.


Here bear it back I pray.


I bear you on my back to hear you; and how play the Ladies sir Cuthbert,
what men do they play best withal, with knights or rookes


With knights my Lord.


It Is pity their board is no broader, and that some men caled guls are not
added to their gam


Why my Lo it needs not, they make the knights guls.


That's pretty sir Cuthbert; you have begone I know Niece, forth I command you.


O yare a sweet uncle.


I have brought her a little Gre^ke, to help me out withal, and she is so coy
of her learning for sooth she makes it strange: Lords, and Ladies, I inuit you
al to supper to night, and you shall not deny me


We will attend your Lordshippe.


Come Ladies let us into the gallerie a little.


And now what says mine own dear niece in faith?


What shood she say to the backfide of a paper.


Come, come, I know you have been a'the belly side.


Now was there ever Lord so prodigal, of his own honored blood, and d^nity?


A^ay with these same horse fair alligations, will you answer the l^r?


Gods my life you go^ like a cuning spokes man, man, answer uncle? what do
ye think me desperate of a husban


Not so niece, but careless of your poor uncle.


I will not write that is certain.


What will you have my friend and I pe^ish, do you thirst our bloods?


O yare in a mighty danger noe doubt on it.


If you have our bloods beware our ghostes I can tell ye, come will ye write?


I will not write in faith.


in faith dame, then I must be your secretary I see, here is the letter, come, do
you dictate and I Will write


If you write no otherwise then I dictate, it will scarce prou^ a kind answer
I believe


But you will be aduis'de I trust. Secretaries are of counsel with their
countesses, thus it begins. Suffer him to love, that suffers not loving, what
answer you to that


He loves extremely that suffers not in love.


He answers you for that presently, his love is without passion, and
therefore free from alteration, for Pa^ you know is in Alterationem lab^ he
loves you in his soul he tells you, wherein there is no passion, say dame what
answer you


Nay if I answer any thing.


Why? veri^ well, i will answer for you.


You answer? shall I set my hand to your answer?


I by my faith shall ye.


By my faith, but you shall answer as I wood have you then.


Always put in with advice of your secretary, niece, come, what answer you?


Since you needs will have my Answer, I Will Answer (...) to the first, and
last part of his letter


Do so Niece, and leave the midst for himself a gods name, what is your
answer


I cannot but suffer you to love, if you do love.


Why v^ry good, there it is, and will requit your love; say you so?


Beshrowe my lips then my Lord.


Beshrowe my fingers but you shall; what, you may promise to requite his love,
and yet not promise him marriage I hope; well, and will requite your love


Nay good my Lord hold your hand, for i will be sworn, i will not set my hand ^oo't.


Well hold of your hand good madam till it shood come on, I Will be ready for it
anon, I warrant ye^ now forth; my Love is without passion, and therefore free
from alteration, what answer you to that madam


Even this my Lord, your Love being mental, needs no bodily Requital.


I am Content with that, and here it is; but in heart.


What but in heart?


Hold of your hand yet I say, I do embrace and repaie it,


You may write uncle, but if you get my hand to it,


Alas Niece this is nothing, is it any thing to a bodily marriage, to say you
love a man in Soul if your hearts agree and your bodies meet not? simple
marriarge rites, now let us forth: he is in the way to felicity, and desires
your hand


My hand shall always sign the way to felicity.


Very good, may not any woman say this now. Conclud now sweet Niece.


And so God prosper your Journey.


Charitably concluded, though far short of that ^oue I wood have showen to
any friend of yours Niece I swear to you, your hand now, andlet this little
stay his appetite


Read what you have writ my Lord.


What needs that madam, you remember it I am sure.


Well if it want sense in the Composition, let my secretary be blamed for it,
theirs my hand


Thanks gentle Niece, now i will read it.


Why now, more then before I pray?


That you shall see strait, I cannot but suffer you to love if you do love
and will requite your love


Remember that requital was of your own putning it, but it shall be after my
fashion I warrant ye


Interrupt me no more, your love being mentoll needs no bodily requital^, but
in heart I embrace and repay it; my hand shall always sign the way to
felicity, and my self knit with you in the bands of marriage ever walk with
you, in it, and so God prosper our journey


Gods me life, it is not thus I hope.


By my life but it is Niece.


By my life but it is none of my deed then.


Do you use to set your hand to that which is not your deed, your hand is at
it Niece, and if there be any law in England, you shall perform it too


Wh, ythis is plain dishonored deceit.
Does all your truest kindness end in law?

Have patience Niece, for what so ere I say
Only the laws of faith, and thy free love
Shall join my friend and thee, or naught at al,
By my friends love, and by this kiss it shall.

Why, thus did false Accontius snare Cydippe.


Indeed dear love his wile was something like
And then it is no vnheard-of^recherie
That was enacted in a gods Eye,
Acconti^s wort^ie love feared not Diana
Before whom he contriu'de this sweet deceit

Well there you have my hand, but i will besworne I never did thing so against my
will


It Will prove the better madam, doubt it not*
And to allay the billows of your blood,
Rais'de with my motion bold and opposite
Dear niece suppe with me, and refresh your spirits:
I have invited your companions
With the two guests that dinde with you to day,
And will send for the old Lord Furnifall
The Captain, and his mates and (tho at night)
We will be merry as the morning Lark.

No, no my Lord, you will have Clarence there.


A las poor gentleman I must tell you now
He Is extreme sick, and was so when he writ
Tho he did charge me not to tell you so;
And for the world he cannot come abroad.

Is this the man that without passion loves


I do not tell you he is sick with love;
Or if he be it is wilful passion.
Which he does choose to suffer for your sake
And cood restrain his sufferance with a thought,
Upon my life he will not trouble you;
And therefore worthy niece fail not to come.

I will on that condition.


It Is performed: for were my friend well and cood comfort me; I wood not now
entreat your company, but one of you I must have, or I die, oh such a friend
is worth a monarchy


Nay my gallants I will tell you more.


Forth good my Lord.


The evening came and then our waxen stars
Spa^kled about the heavenly court of France.
When I then young and readiant as the sun
G^ue luster to those lamps, and curling thus
My golden foretoppe* stepped into the presence,
Where set with other princely dames I found
The Countess of Lancalier and her niece
Who as I told you cast so fixed an eye
On my behauiours talking with the king:

True my good Lord.


They rose when I came in, and all the lights
Burnd dim for shame, when I stood up and shind.

O most passionate description Sir Cut:


True of a candles end.


The passingst description of a candle, that ever lived Sir Cut:


Yet aymd I not at them, nor seemd to note
What grace they did me, but found courtly cause
To talk with an accomplished gentleman
New come from Italy, in quest of news*
I spoke Italian with him.

What so young?


O rarissime volte cad^no nel parlar nostro familiare.


Slidd a cood speak it knight, at three year old.


Nay gentle Captain do not set me forth
I love it not, in truth I love it not.

Slight my Lo^d but truth is truth you know.


I dare ^nsure your Lordship, Truth is truth, and I have heard in France, they
speak French as well, as their mother tongue my Lord


Why it is their mother tongue my noble knight*
But (as I tell you) I seemed not to note
The Ladies notes of me, but held my talk,
with that Italionate Frenchman, and took time
(Still as our conference served) to show my Courtship
In the three quarter leg, and settled look,
The quick kiss of the top of the forefinger
And other such exploytes of good Accost;
All which the Ladies took into their eyes
With such attention that their favors swarm'de
About my bosom, in my hatt, mine ears,
In skarffes about my thighs, upon mine arms
Thick on my wrystes, and thicker on my hands,
And still the less I sought, the more I found.
All this I tell to this notorious end,
That you may use your Courtship with less care
To your coy mistress^s; As when we strike
A goodly Sammon, with a little line
We do not tugge to hale her up by force
For then our line wood break, and our hook lost;
But let her careless play along the stre^me
As you had left her, and she will drown her self.

A my life a most ri^h comparison.


Never stir, if it be not a richer Caparison, then my Lord my Cosine wore
at tilt, for that was brodred with nothing but mooneshine ith the water, and
this has Sa^mons in it; by heaven a most edible Capariso^


Odious thou woodst say, for Co^pariso^s are odious.


So they are indeed sir Cu^* al^ but my* Lords.


Be Caparisons odious Sir Cut: what like flowers?


O ass they be odorous.


A botts athat stinking word odorous, I can never hitt on it,


And how like you my Court-counsaile galla^ts ha*


Out of all proportion excellent my Lord: and belee^e it for Emphaticall
Courtship, your Lordship puts down all the Lords of the Court


No good Captain no.


By France you doemy Lord for Emphaticall Courtship.


For Emphaticall Courtship indeed I can do somewhat.


Then does your merry entertainment become you so festifally, that you have
all the bravery of a Saint Georges day about ye when you use it


Nay that's too much in sadness Captain.


O good my Lord, let him praise you, what so ere it costs your Lordshippe.


I assure your Lordshippe your merry behavior does so festifally show upon
you, that every high holliday when Ladies wood be most bewtifull; eue^y one
wishes to God she were turned into such a little Lord as you, when you are merry


By this fire they do my Lord, I have heard am.


Marry God forbid knight they shood be turned into me; I had rather be turned
into them amine honor


Then for your Lordships quippes, and quick jests, why Gesta Romanorum were
nothing to them a my virtue


Well, well, well, I will hear thee no more, I will hear thee no more, good
Captain, Tha'st an excellent wit, and thou shall have Crowns amine honor,
and now knights and Captain, the fool you told me off, do you al know him


I know him best my Lord.


Do you Sir Gyles, to him then good knight, and be here with him, and here,
and here, and here again; I mean paint him unto us Sir Gyles, paint him
lively, lively now, mygood knightly boy


Why my go^d Lord? he will nere be long from us, because we are all mortal
you know


Very true,


And as soon as ever we go to dinner, and supper together,


Dinner and supper together, whens that troe?


A will come you in amongst us, with his Cloak buttond, loose under his chinne.


Buttond loose my Lord?


I me Lord buttond loose still, and both the flaps cast o^r before, both his
shoulders before him


Both shouldiers before him?


From before him he means; forth good Sir Gyl^s.


Like a potentate My Lord?


Much like a ^otentate indeed.


For all the w^rld like a Potentate S. Cut: ye know.


So Si^.


All his beard nothing but hai^e.


Or something else.


Or something else as you say.


Excellent good.


His Mellons, or his Apricocks, Orrenges always in an unclean hand kerchiffe
very cleanely I warrant you my Lord


A good nea^e fool Sir Gyles of mine honor.


Then hi^ fine words that he sets them in, concatic^ll, a fine Annisseede
wenche fool upon ticket and so forth


Passing strange words believe me,


Knoth every man at the table, though he never saw him before, by sight and
then will he fool you so finely my Lord, that he will make your heart ache,
till your eyes run over


The best that ever I heard, gray mercy good knight for thy merry description,
Captain, I give thee twenty companies of commendations, never to be casheird


Save your Lordship,


My pretty cast of Merlins, what prophecies with your little maistershippes?


Things that cannot come to pass my Lord, the worse our fortunes.


Why what is the matter pages?


^ow now my Ladies foysting hounds.


M. Jack* M. Jack; how do ye M. William, frolic?


Not s^ frolic, as you left us Sir Gyles.


Why wags, what news bring you a Gods name.


Heavy news indeed my Lord, pray pardone us.


Heavy news? not possible your little bodies cood bring am then, unload those
your heavy news I beseech ye


Why my Lord the fool we took for your Lord: is thought too wise for you,
and we dare not present him


Slydd pages, you will not cheates of our fool will ye?


Why sir Giles, he is too dogged and bitter for you in truth, we shall bring
you a fool to make you laugh, and he shall make all the world laugh at us


I indeed sir Giles, and he knows you so well too


Know me* slight he knows me no more then the begge^ knows his dish.


Faith he begs you to be content sir Giles, for he will not come.


Beg me? slight I wood I had known that, the other day, I thought I had met him
in Paul's, and he had been any body else but a pillar, I wood have run him
through by heaven, beg me


H^ begges you to be content sir Giles, that is, he prays you*


O does he praise me, then I commend him.


Let this unsuitable fool go sir G^les, we will make shift without him.


That we will a my word my Lord, and have him too for all this.


Do not you say so sir Giles, for to tel^ you true that fool is dead.


Dead? Slight that cannot be man, I know he wood ha writ to me ont had been so.


Quick or dead let him go sir Giles.


I my Lord, for we have better news for you to harken after.


what are they my good Nou^tions?


My Lord Momford intreates your Lorship and these knights and captain to
accompany the countess Eugenia and the other two Ladies at his house at supper
to night


All desiring your Lo: to pardon them, for not eating your meat to night.


VVithall my heart wagges, and theirs amends; my hearts, now set your courtshippe
a'the last, a'the tainters, and prick up your sel^es for the Ladies


O brave s^r (...) come (...) prick up the Ladies:


And will not the knights two noble kinseme^ be there?


Both will be their my Lord.


Why there is the whole knot of us then, and there shall we kno^ke up the
whole triplicitie of your nuptials


^e make my Lord my Cousin speak for me.


And your Lordship will be for me I hope.


With tooth and nail Captain, A my Lord.


Hang am Tytts i will pommell my self into am.


Your L^: your Cousin S^r Gyles has promised the Ladies they shall see you sow.


Gods me, wood I might never be mortal if I do not carty my work with me.


Do so Sir Gyl^s, and withal use means
To taint their high bloods with the shafte of Love,
Sometimes a fingers motion wounds their minds;
A jest, a Iesture, or a pretty laugh.
A voice, a present, ah, things done ith nick
VVound deep, and sure, and let fly your gold
And we shall nuptials have hold belly hold.

O rare Sir Cut: we shall eat nut-shells. hold belly hold


O pitiful knight, that koowes not nuptials from nutshells.


And now Comme port^ vous monsieur?


Port bien vous remercy.


We may see it indeed Sir, and you shall go before with us.


No good monsieurs.


Another Crashe in my Ladies Celler in faith monsieur.


Remercy de bon ceur m^nsieurs.


How now my friend does not the knowing beams
That through thy common sense glau^ce through thy eyes
To read that letter, through thine eyes retire
And warm thy heart with a tryumphant fire?

My Lord I feel a treble happiness
Mix in o^e soul, which proves how eminent
Things endless are above things temporal,
That are in bodies needefully confin'de;
I cannot suffer their dementions pierst
Where my immortal part admits expansure
Even to the comprehension of two more
Commixt substantially with her mere self.

As how my strange, and riddle* speaking friend?


As thus my Lord, I feel my own minds joy
As it is separate from all other powers,
And then the mixture of an other soul
Ioyn'de in direction to one end, like it,
And thirdly the contentment I enjoy,
As we are joined that I shall work that good
In such a noble spirit as your niece,
Which in my self I feel for absolute;
Each good mind dowbles his own free content
When in an others use they give it vent.

Said like my friend, and that I may not wrong
Thy full perfections with an emptier grace,
Then that which show presents to thy conceits,
In working thee a wi^e worse then she seems;
^e tell thee plain a secret which I know.
My niece does use to paint herself with white
Whose cheeks are naturally mixed with redd
Either because she thinks pale-lookes moves most:
Or of an answereable nice affect
To other of her modest qualities;
Because she wood not with the outward blaze
Of tempting beauty tangle wanton eyes;
And so be troubled with their tromperies:
Which (...) as thou will. I make it known^
That thy free comment may examine it,
As willinger to tell truth of my nee^e,
Then in the least degree to wrong my friend.

A ielous part of friendship you unfold;
For was it ever seen that any dame
Wood chainge of choice a well mixed white and redd
For bloodles palenes, if she strived to move?
Her painting then is to shunn motion,
But if she mended some defect with it
Breeds it more hate then other ornaments;
(Which to supply bare nature) Ladies wear?
What an absurd thing is it to suppose;
(If Nature made us either lame or sick,)
We wood not seek for sound lymmes, or for health
By Art the Rector of confused Nature?
So in a face if Nature be made lamer
Then Art can make it, is it more offense
To help her want there then in other limbs?
Who can give instance where dames faces lost
The privilege their other parts may boast.

But our most Court received Poets says
That painting is pure chastities abator.

That was to make up a poor rhyme to Nature.
And far from any Judgment it confered
For lightness comes from hearts, and not from looks
And if inchastitie possess the heart;
Not painting does not race it, nor being clear
Does painting spot it,
Om^e bonum naturaliter pulchrum.
For outward fairenes bears the divine form,
And moves beholders to the Act of love;
And that which moves to love is to be wished
And each thing simply to be wished is good.
So I conclude mere painting of the face
A lawful and a commendable grace*

What paradox do thou defend in this
And yet through thy clear arguments I see
Thy speech is far exempt from flattery,
And how illiterate custom groslie erres?
Almost in all traditions she preferres.
Since then the doubt I put thee of my niece,
Checks not thy doubtless love, forth my dear friend,
And to all force to those impressions,
That now have carved her fantasy with love,
I have invited her to supper here.
And told her thou art most extreameli^ sick.
Which thou shall counterfeit with all thy skill,

Which is exceeding small to counterfeit,


Practice a little, love will teach it thee,
And then shall doctor Versey the physician,
Come to thee while her self is in my house.
With whom as thou confer'st of thy disease,
I Will bring my niece with all the Lords and Ladies.
Within your hearing under feigned pretext,
To show the pictures that hang ^eere thy chamber,
Where when thou hearst my voice, know she is there.
And therefore speak that which may stir her thoughts,
And make her fly into thy opened arms.
Ladies whom true worth cannot move to ruth
True lovers must deceue to show their truth

Where is Sir Gyles Goosecappe here?


Here my Lord.


Come forward knight it is you that the Ladies admire at working a mine honor.


A little at once my Lord for Idleness sake.


Sir Cut, I say, to her captain.


Come good ser^ant let us see what you work.


Why look you mistress* I am making a fine dry sea, full of fish, playing
in the bottom, and here i will let in the water so lively, that you shall hear
it rore


Not hear it Sir Giles.


Yes in sooth madam with your eyes.


I Lady; for when a thing is done so exceedeingly to the life, as my knight^e
cosen does it, the eye oftentimes takes so strong a heed of it, that it cannot
contain it alone, and therefore the ear seems to take part with it


That Is a very good reason my Lord.


What a Jest it is, to hear how seriously he strives to make his foolish
kinsmans answers wise ones


What shall this be servant?


This shall be a great whale mistress, at all his bigness spouting huge hills of
salt water before him, like a little* water squirt, but you shall not need to
fear him mistress, for he shall be si^ke and gould* he shall do you noe harm,
and he be nere so lively


Thank you good servant.


Do not think Lady, but he had need tell you this a forehand for a mine
honor, he wrought me the monster Caucasus so lively, that at the first sight I
started at it


The monster Caucasus my Lord? Cauca^s is a mountain; Cacus you mean.


Cacus indeed my Lord, cry you mercy.


Here i will take out your eye, and you will mistress.


No by my faith Servant it is better in


Why Lady, I Will but take it out in jest, in carnest.


No, something else there, good servant.


Why then here shall be a Camel, and he shall have horns, and he shall look
(for all the world) like a maid without a husband


O bitter sir Giles.


Nay he has a dry wit Lady I can tell ye.


He bobd me there indeed my Lord.


Marry him sweet Lady, to answer his bitter bob.


So she may answer him with horns indeed.


See what a pretty work he wears in his boote*hose.


Did you work them your self sir Gyles, or buy them?


I bought am for nothing madam in th'exange


Bought am for nothing.


Indeed madam in the exchange they so honor him for his work that they will
take nothing for any thing he buies on am; but where is the rich night-cappe you
wrohgt cosen* if it had not been too little for you, it was the best piece of
work, that ever I saw


Why my Lord, it was bigg enough, when I wrought it, for I wore pantables then
you know


Indeed the warmer a man keeps his feet the less he necdes wear upon his
head


You speak for your kinsman the best, that ever I heard my Lord.


But I believe madam, my Lord my cosen has not told you all my good parts.


I told him so I warrant you cosen.


What do you think he left out Sir Giles?


Marry madam I can take tobacco now, and I have bought glow-wormes to kindle
it withal, better then all the burning glasses ith world


Glowe-wormes sir Giles will they make it burn?


O od madam I feed am with nothing but fire, a purpose, I Will besworne they eat
me sieve faggots aweeke in charcoale


Nay he ha^ the strangest devices Ladies that ever you heard I warrant ye.


That Is a strange device in deed my Lord.


But your sowing sir Gyles is a more gentlewoman-like quality I assure you.


O far away, for now servant, you nee de never marry, you are both husband,
and wife your self


Nay indeed mistress I wood feign marry for all that, and i will tell you my
reason, if you will


Let Us hear it good servant.


Why madam we have a great match at football toward, married men against
batchellers, and the married men be al my friends, so I wood feign marry to
take the married men's parts in truth


The best reason for marriage that ever I heard sir Gyles.


I pray will you keep my work a little mistress; I must needs strain a
little courtsie in truth


Gods my life I thought he was a little to blame.


Come, come, you hear not me dame.


Well said sir Cut, to her now we shall hear fresh courting.


A las sir Cut, you are not worth the (...), every body says you cannot love,
how soever you talk on it


Not love dame? slydd what argument woodst have of my love tro? let me look
as red as scarlet a fore I see thee, and when thou comst in sight if the
sun of thy beauty, do not white me like a sheppards hollandl am a Jew to my
Creator


O excellent.


Let me burst like a Tode, if a frown of thy browe has not turned the very
heart in my belly, and made me ready to be hanged by the heels for a
fortnight to bring it to the right again


You shood have hanged longer Sir Cut: it is not right yet,


Zonnes, bid me cut off the best lymme of my body for thy love, and i will lai't
in thy hand to prove it, do think I am no Christian, have I not a Soul to
save


Yes it is to save yet I warrant it, and will be while it is a soul if yo^ use this.


Excellent Courtship of all hands, only my Captains Courtshippe, is not heard
yet, good madam give him favor to court you with his voice


What shood he Court me with all else my Lord?


Why, I hope madam there be other things to Court Ladies withal besides
voices


I mean with an audible sweet song madam.


With all my heart my Lord, if I shall be so much in debted to him.


Nay I will be indebted to your ears Lady for hearing me sound music.


Well done Captain, prove as it will now.


My Lord Doctor Versey the Physician is come to see master Clarence.


Light and attend him to him presently.


To master Clarence? what is your friend sick?


Exceeding sick.


I am exceeding sorry.


Never was sorrow worthier bestowed
Then for the ill state of so good a man.

Alas poor gentleman; good my Lord lets see him.


Thanks gentle Lady, but my friend is loath
To trouble Ladies since he cannot quitt them.
With any thing he has that they respect.

Respect my Lord; I wood hold such a man
In more respect then any Emperor
For he cood make me Empress of my self
And in mine own rule comprehend the world.

How now young dame? what so dainly inspird
This speech has silver hairs, and reverence asks
And sooner shall have duty done of me
Then any pomp in temperall Emperie.

Good madam get my Lord to let us greet him.


Alas we shall but wrong and trouble him.
His Contemplations greet him with most welcome.

I never knew a man of so sweet a temper
So soft and humble, of so high a Spirit.

Alas my noble Lord he is not rich,
Nor titles has, nor in his tender cheeks
The standing lake of Impudence corrupts,
Has naught in all the world, nor naught wood have,
To grace him in the prostituted light.
But if a man wood consort with a Soul
Where all man's Sea of gall and bitterness
Is quite evaporate with (...) holy flames,
And in whose powers a Doue-like Innocence
Fosters her own deserts, and life and death,
Runs hand in hand before them: All the Skies
Clear and transparent to her piercing eyes,
Then wood my friend be something, but till then
A Cipher, nothing, or the worst of men.

Sweet Lord lets go visit him.


Pray good my Lord, what is that you talk on?


Are you come from your necessary business Sir Gyles? we talk of the visiting
of my sick friend Clarence


O good my Lord lets visit him, cause I know his brother.


Know his brother, nay then Co^nt do not deni^ him.


Pray my Lord whether was eldest, he or his elder brother?


O! the younger brother eldest, while you live Sir Gyles.


I say so still my Lord, but I am so borne down with truth as never any
knightith world was I think


A man wood think he speaks simply now; but indeed it is in the will of the
parents, to make which child they will youngest, or eldest: For often we see
the younger (...), wherein he is eldest


Your Logical wit my Lord is able to make any thing good.


Well come sweet Lords, and Ladies, let us spend
The time till supper-time with some such sights
As my poo^e house is furnished withal
Pictures and Jewels; of which implements
It may be I have ^ome will please you much.

Sweet Lord lets see them.


I think your disease Sir, be rather of the mind then the body.


Be there diseases of the mind Doctor?


No question Sir, even as there be of the body.


And cures for them too?


And cures for them too, but not by Physic.


You will have their deseases, greifes? will ye not?


Yes, oftentimes.


And do not greifes ever rise out of passions?


Evermore.


And do not passions proceed from corporal distempers?


Not the passions of the mind, for the mind many times is sick, when the body
is healthful


But is not the mindes-sicknes of power to make the body sick?


In time, certain.


And the bodies ill affections able to infect the mind?


No question.


Then if there be such a natural commerce of Powers betwixt them, that the
ill estate of the one offends the other, why shood not the medicines for one
cure the other


Yet it will not you see. Heimihi quod nullus a^or est medicabilis herbis.


Nay then Doctor, since you cannot make any reasonable Connection of these two
contrarieties the mind and the body, making both subject to passion, wherein
you confound the substances of both, I must tell you there is no disease of the
mind but one, and that is Ignorance


Why what is love? is not that a disease of the mind?


Nothing so for it springs naturally out of the blood, nor are we subject to
any disease, or sorrow, whose causes or effects simply and natiuely concern
the body, that the mind by any means partaketh, nor are there any passions in
the Soul, for where there are no affections, there are no passions: And
Affectus your master Gallen refers part^irascents, For illic est anima sentiens
vbi sunt affectus: Therefore the Rational Soul cannot be there also


But you know we use to say, my mind gives me this or that, even in those
addictions that concern the body


We use to say so indeed, and from that use comes the abuse of all knowledge,
and her practice, for when the object in question only concerns the state of
the body? why shood the soul be sorry or glad for it? if she willingly mix
her self, then she is a fool, if of necessity and against her will, A
slave, And so, far from that wisdom, and freedom that the Empress of Reason,
and an eternal Substance shood comprehend


Divinely spoken Sir, but very Paradoxicallie.


Who Is there?
I, my Lord.

Bring hither the key of the gallerie, me thought I heard the Doctor and my
friend


I did so sure.


Peace then a while my Lord
We will be bold to evesdroppe; For I know
My friend is as respective in his chamber
And by himself, of any thing he does
As in a Critic Synods curious eyes
Following therein Pyth^goras golden rule.
Maxim omnium ^psum reuerere.

Know you the Countess Eugonia Sir?


Exceeding well Sir, she is a good learned scholar.


Then I perceive you know her well indeed.


Me thinks you two shood use much conference.


Alas sir, we do very seldom meet,
For her esta^e, and mine are so unequal,
And then her knowledge passes mine so far
That I hold much to sacred a respect,
Of her high virtues to let mine attend them.

Pardon me Sir, this humblenes cannot flow
Out of your udgment but from passion.

Indeed I do accoun^ that passion,
The very high perfection of my mind,
That is excited by her excellence,
And therefore willingly, and gladly feel it.
For what was spoken of the most chaste Queen
Of rich Pasiaca may be said of her.
Ante^t sortem moribus virtutibus Annos,
Sex^ animo, morum No^litate Genus.

A most excellent Dictick.


Come Lords away, lets not presume too much
Of a good nature, not for all I have
VVood I have him take knowledge of the wrong
I ru^ely off^r him: come then i will show
A few ^are Jewels to your honored eyes,
And then pre^t you with a common supper.

^wells my Lord, why is not this candlestick^ one of your iew^ pray?


Yes marrre is it Sir Gyles if you will.


^is a most si^e candlestick in truth, it wants nothing but the languages.


The languages servant, why the languages?


Why mistress; there was a la^tin cand^estick h^re before, and that had the
languages I am sure


I thought he had a reason for it Lady.


I and a reason of the Sun too my Lord, for his father wood have bin ashamed
on it


Well master Clarence I perc^iue your mind
Has so incorparate it self wi^h flesh
And therein ratified that flesh to spirit,
That you have need of no Physicians help.
But good Sir even for holy virtues health
And grace of perfect knowledge, do not make
Those ground-workes of eternity, you lay
Means to your ruin, and short being here:
For the too strict and rational Course you hold
Will eat your body up; and then the world,
Or that small point of it, where virtue lives
Will suffer Diminution: It is now
Brought almost to a simple unity,
Which is, (as you well know) Simplicior puncto.
And if that point fail once, why, then alas
The unity must only be supposed,
Let it not fail then, most men else have sold it;
Tho you neglect your self, vphould it,
So with my reverend love I leave you Sir.

Thanks worthy Doctor, I do amply quite you
I proppe poor virtue, that am propt my self,
And only by one friend in all the world,
For virtues only sake I use this wile,
Which otherwise I wood despise and scorn,
The world should s^ke and all the pomp she hugs
Close in her heart, in her ambitious gripe
Ere I sustain it, if this slendrest joint
Moved with the worth that worldlings love so well
Had power to save it from the throat of hell

Come on fair Ladies I must make you both
Familiar witnesses of the most strange part
And full of impudence that ere I plaide.

What Is that good madam?


I that have been so more then maiden-nice
To my dear Lord and uncle not to yield
By his importunate suite to his friends love
In look, or almost thought; will of my self
Far past his expectation or his hope
In action, and in person greet his friend,
And comfort the poor gentleman's sick state.

Is this a part of so much Impudence?


No but I fear me it will stretch to more


Mary madam the more the merrier.


Marry Madam? what shood I marry him?


You take the word me thinks as tho you would,
And if there be a thought of such kind heat
In your cold bosom, wood to God my breath
Might blow it to the flame of your kind heart.

Gods precious Lady, know ye what you say,
Respect you what I am, and what he is,
What the whole world wood say, and what great Lords
I have refused and might as yet embrace,
And speak you like a friend, to wish me him?

Madam I cast all this, and know your choice
Can cast it quite out of the crystal doors
Of your Judicial eyes: I am but young
And be it said without all pride I take,
To be a maid, I am one, and indeed
Yet in my mothers womb to all the wiles
Weend in the loomes of greatness, and of state:
And yet even by that little I have learned
Out of continual conference with you,
I have cride harvest home of thus much judgment
In my green sowing time, that I cood place
The constant sweetness of good Clarence mind,
Filled with his inward wealth and noblenes;
(Look madam here,) when others outward trashe
Shood be contented to come under here.

And so say I upon my maiden head.


It Is well said Ladies, thus we differ then,
I to the truth-wise, you to worldly men:
And now sweet dames observe an excellent jest
(At least in my poor jesting.) The Etl my uncle
Will miss me strait, and I know his close drift
Is to make me, and his friend Clarence meet
By some device or other he has plotted.
Now when he seeks us round about his house
And cannot find us, for we may be sure
He will not seek me in his sick ^iends chamber,
(I have at al times made his love so strange,)
He straight will think, I went away displeased,
Or hartelie careless of his hartiest suit.
And then I know there is no grief on earth
Will touch his heart so much, which I will suffer
To quite his late good pleasure wrought on me,
For i will be sworn in motion and progress
Of his friends suite, I never in my life
VVrastled so much with passion or was moved
To take his firm love in such ^elouse part.

This is most excellent madam, and will prove
A neecelike, and a noble friends Revenge.

Bold in a good cause, then lets greet his friend,
Where is this sickly gentleman at his book?
Now in good troth I wood these books were burnd
That rapp men from their ^app before their time,
How does my uncles friend, no other name
I need give him, to whom I give my self,

O madam let me rise that I may kneel,
And pay some duty to your sovereign grace.

Good Clarence do not wo^ke your self disease
My Lady comes to ease and comfort you.

And we are handmaides to her to that end.


Ladies my heart will break, if it be held
Within the verge of this presumtuous chair.

Why, Clarence is your judgment bent to show
A common lovers passion? let the world,
That liue^ without a heart, and is but show,
stand on her emtie, and impoisoned form,
I know thy kindness, and have seen thy heart,
Clest in my uncles free, and friendly lips
And I am only now to speak and act,
The rit'es due to thy love: oh I cood weep*
A bitter show of tears for thy sick state,
I cood give passion all her blackest rites.
And make a thousand vows to thy deserts,
But these are common, knowledge is the bond,
The seal and crown of our united minds*
And that is ra^e, and constant, and for that,
To my late written hand I give thee this,
See heaven, the soul thou gave is in this hand.
This is the knot of our eternity,
Which fortune, death, nor hell, shall ever loose.

What an unmannerly trick is this of thy countess, to give the noble count
her uncle the slip thus


Vnmannerlie, you villayne? O that I were worthy to wear a ^agger to an^e
purpose for thy sake


Why young gentlemen, utter your anger with your fists.


That cannot be man, for all fists are shut you know, and utter nothing, and
besides I do not think my quarrel just for my Ladies (...) in this cause,
for I protest she does most (...) miscarrie her self


Protest you sawsie Jack you, I shood do my country and court-shippe good
service to beat thy co^lts teeth out of thy head, for suffering such a
reverend word to pass their guarde; why, the oldest courtier in the world
man, can do noe more then protest


Indeed page if you were in France, you wood be broken upon a wheel for it,
there is not the b^st Dukes son in France dares say I protest, till h^e be
one and thirty year old at least, for the inheritance of that word is not to
be possessed before


Well, I am sorry for my presumtion then, but more sorry for my Ladies, marie
most sorry ^or thee good Lord Momforde, that will make (...) most of a^l ^orie
for our selves, if we do not find her out


Why alas what shood we do? all the stars of out heaven see, we seek her
as fast as w^e can, if she be crept into a rush we will seek her out or
burn her


Villains where are your Ladies, seek them
Out; hence, home ye monsters, and still keep you there
Where le^itie keeps, in her in constant Sphere,
A wa^e you pr^ious villains, what a plague,
Of varried tortures is a woman's heart?
How like a peacockes tail with different lights,
They differ from them selves; the very air
Alters the aspen humors of their bloods.
Now excellent good, now superexcellent badd.
Some excellent good, some? but one of all:
VVood any ignorant babie serve her friend,
Such an uncivil part? Sblood what is learning?
An artificial cobwebbe to catch flies,
And nourish Spiders, cood she cut my throat,
VV with her departure I had been her calfe,
And made a dish at supper for my guests
Of her kind charge, I am beholding to her,
Puff, is there not a feather in this ^yre
A man may challenge for her? what? a feather?
So easy to be seen; so apt to trace;
In the weak flight of her unconstant wings?
A mote man at the most, that with the sun,
Is only seen, yet with his radiant eye,
we cannot single so from other motes,
To say this mote is she, passion of death,
She wrongs me past a death, come* come my friend,
Is mine, she not her own, and there is an end.

Come uncle shall we go to supper now?


Zounes to supper? what a do^r is this?


A las what ailes my uncle, Ladies see.


Is not your Lordshippe well?


Good speak my Lord.


A sweet plague on you all, ye witty rogues have you no pity in your
villainous jests, but run a man quite from his fifteen wits


Will not your Lord-shippe see your friend, and niece?


VVood I might sink if I shame not to see her
Tush it was a passion of pure Ielosie,
I Will now make her now a mends with Adoration.
Gods of learning and of constancy,
Of friendship and every other virtue.

Come, come, you have abus'de me now I know
And now you plaster me with flatteries.

My Lord the con^ract is knit fast betwixt them


Now all heavens quire of Angels sing Amen,
And bless the^s true borne (...) with their bliss,
And Niece tho you have (...) me in this,
I Will uncle you yet in an other thing,
And quite deceive your expectation.
For where you think you have contracted hearts
With a poor gentleman, he is sole heir
To all my ^arledome, which to you and yours
I freely, and for ever here bequeath;
Call forth the Lords, sweet Ladies let them see
This sudden and most welcome Novelty;
But ^rie you mercy Niece, perhaps your modesty
Will not have them partake this sudden match.

O uncle think you so, I hope I made
My choice with too much Judgment to take shame
Of any form I shall perform it with.

Said like my Niece, and worthy of my friend.


My Lords, take witness of an absolute wonder,
A marriage made for virtue, only virtue,
My friend, and my dear niece are man and wife.

A wonder of mine honor, and withal
A worthy presedent for all the world;
Heaven bless you for it Lady, and your choice.

Thanks my good Lord.


An Accident that will make policy blushe,
And all the Complements of wealth and state,
In the succesfull and unnumbered Race
That shall flow from it, filled with fame and grace.

So may it speed dear Countsse, worthy Clarence.


Thanks good Sir Cu^berd.


Captain be not dismayed, I Will marry thee,
For while we live, thou shall ^y consort be.

By France my Lord, I am not grieved a whit,
Since Clarence has her; he has bin in France,
And therefore merits her if she were better.

The^ knights i will knit your happy nuptial knots,
I know the Ladies minds better then you;
Tho my rare Niece has chose for virtue only,
Yet some more wise then some, they choose for both
Virtue, and wealth.

Nay (...) then I plead
This goes with my choice, Some more wise then some,
For only virtues choice is truest wisdom.

Take wealth, and virtue both amongst you then,
They love ye knights exreamely, and Sir (...):
I give the ch a st Hippolita to you*
Sir Gyles this Lady;

Nay stay there my Lord,
I have not yet proved all his knightly parts
I hear he is an excellent Poet too.

That I forgot sweet Lady; good Sir Gyles*
Have you no sonnet of your pen about ye?

Yes, that I have I hope my Lord my Cosen.


Why, this is passing fit.


I Would be ^oth to go without paper about me against my mistress, hold my work
again, a man knows not what need he shall have perhaps


Well remembered a mine honor Sir Gyles:


Pray read my Lord, I made this sonnet of my mistress.


Nay read thy self man.


No intruth Sir Cut: I cannot read mine own hand.


Well I will read it.

Three things there be which thou should only crave,
Thou Pomroy, or thou apple of mine eye;
Three things there be, which thou should long to have,
And for which three, each modest dame wood (...),
Three things there be, that shood thine anger swage,
An English mastife, and a fine french page.

Sblood (...), there is but two things, thou (...) thy self.

Why Sir Cut: that's (...), the verse wood have binne too long, and I had put
in the third, S'light you are no Poet I perceive


It Is excellent servant.


Keep it Lady then,
And take the only knight of mortal men.

Thank you good my Lord as much as tho you had given me twenty shillings in
truth, now I may take the married men's parts at footeball


All comforts crown you all; and you Captain
For merry form sake let the willowe crown;
A wreath of willow bring us hither strait.

Not for a world shood that have bin forgot
Captain it is the fashion, take this crown.

With all my heart my Lord, and thank ye too
I will thank any man that gives me crowns.

Now will we con^ecrate our ready supper
To honored Hymen as his nuptial rite,
In form whereof first dance fair Lords and Ladies
And after sing, so we will sing and dance,
And to the skies our virtuous joys advance.
Now to the song, and do this garland grace.


Willowe, willowe, willowe.*
our captain goes down:
Willowe, willowe, willowe,
his valor does crown.
The rest with Rosemarie we grace,
O Hyme^ let thy lights
With richest rays guild (...) face,
and feast hearts with delights.
Willowe, willowe, willow,
we chaunt tothe skies:
And with black and yellows,
give co^rtship the prize.

