WElcome to Bradford, martial gentlemen,
L. Bonfild, and sir Gilbert Armstrong both,
And all my troops, eue^ to my basest groom,
Courage and welcome; for the day is ours:
Our cause is good, it is for the lands avail:
Then let us fight, and dye for Englands good.

We will, my Lord.

As I am Henry Momford, Kendals Earl,
You honor me with this assent of yours,
And here upon my sword I make protest,
For to relieve the poor, or dye myself:
And know, my Lords, that James, the King of Scots,
Wars hard upon the borders of this land:
Here is his Post: say, John Taylour,
What news with King James?

War, my Lord: tell, and good news I trow:
For king Iame vows to meet you the 26. of this month.
God willing, marie does he sir.

My friends, you see what we have to win.
Well, John, commend me to king James,
And tell him I will meet him the 26. of this month,
And all the rest: and so farewell.

why standst thou as a man in dumps?
Courage: for if I win, I Will make thee Duke:
I Henry Momford will be King my self,
And I will make thee Duke of Lancaster,
And Gilbert Armestrong Lord of Doncaster.

Nothing, my Lord, makes me amazde at all,
But that our soldiers finds our victuals scant:
We must make havoc of those country Swaynes:
For so will the rest tremble and be afraid,
And humbly send provision to your camp.

My Lord Bonfild gives good advice,
They make a scorn and stand upon the King:
So what is brought, is sent from them perforce;
Ask Mannering else.

What say thou, Mannering?

When as I showed your high commission,
They made this answer,
Only to send provision for your horses.

Well, hye thee to Wakefield, bid the Town
To send me all provision that I want;
Least I, like martial Tamberlaine, lay waste
Their bordering Countries,
And leaving none alive that contradicts my Commission.

Let me alone, my Lord, I Will make them
Veil their plumes: for whatsoere he be,
The proudest Knight, Justice, or other, that gaynsayeth
Your word, He clap him fast, to make the rest to fear.

Do so Nick: hye thee thither presently,
And let us hear of thee again to morrow.

Will you not remove, my Lord?

No: I will lie at Bradford all this night,
And all the next: come, Bonfield, let us go,
And listen out some bonny lasses here.

M. Mannering, stand aside, whilst we confer
What is best to do.
Townsmen of Wakefield, the Earl of Kendall
Here has sent for victuals;
And in ayding him, we show our selves
No less than traitors to the King:
Therefore let me hear, Townsmen,
What is your consents.

Even as you please we are all content.

Then M. Mannering we are resolved.

As how?

Marriesir, thus.
We will send the Earl of Kendall no victuals,
Because he is a traitor to the King;
And in ayding him we show our selves no less.

Why, men of Wakefield, are you waxen mad;
That present danger cannot whet your wits,
Wisely to make provision of your selves?
The Earl is thirty thousand men strong in power,
And what town so ever him resist,
He lays it flat and level with the ground:
Ye silly men, you seek your own decay:
Therefore send my Lord such provision as he wants,
So he will spare your town, and come no nearer
Wakefield then he is.

Master Mannering, you have your answer,
You may be gone.

Well, Woodroffe, for so I guess is thy name,
I Will make thee curse thy overthwart denial;
And all that sit upon the bench this day,
Shall rue the hour they have withstood my Lords
Commission.

Do thy worst, we fear thee not.

See you these seals? before you pass the town,
I will have all things my Lord does want,
Inspite of you.

Proud dapper Jack, veil bonnet to
The bench,
That represents the person of the King;
Or sir, I Will lay thy head before thy feet.

Why, who art thou?

Why, I am George a Green,
True liegeman to my King,
Who scorns that men of such esteem as these,
Should brook the braues of any traiterous squire:
You of the bench, and you my fellow friends,
Neighbors, we subjects all unto the King,
We are English borne, and therefore Edwards friends,
Voude unto him even in our mothers womb,
Our minds to God, our hearts unto our King,
Our wealth, our homage, and our carcases,
Be all King Edwards: then sir, we have
Nothing left for traitors, but our swords,
Whetted to bathe them in your bloods,
And dye against you, before we send you any victuals.

Well spoken, George a Green.

Pray let George a Green speak for us.

Sir you get no victuals here,
Not if a hoof of beef would save your lives.

Fellow, I stand amazde at thy presumption:
Why, what art thou that dare gaynsay my Lord,
Knowing his mighty puissance and his stroke?
Why, my friend, I come not barely of my self:
For see, I have a large Commission.

Let me see it, sir.
Whose seals be these?

This is the Earl of Kendals seal at arms,
This Lord Charnel Bonfields,
And this sir Gilbert Armestrongs.

I tell thee, sir, did good King Edwards son
Seal a commission against the King his father,
Thus would I tear it in despite of him,
Being traitor to my Sovereign.

What? have thou torn my Lord; Commission?
Thou shall rue it, and so shall all Wakefield.

What, are you in choler? I will give you pills
To cool your stomach.
See thou these seals?
Now by my fathers soul, which was a yeoman,
When he was alive, eat them,
Or eat my daggers point, proud squire.

But thou do but jest, I hope.

Sure that shall you see, before we two part.

Well, and there be no remedy, so George,
One is gone: I pray thee no more now.

O sir, if one be good, the others cannot hurt.
So sir, now you may go tell the Earl of Kendall,
Although I have rent his large Commission,
Yet of courtesy I have sent all his seals
Back again by you.

Well, sir, I will do your arrant.

Now let him tell his Lord, that he has
Spoke with George a Green,
Right pinner of merry Wakefield town,
That has physic for a fool,
Pills for a traitor that does wrong his Sovereign.
Are you content with this that I have done?

I, content, George:
For highly have thou honored Wakefield town,
In cutting of proud Mannering so short.
Come, thou shall be my welcome ghest to day;
For well thou have deserved reward and favor.

Now gentle father list unto thy son,
And for my mothers love,
That erst was blythe and bonny in thine eye,
Grant one petition that I shall demand.

What is that, my Cuddie?

Father, you know the ancient enmity of late,
Between the Musgroues and the wily Scotts,
Whereof they have oath,
Not to leave one alive that strides a lance.
O Father, you are old, and wayning age unto the grave:
Old William Musgroue, which whilome was thought,
The brauest horseman in all Westmerland,
Is weak, and forced to stay his arm upon a staff,
That ^arst could wield a lance:
Then, gentle Father, resign the hold to me;
Give arms to youth, and honor unto age.

Auaunt, false hearted boy, my joints do quake,
Even with anguish of thy very words.
Has William Musgroue seen an hundred years?
Have I been feared and dreaded of the Scotts,
That when they heard my name in any road,
They fled away, and posted thence amain?
And shall I dye with shame now in mine age?
No, Cuddie, no, thus resolve I,
Here have I lived, and here will Musgroue dye.

Now, gentle Grime, God a mercy for our good chere,
Our fare was royal, and our welcome great;
And since so kindly thou have entertained us,
If we return with happy victory,
We will deal as friendly with thee in recompense.

Your welcome was but duty, gentle Lord:
For wherefore have we given us our wealth,
But to make our betters welcome when they come?
O, this goes hard when traitors must be flattered:
But life is sweet, and I cannot withstand it.
God (I hope) will revenge the quarrel of my King.

What said you, Grime?

I say, sir Gilbert, looking on my daughter,
I curse the hour that ere I got the girl:
For sir, she may have many wealthy suitors,
And yet she disdaines them all, to have
Poor George a Green unto her husband.

On that, good Grime, I am talking with thy
Daughter;
But she in quirkes and quiddities of love,
Sets me to school, she is so ouerwise.
But, gentle girl, if thou will forsake
The pinner, and be my love, I will advance thee high:
To dignifie those hairs of amber hiew,
I Will grace them with a chaplet made of pearl,
Set with choice rubies, sparks, and diamonds,
Planted upon a velvet hood to hide that head,
Wherein two saphires burn like sparkling fire:
This will I do, fair Bettris, and far more,
If thou will love the Lord of Doncaster.

Heigh ho, my heart is in a higher place,
Perhaps on the Earl, if that be he,
See where he comes, or angry or in love;
For why, his color looks discontent.

Come, Nick, follow me.

How now, my Lord? what news?

Such news, Bonfild, as will make thee laugh,
And fret thy fill, to hear how Nick was used:
Why, the Justices stand on their terms;
Nick, as you know, is hawtie in his words;
He laid the law unto the Justices,
With threatening braues, that one looked on another,
Ready to stoop: but that a churl came in,
One George a Green, the pinner of the town.
And with his dagger drawn laid hands on Nick,
And by no beggars swore that we were traitors,
Rent our Commission, and upon a brave,
Made Nick to eat the seals, or brook the stabbe:
Poor Mannering afraid, came posting hither straight.

Oh lovely George, fortune be still thy friend,
And as thy thoughts be high, so be thy mind,
In all accords, even to thy hearts desire.

What says fair Bettris?

My Lord, she is praying for George a Green:
He is the man, and she will none but him.

But him? why, look on me, my girl:
Thou know, that yesternight I courted thee,
And swore at my return to wedde with thee:
Then tell me, love, shall I have all thy fair?

I care not for Earl, nor yet for Knight,
Nor Baron that is so bold:
For George a Green the merry pinner,
He has my heart in hold.

Bootlesse, my Lord, are many vain replies.
Let us hye us to Wakefield, and send her the pinners head.

It shall be so. Grime, gramercie,
Shut up the daughter, bridle her affects,
Let me not miss her when I make return:
Therefore look to her, as to thy life, good Grime.

I warrant you, my Lord.

And Bettris, leave a base pinner, for to love an Earl,
Feign would I see this pinner George a Green.
It shall be thus:
Nick Mannering shall lead on the battle,
And we three will go to Wakefield in some disguise:
But howsoever, I Will have his head to day.

Why, Iohnie: then the Earl of Kendall is blithe,
And has brave men that troop along with him.

I marie, my liege, and has good men
That come along with him,
And vows to meet you at Scrasblesea, God willing.

If good S. Andrewe lend King Iame leave,
I will be with him at the pointed day.
But soft: whose pretty boy art thou?

Sir, I am son unto Sir John a Barley,
Eldest and all that ere my mother had,
Edward my name.

And whither art thou going, pretty Ned?

To seek some birds, and kill them, if I can:
And now my scholemaster is also gone:
So have I liberty to ply my bow:
For when he comes, I stir not from my book.

Lord Humes, but mark the visage of this child;
By him I guess the beauty of his mother:
None but Laeda could breed Helena.
Tell me, Ned, who is within with thy mother.

Not but her self and household servants, sir:
If you would speak with her, knock at this gate.

Iohnie, knock at that gate.

O, I am betraide: what multitudes be these?

Fear not, fair Jane: for all these men are mine,
And all thy friends, if thou be friend to me:
I am thy lover James the King of Scotts,
That often have sued and wooed with many letters,
Painting my outward passions with my pen,
When as my inward soul did bleed for woe:
Little regard was given to my suit,
But happily thy husbands presence wrought it:
Therefore, sweet Jane, I fitted me to time;
And hearing that thy husband was from home,
Am come to crave what long I have desirde.

Nay, soft you, sir, you get no entrance here,
That seek to wrong sir John a Barley so,
And offer such dishonor to my mother.

Why, what dishonor, Ned?

Though young, yet often have I heard
My father say,
No greater wrong than to be made cuckold.
Were I of age, or were my body strong,
Were he ten Kings, I would shoot him to the heart,
That should attempt to give sir John the horn.
Mother, let him not come in,
I will go lie at lockie Millers house.

Stay him.

I, well said, Ned, thou have given the King
His answer:
For were the ghost of Caesar on the earth,
Wrapped in the wonted glory of his honor,
He should not make me wrong my husband so:
But good King James is pleasant, as I guess,
And means to try what humor I am in;
Else would he never have brought an host of men,
To have them witness of his Scottish lust.

Jane, in faith, Jane.

Never reply: for I protest by the highest
Holy God,
That doometh just revenge for things amiss,
King James of all men shall not have my love.

Then list to me, Saint Andrewe be my boot,
But I Will raze thy castle to the very ground,
Unless thou open the gate, and let me in.

I fear thee not, King Iamie, do thy worst:
This castle is too strong for thee to scale:
Besides, to morrow will sir John come home.

Well, Jane, since thou disdainst King James love,
I Will draw thee on with sharp and deep extremes:
For by my fathers soul, this brat of thine
Shall perish here before thine eyes,
Unless thou open the gate, and let me in.

O deep extremes: my heart begins to break:
My little Ned looks pale for fear.
Cheer thee, my boy, I will do much for thee.

But not so much, as to dishonor me.

And if thou dyest, I cannot live, sweet Ned.

Then dye with honor, mother, dying chaste.

I am armed:
My husbands love, his honor, and his same,
Ioynes victory by virtue.
Now, King James, if mothers tears cannot alay thine ire,
Then butcher him, for I will never yield:
The son shall dye, before I wrong the father.

Why then he dies.

My Lord, Musgroue is at hand.

Who, Musgroue? The devil he is. Come,
My horse.

Now, King James, thou art my prisoner.

Not thine, but fortunes prisoner.

Father, the field is ours: their colors we
Have seyzed:
And Humes is stayne: I slew him hand to hand.

God and Saint George.

O father, I am sore athirst.

Come in, young Cuddie, come and drink thy fill:
Bring in King Iame with you as a ghest:
For all this broile was cause he could not enter.

The sweet content of men that live in love,
Breeds fretting humors in a restless mind,
And fancy being checked by fortunes spite,
Grows too impatient in her sweet desires:
Sweet to those men whom love leads on to bliss,
But sour to me, whose hap is still amiss.

Marie amen, sir.

Sir, what do you cry, Amen at?

Why, did not you talk of love?

How do you know that?

Well, though I say it that should not say it,
There are few fellows in our parish,
So netled with love, as I have been of late.

Sir, I thought no less, when the other morning,
You rose so early to go to your wenches.
Sir, I had thought you had gone about my honest business.

Trow you have hit it: for master, be it known
To you,
There is some good will betwixt Madge the Sousewife,
And I,
Marie she has another lover.

Can thou brook any riuals in thy love?

A rider? no, he is a sow-gelder, and goes a foot.
But Madge pointed to meet me in your wheat close.

Well, did she meet you there?

Never make question of that:
And first I saluted her with a green gown,
And after fell as hard a wooing,
As if the Priest had bin at our backs, to have married us.

What, did she grant?

Did she grant? Never make question of that:
And she gave me a shirt coler,
Wrought over with no counterfeit stuff.

What, was it gold?

Nay, it was better than gold.

What was it?

Right Couentrie blew,
Who had no sooner come there, but wot you who came by.

No, who?

Clim the sow-gelder.

Came he by?

He spide Madge and I sit together,
He leapt from his horse, laid his hand on his dagger, and
Began to swear.
Now I seeing he had a dagger,
And I nothing but this twig in my hand,
I gave him fair words and said nothing.
He comes to me and takes me by the bosom,
You hoorsen shue, said he, hold my horse,
And look he take no cold in his feet.
No marie shall he sir, quoth I,
I Will lay my cloak underneath him:
I took my cloak, spread it all along,
And his horse on the midst of it.

Thou clown, did thou set his horse upon
Thy cloak?

I, but mark how I served him:
Madge and he was no sooner gone down into the ditch,
But I plucked out my knife,
Cut four hoales in my cloak, and made his horse stand
On the bare ground.

It Was well done: now sir, go and suruay my fields:
If you find any cattle in the corn, to pound with them.

And if I find any in the pound,
I shall turn them out.

Now we have put the horses in the corn,
Let us stand in some corner for to hear,
What brauing terms the pinner will breathe,
When he spies our horses in the corn.

O master where are you? we have a prise.

A prise, what is it?

Three goodly horses in our wheat close.

Three horses in our wheat close? whose be they?

Marie that's a riddle to me: but they are there: Velvet horses, and I never
saw such horses before. As my duty was, I put off my cappe, and said as
follows: My masters, what do you make in our close? One of them hearing me
ask what he made there, held up his head and neighed, and after his manner
laughed as heartily as if a mare had been tied to his girdle. My masters, said
I, it is no laughing matter; for if my master take you here, you go, as round
as a top, to the pound. Another untoward jade hearing me threaten him to the
pound, and to tell you of them, cast up both his heels, and let such a
monstrous great fart; that was as much as in his language to say, A fart for
the pound, and a fart for George a Green. Now I hearing this, put on my cap,
blewe my horn, called them all iades, and came to tell you


Now sir, go and drive me those three horses
To the pound.

Do you hear? I were best take a constable
With me.

Why so?
Why, they being gentlemen's horses, may stand on their
Reputation, and will not obey me.

Go do as I bid you, sir.

Well, I may go.

Whither away, sir?

Whither away? I am going to put the horses
In the pound.

Sir, those three horses belong to us, and we put
Them in, and they must tarry there, and eat their fill.

Stay, I will go tell my master.
Hear you, master? we have another prise:
Those three horses be in your wheat close still,
And here be three geldings more.

What be these?

These are the masters of the horses.

Now, gentlemen, I know not your degrees,
But more you cannot be, unless you be Kings,
Why wrong you us of Wakefield with your horses?
I am the pinner, and before you pass,
You shall make good the trespass they have done.

Peace, saucie mate, prate not to us:
I tell thee, pinner, we are gentlemen.

Why sir, so may I sir, although I give no arms.

Thou? how art thou a gentleman?

And such is my master, and he may give as good
Arms, as ever your great grandfather could give.

Pray thee let me hear how?

Marie my master may give for his arms,
The picture of April in a green ierkin,
With a rooke on one fist, and an horn on the other:
But my master gives his arms the wrong way;
For he gives the horn on his fist:
And your grandfather, because he would not lose his
Arms,
Wears the horn on his own head.

Well pinner, since our horses be in,
In spite of thee they now shall feed their fill,
And eat until our leasures serve to go.

Now by my fathers soul,
Were good king Edwards horses in the corn,
They shall amend the seath or kiss the pound,
Much more yours sir, whatsoere you be.

Why man, thou know not us,
We do belong to Henry Momford Earl of Kendal,
Men that before a month be full expirde,
Will be king Edwards betters in the land.

King Edwards better, rebel, thou lie.

Villain, what have thou done? thou have stroke
An Earl.

Why what care I? A poor man that is true,
Is better then an Earl, if he be false:
Traitors reap no better favors at my hands.

I, so me thinks, but thou shall dear aby this blow.
Now or never lay hold on the pinner.

Stay, my Lords, let us parlie on these broiles:
Not Hercules against two, the proverb is,
Nor I against so great a multitude.
Had not your troops come marching as they did,
I would have stopped your passage unto London:
But now I Will fly to secret policy.

What do thou murmr, George?

Marie this, my Lord, I muse,
If thou be Henry Momford Kendals Earl,
That thou will do poor G. a Green this wrong,
Ever to match me with a troop of men.

Why do thou strike me then?

Why my Lord, measure me but by your self:
Had you a man had served you long,
And heard your foe misuse you behind your back,
And would not draw his sword in your defense,
You would cashere him.
Much more, king Edward is my king:
And before I Will hear him so wronged,
I Will die within this place,
And maintain good whatsoever I have said.
And if I speak not reason in this case,
What I have said I Will maintain in this place.

A pardon my Lord for this pinner,
For trust me he speaks like a man of worth.

Well, George, will thou leave Wakefielde and
Wend with me,
I Will freely put up all and pardon thee.

I my Lord, considering me one thing,
You will leave these arms and follow your good king.

Why George, I rise not against king Edward,
But for the poor that is oppressed by wrong,
From whence came you? where do you dwell?

I am, forsooth, a semsters maid hard-by,
That has brought work home to your daughter.

Nay, are you not some crafty queen,
That comes from George a Green, that rascal,
With some letters to my daughter?
I will have you searched.

Alas, sir, it is Hebrew unto me,
To tell me of George a Green, or any other:
Search me good sir,
And if you find a letter about me,
Let me have the punishment that is due.

Why are you mufled? I like you the worse
For that.

I am not, sir, ashamed to show my face,
Yet loath I am my cheeks should take the air,
Not that I am charie of my beauties hue,
But that I am troubled with the toothache sore.

A pretty wench of smiling countenance,
Old men can like, although they cannot love,
I, and love, though not so brief as young men can.
Well, go in, my wench, and speak with my daughter.
I wonder much at the Earl of Kendall,
Being a mighty man, as still he is,
Yet for to be a traitor to his king,
Is more then God or man will well allow:
But what a fool am I to talk of him?
My mind is more here of the pretty less:
Had she brought some forty pounds to town.
I could be content to make her my wife:
Yet I have heard it in a proverb said,
He that is old, and marries with a less,
Lies but at home, and proves himself an ass.
How now, my wench, how is it? what not a word?
Alas, poor soul, the toothache plagues her sore.
Well, my wench, here is an Angel for to buy thee
And I pray thee use mine house,
The oftener the more welcome: farewell.

O blessed love, and blessed fortune both.
But Bettris, stand not here to talk of love,
But hye thee straight unto thy George a Green:
Never went Roe-bucke swifter on the downs,
Then I will trip it till I see my George.

Come away Ienkin.

Come, here is his house. Where be you, ho?

Who knocks there?

Here are two or three poor men, father,
Would speak with you.

Pray give your man leave to lead me fort

Go, Ienkin, fetch him forth.

Come, old man.

Father, here is three poor men come to question
Thee a word in secret that concerns their lives.

Say on my sons.

Father, I am sure you hear the news,
How that the Earl of Kendal wars against the king,
Now father we three are Gentlemen by birth,
But younger brethren that want revenues,
And for the hope we have to be preferred,
If that we knew that we shall win,
We will march with him:
If not, we will not march a foot to London more.
Therefore good father, tell us what shall happen,
Whether the King or the Earl of Kendal shall win.

The king, my son.

Art thou sure of that?

I, as sure as thou art Henry Momford,
The one L. Bonfild, the other sir Gilbert.

Why this is wondrous, being blind of sight,
His deep perseverance should be such to know us.

Magike is mighty, and foretells great matters:
In deed Father, here is the Earl come to see thee,
And therefore good father fable not with him.

Welcome is the Earl to my poor cell,
And so are you my Lords: but let me counsel you,
To leave these wars against your king,
And live in quiet.

Father, we come not for advice in war,
But to know whether we shall win or leese.

Lose gentle Lords, but not by good king Edward:
A baser man shall give you all the foil.

I marie father, what man is that?

Poor George a Green the pinner.

What shall he?

Pull all your plumes, and sore dishonor you.

He, as how?

Nay, the end tries all, but so it will fall out.

But so it shall not by my honor Christ.
I Will raise my camp, and fire Wakefield town,
And take that servile pinner George a Green,
And butcher him before king Edwards face.

Good my Lord be not offended,
For I speak no more then art reueales to me:
And for greater proof,
Give your man leave to fetch me my staff.

Ienkin, fetch him his walking staff.

Here is your walking staff.

I Will prove it good upon your carcases:
A wiser wisard never met you yet,
Nor one that better could foredoome your fall:
Now I have singled you here alone,
I care not though you be three to one.

Villain, have thou betrayed us?

Momford, thou lie, never was I traitor yet;
Only devised this guile to draw you on,
For to be combatants.
Now conquer me, and then march on to London:
Least you be torn in pieces with she devils:
Mistres Bettris, once, twice, thrice.
Oh is this no cunning?

Is this my love, or is it but her shadow?

I this is the shadow, but here is the substance.

Tell me sweet love, what good fortune
Brought thee hither:
For one it was that favored George a Green.

Both love and fortune brought me to my George,
In whose sweet sight is all my hearts content.

Tell me sweet love, how camst thou from thy
Fathers?

A willing mind has many slips in love:
It was not I, but Wily thy sweet boy.

And where is Wily now?

In my apparel in my chamber still.

Ienkin, come hither: Go to Bradford,
And listen out your fellow Wily.
Come, Bettris, let us in,
And in my cottage we will sit and talk.

Brother of Scotland, I do hold it hard,
Seeing a league of truce was late confirmde
Twixt you and me, without displeasure offered,
You should make such invasion in my land,
The vows of kings should be as oracles,
Not blemished with the stain of any breach,
Chiefly where fealty and homage wills it.

Brother of England, rub not the sore afresh,
My conscience grieves me for my deep misdeede,
I have the worst, of thirty thousand men,
There escaped not full five thousand from the field.

Gramercie, Musgroue, else it had gone hard.
Cuddie, I Will quite thee well ere we two part

But had not his old Father William Musgroue
Played twice the man, I had not now been here,
A stronger man I seldom felt before,
But one of more resolute valiance,
Treads not I think upon the English ground.

I wot well, Musgroue shall not lose his hier.

And it please your grace, my father was
Five score and three at Midsommer last past,
Yet had king Iamie been as good as George a Green,
Yet Billy Musgroue would have fought with him.

As George a Green, I pray thee, Cuddie,
Let me question thee,
Much have I heard since I came to my crown,
Many in manner of a proverb say,
Were he as good as G. a Green, I would strike him sure:
I pray thee tell me, Cuddie, can thou inform me,
What is that George a Green.

Know, my Lord, I never saw the man,
But mickle talk is of him in the Country.
They say he is the Pinner of Wakefield town,
But for his other qualities, I let alone.

May it please your grace, I know the man too well.

Too well, why so, Warwick?

For once he swingde me, till my bones did ache.

Why, dares he strike an Earl?

An Earl my Lord, nay he will strike a king,
Be it not king Edward.
For stature he is framde,
Like to the picture of stout Hercules,
And for his carriage passes Robin Hood.
The boldest Earl or Baron of your land,
That offers scath unto the town of Wakefield,
George will arrest his pledge unto the pound,
And who so resists bears away the blows,
For he himself is good enough for three.

Why this is wondrous, my L. of Warwick,
Sore do I long to see this George a Green.
But leaving him, what shall we do, my Lord,
For to subdue the rebels in the North?
They are now marching up to Doncaster.
Soft, who have we there?

Here is a traitor, the Earl of Kendal.

Aspiring traitor, how dare thou once
Cast thine eyes upon thy Sovereign,
That honored thee with kindenes and with favor?
But I will make thee buy this treason dear.

Good my Lord.

Reply not, traitor.
Tell me, Cuddy, whose deed of honor
Won the victory against this rebel.

George a Green the Pinner of Wakefield.

George a Green, now shall I hear news
Certain what this Pinner is:
Discourse it briefly, Cuddy, how it befell.

Kendall and Bonfild, with sir Gilbert Armstrong,
Came to Wakefield Town disguisd.
And there spoke ill of your grace,
Which George but hearing, feld them at his feet,
And had not rescue come into the place,
George had slain him in his close of wheat.

But Cuddy, can thou not tell
Where I might give and grant some thing,
That might please, and highly gratify the pinners thoughts?

This at their parting George did say to me,
If the king vouchsafe of this my service,
Then gentle Cuddie kneel upon thy knee,
And humbly crave a boon of him for me.

Cuddie, what is it?

It is his will your grace would pardon them,
And let them live although they have offended.

I think the man strives to be glorious.
Well, George has craved it, and it shall be granted,
Which none but he in England should have gotten.
Live Kendall, but as prisoner,
So shall thou end thy days within the tower.

Gracious is Edward to offending subjects.

My Lord of Kend. you are welcome to the court.

Nay, but ill come as it falls out now,
I, ill come in deed, were it not for George a Green,
But gentle king, for so you would auerre,
And Edwards betters, I falute you both,
And here I vow by good Saint George,
You will gain but little when your sums are counted.
I sore do long to see this George a Green:
And for because I never saw the North,
I will forthwith go see it:
And for that to none I will be known,
We will disguise our selves and steal down secretly,
Thou and I king James, Cuddie, and two or three,
And make a merry journey for a month.
Away then, conduct him to the tower.
Come on king James my heart must needs be merry,
If fortune make such havoc of our foes.

Why is not lovely Marian blithe of cheer?
What ails my Lemman that she gins to lowre?
Say good Marian why art thou so sad.

Nothing, my Robin, grieves me to the heart,
But whenever I do walk abroad,
I hear no songs but all of George a Green,
Bettris his fair Lemman passes me.
And this my Robin gauls my very soul.

Content, what wreakes it us though George a
Green be stout,
So long as he does proffer us no scath?
Envy does seldom hurt but to it self,
And therefore, Marian, smile upon thy Robin.

Never will Marian smile upon her Robin,
Nor lie with him under the green wood shade,
Till that thou go to Wakefield on a green,
And beat the Pinner for the love of me.

Content thee, Marian, I will ease thy grief,
My merry men and I will thither stray,
And here I vow that for the love of thee,
I will beat George a Green, or he shall beat me.

As I am Scarlet, next to little John,
One of the boldest yeomen of the crew,
So will I wend with Robin all along,
And try this Pinner what he dares do.

As I am Much the Millers son,
That left my Mill to go with thee,
And nill repent that I have done,
This pleasant life contenteth me,
In ought I may to do thee good,
I Will live and die with Robin Hood.

And Robin, Marian she will go with thee,
To see fair Bettris how bright she is of blee.

Marian, thou shall go with thy Robin.
Bend up your bows, and see your strings be tight,
The arrows keen, and every thing be ready,
I shall be turned out of mine office.

What is that, sir?

Whenever I go to fight with any body,
I use to flourish my staff thrice about my head
Before I strike, and then show no favor.

Well sir, and till then I will not strike thee.

Well sir, here is once, twice, here is my hand,
I will never do it the third time.

Why then I see we shall not fight.

Faith no: come, I will give thee two pots
Of the best Ale, and be friends.

Faith I see it is as hard to get water out of a flint,
As to get him to have about with me:
Therefore I will enter into him for some good cheer:
My friend, I see thou art a faint hearted fellow,
Thou have no stomach to fight,
Therefore let us go to the Alehouse and drink.

Well, content, go thy ways and say thy prayers,
Thou scapst my hands to day.

Tell me sweet love, how is thy mind content,
What can thou brook to live with George a Green?

Oh George, how little pleasing are these words?
Came I from Bradford for the love of thee?
And left my father for so sweet a friend?
Here will I live until my life do end.

Happy am I to have so sweet a love.
But what are these come trasing here along?

Three men come striking through the corn,
My love.

Back again, you foolish travelers,
For you are wrong, and may not wend this way.

That were great shame.
Now by my soul, proud sir,
We be three tall yeomen, and thou art but one:
Come, we will forward in despite of him.

Leap the ditch, or I will make you skip.
What, cannot the hie way serve your turn,
But you must make a path over the corn?

Why, art thou mad? dare thou encounter three?
We are no babes, man, look upon our limbs.

Sir, the biggest lims have not the stourest hearts.
Were ye as good as Robin Hood, and his three merry men,
I Will drive you back the same way that ye came.
Be ye men, ye scorn to encounter me all at once,
But be ye cowards, set upon me all three,
And try the Pinner what he dares perform.

Were thou as high in deeds,
As thou art haughty in words,
Thou well might be a champion for a king:
But empty vessels have the loudest sounds,
And cowards prattle more than men of worth.

Sir, dare thou try me?

I sir, that I dare.

How now? what art thou down?
Come, sir, I am next.

Come sir, now to me, spare me not,
For I Will not spare thee.

Make no doubt, I will be as liberal to thee.

Stay, George, for here I do protest,
Thou art the stoutest champion that ever I laid
Hands upon.

Soft you sir, by your leave you lie,
You never yet laid hands on me.

George, will thou forsake Wakefield,
And go with me,
Two liueries will give thee every year,
And forty crowns shall be thy see.

Why, who art thou?

Why, Robin Hood:
I am come hither with my Marian,
And these my yeomen for to visit thee.

Robin Hood? next to king Edward
Art thou leefe to me:
Welcome, sweet Robin, welcome, maid Marian.
And welcome, you my friends.
Will you to my poor house,
You shall have wafer cakes your fill,
A piece of beef hung up since Martlemas,
Mutton and veale, if this like you not,
Take that you find, or that you bring for me.

Godamercies, good George,
I Will be thy ghest to day.

Robin, therein thou honor me.
I Will lead the way.

Come on, king James, now we are
Thus disguised,
There is none (I know) will take us to be kings:
I think we are now in Bradford,
Where all the merry shoomakers dwell.

Down with your staves, my friends,
Down with them.

Down with our staves? I pray thee, why so?

My friend, I see thou art a stranger here,
Else would thou not have questiond of the thing.
This is the town of merry Bradford,
And here has been a custom kept of old,
That none may bear his staff upon his neck,
But traile it all along throughout the town,
Unless they mean to have about with me.

But hear you sir, has the king
Granted you this custom?

King or Kaisar, none shall pass this way,
Except King Edward,
No not the stoutest groom that haunts his court:
Therefore down with your staves.

What were we best to do?

Faith, my Lord, they are stout fellows.
And because we will see some sport,
We will traile our staves.

Heer'st thou, my friend?
Because we are men of peace and travelers,
We are content to traile our staves.

The way lies before you, go along.

See George, two men are passing
Through the town,
Two lusty men, and yet they traile their staves.

Robin, they are some pesants
Trickt in yeomans weeds. Hollo, you two travelers.

Call you us, sir?

I, you. Are ye not big enough to bear
Your bats upon your necks,
But you must traile them along the streets?

Yes sir, we are big enough, but here is a custom
Kept, that none may pass his staff upon his neck,
Unless he traile it at the weapons point.
Sir, we are men of peace, and love to sleep
In our whole skins, and therefore quietness is best.

Base minded pesants, worthless to be men,
What, have you bones and limbs to strike a blow,
And be your hearts so faint, you cannot fight?
Were not for shame, I would shrub your shoulders well,
And teach you manhood against another time.

Well preached sir Jack, down with your staff.

Do you hear my friends? and you be wise,
Keep down your staves,
For all the town will rise upon you.

Thou speak like an honest quiet fellow.
But hear you me, In spite of all the swains
Of Dradford town, bear me your staves upon your necks,
Or to begin withal, I Will baste you both so well,
You were never better basted in your lives.

We will hold up our staves.

What, have you any more?
Call all your town forth, cut, and longtaile.

What, George a Green, is it you?
A plague found you,
I think you longed to swinge me well.
Come George, we will crush a pot before we part.

A pot you slave, we will have an hundred.
Here, Will Perkins, take my purse,
Fetch me a stand of Ale, and set in the Market place,
That all may drink that are athirst this day,
For this is for a free to welcome Robin Hood
To Bradford town.
Here Robin, sit thou here: for thou art the best man

What is that?

Hark in your ear.

Go your ways and do it.

Come down on your knees, I have got it.

Let us hear what it is first.

Mary, because you have drunk with the king,
And the king has so graciously pledgd you,
You shall be no more called Shoomakers.
But you and yours to the worlds end,
Shall be called the trade of the gentle craft.

I beseech your majesty reform this
Which he has spoken.

I beseech your worship consume this
Which he has spoken.

Confirm it, you would say.
Well, he has done it for you, it is sufficient.
Come, George, we will go to Grime,
And have thy love.

I am sure your worship will abide:
For yonder is coming old Musgroue,
And mad Cuddie his son.
Master, my fellow Wily comes dressed like a woman,
And master Grime will marry Wily: Here they come.

Which is thy old father, Cuddie?

This, if it please your majesty.

Ah old Musgroue, kneel up,
It fits not such gray hairs to kneel.

Long live my Soueragine,
Long and happy be his days:
Vouchsafe, my gracious Lord, a simple gift,
At Billy Musgroues hand:
King James at Meddellom castle gave me this,
This won the honor, and this give I thee.

Godamercie, Musgroue, for this friendly gift,
And for thou feldst a king with this same weapon,
This blade shall here dub valiant Musgroue knight.

Alas what has your highness done? I am poor.

To mend thy living take thou Meddellom castle,
The hold of both: and if thou want living, complain,
Thou shall have more to mainetaine thine estate.
George, which is thy love?

This, if please your majesty.

Art thou her aged father?

I am, and it like your majesty.

And wilt not give thy daughter unto George?

Yes, my Lord, if he will let me marry
With this lovely less.

What say thou, George?

With all my heart, my Lord, I give consent.

Then do I give my daughter unto George.

Then shall the marriage scone be at an end.
Witness, my Lord, if that I be a woman,
For I am Wily, boy to George a Green,
Who for my master wrought this subtle shift.

What, is it a boy? what say thou to this Grime?

Mary, my Lord, I think this boy has
More knauerie, than all the world besides.
Yet am I content that George shall both have
My daughter and my lands.

Now George, it rest I gratify thy worth:
And therefore here I do bequeath to thee,
In full possession half that Kendal has,
And what as Bradford holds of me in chief,
I give it frankely unto thee for ever.
Kneel down George.

What will your majesty do?

Dub thee a knight, George.

I beseech your grace, grant me one thing.

What is that?

Then let me live and die a yeoman still:
So was my father, so must live his son.
For it is more credit to men of base degree,
To do great deeds, than men of dignity.

Well, be it so George.

I beseech your grace dispatch with me,
And set down my ransom.

George a Green, set down the king of Scots
His ransom.

I beseech your grace pardon me,
It passes my skill.

Do it, the honor's thine.

Then let king James make good
Those towns which he has burnt upon the borders,
Give a small pension to the father less,
Whose fathers he caused murdered in those wars,
Put in pledge for these things to your grace,
And so return. King James, are you content.

I am content: and like your majesty,
And will leave good castles in security.

I crave no more. Now George a Green,
I Will to thy house: and when I have supt, I Will go to Ask,
And see if Jane a Barley be so fair,
As good King James reports her for to be.
And for the ancient custom of Veil staff, keep it (...)
Claim privilege from me:
If any ask a reason why? or how?
Say, English Edward vaild his staff to you.


