THere, take your orders, and dispatch;
Your known faiths will not let me doubt th'observance
Of the least circumstance.

Yet give me leave (most noble General
To ask the reason, since his Highness lest
A free dispose at his departure, why
You should use so much severity in your commands?

Not a man enter the city in forfeiture of his life? their's somewhat hard
conditions; I Have entered a Kingdom, and helped to win it too, on far
easier terms; this o'th sudden, and so unexpected too may meet with a harsh
construction


For mine own part, I Have bin so long absent,
Especially being a poor servant to the state too,
I dare conclude I Am lost to all their memories;
Nor do I love the Camp so ill, to part with it
To win upon their faiths; urge a tedious catalogue
Of my dead ancestors, and then search records
To show I was their countryman; all this
For a cold welcome, or an annual pension;
To show my scores of wounds, that tally up
So many months pay behind hand: which
After seven years misery in an hospital,
Shall be both wiped off together: yet all
Are not of my humor.

What though your dull fat Senators, those land-Porpices
That skip, and friske in the storm they n'ere are hurt with,
Those heavy lubbers, lapt in sweaty furs,
Batning on sleep and ease, lie snorting out
The peace poor Soldiers purchase,
And not so much as dream of toil, or danger,
Slight what they are ignorant of: yet you (my Lord)
May know, if cold lazy recompenses injure
Our high deserts such usage kills outright:

True Contareno, that is their intent.


L'as we bring no diseases home with us, unless valor be one; no meager
troops of thin starvelings, that they should fear a famine from our
commerce, we have fed high, though somewhat irreverently: nor return we in
our old skins, blew coats, thrum'd cappes, that harbor so much vermin, they
might fear we'de scatter one of Egypts plagues among them; and make them all
lousy


Enjoy the freedom of your speech; yet know
That they are ignorant of these in junctions,
And for a testimony of their loves
Unto your fair deservings, are all ready
To meet their Countries patriots, (so they term you)
After their ancient custom, with procession;

Show us an enemy then, or danger that is real,
And not the birth of fear, and we will return:

Nay, you may stay at home too:


At home?


It Is so:
Our sons of peace have caught a surfeit, and would be physick't
for it. ha! do they mutiny? do the fierce rams advance
their horns, to batter down the walls that kept them safe?

Be more composed and hear me, though you hate
Treason as ill as cowardice, yet I must
Tell you, you're the men have brought
The enemy home to Naples, I mean the army*
For what less can I term such a vast body,
Consisting of such disproportioned members;
Flesh't with the spoils of fertile Sicily,
Enrich't with what a happy soil can yield
To an insulting conqueror; fed too
With glorious hopes of ease, and plenty?
You know how hard a task you underwent
To govern them abroad, when tamed by want,
Thirst, hunger, heat, and cold; judge then what sway
Authority can bear, when by this change
They are grown mad, and mutinous; who shall
Compose their private jarres, and quarrels, when
Their full cups add fury to their pride?

Enough: this speech has cut of all reply,


Besides, you know Sicily is now in Naples;
The Prince a captive to his Prisoner:
How far his easy nature may be wrought upon
Is yet uncertain, his years though they have outdone
History, are not yet grown up to the ripeness of experience
For my severity; (I Would gladly have
You call it by another name;) it is
My duty, (if not yours) I take it, to be vigilant.

My Lord, think what I spoke was but to gain
Satisfaction, which you have amply given.

And what should I do in the City? that retain
No more of my education there, than what I gained
In the Artillery yard: my company
Would be shunned there more than poverty,
Or a disease; I should be interdicted
The Court, merely because I Am out of fashion,
Or for fear of challenges -- Troth for the Ladies,
The homeliest please me best; I am as much
Too rough hewn for them, as they are to polisht for me:
My constitution requires a dispatch
In The vaulting business, beyond that of tedious
Niceties, and witty prologues.

Gongales, and Petrucchio's regiment
I Have left aboard to guard the fleet, yours must
Make safe the Castle, and the land forts; you
Cannot endeare me more than by your circumspection;
The City will be all in triumphat
These nuptials, twixt our divided houses;
Think these Sicilian's, though you have won
And forced them to groan beneath your sword, may yet
At heart be traitors; if not, opportunity
May make them so; at such a time as this
Surprise is easy; history has such examples,
Unfortunate ones; and you'de be loath to add
Unto the number.

You have chalk't out a way
That leads to honor, and we are hasty
To pursue it:

I shall report you noble.


And General, de'e hear, if you meet with
Ere a masculine feminine, that has impudence
Enough, to follow an army, a wench of twagging hanches,
And full things, fend her to me, she shall be my laundresse.

Good Captain be less wild, and use me,
To the loss of honor.

Did meet with him? -- he is here already.


-- why this distance?
Is It in the power of several climes to break
Our sympathies in nature? true, I have
Bin long estranged from you, not from your virtue;
Why then should you deny your strict embraces?

Valenzo! you are grown too great, and glorious
For my friendship; become a theme for Princes,
Whose worthy acts enrich their high discourse:
The greedy multitude, snatching each word,
As it falls from 'em, wear your praise
As their best ornament!

How have I lost my friend,
And see Piero, for being so thou would
Nor mock, nor flatter me!

Alas Valenzo!
You prejudice your Princes wisdom, and
Your own just merits, those favors yet
Were never worn by them, that had not first
Deserved them.

You mean these titles, vain and empty names;
Let me enjoy thee still, I Will disinvest
My self of all additions, can but swell
Our pride, not virtue up; my Ancestors
Have left me rich enough in title to
Your friendship, and fore I forfeit that! --
That we could mingle souls. --

Though you be prodigal of your affections,
Yet be not cruel to your Charintha,
Who must needs suffer in this wilful scorn,
You throw on that your valor dearly purchased.

Charintha mine! I hold all worth in her.


Were you as monstrous for impiety, as now
You are famed for virtue, such was her pious thrift,
In treasuring up her clean and humble prayers,
You could not die unpardoned, every hour
(As you are always liable to danger,)
Can witness, with what forward zeal she begged
Heaven, to avert the stroke before it came:
We have taken so much pleasure in her orizons,
That even profane men to have heard her pray,
Would turn devout, were there no merit in it.

No more; my reason yields unto my passion.
And it is a joy requires me meet it with
My best temper; I would not surfeit
Nor swallow it too greedily; some light mixture
Of grief would give a relish to it; tell me, come --
What face wears the Court? how looks it
On our new dignities? Envy (like the Sun)
Darts her beams hottest on the rising banks:
Vrsini the grand favorite, is at Court,
And has his Princes bosom?

That Is his sanctuary,
His safety lies there, yet (though I profess
No augury) I foresee, and read
His fall, all these vast glories which he boasts,
Are built upon the ruins of Alberto,
His tombe-stone is the basis of that building,
Which we admire, but think not safe.

There was a noble house soon lost.


Sooner (I believe) than to will be forgotten;
But what was that Frederico, Albert's son?

One that with his father's virtues
Inherited his unhappy fate, young he was,
And valiant; received and known so.

Had he been less famed, he had not yet
Been numbered with the dead; (you are my friend*
My Lord*) I speak my thoughts, and freely; --
Vrsini endures no rival.

I Have maintained
Fair correspondencie with him at distance,
But like not his embracements.

TO is dangerous to be near him;
There Is such an Antipathy, twixt him, and virtue,
He wears it is ruin in his looks.

It Is strange,
A Prince so wise and vertuours should not descry
His falsehood through his vifour; or at least
Lend ear to the loud cries of wronged Innocents.

He has no use of either ear, or eye,
But what his loved Vrsini lends him; he
Only rules, and limits his affections;
Suffers him not to cast a frown or smile,
But where he pleases; his next indearement, is
His care o'th Princess, our Sicilian captive:
Whom sorrow for her fathers death, (slain in
The war, by him that was designed her lover;
Our famed Prince Ferrando,) has brought
Into a desperate melancholy; what reward
He expects, I cannot tell, unless it be
The Crown: you have heard of her strange distemper?

And wonder at the sudden change:
I Have seen her, maugre all those sudden fears,
Her tender age, and womanhood could urge;
Stand in the head of troops, that we even feared
They had engaged some Goddess in their quarrel;
Bear up against the enemy, when her men
Lay scattered in the plains, like the ripe ears
The wealthy harvest yields into the Grange.

I know not how, but sure she has made the King
Wild; he has such diverse fits, as he had learned
To be mysterious in's passion; I have seen him weep,
Like a fond mother over her tender babe,
Whom too rude fate has ravished unripe from her:
Then rave, and curse, talk as he wanted reason
To guide his speeches Organ: or soft sleep
To recall his straggling senses:
Mutter distracted thoughts in broken words,
Until he lights upon her name, and then
He bows at the recital; blesses himself
In the often repetition of Calantha.

There Is somewhat in it, her passion should lie hid
So long, and now break out so violently.
She rather seemed too thrifty, than too prodigal
Of tears, when she left Sicily; and taught us
To called our chiefest happiness, we should have
A Queen, that reigned at home, that bore more sway
Over the people of her breast, than country.

Alas poor maid! why now she is a true captive
To passion, and to Naples: had she been still
Queen over ber great self, none could have said
She Would had been unhappy; now, and not till now
She Is truly miserable.

It Is holiness to pity her.


Our tears are better spent upon her sorrows,
Than our own sins, she talks so prettily,
Clothes grief in such a sad, and pious garb,
So void of any rudeness, that we see
Composedness in distraction, reason in madness;
She never walks but when she is led along,
And that so faintly, as she had not spirits
Enough to actuate her tender limbs:
Want of meat and sleep have made her seem
A living coarse; to see her weep, you'de fear
That every drop were her own funeral tear.

-- Hell, and furies! --


Oh! oh! oh!

A Moore! a devil! a mere devil! his very looks spoke him so, but for his
club-foote, his damnable club-foote, (Ass that I was not to see it, I Am sure
I feel it now,) it is an infallible sign: This damned Devil did I bring to
Court, and preferred him; but I Am served well enough, he that does the Devil
a good turn shall be sure to be thus rewarded. If I should chance to die a
sinner (as it is ten to one but I shall,) he will know me again, for I shall
carry his marks to my grave: because my Lord Vrsini was pleased to exchange
some few words with him in private, he grew so insolent, that I going to strike
him (in passion, in choler I confess) he falls a kicking me in'th open Court


And looks, as if he would, have spet fire; but had I not known him to be a
devil indeed, I Would spet fire with him


How? so hot Signiour?


Men in anger may do anything.


Anything? with your leave Sir,
And you're a fool, and an ass. --

Do'e find it so by my ears? --
And I Will try what you are --

Draw in the Court? I must see the peace kept.


Gentlemen, you know I Am passionate, choleric, somewhat choleric.


And I intend to physic you for it; here is that will allay your heat.


It Is down already.


I will not be jeered.


We intend no abuse, Signiour, we only come to gratulate your good fortune,
you are turned favorite of late


It has pleased his Majesty to take some small notice of me.


Yes, and the Ladies speak high, and gloriously of you.


Of me?


You could not but observe it as you walked the streets: you are the only
object they gaze at


In troth I did not think --


Come you are modest now.


Who was it you bless't to'ther day with a favor?


I give a favor?


Why man? you meant it should be seen.


I slip't a point indeed in a Countesses chamber.


Slip't a point?


Dropped it, dropped it, but to was not worth the taking up.


And yet I Have heard her boast it as a special gift from your own hands.


Indeed I flung it somewhat scornfully, because she was very importunate;
troth I was angry, she would have none but that


Were not for this filthy fretting humor of yours, I could tell you --


What good Grutti?


Of a Lady.


By my best hopes in love with me, is she not?


I Am not so happy as to be acquainted with her intents, but I have heard her
in my Lord Vrsini's presence commend you highly


Prithee who is it?


The Lady Charintha.


The Lady Charintha; what should I do with her? she is honest, the only precise
Madame of the Court


They that drop the most beads, may commit the most sins, but were not so,
you have a kind of tempting presence, and besides --


Oh! I understand you, she is his Lordship's reversion.


St, not a word.


I Will to her presently.


This is my Lord Vrsini's plot, to slander that Ladies chastity.


And he has charged me, to whisper't about Court, that he has enjoyed her.


I wonder much, fince he seeks her himself in marriage, why he should thus
traduce her


On my conscience she is virtuous.


His plots are dark, and mystie, but come, prithee let us leave this talk, we
have state knowledge enough already to make us melancholy: I Will show thee a
scene of mirth --


Where lies it?


This Physician that was sent for hither from the Universitie to our melancholy
Princess, they say, indures no music, and I Have prepared a whole consort of
these gut-scrapers this morning to salute him; no doubt but he will be be very
bountiful


If the varlets can make good use of his charity.


I wonder much the Court endures him here; he is an odd humorsome fellow.


His art privileges him.


My Lord. --


Conduct that Moore hither, and see we have all privacie that may be.


He shall wear my life upon his sword that enters without my leave.


See, he comes: here is one that is fit to kill a King,
A thing, whose soul is nothing but a spot
Transmitted from foul parricides, whose thoughts
Wear a more deep and horrid black, than that
Which spreads upon his body --
My Zisco welcome.

This day my Lord --


No more, I know what thou would say: I promised
To endeare thee to Ferrando's love, and knowledge,
Are you according to my instructions ready
To meet all his demands?

Perfect.


With a forged Commendamus from his holiness?


-- Of my stout service done against the Turks
In the Lepanto battle, where I turned Christian,
And was baptized in mine own blood.

It Is well, but how stands't thou resolved for our design?


Unmoved as destiny.
-- Could you have told me of it in that minute
I should have acted it, I Would owe you for
The glory of a sin, I might have boasted of;
What we intend, nere rises to that height
As what we act, because t'may prove abottive,
And perish in the thought, and for such crimes,
I only have repentance.

But he is a Prince --


Why there is the honor on it,
Killing the head, I kill the body too,
And at one blow lay a whole Kingdom gasping.

-- One upon whom attends a guard of men,
And Angels, on whose brow divinity
Sits charactered, a Majesty that darts
Fork't arrows into the guilty soul, and strikes
A palsied fear through every limb and joint
Of the murderer.

Fancy, fancy this,
I Am proof against it; I Will take him in's cups
When he is drunk, betray him to a rape,
Or fowler sin, then kill him in the act.

Whom?


The King.


Traitor.


It Is as soon done as thought of.


He never loved thee Zisco, nor was known
By special favors to deserve thee to him;
But he has made me great, worn me in's soul;
His father took me up, when I was nothing,
Bequeathed me to him, as a care hereditary,
Belonging to the Crown, placed me so near him,
I Have grown, and spread like a tall mountain Cedar.

And dare encounter lightning, stand a thunderbolt,
Or enraged winds; contend with that high influence
By which you flourish, yet nere fear a blasting:
His favor is a tyranny; it is
The pride of Princes, to be thought Gods here
On earth, daring to mock omnipotence,
To create them favorites, set them aloft
In their own sphere, till remote Kingdoms gaze
At their prodigious height, then in an instant
Shoot them from thence, like falling meteors:
Had he not loved you first, you could not be
The object of his hate, you were too poor,
And safe, when 'twas, to have him glory in
Your ruins: innocence below enjoyes
Security, and quiet sleeps, murder's not heard of,
Treachery is a stranger there, they enjoy
Their friends, and loves, without ravishment,
They are all equal, every one's a Prince,
And rules himself, they speak not with their eyes,
Or brows, but with the tongue, and that too dwells in the heart:
Were it but thus at Court,

your famed Marquess had not fallen. --


Alberto: ha.


Why start you Sir?


It Is he: Frederico.
Oh that man! he was unhappie in his Princes love.

Your honors are no more your own than his:
'Twas the same favor that conferred them both,
And the same frown may take 'em both away:
He lets you only grow till you are envied,
And then you will fall unpittied.

I have learned cruelty from him:
Zisco, thou shall applaud the mysteries,
The rare contrivances of my revenge;
My fate lies in his breast, but this, this arm
Shall ravished thence.

Now your rage becomes you:
When Princes put off their humanity,
Murders, a holy sin, you may be good,
And fall like him, whose aged head lies low,
Low in the dust.

Again? this confirms it.


The groans of whose sunk house, are heard
To affright strangers; whilst Naples yet
Stained with the purple tide, his soul swam forth in,
Does blush at it is own guilt: his son Frederico
(You know) was lost at Sicily in a crowd.

It Is so reported, yet I believe --


My Lord.


That he was slain at Ferrando's command.


Perhaps and by a slave.
Felicia too, unhappy maid --

Your sister,
Now thou strik'st home.

First won to his embraces
By vollies of false oaths, her virgin honor
Rifled, her chaste womb swollen with the imposthume
Of his salt lust, then torn with spite from's bosom,
Ravished, murdered, and by whom? (I could hate my self,
For taking birth amongst such,) cursed Moors:
Were she your enemy, her cause, and sex
Would challenge pity; but you loved her dearly,
The Mistress you adored; who then can think
But that your soul is black, and stained as his,
That are thus tame?

Zisco, thou have raised a flame within this breast,
Naught but his blood can quench: -- thanks to my brame; --
It shall be so; -- The fatal raven croakes;
It Is ominous, if he outlive this night
We are no more: -- Come we will go plot within.

Here Is his, study,


Is he there?


Yet do but observe his posture:

How he sits like a reverend Ape painted upon a Gally-pot, with an Urinall in's
hand


Faith Signior, in my judgment you have wronged your simile.


He Is casting the Princesse's water.


Not upon his beard I hope.


Reading in it --


The color of's copper-nose.


All the plots of Sicily; I warrant the poor Lady has not a thought escapes
him


The Sex has been always accounted open, yet I near knew a State betrayed
that way; some Ladies would be in a pitiful case, if their secrets could be
read in their Gentlewomans --


Foh, they are mere sives.
-- Come, come, these are his Lordships Lodgings,
He came home late yesternight, and I believe
Is scarce stirring yet. -- Your last new tune,

This music sure will make him dance antic.


Not yet? pox on him, he is a sleep in's study: ha you noe loud music?
perhaps his Lordship likes that better


So, ho, oh, ho, ho, murder, murder, murder,


Enter Hieronymo from his naked bed.


Hieronymo was drunk then last night, he lay in's clothes.


Rogues base rogues, scabby rogues, pockie


The best in the Court?


A quaint poison for him.


Does your retiredness lead you to treason? let us apprehend him:


For a Traitor.


Nay good Gentlemen, what shall I do? I Am undone.


A quaint poison! -- so it was.


And for the best in the Court.


In troth, Signiours, I meant it not.


'Twas too much you said it, Sir.


Do but conceal me. --


Then you will confess, and bring us in as parties.


May I be hanged if I do; besides, what ever secret disease you have about
you, I Will cure you gratis


And think no more of poisoning them, that brought the musicians to your
window; 'twas our plot Sir


I forgive you, and pray Gentlemen use me for your Physician when ever the
state of your bodies requires it. I Will learn secrecy of you


Agreed.


Faith Grutty, this plot was well thought on; I could find in my heart to
trust him


You may; and hence forward I Will sin with less scruple.


It Is he -- I am confirmed: Frederico, Albert's
Son -- I Will let him live concealed, he is a sure
Instrument, and will serve me for all turns.
-- humph, -- could he think his puling sisters,
Or his Fathers, wrongs, sat so heavy on my heart strings,
That I could be moved to kill my Prince
In their revenge? Indeed I loved her once,
Till I enjoyed her, but she is lost, so is her memory;
I Have higher thoughts now; Charintha is my aim,
Ferrando's niece; next heir to the Crown;
Mine by his promise: can I but divorce
Valenzo from her love, together with
His life, I Am safe; it is that I am contriving:
He is my rival both in a Mistress, and
A Princes favor. -- Who waits within there? ho.

My Lord.


Have you performed what I commanded you concerning the Lady?


Charintha? it is done Sir; Fungoso straight intends a visit there.


Leave me -- Valenzo's hand, his head shall answer for it; I am his judge,

(My power over the King makes me so:)
And he shall find me cruel; then the fort is mine,
In which his soldiers are in garrison;
This night the French, and Genowayes intend
To ceize our empty fleet, that rides in the harbor;
Those men I have indear'd, --
Mount, mount my soul, let no fear weigh thee down.
He stakes his life that thus casts at a Crown.

This musick'd dull, strike higher, higher yet.


Oh! oh! oh! I can hold no longer, furies, devils, oh! oh!


What ailes our Physician there?


It Is an odd humor my Lord: any kind of music is less pleasing to him,
than the voice of Mandrakes


Cease there, your accents are distasteful.


I am abused, grossly abused, but i will be revenged -- Sir Your pardon.


Rise and proceed.


As I was telling you, you must in every thing humor her; in each word, each
action, the nature of her disease requires it, which yields not unto cure, till
it be wrought up to the height


Still such a sadness Ladies dwell on your brows? trust me, it misbecomes
you: shall's tread a lusty measure? I Am light, and active


But grief is heavy.


Thus we will shake it off, and thus.


Pray, why de'e use me so? you bind my arms,
As if I meant to sight, an they were loose,
Indeed I wo'not, trust me, I Will kill no body.

Pray unbind her.


I never killed the poorest worm, or fly,
Though 'twere against my will, but that I wept for it,
And begged a pardon too, for sure 'twas murder.

Marry was it.


Poor Lady, she is distracted!


Death on my fury, this sight brands my best actions with a stain too deep
for penitence to wash away


This exceeds cruelty, they will not let me eat;
Look I am pined almost to nothing.

A mere skeleton.


Had I but strength enough to struggle with heaven
By prayer, I Would expiate their sins, though they
Continued to be cruel.

Good Lady weep not, for if you continue
These tears, my eyes will drop.

Yes, yes, they will drop out, oh happiness!
Would mine would do so too; they smart extremely;
Were not a courtesy, I think ere this
you had pulled 'em forth.

Lady, I say weep not.


I say, ben't you a coxcombe.


Take away the fool, we are much indisposed
To laugh to day, good heaven, they flour my miseries:
It Is not well done, you may be sick your selves,
Before you die; want one to bid God comfort,
When I am dead.

My Lord, a word -- you are not priviledg'd
To do men wrong: you have done me one,
Pray take notice --

Of what?


S'life he will not challenge him.


The old Lord's afraid on it.


-- How patient I am.


It Is worth the noting, virtue is rare in you.


You Sir, do'e hear? they say you will put
Poison in my drink; do, do, plot on, and be
A politic fool, I see into your thoughts,
My eye-sight's clear, thank heaven, and yet l've lived
A long long while.

Did you hear that?


'Twas shrewd.


Fourscore, and ten, you cannot be less Madame.


Some ere this would have used spectacles, but I Must suffer all.


View all the monuments, and tombs in Naples,
And if you find grief carved there in such variety of postures
As these women stand in, sell me for a statue.

This spectacle has made me one.


Good heavens, have you a curse beyond this?
Throw it on me; my guilt deserves it, and
Somewhat beyond your vengeance: afflict not Innocence,
It will be called your crime, not mine, that she
Is miserable.

Look ye, now I think on it, I Have a fine devise
Come in my head, what think you of a play?
We Will act a play, a tragedy, wilt not be well?
We Will have a King in it, and he, (do'e understand?) he shall be
Killed, methinkes you would act it handsomely.

My Lord, you would play the fool in it, an old doting fool rarely.


Now the curre bites.


If you would lend me your gown, and cap, I should do it better; then, a noise of
Musicians would be excellent


Well, remember this.


Faith so I shall, as often as I am disposed to laugh.


No matter though, Ferrando, now I consider better on it, you shall not, you would
not do it well; do it to the life, I Will not give a pin for it else: let me alone
for one, I Would act that same Kings daughter, I can command a tear or two: if
need be, perhaps a sigh; if 'twere to rave, or grow stark mad, I should
learn too: alas these plays are pretty moralls of our lives; fine,
harmless, innocent sports


Her madness grows strongly upon her.


But Madame, pray what part shall I act?


Thou Sylvio? -- thou art a pretty boy, but that thou weep'st so much; I fear
thou have spoiled thy face; with a little paint 'twould serve turn: thou shall act
some Lady in disguise


How truly do I do it?


One that has been in love.


I should do that scurvily.


Why?


Because I can love none but you, and would be loath to dissemble, though but
in jest


Come, thou shal't not then; thou shall be my page still.


Indeed Madame I should dye if I were otherwise: But pray, when will you be
well? you have bin sick a great while


Yes, and shall be so till I am dead; say nothing Sylvio,
I Will steal away from them, when they shall not know often.

Not alone, I Will dye with you, and be buried with you if you will give me
leave


Ferrando, you will see it done?


What Madame?


See us both buried, laid by my Father, he was a good, good King: build us a
tomb as lasting as our names


A very rich one Madame; I Will ensure you they are about it, with stately
columns, curious antickes, and glorious imagery


There, let us both be cut in spotless marble,
It never shall upbraid us, we were innocent as that;
But innocence is no guard, it could not keep
The tyrant out: my father's, let his be cut
Just as he fell, make a sword pierce his heart,
And let it bleed too, yet don't hurt the Statua,
I would not have you wound it, when it is like
My Father, like a King, lest he that does it,
Learn thence to be a traitor, and in time
Wound you so too, Ferrando.

Mercy good heavens!


Pray why do'e weep? we shall all sleep quietly
When we are dead, there is no noise of chains,
We shall not dream of prisons, rackes or whips:
But every night shall see the Gods descend
On our soft slumbers, and kiss away our miseries.
Ladies, you will see me shrouded decently,
When I am dead, down in the meade you, where
Grimme Pluto stole his Proserpine, are still
The flowers she scattered: go, bring 'em hither,
And strew me ore with 'em; she was a virgin chaste,
And I have heard that flowers of their gathering,
Will never dye; quickly make have, it is said
we are very noisome after death, I would not
Offend then, cause I cannot ask forgiveness:
Before I die I Will break my heart, and give
A piece to every one to wear in's bosom,
And you shall have it whole, Ferrando: pray
Use it as you would her you loved, while I
To quit these miseries will go pray, and die.

Now let me alone with her.


Die? and let her, what should we do with her here an she be mad? I hope
Ladies you have more wit than to die o'th sullens


Grief dares not be so rude, did you but check it.


Las Sir, our miseries have taught it insolence,


Rather your own indulgence, Madame.


Pleasure's the same in Naples as in Sicily.


So are our losses too.


The eyes sad flux is tributary due
Unto your dead Lords memories, I confess it,
It carries virtue in it, but how? whilst it is moderate

Pish, let the dead care for themselves:
Did you but see how ugly sorrow looks. --

And then how fruitless.


Yes, where it is false, but we
Have grief as real as our misery.

Fun, thy judgment Fun, what think thou of these Ladies?


In my judgment, (since your Lordship is pleased to make use of my judgment,)
which indeed (my good Lord) is very small


I perceive thou have one good quality, thou will speak truth.


Truth (my Lord) is precious; but I say in that little judgment I have:
(judgment, (since your Lordship was pleased to term it so) but that is all
one,) in my mind they are mightily taken; --


With what?


A passion (my good Lord,) which the learned call grief.


Thy judgment against any man's in Naples.


My Lord, I praise not my self, yet I can prove by this that they are in love.


As how?


Grief always follows love; if grief follow love, love go's before, ergo,
they are in love


So, suppose now --


(My good Lord) I do suppose.


What?


Even what your Lordship pleases.


Suppose then, any of 'em should be in love with me, would you? --


Yes my Lord.


What?


Any thing. --


Bring her to my chamber.


-- But pimpe, it will contaminate. --


A fools head, will it not? I say you shall bring her.


Nay then I will not bring her; slid, shall bring her? shall bring her?


Nay but Fun. -- Pox on him, he will discover me.


Bid me forsake heaven, my virtue, honor,
And all that is good --

Fie, fie.


You do not see me weep,
Distill mine eyes into a dew,
I will not shed one tear, not vent a sigh,
No not in private.

So, this becomes you --


I have shook off all
Those weights that clogged my bosom -- We can smile,
Shows it not hand some?

Such a smile nere blessed
The cheeks of Peace.

How art thou lost Vrsini!
Discredited to truth by this vile flattery!
Thou should have said, heaven smiled, when set with clouds
Black as nights swarthy mantle, when the air
Breaks out in hideous crackes, that cleave the Temple,
And strike dead the devout Priest at the Altar:
For this an easy faith would have believed,
As having less of contradiction in it:
My soul is rapt with furies, here they gnaw,
Like knotted Adders wrapped about my heart.
Oh! my sides swell as they would break, they want
A hoope, lend me your arm, --

Circled in these.
Embraces, you are safe: collect your self
(Dear Prince;) and let not passion triumph in
The conquest of your reason; think of your honor,
Your name, and spreading glories; how they dye.

I Am black and ugly; all
A whole stain already: Oh Calantha,
Thou go to heaven, to tell Ferrando killed thee;
And those blessed troops of Saints will wreake thy murder,
There Is not one but suffers in it.

-- The King!
Help here -- Oh! Bentivoglio, come,
Come practice here, and raise your self a trophey
In his recovery.

Whence this sudden fit? -- My Lord Ferrando:


Oh Calantha.


She lives,
Calantha lives.

What breath is that, that mockes us
With a false sound of our Calantha's life?
She lives; yet let old time add to his age
But one short pair of minutes, she shall be
No more:

No more distracted: next hour shall render
Calantha to your bosom fair, and well;
As rich in all the ornaments of mind,
As when she first blessed Naples with her presence.

Truth's but a name: it is false, by heaven it is false;
Did not I leave her sunk upon her bed,
Into a soft, but everlasting sleep?

So you supposed; and I have caused her women
To wrap her in her shroud, then sit down by her,
To weep, and pray, as if 'twere for the dead.

As if? -- abuse me not, thy art
Shall be no privilege; she is gone, she is gone.

Ben't so passionate; but hear him.


Vrsini, I have done.


After a strict enquiry into the nature
Of her disease, I find it by each symptom,
A melancholy deep, not dangerous:
The parents which produced it, grief and abstinence
From meat, and sleep; which as it has encrea'st.
Has brought her now to such an extreme dotage,
That she does verily suppose her self,
While living dead: In which false supposition
I Have caused her women to continue her,
By shrowding her to her own desire,
Strewing her over with flowers, then weeping over her

What help from this?


Much Sir, this will work her
Into a strong opinion, that she is dead
Indeed, to confirm which I have prepared
Some two or three, trick't up in the same fashion
With shrowdes, and chaplets, who shall sit down by her,
Walk, talk, eat, drink, sleep, in all which actions
Calantha will straight imitate them: Now I have prepared
A potion which they shall give her,
To make her sleep, the only remedy
Of her disease; this I lately practiced in the French Court,
Yet lost no credit by the experiment.

You may believe him Sir, he is one of the skilfullest Physicians our age has
boasted of, Padua is proud of such an ornament


Thus my Virginio.
My best, my dear'st Virginio: thou do breath
A music to my soul, cures my distemper:
Thou art an honest man, we will found a College,
With a large pension to maintain the Students
In thy rare science; thou shall govern there,
And when thou dyest, we will build a monument
Unto thy name, taller than Aegypts Pyramides.

These over your Court promises,
I Will only study some revenge, for you old Lord,
Then I Will return to the Universitie, and dream on 'em.

For thee Vrsini, we will only live
To do thee honor, that shall be our glory;
The world shall know thee great, and envy thee
Thy share, both in our kingdom, and our soul.

Your goodness, my Lord, is as unlimited
As heavens.

You're sad Vrsini: has our Niece
Given you no cause of joy, by her soft answer?

None, --


The obstacle? tell me; ift' be any in Court she affects, by my honor I Will
remove him


None but this, that she is too much wedded to Heaven, and her devotions.


If that be all, she is thine.


A bliss, I would for ever live to enjoy. --

With me? --
What would that Moore?


He has letters here from his holiness,
In which I Am certifi'd, that he lately turned Christian,
And has well deserved in the wars,
Against the Turk; -- The King admits you to
His hand.

I am in heaven too soon.


We Will view his holiness commendations,
Then hear this Moore, discourse the fight at large;
My griefs begin to vanish; they are much lighter
Than of late they were, I know not why,
But it is a good presage.

Be near us.


Thus far I Am safe, heaven is just, and smiles
On my design, now all that is powerful
To move my spirits, to incite revenge
Appear, if not to sight, to memory;
Alberto: father: and my dear, dear sister,
Poor lost Felicia! -- Ha! he groans, I hear him;
She sighs poor maid, wrings her hands, cries alas,
Look look I see 'em, there, there, sacred shades --
Vanished, and I Am deluded; no they are angry
At my delay:
I Will have, -- for that revenge must needs be just
Which punishes two sins, murder, and lust.

Happy souls that hither come
To enjoy Elysium;
Robbed of bodies though you be,
You Are richer by such poverty;
For with them you have put off pain,
Making of your loss, your gain:
Now your souls may meet and kiss,
Bathing in eternal bliss;
Nor can you surfeit, each delight
Whets, and quiets appetite;
Yet the joys you feed upon
Never increase, nor ere are done;
Freely you may taste, and spend 'em,
Yet nor you, nor time can end 'em:
Where without a fading ray.
Ye enjoy eternal day,
Trace these groves, whose every path
Myriads of true lovers has;
Where disporting, you may prove
A new, but happier, purer love:
Such, whose flames, though th'ever shine
Yet consume not, but refine.

I am too tame Piero, hold me not,
Lest in deferring of a punishment,
I make the sin mine own; had all malice
Dwel't in one tongue, all slander too been housed
Under the same roof with it, and both busy
To plot the ruin of my own fair name;
I could have stood unmoved: but my Charintha!
Heavens! ye ought t'inspire me with revenge,
Such as you would call a Synod to contrive,
That I may meet this hell-borne ravisher
Of my Charintha's spotless fame, with vengeance
As mighty as his crime.

Her virtue is
It self an antidote against all such poisons;
His breath no more can stain that innocent whiteness,
Which ever dwell't upon her soul, than he,
That in a sond maliciousness would throw
Dirt at the Sun, could sulley the least ray;
Her memory, when he, and's lying marble
Consume to dust, and rottenness, shall dwell
On earth like a perfume, after the sacrifice,
Pleasing to God, and men.

If I have used
Any immodest braveries, appeared
In wanton gaudinesse, a hot temptation
To The youthful flowings of the blood;
If I have entertained one looser thought
But such as Chastitie's cold votaries,
When they breath out a soul into her bosom,
Might safely nourish; if I Have misemploy'd
One hour, in which with strict endeavor, I
Might have gained somewhat to my stock of virtue,
(The only dower I Would meet your love withal,)
May I be guilty of that sin, my honor,
My virgin honor's blasted with, and die
A loathed Apostate.

Now you grieve, I suffer double;
Forgive me Lady, I have wronged you, and
Only I.

Mock not my tears, they are holy.


I, that to purchase fame, and idle breath,
Could venture forth abroad into the world,
And leave thee here a prey to ravenous wolves;
Expose thee tender years of a weak virgin
To labour' against the furious tide of lust
That has assaulted thee; that my low birth
Should stand in need of such additions,
To raise me to a height, might equal yours:
That virtue and not blood ennobled us,
This then had never happened.

Greatness transmitted
Has lesser of Divinity; your honors
Are virtues purchase, and your own deservings.
Valenzo thou return'st in glorious triumph,
Rich, from the conquest of a noble foe,
And yet not laden with the gaudy spoil
So much, as with the valor of the enemy:
As if th'ad'st envied them their virtue only,
And sought'st to rob 'em of it; all for me: --

I Have waved a plume, dight me in the warlike garb,
Managed a sword, or shook a dreaded spear,
Looked terrible, bin pitiless to those
That begged a life, revell'd in cities sacked,
And rifled tents: too poor and trivial matters
To point at such rich ends as thee, (my love.)
Thy blood runs high, there is not one purple stream
Cased in these a zure veins, but is derived
From'th spring of Princely ancestry, and thou art
The wealthy storehouse of their fortunes too.

Alas! what are these, but what the owner makes them?
Of themselves nothing, only as we use them,
Are good or bad, a blessing or a curse:

But then their virtues, by a thriftie providence,
Are all summed up in thy blessed self, and make thee
A happiness which if enjoyed must be
Bestowed by gift, because above all purchase.

No (my Valenzo,) virtue's ravished hence,
Charintha's strumpetted, her name is rank't
In The vulgar breath, amongst common prostitutes;
Pardon, (my love) shall't never wed thy shame,
Thy jealousy.

Charintha, thou art cruel, and have learned
An art to wound to the death, yet keep alive
Whom thou have killed, Obe but speedy in
Thy execution, and when I come below:
And walk those fields, that hapless lovers trace,
I will report thee mild, soft as the Turtle in her down*

What means Valenzo?


Perhaps report has injured me, and noys'd
That I was jealous of Charintha's love;
And you contrived this plot to make me hate you;
Or, if you should repent, (as well you may,)
Your favors so ill placed, upon a subject
So poor and worthless; take 'em back again,
Live happy in a better choice, Charintha.

Far, far be such a thought!


Your both abused,
Grossly abused: Vrsini's politic plots
May meet an eye, that can discern of objects
Far subtler than they are; come, come,
'Way with this passion, Love has something else
To employ you in:

Thou Have robbed me of a soul: --


Take in this kiss mine in exchange again.


That Is my Lady Sir,


There, -- take it I say;


My office will scarce deserve it.


Fungoso, as I wished; he is Vrsini's agent, this will confirm my relation;
let us step aside


Ha! What are these? Praesto, be gone; they are vanished: men of office these,
-- and must be rewarded. -- Madame --


Come, to your business.


S'life the Lady's rampant:


Sure the man's mad.


Not with love, sweet Lady; I can hold discourse with your Ladyship, under the
loss of my little wits


A blessed security; but your errand, your errand, Sir.


What do'e take me for? a foote-post.


Some such thing.


Go, you are a --


What?


A merrily disposed Lady: but faith, what do you think sweet, I have a grant
of his Lordships reversion


Of cast suits.


La you now, you would make me angry; pretty piece of ingenuity; you understand
me, was his Lordship wholesome


Stop his mouth, he breathes infection.


Traitor.


Devil.


Oh! oh! I Am dead, I Am dead, I Am dead.


Dares he abuse me to my face? -- Piero
Thou have prevented me; t'shall nere be said,
That thou were forwarder to vindicate
Charintha's fame than I, then her Valenzo.
Nor shall the cause, but the revenge be mine;
I Will show my rage can flow as well as thine.

Thou Have told a pretty story; -- weep no more,
I see the Cupids angry in thine eyes,
That with thy tears, thou have quenched their burning arrows;
Spare 'em until thou art old, and spend 'em then
On thy whole stock of sins: thou play'st the tyrant;
And rob'st thy self of all that beauteous treasure.
Nature instructed thee withal.

Ah me!
Would I had never had it, that alone
Has only caused my grief:

Thou art passionate.


The virgins loved my innocence, and it
When I was yet a child.

So thou told'st me boy:
But after thou arriv'd'st in Sicily,
How fared it with thee?

Judge Sir, by these tears.


Did thy friend leave thee?


Yes, and the world too; I know he would not have been so unkind else.


Then went thou to the Princess.


Begged relief from her.


Why did not return?


'Twas told me there, my Parents streightway dyed.


Thou shall have new ones, royal ones my boy;
A Princely pair, that pride them in their youth,
And innocent sweetness; whose Majesty's shall shed
As vigorous rays on thee, as on the issue,
The Ensuing nuptial promises to spring
From their own loins.

Those are favors Sir,
That become them to give, not me to take.

Thou have deserved them boy, Calantha speaks thee
A miracle of love and piety;
Is passionate in thy praise, all to win
Affection from the Prince to thee, dry up
Those tears; which till this time did never flow
Offensive unto any:
This day is consecrate to mirth and Hymen,
It Is sin to wear a frown, or folded brow,
For every smile, thou lend'st them now, they will pay
A thousand back again:

A large requital! --
A smile from my Ferrando? oh 'twas heaven,
Felicia, whilst thou wish'st it! now thou have
Obtained it, it is a hell; the antidote
Is now become my poison: Tyrant love
That sport'st thee at the pains, thy Martyrs feel
And make thy salve applied, wound when t'should heal.

Come my Calantha, to consummate that joy,
By mutual vows before the Altar made,
Which thy return to life, to health, and reason,
Has begun in me; those minutes which bring
Us any good, are swift and fleeting, and
Once past not to be recalled, who knows
Whether heaven will still be bountiful;

Or smile upon this hasty Union:


Yes royal maid, they have prepared thee for it.
By the addition of new warmth and strength:

For more sorrows; pray let us back, this day
(There Is something whispers to me) will prove fatal.

Vrsini, see she weeps!
I Have took thee from a sea of tears, (my Venus)
And thou art dropping wet yet.

It Is ominous, this might have bin my marriage day;
But heaven forgive, and prosper him.

Create a Sunshine,
With thine own smiles thou may, and dry thee in it:
Let the dull Negro dive to fetch thee Jewels,
These scattered seeds of pearl, are all too rich
And pompous for ornament; the least of these
Thy fond neglect has dropped, would purchase heaven.

Blame not my pious thrift, I shed them for it;
Thither my journey tends, I shortly shall arrive there.

Thou yeeldst too much to passion!


These rites,
(If we may credit what our dreams foretell,)
Will turn to funeral obsequies, for such
This morning, (when your careful art had bound
My senses up.) fancy presented 'em.
Methought I saw,
Aurora from the East come weeping up,
Wrapped in nights sables, and the following day
Pac't slowly on, in griefs sad livery;
The pensive winds sighed forth a solemn dirge,
And strove to blow our marriage tapers out;
When you Vrsini joined in the solemnity,
I saw you look, like Sicily's pale ghost,
Broke from the hollow Caverns of the earth;
This hand Ferrando, at each gentle touch
Mouldred to ashes; on your lip there sat
A frost, which when I tasted straight conveyed
An icy chillness thorough every joint;
The stammering Priest methought mistook the rites,
And stead of those are used at nuptials,
Sung a short requiem to our souls, committed
All that was left of us, to the earth, our last
Cold bed.

I warrant you Ladies, this was because she lay alone; you should advise her
better


'Twas the intemperance of your disease
Suggested these Chimaera's.

And with it they are fled.


No, no Ferrando;
I Have sinned against my fathers ghost; ere yet
His royal corpse had slept two silent Moons
In The peaceful earth, or ere I had paid down
Just tribute of my tears, I Have changed my sables
For a gay nuptial garment, whose light outside
Denotes the looseness of a lighter mind,
To which grief should have bin perpetual guest.

Urge it no more, thy misery's Virgin Queen
Are powerful with me, and have taught this breast
A sad repentance.

Can thou Ferrando then repent?


I can, that I have wronged thy innocence, Killed thy father.


O take me to thy soul, we will mingle sighs,
And tears, which still shall flow together from us,
As if the motion were but one; and those
So frequent, that the stones, which cloth his dust,
Shall soften into turfe, from whence shall spring
A bed of flowers, creeping about the grave,
As if they would strew themselves upon him, then
Whither, that men might think we wept for them.

Yet pardon Love, when ever I remember
He was a Prince, a Prince of equal power,
And strength with him he wronged; that he once stood
A bar betwixt our loves, or rather mocked
Our hopes of mutual enjoyment; that
For his own peevish humor, he would ruin
The edifice, that we had built to honor,
I glory in the act.

Take pity on me courteous death!
My thoughts are grown more terrible then thou!
I am monstrous, a prodigy in nature, one with
Him, that was my fathers murderer.

Royal my Queen!
It Is the excess of piety,
The error of your duty, that thus wrongs
The justice of my cause.

Yet you might have spared
His life, and made it your just praise, that you
Could conquer, and not kill:

He was so eager in the pursuit of the foe,
When first he routed us, that willingly
He ran upon my sword, that stood to oppose
His haste, and met a death instead of victory.

Nay rather we may say, that he met both
Who triumphs over life, and all the misery's
That too officiously attend upon it;
Crown his pale statua, with victorious wreaths,
And call his unkind fate, his happiness!
His fall was honorable, Kings like other men
Travel to death, they go in the common road,
Are in their end as sensible of pain
As the base peasants, whom they by and by
In The grave are equal with; their only privilege
Is in their executioner, who would not rather
Fall under a Kings hand, than yield his life
Up to a weak disease, a Fever, Gout,
Or grating Stone, which had he mist this stroke,
Might straight have seized him; and have robbed him of
The glory of his end?

I cannot yield
So far to reason, but I still must look
Upon you, as an enemy to Sicily;
As him that killed my father, and so hate you;
Yet I must love you too: when first we met
Together in your Tent, both armed (you know)
I would have fought, nay, and have killed you too,
(Could skill or strength have done it, some I had
Of both;) yet I meant not to survive you,
Nor should I need to have made another wound
To let mine own life out, l'de dyed with yours.

Vrsini thou must quit some interest in my love, Calantha --


Deserves it all;
'Twere a sin no less than sacrilege,
To rob her o'th least part of your affections.

My faculties are grown
All to one power, called love, and you engrosse it
Whole to your self; yet have it still entire
To my Calantha, it is a diverse flame,
That burns me, yet but one, each takes it is difference,
And being from the object, be you still
My friend, and thou my love, whom when we have once joined
Unto our amorous folds, thus we will move
And of our arms make a new sphere for love.

This way? to the Temple say?


Married by this:
The Prince is fierce and eager in's desires,
Impatient of delay.

But seemed not she unwilling?


There appeared somewhat more in her, than in a virgin niceness,

They are here: --

The Priest has done his office, all delights
The married have a privilege in, are yours:
Be bold in the enjoyment, what ere while
Was termed a looseness in desire, is now
A virtuous thought: those flames which cloth your Souls
Are chaste and holy, dalliance is your devotion.

Yet you my Royal fair, can wear me at
A careful distance, tremble at each touch
Of hand or lip, as if you feared a rape:
-- Display this beauteous treasure, lovely sweet
And let these flowers which dwell upon thy cheek,
Like those proud Maja wears, in the smiling ides
Blaze wild and open -- see! they are fresh and lively,
Their odor flies to heaven in sacrifice!
Jove I Am thy rival; -- and will share thy incense:
Sweet as the purple smoke arising from
The Phoenix funeral pile, or Southern breath
Perfumed with all Arabia's spiceries.

Good my Lord! you will too much indeare us to you with your courtesies.


And being strangers we are apt to betraduc't:
Our good names are precious, they are all we have left
Unconquered.

Hymen applaud's this early piety:
The doves that drive the chariot of loves Queen.
Are swift in motion, and those happy troops,
Which wait upon her triumphs, mak't their strife
Which shall out-runne the other, those that lagge
Cupid will whip with roses to the Altar.

Henceforth (my Lord) I must attend your will,
Let me but drop a tear or two upon
My father's dust, and with his memory
I Will bid farewell to grief.

This vault contains it.


Let us pay our last duties.


The Quire attends without.


Noblest bodies are but gilded clay;
put away
But the precious shining rind;
The inmost rottenness remains behind.
Kings, on earth though gods they be,
Yet in death are vile as we;
He, a thousands King before,
Now is vassal unto more.
Vermin now insulting lie,
And dig for Diamonds in each eye;
Whilst the scepter bearing hand
Cannot their inroades withstand.
Here does one in odours wade
By the regal unction made,
While another dares to gnaw
On that tongue, his peoples law.

Fools! ah fools are we, who so contrive,
And do strive,
In each gaudy ornament,
Who shall his corpse in the best dish present.

It Is well; enough is wept for Sicily; cheer up,
We have other vows to pay, and as religious ones
As these: we made them at the Altar; and
If we perform them not, shall forfeit all
Our after joys: -- remove those objects there;
We have no use of fables now; they breed
Melancholy thoughts; we will be loud,
And big in mirth, as full of pride as noise,
Till we draw envy on our revels; which
Nor fate, nor the dull stoicke shall control,
Whose sullen faith is the disease of's soul.

Revenge! were thou more ugly than ere Painter
Limbed witch or fury, I could kiss thee now,
For thy so opportunely prompting me;
These brace of Courtiers here, my trim complotters,
Have tried my skill upon their bodies; and now
I Am dearer to them, then their confessor,
Both these have sworn to further my design,
I have against this Lord, this dotard; who
Has heat his blood so with carousing healths,
That he is grown wild and furious; believes
His strength more able in these love-firkes,
Than when he was in the pride, and prime of youth;
Him are these two according to instructions
Leading into the snares, that I Have spread for him;
Into which, if they, and blind fortune conduct him,
I Will use him less gently, than I would a noise
Of gowty-cheek't trumpetters: -- They Are here.
I Will be with you straight. --

Hymen is now predominant; the Stars
Will have it so; I must and will be married.

Married?


Yes, yes, you shall have favors, favors, Gentlemen: bring me but to the
sight of a woman, I Will clap up a match with her, and to bed straight; and if I
don't outdoe Hercules at his thirteenth labor, cut of my dainty dowsets, and
feed dogs with 'em


He deflour'd fifty virgins in one night, I hope you will not marry so many.


Yes, and thou will get so many in the Kingdom, fifty? what is fifty? I Will have a
monopoly of 'em, get 'em all with child with males, and they shall be borne
with beards on


There might have bin some likelihood of this once, but now you are old.


Old? ha! ha! he! Grutti, Grutti, do hear him? ha! ha! he! prithee how old?
how old do think? have I not a warm moist palm? does not my pulse beat
strong, and healthy


The flowings of your blood, that downy chin, and these full veins, speak you
-- some twenty, Sir


And of complexion sanguine, I know it by my dreams.


The rose-buds now are blooming on your cheeks,
And open themselves into a crimson blush;
This hair curles up like wire, and and speaks you lusty,
Your strength is bold, and daring.

Belleeve it, I Am a wanton.


Come let us to a wench then.


Hang marrying, it is a slavery!


A mere purgatory!


An hell to be bound to one, and she prove false, ugly, or loud, when we
may enjoy our liberties, to take or leave 'em, as our stomach serves us; have
the choice beautyes run into our arms, and every night a fresh one


Hey! to a Wench; to a Wench!


Allow 'em but Wenches, and it will be well enough.


Or to lie with a Woman.


How would you do for subjects then?


Perhaps an I had a mind to it, I Would get all my subjects my self, ha! what
say thou to it, Grutti


I say it is fit, you have a mind.


Bentivoglio! we are friends, come thou shall along with us, to a wench, old
trangdido, to a wench, and thou shall so bumfiddle her


Nay, good my Lord, touch no more upon that string; but do you hear? I came to
carry you to one


Art right? art right? old boy! these Physicians are notable jerkers, come,
where is their rendez-vous


In my Lodgings.


Ha? how many? -- how many? -- what is that there?


A draught to provoke.


-- Sleep.


Nay good Bentivoglio give it me, a whole one, a whole one!


Be moderate; you will take the next beggar you meet else; and then the Ladies
expectation yonder will be frustrate


Ha! ha! he! Super naculum! my old bully lively, my authentic Don, soul of
pleasure; line of life; let us to it; such a violent fit o'th sudden! a dozen
Calentures are an ague to it; twenty Juleps will not cool one wish


Let Us have him to bed quickly, and b'ele him warm; Bonum erit si sudaverit,


Foh! his breath stinkes oath University.


Signior it is not perfumed: -- now will I go fetch these Ladies to him; and if
he have courage enough but to speak to 'em; I Will forfeit my art, and turn
tooth-drawer


My Lord! --


Villain!


The injury! I am not any way conscious. --


Traitor thou lie;
Hell, and thy self the greater mischief, has
Conspired to ruin goodness. --

Madame! you have viewed these gardens; -- has not art
Sweetly conspired with nature, to make up
A pleasure of variety?

It takes exceedingly. --


What does?


Pretty indeed,
To have these flowers read moral lectures to us.

Yet Madame, you can find in your heart to tread
Them underfoote, scorning as much the beauty,
As the rare sense they carry.

Yes I can,
Yet straight I turn, and pluck 'em; -- bind 'em up,
In one fair volume, thus --

And what read you, pray?


The emblemes of true virtues in each leaf,
Imprinted there, at natures proper charges.

What think you of this Lilly?


It figures innocence.


Wear it in your bosom.


Innocence indeed
Should be the breasts fair individual mate.

It will become you well.


So will this crown Imperial your head,
Pray stick it there.

I should be the envy of the Court then,
It Is a pretty flower, what think you if I carry it to the Princess?

Fit, very apt and fit, lady, -- as fit
A gift, as this were for a Lord, an hony-suckle,
The amorous woodbindes offspring; it emblemes love;

You would not have us make love?


This mysticke way has bin allowed of;


And practiced?


Yes, and practiced.


Sure I should never do it.


No Madame? why are not men creatures
As worthy Courtship, as we?

Oh! but we are women!


Oh! but we are proud.


Shall I take it on your experience?


Or your own: -- hal whose voice is that?


Hence my delight! thou art turned traitor to me:
Thy strings conveyed a poison to my ears,
And they drank deeply of it; -- yet forbear,
Alas it was my self, my inward grief,
Thrown from the soul in often sighs, that made
Thy sound infectious; it is with that as guilt,
It grows still greater as it is borne about,
And poisons every thing should work it is cure.

Is not this Sylvio, Calantha's Page?


A lover grown? las pretty innocence.
How finely sorrow shows there --! That, that passion
Is well expresl't; now sigh, then knock the breast. Excellent.

Let Us use the benefit of this shade, to hide
Our selves, and secretly acquainted grow
With the black story of his sad mishap.

Felicia.
How has thy name, thy self, thy friend deceived thee!
That only were acquainted with the sound
Of happiness; mocked with a false report,
Into a real misery; whose easy nature
(The greatest foe unto it self, was flattered)
Out of a virgin treasure; and then left
Rifled of all; but (what grief now is preying on)
A hapless life -- yet cruel thief, thou have left
So much of thee behind, as shall hereafter
Tell to the world a dark and gloomy tale
Of thy black perjury.

Ha! does he riddle,
Or play with grief?

No it is too like a truth.


Me thinks each thing
I meet withal upbraids my fond credulity;
The soaring lark hovers aloft in the air,
At distance from th'inchanting glass, that Courts
Her to her ruin! the fearful Quail
Suspects and shuns the music of the pipe
That sings her into fetters.
Only poor I am sillier than these;
Witness th'untimely swelling of this womb
Pregnant to my disgrace; -- As I lay hid
In yonder thicket, the brambles gently swelled,
And hid my shame, which yet each trivial wind
But dallying with, persuaded from my covert!
And left me naked to heaven's eye; the boughs
Of the next willow clung about my head,
As if they would knit themselves into a garland,
Which I should wear for my forsaken lover, --

Very pretty!


Were not so sad.


Oh you the weak supporters of my woes,
Why do'e fail me now at greatest need?
Bear me at least into some hollow cave
Where I may die, free from an after scorn;
And not when I am dead, be found the shame
Of our frail sex; -- Oh! I faint, and fall,
Just like the early branches of some tree,
Whose hasty sap shootes into early fruit,
Till the over laden boughs crack with the weight,
Ere yet they be full ripe --

I am amazed, a woman!


Some Lady here o'th Court, I Will lay my life on it;
Let Us to the Princess and inform her of it.

-- Let me eternally perish to honor,
If their heads answer not for this foul insolence.

Though It be a sin of that portentous bulk,
That 'tstartles all the gods, and justice self
Wakes from a long dead lethargy to meet it:
Yet Kings are great as they, and spite of fate
Or rigorous laws, may triumph in their mercy.

Away with 'em to execution;
Him, and his fellow murderer, away:
-- Pardon a Traitor?

Though you might urge, 'twere treason of that height,
That none but they could think of, much less act:
That murder cries for murder, blood for blood:
That he whose innocence they sacrificed
To their mad fury, was your loyal subject;
This on your marriage day -- to affront Hymen.
And when your nuptial torch burnt brightest, dead it
With blood, into a sickly glimmmering taper:
That they should dare assault me! -- in the Court --
One whom your goodness has bin pleased to look
Into a life, and honors, placed in the state,
Only to interpose my self between,
And meet all dangers that are shot at you.

'Twas a murder
Intended on our person, but that Heaven --

Was just in the prevention; True it might be so,
And were it, yet upon submission
Such faults have been remitted.

Away with 'em, I Will hear no more.


Down holy anger! --
One word, and I Am gone -- you are my Sovereign,
And there is divinity worn in that title,
Which I adore, and think my self as happy
In this so early doom, since you are pleased with it,
As heaven had spoke it; though not till old age,
When nature claimed it as a due! Yet Sir
Be gentle to my memory; and if
At any time my crimes appear before you,
Fresh in your thought, to stain my Heraldrie,
The happy mention of my virtuous acts,
From some that love my dust, shall rise to plead
My innocence --; and may you never live
To curse the untimely hand; or hour that robbed you
Of so much loyalty! -- for you Vrsini --
If ere your name shall fall in mention, when
I come in the other world, expect me not
Your friend; I fear me, I shall tell sad tales
In the ears of heaven; -- Farewell --

Impudent Traitor!


Yet still I dare be good; and spite of all
His hate, or malice to me, thus stand up
To beg his life.

Not after so much injury?


Yes, if Valenzo dare be sinful still
In wrongs, it shall be called my piety
To suffer.

Thou Art all goodness; -- for thy sake
We Will mix some mercy with our doom,
He that submits first to thee, has his pardon,
See justice done on the other; this sentence
Shall stand irrevocable; --

This sentence stand irrevocable?
Plague to your easy nature! --
Ha! this it is to over-act; how have I almost fooled my self, out
Of my own plots;
I were in a fine case now, if Piero
Should not accepta life on this condition.
I Will send to him -- Cassio! Grutti! who waits there? --

Ladies, pray absent your selves a while; --
-- With child? impudent whore! to what cursed lump
Have thy sins swollen thee?

Oh, me miserable!


Hence ingrate wretch! that have abused my favors
So far, till thou have made a sin of charity:
-- Ha! do weep? --
My rare dissembler! those tears which art has taught
To flow, carry more sinful cunning in 'em,
Then those the flattering Sirens wear upon
Their cheeks, when they court man to ruin:
Yet tell me ere you go, whom have those looks
Beguiled, and trained into your sinful arms.

You must prepare your self for a sad story then:


Yes, like enough, a tale as sad, and dismal
As that of Troy, and as much truth in it too!
Quickly, dispatch, before my anger prove
Too masculine! -- and be modest in'th relation.

You Will wished untold.


Undone I do! but why
This tedious circumstance? it does involve
Your guilt.

Know then, that when I was my self
My name was --

What?


Felicia


Alberto's daughter?


Yes his -- that was once Alberto
Durazzo's farre-fam'd Marquess; till
His cruel Master seized on's life, and honors,
At his return from Sicily in the first wars;
Where he received a fatal overthrow.

He was in action bold, and valiant!
However fortune wrought him this disgrace;

Here! here began my misery.


Proceed, trust me I now begin to pity thee.


Then let me die without your farther knowledge
Of my mishap; it will be injurious
Unto my ashes, and disturb their quiet;
I know it will;

Nay, prithee tell me, come, and I Will weep with thee.


You Will have cause enough ere I Have done;
Therefore don't hear't;

Is there ought in it concerns me?


Too much


Nay, then I must, and will have all the story,
Or think thee a foul prostitute.

It Is thus then!
-- Yet do'nt believe me, say that I was mad,
Distracted with my sorrows, that my words
Fell so uneven from me, you mistook
The sense; say any thing. --

Come, come, I know thou will tell truth!


Or may I never find peace hereafter!


How I fear
Whether this story tends?

The King Madame.
Ferrando; -- (Seize me Courteous death,
Or I shall poison all her joys;)

Ha! what of him?
Be sudden, or, I swear by my just anger,
I Will straight rip up the cradle of thy lust,
The den where all thy loose adultery's
Were acted; search each corner of thy womb.
That keeps a record of thy villanyes!

Ferrando was the author of my fall:


More lying then that evil Genius
That wrought the first man's fall!

Ferrando! oh! oh! (Swoons)


Thou rebel passion jealousy! what mean thou
To tumult in my breast? -- ha! yet why not?
Why may not he be false?

Oh! oh! oh!


It Is so! -- Felicia! -- she is gone, she is gone!
Help there, Florinda! Violetta! Ladies!
So -- she begins to breath; -- look up Felicia!

Where am I?


Here, -- a medall? this confirms it;
Ferrando and Felicia!

Ha! the Princess!
Beshrew me but I Have had a fearful dream!
I hope it was but a dream;

No; I know all,
Ferrando's false, as stayn'd with sin, and perjury
As howling-Ghosts.

Good Madame don't affright me;
Your fancy's dark and gloomy.

Yes all hell
Is there at work contriving a revenge;

Revenge? for whom?


No matter whom; -- But tell me
How, and with what false oaths, he won thee first
To his loose sheets.

I Will tell you; but you first
Shall promise me, to bread no other way
To your revenge and mine, then I shall lead you in.

I do:
Let Us sir, and hear it all.

Whilst yet Alberto lived
As great in favor as in blood, the glory
O'th Court of Naples, honored with daily visits
From his Prince; it was my unhappy destiny,
(Fool that I was to be so credulous!)
To receive many favors from Ferrando;
Which I interpreted in the way of love;
Mean while, this match was treated of between
Him, and your self; your Father ( Sicily's King)
After your plighted troths, and formal ceremonies
Used betwixt Prince, and Prince, would break it off,
Which caused a sudden war upon his Country;
In which expedition Alberto
Was sent chief general: the King being fore't
Now to withdraw his public visits, employed
Vrsini in the business; gets access
Privately to me in the might, and that too
Always in the dark, lest happily he might
Be known to any of my servants; Briefly
After his many oaths, and protestations
Of his fair meaning, I at last consented
To let him steal the fruit, he durst not own:
When ere I urged, he was ingug'd to you,
He answered, that was but a trick of state,
A fair pretense to color his design;
And mak't seem glorious, in the eye o'th world;
That he warred for a Kingdom, not a Queen;
Only entreated me, that I Would be silent,
And not so much as in a sign betray
To The day, what only night was conscious of.

You condiscended?


Willingly.
My father in the mean while returns defeated,
For which the King led on by passion, seized
His life and honors, these conferred on his
Now favorite Vrsini: the fleet re enforced,
He himself the second time in person
Went general of the forces, conquered Sicily,
And slew your father on Messina's plains,
Last brought you away captive.

But how came thou to Court in Sicily?
Thou told'st another story then:

For that
I crave your pardon, 'twas all the untruths
My life has ere bin charged with; but 'twas thus:
Led partly by a jealous fear, to see
What he intended; partly to find out
My brother Frederico, who was left there
Commander in Mazara, which was took
In the first expedition, in this disguise,
Amongst others whom desire of fame, or profit
Led to your shore, I cross't the seas; but failing
In quest of him I sought, I came to Court,
Where since I have remained.

But why Felicia
Did not disclose thy self before this time,
Now things are grown so bad?

When first I saw
Your person, and how mutually you loved,
Knowing how far I was beneath your worth,
So dear I held you both, that I determined
For ever to be lost to memory;
And serve you thus in this disguise: which I
Had done, but that this hapless chance
Betrayed me to your knowledge.

Alas! thy piety has undone us both!


'Twas my too cruel destinies!


Methinkes we two now seem to be set copies
Of griefs, to which wronged virgins will repair,
To take out patterns by.

Our wrongs and sorrows
Have made us just so like to one another,
That each seems th'o others counterfeit.

We Will sit, and descant on our miseries,
Count the extent of each, proportion tears,
And sighs unto them.

Here Is that does surmount,
Shall borrow grief of the other.

H'as robbed me of a father cruel Tyrant,


H'as robbed me of a father cruel Tyrant,


Bereaved me of my friends, and loving subjects,


Bereaved me of my Brother, and my friends.


Taken away all my honors, and my dower.


Taken my virgin honor, all my dower.


H'as mocked me with the title of a Queen.


H'as mocked me with the title of a Queen.


-- But I am lost in Passion.


And I am lost in Passion.


Felicia come, and as our wrongs are equal,
So let our revenge be; we will hand in hand
Assault this Tyrant; and in bloody Characters
Print on his body the story of our sufferings:

Yet this cannot cure our grief.


What though, wronged innocence?
In death it will entitle us to honors;
And though our bodies moulder to corruption,
Our better part shall survive fame; our names,
Free from decay, shall swell up numerous volumes;
Whilst our sad legends shall be made a pillow,
To every sleeping virgin.

O yet for my sake have some pity on him,
And for that part of him, that is cradled here,
Alas he may live to make us fair amends.

For thy sake I could spare him, but my wrongs
Sit heavy here, and urge me to revenge.

But say l've thought a way, how we may yet
Be both restored to happiness, would you not
Accept, and follow't?

Speak it (gentle soul.)


As yet (you know) your virgin treasure stands
Free from his ruder touch: those Ceremonies,
Which linked you in one Hymeneall knot,
Religion will make void, the praecontract
'Twixt him and me being known, so that you then,
On this part are free from him; enjoy him thus
You cannot, neither would you (I suppose)
After these wrongs, (if you might be permitted:)
What hinders then, but that I take your place
This night? and show him, to what height his perjury
Has wrought our wrongs, whilst you in some disguise
May quit the Court, and e're next Sun appear,
From hence toward France, to whom you are allied
In blood, and wrongs. --

Content, -- I Will in, and haste me to be gone,
To go there is some hope.

To stay there is none.


-- To me this?


Out of particular respect
He stood engaged to repay your merits.

Dare you
Promise so much for's Lordship?

The Contents
Of that will speak, how much he tenders goodness
In every noble breast.

No doubt Sir, but
You are familiar with the sense it carries,
And can inform me, better than the dark Character.

It Is that you would be pleased t'accept
A life, for which to's Piety you shall owe,
Only a fair acknowledgement.

Wondrous good!
It Is a becoming charity this, and he
Wears it amongst the chiefest of his virtues.

Sir, it must needs be eminent in's Lordship,
Since exercised upon so noble a subject
As your self

But stay? -- now I think on it,
This is a benefit of that nature, it seldom comes
Alone, are there not honors too? preferments
That wait upon this gift? speak, shall I be
His Lordships creature?

He Is passionately yours.


Are we not for design? -- ba, what dark trick
Is there in the State, that does imply danger
Enough for us to manage, does he think
Us fit to temper poisons, or use the benefit
O'th night to seize on his State-rivals, are we
Potent enough for faction, or intended
Intelligencer to some foreign Prince?

What mean you?


Engagements of this nature urge a return
Of thanks proportionable to themselves,
And what we have of such rich values,
I cannot tell, lest t'be our souls forfeited
To The next occasion his Lordship has to use 'em.

This is strange language Sir, my understanding
Has not yet arrived at what it means.

Go home and study it then: -- and do'e hear,
Entreat my Lord, t'employ his favors to
Some further profit, he will scarce be gainer by 'em else.

I shall acquaint him with your humor.


Do maggot, wriggle, wriggle, do: --


Piero.


Madame! I am all joy, life, honors,
Preferment, and what not?

Then I Am undone!
Piero! did not promise me to stand
The utmost of's temptations? did thou boast
Thy virtuous strength, and fall'st at the first onset?

Life Madame is sweet.


If hitherto
It has bin so, hereafter it will be all
Bitterness, thou have betrayed thy friend to death;
The thought of which will sour all thy content,
Make thy best pleasures relish worse then gall.

Life, with the worst that can befall us, is
A good exchange for death; but here are honors
Annex't to it Lady! I shall be great in favor.

Thou will grow big in sin too! thou must barter
Thy virtue for preferment; which being gone,
At best thou't be but painted ruins,
A glorious misery; thou must owe life
To him, that will infect and kill thy soul.

Yet you would be content, Valenzo should
Accept a life, on this condition.

Yet he may live, and still be virtuous.


Why? so may I.


Yet he is thy friend.


Am not I his too?


It Will be a glory to thee after death
That thou were friendships martyr, a title
Will sit upon thy tomb, richer than all
Thy Heraldry; more lasting than thy marble.

To show how far, I can prefer him to
My self, I am content this honor should be his.

False to thy friend, and virtue! that only came
To mock calamity, and midst our wrongs
Remain our greatest in jurie.

Mistake me not,
I only did prepare you for a joy,
Which now you're ripe for: -- know then, 'T returned
Him scorn for all his flattering promises;
And stood resolved t'incounter with his fury,
Made hot by my disdain.

Miracle of friendship.


Since it is decreed that one of us must fall,
And only one, my death shall free us both
From the laws rigor, enjoy your best Valenzo,
Enjoy him long, may you (a happy pair)
Grow like two neighboring roses on one stalk,
Partaking mutually each others sweetes;
Whence no rude hand approach to ravish you,
But when you are full blown, and ripe for heaven,
May you fall gently both into one grave,
There lie entombed in your own odours.

Piero, thou go
To heaven, to be the envy of the Saints;
For when thou come where those blessed troops reside,
No man shall ere direct a vow, or prayer,
But unto thee! -- Valenzo take thy friend,
Take him unto thy bosom, he has so much
Of heaven in him, I fear he can scarce die.

Is it your fear, Madame? can he deserve less in
Your fair opinion, than to be thought immortal?
That death at length should boast a victory
Over so much goodness. -- Methinkes (Piero)
Thou should for ever stand a rich example,
To all mankind, who in thy fall will sicken,
And dye to virtue; enjoy the happiness
Of thine own fate; I will not rob thee of
One precious minute; live till time has powered
A reverend snow upon thy head. --

But justice must be satisfied.


I Will bow my self beneath the stroke.


To slay
The innocent, is not to expiate,
But make a crime, preserve thy self entire
To thy Charintha, King, and Country.

What!
And betray my friend to death?

To what
I have deserved.

It Was thy too forward zeal, and a ripe spirit.
That spurred thee on to action, thou did it for
Thy friend, for me, and had not justice bin
Wronged in it, the honor had bin mine, why not
The shame?

You must not, shall not die.


No more!
'Twill prove a breach of friendship else, I must not,
Shall not die: my honor suffers double,
Thou would foil me both in love, and valor.

Pity these tears.


Or in thy ruin I
Am lost.

Justice requires but one, her fate
Is so involved in yours, you cannot fall,
But in it she must find a certain death;
Think then, how can you satisfy the law?

Far easier than you, in whose sad loss
The whole world suffers, and in thy untipe fall
Looses all goodness.

Stint this pious strife,
I have bin too much woman, and betrayed
My name to infamy, in this tame passion:
Possess me a just anger, a spirit great
And noble as my birth; that I may shake,
And rowze this sleepy Prince, from his dull lethargy;
Who Is wholly lost, in the bewitching flatteries
Of that bad man; -- alas this is a danger
Too potent for your stars to free you from;
Henceforth I Will be your destinies: for since
This calm brings nothing but a certain fall,
A storm shall either save, or ruin all.

Contemn our pardon.


Return your favors too
With so much scorn.

Better they would played with lightning,
Or hugged a thunderbolt.

Justice is slow
Of pace, and if not led by fury,
Seldom o'retakes the crime, let your return
Of punishment be quick, and active, delay is worse
Than pity, and more dangerous: Valenzo
Is popular, and who knows, but he had rather,
Owe his life to the peoples mutiny, than your pardon,
And therefore slighted it.

Oh the state of Princes!
How far are we from that security,
We dreamed of in th'en pectance of our crown?
Were foreign dangers nothing, yet we nourish
Our ruin in our bosom: Valenzo is a traitor,
So is Piero too; and who is not in this age?
It is unsafe not to suspect our self.
To torture with 'em; be noble in thy justice: --
Here draw a warrant for their execution; --
We Will sign't with our own signer; -- hence pity,
Post from our breast; we banish thee our bosom
Thou Art a disease bred there to ruin Majesty:
And sink us below our subjects scotue. --

Our Princely cousin, welcome to Court; thou have
Been too long absent, (I must chide thee for it,)
And envied us the boast of virtue.

Virtue!


Some malicious devil now, or other,
Has enticed her from her beads;
To undo me, and my plots, she carries anger
In her brow: -- this I must mitigate, or I am
Lost. --

Thou art so eager after heaven,
Thou woo't o're-buy thy happiness.

Never fear't Sir.


But thy devotion's seasoned with so much charity,
Thou pil'st a stock of merit up for us
At Court.

I believe you had need on it.


As long as we live here we shall; --


So wicked!


Ha! what frowne's that, whence these clouds, Charintha?
So rises the blushing morn, as thou were wont
To smile, when thou appear'dst, we owe
Our day unto thy eyes; and if thou think
Thy beautie's worn too cheap, we will become tributaries
To thee for light; chase hence this sullen darkness,
Thy absence has already made too long
A night.

No Sir; 'twas your black deeds*


How Is this?
Do'e know me, who I am?

Not well.


Your King.


A Tyrant
Of big, and grorious impietic's,
A regal monster, the true head of that
Beast you rule, the multitude: more cruel
Than enraged lions, or robbed bears; who both
Will spare the innocent, and humble.

Look to the Lady there, sure she is distracted.


My wrongs indeed would make me so.


What wrongs? whence? or from whom?


Raise not my auger higher with your scorn; --


By all that is. --


Or if it be ignorance of my sufferings,
It but betrays your want of reason, and
How far you're lost to man, by your fond dotage.

Grow more particular, or wonder ruins me.


Good God! I Have suffered so long, till patience
Grew my greatest crime. --

Now, now the storm is coming this way,
But I Am prepared to meet it.

Whence? or from whom?
Ask this good man how often he has mourned
Over the ruins of my fame? how often
His ears have met with the report of my
Disgrace? how I was noys'd a strumpet? when
Each talking thing at Court, might freely act
A rape upon my virtue, till I was left
All a whole stain, black as the front of perjured
Sinners? while you, (as if I Would bin a trifle
Cast from your blood, and kindred, or some dark thing,
Whose actions were so sowly bad.
That report bettered 'em in the expression:)
Could sit as silent as the night; as calm
As seas, when the winds sleep; yet at last be just;
And say, how have I appeared to you, or him,
That calumny has thus bin priviledg'd,
To violate my honor?

Madame,
I have always spoke you, chastities best example.

Innocence it self is not so white.


Yet he that would confirm this with his sword,
Must meet, with prisons, wrackes, and tortures,
As a reward of so much virtue!

Ha!


Sweetest Princess! --


And ere he die, must suffer in's honor,
Be proclaimed traitor to the state:

Vrsini, thou have abused our trust.


My Lord. --


Too weak pretense, for your ingratitude
To so large merit; Naples call's him
Her chief preserver; he brought home victory,
By his own arm achieved, when the proud foe,
Threatened your Kingdom with a fatal downfall.
He, to whose arm you owe your life, your crown,
To whom in war, you would sooner fly for help
Then to the Altar; now in peace must have
His temples robbed; his garlands from his brow
Transplanted. to adorn this useless statua.

Madame, I have not so appeared in managing these affairs of yours.


Would thou had,
Or somewhat that carries less resemblance
Of man: Oh thou art bravely wicked.

I have not used the art to boast the virtue
Of mine own actions; yet heaven knows
They were all good, and aimed at ends as honorable
As your desires.

Vrsini leave, till there is hope of pardon,
This impudence in sin,
Bid's a defiance to all mercy; did we not,
At your persuasion, give order for Valenzo's
Quick dispatch?

How ere I seemed (


Ha! What Is here a pardon?


Which you had sealed ere this, had not this Lady here interrupted it.


How?


your passion would not have permitted you,
To have over viewed what you consented too;
This I knew, as likewise how dangerous it
Would have been to the state, if he had fallen.

Again my own Vrsini: --
Charintha, pardon our errors, we will deserve it,
By the future love, and honors we will throw
On our Valenzo, -- here take my signer
Fetch 'em to Court.

You are noble.


Vrsini Wait on her to the Castle.


You honor me.


Oh how near were we destruction.
Reason sit still enthroned in thine own state,
It Is passion only ruins Kings, not fate.

Hold up, hold up Sir, the Ladies are coming this way, -- for shame, -- God's
me, they are here; why do'e tremble so Sir


A violent fit o'th ague; oh! oh! oh! have me to bed gently, gently, or I
shall scatter all my limbs


Discredited for ever, (here take this staff Sir) -- have I boasted your
strength to them? -- fortified you forth' encounter, and you fail me thus? --
undone, undone


Oh! oh! oh! for half a dozen of night caps.


Here Sir, on with 'em; they are somewhat durty, they will keep you the warmer; --
now shall I be called Mountebanke; Quackesalver, Pispot-peeper: and all the
ugly mangy names can be invented. -- come in, come in. --


'Twill be a Scene of modest mirth, Ladies.


The Physician has cooled him.


Why Sir, you will not disgrace me? go toward 'em.


Some fire, some fire; -- cold, cold, cold, cold.


Here, here, on with my gown: -- this cap, so, so.


Ladies, we will take leave to be bold here to vex him.


How do'e my Lord?


We are come here to await your pleasure.


The very thought on it has cast him into a cold sweat.


Oh! oh!


Now for fifty virgins.


A monopoly of women.


Hey, for a wench, for a wench, to bumfiddle now; Ah! ha!


Oh! ho! oh!


Do'e remember you would play the fool in my gown, and cap excellently.


Well said Doctor.


To him Doctor.


Then a noise of Musicians would do rarely.


Look he is nodding.


My Lord you intend no abuse to us?


Make us hazard our credits for nothing?


More clothes; -- why hoe there, on my feet I say.


He Is dreaming.


Fast, fast a sleep, so, so, this charm last's till Midnight, and then he
wakes


'Twill be good sport to see him then --


Dance up and down the Court like the ghost of old Hippocrates.


You must not expose him to the public view.


Mr Doctor you're sufficiently revenged, this is enough for you to boast on
when you come in the University


This, and the rare cures I Have done upon you two shall be my theme. -- Good
night. -- Ladies I Am your servant. -- My doughty placket-hunter lie thee
there, and e'ne awake when thy stomach serves thee; to morrow morning I Am for
Padua. --


The night comes on apace, straight every thing
Will be as black as I, and alike terrible,
Nay out-doe me too: each leaf that stirs
Affrights the fearful, makes the guilty tremble,
And yet this night, what is it but a shadow?
Yet I am less than that, for I do less:
I that have purposed so much, act nothing!
Horror! could but my thoughts be seen, they would own
Murders, more than the basiliske could commit,
Were he all eye, more than revenge has acted,
Or than the trivial spite of plague, and war
Produce, in their full heat. -- Vrsini be speedy
Or I Will outrunne design. --

Zisco.


My Lord.


The hours are favorable
And have brought opportunity along with 'em,
We must resolve for action.

I Am prepared.


But Zisco, art thou sure Felicia was. --


Sure? puh! would you know? I my self
Am the Moore he caused to ravish her.

And can thou do it again?


Bravely.


This night then thou shall -- ravish his Mistress,
Calantha! this night! I Have prepared all things ready
For thy conveyance into her chamber -- thou will do it

Resolved.


And kill her too?


An she were my mother.


Obscure your self a while. -- how now?


My Lord, the French have kept their word,
And unespied have stolen from Genoa,
Entered our haven, and this night have set
Upon our fleet, the bold Sicilians too
In The town are up in arms.

There spoke my Genius.


My Lord! the Cittie's in a mutiny,
The Court in wild distraction.

Well, beyond my hopes: excellent well; Grutti, Cassio, be nere us, we must use
your help to night


Valenzo plays from the Castle with his Canons,
And strikes both parties without distinction:
He Is now marching up with a well ord'red troop,
It Is thought he had intelligence of your intents.

O my fate! that man undoe's me.
Thus early sins are blasted in the bud,
There is no safety but in being good.

-- It Is late.
Each man retire to his quarter: Captains,
We entertain your merit with a serious welcome.

Our deserts, my Lord,
Are so slender, that were not to prejudice
Your judgment, we would blush to own any.

Hang this flattery, merit quotha? is it such a piece of merit to cut a score or
two of throats; knock down an hundred o'th city herd? a gallant could do so
much for's Cockatrice


The King shall give you each particular thinks: He owes you both a trophey,


His acknowledgement
Of our duty, would raise our pride to sin,
We should forget to let heaven share in the victory.

Victories, by Mars's crest it deserves not to come in the Chronicle, though
Hollinshead or Hall, those voluminous forreiners should write our annals,
'twill never make us justle in among the Caesar's, or own a name in the list o'th
worthies


No Contareno, we will not have thee painted in vile ugly colors, and clapped
upon chimneies, thou shall be cut --


In brass? mine would make an excellent brazen face?


In Parian marble, we will rob the Quarries
To rear thee up a glorious monument.

A glorious loame to set lazy spiders a work in, an office for birds to mute
in, if these be your glorious momuments for men of arms, I Will even live to sin
out my merit (as you call it) then when I die, the world and I will shake
hands, and cry quit of all sides


He that should hear thee talk thus, and not know thee well, would doubt thy
valor


Hercules! an he did he should try it.


It Were punishment enough.
Goncales -- I gratulate thy navall victory;
France will have cause hereafter to mention thee in sad story,
Thou giv'st them but a churlish salutation.

Such as they deserved,
It seems they came rather to steal than fight,
They were as ill prepared, as they had meant
To bear our empty hulkes away unquestioned;
For soon as they perceived we descri'd 'em,
Pale, as the lillies in their trembling flagges,
They turned their sails, and fled; we made after 'em,
With swift winged lightning from our Canons mouth,
Which sunk and fired 'em all, ere they could quit
The channel, or gain the wider Ocean;

Believe me, noble Soldier, thou art dear
To fame; as old in victory, as in years,
Yet still thou toyl'st t'undoe thy self, and benefit
Thy ungrateful soil, which never will be able
To requite thy meanest service.

Yet you for the same cause, in the pride of youth,
Opposed your self betwixt the state and danger,
When their sick hopes, were as their fortunes, desperate;
Reduced a Kingdom to your sway, in whose
Rich spoils, your gawdie Soldier triumphs;
Whilst boasting of their rifled plumes, they drink
Health's to victory; yet those so moderate,
Their bowls increase their fury, not their surfeits.

How these tall men o'th sword claw one another?


They have an itch of pride runs through 'em.


The Hero's, when thou come into Elyzium,
To give thee place, shall shift their blessed mansions.

And load thee with their lawrells.


How my fears betray me! shunning
One toil, I run into another.

Che va la?


Oh me! I Am surpised.


Spirit of valor thou art my prisoner.


Ha! whom have you there?


( Valenzo! my voice betrays me.)


A young Sicilian, shall I draw my steel,
And give him a gentle stroke?

Lend me my sword -- and be thou what thou will I dare thee to thy worst.


Bravely spoke, -- set forward then. --


Traitor! the Princess! Calantha!


All the better; she is skillful at her weapon,
We Will but exchange a thrust in sport.

Ha! what means this flight?


Dare none of you fight?


Dear Lady, not with you.


Then you are cowards, they speak you so in the City,
And I came out thus purposely to try you.

If you please, you shall quickly see that,
Command us sheath our swords in one another
Bosoms -- we will fly like lightning to execute your
Commands; -- you're our Princess.

No, I Am your Prince's murthresse.


How?


I Have killed your King: will none
Dispatch me yet?

Sure she is distracted.


We must disarme you Lady; -- it is a duty to our Prince
Was never till now unwillingly performed!
You must back to the Court, whither we will wait upon you.

Villains, cowards,


The Princess! what made she abroad so late?


Did she not say that she had killed the King too?


Come let us walk the round; things are yet unsettled.


It Is so dark now, an the devil should lie perdieu I should go near to
stumble on's horns


Too much of this sad story, Oh these men
How are they degenerate from the goodness
Of their creation! they have been always false --

Silly as we are,
We know it; their vows and oaths are traitors
To us, and yet we hug them, let them into our bosoms,
Into our hearts, till they undo us?

But Madame, why do'e desire us to leave you?
Fear you not his fury, what it may prompt him too,
When he shall see you are not his Calantha.

He never was acquainted with that passion,
He Is violent in nothing, -- But in love.

And yet he may dissemble that too
As well as his vows.

Should he? were his hand
Lift up to strike me, I can charm it there!
Who can look on a Ladies bended knees,
Wet cheeks, swollen eyes, hear her sighs, her prayers,
And yet be cruel: If there be one that can,
That one is not Ferrando; his bosom is
Passable to every groan; it strikes his heart:
He would tell me (when he was absent)
If I sigh't, or wept, for then he said
He wept and sighed by sympathy.

Yet now he loves you not.


Can he not love himself? here, here I bear him,
Himself in a less model, this I Will show him,
If he mistrust it is none of his; let him
But rip me up, there he shall see each limb
As like to his, as his one hand, one eye,
One cheek is like the other: besides there lies
Folded by his own name, he told me he
Would call it so, (Ferrando,) and lest I
Should chance forget, I wrote it in my heart,
There he will find it.

Good Lady!


It Is a sad nuptial night, this,


I Will tell him too how he
Would grieve if I were dead, go hanging down
His head, vailing his eyes from heaven, ashamed
To look up to the place, where his Felicia is:
Or poring on the ground, as he would find
Where my neglected ashes lay a sport
To the winds; where some rude blast might blow me up
Into his eyes, and then he would weep to find,
Me there; weep till the fretting brine had burned
His eye-bals out.
He told me of his dreams, what pleasure he
Had to find me in 'em: alas they will
Be terrible now: I shall affright him, appear
A thin pale ghost, make him start out in his sleep;
(Alas! I will not) yet he will dream he heard me.
Cry out, Ferrando! revenge upon Ferrando:
This cannot choose but startle him. --

Heaven grant it may.


Madame all joy that we can hope, or wish,
Be with you.

I Will go alone into the bedchamber.
There expect him, -- pray leave me.

Good night, I hear him coming.


Our Navy victour.


The City quiet too I those clouds
Which threatened ruin to your Kingdom, all
Blown over; the sky serene and calm, as if
It laugh't at your vain fears; the lamps of heaven
That now seemed all blown out, are trimmed a new
And brighter shine, to lead you to Elyzium.

To Heaven, Elyzium's poor to what we shall
Enjoy to night.

The land of some dull villager
Or doughty Poets dreams.

The birth of fancy,
A thin, fantastic, aierie paradise;
With which they flatter their weak hopes, but mine
Is known to sense; we gather odours there; wealthy
In their native sweetness, flowers of a hew
As bright as lasting, roses and lillies
Blown from their stalks, meet here, and dwell upon
Her cheeks, as if there only they were priviledg'd
To enjoy an everlasting spring. Vrs. Let your
Imaginations seed even to a surfeit, your senses
Are too too weak, and narrow t'entertaine
The bounteous flowing of her pleasures:
You Will let so much pass by unknown,
As if you took but tribute of her blessings:
When the whole stock is yours.

We Will be her Mars, and meet her in soft skirmish,
In amorous duel, where we will softly yield
And let her win: (to raise her to the pride
Of a new victory, as much upon our selves
As we have done upon her Country,
Then shall she bind us gently in her hair
Fetters for Captive lovers, and in scorn
Of our trim youth, and temperate blood, when we
Begin to faint within her arms, shall then
Supply us with new strength from her own eyes;
Whence she will dart a soul at every glance
Rich as her self, and the blessed smiles it is made of;
Create an active flame within our breast
Able to give old statua's life and motion,
Make their stiff marble feet supple as the joints
Of love: -- oh I Am lost! my Venus
Come; lead to my Venus.

Your Cynthia, -- your Moon
With a man in her -- there there is
Your way, why move you not?
How you stand.

Vrsini, Ha! Se'st thou that black thing there?
That ugly fiend, I Will out stare thee, devil.

Where are you Sir?


It Is done.


Ravished! Calantha's ravished -- oh torment!
Grim fury post to hell.

Pardon me Sir,
I Have a little bufinesse to dispatch first --
This for Felicia, thus Alberto fell.

Oh I Am wounded.


Ha! do'e know me Prince?


Frederico! just heavens.


Stay your hand -- be innocent in your revenge,
Let me bear all the guilt.

Could thou think, dull Prince, that heaven so
Doated on thy royalty, thy crown, thy scepter,
Or regal pall could bear thee out in sin?
Or the weak shine of trivial state dazzle
Their eyes that look upon the blessed sun!
Could thou flatter thy self into such a Security,
That vengeance would not find thee out?
When thou had forfeited thy luxurious palate
With all the dainties of Felicia's body
Thirsted her blood, quaff'd off whole bowls of it,
Till thou were drunk, and wild with fury
Of thy intemperate draughts -- Am not I a rare villain now?

Mad, stark mad, besides himself,
Sure this is but a dream, and I asleep.

Thus, thus I Will wake you: --


Oh my blood scalds, h'has shot wild fire into my heart,
Ah traitor, thy steel is poisoned.

Frederico, let me embrace thee:
Now our revenge is perfect.

Your passage lies this way.


Thorough us.


Treason, treason, raise the Court.


Break open the doors.


We are betrayed.


Villain I greet thy heart.


Where tends your business?


Slave to hell, and thou shall carry't thither.


Fire, fire, the poison boyles my entrals.


The Prince wounded!


Where are the traitors?


Here I am his murderer.


Frederico.


Valenzo, I am overcome. --


New miracles, Calantha, my best my dearest love: -- Oh I am sick, stand off
Calantha, my breath's so hot, 'twill singe thee else; and lick thy beauty's
up, like nimble flames; But do thou live


To curse thee false and perjured.


The spheres are out of tune; nature's distraught;
The orbs celestial have turned round so long
That they are giddie: the stars are in a mutiny,
The Intelligences are altogether by the ears.

Heaven! I bless your justice:
Stern tyrant! that triumph'st over the memory
Of my father, mock'st me with love,
Till like a fool I doated on my fetters,
'Cause they were golden ones, that thus
Thy devilish art might make my soul a captive,
With my body.

Aenigmaticall.


Yet then a Lady mourned thy perjured vows.
Whom thou betrayd'st to loose adultery.

Thy speech, Calantha, is darker than an Oracle.


Truer it is, and dare thou yet dissemble it?
It Is a truth precious to time, who will preserv't
To blast thy memory, and derive a stain
On all thy successors.

How? or when arrived this your knowledge Madame?


How? or when arrived this your knowledge Madame?


Felicia told me all her self
Confirmed it by religious oaths; besides
This medall which she gave me from her neck,
A pledge of his broke faith, with the sad fruits
Of his sat lust, within her womb.

She Is a black whore: she lies; believe her not.


Thou will be damned:


So may I; and houle eternally
In those blew flames the devils bath in,
If ever my vows were made to any other
Then thee; and those, as spotless as thy soul. --

But whom have we here?


Felicia! Sad Lady she entreated
This night's exchange of place; that she might show him
What an untimely mother he had made her,
And this 'twas caused my flight,

Felicia!


Ha! murdered.


My love.


My sister! ravished:
And murdered by! me, incestuous villain!

Did thou not tell me that Ferrando ravished her,
And cast her to his slaves, a prey to their
Bold appetites and furies.

To incense you the more against him; I told you
What I only did imagine, because at my return
From Sicily, report whispered her lost,
Lost in the ruins of my Father,
Which made me think her murdered.

Ye Gods! I now acknowledge you supreme:
Your power is mighty over our fond arts.
Silly projectours we ensnare our selves!
Whilst we spread nets for others.
This brain has wrought all these sad plots,
Calantha, take your Lord; who is as true,
And holy in his vo was, as those blessed Saints
He invok't.

And yet Felicia wronged?


'Twas I by whom she swelled, and not Ferrando,
As 'twas supposed.

Supposed! she swore 'twas he.


Vrsini, farewell; I Will hear the rest anon --


That aggravates my crime, who wrought her into
This false belief, for having long loved her,
Without return of mutual flames, and at length
Finding that the impediment was her fond
Dotage upon the Prince; I determined,
Rather than not to be possessed of her,
To part with faith and loyalty, feigned all
My visits for him, courted her acceptance
Of his love, which I so darkly brought about
That she consenting to private meetings
As often as she expected the Prince,
I my self filled her arms. --

Then you conclude Ferrando innocent*


In act, or thought.


Felicia! sister! your brother Frederico call's,
She Is gone, cold, cold! and pale, and yet methinkes
She smiles, look up, Felicia --

But how came it to pass she nere discry'd you?


For reasons I then gave her: all our meetings
Were in the night, and that in the dark too, where I
Dissembled so the Prince in voice and gesture. --

This agrees right with her relation: villain thou haste undone me.


And my self too.


Death hangs upon her lids, it is eternal night with her. hoa, sister, stay,
take me along with you; I Will follow you


Pernicious traitor.


Rage choakes my utterance: -- give me your fword.


Our hearts and hands are yours:


Our hearts and hands are yours:


I Will be an age in killing thee, do tremble?
Thou look like one of those thin frozen ghosts,
That chattering lie on hills of thicke-ribb'd Ice,
Come meet my fury.

Here, here is my heart.

I: I Will dig it out,
And cast it to the hungry fiends.

My strength decays, I reele and totter like a cracked reed that leanes
against the winds


Take your sword. --


Madame.


Take it I say.


You do him too much honor.


Manag't with skill and strength, or thou affront'st
My honor, -- faint-hearted! coward, I Will follow thee to hell.

Mercy heavens!


Ho! Charon, more company, lie farther there jolt-head, what quarrelling you
dogs? thy oar, thy oar ferriman: clap 'em o'th sconce with it, there, there


The Gods are just.


You wore their cause upon your sword.


It Is poor revenge this, can he not live again?
Start up from the earth with life, and double strength?
Were centupled I Would meet him: -- but oh my eyes!
Look here Valenzo: which is Prince, which subject,
Which is my loved Ferrando? I see there is
No ceremonious state, no pomp in death;
They all lie level, all quiet, the bad as well
As the good, why should this traitor here
This divellish arch, arch-traytour lie as silent
As his Lord? should he not stare, and foame,
Start up and howl, till he wakes all the dead?

Lady:


Her old passion returns again.


-- Roar, and curse heavens,
But they too have forgot to punish sinners,
And reward virtue, here is an example on it;
We were both virtuous, and deserved not this
Bad usage; let me embrace thee: --
Cold as the earth he lies on, and as dull too:
Where is the soul, that busy flame that lent
Him life and motion? affected such vain pomp
And glorious noise: whither is it fled? poor livelesse trunk,
It was unkindly done to leave thee thus,
A prey to worms and rottenness.

Are you there fury, Megaera, Tisiphone, Alecto,
Howl, howl, furies, I Will lash you.

Kind death thou art welcome; I kiss thy dart.


The Princess! she is slain, unluckie hand.


Spite of our stars, and all rude opposition,
We are one in death: Valenzo see us interred,
Both in one tomb, that we may mingle ashes
And be securely lodged, you know our souls
Were one; our hearts were long united.

A FATAL UNION.


Draw, draw the curteines there, my love and I
Must sleep; -- uncivil I protest, put out the lights,
We shall sleep best in the dark; pray don't disturb us,
You may fright him from mine arms, -- but -- I Will -- hold -- him -- fast.

The ruined treasure of two Kingdoms
In one heap.

In the bedchamber! this way!


Yes Lady, the cry was full of horror.


'Twas the Physicians potion this my Lord.


Done in revenge.


Would 'thad bin poison.


Bless me! whence all these tragedies.


Astonishment ceizes me.


The King:


Vrsini dead. ha! whom have we here, Frederico,


Yes, and Felicia too.


All slain; by what dire hand?


I Will tell you that within. --
Charintha is your Queen.

May you be happy in her love.


Remove the bodies, in the morning we will take order for the state, and funeral
rites

Of these; the lasting story of whose wrongs
Shall be all royal lovers evening songs.

AFter these ruins, thus your Poet stands,
Expecting his own destiny from your hands,
By them he lives or dies; if it should hap
That stead of a mild doom, applause or clap.
(Your trivial allowance) his listening ears
Meet with harsh whispers, or half stifled jeeres,
Such unkind censure kills him; his sad Muse
Unless you give her bay, has vowed to use
The Cypress wreathes, her piety did allow
Those only to incircle her own brow:
Your candid acceptance will be
New life and soul to his lost Poesy;
His flame's but sickly yet, your breath no doubt
Will either blow't up higher, or quite out.

