THE Gods of Greece, whose deitles I raised
Out of the earth, gave them divinity,
The attributes of Sacrifice and Prayer
Have given old Homer leave to view the world
And make his own presentment. I am he
That by my pen gave heaven to Jupiter,
Made Neptunes Trident calm, the curled waves,
Gave Aeolus Lordship ore the warring winds;
Created black hair'd Pluto King of Ghosts,
And regent ore the Kingdoms fixed below.
By me Mars wars, and fluent Mercury
Speaks from my tongue. I placed divine Apollo
Within the Suns bright Chariot. I made Venus
Goddess of Love, and to her winged son
Gave several arrows, tipped with Gold and lead.
What has not Homer done, to make his name
Live to eternity? I was the man
That flourished in the worlds first infancy:
When it was young, and knew not how to speak,
I taught it speech, and understanding both
Even in the Cradle: Oh then suffer me,
You that are in the worlds decrepit Age,
When it is near his universal grave,
To sing an old song; and in this Iron Age
Show you the state of the first golden world,
I was the Muses Patron, learnings spring,
And you shall once more hear blind Homer sing.

The old Vranus, son of the Air and Day
Is dead, and left behind him two brave sons,
Tytan and Saturn.

Tytan is the eldest,
And should succeed by the true right of birth.

But Saturn has the hearts of all the people,
The Kingdoms high applause, his mothers love,
The least of these are steps unto a crown.

But how will Tytan bear him in these troubles,
Being by nature proud and insolent,
To see the younger seated in his throne,
And he to whom the true right appertains,
By birth, and law of Nations quite cast off?

That either power or steel must arbitrate:
Causes best friended have the best event.
Here Saturn comes.

Behold what nature skanted me in years,
And time, below my brother; your applause,
And general love, fully supplies me with:
And make me to his crown inheritable.
I choose it as my right by gift of heaven,
The peoples suffrage, the dead Kings bequest,
And your election, our fair mother Queen,
Against all these what can twelve moons of time,
Prevail with Tytan to dis-herite us.

The Cretan people, with shrill acclamations
Pronounce thee sovereign ore their lands and lives,
Let Tytan storm, and threaten strange revenge,
We are resolved thy honor to maintain.

Tytan, thy ruin shall attempt in vain
Our hearts ad-here with Uestaes our late Queen,
According to our sovereigns late bequest,
To kneel to Saturn.

We accept your loves,
And we will strive by merit to exceed you.
In just requital of these favors done.

Arm Lords, I hear the voice
Of Tytan storming at this strange election.

Descend proud vpstart, trickt up in stolen weeds
Decked in usurped state, and borrowed honors,
Resign them to their owner, that is to me.

Tytan keep off, I charge thee near me not,
Lest I thy bold presumption seal with blood.

A Crown's worth tugging for, and I will have it
Though in pursuit I dare my ominous Fate.

Down with the usurper.

Saturn here shall stand,
Immovable; vpheld by Vestaes hand.

Am I not eldest?

Ey but yong'st in brain.
Saturn the crown has ceased, and he shall reign.

Am I a bastard, that my heritage
Is wrested from me by a younger birth?
Has Vesta played th'adulteresse withsome stranger?
If I be eldest from Vranus loins,
Your malden Issue, why am I debarred
The law of Nations? am I Vestaes son?
Why does not Vesta then appear a mother?
Was younger Saturn bedded in your womb,
Nearer your heart then I, that he is affected
And I despised? If none of these, then grant me,
What Justice wills, my interest in the Crown:
Or if you make me outcast, if my Mother
For get the love she owes, I shall abandon
The duty of a son. If Saturn prove
Unnatural, I Will be no more a brother,
But maugre all that have my right withstood,
Revenge my wrongs, and make my way through blood.

Tytan we both acknowledge thee a brother,
And Vestaes son, which we will express in love,
But since for many virtues growing in me
That have no life in you, the Queen, the Peers,
And all the people, with loud suffrages,
Have shrild their Auees high above the clouds,
And styled me King, we should forget their loves
Not to maintain their strange election.
Advise you therefore, since this bold adventure
Is much above your strength, to arm your self,
In search of future honors with our love,
For what can Tytan do against a people?

Saturn advises well, list to his consell.

If my own land prove thus unnatural,
I Will purchase forrraine aid.

Rather compound.

Let Tytan make demand of any thing
Saving our Crown, he shall enjoy it freely.

Tytan, your brother offers royally,
Accept his love.

To loose a Crown includes
The loss of all things. What should I demand?

This grant him Saturn, since thy insinuation
Has wrought him quite out of the Cretans hearts,
That Tytans warlike issue may succeed thee.

Lycaon well advised, he during life,
Shall reign in peace, no interruption,
Shall pass from Tytan to disturb his reign,
So to our Giant race thou will assure
The crown as due by right inheritance.

To cut off all hostile effusion
Of human blood, which by our difference
Must needs be spilt upon the barren earth,
We Will swear to this accord.

Conditiond thus,
That to deprive all future enmity
In our succeeding Issue, thy male children
Thou in their Cradle strangle.

Kill my sons?

Or swear to this, or all our warlike race,
Dispersed in several Kingdoms I Will assemble,
To conquer thee, and from thy ambitious head,
Tear that usurped Crown.

Tytan, thy friendship
We Will buy with our own blood, all our male children,
(If we hereafter shall have any borne)
Shall perish in their births, to this we swear,
As we are King and Saturn.

I the like,
As I am Tytan, and Vranus son:
This league confirmed, all my Allies I Will gather
Search foreign clymes, in which I Will plant my kin,
Scorning a seat here where I am dispis'd,
To live a subject to a younger birth.
Nor bow to that which is my own by due.
Saturn farewell, I Will leave thee to thy state,
Whilst I in foreign Kingdoms search my Fate.
Think on thy oath.

First stay with us and feast,
Tytan this day shall be King Saturns guest.

There is no dallying, you must come with all speed,
For Madam Sibilla is grown a great woman.

That is without question, for she is now a Queen.

Nay, she is greater then many Queens are: for though you may think she is
with ancient folks: yet I can assure you she is with child, you may imagine,
being now but morning she is new risen, yet it is thought that ere noone she
will be brought a bed. I never heard she was committed to prison: yet it is
looked every hour when she shall be delivered, and therefore Nurse I was sent
to you in all haste


Is she so near her time?

Yes: and yet it is thought she will notwithstanding hold out, because she is
groaning


Your reason?

Because you know the proverb: A grunting horse, and a groaning wife never
deceive their Master: say, will you make haste Nurse


What Is the best news abroad?

The best news abroad is, that the Queen is likely to keep at home: and is
it not strange, that half an hours being abroad should make a woman have a
months mind to keep in. But the worst news is, that if the King have a
young Prince, he is tide to kill it by oath: but if his majesty went drunk to
bed, and got a gyrle, she has leave to live till she dye, and dye when she can
live no longer


That covenant was the most unnatural
That ever father made: one lovely boy
Has felt the rigor of that strict decree,
And if this second likewise be a son,
There is no way but death.

I can tell you more news: the king has sent to the Oracle to know whether my
Lady be with child of a boy or a gyrle, and what their fortunes shall be: the
Lord that went, is looked for every day to return with his answer: it is so
Gossipt in the Queens chamber, I can tell you. O Nurse we have the brauest
king, if thou knew all


Why I pray thee?

Let his virtues speak for himself: he has taught his people to sow, to
plow, to reap corn, and to skorne Akehorns with their heels, to bake and to
brue: we that were wont to drink nothing but water, have the brauest liquor at
Court as passes. Besides, he has devised a strange engine, called a Bow and
Arrow, that a man may hold in hand, and kill a wild beast a great way off, and
never come in danger of his clutches. I Will tell you a strange thing Nurse, last
time the King went a hunting, he killed a bear, brought him home to be baked and
eaten: A Gentlewoman of the Court, that sed hungerly upon this pie, had such a
rumbling and roaring in her guts, that her Intrails were all in a mutiny, and
could not be appeased. No physic, would help her, what did the King but
caused an excellent Mastiffe to be knocked in the head, and dressed, gave it to
the gentlewoman, of which when she had well eaten, the flesh of the Mastiffe
worried the bear in her belly, and ever since her guts have left wambling. But
come, come, I was sent in have, the Queen must needs speak with you


You shall no more be lodged beneath the trees,
Nor chamber underneath the spreading Oaks:
Behold, I have devised you forms for tools,
To square out timber, and perform the Art
Of Architecture, yet unknown till now.
I Will draw you forms of Cities, Towns and Towers,
For use and strength, behold the models here.

Saturnes inventions are divine, not humane,
A God-like spirit has inspired his reign.

See here a second Art of Husbandry,
To till the earth, to plow, to sow, to plant,
Devised by Saturn: here is gold refined
From Grosser metals, silver, brass, and tin,
With other minerals, extract from earth.
I likewise have found out to make your brooks,
Rivers and (...) by practice Nauigable.
Behold a form to make your Craers and Barks
To pass huge streams in safety, dangerlesse.

Saturn is a God.

The last, not least, this use of Archery,
Thostringed, bow, and nimble-fethered-shaft:
By this you may command the flying foul,
And reach her from on high: this serves for war,
To strike and wound thy foe-man from a far.
What means this acclamation?

It Is thy people,
Deuinest Saturn furnished with these uses,
(More then the Gods have lent them) by thy means.
Proclaim to thee a lasting deity.
And would have Saturn honored as a God.

We Will study future profits for their use,
And in our fresh inventions prove divine.
But Gods are never touched with my suspires,
Passions and throbs: their God-like Issue thrive,
Whilst I vn-man-like must desttoy my babes.
Oh my strict oath to Tytan, which confounds
All my precedent honors: one sweet babe,
My youngest Ops has felt the bloody knife,
And perished in his swathing: And my Queen
Swells with another Infant in her womb,
Ready to taste like rigor. Is that Lord
Returned from Delphos yet?

He is.

Admit him: now what does the Oracle
Speak by the Delphian Priest.

Thus mighty Saturn.
After our Ceremonious Rites performed,
And Sacrifice ended with reverence,
A murmuring thunder hurried through the Temple.
When fell a pleasant shower, whose silver drops.
Filled all the Altar with a roseate dew.
In this amazement, thus the Delphian God,
Spoke from the Incenst Altar: Lord of Creete,
Thus say to Saturn: Sibill his fair wife,
Is great with a young Prince of Noble hopes,
That shall his fathers virtues much excel,
Ceaze on his Crown, and drive him down to Hell.

The Gods (if there be any boue our self)
Envy our greatness, and of one that seeks
To bear himself boue man, makes me more wretched
Then the most slavish bruit. What shall my Sibill
Bring me a son; that shall depose me then?
He shall not; I will cross the Deities,
I Will toombe th'usurper in his Infant blood,
I Will keep my oath; Prince Tytan shall succeed,
Maugre the envious Gods, the brat shall bleed.

Way for the dowager Queen,

How fares ourmother?
How is it with fair Sibilla, our dear Queen?

Your Queens delivered.

Of some female birth,
You Deities I beg: make me oh Heavens,
No more inhumane in the tragic slaughter
Of princely Infants, fill my decreed number
With Virgins, though in them I loose my name
And kingdom, either make her barren ever
Or else all generatiue power and appetite
Deprive me: lest my purple sin be styled
Many degrees boue murder. What Is her birth?

She Is the sad mother of a second son.

Be ever dumb, let everlasting silence
Tong-tye the world, all humane voice henceforth,
Turn to confused, and vndistinguisht found,
Of barking Hounds, hoarse bears, and howling wolves,
To stop all rumor that may sil the world
With Saturnes tyranies against his sons.

Ah, did but Saturn see you smiling babe,
He Would give it life, and break ten thousand oaths
Rather then suffer the sweet infant dye,
His very look would beg a quick reprieue
Even of the tyrant Tytan saw the uncle
With what a graceful look the Infant smiles,
He Would give it life, although he purchased it with loss of a great Kingdom.

Then spare the lad: I did offend too much
To kill the first, tell Sibill he shall live,
I Will be no more so monstrous in my rigor,
Nor with the blood of Princes buy my Crown.
No more their Cradles shall be made their Tombs,
Nor their soft swathes become their winding sheets:
How can my subjects think I Will spare their lives,
That to my own can be so tyranous?
Tell Sibill he shall live.

Vesta will be that joyful messenger.

Stay, let me first reward the Oracle,
It told me Sibill should produce a son,
That should his Fathers virtues much excel,
Cease on my Crown, and drive me down to Hell.
Must I then give an Infant-traitor life,
To sting me to the heart? the brat shall bleed.

Sweet son.

Dear sovereign.

He that next replies,
Mother or friend, by Saturnes fury dies.
Away, fetch me his heart, brimme me a bowl
With his warm blood. Tyran, my vow I Will keep,
Life newly wakend, shall as newly sleep.

Worse then a bruit, for bruits preserve their own
Worse then the worst of things is Saturn grown.

Command the child to death.

Tyrant, I will.
Tigers would save whom Saturn means to kill,

It is my son whom I command to death,
A Prince that may succed me in my Throne,
And to posterity revive my name.
Call Vesta back, and bid her save the Babe.

I Will do it my Lord.

Yet stay: the lad to kill
I save my oath, and keep my kingdom still.
Post after her and charge them on their lives,
Send me the babes blood in a cup of gold,
A present which I Will offer to the Gods.
Delay not, be it our mother, nay our wife,
Forfeits her own to save the Infants life.

I shall inform them so.

Is this a deity,
To be more wretched then the worst on earth,
To be deprived, that comfort of my issue,
Which even the basest of my land enjoy:
I Will henceforth for my rigor hate my self,
Pleasures despise, and joys abandon quite.
The purest blood that runs within my veins,
I Will dull with thick, and troubled melancholy,
I Will war with comfort, be at odds with solace,
And league with nothing but distemprature.
Henceforth my vnkem'd locks shall knot in curles,
Rasor nor any edge shall kiss my cheek,
Until my chin appear a wilderness,
And make we wild in knowledge to the world.
Perpetual care shall cabin in my heart,
My tyranny I Will punish in my self,
And save the Gods that labor --
Saturns disturbance to the world shall be,
That planet that infuseth melancholy.

Is not our mother Vesta yet returned,
That made herself the unwilling messenger,
To bring the king news of his newborn son?

Madam, not yet.

Mother, of all that ever mothers were
Most wretched. kiss thy sweet babe ere he dye,
That has life only lent to suffer death.
Sweet Lad, I would thy father saw thee smile,
Thy beauty and thy pretty Infancy,
Would molifie his heart were hewed from flint,
Or carved with Iron tools from the corsicke rock,
Thou laughest to think thou must be killed in jest.
Oh if thou needs must dye, I Will bethy murdresse,
And kill thee with my kisses (pretty knave)
And can thou laugh to see thy mother weep?
Or art thou in thy cheerful smiles so free
In scorn of thy rude fathers tyranny?

Madam, the King has slain his first borne son,
Whom had he seen alive, he would not have given
For ten such Kingdoms as he now enioyes,
The death of such a fair and hopeful child,
Is full as much as Tytan can demand.

He shall spare this sweet babe, I Will ransom thee
With my own life, the knife that pierces thee,
Will wound thy mothers side, and I shall feel
The least sharp stroke from his offensive steel.

The mother Queen's returned.
How looks she Nurse?
Let her not speak, but yet a little longer
My hopes hold in suspense: oh me most wretched,
I read my Lords harsh answer in her eye,
Her very looks tell me the boy must dye.
Say, must he? must he? kill me with that word,
Which will wound deeper then King Saturnes sword.

The boy must dye.

Oh!

Look to the Queen, she faints.

Oh let us not loose the mother with her infant,
The loss of one's too much.

Oh where is my child?
I Will hide thee in my bed, my bosom, breast,
The murderer shall not find my little son,
Thou shall not dye, be not afraid my boy.
Go tell the King he is mine as well as his,
And I Will not kill my part: one he has slain,
In which I had like interest: this I Will save,
And every second son keep from the grave.

Fobeare sir, for this place is priuiledg'd,
And only for free women.

Yet is the Kings command boue your decree,
And I must play th'intruder against my will.
The King upon your lives has charged you,
To see that infant Lad immediately
Receive his death, he stays for his warm blood
To offer to the Gods. To think him slain,
Sad partner of your sorrows I remain.

Madam you hear the king does threat our lives
Let Us kill him then.

Is he inexorable?
Why should not I prove as severe a mother
As he a cruel father: since the King
Has doomed him, I the Queen will do it my self,
Give me the fatal Engine of his wrath,
I Will play the horrid murdresse for this once.
I Will kiss thee ere I kill thee: for my life,
The Lad so smiles, I cannot hold the knife.

Then give him me, I am his Grandmother,
And I will kill him gently: this sad office
Belongs to me, as to the next of kin.

For heavens sake when you kill him, hurt him not.

Come little knave, prepare your naked throat,
I have not heart to give thee many wounds,
My kindness is to take thy life at once. (Now.)
Alack my pretty Grandchild, smil'st thou still?
I have lust to kiss, but have no heart to kill.

You may be careless of the kings command,
But it concerns me, and I love my life
More then I do a sucklings, give him me,
I Will make him sure, a sharp weapon lend,
I Will quickly bring the yongster to his end.
Alack my pretty knave, it were more then sin,
With a sharp knife to touch thy tender skin.
On Madame, he is so full of Angel grace
I cannot strike, he smiles so in my face.

I Will wink and strike, come once more reach him hither:
For dye he must, so Saturn has decreed,
Alas for a world I would not see him bleed.

Ne shall he do, but swear me secrecy,
The babe shall live, and we be dangerlesse,

O bless me with such happiness.

Attend me.
The king of Epires daughters, two bright maids,
Owe me for many favors the like love,
These I dare trust, to them I Will send this babe
To be brought up, but not as Saturns son.
Do but provide some trusty messenger,
My honor for his safety.

But by what means shall we delude the king,

A young Kids heart, swimming in reeking blood
We Will send the King, and with such forged grief,
And counterfeit sorrow shadow it,
That this imposture never shall be found.

Oh twice my mother you bestow upon me,
A double life thus to preserve my boy.

Give me the child, I Will find a messenger,
Shall bear him safe to Melliseus Court.

The blood and heart I Will presently provide,
To Appease the rage of Saturn.

First lets swear,
To keep this secret from King Saturnes ear.

We will, and if this plot pass vndiscouer'd
By like devise we will save all your sons.
About our taskes; you some choice friend to find,
I with my feigned tears the King to blind.


WHat cannot women's wits? they wonders can
When they intend to blind the eyes of man.
Oh lend me what old Homer wants, your eyes,
To see the event of what these Queens devise.
This past so current, that the third son borne,
Called Neptune, was by like devise preserved,
And sent to Athens, where he lived unknown,
And had in time command upon the seas.
Pluto the youngest was sent to Tartary,
Where he in process a strange City built
And called it Hell, his subjects for their rapine,
Their spoils and theft, are Devils termed abroad.
Thus melancholy Saturn has suruiuing
Three Noble sons in several confines placed
And yet himself thinks sonne-lesse: one fair daughter
Hight Juno is his sole delight on earth.
Think kind spectators seventeen summers past,
Till these be grown to years, and Jupiter
Found in a cave by the great Epyre King,
(where by his daughters he before was hid.)
Of him and of his fortunes we proceeed,
My iournie's long, and I my eyesight want.
Courteous spectators, left blind Homer stray,
Lend me your hands to guide me on your way.

After long war, and tedious differences,
Betwixt King Melliseus and our self,
What crave the Epyre Lords?

This King Lycaon,
Since truce and hostage has taken up these broiles,
And ended them in peaceful amity,
Since all the damadge by the Epyrians done,
Is on our part abundantly made good:
We come Lycaon to demand the like
Of thee and of thy Kingdom, and for proof,
That all our malice is extinct and dead,
We bring thy hostage back, demanding ours.

Receive him Lords, a Banquet instantly,
You shall this day brave Epyre feast with us,
And to your board your hostage shall be brought,
There to receive him freely, mean time sit,
And taste the royal welcomes of our Court.

Lycaon's just in keeping these conditions
So strictly with a reconciled foe.

But fair prince, tell me whence you are derived,
I never heard King Melliseus had
A Prince of your perfections?

This demand
Startles my blood, being borne I know not where,
Yet that I am of gentry at the least,
My Spirtt prompts me, and my noble thoughts
Give me approved warrant, being an infant
Two beauteous Ladies found me in a cave,
Where from their voluntary charity,
Bees fed me with their honey, for that cause
The two bright Ladies called me Jupiter,
And to their Father Melliseus brought me,
My Foster-father, who has trained my youth,
In feats of Arms, and military prowess,
And as an instance of his dearest love,
Has honored me with this late Embassy.

We are satisfied: Princes sit round and feast,
You are this day Lycaons welcom'st guest.

This meat distasts me, does Lycaon feast us
Like Caniballes? feed us with humane flesh?
Whence is this portent?

Feed Epyrians, eat,
Lycaon feasts you with no common meat.

But where is the Epyre Lord we left as hostage?

Behold him here, he is at the table with you,
This is the Epyres head, and these his limbs,
Thinks Melliseus that Lycaon can
(Descended of the valiant Tytanoys)
Bury his hatred, and intoombe his spleen
Without revenge? blood in these wars was shed,
And for that blood your hostage lost his head.

Bear wrong that list, and those can brook it best,
I was not borne to suffrance: thoughts mount hye,
A King has wronged me, and a King shall dye.

Treason, treason.

Down with the tyrant, and that hateful crew,
And in their murdrous breasts your blades imbrue.

Our guard.
Jupiter and the Epyriens beat off Lycaon and his followers.

Lycaon's fled, make good the palace gates,
And to the amazed City bear these limbs,
So basely by the tyrant massacred.
Happly his subjects by our words prepared
May shake their bondage off, and make this war,
The happy means to rid a tyrant thence.
Bear in your left hands these dis-membred limbs,
And in your right your swords, with which make way,
Courage brave Epyres, and a glorious day,

Lycaon's once more fled, we by the help
Of these his people, have confined him hence,
To whom belongs this Crown?

To Jupiter.

None shall protect our lives, but Jupiter.

A Jupiter, A Jupiter.

Nay we are far from such ambition, Lords,
Nor will we entertain such royalty.

Fair Prince, who^ heaven has sent by miracle,
To save us from the bloudyest tyrannies,
That ere were practiced by a mortal prince,
We tender thee our fortunes: oh vouchsafe
To be our Lord, our Governor, and King,
Since all thy people jointly have agreed,
None of that tyrants issue shall succed.

A Jupiter, A Jupiter.

We not refuse the bounty of the Heavens
Expressed in these your voices; we accept
Your patronage, and' against Lycaons tyrannyes
Henceforth protect you: but our conquest yet
Is all uncertain, second us dear subjects,
To assure our conquests: first we must provide
Our safty, ere attempt the helm to guide.

What mean these horrid and these shrill alarmes
That fright the peaceful Court with hostle cries?
Fear and amazement hurry through each chamber;
The Affrighted Ladies light the darkest rooms
With their bright beauties: whence (o whence ye Gods)
Are all you groans, cries, and inhumane sownds
Of blood and death: Licaon, where is he?
Why in this dire and sad astonishment
Appears not he to comfort my sad fears,
And cheer me in this dull distemprature?

The Iron barred doors, and the suspected vaults,
The Barricadoed gates, and every room,
That boasted of his strength, is forced to obey
To our free entrance: nothing can withstand
Our opposite fury. Come, let us ransacke further,
But stay, what strange dejected beauty's this
That on the sudden has surprised my heart,
And made me sick with passion?

Hence away,
When we command, who dares presume to stay?

Bright Lady.

You afright me with your steel.

These weapons Lady come to grace your beauty
And these my arms shall be your sanctuary
From all offensive danger: cheer your sorrow,
Let your bright beauty shoot out of this cloud,
To search my heart, as it has daz'd my eyes.
Are you a Queen enthroned above the Elements,
Made of divine composure, or of earth,
Which I can scarce believe?

I am my self.
Uncivil stranger, you are much to rude,
Into my private chamber to intrude:
Go call the King my father.

Are you their^
Lycaons daughter? (wonder without end,
That from a Fiend an Angel should descend.)
Oh Love, till now I never felt thy dart:
But now her painted eye has pierced my heart.
Fair, can you love?

To be alone I can.

Women, fair Queen, are nothing without men:
You are but ciphers, empty rooms to fill,
And till men's figures come, vncounted still.
Shall I sweet Lady, add unto your grace,
And but for number-sake supply that place.

You Are one too many, and of all the rest,
That bear men's figure, we can spare you best.
What are you sir?

We are Pelasge's King,
And these our subjects.

These did of late belong
To King Lycaon (Oh injurious wrong)

Oh suit your pity with your Angell-beauty,
And live Pelasge's Queen.

Give me a funeral garland to lament,
That best becomes my wretched discontent.

The sunshine of my smiles and iocond love,
Shall from your brows bright azure Elements,
Disperse all clouds: behold my crown is yours.
My sword, my conquest, I am of my self,
Nothing without your soft compassionate love?
For proof, ask what the heaven, earth, air, or sea
Can yield to men by power or orison,
And it is yours.

Sir, I shall prove your love.

Pray use me Lady.

You Will grant it me my Lord.

By all my honors, and by all the sweets
I hope for in your loves fruition,
Your wil's your own.

You Will not revoke your word?

Be It to inuest whom I did late degrade,
I Will do it for you, bright and diuinest maid.

This only freedom to your captive give
That I a Nun and professed maid may live.

More cruel then the tyrant that begat thee,
Had thou ask't love, gold, service, Empiry,
This sword had purchased for Calisto all.
Oh most unkind, in all this universe,
There Is but one jewel that I value hye,
And that (unkind) you will notlet me buy:
To live a maid, what is it? it is to live nothing:
It Is like a covetous man to hoord up treasure,
Barred from your own use, and from others pleasure.
Oh think fair creature, that you had a mother,
One that bore you, that you might bear another:
Be you as she was, of an Infant glad,
Since you from her, have all things that she had.
Should all affect the strict life you desire,
The world it self should end when we expire:
Posterity is all, heavens number fill,
Which by your help may be increased still,
What is it when you loose your mayden-head,
But make your beauty live when you be dead
In your fair issue?

Tush, it is all in vain,
Dian I am now a servant of thy train.

Her order is mere heresy, her sect
A schism, amongst maids not worthy your respect.
Men were got to get; you borne others to bear.
Wrong not the world so much: (nay sweet your ear)
This flower will wither, not being cropped in time,
Age is too late, then do not loose your prime.
Sport whilst you may, before your youth be past.
Loose not this mowld that may such fair ones cast,
Leave to the world your like for face and stature,
That the next age may praise your gifts of nature.
Calisto if you still grow thus precise,
In your strict vow, succeding beauty dies.

I claim your oath, all love with men adue,
Dianae's Cloister I will next pursue.

And there all beauty shall be kept in iaile,
Which with my sword: Ey with my life I Would bail:
What Is that Diana?

She is the daughter of an ancient King,
That swaid the Atticke scepter, who being tempted
By many suitors, first began this vow:
And leaving Court betook her to the forests.
Her beauteous train are virgins of best rank,
Daughters of Kings, and Princes, all devoted
To abandon men, and choose virginity.
All these being first to her strict orders sworn,
Acknowledge her their Queen and Empress.

By all my hopes Calistoe's love to gain,
I Would wish my self one of Dianae's train.

Concerning your state business.

Well remembered.
Posts of these news shall be to Epyre sent,
Of us, and of our new establishment.
Next for Calisto, (but of that no more.)
We must take firm possession of this state,
Our sword has won, Licaon lost so late.
Hail beauteous Dian, Queen of shades,
That dwells beneath these shadowie glades,
Mistress of all those beauteous maids,
That are by her allowed.
Virginity we all profess,
Abjure the worldly vain excess,
And will to Dyan yield no less
Then we to her have vowed.
The Shepherds, Satirs, Nimphs, and Fawnes,
For thee will trippe it ore the lawnes.
Come to the Forest let us go,
And trip it like the barren Do,
The Fawnes and Satirs still do so,
And freely thus they may do.
The Fairies dance, and Satirs sing,
And on the grass tread many a ring,
And to their caves their ven'son bring,
And we will do as they do,
The Shepherds, etc.
Our food is honey from the Bees,
And mellow fruits that drop from trees,
In chase we clime the high degrees
Of every steepie mountain,
And when the weary day is past,
We at the evening hie us fast,
Aad after this our field repast,
We drink the pleasant fountain.
The Shepherds, etc.

These sports, our Fawnes, our Satyrs and our selves;
Make (fair Calisto) for your entertain:
Pan the great God of Shepherds, and the Nymphs
Of Meades and Fountains, that inhabit here,
All give you welcome, with their Rural sports,
Glad to behold a Princess of your birth
A happy Citizen of these Meades and Groves.
These Satyrs are our neighbors, and live here,
With whom we have confirmed a friendly league
And dwell in peace. Here is no City-craft.
Here Is no Court-flattery simpleness and sooth
The harmless Chase, and strict Virginity
Is all our practice. You have read our orders,
And you have sworn to keep them,
Fair Calisto.
Speak, how esteem you them?

With reverence.
Great Queen, I am sequestered from the world,
Even in my soul hate man's society,
And all their lusts, suggestions, all Court-pleasures,
And City-curiosities are vain,
And with my finer temper ill agree,
That now have vowed sacred verginity.

We will not of your sorrows make recital
So lately suffered by the hand of chance:
We are from the world, and the blind Goddess Fortune
We dare to do her worst, as living here
Out of her reach: Us, she of force must spare,
They can loose nothing, that for nothing care.

Madam, devotion drew me to your service,
And I am now your handmaid.

Where Is Atlanta?

Madame.

Is there no princess in our train,
As yet vnmatch'd to be her Cabin-fellow,
And sleep by her?

Madam, we all are cuppled
And twined in love, and hardly is there any
That will be won to change her bedfellow.

You must be single till the next arrive,
She that is next admitted of our train,
Must be her bed-companion, so it is lotted.
Come Fawns, and Nymphs, and Satyrs, girt us rownd
Whilst we ascend our state, and here proclaim
A general hunting in Dianaes name.

There I strid too wide. That step was too large for one that professes the
straight order: what a pitiful coil shall I have to counterfeit this woman,
to lispe (forsooth) to simper and set my face like a sweet Gentlewomans made
out of ginger-bread? shall I venture or no? My face I fear not: for my beard
being in the nonage durst never yet look a Barber in the face. And for my
complexion, I have known as brown Lasses as my self have gone for current.
And for my stature, I am not yet of that Giant size, but I may pass for a bona
Roba, a Ronnceual a Virago, or a good manly Less. If they should put me to
spinne, or to sow, or any such Gentlewomanlike exercise, how should I excuse my
bringing up? Tush, the hazard is nothing, compared with the value of the
gain. Could I manadge this business with Art, I should come to a hundred
pretty sights in a year, as in the Summer when we come to flea our smocks,
etc. I hope Diana does not use to search her maids before she entertaines
them. But howsoeue

Be my loss certain, and my profit none,

It Is for Calisto's love, and I will on.


We Will chase the Stagge, and with our Beagles shrill,
The neighboring Forests with loud eccho's fill.

Is this a heaven terrestrial that contains
So many earthly Angels? (O amazement)
Diana with these beauties circled round,
Pal'd in with these bright pales, bears more state,
Then Gods have lent them by the power of fate.
I am destroyed,

Soft, what intruder's that?
Command her hither.

Hail diuinest Queen,
I come to do thee service.

A manly Less, a stout Virago,
Were all our train proportioned to thy size,
We need not fear men's subtle trecheries.
Thy birth and fortunes?

Madam, I derive
My birth from noble and high parentage:
Respect of your rare beauty, with my love
And zeal I still bear to a virgins life,
Have drawn me to your service.

Welcome Lady. Her largeness pleases me, if she have courage proportioned
with her limbs, she shall be Champion to all our wronged Ladies. You Atlanta,
present her oath


Madam you must be true
To bright Diana and her Virgin crew.

To bright Diana and her train I Will stand.

What can you do?

More then the best here can.

You shall vow chastity:

That Is more then I can promise (well proceed

You never shall with hated man atone,
But ly with woman or else ly alone.

Make my oath strong, my protestation deep,
For this I vow by all the Gods to keep.

With Ladies you shall only sport and play,
And in their fellowship spend night and day.

I shall.

Consort with them at board and bed,
And swear no man shall have your maidenhead.

By all the powers both earthly and divine,
If ere I loos't, a woman shall have mine.

Now your're ours, you are welcome, kiss our hand,
You promise well, we like you, and will grace you.
And if with our election yours agree.
Calisto here your bedfellow shall be.

You Gods your will eternize me to your choice,
Madam I seal both with my soul and voice

Then hand each other and acquaint your self
And now let us proceed in the pursuit,
Of our determined pastimes, dedicate
To the entertainment of these beuteous maids.
Satyrs and fawnes ring out your pleasing quire,
This done, our Bugles shall to heaven aspire.

Follow, pursue, the Stag has took the Mountain,
Come let us climb the steep clifts after him,
Let through the air your nimble iauelinges sing.
And our free spoils home with the evening bring.

Follow, follow, follow.

The nimble Ladies have out-stript us quite,
Unless we speed we shall not see him fall.
We are too slow in pursuit of our game;
Let Us after tho; since they outstrip our eyes,
Run by their noates, that from their Bugles rise.

Have gentle Lady, we shall loose our train,
And miss Dianai's pastime in the chase,
Hie then to stain our Iauelings gilded points
In blood of yon swift Stag, so hot pursu'de.
Will you keep pace with me?

I am tired already.
Nor have I yet been to these pastimes breathed,
Sweet shall we here repose our selves a little?

And loose the honor to be first at fall?

Fear not, you shall come time enough to fall.
Either you must be so unkind to me,
As leave me to these deserts solitary,
Or stay till I have rest, for I am breathles
And cannot hold it out, behold a place
Remote, an Arbor seated naturally,
Trimmed by the hand of nature for a bower,
Skreen'd by the shadowy leaves from the Suns eye.
Sweet will you sit, or on the verdure lie?

Rather then leave you, I will loose the sport

I Will find you pastime, fear not, Oh my Angel,
Whether will thou transport me, grant me measure.
Of joy, be free, I surfeit on this pleasure.

Come shal's lie down a little.

South I will.
I thirst in seas and cannot quaffe my fill,
Behold before me a rich Table spread.
And yet poor I am forced to starve for bread:
We be alone, the Ladies far in chase,
And may I dye an Eunuch by my vow,
If bright Calisto you escape me now.
Sweet bedfellow your hand, what have I felt,
Unless blancht snow, of substance not to melt?

You gripe too hard.

Good sooth I shall not rest
Until my head be pillowed on thy breast.

Lean on me then.

So shall I wrong mine eyes,
To leave your face to look upon the skies.
O how I love the, come let us kiss and play.

How?

So a woman with a woman may.

I do not like this kissing.

Sweet sit still,
Lend me thy lips, that I may taste my fill.

You kiss too wantonly.

Thy bosom lend^
And by thy soft paps let my hand descend.

Nay fie what mean you?

Pre'the let me toy,
I would the Gods would shape thee to a boy,
Or me into a man.

A man, how then?

My sweet lie still, for we are far from men,
Lie down again. Your foot I often have praised,
Ey and your leg: (nay let your skirt be raised)
I Will measure for the wager of a fall,
Who has the greatest great, or smallest small.

You are too wanton, and your hand too free.

You need not blush to let a woman see.

My bareness I have hid from sight of skies,
Therefore may bar it any Ladies eyes.

Me thinks you should be fat, pray let me feel,

Oh God you tickle me.

Lend me your hand,
And freely taste me, note how I will stand,
I am not ticklish.

Lord how you woo,

We maids may wish much, but can nothing do.

I am weary of this toying.

Oh but I
In this Elisium could both live and dye.
I can forbear no longer, though my rape
Be punished with my head, she shall not escape.
Say sweet I were a man.

Thus would I rise,
And fill the Dales and mountains with my cries.
A man! (Oh heaven) to gain Elisiums bliss,
I Would not be said that I a man should kiss.
Come, lets go wound the Stagge.

Stay ere you go,
Here stands one ready that must strike a do.
And thou art she, I am Pelagius King,
That thus have singled thee, mine thou shall be.

Gods, Angels, men, help all a maid to free.

Maugre them all thou art mine.

To do me right,
Help fingers, feet, nails, teeth, and all to fight.

Not they, nor all Dianae's Angell-traine,
Were they in sight, this prize away should gain.


Young Jupiter does force this beauteous maid,
And after would have made her his bright Queen.
But discontent she in the Forest staid,
Loath of Diana's virgins to be seen.
Often did she write, often send, but all in vain,
She never will return to Court again.
Eight moons are filled and wain'd when she grows great
And young Jove's issue in her womb does spring.
This day Diana does her Nimphs entreat,
Unto a solemn bathing, where they bring
Deflowered Calisto, note how she would hide
That which time found, and great Diana spide.
Her crime thus found, she is banished from their crew,
And in a cave she child's a valiant son,
Called Archas, who does noble deeds pursue,
And by Jove's gift Pelagia's seat has won,
Which after by his worth, and glorious fame,
He has trans-stil'd Archadia by his name.
But we return to Tytan, who by spies
Has learned, that Saturn has kept sons alive.
He now assembles all his strange allies,
And for the crown of Creet intends to strive.
Of their success, and fortunes we proceed,
Where Tytans sons by youthful Jove must bleed.

Now are we strong, our giant Issue grown,
Our sons in several kingdoms we have planted,
From whence they have derived us brave supplies,
From Sicily, and from the Aegean sea,
That of our son Aegeon bears the name.
We have assembled infinites of men,
To avenge us on proud Saturnes perjury.

What I have said to Tytan, I Will make good,
It Is rumor'd Melliseus Foster-child
He that expulst me from Pelagia's Crown.
And in my high tribunal sits enthroned,
Is Saturnes son, and styled Jupiter,
(Besides my daughter by his lust deflowred)
On us the poor distressed Tytanoyes
He has committed many outrages.

All which we will punish on K. Saturnes head,
I that have made the Aegean confines shake,
And with my powerful voice affrighted Heaven:
From whose enraged eyes the darkened skies
Have borrowed luster, and Promethian fire,
Will fright from Creet the proud Saturnian troop,
And thousand hack't and mangled soldiers bring
To intombe the glories of the Cretan King.

That must be left to great Enceladus,
The pride and glory of the Tytans host.
I that have curbed the billows with a frown,
And with a smile have made the Ocean calm,
Spurned down huge mountains with my armed foot,
And with my shoulders lift the valleys high,
Will in the wrinkles of my stormy brow,
Bury the glories of the Cretan King,
And on his slaughtered bulk brain all his sons.

And what shall I do then?

Do thou stand still,
Whilst I the foes of Tytan pash and kill.
Am I not eldest from great Tytans loins,
The Saturnists hereditarie scurdge?
Leave all these deeds of horror to my hand,
I like a Trophy ore their spoils will stand.

Why breath we then?

Come arm your sinowy limbs,
With rage and fury fright pale pity hence,
And drown him in the sweat your bodies still.
With hostile industry toss flaming brands
About your fleecy locks, to threat their Cities
With death and desolation, let your steel
Glistring against the sun, daze their bright eyes,
That with the dread of our astonishment
They may be sunk in Lethe, and their grave
May be the dark vawlt, called obliuious Cave,

Are our Ambassadors to Saturn gone,
To let him know whence this our war proceeds?

Your message has by this startled th'vsurper,

Set on them, waste their confines as we march,
And let them taste the rage of sword and fire,
Th'Alarm's given, and has by this arrived
Even at the walls of Creet, the cittadell
Where the Cathedral Saturn is enthroned.

Warlicke Aegeon and Enceladus,
Noble Lycaon lend us your assistance
To forradge as we march, plant desolation
Through all this fertile soil, be this your cry;
Reuendge on Saturn for his perjury.

None speak, let no harsh voice presume to iarr
In our distressed care, I am all sad,
All horrout and afrightment, since the slaughter
And tragic murder of my first borne Ops,
Continued in the vnnat urall massacre
Of three young Princes: not a day has left me
Without distaste, no night but double darkened
With terror and confused melancholy:
No hour but has had care and discontent
Proportioned to his minutes not an instant:
Without remorse and anguish. Oh you crowns,
Why are you made, and mettald out of cares?
I am ouergrowne with sorrow, circumuailed
With multiplicity of distempratures,
And Saturn is a King of nothing else,
But woes, vexations, sorrows, and laments.
To add to these the threatenings of red war,
As if the murder of my Princely babes
Were not enough to plague an usurpation,
But they must add the rage of sword and fire,
To affright my people: these are miseries,
Able to be comprised in no dimension.

My father shall not macerate himself,
I Will dare to interrupt his passions,
Although I buy it dearly with his hate.
My Lord you are a King of a great people,
Your power sufficient to repulse a foe
Greater then Tytan. Though my brothers birthes
Be crowned in blood, yet am I still reserved
To be the hopeful comfort of your age.

My dearest Juno, beautiful remainder
Of Saturnes royal issue, but for thee
I had ere this with these my fingers torn
A grave out of the rocks, to have entombed
The wretched carcass of a caitife King:
And I will live, be it but to make thee Queen
Of all the triumphs and the spoils I win.
Speak, what is the project of their invasion?

That the King of Creet,
Has not (according to his vows and oaths)
Slain his male issue.

Have I not their bloods
Already quaft to angry Nemesis?
Have not these ruthlesse and remorslesse eyes,
(Vn-father-like) beheld their panting hearts
Swimming in bowls of blood? Am I not sonne-lesse?
Nay child-lesse too, save Juno whom I love:
And dare they then? Come, our continued sorrow
Shall into scarlet indignation turn,
And my sons blood shall crown their guilty heads
With purple vengeance. Valiant Lords, set on,
And meet them to their last destruction.

March forward.

Stay, because we will ground our wars
On justice: Fair Sibilla, on thy life,
I charge thee tell me, and dissemble not,
By all the hopes in Saturn thou have stored,
Our nuptial pleasures, and affairs of love,
As thou esteem'st our grace, or vengeance fear,
Resolve me truly. Have thou sons alive?
These tears, and that deiection on thy knee,
Accompanied with dumbness, argue guilt.
Arise and speak.

Let Saturn know, I am a Woman then,
And more, I am a Mother: would you have me
A monster, to exceed in cruelty
The sauadgest of Sauadges? Bears, Tigers, Wolves,
All feed their young: would Saturn have his Queen
More fierce then these? Think you Sibilla dare
Murder her young, whom cruel beasts would spare?
Let me be held a mother, not a murdresse:
For Saturn, thou have living three brave sonncs.
But where? rather then to reveal to thee,
That thou may send, their guiltless blood to spill,
Here cease my life, for them thou shall not kill.

Amazement, war, the threatening Oracle,
All muster strange perplexions 'bout my brain,
And rob me of the true ability
Of my direct conceiuements. Doubt, and war.
Tytans invasion, and my jealousy;
Make me unfit for answer.

Royal Saturn,
'Twas pity in the Queen so to preserve them.
Your strictness slew them, they are dead in you,
And in the pity of your Queen survive.

Divine assistance plunge me from these troubles,
Mortality here fails me, I am wrapped
In millions of confusions.

Arm, great Saturn,
Thy Cities burn: a general massacre
Threatens thy people. The big Tytanoys
Plow up thy Land with their inuasiue steel.
A huge vn-numbred army is at hand,
To set upon thy Camp.

All my disturbances
Convert to rage, and make my spleen as high
As is their toplesse fury, to encounter
With equal force and vengeance. Go Sibilla,
Convey my beauteous Juno to the place
Of our best strength, whilst we contend in Arms
For this rich Cretan wreath: the battle done,
And they confined, we will treat of these affairs.
Perhaps our love may with this breach dispense,,
But first to Arms, to beat th'intruders hence.

Enter Tytan, Lycaon, Enceladus, Egeon.

Saturn gives back, and 'gins to leave the field.

Pursue him then unto that place of strength,
Which the proud Cretans hold impregnable.

This Gigomantichia be eternis'd
For our affright and terror: If they fly,
Toss rockkes, and tops of Mountains after them
To stumble them, or else entombe them quick.

They have already got into the town,
And barricadoed' against us their Iron gates.
What means then shall we find to startle them?

What, but to spurn down their offenciue mures?
To shake in two their Adamantine gates,
Their marble columns by the ground sylls tear,
And kick their ruined walls as high as heaven?

Pursue them to their gates, and 'bout their City
Plant a strong siege. Now Saturn all my suffrances
Shall on thy head fall heavy, we will not spare
Old man or babe. The Tytans all things dare.

The heavens have for our barbarous cruelty
Done in the murder of our first borne Ops,
Powered on our head this vengeance. Where, oh where
Shall we find rcscue?

Patience royal Saturn.

Bid Woolues be mild, and Tigers pitiful,
Command the Libian Lions abstinence,
Teach me to mollify the Corsicke rock,
Or make the Mount Chymera passable.
What Monarch wrapped in my confusions,
Can tell what patience means?

Oh royal Father!

Oh either teach me rescue from these troubles,
Or bid me everlastingly, ey ever
Sink in despair and horror,

Oh my Lord,
You have from your own loins issue reserved, that may redeem all these
calamities

Issue from us?

From Saturn and Sybilla.
That royal Prince King of Pelagia,
And famous Melliseus foster-child,
Whom all the world styles by the noble name
Of Jupiter, he is King Saturnes son.

Thou have Sybilla kept that son alive
That only can redeem me from this thraldom,
Oh how shall we acquaint young Jupiter,
With this his fathers hard success in Arms.

My care did ever these events foresee.
And I have sent to your suruiuing son,
To come unto your rescue; Then great Saturn,
In your wives pity seem to applaude the heavens,
That make me their relentfull minister,
In the repairing of your down cast-state.

If royal Jupiter be Saturnes son,
We shall be either rescued or revenged,
And now I shall not dread those Tytanois,
That threaten fire and steel.

Trust your Sybilla.

Thou art my anchor, and the only column
That supports Saturnes glory, Oh my Jupiter,
On thee the basis of my hopes I erect,
And in thy life King Saturnes fame suruiues.
Are messengers dispatched to signify
My son of our distress.

As far as Epire.
Where as we understand, Jove now remains,

Then Tytan, and the proud Enceladus,
Hyperion and Aegeon with the rest,
Of all the earth-bread race we wey you not,
Threaten your worst, let all your eyes spark fire.
Your flaming nosthrils like Auernus smoke,
Your tongues speak thunder, and your armed hands
Fling Trisulke lightning: Be you Gods above,
Or come you with infernal hatred armed,
We dread you not: we have a son suruiues,
Shall calm your tempests: beauteous Juno comfort,
And cheer Sybilla, if he undertake
Our rescue, we from danger are secure,
We in his valor all our lives assure.

Fair Prince, for less by your deserts and honor.
You cannot be: your fortunes and your birth
Are both unknown to me: my two fair daughters
As a swathed infant brought you to my Court,
But whence, or of what parents you proceed
I am merely ignorant.

Then am I nothing,
And till I know whence my descent has been,
Or from what house derived, I am but air,
And no essential substance of a man.

Help, help, for heaven sake help, I am pursued,
And by my son, that seems to threate my life,

Stay that bold lad.

What Is he? false Jupiter?

Calisto, or I much deceive my self.

Oh thou most false, most treacherous, and unkind,
Behold Calisto by her son pursued,
Indeed thy son: this little sauadge youth
Has liued' among Tigers, Lions, Wolves, and Bears,
And since his birth partakes their cruelty.
Archas his name: since I Diana left,
And from her chaste train was diuorc't, this youth
I childed in a cave remote and silent.
His nurture was amongst the sauadges.
This day I by misfortune moved his spleen,
And he pursued me with revenge and fury,
And had I not forsook the shades and forests,
And fled for rescue to these walled Towns,
He had slain me in his fury: save me then,
Let not the son the mother sacrifice
Before the fathers eye.

Archas my son, my young son Archas, Jupiters first borne
Oh let me hug thee, and a thousand times
Embrace thee in mine arms. Lycaons grandchild
Calisto's son; Oh will you beauteous Lady
Forsake the forests and yet live with us?

No thou false man, for thy periurious lusts
I have abandoned human subtelties:
There take thy son, and use him like a Prince,
Being son unto a Princess. Teach him Arts,
And honored arms. For me: I have abiur'd
All peopled Cities, and betook my self
To solitary desetts. Jove adue.
Thou proving false, no mortal can be ttue

Since she will needs be gone, be pleased then,
Weari'd with beasts, I long to live amongst men.

Yet stay Calisto, why will thou out-runne
Thy Jupiter? She gone, welcome my son.
My dear son Archas, whom if fortune smile,
I will create Lord of a greater style.

Save you sir, is your name K. Melliseus

We are Melliseus, and the Epire King,

Then this letter is to you, but is there not one in your
Court, called (let me see) have you here never a gibbit-maker?

Sir, here is one called Jupiter.

Ey Jupiter, that is he that I would speak with. Here Is another letter to you,
but ere you read it, pray let me ask you one question


What Is that?

Whether you, be a wise child or no?

Your reason?

Because I would know whether you know your own father, but if you do not,
hoping you are in good health, as your father scarce was, at the making hereof,
These are to certify you


News of a father! never could such tidings
Have glutted me with gladness.

For mine own part, though I know not what belongs to the getting of cbildren,
yet I know how to father a child, and because I would be loath to have this
Parish troubled with you, I bring you news where you were borne. I was the man
that laid you at this man's door, and if you will not go home quietly, you shall
be sent from Constable to Constable, till you come to the place where you were
begot. Read further and tell me more


Is Jupiter then mighty Saturns son?

Am I the son of Saturn, King of Creet?
My father baffled by the Tytanoys?
May all my toward hopes die in my birth,
Nor let me ever worthily inherit
The name of royalty, if by my valor
I prove me not descended royally,

I was the man that took pains with you, 'twas I that brought you in the
hand-basket


Should I have wished a father through the world,
It had been Saturn, or a royal mother,
It had been fair Sybilla, Queen of Creet.
Great Epires King, peruse these tragic lines,
And in thy wonted bounty grant supplies
To free my noble father.

Jupiter, as I am Melliseus Epyres King,
Thou shall have free assistance.

Come then, Arm,
Assemble all the powers that we can leauy.
Archas, we make thee of Pelagia King,
As King Lycaons Gran-childe, and the son
Of fair Calisto. Let that Clime henceforth
Be called Arcadia, and usurp thy name.
Go then and press th'Arcadians to the rescue
Of royal Saturn, this great King and I
Will lead th'Epyrians. Fail me not to meet,
To redeem Saturn, and to rescue Creet.

I have no mind to this buffeting: I Will walk after fair and softly, in hope
that all the buffeting may be done before I come. Whether had I better go home
by land, or by sea? If I go by land, and mis-carry, then I go the way of all
flesh. If I go by sea and mis-carry, then I go the way of all fish: I am not
yet resolved. But howsoever, I have done my message so cleanly, that they
cannot say, the messenger is be-reau'd of any thing that belongs to his message


Down treacherous Lord, and be our foot-pace now
To ascend our high tribunal. Where Is that Godhead
With which the people Auee'd thee to heaven?

It Is sunk into the deep Abysme of hell.
Tear from his head the golden wreath of Creet.
Tread on his captive bulk, and with thy weight
Great Tytan, sink him to the infernal shades,
So low, that with his trunk, his memory
May be extinct in Lethe.

More then tyrannous
To triumph over the weak, and to oppress
The low dejected. Let your cruelty
Be the sad period of my wretchedness:
Only preserve my lovely Juno's life,
And give Sibilla freedom,

By these Gods.
We neither fear nor value, but contend
To equal in our actions: both shall dye.
There shall no proud Saturnian live, to brave
The meanest of the high-borne Tytanoyes.

Raze from the earth their hateful memory,
And let the blood of Tytan sway the earth.
Speak, are the ports and confines strongly armed
Against all invasions?

Who dares damadge us?
Let all the passages be open left,
Unguarded let our ports and havens lie.
All danger we despise, mischance or dread
We hold in base contempt.

Conquest is ours.
Maugre divine, or base terrestrial powers.

Arm royal Titan, Arm Enceladus,
A pale of brandisht steel has girt thy land.
From the earths Cauernes break infernal fires,
To make thy villages and hamlets burn.
Tempestuous ruin in the shape of war
Clouds all thy populous kingdom, At my heels
Confusion dogs me, and the voice of death
Still thunders in mine ears.

Is It possible? Bear Saturn first to prison
We Will after parley them.

Come Angels armed, or Diuels'clad in flames,
Our fury shall repel them. Come they girt
With power celestial, or infernal rage,
We Will stand their fierce opposure. Royal Titan,
Aegeon and Hyperion, d'on your arms,
Bravely advance your strong orbicular shields,
And in your right hands brandish your bright steel.
Drown your affrightments in the amazed sounds
Of martial thunder (Diapason'd deep)
We Will stand them, be they Gods; (if men,) expel
Their strengthles force, and stownd them low as hell,

Whence are you that intrude upon our confines?
Or what portend you in these hostile sounds
Of clamorous war?

Tytans destruction,
With all the ruin of his giant race.

By what pretense or claim?

In right of Saturn:
Whom against law the Tytans have deposed.

What art thou speak it?

I am Jupiter.
King Saturnes son, immediate heir to Creet.

There pause, that word disturbs all thy claim,
And proves that Tytan seats him in his own.

If Saturn (as thou say) has sons alive,
His oath is broken, and we are justly seized
Of Creta's Crown by his late forfeiture.

Thy tongue has spoke thy own destruction,
Since whom K. Saturn spared, our swords must kill,
And he is come to offer up that life
Which has so long been forfeit.

Tyrants no:
The heavens preserved me for a further use,
To plague your Offspring that afflict the earth,
And with your threatenings spurn against the Gods.

Now shall thou pay me for Calisto's wrong,
Exiling me, and for dishonouring her.

Are you there Caniball? Man-eating woolfe?
Lycaon, thou art much beholding to me,
I woman'd first Calisto, and made thee
A grandfather. Do not thank me for it?
See here is the Boy, this is Archadia's King.
No more Pelagia now, since thy exile.

To thee that stil'st thy self K. Saturnes son:
Know thou wast doomed before thy birth to dye,
Thy claim disabled, and in saving thee
Thy father has made forfeit of his Crown.

Know Tytan I was borne free, as my father,
Nor had he power to take that life away
That the Gods freely gave me. Tyrants see,
Here is that life you by Indenture claim,
Seize it, and take it: but before I fall,
Death and destruction shall confound you all.

Destruction is our vassaile, and attends
Upon the threatening of our stormy brows.
We trifle hours. Arm all your fronts with horror,
Your hearts with fury, and your hands with death.
Thunder meet thunder, tempests storms defy,
Saturn and all his issue this day dye.


Where Is now the high and proud Enceladus,
To stop the fury of the Adverse foe,
Or stay the base flight of our dastard troops?
Tytan is slain, Hyperion strowes the earth,
And thousands by the hand of Jupiter
Are sent into black darkness. All that stand
Sink in the weight of his high Iouiall hand.
To shun whose rage, Aegeon thou must fly.
Creet with our hoped conquests all adieu.
We must propose new quests, since Saturnes son
Has by his puissance all our camp ore-runne.

None stir, be all your arms cramp't and diseased
Your swords vn-vsefull, may your steely glaues
Command your hands, and not your sinews them,
Till I by single valor have subdued
This murderer of my father.

Here he stands,
That must for death have honor at thy hands.
None interrupt us, singly we will contend,
And'twixt us two give these rude factions end.

Two royal armies then on both sides stand,
To view this strange and dreadful Monomachy.
Thy fall, Saturnian, adds to my renown:
For by thy death I gain the Cretan Crown.

Death is thy due, I find it in thy stars,
Whilst our high name gives period to these wars.

Never was Saturn deifi'd till now,
Nor found that perfectness the Gods enjoy.
Heaven can assure no greater happiness
Then I attain in sight of Jupiter,

Oh my dear son, borne with my painful throws,
And with the hazard of my life preserved,
How well have thou acquitted all my travels,
In this thy last and famous victory?

This tells me, that you royal King of Creet
My father is: and that renowned Queen
My mother: all which proves by circumstance,
That it is but duty, that by me's atchieu'd.
Only you beauteous Lady stands apart,
I know not how to style.

It Is Juno, and thy sister.

Oh my stars!
You seek to make immortal, Jupiter.

Juno is only happy in the fortunes,
Of her renowned brother.

Royal Saturn,
If ever I deserved well as a victor,
Or if my warlike deeds, yet bleeding new,
And perfect both in eyes and memory
May plead for me: Oh if I may obtain,
As one that merits, or entreat of you,
As one that owes; being titled now your son,
Let me espouse fair Juno: and bright Lady
Let me exchange the name of sister with you
And style you by a nearer name of wife.
Oh be my spouse fair Juno:

It Is a name,
I prise'boue sister, if these grace the same.

What is it I Will deny my Jupiter?
She is thy own. I Will royalise thy nuptials
With all the solemn triumphs Creet can yield.

Epyre shall add to these solemnities,
And with a bounteous hand support these triumphs

So all Archadia shall.

Then to our Palace
Pass on in state, let all raryeties
Shower down from heaven a lardges, that these bridals may exceed mortal
pomp. March, March, and leave me
To contemplate these joys, and to devise,
How with best state this night to solemnize.


Saturn at length is happy by his son,
Whose matchless and vnriual'd dignities
Are without peer on earth, Oh joy, joy? corsiue
Worse then the throws of childbirth, or the tortures
Of black Cimmerian darkness. Saturn, now
Bethink thee of the Delphiun Oracle:
He shall his fathers virtue first excel,
Seize Creet, and after drive him down to hell.
The first is past: my virtues are exceeded:
The last I will prevent, by force or treason.
I Will work his ruin 'ere he grow too high.
His stars have cast it, and the boy shall die.
More sons I have, more crowns I cannot win,
The Gods say he must die, and it is no sin.


O blind ambition and desire of rain,
What horri'd mischief wilt not thou devise?
The appetite of rule, and thirst of reign
Besots the foolish, and corrupts the wise.
Behold a King suspicious of his son,
Pursues his innocent life, and without cause.
Oh blind ambition what have thou not done
Against religion, zeal and natures laws?
But men are borne their own fates to pursue,
Gods will be Gods, and Saturn finds it true.
Saturn against his son his force extended,
And would have slain him by his tyrannous hand,
Whilst Jupiter alone his life defended.
But when no prayers his fury could withstand,
He used his force, his father drove from Creet,
And as the Oracle before had told
Usurped the Crown, the Lords kneel at his feet,
And Saturnes fortunes are to exile sold.
But leaving him, of Danae that bright less,
How amorous Jove first wrought her to his power,
How she was closed in a fort of brass,
And how he skal'd it in a golden shower,
Of these we next must speak, curtious and wise,
Help with your hands, for Homer wants his eyes.

Our unkind father double tyrannous,
To prosecute the virtues of his son,
Has sought his own Fate, and by his ingratitude
Left to our head The Imperial wreath of Creet:
Which gladly we receive. Neptune from Athens,
And Pluto from the lower Tartarie
Both welcome to the Cretan Jupiter.
Those Stars that governed our nativity,
And stripped our fortunes from the hand of death,
Shall guard us and maintain us.

Noble Saturn,
Famous in all things, and degenerate only,
In that inhumaine practise'gainst his sons,
Is fled us, whom we came to visit freely,
And filial duties to express. Great Athens
The nurse and fostresse os my infancy,
I have instructed in the sea-mans craft.
And taught them truly how to sail by stars
Besides the unruly Iennet I have tamed
And trained him to the saddle for my practice.
The horse to me is soly consecrate.

I from the bounds of lower Tartarie
Have trauel'd to the fertile plains of Creet.
Nor am I less in luster of my same,
Then Neptune, or renowned Jupiter.
Those barren Kingdoms I have richt with spoils,
And not a people trafficks in those worlds,
For wealth or treasure, but we custom them,
And they enrich our coffers: our armed guards
Prey on their Camels, and their laden Mules,
And Pluto's through the world renowned and feared.
And since we have mist of Saturn lately fled,
It glads me yet, I freely may survey
The honors of my brother Jupiter.

And beauteous Juno, Empress of all hearts
Whom Neptune thus embraces.

So does Pluto.

All divine honors crown the royal temples
Of my two famous brothers.

King Melliseus welcome them to Creet.
Archas do you the like.

Princes your hands.

You are my royal uncles.

Nay hand him Lords, he is your kinsman too.
Archas my son, of fair Calisto borne,
I hope fair Juno it offends not you,
It was before your time.

She was a strumpet.

She shall be a Star.
And all the Qeenes and beauteous maids on earth
That are renowned for high perfections,
We Will woe and win, we were borne to sway and rule.
Nor shall the name of wife be curb to us.
Or snaffle in our pleasures. Beauteous Io,
And fair Europa, have by out transhapes,
And guiles of love already been deflour'd,
Nor lives she that is worthy our desires,
But we can charm with court-ship. Royal brothers
what news of note is rumor'd in those Realms,
Through which you made your travels?

Have you heard
Of great Acrisius, the brave Arges King,
And of his daughter Danae.

His renown,
And her fair beauty often has peirc't our ears.
Nor can we be at peace, till we behold
That face fame has so blazd on. What of her?

Of her enclosure in the Darreine Tower,
Guirt with a triple Mure of shining brass.
Have you not heard?

But we desire it highly.
What marble wall, or Adamantine gate,
What Fort of steel, or Castle forged from brass,
Love cannot scale? or beauty not break through?
Discourse the novel Neptune.

Thus it was.
The Queen of Arges going great, the King
Sends (as the custom is) to th'Oracle,
To know what fortunes shall betide the babe.
Answer's returned by Phoebus and his Priests:
The Queen shall child a daughter beautiful,
Who when she grows to years, shall then bring forth
A valiant Princely boy, yet such a one
That shall the King his grandsire turn to stone.
Danae is borne, and as she grows to ripeness,
So grew her fathers fear: and to prevent
His ominous fate pronounced by th'Otacle,
He mowlds this brazen Tower, impregnable
Both for the seat and guard: yet beautiful
As is the gorgeous palace of the Sun.

Ill does Acrisius to contend and war
Against th'unchanging Fates, I Will scale that Towers:
Or rain down millions in a golden shower.
I long to be the father of that babe,
Begot on Danae, that shall prove so brave,
And turn the dotard to his marble grave.
It Is cast already: Fate be thou my guide,
Whilst for this amorous journey I provide.

But is the Lady there immured, and closed
From all society and sight of man?

So full of jealous fears is King Acrisius,
That, save himself, no man must near the Fort.
Only a guard of Beldams past their lusts,
Insensible of love, or amorous pity,
Partly by bribes hired, partly curbed with threats,
Are guard unto this bright imprisoned dame.

Too pitiless, and too obdur's the King,
To cloister beauty from the sight of man.
But this concerns not us.

That fort I Will scale,
Though in attempting it be death to fail.
Brothers and Princes, all our Courts rarities
Lie open to your royal'st entertainment
Yet pardon me, since vrgence calls me hence
To an enforced absence. Nay Queen Juno
You must be pleased, the cause imports us highly.
Feast with these Princes till our free return.
Attendance Lords, we must descend in gold.
Or you imprisoned beauty never behold.

Here Is a coil to keep fire and tow a sunder. I wonder the King should shut
his daughter up so close: for any thing I see, she has no mind to a man


Content your self, you speak according to your age and appetite. We that are
full fed may praise fast. We that in our heat of youth have drunk our
bellyfuls, may deride those that in the heat of their bloods are athirst. I
measure her by what I was, not by what I am. Appetite to love never fails an
old woman, till cracking of nuts leaves her. When Danae has no more teeth in
her head then you and I, I Will trust a man in her company, and scarce then: for
if we examine our selves, we have even at these years, qualmes, and rhumes,
and devises comes over our stomakes, when we but look on a proper man


That Is no question, I know it by my self, and whilst I stand centinell, I Will
watch her for that I warrant her


And have we not reason, considering the penalty?


If any stand sentinel in her quarters, we shall keep quarter here no longer.
If the Princess miscarry we shall make gunpowder, and they say an old woman is
better for that then Saltpeter


The larme bell rings,
It should be K. Acrisius by the sound of the clapper.

Then clap close to the gate and let him in.


Ladies well done: I like this providence
And careful watch ore Danae: let me find you
Faithless, you dye, be faithful and you live
Eternized in our love. Go call her hither,
Be that your charge: the rest keep watchful eye
On your percullist entrance, which forbids
All men, save us, free passage to this place.
See! Danae is descended. Fair daughter
How do you brook this palace?

Like a prison:
What is it else? you give me golden fetters,
As if their value could my bondage lessen.

The architectur's sumptuous, and the building
Of cost inualuable, so rich a structure
For beauty, or for state, the world affoords not.
Is not thy attendance princely, like a Queens?
Are not all these thy vassails to attend?
Are not thy chambers fair, and richly hung?
The walks within this barricadoed mure
Full of delight and pleasure for thy taste
And curious palate, all the chiefest cates
Are from the furthest verges of the earth
Fetched to content thee. What distates thee then?

That which alone is better then all these,
My liberty. Why am I cloistered thus,
And kept a prisoner from the sight of man?
What has my innocence and infancy
Deserved to be immured in brazen walls?
Can you accuse my faith, or modesty?
Has any loose demeanor in my carriage
Bred this distrust? has my eye played the rioter?
Or has my tongue been lavish? have my favors
Vn-virginlike to any been profuse,
That it should breed in you such jealousy,
Or bring me to this durance?

None of these.
I love my Danae. But when I record
The Oracle, it breeds such fear in me,
That makes this thy reteinement.

The Oracle?
Wherein unto the least of all the Gods
Has Danae been unthankful, or profane,
To bondage me that am a princess free,
And votaresse to every deity?

I Will tell thee Lady. The unchanging mouth
Of Phoebus, has this Oracle pronoun'st,
That Danae shall in time child such a son
That shall Acrisius change into a stone.

See your vain fears. What less could Phoebus say?
Or what has Danae's fate deserved in this?
To turn you into stone; that is to prepare
Your monument, and marble sepulcher.
The meaning is, that I a son shall have,
That when you dye shall bear you to your grave.
Are you not mortal? would you ever live?
Your father died, and to his Monument
You like a mourner did attend his hearse.
What you did to your father, let my son
Perform to you, prepare your sepulcher.
Or shall a stranger bear you to your tomb,
When from your own blood you may store a Prince
To do those sacred rights: or shall vain fears
Cloister my beauty, and consume my years?

Our fears are certain, and our doom as fixed
As the decrees of Gods. Thy durance here
Is with limit endless. Go attend her
Unto her chamber, there to live an Ankresse
And changelesse virgin, to the period
Of her last hour. And you, to whom this charge
Solely belongs, banish all womanish pity:
Be deaf unto her prayers, blind to her tears,
Obdure to her relenting passions.
Should she (as heaven and th'Oracle forbid)
By your corrupting loose that precious Gemme
We have such care to keep and lock safe up:
Your lives are doomed. Be faithful we desire,
And keep your bodies from the threatened fire.

Heaven be as chary of your Highness life, As we of Dana's honor. Now if she
be a right woman, she will have a mind only to loose that, which her father
has such care to keep. There is a thing that commonly sticks under a woman's
stomach


What do we talking of things? there must be no meddling with things in this
place, come let us set our watch, and take our lodgings before the Princess
chamber


Sirrah, now I have sworn you to secrecy attend your (charge


Charge me to the mouth, and till you give fire I Will not of.


Thou know I have stuffed my pack with rich jewels, to purchase one jewel
worth all these


If your precious stones were set in that Jewel it would be brave wearing.


If we get entrance, sooth me up in all things: and if I have recourse to the
Princess, if at any time thou see me whisper to her, find some trick or
other to blind the Beldams eyes


She that has the best eyes of them all, I have a trick to make her nose
stand in her light


No more K. Jupiter but goodman Peddler, remember that


I have my memorandums about me. As I can bear a pack, so I can bear a
brain, and now I talk of a pack, though I know not of the death of any of
your friends, I am sorry for your heaviness


Love and my hopes do make my load seem light,
This wealth I will unburden in the purchase
Of you rich beauty. Prithee ring the bell,

Nay do you take the rope in your hand for luck sake. The moral is, because
you shall ring all-in


I care not if I take thy counsel.


To the gate, to the gate, and know who it is ere you open.


I learned that in my youth, still to know who knocked before I would open.


Save you gentle Matrons: may a man be so bold as ask what he may call this
rich and stately Tower


Thou seem a stranger to ask such a question,
For where is not the tower of Darreine known?

It may be called the tower of Barren for ought I see, for here is none but are
past children


This is the rich and famous Darreine Tower,
Where King Acrisius has enclosed his daughter,
The beauteous Danae, famous through the world
For all perfections.

Oh then it is here; I here I must unload.
Coming through Creet, the great King Jupiter
Entreated me to call here at this Tower,
And to deliver you some special Jewels,
Of high pris'd worth, for he would have his bounty
Renowned through all the earth. Down with your pack,
For here must we unload.

Jewels to us?

And from Jupiter?

Now gold prove thy true virtue. Thou can all things and therefore this.


Comes he wlth presents, and shall he vnpacke at the gate? nay come into the
Porters lodge good Pedlers


That Lady has some manners, she has been well brought up I warrant her.


And I can tell thee peddler, thou have that curtesy that never any man yet
found but the King Acrisius


You shall be well paid for your curtesy,
Here Is first for you, for you, for, for you, for you.

Rare!

Admirable!

The best that e're I saw!

I Will run and show mine to my Lady.

Shut the gate for fear the King come, and if he ring clap the Pedlers into
some of you old rotten corners. And has K. Jupiter been at all this cost?
he is a courteous Prince, and bountiful. Keep you the peddler company, my Lady
shall see mine too


Mean you the Princess Danae? I have tokens from Jupiter to her too.


Run, run, you that have the best legs, and tell my Lady. But have you
any more of the same


Have we quoth he? We have things about us, we have not showed yet, and that
every one must not see, would make those few teeth in your head to water, I
would have you think, I have ware too as well as my Master


Yonder Is my Lady. Nay never be abasht Peddler,
There Is a face will become thy jewels, as well as any face in
Creet or Arges either. Now your token.

I have lost it. It Is my heart, beauty of Angels,
Thou art over matched, earth may contend with heaven,
Nature thou have to make one complete creature
Cheated even all mortality. This face
Has robbed the morning of her blush, the lilly
Of her blanch't whitnes, and like theft committed
Upon my soul: she is all admiration.
But in her eyes I never saw perfect luster.
There is no treasure upon earth but yonder.
She is! (oh I shall loose my self)

Nay Sir, take heed you be not smelt out.

I am my self again.

Did he bestow these freely? Dana's guard
Are much indebted to King Jupiter.
If he have store we will buy some for our use,
And wearing. They are wondrous beautiful,
Where Is the man that brought them?

Here forsooth Lady, hold up your head and blush not, my Lady will not hurt
thee, I warrant thee

This jewel Madam did King Jupiter
Command me to leave here for Danae.
Are you so sti'ld?

If sent to Danae,
It Is due to me. And would the King of Creet,
Knew with what gratitude we take his gift.

Madame he shall. Sirrah set open your pack,
And what the Ladies like let them take freely.

Much have I heard of his renown in arms,
His generousnesse, his virtues, and his fullness
Of all that Nature can bequeath to man.
His bounty I now taste, and I could wish,
Your ear were his, that I might let him know
What interest he has in me to command,

His ear is mine, let me command you then.
Behold I am the Cretan, Jupiter,
That rate your beauty above all these gems.
What cannot love, what dares not love attempt?
Despite Acrisius and his armed guards,
Hither my love has brought me to receive
Or life or death from you, only from you.

We are amazed, and the large difference
Betwixt your name and habit, breeds in us
Fear and distrust. Yet if I censure freely
I needs must think that face and personage
Was never derived from baseness. And the spirit
To venture and to dare to court a Queen
I cannot style less then to be a Kings.
Say that we grant you to be Jupiter,
What thence infer you?

To love Jupiter.

So far as Jupiter loves Dana's honor,
So far will Danae love Jupiter.

We weight well upon my Lady.

Madam you have not seen a clear stone,
For color or for quickness.

Beware your ruin, if you Beldams hear.

Sirrah show all your wares, and let those Ladies best please themselves.


Not all at these years. I spy his knavery. Now would he have me keep them
busied, whilst he courts the Lady


Does my Lady want nothing?


As for example, here is a silner bodkin, this is to remove dandriffe, and dig
about the roots of your siluer-hair'd furre. This is a tooth-picker, but you
having no teeth, here is for you a corrall to rub your gums. This is called a
Mask


Gramarcy for this, this is good to hide my wrinckles, I never see of these
before


Then you have one wrinckle more behind. You that are dim eyed put this
pitiful spectacle upon your nose


As I am son of Saturn, you have wrong
To be coop't up within a prison strong.
Your father like a miser cloisters you,
But to save cost: he is loath to pay your dower,
And therefore keeps you in this brazen Tower.
What are you better to be beautiful,
When no man's eye can come to censure it?
What are sweet cates untasted? gorgeous clothes
Vnworne? or beauty not beheld? yon Beldams
With all the furrows in their wrinkled fronts
May claim with you like worth; ey and compare.
For eye to censure you none can, none dare.

All this is true.

Oh think you I would lie
(With any save Danae.) Let me buy
This jewel, your bright love, though rated higher
Then Gods can give, or men in prayers desire.

You covet that, which save the Prince of Creet
None dares.

That shows how much I love you (sweet)
I come this beauty, this rare face to save,
And to redeem it from this brazen grave.
Oh do not from man's eye this beauty skreene,
These rare perfections, which no earthly Queen
Enioyes save you: 'twas made to be admired.
The Gods, the Fates, and all things have conspired
With Jupiter, this prison to invade,
And bring it forth to that for which 'twas made.
Love Jupiter, whose love with yours shall meet,
And having borne you hence, make at your feet
Kings lay their crowns, and mighty Emperors kneel:
Oh had you but a touch of what I feel,
You would both love and pity.

Both I do.
But all things hinder, yet were Danae free,
She could affect the Cretan.

Now by thee
(For what I most affect, by that I swear)
I from this prison will bright Danae bear,
And in thy chamber will this night fast seal
This covenant made.

Which Danae must repeal.

You shall not, by this kiss.

It Is good to have an eye.

Your nose has not had these spectacles on yet.

Oh Jupiter.

Oh Danae.

I must hence:
For if I stay, I yield: I Will hence, no more.

Expect me for I come.

Yon is my door,
Dare not to enter there. I will to rest.
Attendance.

Come I will.

You had not best.

My Lady calls. We have trifled the night till bedtime. Some attend the
Princess: others see the Pedlers pack't out of the gate


Will you thrust us out to seek our lodging at Midnight. We have paid for our
lodging, a man would think, we might have lain cheaper in any Inn in Arges


This castle stands remote, no lodging near,
Spare us but any corner here below,
Be It but the Inner porch, or the least staire-case,
And we will begone as early as you please.

Consider all things, we have no reason to deny that. What need we fear? alas
they are but Pedlars, and the greatest Prince that breathes would be advised
ere he durst presume to court the princess Danae


He court a princess? he looks not with the face. Well pedlers, for this
night take a nap upon some bench or other, and in the morning be ready to take
thy yard in thy hand to measure me some stuff, and so to be gone before day.
Well, goodnight, we must attend our princess


Gold and reward, thou art mighty, and have power
Over aged, young, the foolish, and the wise,
The chaste, and wanton, foul, and beautiful:
Thou art a God on earth, and can all things.

Not all things, by your leave. All the gold in Creete cannot get one of you
old Crones with child. But shall we go sleep


Sleep thou, for I must wake for Danae.
Hence cloud of baseness, thou have done enough
To bleare you Beldams. When I next appear
To you bright Goddess, I will shine in gold,
Decked in the high Imperial robes of Creet,
And on my head the wreath of Majesty:
For Ornament is a prevailing thing,
And you bright Queen I Will now court like a King.

Command our Eunuch's with their pleasing'st tunes
To charm our eyes to rest. Leave us all, leave us.
The God of dreams has with his downy fan
Swept over our eyelids, and sits heavy on them.

Hey-ho, Sleep may enter in at my mouth, if he be no bigger then a
two-peny-loafe


Then to your chambers, and let wakelesse slu^bers
Charm you in depth of silence and repose.

Good night to thee fair Danae.

Let music through this brazen fortress sound
Till all our hearts in depth of sleep be drowned.


Silence that now has empire through the world
Express thy power and Princedome. Charming sleep
Deaths younger brother, show thy self as still-lesse
As death himself. None seem this night to live,
Save Jove and Danae. But that Goddess won
Give them new life breathed with the morning sun,
You is the door, that in forbidding me
She bad me enter. Women's tongues and hearts
Have different tunes: for where they most desire,
Their hearts cry on. when their tongues bid retire.
All Is whist, I hear the snorting Beldams breathe
Soundness of sleep, none wakes save Love and we
You bright imprisoned beauty to set free.
Oh thou more beauteous in thy nakedness
Then ornament can add to --
How sweetly does she breath? how well become
Imaginary deadness? But I Will wake her
Unto new life. This purchase I must win,
Heavens gates stand open, and Jupiter will in.
Danae?

Who Is that?

It Is I, K. Jupiter.

What mean you Prince? how dare you enter here?
Knowing if I but call, your life is doomed,
And all Creetes treasure cannot guard your person.

You tell me now how much I rate your beauty,
Which to attain, I cast my life behind me,
As loved much less then you.

I Will love you too,
Would you but leave me.

Repentance I Would not buy
At that high rate, ten thousand times to dye.
You are mine own, so all the Fates have sed.
And by their guidance come I to your bed.
The night, the time, the place, and all conspire
To make me happy in my long desire.
Acrisius eyes are charmed in golden sleep,
Those Beldams that were placed your bed to keep,
All drowned in Lethe (save your downy bed,
White shetes, and pillow where you rest your head)
None hears or sees; and what can they devise,
When they (heaven knows) have neither ears nor eyes.

Beshrow you sir, that for your amorous pleasure
Could thus sort all things, person, place and leisure.
Exclaim I could, and a loud vproare keep,
But that you say the Crones are all a sleep:
And to what purpose should I raise such fear,
My voice being soft, they fast, and cannot hear?

They are deaf in rest, then gentle sweetly further,
If you should call, I thus your voice would murder,
And strangle with my kisses.

Kisses, tush.
I Will sink into my sheets, for I shall blush.
I Will diue into my bed.

And I behind?
No: were the Ocean, such a gemme to find,
I would diue after.

Good my Lord forbear
What do you mean? (oh heaven) is no man near,
If you will needs, for modesties chaste law,
Before you come to bed, the curtains draw,
But do not come, you shall not by this light,
If you but offer't, I shall cry out right.
Oh God, how hoarse am I, and cannot? fie
Danae thus naked and a man so nigh.
Pray leave me sir: he makes unready still,
Well I Will even wink, and then do what you will.

I would I were out of this tower of Brass, and from all these brazen faced
Beldams: if we should fall asleep, and the King come and take us napping,
where were we? My Lord stays long, and the night grows short, the thing you
wot of has cost him a simple sort of Jewels. But if after all this cost, the
thing you wot of would not do: If the peddler should show himself a pidler, he
has brought his hog's to a fair market. Fie upon it, what a snorting forward
and backward these Beldams keep? But let them sleep on, some in the house I
am sure are awake, and stirring too, or I miss my aim. Well, here must I sit
and wait the good hour, till the gate be open, and suffer my eyes to do that,
which I am sure my cloak never will, that is, to take nap


Alas my Lord I never loved till now,
And will you leave me?

Beauteous Queen I must,
But thus conditioned; to return again,
With a strong army to redeem you hence,
In spite of Arges, and Acrisius,
That doom's you to this bondage.

Then farewell,
No sooner meet but part? Remember me:
For you great Prince I never shall forget!
I fear you have left too sure a token with me
Of your remembrance.

Danae, be it a son,
It shall be ours when we have Arges won.

But should you fail?

I sooner should forget
My name, my state, then fail to pay this debt,
The day star' gins t'appeare, the Beldams stir,
Ready t'vnlocke the gate, fair Queen adue.

All men prove false, if Jove be found untrue.

My man?

My Lord.

Some cloud to cover me, throw over my shoulders
Some shadow for this state, the Crones are up,
And wait t'vnprison us, nay quickly fellow.

Here My Lord, cast your old cloak about you.

Where be these Pedlers? nay quickly, for heaven sake: the gate is open, nay
when? farewell my honest friends, and do our humble duties to the great King
Jupiter


King Jupiter shall know your gratitude, Farewell.

Nay, when I say farewell, farewell.

Farewell good Miniuers.


Fair Danae does his richest Jewel wear.
That son of whom the Oracle foretold
Which cost both mother and the grand-sire dear
Whose fortunes further leisure shall unfold:
Think Jupiter returned to Creet in have,
To leuy arms for Danaes free release,
(But hindered) till the time be fully past,
For Saturn once more will disturb his peace.
The exiled Saturn by King Troos is aided,
Troos that gave Troy her name, and there reigned King,
Creet by the help of Ganimed's invaded,
Even at that time when Jove should succors bring
To rescue Danae, and that warlike power,
Must now his native Teritories guard,
Which should have brought her from the brazen tower,
(For to that end his forces were prepared)
We grow now toward our port and wished bay,
Gentles your love, and Homer cannot stray.

Whence are these warlike preparations,
Made by the King our brother.

It Is given out,
To conquer Arges. But my sister Juno
Suspects some amorous purpose in the King?

And blame her not, the fair Europaes rape,
Brought from Aegenor, and the Cadmian rape,
Io the daughter of old Inachus,
Deflour'd by him; the lovely Semele,
Fair Laeda daughter to King Tyndarus
With many more, may breed a just suspect,
Nor has he spared fair Ceres Queen of Grain,
Who bare to him the bright Proserpina. (she
Such scapes may breed just fears, and what knows
But these are to surprise fair Danae.

Arm royal brothers, Creet's too small an I Will,
To comprehend our greatness, we must add
Arges and Greece to our Dominions.
And all the petty Kingdoms of the earth,
Shall pay their homage unto Saturnes son,
This day we will take a muster of our forces,
And forward make for Arges.

All Archadia
Assemble to this purpose.

Then set on.
The Eagle in our ensign we will display,
Jove and his fortunes guide us in our way.

Whether intends the King this warlike (march?

For Arges and Acrisius.

Rather guard,
Your native confines, see upon your Coast,
Saturn with thirty thousand Trojans landed
And in his aid King Troos and Ganimed.

In never worse time could the Tyrant come
Then now, to break my faith with Danae.
Oh beauteous love, I fear Acrisius ire
Will with seuerest censure chastise thee,
And thou will deem me faithless and unkind
For promise-breach, (but what we must we must)
Come valiant Lords, we will first our own defend
Ere against foreign climes our arm extend.

Degenerate boys, base bastards, not my sons,
Behold the death we threatened in your Cradles
We come to give you now. See here King Troos
In pity of deposed Saturnes wrongs,
Is come in person to chastise your pride,
And be the heavens relentlesse Iusticer.

Not against Saturn as a Father, we,
But as a murderer, lift our opposite hands.
Nature and heaven gives us this privilege,
To guard our lives against tyrants and inuaders,
That claim we, as we are men, we would but live:
Then take not from us, what you cannot give.

Where has not Saturns fame abroad been spread
For many uses he has given to man;
As Navigations, Tillage, Archery,
Weapons and gold? yet you for all these uses
Deprive him of his kingdom.

We but save
Our Innocent bodies from th'abortiue grave,

We are his sons, let Saturn be content
To let us keep what Heaven and Nature lent.

Those filial duties you so much forget
We come to teach you. Royal Kings to arms,
Give Ganimed the onset of this battle,
That being a son knows how to lecture them,
And chastise their transgressions.

Ganimed,
It shall be so, power out your spleen and rage
On our proud Issue. Let the thirsty soil
Of barren Creet quaffe their degenerate bloods,
And surfeit in their sins. All Saturnes hopes
And fortunes are engaged upon this day.
It is our last, and all, be it our endeavor
To win't for ay, or else to loose it ever.

Our Trojans are repul'st, where is Ganimed?

Amid'st the throng of weapons, acting wonders.
Twice did I call alowd to have him fly,
And twice he swore he had vowed this day to dye.

Let Us make up to his rescue.

Tush, it is vain.
To seek to save him we shall loose our selves.
The day is lost, and Ganimed lost too
Without divine assistance. Hye my Lord
Unto your ships, no safety lives a land,
Even to the Oceans ma^gent we are pursued,
Then save your self by sea.

Creet thou have won
My thirty thousand Soldiers, and my Son.
Come, let us to sea.

To sea must Saturn too,
To whom all good stars are still opposite.
My Crown I first bought with my infants blood,
Not long enjoyed, till Tytan wrested it;
Re-purchast, and re-lost by Jupiter.
These horrid mischiefs that have crowned our brows,
Have bred in us such strange distemprature,
That we are grown dejected and forlorn.
Our blood is changed to Ink, our hairs to quils,
Our eyes half buried in our quechy plots.
Consumptions and cold agues have devoured
And eat up all our flesh, leaving behind
Naught save the Image of despair and death:
And Saturn shall to after ages be
That star, that shall infuse dull melancholy.
To Italy I Will fly, and there abide,
Till divine powers my place above provide.

Yield noble Trojan, there is not in the field
One of thy Nation lifts a hand save thee.

Why that is my honor, when alone I stand
Against thee and all the forces of thy land.

I love thy valor, and would woo thy friendship,
Go freely where thou will, and ransomlesse.

Why that is no gift: I am no prisoner,
And therefore owe no ransom, having breath,
Know I have vowed to yield to none save death.

I wish thee nobly Trojan, and since favor
Cannot attain thy love, I Will try conclusions,
And see if I can purchase it with blows.

Now speak thou like the noblest of my foes.

Stand all apart, and Princes girt us round.

I love him best, whose strokes can lowdest sound.

I have thee, and will keep thee.

Not as prisoner.

A prisoner to my love, else thou art free,
My bosom friend, for so I honor thee.

I am conquered both by Arms and Courtesy.

The day is ours, Troos and K. Saturn's fled,
And Jupiter remains sole conqueror.

Peace with her golden wings houers ore Creet,
Frighting hence discord, and remorslesse war:
Will Jupiter make up for Arges now?

Winter draws on, the sea's vn-nauigable,
To transport an Army. There attends without
A Lord of Arges.

Bring him to our presence.
How stands it with the beauteous Danae?

As one distressed by Fate, and miserable.
Of K. Acrisius, and his Fort of brass,
Danaes enclosure, and her Beldam guard,
Who but has heard? yet through these brazen walls
Love has broke in, and made the maid a mother
Of a fair son, which when Acrisius heard,
Her female guard unto the fire he doomes,
His daughter, and the infant prince her son,
He puts into a mastles boat to sea,
To prove the rigor of the stormy waves.

Acrisius, Arges, and the world shall know
Jove has been wronged in this: her further fortunes
Can thou relate?

I can. As far as Naples
The friendly winds her mastlesse boat transports,
There succourd by a courteous Fisherman
She Is first releeu'd, and after that presented
To King Pelonnus, who at this time reigns:
Who ravished with her beauty, crowns her Queen,
And deckes her with The Imperial robes' of state.

What we have scanted is supplied by fate.
Here then cease Arms, and now court amorous peace
With solemn triumphs, and dear Ganimed,
Be henceforth called The^ friend of Jupiter.
And if the Fates hereafter crown our brows
With divine honors, as we hope they shall,
We Will style thee by the name of Cup Bearer,
To fill us heavenly Nectar, as fair Hebe
Shall do the like to Juno our bright Queen.
Here end the pride of our mortality.
Opinion, that makes Gods, must style us higher.
The next you see us, we in state must shine,
Eternized with honors more divine.

Of Danae Perseus was that night be got,
Perseus that fought with the Gorgonian shield,
Whose fortunes to pursue Time suffers not.
For that, we have prepared an ampler field.
Likewise how Jove with fair Alcmena lay:
Of Hercules, and of his famous deeds:
How Pluto did fair Proserpine betray:
Of these my Muse (now trauel'd) next proceeds.
Yet to keep promise, ere we further wade,
The ground of ancient Poems you shall see:
And how these (first borne mortal) Gods were made,
By virtue of diuinest Poesy.
The Fates, to whom the Heathen yield all power,
Whose doomes are writ in marble, to endure,
Have summoned Saturnes three sons to their Tower,
To them the three Dominions to assure
Of Heaven, of Sea, of Hell. How these are scand,
Let none decide but such as understand.
To Jupiter does high Olimpus fall.
Who thunder and the trisulke lightning bears
Dreaded of all the rest in general:
He on a Princely Eagle mounts the Spheres,
Neptune is made the Lord of all the Seas,
His Mace a Trident, and his habit blew.
He can make Tempests, or the waves appease,
And unto him the Seamen are still true.
And for the winds, these brothers that still war,
Should not disturb his Empire, the three Fates
Bring them to Aeolus, chained as they are,
To be enclosed in caves with brazen gates.
Pluto's made Emperor of the Ghosts below.
Where with his black guard he in darkness reigns,
Commanding hell, where Styx and Lethe flow,
And murderers are hanged up in burning chains.
But leaving these: to your judicial spirits
I must appeal, and to your wonted grace,
To know from you, what ey-lesse Homer merits,
Whom you have power to banish from this place,
But if you send me hence unchecked with fear,
Once more I Will dare upon this Stage t'appeare.


