IO, of whom we next discuss,
Daughter toth' River Inachus,
(The fairest Nymph that lived that time,
As being in her youth and prime)
Was seen by Jove loved, and comprest.
Queen Juno, Her, as of the rest,
Grown Jealous over, does project lay,
How in their sports them to betray.
Whom to prevent (J know not how)
But Jove transhapes her to a Cow.
The Goddess knowing how indeard
She was to him, comes to the Heard,
And begs this Heifer. He not dared
(However the request seemed hard)
Her to deny. She Is now her charge,
And naught her freedom can enlarge.
The passages that hence may grow,
The sequel will hereafter show.
HEre, Daphne, by your father Peneus streams
(which falling from the top of Pindus mount,
Waters Hemonian Tempe) let us sit,
All daughters to the Rivers flowing near:
There old Apidanus steals (murmuring) by;
Next, Poplar-shadowed Enipeus glides:
Not far, Amphrisus, Aeas, and amongst these,
(Not least) my father, good old Inachus
Lifts up his reverend head, with fresh flowers crowned,
Prescribing laws and limits to his streams,
To bound them in their channels, curb their torrent,
Lest in their pride they should o'reswell their banks;
Commanding them, through thousand strange indents
To pay his plenteous tribute to the seas.

And how much are we bound unto the gods,
(Fair Io) to be Nymphs, not generated
From marish Meares, nor yet from standing Lakes,
From sedgy brooks, thick pooles, or shallow foords,
Nor yet from violent and robustuous seas.
Their waters keep a smooth and gentle course,
Not moved to fury by the warring winds;
Nor when loud fluxes fall to swell their bounds,
And make deep inundations on the meads:
Nor can the parching drought so dry their springs,
But that their channels keep a temperature:
Their modest shallowes serve us for cool baths
In summer time to play and wanton in:
Their depths, to bate our hooks with worms and flies
Fastened to lines made of small twisted silk,
And so betray the creatures of the flood.
Their crystal waves are Myrrhors, in the which
We dress our heads, and put these curles in form,
Sometimes so cunningly, as if that Art
Had power to exceed Nature: and again,
With careless, but so curious a neglect,
As if mere Chance did antecede them both.
This makes us of the Satyrs so admired,
And of the Faunes and Swains so much beloved.

Why, have you Suitors, Daphne?

Besides such,
For these my father, by whose will I am swayd)
Accounts as mean) of Gallants I have change;
^oth City and the Court.

But I may claim
Prioritie above all water Nymphs,
Nor can the Naiades compare with me;
No, Daphne, not your self. The rural Swains,
^hey gather from these banks mellifluous flowers,
and make you chaplets to adorn your brows,
and shadow your choice beauty from the Sun,
^ay think them costly Presents: but I Am one
To whom the gods themselves have offered gifts.
Then before all the daughters of these floods
^ claim a just precedence.

By what dream,
^r rather by what brain-sicke fantasy
^ath Io been deluded?

My apprehensions
^^e no weak fantoms to beguile the sense,
^^t real, and in action; with their form
^hey bear a being substance.

Has your Beauty
^^d amongst men such long and strange neglect,
^^at Io would to color such disgrace,
^ccuse the gods of weakness?

Let earths Beauties
^ensure of Earth, mere terren as yours be,
^^d aim no further: the while this of mine
^^all be new questioned by the Powers Divine.

Now by what gods, for Heavens sake?

Not the meanest,
^^ such as we call under-deities,
^ melancholy Saturn, (by his son
^il'd and banished from the supreme rule)
Phoebus, a mere Vassal to the earth,
And forced each natural day to measure heaven;
As Neptune, Sovereign over the Seas, to whom
Our tributary rivers hourly pay:
As Mercury, though son to Jove himself,
No better than his Footboy or his Page,
Compeld at every summons to his speed:
But of the potent Thunderer.

He of whom
You have learned to thunder these impossible braves.
Io, I am ashamed.

Yes, that your beauty's
Composed of the grosser elements,
Want that attraction to call Jove himself
Down from his heavenly Fabric, to behold
Us in our eminence.

Strange wonder sure,
To look upon that face in which we Mortals,
And value it at best, can nothing spy,
Breed admiration in a Deity!

Appear, Jove, in thy glory, let them know
Ei, shamed confess their fond surmises vain,
And what it is, thy godhead to profane.

Fly, fly, lest we be thunder-strooke, away;
Let Us seek our safety, danger's in our stay.

Thou Daphne, who Jove's presence now do shun,
Swifter ere long shall from, Apollo run.
But there lie that which makes us terrible,
Affrighting gods and men. Io to thee
In calmes I come, and Fair one make me proud,
To seal the love which I so long have vowed.

What steal? what vow?

Both thou shall find impressed
On thy smooth cheek, soft lip, and Ivory breast,

Forbear to handle; yet I never knew
A man so bold and rude: Can gods dispense,
To teach us Women unknown impudence?

Nay rather we solicit you to prove
What yet you have not try'de, the sweets of love.

Things that I would not learn.

A Truant still?
If you want art, Io, I can teach you skill:
Give me your hand, your lip: why these but are
The Prologue to a pastime much more rare.
Women by nature are ambitious, and
Long to know what they do not understand.
I Will practice you in that which you before
Never knew.

In all this lip-sport? or what more
Is in these kisses meant? I am so dull, --

All these my Comment shall explain at full.
In vain you strive.

Should I do ought save well,
I were undone, my fathers floods would tell;
These are his banks, they will blab: What mean you? fie;
They swell above their bounds, only to spy
And see what we are doing. Pish, away,
Such deeds of darkness can you do by day?
Besides, shall I consent to what you mean,
Not all these silver drops can wash me clean.

Where I do stain I can again make pure:
And that Day shall not hinder us, be sure:
Arise you fogs and damps, your vapors gather,
To shroud us both from Juno and thy father.

You make me blush.

These blushes none shall see;
Behold these mists, to curtain us and thee.

Well, when what most you sue for, you have won,
My comfort is, I see not what is done,

And Io now I Will teach thee sports untry'de,
In darkness best a Virgins blush to hide.

Not in the heavens? where then? In vain it were
To search the seas; the blew vein'd Nor^ae,
And green hair'd Dorides with all their brats,
Styled by the names of water goddesses,
(Though Prostitutes to Neptune) amongst them all
Yield not a face to please his curious eye.
Where then? The earth? I that, if any place,
Yields choice of tempting Beauties: Argos bred
A golden Danae, Thebes afforded an
Alcmena and a wanton Semele;
Pelagia, a Calisto; Sparta nursed
A swan-like Laeda, (Strumpets) of all which
I sought a sure, but found a vain revenge.
Why may not then Thessalian Tempe yield
Like fascination, since their impudence
Is more and more encouraged by my wrongs:
Here then I make inquiry. The day's clear;
Whence come these foggy mysts that choke the air,
In so serene and bright an hemisphere?
Aut ego fall^r, aut ego ledar.
If from the earth, this sudden overcast
Would smell of thick and suffocating damps:
If from the air, or any sulfurous fire,
It would be found by their caliditie.
If from the Rivers, or these moorish fennes,
Humiditie would tell us whence they were.
No, these are forced, and by some god-like power,
Created for a more peculiaruse:
And now my jealousy most truly prompts me.
It Is some illusion, made to blind mine eyes
From a new injury; which if I find,
On this one Strumpet I will study more,
Than all that have my vengeance escaped before.

The clamorous Queen's descended from the Spheres,
To find the cause of this illusive Fog:
But Io I have so transhap'd thee now,
That she by no means can discover thee;
And in that confidence I Will front her boldly.

Jove hear? my jelousies are then not vain,
However I Will give him gentle entertain,
Concealing what is within.

My lovely Juno?

My Brother and my Husband Jupiter?

What make you here on earth?

What other reason,
But that I mist my sovereign Lord in heaven;
And then I yoakt my Peacocks, to their bills
Tied silken bridles, and in my light chariot
Made of fine gold, and decked with Estrich plumes,
Descended as you see. But what affair
Might Juno be so bold to ask her Lord)
Detaines you now in Tempe?

Though it fits not
Your Sex to ask a thing that ill beseemes,
Or pry into the counsels of the gods;
Yet thus much I Will resolve you? I came down
To censure here some causes amongst men,
And set things crooked upright.

Now I spy
That which has drawn him headlong from the sky,
And I will make the Adulterer himself
^uthor of my just vengeance.

Thou once gone,
^e were again transhap'd, and we both one.
^weet Juno will you once more mount your Chariot,
and keep your state above My designs ended,
^ will not long be from you.

My craft now
Shall match his cunning; if there be in me
A godhead, I have cast her destiny.
Dear loving Lord, since 'twas my kindness drew me
To see unto your safety (though I know
The Deities in every place secure)
Give me some gift on earth, that I in heaven
May applaud your royal bounty.

Be it bred
Beneath the Moon, it is my Saturnia's.

I have not seen so sweet and lovely a Beast
White without spot or stain; Is she of the herd
Belonging to these Meadows?

She is, no doubt.
Why does my Juno ask?

To make her mine.

A gift too small for Juno to entreat,
Or Jove to grant; Demand some greater boon.

This Cow or nothing.

She Is not for thy use;
What would my Love do with her?

Only this,
(Being above the rest most beautiful)
To sacrifice her to your Deity.

Not for the triple world: What was it, Sweet,
That you of me demanded?

Now to know
What put you in this fear? Nay I have begged,
And must not be denied. And have I found you?

In what a straight am I? her to betray,
And give her up into her enemies hand,
In man would prove a savage cruelty,
Much more in us: and to deny a gift
Appearing of so small a consequence,
Would but augment her too much jelousie,
And open that which is as yet concealed.

What hope have I to enjoy greater things,
That am denied a trifle?

Say I will not,
And give no reason; it may then appear,
This Heifer to be no such as she seems.
Well, she is yours; but how will you dispose her?

So carefully, because she is your gift,
My servant Argus with a hundred eyes
Shall guard her from all dangers.

It Is enough,
In that, to us you shall express your love.
But prove he to her churlish or unkind,
There Is one, at once his hundred eyes shall blind.
So, she is now your charge.

And being mine,
I Will teach base Earth to injure what is divine.
Where is my servant Argus?

Who Is that calls?
The sacred goddess Juno? What new service
Will you command your vassal?

Take It in brief;
Beholdst thou This? This? This no matter what,
Not worth a name; only a thing I loath;
Out on thee: But I Will spare my railing words,
To express my hate in action.

What Is the cause
The poor beast trembles that?

A Beast indeed:
Like such she shall be used; behold her, Argus;
Are these lips fitting for a god to kiss?
These hoofes apt palms to gripe? these tears fit pillowes?
On which a Deity should breast himself?
These, eyes to tempt? or this an hide to touch?
These horns? (o me) in mine own heraldry
She mocks me without blushing.

In all this
How will you use my service?

As a Spy:
An hundred eyes thou have, of all which number
I will allow thee two to sleep by turns;
The rest to watch this Strumpet; and of all,
But two to wink, the rest to gaze at full:
Behind thee thou have eyes, both sides, before;
Which way soever thou turnst she is in thy view.
"A thousand he had need, all piercing bright,
"To watch a Lover from his choice delight.

And is this all?

Something I had forgot:
Thou art an Herdsman, Argus, and thou know
To tame unruly cattle; she is such:
In some unworthy halter bind her neck,
For such a Beauty the first Ca^kanet.
Her browsing be the Brakes and bitter couche,
For dainties feed her with the sourest herbs;
Lead her through briers and brambles, which may scratch
Her itching skin even till her soft sides bleed,
Raise up the mud in clear springs when she drinks,
Keep her from shadow, in the parching Sun,
Till she be stung with horse flies, and the brees:
Let her not rest but where the ground's still bare;
Feather her bed with thistles and sharp thorns;
And for her footing choose the barren paths
Strow'd with loose pointed flints to gall her hoofes.
Argus farewell, I leave her to thy trust,
A sweet revenge for her insatiate lust.

Drawing this piece of Beasts flesh thus along,
Methinks I look like Lybian Hercules
Leading the Dog of hell: nay I shall fit her
According to my charge, and I will keep thee
(Calfe with the white face) safe enough from bulling,
The longest day that I have eye to see.
What do you hang an arse? Ptrow, come along,
I Will lead you to bare feeding, and find sallets
To take down your full flanks and these plump cheeks.
Along, I Will watch thee well enough from shrinking
Neck out of collar. Nay, on; thou shall find,
Though my face from thee, I have eyes behind.

Speak not to me of comfort, Jo's lost!
Had she miscarried on the earth, her body
Would have given instance of her timelesse fate:
Or had she been by savage beasts devoured,
Her garments stained with blood would tell her death.
Had she in mine or these my neighbor floods
Perished, they would have borne her gently up,
And cast her on some bank for burial.

Dear Inachus do not torment your self,
Nothing so lost, but may be found at length:
For having seen no token of her death,
There Is of her life some hope.

Behold, Amphrisus
With this your ancient neighbor Appidan,
Peneus and others, as we moan your loss,
So in our pity come to comfort you.

O, brackish not your waters with your tears,
That yet run pure and fresh; but be of comfort.

In vain you speak of what you cannot give,
As I in vain lament mine Io's loss.

How now, cursed Cow? What, start you at that name?
I Will make your long horns shorter.

Io, where?
If under earth, I Will send my springs in search
As low as to the Center, Io, where?
If snatched up in the air, like dew exhaled,
With eyes fixed upward I will still thus gaze,
Till from the bosom of some gentle cloud,
Thou drop into mine arms. Fair Io, where?

I think the beast has breezes in her tail,
She cannot keep her still.

But stay, what is he
That leads the fairest Heifer tether'd fast,
That e're drunk of my streams; for Io's sake
I love all creatures that are beautiful.

How now you Harlatry?

Thou churlish heardsman,
I know thee, Argus, jealous Juno's Spy,
Why can thou be so fierce to one so fair?

What Is that to thee, or any of you all.

Amongst all creatures Nature ever made,
Some to have native beauty 'bove the rest,
Commanding soft affection, this is such.

With all mine eyes I spy no difference,
But love all beasts as beasts.

The more beast thou.

But why should this, the fairest of all herds,
Cast such a pitteous moving eye on you,
As wooing your acquaintance?

And it is true,
Where ere I go, her sad eye follows me,
So she too, did not Argus keep her back:
See, see, how gently she endures my touch,
And makes an offer (had she power) to speak.
Hear, take these flowers, and now she kissed mine hand,
Whilst pitteous tears drop down her tender cheeks.
What should I say? poor beast I pity thee,
And all the good I can do is to grieve,
The have such a churlish Keeper.

Inachus, I fear
There Is something greater in it.

What greater can be,
Unless there live some understanding spirit
In this irrational and savage shape:
What would thou have, that in this bestiall figure
Beg'st humane pity? what intends she, think you,
By pawing on the ground? Observe her, brethren,
It seems she has writ something in the dust,
And see, two letters are imprinted fair,
As if it were my Io's Character, And here I read Io.

Io: and see, in every step she has trod,
That word impressed.

This she? whom I so long in vain have sought,
Through forests, groves, and mountains, fields and floods?
This she, whom I in finding shall most lose?
O miserable wretched Inachus,
More miserable Io, thus transformed:
I term thee lovely, till I knew thee such;
But when thy former beauty I record,
Thou ougly art, mishap'd, and terrible.
Can the gods suffer this?

Leave this your howling.
Forbear, or in this cord I lead her forth,
I Will strangle her. Dare not to follow me,
There Is danger in me both ways; she shall perish,
And you must bleed. Come, Minion we will clime
You craggy mountain top, a prospect fit
For Argus only, who (not moving) can
Behold at once from whence the four winds blow,
And there with her I Will like a Beacon stand,
To watch and to give warning. Will you drive?
I say pursue me not, for if you do,
I Will make her sure, and you repent it too.
Why ptrow there.

With what a pitteous action, wailing tongue,
She gave a loving, but a loath farewell.

But that the high Powers are not limitable,
Who would believe this wonder possible.

We must not question what the gods can do,
Yet in the extremity of all extremes,
And worst of bads, despair not, Inachus.

How easy it is for those that taste not grief,
Bid others be of comfort.

Reverend Sir, --

There is no reverence due: not to the gods,
If this be seen and suffered: O my Io.
With acclamations I will fill the Meades:
In stead of prayers, I Will execrate and curse,
And to the burden of mine untuned shreeks
The rocks and caves shall echo to thy name.

But Inachus. --

But when your Channels swell,
You can have dammes and sluices to discharge
Superfluous waters, lest your torrents rage;
And will you bar the conduits of mine eyes
To ease the flux of my surcharged heart?
My care was, Io, to provide a man
To be thine husband; but I now must find
One of the bellowing heard to call me son:
To have some pretty infant draw thy breast,
But now must some py'de urchin suck thy teats.
But that I am immortal, and the doors
And gate to death against me are debarred,
I Would weep my self to nothing, and this Being
Scatter amongst my floods, that mixed with them,
They might (in less than drops) amongst their waves,
Convey me to the all-devouring seas,
To mix my brine with his, and be so lost;
And lost, forgotten: But I am still the same,
And Io, I Will still call upon thy name.

How am I moved with Inachus exclaimes?
Why are the ears of gods kept open still,
But first to hear, then pity? have thou not, Mercury,
Seen Io's tears? Perceived her scalding sighs,
And even thus far heard her suspires and groans,
Tortured beneath that Neatherd churlish groom,
More savage than the beasts he feeds?

I have.

How often has she, thinking to heave her hands
For divine pity; when she spy'de her hoofes
Cast them to the earth, with them her head with shame,
And bellowing when she would complain her grief,
Started at her own sound?
How often, when grazing on her fathers banks,
(These fruitful banks on which she used to sport)
Offering to drink, when in his Crystal streams,
In which so often she with pride has looked,
On her white brow, red cheek, and golden curles:
Now when she spies those lips a god has kissed,
Stretched to so vast a wideness, penthous'd over
With enlarged nosthrils; looking on those eyes,
(In which 'twas once my sole delight to look)
To see them broad and glaring; her clear brow
Late decked with shining jewels, pressed with horns.
How often has she (more frighted than ashamed)
Thought, from her self, in vain, to hide her self?

This can you see? not study how to help?

I do, and will, by thine aid, Mercury;
Hye therefore to the top of Pindus mount,
(There Argus keeps his watch) in some disguise;
Thy Caduceus and thy wings laid by,
Find with the slave some conference, till by cunning
Thou charm'st his waking eyes, and being fast,
Cut off his head, and with one blow extinguish
So many lights at once.

Great Jove I will:
But thus conditioned, you will interpose
Your awful power 'twixt me and Juno's hate.

Presume the art safe in us.

Then Argus dies;
One fatal stroke shall shut an hundred eyes.

How do thou like thine usage, madam Cow?
Your lodging and your diet? How do think
This hempen chain becomes thee? Will you see
Your sweet face in the river once again?
Or how does your fair beastship feel your self?
Would thou not have some Bulchin from the herd
To physic thee of this venereall itch?
If not, I Will see what Nettles muddy streams,
Couch-grasse and weeds, thorns, briers, and flints can d^
These failing, here is a goad to prick your sides.
If all these medicines will not tame your lust,
I Will muster new inventions. Nay, I know
You look for pity, but it lives not here.
In this high watchtower stand I sentinel,
To spy who comes and goes. I am made thy guardian,
I Will guard thee both from danger and from rest;
'Twas in thy hearing, Juno's late behest.

This shape may prove suspectlesse, and the fittest
To cloud a godhead in; my plumed hat
And fether'd sandals, by the which I am known,
I have left at foot of this descending hill:
My snaky Rod I have to this sheephooke turned.
Accommodated thus, to Argus now,
Aristors son: behooves him keep good watch,
Whom Mercury (Jove's son) intends to catch.
But Many-eyes have spy'de me.

How now shepherd,
There Is none who in that simpl shape or name
Needs treason fear. Should any come prepared
For mischief, I have lights about me shine
Sufficient to prevent it: but thou seem
None of such rank. Come sit by me and talk.

The servant to the great Saturnia
Does me no common grace.

Thou know me then?

What shepherd but not only knows your name,
^ut fears your strength?

Nay sit (by me thou art safe)
And tell some pretty tales to make me laugh:
^ have not long been merry.

First resolve me;
^s that fair heifer of some neighbor herd,
You drag thus in an halter?

She Is my charge,
A witty Brute, a most ingenious beast,
A very apprehensiue Animal,
That can do tricks: she has been taught, I tell thee,
To write and read.

Argus, not possible.

It Is as I said before: but having her,
Some pretty tale, I prithee.

But what if
Some goddess should live in this shape disguised,
To whom you are so churlish. I could tell you
A story to that end.

Such toys I love.

Thus the Pierides report: The Giants
Assembled and made war against the gods,
Heap Ossa upon Pelion, Caucasus
Upon Pernassus, Pindus above them;
Hill upon mountain, mountain upon hill,
Till they had made a scale that reach to heaven.
The conflict then began: the monstrous Typhon
Was Captain of the Giants: Of the gods
Great Jove, Archduke. The Generals met and fought.
In brief (to cut off circumstance) the earth
Prevaild against heaven. The gods are forced to fly:
Jove, chased by Typhon into Egypt, changed
Himself into a Ram: Apollo, frighted,
Turns to a Crow, Bacchus into a Goat,
Juno a Cow, Diana to a Cat;
Venus into a Fish, and took the sea;
Mars to a Pigmy, lest he should be known:
And Mercury, syrnam'd the crafty god,
Into a Fox.

A Fox? But I would meet
That craft which could beguile Argus bright eyes.
Proceed, proceed, good shepherd.

Why may not then
Some goddess be included in this shape?

A goddess, say thou? think me equal then
With one of these huge Giants, if not greater,
That have the power and potencie to lead
A godhead in a string. But ha, what music
Was that struck up? 'Twas sweet and delicat,
Nor have I heard the like.

My fellow shepherds
Behind that rock (from whence an echo grows)
For the more grace have chus'd that place as fittest,
Pressed to bestow their cunning upon you,
Whom they have heard, much tired with watching long

And shall we have some merry Madrigall
To pass away the time with?

What you please.

I fame would know how first these Pipes came up
That make this dainty music?

First from Pan
The god of Shepherds. In the memory
Of the Nymph Syrinz, Music strike and tell,
How in the Arcadian plains it once befell.
Syrinx, one of Dian's train,
Hunting with her on the plain,
Armed alike with shafts and bow;
Each from other would you know?
Which from which could not be told,
Save ones was horn, the others gold.

Hey ho; very fine music I promise you.

Now it begins to work.
Pan he sees himself makes fine,
In his cap he pricks a Pine:
Now grows careless of his heard,
Sits by brooks to prune his beard,
Meets her, and has mind to woo,
Much he speaks, and more would do.

It Is pleasing, but it makes me melancholy,
And drowsy too withal.

'Twill do anon.
Still he profers, she denies;
He pursues (for Syrinx flies.)
Past her knees her coats up flew,
He would feign see something new:
By the leg and thigh he guest
(It seems) the virtue of the rest.

Were it not for my charge I Would take a nap.

This adds wings unto his pace,
The goal for which he is in chase.
She adds feathers to her speed;
Now it was no more than need.
Almost caught, Alas she cries,
Some chaste god my shape disguise.

The rest may sleep secure, so I can keep
But two eyes waking.

Here Is a charm for them.
Laedon hears, and girts her round,
Spies a reed that makes sweet sound:
Such is Syrinx. Wondering Pan
Puts it to his mouth anon:
Yet Syrinx thou art mine he said,
And so of her his first pipe made.
My charm has took effect; with these thine eyes
Take thy last sleep, thou have not one to see;
My task is done, and Jo thou now free.

The dying groans of Argus called down,
To know what of his luster is become.
What, all extinct? and is no memory
Extant of their known brightness? has one night
(Whose nature should be to be proud of stars)
Shut at one time an hundred? nay at once?
Should every piece of time deprive so many,
How shortly would these lights innumerable
Be vanished into nothing? But dear Argus,
That all may know thou had a loving mistress,
Grieuing thou should thus perish for her sake;
And that these eyes (now blind) in aftertimes
May give a light to perpetuity,
And memorize thy name, thy faith and fall,
Thy hundred eyes (who wast for Juno slain)
I will transport into my Peacocks train;
Whilst such a bird has breeding, and can be,
Her painted feathers shall remember thee.

And whilst an heifer graseth on the plain,
Io, her hoof shall still imprint thy name.
My Juno are we friends? Let her long divorce,
My fair entreats, with Inachus exclaimes
Invoke thy love and pity, by my life.

You use me like a sister, not a wife,
My bed is still so empty.

Now by Styx,
An oath no god was ever known to break,
Sign her release, she shall hereafter be
To Jove as a mere stranger.

Since by that you swear,
What Is past is lost, it cuts off future fear,
Saving my quarrel, Mercury, to you.

Madam, I did your servant no great wrong,
^ave teaching him to relish a new song.

Where jars are mediated, vain it were
Call injuries in question. As with Jupiter,
With you we are atton'd.

Now Mercury,
^ince Juno is appeased, fetch Io hither,
^^ her own native beauty, whom we will
Restore unto her father.

Sir I shall.

O Jupiter! o Juno!

Inachus,
^^rcease exclaimes, thy prayers have had access,
^hy tears been pitied, and thy loss bemoaned;
Argus is slain, and fair Saturnia pleased,
and Io to her pristine shape restored.

Thanks you immortal gods.

No sooner was this mighty Queen appeased,
^t the rough hair dropped from her tender skin,
^er horns fell off, her eyes appeard to shine
^ a less orb, her mouth and lips contracted
^oth into compass, and their native sweetness,
^^r shoulders are restored, fingers and hands;
^^r parted hoof divided into five,
^ow with two feet contented, for on them
^e straightway stood erect, and of a Cow,
^^ve whiteness, naught retaining, and even yet
^e fears to speak, lest she in stead of words
^ould bellow forth her mind.

Yet will I dare
^s give my father greeting.

O my child.

I am still jealous of that face: What Is he
that makes but a mean sport of wedlocks breach,
But thinks to violate an oath no sin,
Though calling testates all the Stygian gods?
Great King and Lord, Brother and Husband too,
If I be worthy of those attributes
Yourself have daignd, and all the gods approve,
Grant me a second boon.

For thy remissness
In Io's late affliction, speak, it is granted.

Then from these fields of Tempe banish her,
As far as into Egypt.

From her father?

Be you pleased,
And Juno shall, I hope, be satisfied.
Io, you shall to Egypt be confined,
Be that your punishment for Juno's hate:
Which executed you shall taste our love.
In Egypt held a goddess thou shall be,
Adored and worshipped in thine heifers shape;
Oblations shall be daily offered thee,
And Incense burnt to thy divinity,
And this for ever. Juno, in vain you sorrow,
Jove's word is past, and cannot be revoked.
And now with this one Maxim we conclude;
Where lust is punished, though the blood be tainted,
It (after such long Penance) may be sainted.


