The Iron Age: Containing the Rape of Hellen: The siege of Troy: The Combat
betwixt Hector and Ajax: Hector and Troilus slain by Achilles: Achilles slain
by Paris: Ajax and Ulysses contend for the Armor of Achilles: The Death of
Ajax, etc. Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD

Aut prodesse solent audi Delectare.

Printed at London by Nicholas Oaks. 1632.

SIR, IF the noble Scholar Nichod. Friseelimus, thought that his labor in
Transferring six of Aristophanes his Comedies, out of the Original Greek into
the Roman tongue, was worthy to be dedicated to six several, the most eminent
Princes of his time, for Learning and Judgment: Think it then no disparagment
to you, to undertake as well the Patronage, perusal of this Poem: Which as it
exceedes the strict limits of the ancient Comedy (then in use) inform, so it
transcends them many degrees; both in the fullness of the Scene, and gravity
of the Subject

The History whereon it is grounded, having been the selected Argument of many
exquisite Poets* For what Pen of note, in one page or other has not remembered
Troy, and bewayl'd the sa^ke, and subversion of so illustrious a City* Which,
although it were situate in Asia, yet out of her ashes has risen, two the
rarest Phoenixes in Europe, namely London and Rom^* ^ir my acquaintance with
your worth, and kn^^^^dge of your judgment, were the chief m^tiues, inducing
me to select you before many others: accept it, I entreat you, as favorably
as he exposes it willingly, who as he has antecedently long, so futurely
ever

Shall remain yours: Thomas Heywood.
COurteous Reader: The Gold, Silver, and Brass Ages having been many years
^ince in the Press, continuing the History from Jupiters Birth (the son of
Saturn) to the Death of Hercules. This Iron Age (never till now Published,)
begins where the other left, holding on, a plain and direct course, from
the second Rape of Hellen: (For she was in her minority ravished by Theseus the
Friend of Hercules) not only to the utter ruin, and deuastation of Tro^; but
it, with the second Part, stretches to the Deaths of Hellen, and all those
Kings of Greece, who were the undertakers of that Ten years Bloody and fatal
Seige. I presume the reading there of shall not pr^^ue distasteful unto any*
First inregar^ of the Antiquity and Nobleness of the History: Next because it
includes the most things of especial remarke, which have been ingeniously
Commented, and labouriously Recorded, by the Muses Darlings, the Po^ts: And
Times learned Remembraneers; the Histriographers

Lastly, I desire thee to take notice, that these were the Plays often (and
not with the least applause,) Publickely Acted by two Companies, upon one
Stage at once, and have at sundry times thronged three se^erall Theaters, with
numerous and mighty Auditories, if the grace they had then in the Actings, take
not away the expected luster, hoped for in the Reading, I shall then hold thee
well pleased, and therein, my self fully satisfied; Ever remaining thine as
studious

Prodesse vt Delectare:

Thomas Heywood.
PRinces and Sons of Priam, to this end
We^ called you to this solemn Parleance*
There Is a deuining spirit prompts me still*
That if we new begin Hostility,
The Grecians may be forced to make repair
Of our twice r^in'd walls, and of the rape
Done to our sister fair Hesio^e.
Aeneas. I am my princely Sovereign of your mind,
And can by grounded arguments approve
Your power and potency: what they twice demolish'^,
Is ^ow with strength and beauty reared again.
Your Kingdom grown more populous and rich*
The youth of Troy irregular and untamed,
Covetous of war and martial exercise.
From you and silver tressed Hecuba
Fifty fair sons are lineally derived,
All Asiaes Kings are in your lou^ and league*
Their royalties as of your Empire held*
Hector and Hectors brothers are of power
To fetch your sister from the heart of Greece,
Where she remains embraced by Telamon.

Aeneas, your advise assents with us.
How stand our sons unto these wars inclined?

In mine opinion we have no just cause
To raise new tumults, that may live in peace:
War is a fury quickly coniured up,
But not so soon appeased*

What iuster cause*
When the whole world takes note to our disgrace,
Of this our Troy, twice rac't by Hercules.

And fair Hesione rapt hence to Greece,
Where she still lives coopt up in Salamine.

Troy, was twice rac't, and Troy deserved that wrack,
The valiant (half Divine bred) Hercules,
Redeemed this Town from black mortality,
And my bright Aunt from death, when he surcharged
The vi^gin fed, Sea Monster with his club.
For my own Grand-fire great La^medon,
Denied the Hero, both the meede proposed,
And most (ungrateful) shut him from the Gates:
Troy therefore drew just ruin on it self:
It Is true, our Aunt was borne away to Greece,
Who with more justice might transport her hence,
Then he whose prise she was? bold Telamon
For ventring first upon the walls of Troy,
Alcides gave her to the Salmine Duke.
Detayning her? whom keeps he but his own?
Were she my prisoner I should do the like.
By Jove she is worth the keeping.

Then of force,
She must be worth the fetching.

Fe^ch her that list: my reverent King and father*
If you pursue this expedition,
By the vntaunted honor of these arms
that li^e imblazon'd on my burni^h't shield*
It is without good cause, and I divine
Of all your flourishing line, by which the Gods
have rectified your fame above all Kings,
Not one shall live to meat your Sepulcher,
Or trace your funeral Heralds to the Tombs
Of your great Aucestours: oh for your honor
Take not up unjust Arms.

Prince Hectors words
Will draw on him the imputation
Of fear and cowardesie.

Fie brother Hector,
If our Aunts rape, and Troyes destruction^
Be not revenged, their several blemishes
The aged hand of Time can never wipe
From our succession.
'Twill be registered
That all King Priams sons save one were willing
And forward to reuengs them on the Greeks,
Only that Hector durst not.

Ha, durst not did thou say? effeminate boy*
Go get you to your Sheepe-hooke and your Scrip,
Thou look not like a Soldier, there is no fire
Within thine eyes, nor quills upon thy chinne,
Tell me I dare not? go, rise, get you gone:
Thou Art fitter for young Oenons company
Then for a bench of soldiers: here comes one,
Antenor is returned.

Welcome Antenor, what is the news from Greece?

News of dishonor to the name of Priam,
Your Highness Sister fair Hesiones
Esteemed there as a st^umpet, and no Queen;
(After complaint) when I proposed your Majesty
would fetch her thence perforce, had you but seen^
With what disdainefull pride, and bitter taunts
They tossed my threats: 'twould have inflamed your splee^^
With more then common rage, never was Princess
So basely used: never Ambassador
With such dishonor sent f om Princes Court,
As was thenfrom that of Telamons,
Of Agamemnons and the Spartan Kings.

I shall not dye in peace, if these disgraces
Li^c v^reueng'd.

By Jove we will fetch her thence,
Or make all populous Greece a Wilderness,
Paris a hand, we are friends, now Greece shall find
And thou shall know what mighty Hector dares.
When all th'vnited Kings in Arms shall rue
This base dishonor done to Priams blood.

Hear Gracious sir, my dream in Ida Mount,
Beneath the shadow of a Cedar sleeping.
Celestial Juno, Ve^us, and the Goddess
Borne from the brain of mighty Jupiter.
These three present me with a golden Ball,
On which was writ, Detur pulcherrimae,
Giue't to the fairest: Juno proffers wealth,
Scepters and Crowns: says, she will make me rich*
Next steps forth Pallas with a golden Book,
Says, reach it me, I Will teach the Litterature,
Knowledge and Arts, make thee of all most wise.
Next smiling Venus come, with such a look
Able to rai^sh mankind: thus bespake me,
Make that Ball mine? the fairest Queen that breathes,
I Will i^ requital, cast into thine arms.
How can I stand ag^i^st her golden smiles,
When beauty promised beauty? she preuayl'd:
To her I gave the prise, with which she mounted
Like to a Star from earth shot up to Heaven.
Now if in Greece (as some report) be Ladies
Peerless for beauty, wherefore might not Paris
By Venus aid sail ^ence to Grecia,
And quit the rape of fair Hesion^,
By stealing thence the Queen most beautiful*
That feeds upon the honey of that ay^^?

That amorous Goddess borne upon the waue^
Assist thee in thy voyage, we will rigge
A royal flee^e to want thee into Greece.
Aeneas with our son Deiphobus,
And other Lords shall bear thee company.
What think our sons Hector and Troylus
Of Paris expedition?

As an attempt the Heavens have cause to prosper.
Go brother Paris, if thou bring'st a Queen,
Hector will be her Champion; then let us see
What Greek dare fetch her hence.

Sraight give order
To have his Fleet made ready.

Stay Priam, Paris cease, stay Trojan Peers
To p^ot you^ vniu^rsall ^uert^row.
What has poor Troy dese^u'd, that you should kindle
^lames to destroy it?

What intends Cassandra*

To quench bright burning Troy, to se^u^e thee,
To save old Priam and his fifty sons.
(The royal'st issue, that e're King I enioy'de)
To keep the ^euerent hairs of Hecuba,
From being torn off by her own sad hands*

Cassandra's mad.

You are mad, all Troy is mad^^.
And railes before it is ruin.

What would my sister?

Stay this bold youth my brother, who by water
Would sail to b^ing fire which ^^all bu^ne all T^oy.
Stay him, oh stay him* ere the^^ golden roo^es
Melt over our heads before these g^orious Turret^
Be burnt to ashe^. Ere cle^r^ Simois ^treames
Ru^^e with b^oud royal, and Scamander Plain^,
In which Troy ^^ancis be ma^e a Sepu^chre
To bury Troy, and Trojans.

Away with her, some false deuining spirit
Envying the honor we shall gain from Greece,
Would trouble our designements.

Royal sir,
Cassandra is a Vestall Prophetess,
And consecrate to Pallas; often inspired,
Then lend her gracious audience.

So let our Aunt
Be still a slave in Greece, and we your son^^^
Be held as cowards.

Let Antenors wrongs
Be basely swallowed, and the name of Troy
Be held a word of scorn.

Then let Troy burn,
Let the Greeks clap their hands, and warm themselves
At this bright Bone-fire: dreamed not Hecuba
The night before this fatal Youth was borne,
That she brought forth a firebrand?

It Is most true.

And when King Priam to the Priest revealed
This ominous dream, he with the Gods consulted,
And from the Oracle did this return,
That the Chi^de borne should stately Islion burn.

And well the Prophet guest, for my desire
To visi^ Greece, burns with a quenchlesse fire:
Not from this flaming brand shall I be free,
Till I have left rich Troy, and Sparta see.

Yet Hecuba, ere thou thy Priam loose,
And Priam ere thou loose thy Hecuba,

Away with her.

Why speaks not in this case Andromache?
Thou shall loose a Hector, who is yet thine.
Why good Aeneas do thou speech forbear?
Thou hop'st in time another Troy to rear,
When this is sacked, and therefore thou standst mute,
All struck with silence; none assist my suite.

Force her away and lay her fast in hold.

Then Troy, no Troy, but ashes; and a place
Where once a City stood: poor Priam, thou
That shall leave fatherless fifty fair sons,
And this thy fruitful Queen, a desolate widow*
And Ilium now no Palace for a King,
But a confused heap of twice burnt brick.
They that thy beauty wondered, shall admire
To see thy Towers de^ac'd with Greekish fire.

Thou art no Sibill, but from fury speak,
Not inspiration we regua^d thee not.
Come valiant sons, we will ^^rst prepare our ships,
And with a royal Fleet well rigged to sea
Seek iu^t revenge for fair Hestone.

Know you not me?

Who art thou?

View me well.
And what I am, my looks and tears will teach thee*

Oenon? what brought thee hither?

To see Ida bare
Of her ^all Cedars, to see shipwrights square
The trunks of new feld Pines: Asking the cause,
So many Hatchets, Hammers, Plowes and Sawes
Were thither brought: They began me thus to greet*
With these tall Cedars we must build a fleet
For Paris; who in that must sail to Greece,
To fetch a new wife thence.

And my fair Oenon,
Know that they told truth, for it is decreed
Even by the Gods behest, that I should speed
Upon this new adventure: The Gods all,
That made me judge to give the golden Ball.
Ha^ke, hark, the Sailors cry aboard, aboard;
The Wind blows fair, farewell.

Hear me one word.
By our first love, by all our amorous kisses*
Courtings, embraces, and ten thousand blesses
I conjure thee, that thou in Troy may stay.

They cry aboard, and Paris must away.

What need'st thou plowe the seas to seek a wife*
Having one here, to hazard thy sweet life,
Seeking a Strumpet through wars fiele^ alarmes,
And have so kind a wife lodged in thine arms.

Sweet Oenon, stay me not, unclasp thine hold.

Not for Troyes crown or all the Sun-gods Gold*
Can thou? oh can thou thy sweet life endanger,
And leave tnine own wife to s^eke out a stranger?

I can* farewell.

Oh yet a little stay.

Let go thine hold, or I shall force my way*

Oh do but look on me, yet once again.
Though now a Prince, thou wast an humble swain,
And then I was thine Oenon. (Oh sad fate)
I crave thy love, I covet not thy state;
Still ^ am Oenon: still thou Paris ar^
The selfsame man, but not the selfsame heart*

V^tie, or I shall break thy charming band,
N^ptune assist my course: thou Jove my hand.

Most cruel, most unkind, had thou thus said
The night before thou had my Maidenhead*
I had been free to choose, and thou to wiue;
Not widdowed now, my husband still alive.

King Diomed, Sparta is proud to see you,
Your coming at this time's more seasonable,
In that we have employment for your wisdom
And royal valor.

The Chritian Scepter now in contr^uersi^
(As this Ambassador has late informed)
Despising that usurping hand, which long
Has against Law and Justice swayd and borne it*
Offers it self to your protection.
Is it not so my Lord?

You truly understand our Embasie.

Menelaus!

What says Thersites?

That Heaven has many Stars in it, but no eyes*
And cannot see desert. The Goddess Fortune
Is head-winkt, why else should she proffer thee
Another Crown that has one: (Grand Sir Jove)
What a huge heap of business shall thou have,
Having another Kingdom? being in Creete,
Sparta will go to wrack, being in Sparta,
Creete will to ruin: To have more then these
Such a bright Less as Hellen: Hellen? oh!
'Must have an eye to her too, fie, fie, fie,
Poor man how thou wilt be pusl'd!

Why thinks Thersites my bright Hellens beauty
Is not with her fair virtues equaliz'd?

Yes, I think so, and Hellen is a ^ ass,
But thou beleeu'st so too.

Thersites is a rayler.

No, I disclaim't, I am a Counselor*
I have known a fellow matched to a fair wife,
That has had never a Kingdom: thou have two
To look to, (scarce a house) thou many Palaces,
He scarce a Page, and thou a thousand servants:
Yet he having no more, yet had too much
To look to one fair wife.

Were not the King
Well grounded in the virtues of his Queen,
Thy words Thersites might set odds betwixt them.

My Hellen? therein am I happiest.
Know Diomed, her beauty I prefer
Before the Crowns of Sparta, and of Creete.
Music! I know my Lady then is coming*
To gi^e kind welcome to King Diomed,
Strowe in her way sweet powders, burn Perfume,
And where my Hellen treads no feet presume.

'Twere better strowe horne-shauings.

It Is told is this Ambassador does stay
To take my husband, my dear Lord away.

True Hellen, it is a Kingdom calls me hence.

A Kingdom! has your Hellen such small grace,
That you prefer a Kingdom before her face?
You value me too cheap, and do not know*
The worth and value of the face you owe.

I had rather have a good Calves face.

Theseus, that in my nonage did assail me,
And being too young for pastime, thence did hail me:
He, to have had the least part of your bliss
Often proffered me a Kingdom for a kiss.
You surfeit in your pleasures, swim in sport,
But sir, from henoeforth I shall keep^ you short.

Fair Queen, it is honor calls him hence away,

What Is that to Hellen, if she will have him stay*
Say I should weep at parting, (which I fear)
Some for ten Kingdoms would not have a tear
Fall from his Hellens eye, but he is unkind,
And cares not though I weep my bright eyes blind.

Great King, we have discovered from the shore
A gallant Fleet of ships, that with full sail
Make toward the Port.

What number?

Some two and twenty Sail.

Discover them more amply, and make good the Ha^en against them, till we know
the intent of their arrive

My Royal Lord I shall.

Ambassador this business once blown over,
You shall receive your answer instantly.

You shall not go and leave your Hellen here,
Can I a Kingdom govern in your absence,
And guide so rude a people as yours is?
How shall I do my Lord, when you are gone,
So many bleake cold nights to lie alone?
Y'haue used me so to fellowship in bed,
That should I leave it, I should soon be dead:
Troth I shall never endure it.

My sweet Hellen,
Was never King blessed with so chaste a wife.

The news? whence is their Fleet?

From Troy.

The General?

Priams son.

Their expedition?

To seek adventures and strange Lands abroad*
And though now weather-beat, yet brauer men,
More rich in Jewels, costlier araide,
Or better featured never eye beheld,
Especially the Prince their General,
Paris of Troy one of King Priams sons.

Brauer then these our Lacedemons are*

Madam, by much.

How is the Prince of Troy
To Menelaus mighty Spartans King?

Prince Menelaus is my Sovereign Madam,
But might I freely speak without offense,
(Excepting Menelaus) never breathed
A brauer Gallant then the Trojan Prince.

What Intertainment shall we give these strangers?

What? but the choice that Lacedemon yields,
If they come brave, our bravery let us show,
That what our Sparta yields, their Troy may know:
Let them not say they found us poor and bare.
Or that our Grecian Ladies are less fair
Then theirs: give them occasion to relate
At their return, how we exceed their stare.

Hellen has well advised, and for the best
Her counsel with our honor does agree,
All Spartaes pomp is for the Trojans free.

Oh had I known their Landing one day sooner,
That Hellen might have trimmed up her attire
Against this meeting* then my radiant beauty
I doubt not, might in Troy be termed as fair,
As through all Greece I am reputed rare.

It Is not the Spartan fashion thus to greet
Upon the lips, when royal strangers meet^.
I know not what your Asian Court-ship is.
Oh Jove, how sweetly does this Trojan kiss?

Bear with a stranger Lady* though unknown;
That Is practiced in no fashion save his own.
He that his fault confesses never offends*
Nor can he iniure, that no wrong intends,

To kiss me! why before so many eyes
The King could do no more: would fortune bring
This stranger there where I have met the King*

Patience, sweet Hellen, Trojans welcome all,
You shall receive the princeliest entertain
Sparta can yield you, but some late affairs
About the Cretan seepter calls us hence,
That business once determined we are yours,
In the mean time fair Hellen be it your charge
To make their welcome in my absence large.

Oh Jove my dream! sweet Venus aid my prayer*
And keep thy word: behold a face more fair
Then thou thy self can show, this is the same
Thou promised me in Ida, this I claim.
Give me this face fair Venus, and that is all
I Will ask in guerdon of the golden Ball.

Of what rare metal is this Trojan made?
That one poor kiss has power so to persuade,
Here at my lips the sweetness did begin,
And since has past through all my powers within:
Oh kiss me if thou love me once again,
I feel the first kiss thrill through every vein.

Queen I must speak with you,

Must?

Hellen, I,
I have but two ways to take, to speak, or dye:
Grant my tongue pardon then, or turn your head
And say you will not, and so strike me dead.

Live and say on, but if your words offend,
If my tongue can destroy, you're near your end.

Oh Jove, that I had now an Angels voice
As you an Angels shape have, that my words
Might sound as spheare-like music in your ear.
That Jove himself whom I must call to witness,
Would now stand forth in person to approve
What I now speak, Hellen, Hellen I love.
Chide me, I care not; tell* your husband, do,
Fearelesse of death, behold, I boldly woe*
For let me live, bright Hellen to enjoy,
Or let me never back resayle to Troy:
For you I came, your fame has hither driven me,
Whom golden Venus has by promise given me.
I loved you ere I saw you by your fame,
Report of your ra^e beauty to Troy came*
But more then brute can tell, or fame emblazon
Are these divine perfections that I gaze on.

Insolent stranger, is my Name so light
Abroad in Troy, that thou at thefirst sight
Should hope to strum pet us? thinks Priams son,
The Spartan Queen can be so easily won?
Because once Theseus ravished us from hence,
And did to us a kind of violence:
Follows it therefore we are of such price,
That stolen hence once, we should be rauish't twice?

That Theseus stole you hence (by Heaven) I praise him,
And for that act I to the skies will raise him.
That he returned you back by Jove I wonder,
Had I bee^e Theseus, he that should asunder
Have parted us, and snatched you from my bed:
First from my should shoulders have taken this head.
Oh that you were the prize of some great strife,
And he that winnes might claim you as his wife,
Your self should find, and all the world should see
Hellen, a prise alone ordained for me.

I am not angry; who can angry be
With him that loves her? they that Paris see,
And hears the wonders and rare deeds you boast,
And warlike spoils in which you glory most:
By which you have attaind amongst soldiers grace,
None can believe you that beholds your face.
They that this lovely Trojan see, will say;
He was not made for war, but amorous plays

Love amorous Paris then.

My fame to endanger?

I can be secret Lady.

And a stranger?
Say I should grant thee love, as thou should clime
My long wished bed; if at the appointed time
The Wind should alter, and blow fair for Troy,
Thou must hreake off in amidst of all thy Joy.

Not for great Spartaes Crown, or Asiaes Treasure,
(That exceedes Spartaes) would I loose such pleasure.

would it were come to that.

Your Husband Menelaus hither bring,
Compare our shapes, our youth and every thing,
I make you Iudgesse, wrong me if you can:
You needs must say I am the properer man.

I must confess that too.

Then love me Lady.

Had you then set sail,
When my virginity, and bed to enjoy
A thousand gallant princely Suitors came?
Had I beheld thee first, I here proclaim,
Your feature should have borne me from the rest.
You come too late, and covet goods possessed.

I came from Hellen, Hellens love I crave,
Hellen I love, and Hellen I must have:
Or in this Province where I vent my mones,
I Will beg a Tomb for my exiled bones.

Now Prince of Troy, our business being over
This day in Lacedemon, you shall feast
Paris, we are proud of such a Princely guest.

Thus every man is borne to his own Fate.
Now it raines Horns, let each man shield his Pate.

This royalty extended to the welcome
Of Priams son, is more then Asiaes King
Would yield unto the grearest Prince of Greece.
What is this Paris whom you honor so?

Why asks my Queen?

May not this proud* this beauty vanting Trojan,
In a smooth browe hide black and rugged Treason?

He such an one? rather a giddy brain*
A formal traveler. King Di^med
Your censure of this Trojan?

A Capring, Carpet Knight, a Cushion Lord,
One that has stald his Courtly tricks at home,
And now got lea^e to publish them abroad
Did to a stranger Prince, it could not though
Lea^en my zeal o you: speak the fairest Queen
That ever spoke, this night shall we agree
To con ecrate to pleasure and delights:
Your husband left me charge I should enjoy
All that the Court can yield: if all? then you
I would not for the world, but you should do
All that the King your Lord commands you too:
Your King and husband, you sin doubly still
When you assent not to obey his will:
Speak beauteous Q^eene. No? then it may be
She means by silence to accord with me:
I'^e try that presently, lend me your hand
It Is this I want, and by the Kings command
You are to let me have it: more then this,
I want your lips to help me make a kiss.

Oh Heaven!

Oh love, a joy above all measure,
To touch these lips is more then heavenly pleasure.

Beshrew your amorous rhetoric that did prove*
My husbands will commanded me to love,
For but for that iniun^tion, Paris know
I would not yield such favors to bestow
On any stranger, but since he commands,
You may take more then either lips or hands.
Do I not blush sweet stranger? if I break
The Laws of modest^, think that I speak,
But with my husbands tongue, for I ^ay still
I would not yield, but to obey his will.

This night then without all suspicion,
The ranishing pleasures of your royal bed
You may a^^oord to Paris: bitter Thersites,
King Diomed, and your servants may suppose
By my late counterfeite distemperature
I aim at no such happiness, alas
I am a puny Courtier, a weak brain,
^ braine-sicke young man; but Deuinest Hellen,
When we get safe to Troy.

To Troy?

Yes Queen, by all the gods it is decr^ed,
That I should bear you thither; Priam knows it,
And therefore purposely did rigge this Fleet,
To waft me hither; He and Hecuba,
My nine and forty brothers, Princes all
Of Ladies and bright Virgins infinite,
Will meet us in the road of Tenedos*
Then be r^solu'd for I will cast a plot
To bear you safe from hence!

This Troyan Prince
Will's more then any Prince of Greece dares plead,
And yet I have no power to say him nay:
Well Paris I beshrew you with my heart,
That ever you came to Sparta (by my joy
Queen Hellen lies, and longs to be at Troy:)
Yet use me as you please, you know you have
My dearest love, and therefore cannot crave
What I Will deny; but if reproach and shame
Pursue us, on you Paris light the blame:
I Will wash my hands of all, nor will I yield
But by compulsion to your least demand:
Yet if in lieu of my Kings intertaine,
You bid me to a feast aboard your ship,
And when you have me there, unknown to me
Hoyse sail, weigh Anchor, and bear out to Sea*
I cannot help it, it is not in my power
To let fall sails, or strive with stretching oars
To row me back again: this you may do,
But sooth friend Paris He not yield thereto.

You shall be then compelled, o^ me let all
The danger waiting on this practice fall.

Castor and ^oll^x your two princely brothers
Are newly Landed, and to morrow next
Purpose for Lacedemon*

On their approach
He lay my plot to escape away with Paris.
I have it: you sir for some special reason
There coming keep concealed, but when to morrow
You shall perceive me near the water port,
Even when thou see me ready to take Barge.
You apprehend me.

Gracious Queen I do.

Take that farwell: now my fair princely guest
All that belongs to you's to inuit Queen Hellen
Aboard your ship to morrow.

Spartaes mirror,
Will you vouchsafe to a poor wandering Prince
So much of grace, will your high majesty
Daigne the acceptance of an homely banquet
Aboard his weather beaten Bark?

No Friend,
The King my husband is from Sparta gone,
And I, til his return, must needs keep home:
Urge me not I entreat, it is in vain
Get me aboard, I Will nere turn back again.

Nor shall you Lady, Sparta nor all Greece
Shall fetch you thence, but Troy shall stand as high
On terms with Greece, as Greece has stood with Troy.

This is the VVater-port, the Queens royal guest, has bound me to attendance,
till the Prince and she be ready to take Water: Methinkes in this there
should be some trick or other, she was once stolen away by Theseus, and this
a gallant smooth faced Prince. The Kings from home, the Queens but a Woman,
the Troi^ns ships new trimmed, the wind stands fair, and the Saylors all ready
abo^rd, sweetemeates and wine, good words and opportunity, and indeed not
what? If both parties be pleased, but pleased or not the music gives
warning, are they not now upon their entrance


Health to your M^iesties, your Princely brothers
Castor and Pollux, being within two Leagues
Of this great City, come to visit you.

My brothers stolen upon us unawares.
Let me intreat^ thee royal Di^med,
And you Thersites, d^ me so much grace,
As give them friendly meeting.

Queen we shall.

Our intertainment shall be giu^n aboard,
Where I presume, they shall be welcome guests
To princely Paris.

As to your self, fair Queen,

Set forwards then.

We Will hoyse up sail, near to ^eturne again.

Our brother Menelaus gone for Creete?

Our love to see him, makes us loose much time*
Yet all our labor is not vainly spent,
Since we shall see our sister.

Princes, the Kings betrayed, all Greece dishonored, the Queen borne hence,
the Trojans have weighed anchor, and with a prosperous gale they bear from
hence

Shouting and hurling up their caps for joy,
They ^rye farwell to Greece, amayne for Troy.

Ha, ha, ha.

The Queen borne hence, with that smooth traitor Paris.
See princes with what pride they have advanced
The Arms of Tray upon their wa^ing pendants.

Rage not, but lets resolve what is to be done.

Let some ride post to Creete for menelaus.

That be my charge.

VVho'le after him to Sea?

That will my brother Castor and my self,
And perish there, or bring my sister back.

Princes be it so, and fairly may you speed:
Whilst I to Agamemnon, great Achilles,
Ulysses, Nestor, Ajax, Idomean,
And all the Kings and Dukes of populous Greece,
Relate the wrongs done by this Rauisher.
Part, and be expeditious*

Ha, ha, ha,
I smelt this Sea-rat ere he came a shore, by this he is grawing
Menelaus Cheese, and made a huge hole in it* Ship-dyet plea*
seth above all his Palace banquets, much good do it them:
They are at it without grace by this both bare:
Cuckold? no subject with that name be sorry,
Since Sovereigns may be such in all their glory.

Fair Cresida, by the honor of ^y birth,
As I am Hectors brother, Priams son,
And Troilus best beloved of Hecuba,
As I love Arms and soldiers, I protest,
Thy beauty lives inshrin'd here in my breast.

As I am Calchas daughter, Cresida,
High Priest to Pallas, she that patrons Troy:
Now sent unto the Delphian Oracle,
To know what shall betide Prince Paris voyage.
I hold the love of Troilus dearer far.
Then to be Queen of Asia.

Daughter to Calchas and the pride of Troy,
Plight me your hand and heart.

Fair Heaven I do.
Will Troilus in exchange grant me his too?

Yes, and fast sealed, you gods, your anger wreak
On him or her, that first this union break.

So protests Cresida, wretched may they dye,
That'twixt our souls these holy bands untie.

My brother Troilus, we have news from Greece,
Prince Paris is returned.

And with a prise?

Asia affoords none such.

What is she worth our Aunt Hesione?

Or what might be her name?

Hellen of Sparta.

Hellens name
Has scarce been heard in Troy.

But now her fame
Will be eternized, for a face more fair
Sun never shone on, nor the earth e re bare.
Why stay you here? by this Faris and she
Are landed in the ^ort of Tenedos,
There Priam, Hecuba, Hector, all Troy
Meets the midway to attend the Spartan Queen.

In that fair Train, my Cresid shall be seen
Of rarer beauty then the Spartan Queen.

What Earth, what all mortality
Can in the height of our inventions find
To add to Hellens welcome, Troy shall yield her.
Should Pallas, Patroness of Troy descend,
Priam and Priams wife, and Priams sonne^
Could not afford Her godhead more applause,
Then amply we bestow on Helena?

We count you in the number of our daughters,
Nor can we do Queen Hellen greater honor.

I was not forward to hane Paris sent,
But being returned thou art welcome: I desired not
To have bright Hellen brought, but being landed,
Hector proclaims himself her Champion
Against all the world, and he shall guard thee safe
Despite all opposition.

Hectors word
As Oracle, he will seal it with his sword.

And now my turn eomes to bid Hellen welcome.
You are no stranger here, this is your Troy,
Priam your father, and this Queen your mother:
These be your valiant brothers, all your friends.
Why should a tear fall from these heavenly eyes
Being thus round ingirt with your allies.

I am I know not where, nor amongst whom,
I know no creature that I see save yon:
I have left my King, my brothers, subjects, friends
For strangers, who should they forsake me now,
I have no husband, father, brother near:

Hane you not all these, is not Paris here?
Hark how the people having Hellen s^ene
Appland th'arri^all of the Spartan Queen:
And millions that your coming have attended,
Amazed swear some Goddess is descended.

No way you can your eyes or body turn,
But where you walk the Priests shall Incense burn.

The sacrificed beasts the ground shall beat,
And bright religious fire the Altars heat.

Nor fear the brute of war or threatening steel^,
United Greece we value not.

Alone, by Hector is this Town well manned,
^ee like an Army against Greece shall stand.

And who would fear for such a royal wife
To set the universal World at strife:
Bright Hellens name shall live, and nere have end,
When all the world about you shall contend.

Be as be may, since we are gone thus far,
Proceed we will in spite of threatened war,
Hazard, and dread? both these we nothing hold,
So long as Paris we may thus infold.

My father, mother, brothers, sisters all,
Isli^m and Troy in pomp maiesticall,
Shall solemnize our nuptials. Let that day
In which we espouse the beauteous Hellena,
Be held a holy day, a day of joy
For ever, in the Kalenders of Troy.

It shall be so, we have already sent
Our high priest Calchas to the Oracle
At Delphos to return us the success,
And a true notice of our future wars,
Whilst we expect his coming, be it our care,
The Spartans second nuptials to prepare.

Thou glory of the Greeks, the great commander
Of the stout Mirmedons: welcome from Delphos,
What speaks the Oracle? the sack of Troy?
Or the Greeks ruin? say shall we be victors,
Or Priam triumph in our overthrow.

The god of Delphos sends you joyful news,
Troy shall be sacked, and we be Conquerors:
Upon your helmes wear triple spa^gled plumes:
Let all the lowdest instruments of war,
With stern alarums rowse the monster death,
And march we boldly to the walls of Troy,
Troy shall be sacked and we be conquerors.

Thanks for thy news Achilles, by that honor
My father won upon the walls of Troy.
My warlike father Ajax Telam^n;
I would not for the world, Priam should send
Incestious Hellen back on terms of peace.
May smooth Ulysses and bold Diomed*
Whom you have sent on your late Embassy,
Be welcomed as Antenor was to Greece,
Scorned and reuil'd, since the Oracle has said,
Troy shall be sacked, and we be Conquerors.

King Agamemnon here is a Trojan priest
Was sent by Priam to the Oracle:
The reverent man I welcome, and entreat
The General with these Princes, do the like.

Welcome to Agamemnon reverent Calchas.

To Menelaus welcome.

To Ajax welcome: father can thou fight
As well as pray, if we should want for men?

By prayers I use to fight, and by my counsel
Give aid to Arms.

Such as are past arms, father Calchas still,
Say counsels good, but give me strength at will,
When you with all your Counsel, in the field
Meet Hector with his strength, tell me who will yield?

The strong built walls of stately Tenedos
We have leuel'd with the earth. It now remains
We march along unto the walls of Troy,
And thunder vengeance in King Priams ears,
Had we once answer of our Embassy.

I ever held such Embassies as base,
The restitution of our ravished Queen
On terms of parley bars our stern revenge,
And ends our War ere fully it begin.
King Agamemnon no, Ajax says no,
Whose sword as thirsty as the parched earth,
Shall never ride in peace upon his thigh,
Whilst in the town of Troy there breathes a soul
That gave consent unto the Spartans rape:
March, march, and let the thunder of our drums
Strike terror to the City Pergamus.

The son of Telamon speaks honorably,
We have brought a thousand ship^ to Tenedos,
And every ship full fraught with men at Arms:
And all these armed men with fiery spirits
Sworn to revenge King Menelaus wrongs,
And burn sk ^*kissing Isl^^m to the ground.
Therefore strike up wars Instruments on hye,
And march unto the Town courageously.

Princes, what answer touching Hellena?

What answer but d shonourable term?
Contempt and scorn pearcht on their leaders brows,
By Jove I thought they would have slain us both.
If ever Hellen be redeem d from thence
But by the sack of Troy, say Diomed
Is no true soldier.

Even in the King
There did appear such high maiesticke scorn
Of threatened ruin, that I think himself
Will put on Arms and meet us in the field:
We linger time great Agamemnon, march,
That we may buckle with the pride of Troy.

Priam so inso^ent, his sons so brave
To intertaine so great Embassadou^s
With such ungentle usage.

They have a Knight called Hector, on whose valor
They build their proud defiance, if I meet him,
Now by the azurd Arms of that bright goddess
From whom I am descended, with my sword
I Will loppe that limb off, and enforce their pride
Fall at Achilles feet, Hector and I
Must nor both shine at once in wars bright Sky.

When they both meet, the greater dim the less,
Great General, march, Ajax indures not words
So well as blows, in a field glazd with swords.

Calchas a Traitor?

And amongst the Greeks?

Base runagate wretch, when we their Tents surprise,
As Hector lives the traitorous Prophet dies.

Let not remembrance of so base a wretch
Make us forget our safety, the Argiue Kings*
Are landed, and this day rac't Tenedos:
And bid us battle on Scamander Plains.

Whom we will give a brave and proud affront;
Shall we not brother Hector?

Troilus yes,
And beat a fire out of their Burgonets
Shall like an earthy Commet blaze toward Heaven
There grow a fixed star in the Firmament
To emblaze our lasting glory: Hark their Drums,
Let our Drums give them parleance.

Is there amongst your troops a fellon Prince
Called by the name of Paris?

Is there amongst your troops a Knight so bold
Dares meet that Paris single in the field,
And call him fellon?

Or insulting Greek,
Is there one Telamon, dares set his foot
To Paris (here he stands) and hand to hand
Maintain the wrongs done to Hesione,
As Paris shall the rape of Helena.

Know here is one called Ajax Telamon,
Behold him well, son to that Telamon:
Thou feign would see, and he dares set his foot
To Paris or thy self.

Thou durst not.

Dare not?

Or if thou durst, by this my warlike hand
I Will make thine head fall where thy foot should stand:
And yet I love thee cuze, know thou have parlie'd
With Trojan Hector.

Were It thou ten Hectors, yet withal thy might
Thou can not make my head fa^l to my feet,
By Jove thou can not cuze.

I much have heard
Of such a Knight called by the name of Hector,
If thou be he whose sword has conquered Kingdoms,
Pannonia, ll^yria, and Samothrace,
And to thy fathers Empire added them:
Achilles as a friend wills thee to sheath
Thy war^ike sword, retire from Troyes defenc^
And spare thy precious life, I would not have
A Knight so famed meet an untimely grave.

I meet thee in that honorable love,
And for thine own sake wish thee safe aboard.
For if thou stayest thou son of Peleus,
I Would have thee know thy fame is not thine own,
But all ingrost for me; not all thy guard
Of warlike Mirmidons can wall i^^a^e
From mighty Hector.

Shame you not great Lords
To talk so long over your menacing swords?

Alarm then for Gree^e and Helena.

As much for us, for Troy and Hecuba.

Oh brother Paris, thou have this day lodged
Thy love in Hectors soul, it did me good
To see two Greekssh Knights fall in their blood
Under thy manly arm

My blows weretouches
Unto these ponderous strokes great Hector gave.
Oh that this general quarrel might be ended
In equal opposition, you and I
Against the two most valiant.

I will try
The virtue of a challenge, in the face
Of all the Greeks I will oppose my self
To single combat, he that takes my gage
Shall feel the force of mighty Hectors rage.

Hear me you warlike Greeks, you see these fields
Are all did purple with the reeking gore
Of men on both sides slain, you see my sword
Glazed in the sanguine moisture of your friends.
I call the son of Saturn for a witness
To Hectors words I have not met one Grecian
Was able to withstand me, my strong spirit
Would feign be equaled: Is there in your Troops
A Knight, whose breast includes so much of valor
To meet with Hector in a single war?
By Jove I think there is not: If there be?
To Him I make this proffer; if the gods
Shall grant to him the honor of the day,
And I be slain; his be mine honored Ar mes,
To hang for an eternal Monument
Of his great valor, but my mangled body
Send back to Troy, to a red funeral pile.
But if he fall? the armor which he wears
I Will lodge as Trophies on Apolloes shrine,
And yield his body to have funeral rights.
And a fair Monument so nee^e the S^a,
That Merchants flying in their sayle-wing'd ships
Near to the shore in after times may say*
There lies the man Hector of Troy did slay,
And there is my Gantler to make good my challenge.

Will none take up his gage? shall this proud challenge
Be Intertain'd by none? I know you all
Shame to deny, yet fear to undertake it:
The cause is mine, and mine shall be the honor
To combat Hector.

Menelaus pawse,
Is not Achilles here, stern Ajax here,
And Kingly Diomed* how will they scorn,
That stand upon the honor of their strength,
should you prevent them of this glorious combat.

By Jove I think they dare as well take up
A poisonous Serpent as great Hectors gage.

Yes Trojan, see thou not Aeacides
Dart emmulous looks on Kingly Diomed,
Least he should stoop to take his Gantlet up.
And see how Diomed eyes warlike Ajax,
Ajax, Ulysses: every one inflamed
To answer Hector.

Is there any here
Dares stoop whilst great Achilles is in place?

I dare.

And so dare I.

You are all too weak
To encounter with the mighty Hectors arm,
This combat soly does belong to me.

Then wherefore do not thou take up the Gantlet?

To see if thou or any bolder Greek
Dare be so insolent to touch the same,
And bar me of the honor of the combat.

By all the gods I dare.

And all the devils
I Will loppe his hands off that dares touch the gage.

Pray leave this emulous fury: Agamemnon,
To end this difference, and provide a Champion
To answers Hectors honorable challenge
Of nine the most reputed valiant:
Let several Lots be cast into an Helm,
Amongst them all one prise, he to whom Fortune
Shall give the honor: let him straight be armed
To encounter migdty Hector on this plain.

It shall be so you valiant sons of Priam:
Conduct your warlike Champion to his Tent,
To breath a while, and put his armor on:
No sooner shall the prise be drawn by any,
And our bold Champion armed, but a brave Herald
Shall give you warning by the trumpets sound,
Till when we will retire unto our Tents.
As you unto the Town.

Faint hearted Greeks,
Draw lots to answer such a noble challenge,
Had great Achilles cast his Gauntlet down
Amongst King Priams sons, the weakest of fifty
Would in the heat of flames, or mouth of Hell,
Answer the challenge of so brave a King.

Greeks to your Tents, to put armor on;
Make have, ^ long to know my Champion.

Here from the walls of Troy, my reverent Queen,
And beauteous Hellen, we will stay to see
The warlicke combat 'twixt our valiant son,
And the Greeks champion. Young Astianax,
Pray that thy father may have Victory.

Why should you doubt his fortune? whose strong arm
Unhorsed a thousand Knights all in one day;
And think you any one amongst the Greeks
Is able to encounter with his strength?

But howsoever child, unto the pleasure*
Of the high gods, we must refer the combat.

My royal father, Hector in his arms
Sends for your blessing, with the Queen my mother,
And craves your prayers to the all powerful gods,
To grant him victory.

Blessed may he be with honor, all my orisons
Shall invoke the gods for his success.

I almost had forgot fair Hellena;
Dart me one kiss from these high battlements
To cheer him with: thanks queen these lips are charms
Which who so fights for, is secure from harms.

None pre^^e too near the Champions.

Heralds on both sides, keep the soldiers back.

Now Greeks let me behold my Champion.

It Is I, thy cosen Ajax Telamon.

And Cuz, by Jove thou have a brave aspect,
It cheeres my blood to look on such a foe:
I would there ran none of our Trojan blood
Inall thy veins, or that it were divided
From that which thou receiuest from Telamon:
Were I assured our blood possessed one side,
And that the other; by Olimpicke Jove,
I Would thrill my Iauelin at the Gresian moisture,
And spare the Trojan blood: Ajax I love it
Too dear to shed it, I could rather wish
Achilles the half god of your huge army,
Had been my opposite.

He keeps his Tent
In mournful passion that he mist the combat:
But Hector, I shall give thee cause to say,
There Is in the Greekish host a Knight a Prince,
As Lion hearted, and as Giant strong
As Thetis son: behold my warlicke Target
Of pondrous brass, quilted with seven Ox hides,
Impenetrable, and so full of weight,
That scarce a Grecian (sane my self) can lift it:
Yet can I use it like a Summers fan,
Made of the stately train of Juno's bird:
My sword will bite the hardest Adamant.
I Will with my Iauelin cleave a rock of Marble:
Therefore though great Achilles be not here,
Think not brave cosen Hector but to find,
Achilles equal both in strength and mind.

Hold, you have both shed blood too dear to loose,
In single opposition.

Is your Champion,
My cosen Ajax willing to leave combat;
Will he first give the word.

Sir Paris no,
'Twas Hector challenge, and it is Hectors office,
If we surcease on equal terms of valor,
To give the word.

Then here is thy cousins hand,
By Jove thou have a lusty pondrous arm:
Thus till we meet again, lets part both friends;
For proof whereof Ajax we will interchange
Somewhat betwixt us, for alliance sake:
Here take this sword and target, trust the blad,
It never deceived his master.

Take of me
This purple studded belt, I won it cosen
From the most valiant prince of Samothrace:
And wear it for my sake.

Priam unto the Greekish General
This profer makes. Because these blood-stayn'd fields
Are ouer-spread with slaughter, to take truce
Till all the dead on both sides be interred:
Which if you grant, he here inuites the General,
His nephew Ajax, and the great Achilles,
With twenty of your chief selected Princes,
To banquet with him in his royal Palace:
Those revels ended, then to arms again.

A truce for burying of the slaughtred bodies
We yield unto: but for our safe return
From Troy and you, what pledges have you found?

You shall not need more then the faith of Hector
For Priams pledge, King Agamemnon take
My faith and honor, which if Priam break,
I Will break the heart of Troy.

We Will take your honored word, this night we will part,
To morrow morning when sit hour shall call,
We Will meet King Priam ^eere his Cities wall.

Brave time, rare change, from fighting now to feasting:
So many heavy blades to fly in pieces
For such a piece of light flesh? what is the reason?
A Less of my complexion, and this feature
Might have bin rapt, and stolen again by Paris,
And none of all this stir for it: but I perceive
Now all the World's turned wenchers, and in time
All wenches will turn witches: but these Trumpets
Proclaim their enter-view.

See here is the picture of a polliticke state,
They all embrace and hug, yet deadly hate:
They say their are brave Lasses in this Troy.
What if Thersites sprucely smug'd himself,
And strived to hide his hutch-backe: No not I.
It Is held a rule, whom Nature marks in show
And most deformes, they are best armed below.
I Will not conceal my virtues: yet should I venture
To damme my self for painting, fan my face
With a did Ostritch plume, paster my wrinkles
With some old Ladies Trowell, I might pass
Perhaps for some maide-marrian: and some wench
Wanting good eyesight, might perhaps mistake me
For a spruce Courtier: Courtier? tush, I from
My first discretion have abhorred that name,
Still suiting my conditions with my shape,
And do, and will, and can, when all else ^ayle:
Though neither sooth nor speak well: bravely rail,
And that is Thersites humor.

After so much hostility in steel,
All welcome to this peaceful intertaine.

Priam we know thee to be honorable,
Although ou^ foe Treason is to be feared
In Pesants not in Princes.

Ey so, now ^it a Trojan and a Greek.
Cousin Ai^x near me, you are next in blood,
And near me you shall sit: the strain of honor
That makes you so renowned, sprung from He^i^n^.
It Is part of Hectors blood, your grosser spirits
Less noble are your father Telamons.
Welcome to Troy, and Hector, welcome all:

In Troy thy kinsman, but in field thy foe:
Thy welcome Cousin here I pay with thanks,
The truice expired, with buffets blows and knocks.

For that we love the Cuze.

Me thinks this Trojan Hector
Out shines Achilles and his polisht honors
Ecclipseth our bright glory, till he^ set
W ee cannot rise.

King Menelaus, we were once your guest,
You now are ours, as welcome unto Troy,
As we to Sparta.

But that these our tongues
Should be as well truce bound as our sharp weapons,
We could be bitter Paris: but have done.

Menelaus is discreet, such heinous wrongs
Should be discoursed by Arms and not by tongues.

Why does Achilles eye wander that way?

Is that a Trojan Lady?

She is.

From whence?

Of us.

Her name?

Polyxena.

Polixena? she has m^lted us within,
And has dissolved a spirit of Adamant.
She has done more then Hector and all Troy,
She has subdu'de Achilles.

In one word this Troy shall be sacked and spo^^'d,
For so the gods have told me, Greece shall conquer,
And they be ruined, leave then imminent peril,
And fly to safety.

From Troilus?

From destruction, take Diomed and live,
Or Troilus and thy death.

Then Troilus and my ruin.

Is Cresid mad?
Will thou forsake thy father, who for thee and for thy safety has forsook
his Country


Must then this City perish?

Troy must fall.

Alas for Troy and Troilus.

Love King Diomed
A Prince and valiant, which made Empha^^s
To his Imperial style, line Diomeds Queen,
Be brief, say quickly will thou? is it done?

Diomed and you i will follow, Troilus shun.

Be It Ajax, or Achilles, that Greek ly^s
Who speaks it, i will maintain it on his person.

Ha Ajax!

Achilles!

We speak it, and dares Troilus fay we lie?

And wear it Diomed.

Dar'ft thou make it good?

On Diomed, or the boldest Greek
That ever manac'd Troy excepting none.

None?

None.

Excepting none.

Kings of Greece.

Princes of Troy.

Achilles bafled?

And great Ajax bran'd?

If great Achilles, Ajax, or the Devil brave Troilus, he shall brave and
buffer thee


Sonn^^.

Fellow Kings.

As we are Priam and your father.

As we are Agamemnon General
Turn not this banquet to a Centaus feast,
If their be strife debate it in fair terms,
Show your selnes governed Princes.

We are appeas*d.

We satisfied, if Hector be so.

How grew this strife?

I know not, only this I know.
Troilus will maintain nothing against his honor,
And so far, be it through the heart of Greece,
Hector will back him.

So will Paris too.

Mildly discourse your wrongs, fair Princes do^.

King Diomed maintains his valor thus,
He says it was his Lance dismounted Troilus,
And not the stumbling on the breathless course
Of one new slain that feld me.

It Is false.

It Is true.

It was my fortune to make good that field,
And he fell just before me, Diomed then
Was not within six spears length of the place.

How Trojan rauisher?

Call me not Cuckold maker,
I care not what you term me.

I cannot brook this wrong.

Say thou me so mad Greek?

Paris.

Govern you Kingdoms Lords, and cannot sway
Your own affection?

Paris, forbeate.
Mildly discourse, and gently we shall hear.

I say King Diomed unhorsed not Troilus.

How came I by his horse then?

As the vnbackt courser having lost his rider,
Gallopt about the field you met with him,
And caught him by the rain.

Here was a goodly act
To boast on, and send word to Cresida.

Was no Prince near when I encountered Troilus?

I was, and saw the spear of Diomed
Tumble down Troylus but peruse his armor*
The dint's still in the vainbrace.

Be It so or not so, at this time forbear
To urge extremes. Kings let this health go round,
Pledge me King Priam in a cupful crowned.

Now after banquet, (...) Music strike
A pirhicke strain, we are not all for war,
Soldiers their stormy spirits can appease,
And sometimes play the Courtiers when they please.

I have observed Achilles, and his eye
Dwells on the face of fair Polixena.

Why is not Hellen here at this high feast?
I have sweat many a drop of blood for her,
Ye^ never saw her face.

I could love Hector, what is our cause of quarrel?
For Hellens rape? that rape has cost already
Thousands of souls, why might not this contention
'Twixt Paris and the Spartan King be ended,
And we leave Troy with honor.

Achilles how?

Fetch Hellen hither, set her in the midst
Of this brave ring of Princes, Paris here,
And Menelaus here: she betwixt both:
They court her ore again, whom she elects
Before these Kings, let him enjoy her still,
For who would keep a woman against her will?

The names of wife and husband, th'interchange
Of our two bloods in young Hermione,
To whom we are joint parents, Hellens honor
All plead on my part, I am pleased to stand
To great Achilles motion.

So are we.
All that I have for comfort is but this,
That in the day I show the properer man,
Ith'night I please her better then he can.

Are all the Greecian Kings agreed to this?

We are, we are.

Place the two riuals then, each bide his fate*
And usher in bright Hellen in all state.

Oh that I were (but Hellen) any thing*
Or might have any object in my eye
Save Menelaus: when on him I gaze,
My error chides me, I my shame emblaze.

Oh Hellen, in thy cheek thy guilt appears,
More I would speak, but words are drowned in tears,

A gallant Queen, for such a royal friend
What mortal man would not with Jove contend?

Hellen the time was I might call thee wife,
But that stile's changed; I* thou thy self art changed
From what thou wast: and (most inconstant Dame)
Have nothing left thee, sa^e thy face and name.

And I both these have: have thou not confessed
Fair Hellen, thy exchange was for the best.

What can our Sparta value?

Troy.

You err.

who breathes that Sparta would before Troy prefer.

Thou have left thy father Tendarus.

To gain
King Priam, Lord of all this princely train.

Thy mother Lada thou have left who mournes*
And with her piteous tears laments thy loss:
Cannot this move thee?

Oh I have left my mother.

No Hellen, but exchanged her for another:
Poor L^da, for rich He^uba, a ^are Queen
For the great Asian Empress.

From Castor and from Poll^x thou have ranged
Thy natural brothers.

True, true.

No, but changed,
For Hector, Troilus, and the royal store
Of eight and forty valiant brothers more.

If nothing else can move thee Helena,
Think of our daughter young Hermione.

My dear Hermione.

Can thou call her dear*
And leave that issue which thy womb did bear?
She Is ours betwixt us, can thou?

Can she? knowing,
A sweeter babe within her sweet womb growing
Begot last night by Paris.

Look this way Hellen, see my arms spread wide,
I am thine husband, thou my Spartan bride.

That way?

My Hellen, this way turn thy sight,
These are the arms in which thou layest last night.

Oh how this Trojan tempts me!

This way wife,
Thou shall save many a Greeks and Trojans life*

It Is true, I know it.

This way turn thine head,
This is the path that leads unto our bed.

And it is a sweet smooth path.

Here.

Here.

Take this way Hellen, this is plain and eue^.

That is the way to hell, but this to Heaven:
Bright Comet s^ine this way.

Clear star shoot this*
Here honor dwells.

Here many a thousand kiss.

That way I should, because I know it is (...)

Welcome.

But I Will this way for Paris kisses sweeter.

And may I dye an Eunuch if ere morn
I quit thee not.

I cannot brook this scorn,
Grecians to Arms.

Then Greece from Troy divide,
This difference arms, not language most decide.

Come to our Tents.

And we to man the town.

These Tents shall swim in blood.

Blood Troy shall drown.

Yet shall no stroke fall from Achilles arm,
Fair Polixena, so powerful is thy charm.

King Diomed!

My rival in the love of Cresida.

False Cresida, injurious Diomed.
Now shall I prove in hostile enter-change
Of warlike blows that thou art all unworthy
The love of Cresid.

Why came thou not on Horseback*
That Diomed once again dismounting thee
Might greet his Lady with another course
Won from the hand of Troilus.

Diomed,
By the true love I bear that trothlesse Dame
I Will win thee, and send thy Horse and Armor
Unto the Tent of Cresid guard thy head,
This day by me thou shall be captive led.

Another Horse for Diomed to fly,
He had never greater need then now to run.
Though he be fled yet Troilus this is thine.
My Steed he got by sleight, I this by force.
I Will send her this to whom he sent my horse.

Is this the answer of the note I sent
To royal Priam and Queen Hecuba,
Touching their daughter bright Polixena?

Behold Queen Hecubaes hand, King Priams seal,
With the consent of fair Polixena,
Conditioned thus, Achilles shall forbear
To damage Troy.

Return this answer back,
Tell Priam that Achilles Arme's benumbed,
And cannot lift a weapon against Troy.
Say to Queen Hecuba we are her son,
And not Achilles, nor one Mirmidon
Shall give her least affront, as for the Lady
Bid her presume, we henceforth are her Knight,
And but for her, Achilles scorns to fight.

Then thus says Priam, but restrain thy powers,
And as he is a King, his daughter's yours.

Farewell.

Achilles, where is Achilles, what unarmed,
when all the Champaigne where our battles ioyns,
^s made a standing poole of Greekish blood*
Where horses plung d up to the saddle skirts*
And men above the waste wade for their lines,
And can thou keep thy Tent?

My Lute Patroclus.

Let Greeks, kill Greeks, let us bend unnatural arms
Against our own breasts, ere the conquering Trojans
Have all the honor of this glorious day.
Can our great Champion touch a womanish Lute,
And hear the groans of twenty thousand souls
Gasping their last breath?

I can.

Rescue, some rescue, the red field is strowd
With Hectors honors and young Troilus spoils.
Yet all this moves not me.

How long has great Achilles bin surnamed Coward in Troy, that Hector,
Troilus, Paris, have all that name so current in the^r mouths

I ever held him valiant, yet will Achilles fight?

Ulysses, no,
Beneath this globe Achilles hath^o foe.

Then here unarmed be slain, think thou they will spare
Thee more then us?

Or if thou will not arm thee,
Let thy Patroclus lead thy Mirmidons,
And wear thy Armor.

Thy Armor is sufficient*
Without thy presence being feared in Troy.

To save our oath and keep our Tents from sack,
Patroclus don our Arms, lead forth our guard,
And wearing them by no Prince be out-dar'd.

Achilles honors me, what heart can fear,
And great Achilles sword proof Armor wear?

Where Is this great sword and buckler man of Greece?
We shall have him one of sneakes noise,
And come peaking into the Tents of the Greeks,
With will you have any music Gentlemen.

Base groom, I Will tear thy flesh like falling Snow*

If I had Hectors face thou durst not do it.

Durst not?

Durst not, he is in the field, thou in thy Tent,
Hector playing upon the Greekish burgonets,
Achilles fingring his effeminate Lute.
And now because thou durst not meet him in the field, thou have counterfeited
an humor of love. Achilles

Thou the Champion of Greece, a mere bug-beare* a scar-crow, a Hobbyhorse.


Ulysses taught thee this, deformed slave.

Coward thou durst not do this to Hector.

On thee I Will practice, til I meet with him.

Ajax is valiant, and in the throng of the Trojans,
Achilles is turned Fiddler in the Tents of
The Grecians.

Look here Achilles.

Patroclus?

This wound great Hector gave:
Revenge my death, before I meets my grave.

Yet will Achilles fight? see Ajax wounded,
Two hundred of thy warlike Mirmedons
Thou have lost this day.

Let Us beat him to the field.

Ha?

Had I lost a Patroclus, a dear friend
As thou have dove, I would have doud these arms
In which he dyed, sprung through the Trojan host,
And ma^ger opposition, let the blow
Or by the same hand died: come join with me,
And we without this picture, statue of Greece,
This shadow of Achilles, will once more
Invade the Trojan host.

Ajax?

Achilles?

We owe thee for this scorn.

I scorn that debt:
Thou have not fought with Hector.

My honor and my oath both combat in me:
But lone swayes most.

Our ships are fired, five hundred gallant vessels*
Burnt in the Sea, half of our Fleet destroyed,
Without some present rescue.

Ha, ha, ha.

Does no man ask where is this double fire,
That two ways flies toward heaven?
Upon the right our royal Navy burns,
Upon the left, Achilles Tents on fire.

Our Tent?

By Jove thy Tent, and all thy Mirmedons,
Have not the power to quench it: yet great Hector
Has shed more blood this day, then would have served
To quench, both Fleet and Tent.

My sword and armor:
Polixena, thy love we will lay by,
Till by this hand, that Trojan Hector dye.

I knew he must be fired out.

Strike, stab, wound, kill, toss firebrands, and make way.
Hector of Troy, and a victorious day.

Well fought brave brothers.

What Is he?

It Is Ajax, down with him.

No man presume to dart a feather at him
Whilst we have odds: cosen if thou seek combat?
S^e we stand single, not one Trojan here,
Shall lay a violent hand upon thy life,
Save we our self.

Cosen thou art honorable,
I now must both entreat and conjure thee*
For my old Uncle Priams sake, his sister
Hesione my mother, and thine Aunt:
This day leave thine advantage, spare our Fleet,
And let us quench our Tents, only this day
Stay thy Victorious hand, it is Ajax pleades*
Who but of Jove has never begged before,
And save of Jove, will not entreat again*

Burn, still more fire.

Ple quench it with his blood
That adds one spark unto this kindled flame*
My cousin shall not for Hesiones sake
Be ought denide of Hector, she is our Aunt:
Thou, then this day have saved the Grecian Fleet:
Let Us sound retreat, whose charge made al Greece quak,
We spare whole thousands for one Ajax sake.

Worthiest a live thou have, Greece was this day
At her last cast, had they pursude advantage:
But I divine, hereafter from this hour,
We never more shall shrink beneath their power.

My armor, and my trusty Galatee,
The proudest steed that ever rider backed,
Or with his hoofes beat thunder from the earth,
The Sun begins to mount the Eastern hill,
And we not yet in field: Lords yesterday
We slipped a brave advantage, else these ships
That floate now in the Samothracian road,
And with their wauing pendants menace Troy,
Had with their flames reflecting from the Sea,
Gilt those high towers, which now they proudly brave.

On then; Achilles is unconquered yet,
Great Agamemnon and the Spartan King,
Ajax the bigge-bond Duke of Salamine,
With him that with his Lance made Kenus bleed,
The bold, (but ever rash) King Diome^.
To lead these captiu^ through Scamander Plains*
That were a task worth Hector.

Why not us?
Yet most becoming him, come then Aeneas,
Let each Pick one of these brave Champions out
And single him a captive.

'Twer^ an enterprise
That would deserve a lasting Chronicle:
Lead on renowned Hector.

Vnnimble slave,
Dispatch, make haft, I would be first in field,
And now I mustbe called on.

Oh stay dear Lord, my royal husband stay*
Cast by thy shield, fellow uncase his arms,
Knock off the riuets, lay that baldricke by,
But this one day rest with Andromachs.

What meanest thou woman?

To save my hououred Lord
From a sad fate, for if this ominous day,
This day disastrous, thou appear'st in field
I never more shall see thee.

Fond Andromache.
Give me some reason for it.

A fearful dream,
This night me thought I saw thee amongst the Greeks
Round girt with squadrons of thine enemies*
All which their Iaueli^s thrild against thy breast,
And stuck them in thy bosom.

So many Squadrons,
And all their darts quiuerd in Hectors breast,
Some gla^c'^ upon mine armor, did they not?

Did none of all these darts rebound from Hector
And hit thee sister, for (my Less) I know,
Thou haft been often hit by thiine Hector so.

Oh do not jest my husband to his death*
I wak't and slept, and slept and wak't again:
But both my slumbers and my sound sleeps
Met in this one maine truth, if thou this day
Affront their Army or oppose their fleet,
After this day we never more shall meet.

Trust not deceptious visions, dream, are fables,
Adulterate Scenes of Anticke forgeries
Played upon idle brains, come Lords to horse*
To keep me from the field, dreams have no force.

Troilus, Aeneas, Paris, young Astia^ax,
Hang on thy fathers armor, stay his speed.

Father, sweet father do not fight to day.

Help to take off these burrs, they trouble me.

Hold, hold thy father, if thou can not kneel,
Yet with thy tears entreat him stay at home.

I Will hang upon you, you shall beat me father
Before I let you go.

How boy? I Will whippe you if you stir a foot,
Go get you to your mother.

Come to horse.

Hector, I charge thee by thi^e honor stay,
Go not this day to battle.

By all the gods
Andromache, thou do abate my Ipue
To win me from my glory.

From thy death.
Troilus, persuade thy brother, daughter Hellen*
Speak to thy Paris* to entreat him too.

Paris sweet husband.

Leave your cunning Hellen.
My brother shall to the field.

But by this kiss thou shall ^ot.

Now have not I the heart to say her nay:
This kiss has overcome me.

My dearest love,
Pity your wife, your son, your father, all
These live beneath the safeguard of that arm*
Pity in us whole Troy all ready doomed
To sink beneath your ruin*

If thou fall,
Who then shall stand? Troy shall consume with fire
(That yet remains in thee) we perish all,
Or which is worse, led captine into Greece:
Therefore dear Hector, cast thy armor off.

Husband.

Son.

Brother.

By Jove I am resolved.

Oh all ye gods!

Not all the diuell^
Could half torment me like these women tongues!

At my entreaty, and for Hellens love,
Leave us to bear the fortunes of this day,
Here Is Troilus and my self will make them swear*
Ere the fight end there are two Hectors here.

Besides Aene^s, and Deiphebus
Young Margareton, and a thousand more
Sworn to set fire on all their Tents this day,
Then Hector for this once resolve to stay.

To horse then Paris, do not linger time;

To horse, come brother Troilus.

Watch Margareton, if the youthful Prince
Venture beyond his strength, let him have rescue.

He shall be all our charge.

Hector let us mount upon the walls of Troy,
And thence surueigh the battle.

Well be it so.
But if one Trojan shall for succor cry*
I Will leave the walls and to his rescue fly*

King Diomed.

Cresids first ^oue*

Yes Diomed and her last,
I*le live to love her when thy life is past.

Hold Trojan, for no Greek must be disarmed:

Unmanly odds, King Menelaus turn
Thy face this way, it is Trojan Paris calls*

Of all that breath, I love that Paris tongue
When it shall call to Arms: Now one shall down.

Thou keep'st thy word, for thou art down indeed.
Yet by the sword of Paris shall not dye.
I slew thy fame when I first stole thy Queen,
And therefore Spartan will now spare thy life:
Achilles, Diomed, Ajax, one of three
Were noble prise, thou art no spoil for me.

If thou be noble by thy blood and valor,
Tell me if Hector be in field this day.

Thy coniuration has a double spell,
Hector is not in field, but here I stand
Thy warlike opposite.

Thou art young and weak, retire and spare thy life.

I Am Hectors brother, none of Hectors blood
Did ever yet retreite.

If Hectors friend,
Here must thy life and glory both have end.

Oh father, see where Margareton Iyes,
Your son, my brother by Achilles slain.

Thy brother Troylus will revenge his death:
But Hector shall not move.

Troylus nor all the Trojans in the field
Can make their swords bite on Achilles shield:
It Is none but Hector must revenge his death.

But not this day.

Before the Sun decline,
That terror of the earth I Will make divine.

Thus flies the dust before the Northern winds,
And turns to Attoms dancing in the air,
So from the force of our victorious arm,
Fly armed squadrons of the boldest Greeks,
And mated at the terror of our name,
So clear the field before me, no man's favored:
The blood of three brave Princes in my rage,
I have sacrificed to Margaritons soul.
Ajax Oilaeus, Ajax Telamon,
Merionus, Menelaus, Idomea,
Archdukes and Kings have shrunk beneath this arm,
Besides a thousand Knights have fallen this day
Beneath the fury of my pondrous blows:
And not the least of my victorious spoils,
Quiuer'd my Iauelin through the brawny thigh
Of strong Achilles, and I seek him still,
Once more to tug with him: my sword and breath
Assist me still, till one drop down indeath.

Come cast your selves into a ring of terror,
About this warlike Prince, by whom I bleed.

What means the glory of the Grecian host,
Thus to besiege me with his Mermidons?
And keep aloof himself.

That shall my Lance
In bloody letters text upon thy breast,
For young Patrocsus death, for my dishonours,
For thousand spoils, and for that infinite wrack
Our Army has endured only by thee*
Thy life must yield me satisfaction.

My life? and welcome, by Apolloes fire*
I never ventred blood with more content,
Thenagainst thee Achilles, come prepare.

For eminent death, you of my warlike guard*
My Mermidons, for slaughters most renowned,
Now sworn to my designements, your s^eele polaxes,
Fix all at once, and girt him round with wounds.

Dishonorable Greek, Hecter nere deal
On base advantage, or ever life his sword
Oner a quaking foe, but as a spoil
Unworthy us, still left him to his fear*
No^ on the man, whom singly I struke down,
Have I redoubled blows, my valor still
Oppo^de against a standing enemy.
T^^^ have I twice unhorsed, and when I might
Have sla^ne thee groueling, left thee to the field,
Thine armor and thy shield impenetrable,
Wrought by the god of Lemnos in his forge
By ar^e di^ine, with the whole world engraven,
I have through piere't, and still it wears my skarres:
Forget not how last day, even in thy tent
I fea^ted my good sword, and might have flung
My bals of wildfire round about your Fleet,
To have sent up your Greekish pride in flames,
Which would have fixed a star in that high Orb,
To memorize to all succeeding times
Our glories and your shames, yet this I spared,
And shall I now be slain by treachery?

Tell him your answer on your weapons points,
Upon him my brave soldiers.

Come you ^^aues,
Before I fall, I Will make some food forgiaues,
That gape to swallow cowards* ceaze you dogs*
Upon a Lion with your armed phangs*
And bare me bravely, where I touch I kill,
And where I fasten rear body from soul,
And soul from hope of rest: all Greece shall know,
Blood must run wast in Hectors overthrow.

Farewell the nob'est spirit that ere breathed
In any terrene mansion: Take up his body
And bear it to my Tent* I Will straight to horse,
And at his fetlockes to my greater glory,
I Will dragge his mangled trunk that Grecians all,
May deaf the world with shouts, at Hectors fall.

Black fate, black day, be never Kallendred
Hereafter in the number of the year,
The Planets cease to work, the Spheres to move,
The Sun in his meridian course to shine,
Perpetual darkness ouerwhelme the day,
In which is fallen the pride of Asia.

Rot may that hand.
And every joint drop peece-meale from his arm,
That took such base ^duantage on a worthy,
Who all advantage scorned.

Yet though his life they have basely taken away,
His body we have rescued mauger Greece.
And Paris, I the meanest of Priams sons,
Have made as many Mermidons weep blood,
As had least finger in the Worthies fall.

What but his death could thus have armed ^y hand,
Or drown decreeped Priam to the field:
That star is shot, his luster quite eclipsed:
And shall we now, surrender Hellena?

Not till Achilles lie as dead as Hector*
And Ajax by Achilles, no^ whilst I^li^^
Has one stone reared upon another back
To ouer-looke these walls, or these high wal^
To ouer-peere the plain.

Contrary Elements,
The warring meteors* Hell and Eliziu^
Are not so much opposed, as Troy and Greece,
For Hector, Hectors death.

A most sad Funeral
Will his in Troy be, where shall scarce an eye
Of twice two hundred thousand be found dry:
These obets once past over, which we desire,
Those eyes that now shed water, shall speak fire.

Now found retreat.

We back to Troy return,
Where every soul in funeral black shall mourn.

Hector is dead, and yet my brother Troilus
A second terror to the Greeks still lives.
In him there is hope since all his Mermidons
Having felt his fury, fly even at his name.
But must the proud Achilles still insult
And triumph in the glory of base deeds?
No, Hector he destroyed by treachery,
And he must dye by craft. But Priams temper
Will nere be brought to any base revenge:
A woman is most subject unto spleen,
And I will use the brain of Hecuba:
This bloody son of Thetis does still doat
Upon the beauty of Polexina;
And that is the base we now must build upon.
My mother has by secret letters wrought him
Once more to abandon both the field and arms:
The plot is cast, which if it well succeed^,
He that is of blood insatiate, must nextbleed.

Why will not great Achilles don his Arms,
And rowse his bleeding Mirmidons? shall Troilus
March back to Troy with armor, sword, and lance,
All did in Grecian blood? shall aged ^riam
Boast in fair Islium that the son of Thetis,
Whose warlike spear pierced mighty Hectors bre^^,
Lies like a coward slumbring in his Tent,
Because he fears young Troilus.

Pardon me,
Ulysses, here is a Brief^ from Hecuba,
Wherein she vows, if I but kill one Trojan,
I never shall enjoy Polixena.

But thinks Achilles, if the Greeks be slain,
And forced perforce to march away from Troy,
That he shall then enjoy Polixena?
No, it is King Priams subtilty, whilst thou
Sleep'st in thy Tent, Troilus through all our Troops
Makes Lanes of slaughtered bodies, and will toss
His Balls of wildfire as great Hect^r did
Over all our nauall forces: But did this Prince
Lie breathless bleeding at Achilles feet,
Dispairing Priam would to make his peace
Make humbly tender of P^lixena,
And be much proud to call Achilles son?

Were Troilus slain?

Who else deals wounds so thick and fast as he,
They call him Hectors ghost, he glides so quick
Through our Battalions: If he beat us hence,
And we be then compelled to su^ to them?
It will be answered, that great Hectors deaths-man
Shall never wedd his sister: Hectors son
Will never kneel to him, by whose strong hand
His father fell; but were young Troilus slain,
And Priams sons sent wounded from the field,
Troy then would stoop, and send Polixena
Even to Achilles Tent.

My sword and armor*
Arise my bleeding ministers of death,
I Will feast you with an Ocean of blood-royall^*
Ulysses, ere this Sun fall from the skies,
By this right hand the warlike Troilus dies.

Hold if thou be a man.

Stand if thou be a soldier, do not ^^rinke.

Art not thou Troilus, young and lusty Troilus.

I am, what then?

And I Thersites, lame and impotent,
What honor can thou get by killing me?
I cannot fight.

What make thou in the field then?

I came to laugh at madmen, thou art one*
The Trojans are all mad, so are the Greeks
To kill so many thousands for one drabbe,
For Hellen: a light thing, do thou turn wise
And kill no more; I since these wars began
Shed not one drop of blood.

But proud Achilles
Slew my bold brother, and you Grecians all
Shall perish for the noble Hectors fall.

Hold, the Pox take thee hold, whilst I have breath,
I am bound to curse thy fingers.

I might have slain young Troilus when his sword
Late sparkled fire out of the Spartans helm,
But that had ^tild my fame, but I will trace him
Through the whole Army, when I meet the Trojan
Breathless and faint: I*le thunder on his crest
Some valor, but advantage likes me best.

Let Cowards fight with Cowards, and both fear*
The base Thersites is no match for me,
Oppose me^ to the proudest he in field,
Most eminent i^ Arms and best approved*
To make the thirsty after blood to bleed.
And that is the proud Achilles.

Who names us?

Fa^e, thou have now before me set the man
Whom I most sought, to thee whom I will offe^
To appease Hectors ghost a sacrifice.
You widdowed Matrons who now mourn in tears,
And all you watery eyes surcease to weep.
Fathers that in this war have lost your sons,
And sons your fathers, by Achilles hand;
No more lament upon their funeral Arms,
But from this day rejoice: posterity
From age to age this to succession tell,
He falls by Troilus, by whom Hector f^ll.

Hectors sad fate betyde him, soldiers on*
Both brothers show like mercy, thy vain sound
That boasted lies now leuel'd with the ground.

Achilles!

What Is he? Thersites*

Thou art a coward.

Have I not saved thy life, and slain proud Troilus
By whom the Greeks lie pilde in breathless heaps?

Yes when he was out of breath so thou slewest He^to^
Girt with thy Mirmidons.

Dogged Thersites,
I Will cleave thee to thy Navel if thou op'st
Thy venomous Iawe^.

Do, do, good Dog-killer.

You slave.

I am out of breath now too, else bug-bate Greek
Thou durst not to have touched me.

To whom do thou address thine Embasie?

To Achilles.

And not the General? It concerns our place
To hear King Priams embasie.

Let me have passage to Achilles Tent,
There Agamemnon (if you please) may hear
What Priam sends to your great Champion.

Let it be so,

The General wrongs that honor
We Princes in our love confer on him.
Had I the imperial mandat in my mouth,
I would not loose one jot of my command
For all the proud Achilles's on earth,
Take him at best he is but a fellow peer,
And should lift his head above the Clouds
I hold my self his equal.

Vntuterd Ajax.

Who spoke that word?

'Twas I Achilles, let the son of Priam
Be private with us.

It belongs to us
To be partakers of his Embasie.

Dismiss then our Inferiors, you Ulysses
Are welcome, Menelaus, Diomed.
Let Ajax stay without, and know his duty.

Duty? Oh you gods!
Ha? in what Dialect spoke he that language
Which Greece yet never knew, we owe to him?
I Will after him and dragge him from his Tent,
And teach the insolent, manners: Give me way.
Ulysses, thou and all the world shall know,
That save the obedience that I owe the gods,
And duty to my father Telamon,
Ajax knows none, no not to Agamemnon:
For what he has of mee's my courtesy,
What he claims else, or the proud'st Greek that breaths,
I Will pay him in the poor'st and basest scorn
Contempt was ere expressed in.

Ajax you are too bold with great Achilles,
You bear your self more equal then you ought,
With one so trophy'd.

Bold? oh my merits,
Are you so soon forgot? why King of Ithaca,
What has this Toy (above so talked of) done,
Saving slain Hector, which at best received
Was but scarce fairly, which the common tongues,
Voices, with base advantage.

Yes, Prince Troilus
Surnamed the second Hector, lies imbak'd
In his cold blood, slain by Achilles hand:
The stream of glory now runs all toward him:
Achilles looks for it Ajax.

But when Achilles slumbred in his Tent,
Or waking with his Lute courted the air;
Then Ajax did not bear himself too bold
With this great Champion: when I saved our Fleet
From Hectors wildfire, I deserved some praise,
But then your tongues were mute.

You in these times
Did not affect ostent, but still went on:
But Thetis son looks for a world of sound*
To spread his attributes.

The proud Achilles
Shall no^ outshine me long, in the next battle,
If to kill Trojans be to dim his praise,
I Will quench his luster by my bloody rays.

Shall I return that answer to King Priam?

Say in the morning we will visit him:
So bear our kind regreetes to Hec^ba.

But will Achilles trust himself with Priam,
Whose warlike sons were by his valor slain?

Priam is honorable, see here is his hand,
His Q^eene religious* and behold her name:
P^lixena divine, read here, her vows*
Honor, religions, and divinity,
All jointly promising Achilles safety:
Paris, you hear our answer, so return it.

We shall receive Achilles with all honor.

Were I Achilles and had slain great Hector*
With valiant Troilus, Priams best loved sons,
I for the brightest Lady in all Asia,
Would not so trust my person with the father.

I am resolved, Ulysses you once told me
Priam would sleep if Troilus once were slain*

And I dare gage my life, the reverent King
Intends no treason to Achilles person,
But merely by this honorable League,
To draw our warlike Champion from the field.

But we will deceive his hopes: f^are not great Kings,
When ^o my Tent I bring Polixena:
The sooner Troy lies level with the ground.
You understand me Lords; shall I entreat you
Associate me unto the sacred Temple
Of Di^ine Phoebus?

In me these Kings shall answer, we in peace
Will bring Achilles to A^olloes shrine,
Provided, Priam ^re we enter Troy,
Will give us hostage for our safe return.

My honored hand with his.

Oh Paris, till Achilles lie as dead,
As did thy brother Hector at his feet,
His body hackt with as many wounds,
As was thy brother Troilus when he fell.
I neu^r, neu^r shall have peace with Heaven,
Or take thee for their brother, or my son.

Mother I hate Achilles more then you;
But I have heard he is invulnerable:
His mother Thetis from the Oracle
Receiving answer, he should dye at Troy*
(Being yet a child,) and to prevent that fate,
She dipped him in the Sea, all save the heel:
These parts she drencht, remain impen^trable;
But what her dainty hand (forbore to drown)
As loath to feel the coldness of the wave,
That, and that only may be pierced with steel.
Now since I know his fellow Kings intend,
To be his guard to Islium: what is my rage?
Or this my weapon to destroy a Prince,
Whose fle^h no sword can bite off.

Have I not heard thee Paris, praise thy self
For skill in Archery? have I not seen
A shaft sent level from thy constant hand,
Command the mark at pleasure? may not thou
With such an arrow, and the selfsame bow,
Wound proud Achilles in that vndrencht part,
And by his heel draw lines blood from his heart?

Well thought on, the rare cunning of this hand*
None save the powers immortal can with stand:
When in the Temple he shall think to embrace
My sister Polixena. I Will strike him there.
The Greeks are entered Troy. Let Us fill the train
To avoid suspect, and now my shaft and bow,
Greece from my hand, rec^iue thine overthrow*

Though the damage you have done to Troy,
Might cease our arms, and arm our brows with wrat^,
Yet with a smooth front, and heart vnseigned,
Now bid Achilles welcome; welcome all
Before these Kings, and in the sight of Hellen,
The dearest of my daughters Polixen
I tender thee: on to Apolloes shrine,
The flamin stays: these nuptial rights once past,
You of our best varieties shall taste.

My bow! now thou great god of Archery,
The Patron of our action and our vows,
Direct my shaft to wound bright Thetis son,
And let it not offend thy deity,
That in thy Temple I exhaust his blood,
Without respect of place, revenge seems good.

It Is done, Achilles bleedes, immortal powers
Clap hands, and smile to see the Greek fall dead,
By whom the valiant Hectors blood was shed.

Priam, thou have dishonourably broake
The Laws of Arms.

By all the gods I vow,
I was a stranger to this horrid act:
It never came from Priam.

Call for your Surgeon then to stop his wound.

For if he dye, it will be registered
For ever to thy shame.

A Surgeon there.

It is in vain for live, that god of Physic^e
We Grecians honor in a Serpents shape;
He could not stanch my blood: know fellow Kings
My mother Thetis by whose heavenly wisdom,
My other parts were made invulnerable.
Could not of all the gods obtain that grace,
But that my blood, vented as now it is,
The wound should be incureable: what Coward
That durst not look Achiles in the face,
Has found my lives blood in this speeding place?

'Twas I, 'twas Paris.

'Twas a milke-sop then.

A Traitor to all Valor.

Did not this bleeding Greek kill valiaht Hector*
Incompast with his Guard of Mermidons?

Degenerate Paris, not old Priams son,
Thou never took'st thy treacherous blood from me*

How cheeres Achiles, though thy too much pride
Which held the heart of Ajax from thy love,
He Will be the foremost to revenge thy death.

Gramercy noble Ajax, Agame^^non,
Ulysses, Diomed, I feel my ^^rength
Begins to fail, let me have burial,
And then to Arms, revenge Achilles death:
Or if proud Troy remain i^uincible,
To Lycomedes send to youthful Pirhus,
My son begot on bright Dedamia;
And let him force his vengeance through the hearts
Of these, by whom his father was betrayed.
I faint, may every drop of blood I shed,
Exhald by Phoebus, pu^rifie the air,
That every soul in Asia that draws breath,
May poisoned dye for great Achilles death.

He Is dead, the pride of all our Grecian army*

Will Priam let us bear his body hence?

Yes, and not drag it 'bout the walls of Troy.
As he did Hectors basely.

Take it, withal truce, time to bury it.

Come Princes, on your shoulders bear him then,
Brauest of soldiers, and the best of men.

Where Is mighty Priam?

What Is the news Aeneas?

Such as will make your highness doff your age
And be as youthful spirited as the Spring:
Penthisilea Queen of Amazons,
With mighty troops of Virgin warriers,
Gallant Veragoes, for the love of Hector,
And to revenge his death, are entered Troy.
May it please you, to receive the Scitbean Queen.

What Troy can yield, or Priam can express,
The Amazonian Princess shall partake:
Come Hecuba, and Ladies, let us prepare,
To bid her friendly welcome to this war.

Come, come, spread, spread, up with the pulpets straight,
Seats for the Judges, all the Kings of Greece.
Why when you lazy drudges? Is this place
For a whole Jury royal? where is the Armor,
The prize for which the crafty Fex Ulysses,
And mad Bull Ajax, must this day contend?
What, is all ready? rare world* when insteade
Of smooth tong'd Lawyers, Soldiers now must plead.

This Sessions valiant Duke of S^lamine,
And King of Ithaca was called for you:
Since great Achilles armor is the prise,
Due to the worthier, here before these Kings,
And in the face of all the multitude,
You are appointed for your several pleaes,
That prince who to these arms can prove most right,
Shall wear his purchase in the armies sight.

If to the worthiest they belong to me:
Could you select amongst all this throng of Princes,
None worthier then Ulysses, to contend
With Ajax? and in view of all our Navy,
Of all these tall ships, gilt with Hectors flames*
Which when Ulysses fled into his tent,
I, I exti^guisht, these twelve hundred ships
I saved at once, deserved Achilles arms,
Laertes son may think it grace enough,
That though he miss his aim, he may be said
To have strove with Ajax: Ajax who excels
As much in arms, as he in eloquence.
My hands perform more then his tongue can speak,
Act more then he can talk: were I less valiant,
And had but half my vigor (like him) weak,
My royal birth would for this armor speak.
Duke Telamon, that in the Argoe sailed
To Calchos: and in Isliums second sack,
First reared Alcides colors on the Walls
My father was: His father Eacus,
On of the three that judge infernal souls;
And Eacus was son to Jupiter.
Thus am I third from Jove; besides Achilles
By marriage was my brother, and I crave,
Since he is dead my brothers arms to have.
What has Ulysses with our Kin to do?
Being a stranger, not of Peleus blood:
Grave Heroes, if not honor, prize my merit,
I plead both worth and blood, these arms to inherit.

Bele^ue me, two sound pleas on Ajax part,
I fear the prize will be conferred on him.

His arguments are maxims, and sound proofs
To win him way, into the soldiers hearts.

Let him proceed.

Because I hasted to the siege of Troy,
When he feigned madness, must he wear these arms?
When in the Phalanx, with old Nestor charging,
Thou at the name of Hector fledst the field,
And left the good old man incompast round,
Calling aloud Ulysses, Ulysses ^tay,
The more he cried the more thou made thy way*
Prince Diomed you saw it, and vpbrayded
This Ithacans base flight, but see Heavens Justice.
Old Nestor escaped, great Hector was not there;
But meets Ulysses, as he fled from Hector,
He that but late denide help, now wants help,
For at the sight of Hector down he falls,
And cries aloud for aid, I came, and saw thee
Quaking with terror under Hectors arm,
The pondrous blow I took upon my Targe,
And as the least of all my noble deeds,
Saved these faint limbs from slaughter, which now sue,
To don these glorious arms, nor do I blame thee
Forfearing Hector: what is he of Greece
That saving Ajax, quakt not at his name?
Yet did I meet that Hector guil'd in blood
Of Grecian Princes, fought with him so long,
Till all the host deaft with our horrid strokes,
Begirt us with amazement: will thou know
My honor in this combat? it was this,
I was not conquered: if thou still contendest?
Imagine but that field, the Time, the foes,
Hector alive, thee quaking at his feet,
And Ajax interposing his broad shield
'Twixt death and thee, and thou the arms must yield.

What can the wise Ulysses, say to this?
Ajax preuailes much with the multitude,
The general murmur does accord with him.

I ever thought the son of Telamon
Did better merit the Achillean Arms
Then the Dulichian King.

Forbear to censure.
Till both be fully heard.

Me thinks grave Heroes, you should seek an Ajax
To wear these Arms, not let these Arms be sought
By Ajax: what has slye Ulysses done
To counteruaile my acts? killed unarmed Rhesus,
And set on sleepie Dolon in the night,
Stolen the Palladium from the Trojan Fane.
Oh brave exploits; nor have thou these performed
Without the help of warlike Diomed:
So you betwixt you should divide these spoils.
Alas thou know not what thou seekst, fond man,
Thou that fightst all by craft and in the night
The radiant splendour of this burnisht Helm
Shining in darkness, as the Sun by day,
Thy theeuish spoils and ambush would betray.
Thy politic head's too weak to bear this caske,
This massy Helm; thou can not mount his Spear,
His warlike shield that bears the world engraven
Will tire thine arm, fool thou do ask a Spear,
A shield a caske, thou haft not strength to wear.
Now if these Kings, or the vain peoples error
So far should err from truth to give them thee,
Twould be a mea nes to make thee sooner dye:
The weight would lagge thee that art wont to fly:
Thou haft a shield vnscar'd, my seuen-fold Targe
With thousand gashes peece-meald from mine arm,
And none but that would fit me: To conclude,
Go bear these Arms for which we two contend
Into the mid-ranks of our enemies,
And bid us fetch them thence, and he to wear them
By whom this royal Armor can be won,
I had rather fight then talk, so I have done.

If with your prayers oh Grecian Kings, my vows
Might have prevailed with Heaven, there had bin then
No such contention, thou had kept thine Arms,
And we Achilies thee: But since the Fates
Have taken him from us, who has now more right
To claim these Arms he dead, then he that gave them
Unto Achilles living? nor great Princes,
Let that smooth eloquence, yon fellow scorns,
(If it be any) b^e rejected now,
And hurt his master, which so many times
Has profited whole Greece, if we plead blood
Which is not ours, but all our Ancestors.
Laertes was my father, his Arcesius,
His Jove, from whom I am third: beside I claim
A second godhead by my mothers name.
What do we talk of birth? If birth should bear them,
His father being nearer Jove then he
Should wear this honor, or if next of blood,
A^hilles father Peleus should enjoy them,
Or his son Pirhus; but we plead not kindred,
Or near propinquity: let* alliance rest,
His be the Armor that deserves it best.
Achilles mother Thetis being foretold
Her son should die at Troy, concealed him from us
In habit of a Lady, to this siege
I brought him, therefore challenge all his deeds
As by Ulysses done: 'Twas I sacked Thebes,
Chris^^s, and Scylla, with Lernessus walls,
I Troilus and renowned Hector slew:
First with this Helmet I adorned his head,
He gave it living, who demands it dead?

It Is true, for like a Peddler being disguised,
And coming where Achilles spent his youth
In womanish habit, the young Ladies they
Look on his Glasses, Jewels and fine toys:
He had a Bow too much Achilles drew,
So by his strength the Ithacan him knew.
Had Ajax gone, Achilles then had stay*
Hector still lived, our ransack't Tents to invade:
What can thou do but barely fight? no more;
I can both fight and counsel, I direct
The manner of our battles, and propose
For victual and munition, to supply
The universal host, cheer up the soldiers
To endure a tedious siege, when all the Army
Cried let us away for Greece, and raised their Tents.
Ajax amongst the foremost had trust up
His bag and baggage: when I rated him,
And them, and all, and by my Oratory
Persuaded their retreat: What Greece has won
From Troy since then, is by Ulysses done.
Behold my wounds oh Grecians, and judge you
If they be cowards marks they are in my breast:
Let boasting Ajax show such noble skarres.
These Grecian Heroes took I in your wars.
I grant he fought with Hector, 'twas well done,
Where thou deseru'st well I will give thee due,
But what was the success of that great day?
Hector of Troy unwounded went away.

Now sure the prise will to Ulysses fall,
The murmuring soldiers mutter his deserts,
Preferring him fore Ajax: hear the rest.

But oh Achilles, when I view these Arms,
I cannot but lament thine obsequies:
Thou wall of Greece, when thou wast basely slain
I took thee on my soldiers, and from Troy
Bore thee then a^m'd in the abillements
I once more seek to bear, behold that shield*
It Is a description Cosmograph^call
Ofall the Earth, the Air, the Sea and Heaven*
What are the Hyades? or grim Orion;
He p^eads, or what is Arcton? thy rude hand
Would lift a shield, thou can not under stand:
To omit my deeds of Arms, which all these know
Better then I can speak. When in the night
I venter'd through Troyes gates, and from the Temple
Raped the Palladium, then I conquered Troy,
Troy whilst that stood could never be subdued,
In that I brought away their gods, their honors,
Troyes ruin and the triumphs of whole Greece.
What has blunt Ajax done to conteruaile
This one of mine? He did with Hector fight,
I ten years war have ended in one night.
What Ajax did was but by my direction,
My counsel fought in him, and all his honors
(If they be any,) he may thank me for
What he has done, was since his flight I stayed,
I therefore claim these Arms: so I have said.

Such is the clamor of the multitude,
And such Ulysses are your great deserts,
That those rich Arms are thine, the prize enjoy

To the defense of Greece and sack of Troy.

Come Princes, now this striffe is well determined.

To see how eloqu^nce the people charms,
Ulysses by his tongue has gained these Arms.

Counsel preuailes above strength, Heralds proclaim
Through the whole Camp Ulysses glorious name.

What dream'st thou Ajax?
Or is this object real that I see,
Which topsiturnes my brain, base Ithaca
To sway desert thus: Oh that such rich Troophies
Should cloth a cowards back, nor is it strange;
I Will go turn coward too, and henceforth plot,
Turn politicians all, all politicians.
A rush for valor, valor? this is the difference
*Twixt the bold warrier, and the cunning states*man,
The first seeks honor, and the last his health:
The valiant hoord the knocks, the wise the wealth.
It was a gallant Armor, Ajax limbs
Would have become it bravely; the disgrace
Of loosing such an Armor by contention,
Will live to all posterity, and the shame
In Stigian Lethe drown great Ajax name.
Oh that I had here my base opposite,
In the Achi^lean Armor briskly clad,
Vulcan that wrought it out of gadds of Steel
With his Ciclopian hammers, never made
Such noise upon his Anvile forging it,
Then these my armed fists in Ulysses wrack,
To mould it new upon the cowards back.

Why how now mad Greek?

And art thou come Ulysses? thus, and thus
I Will hammer on thy proof steeled Burganet.

Hold Ajax, hold, the devil take thee, hold;
I am Thersites, hell rot thy fingers off.

But art not thou Ulysses?

No I tell thee.

And is not thine head armed?

Hells plagues confound thee, no; thou think thou
Have Menelaus head in hand, I am Thersites.

Thersites? Can thou rail?

Oh yes, yes; better then fight.

And curse?

Better then either: ^arely.

And spit thy venom in the face of Greece?

Admirably.

Do, do, let us hear, ^prothee for heavens sake do*

With whom shall I begin?

Begin with the head.

Then have at thee Menelaus, thou art a king and a --
No more, bu^ if on any, rail on me.
Desert should still be snarl'd at, vice p^sse free.

Who thou the son of Telamon, thou art a fool,
An Ass, a very block. What make thou here at
Troy to aid a Cuckold, being a Bachelour?
Paris has stolen no wife of thine: if Ajax
Had been ought but the worst of these, he might
Have kept his Country, solac'd his father, and
Comforted his mother: what thanks have thou
For spending thy means, hazarding thy soldiers?
Wasting thy youth, loosing thy blood,
Indangering thy life? and all for a --

Peace.

Yes peace for shame,
But what thanks have thou for all thy travail?
Ulysses has the armor, and what art thou now
Reckoned? a good moyle, a horse that knows
Not his own strength, an Ass fit for service,
And good for burdens, to carry gold, and to
Feed on thistles: farewell Coxe-combe. I shall be
Held to be a Cock of the same dunghill,
For bearing thee company so long,
I Will to Ulysses.

Base slave, thou art for Cowards, not for men
I Will stown'd thee if thou come not back again:
This vantage have the valiant of the base,
Death, which they coldly fear, we boldly embrace.
Help me to rail on them too, or thou dyest.

Do It then, whilst it is hot.

What Is Agamemnon our great General?

A blind Justice, and I would he had kissed
Fortunes blind cheeks, when he could not see
To do thee Justice.

Well, and what is Menelaus?

A King and a Cuckold, and a horne*plague
Consume him.

Amen. What Is Diomed? he sat on the bench too.

A very bench-whistler* and loves Cresida.
Hell and confusion swallow him.

Amen. Amongst these what is Th^^sites?

A Rogue, a railing Rogue, a Cu^r, a barking
Dog, the Pox take me else.

Amen. But what is Ulysses my base adversary?

A damned pollitician, Scilla and Charibdis swallow him*

And greedily devour him.

And utterly consume him*

And eat up his posterity.

And rot out his memory:

In endless infamy.

And everlasting obliquie.

Amen.

Enough, no more: shall he the Arms ini^^.
And we the shame? away Thersites, fly,
Our prayers now said, we must prepare to dye.

Dye, and with them be damned.

Not look on Ajax? Ajax Telamon,
He that at once saved all your ships from fire,
Not look on me? ha? are these hands? this sword?
Which made the fame of Troy great Hector shrink
Below the ruins of an abject scorn?
Slighted? so slighted? what base thing am I,
To c^eepe ^o so dull Greek, whom fame or blood
Has rair'd one step above? Jove, see this;
And laugh old Grand-sir: Ha, ha, ha, by hell
I Will shake thy Kingdom for it: not look on Ajax?
The triple headed-dog, the whippes of Steel,
The ravenous Vulture, and the restless stone
Are all mere fables; here is a trusty sword,
It Is mine, mine own, who claims this from me? ha?
Cowards and shallow witted fools have slept
Amidst an armed troop safe and secure
Under this guard: nay Agamemnon too.
But see, see from yon Sea, a shoale of sands
Come rolling on, trick't up in brisled finnes
Of Porposses and Dog-fish ho my sword,
I will encounter them, they come from Greece,
And bring a poisonous breath from Ithaca
Tempered with false Ulysses gall, ^oh, ^oh;
It stinks of's wifes chaste vrinall, look, look
By yonder wood, how s^iely in the skirts
March policy and the devil, on, I fear you not:
Dare you not yet? not one to fight with me:
Who then? what is he must cope with Ajax?
Echo. Ajax?

Well said old boy, wa'st Nestor my brave Lad?
I Will doot, I Will doot, come my fine cutting blade,
Make me immortal: lively fountain sprout,
Sprout out, yet with more life, brave glorious stream
Grow to a Tide, and sink the Grecian fleet
In seas of Ajax blood: so ho, so ho.
Lure back my soul again, which in amaze
Gropes for a perch to rest on: Heart, great heart
Swell bigger yet and spl^t, know gods, know men,
Furies, enraged Spirits, Tortures all,
Ajax by none could but by Ajax fall.

A sweet exchange of Treasure, term't I may*
Even earth for ashes, and mere dust for clay:
Let Ajax kill himself, and say 'twas brave
Hector, a worthy Call, yet could not save
Poor fool his Coxcombe: Achilles bear him hye,
And Troilus boldly, all these brave ones dye.
Ha, ha, judge you; Is it not better far
To keep our selves in breath, and linger war:
Had all these fought as I Have done, such my care
Has been on both sides, that presume I dare,
These had with thousands more suruiu'd: Judge th'hoast,
I shed no blood, no blood at all have lost:
They shall not see young Pirhus, nor the Queen
Penthiselea, which had they but been
As wise as I, they might: nor Sinon, he
Famous of all men, to be most like me.
Nor after these, Orestes, and his mother
Pillades Egistus with a many other
Our second part does promise: These if I fail,
As I on them; you on Thersites rail.



LONDON. Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1632.


