GRacious Spectators, not to vex your ears
With some old Negative Prologue, saying, Here Is
No Soldier, no Parasite, no Whore,
No Baud (for many understand no more
Then such cheap stage-ware) to unfold our Scene,
And without veil to Open what we mean
Behold.
Has here invited Heaven and All the Arts
To entertayne His Theater, and does bring
What he prepared for our Platonique King:
Deeming Your judgments able to supply
The absence of So Great a Majesty.
But his free conscience does protest, the mirth
Of this his night was but a Fiue-weekes birth;
Yet no Abortiue; if your courteous hands
Shall wrap the Infant in his swathing bands.
It Speaks Already and each Art, to raise
Delight, does use it is Own Distinguished phrase.
Lend your Purged ears. If any do look grim,
Our Author says they wrong the Arts not Him:
He strives to Please. But yet he scorns to be
So vile, to Bargain for a Plaudite;
And from your seats, at a Compacted clap,
Hug an Abusing joy. If it is his hap
To have your Free applause, to This he stands,
The Arts shall not more crown him, then Your Hands.

PHANTASTES, leave us.


I might very well be here, Sir, at a wooing match; but, I go: yet I will not
be far off.


Come, now you shall, Astronomia.


What shall I, Geographus?


Kiss.


What? a' spite of my teeth?


No not so, I hope you do not use to kiss with your teeth.


Marry and I hope I do not use to kiss without them.


I, but (my fine Wit-catcher) I mean you do not Show your teeth when you
kiss: -- 't is thy Ambrosiake lip (sweet Nymph) which thus I salute after
the fine French -- thus, Spanish, -- (hold still) thus the slauering Dutch --
(nay, I will) and thus the devouring Italian fashion -- I Am a Courtier sweet
Nymph, I Am a Courtier; pardon my (you know the Court-humor) boldness


What? is it the Court humor then to kiss a Maid out of breath?


No, sweet chucke, but to kiss them In breath; to make them long-breathed in
kissing, and able to endure a Smothering and Revive again


Faith for my part Sir Courtier, then I am not acquainted with a long breath;
though, I think, they that use kissing much, are acquainted with long breaths,
for, I warrant them, they may be smelt far enough off


Come, my Heaven, I must take off your Zone; shall Astronomia be in girt with
a Zone, and not Geographus? especially since all we Lovers live under Zona
torrida


If it be So Sir, then I pray you keep you there still; for My Zone, I Will
assure you, as yet is a Temperate one; pardon me Sir, Ungirt Unblessed: if I am
not Fast, I Am Loose, untie the Heavens and take away their Zones, we should
have brave Skie-falling

Geog. I, and brave Larke-catching, (pretty Bird) ah! were they all such as
Thee, it should be my First wish


I perceive Sir, then you Courtiers are ready to take a Maid at the Fall;
Well Sir, but let go your hand from my girdle, he that has that, shall have me
and all


With all my heart (my double soul) I have Already trauel'd over the whole
Earth, and am now again in Travel to be Delivered of a second Attempt, the
Peregrination of the Heavens; which to effect, I know no more expedite Course,
then to have Recourse to Astronomia


Pray le be; be Modest yet; I think you will force me to say be Honest, leave,
or I Will Cry


I, but I Will make you Laugh.


Nay, pray you, be not Elephantine; I suppose you have been in India, and
pierce the Phrase


Nay, but Nymph, Will Not you then?


Will Not I? what?


Be kind.


Be kind? how?


(The plague of Lovers! crossing in the point; Physica) why be kind as she
has been


Marry --


It may be she will not consent.


O Sir, your apprehension it too nimble; I was saying, marry gracious are the
Fates, to deliver a Maid from the violence of a Rauisher


Nay, good love, Venus lipp'd) of this Wooers modest kiss, that is but lent
till the next meeting: but farewell, I see thy Mothers aged brow wrinkled
already; and I had rather again undertake my performed journey about the
World, then thou should be shent for me; once more farewell, Geographus his
Astronomia.


I must behave my self now as demurely, as a Gentlewoman when she is eating an
Egg, well I Will prevent her, and go meet Her, or else she will be Meet with
Me


FOrsooth, and 't please you --


Who was that?


And please you forsooth it was --


I, who was it? that is the question I ask.


It was forsooth and please you --


Yes, it pleases me to know, though I fear when I do know it will scarce
please me


Why then forsooth since it pleases you --


Oh, is the excuse made now?


Alas forsooth, I was coming of mine accord, to tell you forsooth.


Well, now I hope forsooth, so many forsooths have made up one excuse by this
time


It was forsooth --.


Yet again?


My Uncle Ethicus.


That came to teach you manners belike, and that is the reason you use so many
mannerly forsooths


No forsooth, he came to inuit me to his House to a Banquet.


To a Banquet? Indeed you are better fed then taught.


And maruail'd that you and I were so great strangers at his house.


Nay, that is not strange, now-adayes, for the nearer kin, the farther off in
friendship, and therefore the greater strangers


But I promised, for my self, my oftener presence hereafter, and bid Ethicus
persuade himself, that though you did not come to him in person, yet that your
love and best Affections dwelt always with him; and I did my best to make part
of an excuse for you


As you do now for your Self: but Minion do you expect a thank of me, for
your excuse? I believe rather, you will stand more in need of an excuse your
self; it seems your are well skilled in the framing of them. What? who bid
you put on this apparel to day? you must be in your skie-colour'd Gown every
day, in your best apparel holy days and working-dayes: and had you never a
worse head-tyre to put on to day but this with colored Ribbands tied like
Stars? but, Minion, the mystery of the truth; come, I must know it: Does your
Uncle Ethicus look of that fashion? is he a Courtier? a Trauellour? a Puppet?
does he make himself a verier Fool then the Taylour makes him? has he a Jury
of Nations come in to give their verdict, for the making up of one suit of
apparel for him? is he for your long Hat, short Cloak, little Band? are his
old hammes grown supple again? is he for your knee-congey? the throwing of a
wavering head off his shoulders in a salutation? or the breaking of his
high-heeld Shoes, or (which is better) sometimes of his crazie legs, when in a
wanton pride they cannot stand upon his giddie feet? you would make a fine
creature of your Uncle; but, my fine Minion, my Periphrasis has incircled your
companion, as his arms did your middle even now: you apprehend? ah Astronomia,
thy face was never made for the coloring of a lie; oh how this one untruth has
Eclipsed thy beauty? thou never receiu'dst such a vile Nature from thy Mother
Physica: no; no; I know from whom this corruption proceeds; it is that false,
that vile Astrologia, that infects thee thus, and whom I observe, still to
follow at thy heels: but I fret mine old age too much, which is enough
anguish to it self: in, in you light Huswife --.


LEt Geometres never use Measure more, if he loves not his dearest Magus
beyond measure: Oh, the Gods! that you and I could never know one another
before! but First it should be my luck to be acquainted with Astronomia, Then
with your Self! Sir, if your occasions can make use of my best endeavors, the
employment shall be a favor: if at any time you want any Characters, and
strange Figures for your Circles, or Circles themselves, for the confining of
your Spirits, know Sir, They shall not be more obedient unto You, then My
officious gratitude, employ Me Sir, I protest I Am grown Infinite in love
with the fairest Astronomia, with your self


Sir, let me never use my Great Art more, if my love to You be not greater
then my Art: the Spirits that I Command, shall not be so quick in my
Ambassages, as the Spirit of my Love, in the effecting your desires, it is as my
Circle, most capacious and without End


Well, Sir: I need not then you think to fear Geographus; for indeed though
he be proud, yet I am sure Astronomia is much more Highminded: and yet were her
Altitude as high as Heaven, could not I Measure it? besides what can she count
of him, but as of a giddie fellow, whose Head is Guided by his Heels? but for
Me, it is well known, I have the Rule of my self: indeed there is Poeta, him I
fear, for he plays at his Mistres with his Hexameter, and Pentameter, as a
Fencer lies at his Rapier and Dagger-foile; but from Him you say Youl' Ward me


I warrant you Sir, as securely as with an Enchanted shield: (and now Sir to
Descend to Realities) I will briefly acquaint you with some of the Mysteries
of our Sacred Science; and first with this. There are three ways, by one of
which your desire may be effected, the first i^ Fascination; the second
Coniuration, and the third Medicine. The first can be wrought only by
opportunity, by being in company with Astronomia


Alas! that is the Unmeasurable Depth of my grief, for I can never almost get
into her company, but yet Sir acquaint me with the device that I may not lose
occasion it offered


I will Sir; This Fascination is, when one does work love in a woman by
looking on her


But is that possible?


O, Sir, in a moderate sort very familiar; I have known a man and a woman by
an earnest looking one upon another, when they fell in love, both become stark
blind


Strange! Wonderful! but if that should happen me, how should I enjoy the
sight of her beauty


Sir, my care shall exempt you from that fear; but to unfold unto you the
manner of this admirable operation --


I Sir, I desire to know what Proportion it can bear with truth.


It is thus: The instrument of fascination is a vapor pure, and subtle,
arising from the heat of the heart, out of the purer bl^ud, which through the
eyes does project beams like it self; those beams do carry with them a
pure vapor, which sometimes carries with it blood, (as we see in bleare-ey'd
folks, who hurt by looking on) which being eiaculated upon the eyes of a woman
(being sent forth with a laboring violence) enter into her eye, pierce her
heart, infect the blood and Spirits, then by a continuance of the eiaculation,
produce an assimilation in the object


Sir, this is Deep; but is this Rule infallible?


There are a sort of your Philosophers that deny this; but (alas!)
vnexperienc'd fellows, that never went beyond the Circle of their Science; but
we men of practice correct and surpass the narrow bounds of their empty
Speculations: and now Sir for the guarding of your self, and the more
powerful operation, I will furnish you with an Unction of Doves, or Sparrowes
blood


Dove, nor Sparrow is so hot, as my love to you, dearest Magus: but you made
mention of a second, Coniuration


Sir, by that I can present unto you, your love.


Presently?


Presently.


Will you?


What will I not for you?


I am yours Soul and Body.


Well, stay you here then, I Will but step forth.


That ever thou wast borne! that ever thou wast borne, Divine Magus! well, the
Devil take me if I do not turn Magician, Astronomia! --


Come, Sir, stand you here, and move not beyond this Circle, and speak not a
word; and now prepare your self to be satisfied with the beauty of your Love

Bael, Agares, Marbas, Pruflas.
Loray, Valefar, Morax, N^berus.

Good Magus leave off, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, I shall never be able to endure.


Classialabolas --


Oh, I Will cry out if ye will not leave.


Amduscias, Zagan, Elauros, Orobas.


Oh, I shall --


Hagaenti, Vual, Zaleos.


I cannot endure it, oh I cannot endure it.


What a faint-hearted Lover is this? I must send them away again, before they
are come

Va, Va, Va, Acim, Acim, Acim,
Ei, Ei, Ei: Hau, Hau, Hau.
Procul hinc, procul ite profani; redite, redite. Come, Sir, will you rise to
see your Love


Is she gone yet?


Why? Do you love her so well, that you would have her gone?


Oh! I cannot endure it.


Not endure her? Marry you love her well then it is likely.


Well, I besecch you, Sir, fall to your last remedy, Medicine: for this is
intolerable


Well, Sir, that does not belong to you.


No? why? Must not I take Physic to make her fall in love with me?


No, Geometres: what device do thou think should be in that?


Nay alas I cannot tell, I do but ask; come I pray, let us be gone hence, I
cannot endure to stay here, we will talk further of this in some other place.
Good Magus, let me hold by you till we are gone a pretty way hence


Come, you're a brave Mars for a Venus!


COme, Lasses: in faith I have been arraigned, condemned and executed, without
holding up my hand at a Bar


Why? Did thou ever offend the Heavens in thy life, Astronomia?


No. But it seems I have offended Nature; for I Am sure my mother Physica has
powered out her affection toward me


As how, I prithee?


Nay, I have been held upon her Items: Item, for being in company with
Geographus: Item, for being in company with Astrologia --


With me?


Item, for wearing my best clothes every day: Alas, alas, does my Mother think
All Natures desire the same things? It pleases Her in Summer to wear one kind
of garment; in Winter another; in Autumn and Spring as different: another
perhaps would count this pride in her: I wear always the same, which me
thinks her age (but that, Age is froward) might interpret, as a three-sold
virtue, Humility, Thrift, and Constancy: but --


Oh! I can easily guess why she speaks against me: I perceive all eminency
of gifts is attended on by envy: but ^ush, Old -- I say no worse: let her
chide the gods that gave me my Foreknowledge of things above her apprehension:
believe me, I saw this great contention before, in the present Conjunction of
Saturn and Mars: But for Geographus, I would wish your Height of worth,
Astronomia, would not Descend unto his Baseness


You abuse me, Astrologia: baseness?


Nay, then I perceive there is somewhat of fate in love; and that the Stars
do not rule men, but men the Stars; why there is no Proportion of worth
between him and Geometres, a man cut out by the very Square of all virtue


I, and let Arithmetica be cast out of the Number of the Sciences; if in his
very face (I speak it freely behind his back) appear not to my eye the very
Figure of sincerity


Alas! would you Parallel Geometres with Geographus? you may as well liken the
Middle of the Earth to the whole Circumference: or, but some Angle to a whole
Map


Nay, you are the whole Heauen-wide, Astronomia, on the contrary part; for
though Geometres think there be too great Disparity between him and me, and
that Arithmetica stands now but for a Cipher in his account; yet, that conceit
of his shall never make a Fraction or Division in my love, but as he was once
mine Entire, so shall I ever hold it the golden Rule of friendship, rather to
Add unto, then Substract from my first affection: but let us not multiply
words: Musica, prithee what do thou think of this


Truly, I think Geographus to be a liberal Gentleman, and therefore may not
consent unto Astrologia, when she calls him base, yet I think he has some
Crotchets now and then of a Traveler: and for Geometres, I take him for a
plain Solid fellow: but in my conceit, in his discourse he is somewhat obtuse,
blunt, blunt


I, that is but thy conceit.


Indeed I must confess I have more conceit then judgment: But in my fancy,
there is Poeta,


Marry thou say true, for I think there he is indeed. Come, let us begone;
for I think every one now a Spy: for my mother told me she would set more Eyes
beside Musicaes to attend me hereafter: but Musica, do thou turn that way
and meet him, that if he be one, I may know whom to thank for my mothers next
kind salutation


FA, la, la, la, la, Sol, la, mi, fa.


How now my Treble, my Minikin, art thou so pleasant?


Oh sir, I see you keep your old Tenor still: you are always Descanting.


But my little Fidde, where have thou been?


Sounding your Harmonious virtues, to a Consort of Ladies.


Mine? If I had not called thee my Fiddle before, I might now call thee my
Trumpet, but I will yet call thee my Pipe, my Syrinx, a piece of Pan's Reed:
but prithee, sirrah, who were they? O Melancholico! here is a Wench, if her
Mistress would part with her, would make thee live one seven years longer, but
to be in her company


It Is a merry Wench indeed.


Why, there was my Lady, with Astrologia, and Arithmetica.


Thy Lady? Indeed I have heard thy Lady loves Music well, and for that
respect I have had a conceit to Her my self


A conceit? Well, I cannot stay or else I could say more.


Hold her, Melancholico, she shall not begone yet.


Why how now Sir? Faith, Poeta, your man looks as if he would fall in love
with me. Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa


Nay, prithee Musica, tell me how thou came to attend on Astronomia first.


Alas, it is beyond my remembrance to tell that: only I have heard a certain
Philosopher that was in love with Astronomia, bestowed me upon her when I was
but a child: but I Am sure she entertaines me so well, that I care for no
other service now under Heaven, she is a Divine Lady, A Divine Lady, and since
my coming thither, she has made rare devices, rare devices to cause Harmony:
but I must be gone, I cannot stay. Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa.


It Is a merry Wench.


But a Divine Lady! but a Divine Lady! I cannot tell what ails me, but I am
not very well. Follow me in, Melancholico


I follow, Sir.


WHat should I cry out now against the iniquity of the (...), for wrapping up
all in blind Fortune, and for the unequal distribution of their gifts? I have
indeed been about all the world, and brought home nothing but a World of care.
I could cry, I confess, but that I cannot find in my heart to be such a fool,
unless my tears would turn to gold, as those of Phaetons sisters did to
Amber; and then in faith I Would turn a most devout penitent: but, Phantastes, put
up the Siquis, put up the Siquis


I will, I will.


Faith I Am almost extracted, I Am come to the Mercury already; there is nothing
left but my wits: but what if I can get no customers now


Faith you had best turn Paper-man, and sell Maps; and yet that trade is
almost down the wind now: or you may get a pretty young -- one -- and set up a
Tabacco-shop


Foh! that is a stinking trade.


Oh your fattest soiles are most full of dirt; and I have known a fellow, that
was not worth a hair of his head, nay, that had not an hair of an honest man,
gather more gold out of this dunghill, then ever Maro did out of his Ennius;
that now he cares not for any man in the Parish: Oh! this is the trade that
yields e fumo fulgorem; Gold out of smoke


Oh, Astronomia! there is my chiefest grief, I confess; for as it is held
policy in rich men to love; so I fear it will prove ridiculous in me, if once
I grow poor


Sir, not many years since, before I undertook with you our journey about the
wide world, I was my self driven to the like streights; I mean, Sir, in that
Cod-piece-ago, when the innocence of men did not blush to show all that Nature
gave them, indeed, because they did no more, then, that taught them: then, when
they wore doublets with crawes, and sleeves with pockets, then (I say) the
fashion was so long at a stand, that I had like to have been at a fall: then
your Philosopher in the University, scorned nothing but (the unjust cause of
scorn) fine apparel, showing the severity of his profession, by the
ruggedness of his gown: but since, I think, I have fashioned them all;
though, of late, some of your gor-belli'd country-chuffes, have cast themselves
into their frieze jerkins, with great tinned buttons siluer'd over, rather out
of a proud niggardliness then an honest thrift


Well, but what course shall I take, if I get money?


Mary, Sir, this: wear apparel of the best, be merry, wanton, toying, bold;
affront any man: get a faire-false-diamond -- on your finger, and by all means
have a gilt watch, which sometimes, to know how the day passes, you must draw
out in the Marketplace, though peradventure there be a Clock hard by within
the view of your eye; 'twill imply, you reckon not your day by the peoples
Dyall: or sometimes you may draw it forth before a rich man's door, (you know
in our travails we observed the like in a Gentleman at Venice) and assure
your self, at the next meeting, he will give you the salutation


Oh! thou have a rare wit, my fine Phantastes! well, let us commit it to the
heavens, and if my stars bless me but to obtain Astronomia; I Will count it as
an enjoying of the whole world, which I have yet but seen.


ANd did she not say, Melancholico, she was a divine Lady?


Yes, she did.


And did she not say she had made rare devices, rare devices (for she repeated
it) to cause Harmony


Yes, she did.


Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa, hum -- and did she not say she would
not change her service for any under Heaven


Yes, she did.


Hum. And did she not say she could say more?


Yes, she did.


Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa, pretty little Musica! Fa, la, la, la, la,
sol, la, mi, fa, for she sung it three times I remember, pretty Musica; divine
Astronomia! -- the juice of the Gods Nepenthe were vinegar to one of her
kisses: divine Astronomia

Unjust, blind god of love, or not enfire

My breast; or, if thou do, crown my desire.


I Will read it, Sir.

If there be any Gentleman, that, for the accomplishing of his natural
indowments, intertaynes a desire of learning the languages, especially, the
nimble French, maiestike Spanish, courtly Italian, masculine Dutch,
happily-compounding Greek, mystical Hebrew, and physical Arabicke; or that
is otherwise transported with the admirable knowledge of foreign policies,
complementall behavior, natural dispositions, or whatsoever else belongs to
any people or country under heaven; he shall, to his abundant satisfaction, be
made happy in his expectation and success, if he please to repair to the
sign of the Globe



Good, good; I Will monopolize this commodity; Astronomia.


SIr, you did that by a Poetica licentia.


SO, Grammaticus, you would feign Rule me still: -- Et nos ergo manum ferulae
subduximus


Nay, Poeta, you must not abuse him that has been your Master, he has been
your Master, Ergo, you must not abuse him


Why, how now, Logicus? will you be the Neptune, to calm these Seas with your
three-fork'd Mace? I thought you could spet nothing but Aristotle


Aristotle? saucy boy? Aristotelis libri sunt omne genus elegantia referti; pro
Omnis generis


Nay, Poeta, we must grant you the eloquence: Nobis non licet esse tam disertis
disertos


Why how, no, Logicus? have thou caught the itch of Grammaticus? I should
rather have thought, thou would have infected him


How now? boys talk? by the soul of Priscian, A praeceptore vapulabis.


Nay, then in faith: Atrepido vix abstinetira Magistro.


Faciam vt meique ac huius diei, ac loci, semper memineris.


Melancholico, do thou crack an argument with clog-head, there.





He bites, he bites: O, do you scratch, you coward?


Yes, Sir, because you have the itch.


To him, Melancholico.





Well, Poeta, Refero ad Senatum.


Will you come again, Sir!


N^n si me obsecres.


I believe thee, in faith; Logicus, will you return?


I see no reason for it: Ergo, I will not.


O, have we broke off one of the forks of your Mace? he most valiantly now
runs away upon two feet: Stay, here comes Choler, Grammaticus his man


Who was that ran away last there? Logicus?


Yes.


Did you beat him?


Yes.


And who was the other? my Master?


Yes


Did you beat him?


Yes, Sir: what say you to that?


What say I to that? mary, I say, I would have fought as long as I could have
stood, if you had not left beating of my Master


Oh! is that all! Domini similis es; farewell, valiant Champion.


Oh! is that all? Domini similis es; farewell, valiant Champion.


How? bafled? by my masters Ferula, I Will quarrel with the next man I meet, who
er'e he be: and yonder comes Sanguis, Medicus his man; but he looks as if he
would say somewhat; I Will therefore stand aside first, and hear what he will say


MY Master is now in a consumption; he is come to putting up a Si-quis already
for want of custom; and if he had not lately been more beholding to Venus
then to Mars, he had been quite spent, long er'e this: She indeed now and
then sends him in, those customers that are sick in her quarters; for most men
now prevent physic, either by death or wariness; either by running upon
violent and quick deaths, and so dying er'e physic comes; or if they fall
out, never coming to bloodshed, but only to a few foolish words in their
idle choler


What? does he speak of me? nay, that is enough.


But I Will put up my Siquis and pray most devoutly to Aesculapius, or else my
Master will be the first that will have so much need of his own physic, as
Salus her self will be scarce able to save him


Soft, Sir, did not you misuse me, behind my back?


Misuse thee? alas! I thought not on thee.


No! did not you say, Idle Choler?


Why, how now Choler, are you so hot?


Yes, Sanguis, as hot as you for your blood.


I shall be about your ears, straight.





O, my head! my head's broke.


It Is no matter, Sanguis; there is custom for thy Master, beyond his expectation.


And beyond mine too; I Will pray no more this good while for this trick; the
gods are quick of hearing, I perceive; Aesculapius has sent my Master a
patient too soon, but the gods know it is a sorry one; but I shall remember
you, Choler.


Do, do; I gave you a remembrance on purpose; but, what had the Rogue in this
Si-quis? I Will put it together again

If there be any man woman, or child, that is affected with any disease, whether
it be luxation or dislocation of the bones, rupture, inflammation, obstruction,
impostumation, consumption, or any ulcer, whether it be pox, plague, or
pestilence, or any destruction of nature, as dumbness, deafness, blindness,
whether temporary and by accident, or continued from the birth; or whatsoever
disease incident to the body of man, that has been ever yet counted
incurable; may it please him, or her, or that child, to repair to the sign of
the Vrinall, and they shall find a speedy salvation.

Why? do not I know Medicus? and did I ever know that he knew this before?
well, he that performs all this, must be a god or a devil: but now I think
on it better, I Am half sorry I broke Sanguis his head; for if my Master be
hurt, he must repair to this Medicus; and then will Sanguis either pay my
Master for my sake; or make my Master pay me for his sake: I see, he that
strikes in his choler, does but repent afterward; well, I Will correct his
hastiness of nature.


WEll, Historia, I see love's unruly even in the wisest; you may do what you
will; but if you would be ruled by your friends, my counsel should be that you
would never fancy this Poeta, a fellow of that kind of profession, which all
Wise men have ever banished out of the commonwealth, as being the Mother of
lies, the Nurse of abuse, and at the Best, but the worst of knowledge; perhaps
you may think Polites uses this disswasion because Poeta's poor; (which also
I confess in the Policy of an ordinary Discretion is to be considered) but I
profess I Am chiefly moved at the uncertainty of his courses; which I think
would not very aptly consort with your sober consistency and stayednesse of
life: but I Will say no more; good Ethicus, supply my room


Reverend Polites --


Nay, nay --


Nay? nay? nay truly Ethicus, it is good manners, to let her answer in her own
defense


Nay, Rhetorica, we know you have words at will; every woman has two tongues,
and you have Four, 'twill come to a fine pass in a while, if we suffer every
young pert thing to be prachant, especially toward their elders, I may be thy
father, wench, and I will speak. Thou art a greene-head, Historia; I say that
Poeta's a licentious fellow, a Drinker, a Dicer, a Wencher, a Ballad-maker, a
Seducer of young minds, a Scoffer, a Libeller, a Sharker, an Humorist, an
Epicure; proud, fantastical, sullen, slothful, lewd, irreligious, and in a
word an enemy to all the Gods and Virtues


Have you done? you have stuck cloves enough in your Orange to make it smell.


Logicus, a fellow of some understanding, and though he has some of thy fault
(as a piece of thy tongue) yet it is likely he will make a good Housekeeper;
he is thrifty, thrifty, and I like that


Historia, take Oeconoma's counsel, or (at least) hear it, I Will speak
moderately


I shall the rather hear you then.


Indeed I think that Poeta will never prove a good housekeeper; for he must
have nothing (unless it be himself) out of Order in his house; but every
thing forsooth so neat, so trim, as if folks had nothing to do but wait upon
his humorous sloth: but we that keep houses (by cock a'py) must have room for
baking, brewing, spinning, carding, washing, wringing, starching, setting,
sleeking, pinning, folding, smoothing; here a chair, there a tub; here a pan,
there a kettle; here a wheel, there a reele; and a hundred such clutterments


It seems you keep a cleanely house; but I pray, how long have you been
married


Married? why, thirty five years last Valentines day; next Valentines day
'twill be -- just as can be -- thirty six years full, blessed be the day
when it comes


You may then indeed have forgot loue-sports by this time; well, you are not
angry with me for hearing you? are you


No.


Why then, I must pray you likewise that you will not be offended, if I do not
follow what I hear


Well, you may (if you will) let your own young head guide you; fare you well,
fare you well Shrewes; I Will pray, that you may have good Housekeepers to your
Husbands


And I, that you may have good Citizens.


And I, that you may have Honest men: farewell Shrewes.


Fare you well; you have had a time to love and woo, and so must we have. These
old folks think their Old Age must carry it away, as if they had won as
clear a Victory from us, as can be; alas! I Will give them leave to use their
Dead Precepts, but if they once come to lively Examples, I Will undertake my Self
to convince their best Experience. Poeta's love indeed of late is much
alienated from me, but as long I love him, I Will speak in his defense; did you
see how Polites did only speak an Accusation against him? and Ethicus Abuse
his froward Age; and Oeconoma Chafe out her weak conjecture? and then, (when
they had rather showed the Weakness of their Age; then the Strength of their
Reason,) flung away, as if their Objections could not be Answered, because they
would not Hear an Answer. I would enquire of Polites (if my Ancestors have
not mis-inform'd me in Antiquity) whether in the Time of Herodotus, and after
that, of Zenophon (and since of many others) there has not bin a like
conjunction to Poeta's and Historia's; and whether your chiefest
Common-wealths-men, either of Former times as Plato; or of Later, as the great
Solon of the Vtopian Commonwealth, have not made a Poetical invention their
chiefest glory? but there is no discoursing with Age; especially, when it is
poss^ssed with a perverse prejudice


And did you mark with what a Strength of Heat, his Cold Feebleness set upon
me? and I was Mistress Tongue; and I was Nimble-tongu'd, and I had Four
tongues. But if the Eye of Age be not so Dim, but that it may Reflect upon
it self: if the Ear of Age be not so Perverse, but that it may Admit a free
Attention; if the Reason of Age, will but yield to Reason; then shall his Eye,
his Ear, his Reason, bring in their several informations against his Age. If
we should inquire with whom does reside the most refined Expolition of
Language; would it be answered with Olde-folkes? if we should inquire with
whom does abide the most nimble vigor of purest Apprehension; would it be
answered with Old-folkes? if we should inquire who are most tried for Quick
Dispatch of weighty Affairs, would it be answered your Old-folkes? whose Age
brings Care, Care Weakness, Weakness Frowardnes, Frowardness Distraction,
Distraction Childishness: and thus running Round in the Circle of Time,
growing Giddie, they fall down upon all Four again, like Children: Children
I may call them for their Impotencie, not Innocence: for their Perverseness,
not Hopefulnesse; for their Impatience, not Tenderness; for then would they
afford a more Tender censure, of our more Tender loves: but let us be gone, and
though they Chide, yet will we Love; and I will sooner confess my Tongue to
want Eloquence, then my Love of Logicus to want Reason


And I will truly acknowledge Historia Unhappy in her love, but never Poeta,
unworthy of her love.


I Perceive yet I am not so Hastie-natur'd, but there be some as Hasty; why,
I would have sworn Logicus had bin a fellow of Reason and very stayed, but
(Heaven defend me) I almost quake to think what a thundering he kept, when he
came to my Masters House, one while he would Fight with Poeta, that he would;
then he would have him in the Law, then again he would Fight with him, then
again he would go to Law with him; at the last he resolves to do both,
though I know not whether he will Perform either: if he go to Law; my
Master (in Policy) will let his Own cause fall, to come in as a Witness for
Logicus; but in the mean time I must serve for a Messenger to Carry this
Challenge from Logicus to Poeta; which I must see, that if I have occasion to
send one to Sanguis, I may know how to draw Blood of him, before we e're come
into the Field; let us see

O Poeta, thou Poeta, base Nayle-byter, Deske-thumper, Head-scratcher: O Poeta,
thou Poeta; the very Bottle-Ale of frothy Humor, and, the floting Cork of
Spungie Vanity; since thou have (though not per te, but, per alium) by thy man
Melancholico, (but woe to thy man Melancholico!) with most audacious and
injurious indignity flowne up into my face (but, oh dreadful flying up into
my face!) know, if thou do not make thy peace with me, by a reconciling
submission (which you may do, and I had rather you should do, then fight. I
never provoked you) I do to thy perdition (O speedy perdition! think upon
that, and let me not fight, I do not provoke you) challenge thee O Poeta,
thee Poeta, thy very self (mark that) to single Combat at any of these
several Weapons, (for I only grant thee the choice of thy death) Battle-Axe,
Single Rapier, Case of Ponyards, Case of Pistols, Bodkins, or Pinnes: but know
that by my art beforehand, I do Define thee a man of death; and, for the
executing of that dire-full judgment, which yet thou may prevent (and o
prevent by not provoking me to fight) I will cleave thee from the crown of thy
head down to thy girdle, with the fury of a Division. Briefly if thou art not
reconciled, I shall gore thee with the Horns of this Dilemma. If thou Come,
Mine Innocence will overcome thee, if thou do Not Come, thine Own
Cowardlinesse: farewell till our next meeting with horror, and then eternally
thy ordained Destroyer

But I will not name my self, lest the sound thereof should kill thee with an
astonishing fear, and so snatch thee from the terror of my prodigious fury

Well, I Will go carry Poeta this Letter of Commission for his Execution, and if
he have the heart to read it through, without fallng into half a dozen
sounds, I Will say he has a good heart; but I must haste, or else I think
Logicus himself will overtake me.


O The soul of Aristotle! I was never in such a Praedicament before in all my
life: well, I Will to Causidicus, they say his house is here about, and I think
this be it: ho, who is within





There Is an answer indeed; when I ask who is within? he asks, who is without?

O, save you Sir, does not one Master Causidicus dwell here?


Yes, what would you have Sir?


Have Sir! nay, I have more already then I would have.


If you have any business, you may impart it to me.


Business? then I perceive you are all for Business, you have but little
entertainment for a friend; well Sir, are not you a Lawyer


I may not deny my profession, Sir.


If then you are a Lawyer Sir, you are either a Civil Lawyer, or an uncivil,
you must admit a Division, Sir, for your Lawyers are Aequiuocall, and therefore
carefully to be distinguished before you be defined


Sir, I must confess, I am not a Civil Lawyer, yet I trust not an Uncivil.


Nay, Sir, my Division holds; I prove it; Either you are a Civil Lawyer, or
you are not a Civil Lawyer: But you confess you are not a Civil Lawyer:
Ergo, you are an Uncivil Lawyer


Well then, Sir, if you would have it so, I am an Uncivil Lawyer.


Marry Sir, I then fear you will scarce plead my cause well: for my complaint
is against an Uncivil fellow, and therefore I much suspect your uprightness:
but yet since I cannot make choice, I must use you; but Sir, you must give me
leave to hold you a little longer upon some Interrogatories: if you are an
Uncivil Lawyer, then you are either an Extraordinary Lawyer or a Common
Lawyer


Faith, I am no extraordinary Lawyer, and therefore (if you will) a Common
Lawyer


Indeed had you bin an Extraordinary Lawyer, you had bin a Disorderly Lawyer:
for, though they are called Canon Lawyers, yet are they most Extrauagant. But
again Sir, if you are a Common Lawyer, you are to be suspected; for commonly
your Common Lawyers are to be suspected

But who comes yonder? Phlegmatico, my valiant Armor-bearer.


Before love most Meteorologicall Tobacco! Indian! (again) Not a lot
Sophisticated (again) A Tobacco-pipe is the Chimney of perpetual Hospitality
(again) Before love most Metropolitan Tobacco!

TObacco's a Musician
And in a Pipe delights;
It descends in a Close,
Through the Organ of the nose,
With a Relish that inuiteth.
This makes me sing So ho, ho, So ho ho boys,
Ho boys sound J loudly;
Earth never did breed
Such a iouiall weed
Whereof to boast so proudly.
Tobacco is a Lawyer,
His pipes do love Long Cases:
When our brains it enters,
Our feet do make Indentures,
Which we Seal with stamping paces.
This makes me sing, So ho, etc.
Tobacco's a Physician
Good both for Sound and Sickly:
It Is a Hot Perfume
That expells Cold Rhewme,
And makes it flow down quickly.
This makes me sing, etc.
Tobacco is a Trauellour
Come from the Indies Hither;
It passed Sea and Land
Ere it came to my hand,
And escaped the Wind, and Wether.
This makes me sing, etc.
Tobacco is a Critticke,
That still Old Paper Turns;
Whose Labor, and Care
Is as Smoke in the Air,
That ascends from a rag when it burns.
This makes me sing, etc.
Tobacco's an Ignis fatuus,
A Fat and Fyrie vapor;
That leads men about
Till the Fire be Out,
Consuming like a Taper,
This makes me sing, etc.
Tobacco is a Whiffler,
And cries Huff Snuff with fury;
His Pipe's his Club and Link;
He Is the visor that does drink;
Thus armed I fear not a Jury.
This makes me sing So ho ho, So ho ho boys,
Ho boys sound I loudly:
Earth never did breed
Such a Iouiall weed,
Whereof to boast so proudly.

'Faith it is my man Phlegmatico, he is at his rheumatike antidote; but I Will --


My Master, and I saw him not!





It would, if you would have let it alone, Sir.


You're my Target-bearer, sirrah, are you not? a present defense at a desperate
combat: bear this also home with you, till I bring you more my self, you
slauering rogue. Causidicus, I have by Action expressed, what my Passion before
would scarce have afforded words to deliver; I my self was in like sort beaten
by a Varlet, but upon an unlike cause, most injuriously; and now I come to you
to be my advocate, and if you will stand my friend, I shall not be wanting to
content you in any reasonable sort; and, because you Lawyers are somewhat
Tongue-tide, suffer me to be the Midwife to cut the string thereof, with this
Silver Penny. Nay, 'pray Sir be not womanish, you shall take it


Sir, I count my Profession Crowned, when I plead most causes: and since I have
at this present Sir, some importunate auocation of businesses; I will promise
you a meditated defense, and when you please but to intimate the instant of
your necessity, I shall fly to you as swiftly, as with the wings of Angels.
Sir, I partly know you, is not your name Master Logicus


I am called so, Sir.


Then fare you well, good Master Logicus.


Fare you well good Master Causidicus. Now look to thy self Poeta, for I
shall make thee fly to thy railing Iambicks: but look to thy self, I say, for
I have put a sword into a mad-mans hand against thee.


I Perceive to what Center all the lines of your Circle tend.


You would rather say to what Circumference all the lines run from my Center.


Lo, now you have confes'd: and is it Astronomia that must so Outshine
Arithmetica? well, were her beauties as the Stars, I Will make them want the
beauty of all beauties, Number; that they shall only be uncertainly gazed
upon, under an Indefinite multitude


You're out, you're out in your Account Arithmetica, believe me you are: I
only intimated your suspicion, not expres'd mine own desires


Well, Geometres, I have known the time when your love to Arithmetica was more
Solid, and not thus Superficial; the time was when Geometres would not do any
thing without Arithmetica; not measure a Foot of ground, but ask of
Arithmetica how many Inches it was; not an Inch but inquire of Arithmetica how
many Grains were in it: but now forsooth the pride of his desires is raised to
an Higher pitch; and now Astronomia is the Star upon which his eye is fixed,
and now Astronomia is the Magnetique Pole, after which the Lodestone of his
heart does turn. And Astronomia --


Peace.


What? cannot you endure to hear the name of your dearest Astronomia?


Not from that mouth.


Because I cannot praise her Infinitely? why then me thinks not from your own,
because you cannot praise her without Measure; well, Geometres, forgive me, but
I must love thee. Come, dearest; I Will be a Globe, be thou the Axle-tree: I Will be
a Circle, be thou the Diameter: I Will be --


A chaste virgin! I think she will get her self with child by an imagination,
without marrying; for she does already, me thinks, Multiply exceedingly, and
Bring forth: well, I Will leave you, or else there is no way, Arithmetica, to
stay your Progression.


Well, Geometres, know, when thou once forsakest Number, thou then run'st
headlong into confusion; but this is the misery of inthral'd affections; yet
since I cannot dissettle them, I will mitigate them; and so long count them at
least supportable, as they shall not exceed Number and Measure


Melancholico, passion of me! I had almost forgot the maine point of the
business: here -- give that to Causidicus. A man may as well open an Oister
without a knife, as a Lawyers mouth without a fee; but if he were half dead,
that would (like strong-water to a dying man) make him Gape, though he could
not speak. O the Serpentine ingratitude of man! that these snakes, whom I have
nourished in my bosom, should now sting me! This Logicus, a base, dry-brain'd
kecks-witted clinch-fist, not long ago, perceiving his fortunes to be brought
to a desperate praecipitation; through the incomprehensible difficulty of his
Artlesse curiosities, most fawningly embosomes himself into my acquaintance,
upon a former consideration of my alluring faculty; and in the dustie terms of
some cob-web eloquence, blunderingly stammerd out his extreme, his extreme
wants: for he had only so much enforced rhetoric, as to bring out those
words twice, and so by chance light upon a sorry Figure; then brutishly he
expres'd the rest, rather by crying then speaking; (and indeed he had no more
moisture else in him, then only to bewail his own misery) when asking what
was his request, he answered, that I would turn his unpleasant rules into
pleasant Verse: I straight out of the open freenes of my nature and an effuse
goodness, prevented the repetition of his suit, by a quick consent; thereupon
set my self a work, and after some travail performed it: Some Travail I
say; for by the Nine Muses, I think I was above Nine Months in travail with
that monstrous birth: If one but consider what splay-footed verses they were, a
man would swear, that some infernal hagge, not a Muse (though unwilling) had
been the mother of them; which unhappy labor when I had showed unto him, the
reviving wretch falls on's knees, admires the work, calls me the Aesculapius
of his salvation, and with hands lifted up, vows to pay his vows at the Muses
altar; that I now more admired at his admiration, then at the deformities of
mine own Work: for, by Jove, they are such unblessed, such unlucky verses,
that, besides the loss of custom, which they may justly procure the Author,
they are able to make a man be suspected for a Coniurer; there wants nothing
but a Circle to make a complete coniuration. Fecana, Caieti, Dafenes, Hebare,
Gedaco
Gebali stant, non stant, Febas, Hebas, Hecas.
Sure I think it should have been Hecate. Well, he enioyes them; and upon
the happiness of this success came Grammaticus to me with the like suit:
'faith I did it, and cast most of his Rules likewise into Verse: but by Jove,
since the proud Schoolmasters has showed himself thus ungracious and
stiff-necked toward me, I Will be even with him; and now I think on it, there is
all his Syntaxis yet to do; but by this hand, if ever I turn line of it into
Verse, let me hereafter be a mere Heteroclite, and the very Aptoton of a
fool per omnes casus


Let Us set upon him. The gods preserve you Sir, from the black dragon of the
night


The broad eye of the Heavens still attend you Sir.


And grant that the sweet Fairies may nightly put money in your shoes Sir.


And sweep your house clean Sir.


And make you the rich husband of many wives.


And the blessed father of many children.


The gods of the night send you happy dreams.


And that you may never pare your nails upon a Friday.


And that the horse-shoo may never be pulled from your threshold.


And that your Stables may be always free from the queen of the Goblins.


That your nose may never bleed only three drops at a time.


That a yellow Death-mould may never appear upon your hand, or any part of
your body


That you may never stumble at your going out in the morning.


That you may --


Be rid of you Varlets. What Egyptian darkness has seaz'd upon your faces?


We are indeed from Aegypt-land, and't please your good vrship: Brother, by
the Ruffian, I think this is a quier coue, he cuts such quier whidds: Good
Sir, if you be a Gentry coue, vouchsafe some small Win or but a Make, for we
have neither Lowre, nor Libbeg, nor Libkin


No by Solomon, unless it be Strommell sometimes in a Skipper; we had rather
Mawnd then Mill to keep us from Trining


Good Gentry coue vouchsafe us a little Lowre, or some old Duddes, as a Castir
or a Commission


Marry if I had a Commission* I knew what to do with you.


Ah, your good vrship, to cover our Quarommes, that our wants may not drive us
to the Chates -- let me see your Famble good Master


My Famble Villain? This is almost as bad as the language of Logicus.


Ah your good vrship! it is the Gypsy language: the vrship of the gods bless
your fair Glasiers, and look out with your merciful eyne


Gentle Ruler of this place, if so you be, vouchsafe to favor us in the way of
truth for the gods cause


Somewhat toward a meals meat, Well and Wisely bestow upon us, and the
Go-ads reward you for it


Ah good Master well and wisely, give me but an old sheet against the cold,
or an old Petticoat or smock of my Mistres's (Heaven save her life) for my
poor Doxy


Good Sir give but a cup of your best drink well and wisely. The gods save
the King and his Counsel, and the governors of this place; you shall have a
fair wife Master, and many children


Ha! a fair wife and many children? how know thou that? what is thy name?


Physiognomus, good Master.


And thine?


Cheiromantes, and't like your good vrship.


Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes? Why what can you do?


We can tell the will of the Heavens good Master; we can tell your fortune,
Master


We can tell the will of the Heavens good Master; we can tell your fortune,
Master


My fortune? why what is my fortune?


You shall have a very fair wife.


Shall have? thou mean, Would have.


No History ever made mention of so fair a one; she shall be as beautiful as
the Stars


Ha! as beautiful as the Stars? and no History ever made mention of so
fair a one? why that is, it shall not be Historia but Astronomia. I Am
crowned! Sirrah, you flatter me


It is the decree of the gods Sir.


Why now my dreame's out.


You shall have many children, and one of them shall be borne with Teeth in his
head, and his name shall be Satyrico


Nay, I Will bear with any misfortune in my children, so I may be happy in my
wife. O divine Astronomia, why? was not this my very dream


The whilst a murmuring Brook did gently play
With his soft sliding waves, and did complain
How Astronomia did my love disdain;
A Lady, like my Love, in Heaven did stand,
The Sun and Moon waiting on either hand:
And when I spoke, she Frowned: and, when I cried,
She, with a wanton smile, seemed to deride.
At last the Sun and Moon did both descend,
And unto me, me thought, their course did bend.
But when they were drawn nigh, they both appeared
Cole-blacke; that with the wonder I was feared.
They came and kissed me, and then suddenly
They both did vanish from my trembling eye.
The Lady then, seeming to smile, did make
A sign unto me, and did bid me take
The Teian Poet, sweet Anacreon,
My individual companion,
And in my native language to translate
His Niobe, and as it was her fate
To turn into a stone; so I by this
Should find a stranger Metamorphosis:
And she, that I did love, should change her heart
Of stone, and by her love release my smart.
I took my book and straight translated it;
(Lines soon are penned when Love does dictate wit)
With that me thought she pulled me up unto her,
And said; I Will now refresh thee my grieved wooer.
She pulled me up, and when I was even crowned
With Heaven, she let me fall back to the ground.
When with the fall me thought I lost my dear
Anacreon, and that increased my fear.
Then with this double fear I straight awake,
And my faint joints with a chill horror shakt.
I Will comment thus: that face that from above
Appeared, was the fair image of my love,
Bright Astronomia: and the darkened Sun
And Moon that graciously vouchsaft to run
From their own Sphere to kiss me, were these two
Black, but glad messengers (if this be true
They do pronounce) and therefore they were sent
From heaven, because they knew the gods intent.
The turning of Anacreon does imply
I shall obtain her love by Poesy.
And, ere I rose, this morn I made my quill
Express Anacreons Ionian skill.
Verses can draw the Moon from Heaven; then may
My lines, if blessed, win Astronomia.
Her letting me fall down, was not true story,
But feigned by envious sleep to make me sorry.
So was the losing my Anacreon:
But dearest friend, as yet thou art not gone:
No, no, my hopes and joys are too too great;
And these do flatter me too much --
But stay -- O my Anacreon, my Anacreon, Anacreon: Varlets, Villains, I Am
deluded, my pockets are picked; I have lost my Anacreon: did I dream? or did I
make Verses? or was I mad? now my dreame's out, it is out indeed, all; for now I
remember me, I left out the worst part vnexpounded, and that was their
vanishing from me: well, this it is to be a Starre-gazer, and fall into a pit; I
was thinking of Astronomia, when I was by promise to have met with Geographus:
well, I Will pursue my first intendment, and to Geographus for the learning of the
languages; and fear never a corriuall under Heaven, now Mithridates, and
Scaliger are dead.


I, But Medicus, who brought you word that Poeta was sick?


Why, Historia has sent one unto me, now to entreat me to minister unto him my
best physic; and the messenger told me (as he heard, it seems) the occasion
thereof, which was, that Historia who was in love with him, hearing that he was
hurt in a fray with Logicus and Grammaticus, out of the jealous fear of her
abundant love, sent to me thus carefully, upon the suspicion of his hurt


Why, Physiognomus, did Poeta seem to you, to be well?


Yes, in faith; or if he were sick 'twas more in mind then in body.


Well, Medicus, where is the messenger?


Why, at my house expecting my return.


Back then, in all haste, and by her servant send him poison, that if he be
sick he may die: and so one may be removed out of Geometres his way. And if
the poison chance to be discovered, thou may pretend 'twas her treachery,
because he does not love her, and that thy physic was good


Let me alone, I warrant you; but if I can but once come to the handling of
him my self, I Will give him but a clyster, and blow him up with a Powder, I
warrant him.


But, Physiognomus, are you sure 'twas he? did not you mistake him?


Faith, neither of us knew him very well; but Cheiromantes has brought some
testimonies from him


What, I prithee? what?


Mary, Sir, a book, and that I think is a sign of a Scholar; but I have a
purse too, and that, I think, is not a sign of a Scholar


What Is in it? what is in it?


Nay, I Will swear, we both ran since I Nimb'd it, that we durst not be so bold
yet, as to take leisure to look in it, but now I Will see


What Is this? Anacreon? an old bawdy Poet? a fit companion for such a Gallant.


A fire burn it; here is nothing but a scuruy paper.


But a murren, how could thou possibly get these things from him?


Faith, Cheiromantes, by the slight of the Hand did it very neatly.


I, 'faith, I have the trick on it: for (a rapture of love seizing on him, and
casting him into an ecstasy) he fell a talking to himself of a dream he had:
I seeing he was fallen into a Dream, persuaded my self he was fast asleep;
and so presumptuously diu'd into his pockets, whence I brought these spoils


Good, good, prithee let us see the paper.

Anacreons Niobe, or his Lyricks to his love, beginning with the daughter of
Tantalus or Niobe, thus, (...
(...).
Translated by me this morning upon occasion of my celestial vision.


Pretty, pretty, why these Poets, they are all of them borne, I think, upon
Friday at the sixth hour, for then Venus has the dominion of the Day, and Mars
of the Hour; now the Planet of the Day does chiefly govern their Actions, and
the Planet of the Hour does admixe a Subordinate Influence, and that is the
reason that your Poets have more of Venus in them then Mars; yet sometimes they
are in combats, as lately Poeta: so on the other side your Warriors for the
most part are borne upon Tuesdaies at the third hour, for then Mars has the
dominion of the Day, and Venus of the Hour, and therefore your Warriors have
more of Mars then Venus


Well, let us read them.

NIOBE, as they say, once stood
Turned to a stone by Phrygian flood,
PANDIONS daughter (so fame sings)
Changed to a Swallow had swift wings,
But I a Looking-glass would be,
Still to be looked upon by Thee:
Or I (my Love) would be thy Gown,
By Thee to be worn up and down.
Or a pure Well full to the brimmes,
That I might wash Thy purer limbs.
Or I Would be precious Balm to 'Noynt
With choicest care each Choicest joint.
Or, if I might, I would be (feign)
About Thy neck thy happy Chain.
Or would it were my blessed hap
To be the Lawne over Thy fair Pap.
Or would I were thy Shoo to be
Daily but Trod upon by Thee.
Pretty, pretty, by the dimpled chin of my Astrologia, pretty; I Will give the
rascal his Anacreon again (because I cannot tell what to do with it) for
this trick, and tell him I found it, and so make him fall in love with me
most poetically; well, my little rascals, expect a better booty of some richer
body the next time; be gone: but be in readiness, there is to be a banquet at
Ethicus his house, for the reconciling of Logicus, Grammaticus, and this Poeta,
if he can be there, and I with Astrologia are invited thither, wherefore if
there should be any occasion of employment for you, be at hand


We warrant you.


Now, Astrologia, take that powder, and according to my instructions at the
banquet, see that Astronomia drink it off, and I warrant her then, 'twill make
her love our more loved Geometres


Fear not, I know already by the Stars 'twill take effect.


Farewell; I must to Geometres, or else in faith he will Conjure me for staying.


FOr the learning of your languages, Sir, I must confess, I do highly approve
of it, but I see no such necessity of travailing, beside the danger and
expense that must be undergone


O, Sir, I could tell you such wonders, as would inflame you with a desire.


As what, I pray you, Sir?


Sir, I can impart such rarities of relation unto you, as would amaze you; and
yet they are familiar to a Trauailour. In a City of Greece, I remember I saw
the admired net, which Vulcan made to entangle Mars and Venus; and it is hanged
up in a Temple dedicated to the same god, and by himself was given thereunto,
to the terror of all Cuckold-makers for ever


O strange! but, Sir, as I remember that net was invisible.


Hum -- oh -- true Sir, it was invisible, but, Now Sir -- it is to be seen.


Sir, I will take leave to help a little my Masters memory, not his
invention; for by Jove, Sir, and by the Artemisian Mausoleum, which these eyes,
not without amazement, have beheld, it is true; thus 'twas, Sir: it can be seen
by any honest man; but if any Adulterer casts his eyes toward it, he presently
loses his sight, and therefore it is their manner of Trial for those that are
accused of adultery


O wonderful!


Nay, Sir, in another place of Greece there is a round, close Valley,
encompassed with exceeding high Hills; only on one side there is a narrow
entrance into it and through the midst of it runs a delicate stream, by
the bank of which if a man stand, he shall as perfectly hear the Music of
the Spheres, as if he were amongst them: and the cause of this, by the
inhabitants is thought to be the height of the Hills: which keeping-in the
sound, and bringing it down to the water, does by an aeriall resultancy produce
a most reciprocal representation of the divine harmony


Oh, that I was not made a trauailour!


Nay, Sir, moreover it is so sweet, that the hearer can never leave hearing of
his own accord, but stands still


O wonderful! but then I pray, Sir, how does he come away?


Hum -- faith I was told the device of that, but I have forgot.


O, Sir, I perfectly remember it, 'twas thus: The inhabitants have, at the foot
of the outside of the Hill, dig'd forth an entrance, and underneath have made
a Vault which reaches just to the bank of the River, all along the side of
which, they have made a many trap-doores, and so when a man has heard enough,
they vnbolt the trap-doores within, and let him slide down gently


Oh admirable! but me thinks when the door is open, they should hear it
below likewise in the Vault, and stand still there too


Well, Sir, by my Mothers soul (that oath I learned in Spain) it is a truth;
and the reason it cannot be heard lower, is, because the sound does not descend
below the water


Indeed, that is an excellent reason.


Nay, by Jove, Sir, I scorn to lie; I scorn to speak any thing without
reason, by Jove; by Jove, I Will give as good a reason of those things I know, as
any man under the cope of Heaven; I will, by Jove


Why, I have seen white bears with faces would make you fall in love with
them


O strange! white bears! and yet indeed I have heard that a late in America
there are white bears, but they are most terrible


Nay, Sir, and these have long tails.


That Is somewhat worth the admiration; and yet I think all Bears at first had
long tails, or else why should the Bear in the heavens have one


It Is true; yet (if you mark it) it is broken.


O, that came thus; when Jupiter pulled him up to heaven by the tail, the
weight of his body broke it, whereupon Jupiter caught him by the rumpe, and so
tied his tail together again, and that is the reason of the knot in the
middle of it, and so it has ever since hung slopeling downe-ward, if you mark
it


Again, Sir, in my travails in Tuscany, I beheld a most curious piece of
Architecture; it was an hall built in the form of a cross, that, which way
soever the wind sat, or the sun shined, a man might always go to one of
the ends, and so decline the present violence of the season: and as in an
arbor unto which the Sun has access, you shall see boughs at the top
correspondently represented on the ground in the shadow: so whatsoever curious
work was seen in the roof of this building, the same underneath was expressed
in the Floor


I fancy the conceit prettily.


Nay, Sir; I Will tell you a wonder, we met with a Trauailour that could speak
some six languages at the same instant


How? at the same instant! that is impossible.


Nay, Sir, the actualitie of the performance puts it beyond all contradiction.
With his tongue he would vowell you out as smooth Italian, as any man breathing:
with his Eye he would sparkle forth the proud Spanish: with his Nose blow out
most Robustious Dutch: the Creaking of his High-heel'd Shoo would articulate
exact Polonian: The knocking of his shin-bones Foeminine French: and his Belly
would grumble most pure and Scholer-like Hungary


How? his Belly speak?


Alas, that is the least wonder, for at what time Pythagoras flourished, that
was a familiar thing with his Scholars: and I may confirm it by a perswasiue
induction drawn from your Pythonisses, and your new-fashion'd Lutes that sound
from within, Sir, from within: nay, besides all this, Sir, at the same time his
Ears could sing, and his Brains crow; and he could Laugh till the tears
stood in's Eyes


O wonderful! wonderful!


If you please, Sir, now to employ me, not only my Wants, but also my Love
shall make me diligently respectfull


Sir, I courteously accept your offered endeavors.


Ah, dearest Astronomia, it is for thy sake I do thus.


How? for Astronomia's? [hee spoke that to himselfe] Sir, I am on a sudden
less well affected, wherefore pardon, I pray you, an abrupt entreating of your
present departure, and some speedy occasion shall shortly offer a second
meeting


Well Sir, we thank you; Apollo be always the Patron of your Muse and Health.


For Astronomia's sake? why? is he in love with her? (For Astronomia's sake!)
or is he in love with me! I woun't torture my self, I Will expound gently;
He Is in love with me, and because (it may be) he hears I love her, he
accounts (it may be) that he does this, that I may obtain her: and thus (it
may be) he means he does this for Her: This is Scuruie; Master Geographus
you have marred your own Market; my stomacke's turned; I have Tongues enough for
a wiseman; thousands before me have got Wife and Children, more then thy could
keep, without learning the Languages; and therefore from henceforth, for
fear of the worst, you may, Master Geographus, (if you please) undertake a
second Travel



That nothing is entire!
Nothing all-blest! but still some new desire
Brings a new torture! and this Fate does lie,
An heavy weight on all mortality!
It does; thus was not lately my affection
Chained to Historia by a strong subjection?
Did I not pule, and pine, entreat, and cry?
Pretend a sickness? threaten I would die,
If she not loved me? did I not act all
The frantike parts wherewith Love does inthrall
His Rebell-Subiects? Did I not look Sad
If she but Frowned; and, if she Smiled, look Glad?
I did; and took delight to be inchain'd
To her, Hope said at last she might be gained.
Yet see the wheel of change! I now do scorn
Her tears, and now she thinks her self forlorn.

Pardon my intrusion Sir, Historia
Hearing you were hurt lately in a Fray,
Has in her jealousy of love sent here
Some Physic, to prevent a greater fear.

She should have sent me Poison, far from her
I count it so; yet let the Messenger
Return our courteous gratitude. Begone.
Lo, thus vexations never come alone;
Well, I woun^t love her; nay, I Will ha^^ her more
Henceforth; she plagues me worse then before.

Pardon once more, Sir, here comes sent by her,
Medicus, Servant to administer
The Physic.

-- Why, I prithee know I lack
No Physic, there it is, thou may carry't back.

The Gods forbid, Sir, this is Poison.


-- How!


It Is Poison, Sir.


-- Why? it was sent but now
From my Loue-sicke Historia.

-- So 't may be:
They'ue changed my Masters Physic.

-- Oh to see
The Treachery of women! well, conceal
The fact as yet; just time shall all reveal.
O Women, Witches, Monsters, Furies Devils,
The impure extract of a World of evils;
Natures great Error; the obliquitie
Of the Gods Wisdom; and the Anomalie
From all that is good; I Will curse you all below
The Center, and, if I could, then further throw
Your cursed heads; and if any should gain
A place in Heaven, I Will time 'em down again
To a worse ruin; yet me thinks I hear
How Astronomia whispers in mine ear,
And begs a Pardon for them; well; to thee
I Will yield, thou stand'st above mortality.
Aspire, my gentle Muse, inflame my breast;
Then thus my graceful love shall be expressed.
Her Brow is like a brave Heroicke line,
That does a sacred Majesty inshrine.
Her Nose Phaleuciake-like in comely sort
Ends in a Trochie, or a long and short.
Her Mouth is like a pretty Dimeter;
Her Eie-browes like a little-longer Trimeter.
Her Chinne is an Adonicke; and her Tongue --
Is an Hyp^rmeter, somewhat too-long.
Her Eyes, I may compare them unto two
Quick-turning Dactyles, for their nimble View.
Her Neck A^clepiad-like turns round about
Behind, before a little bone stands out.
Her Ribs like Staves of Sapphickes do descend
Thither, which but to name were to offend.
Her Arms like two Iambickes raised on hie,
Do with her Brow bear equal Majesty.
Her Legs like two strait Spondies, keep a pace
Slow as two Scazons, but with stately grace.
Thanks to my Muse; yet why do I admire
Her thus, whom I enjoy but by desire?
For more I never shall; this is my weight
Of grief, and this my preordained Fate.

Of all my woes and loves, thou that alone
Do in the midst of sorrows yield relief,
And though not take away, make less my grief.
My dearest Lute, Apoollo's best invention
Wherewith he does compose the wild dissension
Of our untuned desires, which would confound
Us quite, but that they break forth with a sound!
Sighs from our breasts are like sounds from thy womb,
Borne dead, and buried in an aerie Tomb.
Sigh then to Cupid, tell him he is too blame
Not raising in my love a mutual flame.

Ho, Melancholico.


-- Here Sir.


-- Begone.


Did you not call me Sir?


-- Sirrah, begone.

Ho, Melancholico.


-- Sir.


Dance, I say, Dance.


-- I cannot.


-- Sirrah, dance that which I play.
Begone:
-- Away, away,
Charmer, Inchanter, it is a truth to say,
Our bodies cast their shapes into the Air,
And can appear when they are gone; so rare
Philosophers have held, and so I hold:
Pardon, great Astronomia, I was bold,
Too-bold, I do confess, but my dim sight
Could not before behold thee though so bright.
But now mine eyes are cleared; on my bowed knee,
I ask a Pardon of thy Majesty.
Pardon thy Poet, and vouchsafe this grace,
That thy rich beauties he may thus embrace.
And now, dear Love, add hereunto one kiss,
And then thou shall in heaven my soul with bliss.
Maro, thy Riddle's solu'd: I thus untie
The knot, which thou did knit, men's wits to try.
Dic quibus in terris (and eris mihi magnus APOLLO)
Tres pateat Coeli spatium (non amplius) vlnas?
Maro, it is here; here is Astronomia;
Here Is Heaven closed in those narrow limits; nay,
Here Is Deity, the object of all loves,
Enough to make a thousand Heavens of Jove's.
See,
Of Heaven, and in full luster be thou seen
Mortalities amazement; see, she is gone
To mount yet higher to a stately Throne,
Placed on the Azure pauement of the Stars,
Guarded by Days, Months, Hours, then sees the wars
Of Pygmie-mortals --.

-- Sir, here is Ethicus
Is come, and says he would speak with you.

-- With us?
Admit him in.

-- Hay! scarce dressed yet! how so?

What? comes your froward age to chide us?

-- No.
But to inuit you to a Feast, my self your friend,
Desirous of your peace, to set an end
To your contentions with Grammaticus
And Logicus, to night do purpose thus
To make you friends.

But --

-- Nay, no buts: Be there.

I will.

-- Why thanks. Welcome shall be your cheer.

Well then, I Will in and dress me, and so come,
Yet better (...) purchance you had my room.

(...) ^o deal with spirits?

(...) ^ly a Grometrician, it is lawful for you to deal only with bodies: but
if you will undertake Our Superior faculty, it is not only lawful, but most
honorable; why Sir, it is one of the greatest gifts of the Gods to have command
over Spirits; but for the approbation of it, you may only look back unto the
antiquity thereof, which is drawn from more then eight hundred years before
the Siege of Troy, in the time of Agonaces, and of the renowned Zoroaster a
King of the Bactrians, who described the high Mystery of this Divine Science
in an hundred thousand verses; after these there flourished Iobeth, Toluscol,
Zamolxis, whose admired fame was afterward emulated by Almadal, Alchindus, and
Hipocus Arabians: Apuscorus, Zaratus, and Cobares, Medians: Marmaridius, a
Babylonian: Zarmocenidas, an Assyrian, Abbaris, an Hyperborean, Thesphetion, an
Ethiopian, Arnuphis, an Egyptian, Theurgus, a Chaldean: with these I may
recite Cambyses, Zamares, Charondas, Dam^gorgon, Gobrias, Arbatel, Apollonius,
Gog, Hostanes, Atyr, Choastes --


Good Sir, do not conjure.


No Sir, these are nothing but the names of the Sacred Professors of this
Divine Science


I but it may be Sir, they had coniuring names.


Alas, Sir! it is not so easy a matter to work effectually in our Sacred
Science, as most men think it is, and as I will most manifestly declare unto
you; for this is a rule, you must be first an Absolute Astrologian; upon which
fundamental Supposition I thus proceed: before you can obtain the knowledge
of Astrology, you must be a most Grounded Philosopher, a sound Physician, and
an exquisite Mathematician; by the helps of which Sciences you shall know the
courses of the Stars; the number of the Orbs; your Poles; the Circles; the
Vertical and Pedall points; the Azimuth, or Vertical Circle; the
Almucantarath or Circles of Altitude; the Concentricitie and Excentricitie of
the Orbs; the Ascendent, and Descendent Knots, or Syndesmes, that Cut the
Ecliptike; your Orbs Aequant, Epicyclicall, and Deferent of the Apogeum, and
Perigeum, or of the Highest and Lowest Absis; the Planetarie Aspects, or
Configurations, either Right as Conjunction and Opposition, or Collateral as
Sextile, Quadrate, and Trine; the Direct motion of the Planets, their
Retrogradation and Station; then Sir, your Astrology is either Canonical for
the Influence of the Stars, or Thematicall for the Erection of a Scheme of
the Heavens, wherein is to be known the Order of the Domicils, and the
Inscription. Then there is your Iudiciarie, which is either Genethliacall, or
Catholic instructing in predictions, either Idiomaticall or Symptomaticall;
the eight and twenty Mansions of the Moon; the Symbolization of Occult
qualities in Herbs, with the Planets; Signacles, Pentacles, Planetarie
Suffumigations, Unctions, Pailters, Rings, Alligations, Suspensions; the twelve
Scales of the Numbers; the Duodenarie Scale, either Cabalisticall or Orphicall;
the Characters, Seals, and Bands of Spirits --


You Will give me all this in writing Sir; woun't you?


Yes Sir, yes. Then are there diverse kinds of your Magic, as Necromancie,
Anthropomancie, Gastromancie, Cheiromancie, Coscinomancy, --


I pray, do you your self know how many there are in all?


Sir, One and twenty. I Will begin them over again, if you will. Necromancie,
Anthropomancie --


Nay, good Sir hold, we have enough already: But I perceive you Magicians have
admirable memories to get hard words by heart; I marvel you do not turn
Dictionarie-makers: Why? I warrant there is no hard word but you can tell the
meaning on it: you would put all their noses out of joint quite


I, and put them out of their wits, if we list: But then, Sir, to know the
Spirit of Every Day, and Hour; his Name, Power, and Legions under him, his
Form of appearing, whether like a Dragon, or an Horse, or a Wolf, or a flame
of fire; the Region whence he comes; the Gift he bestows, whether Learning,
Riches, Beauty; his Name, his Characters: these, these, are the wonders, the
amazements of our Spiritual Science; Spiritual I may justly call in, since
every Art receives an Excellency from its Object; and yet (alas!) I confess,
I am but young in it yet, and have scarce served a 'prentice-ship in it, if it
may be called a servitude, wherein there is such Freeness, and Euagation of
spirit in such exquisite knowledge; nay, Dominion over Spirits


Young say you? marry, I think, you are absolutely grounded in it, that can
know all these Mysteries; ah, were it the will of the gods, I had but half of
this skill, I Would give all that I have, and get more as I could; but can you do
all these Wonders


Far stranger, far stranger; most amazing transformations; why, there was
Apuleius so skillful in this Art, that he turned himself into an Ass, and
Lucian was turned into an Ass, before he studi'd it


O strange! but can a Spirit give Learning?


Oh, there was Hermolaus Barbarus, when he studied Philosophy, and less
understood any place, he would call up a Spirit to instruct him; so the famous
Cardans father carried one always in a Ring on his finger; and Agrippa had his
Dog with a Uncharacterized Collar


But can you by your Art, tell me whether or no I shall have Astronomia?


Any thing.


How!


Why, I can do it by Coscinomancie.


What Is that?


By the turning of a Sieve.


But I have heard, that is only for things stolen.


Ah, it is more general, and that you shall see; stay here, I Will but step forth.


Well, this is the man whom the Heavens have ordained to make me happy; O
Venus, be favorable unto me, and I Will build thee a fayrer Temple then ever the
Ephesians directed to Diana.


Come Sir, here are Sheeres and a Sieve; I must fasten the Sheeres? now do as I
bid you; Hold up the side of the Sheeres with your finger. shall have her; and
amongst them name you also; and at whose name the Sieve turns, he shall have
her


If it does not turn at mine, I shall die: 'pray make it turn at mine.


Nay, then it must go for nothing, for it must turn of its own accord. Be
silent now. Dies mies, Ieschet, been doefet, Dowim^, Enitemaus. Who shall have
Astronomia? Shall Poeta? Astronomia? Shall Logicus


He Is not in love with her, Sir; 'pray do not you put in him too.


O vile! peace; now must I begin again. Diet mies, Ieschet, Been doefet,
Dowima, Enitemaus. Who shall have Astronomia? Shall Poeta? Astronomia? Shall
Logicus? Astronomia? Shall Geographus? Astronomia? Shall Geometres?


Magus, what is mine is yours, goods, life, soul, and all: Venus, thy temple
shall be a mile in length; thy Image in it shall be greater then the Colossus at
Rhodes, it shall be all white Marble: The temple at Millaine shall look like
pale-faced ^^llow to it; it shall have as many pillars, as there are hours in
the year, and as many windows as there are minutes; and the Spire shall be
higher then Tenariffa, or the Tower of Babylon by eight score Measured surlongs
at the least. Magus, I have enough, I have enough


Nay but, Sir, you must Measure your joy; diverse have died with overmuch
rejoicing, and so may you; and then you would both break your vow to the Goddess,
and lose your Love besides


You say true.


Besides, you must use a means you see, Fascination; which you shall use at
the Banquet, which (you know) we are invited unto


Nay, let me alone for looking on her; I Will look through her, and through her;
and make her as Perspectiue, as I am Solid


Besides, there was a little moving, you saw, at the name of Geographus: to
signify he will be fair for her too. And again, there was a little moving
at the word Medicine, and therefore that must be used too: but for that take
you no care


Well, you learned men put so many doubts -- but I care not, I shall have her
in the end: come, I Have enough, now let us go


Measure your joy, I say.


You Are mine, you are mine, Astronomia, I Am in Heaven already; Geographus may
go travail again, and Poeta, in stead of Baies, may go wear a
Willow-garland


Come, let us in.


MArry, and I be thus troubled with you when you woo me, and seek to please;
what should I expect and we were married once


Nay, dearest Logicus, let not the excellency of your reason be so severe,
but that it may admit a gracious apprehension of a smiling love; let not the
exactnes of your wisdom be so regulated, but that it may express a courteous
acceptance of a Lovers admiration; let not --


Nay, and you once fall to Set speeches, I am gone; I perceive you are not for
common talk; I wonder, now I think on it, in what Praedicament a woman's tongue
is; let us see: yet, what if I make it a Transcendent? and yet it cannot be so,
for it is neither vnum, nor verum, nor honum: 'faith, and't be in any
Praedicament, it shall be in Quantitate Continua, and that is opposite to
Discreta; or rather, since it is so irregular, and therefore can hardly be
admitted into any Order, I will count it that Monster in Nature, and
Contradiction of Philosophy, Infinitum in acta


Why lo, now your self has made a set speech; and thus whilst you Reprehend,
you Offend: whilst you Direct, you Neglect: whilst you Reform, you Deforme:
whilst you --


Hey day! this is tick-tack: Here Is another shorter trick: well, I perceive
there is no other course -- which is your way


Which is your way?


Do you speak first.


Nay, do you speak first, you are the better Man.


Why, mine lies this way.


Why so does mine; we will go together.


I, But I must go this way to do a little business first.


Why so must I.


But I must walk here alone a little to think on it first.


Why, and I must walk here alone a little first.


Why, then fare you well; I can think on my business by the way.


Why, and I can very well think on my business by the way.


Why, you woun't follow me? I am going to a Feast.


Why, and I am going to a Feast.


I am going to Ethicus.


Why, and I am going to Ethicus.


O you gods! which of you will come to deliver me? Well, if we must together,
and if you will stick so close unto me; yet, good Mistres Tongue, do not
cleave to the roof of my Mouth


No, no; your lip is all that I desire.


TAra, ding de ding, ding de ding, lan, tan, dan, dido.


How now my nimble Crotchet? who was the first Fiddle-maker?


Thats's a question, Sir.


Why, for that reason I proposed it.


Why, for that reason you might have proposed many more.


I, but Answer.


I, but I must know first; it is a great controversy.


What then was the first kind of Instrument?


Why, that is as hard.


Why, I can tell.


What?


An Harp.


I but you're deceived, I rather think 'twas a Bagge-pipe.


A Bag-pipe? why prithee?


Why? marry, first understand this reason, and then I Will show you: You know
every Art both draws it is imitation from Nature, and labors to perfect it,
which it does by finding comforts to preserve it: Music then at the first was
found out as an antidote against grief: and by this means, when men were
grieved, they cried Oh, and there was one Note: then Hey-ho, there were two
Notes more. So, when they laughed, they observed three more by Ha, ha, ho. These
being first joined together, and afterward variously intermixed, were the first
harmony in voice; which being repeated unto grieved minds, were as it were a
pretty deluding of their sorrows; and these by observation were afterward
reduced to instrument --


I conceit it, Musica.


Thus, men perceiving that these notes were conceived in the belly, and
afterward, (as it were) formed in the passage of the throat, sowed Leather in
the form of a Belly, or bag; and with a Reed made a long Neck unto it, and
a Winde-pipe; which when they blew full of wind, and perceived it gave no
sound, they cut many holes in the reed to let it out, and then alternately
stopping the holes, they found an admirable variety of harmony; and as the
holes serve for distinction of notes in a Winde-instrument, so do your frets
on a String'd-instrument


Indeed I think this a truth; for as the voice was before the Instrument, so
the Winde-instrument before the string'd. But then how came your Trumpet up


Why, on this manner: When Triton came to help the gods in the Wars of the
Giants, he wanted a weapon, and finding the shell of a Fish, he did blow in it,
which yielded a most hideous noise: the Giants thinking it had been some
terrible beast, fled away affrighted, and since by a perfecting imitation, men
have altered both the matter, and the form of that Instrument


Nay, I do believe there is a great virtue in Music.


O Sir, it is your only medicine of the mind.


Indeed I think so, and that is the reason, it is likely, why Apollo is the god
both of Music and Physic: and now I remember it, in one place where we
came, in our travails, there were no Physicions, but all their sick folks
were cured by Music; where was it, Phantastes? I have quite forgot


Why 'twas in Creet Sir, where Jupiter was nursed, and the Music was made
with those Kettle-drums, which they sounded to drown the crying of Jupiter,
when he was in his swathe-bands: in reward of which love, he procured of
Apollo, in the favor of the Cretians, that at the sound of those
Kettle-drummes all sick folks, whose time of death was not come, should
without any languishing sickness immediately recover; and therefore the order
is, when any one is sick, they carry him presently in a Litter to the Temple
where these Drums are kept; and if he does not straight-wayes recover, they
carry him home again, as a man that must dye, and so provide for his funeral


Where is this Sir? in Creet?


Yes, in Creet.


I, but I have heard, the Cretians are mighty liars.


Upon the Faith of a Trauellour, the Honesty of a Courtier, and the Word of a
Gentleman, it is a most confirmed truth


Indeed these three are much about one value.


Well, Musica, I could talk with thee all day --


I, and all night too.


But I cannot stay now; I Am afraid they stay for me at the banquet. Is thy
Mistress there


Yes, I think, by this time.


Well, farewell till anon: you will meet us at supper? woun't you?


Yes, yes; I Am going for Music.


Come, my pretty Pigeon, let us bill a little; is it possible, Phantastes and
Musica should meet, and part without a kiss? -- now farewell.


Ah: these Courtiers are lycourish-lip'd: but I must go fetch the Music, To
ra ding de ding, ding de ding, lan, tan dan dido.


WElcome, welcome, all of you; i'good faith, I Am even young again, to see such
a jolly company of my friends together: but, passion of me! why, Oeconoma


I, I, presently, presently,


Ah, there is a good huswife, neither meat oth' table, nor cloth laid, nor any
thing in a readiness. Good friends pardon us, we are somewhat unmannerly to
make you stay thus; we will talk till supper is served in; but where is
Geographus?


Thanks, Ethicus -- save you gallants -- fair Ladies --


Phantastes, and Choler, Musica, now thou art come, be a little forward to make
a supply for our backwardness, and step in to my wife to help out supper
quickly: Historia


Historia? why, ask Poeta.


Me?


I, you; they say she is sick of love.


Poeta, where is your man Melancholico?


Faith, when I was coming hither, he was in a dump, and therefore I thinking
him not fit to come to a banquet, left him behind me; and indeed that is his
fault, he will not commonly be merry in company


Logicus, where is your man Phlegmatico?


Faith, as I was coming, my Slauerer was at his Tobacco, but, I think, I made
him smoke for his labor, and so would not let him come, for he would nothing
but have spawl'd in your room,


Well, remember this Phantastes.


What?


That you carry in the march-pane and not I, but I Will --


What? amn't I the better man?


Would supper were done: I Would bumme you.


What Is the matter?


Why, Sir, he is angry that I brought in the marchpane.





Why, sirrah, Choler, will you still be quarrelling?


You should let him be my man a little; faith I should be as froward as he; we
two should have a bickering once a day.


I would supper were done once for your sake.


Why, sirrah, are you still grumbling?


Come, friends, you are all welcome, we have made you stay here too-long for a
little sorry cheer; come husband will you place the guests


Sit down, you know your places; sit down


You are all heartily welcome, heartily welcome.


Why, Musica, where are the Musicians?


Here, Sir, here.


Come on, play, feed you our ears, whilst we seed our bellyes.


O Happy state
Above power of fate
Which you, blessed Arts, enjoy!
You were little Gods,
If you fell not at ods,
And did not your selves annoy.
But when pride does once tickle,
It makes us too fickle
And vain:
Till some good Old-men
Do temper us then,
And bring us in tune again.
Then learn of me
Thus wise to be
To have a yielding mind;
With weather-cocke art
To play well your part
And turn with each strong wind.
So you shall by prevention
Escape all contention
And iars:
So you shall be secure,
And never endure
The affliction of Learned wars.
O harmless feast
With Mirth increast,
Where Music and Love do meet!
Where the Piper does find
A more delicate wind
To make his pipe sound more sweet:
Whiles his stick does belabour
The head of his Tabour
Amain.
Where the Wine in the boules,
And every tongue roules,
Yet never disturbs the brain.
Jove's Trojan boy
Was no such joy,
Nor all his Heavenly whores:
There Is no such delight
By day or by night
E're felt by feigning wooers;
As is the soft pleasure
At such honest leisure
To sport:
When all are so merry,
They sing till they are weary,
And trippe it in comely sort.

Here, Logicus, you shall drink to Poeta,


I accept your Proposition, Sir; Poeta, to set a Conclusion to our former
dissentions, and to make a plain Demonstration of reconcilement, I drink to
you.


With the most ingenuous freedom of a Poet, I accept it: Grammaticus, that our
contention ending in love, may make a Tragike-Comedie, I drink to you.


I protest to you, Sir, I do put all former wrongs in the praeter-plu-perfect
Tence, and am glad of this happy Conjunction, and that we are all of us in such
a merry Mood: but by the way, my Masters, these Noune-Adiectiues of the
Foeminine gender, sit all this while vn-drunke to: Astronomia.


Intruth, Grammaticus, I am not in Case to pledge you: I pledged Astrologia
even now, and I am not since half well


Arithmetica --


If you Count again, you shall find that I drunk last.

Rhetorica -- here is to moysten your eloquent tongue.


An eloquent tongue is never dry, Astrologia will pledge you for me.


Astrologia --


In troth I have been drinking my Belly full of Nectar; but just now, my
thoughts were upon the present Conjunction of Mars and Venus


Why how now, Grammaticus! who do you drink to? faith thou art now a Noune
Substantive indeed, for thou standst alone by thy self, without being joined
to any of these Adjectives


Nay, do not you jest.


What? do thou make a Iester of me?


Nay, I Conjure you both; by our present meeting, that you go not out of the
Circle of harmless mirth


Me thinks I see a Direct line pass from the Eye of Geometres to Astronomia's.


Nay, will you, Poeta? you make Astronomia blush.


Some Aqua vitae, I say, for Geometres.


Why, Poeta?


Why, he is a dying I think, his eyes are fixed in's head already.


It may be, Poeta, you measure Geometres his looks by your own.


Me thinks I see a Direct line pass from the Eye of Geometres to Astronomia's.


I Am even stifled, I do not use to be in such a close Room, I love the Open
Air


Alas! Astronomia's extreme ill.


Friends, you are all heartily welcome, rest you here I pray, and we will in with
her.


Astrologia, follow her, and see you be never from her all the while she is
sick


I saw this disastrous chance in the stars, for as Mars and Venus were
sporting, they were beheld by the rest of the envious gods.


I Will in too, to sit and Talk with her, whiles she is sick.


I Will in too, that I may --


Be made sit down again.


Alas, my Mistress!


She did not look well.


Astronomia sick? then all the Heauen's awry, and my Musike's quite out of
tune.


'Twas, I fear me, a fit of an Ague.


Astronomia in a fit of an Ague? I never understood the Motus trepidationis of
the Heaven before


Musicians, depart the room. The Musicians go out.


By Jove I came to be merry, and I will be merry. Here Is an health to
Astronomia.


Here Is a health to Astronomia.


Here Is a health to Astronomia.


Sir, you wrong us all, not to take off your full measure.


Oh, Sir, they that drink with Measure, drink without Measure.


I, indeed, for they that Number their cups, commonly Multiply their cups.


He loves not Astronomia, that does not pledge her a whole one.


Well, because it is to her, I Will do it,


I cannot drink.


Nor I.


Nor I.


You woun't, I know, require it of me.


Well, and you woun't, here is to you that will: A second health to Astronomia.


A second health to Astronomia.


A second health to Astronomia.


By Jove I must be merry, and I will be merry; can you sing?


Begin, we will follow.


Begin, we will follow.


Have at you then.

FIll up my boule to the brim-a,
That my lips in wine may swim-a;
That my Muse may slow
And the world may it know:
Fill up my boule to the brimme-a

That my Muse may slow
And the world may it know:
Fill up my bowl to the brimme-a.

He Is a puny cannot swagger,
Carouse and yet never stagger,
But be soberly drunk
And closely have his punke:
He Is a puny cannot swagger.

But he soberly drunk
And closely have his punke:
He Is a puny cannot swagger.

O my Jacobs staff is broken,
And that's a disast'rous token,
My Compasses did slide,
My Ruler slipped aside:
O my Jacobs staff is broken.

My Compasses did slide
My Ruler slipped aside
O my Iacobs-staffe is broken.

Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna,
And still that sport we will beginn-a,
That our souls so may meet
In our lips, while they greet:
Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna.

That our souls so may meet
In our lips, while they greet:
Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna.

Here Is a health to Astronomia.


Here Is a health to Astronomia.


Here Is a health to Astronomia. Prithee Poeta do thou sing a Catch alone, and
we will sing the Close with thee


A match, hay boys.

THe black Jacke
The merry black Jack
As it is tossed on by-a
Grows,
Flows,
Till at last they fall to blows,
And make their noddles cry-a.

-- Grows,
Flows,
Till at last the fall to blows,
And make their noddles cry-a.
The brown bowl,
The merry brown bowl,
As it goes round about-a.
Fill
Still
Let the world say what it will
And drink your drink all out-a.

-- Fill
Still
Let the world say what it will
And drink your drink all out-a.

The deep Can
The merry deep Can
As thou do freely quaffe a.
Sing.
Fling.
Be as merry as a King
And Sound a lusty laugh a.

Sing.
Fling.
Be as merry as a King
And sound a lusty laugh a.

Here Is a health to Astronomia.


Faith, I can drink no more, Poeta.


Nor I.


How? not pledge me? Choler, fill the bowl again; by Jove, not pledge me?
pledge me, pledge me, Geographus: for by Jove --


What?


I will drink with thee, and I will sing with thee, and I will fight with thee.


Nay, 'pray let us have no fighting.


By Jove. I will drink with thee, I will sing with thee, and I will fight with
thee


By Jove you're almost foxt.


By Jove


Sleep, sleep, Poeta.


A rope of a drunken fool; I Have lost my supper by this: I must follow my
Master.


Ten-toes, I know you're a good footman; Come, Geometres, I hope you will sit
squarely to it still


Nay, if I cannot Rule others, I will Rule my self.


And if Geometres depart, Arithmetica will be none of the Number.


Farewell, Hostess; we shall be sure to have no reckoning now Arithmetica's
gone: and yet I Will pay you somewhat, Clinch-fist.


Well, you drunken rogue, I Will have an Opposition for you before Polites, that
you shall not be able to Answer to.


Farewell block-head: now pae-da-gog, pa-da-gog: I must say my Part to you too.


I, but, I cannot stay to Hear you, now.


Choler, will not you fight for your Master, valiantly?


No, I thank you, Sir, your moisture does allay my heat.


Are you all gone? then, Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto. I am King, I am
King: by Tantalus I am as dry as an Horse.


Alte dormi, Irioni, Chiriori, Essera, Chuder, Fere; Pax, Caspor, Prax,
Melchior, Max, Balthazar, Ymax, Adimax, Galbes, Galbat, Galdes, Galdat, Hax,
pax, max, alte dormi. Poeta snores: Magus waves his rod over him, and runs
round about him. Oh, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho; O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. Dragons fly
swiftly, Dragons fly swiftly





Ye gods that dwell
In darkest cell
Of lowest Hell,

Vouchsafe this grace
A little space
To guard this place.

Let now a deep
And moystning sleep
His watch here keep.

We would obtain
This, for this swain,
Whom wine does chain.

That so since day
Is fled, we may
Make him our pray.

O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho,


O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.


What a Rogue's this? he laughes at us in his Dream.


O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho: Tantalus, some drink, some
drink; or I will --


What will he do?


By the -- by the --


He Is about to swear sure by somewhat.


By the great -- By the great --


He will swear by the Great.


By the great -- By the great --


It Is so great 'twoun't come out.


By the great Hogs-head at Heidelburge, Logicus is a Blockhead.


Well said in faith, I perceive there is some remembrance of ones friends in
Wine


Corinna, will you kiss? will you kiss cockle-kisse? close, close, you Whore.


Oh, here is a brave Dreamer!


I will make this Verse like a Nut-hooke-like a Nut-hooke-and then pull down
-- pull down the Moon with it.


Sure, Magus, you have not charmed him well.


Let me alone; I warrant you.


Come kiss, my Pigeon, come kiss, my pretty Corinna, Nibble a little, my
Love; nibble again, and again


Hay day! he is at's Hexameter and Pentameter Verses in our tongue: 'saith I
think in some such humor this kind of Verses was first made amongst us


My purse is richer the^ the Mines rich India brings forth.


You shall not need to make a short Verse to that Sir: we will be very short
with you.


Take off your whole one, or take a sowse of the chops.


Beshrow his drunken fingers; Magus you have not charmed him well.


Alte dormi, pax, prax, max; alie dormi, Galbos, Galbat: Galdes, Galdat: pax,
prax, max, alte dormi.


See what is in his pocket.


A murren on it, here is nothing but a Purse with a paper in it.


Let Us see it, why, what is here? Verses!

Translated by me upon occasion of Ethicus his inuiting me to Supper.

The fruitful Earth does drink the rain;
Trees drinks the fruitful Earth again.
The Sea does drink the liquid Air;
By the Suns beams the Sea-waues are
Drunk up; which is no sooner done,
But straight the Moon drinks up the Sun.
Why then, companions, do you think
I may not with like freedom drink?
This had been lost, if I had not given the Rogue his Anacreon again. Is this
the rich Purse? Come, 'ifaith we will even serve for a Voyder, and carry him
away, whiles he is drunk, rid the room of him


Room for a Poet, Room for a Poet, Room for a Poet.


ANd have you been in Italy too?


In the most parts of the World, Sir.


You have disposed your observations by heads! have you not?


They are yet Sir but a miscellany, but I am now in reducing of them.


And what may the sum of them be?


Sir, they are principally drawn from the People, and Country: discoursing
upon the policy, and natural disposition of the first; as on the situation,
and fertility of the second


Hum, the method is sufficiently approoueable: but I like that very well that
you place Policy first; and would wish you to prosecute that fully, with the
most subtle examinations of your purest judgment: 'twill be worth your
travail: and it is a maine fault of your common Geographers, that now-a-dayes
do rather garnish the margin of a Map, then materially describe it; and only
draw a company of lines through it; as if they had rid over the Country to
take notice only of the highways; which yet a Carriers Horse knows better
then they; neglecting in the mean time more solid observations; whilst their
fancies (I will not say judgments) are weakly satisfied with these fruitless
superficialities; not unlike your sedentary Students, who for the attaining of
a little glory with some few less judicious of their own Sect, stirred up
with a contemplative ambition, earnestly prosecute those studies, which
themselves shall never reduce unto practice, in the actions of their life


Sir, the observation of government was my first and principal intendment,
especially in some secrets of state, as yet (to my knowledge) not observed, at
least not revealed by any


As what?


I will show unto you.


But how could you come unto the knowledge of them?


You shall understand that too. The secret is concerning the happy detection
of such, as from enemy-states, are usually sent to the subversion of a Land; my
means of attayning to the knowledge of this Mystery, was my acquaintance with
a Gentleman in Italy, who having been one of the most practiced
Intelligencers in Europe, upon the death of his Lord, who employed him, fell
into great wants; when, out of the fullness of a grieved mind, and the rather
to excite in me a compassion of his griefs, unfolded unto me the whole secret


Proceed.


The Italian Lord, that employed this Gentleman, furnished him always with
money, that he might cast himself into what shape he would, then sent him to
the enemies Land, where living, (either concealing his own Country, or
professing a dislike of it) and insinuating himself into the acquaintance of
men next to the best, would, commonly by entertaining their humors, and giving
occasion of such discourse at any meeting, with much Art and ease, allure every
man, to discover (even for glory, to show who could show most) all intended and
secret employments into foreign Lands; by this means he would learn the
whole design, agent, time, and whatsoever other necessary circumstance; then
the person to be employed, being commonly of estate not beyond himself, he
would upon some sought (though but slight) occasion, grow so far acquainted
with him, as to entreat the courtesy of Nations of him, to carry a Letter from
him to that Country; which being with all courtesy granted, he would, against
the time of his departure, provide a Letter fairly written, containing nothing
but some complement, or lighter business to his friend --


Who? to his Lord?


No, Sir, but to another agent, whom his Lord employed at home, as this
Gentleman abroad


Proceed then.


VVithall giving his friend in charge, upon their love, to give all courteous
entertainment to the bearer thereof; as, to provide him a fit lodging, with all
other complements of friendship: then reading this Letter to the Gentleman, to
free him from all suspicion of false dealing, would seal it in his presence,
and deliver it to him --


What device was there-in this?


This Letter, Sir, being written by the Art of Steganography, contained the
whole intendement of this imployd Messenger. That Art (as Trithemius has at
large discovered, or rather taught it) proceeds upon many devices, as the
putting together every first letter of a word, or every last, or every second,
according to the compact before laid between these two friends. Upon the
receipt of which, proceeded first a most courteous entertayning, and then upon
the maturitie of his intendements, an artificial detection of al his designs


All this bears a just probability of truth. Well, Geographus, we shall take
a further notice of your wants and worth; and since you have ingeniously
discovered both your free education, present state, and unavoidable affection
to Astronomia, and, as you say, hers mutually to you, I shall, I trust,
effectually, in your behalf, remove the unwillingness of her Mother Physica.
But withal, I hold it a course, not altogether without Policy, to inquire of
Astronomia, the dislikes, for which she does except against you, and therein by
a praeuenient discretion, exactly to manifest a reformation; for this time the
expectation of some business admits not a further continuance of our discourse


I shall rest, Sir, at the bounty of your virtue.


A Gentleman of parts worth the taking notice of; well, such wits must be
nourisht: it is the saying of my Tacitus: Ingenia, studique oppresseris facilius
quam reuocaueris; and I remember he there shows an analogy between men's wits
and their bodies: They are (says he) both of them long a making, but soon
marred. And indeed, young wits that are worth the nourishing, when they see
themselves neglected, are too-too prone to fall to desperate resolutions,
arguing thus with themselves, That if Virtue and Learning cannot advance them;
by a reason from the contrary, neither Vice nor Ignorance can debase them; thus
from bad premises drawing a worse conclusion, they overthrow in a moment the
workmanship of many years. But my Kins-woman Historia said she would be here
by this. Oh, here she comes


NOw Cousin, what? always sad? always sad?


Do you admire at my sadness, when you know, nay when you are the cause of it?


I? Cousin? how? how?


Your continual declamations, Sir, against my most loved Poeta, a man whose
praises admit no Hyperbole; no, they transcend all; and whose worth we may
admire rather then express


Why Cousin? my declamations have been only against his faults, not his
person, and so far --


Nay, for your State-distinctions you may reserve them to your self, you can
love and hate the same man at the same time by a distinction; I do but
plainly relate the truth unto you, and I think there is hardly any man could
more violently have inueigh'd against him then your self; excepting old
froward Ethicus; his age indeed must always be correcting some body


Why, but why should you regard him, when it seems he little regards you?


Marry, and little reason he has, when he sees the best of my friends, your
self, and Ethicus to neglect him. But otherwise I Am sure he did love me once:
there have bin of the Historias that have been well beloved by Poets, and
those the most renowned in all ages: as by admired Homer, the greatest glory
and Shame of Greece, the one for his worth, the other for his wants: then by
divine Maro, that beautiful wonder of Nature; and especially by one Lucan, a
worthy Gentleman of Rome, besides many more; that if you would vouchsafe but to
grace him, his Laurel would be the crown of your glory


I but he bears love to Astronomia.


I understand so much: but I think that rather the exiliency of some passion,
then any consistency of a settled desire. I have indeed heard also of some of
the Astronomias that have been beloved by Poets; as by Manilius, Pontanus, and
some other, who have written whole Books in the praise of their beauties; but
it seems their beauties had such small divinity in them, that they could not
raise, to any height of poeticke rapture, the wits of their admirers. And there
was also one Lucretius, a Roman Gentleman, in former times that fell in love
with Physica, she from whom Physica the mother of Astronomia deriues now both
her name and lineage, which Gentleman, in the passion of his love, writ books in
the praise of her beauty; but what wrinkle-fac'd Verses they are, let the
present age judge; and if her beauty was like his lines, sure she was past her
Threescore, when he fell in love with her; but alas, there was never any of
that family that ever came near the Historias for beauty


Well, Cousin, then what is the employment wherewith you will task me?


Why, if you mean to have me alive long, change your dislike of Poeta into
love, and reform him if you will, but not hate him; admonish him, entreat him,
woo him, and in a word, win him unto me; and those hymns of your praises,
and relations of your glory shall be put in the mouth of posterity; that
sooner shall the Commonwealth dye, then your fame


Well, Cousin, you have now enough admonisht me, entreated me, wooed me, and
in a word won me: refer the finding out of means, and the accomplishing of
your desire to the priuacie of my meditations


Reverend Polites, pardon the unmannerliness of my disordered passions; love
resisted grows rude and furious: but I will not instruct your wisdom; only
remember my life lies in your hands


And that shall not perish if I can save it. There are many accusations in
against this Poeta, and some of them I perceive will be prosecuted; he has bad,
and good parts; he has a wild head, yet may be reformed, and then there is a
man saved: a good purchase; nay, Historia is saved, that is a double. Well, then
since I must love him, I will save him: if he prove good, I win two; if bad,
'twill be but the loss of one, of Historia; who already professes, that,
without him, she shall be lost


OH, I Am so hot, I could drink a whole River of water.


Nay, if you talk of drinking, I could drink my self half a doozen Helicons
off at a draught: Musica, fetch a flaggon of Wine


Nay, let it be pure Water.


Have a care what you do: it is as much as your life's worth.


By Jove we will have our liquor about us. Go Wench, why, Sir, should not she
drink


Why, to drink in the heat of an Ague is present death; and I remember Galen in
his Book de consuetudine, relates a Story of Arius a Peripateticke, who dyed
suddenly, being forced to drink a full draught of cold water in the hea^ of
his Fever; though according to the prescriptions of his Physicians: yet, I
confess, in him there was another adioyn'd cause, which Galen in the same
place makes mention of, to wit, his stomach being always very cold, he
resolved on a perpetual abstinence from all cold nourishments, so that this
aduentitious cold of the water he drank, wrought not only against his
disease, but also against his constitution


Oh that was it, that was it; then fill out the liquor.


You Poets would make mad Physicians; or at the best but desperate
Paracelsians; But Astronomia, you stir too much; and so the heat of your
disease increases to an inflammation: you must rest more, you must rest more


Nay, I shall never live, if I leave moving.


I, but not so fast; you walk as fast as you do when you are in health.


Indeed, me thinks, she keeps always the same pace.


I, but if you mark it, it is not a direct Progression, but a kind of giddie
turning Round, which proceeds from a lightness of the head, caused by her
disease


I dislike your diet; for in the very hottest of Summer, when the Sun is in
Cancer, you eat the hottest meat, feeding altogether upon Crab; which two
concurrent heates of the Meat and of the Weather, are able to cast any man into
the inflammation of a Fever


Indeed, I confess that; and it is at that season, my only diet.


I, but it is bad; and again it is very good to feed upon variety of meat.


Say you so! marry, I think, you will prove a paradoxicall Paracelsian your
self; if you hold such Tenants: for you know, Sir, it is the most received
opinion of Physicians, that variety of meats disturbes concoction


Sir, I hold that opinion rather to argue the Authors superstition, then
judgment: for our nature delights in variety, and those meats which the
stomach does with pleasure desire, it does most embracingly attract, and
concoct most faithfully, besides the substance of our bodies consisting of a
various nature, as moisture, air, and the like, one of these parts may be more
spent then another, by labor, or other means; so that a man had need, for the
undoubted supply of all these parts, receive a great variety of nourishments,
that there may be a reparation for whatsoever the body does euacuate


I understand Sir.


Besides, Astronomia, going abroad you never take care in what Air you walk.


Indeed, I confess, I am too neglectiue of that.


Oh, that is a chief matter to be provided for; for the very same air
sometimes is hurtful for one part of the body, and good for another


How? is that possible?


Sir, it is a truth observed by Guido Cauliacensis; and in particular of the
air of Paris; where, if the same man have a wound in his head, and another in
his thigh; it hurts the one and heales the other


That Is pretty in faith: the reason, the reason, Master Physician.


It Is thus, Sir, the air there is cold and moist, and therefore most hurtful
for the head; and again, the same air by an obscuration of the spirits, a
degrauation of the blood, and a condensation of the humors, whereby they are
made less quick to flow down, does therefore make the wounds of the thighs
more curable, whiles the course of the humors is intercepted, whose defluence
or flowing down would hinder the cure of the wound


You Physicians, I perceive, sometimes have some of Apollo in you.


Pray, Medicus, tell me one thing; you are a Physician; I have heard Geographus
relate of a place in his Travels, where the people are healed by Music: is
that possible


O yes: I Will confirm it by mine own experience: I knew a young Gentle man that
married a young Gentlewoman; who being extraordinarily fair, and he as
melancholy, grew into a great jealousy, that she had made him a Cuckold, upon
which conceit, at the first but light, the strength of his melancholy and
jealousy working together; he fell into a strong persuasion that he had
Horns: the best Physicians were sent for, used all medicines and inventions to
cure him, nothing prevailed, whereupon they left him, entreating his wife to be
patient, and expect his recovery in time. Away they went, and none but a
little boy was left in the room to tend the Gentleman, when upon a sudden
there comes me by, a Bag-pipe-player, at the sound of whose Pipe the Gentleman
suddenly arose, leapes about the Chamber, beats his head against the wall,
so long, till at last he had broke his face in diverse places that the blood
gushed out; upon the effusion of which melancholy blood, that had corrupted his
brain and fantasy, the Gentleman's Horns were beaten off against the wall,
and the Gentlewoman became as honest a woman after that time, as any in Europe


In good faith, you Physicians are the only fellows in the world to tell
Tales by Gentlewomens Bed-sides, whiles they are sick


I, this Cure was by the effusion of blood, but they whom Geographus told of,
were healed without any such means


I Will satisfy you in that by another particularitie of experience: I knew
another Gentleman, who being very sick of a contagious disease, and finding no
remedy by Medicine, the Physicians caused Musicians to be brought into the
room, and play; at the hearing of which Music, he suddenly leapes and
continued dancing so long, till the laborious exagitation of his whole body,
had by sweat and breathing dissipated the contagion


I wonder you Physicians do not turn Trauailors, you would have an advantage
beyond them all, by making good your Relations, by giving a reason for them


O by no means, Sir; for if we should travail into foreign Lands, our skill
would there fail us; by reason of the difference of the Country, and our
ignorance of their constitutions and diet


Musica, some drink; me thinks, I have not one jot of moisture in me.


Musica, fetch none, she shall drink no more.


I must drink, the World was not in such a combustion at Phaeton's driving the
Chariot of the Sun, as I am in now


Come, come, Medicus, the strictness of your prescriptions must be dispensed
with, a little


Will you spoil her, Astrologia?


I Will warrant you, she will never dye of this disease, I have calculated her
Nativity, to know so much beyond your Art: the sixth House of her Horoscope,
wherein all her diseases are Prefiguratiuely registered, promises a better issue
of her sickness then so: besides, she shall have an happy Womb, for I find
in her Horoscope, Venus in her Exaltation, to wit, in Pisces, and Jupiter in
the fifth House, the Radiation of Venus falling on the First House, and of
Jupiter on the Eleventh, Luna being in the Seventh, illustrating the Fifth House
with a Sextile Radiation; she shall have a beautiful Daughter, her name shall
be Optica: there shall appear at her Birth four Suns, and as many
Rain-bowes, and the Air ouer-against these Rain-bowes, shall seem to be full
of Looking-glasses, and in the middle of each Rainbow shall appear a
Peacockes tail, which being reflected from the Looking-glasses, shall project
an infinity of colors in the Air


Astronomia, you go too much, you will never leave your Walking, and if
Copernicus were alive again, 'ifaith he would make you stand still


Some drink.


Help, Astronomia falls.


Marie, Heavens forbid.


I, here is your drink.


Ah, Astrologia, you made no Reckoning of this sickness, I shall scarce e're
trust you again, as long as I know you: Come, let us have her in, let us have
her in.


NOw my sweet Devils, I am even sick with expecting when Medicus will come and
visit me: I fear, his physic cannot work upon Poeta: that rogues Verses, I
think, are a counter-charme against all our coniurations: a rope on his
sixe-footed lousy Hexameters: sure, the slaves skin is enchanted; the quilting
of Ajax shield was but a thin Cheu'rill to it


Why, but do you think it is impenetrable?


Oh, far tougher then a Tanners: I have heard of a Poet, that having been
buried a matter of two or three hundred years, has been taken up again
whole, without the least perishing of his skin, as fair as any Vellome


Nay, by this Hand, I hold them to be everlasting villains.


And I know by his looks, if he once settle his affection upon a wench, he will
pursue her more swiftly then ever Apollo did Daphne; for he will overtake her
before her Metamorphosis


I, and I know the rascal to have a soft and moist Hand, by which I also
infallibly know he loves: for take a Poet without his wine and his wench; and
if he make not dry, pitiful dry Verses, I Will forswear Fortune-telling as
long as I live


But, I hope, that wench shall not be Astronomia.


Never fear that: I have seriously observed (taking an opportunity the other
day to look on her) the whole composure of her Face; and first for her
beauty, I must confess it absolute; for there are the two causes of all
beauty; a most exquisite Symmetrie, or correspondent commensuration of the
parts; and an exact mixture of colors, which adds unto the proportion an
incomprehensible pulchritude: since which time, I have taken a like view of
Geographus and Geometres; now for their heights, Geographus is somewhat lower
then she; but Geometres is of her pitch just; for the lines of proportion in
their faces, I must confess, I can hardly judge which is most like her, well,
I hope yet 'twill be Geometres, or if Geographus do win her, 'twill be by his
comely deportment: 'faith I wish him well, but we must work for them that
feel us in the fist


Well, Ravens, croke here, and whosoe'r comes by, make a prey of him; in the
mean time I Will to Astrologia, for I know not what is the reason on it, but my
Spirits cannot inform me of any thing she does, so that I must of necessity
to Astrologia, to know how things proceed: but there is one Galilaus an
exquisite Mathematicean, an Italian: whom I came very lately acquainted with,
by admirable luck; and he has promised to help me to a glass, by which I
shall see all things as perfectly represented in Astronomia's house, as if I
were there: till which time I must take the pains to have it by relation; but
to your charge, to your charge; croke Ravens, croke


HEre comes some body, Physiognomus; set a good Face on it and Affront him; and
I Will set my Fingers a work, presently


Hold thy Hands there, it is Sanguis, he is of our side, stay a little.


Well, I shrowdly suspect my Master for this physic: but mum, I am
o're-heard, I fear


How now, Sanguis? why do thou blush so?


Do I blush?


I Am sure thou look as red as fire; I think all the Blood in thy body is
in thy face


Well, well, all your words will not make me a jot redder then I am: but, if
you talk of blushing, I think you have more need to blush, if you knew the
report that goes of you


Of us?


I, of you; but especially of Cheiromantes.


Of me? what?


Nothing, but that you are a Cutpurse.


I defy mine accusers, and I call honesty it self to witness, that I get my
living by my fingers ends


Come, come, leave these protestations: a bad cause is better defended by
silence, then argument


Faith it is true; let us be friends: and since thy Master Medicus has taught
thee to Kill, we will teach thee to Steal: but honestly, Sanguis, honestly


We three will set upon the next man we meet.


I would 'twere Choler that broke my head the other day: of that condition, I Would
stay; but my Master has sent me to Magus. I must begone


Nay, stay a little longer now, Sanguis: who comes yonder? do you know his
Face


Well, you woe will help me?


My Hand shall be always ready to help my friend.


Choler, I Am Sanguis, and here is my head.


Sanguis, I Am Choler and here is my hand.


How? three against one? Hercules himself could not fight with such
disadvantage: there is no ingenuitie in this; I Will take his part for pittie-sake
at adventure, be it right or wrong.


O my nose, my nose --


I Will make you too Sanguis cry your Bloody nose before I have done.


O my hand! my hand! O you rogue, you bow it quite double almost.


Why men, beasts, furies, what do you mean?


Choler, Choler, draw thy knife, and flit Physiognomus his nose.


Ah you dull rogue, do you kick?


Oh, Phlegmatico! you are welcome; but prithee throw away thy pipe; unless
'twere one could make them dance after it, and so cool their fury


Why, ho!


Orpheus, they say, by music held beasts by the ears; let Musica then hold
the beastly furies of you, that are now by the ears


Why, ho!


He has picked my pocket. Sirrah, Cheiromantes, you rogue, where is my
hand-kercher


Nay, give him his hand-kercher, I saw you take it: there, there is thy
hand-kercher, Melancholico: why I thought thou had been no fighter


'Faith, ingenuitie made me fight, when I saw three upon one.


Come, come, for shame, be friends; you shall all be friends before you part.


Nay, I Am angry with no body: I did but fight, to make them leave fighting.


Nor we; for the quarrel was not ours.


Nor we; for the quarrel was not ours.


I thought 'twas Choler, and Sanguis, they still are provoking one another:
What have thou in thy bottle, Musica? Nepenthe to reconcile the Gods


'Faith here is drink to reconcile these furies, if they will?


Come, Musica, do you begin, and we will all dance after thy pipe.


You have spoke truer then you think, for there is a Piper coming after me,
and somebody else; they will be here anon: well, here is to you all then.


Phlegmatico, here is to thee.


Sanguis, here is to thee.


Choler, here is to thee.


Cheiromantes, have at you.


Work. (Choler drinks) Physiognomus, will you taste this liquor?


Play off: (Cheiromantes drinks) Well then, I am last, I Will drink to you all;
I Will leave never a jot: (He drinks) there, Musica, there is thy bottle


Sanguis and Choler shake hands; are you friends?


With all my heart.


With all my heart.


Cheiromantes, they say, you can tell fortunes; is it true?


Try me.


Let Us know all our fortunes then.


Come on, let me see your hand, sweet Musica: you shall be beloved of two, a
Courtier and a Scholar; you shall love the Courtier more; but the Scholar shall
have you; and it shall so come to pass, that the Courtier shall afterward be
your servant: your husband shall be exceeding melancholy: you shall have three
sons; the first shall be called by his fathers name (but I know not what that
shall be) and he shall be extreme discontent and solitary; and if he prevent
a consumption, he may live till forty; for longer he cannot, being of a cold
and dry constitution: the second shall be called Timido, and he will be
endanger of being bit with a mad dog; which if he escape, he may live till
fifty: the third shall be called Iucundo; the other two took after their
father; but he will take after his mother; he will be exceedingly given to good
cheer, music, and women: he will be in danger of a Surfeit; and of Fire; and
if he escape these two, especially burning, he may live to be an old man


Tell me mine next.


You, Phlegmatico; 'twill be long ere you can get you a wife; yet you will have
one, and one daughter; the child will die very young, of the black Iaundice,
and your wife of the dropsy


Sirrah, I saw you steal before, and now I hear you lie, you rogue.


Tell me mine next.


I Will tell you yours in your ear.


Thanks, dear Cheiromantes.


Nay, and fortunes be so good that are told in ones ear; I Will have mine told in
my care too


Thus it is then.


Pish, this is no such fine fortune.


Tell me mine openly.


Why, this it is: You, Choler, shall be somewhat happy in your wife: her name
shall be Poenitentia; you shall have two children; and one shall take only
after you, his name shall be Furioso. He shall die in his young age, in an
Alehouse, of a stab in at the mouth, which shall pass through his tongue, and
brains. The other child shall be a daughter; she shall take after her mother;
her name shall be Lacryma, a modest sober girl, and one that shall be well
beloved by wise men


Well, this is a pretty mixed fortune; now, what is thine own fortune and thy
fellows


Oh, stark naught, stark naught; I Will conceal them.


Then fare you well; I can stay no longer.


'Faith you shall not go yet; what have you in your pack?


What Is that to you?


Prethec, Musica, tell me, what thou have in thy pack?


Why, because you speak kindly now, and entreat me, I Will show you.


Hay, brave! what is here?


Morrice-bels?


And waste-coates, and napkins?


Why, how came thou by them?


Why, thus: my Mistress had been ill a good while, and because I tended her
very carefully; she gave me leave to recreate my self to day; and in faith I
light on merry company, where they used these jinglers: and when they had
done, they prayed me to carry them home with this bottle of drink


Faith, and there were enough, we would dance.


Enough? now I think on it, there is just enough, there is six pair.


Faith we will to it then, but what would thou do, Musica?


Why, I Will play the maid Marian.


A match, a match: dress, dress, we will have brave jingling.


I cannot dance.


Nay, prithee be not sullen, good Melancholico.


If I do, I Will wear no bells.


Why then lay one pair aside.


But I woun't dance now.


Why, Melancholico?


I woun't dance, unless I have one of the wrought waste-coates.


Why, now they have put them on.


I care not, I woun't dance else.


Come prithee, Cheiromantes, slip off thine again and change with him;
Melancholico must have his sullen humors. So, now we want nothing but the
Tabor we talked of: but it is no matter, since he does not come, we will sing,
and so make music to our selves. Who can tune the Morris best

Oh,


O my arm, my arm!


O my shinne!


Ah, murren on him; who the deuill's this?


I have hurt my breast.


O the side of my face!


A rope on you, must you throw me quite down?


Prithee dance the morris quietly with us: up, up, ho, and we will dance.


A murren go with you -- Musica, who played in the hobbyhorse?


No, I must not tell.


Come then, we will go now to Barly-breake.


I but there is one odd: what shall he do? sit out every time?


Yes faith, and give a reason of the other three couples meeting.


Agreed: run.


A murren on it, must I be the first man must sit out? nothing angers me but
that


Nay Choler, thou't fret and chafe now --


Come Choler, your reasons.


Why, thou and Musica are met together -- because -- Sanguine folks are most
fit for Music and sports. Physiognomus and Chieromantes met, because they
feared we would have suspected they would have picked our pockets, if they had
joined with any of us --


We thank you Choler, we shall be even with you, and't come to our turn.


Melancholico, and Phlegmatico joined; because one's too dry; and the other's
too moist: and so they will serve for Medicines one for another: come run
again: I Will be sure to catch some body this time


I can tell you Choler, you had almost mis't this same time too. Well, to my
task, since it is my luck. Sanguis and Melancholico met, because one's cold
and dry, and the other's hot, and sufficiently moist: Choler and Phlegmatico
(have at you Choler) are like a flap-dragon, or a piece of bread sopt in
Aqua-vitae, and then set a-fire --


Thank you Physiognomus.


And Musica met with Cheiromantes, because the hand in this sense, in respect
of Music, may most justly be called the Instrument of instruments: and
therefore most fitly to be coupled with it


In Faith Cheiromantes you are beholding to him, he has graced you.


Come, run again.


What? is it my course?


Hay! Melancholico will give gallant reasons.


I, he will be exceeding witty, I warrant you.


Nay, I believe he will give incomparable reasons.


Come on Melancholico.


Let Us hear the first.


He looks as if he would give profound ones.


What? do you mean to abuse me? I Will give none. I Will play no more.


That Is a poor put-off in faith; either play on, or else I Will call thee
Block-head as long as I know thee


Do, do.


Block-head, block-head.


Come, you saucy Ass, because you are so hot, I Will take you down: I Will propose
a riddle


Let it be a good one, and it shall be for all the reasons thou should have
given


Yes faith, and't be a good one.


Well, take it as it is: Riddle me, riddle me, what is this? It is not, and yet
we see it: it is like a picture, and yet it is no picture: and it was drawn by a
blind Painter


This is impossible.


Nay Choler, you are too rash in your judgment -- It is not, and yet we see
it, -- why, it may be you mean honesty, which peradventure you think is
nowhere truly: but seems to be some-where


No, no, your conjecture halts.


It is not, and yet we see it? -- If it had been, It is not, and yet we hear
it, I could have given a reasonable conjecture


As how? I prithee.


Why, I could have thought it to be Fame.


Indeed that had been reasonable: but you see it is not so proposed; neither
could that hold with the parts that follow: well, to the next


It Is like a picture, and yet no picture? I Will give a very strong conjecture at
that


Let Us hear it.


Why, it may be a Gentlewomans face painted.


That conjecture is plausible, but 'twill not hold with the rest. To the last.


And it was drawn by a blind Painter.


That Is altogether impossible.


You're too quick again, Choler. I can conceive how that may be.


How?


How? Why the Painter might lose his sight after he had drawn the picture, And
so be a blind Painter


Pretty, pretty, pretty.


But you are out, Sir.


Well, what was it now?


Nay, since you are so hot, you shall not know.


Nay, prithee what is it.


No, I woun't tell it.


Nay what sullenness is this? Prithee tell. What is it?


I woun't.


A pox on it, I long to know. Prithee what is it Melancholico?


Come, what is it, Melancholico?


Nay, I Am a block-head, I Am a block-head, Choler, 'pray what is it? your
delicate wit, I doubt not can easily tell


A rope of all sullen noddies: he sees every one greedy to know, and therefore
out of a doggednesse conceales it


A rope, if he had never proposed it, it would never have angered me. Will you
tell, Melancholico


Alas, I Am a block-head.


Well, we will wait his leisure.


I shall not sleep for thinking on it, if he does not tell me.


I shall dream on it all night.


Good Melancholico, what is it?


Alas, I Am a block-head.


Pish, why then Good block-head, what is it?


Nay, you wonn't tell who danced in the Hobbyhorse, you.


IN says I will, if you will tell this first, and swear you will not be angry
with him, for throwing you down


Nay, I Will know that first, and without all conditions.


Do (...) (...) pr^thee do.


I Will tell you (...) in your ear, Melancholico.


Nay, he have it told openly, it concerns every one as much as me.


Why then if you would know, 'twas Phantastes; that had bin at the same
merry-making with me


Phantastes! Indeed I have heard he is the only fellow in the Country to
dance in an Hobbyhorse: but he might have used his friends the humors better


But you will forgive him I hope now.


For thy sake we will.


Well. Now Melancholico, what is it?


I but Musica, you shall kiss me first.


Come on then.


Kiss me again.


Why and again.


And again.


And again.


Now you shall all recant the word Block-head, and say Melancholico is no
block-head: say so


Melancholico is No block-head.


So Musica, kiss me once more, and then I Will tell.


Why thus I do, sweet Melancholico, that art no block-head.


Well said, you little rogue. Why now I Will tell you, It is the Rainbow
described by Homer; but you shall have it by parts: It is not, and yet we see
it, -- the colors in the Rain bow are not true and very colors, but only
seem so to be; as I have heard Physica often say. It is like a picture, and
yet is no picture, -- that is manifest. And it was drawn by a blind Painter,
-- Homer was blind and a Poet, now a Poet as I have heard my Master say, may
fitly be called a Painter; as painting may be called Poe^sie in picture


The illation is superfluous to apprehensiue ears.


I Will remember this in faith; where are my Bells, and Wast-coates, and Napkins?
Well, now fare you well all.


Farewell, Musica.


Farewell, Gallants; my business lies this way too.


Who goes this way?


That do I.


Come on then; farewell, Lads.


Fare you well: I Am glad they are all gone, I have got some what.


What is it?


The pair of Bells which Melancholico would not wear.


I protest, I never perceived, when thou did nimbe them.


Nor I.


Nay, I Have the slight of the hand exactly; if I steal not some what where ere
we come, let me be hanged: come, Boys, we will have some liquor for these
Iinglers: in faith, Sanguis, we must take a Cup or two before you go to Magus


I care not now for drinking.


Fie, fie, forsake thy liquor? 'twil breed good blood: Sanguis, 'twill breed
good blood: Come along Boys


I Do find my self at this present affected with that which should not touch
a good Magistrate, an unwillingness to do Justice: yet I profess it proceeds
not from a desire to be injurious, but merciful; not for an ill will to
either, but a love to both. Whilst heretofore, I understood of this
dissension, as I was somewhat cast down with sorrow, so I was raised with an
hope of happy reconcilement, but now that hope also which before was the cause
of an uncertain joy, is become the ground of my most certain grief; and the
rather to see the state of our most blessed Commonwealth (which the gods have
decreed shall be eternal, if our selves hinder not) to be thus torn with our
civil Discords. You are not ignorant of the miraculous means which the gods
have used in raising us to this greatness: not by riches, but poverty; not by
plenty, but want; that what to others has been the occasion of disgrace, has
to us been the means of our present honor: It is the observation of the
Grecians, Tacitus, and truest Oracle of Greece, Thucidides, that the Athenians
Commonwealth was not raised to that glory (like the rest of Greece) by the
fruitfulness but barrenness of the soil: for which cause whilst the
Inhabitants lived secure from the invasion of Borderers, others growing rich,
were at last consumed by their own dissentions: so that for the avoiding of
public disturbance, when any were afflicted, they retired to the Athenians,
with what they had left, before all were lost; who as they did partake of the
Athenians security, so mutually offered to the Athenians the participation of
their wealth: the like I may say of our present estate; we have not sought unto
others; yet who have not sought to us? we had nothing, yet what want we,
unless it be a moderation of our felicity? All other Mechanicke faculties, of
whatsoever Corporations, have they not forsook themselves to retire to us? and
yielded up their estates, which they thought unhappy, to receive them as an
happiness from our bounty? I speak not these things unto you as an
instructor, but a remembrancer: Not to impose on you a new belief beyond your
experience, but to imprint in your minds a just consideration of your
dangerous contention. I have yet but begun to speak; but sorrow is a bad
Orator, and I must continue my speech with a silent Rhetorike.


Press the abuse thoroughly, as I instructed you.


I warrant you Sir.


How now, Sir! What do you whispering with my Lawyer?


With yours? I Would laugh at that, in faith.


With mine? I, mine, I Am sure I gave him a fee.


But I Am sure I gave him a couple.


How now! what new contention's this?


And't please you, he abuses me before your face; he bribes my Lawyer.


Yours! he is mine.


Thine? he is none of thine. He Is mine.


He can be Advocate but for one: ask him whose he is.


Causidicus, are not you my Lawyer?


Yes.


How! thou Varlet! why? art thou not mine?


-- Yes.


What new face of impudent villainy is this, which does appear unto us? O thou
Monster of a double tongue and heart


Pardon, honored Polites.


Varlet, thou prophaner of Justice! pardon?


Honored Polites --


Varlet, abuse not mine honest name with that mouth: with what face can thou
ask for mercy, unless thou had another face too? with what tongue will thou beg for mercy, unless thou have a third! with what heart will thou
manifest a truth of sorrow, unless thou have a third also? do not speak,
kneel, mutter; one Lawyer come to plead two causes? O new confidence! stand
aside, thy absence peradventure might sooner cause us to forget thy crime: then
thy presence, though with most fawning dissimulation, to pardon it: Logicus,
you are the accuser; propose your own cause; then shall Poeta answer for
himself; and lastly, Grammaticus your witness, shall allege what he knows.
Begin, Logicus


And't please you, Grammaticus was soundly beaten by this fellow Poeta, and, I
forsooth, by his man a clogge-headed Rogue; but that riming Rascal set him on


Fie, Logicus, fie, fie; how shamefully you wrong your self, by these
unseemly terms? besides, the Gentleman's worth is well known


He Is a Rascal to Me I Am sure.


Fie, Logicus, fie; you see I give you never a foul word, and that the
goodness of my Cause, moves even the Judge in my defense


And't please you Polites, every one counts him but a dissolute Rascal, and so
he has in all times been held but for my faculty, what age ever flourisht in
which that flourisht not


Nay, Logicus, you have little reason to say so, I can tell you: for if we take
a view of the most illustrious Age, that ever the world inioy'd, which I think
to be the time of the twelve Roman Caesar's; wherein Arms and Learning were at
their height, you may observe Poetry to have been most famous, embraced by
Emperors, admired by all who labored to have their names amongst the Learned.
But for Logicians, alas, (I must speak the truth) as their names were
unknown, so were their endeavors buried in obscurity: Indeed those times
were thriftie, and active: but these, out of a wanton softness of a dainty
sloth, do only spinne out these Spider-webs of curiosity; and it has been
often my meditation, to have an amputation of such Excrescencies, and to cause
that our youth which is to be instructed for future use, should not consume
the strength of their wits, in an injurious labor of fruitless vanities. I
do not deny a just knowledge of your faculty, to be most necessary, and our
selves thereinto have an advantage of former times: but yet, alas! how many
thousand famous Orators have there been without Logic? how many eternal
Poets without Logic? whose divine eloquence could speak beyond all Logic;
without all Logic.


Reverend Polites, necessity has imposed a bad message upon me, though unfit:
Astronomia is in a trance, and only the Heavens know whether or no she will
again recover. (I knew it boded no good luck, that all my Lutestrings cracked
last night of their own accord.


All the gods forbid; ah dear Astronomia, grief upon grief still: Indeed
Musica, thou wast an unfit Messenger for such sad news: for this contention,
it must rest undecided till another occasion. Causidicus, I warn you to be in
a readiness to appear, when you are sent for


Pardon, good Polites, honored Polites, good Polites, pardon.


Grammaticus what think thou of this departure? is it not pretty?


By my faith, I could make a bad Construction of it: this may be but a trick;
well, Poeta, I perceive you have some Invention


You abuse the integrity of our Honorable Judge.


Thou talk of integrity? go, go, thou art a cracked Pitcher, a broken
Pisse-pot, Polites talks against Logicians; when as your Logicians are the
only Scholars in the world: but the best is he does but talk against them


The only Scholars? the only Dunces.


Sirrah, Dunces?


Yes Logger-head, Dunces: do thou murmr? thou know not the Letters of
thy Alphabet yet


How you Slave?


Nay, never make a Vizard of thy scuruie face: I say thou know not the
Letters of thy Alphabet: have not I heard thee say? Omne A. est B. Omne B^st C.
Ergo Omne A. est C. and indeed I think there is a like reason, for A. may as
well be C. as B. but fare you well Blockhead, fare you well.


And my Choler were here, he would have him by the ears: come let us begone,
here is nothing to be done: are these your Law-cases? a murren on them, they are
Dative cases to the Lawyers; but Ablative to the Clients


Come, come; I Am sure our case is in a fine Predicament: I think we have been
put off long enough: i'saith all Law-cases shall hereafter be no more put in
the Predicament of Action; but of Quando, of Quando; a plague of these Lawyers.


WHy so; this is good: I have brought my self into a fine case: I must be a
Poysoner, I: and to get my Living must lose my Life; blessing on my wise pate
in the mean while. And to observe the witty revenge of the gods; that this
intended Murder should come forth by mine own man Sanguis, from whom in
Policy I concealed it: well, I perceive Blood is Open-mouthed and will tell
all: but since it is not much known, and that I am not as yet accused to
Polites, and now requested to help Astronomia, I Will take the happy occasion,
and use my best art to cure her, and so if she escape, I may peradventure escape
too; obtaining pardon for my recompense -- let me see -- by this water I do
find the state of her body much altered, and her disease changed. There was
an Astronomia that I once had in cure before now, and she was of the very same
constitution, had the like disease, and the like turning in her head; now she
dyed, and afterward we made a dissection in her head, to see what was the
disaffection of her brain, which when we had done, we found all her brains
turned to a matter much like clear Ielly, or a Crystalline Orb: but I hope
all such suspicions of this Astronomia are Fables -- but stay -- what is the
relish of her urine? (he tastes it) -- Pah, naught, naught: oh, who would be
a Physician to taste these things? it is worse then to be a Salt-peeterman, and
dig in a Priuie-house -- but what smell has it? (he smells to it.) Foh, worse,
worse, I cannot endure it, [he throws away the Vrinall, and breaks it.]
Astronomia's of a fair complexion her self, I wonder that her Urine should be
so dark; it is of the color of a Cloud. Well, I see she is very corrupt
within, and I fear it is this Astrologia has powdered her; to give her a Potion
at the mouth will not do much good; for 'twill be so long in descending, that
the power of it will be much debilitated; I conclude then, it must be a
Clyster, a Clyster; and so I Will in, to administer it: well, if I escape this
Scowring cleanly; I Will never come in the like Pickle again, whilst I breathe.


YOu see, I have in part described the worthy parts of Geographus; and
doubtless it is pity any cowardly youngman should spend the strength of his
best age in the murmurings of discontent. I can say no more, and you may --


Nay, I must needs approve of such commendable parts in him; but I have ever
thought your Trauailers like unto Meteors which wander in the Air, and their
love in particular like the shooting star, which only lasts till the fire is
spent, and then falls down again with a swift precipitation: but I Am sure my
Astronomia is of a more Fixed desire


I, but I Am persuaded he will be so regular, he will never go beyond the
prescribed bounds of her will; come, you shall see, she will so encompasse
him, that he shall never get out


He must, and shall then turn away his man Phantastes, that has incited him
to entertayne all his uncertain courses


Will you be willing, on that condition, to yield your consent, that he shall
have her


I will.


Well then, I Will hasten a speedy celebration of this marriage: for I Will make him
discard his Phantastes immediately; 'twas somewhat tolerable to entertayne such
a giddie Counselor, whilst be was unmarried; but hereafter assure your self
he will be more stayed: and consider, Physica, that though he have been a
Trauailer, yet he is now come home, and I hope not only to his Country, but
to himself


Well, your wishes and my counsels will work upon him, I trust; and I Will be
sure, he shall never stir abroad, but Astronomia still shall have an eye to
him


Come then, let us in.


FAirest Rhetorica, will the pride of your beauty still tyrannize? will it be
still in the Imperative Mood? and shall my languishing desire be always in the
unhappy Optatiue? let me go a little further, and come at last to the
Potentiall


Yes, faith, you shall go further if you will, to the Infinitive: I am not in
the Mood to be wooed now


Ah, dearest Rhetorica, I cannot choose.

Omnia vincit Amor, and nos cedamus Amori.


I wonder at this, Grammaticus: that you having brought Love under a Rule,
cannot notwithstanding rule it


Hei mihi quod nullie Amor est medicabilis herbis.


But why should you torture yourselfe so with love?


Torture? O but it is a sweet, a sweet torture.

-- In Genitiuo
Id tibi dulcedo faciens dulcedinis, illud
Demonstratque propago, propaginis: adijce virgo
-we learn this in the very School.


I think they are happy that never marry.


Oh, it is the right of nature: Funus iusta petit, petit and sponsalia virgo.


If then women desire so much to marry, why is Amor of the Masculine gender?


Because women are not so much love it self, as the cause of love in men.


I, but me thinks, they should be afraid of Actaeons fortune.


Indeed -- Est cornus cura sinistra: but that is not always: it is but a
Redundans, and therefore we put it among the Heteroclites


Well, Sir, my necessary departure must cut off the End of your discourse by
an Apocope.


I, but it is a Prothesis to my discontent: O, see the scorn of love: she
flies away. -- Nec vult Panthera demari -- well if I were rich enough, I durst
lay the loss of her, I Would gain her: but it is money must go first; and
therefore, now I think on it, it runs so in the rule. -- Diuitiaeque Nuptiae
item -- for riches must be the Usher, -- Oh! but who would fall in love?
before, I had a little Understanding; then I fell mad in Love, and now I do
nothing but waste my self with a fruitless Sloth; why this it is -- Intelligo,
diligo, Negligo tantum -- and yet I can scarce hope, and yet I must love.
Naturam expellas furca licet, vsque recurret.


MY great gods protect me; but the last night was a-dreadfull night unto me.


Why? had you any terrible dreams?


Worse, worse: my spirit Glassialabolas appeared unto me, and being skilful in
the knowledge of future things, most lovingly has foretold me of great danger
coming toward me; and he said it would happen when I did least suspect it,
and amongst my acquaintance too; he appeared in his wonted shape like a Dog
with the wings of a Griffin, but he looked most horridly, most horridly: and me
thought when he went out, there followed him four, just like to us four for
all the world


Like to us four? alas!


Just like to us four; and they cried exceedingly as they went: and I ventured
to call him back again, but he would not come


I vvonder I vvakt not; why did you not tell me of it before?


I protest I was in a doubt whether I should tell thee at all or no, it was so
terrible


Why you're of my mind just: for I had an untoward dream, and was verily
resolved not to tell you, but now I will: me thought I and Astronomia fell out
exceedingly about Geographus, because she kissed him, and me thought
shee-forbade forbade me her house, and that her mother Physica did soreioyce at
it, which angered me most of all. Indeed I do not like the effect which I see
the heavens likely to produce ere long, against somebody, but I hope 'twill
not be to us


In good faith, I had the prettiest dream that e're you heard, me thought as
I was about to pick a fellows pocket, he struck me quite through the hand
with a knife, and leaving the knife in my hand, thrust his hand into my pocket
and picked it, and so punished me, as I have punished others many a time


Troth, and as I was going to bed last night, there stood in the chamber window
a looking-glass; and as I came by, chance to lay my hand down there, the
candle not standing far off, I saw my face in the glass, but in good faith
me thought I looked so wanly and so scuruily -- and indeed I have heard them
often say, it is ill luck to see ones face in a glass by candlelight


Well, let then all our ill luck come together, if it will: indeed
Astronomia's perfectly recouer'd, and I saw but now Geographus and her with
Polites; which can bode no good: and afterward I met with Geometres, and he
passed by, without saluting me, but looked sullenly toward me: I know not
what is the matter; but I fear me, he has scarce learned the Rule of
friendship, to keep secrets. Well; come what will, we will not accuse our
selves by a foolish retiredness or fear; and if we should chance to be
conuented, we must be very obedient, and that will argue an innocence: and let
them prove what they can, it may be they can prove nothing, and then we are
free; if they prove the worst they can, and condemn us to death, we'll
patiently hear our sentence of condemnation; but when they are about to carry
us to prison, then you shall see my art: Glassialabolas three times, and we
shall all four immediately become invisible


Hay brave! we stand above fate, and the heavens.


Come, now let us go securely.


Long may great Magus live: long may great Magus live.


I Protest, Phantastes, I Am sorry for thee; but thou know I have a man
already, and one that loves me very well, Melancholico


Yet, dearest Poeta, if you will vouchsafe another also intertaynment,
Phantastes shall be ready at your command


How far have thou trauail'd with Geographus?


Too far, Sir, to be cast off now: why, about the world, Sir; or to speak
the truth, I have gone further then he


Say thou so?


Yes, I Will assure you, Sir: and I can acquaint you, Sir, if you please, with one
particular attempt of mine, whereby I out-ventur'd him


What Is that?


Why, Sir, in our North-voyage being come to the utmost part in all Finmarchia,
to the North-cape (the Longitude thereof is well-nigh fifty degrees, and the
Latitude almost 73.) being then past the Articke-circle about six degrees, and
so by consequent being in a parallel Sphere, Geographus durst not venture any
further; and there was, Sir, at that time in our company, a great Magician (I
have forgot of what University) which Magician and I, leaving Geographus upon
the Land, undertook (being so near) to discover the parts directly under the
Pole


But what was your device against the cold?


Why, Sir, besides excellent furs we had, we had also hot waters to preserve
our heat within: but at last we were come so far, that we were feign to
come out of our ship upon the ice, and then the Magician being also an
exquisite Geometrician, got the ship upon the Ice, and then made wheels for
it, and an artificial Engine to make it go of it self; you may see
proportionally the like device in your Puppets that will go and turn of
themselves. The ice then being smooth, the ship went forward of its own
accord, till we found our selves to have past the Articke circle twenty three
degrees full. Then were we half a degree just from the Pole: there we met with
a most furious sea, that scorns to yield to the usurping cold; when the
Geometrician takes me off the wheels, and forth we lanched, and so sailed till
we came to have the Pole it self for our Zenith; and then we beheld a
dreadful rock


How did ye then?


Why thus, Sir: when the Magician saw this, he immediately draws a book out
of his Pocket, and falls to reading; when straightway all the sea about us
was as calm as a fresh water river amongst us: and the ship went no faster
then we would have it our selves; and so without any danger we came to the
rock; unto which making a shift to fasten our ship, we ascended: it seemed
as black as any Pitch: upon the top of which (for we went to the top) there
ascended an huge Pillar: which on the lower parts seemed as black as the
rock; but still in the Ascent it grew whiter, and whiter; and indeed the whole
pillar seemed to us very Ice, but that it was at the lower part blacker, and it
was as big as ordinarily any tower among us; and at the bottom of it there
was a passage to go in. We went in, and being entered, there were two pair of
stairs, the one descending, the other ascending: for we found the pillar to be
hollow, and our sight could not discover without-side how high it was: we went
down wards some dozen or twenty stairs, where we heard a most hideous noise,
that our hearts failing us we came up again


And what did you come away then?


No, Sir, we then went upwards, and in our ascent we still found open places to
give us light and Air; as big commonly as a door; and we ascended so far,
that at last the Sun shined upon us, as it does here, and then it grieved us
to think we were to go back such an uncouth way again; well, we went still
higher, and at last looking out at these doors, and seeing that part of the
world that lay toward us, (being a fine Sunshine day,) we saw a very terrible
battle, fought between the Turk and the Persian, wherein the Turk was put
to the worst: but now the Magician growing weary, and desirous to know how
far this Pillar ascended, he held by the side of the door, and looked
vpwardes, but with the fear suddenly fell down: and there was the unhappy
end of my companion. This pillar doubtless we coniectur'd to be the Pole, and
the way to heaven; and the stairs that descended, the way to hell, and to the
other Pole. With this accident I being half affrighted, with a trembling at
the wonders of the gods, humbly descended


Alas! what did you do in that case being alone?


Why, Sir, when I was come down, the sea was still calm; and so I vnfastening
the ship, saild the Ice, and according to the instruction I had learned of the
Magician, I got it over the Ice; and without any danger returned to Geographus


Me thinks you should have had but Cold Comfort to be in that place alone.


I protest unto you, Sir, simple as I stand here now, I did it then. Now, Sir,
wheresoever Geographus comes, he equally bragges of this attempt as his also;
but I vow by my former dangers and present griefs, the discovery was made
only by Magus, and Phantastes; and the relation by Phantastes only


And is this the reward which Geographus having now gotten enough gives unto
you? especially you having saved his credit hitherto in not discovering also
his lying arrogancy? it is inhumane ingratitude

Ethicus (to Phantastes) How now weather-cocke? what wind blew you this way?
(to Poeta) Why, wise man, have you never a fitter Companion then this
travailing gallant? [to Phantastes] Pray be so mannerly as to travail a little
aside; I must speak with Poeta


Alas sir, I Will not disturb you; when a man's once down, I perceive he shall
be trod upon.


How now? what would this fellovv have with you?


A service.


Yes faith, you should entertain every man's castoff. Come, are you ready with
your Mask you promised Polites at the Celebration of Astronomia's marriage?
all the chief of the Commonwealth will be there


Yes I will attend upon their joy and mine own grief: I have made a mask
aforehand; for I foresavv long ago Geographus should have her; I have kept my
promise; but it is but short, as my discontent would give me leave: and the
boys that are to act it, have learned it at once reading over, and
Melancholico has dressed them by this time I think


Come, let us in: I hope ere long to come to your wedding and Historia's.


Mine? alas! I Will resolve now to live and die a maid: Historia shall register
me up among her examples of virginity


I, and thy verse make her immortal: come, let us go, but thou make me
laugh, a Poet die a maid? I never knew any of the brood yet, so chaste.


NAy Causidicus, your state cannot be worse then mine; for I Am in a terrible
quandarie, more shaking then an Ague: 't had bin better I had taken the poison
my self, for so I might have took a Vomit, and peradventure got it up again;
but I shall never be able to Purge my self of this infamy


'Faith Medicus, and I think no man's case can be likely worse then mine own:
for it had been better for me if I had pleaded never a cause, rather then two.
Well, I fear by this double fee, I shall purchase the fee-simple of a knave,
as long as I live


Indeed I do not well see how you will be ever able to plead again now your
tongue's cloven; and yet I remember there was a famous Lawyer, that riding to
plead two or three causes (just as you would have done now) unhappily fell off
his horse, and falling on his chinne, his tongue by chance doubling in his
mouth, he bit it quite through, and yet by good luck I cured him


Nay, for my tongue, that will do well enough: but it is my ears that I fear:
I would I had but a Lease of mine own life for them


'Faith, witty great crimes are like a consumption, they are easily to be cured
when they begin, but hardly discovered; and easily discovered when they are
ripe, but hardly cured: and therefore I fear we shall be both cut off as
desperate Members


Well, yet let us keep possession of our states as long as we can; and that
must be by this means. If we be called to our accounts, not presently to
confess, for the veriest thief will at the first plead, Not Guilty: and yet
we will not too-stiffely stand in our innocence, that so there may be a way
left for our pardon


Well, let us hasten in to the celebration of the marriage; for wee're expected
before this time; my heart's almost at my mouth with fear, and Dances, me
thinks, as if it were at the wedding already


This Polites is a subtle fellow, and he will take us when we little think on it;
but we will go voluntarily, and so he shall not need to send out a Capias ad
respondendum, for us


Well, I think when all comes to all, our best means to wash away these
faults, will be our Distillation of tears.


ALl happiness attend the Nuptials.


All happiness attend the Nuptials.


Physica, you now behold the blessed union of your dearest child.


And with joy, thanks to the gods and most honored Polites.


How now, sirrah? what do you here? you serve no body here, get you our again.


I woun't, Sir: they say here is a mask to be seen.


Woun't you, Sir? I Will try that.


What Is the matter there?


Why, and't please you, Sir, Phantastes is shifted in here to see a mask,
which he says, he heard should be here, but he is deceived, and I Would have him
out again


Come, let him alone, let him alone, this once; he will sooner shift to see such
a toy then a better thing: but wisemens marriages now-adayes can be thriftily
celebrated without Fiddlers


Sirrah, now I will stand here in spite of your teeth.


You may thank Polites, or else in faith I Would have trounc'd you.


Silence: Since the gods have afforded us the happiness of so frequent an
Assembly, I think it the next happiness to use a preuenient discretion, upon
this offered occasion, for the reformation of some dangerous abuses, which most
stealingly have crept into the commonwealth: and therefore are the more
dangerous, by how much they are the more secret. Magus and Astrologia, depart
the Bench


We?


We?


Obey, or justice shall be violent to enforce you. Choler, are the two rogues,
Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes apprehended, as I gave command


Yes, Sir, and at hand.


Let them be brought in then; and with them Causidicus.


I? who is my accuser?


Thine own actions, and thy man Sanguis shall cry loud against thee.


O the gods! and't please you, Polites, this little rogue Cheiromantes being
unwilling to come, as I was drawing him, picked my pocket. 'Sbones, these
Varlets are worse then witches, for they say when they are in hold, they must
leave their devil, but a man had as leife have the devil in hold as these,
for they will have his money in hold, or it shall escape 'hem hardly


Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes, do you know this Gentleman?


Yes, Sir.


Yes, Sir.


And did you never know a purse of his?


I protest unto your Honor, there was nothing but a few idle papers in it, but
not a penny of money


Oh the impudence of villainy! by the reputation of a Gentleman, I put five
pounds of gold into it the morning before I came forth; or else Poeta's a
Feigner


Sure then, Sir, you put it forth again before you came forth.


Well, your own confession proclaims your guilt; Justice, therefore awards
you this sentence. Thou Physioguemus, that thou may never look any man in
the Face more, shall be burnt in the forehead for a Rogue, that so every one
may know thee by thy Physiognomie -- Cheiromantes, since thou have had a Hand
in this matter too, thou shall be burnt in the hand, and then both of you
shall be banished the Commonwealth of the Sciences. -- Choler, take them away


Tush, I Will but paint my Face afterward.


And I Will quickly bite it out of my hand again.


We scorn to escape this punishment.


We scorn to escape this punishment.


Geometres, did not Magus offer by Magike and loue-cups to procure you the love
of Astronomia


Yes, Sir, he did.


And Geometres, did not you see Astrologia at the Banquet at Ethicus his house,
cast a powder into Astronomia's drink


I did Sir.


Why then, justice must proceed upon you.


We yield our selves to your Honors mercy.


We yield our selves to your Honors mercy.


Melancholico and Sanguis lay ^ands upon them presently, search their pockets,
and take out certain Rings if they have any


Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas. Oh violence! Oh violence!


Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas. Oh violence!


Here Is one Sir.


And here is another.


I, these are they. Magus himself acquainted me with this device: for, these
Rings put on their little-fingers, and those words repeated thrice, would have
made them invisible immediately


O strange!


Now honored Polites, you may proceed.


Magus, because thy profoundest villainy was wrought by a Circle; in stead of
an endless punishment like thy Circle, here thou shall be broken upon a
wheel, and afterward the gods no doubt will adiudge thee for ever to supply
Ixions room, by turning his wheel. Thou Astrologia, shall not as yet be
determined on, but cast into a close Prison, that thou may never more behold
the Heavens, but be tortured continually with a perpetual anxietie, and
expectation of thy fate


Nay, honored Polites, let me beg Magus his life.


I; and I, that Astrologia may enjoy the benefit of the Heavens, liberty.


I may not without a danger to the Commonwealth.


Then let Geographus obtain the request on this condition, that they undertake
a voluntary travail, in stead of an enforced banishment


Depart then the Commonwealth for ever.


We go. Heaven and Hell conspite Magus and Astrologia's ruin; and yet they
will not ruin us


We go. Heaven and Hell conspite Magus and Astrologia's ruin; and yet they
will not ruin us


Medicus, did not you send Poison in stead of Physic to Poeta being sick?


And't please you, I know not whether it were Poison or not: I sent Historia's
own servant with a Recipe, to Galli-pot mine Apothecarie: and if it were bad,
'twas his villainy


Well, as if he had any reason to have done so, without underhand notice from
you? do not deprive your self of an hope of pardon by an unjust pretense of
innocence


Good Polites.


What can thou say for thy self, that judgment should not proceed against
thee


Honored Polites, vouchsafe to hear me speak: with grief I acknowledge
mine offense, but it was need first made me bad: I was at the first an
Apothecaries man, and keeping a note of Recipe's that came to my Master, and
inquiring of the bearers the disease of the Patient, I afterward turned
Physician, but I never administered any Physic but such as I found in my
Papers: and then, for fashion, I fell to reading some Physick-bookes: and
though I could not judge of them, and make use of them, yet I by them did
learn to talk with my Patients in their sickness


Oh, the confident ignorance of beggarly Emperickes! Well, stand aside a
little: Causidicus, can thy two tongues, make one honest defense for the
justifying of thy self? what can thou allege that judgment should not
proceed against thee


My Book, honored Polites.


Thou can not have it.


H^nour'd Polites --


Thou can not have it.


Then vouchsafe, I beseech you, to hear me speak. I likewise must accuse
Poverty of my first guilt; 'twas need also that first made me bad: I was at
the first a Sumner, then got to be a Scriuener, then a Lawyers Clarke; and
these were the first steps of my fortune: and since I have been a Lawyer,
(alas!) such have been my wants, that having no Clyents to save my credit, I
have pretended business, and gone up and down with a Pen and Inke-horne by my
side, as earnestly as if I had a dozen Causes to plead: when (alas!) I had
scarce bread to live on, that, I protest unto your honor, Fortune had quite
out-lawed my estate


Well then, I award thee this merciful judgment: because, Causidicus, after
seven years practice of the Law (for so long thou have, I know not how justly,
gone under that title) thou have deserved to hold up thy hand at the Bar,
when thou should have been the defender of Justice, thou shall henceforth
be called a Barrister; till by thy honest pleading you redeem your self from
that name; and hereafter when any of thy Profession plead Causes, they shall,
in the admonishing remembrance of thy crime, plead at a Bar --; and that thy
pleading of two Causes may be remembered, thou shall wear, etc. -- For you,
Medicus, because you did happily recover Astronomia --


Indeed he gave me a very good Clyster, Heaven knows.


We pardon your offense: and thus upon your Good-behauiour we will suffer you
both in the Commonwealth; but with this caution, that if ever you come by your
Learning to any degrees in the University of our Commonwealth, (that you may
for ever be distinguished from other men) because you have not been found
Viri quadrati, Square and upright men; you shall be enioyn'd to wear Round
Caps


A like mercy still attend Polites.


A like mercy still attend Polites.


But, Medicus, see you love your man Sanguis, though this your crime was
detected by him: I say, Sanguis is an honest servant, and more faithful to the
whole Body of the Commonwealth, then any one Corrupt Member. Depart, and
henceforth abuse not our mercy


Long may Polites live most honored; long may Polites live most honored.


Long may Polites live most honored; long may Polites live most honored.


Thus, as in a natural body, the first way to health, is by remoouing all
more dangerous corruptions; and the second, by reducing the humors to a
composed temperature: the first is already performed, and now it remains that
we temper our selves. Most honored Citizens, I am not ignorant either of your
contentions or loves: the first of which, as I would labor to dissolve: so to
unite the last; if your selves will be pleased but to refer the composing of
your differences to my impartial censure


We are pleased, Reverend Polites.


The gods add the happiness of success to my determinations. First, then
Poeta, Logicus, and Grammaticus, you shall bury all former contentions in a
perpetual (...), or oblivion, and then I thus proceed: For you Geometres, I am
sorry that that Villain Magus did so far seduce you; but we all rejoice at
your recovery: and since Geographus has obtained Astronomia, embrace you
courteously the love of Arithmitica. I Am sure ever since you have both been of
years of discretion, you have been acquainted: and besides, Geometres, there
is not any man in the World, whom she makes more account of then your self:
and therefore I will not say, vt ameris ama, love her, that she may love you;
but Quia amaris ama. Love because you are first loved; nay, it is a just
gratitude, which also is a love, and so you shall double it. Briefly, if there
be any point, Geometres, which you stand upon, know you remain still at Ods;
but if you embrace the love of Arithmetica, you will be at a perfect unity


Well, Polites, Geometres shall be Ruled by you this once; come, Wench, sure I
must love thee, I even long to take thine Altitude


And I trust we two shall be always Even.


Poeta, you have partly yielded to me in private a consent to the embracing of
Historia's love, which if you shall publicly confess, and so confirm, you
shall not only get a Wife, but a friend; and what honor Polites may do, to
Poeta, love and opportunity shall vnitedly perform


I; consent, wild-head, consent: she will make thee more stayed.


I yield: Historia, my love shall more inseparably follow thee, then the
Hexameter the Pentameter; or the Adonicke, the Sapphicke


Why, thus did Xenophon and his Love join together.


As for you, Grammaticus, I understand of your great affection to Rhetorica;
who though she loves Logicus, yet because he loves not her mutually (which
must be required between such paires) and that Rhetorica had showed some kind
of affection toward Grammaticus, with my best desires I will join you two; and
the rather to induce a willingness in you, Rhetorica, I would have you not
forget, how Grammaticus and you have been brought up from Children together,
and Schoole-fellowes, and take this for a rule: Change not an old friend. Yield
Rhetorica, yield, let Physica entreat thee


Why then, Grammaticus, at this double request, without any Circumlocutions or
Figures, I plainly offer unto thee my love


Why then, dearest Rhetorica, Qua nostros vidisti flentis ocallos. Thou do
not only gratify Polites, but also Physica, and Nature her self: for,
Commune omnium animantium est coniunctionis appetitus procreandi causa


You Logicus, if you will leave your contentions, having no desire, as I perceive,
to marry --


I care not for marrying; I see no good Foundation, for any such Relation.


We will assume you for your approved understanding --


I, I should be sorry if I had not a good understanding --


As an assistant to our self. For your man Phlegmatico, if he will win Polites
his love, let him leave his Tobacco


I, and learn more, manners, for I am sure he wants them.


And Grammaticus, for your man, let him bridle his Choler. Now my counsel
shall be, that you, Ethicus, and Oeconoma, would vouchsafe to give good advice
to Poeta and Historia: and you, honored Physica, to your happy children
Geographus and Astronomia: for Grammaticus and Rhetorica their Tongues will
always agree, and then I think they can hardly fall out: and for Geometres
and Arithmetica, I likewise know they will be very Regular, and now all is
composed; and yet, now I think on it, it is not, for yonder Melancholico stands
sad, and alone, amongst all these matches: and yet it is better thought on;
yonder is Musica too: now surely a sit match; but they shall be henceforth for
their ingenuitie, both exempt from servitude, and made joint fellows with our
selves


Thanks to Polites: come, my little Minikin, thou and I will be play-fellowes.


'Faith I Will have Dancing at my wedding, what ere comes on it.


I beseech you, Polites, suffer not a servant through want to be lost, and come
to an ignominious death


I (alas!) Polites, let Poeta obtain so much for Phantastes: that he may be
servant to Melancholico and Musica


I yield unto it.


And I trust I shall please my Master, and Mistress, beyond imagination.


And now most honored Citizens, when our aged and retired Prince Metaphysicus
(whose Deputy only I am, and from whom, as from our Sovereign, we hold all
we have) when, I say, he shall hear of these happy combinations, what a
content may we conceive he will conceit at the report? and for your selves, you
may more easily enjoy your felicity, then I express it; and my endeavors also
shall not receive a small encouragement, when the Royal bounty of his
Majesty shall take notice, that these things were done by me. Poeta, you shall
give me leave, for conclusion of my speech, to usurp two Verses, which I have
heard you often speak


All Subjects labors fail, if Princes frown:
The Princes favor is the Subjects Crown.
IVdicious Hearers, you
What task it is to make the Arts descend
To Popular cares; you whose pure judgment knows,
How to distinguish between Art and Shows;
Our Author now salutes. And does compare
His Comedy unto his Theater;
Where some play Arts, some Humors; and thus fits
Himself, to all variety of wits.
If any yet shall ask why he does bring
A Hobbyhorse, or such a nimble thing
To raise an Ignorant laugh: It was his Art
That said, This will express Phantastes part;
And thus he Scorned and Used it. He did fear
Indeed, there was a People too, even Here.
Therefore his Courteous Comedy did speak
And act Some things to satisfy the Weak
She Academickes; and to make Them smile,
Brought in Impostors, Gypsies, and such vile
Pedlars of Arts: yet does he not from These
Hope for a Tin-foil'd glory: or so please
Himself, by a Reflection. Here to stay,
And in a Looking glass behold his play;
Nor does he promise to himself, in high
Conceit, a Saucy Immortality.
Yet This he says: Let no man judge his Aarts,
But he that first can judge of All the Arts.
But I forget one message; Fate of life*
Poor Melancholico has lost his wife.
For whilst, within, he on the Humors tended,
Pure Music with the Arts to Heaven ascended.
Which makes the poor man sad, that now he is grown
Into a Dump, thus to be left Alone.
Yet since he cannot call Her back again,
He does entreat this grace he may obtain;
That You would, to repair his Marriage bands,
Create Another Musica with Your Hands.

