VFFE, where art thou?


Here at hand.


Where is this Cuffe?


Almost at your Elbow.


OH Band, art thou there? I thought thou had been worn out of date by
this time, or shrunk in the wetting at least


What? do you think I am afraid of your great words? no, you shall know that
there be men of fashion in place, as well as your self


Good Band, do not fret so.


A scurvie shag-ragge Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Punie, a
Freshman, come up hither to learn fashions and seek to expel me


Nay: if you be so broad with him, Band, we shall have a fray presently.


Sir, I Will pull down your Choler from you.


It was fit time for me to stay you up, for I am sure you were a falling Band.


Well, Band, for all you are so stiff, I Will make you limber enough before I
have done with you


No, Hodge Peake, its more then you can do.


Sfoot, let me come to him: well, Band, let me catch you in another place,
and I will make cut-worke of you


There Is never a Spanish Ruff of you all can do it.


Sfoot, if these two should go together by the cares and hurt one another,
Ruff would be in a fine plight: would he not


Well, Band, look to thy self, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee roundly.


Lace me? thou would be laced thy self, Ruff, for this is the very truth,
thou art a plain Knave


If they talk of lacing, I were best look about my self.


Dare thou meet me in the field?


In the field? why? thou art but an effeminate fellow, Ruff; for all thou art
so well set: but at what weapon


Nay, I will give thee that advantage, bring thou what weapons thou will, I
scorn to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle work


Sfoot, thou shall know, a Gentleman and a Soldier scorns thy proffer.


A Soldier?


Did you not hear of the great Bands went over of late?


Where did you serve? in the Low Countries?


It may be so; for I am sure he is a Holland Band.


Where I have served, it is no matter, but I am sure I have been pressed often.


Truly, his Landresse will bear him witness thereof.


Press me no pressings, I Will make you know that Ruff is steeled to the back,
if I had my stick here, you should feel it


Nay bragger, it is not your great words can carry it away so; give Band but a
hemme, and he will be for you at any time, name the place, the time and hour
of our meeting


The place, the Paper mills, where I will tear thee into rags, before I have
done with thee: the time, to morrow in the afternoon about one: but do you
hear? we will fight single, you shall not be double, Band


Now I perceive, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly.


But do you hear? once more do not say at our next meeting you forgot the
time


No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more careful of the time then he: for
I am sure he has always at the least a dozen Clocks about him


Farewell then.


Then farewell.


Nay, you shall not part so, you will go into the fields, and know not what
fighting means: a couple of white liuered fellows, your Landresse will make
you both as white as a clout it she list; If you lack beating, she will beat you
I Will warrant you, she will so clap your sides together, that they shall be beaten
out in once or twice ha^dling; why? I have known her leave her mark behind
her a whole week after, sheell quickly beat you Black and Blew, for I am
sure she will scarce wash white before she starch


Well, remember the time and place, Ruff.


Well, remember your sclues and Misteris Stichwell, one to whom you have been
both beholding in your days


Who? Mistress Stichwell, by this light I know her not.


No, nor you neither.


Nor I, I swear by all the Gum and Blew-starch in Christendom.


I thought so, why its the Semster, one that both you had been undone had it
not been for her, but what talk you of undoing? I say Mister is Stichwell the
Semster was the very maker of you both, yet thus little do you regard her, but
it is the common custom of you all, when you come to be so great as you are,
you forget from what house you come


Sfoote Ruff cares not a pin for her.


Nor Band a button.


Well Band and Ruff, you were best both of you to take heed of her, you know
she set you both in the Stocks once before, and if she catch you again, it
is a hundredth to one, if she hang you not both up, for she has got strings
already


Meet me, if thou dare?


The place the Paper-mils, the hour to morrow at one.


Since you will go, go; but hear me, if you go, look at me well; as little
a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuffe you both out of the fields; if I do
not, say, Cuffe is no man of his hands


Alas poor shrimpe, thou art nothing in my hands.


If you go, you shall never say that Cuffe came of a sleeuelesse errand, I Will
bind your hands (I warrant you) for striking


Say and hold.


Remember the Paper-mils.


And you be so chollericke, I Will even pin you both in, as soon as I come
home: can you not decide the quarrel between your selves without a field? I
had thought you had been a little more mild, Ruff. You were a horrible
Puritan the other day, a very precise Ruff


Hang him, base Rascal: would he not make any man mad, to see such a -- I
durst not scarce peep out before Collar came to Town, now to swagger thus


Come, you shall be friends, Band.


Friends with him? such a base Rascal? he is a very threed-bare fellow, I
scorn, but my man Collar should go as well as he every day in the week, and
be friends with him


Thy man Collar? thy Master, thou would have said, I am sure he is thy
vp-holder


Nay, surely he is his Master, at least his Maker: for Bands, make rags; Rags
make Paper; Paper makes Past-board; and Past-board makes Collar; and I think
that this is a stiff argument that he is his Master


Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, I Will cut him in iags, let me
but claspe him, and I Will make him for stirring


But you shall not fight: have you not Friends and Neighbors enough to end
this controversy, but you must go into the fields, and there cut the thread
of your lives? we will have none of that, come choose you an Vmpire, Band, for it
shall be so


Since you will force me to it, if Ruff be content, I am willing.


Ruff, you shall be content.


If I shall then, I must, let him name him.


If I may choose, I Will have Master Handkerchiefe.


Nay, stay there, he is a most filthy Sniveling fellow, and he will wipe your
Nose of all, if you put the case to him, but what say you to Shirt


He is a shifting knave, and one, to whom Band, a little before has been much
beholding, they were joined a long time together in friendship


Why, then go to Master Cap, the headman of the Town.


No, I deny that, he is a very bad Justice, you may have him wrought on any
side for monic


I Will tell you what, then we will go to my Lord Corpus himself.


He is not in Town.


He is, for I saw Sock, his chief Footeman in Town.


Here Is a do with you, and my Lord Corpus, indeed I would you were both
hanged about his neck for me, but I see, this strife will never be ended, till
I be Arbitrator my self, you know, I am equally allied to you both: shall I
be Moderator between you


Content.


Well then, Ruff shall be most accounted of amongst the Clergy, for he is
the grave Fellow (although I know, the Puritans will not greatly care for him,
he has such a deal of setting, and they love standing very well.) As for you,
Band, you shall be most made of amongst the young Gal ants, although sometimes
they shall use Ruff, for a fashion, but not otherwise; how ever, you need not
regard the gid die headed multitude, let them do as they list, sometimes
respecting one, sometimes the other: but when you come to the Counsailor, and
men of Law, which know right from wrong, acknowledging Master Worths to be
equal, they shall prefer neither, but use the kindness of you both, wearing
both a Band and a Ruff; how say you, are you both content


We are.


Then go before me to the next town, and I Will follow after with a Band of your
friendship drawn, which I hope, these Gentlemen will seal with their hands


Claw me, and I Will claw thee, the proverb goes, Let it be true in that our Muse
here shoes, Cuffe graceth hand, Cuffes debtors hands remain, Let hands clap
me, and I Will Cuffe them again



