A PARTICVLAR ENTERTAINMENT OF THE QVEENE AND PRINCE THEIR HIGHNESS AT
ALTHROPE, AT The Right Honorable the Lord SPENCERS, on Satturday being the 25.
of June 1603. as they came first into the Kingdom

Written by the same Author, and not before published.

The Author B. I.

LONDON, M. DC. XVI.

THe invention was, to have a Satyr lodged in a little Spinet, by which her
Majesty, and the Prince were to come, who (at the report of certain Corne^s
that were divided in several places of the Park, to signify her approach)
advanced his head above the top of the wood, wondering, and (with his pipe in
his hand) began as follows

HEre? there? and every where?
Some solemnities are near,
That these changes strike mine ear.
My pipe and I a part shall bear.
Look, see; (beshrew this tree,)
What may all this wonder be?
Pipe it, who that list for me:
I Will fly out abroad, and see.
That is CYPARISSVS face!
And the dame has SYRINX grace!
O that PAN were now in place,
Sure, they are of heavenly race.

Hail, and welcome worthiest Queen,
Joy had never perfect been,
To the Nymphs that haunt this green,
Had they not this evening seen.
Now they print it on the ground
With their feet in figures round,
Marks that will be ever found,
To remember this glad stound.
Trust her not, you bonny-bell,
She will forty leasings tell,
I do know her pranks right well.

Satyr, we must have a spell,
For your tongue, it runs too fleet.

Not so nimbly as your feet,
When about the creame-bowles sweet,
You, and all your Elues do meet.
This is MAB the mistris-Faerie,
That does nightly rob the dayrie,
And can hurt, or help the cherning,
(As she please) without discerning.

PVG, you will anon take warning?
She, that pinches country wenches,
If they rub not clean their benches,
And with sharper nails remembers,
When they rake not up their embers:
But if so they chance to feast her,
In a shoe she drops a tester.

Shall we strip the skipping iester?
This is she, that empties cradles,
Takes out children, puts in ladles:
Traynes forth mid-wiues in their slumber,
With a sieve the holes to number.
And then leads them, from her borroughs
Home through ponds, and water furrows.

Shall not all this mocking stir us?
She can start our FRANKLINS daughters,
In their sleep, with shrikes, and laughters,
And on sweet Saint ANNE'S night,
Feed them with a promised sight,
Some of husbands, some of lovers,
Which an empty dream discouers.

Satyr, vengeance near you houers,
And in hope that you would come here
Yester-eue the lady Summer,
She invited to a banquet:
But (in sooth) I con you thank yet,
That you could so well deceive her
Of the pride which began vp-heaue her:
And (by this) would so have blown her,
As no wood-god should have known her.

Mistress, this is only spite:
For you would not yester-night
Kiss him in the cock-shout light.

By PAN, and thou have hit it right.

Fayries, pinch him black and blue,
Now you have him, make him rue.

O, hold, MAB: I sue.

Nay, the devil shall have his due.

Pardon lady this wild strain,
Common with the SYLVAN train,
That do skip about this plain:
Elues, apply your gyre again.
And whilst some do hop the ring,
Some shall play, and some shall sing,
We Will express in every thing,

THis is she,
This is she,
In whose world of grace
Every season, person, place,
That receive her, happy be,
For with no less,
Then
Does she private Lares bless,
And ours above the rest:
By how much we deserve it least.
Long live ORIANA
To exceed (whom she succeeds) our late DIANA.

Madame, now an end to make,
Deigne a simple gift to take:
Only for the Faeries sake,
Who about you still shall wake.
It Is done only to supply,
His suspected courtesy,
Who (since THAMYRA did dye)
Has not brookt a ladies eye,
Nor allowed about his place,
Any of the female race.
Only we are free to trace
All his grounds, as he to chase.
For which bounty to us lent,
Of him vnknowledgde, or unsent,
We prepared this complement,
And as far from cheap intent,
In particular to feed,
Any hope that should succeed.
Or our glory by the deed,
As your self are from the need.
Utter not; we you implore,
Who did give it, nor wherefore.
And when ever you restore
Your self to us, you shall have more.
Highest, happyest Queen farewell,
But beware you do not tell.

Not tell? Ha, ha, I could smile,
At this old, and toothlesse wile.
Lady, I have been no sleeper,
She belyes the noble keeper.
Say, that here he like the groves:
And pursue no foreign loves,
Is he therefore to be deemed,
Rude, or savage? or esteemed,
But a sorry entertayner,
'Cause he is no common strayner:
After painted Nymphs for favors,
Or that in his garb he savors
Little of the nicety,
In the sprucer courtiery;
As the rosarie of kisses,
With the oath that never misses,
This, believe me on the breast,
And then telling some man's jest,
Thinking to prefer his wit,
Equal with his suite by it,
I mean his clothes: No, no, no,
Here does no such humor flow.
He can neither bribe a grace,
Nor encounter my lords face
With a plyant smile, and flatter,
Though this lately were some matter
To the making of a courtier.
Now he hopes he shall resort there,
Safer, and with more allowance;
Since a hand has governance,
That has given those customs chase,
And has brought his own in place.
O that now a wish could bring,
The god-like person of a king,
Then should even Envy find,
Cause of wonder at the mind
Of our wood-man: but lo, where
His kingly image does appear,
And is all this while neglected.
Pardon (lord) you are respected
Deep as is the Keepers heart,
And as dear in every part.
See, for instance where he sends

Low, as is his fathers earth,
To the womb that gave you birth
So he was directed first,
Next to you, of whom the thirst
Of seeing takes away the use
Of that part, should plead excuse
For his boldness, which is less
By his comely shamefac'tnesse.
Rise up, sir, I will betray,
All I think you have to say;
That your father gives you here,
(Freely as to him you were)
To the service of this Prince:
And with you these instruments
Of his wild and Syluan trade,
Better not ACTEON had.
The bow was PHoeBES, and the horn,
By ORION often worn:
The dog of Sparta breed, and good,
As can ring within a wood;
Thence his name is: you shall try
How he hunteth instantly.
But perhaps the Queen your mother,
Rather does affect some other
Sport, as coursing: we will prove
Which her highness most does love.
Satyrs let the woods resound,
They shall have their welcome crowned,
With a brace of bucks to ground.
IF my outside move your laughter,
Pray JOVE, my inside be thereafter.
Queen, Prince, Duke, Earls,
Countesses; you courtly Pearls:
(And, I hope no mortal sin,
If I put less Ladies in)
Fair saluted be you all.
At this time it does befall,
We are the Huisher to a Morrise,
(A kind of Masque) whereof good store is
In the country hereabout,
But this, the choice of all the rout.
Who, because that no man sent them,
Have got NO-BODIE to present them.
These are things have no suspicion
Of their ill doing; nor ambition
Of their well: but as the Pipe
Shall inspire them, mean to skip.
They come to see, and to be seen,
And though they dance before the Queen,
There Is none of these does hope to come by
Wealth, to build another Holmby:
All those dancing days are done,
Men must now have more then one
Grace, to build their fortunes on,
Else our soles would sure have gone,
All by this time to our feet.
I not deny, where Graces meet
In a man, that quality
Is a graceful property:
But when dancing is his best,
(Beshrew me) I suspect the rest.
But I am NO-BODIE, and my breath
(Soon as it is borne) has death.
Come on clownes, forsake your dumps,
And bestirre your hob-nail'd stumps,
Do your worst, I Will undertake,
Not a ierke you have shall make
Any Lady here in love.
Perhaps your Fool, or so, may move
Some Ladies woman with a trick,
And upon it she may pick
A pair of reuelling legs, or two,
Out of you, with much ado.
But see, the Hobbyhorse is forgot.
Fool, it must be your lot,
To supply his want with faces,
And some other Buffon graces,
You know how; Piper play,
And let no body hence away.
ANd will you then, Mirror of Queens, depart?
Shall nothing stay you? not my Masters heart?
That pants to leese the comfort of your light,
And see his Day ere it be old grow Night?
You are a Goddess, and your will be done:
Yet this our last hope is, that as the Sun
Cheeres objects far removed, as well as near;
So, where so'ere you shine, you will sparkle here.
And you dear Lord, on whom my covetous eye
Does feed it self, but cannot satisfy,
O shoot up fast in spirit, as in years;
That when upon her head proud Europe wears
Her stateliest tire, you may appear thereon
The richest gem, without a paragon.
Shine bright and fixed as the Artick star:
And when slow Time has made you fit for war,
Look over the strict Ocean, and think where
You may but lead us forth, that grow up here
Against a day, when our officious swords
Shall speak our action better then our words.
Till then, all good event conspire to crown
Your parents hopes, our zeal, and your renown.
Peace usher now your steps, and where you come,
Be Envy still struck blind, and Flattery dumb.

Leap light hearts in every breast,
Joy is now the fittest passion;
Double majesty has blessed
All the place, with that high grace,
Exceeds admiration!
Welcome, monarch of this Isle,
Europes envy, and her merror;
Great in each part of thy style:
Englands wish, and Scotlands bliss,
Both France, and Irelands terror.
Welcome, are you; and no less,
Your admired queen: the glory
Both of state, and comeliness.
Every line of her divine
Form, is a beauteous story.
High in fortune, as in blood,
So are both; and blood renowned
By often falls, that make a flood
In your veins: yet, all these streines
Are in your virtues drowned.
House, be proud; For of earth's store
These two, only, are the wonder:
In them she is rich, and in no more.
Zeal is bound their praise to sound
As loud as fame, or thunder.
Note, but how the air, the spring
Concur in their devotions;
Payres of Turtles sit, and sing
On each tree, ore-ioy'd to see
In them like love, like motions.
Enter sir, this longing door,
Whose glad lord naught could have blessed
Equally; (I Am sure not more)
Then this sight: saue' of your right,
When you were first possessed.
That, indeed, transcended this.
Since which hour, wherein you gayn'd it.
For this grace, both he and his,
Every day, have learned to pray,
And, now, they have obtayn'd it.

Retire, you houshold-gods, and leave these excellent creatures to be
entertained by a more eminent deity. Hayle King, and Queen of the Islands,
called truly fortunate, and by you made so; To tell you, who I am, and wear
all these notable, and speaking ensigns about me, were to challenge you of
most impossible ignorance, and accuse my self of as palpable glory: It is
enough that you know me here, and come with the license of my father JOVE, who
is the bounty of heaven, to give you early welcome to the bower of my mother
MAIA, no less the goodness of earth. And may it please you to walk, I will
tell you no wonderful story. This place, whereon you are now advanced (by the
mighty power of Poetry, and the help of a faith, that can remove mountains)
is the Arcadian hill CYLLENE, the place, where my self was both begot, and
borne; and of which I am frequently called CYLLENIVS: Under yond' purslane tree
stood sometime my cradle. Where, now, behold my mother MAIA, sitting in the
pride of her plenty, gladding the air with her breath, and cheering the
spring with her smiles. At her feet, the blushing AVRORA, who, with her rosy
hand, casts her honey dewes on those sweeter herbs, accompanied with that
gentle wind, FAVONIVS, whose subtle spirit, in the breathing forth, FLORA
makes into flowers, and sticks them in the grass, as if she contended to have
the imbroyderie of the earth, richer then the cope of the sky. Here, for her
month, the yearly delicate May keeps state; and from this Mount, takes
pleasure to display these valleys, yon'd lesser hills, those statelier
edifices, and towers, that seem enamored so far off, and are reared on end,
to behold her, as if their utmost object were her beauties. Hither the Dryads
of the valley, and Nymphs of the great river come every morning, to taste of
her favors; and depart away with laps filled with her bounties. But, see! upon
your approach their pleasures are instantly remitted. The birds are hushed,
ZEPHYRE is still, the MORN forbeares her office, FLORA is dumb, and herself
amazed, to behold two such maruailes, that do more adorn place, then she can
time; Pardon, your Majesty, the fault, for it is that has caused it; and till
they can collect their spirits, think silence, and wonder the best adoration


SEe, see, O see, who here is come a Maying!
The master of the Ocean;
And his beauteous ORIAN:
Why left we off our playing?
To gaze, to gaze,
On them, that gods no less then men amaze.
Up Nightingale, and sing
Iug, jug, jug, jug, etc.
Raise Lark thy note, and wing,
All birds their music bring,
Sweet Robin, Linet, Thrush,
Record, from every bush,
The welcome of the King;
And Queen:
Whose like were never seen,
For good, for fair.
Nor can be; though fresh May,
Should every day
Inuit a several pair,
No, though she should inuit a several pair.
If all the pleasures were distilled
Of every flower, in every field,
And all that HIBLA hiues do yield
Were into one broad mazor filled;
If, thereto, added all the gummes,
And spice, that from PANCHAIA comes,
The odor, that HYDASPES lends
Or PHoeNIX proves, before she ends;
If all the Air, my FLORA drew,
Or spirit, that ZEPHYRE ever blew;
Were put therein; and and all the dew
That ever rosy Morning knew;
Yet, all diffused upon this bower,
To make one sweet detayning hour,
Were much too little for the grace,
And honor, you vouchsafe the place.
But, if you please to come again,
We vow, we will not then, with vain,
And empty passe-times entertayne,
Your so desired, though grieved pain.
For, we will have the wanton fawnes,
That frisking skip, about the lawnes,
The Paniskes, and the Siluanes rude,
Satyrs, and all that multitude,
To dance their wilder rounds about,
And cleave the air, with many a shout,
As they would hunt poor Echo out
Of yonder valley, who does flout
Their rusticke noise. To visit whom
You shall behold whole beuies come
Of gaudy Nymphs, who tender calls
Well tuned (unto the many falls
Of sweet, and several sliding rills,
That stream from tops of those less hills)
Sound like so many silver quills
When ZEPHYRE them with music fills.
For these, FAVONIVS here shall blow
New flowers, which you shall see to grow,
Of which, each hand a part shall take,
And, for your heads, fresh garlands make.
Wherewith, whilst they your temples round,
An air of several birds shall sound
An Io paean, that shall drown
The acclamations, at your crown.
All this, and more then I have gift of saying,
MAY vows, so you will often come here a Masing.

And MERCVRY, her son, shall venture the displeasure of his father, with the
whole bench of Heaven, that day, but he will do his mothers intents all
serviceable assistance. Till then, and ever, live high and happy, you, and your
other you; both envied for your fortunes, loved for your graces, and admired
for your virtues


Again, great pair, I salute you; and with leave of all the gods: whose high
pleasure it is, that MERCVRY make this your holy day. May all the blessings
both of earth, and heaven, concur to thank you: For till this days sun, I
have faintly inioy'd a minutes rest to my creation. Now, I do, and acknowledge
it you sole, and no less the divine benefit. If my desire to delight you,
might not divert to your trouble, I would entreat your eyes to a new, and
strange spectacle; a certain son of mine, whom the Arcadians call a god,
howsoever the rest of the world receive him: It is the horned PAN, whom in the
translated figure of a goat I begot on the fair Spartan PENELOPE; MAY, let
both your ears, and looks forgive it: These are but the lightest escapes of
our Deities. And, it is better in me, to prevent his rusticke impudence, by my
blushing acknowledgement, then, anon, by his rude, and not insolent claim, be
enforced to confess him. Yonder he keeps, and with him the wood Nymphs,
whose leader he is in rounds, and daunces, to this Syluane music. The place,
about which they skip, is the fount of laughter, or BACCHVS spring; whose
statue is advanced on the top; and from whose pipes, at an observed hour of
the day, there flows a lusty liquor, that has the present virtue to expel
sadness; and within certain minutes after it is tasted, force all the mirth
of the spleen into the face. Of this is PAN the Guardian. Lo! the fountain
begins to run, but the Nymphs at your sight are fled. PAN, and his Satyrs
wildly stand at gaze. I will approach, and question him: vouchsafe your ear,
and forgive his behavior, which (even to me, that am his parent) will no doubt
be rude enough, though otherwise full of salt, which, except my presence did
temper, might turn to be gall, and bitterness; but that shall charm him


O, it is MERCVRY! Hollow 'hem, again,
What be all these, father? gods, or men?

All humane. Only, these two are deities on earth, but such, as the greatest
powers of heaven may resign to


Why did our Nymphs run away? can you tell?
Here be sweet beauties love MERCVRY well?
I see by their looks. How say you? great master?
Will you please to here? Shall I be your taster?

PAN, you are too rude.

It is but a glass,
By my beard, and my horns, it is a health, and shall pass.
Were he a king, and his mistress a queen
This draught shall make him a petulant spleen.
But, trow, is he loose, or costiue of laughter?
I Would know, to fill him his glass, thereafter,
Sure, either my skill, or my sight does mock,
Or this lordings look should not care for the smock;
And yet he should love both a horse and a hound,
And not rest till he saw his game on the ground:
Well, look to him, Dame; beshrow me were I
Amongst these bonny-bells, you should need a good eye.
Here mistress; all out. Since a god is your skinker:
By my hand, I believe you were borne a good drinker.
They are things of no spirit, their blood is asleep,
That, when it is offered 'hem do not drink deep.
Come, who is next? Our liquour here cooles.
Ladies, I Am sure, you all have not fools
At home to laugh at. A little of this,
Taken down here in private, were not amiss.
Believe it, she drinks like a wench, that had store
Of lord for her laughter, will you have more?
What answer you, lordings? will you any, or none?
Laugh, and be fat, sir, your penance is known.
They that love mirth, let 'hem heartily drink,
It Is the only receipt, to make sorrow sink.
The young Nymph, that is troubled with an old man,
Let her laugh him away, as fast as he can.
Nay drink, and not pause, as who would say must you?
But laugh at the wench, that next does trust you.
To you, sweet beauty; nay, 'pray you come hither:
E're you sit out, yow'le laugh at a fether.
I Will never fear you, for being too witty,
You sip, so like a forsooth of the city,
Lords, for your selves, your own cups crown,
The ladies, in faith, else will laugh you down.
Go to, little blushet, for this, anan,
Yow'le steal forth a laugh in the shade of your fan.
This, and another thing, I can tell you,
Will breed a laughter, as low as your belly
Of such sullen pieces, JOVE send us not many,
They must be tickled, before they will any.
What have we done? They that want, let'hem call,
Gallants, of both sides, you see here is all.
PAN'S entertaynment: Look for no more.
Only, good faces, I reed you, make store
Of your amorous Knights, and Squiers hereafter,
They are excellent sponges, to drink up your laughter.
Farewell, I must seek out my Nymphs, that you frighted;
Thank HERMES, my father, if ought' have delighted.

I am sure, thy last rudeness cannot; for it makes me seriously ashamed. I
will not labor his excuse, since I know you more ready to pardon, then he to
trespass: but, for your singular patience, tender you all abundance of
thanks; and, mixing with the Master of the place, in his wishes, make them my
diuinations: That your loves be ever flourishing as May, and your house as
fruitful: That your acts exceed the best, and your years the longest of your
predecessors: That no bad fortune touch you, nor good change you. But still,
that you triumph, in this facility, over the ridiculous pride of other
Princes; and for ever live safe in the love, rather, then the fear of your
subjects


And thus it ended.

BEN. IONSON.
THe Kings being entered the inner Court; above, over the porch, sat the three
Hours, upon clouds, as at the ports of Heaven; crowned with several flowers:
of which, one bore a Sunne-diall; the other, a Clock; the third, an
Hower-glasse; signifying as by their names, Law, Justice, and Peace. And for
those faculties chosen to gratulate their coming with this speech

ENter, O longed for Princes, bless these bowers,
And us, the three, by you made happy, Hours:
We that include all Time, yet never knew
Minute like this, or object like to you.
Two Kings, the worlds prime honors, whose access
Shows eithers greatness, yet makes neither less:
Vouchsafe your thousand welcomes in this shewer;
The Master vows, not SYBILL'S leaves were truer.
Expressed to the King of DENMARK thus.

Qui colit has aedeis, ingentia gaudia adumbrans,
Cernendo Reges pace coire pares,
Nos tempestiuas, ad limina, collocat Horas,
Quod bona sub nobis omnia proueniant.
Vnum ad laetitiae cumulum tristatur abesse,
Quod nequeat signis laetitiam exprimere.
Sed, quia res solum ingentes hac part laborant
Vtcunque expressam credidit esse satis.
At, quod non potuit Dominus, suppleuit abunde
Frondoso tellus munere facta loquax.
Eccos quam grati veniant quos terra salutat!
Verior his folijs nulla SYBILLA fuit.
The Inscriptions on the walls were, DATE VENIAM SVBITIS.
DEBENTVR QVAE SVNT QVAEque FVTVRA.


SAEpe THEOBALDAE (sortis bonitate beatae)
Excepere suos sub pia tecta deos;
Haud simul at geminos: sed enim potuisse negabant:
Nec fas est tales posse putare duos.
Fortunata antehac, sed nunc domus vndique faelix,
At Dominus quanto (si licet vsque) magis!
Et licet, o MAGNI, folijs si siditis istis,
Queis HORAE summam contribuere fidem.
Miraris, cur hospitio te accepimus HORAE,
Cuius ad obsequium non satis annus erat?
Nempe quod adueniant ingentia gaudia raro,
Et quando adueniant vix datur hora frui.
Miraris, cur hospitio te accepimus HORAE,
Quas Solis famulas Graecia docta vocat?
Talis ab aduentu vestro lux fulsit in aedeis,
Vt Dominus solemn crederet esse nouum.
HOspitio qui te caepit, famulantibus Horis,
Cedere abhinc, nulla concomitante sinit;
Nempe omneis horas veniendi duxit amicas
Sed discedendi nulla minuta probat.
Te veniente, nouo domus haec frondebat amictu;
Te discessuro, non prout ante viret:
Nempe, sub accessu solis, nouus incipit Annus,
Et, sub discessu, squalida saeuit Hyems.
The Author B. I.
LEt not your glories darken, to behold
The place, and me, her GENIUS here, so sad;
Who, by bold Rumor, have been lately told,
That I must change the loved Lord, I had.
And he, now, in the twy-light of sere age,
Begin to seek a habitation new;
And all his fortunes, and himself engage
Unto a seat, his fathers never knew.
And I, uncertain what I must endure,
Since all the ends of dest'ny' are obscure.

Despair not, GENIUS, thou shall know thy fate.

WHat sight is this, so strange! and full of state!
The son of MAIA, making his descent
Unto the fates, and met with good Event.

Daughters of night, and secrecy, attend;
You, that draw out the chain of Destiny,
Upon whose threads, both lives and times depend,
And all the periods of mortality.
The will of JOVE is, that you straight do look
The change, and fate unto this house decreed,
And speaking from your Adamantine book,
Unto the GENIUS of the place it read;
That he may know, and knowing, bless his lot,
That such a grace, beyond his hopes, has got.

When, underneath thy roof, is seen
The greatest King, and fairest Queen,
With Princes an unmatched pair,
One, hope of all the earth, their heir;
The other styled of Lorraine,
Their blood; and sprung from CHARLEMAINE:
When all these Glories jointly shine,
And fill thee with a heat divine,
And these reflected, do beget
And splendent Sun, shall never set,
But here shine fixed, to affright
All after-hopes of following night,
Then, GENIUS, is thy period come,
To change thy Lord: Thus, Fates do doom.

But is my Patron with this lot content,
So to forsake his fathers moniment?
Or, is it gain, or else necessity,
Or will to raise a house of better frame,
That makes him shut forth his posterity
Out of his patrimony, with his name?

Nor gain, nor need; much less a vain desire,
To frame new roofes, or build his dwelling higher;
He has, with mortar, busied been too much,
That his affections should continue such.

Do men take joy in labors, not t'enioy?
Or does their business all their likings spend?
Have they more pleasure in a tedious way,
Then to repose them at their iourneys end?

GENIUS, obey, and not expostulate;
It is your virtue: and such powers as you,
Should make religion of offending fate,
Whose doomes are just, and whose designs are true.

The person, for whose royal sake,
Thou must a change so happy make,
Is he, that gouernes with his smile,
This lesser world, this greatest Isle.
His Ladies servant thou must be;
Whose second would great NATVRE see,
Or FORTUNE, after all their pain,
They might despair to make again.

She is the grace of all, that are:
And as ELISA, now a star,


