NOw trust me, here is a goodly day toward. Musco, call up my son Lorenzo: bid
him rise: tell him, I have some business to employ him in


I will, sir, presently.

But hear you, sirrah;
If he be at study, disturb him not.

Very good, sir.

How happy would I estimate my self,
Could I (by any mean) retire my son,
From one vain course of study he affects?
He is a scholar (if a man may trust
The lib'rall voice of double-toung'd report)
Of dear account, in all our Academies.
Yet this position must not breed in me
A fast opinion, that he cannot err.
My self was once a student, and indeed
Fed with the selfsame humor he is now,
Dreaming on naught but idle Poetry:
But since, Experience has awakt my sprit's,
And reason taught them, how to comprehend
The sovereign use of study. What, cousin Stephano?
What news with you, that you are here so early?

Nothing: but ^ene come to see how you do, uncle.

That Is kindly done, you are welcome, cousin.

I, I know that sir, I would not have come else: how does my cousin, uncle?


Oh well, well, go in and see; I doubt he is scarce stirring yet.


Uncle, before I go in, can you tell me, and he have ^'re a book of the
sciences of hawking and hun^ing? I would feign borrow it


Why I hope you will not a hawking now, will you?

No wusse; but i will practice against next year: I have bought me a hawke, and
bells and all; I lack nothing but a book to keep it by


Oh most ridiculous.

Nay look you now, you are angry uncle, why you know, and a man have not
skill in hawking and hunting now a days, i will not give a rush for him; he is
for no gentleman's company, and (by Gods will) I scorn it I, so I do, to be a
consort for every hum-drum; hang them scroiles, there is nothing in them in the
world, what do you talk on it? a gentleman must show himself like a
gentleman, uncle I pray you be not angry, I know what I have to do I trow, I
am no nouice


Go to, you are a prodigal, and selfe-wild fool,
Nay never look at me, it is I that speak,
Take It as you will, i will not flatter you.
What? have you not means inow to wast
That which your friends have left you, but you must
Go cast away your money on a Buzzard,
And know not how to keep it when you have done?
Oh it is brave, this will make you a gentleman,
Well Cosen well, I see you are e'ene past hope
Of all reclaim; I so, now you are told on it, you look another way.

What would you have me do trow?

What would I have you do? mary
Learn to be wise, and practice how to thrive,
That I would have you do, and not to spend
Your crowns on every one that humors you:
I would not have you to intrude your self
In every gentleman's society,
Till their affections or your own desert,
Do worthily inuit you to the place.
For he that's so respectlesse in his course,
Often sels his reputation vile and cheap.
Let not your carriage, and behavior taste
Of affectation, lest while you pretend
To make a blaze of gentry to the world
A little puff of scorn extinguish it,
And you be left like an unsavory snuff,
Whose property is only to offend.
Cosen, lay by such superficial forms,
And entertain a perfect real substance,
Stand not so much on your gentility,
But moderate your expenses (now at first)
As you may keep the same proportion still.
Bear a low sail: soft who is this comes here.

Gentlemen, God save you.

Welcome good friend, we do not stand much upon our gentilitie; yet I can
assure you mine uncle is a man of a thousand pound land a year; he has but
one son in the world; I am his next heir, as simple as I stand here, if my
cosen die: I have a fair living of mine own too beside


In good time sir.

In good time sir? you do not flout, do you?

Not I sir.

And you should, here be them can perceive it, and that quickly too: Go too,
and they can give it again soundly, and need be


Why sir let this satisfy you. Good faith I had no such intent.


By God, and I thought you had sir, I would talk with you.


So you may sir, and at your pleasure.

And so I would sir, and you were out of mine vncle^ ground, I can tell you.


Why how now cosen, will this nere be left?

Horson base fellow, by Gods lid, and't were not for shame, I would.


What would you do? you peremptory Ass,
And yowle not be quiet, get you hence.
You see, the gentleman contaynes himself
In modest limits, giving no reply
To your vnseason'd rude comparatiues;
Yet yowle demean your self, without respect
Either of duty, or humanity.
Go get you in: fore God I am ashamed
Thou have a kinsmans interest in me.

I pray you, sir, is this Pazzi house?

Yes mary is it, sir.

I should enquire for a gentleman here, one Signior Lorenzo di Pazzi; do you
know any such, sir, I pray you

Yes, sir: or else I should forget my self*

I cry you mercy, sir, I was requested by a gentleman of Florence (having some
occasion to ride this way) to deliver you this letter


To me, sir? What do you mean^? I pray you remember your curt'sy.

To his dear and most elected friend, Signior Lorenzo di Pazzi. What might the
gentleman's name be, sir, that sent it? Nay, pray you be covered


Signior Prospero.

Signior Prospero? A young gentleman of the family of Strozzi, is he not?


I, sir, the same: Signior Thorello, the rich Florentine merchant married his
sister


You say very true. Musco.

Sir.

Make this Gentleman drink, here.
I pray you go in, sir, and't please you.
Now (without doubt) this letter's to my son.
Well: all is one: I Will be so bold as read it,
Be it but for the styles sake, and the phrase;
Both which (I do presume) are excellent,
And greatly varied from the vulgar form,
If Prospero's invention gave them life.
How now? what stuff is here?
Sirrah Lorenzo, I muse we cannot see thee at Florence: S'blood, I doubt, Apollo
has got thee to be his Ingle, that thou come not abroad, to v^s^t thine old
friends: well, take heed of him; he may do somewhat for his household
servants, or so; But for his Retayners, I am sure, I have known some of them,
that have followed him, three, four, five year together, scorning the world
with their bare heels, and at length been g^ad for a shift, (though no clean
shift) to lie a whole winter, in half a sheet, cursing Charles wayne, and the
rest ^f the stars intolerably. But (quis contra diuos?) well; Sirrah, sweet
villayne, come and see me; but spend one minute in my compa^y, and it is enough:
I think I have a world of good le^ts for thee* oh sirrah, I can show thee two
of the most perfect, rare, and absolute true Gulls, that ever thou saw, if
thou will come. S'blood, invent some famous ^^morable lie, or other, to flap
thy father in the mouth withal: thou have been father of a thousand, in thy
days, (...) could be no Poet else: any sciruy roguish excuse will serve;
say thou com^st but to fetch wool for thine Inke-borne. And then too, thy
Father will say thy wits are a wooll-gathering. But it is no matter; the worse,
the better. Any thing is good enough for the old man. Sirrah, how (...) thy
Father should see this now? what would he think^ of me? Well, (howeuer I write
to thee) ^ reverence him in my soul, for the general good all Florence
delivers of him. Lorenzo, I conjure thee (by what, let me see) by the depth of
our love, by all the strange sights we have seen in our days, (I or nights
either) to come to me to Florence this day. Go to, you shall come, and let your
Muses go spinne for once. If thou will not, s'hart, what is your gods name?
Apollo? I; Apollo If this melancholy rogue (Lorenzo here) do not come, grant,
that he do turn Fool presently, and never hereafter, be able to make a good
Jest, or a blanke verse, but live in more penury of wit and Invention, then
either the Hall-Beadle, or Poet Nuntius

Well, ^t is the strangest letter that ever I read.
Is this the man, my son (so often) has praised
To be the happiest, and most precious wit
That ever was familiar with Art?
Now (by our Ladies blessed son) I swear,
I rather think him most unfortunate,
In the possession of such holy gifts,
Being the master of so loose a spirit.
Why what unhallowed ruffian would have writ,
With so profane a pen, unto his friend?
The modest paper eene looks pale for grief
To feel her virgin-cheeke defilde and staind
With such a black and criminal inscription.
Well, I had thought my son could not have straied,
So far from judgment, as to mart himself
Thus cheapely, (in the open trade of scorn)
To geering folly, and fantastique (...)
But now I see opinion is a fool,
And has abusde my senses. Musco.

Sir.

What is the fellow gone that brought this letter?

Yes sir, a pretty while since.

And where is Lorenz^?

In his chamber sir.

He spoke not with the fellow, did he?

No sir, he saw him not.

Then Musco take this letter, and deliver it unto Lorenzo: but sir, (on your
life) take you no knowledge I have opened it


O Lord sir, that were a jest in deed.

I am resolved I will not cross his journey.
Nor will I practice any violent mean,
To stay the hot and lusty course of youth.
For youth restraind straight grows impatient,
And (in condition) like an eager dog,
Who (never so little from his game withheld)
Turns head and leapes up at his masters throat.
Therefore i will study (by some milder drift)
To call my son unto a happier shrift.

Yes sir, (on my word) he opend it, and read the contents*


It scarce contents me that he did so. But Musco did thou observe his
countenance in the reading of it, whether he were angry or pleased


Why sir I saw him not read it.

No? how know thou then that he opend it?

Marry sir because he charged me (on my life) to tell no body that he opend
it, which (unless he had done) he would never fear to have it reueald


That's true: well Musco hie thee in again,
Least thy protracted absence do lend light,
To dark suspicion: Musco be assurde
I Will not forget this thy respective love.

Oh Musco, did thou not see a fellow here in a whatsha-callum doublet; he
brought mine uncle a letter even now


Yes sir, what of him?

Where is he, can thou tell?

Why he is gone.

Gone? which way? when went he? how long since?

Its almost half an hour ago since he rid hence.

Horson Scanderbag rogue, oh that I had a horse; by Gods lidde i would fetch him
back again, with heave and ho


Why you may have my masters bay gelding, and you will.


But I have no boots, that's the spite on it.

Then its no boot to follow him. Let him go and hang sir.

I by my troth; Musco, I pray thee help to trusse me a little; nothing angers
me, but I have waited such a while for him all vnlac'd and untrust yonder, and
now to see he is gone the other way


Nay I pray you stand still sir.

I will, I will: oh how it vexes me.

Tut, never vex your self with the thought of such a ba^e fellow as he.


Nay to see, he stood upon points with me too.


Like enough so; that was, because he saw you had so few at your hose.


What? Have thou done? God a mercy, good Musco.


I marle, sir, you wear such ill-fauourd course stockings, having so good a
leg as you have


Fo, the stockings be good enough for this time of the year; but I Will have a
pair of silk, e're it be long: I think, my leg would show well in a silk
hose


I before God would it rarely well.


In sadness I think it would: I have a reasonable good leg.


You have an excellent good leg, sir: I pray you pardon me, I have a little
haste in, sir


A thousand thanks, good Musco.
What, I hope he laughs not at me; and he do --

Here is a style indeed, for a man's senses to leap over, e're they come at it:
why, it is able to break the shinnes of any old man's patience in the world. My
father read this with patience? Then will I be made an Eunuch, and learn to
sing Ballads. I do not deny, but my father may have as much patience as any
other man; for he uses to take physic, and often taking physic, makes a man
a very patient creature. But, Signior Prospero, had your swaggering Epistle
here, arrived in my fathers hands, at such an hour of his patience, (I mean,
when he had taken physic) it is to be doubted, whether I should have read
sweet villaynt here. But, what? My wise cousin; Nay then, I Will furnish our
feast with one Gull more toward a mess; he writes to me of two, and here is
one, that is three, Ifayth. Oh for a fourth: now, Fortune, or never Fortune


Oh, now I see who he laughed at: he laughed at some body in that letter. By
this good light, and he had laughed at me, I would have told mine uncle


Cousin Stephano: good morrow, good cousin, how fare you?


The better for your asking, I will assure you. I have been all about to seek
you; since I came I saw mine uncle; and in faith how have you done this great
while? Good Lord, by my troth I am glad you are well cousin


And I am as glad of your coming, I protest to you, for I am sent for by a
private gentleman, my most special dear friend, to come to him to Florence
this morning, and you shall go with me cousin, if it please you, not else, I
will enjoin you no further then stands with your own consent, and the
condition of a friend


Why cousin you shall command me and't were twice so far as Florence to do
you good; what do you think I will not go with you? I protest


Nay, nay, you shall not protest.


By God, but I will sir, by your leave i will protest more to my friend then i will
speak of at this time


You speak very well sir.


Nay not so neither, but I speak to serve my turn.


Your turn? why cousin, a gentleman of so fair sort as you are, of so true
carriage, so special good parts; of so dear and choice estimation; one whose
lowest condition bears the stamp of a great spirit; nay more, a man so
graced, gilded, or rather (to use a more fit Metaph^r) tinfoyld by nature,
(not that you have a leaden constitution, couze, although perhaps a little
inclining to that temper, and so the more apt to melt with pity, when you
fall into the fire of rage) but for your luster only, which reflects as bright
to the world as an old Ale-wiues pewter again a good time; and will you now
(with nice modesty) hide such real ornaments as these, and shadow their
glory as a Millaners wife does her wrought stomacher, with a smoakie lawne or
a black cipresse? Come, come, for shame do not wrong the quality of your
desert in so poor a kind: but let the Idea of what you are, be portraied in
your aspect, that men may read in your looks; Here within this place is to be
seen, the most admirable rare and accomplished work of nature; Cousin what
think you of this


Marry I do think of it, and I will be more melancholy, and gentlemanlike
then I have been, I do ensure you


Why this is well: now if I can but hold up this humor in him, as it is begun,
Ca^so for Florence, match him and she can; Come cousin


I Will follow you. Le. iu. Follow me? you must go before.


Must I? nay then I pray you show me good cousin.


I think this be the house: what howgh?


Who Is there? oh Signior Matheo. God give you good morrow sir.


What? Cob? how do thou good Cob? do thou inhabit here Cob?


I sir, I and my lineage have kept a poor house in our days.


Thy lineage monsieur Cob? what lineage, what lineage?


Why sir, an ancient lineage, and a princely: mine ancetri^ came from a kings
loins, no worse man; and yet no man neither, but Herring the king of fish, one
of the monarchs of the world I assure you. I do fetch my pedigree and name
from the first read herring that was eaten in Adam, and Eues kitchen: his Cob
was my great, great, mighty great grandfather


Why mighty? why mighty?


Oh its a mighty while ago sir, and it was a mighty great Cob.


How know thou that?


How know I? why his ghost comes to me every night.


Oh unsavory jest: the ghost of a herring Cob.


I, why not the ghost of a herring Cob, as well as the ghost of Rashero
Baccono, they were both broild on the coals: you are a scholar, vpsolue me
that now


Oh rude ignorance. Cob can thou show me, of a ge^tleman, one Signior
Bobadilla, where his lodging is


Oh my guest sir, you mean?


Thy guest, alas? ha, ha.


Why do you laugh sir? do you not mean signior Bobadilla?


Cob I pray thee advise thy self well: do not wrong the gentleman, and thy
self too. I dare be sworn he scorns thy house he. He lodge in such a base
obscure place as thy house? Tut, I know his disposition so well, he would not
lie in thy bed if ^hould'st give it him


I will not give it him. Mass I thought (somewhat was in it) we could not get
him to bed all night. Well sir, though he lie not on my bed, he lies on my
bench, and't please you to go up sir, you shall find him with two cushions
under his head, and his cloak wrapped about him, as though he had neither won
nor lost, and yet I warrant he never cast better in his life then he has
done to night


Why was he drunk?


Drunk sir? you hear not me say so; perhaps he swallowed a tavern token, or
some such devise sir; I have nothing to do withal: I deal with water and not
with wine. Give me my tankard there, ho. God be with you sir, its six a
clock: I should have carried two turns by this, what ho? my stopple come


Lie in a waterbearers house, a gentleman of his note? well i will tell him my
mind


What Tib, show this gentleman up to Signior Bobadilla: oh and my house were
the Brazen head now, faith it would eene cry more fools yet: you should have
some now, would take him to be a gentleman at the least; alas God help the
simple, his father's an honest man, a good fishmonger, and so forth: and now
does he creep and wriggle into acquaintance with all the brave gallants about
the town, such as my guest is, (oh my guest is a fine man) and they ^lout him
inuinciblie. He uses every day to a Marcha^ts house (where I serve water) one
M. Thorellos; and here is the jest, he is in love with my masters sister, and
calls her mistres: and there he sits a whole afternoon sometimes, reading of
these same abominable, vile, (a pox on them, I cannot abide them) rascally
verses, Poetry, poetry, and speaking of E^terludes, it will make a man burst
to hear him: and the wenches, they do so geere and ti^e at him; well, should
they do as much to me, Ild forswear them all, by the life of Pharaoh, there is
an oath: how many waterbearers shall you hear swear such an oath? oh I have a
guest (he teaches me) he does swear the best of any man christened: By
Phoebus, By the life of Pharaoh, By the body of me, As I am gentleman, and a
soldier: such dainty oaths; and withal he does take this same filthy
roaguish Tobacco the finest, and cleanliest; it would do a man good to see the
fume come forth at his nostrils: well, he owes me forty shillings (my wife
lent him out of her purse; by sixpence a time) besides his lodging; I would I
had it: I shall have it he says next Action* Helter skelter, hang sorrow, care
will kill a cat, vptailes all, and a pox on the hangman

Bobadilla discouers himself: on a bench; to him Tib.


Hostess, hostess.


What say you sir?


A cup of your small beer sweet hostess.


Sir, there is a gentleman below would speak with you.


A gentleman, (Gods so) I am not within.


My husband told him you were sir.


What ha plague? what meant he?


Signior Bobadilla.


Who Is there? (take away the basin good hostess) come up sir.


He would desire you to come up sir; you come into a cleanly house here.


God save you sir, God save you.


Signior Matheo, is it you sir? please you sit down.


I thank you good Signior, you may see, I am somewhat audacious.


Not so Signior, I was requested to supper yesternight* by a sort of gallants
where you were wished for, and drunk to I assure you


Vouchsafe me by whom good Signior.


Marry by Signior Prosper^, and others, why hostess, a stool here for this
gentleman


No haste sir, it is very well.


Body of me, it was so late ere we parted last night, I can scarce open mine
eyes yet; I was but new risen as you came: how passes the day abroad sir? you
can tell


Faith some half hour to seven: now trust me you have an exceeding fine
lodging here, very neat, and private


I sir, sit down I pray you: Signior Matheo (in any case) possess no
gentlemen of your acquaintance with notice of my lodging


Who I sir? no.


Not that I need to care who know it, but in regard I would not be so popular
and general, as some be


True Signior, I conceive you.


For do you see sir, by the heart of my self (except it be to some peculiar and
choice spirits, to whom I am extraordinarily engaged, as your self, or so) I
would not extend thus far


O Lord sir I resolve so.


What new book have you there? what? Go by Hier^^imo.


I, did you ever see it acted? is it not well pend?


Well pend: I would feign see all the Poets of our time pen such another play
as that was; they I prate and swagger, and keep a stir of a^te and devises,
when (by Gods so) they are the most shallow pitiful fellows that live upon
the face of the earth again


Indeed, here are a number of fine speeches in this book: Oh eyes, no eyes
but fountains fraught with tears; there is a conceit: Fountains fraught with
tears. Oh life, no life, but lively form of death: is it not excellent? Oh
world, no world, but mass of public wrongs; O Gods me: confusde and filled
with murder and misdeeds. Is It not simply the best that ever you heard? Ha,
how do you like it


It Is good.


To thee the purest object to my senc^,
The most refined essence heaven couers,
Send I these lines, wherein I do commence
The happy state of true deserving lovers.
If they prove rough, vnpolish't, harsh and rude,
Haste made that waste; thus mildly I conclude.

Nay proceed, proceed, where is this? where is this?


This sir, a toy of mine own in my nonage: but when will you come and see my
study? good faith I can show you some very good things I have done of late:
that boot becomes your leg passing well sir, me thinks


So, so, it is a fashion gentlemen use.


Mass sir, and now you speak of the fashion, Signior Prosperos elder brother
and I are fallen out exceedingly: this other day I happened to enter into some
discourse of a hanger, which I assure you, both for fashion and workmanship was
most beautiful and gentlemanlike; yet he condemned it for the most pide and
ridiculous that ever he saw


Signior Giuliano, was it not? the elder brother?


I sir, he.


Hang him Rooke he? why he has no more judgment then a malt horse. By S.
George, I hold him the most peremptory absurd clown (one a them) in
Christendom: I protest to you (as I am a gentleman and a soldier) I never
talked with the like of him: he has not so much as a good word in his belly,
all iron, iron, a good commodity for a smith to make hobnailes on


I, and he thinks to carry it away with his manhood still where he comes: he
brags he will give me the bastinado, as I hear


How, the bastinado? how came he by that word trow?


Nay indeed he said cudgill me; I tearmd it so for the more grace.


That may be, for I was sure it was none of his word: but when, when said he
so


Faith yesterday they say, a young gallant a friend of mine told me so.


By the life of Pharaoh, and't were my case now, I should send him a challenge
presently: the bastinado? come hither, you shall challenge him; i will show you a
trick or two, you shall kill him at pleasure, the first stockado if you will,
by this air


Indeed you have absolute knowledge in the mystery, I have heard sir.


Of whom? of whom I pray?


Faith I have heard it spoken of diverse, that you have very rare skill sir.


By heaven, no, not I, no skill in the earth: some small science, know my time,
distance, or so, I have professed it more for noblemen and gentlemen's use, then
mine own practice I assure you. Hostess, lend us another bedstaffe here
quickly: look you sir, exalt not your point above this state at any hand, and
let your poyneard maintain your defense thus: give it the gentleman. So sir,
come on, oh twine your body more about, that you may come to a more sweet
comely gentlemanlike guard; so indifferent. Hollow your body more sir, thus:
now stand fast on your left leg, note your distance, keep your due proportion
of time: oh you disorder your point most vilely


How is the bearing of it now sir?


Oh out of measure ill, a well experienced man would pass upon you at pleasure.


How mean you pass upon me?


Why thus sir? make a thrust at me; come in upon my time; control your point,
and make a full carriere at the body: the best practiced gentlemen of the time
term it the passado, a most desperate thrust, believe it


Well, come sir.


Why you do not manage your weapons with that facility and grace that you
should do, I have no spirit to play with you, your dearth of judgment makes
you seem tedious


But one very sir.


Fie veney, most gross denomination, as ever I heard: oh the stockado while
you live Signior, note that. Come put on your cloak, and we will go to some
private place where you are acquainted, some tavern or so, and we will se^d for
one of these fencers, where he shall breath you at my direction, and then i will
teach you that trick, you shall kill him with it at the first if you please:
why i will learn you by the true judgment of the eye, hand and foot, to control
any man's point in the world; Should your adversary confront you with a pistol,
it were nothing, you should (by the same rule) control the bullet, most
certain by Phoebus: unless it were haile-shot: what money have you about you sir


Faith I have not past two shillings, or so.


It Is somewhat with the least, but come, when we have done, we will call up
Signior Prospero; perhaps we shall meet with Coridon his brother there


Piso, come hither: there lies a note within upon my deske; here take my key:
it is no matter neither, where is the boy


Within sir, in the warehouse.


Let him tell over that Spanish gold, and weigh it, and do you see the
delivery of those wares to Signior Bentiuol^: i will be there my self at the
receipt of the money anon


Very good sir.


Brother, did you see that same fellow there?


I, what of him?


He is e'ene the honestest faithful servant, that is this day in Florence; (I
speak a proud word now) and one that I durst trust my life into his hands, I
have so strong opinion of his love, if need were


God send me never such need: but you said you had somewhat to tell me, what
is it


Faith brother, I am loath to utter it,
As fearing to abuse your patience,
But that I know your judgment more direct,
Able to sway the nearest of affection.

Come, come, what needs this circumstance?

I will not say what honor I ascribe
Unto your friendship, nor in what dear state
I hold your love; let my continued zeal,
The constant and religious regard,
That I have ever carried to your name,
My carriage with your sister, all contest,
How much I stand affected to your house.

You are too tedious, come to the matter, come to the matter.


Then (without further ceremony) thus.
My brother Prospero (I know not how)
Of late is much declined from what he was,
And greatly alterd in his disposition.
When he came first to lodge here in my house,
Never trust me, if I was not proud of him:
Me thought he bare himself with such observance,
So true election and so fair a form:
And (what was chief) it showed not borrowed in him,
But all he did became him as his own,
And seemd as perfect, proper, and innate,
Unto the mind, as collor to the blood,
But now* his course is so irregular,
So loose affected, and deprived of grace.
And he himself withal so far fallen off
From his first place, that scarce no note remains,
To tell men's judgments where he lately stood;
He Is grown a stranger to all due respect,
Forgetful of his friends, and not content
To stale himself in all societies,
He makes my house as common as a Mart,
A Theater, a public receptacle
For giddie humor, and diseased riot,
And there, (as in a Tavern, or a stews,)
He, and his wild associates, spend their hours,
In repetition of lascivious ^e^ts,
Swear, leap, and dance, and revel night by night,
Control my servants: and indeed what not?

Faith I know not what I should say to him: so God save me, I am eene at my
wits end, I have told him enough, one would think, if that would serve: well,
he knows what to trust to for me: let him spend, and spend, and domineere till
his heart ache: and he get a penny more of me, I Will give him this ^are


Nay good Brother have patience.


S'blood, he mads me, I could eat my very flesh for anger:
I marle you will not tell him of it, how he disquiets your house*

O there are diu^ers reasons to dissuade me,
But would your self vouchsafe to travail in it,
(Though but with plain, and easy circumstance,)
It would, both come much better to his sense,
And savor less of grief and discontent.
You are his elder brother, and that title
Confirms and warrants your authority:
Which (seconded by your aspect) will breed
A kind of duty in him, and regard.
Whereas, if I should intimate the least,
It would but add contempt, to his neglect,
Heap worse on ill, rear a huge pile of hate,
That in the building, would come tottring down,
And in her ^uines, bury all our love.
Nay more then this brother; (if I should speak)
He would be ready in the heat of passion,
To fill the ears of his familiars,
With often reporting to them, what disgrace
And gross disparagement, I had proposed him.
And then would they straight back him, in opinion,
Make some loose comment upon every word,
And out of their distracted fantasies;
Contriue some slander, that should dwell with me.
And what would that be think you? mary this,
They would give out, (because my wife is fair,
My self but lately married, and my sist^r
Here soiourning a virgin in my house)
That I were jealous: nay, as sure as death,
Thus they would say: and how that I had wronged
My brother purposely, thereby to find
An apt pretext to banish them my house.

Mass perhaps so.

Brother they would believe it: so should I
(Like one of these penurious quack-slaluers,)
But try experiments upon my self,
Open the gates unto mine own disgrace,
Lend bare-ribd envy, opportunity.
To stab my reputation, and good name.

I will speak to him.


Speak to him? away, by the life of Pharaoh you shall not, you shall not do
him that grace: the time of day to you Gentleman: is Signior Prospero stirring


How then? what should he do?


Signior Thorello, is he within sir?


He came not to his lodging to night sir, I assure you.


Why do you hear? you.


This gentleman has satisfied me, I Will talk to no Scauenger.


How Scauenger? stay sir stay.


Nay Brother Giuliano.


S'blood stand you away, and you love me.


You shall not follow him now I pray you, Good faith you shall not.


Ha? Scauenger? well go to, I say little, but, by this good day (God forgive
me I should swear) if I put it up so, say I am the rankest -- that ever pist.
S'blood and I swallowe this, I Will near draw my sword in the sight of man
again while I live; I Will ^it in a Barn with Madge-owlet first, Scauenger?
'Hart and I Will go near to fill that hug^ timbrell slop of yours with somewhat
and I have good luck, your Garagantua breech cannot carry it away so


Oh do not fret your self thus, never think o^'t.


These are my brothers consorts these, these are his Cumrades, his walking
mates, he is a gallant, a Caueliero too, right hangman cut, God let me not live,
and I could not find in my heart to swinge the whole ne^t of them, one after
another, and begin with him first, I am grieved it should be said he is my
brother, and take these courses, well he shall hear on it, and that tightly
too, and I live In Faith


But brother, let your apprehension (then)
Run in an easy current, not transported
With heady rashness, or devouring choler,
And rather carry a persuading spirit,
Whose powers will pearce more gently; and allure,
The imperfect thoughts you labor to reclaim,
To a more sudden and resolved assent.

I, I, let me alone for that I warrant you.

How now? oh the bell rings to breakefast.
Brother Giuliano, I pray you go in and bear my wife company:
I Will but give order to my servants for the dispatche of some business and come
to you presently

What Cob? our maids will have you by the back (In Faith)
For coming so late this morning.

Perhaps so sir, take heed some body have not the^* by the belly for walking
so late in the evening


Now (in good faith) my mind is somewhat easd,
Though not repo^d in that security,
As I could wish; well, I must be content,
How e're I set a face on it to the world,
Would I had lost this ^inger at a vente,
So Prospero had never lodged in my house,
Why't cannot be, where there is such resort
Of wanton gallants, and young reuellers,
That any woman should be honest long.
Is It like, that factious beauty will preserve
The sovereign state of chastity vnscard,
When such strong motives muster, and make head
Against her single peace? no, no: beware
When mutual pleasure swayes the appetite,
And spirits of one kind and quality,
Do meet to parlee in the pride of blood.
Well (to be plain) if I but thought, the time
Had answered their affections: all the world
Should not persuade me, but I were a cuckold:
Mary I hope they have not got that start.
For opportunity has balkt them yet,
And shall do still, while I have eyes and ears
To attend the imposition of my heart,
My presence shall be as an Iron Bar,
Twixt the conspiring motions of desire,
Yea every look or glaunce mine eye objects,
Shall check occasion, as one does his slave,
When he forgets the limits of prescription.

Sister Hesperida, I pray you fetch down the Rose water above in the closet:
Sweet heart will you come in to breakfast


And she have ouer-heard me now?


I pray thee (good Musse) we stay for you.


By Christ I would not for a thousand crowns.


What ayle you sweet heart, are you not well, speak good Musse.


Troth my head aches extremely on a sudden.


Oh Jesus!


How now? what?


Good Lord how it burns? Musse keep you warm, good truth it is this new
disease, there is a number are troubled withal: for Gods sake sweet heart,
come in out of the air


How simple, and how subtle are her answers?
A new disease, and many troubled with it.
Why true, she heard me all the world to nothing.

I pray thee good sweet heart come in; the air will do you harm in troth.


I Will come to you presently, it will away I hope.

Pray God it do.

A new disease? I know not, new or old.
But it may well be called poor mortals Plague;
For like a pestilence it does infect
The houses of the brain: first it begins
Solely to work upon the fantasy,
Filling her seat with such pestiferous air,
As soon corrupts the judgment, and from thence,
Sends like contagion to the memory,
Still each of other catching the infection,
Which as a searching vapor spreads it self
Confusedly through every sensiue part,
Till not a thought or motion in the mind
Be free from the black poison of suspect.
Ah, but what error is it to know this,
And want the free election of the soul
In such extremes? well, I will once more strive,
(Even in despite of hell) my self to be,
And shake this fever off that thus shakes me.

S'blood, I cannot choose but laugh to see my self translated thus, from a
poor creature to a creator; for now must I create an intolerable sort of lies,
or else my profession looses his grace, and yet the lie to a man of my coat, is
as ominous as the (...) oh sir, it holds for good policy to have that
outwardly in vilest estimation, that inwardly is most dear to us: So much for
my borrowed shape. Well, the troth is, my master intends to follow his son
drie-foot to Florence, this morning: now I knowing of this conspiracy, and the
rather to insinuate with my young master, (^or so must we that are blew
waiters, or men of service do, or else perhaps we may wear motley at the
years end, and who wears motley you know:) I have got me before in this
disguise, determining here to lie in ambuscado, and intercept him in the
midway: If I can but get his cloak, his purse, his hat, nay any thing so I can
stay his journey, Rex Regum, I am made for ever in faith: well, now must I
practice to get the true garb of one of these Launce-knights: my arm here,
and my: Gods so, young master and his cousin


So sir, and how then?


Gods foot, I have lost my purse, I think.


How? lost your purse? where? when had you it?


I cannot tell, stay.


S'lid I am afeard they will know me, would I could get by them.


What? have you it?


No, I think I was bewitched, I.


Nay do not weep, a pox on it, hang it let it go.


Oh it is here, nay and it had been lost, I had not cared but for a ^et ring
Marina ^ent me


A iet ring? oh the poesy, the poesy?


Fine in faith: Though fancy sleep, my love is deep: meaning that though I did
not fancy her, yet she loved me dearly


Most excellent.


And then I sent her another, and my poesy was; The deeper the sweeter, I Will be
judged by Saint Peter


How, by S. Peter? I do not conceive that.


Marry, S. Peter to make up the meeter.


Well, you are beholding to that Saint* (...) helped you at your need; thank
him, thank him


I will venture, come what will: Gentlemen, please you change a few crowns
for a very excellent good blade here; I am a poor gentleman, a soldier, one
that (in the better state of my fortunes) scornd so mean a refuge, but now its
the humor of necessity to have it so: you seem to be gentlemen well affected
to martial men, else I should rather die with silence, then live with shame:
how e're, vouchsafe to remember it is my want speaks, not my self: this
condition agrees not with my spirit


Where have thou served?


May it please you Signior, in all the provinces of Bohemia, Hungaria,
Dalmatia, Poland, where not? I have been a poor seruitor by sea and land, any
time this xiiij. years, and followed the fortunes of the best Commanders in
Christendom. I was twice shot at the taking of Aleppo, once at the relief of
Vienna; I have been at America in the galleyes thrice* where I was most
dangerously shot in the head, through both the thighs, and yet being thus
maimed I am void of maintenance, nothing left me but my scarres, the noted
marks of my resolution


How will you sell this Rapier friend?


Faith Signior, I refer it to your own judgment; you are a gentleman, give
me what you please


True, I am a gentleman, I know that; but what though,
I pray you say, what would you ask?

I assure you the blade may become the side of the best prince in Europe.


I, with a velvet scabberd.


Nay and't be mine it shall have a velvet scabberd, that is flat, ^'de not
wear it as'tis and you would give me an angel


At your pleasure Signior, nay it is a most pure Toledo.


I had rather it were a Spaniard: but tell me, what shall I give you for it? and
it had a silver hilt --


Come, come, you shall not buy it; hold there is a shilling friend, take thy
Rapier


Why but I will buy it now, because you say so: what shall I go without a
rapier


You may buy one in the city.


Tut, i will buy this, so I will; tell me your lowest price.


You shall not I say.


By Gods lid, but I will, though I give more then it is worth.


Come away, you are a fool.


Friend, i will have it for that word: follow me.


At your service Signior.


My laboring spirit being late oppressed
With my sons folly, can embrace no rest,
Till it has plotted by advise and skill,
How to reduce him from affected will
To reasons manage; which while I intend,
My troubled soul begins to apprehend
A farther secret, and to meditate
Upon the difference of man's estate:
Where is deciphered to true judgments eye
A deep, conceald, and precious mystery.
Yet can I not but worthily admire
At natures art: who (when she did inspire
This heat of life) placed Reason (as a king)
Here in the head, to have the marshalling
Of our affections: and with sovereignty
To sway the state of our weak empe^ie,
But as in diverse commonwealthes we see,
The form of government to disagree:
Even so in man who searches soon shall find
As much or more variety of mind.
Some men's affections like a fullen wife,
Is with her husband reason still at strife.
Others (like proud Arch-traitors that rebel
Against their sovereign) practice to expel
Their liege Lord Reason, and not shame to tread
Upon his holy and anointed head.
But as that land or nation best does thrive,
Which to smooth-fronted peace is most procliue,
So does that mind, whose fair affections ranged
By reasons rules, stand constant and unchanged,
Else, if the power of reason be not such,
Why do we attribute to him so much?
Or why are we obsequious to his law,
If he want spirit our affects to awe?
Oh no, I argue weakly, he is strong,
Albeit my son have done him too much wrong.

My master: nay faith have at you: I am flesht now I have sped so well:
Gentleman, I beseech you respect the estate of a poor soldier; I am ashamed of
this base course of life (God's my comfort) but extremity prouokes me to it,
what remedy


I have not for you now.


By the faith I bear unto God, gentleman, it is no o^^dinarie custom, but
only to preserve manhood. I protest to you, a man I have bin, a man I may be,
by your sweet bounty


I pray thee good friend be satisfied.


Good Signior: by Jesus you may do the part of a kind gentleman, in lending a
poor soldier the price of two cans of beer, a matter of small value, the King
of heaven shall pay you, and I shall rest thankful: sweet Signior


Nay and you be so importunate --


Oh Lord sir, need will have his course: I was not made to this vile use; well,
the edge of the enemy could not have abated me so much: it is hard when a man
has served in his Princes cause and be thus. Signior, let me derive a small
piece of silver from you, it shall not be given in the course of time, by this
good ground, I was feign to pawn my rapier last night for a poor supper, I am
a Pagan else: sweet Signior


Believe me I am rapte with admiration,
To think a man of thy exterior presence,
Should (in the constitution of the mind)
Be so degenerate, infirm, and base.
Art thou a man? and sham'st thou not to beg?
To practice such a servile kind of life?
Why were thy education never so mean,
Having thy limbs: a thousand fairer courses
Offer themselves to thy election.
Nay there the wars might still supply thy wants,
Or service of some virtuous Gentleman,
Or honest labor; nay what can I name,
But would become thee better then to beg?
But men of your condition feed on sloth,
As does the Scara^e on the dung she breeds in,
Not caring how the temper of your spirits
Is eaten with the rust of idleness.
Now before God, what e're he be, that should
Relieve a person of thy quality,
While you insist in this loose desperate course,
I would esteem the sin not th^ne but his.

Faith signior, I would gladly find some other course if so*


I, you would gladly find it, but you will not seek it.


Alas^e sir, where should a man seek? in the wars, there is no assent by
desert in these days, but: and for service would it were as soon purchased as
wished for (Gods my comfort) I know what I would say


What Is thy name.


Please you: Portensi^.


Portensio?
Say that a man should entertain thee now,
Would thou be honest, humble, just and true.

Signior: by the place and honor of a soldier.


Nay, nay, I like not these affected oaths; Speak plainly man: what think
thou of my words


Nothing signior, but wish my fortunes were as happy as my service should be
honest


Well follow me, i will prove thee, if thy deeds Will carry a proportion to thy
words


Yes sir straight, i will but g^rter m^ ^ose; oh that my belly were hoopt now,
for I am ready to burst with laughing. S^lid, was there ever seen a fox in
years to betray himself thus? now shall I be possessed of all his
determinations, and consequently and my young master well he is resolved to
prove my honesty: faith and I am resolved to prove his patience: oh I shall
abuse him intollerablie: this small piece of service will bring him clean out
of love with the soldier for ever. It Is no matter, let the world think me a
bad counterfeit, if I cannot give him the slip at an instant: why this is
better then to have staid his journey by half, well i will follow him; oh how I
long to be employed


Yes faith sir, we were at your lodging to seek you too.


Oh I came not there to night.


Your brother delivered us as much.


Who Giuliano?


Ciuliano* Signior Prospero, I know not in what kind you value me, but let me
tell you this: as sure as God I do hold it so much out of mine honor and
reputation, if I should but cast the least regard upon such a dunghill of
flesh; I protest to you (as I have a soul to be saved) I never saw any
gentlemanlike part in him: and there were no more men living upon the face of
the earth, I should not fancy him by Phoebus


Troth nor I, he is of a rusticall cut, I know not how: he does not carry
himself like a gentleman


Oh Signior Matheo, that is a grace peculiar but to a few; quos aequus amauit
Jupiter


I understand you sir.


No question you do sir: Lorenzo; now on my soul welcome; how do thou sweet
rascal? my Genius? S'blood I shall love Apollo, and the m^d Thespian girls the
better while I ^ue for this; my dear villain, now I see there is some spirit
in thee: Sir these be they two I writ to thee of, nay what a drowsy humor is
this now? why do thou not speak


Oh you are a fine gallant, you sent me a rare letter.


Why was it not rare?


Yes i will be sworn I was never guilty of reading the like, match it in all
Pli^ies familiar Epistles, and i will have my judgment burnd in the ^are for a
rogue, make much of thy vain, for it is inimitable. But I marle what Camel it
was, that had the carriage of it? for doubtless he was no ordinary beast that
brought it


Why?


Why say thou? why do thou think that any reasonable creature,
especially in the morning, (the sober time of the day too) would have taine my
father for me


S'blood you jest I hope?


Indeed the best use we can turn it too, is to make a jest on it now: but i will
assure you, my father had the proving of your copy, some hour before I saw it


What a dull slave was this? But sirrah what said he to it in faith?


Nay I know not what he said. But I have a shrewd guess what he thought.


What? what?


Mary that thou are a damned dissolute villain, And I some grain or two
better, in keeping thee company


Tut that thought is like the Moon in the last quarter, twill change shortly:
but sirrah, I pray thee be acquainted with my two Zanies here, thou will take
exceeding pleasure in them if thou hearst them once, but what strange piece of
silence is this? the sign of the dumb man


Oh sir a ki^sman of mine, one that may make our Music the fuller and he
please, he has his humor sir


Oh what is it? what is it?


Nay: i will neither do thy judgment, nor his folly that wrong, as to prepare thy
apprehension: i will leave him to the mercy of the time, if you can take him: so


Well signior Bobadilla: signior Matheo: I pray you know this Gentleman here,
he is a friend of mine, and one that will well deserve your affection, I know
not your name signior, but I shall be glad of any good occasion, to be more
familiar with you


My name is signior Stephano, sir, I am this Gentleman's cousin, sir his father
is mine uncle; sir, I am somewhat melancholy, but you shall command me sir,
in whatsoever is incident to a Gentleman


Signior, I must tell you this, I am no general man, embrace it as a most high
favor, for (by the host of Egypt) but that I conceive you, to be a Gentleman
of some parts, I love few words: you have wit: imagine


I truly sir, I am mightily given to melancholy.


Oh Lord sir, it is your only best humor sir, your true melancholy, breeds your
perfect fine wit sir: I am melancholy my self diverse times sir, and then do I
no more but take your pen and paper presently, and write you your half score
or your dozen of sonnets at a sitting


Mass then he vtters them by the gross.


Truly sir and I love such things out of measure.


I faith, as well as in measure.


Why I pray you signior, make use of my study, it is at your service.


I thank you sir, I shall be bold I warrant you, have you a close stool there?


Faith sir, I have some papers there, toys of mine own doing at idle hours,
that you will say there is some sparks of wit in them, when you shall see them


Would they were kindled once, and a good fire made, I might see self love
burnd for her heresy


Cousin, is it well? am I melancholy enough?


Oh I, excellent.


Signior Bobadilla? why muse you so?


He is melancholy too.


Faith sir, I was thinking of a most honorable piece of service was performed
to morrow; being S Marks day: shall be some te^ years


In what place was that service, I pray you sir?


Why at the beleagring of Ghibell^tto, where, in less then two hours, seven
hundred resolute gentlemen, as any were in Europe, lost their lives upon the
b^each: i will tell you gentlemen, it was the first, but the best leaug^^ that
ever I beheld with these eyes, except the taking in of (...) last year by the
Genowayes, but that (of all other) was the most fatal and dangerous exploit,
that ever I was ranged in, since I first bore arms before the fa^e of the
enemy, as I am a gentleman and a soldier


So, I had as liefe as an angel I could swear as well as that gentleman.


Then you were a seruitor at both it seems.


Oh Lord sir: by Phaeton I was the first man that entered the breach, and had I
not effected it with resolution, I had been slain if I had had a million of
lives


Indeed sir?


Nay and you heard him discourse you would say so: how like you him?


I assure you (upon my salvation) it is true, and your self shall confess.


You must bring him to the rack first.


Observe me iudicially sweet signior: they had planted me a demi culuering,
just in the mouth of the breach; now sir (as we were to ascend) their master
gunner (a man of no mean skill and courage, you must think) confronts me with
his Linstock ready to give fire; I spying his intendement, discharged my
Petrinell in his bosom, and with this instrument my poor Rapier, ran
violently upon the Moors that guarded the ordinance, and put them pell-mell to
the sword


To the sword? to the Rapier signior.


Oh it was a good figure observed sir: but did you all this signior without
hurting your blade


Without any impeach on the earth: you shall perceive sir, it is the most
fortunate weapon, that ever rid on a poor gentleman's thigh: shall I tell you
sir, you talk of More glay, Excaliber, Durindana, or so: tut, I lend no credit
to that is reported of them, I know the virtue of mine own, and therefore I
dare the boldlier maintain it


I marle whether it be a Toledo or no?


A most perfect Toledo, I assure you signior.


I have a countriman of his here.


Pray you let us see (...): yes faith it is.


This a Toledo* pis^^.


Why do you pish signior?


A Fleming by Phoebus, i will buy them for a guilder a pece^ and i will have a
thousand of them


How say you cousin, I told you thus much.


Where bought you it sig^ior?


Of a scuruy rogue Soldier, a pox of God on him, he swore it was a Toledo.


A prouant Rapier, no better.


Mass I think it be indeed.


Tut now it is too late to look on it, put it up, put it up.


Well I will not put it up, but by Gods foot, and ere I meet him --


Oh it is past remedy now sir, you must have patience.


Horson conny-catching Rascal; oh I could eat the very hilts for anger.


A sign you have a good Ostrich stomach Cousin.


A stomach? would I had him here, you should see and I had a stomach.


It Is better as it is: come gentlemen shall we go?


A miracle cousin, look here, look here.


Oh, Gods lid, by your leave, do you know me sir.


I sir, I know you by sigh^.


You sold me a Rapier, did you not?


Yes marry did I sir.


You said it was a Toled^ ha?


True I did so.


But it is none.


No sir, I confess it, it is none.


Gentlemen bear witness, he has con^est it. By Gods lid, and you had not
confessed it --


Oh cousin, forbear, forbear.


Nay I have done cousin.


Why you have done like a Gentleman, he has confessed it, what would you more?


Sir how do thou like him.


Oh its a precious good fool, make much on him: I can compare him to nothing
more happily, then a Barbers virginals; for every one may play upon him


Gentleman, shall I entreat a word with you?


With all my heart sir, you have not another Toledo to sell, have ye?


You are pleasant, your name is signior Lorenzo as I take it.


You are in the right: S'bloud he means to catechize me I think.


No sir, I leave that to the Curate, I am none of that coat.


And yet of as bare a coat; well, say sir.


Faith signior, I am but servant to God Mars extraordinary, and indeed (this
brass varnish being washed off, and three or four other tricks sublated) I
appear yours in reuersion, after the decease of your good father, Musco


Musco, s'bloud what wind has blown thee hither in this shape.


Your Easterly wind sir, the same that blew your father hither.


My father?


Nay never start, it is true, he is come to town of purpose to seek you.


Sir Prospero: what shall we do sir, my father is come to the city.


Thy father: where is he?


At a Gentleman's house yonder by Saint A^thonies* where he but stays my
return; and then --


Who Is this? Musco?


The same sir.


Why how comst thou trans-muted thus?


Faith a devise, a devise, nay for the love of God, stand not here Gentlemen,
house your selves and i will tell you all


But art thou sure he will stay thy return?


Do I live sir? what a question is that?


Well we will prorogue his expectation a little: Musc^ thou ^halt go with us:
Come on Gentlemen: nay I pray thee (good rascal) droope not, s'hart and our
wits be so gowty, that one old plodding brain can outstrip us all, Lord I
beseech thee, may they lie and starve in some miserable spittle, where they may
never see the face of any true spirit again, but be perpetually haunted with
some churchyard Hobgoblin in s^cul^ secul^rum


Amen, Amen.


He will expect you sir within this half hour.


Why what is a clock?


New stricken ten.


Has he the money ready, can you tell?


Yes sir, Baptista brought it yesternight.


Oh that is well: fetch me my cloak.
Stay, let me see; an hour to go and come,
I that will be the least: and then 'twill be
An hour, before I can dispatch with him;
Or very near: well, I will say two hours;
Two hours? ha? things never drempt of yet
May be contrived, I and effected too,
In two hours absence: well I will not go.
Two hours; no flee^ing opportunity
I will not give your treachery that scope.
Who will not judge him worthy to be robbed,
That sets his doors wide open to a thief,
And shows the felon, where his treasure lies*
Again, what earthy spirit but will attempt
To taste the fruit of beauties golden tree,
When leaden sleep seals up the dragons eyes?
Oh beauty is a Project of some power,
Chiefly when opportunity attends her:
She will infuse true motion in a stone,
Put glowing fire in an Icie soul,
Stuff peasants bosoms with proud Caesar's spleen,
Power rich device into an empty brain:
Bring youth to follies gate: there train him in,
And after all, extenuate his sin.
Well, I will not go, I am resolved for that.
Go carry it again, yet stay: yet do too,
I will defer it till some other time.

Sir, signior Platano will meet you there with the bo^d.


That Is true: by Jesus I had clean forgot it.
I must go, what is a clock?

Past ten sir.


'Hart, then will Prospero presently be here too,
With one or other of his loose consorts.
I am a Jew, if I know what to say,
What course to take, or which way to resolve.
My brain (me thinks) is like an hower-glasse,
And my imaginations like the sands,
Run dribling forth to fill the mouth of time,
Still chaung'd with turning in the ventricle.
What were I best to do? it shall be so.
Nay I dare build upon his secrecy? Piso.

Sir.


Yet now I have bethought me to, I will not. Is Cob within?


I think he be sir.


But he will prate too, there is no talk of him.
No, there were no course upon the earth to this,
If I durst trust him; tut I were secure,
But there is the question now, if he should prove,
Rimarum plenus, then, s'blood I were Rook^.
The state that he has stood in till this present*
Does promise no such change* what should I fear then?
Well, come what will, i will tempt my fortune once.
Piso, thou may deceive me, but I think thou love me Piso.

Sir, if a servants zeal and humble duty may be termed love, you are
possessed of it


I have a matter to impart to thee, but thou must be secret, Piso.


Sir for that --


Nay hear me man; think I esteem thee well,
To let thee in thus to my private thoughts;
Piso, it is a thing, sits nearer to my crest,
Then thou art ware of: if thou should reveal it --

Reveal it sir?


Nay, I do not think thou would, but if thou should:


Sir, then I were a villain: Disclaim in me for ever if I do.


He will not swear: he has some meaning su^e,
Else (being urged so much) how should he choose,
But lend an oath to all this protestation?
He is no puritan, that I am certain of.
What should I think of it? urge him again,
And in some other form: I will do so.
Well Piso, thou have sworn not to disclose; I you did swear*

Not yet sir, but I will, so please you.


Nay I dare take thy word.
But if thou will swear; do as you think good,
I am resolved without such circumstance.

By my souls safety sir I here protest,
My tongue shall never take knowledge of a word
Delivered me in compass of your trust.

Enough, enough, these ceremonies need not,
I know thy faith to be as firm as brass.
Piso come hither: nay we must be close
In managing these actions: So it is,
(Now he has sworn I dare the safelier speak;)
I have of late by diverse observations --
But, whether his oath be lawful yea, or no, ha^
I will ask counsel ere I do proceed:
Piso, it will be now too long to stay,
We Will spy some fitter time soon, or to morrow.

At your pleasure sir.


I pray you search the books against I return For the receipts twixt me and
Platan^


I will sir.


And hear you: if my brother Prospero Chance to bring hither any gentlemen Ere
I come back: let one straight bring me word


Very well sir.


Forget it not, nor be not you out of the way.


I will not sir.


Or whether he come or no, if any other, Stranger or else? fail not to send me
word


Yes sir.


Have care I pray you and remember it.


I warrant you sir.


But Piso, this is not the secret I told thee of.


No sir, I suppose so.


Nay believe me it is not.


I do believe you sir.


By heaven it is not, that is enough. Marry, I would not thou should utter it
to any creature living. Yet I care not

Well, I must hence: Piso conceive thus much,
No ordinary person could have drawn
So deep a secret from me; I mean not this,
But that I have to tell thee: this is nothing, this.
Piso, remember, silence, buried here:
No greater hell then to be slave to fear.

Piso, remember, silence, buried here:
Whence should this flow of passion (trow) take head? ha?
Faith i will dream no longer of this running humor.
For fear I sink, the violence of the stream
Already has transported me so far,
That I can feel no ground at all: but soft,
Oh it is our water bearer: somewhat has crossed him now.

Fasting days: what tell you me of your fasting days* would they were all on
a light fire for me: they say the world shall be consumed with fire and
brimstone in the latter day: but I would we had these ember weeks, and these
villainous fridaies burnt in the mean time, and then --


Why ^ow now C^b, what moves thee to this choler? ha?


Collar fir^ swounds I scorn^ your collar, I sir am no colliers horse sir,
never ride me with your collar, and you do, i will show you a iades trick


Oh you will slip your head out of the collar: why Cob you mistake me.


Nay I have my rewme, and I be angry as well as another, sir.


Thy rewme; thy humor man, thou mistakest.


Humor? macke, I think it be so indeed: what is this humor? it is some rare
thing I warrant


Marry i will tell thee what it is (as it is generally received in these days) it
is a monster bred in a man by self love, and affectation, and fed by folly


How? must be (...)


Oh I* humor is nothing if it ^e not ^ed, why, did thou (...) hear of that?
it is a common phrase, Feed my (...)


I Will none on it: humor, auaunt, I know you not, be gone. Let who will make
hungry meals for you, it shall not be I: Feed you quoth (...) blood I have
much ado to feed my self, especially on these (...) days ^oo, and't had been
any other day but a fasting day* (...) on them all for me: by this light one
might have done God good service and have drowned them (...) in the flood two
or three hundred thousand year^^ ago, oh I do stomach them hugely: I have a
mawe now, and't were for (...) Be^isses horse


Nay, but I pray thee Cob, what makes thee so out of love with fasting days?


Marry that, that will make any man out of love with them, I think: their bad
conditions and you will needs know: First, they are of a Flemmish breed I am
sure on it, for they rau^e up more butter then all the days of the week
beside: next, they stink of fish miserably: Thirdly, they will keep a man
devoutly hungry all day, and at night send him supperlesse to bed


Indeed these are faults Cob.


Nay and this were all, 'twere something, but they are the only known enemies
to my generation. A fasting day no sooner comes, but my lineage goes to rack,
poor Cobbes they smoke for it, they melt in passion, and your maids too know
this, and yet would have me turn Hannibal, and eat my own fish and blood:


S'oule peace, thou wilt be beaten like a stockfish else: here is Signior Math^^.
Now must I look out for a messenger to my Master


Beshrew me, but it was an absolute good jest, and exceedingly well carried.


I and our ignorance maintained it as well, did it not?


Yes faith, but was it possible thou should not know him?


Fore God not I, and I might have been ioind patten with one of the nine
worthies for knowing him. S'blood man, he had so writhe^ himself into the
habit of one of your poor Dispar^i^'s here, your decayed, ruinous, worme-eaten
gentlem^n of the round: such as have vowed to sit on the skirts of the city,
let your Provost and his half dozen of halberders do what they can; and have
translated begging out of the old hackney pace, to a fine easy amble, and made
it run as smooth of the tongue, as a shoue-groat shilling, into the likeness of
one of these lean Pirgo's, had he molded himself so perfectly, observing
every trick of their action, as varying the accent: swearing with an
Emphasis. Indeed all with so special and exquisite a grace, that (had thou
seen him) thou would have sworn he might have been the Tamberlaine, or the
Agamemnon on the rout


Why Musco: who would have thought thou had been such a gallant?

I cannot tell, but (unless a man had iuggled begging all his life time, and
been a weauer of phrases from his infancy, for the apparrelling of it) I
think the world cannot produce his Rival


Where got'st thou this coat I marl'e.

Faith sir, I had it of one of the devils near kinsmen, a Broker.

That cannot be, if the proverb hold, a crafty knave needs no broker.

True sir, but I need a broker, Ergo no crafty knave.

Well pu^ off, well put off.

Tut, he h^'s more of these shifts.

And yet where I have one, the broker has ten sir.

Francisco: Martino: never a one to be found now, what a spite's this?

How now Piso? is my brother within?

No sir, my master went forth e'ene now: but Signio^ Gi^l^ano is within. Cob,
what Cob: is he gone too

Whither went thy master? Pis^ can thou tell?

I know not, to Doctor Cle^^n^s, I think sir. Cob.

Doctor Clement, what is he? I have heard much speech of him.

Why, do thou not know him? he is the Go^^alioner^ of the state here, an
ex^ellent rare ciuilian, and a great scholar, but the only mad merry old
fellow in Europe: I showed him you the other day


Oh I remember him now; Good faith, and he has a very strange presence me
thinks, it shows as if he stood out of the rank from other men. I have
heard many of his jests in Padua: they say he will commit a man for taking the
wall of his horse


I or wearing his cloak of one shoulder, or any thing indeed, if it come in
the way of his humor

Gasper, Martin^, Cob: S'hart, where should they be trow?

Signior Thorello's man, I pray thee vouchsafe us the lighting of this match.

A pox on your match, no time but now to vouchsafe? Francisco, Cob.

Body of me: here is the remainder of seven pound, since yesterday was seven
night. It Is your right Trinidad^: did you never take any, signior


No truly sir? but i will learn to take it now, since you commend it so.

Signior believe me, (upon my relation) for what I tell you, the world shall not
improve. I have been in the Indies (where this herb grows) where neither my
self, nor a dozen Gentlemen more (of my knowledge) have received the taste of
any other nutriment, in the world, for the space of one and twenty weeks, but
Tobacco only. Therefore it cannot be but it is most divine. Further, take it in
the nature, in the true kind so, it makes an Antidote, that (had you taken the
most de^dly poisonous simple in all Florence, it should expel it, and clarify
you, with as much ease, as I speak. And for your green wound, your Bals^^um,
and your -- are all mere gull^ries, and trash to it, especially your
Trinidado: your (...) is good too: I could say what I know of the virtue of it,
for the exposing of rewmes, raw humors, crudities, obstructions, with a
thousand of this kind; but I profess my self no quacke-saluer: only thus
much: by H^rcul^s I do hold it, and will affirm it (before any Prince in
Europe) to be the most sovereign, and precious herb, that ever the earth
tendered to the use of man


Oh this speech would have done rare in a potheca^ies mouth.

I* close by Saint A^thonies: Doctor Clements.

Oh, Oh.

Where Is the match I gave thee?

S'blood would his match, and he, and pipe, and all were at Sancto Domingo.

By gods dey^es: I marle what pleasure of felicity they have in taking this
rogish Tobacco: it is good for nothing but to choke a man, and fill him full of
smoke, and imbers: there were four died out of one house last week with
taking of it, and two more the bell went for yester-night, one of them (they
say) will never escape it, he voyded a bushel of ^oote yester-day, upward and
downward. By the stocks; and there were no wiser men then I, I Would have it
present death, man or woman, that should but deal with a Tobacco pipe; why, it
will sti^le them all in the'nd as many as use it; it is little better then rats
bane


Oh good signior; hold, hold.

You base cullion, you.

Sir, here is your match; come, thou must needs be talking too.

Nay he will not meddle with his match I warrant you: well it shall be a dear
beating, and I live

Do you prate?

Nay good signior, will you regard the humor of a fool? away knave.

Piso get him away.

A horson filthy slave, a turd, an excrement. Body of Caesar, but that I scorn
to let forth so mean a spirit, i would have stabbed him to the earth


Mary God forbid sir.

By this fair heaven I would have done it.

Oh he swears admirably: (by this fair heaven:) Body of Caesar: I shall never
do it, sure (upon my salvation) no I have not the right grace


Signior will you any? By this air the most divine Tobacco as ever I drunk.

I thank you sir.

Oh this Gentleman does it rarely too, but nothing like the other. By this
air, as I am a Gentleman: by Phoebus


Master glaunce, glaunce: Signior Prospero.

As I have a soul to be saved, I do protest;

That you are a fool.

Cousin will you any Tobacco?

I sir: upon my salvation.

How now cousin?

I protest, as I am a Gentleman, but no soldier indeed.

No signior, as I remember you served on a great horse, last general muster.

I sir that is true: cousin may I swear as I am a soldier, by that?

Oh yes, that you may.

Then as I am a Gentleman, and a soldier, it is divine Tobacco.

But soft, where is signior Matheo? gone?

No sir, they went in here.

Oh let us follow them: signior Matheo is gone to salute his mistress, sir
now thou shall hear some of his verses, for he never comes hither without some
shreds of poetry: Come signior Stephano, Musco


Musco? where? is this Musco?

I, but peace cousin, no words of it at any hand.

Not I by this fair heaven, as I have a soul to be saved, by Phoebus.

Oh rare! your cousins discourse is simply suited, all in oaths.

I, he lacks nothing but a little light stuff, to draw them out withal, and
he were rarely fitted to the time


Ha, how many are there, say thou?

Marry sir, your brother, Signior Prosp^r^.

Tut, beside him: what strangers are there man?

Strangers? let me see, one, two; mass I know not well there is so many.

How? so many?

I, there is some five or six of them at the most.

A swarm, a swarm,
Spite of the Devil, how they sting my heart!
How long have thou been coming hither Cob?

But a little while sir.

Did thou come running?

No sir.

Tut, then I am familiar with thy haste.
Ban^ to my fortunes: what meant I to marry?
I that before was rankt in such content,
My mind attired in smoothe silken peace,
Being free master of mine own free thoughts,
And now become a slave? what, never sigh,
Be of good cheer m^n: for thou art a cuckold,
It Is done, it is done: nay when such flowing store,
Plenty it self falls in my wives lap,
The Cor^u-copi^ will be mine I know. But Cob,
What entertainment had they? I am sure
My sister and my wife would bid them welcome, ha?

Like enough: yet I heard not a word of welcome.

No, their lips were sealed with kisses, and the voice
Drowned in a flood of joy at their arrival,
Had lost her motion, state and faculty.
Cob, which of them was it that first kissed my wife?
(My sister I should say) my wife, alas,
I fear not her: ha? who was it say thou?

By my troth sir, will you have the truth of it?

Oh I good Cob: I pray thee.

God's my judge, I saw no body to be kissed, unless they would have kissed the
post, in the middle of the warehouse; for there I left them all, at their
Tobacco with a pox


How? were they not gone in then e're thou came?

Oh no sir.

Spite of the Devil, what do I stay here then? Cob, follow me.

Nay, soft and fair, I have eggs on the spit; I cannot go yet sir: now am I
for some diverse reasons hammering, hammering revenge: oh for three or four
gallons of vinegar, to sharpen my wits: Revenge, vinegar revenge, russet
revenge; nay, and he had not line in my house, it would never have grieved me;
but being my guest, one that i will be sworn, my wife has lent him her smock
off her back, while his own shirt ha been at washing: pawnd her neckerchers
for clean bands for him: sold almost all my platters to buy him Tobacco; and
yet to see an ingratitude wretch: strike his host; well I hope to raise up an
host of furies for it: here comes M. Doctor


What Is Signior Thorello gone?

I sir.

Heart of me, what made him l^aue us so abruptly How now sir; what make you
here? what would you have, ha

And't please your worship, I am a poor neighbor of your worships.

A neighbor of mine, knave?

I sir, at the sign of the water-tankerd, hard by the green lattice: I have
p^ide scot and lott^ there any time this eighteen years


What, at the green lattice?

No sir: to the parish: mary I have seldom escaped scot* free at the lattice.

So: but what business has my neighbor?

And't like your worship, I am come to crave the peace of your worship.

Of me, knave? peace of me, knave? did I e're hurt thee? did I ever threaten
thee? or wrong thee? ha

No god's my comfort, I mean your worships warrant, for one that has wronged
me sir: his arms are at too much liberty, I would feign have them bound to a
treaty of peace, and I could by any means compass it


Why, do thou go in danger of thy life for him?

No sir; but I go in danger of my death every hour^ by his means; and I die
within a twelue-moneth and a day, I may swear, by the laws of the land, that
he killed me


How? how knave? swear he killed thee? what pretext? what color have thou for
that

Mary sir: both black and blew, color enough, I warrant you I have it here to
show your worship

What is he, that gave you this sir?

A Gentleman in the city sir.

A Gentleman? what call you him?

Signior Bobadilla.

Good: But wherefore did he beat you sir? how began the quarrel twixt you?
ha: speak truly knave, I advise you


Marry sir, because I spoke against their vagrant Tobacco, as I came by them:
for nothing else

Ha, you speak against Tobacco? Peto, his name.

What Is your name (...)?

Oliver C^b, sir set Oli^er Cob, sir.

Tell Oli^er Cob he shall go to the iayle.

(...) Cob, master Doctor says you shall go to the iayle.

Oh I beseech your worship for gods love, dear master Doctor.

Nay gods precious: and such drunken knaves as you are come to dispute of
Tobacco once; I have done: away with him


Oh good master Doctor, sweet Gentleman.

Sweet Oliver, would I could do thee any good; master Doctor let me entreat
sir

What? a tankard-bearer, a threadbare rascal, a beggar, a slave that never
drunk out of better the^ pispot mettle in his life, and he to deprave, and
abuse the virtue of an herb, so generally receyu'd in the courts of princes,
the chambers of nobles, the bowers of sweet Ladies, the cabbins of soldiers:
Peto away with him, by gods passion, I say, go too


Dear master Doctor.

Alas poor Oliver.

Peto: I: and make him a warrant, he shall not go, I but fear the knave.

O divine Doctor, thanks noble Doctor, most dainty Doctor, delicious Doctor.

Signior Lorenzo: Gods pity man, Be merry, be merry, leave these dumpes.

Troth would I could sir: but enforced mirth (In my weak judgment) h'as no
happy birth
The mind, being once a prisoner unto cares,
The more it dreams on joy, the worse it fares.
A smyling look is to a heavy soul,
As a guilt bias, to a leaden bowl,
Which (in it self) appears most vile, being spent.
To no true use; but only for ostent.

Nay but good Signior: hear me a word, hear me a word, your cares are
nothing; they are like my cap, soon put on, and as soon put off. What? your
son is old enough, to govern himself; let him run his course, it is the
only way to make him a stayed man: if he were an unthrift, a ruffian, a
drunkard or a licentious liver, then you had reason: you had reason to take
care: but being none of these, Gods passion, and I had twice so many cares, as
you have, I Would drown them all in a cup of sack: come, come, I muse your
parcel of a soldier returns not all this while


Well sister, I tell you true: and you will find it so in the end.

Alas brother, what would you have me to do? I cannot help it; you see, my
brother Pr^spero he brings them in here, they are his friends


His friends? his friends? s'blood they do nothing but haunt him up and down
like a sort of unlucky Sprites, and tempt him to all manner of villainy, that
can be thought of; well, by this light, a little thing would make me play the
devil with some of them; and't were not more for your husbands sake, then any
thing else, I Would make the house too hot for them; they should say and swear,
Hell were broken loose, e're they went: But by gods bread, it is no bodies fault
but yours: for and you had done as you might have done, they should have been
damned e're they should have come in, e're a one of them


God's my life; did you ever hear the like? what a strange man is this? could
I keep out all them think you? I should put my self against half a dozen
men? should I? Good faith you would mad the patient'st body in the world, to hear
you talk so, without any sense or reason


Servant (in troth) you are too prodigal of your wit^ treasure; thus to power
it forth upon so mean a subject, as my worth


You say well, you say well.

Hoyday, hear is stuff.

Oh now stand close: pray God she can get him to read it.

Tut, fear not: I warrant thee, he will do it of himself with much impudency.

Servant, what is that same I pray you?

Mary an El^gi^, an Elegi^, an oddetoy.

I to mock an Ape with all, Oh I^su.

Sister, I pray you lets hear it.

Mistress I Will re^de it if you please.

I pray you do servant.

Oh hears no foppery. Sblood it freates me to the galle to think on it.

Oh I, it is his condition* peace: we are farely ridd^ of him.

Faith I did it in an h^mor: I know not how it is, b^t please you come near
signior: this gentleman has i^dgement, he knows how to cens^re of a* -- I
pray you ^ir* you can judge


Not I sir: as I have a soul to b^ saved, as I (...).

Nay its well; so long as he does ^ot forsw^^^^ himself.

Signior you abuse the excell^ncie of your mistress^, and her fair sister. Fie
while you live ^uoyd this prolixity

I shall sir: well, Incip^r^ dulce.

How, Inciper^ dulce? a sweet thing to be a Fool indeed.

What, do you take Incipe^^ in that sense?

You do not you? Sblood this was your villainy to gull him with a mott^.

Oh the Benchers phrase: Pau^a ver^^, (...).

Rare creature let me speak without offense,
Would God ^y rude woo^ds ^ad the influence:
To rule thy thoughts, as (...) f^yr^ looks do mine,
Then should thou be his prisoner, who is thine.

S'hart, this is in Hero and Leander?

Oh I: peace, we shall have more of this.

Be not unkind and fair mish^^en st^ffe*
Is of beh^^^^ur boisterous and rough:
How like you that signior, (...) he shakes his head like a bo^tle, to feel
and there be any brain in it


But observe the Catastroph^ now,
And I in duty will exceed all other.
As you in beauty do excel lo^^s ^^ther.

W^ll (...) have him free of the brok^^s, for he vtters nothing but stolen
remnant^

Nay good Critique forbear.

A pox on him, hang him ^ilching rogue, s^eale from the dead? its worse then
sacrilege

Sister vvh^t have you hear? (...) I pray you lets see.

Do you let them go so lightly sister.

^es ^ayth when they come lightly.

I but if your servant should hear you, he would take it heauely.

No matter he is able to bear.

So are Asses.

so is he.

Signior Matheo, who made these verses? they are excellent good.

Oh God sir, its your pleasure to say so sir. Faith I mad^ them (...) this
morning

How ex^empo^e?

I would I might be damnd else: ask signior Bo^adill^. He saw me write them,
(...) the: (pox^ on it) the Miter yonder


Well, and the Pope knew he cursed the Miter it were enough to have him
excommunicated ^ll the Ta^erns in the town


Cosen how do you like this gen^lem^ns vers^^.

Oh admirable, the best that (...) I heard.

By this fayr^ ^eauens, they are admirable, The best that ever I heard.

I am vexed I can hold never a bone o^ me s^ill, Sblood I think they mean to
build a Tabernacle ^eare, well

Sister you have a simple servant hear, that crowns your beauty with such
Encomions and Devises, you may see what it is to be the mistress of a vv^t,
that can make your perfections so transeparent, that every bleare eye may look
thorough them, and see him drowned over head and ears, in the deep well of
desire. Sister Biancha I marvel you get you not a servant that can ^ime and
do ^rickes too


Oh monster? ^mpudence it self; tricks?

Tricks, brother? what tricks?

Nay, speak I pray you, what trick^s?

I, never spare any body hear: but say, what tricks?

Passion of my heart? do tricks?

Sblood hears a trick^ vied, and reuied: why you monkies you? what a cat^er
waling do you keep? has he not given you rymes, and verses, and tricks


Oh see the Devil?

N^y, you lamp of virginity, that take it in snuff so: come and cherish this
tame poetical ^ury in your servant, you will be begd else shortly for a
concealment: go to, reward his muse, you cannot give him less then a
shilling in conscience* for the book he had it out of cost him a te^ton at the
least, how now gallants, L^renzo, s^^gnior Bobadill^? what all sons of
scilence? no spirit


Come you might practice your Ruff^an tricks somewhere else, and not hear I
wisse: this is no Tavern, nor no place for such exploites


Shart how now.

Nay boy, never look askaunce at me for the matter; i will tell you o^ it by Gods
bread? I, and you and your compan^ons mend your selves when I have done


My companions.

I your companions ^ir, so I say? Sblood I am not affrayed of you nor them
neither, you must have your Poets, and your caueleeres, and your fools follow
you up and down the city, and hear they must come to dominee^e and swagger?
sirrah, you Ballad singer, and Sl^ps your fellow there, get you out; get you
out: or (by the will of God) I Will cut of your ears, go to


Sblood stay, lets see what he dare do: cut of his ears you are an ass, touch
any man hear, and by the Lord i will run my rapier to the hilts in thee


Yea,

Oh (...) Piso, Math^^ murder.

Help, help, Piso.

Gentlemen, Prospero, forbear I pray you.

Well sirrah, you Hollofernus: by my hand I will pinck thy flesh full of holes
with my rapier for this, I will by this good heaven: nay let him come, let him
come, gentlemen by the body of S. George i will not kill him.


Hold, hold forbear:

You whoreson bragging coystryll.

Why, how now? what is the matter? what stir is hear,
Whence springs this quarrel, P^^o where is he?
Put up your weapons, and put of this rage.
My wife and sister they are cause of this,
What, Pizo? where is this kna^e.

Hear sir.

Come, lets go: this is one of my brothers ancient humors this?

I am glad no body was hurt by this ancient humor.

Why how now brother, who enforst this braule.

A sort of lewd rakehelles, that care neither for God nor the Devil, And they
must come hear to read Ballads and Rogery' and Trash, I Will mar the knot of
them ere I sleep perhaps: especially signior Pit^agorus, he that's al manner of
shapes: and Songs and sonne^s, his fellow there


Brother indeed you are to violent,
To sudden in your courses, and you know
My brother Prosperus temper will not bear
Any reproof, chiefly in such a presence,
Where every slight disgrace he should receive,
Would wound him in opinion and respect.

Respect? what talk you of respect among such
As had neither spark of manhood nor good manners,
By God I am ashamed to hear you^ respect?

Yes there was one a ciuil^ gentleman,
And very worthily demeand himself.

Oh that was some love of yours, sister.

A love of mine? infayth I would he were No others love but mine.

Indeed he seemd to be a gentleman of an exceeding fair disposition, and of
very excellent good (...)

Her love, by Jesus: my wises minion,
Fair disposition? excellent good parts?
S'hart, these phr^ses are intolerable,
Good parts? how should she know his parts? well* well*
It is too plain, ^oo clear: Piz^* come hither.
What are they gone?

I sir they went in.

Are any of the gallants within?

No ^ir they are all gone.

Art thou sure o^ it?

I sir I can assure you.

Pizo what gentleman was that they praised so?

One they call him signior Lorenzo, a fair young gentleman sir.

I, I thought so: my mind gave me as much:
Sblood i will be hanged if they h^^e not hid him in the house,
Some where, i will go s^arch, Piz^ go with me,
Be true to me and thou shall find me bo^ntifull.

What Tib, Tib, I say.

How now, wh^t cuckold is that knock^^ so hard? Oh husband is it you, what is the
n^wes

Nay you have stonnd me I faith? you hue given me a knock on the forehead,
will stick by me: cuckold? Swoundes cuckolde


Away you fool did I know it was you that knocked, Come, come, you may call me
(...) bad when you list

May I? swoundes Tib you are a whore:

S'hart you lie in your throat.

How the lie? and in my throat too? do you long to be stabd, ha?

Why you are no soldier?

Mass that's true, when was Bobadilla hear? that Rog^e, th^^ (...), that
fencing* B^rgullian? i will tickle him I faith

Why what is the matter?

Oh he has basted me rarely, sumptiously: but I have it hear will s^use him,
oh the doctor, the honestest old Trojan in all Italy, I do honor the very ^lea
of his dog: a plague on him he (...) me once in a villainous filthy fear: marry
it vanished away (...) smook^ of To^^cco: but I was smookt soundly first, I
thank the Devil, and his good Angel my guest: well wife: or Tib (which
you will) get you in, and lock the door I charge you, let no body into you:
not Bobbadilla himself; nor the di^ell in his likeness; you are a woman; you
have flesh and blood enough in you; therefore be not tempted; keep the door
shut upon all cummers


I vv^rrant you there shall no body enter hear without my consent.

Nor with your consent sweet Tib and so I leave you.

Its more then you know, whether you leave me so.

How?

Why sweet.

Tut (...) sour, thou art a flower,
Keep close thy door, I ask no more.

Well Musco perform this business happily,
And thou make a conquest of my love forever,

I faith now let thy spirits put on their best habit,
B^t at any hand remember thy message to my brother.
For there is no other means to start him?

I warrant you sir, ^^are nothing I have a nimble soul that has wakt all my
imaginatiue forces by this time, and put then* in true motion: what you have
poss^st me withal? ^le discharge it amply sir. Make no question


That's well said Musco: faith sirrah how do thou, aproue my wit in this
devise

Troth well, howsoever? but excellent if it take.

Take man: why it cannot choose* but take* if the circumstances miscarry not,
but tell me zealo^sly: do tho^ affect my sister Hesperida as thou pretendest


Prospero by Jesus.

Come do not pro^est I believe thee: I faith she is ^ virgin of good ^rnament,
and much modesty, un esse I conc^iud very w^rthely o^ her, thou should not
have her


Nay I think it a question whether I shall ha^^ her for all that.

Sblood thou shall have her, by this light thou shall?

Nay do not swear.

By S. Mark thou shall have her: i will go fetch her presently, point but where
to meet, and by this hand i will bring her


Hold, hold, what all policy dead? no prevention of mischiefs stirring.

Why, by what shall I swear by? thou shall have her by my soul.

I pray the have patience I am satisfied: Prosp^ro omit no off^red occasion,
that may make my desires complete I beseech thee


I warrant thee.

Was your man a soldier sir.

I a knave I took him up begging upon the way,
This morning as I was cumming to the city,
Oh? h^are he is; come on, you make fair speed:
Why? whereon Gods name have you been so long?

Mary (Gods my co^^ort) where I thought I should have had little comfort of
your worships service

How so?

Oh God sir? your cumming to the city, and your entertaynement of men, and
your sending me to watch; indeed, all the circumstances are as open to ^our
son as to your self


How should that be? unless that villain M^s^o
Have told him of the letter, and discovered
All that I strictly chargd him to conceal? it is so.

I faith you have hit it: it is so indeed.

But how should he know thee to be my man.

Nay, ^ir, I cannot tell; unless it were by the black art? is not your son
a scholar sir

Yes; but I hope his soul is not allied
To such a devilish practice: if it were,
I had just cause to weep my part in him,
And curse the time of his creation.
But where did thou find them Po^t^nsio?

N^y sir, rather you should ask where the found me? for i will be sworn I was
going along in the street, thinking nothing, when (of a suddayne) one calls,
Sig^ior Lorenzo^ man: another, he cries soldier: and thus half a dosen of
them, till they had go* me within doors, where I no sooner came* but out flies
their rapiers and all bent against my breast, they swore some two or three
hundredth oaths, and all to tell me I was but a dead man, if I did not confess
where you were, and how I was employed, and about what, which when they could
not get out of me: (as Gods my judge, they should have killed me first) they
locked me up into a room in the top of a house, where by great miracle
(having a light heart) I slidde down by a bottom of packthread into the
street, and so escaped: but ma^ster, thus much I can assure you, for I heard it
while I (...) locked up: there were a great many merchants and rich citizens
wives with them at a banquet, and your son Signior Lorenzo* has poynted one
of them to meet anon at one Cobs house, a waterbearers? that dwelles by the
wall: now there you shall be sure to take him: for fail he will not


Nor will I fail to break this match, I doubt not;
Well: go thou along with master doctors man,
And stay there for me? at one C^bs house say thou.

I sir, there you shall have him: when can you tell? much wench, or much son:
sblood when he has stayed there three or four hours, traveling with the
expectation of somewhat; and at the length be delivered of nothing: oh the
sport that I should the^ take to look on him if I durst but now I mean to
appear no more before him in this shape: I have another trick to act yet? oh
that I were so happy, as to light upon an ounce now of this doctors clarke: God
save you (...)


I thank you good sir.

I have made you stay somewhat long sir.

Not a w^it sir, I pray you what sir do you mean: you have been lately in the
wars sir it seems

I Marry have I sir.

Troth sir, I would be glad to bestow a pot^le of wine of you if it please you
to accept it

Oh Lord sir.

But to hear the manner of you seruises, and your devises in the wars, they
say they be very strange, and not like those a man reads in the Roman
histories


Oh God no sir, why at any time when it please you, I shall be ready to
descourse to you what I know: and more to somewhat


No better time then now sir, we will go to the Meer^m^ide there we shall have a
cup of neat wine, I pray you sir let me request you


I Will follow you sir, he is mine own I faith.
Mat Signi^r did you ever see the like cloune of him, where we were to day^:
signior Prosperos brother? I think the vvh^le ^arth cannot show his like by
Jesus


We were now speaking of him, signior Bobadill^ tells me he is fallen foul
of you two

Oh I sir, he threatened me with the bastinado.

I but I think I taught you atrick this morning for that.
You shall kill him without a^l question: if you be so minded*

Indeed it is a most excellent trick.

Oh you do not give spirit enough to your motion, you are too dull, too tardie:
oh it must be done like lightning, hay

Oh rare.

Tut it is nothing and't be not done in a --

Signior did you never play with any of our mais^ers here.

Oh good sir.

Nay for a more instance of their preposterous humor, there came three or ^oure
of them to me, at a ge^tlemans house, where it was my chance to be resident at
that time, to intre^te my presence at their schole^, and withal so much
importund me, that (I protest to you as I am a gentleman) I was ashamd of their
rude demeanor out of all measure: well, I told them that to come to a
public school they should pardon me, it was opposite to my humor but if so
they would attend me at my lodging, I protested to do them what right or
favor I could, as I was a gentleman* etc


So sir, then you tried their skill.

Alas soon tried: you shall hear sir, ^ithin two or three days after, they
came, and by Jesus go^^ signior believe me, I graced them^exceedingly, showed
them some ^wo or three trick^s of prevention, has got them sinc^ admirable
credit, they cannot deny this; and yet now they (...), and why? because I am
excellent, and for no other (...) earth


This is strange and vile as (...) I h^ard.

I will tell you sir upon my first coming to the ci^ie, they assaulted me some
three, four, five, six, of them together as I have walked alone, in diverse
places of the city; as upon ^he exchange, at my lodging* and at my ordinary:
where I have driven them before me the whole length of a street, in the open
view of all our gallan^s, pitying to hurt them believe me; yet all this lenety
will not depresse their spleen: they will be doing with the Pismier, ray^i^g a
hi^l, a man may spurn abroad with his foot at pleasure: by my soul I could
have sla^ne them all, but I delight not in murder: I am loath to ^ea^e any other
but a bastinado for them, and yet I ho^ld it good policy not to go disarmd,
for though I be skillful, ^ may be suppressd with multitudes


I by Jesus may you sir and (in my conceit) our whol^ nation should sustain
the loss by it, if it were so

Alas no: what is a peculier man, to a nation? not seen.

I but your skill sir.

Indeed that might be some loss, but who respects it? I will tell you Signior
(in private) I am a gentleman, and live here obscure, and to my self: but were
I known to the Duke (observe me) I would undertake (upon my head and life) for
the p^blique benefit of the state, not only to spare the entire lives of his
subjects ingenerall, but to save the one half: nay there parts of his y^erely
charges, in houlding wars generally against all his enemies? and how will I
do it think you


Nay I know not, nor can I conceive.

Marry thus, I would select 19 more to my self, throughout the land, gentlemen
the^ should be of good spirit; strong and able constitution, I would choose the^
by an instinct, a trick that I have: and I would teach these 19. the special
tricks, as your P^nt^, ^our Reuerso, your Stoccato, your Imbroccato, your
Pass^do, your Montaunto, till they could all play very near or altogether as
well as my self* this done; say the enemy were forty thousand strong: we
twenty would come into the field the tenth of March, or there abouts; and would
challendge twenty of the enemy? they could not in there honor refuse the
combat: well, we would kill them: challenge twenty more, kill then; twenty
more, kill then; twenty more, kill them too; and thus would we kill every man,
his twenty a day, that's twenty score; twenty score, that's two hundredth; two
hundredth a day, five days a thousand: forty thousand; forty times five, five
times forty, two hundredth days killes them all, by computation, and this will
I venture my life to perform: provided there be no treason practiced upon us


Why are you so sure of your hand at all times?

Tut, never mistrust upon my soul.

Mass I would not stand in signior G^uliano state, then;
And you meet him, for the wealth of Florence.

Why signior, by Jesus if he were hear now: I would not draw my w^apon on him,
let this gentleman do his mind but I will bastin^do him (by heaven) and ever I
meet him


Faith and i will have a fling (...) him.

Look yo^der he goes I think.

Sblood what luck have I, I cannot meet with these br^gging rascals*

It^ not h^: is it?

Yes faith it is he?

I Will be hanged then if that were he.

Before God it was he: you make me swear.

Upon my salvation it was h^^.

Well had I thought it had been he: he could not have gone so, but I cannot be
induced to believe it was he yet

Oh gallant have I found you? draw to your tools, draw, or by Gods will i will
thresh you

Signior hear me?

Draw your weapons then:

Signior, I n^uer thought it till now: body of S. George, I have a vvarrant of
the peace served on me even now, as I came along by a vvaterbearer, this
gentleman saw it, signior Mat^^^


The peace* Sblood, you will not draw?

Hold signior hold, under thy favor forbear.

Prate again as you like this you vvhoreson cowardly rascal, you will control
the point you? your consort he is gone? had he stayed he had shard with you
infayth


Well gentlemen bear witness I was bound to the peace, by Jesus.

Why and though you were sir, the law alowes you to defend your self; that's
but a poor excuse

I cannot t^ll; I never sus^^yned the like disgrace (by heaven) sure I was
struck with a Plannet then, for I had no power to touch my vve^pon


I like enough I have heard of many that have been beaten under a plannet; go
get you to the Surgions, sblood and these be your tricks, your passados, and
your Mountauntos ilenone of them: oh God that this age should bring forth such
creat^res? come cosen


Mass i will have this cloak.

Gods will: its Giullianos.

Nay but it is mine now, another might have tan^ it up as well as I, i will vv^^^e it
so I will

How and he see it, heel ^h^llen^e it ass^ur^ your self.

I but he shall not have it* i will s^y I bo^ght it.

Advise you cosen, ta^e heed he give not you as much.

Now trust me Pr^s^^ro you were much to blame,
T'incense your brother and disturb the peace,
Of my poor^ house, for there be s^ntinelles,
That ^uery minute vvatch to give alarames,
Of civil war, without adiection,
Of your assistance and occasion.

No harm done brother I vvarrant you: since there is no harm done, anger
costs a man nothing: and a tall man is never his own man til he be angry, to
keep his valor in obscurity: is to keep himself as it were in a cloke-bag:
what is a musition unless he play? what is a tall man unless he fight? for
indeed all this my brother stands upon absolutely, and that made me fall in
with him so resolutely


I but what harm might have come of it?

Might? so might the good warm clothes your husband wears be poysond for
any thing he knows, or the wholesome wine he drunk even now at the table


Now God forbid: O me? now I remember,
My wife drunk to me last; and changd the cup,
And bad me vvare this cursed suit to day,
See, if God suffer murder undiscovered?
I feel me ill; give me some Mithredate,
Some Mithredate and oil; good sister fetch me,
O, I am sick at heart: I burn, I burn;
If you will save my life go fetch it me.

Oh strange humor my very breath has poysond him.

Good brother be content, what do you mean, The strength of these extreme
conceits will kill you

Be^hrew your heart blood, brother Prospero, For putting such a toy into his
head

Is a fit similie, a toy? will he be poysond with a similie*
Broth^^ Thor^ll^, what a strange and vain imagination is this?
For shame be wiser, of my soul there is no such matter.

Am I not sick? how am I then not poysond? Am I not poysond? how am I then so
sick

If you be sick, your own thoughts make you sick.

His iealoucie is the poison he has taken.

Signior Thorello my m^^ster doctor Clement salutes you, and de^ires to speak
with you, with all speed possible


No time but now? well, i will wait upon his worship, Pizo, Cob, i will seek them
out, and set them sentinell^^ till I return. Pizo, Cob, Pizo


Musco, this is rare, but how gotst thou this apparel of the doctors man.

Marry sir. My youth would needs bestow the wine of me to hear some martial
discourse; where I so marsha^d him, that I made him monstrous drunk, and
because too much heat was the cause of his distemper, I stripped him stark
naked as he lay along a sleep, and borrowed his sewt to deliver this
counterfeit message in, leaving a rustie armoure, and an old brown bill to
watch him; till my return: which shall be when I have paund his apparel, and
spent the moni^ perhaps


Well thou art a mad knave Musco, his absence will be a good subject for more
mirth: I pray the return to thy young master Lorenzo, and will him to meet
me and Hesperida at the Friery presently: for here tell him the house is so
sturde with jealousy, that there is no room for love to stand upright in: but
i will use such means she shall come thither, and that I think will meet best
with his desires: Hye thee good Musco


I go sir.

Ho Pizo, Cob, where are these villains troe?
Oh, art thou there? Pizo hark thee here:
Mark what I say to thee, I must go forth;
Be careful of thy promise, keep good watch,
Note every gallant and observe him well,
That enters in my absence to thy mistrisse;
If she would show him rooms, the jest is stale,
Follow them Pizo or else hang on him,
And let him not go after, mark their looks?
Note if she offer but to see his band,
Or any other amorous toy about him,
But praise his leg, or foot, or if she say,
The day is hot, and bid him feel her hand,
How hot it is, oh that's a monstrous thing:
Note me all this, sweet Pizo; mark their sighs,
And if they do but vvisper break them off,
I Will bear thee out in it: vvilt thou do this?
Will thou be true sweet Pizo?

Most true sir.

Thanks gentle Pizo: where is Cob? now: Cob?

He Is ever calling for Cob, I vvonder how he imployes Cob so.


Indeed sister to ask how he imployes Cob, is a necessary question for you
that are his wife, and a thing not very easy for you to be satisfied in: but
this i will assure you Cobs wife is an excellent baud indeed: and oftentimes your
husband hauntes her house, marry to what end I cannot altogether accuse him,
imagine you what you think convenient: but I have known fair hides have
foul hearts ear now, I can tell you


Never said you truer then that brother? Pizo fetch your cloak, and go with
me, i will after him presently: I would to Christ I could take there I faith


So let them go: this may make sport anon, now my fay^e sister Hesperida: ah
that you knew how happy a ting it vv^re to be fair and bewtifull


That touches not me brother.


That's true: that's even the fault of it, for indeed beauty stands a woman in
no stead, unless it procure her touching: but sister whether it touch you or not, it touches your bewties, and I am sure they will abide the touch, and they
do not a plague of al ceruse say I, and it touches me to inpart, though not in
thee. Well, there is a dear and respected friend of mine sister, stands very
strongly affected toward you, and has vowed to inflame whole bonefires of
zeal in his heart, in honor of your perfections, I have already engaged my
promise to bring you where you shall hear him conferme much more then I am able
to lay down for him: Signior Lorenzo is the man: what say you sister shall I
entreat so much favor of you for my friend, is too direct and attend you to
his meeting? upon my soul he loves you extremely, approve it sweet Hesperida
will you


Hayth I had very little confidence in mine own costancie if I durst not meet
a man: but brother Prospero this motion of your savors of an old knight
adventurers servant, me thinks


What Is that sister.


Marry of the squire.


No matter Hesperida if it did, I would ve such an one for my friend, but say,
will you go


Brother I will, and bless my happy stars.


Why what villainy is this? my man gone on a false message, and run away
when he has done, why what trick is there in it trow? 1.2.3.4. and 5


How: is my wife gone forth, where is she sister?

She Is gone abroad with Pizo.


Abroad with Pizo? oh that villain dors me.
He has discovered all unto my wife,
Beast that I was to trust him: vvhither went she?

I know not sir.


I Will tell you brother vvhither I suspect she is gone.


Whither for gods sake?


To Cobs house I believe: but keep my counsel.


I will, I will, to Cobs house? does she haunt Cobs,
She Is gone a purpose now to cuckold me,
With that lewd rascal, who to win her favor,
Has told her all.

But did you mistress see my man bring him a message.


That we did master doctor.


And vvhither went the knave?


To the Tavern I think sir.

What did Thorello give him any thing to spend for the message he brought him?
if he did I should commend my man's wit exceedingly if he would make himself
drunk, with the joy of it, farewell Lady, keep good rule you two: I beseech
you now: by Gods marry my man makes me laugh


What a mad Doctor is this? come sister lets away.

I vvonder signior what they will say of my going away: ha?

Why, what should they say? but as of a discreet gentleman.
Quick, wary, respectfull of natures,
Fair liniamentes, and that's all.

Why so, but what can they say of your beating?

A rude part, a touch with soft wood, a kind of gross battery used, laid on
strongly: borne most patiently, and that's all


I but would any man have offered it in Venice?

T^ut I assure you no: you shall have there your Nobilis, your Gentelezza, come
in bravely upon your reuerse, stand you close, stand you ferme, stand you
fair, save your retricato with his left leg, come to the assaulto with the
right, thrust with brave steel, defy your base wood. But wherefore do I awake
this remembrance? I was bewitched by Jesus: but I will be reuengd


Do you hear is it not best to get a warrant and have him arested, and brought
before doctor Clement

It were not amiss would we had it.

Why here comes his man, lets speak to him.

Agreed, do you speak.

God save you sir.

With all my heart sir?

Sir there is one Giulliano has abusd this gentleman and me, and we determine
to make our amends by law, now if you would do us the favor to procure us a
warrant for his arest of your master, you shall be well considered I assure, I
faith sir


Sir you know my service is my living, such favors (...) these gotten of my
master is his only preferment, and therefore you must consider me, as I may
make benefit of my place


How is that?

Faith sir, the thing is extraordinary, and the gentleman may be o^ great
account: ye^ be what he will, if you will lay me down five crowns in my hand,
you shall have it, othe^wise no^


H^w shall we do signio^? you have no money.

Not a cr^s^e by Jesus.

N^r I (...) God but two pence: left of my tw^ shi^l^ngs in the mo^n^ng for
wine and (...) let us give him some p^^ne


P^wn^? we have none to the value of his demand.

Oh Lo^d, ^an, ^le ^awne this jewel in my ^are, and you may pawn your silk
sto^kins, and pull up your boots, they will near be mi^t


Well and there be no remedy: i will step aside and put them of.

Do you hear sir, we have no store of money at this time, but you shall have
good pawnes, look you sir, this Jewel, and this gentleman's silk stockins,
because we would have it di^patcht ere we went to our chambers


I am content sir, I will get you the warrant presently what is his name say ^ou
(Giulliano.

I, I, Giulliano.

What manner of man is he?

A tall big man sir, he goes in a cloak most commonly of silk rus^et: laid
about with russet lace

Ti^ very good sir.

Here sir, here is my jewel?

And hear are stockins.

Well gentlemen i will procure this vvaarrant presently* and appoint you a varlet
of the city to s^rue it, if you will be upon the Realto anon, the varlet shall
meet you there


Very good sir I vvish no better.

This is rar^, now will I go pawn this cloak of the doctors m^ns at the
brokers for a varlets suit, and be the varlet my self, and get either more
pawnes, or more money of Giulliano for my arrest


Oh hear it is, I am glad I have found it now, Ho? who is within hear^?

I am within sir, what is your pleasure?

To know who is within besides your self.

Why sir, you are no constable I hope?

O fear you the constable? then I doubt not*
You have some guests within deserve that fear,
I Will fetch him straight.

A Gods name sir.

Go to, tell me is not the young Lorenzo here?

Young Lorenzo, I saw none such sir, of mine honesty.

Go to, your honesty flies too lightly from you: There Is no way but fetch the
constable

The constable, the man is mad I think.

Ho, who keeps house here?

Oh, this is the female copese^mate of my son.
Now shall I meet him straight.

Knock Pizo pray thee.

Ho good wife.

Why what is the matter with you.

Why woman, grieves it you to open your door^? Belike you get something to
keep it shut

What mean these questions pray (...)

So strange you make it? is not Thorello my tried husband here.

Her husband?

I hope he needs not to be tried here.

No dame: he hoth it not ^or need but pleasure.

Neither for need nor pleasure is he here.

This is but a devise to balke me with al; Soft, whoes this?

Oh sir, have I fore-stald your honest market?
Found your close walks? you stand amazd now, do you?
I faith (I am glad) I have smokt you yet at las^;
What Is your jewel trow? In: come lets see her;
Fetch forth your huswife, dame; if she be fayrer
In any honest judgment then my self,
I Will be content with it: but she is change,
She feeds you fat; she soothes your appetite,
And you are well: your wife an honest woman,
Is meat twice sod to you sir; A you trecher.

She cannot counterfeit this palpably.

Out on thee more then strumpets impudency,
Stealst thou thus to thy hauntes? and have I taken,
Thy baud, and thee, and thy companion?
This hoary headed letcher, this old goat
Close at your villainy, and would thou scuse it,
With this stale harlots jest, accusing me?
O old incontinent, do thou not shame,
When all thy powers inchastitie is spent,
To have a mind so hot? and to entise
And feed the intisements of a lustful woman?

Out I defy thee I, desembling wretch:

Defy me strumpet? ask thy paunder here* Can he deny it? or that wicked
elder

Why hear you signior?

Tut, tut, never speak,
Thy guilty conscience will discover thee:

What l^nacie is this that haunts this man?

Oh sister did you see my cloak?

Not I, I see none.

Gods life I have lost it then, saw you Hesperida?

Hesperida? is she not at home

No she is gone abroad, and no body can tell me of it at home.

Oh he^uen,? abroad? what light? a harlot too?
Why? why? hark you, has she? has she not a brother?
A brothers house to keep? to look unto?
But she must fling abroad, my wife has spoyld her,
She takes right after her, she does, she does,
Well you goody b^u^ and --
That make your husband such a hoddy dod^;
And you young apple squire, and old cuckold m^ker,
I Will have you every one before the Doctor,
Nay you shall answer it I chardge you go.

M^rry with ^ll my h^rt, i will go ^^^lingly: how have I vvrongd my self in
coming here

G^ with thee? i will go with thee to thy sh^me* I warrant thee.

W^y what is the matter? what is here to do?

What Cob art thou here? oh I am abusd,
And in thy house, was never man so vvrongd.

Slid in my house? who vvrongd you in my house?

Marry young lu^t in old, and old in young here,
Thy wifes their baud, here have I taken them.

Do you here?


Friend have patience if she have done wrong in this let her answer it before
the M^gistrate

I, come, you shall go before the Do^t^r.

Nay, I will go, i will see and you may be aloud to beat your poor wife thus at
every cucko^dly knaves pleasure, the Devil and the Pox t^ke you all for me:
why do you not go now


A bitter queen, come we will have you tamd.

Well of all my disguises yet now am I most like my self being in this
va^lets suit, a man of my present profession never counterfeites till he lay
hold upon a debtor, and says he rests him, for then he bringes him to al
manner of unrest; A kind of little kings we are, bearing the diminitiue of a
mace made like a young Hartechocke that always car^ies Pepper and salt in it
self, well I know not what danger I under go by this exploi^e, pray God I come
well of


See I think yonder is the varlet.

Lets go inquest of him.

God save you friend, are not you here by the appointment of doctor Clemants
man

Yes and please you sir, he told me two gentlemen had wild him to procure an
arest upon one signior Giulliano by a vvarrant from his master, which I have
about me


It is honestly done of you both, and see where he coms you must arest, upon
him for Gods sake before he beware


Bear back Matheo?

Signior Giulliano* I arest you sir in the Dukes name.

Signior Giulli^^o? am I signior Giulliano? I am one signior Stephano I tell
you, and you do not well by Gods slid to arest me, I tell you truly; I am not
in your masters books, I would you should well know I: and a plague of God
on you for making me afraid thus


Why, how are you deceived gentlemen?

He wears such a cloak, and that deceived us, But see here a coms, officer,
this is he

Why how now signior gull: are you a turned flincher of late* come deliver my
cloak

Your cloak sir? I bought it even now in the market.

Sign^or Giulliano I must arest you sir*

Arrest me sir, at whose suite?

At these two gentlemen's.

I obey thee varlet; but for these villianes --

Keep the peace I charge you sir, in the Dukes name Sir.

What Is the matter varlet?

You must go before master doctor Clement sir, to answer what these
gentlemen will object against you, hark you sir, I will use you kindly


We Will be even with you sir, come signior Bobadilla* we will go before and
prepare the doctor: varlet look to hi^


The varlet is a tall man by Jesus.

Away you rascalles, Signior I shall have my cloak.

Your cloak: I say once again I bought it, and i will keep it.

You will keep ^t?

I, that I will.

Verlet stay, here is thy fee arrest him.

Signior Step^ano I arrest you.

Arrest me? there take your cloak: i will none of it.

Nay that shall not serve your turn, varlet, bring him away, i will go^ with thee
now to the doctors, and carry him along


Why is not here your cloak? what would you have?

I care not for that.

I pray yo^ sir.

Never talk of it; I will have him answer it.

Well sir then i will leave you, i will take this gentleman's word for his
appearance, as I have done yours

Tut i will have no words taken, bring him along to answer it.

Good sir I pity the gentleman's case, here is your money again.

Gods br^ad, tell not me of my money, bring him away I say.

I warrant you, he will go with you of himself.

Yet more ado?

I have made a fair mashe of it.

Must I go?

Nay but stay, stay give me leave; my chair sirrah? you signior Lorenzo say you
went thither to meet your son


I sir.

But who directed you thither?

That did my man sir?

Where is he?

Nay I know not now, I left him with your clarke,
And appointed him to stay here for me.

About what time was this?

Marry between one and two as I take it.

So, what time came my man with the message to you Signior Thorello?

After two sir.

Very good, but Lady how that you were at Cobs: ha?

And please you sir, i will tell you: my brother Pr^sper^ told me that Cobs house
was a suspected place

So it appears me thinks; but on,

And that my husband used thither daily;

No matter, so he use himself well.

True sir, but you know what grows by such haunts oftentimes.

I, rank fruits of a jealous brain Lady: but did you find your husband
there in that case, as you suspected

I found her there sir.

Did you so? that alters the case; who ga^e you knowledge of your wi^es being
there

Marry that did my brother Prospero.

How Prospero, first tell her, then tell you after? where is Prospero.

Gone with my sister sir, I know not vvhither.

Why this is a meare trick, a devise; you are gulled in this most grossly:
alas poor vvench were thou beaten for this, how now ^irha what is the
matter? Enter one of the Do. men


Sir there is a gentleman in the court without desires to speak with your
worship

A gentleman? what is he?

A Soldier, sir, he says*

A Soldier? fetch me my armor, my sword, quickly a soldier speak with me,
why when knaves, -- come on, come on, hold my cap there, so; give me my
gorget, my sword stand by ^ will end your matters anon; let the soldier
enter, now sir what have you to say to me


By your worships favor.

Nay keep out sir, I know not your pretense, you send me word ^ir you are a
soldier, why sir you shall be answered here, here be them have been amongst
sould^^rs. Sir your pleasure


Faith sir so it is: this gentleman and my self have been most violently
vvronged by one signior Giullian^: a gallant of the city here and for my own
part I protest, being a man in no sort given to this filthy humor of
quarreling, he has asaulted me in the way of my peace: dispoyld me of mine
honor, disarmd me of my weapons, and beaten me in the open streets: when I
not so much as once offered to resist him


Oh Gods precious is this the soldier? here take my armor quickly, twill make
him swoone I fear; he is not fit to look on it, that will put up a blow


Andt pleas^ your worship he (...) bound to the peace.

Why, and he were sir, his hands* were not bound, were they?

There is one of the varlets of the city, has b^ought two gentlemen here upon
arest sir

Bid him come in, set by the picture: now sir, what? signior Giulliano? is it you
that are arested at ^ignior freshwaters suit here


I faith master Doctor, and here is another brought at my suite.

What are yo sir.

A gentleman sir^ oh uncle?

Uncle? who, Lore^zo?

I Sir.

Gods my witness my vn^^e, I am vvrongd here monstrously, he charge me
with stealing of his cloak, and would I might never stir, if I did not find
it in the street by chance


Oh did you find it now? you said you bought it (...) while?

And you said I stole it, nay now my uncle is here I care not.

Well let this breath a while; you that have cause t^ complain there, stand
forth; had you a vvarrant for thi^ arrest


I andt please your worship.

Nay do not speak in passion so, where had you it?

Of your clarke sir.

That's well and my clarke can make warrants, and my hand not at them; where
is the vvarrant? varlet ha^^ you it


No sir your vvorshippes man bid me do it; for these gentlemen and he would
be my discharge

Why signior Giullian^, are you such a nouice to be arrested and never see the
vvarrant

Why sir, he did not arrest me.

No? how then?

Marry sir he came to me and said he must arrest me, (...) he would use me
kindly, and so forth

Oh Gods pity, was it so sir, he must arrest you: gi^e me my long sword
there: help me of; so, come on sir varlet, I must cut of your legs si^ha;
nay stand up i will use you kindly; I mu^^ cut of your legs I say


Oh good sir I beseech you, nay good master doctor, Oh* good sir.

I must do it^ there is no remedy;
I must cut of you^ legs sirrah.
I must cut of your ears, you rascal I must do it;
I must cut of your nose, I must cut of your head.

Oh for God sake good Master Doctor.

Well rise how do thou now? do thou feel thy self well? have thou no
harm

No I thank God sir and your good worship.

Why so I said I must cut of thy legs, and I must ^ut of thy arms, and I
must cut of thy head: but I did not do it: so you said you must arrest this
gentleman, but you did not arrest him you knave, you sl^ue, you rogue, do you
say you must arrest sirrah: away with him to the iayle, i will teach yo^ a ^r^^ke
for your must


Goo^ M. Doctor I beseech you be good to me.

Marry a God: away with him I say.

Nay sblood before I go to prison, i will put on my old brazen face, and
disclaim in my vocation* I Will discover that's flat, and I be committed, it shall
be for the committing of more (...) then this, hang (...) I loos^ the least
grain of my fam^


Why? when knave? by Gods marry, i will clappe thee by the heel^s (...).

Hold, hold I pray you.

What the (...)? stay there.

Faith sir before I go to this house of bondage, I have a case to unfold to
your worship: which (that it may appear more plain unto your worshippes
view) I do thus first of all uncase, and appear in mine own proper nature,
servant to this gentleman: and known^ by the name of Musco


Ha? Musco.

Oh uncle, Musco has been with my cosen and I all this day.

Did not I tell you there was some devise.

Nay good M. Doctor since I have laid my self thus open to your worship: now
stand strong for me, till the progress of my tale be ended, and then if my
wit do not deserve your countenance: Slight throw it on a dog, and let me
go hang my self


Body of me a merry knave, give me a boule of Sack, signior Lorenzo, I bespeak
your patience in particular, marry your ears ingenerall, here knave, Doctor
Clement drinks to thee


^ pledge M. Doctor and 't were a sea to the bottom.

Fill his boule for that, fill his boule: so, now speak freely.

Indeed this is it will make a man speak freely. But to the point, know then
that I Musc^ (being somewhat more t^usted of my master then reason required
and knowing his intent to Fl^rence) did assume the habit of a poor soldier in
wants, and minding by some means to intercept his journey in the mid way, tw^xt
the grandg and the city, I encountered him, where begging of him in the most
accomplished and true garb (as they term it) contrary to al expectation, he
reclaimed me from that bad course of life; entertained me into (...) se^^ice,
employed me in his business possessed me with his secrets, which I no sooner had
received* but (seeking my young master, and finding him at this gentleman's
house) I revealed all mos^amply: this done, by the d^uise of signior Pros^ero,
and him together, I returned (^s the Raven did to the Arc) to mine old maist^r
again, told him he should find his son in what manner he knows, at one Cobs
house, where indeed he never meant to come, now my master lie to maintain the
jest, went thither, and ieft me with your worships clarke: who being of a
most fine supple disposition (as most of your clerks are) proffers me the
wine, which I h^d the grace to accept very easily, and to the tavern we went:
there after much ceremony, I made him drunk in kindness, stripped him to his
shurt, and leaving him in that cool vain, departed, frolic, courtier like,
having obtained a suit: which suit fitting me exceedingly well, I put on, and
usurping your m^ns phrase and action, carried a message to Signior Thorello in
your name: which message was merely devised but to procure his absence,
while signior Prospero might make a conueiance of Hesperida to my master


Stay, fill me the boule again, here; twere pity of his life would not
cherish such a spirit: I drink to thee, fill him wine, why now do you
perceive the trick of it


I, I, percei^e well we were all ab^sed*

Well what remedy?

Where is Lorenz^, and Prospero can thou tell?

I sir, they are at supper (...) the M^^r^maid, where I left your man.

Sirrah go vvar^e them ^^ther presently before me: and if the hour of your
fellowe^ resurrection become bring him to. But forward, forward, when thou
had been at Thorre^^^s


M^rry sir (coming along the street) these two g^^tlemen meet me, and very
strongly supposing me to be yo^^ vvorship^ scribe, (...) me to pro^ure them a
vvarr^^t, for the arrest of signior (...), I promised them upon some pair ^f
silk stockins or a jewel, or so, to do it, and to get a varlet of the city
to serve it, which varlet I appointed should meet them upon the Realto (...)
such an hour, they no sooner gone, b^t I in a mere hope of more g^ine by
signior Gi^lli^n^, went to one of S^^ans old Ingles ^ broker, and there pa^nd
your man^ liuerie, for a varlets suite, which here with my self, I offer
unto your worships consideration


Well give me thy hand: Proh. superi ing^nium (...) quis n^scit Ho^erum. Il^i^s
(...) si l^tuisset op^^? I admire thee I honor thee, and if thy master, or any
man here be angry with thee, I shall suspect his wit while I know him for it,
do^ you hear Signior Thorell^, Signior Lorenz^, and the rest of my good
friends, I pray you let me have peace when they come, I h^^e sent for the two
gallants and Hesperida, Gods marry I musi have yo^ friends, how now? what
noyseis there


Sir it is Pet^ is come hom^.

Peto bring him hither, bring him hither, what how now signior drunckard, in
arms against me, ha? your reason your reason for this


I beseech your worship to pardon me.

Well, sirrah tell him I do pardon him.

Truly sir I did happen into bad company by chance and they cast me in a
sleep and stripped me of all my clothes

Tut this is not to the purpose touching your armor, what might your armor
signify

Marry (...) hung in the room where they stripped me, and I borrowed it of on of
the drawers, now in the evening to come home in, because I was loath to come
through the street in my shurt


Well disarme him, but its no matter let him stand by, who be these? oh young
gal^ants; welcome, welcome, and you Lady, nay never scatter such amazed looks
amongst us, Qui nil potest sperare desperet nihil


Faith M. Doctor that's even I, my hopes are small, and my despair shall be as
little. Brother, sister, brother what cloudy, cloudy? and will (...) sunshine
on these looks appear, well since there is such a tempest toward, i will be the
porpuis, i will dance: wench be of good cheer, thou have a cloak for the rain
yet, where is he? S'hart how now, the picture of the prodigal, go to i will have
the calfe dressed for you at my charges


Well son L^renzo, this days work of yours has much deceived my hopes,
troubled my peace, and stretched my patience further then became ^he spirit of
duty


Nay Gods pity signior Lorenzo you shall urge it no more come since you are
here, i will have the disposing o^ all, but first signior Giulliano at my request
take your cloak agayn^


Well sir I am content.

Stay now let me see, oh signior Snow^liuer I had almost forgotten him, and
your Genius there, what does he suffer for a good conscience to? does he bear
his cross with patience


Nay they have scarce one c^os between the^ both to bear.

Why do thou know him, what is he? what is he?

Marry search his pocket sir, and the^e show you he is an Author Sir.

Dic mihi musa virum: are you an Author sir, give me leave a little, come on
sir, i will make verses with you now in honor of the Gods, and the Goddesses for
what you dare extempore; and now I begin

Mount the my P^legon muse, and testify,
How Saturn sitting in an Ebon cloud,
Disro^d his podex, white as iuorie,
And through the welkin thundered all aloud. there is for you sir.

Oh he writes not in that height of style.

No: we will come a step or two lower then.
From Catadupa and the banks of Nile,
Where only breeds your monstrous Crocodile:
Now are^ we purposd for to fetch our style.

Oh too far fetched for him still master Doctor:

I, say you so, lets entreat a sight of his vain then?

Signior, master Doctor desires to see a sight of your vain, nay you must not
deny him

What; all this verse, body of me he carries a whole realm; a common wealth of
paper in his hose, lets see some of his sub^ects

Unto the boundless ocean of thy beauty,
R^nnes this poor river, chargd with streams of zeal,
Returning thee the tribute of my duty:
Which here my youth, my plaints, my love reue^le.
Good? is this your own invention*

No sir* I translated that o^t of a book, called Delia.

Oh but I would see some of your own, some of your own.

Sir; here is the beginning of a sonnet I made to my mistress.

That that: who? to Madd^^a Hesperida is she your mistress.

It pleases him to call her so, sir.

In Summer time when Phoebus golden rays.
You translated this too? did you not?

No this is invention; he found it in a ballad.

Faith sir* I had most of the conceit of it (...) of a ballad i^deede.

Conceit, fetch me a couple of torches, sirrah, I may see the conceit:
quickly? its very dark

Call you this poetry?

Poetry? nay then call blasphemy, religion;
Call Devils, Angels; and Sin, piety:
Let all things be preposterously transchangd.

Why how now son? what? are you startled now?
Has the brize pricked you? ha? go to; you see,
How abiectly your Poetry is ranckt, in general opinion.

Opinion, O God let gross opinion sinck and be damnd
As deep as Barathrum,
If it may stand with your most wished content,
I can refell opinion and approve,
The state of poe^ie, such as it is,
Blessed, aeternall, and most true divine:
Indeed if you will lock on Po^^ie,
As she appears in many, poor and lame,
Patcht up in remnants and old worn rags,
Half starud for want of her peculi^r food:
Sacred invention, then I must conferme,
Both your conceit and censure of her merrite,
But view her in her glorious ornaments,
Attired in the majesty of art,
Set high in spirit with the precious taste,
Of sweet philosophy, and which is most,
Crowned with the rich traditions of a soul,
That hates to have her dignity prophand,
With any relish of an earthly thought:
Oh them how proud a presence does she bear.
Then is she like her self fit to be seen,
Of none but grave and consecrated eyes:
Nor is it any blemish to her fame.
That such lean* ignorant, and blasted wits,
Such brainlesse guls, should utter their stolen wares
With such aplauses in our vulgar ears:
Or that their slubberd lines have current pass,
From the fat judgments of the multitude,
But that this barren and infected age,
Should set no difference twixt these empty spirits,
And a true Poet: then which reverend name,
Nothing can more adorn humanity.

I Lorenzo, but election is now gouernd altogether by the influence of humor,
which instead of those holy flames that should direct and light the soul to
eternity, hurles forth nothing bu^ smooke and congested vapors, that stifle
her up, and berea^e her of al sight and motion. But she must have store of
Ell^bor^, given her to purge these gross obstructions: oh that's well said,
give me thy torch, come lay this stuff together. So, give fire? there, see,
see, how our Poets glory shines brighter, and brighter, still, still it
incr^^seth, oh now its at the highest, and now it declines as fast: you may see
gallants, Sic transit gloria mundi. Well now my two Signior out sides, stand
forth, and l^nd me your large (...), to ^ sentence, to a sentence: first you
signior shall this night to the cage, and so shall you sir, from thence to
morrow mor^ing, you signior shall be carried to the market cross, and be there
bound: and so shall yo^ sir, in a large motlie coat, with ^ rod at your
girdle; and you in an old suite of sa^kcloth, ^^d the ashes of your papers
(save the ashes sirrah) shall mourn all day, and at night both together sing
some ballad of repentance very pitteously, which you shall make to the t^^e of
Wh^ list t^ lead^ and a soldiers life, Sirrah bil man, embrace you this torch,
and light the gentlemen to their lodgings, and because we tender their safety,
you shall watch them to night, you are provided for the purpose* away and look
to your charge with an open eye sirrah


Well I am ar^d in soul against the worst of fortune.

Faith so should I be, and I had slept on it.

I am armd too, but I am not like to sleep on it.

Oh how this pleases me.

Now Signior Th^^ello, Giulliano, Prospero, Bi^ncha.

And not me sir.

Yes and you sir: I had lost a sheep and he h^d no^ bleated, I must have you
all friends: but first a word wit^ you young gallant, and you Lady


Well brother Prospero by this good light that shines here I am loath to kindle
fresh coals, but and you had come in my walk within these two hours I had
given you that you should not have clawne of again in have, by Jesus I had
done it, I am the arrenst rogue that ever bre^thd else, but now beshrew my heart
if I bear you any malice in the earth


Faith I did it but to hold up a jest: and help my sister to a husband, but
brother Thor^llo, and sister, you have a spice of the yealous yet both of you,
(in your hose I mean,) come do not dwell upon your anger so much, lets all be
smoth fore headed once again


He plays upon my fore head, brother Giulliano, I pray you tell me one thing I
shall ask you: is my foreheade any thing rougher then it was wont to be


Rougher? your forehead is smoth enough man.

Why should he then say? be smoth foreheaded,
Unless he iested at the smothnesse of it?
And that may be; for horn is very smoth;
So are my brows* by Jesus, smoth as horn?

Brother had he no haunt thither in good faith?

No upon my soul.

Nay then sweet heart: nay I pray the be not angry, good faith i will never suspect
thee any more, nay kiss me sweet musse

Tell me Bi^^cha, do not you play the woman with me.

What Is that sweet heart.

Dissemble?

Dissemble?

Nay do not turn away: but say I faith was it not a match appointed twixt
this old gentleman and you

A match.

Nay if it were not, I do not care: do not weep I pray thee sweet Biancha,
nay so now? by Jesus I am not jealous, but resolved I have the faythfulst wife
in Italy

For this I find where jealousy is fed,
Horns in the mind^, are worse then on the head.
See what a drove of horns fly in the air,
Wingd with my cle^^sed, and my credulous breath:
Watch them suspicious eyes, watch where they fall,
See see, on heads that think they have none at all.
Oh what a ple^^uous world of this will come,
When air raynes horns, all men besure of some.

Why that's well, come then: what say you are all agreed? does none^stand out.

None but this gentleman: to whom in my own person I owe all duty and
affection: but most seriously entreat pardon, for whatsoever has past in
these occurrants, that might be contrary to his most desired content


Faith sir it is a virtue that persues,
Any ^aue rude and vncomposed spirits,
To make a fair construction and indeed
Not to stand of, when such respective means,
Inuit a general content in all.

Well then I conjure you all here to put of all coffeehouse, first you
Signior L^renz^ your cares; you, and you, your iealosie: you your anger, and
you your wit sir: and for a peace offering, here is one willing to be sacrifised
upon this altar: say d^ you approve my motion


We do i will be mouth for all.

Why then I wish them all joy, and now to make our evening happiness more
full: this night you shall be all my guestes: where we will enjoy the very
spirit of mirth, and carouse to the health of this Heroic spirit, whom to
honor the more I do inuest in my own robes, desiring you two Giulliano, and
Pr^spero, to be his supporters, the train to follow, my self will leade^,
vsherd by my page here with this honorabl^ verse. Claudite iam riuos pueri sat
pr^ta biberunt



