Every MAN IN HIS HVMOVR. A Comoedie. Acted in the year 1598. By the then Lord
Chamberlain his Servants

The Author B. I.

Haud tamen inuideas vati, quem pulpita pascunt.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. DC. XVI.

SIR, THere are, no doubt, a supercilious race in the world, who will esteem
all office, done you in this kind, an injury; so solemn a vice it is with
them to use the authority of their ignorance, to the crying down of Poetry,
or the Professors: But, my gratitude must not leave to correct their error;
since I am none of those, that can suffer the benefits conferred upon my youth,
to perish with my age. It is a frail memory, that remembers but present
things: And, had the favor of the times so conspired with my disposition, as
it could have brought forth other, or better, you had had the same proportion,
and number of the fruits, the first. Now, I pray you, to accept this, such,
wherein neither the confession of my manners shall make you blush; nor of my
studies, repent you to have been the instructor: And, for the profession of my
thanke-fulnesse, I am sure, it will, with good men, find either praise, or
excuse

Your true lover, BEN. IONSON.
THE SCENE LONDON.

THough need make many Poets, and some such
As art, and nature have not betterd much;
Yet ours, for want, has not so loved the stage
As he dare serve the will customs of the age:
Or purchase your delight at such a rate,
As, for it, he himself must justly hate.
To make a child, now swadled, to proceed
Man, and then shoot up, in one beard, and weed,
Past threescore years: or, with three rustie swords,
And help of some few foot-and-halfe-foote words,
Fight over York, and Lancasters long iarres:
And in the tyring-house bring wounds, to scarres.
He rather prays, you will be pleased to see
One such, to day as other plays should be;
Where neither Chorus wafts you ore the seas;
Nor creaking throne comes down, the boys to please;
Nor nimble squibbe is seen, to make afear'd
The gentlewomen; nor roul'd bullet heard
To say, it thunders; nor tempestuous drum
Rumbles, to tell you when the storm does come;
But deeds, and language, such as men do use:
And persons, such as Comoedie would choose,
When she would show an Image of the times,
And sport with humane follies, not with crimes.
Except, we make 'hem such by loving still
Our popular errors, when we know they are ill.
I mean such errors, as you will all confess
By laughing at them, they deserve no less:
Which when you heartily do, there is hope left, then,
You, that have so graced monsters, may like men.
A Goodly day toward! and a fresh morning! BRAYNE-WORME,
Call up your young master: bid him rise, sir.
Tell him, I have some business to employ him.

I will sir, presently.

But hear you, sirah,
If he be'at his book, disturb him not.

Well sir.

How happy, yet, should I esteem my self
Could I (by any practice) weane the boy
From one vain course of study, he affects.
He is a scholar, if a man may trust
The liberal voice of fame, in her report
Of good account, in both our universities,
Either of which has favored him with graces:
But their indulgence, must not spring in me
A fond opinion, that he cannot err.
My self was once a student; and, indeed,
Fed with the selfsame humor, he is now,
Dreaming on naught but idle poetry,
That fruitless, and unprofitable art,
Good unto none, but least to the professors,
Which, then, I thought the mistress of all knowledge:
But since, time, and the truth have waked my judgment,
And reason taught me better to distinguish,
The vain, from th'vsefull learnings. Cossin STEPHEN!
What news with you, that you are here so early?

Nothing, but eene come to see how you do, uncle.

That Is kindly done, you are wel-come, cousse.

I, I know that sir, I would not ha'come else.
How do my coussin EDWARD, uncle?

O, well cousse, go in and see: I doubt he be scarce stirring yet.

Uncle, before I go in, can you tell me, an' he have ere a book of the
sciences of hawking, and hunting? I would feign borrow it


Why, I hope you will not a hawking now, will you?


NO wusse; but I Will practice against next year uncle: I have bought me a
hawke, and a hood, and bells, and all; I lack nothing but a book to keep it
by


O, most ridiculous.


Nay, look you now, you are angry, uncle: why you know, an'a man have not
skill in the hawking, and hunting-languages now a days, I Will not give a rush
for him. They are more studied then the Greek, or the Latin. He is for no
gallants company without 'hem. And by gads lid I scorn it, I, so I do, to be
a consort for every hum drum, hang 'hem scroyles, there is nothing in 'hem, in
the world. What do you talk on it? Because I dwell at Hogsden, I shall keep
company with none but the archers of Finsburie? or the citizens, that come a
ducking to Islington ponds? A fine jest in faith! Slid a gentleman mun show
himself like a gentleman. Uncle, I pray you be not angry, I know what I have
to do, I trow, I am no nouice


You are a prodigal absurd cocks-combe: Go to.
Nay never look at me, it is I that speak.
Take It as you will sir, I Will not flatter you.
Have you not yet found means enough, to wast
That, which your friends have left you, but you must
Go cast away your money on a kite,
And know not how to keep it, when you ha'done?
O it is comely! this will make you a gentleman!
Well cosen, well! I see you are eene past hope
Of all reclaim. I, so, now you are told on it,
You look another way.

What would you have me do?

What would I have you do? I Will tell you kinsman,
Learn to be wise, and practice how to thrive,
That would I have you do: and not to spend
Your coin on every babble, that you fancy,
Or every foolish brain, that humors you.
I would not have you to invade each place,
Nor thrust your self on all societies,
Till men's affections, or your own desert,
Should worthily inuit you to your rank.
He, that is so respectlesse in his courses,
Often sells his reputation, at cheap market.
Nor would I, you should melt away your self
In flashing bravery, least while you affect
To make a blaze of gentry to the world,
A little puff of scorn extinguish it,
And you be left, like an unsavory snuff,
Whose property is only to offend.
I Would ha'you sober, and contain your self;
Not, that your sail be bigger then your boat:
But moderate your expenses now (at first)
As you may keep the same proportion still.
Nor, stand so much on your gentilitie,
Which is an aerie, and mere borrowed thing,
From dead men's dust, and bones: and none of yours
Except you make, or hold it. Who comes here?

Save you, gentlemen.


Nay, we do' not stand much on our gentilitie, friend; yet, you are wel-come,
and I assure you mine uncle, here, is a man of a thousand a year, Middlesex
land: he has but one son in all the world, I am his next heir (at the
common law) master STEPHEN, as simple as I stand here, if my cossen die (as
there is hope he will) I have a pretty living of mine own too, beside, hard-by
here


In good time, sir.


In good time, sir? why! and in a very good time, sir. You do not stout,
friend, do you


Not I, sir.


Not you sir? you were not best, sir; an' you should, here be them can
perceive it, and that quicky to: go to. And they can give it again soundly
to, and need be


Why, sir, let this satisfy you: good faith, I had no such intent.


Sir, an' I thought you had, I would talk with you, and that presently.


Good master STEPHEN, so you may, sir, at your pleasure.


And so I would sir, good my fancy companion! an' you were out of mine uncles
ground, I can tell you; though I do not stand upon my gentilitie neither in it


Cossen! cossen! will this nere be left?


Whoreson base fellow! a mechanical seruing-man! By this cudgel, and 't were
not for shame, I would --


What would you do, you peremptory gull?
If you cannot be quiet, get you hence.
You see, the honest man demeanes himself
Modestly to'ards you, giving no reply
To your vnseason'd, quarrelling, rude fashion:
And, still you huffe it, with a kind of carriage,
As void of wit, as of humanity.
Go, get you in; fore heaven, I am ashamed
Thou have a kinsmans interest in me.

I pray you, sir. Is this master KNO'WELL'S house?

Yes, marie, is it sir.

I should enquire for a gentleman, here, one master EDWARD KNO'WELL: do you
know any such, sir, I pray you


I should forget my self else, sir.


Are you the gentleman? cry you mercy sir: I was required by a gentleman in
the city, as I rode out at this end of the town, to deliver you this letter,
sir


To me, sir! What do you mean? pray you remember your court'sie.


One master WELL-BRED, sir.


Master WELL-BRED! A young gentleman? is he not?


The same sir, master KITELY married his sister: the rich merchant in the old
Iewrie


You say very true. BRAINE-WORME,


Sir.


Make this honest friend drink here: pray you go in.
This letter is directed to my son:
Yet, I am EDWARD KNO'WELL too, and may
With the safe conscience of good manners, use
The fellows error to my satisfaction.
Well, I will break it open (old men are curious)
Be it but for the styles sake, and the phrase,
To see, if both do answer my sons praises,
Who is, almost, grown the idolater
Of this young WELL-BRED: what have we here? what is this?
Why, NED, I beseech thee; have thou for-sworne all thy friends in the old
Iewrie? or do thou think us all Jews that inhabit there, yet? If thou do,
come over, and but see our frip perie: change an old shirt, for a whole
smock, with us. Do not conceive that antipathy between us, and Hogs-den; as
was between Jews, and hogs-flesh. Leave thy vigilant father, alone, to number
over his green apricots, evening, and morning, of the north-west wall: An' I
had been his son, I had saved him the labor, long since; if, taking in all
the young wenches, that pass by, at the back-dore, and codd'ling every kernel
of the fruit for'hem, would have served. But, pr'y thee, come over to me,
quickly, this morning: I have such a present for thee (our Turkey company
never sent the like to the Grand-SIGNIOR.) One is a Rimer sir, of your own
batch, your own leuin; but does think himself Poet-maior, of the town:
willing to be shown, and worthy to be seen. The other -- I will not venture
his description with you, till you come, because I would have you make hither
with an appetite. If the worst of 'hem be not worth your journey, draw your bill
of charges, as unconscionable, as any Guild Hall verdict will give it you, and
you shall be allowed your viaticum


From the Burdello, it might come as well;
The Spittle: or Pict-hatch. Is this the man,
My son has sung so, for the happiest wit,
The choysest brain, the times has sent us forth?
I know not what he may be, in the arts;
Nor what in schools: but surely, for his manners,
I judge him a profane, and dissolute wretch:
Worse, by possession of such great good gifts,
Being the master of so loose a spirit.
Why, what vnhallow'd ruffian would have writ,
In such a scurrilous manner, to a friend!
Why should he think, I tell my Apri-cotes?
Or play the Hesperian Dragon, with my fruit,
To watch it? Well, my son, I'had thought
Y' had had more judgment, to have made election
Of your companions, to have taken on trust,
Such petulant, geering gamsters, that can spare
No argument, or subject from their jest.
But I perceive, affection makes a fool
Of any man, too much the father. BRAYNE-WORME,

Sir.

Is the fellow gone that brought this letter?

Yes, sir, a pretty while since.

And, where is your young master?

In his chamber sir.

He spoke not with the fellow! did he?

No sir, he saw him not.

Take you this letter, and deliver it my son
But with no notice, that I have opened it, on your life.

O lord, sir, that were a jest, indeed!

I am resolved, I will not stop his journey;
Nor practice any violent mean, to stay
The unbridled course of youth in him: for that,
Restrained, grows more impatient, and, in-kind,
Like to the eager, but the generous greyhound;
Who never so little from his game withheld,
Turns head, and leapes up at his holders throat.
There is a way of winning, more by love,
And urging of the modesty, then fear:
Force works on servile natures, not the free.
He, that is compelled to goodness, may be good;
But it is but for that fit: where others drawn
By softness, and example, get a habit.
Then, if they stray, but warn 'hem: and, the same
They should for vertu'haue done, they will do for shame.

DId he open it, say thou?


Yes, of my word sir, and read the contents.


That scarce contents me. What countenance (pr'y thee) made he, in the reading
of it? was he angry, or pleased


Nay sir, I saw him not read it, nor open it, I assure your worship.


No? how know thou, then, that he did either?


Marie sir, because he charged me, on my life, to tell nobodie, that he opened
it: which, unless he had done, he would never fear to have it revealed


That Is true: well I thank thee, BLAYNE-WORME.


O, BRAYNE-WORME, did thou not see a fellow here in a what-sha'-call-him
doublet! he brought mine uncle a letter even now


Yes, master STEPHEN, what of him?


O, I have such a mind to beat him -- Where is he? can thou tell?


Faith, he is not of that mind: he is gone, master STEPHEN.


Gone? which way? when went he! how long since?


He is rid hence. He took horse, at the street door.


And, I staid in the fields! horson scander-bag rogue! O that I had but a horse
to fetch him back again


Why, you may have my mrs. gelding, to save your longing, sir.


But, I have no boots, that is the spite on it.


Why, a fine wispe of hay, rould hard, master STEPHEN.


No faith, it is no boot to follow him, now: let him eene go, and hang. 'Pray
thee, help to trusse me, a little. He dos so vex me --


You Will be worse vexed, when you are trussed, master STEPHEN. Best, keep
vn-brac'd; and walk your self, till you be cold: your choler may foundre you
else


By my faith, and so I will, now thou tell me on it: How do thou like my
leg, BRAYNE-WORME


A very good leg! master STEPHEN! but the woollen stocking does not commend it
so well


Foh, the stockings be good enough, now summer is coming on, for the dust: I Will
have a pair of silk, again'winter, that I go to dwell in the town. I think
my leg would show in a silke-hose


Believe me, master STEPHEN, rarely well,


In sadness, I think it would: I have a reasonable good leg.


You have an excellent good leg, master STEPHEN, but I cannot stay, to praise
it longer now, and I am very sorry for it


Another time will serve, BRAYNE-WORME. Gramercie for this.


Ha, ha, ha!


Slid, I hope, he laughes not at me, and he do --


Here was a letter, indeed, to be intercepted by a man's father, and do him
good with him! He cannot but think most virtuously, both of me, and the
sender, sure; that make the careful Costar'-monger of him in our familiar
Epistles. Well, if he read this with patience, I Will be gelt, and troll ballads
for Mr. JOHN TRVNDLE, yonder, the rest of my mortality. It is true, and
likely, my father may have as much patience as another man; for he takes much
physic: and, often taking physic makes a man very patient. But would your
packet, master WEL-BRED, had arrived at him, in such a minute of his patience;
then, we had known the end of it, which now is doubtful, and threatens --
What! my wise cossen! Nay, then, Il efurnish our feast with one gull more
to'ard the mess. He writes to me of a brace, and here is one, that is three: O,
for a fourth; Fortune, if ever thou wilt use thine eyes, I entreat thee --


O, now I see, who he laughed at. He laughed at somebody in that letter. By
this good light, and he had laughed at me --


How now, coussen STEPHEN, melancholy'?


Yes, a little. I thought, you had laughed at me, cossen.


Why, what an' I had cousse, what would you have done?


By this light, I would have told mine uncle.


Nay, if you would ha'told your uncle, I did laugh at you, cousse.


Did you, indeed?


Yes, indeed.


Why, then --


What then?


I am satisfied, it is sufficient.


Why, be so gentle cousse. And, I pray you let me entreat a courtesy of you.
I am sent for, this morning, by a friend in the old Iewrie to come to him; It Is
but crossing over the fields to More-gate: Will you bear me company? I
protest, it is not to draw you into bond, or any plot against the state, cousse


Sir, that is all one, and't were; you shall command me, twice so far as
More-gate to do you good, in such a matter. Do you think I would leave you?
I protest --


No, no, you shall not protest, cousse.


By my fackins, but I will, by your leave; I Will protest more to my friend, then
I Will speak off, at this time


You speak very well, cousse.


Nay, not so neither, you shall pardon me: but I speak, to serve my turn.


Your turn, couss? Do you know, what you say? A gentleman of your sort,
parts, carriage, and estimation, to talk of your turn in this company, and
to me, alone, like a tankard-bearer, at a conduit! Fie. A wight, that
(hitherto) his every step has left the stamp of a great foot behind him, as
every word the favor of a strong spirit! and he! this man! so graced, gilded,
or (to use a more fit metaphore) so tin-foild by nature, as not ten house-wiues
pewter (again' a good time) shows more bright to the world then he! and he (as
I said last, so I say again, and still shall say it) this man! to conceal
such real ornaments as these, and shadow their glory, as a Millaners wife
does her wrought stomacher, with a smokie lawne, or a black cypress? O couss!
It cannot be answered, go not about it. DRAKES old ship, at Detford, may
sooner circle the world again. Come, wrong not the quality of your desert,
with looking downward, couz; but hold up your head, so: and let the Idea of
what you are, be portrayed in your face, that men may read in your physnomie,
( Here, within this place, is to be seen the true, rare, and accomplished
monster, or miracle of nature, which is all one.) What think you of this,
couss


Why, I do think of it; and I will be more proud, and melancholy, and
gentleman-like, then I have been: I Will ensure you


Why, that is resolute master STEPHEN! Now, if I can but hold him up to his
height, as it is happily begun, it will do well for a suburbe-humor: we may
hap have a match with the city, and play him for forty pound. Come, couss


I Will follow you.


Follow me? you must go before.


Nay, an' I must, I will. Pray you, show me, good cousin.


I Think, this be the house: what, hough?


Who Is there? O, master MATTHEW! gi' your worship good morrow.


What! COB! how do thou, good COB? do thou inhabit here, COB?


I, sir, I and my lineage have kept a poor house, here, in our days.


Thy lineage, Monsieur COB, what lineage? what lineage?


Why sir, an ancient lineage, and a princely. Mine ance'trie came from a Kings
belly, no worse man: and yet no man neither (by your worships leave, I did lie
in that) but Herring the King of fish (from his belly, I proceed) one of the
Monarchs of the world, I assure you. The first red herring, that was broiled in
ADAM, and EVE'S kitchen, do I fetch my pedigree from, by the Harrots books.
His COB, was my great-great-mighty-great Grand father


Why mighty? why mighty? I pray thee.


O, it was a mighty while ago, sir, and a mighty great COB.


How know thou that?


How know I? why, I smell his ghost, ever and anon.


Smell a ghost? O unsavory jest! and the ghost of a herring COB!


I sir, with ^auour of your worships nose, Mr. MATTHEW, why not the ghost of a
herring-cob, as well as the ghost of rasher-bacon


ROGER BACON, thou would say?


I say rasher-bacon. They were both broyl'd of the col^s? and a man may smell
broyld-meate, I hope? you are a scholar, vpsolue me that, now


O raw ignorance! COB, can thou show me of a gentleman, one Captain
BOBADILL, where his lodging is


O, my guest, sir! you mean.


Thy guest! Alas! ha, ha.


Why do you laugh, sir? Do you not mean Captain BOBADILL?


COB, 'pray thee, advise thy self well: do not wrong the gentleman, and thy
self too. I dare be sworn, he scorns thy house: he! He lodge in such a
base, obscure place, as thy house! Tut, I know his disposition so well, he
would not lie in thy bed, if tho'uldst gi'it him


I will not give it him, though, sir. Mass, I thought somewhat was in it, we
could not get him to bed, all night! Well, sir, though he lie not of my bed, he
lies of my bench: an 't please you to go up, sir, you shall find him with two
cushions under his head, and his cloak wrapped about him, as though he had
neither wun nor lost, and yet (I warrant) he never cast better in his life,
then he has done, to night


Why? was he drunk?


Drunk, sir? you hear not me say so. Perhaps, he swallowed a tauerne-token,
or some such device, sir: I have nothing to do withal. I deal with water,
and not with wine. Gi'me my tankard there, hough. God b'w'you, sir. It Is six a
clock: I should have carried two turns, by this. What hough? my stopple? come


Lie in a water-bearers house! A gentleman of his hauings! Well, I Will tell him
my mind


What TIB, show this gentleman up to the Captain. O, an' my house were the
Brasen-head now! faith, it would eene speak, Mo fools yet. You should have
some now would take this Mr. MATTHEW to be a gentleman, at the least. His
father's an honest man, a worshipful fishmonger, and so forth; and now dos he
creep, and wriggle into acquaintance with all the brave gallants about the
town, such as my guest is: (O, my guest is a fine man) and they flout him
invincibly. He uses every day to a Merchants house (where I serve water) one
master KITELY'S, in the old Iewry; and here is the jest, he is in love with my
masters sister, (mistress BRIDGET) and calls her mistress: and there he will sit
you a whole afternoon sometimes, reading of these same abominable, vile, (a
pox on 'hem, I cannot abide them) rascally verses, poyetrie, poyetrie, and
speaking of enterludes, 'twill make a man burst to hear him. And the wenches,
they do so geere, and ti-he at him -- well, should they do so much to me, Ild
for-sweare them all, by the foot of PHARAOH. There Is an oath! How many
water-bearers shall you hear swear such an oath? O, I have a guest (he
teaches me) he dos swear the legiblest, of any man christened: By St. GEORGE,
the foot of PHARAOH, the body of me, as I am gentleman, and a soldier: such
dainty oaths! and withal, he dos take this same filthy roguish tobacco, the
finest, and cleanliest! it would do a man good to see the fume come forth at
's tonnells! Well, he owes me forty shillings (my wife lent him out of her
purse, by sixe-pence a time) besides his lodging: I would I had it. I shall have
it, he says, the next Action. Helter skelter, hang sorrow, care 'll kill a
cat, vp-tailes all, and a louse for the hangman


Hostess, hostess.


What say you, sir?


A cup of thy small beer, sweet hostess.


Sir, there is a gentleman, below, would speak with you.


A gentleman! 'ods so, I am not within.


My husband told him you were, sir.


What a plague -- what meant he?


Captain BOBADILL?


Who Is there? (take away the basin, good hostess) come up, sir.


He would desire you to come up, sir. You come into a cleanly house, here.


'Saue you, sir. 'Saue you, Captain.


Gentle master MATTHEW! Is it you, sir? Please you sit down.


Thank you, good Captain, you may see, I am somewhat audacious.


Not so, sir. I was requested to supper, last night, by a sort of gallants,
where you were wished for, and drunk to, I assure you


Vouchsafe me, by whom, good Captain.


Mary, by young WELL-BRED, and others: Why, hostess, a stool here, for this
gentleman


No haste, sir, it is very well.


Body of me! It was so late ere we parted last night, I can scarce open my
eyes, yet; I was but new risen, as you came: how passes the day abroad, sir?
you can tell


Faith, some half hour to seven: now trust me, you have an exceeding fine
lodging here, very neat, and private


I, sir: sit down, I pray you. Master MATTHEW (in any case) possess no
gentlemen of our acquaintance, with notice of my lodging


Who? I sir? no.


Not that I need to care who know it, for the Cabin is convenient, but in
regard I would not be too popular, and generally visited, as some are


True, Captain, I conceive you.


For, do you see, sir, by the heart of valor, in me, (except it be ^o some
peculiar and choice spirits, to whom I am extraordinarily engaged, as your
self, or so) I could not extend thus far


O Lord, sir, I resolve so.


I confess, I love a cleanely and quiet priuacy, above all the tumult, and
roar of fortune. What new book have you there? What! Go by, HIERONYMO


I, did you ever see it acted? is it not well pend?


Well pend? I would feign see all the Poets, of these times, pen such another
play as that was! they will prate and swagger, and keep a stir of art and
devices, when (as I am a gentleman) read 'hem, they are the most shallow,
pitiful, barren fellows, that live upon the face of the earth, again


Indeed, here are a number of fine speeches in this book! O eyes, no eyes, but
fountaynes fraught with tears! There Is a conceit! fountains fraught with
tears! O life, no life, but lively form of death! Another! O world, no world,
but mass of public wrongs! A third! Confused and sil'd with murder, and
misdeeds! A fourth! O, the Muses! Is It not excellent? Is It not simply the best
that ever you heard, Captain? Ha? How do you like it


It Is good.


To thee, the purest object to my sense,
The most refined essence heaven couers,
Send I these lines, wherein I do commence
The happy state of turtle-billing lovers.
If they prone rough, vn-polish't, harsh, and rude,
Have made the vast. Thus, mildly, I conclude.

Nay, proceed, proceed. Where Is this?


This, sir? a toy of mine own, in my nonage: the infancy of my Muses! But,
when will you come and see my study? good faith, I can show you some very good
things, I have done of late -- That boot becomes your leg, passing well,
Captain, methinkes


So, so, It Is the fashion, gentlemen now use.


Troth, Captain, an' now you speak of the fashion, master WELL-^RED'S elder
brother, and I, are fallen out exceedingly: this other day, I happened to enter
into some discourse of a hanger, which I assure you, both for fashion, and
worke-man-ship, was most peremptory-beautifull, and gentleman-like! Yet, he
condemned, and cried it down, for the most pyed, and ridiculous that ever he
saw


Squire DOWNRIGHT? the halfe-brother? was it not?


I sir, he.


Hang him, rooke, he! why, he has no more judgment then a malt-horse. By S.
GEORGE, I wonder youl'd loose a thought upon such an animal: the most
peremptory absurd clown of christendom, this day, he is holden. I protest to
you, as I am a gentleman, and a soldier, I never changed words, with his
like. By his discourse, he should eat nothing but hay. He was borne for the
manger, pannier, or pack-saddle! He has not so much as a good phrase in his
belly, but all old iron, and rustie proverbs! a good commodity for some
smith, to make hob-nailes of


I, and he thinks to carry it away with his manhood still, where he comes. He
brags he will gi' me the bastinado, as I hear


How! He the bastinado! how came he by that word, trow?


Nay, indeed, he said cudgel me; I termed it so, for my more grace.


That may be: For I was sure, it was none of his word. But, when? when said he
so


Faith, yesterday, they say: a young gallant, a friend of mine told me so.


By the foot of PHARAOH, and 't were my case now, I should send him a chartel,
presently. The bastinado! A most proper, and sufficient dependence, warranted
by the great CARANZA. Come hither. You shall chartel him. I Will show you a
trick, or two, you shall kill him with, at pleasure: the first stoccata, if you
will, by this air


Indeed, you have absolute knowledge in the mystery, I have heard, sir.


Of whom? Of whom have you heard it. I beseech you?


Troth, I have heard it spoken of diverse, that you have very rare, and
vn-in-one-breath-vtter-able skill, sir


By heaven, no, not I; no skill in the earth: some small rudiments in the
science, as to know my time, distance, or so. I have professed it more for
noblemen, and gentlemen's use, then mine own practice, I assure you. Hostess,
accommodate us with another bed-staffe here, quickly: Lend us another
bed-staffe. The woman does not understand the words of Action. Look you, sir.
Exalt not your point above this state, at any hand, and let your poynard
maintain your defense, thus: (give it the gentleman, and leave us) so, sir.
Come on: O twine your body more about, that you may fall to a more sweet comely
gentleman-like guard. So, indifferent. Hollow your body more sir, thus. Now,
stand fast of your left leg, note your distance, keep your due proportion of
time -- Oh, you disorder your point, most irregularly


How is the bearing of it, now, sir?


O, out of measure ill! A well-experienc'd hand would pass upon you, at
pleasure


How mean you, sir, pass upon me?


Why, thus sir (make a thrust at me) come in, upon the answer, control your
point, and make a full carreere, at the body. The best-practis'd gallants of
the time, name it the passada: a most desperate thrust, believe it


Well, come, sir.


Why, you do not manage your weapon with any facility, or grace to inuit
me: I have no spirit to play with you. Your dearth of judgment renders you
tedious


But one venue, sir.


Venue! Fie. Most gross denomination, as ever I heard. O, the stoccata, while
you live, sir. Note that. Come, put on your cloak, and we will go to some
private place, where you are acquainted, some tavern, or so -- and have a bit
-- I Will send for one of these Fencers, and he shall breath you, by my
direction; and, then, I will teach you your trick. You shall kill him with it,
at the first, if you please. Why, I will learn you, by the true judgment of
the eye, hand, and foot, to control any enemies point in the world. Should
your adversary confront you with a pistol, 'twere nothing, by this hand, you
should, by the same rule, control his bullet, in a line: except it were
hayle-shot, and spread. What money have you about you, Mr. MATTHEW


Faith, I have not past a two shillings, or so.


It Is some what with the least: but, come. We will have a bunch of redish, and
salt, to taste our wine; and a pipe of t^bacco, to close the orifice of the
stomach: and then, we will call upon young WEL-BRED. Perhaps we shall meet the
CORIDON, his brother, there: and put him to the question


THOMAS, Come hither,
There lies a note, within upon my deske,
Here, take my key: It is no matter, neither.
Where is the Boy?

Within, sir, in the warehouse.

Let him tell over, straight, that Spanish gold,
And weigh it, with the pieces of eight. Do you
See the delivery of those silver stuffes,
To Mr. LVCAR. Tell him, if he will,
He shall have the grogran's, at the rate I told him,
And I will meet him, on the Exchange, anon.

Good, sir.

Do you see that fellow, brother DOWNRIGHT?

I, what of him?

He is a jewel, brother.
I took him of a child, up, at my door,
And christened him, gave him mine own name, THOMAS,
Since bred him at the Hospital; where proving
A toward impe, I called him home, and taught him
So much, as I have made him my Cashier,
And given him, who had none, a surname, CASH:
And find him, in his place so full of faith,
That, I durst trust my life into his hands.

So, would not I in any bastards, brother,
As, it is like, he is: although I knew
My self his father. But you said yo' had somewhat
To tell me, gentle brother, what is it? what is it?

Faith, I am very loath, to utter it,
As fearing, it may hurt your patience:
But, that I know, your judgment is of strength,
Against the neerenesse of affection --

What need this circumstance? pray you be direct.

I will not say, how much I do ascribe
Unto your friendship; nor, in what regard
I hold your love: but, let my past behavior,
And usage of your sister, but confirm
How well I'aue been affected to your --

You are too tedious, come to the matter, the matter.

Then (without further ceremony) thus.
My brother WELL-BRED, sir, (I know not how)
Of late, is much declined in what he was,
And greatly altered in his disposition.
When he came first to lodge here in my house,
Never trust me, if I were not proud of him:
Me thought he bare himself in such a fashion,
So full of man, and sweetness in his carriage,
And (what was chief) it showed not borrowed in him,
But all he did, became him as his own,
And seemed as perfect, proper, and possessed
As breath, with life, or color, with the blood.
But, now, his course is so irregular,
So loose, affected, and deprived of grace,
And he himself withal so far fallen off
From that first place, as scarce no note remains,
To tell men's judgments where he lately stood.
He Is grown a stranger to all due respect,
Forgetful of his friends, and not content
To stale himself in all societies,
He makes my house here common, as a Mart,
A Theater, a public receptacle
For giddie humor, and diseased riot;
And here (as in a tavern, or a stews)
He, and his wild associates, spend their hours,
In repetition of lascivious jests,
Swear, leap, drink, dance, and revel night by night,
Control my servants: and indeed what not?

'Sdeynes, I know not what I should say to him, in the whole world! He values
me, at a cracked three-farthings, for ought I see: It will never out of the
flesh that is bred in the bone! I have told him enough, one would think, if
that would serve: But, counsel to him, is as good, as a shoulder of mutton to
a sick horse. Well! he knows what to trust to, for GEORGE. Let him spend, and
spend* and domineere, till his heart ache; an' he think to be relieved by me,
when he is got into one o'your city pounds, the Counters, he has the wrong sow
by the ear, in faith: and claps his dish at the wrong man's door. I Will lay my
hand of my halfe-peny, e're I part with 't, to fetch him out, I Will assure him


Nay, good brother, let it not trouble you, thus.


'S death, he mads me, I could eat my very spur-lethers, for anger! But, why
are you so tame? Why do not you speak to him, and tell him how he disquiets
your house


O, there are diverse reasons to dissuade, brother.
But, would your self vouchsafe to travail in it,
(Though but with plain, and easy circumstance)
It would, both come much better to his sense,
And savor less of stomach, or of passion.
You are his elder brother, and that title
Both gives, and warrants you authority;
Which (by your presence seconded) must breed
A kind of duty in him, and regard*
Whereas, if I should intimate the least,
It would but add contempt, to his neglect,
Heap worse on ill, make up a pile of hatred
That, in the rearing, would come tottring down,
And, in the ruin, bury all our love.
Nay, more then this, brother, if I should speak
He would be ready from his heat of humor,
And ouer-flowing of the vapor, in him,
To blow the ears of his familiars,
With the false breath, of telling, what disgraces,
And low disparadgments, I had put upon him.
Whilst they, sir, to relieve him, in the fable,
Make their loose comments, upon every word,
Gesture, or look, I use; mock me all over,
From my flat cap, unto my shining shoes:
And, out of their impetuous rioting phant'sies,
Beget some slander, that shall dwell with me.
And what would that be, think you? mary, this.
They would give out (because my wife is fair,
My self but lately married, and my sister
Here soiourning a virgin in my house)
That I were jealous! nay, as sure as death,
That they would say. And how that I had quarreled
My brother purposely, thereby to find
An apt pretext, to banish them my house.

Mass perhaps so: They' are like enough to do it.

Brother, they would, believe it: so should I
(Like one of these penurious quack-saluers)
But set the bills up, to mine own disgrace,
And try experiments upon my self:
Lend scorn and envy, opportunity,
To stab my reputation, and good name --

I Will speak to him --


Speak to him? away, by the foot of PHARAOH, you shall not, you shall not do
him that grace. The time of day, to you, Gentleman of the house. Is Mr.
WELL-BRED stirring


How then? what should he do?


Gentleman of the house, it is to you: is he within, sir?


He came not to his lodging to night sir, I assure you.


Why, do you hear? you.


The gentleman-citizen has satisfied me, I Will talk to no scauenger.


How, scauenger? stay sir, stay?


Nay, brother DOWNRIGHT.


'Heart! stand you away, and you love me.


You shall not follow him now, I pray you, brother,
Good faith you shall not: I will overrule you.

Ha? scauenger? well, go to, I say little: but, by this good day (god forgive
me I should swear) if I put it up so, say, I am the rankest cow, that ever
pist. 'Sdeynes, and I swallow this, I Will never draw my sword in the sight of
Fleet Street again, while I live; I Will sit in a barn, with Madge-howlet, and
catch mice first. Scauenger? 'Heart, and I Will go near to fill that huge
tumbrell-slop of yours, with somewhat, and I have good luck: your GARAGANTVA
breech cannot carry it away so


Oh do not fret your self thus, never think^ on it.


These are my brothers consorts, these! these are his Cam'rades, his walking
mates! he is a gallant, a Caualiero too, right hangman cut! Let me not live,
and I could not find in my heart to swinge the whole ging of 'hem, one after
another, and begin with him first. I am grieved, it should be said he is my
brother, and take these courses. Well as he brewes, so he shall drink, for
GEORGE, again. Yet, he shall hear on it, and that tightly too, and I live,
In Faith


But, brother, let your reprehension (then)
Run in an easy current, not ore-high
Carried with rashness, or devouring choler;
But rather use the soft persuading way,
Whose powers will work more gently, and compose
Th'imperfect thoughts you labor to reclaim:
More winning, then enforcing the consent.

I, I, let me alone for that, I warrant you.

How now? oh, the bell rings to breakefast.
Brother, I pray you go in, and bear my wife
Company, till I come; I Will but give order
Forsome dispatch of business, to my servants --

WHat, COB? our maids will have you by the back (In Faith)
For coming so late this morning.

Perhaps so, sir, take heed some body have not them by the belly, for walking
so late in the evening


Well, yet my troubled spirit's somewhat eased,
Though not reposed in that security,
As I could wish: But, I must be content.
How e're I set a face on it to the world,
Would I had lost this finger, at a venture,
So WELL-BRED had never lodged within my house.
Why't cannot be, where there is such resort
Of wanton gallants, and young reuellers,
That any woman should be honest long.
Is It like, that factious beauty will preserve
The public weal of chastity, vn-shaken,
When such strong motives muster, and make head
Against her single peace? no, no. Beware,
When mutual appetite does meet to treat,
And spirits of one kind, and quality,
Come once to parlee, in the pride of bluod:
It is no slow conspiracy, that follows.
Well (to be plain) if I but thought, the time
Had answered their affections: all the world
Should not persuade me, but I were a cuckold.
Mary, I hope, they have not got that start:
For opportunity has balkt 'hem yet,
And shall do still, while I have eyes, and ears
To attend the impositions of my heart.
My presence shall be as an iron bar,
'Twixt the conspiring motions of desire:
Yea, every look, or glance, mine eye eiects,
Shall check occasion, as one does his slave,
When he forgets the limits of prescription.

Sister BRIDGET, pray you fetch down the rose water above in the closet. Sweet
heart, will you come in, to breakefast


An' she have ouer-heard me now?

I pray thee (good MVSSE) we stay for you.

By heaven I would not for a thousand angels.

What aile you sweet heart, are you not well, speak good MVSSE.


Troth my head aches extremely, on a sudden.

Oh, the lord!

How now? what?

Alas, how it burns? MVSSE, keep you warm, good truth it is this new
disease! there is a number are troubled withal! for loves sake, sweet heart,
come in, out of the air


How simple, and how subtle are her answers?
A new disease, and many troubled with it!
Why, true: she heard me, all the world to nothing.

I pray thee, good sweet heart, come in; the air will do you harm in, troth.


The air! she has me in the wind! sweet heart!
I Will come to you presently: 't will away, I hope.

Pray heaven it do.

A new disease? I know not, new, or old,
But it may well be called poor mortals plague:
For, like a pestilence, it does infect
The houses of the brain. First, it begins
Solely to work upon the fantasy,
Filling her seat with such pestiferous air,
As soon corrupts the judgment; and from thence,
Sends like contagion to the memory:
Still each to other giving the infection.
Which, as a subtle vapor, spreads it self,
Confusedly, through every sensiue part,
Till not a thought, or motion, in the mind,
Be free from the black poison of suspect.
Ah, but what miserie' is it, to know this?
Or, knowing it, to want the minds erection,
In such extremes? Well, I will once more strive,
(In spite of this black cloud) myself to be,
And shake the fever off, that thus shakes me.

S'Lid, I cannot choose but laugh, to see myself translated thus, from a poor
creature to a creator; for now must I create an intolerable sort of lies, or my
present profession looses the grace: and yet the lie to a man of my coat, is as
ominous a fruit, as the Fico. O sir, it holds for good polity ever, to have
that outwardly in vilest estimation, that inwardly is most dear to us. So
much, for my borrowed shape. Well, the troth is, my old master intends to
follow my young, dry foot, over More-fields, to London, this morning: now I,
knowing, of this hunting-match, or rather conspiracy, and to insinuate with my
young master (for so must we that are blew-waiters, and men of hope and service
do, or perhaps we may wear motley at the years end, and who wears motley,
you know) have got me before, in this disguise, determining here to lie in
ambuscado, and intercept him, in the midway. If I can but get his cloak, his
purse, his hat, nay, anything, to cut him off, that is, to stay his journey,
Veni, vidi, vici, I may say with Captain CAESAR, I am made for ever, in faith.
Well, now must I practice to get the true garb of one of these Lance-knights,
my arm here, and my -- young master! and his cousin, Mr. STEPHEN, as I am true
counterfeit man of war, and no soldier


So sir, and how then, couss?


'Sfoot, I have lost my purse, I think.


How? lost your purse? where? when had you it?


I cannot tell, stay.


'Slid, I am afeard, they will know me, would I could get by them.


What? have you it?


No, I think I was bewitched, I --


Nay, do not weep the loss, hang it, let it go.


Oh, it is here: no, and it had been lost, I had not cared, but for a iet ring
mistress MARY sent me


A iet ring? oh, the poesy, the poesy?


Fine, in faith! Though fancy sleep, my love is deep. Meaning that though I did
not fancy her, yet she loved me dearly


Most excellent!


And then, I sent her another, and my poesy was: The deeper, the sweeter, I Will
be judged by St. PETER


How, by St. PETER? I do not conceive that!


Mary, St. PETER, to make up the meeter.


Well, there the Saint was your good patron, he helped you at your need:
thank him, thank him


I cannot take leave on 'hem, so: I will venture, come what will. Gentlemen,
please you change a few crowns, for a very excellent good blade, here? I am a
poor gentleman, a soldier, one that (in the better state of my fortunes)
scorned so mean a refuge, but now it is the humor of necessity, to have it
so. You seem to be gentlemen, well affected to martial men, else I should
rather die with silence, then line with shame: how ever, vouchsafe to remember,
it is my want speaks, not my self. This condition agrees not with my spirit
--


Where have thou served?


May it please you, sir, in all the late wars of Bohemia, Hungaria, Dalmatia,
Poland, where not, sir? I have been a poor seruitor, by sea and land, any
time this fourteen years, and followed the fortunes of the best Commanders in
christendom. I was twice shot at the taking of Alepo, once at the relief of
Vienna; I have been at Marseilles, Naples, and the Adriatique gulf, a
gentleman-slaue in the galleys, thrice, where I was most dangerously shot in
the head, through both the thighs, and yet, being thus maym'd, I am void of
maintenance, nothing left me but my scarres, the noted marks of my resolution


How will you sell this rapier, friend?


Generous sir, I refer it to your own judgment; you are a gentleman, give
me what you please


True, I am a gentleman, I know that friend: but what though? I pray you say,
what would you ask


I assure you, the blade may become the side, or thigh of the best prince, in
Europe


I, with a velvet scabberd, I think.


Nay, and 't be mine, it shall have a velvet scabberd, Couss, that is flat: I Would
not wear it as it is, and you would give me an angel


At your worships pleasure, sir; nay, it is a most pure Toledo.


I had rather it were a Spaniard! but tell me, what shall I give you for it?
An' it had a silver hilt --


Come, come, you shall not buy it; hold, there is a shilling fellow, take thy
rapier


Why, but I will buy it now, because you say so, and there is another shilling,
fellow. I scorn to be out-bidden. What, shall I walk with a cudgel, like
Higgin-Bottom? and may have a rapier, for money


You may buy one in the city.


Tut, I Will buy this in the field, so I will, I have a mind to it, because it is a
field rapier. Tell me your lowest price


You shall not buy it, I say.


By this money, but I will, though I give more then it is worth.


Come away, you are a fool.


Friend, I am a fool, that is granted: but I Will have it, for that words sake.
Follow me, for your money


At your service, sir.


I Cannot loose the thought, yet, of this letter,
Sent to my son: nor leave t'admire the change
Of manners, and the breeding of our youth,
Within the kingdom, since my self was one.
When I was young, he lived not in the stews,
Durst have conceived a scorn, and vtter'd it,
On a gray head; age was authority
Against a buffon: and a man had, then,
A certain reverence pai'd unto his years,
That had none due unto his life. So much
The sanctity of some prevailed, for others.
But, now, we all are fallen; youth, from their fear:
And age, from that, which bred it, good example.
Nay, would our selves were not the first, even parents,
That did destroy the hopes, in our own children:
Or they not learned our vices, in their cradles,
And sucked in our ill customs, with their milk.
Ere all their teeth be borne, or they can speak,
We make their palats cunning! The first words,
We form their tongues with, are licentious jests!
Can it call, whore? cry, bastard? O, then, kiss it,
A witty child! Cannot swear? The fathers dearling!
Give it two plums. Nay, rather then 't shall learn
No bawdie song, the mother' her self will teach it!
But, this is in the infancy; the days
Of the long coat: when it puts on the breeches,
It will put off all this. I, it is like:
When it is gone into the bone already.
No, no: This die goes deeper then the coat,
Or shirt, or skin. It stains, unto the liver,
And heart, in some. And, rather, then it should not,
Note, what we fathers do! Look, how we live!
What mistresses we keep! at what expense,
In our sons eyes! where they may handle our gifts,
Hear our lascivious courtships, see our dalliance,
Taste of the same provoking meats, with us,
To ruin of our states! Nay, when our own
Portion is fled, to prey on their remainder,
We call them into fellowship of vice!
Bait 'hem with the young chambermaid, to seal!
And teach 'hem all bad ways, to buy affiction!
This is one path! but there are millions more,
In which we spoil our own, with leading them.
Well, I thank heaven, I never yet was he,
That trauail'd with my son, before sixteen,
To show him, the Venetian cortezans.
Nor read the grammar of cheating, I had made
To my sharp boy, at twelve: repeating still
The rule, Get money; still, Get money, Boy;
No matter, by what means; Money will do
More, Boy, then my Lords letter. Neither have I
Dressed snailes, or mushromes curiously before him,
Perfumed my sauces, and taught him to make 'hem;
Preceding still, with my gray gluttony,
At all the ordinaries: and only feared
His palate should degenerate, not his manners.
These are the trade of fathers, now! how ever
My son, I hope, has met within my threshold,
None of these household precedents; which are strong,
And swift, to rape youth, to their precipice.
But, let the house at home be nere so clean
Swept, or kept sweet from filth; nay, dust, and cob-webs:
If he will live, abroad, with his companions,
In dung, and leystalls; it is worth a fear.
Nor is the danger of conuersing less,
Then all that I have mentioned of example.

My master? nay, faith have at you: I am flesht now, I have sped so well.
Worshipful sir, I beseech you, respect the estate of a poor soldier; I am
ashamed of this base course of life (god's my comfort) but extremity prouokes
me to it, what remedy


I have not for you, now.


By the faith I bear unto truth, gentleman, it is no ordinary custom in me,
but only to preserve manhood. I protest to you, a man I have been, a man I may
be, by your sweet bounty


'Pray thee, good friend, be satisfied.


Good sir, by that hand, you may do the part of a kind gentleman, in lending a
poor soldier the price of two cannes of beer (a matter of small value) the
king of heaven shall pay you, and I shall rest thankful: sweet worship --


Nay, and you be so importunate --


Oh, tender sir, need will have his course: I was not made to this vile use!
well, the edge of the enemy could not have abated me so much: It Is hard when
a man has served in his Princes cause, and be thus -- Honorable worship, let
me derive a small piece of silver from you, it shall not be given in the
course of time, by this good ground, I was feign to pawn my rapier last night
for a poor supper, I had sucked the hilts long before, I am a pagan else:
sweet honor


Believe me, I am taken with some wonder,
To think, a fellow of thy outward presence
Should (in the frame, and fashion of his mind)
Be so degenerate, and sordid-base!
Art thou a man? and sham'st thou not to beg?
To practice such a servile kind of life?
Why, were thy education never so mean,
Having thy limbs, a thousand fairer courses
Offer themselves, to thy election.
Either the wars might still supply thy wants,
Or service of some virtuous gentleman,
Or honest labor: nay, what can I name,
But would become thee better then to beg?
But men of thy condition feed on sloth,
As does the beetle, on the dung she breeds in,
Not caring how the metal of your minds
Is eaten with the rust of idleness*
Now, before me, what e're he be, that should
Relieve a person of thy quality,
While thou insist's in this loose desperate course,
I would esteem the sin, not thine, but his.

Faith sir, I would gladly find some other course, if so --

I, you would gladly ^inde it, but you will not seek it.

Alas sir, where should a man seek? in the wars, there is no ascent by desert
in these days, but -- and for service, would it were as soon purchased, as
wished for (the ayre's my comfort) I know, what I would say --


What Is thy name?

Please you, FITZ-SWORD, sir.

FITZ-SWORD?
Say, that a man should entertayne thee now,
Would thou be honest, humble, just, and true?

Sir, by the place, and honor of a soldier --

Nay, nay, I like not those affected oaths;
Speak plainly man: what think thou of my words?

Nothing, sir, but wish my fortunes were as happy, as my service should be
honest


Well, follow me, I Will prove thee, if thy deeds
Will carry a proportion to thy words.

Yes sir, straight, I Will but garter my hose. Oh that my belly were hoopt now,
for I am ready to burst with laughing! never was bottle, or bag-pipe fuller.
S'lid, was there ever seen a fox in years to betray himself thus? now shall
I be possessed of all his counsels: and, by that conduit, my young master. Well,
he is resolved to prove my honesty; faith, and I am resolved to prove his
patience: oh I shall abuse him intollerably. This small piece of service, will
bring him clean out of love with the soldier, for ever. He will never come
within the sign of it, the sight of a cassock, or a musket-rest again. He
will hate the musters at Mile-end for it, to his dying day. It Is no matter, let
the world think me a bad counterfeit, If I cannot give him the slip, at an
instant: why, this is better then to have staid his journey! well, I Will follow
him: oh, how I long to be employed


YEs faith, sir, we were at your lodging to seek you, too.


Oh, I came not there to night.


Your brother delivered us as much.


Who? my brother DOWNRIGHT?


He. Mr. WELL-BRED, I know not in what kind you hold me, but let me say to you
this: as sure as honor, I esteem it so much out of the sunshine of
reputation, to through the least beam of reguard, upon such a --


Sir, I must hear no ill words of my brother.


I, protest to you, as I have a thing to be saved about me, I never saw any
gentleman-like part --


Good Captain, faces about, to some other discourse.


With your leave, sir, and there were no more men living upon the face of the
earth, I should not fancy him, by S. GEORGE


Troth, nor I, he is of a rusticall cut, I know not how: he does not carry
himself like a gentleman of fashion --


Oh, Mr. MATTHEW, that is a grace peculiar but to a few; quos aquus amauit
IVPITER


I understand you sir.


No question, you do, or you do not, sir. NED KNO'WELL! by my soul welcome;
how do thou sweet spirit, my Genius? S'lid I shall love APOLLO, and the mad
Thespian girls the better, while I live, for this; my dear fury: now, I see
there is some love in thee! Sir, these be the two I writ to thee of (nay,
what a drowsy humor is this now? why do thou not speak?


Oh, you are a fine gallant, you sent me a rare letter!


Why, was it not rare?


Yes, I Will be sworn, I was never guilty of reading the like; match it in all
PLINY, or SYMMACHVS epistles, and I Will have my judgment burned in the ear for
a rogue: make much of thy vain, for it is inimitable. But I marle what camel
it was, that had the carriage of it? for doubtless, he was no ordinary beast,
that brought it


Why?


Why, faiest thou? why do thou think that any reasonable creature,
especially in the morning (the sober time of the day too) could have mis-tane
my father for me


S'lid, you jest, I hope?


Indeed, the best use we can turn it too, is to make a jest on it, now: but
I Will assure you, my father had the full view of your flourishing style, some
hour before I saw it


What a dull slave was this? But, sirrah, what said he to it, In Faith?


Nay, I know not* what he said: but I have a shrewd guess what he thought.


What? what?


Mary, that thou art some strange dissolute young fellow, and I a grain or two
better, for keeping thee company


Tut, that thought is like the moon in her last quarter, 'twill change
shortly: but, sirrah, I pray thee be acquainted with my two hangby's, here;
thou will take exceeding pleasure in 'hem if thou hear'st 'hem once go: my
wind-instruments. I Will wind 'hem up -- but what strange piece of silence is
this? the sign of the dumb man


Oh, sir, a kinsman of mine, one that may make your music the fuller, and he
please, he has his humor, sir


Oh, what is it? what is it?


Nay, I Will neither do your judgment, nor his folly that wrong, as to prepare
your apprehension: I Will leave him to the mercy of your search, if you can take
him, so


Well, Captain BOBADILL, Mr. MATTHEW, pray you know this gentleman here, he is
a friend of mine, and one that will deserve your affection. I know not your
name sir, but I shall be glad of any occasion, to render me more familiar to yo


My name is Mr. STEPHEN, sir, I am this gentleman's own cousin, sir, his father
is mine uncle, sir, I am somewhat melancholy, but you shall command me, sir,
in what soever is incident to a gentleman


Sir, I must tell you this, I am no general man, but for Mr. WEL-BRED'S sake
(you may embrace it, at what height of favor you please) I do communicate
with you: and conceive you, to be a gentleman of some parts, I love few words


And I fewer, sir. I have scarce inow, to thank you.


But are you indeed. Sir? so given to it?


I, truly, sir, I am mightily given to melancholy.


Oh, it is your only fine humor, sir, your true melancholy, breeds your perfect
sine wit, sir: I am melancholy my self diverse times, sir, and then do I no
more but take pen, and paper presently, and ouerflow you half a score, or a
dozen of sonnets, at a sitting


Sure, he vtters them then, by the gross.)


Truly sir, and I love such things, out of measure.


I faith, better then in measure, I Will undertake.


Why, I pray you, sir, make use of my study, it is at your service.


I thank you sir, I shall be bold, I warrant you; have you a stool there, to
be melancholy' upon


That I have, sir, and some papers there of mine own doing, at idle hours,
that you will say there is some sparks of wit in 'hem, when you see them


Would the sparks would kindle once, and become a fire a^ongst 'hem, I might
see self-love burned for her heresy


Cousin, is it well? am I melancholy enough?


Oh I, excellent!


Captain BOBADILL: why muse you so?


He is melancholy, too.


Faith, sir, I was thinking of a most honorable piece of service, was performed
tomorrow, being St. MARKS day: shall be some ten years, now


In what place, Captain?


Why, at the beleag'ring of Strigonium, where, in less then two hours, seven
hundred resolute gentlemen, as any were in Europe, lost their lives upon the
breach. I Will tell you, gentlemen, it was the first, but the best leagure, that
ever I beheld, with these eyes, except the taking in of -- what do you call
it, last year, by the Genowayes, but that (of all other) was the most fatal,
and dangerous exploit, that ever I was ranged in, since I first bore arms
before the face of the enemy, as I am a gentleman, and soldier


'So, I had as liefe, as an angel, I could swear as well as that gentleman!


Then, you were a seruitor, at both it seems! at Strigonium? and what do you
called


Oh lord, sir? by S. GEORGE, I was the first man, that entered the breach: and,
had I not effected it with resolution, I had been slain, if I had had a
million of lives


'Twas pity, you had not ten; a cats, and your own, in faith. But, was it
possible


'Pray you, mark this discourse, sir.


So, I do.)


I assure you (upon my reputation) it is true, and your self shall confess.


You must bring me to the rack, first.


Observe me iudicially, sweet sir, they had planted me three demi-culuerings,
just in the mouth of the breach; now, sir (as we were to give on) their master
gunner (a man of no mean skill, and mark, you must think) confronts me with
his linstock, ready to give fire; I spying his intendment, discharged my
petrionel in his bosom, and with these single arms, my poor rapier, ran
violently, upon the Moors, that guarded the ordinance, and put'hem pell-mell
to the sword


To the sword? to the rapier, Captain?


Oh, it was a good figure observed, sir! but did you all this, Captain,
without hurting your blade


Without any impeach, of the earth: you shall perceive sir. It is the most
fortunate weapon, that ever rid on poor gentleman's thigh: shall I tell you,
sir? you talk of Morglay, Excalibur, Durindana, or so? tut, I lend no credit
to that is fabled of 'hem, I know the virtue of mine own, and therefore I
dare, the boldlier, maintain it


I mar'le whether it be a Toledo, or no?


A most perfect Toledo, I assure you, sir.


I have a countriman of his, here.


Pray you, let us see, sir: yes faith, it is!


This a Toledo? pish.


Why do you pish, Captain?


A Fleming, by heaven, I Will buy them for a guilder, a piece, an' I would have a
thousand of them


How say you, cousin? I told you thus much?


Where bought you it, Mr. STEPHEN?


Of a souruie rogue soldier (a hundred of lice go with him) he swore it was a
Toledo


A poor prouant rapier, no better.


Mass, I think it be, indeed! now I look on it, better.


Nay, the longer you look on it, the worse. Put it up, put it up.


Well, I will put it up, but by -- (I have forgot the Captains oath, I thought
to have sworn by it) an' ere I meet him --


O, it is past help now, sir, you must have patience.


Horson connie-catching rascal! I could eat the very hilts for anger!


A sign of good digestion! you have an ostrich stomach, cousin.


A stomach? would I had him here, you should see, an' I had a stomach.


It Is better as it is: come, gentlemen, shall we go?


A Miracle, cousin, look here! look here!


Oh, gods lid, by your leave, do you know me, sir?


I sir, I know you, by sight.


You sold me a rapier, did you not?


Yes, marie, did I sir.


You said, it was a Toledo, ha?


True, I did so.


But, it is none?


No sir, I confess it, it is none.


Do you confess it? gentlemen, bear witness, he has confessed it. By gods
will, and you had not confessed it --


Oh cousin, forbear, forbear.


Nay, I have done, cousin.


Why you have done like a gentleman, he has confessed it, what would you more?


Yet, by his leave, he is a rascal, under his savor, do you see?


I, by his leave, he is, and under savor: a pretty piece of civility! Sir,
how do thou like him


Oh, it is a most precious fool, make much on him: I can compare him to nothing
more happily, then a drum; for every one may play upon him


No, no, a childs whistle were far the fitter.


Sir, shall I entreat a word with you?


With me, sir? you have not another Toledo to sell, have you?


You are conceipted, sir, your name is Mr. KNO'WELL, as I take it?


You are, in the right? you mean not to proceed in the catechism, do you?


No sir, I am none of that coat.


Of as bare a coat, though? well, say sir.


Faith sir, I am but servant to the drum extraordinary, and indeed (this
smokie varnish being washed off, and three or four patches removed) I appear
your worships in reuersion, after the decease of your good father, BRAYNE-WORME


BRAYNE-WORME! S'light, what breath of a coniurer, has blown thee hither in
this shape


The breath of your letter, sir, this morning: the same that blew you to the
windmill, and your father after you


My father?


Nay, never start, it is true, he has followed you over the field's, by the
foot, as you would do a hare in the snow


Sir, WEL-BRED, what shall we do, sir? my father is come over, after me.


Thy father? where is he?


At Justice CLEMENTS house here, in Colman-street, where he but stays my
return; and then --


Who Is this? BRAYNE-WORME?


The same, sir.


Why how, in the name of wit, come thou trans-muted, thus?


Faith, a devise, a devise: nay, for the love of reason, gentlemen, and
avoiding the danger, stand not here, withdraw, and I Will tell you all


But, art thou sure, he will stay thy return?


Do I live, sir? what a question is that?


We Will prorogue his expectation then, a little: BRAYNE-WORME, thou shall go
with us. Come on, gentlemen, nay, I pray thee, sweet NED, droope not: 'heart,
and our wits be so wretchedly dull, that one old plodding brain can outstrip
us all, would we were eene pressed, to make porters of; and serve out the remnant
of our days, in Thames Street, or at Custom House key, in a civil war,
against the car-men


AMEN, AMEN, AMEN, say I.


WHat says he, THOMAS? Did you speak with him?

He will expect you, sir, within this half hour.

Has he the money ready, can you tell?

Yes, sir, the money was brought in, last night.

O, that is well: fetch me my cloak, my cloak.
Stay, let me see, an hour, to go and come;
I, that will be the least: and then 'twill be
An hour, before I can dispatch with him;
Or very near: well, I will say two hours.
Two hours? ha? things, never dreamt of yet,
May be contrived, I, and effected too,
In two hours absence: well, I will not go.
Two hours; no, fleering opportunity,
I will not give your subtlety that scope.
Who will not judge him worthy to be robbed*
That sets his doors wide open to a thief,
And shows the fellon, where his treasure lies?
Again, what earthie spirit but will attempt
To the taste fruit of beauties golden tree,
When leaden sleep seals up the Dragons eyes?
I will not go. Business, go by, for once.
No beauty, no; you are of too good caract,
To be left so, without a guard, or open!
Your luster too'll inflame, at any distance,
Draw courtship to you, as a iet does strawes,
Put motion in a stone, strike fire from ice,
Nay, make a porter leap you, with his burden!
You must be then kept up, close, and well-watch'd,
For, give you opportunity, no quick-sand
Deuoures, or swallows swifter! He that lends
His wife (if she be fair) or time, or place;
Compells her to be false. I will not go.
The dangers are to many. And, then, the dressing
Is a most main attractiue! Our great heads,
Within the city, never were in safety,
Since our wives wore these little caps: I Will change 'hem,
I Will change 'hem, straight, in mine. Mine shall no more
Wea^e three-pild akornes, to make my horns ache.
Nor, will I go. I am resolved for that.
Carry'in my cloak again. Yet, stay. Yet, do too.
I will defer going, on all occasions.

Sir. SNARE, your scriuener, will be there with th'bonds.

That Is true! fool on me! I had clean forgot it,
I must go. What Is a clock?

Exchange time, sir.

'Heart, then will WELL-BRED presently be here, too,
With one, or other of his loose consorts.
I am a knave, if I know what to say,
What course to take, or which way to resolve.
My brain (me thinks) is like an houre-glasse,
Wherein, my imaginations run, like sands,
Filling up time; but then are turned, and turned:
So, that I know not what to stay upon,
And less, to put in act. It shall be so.
Nay, I dare build upon his secrecy,
He knows not to deceive me. THOMAS?

Sir.

Yet now, I have bethought me, too, I will not.
THOMAS, is COB within?

I think he be, sir.

But he will prate too, there is no speech of him.
No, there were no man of the earth to THOMAS,
If I durst trust him; there is all the doubt.
But, should he have a chinke in him, I were gone,
Lost in my fame for ever: talk for The Exchange.
The manner he has stood with, till this present,
Does promise no such change! what should I fear then?
Well, come what will, I Will tempt my fortune, once.
THOMAS -- you may deceive me, but, I hope --
Your love, to me, is more --

Sir, if a servants
Duty, with faith, may be called love, you are
More then in hope, you are possessed of it.

I thank you, heartily, THOMAS; Gi' me your hand:
With all my heart, good THOMAS. I have, THOMAS,
A secret to impart, unto you -- but
When once you have it, I must seal your lips up:
(So far, I tell you, THOMAS.)

Sir, for that --

Nay, hear me, out. Think, I esteem you, THOMAS,
When, I will let you in, thus, to my private.
It is a thing fits, nearer, to my crest,
Then thou art ware of, THOMAS. If thou should
Reveal it, but --

How? I reveal it?

Nay,
I do not think thou would; but if thou should:
'Twere a great weakness.

A great treachery.
Give it no other name.

Thou will not do it, then?

Sir, if I do, mankind disclaim me, ever.

He will not swear, he has some reservation,
Some concealed purpose, and close meaning sure:
Else (being urged so much) how should he choose,
But lend an oath to all this protestation?
His no precisian, that I am certain of.
Nor rigid Roman-catholike. He Will play,
At Fayles, and Tick-tack, I have heard him swear.
What should I think of it? urge him again,
And by some other way? I will do so.
Well, THOMAS; thou have sworn not to disclose;
Yes, you did swear?

Not yet, sir, but I will,
Please you --

No, THOMAS, I dare take thy word.
But; if thou will swear, do, as thou think good;
I am resolved without it; at thy pleasure.

By my souls safety then, sir, I protest.
My tongue shall never take knowledge of a word,
Delivered me in nature of your trust.

It Is too much, these ceremonies need not,
I know thy faith to be as firm as rock.
THOMAS, come hither, near: we cannot be
Too private, in this business. So it is,
(Now, he has sworn, I dare the safelier venture)
I have of late, by diverse observations --
(But, whether his oath can bind him, yea, or no',
Being not taken lawfully? ha? say you?
I will ask counsel, ere I do proceed:)
THOMAS, it will be now too long to stay,
I Will spy some fitter time soon, or to morrow.

Sir, at your pleasure?

I will think. And, THOMAS,
I pray you search the books against my return,
For the receipts 'twixt me, and TRAPS.

I will, sir.

And, hear you, if your mistress brother, WEL-BRED,
Chance to bring hither any gentlemen,
Ere I come back; let one straight bring me word.

Very well, sir.

To the Exchange; do you hear?
Or here in Colman-street, to Justice CLEMENTS.
Forget it not, nor be not out of the way.

I will not, sir.

I pray you have a care on it.
Or whether he come, or no, if any other,
Stranger, or else, fail not to send me word.

I shall not, sir.

Be It your special business
Now, to remember it.

Sir. I warrant you.

But, THOMAS, this is not the secret, THOMAS,
I told you of.

No, sir. I do suppose it.

Believe me, it is not.

Sir. I do believe you.

By heaven, it is not, that is enough. But, THOMAS,
I would not, you should utter it, do you see?
To any creature living, yet, I care not.
Well, I must hence. THOMAS, conceive thus much.
It was a trial of you, when I meant
So deep a secret to you, I mean not this,
But that I have to tell you, this is nothing, this.
But, THOMAS, keep this from my wife, I charge you,
Locked up in silence, midnight, buried here.
No greater hell, then to be slave to fear.

Locked up in silence, midnight, buried here.
Whence should this flood of passion (trow) take head? ha?
Best, dream no longer of this running humor,
For fear I sink! the violence of the stream
Already has transported me so far,
That I can feel no ground at all! but soft,
Oh, it is our water-bearer: somewhat has crossed him, now.

FAsting days? what tell you me of fasting days? S'lid, would they were all
on a light fire for me: They say, the whole world shall be consumed with fire
one day, but would I had these ember-weekes, and villainous fridayes burnt, in
the mean time, and then --


Why, how now COB, what moves thee to this choler? ha?


Collar, master THOMAS? I scorn your collar, I sir, I am none o'your
cart-horse, though I carry, and draw water. An' you offer to ride me, with your
collar, or halter either, I may hap show you a jades trick, sir


O, you will slip your head out of the collar? why, goodman COB, you mistake me.


Nay, I have my rewme, and I can be angry as well as another, sir.


Thy rewme, COB? thy humor, thy humor? thou mistak'st.


Humor? mack, I think it be so, indeed: what is that humor? some rare thing,
I warrant


Mary, I Will tell thee, COB: It is a gentleman-like monster, bred, in the
special gallantrie of our time, by affectation; and fed by folly


How? must it be fed?


Oh I, humor is nothing, if it be not fed. Did thou never hear that? it is
a common phrase, Feed my humor


I Will none on it: Humor, auant, I know you not, be gone. Let who will make
hungry meals for your monster-ship, it shall not be I. Feed you, quoth he?
S'lid, I ha'much ado, to feed my self; especially, on these lean rascally
days, too; and't had been any other day, but a fasting day (a plague on them
all for me) by this light, one might have done the commonwealth good service,
and have drowned them all in the flood, two or three hundred thousand years
ago. O, I do stomach them hugely! I have a maw now, and't were for Sr BEVIS
his horse, against 'hem


I pray thee, good COB, what makes thee so out of love with fasting-dayes?


Mary that, which will make any man out of love with 'hem, I think: their bad
conditions, and you will needs know. First, they are of a Flemmish breed, I am
sure on it, for they raven up more butter, then all the days of the week,
beside; next, they stink of fish, and leeke-porridge miserably: thirdly,
they will keep a man devoutly hungry, all day, and at night send him
supperlesse to bed


Indeed, these are faults, COB.


Nay, and this were all, 'twere something, but they are the only known
enemies, to my generation. A fasting-day, no sooner comes, but my lineage goes
to rack, poor cobs they smoke for it, they are made martyrs of the gridiron,
they melt in passion: and your maids too know this, and yet would have me
turn HANNIBAL, and eat my own fish, and blood: My princely couz, fear
nothing; I have not the heart to devour you, and I might be made as rich as
King COPHETVA. O, that I had room for my tears, I could weep salt water
enough, now, to preserve the lives of ten thousand of my kin. But, I may curse
none but these filthy Almanacles, for an't were not for them, these days of
persecution would never be known. I Will be hanged, an'some Fish-mongers son
do not make of hem; and puts in more fasting-dayes then he should do, because
he would utter his fathers dried stock fish, and stinking conger


S'light, peace, thou wilt be beaten like a stock fish, else: here is Mr.
MATTHEW. Now must I look out for a messenger to my master


BEshrew me, but it was an absolute good jest, and exceedingly well carried!


I, and our ignorance maintained it as well, did it not?


Yes faith, but was it possible thou should not know him? I forgive Mr.
STEPHEN, for he is stupiditie it self


Before god, not I, and I might have been joined patten with one of the seven
wise masters, for knowing him. He had so writhen himself, into the habit of
one of your poor Infanterie, your decayed, ruinous, worme-eaten gentlemen of
the round: such as have vowed to sit on the skirts of the city, let your
Provost, and his halfe-dozen of halberdeirs do what they can; and have
translated begging out of the old hackney pace, to a fine easy amble, and made
it run as smooth, of the tongue, as a shoue-groat shilling. Into the
likeness of one of these Reformado's had he molded himself so perfectly,
observing every trick of their action, as varying the accent, swearing with an
emphasis, indeed all, with so special, and exquisite a grace, that (had thou
seen him) thou would have sworn, he might have been Serieant- Mayor, if
not Lieutenant- Coronell to the regiment


Why, BRAYNE-WORME, who would have thought thou had been such an artificer?


An artificer? An architect! except a man had studied begging all his
lifetime, and been a weauer of language, from his infancy, for the clothing
of it! I never saw his rival


Where got'st thou this coat, I marl'e?


Of a Hounds-ditch man, sir. One of the deuil's near kinsmen, a broker.


That cannot be, if the proverb hold; for, a crafty knave needs no broker.


True sir, but I did need a broker, Ergo.


(Well put off) no crafty knave, you will say,


Tut, he has more of these shifts.


And yet where I have one, the broker has ten, sir,


FRANCIS, MARTIN, never a one to be found, now? what a spite's this?


How now, THOMAS? is my brother KITELY, within?


No sir, my master went forth eene now: but master DOWNERIGHT is within. COB,
what COB? is he gone too


VVhither went your master? THOMAS, can thou tell?


I know not, to Justice CLEMENTS, I think, sir. COB.


Justice CLEMENT, what is he?


Why, do thou not know him? he is a citie-magistrate, a Justice here, an
excellent good Lawyer, and a great scholar: but the only mad, merry, old
fellow in Europe! I showed him you, the other day


Oh, is that he? I remember him now. Good faith, and he has a very strange
presence, me thinks; it shows as if he stood out of the rank, from other
men: I have heard many of his jests in university. They say, he will commit a
man, for taking the wall, of his horse


I, or wearing his cloak of one shoulder, or serving of god: any thing indeed,
if it come in the way of his humor


GASPER, MARTIN, COB: 'heart, where should they be, trow?


Master KITELY'S man, 'pray thee vouchsafe us the lighting of this match.


Fire on your match, no time but now to vouchsafe? FRANCIS. COB.


Body of me! here is the remainder of seven pound, since yesterday was
seuen-night. It Is your right Trinidado! did you never take any, master STEPHEN


No truly, sir? but I Will learn to take it now, since you commend it, so.


Sir, believe me (upon my relation) for what I tell you, the world shall not
reprove. I have been in the Indies (where this herb grows) where neither my
self, nor a dozen gentlemen more (of my knowledge) have received the taste of
any other nutriment, in the world, for the space of one and twenty weeks, but
the fume of this simple only. Therefore, it cannot be, but it is most divine!
Further, take it in the nature, in the true kind so, it makes an antidote, that
(had you taken the most deadly poisonous plant in all Italy, it should expel
it, and clarify you, with as much ease, as I speak. And, for your green
wound, your Balsamum, and your St. JOHN'S woort are all mere gulleries, and
trash to it, especially your Trinidado: your Nicotian is good too. I could say
what I know of the virtue of it, for the expulsion of rhewmes, raw humors,
crudities, obstructions, with a thousand of this kind, but I profess my self
no quack-saluer. Only, thus much, by HERCULES, I do hold it, and will affirm
it (before any Prince in Europe) to be the most sovereign, and precious weed,
that ever the earth tendered to the use of man


This speech would have done dece^tly in a tabacco-traders mouth!


At Justice CLEMENTS, he is: in the middle of Colman-street.


O, oh?


Where Is the match I gave thee? Master KITELIES man?


Would his match, and he, and pipe, and all were at SANCTO DOMINGO! I had
forgot it


By gods me, I marle, what pleasure, or felicity they have in taking this
roguish tobacco! it is good for nothing, but to choke a man, and fill him full
of smoke, and embers: there were four dyed out of one house, last week, with
taking of it, and two more the bell went for, yester-night; one of them (they
say) will never escape it: he voided a bushel of soot yester-day, upward, and
downward. By the stocks, an' there were no wiser men then I, I Would have it
present whipping, man, or woman, that should but deal with a tabacco-pipe;
why, it will stifle them all in the end, as many as use it; it is little better
then rats bane, or rosaker


Oh, good Captain, hold, hold.


You base cullion, you.


Sir, here is your match: come, thou must needs be talking, too, tho'art well
enough served


Nay, he will not meddle with his match, I warrant you: well it shall be a
dear beating, and I live


Do you prate? Do you murmr?


Nay, good Captain, will you regard the humor of a fool? away, knave.


THOMAS, get him away.


A horson filthy slave, a dung-worme, an excrement! Body of CAESAR, but that I
scorn to let forth so mean a spirit, I Would have stabbed him, to the earth


Mary, the law forbid, sir.


By PHAROAHS foot, I would have done it.


Oh, he swears admirably! (by PHAROAHS foot) (body of CAESAR) I shall never
do it, sure (upon mine honor, and by Saint GEORGE) no, I have not the right
grace


Master STEPHEN, will you any? By this air, the most divine tobacco, that ever
I drunk


None, I thank you, sir. O, this gentleman does it, rarely too! but nothing
like the other. By this air, as I am a gentleman: by --


Master, glance, glance! Master WELL-BRED!


As I have somewhat to be saved, I protest --


You are a fool: It needs no affidauit.


Cousin, will you any tobacco?


I sir! upon my reputation --


How now, cousin!


I protest, as I am a gentleman, but no soldier, indeed --


No, Master STEPHEN? as I remember your name is entered in the artillery garden?


I sir, that is true: Cousin, may I swear, as I am a soldier, by that?


Oh yes, that you may. It Is all you have for your money.


Then, as I am a gentleman, and a soldier, it is divine tobacco!


But soft, where is Mr. MATTHEW? gone?


No, sir, they went in here.


O, let us follow them: master MATTHEW is gone to salute his mistress, in verse.
We shall have the happiness, to hear some of his poetry, now. He never
comes vnfurnish'd. BRAYNE-WORME


BRAYNE-WORME? Where? Is this BRAYNE-WORME?


I, cousin, no words of it, upon your gentilitie.


Not I, body of me, by this air, S. GEORGE, and the foot of PHARAOH.


Rare! your cousins discourse is simply drawn out with oaths.


It Is larded with 'hem. A kind of french dressing, if you love it.


HA? how many are there, say thou?


Mary sir, your brother, master VVELL-BRED --


Tut, beside him: what strangers are there, man?


Strangers? let me see, one, two; mass I know not well, there are so many.


How? so many?


I, there is some five, or six of them, at the most.


A swarm, a swarm,
Spite of the devil, how they sting my head
With forked stings, thus wide, and large! But, COB,
How long have thou been coming hither, COB?

A little while, sir.

Did thou come running?

No, sir.

Nay, then I am familiar with thy haste!
Bane to my fortunes: what meant I to marry?
I, that before was rankt in such content,
My mind at rest too, in so soft a peace,
Being free master of mine own free thoughts,
And now become a slave? What? never sigh,
Be of good cheer, man: for thou art a cuckold,
It Is done, it is done! nay, when such flowing store,
Plenty it self, falls in my wives lap,
The Cornu-copiae will be mine, I know. But, COB,
What entertaynement had they? I am sure
My sister, and my wife, would bid them welcome! ha?

Like enough, sir, yet, I heard not a word of it.

No: their lips were sealed with kisses, and the voice
Drowned in a flood of joy, at their arrival,
Had lost her motion, state, and faculty.
COB, which of them was it, that first kissed my wife?
(My sister, I should say) my wife, alas,
I fear not her: ha? who was it, say thou?

By my troth, sir, will you have the truth of it?

Oh I, good COB: I pray thee, heartily.

Then, I am a vagabond, and fitter for Bride-well, then your worships company,
if I saw any body to be kissed, unless they would have kissed the post, in the
middle of the warehouse; for there I left them all, at their tobacco, with a
pox


How? were they not gone in, then, e're thou came?


Oh no sir.


Spite of the devil* what do I stay here, then? COB, follow me.


Nay, soft and fair, I have eggs on the spit; I cannot go yet, sir. Now am I
for some five and fifty reasons hammering, hammering revenge: oh, for three or
four gallons of vinegar, to sharpen my wits. Revenge, vinegar revenge:
vinegar, and mustard revenge: nay, and he had not lain in my house, 't would
never have grieved me, but being my guest, one, that I Will be sworn, my wife
has lent him her smock off her back, while his one shirt has been at
washing; pawned her neckerchers for clean bands for him; sold almost all my
platters, to buy him tobacco; and he to turn monster of ingratitude, and
strike his lawful host! well, I hope to raise up an host of fury for it: here
comes Justice CLEMENT


What Is master KITELY gone? ROGER?


I, sir.


'Hart of me! what made him leave us so abruptly! How now, sir? what make you
here? what would you have, ha


And't please your worship, I am a poor neighbor of your worships --


A poor neighbor of mine? why, speak poor neighbor.


I dwell, sir, at the sign of the water-tankerd, hard by the green lattice: I
have paid scot, and lot there, any time this eighteen years


To the green lattice?


No, sir, to the parish: mary, I have seldom escaped scot-free, at the lattice.


O, well! what business has my poor neighbor with me?


And't like your worship, I am come, to crave the peace of your worship.


Of me knave? peace of me, knave? did I e're hurt thee? or threaten thee? or
wrong thee? ha


No, sir, but your worships warrant, for one that has wronged me, sir: his
arms are at too much liberty, I would feign have them bound to a treaty of
peace, an' my credit could compass it, with your worship


Thou go far enough about for it, I am sure.


Why, do thou go in danger of thy life for him? friend?


No sir; but I go in danger of my death, every hour, by his means: an' I
die, within a twelue-moneth and a day, I may swear, by the law of the land,
that he killed me


How? how knave? swear he killed thee? and by the law? what pretense? what
color have thou for that


Mary, and't please your worship, both black, and blew; color enough, I
warrant you. I have it here, to show your worship


What is he, that gave you this, sir?


A gentleman, and a soldier, he says he is, of the city here.


A soldier of the city? What call you him?


Captain BOBADIL.


BOBADIL? And why did he bob, and beat you, sirrah? How began the quarrel
betwixt you? ha: speak truly knave, I advise you


Mary, indeed, and please your worship, only because I spoke against their
vagrant tobacco, as I came by 'hem, when they were taking on it, for nothing
else


Ha? you speak against tobacco? FORMAL, his name.


What Is your name, sir?


OLIVER, sir, OLIVER COB, sir.


Tell OLIVER COB, he shall go to the iayle, FORMAL.


OLIVER COB, my master, Justice CLEMENT, says, you shall go to the iayle.


O, I beseech your worship, for gods sake, dear master Justice.


Nay, gods precious: and such drunkards, and tankards, as you are, come to
dispute of tobacco once; I have done! away with him


O, good master Justice, sweet old gentleman.


Sweet OLIVER, would I could do thee any good: Justice CLEMENT, let me entreat
you, sir


What? a threadbare rascal! a beggar! a slave that never drunk out of better
then pisse-pot mettle in his life! and he to deprave, and abuse the virtue of
an herb, so generally received in the courts of princes, the chambers of
nobles, the bowers of sweet ladies, the cabbins of soldiers! ROGER, away with
him, by gods precious -- I say, go too


Dear master Justice; Let me be beaten again, I have deserved it: but not
the prison, I beseech you


Alas, poor OLIVER!


ROGER, make him a warrant (he shall not go) I but fear the knave.


Do not stink, sweet OLIVER, you shall not go, my master will give you a
warrant


O, the Lord maintain his worship, his worthy worship.


Away, dispatch him. How now, master KNO'WEL! In dumps? In dumps? Come, this
becomes not


Sir, would I could not feel my cares --


Your cares are nothing! they are like my cap, soon put on, and as soon put
off. What? your son is old enough, to govern himself: let him run his
course, it is the only way to make him a stayed man. If he were an unthrift, a
ruffian, a drunkard, or a licentious liver, then you had reason; you had reason
to take care: but, being none of these, mirth's my witness, an' I had twice so
many cares, as you have, I Would drown them all in a cup of sack. Come, come,
let us try it: I muse, your parcel of a soldier returns not all this while


WEll sister, I tell you true: and you will find it so, in the end.


Alas brother, what would you have me to do? I cannot help it: you see, my
brother brings 'hem in, here, they are his friends


His friends? his fiends. S'lud, they do nothing but hant him, up and down,
like a sort of unlucky sprites, and tempt him to all manner of villainy, that
can be thought of. Well, by this light, a little thing would make me play the
devil with some of 'hem; and 'twere not more for your husbands sake, then any
thing else, I Would make the house too hot for the best on hem: they should say,
and swear, hell were broken loose, e're they went hence. But, by gods will,
it is no bodies fault, but yours: for, an' you had done, as you might have done,
they should have been perboyl'd, and baked too, every mothers son, e're they
should have come in, e're a one of 'hem


God's my life! did you ever hear the like? what a strange man is this! Could
I keep out all them, think you? I should put my self, against half a dozen
men? should I? Good faith, you would mad the patient'st body in the world, to
hear you talk so, without any sense, or reason


Servant (in troth) you are too prodigal
Of your wits treasure, thus to power it forth,
Upon so mean a subject, as my worth?

You say well, mistress; and I mean, as well.

Hoy-day, here is stuff!

O, now stand close: pray heaven, she can get him to read:
He should do it, of his own natural impudency.

Servant, what is this same, I pray you?

Mary, an Elegy, an Elegy, an odd toy --

To mock an ape withal. O, I could sow up his mouth, now.

Sister, I pray you let us hear it.

Are you rime-giuen, too?

Mistress, I Will read it, if you please.

Pray you do, servant.

O, here is no fopperie! Death, I can endure the stocks, better.

What ails thy brother? can he not hold his water, at reading of a ballad?


O, no: a rhyme to him, is worse then cheese, or a bag-pipe. But, mark, you
loose the protestation


Faith, I did it in an humor; I know not how it is: but, please you come
near, sir. This gentleman has judgment, he knows how to censure of a --
pray you sir, you can judge


Not I, sir: upon my reputation, and, by the foot of PHARAOH.


O, chide your cossen, for swearing.


Not I, so long as he does not for swear himself.


Master MATTHEW, you abuse the expectation of your dear mistress, and her fair
sister: Fie, while you live, avoid this prolixitie


I shall, sir: well, In^ipere dulce.


How! Insipere dulce? a sweet thing to be a fool, indeed.


What, do you take Insipere, in that sense?


You do not? you? This was your villainy, to gull him with a mo^te.


O, the Benchers phrase: pauca verba, pauca verba.


Rare creature, let me speak without offense,
Would god my rude words had the influence,
To rule thy thoughts, as thy fair looks do mine,
Then should thou be his prisoner, who is thine.

This is in HERO and LEANDER?

O, I! peace, we shall have more of this.

Be not unkind, and fair, misshapen stuff
Is of behavior boisterous, and rough:

How like you that, sir?

S'light, he shakes his head like a bottle, to feel and there be any brain in
it


But observe the catastrophe, now,
And I in duty will exceed all other,
As you in beauty do excel loves mother.

Well, I Will have him free of the wit-brokers, for he vtters nothing, but stolen
remnants


O, forgive it him.


A filtching rogue? hang him. And, from the dead? it is worse then sacrilege.


Sister, what have you here? verses? pray you, lets see. Who made these verses?
they are excellent good


O, master WEL-BRED, it is your disposition to say so, sir. They were good in
the morning, I made 'hem, extempore, this morning


How? extempore?


I, would I might be hanged else: ask Captain BOBADILE. He saw me write
them, at the -- (pox on it) the star, yonder


Can he find, in his heart, to curse the stars, so?


Faith, his are even with him: they have cursed him enough already.


Cosen, how do you like this gentleman's verses?


O, admirable! the best that ever I heard, cousse!


Body of CAESAR! they are admirable!
The best, that ever I heard, as I am a soldier.

I am vexed, I can hold never a bone of me still! Heart, I think, they mean
to build, and breed here


Sister, you have a simple servant here, that crowns your beauty, with such
encomions, and devises: you may see, what it is to be the mistress of a wit!
that can make your perfections so transparent, that every bleare eye may look
through them, and see him drowned over head, and ears, in the deep well of
desire. Sister KITELY, I marvel, you get you not a servant, that can rhyme,
and do tricks, too


Oh monster! impudence it self! tricks?


Tricks, brother? what tricks?


Nay, speak, I pray you, what tricks?


I, never spare any body here: but say, what tricks?


Passion of my heart! do tricks?


S'light, here is a trick vyed, and reuyed! why, you munkies, you? what a
catter-waling do you keep? has he not given you rimes, and verses, and
tricks


O, the fiend!


Nay, you, lamp of virginity, that take it in snuff so! come, and cherish
this tame poetical fury, in your servant, you will be begged else, shortly, for
a concealment: go to, reward his muse. You cannot give him less then a
shilling, in conscience, for the book, he had it out of, cost him a teston, at
least. How now, gallants? Mr. MATTHEW? Captain? What? all sons of silence?
no spirit


Come, you might practice your ruffian-tricks somewhere else, and not here, I
wusse: this is no tavern, nor drinking-schole, to vent your exploits in


How now! whose cow has calu'd?


Mary, that has mine, sir. Nay, Boy, never look askance at me, for the
matter; I Will tell you of it, I, sir, you, and your companions, mend your selves,
when I have done


My companions?


Yes sir, you companions, so I say, I am not afraid of you, nor them neither:
your hang-byes here. You must have your Poets, and your potlings, your
soldado's, and foolado's, to follow you up and down the city, and here they
must come to domineere, and swagger. Sirrah, you, ballad-singer, and slops,
your fellow there, get you out; get you home: or (by this steel) I Will cut off
your ears, and that, presently


S'light, stay, let us see what he dare do: cut off his ears? cut a whetstone.
You are an ass, do you see? touch any man here, and by this hand, I Will run
my rapier to the hilts in you


Yea, that would I feign see, boy.


O Jesus! murder. THOMAS, GASPAR!


Help, help, THOMAS.


Gentlemen, forbear, I pray you.


Well, sirrah, you, HOLOFERNES: by my hand, I will pinck your flesh, full of
holes, with my rapier for this; I will, by this good heaven: Nay, let him come,
let him come, gentlemen, by the body of Saint GEORGE, I Will not kill him


Hold, hold, good gentlemen.


You whoreson, bragging coystrill:


WHy, how now? what is the matter? what is the stir here?
Whence springs the quarrel? THOMAS! where is he?
Put up your weapons, and put off this rage.
My wife and sister, they are cause of this,
What, THOMAS? where is this knave?

Here, sir.

Come, let us go: this is one of my brothers ancient humors, this.


I am glad, no body was hurt by his ancient humor.


Why, how now, brother, who en^orst this brawle?


A sort of lewd rake-hells, that care neither for god, nor the devil! And,
they must come here to read ballads, and rogery, and trash! I Will mar the knot
of 'hem ere I sleep, perhaps: especially BOB, there: he that is all manner of
shapes! and Songs, and sonnets, his fellow


Brother, indeed, you are too violent,
To sudden, in your humor: and, you know
My brother WEL-BREDS temper will not bear
Any reproof, chiefly in such a presence,
Where every slight disgrace, he should receive,
Might wound him in opinion, and respect.

Respect? what talk you of respect among such,
As have nor spark of manhood, nor good manners?
'Sdeynes I am ashamed, to hear you! respect?

Yes, there was one a civil gentleman,
And very worthily demeaned himself!

O, that was some love of yours, sister!

A love of mine? I would it were no worse, brother!
You'lld pay my portion sooner, then you think for.

Indeed, he seemed to be a gentleman of an exceeding fair disposition, and of
very excellent good parts


Her love, by heaven! my wifes minion!
Fair disposition? excellent good parts?
Death, these phrases are intolerable!
Good parts? how should she know his parts?
His parts? Well, well, well, well, well, well!
It is too plain, too clear: THOMAS, come hither.
What, are they gone?

I, sir, they went in.
My mistress, and your sister --

Are any of the gallants within!

No, sir, they are all gone.

Art thou sure of it?

I can assure you, sir.

What gentleman was that they praised so, THOMAS?

One, they call him master KNO'WELL, a handsome young gentleman, sir.


I, I thought so: my mind gave me as much.
I Will die, but they have hid him in the house,
Somewhere; I Will go and search: go with me, THOMAS.
Be true to me, and thou shall find me a master.

WHat TIB, TIB, I say.


How now, what cuckold is that knocks so hard? O, husband, is it you? what is the
news


Nay, you have stonn'd me, I faith! you have given me a knock of the forehead,
will stick by me! cuckold? 'Slid, cuckold


Away, you fool, did I know it was you, that knocked?
Come, come, you may call me as bad, when you list.

May I? TIB, you are a whore.

You lie in your throat, husband.

How, the lie? and in my throat too? do you long to be stabbed, ha?


Why, you are no soldier, I hope?


O, must you be stabbed by a soldier? Mass, that is true! when was BOBADILL
here? your Captain? that rogue, that foist, that fencing Burgullian? I Will
tickle him, in faith


Why, what is the matter? trow!


O, he has bast^d me, rarely, sumptiously! but I have it herein black and
white; for his black, and blew: shall pay him. O, the Justice! the honestest
old brave Trojan in London! I do honor the very flea of his dog. A plague on
him though, he put me once in a villainous filthy fear; mary, it vanished away,
like the smoke of tobacco: but I was smok't soundly first. I thank the devil,
and his good angel, my guest. Well, wife, or TIB (which you will) get you in,
and lock the door, I charge you, let no body in to you; wife, no body in, to
you: those are my words. Not Captain BOB himself, nor the fiend, in his
likeness; you are a woman; you have flesh and blood enough in you, to be
tempted: therefore, keep the door, shut, upon all comers


I warrant you, there shall no body enter here, without my consent.


Nor, with your consent, sweet TIB, and so I leave you.


It Is more, then you know, whether you leave me so.


How?


Why, sweet.


Tut, sweet, or sour, thou art a flower,
Keep close thy door, I ask no more.

WEll BRAYNE-WORME, perform this business, happily,
And thou make a purchase of my love, for-euer,

In Faith, now let thy spirits use their best faculties. but, at any hand,
remember the message, to my brother: for, there is no other means, to start him


I warrant you, sir, fear nothing: I have a nimble soul has wakt all forces
of my phant'sie, by this time, and put 'hem in true motion. What you have
possessed me withal, I Will discharge it amply, sir. Make it no question


Forth, and prosper, BRAYNE-WORME. Faith, NED, how do thou approve of my
abilities in this devise


Troth, well, howsoever: but, it will come excellent, if it take.


Take, man? why, it cannot choose but take, if the circumstances miscarrie not:
but, tell me, ingenuously, do thou affect my sister BRIDGET, as thou
pretend'st


Friend, am I worth belief?


Come, do not protest. In faith, she is a maid of good ornament, and much
modesty: and, except I conceived very worthily of her, thou should not have
her


Nay, that I am afraid will be a question yet, whether I shall have her, or no?


Slid, thou shall have her; by this light, thou shall.


Nay, do not swear.


By this hand, thou shall have her: I Will go fetch her, presently. Point, but
where to meet, and as I am an honest man, I Will bring her


Hold, hold, be temperate.


Why, by -- what shall I swear by? thou shall have her, as I am --


'Pray thee, be at peace, I am satisfied: and do believe, thou will omit no
offered occasion, to make my desires complete


Thou shall see, and know, I will not.


WAs your man a soldier, sir?

I, a knave, I took him begging of the way,
This morning, as I came over More-fields!
O, here he is! yo' have made fair speed, believe me:
Where, in the name of sloth, could you be thus --

Mary, peace be my comfort, where I thought I should have had little comfort of
your worships service


How so?


O, sir! your coming to the city, your entertainment of me, and your sending
me to watch -- indeed, all the circumstances either of your charge, or my
employment, are as open to your son, as to your self


How should that be! unless that villain, BRAYNE-WORME,
Have told him of the letter, and discovered
All that I strictly charged him to conceal? it is so!

I am, partly, of the faith, it is so indeed.

But, how should he know thee to be my man?

Nay, sir, I cannot tell; unless it be by the black art! Is not your son a
scholar, sir


Yes, but I hope his soul is not allied
Unto such hellish practice: if it were,
I had just cause to weep my part in him,
And curse the time of his creation.
But, where did thou find them, FITZ-SWORD?

You should rather ask, where they found me, sir, for, I Will be sworn I was
going along in the street, thinking nothing, when (of a sudden) a voice calls,
Mr KNO-WEL's man; another cries, soldier: and thus, half a dosen of 'hem,
till they had called me within a house where I no sooner came, but thy seemed
men, and out flue al their rapiers at my bosom, with some three or four score
oaths to accompany 'hem, and al to tell me, I was but a dead man, if I did not
confess where you were, and how I was employed, and about what; which, when
they could not get out of me (as I protest, they must have dissected, and made
an Anatomy of me, first, and so I told 'hem) the locked me up into a room in
the top of a high house, whence, by a great miracle (having a light heart) I
slid down, by a bottom of pack-thred, into the street, and so escaped. But, sir,
thus much I can assure you, for I heard it, while I was locked up, there were a
great many rich merchants, and brave citizens wives with 'hem at a feast, and
your son, Mr. EDWARD, withdrew with one of 'hem, and has pointed to meet her
anon, at one COBS house, a water-bearer, that dwells by the wall. Now, there,
your worship shall be sure to take him, for there he preyes, and fail he will
not


Nor, will I fail, to break his match, I doubt not.
Go thou, along with Justice CLEMENT'S man,
And stay there for me. At one COBS house, sai'st thou?

I sir, there you shall have him. Yes? Invisible? Much wench, or much son!
'Slight, when he has staid there, three or four hours, traveling with the
expectation of wonders, and at length be delivered of air: o, the sport, that
I should then take, to look on him, if I durst! But, now, I mean to appear
no more before him in this shape. I have another trick, to act, yet. O, that I
were so happy, as to light on a nupson, now, of this Justices nouice. Sir, I
make you stay somewhat long


Not a whit, sir. 'Pray you, what do you mean? sir?


I was putting up some papers --


You have been lately in the wars, sir, it seems.


Mary have I, sir; to my loss: and expense of all, almosst --


Troth sir, I would be glad to bestow a pottle of wine o'you, if it please you
to accept it --


O, sir --


But, to hear the manner of your services, and your devices in the wars,
they say they be very strange, and not like those a man reads in the Roman
histories, or sees, at Mile-end


No, I assure you, sir, why, at any time when it please you, I shall be ready
to discourse to you, all I know: and more too, somewhat


No better time, then now, sir; we will go to the windmill: there we shall
have a cup of neat grift, we call it. I pray you, sir, let me request you,
to the windmill


I Will follow you, sir, and make grift o'you, if I have good luck.


SIr, did your eyes ever taste the like clown of him, where we were to day, Mr.
WEL-BRED's half brother? I think, the whole earth cannot show his parallel,
by this daylight


We were now speaking of him: Captain BOBADIL tells me, he is fallen foul
o'you too


O, I, sir, he threatened me, with the bastinado.


I, but I think, I taught you prevention, this morning, for that -- You shall
kill him, beyond question: if you be so generously minded


Indeed, it is a most excellent trick!


O, you do not give spirit enough, to our motion, you are too tardie, too
heavy! O, it must be done like lightning, hay


Rare Captain!


Tut, it is nothing, and 't be not done in a -- punto!


Captain, did you ever prove your self, upon any of our masters of defense,
here


O, good sir! yes, I hope, he has.


I will tell you, sir. Upon my first coming to the city, after my long
travail, for knowledge (in that mystery only) there came three, of four of
'hem to me, at a gentleman's house, where it was my chance to be resident, at
that time, to entreat my presence at their schools, and withal so much
importuned me, that (I protest to you as I am a gentleman) I was ashamed of
their rude demeanor, out of all measure: well, I told 'hem, that to come to a
public school, they should pardon me, it was opposite (in diameter) to my
humor, but, if so they would give their attendance at my lodging, I protested
to do them what right or favor I could, as I was a gentleman, and so forth


So, sir, then you tried their skill?


Alas, soon tried! you shall hear sir. Within two or three days after, they
came; and, by honesty; fair sir, believe me, I graced them exceedingly,
showed them some two or three tricks of prevention, have purchased 'hem, since,
a credit, to admiration! they cannot deny this: and yet now, they hate me, and
why? because I am excellent, and for no other vile reason on earth


This is strange, and barbarous! as ever I heard!

Nay, for a more instance of their preposterous natures, but note, sir. They
have assaulted me some three, four, five, six of them together, as I have
walked alone, in diverse skirts in the town, as Turne-bull, White-chappell,
Shore-ditch, which were then my quarters, and since upon the Exchange, at my
lodging, and at my ordinary: where I have driven them before me, the whole
length of a street, in the open view of all our gallants, pitying to hurt
them, believe me. Yet, all this lenity will not ore-come their spleen: they
will be doing with the pismier, raising a hill, a man may spurn abroad, with
his foot, at pleasure. By my self, I could have slain them all, but I delight
not in murder. I am loath to bear any other then this bastinado for 'hem: yet,
I hold it good polity, not to go disarmed, for though I be skillful, I may
be oppressed with multitudes


I, believe me, may you sir: and (in my conceit) our whole nation should
sustain the loss by it, if it were so


Alas, no: what is a peculiar man, to a nation? not seen.


O, but your skill, sir!


Indeed, that might be some loss; but, who respects it? I will tell you, sir,
by the way of private, and under seal; I am a gentleman, and live here
obscure, and to my self: but, were I known to her Majesty, and the Lords
(observe me) I would undertake (upon this poor head, and life) for the
public benefit of the state, not only to spare the entire lines of her
subjects in general, but to save the one half, nay, three parts of her
yearly charge, in holding war, and against what enemy soever. And, how
would I do it, think you


Nay, I know not, nor can I conceive.


Why thus, sir. I would select nineteen, more, to my self, throughout the
land; gentlemen they should be of good spirit, strong, and able constitution,
i would choose them by an instinct, a character, that I have: and I would teach
these nineteen, the special rules, as your Punto, your Reuerso, your
Stoccata, your Imbroccata, your Passada, your Montanto: till they could all
play very near, or altogether as well as my self. This done, say the enemy
were forty thousand strong, we twenty would come into the field, the tenth of
March, or thereabouts; and we would challenge twenty of the enemy; they
could not, in their honor, refuse us, well, we would kill them: challenge
twenty more, kill them; twenty more, kill them; twenty more, kill them too;
and thus, would we kill, every man, his twenty a day, that is twenty score;
twenty score, that is two hundredth; two hundredth a day, five days a thousand;
forty thousand; forty times five, five times forty, two hundredth days kills
them all up, by computation. And this, will I venture my poor gentleman-like
carcass, to perform (provided, there be no treason practiced upon us) by
fair, and discreet manhood, that is, ciuilly by the sword


Why, are you so sure of your hand, Captain, at all times?


Tut, never miss thrust, upon my reputation with you.


I would not stand in DOWNE-RIGHTS state, then, an' you meet him, for the
wealth of any one street in London


Why, sir, you mistake me! if he were here now, by this welkin, I would not
draw my weapon on him! let this gentleman do his mind: but, I will bastinado
him (by the bright sun) where-euer I meet him


Faith, and I Will have a ^ling at him, at my distance.


Gods so', look, where he is: yonder he goes.


What peevish luck have I, I cannot meet with these bragging raskalls?


It Is not he? is it?


Yes faith, it is he?


I Will be hanged, then, if that were he.


Sir, keep your hanging good, for some greater matter, for I assure you, that
was he


Upon my reputation, it was he.


Had I thought it had been he, he must not have gone so: but I can hardly be
induced, to believe, it was he, yet


That I think, sir. But see, he is come again!


O, PHAROAHS foot, have I found you? Come, draw, to your tools: draw, gypsy,
or I Will thresh you


Gentleman of valor, I do believe in thee, hear me --


Draw your weapon, then.


Tall man, I never thought on it, till now (body of me) I had a warrant of the
peace, served on me, even now, as I came along, by a water-bearer; this
gentleman saw it, Mr. MATTHEW


'Sdeath, you will not draw, then?


Hold, hold, under thy favor, forbear.


Prate again, as you like this, you whoreson foist, you. You Will control the
point, you? Your consort is gone? had he staid, he had shared with you, sir


Well, gentlemen, bear witness, I was bound to the peace, by this good day.


No faith, it is an ill day, Captain, never reckon it other: but, say you were
bound to the peace, the law allows you, to defend your self: that'll prove
but a poor excuse


I cannot tell, sir. I desire good construction, in fair sort. I never
sustained the like disgrace (by heaven) sure I was struck with a plannet
thence, for I had no power to touch my weapon


I, like enough, I have heard of many that have been beaten under a plannet:
go, get you to a surgean. 'Slid, an' these be your tricks, your passada's, and
your mountanto's, I Will none of them. O, manners! that this age should bring
forth such creatures! that Nature should be at leisure to make hem! Come,
cousse


Mass, I Will have this cloak.


Gods will, it is DOWNE-RIGHT'S.


Nay, it is mine now, another might have taken up, as well as I: I Will wear it, so
I will


How, an' he see it? he will challenge it, assure your self.


I, but he shall not have it; I Will say, I bought it.


Take heed, you buy it not, too dear, cousse.


NOw, trust me brother, you were much to blame,
T'incense his anger, and disturb the peace,
Of my poor house, where there are sentinells,
That every minute watch, to give alarmes,
Of civil war, without adiection
Of your assistance, or occasion.

No harm done, brother, I warrant you: since there is no harm done. Anger
costs a man nothing: and a tall man is never his own man, till he be angry.
To keep his valor in obscurity, is to keep himself, as it were, in a
cloke-bag. What Is a musician, unless he play? what is a tall man, unless he
fight? For, indeed, all this, my wise brother stands upon, absolutely: and,
that made me fall in with him, so resolutely


I, but what harm might have come of it, brother?


Might, sister? so, might the good warm clothes, your husband wears, be
poisoned, for any thing he knows: or the wholesome wine he drunk, even now,
at the table --


Now, god forbid: O me. Now, I remember,
My wife drunk to me, last; and changed the cup:
And bade me wear this cursed suit to day.
See, if heaven suffer murder vndiscour'd!
I feel me ill; give me some mithridate,
Some mithridate and oil, good sister, fetch me;
O, I am sick at heart! I burn, I burn.
If you will save my life, go, fetch it me.

O, strange humor! my very breath has poisoned him.

Good brother, be content, what do you mean?
The strength of these extreme conceits, will kill you.

Beshrew your heart-bloud, brother WELL-BRED, now; for putting such a toy into
his head


Is a fit simile, a toy? will he be poisoned with a simile? Brother KITELY,
what a strange, and idle imagination is this? For shame, be wiser. OF my
soul, there is no such matter


Am I not sick? how am I, then, not poisoned?
Am I not poisoned? how am I, then, so sick?

If you be sick, your own thoughts make you sick.

His jealousy is the poison, he has taken.

Mr. KITELY, my master, Justice CLEMENT, salutes you; and desires to speak
with you, with all possible speed


No time, but now? when, I think, I am sick? very sick! well, I will wait
upon his worship. THOMAS, COB, I must seek them out, and set 'hem sentinells,
till I return. THOMAS, COB, THOMAS


This is perfectly rare, BRAYNE-WORME! but how got'st thou this apparel of the
Justices man


Mary sir, my proper fine penman, would needs bestow the grist of me, at the
wind-mil, to hear some martial discourse; where so I marshaled him, that I made
him drunk, with admiration! and, because, too much hear was the cause of his
distemper, I stripped him stark naked, as he lay along asleep, and borrowed his
suit, to deliver this counterfeit message in, leaving a rustie armor, and an
old brown bill to watch him, till my return: which shall be, when I have
pawned his apparel, and spent the better part of the money, perhaps


Well, thou art a successful merry knave, BRAYNE-WORME, his absence will be a
good subject for more mirth. I pray thee, return to thy young master, and will
him to meet me, and my sister BRIDGET, at the tower instantly: for, here, tell
him, the house is so stored with jealousy, there is no room for love, to
stand upright in. We must get our fortunes committed to some larger prison,
say; and, then the tower, I know no better air: nor where the liberty of the
house may do us more present service. Away


Come hither, THOMAS. Now, my secret's ripe,
And thou shall have it; lay to both thine ears.
Hark, what I say to thee. I must go forth, THOMAS.
Be careful of thy promise, keep good watch,
Note every gallant, and observe him well,
That enters in my absence, to thy mistress:
If she would show him rooms, the jest is stale,
Follow 'hem, THOMAS, or else hang on him,
And let him not go after; mark their looks;
Note, if she offer but to see his band,
Or any other amorous toy, about him;
But praise his leg; or foot; or if she say,
The day is hot, and bid him feel her hand,
How hot it is; o, that is a monstrous thing!
Note me all this, good THOMAS, mark their sighs,
And, if they do but whisper, break 'hem off:
I Will bear thee out in it. Will thou do this?
Will thou be true, my THOMAS?

As truth's self, sir.

Why, I believe thee: where is COB, now? COB?

He Is ever calling for COB! I wonder, how he imployes COB, so!


Indeed, sister, to ask how he imploies COB, is a necessary question for
you, that are his wife, and a thing not very easy for you to be satisfied in
us: but this I Will assure you, COBS wife is an excellent bawd, sister, and,
oftentimes, your husband hants her house, mary, to what end, I cannot
altogether accuse him, imagine you what you think convenient. But, I have
known, fair hides have foul hearts, E're now, sister


Never said you truer then that, brother, so much I can tell you for your
learning. THOMAS, fetch your cloak, and go with me, I Will after him presently: I
would to fortune, I could take him there, in faith. Il'd return him his own, I
warrant him


So, let hem go: this may make sport anon. Now, my fair sister in-law, that
you knew, but how happy a thing it were to be fair, and beautiful


That touches not me, brother.


That Is true; that is even the fault of it: for indeed, beauty stands a woman
in no stead, unless it procure her touching. But, sister, whether it touch
you, or no, it touches your beauties; and, I am sure, they will abide the
touch; an' they do not, a plague of all ceruse, say I: and, it touches me to
in part, though not in the -- Well, there is a dear and respected friend of
mine, sister, stands very strongly, and worthily affected toward you, and has
vowed to inflame whole bone-fires of zeal, at his heart, in honor of your
perfections. I have already engaged my promise to bring you, where you shall
hear him confirm much more. NED KNO'WELL is the man, sister. There Is no
exception against the party. You are ripe for a husband; and a minutes loss
to such an occasion, is a great trespass in a wise beauty. What say you,
sister? On my soul he loves you. Will you give him the meeting


Faith, I had very little confidence in mine own constancy, brother, if I
durst not meet a man: but this motion of yours, savors of an old
knight-aduenturers servant, a little too much, me thinks


What Is that, sister?


Mary, of the squire.


No matter if it did, I would be such an one for my friend, but see! who is
returned to hinder us


What villainy is this? called out on a false message?
This was some plot! I was not sent for. BRIDGET,
Where Is your sister?

I think she be gone forth, sir.

How! is my wife gone forth? whether for gods sake?

She Is gone abroad with THOMAS.

Abroad with THOMAS? oh, that villain dors me.
He has discovered all unto my wife!
Beast that I was, to trust him: whither, I pray you, went she?

I know not, sir.

I Will tell you, brother, whither I suspect she is gone.

Whither, good brother?

To COBS house, I believe: but, keep my counsel.

I will, I will: to COBS house? does she hant COBS?
She Is gone a'purpose, now, to cuckold me,
With that lewd rascal, who, to win her favor,
Has told her all.

Come, he is once more gone.
Sister, let us loose no time; th'affaire is worth it.

I Wonder, Captain, what they will say of my going away? ha?


Why, what should they say? but as of a discreet gentleman? quick, wary,
respectfull of natures fair lineaments: and that is all


Why, so! but what can they say of your beating?


A rude part, a touch with soft wood, a kind of gross battery used, laid on
strongly, borne most patiently: and that is all


I, but, would any man have offered it in Venice? as you say?


Tut, I assure you, no: you shall have there your Nobilis, your Gentelezza,
come in bravely upon your reuerse, stand you close, stand you firm, stand you
fair, save your retricato with his left leg, come to the assalto with the
right, thrust with brave steel, defy your base wood! But, wherefore do I
awake this remembrance? I was fascinated, by IVPITER: fascinated: but I will be
vn-witch'd, and revenged, by law


Do you hear? is it not best to get a warrant, and have him arrested, and
brought before Justice CLEMENT


It were not amiss, would we had it.


Why, here comes his man, let us speak to him.


Agreed, do you speak.


Save you, sir.


With all my heart, sir?


Sir, there is one DOWNRIGHT, has abused this gentleman, and my self, and
we determine to make our amends by law; now, if you would do us the favor, to
procure a warrant, to bring him before your master, you shall be well
considered, I assure you, sir


Sir, you know my service is my living, such favors as these, gotten of my
master, is his only preferment, and therefore, you must consider me, as I may
make benefit of my place


How is that? sir.


Faith sir, the thing is extraordinary, and the gentleman may be, of great
account: yet, be what he will, if you will lay me down a brace of angels,
in my hand, you shall have it, otherwise not


How shall we do, Captain? he asks a brace of angels, you have no money?


Not a cross, by fortune.


Nor I, as I am a gentleman, but two pence, left of my two shillings in the
morning for wine, and redish: let us find him some pawn


Pawn? we have none to the value of his demand.


O, yes. I Will pawn this jewel in my ear, and you may pawn your silk
stockings, and pull up your boots, they will never be mist: It must be done,
now


Well, an' there be no remedy: I Will step aside, and pull 'hem off.


Do you hear, sir? we have no store of money at this time, but you shall
have good pawnes: look you, sir, this jewel, and that gentleman's silk
stockings, because we would have it dispatched, e're we went to our chambers


I am content, sir; I will get you the warrant presently, what is his name, say
you? DOWNRIGHT


I, I, GEORGE DOWNRIGHT.


What manner of man is he?


A tall big man, sir; he goes in a cloak, most commonly, of silk russet,
laid about with russet lace


It Is very good, sir.


Here sir, here is my jewel?


And, here, are stockings.


Well, gentlemen, I Will procure you this warrant presently, but, who will you
have to serve it


That Is true, Captain: that must be considered.


Body of me, I know not! it is service of danger?


Why, you were best get one of the varlets of the city, a serieant. I Will
appoint you one, if you please


Will you, sir? why, we can wish no better.


We Will leave it to you, sir.


This is rare! now, will I go pawn this cloak of the Iustice's man's, at the
brokers, for a varlets suit, and be the varlet my self; and get either more
pawnes, or more mouie of DOWNRIGHT, for the arrest


OH, here it is, I am glad: I have found it now.
Ho? who is within, here?

I am within, sir, what is your pleasure?

To know, who is within, besides your self.

Why, sir, you are no constable, I hope?

O! fear you the constable? then, I doubt not.
You have some guests within, deserve that fear,
I Will fetch him straight.

OF gods name, sir.

Go to. Come, tell me, Is not young KNO'WEL, here?

Young KNO-WELL? I know none such, sir, of mine honesty!

Your honesty? dame, it flies too lightly from you:
There is no way, but, fetch the constable.

The constable? the man is mad, I think.

Ho, who keeps house, here?

O, this is the female copes-mate of my son?
Now shall I meet him straight.

Knock, THOMAS, hand.

Ho, good wife?

Why, what is the matter with you?

Why, woman, grieves it you to ope' your door?
Belike, you get something, to keep it shut.

What mean these questions, 'pray ye?

So strange you make it? is not my husband, here?

Her husband!

My tried husband, master KITELY.

I hope, he needs not to betryed, here.

No, dame: he does it not for need, but pleasure.

Neither for need, nor pleasure, is he here.

This is but a device, to balke me withal.
Soft, who is this? It Is not my son, disguisd?

O, sir, have I fore-stald your honest market?
Found your close walks? you stand amazed, now, do you?
I faith (I am glad) I have smokt you yet at last!
What is your jewel trow? In: come, lets see her;
(Fetch forth your huswife, dame) if she be fairer,
In any honest judgment, then my self,
I Will be content with it: but, she is change,
She feeds you fat, she soothes your appetite,
And you are well? your wife, an honest woman,
Is meat twice sod to you, sir? O, you trecher!

She cannot counterfeit thus palpably.

Out on thy more then strumpets impudence!
Steal'st thou thus to thy haunts? and, have I taken
Thy bawd, and thee, and thy companion,
This horie-beaded letcher, this old goat,
Close at your villainy, and would thou 'scuse it,
With this stale harlots jest, accusing me?
O, old incontinent, do not thou shame,
When all thy powers in chastity is spent,
To have a mind so hot? and to entice,
And feed th'enticements of a lustful woman?

Out, I defy thee, I, dissembling wretch.

Defy me, strumpet? ask thy pandar, here,
Can be deny it? or that wicked older?

Why, hear you, sir.

Tut, tut, tut: never speak.
Thy guilty conscience will discover thee.

What lunacie is this, that hants this man?

Well, good-wife BA'D, COBS wife; and you,
That make your husband such a hoddie-doddie;
And you, young apple-squire; and old ouckold-maker;
He ha'you every one before a Justice:
Nay, you shall answer it, I charge you go.

Marie, with all my heart, sir: I go willingly.
Though I do taste this as a trick, put on me,
To punish my impertinent search; and justly:
And half forgive my son, for the device.

Come, will you go?

Go? to thy shame, believe it.

Why, what is the matter, here? What Is here to do?

O, COB, art thou come? I have been abused,
And in thy house. Never was man so, wronged!

Slid, in my house? my master KITELY? Who wrongs you in my house?


Marie, young lust in old; and old in young, here:
Thy wife's their bawd, here have I taken 'hem.

How? bawd? Is my house come to that? Am I preferred thither? Did I charge you
to keep your doors shut, Is 'BEL? and do you let 'hem lie open for all
comers


Friend know some cause, before thou beat'st thy wife,
This 's madness, in thee.

Why? is there no cause?

Yes, I Will show cause before the Justice, COB:
Come, let her go with me.

Nay, she shall go.

Nay, I will go. I Will see, an' you may be allowed to make a bundle of hemp,
of your right and lawful wife thus, at every cuckoldly knaves pleasure. Why
do you not go


A bitter queen. Come, we will have you tamed.


WEll, of all my disguises, yet, now am I most like my self: being in this
Sergeants gown. A man of my present profession, never counterfeits, till he
lays hold upon a debtor, and says, he rests him, for then he brings him to
all manner of unrest. A kind of little kings we are, bearing the diminutiue
of a mace, made like a young artichocke, that always carries pepper and salt,
in it self. Well, I know not what danger I undergo, by this exploit, pray
heaven, I come well of


See, I think, yonder is the varlet, by his gown.


Let Us go, in quest of him.


'Saue you, friend, are not you here, by appointment of Justice CLEMENTS man.


Yes, an't please you, sir: he told me two gentlemen had willed him to procure
a warrant from his master (which I have about me) to be served on one
DOWNRIGHT


It is honestly done of you both; and see, where the party comes, you must
arrest: serve it upon him, quickly, before he be aware --


Bear back, master MATTHEW.


Master DOWNRIGHT, I arrest you, in the queens name, and must carry you before
a Justice, by virtue of this warrant


Me, friend? I am no DOWNRIGHT, I. I am master STEPHEN, you do not well, to
arrest me, I tell you, truly: I am in nobodies bonds, nor books, I, would you
should know it. A plague on you heartily, for making me thus afraid before my
time


Why, now are you deceived, gentlemen?


He wears such a cloak, and that deceived us: But see, here a comes, indeed!
this is he, officer


Why how now, signior gull! are you turned filtcher of late? come, deliver my
cloak


Your cloak, sir? I bought it, even now, in open market.


Master DOVVNE-RIGHT, I have a warrant I must serve upon you, procured by these
two gentlemen


These gentlemen? these rascals?


Keep the peace, I charge you, in her Majesty's name.


I obey thee. What must I do, officer?


Go before, master Justice CLEMENT, to answer what they can object against
you, sir. I will use you kindly, sir


Come, let us before, and make the Justice, Captain --


The varlet's a tall man! before heaven!


Gull, you will gi' me my cloak?


Sir, I bought it, and I Will keep it.


You will.


I, that I will.


Officer, there is thy fee, arrest him.


Master STEPHEN, I must arrest you.


Arrest me, I scorn it. There, take your cloak, I Will none ou't.


Nay, that shall not serve your turn, now, sir. Officer, I Will go with thee,
to the Justices: bring him along


Why, is not here your cloak? what would you have?


I Will ha'you answer it, sir.


Sir, I Will take your word; and this gentleman's, too: for his appearance.


I Will have no words taken. Bring him along.


Sir, I may choose, to do that: I may take bail.


It Is true, you may take bail, and choose; at another time: but you shall not,
now, varlet. Bring him along, or I Will swinge you


Sir, I pity the gentleman's case. Here Is your money again.


'Sdeynes, tell not me of my money, bring him away, I say.


I warrant you he will go with you of himself, sir.


Yet more ado?


I have made a fair mash on it.


Must I go?


I know no remedy, master STEPHEN.


Come along, before me, here. I do not love your hanging look behind.


Why, sir. I hope you cannot hang me for it. Can he, fellow?


I think not, sir. It is but a whipping matter, sure!


Why, then, let him do his worst, I am resolute.


NAy, but stay, stay, give me leave: my chair, sirrah. You, master KNO'WELL,
say you went thither to meet your son


I, sir.


But, who directed you, thither?


That did mine own man, sir.


Where is he?


Nay, I know not, now; I left him with your clarke: And appointed him, to stay
here for me


My dark? about what time, was this?


Mary, between one and two, as I take it.


And, what time came my man with the false message to you, master KITELY?


After two, sir.


Very good: but, mistress KITELY, how that you were at Cons? ha?


An' please you, s^r, I Will tell you: my brother, WEL-BRED, told me, that COBS
house, was a suspected place --


So it appears, me thinks: but, on.


And that my husband used thither, daily.


No matter, so he used himself well, mistress.


True sir, but you know, what grows, by such hants, oftentimes.


I see, rank fruits of a jealous brain, mistress KITELY: but, did you find
your husband there, in that case, as you suspected


I found her there, sir.


Did you so? that alters the case. Who gave you knowledge, of your wives being
there


Marie, that did my brother WEL-BRED.


How? WEL-BRED first tell her? then tell you, after? where is WEL-BRED?


Gone with my sister, sir, I know not whither.


Why, this is a mere trick, a device; you are gulled in this most grossly, all!
alas, poor wench, were thou beaten for this


Yes, most pitifully, and 't please you.


And worthily, I hope: if it shall prove so.


I, that is like, and a piece of a sentence. How now, sir? what is the matter?


Sir, there is a gentleman, in the court without, desires to speak with your
worship


A gentleman? what is he?


A soldier, sir, he says.


A soldier? take down my armor, my sword, quickly: a soldier speak with me!
why, when knaves? come on, come on, hold my cap there, so; give me my gorget,
my sword: stand by, I will end your matters, anou -- Let the soldier enter,
now, sir, what ha'you to say to me


BY your worships favor --


Nay, keep out, sir, I know not your pretense, you send me word, sir, you are
a soldier: why, sir, you shall be answered, here, here be them have been
amongst soldiers. Sir, your pleasure


Faith, sir, so it is, this gentleman, and my self, have been most uncivilly
wronged, and beaten, by one DOWNRIGHT, a course fellow, about the town,
here, and for mine own part, I protest, being a man, in no sort, given to this
filthy humor of quarrelling, he has a^^aulted me in the way of my peace;
dispoil'd me of mine honor; dis-arm'd me of my weapons; and rudely, laid me
along, in the open streets: when, I not so much as once offered to resist him


O, gods precious! is this the soldier? here, take my armor of quickly,
'twill make him swonne, I fear; he is not ^it to look on it, that will put up
a blow


An't please your worship, he was bound to the peace.


Why, and he were, sir, his hands were not bound, were they?


There Is one of the varlets of the city, sir, has brought two gentlemen,
here, one, upon your worships warrant


My warrant?


Yes, sir. The officer says, procured by these two.


Bid him, come in. Set by this picture. What, Mr. DOWNRIGHT! are you brought
at Mr. FRESH-WATERS suite, here


I Faith, sir. And here is another brought at my suite.


What are you, sir?


A gentleman, sir? O, uncle!


Uncle? who? master KNO'W^LL?


I, sir! this is a wise kinsman of mine.


God's my witness, uncle, I am wronged here monstrously, he charges me with
stealing of his cloak, and would I might never stir, if I did not find it in
the street, by chance


O, did you find it, now? you said, you bought it, ere-while.


And, you said, I stole it; nay, now my uncle is here, I Will do well enough,
with you


Well, let this breath a while; you, that have cause to complain, there, stand
forth: had you my warrant for this gentleman's apprehension


I, an't please your worship.


Nay, do not speak in passion so: where had you it?


Of your clarke, sir?


That Is well! an' my clarke can make warrants, and my hand not at 'hem! Where
is the warrant? Officer, have you it


No, sir, your worship's man, master FORMAL, bid me do it, for these
gentlemen, and he would be my discharge


Why, master DOWNRIGHT, are you such a nouice, to be served, and never see
the warrant


Sir. He did not serve it on me.


No? how then?


Mary, sir, he came to me, and said, he must serve it, and he would use me
kindly, and so --


O, gods pity, was it so, sir? he must serve it? give me my long-sword there,
and help me of; so. Come on, sir varlet, I must ^ut off your legs, sirrah:
nay, stand up, I Will use you kindly; I must ^ut off your legs, I say


O, good sir, I beseech you; nay, good master Justice.


I must do it; there is no remedy. I must cut off your legs, sirrah, I must
cut off your ears, you rascal, I must do it; I must cut off your nose, I
must cut off your head


O, good your worship.


Well, rise, how do thou do, now? do thou feel thy self well? have
thou no harm


No, I thank your good worship, sir.


Why, so! I said, I must cut off thy legs, and I must cut off thy arms, and I
must cut off thy head; but, I did not do it: so, you said, you must serve this
gentleman, with my warrant, but, you did not serve him. You knave, you slave,
you rogue, do you say you must? sirrah, away with him, to the iayle, I Will teach
you a trick, for your must, sir


Good, sir, I beseech you, be good to me.


Tell him he shall to the iayle, away with him, I say*


Nay, sir, if you will commit me, it shall be for committing more then this:
I will not loose, by my travail, any grain of my fame certain


How is this!


My man, BRAYNE-WORME!


O yes, uncle. BRAYNE-WORME has been with my cossen EDWARD, and I, all this
day


I told you all, there was some device!


Nay, excellent Justice, since I have laid my self thus open to you; now,
stand strong for me: both with your sword, and your balance


Body of me, a merry knave! Give me a bowl of sack: If he belong to you,
master KNO'WELL, I bespeake your patience


That is it, I have most need of. Sir, if you will pardon me, only; I Will glory
in all the rest, of my exploits


Sir, you know, I love not to have my favors come hard, from me. You have your
pardon: though I suspect you shrewdly for being of counsel with my son,
against me


Yes, faith, I have, sir; though you retained me doubly this morning, for your
self: first, as BRAYNE-WORME; after, as FITZ-SWORD. I was your reformed
soldier, sir. 'Twas I sent you to COBS, upon the errand, without end


Is it possible! or that thou should disguise thy language so, as I should
not know thee


O, sir, this has been the day of my metamorphosis! It is not that shape
alone that I have run through, to day. I brought this gentleman, master
KITELY, a message too, in the form of master Justices man, here, to draw him
out of the way, as well as your worship: while master WELL-BRED might make a
conueiance of mistress BRIDGET, to my young master


How! my sister ^^olne away?


My son is not married, I hope!


Faith, sir, they are both as sure as love, a priest, and three thousand pound
(which is her portion) can make 'hem: and by this time are ready to bespeake
their wedding supper at the windmill, except some friend, here, prevent 'hem,
and inuit 'hem home


Marie, that will I (I thank thee, for putting me in mind o^'t.) Sirrah, go
you, and fetch 'hem hither, upon my warrant. Neithers friends have cause to be
^orrie, if I know the young couple, aright. Here, I drink to thee, for thy good
news. But, I pray thee, what have thou done with my man FORMAL


Faith, sir, after some ceremony past, as making him drunk, first with
story, and then with wine (but all in kindness) and stripping him to his
shirt: I left him in that cool vain, departed, sold your worships warrant to
these two, pawned his liuerie for that varlets gown, to serve it in; and thus
have brought my self, by my actiuitie, to your worships consideration


And I will consider thee, in another cup of sack. Here Is to thee, which having
drunk of, this is my sentence. Pledge me. Thou have done, or assisted to
nothing, in my judgment, but deserves to be pardoned for the wit of the
offense. If thy master, or any man, here, be angry with thee, I shall suspect
his ingine, while I know him for it. How now? what noise is that


Sir, it is ROGER is come home.


Bring him in, bring him in. What! drunk in arms, against me? Your reason,
your reason for this


I Beseech your worship to pardon me; I happened into ill company by chance,
that cast me into a sleep, and stripped me of all my clothes --


Well, tell him, I am Justice CLEMENT, and do pardon him: but, what is this to
your armor! what may that signify


And 't please you, sir, it hung up 'i the room, where I was stripped; and I
borrowed it of one of the drawers, to come home in, because I was loath, to do
penance through the street, in my shirt


Well, stand by a while. Who be these? O, the young company, welcome, welcome.
Gi' you joy. Nay, mistress BRIDGET, blush not; you are not so fresh a bride, but
the news of it is come hither a^ore you. Master Bridegroom, I have made your
peace, give me your hand: so will I for all the rest, ere you forsake my roof


WE are the more bound to your humanity, sir.


Only these two, have so little of man in 'hem, they are no part of my care.


Yes, sir, let me pray you for this gentleman, he belongs, to my sister, the
bride


In what place, sir?


Of her delight, sir, below the stairs, and in public: her poet, sir.


A poet? I will challenge him my self, presently, at extempore. Mount up thy
Phlegon muse, and testify
How SATVRNE, sitting in an ^bo^ cloud,
Disro^'d his podex white as iuorie,
And, through the welkin, thundered all aloud.



He is not for extempore, sir. He is all for the pocket- muse, please you
command a sight of it


Yes, yes, search him for a taste of his vein.


You must not deny the Queens Justice, Sir, under a writ of rebellion.


What! all this verse? Body of me, he carries a whole realm, a commonwealth
of paper, in's hose! let us see some of his subjects! Unto the boundless Ocean
of thy face
Runs this poor ri^er changed with streams of eyes.
How? this is stolen!


A Parodie! a parodie! with a kind of miraculous gift, to make it ab^urder then
it was


Is all the rest, of this batch? Being me a torch; lay it together, and give
^^^e. Cleanse the air. He was enough to have infected, the whole city, if it
had not been taken in time! See, see, how our Poets glory shines! brighter,
and brighter! ^ull it increases! O, now, it is at the highest: and, now, it
declines as fast. You may see. Sic transi^ gloria mundi


There Is an emblem for you, son, and your studies!


Nay, no speech, or act of mine be drawn against such as profess it worthily.
They are not borne eu^rie year, as an Alderman. There goes more to the making
of a good Poet, then a Sheriff, Mr. KITELY. You look upon me! though, I live
in the city here, amongst you, I will do more reverence, to him, when I meet
him, then I will to the Major, out of his year. But, these paper-pedlers!
these inke-dablers! They cannot expect reprehension, or reproach. They have it
with the fact


Sir, you have saved me the labor of a defense.


It shall be discourse for supper; between your father and me, if he dare
undertake me. But, to dispatch away these, you sign of the Soldier, and
picture of the Poet (but, both so false, I will not have you hanged out at my
door till midnight) while we are at supper, you two shall penitently fa^^ it out
in my court, without; and, if you will, you may pray there, that we may be so
merry within, as to forgive, or forget you* when we come out. Here Is a third,
because, we tender your safety, shall watch you, he is provided for the
purpose. Look to your change, sir


And what shall I do?


O! I had lost a sheep, an he had not bleated! Why, sir, you shall give Mr.
DOWNRIGHT his cloak: and I will entreat him to take it. A trencher, and a
napkin, you shall have, in the buttrie, and keep COB, and his wife company,
here; whom, I will entreat first to be reconciled: and you to endeavor with
your wit, to keep 'hem so


I Will do my best.


Why, now I see thou art honest, TIB, I receive thee as my dea^e, and mortal
wi^e, again


And, I you, as my loving, and obedient husband.


Good complement! It will be their bridale night too. They are married anew.
Come, I conjure the rest, to put of all discontent. You, Mr. DOWNRIGHT, your
anger; you, master KNO'WELL, your cares; master KITELY, and his wife, their
jealousy

For, I must tell you both, while that is fed,
Horns in the mind are worse then of the head.

Sir, thus they go from me, kiss me, sweet heart. See, what a drove of horns
fly, in the air
Winged with my densed, and my credulous breath!
Watch 'hem, suspicious eyes, watch, where they fall.
See, see! on hends, that think th'haue none at all!
O, what a plenteous world of this, will come!
When air raynes horns, all may be sure of same.
I have learned so much verse out of a jealous man's part, in a play.


It Is well, it is well! This night we will dedicate to friendship, love, and
laughter. Master bridegroom, take your bride, and lead: every one, a fellow.
Here is my mistress. BRAYME-WORME! to whom all my addresses of courtship shall
have their reference. Whose adventures, this day, when our grandchildren shall
hear to be made a fable, I doubt not, but it shall find both spectators, and
applause


This Comoedie was first Acted, in the year 1598.

By the then L. CHAMBERLAYNE his Servants.

With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.


