TRuth says, of old, the art of making Plays
Was to content the people; and their praise
Was to the Poet money, wine, and bays.
But in this age, a sect of Writers are,
That, only, for particular likings care,
And will taste nothing that is populare.
With such we mingle neither brains, nor breasts;
Our wishes, like to those (make public feasts)
Are not to please the Cooks tastes, but the guests.
Yet, if those cunning palates hither come,
They shall find guests entreatie, and good room;
And though all relish not, sure, there will be some,
That, when they leave their seats, shall make 'hem say,
Who wrote that piece, could so have wrote a Play:
But that, he knew, this was the better way.
For, to present all Custard, or all Tart,
And have no other meats, to bear a part,
Or to want bread, and salt, were but course art.
The Poet prays you then, with better thought
To sit; and, when his Cates are all in brought,
Though there be none far fet, there will deare-bought
Be fit for Ladies: some for Lords, Knights, Squires,
Some for your waiting wench, and Citie-wires,
Some for your men, and daughters of White-Fryars.
Nor is it, only, while you keep your seat
Here, that his feast will last; but you shall eat
A week at Ord'narie^, on his broken meat:
If his Muse be true,
Who commends her to you.
THe ends of all, who for the Scene do write,
Are,
And still 't has been the praise of all best times,
So persons were not touched, to tax the crimes.
Then, in this Play, which we present tonight,
And make the object of your ear, and sight,
On forfeit of your selves, think nothing true,
Lest so you make the maker to judge you.
For he knows, Poet never credit gained
By writing truths, but things (like truths) well feigned.
If any, yet, will (with particular slight
Of application) wrest what he does write;
And that he meant or him, or her, will say:
They make a Libell, which he made a Play.




Yes, Sir.


Let me hear it.


You shall, Sir, but i'saith let no body else.


Why, I pay?


It will get you the dangerous name of a Poet in Town, Sir, besides me a
perfect deal of ill will at the Mansion you wot of, whose Lady is the
Argument of it: where now I am the welcom'st thing under a man that comes there


I think, and above a man too, if the truth were racked out of you.


No faith, I Will confess before, Sir. The Gentlewomen play with me, and throw
me of the bed; and carry me into my Lady; and she kisses me with her oiled
face; and puts a Perruke of my head; and asks me an^ I will wear her Gown;
and I say, no: and then she hits me a blow of the ear, and calls me Innocent,
and lets me go


No marvel, if the door be kept shut against your Master, when the entrance
is so easy to you -- well Sir, you shall go there no more, lest I be feign
to seek your voice in my Ladies Rushes, a fortnight hence, Sing, Sir.


Why, here is the man that can melt away his time, and never feels it! what,
between his Mistress abroad, and his Engle at home, high Fare, soft Lodging,
fine Clothes, and his Fiddle; he thinks the hours ha'no wings, or the day no
Post-horse. Well, Sir Gallant, were you struck with the Plague this minute, or
condemned to any capital punishment to morrow, you would begin then to
think, and value every Article of your time, esteem it at the true rate, and
give all for it


Why, what should a man do?


Why, nothing: or that, which when it is done, is as idle. Harken after the next
Horse-race, or Hunting-match; lay Wagers, praise Puppy, or Pepper-corne,
White-foot, Franklin; White-maynes party; sp^nd aloud, that my Lords may hear
you; visit my Ladies at night, and be able to give 'hem the Character of every
Bowler, or Better of the Green. These be the things, wherein your fashionable
men exercise themselves, and I for company


Nay, if I have thy authority, I Will not leave yet. Come, the other are
considerations, when we come to have gray heads, and weak hammes, moist eyes,
and shrunk members. we think she sleeps: nor, when the doors are shut,
should men be inquiring, all is sacred within, then. Is it for us to see their
Perrukes put on, their false Teeth, their Complexion, their Eyebrows, their
Nails? you see guilders will not work, but enclosed. They must not discover,
how little serve, with the help of art, to adorn a great deal. How long did
the Canuas hang before Ald-gate? were the people suffered to see the Cities
Love, and Charity, while they were rude stone, before they were painted, and
burnished? No. No more should Servants approach their Mistresses, but when they
are complete, and finished


Well said, my True-wit.


And a wise Lady will keep a guard always upon the place, that she may do
things securely. I once followed a rude fellow into a Chamber, where the poor
Madame, for haste, and troubled, snatched at her Perruke, to cover her
baldness: and put it on, the wrong way


O prodigy!


And the vn-conscionable Knave held her in Complement an hour, with that
reuerst face, when I still looked when she should talk from the the other side


Why, thou should have releeu'd her.


No faith, I let her alone, as we will let this argument, if you please, and
pass to another, When saw you Dauphine, Eugenie


Not these three days. Shall we go to him this morning? he is very
melancholique, I hear


Sick of the Uncle? is he? I met that stiff piece of Formalitie, his Uncle,
yesterday, with a huge Turbant of Night-Caps on his head, buckled over his
ears


O, that is his custom when he walks abroad. He can endure no noise, man.


So I have heard. But is the disease so ridiculous in him, as it is made? they
say, he has been upon diverse Treaties with the Fish-wiues, and Orenge-women;
and Articles propounded between them: marry, the Chimney-sweepers will not be
drawn in


No, nor the Broome-men: They stand out stiffely. He cannot endure a
Costard-monger, he swounes if he hear one


Me thinks, a Smith should be ominous.


Or any Hammer-man. A Brasier is not suffered to dwell in the Parish, nor an
Armorer. He would have hanged a Pewterers' prentice once up on a
Shroue-tuesdayes Riot, for being of that Trade, when the rest were quit


A Trumpet should fright him terribly, or the Hau^boyes?


Out of his senses. The Waights of the City have a Pension of him, not to come
near that Ward. This Youth practiced on him, one night, like the Bell-man; and
never left till he had brought him down to the door, with a Long-Sword: and
there left him flourishing with the Air


Why, Sir! he has chosen a street to lie in, so narrow at both ends, that it
will receive no Coaches, nor Carts, nor any of these common noyses: and
therefore, we that love him, devise to bring him in such as we may, now and
then, for his exercise, to breath him. He would grow restie else in his ease.
His Virtue would rust without action. I entreated a Beare-ward, one day, to
come down with the Dogs of some four Parishes that way, and I thank him,
he did; and cried his Games under Master Morose's windore: till he was sent
crying away, with his head made a most bleding Spectacle to the multitude. And,
another time, a Fencer, marching to his Prize, had his Drum most tragically
run through, for taking that street in his way, at my request


A good Wagge. How does he for the Bells?


O, in the Queens time, he was wont to go out of Town every Satterday at
ten a clock, or on Holy-day-eues. But now, by reason of the sickness, the
perpetuity of ringing has made him devise a room, with double walls, and
treble feelings; the windores close shut, and calle'd: and there he lives by
Candlelight. He turned away a man last week, for having a pair of new
Shoes, that creak'd. And this fellow wayts on him now, in Tennis-court Sockes,
or Slippers sol'd with Wool: and they talk each to other, in a Trunk. See
who comes here


HOw now! what all you Sirs? dumb?


Struck into stone almost, I am here, with Tales of thine Uncle! There was
never such a Prodigy heard of


I would you would once loose this subject, my masters, for my sake. They are
such as you are, that have brought me into that predicament, I am, with him


How is that?


Marry, that he will dis-inherit me, no more. He thinks, I, and my company
are Authors of all the ridiculous Acts, and Moniments are told of him


Slid, I would be the Author of more, to vex him, that purpose deserves it:
it gives thee law of plaguing him. I Will tell thee what I would do. I would
make a false Almanake; get it printed: and then have him drawn out on a
Coronation day to the Tower-Wharfe, and kill him with the noise of the
Ordinance. Dis-inherit thee! he cannot, man. Art not thou next of blood, and
his Sisters Son


I but he will thrust me out of it, he vows, and marry.


How! that is a more portent. Can he endure no noise, and will venture on a Wife?


Yes: why, thou art a stranger, it seems, to his best trick, yet. He has
imployd a fellow this half year, all over England, to harken him out a dumb
woman; be she of any form, or any quality, so she be able to bear children:
her silence is Dowry enough, he says


But, I trust to God, he has found none.


No, but he has heard of one that is lodged in the next street to him, who is
exceedingly soft-spoken; thrifty of her speech; that spends but six words a
day. And her he is about now, and shall have her


Is It possible! who is his agent in the business?


Marry, a Barber, one Cut-berd: an honest fellow, one that tells Dauphine all
here


Why, you oppress me with wonder! A woman, and a Barber, and love no noise!


Yes faith. The fellow trims him silently, and has not the knacke with his
Sheeres, or his fingers: and that continence in a Barber he thinks so emient
a virtue, as it has made him chief of his counsel


Is the Barber to be seen? or the Wench?


Y^^, that they are.


I p^ay thee, Dauphine, let us go thither.


I have some business now: I cannot in faith.


You shall have no business shall make you neglect this, Sir, we will make her
talk, believe it; or if she will not, we can give out, at least so much as
shall interrupt the Treaty: we will break it. Thou art bound in conscience,
when he suspects thee without cause to torment him


Not I, by any means. I ll give no suffrage to 't. He shall never ha that
plea against me, that I opposed the least phant'sie of his. Let it lie upon my
Stars to be guilty, I Will be innocent


Yes, and be poor, and beg; do, innocent: when some Groom of his has got
him an Heir, or this Barber, if he himself cannot. Innocent! I pray thee,
Ned, where lies she? let him be innocent, still


Why, right over against the Barbers; in the house, where Sir John Daw lies.


You do not mean to confound me!


Why?


Does he, that would marry her, know so much?


Excellent! He was a fine youth last night, but now he is much finer! what is
his christen-name? I have forgot


Si Amorous La-foole.


The Gentleman is here below, that ownes that name.


Heart, he is come, to inuit me to Dinner, I hold my life.


Like enough: pray thee, let us have him up.


Boy, marshall him.


With a Truncheon, Sir?


A way, I beseech you. I Will make him tell us his Pedigree, now; and what meat
he has to Dinner; and, who are his Guests; and, the whole course of his
fortunes: with a breath


S'Aue, dear Sir Dauphine, honored Master Clerimont.


Sir Amorous! you have very much honested my Lodging, with your presence.


Good faith it is a fine Lodging! almost, as delicate a Lodging, as mine.


Not so, Sir.


Excuse me, Sir, if it were in the Strand, I assure you. I am come, Master
Clermont, to entreat you wait upon two or three Ladies, to dinner, to day


How, Sir! wait upon 'hem? did you ever see me carry Dishes?


No, Sir, dispense with me; I meant, to bear 'hem company.


O, that I will, Sir. The doubtfulnesse of your phrase, believe it, Sir, would
breed you a quarrel, once an hour, with the terrible Boys, if you should but
keep 'hem fellowship a day


It should be extremely against my will, Sir, if I contested with any man.


I believe it, Sir; where hold you your Feast?


At Tom Otters, Sir.


Tom Otter? what is he?


Captain Otter, Sir; he is a kind of Gamester: but he has had command, both by
Sea, and by Land


O, then he is animal amphibium?


I, Sir: his Wife was the rich China-woman, that the Courtiers visited so
often, that gave the rare entertaynment. She commands all at home


Then, she is Captain Otter?


You say very well, Sir: she is my Kins-woman, a La-Foole by the Mother side,
and will inuit, any great Ladies, for my sake


Not of the La-Fooles of Essex?


No, Sir, the La-Fooles of London.


Now, h'is in.


They all come out of our House, the La-fooles of the North, the La-fooles of
the West, the La-Fooles of the East, and South -- we are as ancient a Family,
as any is in Europe -- but I my self am descended lineally of the French
La-Fooles -- and, we do bear for our Coat Yellow, or Or, checkered Azure,
and Gules, and some three or four Colors more, which is a very noted Coat,
and has, sometimes been solemnly worn by diverse Nobility of our House --
but let that go, Antiquity is not respected now -- I had a brace of fat Does
sent me Gentlemen, and half a dosen of Phesants, a dosen or two of God wits,
and some other Foul, which I would have eaten, while they are good, and in
good company -- there will be a great Lady, or two, my Lady Haughty, my Lady
Centaure, Mistress Dol Mauis -- and they come a'purpose, to see the silent
Gentlewoman, Mistress Epicoene, that honest Sir John Daw has promised to bring
thither -- and then, Mistress Trusty, my Ladies Woman, will be there too, and
this Honorable Knight, Sir Dauphine, with your self, Master Clerimont -- and
we will be very merry, and have Fiddlers, and dance -- I have been a mad Wag,
in my time, and have spent some Crowns since I was a Page in Court, to my Lord
Lofty, and after, my Ladies Gentleman-usher, who got me knighted in Ireland,
since it pleased my elder Brother to dye -- I had as fair a gold Ierkin on
that day, as any was worn in the Iland-Voyage, or at Caliz, none disprays'd,
and I came over in it hither, showed my self to my friends, in Court, and
after went down to my Tenants, in the Country, and suruai'd my Lands, let new
Leases, took their Money, spent it in the eye of the Land here, upon Ladies --
and now I can take up at my pleasure


Can you take up Ladies, Sir?


O, let him breathe, he has not recouer'd.


Would I were your half, in that commodity --


No, Sir, excuse me: I meant Money, which can take up any thing. I have
another Guest, or two, to inuit, and say as much to, Gentlemen. I Will take my
leave abruptly, in hope you will not fail -- Your Servant


We will not fail you, Sir precious La-Foole; but she shall, that your Ladies
come to see: if I have credit, before Sir Daw


Did you ever hear such a Wind-fucker, as this?


Or, such a Rooke, as the other! that will betray his Mistress, to be seen.
Come, it is time, we prevented it


Go.


CAnnot I, yet, find out a more compendious method, then by this Trunk, to
save my Servants the labor of speech, and mine ears, the discord of sounds?
Let me see: all Discourses, but mine own, afflict me, they seem harsh,
impertinent, and irksome. Is it not possible, that thou should answer me,
by Signs, and, I apprehend thee, fellow? speak not, though I question you.
You have taken the Ring, off from the street door, as I bad you? answer me
not, by speech, but by silence; unless, Cutberd, the Barber, to have him come
to me? ( --) good. And, he will come presently? answer me not but with your
leg, unless it be otherwise: if it be otherwise, shake your head, or
shrugge ( --) so. Your Italian, and Spaniard, are wise in these! and it is a
frugall, and comely gravity. How long will it be, ere Cutberd come? stay, if
an hour, hold up your whole hand; if half an hour, two fingers; if a
quarter, one; ( --) good: half a quarter? it is well. And have you given him a
Key, to come in without knocking? ( --) good. And, is the Lock oyld, and the
Hinges, to day? ( --) good. And the Quilting of the stayres no where worn out,
and bare ( --) very good. I see, by much doctrine, and impulsion, it may be
effected: stand by. The Turk, in this divine discipline, is admirable,
exceeding all the Potentates of the Earth; still waited on by Mutes; and all
his Commands so executed; yea, even in the War (as I have heard) and in his
Marches, most of his Charges, and directions, given by Signs, and with
silence: and exquisite art! and I am heartily ashamed, and angry oftentimes,
that the Princes of Christendom, should suffer a Barbarian, to transcend 'hem
in so high a point of felicity. I will practice it, hereafter. How now? oh!
oh! what Villain? what Prodigy of Mankind is that? look. Oh!


It is a Post from the Court --


Out Rogue, and must thou blow thy Horn, too?


Alas, it is a Post from the Court, Sir, that says, he must speak with you,
pain of death --


Pain of thy life, be silent.


BY your leave, Sir (I am a stranger here) is your name, Master Morose? is your
name, Master Morose? F^shes! Pythagoreans all! this is strange! What say you,
Sir, nothing? Has Harpocrates been here, with his Club, among you? well Sir, I
will believe you to be the man, at this time: I will venture upon you, Sir. Your
friends at Court commend 'hem to you, Sir --


And are extremely sollicitous for you, Sir.


Whose Knave are you!


Mine own Knave, and your Compere, Sir.


Fetch me my Sword --


You shall taste the one half of my Dagger, if you do (Groom) and you, the
other, if you stir, Sir: be patient, I charge you, in the Kings Name, and
hear me without insurrection. They say, you are to marry? to marry! do you
mark, Sir


How then, rude companion!


Marry, your friends do wonder, Sir, the Thames being so near, wherein you
may drown so handsomely; or London Bridge, at a low fall, with a fine leap,
to hurry you down the stream; or, such a delicate Steeple, in the Town, as
Bow, to vault from; or, a brauer height, as Paul's, or, if you affected to do
it nearer home, and a shorter way, an excellent Garret Windore, into the
street; or, a Beam, in the said Garret, with this Halter; which they have
sent, and desire, Matrimony. Alas, Sir, do you ever think to find a chaste
Wife, in these times? now? when there are so many Masks, Plays, Puritan
Preachings, Mad-folkes, and other strange fights to be seen daily, private and
public? if you had lived in King Etheldred's time, Sir, or Edward the
Confessors, you might, perhaps have found in some cold Countrey-Hamlet, then, a
dull frostrie Wench, would have been contented with one man: now, they will as
soon be pleased with one leg, or one eye. I Will tell you, Sir, the monstrous
hazards you shall run with a Wife


Good Sir! have I ever cosen'd any friends of yours of their Land? bought their
Possessions? taken forfeit of their Morgage? begged a Reuersion from 'hem?
bastarded their Issue? what have I done, that may deserve this


Nothing, Sir, that I know, but your itch of Marriage.


Why? if I had made an Assassinate upon your Father; vitiated your Mother;
ravished your Sisters --


I would kill you, Sir, I would kill you, if you had.


Why? you do more in this, Sir: It were a vengeance centuple, for all
facinorous Acts, that could be named, to do that you do --


Alas, Sir, I am but a Messenger: I but tell you, what you must hear. It
seems, your friends are careful after your souls health, Sir, and would have
you know the danger (but you may do your pleasure, for all them, I persuade
not, Sir) If, after you are married, your Wife do run away with a Vaulter, or
the Frenchman that walks upon Ropes, or him that daunces the Ijg, or a Fencer
for his skill at his Weapon, why it is not their fault; they have discharged
their consciences: when you know what may happen. Nay, suffer valiantly, Sir,
for I must tell you, all the perils that you are obnoxious too. If she be
fair, and young, vegetous, no Sweet-meates ever drew more Flies; all the
Yellow Doublets, and great Roses in the Town will be there. If foul, and
crooked, she will be with them, and buy those Doublets and Roses, Sir. If rich,
and that you marry her Dowry, not her; she will reign in your House, as
imperious as a Widow. If Noble, all her Kindred will be your Tyrannes. If
fruitful, as proud as May, and humorous as April; she must have her Doctors,
her Mid-wiues, her Nurses, her longings every hour: though it be for the
dearest morsel of man. If learned, there was never such a Parrat; all your
Patrimony will be too little for the Guests, that must be invited, to hear
her speak Latin and Greek: and you must lie with her in those Languages too,
if you will please her. If precise, you must feast all the silenced Brethren,
once in three days; salute the Sisters; entertayne the whole Family, or Wood
of 'hem; and hear long-winded Exercises, Singings, and Catechisings, which you
are not given to, and yet must give for: to please the zealous Matron your
Wife, who, for the holy cause, will cosen you, over and above. You begin to
sweat, Sir? but this is not half, in faith: you may do your pleasure
notwithstanding,


O, what is my sin! what is my sin?


Then, if you love your Wife, or rather, dote on her, Sir: O, how she will
torture you! and take pleasure in your torments! you shall lie with her but
when she lists; she will not hurt her beauty, her complexion: or it must be
for that Jewel, or that Pearl, when she does; every half hours pleasure
must be bought anew: and with the same pain, and charge, you wooed her at
first. Then, you must keep what Servants she please; what company she will;
that friend must not visit you without her license; and him she loves most
she will seem to hate eagerliest, to decline your jealousy; or, faigne to
be jealous of you first; and for that cause go live with her she-friend, or
Cosen at the College, that can instruct her in all the Mysteries, of writing
Letters, corrupting Servants, taming Spies; where she must have that rich
Gown for such a great day; a new one for the next; a richer for the third; be
served in silver; have the Chamber filled with a succession of Grooms,
Footmen, Vshers, and other Messengers; besides Embroyderers, Iewellers,
Tyre-women, Sempsters, Fether-men, Perfumers; while she feels not how the Land
drops away; nor the Acres melt; nor foresees the change, when the Mercer has
your Woods for her Veluets; never weighes what her Pride costs, Sir: so she may
kiss a Page, or a smooth chinne, that has the despair of a Beard; be a
States-woman, know all the News, what was done at Salisbury, what at the Bath,
what at Court, what in Progress; or, so she may censure Poets, and Authors,
and styles, and compare'hem, Daniel with Spenser, Johnson with the the other
youth, and so forth; or, be thought cunning in Controversies, or the very
knots of Divinity; and have, often in her mouth, the state of the question:
and then skip to the Mathematiques, and demonstration and answer, in Religion
to one; in state, to another, in baud'ry to a third


O, o!


All this is very true, Sir. And then her going in disguise to that Coniurer,
and this cunning woman: where the first question is, how soon you shall die?
next, if her present Servant love her? next that, if she shall have a new
Servant? and how many? which of her Family would make the best Baud, Male, or
Female? what precedence she shall have by her next match? and sets down the
answers, and believes 'hem above the Scriptures. Nay, perhaps she will study
the Art


Gentle Sir, have you done? have you had your pleasure of me? I Will think of
these things


Yes Sir: and then comes reeking home of vapor and sweat, with going afoot, and
lies in, a month, of a new face, all Oil, and Bird-lime; and rises in Asses
Milk, and is clens'd with a new fucus: God b'w'you, Sir. One thing more (which
I had almost forgot.) This too, with whom you are to marry, may have made a
conuayance of her Virginity aforehand, as your wise Widows do of their
states, before they marry, in trust to some friend, Sir: who can tell? or if
she have not done it yet, she may do, upon the Wedding day, or the night
before, and antidate you Cuckold. The like has bin heard of, in nature. It Is no
devised impossible thing, Sir. God b'w'you: I Will be bold to leave this Rope
with you, Sir, for a remembrance. Farewell Mute





It Is I, Sir, your Barber.


O Cutberd, Cutberd, Cutberd! here has been a cutthroate with me: help me in
to my bed, and give me Physic with thy counsel


NAy, and she will, let her refuse, at her own charges: it is nothing to me,
Gentlemen. But she will not be invited to the like Feasts, or Guests, every day





You shall not go; let him be laughed at in your stead, for not bringing you:
and put him to his extemporall faculty of fooling, and talking loud to
satisfy the company


He will suspect us, talk aloud. 'Pray, Mistress Epicoene, let us see your
Verses; we have Sir John Daw's leave: do not conceal your Servants merit,
and your own glories


They Will prove my Servants glories, if you have his leave so soon.


His vain glories, Lady!


Show 'hem, show 'hem, Mistress, I dare own 'hem.


Judge you, what glories?


Nay, I Will read 'hem my self, too: an Author must recite his own Work. It
is a Madrigall of Modesty

Modest, and fair, for fair and good are near
Neighbors, how ere. --

Very good.


I, Is It not?


No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.

Excellent!


That again, I pray 'Sir John.


It has some thing in it like rare wit, and sense.


Peace.


No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.
Then, when I praise sweet Modesty, I praise
Bright Beauties rays:
And having praised both Beauty' and Modestee,
I have praised thee.

Admirable!


How it chimes, and cries tinke in the close, divinely!


I, it is Seneca.


No, I think it is Plutarch.


The dor on Plutarch, and Seneca, I hate it: they are mine own imaginations,
by that light. I wonder those fellows have such credit with Gentlemen


They are very grave Authors.


Grave Asses! mere Essaists! a few loose Sentences, and that is all. A man
would talk so, his whole age, I do utter as good things every hour, if they
were collected, and observed, as either of 'hem


Indeed! Sir John?


He must needs, living among the Wits, and Braueries too.


I, and being President of 'hem, as he is.


There Is Aristotle, a mere common place-fellow; Plato, a Discourser;
Thucidides, and Liuic, tedious and dry; Tacitus, an entyre knot: sometimes
worth the untying, very seldom


What do you think of the Poets, Sir John?


Not worthy to be named for Authors. Homer, an old tedious prolixe Ass, talks
of Curriers, and Chines of Beef. Virgil, of dunging of Land, and Bees. Horace,
of I know not what


I think so.


And so Pindarus, Lycophron, Anacreon, Catullus, Seneca the Tragoedian, Lucan,
Propertius, Tibullus, Martial, Iuuenal, Ausonius, Statius, Politian, Valerius
Flaccus, and the rest --


What a sacke-full of their names he has got!


And how he powers 'hem out! Politian, with Valerius Flaccus!


Was not the Character right, of him?


As could be made, in faith.


And Persius, a crabbed Cockescombe, not to be endured.


Why? whom do you account for Authors, Sir John Daw?


Syntagma Iuris Ciuilis, Corpus Iuris Ciuilis, Corpus Iuris Canonici, the King
of Spaines Bible


Is the King of Spaines Bible an Author?


Yes, and Syntagma.


What was that Syntagma, Sir?


A Civil Lawier, a Spaniard.


Sure, Corpus was a Dutchman.


I, both the Corpusses, I knew 'hem: they were very corpulent Authors.


And, then there is Vatablus, Pomponatius, Symancha, the other are not to be
received, within the thought of a Scholar


Fore God, you have a simple learned Servant, Lady, in Titles.


I wonder that he is not called to the Helm, and made a Councellor!


He is one extraordinary.


Nay, but in Ordinary! to say truth, the State wants such.


Why, that will follow.


I muse, a Mistress can be so silent to the dotes of such a Servant.


It Is her Virtue, Sir. I have written somewhat of her silence too.


In Verse, Sir John?


What else?


Why? how can you justify your own being of a Poet, that so slight all the
old Poets


Why? every man, that writes in Verse, is not a Poet; you have of the Wits,
that write Verses, and yet are no Poets: they are Poets that live by it, the
poor fellows that live by it


Why? would not you live by your Verses, Sir John?


No, 'twere pity he should. A Knight live by his Verses? he did not make 'hem
to that end, I hope


And yet the noble Sidney lives by his, and the Noble Family not ashamed.


I, he professed himself; but Sir John Daw has more caution: he will not hinder
his own rising in the state so much! do you think he will? Your Verses, good
Sir John, and no Poems


Silence in woman, is like speech in man,
Deny't who can.

Not I, believe it: your reason, Sir.


Nor is it a Tale,
That Female Vice should be a Virtue Male,
Or Masculine Vice, a Female Virtue be:
You shall it see
Proved with increase,
I know to speak, and she to hold her peace.
Do you conceive me Gentlemen?


No faith, how mean you with increase, Sir John?


Why, with increase is, when I court her for the common cause of Mankind; and
she says nothing, but consentire videtur: and in time is grauida


Then, this is a Ballad of Procreation?


A Madrigall of Procreation, you mistake.


'Pray give me my Verses again, Servant.


If you you will ask 'hem aloud, you shall.


See, here is Tru-wit again!


WHere have thou been, in the name of madness! thus accoutred with thy Horn?


Where the sound of it might have pierced your senses, with gladness, had you
been in eare-reach of it. Dauphine, fall down and worship me: I have forbid
the Banes, Lad. I have been with thy virtuous Uncle, and have broke the match


You have not, I hope.


Yes faith; and thou should hope otherwsse, I should repent me: this Horn
got me entrance, kiss it. I had no other way to get in, but by fayning to be
a Post; but when I got in once, I proved none, but rather the contrary, turned
him into a Post, or a Stone, or what is stiffer, with thundering into him the
incommodities of a Wife, and the miseries of Marriage. If ever Gorgon were
seen in the shape of a woman, he has seen her in my description. I have put
him off of that sent, for ever. Why do you not applaud, and adore me, Sirs?
why stand you mute? Are you stupid? you are not worthy of the benefit


Did not I tell you? mischief! --


I would you had placed this benefit somewhere else.


Why so?


Slight you have done the most inconsiderate, rash, weak thing, that ever man
did to his friend


Friend! if the most malicious enemy I have, had studied to inflict an injury
upon me, it could not be a greater


Wherein? for gods sake! Gent, come to your selves again.


But I presaged thus much before, to you.


Would my lips had been soldred, when I spoke on it. Slight, what moved you to
be thus impertinent


My Masters, do not put on this strange face to pay my courtesic: off with
this Visor. Have good turns done you and thank 'hem this way


Fore Heaven, you have undone me. That, which I have plotted for, and been
maturing now these four Months, you have blasted in a minute: now I am lost,
I may speak. This Gentlewoman was lodged here by me of purpose, and, to be
put upon my Uncle, has professed this obstinate silence for my sake, being my
entyre friend; and one, that for the requital of such a fortune, as to marry
him, would have made me very ample conditions: where now, all my hopes are
utterly miscarryed by this unlucky accident


Thus it is, when a man will be ignorantly officious; do services, and not know
his why: I wonder what courteous itch possessed you! you never did absurder part
in your life, nor a greater trespass to friendship, to humanity


Faith, you may forgive it, best: 'twas your cause principally.


I know it, would it had not.


How now, Cutberd? what news?


The best, the happiest that ever was, Sir. There has been a mad Gentleman
with your Uncle, this morning, (I think this be the Gentleman) that has almost
talked him out of his wits, with threatening him from Marriage --


On, I pray thee.


And your Uncle, Sir, he thinks 'twas done by your procurement; therefore he
will see the party, you wot of, presently: and if he like her, he says, and
that she be so inclining to dombe, as I have told him, he swears, he will
marry her, to day, instantly, and not defer it a minute longer


Excellent! beyond our expectation!


Beyond your expectation? by this light, I knew, it would be thus.


Nay, sweet Tru-wit, forgive me.


No, I was ignorantly officious, impertinent: this was the absurd, weak part.


Will thou ascribe that to merit, now, was mere fortune?


Fortune? mere Providence. Fortune had not a finger in it. I saw it must
necessarily in nature fall out so: my genius is never false to me in these
things. Show me, how it could be otherwise


Nay, Gentlemen, contend not, it is well now.


Alas, I let him go on with inconsiderate, and rash, and what he pleased.


Away thou strange instifier of thy self, to be wiser then thou were, by the
event


Event! By this light, thou shall never persuade me, but I foresaw it, as well
as the Stars themselves


Nay, Gentlemen, it is well now do you two entertain Sir John Daw, with
discourse, while I send her away with instructions


I Will be acquainted with her, first, by your favor.


Master Tru-wit, Lady, a friend of ours.


I am sorry, I have not known you sooner, Lady, to celebrate this rare virtue
of your silence


Faith, an' you had come sooner, you should have seen, and heard her well
celebrated in Sir John Daw's Madrigalls


Jack Daw, God save you, when saw you La-Foole?


Not since last night, Master Tru-wit.


That Is Miracle! I thought you two had been inseparable.


He Is gone to inuit his Guests.


Gods so! tls true! what a false memory have I toward that man! I am one: I
met him e'ne now, upon that he calls his delicate fine black Horse, rid into a
foame, with posting from place to place, and person to person, to give hem the
cue --


Left they should forget?


Yes: there was never poor Captain took more pains at a Muster to show men,
then he, at this meal, to show friends


It is his Quarter-feast, Sir.


What! do you say so, Sir John?


Nay, Jack Daw will not be out, at the best friends he has, to the Talent of
his wit: where is his Mistress, to hear and applaud him? is she gone


Is Mistress Epicoene gone?


Gone before, with Sir Dauphine, I warrant to the place.


Gone before! that were a manifest injury; a disgrace and a half: to refuse
him at such a Festival time, as this, being a Bravery, and a Wit too


Tut, he will swallow it like Cream: he is better read in Iure Civilly, then to
esteem any thing a disgrace is offered him from a Mistress


Nay, let her eene go; she shall sit alone, and be dumb in her Chamber, a
Week together, for John Daw, I warrant her: does she refuse me


No, Sir, do not take it so to heart: she does not refuse you, but a little
neglect you. Good faith, Tru-wit, you were too blame to put it into his head,
that she does refuse him


She does refuse him, Sir, palpably: how ever you mince it. An' I were as he,
I would swear to speak never a word to her, to day, for it


By this light, no more I will not.


Nor to any body else, Sir.


Nay, I will not say so, Gentlemen.


It had been an excellent happy condition for the company, if you could have
drawn him to it


I Will be very melancholique, in faith.


As a Dog, if I were as you, Sir John.


Or a Snaile, or a Hog-louse: I would roll my self up for this day, in troth,
they should not unwind me


By this Pick-tooth, so I will.


It Is well done: he begins already to be angry with his teeth.


Will you go, Gentlemen?


Nay, you must walk alone, if you be right melancholique, Sir John.


Yes Sir, we will dog you, we will follow you a far off.


Was there ever such a two yards of Knighthood, measured out by Time, to be
sold to laughter


A mere talking Mole! no Mushrome was ever so fresh. A fellow so utterly
nothing, as he knows not what he would be


Let Us follow him: but first, let us go to Dauphine, he is houering about the
House, to hear what news


Content.


WElcome Cutberd; draw near with your fair charge: and, in her ear, softly
entreat her to vnmasque ( --) So. Is the door shut? ( --) enough. Now,
Cutberd, with the same discipline I use to my Family, I will question you. As I
conceive, Cutberd, this Gentlewoman is she, you have provided, and brought, in
hope she will fit me in the place and person of a Wise? Answer me not, but
with your leg, unless it be otherwise: ( --) very well done, Cutberd. I
conceive, besides, Cutberd, you have been preacquainted with her birth,
education, and qualities, or else you would not prefer her to my acceptance,
in the weighty consequence of Marriage. ( --) this I conceive, Cutberd. Answer
me not but with your leg, unless it be otherwise. ( --) Very well done
Cutberd. Give aside now a little, Cutberd, and my man, might not: for, of all
sounds, only, the sweet voice of a fair Lady has the just length of mine
ear. I beseech you, say Lady, out of the first fire of meeting eyes, (they
say) love is stricken; do you feel any such motion, suddenly shot into you,
from any part you see in me? ha, Lady? ( --) Alas, Lady, these answers by
silent curt'sies, from you, are too courtlesse, and simple. my Wife, must be
accomplished with Courtly, and audacious ornaments. Can you speak, Lady


Judge you, forsooth.


What say you, Lady? speak out, I beseech you.


Judge you, forsooth.


OF my judgment, a divine softness! but can you naturally, Lady, as I enjoin
these by doctrine and industry, refer your self to the search of my
judgment, and (not taking pleasure in your tongue, which is a woman's chiefest
pleasure) think it plausible, to answer me by silent gestures, so long as my
speeches iumpe right, with what you conceive? Cutherd, thou art made for ever,
as thou have made me, if this felicity have lasting: but I will try her
further. Dear Lady, I am Courtly, I tell you, and I must have mine ears
banqueted with pleasant, and witty Conferences, pretty Girds, Scoffs, and
Dalliance in her, that I mean to choose for my Bed-pheere. The Ladies in
Court, think it a most desperate impair to their quickness of wit, and good
carriage, if they cannot give occasion for a man to court 'hem; and, when an
amorous Discourse is set on foot, minister as good matter to continue it, as
himself: and do you alone so much differ from all them, that, what they (with
so much circumstance) affect, and toil for, to seem learned, to seem
judicious, to seem sharp, and conceited, you can bury in your self, with
silence? and rather trust your graces to the fair conscience of Virtue, then
to the Worlds, or your own Proclamation


I should be sorry else.


What say you, Lady? good Lady, speak out.


I should be sorry, else


That sorrow does fill me with gladness! O Morose! thou art happy above
Mankind! pray that thou may contain thy self. I will only put her to it
once more, and it shall be with the utmost touch, and test of their Sex. But
hear me, fair Lady, I do also love to see her, whom I shall choose for my
Heicfar, to be the first and principal in all Fashions; praecede all the Dames
at Court, by a sortnight; have her Counsel of Tailors, Linneners, Lace-women,
Embroyderers, and sit with 'hem sometimes twice a day, upon French
Intelligences; and then come forth, varyed like Nature, or oftener then she,
and better, by the help of Art, her aemulous Servant. This do I affect. And
how will you be able, Lady, with this frugalitie of speech, to give the
manifold (but necessary) instructions, for that Bodies, these Sleeves, those
Sirkts, this Cut, that Stitch, this Embroydery, that Lace, this Wire, those
Knots, that Ruff, those Roses, this Girdle, that Fan, the the other Skarfe,
these Gloves? ha! what say you, Lady


I Will leave it to you, Sir.


How, Lady? pray you, rise a note.


I leave it to Wisdom, and you, Sir.


Admirable Creature! I will trouble you no more: I will not sin against so
sweet a simplicity. Let me now be bold to print, on those divine lips, the
seal of being mine. Cutberd, I give thee the Lease of thy House free: thank
me not, but with thy leg ( --) I know what thou would say, she is poor, and
her friends deceased; she has brought a wealthy dowry in her silence, Cutberd:
and in respect of her poverty, Cutberd, I shall have her more loving, and
obedient, Cutberd. Go thy ways, and get me a Minister presently, with a soft,
low voice to marry us, and pray him he will not be impertinent, but brief as
he can; away: softly, Cutberd. Sirrah, conduct your Mistress into the dining
Room, your now-Mistris. O my felicity! how I shall be revenged on mine
insolent Kinsman, and his plots to fright me from marrying! This night I will
get an Heir, and thrust him out of my blood like a Stranger; he would be
knighted, forsooth, and thought by that means to reign over me, his Title
must do it: no Kinsman, I will now make you bring me the tenth Lords, and the
sixteenth Ladies Letter, Kinsman; and it shall do you no good, Kinsman. Your
Knighthood it self shall come on it is knees, and it shall be rejected; it
shall be sued for it is fees to execution, and not be redeemed; it shall cheat
at the twelue-peny Ordinary, it Knighthood, for it is Diet all the Terme-time,
and tell Tales for it in the Vacation, to the Hostess: or it Knighthood shall
do worse; take Sanctuary in Cole-harbor, and fast. It shall fright all it
friends, with borrowing Letters, and when one of the foure-score has brought
it Knighthood ten shillings, it Knighthood shall go to the Cranes, or the
Bear at the Bridge-foot, and be drunk in fear: it shall not have money to
discharge one Tavern reckoning, to inuit the old Creditors, to forbear it
Knighthood; or the new, that should be, to trust it Knighthood. It shall be
the tenth name in the Bond, to take up the commodity of Pipkins and stone Iugs;
and the part thereof shall not furnish it Knighthood forth, for the attempting
of a Bakers Widow, a brown Bakers Widow. It shall give it Knight-hoods name,
for a stallion, to all gamesome Citizens Wives, and be refused; when the
Master of a Dancing School, or ( How do you call him) the worst Reueller in
the Town is taken: it shall want Clothes, and by reason of that, wit, to fool
to Lawyers. It shall not have hope to repair it self by Constantinople,
Ireland, or Virginia; but the best, and last fortune to it Knighthood shall
be, to make Dol Teare-sheet, or Kate-Common, a Lady: and so, it Knighthood
may eat


ARe you sure he is not gone by?


No, I staid in the shop ever since.


But, he may take the other end of the Lane.


No, I told him I would be here at this end: I appointed him hither.


What a Barbarian it is to stay then!


Yonder he comes.


And his charge left behind him, which is a very good sign, Dauphine.


How now Cutberd, succeeds it, or no?


Past imagination, Sir, omnia secunda; you could not have prayed, to have had
it so well: Saltat senex, as it is in the Proverb, he does triumph in his
felicity; admires the party! he has given me the Lease of my House too! and,
I am now going for a silent Minister to marry 'hem, and away


Slight, get one of the silenced Ministers, a zealous Brother would torment him
purely


Cum priuilegio, Sir.


O, by no means, let us do nothing to hinder it now when it is done and
finished, I am for you: for any devise of vexation


And that shall be within this half hour, upon my dexterity, Gentlemen.
Contriue what you can, in the mean time, bonis auibus


How the Slave does Latin it!


It would be made a Jest to Posterity, Sirs, this days mirth, if ye will.


Be shrew his heart that will not, I pronounce.


And, for my part. What is it?


To translate all La-Fooles company, and his Feast hither, to day, to celebrate
this Bride-ale


I marry, but how will it be done?


I Will undertake the directing of all the Ladie-Guests thither, and then the
meat must follow


For Gods sake, let us effect it: it will be an excellent Comoedy of affliction,
so many several noyses


But are they not at the other place already, think you?


I Will warrant you for the Colledge-honours: one of their faces has not the
priming color laid on yet, nor the other her Smock sleek'd


O, but they will rise earlier then ordinary, to a Feast.


Best go see, and assure our selves.


Who knows the House?


I Will lead you, were you never there yet?


Not I.


Nor I.


Where have you lived then? not know Tom Otter!


No: for Gods sake, what is he?


An excellent Animal, equal with your Daw, or La-Foole, if not transcendent;
and does Latin it as much as your Barber: he is his Wifes Subject, he calls
her Princess, and at such times as these, follows her up and down the House
like a Page, with his Hat off, partly for heat, partly for reverence. At this
instant, he is marshalling of his Bull, Bear, and Horse


What be those, in the name of Sphinx?


Why Sir? he has been a great man at the Beare-Garden in his time: and from
that subtle sport, has taken the witty denomination of his chief carousing
Cups. One he calls his Bull, another his Bear, another his Horse. And then he
has his lesser Glasses, that he calls his Dear, and his Ape; and several
degrees of 'hem too: and never is well, nor thinks any entertaynment perfect,
till these be brought out, and set of the Cupbord


For Gods love! we should miss this, if we should not go.


Nay, he has a thousand things as good, that will speak him all day. He will
rail on his Wife, with certain common places, behind her back; and to her
face --


No more of him. Let Us go see him, I petition you,


NAy, good Princess, hear me pauca verba.


By that light, I Will a' you chained up, with your Bul-dogges, and Beare-dogges,
if you be not civil the sooner. I Will send you to kennell, in faith. You were
best bait me with your Bull, Bear, and Horse? Never a time, that the
Courtiers, or Collegiates come to the House, but you make it a Shrouetuesday! I
would have you get your Whitsonti^e-Veluet-Cap, and your staff in your hand, to
entertain 'hem: yes in troth, do


Not so Princess, neither, but under correction, sweet Princess, gi'me leave
-- these things I am known to the Courtiers by. It is reported to them for my
humor, and they receive it so, and do expect it. Tom Otters Bull, Bear, and
Horse is known all over England, in rerum natura


Fore me, I will na-ture 'hem over to Paris-Garden, and na-ture you thither
too, if you pronounce them again. Is a Bear a fit Beast, or a Bull, to mix
in society with great Ladies? think in your discretion, in any good polity


The Horse then, good Princess.


Well, I am contented for the Horse: they love to be well horsed, I know. I
love it my self


And it is a delicate fine Horse. Poetarum Pegasus. Under correction,
Princess, Jupiter did turn himself into a -- Taurus, or Bull, under
correction, good Princess


By my integritiy, I Will send you over to the Banke-side, I Will commit you to the
Master of the Garden, if I hear but a syllable more. Must my house, or my
roof, be polluted with the scent of Bears, and Bulls, when it is perfumed for
great Ladies? Is this according to the instrument, when I married you? That I
would be Princess, and reign in mine own House: and you would be my
subject, and obey me? What did you bring me, should make you thus peremptory?
Do I allow you your halfe-crowne a day, to spend, where you will, among your
Gamesters, to vex and torment me, at such times as these? Who gives you your
maintenance, I pray you? who allows you your Horsemeat, and Mans-meat? your
three Suits of Apparel a year? your four pair of Stockings, one Silk,
three Worsted? your clean Linen, your Bands, and Cuffes when I can get you to
wear 'hem? It Is mar'l you ha'hem on now. Who graces you with Courtiers, or
great Personages, to speak to you out of their Coaches, and come home to your
House? Were you ever so much as looked upon by a Lord, or a Lady, before I
married you: but on the Easter, or Whitson-holy-dayes? and then out at the
Banqueting House windore, when Ned Whiting, or George Stone, were at the stake


(For Gods sake, let us go staue her off him.)


Answer me to that. And did not I take you up from thence, in an old Greasy
Buffe-Doublet, with Points; and Green Vellet Sleeves, out at the elbowes? you
forget this


(She Will worry him, if we help not in time.)


O, here are some of the Gallants! Go to, behave your self distinctly, and
with good morality; Or, I protest, I Will take away your exhibition


BY your leave, fair Mistress Otter, I Will be bold to enter these Gentlemen in
your acquaintance


It shall not be obnoxious, or difficill, Sir.


How does my noble Captain? Is the Bull, Bear, and Horse, in rerum natura
still


Sir. Sic visum superis.


I would you would but intimate 'hem, do. Go your ways in, and get Tosts,
and Butter, made for the Wood-cocks. That Is a fit Province for you


Alas, what a tyranny, is this poor fellow married too.


O, but the sport will be anon, when we get him loose.


Dares be ever speak?


No Anabaptist ever railed with the like license: but mark her Language in the
meane-time, I beseech you


Gentlemen, you are very aptly come. My Cousin, Sir Amorous, will be here
briefly


In good time, Lady. Was not Sir John Daw here, to ask for him, and the
company


I cannot assure you, Mr. Tru-wit. Here was a very melancholy Knight in a
Ruff, that demanded my subject for some body, a Gentleman, I think


I, that was he, Lady.


But he departed straight, I can resolve you.


What an excellent choice phrase, this Lady expresses in?


O, Sir! she is the only authentical Courtier, that is not naturally bred
one, in the City


You have taken that report upon trust, Gentlemen.


No, I assure you, the Court gouernes it so, Lady, in your behalf.


I am the Servant of the Court, and Courtiers, Sir.


They are rather your Idolaters.


Not so, Sir.


How now, Cutberd? Any cross?


and indeed, so ashamed of her injury to you, that she desires you to forgive
her, and but grace her Wedding with your presence to day -- She is to be
married to a very good fortune, she says, his Uncle, old Morose: and she
willed me in private to tell you, that she shall be able to do you more
favors, and with more security now, then before

Did she say so, in faith?


Why, what do you think of me, Sir John! ask Sir Dauphine.


Nay, I believe you. Good Sir Dauphine, did she desire me to forgive her?


I assure you, Sir John, she did.


Nay then, I do with all my heart, and I Will be iouiall.


Yes, for look you Sir, this was the injury to you. La-Foole intended this
Feast to honor her Bridale day, and made you the property to inuit the
College Ladies, and promise to bring her: and then at the time, she should
have appeared (as his friend) to have given you the dor. Whereas now, Sir
Dauphine has brought her to a feeling of it, with this kind of satisfaction,
that you shall bring all the Ladies to the place where she is, and be very
iouiall; and there she will have a Dinner, which shall be in your name: and so
disappoint La-Foole, to make you good again, and (as it were) a sauer in the
man


As I am a Knight, I honor her, and forgive her heartily.


About it then presently, Tru-wit is gone before to confront the Coaches, and
to acquaint you with so much, if he meet you. Join with him, and it is well.
See, here comes your Antagonist, but take you no notice, but be very iouiall


Are the Ladies come, Sir John Daw, and your Mistress? Sir Dauphine! you are
exceeding welcome, and honest Master Clerimont. Where Is my Cossen? did you see
no Collegiats, Gentlemen


Collegiats! Do you not hear, Sir Amorous, how you are abused?


How Sir!


Will you speak so kindly to Sir John Daw, that has done you such an affront?


Wherein Gentlemen? let me be a Sut or to you to know, I beseech you!


Why Sir, his Mistress is married to day, to Sir Dauphines Uncle, your Cosens
Neighbor, and he has diuerted all the Ladies, and all your company thither,
to frustrate your provision, and stick a disgrace upon you. He was here, now,
to have enticed us away from you too: but we told him his own, I think


Has Sir John Daw wronged me so in-humanely?


He has done it, Sir Amorous, most maliciously, and trecherously: but if
you will be ruled by us, you shall quit him in faith


Good Gentlemen! I Will make one, believe it. How I pray?


Marry Sir, get me your Phesants, your Godwits, and your best meat, and dish
it in Silver Dishes of your Cosens presently, and say nothing, but clap me a
clean Towell about you, like a Sewer; and bare-headed, march before it with a
good confidence ('it is but over the way, hard by) and we will second you, where
you shall set of the Board, and bid 'hem welcome to it, which shall show it is
yours, and disgrace his preparation utterly: and, for your Cosen, whereas she
should be troubled here at home with care of making and giving welcome, she
shall transfer all that labor thither, and be a principal guest her self,
sit ranked with the Colledge-Honors, and be honored, and have her Health
drunk as often, as bare, and as loud as the best of 'hem


I Will go tell her presently. It shall be done, that is resolved.


I thought he would not hear it out, but 'twould take him.


Well, there be Guests, and meat now; how shall we do for Music?


The smell of the Venison, going through the Street, will inuit one noise of
Fiddlers, or other


I would it would call the Trumpeters thither.


Faith, there is hope, they have intelligence of all Feasts. There Is good
correspondence betwixt them, and the London-Cookes. It Is twenty to one but we
have 'hem


'Twill be a most solemn day for my Uncle, and an excellent fit of mirth for
us


I, if we can hold up the aemulation betwixt Fool and Daw, and never bring
them to expostulate


Tut, flatter 'hem both (as Tru-wit says) and you may take their
understandings in a Purse-net. They Will believe themselves to be just such men
as we make 'hem, neither more nor less. They have nothing, not the use of
their senses, but by tradition


See! Sir Amorous has his Towell on already.


Yes, it is very faesible: she will do any thing, she says, rather then the
La-Fooles shall be disgraced


She is a Noble Kinswoman. It will be such a pest'-ling device, Sir Amorous! It
will pound all your enemies practices to poulder, and blow him up with his own
mine, his own train


Nay, we will give fire, I warrant you.


But you must carry it privately, without any noise, and take no notice by any
means --


Gentlemen, my Princess says, you shall have all her Silver Dishes,
festinate: and she is gone to alter her Tire a little, and go with you --


And your self too, Captain Otter.


By any means, Sir.


Yes Sir, I do mean it: but I would entreat my Cosen Sir Amorous, and you
Gentlemen, to be Suitors to my Princess, that I may carry my Bull, and my
Bear, as well as my Horse


That you shall do, Captain Otter.


My Cosen will never consent, Gentlemen.


She must consent, Sir Amorous, to reason.


Why, she says they are no decorum among Ladies.


But they are decora, and that is better, Sir.


I, she must hear argument. Did not Pasiphae, who was a Queen, love a Bull?
and was not Calisto, the Mother of Arcas, turned into a Bear, and made a
Star, Mistress Vrsula, in the Heavens


O God! that I could have said as much! I will have these Stories painted in the
Beare-garden, Ex Ouidij Metamorphosi


Where is your Princess, Captain? pray' be our Leader.


That I shall, Sir.


Make haste, good Sir Amorous.


SIr, there is an Angel for your self, and a brace of Angels for your cold.
Muse not at this manage of my bounty, It is fit, we should thank Fortune,
double to Nature, for any benefit she conferres upon us; besides, it is your
imperfection, but my solace.


I thank your Worship, so is it mine, now.


What says he, Cutberd?


He says, Praesto, Sir, whenever your Worship needs him, he can be ready
with the like. He got this cold with sitting up late, and singing Catches with
Cloth-workers


No more. I thank him.


God keep your Worship, and give you much joy with your fair Spouse.


O, o, stay Cutberd! let him give me five shillings of my money back. As it is
bounty to reward benefits, so is it equity to mulct injuries. I will have it.
What says he


He cannot change it, Sir


It must be changed.


Cough again.


What says he?


He will cough out the rest, Sir.


(Vmh,


Away, away with him, stop his mouth, away, I forgive it. --


Fie, Master Morose, that you will use this violence to a man of the Church.


How!


It does not become your gravity, or breeding, (as you pretend in Court) to
have offered this outrage on a water-man, or any more boystrous creature, much
less on a man of his civil Coat


You can speak then!


Yes, Sir.


Speak out I mean.


I Sir. Why, did you think you had married a Statue? or a Motion, only? one
of the French Puppets, with the eyes turned with a Wire? or some innocent out
of the Hospital that would stand with her hands thus, and a playse mouth, and
look upon you


O immodestie! a manifest woman! what Cutberd?


Nay, never quarrel with Cutberd, Sir, it is too late now. I confess, it does
bate somewhat of the modesty I had, when I writ simply Maid: but I hope, I
shall make it a stock still competent, to the estate, and dignity of your
Wife


She can talk!


Yes indeed, Sir.


What, Sirrah. None of my Knaves there? where is this Impostor, Cutberd?


Speak to him, fellow, speak to him, I Will have none of this coacted,
unnatural dumbness in my house, in a Family where I govern


She is my Regent already! I have married a Penthesilea, a Semiramis, sold my
liberty to a Distaffe


Where Is Master Morose?


Is he come again! Lord have mercy upon me.


I wish you all joy, Mistress Epicoene, with your grave and honorable match.


I return you the thanks, Master Tru-wit, so friendly a wish deserves.


She has acquaintance, too!


God save you Sir, and give you all contentment in your fair choice, here.
Before I was the Bird of night to you, the Owl but now I am the Messenger of
Peace, a Dove, and bring you the glad wishes of many friends, to the
celebration of this good hour


What hour, Sir?


Your Marriage hour Sir. I commend your resolution, that (notwithstanding all
the dangers I laid before you, in the voice of a Night-Crow) would yet go on,
and be your self. It shows you are a man constant to your, own ends, and
upright to your purposes, that would not be put off with left handed cries


How should you arrive at the knowledge of so much!


Why, did you ever hope, Sir committing the secrecy of it to a Barber, that
less then the whole Town should know it? you might as well have told it to the
Conduit, or the Bake-house, or the Infant'ry that follow the Court, and with
more security. Could your Gravity forget so old and noted a remnant, as,
lippis and tonsoribus notum, Well Sir, forgive it your self now, the fault,
and be communicable with your friends. Here will be three or four
fashionable Ladies, from the College to visit you presently, and their train
of Minions, and Followers


Bar my doors! bar my doors! where are all my eaters? my mouths now?
baire up my doors, you Varlets


He is a Varlet, that stirs to such an office. Let 'hem stand open. I would
see him that dares move his eyes toward it. Shall I have a Barricado made
against my friends, to be barred of any pleasure they can bring in to me with
honorable visitation


O Amazonian impudence!


Nay faith, in this, Sir, she speaks but reason: and me thinks is more
continent then you. Would you go to bed so presently, Sir, before noone? a man
of your head, and hair, should owe more to that reverend Ceremony, and not
mount the Marriage Bed, like a Towne-Bull, or a Mountayne-Goate; but stay the
due season; and ascend it then with Religion, and fear. Those delights are to
be ste^ep'd in the humor, and silence of the night; and give the day to other
open pleasures, and iollities of Feast, of Mufique, of Revels, of Discourse:
we will have all, Sir, that may make your Hymen high, and happy


O, my torment, my torment!


Nay, if you endure the first half hour, Sir, so tediously, and with this
irksomeness; what comfort, or hope, can this fair Geutlewoman make to her
self hereafter, in the consideration of so many years as are to come --


Of my affliction. Good Sir, depart, and let her do it alone.


I have done, Sir.


That cursed Barber!


(Yes faith, a cursed Wretch indeed, Sir.)


I have married his Citterne, that is common to all men. Some plague above the
plague --


(All Egypts ten Plagues)


Revenge me on him.


It Is very well, Sir. If you laid on a curse or two, more, I Will assure you
he will bear 'hem. As, that he may get the Pox with seeking to cure it, Sir?
Or, that while he is curling another man's hair, his own may drop off? Or, for
burning some Male-baudes Lock, he may have his brain beat out with the
Curling-Iron


No, let the Wretch live wretched. May he get the Itch, and his Shop so
lousie, as no man dare come at him, nor he come at no man


(I, and if he would swallow all his Balls for Pills, let not them purge him)


Let his Warming-Pan be ever cold.


(A perpetual Frost underneath it, Sir)


Let him never hope to see fire again.


(But in Hell, Sir)


His Chayres be always empty, his Scissors rust, and his Combs mould in
their Cases


Very dreadful that! (And may he loose the invention, Sir, of caruing
Lanternes in Paper


Let there be no Baud carted that year, to employ a Basin of his: but let him
be glad to eat his Sponge, for Bread


And drink lotium to it, and much good do him.


Or, for want of Bread --


Eat Eare-Waxe, Sir. I Will help you. Or draw'his own Teeth, and add them to
the Lute-string


No, beat the old ones to poulder, and make Bread of them.


(Yes, make meal of the Milstones.)


May all the Botches, and Burns, that he has cured on others, break out upon
him


And he now forget the cure of 'hem in himself, Sir: or, if he do remember
it, let him have scraped all his Linen into Lint for it, and have not a ragge
left him, to set up with


That falls out often, Madame, that he that thinks himself the Master-wit,
is the Master-foole. I assure your Ladyship, ye cannot laugh at her


No, we will have her to the College: and she have wit, she shall be one of
us.! shall she not Centaure? we will make her a Collegiate


Yes faith, Madame, and Mauis, and she will set up a side.


Believe it Madame, and Mistress Mauis, she will sustain her part.


I Will tell you that, when I have talked with her, and tried her.


Use her very ciuilly, Mauis.


So I will, Madame.


Blessed minute, that they would whisper thus ever.


In the the mean time, Madame, would but your Ladyship help to vex him a
little: you know his disease, talk to him about the Wedding Ceremonies, or
call for your Gloves, or --


Let me alone. Centaure, help me. Master Bridegroom, where are you?


O, it was too miraculously good to last!


We see no Ensigns of a Wedding, here; no Character of a Brideale: where be
our Skarfes, and our Gloves? I pray you, give 'hem us. Let Us know your Brides
Colors, and yours, at least


Alas, Madame, he has provided none.


Had I known your Ladyships Painter, I would.


He has given it you, Centaure, in faith. But do you hear Master Morose, a Jest
will not absolve you in this manner. You that have sucked the Milk of the
Court, and from thence have been brought up to the very strong meats, and
Wine, of it; been a Courtier from the Biggen, to the Nightcap: (as we may
say) and you, to offend in such a high point of Ceremony, as this and let your
Nuptials want all marks of solemnity! How much Plate have you lost to day
(if you had but regarded your profit) what gifts, what friends, through your
mere Rusticitie


Madame --


Pardon me, Sir, I must insinuate your errors to you. No Gloves? no Garters? no
Skarfes? no Epithalamium? no Masque


Yes, Madame, I Will make an Epithalamium, I promised my Mistress, I have begun
it already: will your Ladyship hear it


I, good Jack Daw.


Will it please your Ladyship command a Chamber, and be private with hour
friend? you shall have your choice of Rooms, to retire to after: my whole
House is yours. I know, it has been your Ladishis errand, into the City, at
other times, how ever now you have been unhappily diuerted upon me* but I
shall be loath to break any honorable custom of your Ladyships. And
therefore, good Madame --


Come, you are a rude Bridegroom, to entertayne Ladies of honor in this
fashion


He is a rude Groom, indeed.


By that light, you deserve to grafted, and have your Horns reach from one
side of the Island, to the other. Do not mistake me, Sir, I but speak this,
to give the Ladies some heart again, not for any malice to you


Is this your Brau^, Ladies?


As God help me, if you utter such another word, I Will take Mistress Bride in
and begin to you, in a very sad cup, do you see? Go too, know your friends,
and such, as love you


BY your leave, Ladies. Do you want any Music? I have brought you variety
of noyses. Play, Sirs, all of you





No, they are Hair, Rosin, and Guts. I can give you the Receipt.


Peace, Boys.


Play, I say.


Peace, Rascals. You see who is your friend now, Sir? Take courage, put on a
Martyrs resolution. Mock down all their attemptings, with patience. It Is but
a day, and I would suffer heroically. Should an Ass exceed me in fortitude?
No. You betray your infirmity with your hanging dull ears, and make them
insult: bear up bravely, and constantly. Look you here, Sir, what honor is
done you unexpected, Otter, your Neighbor, in the Rump, or Tail of it


Is that Gorgon, that Medusa come? Hide me, hide me.


I warrant you, Sir, she will not transform you. Look upon her with a good
courage. Pray you entertayne her, and conduct your Guests in, No? Mistress
Bride, will you entreat in the Ladies? your Bridegroom is so shame-fac'd, here
--


Will it please your Ladyship, Madame?


With the benefit of your company, Mistress.


Servant, pray you perform your duties.


And glad to be commanded, Mistress.


How like you her wit, Mauis.


Very prettily, absolutely well.


It Is my place.


You shall pardon me, Mistress Otter.


Why, I am a Collegiate.


But not in ordinary.


But I am.


We Will dispute that within.


Would this had lasted a little longer.


And that they had sent for the Heralds. Captain Otter, what news?


I have brought my Bull, Bear, and Horse, in private, and yonder are the
Trumpetters without, and the Drum, Gentlemen


O, o, o.


And we will have a rouse in each of 'hem, anon, for bold Britons, in faith.


Follow, follow, follow.


WAs there ever poor Bridegroom so tormented? or man indeed?


I have not read of the like, in the Chronicles of the Land.


Sure, he cannot but go to a place of rest, after all this Purgatory.


He may presume it, I think.


The spitting, the coughing, the laughter, the neesing, the farting, dancing,
noise of the Music, and her masculine, and loud commanding, and urging the
whole Family, makes him think he has married a Fury


And she carries it up bravely.


I, she takes any occasion to speak: that is the height on it.


And how so berly Dauphine labors to satisfy him, that it was none of his
plot


And has almost brought him to the faith, in the article. Here he comes. Where
is he now? what is become of him, Dauphine


O, hold me up a little, I shall go away in the jest else. He has got on his
whole Nest of Night-caps, and locked himself up, in the top of the House, as
high as ever he can climb from the noise. I peeped in at a cranny, and saw him
sitting over a crosse-beame of the roof, like him of the Sadiers Horse in
Fleetstreet, vp-right: and he will sleep there


But where are your Collegiates?


With-drawne with the Bride in private.


O, they are instructing her in the Colledge-Grammar. If she have grace with
them, she knows all their secrets instantly


Me thinks, the Lady Haughty looks well to day, for all my disprayse of her
in the morning. I think, I shall come about to thee again, Tru-wit


Believe it, I told you right. Women ought to repair the losses, time and
years have made in their features, with dressings. And an intelligent Woman,
if she know by her self the least defect, will be most curious, to hide it:
and it becomes her. If she be short, let her sit much, lest when she stands,
she be thought to sit. If she have an ill foot, let her wear her Gown the
longer, and her Shoo the thinner. If a fat Hand, and scald Nails, let her
carue the less, and act in Gloves. If a sour breath, let her never discourse
fasting: and always talk at her distance. If she have black and rugged Teeth,
let her offer the less at laughter, especially if she laugh wide, and open


O, you shall have some women, when they laugh, you would think they brayed,
it is so rude, and --


I, and others, that will stalk i'their gait like an Estrich, and take huge
strides. I cannot endure such a sight. I love measure in the feet, and number
in the voice: they are Gentlenesses, thaa oft-times draw no less then the face


How came thou to study these Creatures so exactly? I would thou would
make me a Proficient


Yes, but you must leave to live in your Chamber then a month together upon
Amadis de Gaul, or Don Quixote, as you are wont; and come abroad where the
matter is frequent, to Court, to Tiltings, public Shows, and Feasts, to
Plays, and Church sometimes: thither they come to show their new Tyres too, to
see, and to be seen. In these places a m^n shall find whom to love, whom to
play with, whom to touch once, whom to hold cuer. The variety arrests his
judgment. A Wench to please a man comes not down dropping from the seeling,
as he lies on his back droning a Tobacco Pipe. He must go where she is


Yes, and be never the near.


Out Heretic. That diffidence makes thee worthy, it should be so.


He says true to you, Dauphine.


Why?


A man should not doubt to over come any Woman. Think he can vanquish 'hem,
and he shall, for though they deny, their desire is to be tempted. Penelope
her self cannot hold out long. Ostend, you saw, was taken at last. You must
persevere, and hold to your purpose. They would solicit us, but that they are
afraid. Howsoever, they wish in their hearts we should solicit them. Praise
them, flatter. 'hem, you shall never want Eloquence, or trust: even the
chastest delight to feel themselves that way rubbed. With Praises you must mix
Kisses too. If they take them, they will take more. Though they strive, they
would be overcome


O, but a man must beware of force.


It is to them an acceptable violence, and has ofttimes the place of the
greatest courtesy. She that might have been forced, and you let her go free
without touching though she then seem to thank you, will ever hate you after:
and glad in the face, is assuredly sad at the heart


But all women are not to be taken always.


It Is true. No more then all Birds, or all Fishes. If you appear learned to an
ignorant Wench, or iocund to a sad, or witty to a foolish, why she presently
begins to mistrust herself. You must approach them in their own height,
their own line: for the contrary makes many that fear to commit themselves to
noble and worthy fellows, run into the embraces of a Rascal. If she love
Wit, give Verses, though you borrow 'hem of a friend, or buy 'hem, to have
good. If Valor, talk of your Sword, and be frequent in the mention of
Quarrels, though you be staunch in fighting. If actiuity be seen o'your Barbary
often, or leaping over stools, for the credit of your back. If she love good
clothes or dressing have your learned Counsel about you every morning, your
French Tailor, Barber, Linnener, etc. Let your Poulder, your Glass, and your
Comb, be your dearest acquaintance. Take more care for the ornament of your
head, then the safety: and wish the Commonwealth rather troubled, then a
hair about you. That will take her. Then if she be covetous and craving, do
you promise any thing, and perform sparingly: so shall you keep her in
appetite still. Seem as you would give, but be like a barren field that yields
little, or unlucky Dice, to foolish, and hoping Gamesters. Let your gifts be
flight, and dainty, ra her then precious. Let cunning be above cost. Give
Cherries at time of year, or Apricots; and say they were sent you out of the
Country, though you bought 'hem in Cheap-siae. Admire her Tyres; like her in
all fashions; compare her in every habit to some Deity; invent excellent
Dreams to flatter her, and Riddles; or, if she be a great one, perform
always the second parts to her: like what she likes, praise whom she praises,
and fail not to make the Household and Servants yours, yea the whole Family,
and salute 'hem by their names: ('it is but light cost if you can purchase' hem
so) and make her Physician your Pensioner, and her chief woman. Nor will it
be out of your gain to make love to her too, so she follow, not usher, her
Ladies pleasure. All blabbing is taken away, when she comes to be a part of the
crime


On what Courtly lap have thou late slept, to come forth so sudden and absolute
a Courtling


Good faith, I should rather question you, that are so harkening after these
Mysteries. I begin to suspect your diligence, Dauphine. Speak, art thou in
love in earnest


Yes by my troth am I: 'twere ill dissembling before thee.


With which of 'hem, I pray thee?


With all the Collegiates.


Out on thee. We Will keep you at home, believe it, in the Stable, and you be
such a Stallion


No, I like him well. Men should love wisely, and all women: someone for the
face, and let her please the eye; another for the skin, and let her please the
touch; a third for the voice, and let her please the ear; and where the
Objects mix, let the senses so too. Thou would think it strange, if I
should make 'hem all in love with thee a fore Night


I would say thou had the best Philtre in the World, and could do more
then Madame Medea, or Doctor Foreman


If I do not, let me play the Mounte-banke for my meat while I live, and the
Bawd for my drink


So be it, I say.


O Lord, Gentlemen, how my Knights and I have mist you here!


Why, Captain, what Service? what Service?


To see me bring up my Bull, Bear, and Horse to fight.


Yes faith, the Captain says we shall be his Dogs to bait 'hem.


A good employment.


Come on, let us see a course then.


I am afraid my Cousin will be offended if she come.


Be afraid of nothing. Gentlemen, I have placed the Drum and the Trumpets,
and one to give 'hem the sign when you are ready. Here Is my Bull for my
self, and my Bear for Sir John Daw, and my Horse for Sir Amorous. Now set
your foot to mine, and yours to his, and --


Pray God my Cousin come not.


Saint George, and Saint Andrew, fear no Cousins. Come, sound, sound. Et rauco
strepuerunt cornuacantu


Well said, Captain, in faith: well fought at the Bull.


Well held at the Bear.


Low, low, Captain.


OF the Horse has kicked off his Dog already.


I cannot drink it, as I am a Knight.


Gods so, off with his Spurs, somebody.


It goes again my conscience. My Cousin will be angry with it.


I have done mine.


You fought high and fair, Sir John.


At the head.


Like an excellent Beare-Dogge.


You take no notice of the business I hope.


Not a word, Sir, you see we are iouiall.


Sir Amorous, you must not aequiuocate. It must be pulled down, for all my
Cousin


Sfoot, if you take not your drink, they will think you are discontented with
some thing: you will betray all, if you take the least notice


Not I, I Will both drink, and talk then.


You must pull the Horse on his knees, Sir Amorous: fear no Cousins. Iacta est
alea


O, now he is in his vain, and bold. The least hint given him of his Wife now
will make him rail desperately


Speak to him of her.


Do you, and I Will fetch her to the hearing of it.


Captain he- Otter, your she- Otter is coming, your Wife.


Wife! Buz. Titinilitium. There Is no such thing in nature. I confess,
Gentlemen, I have a Cook, a Laundresse, a House-Drudge, that serves my
necessary turns, and goes under that title: But he is an Ass that will be so
vxorious, to tie his affections to one Circle. Come, the name duls appetite.
Here, replenish again: another bout. Wives are nasty, sluttish Animalls


O, Captain.


As ever the Earth bare, tribus verbis. Where Is Master Tru-wit?


He Is slipped aside, Sir.


But you must drink, and be iouiall,


Yes, give it me.


And me, too.


Let Us be iouiall.


As iouiall as you will.


Agreed. Now you shall have the Bear, Cousin, and Sir John Daw the Horse, and
I Will have the Bull still. Sound Tritons of the Thames. Nunc est bibe^dum, nunc
pede libero --





O, now the Trumpets have waked him, we shall have his company.


A Wife is a sciruy Clogdogdo; an unlucky thing, a very foresaid Beare-whelpe,
without any good fashion or breeding: mala bestia


Why did you marry one then, Captain?


Fury these forty weeks.


The more to blame you, Captain.


Nay, Mistress Otter, hear him a little first.


She has a breath worse then my Grand-mothers, profecto.


O treacherous Liar. Kiss me sweet Master Tru-wit, and prove him a slandring
Knave


I Will rather believe you, Lady.


And she has a Perruke, that is like a pound of Hemp, made up in Shoo-thrids.


O Viper, Mandrake!


A most vile face! and yet she spends me forty pound a year in Mercury, and
Hogs-bones. All her Teeth were made in the Black- Friars: both her eyebrows
in the Strand, and her Hair in Siuer-street. Every part of the Town ownes a
piece of her


I cannot hold.


She takes her self asunder still when she goes to bed, into some twenty
Boxes; and about next day noone is put together again, like a great Germane
Clock: and so comes forth and rings a tedious larum to the whole House, and
then is quiet again for an hour, but for her quarters. Have you done me right,
Gentlemen


No, Sir, I Will do you right with my quarters, with my quarters.





Sound, sound.


A battle, a battle.


You notorious stinkardly Beareward, does my breath smell?


Under correction, dear Princess: look to my Bear, and my Horse, Gentlemen.


Do I want Teeth, and Eyebrows, thou Bul-Dogge?


Sound, sound still.


No, I protest, under correction --


I, now you are under correction, you protest: but you did not protest before
correction, Sir. Thou Judas, to offer to betray thy Princess! I Will make thee
an example --


Otter.


Ah --


Mistress Mary Ambree, your examples are dangerous. Rogues, Hell Hounds,
Stentors, out of my doors, you sons of noise and tumult, begot on an ill
May Day, or when the Gally-foist is a-float to Westminster! A Trumpetter could
not be conceived but then


What ailes you, Sir?


They have rent my Roof, Walls, and all my Windores asunder, with their
brazen throats


Best follow him, Dauphine.


So I will.


Where Is Daw, and La-Foole?


They are both run away, Sir. Good Gentlemen, help to pacify my Princess,
and speak to the great Ladies for me. Now must I go lie with the Bears this
fortnight, and keep out of the way, till my peace be made, for this scandale
she has taken. Did you not see my Bull-head, Gentlemen


Is It not on, Captain?


No: but he may make a new one, by that, is on.


O, here it is. And you come over, Gentlemen, and ask for Tom Otter, we will go
down to Ratcliffe, and have a course in faith: for all these disasters. There Is
bona spet left


Away, Captain, get off while you are well.


I am glad we are rid of him.


You had never been, unless we had put his Wife upon him. His humor is as
tedious at last, as it was ridiculous at first


WE wondered why you shreek'd so, Mistress Otter.


O God, Madame, he came down with a huge long naked Weapon in both his hands,
and looked so dreadfully! Sure, he is beside himself


Why, what made you there, Mistress Otter?


Alas, Mistress Mauis, I was chastising my subject, and thought nothing of him.


Faith, Mistress, you must do so too. Learn to chastize. Mistress Otter
corrects her Husband so, he dares not speak, but under correction


And with his Hat off to her: 'twould do you good to see.


In sadness it is good, and mature counsel: practice it, Morose. I Will call you
Morose still now, as I call Centaure, and Mauis: we four will be all one


And you will come to the College, and live with us?


Make him give Milk, and Honey.


Look how you manago him at first, you shall have him ever after.


Let him allow you your Coach, and four Horses, your Woman, your Chambermaid,
your Page your Gentleman-usher, your French Cook, and four Grooms


And go with us, to Bed'lem, to the China Houses, and to the Exchange.


It will open the gate to your fame.


Here Is Centaure has immortalized her self, with taming of her wild Male.


I, she has done the Miracle of the Kingdom.


But Ladies, do you count it lawful to have such plurality of Servants, and
do 'hem all graces


Why not? why should women deny their Favors to men? Are they the poorer, or
the worse


Is the Thames the less for the Dyers Water, Mistress?


Or a Torch, for lighting many Torches?


Well said, La-Foole; what a new one he has got!


They are empty losses, women fear, in this kind.


Besides, Ladies should be mindful of the approach of age, and let no time
want his due use. The best of our days pass first


We are Rivers, that cannot be called back, Madame: she that now excludes
her Lovers, may live to lie a forsaken Beldame, in a frozen Bed


It Is true, Mauis: and who will wait on us to coach then? or write, or tell us
the news then? Make Anagrams of our names, and inuit us to the Cockpit, and
kiss our hands all the Play-time, and draw their weapons for our honors


Not one.


Nay, my Mistress is not altogether vn-intelligent of these things; here be in
presence have tasted of her favors


What a neighing Hobbyhorse is this!


But not with intent to boast 'hem again, Servant. And have you those
excellent Receipts, Madame, to keep your selves from bearing of Children


now to comfort a poor Gentlewoman? Ay me! what fortune had I to marry a
distracted man

I Will tell you, Mistress --


How rarely she holds it up!


What mean you, Gentlemen?


What will you tell me, Servant?


The Disease in Greek, is called Mayia, in Latin, Insania, Furor, vel
Ecstasis melancholica, that is, Egressio, when a man ex melancholico, euadit
fanaticus


Shall I have a Lecture read upon me alive?


But he may be but Phreneticus, yet, Mistress? and Phrenetis is only delirium,
or so --


I, that is for the Disease, Servant: but what is this to the cure? we are sure
enough of the Disease


Let me go.


Why, we will entreat her to hold her peace, Sir.


O, no. Labor not to stop her. She is like a Conduit-pipe, that will gush out
with more force, when she opens again


I Will tell you, Morose, you must talk Divinity to her altogether, or moral
Philosophy


I, and there is an excellent Book of moral Philosophy, Madame, of Raynard the
Fox, and all the Beasts, called Dones Philosophy


There is, indeed, Sir Amorous La-Foole.


O misery!


I have read it, my Lady Centaure, all over to my Cousin, hers.


I, and it is a very good Book as any is, of the Modernes.


Tut, he must have Seneca read to him, and Plutarch, and the Ancients; the
Modernes are not for this Disease


Why, you discommended them too, to day, Sir John


I, in some Cases: but in these they are best, and Aristotle's Ethics.


Say you so, Sir John? I think you are decelu'd: you took it upon trust.


Where Is Trusty, my woman? I Will end this difference. I pr'y thee, Otter, call
her. Her Father and Mother were both mad, when they put her to me


I think so. Nay, Gentlemen, I am tame. This is but an exercise, I know a
Marriage Ceremony, which I must endure


And one of 'hem (I know not which) was cured with the Sick-mans Salve; and the
other with Greens Groats-worth of wit


A very cheap Cure, Madame.


I, it is very faesible.


My Lady called for you, Mistress Trusty: you must decide a Controversy.


O Trusty, which was it you said, your Father, or your Mother, that was cured
with the Sick-mans Salve


My Mother, Madame, with the Salve.


Then it was the Sick-womans Salve.


And my Father with the Groats-worth of wit. But there was other means used:
we had a Preacher that would preach folk asleep still; and so they were
prescribed to go to Church, by an old Woman that was their Physician, thrice a
Week --


To sleep?


Yes forsooth: and every night they read themselves asleep on those Books.


Good faith, it stands with great reason. I would I knew where to procure those
Books


Oh.


I can help you with one of 'hem, Mistress Morose, the Groats-worth of wit.


But I shall disfurnish you, Sir Amorous: can you spare it?


O, yes, for a Week, or so; I Will read it my self to him.


No, I must do that, Sir: that must be my office.


Sure, he would do well enough, if he could sleep.


No, I should do well enough, if you could sleep. Have I no friend that will
make her drunk? or give her a little ladanum? or opium


Why, Sir, she talks ten times worse in her sleep.


How!


Do you not know that, Sir? never ceases all night.


And snores like a Porcpisce.


O, redeem me, Fate, redeem me, Fate. For how how many causes may a man be
diuorc'd, Nephew


I know not truly, Sir.


Some Divine must resolve you in that, Sir, or Canon Lawyer.


I will not rest, I will not think of any other hope or comfort till I know.


Alas, poor man.


You Will make him mad indeed, Ladies, if you pursue this.


No, we will let him breathe, now a quarter of an hour, or so.


By my faith, a large Truce.


Is that his keeper, that is gone with him?


It is his Nephew, Madame.


Sir Dauphine, Eugenie.


He looks like a very pitiful Knight --


As can be. This Marriage, has put him out of all.


He has not a penny in his Purse, Madame --


He is ready to cry all this day.


A very Sharke, he set me in the nicke the other night at Primero.


How these Swabbers talk!


I, Otters Wine has swelled their humors above a Springtide.


Good Morose, let us go in again. I like your couches exceeding well: we will
go lie, and talk there


I wait on you, Madame.


'Slight, I will have 'hem as silent as Signs, and their Posts too, e're I have
done. Do you hear, Ladie-Bride? I pray thee now, as thou art a noble Wench,
continue this Discourse of Dauphine within: but praise him exceedingly.
Magnify him with all the height of affection thou can. (I have some purpose
in it) and but beat off these two Rookes, Jack Daw, and his fellow, with any
coffeehouse hither, and I Will honor thee for ever


I was about it, here. It angered me to the soul, to hear 'hem begin to
talk so malepert


Pray thee perform it, and thou win'st me an Idolater to thee, everlasting.


Will you go in, and hear me do it?


No, I Will stay here. Drive 'hem out of your company, it is all I ask: which
cannot be any way better done, then by extolling Dauphine, whom they have so
slighted


I warrant you: you shall expect one of 'hem presently.


What a cast of Kastrils are these, to hawke after Ladies, thus?


I, and strike at such an Eagle as Dauphine.


He will be mad, when we will tell him. Here he comes.


O Sir, you are welcome.


Where Is thine Uncle?


Run out o'doores in's Night-caps, to talk with a Casuist, about his
Divorce. It works admirably


Thou would have said so, and thou had been here! The Ladies have laughed
at thee, most Comically, since thou wentst, Dauphine


And asked, if thou were thine Uncles keeper?


And the brace of Babouns answered, yes; and said, thou were a pitiful poor
fellow, and did live upon posts: and had nothing but three Suits of
Apparel, and some few Beneuolences that Lords ga'thee to fool to hem, and
swagger


Let me not live, I Will beat 'hem. I Will bind 'hem both to grand Madames Bed.
posts, and have 'hem bayted with Monkeyes


Thou shall not need, they shall be beaten to thy hand, Dauphine. I have an
Execution to serve upon 'hem, I warrant thee shall serve: trust my plot


I, you have many plots! So you had one, to make all the Wenches in love with
me


Why, If I do not yet before night, as near as it is; and that they do not
every one inuit thee, and be ready to scratch for thee: take the morgage of
my wit


Before God, I Will be his witness; thou shall have it, Dauphine: thou shall be
his Fool for ever, if thou do not


Agreed. Perhaps 'twill be the better estate. Do you observe this Gallerie?
or rather Lobby, indeed? Here are a couple of Studies, at each end one: here
will I act such a Tragi-comoedy between the Cuelphes, and the Ghibellines, Daw
and La-Foole -- which of 'hem comes out first, will I seize on: (you two shall
be the Chorus behind the Arras, and whip out between the Acts, and speak.) If
I do not make 'hem keep the peace, for this remnant of the day, if not of the
year, I have faild once -- I hear Daw coming: Hide, and do not laugh, for
Gods sake


Which is the way into the Garden, trow?


O, Jack Daw! I am glad I have met with you. In good faith, I must have this
matter go no further between you. I must have it taken up


What matter, Sir? Between whom?


Come, you disguise it -- Sir Amorous and you. If you love me, Jack, you shall
make use of your Philosophy now, for this once, and deliver me your Sword. This
is not the Wedding the Centaures were at, though there be a shee-one here. The
Bride has entreated me I will see no blood shed at her Bridal, you saw her
whisper me ere-while


As I hope to finish Tacitus, I intend no Murder.


Do you not wait for Sir Amorous?


Not I, by my Knighthood.


And your Schollership too?


And my Schollership too.


Go to, then I return you your Sword, and ask you mercy; but put it not up,
for you will be assaulted. I understood that you had apprehended it, and walked
here to brave him: and that you had held your life contemptible, in regard of
your honor


No, no, no such thing I assure you. He and I parted now, as good fileds as
could be


Trust not you to that Visor. I saw him since Dinner with another face: I have
known many men in my time vexed with losses, with doeths, and with abuses, but
so offended a Wight as Sir Amorous, did I never see, or read of. For taking
away his Guests, Sir, to day, that is the cause: and he declares it behind your
back; with such threatenings and centempts -- He said to Dauphine, you were the
errandst Ass --


I, he may say his pleasure.


And swears you are so protested a Coward, that he knows you will never do
him any manly or single right, and therefore he will take his course


I Will give him any satisfaction, Sir -- but fighting.


I, Sir, but who knows what satisfaction he will take? blood he thirsts for,
and blood he will have: and where-abouts on you he will have it, who knows
but himself


I pray you, Master Tru-wit, be you a Mediator.


Amorous, he is not this way, I pray you be merciful, do not murder him; he
is a Christian as good as you: you are armed as if you sought a revenge on all
his Race. Good Dauphine, get him away from this place. I never knew a man's
choler so high, but he would speak to his friends, he would hear reason.
Jack Daw, Jack Daw! a-sleepe


Is he gone, Master Tru-wit?


I, did you hear him?


O God, yes.


What a quick ear fear has?


But is he so armed, as you say?


Armed? did you ever see a fellow, set out to take possession?


I, Sir.


That may give you some light, to conceive of him: but it is nothing to the
principal. Some false Brother in the house has furnished him strangely. Or, if
it were out of the house, it was Tom Otter


Indeed, he is a Captain, and his Wife is his Kinswoman.


He has got some-bodies old two-hand-sword to mow you off at the knees. And
that Sword has spawned such a Dagger! -- but then he is so hung with Pikes,
Halberds, Peitro^ells, Calliuers, and Muskets, that he looks like a Justice
of Peace's Hall: a man of two thousand a year, is not sess'd at so many
weapons, as he has on. There was never Fencer challenged at so many several
Foyles. You would think he meant to murder all Saint Pulehres Parish. If he
could but victual himself for half a year, in his breeches, he is
sufficiently armed to overrun a Country


Good Lord, what means he, Sir! I pray you Master Tru-wit, be you a Mediator?


Well, I Will try if he will be appeased with a Leg or an Arm, if not you must
die once


I would be loath to loose my right Arm, for writing Madrigalls.


Why, if he will be satisfied with a thumb, or a little finger, all is one to
me. You must think, I Will do my best


Good Sir, do.





He will let me do nothing, man, he does all before me, he offers his left
arm


His left wing, for a Jack Daw.


Take it, by all means.


How! Maime a man for ever, for a jest? what a conscience have thou?


It Is no loss to him: he has no employment for his Arms, but to eat
spoone-meat. Beside, as goods maime his body as his reputation


He is a Scholar, and a Wit, and yet he does not think so. But he looses no
reputation with us, for we all resolved him an Ass before. To your places
again


I pray thee, let me be in at the other a little.


Look, you will spoil all: these be ever your tricks.


No, but I could hit of somethings that thou will miss, and thou will say are
good ones


I warrant you. I pray forbear, I Will leave it off, else.


Come away, Clerimont.


Sir Amorous!


Master Tru-wit.


Whither were you going?


Down into the Court, to make water.


By no means, Sir, you shall rather tempt your breeches.


Why, Sir?


Enter here, if you love your life.


Why! why!


Question till your throat be cut, do: dally till the enraged soul find you.


Who Is that?


Daw it is: will you in?


I, I, I Will in: what is the matter?


Nay, if he had been cool enough to tell us that, there had been some hope
to atone you, but he seems so implacably enraged


'Slight, let him rage. I Will hide my self.


Do, good Sir. But what have you done to him within, that should provoke him
thus? you have broke some Jest upon him, a-fore the Ladies --


Not I, never in my life, broke Jest upon any man. The Bride was praising Sir
Dauphine, and he went away in snuff, and I followed him, unless he took
offense at me, in his drink ere while, that I would not pledge all the horse
full


By my faith, and that may be, you remember well: but he walks the round up
and down, through every room of the house, with a Towell in his hand, crying,
where is La-Foole? who saw La-Foole? and when Dauphine, and I, demanded the
cause, we can force no answer from him, but (o revenge, how sweet art thou!
I will strangle him in this Towell) which leads us to conjecture, that the
maine cause of his fury is for bringing your meat to day, with a Towell about
you, to his discredit


Like enough. Why, and he be angry for that. I Will stay here, till his anger be
blown over


A good becoming resolution, Sir. If you can put it on of the sudden.


Yes, I can put it on. Or, I Will away into the Country presently.


How will you get out of the house, Sir? He knows you are in the house, and
he will watch you this se'n-night but he will have you. He Will out-wait a Seriant
for you


Why, then I Will stay here.


You must think, how to victual your self in time, then.


Why, sweet Master Tru-wit, will you entreat my Cousin Otter, to send me a cold
Venison Pasty, a Bottle or two of Wine, and a Chamber Pot


A stool were better, Sir, of Sir A-iax his invention.


I, that will be better indeed: and a Pallat to lie on.


O, I would not advise you to sleep by any means.


Would you not, Sir? why, then I will not.


Yet, there is another fear --


Is there, Sir? What is it?


No, he cannot break open this door with his foot, sure.


I Will set my back against it, Sir. I have a good back.


But, then if he should batter.


Batter! if he dare, I Will have an Action of Batt'ry, against him.


Cast you the worst. He has sent for poulder already, and what he will do
with it, no man knows: perhaps blow up the corner of the house where be
suspects you are. Here he comes, in quickly. I protest, Sir John Daw, petar de
here. I Will dye rather Will you not take my word? I never knew one but would be
satisfied. Sir Amorous, there is no standing out. He has made a petarde of an
old brass Pot, to force your door. Think upon some satisfaction or terms,
to offer him


Sir, I Will give him any satisfaction. I dare give any terms.


You Will leave it to me, then?


I, Sir. I Will stand to any conditions.





Yes, but this fears the brauest: the other a whiniling daftard, Jack Daw: but
La-Foole, a brave heroique coward! and is afraid in a great look, and a stout
accent. I like him rarely


Had it not been pity, these two should ha'beene concealed?


Shall I make a motion?


Briefly. For I must strike while it is hot.


Shall I go fetch the Ladies to the Catastrophe?


Vmh? I, by my troth.


By no mortal means. Let them continue in the state of ignorance, and err
still: think 'hem wits, and fine fellows, as they have done. 'Twere sin to
reform them


Well, J will have 'hem fetched, now I think on it, for a private purpose of
mine: do, Clerimont, fetch 'hem, and discourse to 'hem all that is past, and
bring 'hem into the Gallery here


This is thy extreme vanity, now: thou think thou were undone, if every
Jest thou make were not published


Thou shall see, how unjust thou art, presently. Clerimont, say it was
Dauphine's plot. Trust me not, if the whole drift be not for thy good.
There Is a Carpet in the next room, put it on, with this Scarf over thy face,
and a Cushion of thy head, and be ready when I call Amorous. Away --. John Daw


What good news, Sir?


Faith, I have followed, and argued with him hard for you. I told him, you were
a Knight, and a Scholar; and that you knew fortitude did consist magis
patiendo quam faciendo, magis ferendo quam feriendo


It does so indeed, Sir.


And that you would suffer, I told him: so, at first he demanded, by my troth,
in my conceit, too much


What was it, Sir.


Your upper lip, and six of your fore-teeth.


'Twas unreasonable.


Nay, I told him plainly, you could not spare 'hem all. So after long argument
( pro and con, as you know) I brought him down to your two Butter-teeth, and
them he would have


O, did you so? why, he shall have 'hem.


But he shall not, Sir, by your leave. The conclusion is this, Sir, because you
shall be very good friends hereafter, and this never to be remembered, or
vpbrayded; besides, that he may not boast, he has done any such thing to you in
his own person: he is to come here in disguise, give you five kicks in
private, Sir, take your Sword from you, and lock you up in that Study, during
pleasure. Which will be but a little while, we will get it released presently


Five kicks? he shall have six, Sir, to be friends.


Believe me, you shall not ouer-shoot your self, to send him that word by me.


Deliver it, Sir. He shall have it with all my heart, to be friends.


Friends? Nay, and he should not be so, and heartily too, upon these terms, he
shall have me to enemy while I live. Come, Sir, bear it bravely


O God, Sir, it is nothing.


True. What Is six kicks to a man, that reads Seneca?


I have had a hundred, Sir.


Sir Amorous. No speaking one to another,


One, two, three, four, five. I protest, Sir Amorous, you shall have six.


Nay, I told you should not talk. Come give him six, and he will needs. Your
Sword. Now return to your safe custody: you shall presently meet before the
Ladies, and be the dearest friends one to another -- Give me the Scarf, now,
thou shall beat the other barefaced. Stand by, Sir Amorous


What Is here? A Sword.


I cannot help it, without I should take the quarrel upon my self: here he
has sent you his Sword --


I ll receive none on it.


And he wills you to fasten it against a wall, and break your head in some few
several places against the Hilts


I will not: tell him roundly. I cannot endure to shed my own blood.


Will you not?


No. I ll beat it against a fair flat wall, if that will satisfy him: If not,
he shall beat it himself, for Amorous


Why, this is strange starting off, when a man undertakes for you! I offered
him another condition: will you stand to that


Yes, I am content, at the blunt.


Then you must submit your self to be hood-winked in this Skarse, and be led
to him, where he will take your Sword from you, and make you bear a blow,
over the Mouth, Gules, and tweakes by the Nose, Sans number


I am content. But why must I be blinded?


That Is for your good, Sir: because, if he should grow insolent upon this, and
publ^sh it hereafter to your disgrace (which I hope he will not do) you might
swear safely and protest, he never beat you to your knowledge


O, I conceive.


I do not doubt, but you will be perfect good friends upon it, and not dare to
utter an ill thought one of another, in future


Not I, as God help me, of him.


Nor he of you, Sir. If he should -- Come, Sir. All hid, Sir John.


Oh, Sir John, Sir John.


Good Sir John, leave tweaking, you will blow his Nose off. It Is Sir John's
pleasure, you should retire into the Study. Why, now you are friends. All
bitterness between you, I hope, is buried; you shall come forth by and by,
Damon and Pythias upon it: and embrace with all the rankness of Friendship that
can be. I trust, we shall have 'hem tamer i'their Language hereafter.
Dauphine, I worship thee. Gods will, the Ladies have surprised us


CEntaure, how our judgments were imposed on by these adulterate Knights!


Nay, Madame, Mauis was more deceived then we, 'twas her commendation vtter'd
'hem in the College


I commended but their wits, Madame, and their braueries. I never looked toward
their valors


Sir Dauphine is valiant, and a wit too, it seems.


And a bravery too.


Was this his project?


So Master Clerimont intimates, Madame.


Good Morose, when you come to the College, will you bring him with you? He
seems a very perfect Gentleman


He is so Madame, believe it.


But when will you come, Morose?


Three or four days hence, Madame, when I have got me a Coach, and Horses.


No, to morrow, good Morose, Centaure shall send you her Coach.


Yes faith, do, and bring Sir Dauphine with you.


She has promised that Mauis.


He is a very worthy Gentleman, in his exteriors, Madame.


I, he shows he is judicial in his clothes.


And yet not so superlatiuely neat as some, Madame, that have their faces set
in a Brake


I, and have every hair in form!


That wear purer Linen then our selves, and profess more neatness, then the
French Hermaphrodite


I Ladies, they, what they tell one of us, have told a thousand, and are the
only Thieves of our fame: that think to take us with that Perfume, or with
that Lace, and laugh at us vn-conscionably when they have done


But, Sir Dauphines carelessness becomes him.


I could love a man, for such a Nose!


Or such a Leg!


He has an exceeding good eye, Madame!


And a very good Lock!


Good Morose, bring him to my Chamber first.


Please your Honors, to meet at my House, Madame?


See, how they eye thee, man! they are taken I warrant thee.


You have vnbrac'd our brace of Knights, here, Master Tru-wit.


Not I, Madame, it was Sir Dauphines inginer: who, if he have disfurnish'd your
Ladyship of any guard, or service by it, is able to make the place good again,
in himself


There Is no suspicion of that, Sir.


God so, Mauis, Haughty is kissing.


Let us go too, and take part.


But I am glad of the fortune (beside the discovery of two such empty
Caskets) to gain the knowledge of so rich a Mine of Virtue, as Sir Dauphine


We would be all glad to style him of our friendship, and see him at the
College


He cannot mix with a sweeter society, I Will prophecy, and I hope he
himself will think so


I should be rude to imagine otherwise, Lady.


Did not I tell thee, Dauphine? Why, all their actions are governed by crude
opinion, without reason or cause; they know not why they do any thing: but as
they are informed, believe, judge, praise, condemn, love, hate, and in
aemulation one of another, do all these things alike. Only, they have a
natural inclination swayes 'hem generally to the worst, when they are left to
themselves. But, pursue it, now thou haft 'hem


Shall we go in again, Morose?


Yes, Madame.


We Will entreat Sir Dauphines company.


Stay, good Madame, the inter-view of the two friends, Pylades and Orestes:
I Will fetch 'hem out to you straight


Will you, Master Tru-wit?


I, but noble Ladies, do not confess in your countenance, or outward bearing
to 'hem any discovery of their follies, that we may see, how they will bear
up again, with what assurance, and erection


We will not, Sir Dauphine.


Mau. Upon our honors, Sir Dauphine.


Sir Amorous, Sir Amorous. The Ladies are here.


Are they?


Yes, but slip out by and by, as their backs are turned, and meet Sir John
here, as by chance, when I call you. Jack Daw


What say you, Sir?


Whip out behind me suddenly: and no anger in your looks to your Adversary.
Now, now


Noble Sir John Daw! where have you been?


To seek you, Sir Amorous.


Me! I honor you.


I prevent you* Sir.


They have forgot their Rapiers!


O, they meet in peace, man.


Where Is your Sword, Sir John?


And yours, Sir Amorous?


Mine! my Boy had it forth, to mend the handle, cene now.


And my gold handle was broke too, and my Boy had it forth.


Indeed, Sir? How their excuses meet!


What a consent there is, in the handles?


Nay, there is so in the points too, I warrant you.


O me! Madame, he comes again, the mad man, away.





O, Sir! here has like to been muder since you went! A couple of Knights
fallen out about the Brides favors: we were feign to take away their weapons,
your house had been begged by this time else --


For what?


For Man slaughter, Sir, as being accessory.


And, for her favors?


I, Sir, heretofore, not present. Clerimont, carry 'hem their Swords, now.
They have done all the hurt they will do


Have you spoke with a Lawyer, Sir?


O, no! there is such a noise in the Court, that they have frighted me home,
with more violence then I went! such speaking, and counter-speaking, with their
several voices of Citations, Appellations, Allegations, Certificates,
Attachments, Intergatories, References, Conuictions, and Afflictions indeed,
among the Doctors and Proctors! that the noise here is silence to it! a kind of
midnight


Why, Sir, if you would be resolved indeed, I can bring you hither a very
sufficient Lawyer, and a Learned Divine, that shall inquire into every least
scruple for you


Can you Master Tru-wit?

Yes, and are very sober grave persons, that will dispatch it in a Chamber,
with a whisper, or two


Good Sir, shall I hope this benefit from you, and trust my self into your
hands


Alas, Sir! your Nephew, and I, have been ashamed, and oft-times mad since you
went, to think how you are abused. Go in, good Sir, and lock your self up
till we call you, we will tell you more anon, Sir


Do your pleasure with me, Gentlemen; I believe in you: and that deserves no
delusion --


You shall find none, Sir: but heapt, heapt plenty of vexation.


What will thou do now, Wit?


Recover me hither Otter, and the Barber if you can, by any means, presently.


Why? to what purpose?


O, I Will make the deepest Divine, and grauest Lawyer, out of them two, for him
--


Thou can not man, these are waking Dreams.


Do not fear me. Clap but a Civil Gown with a Welt, of the one; and a
Canonical Cloak with Sleeves, of the other: and give 'hem a few terms in
their mouths, if there come not forth as able a Doctor, and complete a Parson,
for this turn, as may be wished, trust not my Election. And, I hope without
wronging the dignity of either Profession, since they are but persons put on,
and for mirths sake, to torment him. The Barber smatters Latin, I remember


Yes, and Otter too.


Well then, if I make 'hem not wrangle out this Case, to his no comfort, let
me be thought a lack Daw, or La-Foole, or any thing worse, Go you to your
Ladies, but first send for them


I will.


WHere had you our Swords, Master Clerimont?


Why, Dauphine took 'hem from the madman.


And he took 'hem from our Boys, I warrant you?


Very like, Sir.


Thank you good Master Clerimont. Sir John Daw, and I are both beholden to you.


Would I knew how to make you so, Gentlemen:


Sir Amorous, and I are your Servants, Sir.


Gentlemen, have any of you a Pen-and-Inke. I would feign write out a Riddle in
Italian, for Sir Dauphine, to translate


Not I, in troth Lady, I am no Scriuener.


I can furnish you, I think, Lady.


He has it in the Haft of a Knife, I believe!


No, he has his Box of Instruments.


Like a Surgean!


For the Mathematiques: his Squire, his Compasses, his Brass Pens, and
Black-lead, to draw Maps of every place, and person, where he comes


How, Maps of persons!


Yes, Sir, of Nomentack, when he was here, and of the Prince of Moldauia, and
of Mistress, Mistress Epicane


Away! he has not found our her Latitude, I hope.


You are a pleasant Gentleman, Sir.


Faith, now we are in private, let us wanton it a little, and talk waggishly.
Sir John, I am telling Sir Amorous here, that you two govern the Ladies, where
e're you come. you carry the Feminine Gender before you


They shall rather carry us before them, if they will, Sir.


Nay, I believe that they do, withal -- But, that you are the prime-men in
their affections, and direct all their actions --


Not I: Sir Amorous is.


I protest, Sir John is.


As I hope to rise in the state, Sir Amorous, you have the person.


Sir John, you have the person, and the Discourse too.


Not I, Sir. I have no discourse -- and then you have actiuitie beside.


I protest, Sir John, you come as high from Tripoly, as I do every whit: and
lift as many joined stools, and leap over 'hem, if you would use it --


Well, agree on it together Knights; for between you, you divide the Kingdom,
or Commonwealth of Ladies affections: I see it, and can perceive a little how
they observe you, and fear you, indeed. You could tell strange Stories, my
Masters, if you would, I know


Faith, we have seen somewhat, Sir.


That we have -- Vellet Petticoates, and wrought Smocks, or so.


I, and --

Nay, out with it, Sir John: do not envy your friend the pleasure of hearing,
when you have had the delight of tasting


Why -- a -- do you speak, Sir Amorous.


No, do you, Sir John Daw.


In Faith, you shall.


In Faith, you shall.


Why, we have been --


In the great Bed at Ware together in our time. On, Sir John.


Nay, do you, Sir Amorous.


And these Ladies with you, Knights?


No, excuse us, Sir.


We must not wound reputation.


No matter -- they were these, or others. Our bath cost us fifteen pound, when
we came home


Do you hear, Sir John, you shall tell me but one thing truly, as you love
me


If I can, I will, Sir.


You lay in the same house with the Bride, here?


Yes, and conuerst with her hourly, Sir.


And what humor is she of? is she coming, and open, free?


O, exceeding open, Sir. I was her Servant, and Sir Amorous was to be.


Come, you have both had favors from her? I know, and have heard so much.


O, no, Sir.


You shall excuse us, Sir: we must not wound reputation.


Tut, she is married, now; and you cannot hurt her with any report, and
therefore speak plainly: how many times, in faith? which of you lead first? Ha


Sir John had her Mayden-head, indeed.


O, it pleases him to say so, Sir, but Sir Amorous knows what is what, as well.


Do thou in faith, Amorous?


In a manner, Sir.


Why, I commend you Lads. Little knows Don Bride groom of this. Nor shall he,
for me


Hang him, mad Ox.


Speak softly: here comes his Nephew, with the Lady Haughty. He Will get the
Ladies from you, Sirs, if you look not to him in time


Why, if he do, we will fetch 'hem home again, I warrant you.


IAssure you, Sir Dauphine, it is the price and estimation of your virtue only,
that has embarked me to this adventure, and I could not but make out to tell
you; nor can I repent me of the act, since it is always an argument of some
virtue in our selves, that we love and affect it so in others


Your Ladyship sets too high a price, on my weakness.


Sir, I can distinguish Gemmes from Peebles --


(Are you so skillful in Stones?)


And, howsoever I may suffer in such a judgment as yours, by admitting
equality of rank, or society, with Centaure or Mauis --


You do not, Madame, I perceive they are your mere Foyles.


Then are you a friend to truth, Sir. It makes me love you the more. It is not
the outward, but the inward man that I affect. They are not apprehensiue of an
eminent perfection, but love flat, and dully


Where are you, my Lady Haughty.


I come presently, Centawe. My Chamber, Sir, my Page shall show you; and
Trusty, my woman, shall be ever a wake for you: you need not fear to
communicate any thing with her, for she is a Fidelia. I pray you wear this
Jewel for my sake, Sir Dauphine. Where Is Mauis, Centaure


Within, Madame, a writing. I Will follow you presently. I Will but speak a word
with Sir Dauphine


With me, Madame?


Good Sir Dauphine, do not trust Haughty, nor make any credit to her, what
ever you do besides. Sir Dauphine, I give you this caution, she is a perfect
Courtier; and loves no body, but for her uses: and for her uses, she loves all.
Besides, her Phisicians give her out to be none of the cleerest, whether she pay
'hem or no, Heaven knows: and she is abode fifty too, and pargets! See her in
a fore-noone. Here comes Mauis, a worse face then she! you would not like
this, by Candlelight. If you will come to my Chamber one of these Mornings
early, or late in an Evening, I Will tell you more. Where Is Haughty, Mauis


Within, Centaure.


What have you, there?


An Italian Riddle for Sir Dauphine, (you shall not see it in faith, Centaure.)
Good Sir Dauphine, solue it for me. I Will call for it anon


How now, Dauphine? how do thou quit thy self of these Females?


'Slight, they haunt meelike Fayries, and give me Jewels here, I cannot be rid
of 'hem


O, you must not tell, though.


Mass, I forgot that: I was never so assaulted. One loves for virtue, and
bribes me with this. Another loves me with caution, and so would possess
me. A third brings me a Riddle here, and all are jealous: and rail each at
other


Sir Dauphine, I chose this way of intimation for priuacie. The Ladies here, I
know, have both hope, and purpose, to make a Collegiate and Servant of you. If
I might be so honored, as to appear at any end of so noble a Work, I would
enter into a fame of taking Physic to morrow, and continue you it four or
five days, or longer, for your visitation. Mauis. By my faith, a subtle one!
Call you this a Riddle? What Is their plain dealing, trow


We lack Tru-wit, to tell us that.


We lack him for somewhat else too: his Knights reformados are wound up as
high, and insolent, as ever they were


You jest.


No Drunkards, either with Wine or Vanity, ever confessed such Stories of
themselves. I would not give a Flies leg, in ballauce against all the women's
reputations here, if they could be but thought to speak truth: and, for the
Bride, they have made their affidauit against her directly --


What, they have lain with her?


Yes, and tell times, and circumstances, with the cause why, and the place
where. I had almost brought 'hem to affirm that they had done it, to day


Not both of 'hem.


Yes faith: with a sooth or two more I had effected it. They would have set it
down under their hands


Why, they will be our sport, I see, still! whether we will, or no.


O, Are you here? Come Dauphine, Go call your Uncle presently. I have fitted
my Divine, and my Canonist, dyed their Beards and all: the Knaves do not know
themselves they are so exalted, and altered. Preferment changes any man. Thou
shall keep one door, and I another, and then Clerimont in the midst, that he
may have no means of escape from their cauilling, when they grow hot once
again. And then the women (as I have given the Bride her instructions) to
break in upon him, in the l'enuoy. O, 'twill be full and twanging! Away,
fetch him. Come, Master Doctor, and Master Parson, look to your parts now, and
discharge 'hem bravely: you are well set forth, perform it as well. If you
chance to be out, do not confess it with standing still, or humming, or
gaping one at another: but go on, and talk alowd, and eagerly, use vehement
action, and only remember your terms, and you are safe. Let the matter go
where it will: you have many will do so. But at first, be very solemn, and
grave like your garments, though you lose your selves after, and skip out like
a brace of Iugglers on a Table. Here he comes! set your faces, and look
superciliously, while I present you


Are these the two learned men?


Yes, Sir, please you salute 'hem?


Salute 'hem? I had rather do any thing, then wear out time so unfruitfully,
Sir. I wonder, how these common forms, as God save you, and you are well-come,
are come to be a habit in our lives! or, I am glad to see you! when I cannot
see, what the profit can be of these words, so long as it is no whit better
with him, whose affairs are sad, and grievous, that he hears this salutation


It Is true, Sir, we will go to the matter then. Gentlemen, Master Doctor, and
Master Parson, I have acquainted you sufficiently with the business, for which
you are come hither. And you are not now to inform your selves in the state of
the question, I know. This is the Gentleman, who expects your resolution, and
therefore, when you please, begin


Please you, Master Doctor.


Please you, good Master Parson.


I would hear the Canon law speak first.


It must give place to positive Diunitie, Sir.


Nay, good Gentlemen, do not throw me into circumstances. Let your comforts
ar^iue quickly at me, those that are. Be swift in affoording me my peace, if
so I shall hope any. I love not your Dispurations, or your Court-tumults. And
that it be not strange to you, I will tell you. My Father, in my education, was
wont to advise me, that I should always collect, and contain my mind, not
suffering it to flow loosely; that I should look to what things were necessary
to the carriage of my life, and what not: embracing the one and eschewing the
other. In short, that I should endeare my self to rest, and avoid turmoile:
which now is grown to be another nature to me. So that I come not to your
public pleadings, or your places of noise; not that I neglect those things,
that make for the dignity of the Commonwealth: but for the mere avoiding of
clamours, and impertinences of Orators, that know not how to be silent. And
for the cause of noise, am I now a suitor to you You do not know in what a
misery I have been exercised this day, what a torrent of evil! My very House
turns round with the tumult! I dwell in a Windmill! The perpetual about
motion is here, and not at Eltham


Well, good Master Doctor, will you break the ice? Master parson will wade
after


Sir, though unworthy, and the weaker, I will presume.


It Is no presumption, Domine Doctor.


Yet again!


Your question is, for how many causes a man may have diuortium legitimum, a
lawful Divorce. First, you must understand the nature of the word Divorce, a
diuertendo --


No excursions upon words, good Doctor, to the question briefly.


I answer then, the Canon Law affords Divorce but in few cases, and the
principal is in the common case, the adulterous case. But there are duodecim
impedimenta, twelve impediments (as we call 'hem) all which do not dirimere
contractum, but irritum reddere matrimonium, as we say in the Canon Law, not
take away the bond, but cause a nullitie therein


I understood you, before: good Sir, avoid your impertinencie of Translation.


He cannot open this too much, Sir, by your favor.


Yet more!


O, you must give the learned men leave, Sir. To your impediments, Master
Doctor


The first is impedimentum erroris.


Of which there are several species.


I, as error personae.


If you contract your self to one person, thinking her another.


Then, error fortunae.


If she be a Beggar, and you thought her rich.


Then, error qualitatis.


If she prove stubborn, or headstrong, that you thought obedient.


How? is that, Sir, a lawful impediment? One at once, I pray you Gentlemen.


I, ante copulam, but not post copulam, Sir.


Master Parson says right. Nec post nuptiarum benedictionem. It does indeed
but irrita reddere sponsalia, annull the Contract: after Marriage it is of no
obstancy


Alas, Sir, what a hope are we fallen from, by this time!


The next is conditio: if you thought her free borne, and she prove a
bondwoman, there is impediment of estate and condition


I, but Master Doctor, those seruitudes are subla^^e, now, among us Christians.


By your favor, Master Parson --


You shall give me leave, Master Doctor.


Nay, Gentlemen, quarrel not in that question; it concerns not my case: pass
to the third


Well then, the third is votum. If either party have made a vow of Chastity.
But that practice, as Master Parson said of the other, is taken away among us,
thanks be to discipline. The fourth is cognatio: if the persons be of kin,
within the degrees


I: do you know, what the degrees are, Sir?


No, nor I care not, Sir: they offer me no comfort in the question, I am sure,


But, there is a branch of this impediment may, which is cognatio spiritualis.
If you were her Godfather, Sir, then the Marriage is incestuous


That comment is absurd, and superstitious, Master Doctor. I cannot endure it.
Are we not all Brothers and Sisters, and as much a kin in that, as
Godfathers, and God-daughters


O me! to end the Controversy, I never was a Godfather, I never was a
Godfather id my life, Sir. Pass to the next


The sift is crimen adulterij: the known Case. The sixth, cultus disparitas,
difference of Religion: have you ever examined her what Religion she is of


No, I would rather she were of none, then be put to the trouble of it!


You may have it done for you, Sir.


By no means, good Sir, on to the rest: shall you ever come to an end, think
you


Yes, he has done half, Sir. (On, to the rest) be patient, and expect, Sir.


The seventh is, vis: if it were upon compulsion, or force.


O no, it was too voluntary, mine: too voluntary.


The eighth is, ordo: if ever she have taken holy Orders.


That Is superstitious, too.


No matter, Master Parson: would she would go into a Nunnerie yet.


The ninth is, ligamen: if you were bound, Sir, to any other before.


I thrust my self too soon into these Fetters.


The tenth is, publica honestas: which is inchoata quaedam affinitas.


I, or affinitas orta ex sponsalibus: and is but leave impedimentum.


I feel no air of comfort blowing to me, in all this.


The eleventh is, affinitas ex fornicatione.


Which is no less vera affinitas, then the other Master Doctor.


True, quae oritur ex legitimo matrimonio.


You say right, venerable Doctor. And, nascitur ex co, quod per coniugium duae
personae efficiuntur vna caro --


Hey-day, now they begin.


I conceive you, Master Parson. Ita per fornicationem aeque est verus pater,
qui sic generat --


Et vere filius qui sic generatur --


What Is all this to me?


Now it grows warm.


The twelfth, and last is, si forte coire nequibis.


I, that is impedimentum grauissimum. It does utterly annull, and annihilate,
that. If you have manifestam frigiditatem, you are well, Sir


Why, there is comfort come at length, Sir. Confess your self but a man
unable, and she will sue to be diuorc'd first


I, or if there be morbus perpetuus, and insanabilis, as Paralysis,
Elephantiasis, or so --


O, but frigiditas is the fairer way, Gentlemen.


You say troth, Sir, and as it is in the Canon Master Doctor.


I conceive you, Sir.


Before he speaks.


That a Boy, or child, under years, is not fit for marriage, because he cannot
reddere debitum. So your omnipotentes --


Your impotentes, you whoreson Lobster.


Your impotentes, I should say, are minime apti ad contrahenda matrimonium.


Matrimonium? We shall have most vn-matrimoniall Latin, with you: Matrimonia,
and be hanged


You put 'hem out, man.


But then there will arise a doubt, Master Parson, in our Case, post
Matrimonium: that frigiditate praeditus (do you conceive me, Sir?


Very well, Sir.


Who cannot vti vxore pro vxore, may habere came pro sorore.


Absurd, absurd, absurd, and merely Apostaticall.


You shall pardon me, Master Parson, I can prove it.


You can prove a Will, Master Doctor, you can prove nothing else. Does not
the Verse of your own Caxan say, Haec socianda vetant connubia, facta
retractant --


I grant you, but how do they retractare, Master Parson?


(O, this was it, I feared.)


In aeternum, Sir.


That Is false in Divinity, by your favor.


It Is false in humanity, to say so. Is he not prorsus inutilis ad Thorum? Can
he praestare fidem datam? I would feign know


Yes: how if he do conualere?


He cannot connulere, it is impossible.


Nay, good Sir, attend the learned men, they will think you neglect 'hem else.


Or, if he do simulare himself frigidum, odio vxoris, or so?


I say, he is adulter manifestus, then.


(They dispute it very learnedly, in faith.)


And prostitutor vxoris, and this is positive.


Good Sir, let me escape.


You will not do me that wrong, Sir?


And therefore, if he be manifest frigidus, Sir --


I, if he be manifest frigidus, I grant you --


Why, that was my conclusion.


And mine too.


Nay, hear the conclusion, Sir.


Then frigiditatis causa --


Yes, causa frigiditatis --


O, mine ears!


She may have libellum diuortij, against you.


I, diuorty libellum she will sure have.


Good Eccho's, forbear.


If you confess it.


Which I would do, Sir --


I will do any thing --


And clear my self in Foro Conscientiae --


Because you wanc indeed --


Yet more?


Exercende potestate.


I Will not endure it any longer. Ladies, I beseech you help me. This is such a
wrong, as never was offered to poor Bride before. Upon her Marriage day, to
have her Husband conspire against her, and a couple of Mercinary Companions, to
be brought in for forms sake, to persuade a Separation! If you had blood, or
virtue in you, Gentlemen, you would not suffer such Eare-wigs about a Husband,
or Scorpions, to creep between Man and Wife --


O, the variety, and changes of my torment!


Let 'hem be cudgelled out of doors, by our Grooms.


I Will lend you my Footman.


We Will have our men blanket 'hem in the Hall.


As there was one, at our House, Madame, for peeping in at the door.


Content, in faith.


Stay, Ladies, and Gentlemen, you will hear, before uproceed?


I'lld have the Bridegroom blanketted, too.


Begin with him first.


Yes, by my troth.


O, Mankind Generation!


Ladies, for my sake forbear.


Yes, for Sir Dauphines sake.


He shall command us.


He is as fine a Gentleman of his inches, Madame, as any is about the Town,
and wears as good colors when he lift


Be brief, Sir, and confess your infirmity, she will be a-fire to be quit of
you, if she but hear that named once, you shall not entreat her to stay.
She Will fly you, like one that had the marks upon him


Ladies, I must crave all your pardons --


Silence, Ladies.


For a wrong I have done to your whole sex, in marrying this fair, and
virtuous Gentlewoman --


Hear him, good Ladies.


Being guilty of an infirmity, which before I conferred with these learned
men, I thought I might have conceald --


But now being better informed in his conscience by them, he is to declare it,
and give satisfaction, by asking your public forgiveness


I am no man, Ladies.


How!


Utterly vn-abled in nature, by reason of frigiditie, to perform the duties,
or any the least office of a Husband


Now, out upon him, prodigious creature!


Bridegroom un carnate.


And would you offer it to a young Gentlewoman?


A Lady of her longings?


Tut, a device, a device, this, it smells rankly, Ladies. A mere comment of his
own


Why, if you suspect that, Ladies, you may have him searched.


As the custom is, by a Jury of Physicians.


Yes faith, 'twill be brave.


O me, must I undergo that!


No, let women search him, Madame: we can do it our selves.


Our on me, worse!


No Ladies, you shall not need, I Will take him with all his faults.


Worst of all!


Why, then it is no Divorce, Doctor, if she consent not?


No, if the man be frigidus, it is de part vxoris, that we grant Libellum
diuorty, in the Law


I, it is the same in Theology.


Worse, worse then worst!


Nay, Sir, be not utterly dis-heartned, we have yet a small relike of hope
left, as near as our comfort is blown out. Clerimont, produce your brace of
Knights. What was that, Master Parson, you told me in errore qualitatis e'ne
now? Dauphine, whisper the Bride, that she carry it as if she were guilty, and
ashamed


Mary Sir, in errore qualitatis (which Master Doctor did forbear to urge) if
she be found corupta, that is, vitiated or broken up, that was pro virgin
desponsa, espoused for a Maid --


What then, Sir?


It does dirimere contractum, and irritum reddere too.


If this be true, we are happy again, Sir, once more. Here are an honorable
brace of Knights, that shall affirm so much


Pardon us, good Master Clerimont.


You shall excuse us, Master Clerimont.


Nay, you must make it good now, Knights, there is no remedy, I Will eat no
words for you, nor no men: you know you spoke it to me


Is this Gentleman-like-like, Sir?


Jack Daw, he is worse then Sir Amorous: fiercer a great deal. Sir Amorous,
beware, there be ten Dawes in this Clerimont


I Will confess it, Sir.


Will you, Sir Amorous? will you wound reputation?


I am resolved.


So should you be too, Jack Daw: what should keep you off? she is but a woman,
and in disgrace. He Will be glad on it


Will he? I thought he would ha 'beene angry.


You will dispatch, Knights, it must be done, in faith.


Why, an' it must it shall, Sir, they say. They Will never go back. Do not
tempt his patience


It is true indeed, Sir.


Yes, I assure you, Sir.


What is true Gentlemen? what do you assure me?


That we have known your Bride, Sir --


In good fashion. She was our Mistress, or so --


Nay, you must be plain, Knights, as you were to me.


I, the question is, if you have carnaliter, or no.


Carnaliter? what else, Sir?


It is enough: a plain nullitie.


I am vn-done, I am vn-done!


O, let me worship and adore you, Gentlemen!


I am undone!


Yes, to my hand, I thank these Knights: Master Parson, let me thank you
otherwise


And, have they confessed?


Now out upon 'hem, Informers!


You see, what creatures you may bestow your favors on, Madames.


I would except against 'hem as beaten Knights, Wench, and not good Witnesses
in Law


Poor Gentlewoman, how she takes it!


Be comforted, Morose, I love you the better for it.


So do I, I protest.


But Gentlemen, you have not known her, since matrimonium?


Not to day, Master Doctor.


No, Sir, not to day.


Why, then I say, for any act before, the matrimonium is good and perfect:
unless, the worshipful Bridegroom did precisely, before witness demand, if
she were virgo ante nuptias


No, that he did not, I assure you, Master Doctor.


If he cannot prove that, it is ratum coniugium, notwithstanding the premises.
And they do no way impedire. And this is my Sentence, this I pronounce


I am of Master Doctors resolution too, Sir: if you made not that demand, ante
nuptias


O my heart! will thou break? will thou break? this is worst of all worst
worsts! that Hell could have devised! Marry a Whore! and so much noise


Come, I see now plain confederacy in this Doctor, and this Parson, to abuse
a Gentleman. You study his affliction. I pray' be gone companions. And
Gentlemen, I begin to suspect you for having parts with 'hem. Sir, will it
please you hear me


O, do not talk to me, take not from me the pleasure of dying in silence,
Nephew


Sir, I must speak to you. I have been long your poor despised Kins-man, and
many a hard thought has strengthened you against me: but now it shall appear
if either I love you or your peace, and prefer them to all the World beside.
I will not be long or grievous to you, Sir. If I free you of this unhappy match
absolutely, and instantly after all this trouble, and almost in your despair,
now --


(It cannot be.)


Sir, that you be never troubled with a murmr of it more, what shall I hope
for, or deserve of you


O, what thou will, Nephew! thou shall deserve me, and have me.


Shall I have your favor perfect to me, and love hereafter?


That, and any thing beside. Make thine own conditions. My whole estate is
thine. Manage it, I will become thy Ward


Nay, Sir, I will not be so unreasonable.


Will Sir Dauphine be mine enemy too?


You know, I have been a long Suter to you, Uncle, that out of your estate,
which is fifteen hundred a year, you would allow me but five hundred during
life, and assure the rest upon me after: to which I have often, by my self
and friends tendered you a writing to sign, which you would never consent, or
incline too. If you please to effect it now --


Thou shall have it, Nephew. I will do it, and more.


If I quit you not presently? and for-euer of this cumber, you shall have power
instantly, before all these, to revoke your act, and I will become, whose Slave
you will give me to, for-euer


Where is the Writing? I will seal to it, that, or to a Blanke, and write
thine own conditions


O me, most unfortunate wretched Gentlewoman!


Will Sir Dauphine do this?


Good Sir, have some compassion on me.


O, my Nephew knows you belike: away Crocodile.


He does it not sure, without good ground.


Here, Sir.


Come Nephew: give me the Pen. I will subscribe to any thing, and seal to what
thou will, for my deliverance. Thou art my restorer. Here, I deliver it thee as
my Deed. If there be a word in it lacking, or writ with false Orthographie, I
protest before -- I will not take the advantage


Then here is your release, iustum impedimentum, I hope, error personae?


Yes Sir, in primo gradu.


In primo graou.


Cutberd, and Parson Otter. You are beholden to 'hem, Sir, that have taken this
pains for you: and my friend, Master Tru-wit, who enabled 'hem for the
business. Now you may go in and rest, be as private as you will, Sir. I Will
not trouble you, till you trouble me with your Funeral, which I care not how
soon it come. Cutberd, I Will make your Lease good. Thank me not, but with your
leg, Cutberd. And Tom Otter, your Princess shall be reconciled to you. How
now, Gentlemen! do you look at me


A Boy.


Yes, Mistress Epicoene.


Well, Dauphine, you have lurch'd your friends of the better half of the
Garland, by concealing this part of the plot: but much good do it thee, thou
deseru'st it, Lad. And Clerimont, for thy unexpected bringing in these two to
confession, wear my part of it freely. Nay, Sir Daw, and Sir La-Foole, you see
the Gentlewoman that has done you the favors! we are all thankful to you, and
so should the womankind here, specially for lying on her, though not with her!
You meant so, I am sure? But, that we have stuck it upon you to day, in your
own imagined persons, and so lately; this Amazon, the Champion of the sex,
should beat you now thriftily, for the common slanders, which Ladies receive
from such Cuckowes, as you are. You are they, that when no merit or fortune can
make you hope to enjoy their bodies, will yet lie with their reputations, and
make their fame suffer. Away you common Moths of these, and all Ladies honors,
Go, travail to make legs and faces, and come home with some new matter to
be laughed at: you deserve to live in an Air as corrupted, as that wherewith
you feed rumor. Madames, you are mute, upon this new Metamorphosis! but here
stands she, that has vindicated your fames. Take heed of such insectae
hereafter. And let it not trouble you that you have discovered any Mysteries to
this young Gentleman. He is (a'most) of years, and will make a good Visitant
within this twelue-month. In the mean time, we will all undertake for his
secrecy, that can speak so well of his silence. Spectators, if you like this
Comoedie, rise cheerfully, and now Morose is gone in, clap your hands. It may
be, that noise will cure him, at least please him



