NAy my dear Asper,

Stay your mind,

Away.
Who is so patient of this impious world,
That he can check his spirit, or reine his tongue?
Or who has such a dead unfeeling sense,
That heavens horride thunders cannot wake?
To see the earth, cracked with the weight of sin,
Hell gaping under us, and over our heads
Black rau'nous Ruin with her saile-stretcht wings,
Ready to sink us down and cover us.
Who can behold such prodigies as these,
And have his lips sealed up? not I: my soul
Was never ground into such oily colors,
To flatter Vice and daube Iniquity:
But (with an armed, and resolved hand)
I Will strip the ragged follies of the time
Naked as at their birth:

Be not too bold,

You trouble me, and with a whip of steel
Print wounding lashes in their iron ribs.
I fear no mood stamped in a private brow,
When I am pleased t'vnmaske a public vice.
I fear no strumpets drugs, nor ruffians stab,
Should I detect their hateful luxuries;
No brokers, usurers, or lawyers gripe,
Were I disposed to say, they are all corrupt.
I fear no courtiers frown, should I applaud
The easy flexure of his supple hammes:
Tut, these are so innate and popular,
That drunken Custom would not shame to laugh
(In scorn) at him, that should but dare to tax 'hem:
And yet, not one of these but knows his Works,
Knows what Damnation is, the Devil, and Hell,
Yet howerly they persist, grow rank in sin,
Puffing their souls away in perj'rous air,
To cherish their extortion, pride, or lusts.

Forbear good Asper, be not like your name.

O, but to such, whose faces are all zeal,
And (with the words of Hercules) invade
Such crimes as these; that will not smell of sin,
But seem as they were made of Sanctity;
Religion in their garments, and their hair
Cut shorter than their eie-browes; when the conscience
Is vaster than the Ocean, and deuours
More wretches than the Counters.

Gentle Asper,

Contain your spirit in more stricter bounds,
And be not thus transported with the violence
Of your strong thoughts.
Unless your breath had power
To melt the world, and mould it new again,
It is in vain to spend it in these moods.

I not observed this thronged round till now:
Gracious, and kind Spectators, you are welcome,
Apollo, and the Muses feast your eyes
With graceful objects; and may our Minerva
Answer your hopes, unto their largest strain.
Yet here, mistake me not judicious friends:
I do not this to beg your patience,
Or servilely to fawn on your applause,
Like some dry brain, despairing in his merit:
Let me be censured, by th'austerest brow,
Where I want art, or judgment, tax me freely:
Let envious Critickes with their broadest eyes
Look through and through me; I pursue no favor:
Only vouchsafe me your attentions,
And I will give you music worth your ears.
O how I hate the monstrousness of time,
Where every servile imitating spirit,
(Plagued with an itching leprosy of wit)
In a mere halting fury, strives to fling
His vlc'rous body in the Thespian spring,
And straight leap's forth a Poet; but as lame
As Vulcane, or the founder of Criplegate.

In faith this Humor will come ill to some,
You will be thought to be too peremptory.

This Humor? good; and why this Humor, Mitis?
Nay do not turn, but answer.

Answer? what?

I will not stir your patience, pardon me,
I urged it for some reasons, and the rather
To give these ignorant well-spoken days
Some taste of their abuse of this word Humor.

O do not let your purpose fall, good Asper,
It cannot but arrive most acceptable,
Cheefely to such as have the happiness
Daily to see how the poor innocent word
Is rackt, and tortured.

I; I pray you proceed.

Ha? what? what is 't?

For the abuse of Humor.

O, I crave pardon, I had lost my thoughts.
Why Humor (as it is ens) we thus define it
To be a quality of air or water,
And in it self holds these two properties,
Moisture and Fluxure: As for demonstration,
Pour water on this floor, 'twill wet and run,
Likewise the air (forced through a horn or trumpet)
Flows instantly away, and leaves behind
A kind of dew; and hence we do conclude,
That what soever has fluxure and humiditie,
As wanting power to contain it self,
Is Humor: so in every humane body
The choler, melancholy, phlegm, and blood,
By reason that they flow continually
In some one part, and are not continent,
Receive the name of Humors. Now thus far
It may by Metaphore apply it self
Unto the general disposition,
As when some one peculiar quality
Does so possess a man, that it does draw
All his affects, his spirits, and his powers
In their confluctions all to run one way,
This may be truly said to be a Humor,
But that a Rooke in wearing a pied feather,
The cable hatband, or the three-pild ruff,
A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
On his French garters, should affect a Humor,
O, it is more than most ridiculous.

He speaks pure truth: now if an Idiot
Have but an Apish or Phantasticke strain,
It is his Humor.

Well I will scourge those apes,
And to these courteous eyes oppose a mirror
As large as is the stage whereon we act,
Where they shall see the times deformity,
Anatomized in every Nerve and sinew,
With constant courage, and contempt of fear.

Asper (I urge it as your friend) take heed,
The days are dangerous, full of exception,
And men are grown impatient of reproof.

Ha, ha:
You might as well have told me, yond' is heaven,
This earth, these men; and all had moved alike.
Do not I know the times condition?
Yes Mitis; and their souls, and who they be
That either will or can except against me:
None but a sort of fools, so sick in ta^t,
That they contemn all Physic of the mind,
And like gald Camels kick at every touch
Good men, and virtuous spirits, that loath their vices,
Will cherish my free labors, love my lines,
And with the fervor of their shining grace,
Make my brain fruitful to bring forth more objects
VVorthie their serious and intentive eyes.
But why enforce I this, as fainting? no:
If any here chance to behold himself,
Let him not dare to challenge me of wrong,
For if he shame to have his follies known,
First he should shame to act 'hem: my strict hand
Was made to ceaze on vice; and with a gripe
Crush out the Humor of such spongie souls,
As lick up every idle vanity.

Why this is right Furor Po^ticus:
Kind gentlemen, we hope your patience
Will yet conceive the best, or entertain
This supposition, That a madman speaks.

What? are you ready there? Mitis sit down;
And my Cordatus. Sound hoe, and begin:
I leave you two as Censors to sit here,
Observe what I present, and liberally
Speak your opinions, upon every Scene,
As it shall pass the view of these Spectators,
Nay now, you are tedious Sirs, for shame begin:
And Mitis, note me if in all this front,
You can epsy a gallant of this mark,
Who (to be thought one of the judicious)
Sits with his arms thus wreathed, his hat pulled here,
Cries meaw, and nods, then shakes his empty head,
Will show more several motions in his face
Than the new London, Rome, or Nineueh,
And (now and then) breaks a dry biscuit jest,
Which that it may more easily be chewed,
He steeps in his own laughter.

Why? will that
Make it be sooner swallowed?

O, assure you:
Or if it did not, yet as Horace sings:
"Ieiunus rar stomachus vulgaria temnit,
"Mean cates are welcome still to hungry guests.

It Is true, but why should we observe 'hem Asper?

O I would know 'hem, for in such assemblies,

They Are more infectious than the Pestilence,
And therefore I would give them pills to purge,
And make 'hem fit for fair societies.
How monstrous and detested is 't to see
A fellow that has neither art nor brain,
Sit like an Aristarchus, or stark ass,
Taking men's lines with a Tobacco face
In snuff, still spitting, using his wried looks
(In nature of a vice) to wrest and turn
The good aspect of those that shall sit near him,
From what they do behold? O it is most vile.
Nay Asper.

Peace Mitis, I do know your thought:
You Will say, your audience will except at this?
Pish: you are too timorous, and full of doubt:
Then, he a patient, shall reject all Physic
'Cause the physician tells him you are sick:
Or, if I say That he is vicious,
You will not hear of virtue: come, you are fond.
Shall I be so extravagant to think
That happy judgments and composed spirits
Will challenge me for taxing such as these?
I am ashamed.

Nay, but good pardon us:
We must not bear this perempt orie sail,
But use our best endeavors how to please.

Why therein I commend your careful thoughts,
And I will mix with you in industry
To please; but whom? attentive auditors,
Such as will join their profit with their pleasure,
And come to feed their understanding parts:
For these, I Will prodigally spend my self,
And speak away my spirit into air;
For these, I Will melt my brain into invention,
Coin new conceits, and hang my richest words
As polisht jewels in their bounteous ears.
But stay, I loose my self, and wrong their patience;
If I dwell here, they 'le not begin, I see:
Friends sit you still, and entertain this troop
With some familiar and by-conference,
I Will have them sound: now gentlemen I go
To turn an Actor, and a Humorist,
Where (ere I do resume my present person)
We hope to make the circles of your eyes
Flow with distilled laughter: if we fail,
We must impute it to this only chance,
" Art has an enemy called Ignorance.

How do you like his spirit, Mitis?

I should like it much better, if he were less confident.

Why, do you suspect his merit?

No, but I fear this will procure him much envy.

O, that sets the stronger seal on his desert, if he had no enemies, I should
esteem his fortunes most wretched at this instant


You have seen his play Cordatus? pray you; how is it?


Faith sir, I must refrain to judge, only this I can say of it, it is strange,
and of a particular kind by it self, somewhat like Vetus Comoedia: a work
that has bounteously pleased me, how it will answer the general expectation,
I know not


Does he observe all the laws of Comedy in it?


What laws mean you?


Why the equal division of it into Acts and Scenes, according to the
Terentian manner, his true number of Actors; the furnishing of the Scene with
Grex or Chorus, and that the whole Argument fall within compass of a days
efficiencie


O no, these are too nice observations.


They are such as must be received by your favor, or it cannot be Authentic.


Troth I can discern no such necessity.


No?


No, I assure you signior; if those laws you speak of, had been delivered
us, ab Initio; and in their present virtue and perfection, there had been some
reason of obeying their powers: but it is extant, that that which we call
Comoedia, was at first nothing but a simple and continued Satyr, sung by one
only person, till Susario invented a second, after him Epicharmus a third,
Phormus, and Chionides devised to have four actors, with a Prologue and
Chorus; to which Cratinus (long after) added a fifth and sixth; Eupolis more,
Aristophanes more than they: every man in the dignity of his spirit and
judgment, supplied something: and (though that in him this kind of Poem
appeared absolute, and fully perfected) yet how is the face of it changed
since, in Menander, Philemon, Cecilius, Plautus, and the rest; who have utterly
excluded the Chorus, altered the property of the persons, their names, and
natures, and augmented it with all liberty, according to the elegancie and
disposition of those times wherein they wrote? I see not then but we should
enjoy the same Licentia or free power, to illustrate and heighten our invention
as they did; and not be tied to those strict and regular forms, which the
niceness of a few (who are nothing but Form) would thrust upon us


Well, we will not dispute of this now: but what is his Scene?


Mary Insula fortunata, Sir.


O, the fortunate Island? mass he has bound himself to a strict law there.


Why so?


He cannot lightly alter the Scene without crossing the seas.


He needs not, having a whole Island to run through, I think.


No? how comes it then, that in some one play we see so many seas, countries,
and kingdoms, past over with such admirable dexterity


O, that but shows how well the Authors can travail in their vocation, and
outrun the apprehension of their Auditorie. But leaving this, I would they
would begin once: this protraction is able to sower the best-setled patience in
the Theater


They have answered your wish sir: they sound.


O here comes the Prologue: Now sir, if you had staid a little longer, I meant
to have spoke your Prologue for you, I faith


Mary with all my heart sir, you shall do it yet, and I thank you.


Nay, nay, stay, stay, hear you?


You could not have studied to have done me a greater benefit at the instant,
for I protest to you, I am imperfect, and (had I spoke it) I must of necessity
have been out


Why but do you speak this seriously?


Seriously! I (God's my help do I) and esteem my self indebted to your
kindness for it


For what?


Why for undertaking the Prologue for me.


How? did I undertake it for you?


Did you! I appeal to all these gentlemen whether you did or no? Come, it
pleases you to cast a strange look on it now; but 'twill not serve


Fore God but it must serve: and therefore speak your Prologue.


And I do, let me die poisoned with some venomous hiss, and never live to
look as high as the two-pennie room again


He has put you to it, sir.


Sdeath, what a humorous fellow is this? Gentlemen, good faith I can speak no
Prologue, howsoever his weak wit has had the fortune to make this strong use
of me here before you: but I protest


Come, come, leave these fustian protestations: away, come, I cannot abide
these gray headed ceremonies. Boy, fetch me a glass, quickly, I may bid these
gentlemen welcome; give 'hem a health here: I marl'e whose wit 'twas to put a
Prologue in you would sackbuts mouth: they might well think hee'ld be out of tune,
and yet you would play upon him too


Hang him dull block.


O good words, good words, a well-timberd fellow, he would have made a good
column and he had been thought on when the house was a building. O art thou
Elixi'r and spirit of abroad (now and then) once in a fortnight, and makes a
good meal among Players, where he has Caninum appetitum: mary at home he
keeps a good Philosophical diet, beans and butter-milke: an honest pure
rogue, he will take you off three, four, five of these one after another, and
look vilanously when he has done, like a one-headed C^rb^rus (he do 'not hear
me I hope) and then (when his belly is well ballac't, and his brain rigged a
little) he sails away withal, as though he would work wonders when he
comes home: he has made a play here, and he calls it; Every man out of his
Humor: Sblood and he get me out of the humor he has put me in, I Will never trust
none of his tribe again, while I live: Gentles, all I can say for him, is, you
are welcome. I could wish my bottle here amongst you: but there is an old rule;
No pledging your own health: mary if any here be thirsty for it, their best
way (that I know) is, sit still, seal up their lips, and drink so much of the
play in at their ears


What may this fellow be, Cordatus?


Faith, if the time will suffer his description, I Will give it you: he is one,
the Author calls him Carlo Buffone, an impudent common jester, a violent
railer, and an incomprehensible Epicure: one, whose company is desired of all
men, but beloved of none; he will sooner loose his soul than a jest, and
profane even the most holy things, to excite laughter: no honorable or
reverend personage whatsoever, can come within the reach of his eye, but is
turned into all manner of variety, by his adult' rate simile's


You paint forth a monster.


He will prefer all countries before his native, and thinks he can never
sufficiently, or with admiration enough, deliver his affectionate conceit of
foreign Atheistical policies: but stay, observe these, he will appear
himself anon


O, this is your envious man (Macilente) I think.


The same, sir.


Viriest, fortunae caecitatem facile far:
It Is true; but Stoique: where (in the vast world)
Does that man breath, that can so much command
His blood and his affection? well: I see,
I strive in vain to cure my wounded soul;
For every cordial that my thoughts apply
Turns to a cor'siue, and does eat it farther.
There is no taste in this Philosophy,
It Is like a Potion that a man should drink,
But turns his stomach with the sight of it.
I am no such pild Cinique, to believe
That beggerie is the only happiness;
Or (with a number of these patient fools)
To sing: My mind to me a kingdom is,
When the lanke hungry belly barks for food:
I look into the world, and there I meet
With objects, that do strike my blood-shot eyes
Into my brain: where, when I view my self;
Having before observed: this man is great,
Mighty, and feared: that, loved and highly favored:
A third, thought wise and learned: a fourth, rich,
And therefore honored: a fifth, rarely featured:
A sixth, admired for his nuptial fortunes:
When I see these (I say) and view my self,
I wish my Optique instruments were cracked;
And that the engine of my grief could cast
Mine eye balls like two globes of wildfire forth,
To melt this vnproportion'd frame of Nature.
Oh, they are thoughts that have trans^ixt my heart,
And often (in the strength of apprehension)
Made my cold passion stand upon my face,
Like drops of sweat on a stiff cake of ice.

This alludes well to that of the Poet,
Inuidus suspirat, gemit, incutitque dentes,
Sudat frigidus, intuens quod odit.

O peace, you break the Scene.

Soft, who be these?
I Will lay me down a while till they be past.

Signior, note this gallant I pray you.


What is he?


A tame Rooke, you will take him presently: List.


Nay look you Carlo: this is my Humor now; I have land and money, my friends
left me well, and I will be a gentleman whatsoever it cost me


A most gentleman-like resolution.


Tut, and I take an humor of a thing once, I am like your tailors needle, I go
through: but, for my name Signior, how think you? will it not serve for a
gentleman's name, when the Signior is put to it? Ha


Let me hear: how is it?


Signior Insulso Sogliardo: me thinks it sounds well.


O excellent: tut and all fitted to your name, you might very well stand for a
gentleman: I know many Sogliardos gentlemen


Why and for my wealth I might be a Justice of peace.


I, and a Constable for your wit.


All this is my lordship you see here, and those farms you came by.


Good steps to gentilitie too, mary: but Sogliardo, if you affect to be a
gentleman indeed, you must observe all the rare qualities, humors, and
complements of a gentleman


I know it signior, and if you please to instruct, I am not too good to learn,
I Will assure you


Enough sir: I Will make admirable use in the proiection of my medicine upon this
lump of copper here. I Will bethink me for you sir


Signior, I will both pay you and pray you, and thank you and think on you.


Is not this purely good?


God's Blood, why should such a prick-eard Hind as this
Be rich? Ha? a fool? such a transparent gull
That may be seen through? wherefore should he have land,
Houses, and lordships? O, I could eat my entrails,
And sink my soul into the earth with sorrow.

First (to be an accomplished gentleman, that is, a gentleman of the time) you
must give over housekeeping in the country, and live altogether in the city
amongst gallants; where, at your first appearance, 'twere good you turned four
or five hundred acres of your best land into two or three trunkes of apparel;
you may do it without going to a Coniurer: and be sure you mix your self
still, with such as flourish in the spring of the fashion, and are least
popular; study their carriage and behauior in all: learn to play at Primero
and Passage, and (ever when you loose) have two or three peculiar oaths to
swear by, that no man else swears: but above all, protest in your play, and
affirm, Upon your credit; As you are a true gentleman (at every cast:) you
may do it with a safe conscience, I warrant you


O admirable rare! he cannot choose but be a gentleman, that has these
excellent gifts: more, more, I beseech you


You must endeavor to feed cleanly at your Ordinary, sit melancholy, and pick
your teeth when you cannot speak: and when you come to Plays, be Humorous,
look with a good starch't face, and ruffle your brow like a new boot, laugh at
nothing but your own jests, or else as the Noblemen laugh; that is a special
grace you must observe


I warrant you, sir.


I, and sit of the stage, and flout; provided, you have a good suit.


O I Will have a suit only for that sir.


You must talk much of your kindred and allies.


Lies! no Signior, I shall not need to do so, I have kindred in the ^ittie to
talk of: I have a niece is a merchants wife; and a nephew, my brother Sordidos
son, of the Innes of court


O but you must pretend alliance with Courtiours and great persons: and ever
when you are to dine or ^uppe in any strange presence, hire a fellow with a
great chain (though it be copper it is no matter) to bring you letters, feigned
from such a noble man, or such a knight, or such a Lady, To their worshipful,
right rare, and noble qualified friend or kinsman, Signior Insulso Sogliardo;
give your self style enough. And there (while you intend circumstances of
news, or inquiry of their health, or so) one of your familiars (whom you
must carry about you still) breaks it up (as't were in a jest) and reads it
publicly at the table: at which, you must seem to take as unpardonable
offense as if he had torn your mistress colors, or breathed upon her
picture; and pursue it with that hot grace, as if you would enforce a challenge
upon it presently


Stay, I do not like that humor of challenge, it may be accepted: but I Will
tell you what is my humor now: I will do this, I will take occasion of sending
one of my suites to the Tailors to have the pocket repaired, or so; and there
such a letter as you talk of (broke open and all) shall be left: O, the Tailor
will presently give out what I am upon the reading of it: worth twenty of your
Gallants


But then you must put on an extreme face of coffeehouse at your man's
negligence


O, so I will, and beat him too: I Will have a man for the purpose.


You may; you have land and crowns: O partial Fate!


Mass well remembered, you must keep your men gallant, at the first, fine pied
Liueries laid with good gold lace, there is no loss in it, they may rip't off
and pawn it, when they lack victuals


Byr Lady that is chargeable Signior, 'twill bring a man in debt.


Debt? why that is the more for your credit sir: it is an excellent policy to
owe much in these days, if you note it


As how good Signior? I would feign be a Politician.


O, look where you are indebted any great sum, your creditor observes you
with no less regard, than if he were bound to you for some huge benefit, and
will quake to give you the least cause of offense, least he loose his money: I
assure you (in these times) no man has his servant more obsequious and pliant,
than gentlemen their creditors: to whom (if at any time) you pay but a moiety
or a fourth part, it comes more acceptedly, than if you gave 'hem a newy ears
gift


I perceive you sir, I will take up, and bring my self in credit sure.


Marry this; always beware you commerce not with bankrupts, or poor needy
Ludgathians: they are impudent creatures, turbulent spirits, they care not what
violent tragedies they stir, nor how they play fast and loose with a poor
gentleman's fortunes to get their own: marry, these rich fellows (that ha'the
world, or the better part of it, sleeping in their countinghouses) they are ten
times more placable, they: either fear, hope, or modesti^, restraines them
from offering any outrages: but this is nothing to your followers, you shall
not run a penny more in arrerage for them, and you list your self


No? how should I keep 'hem then?


Keep 'hem? God's Blood let them keep themselves, they are no sheep, are they?
What? you shall come in houses, where plate, apparel, rewels, and diverse
other pretty commodities lie negligently scattered, and I would ha'those
Mercu^ies follow me (I trow) should remember they had not their fingers for
nothing


That Is not so good me thinks.


Why after you have kept 'hem a fornight or so, and showed 'hem enough to the
world, you may turn 'hem away, and keep no more but a boy, it 's enough


Nay my humor is not for boys, I Will keep men, and I keep any; and I Will give
coats, that is my humor: but I lack a Cullisen


Why now you ride to the city, you may buy one, I Will bring you where you shall
have your choice for money


Can you sir?


O I: you shall have one take measure of you, and make you a Coat of arms to
fit you of what fashion you will


By word of mouth I thank you Signior; I Will be once a little prodigal in a Humor
in faith, and have a most prodigious Coat


Torment and death, break head and brain at once
To be delivered of your fighting issue.
Who can endure to see blind Fortune dote thus?
To be enamored on this dustie Turfe?
This clod? a horson Puckefist? O God, God, God, God, etc.
I could run wild with grief now to behold
The rankness of her bounties, that does breed
Such bullrushes; these Mushrompe Gentlemen,
That shoot up in a night to place and worship.

Let him alone, some stray, some stray.


Nay I will examine him before I go sure.


The Lord of the soil has all we^ts and straies here? has he not?


Yes sir.


Faith then I pity the poor fellow, he is fallen into a fools hands.


Sirah, who gave you commission to lie in my Lordship?


Your Lordship?


How? my Lordship? do you know me sir?


I do know you sir.


S'heart, he answers him like an Echo.


Why, who am I Sir?


One of those that fortune favors.


The Periphrasis of a fool; I Will observe this better.


That fortune favors? how mean you that friend?


I mean simply; That you are one that lives not by your wits.


By my wits? No sir, I scorn to live by my wits, I; I have better means I
tell thee, than to take such base courses, as to live by my wits. God's Blood do
thou think I live by my wits


Me thinks Iester, you should not relish this well.


Ha? does he know me?


Though yours be the worst use a man can put his wit too of thousands, to
prostitute it at every Tavern and Ordinary; yet (me thinks) you should have
turned your broad side at this, and have been ready with an Apology, able to
sink this Hulke of Ignorance into the bottom, and depth of his Contempt


God's Blood it is Macilente: Signior, you are well encountered, how is it? O we must
not regard what he says man, a Trout, a shallow fool, he has no more brain
than a Butterfly, a mere stuffed suit, he looks like a mustie Bottle, new
wickerd, his head's the Cork, light, light. I am glad to see you so well
returned Signior


You are? Gramercie good Ianus.


Is he one of your acquaintance? I love him the better for that.


Gods precious, come away man, what do you mean? and you knew him as I do,
you would shun him, as you would do the plague


Why sir?


O, he is a black fellow, take heed on him.


Is he a Scholar or a Soldior?


Both, both; a lean Mungrell, he looks as if he were chap-falne with barking
at other men's good fortunes: 'ware how you offend him, he carries Oil and
Fire in his pen, will scald where it drops, his Spirit's like Powder, quick,
violent: he will blow a man up with a jest: I fear him worse than a rotten
Wall does the Cannon, shake an hour after at the report: away, come not near
him


For Gods sake let us be gone, and he be a Scholar, you know I cannot abide
him, I had as leeue see a Cocatrice, specially as Cocatrices go now


What, you will stay signior? this gentleman Sogliardo and I are to visit the
knight Punta^volo, and from thence to the City, we shall meet there


I, when I cannot shun you, we will meet.
It Is strange: of all the creatures I have seen,
I envy not this Buffon, for indeed
Neither his fortunes nor his parts deserve it;
But I do hate him as I hate the devil,
Or that brasse-visag'd monster Barbarism.
O, it is an open-throated, blacke-mouth'd curre,
That bites at all, but eats on those that feed him,
A slave, that to your face will ( Serpent-like)
Creep on the ground, as he would eat the dust;
And to your back will turn the tail and sting
More deadly than a Scorpion: stay, who is this?
Now for my soul, another minion
Of the old lady Chance's: I Will observe him.

O rare, good, good, good, good, good, I thank my Christ, I thank my Christ
for it


Said I not true? does not his passion speak
Out of my di^ination? O my senses,
Why loose you not your powers, and become
Dead, dull, and blunted with this Spectacle?
I know him, it is Sordido, the farmer,
A Boor^, and brother to that Swine was here.

Excellent, excellent, excellent, as I would wish, as I would wish.

See how the strumpet Fortune tickles him,
And makes him swoune with laughter, O, O, O.

Ha, ha, ha, I will not sow my grounds this year, Let me see, what harvest
shall we have? June, Iulie


What is 't a Prognostication rap's him so?


The xx.xxi.xxij. days, rain and wind, O good, good; the xxiij. and xxiiij.
rain and some wind, good; the xxv. rain, good still; xxvj.xxvij.xxviij, wind
and some rain; would it had been rain and some wind: well it is good (when it
can be no better) xxix. inclining to rain: in clining to rain that is not so
good now. xxx. and xxxj. wind and no rain: no rain? S'lid stay; this is worse
and worse: what says he of S. Swithins? turn back, look, S. Swithins: no
rain


O here is a precious filthy damned rogue,
That fats himself with expectation
Of rotten weather, and vnseason'd hours;
And he is rich for it, an elder brother,
His barnes are full, his reekes, and mowes well trod,
His garners crack with store. O, it is well; ha, ha, ha:
A plague consume thee and thy house.

O here, S. Swithins, the xv. day, variable weather, for the most part rain,
good; for the most part rain: Why it should rain forty days after now,
more or less, it was a rule held before I was able to hold a plough, and yet
here are two days, no rain; ha? it makes me muse. We Will see how the next
month begins, if that be better. August: August, first, second, third, and
fourth days, rainie, and blustering; this is well now: fifth, sixth, seventh,
eight, and ninth, rain, with some thunder; I marry, this is excellent; the
other was false printed sure: the tenth and eleventh, great store of rain; O
good, good, good, good, good; the twelft, thirteenth, and fourteenth days,
rain; good still: fifteenth and sixteenth, rain; good still: seventeenth and
eighteenth, rain, good still; nineteenth and twentieth, Good still, good
still, good still, good still, good still; one and twentieth, some rain; some
rain? well, we must be patient, and attend the heavens pleasure, would it
were more though: the one and twentieth, two and twentieth, three and twentieth,
great tempest of rain, thunder, and lightning

O good again, past expectation good:
I thank my blessed angel; never, never,
Laid I penny better out than this,
To purchase this dear book: not dear for price,
And yet of me as dearly prized as life,
Since in it is contained the very life,
Blood, strength, and sinews of my happiness:
Blessed be the hour wherein I bought this book,
His studies happy that composed the book,
And the man fortunate that sold the book:
Sleep with this charm, and be as true to me
As I am joy'd and confident in thee.

Ha, ha, ha? I'not this good? Is 't not pleasing this? ha, ha? Gods ha?
Is It possible that such a spacious villain
Should live and not be plagued? or lies he hid
Within the wrinckled bosom of the world,
Where heaven cannot see him? God's Blood (me thinks)
It Is rare and admirable, that he should breath, and walk.
Feed with disgestion, sleep, enjoy his health,
And (like a boisterous VVhale swallowing the poor)
Still swim in wealth and pleasure: is it not strange?
Unless his house and skin were thunder-proofe,
I wonder at it. Me thinks now, the Hecticke,
Gout, Leprosy, or some such loathed disease
Might light upon him; or that fire (from heaven)
Might fall upon his barnes; or mice and rats
Eat up his grain; or else that it might rot
Within the hoarie Reekes, e'ne as it stands:
Me thinks this might be well; and after all
The devil might come and fetch him: I, it is true.
Mean time he surfets in prosperity,
And thou (in envy of him) gnaw'st thy self,
Peace fool, get hence, and tell thy vexed spirit,
"Wealth in this age will scarcely look^ on merit.

Who brought this same sir ha?


Marry sir one of the justices men, he says it is a precept, and all their
Hands be at it


I, and the prints of them stick in my flesh
Deeper than in their letters: They have sent me
Pills wrapped in paper here, that should I take 'hem,
Would poison all the sweetness of my Book,
And turn my Honey into Hemlocke juice:
But I am wiser than to serve their precepts,
Or follow their prescriptions: Here Is a devise,
To charge me bring my Grain unto the markets:
I, much, when I have neither Barn nor Garner,
Nor Earth to hide it in, I Will bring it; but till then,
Each corn I send shall be as big as Paul's.
O, but (say some) the poor are like to sterue.
Why let 'hem sterue, what is that to me? are Bees
Bound to keep life in Drones and idle Moaths? no:
Why such are these (that term themselves the poor*
Only because they would be pitied)
But are indeed a sort of lazy Beggars,
Licencious Rogues and sturdie Vagabonds,
Bred (by the sloth of a fat plenteous year)
Like snakes in heat of summer out of dung,
And this is all that these cheap times are good for:
Whereas a wholesome and penurious Dearth
Purges the soil of such vile excrements,
And kills the Vipers up.

O but master,
Take heed they hear you not.

Why so?

They will exclaim against you.

I, their exclaimes
Move me as much, as thy breath moves a Mountain;
Poor worms, they hiss at me, whilst I at home
Can be contented to appl^^d my self,
To sit and clap my hands, and laugh and leap,
Knocking my head against my roof, with joy
To see how plumpe my bags are, and my barnes.
Sirah, go, hie you home, and bid your fellows
Get all their flailes ready again I come.

I will Sir.

I Will instantly set all my hinds to thrashing
Of a whole Reeke of corn, which I will hide
Under the ground; and with the straw thereof
I Will stuff the outsides of my other Mowes:
That done, I Will have 'hem empty all my Garners,
And in the friendly Earth bury my store,
That when the Searchers come they may suppose
All Is spent, and that my fortunes were belied.
And to lend more opinion to my want,
And stop that many-mouthed vulgar Dog,
(Which else would still be baying at my door)
Each market day, I will be seen to buy
Part of the purest Wheat, as for my household:
Where when it comes, it shall increase my heaps,
Twill yield me treble gain at this dear time,
Promisd in this dear Book: I have cast all,
Till then I will not sell an care, I Will hang first.
O I shall make my prizes as I list,
My House and I can feed on Pease and Barley,
What though a world of VVretches sterue the while?
"He that will thrive, must think no courses vile.

Now signior, how approve you this? have the Humorists expressed themselves truly
or no


Yes (if it be well prosecuted) it is hitherto happy enough: but me thinks
Macilente went hence too soon, he might have been made to stay and speak
somewhat in reproof of Sordido's wretchedness, now at the last


O no, that had bin extremely improper, besides he had continued the Scene too
long with him as't was, being in no more actio^


You may enforce the length as a necessary reason; but for propriety the Scene
would very well have born it, in my judgeme^t


O worst of both: why you mistake his Humor utterly the^.


How? do I mistake it? is it not Envy?


Yes, but you must understand Signior, he enuies him not as he is a villain,
a wolf in the commonwealth, but as he is rich and fortunate; for the true
condition of envy, is Dolor alien^ felicitatis, to have our eyes continually
fixed upon another man's prosperity, that is his chief happiness, and to
grieve at that. Where as if we make his monstrous and abhord actions, our
object, the grief (we take then) comes nearer the nature of Hate than Envy,
as being bred out of a kind of contempt and lothing in our selves


So you (...) infer it had been Hate, not Envy in him, to reprehend the humor
of Sordido


Right, for what a man truly enuies in another, he could always love, and
cherish in himself; but no man truly reprehends in another what he loves in
himself, therefore Reprehension is out of his Hate. And this distinction has
he himself made in a speech there (if you marked it) where he says, I envy
not this Buffon, but I hate him


Stay sir: I envy not this Buffon, but I hate him: why might he not as well
have hated Sordido as him


No sir, there was subject for his envy in Sordido; his wealth: So was there
not in the other, he stood possessed of no one eminent gift, but a most odious
and fiend-like disposition, that would turn Charity it self into Hate, much
more Envy for the present


You have satisfied me sir, O here comes the Fool and the Iester again me
thinks


'Twere pity they should be parted sir.


What bright-shining gallant's that with them? the knight they went to?


No sir, this is one Monsieur Fastidius Brisk, otherwise called the fresh
Frenchefied courtier


A humorist too?


As humorous as quickesiluer, do but observe him, the Scene is the country
still, remember


Cinedo, watch when the knight comes, andgiue us word.


I will sir.


How like thou my boy, Carlo?


O well, well, he looks like a colonel of the Pigmies horse, or one of these
motions in a great antique clock: he would show well upon a Habberdashers
stall, at a corner shop rarely


S'heart, what a damned witty rogue's this? how he confounds with his
simile's


Better with simile's than smiles: and whither were you riding now Signior?


Who I? what a silly jest's that? whither should I ride but to the Court?


O pardon me sir, twenty places more: your hot-house, or your --


By the virtue of my soul this knight dwells in Elysium here.


He Is gone now, I thought he would fly out presently. These be our
nimble-sprighted Catso's that have there euasions at pleasure, will run over a
bog like your wild Irish; no sooner started, but they will leap from one thing
to another like a squirrell, heigh; Dance, and do tricks in their discourse,
from Fire to Water, from Water to Air, from Air to Earth, as if their
tongues did but even lick the four Elements over, and away


Sir Carlo, thou never saw my gray Hobbie yet, did thou?


No: have you such a one?


The best in Europe (my good villain) thou wilt say, when thou see him.


But when shall I see him?


There was a Noble man in the Court offered me 100 pound for him by this light:
a fine little fiery slave, he runs like a (O) excellent, excellent, with the
very sound of the spur


How? the sound of the spur?


O, it is your only humor now extant sir: a good gingle, a good gingle.


God's Blood you shall see him turn morrisedancer, he has got him bells, a good
suit, and a Hobbie-horse


Signior, now you talk of a Hobbyhorse, I know where one is, will not be given
for a brace of angels


How is that Sir?


Mary sir I am telling this gentleman of a Hobbyhorse, it was my fathers
indeed, and (though I say i


That should not say it) on, on.


He did dance in it with as good humor and as good regard as any man of his
degree whatsoever, being no Gentleman: I have daunc't in it my self too


Not since the Humor of gentilitie was upon you? did you?


Yes once; marry, that was but to show what a gentleman might do in a Humor.


O very good.


Why this fellows discourse were nothing but for the word Humor.


O bear with him, and he should lack matter and words too, 'twere pitiful.


Nay look you Sir, there is never a Gentleman in the country has the like
humors for the Hobbyhorse as I have; I have the Method for the threeding of
the needle, the --


How the Method.


I, the Leigeritie for that, and the wigh-hie, and the daggers in the nose, and
the travels of the egg from finger to finger, all the humors incident to the
quality. The horse hangs at home in my parlor, I Will keep it for a monument,
as long as I live sure


Do so; and when you die, 'twill be an excellent Trophee to hang over your
tomb^


Mass, and I Will have a tomb (now I think on it) it is but so much charges.


Best build it in your life time then, your heirs may hap to forget it else.


Nay I mean so, I Will not trust to them.


No, for heirs and executors are grown damnably careless, specially since the
ghosts of Testators left walking: how like you him Signior


Before heavens his Humor arrides me exceedingly.


Arrides you?


I, pleases me (a pox on 't) I am so haunted at the court and at my lodging
with your refined choice spirits, that it makes me clean of another Garb,
another strain, I know not how; I cannot frame me to your harsh vulgar phrase,
it is against my Genius


Signior Carlo.


This is right to that of Horace, Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria currunt:
so this gallant laboring to avoid Popularitie, falls into a habit of
Affectatio^ ten thousand times more hateful than the former


Who he? a gull? a fool? no salt in him in the earth man: he looks like a
fresh Salmon kept in a tub; he will be spent shortly, his braine's lighter than
his feather already, and his tongue more subject to lie, than that is to wag:
he sleeps with a muske-cat every night, and walks all day hanged in Pomander
chains for penance: he has his skin tan'd in ciuet, to make his
complexion strong, and the sweetness of his youth lasting in the sense of his
sweet lady. A good empty Puff, he loves you well Signior


There shall be no love lost Sir, I Will assure you.


Nay Carlo, I am not happy in thy love I see, pr'y thee suffer me to enjoy thy
company a little (sweet mischief) by this air, I shall envy this gentleman's
place in thy affections, if you be thus private I faith: how now? is the knight
arrived


No sir, but it is gest he will arrive presently, by his forerunners.


His hounds! by Min^rua an excellent Figure; a good boy.


You should give him a French crown for it: the boy would find two better
Figures in that, and a good Figure of your bounty beside


Tut, the boy wants no crowns.


No crown: speak in the singular number, and we will believe you.


Nay, thou art so capriciously conceited now: Sir (Damnation) I have heard
this knight Puntarvolo, reported to be a gentleman of exceeding good humor:
thou know him; pr'ythee, how is his disposition? I never was so favored of
my stars as to see him yet. Boy, do you look to the Hobbie


I sir, the groom has set him up.


It Is well: I rid out of my way of intent to visit him, and take knowledge of
his: Nay good Wickedness, his humor, his humor


Why he loves dogs, and hawks, and his wife well: he has a good riding
face, and he can sit a great horse; he will taint a staff well at tilt: when
he is mounted, he looks like the sign of the George, that is all I know; save
that in stead of a Dragon he will brandish against a tree, and break his sword
as confidently upon the knottie bark, as the other did upon the skales of the
beast


O, but this is nothing to that is deliuerd of him: they say he has dialogues,
and discourses between his horse, himself, and his dog; and that he will
court his own Lady, as she were a strang^r never encountered before


I, that he will, and make fresh love to her every morning: this Gentleman has
been a Spectator of it, Signior Insulso


I am resolute to keep a Page* say you sir?


You have seen Signior Puntarvolo accost his Lady?


O, I sir.


And how is the manner of it pr'ythee good Signior?


Faith ^^r in very good sort; he has his humors for it sir* as first, (supp^se
he were now to come from riding, or hunting, or so) he has his trumpet to
sound, and then the waiting Gentlewoman, she looks out; and then he speaks,
and then she speaks: very pretty I faith Gentlemen


Why, but do you remember no particulars, Signior?


O, yes sir: first, the Gentlewoman she looks out at the window.


After the trumpet has summoned a parle? not before?


No sir, not before: and then says he; ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


What says he? be not rapt so.


Says he; ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


Nay speak, speak.


Ha, ha, ha, Says he: God save you, ha, ha, etc.


Was this the ridiculous motive to all this passion?


Nay that, that comes after is: ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.


Doubtless he apprehends more than he vtters, this fellow: or else.


Lift, lift, they are come from hunting:


So it had need, 'twill scarce poize the observation else.


Faith I remember all, but the manner of it is quite out of my head.


O withdraw, withdraw, it cannot be but a most pleasing object.


Forrester, give wind to thy Horn. Enough; by this the sound has touched the
ears of the enclosed: Depart, leave the dog, and take with thee what thou
have deserved; the Horn, and thanks


I mary, there is some taste in this.


It Is not good?


Ah peace, now above, now above.


Stay: mine eye has (on the instant) through the bounty of the window,
received the form of a Nymph. I will step forward three paces: of the which, I
will barely retire one; and (after some little flexure of the knee) with an
erected grace salute her: 1, 2, and 3. Sweet Lady, God save you


No forsooth: I am but the waiting Gentlewoman.


He knew that before.


Pardon me: Humanum est ^rrare.


He learned that of a Puritan.


To the perfection of Complement (which is the dyall of the thought, and guided
by the Sun of your beauties) are required these three Projects: the Gnomon,
the Puntilio's, and the Superficies: the Superficies, is that we call Place;
the Puntilio's, Circumstance; and the Gnomon, Ceremonic: in either of which,
for a stranger to err, it is easy and facile; and such am I


True, not knowing her Horizon, he must needs err: which I fear, he knows
too well


What call you the Lord of the castle? sweet Face.


The Lord of the castle is a knight sir; Signior Puntarvolo.


Puntarvolo? O.


Now must he ruminate.


Does the wench know him all this while then?


O, do you know me man? why therein lies the sirrup of the jest; it is a
Project, a designment of his own, a thing studied, and rehearst as ordinarily
at his coming from hawking or hunting, as a jigge after a Play


I, even like your jigge sir.


It Is a most sumptuous and stately edifice; what years is the knight, fair
Damsel


Faith much about your years sir.


What complexion, or what stature bears he?


Of your stature, and very nere upon your complexion.


Mine is Melancholy:


So is the dogs, just.


And does argue constancy, chiefly in love. What are his endowments? Is he
courteous


O the most courteous Knight upon Gods earth sir.


Is he magnanimous?


As the skin between your brows sir.


Is he bountiful?


God's Blood, he takes an Inventory of his own good parts.


Bountiful? I sir I would you should know it; the poor are served at his gate
early and late sir


Is he learned?


O, I sir, he can speak the French and Italian.


Then he is trauail'd?


I forsooth, he has been beyond sea once or twice.


As far as Paris, to fetch over a fashion and come back again.


Is he religious?


Religious? I know not what you call Religious, but he goes to Church I am sure.


S^^d me thinks these answers should offend him.


Tut no; he knows they are excellent, and to her capacity that speaks 'hem.


Would I might see his face.


She should let down a glass from the window at that word, and request him
to look in it


Doubtless, the gentleman is most exact, and absolutely qualified? does the
castle contain him


No Sir, he is from home, but his Lady is within.


His Lady? what is she fair? splendidious? and amiable?


O Jesus sir!


Pr'y thee dear Nymph, entreat her beauties to shine on this side of the
building


That he may erect a new dyall of complement, with his Gnomons, and his
Puntilio's


Nay, thou art such another Cinique now, a man had need walk uprightly before
thee


Heart, can any man walk more upright than he does? Look, look; as if he
went in a frame, or had a suit of wanescot on: and the dog watching him least
he should leap out on it


O villain!


Well, and ever I meet him in the city, I Will have him joynted, I Will pawn him
in East-cheape among butchers else


Peace, who be these, Carlo?


Yonder Is your godfather; do your duty to him son.


This sir? a poor elder brother of mine sir, a yeoman, may dispend some seven
or eight hundred a year: that is his son, my nephew there


You are not ill-come neighbor Sordido, though I have not yet said welcome:
what, my god-sonne is grown a great Proficient by this


I hope he will grow great one day, sir.


What does he study? the law?


I sir, he is a gentleman, though his father be but a yeoman.


What call you your nephew, Signior?


Mary his name is Fungoso.


Fungoso? O, he look^ somewhat like a sponge in that pinckt doublet me
thought: well, make much of him; I see he was never borne to ride upon a moile


My Lady will come presently sir.


O now, now.


Stand by, retire your selves a space: nay, pray you, forget not the use of
your hat; the air is piercing


What? will not their presence prevail against the current of his humor?


O no: it is a mere flood, a Torrent, carries all before it.


What more than heavenly pulchritude is this?
What Magazine, or treasury of bliss?
Dazzle, you organs to my optique sense,
To view a creature of such eminence:
O I am planet-strooke, and in yond Sphere,
A brighter star than Venus does appea^^.

How? in verse?


^n Ecstasy, an Ecstasy, man.


Is your desire to speak with me, sir Knight?


He will tell you that anon; neither his Bra^^e, nor his Body, are yet molded
for an answer


Most debonaire, and Luculent Lady, I decline me as l^w as the Basis of your
Altitude


He makes congies to ^is wife in Geometrical proportions.


Is It possible there should be any such Humorist?


Very easily possible, Sir, you see there is.


I have ^^arse collected my spirits, but lately scattered in the admiration of
your Form; to which (if the bounties of your mind be any way respo^sible) I
doubt not but my desires shall find a s^ooth and secure passage. I am a poor
Knight^rrant (Lady) that hunting in the adjacent Forest, was by adventure in
the pursuit of a Heart, brought to this place; which Heart (dear Madame) escaped
by enchantment: the evening approaching (my self and servant wear^ed) my suit
is, to enter your fair Castle, and refr^sh me


Sir Knight, albeit it be not usual with me (chiefly in the absence of a
husband) to admit any entrance to strangers, yet in the true regard of those
i^nate^ virtues, and fair parts which so strive to express themselves in you;
I am resolved to enterteine you to the best of my unworthy power; which I
acknowledge to be nothing, valew'd with what so worthy a person may deserve.
Please you but stay, while I descend


Most admired Lady, you astonish me.


What? with spe^king a speech of your own penning?


Nay look; pr^y thee peac^.


Pox on it: I am impatient of such ^opperie.


O lets hear the rest.


What? a tedious Chapter of Courtship, after sir Lan^^lot, and Queen
Guevener? away: I mar'le in what dull cold nooke he found ^his Lady out? that
(being a woman) she was blessed with no more Copy of wit, but to serve his Humor
thus. Sblood, I think he feeds her with Porridge, I: she could never have such
a thick brain else


Why is Porridge so hurtful, Signior?


O, nothing under heaven more prejudicial to those ascending subtle powers,
or does sooner abate that which we call, Acumen Ingenij, than your gross fare:
why I Will make you an Instance: your City wives, but observe 'hem, you have not
more perfect true fools in the world bred than they are generally; and yet you
see (by the finenesse and delicacie of their Diet, di^ing into the fat Capons,
drinking your rich wines, feeding on Larkes, Sparrows, Potato pyes, and such
good unctuous meats) how their wits are refi^'d and rare^i'd: and sometimes a
very Quintessence of conceit ^^ows from 'hem, able to drown a weak
Apprehension


Peace, here comes the Lady.


Gods me, here is company: turn in again.


S'light, our presence has cut off the convoy of the jest.


All the better; I am glad on it: for the issue was very perspicuous. Come,
let us discover, and salute the knight


Stay: who be these that address themselves toward us? what Carlo? now by the
Sincerity of my Soul, welcome; welcome Gentlemen: and how do thou, thou
Grand Scourge; or, Second Untruss of the time


Faith spending my metal in this Reeling world (here and there) as the sway
of my Affection carries me, and perhaps stumble upon a yeoman Pheuterer, as I
do now; or one of Fortunes Moyles laden with treasure, and an empty Clokebagge
following him, gaping when a bag will untie


Peace you Bandogge peace: what brisk Nim^adoro is that in the white virgin
boot there


Mary sir, one, that I must entreat you take a very particular knowled^e of,
and with more than ordinary respect: Monsieur Fastid^^^


Sir, I could wish that for the time of your vouchsaft abiding here, and more
Real entertainment, this my house stood on the Muses hill; and these my
Orchards were those of the Hesperide's


I possess as much in your wish sir, as if I were made Lord of the Indies; and
I pray you believe it


I have a better opinion of his Faith, than to think it will be so corrupted.


Come brother, I Will bring you acquainted with Gentlemen, and good fellows, such
as shall do you more grace, than --


Brother, I hunger not for such acquaintance: Do you take heed, least: --


Hushed: my Brother sir, for want of education sir, somewhat nodding to the
Boore, the Clown; but I request you in private sir


By Jesus, it is a very fine suit of clothes.


Do you observe that, Signior? there is another Humor has new cracked the shell.


What? he is enamored of the Fashion, is he?


O you forestall the jest.


I mar'le what it might stand him in?


Nephew?


Before God it is an excellent S^te, and as neatly becomes him. What said you
Uncle


When saw you my Niece?


Mary yesternight I supt there. That kind of Boot does very rare too.


And what news hear you?


The guilt Spur and all: would I were hanged, but it is exceeding good. Say
you


Your mind is carried away with somewhat else: I ask what news you hear?


Troth we hear none: in good faith I was never so pleased with a fashion
days of my life; O^ (and I might have but my wish) I Would ask no more of God
no^^ but such a Suit, such a Hat, such a Band, such a Doublet, such a Hose,
such a Boot, and such a --


They say there is a new Motion of the city of Nineueh, with Jonas and the
VVhale, to be seen at Fleet-bridge? you can tell cousin


Here Is such a world of question with him now: Yes, I think there be such a
thing, I saw the picture: would he would once be satisfied. Let me see, the
Doublet, say fifty shillings the Doublet, and between three or four pound the
Hose; then Boots, the Hat, and Band: some ten or eleven pound would do it all,
and suit me for the heavens


I Will see all those devises, and I come to London once.


Gods s'lid, and I could compass it, 'twere rare: hark you Uncle.


What says my Nephew?


Faith Uncle, I Would have desired you to have made a motion for me to my father in
a thing, that; walk aside and I Will tell you sir, no more but this: there is a
parcel of Law books, (some twenty pounds worth) that lie in a place for
little more than half the money they cost; and I think for some twelve pound
or twenty mark, I could go near to redeem 'hem: there is Plowden, Diar,
Brook, and Fitz-Herbert; diverse such as I must have ere long: and you know I
were as good save five or six pound as not, Uncle: I pray you move it for me


That I will: when would you have me do it? presently?


O I, I pray you good Uncle: God send me good luck; Lord (and't be thy will)
prosper it: O Jesus; now, now, if it take (O Christ) I am made for ever


Shall I tell you sir: by this air I am the most beholding to that Lord, of
any Gentleman living; he does use me the most honorably, and with the
greatest respect, more indeed, than can be vtter'd with any opinion of truth


Then have you, the Count Gratiato?


As true noble a Gentleman too as any breaths; I am exceedingly endeared to his
love: by Jesus, (I protest to you Signior, I speak it not gloriously, nor out
of affectation, but) there is he, and the Count Frugale, Signior Illustre,
Signior Luculento, and a sort of 'hem; that (when I am at the Court) they do
share me amongst 'hem. Happy is he can enjoy me most private; I do wish my
self sometime an Vbiquitarie for their love, in good faith


There Is never a one of these but might lie a week on the rack, ere they
could bring forth his name; and yet he powers them out as familiarly as if
he had seen 'hem stand by the firc in the Presence, or taken Tobacco with them
over the stage in the Lords room


Then you must of necessity know our Court-starre there? that Planet of wit,
Maddona Saviolina


O Lord Sir! my mistress.


Is she your mistress?


Faith, here be some slight favors of hers sir, that do speak it, She is; as
this Scarf sir, or this Ribband in mine ear, or so; this Fether grew in her
sweet Fan sometimes, though now it be my poor fortunes to wear it as you
see sir; slight, slight; a foolish toy


Well, she is the Lady of a most exalted, and ingenous spirit.


Did you ever hear any woman speak like her? or enricht with a more
plentiful discourse


O vilanous! nothing but Sound, Sound, a mere Echo; she speaks as she goes
tired, in Cobweb lawne, light, thin: good enough to catch flies withal


O, manage your affections.


Well, if thou be not plagued for this blasphemy one day: --


Come, regard not a jeaster; it is in the power of my purse to make him speak
well or ill of me


Sir, I affirm it to you (upon my Credit and Judgment) she has the most
Harmonious and Musical strain of Wit, that ever tempted a true ear; and yet
to see, a rude tongue will profane Heaven


I am not ignorant of it sir.


Oh, it flows from her like Nectar, and she does give it, that sweet, quick
grace, and exornation in the composure, that ( By this good Heaven) she does
observe as pure a Phrase, and use as choice Figures in her ordinary
conferences, as any be in the Arcadia


Or rather in Greenes works, whence she may steal with more security.


Well, if ten pound will fetch 'hem, you shall have it, but I Will part with no
more


I Will try what that will do, if you please.


Do so: and when you have 'hem, study hard.


Yes sir: and I could study to get forty shillings more now: well, I will put
my self into the Fashion, as far as this will go presently


I wonder it raines not! the Almanac says we should have store of rain to
day


Why sir, to morrow I will associate you to the Court my self; and from
thence to the City, about a Business, a Project I have: I will expose it to
you sir: Carlo I am sure has heard of it


What Is that sir?


I do entend this year of Iubile to travail: and (because I will not
altogether go upon expense) I am determined to put forth some five thousand
pound, to be paid me five for one, upon the return of my self, my Wife, and
my Dog, from the Turks Court in Constantinople. If all, or either of us
miscarrie in the journey, it is gone: if we be successful, why, there will be
xxv. thousand pound to entertain time withal. Nay, go not neighbor S^dido;
stay to night, and help to make our society the fuller* Gentlemen, frolic:
Carlo? what? dull now


I was thinking on your Project sir, and you call it so: is this the Dog goes
with you


This is the Dog sir.


He do'not go barefoot, does he?


Away you traitor, away.


Nay before God, I speak simply; he may prick his foot with a thorn, and be as
much as the whole venture is worth. Besides, for a Dog that never trauail'd
before, it is huge journey to Constantinople: I Will tell you now (and he were
mine) I Would have some present conference with a Phisician, what Antidotes were
good to give him, and Preservatives against poison: for (assure you) if once
your money be out, there'll be diverse attempts made against the life of the
poor Animal


Thou art still dangerous.


Is Signior D^liros wife your kinswoman?


I sir, she is my Niece, my brothers daughter here, and my Nephews sister.


Do you know her sir?


O God sir, Signior Deliro her husband is my Merchant.


I, I have seen this Gentleman there, often.


I cry you mercy sir: let me crave your name, pray you.


Fungoso sir.


Good Signior Fungoso, I shall request to know you better sir.


I am her brother Sir.


In fair time sir.


Come Gentlemen, I will be your Conduct.


Nay pray you sir; we shall meet at Signior Deliro's often.


You shall ha'me at the Heralds office sir, for some week or so, at my first
coming up. Come Carlo


Me thinks Cordatus, he dwelt somewhat too long on this Scene; it hung in the
hand


I see not where he could have insisted less, and to have made the Humors
perspicuous enough


True, as his Subject lies: but he might have altered the shape of Argument,
and explicated 'hem better in single Scenes


That had been Single indeed: why? be they not the same persons in this, as
they would have been in those? and is it not an object of more State, to behold
the Scene full, and relieved with variety of Speakers to the end, than to see
a vast empty stage, and the Actors come in (one by one) as if they were dropped
down with a feather into the eye of the Audience


Nay, you are better traded with these things than I, and therefore I Will
subscribe to your judgment; mary you shall give me leave to make objections


O what else? it is the special intent of the Author you should do so: for
thereby others (that are present) may as well be satisfied, who happily would
object the same you do


So sir, but when appears Macilente again?


Mary he stays but till our silence give him leave: here he comes, and with
him Signior Deliro a merchant, at whose house he is come to sojourne: Make your
own obscruation now; only transfer your thoughts to the City with the
Scene; where, suppose they speak


I Will tell you by and by sir.
VVelcome (good Macilente) to my house,
To sojourne even for ever; if my best
In cates, and every sort of good entreaty
May moou^ you stay with me.

I thank you sir:
And yet the muffled Fates (had it pleased them)
Might have supplied me from their own full store
Without this word ( I thank you) to a fool.
I see no reason why that Dog (^all'd Chance)
Should fawn upon this fellow more than me:
I am a man, and I have Limbs, Flesh, Blood,
Bones, Sinews, and a Soul as well as he:
My parts are every way as good as his,
If I said better? why I did not lie,
Nath'lesse his wealth (but nodding on my wants)
Must make me bow, and cry: I thank you Sir.

Dispatch, take heed your mistress see you not.


I warrant you sir.


Nay gentle friend be merry, raise your looks
Out of your bosom, I protest (by heaven)
You are the man most welcome in the world.

I thank you Sir, I know my cue I think.


Where will you have 'hem burn Sir?


Here good Fido:
What? she did not see thee?

No Sir.


That Is well:
Strew, strew, good Fido, the freshest flowers, so.

What means this Signior Deliro?


Cast in more Frankincence, yet more, well said.
O Macilente, I have such a wife,
So passing fair, so passing fair unkind,
And of such worth and right to be unkind,
(Since no man can be worthy of her kindness.)

What can there not?

No, that is sure as death,
No man alive: I do not say is not,
But cannot possibly be worth her kindness^.
Nay that is certain, let me do her Right:
How said I? do her Right? as though I could,
As though this dull gross tongue of mine could utter
The rare, the true, the pure, the infinite Rights
That sit (as high as I can look) within her.

This is such dotage as was never heard.

Well, this must needs be granted.

Granted quoth you?

Nay Macilente; do not so discredit
The goodness of your judgment to deny it,
For I do speak the very least of her.
And I would crave and beg no more of heaven
For all my fortunes here, but to be able
To utter first in fit terms, what she is,
And then the true joies I conceive in her.

Is It possible she should deserve so well
As you pretend?

I, and she knows so well
Her own deserts that (when I strive to enjoy them)
She ways the things I do, with what she merits:
And (seeing my worth outwai'd so in her graces)
She is so solemn, so precise, so froward,
That no observance I can do to her,
Can make her kind to me: if she find fault,
I mend that fault, and then she says I faulted
That I did mend it. Now good Friend advise me
How I may temper this strange Spleen in her.

You are too amorous, too obsequious,
And make her, too assured she may command you.
When women doubt most of their husbands loves,
They are most loving. Husbands must take heed
They give no gluts of kindness to their wives,
But use them like their Horses, whom they feed
Not with a manger-full of meat together,
But half a pecke at once, and keep them so
Still with an appetite to that they give them.
He that desires to have a loving wife,
Must bridle all the show of that desire:
Be kind, not amorous, nor bewraying kindness,
As if Love wrought it, but considerate Duty:
"Offer no loue-rites, but let wives still seek them,
"For when they come unsought, they seldom like them.

Believe me Macilente, this is Gospel.
O that a man were his own man so much,
To rule himself thus; I will strive in faith
To be more strange and careless: yet I hope
I have now taken such a perfect course,
To make her kind to me, and live contented,
That I shall find my kindness well returned,
And have no need to fight with my affections.
She (late) has found much fault with every room
Within my house; One was too big (she said)
Another was not furnished to her mind,
And so through all: All which I have altered.
Then here she has a place (on my backeside)
Wherein she loves to walk; and that (she said)
Had some ill smells about it. Now this walk
Have I (before she knows it) thus perfumed
With herbs and flowers, and laid in diverse places
(As 'twere on Altars consecrate to her)
Perfumed Gloves, and delicate chains of Amber,
To keep the air in awe of her sweet nosthrils:
This have I done, and this I think will please her.
Behold she comes.

Here Is a sweet stink indeed:
What, shall I ever be thus crossed and plagued?
And sick of Husband? O my head does ache
As it would cleave asunder with these sauors,
All my Room's altered, and but one poor Walk
That I delighted in, and that is made
So fulsome with perfumes, that I am feared
(My brain does sweat so) I have caught the Plague.

Why (gentle wife) is now thy Walk too sweet?
Thou said of late it had sower aires about it,
And found'st much fault, that I did not correct it.

Why, and I did find fault Sir?


Nay dear wife;
I know thou have said thou have loved perfumes,
No woman better.

I, long since perhaps,
But now that Sense is alterd: you would have me
(Like to a puddle or a standing poole)
To have no motion, nor no spirit within me.
No, I am like a pure and sprightly River,
That moves for ever, and yet still the same;
Or fire that burns much wood, yet still one flame.

But yesterday, I saw thee at our garden
Smelling on Roses and on purple flowers,
And since I hope the Humor of thy Sense
Is nothing changed.

Why those were growing flowers,
And these within my walk are cut and strewn.

But yet they have one sent.

I, have they so?
In your gross judgment: if you make no difference
Betwixt the sent of growing flowers and cut ones,
You have a sense to taste Lampe-oyle, in faith.
And with such judgment have you changed the chambers,
Leaving no room that I can joy to be in
In all your house: and now my Walk and all
You smoke me from, as if I were a Fox,
And long belike to drive me quite away:
Well walk you there, and I Will walk where I list.

What shall I do? oh I shall never please her.

Out on thee dotard, what star ruled his birth?
That brought him such a Star? blind Fortune still
Bestows her gifts on such as cannot use them:
How long shall I live, ere I be so happy,
To have a wife of this exceeding Form?
Away with 'hem, would I had broke a joint,
When I devised this that should so dislike her,
Away, be are all away.

I do: for fear.
Ought that is there should like her. O this man
How cunningly he can conceal himself,
As though he loved? loved? nay honored and adored?

Why, my sweet heart?


Sweet heart? oh, better still:
And asking, why? wherefore? and looking strangely,
As if he were as white as innocence.
Alas, you are simple, you: you cannot change,
Look pale at pleasure, and then red with VVonder:
No, no, not you: I did but cast an amorous eye e'ennow
Upon a pair of Gloves that somewhat likt me,
And straight he noted it, and gave command
All should be taken away.

Be they my bane then:
What sir, Fido, bring in those Gloves again
You took from hence.

S'body sir, but do not:
Bring in no Gloves to spite me: if you do --

Ay me, most wretched; how am I misconstru'd?

O, how she tempts my heart strings with her eye,
To knit them to her Beauties, or to break?
What moved the heavens, that they could not make
Me such a woman? but a man; a Beast,
That has no bliss like to others. Would to God
(In wreake of my misfortunes) I were turned
To some fair water-Nymph, that set upon
The deepest whirlepit of the rau'nous Seas,
My Adamantine eyes might headlong hale
This Iron world to me, and drown it all.

Behold, behold, the translated Gallant.


O, he is welcome.


God save you Brother, and Sister, God save you sir; I have commendations for
you out in the country: (I wonder they take no knowledge of my Suit:) mine
Uncle Soghardo is in town; Sister, me thinks you are Melancholy: why are you
so sad? I think you took me for Master Fastidius Brisk (Sister) did you not


Why should I take you for him?


Nay nothing, I was lately in Master Fastidius his company, and me thinks we
are very like


You have a fair suit Brother, God give you joy on it.


Faith good enough to ride in Brother, I made it to ride in.


O, now I see the cause of his idle demand was his new suit.


Pray you good Brother; try if you can change her mood.


I warrant you, let me alone. I Will put her out of her dumpes. Sister, how like
you my suit


O you are a gallant in print now Brother.


Faith, how like you the fashion? it is the last Edition I assure you.


I cannot but like it to the desert.


Troth sister, I was feign to borrow these Spurs, I have left my gown in gage
for 'hem, pray you lend me an angel


Now beshrow my heart then.


Good truth I Will pay you again at my next exhibitior: I had but bare ten
pound of my father, and it would not reach to put me wholly into the fashion


I care not.


I had Spurs of mine own before, but they were no^ Ginglers. Monsieur
Fastidius will be here anon Sister


You jest?


Never lend me penny more (while you live then) and that I Would be loath to say,
in truth


When did you see him?


Yesterday, I came acquainted with him at Sir Puntar^olo's: nay sweet Sister.


I feign would know of heaven now, why yond fool
Should wear a suit of Satin? he? that Rooke?
That painted Iay with such a deal of outside?
What is his inside trow? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Good Heaven give me patience,
A number of these Popenjayes there are,
Whom if a man confer, and but examine
Their inward merit, with such men as want;
Lord, Lord, what things they are!

Come, when will you pay me again now?


O God Sister.


Here comes another.


Save you Signior Deliro: how do' st thou sweet Lady? Let me kiss thee.


How? a new suit? Ay me.


And how does Master Fastidius Brisk?


Faith live in court Signior Deliro, in grace I thank God, both of the noble
Masculine and Feminine. I must speak with you in private by and by


When you please Sir.


Why look you so pale brother?


S'lid all this money is cast away now.


I, there is a newer Edition come forth.


It Is but my hard fortune: well, I Will have my suit cha^g'd, I Will go fetch my
tailor presently, but first I Will devise a letter to my father. Have you any pen
and ink Sister


What would you do withal?


I would use it. S'light and it had come but four days sooner the Fashion.


There was a Countess gave me her hand to kiss to day in the presence: 'did
me more good by Jesus, then, and yesternight sent her Coach twice to my lodging,
to intre at me accompany her, and my sweet mistress, with some two or three
namelesse Ladies more: O, I have been graced by 'hem beyond all aim of
affection: this' her garter my dagger hangs in: and they do so commend and
approve my apparel, with my judicious wearing of it, it is above wonder


Indeed Sir, it is a most excellent suit, and you do wear it as extraordinary.


Why I Will tell you now (in good faith) and by this Chair, which (by the grace
of God) I entend presently to sit in, I had three Suits in one year, made
three great Ladies in love with me: I had other three, undid three Gentlemen in
imitation: and other three, gat three other Gentlemen, Widows of three
thousand pound a year


Is It possible?


O believe it sir; your good Face is the VVitch, and your Apparel the Spells,
that bring all the pleasures of the world into their Circle


Ah, the sweet Grace of a Courtier!


Well, would my father had left me but a good Face for my portion yet; though
I had shared the unfortunate Wit that goes with it, I had not cared: I might
have past for somewhat in the world then


Why, assure you Signior, rich apparel has strange virtues: it makes him that
has it without means, esteemed for an excellent Wit: he that enjoyes it with
means, puts the world in remembrance of his means: it helps the deformities
of Nature, and gives Luster to her beauties; makes continual Holiday where it
shines; sets the wits of Ladies at work, that otherwise would be idle:
furnishes your two-shilling Ordinary; takes possession of your Stage at your
new Play; and enricheth your Oars, as scorning to go with your Scull


Pray you sir, add this; it gives Respect to your fools, makes many Thieves,
as many Strumpets, and no fewer Bankrupts


Out, out, unworthy to speak where he breaths.


What Is he, Signior?


A friend of mine, sir.


By heaven, I wonder at you Citizens, what kind of Creatures you are?


Why sir?


That you can consort your selves with such poor seame-rent fellows.


He says true.


Sir I will assure you (how ever you esteem of him) he is a man worthy of
regard


Why? what has he in him of such virtue to be reguarded? ha?


Marry he is a Scholar Sir.


Nothing else?


And he is well trauail'd.


He should get him cloths: I would cherish those good parts of travel in him,
and prefer him to some Nobleman of good place


Sir, such a benefit should bind me to you for ever (in my friends right) and I
doubt not but his desert shall more than answer my praise


Why, and he had good cloths, I Would carry him to the Court with me to morrow.


He shall not want for those Sir, if Gold and the whole City will furnish
him


You say well Sir: faith Signior Deliro, I am come to have you play the
Alchymi^^^ with me, and change the Species of my land, into that metal you
talk of


With all my heart Sir, what sum will serve you?


Faith some three or fourscore pound.


Troth Sir I have promised to meet a Gentleman this morning in Paul's, but upon
my return I Will dispatch you


I Will accompany you thither.


As you please Sir; but I go not thither directly.


It Is no matter, I have no other designem^^^^ in hand, and therefore as good
go along


I were as good have a Quartane fever follow me now, for I shall never be rid
of him: (bring me a Cloak there one) Still upon his grace at the Court am I
sure to be visited; I was a beast to give him any hope. Well, would I were in
that I am out with him once, and -- Come Signior ^^^^lente, I must co^ferre
with you as we go. Nay de^re wife, I beseech the^ forsake these moods: look
not like winter thus. Here take my keres, open my counting houses, spread all
my wealth before thee, choose any object that delights thee: If thou will eat
the spirit of Gold, and drink dissolved Pearl in wine, it is for thee


So Sir.


Nay my sweet wife.


Good Lord! how you are perfumed in your terms and all: pray you leave us.


Come Gentlemen.


Adieu, sweet Lady.


I, I, Let thy words ever sound in mine ears, and thy Graces disperse
contentment through all my senses: O, how happy is that Lady above other
Ladies, that enjoyes so absolute a Gentleman to her Servant! A Countess give
him her hand to kiss! a^^foolish Countess; he e's a man worthy (if a woman
may speak of a man's worth) to kiss the lips of an Empress


What Is Master Fastidius gone, Sister?


I brother: he has a Face like a Cherubin.


Gods me, what lucke's this? I have fetched my Tailor and all: which way went he
Sister? can you tell


Not I, in good faith: and he has a Body like an Angel.


How long is it since he went?


Why but even now: did you not meet him? and a Tongue able to ravish any woman
in the earth


O, for Gods sake (I Will please you for your pains:) but even now, say you?
Come good sir: S'lid I had forgot it too: Sister, if any body ask for mine
Uncle Sogliardo, they shall have him at the Heralds Office yonder by Paul's


Well, I will not altogether despair: I have heard of a Citizens wife has
been beloved of a Courtier; and why not I? heigh ho: well, I will into my
private Chamber, lock the door to me, and think over all his good parts one
after another


Well, I doubt this last Scene will endure some grievous Torture.


How? you fear 'twill be rackt by some hard Construction*


Do not you?


No in good faith: unless mine eyes could light me beyond Sense, I see no
reason why this should be more Liable to the Rack than the rest: you will say
perhaps the City will not take it well, that the Merchant is made here to dote
so perfectly upon his wife; and she again, to be so Fastidiously affected, as
she is


You have vtter'd my thought sir, indeed.


Why (by that proportion) the Court might as well take offense at him we call
the Courtier, and with much more Pretext, by how much the place transcends and
goes before in dignity and virtue: but can you imagine that any Noble or true
spirit in the Court (whose Sinewie, and altogether unaffected graces, very
worthily express him a Courtier) will make any exception at the opening of
such an empty Trunk as this Brisk is? or think his own worth empeacht by
beholding his motley inside


No Sir, I do not.


No more, assure you, will any grave wise Citizen, or modest Matron, take the
object of this Folly in Deliro and his Wife; but rather apply it as the foil
to their own virtues: For that were to affirm, that a man writing of Nero,
should mean all Emperors: or speaking of Machiavell, comprehend all
Statesmen; or in our Sordido, all Farmars; and so of the rest: than which,
nothing can be vtter'd more malicious and absurd. Indeed there are a sort of
these narrow-ey'd Decipherers, I confess, that will extort strange and
abstruse meanings out of any Subject, be it never so Conspicuous and
Innocently deliuerd. But to such (where e're they sit conceald) let them know,
the Author defies them, and their writing-Tables; and hopes, no sound or safe
judgment will infect it self with their contagious Comments, who (indeed)
come here only to pervert and poison the sense of what they hear, and for
naught else


Stay, what new Mute is this that walks so suspiciously?


O, marry this is one, for whose better Illustration; we must desire you to
presuppose the Stage, the middle Isle in Paul's; and that, the West end of it


So Sir: and what follows?


Faith a whole volume of Humor, and worthy the vnclasping


As how? what name do you give him first?


He has shift of names Sir: some call him Apple John, some Signior Whiffe,
marry his maine standing name is Cavalier Shift: the rest are but as clean
shirts to his Nature


And what makes he in Paul's now?


Troth as you see, for the advancement of a Siquis or two; wherein he has so
varied himself, that if any one of 'hem take, he may hul up and down in the
Hu^orous world a little longer


It seems then, he bears a very changing sail*


O, as the wind Sir: here comes More.


This is rare, I have set up my bills without discovery.


What? Signior Whiffe? what ^ortune has brought you into these West parts?


Troth Signior, nothing but your Rheum; I have been taking an ounce of Tobacco
hard by here with a gentleman, and I am come to spit private in Paul's. God
save you Sir


A dieu good Signior Whiffe.


Master Apple John? you are well met: when shall we sup together, and laugh
and be fat with those good wenches? ha


Faith Sir, I must now leave you, upon a few Humors and occasions: but when
you please Sir


Farewell sweet Apple John: I wonder there are no more store of Gallants here*


What be these two, Signior?


Mary a couple sir, that are mere strangers to the whole scope of our Play;
only come to walk a turn or two i'this Scene of Paul's by chance


Save you, good Master Clouc.


Sweet Master Orange.


How? Cloue, and Orange?


I, and they are well met, for it is as dry an Orange as ever Grew: nothing but
Salutation, and O God sir, and It pleases you to say so Sir; one that can laugh
at a jest for company with a most plausible, and extemporall grace; and some
hour after in private ask you what it was: the other, Monsieur Cloue, is a
more spic't youth: he will sit you a whole afternoon sometimes, in a
booksellers shop, reading the Greek, Italian, and Spanish; when he
understands not a word of either: if he had the Tongues to his Suits, he were
an excellent Linguist


Do you hear this reported for certeintie?


O good sir.


Sirrah, take my Cloak: and you sir knave, follow me closer: if thou loosest
my Dog, thou shall die a Dogs death; I will hang thee


Tut, fear him not, he is a good lean slave, he loves a Dog well I warrant
him; I see by his looks, I: mass he is somewhat like him. Sblood poison him,
make him away with a crooked pin, or somewhat man; thou may have more
security of thy life: and so Sir, what? you have not put out your whole venture
yet? have you


No, I do want yet some fifteen or sixteen hundred pounds: but my Lady (my
wife) is out of her Humor; she does not now go


No? how then?


Mary, I am now enforced to give it out, upon the return of my self, my
Dog, and my Cat


Your Cat? where is she?


My Squire has her there in the Bag: Sirrah, look to her: How like thou my
change, Carlo


Oh, for the better sir; your Cat has nine lives, and your wife have but one.


Besides, she will never be Sea-sicke, which will save me so much in
Conserues: when saw you Signior Sogliardo


I came from him but now, he is at the Heralds Office yonder: he requested me
to go before and take up a man or two for him in Paul's, against his Cognizance
was ready


What? has he purchased arms then?


I, and rare ones too: of as many Colors, as e're you saw any fools coat in
your life* I Will go look among yond' Bills, and I can ^it him with Legs to his
Arms


With Legs to his Arms! Good: I will go with you sir.


Come, lets walk in the Mediterraneum: I assure you sir I am not the least
respected among Ladies; but let that pass: do you know how to go into the
Presence Sir


Why, on my feet sir.


No, on your head sir: for it is that must bear you out, I assure you: as thus
sir: You must first have an especial care so to wear your Hat, that it
oppress not confusedly this your Predominant or Fore-top; because (when you
come at the Presence door) you may with once or twice stroking up your Forehead
thus, enter with your Predominant perfect: that is, standing up stiff


As if one were frighted?


I sir.


Which indeed, a true fear of your (...) should do, rather than Gum water,
or whites of Eggs: is it not so Sir


An Ingenious observation: give me leave to crave your name sir.


His name is Macilente sir.


Good Signior Macilente: if this Gentleman, Signior D^liro, furnish you (as he
says he will) with clothes, I will bring you to morrow by this time into the
Presence of the most Divine and Acute Lady of the Court: you shall see sweet
Silent Rhetorique, and Dumb Eloquence speaking in her eye; but when she
speaks her self, such an Anatomy of Wit, so Sinewiz'd and Arteriz'd, that
it is the goodliest Model of pleasure that ever was, to behold. Oh, she
strikes the world into Admiration of her; (O, O, O) I cannot express 'hem
believe me


O, your only Admiration, is your silence, sir.


Before God Carlo, this is good; let us read 'hem again: If there be any Lady,
or Gentlewoman of good carriage, that is desirous to entertain^ (to her private
^ses) a young, straight, and upright Gentleman, of the age of five, or six and
twenty at the most: who can serve in the nature of a Gentleman Usher, and has
little legs of purpose, and a black Satin Suit of his own to go before
her in: which Suit (for the more sweetning) now lies in Lauander: and can hide
his face with her Fan, if need require: or sit in the cold at the stayre foot
for her as well as an other Gentleman: Let her subscribe her Name and Place,
and diligent respect shall be given. This is above measure excellent: ha


No this, this: here is a fine slave.


If this City, or the Sub-urbs of the same, do affourd any young Gentleman,
of the first, second, or third head, more or less, whose friends are but
lately deceased, and whose lands are but new come to his hands, that (to be as
exactly qualified as the best of our Ordinaric Gallants are) is affected to
entertain the most Gentlemanlike use of Tobacco: as first, to give it the most
exquisite Persume: then, to know all the delicate sweet Forms for the
Assumption of it: as also the rare Corollarie and practice of the ^^ban
Ebolition, EVRIPVS, and Whiffe; which ^ee shall receive or take in here at
London, and evaporate at Vxbridge, or farther, if it please him. If there be any
such Generous spirit, that is truly enamored of these good faculties: May it
please him, but (by a note of his hand) to specify the place, or Ordinari^
where he uses to ^at and Lie, and most sweet attendance with Tobacco, and
Pipes of the best sort shall be ministered: STET QVAESO CANDIDE LECTOR* why this
is without Parallel, this


Well, I Will mark this fellow for Sogliardo's use presently.


Or rather, Sogliardo for his use.


Faith either of 'hem will serve, they are both good Properties: I Will design
the other a place too, that we may see him


No better place than the Mitre, that we may be Spectators with you Carlo.
Soft, behold, who enters here: Signior Sogliardo! God save you


Save you good sir Punt arvolo; your Dogge's in health sir I see: how now Carlo?


We have taken simple pains to choose you out followers here.


Come hither Signior.


Monsieur Orange, yond' Gallants observes us; pr'y thee let us talk Fustian a
little and gull 'hem: make 'hem believe we are great Scholars


O Lord sir.


Nay, pr'y thee let us, by Jesus; you have an excellent habit in discourse.


It pleases you to say so sir.


By this Church you have la: nay come, begin: Aristotle in his Daemonologia
approoues Scaliger for the best Nauigator in his time: and in his
Hypercritiques, ^ee reports him to be H^autontimorumenos: you understand the
Greek sir


O God sir.


For societies sake he does. O here be a couple of fine tame Parrats.


Now Sir, Whereas the Ingenuiti^ of the time, and the souls Synderisis are
but Embrions in Nature, added to the panch of Esquiline, and the Inter-vallum
of the Zodiac, besides the Eclipticke line being Opticke, and not Mental, but
by the contemplatine and Theoricke part there of, does demonstrate to us the
vegetable circumference, and the ventositie of the Tropicks, and whereas our
intellectual or mincing capreall, (according to the Metaphisickes) as you may
read in Plato's Histriomastix. You conceive me Sir


O Lord Sir.


Then coming to the pretty Animal, as Reason long since is fled to Animals
you know, or indeed for the more modellizing or enam^lling, or rather
diamondizing of your subject, you shall perceive the Hipothersis or Galaxia,
(where of the Meteors long since had their Initiall inceptions and Notions) to
be merely Pithagoricall, Mathematical, and Aristocraticall: for look you
Sir, there is ever a kind of Concinnitie and Species. Let us turn to our
former discourse, for they mark us not


Mass, yonder is the knight Puntarvolo.


And my cousin Sogliardo me thinks.


I, and his familiar that haunts him, the Devil with a shining face.


Let 'hem alone, obscrue 'hem not.


Nay I will have him, I am resolute for that, by this Parchment Gentlemen, I
have been so toiled among the Harrots yonder, you will not believe, they do
speak in the straungest language, and give a man the hardest terms for his
money, that ever you knew


But have you arms? have your arms?


In Faith, I thank God I can write my self Gentleman now, here is my Pattent, it
cost me thirty pound by this breath


A very fair Coat, ^ell charged and full of Armorie.


Nay, it has as much variety of colors in it, as you have seen a Coat have,
how like you the Crest Sir


I understand it not well, what is it?


Marry Sir, it is your Bore without a head Rampant.


A Bore without a head, that is very rare.


I, and Rampant too: troth I commend the Heralds wit, he has deciphered him
well: A Swine without a head, without brain, wit, any thing indeed, Ramping to
Gentilitie. You can blazon the rest signior? can you not


OI, I have it in writing here of purpose, it cost me two shillings the
tricking


Let Us hear, Let Us hear.


It is the most vile, foolish, absurd, palpable, and ridiculous Escutch^on that
ever this eye survis'd. Save you good Mounsieur Fastidius


Silence good knight: on, on.


GYRONY of eight pieces, AZVRE and GVLES, between three plates a CHEV'RON
engrailed checkey, OR, VERT and ERMINES; on a chief ARGENT between two
ANN'LETS, ^ables a Bores head PROPE^


How Is that? on a chief ARGENT?


On a Chief ARGENT, a Bores head PROPER between two ANN'LETS ^ables.


S'lud, it is a Hogs Cheek and Puddings in a Peuter field this


How like you them signior?


Let the word be, Not without mustard, your Crest is very rare sir.


A frying pan to the Crest had had no fellow.


Entreat your poor friend to walk off a little Signior, I will salute the
knight


Come, lap't up, lap't up.


You are right well encou^tred sir, how does your fair Dog?


In reasonable state sir, what Citizen is that you were consorted with? a
merchant of any worth


It Is Signior Deliro sir.


Is it he? Save you sir.


Good sir Puntarvolo.


O what Copy of fool would this place minister to one endew'd with Patience
to observe it


Nay look you sir, now you are a Gentleman, you must carry a more exalted
presence, change your mood and habit to a more austere form, be exceeding
proud, stand upon your Gentilitie, and scorn every man* Speak nothing humbly,
never discourse under a Nobleman, though you never saw him but riding to the
Star Chamber, it is all one. Love no man, Trust no man, Speak ill of no man
to his face, nor well of any man behind his back. Salute fairly on the front,
and wish 'hem hanged upon the turn. Spread your self upon his bosom
publickely, whose heart you would eat in private. These be principles, think on
'hem, I Will come to you again presently


Sirah, keep close, yet not so close, thy breath will thaw my ruff.


O good cousin, I am a little busy, how does my niece, I am to walk with a
knight here


(...) is here, look you sir, that is the Gentleman:


What he in the blush-colour'd Satin?


I, he sir, though his Suit blush, he blushes not: look you, that is the Suit
sir: I would have mine, such a Suit without difference, such Stuff, such a
VVing, such a Sleeue, such a Skirt, Belly and all; therefore, pray you observe
it. Have you a pair of Tables


Why do you see sir? they say I am Fantastical: why true, I know it, and I
pursue my Humor still in contempt of this censor^ous age: S'light and a man
should do nothing but what a sort of stale judgments about this town will
approve in him, he were a sweet Ass, Il'd beg him in faith: I never knew any
more find fault with a fashion, then they that knew not how to put themselves
into it. For mine own part, so I please mine own appetite, I am careless what
the fusti^ World speaks of me, puh


Do you mark how it hangs at the knee there?


I warrant you sir.


For Gods sake do, note all: do you see the Collar sir*


Fear nothing, it shall not differ in a stitch sir.


Pray God it do not, you will make these linings serve? and help me to a Chapman
for the outside, will you


I Will do my best sir: you 'le put it off presently:


I, go with me to my chamber you shall have it, but make have of it, for the
love of Christ, for I Will sit ^ my old suit, or else lie a bed and read the
Arcadia, till you have done


O, if ever you were struck with a jest, gallants, now, now* I do usher the
most strange piece of Military Profession, that ever was discovered in Insula
Paulina


Where? where?


What is he for a Creature?


A Pimpe, a Pimpe, that I have observed yonder, the rarest Superficies of a
Humor; he comes every morning to empty his lungs in Paul's here, and offers
up some five or six Hecatomb's of faces and sighs, and away again. Here he
comes; nay walk, walk, be not seen to note him, and we shall have excellent
sport


S'lid he vented a sigh e'ne now, I thought he would have blown up the church.


O you shall have him give a number of those false fires ere he depart.


See now he is expostulating with his Rapier, Look, Look.


Did you ever in your days observe better passion over a hilt?


Except it were in the person of a Cutlers boy, or that the fellow were nothing
but Vapor, I should think it impossible


See, again, he claps his sword of the head, as who should say, Well, go to.


O violence, I wonder the blade can contain it self, being so prouokt.


With that, the moodie Squire thumpt his breast,
And reared his eyes to Heaven for Revenge.

Troth, and you be Gentlemen, Let Us make 'hem friends, and take up the matter
between his Rapier and he


Nay, if you intend that, you must lay down the matter, for this Rapier (it
seems) is in the nature of a Hanger on* and the good Gentleman would happily
be rid of him


By my faith, and it is to be suspected, I Will ask him.


O here 's rich stuff, for Christ sake, let us go,
A man would wish himself a senseless pillar,
Rather than view these monstrous prodigies:
Nil habet in s^elix Paupert as durius inse,
Quam quod Ridiculos ^omines facit.

Signior.


At your service.


Will you ^ell your Rapier?


Sbl^^d he is turned wild upon the question, he looks as he had seen a
Sergeant


Sell my Rapier? now God bless me.


Amen.


You ask't me, if I would sell my Rapier Sir?


I did indeed.


Now Lord have mercy upon me.


Amen I say still.


S'lud Sir, what should you behold in my face Sir, that should move you (as
they say Sir) to ask me Sir, if I would sell my Rapier


Nay (let me pray you Sir) be not moved: I protest I would rather ^aue been
silent than any way offensive, had I known your nature


Sell my Rapier? Gods lid: Nay Sir (for mine own part) as I am a man that has
served in causes, or so, so I am not apt to injure any Gentleman in the degree
of falling foul, but: sell my Rapier* I will tell you Sir, I have served with
this foolish Rapier, where some of us dare not appear in have, I name no man:
but let that pass; Sell my Rapier? Death to my Lungs. This Rapier Sir, has
trauail'd by my side Sir, the best part of France and the low Country: I have
seen Vlishing, Brill, and the Haghe with this Rapier sir, in my Lord of
Leysters time: and (by Gods will) he that should offer to disrapier me now, I
would. -- Look you sir, you presume to be a Gentleman of good sort, and so
likewise your friends here, if you have any disposition to travel, for the
sight of service or so, One, two, or all of you, I can lend you letters to
diverse Officers and Commanders in the Low Countries, that shall for my cause
do you all the good offices that shall pertain or belong to Gentlemen of your
-- Please you to show the Bounty of your mind Sir, to impart some ten groates
or half a Crown to our use, till our abilitle be of grow'th to return it,
and we shall think our self. -- God's Blood, sell my Rapier


I pray you what said he Signior, he is a proper man.


Mary he tells me, If I please to show the bounty of my mind, to impart some
ten groats to his use or so


Break his head, and give it him.


I thought he had been playing on the Jews Trump I.


My Rapier? no Sir: my Rapier is my Guard, my Defense, my Reuenew, my Honor:
(if you cannot impart be secret I beseech you) and I will maintain it, where
there is a grain of dust or a drop of water: (hard is the choice when the
valiant must eat their Arms or clem:) Sell my Rapier? no my Dear, I will not
be diuor^'t from thee yet, I have ever found thee true as Steel: and (you
cannot impart Sir) God save you Gentlemen: (nevertheless if you hauie a fancy
to it sir.


Pr'y thee away: is Signior Deliro departed?


Have you seen a Pimpe outface his own wants better.


I commend him, that can dissemble them so well.


True, and having no better a cloak for it than he has neither.


Gods precious, what mischievous luck is this: adiew^ Gentlemen.


VVhither? in such have, Monsie ur Fastidius?


After my Merchant, Signior Deliro sir.


O hinder him not, he may hap loose his Tide, a good Flounder in faith.


Hark you Sig. Whiffe, a word with you.


How? Signior Whiffe?


What was the difference between thast young Gallant that is gone, and you sir.


No difference: he would have given me sieve pound for my Rapier, and I refused
it; that is all


O, was it no otherwise? we thought you had been upon some terms.


No other than you saw sir.


Adieu good Master Apple John.


How? Whiffe, and Apple Joan too? Heart, what'll you say if this be the
Appendix, or Labell to both yond' Indentures


It may be.


Resolve us of it Ianus, thou that lookst every way; or thou Hercules, that
have trauail'd all Countries


Nay Carlo, spend not time in Inuocations now; it is late.


Signior, here is a Gentleman desirous of your name sir.


Sir, my name is Caualier Shift: I am known sufficiently in this walk sir.


Shift? I heard your name varied even now, as I take it.


True sir, it pleases the world (as I am her excellent Tabacconist) to give me
the Style of Signior Whiffe: as I am a poor Esquire about the town here, they
call me Master Apple John: variety of good names does well sir


I, and good parts, to make those good names: out of which I imagine yond'
Bills to be yours


Sir, if I should deny the Scriptures, I were worthy to be banished the middle
I Will for ever


I take your word Sir: this Gentleman has subscribed to 'hem, and is most
desirous to become your Pupil; mary yo^ must use expedition: Signior Insulso
Sogliardo, this is the Professor


In good time sir, nay good sir house your head, do your profess these
sleights in Tobacco


I do more than profess sir, and (if you please to be a practioner) I will
undertake in one fortnight to bring you, that you shall take it plausibly in
any Ordinary, Theater, or the Tilt-yard if need be; the most popular assembly
that is


But you cannot bring him to the Whiffe so soon?


Yes as soon sir; he shall receive the 1, 2, and 3 Whiffe, if it please him,
and (upon the receipt) take his horse, drink his three cups of Canarie, and
expose one at Hounslow, a second at Stanes, and a third at Bagshot


Baw-waw.


You will not serve me sir, will you^* I Will give you more tha^ Countenance.


Pardon me sir, I do scorn to serve any man.


Who? he serve? God's Blood he keeps High men, and Low men, he; he has a fair
living at Fullam


But in the nature of a fellow, I Will be your follower if you please.


Sir you shall stay and dine with me, and if we can agree, we will not part in
have: I am very bountiful to men of quality. Where shall we go Signior


Your Miter is your best house.


I can make this dog take as many whiffes as I list, and he shall retain or
e^ume them at my pleasure


By your patience, follow me fellows.


Sir Puntarvolo.


Pardon me, my Dog shall not eat in his company for a Million.


Nay be not you amazed signior Whiffe, what e're that stiffeneckt Gentleman
says


No, for you do not know the Humor of the dog as we do: whereshall we dine
Carlo? I would feign go to one of these Ordinaries now I am a Gentleman


So you may, were you never at none yet?


No faith, but they say there resorts your most choice gallants.


True, and the fashion is, when any stranger comes in amongst 'hem, they all
stand up and stare at him, as he were some unknown beast brought out of
Affricke, but that'll be helped with a good adventurous face, you must be
impudent enough, sit down and use no respect, when any thing's propounded
above your capacity, smile at it, make two or three faces, and it is excellent,
they 'le think you have trauail'd: though you argue a whole day in Silence
thus, and discourse in nothing but Laughter, 'twill pass. Only (now and then)
give fire, Discharge a good full Oath, and offer a great Wager, 'twill be
admirable


I warrant you, I am resolute, come good Signior, there is a poor French crown
for your Ordenarie


It comes well, for I had not so much as the least Port^ullice of come before.


I travel with another objection Signior, which I fear will be enforced
against the Author, ere I can be delivered of i


What Is that sir?


That the argument of his Comedy might have been of some other nature, as of a
Duke to be in love with a Countess, and that Countess to be in love with the
Dukes son, and the son to love the Ladies waiting maid: some such cross woing,
with a Clown to their seruingman, better than to be thus near and familiarly
allied to the time


You say well, but I would feign hear one of these Autumn- judgments define
once, Quid sit Comoedia? if he cannot, let him content himself with Ciceros
definition (till he have strength to propose to himself a better) who would
have a Comedy to be ^mitatio vitae, Speculum Consuetudinis, Imago veritatis, a
thing throughout pleasant and ridiculous, and accommodated to the correction of
manners: if the maker have failed in any particle of this, they may worthily
tax him, but if not, why; be you (that are for them) silent, as I will be for
him; and give way to the Actors


Nay Gods-pretious, if the weather and the Season be so respectlesse, that
Beggars shall live as well as their betters; and that my hunger and thirst for
Riches, shall not make them hunger and thirst with Poverty; that my sleeps
shall be broken, and their hearts not broken; that my coffers shall be full,
and yet care; theirs empty, and yet merry: It Is time that a Cross should bear
flesh and blood, since flesh and blood cannot bear this cross


What will he hang himself?


Faith I, it seems his Prognostication has not kept touch with him, and that
makes him despair


Be shrow me, he will be out of his Humor then indeed.


Tut, these star-monger knaves, who would trust 'hem? one says, dark and
rainie, when it is as clear as Crystal; another says, tempestuous blasts,
and storms, and 'twas as calm as a Milk bowl; here be sweet rascals for a
man to credit his whole fortunes with: You skie-staring Cocks combs you: you
fat brains, out upon you; you are good for nothing but to sweat night-caps and
make rug-gownes dear: you learned men, and have not a Legion of Devils, a
vostr^ service: a vostre service? By heaven I think I shall die a better
scholar than they, but soft, how now sirah


Here Is a letter come from your Son sir.


From my Son sir? what would my Son sir? some good news no doubt. Sweet
and dear father, (desiring you first to send me your blessing, which is more
worth to me than Gold or Silver) I desire you likewise to be advertised, that
this Shrouctide (contrary to custom) we use always to have Revels; which is
indeed Dancing, and makes an excellent show in truth; especially if we
Gentlemen be well attired, which our Seniors note, and think the better of
our fathers, the better we are maintained, and that they shall know if they
come up, and have any thing to do in the Law: therefore good Father, these are
(for your own sake as well as mine) to re-desire you, that you let me not want
that which is fit for the setting up of our name in the honorable volume of
Gentilitie, that I may say to our Calumnators with Tullie, EGO SVM ORTVS DOMVS
MEAE, TV OCCASVSTVAE. And thus (not doubting of your fatherly Benevolence)
^^umbly ask you blessing, and pray God to bless you

Yours, if his own.

How Is this; Yours, if his own? is he not my Son, except he be his own
Son. Belike this is some new kind of subscription the Gallants use. Well,
wherefore do thou stay knave? Away: go


Here Is a letter indeed; Reu^ls? and benevolence? is this a weather to send
benevolence? or is this a season to revel in? Slid the Devil and all takes
part to vex me I think: this letter would never have come now else, now, now,
when the sun shines, and the air thus clear. Soul if this hold, we shall
shortly have an excellent crop of Corn spring out of the high ways, the
Streets, and Houses of the town will be hid with the rankenesse of the fruits
that grow there in spite of good Husbandry. Go to I Will prevent the sight of
it, come as quickly as it can, I will prevent the sight of it. I have this
remedy Heaven: stay; I Will try the pain thus a little, O, nothing, nothing.
Well now: shall my son gain a benevolence by my death* or any body be the
better for my Gold or so forth: No Alive, I kept it from 'hem, and (dead) my
ghost shall walk about it and preserve it, my Son and Daughter shalsterue
ere they touch it, I have hid it as deep as Hell from the ^ight of Heaven, and
to it I go now

Aye me, what pitiful sight is this? help, help, help*


How now? what is the matter?


O here is a man has hanged himself, help to get him again.


Hanged himself? Slid carry him before a Justice, it is chance medley on my word.


How now, what is here to do?


How comes this?


One has executed himself contrary to the order of Law, and by my consent he
shall answer't


Would he were in case to answer it.


Stand by, he recouers, give him breath.


Oh.


Mass, 'twas well you went the footway neighbor.


I, and I had not cut the halter.


How? cut the halter? Aye me, I am undone, I am undone.


Marry if you had not been undone, you had been hanged I can tell you.


You thredbare horse-bread eating rascals, if you would needs have been
meddling, could you not have untied it, but you must cut it? and in the midst
too? Aye me


Out on me, it is the Caterpiller Sordido; how cursed are the poor, that the
viper was blessed with this good fortune


Nay how accursed are thou, that art cause to the curse of the poor?


I, and to save so wretched a Caytife.


Cursed be thy fingers that loosed him.


Some desperate fury possess thee, that thou may hang thy self too.


Never may thou be saved, that saved so damned a monster.


What curses breath these men? how have my deeds
Made my looks differ from another man's,
That they should thus detest, and loath my life?
Out on my wretched Humor, it is that
Makes me thus monstrous in true humane eyes.
Pardon me (gentle friends) I Will make fair mends
For my foul errors past and twentie-fold
Restore to all men, what with wrong I robbed them:
My Barnes and Garners shall stand open still
To all the poor that come, and my best grain
Be made almes-bread to feed halfe-famisht mouths.
Though hitherto amongst you I have lived
Like an unsavory Muck hill to my self,
Yet now my gathered heaps being spread abroad,
Shall turn to better, and more fruitful uses.
Bles^e then this man, curse him no more for saving
My life and soul together. O how deeply
The bitter curses or the poor do pierce!
I am by wonder changed; come in with me
And witness my repentance: now I prove,
"No life is blessed, that is not graced with Love.

O miracle! see when a man has grace.


Had't not been pity so good a man should have been cast away?


Well, I Will get our Clarke put his conversion in the Chronicle.


Do, for I warrant him he is a virtuous man.


O god how he wept if you marked it: did you see how the tears trill'd?


Yes believe me; like master Vicars bowls upon the green, for all the world.


O neighbor, god's blessing your heart neighbor, 'twas a good grateful deed.


How now Mitis? what is that you consider so seriously?


Troth, that which does essentially please me: the warping condition of this
green and soggie multitude: but in good faith Signior, your Author has
largely outstript my expectation in this Scene, I will liberally confess it.
For when I saw Sordido so desperately intended, I thought I had had a hand of
him then


What? you supposed he should have hung himself indeed?


I did; and had framed my objection to it ready, which may yet be very fitly
urged, and with some necessity: for though his purposed violence lost
the effect, and extended not to death, yet the Intent and Horror of the object
was more than the nature of a Come die will in any sort allow


I? what think you of Plautus in his Come die called Cistellaria there? where
he brings in Alcesimarchus with a drawn sword ready to kill himself, and as
he is e'ne fixing his breast upon it, to be restrained from his resolved
outrage by Silenium and the Bawd: is not his authority of power to give our
Scene approbation


Sir, I have this (your only) evasion leftmee, to say, (...) think it be so
indeed, your memory is happier than mine: but I wonder what engine he will use
to bring the rest out of their Humors


That will appear anon, never preoccupie your imagination withal. Let your
mind keep company with the Scene still, which now remoues it self from the
Country to the Court. Here comes Macilente and Signior Brisk freshly suited,
loose not your self, for now the Epitasis or busy part of our Subject is in
Action


Well now Signior Macilente, you are not only welcome to the Court, but also
to my mistress with drawing chamber: Boy get me some Tobacco, I Will but go in,
and show I am here, and come to you presently sir


What Is that he said? by heaven I marked him not,
My thoughts, and I were of another world;
I was admiring mine own outside here,
To think what privilege and palm it bears
Here in the court: Be a man never so vile
In wit, in judgment, manners, or what else;
If he can purchase but a Silken cover,
He shall not only pass, but pass regarded:
Whereas let him be poor and meanly clad,
Though never so richly parted; you shall have
A fellow (that knows nothing but his Beef
Or how to rince his clammie guts in beer)
Will take him by the shoulders or the throat,
And kick him down the stairs, Such is the state
Of virtue in bad Cloths, ha, ha, ha, ha,
That Raiment should be in such high request?
How long should I be ere I should put off
To my Lord Chancelors tomb, or the Shriues posts?
By heaven (I think) a thousand thousand year,
His Grauiti^, his wisdom, and his faith,
To my dread Sovereign (graces that survive him)
These I could well endure to reverence,
But not his Tomb, no more than I Will commend
The Chapel Organ for the guilt without,
Or this bace Violl for the varnisht face.

In faith I have made you stay somewhat long sir, but is my Tobacco ready boy?


I Sir.


Give me, my mistress is upon coming, you shall see her presently sir, (Tab.)
you will say you never accosted a more piercing wit. This Tobacco is not dried
Boy, or else the Pipe's defective. Oh, your wits of Italy are nothing
comparable to her, her braine's a very Quiver of jests, and she does dart them
abroad with that sweet loose and judicial aim that you would -- here she
comes sir


'Twas time, his invention had been bogd else.


Give me my fan there.


How now Mounsieur Brisk?


A kind of affectionate reverence strikes me with a cold shiuering (me thinks.)


I like such tempers well, as stand before their Mistresses with fear and
trembling, and before their Maker like impudent mountains


By Jesus, I Would spend twenty pound my vauting Horse stood here now, she might
see me do but one trick


Why does she love actiuitie*


Or if you had but your long stockings on to be dancing a Galliard, as she
comes by


I either. O these stirring humors make Ladies mad with desire, she comes. My
good Genius embolden me, Boy the Pipe quickly


What? will he give her music?


A second good morrow to my fair mistress.


Fair servant, I Will thank you a day hence, when the date of your salutation
comes forth


How like you that answer? is it not admirable?


I were a simple Courtier, if I could not admire tri^^^es sir.


Troth sweet Lady I shall (Tab.) be prepared to give you thanks for those
thanks, and (Tab.) study more officious and obsequous regards (Tab.) to your
fair beauties: (Tab.) mend the pipe boy


I never knew Tobacco taken as a parenthesis before.


Fore God (sweet Lady) believe it, I do honor the meanest rush in this
chamber for your love


I, you need not tell me that sir, I do think you do prize a rush before my
love


Is this the wonder of nations?


O, by Jesus pardon me, I said for your love, by this light; but it is the
accustomed sharpness of your Ingenuitie sweet Mistress to -- Mass your
Violl's new str^ng me thinks


Ingenuitic; I see his ignorance will not suffer him to stander her; which he
had done most notably, if he had said Wit for Ingenuiti^, as he meant it


By the soul of Music Lady (hum, hum.)


Would we might hear it once.


I do more adore and admire your (hum, hum) predominant perfections than (hum,
hum) ever I shall have power and faculty to express (hum.


Upon the Violl de Gambo you mean?


It Is miserably out of tune, by this hand.


Nay rather by the fingers.


It makes good Harmoni^ with her wit.


Sweet Lady tune it. Boy some Tobacco.


Tobacco again? he does court his mistress with very exceeding good changes.


Signior Macilente, you take none sir? (Tab.)


No, unless I had a mistress Signior, it were a great Indecorum for me to
take Tobacco


How like you her wit? (Tab.)


Her ing^nuitie is excellent sir.


You see the subject of her sweet fingers there? (Tab.) *Oh she tickles it so,
that (Tab.) she makes it laugh most Divinely; ( Tab.) I Will tell you a good
jest now, and your self shall say it is a good one: I have wished my self to
be that Instrument (I think) a thousand times, and not so few, by Heavens (
Tab.


Not unlike Sir: but how? to be cased up and hung by on the wall?


O, no Sir, to be in use I assure you; as your judicious eyes may testify.
(Tab.


Here Servant, if you will play, come.


Instantly sweet Lady (Tab.) In good faith here is most Divine Tobacco.


Nay, I cannot stay to Dance after your Pipe.


Good, nay dear Lady stay: by this sweet Smoke, I think your wit be all
fire: (Tab.


And he is the Salamander that lives by it.


Is your Tobacco perfumed Sir? that you swear by the sweet Smoke?


Still more excellent: (before God, and these bright Heavens) I think (Tab.)
you are made of Ingenuitie, I (Tab.


True, as your discourse is: O abominable!


Will your Ladyship take any?


O, peace I pray you; I love not the breath of a Woodcocks head.


Meaning my head, Lady?


Not altogether so Sir; but (as it were Fatal to their follies that think to
grace themselves with taking Tobacco, when they want better entertainment) you
see your Pipe bears the true form of a Woodcocks head


O Admirable Simil^!


It Is best leaving of you in Admiration, Sir*


Are these the admired Ladie-wits, that having so good a Plaine-song, can run
no better Division upon it. S'heart, all her jests are of the stamp March was
fifteen years ago. Is this the Com^t Monsieur Fastidius, that your Gallants
wonder at so


Heart of a Gentleman to neglect me before presence thus: Sweet sir, I bese^ch
you be silent in my disgrace, By Jesus, I never was in so vile a Humor in my
life, and her wit was at the ^loud too, Report it not for a million good sir;
let me be so far endeared to your love


What follows next Signior Cordatus? this Gallants Humor is almost spent me
thinks, it ^bbes apace, with this contrary breath of his mistress


O, but it will flow again for all this, till there come a general drought of
Humor among all our Actors, and then I fear not but his will fall as low as
any. See who presents himself here


What, in the old case?


In Faith, which makes it the more pitiful, you understand where the Scene is?


Why are you so melancholy Brother?


I am not melancholy I thank you Sister.


Why are you not merry then? there are but two of us in all the world, and if
we should not be comforts to one another, God help us


Faith, I cannot tell Sister, but if a man had any true Melancholy in him, it
would make him melancholy, to see his yeomanly father cut his neighbors
throats to make his son a Gentleman: and yet when he has cut 'hem, he will
see his sons throat cut too, ere he make him a true Gentleman indeed, before
Death cut his own throat* I must be the first Head of our house, and yet he
will not give me the head, till I be made so. Is any man termed a Gentleman
that is not always in the fashion? I would know but that


If you be melancholy for that Brother, I think I have as much cause to be
melancholy, as one; for I Will be sworn I live as little in the fashion, as any
woman in London. By the Bible of heaven (beast that I am to say it) I have not
one friend in the world besides my husband. When saw you Master Fastidius
Brisk, Brother


But a while since Sister, I think, I know not well in truth. By Gods lid I
could sight with all my heart me thinks


Nay good Brother, be not resolute.


I sent him a letter, and he writes me no answer neither.


Oh sweet Fastidius Brisk, O fine Courtier, thou a^ he make me sigh and
say, How blessed is that woman that has a Courtier to her husband? and how
miserable a dame she is that has neither husband nor friend in the Court: O
sweet Fastidius, O fine Courtier. How comely he bows him in his courtesy?
how full he hits a woman betwixt the lips when he kisses? how upright he
sits at the Table? how daintily he carues? how sweetly he talks, and tells
news of this Lord, and of that Lady? how cleanely he wipes his spoon at
every spoonful of any whit-meat he eats, and what a near case of picketooths
he carries about him still? Oh sweet Fastidius, O sine Courtier


See yonder she is Gentlemen, now (as ever you will bear the name of Musicians)
touch your instruments sweetly, she has a delicate ear, I tell you, play not
a false note I beseech you


Fear^ not Signior Deliro.


O begin, begin, some sprightly thing; Lord, how my imagination labors with
the success of it: well said, good in faith, heaven grant it please her, I Will
not be seen, for then she will be sure to dislike it


Hey da, this is excellent, I Will lay my life this is my husbands dotage, I
thought so, nay never play peeke-boe with me, I know you do nothing but study
how to anger me sir


Anger thee, sweet wife? why did thou not send for Musicians to supper last
night thy self


To Supper sir? now come up to Supper I beseech you: as though there were no
difference between Supper time when folks should be merry, and this time
when they would be Melancholy? I would never take upon me to take a wife, if I
had no more Judgment to please her


Be pleased sweet wife, and they shall have done: and would to Christ my life
were done, if I can never please thee


God save you Lady; where is Master Deliro?


Here, Master Macilente: you are welcome from the Court Sir; no doubt you have
been graced exceedingly of Master Briskes Mistress, and the rest of the Ladies
for his sake


Alas, the poor Phantasticke, he is scarce known
To any Lady there: and those that know him,
Know him the simplest man of all they know:
Deride, and play upon his amorous Humors,
Though he but Apishly does imitate
The gallan't Courtiers, kissing ladies Pumps,
Holding the Cloth for them, praising their Wits,
And seruilely observing every one,
May do them pleasure: Fearful to be seen
With any man (though he be never so worthy)
That Is not in grace with some that are the greatest.
Thus Courtiers do, and these he counterfeits,
But sets not such a sightly carriage
Upon their vanities, as they themselves;
And therefore they despise him: for indeed
He Is like a Zani to a Tumbler,
That tries tricks after him to make men laugh.

Here Is an unthankful spiteful wretch: the good Gentleman vouchsaft to make
him his companion (because my husband put him into a few Rags) and now see how
the vnrude Rascal backbites him


Is he no more graced amongst'hem then? say you?


Faith like a pawn at Chesse, fills up a room, that is all.


O monster of men! can the Earth bear such an envious Caitiffe?


Well, I repent me I e're credited him so much: but (now I see what he is,
and that his masking viz or is of) I Will forbear him no longer: all his lands
are morgag'd to me, and forfeited: besides, I have Bonds of his in my hand for
the receipt of now xx pound, now xxx, now xxv: still as he has had a Fan but
wagg'd at him, he would be in a new Suit. Well, I Will salute him by a Sergeant,
the next time I see him in faith, I Will Suit him


Why, you may soon see him Sir, for he is to meet Signior Puntarvolo at a
Notaries by the Exchange presently, where he means to take up upon return


Now out upon thee Judas; can thou not be content to backbite thy friend, but
thou must betray him? will thou seek the undoing of any man? and of such a man
too? and will you Sir get your living by the counsel of Traitors


Dear wife, have patience.


The house wilfal, the ground will open, and swallow us: I Will not bide here for
all the Gold an Silver in Heaven


O good Macilente, let us follow and appease her, or the Peace of my life is at
an end


Now Pease, and not Peace feed that life, whose head hangs so heavily over a
woman's Manger


Help me brother: Gods body and you come here, I Will do my self a mischief.


Nay, hear me sweet wife, unless thou will have mec go, I will not go.


Tut, you shall never have that vantage of me, to say you are undone by me:
I Will not bid you stay, I. Brother, sweet brother, here is four Angels, I Will
give you toward your Suit; for the love of Jesus, and as ever you came of
Christen creature, make have to the water side (you know where Master Fastidius
uses to land) and give him warning of my husbands intent; and tell him of that
lean Rascals treachery: O Jesus, how my flesh rises at him? nay, sweet brother
make have; you may say I would have writ to him, but that the necessity of the
time would not suffer it: He cannot choose but take it extraordinarily from me:
and Commend me to him, good brother: say I sent you


Let me see; these four Angels: and then forty shillings more I can borrow on
my Gown in Fetter-lane: well, I will go presently, say on my Suit, pay as
much money as I have, and swear my self into Credit with my Tailor for the
rest


O, on my Soul you wrong her, (...), Though she be froward, yet I know she is
honest


Well, then have I no Judgment; would nay woman (but one that were wild in
her affections) have broke out into that immodest and violent Passion against
her husband? or is it possible --


If you love me, forbear; all the Arguments in the world shall never wrest my
heart to believe it


How like you the Deciphering of his Dotage?


O, strangely; and of the others Envy too, that labors so seriously to set
debate betwixt a man and his wife, Stay, here comes the Knight Aduenturer


I, and his Scriuener with him.


I wonder Monsieur Fastidius comes not! but Notarie, if thou please to draw the
Indentures the while, I will give thee the Theorie


With all my heart Sir; and I Will fall in hand with 'hem presently.


Well then, first; the Sum is to be understood.


Good sir.


Next, our several Appellations, and Character of my Dog and Cat must be
known: show him the Cat Sirrah


So sir.


Then, that the intended Point, is the Turks Court in Constantinople: the Time
limited for our Return, a year: and that if either of us miscarrie, the whole
Venture is lost. These are General; conceiu'st thou? or if either of us turn
Turque


I Sir.


Now for Particulars: that I may make my trauails by Sea or Land, to my best
liking: and that (hiring a Coach for my self) it shall be lawful for my Dog
and Cat to ride with me in the said Coach


Very good sir.


That I may choose to give my Dog or Cat Fish, for fear of Bones, or any other
Nutriment, that (by the judgment of the most Autenticall Physicians where I
travail) shall be thought dangerous


Well sir.


That (after the receipt of his money) he shall neither in his own person, nor
any other, either by direct or indirect means; as Magique, Witchcraft, or
other such Exoticke Arts, attempt, practice, or complot any thing, to the
prejudice of Me, my Dog, or my Cat: Neither shall I use the help of any
such Sorceries or Enchantments; as Unctions, to make our skins impenetrable,
or to travail invisible by virtue of a Powder, or a Ring, or to hang any
three-forked Charm about my Dogs neck, secretly conuey'd into his Collar:
understand you? but that all be performed, sincerely, without fraud or
Imposture


So sir.


That (for testimony of the Performance) my self am to bring thence a Turks
Mustachio, my Dog a Hares lip, and my Cat the train or tail of a Rat


It Is done sir.


It Is said Sir, not done sir, but forward. That upon my return and landing on
the Tower wharfe with the aforesaid Testimony, I am to receive five for one,
according to the proportion of the sums putforth


Well Sir.


Provided, That if before our departure or setting forth, either my self, or
these be visited with sickness, or any other casual event, so that the whole
course of the Adventure be hindered thereby; that then, He is to return, and I
am to receive the prenominated Proportion, upon fair and equal terms


Very good sir; is this all?


It is all Sir: and dispatch them good Notarie.


As fast as is possible Sir.


O Carlo, welcome: saw you Monsieur Brisk?


Not I: did he appoint you to meet here?


I, and I muse he should be so tardie: he is to take an hundred pounds of me
in venture, if he maintain his promise


Is his hour past?


Not yet, but it comes on apace.


Tut, be not jealous of him; he will sooner break all the ten Commandments,
than his Hour; upon my life in such a case trust him


Me thinks Carlo, you look very smooth? ha?


Why I come but now from a Hothouse, I must needs look smooth.


From a Hothouse?


I, do you make a wonder on it? why it is your only Physic. Let a man sweat
once a week in a Hothouse, and be well rubd and froted with a good plumpe
juicie wench, and sweet linen, he shall never ha'the Pox


What? the French Pox?


The French Pox! our Pox: S'blood we have 'hem in as good form as then man:
what


Let me perish, but thou art a Villain: was your new-created Gallant there
with you? Sogliardo


O Porpuse, hang him, no: he is a Lieger at Horns Ordinary yonder: his
villainous Ganimede and he ha'been droning a Tobacco Pipe there, ever sin'
yesterday noone


Who? Signior Tripartite, that would give my Dog the Whiffse?


I, he: they have hired a chamber and all private to practice in, for the
making of the Patoun, the Receipt Reciprocal, and a number of other mysteries,
not yet extant* I brought some dosen or twenty Gallants this morning to
view'hem (as you would do a piece of Perspectiue) in at a keyhole; and there we
might see Sogliardo sit in a Chair, holding his snowt up like a Sow under an
Apple Tree, while the other opened his Nostrills with a Poking-sticke, to give
the smoke a more free delivery. They had spit some three or fourscore ounces
between 'hem, before we came away


How! spit three or fourscore ounces?


I, and preserved it in Porrengers, as a Barber does his Blood when he pricks a
vein


Out Pagan; how do thou prick the Vain of thy friend?


Friend? Is there any such foolish thing in the world? ha? S'lid I never
rellisht it yet


Thy Humor is the more dangerous.


No not a whit Signior: Tut, a man must keep time in all: I can oil my tongue
when I meet him next, and look with a good slicke forehead; 'twill take away
all soil of Suspicion, and that is enough: what Lynceus can see my heart? Pish,
the title of a Friend, it is a vain idle thing, only venerable among fools:
you shall not have one that has any opinion of wit affect it


Save you good Sir Puntarvolo.


Signior Deliro! Welcome.


Pray you sir, did you see Master Fastidius Brisk? I heard he was to meet your
Worship here


You heard no Figment s^^, I do expect him every minute my VVatch strikes.


In good time sir.


There Is a fellow now, looks like one of the Patricians of Sparta, mary his
wit's after ten in the hundred. A good Bloudhound, a close mouthed Dog, he
follows the sent well, marry he is at a fault now me thinks


I should wonder at that Creature is free from the danger of thy tongue.


O I cannot abide these limbs of Satin, or rather Satan indeed, that 'll
walk (like the children of darkness) all day in a melancholy shop, with
their pockets full of Blankes, ready to swallow up as many poor unthrifts, as
come within the verge


So: and what have thou for him that is with him now?


O (Damn me) Immortality, I Will not meddle with him, the pure Element of Fire,
all Spirit, Extraction


How Carlo? ha, what is he man?


A scholar, Macilente, do you not know him? a lanke rawbon'd Anatomy, he
walks up and down like a charged Musket, no man dares encounter him: that is his
Rest there


His Rest? why has he a forked head?


Pardon me, that is to be suspended, you are too quick, too apprehensiue.


Troth (now I think on it) I Will defer it til some other time.


Gods-pretious, not by any means Signior, you shall not loose this
opportunity, he will be here presently now


Yes faith Macilente, it is best. For look you sir, I shall so exceedingly
offend my wife in it, that --


Your wife? now for shame loose these thoughts, and become the master of your
own spirits. Should I (if I had a wife) suffer my self to be thus passionatly
carried (to and for) with the stream of her Humort and neglect my deepest
affairs, to serve her affections? God's Blood I would geld my self first


O but Signior, had you such a wife as mine is, you would --


Such a wife: Now God hate me sir, if ever I discerned any wonder in your wife
yet, with all the Speculation I have: I have seen some that ha'beene thought
fairer than she, in my time; and I have seen those, have not been altogether so
tall, esteemed proper women; and I have seen less Noses grow upon sweeteer
Faces, that have done very well too in my judgemment: but in good faith Signior
for all this, the Gentlewoman is a good pretty proud hard-fauour'd thing, mary
not so peerlessely to be doted upon, I must confess: nay be not angry


Well sir (how ever you please to forget your self) I have not deserved to be
thus played upon, but henceforth, pray you forbear my house, for I can but
faintly endure the savor of his breath at my table, that shall thus jade me for
my courtesies


Nay then Signior, let me tell you, your wife is no proper woman by Jesus, and I
suspect her honesty, that is more, which you may likewise suspect (if you
please:) do you see? I Will urge you to nothing against your appetite, but if you
please, you may suspect it


Good Sir.


Good sir? Now Horn upon Horn pursue thee, thou blind egregious Dotard.


O you shall hear him speak like Envy. Signior Macilente, you saw Mounsieur
Brisk lately? I heard you were with him at the Court


I Buffone, I was with him.


And how is he respected there? (I know you will deal ingeniously with us) is he
made of amongst the sweeter sort of gallants


Faith I, his Ciuet and his casting glass,
Have helped him to a place amongst the rest,
And there his Seniors give him good slight looks,
After their Garb, smile, and salute in French
With some new complement.

What is this all?


Why say, that they should show the frothie fool,
Such grace as they pretend comes from the heart,
He had a mighty wind-fall out of doubt.
Why all their Graces are not to do Grace
To virtue, or desert: but to ride both
With their guilt Spurs quite breathless from them^elues.
It Is now esteemed Precisianisme in wit;
And a Disease in Nature to be kind
Toward Desert, to Love, or seek good Names:
Who feeds with a Good name? who thriues with loving?
Who can provide feast for his own desires,
With serving others? ha, ha, ha:
It Is folly by our wisest worldlings proved
(If not to gain by love) to be beloved.

How like you him? is it not a good spiteful slave? ha?


Shrewd, shrewd.


Damme me, I could eat his flesh now: Divine sweet villain.


Nay, pr'y thee leave: what is he there?


Who? this in the starcht Beard? it is the dull stiff Knight Puntarvolo man;
he is to travail now presently: he has a good knottie wit, marry he carries
little on it out of the land with him


How then?


He puts it forth in venture, as he does his money; upon the return of a Dog
and Cat


Is this he?


I, this is he; a good tough Gentleman: he looks like a Chine of Brawne at
Shrouetide, out of date, and ready to take his leave: or a dry Poule of Ling
upon Easter-eue, that has furnished the Table all Lent, as he has done the
City this last Vacation


Come, you will never leave your stabbing Simil^'s: I shall have you aiming at me
with 'hem by and by, but --


O, renounce me then: pure, honest, good Devil, I love thee above the love of
women; I could even melt in Admiration of thee now: Gods so, look here man;
Sir Dagonet and his Squire


Save you my dear Gallanto's. nay, come approach, good Caualier: pr'y thee
(sweet Knight) know this Gentleman, he is one that it pleases me to use as my
good friend and companion; and therefore do him good offices: I beseech you
Gentles, know him


Sir (for Signior Sogliardos sake) let it suffice, I know you.


Why by Jesus, I thank you Knight, and it shall suffice. Hark you Sir
Puntarvolo, you would little think it; he is as resolute a piece of flesh as
any's in the world


Indeed sir?


Upon my Gentilitie sir: Carlo, a word with you; Do you see that same fellow
there


What? Caualier Shift?


O, you know him; cry you mercy: before God, I think him the tallest man
living within the walls of Europe


The walls of Europe! take heed what you say Signior, Europe's a huge thing
within the walls


Tut, (and 'twere as huge again) I Would justify what I speak. S'lid he
swagger'd even now in a place where we were: I never saw a man do it more
resolute


Nay indeed swaggering is a good Argument of Resolution. Do you hear this,
Signior


I, to my grief. O that such muddie Flags
For every drunken flourish, should atchieue
The name of Manhood; whilst true perfect Valor
(Hating to show it self) goes by despised.
God's Blood, I doc know now (in afaire just cause)
I dare do more than he; a thousand times:
Why should not they take knowledge of this? ha?
And give my worth allowance before his?
Because I cannot swagger. Now the Pox
Light on your Pickt-Hatch prowess.

Why I tell you Sir, he has been the only Bid-stand that ever was, kept
New Market, Salisburie Plain, Hockley in the hole, Gads-Hill; all the high
plac^s of any Request: he has had his Mares and his Geldings he, have been
worth forty, threescore, a hundred pound a Horse, would have sprung you over
hedge and ditch like your Greyhound: he has done five hundred Robberies in his
time, more or less, I assure you


What? and escaped?


Escaped! in faith I: he has broken the jayle when he has been in yrons, and
yrons; and been out, and in again; and out, and in; forty times and not so
few, he


A fit Trumpet to proclaim such a person.


But can this be possible?


why' it is nothing sir, when a man gives his Affections to it.


Good Pylades discourse a Robbery or two, to satisfy these Gentlemen of thy
worth


Pardon me my dear Orestes: Causes have their Quiddits, and it is ill jesting
with Bell-ropes


How? Pylades and Orestes?


I, he is my Pylades, and I am his Orestes: how like you the conceit?


O, it is an old stale Interlude devise: No, I Will give you Names my self: look
you, he shall be your Judas, and you shall be his Elder tree to hang on


Nay rather, let him be Captain Pod, and this his Motion; for he does nothing
but Show him


Excellent: or thus; you shall be Holden, and he your camel.


You do not mean to ride Gentlemen?


Faith let me end it for you Gallants: you shall be his Countenance, and he
your Resolution


Troth that is pretty: how say you Caualier, shall be so?


I, I, most voices.


Faith I am easily yielding to any good Impressions:


Then give hands good Resolution.


Mass he cannot say good Countenance now (properly) to him again.


Yes, by an Ironie.


O sir, the countenance of Resolution should, as he is altogether grim and
unpleasant


Good hours make Music with your mirth Gentlemen, and keep time to your
humors: how now Carlo


Monsieur Brisk! many a long look have I extended for you sir.


Good faith I must crave pardon; I was invited this morning ere I was out of my
bed, by a Beuie of Ladies, to a Banquet: whence it was almost one of Hercules
Labors for me to come away, but that the respect of my promise did so prevail
with me: I know they will take it very ill, especially one that gave me this
Bracelet of her Hair but over night, and this Pearl another gave me from her
forehead, Mary she -- what? are the VVritings ready


I will send my man to know. Sirrah, go you to the Notaries, and learn if he
be ready: leave the Dog sir


And how does my rare qualified friend Sogliardo? oh Signior Macilente! by
these eyes I saw you not, I had saluted you sooner else on my troth: I hope sir
I may presume upon you that you will not divulge my late cheek, or disgrace
indeed sir


You may sir.


S'heart he knows some notorious jest by this Gull, that he has him so
obsequious


Monsieur Fastidius, do you see this fellow there? does he not look like a
Clown? would you think there is any thing in him


Any thing in him? beshrow me, I; the fellow has a good ingenious face.


By this Element, he is an ingenious tall man as ever swaggerd about London:
he and I call Countenance and Resolution, but his name is Caualier Shift


Caualier, you knew Signior Clog, that was hanged for the robbery at Harrow on
the hill


Knew him Sir! why 'twas he gave all the directions for the Action.


How? was it your Project sir?


Pardon me Countenance, you do me some wrong to make that public, which I
imparted to you in private


Gods will, here are none but friends Resolution.


That Is all one; things of Consequence must have their respects, where, how,
and to whom. Yes sir, he showed himself a true Clogge in the Coherence of
that affair sir; for if he had managed matters as they were corroborated to
him, it had been better for him by a forty or fifty score of pounds sir, and
he himself might have lived (in despite of Fate) to have fed on Woodcockes
with the rest: but it was his heavy fortunes to sink poor Clogge, and
therefore talk no more of him


why, had he more Agents then?


O God sir; I, there were some present there, that were the nine Worthies to
him in faith


I sir, I can satisfy you at more convenient conference: but (for mine own
part) I have now reconciled my self to other courses, and profess a living
out of my other qualities


Nay, he has left all now (I assure you) and is able to live like a Gentleman
by his Quality. By this Dog, he has the most rare gift in Tobacco that ever
you knew


S'heart, he keeps more ado with this Monster, than ever Banks did with his
Horse, or the Fellow with the Elephant


He will hang out his Picture shortly in a cloth, you shall see.


O, he does manage a quarrel the best that ever you saw, for Terms and
Circumstances


Good faith Signior (now you speak of a quarrel) I Will acquaint you with a
difference that happened between a Gallant and my self: sir Puntarvolo, you
know him if I should name him; Signior Luculento


Luculento! what inauspicious chance interposed it self betwixt your two
loves


Faith sir, the same that sundred Agamemnon and great Thetis son; but let the
cause escape Sir: He sent me a challenge (mixed with some few braues) which I
restored, and in fine we met. Now indeed Sir (I must tell you) he did offer at
first very desperately, but without judgment: for look you sir. I cast my
self into this figure: now he, comes violently on, and withal advancing his
Rapier to strike, I thought to have took his arm (for he had left his whole
body to my election, and I was sure he could not recover his guard) Sir, I mist
my purpose in his arm, rasht his doublet sleeue, ran him close by the left
cheek, and through his hair: He again lights me here, I had a gold Cable
hatband then new come up, (which I wore about a murrey French Hat I had) cuts
my Hatband (and yet it was Massy, gold-Smithes work) cuts my brimmes, which
by good fortune (being thick embrodered with gold twist, and Spangles)
disapointed the force of the blow: Nevertheless it grazed on my shoulder,
takes me away six purles of an Italian cut-worke Band I wore, cost me three
pounds in the exchange but three days before


This was a strange encounter.


Nay you shall hear sir, with this we both fell out and breathed: Now (upon
the second ^igne of his assault) I betook me to the former manner of my
defense; he (on the other side) abandoned his body to the same danger as
before, and follows me still with blows. But I (being loath to take the
deadly advauntage that lay before me of his left side) made a kind of
stramazoun, ran him up to the hilts, through the Doublet, through the Shirt,
and yet mist the skin. He (making a reuerse blow) falls upon my embossed girdle
(I had thrown off the hangers a little before) strikes off a skirt of a thick
lac't Satin Doublet I had (lined with some four Taffataes) cuts of two panes
embrodered with Pearl, rents through the drawings out of Tyss^w, enters the
linings, and skips the flesh


I wonder he speaks not of his wrought Shirt.


Here (in the opinion of mutual damage) we paused: but (ere I proceed) I must
tell you Signior, that (in this last encounter) not having leisure to put off
my silver Spurs, one of the rowels caught hold of the ruffle of my Boot, and
(being Spanish leather, and subject to tear) overthrows me, rends me two
pair of silk stockings (that I put on being somewhat a raw morning, a Peach
color and another) and strikes me some half inch d^epe into the side of the
Calfe; He (seeing the blood come) presently takes horse and away. I (having
bound up my wound with a piece of my wrought Shirt


O comes it there?


Rid after him, and (lighting at the court gate both together) embraced and
marched hand in hand up into the Presence


Well, by this we can guess what apparel the Gentleman wore.


Before God it was a designment begun with much resolution, maintained with as
much prowess, and ended with more humanity. How now, what says he


The Notari^ says he is ready sir, he stays but your Worships pleasure.


Come we will go to him Mounsieur. Gentlemen shall we entreat you to be
witnesses


You shall entreat me sir, come Resolution.


I follow you good Countenance.


Come Signior, come, come.


O, that there should be fortune
To cloth these men, so naked in desert,
And that the just Storm of a wretched life,
Beats'hem not ragged for their wretched souls,
And since as fruitless, even as black as coals.

Why but Signior, how comes it that Fungoso appeared not with his sisters
intelligence to Brisk


Mary long of the evil Angels that she gave him, who have indeed tempted the
good simple youth to follow the tail of the Fashion, and neglect the
imposition of his friends. Behold here he comes, very VVorshipfully attended,
and with good variety


Gramercie good Shoemaker, I Will put too strings my self.
Now Sir, let me see, what must you have for this Hat?

Here Is the bill, sir.


How do become me, well?


Excellent Sir, as ever you had any Hat in your life.


Nay faith Sir, the Hat's as good as any man in this town can serve you. And
will maintain Fashion as long, never trust me for a groat else


Does it apply well to my suit?


Exceeding well sir.


How like thou my suit Haberdasher?


By my troth sir it is very rarely well made, I never saw a suit sit better I
can tell on


Nay, we have no Art to please our friends, we.


Here Haberdasher tell this same.


Good faith sir, it makes you have an excellent body.


Nay (believe me) I think I have as good a body in cloths as another.


You lack points to bring your apparel together.


I Will have points anon: how now? is it right?


Faith sir it is too little, but upon farther hopes. Good morrow to you sir.


Farewell good Haberdasher, well now master Smp let me see your bill.


Me thinks he discharges his followers too thick, O therein he faucily
imitates some Great man. I warrant you though he turns off them, he keeps
this Tailor in place of a Page to follow him still


This Bill is very reasonable in faith, hark you master Snip. Troth sir I am
not altogether so well furnished at this present, as I could wish I were: but --
If you will do me the favor to take part in hand, you shall have all I have by
Jesus


Sir --


And but give me credit for the rest, till the beginning of the next Term.


O lord sir --


Before God and by this light I Will pay you to the utmost, and acknowledge my
self very deeply engaged to you by this hand


Why how much have you there Sir?


Marry I have here four Angels, and fifteen shillings of White money, it is
all I have as'hope to be saved


You will not fail me at the next Term with the rest.


No and I do, pray God I be hanged. Let me never breath again upon this
mortal Stage, as the Philosopher calls it. By this air, and (as I am a
Gentleman) I Will hold


He were an yron-hearted fellow in my judgment, that would not credit him
upon these monstrous others


Well sir, I Will not stick with any Gentleman for a trifle: you know what it is
remains


I sir, and I give you thanks in good faith, O God how happy am I made in
this good fortune. Well, now I Will go seek out Mounsieur Brisk. Gods so, I
have forgot Ribband for my shoes; and points. S'lid what lucke's this? how
shall I do? Master Snippe, pray let me reduct some two or three shillings for
points and Ribband, by Jesus I have utterly disfurnisht my self in the default
of memory, pray, le' me be beholding to you, it shall come home in the bill
believe me


Faith sir, I can hardly depart with money, but I Will take up and send you by my
boy presently. What colored Ribband would you have


What you shall think meet in your judgment Sir to my suit.


Well, I Will send you some presently.


And points too sir?


And points too sir.


Good Lord how shall I study to deserve this kindness of you sir. Pray let your
youth make have, for I should have done a business an hour since, that I
doubt I shall come too late. Now in good truth I am exceeding proud of my fute


Do you observe the plunges that this poor Gallant is put too (Signior) to
purchase the Fashion


I, and to be still a Fashion behind with the world, that is the sport.


Stay: O here they come from sealed and delivered.


Well now my whole venture is forth, I will resolve to depart shortly.


Faith sir Puntaruolo go to the Court, and take lea^e of the Ladies first.


I care not if it be this afternoones labor. Where is Carlo?


Here he comes.


Faith Gallants, I am persuading this Gentleman to turn Courtier, he is a man
of fair Revenue, and his estate will bear the charge well, besides for his
other gifts of the mind, or so, why, they are as Nature lent him 'hem, pure,
simple, without any Artificial drug or mixture of these two thredbare beggarly
qualities, Learning and Knowledge, and therefore the more accommodate and
Gen^ine. Now for the life it self --


O, the most Celestial, and full of wonder and delight that can be imagined
Signior, beyond all thought and apprehension of Pleasure. A man lives there in
that divine Rapture, that he will think himself in the third Heaven for the
time, and loose all sense of Mortality whatsoever; when he shall behold such
glorious (and almost immortal) beauties, hear such Angelical and Harmonious
voices, discourse with such flowing and Ambrosian spirits, whose wits as
sudden as Lightning, and humorous as Nectar; Oh: it makes a man all
Quintessence and Flame, and lifts him up (in a moment) to the very Crystal
Crown of the sky, where (houering in the strength of his Imagin^tion) he shall
behold all the delights of the Hesperides, the Insulae Fortunatae, Adonis
gardens, Tempe, or what else (confined within the amplest verge of Poesy) to
be mere Vmbrae, and imperfect Figures, conferred with the most essential
felicity of your Court


Well this ENCOMION was not extemporall, it came too perfectly off.


Besides Sir, you shall never need to go to a hothouse, you shall sweat there
with courting your mistress, or loosing your money at Primero, as well as in
all the Stoues in Flaunders. Mary this sir, you must ever be sure to carry a
good strong perfume about you, that your mistress Dog may smell you out
amongst the rest; and (in making love to her) never fear to be out: for you
may have a pipe of Tobacco, or a base Violl shall hang of the wall of purpose,
will put you in presently. The Tricks your Resolution has taught you in
Tobacco, (the VVhiffe, and those sleights) will stand you in very good Ornament
there


I, to some perhaps: but, and he should come to my Mistress with Tobacco
(this Gentleman knows) she 'ld reply upon him in faith. Oh (by this bright
sun) she has the most acute, ready, and facetious wit, that -- tut there is
no spirit able to stand her. You can report it Signior, you have seen her


Then can he report no less out of his judgment, I assure him.


Troth I like her well enough, but she is too selfe-conceited me thinks.


I indeed, she is a little too selfe-conceited, and 'twere not for that Humor,
she were the most to be admired Lady in the world


Indeed it is a Humor that takes from her other excellencies.


Why it may easily be made to forsake her in my thought.


Easily Sir? then are all impossibilities easy.


You conclude too quick upon me Signior, what will you say if I make it so
perspicuously appear now, that your self shall confess nothing more possible


Marry I will say, I will both applaud you, and admire you for it.


And I will second him.


Why I Will show you Gentlemen, Carlo come hither.


Good faith I have a great Humor to the Court, what thinks my Resolutions?
shall I adventure


Troth Countenance, as you please; the Place is a place of good Reputation and
Capacity


O, my tricks in Tobacco (as Carlo says) will show excellent there.


Why you may go with these Gentlemen now, and see fashions; and after, as you
shall see Correspondence


You say true. You will go with me Resolution?


I will meet you Countenance, about three or four of Clock, but, to say to
go with you I cannot, for (as I am Apple John) I am to go before the
Cocatrice you saw this morning, and therefore pray, present me excused good
Countenance


Farewell good Resolution, but fail not to meet.


As I live.


Admirably excellent.


If you can but persuade Sogliardo to the Court, there is all now.


O let me alone, that is my task:


Now by Jesus Macilente, it 's above measure excellent: 'twill be the only
courtly exploit that ever proved Courtier ingenious


Upon my soul it puts the Lady quite out of her Humor, and we shall laugh
with judgment


Come, the Gentleman was of himself resolved to go with you, before I moved it.


Why then Gallants, you two and Carlo go before to prepare the jest:
Sogliardo and I will come some while after you


Pardon me, I am not for the Court.


That Is true: Carlo comes not at the Court indeed well, you shall leave it to
the faculty of Mounsieur Brisk, and my self; upon our lives we will manage
it happily. Carlo shall bespeake supper at the Miter against we come back:
where we will meet, and dimple our cheeks with laughter at the success


I, but will you all promise to come.


My self shall manfrede it for them: he that fails, let his Reputation lie
under the lash of thy tongue


Gods so', look who comes here.


What, Nephew?


Uncle, God save you; did you see a Gentleman, one Monsieur Brisk? a Courtier,
he goes in such a Suit as I do


Here is the Gentleman Nephew, but not in such a Suit.


Another Suit!


How now Nephew?


Would you speak to me Sir?


I, when he has recovered himself: poor Poll.


Some Rosa-^olis.


How now Signior?


I am not well Sir.


Why this it is, to dog the Fashion.


Nay come Gentlemen, remember your affairs; his disease is nothing but the
Flux of Apparel


Sirs, return to the lodging, keep the Cat safe; I Will be the Dogs Guardian my
self


Nephew, will you go to the Court with us; these Gentlemen and I are for the
Court: nay be not so Melancholy


By Gods lid I think no man in Christendom has that rescally fortune that I
have


Faith your Suit is well enough Signior.


Nay, not for that I protest; but I had an errand to Monsieur Fastidius, and I
have forgot it


Why go along to the Court with us, and remember it, come. Gentlemen, you
three take one Boat, and Sogliardo and I will take another: we shall be there
instantly


Content: good Sir vouchsafe us your pleasance.


Farewell Carlo; remember.


I warrant you: would I had one of Kemps shoes to throw after you.


Good Fortune will close the eyes of our jest, fear not: and we shall
frollicke


This Macilente Signior begins to be more sociable on a sudden me thinks,
than he was before, there 's some Portent in it, I believe


O he is a fellow of a strange Nature. Now does he (in this calm of his
Humor) plot and store up a world of malicious thoughts in his brain, till he
is so full with 'hem, that you shall see the very Torrent of his Envy break
forth, and against the course of all their affections oppose it self so
violently, that you will almost have wonder to think how it is possible the
current of their Dispositions shall receive so quick and strong an alteration


I marry sir, this is that on which my Expectation has dwelt all this while:
for I must tell you Signior (though I was loath to interrupt the Scene) yet I
made it a question in mine own private discourse, how he should properly call
it, Every man out of his Humor, when I saw all his Actors so strongly pursue
and continue their Humors


Why therein his Art appears most full oflustre, and approaches nearest the
life, especially when in the flame and height of their Humors they are laid
flat, it fills the eye better, and with more contentment. How tedious a sight
were it to behold a proud exalted tree lopt and cut down by degrees, when it
might be feld in a moment? and to set the Axe to it, before it came to that
pride and fullness, were as not it have it grow


Well I shall long till I see this fall you talk of.


To help your longing, Signior, let your imagination be swifter than a pair
of Oars, and by this, suppose Puntarvolo, Brisk, Fungoso, and the Dog,
arrived at the court gate, and going up to the great chamber. Macilente and
Sogliardo, we 'le leave them on the water till Possibility and Natural
means may land 'hem. Here come the Gallants, now prepare your Expectation


Come Lordings. Signior you are sufficiently instructed.


Who I sir?


No, this Gentleman. But stay, I take thought how to bestow my dog, he is no
competent atte^dant for the Presence


Mass that 's true in deed knight, you must not carry him into the Presence.


I know it, and I (like a dull beast) forgot to bring one of my Cormorants to
attend me


Why you're best leave him at the Porters lodge.


Not so: his worth is too well known amongst them, to be forth-comming.


Slight, how'll you do then?


I must leave him with one that is ignorant of his quality, if I will have him
to be safe. And see; Here comes one that will carry coals, Ergo, will hold my
Dog. My honest friend, may I commit the tuition of this Dog to thy prudent
care


You may if you please sir.


Pray thee let me find thee here at my return: it shall not be long, till I
will Ease thee of thy emploiment, and Please thee. Forth Gentles


Why, but will you leave him with so slight command, and infuse no more charge
upon the fellow


Charge? no, there wear no policy in that; that were to let him know the
value of the Gem he holds, and so, to ^emp frail nature against her
disposition. No, pray thee let thy Honesty be sweet and short


Yes sir.


But hark you Gallants, and cheefely Monsieur Brisk^ When we come in
eye-shot or presence of this Lady, let not other matters carry us from our
Project: but (if we can) single her forth to some place


I warrant you.


And be not too sudden, but let the devise induce it self with good
Circumstance: on


Is this the way? good truth here be fine hangings.


Honesty, Sweet and Short? mary it shall sir, doubt you not: for even at this
instant if one would give me twenty pounds, I would not deliver him; there is
for the Sweet: but now, if any man come offer me but twopence, he shall have
him; there is for the Short now. God's Blood, what a mad Humorous Gentleman is this
to leave his Dog with me: I could run away with him now and he were worth
any thing: well, I pray God send him quickly again


Come on Signior, now prepare to Court this All-witted Lady, most Naturally
and like your self


Faith and you say the word, I Will begin to her in Tobacco.


O, fie on it. no: you shall begin with, How does my sweet Lady; or, Why are
you so melancholy Madame? though she be very merry, it is all one: be sure to
kiss your hand often enough; pray for her health, and tell her, how more than
most fair she is: Screw your face at' one side thus, and Protest; let her
fleere and look a skaunce, and hide her Teeth with her Fan, when she
laughes a fit, to bring her into more matter; that is nothing: you must talk
forward (though it be without sense, so it be without blushing) it is most
Courtlike and well


But shall I not use Tobacco at all?


O, by no means, 'twill but make your breath suspected; and that you use it
only to confound the rankenesse of that


Nay, I Will be advised sir by my friends.


Gods my life, see where sir Puntars Dog is.


I would the Gentleman would return for his follower here, I Will leave him to
his fortunes else


S'heart, 'twere the only true jest in the world to poison him now: ha? by
Gods will I Will do it, if I could but get him of the fellow. Signior Sogliardo,
walk aside, and think upon some devise to entertain the Lady with


So I do sir.


How now mine honest friend? whose Dog-keeper art thou?


Dog-keeper sir? I hope I scorn that in faith.


Why? do thou not keep a Dog?


Sir, now I do, and now I do not: I think this be Sweet and Short: make me
his Dog-keeper


This is excellent above expectation: nay stay sir, you would be travailing; but
I Will give you a Dram shall shorten your voyage: here: so sir, I Will be bold to
take my leave of you: now to the Turks Court in the Devils name, for you shall
never go on Gods name. Sogliardo, come


I have 't in faith now, will sting it.


Take heed you leese it not Signior, ere you come there: preserve it.


How like you this first exploit of his?


O, a piece of true Envy, but I expect the issue of the other devise.


Here they come, will make it appear.


Why I thought Sir Puntarvolo, you had been gone your Voyage?


Dear, and most Amiable Lady, your Divine Beauties do bind me to those
Offices, that I cannot depart when I would


It Is most Courtlike spoken sir; but how might we do to have a sight of your
Dog and Cat


His Dogge's in the Court, Lady.


And not your Cat? how dare you trust her behind you Sir?


Troth Madame she has sore eyes, and she does keep her Chamber: marry I
have left her under sufficient guard: there are two of my Hinds to attend her


I Will give you some Water for her eyes: when do you go sir?


Certes sweet Lady, I know not.


He does stay the rather Madame, to present your Acute judgment with so
Courtly, and well-Parted a Gentleman, as yet your Ladyship has never seen


What Is he, gentle Monsieur Brisk? not that Gentleman?


No Lady, this is a Kinsman of Justice Silence.


Pray' sir, give me leave to report him: he is a Gentleman (Lady) of that rare
and admirable ^acultie, as (I protest) I know not his like in Europe: he is
exceedingly Valiant, an excellent Scholar, and so exactly trauail'd, that he
is able in discourse, to deliver you a Model of any Princes Court in the
world: 'speakes the Languages with that purity of Phrase, and facility of
Accent, that it breeds astonishment: his Wit, the most Exuberant, and (above
wonder) pleasant, of all that ever entered the concaue of this care


It Is most true Lady; mary he is no such excellent proper man.


His Travails have changed his complexion, Madam.


O Sir Puntarvolo, you must think every man was not borne to have my Servant
Briskes feature


But that which transcends all, Lady; he does so Peerlessely imitate any
manner of person for Gesture, Action, Passion, or what ever --


I, especially a Rusticke or a Clown Madam, that it is not possible for the
sharpest-sighted wit (in the world) to discern any sparks of the Gentleman in
him, when he does it


O Monsieur Brisk, be not so Tyranous to confine all Wits within the compass
of your own: Not find the sparks of a Gentleman in him, if he be a Gentleman


No in truth (sweet Lady) I believe you cannot.


Do you believe so? Why I can find sparks of a Gentleman in you Sir.


I, he is a Gentleman Madam, and a Reueller.


Indeed I think I have seen your Ladyship at our Revels.


Like enough sir: but would I might see this wonder you talk of: may one have
a sight of him for any reasonable sum


Yes Madam, he will arrive presently.


What, and shall we see him Clown it?


I faith (sweet Lady) that you shall: see here he comes.


This is he; pray observe him Lady.


Beshrew me, he Clownes it properly indeed.


Nay, mark his Courtship.


How does my sweet Lady; hot and moist? Beautiful and lusty? ha?


Beautiful and it please you sir, but not lusty.


O ho Lady; it pleases you to say so in truth: and how does my sweet Lady; in
health? Bonaroba, quaeso? que Novelles? que Novelles? Sweet creature


O excellent: why Gallants, is this he cannot be Deciphered? they were very
bleare-witted in faith that could not discern the Gentleman in him


But do you, in earnest Lady?


Do I sir? why if you had any true Court-judgement in the carriage of his eye,
and that inward power that forms his countenance, you might perceive his
counterfaiting as clear as the noone day: Alas; Nay if you would have tried my
Wit indeed, you should never have told me he was a Gentleman, but presented
him for a true Clown indeed; and then have seen if I could have Deciphered
him


Before God, her Ladyship says true (Knight:) but does he not affect the Clown
most naturally, Mistress


O, she cannot but affirm that, out of the Bounty of her Judgment.


Nay out of doubt he does well, for a Gentleman to imitate; but I warrant you,
he becomes his Natural carriage of the Gentleman, much better than his
Clownerie


It Is strange in truth, her Ladyship should see so far into him.


I, is it not.


Faith as easily as may be: not Decipher him, quoth you?


Good sadness, I wonder at it.


Why, has she Deciphered him, Gentlemen?


O most miraculously, and beyond Admiration.


Is It possible?


She has given most infallible signs of the Gentleman in him, that is
certain


Why Gallants, let me laugh at you a little: was this your device, to try my
judgment in a Gentleman


Nay Lady, do not scorn us, though you have this gift of Perspicacie above
others: What if he should be no Gentleman now, but a Clown indeed Lady


How think you of that? would not your Ladyship be out of your Humor?


O, but she knows it is not so.


What if he were not a man, ye may as well say? nay if your Worships could
Gull me so indeed, you were wiser than you are taken for


In good faith Lady, he is a very perfect Clown, both by Father and Mother:
that I Will assure you


O Sir, you are very pleasurable.


Nay, do but look on his Hand, and that shall resolve you: Look you Lady,
what a Palm here is


Tut, that was with holding the Plough.


The Plough! did you discern any such thing in him Madame?


Faith no, she saw the Gentleman as bright as at noonday she: she deciphered
him at first


Troth I am sorry your Ladyships sight should be so suddenly struck.


O, you're goodly Beagles!


What, is she gone?


Nay stay sweet Lady; Que Novelles, Que Novelles.


Out, you fool you.


She Is out of her Humor in faith.


Nay, let us follow it while it is hot Gentlemen.


Come, on mine Honor we will make her blush in the Presence: my spleen is great
with laughter


Your laughter will be a child of a feeble life I believe sir. Come Signior,
your looks are too dejected me thinks: why mix you not mirth with the rest


By Gods will this Suit frets me at the Soul. I Will have it altered to morrow
sure


I am come to the Court to meet with my Countenance Sogliardo: poor men must
be glad of such Countenance, when they can get no better. Well, Need may insult
upon a man, but it shall never make him despair of Consequence: The world will
say, it is base; tush, base! it is base to live under the earth, not base to live
above it, by any means


The poor Lady is most miserably out of her Humor in faith.


There was never so witty a jest broken at the Tilt, of all the Court wits
christened


O, this applause taints it fowly.


I think I did my part in Courting. O Resolution!


Aye me, my Dog.


Where is he?


Gods precious, go seek for the fellow, good Signior.


Here, here I left him.


Why none was here when we came in now, but Caualier Shift, enquire of him.


Did you see Sir Puntarvolos Dog here Cavalier, since you came?


His Dog sir? he may look his Dog sir; I see none of his Dog sir.


Upon my life he has stol'ne your Dog sir, and been hired to it by some that
have ventured with you; you may guess by his peremptory answers


Not unlike; for he has been a notorious thief by his own confession.
Sirrah, where is my Dog


Charge me with your Dog sir? I have none of your Dog Sir.


Villain, thou lie.


Lie sir? S'blood you are but a man sir.


Rogue and Thief, restore him.


Take heed sir Puntarvolo what you do; he will bear no coals I can tell you
(of my word.


This is rare.


It Is mar'le he stabs you not: by this Light, he has stabbed forty for forty
times less matter, I can tell you, of my knowledge


I will make thee stoop, thou Abject.


Make him stoop sir! Gentlemen pacify him or he will be killed.


Is he so tall a man?


Tall a man? if you love his life stand betwixt 'hem* make him stoop!


My Dog Villain, or I will hang thee: thou have confessed robberies, and other
Fellonious acts to this Gentleman thy Countenance


I Will bear no witness.


And without my Dog I will hang thee, for them.


What? kneel to thine enemy?


Pardon me good sir; God is my Judge I never did Robbery in all my life.


O sir Puntarvolo, your Dog lies giving up the ghost in the wood-yard.


S'blood is he not dead yet?


O, my Dog borne to disastrous fortune! pray you conduct me sir.


How? did you never do any robbery in your life?


O this is good: so he swore sir.


I, I heard him. And did you swear true sir?


I (as God shall have part of my soul Sir) I never robbed any man I; never
stood by the high way side sir, but only said so, because I would get my self a
name and be counted a tall man


Now out base Viliaco: Thou my Resolution? I thy Countenance? By this light
Gentlemen, he has confessed to me the most inexorable company of Robberies, and
damned himself that he did 'hem; you never heard the like: out skoundrell out,
follow me no more I command thee: out of my ^ight, go, hence, speak not: I
will not hear thee; away Camouccio


O, how I do feed upon this now, and fat my self? here were a couple
unexpectedly dishumor'd: well, by this time I hope sir Puntarvolo and his Dog
are both out of Humor to travail: nay Gentlemen, why do you not seek out the
Knight, and comfort him? our Supper at the Mitre must of necessity hold to
night, if you love your Reputations


Before God I am so Melancholy for his Dogs disaster, but I Will go.


Faith and I may go too, but I know I shall be so Melancholy.


Tush, Melancholy? you must forget that now, and remember you lie at the
mercy of a Fury: Carlo will rack your sinews asunder, and rail you to dust
if you come not


O then their fear of Carlo be like, makes them hold their meeting.


I, here he comes: conceive him but to b^e entered the Mitre, and it is enough.


Holla: where be these Shot-sharkes?


By and by: you're welcome good Master Buffone.


Where Is George? call me George hither quickly.


What wine please you have Sir? I Will draw you that is neat Master Buffone.


Away Neophite, do as I bid; bring my dear George to me: Mass here he comes.


VVelcome Master Carlo.


What Is Supper ready, George?


I sir, almost: will you have the cloth laid, Master Carlo?


O, what else: are none of the Gallants come yet?


None yet sir.


Stay, take me with you George: let me have a good fat Loyne of Porke laid to
the fire presently


It shall sir.


And withal, hear you? draw me the biggest shaft you have out of the But you
wot of: away, you know my meaning George, quick


Done sir.


God's Blood, I never hungered so much for thing in my life, as I do to know our
Gallants success at the Court: now is that lean Bald-rib Macilente, that salt
Villain, plotting some mischievous devise, and lies a soaking in their frothy
Humors like a dry crust, till ^e has drunk 'hem all up: could the Ke^ks but
hold vp's eyes at other men's happiness in any reasonable proportion, S'lid the
^laue were to be loved next Heaven, above Honor, Wealth, rich Fare, Apparel,
Wenches, all the delights of the Belly, and the Groine, whateuer


Here Master Carlo.


Is^t right, Boy?


I sir, I assure you it is right.


Well said my dear George, depart: Come, my small Gymblet, you in the false
scabberd, away; so: Now to you sir Burgomaster, let us taste of your Bounty


What, will he deal upon such quantities of Wine alone.


You shall perceive that sir.


I marry sir, here is purity* O George, I could bite off thy nose for this now:
Sweet Rogue, he has drawn Nectar, the very Soul of the Grape: I Will wash my
temples with some on it presently, and drink some half a score draughts;
'twill heat the Brame, kindle my Imagination, I shall talk nothing but
Crackers and Fire-worke to night. So sir; Please you to be here sir, and I
here: So


This is worth the observation, Signior.


Now sir, here is to you; and I present you with so much of my love.


I take it kindly from you Sir.


By Jesus you ^^ce put me in mind now of a very necessary office, which I will
propose in your pledge sir: The health of that Honorable Countess, and the
sweet Lady that sat by her sir


I do vail to it with reverence.


And now Signior, with these Ladies, I Will be bold to mix the health of your
Divine Mistress


^ Do you know her sir?


O Lord sir, I, and in the respectfull memory and mention of her, I could wish
this Wine were the most (...) is drugge in the world


Good faith sir, you do honor me (...) exceedingly.


Whom should he personate in this, Signior?


Faith I know not sir, observe, observe him.


If it were the basest filth or mudde that runs in the channel, I am bound
to pledge it by God sir. reciprocally return upon you to the health of the
Count Frugale


The Count Frugales health sir? I Will pledge it on my knees by Jesus.


Will you sir? I Will drink it on my knees then, by the Lord.


Why this is strange.


Have you heard a better drunken Dialogue?


Nay, do me right Sir.


So I do in good faith.


Good faith you do not; mine was fuller.


Why by Jesus it was not.


By Jesus it was, and you do lie.


Lie sir.


I Sir.


S'wounds you Rascal.


O, come, stabbe if you have a mind to it.


Stabbe? do thou think I dare not?


Why how now Carlo; what Humor's this?


O my good Mischief, art thou come? where are the ^est? where are the rest?


Faith three of our Ordinance are burst.


Burst? how comes that?


Faith ouer-charg'd, ouer-charg'd.


But did not the train hold?


O yes, and the poor Lady is irrecouerably blown up.


Why, but which of the Munition is miscarried? ha?


Imprimis, Sir Puntarvolo: next, the Countenance, and Resolution.


How? how for these love of God?


Troth the Resolution is proou'd Recreant; the Countenance has changed his
Coppie; and the Passionate Knight, is shedding Funeral tears over his
departed Dog


What Is his Dog dead?


Poisoned it is thought: mary how, or by whom, that is left for some Cunning
woman he^re of the Banke-side to resolve: For my part, I know nothing, more
than that we are like to have an exceeding Melancholy Supper of it


S'life, and I had purposed to be extraordinarily merry: I had drunk off a
good Preparatiue of old Sack here: but will they come, will they come


They will assuredly come: marry Carlo (as thoulou'st me) run over 'hem all
freely to night, and especially the Knight; spare no Sulphurous jest that may
come out of that sweatie Forge of thine, but ply 'hem with all manner of Shot,
Minion, Saker, Culverine, or any thing what thou will


I warrant thee my dear Case of Petrionels, so I stand not in dread of thee,
but that thou wilt second me


Why my good Germane Tapster, I will.


What George. Lomtero, Lomtero, etc.


Did you call, Master Carlo?


More N^ctar, George: Lomtero, etc.


Your meat's ready sir and your company were come.


Is the Loine a Porke enough?


I Sir, it is enough?


Porke? S'heart what do thou with such a greasy Dish; I think thou do
Varnish thy face with the fat on it, it looks so like a Glew-pot


True, my Raw-bon'd Rogue: and if thou would farce thy lean Ribs with it
too, they would not (like ragged Lathes) rub out so many Dublets as they do:
but thou know not a good Dish, thou. O, it is the only nourishing meat in the
world: No marvel though that saucie stubb^rne Generation the Jews, were
forbidden it: for what would they have done, well pampered with fat Porke, that^
durst murmr at their maker out of Garli^ke and Onions. S^lood fed with it,
the (...) strummell pa^cht, Goggle-ey'd Grumble doryes, would have
Gigantomachiz'd. Well said my sweet George, fill, fill


This savors too much of Profanation.


O servetur ad imum, qualis ab incepto processerit, and sibo constet. The
necessity of his vain compels a tolleratio^: for, bar this, and dash him
out of Humor before his time


It Is an Axiom in Natural Philosophy, What comes nearest the Nature of that
it feeds, conuerts quicker to nourishment, and does sooner essentiate. Now
nothing in Flesh and Entrails, assimulates or resembles Man more, than a Hog
or Swine


True; and he (to requite their courtesy) oftentimes d'offeth off his own
Nature, and puts on theirs; as when he becomes as churlish as a Hog, or as
drunk as a Sow: but to your conclusion


Marry I say, nothing resembling Man more than a Swine, it follows, nothing
can be more nourishing: for indeed (but that it abhorres from our nice Nature)
if we fed one upon another, we should shoot up a great deal faster, and thri^e
much better: I refer me to your Long-la^e Cannibals, or such like: but since
it is so contrary; Porke, Porke; is your only feed


I take it your Devil be of the same Diet; he would never have desired to been
incorporated into Swine else. O here comes the Melancholy mess: upon 'hem
Carlo, charge, charge


Before God sir Puntarvolo, I am sorry for your heaviness; Body a me, a
shrewd mischaunce: why had you no Unicorn horn, nor B^zars stone about you?
ha


Sir, I would request you be silent.


Nay, to him again.


Take comfort good Knight, if your Cat ha'recouered her Cataract, fear
nothing; your Dogs mischaunce may be helped


Say how (sweet Carlo) for so God mend me, the poor Knights mones draw me
into fellowship of his misfortunes. But be not discouraged good sir Puntarvolo,
I am content your adventure shall be performed upon your Cat


I believe you Musk-cod, I believe you, for rather than thou would make
present repaime^t, thou would take it upon his own bare return from
Callice


Nay Gods life, hee'ld be content (so he were well ^id out of his company) to
pay him five for one at his next meeting him in Paul's. But for your Dog, sir
Puntar, if he be not outright dead, there is a friend of mine a Quack-saluer,
shall put life in him again, that is certain


O no, that comes too late.


Gods precious Knight, will you suffer this?


Drawer; get me a Candle and hard wax presently.


I, and bring up Supper; for I am so Melancholy.


Ah Signior, where is your Resolution?


Resolution! hang him Rascal: O Carlo, if you love me do not mention him.


Why, how so? how so?


O the arrant'st Crocodile that ever Christian was acquainted with. By Jesus, I
shall think the worse of Tobacco while I live for his sake: I did think him
to be as tall a man --


Nay Buffone, the Knight, the Knight.


Sblood, he looks like an Image carved out of Box, full of knots: his Face
is (for all the world) like a Dutch purse with the mouth downward; his beard's
the Tassels: and he walks (let me see) as Melancholy as one of the Masters
side in the Counter. Do you hear sir Puntar


Sir, I do en^reat you no more, but enjoyne you to silence, as you affect your
peace


Nay but dear Knight understand (here are none but friends, and such as wish
you well) I would have you do this now; Fleame your Dog presently (but in any
case keep the head) and stuff his skin well with straw, as you see these dead
monsters at Bartholmew fair


I shall be sudden I tell you.


Or if you like not that sir, get me somewhat a less dog and clap into the
skin; here 's a slave about the town here, a Jew, one Yohan; or a fellow that
makes Periwigs will glue it on artificially, it shall never be discerned;
besides, 'twill be so much the warmer for the Hound to travel in you know


Sir Puntarvolo, Sdeath can you be so patient?


Or thus Sir: you may have (as you come through Germany) a Familiar for little
or nothing shall turn it self into the shape of your Dog, or any thing (what
you will) for certain hours: Gods my life knight, what do you mean? you will
offer no violence, will you? Hold, hold


God's Blood you slave, you Bandog you.


As you love God, stay the enraged knight, Gentlemen.


By my knighthood, he that stirs in his rescue, dies. Drawer be gone.


Murder, murder, murder.


I, are you houling, you Wolf? Gentlemen, as you tender your lives, suffer no
man to enter, till my revenge be perfect. Sirrah Buffone, lie down; make no
exclamations, but down; down you Curre, or I will make thy blood flow on my
Rapier hilts


Sweet knight hold in thy fury, and before God I Will honor thee more than the
Turk does Mahomet


Down (I say.) Whose there?


Here Is the Constable, open the doors.


Good Macilente.


Open no door, if the Adalantado of Spain were here, he should not enter: On,
help me with the light, Gentlemen: you knock in vain sir officer


Et tu Brute.


Sirrah close your lips, or I will drop it in thine eyes by heaven.


O, O.


Open the door, or I will break it open.


Nay good Constable have patience a little, you shall come in presently, we
have almost done


So; now, are you out of your humor sir. Shift Gentlemen.


Lay hold upon this gallant, and pursue the rest.


Lay hold on me sir! for what?


Mary for your riot here sir, with the rest of your companions.


My riot! God's my judge, take heed what you do; Carlo did I offer any
violence


O sir, you see he is not in case to answer you, and that makes you so
paramptorie


Peremptory, Shife I appeal to the Drawers, if I did him any hard measure.


They are all gone, there is none of them will be laid any hold on.


Well sir, you are like to answer till the rest can be found out.


God's Blood I appeal to George here.


Tut George was not here: away with him to the Counter sirs. Come sir you were
best get your self dressed somewhere


Good Lord that master Carlo could not take heed, and knowing what a Gentleman
the knight is if he be angry


A pox on 'hem, they have left all the meat on our hands, would they were
choakt with it for me


What are they gone sirs.


O here is master Macilente.


Sirrah George do'you see that concealment there? that Napkin under the Table?


Gods so', Signior Fungoso!


He Is a good pawn for the reckoning; be sure you keep him here, and let him
not go away till I come again, though he offer to discharge all; I Will return
presently


Sirrah, we have a pawn for the Reckoning.


What? of Macilente?


No; look under the Table.


I hope all be quiet now; if I can get but forth of this street, I care not.
Masters, I pray you tell me, is the Constable gone


What? Master Fungoso?


VVas't not a good devise the same of me Sirs?


Yes faith; have you been here all this while?


O God I: good sirs look and the coast be clear, I Would feign be going.


All Is clear Sir, but the Reckoning; and that you must clear and pay before
you go, I assure you


I pay? S'light, I eat not a bit since I came into the house yet.


Why you may when you please sir, it is all ready below that was bespoken.


Bespoken? not by me, I hope?


By you Sir? I know not that: but 'twas for you and your company, I am sure.


My company? S'lid I was an invited guest, so I was.


Faith we have nothing to do with that Sir, they are all gone but you, and we
must be answered; that is the short and the long on it


Nay, if you will grow to extremities, my Masters, then would this Pot, Cup,
and all were in my belly, if I have a cross about me


What, and have such Apparel? Do not say so, Signior, that mightily
discredits your clothes


By Jesus the Taylour had all my money this morning, and yet I must be feign to
alter my Suit too: good sirs, let me go, it is Friday night; and in good truth
I have no stomach in the world to eat any thing


That Is no matter so you pay sir.


Pay? Gods light, with what conscience can you ask me to pay that I never
drank for


Yes sir, I did see you drink once.


By this Cup (which is silver) but you did not, you do me infinite wrong, I
looked in the pot once indeed, but I did not drink


Well sir, if you can satisfy my Master, it shall be all one to us. By and
by


Loose not your self now Signior.


Tut sir, you did bear too hard a conceit of me in that, but I will now make
my love to you most transparent, in spite of any dust of suspicion, that may
be raised to dim it: and henceforth since I see it is so against your Humor,
I will never labor to persuade you


Why I thank you Signior, but what is that you tell me may concern my peace
so much


Faith sir it is thus. Your wives brother Signior Fungoso, being at supper to
night at a Tavern with a sort of Gallants: there happened some division
amongst'hem, and he is left in pawn for the Reckoning: now if ever you look
that time shall present you with a happy occasion to do your wife some
gracious and acceptable service, take hold of this Opportunity, and presently
go and redeem him; for being her brother, and his credit so amply engaged as
no^^ it is, when she shall hear (as he cannot himself, but he must out of
extremity report it) that you came and offered your self so kindly, and with
that respect of his Reputation, Slud the benefit cannot but make her dote, and
grow mad of your affections


Now by heaven Macilente, I acknowledge my self exceedingly indebted to you,
by this kind tender of your love; and I am sorry to remember that I was ever so
rude to neglect a friend of your worth, bring me shoes and a cloak there, I was
going to bed if you had not come, what Tavern is it


The Miter sir.


O; why Fido, my shoes. Good faith it cannot but please her exceedingly.


Come, I mar'le what piece of nightworke you have in hand no^, that you call
for your cloak and your shoes: what, is this your Pandor


O sweet wife speak lower, I would not he should hear thee for a world --


Hang him rascal, I cannot abide him for his treachery, with his wild
quicke-set beard there. Whether go you now with him


No whether with him dear wife, I go alone to a place, from whence I will
return instantly. Good Macilente acquaint not her with it by any means, it
may come so much the more accepted, frame some other answer, I Will come back
immediately


Nay, and I be not worthy to know whether you go, stay till I take knowledge of
your coming back


Hear you mistres Deliro.


So Sir, and what say you?


Faith Lady, my intents will not deserve this slight respect, when you shall
know'hem


Your intents? why, what may your intents be for Gods sake?


Troth the time allows no circumstance Lady, therefore know, this was but a
devise to remove your Husband hence, and bestow him securely, whilst (with
more conueniencie) I might report to you a misfortune that has happened to
Mounsieur Brisk; nay comfort sweet Lady. This night (being at supper) a sort
of young Gallants committed a Riot, for the which he (only) is apprehended
and cari^d to the Counter, where if your Husband and other Creditors should but
have knowledge of him, the poor Gentleman were undone for ever


Aye me, that he were.


Now therefore, if you can think upon any present means for his delivery,
do not forslow it. A bribe to the officer that committed him, will do it


O God Sir, he shall not want for a bribe: pray you, will you commend me to
him, and say I Will visit him presently


No Lady, I shall do you better service in protracting your husbands return,
that you may go with more safety


Good truth so you may; farewell good Sir* Lord how a woman may be mistaken in
a man? I would have sworn upon all the Testaments in the world he had not
loved master Brisk. Bring me my keys there maid: Alas good Gentleman, if
all I have in this earthly world will pleasure him, it shall be at his service


How Macilente sweats in this business, if you mark him?


I, you shall see the true picture of Spite anon, here comes the Pawn and
his Redeemer


Come Brother, be not discouraged for this man, what?


No truly, I am not discouraged, but I protest to you Brother I have done
imitating any more Gallants either in purse or apparel, but as shall become a
Gentleman for good carriage or so


You say well. This is all in the bill here? is it not?


I Sir.


There Is your money, tell it: and Brother, I am glad I met with so good
occasion to show my love to you


I will study to deserve it in good truth, and I live.


What is it right?


I Sir, and I thank you.


Let me have a Capons leg saved, now the reckoning is paid.


You shall Sir:


Where Is Signior Deliro?


Here Macilente.


Hark you sir, have you dispatched this same?


I marry have I.


Well then, I can tell you news, Brisk is in the Cloun^er.


IN the Counter?


It Is true Sir, committed for the stir here to night. Now would I have you
send your brother home before, with the report of this your kindness done him
to his sister, which will so pleasingly possess her, and out of his mouth too,
that in the mean time you may clap your Action on Brisk, and your wife (being
in so happy a mood) cannot entertain it ill by any means


It Is very true, she cannot indeed, I think.


Think? why 'ts past thought, you shall never meet the like opportunity, I
assure you


I will do it. Brother pray you go home before, this Gent. and I have some
private business; and tell my sweet wife, I Will come presently


I will Brother.


And Signior, acquaint your sister, how liberally and out of his bounty, you
brother has used you. (Do you see?) made you a man of good Reckoning; redeemed
that you never were possessed of, Credit; gave you as Gentlemanlike terms as
might be; found no fault with your coming behind the fashion; nor nothing


Nay I am out of those Humors now.


Well, if you be out, keep your distance, and be not made a Shot-clog no
more. Come Signior, let us make have


O master Fastidius, what pity is it to see so sweet a man as you are, in so
sour a place


As upon her lips does she mean?


O, this is to be imagined the Counter belike?


Troth fair Lady, it is first the pleasure of the Fates, and next of the
Constable to have it so, but, I am patient, and indeed comforted the more in
your kind visitation


Nay, you shall be comforted in me more than this, if you please Sir. I sent
you word by my Brother Sir, that my husband laid to rest you this morning, I
know not whether you received it, or no


No believe it, sweet Creature, your Brother gave me no such intelligence.


O the Lord!


But has your husband any such purpose?


O God Master Brisk, yes: and therefore be presently discharged; for if he
come with his Actions upon you (Lord deliver you) you are in for one half a
score year; he kept a poor man in Ludgate once, twelve year for sixteen
shillings. Where Is your keeper, for Gods love call him, let him take a bribe,
and dispatch you, Lord how my heart trembles! here are no spies? are there


No sweet mistress, why are you in this passion?


O Christ Master Fastidius, if you knew how I took up my husband to day, when
he said he would arrest you; and how I railed at him that persuaded him to it,
the Scholar there, (who on my conscience loves you now) and what care I took
to send you intelligence by my Brother; and how I gave him four Sovereigns
for his pains; and now, how I came running out hither without man or boy with
me, so soon as I heard on it; you would say, I were in a Passion indeed: your
keeper for Gods sake. O Master Brisk (as it is in Euphues) Hard is the choice,
when one is compelled either by silence to die with gree^e, or by speaking to
live with shame


Fair Lady I conceive you, and may this kiss assure you, that where
Adversity has (as it were) contracted, Prosperity shall not -- Gods light
your Husband


O me!


I? is it thus!


Why how now Signior Deliro? has the Wolf seen you? ha? has Gorgons head
made marble on you


Some Planet strike me dead.

Why look you Sir, I told you, you might have suspected this long before, had
you pleased; and ha'sau'd this labor of Admiration now, and Passion, and such
extremities as this frail lump of Flesh is subject unto. Nay, why do you not
dote now Signior? Me thinks you should say it were some Enchantment, Deceptio
visus, or so, ha? if you could persuade your self it were a dream now, 'twere
excellent: faith try what you can do Signior; it may be your Imagination
will be brought to it in time, there is nothing impossible


Sweet Husband?


Out lascivious Strumpet.


What? did you see how ill that stale vain became him before, of Sweet Wife,
and Dear heart? and are you fallen just into the same now? with Sweet Husband.
Away, follow him, go, keep state, what? Remember you are a woman: turn
impudent: gi' him not the head, though you gi 'him the horns, Away.
Infans-perdus here, your forlorn hope. How now Mounsieur Brisk: what? Friday at
night? and in affliction too? and yet your Pulpamenta? your delicate Morsels: I
perceive the affection of Ladies and Gentlewomen, pursues you wheresoever you
go Mounsieur


Now in good faith (and as I am Gentle) there could not have come a thing in
this world to have distracted me more than the wrinckled fortunes of this
poor Dame


O yes Sir: I can tell you a thing will distract you much better, believe it.
Signior Deliro has entered three Actions against you, three Actions Mounsieur:
mary one of them (I Will put you in comfort) is but three thousand mark, and the
other two some five thousand pound together, trifles, trifles


O God, I am undone.


Nay not altogether so Sir, the Knight must have his hundred pound repai'd,
that'll help too, and then sixescore pound for a Diamond: you know where?
these be things will weigh Mounsieur; they will weigh


O Jesus!


What do you sigh? this it is to kiss the hand of a Countess, to have her
Coach sent for you, to hang Poinards in Ladies garters, to wear Bracelets of
their hair, and for every one of these great ^^uours to give some slight
Jewel of five hundred cro^nes, or so, why it is nothing. Now Mounsieur, you see
the plague that treads of the heels of your fopperie, well, go your ways in;
Remove your self to the two-penny ward quickly to save charges, and there set
up your rest to spend Sir Puntars hundred pound for him. Away good Pomander,
go


Why here is a change: Now is my soul at peace,
I am as empty of all Envy now,
As they of Merit to be envied at,
My Humor (like a ^lame) no longer lasts
Than it has stuff to feed it, and their virtue,
Being now raked up in embers of their Folly,
Affords no ampler Subject to my Spirit;
I am so far from malicing their states,
That I begin to pity 'hem: it greeues me
To think they have a being; I could wish
They might turn wise upon it, and be saved now,
So Heaven were pleased: but let them vanish Vapors.
And now with Aspers tongue (though not his shape)
Kind Patrons of our spo^^s (you that can judge,
And with discerning thoughts measure the pace
Of our strange Muse in this her Maze of Humor,
You, whose true Notions do confine the former
And nature of sweet Poesi^) to you
I tender solemn and most duteous thanks,
For your stretched patience and attentive grace.
We know (and we are pleased to know so much)
The Cates that you have tasted were not seasoned
For every vulgar Pallat, but prepared
To banquet pure and apprehensiue ears:
Let then their Voices speak for our desert;
Be their Applause the Trumpet to proclaim
Defiance to rebelling Ignorance,
And the green spirits of some tainted Few,
That (spite of pity) betray themselves
To Scorn and Laughter; and like guilty Children,
Publish their infancy before their time,
By their own fond exception: Such as these
We pawn 'hem to your censure, till Time, Wit,
Or Observation, set some stronger seal
Of judgment on their indgements; and entreat
The happier spirits in this faire-fild Globe,
(So many as have sweet minds in their breasts,
And are too wife to think themselves are taxt
In any general Figure, or too virtuous
To need that wisdoms imputation:)
That with their bounteous Hands they would confirm
This, as their pleasures Pattent: which so signed,
Our lean and spent Endeavors shall renew
Their Beauties with the Spring to sinile on you.
IT had another Catastrophe or Conclusion, at the first Playing: which ((...))
many seemed not to relish it; and therefore 'twas since altered: yet that a
right-^i'd and solid Reader may perceiu^ it was not so great a part of the
Heaven awry, as they would make it; we request him but to look down upon
these following Reasons

1 There has been President of the like Presentation in diverse Plays: and is
yearly in our City Pageants or shows of Triumph

2 It is to be conceived, that Macilente being so strongly possessed with Envy,
(as the Poet here makes him) it must be no slight or common Object, that
should effect so sudden and strange a cure upon him, as the putting him
clean Out of his Humor

3 If his Imagination had discours't the whole world over for an Object, it
could not have met with a more Proper, Emiment, or worthy Figure, than that of
her Majesty's: which his Election (though boldly, yet respectively) used to a
Moral and Mysterious end

4 His greediness to catch at any Occasion, that might express his affection
to his Sovereign, may worthily plead for him

5 There was nothing (in his examined Opinion) that could more near or truly
exemplify the power and strength of her Inualuable Virtues, than the working
of so perfect a Miracle on so opposed a Spirit, who not only persisted in his
Humor, but was now come to the Court with a purposed resolution (his Soul as
it were new dressed in Envy) to malign at any thing that should front him; when
suddenly (against expectation, and all steel of his Malice) the very wonder
of her Presence strikes him to the earth dumb, and astonished. From whence
rising and recovering heart, his Passion thus ^vtters it self

Blessed, Divine, Unblemished, Sacred, Pure,
Glorious, Immortal, and indeed Immense;
O that I had a world of Attributes,
To lend or add to this high Majesty:
Never till now did Object greet mine eyes
With any light Content: but in her Graces
All my malicious Powers have lost their stings:
Envy is fled my Soul at sight of her,
And she has chased all black thoughts from my bosom,
Like as the Sun does darkness from the world.
My stream of Humor is run out of me:
And as our Cities Torrent (bent t'infect
The hallowed bowels of the silver Thames)
Is checked by strength and clearenesse of the River,
Till it has spent it self e'ene at the shore;
So in the ample and vnmeasur'd Flood
Of her Perfections, are my Passions drowned:
And I have now a Spirit as sweet and clear,
As the most rarefi'd and subtle Air;
With which, and with a heart as pure as Fire,
(Yet humble as the Earth) do I implore,
O Heaven: that She (whose Figure has effected
This change in me) may never suffer Change
In her Admired and happy Government:
May still this Island be called Fortunate,
And Rugged Treason tremble at the sound
When Fame shall speak it with an Emphasis.
Let foreign Policy be dull as Lead,
And pale Invasion come with half a heart
When he but looks upon her blessed Soil:
The Throat of War be stopped within her Land,
And Turtle-footed Peace dance fairie Rings
About her Court; where never may there come
Suspect or Danger, but all Trust and Safety:
Let Flattery be dumb, and Envy blind
In her dread Presence: Death himself admire her:
And may her Virtues make him to forget
The use of his inevitable hand.
Fly from her Age; Sleep Time before her Throne,
Our strongest wall falls down when she is gone.

How now Sirs? how like you it? has't not bentedious?


Nay, we have done censuring, now.


Yes faith.


How so?


Mary because we will imitate your Actors, and be out of our Humors. Besides,
here are those (round about you) of more ability in Censure than we, whose
Judgments can give it a more satisfying Allowance: we will refer you to them


I? is it even so? Well, Gentlemen, I should have gone in, and returned to you
as I was Asper at the first: but (by reason the Shift would have been somewhat
long, and we are loath to draw your Patience any farther) we will entreat you to
imagine it. And now (that you may see I will be out of Humor for company) I
stand wholly to your kind Approbation, and (indeed) am nothing so peremptory
as I was in the beginning: Mary I will not do as Plautus in his Amphitryo for
all this ( Summi Iouis causa, Plaudite:) beg a Plaudite for Gods sake; but if
you (out of the Bounty of your good liking) will bestow it; why, you may (in
time) make lean Macilente as fat as Sir John Fallstaffe



