THe Invention was, to have a Satyr lodged in a little Spinet, by which her
Majesty, and the Prince were to come, who (at the report of certain Cornets
that were divided in several places of the Park, to signify her approach)
advanced his head above the top of the wood, wondering, and (with his Pipe in
his hand) began as follows

HEre? there? and every where?
Some solemnities are near,
That these changes strike mine ear.
My Pipe and I a part shall bear.
And after a short strain with his Pipe; again.

Look, see; (beshrew this Tree,)
What may all this wonder be?
Pipe it, who that list for me:
I Will fly out abroad, and see.
There he leaped down, and gazing the Queen and Prince in the face, went
forward

That is Cyparissus face!
And the Dame has Syrinx grace!
O that Pan were now in Place,
Sure they are of heavenly race.
Here he ran into the wood again, and hid himself whilst to the sound of
excellent soft Music that was there conceald in the thicket; there came
tripping up the lawne, a Beuy of Faeries attending on Mab their Queen, who
falling into an artificial ring, that was there cut in the pathe, began to
dance a round, whilst their Mistress spoke as follows


Hail, and welcome worthiest Queen,
Joy had never perfect been,
To the Nymphs that haunt this Green,
Had they not this evening seen.
Now they Print it on the Ground
With their feet in figures round,
Marks that will be ever found,
To remember this glad stound.

The Satyr peeping out of the bush, said.

Trust her not you bonny-bell,
She will forty leasinges tell,
I do know her pranks right well,
Satyr, we must have a spell,
For your tongue, it runs to fleet.

Not so nimbly as your feet,
When about the creame-boules sweet.
You, and all your Elues do meet.

Here he came hopping forth, and mixing himself with the Faeries skipped in,
out, and about their Circle, while the Elues made many offers to catch at him

This is Mab the mistresse-Faerie,
That does nightly rob the Dairie,
And can hurt, or help the cherning,
(As she please) without discerning.
Pug, you will anon take warning?
She, that pinches country wenches,
If they rub not clean their benches,
And with sharper Nails remembers,
When they rake not up their Embers:
But if so they chance to feast her
In a shoe she drops a tester.

Shall we strip the skipping Iester?
This is she, that empties Cradles,
Takes out Children, puts in Ladles:
Trains forth Midwiues in their slumber,
With a sieve the holes to number.
And then leads them, from her Borroughs
Home through Ponds, and water furrows.

Shall not all this mocking stir us?
She can start our Franklins daughters,
In their sleep, with shrikes, and laughters,
And on sweet Saint Anne's Night,
Feed them with a promisd sight,
Some of husbands, some of Lovers,
Which an empty dream discouers.

Satyr, vengeance near you houers,
And in hope that you would come here
Yester-eue the Lady Summer,
She invited to a Banpuet:
But (in sooth) I con you thank yet,
That you could so well deceive her
Of the pride which began vp-heaue her:
And (by this) would so have blown her,
As no wood-god should have known her.
Here he skipped into the Wood.


Mistres, this is only spite:
For you would not yester-night
Kiss him in the Cock-shoutlight:
And came again,


By Pan, and thou have hit it right.
There they laid hold on him, and nipt him,


Fai^ies, pinch him black and blew,
Now you have him (...) him rue:

O, hold, Mab: I sue.

Nay, the Devil shall have his due.

There he ran quite away and left them in a confusion while the Faery began
again

Pardon Lady this wild strain,
Common with the Syluan train.
That do skip about this plain:
Elues, apply your Gyre again.
And whilst some do hop the ring,
Some shall play, and some shall sing,
We Will express in every thing,
Oranas well-comming.

THis is she,
This is she,
In whose world of Grace
Every Season, Person, Place,
That receive her, happy be,
For with no less,
Then
Does she private Lares bless,
And ours above the rest:
By how much we deserve it least.
Long line (...)
To exceed (whom she succeeds) our late Diana.
Madame, now an end to make,
Deigne a simple gift to take:
Only for the Faeries sake,
Who about you still shall wake.
It Is done only to supply,
His suspected courtesy,
Who (since Thamyra did dye)
Has not brookt a Ladies eye,
Nor allowed about his place,
Any of the female race.
Only we are free to trace
All his grounds, as he to chase.
For which Bounty to us lent,
Of him vnknowledgde, or unsent,
We prepared this Complement,
And as far from cheap intent,
In particular to feed,
Any hope that should succeed.
Or our glory by the deed,
As your self are from the need.
Utter not; we you implore,
Who did give it, nor wherefore,
And when ever you restore
Your self to us, you shall have more.
Highest, happiest Queen farewell,
But beware you do not tell.
Here the Faeries hopt away in a fantastique dance, when on a sudden the
Satyr discovered himself again and came ^oorth


Not tell? Ha, ha, I could smile,
At this old, and toothlesse wile.
^^dy, I have been no sleeper,
She belies the noble Keeper.
Say, that here he like the Groves:
And pursue no ^^^raine Loves,
Is he therefore to be deemed,
Rude, or sau^dge? or esteemed,
But a sorry Entertainer,
Cause he is no common strainer:
After painted Nymphs for sauors,
Or that in his Garb he sauors
Little of the nice^y,
In the sprucer Courtiery;
As the Ros^^y of kisses,
With the oath that never misses,
This, Believe me on the breast,
And then telling some man's jest,
Thinking to prefer his wit,
Equal with his suite by it,
I mean his Clothes: No, no, no,
Here does no such humor flow.
He can neither bribe a grace,
Nor encounter my Lords face
With a pliant smile, and flatter,
Though this lately were some matter
To the making of a Courtier.
Now he hopes he shall resort there,
Safer, and with more allowance*
Since a hand has governance,
That has given those Customs chase,
And has brought his own in place.
O that now a wish could bring,
The God-like person of a King,
Then should even Enuiefinde,
Cause of wonder at the mind
Of our Wood-man: But lo where
His Kingly Image does appear,
And is all this while neglected:
Pardon (Lord) you are respected
Deep as is the Keepers heart,
And as dear in every part.
See,
His Son, his Heir; who humbly bends
Low, as is his Fathers earth,
To the womb that gave you birth:
So he was directed first.
Next to you, of whom the thirst
Of seeing takes away the use
Of that part, should plead excuse
For his boldness, which is less
By his comlie shamfastnesse.
Rise up Sir, I will betray,
All I think you have to say;
That your Father gives you here,
(Freely as to him you were)
To the service of this Prince:
And with you these Instruments
Of his wild and Sy^^an trade,
Better not (...) had.
The Bow was Ph^ebas, and the horn,
By Orion often worn:
The Dog of Sparta breed, and good,
As can ring within a Wood:
Thence his name is: you shall try
How he hunteth instantly.
But perhaps the Queen your mother,
Rather does affect some other
Sport, as coursing: we will prove
Which her Highness most does love.
Satyrs let the Woods refound,
They shall have their welcome crowned,
With abrace of (...) to ground.
At that, the whole Wood and place re^ounded with the noise of Cornets, Horns,
and other Hunting Music, and a brace of (...) p^t out; and as fortunately
killd, as they were meant to be; even in the sight of her Maiesti^

This was the first Nights show. Where the next day being Sunday, she rested,
and on Monday, till after dinuer; where there was a speech suddenly thought on,
to induce a Morrise of the Clownes there about, who most officiouslie presented
themselves, but by reason of the throng of the Country that came in, their
Speaker could not be hard, who was in the person of Nobody, to deliver this
following speech and attired in a pair of Breeches which were made to come up
to his neck, with his arms out at his pockets, and a Cap drowning his face

If my outside move your Laughter,
Pray Jove, my inside be thereafter.
Queen, Prince, Duke, Earls,
Countesses; you courtly Pearls:
(And, I hope no mortal sin,
If I put less Ladies in)
Fair saluted be you all.
At this time it does befall,
We are the Huisher to a Morrise,
(A kind of Masque) whereof good store is
In the Country here about,
But this, the choice of all the rout.
Who because that no man sent them,
Have got Nobody to present them.
These are Things have no suspicion
Of their ill doing: nor Ambition,
Of their well: but as the Pipe
Shall inspire them, mean to skip.
They come to see, and to be seen,
And though they dance before the Queen,
There Is none of these does hope to come by
Wealth, to build another Holmby:
All those dancing days are done,
Men must now have more then one
Grace, to build their fortunes on,
Else our souls would sure have gone,
All by this time to our feet.
I not deny where Graces meet
In a man, that quality
Is a graceful Property?
But when dancing is his best,
(Beshrew me) I suspect the rest.
But I am Nobody, and my Breath
(Soon as it is borne) has death.
Come on Clownes forsake your dumps,
And bestir your Ho^naild stumps,
Do your worst, I Will undertake,
Not a Ierke you have shall make
Any Lady here in Love.
Perhaps your Fool, or so, may move
Some Ladies woman with a Trick,
And upon it she may pick
A pair of reuelling legs or two,
Out of you with much a do.
But see the Hobbyhorse is forgot.
Fool it must be your lot,
To supply his want with faces
And some other Busson graces
You know how; Piper play,
And let no body hence away.
There was also another parting speech, which was to have been presented in the
person of a youth, and accompained with diverse Gentlemen's younger sons of the
Country, but by reason of the Multitudinous press, was also hindered. And
which we have here adjoined

ANd will you then Mirror of Queens depart?
Shall nothing stay you? not my Masters heart
That pants to leese the comfort of your light,
And see his Day e^e it be old grow Night?
You are a Goddess, and your will be done;
Yet this our last hope is, that as the Sun
Cheares objects far removed, as well as near,
So where soever you shine, you will sparkle here.
And you dear Lord, on whom my covetous eye
Does feed it self but cannot satisfy,
O shoot up fast in spirit, as in years;
That when upon her head proud Europe wears
Her stateliest tire, you may appear thereon
The richest Gem without a paragon.
Shine bright and fixed as the Artic^^ star:
And when flow Time has made you fit for war,
Look over the strict Ocean, and think where
You may but lead us forth, that grow up here
Against a day, when our officious swords
Shall speak our action better then our words.
Till then, all good event conspire to crown
Your Parents hopes, our zeal, and your renown.
Peace, usher now your steps, and where you come,
Be Envy still stroke blind, and Flattery dumb.
Thus much (which was the least of the Entert^i^ement in respect of the
reality, abondance, delicacie, and order of all things else) to do that
serviceable right, to his noble Friend, which his affection owes, and his
Lordships merit may challenge, the Author has sufferd to come out, and
encounter Censure: and not here unnecessarily adjoined, being performed to the
same Queen and Prince; who were no little part of these more labord and
^riumphall shows. And to whose greatest part, he knows the Ho. L. (had he
been so blessed as to have seen him at his Lodge) would have stretched in
observance, though he could not in Love or zeal



