THE ALCHEMIST. A Comoedie. Acted in the year 1610. By the Kings MAJESTY'S
Servants

The Author B. I.

-- petere inde coronam,
Vnde prius nulli velarint tempora Musae.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY

M. D C. XVI.

MADAME, IN the age of sacrifices, the truth of religion was not in the
greatness, and fat of the offerings, but in the devotion, and zeal of the
sacrificers: Else, what could a handful of gummes have done in the sight of a
hecatombe? or, how might I appear at this altar, except with those affections,
that no less love the light and witness, then they have the conscience of
your virtue? If what I offer bear an acceptable odor, and hold the first
strength, it is your value of it, which remembers, where, when, and to whom it
was kindled. Otherwise, as the times are, there comes rarely forth that thing,
so full of authority, or example, but by assiduitie and custom, grows less,
and looses. This, yet, safe in your judgment (which is a SIDNEYS) is forbidden
to speak more; lest it talk, or look like one of the ambitious Faces of the
time: who, the more they paint, are the less themselves

Your La: true honorer, BEN. IONSON.
THE SCENE LONDON.

The sickness hot, a master quit, for fear,
His house in town: and left one servant there.
Ease him corrupted, and gave means to know
A cheater, and his punque; who, now brought low,
Leaving their narrow practice, were become
Cos'ners at large: and, only wanting some
House to set up, with him they here contract,
Each for a share, and all begin to act.
Much company they draw, and much abuse,
In casting figures, telling fortunes, news,
Selling of flies, flat bawdry, with the stone:
Till it, and they, and all in fume are gone.
FORTUNE, that favors fools, these two short hours
We wish away; both for your sakes, and ours,
Judging Spectators: and desire in place,
To The Author justice, to our selves but grace.
Our Scene is London, 'cause we would make known,
No countries mirth is better then our own.
No clime breeds better matter, for your whore,
Bawd, squire, impostor, many persons more,
Whose manners, now called humors, feed the stage:
And which have still been subject, for the rage
Or spleen of comick-writers. Though this pen
Did never aim to grieve, but better men;
How ever the age, he lives in, does endure
The vices that she breeds, above their cure.
But, when the wholesome remedies are sweet,
And, in their working, gain, and profit meet,
He hopes to find no spirit so much diseased,
But will, with such fair correctiues be pleased.
For here, he does not fear, who can apply.
If there be any, that will sit so nigh
Unto the stream, to look what it does run,
They shall find things, they'ld think, or wish, were done;
They are so natural follies, but so shown,
As even the doers may see, and yet not own.
BEleeu't, I will.

Thy worst. I fart at thee.

Have you your wits? Why gentlemen! for love --

Sirrah, I Will strip you --

What to do? lick sigs
Out at my --

Rogue, rogue, out of all your sleights.

Nay, look ye! Sovereign, General, are you madmen?

O, let the wild sheep loose. I Will gum your silks
With good strong water, an'you come.

Will you have
The neighbors hear you? Will you betray all?
Hark, I hear some body.

Sirrah --

I shall mar
All that the tailor has made, if you approach.

You most notorious whelpe, you insolent slave.
Dare you do this?

Yes faith, yes faith.

Why! who
Am I, my mungrill? Who am I?

I Will tell you,
Since you know not your self --

Speak lower, rogue.

Yes. You were once (time's not long past) the good,
Honest, plain, liuery-three-pound-thrum; that kept
Your masters worships house, here, in the friars,
For the vacations --

Will you be so loud?

Since, by my means, translated suburb-Captayne.

By your means, Doctor dog?

Within man's memory,
All this, I speak of.

Why, I pray you, have I
Been countenanced by you? or you, by me?
Do but collect, sir, where I met you first.

I do not hear well.

Not of this, I think it.
But I shall put you in mind, sir, at pie-corner.
Taking your meal of steeme in, from cooks stalls,
Where, like the father of hunger, you did walk
Piteously costiue, with your pinch'd-horne-nose,
And your complexion, of the roman wash,
Stuck full of black, and melancholique worms,
Like poulder-cornes, shot, at the artillerie-yard.

I wish, you could advance your voice, a little.

When you went pinned up, in the several rags,
Yo'had raked, and picked from dung-hills, before day,
Your feet in mouldie slippers, for your kibes,
A felt of rugg, and a thin thredden cloak,
That scarce would cover your no-buttocks --

So, sir!

When all your alchemy, and your algebra,
Your mineralls, vegetalls, and animalls,
Your coniuring, cosning, and your dosen of trades,
Could not relieve your corpse, with so much linen
Would make you tinder, but to see a fire;
I ga'you countenance, credit for your coals,
Your stills, your glasses, your materials,
Built you a furnace, drew you customers,
Advanced all your black arts; lent you, beside,
A house to practice in --

Your masters house?

Where you have studied the more thriuing skill
Of bawdrie, since.

Yes, in your masters house.
You, and the rats, here, kept possession.
Make it not strange. I know, yo' were one, could keep
The buttry-hatch still locked, and save the chippings,
Sell the dole-beere to aqua-vitae-men,
The which, together with your christ-masse vailes,
At post and pair, your letting out of counters,
Made you a pretty stock, some twenty marks,
And gave you credit, to converse with cob-webs,
Here, since your mistress death has broke up house.

You might talk softlier, rascal.

No, you scarabe,
I Will thunder you, in pieces. I will teach you
How to beware, to tempt a fury again
That carries tempest in his hand, and voice.

The place has made you valiant.

No, your clothes.
Thou vermin, have I taken thee, out of dung,
So poor, so wretched, when no living thing
Would keep thee company, but a spider, or worse?
Raised thee from broomes, and dust, and watring pots?
Sublimed thee, and exalted thee, and fixed thee
IN the third region, called our state of grace?
Wrought thee to spirit, to quintessence, with pains
Would twice have won me the philosophers work?
Put thee in words, and fashion? made thee fit
For more then ordinary fellowships?
Given thee thy oaths, thy quarrelling dimensions?
Thy rules, to cheat at horse-race, cockpit, cards,
Dice, or what ever gallant tincture, else?
Made thee a second, in mine own great art?
And have I this for thank? Do you rebel?
Do you fly out, in the proiection?
Would you be gone, now?

Gentlemen, what mean you?
Will you mar all?

Slave, thou had had no name --

Will you vn-doe your selves, with civil war?

Never been known, past equi clibanum,
The heat of horse-dung, under ground, in cellars,
Or an alehouse, darker then deaf John's: been lost
To all mankind, but laundresses, and tapsters,
Had not I been.

Do'you know who hears you, Sovereign?

Sirrah --

Nay, General, I thought you were civil --

I shall turn desperate, if you grow thus loud.

And hang thy self, I care not.

Hang thee, colliar,
And all thy pots, and pans, in picture I will,
Since thou have moved me. --

(O, this'll ore-throw all.)

Write thee up bawd, in Paul's; have all thy tricks
Of cosning with a hollow cole, dust, scrapings,
Searching for things lost, with a sieve, and sheeres,
Erecting figures, in your rows of houses,
And taking in of shadows, with a glass,
Told in red letters: And a face, cut for thee,
Worse then GAMALIEL RATSEY'S.

Are you sound?
Have you your senses, masters?

I will have
A book, but barely reckoning thy impostures,
Shall prove a true philosophers stone, to printers.

Away, you trencher-raskall.

Out you dog-leach,
The vomit of all prisons --

Will you be
Your own destructions, gentlemen?

Still spewed out
For lying too heavy of the basket.

Cheater.

Bawd.

Cow-herd.

Coniurer.

Cutpurse.

Witch.

O me!
We are ruined! lost! Ha'you no more regard
To your reputations? Where Is your judgment? S'light,
Have yet, some care of me, o'your republique --

Away this brach. I Will bring thee, rogue, within
The statute of sorcerie, tricesimo tertio.
Or HARRY the eight: I, and (perhaps) thy neck
Within a nooze, for laundring gold, and barbing it.

You Will bring your head within a cocks-combe, will you?
And you, sir, with your menstrue, gather it up.
God's Death, you abominable pair of stinkards,
Leave off your barking, and grow one again,
Or, by the light that shines, I Will cut your throats.
I Will not be made a prey unto the marshall,
For never a snarling dog-bolt o'you both.
Have you together cossen'd all this while,
And all the world, and shall it now be said
Yo' have made most courteous shift, to cosen your selves?
You will accuse him? You will bring him in
Within the statute? Who shall take your word?
A whore-sonne, vpstart, apocryphal captain,
Whom not a puritan, in black- friars, will trust
So much, as for a feather! And you too,
Will give the cause, forsooth? You will insult,
And claim a primacie, in the divisions?
You must be chief? as if you, only, had
The poulder to project with? and the work
Were not begun out of equality?
The venture tripartite? All things in common?
Without prioritie? God's Death, you perpetual curres,
Fall to your couples again, and cossen kindly,
And heartily, and lovingly, as you should,
And loose not the beginning of a term,
Or, by this hand, I shall grow factious too,
And, take my part, and quit you.

'T is his fault,
He ever murmures, and objects his pains,
And says, the weight of all lies upon him.

Yes, but they are not equal.

Why, if your part exceed to day, I hope
Ours may, to morrow, match it.

I, they may.

May, murmuring mastiffe? I, and do. Death on me!
Help me to thrattell him.

DOROTHEE, mistress DOROTHEE,
O'ds preciuos, I Will do anything. What do you mean?

Because o'your fermentation, and cibation?

Not I, by heaven --

Your Sol, and Luna -- help me.

Would I were hanged then. I Will conform my self.

Will you, sir, do so then, and quickly: swear.

What should I swear?

To leave your faction, sir.
And labor, kindly, in the commune work.

Let me not breath, if I meant ought, beside.
I only used those speeches, as a spur
To him.

I hope we need no spurs, sir. Do we?

'Slid, prove to day, who shall sharke best.

Agreed.

Yes, and work close, and friendly.

'Slight, the knot
Shall grow the stronger, for this breach, with me.

Why so, my good babounes! Shall we go make
A sort of sober, sciruy, precise neighbors,
(That scarce have smiled twice, sin' the king came in)
A feast of laughter, at our follies? raskalls,
Would run themselves from breath, to see me ride,
Or you to have but a hole, to thrust your heads in,
For which you should pay eare-rent? No, agree.
And may Don Provost ride a feasting, long,
In his old velvet ierken, and stayn'd scarfes,
(My noble Sovereign, and worthy General)
Ere we contribute a new crewell garter
To his most worsted worship.

Royal DOL!
Spoken like CLARIDIANA, and thy self!

For which, at supper, thou shall sit in triumph,
And not be styled DOL Common, but DOL Proper,
DOL Singular: the longest cut, at night,
Shall draw thee for his DOL Particular.

Who Is that? one rings. To the windo',

Pray heaven,
The master do not trouble us, this quarter.

O, fear not him. While there dies one, a week,
Of The plague, he is safe, from thinking toward London.
Beside, he is busy at his hop-yards, now:
I had a letter from him. If he do,
He Will send such word, for ayring of the house
As you shall have sufficient time, to quit it:
Though we break up a fortnight, it is no matter.

Who is it, DOL?

A fine young quodling.

O,
My Lawyers clarke, I lighted on, last night,
In Hol'bourne, at the dagger. He would have
(I told you of him) a familiar,
To rifle with, at horses, and win cups.

O, let him in.

Stay. Who shall do it?

Get you
Your robes on. I will meet him, as going out.

And what shall I do?

Not be seen, away.
Seem you very reserved.

Enough.

God b'w'you, sir.
I pray you, let him know that I was here.
His name is DAPPER. I would gladly have staid, but --

Captain, I am here.

Who Is that? He Is come, I think, Doctor.
Good faith, sir, I was going away.

In truth,
I Am very sorry, Captain.

But I thought
Sure, I should meet you.

I, I Am very glad.
I'had a sciruy writ, or two, to make,
And I had lent my watch last night, to one
That dines, to day, at the shrieffs: and so was robbed
Of my passe-time. Is this the cunning-man?

This is his worship.

Is he a Doctor?

Yes.

And ha'you broke with him, Captain?

I.

And how?

Faith, he does make the matter, sir, so dainty,
I know not what to say --

Not so, good Captain.

Would I were fairly rid on it, believe me.

Nay, now you grieve me, sir. Why should you wish so?
I dare assure you. I Will not be ungrateful.

I cannot think you will, sir. But the law
Is such a thing -- And then, he says, Reade's matter
Falling so lately --

Read? He was an ass,
And dealt, sir, with a fool.

It was a clarke, sir.

A clarke?

Nay, hear me, sir, you know the law
Better, I think --

I should, sir, and the danger.
You know I showed the statute to you?

You did so.

And will I tell, then? By this hand, of flesh,
Would it might never wright good court-hand, more,
If I discover. What do you think of me,
That I am a Chiause?

What Is that?

The Turk was, here --
As one would say, do you think I am a Turk?

I Will tell the Doctor so.

Do, good sweet Captain.

Come, noble Doctor, 'pray thee, let us prevail,
This is the gentleman, and he is no Chiause.

Captain, I have returned you all my answer.
I would do much, sir, for your love -- But this
I neither may, nor can.

Tut, do not say so.
You deal, now, with a noble fellow, Doctor,
One that will thank you, richly, and h'is no Chiause:
Let that, sir, move you.

Pray you, forbear --

He has
Four angels, here --

You do me wrong, good sir.

Doctor, wherein? To tempt you, with these spirits?

To tempt my art, and love, sir, to my peril.
Before heaven, I scarce can think you are my friend,
That so would draw me to apparent danger.

I draw you? A horse draw you, and a halter,
You, and your flies together --

Nay, good Captain.

That know no difference of men.

Good words, sir.

Good deeds, sir, Doctor dogs-meate. 'Slight I bring you
No cheating CLIM- of the-CLOVGHS, or CLARIBELS,
That look as big as fiue-and- fifty, and flush,
And spit out secrets, like hot custard --

Captain.

Nor any melancholic vnder-scribe,
Shall tell the Vicar: but, a special gentle,
That is the heir to forty marks, a year,
Consorts with the small poets of the time,
Is the sole hope of his old grandmother,
That knows the law, and writes you six fair hands,
Is a fine clarke, and has his cyphring perfect,
Will take his oath, of the greek XENOPHON,
If need be, in his pocket: and can court
His mistress, out of OVID.

Nay, dear Captain.

Did you not tell me, so?

Yes, but I Would have you
Use master Doctor, with some more respect.

Hang him proud stagge, with his broad velvet head.
But, for your sake, I Would choke, ere I would change
An article of breath, with such a puck-fist --
Come let us begone.

Pray you, le'me speak with you.

His worship calls you, Captain.

I am sorry,
I e're imbarqu'd my self, in such a business.

Nay, good sir. He did call you.

Will he take, then?

First, hear me --

Not a syllable, 'lesse you take.

Pray ye', sir --

Upon no terms, but an assumpsit.

Your humor must be law.

Why now, sir, talk.
Now, I dare hear you with mine honor. Speak.
So may this gentleman too.

Why, sir --

No whispring.

Before heaven, you do not apprehend the loss
You do you self, in this.

Wherein? For what?

Mary, to be so'importunate for one,
That, when he has it, will vn-doe you all:
He Will win up all the money in the town.

How!

Yes. And blow up gamster, after gamster,
As they do crackers, in a puppit-play.
If I do give him a familiar,
Give you him all you play for; never set him:
For he will have it.

You Are mistaken, Doctor.
Why, he does ask one but for cups, and horses,
A rifling fly: none o'your great familiars.

Yes, Captain, I would have it, for all games.

I told you so.

'Slight, that is a new business!
I understood you, a tame bird, to fly
Twice in a term, or so; on friday-nights,
When you had left the office: for a nagge,
Of forty, or fifty shillings.

I, it is true, sir,
But I do think, now, I shall leave the law,
And therefore --

Why, this changes quite the case!
Do'you think, that I dare move him?

If you please, sir,
All Is one to him, I see.

What! for that money?
I cannot with my conscience. Nor should you
Make the request, me thinks.

No, sir, I mean
To add consideration.

Why, then, sir,
I Will try. Say, that it were for all games, Doctor?

I say, then, not a mouth shall eat for him
At any ordinary, but of the score,
That is a gaming mouth, conceive me.

Indeed!

He Will draw you all the treasure of the realm,
If it be set him.

Speak you this from art?

I, sir, and reason too: the ground of art.
H'is of the only best complexion,
The queen of Fairy loves.

What! is he!

Peace.
He Will ouer-heare you. Sir, should she but see him --

What?

Do not you tell him.

Will he win at cards too?

The spirits of dead HOLLAND, living ISAAC,
You Would swear, were in him: such a vigorous luck
As cannot be resisted. 'Slight he will put
Six o'your gallants, to a cloak, indeed.

A strange success, that some man shall be borne too!

He hears you, man --

Sir, I Will not be ungrateful.

Faith, I have a confidence in his good nature:
You hear, he says, he will not be ungrateful.

Why, as you please, my venture follows yours.

Troth, do it, Doctor. Think him trusty, and make him.
He may make us both happy in an hour:
Win some five thousand pound, and send us two on it.

Believe it, and I will, sir.

And you shall, sir.
You have heard all?

No, what was it? nothing, I sir.

Nothing?

A little, sir.

Well, a rare star
Reigned, at your birth.

At mine, sir? no.

The Doctor
Swears that you are --

Nay, Captain, yo'll tell all, now.

Allied to the queen of Faerie.

Who? that I am?
Believe it, no such matter --

Yes, and that
Yo'were borne with a caul o'your head.

Who says so?

Come.
You know it well enough, though you dissemble it.

I-fac, I do not. You are mistaken.

How!
Swear by your fac? and in a thing so known
Unto the Doctor? How shall we, sir, trust you
In The other matter? Can we ever think,
When you have won five, or six thousand pound,
You Will send us shares in it, by this rate?

By JOVE, sir,
I Will win ten thousand pound, and send you half.
I-fac's no oath.

No, no, he did but jest.

Go too. Go, thank the Doctor. He Is your friend
To take it so.

I thank his worship.

So?
Another angel.

Must I?

Must you? Slight,
What else is thanks? will you be triuiall? Doctor,
When must he come, for his familiar?

Shall I not ha'it with me?

O, good sir!
There must a world of ceremonies pass,
You must be bathed, and fumigated, first;
Besides, the Queen of Faerie does not rise,
Till it be noone.

Not, if she daunc'd, to night.

And she must bless it.

Did you never see
Her royal Grace, yet?

Whom?

Your aunt of Faerie?

Not, since she kissed him, in the cradle, Captain,
I can resolve you that.

Well, see her Grace,
What ere it cost you, for a thing that I know!
It will be somewhat hard to compass: but,
How ever, see her. You are made, believe it,
If you can see her. Her Grace is a lone woman,
And very rich, and if she take a phant'sye,
She will do strange things. See her, at any hand.
'Slid, she may hap to leave you all she has!
It is the Doctors fear.

How will it be done, then?

Let me alone, take you no thought. Do you
But say to me, Captain, I Will see her Grace.

Captain, I Will see her Grace.

Enough.

Who Is there?
Anon. (Conduct him forth, by the back way)
Sir, against one a clock, prepare your self.
Till when you must be fasting; only, take
Three drops of vinegar, in, at your nose;
Two at your mouth; and one, at either ear;
Then, bath your fingers ends; and wash your eyes;
To sharpen your five senses; and, cry hum,
Thrice; and then buz, as often; and then, come.

Can you remember this?

I warrant you.

Well, then, away. It Is, but your bestowing
Some twenty nobles, among her Graces servants;
And, put on a clean shirt* You do not know
What grace her Grace may do you in clean linen.

COme in (Good wives, I pray you forbear me, now.
Troth I can do you no good, till afternoon)
What is your name, say you, ABEL DRVGGER?

Yes, sir.

A seller of tobacco?

Yes, sir.

'Vmh.
Free of the Grocers?

I, and't please you.

Well --
Your business, ABEL?

This, and't please your worship,
I Am a young beginner, and am building
Of a new shop, and't like your worship; just,
At corner of a street: (Here Is the plot on it.)
And I would know, by art, sir, of your worship,
Which way I should make my door, by necromancie.
And, where my shelues. And, which should be for boxes.
And, which for pots. I would be glad to thrive, sir.
And, I was wished to your worship, by a gentleman,
One Captain FACE, that says you know men's planets,
And their good angels, and their bad.

I do,
If I do see 'hem --

What! my honest ABEL?
Thou art well met, here!

Troth, sir, I was speaking,
Just, as your worship came here, of your worship.
I pray you, speak for me to master Doctor.

He shall do any thing. Doctor, do you hear?
This is my friend, ABEL, an honest fellow,
He lets me have good tobacco, and he does not
Sophisticate it, with sack-lees, or oil,
Nor washes it in muscadell, and grains,
Nor buries it, in gravel, under ground,
Wrapped up in greasy leather, or pissed clouts:
But keeps it in fine lilly-pots, that opened,
Smell like conserve of roses, or french beans.
He has his maple block, his silver tongs,
Winchester pipes, and fire of juniper.
A neat, spruce-honest-fellow, and no goldsmiths.

H'is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on --

Already, sir, have you found it? Lo'thee ABEL!

And, in right way to'ward riches --

Sir.

This summer,
He will be of the clothing of his company:
And, next spring, called to the scarlet. Spend what he can.

What, and so little beard?

Sir, you must think,
He may have a receipt, to make hair come.
But he will be wise, preserve his youth, and fine for it:
His fortune looks for him, another way.

'Slid, Doctor, how can thou know this so soon?
I Am amused, at that!

By a rule, Captain,
In metaposcopie, which I do work by,
A certain star in the forehead, which you see not.
Your chest-nut, or your oliue-colour'd face
Does never fail: and your long ear does promise.
I knew't, by certain spots too, in his teeth,
And on the nail of his mercurial finger.

Which finger's that?

His little finger. Look.
Yo'were borne upon a wensday?

Yes, indeed, sir.

The thumb, in chiromantie, we give VENUS;
The forefinger to JOVE; the midst, to SATVRNE;
The ring to SOL; the least, to MERCVRIE:
Who was the lord, sir, of his horoscope,
His house of life being Libra, which fore-shew'd,
He should be a merchant, and should trade with balance.

Why, this is strange! Is It not, honest NAB?

There is a ship now, coming from Ormus,
That shall yield him, such a commodity
Of drugs -- This is the west, and this the south?

Yes, sir;

And those are your two sides?

I, sir.

Make me your door, then south; your broad side, west:
And, on the east side of your shop, aloft,
Write Mathlai, Tarmiel, and Baraborat;
Upon the north-part, Rael, Velel, Thiel.
They are the names of those Mercurial spirits,
That do fright flies from boxes.

Yes, sir.

And
Beneath your threshold, bury me a lodestone
To draw in gallants, that wear spurs: The rest,
They Will seem to follow.

That Is a secret NAB!

And, on your stall, a puppet, with a vice,
And a court- fucus, to call city-dames.
You shall deal much, with mineralls.

Sir, I have,
At home, already --

I, I know, you'haue arsnike,
Vitriol, sal-tartre, argaile, alkaly,
Cinoper: I know all. This fellow, Captain,
Will come, in time, to be a great distiller,
And give a say (I will not say directly,
But very fair) at the phiosophers stone.

Why, how now, ABEL! Is this true?

Good Captain,
What must I give?

Nay, I Will not counsel thee.
Thou hearst, what wealth (he says, spend what thou can)
Thou Art like to come too.

I would gi'him a crown.

A crown! 'nd toward such a fortune? Heart,
Thou shall rather gi'him thy shop. No gold about thee?

Yes, I have a portague, I have kept this half year.

Out on thee, NAB, S'light, there was such an offer --
'Shalt keepe't no longer, I Will gi'it him for thee?
Doctor, NAB prays your worship, to drink this: and swears
He will appear more grateful, as your skill
Does raise him in the world.

I would entreat
Another favor of his worship.

What is it, NAB?

But, to look over, sir, my almanac,
And cross out my ill-dayes, that I may neither
Bargain, nor trust upon them.

That he shall, NAB.
Leave it, it shall be done, against afternoon.

And a direction for his shelues.

Now, NAB?
Art thou well pleased, NAB?

Thank, sir, both your worships.

Away.
Why, now, you smoky persecuter of nature!
Now, do you see, that some-thing's to be done,
Beside your beech-coale, and your cor'siue waters,
Your crosse-lets, crucibles, and cucurbites?
You must have stuff, brought home to you, to work on?
And, yet, you think, I am at no expense,
In searching out these veins, then following 'hem,
Then trying 'hem out. Before god, my intelligence
Costs me more money, then my share often comes too,
In these rare works.

You're pleasant, sir. How now?

WHat says, my dainty DOLKIN?

Yonder fish-wife
Will not away. And there is your giantesse,
The bawd of Lambeth.

Heart, I cannot speak with 'hem.

Not, before night, I have told 'hem, in a voice,
Thorough the trunk, like one of your familiars.
But I have spied sir EPICVRE MAMMON-

Where?

Coming along, at far end of the lane,
Slow of his feet, but earnest of his tongue,
To one, that is with him.

FACE, go you, and shift,
DOL, you must presently make ready, too --

Why, what is the matter?

O, I did look for him
With the suns rising: 'Maruaile, he could sleep!
This is the day, I am to perfect for him
The magisterium, our great work, the stone;
And yield it, made, into his hands: of which,
He has, this month, talked, as he were possess;d.
And, now, he is dealing pieces on it, away.
Me thinks, I see him, entering ordinaries,
Dispensing for the pox; and plaguy-houses,
Reaching his dose; walking more-fields for lepers;
And offering citizens-wiues pomander-bracelets,
As his preservative, made of the elixir;
Searching the spittle, to make old bawdes young;
And the highways, for beggars, to make rich:
I see no end of his labors. He will make
Nature ashamed, of her long sleep: when art,
Who Is but a step-dame, shall do more, then she,
In her best love to mankind, ever could.
If his dream last, he will turn the age, to gold.

COme on, sir. Now, you set your foot on shore
In nouo orb; Here Is the rich Peru:
And there within, sir, are the golden mines,
Great SALOMON'S Ophir! He was sailing to it,
Three years, but we have reached it in ten months.
This is the day, wherein, to all my friends,
I will pronounce the happy word, be rich.
This day, you shall be spectatissimi.
You shall no more deal with the hollow die,
Or the frail card. No more be at charge of keeping
The liuery-punke, for the young heir, that must
Seal, at all hours, in his shirt. No more
If he deny, have him beaten to it, as he is
That brings him the commodity. No more
Shall thirst of satin, or the covetous hunger
Of velvet entrails, for a rude-spun cloak,
To be displaid at Madame AVGVSTA'S, make
The sons of sword, and hazard fall before
The golden calfe, and on their knees, whole nights,
Commit idolatry with wine, and trumpets:
Or go a feasting, after drum and ensign.
No more of this. You shall start up young Vice-royes,
And have your punques, and punquettees, my SVRLY.
And unto thee, I speak it first, be rich.
Where is my SVBTLE, there? Within hough?
He Will come to you, by and by.

That Is his fire-drake,
His lungs, his Zephyrus, he that puffes his coals,
Till he firke nature up, in her own center.
You are not faithful, sir. This night, I Will change
All, that is metal, in thy house, to gold.
And, early in the morning, will I send
To all the plumbers, and the pewterers,
And buy their tin, and lead up: and to Lothbury,
For all the copper.

What, and turn that too?

Yes, and I Will purchase Devonshire, and Cornwaile,
And make them perfect Indies! You admire now?

No faith.

But when you see the effects of the great medicine!
Of which one part proiected on a hundred
Of Mercury, or Venus, or the Moon,
Shall turn it, to as many of the Sun;
Nay, to a thousand, so ad infinitum:
You will believe me.

Yes, when I see it, I will.
But, if my eyes do cossen me so (and I
Giving 'hem no occasion) sure, I Will have
A whore, shall piss 'hem out, next day.

Ha! Why?
Do you think, I fable with you? I assure you,
He that has once the flower of the sun,
The perfect ruby, which we call elixir,
Not only can do that; but by it is virtue,
Can confer honor, love, respect, long life,
Give safety, valor: yea, and victory,
To whom he will. In eight, and twenty days,
I Will make an old man, of fourscore, a child.

No doubt, he is that already.

Nay, I mean,
Restore his years, renew him, like an eagle,
To the fifth age; make him get sons, and daughters,
Young giants; as our Philosophers have done
(The ancient Patriarchs before the flood)
But taking, once a week, on a knives point,
The quantity of a grain of mustard, of it:
Become stout MARSES, and beget young CVPIDS.

The decayed Vestall's of Pickt-hatch would thank you,
That keep the fire a-liue, there.

It Is the secret
Of nature, naturiz'd against all infections,
Cures all diseases, coming of all causes,
A month's grief, in a day; a years, in twelve:
And, of what age soever, in a month.
Past all the doses, of your drugging Doctors.
I Will undertake, withal, to fright the plague
Out of the kingdom, in three months.

And I Will
Be bound, the players shall sing your praises, then,
Without their poets.

Sir, I Will do it. Mean time,
I Will give away so much, unto my man,
Shall serve the whole city, with preservative,
Weekly, each house his dose, and at the rate --

As he that built the water-worke, does with water?

You are incredulous.

Faith, I have a humor,
I would not willingly be gulled. Your stone
Cannot transmute me.

PERTINAX, SVRLY,
Will you believe antiquity? records?
I Will show you a book, where MOSES, and his sister,
And SALAMON have written, of the art;
I, and a treatise penned by ADAM.

How!

Of The Philosophers stone, and in high- Dutch.

Did ADAM write, sir, in high- Dutch?

He did:
Which proves it was the primitive tongue.

What paper?

On cedar board.

O that, indeed (they say)
Will last against worms.

It Is like your Irishwood,
Against cob-webs. I have a piece of IASONS fleece, too,
Which was no other, then a book of alchemie,
Writ in large sheepe-skin, a good fat ram-vellam.
Such was PYTHAGORA'S thigh, PANDORA's tub;
And, all that fable of MEDEAS charms,
The manner of our work: The Bulls, our furnace,
Still breathing fire; our argent-viue, the Dragon:
The Dragons teeth, mercury sublimate,
That keeps the whiteness, hardness, and the biting;
And they are gathered, into IASON's helm,
(The alembeke) and then sowed in MARS his field,
And, thence, sublimed so often, till they are fixed.
Both this, the Hesperian garden, CADMVS story,
Jove's shower, the boon of MIDAS, ARGVS eyes,
BOCCACE his Demogorgon, thousands more,
All abstract riddles of our stone. How now?

Do we succeed? Is our day come? and hold's it?

The evening will set red, upon you, sir;
You have color for it, crimson: the red ferment
Has done his office. Three hours hence, prepare you
To see proiection.

PERTINAX, my SVRLY,
Again, I say to thee, aloud, be rich.
This day, thou shall have ingots: and to morrow,
Give lords th'affront. Is it, my ZEPHYRVS, right?
Blushes the bolts-head?

Like a wench with child, sir,
That were, but now, discovered to her master.

Excellent witty Lungs! My only care is,
Where to get stuff, enough now, to project on,
This town will not half serve me.

No, sir? Buy
The covering of of churches.

That Is true.

Yes.
Let 'hem stand bare, as do their auditorie.
Or cap 'hem, new, with shingles.

No, good thatch:
Thatch will lie light vpo' the rafters, Lungs.
Lungs, I will manumit thee, from the furnace;
I will restore thee thy complexion, Puff,
Lost in the embers; and repair this brain,
Hurt wi' the fume of the mettalls.

I have blown, sir,
Hard, for your woship; thrown by many a coal,
When 'twas not beech; weighed those I put in, just,
To keep your heat, still even; These bleard-eyes
Have waked, to read y our several colors, sir,
Of the pale citron, the green lion, the crow,
The peacocks tail, the plumed swan.

And, lastly,
Thou have descryed the flower, the sanguis agni?

Yes, sir.

Where Is master?

At's prayers, sir, he,
Good man, he is doing his devotions,
For the success.

Lungs, I will set a period,
To all thy labors: Thou shall be the master
Of my seraglia.

Good, sir.

But do you hear?
I Will geld you, Lungs.

Yes, sir.

For I do mean
To have a list of wives, and concubines,
Equal with SOLOMON; who had the stone
Alike, with me: and I will make me, a back
With the elixir, that shall be as tough
As HERCULES, to encounter fifty a night.
Thou Art sure, thou saw it blood?

Both blood, and spirit, sir.

I will have all my beds, blown up; not stuffed:
Down is too hard. And then, mine oual room,
Filled with such pictures, as TIBERIUS took
From ELEPHANTIS: and dull ARETINE
But coldly imitated. Then, my glasses,
Cut in more subtle angles, to disperse,
And multiply the figures, as I walk
Naked between my succubae. My mists
I Will have of perfume, vapor'd 'bout the room,
To loose our selves in; and my baths, like pits
To fall into: from whence, we will come forth,
And roll us dry in gossamour, and roses.
(Is it arrived at ruby?) -- Where I spy
A wealthy citizen, or rich lawyer,
Have a sublimed pure wife, unto that fellow
I Will send a thousand pound, to be my cuckold.

And I shall carry it?

No. I Will have no bawds,
But fathers, and mothers. They will do it best.
Best of all others. And, my flatterers
Shall be the pure, and grauest of Divines,
That I can get for money. My mere fools,
Eloquent burgesses, and then my poets
The same that writ so subtly of the fart,
Whom I will entertain, still, for that subject.
The few, that would give out themselves, to be
Court, and towne-stallions, and, each where, belie
Ladies, who are known most innocent, for them;
Those will I beg, to make me eunuchs of:
And they shall fan me with ten estrich tails
A piece, made in a plume, to gather wind.
We will be brave, Puff, now we have the medicine.
My meat, shall all come in, in Indian shells,
Dishes of agate, set in gold, and studded,
With emeralds, sapphires, hiacynths, and rubies.
The tongues of carpes, dormise, and camels heels,
Boiled in the spirit of SOL, and dissolved pearl,
(APICIVS diet, against the epilepsie)
And I will eat these broaths, with spoones of amber,
Headed with diamant, and carbuncle.
My footboy shall eat phesants, caluerd salmons,
Knots, godwits, lamprey's: I my self will have
The beards of barbels, served, in stead of sallades;
Oild mushromes; and the swelling unctuous paps
Of a fat pregnant sow, newly cut off,
Dressed with an exquisite, and poynant sauce;
For which, I Will say unto my cook, there is gold,
Go forth, and be a knight.

Sir, I Will go look
A little, how it heightens.

Do. My shirts
I Will have of taffata-sarsnet, soft, and light
As cob-webs; and for all my other raiment
It shall be such, as might provoke the Persian;
Were he to teach the world riot, a new.
My gloves of fishes, and birds-skins, perfumed
With gummes of paradise, and eastern air --

And do'you think to have the stone, with this?

No, I do think, to have all this, with the stone.

Why, I have heard, he must be homo frugi,
A pious, holy, and religious man,
One free from mortal sin, a very virgin.

That makes it, sir, he is so. But I buy it.
My venture brings it me. He, honest wretch,
A notable, superstitious, good soul,
Has worn his knees bare, and his slippers bald,
With prayer, and fasting for it: and, sir, let him
Do'it alone, for me, still. Here he comes,
Not a profane word, before him: It Is poison.

GOod morrow, father.

Gentle son, good morrow,
And, to your friend, there. What is he, is with you?

An heretic, that I did bring along,
In hope, sir, to convert him.

Son, I doubt
Yo'are covetous, that thus you meet your time
In The just point: prevent your day, at morning.
This argues something, worthy of a fear
Of importune, and carnal appetite.
Take heed, you do not cause the blessing leave you,
With your vngouern'd have. I should be sorry,
To see my labors, now, e'ene at perfection,
Got by long watching, and large patience,
Not prosper, where my love, and zeal has placed 'hem.
Which (heaven I call to witness, with your self,
To whom, I have poured my thoughts) in all my ends,
Have looked no way, but unto public good,
To pious uses, and dear charity,
No grown a prodigy with men. Wherein
If you, my son, should now preuaricate,
And, to your own particular lusts, employ
So great, and catholic a bliss: be sure,
A curse will follow, yea, and overtake
Your subtle, and most secret ways.

I know, sir,
You shall not need to fear me. I but come,
To ha'you confute this gentleman.

Who is,
Indeed, sir, somewhat caustiue of belief
Toward your stone: would not be gulled.

Well, son,
All that I can convince him in, is this,
The work is done: Bright SOL is in his robe.
We have a medicine of the triple Soul,
The glorified spirit. Thanks be to heaven,
And make us worthy of it. Ulen spiegel.

Anon, sir.

Look well to the register,
And let your heat, still, lessen by degrees,
To the Aludels.

Yes, sir.

Did you look
Of The Bolts-head yet?

Which on D. sir?

I,
What Is the complexion?

Whitish.

Infuse vinegar,
To draw his volatile substance, and his tincture:
And let the water in Glass E. be feltred,
And put into the Gripes egg. Lute him well;
And leave him closed in balneo.

I will, sir.

What a brave language here is? next to canting?

I'haue another work; you never saw, son,
That, three days since, past the Philosophers wheel,
In the lent heat of Athanor; and's become
Sulphur o'nature.

But it is for me?

What need you?
You have enough, in that is, perfect.

O, but --

Why, this is couetise!

No, I assure you,
I shall employ it all, in pious uses,
Founding of colleges, and grammar schools,
Marrying young virgins, building hospitalls,
And now, and then, a church.

How now?

Sir, please you,
Shall I not change the feltre?

Mary, yes.
And bring me the complexion of Glass B.

Have you another?

Yes, son, were I assured
Your piety were firm, we would not want
The means to glorify it. But I hope the best:
I mean to tinct C. in sand-heat, to morrow,
And give him imhibition.

Of white oil?

No, sir, of red. F. is come over the helm too,
I thank my Maker, in S. MARY'S bath,
And shows lac Virginis. Blessed be heaven.
I sent you of his faeces there, calcined.
Out of that calx, IN have won the salt of MERCVRY.

By pouring on your rectified water?

Yes, and reuerberating in Athanor.
How now? What color says it?

The ground black, sir.

That Is you crowes-head?

Your cocks-comb's, is it not?

No, it is not perfect, would it were the crow.
That work wants something.

(O, I looked for this.
The hay is a pitching.)

Are you sure, you loosed 'hem
IN their own menstrue?

Yes, sir, and then married 'hem,
And put 'hem in a Bolts-head, nipp'd to digestion,
According as you bad me; when I set
The liquor of MARS to circulation,
In the same heat.

The process, then, was right.

Yes, by the token, sir, the Retort brake,
And what was saved, was put into the Pellicane,
And signed with HERMES seal.

I think 'twas so.
We should have a new amalgama.

(O, this ferret
Is rank as any pole-cat.)

But I care not.
Let him e'ene die; we have enough beside,
In embrion. H has his white shirt on?

Yes, sir,
He Is ripe for inceration: He stands warm,
In his ash-fire. I would not, you should let
Any die now, if I might counsel, sir,
For lucks sake to the rest. It is not good.

He says right.

I, are you bolted?

Nay, I know it, sir,
I'haue seen the will fortune. What is some three ounces
Of fresh materials?

Is It no more?

No more, sir,
Of gold, to amalgame, with some six of Mercury.

Away, here is money. What will serve?

Ask him, sir.

How much?

Give him nine pound: you may gi'him ten.

Yes, twenty, and be cossend, do.

There it is.

This needs not. But that you will have it, so,
To see conclusions of all. For two
Of our inferior works, are at fixation.
A third is in ascension. Go your ways.
Have you set the oil of Luna in kemia?

Yes, sir.

And the philosopers vinegar?

I.

We shall have a sallad.

When do you make proiection?

Son, be no hasty, I exalt our medicine,
By hanging him in balneo vaporoso;
And giving him solution; then congeale him;
And then dissolve him; then again congeale him;
For look, how often I iterate the work,
So many times, I add unto his virtue.
As, if at first, one ounce convert a hundred,
After his second loose, he will turn a thousand;
His third solution, ten; his fourth, a hundred.
After his fifth, a thousand thousand ounces
Of any imperfect metal, into pure
Silver, or gold, in all examinations,
As good, as any of the natural mine.
Get you your stuff here, against afternoon,
Your brass, your pewter, and your andirons.

Not those of iron:

Yes. You may bring them, too.
We Will change all mettall's.

I believe you, in that.

Then I may send my spits?

Yes, and your racks.

And dripping-pans, and pot-hangers, and hooks?
Shall he not?

If he please.

To be an ass.

How, sir!

This gent'man, you must bear withal.
I told you, he had no faith.

And little hope, sir,
But, much less charity, should I gull my self.

Why, what have you observed, sir, in our art,
Seems so impossible?

But your whole work, no more.
That you should hatch gold in a furnace, sir,
As they do eggs, in Egypt!

Sir, do you
Believe that eggs are hatched so?

If I should?

Why, I think that the greater miracle.
No egg, but differs from a chicken, more,
Then mettalls in themselves.

That cannot be.
The egg's ordained by nature, to that end:
And is a chicken in potentia.

The same we say of lead, and other mettalls,
Which would be gold, if they had time.

And that
Our art does further.

I, for 'twere absurd
To think that nature, in the earth, bred gold
Perfect, in the instant. Something went before.
There must be remote matter.

I, what is that?

Mary, we say --

I, now it heats: stand Father.
Pound him to dust --

It is, of the one part,
A humide exhalation, which we call
Materia liquida, or the unctuous water;
On the other part, a certain crasse, and viscous
Portion of earth; both which, concorporate,
Do make the elementarie matter of gold:
Which is not, yet, propria materia,
But commune to all mettalls, and all stones.
For, where it is forsaken of that moisture,
And has more dryness, it becomes a stone;
Where it retains more of the humid fatness,
It turns to sulphur, or to quicksilver:
Who are the parents of all other mettalls.
Nor can this remote matter, suddenly,
Progress so from extreme, unto extreme,
As to grow gold, and leap ore all the means.
Nature does, first, beget th'imperfect; then
Proceeds she to the perfect. Of that ayrie,
And oily water, mercury is engendered;
Sulphur of the fat, and earthy part: the one
(Which is the last) supplying the place of male,
The other of the female, in all mettalls.
Some do believe hermaphrodeitie,
That both do act, and suffer. But, these two
Make the rest ductile, malleable, extensiue.
And, even in gold, they are; for we do find
Seeds of them, by our fire, and gold in them:
And can produce the species of each metal
More perfect thence, then nature does in earth.
Beside, who does not see, in daily practice,
Art can beget bees, hornets, beetles, waspes,
Out of the carcasses, and dung of creatures;
Yea, scorpions, of an herb, being ritely placed:
And these are living creatures, far more perfect,
And excellent, then mettalls.

Well said, father!
Nay, if he take you in hand, sir, with an argument,
He Will bray you in a mortar.

'Pray you, sir, stay.
Rather, then I Will be brai'd, sir, I Will believe,
That Alchemie is a pretty kind of game,
Somewhat like tricks of the cards, to cheat a man,
With charming.

Sir?

What else are all your terms,
Whereon no one o'your writers grees with other?
Of your elixir, your lac virginis,
Your stone, your medicine, and your chrysosperme,
Your sal, your sulphur, and your mercury,
Your oil of height, your tree of life, your blood,
Your marchesite, your tutie, your magnesia,
Your toade, your crow, your dragon, and your panthar,
Your sun, your moon, your firmament, your adrop,
Your lato, azoch, zernich, chibrit, heautarit,
And then, your red man, and your white woman,
With all your broths, your menstrues, and materials,
Of piss, and egge-shells, women's terms, man's blood,
Hair of the head, burnt clouts, chalk, merds, and clay,
Poulder of bones, scalings of iron, glass,
And worlds of other strange ingredients,
Would burst a man to name?

And all these, named,
Intending but one thing: which art our writers
Used to obscure their art.

Sir, so I told him,
Because the simple idiot should not learn it,
And make it vulgar.

Was not all the knowledge
Of the Egyptians writ in mystic symboles?
Speak not the Scriptures, often, in parables?
Are not the choicest fables of the Poets,
That were the fountains, and first springs of wisdom,
Wrapped in perplexed allegories?

I urged that,
And cleared to him, that SISIPHVS was damned
To roll the ceaseless stone, only, because
He would have made ours common. Who is this?

God's precious -- What do you mean? Go in, good lady,
Let me entreat you. Where Is this varlet?

Sir?

You very knave! do you use me, thus?

Wherein, sir?

Go in, and see, you traitor. Go.

Who is it, sir?

Nothing, sir. Nothing.

What Is the matter? good, sir!
I have not seen you thus distemp'red. Who is it?

All arts have still had, sir, their adversaries,
But ours the most ignorant. What now?

'Twas not m;y fault, sir, she would speak with you.

Would she, sir? Follow me.

Stay, Lungs.

I dare not, sir.

How! 'Pray thee stay?

She Is mad, sir, and sent hither --

Stay man, what is she?

A lords sister, sir.
(He Will be mad too.

I warrant thee.) Why sent hither?

Sir, to be cured.

Why, rascal!

Lo you. Here, sir.

'Fore-god, a BRADAMANTE, a brave piece.

Heart, this is a bawdy house! I Will be burnt else.

O, by this light, no. Do not wrong him. H'is
Too scrulous, that way. It is his vice.
No, h'is a rare physician, do him right.
An excellent Paracelsian! and has done
Strange cures with mineral physic. He deals all
With spirits, he. He will not hear a word
Of GALEN, or his tedious recipe's.
How now, Lungs!

Softly, sir, speak softly. I meant
To have told your worship all. This must not hear.

No, he will not be gulled; let him alone.

You Are very right, sir, she is a most rare scholar;
And is gone mad, with studying BRAVGHTONS works.
If you but name a word, touching the Hebrew,
She falls into her fit, and will discourse
So learnedly of genealogies,
As you would run mad, too, to hear her, sir.

How might one do to have conference with her, Lungs?

O, diverse have run mad upon the conference.
I do not know, sir: I am sent in have,
To fetch a violl.

Be not gulled, sir MAMMON.

Wherein? 'Pray ye, be patient.

Yes, as you are.
And trust confederate knaves, and bawdes, and whores.

You are too foul, believe it. Come, here, Ulen.
One word.

I dare not, in good faith.

Stay, knave.

H'is extreme angry, that you saw her, sir.

Drink that. What is she, when she is out of her fit?

O, the most affablest creature, sir! so merry!
So pleasant! she will mount you up, like quicksilver,
Over the helm; and circulate, like oil,
A very vegetall: discourse of state,
Of mathematiques, bawdry, any thing --

Is she no way accessible? no means,
No trick, to give a man a taste of her -- wit --
Or so? -- Ulen.

I Will come to you again, sir.

SVRLY, I did not think, one of your breeding
Would traduce personages of worth.

Sir EPICVRE,
Your friend to use: yet still, loath to be gulled.
I do not like your philosophical bawdes.
Their stone is lechery enough, to pay for,
Without this bait.

'Hart, you abuse your self.
I know the lady, and her friends, and means,
The original of this disaster. Her brother
H'as told me all.

And yet, you n'ere saw her
Till now?

O, yes, but I forgot. I have (believe it)
One of the trecherou'st memories, I do think,
Of all mankind.

What call you her, brother?

My lord --
He wi' not have his name known, now I think on 't.

A very treacherous memory!

OF my faith --

Tut, if you have it not about you, pass it,
Till we meet next.

Nay, by this hand, 't is true.
He Is one I honor, and my noble friend,
And I respect his house.

Heart! can it be,
That a grave sir, a rich, that has no need,
A wife sir, too, at other times, should thus
With his own oaths, and arguments, make hard means
To gull himself? And, this be your elixir,
Your lapis mineralis, and your lunarie,
Give me your honest trick, yet, at primero,
Or gleeke; and take your lutum sapientis,
Your menstruum simplex: I Will have gold, before you,
And, with less danger of the quicksilver;
Or the hot sulphur.

Here Is one from Captain FACE, sir,
Desires you meet him in the Temple-church,
Some half hour hence, and upon earnest business.
SIr, if you please to quit us, now; and come,
Again, within two hours: you shall have
My master busy examining of the works;
and I will steal you in, unto the party,
That you may see her converse. Sir, shall I say,
You Will meet the Captains worship?

Sir, I will.
But, by attorney, and to a second purpose.
Now, I am sure, it is a bawdy house;
I Will swear it, were the Marshall here, to thank me:
The naming this Commander, does confirm it.
Don FACE! Why, h' is the most autentique dealer
IN these commodities! The Superintendent
To all, the queinter traffiquers, in town.
He is their Visiter, and does appoint
Who lies with whom; and at what hour; what price;
Which gown; and in what smock; what fall; what tire.
Him, will I prove, by a third person, to find
The subtilties of this dark labyrinth:
Which, if I do discover, dear sir MAMMON,
You Will give your poor friend leave, though no Philosopher,
To laugh: for you that are, it is thought, shall weep.

Sir. He does pray, you will not forget.

I will not, sir.
Sir EPICVRE, I shall leave you?

I follow you, straight.

But do so, good sir, to avoid suspicion.
This gent'man has a par'lous head.

But will thou, Ulen,
Be constant to thy promise?

As my life, sir.

And will thou insinuate what I am? and praise me?
And say I am a noble fellow?

O, what else, sir?
And, that you will make her royal; with the stone,
An Empress; and your self king of Bantam.

Will thou do this?

Will I, sir?

Lungs, my Lungs!
I love thee.

Send your stuff, sir, that my master
May busy himself, about proiection.

Thou Have witch'd me, rogue: Take, go.

Your jack, and all, sir.

Thou art a villain -- I will send my jack;
And the weights too. Slave, I could bite thine ear.
Away, thou do not care for me.

Not I, sir?

Come, I was borne to make thee, my good weasell;
Set thee on a bench: and, have thee twirle a chain
With the best lords vermin, of'hem all.

Away, sir.

A Count, nay, a Count-palatine --

Good sir, go.

Shall not advance thee, better: no, nor faster.

HAs he bit? Has he bit?

And swallowed too, my SVBTLE.
I have given him line, and now he plays, I faith.

And shall we twitch him?

Thorough both the gills.
A wench is a rare bait, with which a man
No sooner's taken, but he straight firkes mad.

DOL, my lord WHA'TS'HVMS sister, you must now
Bear your self statelich.

O, let me alone.
I Will not forget my race, I warrant you.
I Will keep my distance, laugh, and talk aloud;
Have all the tricks of a proud sciruy lady,
And be as rude'as her woman.

Well said, Sanguine.

But will he send his andirons?

His jack too;
And's iron shooing-horne: I have spoke to him. Well,
I must not loose my wary gamster, yonder.

O Monsieur Caution, that will not be gulled?

I, if I can strike a fine hook into him, now,
The Temple-church, there I have cast mine angle.
Well, pray for me. I Will about it.

What, more gudgeons!
DOL, scout, scout; stay FACE, you must go to the door:
'Pray god, it be my Anabaptist. Who is it, DOL?

I know him not. He looks like a gold-end-man.

Gods so! it is he, he said he would send. What call you him?
The sanctified Elder, that should deal
For MAMMONS jack, and andirons! Let him in.
Stay, help me of, first, with my gown. Away
Ma-dame, to your withdrawing chamber. Now,
In a new tune, new gesture, but old language.
This fellow is sent, from one negotiates with me
About the stone, too; for the holy Brethren
Of Amsterdam, the exiled Saints: that hope
To raise their discipline, by it. I must use him
In some strange fashion, now, to make him admire me.

WHere is my drudge?

Sir.

Take away the recipient,
And rectify your menstrue, from the phlegma.
Then power it, of the Sol, in the cucurbite,
And let'hem macerate, together.

Yes, sir.
And save the ground?

No. Terra damnata
Must not have entrance, in the work. Who are you?

A faithful Brother, if it please you.

What Is that?
A Lullianist? a Ripley? Filius artis?
Can you sublime, and dulcefie? calcine?
Know you the sapor pontick? sapor slipstick?
Or, what is homogene, or heterogene?

I understand no heathen language, truly.

Heathen, you KNIPPER-DOLING? Is Ars sacra,
Or Chrysopoeia, or Spagirica,
Or the pamphysick, or panarchick knowledge,
A heathen language?

Heathen Greek, I take it.

How? heathen Greek?

All Is heathen, but the Hebrew.

Sirah, my varlet, stand you forth, and speak to him
Like a Philosopher: Answer, in the language.
Name the vexations, and the martyrizations
Of mettalls, in the work.

Sir, Putrefaction,
Solution, Ablution, Sublimation,
Cohobations, Calcination, Ceration, and
Fixation.

This is heathen Greek, to you, now?
And when comes Vivification?

After Mortification.

What Is Cohobation?

'T is the pouring on
Your Aqua Regis, and then drawing him off,
To the trine circle of the seven spheres.

What Is the proper passion of mettalls?

Malleation.

What Is your vltimum supplicium auri?

Antimonium.

This's heathen Greek, to you? And, what is your Mercury?

A very fugitive, he will be gone, sir.

How know you him?

By his viscositie,
His oleositie, and his suscitabilitie.

How do you sublime him?

With the calce of egge-shels,
White marble, talck.

Your magisterium, now?
What Is that?

Shifting, sir, your elements,
Dry into cold, cold into moist, moist into hot, hot into dry.


This's heathen Greek to you, still?
Your lapis philosophicus?

It Is a stone, and not
A stone; a spirit, a soul, and a body:
Which, if you do dissolve, it is dissolved,
If you coagulate, it is coagulated,
If you make it to fly, it flies.

Enough.
This's heathen Greek, to you? What are you, sir?

Please you, a servant of the exiled Brethren,
That deal with widows, and with orphans goods;
And make it a just account, unto the Saints:
A Deacon.

O, you are sent from master WHOLESOME,
Your teacher?

From TRIBVLATION WHOLESOME,
Our very zealous Pastor.

Good. I have
Some orphans goods to come here.

Of what kind, sir?

Pewter, and brass, andirons, and kitchen ware,
Mettalls, that we must use our medicine on:
Wherein the Brethren may have a penn'orth.
For ready money.

Were the orphans parents
Sincere professors?

Why do you ask?

Because
We then are to deal justly, and give (in truth)
Their vtomost value.

"Slid, you would cossen, else,
And, if their parents were not of the faithful?
I will not trust you, now I think on it,
Till I have talked with your Pastor. Have you brought money
To buy more coals?

No, surely.

No? How so?

The Brethren bid me say unto you, sir.
Surely, they will not venture any more,
Till they may see andgt;proiection.

How!

Yo'haue had,
For the instruments, as bricks, and lome, and glasses,
Already thirty pound; and, for materials,
They say, some ninety more: And, they have heard, since,
That oe, at Heidelberg, made it, of an egg,
And a small paper of pin-dust.

What Is your name?

My name is ANANIAS.

Out, the varlet
That cossend the Apostles! Hence, away,
Flee Mischief; had your holy Consistory
No name to send me, of another sound;
Then wicked ANANIAS? Send your Elders,
Hither, to make atonement for you, quickly.
And gi'me satisfaction; or out-goes
The fire: and down the alembekes, and the furnace.
Piger Henricus, or what not. Thou wretch,
Both Sericon, and Bufo, shall be lost,
Tell 'hem. All hope of rooting out the Bishops,
Or the Antichristian Hierarchy shall perish,
If they stay threescore minutes. The Aqueitie,
Terrestie, and Sulphureitie
Shall run together again, an all be annulled
Thou wicked ANANIAS. This will fetch 'hem,
And make 'hem have toward their gulling more.
A man must deal like a rough nurse, and fright
Those, that are froward, to an appetite.

H'Is busy with his spirits, but we will upon him.

How now! What mates? What Bairards have we here?

I told you, he would be furious. Sir, here is NAB,
Has brought yo' another old piece of gold, to look on:
(We must appease him. Give it me) and prays you,
You would devise (what is it NAB?)

A sign, sir.

I, a good lucky one, a thriuing sign, Doctor.

I was devising now.

('Slight, do not say so,
He will repent he ga' you any more.)
What say you to his constellation, Doctor?
The Balance?

Not, that way is stale, and common.
A townes-man, borne in Taurus, gives the bull
Or the bulls-head: in Aries, the ram.
A poor device. No, I will have nis name
Formed in some mystic character; whose radij,
Striking the senses of the passers by,
Shall, by a vertuall influence, breed affections,
That may result upon the party ownes it:
As thus --

NAB!

He first shall have a bell, that is ABEL;
And, by it, standing one, whose name is DEE,
In a rugg gown; there is D. and Rug, that is DRVG:
And, right anenst him, a Dog snarling Er;
There Is DRVGGER, ABEL DRVGGER. That Is his sign.
And here is now mystery, and hieroglyphick!

ABEL, thou art made.

Sir, I do thank his worship.

Six o'thy legs more, will not do it, NAB.
He has brought you a pipe of tobacco, Doctor.

Yes, sir:
I have another thing, I would impart --

Out with it, NAB.

Sir, there is lodged, hard by me,
A rich young widow --

Good! a bona roba?

But nineteen, at the most.

Very good, ABEL.

Mary, sh'is not in fashion, yet; she wears
A hood: but 't stands a cop.

No matter, ABEL.

And, I do, now and then give her a fucus --

What! do thou deal, NAB?

I did tell you, Captain.

And physic too sometime, sir: for which she trusts me
With all her mind. She Is come up here, of purpose
To learn the fashion.

Good (his match too!) on, NAB.

And she does strangely long to know her fortune.

Gods lid, NAB, Send her to the Doctor, hither.

Yes, I have spoke to her of his worship, already:
But she is afraid, it will be blown abroad
And hurt her marriage.

Hurt it? It Is the way
To heal it, if 'twere hurt; to make it more
Followed, and sought: NAB, thou shall tell her this.
She Will be more known, more talked of, and your widows
Are never of any price till they be famous;
Their honor is their multitude of suitors:
Send her, it may be thy good fortune. What?
Thou do not know.

No, sir, she will never marry
Under a knight. Her brother has made a vow.

What, and do thou despair, my little NAB,
Knowing, what the Doctor has set down for thee,
And, seeing so many, of the city, dubbed?
One glass o'thy water, with a Madame, I know,
Will have it done,

What Is her brother? a knight?

No, sir, a gentleman, newly warm in 'his land, sir,
Scarce cold in his one and twenty; that does govern
His sister, here: and is a man himself
Of some three thousand a year, and is come up
To learn to quarrel, and to live by his wits,
And will go down again, and dye in the country.

How! to quarrel?

Yes, sir, to carry quarrels,
As gallants do, and manage 'hem, by line.

'Slid, NAB! The Doctor is the only man
In Christendom for him. He has made a table,
With Mathematical demonstrations,
Touching the Art of quarrels. He will give him
An instrument to quarrel by. Go, bring 'hem, both:
Him, and his sister. And, for thee, with her
The Doctor happ'ly may persuade. Go to.
'Shalt give his worship, a new damask suite
Upon the premises.

O, good Captain.

He shall,
He is the honestest fellow, Doctor. Stay not,
No offers, bring the damask, and the parties.

I Will try my power, sir.

And thy will too, NAB.

It Is good tobacco this! What is it an ounce?

He Will send you a pound, Doctor.

O, no.

He will do it.
It is the gooddest soul. ABEL, about it.
(Thou shall know more anon. Away, be gone.)
A miserable rogue, and lives with cheese,
And has the worms. That was the cause indeed
Why he came now. He dealt with me, in private,
To get a medicine for'hem.

And shall, sir. This works.

A wife, a wife, for one on'vs, my dear SVBTLE:
We Will eene draw lots, and he, that fails, shall have
The more in goods, the other has in tail.

Rather the less. For she may be so light
She may want grains.

I, or be such a burden,
A man would scarce endure her, for the whole.

Faith, best let us see her first, and then determine.

Content. But DOL must have no breath on it.

Mum.
Away, you to your SVRLY yonder, catch him.

'Pray god, I have not stayed too long.

I fear it.

THese chastisements are common to the Saints,
And such rebukes we of the Separation
Must bear, with willing shoulders, as the trialls
Sent forth, to tempt our frailties.

In pure zeal,
I do not like the man: He is a heathen.
And speaks the language of Canaan, truly.

I think him a profane person, indeed.

He bears
The visible mark of the Beast, in his forehead.
And for his Stone, it is a work of darkness,
And, with Philisophie, blinds the eyes of man.

Good Brother, we must bend unto all means,
That may give furtherance, to the holy cause.

Which his cannot: The sanctified cause
Should have a sanctified course.

Not always necessary.
The children of perdition are oft-times,
Made instruments even of the greatest works.
Beside, we should give somewhat to man's nature,
The place he lives in, still about the fire,
And fume of mettalls, that intoxicate
The brain of man, and make him prone to passion.
Where have you greater Atheists, then your Cooks?
Or more profane, or choleric then your Glasse-men?
More Antichristian, then your Bell-founders?
What makes the Devil so deuillish, I would ask you,
Satan, our common enemy, but his being
Perpetually about the fire, and boiling
Brimstone, and arsnike? We must give, I say,
Unto the motives, and the stirrers up
Of humors in the blood. It may be so.
When as the work is done, the stone is made,
This heat of his may turn into a zeal,
And stand up for the beauteous discipline,
Against the menstruous cloth, and ragg of Rome.
We must await his calling, and the coming
Of the good spirit. You did fault, t'vpbraid him
With the Brethrens blessing of Heidelberg, waighing
What need we have, to hasten on the work,
For the restoring of the silenced Saints,
Which never will be, but by the Philosophers stone.
And, so a learned Elder, one of Scotland,
Assured me; Aurum potabile being
The only medicine, for the civil Magistrate,
T'incline him to a feeling of the cause:
And must be daily used, in the disease.

I have not edified more, truly, by man;
Not, since the beautiful light, first, shone on me:
And I am sad, my zeal has so offended.

Let us call on him, then.

The motion's good,
And of the spirit; I will knock first: Peace be within.

O, Are you come? 'Twas time. Your threescore minutes
Were at the last thread, you see; and down had gone
Furnus acediae, Turris circulatorius:
Lembeke, Bolts-head, Retort, and Pellicane
Had all been cinders. Wicked ANANIAS!

Sir, be appeased, he is come to humble
Himself in spirit, and to ask your patience,
(...) (...)
And, then, the turning of this Lawyers pewter
To plate, at Christ-masse --

Christ-tide, I pray you.

Yet, ANANIAS?

I have done.

Or changing
His parcel guilt, to massy gold. You cannot
But raise you friends. With all, to be of power
To pay an army, in the field, to buy
The king of France, out of his realms; or Spain;
Out of his Indies: What can you not do,
Against lords spiritual, or temporal,
That shall oppone you?

Verily, it is true.
We may be temporal lords, our selves, I take it.

You may be any thing, and leave off to make
Long-winded exercises: or suck up,
Your ha, and hum, in a tune. I not deny,
But such as are not graced, in a state,
May, for their ends, be adverse in religion,
And get a tune, to call the flock together:
For (to say sooth) a tune does much, with women,
And other phlegmatic people, it is your bell.

Bells are profane: a tune may be religious.

No warning with you? Then, farewell my patience.
'Slight, it shall down: I will not be thus tortured.

I pray you, sir.

All shall perish. I have spoke it.

Let me find grace, sir, in your eyes; the man
He stands corrected: neither did his zeal
(But as your self) allow a tune, some-where.
Which, now, being to'ard the stone, we shall not need.

No, nor your holy vizard, to win widows
To give you legacies; or make zealous wives
To rob their husbands, for the common cause:
Nor take the start of bonds, broke but one day,
And say, they were forfeited, by providence.
Nor shall you need, ore-night to eat huge meals,
To celebrate your next days fast the better:
The whilst the Brethren, and the Sisters, humbled,
Abate the stiffenesse of the flesh. Nor cast
Before your hungry hearers, scrupulous bones,
As whether a Christian may hawke, or hunt;
Or whether, Matrons, of the holy assembly,
May lay their hair out, or wear doublets:
Or have that idol Starch, about their linen.

It is, indeed, an idol.

Mind him not, sir.
I do command thee, spirit (of zeal, but trouble)
To peace within him. Pray you, sir, go on.

Nor shall you need to libell against the Prelates,
And shorten so your ears, against the hearing
Of the next wire-drawne grace. Nor, of necessity,
Rail against plays, to please the Alderman,
Whose daily custard you devour. Nor lie
With zealous rage, till you are hoarse. Not one
Of these so singular arts. Nor call your selves,
By names of TRIBVLATION, PERSECVTION,
RESTRAINT, LONG-PATIENCE, and such like, affected
By the whole family, or wood of you,
Only for glory, and to catch the ear
Of the Disciple.

Truly, sir, they are
Ways, that the godly Brethren have inuente^
For propagation of the glorious cause,
As very notable means, and whereby, also,
Themselves grow soon, and profitably famous.

O, but the stone, all is idle to'it! nothing!
The art of Angels, Natures miracle,
The divine secret, that does fly in clouds,
From east to west: and whose tradition
Is not from men, but spirits.

I hate Traditions:
I do not trust them --

Peace.

They are Popish, all.
I will not peace. I will not --

ANANIAS.

Please the profane, to grieve the godly: I may not.

Well, ANANIAS, thou shall overcome.

It is an ignorant zeal, that haunts him, sir.
But truly, else, a very faithful Brother,
A botcher: and a man, by revelation,
That has a competent knowledge of the truth.

Has he a competent sum, there, in the bagg,
To buy the goods, within? I am made guardian,
And must, for charity, and conscience sake,
Now, see the most be made, for my poor orphane:
Though I desire the Brethren, too, good gayners.
There, they are, within. When you have viewed, and bought'hem,
And taken the inventory of what they are,
They are ready for proiection; there is no more
To do: cast on the medicine, so much silver
As there is tin there, so much gold as brass,
I Will gi'it you in, by weight.

But how long time,
Sir, must the Saints expect, yet?

Let me see,
How Is the moon, now? Eight, nine, ten days hence
He will be silver potate; then, three days,
Before he citronise: some fifteen days,
The Magisterium will be perfected.

About the second day, of the third week,
In the ninth month?

Yes, my good ANANIAS.

What will the orphans goods arise to, think you?

Some hundred marks; as much as filled three carres,
Vnladed now: you will make six millions of 'hem.
But I must have more coals laid in.

How!

Another load,
And then we have finished. We must now increase
Our fire to ignis ardens, we are past
Fimus equinus, Balnei, Cineris,
And all those lenter heats. If the holy purse
Should, with this draught, fall low, and that the Saints
Do need a present sum, I have trick
To melt the pewter, you ^^all buy now, instantly,
And, with a tincture, (...) you as good Dutch dollers,
As any are in Holland.

Can you so?

I, and shall bide the third examination.

It will be joyful tidings to the Brethren.

But you must carry it, secret.

I, but stay,
This act of coining, is it lawful?

Lawful?
We know no Magistrate. Or, if we did,
This's foreign coin.

It is no coining, sir.
It is but casting.

Ha? you distinguish well.
Casting of money may be lawful.

It Is, sir.

Truly, I take it so.

There is no scruple,
Sir, to be made of it; believe ANANIAS:
This case of conscience he is studied in.

I Will make a question of it, to the Brethren.

The Brethren shall approve it lawful, doubt not.
Where shall't be done?

For that we will talk, anon.
There Is some to speak with me. Go in, I pray you,
And view the parcells. That Is the inventory.
I Will come to you straight. Who is it? FACE! Appear.

HOw now? Good prise?

Good pox! Yond' caustiue cheater
Never came on.

How then?

I have walked the round,
Till now, and no such thing.

And have you quit him?

Quit him? and hell would quit him too, he were happy.
'Slight would you have me stalk like a mill-iade.
All day, for one, that will not yield us grains?
I know him of old.

O, but to have gulled him,
Had been a maistry.

Let him go, black Boy,
And turn thee, that some fresh news may possess thee.
A noble Count, a Don of Spain (my dear
Delicious compeere, and my partie-bawd)
Who is come hither, private, for his conscience,
And brought munition with him, six great slopps,
Bigger then three Dutch hoighs, beside round trunkes,
Furnished with pistolets, and pieces of eight,
Will straight be here, my rogue, to have thy bath
(That is the color,) and to make his battry
Upon our DOL, our Castle, our cinque-Port,
Our Dover pire, our what thou will. Where is she?
She must prepare perfumes, delicate linen,
The bath in chief, a banquet, and her wit,
For she must milk his Epididimis.
Where is the Doxie?

I Will send her to thee:
And but dispatch my brace of little JOHN LEYDENS,
And come again my self.

Are they within then?

Numbering the sum.

How much?

A hundred marks, Boy.

Why, this's a lucky day! Ten pounds of MAMMON!
Three of my clarke! A portague of my grocer!
This of the Brethren! beside reuersions,
And states, to come in the widow, and my Count!
My share, to day, will not be bought for forty --

What?

Pounds, dainty DOROTHEE, art thou so near?

Yes, say lord General, how fares our camp?

As, with the few, that had entrenched themselves
Safe, by their discipline, against a world, DOL:
And laughed, within those trenches, and grew fat
With thinking on the booties, DOL, brought in
Daily, by their small parties. This dear hour,
A doughtie Don is taken, with my DOL;
And thou may make his ransom, what thou will,
My Dousabell: He shall be brought here, fettered
With thy fair looks, before he see's thee; and thrown
In a downe-bed, as dark as any dungeon;
Where thou shall keep him waking, with thy drum;
Thy drum, my DOL; thy drum; till he be tame
As the poor black-birds were in the great frost,
Or bees are with a basin: and so hiue him
IN the swan-skin couerlid, and cambrick sheets,
Till he work honey, and wax, my little Gods-guift.

What is he, General?

An Adalantado,
A Grande, girl. Was not my DAPPER here, yet?

No.

Nor my DRVGGER?

Neither.

A pox on 'hem.
They are so long a furnishing! Such stinkards
Would not be seen, upon these festival days.

And gallants, yet. Here Is a young gentleman,
Is borne to nothing, forty marks a year,
Which I count nothing. H'is to be initiated,
And have a fly of the Doctor. He will win you
By irresistable luck, within this fortnight,
Enough to buy a baronie. They will set him
Vpmost, at the Groome-porters, all the Christmasse!
And, for the whole year through, at every place,
Where there is play, present him with the chair;
The best attendance, the best drink, sometimes
Two glasses of canarie, and pay nothing;
The purest linen, and the sharpest knife,
The partrich next his trencher: and, somewhere,
The dainty bed, in private, with the dainty.
You shall have your ordinaries bid for him,
As play houses for a poet; and the master
Pray him, aloud, to name what dish he affects,
Which must be butterd shrimps: and those that drink
To no mouth else, will drink to his, as being
The goodly, president mouth of all the board.

Do you not gull one?

'Od's my life! Do you think it?
You shall have a cast commander, (can but get
In credit with a glouer, or a spurrier,
For some two pair, of eithers ware, aforehand)
Will, by most swift posts, dealing with him,
Arrive at competent means, to keep himself,
His punke, and naked boy, in excellent fashion.
And be admired for it.

Will the Doctor teach this?

He will do more, sir, when your land is gone,
(As men of spirit hate to keep earth long(
In a vacation, when small money is stirring,
And ordinaries suspended till the term,
He Will show a perspectiue, where on one side
You shall behold the faces, and the persons
Of all sufficient young heirs, in town,
Whose bonds are current for commodity;
On the other side, the merchants forms, and others,
(That, without help of any second broker,
(Who would expect a share) will trust such parcels:
In the third square, the very street, and sign
Where the commodity dwells, and does but wait
To be delivered, be it pepper, soap,
Hops, or tobacco, oat-meale, woad, or cheeses.
All which you may so handle, to enjoy,
To your own use, and never stand obliged.

In Faith! Is he such a fellow?

Why, NAB here knows him.
And then for making matches, for rich widows,
Young gentlewomen, heirs, the fortunat'st man!
He Is sent too, far, and near, all over England,
To have his counsel, and to know their fortunes.

Gods will, my suster shall see him.

I Will tell you, sir,
What he did tell me of NAB. It Is a strange thing!
(By the way you must eat no cheese, NAB, it breeds melancholy:
And that same melancholy breeds worms) but pass it,
He told me, honest NAB, here, was never at tavern,
But once in's life!

Truth, and no more I was not.

And, then he was so sick --

Could he tell you that, too?

How should I know it?

In troth we had been a shooting,
And had a piece of fat ram-mutton, to supper,
That lay so heavy of my stomach --

And he has no head
To bear any wine; for, what with the noise of the fiddlers,
And care of his shop, for he dares keep no servants --

My head did so ache --

As he was feign to be brought home,
The Doctor told me. And then, a good old woman --

(Yes faith, she dwells in Sea-coale-lane) did cure me,
With sodden ale, and pellitorie of the wall:
Cost me but two pence. I had another sickness,
Was worse then that.

I, that was with the grief
Thou took'st for being sess'd at eighteen pence,
For the water-worke.

In truth, and it was like
To Have cost me almost my life.

Thy hair went off?

Yes, sir, 'twas done for spite.

Nay, so says the Doctor.

Pray thee, tabacco-Boy, go fetch my suster,
I Will see this learned Boy, before I go:
And so shall she.

Sir, he is busy now:
But, if you have a sister to fetch hither,
Perhaps, your own pains may command her sooner;
And he, by that time, will be free.

I go.

DRVGGER, she is thine: the damask. (SVBTLE, and I
Must wrestle for her.) Come on, master DAPPER.
You see, how I turn clients, here, away,
To give your cause dispatch. Ha'you performed
The ceremonies were inioyn'd you?

Yes, of the vinegar,
And the clean shirt.

It Is well: that shirt may do you
More worship then you think. Your aunt's a fire
But that she will not show it, to have a sight on you.
Ha'you provided for her Graces servants?

Yes, here are sixe-score EDWARD shillings.

Good.

And an old HARRY'S sovereign.

Very good.

And three JAMES shillings, and an ELIZABETH groat,

(...)

O, Sir, yo'are come in the only, finest time --

Where Is master?

Now preparing for proiection, sir.
Your stuff will b' all changed shortly.

Into gold?

To gold, and silver, sir.

Silver, I care not for.

Yes, sir, a little to give beggars.

Where Is the lady?

At hand, here. I have told her such brave things, of you,
Touching your bounty and your noble spirit --

Have thou?

As she is almost in her fit to see you.
But, good sir, no divinity in your conference,
For fear of putting her in rage --

I warrant thee.

Six men will not hold her down. And, then
If the old man should hear, or see you --

Fear not.

The very house, sir, would run mad. You know it
How scrupulous he is, and violent,
Against the least act of sin. Physic, or Mathematiques,
Poetry, State, or Bawdry (as I told you)
She will endure, and never startle: But
No word of controversy.

I am schooled, good Ule^.

And you must praise her house, remember that,
And her nobility.

Let me, alone:
No Herald, no nor Antiquarie, Lungs,
Shall do it better. Go.

Why, this is yet
A kind of modern happiness, to have
DOL Common for a great lady.

Now, EPICVRE,
Heighten thy self, talk to her, all in gold;
Rain her as many showers, as JOVE did drops
Unto his DANAE: Show the God a miser,
Compared with MAMMON. What? the stone will do it.
She shall feel gold, taste gold, hear gold, sleep gold:
Nay, we will concumbere gold. I will be puissant,
And mighty in my talk to her! Here she comes.

To him, DOL, suckle him. This is the noble knight,
I told your ladyship --

Madame, with your pardon,
I kiss your vesture.

Sir, I were vn-ciuill
If I would suffer that, my lip to you, sir.

I hope, my lord your brother be in health, lady?

My lord, my brother is, though I no lady, sir.

(Well said my Guiny-bird.)

Right noble madame --

(O, we shall have most fierce idolatry!)

It Is your prerogative.

Rather your courtesy.

Were there naught else t'inlarge your virtues, to me,
These answers speak your breeding, and your blood*

Blood we boast none, sir, a poor Baron's daughter.

Poor! and gat you? Profane not. Had your father
Slept all the happy remnant of his life
After that act, lain but there still, and panted,
H' had done enough, to make himself, his issue,
And his posterity noble.

Sir, although
We may be said to want the guilt, and trappings,
The dress of honor; yet we strive to keep
The seeds, and the materials.

I do see
The old ingredient, virtue, was not lost,
Nor the drug money, used to make your compound.
There is a strange nobility, in your eye,
This lip, that chin! Me thinks you do resemble
One of the Austriack princes.

Very like,
Her father was an Irish costar-monger.

The house of Valois, just, had such a nose.
And such a forehead, yet, the Medici
Of Florence boast.

Troth, and I have been lik'ned
To all these Princes.

I Will be sworn, I heard it.

I know not how! it is not any one,
But even the very choice of all their features.

I Will in, and laugh.

A certain touch, or air,
That sparkles a divinity, beyond
An earthly beauty!

O, you play the courtier.

Good lady, gi' me leave --

In faith, I may not,
To mock me, sir.

To burn in this sweet flame:
The Phoenix never knew a nobler death.

Nay, now you court the courtier: and destroy
What you would build. This art, sir, in your words,
Calls your whole faith in question.

By my soul --

Nay, oaths are made of the same air, sir.

Nature
Never bestowed upon mortality,
A more vnblam'd, a more harmonious feature:
She played the step-dame in all faces, else.
Sweet madame, le' me be particular --

Particular, sir? I pray you, know your distance.

In no ill sense, sweet lady, but to ask
How your fair graces pass the hours? I see
Yo'are lodged, here, in the house of a rare man,
An excellent Artist: but, what is that to you?

Yes, sir. I study here the mathematiques,
And distillation.

O, I cry your pardon.
H' is a divine instructor! can extract

Do thou not laugh?

Yes. Are they gone?

All Is clear.

The widow is come.

And your quarrelling disciple?

I.

I must to my Captaine-ship again, then.

Stay, bring 'hem in, first.

So I meant. What is she?
A Bony-bell?

I know not.

We Will draw lots,
You Will stand to that?

What else?

O, for a suite,
To fall now, like a cortine: flap.

To th'dore, man.

You Will have the first kiss, 'cause I am not ready.

Yes, and perhaps hit you through both the nostrils.

Who would you speak with?

Where Is the Captain?

Gone, sir,
About some business.

Gone?

He Will return straight.
But master Doctor, his Lieutenant, is here.

Come near, my worshipful Boy, my terrae Fili,
That is, my Boy of land; make thy approches:
Welcome, I know thy lusts, and thy desires,
And I will serve, and satisfy 'hem. Begin,
Charge me from thence, or thence, or in this line;
Here is my center: Ground thy quarrel.

You lie.

How, child of wrath, and anger! the loud lie?
For what, my sudden Boy?

Nay, that look you too,
I am aforehand.

O, this's no true Grammar,
And as ill Logic! You must render causes, child,
Your first, and second Intentions, know your canons,
And your divisions, moodes, degrees, and differences,
Your praedicaments, substance, and accident,
Series externe, and interne, with their causes
Efficient, material, formal, final,
And have your elements perfect --

What is this!
The angry tongue he talks in?

That false precept,
Of being aforehand, has deceived a number;
And made 'hem enter quarrels, oftentimes,
Before they were aware: and, afterward,
Against their wills.

How must I do then, sir?

I cry this lady mercy. She should, first,
Have been saluted. I do call you lady,
Because you are to be one, ere't be long,
My soft, and buxome widow.

Is she, i-faith?

Yes, or my art is an egregious liar.

How know you?

By inspection, on her forehead,
And subtlety of her lip, which must be tasted
Often, to make a judgment. 'Slight, she melts
Like a Myrobalane! Here is, yet, a line
In riuo frontis, tells me, he is no knight.

What is he then, sir?

Let me see your hand.
O, your linea Fortunae makes it plain;
And stella, here, in monte Veneris:
But, most of all, iunctura annularis.
He is a soldier, or a man of art, lady:
But shall have some great honor, shortly.

Brother,
He Is a rare man, believe me!

Hold your peace.
Here comes the the other rare man. 'Saue you Captain.

Good master KASTRIL. Is this your sister?

I, sir.
Please you to kusse her, and be proud to know her?

I shall be proud to know you, lady.

Brother,
He calls me lady, too.

I, peace. I heard it.

The Count is come.

Where is he?

At the door.

Why, you must entertain him.

What'll you do
With these the while?

Why, have 'hem up, and show 'hem
Some fustian book, or the dark glass.

Before god,
She is a delicate dab-chick! I must have her.

Must you? I, if your fortune will, you must.
Come sir, the Captain will come to us presently.
I Will have you to my chamber of demonstrations,
Where I Will show you both the Grammar, and Logic,
And Rhetoric of quarrelling; my whole method,
Drawn out in tables: and my instrument,
That ha^h the several scale upon it, shall make you
Able to quarrel, at a strawes breadth, by Moone-light.
And, lady, I Will have you look in a glass,
Some half an hour, but to clear your eyesight,
Against you see your fortune: which is greater,
Then I may judge upon the sudden, trust me.

WHere are you, Doctor?

I Will come to you presently*

I will have this same widow, now I have seen her,
On any composition.

What do you say?

Have you disposed of them?

I have sent 'hem up.

SVBTLE, in troth, I needs must have this widow.

Is that the matter?

Nay, but hear me.

Go to,
If you rebel once, DOL shall know it all.

And scrub'd, and fub'd, dear Don, before you go.
You shall, in faith, my sciruie babioun Don:
Be curried, clawed, and flaw'd, and taw'd, indeed.
I will the heartilier go about it now,
And make the widow a punke, so much the sooner,
To be revenged on this impetuous FACE:
The quickly doing of it is the grace.

COme lady: I knew, the Doctor would not leave,
Till he had found the very nick of her fortune.

To be a Countess, say you? A Spanish Countess, sir.

Why? is that better then an English Countess?

Better? 'Slight, make you that a question, lady?

Nay, she is a fool, Captain, you must pardon her.

Ask from your courtier, to your innes of court-man,
To your mere millaner: they will tell you all,
Your Spanish iennet is the best horse. Your Spanish
Stoop is the best garb. Your Spanish beard
Is the best cut. Your Spanish ruffes are the best
Wear. Your Spanish Pauin the best dance.
Your Spanish titillation in a glove
The best perfume. And, for your Spanish pike,
And Spanish blade, let your poor Captain speak.
Here comes the Doctor.

My most honored lady,
(For so I am now to style you, having found
By this my scheme, you are to undergo
An honorable fortune, very shortly.)
What will you say now, if some --

I have told her all, sir.
And her right worshipful brother, here, that she shall be
A Countess: do not delay 'hem, sir. A Spanish Countess.

Still, my scarce worshipful Captain, you can keep
No secret. Well, since he has told you, madame,
Do you forgive him, and I do.

She shall do that, sir.
I Will look to it, it is my charge.

Well then. Naught rests
But that she fit her love, now, to her fortune.

Truly, I shall never brook a Spaniard.

No?

Never, sin' eighty-eight could I abide 'hem,
And that was some three year before I was borne, in truth.

Come, you must love him, or be miserable:
Choose, which you will.

By this good rush, persuade her,
She will cry straw-berries else, within this twelue-month.

Nay, shads, and mackrell, which is worse.

Indeed, sir?

Gods lid, you shall love him, or I Will kick you.

Why?
I Will do as you will have me, brother.

Do,
Or by this hand, I Will maull you.

Nay, good sir,
Be not so fierce.

No, my enraged child,
She will be ruled. What, when she comes to taste
The pleasures of a Countess! to be courted --

And kissed, and ruffled!

I, behind the hangings.

And then come ^orth in pomp!

And know her state!

Of keeping all th'idolaters of the chamber
Barer to her, then at their prayers!

Is served
Upon the knee!

And has her pages, huishers,
Footmen, and coaches --

Her six mares --

Nay, eight!

To hurry her through London, to the Exchange,
Bet'lem, the China-houses --

Yes, and have
The citizens gape at her, and praise her tyres!
And my-lords goose-turd bands, that rides with her!

Most brave! By this hand, you are not my suster,
If you refuse.

I will not refuse, brother.

Que es esto, Sennores, que non se venga?
Esta tardanza me mata!

It is the Count come!
The Doctor knew he would be here, by his art.

En gallanta Madama, Don! gallantissima!

Por todos los dioses, la mas acabada
Hermosura, que he visto en mi vida!

Is It not a gallant language, that they speak?

An admirable language! Is It not French?

No, Spanish, sir.

It goes like law- French,
And that, they say, is the court-liest language.

List, sir.

El Sol ha perdido su lumbre, con el
Resplandor, que trae esta dama. Valga me dios!

He' admires your sister.

Must not she make curtsie?

'Ods will, she must go to him, man; and kiss him!
It is the Spanish fashion, for the women
To make first court.

It Is true he tells you, sir:
His art knows all.

Por que no se acude?

He speaks to her, I think?

That he does sir.

Por el amor de dios, que es esto, que se tarda?

Nay, see: she will not understand him! Gull.
Noddy.

What say you brother?

Ass, my suster,
Go kusse him, as the cunning man would have you,
I Will thrust a pin in your buttocks else.

O, no sir.

Sennora mia, mi persona muy indigna esta
All gar a tanta Hermosura.

A peck of coals, or so, which is cold comfort, sir.

O my voluptuous mind! I am justly punished.

And so am I, sir.

Cast from all my hopes --

Nay, certainties, sir.

By mine own base affections.

O, the cursed fruits of vice, and lust!

Good father,
It was my sin. Forgive it.

Hangs my roof
Over us still, and will not fall, O justice,
Upon us, for this wicked man!

Nay, look, sir,
You grieve him, now, with staying in his sight:
Good sir, the noble man will come too, and take you,
And that may breed a tragoedie.

I Will go.

I, and repent at home, sir. It may be,
For some good penance, you may ha'it, yet,
A hundred pound to the box at Bet'lem --

Yes.

For the restoring such as have their wits.

I Will do it.

I Will send one to you to receive it.

Do.
Is no proiection left?

All flowne, or stinks, sir.

Will naught be saved, that is good for medicine, think thou?

I cannot tell, sir. There will be, perhaps,
Something, about the scraping of the shardes,
Will cure the itch: though not your itch of mind, sir.
It shall be saved for you, and sent home. Good sir,
This way: for fear the lord should meet you.

FACE.

I.

Is he gone?

Yes, and as heavily
As all the gold he hoped for, were in his blood.
Let us be light, though.

I, as balls, and bound
And hit our heads against the roof for joy:
There Is so much of our care now cast away.

Now to our Don.

Yes, your young widow, by this time
Is made a Countess, FACE: Sh' has been in travail
Of a young heir for you.

Good, sir.

Off with your case,
And greet her kindly, as a bridegroom should,
After these common hazards.

Very well, sir.
Will you go fetch Don DIEGO off, the while?

And fetch him over too, if you will be pleased, sir:
Would DOL were in her place, to pick his pockets now.

Why, you can do it as well, if you would set to it.
I pray you prove your virtue.

For your sake, sir.

LAdy, you see into what hands, you are fallen;
Among what a nest of villains! and how near
Your honor was to have caught a certain clap
(Through your credulity) had I but been
So punctually forward, as place, time,
And other circumstance would have made a man:
For yo'are a handsome woman: would yo' were wise, too.
I am a gentleman, come here disguised,
Only to find the knaueries of this Citadell,
And where I might have wronged your honor, and have not,
I claim some interest in your love. You are,
They say, a widow, rich: and I am a batcheler,
Worth naught: Your fortunes may make me a man,
As mine have preserved you a woman. Think upon it,
And whether, I have deserved you, or no.

I will, sir.

And for these houshold-rogues, let me alone,
To treat with them.

How does my noble DIEGO?
And my dear madame, Countess? Has the Count
Been courteous, lady? liberal? and open?
Donzell, me thinks you look melancholic,
After your coitum, and scuruy! True-ly,
I do not like the dullness of your eye:
It has a heavy cast, it is vpsee Dutch,
And says you are a lumpish whore-master.
Be lighter, I will make your pockets so.

Will you, Don bawd, and pick-purse? How now? Reele you?
Stand up sir, you shall find since I am so heavy,
I Will gi' you equal weight.

Help, murder!

No, sir.
There Is no such thing intended. A good cart,
And a clean whip shall ease you of that fear.
I am the Spanish Don, that should be cossened,
Do you see? cossened? Where Is your Captain FACE?
That parcell-broker, and whole-bawd, all rascal.

How, SVRLY!

O, make your approach, good Captain.
I'haue found, from whence your copper rings, and spoones
Come, now, wherewith you cheat abroad in tauernes.
'Twas here, you learned t'anoint your boot with brimstone,
Then rub men's gold on it, for a kind of touch,
And say 'twas naught, when you had changed the color,
That you might have it for nothing? And this Doctor,

I know not, NAB: thou shall, if I can help it.
HIERONYMO'S old cloak, ruff, and hat will serve,
I Will tell thee more, when thou bringst 'hem.

Sir, I know
The Spaniard hates the Brethren, and has spies
Upon their actions: and that this was one
I make no scruple. But the holy Synod
Have been in prayer, and meditation, for it.
And it is revealed no less, to them, then me,
That casting of money is most lawful.

True.
But here, I cannot do it; if the house
Should chance to be suspected, all would out,
And we be locked up, in the tower, for ever,
To make gold there (for th'state) never come out:
And, then, are you defeated.

I will tell
This to the Elders, and the weaker Brethren,
That the whole company of the Separation
May join in humble prayer again.

And fasting.)

Yea, for some fitter place. The peace of mind
Rest with these walls.

Thanks, courteous ANANIAS.

What did he come for?

About casting dollers,
Presently, out of hand. And so, I told him,
A Spanish minister came here to spy,
Against the faithful --

I conceive. Come SVBTLE,
Thou art so down upon the least disaster!
How would though have done, if I had not helped thee out?

I thank thee FACE, for the angry Boy, i-faith.

Who would have looked, it should have been that rascal?
SVRLY? He had died his beard, and all. Well, sir,
Here Is damask come, to make you a suit.

Where Is DRVGGER?

He is gone to borrow me a Spanish habit,
I Will be the Count, now.

But where is the widow?

Within, with my lords sister: Madame DOL
Is entertayning her.

By your favor, FACE,
Now she is honest, I will stand again.

You will not offer it?

Why?

Stand to your word,
Or -- here comes

She knows --

Yo'are tyrannous still.

Strict for my right. How now, DOL? Hast'told her,
The Spanish Count will come?

Yes, but another is come,
You little looked for!

Who Is that?

Your master:
The master of the house.

How, DOL!

She lies.
This is some trick. Come, leave your quiblins, DOROTHEE.

Look out, and see.

Art thou in earnest?

'Slight,
Forty of the neighbors are about him, talking.

It Is he, by this good day.

'Twill prove ill day,
For some on us.

We are undone, and taken.

Lost, I Am afraid.

You said he would not come,
While there dyed one a week, within the liberties.

No: 'twas within the walls.

Was It so? Cry' you mercy:
I thought the liberties. What shall we do now, FACE?

Be silent: not a word, if he call, or knock.
I Will into mine old shape again, and meet him,
Of JEREMY, the butler. IN the mean time,
Do you two pack up all the goods, and purchase,
That we can carry in the two trunkes. I Will keep him
Off for to day, if I cannot longer: and then
At night, I Will ship you both away to Ratcliffe,
Where we will meet to morrow, and there we will share.
Let MAMMON'S brass, and pewter keep the cellar:
We Will have another time for that. But, DOL,
'Pray thee, go heat a little water, quickly,
SVBTLE must shave me. All my Captains beard
Must off, to make me appear smooth JEREMY.
You Will do it?

Yes, I Will shave you, as well as I can.

And not cut my throat, but trim me?

You shall see, sir.

HAs there been such resort, say you?

Daily, sir.

And nightly, too.

I, some as brave as lords.

Ladies, and gentlewomen.

Citizens wives.

And knights.

In coches.

Yes, and oyster-women.

Beside other galla^ts.

Sailors wives.

Tabacco-men.

Another Pimlico!

What should my knave advance,
To draw this company? He hung out no banners
Of a strange Calfe, with five legs, to be seen?
Or a huge Lobster, with six claws?

No, sir.

We had gone in then, sir.

He has no gift
Of teaching in the nose, that ere I knew of!
You saw no Bills set up, that promised cure
Of agues, or the toothache?

No such thing, sir.

Nor heard a drum struck, for Babiouns, or Puppets?

Neither, sir.

What device should he bring forth now!
I love a teeming wit, as I love my nourishment.
'Pray god he have not kept such open house,
That he has sold my hangings, and my bedding:
I left him nothing else. If he have eat 'hem,
A plague of the moath, say I. Sure he has got
Some bawdy pictures, to call all this ging;

Should be to day pronounced, to all your friends.
And where be your andirons now? and your brass pots?
That should have been golden flaggons, and great wedges?

Let me but breath. What! They have shut their doors,
Methinks!

I, now, it is holy day with them.

Rogues,
Coseners, impostors, bawds.

What mean you, sir?

To enter if we can.

Another man's house?
Here is the owner, sir. Turn you to him,
And speak your business.

Are you, sir, the owner?

Yes, sir.

And are those knaves, within, your cheaters?

What knaves? what cheaters?

SVBTLE, and his Lungs.

The gentleman is distracted, sir! No lungs,
Nor lights have been seen here these three weeks, sir,
Within these doors, upon my word!

Your word,
Groom arrogant?

Yes, sir, I am the housekeeper,
And know the keys have not been out of my hands.

This's a new FACE?

You do mistake the house, sir!
What sign was it at?

You rascal! This is one
OF the confederacy. Come, let us get officers,
And force the door.

'Pray you stay, gentlemen.

No, sir, we will come with warrant.

I, and then,
We shall have your doors open.

What means this?

I cannot tell, sir!

These are two of the gallants,
That we do think we saw.

Two of the fools?
You talk as idly as they. Good faith, sir,
I think the Moon has cras'd 'hem all! (O me,
The angry Boy come too? He Will make a noise,
And nere away till he have betrayed us all.)

What rogues, bawds, slaves, you will open the door anon,
Punque, cocatrice, my suster. By this light
I Will fetch the marshall to you. You are a whore,
To keep your castle --

Who would you speak with, sir?

The bawdy Doctor, and the cosening Captain,
And PVS my suster.

This is something, sure!

Upon my trust, the doors were never open, sir.

I have heard all their tricks, told me twice over,
By the fat knight, and the lean gentleman.

Here comes another.

ANANIAS too?
And his Pastor?

The doors are shut against us.

Come forth, you seed of sulphur, sons of fire,
Your stench, it is broke forth: abomination
Is in the house.

I, my suster's there.

The place,
It is become a cage of unclean birds.

Yes, I will fetch the scauenger, and the constable.

You shall do well.

We Will join, to weed them out.

You will not come then? punque, device, my suster!

Call her not sister. She is a harlot, verily.

I Will raise the street.

Good gentlemen, a word.

Satan, avoid, and hinder not our zeal.

The world's turned Bet'lem.

These are all broke loose,
Out of S. KATHER'NES, where they use to keep,
The better sort of mad-folkes.

All these persons
We saw go in, and out, here.

Yes, indeed, sir.

These were the parties.

Peace, you drunkards. Sir,
I wonder at it! Please you, to give me leave
To touch the door, I Will try, an'the lock be changed.

It mazes me!

Good faith, sir, I believe,
There Is no such thing. It Is all deceptio visus.
Would I could get him away.

Master Captain, master Doctor.

Who Is that?

(Our clark within, that I forgot!) I know not, sir.

For gods sake, when will her Grace be at leisure?

Ha!
Illusions, some spirit of the air: (his gag is melted,
And now he sets out the throat.)

I am almost stiffled --

Would you were altogether.)

It Is in the house.
Ha! List.

Believe it, sir, in the air!

Peace, you --

Mine aunts Grace does not use me well.

You fool,
Peace, you will mar all.

Or you will else, you rogue.

O, is it so? Then you converse with spirits!
Come sir. No more o'your tricks, good JEREMY,
The truth, the shortest way.

Dismiss this rabble, sir.
What shall I do? I am caught.

Good neighbors,
I thank you all. You may depart. Come sir,
You know that I am an indulgent master:
And therefore, conceal nothing. What Is your medicine,
To draw so many several sorts of wild-fowle?

Sir, you were wont to affect mirth, and wit:
(But here is no place to talk on it in the street.)
Give me but leave, to make the best of my fortune,
And only pardon me the abuse of your house:
It Is all I beg. I Will help you to a widow,
In recompense, that you shall gi' me thanks for,
Will make you seven years younger, and a rich one.
It Is but your putting on a Spanish cloak,
I have her within. You need not fear the house,
It was not visited.

But by me, who came
Sooner then you expected.

It is true, sir.
'Pray you forgive me.

Well: let us see your widow.

HOw! have you eaten your gag?

Yes faith, it crumbled
Away in my mouth.

You have spoiled all then.

No,
I hope my aunt of Faery will forgive me.

Your aunt's a gracious lady: but in troth
You were to blame.

The fume did overcome me,
And I did do it to stay my stomach. 'Pray you
So satisfy her Grace. Here comes the Captain.

How now! Is his mouth down?

I! he has spoken!

(A pox, I heard him, and you too.) He Is vn-done, then.
(I have been feign to say, the house is haunted
With spirits, to keep churl back.

And have thou done it?

Sure, for this night.

Why, then triumph, and sing
Of FACE so famous, the precious king
Of present wits.

Did you not hear the coil,
About the door?

Yes, and I dwindled with it.)

Show him his aunt, and let him be dispatched:
I Will send her to you.

Well sir, your aunt her Grace,
Will give you audience presently, on my suit,
And the Captains word, that you did not eat your gag,
In any contempt of her Highness.

Not I, in troth, sir.

Here she is come. Down o'your knees, and wriggle:
She has a stately presence. Good. Yet nearer,
And bid, God save you.

Madame.

And your aunt.

And my most gracious aunt, god save your Grace.

Nephew, we thought to have been angry with you:
But that sweet face of yours, has turned the tide,
And made it flow with joy, that eb'd of love.
Arise, and touch our velvet gown.

The skirts,
And kiss 'hem. So.

Let me now stroke that head,
Much, nephew, shall thou win; much shall thou spend;
Much shall thou give away: much shall thou lend.

(I, much, indeed.) Why do you not thank her Grace?

I cannot speak, for joy.

See, the kind wretch!
Your Graces kins-man right.

Give me the Bird.
Here is your Fly in a purse, about your neck, cosen,
Wear it, and feed it, about this day seu' night,
On your right wrist --

Open a vein, with a pin,
And let it suck but once a week: till then,
You must not look on it.

No. And, kins-man,
Bear your self worthy of the blood you come on.

Her grace would ha'you eat no more Wool-sack pies,
Nor Dagger frume'ty.

Nor break his fast,
In heaven, and hell.

She Is with you every where!
Nor play with Costar-mongers, at mum-chance, tray-trip.
God make you rich, (when as your aunt has done it:) but keep
The gallant'st company, and the best games --

Yes, sir.

Gleeke and primero: and what you get, be true to us.

By this hand, I will.

You may bring's a thousand pound,
Before to morrow night, (if but three thousand,
Be stirring) an' you will.

I swear, I will then.

Your Ply will learn you all games.

Have you done there?

Your grace will command him no more duties?

No:
But come, and see me often. I may chance
To leave him three or four hundred chests of treasure,
And some twelve thousand acres of Faerie land:
If he game well, and comely, with good gamesters.

There Is a kind aunt! kiss her departing part.
But you must sell you forty mark a year, now:

I, sir, I mean.

Or, gi't away: pox on it.

I Will gi't mine aunt. I Will go and fetch the writings.

It Is well, away.

Where Is SVBTLE?

Here. What news?

DRVGGER is at the door, go take his suite,
And bid him fetch a Parson, presently:
Say, he shall marry the widow. Thou shall spend
A hundred pound by the service! Now, queen DOL,
Have you packed up all?

Yes.

And how do you like
The lady PLYANT?

A good dull innocent.

Here Is your HIERONIMO'S cloak, and hat.

Give me 'hem.

And the ruff too?

Yes, I Will come to you presently.

Now, he is gone about his project, DOL,
I told you of, for the widow.

It Is direct
Against our articles.

Well, we will fit him, wench.
Have thou gulled her of her jewels, or her bracelets?

No, but I will do it.

Soon at night, my DOLLY,
When we are shipped, and all our goods aboard,
Eastward for Ratcliffe; we will turn our course
To Brainford, westward, if thou'saist the word:
And take our leaves of this ore-weaning rascal,
This peremtorie FACE.

Content, I Am weary of him.

Tho 'hast cause, when the slave will run a wiuing, DOL,
Against the instrument, that was drawn between us.

I Will pluck his bird as bare as I can.

Yes, tell her,
She must by any means, address some present
To the cunning man; make him amends, for wronging
His art with her suspicion; send a ring;

Or chain of pearl; she will be tortured else
Extremely in her sleep, say: and have strange things
Come to her. Will thou?

Yes.

My fine flitter-mouse,
My bird of the night; we will tickle it at the pigeons,
When we have all, and may vn-lock the trunkes,
And say, this's mine, and thine, and thine, and mine --

What now, a billing?

Yes, a little exalted
In the good passage of our stock-affaires.

DRVGGER has brought his Parson, take him in, SVBTLE,
And send NAB back again, to wash his face.

I will: and shave himself?

If you can get him.

You are hot upon it, FACE, what ere it is!

A trick, that DOL shall spend ten pound a month by.
Is he gone?

The Chaplain waits you in the hall, sir.

I Will go bestow him.

He Will now marry her, instantly.

He cannot, yet, he is not ready. Dear DOL,
Cosen her of all thou can. To deceive him
Is no deceit, but justice, that would break
Such an inextricable tie as ours was.

Let me alone to fit him.

Come, my venturers,
You have packed up all? Where be the trunkes? Bring forth.

Here.

Let Us see 'hem. Where Is the money?

Here,
In this.

MAMMONS ten pound: eight score before.
The Brethrens money, this. DRVGGERS, and DAPPERS.
What paper's that?

The jewel of the waiting maids,
That stole it from her lady, to know certain --

If she should have precedence of her mistress?

Yes.

What box is that?

The fish-wiues rings, I think:
And th'ale-wiues single money. Is It not DOL?

Yes: and the whistle, that the saylors wife
Brought you, to know, and her husband were with WARD.

We Will wet it to morrow: and our siluer-beakers,
And tavern cups. Where be the French petti-coats,
And girdles, and hangers?

Here, in the trunk,
And the bolts of lawne.

Is DRVGGERS damask, there?
And the tobacco?

Yes.

Give me the keys.

Why you the keys!

No matter, DOL: because
We shall not open 'hem, before he comes.

It Is true, you shall not open them, indeed:
Nor have 'hem forth. Do you see? Not forth, DOL.

No!

No, my smock-rampant. The right is, my master
Knows all, has pardoned me, and he will keep 'hem,
Doctor, it is true (you look) for all your figures:
I sent for him, indeed. Wherefore, good partners,
Both he, and she, be satisfied: for, here
Determines the indenture tripartite,
Twixt SVBTLE, DOL, and FACE. All I can do
Is to help you over the wall, of the backside;
Or lend you a sheet, to save your velvet gown, DOL.
Here will be officers, presently; bethink you,
Of some course suddenly to escape the dock:
For thither you will come else. Hark you, thunder.

You are a precious fiend!

Open the door.

DOL, I am sorry for thee i-faith. But hearst thou?
It shall go hard, but I will place thee some-where:
Thou shall have my letter to mistress AMO.

Hang you --

Or madame Caesarean.

Pox upon you, rogue,
Would I had but time to beat thee.

SVBTLE,
Let Us know where you set up next; I Will send you
A customer, now and then, for old acquaintance:
What new course ha'you?

Rogue, I Will hang my self:
That I may walk a greater devil, then thou,
And haunt thee in the flock-bed, and the buttery.

WHat do you mean, my masters?

Open your door,
Cheaters, bawds, coniurers.

Or we will break it open.

What warrant have you?

Warrant enough, sir, doubt not:
If you will not open it.

Is there an officer, there?

Yes, two, or three for failing.

Have but patience,
And I will open it straight.

Sir, have you done?
Is it a marriage? perfect?

Yes, my brain.

Off with your ruff, and cloak then, be your self, sir.

Down with the door.

'Slight, ding it open.

Hold.
Hold gentlemen, what means this violence?

Where is this Colliar?

And my Captain FACE?

These day-Owles.

That are birding in men's purses.

Madame Suppository.

Doxey, my sister.

Locusts
Of the foul pit.

Profane as BELL, and the Dragon.

Worse then the Grasse-hoppers, or the Lice of Egypt.

Good gentlemen, hear me. Are you officers,
And cannot stay this violence?

Keep the peace.

Gentlemen, what is the matter? Whom do you seek?

Be patient ANANIAS.

I am strong,
And will stand up, well girt, against an host,
That threaten GAD in exile.

I shall send you
To Amsterdam, to your cellar.

I will pray there,
Against thy house: may dogs defile thy walls,
And waspes, and hornets breed beneath thy roof,
This seat of false-hood, and this cave of cos'nage.

Another too?

Not I sir, I am no Brother.

Away you HARRY NICHOLAS, do you talk?

No, this was ABEL DRVGGER. Good sir, go,
And satisfy him; tell him, all is done:
He stayed too long a washing of his face.
The Doctor, he shall hear of him at Westchester;
And of the Captain, tell him at Yarmouth: or
Some good port-towne else, lying for a wind.
If you get off the angry Child, now, sir --

Come on, you yew, you have matched most sweetly, have you not?
Did not I say, I would never have you tupt
But by a dubbed Boy, to make you a lady- Tom?
'Slight, you are a mammet! O, I could touse you, now.
Death, mun' you marry with a pox?

You lie, Boy;
As sound as you: and I am aforehand with you.

Anon?

Come, will you quarrel? I will feize you, sirrah.
Why do you not buckle to your tools?

Gods light!
This is a fine old Boy, as ere I saw!

What, do you change your copy, now? Proceed,
Here stands my dove: stoop at her, if you dare.

'Slight I must love him! I cannot choose, i-faith!
And I should be hanged for it. Suster, I protest,
I honor thee, for this match.

O, do you so, sir?

Yes, and thou can take tobacco, and drink, old Boy,
I Will give her five hundred pound more, to her marriage,
Then her own state.

Fill a pipe-full, JEREMY.

Yes, but go in, and take it, sir.

We will.
I will be ruled by thee in any thing, JEREMY.

'Slight, thou art not hide-bound! thou art a Iouy' Boy!
Come let us in, I pray thee, and take our whiffes.

Whiffe in with your sister, brother Boy. That master
That had received such happiness by a servant,
In such a widow, and with so much wealth,
Were very ungrateful, if he would not be
A little indulgent to that servants wit,
And help his fortune, though with some small strain
Of his own candor. Therefore, gentlemen,
And kind Spectators, if I have out-stript
An old man's gravity, or strict canon, think
What a young wife, and a good brain may do:
Stretch ages truth sometimes, and crack it too.
Speak for thy self, knave.

So I will, sir. Gentlemen,
My part a little fell in this last Scene,
Yet 'twas decorum. And though I am clean
Got off, from SVBTLE, SVRLY, MAMMON, DOL,
Hot ANANIAS, DAPPER, DRVGGER, all
With whom I traded; yet I put my self
On you, that are my country: and this pelf,
Which I have got, if you do quit me, rests
To feast you often, and inuit new ghests.

This Comoedie was first acted, in the year 1610.

By the Kings Majesty's SERVANTS.

The principal Comoedians were,

With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.


