IT is a noble and just advantage, that the things subjected to Understanding
have of those which are objected to Sense, that the one sort are but
momentarie, and merely taking; the other impressing, and lasting: Else the
Glory of all these Solemnities had perished like a Blaze, and gone out, in the
Beholders eyes. So short-lived are the Bodies of all Things, in comparison of
their Souls. And, though Bodies oft-times have the ill luck to be sensually
preferred, they find afterward, the good fortune (when Souls live) to be
utterly forgotten. This it is has made the most royal Princes, and greatest
Persons, (who are commonly the Personaters of these Actions) not only studious
of Riches, and Magnificence in the outward Celebration, or Show; (which rightly
becomes them) but curious after the most high, and hearty Inventions, to
furnish the inward parts: (and those grounded upon Antiquity, and solid
Learnings) which, though their Voice be taught to sound to present Occasions,
their Sense, or does, or should always lay hold on more removed Mysteries.
And, howsoever some may squeamishly cry out, that all Endevor of Learning, and
Sharpness in these transitory Devises especially, where it steps beyond
their little, or (let me not wrong 'hem) no Brain at all is superfluous; I am
contented, these fastidious Stomachs should leave my full Tables, and enjoy at
home, their clean empty Trenchers, fittest for such airy Tastes: where perhaps
a few Italian Herbs, picked up, and made into a Sallade, may find sweeter
acceptance, than al, the most norishing, and sound Meats of the world

For these Men's palates, let not me answer, O Muses. It is not my fault, if I
fill them out Nectar, and they run to Metheglin. Vaticana bibant, si
delectentur

All the courtesy I can do them, is to cry, again; Praetereant, si quid non
facit ad stomachum

As I will, from the thought of them, to my better Subject.

ON the Night of the Masks (which were two, One of Men, the Other of Women)
the Scene being drawn, there was first discovered an Altar; upon which was
inscribed, in Letters of Gold

To this Altar entered five Pages, attired in white, bearing Tapers of Virgin
Wax; Behind them, One representing a Bridegroom: His

On the other hand, entered HYMEN (the God of Marriage) in a saffron-coloured
Robe, his vnder-Vestures white, his Sockes yellow, a yellow Veil of silk on
his left arm, his Head crowned with Roses, and Marioram, in his right hand a
Torch of

After him a Youth, attired in white, bearing another Light, of white Thorn;
under his arm, a little wicker- Flasket, shut: Behind him two Others, in white,
the one bearing a Distaffe, the other a Spindle. Betwixt these a Personated
Bride, supported, her hair flowing, and loose, sprinkled with gray; on her
head a Gyrland of Roses, like a Turret; her Garments white: and, on her back, a
Weathers Fleece hanging down: Her Zone, or Girdle about her waste of white
wool, fastened with the Herculean Knot

In the middst went the Auspices; after them, two that sung, in several
colored silks. Of which, One bore the Water, the Other the Fire: Last of all
the Musicians, diversely attired, all crowned with Roses; and, with this Song
began

BId all profane away;
None here may stay
To view our Mysteries,
But, who themselves have been,
Or will, in Time, be seen
The selfsame Sacrifice.
For UNION, Mistress of these Rites,
Will be observed with Eyes,
As simple as her Nights.
Fly then, all profane, away,
Fly far off, as has the Day;
Night her Cortine does display,
And this is HYMEN'S Holiday.
The Song being ended, HYMEN presented him self foremost; and, after some sign
of Admiration, began to speak

What more than usual Light
(Throughout the Place extended)
Makes IVNO'S Fane so bright!
Is there some greater Deity descended?
Orraigne, on earth, those Powers
So rich, as with their beams
Grace UNION more than our's;
And bound her Influence, in their happier streams?
It Is so: This same is he,
The King, and Priest of Peace!
And that his Empress, she,
That sits so crowned with her own increase!
O you, whose better Blisses,
Have proov'd the strict embrace
Of UNION, with chaste kisses,
And seen it flow so in your happy Race;
That know, how well it binds
The fighting Seeds of Things,
Winnes Natures, Sexes, Minds,
And every discord in true Music brings:
Sit now propitious Aids,
To Rites, so duly prized;
And view two Noble Maids,
Of different Sex, to UNION sacrifiz'd.
In honor of that blessed Estate,
Which all Good Minds should celebrate.

Here out of a Microcosme, or Globe (figuring Man) with a kind of contentious
Music, issued forth the first Masque, of eight Men, whose Names in order, as
they were then Marshalled, by Couples, I have Heraldry enough to set down.

These represented the four Humors, and four Affections, all gloriously
attired, distinguished only, by their several Ensigns, and Colors; And,
dancing out on the Stage, in their return, at the end of their Dance, drew
all their swords, offered to encompasse the Altar, and disturb the
Ceremonies. at which HYMEN troubled, spoke

SAve, save the Virgins; Keep your hal^ow'd Lights
Untouched: And with their flame defend our Rites.
The four vntempred Humors are broke out:
And, with their wild Affections, go about
To ravish all Religion. If there be
A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Body,
Or little World of Man, from whence these came,
Look forth, and with thy bright and
Instruct their Darkness, make them know, and see,
In wronging these, they have rebelled against thee.

Hereat, REASON seated in the top of the Globe (as in the brain, or highest
part of Man) figured in a venerable Personage, her hair white, and trayling
to her waste, crowned with Lights, her Garments blew, and semined with Star^es,
girded unto her with a white Bend, filled with Arithmeticall Figures, in one
hand bearing a Lamp, in the other a bright Sword, descended, and spoke

Forbear your rude attempt; what Ignorance
Could yield you so profane, as to advance
One thought in Act, against these Mysteries?
Are VNION'S Orgies of so slender price?
She that makes Souls, with Bodies, mix in Love,
Contracts the World in one, and therein JOVE;
Is Spring, and End of all Things yet, most strange!
Her self nor suffers Spring, nor End, nor Change.
No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
For none but Humors and Affections would
Have dared so rash a venture. You will say
It was your Zeal, that gave your powers the sway;
And urge the masqued, and disguisd pretense
Of saving Blood, and succ'ring Innocence?
So want of Knowledge, still, begets iarres,
When humorous Earthlings will control the Stars.
Inform your selves, with safer Reverence,
To these mysterious Rites, whose mysticke sense
REASON (which all things but it self) confounds)
Shall clear unto you, from th'authentique grounds.

At this, the Humors and Affections sheathed their swords, and retired amazed
to the sides of the Stage, while HYMEN began to rank the Persons, and order
the Ceremonies: And REASON proceeded to speak

THe Pair, which do each other side,
Though (yet) some space does them divide,
This happy Night must both make one
Blessed Sacrifice, to UNION.
Nor is this Altar hut a Sign
Of one more soft, and more divine
The Geniall Bed, where HYMEN keeps
The solemn Orgies, void of sleeps:
And wildest CUPID, waking, hovers
With adoration 'twixt the Lovers.
The Tead of white, and blooming Thorn,
In token of increase is borne:
As
To fright all Malice from the Night.
Like are the Fire, and Water set;
That, even as Moisture, mixed with Heat,
Helps every Natural Birth, to life;
So, for their Race, join Man, and Wife.
The Veyle shows shamefastness
Th'ingenuous Virgin should profess
At meeting with the Man: Her Hair
That
Is shed with gray, to intimate
She enters to a Matrons state.
For which those Vtensills are borne.
And, that she should not Labor scorn,
Her self a Snowie Fleece does wear,
And these her Rock and Spindle bear,
To show, that Nothing, which is good,
Gives check unto the highest blood.
The Zone of wool about her waste,
Which, in contrary Circles cast,
Does meet in one that binds,
Tells you, so should all Married Minds.
And lastly, these five Waxen Lights
Imply Perfection in the Rites;
For Five the special Number is,
Whence halow'd UNION claymes her bliss.
As being all the Sum, that grows
From the united strengths, of those
Which Male, and Female Numbers we
Do style, and are First Two, and Three.
Which, joined thus, you cannot sever
In aequall parts, but One will ever
Remain as common; so we see
The binding-force of Unity:
For which alone, the peace-full Gods
In Number, always, love the odds;
And even parts as much despise,
Since out of them all Discords rise.

Here, the upper part of the Scene, which was all of Clouds, and made
artificially to swell, and ride like the Rack, began to open; and, the Air
clearing, in the top thereof was discovered Peacockes, her attire rich, and
like a a Fascia of several color'd silks, set with all sorts of Iewelles, and
raisd in the top with Lillies, and Roses; In her right hand she held a Scepter,
in the other a Timbrell, at her golden feet the Region of Fire, with a
continual Motion, was seen to whirle circularly, and IVPITER standing in the
Top (figuring the Heaven) brandishing his Thunder: Beneath her the
Raine-bowe, IRIS, and, on the two sides eight Ladies, attired richly, and alike
in the most celestial colors, who represented her Powers, as she is the
Governesse of Marriage, and made the second Masque. All which, upon the
discovery, REASON made narration of

ANd see, where IVNO, whose great Name
Is VNIO, in the Anagram,
Displayes her glistering State, and Chair,
As she enlightened all the Air!
Hark how the charming Tunes do beat
In sacred Concords bout her seat!
And lo! to grace what these intend,
Eight of her Noblest Powers descend,
Which are enstil'd her Faculties,
That govern nuptial Mysteries;
And wear those Masks before their faces,
Lest, dazzling Mortals with their graces
As they approach them, all Mankind
Should be, like CUPID, stricken blind.
These ORDER waytes for, on the ground,
To keep, that you should not confound
Their measured steps, which only move
About the harmonious sphaere of LOVE.

The names of the eight Ladies, as they were after orderd (to the most
conspicuous show) in their Daunces, by the rule of their statures; were the

Their Descent was made in two great Clouds, that put forth themselves
severally, and (with one measure of time) were seen to stoop, and fall gently
down upon the Earth. The manner of their Habites, came after some Statues of
IVNO, no less airie, than glorious. The dressings of their Heads, rare; so
likewise of their Feet: and all full of splendour, soveraignety, and riches.
Whilst they were descending, this Song was sung at the Altar

THese, these are they,
Whom Humor and Affection must obey;
Who come to deck the geniall Bower,
And bring, with them, the grateful Hour
That crowns such Meetings, and excites
The married Pair to fresh Delights:
As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Oths, and Vows,
Soft Whisperings, Embracements, all the Joys,
And melting Toys,
That chaster LOVE allows.
CHO. Have, have, for HESPERVS his head down bows.
The Song ended, they daunced forth in Paires, and each Pair with a varied and
noble grace; to a rare and full Music of twelve Lutes: led on by ORDER, the
Servant of REASON, who was, there, rather a Person of Ceremony, than Use. His
vnder-Garment was blew, his upper white, and painted full of Arithmeticall, and
Geometrical Figures; his Hair, and Beard long, a Star on his forehead, and
in his hand a Geometrical Staff: To whom, after the Dance, REASON spoke

COnvey them, ORDER, to their places,
And rank them so, in several traces,
As they may set their mixed Powers
Unto the Music of the Hours;
And THESE, by joining with them, know
In better temper how to flow:
Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
Report the virtues of the Dames.
First CVRIS comes to deck the Brides fair Tresse.
Care of the ointments does profess.
IVGA, her office to make One of Twain:
sees that they should so remain.
Fair ITERDVCA leads the Bride her way;
And DOMIDVCA home her steps does stay:
CINXIA the Maid, quit of her Zone defends;
for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.

By this time, the Ladies were payred with the Men, and the whole Sixteen
ranked forth, in order, to dance: and were with this Song provoked

NOw, now begin to set
Your spirits in active heat;
And, since your Hands are met,
Instruct your nimble Feet,
In motions swift, and meet,
The happy ground to beat:
Whilst all this Roof does ring,
And each discording String,
With every varied Voice,
In UNION does rei^yce.
Here, they daunced forth a most neat and curious Measure, full of Subtelty
and Device; which was so excellently performed, as it seemed to take away that
Spirit from the Invention, which the Invention gave to it: and left it
doubtful, whether the Forms flowed more perfectly from the Authors brain, or
their feet. The Strains were all notably different, some of them formed into
Letters, very signifying to the Name of the Bridgroom^, and ended in manner of
a Chain, linking hands: To which, this was spoken

SVch was Golden Chain let down from Heaven;
And not those Linkes more even,
Then these: so sweetly tempered, so combined
By UNION, and refined.
Here no Contention, Envy, Grief, Deceit,
Fear, Jealousy have weight;
But all is Peace, and Love, and Faith, and Bliss:
What Harmony like this?
The Gall, behind the Altar quite is thrown;
This Sacrifice has none.
Now no Affections rage, nor Humors swell;
But all composed dwell.
O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
Can merit with you two?
Without your presence, VENUS can do naught,
Save what with shame is bought:
No Father can himself a Parent show,
Nor any House with prosperous Issue grow.
O then! What Deities will dare
With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?

The speech being ended, they dissolved: and all took forth other Persons,
(Men, and Women,) to dance other Measures, Galliards, and Corranto's; the
whilst this Song importuned them to a fit Remembrance of the Time

Think, yet, how Night does wast,
How much of Time is past,
What more then winged have
Your selves would take,
If you were but to taste
The joy, the Night does cast
(O might it ever last)
On this bright Virgin, and her happy Make.
Their Daunces yet lasting, they were the second time importuned, by Speech.

SSee, see! the bright Star,
That lights Lovers to their War,
Complains, that you her influence loose;
While thus the Night-sports you abuse.

THe longing Bridegroom, in the Porch,
Shows you again, the bated Torch;
And thrice has IVNO Air
With Fire, to sommon your repair.

SEe, now she clean withdrawes her Light;
And (as you should) gives place to Night:
That spreades her broad, and blackest wing
Upon the world, and comes to bring
A Loves,
Some like Sparrowes, some like Doves,
That hop about the Nuptiall-Roome,
And fluttering there (against you come)
Warm the chaste Bower, which strowes,
With many a Lilly, many a Rose.

HAste therefore, haste, and call, Away:
The gentle Night is pressed to pay
The usury of long Delights,
She owes to these protracted Rites.

At this (the whole Scene being drawn again, and all covered with Clouds, as
a Night,) they left off their entermixed Daunces, and returned to their first
Places; where, as they were but beginning to move, this Song, the third time,
urged them

O Know to end, as to begin:
A Minutes loss, in Love, is sin.
These Humors will the Night out wear
In their own Pastimes here;
You do our Rites much wrong,
In seeking to Prolong
These outward Pleasures:
The Night has other Treasures
Then these (though long concea'ld)
Ere day, to be revealed.
Then, know to end, as to begin;
A Minutes loss, in Love, is sin.
Here they daunc'd their last Daunces, full of excellent delight and change,
and, in their latter strain, fell into a fair Orb, or Circle; REASON
standing in the midst, and speaking

HEre stay, and let your Sports be crowned:
The perfect'st Figure is the Round.
Nor fell you in it by adventer,
When REASON was your Guide, and Center.
This, this that beauteous is
of Lovers many-coulor'd Bliss.
Come HYMEN, make an inner Ring,
And let the Sacrificers sing;
Cheer up the faint, and trembling Bride,
That quakes to touch her Bridegroom's side:
Tell her, what IVNO is to JOVE,
The same shall she be to her Love;
His Wife: which we do rather measure
Dignity, then Pleasure.
Up Youths, hold up your Lights in air,
And shake abroad
Now move united, and, in Gate,
As you (in paires) do front the State,
With grateful Honors, thank his Grace
That has so glorified the Place:
And as, in Circle, you depart
Linked hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
May all those Bodies still remain
Whom he, (with so much sacred pain)
No less has bound within his Realms
Then they are with the OCEANS streams.
Long may his UNION find increase
As he, to ours, has deigned his peace.

With this, to a soft strain of Music, they paced once about, in their Ring,
every Pair making their Honors, as they came before the State: and then
dissolving, went down in Couples, led on by HYMEN, the Bride, and Auspices
following, as to the Nupti^ll Bower. After them, the Musicians with this Song,
of which, then, only one Staff was sung; but because I made it both in Form,
and Matter to aemulate that kind of Poem, which was called Epithalamium, and
(by the Auntients) used to be song, when the Bride was led into her Chamber, I
have here set it down whole: and do heartily forgive their ignorance whom it
chances not to please. Hoping, that Nemo doctus me iubeat Thalassionem verbis
dicere non Thalassionis

GLad Time is at his point arrived,
For which Loves hopes were so long-lived.
Lead HYMEN, lead away;
And let no Object stay,
Nor Banquets, (but sweet kisses)
The Turtles from their Blisses.
It Is CUPID calls to arm;
And this his last Alarm.
Shrink not, soft VIRGIN, you will love,
Anon, what you so fear to prove.
This is no killing War,
To which you pressed are;
But fair and gentle strife
Which Lovers call their Life.
It Is CUPID cries to Arm;
And this his last Alarm.
Help Youths, and Virgins, help to sing
The Prize, which HYMEN here does bring,
And did so lately
From forth the Mothers lap,
To place her by that side
Where she must long abide.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
What Star can so deserve of you?
Whose light does still adorn
Your Bride, that ere the Morn,
Shall far more perfect be,
And rise as bright as He;
When like to him) her Name
Is changed, but not her Flame.
Have, tender Lady, and adventer;
The covetous House would have you enter,
That it might wealthy be,
And you, her
Have your own good to meet;
And lift your golden feet
Above the Threshold, high,
With prosperous Augury.
Now, Youths, let go your pretty arms;
The Place within chant's other charms.
Whole showers of Roses flow;
And Violets seem to grow,
Strewn in the Chamber there,
As VENUS Meade it were.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
Good Matrons, that so well are known
To aged Husbands of your own,
Place you our Bride to night;
And Light:
That
Beneath her Spouse's Bed;
Nor
To help the funeral Flame.
So, now you may admit him in;
The Act he covets, is no Sin,
But chaste, and holy Love,
Which HYMEN does approve:
Without whose hallowing Fires
All Aims are base Desires.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
N^w, free from Vulgar Spite, or Noise,
May you enjoy your mutual joys;
Now, You no Fear controules,
But Lips may mingle Souls;
And soft Embraces bind,
To each, the others Mind:
Which may no Power untie,
Till One, or both must die.
And, look, before you yield to slumber,
That your Delights be drawn past number;
"Joys, got with strife, increase.
A^^ect no sleepy peace;
But keep the Brides fair eyes
Awake, with her own Cries,
Which are but Mayden-feares:
And Kisses dry such tears.
Then, Coin them, twixt your Lips so sweet,
And let not Cockles closer meet;
Nor may your Murmuring Loves
Be drowned by CYPRIS Doves:
Let Ivy not so bind
As when your Arms are twined:
That you may Both, e're Day,
Rise perfect every way.
And, IVNO, whose great Powers protect
The Marriage Bed, with good effect
The Labor of this Night
Bless thou, for future Light;
And, Thou, thy happy charge,
Glad GENIUS, enlarge:
That they may Both, e're Day,
Rise perfect every way.
And VENUS, Thou, with timely seed
(Which may their after-Comforts breed)
Inform the gentle Womb;
Nor, let it prove a Tomb:
But, e're ten Moons be wasted,
The Birth, by CYNTHIA hasted.
So may they Both, e're Day,
Rise perfect every Way.
And, when the Babe to light is shown,
Let it be, like each Parent, known;
Much of the Fathers Face,
More of the Mothers Grace:
And either Grand-Sires Spirit,
And Fame let it inherit.
That Men may bless the Embraces,
That joined two such Races.
Cease Youths, and Virgins, you have done;
Shut fast the Door: And, as They soon
To their Perfection have,
So may their ardors last.
So eithers strength outlive
All loss that Age can give:
And, though full Years be told,
Their Forms grow slowly old.
HItherto extended the first Nights Solemnity, whose Grace in the Exequution
left not where to add unto it, with wishing: I mean, (nor do I court them)
in those, that sustained the Nobler parts. Such was the exquisit Performance,
as (beside the Pomp, Splendor, or what we may call Apparrelling of such
Presentiments) that alone (had all else been absent) was of power to surprise
with Delight, and steal away the Spectators from themselves. Nor was there
wanting whatsoever might give to the Furniture, or Complement: either in
riches, or strangeness of the Habites, delicacie of Daunces, Magnificence of
the Scene, or divine Rapture of Music. Only the Envy was, that it lasted
not still, or (now it is past) cannot by Imagination, much less Description,
be recovered to a part of that Spirit, it had in the gliding by

Yet, that I may not utterly defraud the Reader of his Hope, I am drawn to
give it those brief touches, which may leave behind some shadow of what it
was: And first of the Attires

That, of the Lords, had part of it (for the fashion) taken from the Antique
Greek Statue; mixed with some Modern Additions: which made it both graceful,
and strange. On their Heads they wore Persick Crowns, that were with Scroles
of Gold-plate turned outward; and wreathed about with a Carnation and Silver
Net-lawne: The one End of which hung carelessly on the left shoulder, the other
was tricked up before in several degrees of fouldes, between the Plates, and
set with rich Iewelles, and great Pearl. Their Bodies were of Carnation cloth
of silver, richly wrought, and cut to express the Naked, in manner of the
Greek Thorax; girt under the Breasts, with a broad Belt of Cloth of Gold,
imbrodered, and fastened before with Jewels: Their Labells were of White Cloth
of silver, laced, and wrought curiously between, suitable to the upper half of
their Sleeves; whose nether parts, with their Bases, were of Watchet Cloth of
Silver, chev'rond all over with Lace. Their Mantills were of several colored
silks, distinguishing their Qualities, as they were coupled in payres; The
first, Sky color; The second, Pearl color; The third, Flame color; The
fourth, Tawnie; And these cut in leaves, which were subtly tacked up, and
imbrodered with Oo's, and between every rank of Leaves, a broad silver Lace.
They were fastened on the right shoulder, and fell Compass down the back in
gracious folds, and were again tied with a round Knot, to the fastening of
their Swords. Upon their legs they wore Silver Greaves, answering in work to
their Labells; and these were their Accoutrements

The Ladies Attire was wholly new, for the Invention, and full of Glory; as
having in it the most true impression of a Celestial Figure: The upper part of
White Cloth of Silver, wrought with IVNOES Birds and Fruicts; A loose under
garment, full-gather'd, of Carnation, stripped with Silver, and parted with a
Golden Zone; Beneath that, an other flowing Garment, of Watchet Cloth of
Silver, laced with Gold: Through all which, though they were round, and
swelling, there yet appeared some touch of their delicate Lineaments,
preserving the sweetness of Proportion, and expressing it self beyond
expression. The Attire of their Heads, did answer, if not exceed; their Hair
being carelessly (but yet with more art, then if more affected) bound under the
circle of a rare, and rich Coronet, adorned with all variety, and choice of
Jewels; from the top of which, flowed a trasparent Veil down to the ground;
whose verge, returning up, was fastened to either side in most sprightly Manner.
Their shoes were Azure, and Gold, set with Rubies, and Diamonds; so were all
their Garments: and every part abounding in Ornament

No less to be admired, for the Grace, and Greatness, was the whole Machine
of the Spectacle, from whence they came: the first part of which was a (...),
or Globe, filld with Countries, and those gilded; where the Sea was ^xprest,
heightened with silver waves. This stood, or rather hung, (for no Axell was
seen to support it) and turning softly, discoverd the first Masque, (as we
have before, but too runningly declared) which was of the Men, sitting in fair
Composition, within a Mine of several Mettalls: To which, the Lights were so
placed, as noe one was seen; but seemed, as if onel^ REASON, with the splendour
of her Crown, illumined the whole Grot

On the sides of this (which began the other part) were placed two great
Statues, fayn'd of Gold, one of Atlas, the other of Hercules, in varied
postures, bearing up the Clouds, which were of Releue, embossed, and
tralucent, as Naturalls: To these, a Cortine of painted Clouds joined, which
reached to the vpmost Roof of the Hall; and suddenly opening, revealed the
three Regions of Air: In the highest of which, sat IVNO, in a glorious Throne
of Gold, circled with Comets, and fiery Meteors, engendered in that hot and dry
Region; her Feet reaching to the lowest, where was made a Rainebow, and within
it, Musicians seated, figuring Ayry Spirits, their habits various, and
resembling the several colors, caused in that part of the Air by reflection.
The midst was all of dark and condensed Clouds, as being the proper Place
where Rain, Hayle, and other watery Meteors are made; out of which two concave
Clouds, from the rest, thrust forth themselves (in nature of those Nimbi,
wherein, by Homer, Virgill, etc. the Gods are feigned to descend) and these
carried the eight Ladies, over the heads of the two Terms; who (as the Ingine
moved) seemed also to bow themselves (by virtue of their shadows) and
discharge their shoulders of their glorious burden: when, having set them on
the Earth, both they, and the Clouds gathered themselves up again, with some
rapture of the Beholders

But that, which (as above in place, so in the beuty) was most taking in the
Spectacle, was the Sphere of Fire; in the top of all, encompassing the Air,
and imitated with such art, and industry, as the Spectators might discern the
Motion (all the time the Shows lasted) without any Moover: and, that so swift,
as no Eye could distinguish any Color of the Light, but might form to it
self five hundred several hewes, out of the tralucent Body of the Air,
objected betwixt it, and them

And this was crowned with a statue of IVPITER, the Thunderer.

The Design, and Act of all which, together with the Device of their Habits,
belongs properly to the Merit, and Reputation of Master YNYGO JONES; whom I
take modest occasion, in this fit place, to remember, lest his own worth might
accuse me of an ignorant neglect from my silence

And here, that no man's Deservings complain of injustice (though I should have
done it timelier, I acknowledge) I do for honors sake, and the pledge of our
Friendship, name Ma. ALPHONSO FERABOSCO, a Man, planted by himself, in that
divine Sphere; and mastring all the spirits of Music: To whose judicial
Care, and as absolute Performance, were committed all those Difficulties both
of Song, and otherwise. Wherein, what his Merit made to the Soul of our
Invention, would ask to be expressed in Tunes, no less ravishing then his.
V^rtuous friend, take well this abrupt testimony, and think whose it is: It
cannot be Flattery, in me, who never did it to Great ones; and less then
Love, and Truth it is not, where it is done out of Knowledge

The Daunces were both made, and taught by Master THOMAS GILES; and cannot be
more approved, then they did themselves: Nor do I want the will, but the skill
to commend such Subtilties; of which the Sphere, wherein they were acted, is
best able to judge

What was my part, the Faults here, as well as the Virtues must speak. Mutare
dominum nec potest Liber notus

ON the next Night, whose Solemnity was of Barriers, (all mention of the
former, being utterly remo'vd, and taken away) there appeared, at the lower end
of the Hall, a Mist made of delicate perfumes; out of which (a Battle being
sounded under the Stage) did seem to break forth two Ladies, the one
representing TRVTH, the other OPINION: but both so alike attired, as they could
by no Note, be distinguished. The color of their Garments were blew, their
Socks White; They were crowned with wreathes of Palm, and in their hands, each
of them sustained a Palm-bough. These, after the Mist was vanished, began to
examine each other curiously with their eyes, and approaching the State, the one
expostulated the other in this manner

WHo art thou, thus that imitat'st my Grace,
In Steps, in Habit, and resembled Face?

Grave Time, and Industry my Parents are;
My Name is TRVTH, who through these sounds of War
(Which figure the wise Minds discursive fight)
In Mists by Nature wrapped, salute the Light.

I am that TRVTH, thou some illusive Spright;
Whom to my likeness, the black Sorceresse Night
Has of these dry, and empty fumes created.

Best Herald of thine own Birth, well related:
Put me and mine to proof of words, and facts,
In any Question this fair Hour exacts.

I challenge thee, and fit this Time of Love,
With this Position, which TRVTH comes to prove;
That the most honored state of Man and Wife,
Does far exceed th'insociate Virgin-Life.

I take the adverse part; and she that best
Defends her side, be TRVTH by all confessed.

It is confirmed. With what an equal brow
To TRVTH, OPINION'S confident! and how,
Like TRVTH, her Habit shows to sensual Eyes!
But whosoever thou be, in this disguise,
Clear TRVTH, anon, shall strippe thee to the heart;
And show how mere Fantastical thou art.
Know then, the first Production of Things,
Required Two; from mere One nothing springs:
Without that knot, the Theme thou gloriest in,
(Th'vnprofitable Virgin) had not bin.
The Golden Tree of Marriage began
In Paradise, and bore the fruict of Man;
On whose sweet branches Angels sat, and sung,
And from whose firm root all Society sprung.
LOVE (whose strong Virtue wrapped Heavens soul in Earth,
And made a Woman glory in his Birth
In Marriage, opens his inflamed Breast;
And, lest in him Nature should stifled rest,
His geniall fire about the world he darts;
Which Lips with Lips combines, and Hearts with Hearts.
Marriage LOVES Object is; at whose bright eyes
He lights his Torches, and call's them his Skies.
For her, he wings his shoulders; and does fly
To her white bosom, as his Sanctuary:
In which no lustful Finger can profane him,
Nor any Earth, with black Eclipses wane him.
She makes him smile in sorrows, and does stand
Twixt him, and all wants, with her silver hand.
In her soft Locks, his tender Feet are tied;
And in his Fetters he takes worthy pride.
And as Geometricians have approved
That Lines, and Superficies are not moved
By their own forces, but do follow still.
Their Bodies motions; so the selfe-lov'd Will
Of Man, or Woman should not rule in them,
But each with other wear the Anademe.
Mirrors, though decked with Diamants, are noght worth,
If the like Forms of Things they set not forth;
So Men, or Women are worth Nothing, neither,
If eithers Eyes and Hearts present not either.

Untouched Virginity, Laugh out; to see
Freedom in Fetters placed, and vrg'd' against thee.
What Griefs lie groaning on the Nuptial Bed?
What dull Satietie? In what sheets of Lead
Tumble, and toss the restless Married Pair,
Each, often, offended with the Others air?
From whence springs all-devouring Avarice,
But from the Cares, which out of Wedlock rise?
And, where there is in Life's best-tempred Fires
And End, set in it self to all desires,
A settled Quiet, Freedom never checked,
How far are Married Lives from this effect?
that bears Ships, in all their pride,
Against roughest Winds, with violence of his Tide,
And ebbes, and flows, seven times in every day,
Toils not more turbulent, or fierce then they.
And the^, what Rules Husbands praescribe their Wives!
In their Eyes Circles, they must bound their Lives.
The Moon, when farthest from the Sun she shines,
Is most refulgent; nearest, most declines:
But your poor Wives far off must never rome,
But wast their Beauties, near their Lords, at home:
And when their Lords range out, at home must hide
(Like to begged Monopolies) all their Pride.
When their Lords list to feed a serious Fit
They must be serious; when to show their Wit
In lests, and Laughter, they must laugh, and jest;
When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
And to their Wives Men give such narrow scopes,
As if they meant to make them walk on Ropes:
No Tumblers bide more peril of their Necks
In all their Tricks; Then Wives in Husbands Checks.
Where Virgins, in their sweet, and peaceful State
Have all things perfect; spinne their own free Fate;
Depend on no proud Second; are their own
Center, and Circle; Now, and always One.
To whose Example, we do still hear named
One God, one Nature, and but one World framed,
One Sun, one Moon, one Element of Fire,
So, of the Rest; One King, that does inspire
Soul, to all Bodies, in this royal Sphere:

And where is Marriage more declared, then there?
Is there a Band more strict, then that does tie
The Soul, and Body in such unity?
Subjects to Sovereigns? does one Mind display
In th'ones Obedience, and the others Sway?
Believe it, Marriage suffers no compare,
When both Estates are valew'd, as they are.
The Virgin were a strange, and stubborn Thing,
Would longer stay a Virgin, then to bring
Her self fit use, and profit in a Make.

How she does err! and the whole Heaven mistake!
Loo^e how a Flower, that close in Closes grows,
Hid from rude Cattle, bruised with no Ploughes,
Which the Air does stroke, Sun strengthen, Showers
It many Youths, and many Maids desire; (shoot higher,
The same, when cropped by cruel hand is withered,
No Youths at all, No Maidens have desired:
So a Virgin, while vutouch'd she does remain,
Is dear to hers; but when with Bodies stayne
Her chaster Flower is lost, she leaves to appear
Or sweet to Young Men, or to Maidens dear.
That Conquest then may crown me in this War,
Virgins, O Virgins fly from HYMEN far.

Virgins, O Virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield,
For as a lone Vine, in a naked Field,
Never extols her branches, never bears
Ripe Grapes, but with a headlong heaviness wears
Her tender body, and her highest sproote
Is quickly levelled with her fading root;
By whom no Husbandmen, no Youths will dwell;
But if, by fortune, she be married well
To th Elm, her Husband, many Husbandmen,
And many Youths inhabit by her, then:
So whilst a Virgin does, untouched, abide
All vnmanur'd, she grows old, with her pride;
But when to equal Wedlock, in fit Time,
Her Fortune, and Endeavor lets her clime
Dear to her Love, and Parents, she is held.
Virgins, O Virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield.

These are but words; have thou a Knight will try
(By stroke of Arms) the simple Verity?

To that high proof I would have dared thee.
I Will strait fetch Champions for the Brides and Me.

The like will I do for Virginity.

HEre, they both descended the Hall, where at the lower end, a March being
sounded with Drums and Phifes, there entered (led forth by the Earl of
Notingham, who was Lord high Constable for that night, and the Earl of
Worc'ster, Earl Marshall) sixteen Knights, Armed, with Pikes, and Swords;
their Plumes, and Colors, Carnation and White, all richly accoutred, and
making their Honors to the State, as they marched by in Paires, were all ranked
on one side of the Hall. They placed, Sixteen others alike accoutred for
Riches, and Arms, only that their Colors were varied to Watchet, and White;
were by the same Earls led up, and passing in like manner, by the State,
placed on the opposite side. Whose Names (as they were given to me, both in
Order, and Orthographie) were these.

By this time, the Bar being brought up, TRVTH proceeded.

Now join; and if his varied Trial fail,
To make my Truth in Wedlocks praise prevail,
I will retire, and in more power appear;
To cease this strife, and make our Question clear.
Whereat OPINION insulting, followed her with this speech.

I, Do: it were not safe thou should abide:
This speaks thy Name, with shame to quit thy side.

Here the Champions on both sides addresst themselves for fight, first Single;
after Three to Three: and performed it with that alacrity, and vigor, as if
MARS himself had been to triumph before VENUS, and invented a new Music.
When, on a sudden, (the last Six having scarcely ended) a striking Light
seemed to fill all the Hall, and out of it (...) Angel or Messenger of Glory
appearing

PRinces, attend a tale of height, and wonder.
TRVTH is descended in a second Thunder,
And now will greet you, with ludiciall state,
To grace the Nuptial part in this debate;
And end with reconciled hands these wars.
Upon her head she wears a Crown of Stars,
Through which her ori^nt Hair waves to her wast,
By which believing Mortals hold her fast,
And in those golden Chordes are carried even
Till with her breath she blows them up to Heaven.
She wears a Roabe enchas'd with Eagles Eyes,
To signify her sight in Mysteries;
Upon each shoulder sits a milk white Dove,
And at her feet do witty Serpents move:
Her spacious Arms do reach from East to West,
And you may see her Heart shine through her breast.
Her right hand holds a Sun with burning Rays,
Her left a curious bunch of golden Kayes,
With which Heaven Gates she locketh, and displayes.
A Cristall Mirror hangs at her breast,
By which men's Consciences are searched, and dressed:
On her Coach wheels Hypocrisy lies rackt;
And squint-eyd Slander, with Vainglory backed
Her bright Eyes burn to dust: in which shines Fate.
An Angel vshers her triumphant Gate,
Whilst with her fingers Fannes of Stars she twists,
And with them beats back Error, clad in mists.
Eternal Unity behind her shines
That Fire, and Water, Earth, and Air combines.
Her voice is like a Trumpet loud, and shrill,
Which bids all sounds in Earth, and Heaven be still.
And see! descended from her Chariot now,
In this related Pomp she visits you.

Honor to all, that Honor Nuptials.
To whose fair Lot, in justice, now it falls,
That this my Counterfeit be here disclosed,
Who, for Virginity has her self opposed.
Nor, though my Brightness do undo her Charms,
Let these her Knights think, that their equal Arms
Are wronged therein; "For Valor wins applause
"That dares, but to maint aine the weaker Cause.
And Princes, see, it is mere OPINION,
That in TRVTH'S forced Robe, for TRVTH has gone!
Her gaudy Colors, peec'd, with many Folds,
Show what vncer tainties she ever holds:
Vanish Adult'rate TRVTH, and never dare
With proud Maids praise, to prease where Nuptials are.
And Champions, since you see the Truth I held,
To Sacred HYMEN, reconciled, yield:
Nor, (so to ye^ld,) think it the least Despite
"It is a Conquest to submit to Right.
This Royal Judge of our Contention
Will prop, I know, what I have under gone;
To whose right Sacred Highness Iresigne
Low, at his feet, this Starry Crown of mine,
To show his Rule, and Judgment is divine;
These Doves to him I consecrate withal,
To note his Innocence, without spot, or gall;
These Serpents, for his Wisdom* and these Rays,
To show his piercing Splendour; These bright Keys,
Designing Power to open the ported Skies,
And speak their Glori^s to his Subjects Eyes.
Lastly, this Heart, with which all Hearts be true:
And TRVTH in him make Treason ever rue.

With This, they were led forth, hand in hand, reconciled, as in Triumph: and
thus the Solemnities ended

Vivite concordes, and nostrum discite munus.
