Frolic Ieronimo, thou art now confirmd,
Marshall of Spain, by all the dewes
And customary rights unto thy office.

My knee sings thanks unto your highness bounty,
Come hither boy Horatio; fould thy joints;
Kneel by thy fathers loins, and thank my leedge,
by honering me, thy Mother, and thy self,
with this high staff of office.

O my leedge I have a heart thrice stronger then my years*
and that shall answer gratefully for me.
Let not my youthful blush impare my valor,
If ever you have foes, or red field scars,
I Will empty all my veins to serve your wars:
I Will bleed for you: and more, what speech afords,
i will speak in drops when I do fail in words.

UUell spoke my boy, and on thy fathers side.
My leedge how like you Don Horatios sperit,
what, does it not promise fair,

I, and no doubt his merit will purchase more,
Knight Marshall rise, and still rise
Higher, and greater in thy Soueraines eyes.

O fortunate hour, blessed mynuit, happy day,
Able to ravish even my sense away;
Now I remember too: O sweet rememberance,
This day my years strike fifty, and in Rome,
They call the fifty year the year of Iubily,
The merry year, the peaceful year, Iocond year,
A year of joy, of pleasure and delight,
This shall be my year of Iubily, for it is my fifty.
Age vshers honor, it is no shame, confess;
Beard, thou art fifty full, not a hair less.

How now, what news from spain, tribute returned.

Tribute in words my leedge, but not in coin.

Ha: dare he still procrastinate with Spain,
Not tribute paid, not three years paid,
It Is not at his coin
But his slack homage, that we most repine.

My leedge, if my opinion might stand firm
Within your highness thoughts:

Marshall, our kingdom calls thee father:
Therefore speak free*
Thy counsel i will embrace, as I do thee.

I thank your highness: then my Gracious leedge,
I hold it meet by way of Embassage,
To demand his mind, and the nectlect of tribute:
But my leedge here must be kind words,
Which does often besiedge the ears of rough
Heawn tyrants more then blows.
Oh, a polyticke speech beguiles the ears of foes,
Mary my leedge mistake me not I pray,
If friendly phraises, honied speech, bewitching accent,
Well tuned mellody, and all sweet gifts of nature,
Cannot avail or win him to it,
Then let him raise his gall up to his tongue,
And be as bitter as physicians drugs,
Stretch his mouth wider, with big swollen phrases:
Oh heeres a Lad of mettle, stout Don Andrea,
Mettle to the crown
Would shake the kings hie court three handfuls down.

And well picked out knight Marshall,
Speech well strung,
I Would rather choose Horatio* were he not so young.

I humbly thank your highness,
In placing me next unto his royal bosom.

How stand ye Lords to this election.

Right pleasing our dread Sovereign,

Only with pardon mighty Sovereign.

I should have chose Don Lorenzo.
I Don Rogero,

O no, not me my Lords;
I am wars Champion, and my fees are swords,
Pray king, pray peers, let it be Don Andrea,
He Is a worthy lim,
Loves wars and Soldiers therefore I love him.

And I love him, and thee valliant Rogero,
Noble spyrits, gallant bloods,
Your no wise insinnating Lords,
You ha no tricks, you ha none of all their slights.

So, so, Andrea must be sent imbassador,
Lorenzo is not thought upon: good.
I Will wake the Court, or startle out some blood.

How stand you Lords to this election?

Right pleasing our dread Sovereign.

then Don Andrea.

My aproued leedge.

UUe make thee our Lord hie imbassador.

Your highness cirkels me with honors bounds,
I still discharg the weight of your command,
with best respect, i friendly tempred phraise,
Cannot affect the virtue of your charge,
I will be hard like thunder, and as rough,
as Northern tempests, or the vexed bowels,
Of too insulting waves, who at one blow,
Five merchants wealths into the deep does throw,
i will threaten crumson wars.

I, I, that's good;
Let them keep coin, pay tribute with their blood.

Farewell then don Andrea, to thy chardge:
Lords letes in, joy shall be now our guest,
Lets in to celebrate our second feast.

Andrea's gone ambassador;
Lorenza is not drempt on in this age,
Hard fate,
when villains sit not in the highest state
Ambitions plumes that florisht in our court,
Severe authority has dashed with justice;
And policy, and pride, walk like two exiles
Giving attendance, that were once attended;
and we rejected that were once high honored,
I hate andrea, cause he aims at honor,
when my purest thoughts, work in a pitchy vale,
which are as different as heaven and hell,
One peers for day, the other gappes for night.
That yawning Beldam with her Iestie skin,
It Is she I hug as mine effeminate bride,
For such complexions best appease my pride:
I have a lad in pikell of this stamp,
A melancholy discontented courtier
Whose famisht jaws look like the chap of death
Upon whose eye brows hang damnation,
Whose hands are washed in rape, and murders bold,
Him with a goulden bait will I allure,
For Courtiers will do any thing for gould,
To be Andrea's death at his return:
He loves my Sister; that shall cost his life,
So she a husband, he shall lose a wife,
O sweet, sweet policy, I hugg thee, good:
Andreas himens draught, shallbe in blood.

Whether in such have my second self.

In Faith my dear bosom, to take solemn leave,
Of a most weeping creature.

That's a woman.

That's Bellimperia.

See see, she meets you here:
And what it is to love? And be loved dear,

I have hard of your honor, gentle breast,
I do not like it now so well me thinks.

What, not to have honor bestoued on me.

O yes: But not a wandering honor dear,
I could afford well did thou stay here,
Could honor melt it self into thy veins,
And thou the fountain, I could wish it so,
If thou would remain here with me: and not go.

It Is but to portugale.

But to demand the tribute Lady.

Trybute, alas that Spain, cannot of peace
Forbear, a little coin, the Indies being so near,
And yet this is not all: I know you are to hot,
to ull of spleen or an imbassador,
And will lean much to honor.

Push.

Nay hear me dear I know you will be rough
And violent, and portingale has a tempestus son,
Stamped with the mark of fury, and you too.

Sweet Bellimperia.

We Will meet like thunder, eatch imperious over
Others spleen, you have both proud spirits, and both will
strive to aspire, when two vexed Clouds iustle they strike
Out fire, and you I fear me war, which peace forsend,
O dear andrea pray, lets have no wars,
First let them pay the soldiers, that were mainde
In the last battle, ere more wretches fall,
Or walk on stilts to timelesse Funeral.

Respective dear, O my lives happiness,
the joy of all my being, do not shape
Frightfull conceit beyond the intent of act,
I know thy love is vigilant ore my blood,
And fears ill fate which heaven has yet withstood,
But be of comfort, sweet Horatio knows,
I go to knit friends, not to kindle foes.

true Madam Belimperia, that's his task
the phraise he uses must be gently stylde,
the king has warned him to be smooth and mild.

But will you indeed andrea.

By this.

By this lip blushing kiss.

O you swear sweetly.

I Will keep your oath for you tell you return.
Then i will be sure you shall not be forsworn.

Ho Pedringano.

Signioro.

Are all things abord.

They are my good Lord.

Then Bellimperia. I take leave: Horatio
Be in my absence my dear self, chaste self,
What playing the woman Bellimperia:
Nay then you love me not, or at the least,
You drown my honores in those flowing watters,
Believe it Bellimperia, it is as common,
To weep at parting, as to be a woman,
Love me more valliant, play not this moist prize,
Be woman in all parts, save in thy eyes:
And so I leave thee.

Farewell my Lord:
Be mindful of my love, and of your word.

It Is fixed upon my heart, adieu souls friend.

All honor, one Andreas steps attend.

Yet he is in sight, and yet but now he is vanished.

Nay Lady if you stoop so much to passion, i will call him back again.


O good Horatio, no: it is for honor prithee let him go.


Then Madam be composd as you wear wont,
to music and delight, the time being Commick, will
Seem short and pleasant, till his return
From Portingale: and madam in this circle,
Let your heart move,
Honored promotion is the sap of love.

Come my souls spaniell, my life's ietty substance,
What Is thy name?

My names an honest name, a Courtiers
Name: it is lazarotto.

What lazarotto.

Or rather rotting in this lazy age, that
Yields me no employments, I have mischief
Within my breast more then my bulk can hold,
I want a midwife to deliver it.

I Will be the he one then, and rid thee soon
Of this dull, leaden, and tormenting elfe:
Thou know the love betwixt Bellimperia and
Andreas bosom?

I, I do.

How might I cross, it, my sweet mischief:
Hunny damnation how?

Well: as many ways as there are paths to hell
And that's enough in faith: from vserers door
There goes one pathe, from friars that nurse
Whores, there goes another path: from brokers
Stals, from rich that die and build no hospitals,
Two other paths: from farmers that crack barns,
With stuffing corn, yet starve the needy swarms,
Another path: from drinking schools one, from
Dicing houses, but from the court, none, none.

Here is a slave just a the stamp, I with:
Whose ^uck-soules, blacker then his name,
Though it stand printed with a Ravens quill.
But lazarotto cross, my Sisters love, and i will
Rain showers of Ducats in thy palm.

Oh Ducats, dainty ducks forgive me,
Ducats, i will fetch you duck enough or gold,
And thinck males, the punck wanton and the
Bawd to wink.

Discharg, discharg, good lazaratto, how we
May cro^e my Sisters loving hopes.

Nay? now i will tell you.

Thou know Addreas gone ambassador.

The better there is oppertunity now list to me.
Alcario the duke Medinas son,
Dotes on your Sister Bellimperia,
Him in her private gallery you shall place,
To court her, let his protestations be,
Fashoned with rich Jewels, for in love, great,
Gifts and gold have the best tongue to move,
Let him not spare an oath, without a jewel,
To bind it fast: Oh I know women's hearts
What stuff they are made of, my Lord:
Gifts and giving, will melt the cha^est
Seeming female living.

Indeed andrea is but poor, though honorable,
His bounty amongst soldiers ^okes him dry,
And there ore great gifts may bewitch her eye.

Heeres no fine villainie, no damnd brother?

But say she should deny his gifts, be all
Compo^d of hate, as my mind gives me,
that she wool* what then?

Then thus: At his return to spain, I Will
Murder don Andrea.

Dare thou sperit.

What dares not he do, that near hopes
To Inherit.

He dares be damnd like thee.

Dare I* Ha, ha, I have no hope of everlasting
Height, my souls a Moore you know saluations
White, what dare not I enact then, tush, he dies;
I will make way to Bellimperias eyes.

To weep I fear but not to tender love.

Why is she not a woman, she must weep
A while as widows use till their first sleep*
Who in the morrow folloing will be sold to new,
Before the first are thoroughly cold: So
Bellimperia; For this is common, the more
She weeps, the More she plays the woman.

Come then, how ere it hap Andrea shall be crossed.

Let me alone, I Will turn him to a ghoast.

Farewell true brace of villaynes,
Come hither boy Horatio, did thou here them.

O my true brested father, my ears have sukt
In poison, deadly Poison, murder Andrea:
O Inhumain practis, had not your reverend
Years been present here, I should have
Ponyarded the villaynes bowels, and shoued his
Soul out to Damnation, Murder Andrea:
Honest lord: Impions villayns.

I like thy true heart boy, thou love thy friend,
It is the greatest argument and sign that I begot thee,
For it shows thou art mine.

O father: It Is a charitable deed,
To prevent those that would make virtue bleed.
I Will dispatch letters to don andrea,
Unfould their hellish Practice, damnd intent,
Against the virtuous rivers of his life?
Murder andrea.

Peace: Who comes here: news, news Isaballa.

What news Ieronimo?

Strange news, Lorenzo is become an honest man

Is this your wondrous news.

I i^ not wondrous to have honesty in hell, go, tell
It Abrod now, but see you put no new aditions
To it: as thus, shall I tell you gossip: Lorenzo,
Is become an honnest man: Beware, heware,
For honesty spoken in derision points out knavery.
O then take heed, that Jest would not be trim,
He Is a great man, therefore we must not knave him.
In gentle soul, I Will not be long away,
As short my body, Short shallbe my stay.

Murder andrea: What blood sucking slave
Could choke bright honor in a skabard grave,

What harping still upon anadreas death,
Have courage boy: I shall prevent their plots,
And make them both stand like too politic sots.

Lorenzo has a reach as far as hell,
To hook the devil from his flaming cell*
Oh sprightly father heel out rech you then,
Knaves, longer reaches have the^ honest men.

But boy fear not, I Will out stretch them al
My minds a giant, though my bulk be full.

What is the meaning of this loud report

An emba^. my Lord is new arrived from spain.

Son Balthezer we pray do you go meet him,
And do him all the honor that belonges him.

Father my best endeavor shall obey you,
Welcome worthy lord, spaines choice ambassador,
Brave stout, andrea, for so I guess thee.

Portugalles eire I thank thee,
Thou semes no les then what thou art, a prince:
And an heroycke spirit, Portingalles king,
I kiss my hand, and tender on thy throne,
My masters love, peace, and affection.

And we receue them, and thee worthy andrea;
Thy masters hy pri^ed love unto our heart,
Is welcome to his friend thou to our court.

Thanks Portingall: My lords I had in charge
At my depart from spain this embasage,
To put your breast in mind of tribute due
Unto our masters kingdom, these three years
Detained and kept back: and I sent to know,
Whether neglect, or will detaines it so.

Thus much return unto thy king andrea,
We have with best advise thought of our state,
And find it much dishonord by base homage,
I not deny but tribute has bin due to Spain,
By our forfathers base captivity,
Yet cannot raze out there successors merit:
It Is said we shall not answer at next birth
Our fathers fawltes, in heaven, why then one earth:
Which proves and shows that which they lost by base Captivity,

We may redeem with honored valiansie,
We borow naught, our kingdom is our own,
He is a base king that pays rent for his throne.

Is this thy answer Portingalle:

I spain, a royal answer to, which I Will maintain.

And all the peers of Portugalle the like.

Then thus all spain which but three minites, ago was thy full friend, is now
returned thy foe


An excellent foe, we shall have scuflling good.

Thou shall pay trybute, Portugalle with blood.

Trybute for trybute then: And foes, for foes.

I bid you sudden wars.

I sudden blows, and that's as good as wars.
Don, I Will not bate,
An inch of courrage nor a hair of sat,
Pay trybute I with strockes.

I with strockes you shall
Allas that spain should correct Portugal.

Correct: O in that one word, such torments do,
I feel that I could lash thy ribes with valiant steel.

Prince Balthezer, shalles meet?

Meet don Andrea, yes in the battles Bowels:
Here Is my gage aneuer failing pawn.
twill keep his day his hour, nay minute: Twill.

Then thine, and this posses one quality.

O let them kis, did I not understand thee noble
Ualliant, and worthy my swords society with thee,
For all Spaines wealth, I Would not graspe hands,
Meet Don andrea. I tell thee noble spirit*
I Would wade up to the knees in blood,
I Would make a bridge of spanish carkases
to single thee, out of the gasping army.

Woot thou prince: why even for that I love.

Tut, love me man when we have drunk,
Hot blood together* wounds will tie
an everlasting settled amity.
And so shall thine.

And thine.

What give no place?

to whom.

to me.

To thee: why should my face,
that's placed above my mind,
Fall under it.

I Will make thee yield,

I when yon get me down,
But I stand even yet, iump crown to crown.

Dare thou?

I dare.

I am all vexed.

I care not.

I shall forget the Law.

Do, do.

Shall I?

Spare not?

But thou will yield first.

No.

O, I hug thee sort,
the valianst spirit ere trod the Spanish court,
Here let the rising of our hot blood set.

My leedge two nobler spyrits never met.

Until we meet in purple, when our swords,

Agreed, right valliant prince:
Then Portugale this is thy resolute answer.

So return: its so, we have bethought us what
Tribute is, how poor that Monarch shoes,
Who for his throne a yearly penshion owes:
And what our predesessors lost to spain,
We have fresh sperits that can renew it again.

Then I unclasp the purple leaves of war,
Many a new wound must gasp, through an old scar:
So Portugale I leave thee.

Our self in person will see thee safe aboard:
Come son, come Lords,
In stead of tribute we must pay our swords.

Remember Don andrea that we meet.

Up hither sailing in a crimson fleet.

Do you affect my Sister.

Affect, above affection: for her breast,
Is my lives treasure, O entire
Is the condition of my hot desire.

Then this must be your plot,
You know andreas gone ambassador,
On whom my Sister Bellimperia,
Casts her affection: you are in stature like him,
Speech alike, and had you but his vestment
On your back, there is no one living but would
Swear twere he: therefore, sly policy must
Be your guide, I have a suite just
Of andreas, cullers, proportiond in all parts,
Nay it was his own: this suit within my clo^et,
Shall you wear, and so disgui^d woe, sue, and
Then at last.

What.

Obtain my love.

This false out rare,
In this disguise I may both wed, bed, and board her.

You may you may? besides, within these few days
Heel return.

Till this be acted I in passion burn.

All falls out for the purpose, all hits iumpe,
The date of his embassage nighe expired,
Gives strength unto our plot.

True, true, all to the purpose.

Moreover, I will buze Andreas Landing;
which once but crept into the vulger mouths,
Is hurryed here, and there, and sworn for troth,
Think it is your love makes me create this guise,
And willing hope to see your virtue rise.

Lorenzoes bounty I do more enfould,
Then the greatest mind of indians brightest gold.

Come let us in, the next time you shall show,
All Don andrea, not alcario.

Come pull the table this way, so it is well:
Come write horatio write,
This speedy letter must away to night.
What fold paper that way, to a noble man,
to Don andrea Spaines ambassador?
Fie I am a shamed to see it,
Have thou worn gowns in the Uniuersity,
Lost logic, sucked Philosophy,
Eat Cues, drunk Cees, and cannot
give A letter the right Courtiers crest:
O there is a kind of state,
In every thing save in a Cuckolds pate,
Fie, fie, horatio, what is your pen foul.

No Father cleaner then lorenzoes soul,
That's dipped in inck made of an envious gall,
Elce had my pen no cause to write at all.

Signeor andrea say.

Signeor andrea.

it is a villainus age this.

it is a villainus age this.

That a nobleman should be a knave, as
Well as an Ostler.

That a nobleman should be a knave, as
Well as an Ostler.

Or a seriant.

Or a seriant.

Or a Broker.

Or a Broker.

Yet I speak not this of lorenzo,
For he is an honest Lord.

S^oot, Father de not write him honest Lord.

take up thy pen, or i will take up thee.

What right him honest Lord i will not agree.

You Will take it up Sir.

well, well.

what went before, thou have put me out; beshrow
thy impudence or insolence.

Lorenzoes an honest Lord.

well Sir, and has hired one to murder you.

O, I cry you mercy Father, meant you so.

Art thou a scholar Don horatio?
And can not aim at Figurative speech.

I pray you pardon me, it was but youths
Hasty error.

Come read then?

And has hired one to murder you.

He means to send you to heaven, when
You return from Portugale.

From portugale.

Yet he is an honest dukes son.

Yet he is an

But not the honest son of a Duke.

But not the honest.

O that villainy should be found in the great Chamber.

O that villainy.

And honesty in the bottom of the a seller.

And honesty.

If you will be murdered you may?

If you will be

If you be not, thank God, and Ieronimo.

I you be not.

If you be, thank the devil and lorenzo.

If you be thank.

Thus hoping you will not be murdered and you Can choose.

Thus hoping you will.

Especially being warned before hand.

Especially
I take my leave boy, Horatio, write leave,
Bending in the hams like an old Courtier,
Thy assured friend say, against lorenza and
The devil, little Ieronimo Marshall.

Ieronimo Marshall.

So now read it ore.

Signeor andrea it is a villainus age this,
That a Nobleman should be a knave, as well
As an Ostler: or a Seriant, or a broker, yet
I speak not this of Lorenzo: he is an
Honest Lord, and has hired one to murder you,
When you return from Portugale, yet
He Is an honest Dukes son, but not the
Honest son of a Duke? O that villainy
Should be found in the great chamber, and honesty
In the bottom of a seller.

True boy: there is a morrall in that, as much
To say knavery in the Court and honesty in a Cheese house.

If you will be murdered you may: if you be
Not thank God and Ieronimo: if you be,
Thank the devil and Lorenzo. Thus hoping
You will not be murdered, and you can choose,
Especially being warnd before hand, I take my leave.

Horatio have thou wr^tten leave bending in the
Hams: enough like a Gentlemau usher, Sfoote
No Horatio, thou have made him straddle too much,
Like a Frenchman, for shame put his legs closer
Though it be painful.

So: it is done, it is done.
Thy assured friend against Lorenza, and the devil,
Little Ieronimo, Marshall.

Yonder he is my Lord pray you speak to him.

Wax, wax Horatio: I had need wax two,
Our ^oes will stride else over me and you?

He Is writing a love letter to some Spanish Lady,
And now he calls for wax to ^eale it.

God save you good knight Marshall.

Whose this, my Lord lorenzo: welcome, welcome,
Your the last man I thought on, save the devil.
Much does your presence grace our homely roof.

O Ieronimo, your wife condemns you of a vncurtesie
And over passing wrong, and more she names
Love letters which you send to spanish Dames.

Do you accuse me so kind Isabella.

Unkind Ieronimo.

And for my instance this in your hand is one.

In sooth my Lord there is no written name
Of any Lady, then no spanish dame.

If it were not so, you would not be afeard
To read or show the waxt letter:
Pray you let me behold it.

I pray you pardon me*
I must confess my Lord, it treats of love,
Love to andrea, I even to his very bosom.

What news my Lord hear you from portugale.

Who I, before your grace it must not be,
The Badger feeds not till the Lions served,
Nor fits it news so soon kiss subjects,
As the fair cheek of high authrority:
Ieronimo lives much absent from the Court,
And being absent, there lives from report.

Farewell Ieronimo.

welcome my Lord Lorenzo.

Boy thy mothers iealious of my love to her,

O she played us a wi^e part, now ten to one
He had not over heard the letter read, just as he enterd.

Though it had happend evil,
He should have hard his name yokt with the devil,
Here seal the letter with a loving knot,
Send it with speed, Horatio linger not:
That Don andrea, may prevent his death,
And know his enemy by his envious breath.

Now by the honor of Casteels true house,
You are as like andrea, part for part,
as he is like himself: did I know you,
By my cross I swear: I could not think you
But Andreas self, so legd, so fa^st, so
Speecht, so all in all: methinks, I should salute
Your quick return and speedy have from portugale,
Welcome fair Lord, worthy ambassador,
Brave Don andrea, Oh I laugh to see
How we shall jest at her mistaking thee.

What have you given it out andrea is returned?

It Is all about the court in every ear,
And my invention, brought to me for news,
Last night at supper, and which the more to cover,
I took a boule and quaft a health to him,
When it would scarce go down for exstreame laughter,
to think how soon report had scatterd it.

But is the villain Lazarotto acquainted with Our drift.

Not for Spains wealth,
though he be secret, yet suspects the worst,
For confidence confounds the stratagem,
the fewer in a plot of jealousy,
Build a foundation surest, when multitudes
Makes it confused ere it come to head,
Be secret then, trust not the open air,
For air is breath, and breath blown words raise care:
this is the gallery where she most frequents,
Within this walk have I beheld her dally,
With my shapes substance, O immortal powers.
Lend your asistance, clap a silver tongue within
This pallat, that when I approach,
Within the presence of this demi Goddess,
I may posses an adimanticke power,
And so bewitch her with my honied speech,
Have every syllable a music stop,
that when I pause the mellody may move,
And hem persuasion tweene her snowy paps
that her heart hearing may relent and yield.

Break of my Lord, see where she makes approach.

then fall into your former veins of terms:

Welcome my Lord, welcome brave Don
Andrea, Spaines best of sperit: what news,
From Portugale tribute or war,
But see my Sister Bellimperia comes,
I will defer it till some other time,
For company hinders louds conference.

Welcome my life's self form, dear Don Andrea,

My words iterated gives thee as much,
Welcome my self, of self.

What news Andrea? treats it peace or war?

At first they cried all war, as men resolved
to loose both life and honor at one cast:
At which I thunderd words all clad in proof,
Which struck amazement to their pauled speech,
And tribute presently was yielded up.
But maddam Bellimperia leave we this,
And talk of former suites and quests of love.

it is all about the Court Andreas come;
Would I might greet him and I wonder much
My Lord lorenzo is so slack in murder,
Not to afford me notice all this while.
Gold I am true I had my hier,
And thou shall have thy due:
Wast possible to miss him so, soft, soft,
this gallery leads to Bellimperias lodging,
there he is sure, or will be sure I Will stay,
the evening to begins to slub^er day,
Sweet oportunefull season here i will lean,
Like a court hound that liks fat trenchers clean.

But has the king pertooke your embassy.

that till to morrow shall be now deferd.

Nay then you love me not,
Let that be first dispatch,
till when receive this token.

I to the king with this unfaithful heart,
It must not be, I play to falce a part.

Up lazarotto, yonder comes thy prize,
Now lives Andrea, now Andrea dies.

that villain lazarotto has killed me
In stead of andrea.

Welcome home Lord ambassador.

Oh, oh, oh.

Whose groan was that, what frightfull villains this,
His sword vnshethed, whom have thou murdered slave?

Why Don, Don andrea?

No conterfetting villain,
He ses my Lord that he has murdered me.

I Don Andrea, or else Don the devil.

Lay hands one hun, some rear up the bleeding
Body to the light.

My Lord I think it is you, were you not here
A man might swear twere you.

His garments ha like mine, his face made like:
An omynous horror, all my veins does strike,
Sure this pretends my death, this misery
Aims at some fatal pointed tragedy.

Son Horatio see Andrea slain.

andrea slain, then weapon clyng my breast.

Live truest friend for ever loved and blessed.

Lives Don andrea.

I but slain in thought,
To see so strange a likeness forged and wrought,
Lords cannot you yet discry
Who is the owner, of this red melting body.

My Lord it is alcario Duke Medinas son,
I know him by this mould upon his breast.

alcario slain, have thou beguild me sword?
Arm have thou slain thy bountiful kind lord,
Why then rot off, and drop upon the ground,
Strew all the galleries with gobbits round.

Who names Alcario slain, it is Alcario,
O cursed deed, could thou not see,
But make the wrong man bleed.

Sfoot it was your fault my lord, you brought noe word.

Peace, no words, i will get thy pardon.
Why mum then.

Who names Andrea slain, O it is andrea,
O I sound I die.

Look to my Sister Bellimperia.

Raise up my dear love, Bellimperia,
O be of comfort sweet, call in thy sperits,
Andrea lives O let not death beguile thee.

Are you Andrea.

Do not forget, that was alcario
My shapes counterset.

Why speaks not this accursed damned villain.

O good words my Lords, for those are courtiers vailes,
The king must hear why should I make
Two tails, for to be ^ound in two,
Before the king, I will resolve you all,
This strange strange thing, I hot, yet mist,
It Was I mistook my part.

I villain: for thou aymst at this true heart.

Horatio* it was well as fortune stands,
This letter came not to Andreas hands.

It Was happiness indeed.

Was it not you Andrea questioned me bout love?

No Bellimperia, belike it was false Andrea,
For the first object mine eyes met,
Was that most accursed
witch, I much fear me by all signs pretend
Most doubtful wars and dangerous pointed ends*
To light upon my blood.

Angels of heaven foresend it.

Some take up the body, others take charg
Of that accursed villain.

My Lord leave that to me; i will look to him.

Mark, mark, Horatio: a villain guard a villain.

The king may think my news is a bad guest,
When the first object is a bleeding breast.

My Lords, what heavy sounds are these?
Nearer, and nearer, ha andrea the foore-runner
Of these news, nay then I fear spaines
Inevitable ill
Ha andrea speak, what news from Portugale?
What is tribute paid: peace, or wars.

Wars my dread leedge.

Why then that bleeding object
does presage what shall hereafter follow:
What Is he that lies there slain, or hurt,
Or both: speak?

My leedge, alcario Duke medinas son,
And by that slave this purple act was done.

Who names Alcario slain: aie me it is he?
Art thou that villain.

How did know my name.
I see an excellent villain has his fame
As well as a great courtier.

Speak villain, wherefore did thou this accursed deed.

Because I was an ass, a villainus ass,
For had I hot it right, Andrea had line there:
He walked upright, this ominns mistake,
This damned error breeds in my soul
An everlasting terror.

Say slave, how came this accursed evil?

Faith by my self, my short sword, and the devil,
To tell you all without a tedious tongue,
I Will cut them down, my words shall not hang,
That haples bleeding Lord alcario*
Which this hand slew, pexont, was a huge dotar
On Bellimperias beautye who replide in scorn
And his hot suite denide:
For her affections were all firmly planted,
In Don andreas bosom, yet unwise,
He still pursued it with blind lovers eyes:
Then hired he me with gold: O fate thou elfe,
To kill Andrea which hixe killed himself.
For not content to stay the time of murder,
He took andreas shape unknown to me,
And in all parts disguis^ as there you see,
Intending as it seemed by that sly shift,
To steal away her troth: short tale to tell,
I took him for Andrea, down he fell.

Olmpious deed, to make the heir of honor
Melt and bleed, bear him away to execution.

Nay Lord Lorenzo, whers the pardon?
Sfoot i will peach else.

Peace Lazarotto, i will get it of the king.

Doot quickly then or i will spread villainy.

My Lord he is the most notorious rogue
That ever breathd.

Away with him.

Your highness may do well to bar his speech,
It Is able to infect a virtuous ear.

Away with him I will not hear him speak

My Lord Lorenzo is a

Is not this a monstrous courtier.

He is the court fode father,

Trybute denide us, ha.

It is my leedge, and that with no mean words;
He will redeem his honor lost with swords.

So daring? Ha, so Peremptory,
Can you remember the words he spoke?

Word for word my gracious sovereign,
And these they were: Thus much return to Spain,
Say: That our settled Judgment has aduisd us,
What tribute is, how poor that Monarch shows,
Who for his throne a yearly pension owes,
And what our predecesors lost to Spain,
We have fresh spirits that can renew it again.

Ha so peremptory, daring, stout.

Then my leedge, acording your gracious dread, Command,
I bad defiance with, a vengfull hand.

He entertained it.

I and returned it with menasing brows,
Prince Baltheser his son,
Grow Uiolent and wished the fight begune.

So, so, I have sent my slave to hell:
Tho he blab there, the diueles will not tell.

How now, what means this trumpets sound?
My leedge, the Portugalles.

Are up in arms glittring in steel.

Where Is our lord general, lorenzo stout andrea,
With whom I rank spritely Horatio.
what for shame, shall the Portugalles
Trample the fields before you.

No my leedge, there is time enough
To let out blood enough, tribute shall flow,
Out of their bowels, and be tendered so.

Farewell brave Lords, my wishes are bequeathd
A nobler rank of sperits never breathd.

O my sweet boy, heaven shield thee still from care,
O be as fortunate as thee art fair.

And heaven bless you my father in this fight,
that I may see your Gray head crowned in white.

You came but now, must you part again.
You told me that you sperit
Should put on peace but see war follows war.

Nay sweet love cease,
to be denide our honor why twere base,
to breath and live, and wars in such a case,
Is even as necessary as our blood,
Swords are in season then, when rightes with stood,
Deny us tribute, that so many years,
We have in peace told out,
Why it would raise spleen in the host
Of Angels: twere enough
to make tranquile saints of angry stuff.

You have ore wrought the chiding of my breast,
And by that argument, you firmly prove
Honor to sore above the pitch of love.
Lend me thy loving and thy warlicke arm,
On which I knit this soft and silken charm,
Tied with an amorous knot, O may it prove
Inchaunted armor, being charmed by love,
That when it mounts up to thy warlick crest,
It may put by the sword, and so be blessed.

O what deuinity proceeds from love?
What happier fortune then my self can move,
Hark, the drum beckens me; sweet dear farewell,
This scarf shall be my charm, against foes and hell.

O let me kiss thee first.

The drum again.

Has that more power then I?

Doot quickly then: farewell.

Farewell O cruel part,
andreas bosom bears away my heart.

Come valliant sperits you Peers of Portugale,
That owe yout lives, your faiths, and services,
To set you free from base captivity:
O let our fathers scandal nere be seen,
As a base blush upon our free borne cheeks,
Let all the tribute that proud Spain receaud,
Of those all captive Portugales deceased,
Turn into chafe, and choke their insolence:
Methinks no, moyetie not one little thought,
Of them whole servile acts live in their graves,
But should raise spleens big as a cannon bullet,
Within your bosoms: O for honor,
Your countries reputation, your lives freedom,
Indeed your all, that may be termed reueng,
Now let your bloods be liberal as the sea:
And all those wounds that you receive of Spain,
Let there is be equal to quit yours again*
Speak portugales: are you resolved as I,
to live like captives, or as free borne die?

Prince Balthezer as you say, so say we,
to die with honor, scorn captivity.

Why spoke like true Portugales indeed,
I am asured of your forwardnes:
Now Spain sit firm, i will make thy towers shake,
And all that gold thou had from Portugale,
which makes thy court melt in Luxuriousnes,
I vow to have it treble at thy hands,
Hark Portugales: I hear their spanish drum;
March on and meet them* this must be the day,
that all they have received, they back must pay.

What are you brauing us before we come,
we will be as shrill as you: strike a larum drum.

Thou ynch of Spain,
Thou man from thy hose down ward,
Scarce so much: thou very little longer then
Thy beard: speak not such big words,
Thaile throw thee down little Ieronimo,
words greater then thy self, it must not.

And thou long thing of Portugale, why not
Thou, that art full as tall
As an English gallows: vper beam and all:
Deuourer of apparel, thou huge swallower,
My hose will scarce make thee a standing collar,
What? Have I almost quited you?

Have done impatiant Marshall.

Spanish combatants, what do you set a little
Pygnire Marshall to question with a Prince?

No prince Balthezer, I have desired him peace,
That we might war: What is the tribute,
Money tendered yet?

Trybute ha, ha! what else wherefore meet our
Drums but to tender and receive the somes,
Of many a bleeding heart which ear Sun fall,
Shall pay dear trybute, even there lives and all.

Prince balthezer, I know your valiant sperit*
I know your curage to be trid and good,
Yet, O prince, be not confirmed in blud;
Not that I taste of fear or cowerdyse,
But of religion pietye, and love,
To many bosoms, that yet firmly move,
With out disturbed spleenes: O, in thy heart*
Weigh the dear dropes of many a purple part,
That must be acted on the feeldes green stage,
Before the evening deawes quentch the sons rage,
Let trybute be apeased, and so stayed,
And let not wonted fealty be denied,
To our desert full kingdom: portugales,
Keep your forfathers Oaths; that virtue craves;
Let them not ly forsworn now in their graves,
To make their ashes periorde, and unjust,
For heaven can be revenged on their dust,
They swore to Spain both for themselves and you,
And will prosterity prove their sires untrue,
This should not be mong men of virtuous sprit*
Pay trybute thou, and receive peace and writ.

O virtuous coward*

O ignoble sperit?
To term him coward for his virtuous merit

Coward, nay then: relentles-rib of steel,
What virtue cannot, thou shall make him feel.

Proud Alexandro thou art mine?

Agreed.

And thou Vullupo mine?

I Will make thee bleed.

And thou Don Pedro mine?

I care not whose, or thine, or thine, or all at once.

I bind thee Don Andrea, by thy honor, thy valiansie,
And all that thou holdst great,
To meet me single in the battles heat;
Where i will set down, in Caractors upon thy flesh,
Four precious lines, spoke by our fathers mouth
When first thou camst ambassador: these they are:
It Is said we shall not answer at next birth
Our Fathers faults in heaven, why then on earth,
Which proves and shows, that what they
Lost by base Captivity,
We may redeem with wonted Ualliansie.
And to this crimson end our Coullers spread
Our courage are newborn our valors bred,
Therefore Andrea as thou tenderst fame,
Wars reputation, and a Soldiers name. meet me*

A will.

Single me out.

I shall.

Do you the like*

And you.
All and we.

Can we be foes, and all so well agreed.

Why man in war there is bleeding amity,
And he this day gives me the deepest wound,
I Will call him brother.

The prince call me so;
To gain that name i will give the deepest blow.

Nay then if brotherhood by strokes come dew,
I hope boy thou will gain a brother too.

Father I doubt it not.

Lord General, breath like your name,
A General defiance against portugale.

Defiance to the Portugales.

the like breath our Lord General against the spaniards

Defiance to the Spaniards.

Now cease words,
I long to hear the music of clashed swords,

why thou shall hear it presently.

Quickly then.

Why now.

O stay my Lords,
This will but breed a muteny in the camp.

I am all fire, andrea.

Art thou, good:
Why then i will quench thee prince, with thyn own blood.

Adieu.

Adieu.

Lets meet.

It Is meet we did.

Alexandro.

lorenzo.

Vollupo.

Rogero.

Don Pedro.

Horatio.

I, I, Don Pedro my boy shall meet thee,
Come valliant sperits of Spain,
Ualliant Andrea, fortunate lorenzo, worthy Rogero,
Sprightly Horatio, O let me dwell a little on that name,
Be all as fortunate as heavens blessed host;
But blame me not, i would have Horatio most,
Ride all Conquerours when the fight is done,
Especially ride thee home so my son:
So, now kiss and embrace, come, come,
I am wars tuter, strike a larum drum.

O valiant boy, struck with a Giants arm,
His sword so falls upon the Portugales,
As if he would slise them out like Orenges,
And squeese their bloods out: O abundant joy,
Never had father a more happier boy.

Can you not find Don andrea forth,
O for a voise shriller then all the trumpets,
To prince Andreas ears! through the hot army,
Go search again, bring him or near return.
Ualliant Andrea, by thy worthy blood*
Thy honored ^aith, which thou pawnst to mine,
By all that thou holdst dear upon this earth,
Sweat now to find me in the hight of blood,
Now death does heap her goods up all at once,
And crams his store house to the top with blood,
Might I now and andrea in one fight,
Make up thy wardroope Richer by a knight.

Whose that andrea?

Ha, Vullupo.

No, but a better,

Pox ont.

Pies ont, what luck is this, but Sir
You part not, so, what ere you be, i will have
About with you?

Content: this is joy mixed with spite,
To miss a Lord and meet a prince in fight.

Come meet me Sir.

Just halse way, i will meet it with my sword.

Where might I find this vallorus balthezer,
This fierce, courageous Prince, a noble, worthy,
Made of the ribs of mars and fortitude,
He promis^ed to meet fair, and single me
Out a the mistie battle: did you search
The least wing for him? speak:

We did my Lord.

And could he not be found.

Not in that wing my Lord.

Why this would vex the resolution
Of a suffering spleen: Prince Balthezer,
Portugals valliant heir,
The glory of our foe, the heart of courage,
The very soul of true nobility:
I call thee by thy right name, answer me,
Go Captain pass the leaft wing squadron; hie,
Mingle your self again amidst the army;
Pray sweat to find him out.
This place i will keep,
Now wounds are wide, and blood is very deep,
It Is now about the heavy dread of battle,
Soldiers drop down as thick as if death mowed them,
As sithmen trim the long haird Ruffian fields,
So fast they fall: so fast to fate life yields.

I have sweat much, yet cannot find him andrea.

Prince Balthezer: O lucky minute?

O long wished for hour,
Are you remembered Don, of a daring message
And a proud attempt, you braued me Don
Within my Fathers court.

I think I did.

this sword shall lash you for it.

Alas, war knows I am to proud a scholar grown,
Now to be lashed with steel had I not known
My strength, and courage it had bin easy then,
to have me borne upon the backs of men;
But now I am sorry Prince you come to late,
that wear proud steel in faith that should do that.

I can hold no longer:
Come, come lets see which of our strengths is stronger.

Mine for a wager.

thine: what wager, say.

I hold three wounds to one.

Content, a lay; but you shall keep stakes then.

Nay i will trust you.

For your a prince, I know you will pay your dew.

I Will pay it you soundly.

Prince you might have paid
Tribute as well, then battles had bin staid.

Heers tribute for you.

I Will receive it of you,
And give you acquittance with a wound or two*

Thou art a wondrous friend, a happy sperit,
I owe thee now my life could thou inherit,
Within my bosom, all I have is thine,
For by this act I hold thy arm divine.

Are you not wounded: let me search and see?

No my dear self, for I was blessed by thee,
Else his vnpiting sword had cleft my heart,
Had not Horatio played some Angels part.
Come happy mortal, let me rank by thee,
Then am I sure no star will threaten me.

Lets to the battle once more, we may meet.
This haughty prince, and wound him at our feet.

art thou true valliant? have thou no
Cote of proof girt to thy loins?
art thou true loyal?

Why look: witness the naked truth,
Upon my breast, come lets meet
Lets meet and break our haughty sculs
Down to our feet.

O me, ill stead, valliant rogero slain.

O my sad fates, Don Pedro weltring in his gore.
O could I meet andrea, now my bloods a tiptoe.
This hand and sword should melt him:
Ualliant Don Pedro.

Worthy rogero, sure it was multitudes
That made thee stoop to death,
One Portugale could near orewhelmne thee
In such crim on streams,
And no mean blood shall quit it,
balthezer prince balthezer.

andrea, we meet in blood now.

I in valliant blood, of Don rogeroes sheding
And each drop is worth a thousand Portugales.

I Will top thy head for that ambitious word.

You cannot prince, see a reueng^ull sword
Waves ore my head.

Another over mine
Let them both meet in crimson tinctures shine.

O I am slain, help me Horatio,
My foes are base, and slay me cowardly,
Farewell dear, dearest Bellimperia,
Yet herein joy is mingled with sad death,
I keep her favor longer then my breath.

My other soul, my bosom, my hearts friend.
My O Andrea slain, i will have the price
Of him in princely blood; Prince Balthezer
My sword shall strike true strains,
And ^etch Andreas ransom fourth thy veins,
Lord General drive them hence while I make war?

Has war made thee so impndent and young,
My sword shall gine correction to thy tongue.

Correct thy rascals Prince, thou correct him,
Lug with him boy, honors in blood best swim.

So young and vallerus this arm near met,
So strong a courage of so green a set.

I^ thou be valliant cease these idle words,
And let revenge hang on our glittering swords,
With this proud prince the haughty Balthezer.

Hand of lorenzo touch not my prisoner.

He Is my prisoner,
I seizd his weapons first.

O base renown it is easy to seize those,
Were ^orst laid down.

My lance first threw him from his Warlicke steed*

Thy Lance lorenzo? now by my beard you lie?

Well my Lord to you a while I tender my Whole pri^oner.

Horatio, you tender me part of mine own you kno.

Well peace, with my blood dispense
Until my leedge shall end the difference.

lorenzo, thou do boast of base renown,
Why I could whip al these, were there hose down.

Speak prince to whether do thou yield?

The vanquished yields to both, to you first

O abject prince, what do thou yield to two?

Content thee boy, thou shall instaine no wrong,
I Will to the king before, and let him know,
The sum of victory, and his overthrow.

Andrea slain, thanks to the stars above,
I Will choose my Sister out her second love.

Come noble rib of honor, valliant carcass,
I loved thee so entirely when thou breathest,
That I could die were but to bleed with thee,
And wish me wounds, even for society.
Heaven and this arm, once saved thee from thy foe,
When his all wrathful sword did basely point
At the rich circle of thy laboring heart,
Thou groueling under indignation,
Of sword and ruth, O then stepped heaven and I,
Between the stroke, but now alack must die:
Since so the powers above have writ it down,
In marble leaves that death is mortal crowned,
Come then my friend in purple I will bear,
Thee to my private tent, and then prepare,
For honored Funeral for thy melting course.
This scarce i will wear in memory of our souls,
And of our muteall loves, here, here, i will wind it,
And full as often as I think one thee,
I Will kiss this little ensign this soft banner,
Smeard with foes blood, all for the masters honor,
Alas I pity Bellimperias eyes,
Just at this instant her heart sincks and dies.

My boy ads treble comfort to my age,
His share is greatest in this victory,
The Portugales are slain and put to flight,
By Spaniards ^orce, most by Horatioes might:
I Will to the Spanish tents to see my son,
Give him my blessing, and then all is done.

O my Lords?
See Don Andreas ghoast salutes me, see embraces me.

It is your love that shapes this apprehention.

Do you not see him plainly Lords,
Now he would kiss my cheek, O my pale friend,
Were thou any thing but a ghoast I could love theee,
See he points at his own hearse, mark all,
As i^ he did rejoice at funeral.

Reueng give my tongue freedom, to paint her part,
To thank Horatio, and commend his heart.

No you will blab secrets then?

By Charons boat I will not.

Nay you shall not: therefore pass,
Secrets in hell are locked with doors o^ brass:
Use action if you will, but not in voice,
Your friend conceiues in signs how you rejoice.

See, see, he points to have his go forward on,
I prithee rest, it shall be done sweet Don,
O now he is vanished.

I am a happy Ghost,
Reueng, my passage now cannot be crossed,
Come charon: come hels Sculler, waft me ore,
You ^able streams which look like moulten pitch,
My Funeral rights are made, my hearse hung rich.

Charon: a boat, Charon, charon?

Who calls so loud on charon.
Indeed it is such a time the truth to tell,
I never want a fare, to pass to hell.

These honored rights and worthy duties spent
Upon the Funeral of Andreas dust,
Those once his valliant ashes, march we now
Homeward with victory to crown Spaines brow.

The day is ours and joy yields happy treasure,
Set on to Spain, in most triumphant measure.

Foregod I have just mist them: ha?
Soft Ieronimo: thou have more friends
To take thy leave of: Look well about thee,
Embrace them, and take friendly leave,
My arms are of the shortest,
Let your loves piece them out,
Your welcome all, as I am a Gentleman,
For my sons sa^e, grant me a man at least,
At least I am: (...) good night kind gentles,
For I hope the^^ never a Jew among you all,
And so I leave ^ou.


