WHere the Be can suck no honney, she leaves her stinge behind, and where
the Bear cannot find Origanum to heal his grief, he blasteth all other
leaves with his breath. We fear it is like to fare so with us, that seeing
you cannot draw from our labors sweet content, you leave behind you a sour
mislike, and with open reproach blame our good meaninges: because you cannot
reap your wonted mirthes. Our intent was at this time to move inward delight,
not outward lightness, and to breed, (if it might be) soft smiling, not
loud laughing: knowing it to the wise to be as great pleasure to hear
counsel mixed with wit, as to the foolish to have sport mingled with
rudeness. They were banished the Theater at Athens, and from Rome hyssed, that
brought parasites on the stage with apish actions, or fools with uncivil
habites, or Curtisans with immodest words. We have endeavored to be as far
from unseemly speeches, to make your ears glowe, as we hope you will be
from unkind reports to make our cheeks blush. The Griffyon never spreads
her wings in the sun, when she has any sick feathers: yet have we ventured
to present out exercise before your indgements, when we know them full of weak
matter, yielding rather our selves to the courtesy, which we have ever sound,
then to the preciseness, which we ought to fear


THe Arabya^s being stuffed with perfumes, burn Hemblock, a rank poison: and
in Hybla being cloid with ho^ney, they account it dainty to feed on wax.
Your Highness eyes, whom variety has filled with fair shows, and whose
ears pleasure has possessed with rare soundes, will (we trust) at this time
resemble the princely Eagle, who fearing to surfeit on spices, stoupeth to bite
on wormwood. We present no conceits nor wars, but deceites and loves,
wherein the truth may excuse the plainness. The necessity, the length: the
poetry, the bitterness. There is no needelesse point so small, which has not
his compass: nor hair so slender, which has not his shadow: nor sport so
simple, which has not his shadow: nor sport so simple, which has not show.
Whatsoever we present, whether it be tedious (which we fear) or toyishe (which
we doubt) sweet or sour, absolute or imperfect, or whatsoever, in all
humbleness we all, and I on knee for all, entreat, that your Highness
imagine your self to be in a deep dream, that staying the conclusion, in your
rising your Majesty vouchfafe but to say, And so you awakte


THou art a Ferriman, Phao, yet a free man, possessing for riches content, and
for honors quiet. Thy thoughts are no higher the^ thy fortunes, nor thy desires
greater then thy calling. Who climeth, stands on glass, and falls on
thorn. Thy hearts thirste is satisfied with thy hands thrift, and thy gentle
labors in the day, turn to sweet slumbers in the night. As much does it
delight thee to rule thine oar in a calm stream, as it does Sapho to swaye
the Scepter in her brave court. Envy never casts her eye low, ambition
points always upward, and revenge barketh only at stars. Thou farest
dilicately, if thou have a fare to buy any thing. Thine angle is ready, when
thine oar is idle, and as sweet is the fish which thou gettest in the river, as
the foul which other buy in the market. Thou needst not fear poison in thy
glass, nor treason in thy guard. The wind is thy greatest enemy, whose might
is withstoode with policy. O sweet life seldom found under a golden covert,
often under a thached cotage. But here comes one, I will withdraw my self
aside, it may be a passenger


It is no less unseemly then vnwholsom for Venus, who is most honored in
Princes courts, to soiourne with Vulcan in a smithes forge, where bellows
blow in steed of sighs, dark smokes rise for sweet perfumes, and for the
panting of loving hearts, is only heard the beating of steeled ha^mers. Unhappy
Venus, yt cariing fire in thine own breast, thou should dwell with fire in
his forge. What does Vulcan all day but endeavor to be as crabbed in manners, as
he is crooked in body? driving nails, when he should give kisses, and
hammering hard armours, when he should sing sweet Amors. It came by lot, not
love, that I was lincked with him. He gives thee bolts, Cupid, in steed of
arrows, fearing belike (jealous fool that he is) that if he should give thee
an arrow head he should make himself a broad head. But come, we will to
Syracusa, where thy deity shall be shown, and my disdain. I will yoke the
neck, that yet never bowed, at which, if Jove repine, Jove shall repent. Sapho
shall know, be she never so fair, that there is a Venus, which can co^quer,
were she never so fortunate


If Jove epsy Sapho, he will devise some new shape to entertain her.


Strike thou Sapho, let Jove devise what shape he can.


Mother, they say she has her thoughts in a string, that she conquers
affections, and sends love up and down upon arrandes, I am afraid she will
yerke me, if I hit her


Peevish boy, can mortal creatures resist that, which the immortal Gods
cannotredresse


The Gods are amorous and therefore willing to be pearsed.


And she amiable, and therefore must be pearsed.


I dare not.


Draw thine arrow to the head, else I will make thee repent it at the heart. Come
away and behold the ferry boy ready to conduct us. Pretty youth, de you keep the
ferry that bends to Syracusa


The ferrie, fair Lady, that bends to Syracusa.


I fear if the water should begin to swel thou will want cunning to guide.


These waters are commonly as the passengers be, and therefore carrying one so
fair in show, there is no cause to fear a rough sea


To pass the time in thy boat, can thou devise any pastime?


If the wind be with me, I can angle, or tell tales: if against me, it will be
pleasure for you to see me take pains


I like not fishing: yet was I borne of the sea.


But he may bless fishing, that caught such an one in the sea.


It was not with an angle, my boy, but with a net.


So was it said, that vulcan caught Mars with Venus.


Did thou hear so? It was some tale.


Yea Madame and that in the boat I did mean to make my tale.


It is not for a ferry man to talk of the Gods loves: but to tell how thy
father could dig, and thy mother spinne. But come, let us away


I am ready to wait.


Pandion, since your coming from the university to the court, from Athens to
Syracusa, how do you feel your self altered either in humor or opinion


Altered Trachinus, I say no more, and shame that any should know so much.


Here you see as great virtue, far greater brave ry, the action of that which
you co^template* Sapho, fair by nature, by birth royal, learned by education
by government politic, rich by peace: insomuch as it is hard to judge, whether
she be more beautiful or wise, virtuous or fortunate. Beesides, do you not
look on fair Ladies in steed of good letters, and behold fair faces in
steed of fine phrases: In universities virtues and vices are but shadowed in
colors white and black, in courts showed to life good and bad. There, times
paste are read of in old books, times present set down by new devises, times
to come coniectured at by aim, by prophecy, or chance here, are times in
perfection, nor by devise, as fables, but in execution, as trueths. Believe me
Pandion, in Athens you have but tombs, we in court the bodies, you the pictures
of Venus and the wise Goddesses, we the persons and the virtues. What has a
seh oller found out by study, that a courtier has not found out by practice.
Simple are you that think to see more at the candle snuff, then the sun
beams, to sail further in a little brook, then in the maine Ocean, to make a
greater harvest by gleaning, then reaping. How say you Pandion, is not all this
true


Trachinus, what would you more, all true.


Cease then to lead thy life in a study, pinned with a few boardes, and
endeavor to be a courtier to live in emboste rouffes


A labor intolerable for Pandion.


Why?


Because it is harder to shape a life to dissemble, then to go forward with
the liberty of truth


Why do you think in court any use to dissemble?


Do you know in court any that mean to live?


You have no reason for it, but an old report.


Report has not always a blister on her tongue.


I, but this is the court of Sapho natures miracle, which resembles the tree
Salurus, whose root is fastened upon knotted steel, and in whose top bud
leaves of pure gold


Yet has Salurus blasts, and water boughs, worms and Caterpillars.


The virtue of the tree is not the cause: but the Easterly wind, which is
thought commonly to bring cankers and rottenesse


Nor the excellency of Sapho the occasion: but the iniquity of flatterers,
who always whisper in Princes ears suspicion and sowrenesse


Why, then you conclude with me, that Sapho for virtue has no copartner.


Yea, and with the judgment of the world, that she is without comparison.


We will thither straight.


I would I might return straight.


Why, there you may live still.


But not still.


How like you the Ladies, are they not passing fair?


Mine eye drinks neither the color of wine nor women.


Yet am I sure that in judgment you are not so severe, but that you can be
content to allow of beauty by day or by night


When I behold bewty before the sun, his beams dim beauty: when by candle,
bewty obscures toarch light: so as no time I can judge, because at any time I
cannot discern being in the sun a brightness to shadow beauty, and in
beauty a glistering to extinguish light


Schollerlike said, you flatter that, which you seem to mislike, and to
disgrace that, which you most wonder at. But let us away


I follow. And you sir boy go to Syracusa about by land, where you shall meet
my stuff, pay for the carriage, and convey it to my lodging


I think all your stuff are bundles of paper: but now must you learn to turn
your library to a war drope, and see whether your rapier hang better by your
side, then the pen did in your ear


Molus, what odds between thy commons in Athens, and the diet in court? A
pages life, and a scollers


This difference: there of a little I had somewhat, here of a great deal
nothing, there did I wear Pantopheles on my legs, here do I bear them in my
hands


Thou may be skilled in thy Logic, but not in thy Lerypoope: belike no meat
can down with you, unless you have a knife to cut it: but come among us,
and you shall see us once in a morning have a mouse at a bay


A mouse? improperly spoken.


Aptly understood, a mouse of beafe.


I think indeed a piece of beafe as big as a mouse, serves a great company
of such cattes. But what else


For other sportes, a square die in a pages pocket, is as decent as a square
cap on a Graduates head


You courtiers be mad fellows, we silly souls are only plodders at Ergo,
whose wits are claspt up with our books, and so full of learning are we at
home, that wescarce know good manners when we come abroad, Cunning in nothing
but in making small things great by figures, pulling on with the sweat of our
studies a great shoe upon a little foot, burning out one ca^dle in seeking for
an other, raw wordlings in matters of substance passing wranglers about
shadows


Then is it time lost to be a scholar. We pages are Politians: for look what
we hear our masters talk of, ve determine of: where we suspect, we
undermine: and where we mislike for some particular grudge, there we pick
quarrels for a general grief. Nothing among us but in steed of good morrow,
what news: we fall from cogging at dice to cogge with states: and so forward
are mean me^ in those matters, that they would be cocks to tread down others,
before they be chicke^s to rise themselves. Youths are very forward to stroke
their chins, though they have no beardes, and to lie as loud as he that has
lived longest


These be the golden days.


Then be they very dark days: for I can see no gold.


You are gross witted, master courtier.


And you master scholar slender witted.


I meant times which were prophesied golden for plenty of all things,
sharpness of wit, excellency in knowledge, policy in government, for


Soft Scholaris, I deny your argument.


Why, it is no argument.


Then I deny it because it is no argument. But let us go and follow our
masters


Is it not straung that Phao on the sudden should be so fair?


It cannot be strange, since Venus was disposed to make him fair. That cunning
had been better bestowed on women, which would have deserved thanks of nature


Haplye she did in spite of women, or scorn of nature.


Proud else, how squeamish he is be come already, using both disdaineful
looks, and imperious words: insomuch that he galleth with ingratitude. And
then Ladies you know how it cutteth a woman to become a wooer


Tush, children and fools, the fairer they are, the sooner they yield, an
apple will catch the one, a baby the other


Your loouer I think be a fair fool: for you love nothing but fruit and
puppets


I laugh at that you all call love, and judge it only a word called love. Me
thinks lyking, a courtesy, a smile, a beck, and such like, are the very
Quintessence of love


I, Mileta, but were you as wise, as you would be thought fair, or as fair,
as you think your self wise, you would be as ready to please men, as you are
coye to pranke your self, and as careful to be accounted amorous, as you are
willing to be thought discrete


No, no, men are good souls (poor souls:) who never enquire but with their
eyes, loving to father the cradle, though they but mother the child. Give me
their gifts, not their virtues, a grain of their gold weighs down a pound
of their wit, a dram of give me, is heavier then an ounce of hear me. Believe
me Ladies, give is a pretty thing


I cannot but oftentimes smile to my self, to hear men call us weak
vessels, when they prove themselves broken hearted, us frail, when their
thoughts cannot hang together, studying with words to flatter, and with
bribes to allure, when we commonly wish their tongues in their purses, they
speak so simply, and their offers in their bellies, they do it so peeuishly


It is good sport to see them want matter: for then fall they to good manners,
having nothing in their mouths but sweet mistress, wearing our hands out with
courtly kissings, when their wits fail in courtly discourses. Now rufling
their hairs, now setting their ruffes, then gazing with their eyes, then
sighing with a privy wring by the hand, thinking us like to be wowed by signs
and ceremonies


Yet we, when we swear with our mouths we are not in love, then we sigh from
the heart and pine in love


We are mad wenches, if men mark our words: for when I say, I would none
cared for love more then I, what mean I, but I would none loved but I, where
we cry away, do we not presently say, go too: and when men strive for kisses,
we exclaim, let us alone, as though we would fall to that our selves


Nay, then Canope, it is time to go, and beehold Phao.


Where?


In your head Ismena, no where else: but let us keep on our way.


Wisely.


Phao, thy mean fortune causes thee to use an oar, and thy sudden beauty a
glass: by the one is seen thy need, in the other thy pride. O Venus, in
thinking thou have blessed me, thou have cursed me, adding to a poor estate, a
proud heart: and to a disdained man, a disdaining mind. Thou do not flatter
thy self Phao, thou art fair: fair? I fear me fair, be a word too foul
for a face so passing fayte. But what avails beauty, had thou all things
thou would wish, thou might die to morrow, and did thou want al things
thou desire, thou shall live till thou die. Tushe Phao, there is grown
more pride in thy mind, then favor in thy face. Blush foolish boy, to think
on thine own thoughts: cease complaints, and crave counsel. And lo, behold
Sybilla in the mouth of her cave, I will salute her. Lady, I fear me I am out
of my way, and so benighted withal that I am compelled to ask your direction


Fair youth, if you will be advised by me, you shall for this time seek none
other Inn, then my cave: for that it is no less perilous to travail by
night, then uncomfortable


Your courtesy offered has prevented what my necessity was to entreat.


Come near, take a stool, and sit down. Now, for that these winter nights
are long, and that children delight in nothing more then to hear old wives
tales, we will beguile the time with some story. And though you behold
wrinkles and furrows in my tawny face: yet may you happily find wisdom and
counsel in my white hairs


Lady nothing can content me better the^ a tale, neither is there any thing
more necessary for me then counsel


Were you borne so fair by nature?


No, made so fair by Venus.


For what cause?


I fear me for some curse.


Why, do you love, and cannot obtain?


No I may obtain but cannot love.


Take heed of that my child.


I cannot choose good Madame.


Then hearken to my tale, which I hope shall be as a straight thread to lead
you out of those crooked conceits, and place you in the plain path of love


I attend.


When I was young, as you now are, I speak it without boasting, I was as
bewtifull: for Phoebus in his Godhead sought to get my maiden head: but I,
fond wench, receiving a benefit from above, began to wax sqemishe beneath,
not unlike to Asolis, which being made green by heavenly drops, shrinketh
into the ground when there fall showers: or the Syrian mudde, which being made
white chalk by the sun, never cease rolling, til it lie in the shadow. He
to sweet prayers added great promises, I either desirous to make trial of his
power, or willing to prolong mine own life, caught up my handful of sand,
consenting to his suite, if I might live as many years as there were grains.
Phoebus, (for what cannot Gods do, and what for love will they not do,)
granted my petition. And then I sighe and blushe to tell the rest, I recalled
my promise


Was not the God angry to see you unkind?


Angry my boy, which was the cause that I was unfortunate.


What revenge for such rigor used the Gods?


None, but suffering us to live, and know we are no Gods.


I pray tell on.


I will Having received long life by Phoebus, and rare beauty by nature, I
thought all the year would have been May, that fresh colors would always
continue, yt time and fortune could not wear out, what Gods and nature had
wrought up: not once imagining that white and read should return to black
and yellow, the Juniper, the longer it grew, the crookedder it waxed, or that
in a face without blemish, there should come wrinkles without number. I did as
you do, go with my glass, ravished with the pride of mine own beauty, and you
shall do as I do, loath to see a glass disdaining deformity. There was none
that heard of my fault, but shunned my favor, insomuch as I stooped for age
before I tasted of youth, sure to be long lived, uncertain to be beloved.
Gentlemen that used to sigh from their hearts for my sweet love, began to
point with their fingers at my withered face, and laughed to see the eyes, out
of which fire seemed to sparkle, to be suckered being old with spectacles. This
causes me to withdraw my self to a solitary cave, where I must lead six
hundred years in no less pensiveness of crabbed age, then grief of remembered
youth. Only this comfort, that being ceased to be fair, I study to be wise,
wishing to be thought a grave matro^, since I cannot return to be a young
maid


Is it not possible to die before you become so old?


No more possible then to return as you are, to be so young.


Could not you settle your fancy upon any, or would not destiny suffer it?


Women willinglye ascribe that to fortune, which wittingly was committed by
frowardness


What will you have me do?


Take heed you do not as I did. Make not too much of fading bewty, which is
fair in the cradle, and foul in the grave, resembling Polyon, whose leaves are
white in the morning, and blew before night, or Anyta, which being a sweet
flower at the rising of the sun, becomes a weed, if it be not plucked
before the setting Fair faces have no fruits, if they have no witnesses. When
you shall behold over this tender flesh a tough skin, your eyes which were
wont to glaunce on others faces to be suncke so hollow, that you can scarce
look out of your own head, and when all your teech shall wagge as fast as
your tongue, the^ will you repent the time which you cannot recall, and be
enforced to bear what most you blame. Loose not the pleasant time of your
youth, then the which there is nothing swifter, nothing sweeter. Beauty is a
slippery good, which decreaseth whilst it is increasing, rese^bling the
Medler, which in the moment of his full ripenes is known to be in a rottennes.
Whiles you look in the glass, it waxes old with time, if on the Sun parcht
with heat, if on the wind, blasted with cold. A great care to keep it, a
short space to enjoy it, a sudden time to loose it. Be not coy, when you are
courted. Fortunes wings are made of times feathers, which stay not whilst one
may measure them. Be affable and courteous in youth, that you may be honored in
age. Roses that lose their colors, keep their savors, and plucked from the
stalk, are put to the still. Cotonea, because it boweth when the sun rises,
is sweetest, when it is oldest: and children, which in their tender years sow
courtesy, shall in their declining states reap pity. Be not proud of bewties
painting whose colors consume themselves, because they are bewties painting


I am driven by your counsel into diverse conceits, neither knowing how to
stand, or where to fall, but to yield to love is the only thing I hate


I commit you to fortune, who is like to play such prancks with you, as your
tender years can scarce bear, nor your green wits understand. But repair
unto me often, and if I cannot remove the effects, yet I will manifest the
causes


I go, ready to return for advice, before I am resolved to adventure.


Yet hearken two words, thou shall get friendship by dissembling, love by
hatred, unless thou perish, thou shall perish: in digging for a stone, thou
shall reach a star: thou shall be hated most, because thou art loved most.
Thy death shall be feared and wished: so much for prophecy, which nothing can
prevent: and this for counsel, which thou may follow. Keep not company
with Antes, that have wings, nor talk with any, near the hill of a mowle,
where thou smellest the sweetness of serpents breath, beware thou touch no
part of the body. Be not merry among those that put Buglosse in their wine,
and sugar in thine. If any talk of the Eclipse of the sun, say thou never
saw it. Nourishe no conies in thy vaultes, nor swallows in thine eues. Sow
next thy vine Mandrage, and ever keep thine ears open, and thy mouth shut,
thine eyes upward, and thy fingers down: so shall thou do better then
otherwise, though never so well as I wish


Alas Madame, your prophecy threatens miseries, and your counsel warns
impossibilities


Farewell, I can answer no more.


Unhappy Phao. But soft, what gallant troop is this? What Gentlewoman in this?


Sapho, a Lady here in Sycily.


What fair boy is that?


Phao, the Ferrie man of Syracusa.


I never saw one more brave: be al Ladies of such majesty?


No, this is she that al wonder at and worship.


I have seldom seen a sweeter face. Be all Ferrie men of that fairness?


No Madame, this is he that Venus determined among men to make the fairest.


Seeing I am only come forth to take the air, I will cross the Ferrie, and
so the fields, then going in through the park, I think the walk will be
pleasant


You will much delight in the flattering green, which now begins to be in
his glory


Sir boy, will ye undertake to carry us over the water? Are you dumb, can you
not speak


Madame, I crave pardon, I am spurblinde, I could scarce see.


It is pity in so good a face there should be an evil eye.


I would in my face there were never an eye.


Thou can never be rich in a trade of life of all the basest.


Yet content Madame, which is a kind of life of all the best.


Will thou forsake the ferrie, and follow the court as a Page?


As it pleases fortune Madame, to whom I am a prentice.


Come, let us go?


Will you go Pandion.


Yea.


Cryticus comes in good time, I shall not be alone. What news Cryticus?


I taught you that lesson, to ask what news, and this is the news: to morrow
there shall be a desperate fray between two, made at all weapons, from the brown
bill to the bodkin


Now thou talkest of Frayes, I pray thee what is that, whereof they talk so
commonly in court, valor, the stab, the pistol, for the which every man
that dares is so much honored


O Molus, beware of valor, he that can look big, and wear his dagger
pomel lower the^ the point, that lies at a good ward, and can hit a button
with a thrust, and will into the field man to man for a boute or two, he,
Molus, is a shrewd fellow, and shall be well followed


What is the end?


Danger or death.


If it be but death that brings all this commendation, I account him as
valiant that is killed with a surfeit, as with a sword


How so?


If I venture upon a full stomach to eat a rasher on the coals, a carbonado,
drink a carouse, swallow all things that may procure sickness or death, am
not I as valiant to die so in a house, as the other in a field? Me thinks
that Epicures are as desperate as soldiers, and cooks provide as good weapons
as cutlers


O valiant kinght.


I will die for it, what greater valor?


Scholars fight, who rather seek to choke their stomachs, then see their
blood


I will stand upon this point: if it be valor to dare die, he is valiant
howsoever he dies


Well, of this hereafter but here comes Calipho, we will have some sport.


My mistress, I think has got a Gadfly, never at home, and yet none can tell
where abroad. My master was a wise man, when he matched with such a womanne.
When she comes in, we must put out the fire, because of the smoke, hang up our
hammers because of the noise, and do no work, but watch, what she wants.
She is fair, but by my troath I doubt of her honesty. I must seek her, that
I fear Mars has found


Whom do thou seek?


I have found those I seek not.


I hope you have found those, which are honest.


It may be: but I seek no such.


Cryticus, you shall see me by learning to prove Calipho to be the deiull.


Let us see but I pray thee prove it better, then thou did thy self to be
valiant


Calipho, I will prove thee to be the devil.


Then will I swear thee to be a God.


The devil is black.


What care I.


Thou art black.


What care you.


Therefore thou art the devil.


I deny that.


It is the conclusion, thou must not deny it.


In spite of all conclusions, I will deny it.


Molus, the Smith holds you hard.


Thou see he has no reason.


Try him again.


I will reason with thee now from a place.


I mean to answer you in no other place.


Like master, like man.


Yt may be.


But thy master has horns.


And so may thou.


Therefore thou have horns, and ergo a devil,


Be they all diuelles have horns?


All men that have horns, are.


Then are there more devils on earth the^ in hell.


But what do thou answer?


I deny that.


What?


Whatsoever it is, that shall prove me a devil. But hear thou scholar, I
am a plain fellow, and can fashion nothing but with the hammer. What will thou
say, if I prove thee a smith


Then will I say thou art a scholar.


Prove it Calipho, and I will give thee a good Colaphum.


I will prove it, or else,


Or else what?


Or else I will not prove it. Thou art a Smith: therefore thou art a smith. The
conclusion, you say, must not be denied: and therefore it is true, thou art a
smith


I, but I deny your Antecedent.


I, but you shall not. Have I not touched him Cryticus?


You have both done learnedly: for as sure as he is a smith, thou art a devil.


And then he a devil, because a smith: for that it was his reason to make me a
devil being a smith


There is no reasoning with these Mechanical doltes, whose wits are in their
hands, not in their heads


Be not choleric, you are wise: but let us take up this matter with a song.


I am content, my voice is as good as my reason.


Than shall we have sweet music. But come, I will not break of.


What unacquainted thoughts are these Phao, far unfit for thy thoughts,
unmeet for thy birth, thy fortune, thy years, for Phao: unhappy, can thou
not be content to behold the sun, but thou must covet to build thy nest in
the Sun? Does Sapho bewitch thee, whom all the Ladies in Sicily could not
woo: Yea, poor Phao, the greatness of thy mind is far above the beauty of
thy face, and the hardness of thy fortune beyond the bitterness of thy
words. Die Phao, Phao die: for there is no hope if thou be wise, nor safety,
if thou be fortunate. Ah Phao, the more thou seek to suppress those
mounting affections, they soar the loftier, and the more thou wrastlest with
them the stronger they wax, not unlike unto a ball, which the harder it is
thrown against the earth, the higher it boundeth into the air: or our
Sycilyan stone, which grows hardest by hammeringe. O divine love, and
therefore divine, because love, whose deity no conceit can compase, and
therefore no authority can constrain, as miraculous in working as mighty,
and no more to be suppressed then comprehended. How now Phao, whether art
thou carried, committing idolatry with that God, whom thou have cause to
blaspheme. O Sapho, fair Sapho; peace miserable wretch, enjoy thy care in
covert, we are willow in thy hatte, and baies in thy heart. Lead a Lamb in thy
hand, and a Fox in thy head, a dove on the back of thy hand, and a sparow in
the palm. Gold boyleth best, when it bubleth least, water runs smoothest,
where it is deepest. Let thy love hang at thy hearts bottom, not at the
tongues brimme. Things untold, are undone, there can be no greater comfort,
then to know much, nor any less labor, then to say nothing. But ah thy bewty
Sapho, thy bewty. Beginnest thou to blabbe? I blabbe it Phao, as long as thou
blabbest her bewty. Bees that die with honney, are buried with harmony.
Swannes that end their lives with songs, are covered when they are dead, with
flowers: and they that till their latter gasp commend bewty, shall be ever
honored with benefits. In these extreamities I will go to none other Oracle*
then Sybilla, whose old years have not been idle in these young attemptes,
and whose sound advice may mitigate (though the heavens cannot remove) my
miseries. O Sapho, sweet Sapho, Sapho. Sibilla


Who is there?


One not worthy to be one.


Fair Phao?


Unfortunate Phao.


Come in.


So I will, and quite thy tale of Phoebus, with one whose brightness darkeneth
Phoebus. I love Sapho, Sybilla, Sapho, ah Sapho, Sybilla


A short tale Phao, and a sorrowful, it asks pity rather then counsel.


So it is Sybilla: yet in those firm years me thinks there should harbor
such experience, as may defer, though not take away, my destiny


It is hard to cure that by words, which cannot be eased by herbs, and yet
if thou will take advice, be attentive


I have brought mine ears of purpose, and will ha^g at your mouth, til you
have finished your discourse


Love, fair child, is to be governed by art, as thy boat by an oar: for
fancy, though it comes by hazard, is ruled by wisdom. If my precepts may
persuade, (and I pray thee let them persuade) I would wish thee first to be
diligent: for that womenne desire nothing more then to have their servants
officious. Be always in sight, but never slothful. Flatter I mean, lie, little
things catch light minds, and fancy is a worm, that feeds first upon
fenell. Imagine with thy self all are to be won, otherwise mine advise were
as unnecessary as thy labor. It is impossible for the brittle metal of women
to withstand the flattering attemptes of men: only this, let them be asked,
their sex requires no less, their modesties are to be allowed so much. Be
prodigal in praises and promises, beauty must have a trumpet, and pride a
gift. Peacocks never spread their feathers, but when they are flattered, and
Gods are seldom pleased, if they be not bribed. There is none so foul, that
thinks not her self fair. In commending thou can loose no labor. for of
every one thou shall be believed. O simple women, that are brought rather to
believe what their ears hear of flattering men, then what their eyes see in
true glasses


You degresse only to make me believe, that women do so lightly believe.


Then to the purpose. Choose such times to break thy suite, as thy Lady is
pleasant. The wooden horse entered Troy, when the soldiers were quaffyng, and
Penelope forsooth, whom fables make so coy, among the pottes wrong her wooers
by the fists, when she lowred on their faces. Grapes are mind glasses. Venus
works in Bacchus press, and blows fire upon his lycour. When thon talkest
with her, let thy speech be pleasant, but not incredible. Choose such words as
may (as many may) melt her mind. Honney ranckleth, when it is eaten for
pleasure and fair words wound, when they are heard for love. Write, and
persist in writing, they read more then is written to them, and write less
then they think. In co^ceite study to be pleasant in attire brave, but not
too curious, when she smileth laugh outright, if rise, stand up, if sit, lie
down. Loose al thy time to keep time with her. Can you sing, show your
cunning, can you dance, use your legs, can you play upon any instrument,
practice your fingers to please her fancy, seek out qualyties. If she seem at
the first cruel, be not discouraged. I tell the a straung thing, womenne
strive, because they would be overcome, force they call it: but such a welcome
force they account it, that continually, they study to be enforced. To fair
words join sweet kisses, which if they gently receive, I say no more, they will
gently receive. But be not pinned always on her sleeves, strangers have
green rushes, when daily guests are not worth a rushe. Look pale, and learn
to be lean, that who so sees thee, may say, the Gentleman is in love. Use no
forcerie to hasten thy success, wit is a witch, Ulysses was not fair, but
wise, not cunning in charms, but sweet in speech, whose filed tongue made
those inamoured that sought to have him inchau^ted. Be not coy, bear, sooth,
swear, die to please thy Lady, these are rules for poor lovers, to others I
am no mistress. He has wit enough, that can give enough. Dumb men are
eloquent, if they be liberal. Believe me great gifts are little Gods. When thy
mistress does bend her brow, do not thou bend thy fiste. Camokes must be bowed
with slight, not strength, water to be trained with pipes, not stopped with
sluses, fire to be quenched with dust, not with swords. If thou have a ryuall,
be pacient, art must wind him out not malice: time, not might, her change,
and thy constancy. Whatsoever she wears: swear it becomes her. In thy louce
be secret. Venus cofers, though they be hollow, never sound, and when they
seem emptiest, they are fullest. Old fool that I am, to do thee good, I
begin to doat, and counsel that, which I would have concealed. Thus Phao
have I given thee certain regardes, no rules, only to set thee in the way, not
to bring thee ho^e


Ah Sybilla, I pray go on, that I may glutte my self in this science.


Thou shall not surfette Phao, whilst I diet thee. Flies that die on the
honney suckle become poison to bees. A little in love is a great deal


But all that can be said not enough.


White silver draws black lines, and sweet words will breed sharp
torments


What shall become of me?


Go dare


I go, Phao, thou can but die, and then as good die with great desires, as
pine in base fortunes


Sapho is fallen suddenly sick, I cannot guess the cause.


Some cold belike, or else a woman's qualme.


A strange nature of cold, to drive one into such an heat.


Your Physic sir I think be of the second sort, else would you not judge it
rare, that whot fevers are engendered by cold causes


Indeed Lady, I have no more Physic then will purge choler, and that if it
please you, I will practice upon you. It is good for women that be waspish


Faith sir no, you are best purge your own melancholy: belike you are a male
content


It is true, and are not you a female content.


Soft, I am not content, that a male and Female content, should go together.


Ismena is disposed to be merry.


No, it is Pandion would feign seem wise.


You shall not fall out? for Pigions after biting fall to billing, and open
iarres make the closest iestes


Mileta, Ismena, Mileta: Come away, my Lady is in a sown.


Aye me.


Come, let us make haste.


I am sorry for Sapho: because she will take no Physic, like you Pandion,
who being sick of the sullens, will seek no friend


Of men we learn to speak, of Gods to hold our peace. Silence shall disgeste
what follye has swallowed, and wisdom weane what fancy has noursed


Is it not love?


If it were, what then?


Nothing, but that I hope it be not.


Why, in courts there is nothing more common. And as to be bald among the
Micanyans it was accounted no shame, because they were all balde: so to be in
love among courtiers it is no discredit: for that they are al in love


Why, what do you think of our Ladies?


As of the Seres wool, which being whitest and softest, fretteth soonestand
deepest


I will not tempt you in your deep Mela^choly, least you seem sour to those,
which are so sweet. But come, let us walk a little into the fields, it may
be the open air will disclose your close conceits


I will go with you: but send our pages away.


What brown study ar^ thou in Molus, no mirth? no life?


I am in the depth of my learning driven to a muse, how this lent I shall
scamble in the court, that was wont to fast so often in the University


Thy belly is thy God.


Then is he a deaffe God.


Why?


For venture non habet aures. But thy back is thy God.


Then is it a blind God.


How prove you that?


Easy. Nemo videt manticae, quod intergo est.


Then would the sachell that hanges at your God, id est, your back, were full
of meat to stuff my God, hoc est, my belly


Excellent. But how can thou study, when thy mind is only in the kitchen?


Does not the horse travel best, that sleapeth with his head in the maunger?


Yes, what then?


Good wits will apply. But what cheer is there here this Lent?


Fish.


I can eat none, it is wind.


Eggs.


I must eat none, they are fire.


Cheese.


It is against the old verse, Caseus est nequam.


Yea, but it disgesteth all things except it self.


Yea, but if a man has nothing else to eat, what shall it digest?


You are disposed to jest. But if your silke^ throat can swallow no packthread,
you must pick your teeth, and play with your trencher


So shall I not incur the fulsom and unmannerly sin of surfeiting. But here
comes Calipho


What news?


Since my being here, I have sweat like a dog, to prove my master a devil,
he brought such reasons to refel me, as I promise you, I shall like the better
of his wit, as long as I am with him


How?


Thus, I always arguing that he had horns, and therefore a devil, he said:
fool, they are things like horns, but no horns. For once in the Senate of
Gods being hold a solemn sesion, in the midst of their talk I put in my
sentence, which was so indifferent, that they all concluded it might as well have
been left out, as put in, and so placed on each side of my head things like
horns, and called me a Parenthesis, Now my masters, this may be true, for I
have seen it my self about diverse sentences


It is true, and the same time did Mars make a full point, that Vulcans head
was made a Parenthesis


This shall go with me, I trust in Syracusa to give one or other a Parenthesis.


Is Venus yet come home?


No, but were I Vulcan, I would by the Gods,


What would thou?


Nothing, but as Vulcan halt by the Gods.


I thought you would have hardly entreated Venus.


Nay, Venus is easily entreated: but let that go bie.


What?


That which makes so many Parenthesis.


I must go by too, or else my master will not go by me: but meet me full
with his fiste. Therefore, if we shall sing, give me my part quickly: for if I
tarry long, I shall cry my part woefully


Hey ho: I know not which way to turn me Ah, ah, I fainte, I die,


Madame, I think it good you have more clothes, and sweat it out.


No, no, the best ease I find is to sigh it out.


A strange disease, that should breed such a desire.


A strange desire that has brought such a disease.


Where, Lady, do you feel your most pain?


Where no body else can feel it Canope.


At the heart?


In the heart.


Will you have any Mithrydate?


Yea, if for this disease there were any Mithrydate?


Why? what disease is it Madam, that physic ca^ not cure?


Only the disease Mileta that I have.


Is it a burning ague?


I think so, or a burning agony.


Will you have any of this Syrope, to moisture your mouth?


Would I had some local things to dry my brain.


Madame will you see if you can sleep?


Sleep Fauilla: I shall then dream.


As good dream sleeping, as sigh waking.


Phao is cunning in all kind of simples, and it is hard, if there be none to
procure sleep


Who?


Phao.


Yea Phao, Phao, ah Phao, let him come presently.


Shall we draw the cutteines, whilst you give your self to slumber?


Do, but depart not, I have such startes in my sleep, disquieted I know not
how.


What say you Madame?


Nothing, but if I sleep not now, you send for Phao. Ah Gods.


There is a fish called Garus, that heals al sick nesse, so as whilst it is
applied one name not Garus


An evil medicine for us women: for if we should be forbidden to name Garus, we
should chat nothing but Garus


Well said Eugenua, you know your self.


Yea Canope, and that I am one of your sex.


I have heard of an herb called Lunary, that being bound to the pulses of
the sick, causes nothing but dreams of weddings and daunces


I think Ismena, that herb be at thy pulses now: for thou art ever talking of
matches and merymentes


It is an unlucky figne in the chamber of the sick to talk of marriages; for my
mother said, it foresheweth death


It is very evil to Canope to sit at the beds feet, and foretells
danger: therefore remove your stool, and sit by me


Sure it is some cold she has taken.


If one were burnt, I think we women would say, he died of a cold.


It may be some conceit.


Then is there no fear: for yet did I never hear of a woman that died of a
conceit


I mistruste her not: for that the owl has not shrikte at the window, or the
night Raven crooked, both being fatal


You are all superstitious: for these be but fancies of doting age: who by
chance observing it in some, have set it down as a religion for all


Fauilla, thou art but a Girl, I would not have a Weesel cry, nor desire to
see a Glass, nor an old wife come into my chamber: for then though I lyngred
in my disease, I should never escape it


Ah, who is there? what sodeine affrightes be these? Me thought Phao came
with simples to make me sleep. Did no body name Phao before I began to
slumber


Yes, we told you of him.


Let him be here too morrow.


He shall, will you have a little broth to comfort you?


I can relish nothing.


Yet a little you must take to sustain nature.


I cannot Mileta, I will not. Oh, which way shall I lie? what shall I do?
Heygh ho. O Mileta, help to rear me up, my bed, my head lies too low. You
pester me with too many clothes. Fie, you keep the chamber too hot, avoid
it, it may be I shall steal a nappe when all are gone


We will.


Ah impacient disease of love, and Goddess of love thrice vnpitifull. The
Eagle is never stricken with thunder, nor the Olyue with lightning and may
great Ladies be plagued with love? O Venus, have I not strawed thine Altars
with sweet roses? kept thy swannes in clear rvuers? sead thy sparrowes with
ripe corn, and harbored thy doves in fair houses? Thy Tortoys have I
nourished under my fig tree, my chamber have I ceeled with thy Cockleshels, and
dipped thy spung into the freshest waters. Did thou nourse me in my swaddling
clouts with wholesome herbs, that I might perish in my flowting years by
fancy? I perceive, but to late I perceive, and yet not too late, because at
last, that strains are caught as well by stooping too low, as reaching to high:
that eyes are bleared as soon with vapors that come from the earth, as with
beams that proceed from the sun. Love lodges sometimes in caves: and thou
Phoebus, that in the pride of thy hearre shinest all day in our Horizon, at
night dippest thy head in the Ocean. Resist it Sapho, whilst it is yet
tender. Of Acornes comes Oaks, of drops floudes, of sparks flames of
Atomies Elements. But alas it fares with me as with waspes, who feeding on
serpents, make their stings more venomous: for glutting my self on the face of
Phao, I have made my desire more desperate. Into the neast of an Alcyon no
bird can enter but the Alcyon, and into the heart of so great a Lady can any
creep but a great Lord? There is an herb (not unlike unto my love) which the
further it grows from the sea, the salter it is, and my desires the more they
swerve from reason, the more seem they reasonable. When Phao comes, what
the^? will thou open thy love? Yea. No Sapho: but staring in his face till
thine eyes dasell, and thy spirits fainte, die before his face: then this
shall be written on thy Tomb, that though thy love were greater then wisdom
could endure; yet thine honor was such, as love could not violate, Mileta


I come.


It will not be, I can take no rest, which way soever I turn.


A strange malady.


Mileta, if thou will, a Martiredom. But give me my lute, and I will see if in
song I can beguile mine own eyes


Here Madame.


Have you sent for Phao?


Yea.


And to bring simples that will procure sleep?


No.


Foolish wensh, what should the boy do here, if he bring not remedies with
him? you think belike I could sleep if I did but see him, Let him not come at
al, yes, let him come: no, it is no matter: yet will I try, let him come:
do you hear


Yea Madame, it shall be done Peace, no noise: she begins to fall asleep.
I will go to Phao


Go speedily: for if she wake, and find you not here, she will be angry.
Sick folks are testie, who though they eat nothing yet they feed on gall


I would either your cunning, Phao, or your fortune might by simples provoke
my Lady to some slumber


My simples are in operation as my simplicity is, which if they do little good,
assuredly they can do no harm


Were I sick, the very sight of thy fair face would drive me into a sound
sleep


Indeed Gentlewomen are so drowsy in their desires, that they can scarce hold
up their eyes for love


I mean the delight of beauty would so blind my senses, as I should be
quickly rocked into a deep rest


You women have an excuse for an advantage, which must be allowed: because
only to you women it was allotted


Phao, thou art passing fair, and able to draw a chaste eye not only to
glaunce: but to gaze on thee. Thy young years, thy quick wit, thy stayed
desires are of force to control those which should command


Lady, I forgot to commend you first, and least I should have ouerslipped to
praise you at all, you have brought in my beauty, which is simple, that in
curtisie I might remember yours, which is singular


You mistake of purpose, or misco^ster of malice.


I am as far from malice, as you from love, and to mistake of purpose, were
to mislike of peeuishnes


As far as I from love? Why, think you me so dull I cannot love, or so spiteful
I will not


Neither Lady: but how should men imagine women can love, when in their mouths
there is nothing rifer, then in faith I do not love


Why, will you have wome^s love in their tongs?


Yea,else do I think there is none in their hearts.


Why?


Because there was never any thing in the botto^ of a woman's heart, that comes
not to her tongs end


You are too young to cheapen love.


Yet old enough to talk with market folks.


Well, let us in.


Phao is come.


Who?Phao? Phao, let him come near: but who sent for him?


You Madame.


I am loath to take any medicines: yet must I rather the^ pine in these
maladies. Phao, you may make me sleep, if you will


If I can, I must, if you will?


What herbs have you brought Phao?


Such as will make you sleep Madame, though they cannot make me slumber.


Why, how can you cure me, when you cannot remedy your self?


Yes Madame, the causes are contrary. For it is only a dryness in your
brains, that keeps you from rest, But


But what?


Nothing, but mine is not so.


Nay, then I despair of help, if our disease be not all one.


I would our diseases were all one.


It goes hard with the pacient, when the Physician is desperate.


Yet Medea made the euerwaking Dragon to snorte, when she poor soul could
not wink


Medaea was in love, and nothing could cause her rest but Jason.


Indeed I know no herb to make lovers sleep but Hearts ease, which because
it grows so high, I cannot reach: for


For whom?


For such as love.


It grows very low, and I can never stoop to it that,


That what?


That I may gather it: but why do you sight so Phao


It is mine use Madame.


It will do you harm, and me too: for I never hear one sighe, but I must
sight also


It were best then that your Ladyship give me leave to be gone: for I can but
sigh


Nay stay: for now I begin to sighe, I shall not leave, though you be gone.
But what do you think best for your sighing to take it away


Yew Madame.


Me?


No Madame, yewe of the tree.


Then will I love yewe the better. And indeed I think it would make me sleep
too, therefore all other simples set aside, I will simply use only yewe


Do madame:for I think nothing in the world so good as yewe.


Farewell for this time.


Is not your name Phao?


Phao, fair Venus, whom you made so fair.


So passing fair, O fair Phao, O sweet Phao: what will thou do for Venus?


Anything that comes in the compass of my poor fortune.


Cupid shall teach thee to shoot, and I will instruct thee to dissemble.


I will learn any thing but dissembling.


Why my boy.


Because then I must learn to be a woman,


Thou heardest that of a man.


Men speak truth.


But truth is a she, and so always painted.


I think a painted truth.


Well, farewell for this time; for I must visit Sapho.


Sapho, I have heard thy complaints, and pitied thine agonies.


O Venus, my cares are only known to thee, and by thee only came the cause.
Cupid, why did thou wound me so deep


My mother bad me draw mine arrow to ye head.


Venus, why did thou prove so hateful?


Cupid took a wrong shafte.


O Cupid too unkind, to make me so kind, that almost I transgress the
modesty of my kind


I was blind, and could not see mine arrow.


How came it to pass, thou did hit my heart?


That came by the nature of the head, which be ing once let out of the bow,
ca^ find none other lighting place but the heart


Be not dismaide, Phao shall yield.


If he yield, then shall I shame to embrace one so mean if not, die: because
I cannot embrace one so mean. Thus do I find no mean


Well, I will work for thee. Farewell.


Farewell sweet Venus, and thou Cupid, which art sweetest in thy sharpness.


Cupid, what haste thou done put thine arrows in Phaoes eyes, and wounded thy
mothers heart


You gave him a face to allure, then why should not I give him eyes to pearce?


O Venus, un happy Venus, who in bestowinge a benefit upon a man, haste brought
a bane unto a Goddess. What perplexities do thou feel? O fair Phao, and
therefore made fair to breed in me a frenzy? O would that when I gave thee
golden locks to curle thy head, I had shackled thee with iron locks on thy
feet. And when I noursed thee Sapho with lettice, would it had turned to
hemlocke, Have I brought a smooth skin over thy face to make a rough scarre in
my heart? and given thee a fresh color like the damask rose, to make mine pale
like the stained Turkey. O Cupid, thy flames with Psyches were but sparks, and
my desires with Adonis but dreams, in respect of these unacquainted
torments. Laugh Juno, Venus is in love, but Juno shall not see with whom,
least she be in love. Venus belike is become stale. Sapho forsooth because she
has many virtues, therefore she must have all the favors. Venus waxes old:
and then she was a pretty wench, when Juno was a young wife, now crows foot
is on her eye, and the black ox has troad on her foot. But were Sapho never
so virtuous, does she think to contend with Venus to be as amorous? Yield
Phao, but yield to me Phao, I entreat where I may command, command thou,
where thou should entreat. In this case Cupid what is thy counsel, Venus
must both play the lover and the dissembler, and therefore the dissembler,
because the Lover


You will ever be playing with arrows, like children with knives, and the^ when
you bleed, you cry, go to Vulcan, entreat by prayers, threate^ with blows,
wowe with kisses, banne with curses, try al means to rid these extremities


To what end?


That he might make me new arrows: for nothing can root out the desires of
Phao, but a new shafte of inconstancy, nor any thing turn Saphoeshart, but a
new arrow of disdain. And then they dislyking one the other, who shall enjoy
Phao but Venus


I will follow thy counsel. For Venus, though she be in her latter age for
years: yet is she in her Nonage for affections. When Venus cease to love,
let love cease to rule. But come, let us to Vulcan


What dreams are these Mileta? and can there be no truth in dreams? yea,
dreams have their truth. Me thought I saw a Stock dove or woodquist, I know
not how to term it, that brought short strawes to build his neast in a tall
Caedar, where, whiles with his bill he was framing his buylding, he lost as
many feathers from his wings, as he laid strawes in his neast: yet scambling to
catch hold to harbor in the house he had made, he so denly fell from the bough
where he stood. And the^ pitifully casting up his eyes, he cried in such
terms (as I imagined) as might either condemn the nature of such a tree, or
the daring of such a mind. Whilst he lay quaking upon the ground, and I
gazing one the Caeder, I might perceive Antes to breed in the rind coveting
only to hoord, and caterpillars to cleave to the leaves, laboring only to
suck, which caused mo leaves to fall from the tree, the^ there did feathers
before from the dove. Me thought Mileta, I sighed in my sleep, pitying both
the fortune of the bird, and the misfortun of the tree but in this time quils
began to bud again in the bird, which made him look as though he would fly
up, and then wished I that the body of the tree would bow, that he might but
creep up the tree, then and so* Hey, ho


And so what?


Nothing Mileta: but, and so I waked. But did no body dream but I?


I dreamed last night, but I hope dreams are contrary, that holding my head
over a sweet smoke, al my hair blazd on a bright flame. Me thought Ismena
cast water to quench it: yet the sparks fell on my bosom, and wiping them away
with my hand, I was all in a gore blood, till one with a few fresh flowers
staunched it. And so stretching my self as stif I started, it was but a dream


It is a sign you shall fall in love with hearing fair words. Water
signifies counsel, flowers death. And nothing can purge your loving humor
but death


You are no interpreter: but an interprater, harping always upon love, till
you be as blind as a Harpar


I remember last night but one, I dreamed mine eye tooth was lose, and that I
thrust it out with my tongue


It foretells the loss of a friend: and I ever thought thee so full of
prattle, that thou would thrust out the best friend with the tatling


Yea Mileta: but it was loose before, and if my friend be lose, as good
thrust out with plain words, as kept in with dissembling


Dreams are but dotings, which come either by things we see in the day, or
meats that we eat, and so the common sense preferring it to be the
imaginatiue


Soft Philosophatrix, well seen in the secrets of art, and not seduced with
the superstitions of nature


Ismenaes tongue never lies still, I think all her teeth will be loose, they
are so often iogged against her tongue. But say on Eugenua


There is all.


What did you dream, Canope?


I seldom dream Madame: but sithence your sickness, I cannot tell whether
with over watching but I have had many fantastical visions, for even now
slumbring by your beds side, me thought I was shadowed with a clowd, where
laboring to unwrap my self, I was more entangled. But in the midst of my
striving, it seemed to mysell gold, with fair drops, I filled my lap, and
running to show it my fellows, it turned to duste, I blushed, they laughed;
and then I waked, being glad it was but a dream


Take heed Canope, that gold tempt not your lap, and then you blush for
shame


It is good luck to dream of gold.


Yea, if it had continued gold.


I dream every night, and the last night this. Me though that walking in the
sun, I was stung with the fly Tarantula, whose venom nothing can expel but
the sweet consent of music. I tried all kind of instruments, but found no
ease, till at the last two Lutes tuned in one key, so glutted my thirsting
ears, that my grief presently seized, for joy whereof as I was clapping my
hands, your Ladyship called


It is a sign that nothing shall assuage your love but marriage: for such is
the tying of two in wedlock, as is the tuning of two Lutes, in one key: for
strikinge the stringes of the one, strawes will stir upon the stringes of the
other, and in two minds lincked in love, one cannot be delighted but the other
rejoices


Me thought going by the sea side among Pebels, I saw one playing with a
round stone, ever throwing it into the water, when the sun shined: I asked
the name, he said, it was called Abeston, which being once whotte, would
never be cold, he gave it me, and vanished. I forgetting my self, delighted
with the fair show, would always show it by candle light, pull it out in
the Sun, and see how bright it would look in the fire, where catching
heat, nothing could cool it: for anger I threw it against the wall, and with
the heauing up of mine arm I waked


Beware of love, Fauilla: for women hearts are such stones, which warmed by
affection, cannot be coold by wisdom


I warrant you: for I never credit men's words.


Yet be wary* for women are scorched sometimes with men's eyes, though they had
rather consume then confess


Cease your talking: for I would feign sleep, to see if I can dream, whether
the bird has feathers, or the Antes wings. Draw the curteine


Come Cupid, Vulcans flames must quench Venus fires. Vulcan?


Who?


Venus.


Ho, ho, Venus.


Come sweet Vulcan, thou know how sweet thou have found Venus, who being,
of all the gooddesses the most fair, has chosen thee of all the Gods the most
foul, thou must needs then confess I was most loving. Enquire not the cause
of my suite by questions: but prevent the effects by curtifie. Make me six
arrowe heads: it is given thee of the Gods by permission to frame them to any
purpose, I shall request them by prayer. Why lowrest thou Vulcan? will thou
have a kiss: hold up thy head. Venus has young thoughts, and fresh
affections. Roots have stringes, when boughs have no leaves. But hearken in
thine ear Vulcan: how say thou


Vulcan is a God with you, when you are disposed to flatter. A right womanne,
whose tongue is like a Bees stinge, which pricketh deepest, when it is fullest
of honnye. Because you have made mine eyes dronk with fair looks, you will set
mine ears on edge with sweet words. You were wont to say that the beating of
hammers made your head ache, and the smoke of the forge your eyes water, and
every coal was a block in your way. You weep rose water, when you ask, and
spitte vinegar, when you have obtained. What would you now, with new arrows?
belike Mars has a tougher skin one his heart, or Cupid a weaker arm, or Venus
a better courage. Well Venus, there is never a smile in your face but has
made a wrinkle in my forehead. Ganymedes must fill your cup* and you will
pledge none but Jupiter. But I will not chide Venus: Come Cyclops, my wife must
have her will let us do that in earth, which the Gods cannot undo in heaven


Gramercie sweet Vulcan: to your work.


Here Venus, I have finished these arrows by art, bestow them you by wit:
for as great advise must he use that has them, as he cunning that made them


Vulcan, now you have done with your forge, let us alone with the fancye:
you are as the Fletcher, not the Archer, to meddle with the arrowe, not the
aim


I thought so: when I have done working, you have done woowing. Where is now
sweet Vulcan? Well, I can say no more, but this which is enoughe, and as much
as any can say: Venus is a woman


Be not angrye Vulcan, I will love thee again, when I have either business,
or nothing else to do


My mother will make much of you, when there are no more men then Vulcan.


Come Cupid, receive with thy fathers instruments, thy mothers instructions:
for thou must be wise in conceit, if thou will be fortunate in execution. This
arrow is feathered with the wings of Aegitus, which never sleeps for fear
of his hen: the head touched with the stone Perillus, which causes mistruste
and jealousy. Shoot this, Cupid, at men that have fair wives, which will make
them rub the brows, when they swell in the brains. This shaft is headed
with Lidian steel, which strikes a deep disdain of yt which we most desire,
ye feathers are of Turtel, but dipped in the blood of a Tigresse, draw this up
close to the head at Sapho, that she may despise, where now she doates. Good my
boy, gall her on the side, that for Phaos love she may never sighe. This arrow
is feathered with the Phoenix winge, and headed with the Eagles bill, it makes
me^ passionate in desires, in love constant, and wise in conueiaunce, melting
as it were their fancies into faith: this arrowe, sweet child, and with as
great aim as thou can, must Phao be stricken withal, and cry softly to thy
self in the very loose, Venus. Sweet Cupid mistake me not, I will make a
quiver for that by it self. The fourth has feathers of the Peacocke, but
glewed with the gum of the Myrtle tree, headed with fine gold, and fastened
with brittle Chrysocoll: this shoot at dainty and coy Ladies, at amiable and
young Nymphs, choose no other white but women: for this will work lyking in
their minds, but not love affability in speech, but no faith, courtly
favors, to be Mistresses over many, but constant to none: sighs to be fetched
from the longes, not the heart, and tears to be wrong out with their
fingers, not their eyes, secret laughing at men's pale looks and neat attire,
open reioycinge at their own comeliness and men's courtinge. Shoot this arrowe
among the thickest of them, whose bosoms lie open, because they would be
stricken with it. And seeing men term women Jupiters fools, women shall make
men Venus fools. This shafte is lead in the head, and whose feathers are of
the night Raven, a deadly and poisoned shafte, which breeds hate only
against those which sue for love. Take heed Cupid thou hitte not Phao with
this shafte: for then shall Venus perish. This last is an old arrow, but
newlye mended, the arrow which hitte both Sapho and Phao, working only in
mean minds an aspiring to superiors, and in high estates a stooping to
inferiors: with this Cupid I am galled my self, till thou have galled Phao
with the other


I warrant you I will cause Phao to languishe in your love and Sapho to
disdain his


Go, loyter not, nor mistake your shafte. Now Venus, have thou plaide a
cunning part, though not curraunt. But why should Venus dispute of
unlawfulness in love, or faith in affection? being both the Goddess of love
and affection? knowing there is as little truth to be used in love, as there is
reason. No, sweet Phao, Venus will obtain because she is venus. Not thou Jove
with thu^der in thy hand, shall take him out of my hands. I have new arrows
now for my boy, and fresh flames, at which the Gods shall tremble, if they
begin to trouble me. But I will expect the event, and tarry for Cupid at the
forge


What have thou done Cupid?


That my mother commanded, Sapho.


My thinks I feel an alteration in my mind, and as it were a withstanding in
my self of mine own affections


Then has mine arrow his effect.


I pray thee tell me the cause?


I dare not.


Fear nothing: for if Venus fret, Sapho can frown, thou shall be my son.
Mileta* give him some sweet meats, speak good Cupid, and I will give thee
many pretty things


My mother is in love with Phao, she willed me to strike you with disdain of
him, and him with desire of her


O spiteful Venus, Mileta give him some of that. What else Cupid?


I could be even with my mother: and so I will, if I shall call you mother?


Yea Cupid, call me any thing, so I may be even with her.


I have an arrow, with which if I strike Phao, it will cause him to loath only
Venus


Sweet Cupid, strike Phao with it. Thou shall sit in my lap, I will rock
thee asleep, and feed thee with all these fine knackes


I will about it.


But come quickly again. Ah unkind Venus, is this thy promise to Sapho? But
if I get Cuppid from thee, I my self will be the Queen of love. I will
direct these arrows with better aim, and conquer mine own affections, with
greater modesty. Venus heart shall flame, and her love be as common as her
craft. O Mileta, time has disclosed that, which my temperance has kept in:
but since I am rid of the disease, I will not be ashamed to confess the cause.
I loved Phao Mileta, a thing unfit for my degree, but forced by my desire


Phao?


Phao, Mileta, of whom now Venus is inamoured.


And do you love him still.


No, I feel relenting thoughts, and reason not yielding to appetite. Let
Venus have him, no, she shall not have him. But here coms Cupid. How now my
boy, haste thou done it


Yea, and left Phao railing on Venus, and cursing her name: yet still sighing
for Sapho, and blafing her virtues


Alas poor Phao, thy extreme love should not be requited with so mean a
fortune, thy fair face deserved greater favors: I cannot love, Venus has
hardened my heart


I meruale Cupid comes not all this while. How now, in Saphoes lap?


Yea Venus, what say you to it, in Saphoes lap.


Sir boy, come hither?


I will not.


What now? will you not? has Sapho made you so saucy?


I will be Saphoes son, I have as you commanded stricken her with a deep
disdain of Phao, and Phao as she entreated me, with a great despite of you


Unhappy wag, what have thou done? I will make thee repent it every vain in
thy heart


Venus be not collerick, Cupid is mine, he has given me his Arrows, and I
will give him a new bow to shoot in. You are not worthy to be the Lady of
love, that yield so often to the impressions of love. Immodest Venus, that to
satisfy the unbridled thoughts of thy heart, transgressest so far from
the stay of thine honor. How say thou Cupid, will thou be with me


Yes.


Shall not I be on earth the Goddess of affections?


Yes.


Shall not I rule the fancies of men, and lead Venus in chains like a captive?


Yes.


It is a good boy.


What have we here? you the Goddess of Love? and you her son, Cupid? I will
tame that proud heart, else shall the Gods say, they are not Venus friends. And
as for you, sit boy, I will teach you how to run away: you shall be stripped from
top to toe, and whipped with nettles, not roses. I will set you to blow
Vulcans coals, not to bear Venus quiver, I will handle you for this gear:
well, I say no more. But as for the new Mistress of love, or Lady, I cry you
mercy, I think you would be called a Goddess, you shall know what it is to
usurp the name of Venus. I will pull those plumes, and cause you to cast your
eyes on your feet, not your feathers: your soft hair will I turn to hard
bristles, your tongue to a stinge, and those alluring eyes to vnluckynes, in
which if the Gods aid me not, I will curse the Gods


Venus, you are in a vain aunswerable to your vanity, whose high words
neither beecome you, nor fear me. But let this suffice, I will keep Cupid
in dispighte of you, and yet with the content of the Gods


Will you? why then we shall have pretty Gods in heaven, when you take Gods
prisoners on earth. Before I sleep you shall both repent, and find what it is
but to think irreverently of Venus. Come Cupid, she knows not how to use
thee, come with me, you know what I have for you: will you not


Not I.


Well, I will be even with you both, and that shortly,


Cupid, fear not, I will direct thine arrows better. Every rude ass shall
not say he is in love. It is a toye made for Ladies, and I will keep it only
for Ladies


But what will you do for Phao?


I will wish him fortunate. This will I do for Phao, because I once loved Phao:
for never shall it be said that Sapho loved to hate, or that out of love she
could not be as courteous, as she was in love passionate. Come Mileta, shut
the door


Go to Sybilla, tell the beginning of thy love, and the end of thy fortune.
And lo how happilye she sits in her cave. Sybilla


Phao, welcome, what news?


Venus, the Goddess of love I loath, Cupid causd it with a new shafte. Sapho
disdaineth me, Venus causd it for a new spite. O Sybilla, if Venus be
unfaithful in love, where shall one fly for truth? She uses deceit, is it
not then likely she will dispense with subtlety. And being careful to commit
injuries, will she not be careless to revenge them? I must now fall from
love to labor, and endeavor with mine oar to get a fare, not with my pen
to write a fancy. Loves are but smokes, which vanish in the seeing, and yet
hurt whilst they are seen. A Ferrie Phao, no the stars cannot call it a
worser fortune. Raung rather over the world, forswear affections, entreat for
death. O Sapho, thou haste Cupid in thine arms, I in my heart, thou kissest
him for sport, I must curse him for spite: yet will I not curse him Sapho,
whom thou kissest. This shall be my resolution, where ever I wa^der, to be as I
were ever kneeling before Sapho, my loyalty unspotted, though unrewarded. With
as little malice will I go to my grave, as I did lie with all in my cradle. My
life shall be spente in sighing and wishing, the one for my bad fortune, the
other for Saphoes good


Do so Phao: for destiny calls thee as well from Sycily as from love. Other
things hang over thy head, which I must neither tell, nor thou enquire. And so
farewell


Farewell Sybilla, and farewell Sycily. Thoughts shall be thy food, and in thy
steps shall be printed beehinde thee, that there was none so loyal left
behind thee. Farewell Syracusa, unworthy to harbor faith, and when I am gone,
unless Sapho be here, unlikely to harbor any


THey that tread in a maze, walk oftentimes in one path, and at the last come
out where they entered in. We fear we have lead you all this while in a
Labyrinth of conceits, diverse times hearing one device, and have now brought
you to an end, where we first began. Which wearisome travail, you must
impute to the necessity of the history, as Theseus did his labor to the art
of the Labyrinth. There is nothing causes such giddines, as going in a wheel,
neither ca^ there any thing breed such tediousness, as hearing many words
uttered in a small compass. But if you accept this dau^ce of a Farie in a
circle, we will herafter at your wills frame our fingers to all forms. And
so we wish every one of you a thread to lead you out of the doubts, wherewith
we leave you entangled: that nothing be mistaken by our rash ouersightes, nor
misconstrued by your deep insights

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson, for Thomas Cadman.


