WHy how now? are ye mad? or drunk? or both? or what?


Are ye building Babylon there?


Here Is a noise in Court* you think you are in a Tavern, do you not?


You think you are in a bro^hell house do you not? This room is ill sented.

So; perfume; perfume; some upon me I pray thee: The Duke is upon instant
entrance; so, make place there


Where breath's that Music?


The discord rather then the Music is heard from the Malcontent Maleuoles
(...)


Maleuole.


Ganimed Iunces jealous of thy long stockings: shadow of a woman, what would
Weesell? thou lamb a Court: what do thou bleat for? a you smooth chind
Ca^amite


Come down thou rugged Cur, and snarle here, I give thy dogged sullenness
free liberty: trot about and be-spurtle whom thou please


I Will come among you, you Gotish bloudded Toderers, as Gum into Taffata, to
fret, to fret: I Will fall like a sponge into water to suck up; to suck up. Howl
again. I Will pray, and come to you


This Maleuole is one of the most prodigious affections that ever conuerst with
nature; A man or rather a monster; more discontent then Lucifer when he was
thrust out of the presence, his appetite is insatiable as the Grave; as far
from any content as from heaven, his highest delight is to procure others
vexation, and therein he thinks he truly se^ues heaven; for it is his position,
whosoever in this ^arth can be contented is a slave and damned; therefore does
he afflict all in that to which they are most affected; the Elements struggle
within him; his own soul is at varience; his speech is halter-worthy at all
hours; I like him faith, he gives good intelligence to my spirit, makes me
understand those weaknesses which others flattery palliate: hark they sing


See he comes; now shall you hear the extremity of a Malecontent: he is as
free as air; he blows over every man. And sir whence come you now

From the public place of much dissimulation;


What did there?


Talk with a Usurer; take up at Intetest.


I wonder what religion thou art?


Of a Soldiers religion.


And what do thou think makes most Infidels now?


Sects, sects, I have seen seeming Piety change her roabe so often, that sure
none but some arch-diuell can shape her a new Peticote


Of a religious policy.


But damnation on a politic religion.


But what is the common news abroad Maleuole, thou dogst rumor still.


Common news? why common words are, God save ye, Fare ye well: common
actions, Flattery and Cosenage: common things, Women and Cuckolds: and how does
my little Ferrard: a ye lecherous Animal, my little Ferret, he goes sucking
up and down the Palace into every Hens nest like a Weesell: and to what do
thou addict thy time to now, more then to those Antique painted drabs that are
still affected of young Courtiers, Flattery, Pride and Ven^ry


I study languages: who do think to be the best linguist of our age?


Phew, the Devil let him possess thee, heel teach thee to speak all
languages, most readily and strangely, and great reason mary, he is traueld
greatly ithe world; and is every where


Save ith Court.


I save ith Court: and how does my old Muckill ouerspred with fresh snow* thou
half a man half a Goat,


Out you improuident rascal.


Do, kick thou hugely hornd old Dukes Ox, good Master Make-pleece.


How do thou live now a days Maleuole?


Why like the Knight S. Patrik Penlobrans, with killing a Spiders for my Ladies
Munckey


How do spend the night, I here thou never sleepst?


O no, but dream the most fantastical: O heaven: O fubbery, fubbery.


Dream, what dreamst?


Why me thinks I see that Signior pawnd his footcloth, that Metreza her Plate,
this madam takes physic, that the other Mounsieur may minister to her: here is a
Pandar Ieweld: there a fellow in shift of Satin this day, that could not shift
a shirt the other night, here a Paris supports that Hellen, there is a Lady Guineuer
bears up that sir Lancelot. Dreams, dreams, visions, fantasies, Chimeras,
imaginations, tricks, conceits, Tristram Trimtram come a loft lack a napes
with a whim wham, here is a Knight of the land of Catito shall play at trap with
any Page in Europe; Do the sword dance, with any Morris*dauncer in
Christendom; ride at the Ring till the finne of his eyes look as blew as the
welkin, and run the wilde-goose chase even with Pompey the huge


You run.


To the devil: now Signor Guerchino; that thou from a most pitied prisoner
should grow a most loathd flatterer: Alas poor Celso, thy stars oppressed,
thou art an honest Lord, it is pity


Is It pity?


I marry is it Philosophical Equato, and it is pity that thou being so excellent
a Scholar by Art, should be so riculous a fool by Nature: I have a thing to
tell you Duke; bid vm auant, bid vm auant


Leave us, leave us, now sir what is it?


Duke thou art a Beco, a Corn^to.


How?


Thou art a Cuckold.


Speak; vnshale him quick.


With most tumbler-like nimblenes.


Who? by whom? I burst with desire.


Mendozo is the man makes thee a horned beast; Duke it is Mendozo cornutes thee.


What conformance, relate, short, short.


As a Lawyers beard,

There is an old Crone in the Court, her name is Maquerelle,
She is my Mistress sooth to say, and she does ever tell me,
Blirt a rhyme; blirt a rhyme; Maquerelle is a cunning Bawd, I am an honest
villain, thy wife is a close Drab, and thou art a notorious Cuckold, farewell
Duke


Stay* stay.


Dull, dull Duke, can lazy patience make lame revenge; O God for a woman to
make a man that which God never created, never made


What did God never make?


A Cockold: To be made a thing that's hud-winkt with kindness whilst every
rascal philips his brows; to have a Cox-combe with egregious horns pind to a
Lords back, every page sporting himself with delightful laughter, whilst he
must be the last must know it; Pistols and Poniards, Pistols and Poinards


Death and damnation.


Lightning and thunder.


Vengeance and torture.


Catzo.


O revenge.


I would dam him and all his generation, my own hands should do it; ha I would
not trust heaven with my vengeance any thing


Any thing, any thing Maleuole thou shall see instantly what temper my spirit
houlds; farewell, remember, I forget thee not, farewell


My honored Lord.


Peace, speak low; peace, O Celso, constant Lord,
Thou to whose faith I only rest discovered,
Thou one of full ten millions of men
That love virtue only for it self,
Thou in whose hands old OPS may put her soul;
Behold for ever banished Altofront
This Genoas last years Duke. O truly noble,
I wanted those old instruments of state,
Dissemblance, and suspect: I could not time it Celso,
My throane stood like a point in amidst of a circle,
To all of equal neerenes, bore with none:
Raind all alike, so slept in fearelesse virtue,
Suspectles, too suspectles, till the crowde:
(Still liquerous of untried novelties)
Impacient with seuerer gouernmente:
Made strong with Florence: banished Altofront.

Strong with Florence, I thence your mischief rose,
For when the danghrer of the Florentine:
Was matched once with this Pietro now Duke,
No stratagem of state vnt^ide was left, till you of all

Of all was quite berefte,
Alas Maria too close prisoned:
My true sayth'd duchess in the Citadell.

I Will still adhere, lets mutiny and die.


O clime not*a falling tower Celso,
It Is well held desperation, no Zeal:
Hopeles to strive with fate (peace) Temporize.
Hope, hope, that never forsak'st the wretchedst man,
Yet bidst me live, and lurk in this disguise,
What play I well the ^ree breathed discontent,
Why man we are all philosophical monarkes or natural fools, Celso the
Courts a ^ar, the duchess sheets will smoke forth ere it be long: Impure
Mendozo that sharp nosed Lord, that made the cursed match linkt Genoa with
Florence now broad horns, the Duke which he now knows: Discord to
malcontents is very Manna, when the ranks are burst* then scuffle Altophant


I but durst.


It Is gone, it is swallowed like a mineral, some way twill work, phewt i will not
shrink,

He Is resolute who can no lower sink.


Yonder Is Mendoza.


True, the privy key.


I take my leave sweet Lord.


It Is fit, away.


Leave your suites with me, I can and will: attend my secretary, leave me.


Mendoza hark ye, hark ye, You are a treacherous villain, God buy ye.


Out you base borne rascal.


We are all the sons of heaven though a Tripe wife were our mother; a you
whore-sonne hot rainde he Marmoset, Egistus did ever here of one Egistus


Gistus?


I Egistus, he was a filthy incontinent Fleshmonger, such a one as thou art.


Out grumbling roage.


Orestes, beware Orestes.


Out beggar.


I once shall rise,


Thou rise?


I at the resurrection.
No vulgar seed but once may rise and shall,
No King so huge, but fore he die may fall.

Now good Elysium, what a delicious heaven is it for a man to be in a Princes
favor? o sweet God, o pleasure! o Fottune! o all thou best of life? what
should I think? what say? what do? to be a favorite? a minion? to have a
general timorous respect* observe a man, a statefull scilence in his presence:
solitariness in his absence, a confused ham and busy murmr of obsequious
suitors training him; the cloth held up, and way proclaimd before him;
Petitionarie vassailes licking the pauement with their slavish knees, whilst
some odd palace Lampreeles that engender with Snakes, and are full of eyes on
both sides with a kind of insinuating humbleness fix all their lights upon
his browe: O blessed state what a rauishing prospect does the Olympus of favor
yield; Death, I cornute the Duke: sweet women, most sweet Ladies, nay Angels;
by heaven he is more accursed then a Devil that hates you, or is hated by you,
and happier then a God that loves you, or is beloved by you; you preseruers of
mankind, life blood of society, who would live, nay who can live without you? O
Paradise, how maiesticall is your austerer presence? how imperiously chaste is
your more modest face? but O! how full of rauishing attraction is your pretty,
petulant, languishing, laciuiously-composed countenance: these amarous smiles,
those soule-warming sparkling glances; ardent as those flames that singed the
world by heedlesse Phaeton; in body how delicate, in soul how witty, in
discourse how pregnant, in life how wary, in favors how iud^ious, in day how
sociable, and in night how? O pleasure vn^tterable, indeed it is most certain,
one man cannot deserve only to enjoy a beauteous woman: but a Duchess? in
dispight of Phoebus I Will write a Sonnet instantly in praise of her


And is it possible? Mendozo slight me, possible?


Possible? what can be strange in him that's drunk with favor,
Groes insolent with grace, speak Maquerelle, speak.

To speak feelingly, more, more richely in sollid sense then worthless words,
give me those Jewels of your ears to receive my enforced duty, as for my part
it is well known I can put up any thing; can bear patiently with any man: But
when I heard he wronged your precious sweetness, I was enforced to take deep
offense; It Is most certain he loves Emillia with high appetite; and as she told
me (as you know we women impart our secrets one to another) when she repulsed
his suite, in that he was possessed with your indeered grace: Mendozo most
ingratfully renounced all faith to you


Nay, called you, speak Maquerelle, speak.


By heaven witch? dride bisquet, and contested blushlesly he loved you but for
a spurt or so


For maintenance.


Advancement and regard.


O villain? O impudent Mendozo.


Nay he is the rustiest iawde, the fowlest mouthd knave in railing against our
sex: he will rail again women


How? how?


I am ashamed to speakt, I.


I love to hate him, speak.


Why when Emillia scornde his base vnsteddines the black throated rascal
scoulded, and sedd


What?


Troth it is too shameless,


What said he?


Why that at four women were fools, at fourteen Drabbes, at forty Bawdes,
at fourscore witches, and a hundredth Cats


O vnlimitable impudency!


But as for poor Fernezes fixed heart,
Was never shadelesse meadow drier parcht,
Under the scortching heat of heavens dog,
Then is my heart with your enforcing eyes.

A hot simile.


Your smiles have bin my heaven, your frowns my hell,
O pity then; Grace should with beauty d well.

Reasonable perfect bir-lady.


I will love thee, be it but in dispight,
Of that Mendozo, witch! Farneze, witch!
Ferneze thou art the Duchess favorite,
Be faithful, private, but it is dangerous,

His love is liuelesse, that for love fears breath,
The worst that's due to sin, O would't were death.

Enjoy my favor, I will be sick instantly and take physic,
Therefore in depth of night, visit

Visit her chamber, but conditionally you shall not offend her bed: by this
Diamond


By this Diamond.


Nortary longer then you please: by this Ruby.


By this Ruby.


And that the door shall not creake.


And that the door shall not creake.


Nay but swear.


By this purse.


Go to, I Will keep your oaths for you: remember, visit.


Dried bisquet? look where the base wretch comes.


Beauties life, Heavens model, Loves Queen.


That's his Aemilia.


Natures triumph, best of Earth.


Meaning Emillia.


Thou only wonder that the world has seen.


That's Emilia.


Must I then here her praisd? Mendozo.


Madam, your excellency is graciously incountred; I have bin writing passionate
flashes in honor of --


Out villain, villain, O judgment where have bin my eyes? what bewitched
election made me doat on thee? what sorcery made me love thee? but be gone,
bury thy head; O that I could do more then loath thee: Hence worst of ill, No
reason else, my reason is my will


Women? nay furies, nay worse, for they torment Only the bad, but women good
and bad

Damnation of mankind, breath have thou praisd them for this: And is it you
Ferneze are wrigled into smock grace; fit sure, O that I could rail against
these monsters in nature, models of hell, curse of the earth, women that dare
attempt any thing, and what they attempt they care not how they accomplish,
without all premeditation or prevention; rash in asking, desperate in working,
impatient in suffering, extreme in desiring, slaves unto appetite, mistresses
in dissembling, only constant in inconstancy, only perfect in
cou^terfetting: their words are fained, their eyes forged, their sights
dissembled, their looks counterfeit, their hair false, their given hopes
deceitful, their very breath artificial

Their blood is their only God: Bad clothes, and old age are only the Devils
they tremble at

That I could rail now.


A mischief fill thy throat, thou foul iaw'd slaue^ Say thy prayers.


I ha forgot vm.


Thou shall dye.


So shall thou; I am heart mad.


I am horn mad.


Extreme mad.


Monstrously mad.


Why?


Why? thou thou have dishonored my bed.


I? come, come, sit, heeres my bare heart to thee as steady as is this center
to this glorious world

And yet hark thou art a Cornuto; but by me?


Yes slave by thee.


Do not, do not with tart and spleenefull breath,
Loose him can loose thee; I offend my Duke?
Bare record O ye dumb and raw aird nights,
How vigilant my sleeplesse eyes have bin,
To watch the Traitor; record thou spirit of truth,
With what debasement I ha throne my self,
To under offices, only to learn
The truth, the party, time, the means, the place,
By whom, and when* and where thou were disgraced:
And am I paid with slave? has my intrusion
To places private, and prohibited,
Only to observe the closer passages:
Heaven knows with vows of revelation,
Made me suspected, made me deemd a villain?
What roage has wronged us?

Mendozo, I may err.


Err? it is too mild a name, but err and err,
Run giddy with suspect, fore through me thou know,
That which most creatures save thy self do know,
Nay since my service has so loathed reject,
Fore I Will reveal, shall find them clipped together.

Mendozo thou know I am a most plain brested man.


The fitter to make a Cornuto, would your brows were most plane to.


Tell me, indeed I heard thee rail?


At women, true, why what cold fleame could chose,
Knowing a Lord so honest, virtuous,
So boundless loving, bounteous, fair shapt, sweet,
To be contemned, abused, defamed, made Cuckold,
Heart, I hate all women for it: sweet sheets, wax lights, Antique bed-posts,
Cambrick smocks, villainous curtains, Arras pictures, oylde hinges, and all ye
tong-tide lascivious witnesses of great creatures wantonness: what salvation
can you expect


Will thou tell me?


Why you may find it your self, observe, observe.


I ha not the patience, will thou deserve me; tell, give it.


Take It, why Farneze is the man, Ferneze, I Will proou't, this night you shall take
him, in your sheets, wilt serve


It will, my bozomes in some peace, till night.


What?


Farewell.


God how weak a Lord are you,
Why do you think there is no more but so?

Why?


Nay then will I presume to council you,
It should be thus; you with some guard upon the sudden
Break into the Princes chamber, I stay behind
Without the door, through which he needs must pass,
Ferneze flies, let him, to me he comes, he is killed
By me, observe by me, you follow, I rail,
And seem to save the body: Duchess comes
On whom (respecting her advanced birth,
And your fair nature) I know, nay I do know
No violence must be used. She comes, I storm,
I praise, excuse Ferneze, and still maintain
The Duchess honor, she for this loves me,
I honor you, shall know her soul, you mine,
Then naught shall she contriue in vengeance,
(As women are most thoughtfull in revenge)
Of her Ferneze, but you shall sooner know it
Then she can think it, thus shall his death come sure,
Your Duchess braine-caught; so your life secure.

It is too well, my bozome, and my heart,
When nothing helps, cut of the rotten part.

Who cannot feign friendship, can nere produce the effects of hatred: Honest
fool Duke, subtle lascivious Duchess, silly nouice ferneze; I do laugh at
ye, my brain is in labor till it produce mischief, and I feel sudden
thro's, proofs sencible, the issue is at hand

As Bears shape young, so I Will form my device,
Which grown proves horrid: Vengeance makes men wise.

He Is caught, the Woodcocks head is in the noose,
Now treads Ferneze in dangerous path of lust,
Swearing his sense is merely deified.
The fool grasps clouds, and shall beget Centaures.
And now in strength of panting faint delight,
The Goat bids heaven envy him; good Goose,
I can afforde thee nothing but the poor comfort of calamity, Pity.
Lusts like the plummets hanging on clock lines,
Will nere a done till all is quite is undone.
Such is the course salt sallow lust does run.
Which thou shall try; I Will be revenged. Duke thy suspect,
Duchess thy disgrace, Ferneze thy riuall-ship,
Shall have swift vengeance, nothing so holy,
No band of nature so strong,
No law of friendship so sacred,
But i will profane, burst, violate
Fore i will endure disgrace: contempt and poverty:
Shall I whose very humme, struck all heads bare,
Whose face made scilence: creaking of whose shoe,
Forced the most private passages fly open,
Scrape like a servile dog at some latch'd door?
Learn now to make a leg? and cry beseech ye,
Pray ye is such a Lord within? be awed
At some odd vshers scoft formality?
First sear my brains: Unde cadis non quo refert.
My heart cries perish all, how? how? what fate?
Can once avoid revenge, that's desperate,
I Will to the Duke, if all should open, if? tush
Fortune still dotes on those who cannot blush.

Bless ye cast a Ladies; ha Dipsas, how do thou old Cole.


Old Cole?


I old Cole, me thinks thou lie like a brand under these billets of green
wood

He that will inflame a young wenches heart, let him lay close to her, an old
Cole that has first bin fierd a pandresse, my half burnt lynt, who though
thou can not flame thy self yet art able to set a 1000. virgins tapers a
fiar: and how does Ianiuere thy husband, my little periwincle: is a trobled
with the cough a the Lunges still, does he hawke anights still, he will not
bite


No by my troth, I took him with his mouth empty of old teeth.


And he^ took thee with thy belly full of young bones, marry he took his maime
by the stroke of his enemy


And I mine by the stroke of my freinde:


The close stock, o mortal wench: Lady ha ye now no restoratiues for your
decayed Jason, look ye, Crabs guts baked, distilled Oxe-pith, the puluerized
hairs of a Lions upper lip, gelly of Cock-sparrowes, He Monkeis marrow, or
powder of Foxe-stones; and whither are all you ambling now


Why to bed, to bed.


Do your husbands lie with ye?


That were country fashion in faith.


Ha ye no foregoers about you; come, whither in good deed law now?


In good indeed law now, to eat the most miraculously, admirably, astonishable
composed Posset with three Curds, without any drink: will ye help me with a
He Fox: here is the Duke


The night grows deep and foul, what hour is it?


Upon the stroke of twelve.


Save ye Duke.


From thee, begone I do not love thee, let me see thee no more, we are
displeasd


Why God buy thee, heaven hear my curse,
May thy wife and thee live long together.

Be gone sir.


When Arthur first in Court began, -- Agamennon, Menelaus, -- was ever any Duke
a Cornuto


Begone hence.


What religion will thou be of next?


Out with him.


With most servile patience, time will come,
When wonder of thy error will strike dumb,
Thy beseld sense, slaves I favor, I marry shall he rise,
Good God how subtle Hell does flatter vice,
Mount him aloft, and makes him seem to fly,
As foul the Tortois mocked: who to the sky,
The Ambitious shell fish raised, the end of all,
Is only that from height he might dead fall.

It shall be so.


It must be so, for where great States revenge,
It Is requisite, the parts with piety
And soft respect forbeares, be closely dogd,
Lay one into his breast shall sleep with him,
Feed in the same dish, run in self faction,
Who may disseuer any shape of danger,
For once disgraced, discovered in offense,
It makes man blushlesse, and man is (all confess)
More prone to vengeance then to gratefulness.
Favors are writ in dust, but stripes we feel,
Depraved nature stamps in lasting steel.

You shall be leauged with the Duchess.


The plot is very good.


You shall both kill, and seem the course to save.


A most fine brain trick.


Of a most cunning knave.


My Lords: The heavy action we intend
Is death and shame, two of the vgliest shapes
That can confound a soul, think, think of it;
I strike but yet like him that against stone walls,
Directs his shaftes, rebounds in his own face,
My Ladies shame is mine, O God, it is mine.
Therefore I do conjure all secrecy,
Let it be as very little as may be; pray ye, as may be;
Make frightlesse entrance, salute her with soft eyes,
Stain naught with blood, only Ferneze dies,
But not before her brows: O Gentlemen
God knows I love her, nothing else, but this
I am not well; if grief that sucks veins dry,
Riuels the skin, casts ashes in men's faces,
Be-duls the eye, vnstrengthens all the blood,
Chance to remove me to an other world,
As sure I once must dye: let him succeed:
I have no child, all that my youth begot,
Has bin your loves, which shall inherit me,
Which as it ever shall, I do conjure it
Mendozo may succeed, he is nobly borne;
With me of much desert.

Much.


Your silence answers I,
I thank you, come on now, o that I might dye,
Before her shames displaide, would I were forced
To burn my fathers Tomb; vnhill his boanes,
And dash them in the dirt, rather then this:
This both the living and the dead offends,
Sharp surgery where naught but death amends.

Even here it is, three curds in three regions indiuiduallie distinct,
Most methodically according to art compos^d, without any drink.

Without any drink.


Upon my honor, will ye sit and eat.


Good the composure the recei^e, how is it:


It Is a pretty pearl, by this pearl, (how do with me) thus it is, seven and
thirty vo^lks of Barbary hens eggs, eighteen spoonfulles and a half of the
Ioice of cocksparrowe bon s, one ounce, three drams, ^oure scruples, and one
quarte^ of the Sirrop of Ethiopian Dates, sweetened with three quarters of a
pound of pure Candid Indian (...), strow'd over with the powder of Pearl of
America, Amber of Cataia, and Lamb stones of (...)


Trust me the ingredients are very Cordial, and no question go^d, and most
powerful in operation


I know not what you mean by restauracion, but this it does, it purifieth the
blood, smootheth the skin, i^lifeneth the eye, strengthens the veins*
mundefieth the teeth, comfort the stomach, fortifieth the back, and
quickneth the wi^, that's all


By my troth I have eaten but two spoonefuls, and me thinks I could discourse
most swiftly, and wittily already


Have you the art to seem honest.


I thank advise and practice.


Why then eat me a this posset, quicken your blood, and preserve your beauty,
do you know Doctor Plaster-face, by this curd he is the most exquisite in
forging of veins, sprightning of eyes, dying of hair, sleeking of skins,
blushing of cheeks, surpheling of breasts, blanching and bleaching of teeth,
that ever made an old lady gracious by torch-light: by this curd law


Well we are resolved, what God has given us weell cherish.


Cherish any thing saving your husband, keep him not too high least he leap
the pale: but for your beauty, let it be your Saint, bequeath two hours to it
every morning in your closet, I ha bin young, and yet in my conscience I am not
above five and twenty, but believe me, preserve and use your beauty, for youth
and beauty once gone, we are like Beehiues without honey: out a fashion,
apparel that no man will wear, therefore use me your beauty


I but men say.


Men say, let men say what the will, life a woman, they are ignorant of our
wants, the more in years the more in perfection the grow: if they loose youth
and beauty, they gain wisdom and discretion: But when our beauty fades,
godnight with us, there cannot be an vglier thing to see then an old woman,
from which, o pruning, pinching, and painting, deliver all sweet beauties


Hark music.


Peace it is ithe Duchess bedchamber, good rest most prosperously graced ladies.


God night centinell.


Night dear Maquerelle.


May my possets operation send you my wit and honesty,
And me your youth and beauty, the pleasingst rest.

Strike, strike.


Save my Ferneze, o save my Ferneze.


Follow, pershew.


O save Ferneze.


Pierce, pierce, thou shallow fool drop there,
He that attempts a Princes lawless love,
Must have broad hands, close heart with Argos eyes,
And back of Hercules, or else he dies.

Follow, follow,


Stand off, forbear, ye most uncivil Lords.


Strike.


Do not; tempt not a man resolved;
Would you inhumane murderers more then death?

O poor Ferneze.


Alas now all defense too late.


He Is dead.


I am sorry for our shame, go to your bed,
Weep not too much, but leave some tears to shed
When I am dead?

What weep for thee? my soul no tears shall find.


Alas, alas, that women's souls are blind.


Betraye such beauty? murder such youth? contemn civility,
He loves him not that railes not at him.

Thou can not move us, we have blood enough;
And please you Lady we have quite forgot
All your defects: if not, why then

Not.


Not: the best of rest, good night.


Despite go with thee.


Madam, you ha done me soul disgrace,
You have wronged him much, loves you too much.
Go to; your soul knows you have.

I think I have.


Do you but think so?


Nay sure I have, my eyes have witnessed thy love,
Thou have stood too firm for me.

Why tell me fair checked Lady, who even in tears
Art powerfully beauteous, what unadvised passion
Struck ye into such a violent heat against me,
Speak, what mischief wronged us? what devil injured us?
Speak?

That thing nere worthy of the name of man; Ferneze,
Ferneze swore thou love Emillia,
Which to advance, with most reproachful breath,
Thou both did blemish and denounce my love.

Ignoble Villain, did I for this bestride
Thy wounded limbs; for this? rank opposite
Even to my Sovereign: for this? O God for this?
Sunk all my hopes, and with my hopes my life,
Ripped bare my throat unto the hangmans Axe,
Thou most dishonored trunk -- Emillia?
By life I know her not -- Emillia?
Did you believe him?

Pardon me, I did.


Did you, and thereupon you graced him?


I did.


Took him to favor, nay even claspd with him?


Alas I did.


This night?


This night.


And in your lustful twines the Duke took you?


A most sad truth.


O God, O God, how we dull honest souls,
Heavy braind men, are swallowed in the bogs
Of a deceitful ground, whilst nimble bloods,
Light iointed spirits pent, cut good men's throats,
And escape alas, I am too honest for this age,
Too full of fleame* and heavy steadiness:
Stood still whilst this slave cast a noose about me;
Nay then to stand in honor of him, and her,
Who had even sliced my heart.

Come I did err, and am most sorry, I did err.


Why we are both but dead, the Duke hates us,

'' And those whom Princes do once groundly hate,
'' Let them provide to dye; as sure as fate,
'' Prevention is the heart of policy.

Shall we murder him.


Instantly?


Instantly, before he casts a plot,
Or further blaze my honors much known blot,
Lets murder him?

I would do much for you, will ye marry me?


I Will make thee Duke, we are of Medices,
Florence our friend, in court my faction
Not meanly strength* full; the Duke then dead,
We well prepared for change, the multitude
Irresolutely reeling, we in force,
Our party seconded, the kingdom mazde,
No doubt of swift success all shall be graced.

You do confirm me, we are resolute,
To morrow look for change, rest confident,
It Is now about the immodest waste of night,
The mother of moist dew with pall^d light,
Spreds gloomy shades about the nummed earth,
Sleep, sleep, whilst we contriue our michiefes birth,
This man i will get inhum'de, farewell, to bed,
I kiss thy pillow* dream, the duke is dead.
So, so, good night, how fortune dotes on impudence,
I am in private the adopted son of yon good Prince,
I must be Duke, why if I must, I must,
Most silly Lord, name me? O heaven
I see God made honest fools, to maintain crafty knaves:
The duchess is wholly mine too; must kill her husband
To quit her shame, mutch: then marry her: I,
O ^ grow proud in prosperous treachery,
As wrestlers clip, so i will imbrac^ you all,
Not to support, but to procure your fall.

God arrest thee.


At whose suite?


At the devils, ha you treacherous damnable monster,
How do* how do thou treacherous roage,
Ha ye^ rascal, I am banish the Court, Sir.

P^ethee lets be acquainted, I do love thee faith.


At your service, by the Lord law, shals go to supper, Lets be once drunk
together* and so unite a most virtuously strengt^ned friendship, shals H^gonot,
shals


Wilt ^ll upon my chamber to morrow morn.


As a Raven to a dunghill, they say there is one dead here p^ickt for the pride
of the flesh


Fernez: there he is, prey thee bury him.


O most willingly, I mean to turn pure Rochell Churchman, I.


Thou Churchman, why? why?


Because i will live lazely, fail upon authority, deny Kings supremacy in
things indifferent, and be a Pope in mine own parish


Wherefore doo'st thou think Churches were made?


To scour Plough shar^ (...) (...) (...) plough up Altars:


Strange.


Nay monstrous, I ha seen a sumptuous steeple turned to a stinking privy:
more beastly, the sacredst place made a Dogs kenill: nay most inhumane, the
stoned coffins of long dead Christians burst up, and made Hogstroughs

Shall I ha some sack, and cheese at thy chamber, Good night, good mischiuous
incarnate diuill, godnight Mendozo, ha, ye Inhumain villain godnight, night
fub


God night: to morrow morn.


I, I will come friendly Damnation, I will come, I do discrie crosse-poynts,
honesty, and court-ship, straddle as far a sunder, as a true Frenchmans
legs


O!


Proclamations, more proclamations.


O a Surgion.


Hark lust cries for a surgion, what news from Limb How does the graund
cuckold Lucifer


O help, help, conceal and save me.


Thy shame more then thy wounds do grieve me far,
''Thy wounds but leave upon thy flesh some skarre:
''But fame near heales still ranckl's worse and worse,
''Such is of uncontrolled Lust the curse.
''Thinke what it is in lawless sheets to lie,
''But o Ferneze what in lust to die:
''Then thou that shame respects o fly converse,
''With women's eyes and lisping wantonness:
''Stick candells against a virgin walls white back,
''If they not burn, yet at the least they will black,
Come I Will convey thee to a private port,
Where thou shall live (O happy man) from court.
The beauty of the day begins to rize,
From whose bright form Nights heavy shadow flies.
Now gins (...) plots to work, the Scene grows full,
And craves (...) eyes who has a sollid Skull.

It Is grown to youth of day, how shall we wast this light?
My hart's more heavy then a tyrants crown.
Shall we go hunt? Prepare for field.

Would ye could be merry.


Would God I could: Mendoza bid am have.
I would feign shift place, O vain relief.
'' Sad souls may well change place, but not change grief:
As Dear being struck fly through many soyles,
Yet still the shaft stick fast, so, A good old simile my honest Lord,
I am not much unlike to some sickman,
That long desired hurtful drink; at last
Swilles in and drinks his last, ending at once
Both life and thirst: O would I nere had known
My own dishonor: good God, that men should
Desire to search out that, which being found kills all
Their joy of life: to taste the tree of Knowledge,
And then be driven from out Paradise.
Can give me some comfort?

My Lord, I have some books which have been dedicated to my honor, and I
near read am, and yet they had very fine names: Physic for Fortune: Lozinges
of sanctified sincerity; very pretty works of Curats, Scriueners and
Schoolemaisters. Mary I remember one Seneca, Lucius Aneus Seneca


Out upon him, he writ of Temperance and Fortitude, yet lived like a voluptuous
Epicure, and died like an effeminate coward. Have thee to Florence: here take
our Letters, see um sealed, away: report in private to the honored duke his
daughters forced disgrace, tell him at length we know too much, due complaints
advance

There Is naught that's safe and sweet but Ignorance.


I cannot sleep my eyes ill neighboring lids
Will hold no fellowship: O thou pale sober night,
Thou that in sluggish fumes all sense do steep:
Thou that gives all the world full leave to play,
Vnbendst the feebled veins of sweatie labor;
The Gally-slaue, that all the toilesome day,
Tugges at his oar against the stubborn wave,
Straining his rugged veins; snores fast:
The stooping S^heman that does barbe the field,
Thou* makst wink sure: in night all creatures sleep,
Only the Malecontent, that against his fate,
Repines and quarrels, alas he is goodman tell-clock,
His sallow ^aw-bones sincke with wasting moan,
Whilst other^ beds are down, his pillowes stone.

Mal uole.


Elder of Izrael, thou honest defect of wicked nature and obstinate ignorance,
when did thy wife let thee lie with her


I am going Ambassador to Florence.


Ambassador, now for thy countries honor, preethe do not put up Mutton and
Porredge i'thy clock bag: thy young lady wife goes to Florence with thee too
does she not


No, I leave her at the Palace.


At the Palace? now discretion shield man, for Gods love lets ha no more
cuckolds, Hymen begins to put of his Saffron robe, keep thy wife in the state
of grace, heart a truth, I would sooner leave my lady singled in a Bordello,
then in the Genoa palace, sin there appearing in her sluttish shape Would
soon grow loath some, even to blushes sense

Surfeit would cloak intemperare appetite,
Make the soul sent the rotten breath of lust.
When in an Italian lascivious Palace, a Lady gardianlesse.
Left to the push of all allurement,
The strongest incitements to immodestie,
To have her bound, incensed with wanton sweetes,
Her veins filled hie with heating delicates,
Soft rest, sweet Music, amorous Masquerers, lascivious banquets, sin it
self gilt ore, strong fantasy tricking up strange delights, presenting it
dressed pleasingly to sense, sense leading it unto the soul, confirmed with
potent example, impudent custom enticed by that great bawd opportunity, thus
being prepared, clap to her easy ear, youth in good clothes, well shapt,
rich, fair spoken, promising noble, ardent bloud-full, witty, flattering,
Ulysses absent, O Ith^ can chastest Penelope hold out


Mass i will think on it farewell.


Farewell, take thy wife with the, farewell,
To Florence, um? it may prove good, it may,
And we may once unmask our brows.

My honored Lord.


Celso peace, how is it? speak lo, pale fears suspect that hedges, walls and
trees have ears, speak how runs all


I faith my Lord, that beast with many heads,
The staggering multitude recoiles apace,
Though through great men's envy, most men's malice,
Their much intemperate heat has banished you.
Yet now they faind envy and malice near,
Produce faint reformation.
The Duke, the too soft Duke lies as a block,
For which two tugging factions seem to saw,
But still the Iron through the ribs they draw.

I tell thee Celzo, I have ever found
Thy breast most far from shifting cowardice
And fearful baseness: therefore i will tell thee Celzo,
I find the wind begins to come about,
I Will shift my suit of fortune, I know the Florentine whose only force,
By marying his proud daughter to this Prince,
Both banished me, and made this weak Lord Duke,
Will now forsake them all, besure he will:
I Will lie in ambush for conueniencie,
Upon their seuerance to confirm my self.

Is Ferneze interred?


Of that at leisure: he lives.


But how stands Mendoza, how is it with him?


Faith like a pair of Snuffers, s^ibbes filth in other men, and retains it in
himself


He does fly from public notice me thinks, as a Hair does from hounds, the
feet whereon he flies betraies him


I can track him Celzo:
O my disguise fools him most powerfully:
For that I seem a desperate malecontent
He feign would claspe with me: he is the true slave,
That will put on the most affected grace,
For some vild second cause.

He Is here.


Give place.

Illo, ho ho ho, art there old true penny,

Where have thou spent thy self this morning? I see flattery in thine eyes,
and damnation i'thy soul. Ha ye huge Rascal


Thou art very merry.


As a scholar futuens gratis: How doz the devil go with thee now.


Maleuole, thou art an arrant knave.


Who I? I have been a Sergeant man.


Thou art very poor.


As Job, an Alcumist, or a Poet.


The Duke hates thee.


As Irishmen do bum-cracks.


Thou have lost his amity.


As pleasing as Maids loose their virginity.


Would thou were of a lusty spirit, would thou were noble.


Why sure my blood gives me I am noble, sure I am of noble kind, for I find
my self possessed with all their qualities: love Dogs, Dice and Drabs* scorn
wit in stuff clothes, have beat my Shoemaker, knocked my Sempstres, cuckold
my Pottecary, and undone my Tailor

Noble, why not? since the Stoic said; Neminem ser^m non ex regibus, neminem
regem non ex seruis esse oriundum, only busy fortune towses, and the provident
chances blends them together; I Will give you a symilie: did you ere see a Well
with 2. buckets, whilst one comes up full to be emptied, another goes down
empty to be filled; such is the state of all humanity: why look you, I may
be the son of some Duke, for believe me intemperate lascivious bastardie
makes nobility doubtful, I have a lusty daring heart Mendoza


Lets graspe? I do like thee infinitely, wilt inact one thing for me?


Shall I get by it?

Command me, I am thy slave, beyond death and hell.


Murder the Duke?


My hearts wish, my souls desire, my fantasies dream, My bloods longing, the
only haight of my hopes, how? O God how? O how my united spirits throng
together, So strengthen my resolve


The Duke is now a hunting.


Excellent, admirable, as the devil would have it, lend me, lend me, Rapier
Pistol, Crosebow: so, so, i will do it


Then we agree.


As Lent and Fishmongers, come a cape ape, how in form?


Know that this weak braind duke, who only stands on Florence stilts, has out
of witless zeal made me his heir, and secretly confirmed the wreathe to me
after his life's full point


Upon what merit?


Merit? by heaven I horn him, only Fernezies death gave me states life: tut
we are politic, he must not live now


No reason marry: but how must he dye now.


My utmost project is to murder the Duke, that I might have his state, because
he makes me his heir: to banish the Duches, that I might be rid of a cunning
Lacedemonian, because I know Florence will forsake her, and then to marie Maria
the banished duke Altofronts wife, that her friends might strengthen me and my
faction, this is all law


Do you love Maria.


Faith noe great affection, but as wise men do love great women to in^oble
their blood and augment their reuenew: to accomplish this now, thus now. The
Duke is in the forest next the Sea, single him* kill him, hurl him in the
maine, and proclaim thou sawst Woolues eat him


Vm, not so good, me thinks when he is slain to get some Ipocrite, some
dangerous wretch that's muffled, or with feigned holiness to swear he hard the
Duke on some steep cliffe lament his wifes dishonor, and in an agony of his
hearts torture hurled his groaning sides into the swollen sea, this circumstance
well made, soundes probable, and hereupon the Duchess


May well be banished: o vnpeerable inuension, rare, Thou God of policy! it
hunnies me


Then fear not for the wife of Altofront, i will close to her.


Thou shall, thou shall, our excellency is pleased: why were not thou an
Emperor, when we are Duke i will make thee some great man sure


Nay make me some rich knave, and I Will make my self some great man.


In thee be all my spirit, retain ten souls, unite thy vertuall powers,
resolve, ha, remember greatness, heart farewell

The fate of all my hopes in thee does dwell.


Celzo did hear? o heaven did hear?
Such devilish mischief, suffer thou the world
Carowse damnation even with greedy swallow,
And still do wink, still duz thy vengeance slumber,
If now thy brows are clear; when will they thunder.

The Dogs are at a fault.


Would God nothing but the dogs were at it? let the Dear pursue safely, the
Dogs follow the game, and do you follow the dogs, as for me, it is unfit one
beast should hunt another; I ha one chaseth me: and please you I would be rid
of ye a little


Would your grief would as soon as we, leave you to quietness.


I thank you: Boy; what do thou dream of now?


Of a dry summer my Lord for here is a h^e world toward: but my Lord I had a
strange dream last ^ight


What strange dream?


Why me thought I pleased you with singing, and then I dreamt you gave me that
short sword


Prettily begd: hold thee, i will prove thy dream true, take it.


My duty: But stiil I dreamt on my Lord, and me thought and shall please your
excellency, you would needs out of your royal bounty give me that jewel in
your Hat


O thou did but dream boy, do not believe it, dreams prove not always
true, they may hold in a short sword, but not in a Jewel. But now sir you
dream^ you had pleased me with singing, make that true as I ha made the other


Faith my Lord I did but dream, and dreams you say prove not always true:
they may hold in a good sword, but not in a good song: the truth is, I ha lost
my voice


Lost thy voice, how?


With dreaming faith but here is a couple of Syrenicall rascal^ shall inchaunt
ye: What shall they singe my good Lord


Sing of the nature of women, and then the song shall be su^ely full of
variety, old crochets and most sweet closes; it shall be humerous, grave,
fantastic, amorous, melancholy, sprightly, one in all, and all in one


All in on?


Bir Lady too many sing, my speech grows culpable of unthrifty idleness,
sing


A, so. so, sing, I am heavy, walk of, I shall talk in my sleep walk of.

Brief, brief, who? the Duke? good heaven that fools should stumble upon
greatness? do not sleep duke, give ye good morrow: must be brief Duke. I am
feed to murder thee, start not; Mendozo, Mendozo hired me, h^r's his gold, his
Pistol, Crosbowe, Sword, it is all as firm as earth: O fool, fool, choakt
with the common maze of easy Idiots, credulity make him thine heir, what thy
sworn murderer


O can it be?


Can?


Discovered he not Ferneze?


Yes, but why? but why? for love to thee, much, much, to be revenged upon his
rival, who had thrust his jaws awrye, who being slain supposed by thine own
hands; defended by his sword, made thee most loathsome, him most gracious, with
thy loose Princes, thou closely yielding egresse and regresse to her, made
him heir, whose hot unquiet lust straight towzd thy sheets, and now would
seize thy state, politician, wise man, death to be led to the stake, like a
Bull by the horns to make even kindness cut a gentle throat, life, why art
thou numbed: Thou foggie dullness speak? lives not more faith in a home
thrusting tongue, then in these fencing tip tap Courtiers


Lord Maleuole, if this be true


If? come shade thee with this disguise, if? thou shall handle it, he shall
thank thee for killing thy self, come follow my directions, and thou shall
see strange sleights


World whether will thou?


Why to the Devil: come, the morn grows late.
A steady quicknes is the soul of state.

Medam, Medam, are you stirring Medame, if you be stirring Medam, if I thought
I should disturb ye


My Lady is up forsooth.


A, pretty boy, faith how old art thou?


I think fourteen.


Nay, and ye be in the teens, are ye a gentleman borne, do you know me, my
name is Medam Maquerelle, I lie in the old Cunny Court

See here the Ladies.


A fair day to ye Maquerelle.


Is the Duchess up yet Centinell?


O Ladies, the most abominable mischance, O dear Ladies the most piteous
disaster, Farneze was taken last night in the Duchess Chamber: Alas the Duke
caught him and killed him


Was he found in bed?


O no, but the villainous certenty is, the door was not bolted, the tongue-tyed
hatch held his peace, so the naked troth is, he was found in his shirt, whilst
I like an arrand beast lay in the outward Chamber, heard nothing, and yet they
came by me in the dark, and yet I felt the^ not, like a senseless creature as
I was. O beauties, look to your buske-poynts, if not chastely, yet charily: be
sure the door be boulted: is your Lord gone to Florence


Yes Maquarelle.


I hope you will find the discretion to purchase a fresh gown fore his return:
Now by my troth beauties, I would ha ye once wise: he loves ye, pish: he is
witty, bubble: fair proportioned, mew: nobly borne, wind; let this be still
your fixed position, esteem me every man according to his good gifts, and so
ye shall ever remain most dear, and most worthy to be most dear Ladies


Is the Duke returned from hunting yet?


They say, not yet.


It Is now in midst of day.


How bears the Duchess with this blemish now?


Faith boldly, strongly defyes defame, as one that haz a Duke to her father.
And there is a note to you, be sure of a stout friend in a corner, that may
always awe your husband. Mark the hauiour of the Duchess now, she dares
defame, cries, Duke do what thou can, i will quite mine honor: nay, as one
confirmed in her own virtue against ten thousand mouths that mutter her
disgrace, she is presently for daunces


For daunces?


Most true.


Most strange, see, heeres my servant young Ferrard: How many servants think
thou I have, Maquarelle


The more the merier: it was well said, use your servants as you do your smocks,
have many, use one, and change often, for that is most sweet and courtlike


Save y^e fair Ladies, is the Duke returned?


Sweet Sir, no voice of him as yet in Court.


It Is very strange.


And how like you my servant, Maquarelle?


I think he could hardly draw Ulisses bow, but by my fidelity, were his
nose narrower, his eyes broader, his hands thinner, his lips thicker, his
legs bigger, his feet lesser, his hair blacker, and his teeth whiter, he
were a tolerable sweet youth in faith. And he will come to my Chamber, I will
read him the fortune of his beard


Not yet returned I fear, but
The Duchess approaches.

We will dance, music, we will dance.


Lesquanto (Lady) penses bien, passa regis, or Beanchas brawle.


We have forgot the brawle.


So soon? it is wonder.


Why it is but two singles on the left, two on the right, three double forward, a
trauerse of six round: do this twice, three singles side, galliard trick of
twenty, curranto pace; a figure of eight, three singles broken down, come up,
meet two doubles, fall back, and then honor


O Dedalus! thy maze, I have quite forgot it.


Trust me so have I, saving the falling back, and then honor.


Music, music.


Who saw the duke? the duke.


Music.


The duke, is the duke returned?


Music:


The duke is either quite invisible, or else is not.


We are not pleased with your intrusion upon our private retirement: we are
not pleased: you have forgot your selves


Boy, thy Master, where is the Duke?


Alas, I left him burying the earth with his spread ioylesse limbs: he told me
he was heavy, would sleep, bade me walk off, for that the strength of fantasy
often made him talking in his dreams: I strait obeide, nor never saw him since:
but, where so ere he is, he is sad


Music sound high, as is our heart, sound high.


The Duke, peace, the Duke is dead.


Music.


Is It Music?


Give proof.


How?


Where.


When?


Rest in peace, as the Duke duz, quietly sit: for my own part, I beheld him
but dead, that's all: marry heers one can give you a more particular account of
him


Speak holy father, nor let any browe within this presence fright thee from
the truth: speak confidently and freely


We attend.


Now had the mounting Suns all-ripening wings
Swept the cold sweat of night from earths danke breast,
When I (whom men call Hermit of the Rock)
Forsook my Ceil, and clamberd up a cliffe,
Against whose base, the heady Neptune dashed
His high curld brows, there it was I easde my limbs,
When lo, my entrails melted with the moan,
Some one, who far boue me was climbde, did make:
I shall offend.

Not.


On.


Me thinks I hear him yet, O female faith!
Coe sow the ungrateful sand, and love a woman:
And do I live to be the skoffe of men,
To be their wittall cuckold, even to hug my poison?
Thou know o Truth!
Sooner hard steel will melt with Southern wind;
A Seamans whistle calm the Ocean;
A town on fire be extinct with tears,
Then women vowed to blushlesse impudence,
With sweet behavior and soft minioning,
Will turn from that where appetite is fixed.
O powerful blood! how thou do slave their soul?
I washed an Ethiop, who for recompense
Sullyde my name. And must I then be for'cd.
To walk, to live thus black: must, must, fie,
He that can bear with must, he cannot die.
With that he sighed so passionately deep,
That the dull air even groand, at last he cries:
Sink shame in seas, sink deep enough, so dies.
For then I viewd his body fall and sowse
Into the fomy maine, O then I saw
That which me thinks I see, it was the Duke,
Whom straight the nicer stomackt sea
Belcht up: but then,

Then came I in, but las all was too late,
For even straight he sunk.

Such was the Dukes sad fate.


A better fortune to our Duke Mendozo.

Cry all, Mendozo: Cornets flourish.


A guard, a guard, we full of hearty tears,
For our good fathers loss,
For so we well may call him:
Who did beseech your loves, for our succession,
Cannot so lightly ouer-iumpe his death.
As leave his woes reuenglesse:
We banish thee for ever to the place,
From whence this good man comes,
Nor permit on death unto the body any ornament:
But base as was thy life, depart away.

Ungrateful.


Away.


Villain hear me.


Be gone my Lords, address to public counsel,
It Is most fit,
The train of Fortune is borne up by wit.
Away, our presence shall be sudden, haste.

Now you egregious devil, ha ye murdering politician, how do duke? how do
look now? brave duke in faith


How did you kill him?


Slatted his brains out, then sowst him in the brinie sea.


Braind him and drowned him too?


O it was best, sure work:

For he that strikes a great man, let him strike home, or else ware, heel
prove no man: shoulder not a huge fellow, unless you may be sure to lay him
in the kennell.


A most sound brain pan,
I Will make you both Emperors

Make us christians, make us christians.


I Will hoist ye, ye shall mount.


To the gallows, say ye? O o me, Pra^ium incertum petit certum scelus. How
stands the Progress


Here, take my ring unto the Citadell,
Have entrance to Maria the grave Duchess
Of banished Altofront. Tell her we love her:
Omit no circumstance to grace our Person (do it)

Iste make an excellent pandar: Duke farewell, due adue Duke.


Take Maquerelle with thee; for it is found,
None cutts a Diamon but a Diamound.
Hermit, thou art a man for me, my Confessor,
O thou selected spirit, borne for my good,
Sure thou would make an excellent elder in a deformed church:
Come, we must be inward, thou and I all one.

I am glad I was ordained for ye.


Go to then, thou must know that Malenole is a strange villain: dangerous,
very dangerous, you see how broad a speaks, a grose-jawde rogue, I would
have thee poison him: he is like a korne upon my great ^oe, I cannot go for
him: he must be kored out: he must, wilt do it, h^


Anything, any thing.


Heart of my life, thus then to the Citadell,
Thou shall consort with this Maleuole,
There being at supper, poison him,
It shall be laid upon Maria, who yeeldes love, or dies,
Skud quick.

Like lightning good deeds crawle, but mischief flies.


Your diuelships ring haze no virtue, the buffecaptaine, the sallo-westfalian
gamon-faced zaza cries stand out, must have a stiffer wareant, or no pass into
the castle of Comfort


Command our sudden Letter: not enter? sha^, what place is there in Genoa,
but thou shall into my heart, into my very heart: come, lets love, we must
love, we two, soul and body


How did like the Hermit? A strange Hermit sirrah.


A dangerous fellow, very perilous: he must die.


I, he must die.


Thoust kill him: we are wise, we must be wise.


And provident.


Yea provident; beware an hypocrite.

A Church man once corrupted, oh avoid*
A fellow that makes Religion his stawking horse,
He breeds a plague: thou shall poison him.

Ho, it is wondrous necessary: how?


You both go jointly to the Citadell,
There sup, there poison him: and Maria,
Because she is our opposite, shall bear
The sad suspect, on which she dies, or loves us.

I run.


We that are great, our sole self good still moves us:
They shall die both, for their deserts craves more
Than we can recompense, their presence still
Imbraides our fortunes with beholdingness,
Which we abhor, like deed, not door: then conclude,
They live not to cry out Ingratitude.
One stick burns the other, steel cuts steel alone:
It Is good trust few: but O, it is best trust none.

How do you? how do Duke?


O let the last day fall, drop, drop in our curssed heads!
Let heaven vnclasp itself, vomit forth flames:

O do not rave, do not turn Player, there is more of them, than can well live
one by an other already. What, art an Infidel still


I am mazde, struck in a swowne with wonder, I am commanded to poison thee.


I am commanded to poison thee, at supper.


At supper?


In the Citadell.


In the Citadell.


Cross capers, tricks? truth a heaven would discharge us as boys do elder
gunnes, one pellet to strike out another: of what faith art now


Al is damnation, wickedness extreme, there is no faith in man.


In none but usurers and brokers, they deceive no man, men take vm for
blood-suckers, and so they are: now God deliver me from my friends


Thy friends?


Yes, from my friends, for from mine ennemies I Will deliver my self. O,
cut-thr^ate friendship is the ranckest villainy, mark this Mendozo, mark him
for a villain: but heaven will send a plague upon him for a rogue


O world!


World? It Is the only region of Death, the greatest shop of the Devil, the
cruelst prison of men, out of the which none pass without paying their dearest
breath for a fee, there is nothing perfect in it, but extreme extreme
calamity, such as comes yonder


To banishment, led on to banishment*


Lady, the blessedness of repentance to you.


Why, why, I can desire nothing but death, nor deserve any thing but hell.

If heaven should give sufficiency of grace
To dear my soul, it would make heaven graceless:
My sins would make the stock of mercy poor,
Oh they would try heavens goodness to ^eclaime them:
Judgment is just yet from that vast villain:
But sure he shall not miss sad punishment,
For he shall rule on to my Cell of shame.

My Cell it is Lady, where insteede of Maskes,
Music, Tilts, Tournies, and such Courtlike shows,
The hollow murmr of the checklesse winds
Shall groan again, whilst the unquiet sea
Shakes the whole rock with foamy battery:
There Vsherlesse the air comes in and out,
The reumy vault will force your eyes to weep,
Whilst you behold true desolation:
A rocky barrenness shall pain your eyes,
Where all at once one reaches, where he stands,
With brows the roof, both walls with both his hands.

It is to good, blessed spirit of my Lord:
O in what or befoere thy soul is throand,
Behold me worthily most miserable:
O let the anguish of my contrite spirit,
Entreat some reconciliation:
If not, O joy! triumph in my just grief,
Death is the end of woes, and tears relief.

Belike your Lord not loved you, was unkind.


O heaven,
As the soul loved the body, so loved he,
It Was death to him to part my presence,
Heaven to see me pleased:
Yet I like to a wretch given ore to hell,
Brake all the sacred rites of marriage,
To clippe a base ungentle faithles villain:
O God, a very Pagan reprobate!
What should I say, ungrateful throws me out,
For whom I lost soul, body, fame, and honor:
But it is most fit: why should a better fate
Attend on any, who forsake chaste sheets,
Fly the embrace of a devoted heart,
Joined by a solemn vow sore God and man,
To taste the brackish blood of beastly lust
In an adulterous touch? Oh ravenous immodesty,
Insatiate impudence of appetite:
Look, heere'^ your end, for mark what sap in dust,
What sin in good, even so much love in lust:
Joy to thy ghost, sweet Lord, pardon to me.

It is the Dukes pleasure this night you rest in court.


Soul lurk in shades, run shame from brightsome skies,
In night, the blind man misseth not his eyes.

Do not weep kind cuckold, take comfort man, thy betters have been Beccos:
Agamemnon Emperor of all the merry Greeks; that tickled all the true Troyans,
was a Cornuto: Prince Arthur that cut off twelve Kings beardes was a Cornuto:
Hercules, whose back, bore up heaven, and got forty wenches with child in one
night


Nay it was fifty.


Faith fortie's enough a conscience, yet was a Cornuto: patience, mischief
grows proud, be wise


Thou pinchest too deep, art too keen upon me.


Tut, a pitiful surgeon makes a dangerous sore. I Will tent thee to the ground.
Think I Will sustain my self by ^ttering thee, because thou art a Prince? I
had rather follow a drunkard, and live by licking up his vomit, than by
servile flattery


Yet great men ha don't.


Great slaves fear better than love, borne naturally for a coale-basket,
though the common ysher of princes presence fortune ha blindely given them
better place, I am vowed to be thy affliction


Prithee be, I love much misery, and be thou son to me.


Because you are an usurping Duke,
Your Lordship's well returned for Florence.

Well returned, I praise my horse.


What news from the Florentines?


I will conceal the great Dukes pleasure, only this was his charge, his
pleasure is, that his daughter die, Duke Pietro be banished for banishing his
bloudes dishonor, and that Duke Altofront be reaccepted: this is all, but I
hear Duke Pietro is dead


I, and Mendozo is Duke, what will you do?


Is Mendozo strongest?


Yet he is.


Then yet I Will hold with him.


But if that Altofront should turn strait again?


Why then I would turn strait again:
It Is good run still with him that haz most might:
I had rather stand with wrong, then fall with right*

Your Lordship sweats, your young Lady will get you a cloth for your old
worships brows, Maxim^. (flatter the greatest, and oppress the least:) a
whoreson flesh fly, that still gnawes upon the lean gauld backs


Why dust then salute him?


Faith as ba^des go to Church, for fashion sake: come, be not confounded,
thou art but in danger to (...) a Dukedom, think this: this earth is the only
grave a^ ^olgotha wherein all things that live must rotte: it is but the draught
wherein the heavenly bodies discharge their corruption, the very muckhill on
which the sublunarie orbs cast their excrements: man is the slime of this
dongue-pit, and Princes are the governors of these men: for, for our souls,
they are as free as Emperoures, all of one piece, there goes but a pair of
sheeres betwixt an Emperor and the son of a bagpiper: only the dying,
dressing, pressing, glossing makes the difference: now what art thou like to
lose

A iaylors office to keep men in bonds,
Whilst toil and treason, all life's good confounds.

I here renounce for ever Regencie,
O Altofront, I wrong thee to supplant thy right:
To trip thy heels up with a devilish slight.
For which I now from Throane am thrown, world tricks abjure,
For vengance that comes s^ow, yet it comes sure.
O I am changed, for heerefore the dread power*
In true contrition I do dedicate,
My breath to solitary holiness,
My lips to prayer, and my breasts ^are shall be,
Restoring Altofront to regency.

Thy vows are heard, and we accept thy faith.

Altofront, Ferneze, Celso, Pietr^.

Banish amazement: come, we four must stand full shocke of Fortune, be not so
w^nder st^


Does Ferneze live?


For your pardon.


Pardon and love, give leave to recollect
My thoughts dispersed in wild astonishment:
My vows stand fixed in heaven, and from hence
I crave all love and pardon.

Who doubts of providence,
T^ (...) this change, a hearty faith to all:
H^ (...) ^ust rise, who can no lower fall,
(...) petuous Vicissitude
Loses the world, then let no maze intrude
Upon your spirits: wonder not I rise,
For who can sink that close can temporise?
The time grows ripe for action, I Will detect
My priuatst plot, ^est ignorance fear suspect:
Lets cloase to counsel, leave the rest to fate,
Mature discretion is the life of state.

The Dutchman for a drunkard,


The Dane for golden locks:


The Irishman for vsquebath,


The Frenchman for the ()


O thou art a blessed creature, had I a modest woman to conceal, I would put
her to thy custody, for no reasonable creature would ever suspect her to be in
thy company: ha, thou art a melodious Maquarelle, thou picture of a woman and
substance of a beast, and how do thou think a this transformation of state
now


Very very well, for we women always note, the falling of the one, is the
rising of the other: some must be fat, some must be lean, some must be fools,
and some must be Lords: some must be knaves, and some must be officers, some
must be beggars, some must be Kni^* some must be cuck olds, and some must be
citizens: as for example, I have two court dogs, most fawning curres* ^he one
calde Watch, the other Ca^h: now I, like Lady Fortune, sometimes love this dog*
sometimes rouse that dog, sometimes favor Watch, most commonly fancy Catch: Now
that dog which I favor I feed* and h^es so ravenous, that what I give he
never chawes it, gulpes it dow^ (...) without any relish of what he haz, but
with a (...) ^pectation of what he shall have: the other dog* (...


No more dog, soote Maquarelle no more dog^ and what hope have thou of the
Duchess Maria, will she stoop to the Dukes luer, will she come, think


Let me see where is ^he sign now? ha ye e^e a callender, where is the sign tro^
you


Sign? why, is there any moment in that?


O believe me a most secret power, look ye a Caldean, or an Assyrian, I am
sure it was a most sweet Jew ^ould me, court any woman in the right sign, you
shall not miss, but you must take he^ in the right vein then: As when the
sign is in Pisces, a fishmo^gers wife is very sotiable: in Cancer, a
pr^cisians wife is very flexible: in Capricorn, a Merchants wife hardly
holds out: in Libra, a Lawyers wife is very tractable, especially, if her
husband be at the term: only, in Scorpio ^s ve^ie dangerous meddling, haz the
Duke sent any jewel, any rich stones


I, I think those are the best signs, to take a Lady in: by your favor
signeur: I must discourse with the Lady Maria, Altofronts Duchess: I must enter
for the Duke


She here shall guie you enterveiw, I received the guardshippe of this
Ci^adell from the good Al^front, and for his use I Will keep't, til I am of ^o use


Will thou, O heaven that a christian should be found in a buffeierkin,
Captain conscience? I love thee Capt^e.


Twill go hard, she was a could creature ever, she hated munkies, fools,
ieasters, and gentlemen vshers extremely: she had the vilde trick on it, not
only to be truly modestly honorable in her own conscienc^ (...) she would
avoid the least wanton carria^ (...) might incur suspect, as God bless me,
she (...) (...) brought bed pressing out of fashion: I could ^arce get a fine,
for the lease of a Ladies favor once in a fortnight


Now in the name of immodesty, how many maiden-heads have thou brought to the
block


Let me see: heaven forgive us our misdeedes, heeres the Duchess.


God bless thee Lady,


out of thy company:


We have brought thee tender of a husband,


I hope I have one already.


Nay, by mine honor madam, as good he nere a husband, as a banished husband,
he is in an other world now, I Will tell y^ Lady, I have heard of a sect that
maintained, when the husband was asleep, the wife might lawfully entertain
another man: for then her husband was as dead, much more when he is banished


Dishonest creature:


Pish, honesty is but an art to seem so: pray ye what is honesty? what is
constancy? but fables fained, odd old fools chat deuisde by ielous fools, to
wrong our liberty


Mully, he that loves thee is a Duke, Mendozo, he will maintain thee royally,
love the ardently, defend thee powerfully, marry thee sumptuously, and keep
thee in despite of Rosciclere, or Donzell dell Phebe^ there is ^wels, if thou will, so, if not, so


Captain, for Gods love save poor wretchedness,
From tyranny of lustful insolence:
Enforce me in the deepest dungeon dwell
Rather then here, here round about is hell.
O my dear'st Altofront where ere thou breath,
Let my soul sink into the shades beneath:
Before I stain thine honor, it is thou have,
And long as I can die* I will live chaste.

Against him that can enforce how vain is strife?


She that can be enforced haz nere a knife.
She that through force her limbs with lust enroules,
Wants Cleopatraes aspes and Portiaes coals.
God amend you.

Now the fear of the Devil for ever go with thee. Maquerelle, I tell thee I
have found an honest woman, faith I perceive when all is done, there is of
women as of all other things: some good, most bad, some saints, some sinners:
for as now adays no Courtier but haz his mistress, no Captain but haz his
cockatrice, no Cuckold but haz his horns, and no fool but haz his f^ther:
even so no woman but haz her weakness and feather too, no sex but haz his: I
can hunt the letter no further: O God how loathsome this toying is to me, that a
Duke should be for^d to fool it: well, Stultoru^plena sunt omnia, better play
the fool Lord, then be the fool Lord: now, where is your slightes Madam
Maquarelle


Why, are ye ignorant that it is sed, a squemish affected nicenes is natural to
women, and that the excuse of their yielding, is only forsooth the difficult
obtaining, you must put her too'^, women are flax, and will fire in a moment


Why was the flax put into thy mouth, and yet thou? thou set fire? thou inflame
her


Mary, but I Will tell ye now, you were too ho^*


The fitter to have (...) the flaxwoman.


You were too boisterous (...)* for indeed.


(...), thou art a weak pandres, now I se^.
^ner earthes fire heaven it self shall waste,
Then all with he^ c^n mel^ a mind that is chaste.
Go thou the Dukes lime-twigge, I Will make the Duke turn thee out of thine
office, what not get one touch of hope, and (...) at such advantage


Now a my con^, now I think in my discre^ (...) did not take her (...) ^e ^ght
sign, the blood was not in the true vein, sure


On on, leave us, leave us (...) where is the hermit*


With Duke Pietro, with (...) Pietro.


Is he dead? is he poisoned*


Dead as the Duke is.


Good, excellent, he will not (...)* se^renes lives in secrecy* come liether*
come liether


Thou have a certain strong villa^ sent about thee, my nature cannot indu^e.


Sent man? what returns Maria? what answer to our suit?


Cold* frostie, she is obstinate.


Then she is but dead ^is resolute, she dies:
Black deed only through black deeds safely flies*

Pew, per sc^ra semper sceleribus tutum est ^ter.


What ar^ a scholar? art a politician? sure thou a^te an arrand knave.


Wh^ I? I h^ been (...) an under sheriff, man.


Can ^hou impoys^* can thou impoyson?


Excellently* no Jew* Potecary, or (...) better: look ye, here is a box, whom
would thou impoison, here is a box, which opened, and the (...) ^ne up in
condites, through which the brain purge^ it self, does instantly for 12.
hours space, bind up al show of life in a deep sensles sleep: here is another,
which being opened under the sleeper^ nose, ch^aks all the pores of life, (...)
him suddenly


I Will try experiments, it is good not to be decoued* (...) so, Catzo:

Who would fear that ma destroy, death has no teeth, nor t^ng,
And he that's great* to him one slaves sham^,
Murder, fame and wrong* Celzo^

My honored Lord.


The good Maleuole, that plain-tongued (...), is dead on sudden wondrou^
strangely, he held in o^r esteem good place

Celso, see him buried, see him buried.


I shall observe y^e.


And Celso, (...) let it be thy care to night
To have some pretty show* ^o solemnize
Our high instalment, some music, maskery:
We Will give f^re ent^taine unto Maria
The Duchess to the banishd Altofront:
Thou shall conduct her from the Citadell
Unto the Palace, think on some maskery.

Of what shape, sweet Lord,


Why shape? why any quick done fiction,
As some brau^ spirits of the Gen^ Dukes,
To come out of Elysium forsooth,
Led in by Mercury to gratulate
Our happy fortune, some such any thing, some far ^et trick, good for
Ladies, some stale toy or other, no matter so't be of our devising

Do thou prepar't, it is but for fashion sake,
Fear not, it shall be graced man, it shall take.

All service.


All thanks, our hand shall not be ^lose to thee: farewell
Now is my treachery secure, nor can we fall:
Mischief that pr^spers men do virtue call,
I Will trust no man, he that by trickes*go^s wreathes,
Keeps them with ^le, no man se^ely breathes,
Out of (...) ranks the Crowde will m^tter fool:
Who cannot bear with spi^e he cannot rule:
The chi^st (...) for a man of flat^,
Is to live senseless of a strengthlesse hate.

Death of the damned thief, I Will make one in the mask, thou shall ha some

Br^ue spirits of the antique Dukes.


My Lord, what strange di^sion?


Most happy, dear (...), poi^ with an empty Celso.

For n^ disastrous chance can ever m^e him,
That leaves nothing but a God above him.

Make room there, room for the ladies: why gentlemen, will not ye suffer the
ladies to be entr^d in the great chamber? why gallants? and you sir, to drop
your Torch where the beauties must sit too


And there is a great fellow plays the knave, why do not strike him?


Let him play the knave a Gods name, think thou I have no more wit then to
strike a great fellow, the music, more lights, reueling, scaffolds: do you
hear? let there be oaths enough ready at the door, swear out the devil
himself. Lets leave the Ladies, and go see if the Lords be ready for them


And by my troth Beauties, why do you not put you into the fashion, this is a
stale cu^* you must come in fashion: look ye, you must be all felt, fealt and
feather, a fealt upon your head: look ye, these ^ing things are justly out of
request now: and do ye hear? you must wear falling bands, you must come
into the falling fashion: there is such a deal a pinning these ruffes, when
the sine clean fall is worth all: and again* if you should chance to take a
nap in the afternoon, your falling ba^ requires no poting stick to recover
his form: beheue (...), no fashion to the falling band I say


And is not (...) S. Andrew Iaqu^ ^ gallant fellow now?


By my maidenhead la, honor and he agrees as well together, as a satin suit
and woollen stockings


But, is not Marshall Make-roome my servant in reversion, a proper gentleman?


Yes in (...) as he had his office, as in truth he has all things in
reversion: he haz his Mistress in reversion, his clothes in reversion, his wit
in reversion, and indeed^, is a suter to me for my dog in reversion: but in
good verity la, he is as proper a gentleman in reversion as: and indeed, as
fine a man as may be, having a red beard and a pair of warpt legs


But I faith I am most monstrously in love with count Quidlibet in Quodlibet,
is he not a pretty dapper windle gallant


He is even one of the most busy ^ingerd lords, he will put the beauties to the
squeake most hiddeously


Room, make a lane there, the Duke is entering: stand handsomely for beauties
sake, take up the Ladies there. So, cornets, cornets


Madam, with gentle ear receive my suite,
A kingdoms safety should over pa^ze slight rites,
Marriage is merely Natures policy:
Then since unless our royal beds be joined,
Danger and civil tumul^ frights the sta^e,
Be wise as you are fair, give way to fa^.

What would thou, thou affliction to our house? Thou ever devil, it was the
that banishedst my truly noble Lord


I?


I, by the plo^e ^hy ^hy blac^ ^agems,
Twelve Moons have suffered change since I be held
The lou^d presence of my de^st Lord.
O thou fair worse than death, he parts but soul
From a weak body, but thou soul from soul
Disseuerst, that which Gods own hand did kni^.
Thou scant of honor, full of di^elish wi^.

We Will check your too intemperate Iauishnes, I I can, and will.


What can?


Go to, in banishment thy husband dies.


He ever is at home that's ever wise.


Youst never meet more ^eason should Love control,


Not meet?

She that de^re loves, her love's still in her soul.


You are but a woman Lady, you must yield.


O save me thou innated bashfulnes,
Thou only ornament of woman's modesty.

Modesty? Death I Will torment thee,


Do, urge all torments, all afflictions try,
I Will die, my Lords, as long as I can die.

Thou obstinate, thou shall die: captain, that Ladies life is forfeited to
Justice, we have examined her

And we do find, she has impoisoned
The re^erend Hermit, therefore we command
Se^rest custody. Nay, if you will dooes no good,
Youst dooes no harm, a tyrants peace is blood.

O thou art merciful, O gracious devil,
Rather by much let me condemned be,
For seeming murder than be ^amn'd for thee.
I Will mourn no more, come girt my brows with flowers,
Revel and dance, soul, now thy wish thou have,
Die like a Bride, poor heart thou shall die chaste.
Life is a frost of could felicity,

And death the thaw of all our vanity.
Wast not an honest Priest that wrote so?

Who? let her in.


Forbear.


Forbear^.


Alas (...) is (...) where.
Sad misery, dispight your (...) doors*
Will enter even in court.

Peace.


I ha done; one word, take heed, I ha done.


Cilleman Merc^, the God of ghostes,
From glomie shades that spread the lower coasts,
Calls four high famed Genoa Dukes to come,
And make this presence their (...):
To pass away this high triumphall night,
With song and daunces, courts more soft delight.

Are you God of ghostes, I have a suit depending in hell betwixt me and my
conscience, I would ^aine have thee help me to an advocate


Mercury shall be your lawier Lady,


Nay faith, Mercury haz too good a face to be a right lawier.


Peace, forbear: Mercury presents the ma^ke.


Celso, Celso, court Maria for our love Lady, be gracious, yet grace.


With me Sir?


Yes more loved then my breath:
With you I Will dance.

Why then you dance with death,
But come Sir, I was nere more apt for mirth.
Death gives eternity a glorious breath^
O, to die honored, who would fear to die.

They die in fear who live in villainy.


Yes, believe him Lady, and be ruled by him.


Madam with me?


Would then be miserable?


I need not wish.


O, yet forbear my hand, away, fly, fly,
O seek not her that only (...) to ^y.

Poor loved soul.


What, would court misery?


Yes.


She Will come too soon O my gree^'d heart.


Lady ha done, ha, done.
Come down lets dance, be once from sorrow free.

Art a sad man?


Yes sweet.


Then we will agree.


Believe it Lady, shall I swear, let me enjoy you in


I had rather you would swear by your body: I think that would prove the more
regarded oath with you


I Will swear by them both, to please you.


O* dam them not both, to please me, for Gods sake.


Faith sweet creature let me enjoy you to night, and I Will marry you to morrow
fortnight, by my troth lo


On his ^roth lo, believe him not, that kind of cunnicatching is as stale as
fir Oliver Anchoues perfumde ierkin: promise of matrimony by a young Gallant,
to bring a virgin Lady into a fools paradise: make her a great woman, and then
cast her off: it is as common as natural to a Courtier, as jelosie to a Citizen,
gluttony to a Puritan, wisdom to an Alderman, pride to a Tailor, or an empty
to one of these sixepenny damnations: of his troth lo, believe him not, traps
to catch polecats


Keep your face constant, let no sudden passion speak in your eyes.


O my Altofront.


A tyrants jelosies are very nimble, you receive it all.


My heart though not my knees does v^bly fall, Lo as the earth to thee.


Peace, next change, no words.


^


Maleuole*


No.


Altofront, Duke Lorenzo Fer^, hah?


Duke (...), Duke Altofront.


Are we surprizde? what strange delusions ^cke
Our senses, do I dream? or have I dream^
This two days space? where am I?

Where an arch villain i^.


O lend me breath to live til I am fit to die.
For peace with heaven, for your own souls sake
Vouchsafe me life.

Ignoble villain, whom neither h^en nor hell, goodness of God or man could
once make good


Base trecherour wretch, what grace ^anst thou expect,
That have grown impudent in gracelesnesse.

O life!


Slave, take thy life.
Were thou defenced through blood and wounds,
The sternest horror of a civil fight,
Would I atcheeue thee, but prostrat at my feet,
I scorn to hurt thee, it is the heart of slaves
That daines to triumph ou^r peasants (...).
For such thou art since (...) d^ (...) (...)
A man mong ^ouarkes, but a glorious so^le*
You are ioyd spirits, wi^e your long ^et (...).
Hence with this man: an Eagle takes not flies.
You to your vows to Pietro and Aureli^, and thou unto the (...).
You to my worst friend I would (...) give:
Thou art a perfect old knau^ all pleased live*
You two unto my breast, thou to my heart*
And as for me I here assume my right,
To which I hope all is pleased: to all god night.


