Have you played over all your old Lessons of the Virginals?


Yes.


Yes, you are a dull Maid alate, me thinks you had need have somewhat to
quicken your Green Sickness, do you weep? A Husband. Had not such a piece
of Flesh been ordained, what had us Wives been good for? To make Sallets, or
else cried up and down for Sampier. To see the difference of these Seasons,
when I was of your youth, I was lightsome, and quick, two years before I was
married. You fit for a Knights bed, drowsy browd, dull eyed, drossie sprited,
I hold my life you have forgot your Dancing: When was the Dauncer with you


The last week.


Last week, when I was of your board, he mist me not a night, I was kept at it,
I took delight to learn, and he to teach me, prittie brown Gentleman, he
took pleasure in my company, but you are dull, nothing comes nimbly from you,
you dance like a Plummers Daughter, and deserve two thousand pound in Lead to
your marriage, and not in Gold-Smithes Ware


Now what is the din betwixt Mother and Daughter, ha?


Faith small, telling your Daughter Mary of her Errors.


Errors, nay the City cannot hold you Wife, but you must needs fetch words
from Westminster, I ha done I faith, has no Atturneys Clarke been here a late,
and changed his Halfe-Crowne-peece his Mother sent him, or rather cozend you
with a gilded Twopence, to bring the word in fashion, for her faults or
crackes, in duty and obedience, term em eeue so sweet Wife. As there is no
Woman made without a Flaw, your purest Lawnes have Frayes, and Cambrickes
Brackes


But it is a Husband sowders up all Crackes.


What is he come Sir?


Sr Walters come.
He was met at Holbourne Bridge, and in his company, a proper fair young
Gentlewoman, which I guess by her red Hair, and other rank descriptions, to
be his landed Niece, brought out of Wales, which Tim our Son (the Cambridge
Boy) must marry
It Is a match of Sr Walters own making to bind us to him, and our Heirs for
ever

We are honored then, if this Baggage would be humble, and kiss him with
devotion when he enters
I cannot get her for my life to instruct her Hand thus, before and after,
which a Knight will look for, before and after
I have told her still, it is the wauing of a Woman dose often move a Man, and
preuailes strongly
But sweet, ha you sent to Cambridge, (has Tim word an't?)

Had word just the day after when you sent him the Silver Spoone to eat his
Broth in the Hall, amongst the Gentlemen Commoners


O 'twas timely.


How now?


A Letter from a Gentleman in Cambridge.


O one of Hobsons Porters, thou art well-come.
I told thee Maud we should hear from Tim. Amantissimis charissimisque ambobus
parentibus patri and matri

What Is the matter?


Nay by my troth, I know not, ask not me, he is grown too verbal, this
Learning is a great Witch


Pray let me see it, I was wont to understand him.
Amantissimus charissimus, he has sent the Carryers Man he says: ambobus
parentibus, for a pair of Boots: patri and matri, pay the Porter, or it makes
no matter

Yes by my faith Mistress, there is no true construction in that, I have took a
great deal of pains, and come from the Bell sweating. Let me come to'te, for
I was a Scholar forty years ago, it is thus I warrant you: Matri, it makes no
matter: ambobus parentibus, for a pair of Boots: patri, pay the Porter:
amantissimis charissimis, he is the Carryers Man, and his name is Sims, and
there he says true, forsooth my name is Sims indeed, I have not forgot all my
learning. A Money matter, I thought I should hit on it


Go thou art an old Fox, there is a Tester for thee.


If I see your Worship at Goose Fair, I have a Dish of Birds for you.


Why do dwell at Bow?


All my life time Sir I could ever say Bo, to a Goose. Farewell to your Worship.


A merry Porter.


How can he choose but be so, coming with Cambridge Letters from our Son Tim?


What Is here, maximus diligo, Faith I must to my learned Counsel with this
geere, 'twill nere be discernd else


Go to my Cosen then, at Innes of Court.


Fie they are all for French, they speak no Latin.


The Parson then will do it.


Nay he disclaimes it, calls Latin Papistry, he will not deal with it. What
is it you lack Gentleman


Pray weigh this Chain.


Now Wench thou art well-come to the Heart of the City of London.


Dugat a whee.


You can thank me in English if you list.


I can Sir simply.


'Twill serve to pass Wench, 'twas strange that I should lie with thee so
often, to leave thee without English, that were unnatural, I bring thee up to
turn thee into Gold Wench, and make thy fortune shine like your bright Trade,
a Gold-Smithes Shop sets out a City Maid. Dauy Dahanna, not a word


Mum, mum Sir.


Here you must pass for a pure Virgin.


Pure Welsh Virgin, she lost her Maydenhead in Brekenocke-Shire.


I hear you mumble Dauy.


I have Teeth Sir, I need not mumble yet this forty years.


The Knave bites plaguely.


What Is your price Sir?


A hundred pound Sir.


A hundred marks the utmost, it is not for me else.
What Sr Walter Whorehound?

O Death.


Why Daughter.
Faith the Baggage a bashful Girl Sir, these young things are shamefast,
besides you have a presence sweet Sr Walter, able to daunt a Maid brought up
in the City
A brave Court Spirit makes our Virgins quiver, and kiss with trembling
Thighs. Yet see she comes Sir

Why how now pretty Mistress, now I have caught you. What can you iniure so
your time to strey thus from your faithful Servant


Pish, stop your words good Knight, 'twill make her blush else, which wound to
high for the Daughters of the Freedom, honor, and faithful Servant, they are
complements for the Worthy's of Whitehall, or Greenwitch, eene plain,
sufficient, subsidy words serves us Sir. And is this Gentlewoman your worthy
Niece


You may be bold with her on these terms, it is she Sir, Heir to some
nineteen Mountains


Bless us all, you ouer-whelme me Sir with love and riches.


And all as high as Paul's.


Here Is work I faith.


How say thou Dauy?


Higher Sir by far, you cannot see the top of 'em.


What Man? Maudline salute this Gentlewoman, our Daughter if things hit right.


My Knight with a brace of Footmen, is come and brought up his Ewe Mutton, to
find a Ram at London, I must hasten it, or else pick a Famine, her Bloods
mine, and that is the surest. Well Knight, that choice spoy is only kept for me

Sir?


Turn not to me till thou may lawfully, it but whets my stomach, which is
too sharp set already. Read that note carefully, keep me from suspicion
still, nor know my zeal but in thy Heart: read and send but thy liking in
three words, I Will be at hand to take it


O turn Sir, turn.
A poor plain Boy, an University Man, proceeds next Lent to a Batcheler of
Art, he will be called Sr Yellowhammer then over all Cambridge, and that is
half a Knight

Please you draw near, and taste the well-come of the City Sir?


Come good Sr Walter, and your virtuous Niece here.


It Is manners to take kindness.


Lead 'em in Wife.


Your company Sir.


I Will giue't you instantly.


How strangely busy is the Devil and riches,
Poor Soul kept in too hard, her Mothers Eye, is cruel toward her, being to
him, 'twere a good mirth now to set him a work to make her wedding Ring. I
must about it
Rather then the gain should fall to a Stranger, 'twas honesty in me to
enrich my Father

The Girl is wondrous peuish, I fear nothing, but that she is taken with some
other love, then all is quite dashed, that must be narrowly looked to, we cannot
be too wary in our Children. What is it you lack

O nothing now, all that I wish is present.
I would have a wedding Ring made for a Gentlewoman, with all speed that may be.

Of what weight Sir?


Of some half ounce, stand fair and comely, with the Spark of a Diamond.
Sir 'twere pity to lose the least grace.

Pray let us see it, indeed Sir it is a pure one.


So is the Mistress.


Have you the wideness of her Finger Sir?


Yes sure I think I have her measure about me, good faith it is down, I cannot
show't you
I must pull too many things out to be certain.
Let me see, long, and slender, and neatly ioynted,
Just such another Gentlewoman that is your Daughter Sir.

And therefore Sir no Gentlewoman.


I protest I never saw two Maids handed more alike
I Will nere seek farther, if you will give me leave Sir.

If you dare venture by her Finger Sir.


I, and I Will bide all loss Sir.


Say you so Sir, let us see hither Girl.


Shall I make bold with your finger Gentlewoman?


Your pleasure Sir.


That fits her to a hair Sir.


What Is your Posie now Sir?


Mass that is true, Posie I faith eene thus Sir.
Love that is wise, blinds Parents Eyes.

How, how, If I may speak without offense Sir,
I hold my life

What Sir?


Go too, you will pardon me?


Pardon you? I Sir.


Will you I faith?


Yes faith I will.


You Will steal away some Man's Daughter, am I nere you?
Do you turn aside? You Gentlemen are mad Wage, I wonder things can be so
warily carried, and Parents blinded so, but the're served right that have two
Eyes, and were so dull a fight

Thy doom take hold of thee.


To morrow noone shall show your Ring well done.


Being so it is soon, thanks, and your leave sweet Gentlewoman


Sir you are well-come.
O were I made of wishes, I went with thee.

Come now we will see how the rules go within.


That robs my Joy, there I loose all I win.


Honesty wash my Eyes, I have spied a Witall.


What Dauy Dahanna, well-come from North Wales
I faith, and is Sr Walter come?

Now come to Town Sir.


Into the Mayds sweet Dauy, and give order his Chamber be made ready instantly,
my Wife's as great as she can wallow Dauy, and longs for nothing but pickled
Coucombers, and his coming, and now she shall ha'te Boy


She Is sure of them Sir.


Thy very sight will hold my Wife in pleasure, till the Knight come himself.
Goin, in, in Dauy
The Founders come to Town, I am like a Man finding a Table furnished to his
hand, as mine is still to me, prays for the Founder, bless the right
Worshipful, the good Founders life
I thank him, h'as maintained my House this ten years, not only keeps my
Wife, but a keeps me, and all my Family, I am at his Table, he gets me all my
Children, and pays the Nurse, monthly, or weekly, puts me to nothing, rent,
nor Church duties, not so much as the Scauenger, the happiest state that ever
Man was borne to
I walk out in a morning, come to breake-fast,
Find excellent Cheer, a good Fire in Winter,
Look in my Coale-house about Midsommer-eeue,
That Is full, five or six Chaldorne, new laid up,
Look in my back yeard, I shall find a steeple
Made up with Kentish Fagot's, which o're-lookes
The Water-House and the Wind-milles, I say nothing
But smile, and pin the door, when she lies in,
As now she is even upon the point of grunting,
A Lady lies not in like her, there is her imbossings,
Embrodring, spanglings, and I know not what,
As if she lay withal the gaudy Shops
In Gressams Bursse about her, then her restoratiues,
Able to set up a young Pothecarie,
And richly stock, the Foreman of a Drug-shop.
Her Sugar by whole Loaves, her Wines by Rundlets.
I see these things, but like a happy Man,
I pay for none at all, yet Fools think's mine,
I have the name, and in his Gold I shine.
And where some Merchants would in Soul kiss Hell,
To buy a Paradise for their Wines, and dye
Their Conscience in the Bloods of prodigal Heirs,
To deck their Night-peece, yet all this being done,
Eaten with jealousy to the inmost Bone,
As what affliction Nature more constraynes,
Then feed the Wife plumpe, for another veins.
These torments stand I freed of, I am as clear
From jealousy of a Wife, as from the charge.
O two miraculous blessings, it is the Knight
Has took that labor, all out of my hands,
I may sit still and play, he is iealouse for me,
Watches her steps, sets spies, I live at ease,
He has both the cost and torment, when the strings
Of his Heart freats, I feed, laugh, or sing,
La dildo, dildo la dildo, la dildo dildo de dildo.

What has he got a singing in his Head now?


Now Is out of work he falls to making Dildo's.


Now Sirs, Sr Walters come.


Is our Master come?


Your Master, what am I?


Do not you know Sir?


Pray am not I your Master?


O you are but our Mistresses Husband.


Ergo Knave, your Master.


Negatur argumentum. Here comes Sr Walter, now a stands bare as well as we,
make the most of him he is but one peep above a Seruingman, and so much his
Horns make him


How do Jack?


Proud of your Worships health Sir.


How does your Wife?


Eene after your own making Sir,
She Is a tumbler a faith, the Nose and Belly meets.

The 'ile part in time again.


At the good hour, they will and please your worship.


Here Sir, pull off my Boots. Put on, but on Jack.


I thank your kind worship Sir.


Slippers, Heart you are sleepy.


The game begins already.


Pish, put on Jack.


Now I must do it, or he will be as angry now, as if I had put it on at first
bidding, it is but observing, it is but observing a Man's humor once, and he may
have him by the Nose all his life


What entertainment has layne open here,
No strangers in my absence?

Sure Sir not any.


His jealousy begins, am not I happy now
That can laugh inward whilst his Marrow melts?

How do you satisfy me?


Good Sir be patient.


For two months absence I Will be satisfied.


No living Creature entered.


Entered, come swear.


You will not hear me out Sir.


Yes I Will heare't out Sir.


Sir he can tell himself.


Heart he can tell,
Do you think I Will trust him? As a Usurer
With forfeited Lordships. Him, o monsterous injury!
Believe him, can the Devil speak ill of Darkness?
What can you say Sir?

Of my soul and conscience Sir, she is a Wife as honest of her Body to me, as
any Lords proud Lady can be


Yet by your leave, I heard you were once offering to go to bed to her.


No I protest Sir.


Heart if you do, you shall take all, I Will marry.


O I beseech you Sir,


That wakes the Slave, and keeps his Flesh in awe.


I Will stop that gap
Where e're I find it open, I have poisoned
His hopes in marriage already,
Some old rich Widows, and some landed Virgins,
And I Will fall to work still before I Will lose him,
He Is yet too sweet to part from.

God-den Father.


Ha Villain, peace.


God-den Father.


Peace Bastard, should he hear em. (...) are two foolish Children, they do
not know the Gentleman that sits there


Oh Wat, how do Nick^? Go to School,
Ply your Books Boys, ha?

Where Is your Legs Whore sons? They should kneel indeed if they could say
their Prayers


Let me see, stay,
How shall I dispose of these two Brats now
When I am married, for they must not mingle
Amongst my Children that I get in Wedlock,
'Twill make foul work that, and raise many storms.
I Will bind Wat Prentice to a Goldsmith, my Father Yellowh.
As fit as can be. Nick with some Vintner, good, Goldsmith
And Vintner, there will be Wine in Boles I faith.

Sweet Knight
Welcome, I have all my longings now in Town,
Now well-come the good hour.

How cheeres my Mistress?


Made lightsome, eene by him that made me heavy.


Me thinks she shows gallantly, like a Moon at full Sir.


True, and if she bear a Male child, there is the Man in the Moon Sir.


It Is but the Boy in the Moon yet Goodman Calfe.


There was a Man, the Boy had never been there else.


It shall be yours Sir.


No by my troth, I Will swear it is none of mine, let him that got it keep it,
thus do I rid my self of fear, Lie soft, sleep hard, drink Wine, and eat
good cheer


'Twill be so tedious Sir to live from you,
But that necessity must be obeyed.

I would it might not Wife, the tediousness
Will be the most part mine, that understand
The blessings I have in thee, so to part
That drives the torment to a knowing Heart,
But as thou say, we must give way to need
All live awhile asunder, our desires
Are both too fruitful for our barren fortunes.
How aduers runs the desteny of some Creatures,
Some only can get riches and no Children,
We only can get Children and no riches,
Then it is the prudents part to check our wills,
And till our state rise, make our Bloods lie still.
'Life every year a Child, and some years two,
Besides, drinkings abroad, that is never reckoned,
This geere will not hold out.

Sir for a time, I Will take the courtesy of my Uncles House
If you be pleased to like on it, till prosperity
Look with a friendly Eye upon our states.

Honest Wife I thank thee, I never knew
The perfect treasure thou brought with thee more
Then at this instant minute. A Man's happy
When he is at poorest that has matched his Soul
As rightly as his Body. Had I married
A sensual Fool now, as it is hard to escape it
Amongst Gentlewomen of our time, she would have hanged
About my Neck, and never left her hold
Till she had kissed me into wanton businesses,
Which at the waking of my better Judgment
I should have cursed most bitterly,
And laid a thicker vengance on my act
Then misery of the Birth, which were enough
If it were borne to greatness, whereas mine
Is sure of beggerie, though it were got in Wine.
Fullness of Joy shows the goodness in thee,
Thou art a matchless Wife, Farewell my Joy.

I shall not want your sight?


I Will see thee often,
Talk in mirth, and play at kisses with thee,
Any thing Wench but what may beget Beggars,
There I give over the Set, throw down the Cards,
And dare not take them up.

Your will be mine Sir.


This does not only make her honesty perfect,
But her discretion, and approues her Judgment.
Had her desire been wanton, they would been blameless
In being lawful ever, but of all Creatures
I hold that Wife a most unmatched treasure,
That can unto her fortunes fix her pleasure,
And not unto her Blood, this is like wedlock,
The feast of marriage is not Lust but Love,
And care of the estate, when I please Blood,
Merely I sing, and suck out others, then
It Is many a wisemans fault, but of all Men
I am the most unfortunate in that game
That ever pleased both Genders, I never played yet
Under a Bastard, the poor Wenches curse me
To the Pit where e're I come, they were never served so,
But used to have more words then one to a bargain,
I have such a fatal Finger in such business
I must forth with it, chiefly for Country Wenches,
For every Harvest I shall hinder Hay-making,
I had no less then seven lay in last Progress,
Within three weeks of one another time.

O Snaphance, have I found you.


How Snaphance?


Do you see your workmanship,
Nay turn not from it, nor offer to escape, for if you do,
I Will cry it through the Streets, and follow you.
Your name may well be called Tuchwood, a Pox on you,
You do but touch and take, thou have undone me,
I was a Maid before, I can bring a Certificate for it,
From both the Churchwardens.

I Will have the Parsons Hand too, or I Will not yield to it.


Thou shall have more thou Villain, nothing grieves me, but Ellen my poor
cosen in Darbishiere, thou have cracked her marriage quite, she will have a bout
with thee


Faith when she will I Will have a bout with her.


A Law bout Sir I mean.


True, Lawyers use such bouts as other Men do,
And if that be all thy grief, I Will tender her a Husband,
I keep of purpose two or three Gulls in pickle
To eat such Mutten with, and she shall choose one.
Do but in courtesy faith Wench excuse me,
Of this half yeard of Flesh, in which I think it wants
A Nail or two.

No, thou shall find Villain
It has right shape, and all the Nails it should have.

Faith I am poor, do a charitable deed Wench,
I am a younger Brother, and have nothing.

Nothing, thou have too much thou lying villain
Unless thou were more thankful.

I have no dwelling,
I brake up House but this morning, Pray thee pity me,
I am a good Fellow, faith have been too kind
To people of your Gender, if I ha'te
Without my Belly, none of your Sex shall want it,
That word has been of force to move a Woman.
There Is tricks enough to rid thy Hand on it Wench,
Some rich-mans Porch, to morrow before day,
Or else anon in the evening, twenty devises,
Here Is all I have, I faith, take purse and all,
And would I were rid of all the Ware in the Shop so.

Where I find manly dealings I am pitiful,
This shall not trouble you.

And I protest Wench, the next I Will keep my self.


Soft, let it be got first.
This is the fifth, if e're I venture more
Where I now go for a Maid, may I ride for a Whore.

what shift shele make now with this piece of flesh
In this strict time of Lent, I cannot imagine,
Flesh dare not peep abroad now, I have known
This City now above this seven years,
But I protest in better state of government,
I never knew it yet, nor ever heard of,
There has been more religious wholesome Laws
In the half cirkle of a year erected
For common good, then memory ever knew of,
Setting apart corruption of Promoters,
And other poisonous Officers that infect
And with a venomous breath taint every goodness.

O that e're I was begot, or bred, or borne.


Be content sweet Wife.


What Is here to do now?
I hold my life she is in deep passion
For the imprisonment of Veale and Mutton
Now kept in Garets, weeps for some Calves Head now,
Me thinks her Husbands Head might serve with Bacon.

Hist.


Patience sweet Wife.


Brother I have sought you strangely.


Why what is the business?


With all speed thou can procure a License for me.


How, a License?


Cuds-foot she is lost else, I shall miss her ever.


Nay sure thou shall not miss so fair a mark*
For thirteen shillings four pence.

Thanks by hundreds.


Nay pray thee cease, I Will be at more cost yet,
Thou know we are rich enough.

All but in blessings,
And there the Beggar goes beyond us. O, o, o,
To be seven years a Wife and not a Child, o not a Child.

Sweet Wife have patience.


Can any Woman have a greater cut?


I know it is great, but what of that Wife?
I cannot do with all, there is things making
By thine own Doctors advice at Poticaries,
I spare for nothing Wife, no if the price
Were forty marks a spoone-full,
I Would give a thousand pound to purchase fruitfulness,
It Is but bating so many good works
In the erecting of Bridewels and Spittle-houses,
And so fetch it up again, for having none
I mean to make good deeds my Children.

Give me but those good deeds, and I Will find Children.


Hang thee, thou have had too many.


Thouly'st brevity.


O horrible, dare thou call me brevity?
Dare thou be so short with me?

Thou deseruest worse.
Think but upon the goodly Lands and Livings
That Is kept back through want on it.

Talk not on it pray thee,
Thou Wilt make me play the Woman, and weep too.

It Is our dry barrenness puffes up Sr Walter,
None gets by your not-getting, but that Knight,
He Is made by the means, and fats his fortunes, shortly
In a great Dowry with a Goldsmiths Daughter.

They may be all deceived,
Be but you patient Wife.

I have suffered a long time.


Suffer thy Heart out, a Pox suffer thee.


Nay thee, thou desertlesse Slave.


Come, come, I have done,
You Will to the Gossiping of Mr Allwits Child?

Yes, to my much joy,
Every one gets before me, there is my Sister
Was married but at Bartholmew-eeue last,
And she can have two Children at a birth,
O one of them, one of them would have served my turn.

Sorrow consume thee, thou art still crossing me,
And know my nature.

O Mistress, weeping or railing,
That Is our House harmony.

What say Iugg?


The sweetest news.


What is it Wench?


Throw down your Doctors Drugges,
They Are all but Heretics, I bring certain remedy
That has been taught, and proved, and never fayl'd.

O that, that, that or nothing.


There Is a Gentleman,
I happily have his Name too, that has got
Nine Children by one Water that he uses,
It never mis(...)es, they come so fast upon him,
He was feign to give it over.

His name sweet Iugg?


One Mr Tuchwood, a fine Gentleman,
But run behind-hand much with getting Children.

Is It possible?


Why Sir, he will undertake,
Using that Water, within fifteen year,
For all your wealth, to make you a poor Man,
You shall so swarm with Children.

I Will venture that I faith.


That shall you Husband.


But I must tell you first, he is very dear.


No matter, what serves wealth for?


True sweet Husband,
There Is Land to come, Put case his Water stands me
In some five hundred pound a pint,
'Twill fetch a thousand, and a Kersten Soul.
I Will about it.
And that is worth all sweet Husband.

I Will go bid Gossips presently my self,
That Is all the work I Will do, nor need I stir,
But that it is my pleasure to walk forth
And air my self a little, I am tied to nothing
In this business, what I do is merely recreation,
Not constraint.
Here Is running to and fro, Nurse upon Nurse,
Three Chare women, besides maids and neighbors children.
Fie, what a trouble have I rid my Hands on,
It makes me sweat to think on it.

How now Jack?


I am going to bid Gossips for your Wps child Sir,
A goodly Girl I faith, give you joy on her,
She looks as if she had two thousand pound to her portion
And run away with a Tailor, A fine plumpe black ei'd slut,
Under correction Sir,
I take delight to see her: Nurse.

Do you call Sir?


I call not you, I call the Wet Nurse hither,
Give me the wet Nurse, I it is thou,
Come hither, come hither,
Lets see her once again; I cannot choose
But busse her thrice an hour.

You may be proud on it Sir,
It Is the best piece of work that e're you did.

Think thou so Nurse, What say to Wat and Nicke?


They Are pretty children both, but here is a wench
Will be a knocker.

Pup say thou me so, pup little Countess,
Faith Sir I thank your Worship for this Girl,
Ten thousand times, and upward.

I am glad I have her for you Sir.


Here take her in Nurse, wipe her, and give her Spoone-meat.


Wipe your Mouth Sir.


And now about these Gossips.


Get but two, I Will stand for one my self.


To your own Child Sir?


The better policy, it preuents suspicion,
It Is good to play with rumor at all weapons.

Troth I commend your care Sir, it is a thing
That I should never have thought on.

The more Slave,
When Man turns base, out goes his Souls pure flame,
The fat of ease o're-throwes the eyes of shame.

I am studying who to get for Godmother
Suitable to your Worship, Now I have thought on it.

I Will ease you of that care, and please my self in it
My Love the Goldsmithes Daughter, if I send,
Her Father will command her, Dauy Dahumma.

I Will fit your Worship then with a Male Partner.


What is he?


A kind proper Gentleman, Brother to Mr Tuchwood.


I know Tuchwood, has he a Brother living?


A neat Bachelor.


Now we know him, we will make shift with him
Dispatch the time draws near, Come hither Dauy.

In troth I pity him, he never stands still,
Poor Knight what pains he takes, sends this way one,
That way another, has not an hours leisure,
I would not have thy toil, for all thy pleasure,
Ha, how now, what are these that stand so close
At the Street-corner, pricking up their Ears,
And snuffing up their Noses, like rich-mens Dogs
When the first Course goes in? By the mass Promoters,
It Is so I hold my life, and planted there
To arrest the dead Corpse of poor Calves and Sheep,
Like ravenous Creditors, that will not suffer
The Bodies of their poor departed Debtors
To go to' the grave, but eene in Death to vex
And stay the Corpse, with Bills of Middlesex,
This Lent will fat the whoresons up with Sweetbreds,
And lard their whores with Lambe-stones, what their gols
Can clutch, goes presently to their Mols and Dols,
The Bawds will be so fat with what they earne,
Their Chins will hang like Vdders, by Easter-eeue,
And being stroak't, will give the Milk of Witches,
How did the Mungrels hear my wife lies in?
Well, I may baffle 'em gallantly, By your favor Gentlemen
I am a stranger both unto the City,
And to her carnal stricktnesse.

Good, Your will Sir?


Pray tell me where one dwells that kills this Lent.


How kills? Come hither Dicke,
A Bird, a Bird.

What is it that you would have?


Faith any Flesh,
But I long especially for Veale and Greene-sauce.

Greene-Goose, you shall be sau'st.


I have half a scornful stomach, no Fish will be admitted.


Not this Lent Sir?


Lent, what cares Colon here for Lent?


You say well Sir,
Good reason that the Colon of a Gentleman
As you were lately pleased to term your worship Sir,
Should be fulfilled with answerable food,
To sharpen Blood, delight Health, and tickle Nature,
Were you directed hither to this Street Sir?

That I was, I marry.


And the Butcher belike
Should kill, and sell close in some upper Room?

Some Apple-loft as I take it, or a Cole-house,
I know not which I faith.

Either will serve,
This Butcher shall kifse Newgate, less he turn up the
Bottom of the Pocket of his Apron,
You go to seek him?

Where you shall not find him,
I Will buy, walk by your Noses with my Flesh,
Sheepe-biting Mungrels, Hand-basket Free-booters,
My Wife lies in, a footra for Promoters.

That shall not serve your turn, what a Rogue's this, how cunningly he came
over us


Hushed, stand close.


I have escaped well thus far, they say the Knaves are wondrous hot and busy.


By your leave Sir,
We must see what you have under your Cloak there.

Have? I have nothing.


No, do you tell us that, what makes this lump stick out then, we must see
Sir


What will you see Sir, a pair of Sheets, and two of my Wives foul Smocks,
going to the Washers


O we love that sight well, you cannot please us better: What do you gull us,
call you these Shirts and Smockes


Now a Pox choke you,
You have cozend me and five of my Wives kindred
Of a good Dinner, we must make it up now
With Herrings and Milke-potage.

It Is all Veale.


All Veale, Pox the worse luck, I promised faithfully to send this morning a
fat quarter of Lamb, to a kind Gentlewoman in Turnebull street that longs, and
how I Am crossed


Let Us share this, and see what hap comes next then.


Agreed, stand close again, another booty,
What Is he?

Sir, by your favor.


Meaning me Sir?


Good Mr Oliver, cry thee mercy, I faith.
What have thou there?

A Rack of Mutton Sir, and half a Lamb,
You know my Mistrisses diet.

Go, go, we see thee not, away, keep close,
Heart let him pass, thou wilt never have the wit
To know our benefactors.

I have forgot him.


It Is M. Beggerlands man the wealthy Merchant
That is in fee with us.

Now I have a feeling of him.


You know he purchased the whole Lent together
Gave us ten groats a piece on Ash-wensday.

True, true.


A Wench.


Why then stand close indeed.


Women had need of wit, if they will shift here,
And she that has wit, may shift any-where.

Look, look, poor Fool,
She has left the Rumpe vncouer'd too,
More to betray her, this is like a Murdrer,
That will outface the deed with a bloody Band.

What time of the year is it Sister?


O sweet Gentlemen, I am a poor Servant,
Let me go.

You shall Wench, but this must stay with us.


O you undo me Sir,
It Is for a welthy Gentlewoman that takes Physic Sir,
The Doctor does allow my Mistress Mutton,
O as you tender the dear life of a Gentlewoman,
I Will bring my Master to you, he shall show you
A true authority from the higher powers,
And I Will run every foot.

Well, leave your Basket then,
And run and spare not.

Will you swear then to me,
To keep it till I come.

Now by this light I will.


What say you Gentleman?


What a strange Wench it is?
Would we might perish else.

Nay then I run Sir.


And never return I hope.


A politic Baggage,
She makes us swear to keep it,
I prithee look what market she has made.

Imprimis Sir, a good fat Loyne of Mutton,
What comes next under this Cloth?
Now for a quarter of Lamb.

Not for a Shoulder of Mutton.


Done.


Why done Sir.


By the mass I feel I have lost,
It Is of more weight I faith.

Some Loyne of Veale?


No faith, here is a Lambs Head,
I feel that plainly, why yet win my wager.

Ha?


Swounds what is here?


A Child.


A Pox of all dissembling cunning Whores.


Here Is an unlucky Breakefast.


What shal's do?


The Queen made us swear to keep it too.


We might leave it else.


Villainous strange,
'Life had she none to gull, but poor Promoters,
That watch hard for a living.

Half our gettings must run in Suger-sope,
And Nurses wages now, besides many a pound of Soap,
And Tallow, we have need to get Loins of Mutton still,
To save Suet to change for Candles.

Nothing mads me, but this was a Lamb^ head with you, you felt it, she has made
Calves heads of us


Prithee no more on it,
There Is time to get it up, it is not come
To Mid-Lent Sunday yet.

I am so angry, I Will watch no more to day.


Faith nor I neither.


Why then I Will make a motion.


Well, what is it?


Let Us e'ne go to the Checker at Queene-hiue and roast the Loyne of Mutton,
till young Flood, then send the Child to Branford


It Is a busy day at our House Dauy.


Always the Kursning day Sir.


Trusse, trusse me Dauy.


No matter and you were hanged Sir.


How does this Suit fit me Dauy?


Excellent neatly, my Masters things were ever fit for you Sir, e'ne to a Hair
you know


Thou have hit it right Dauy,
We ever iumpt in one, this ten years Dauy,
So well said, what art thou?

Your Comfit-makers Man Sir.


O sweet youth, into the Nurse quick,
Quick, it is time I faith,
Your Mistress will be here?

She was setting forth Sir.


Here comes our Gossips now, O I shall have such kissing work to day, Sweet
Mistress Vnderman welcome I faith


Give you joy of your fine Girl Sir,
Grant that her education may be pure,
And become one of the faithful.

Thanks to your Sisterly wishes Mr Vnderman.


Are any of the Brethrens Wives yet come?


There are some Wives within, and some at home.


Verily thanks Sir.


Verily you are an Ass forsooth,
I must sit all these times, or there is no Music,
Here comes a friendly and familier payer,
Now I like these Wenches well.

How do sir?


Faith well I thank you Neighbor, and how do thou?


Want nothing, but such getting Sir as thine.


My gettings wench, they are poor.


Fie that thou wilt say so,
Thou Have as fine Children as a Man can get.

I as a Man can get,
And that is my Master.

They are pretty foolish things,
Put to making in minutes,
I never stand long about 'em,
Will you walk in Wenches?

The hapiest meeting that our souls could wish for
Here Is the Ring ready, I am beholding unto your Fathers have, h'as kept his
hour

He never kept it better.


Back, be silent.


Mistress and Partner, I will put you both into one Cup.


Into one Cup, most proper,
A fitting complement for a Goldsmiths Daughter.

Yes Sir, that is he must be your Worships Partner
In this days business, Mr Tuchwoods Brother.

I embrace your acquaintance Sir.


It vows your service Sir.


It Is near high time, come Mr All-wit.


Ready Sir.


Will It please you walk?


Sir I obey your time.


Good Mris Yellowhammer.


In faith I will not.


Indeed it shall be yours


I have sworn I says.


I Will stand still then.


So will you let the Child go without company
And make me forsworn.

You are such another Creature.


Before me, I pray come down a little.


Not a whit, I hope I know my place.


Your place, great wonder sure, are you any better then a Comfit-makers wife.


And that is as good at all times as a Pothicaries.


Ye lie, yet I forbear you too.


Come sweet Sister, we go in unity, and show the fruits of peace like
Children of the Spirit


I love lowliness.


True, so say I, though they strive more,
There comes as proud behind, as goes before.

Every inch I faith.


O Sir, if ever you felt the force of love, pity it in me.


Yes, though I never was married Sir,
I have felt the force of love from good men's daughters,
And some that will be Mayds yet three years hence.
Have you got a License?

Here it is ready Sir.


That Is well.


The Ring and all things perfect, she will steal hither.


She shall be welcome Sir, I Will not be long
A clapping you together.

O here she is come Sir.


What Is he?


My honest Brother.


Quick, make have Sirs.


You must dispatch with all the speed you can,
For I shall be mist straight, I made hard shift
For this small time I have.

Then I Will not linger,
Place that Ring upon her Finger,
This the Finger plays the part,
Whose master Vein shoots from the Heart,
Now join Hands.

Which I will sever,
And so never again meet never.

O we are betrayed.


Hard fate.


I am struck with wonder.


Was this the politic fetch, thou mystical baggage
Thou disobedient strumpet,
And were so wise to send for her to such an end,

Now I disclaim the end, you will make me mad.


And what are you Sir?


And you cannot see with those two Glasses, put on a pair more.


I dreampt of anger still, here take your Ring Sir,
Ha this, life it is the same, abominable,
Did not I sell this Ring?

I think you did, you received money for it.


Heart, hark you Knight,
Here Is no inconscionable villainy,
Set me a work to make the Wedding Ring,
And come with an intent to steal my Daughter,
Did ever run-a-way match it?

'This your Brother Sir?


He can tell that as well as I.


The very Poesy mockes me to my face,
Love that is wise, blinds Parents eyes,
I thank your wisdom Sir for blinding of us,
We have good hope to recover our sight shortly,
In the mean time I will lock up this baggage,
As carefully as my Gold, she shall see as little Sun
If a close Room or so can keep her from the light on it.

O sweet Father, for Loves sake pity me.


Away.


Farewell Sir, all content bless thee,
And take this for comfort,
Though violence keep me, thou can loose me never,
I am ever thine although we part for ever.

I we shall part you Minkes.


Your acquaintance Sir, came very lately,
Yet it came too soon,
I must here-after know you for no friend,
But one that I must shun like Pestilence,
Or the Disease of Lust.

Like enough Sir, you have taken me at the worst time for words that e're ye
picked out, faith do not wrong me Sir


Look after him and spare not, there he walks
That never yet received baffling, you are blessed
More then e're I knew, go take your rest.

I pardon you, you are both loosers.


How is it Woman, we have brought you home
A Kursen Soul.

I, I thank your pains.


And verily well kursend, in the right way,
Without Idolatry or Superstition,
After the pure manner of Amsterdam.

Sit down good Neighbors, Nurse.


At hand forsooth.


Look they have all low stools


They have forsooth.


Bring the Child hither Nurse, how say you now
Gossip, is it not a chopping Girl, so like the Father?

As if it had been spit out of his Mouth,
By'd, nosed, and brow'd as like a Girl can be,
Only indeed it has the Mothers Mouth.

The Mothers Mouth up and down, up and down.


It Is a large Child, she is but a little Woman.


No believe me, a very spynie Creature, but all heart,
Well metteld, like the faithful to endure
Her tribulation here, and raise up seed.

She had a sore labor on it I warrant you, you can tell Neighbor.


O she had great speed,
We were afraid once,
But she made us all have joyful hearts again,
It Is a good Soul I faith,
The Midwife found her a most cheerful Daughter.

It Is the spirit, the Sisters are all like her,


O here comes the chief Gossip Neighbors.


The fatness of your wishes to you all Ladies.


O deer sweet gentleman, what fine words he has
The fatness of our wishes.

Calls us all Ladies.


I promise you a fine Gentleman, and a courteous.


Me thinks her Husband shows like a Clown to him.


I would not care what Clown my Husband were too, so I had such fine Children.


She Is all fine Children Gossip.


I, and see how fast they come.


Children are blessings, if they be got with zeal,
By the Brethren, as I have five at home.

The worst is past, I hope now Gossip.


So I hope to good Sir.


Why then so hope I too for company,
I have nothing to do else.

A poor remembrance Lady,
To the love of the Babe, I pray accept of it.

O you are at too much charge Sir.


Look, look, what has he given her, what Is It Gossip?


Now by my faith a fair high standing Cup, and two great Postle Spoones, one
of them gilt


Sure that was Judas then with the red Beard.


I would not feed my daughter with that spoone for all the World, for fear of
coloring her Heir, Red Hair the Brethren like not, it consumes them much,
it is not the Sisters color


Well said Nurse,
About, about with them amongst the Gossips,
Now out comes all the tasseld Handkerchers,
They are spread abroad between their Knees already,
Now in goes the long Fingers that are washed
Some thrice a day in Vrin, my Wife uses it,
Now we shall have such pocketing,
See how they lurch at the lower end.

Come hither Nurse.


Again, she has taken twice already.


I had forgot a Sisters Child that is sick.


A Pox it seems your purity loves sweet things well that puts in thrice
together, had this been all my cost now I had been beggerd, these Women have
no consciences at sweet meats, where e're they come, see and they have not culd
out all the long Plumbes too, they have left nothing here but short
riggle-tayle-Comfits, not worth mouthing, no mar'le I heard a Citizen complain
once, that his Wives Belly only broke his Back: Mine had been all in fitters
seven years since, but for this worthy Knight, that with a prop vpholds my
Wife and me, and all my estate buried in Bucklers-berrie


Here Mris Yellowhammer, and Neighbors,
To you all that have taken pains with me,
All the good Wives at once.

I Will answer for them,
They wish all health and strength,
And that you may courageously go forward,
To perform the like and many such,
Like a true Sister with Motherly bearing.

Now the cups trole about to wet the gossips whistles
It poures down I faith, they never think of payment.

Fill again Nurse.


Now bless thee, two at once, I Will stay no longer,
It would kill me and if I paid for it,
Will it please you to walk down and leave the women.

With all my Heart Jack.


Troth I cannot blame you.


Sit you all merry Ladies.


Thank your Worship Sir.


Thank your Worship Sir.


A Pox twice tipple ye, you are last and lowest.


Bring hither that same Cup-Nurse, I would feign drive away this hup
Antichristian grief


See Gossip and she lies not in like a Countess,
Would I had such a Husband for my Daughter.

Is not she toward marriage?


O no sweet Gossip.


Why she is nineteen?


I that she was last Lammas,
But she has a fault Gossip, a secret fault.

A fault, what is it?


I Will tell you when I have drunk.


Wine can do that I see, that friendship cannot.


And now I Will tell you Gossip, she is too free.


To free?


O I, she cannot lie dry in her Bed.


What, and nineteen?


It Is as I tell you Gossip.


Speak with me Nurse, who is it?


A Gentleman from Cambridge,
I think it be your Soon forsooth.

It Is my Soon Tim I faith,
Prithee call him up among the Women,
'Twill imbolden him well,
For he wants nothing but audacitie,
'Would the Welsh gentlewoman at home were here now.

Is your Son come forsooth?


Yes from the University forsooth.


It Is great joy on ye.


There Is a great marriage toward for him.


A marriage?


Yes sure, a hughe Heir in Wales,
At least to nineteen Mountains,
Besides her Goods and Cattle.

O, I Am betrayed.


What gone again, run after him good Nurse,
He Is so bashful, that is the spoil of youth,
In the University they are kept still to Men,
And never trayn'd up to Women's company.

It Is a great spoil of youth indeed.


Your Mother will have it so.


Why Son, why Tim,
What must I rise and fetch you? For shame Son.

Mother you do entreat like a fresh Woman,
It Is against the Laws of the University,
For any that has answered under Bachelor
To thrust amongst married Wives.

Come we will excuse you here.


Call up my Tutor Mother, and I care not.


What is your Tutor come, have you brought him up?


I have not brought him up, he stands at door,
Negatur, there is Logic to begin with you Mother.

Run call the gentleman nurse, he is my sons tutor
Here eat some Plumbes.

Come I from Cambridge, and offer me six plumbs?


Why how now Tim,
Will not your old tricks yet be left?

Served like a Child,
When I have answered under Batcheler?

You Will never lin till I make your Tutor whip you, you know how I served you
once at the Free School in Paul's Church-yeard


O monstrous absurdity,
Never was the like in Cambridge since my time,
'Life whip a Batcheler, yow'ld be laughed at soundly,
Let not my Tutor hear you,
'Twould be a Jest through the whole University,
No more words Mother.

Is this your Tutor Tim?


Yes surely Lady, I am the man that brought him in League with Logic, and red
the Dunces to him


That did he Mother, but now I have 'em all in my own Pate, and can as well
read 'em to others


That can he Mistress, for they flow naturally from him.


I Am the more beholding to your pains Sir.


No^ ideo sa^^.


True, he was an Idiot indeed,
When he went out of London, but now he is well mended*
Did you receive the two Goose-pies I sent you?

And eat them heartily, thanks to your Worship.


It Is my Son Tim, I pray bid him welcome Gentlewomen.


Tim, hark you Timothius Mother, Timothius.


How, shall I deny your Name? Timothius quoth he? Faith there is a name, it is my
Son Tim forsooth


You're welcome Mr Tim.


O this is horrible, she wets as she kisses,
Your Handkercher sweet Tutor, to wipe them off, as fast as they come on.

Welcome from Cambridge.


This is intolerable, This woman has a villainous sweet breath, did she not
stink of Comfits, Help me sweet Tutor, or I shall rub my Lips off


I Will go kiss the lower end the whilst.


Perhaps that is the sweeter, and we shall dispatch the sooner.


Let me come next, Welcome from the Welspring of discipline, that waters all
the Brethren


Hoyst I beseech thee.


O bless the Woman, Mr Vnderman.


It Is but the common affliction of the faithful,
We must embrace our falls.

I Am glad I escaped it, it was some rotten kiss sure,
It dropped down before it came at me.

Here Is a noise, not parted yet?
Hyda, a Looking-glass, they have drunk so hard in Plate,
That some of them had need of other Vessels,
Yonder Is the brauest Show.

Where? Where Sir?


Come along presently by the Pissing-conduit,
With two brave Drums and a Standert-bearer.

O Brave.


Come Tutor.


Farewell sweet Gossip.


I thank you all for your pains.


Feed and grow strong.


You had more need to sleep then eat,
Go take a nap with some of the Brethren, go,
And rise up a well edified, boldified Sister,
O here is a day of toil well past over,
Able to make a Citizen Hare mad,
How hot they have made the Room with their thick Bums,
Do not feel it Dauy?

Monstrous strong Sir.


What Is here under the Stools?


Nothing but wet Sir, some Wine spilt here belike.


Is It no worse think thou?
Fair Needle work Stools, cost nothing with them Dauy

Nor you neither I faith.


Look how they have laid them,
Ee'ne as they lie themselves, with their Heels up,
How they have shufflled up the Rushes too Dauy
With their short figging little shittle-corke-heels,
These Women can let nothing stand as they find it,
But what is the secret thou'st about to tell me
My honest Dauy?

If you should disclose it Sir.


Life rip my Belly up to the Throat then Dauy.


My Master's upon Marriage.


Marriage Dauy, send me to hanging rather.


I have stong him.


When, where, what is she Dauy?


E'ne the same was Gossip, and gave the Spoone.


I have no time to stay, nor scarce can speak,
I Will stop those wheels, or all the work will break.

I knew 'twold prick, Thus do I fashion still
All mine own ends by him and his rank toil,
It Is my desire to keep him still from marriage,
Being his poor nearest Kinsman, I may fare
The better at his death, there my hopes build
Since my Lady Kixe is dry, and has no Child.

You Are in the happiest way to enrich your self,
And pleasure me Brother, as Man's feet can tread in,
For though she be locked up, her vow is fixed only to me;
Then time shall never grieve me, for by that vow,
E'ne absent enjoy her, assuredly confirmed that none
Else shall, which will make tedious years seem gamefull
To me, In the mean space lose you no time sweet brother,
You have the means to strike at this Knights fortunes,
And lay him level with his bankrout merit,
Get but his Wife with Child, perch at tree top,
And shake the golden fruit into her Lap,
About it before she weep her self to a dry ground,
And whine out all her goodness.

Prithee cease, I find a too much aptness in my blood
For such a business without provocation,
You might 'well spared this banquet of Oringoes,
Hartechokes, Potatoes, and your buttered Crabbe,
They were fitter kept for your own wedding dinner.

Nay and you will follow my suit, and save my purse too
Fortune doats on me, he is in happy case
Finds such an honest friend in the Common place.

Life what makes thee so merry? thou have no cause
That I could hear of lately since thy crosses,
Unless there be news come, with new additions.

Why there thou have it right,
I look for her this Evening Brother.

How Is that, look for her?


I will deliver you of the wonder straight Brother,
By the firm secrecy, and kind assistance
Of a good Wench in the House, who made of pity,
Weighing the case her own, she is lead through Gutters,
Strange hidden ways, which none but Love could find,
Or have the Heart to venture, I expect her
Where you would little think.

I care not where, so she be safe, and yours.


Hope tells me so,
But from your love and time my peace must grow.

You know the worst then brother, now to my Kix
The barren he and she, they are in the next Room,
But to say which of their two humors hold them
Now at this instant, I cannot say truly.

Thou lie Barrenness.


O is it that time of day, give you joy of your tongue
There Is nothing else good in you, this their life
The whole day from eyes open to eyes shut,
Kissing or scolding, and then must be made friends,
Then rail the second part of the first fit out,
And then be pleased again, no Man knows which way,
Fall out like Giants, and fall in like Children,
Their Fruit can witness as much.

It Is thy fault.


Mine, Drouth and coldness?


Thine, it is thou art barren.


I barren, o life that I durst but speak now,
In mine own Justice, in mine own Right, I barren,
'Twas otherwise with me when I was at Court,
I was never called so till I was married.

I Will be deuorc't.


Be hanged, I need not wish it,
That will come too soon to thee:
I may say, Marriage and hanging goes by destiny,
For all the goodness I can find in it yet.

I Will give up House, and keep some fruitful whore,
Like an old Batcheler in a Tradsmans Chamber,
She and her Children shall have all.

Where be they?


Pray cease,
When there are friendlier courses took for you,
To get and multiply within your House,
At your own proper costs in spite of censure,
Me thinks an honest peace might be established.

What with her? Never.


Sweet Sir.


You work all in vain.


Then he does all like thee.


Let me entreat Sir.


Singleness confound her,
I took her with one Smock.

But indeed you came not so single,
When you came from Shipboard.

Heart she bit sore there,
Prithee make's friends.

Is It come to that, the peale begins to cease.


I Will sell all at an Outcry.


Do thy worst Slave,
Good sweet Sir bring us into love again.

Some would think this impossible to compass,
Pray let this storm fly over.

Good Sir pardon me, I Am Master of this House,
Which I Will sell presently, I Will clap up Bills this Evening.

Lady friends come?


If e're ye loved Woman, talk not on it Sir, what friends with him? good faith
do you think I Am mad with one that is scarce the hinder quarter of a Man


Thou art nothing of a Woman.


Would I were less then nothing.


Nay prithee what do mean?


I cannot please you.


I faith thou art a good Soul, he lies that says it,
Busse, busse, pretty Rogue.

You care not for me.


Can any man tell now which way they came in?
By this light I Will be hanged then.

Is the Drink come?


Here Is a little Vial of Almond-milke
That stood me in some three pence.

I hope to see thee wench within these few years,
Cirkled with Children, pranking up a Girl,
And putting Jewels in their little Ears,
Fine sport I says.

I had you been ought Husband,
It had been done ere this time.

Had I bin ought, hang thee, had thou bin ought,
But a cross thing I ever found thee.

Thou art a Grub to say so.


A Pox on thee.


By this light they are out again at the same door,
And no Man can tell which way,
Come here is your Drink Sir.

I will not take it now Sir,
And I were sure to get three Boys ere Midnight.

Why there thou show now of what breed thou come
To hinder generation, O thou Villain,
That knows how crookedly the World goes with us,
For want of Heirs, yet put by all good fortune.

Hang strumpet, I will take it now in spite.


Then you must ride upon it five hours.


I mean so, Within there?


Sir?


Saddle the white Mare,
I Will take a Whore along, and ride to Ware.

Ride to the Devil.


I Will plague you every way,
Look ye, do you see, it is gone.

A Pox go with it.


I curse and spare not now.


Stir up and down sir, you must not stand.


Nay I Am not given to standing.


So much the better sir for the --


I never could stand long in one place yet,
I learnt it of my Father, ever figient,
How if I crossed this Sir?

O passing good Sir, and would show well a Horseback: When you come to your
Inn, If you leapt over a ioynt-stoole or two, 'twere not amiss although you
brake your neck Sir


What say you to a Table thus high Sir?


Nothing better Sir, if it be furnished with good Victuals. You remember how
the bargain runs about this business


Or else I had a bad Head: you must receive Sir four hundred pounds of me at
four several payments
One hundred pound now in hand.

Right, that I have Sir.


Another hundred when my Wifes is quick: the third when she is brought a bed:
and the last hundred when the Child cries, For if it should be still borne, it
does no good Sir


All this is even still, a little faster Sir.


Not a whit Sir,
I Am in an excellent pace for any Physic,

Your white Mares ready.


I shall up presently: One kiss, and farewell.


Thou shall have two Love.


Expect me about three.


With all my Heart Sweet.


By this light they have forgot their anger since,
And are as far in again as e're they were,
Which way the Devil came they, Haart I saw 'em not,
Their ways are beyond finding out. Come sweet Lady.

How must I take mine Sir?


Clean contrary, yours must be taken lying.


A Bed Sir?


A Bed, or where you will for your own ease,
Your Coach will serve.

The Physic must needs please.


Negatur argumentum Tutor.


Probo tibi Pupil, stultus non est animal rationale.


Faller is sane.


Quaso v^ taceas, probo tibi.


Quomodo proba^ domine.


Stultus non habet rationem, ergo non est animal rationale.


Sic argumentaris domine, stultus non habet rationem, ergo non est animal
rationale, negatur argumentum again Tutor


Argumentum itterum probo tibi domine, qui non participat de ratione nullo modo
potest vocari rationalibus, but stultus non participat de ratione, ergo stultus
nullo modo potest dicere rationalis


Participat.


Sic disputus, qui participat quomodo participat.


Vt homo, probabo tibi in silagismo.


Hunc proba.


Sic probo domine, stultus est homo sicut tu and ego sum, homo est animal
rationele, sicut stultus est animal rationale.


Here Is nothing but disputing all the day long with 'em.


Sic disputus, stultus est homo sicut tu and ego sum homo est animal rationale,
sicut stultus est animal rationale.


Your reasons are both good what e're they be
Pray give them over, faith you will tire your selves,
What Is the matter between you?

Nothing but reasoning about a Fool Mother.


About a Fool Son, alas what need you trouble your heads about that, none of
us all but knows what a Fool is


Why what is a Fool Mother?
I come to you now.

Why one that is married before he has wit.


It Is pretty I faith, and well guest of a Woman never brought up at the
University: but bring forth what Fool you will Mother, I Will prove him to be
as reasonable a Creature, as my self or my Tutor here


Fie it is impossible.


Nay he shall do it forsooth.


It Is the easiest thing to prove a Fool by Logic,
By Logic I Will prove any thing.

What thou will not?


I Will prove a Whore to be an honest Woman.


Nay by my faith, she must prove that her self, or Logic will never do it.


'Twill do it I tell you.


Some in this Street would give a thousand pounds that you could prove their
Wives so


Faith I can, and all their Daughters too, though they had three Bastards. When
comes your Tailor hither


Why what of him?


By Logic I Will prove him to be a Man,
Let him come when he will.

How hard at first was Learning to him? Truly
Sir I thought he would never a took the Latin Tongue.
How many Accidences do you think he wore out e're he came to his Grammar?

Some three or four.


Believe me Sir some four and thirty.


Pish I made haberdins of 'em in Church porches


He was eight years in his Grammar, and stuck horribly at a foolish place
there called Ass in presenti


Pox I have it here now.


He so shamed me once before an honest Gentleman that knew me when I was a Maid


These women must have all out.


Quidest Gramatica? Says the Gentleman to him (I shall remember by a sweet
sweet token) but nothing could he answer


How now Pupil, ha, Quid est Gramatica?


Grammatica? Ha, ha, ha.


Nay do not laugh Son, but let me hear you say it now: There was one word
went so prettily off the Gentleman's tongue, I shall remember it the longest day
of my life


Come, Quid est Gramatica?


Are you not ashamed Tutor, Gramatica? Why Recte scribendi atque loquendi ars,
ser-reuerence of my Mother


That was it I faith: Why now Son I see you are a deep Scholar: And Mr
Tutor a word I pray, let us withdraw a little into my Husbands Chamber, I Will
send in the North Wales Gentlewoman to him, she looks for wooing: I Will put
together both, and lock the Door


I give great approbation to your conclusion.


I mar'le what this Gentlewoman should be,
That I should have in marriage, she is a stranger to me:
I wonder what my Parents mean I faith,
To match me with a stranger so:
A Maid that is neither kiss nor kin to me:
Life do they think I have no more care of my Body,
Then to lie with one that I never knew,
A mere stranger,
One that never went to School with me neither,
Nor ever play-fellowes together,
They Are mightily o're-seene in it me thinks,
They say she has Mountains to her marriage,
She Is full of Cattle, some two thousand Runts,
Now what the meaning of these Runts should be,
My Tutor cannot tell me,
I have looked in Riders Dixcionarie for the Letter R,
And there I can hear no tidings of these Runts neither,
Unless they should be Rumford Hogs,
I know them not,
And here she comes,
If I know what to say to her now
In the way of marriage, I Am no Graduate,
Me thinks I faith it is bouldly done of her
To come into my Chamber being but a stranger,
She shall not say I Am so proud yet, but I Will speak to her,
Marry as I will order it,
She shall take no hold of my words I Will warrant her,
She looks and makes a coursey,
Salve tu quoque puella puleherima,
Quid vis nescio nec sane curo,
Tully's own phrase to a Heart.

I know not what he means,
A Suitor quoth a?
I hold my life he understands no English.

Ferter me hercule tu virgo,
Wallia vt opibus abundis maximis.

What Is this fertur and abundundis?
He mockes me sure, and calls me a bundle of Farts.

I have no Latin word now for their Runts, I Will make some shift or other:
Itterum dico opibus abundat maximis montibus and fontibus and vt ita dicam
Rontibus, attamen vero homauculus ego sum natura simule art bachalarius lecto
profecto non parata


This is most strange, may be he can speak Welsh,
Auedera whee comrage, der due cog foginis.

Cog foggin, I scorn to cog with her, I Will tell her so too in a word near her
own Language: Ego non cogo


Rhegosin a whiggin harle ron corid ambre.


By my faith she is a good scholar, I see that already
She has the Tongues plain, I hold my life she has traueld,
What will folks say? There goes the learned couple,
Faith if the truth were known, she has proceeded.

How now, how speeds your business?


I Am glad my Mothers come to part us.


How do you agree forsooth?


As well as e're we did before we met.


How Is that?


You put me to a Man I understand not,
Your Sonne's no English Man me thinks.

No English Man, bless my Boy,
And borne in the Heart of London?

I have been long enough in the chamber with him,
And I find neither Welsh nor English in him.

Why Tim, how have you used the Gentlewoman?


As well as a Man might do Mother, in modest Latin.


Latin Fool?


And she recoyl'd in Hebrew.


In Hebrew Fool? It Is Welsh.


All comes to one Mother.


She can speak English too.


Who told me so much?
Heart and she can speak English, I Will clap to her,
I thought you would marry me to a stranger.

You must forgive him, he is so inured to Latin,
He and his Tutor, that he has quite forgot
To use the Protestant tongue.

It Is quickly pardoned forsooth.


Tim make amends and kiss her,
He makes toward you forsooth.

O delicious, one may discover her Country by her kissing, It Is a true saying,
there is nothing tastes so sweet as your Welsh Mutton: It was reported you could
sing


O rarely Tim, the sweetest British Songs.


And it is my mind I swear before I marry,
I would see all my Wives good parts at once,
To view how rich I were.

Thou shall here sweet Music Tim.
Pray forsooth.

CUPID is VENUS only Joy,
But he is a wanton Boy,
A very very wanton Boy,
He shoots at Ladies naked Breasts,
He is the cause of most Men's Crests,
I mean upon the Forehead,
Invisible but horrid,
'Twas he first taught upon the way,
To keep a Ladies Lips in play.
Why should not VENUS chide her Son,
For the prankes that he has done,
The wanton prankes that he has done?
He shoots his Fiery Darts so thick,
They hurt poor Ladies to the quick,
Ah me, with cruel wounding,
His Darts are so confounding,
That life and sense would soon decay,
But that he keeps their Lips in play.
Can there be any part of bliss,
In a quickly fleeting kiss,
A quickly fleeting kiss,
To ones pleasure, leasures are but wast,
The slowest kiss makes too much have,
And loose it ere we find it,
The pleasing sport they only know,
That cloase above and cloase below.
I would not change my wife for a Kingdom,
I can do somewhat too in my own Lodging.

Why well said Tim, the Bells go merrily,
I love such peales alife, wife lead them in a while,
Here Is a strange Gentleman desires private conference.
You Are welcome Sir, the more for your names sake.
Good Mr Yellowhammer, I love my name well,
And which a'the Yellowhammers take you descent from,
If I may be so bold with you, which I pray?

The Yellowhammers in Oxfordshiere,
Near Abbington.

And those are the best Yellowhammers, and truest bred: I came from thence my
self, though now a Citizen: I Will be bold with you, You are most welcome


I hope the zeal I bring with me shall deserve it.


I hope no less, what is your will Sir?


I understand by rumors, you have a Daughter,
Which my bold love shall henceforth title cosen.

I thank you for her Sir.


I heard of her virtues, and other confirmed graces.


A plaguey Girl Sir.


Fame sets her out with richer ornaments,
Then you are pleased to boast of, It Is done modestly,
I hear she is toward marriage.

You hear truth Sir.


And with a Knight in Town, Sr Walter Whorehound.


The very same Sir.


I am the sorrier for it.


The sorrier, Why cosen?


It Is not too far past is it? It may be yet recal'd?


Recal'd, why good Sir?


Resolve me in that point ye shall hear from me.


There Is no Contract past.


I am very joyful Sir.


But he is the Man must bed her.


By no means cus, she is quite undone then,
And you will curse the time that e're you made the match,
He Is an arrant whoremaster, consumes his time and state, -- whom in my
knowledge he has kept this 7 years
Nay cus, an other Man's Wife too.

O ahbominable!


Maintains the whole house, apparels the husband,
Pays servants wadges, not so much, but --

Worse and worse, and does the husband know this?


Knows? I and glad he may too, it is his living,
As other Trades thrive, Butchers by selling Flesh,
Poulters by venting Connies, or the like cous.

What an incomparable Witall's this?


Tush, what cares he for that?
Believe me cous, no more then I do.

What a base Slave is that?


All Is one to him, he feeds and takes his ease,
Was never the Man that ever broake his sleep,
To get a Child yet by his own confession,
And yet his Wife has seven.

What, by Sr Walter?


Sr Walter's like to keep 'em, and maintain 'em,
In excellent fashion, he dares do no less Sir.

Life has he Children too?


Children? Boys thus high,
In their Cato and Cordelius.

What you jest Sir?


Why, one can make a Verse,
And is now at Eaton College.

O this news has cut into my Heart cous.


It had eaten nearer if it had not been prevented.
One Allwit's Wife.

Allwit? 'Foot I have heard of him,
He had a Girl Kursned lately?

I that work did cost the Knight above a hundred mark.


I Will mark him for a Knave and Villain for it,
A thousand thanks and blessings, I have done with him.

Ha, ha, ha, this Knight will stick by my ribs still,
I shall not loose him yet, no Wife will come,
Where e're he woos, I find him still at home, Ha, ha,

Well grant all this, say now his deeds are black,
Pray what serves marriage, but to call him back,
I have kept a Whore my self, and had a Bastard,
By Mris Anne, in Anno
I care not who knows it, he is now a jolly fellow,
H'as been twice Warden, so may his fruit be,
They were but base begot, and so was he,
The Knight is rich, he shall be my Sonne-in-Law,
No matter so the Whore he keeps be wholesome,
My Daughter takes no hurt then, so let them wed,
I Will have him sweat well e're they go to Bed.

O Husband, Husband.


How now Maudline?


We are all undone, she is gone, she is gone.


Again, Death which way?


Over the Houses:
Lay the Waterside, she is gone for ever else.

O ventrous Baggage!


Thieves, Thieves, my Sister's stolen,
Some Thief has got her:
O how myraculously did my Fathers Plate escape,
'Twas all left out Tutor.

Is It possible?


Besides three chains of Pearl and a Box of Curral.
My Sister's gone, let us look at Trig-staires for her,
My Mother's gone to lay the Common-staires,
At Puddle-wharfe, and at the Docke below,
Stands my poor silly Father, Run sweet Tutor, run.

I had been taken Brother by eight Sergeants,
But for the honest Watermen, I am bound to them,
They are the most requiteful'st people living,
For as they get their means by Gentlemen,
They are still the forwardest to help Gentlemen,
You heard how one escaped out of the Blacke-Fryers,
But a while since from two or three Varlets
Came into the House with all their Rapiers drawn,
As if they would dance the Sword-dance on the Stage,
With Candles in their Hands like Chandlers Ghosts,
Whilst the poor Gentleman so pursued and banded,
Was by an honest pair of Oars safely landed.

I love them with my Heart for it.


Your first Man Sir.


Shall I carry you Gentlemen with a pair of Oars?


These be the honest Fellows,
Take one pair, and leave the rest for her.

Barne-Elmes.


No more Brother.


Your first man.


Shall I carry your Worship?


Go, and you honest watermen that stay,
Here Is a French-crowne for you,
There comes a Maid with all speed to take water,
Row her lustily to Barne-Elmes after me.

To Barne-Elmes, good Sir: make ready the boat Sam,
We Will wait below.

What made you stay so long?


I found the way more dangerous then I looked for.


Away quick, there is a Boat waits for you,
And I Will take water at Pauls-wharfe, and ouer-take you.

Good Sir do, we cannot be too safe.


Life, call you this close keeping?


She was kept under a double lock.


A double Devil.


That Is a buffe Serieant Tutor, he will never were out.


How would you have Women locked?


With Padlockes Father, the Venetian uses it,
My Tutor reads it.

Heart, if she were so locked up, how got she out?


There was a little hole looked into the gutter,
But who would have drempt of that?

A wiser Man would.


He says true Father, a wise man for love will seek every hole: my Tutor
knows it


Verum poeta dicit.


Dicit Virgillius Father.


Prithee talk of thy Gills some-where else, she is played the Gill with me:
where is your wise Mother now


Run mad I think, I thought she would have drowned her self, she would not
stay for Oars, but took a Smelt-boat: sure I think she be gone a fishing for
her


She Will catch a goodly dish of Gudgeons now,
Will serve us all to Supper.

I Will tug thee home by the Hair.


Good Mistress spare her.


Tend your own business.


You are a cruel Mother.


O my Heart dies!


I Will make thee an example for all the Neighbors Daughters.


Farewell life.


You that have tricks can counterfeit.


Hold, hold Maudline.


I have brought your Jewel by the Hair.


She Is here Knight.


Forbear or I Will grow worse.


Look on her Tutor, she has brought her from the Water like a Mermayd, she is
but half my Sister now, as far as the Flesh goes, the rest may be sold to
Fishwiues


Desembling cunning baggage.


Impudent Strumpet.


Either give over both, or I Will give over:
Why have you used me thus unkind Mistress?
Wherein have I deserved?

You talk too fondly Sir, we will take another course and prevent all, we might
have don't long since, we will loose no time now, nor trust to it any longer, to
morrow morn as early as Sun rise we will have you joined


O bring me Death to night, Love pitying Fates,
Let me not see to morrow up upon the World.

Are you content Sir, till then she shall be watch't?


Baggage you shall.


Why Father, my Tutor and I will both watch in Armor.


How shall we do for Weapons?


Take you no care for that, if need be I can send for conquering metal Tutor,
never lost day yet, it is but at Westminster, I am acquainted with him that
keeps the Monuments, I can borrow Harry the Fifth's Sword, 'twill serve us
both to watch with


I never was so near my wish, as this chance
Makes me, ere to morrow noone,
I shall receive two thousand pound in Gold,
And a sweet Mayden-head
Worth forty.

O thy news splits me.


Half drowned, she cruelly tug'd her by the Hair,
Forced her disgracefully, not like a Mother.

Enough, leave me like my Joys,
Sir saw you not a wretched Maid pass this way?
Heart Villain, is it thou?

Yes Slave, it is I.


I must break through thee then, there is no stop
That checkes my Tongue, and all my hopeful fortunes,
That Breast excepted, and I must have way.

Sir I believe 'twill hold your life in play.


Sir you will gain the Heart in my Breast at first?


There is no dealing then, think on the Dowry for two thousand pounds.


O now it is quit Sir.


And being of even hand, I Will play no longer.


No longer Slave?


I have certain things to think on,
Before I dare go further.

But one bout?
I Will follow thee to death, but have it out.

A misery of a House.


What shall become of us?


I think his wound be mortal.


Think thou so Dauy?
Then am I mortal too, but a dead Man Dauy,
This is no world for me, when e're he goes,
I must e'ne trusse up all, and after him Dauy,
A Sheet with two knots, and away.

O see Sir,
How faint he goes, two of my Fellows lead him.

O me!


Hyday, my wife's laid down too, here is like to be
A good House kept, when we are altogether down,
Take pains with her good Dauy, cheer her up there,
Let me come to his Worship, let me come.

Touch me not Villain, my wound aches at thee,
Thou poison to my Heart.

He raues already,
His senses are quite gone, he knows me not,
Look up an't like your Worship, heave those Eyes,
Call me to mind, is your remembrance lost?
Look in my face, who am I an't like your Worship?

If any thing be worse then Slave or Villain,
Thou art the Man.

Alas his poor Worships weakness,
He will begin to know me by little and little.

No Devil can be like thee.


Ah poor Gentleman,
Me thinks the pain that thou endurest.

Thou know me to be wicked for thy baseness
Kept the Eyes open still on all my sins,
None knew the dear account my soul stood charged with
So well as thou, yet like Hels flattering Angel,
Would never tell me an't, let'st me go on,
And join with Death in sleep, that if I had not wak't
Now by chance, even by a strangers pity,
I had everlastingly slept out all hope
Of grace and mercy.

Now he is worse and worse,
Wife, to him wife, thou wast wont to do good on him.

How is it with you Sir?


Not as with you,
Thou loathsome strumpet: some good pitying Man
Remove my sins out of my sight a little,
I tremble to behold her, she keeps back
All comfort while she stays, is this a time,
Unconscionable Woman, to see thee,
Art thou so cruel to the peace of Man,
Not to give liberty now, the Devil himself
Shows a far fairer reverence and respect
To goodness then thy self, he dares not do this,
But part in time of penitence, hides his Face,
When Man with-drawes from him, he leaves the place,
Have thou less manners, and more impudence,
Then thy instructor, prithee show thy modesty,
If the least grain be left, and get thee from me,
Thou should be rather locked many Rooms hence,
From the poor miserable sight of me*
If either love or grace had part in thee.

He is lost for ever.


Run sweet Dauy quickly,
And fetch the Children hither, sight of them,
Will make him cheerful straight.

O Death! Is this
A place for you to weep? What tears are those?
Get you away with them, I shall fare the worse,
As long as they are a weeping, they work against me,
There Is nothing but thy appetite in that sorrow,
Thou weep'st for Lust, I feel it in the slacknesse
Of comforts coming toward me,
I was well till thou began'st to undo me,
This shows like the fruitless sorrow of a careless mother
That brings her Son with dalliance to the Gallows,
And then stands by, and weeps to see him suffer.

There are the children Sir, an't like your worship,
Your last fine Girl, in troth she smiles,
Look, look, in faith Sir.

O my vengeance, let me for ever hide my cursed Face
From sight of those that darkens all my hopes,
And stands between me and the sight of Heaven,
Who sees me now, ho to and those so near me,
May rightly say, I am o're-growne with sin,
O how my offenses wrestle with my repentance,
It has scarce breath,
Still my adulterous guilt houers aloft,
And with her black Wings beats down all my prayers.
Ere they be half way up, what is he knows now,
How long I have to live? o what comes then,
My taste grows bitter, the round World, all Gall now,
Her pleasing pleasures now has poisoned me,
Which I exchanged my Soul for,
Make way a hundred sighs at once for me.

Speak to him Nicke.


I dare not, I am afraid.


Tell him he hurts his wounds Wat, with making moan.


Wretched, death of seven.


Come let us be talking somewhat to keep him alive
Ah sira Wat, and did my Lord bestow that Jewel on thee,
For an Epistle thou made in Latin,
Thou art a good forward Boy, there is great joy on thee.

O sorrow!


Heart will nothing comfort him?
If he be so far gone, it is time to moan,
Here Is Pen, and Incke, and Paper, and all things ready,
Will It please your Worship for to make your Will?

My Will? Yes, yes, what else? Who writes apace now?


That can your man Dauy an't like your Worship,
A fair, fast, legible Hand.

Set it down then:
Inprimis, I bequeath to yonder Witall,
Three times his weight in Curses,

How?


All Plagues of Body and of Mind,


Write them not down Dauy.


It is his Will, I must.


Together also,
With such a Sickness, ten days ere his Death.

There Is a sweet Legacy,
I am almost choked with it.

Next I bequeath to that foul whore his Wife,
All barrenness of Joy, a drouth of Virtue,
And dearth of all repentance: For her end,
The common misery of an English Strumpet,
In French and Duch, beholding ere she dies
Confusion of her Brats before her Eyes,
And never shed a tear for it.

Where Is the Knight?
O Sir, the Gentleman you wounded, is newly departed.

Dead? Lift, lift, Who helps me?


Let the Law lift you now, that must have all,
I have done lifting on you, and my Wife too.

You were best lock your self close.


Not in my House Sir,
I Will harbor no such persons as Men-slayers,
Lock your self where you will.

What Is this?


Why Husband.


I know what I do Wife.


You cannot tell yet,
For having killed the Man in his defense,
Neither his Life, nor estate will be touched Husband.

Away Wife, hear a Fool, his Lands will hang him.


Am I denied a Chamber?
What say you forsooth?

Alas Sir, I am one that would have all well,
But must obey my Husband. Prithee Love
Let the poor Gentleman stay, being so sore wounded,
There Is a close Chamber at one end of the Garret
We never use, let him have that I prithee.

We never use, you forget sickness then,
And Physic times: Is It not a place for easement?

O Death! do I hear this with part
Of former life in me? What Is the news now?

Troth worse and worse, you are like to lose your land
If the Law save your life Sir, or the Surgeon.

Hark you there Wife.


Why how Sir?


Sr Oliver Kixes Wife is new quickened,
That Child undoes you Sir.

All ill at once.


I wonder what he makes here with his consorts?
Cannot our House be private to our selves,
But we must have such Guests? I pray depart Sirs,
And take your Murderer along with you,
Good he were apprehended ere he go,
H'as killed some honest Gentleman, send for Officers.

I Will soon save you that labor.


I must tell you Sir,
You have been somewhat boulder in my House,
Then I could well like of, I suffered you
Till it stuck here at my Heart, I tell you truly
I thought you had been familiar with my Wife once.

With me? I Will see him hanged first, I defy him,
And all such Gentlemen in the like extremity.

If ever Eyes were open, these are they,
Gamsters farewell, I have nothing left to play.

And therefore get you gone Sir.


Of all Wittalles,
Be thou the Head. Thou the grand whore of Spittles.

So, since he is like now to be rid of all,
I am right glad, I am so well rid of him.

I knew he durst not stay, when you named Officers


That stopped his Spirits straight,
What shall we do now Wife?

As we were wont to do.


We are richly furnished wife, with Household Stuff


Let Us let out Lodgings then,
And take a House in the Strand.

In troth a match Wench:
We are simply stock't, with Cloth of Tissue Cussions,
To furnish out bay-windows: Push, what not that is queint
And costly, from the top to the bottom:
Life, for Furniture, we may lodge a Countess:
There Is a Cloase-stoole of tawny Velvet too,
Now I think on it Wife.

There Is that should be Sir,
Your Nose must be in every thing.

I have done Wench,
And let this stand in every Gallants Chamber,
There Is no Gamster like a politic sinner,
For who e're games, the Box is sure a winner.

O Husband, husband, she will dye, she will dye
There is no sign but death.

'Twill be our shame then.


O how she is changed in compass of an hour:


Ah my poor girl! good faith thou were too cruel
To dragge her by the Hair.

You would have done as much Sir,
To curb her of her humor.

It Is curbed sweetly, she caught her bane o'th water.


How now Tim.


Faith busy Mother about an Epitaph,
Upon my Sisters death.

Death! She is not dead I hope?


No: but she means to be, and that is as good,
And when a thing's done, it is done,
You taught me that Mother.

What is your Tutor doing?


Making one too, in principal pure Latin,
Cul'd out of Ovid de Tristibus.

How does your Sister look, is she not changed?


Changed? Gold into white Money was never so changed,
As is my Sisters color into palenesse.

O here she is brought, see how she looks like death


Looks she like Death, and never a word made yet,
I must go beat my Brains against a Bed-post,
And get before my Tutor.

Speak, how do thou?


I hope I shall be well, for I am as sick at Heart,
As I can be.

Alas my poor Girl,
The Doctor's making a most sovereign drink for thee,
The worst Ingredience, dissolved Pearl and Amber,
We spare no cost Girl.

Your love comes to late,
Yet timely thanks reward it: What is comfort,
When the poor Patients Heart is past relief?
It is no Doctors Art can cure my grief.

All is cast away then,
Prithee look upon me cheerfully.

Sing but a strain or two, thou will not think
How 'twill revive thy Spirits: strive with thy fit,
Prithee sweet Moll.

You shall have my good will Mother.


Why well said Wench.


Weep Eyes, break Heart,
My Love and I must part,
Cruel Fates, trew-loue do soonest sever,
O, I shall see thee, never, never, never.
O happy is the Maid, whose life takes end,
Ere it knows Parents frown, or loss of friend.
Weep Eyes, break Heart,
My Love and I must part.
O, I could die with Music: well sung Girl.


If you call it so, It was.


She plays the Swan, and sings her self to death.


By your leave Sir.


What are you Sir? Or what is your business pray?


I may be now admitted, tho the Brother
Of him your hate pursude, it spreads no further,
Your malice sets in death, does it not Sir?

In Death?


He Is dead: 'twas a dear Love to him,
It cost him but his life, that was all Sir:
He paid enough, poor Gentleman, for his Love.

There Is all our ill removed, if she were well now:
Impute not Sir, his end to any hate
That sprung from us, he had a fair wound brought that.

That helped him forward, I must needs confess:
But the restraint of Love, and your unkindness,
Those were the wounds, that from his Heart drew Blood,
But being past help, let words forget it too:
Scarcely three Minutes, ere his Eyelids closed,
And took eternal leave of this Worlds light,
He wrote this Letter, which by Oath he bound me,
To give to her own Hands, that is all my business.

You may perform it then, there she sits.


O with a following look.


I trust me Sir, I think she will follow him quickly.


Here Is some Gold,
He wil'd me to distribute faithfully amongst your Servants.

Alas what does he mean Sir?


How cheer you Mistress?


I must learn of you Sir.


Here Is a Letter from a Friend of yours,
And where that fayles, in satisfaction
I have a sad Tongue ready to supply.

How does he, ere I look on it?


Seldom better, h'as a contented health now.


I am most glad on it.


Dead Sir?


He is: Now Wife let us but get the Gerle
Upon her Legs again, and to Church roundly with her.

O sick to Death he tells me:
How does he after this?

Faith feels no pain at all, he is dead sweet Mistress.


Peace close mine Eyes.


The Girl, look to the Girl Wife.


Moll, Daughter, sweet Girl speak,
Look but once up, thou shall have all the wishes of thy heart
That wealth can purchase.

O she is gone for ever, that Letter broake her heart.


As good now then, as let here lie in torment,
And then break it.

O Susan, she thou louedst so dear, is gone.


O sweet Maid!


This is she that helped her still,
I Have a reward here for thee

Take her in,
Remove her from our sight, our shame, and sorrow.

Stay, let me help thee, it is the last cold kindness
I can perform for my sweet Brothers sake.

All the whole Street will hate us, and the World
Point me out cruel: It is our best course Wife,
After we have given order for the Funeral,
To absent our selves, till she be laid in ground.

Where shall we spend that time?


I Will tell thee where Wench, go to some private Church,
And marry Tim to the rich Brecknocke Gentlewoman.

Mass a match,
We Will not loose all at once, somewhat we will catch.

Ho my Wives quickened, I am a Man for ever,
I think I have bestur'd my stumps I faith:
Run, get your Fellows altogether instantly,
Then to the Parish Church, and ring the Belles.

It shall be done Sir.


Upon my love I charge you Villain, that you make a Bon-fier before the Door
at night


A Bon-fier Sir?


A thwacking one I charge you.


This is monstrous.


Run, tell a hundred pound out for the Gentleman
That gave my Wife the Drink, the first thing you do.

A hundred pounds Sir?


A bargain, as our joys grows,
We must remember still from whence it flows,
Or else we prove ungrateful multiplyers:
The Child is coming, and the Land comes after,
The news of this will make a poor Sr Walter.
I have struck it home I faith.

That you have marry Sir.
But will not your Worship go to the Funeral
Of both these Lovers?

Both, go both together?


I Sir, the Gentleman's Brother will have it so,
'Twill be the pittifullest sight, there is such running,
Such rumors, and such throngs, a pair of Lovers
Had never more spectators, more Men's pitties,
Or Women's wet Eyes.

My Wife helps the number then?


There Is such drawing out of Handkerchers,
And those that have no Handkerchers, lift up Aprons.

Her Parents may have joyful Hearts at this,
I would not have my cruelty so talked on,
To any Child of mine, for a Monopoly.

I believe you Sir.
It Is cast so too, that both their Coffins meet,
Which will be lamentable.

Come, we will see it.


Never could Death boast of a richer prize
From the first Parent, let the World bring forth
A pair of truer Hearts, to speak but truth
Of this departed Gentleman, in a Brother,
Might by hard censure, be called flattery,
Which makes me rather, silent in his right,
Then so to be delivered to the thoughts,
Of any envious hearer, starved in virtue,
And therefore pining to hear others thrive.
But for this Maid, whom Envy cannot hurt
With all her Poisons, having left to Ages,
The true, chaste Monument of her living name,
Which no time can deface, I say of her
The full truth freely, without fear of censure
What Nature could there shine, that might redeem
Perfection home to Woman, but in her
Was fully glorious, beauty set in goodness
Speaks what she was, that Jewel so infixt,
There was no want of any thing of life,
To make these virtuous presidents, Man and Wife.

Great pity of their deaths.


Never more pity.


It makes a hundred weeping Eyes, sweet Gossip.


I cannot think, there is any one amongst you,
In this full fair assembly, Maid, Man, or Wife,
Whose Heart would not have sprung with joy and gladness
To have seen their marriage day?

It would have made a thousand joyful Hearts.


Up then a pace, and take your fortunes,
Make these joyful Hearts, here is none but Friends.

Alive Sir? o sweet dear Couple.


Nay, do not hinder 'em now, stand from about 'em,
If she be caught again, and have this time,
I Will nere plot further for 'em, nor this honest chambermaid
That helped all at a push.

Good Sir a pace.


Hands join now, but Hearts for ever,
Which no Parents mood shall sever.
You shall forsake all Widows, Wives, and Mayds:
You, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Men of Trades:
And if in have, any Article misses,
Go inter-line it with a brace of kisses.

Here Is a thing trould nimbly. Give you joy brother
Were It not better thou should have her,
Then the Maid should dye?

To you sweet Mistress Bride.


Joy, joy to you both.


Here be your Wedding Sheets you brought along with you, you may both go to
Bed when you please too


My joy wants utterance.


Utter all at night then Brother.


I am silent with delight.


Sister, delight will silence any Woman,
But you will find your Tongue again, among Maid Servants,
Now you keep House, Sister.

Never was hour, so filled with joy and wonder.


To tell you the full story of this Chamber-Mayd,
And of her kindness in this business to us,
'Twould ask an hours discourse: In brief 'twas she,
That wrought it to this purpose cunningly.

We shall all love her for it.


See who comes here now.


A storm, a storm, but we are sheltred for it.


I will prevent you all, and mock you thus,
You, and your expectations, I stand happy,
Both in your lives, and your Hearts combination.

Here Is a strange day again.


The Knights proved Villain,
All Is come out now, his Niece an arrant Baggage,
My poor Boy Tim, is cast away this morning,
Even before Breakefast: Married a Whore
Next to his Heart.

A Whore?


His Niece forsooth.


I think we rid our Hands in good time of him.


I knew he was past the best, when I gave him over.
What is become of him pray Sir?

Who the Knight? he lies in the Knights ward now.
Your Belly Lady begins to blossom, there is no peace for him
His Creditors are so greedy.

Mr Tuchwood, hear'st thou this news?
I am so indeer'd to thee for my Wives fruitfulness,
That I charge you both, your Wife and thee,
To live no more asunder for the Worlds frowns,
I have Purse, and Bed, and Board for you:
Be not afraid to go to your business roundly,
Get Children, and I Will keep them.

Say you so Sir?


Prove me, with three at a birth, and thou dare now.


Take heed how you dare a Man, while you live Sir
That has good skill at his Weapon.

'Foot, I dare you Sir.


Look Gentlemen, if ever you say the picture
Of the unfortunate Marriage, yonder it is.

Nay good sweet Tim.


Come from the University,
To marry a Whore in London, with my Tutor too?
O Tempora! O Mors!

Prithee Tim be pacient.


I bought a Jade at Cambridge,
I'e let her out to execution Tutor,
For eighteen pence a day, or Brainford Horse-races,
She Will serve to carry seven Miles out of Town well.
Where be these Mountains? I was promised Mountains,
But there is such a Mist, I can see none of 'em.
What are become of those two thousand Runts?
Let Us have about with them in the mean time.
A Vengeance Runt thee.

Good sweet Tim have patience.


Flectere si neguro Superos Acherouta mourbo, mother


I think you have married her in Logic Tim.
You told me once, by Logic you would prove
A Whore, an honest Woman, prove her so Tim
And take her for thy labor.

Troth I thank you.
I grant you I may prove another Man's Wife so,
But not mine own.

There Is no remedy now Tim,
You must prove her so as well as you may.

Why then my Tutor and I will about her,
As well as we can.
Vxor non est Meritrix, ergo falacis.

Sir if your Logic cannot prove me honest,
There Is a thing called Marriage, and that makes me honest.

O there is a trick beyond your Logic Tim.


I perceive then a Woman may be honest according to the English Print, when she
is a Whore in the Latin
So much for Marriage and Logic. I Will love her for her Wit, I Will pick out my
Runts there: And for my Mountains, I Will mount upon --

So Fortune seldom deals two Marriages
With one Hand, and both lucky: The best is,
One Feast will serve them both: Marry for room,
I Will have the Dinner kept in Gold-Smithes-Hall,
To which kind Gallants, I inuit you all.


