I Have seen the old year fairly buried,
Good Gentleman he was, but toward his end
Full of Diseases, he kept no good Diet,
He Loved a wench in June, (which we' count Vilde,
And got the latter end of May with child;
That was his fault, and many an old year smells on it.
How now? who is it is? oh, one ath' Fasting-dayes
That followed him to his grave;
I know him by his gauntnes, his thin chitterlings,
He would undo a Tripe-wise; Fasting-day!
Why art so heavy?

Oh, sweet Doctor Almanacke,
I have lost a dear old Master, beside Sir,
I have been out of service, all this Kersmas;
Nobody minds Fasting day, I have scarce bin thought upon a' Friday nights;
And because Kersmas this year fell upon it,
The Frydayes have been ever since so proud
They scorn my company, the Butchers boys
At Temple-Barre, set their great Dogs upon me,
I dare not walk abroad, nor be seen yet,
The very Poulters Girls throw rotten Eggs at me,
Nay Fishstreete loves me, even but from teeth outward,
(The nearest Kin I have) looks shye upon me,
As if t'ad forgot me, I met Plumporridge now,
My big-swolne Enemy, he is plumpe and lusty,
The only man in place, sweet Master Doctor,
Prefer me to the New-Yeere, you can do it.

When can I do it sir? you must stay til Lent.


Till Lent, you kill my heart, sweet M. Doctor, Thrust me into Candlemas Eve, I
do beseech you


Away, Candlemas Eve will never bear thee in these days, it is so frampole,
the Puritanes will never yield to it


Why they are fat enough.


Here comes Plumporridge.


I, he is sure of wel-come; me thinks he moves like one of the great Porridge
Tubs, going to the Counter


Oh killing cruel sight, yonder is a Fasting day: A lean spinie Rascal with a
Dog in's belly, his very Bowels bark with hunger; auaunt, thy Breath
stinkes, I do not love to meet thee fasting, thou art nothing but wind, thy
Stomack's full of Farts, as if they had lost their way, and thou made with the
wrong end upward, like a Dutch Mawe, that discharges still into 'th Mouth


Why thou whoreson Breakefast, Dinner, Nuntions, Supper and Beuer, Celler, Hall,
Kitchen, and Wet-larder


Sweet Master Doctor, look quickly upon his Water, that I may break the
Vrinall about his pate


Nay friendship, friendship.


Never Master Doctor, with any Fastingday, persuade me not.


Nor any thing belongs to Ember-weeke.
And if I take against a thing, I Am stomackfull,
I was borne an Anabaptist, a fell foe,
To fish and Fridayes, Pig's my absolute Sweetheart.
And shall I wrong my Love, and cleave to Saltfish!
Commit adultery with an Egg and Butter?
Well setting this apart, whose water's this sir?


On, thereby hangs a tale, my M. Kersmasses.
It is his water, sir, he is drawing on.

Kersmas? why let me see,
I saw him very lusty a Twelfe-night.

I, that is true, sir, but then he took his bane,
With choosing King and Queen;
Has made his Will already, here is the Copy.

And what has he given away, let me see, Plumbroth.


He could not give away much, sir, his children have so consumed him before
hand


IN primis I give and bequeath to my second Son In, and In; his perpetual
Lodging in the Kingsbench, and his Ordinary out of the Basket



A sweet allowance for a second brother.


Item, I give to my youngest Sons Gleeke and Priministe, the full consuming of
Nights and Days, and Wives and Children, together with one secret gift, that
is, never to give over, while they have a penny

And if e're they do, I Will be hanged.


For the possession of all my Lands, Manors, Mannor-houses, I leave them full
and wholly to my eldest Son, Noddie, whom during his minority, I commit to
the custody of a pair of Knaves and one and thirty

There Is Knaves enough a conscience to coozen one Fool.


Item, I give to my eldest Daughter, Tickle me quickly, and to her sister my
Ladies Hole, free leave to shift for themselves, either in Court, City, or
Country

We thank him heartily.


Item, I leave to their old Aunt, my Sow h'as Pigd, a Litter of Curtizans to
breed up for Shroue-tide

They will be good ware in Lent, when flesh is forbid by Proclamation.


Item, I give to my Nephew Gambols, commonly called by the name of Kersmas
Gambols, all my Cattle, Horse and Mare, but let him shoe 'em himself

I have seen him shoe the Mare forty times over.


Also, I bequeath to my Coozen-Germane Wassel-Bowle, borne of Dutch Parents,
the Privilege of a free Denizen, that is, to be drunk with Scotch-Ale, or
English-Beere: and lastly, I have given by word of mouth, to poor Blind man
Buffe, a flap with a Foxetayle

I, so h'as given 'em all for ought I see. But now what think you of his
Water, sir


Well he may linger out till Candlemas: But never recover it.


Would he were gone once, I should be more respected.


Here Is New-yeere?


I have never a gift to give him, I Will be gone.


Mirth and a healthful time fill all your days. Look freshly, Sir.


I cannot, Master Doctor.
My fathers death sets the Spring backward i am.
For joy and comfort yet, I Am now between
Sorrow and joy, the Winter and the Spring.
And as Time gathers freshness in it is season,
No doubt Affects will be subdued with reason.

You Have a brave mind to work on, use my rules,
And you shall cut a Caper in November,
When other years your Grandfathers lay bedrid.

What Is he, that looks so piteously, and shakes so?


A Fasting-day?


How Is that?


A foolish Fasting-day,
An unseasonable cock scomb, seeks now for a service,
Has hunted up and down, has been at Court,
And the Long-Porter broke his head a'crosse there,
He had rather see the Devil, for this he says,
He never grew up so tall with Fasting-dayes,
I would not for the price of all my Almanacks;
The Guard had took him there, they would ha beat out his brains with
Bombards
I bade him stay till Lent, and now he whimpers;
He would to Rome forsooth, that is his last refuge,
But would try awhile,
How well he should be used in Lancashire.

He was my Fathers servant, That he was, sir.


It Is here upon Record.


I served him honestly, and cost him little.


I, I Will besworne for that.


Those were the Times, sir,
That made your Predecessors rich, and able
To lay up more for you, and since poor Fasting-daies
Were not made reckoning on, the pampered flesh
H'as plaide the knave, Maids have had fuller bellies,
Those meals that once were saved, have stird, and lept,
And begot Bastards, and they must be kept,
Better keep Fasting-dayes, your self may tell you,
And for the profit of purse, back and belly?

I never yet heard Truth better whin'de out.


Thou shall not al be lost, not for vainglorie
Greedily welcomed, we will begin with Virtue,
As we may hold with it, that does Virtue right,
Set him down, Sir, for Candlemas Eve at night.

Well, better late then never.
This is my comfort, I shall come to make
All the Fat Rogues go to bed supperlesse,
Get dinners where they can.

How now? what is he?


It Is old Time, Sir, that belongd To all your Predecessors.


Oh I honor
That Reverend Figure, may I ever think
How precious thou 'rt in youth, how rarely
Redeemed in Age.
Time Observe, you have Times service.
There Is all in brief.

Hah? Doctor? What are these?

Time The Rabble that I pity, these I have served too,
But few or none have ever observed me,
Amongst this dissolute Route, Candlemas day!
I Am sorry to see him so ill associated?

Why that is his cause of coming to complain,
Because Shrouetuesday this year dwells so near him.
But it is his place he cannot be removed.
You must be patient, Candlemas, and brook it.
This Rabble, Sir, Shrouetuesday, hungry Lent,
Ill May Day, Midsummer Eve, and the first Dogge-day,
Come to receive their places due by custom,
And that they build upon.

Giu'em their charge, and then admit'em.


I will do it in Cone.

Stand forth Shrouetuesday, one'a the silenc'st Bricke-Layers,
It Is in your charge to pull down Bawdyhouses,
To set your Tribe aworke, cause spoil in Shorditch,
And make a Dangerous Leake there, deface Turnbul,
And tickle Codpiece Row, ruin the Cockpit, the
Poor Players never thriud in it, a my Conscience some
Queen pist upon the first Brick;
For you, lean Lent, be sure you utter first
Your rotten Herrings and keep up your best
Till they be rotten, then there is no deceit
When they be all alike. You Ill-Mayday,
Be as unruly a Rascal as you may,
To stir up Deputy Double Diligence,
That comes perking forth with Halberts:
And for you Midsomer Eve, that watches warmest,
Be but sufficiently drunk, and you are well harnest,
You Dogday!

Woh.


A churlish maundring Rogue,
You must both beg and rob, curse and collogue,
In cooler Nights the Barn with Doxies fill,
In Harvest lie in Haycock with your Iill.
They have all their charge.

You have gin't at the wrong end,


To bid'em sin's the way to make them mend,
For what they are forbid, they run to headlong.
I have cast their Inclinations, now your service,
To draw fresh blood into your Mrs. cheeks, slaves!

What scornful looks the Abusiue Villains threw,
Upon the reverend form and face of Time!
Me thought it appeared sorry, and went angry.

It Is still your servant.


How now? what are these?


These are your Good Days, and your Bad Days, Sir,
Those your Indifferent days, nor good, nor bad.

But is here all?


A wonder there is so many.
How these broke loose, every one stops their passage,
And makes inquiry after 'em.
This Farmer will not cast his seed in the ground
Before he look in Bretnor, there he finds
Some word which he hugs happily, as, Ply the Box,
Make Hay betimes, It falls into thy Mouth.
A punctual Lady will not paint forsooth
Upon his Critical days, twill not hold well,
Nor a nice Citie-Wedlocke eat fresh Herring,
Nor Perriwinkles;
Although she long for both, if the word be that day,
Gape after Gudgins, or some fishing phrase.
A Scriueners Wife will not entreat the Mony-master
That lies in the house, and gets her Husbands children
To furnish a poor Gentleman's Extremes,
If she find, Nihil in a Bag, that morning,
And so of thousand follies, these suffice
To show you Good, Bad, and Indifferent Days,
And all have their Inscriptions, here is, Cock a Hoop,
This the Geere cottens, and this, Faint Heart, never*
These, noted Black for Badnesse, Rods in piss.
This, Post for Puddings, this Put up thy Pipes,
These black and white indifferently inclining
To both their natures, neither Full nor Fasting,
In Dock, out Nettle, -- Now to your motion,
Black Knaves, and white Knaves, and you parcel Rascals,
Two hypocritical party-colord Varlets,
That play o'both hands.

I see these pleasures of low Births and Natures,
Add little freshness to your cheeks, I pity you,
And can no longer now conceal from you,
Your happy Omen, Sir, Blessings draw near you,
I will disclose a Secret in Astrology,
By the sweet Industry of Harmony,
Your white and glorious friend;
Even very Deities have conspired, to grace
Your fair Inauguration, here I find it,
It Is clear in Art,
The minute, nay, the point of Time's ariu'd,
Me thinks the blessings touch you, now they are felt, Sir.

NEw-yeere, New-yeere! hark, harken to me,
I am sent down
To crown,
Thy wishes, with me,
Thy fair desires in Virtues Court are fil'de,
The goodness of thy thought,
This blessed work has wrought,
Time shall be reconcilde:
Thy Spring shall in all sweets abound,
Thy Summer shall be clear and sound,
Thy Autumn swell the Barn and Loft,
With Corn and fruits, ripe, sweet and soft,
And in thy Winter, when all go,
Thou shall depart as white as Snow.
Behold, behold, hark, harken to me,
Glories come down,
To crown
Thy wishes, with me,
Bright Heroes in lasting Honor spher'd
Virtues eternal Spring,
(By making Time their King.)
See, they are beyond Time reard.
Yet in their love to humane good,
In which estate themselves once stood,
They all descend to have their worth
Shine, to Imitation, forth:
And by their Motion, Light and Love,
To Show how after Times should move!



Move on, Move on, be still the same,
You Beauteous Sons of Brightness,
You add to Honor Spirit and Flame,
To Virtue, Grace, and Vhitenesse;
You, whose every little motion
May learn Strictness more Devotion,
Every Pace, of that high worth,
It treades a fair Example forth;
Quickens a Virtue, makes a Story,
To your own Heroic Glory.
May your three times thrice Blessed Number
Raise Merit from his Ancient S'umber;
Move on, Move on, etc.



SEe, whether Fate has lead you, (Lamps of Honor)
(Fog Goodness brings her own reward upon her)
Look, turn your Eyes, and then conclude, commending,
And say, you have lost no Worth by your Descending,
Behold a Heaven about you, Spheres more plenty,
There, for one Luna, here shines Ten,
And for one Venus, Twenty;
Then Heroes, double both your Fame and Light,
Each choose his Star, and full adorn this Night.


The Morning gray,
Bids, come away,
Every Lady should begin
To take her Chamber, for the Stars are in:
Live Long the Miracles of Times and Years,
Till with those Heroes, You sit fixed in Spheres.


