All Is gone! still you are a Gentleman, that is all; but a poor one, that is
nothing: What Milk brings thy Meadows forth now? where are thy goodly
Vp-lands and thy Downe-lands, all sunck into that little pit Lechery? why
should a Gallant pay but two shillings for his Ordnary that nourishes him, and
twenty times two for his Brothell that consumes him? but where is Long-acre? in
my Uncles conscience, which is 3. years voyage about; he that setts out upon
his conscience, nere finds the way home again, he is either swallowed in the
quicksands of Law-quillits, or splits upon the Piles of a Praemunire; yet
these old Foxe-braind -- and oxe-browde Uncles, have still defenses for their
Avarice, and Apologies for their practices, and will thus greet our follyes

He that does his youth expose,
To Brothell, drink, and danger,
Let him that is his nearest Kin,
Cheat him before a stranger.
And that is his Uncle, it is a principle in Usury; I dare not visit the City,
there I should be too soon visited, by that horrible plague my Debts, and by
that means I loose a Virgins love, her portion and her Virtues, well, how
should a man live now, that has no living; hum? why are there not a million of
men in the world, that only soiourne upon their brain, and make their wits
their Mercers; and am I but one amongst that Million and cannot thrive upon it;
any Trick out of the compass of Law now, would come happily to me


My love.


My lothing; have thou been the secret consumption of my purse? and now comst
to undo my last means, my wits? wilt leave no virtue in me and yet thou nere
the better? hence Curtizan, round webd Tarantula
That dryest the Roses in the cheeks of youth.

I have been true unto your pleasure, and all your lands thrice rackt, was
never worth the Jewel which I prodigally gave you, my virginity
Lands morgag'd may return and more esteemde,
But honesty once pawnd, is nere redeemd.

For give I do thee wrong,
To make thee sin, and then to chid thee fort.

I know I am your loathing now, farewell.


Stay best invention, -- stay.


I that have been the secret consumption of your purse shall I stay now to
undo your last means, your wits? hence Currizan away


I prithee, make me not mad at my own weapon, stay, (a thing few women can do
I know that, and therefore they had need wear stays;) be not contrary, do
love me

Fate has so cast it that all my means I must derive from thee.


From me! be happy then,
What lies within the power of my performance,
Shall be commanded of thee.

Spoke like an honest drab in faith, it may prove som-thing what Trick is not an
Embrion at first, until a perfect shape come over it


Come I must help you where abouts left you,
I Will proceed.
Tho you beget, it is I must help to breed,
Speak what is it, I Would feign conceive it.

So, so, so, thou shall presently take the name and form upon thee of a rich
country widow four hundred a year valiant, in Woods, in Bullocks, in Barnes
and in Rye-stacks, we will to London* and to my covetous Uncle


I begin to applaud thee, our States being both desperate, they' are soon
resolute, but how for horses


Mass that is true, the Jest will be of some continuance, let me see, Horses
now, a bottes on em; Stay, I have acquaintance with a mad Host, never yet
Bawd to thee, I have rinzde the whoresons gums in Mull-sack many a time and
often, put but a good Tale into his ear now, so it come off cleanely, and
there is Horse and man for us I dare warrant thee


Arm your wits then speedily, there shall want nothing in me, either in
behavior, discourse or fashion, that shall discredit your intended purpose
I will so art-fully disguise my wants,
And set so good a courage on my state,
That I will be believed.

Why then all is furnished; I shall go nigh to catch that old Fox mine Uncle,
tho he make but some amends for my undoing, yet there is some comfort in it --
he cannot otherwise choose (tho it be but in hope to coozen me again) but
supply any hasty want that I bring to town with me, the Device well and
cunningly carried, the name of a rich Widow, and four hundred a year in
good earth, will so conjure up a kind of Usurers love in him to me, that he
will not only desire my presence, which at first shall scarce be granted him,
I Will keep off a purpose, but I shall find him so officious to deserve, so
ready to supply, I know the state of an old man's affection so well, if his
Nephew be poor indeed, why he letts God alone with him, but if he be once
rich, then heel be the first man that helps him


It Is right the world, for in these days an old man's love to his kindred, is
like his kindness to his wife, it is always done before he comes at it


I owe thee for that Jest, be gone, here is all my wealth; prepare thy self,
away? I Will to mine Host withal possible have, and with the best Art, and most
profitable form, power the sweet circumstance into his ear, which shall have
the gift to turn all the wax to hunny; how no; oh the right worshipful
Seniors of our Country --


Whose that;


Oh the common Rioter, take no note of him.


You will not see me now, the comfort is ere it be long you will scarce see
your selves


I wonder how he breathes, has consumed all upon that Curtizan?


We have heard so much.


You have heard all truth, his Uncle and my Brother, have been these three
years mortal Adversaries. Two old tough spirits, they seldom meet but
fight, or quarrel when it is calmest
I think their anger be the very fire
That keeps their age alive:

What was the quarrel sir?


Faith about a purchase, fetching over a young heir; Master Hoord my brother
having wasted much time in beating the bargayne, what did me old Lucre* but as
his conscience moved him, knowing the poor Gentleman* stepped in between them
and couzned him himself


And was this all sir:


This was even it sir, yet for all this I know no reason but the match might go
forward betwixt his wives Son and my Niece, what tho there be a dissension
between the two old men, I see no reason it should put a difference between
the two younger, it is as natural for old folks to fall out, as for young to fall
in? A scholar comes a wooing to my Niece, well, he is wise, but he is poor,
her Son comes a wooing to my Niece, well, he is a fool, but he is rich --


I marry sir?


Pray now is not a rich fool better then a poor Philosopher.


One would think so in faith?


She now remains at London with my brother her second Uncle, to learn
fashions, practice Music, the voice between her lips, and the violl between
her legs, she will be fit for a consort very speedily, a thousand good pound
is her portion, if she marry, we will ride up and be merry, --


A match, if it be a match?


Mine Host?


Young master Wit-good.


I have been laying all the Town for thee.


Why what is the news Bully-Hadland?


What Geldings are in the house of thine own? answer me to that first.


Why man, why?


Mark me what I say, I Will tell thee such a tale in thine ear, that thou shall
trust me spite of thy teeth, furnish me with some money, will, nille, and
ride up with me thy self Contra voluntatem et profession em


How: let me see this trick, and I Will say thou have more
Art then a Coniurer.

Do thou joy in my advancement?


Do I love Sack and Ginger?


Comes my prosperity desiredly to thee?


Come forfeitures to a Usurer, fees to an officer, punkes to an Host, and Pigs
to a Parson desiredly? why then la


Will the report of a Widow of four hundred a year boy, make thee leap,
and sing, and dance, and come to thy place again


Will thou command me now? I am thy spirit, conjure me into any shape.


I ha brought her from her friends, turnde back the Horses by a slight, not so
much as one amongst her six men, goodly large Yeomanly fellows, will she
trust with this her purpose: by this light all vnmand; regardlesse of her
state, neglectfull of vainglorious ceremony, all for my love; oh it is a fine
little voluble tongue mine Host, that wins a widow


No it is a tongue with a great T my boy that winnes a widow.


Now sir, the case stands thus, good mine Host, if thou love my happiness
assist me


Command all my beasts ith house.


Nay that's not all neither, prithee take truce with thy joy, and listen to me,
thou know I have a wealthy Uncle in the City, somewhat the wealthier by my
follyes; the report of this fortune well and cunningly carried, might be a
means to draw some goodness from the Usuring Rascal, for I have put her in
hope already of some estate that I have either in land or money: now if I be
found true in neither, what may I expect but a sudden breach of our love,
utter dissolution of the match, and confusion of my fortunes for ever


Will thou but trust the managing of thy business with me?


With thee? why will I desire to thrive in my purpose? will I hug four
hundred a year? I that know the misery of nothing? will that man wish a rich
widow, that has nere a hole to put his head in? with thee mine Host, why
believe it, sooner with thee then with a Couy of Counselors


Thank you for your good report in faith sir, and if I stand you not instead,
why then let an Host come off Hic and haec hostis, a deadly enemy to Dice,
Drink, and Venery; come where is this widow


Hard at Parke-end.


I Will be her Seruing-man for once.


Why there we let off together, keep full time, my thoughts were striking
then just the same number


I knew't, shall we then see our merry days again?


Our merry nights -- which nere shall be more seen.


Nay good Master Lucre, and you Master Hoord* anger is the wind which you*re
both too much troubled with all


Shall my adversary thus daily afront me, ripping up the old wound of our
malice, which three Summers could not close up, into which wound the very sight
of him, drops scalding Lead instead of Balsamum


Why Hoord, Hoord, Hoord, Hoord, Hoord; may I not pass in the state of
quietness to mine own house, answer me to that* before witness, and why?
I Will refer the cause to honest euen-minded Gentlemen, or require the mere
indifferences of the Law, to decide this matter, I got the purchase, true;
was it not any man's case? yes, will a wiseman stand as a Bawd, whilst another
wipes his nose of the bargain, no, I answer no in that case


Nay sweet Master Lucre.


Was it the part of a friend: no, rather of a Jew, mark what I say, when I had
beaten the bush to the last bird, or as I may term it, the price to a pound,
then like a cunning Usurer to come in the evening of the bargain, and gleane
all my hopes in a minute, to enter as it were at the back-doore of the
purchase, for thou nere camst the right way by it


Have thou the conscience to tell me so, without any impeachment to thy self?


Thou that can defeat thy own Nephew, Lucre, lap his lands into bonds, and
take the extremity of thy kindreds forfeitures because he is a rioter, a
wast-thrift, a brothell-maister, and so forth -- what may a Stranger expect
from thee, but Vulnera delacerata, as the Poet says, delacerate dealing


Vpbraidst thou me with Nephew? is all imputation laid upon me? what
acquaintance have I with his follyes, if he riott, it is he must want it, if
he surfeit, it is he must feel it: if he Drab it, it is he must lie by it,
what is this to me


What Is all to thee? nothing, nothing; such is the gulf of thy desire, and the
Wolf of thy conscience, but be assured old pecunious lucre, if ever fortune so
bless me, that I may be at leisure to vex thee, or any means so favor me,
that I may have opportunity to mad thee, I will pursue it with that flame of
hate, that spirit of malice, vnrepressed wrath, that I will blast thy comforts


Ha, ha, ha!


Nay master Hoord you*re a wise Gentleman.


I will so cross thee,


And I thee.


So without mercy fret thee.


So monstrously oppose thee?


Do scoff at my just anger? oh that I had as much power as usury has over
thee


Then thou would have as much power as the devil has over thee.


Toade!


Aspick.


Serpent.


Viper.


Nay Gentlemen, then we must divide you perforce.


When the fire grows too unreasonable hot, there is no better way then to take
of the wood


A word good Signior.


How now, what is the news?


It Is given me to understand, that you are a rival of mine in the love of
Mistress Joyce, master Hoords Niece: say me I, say me no


Yes, it is so.


Then look to your self, you cannot live long, I Am practizing every morning,
a month hence I Will challenge you


Give me your hand upon it there is my pledge I Will meet you?


Oh, oh -- what reason had you for that sir to strike before the mouth, you
knew I was not ready for you, and that made you so cranck, I am not such a
coward to strike again I warrant you, my ear has the law of her side for it
burns horribly, I will teach him to strike a naked face, the longest day of
his life, slid it shall cost me some money, but I Will bring this box into the
Chancery


Fear you nothing sir, I have lodgd her in a house of credit I warrant you.


Have thou the writings?


Firm sir


Prithee stay, and behold two the most prodigious rascals that ever slipped into
the shape of men, Dampit sirrah, and young Gulf, his fellow Cater-piller


Dampit? sure I have heard of that Dampit.


Heard of him? why man he that has lost both his ears, may hear of him, a
famous infamous Trampler of time; his own phraze: note him well, that Dampit
sirrah, he in the uneven Beard, and the Serge cloak, is the most notorious,
usuring, blasphemous, Atheistical, Brothell, vomiting rascal, that we have
in these latter times now extant, whose first beginning was the stealing of a
mastie Dog from a Farmers house


He looked as if he would obey the commandment well, when he began first with
stealing


True, the next Town he came at, he set the Dogs together by the ears.


A sign he should follow the law by my faith.


So it followed indeed, and being destitute of all fortunes, stakte his Mastie
against a Noble, and by great fortune his Dog had the day, how he made it up
ten shillings I know not, but his own boast is, that he came to town but
with ten shillings in his purse, and now is credibly worth ten thousand pound


How the devil came he by it?


How the devil came he not by it, if you put in the devil once riches come
with a vengeance, has been a Trampler of the Law sir, and the devil has a
care of his footmen, the Rogue has spied me now, he nibled me finely once
too; a pox search you, oh master Dampit, the very Loins of thee; cry you
mercy master Gulf, you walk so low I promise you I saw you not sir


He that walks low walks safe, the Poets tell us.


And nyer hell by a foot and a half then the rest of his fellows, but my old
Harry


My sweet Theodorus?


It Was a merry world when thou came to town with ten shillings in thy purse.


And now worth ten thousand pound my Boy, report it, Harry Dampit, a trampler
of time, say, he would be up in a morning, and be here with his Serge Gown,
dashed up to the hams in a cause, have his feet stincke about Westminster hall
and come home again, see the Galleouns, the Galleasses the great Armadoes of the
Law, then there be Hoyes and petty vessels, Owers and Scullers of the time,
there be picklocks of the Time too, then would I be here, I would trample up
and down like a Mule; now to the Judges, may it please your reverend --
honorable father-hoods: then to my Counselor, may it please your worshipful
patience, then to the examiners Office, may it please your Maistershippes
Gentleness, then to one of the Clerks, may it please your worshipful
Lowzinesse, for I find him scrubbing in his codpeice, then to the hall again,
then to the Chamber again


And when to the sellar again?


Even when thou will again; Tramplers of time, Motions of Fleete-streete, and
Visions of Holborne, here I have fees of one, there I have fees of another, my
clients come about me, the Fooli-aminy and Cocks-combri of the Country, I still
trasht and trotted for other men's causes, thus was poor Harry Dampit made rich
by others laziness, who, tho they would not follow their own Suites, I made
them follow me with their purses


Did thou so old Harry?


I, and I souc'st them with bills of Charges ifayth, twenty pound a year have
I brought in for boate-hire, and I nere stepped into boat in my life


Tramplers of time.


I, Tramplers of time, Raskalls of time, Bulbeggars:


Ah you are a mad old Harrie? kind Master Gulf, I am bold to renew my
acquaintance


I embrace it sir.


My Adversary evermore twittes me with my Nephew, forsooth my Nephew: why may
not a virtuous uncle have a dissolute Nephewe? what tho he be a Brotheller, a
wast-thrift, a common Surfetter, and to conclude a beggar, must sin in him,
call up shame in me: since we have no part in their follies, why should we
have part in their infamies? for my strickt hand toward his morgage that I
deny not, I confess I had an Uncles penworth: let me see, half in half,
true, I saw neither hope of his reclayming, nor comfort in his being, and was
it not then better bestowed upon his Uncle, then upon one of his Aunts, I need
not say bawd, for every own knows what Aunt stands for in the last
Translation now sir


There Is a Country Seruing-man sir, attends to speak with your worship.


I Am at best leisure now, send him in to me;


Bless your venerable worship.


Welcome good fellow.


He calls me thief at first sight, yet he little thinks I am an Host?


What Is thy business with me?


Faith sir, I am sent from my Mistrisse to any sufficient Gentleman indeed, to
ask advise upon a doubtful point, it is indifferent sir, to whom I come, for
I know none, nor did my Mistres direct me to any particular man, for she is as
mere a stranger here as my self, only I found your worship within, and it is a
thing I ever loved sir to be dispacht as soon as I can


A good blunt honesty, I like him well what is thy Mistres?


Faith a Cuntry Gentlewoman and a widow sir, yesterday was the first flight of
us, but now she entends to stay till a little Term business be ended


Her name I prithee?


It runs there in the writings sir, among her Lands, widow Medler?


Meddler? mass have I near heard of that widow?


Yes, I wa^^nt you, have you sir, not the rich widdowe in Staffordsheere:


Cuds me, there it is indeed, thou have put me into memory, there is a widow
indeed, ah that I were a batchiler again


No doubt your worship might do much then, but she is fayrely promised to a
bachiler already


Ah what is he I prithee?


A Country Gentleman too, one whom your worship knows not I Am sure: has spent
some few follies in his youth, but marriage by my faith begins to call him
home, my Mistress loves him sir, and love couers faults you know, one master
VVit-good if ever you have heard of the Gentleman


Ha? Wit-good say thou?


That's his name indeed sir; my Mistress is like to bring him to a goodly seat
yonder, four hundred a year by my faith


But I pray take me with you.


I sir*


What Countryman might this young Wit-good be?


A Lestershire gentleman sir.


My Nephew, by th* mass my Nephew, I Will fetch out more of this in faith, a simple
Country fellow, I Will workte out of him, and is that Gentleman say thou
presently to marry her


Faith he brought her up to town sir, has the best card in all the bunch fort,
her heart: and I know my Mistress will be married, ere she go down, nay I Will
swear that, for she is none of those widows that will go down first, and
be married after, she hates that I can tell you sir


By my faith sir, she is like to have a proper Gentleman and a comely, I Will
give her that gift


Why does your worship know him sir?


I know him! dos not all the world know him, can a man of such exquisite
qualities be hid under a bushel


Then your worship may save me a labor, for I had charge given me to
enquire after him


Enquire of him? if I might counsel thee, thou should nere trouble thy self
further, enquire of him of no more but of me, I Will fit thee? I grant he has
been youthful, but is he not now reclaimde; mark you that sir, has not your
Mistress think you been wanton in her youth? if men be wagges, are there not
women wagtayles


No doubt sir:


Does not he return wisest, that comes home whipped with his own follies.


Why very true sir.


The worst report you can hear of him I can tell you is that he has been a
kind Gentleman, a liberal and a worthy, who but lusty Wit-good, thrice
Noble Wit-good


Since your worship has so much knowledge in him, can you resolve me Sir what
his living might be, my duty binds me sir to have a care of my mistress
estate, she has been ever a good mistress to me though I say it, many welthy
Suitors has she Nonsuted for his sake, yet tho her Love be so fixed, a man
cannot tell whether his Nonperformance may help to remove it sir; he makes
us believe he has lands and living


Who young master Wit-good! why believe it he has as goodly a fine living out
yonder, what do you call the place


Nay I know not in faith.


Hum, see like a Beast if I have not forgot the name, puh, and out yonder again,
goodly grown woods and fair meado ves, pax ont, I can nere hit of that place
neither, he; why hes Wit-good of Wit-good-Hall, he, an unknow thing


Is he so sir, to see how rumor will alter, trust me sir we heard once he had
no lands, but all lay morgagde to an Uncle he has in town here


Push, it is a tale, it is a tale.


I can assure you sir it was credibly reported to my Mistress.


Why do you think in faith he was ever so simple to morgage his lands to his
Uncle? or his uncle so unnatural to take the extremity of such a morgage


That was my saying still sir.


Puh, nere think it.


Yet that report goes current.


Nay then you urge me,
Cannot I tell that best that am his Uncle,

How sir! what have I done.


Why how now in a Sown, man*


Is your worship his Uncle sir.


Can that be any harm to you sir.


I do beseech your sir do me the favor to conceal it, what a Beast was I to
utter so much: pray sir do me the kindness to keep it in, I shall have my
coat pulled ore my ears, ant should be known, for the truth is an't please
your worship, to prevent much rumor and many suitors, they entend to be
married very suddenly and privately


And do thou think it stands with my Judgment to do them injury, must I
needs say the knowledge of this marriage comes from thee? am I a fool at
fifty four? do I lack subteltie now that have got all my wealth by it?
there is a leash of Angels for thee, come let me woe thee, speak where lie
they


So I might have no anger sir --


Passion of me not a jot, prithee come.


I would not have it known it came by my means, --


Why am I a man of wisdom?


I dare trust your worship sir, but I Am a stranger to your house, and to
avoid al Intelligencers I desire your worshippes ear


This fellowe's worth a matter of trust -- come sir, why now you are an honest
lad: ah sirrah Nephew


Please you sir now I have begun with your worship when shall I attend, for
your advice upon that doubtful point, I must come warily now


Tut, fear thou nothing, to morrowes evening shall resolve the doubt.


The time shall cause my attendance.


Fare thee well: there is more true honesty in such a Cuntrie Seruingman, then
in a hundred of our cloak companions, I may well call them companions, for
since blew coats have been turned into cloakes, we can scarce know the man
from the Master -- George --


Anon sir?


List hither, -- keep the place secret, commend me to my Nephewe, I know no
cause tell him but he might see his Uncle


I will sir.


And do you hear sir, take heed you use him with respect and duty.


Here Is a strange alteration, one day he must be turned out like a Beggar, and
now he must be called in like a Knight


Ah Sirrah, that rich widow, 400. a year, beside I here she lays Claim to a
title of a hundred more, this falls unhappily that he should bear a Grudge to
me now being likely to prove so rich, what is it tro that he makes me a Stranger
for? hum, I hope he has not so much wit to apprehend that I cozned him, he
decaues me then? good heaven, who would have thought, it would ever have come
to this pass, -- yet he is a proper Gentleman in faith, give him his due --
marry that's his Morgage, but that I nere mean to give him, i will make him rich
enough in words if that be good, and if it come to a piece of money I will not
greatly stick fort, there may be hope some of the widows lands too, may one
day fall upon me if things be carried wisely: now sir, where is he


He desires your worship to hold him excusde, he has such weighty Business it
commands him wholly from all men


Were those my Nephews words?


Yes indeed sir.


When men grow rich they grow proud too, I perceive that, he would not have
sent me such an answer once within this tweluemonth, see what it is when a man's
come to his lands, return to him again sir, tell him his Uncle desires his
company for an hour* I Will trouble him but an hour say, it is for his own good
tell him, and do you hear sir, put worship upon him, go too, do as I bid you,
he is like to be a Gentleman of worship very shortly


This is good sport in faith.


Troth he uses his Uncle, discourteously now, can he tell what I may do for
him, Goodness may come from me in a minute that comes not in Seven year again,
he knows my humor I am not so usually good, it is no small thing that draws
kindness from me, he may know that, and he will; the chief cause that inuites
me to do him most good, is the sudden astonishing of old Hoord my Adversary,
how pale his malice will look at my Nephews Advancement, with what a dejected
Spirit he will behold his Fortunes, whom but last day, he proclaymde
Riotter, Penurious Make-shift, despised Brothell Master; ha, ha, twill do me
more secret Joy then my last purchasse, more precious comfott then all these
widows Reuennewes, -- Now Sir. --


With much entrety he is at length come sir,


Oh Nephew, let me salute you sir, your welcome Nephew


Uncle I thank you.


Yaue a sault Nephew, your a Stranger here, well Heaven give you joy.


Of what Sir?


Hah, we can hear.
You might have known your Uncles house in faith, you and your widow, go too,
you were too blame; If I may tell you so without offense

How could you hear of that sir?


Oh pardon me,
It was your will to have it kept from me I perceive now.

Not for any defect of Love I protest Uncle.


Oh it was Unkindness Nephew, fie, fie, fie.


I am sorry you take it in that sense sir.


Puh, you cannot color it in faith Nephew.


Will you but hear what I can say in my just excuse sir.


Yes faith will I, and welcome.


You that know my danger ith City sir so well, how great my debts are, and how
extreme my Creditors could not out of your pure judgment sir, have wished us
hither


Mass a firm reason indeed,


Else my Uncles house, why tad been the only make -- Match. --


Nay and thy credit.


My credit? nay my countenance, push, nay I know uncle you would have wrought
it so by your wit you would have made her believe in time the whole house had
been mine --


I and most of the goods too --


La you there; well, let them al prate what they will there is nothing like the
bringing of a widow to ones Uncles house


Nay let Nephews be ruled as they list, they shall find their Uncles house,
the most natural place when all is done


There they may be bold.


Life, they may do any thing there man, and fear neither Beadle nor Somner, an
Uncles house! a very coale-harbour? Sir, I Will touch thee near now, have thou
so much interest in thy widow, that by a token thou could presently send for
her


Troth I think I can uncle.


Go too, let me see that?


Pray command one of your men hither Uncle.


George?


Here sir.


Attend my Nephew? I love a life to prattle with a rich widow, it is pretty me
thinks when our tongues go together, and then to promise much and perform
little; I love that sport a life in faith, yet I am in the mood now to do my
Nephew some good, if he take me handsomely: what have you dispacht


I ha sent sir?


Yet I must condemn you of unkindness Nephew.


Heaven forbid Uncle?


Yes faith must I; say your debts be many, your creditors importunate, yet the
kindness of a thing is all Nephew, you might have sent me close word on it,
without the least danger, or praeiudice to your fortunes


Troth I confess it Uncle, I was too blame there, but indeed my intent was to
have clapped it up suddenly, and so have broke forth like a joy to my friends,
and a wonder to the world, beside there is a trifle of a forty pound matter
toward the setting of me forth, my friends should nere have known on it, I
meant to make shift for that my self


How Nephew? let me not hear such a word again, I beseech you, -- shall I be
beholding to you


To me alas, what do you mean Uncle?


I charge you upon my love: you trouble no body but my self.


You Have no reason for that Uncle.


Troth I Will nere be friends with you while you live and you do.


Nay and you say so Uncle, here is my hand, I will not doote --


Why well said, there is some hope in thee when thou will be ruled, i will make
it up fifty faith, because I see thee so reclaimde; peace, here comes my wife
with Sam her the other husbands Son


Good Aunt --


Couze^ Wit-good? I rejoice in my salute, your most welcome to this Noble City
governed with the sword in the Scabbard


And the wit in the pommell, good Master Sam fredome I return the salute.


By the mass she is coming wife, let me see now how thou will entertain her.


I hope I am not to learn sir, to entertain a widdowe, it is not so long ago
since I was one my self


Uncle?


She Is come indeed?


My Uncle was desirous to see you widow, and I praesum'd to enuite you.


The praesumption was nothing Master Wit-good, is this yours Uncle sir?


Marry am I sweet widow, and his good Uncle he shall find me, I by this smack
that I give thee, you are welcome, wife, bid the widow welcome the same way
again


I am a Gentleman now too, by my fathers occupation, and I see no reason but I
may kiss a widdowe by my Fathers Copy, truly I think the Charter is not
against it, surely these are the words, the Son once a Gentleman, may revel
it, tho his father were a dauber, it is about the 15 page, -- i will to her --


You Are not very busy now, a word with thee sweet widow --


Coades-Nigs, I was never so disgrac'st, since the hour my mother whipped me.


Beside, I have no child of mine own to care for, she is my second wife, old,
past bearing, clap sure to him widow, he is like to be my heir I can tell you


Is he so sir?


He knows it already and the knaves proud on it, jolly rich widows have
been offered him here ith City, great merchants wives, and do you think he
would once look upon them? forsooth heel none, you are beholding to him ith
Country then; ere we could be, nay, i will hold a wager widow if he were once
known to be in town, he would be presently sought after, nay and happy
were they, that could catch him first


I think so?


Oh, there would be such running to and fro widow, he should not pass the
streets for them: he'ed be took up in one great house or other presently,
fah, they know he has it and must have it; you see this house here widdowe,
this house and all comes to him, goodly Rooms ready furnished, seeld with
plaster of paris, and all hung above with cloth of arras. Nephew


Sir --


Show the widdowe your house, carry her into all the Rooms, and bid her
welcome, -- you shall see widow -- Nephew? -- strike all sure above and thou
be a good boy -- ah --


Alas sir, I know not how she would take it:


The right way I warrant tee, a pox, art an ass, would I were in thy stead,
get you up, I am a shamde of you, so: let them agree as they will now? many a
match has been struck up in my house a this fashion, let them try all manner of
ways still there is nothing like an Uncles house to strike the stroke in, --
I Will hold my wife in talk a little, now Ginnee; your son there goes a wooing
to a poor Gentlewoman but of a 1000. portion, see my Nephew, a lad of less
hope, strikes at four hundred a year in good Rubbish


Well we must do as we may sir.


I Will have his money ready told for him, again he come down, let me see too,
by the mass I must present the widdowe with some Jewel, a good piece a plate
or such a device, twill harten her on well, I have a very fair stranding cup,
and a good hie standing cup will please a widow above al other pieces


Do you mock us with your Nephew, I have a plot in my head son, in faith
husband to cross you


Is it a tragedy plot, or a comedy plot, good mother.


It Is a plot shall vex him, I charge you of my blessing Son Sam, that you
presently withdraw the Action of your love from Master Hoords Niece


How mother.


Nay I have a plot in my head in faith, here take this chain of gold and this
fair diamond, dog me the widow home to her lodging, and at thy best
opportunity fasten them both upon her -- nay I have a Reach, I can tell you thou
art known what thou art son among the right worshipful; all the twelve
companyes


Truly I thank 'em for it.


He, he is a scab to thee, and so certify her, thou have two hundred a year of
thy self, beside thy good parts -- a proper person and a lovely, if I were a
widow I could find in my heart to have thee my self, son, I, from em all


Thank you for your good will mother, but in deed I had rather have a
Stranger: and if I woe her not in that Violent fashion, that I will make her be
glad to take these gifts ere I leave her, let me never be called the heir of
your body


Nay I know there is enough in you son if you once come to put it forth.


I Will quickly make a Bolt, or a shaft ont.


Faith Master Hoord, I have bestowde many months in the Suite of your Niece,
such was the dear love I ever bore to her virtues, but since she has so
extremely denied me, I am to lay out for my fortunes else where


Heaven forbid but you should fir, I ever told you my Niece, stood otherwise
affected


I must confess you did sir, yet in regard of my great loss of time, and the
zeal with which I sought your Niece, shall I desire one favor of your worship


In regard of those two it is hard but you shall sir.


I shall rest grateful, it is not full 3. hours sir, since the happy rumor of
a rich Country widow came to my hearing


How a rich Country widow?


Four hundred a year landed.


Yea?


Most firm sir, and I have learnt her lodging, here my suite begins sir, if I
might but entreat your worship to be a countenance for me, and speak a good
word: for your words will pass, I nothing doubt, but I might set fair for the
widdowe, nor shall your labor sir end altogether in thanks, two hundred
Angels --


So, so, what suitors has she?


There lies the comfort sir, the report of her is yet but a whisper, and only
solicited by young Riotous Wit-good, Nephew to your mortal adversary


Ha? art certain he is her suitor?


Most certain sir, and his Uncle very industrious to beguile the widow, and
make up the match


So? very good?


Now sir you know this young Wit-good is a spend-thrift -- dissolute fellow.


A very Rascal:


A midnight surfetter.


The spume of a Brothel-house.


True sir? which being well told in your worshippes phraze, may both heave him
out of her mind, and drive a fair way for me to the widows affections


Attend me about 5.


With my best care sir.


Fool thou have left thy treasure with a thief, to trust a widdower with a
suite in love, happy revenge I hug thee, I have not only the means laid
before me, extremely to cross my adversary, and confound the last hopes of
his Nephew, but thereby to enrich my state; augment my reuennewes, and build
mine own fortunes greater, ha, ha
I Will mar your phraze, ore-turne your flatteries,
Undo your windings, policies, and plots,
Fall like a secret and dispatchfull plauge on your secured comforts, why I am
able to buy 3. of Lucer, thrice out-bid him, let my out-monies be reckond and
all

I am glad of this news.


So are we by my faith.


Young Wit-good will be a gallant again now.


Peace?


I promise you Master Cockpit she is a mighty rich widow.


Why have you ever heard of her.


Who widow Medler, she lies open to much rumor.


Four hundred a year they say in very good land.


Nay take it of my word if you believe that, you believe the least.


And to see how closse he keeps it.


Oh sir there is policy in that to prevent better suitors.


He owes me a hundred pound, and I protest I near lookte for a penny.


He little dreams of our coming, heel wonder to see his creditors upon him.


Good, his creditors, i will follow, this makes for me, all know the widows
wealth and it is well known, I can estate her fairly, I and will
In this one chance shines a twice happy Fate,
I both deiect my foe, and raise my state.

Why alas, my Creditors? could you find no other time to undo me but now,
rather your malice appears in this then the justness of the debt


Master Wit-good I have forborne my money long.


I pray speak low sir, what do you mean?


We hear you are to be married suddenly to a rich Country widow?


What can be kept so closse but you creditors here on it, well, it is a lamentable
state, that our chiefest afflicters should first hear of our fortunes, why
this is no good course in faith sirs, if ever you have hope to be satisfied, why
do you seek to confound the means that should work it, there is neither
piety, no nor policy in that, shine favorably now, why I may rize and spread
again, to your great comforts


He says true in faith.


Remove me now, and I consume for ever.


Sweet Gentleman?


How can it thrive which from the Sun you sever.


It cannot indeed?


Oh then show patience, I shall have enough to satisfy you all.


I, if we could be content a shame take us.


For look you, I am but newly sure yet to the widow, and what a Rend might
this discredit make: within these 3. days will I bind you lands for your
securities


No, good Master Wit-good,
Would twere as much as we dare trust you with?

I know you have been kind, how ever now either by wrong report, or false
incitement your gentleness is iniurde, in such a state as this a man cannot
want foes

If on the sudden he begin to rize,
No man that lives can count his enimyes.
You had some intelligence I warrant ye, from an ill-willer.

Faith we heard you brought up a rich widow sir, and were suddenly to marry
her


I, why there it was, I knew it was so, but since you are so well resolude of my
faith toward you, let me be so much fauor'd of you, I beseech you all --


Oh, it shall not need in faith sir, --


As to lie still a while, and bury my debts in silence, till I be fully possessed
of the widow, for the truth is, I may tell you as my friends --


Oh -- o -- o --


I am to raise a little money in the City, toward the setting forth of my
self, for mine own credit, and your comfort, now if my former debts should be
diuulg'd, all hope of my proceedings were quite extinguished


Do you hear sir, I may deserve your custom hereafter, pray let my money be
accepted before a strangers, here is forty pound I received as I came to you,
if that may stand you in any stead make use on it, nay pray sir, it is at your
service --


You do so ravish me with kindness, that I Am constrainde, to play the maid
and take it


Let none of them see it I beseech you.


Fah --


I hope I shall be first in your remembrance after the marriage rites.


Believe it firmly.


So, what do you walk sirs?


I go -- take no care sir for money to furnish you, within this hour i will send
you sufficient: come Master Cockpit we both stay for you


I ha lost a ring in faith, i will follow you presently -- but you shall find it
sir, I know your youth and expenses have disfurnisht you of all Jewels, there is
a Ruby of twenty pound price sir, bestow it upon your widow, -- what man,
twill call up her blood to you, beside if I might so much work with you, I
would not have you beholding to those bloud-suckers for any money


Not I believe it.


The'ar a brace of cut-throates?


I know them.


Send a note of all your wants to my shop and i will suply you instantly.


Say you so, why here is my hand then no man living shall do it but thy self.


Shall I carry it away from them both then.


I faith shall thou?


Troth then I thank you sir.


Welcome good master Cockpit!

ha, ha, ha? why is not this better now, then lying a bed, I perceive there is
nothing coniures up wit sooner then poverty, and nothing lays it down sooner
then wealth and lechery? this has some savor yet, oh that I had the morgage
from mine Uncle as sure in possession as these trifles, I would forswear
Brothel at noone day, and Muscadine and eggs at midnight


Master Wit-good? where are you?


Holla.


Rich News!


Would twere all in Plate,


There Is some in chains and Jewels, I am so haunted with shuters Master
Wit-good, I know not which to dispatch first


You have the better term by my faith


Among the number, one Master Hoord an Ancient Gentleman.


Upon my life my Uncles adversary.


It may well hold so, for he rayles on you,
Speaks shamefully of him.

As I could wish it.


I first denied him, but so cunningly,
It rather promisde him assured hopes,
Then any loss of labor.

Excellent,


I expect him every hour, with Gentlemen,
With whom he labors to make good his words,
To approve you Riotous, your state consumde, your Uncle, --

Wench, make up thy own fortunes now, do thy self a good turn once in thy
Days, he is rich in money, moueables, and lands, -- marry him, he is an old
doting fool, and that's worth all, marry him, twould be a great comfort to me
to see thee do well in faith, -- marry him, twould ease my conscience well to see
thee well destowd, I have a care of thee in faith


Thanks sweet master Wit-good.


I reach at farther happiness; first I am sure it can be no harm to thee, and
there may happen goodness to me by it, prosecute it well, lets send up for out
wits, now we require their best and most pregnant Assistance


Step in, I think I hear them.


Art thou the widows man, by my faith sh' as a company of proper men then.


I am the worst of six sir, good enough for blew-coates.


Hark hither, I hear say thou art in most credit with her.


Not so sir.


Come, come, you are modest, there is a Brace of royalls, prithee help me to the
speech of her


I Will do what I may sir always saving my self harmless.


Go too do it I say, thou shall hear better from me.


Is not this a better place then 5. Mark a year standing wages; say a man had
but 3. such clients in a day, me thinks he might make a poor living ont,
beside I was never brought up with so little honesty, to refuse any man's money
never; what g^lles there are a this side the world, now know I the widows
mind, none but my young master comes in her clutches, ha, ha, ha


Now my dear Gentlemen stand firmly to me, you know his follyes, and my worth.


We do sir.


But Master Hoord, are you sure he is not ith house now?


upon my honesty* I chose this time,
A purpose, fit, the spend-thrift is abroad,
Assist me: here she comes* now my sweet widow,

Y are welcome Master Hoord.


Dispatch, sweet Gentlemen, dispatch,
I am come widow, to prove those my words,
Neither of envy Sprung nor of false tongs,
But such as their desar^s and Actions,
Do merit and bring forth, all which these Gentlemen well known and better
reputted will confess

I cannot tell,
How my affections may dispose of me,
But surely if they find him so desartlesse,
They Will have that reason to withdraw themselves.
And therefore Gentlemen I do entreat you,
As you are fair in Reputation,
And in appearing form so shine in truth;
I am a widow and alas you know,
Soon ouerthowen, it is a very small thing,
That we with-stand, our weakness is so great,
Be partial unto neither, but deliver,
Without affection your opinion,

And that will drive it home,


Nay I besecch your silence Master Hoord,
You are a party.

Widow? not a word!


The better first to work you to belief,
Know neither of us owe him flattery,
Nor the other malice, but vnbribed censure,
So help us our best fortunes.

It suffizes?


That Wit-good is a riotous undone man,
Imperfect both in fame and in estate:
His debts welthier then he, and executions
In wait for his due body, we'ele maintain
With our best credit, and our dearest blood.

Nor land, nor living say you, pray take heed you do not wrong the Gentleman?


What we speak,
Our lives and means are ready to make good.

Alas, how soon are we poor souls beguild!


And for his Uncle. --


Let that come to me,
His Uncle a severe extortioner,
A Tyrant at a forfeiture, greedy of others miseries,
One that would undo his brother; nay swallowe
Up his father, if he can
Within the fadomes of his conscience.

Nay believe it widow,
You had not only matched your self to wants,
But in an evil and unnatural stock.

Follow hard, Gentlemen, follow hard?


Is my love so deceau'd, before you all
I do renounce him, on my knees I vow
He nere shall marry me, --

Heaven knows he never meant it?


There, take her at the bound, --


Then with a new and pure affection,
Behold you Gentleman, grave, kind and rich:
A match worthy your self, esteeming him,
You do regard your state.

I Will make her a ioynture say.


He can join land to land, and will possess you of what you can desire.


Come widow come.


The world is so deceitful?


There it is deceitful,
Where flattery, want, and imperfection lies:
But none of these in him? push --

Pray sir.


Come you widows are ever most back-ward, when you should do your selves
most good, but were it to marry a chin not worth a hair now, then you would
be forward enough? come, clap hands, a match


Withal my heart widow, thanks Gentlemen,
I will deserve your labor, and thy love.

Alas, you love not widows but for wealth,
I promise you I ha nothing sir,

Well said, widdowe, well said, thy Love is all I seek, before these Gentlemen.


Now I must hope the best,


My joys are such they want to be expressed,


But Master Hoord, one thing I mus^ remember you of before these gentlemen
your friends, how shall I suddenly avoid the loathed Solleciting of that
periurd Wit-good, and his Tedious -- dissembling Uncle, who this very uery day
has appointed a meeting for the same purpose too, where had not truth come
forth I had been undone, utterly undone


What think you of that Gentlemen.


It Was well deuized.


Hark thee widow, train out young Wit-good single, hasten him thither with
thee, somewhat before the hour where at the place appointed these Gentlemen
and my self will wait the opportunty, when by some slieght removing him from
thee we will suddenly enter and surprise thee, carry thee away by boat to
Coale-harbour, have a Priest ready and there Clap it up instantly, how like
it widow


In that it pleases you, it likes me well.


I Will kiss thee for those words, come* Gentlemen,
Still must I live a Suitor to your favors,
Still to your aid beholding.

We Are engade sir.
It Is for our credits now to see it well ended.

It Is for your honors Gentlemen; nay look toote,
Not only in joy, but I in wealth excel,
No more sweet widow, but sweet wife, farewell.

Farewell sir. --


Oh for more scope, I could laugh eternally,
Give you joy Mistres Hoord, I promise your fortune was good forsooth, you have
fell upon wealth enough, and there is young Gentlemen enough can help you to the
rest; now it requires our wits: carry thy self but heedfully now, and we are
both --

Master Wit-good your Uncle --


Cuds me, remove thy self a while, i will serve for him?


Nephew, good morrow, Nephew?


The same to you kind Uncle.


How fares the widow, does the meeting hold?


Oh no question of that sir?


I Will strike the stroke then for thee, no more days.


The sooner the better Uncle, oh she is mightily followed, --


And yet so little rumourd.


Mightily? here comes one old Gentleman, and heel make her a ioynture of three
hundred a year forsooth, another welthy suitor will estate his son in his
life time, and make him weigh down the widow, here a Merchants son will
possess, her with no less then three goodly Lordships at once, which were all
pawnes to his Father


Peace Nephew let me hear no more of them, it mads me, thou shall prevent them
all, no words to the widow of my coming hither, let me see, it is now upon
nine, before twelve. Nephew we will have the bargain struck, we will faith
boy


Oh my precious Uncle.


Niece, sweet Niece, prithee have a care to my house, I leave al to thy
discretion, be content to dream a while, i will have a husband for thee shortly,
put that care upon me wench, for in choosing wives and husbands I am only
fortunate, I have that gift given me


But it is not likely you should choose for me,
Since Nephew to your chiefest enemy:
Is he whom I affect, but oh forgetful,
Why do thou flatter thy affections so:
With name of him, that for a widows bed,
Neglects thy purer love, can in be so?
Or does report dissemble: how now sir?

A letter with which came a private charge.


Therein I thank your care -- I know this hard,
Deerer then sight, what the world reports of me yet believe not, rumor will
alter shortly, be thou constant, I am still the same that I was in love, and I
hope to be the same in fortunes

Theodorus Wit-good.

I am resolude, no more shall fear or doubt,
Raise their pale powers to keep affection out.

You're very welcome Gentlemen, Dick show those Gentlemen the Pomgranite
there, --


Hist --


Up those stairs Gentlemen.


Pist Drawer, --


Anon sir?


Prithee ask at the Bar, if a gentlewoma^ came not in lately?


William at the Bar did you see any Gentlewoman come in lately, speak you I,
speak you no


No, none came in yet but mistres Florence.


He says none came in yet sir, but one Mistres Florence.


What is that Florence? a widow!


Yes a duch widow.


How?


That's an English drab sir, give your worship good morrow.


A merry knave in faith, I shall remember a dutch widow the longest day of my
life


Did not I use most art to win the widow.


You shall pardon me for that sir, Master Hoord knows I took her at best
vantage


What Is that sweet Gentlemen, what is that?


He will needs bear me down that his art only, wrought with the widow most.


Oh you did both well Gentlemen, you did both well, I thank you.


I was the first that moved her.


You were in faith.


But it was I that took her at the bound.


I, that was you, faith Gentlemen, it is right.


I boasted least, but it was I joined their hands,


By The mass I think he did, you did all well gentlemen, you did al well,
contend no more


Come you rooms fittest:


True it is next the door?


Your very welcome, please you to walk up stai^s cloths laid sir.


Up stairs! troth I am weary Master Wit-good


Rest your self here a while widdowe, we will have a cup of Muscadine in this
little Room


A cup of Muscadine, you shall have the best sir.


But do you hear sirrah.


Do you call, anon sir.


What is there provided for dinner


I cannot readily tell you sir, if you please, you may go into the kitchen and
see your self sir, many Gentlemen of worship do use to do it, I assure you sir


A pretty familiar Priggin rascal, he has his part without book?


Against you are ready to drinck to me, widow, i will be present to pledge you.


Nay I commend your care, it is done well of you? ass what have I forgot.


What Mistres?


I slipped my wedding Ring off when I washed, and left it at my lodging, prithee
run, I shall be sad without it, so, he is gone! -- boy


Anon forsooth?


Come hither sirrah, learn secretly if one Master Hoord an ancient Gentleman
be about house


I heard such a one named.


Commend me to him.


I be do thy commendations?


Oh you come well: away, to boat, be gone.


Thus wisemen are revenged give two for one.


I must request you sir, to show extraordinary care, my Uncle comes with
Gentlemen his friends, and it is upon a making


Is it so?
I Will give a spetiall charge good Master Wit-good, may I be bold to see her?

Who he widow?
Withal my heart ifayth, i will bring you to her?

If she be a Staffordsheere Gentlewoman, it is much if I know her not, --


How now, boy, drawer.


Hie?


Do you ca^l sir?


Went the Gentlewoman up that was here?


Up sir? she went out sir.


Out sir?


Out sir: one Master Hoord with a guard of Gentlemen carried her out at
backdoore, a pretty while since sir


Hoord, death and darkness, Hoord.


The devil of ring I can find?


How now, what news, where is the widow?


My Mistress? is she not here sir?


More madness yet.


She sent me for a Ring.


A plot, a plot: to Boat she is stole away.


What?


Follow, enquire, old Hoord my Uncles Adversary --


Nephew, what is that?


Thrice miserable wretch.


Why what is the matter?


The widdow's borne away sir?


Ha, passion of me, a heavy welcome Gentlemen.


The widow gone?


Who durst attempt it?


Who but old Hoord, my Uncles adversary?


How?


With his confederates.


Hoord, my deadly enemy, Gentlemen stand to me,
I will not bear it, it is in hate of me,
That villain seeks my shame, nay thrifts my blood, he owes me mortal
malice
I Will spend my wealth on this despitefull plot,
Ere he shall cross me and my Nephew thus.

So malitiouslie.


How now you treacherous Rascal?


That Is none of my name sir.


Poor soul he knew not on it.


I Am sorry, I see then 'twas a mere plot.


I trac'de them nearly. --


Well.


And hear for certain, they have took Cole-harbor.


The Diuils Sanctuary,
They shall not rest, I Will pluck her from his arms,
Kind and dear Gentlemen, if ever I had seat within your breasts --

No more good sir, it is a wrong to us,
To see you injured in a cause so just:
We Will spend our lives, but we will right our friends,

Honest, and kind, come, we have delayed to long,
Nephew take comfort; a Just cause is strong.

That's all my comfort Uncle, ha, ha, ha.
Now may events fall luckily, and well,
He that nere strives, says wit shall nere excel.

When did I say my prayers? In Anno 88. when the great Armado was coming, and
In Anno. 99. when the great Thundering and Lighting was I prayed heartily then
in faith, to overthrow Poouyes new buildings, I kneeld by my great iron chest I
remember


Master Dampit, one may hear you, before they see you, you keep sweet hours
Master Dampit, we were all a bed 3 hours ago


Audry.


Oh yare a fine Gentleman.


So I am in faith, and a fine Scholar, do you use to go to bed Bed, so early
Audry


Call you this early Master Dampit.


Why is it not one of Clock ith morning is not that early enough? fetch me a
glass of fresh-Beere


Here, I have warmd your Nightcap for you master Dampit.


Draw it on then -- I am very weak truly, I have not eaten so much as the
bulk of an Egg these 3. days


You have drunk the more Master Dampit,


What Is that?


You might, and you would Master Dampit.


I answer you I cannot, hold your prating, you prat too much, and understand
too little, are you answered, -- give me a glass of bear


May I ask you how you do Master Dampit?


How do I? in faith naught.


I nere knenw you do otherwise,


I eat not one pennort of bread these 2. years, give me a glass of fresh
beer, -- I am not sick, nor I am not well. --


Take ths warm Napken about your neck sir, whilst I help to make you unready.


How now Audrie-prater, with your skiruy devices, what say you now?


What say I Master Dampit? I say nothing but that you are very weak,


Faith thou have more cunny catching devices then all London?


Why Master Dampit I never deceiu*d you in all my life?


Why was that? because I never did trust thee.


I care not what you say Master Dampit?


Hold thy prating, I answer thee, thou art a beggar, a queen, and a bawd:
are you answered


Fie Master Dampit, a Gentleman and have such words.


Why thou base drudge of infortunity, thou kitchin-stuffe drab of Beggary,
Roguery and cockscombre, thou Cauernesed queen of foolery, knavery and
baudreaminy, i will tell thee what, I will not give a lowse for thy fortunes


No, master Dampit, and there is a Gentleman comes a wooing to me, and he
doubts nothing but that you will get me from him


I, if I would either have thee or lie with thee for two thousand pound, would
I might be dambd, why thou base impudent queen of foolery, flattery, and
cockscombry, are you answered


Come will you rise and go to bed sir?


Rise, and go to bed too Audry? how does Misters Proserpine?


Fooh --


She Is as fine a Philosipher of a stinkards wife, as any within the liberties,
-- fah, fah Audry


How now Master Dampit?


Fie upon it, what a choice of stinckes here is, what have thou don Audry fie
vppon't, here is a choice of stinckes indeed; give me a glass of fresh Beer,
and then I will to bed


It waits for you above sir?


Foh, I think they burn horns in Barnards Inn, if ever I smelt such an
abominable stinck, usury forsake me


They be the stinking nails of his trampling feet, and he talks of burning
of horns


Join hearts, join hands, In wedlocks bands,
Never to part, till death cleave your heart,
You shall forsake all other women,
You Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Yeomen.
What my tongue slips, make up with your lips.

Give you joy Mistress Hoord, let the kiss come about,
Who knocks? convey my little Pig-eater out.

Hoord?


Upon my life, my adversary, Gentlemen.


Hoord, open the door, or we will force it open,
Give us the widow.

Gentlemen keepe'm out.


He comes upon his death that enters here.


My friends assist me.


He has assistants, Gentlemen.


Tut, nor him, nor them, we in this action fear.


Shall I in peace, speak one word with the widow?


Husband and Gentlemen, hear me but a word.


Freely sweet wife.


Let him in peaceably, you know we are sure, from any act of his.


Most true,


You may stand by and smile at his old weakness, let me alone to answer him.


Content,
Twill be good mirth in faith, how think you Gentlemen?

Good gullery?


Upon calm conditions let him in.


All spite and malice --


Hear me Master Lucre, so you will vow a peaceful entrance with those your
friends and only exerciz
Calm conference with the widow, without fury,
The passage shall receive you.

I do vow it.


Then enter and talk freely, here she stands.


Oh Master Hoord, your spite has wacht the hour, your excellent at vengeance
Master Hoord


Ha, ha, ha.


I am the fool you laugh at, you are wise sir and know the seasons, well,
come hither widow, why is it thus
Oh you have done me infinite disgrace,
And your own credit no small Injury,
Suffer mine enemy so dispitefully
To bear you from my Nephewe, oh,
I had rather half my substance had been forfet, and begd by some staru*d
Rascal

Why what would you wish me do sir?
I must not overthrow my state for love,
We have too many presidents for that,
From thousands of our welthie undone widows
One may derive some wit; I do confess,
I lou*d your Nephew, nay I did affect him,
Against the mind and liking of my friend:
Believed his promises, lay here in hope,
Of fla^terd living and the boast of lands,
Coming to touch his wealth and state indeed,
It appears dross, I find him not the man,
Imperfect, mean, scarce furnished of his needs:
In words, fair Lordships, in performance Houills,
Can any woman love the thing that is not?

Broke you for this?


Was it not cause too much?
Send to enquire his state, most part of it,
Lay two years morgag'd in his Uncles hands:

Why say it did, you might have known my mind; I could have soon restorde it.


I had I but seen any such thing performed why twould have tied my affection
and contaynd me in my first desires, do you think ifayth, that I could twine
such a dry, oak as this, had promise in your Nephew took effect


Why and there is no time past, and rather then my adversary should thus thw'art
my hopes, I would --


^ut you have been ever full of golden ^peech,
If words were lands, your Nephew would be rich.

Widow, believe it I vow by my best bliss,
Before these Gentlemen I will give in
The morgage to my Nephew instantly,
Before I sleep or eat.

We Will pawn our credits widow, what he speaks shall be performde in
fulness


Nay more I will estate him
In farther blessings, he shall be my heir*
I have no Son,
I Will bind my self to that condition.

When I shall hear this done, I shall soon yield, to reasonable terms.


In the mean season,
Will you protest before these Gentlemen,
To keep your self, as you are, now at this present.

I do protest before these Gentlemen,
I will be as clear then, as I am now.

I do believe you, here is your own honest servant,
I Will take him along wi^h me.

I, with all my heart.


He shall see all performde and bring you word.


That's all I wait for.


What have you finished Master Lucre? ha, ha, ha, ha!


So, laugh Hoord, laugh at your poor enemy, do, the wind may turn you may be
laughed at too, yes marry may you sir -- ha, ha, ha


Ha, ha ha, if every man that swells in malice,
Could be reuengd as happily as I:
He would choose hate, and forswear amity.
What did he say wife, prithee?

Faith spoke to ease his mind, --


Oh -- o -- o --


You know now, little to any purpose.


True, true, true.


He would do mountains now.


I, I, I, I.


You Have struck him dead Master Hoord.


I and his Nephew desperate:


I knowte sirs I,
Never did man so crush his enemy?

My son in law,
Sam Freedom? where is my Nephew?

O man in lamentation father?


How!


He thumpes his breast like a gallant Dicer that has lost his doublet, and
stands in's shirt to do penance


Alas poor gentleman.


I warrant, you may hear him sigh in a still evening to your house at Hyegate.


I prithee send him in.


Were it to do a greater matter, I will not stick with you sir, in regard you
married my Mother


Sweet Gentlemen cheer him up, I will but fetch the morgage, and return to
you instantly


We Will do our best sir? -- see where he comes,
Even ioylesse and regardlesse of all form.

Why how Master Wit-good, fie, you a firm scholar, and an understanding
Gentleman, and give your best parts to passion


Come fie?


Oh Gentlemen! --


Sorrow of me what a sigh was there sir, nine such widows are not worth it.


To be borne from me by that lecher Hoord.


That vengeance is your Uncles, being done
More in despite to him, then wrong to you,
But we bring comfort now, --

I beseech you Gentlemen.


Cheer thy self man, there is hope of her ifayth?


To gladsome, to be true.


Nephew what cheer? alas poor Gentleman how art thou changd? call thy fresh
blood into thy cheeks again, she comes --


Nothing afflicts me so much,
But that it is your Adversary, Uncle,
And merely plotted in despite of you.

I that's it mads me, spites me? i will spend my wealth, e're he shall carry her
so, because I know it is only to spite me, I this is it, -- here Nephew, before
these kind Gentlemen I deliver in your morgage, my promise to the widow, see
it is done, be wise your once more Master of your own, the widow shall
perceive now, you are not altogether such a beggar as the world reputes you,
you can make shift to bring her to 300. a year sir


Berlady and that's no toye sir:


A word Nephew?


Now you may certifye the widow?


You must conceive it a right Nephewe now, to do you good, I am content to do
this


I know it sir?


But your own conscience can tell I had it dearly enough of you?


I that's most certain.


Much money laid out, beside maney a journey to fetch the rent, I hope you will
think on it Nephew


I were worse then a beast else ifayth.


Although to blind the widow and the world I out of policy doote, yet there is
a conscience Nephew


Heaven forbid else.


When you are full possessed,
It Is nothing to return it:

Alas a thing quickly done Uncle.


Well said, -- you know I give it you but in trust.


Pray let me understand you rightly, Uncle,
You give it me but in trust.

No.


That is, you trust me with it.


True, true:


But if ever I trust you with it again, would I might be trust up for my labor.


You can all witness Gentlemen, and you sir yeoman?


My life for yours sir now, I know my Mistrisses mind to well toward your
Nephew, let things be in preparation, and i will train her hither in most
excellent fashion


A good old boy, -- wife Girnne?


What Is the news sir?


The wedding days at hand, prithee sweet wife, express thy houswifery,
you are a fine Cook I knowte, thy first husband married thee out of an
Aldermans kitchen, go too, he raisde thee for raising of paste, what, here is
none but friends, most of our beginnings must be winckt at, Gentlemen I enuite
you all to my Nephews wedding against Thursday morning


Withal our hearts, and we shall joy to see your enemy so mocked:


He laughed at me, gentlemen, ha, ha, ha:


He has no conscience, faith would laugh at them, they laugh at one another?
Who then can be so cruel, troth, not I,
I rather pity now, then ought envy,
I do conceive such joy in mine own happiness, I have no leisure yet, to
laugh at their follies
Thou soul of my estate I kiss thee,
I miss life's Comfort when I miss thee.
Oh never will we part again,
Until I leave the Sight of men,
We Will nere trust conscience of our kin,
Since Coosenage brings that title in.

I Will wait these 7. hours but I Will see him caught,


Faith so will I.


Hang him prodigal, he is stripped of the Widow.


A my Troth she is the wiser, she has made the happier choice, and I wonder of
what Stuff those widows hearts are made of, that will marry vnfledgd Boys,
before comely thrumbchind Gentlemen


News, news news,


What boy?


The Rioter is caught.


So, so, so, so, it warmes me at the heart, I love a life to see Dogs upon men;
oh here he comes


My last joy was so great it took away the sense of all future afflictions,
what a day is here orecast? how soon a black tempest rises


Oh we may speak with you now sir, what is become of your rich widow, I think
you may cast your cap at the widow, may you not sir


He a rich widow? who a prodigal, a daily Rioter, and a nightly vomiter, he a
widow of account? he a hole ith counter


You do well my masters, to tiranize over misery to afflect the affl^cted, it is
a custom you have here amongst you, I would wish you never leave it and I hope
you will do as I bid yo


Come, come sir, what say you extempore now to your bill of a hundred pound: a
sweet debt, for froating your doublets


Here Is mine of forty,


Here Is mine of fifty.


Pray sirs* you will give me Breath.


No sir, wel'e keep you out of breath still, then we shall be sure you will
not run away from us


Will you but here me speak?


You shall pardon us for that sir, we know you have too fair a tongue of your
own, you ouer-came us to lately, a shame take you, we are like to loose all
that for want of witnesses, we dealt in policy then, always when we strive to
be most politic we prove most cocskcombs, Non plus vltra. I perceive by us,
were not ordaynde to thrive by wisdom, and therefore we must be content to be
Tradesmen


Give me but reasonable time, and I protest I Will make you ample Satisfaction.


Do you talk of Reasonable time to us?


It Is true, beasts know no reasonable time,


We must have either money or carcass.


Alas what good will my carcass do you?


Oh it is a Secret delight we have amongst us, we that are used to keep birds in
cages, have the heart to keep men in prison, I warrant you


I perceive I must crave a little more Aid from my wits, do but make shift for
me this once, and I Will forswear ever to trouble you in the like fashion
hereafter, I Will have better employment for you, and I live. You Will give me leave
my masters to make Trial of my friends and raise all means I can


That's our desires sir.


Master Wit-good.


Oh art thou come!


May I speak one word with you in private sir?


No by my faith can thou. I am in hell here and the Devils will not let me
Come to thee


Do you call us diuuills, you shall find us Puritanes bear him away, let em
talk as they go, we will not stand to hear 'em, ah sir, am I a deuile, I shall
think the better of my self as long as I live, a Devil in faith


What a Sweet blessing have thou Master Hoord above a multitude, will thou
never be thankeful? how do thou think to be blessed another time? or do thou
count this the full measure of thy hapines by my troth I think thou do* not
only a wife large in possessions, but spacious in content, she is rich, she is
young, she is fair, she is wife, when I wake I think of her lands that reuiues
me, when I go to bed, I dream of her beauty, and that's enough for me, she is
worth 4. hundred a year in her very smock, if a man knew how to use it, but
the journey will be all in troth into the Country, to ride to her Lands in
state and order following my Brother and other worshipful Gentlemen whose
companies I ha sent down for already, to ride along with us, in their goodly
Decorum beards, their broad Velvet chashocks, and chains of gold twice or
thrice double; against which time, i will entertain some ten men of mine own,
into Liueries, all of occupations or qualities, I will not keep an idle man
about me, the sight of which will so vex my Adversary Lucre, for we will pass
by his door of purpose, make a little stand for nonce, and have our horses
Curuet before the window, certainly he will never endure it, but run up and
hang himself presently? how now sir? what news? any that offer their service
to me yet


Yes sir, there are some ith hall, that wait for your worships liking, and
desire to be entertainde


Are they of occupation?


They are men fit for your worship sir.


Say so? send them all in! -- to see ten men ride after me in watchet
liueries with Orenge-tawny capes, twill cut his comb ifayth, how now? of what
occupation are you sir


A Tailor, an't please your worship.


A tailor, oh very good, you shall serve to make all the Liueries -- what are
you sir


A Barber sir.


A Barber very needful, you shall shave all the house, and if need require
stand for a Reaper ith Summer time, -- You sir


A Perfumer?


I smelt you before, Persumers of all men had need carry themselves uprightly,
for if they were once knaves they would be smelt out quickly, -- to you sir


A Fawlkner an't please your worship --


Sa ho, sa ho, sa ho -- and you sir?


A Huntsman sir.


There boy, there boy, there boy? I am not so old but I have pleasant days
to come, I promise you my Masters I take such a good liking to you, that I
entertain you all, I put you already into my countenance, and you shall be
shortly in my liuerie? but especially you two my ^olly Fawlkner, and my bonny
huntsman, we shall have most need of you at my wifes Mannor-houses ith
Country, there is goodly parkes and Champion-grounds for you, we shall have all
our sports within our selves, all the Gentlemen ath Country shall be beholding
to us and our pastimes


And we will make you worship admire sir:


Say thou ^o do but make me admire, and thou shall want for nothing, -- my
Tailor


Anon sir.


Go presently in hand with the liueries.


I will sir.


My Barber.


Here sir.


Make them all trim fellows, lowse them well, especially my huntsman, and cut
all their beards of the Polonian fashion: my perfumer


Under your nose sir:


Cast a better savor upon the knaves, to take away the sent of my Tailors
feet, and my Barbers Lotium-water


It shall be carefully performde sir.


But you my Faulkner and Huntsman, the welcomst men alive ifayth:


And we will show you that sir, shall deserve your worshippes favor?


I prithee show me that: go you knaves all, and wash your lungs ith Buttery,
go -- byth mass, and well remembered, i will ask my wife that question, wife,
Mistrs Jane Hoord


Sir? would you with me.


I would but know sweet wife, which might stand best to thy liking, to have the
wedding dinner kept here or ith Country


Hum? faith sir twould like me better here, here you were married, here let all
rites be ended


Could a Marquess give a better answer? Hoord bear thy head aloft, thou'st a
wife will advance it, what haste comes here now? ye a letter: some dregge of
my Adversaries malice: come hither, what is the news


A thing that concerns my Mistress sir.


Why then it concerns me knave?


I and you knave too, (cry your worship mercy) you are both like to come into
trouble I promise you sir, a praecontrac


How a praecontract say thou?


I fear they have too much proof on it sir, old Lucre he runs mad up and down
and will to law as fast as he can, young Wit-good laid hold on by his
creditors, he exclaymes upon you a the other side, says you have wrought his
undoing, by the injurious detayning of his contract


Body a me?


He will have utmost satisfaction.
The law shall give him recompense he says.

Alas his creditors so merciless, my state being yet uncertain, I deem it
not unconscionable to further him


True sir --


Wife, what says that letter let me construe it.


Cursed be my rash and unadvised words,
I Will set my foot upon my tongue,
And tread my inconsiderate grant to dust.

Wife --


A pretty shift in faith, I commend a woman when she can make away a letter from
her husband handsomely, and this was cleanely done by my troth


I did sir?
Some foolish words I must confess did pass,
Which, now letigiously he fastens on me.

Of what force? let me ezamine them.


Too strong I fear, would I were well freed of him.


Shall I compound?


No sir, i would have it done some Nobler way
Of your side; i would have you come off with honor,
Let baseness keep with them: why have you not the means sir, the occasions
offered you

Where? how? dear wife.


He is now caught by his creditors, the slaue's needy, his debts petty,
he will rather bind himself, to all inconveniences then rot in prison, by this
only means you may get a release from him, it is not yet come to his Uncles
hearing, send speedily for the creditors, by this time he is disperate, he will
set his hand to any thing, take order for his debts, or discharge them quite, a
pax on him, lets be rid of a rascal


Excellent, thou do astonish me, go, run, make have, bring both the
creditors and Wit-good hither


This will be some revenge yet.


In the mean space I Will have a release drawne-within there.


Sir.


Sirrah, come take derictions, go to my Scriuener.


I Am yet like those, whose riches lie in dreams,
If I be wakte the're false, such is my fate,
Who ventures deeper then the desperate state.
Though I have find yet could I become new,
For where I once vow, I am ever true.

Away, Dispatch, on my Displeasure, quickly, happy occasion, pray heaven he
be in the right Vain now to set his hand toot, that nothing alter him; grant
that al his follyes may meet in him at once, to besot him enough
I pray for him in faith, and here he comes;

What would you with me now, my Uncles spiteful adversary.


Nay I am friends,


I when your mischeifes spent.


I heard you were arrested.


Well, what then? you will pay none of my debts I am sure.


A wiseman cannot tell,
There may be those Conditions greed upon,
May move me to do much,

I when It Is thou perjured Woman, O no name
Is vild enough to match thy treachery,
That art the cause of my confusion.

Out you penurious slave.


Nay wife you are too froward,
Let him alone, give loosers leave to talk.

Shall I remember thee of an other promise far stronger then the first.


I Would feign know that.


Twould call shame to thy cheeks.


Shame.


Hark in your ear. -- will he come of think thou, and pay my Debts roundly.


Doubt nothing, there is a Release a drawing and all to which you must set your
hand


Excellent.


But me thinks in faith you might have made some shift to discharge this your
self, having in the morgage, and never have burdned my conscience with it


A my troth I could not, for my creditors cruelties extend to the present.


No more, -- why do your worst for that, I defy you.


You Are impudent, i will call up witnesses.


Call up thy wits for thou have been devoted to follies a long time.


Wife, you are too bitter? Master Wit-good, and you my Masters, you shall hear
a mild speech come from me now, and this it is, tas been my fortune,
Gentlemen, to have an extraordinary blessing powered upon me alate, and here she
stands, I have wedded her and bedded her, and yet she is little the worse, some
foolish words she has past to you in the Country, and some peevish debts you
owe here in the City, set the Hares head to the Goose -- giblet, release you
her of her words, and i will release you of your debts sir


Would you so, I thank you for that sir, I cannot blame you ifayth.


Why are not debts better then words sir?


Are not words promises, and are not promises debts sir.


He plays at back-Racket with me.


Come hither Master Wit-good come hither, be ruled by fools once:


We are Citizens and know what belong toote.


Take hold of his offer pax on her, let her go, if your debts were once
discharged, I would help you to a widow my self worth ten of her


Mass partner and now you remember me on it, there is Master Muligrubs sister
newly fallen a widow


Cuds me, as pat as can be, there is a widow left for you, ten thousand in
money, beside Plate, Jewels et caetera I warrant it a match, we can do all in
all with her, prithee dispatch we will carry thee to her presently


My Uncle will nere endure me, when he shall hear I set my hand to a release:


Hark, i will tell thee a Trick for that, I have spent five hundred pound in
suites in my time, I should be wise, thou it now a prisoner, make a release,
takte of my word, whatsoever a man makes as long as he is in durance, it is
nothing in law, not thus much


Say you so sir?


I have paid for it I know it.


Proceed then, I consent.


Why well said:


How now my Masters, what have you done with him?


With much a do sir, we have got him to consent.


Ah -- a -- a, -- and what came his debts to now?


Some eight score od pounds sir.


Nau, nau, nau, nau, naw, tell me the second time, give me a lighter sum,
they are but desperate debts you know, near called in but upon such an accident,
a poor needy knave he would starve and rot in prison, come, come, you shall
have ten shillings in the pound and the sum down roundly --


You must make it a mark sir, --


Go too then, tell your money in the mean time, you shall find little less
there, -- come Master Wit-good you are so unwilling to do your self good now,
welcome honest Scriuener, now you shall hear the release read, --


Be it known, to al men by these presents, that I Theodorus Wit-good,
Gentleman, sole Nephew to Pecunious Lucre, having unjustly made title and
claim, to one Jane Medler, late widow of Anthory Medler, and now wife to
Walkadine Hoord, in consideration of a competent some of money to discharge my
debts, do for ever hereafter disclaim any title, right, estate, or interest in
or to the said widow late in the occupation of the said Anthony Medler, and
now in the occupation of Walkadine Hoord, as also neither to lay claim, by
virtue of any former contract, grant, promise or demise, to any of her Manor,
Mannorhouses, Parkes, Groves, Meadow-grounds, arrable lands, Barnes, stacks,
Stables, Doue-holes, and Cunny-borrowes, together with all her cattle, money,
plate, jewels, borders, chains, bracelets, furnitures, hangings, moueables,
or immouerables in witness whereof I the said Theodorus Wit-good, have
enterchangeably set to my hand and seal before these presents, the day, and
date above written


What a precious fortune have thou slipped here like a beast as thou art?


Come, unwilling heart come.


well Master Hoord, give me the pen, I see
It Is vain to quarrel with our destiny.

Oh as vain a thing as can be, you cannot commit a greater absurdity sir, --
so, so, give me that hand now, before al these presents I am friends for ever
with thee


Troth, and it were pit^y of my heart now, if I should bear you any grudge
in faith


Content, i will send for thy Uncle against the wedding dinner, we will be friends
once again


I hope to bring it to pass my self sir?


How now? is it right my masters?


It Is something wanting sir, yet it shall be sufficient.


Why well said, a good conscience makes a fine show now a days, come my
Masters you shall all -- taste of my wine ere you depart


We follow you sir?


I Will try these fellows now, -- a word sir, what will you carry me to that
widow now


Why do you think we were in earnest in faith? carry you to a rich widow, we
should get much credit by that; a noted Rioter a contemptible prodigal, it was a
Trick we have amongst us, to get in our money, fare you well sir


Farewell and be hanged, you short-pig-hayrde Ram-headed raskalls, he that
believes in you, shall nere be saved I warrant him, by this new league, I shall
have some access unto my love --


Master Wit-good?


My life.


Meet me presently, that note directs you, I would not be suspected our
happiness attends us, farewell


A words enough.


Let the Usurer cram him, in interest that excel,
There Is pits enough to dam him, before he comes to hell.
In Holborne, some: in Fleete-street some,
Where ere he come, there is some there is some.

Trahe, traheto, draw the Curtain, give me a sippe of Sack more.


Look you, did not I tell you he lay like the devil in chains, when he was
bound for a thousand year


But I think the devil had no steel Bedstaffes, he goes beyond him for that.


Nay do but mark the conceit of his drincking, one must wipe his mouth for
him with a muckinder, do you see sir


Is this the sick trampler, why he is only bed-red with drincking.


True sir, he spies us.


What? sir Tristram? you come and see a weak man here, a very weak man, --


If you be weak in body, you should be strong in prayer sir.


Oh, I have prayed too much poor man.


There Is a taste of his soul for you.


Fah, loathsome?


I come to borrow a hundred pound of you sir.


Alas you come at an ill time, I cannot spare it ifayth,
I ha but two thousand ith house.

Ha, ha, ha.


Out you gernatiue queen, the mullipood of villainy, the Spinner of
concupiscency


Ye gentlemen are you here before us? how is he now?


Faith the same man still, the Tavern bitch has bit him ith head.


We shall have the better sport with him, peace, and how cheeres Master
Dampit now


Oh, my bosom sir Lancelot, how cheer I? thy presence is restoratiue:


But I hear a great complaint of you Master Dampit, among gallants.


I am glad of that ifayth; -- prithee what?


They say you are waxte proud alate, and if a friend visit you in the
afternoon, you will scarce know him


Fie, fie, proud? I cannot remember any such thing, sure I was drunck then.


Think you so sir?


There it was ifayth, nothing but the pride of the Sack and so certify them,
fetch Sack sirrah


A vengeance Sack you once.


Why Master Dampit if you hold on as you begin, and lie a little longer, you
need not take care how to dispose your wealth, you will make the Vintner your
heir


Out you babliaminy, you vnfetherd cremitoryed queen, you cullisance of
scabiofity


Good words Master Dampit, to speak before a maid and a virgin.


Hang thy virginity, upon the pole of carnality.


Sweet terms, my Mistress shall know them.


Note but the misery of this usuring slave, here he lies like a noisome
dunghill, full of the poison of his drunken blasphemies, and they to whom he
bequeathes all, grudge him the very meat that feeds him, the very pillow that
eases him, here may a usurer behold his end, what profits it to be a slave in
this world, and a devil ith next


Sir Lancelot? let me busse thee sir Lancelot, thou art the only friend that I
honor and respect


I thank you for that Master Dampit.


Farewell my bosom sir Lancelot.


Gentlemen, and you love me, let me step behind you, and one of you fall a
talking of me to him


Content -- Master Dampit.


So sir.


Here came sir Lancelot to see you even now.


Hang him rascal.


Who sir Lancelot.


Pythagoricall rascal.


Pythagoricall?


I he changes his cloak when he meets a Sergiant.


What a rogues this?


I wonder you can rail at him sir, he comes in love to see you.


A louse for his love, his father was a Combe-maker, I have no need of his
crawling love, he comes to have longer day, the superlatiue rascal


Sfoote I can no longer endure the rogue, Master Dampit, I come to take my
leave once again sir


Who? my dear and kind Sir Lancelot? the only Gentleman of England, let me
hug thee, farewell and a thousand


Composde of wrongs and slavish flatteries.


Nay Gentlemen, he shall show you more Tricks yet, i will give you another taste of
him


Is It possible?


His memory is upon departing.


Another cup of Sack.


Mass then twill be quite gone: before he drink that, tell him there is a cuntry
client come up, and here attends for his Learned advice


Enough.


One Cup more, and then let the Bell toale, I hope I shall be weak enough by
that time


Master Dampit.


Is the Sack spouting.


It Is coming forward sir, -- here is a countryman a client of yours, waytes for
your deep and profound advice sir


A cockscombry? where is he? let him approach, set me up a pegge higher.


You must draw nere sir.


Now good man fooleaminy, what say you to me now


Please your good worship, I am a poor man sir. --


What make you in my Chamber then?


I would entreat your worships device in a just and honest cause sir. --


I meddle with no such matters, I refer them, to Master No-mans Office.


I had but one house left me in all the world sir which was my fathers, my
Grandfathers, my great Grandfathers, and now a Villain has unjustly wrung me
out, and took possession out


Has he such feats? thy best course is to bring thy eiectione firm, and in
Seven year thou may shoue him out by the Law


Alas, ant please your worship, I have small friends and less money.


Hoyda, this geere will fadge well, have no money, why then my advice is thou
must set fire ath house and so get him out


That will break strife indeed,


I thank your worship for your hot Counsel sir. -- altring but my voice
alitle, you see he knew me not, you may observe by this that a drunkards
memory, holds longer in the voice then in the person, but Gentlemen shall I
show you a sight, behold the little diue-dapper of Damnation, Gulf the usurer,
for his time worse then the other


What Is he comes with him?


Why Hoord, that married lately the widdowe medler.


Oh, I cry you mercy sir.


Now gentlemen visitants? how dos master Dampit?


faith here he lies e'n drawing -- in sir, good canary as fast as he can sir,
a very weak creature truly, he is almost past memory


Fie Master Dampit: you lie lazing a bed here, and I come to enuite you to my
wedding dinner, up, up, up


Whose this master Hoord! who have thou married in the name of foolery.


A rich widow.


A Duch widow.


A rich widow, -- one widow medler.


Medler she keeps open house.


She did I can tell you in her the other husbands days, open house for all
comers, horse and man was welcome, and Room enough for em all


There Is to much for thee then, thou may let out some to thy Neighbors.


What? hung a live in chains O Spectacle, bed staffs of steel, O monstrum,
horrendum, Inform, Ingens cui Lumen ademptum, O Dampit, Dampit, here is a Just
judgment, shown upon usury, extortion, and trampling Villainy


This exlent, thief rayles upon the Thief.


Is this the end of cut throat Usury, Brothell, and blasphemy? now may thou
see what Race a Usurer runs


Why thou Rogue of universality, do not I know thee? thy Sound is like the
cuckowe, the welsh Ambassador, thou cowardly slave that offers to fight with a
sick man when his weapons down: rail upon me in my naked bed? why thou great
Lucifers little vicar, I am not so weak but I know a knave at first sight, thou
Inconscionable Rascal, thou that go upon middlesex Iuryes, and will make
have to give up thy verdit, because thou will not loose thy dinner, are you
answered


Ant twere not for shame. --


Thou would be hanged then.


Nay you must exercize patience Master Gulf, always in a sick-mans Chamber.


'Heele quarrel with none I warrant you, but those that are bedred.


Let him come Gentlemen, I am armed, reach my closse stool hither.


Here will be a sweet fraie anon, I Will leave you gentlemen.


Nay wel'e a long with you, Master Gulf.


Hang him usuring rascal.


Push, set your Strenght to his, your wit to his.


Pray Gentlemen depart, his hours come upon him, sleep in my bosom, sleep.


Nay we have enough of him in faith, keep him for the house. -- Now* make your
best
For thrice his wealth, I would not have his breast.

A little thing would make me beat him, now he is asleep.


Mass then twilbe a pitiful day when he wakes.
I would be loath to see that day, come.

You overrule me gentlemen in faith.


Nay uncle, let me prevail with you so much,
In Faith go, now he has enuited you,

I shall have great joy there, when he has borne away the widow.


Why la, I thought where I should find you presently;
Uncle, a my troth, it is nothing so.

What Is nothing so sir, is not he married to the widow.


No by my troth is he not Uncle.


How?


Will you have the truth out, he is married to a whore in faith.


I should laugh at that.


Uncle, let me perish in your favor if you find it not so and that it is I that
have married the honest woman


Ha? I Would walk ten mile a foot to see that in faith.


And see'te you shall, or I Will nere see you again.


A Queen in faith? ha, ha, ha.


Pup, pup, pup, pup, I like not this wine, is there never a better Teirs in the
house


Yes sir, there are as good Teirs in the house, as any are in England.


Desire your mistress you knave, to taste them all over, she^ has better Skill.


Has she so, the better for her* and the worse for you.


Arthur, is the cupbard of plate set out,


All Is inorder sir.


I am in love with my Liueryes every time I think on them, they make a gallant
show by my troth. -- Niece


Do you call sir?


Prithee show a little diligence, and ouer-looke the knaves a little, they will
filtch and steal to day and send whole pasties home to their wives, and thou
be a good Niece, do not see me purloynd


Fear it not sir, I have cause, tho the feast be prepared for you, yet it
serves fit for my wedding dinner too


Master Lamprey, and Master Spichcocke two the most welcome gentlemen alive,
your fathers and mine were all free a^h Fishmongers


They were indeed sir, you see bold guestes sir, soon entreated


And that's best sir -- how now sirrah?


There Is a coach come to the door sir.


My Lady Foxestone a my life. Mistress Jane Hoord, wife, mass it is her Ladyship
indeed, Madame you are welcome to an unfurnished house, dearth of cheer,
scarcsity of attendance


You are pleased to make the worst sir.


Wife.


Is this your Bride.


Yes Maddam salute my Lady Foxtone.


Please you Madam a while to taste the air in the garden?


Twill please us well.


Who would not wed the most delitious life,
No Joys are like the comforts of a wife.

So we bachilers think that are not troubled with them


Your worships brother with an other ancient Gentleman, are newly allighted Sir.


Master Onesiphorus Hoord, why now our company begins to come in: my dear and
kind brother welcome in faith


You see we are men at an hour brother.


I, I Will say that for you brother you keep as good an hour to come to a feast,
as any Gentleman in the Sheere* what old Master Limber and Master Kicks, do
we meet in faith Jolly Gentlemen


We hope you lack guess sir?


Oh welcome, welcome, we lack still such guess as your worships.


Ah sirrah brother, have you caught up widow Medler.


From them all brother, and I may tell you, I had mighty enemies, those that
stuck sore, old Lucre is a sore fox I can tell you brother


Where is she, i will go seek her out, I long to have a smack at her lips.


And most wishfully brother see where she comes, give her a smerck now we may
hear it all the house over


Oh heaven, I am betrayde, I know that face.


Ha, ha, ha, why how now? are you both a shamde? come Gentlemen, we will look
another way --


Nay Brother, hark you, come you are disposde to be merry?


Why do we meet else man?


That Is another matter, I was nere so fread in my life but that you had been
in earnest


How mean you brother?


You said she was your wife?


Did I so? by my troth and so she is.


By your troth Brother?


What reason have I to dissemble with my friends, brother, if marriage can make
her mine, she is mine? why


Troth I am not well of a sudden? I must crave pardon brother, I came to see
you, but I cannot stay dinner in faith


I hope you will not serve me so brother.


By your leave Master Hoord.


What now? what now? pray Gentlemen, you were wont to show your selves wisemen.


But you have shown your folly too much here.


How?


Fie, fie, a man of your repute and name,
You Will feast your friends but cloye them first with shame.

This grows too deep pray let us reach the sense.


In your old age doat on a Curtizan --


Ha?


Marry a Srumpet?


Gentlemen!


And Wit-goods queen:


Oh, nor Lands, nor living?


Living?


Speak?


Alas you know at first sir,
I told you I had nothing:

Out, out, I am cheated, infinitely couzned.


Nay Master Hoord:


A dutch widow, a dutch widow, a dutch widow:


Why Nephew shall I trace thee still a lier? wilt make me mad is not yon thing
the widow


Why la, you are so hard a belief Uncle, by my troth she is a whore.


Then you are a knave:


Negatur Argumentum Uncle.


Probo tibi, Nephew: He that knows a woman to be a queen must needs be a
knave, thou say thou know her to be one, ergo if she be a queen you are
a knave


Negatur, sequela maioris, Uncle, he that knows a woman to be a queen, must
needs be a knave, I deny that


Lucre, and Wit-good, you are both villains, get you out of my house:


Why did not inuit me to thy wedding dinner?


And are not you and I sworn perpetual friends before witness sir, and were
both drunck upon it


Daintily abusde you have put a Iunt upon me:


Ha, ha, ha:


A common strumpet?


Nay now you wrong her sir* if I were she i would have the law on you for that, I
durst depose for her, she nere had common use, nor common thought


Despise me, publish me I am your wife,
What shame can I have now but you will have part,
If in disgrace you share, I sought not you:
You pursued me, nay forc'st me,
Had I friends would follow it,
Less then your action has been proved a rape.

Brother?


Nor did I ever boast of lands unto you,
Money or goods: I took a playner course:
And told you true i would nothing,
If error were committed it was by you.
thank your own folly, nor has my sin been so odious but worse has bin for
given, nor am I so deformd but I may challing the utmost power of any old man's
love, she that tastes not sin before, twenty to one but she will taste it after:
most of you old men are content to mary young Virgins and take that which
follows, where marrying one of us, you both save a sinner, and are quit from a
cuckold for ever
"And more in breife let this your best thoughts win,
"She that knows sin, knows best how to hate sin.

Cursed be all Malice, black are the fruits of spite,
And poison first their owners: O my friends,
I must embrace shame, to be rid of shame,
Conceald disgrace preuents a public name.
Ah Wit-good ah Theodorus,

Alas sir, I was prick tin conscience to see her well bestowd* and where
could I bestow her beter then upon your pitiful worship: excepting but my
self, I dare swear she is a Virgin, and now by marrying your Niece I have
banished my self for ever from her, she is mine Aunt now by my faith, and there is
no Meddling with mine Aunt you know, a sin against my Nuncle


Lo, Gentlemen, before you all.
In true reclaymed form I fall,
Henceforth for ever I defy,
The Glances of a sinful eye,
Wauing of Fans, which some suppose,
Tricks of Fancy, Treading of Toes,
Wringing of Fingers, biting the Lip,
The wanton gate the alluring Trip,
All secret friends and private meetings,
Close borne letters, and Baudes greetings,
Fayning excuse to weomens Labors,
When we are sent for to the next Neighbors,
Taking false Physic, and nere start,
To be let blood, tho sign be at heart,
Removing chambers, shifting beds,
To welcome Friends in husbands steads,
Them to enjoy, and you to marry,
They first serud, while you must tarry,
They to spend and you to gather,
They to get and you to father,
These and thousand thousand more,
New reclaymed I now abhore.

A, here is a lesson Rioter for you.


I must confess my follyes, I Will down to
And Here for ever I disclaim,
The cause of youths undoing. Game:
Chiefly dice, those true outlanders,
That shake out Beggars, Thieves and Panders,
Soul wasting Surfets, sinful Riotts,
Queanes Evils, Doctors diets.
Pothecaries Drugs, Surgeons Glisters,
Stabbing of arms for a common Mistress,
Riband favors* Ribauld Speeches,
Dear perfumde Iacketts, pennylesse breeches,
Dutch Flapdragons, healths in Urine,
Drabs that keep a man to sure in:
I do defy you all.
Lend me each honest hand, for here I rise,
A reclaymde man loathing the general vice.

So, so, all friends, the wedding dinner cooles,
Who seem most crafty prove often times most fools.


