WHy so? thus do I hope to please:
Music reuiues, and mirth is tolerable.
Comedy play thy part, and please,
Make merry them that coms to joy with thee:
Joy then good gentilles, I hope to make you laugh.
Sound forth Bellonas silver tuned strings.
Time fits us well, the day and place is ours.
Nay stay minion, there lies a block.
What al on mirth; I Will interrupt your tale.
And mix your music with a tragic end^

What monstrous ugly hagge is this,
That dares comtrowle the pleasures of our will?
Vaunt churlish curre, besmearde with gorie blood,
That seemst to check (...)
And stifle the (...)
Blush, monster blush, and post away with shame,
That seek disturbance of a goddess deeds.

Post hence thy self, thou counterchecking trul,
I will possess this habite^ spite of thee
And gain the glory of thy wished port,
I Will thunder music shall appale the nymphs,
And make them sheuer their clattering strings:
Flying for succor to their danes caves.
Hearken, thou shall hear a noise
Shall fill the air with a shrilling sound,
And thunder music to the gods above:
Mars shall himsel^e breathe down
A peerless crowene upon brave enuies head,
And raise his chiuall with a lasting fame
In this brave music Envy takes delight,
Where I may see them wallow in there blood,
To spurn at armes^ and legs quite shiuered off,
And hear the cries of many thousand slain,
How likst thou this my ^r^ll, this sport alone for mee^

Vaunt bloody cur^e, nur^t up with tigers sapp,
That so do seek to quail a woman's mind,
Comedy is mild gentle, willing for to please,
And seeks to gain the love of all estates^
Delighting in mi^th^ mixed all with lovely ^ales^
And brings things with ^reble joy to pas^e,
Thou bloody, Envious, disdainer of men's joy,
Whose name is fraught with bloody stratagemes,
D^lights in nothing but in spoy^e and death,
Where (...) blood,
And (...)
Yet veil thy mind, revenge thou not on me,
A silly woman begs it at thy hands,
Give me the leave to utter out my play,
Forbear this place, I humbly crave thee hence,
And mix not death amongst pleasing comedies,
That treats naught else but pleasure and delight.
If any spark of human rests in thee,
Forbear, be gone, tender the suite of me.

Why so I will, forbearance shall be such
As tr^ble death shall cross thee with despite,
And make thee mourn where most thou ioiest,
Turning thy mirth into a deadly dole:
Whirling thy pleasures with a peale of death,
And drench thy methodes in a sea of blood:
This will I do, thus shall I bear with thee
And more to vex thee with a deeper spite,
I will with th^eates of blood begin thy play:
Favoring thee with envy and with hate.

Then ugly monster do thy woorst,
I will defend them in despite of thee:
And thought thou think with tragic fumes
To brave my play unto my deep disgrace.
I force it not, I scorn what thou can do
I Will grace it so, thy self shall it confess:
From tragic stuff to be a pleasant comedy

Why then (...) send thy actors forth
And I will cross the first steps of their tread:
Making them fear the very dart of death.

And I Will defend them mangre all thy spite
So ugly fiend frewell, tell time shall serve,
That we may meet to parle forth best

Conten^ C^medie, i will go spread my branch,
And scattered blossoms from mine envious tree.

Oh fly Madam, fly or else we art but dead.

Help Segasto help, help swet Segasto or ele I die.
Alas madam, there is no way but flight,
Then have and save your self.

Why then I die, ah help me in distress,

Stay Lady stay, and be no more dismaide,
That cruel beast most mercelesse and fell,
Which have bereaved thousands of their lives,
Affrighted many with his hard pursues,
Prying from place to place to find his pray,
Prolonging thus his life by others death,
His carcass now lies headless void of breath.

That foul deformed monster is he dead?

Assure your self thereof, behold his head^
Which if it please you Lady to accept,
With willing heart I yield it to your majesty.

Thanks worthy shepherd, thanks a thousaud times
This gift assure thy self contents me more,
Then greatest bounty of a mighty prince:
Although he were the monarch of the world.

Most gracious goddess, more then mortal wight,
Your heavenly hew of right imports no less,
Most glad am I in that it was my chance,
To undertake this enterprise in hand.
Which does so greatly glad your princely minde^

No goddess shepherd, but a mortal wight
A mortal wight destressed as thou see:
My father here is king of Arragon.
I Amadine his only daughter am:
And after him sole heir unto the crown.
Now where as it is my fathers will,
To mary me unto Segasto,
On whose wealth through fathers former usury
Is known to be no less then wonderful,
We both of custom oftentimes did use,
Leaving the court to walk within the fields,
For recreation esecially the spring,
In that it yelds great store of rare delights:
And passing further then our wonted walks,
Scarce were entered within these lucklesse woods,
But right before us down a steep fall hill
A monstrous ugly bear did hie him fast,
To meet us both, I faint to tell the rest,
Good shepherd, but suppose the ghastly looks,
The hiddious fears, the thousant hunderd woes,
Which at this instant Amadine susteind.

Yet worthy princes let thy sorrow cease,
And let this sight your former joys revive.

Believe me shepherd so it does no less.

Long may they last unto your hearts content.
But tell me Lady what is become of him,
Segasto called, what is become of him?

I know not I, that know the powers diui^^^
But God grant this that sweet Segasto live.

Yet heard hearted he in such a case,
So cowardly to save himself by flight:
And leave so brave a princess to the spoil

Well shephearde for thy worthy valor tried,
Endangering thy self to set me free:
Vnrecompensed sure thou shall not be.
In court thy courage shall be plainly known:
Throughout the Kingdom will I spread thy name,
To thy renown and never dying fame:
And that thy courage may be better known.
Bear thou the head of this most monstrous beast
In open sight to every courtiers view
So will the king my father thee reward.
Come lets away, and guard me to the court.

With all my heart.

When heaps of harms do houer over head,
It Is time as then, some say to look about,
And so ensuing harms to choose the least:
But hard, yea hapless is that wretchesse chance,
Lucklesse his lot and caytiffe like acourste,
At whose proceedings fortune ever frowns.
My self I mean most subject unto thrall,
For I the more I seek to shun the worst:
The more by proof I find my self accursed:
Ere whiles assaulted with an ugly bear,
Fair Amadine in company all alone,
Forthwith by flight I thought to save my self,
Leaving my Amadine unto her shifts:
For death it was for to resist the bear.
And death no less of Amadines harms to hear.
Accursed I in lingering life thus long,
In leeuing thus each minute of an hour
Does pierce my heart with darts of thousand deathe^:
If she by flight her fury do escape,
What will she think;
Will she not say; yea flatly to my face,
Accusing me of mere disloyalty,
A trusty friend is tried time of need:
But I when she in danger was of death
And needed me, and cried Segas^o help:
I turned my back and quickly ran away.
Unworthy I to bear this vital breath:
But what, what needs these plaintes
If Amadine do live then happy I,
She will in time forgive and so forget,
Amadine is merciful, not Juno like.
In harmful heart to harbor hatred long.

Clubs, prongs, pitchfo^ks, bills, O help, a bear, a bear, a bear.

Still bears, and nothing else but bears.
Tell me sir where she is;

O sir, she is run down the woods:
I see her wite head and her white belly.

Thou talkest of wonders, to tell me of white bears.
But sir did thou ever see any such;

No faith I never saw any such,
But I remember my fathers words,
He bad me take he^de I was not caught with a white bear

A lamentable tale no dout.

I tell you what sir as I was going a field to serve my fathers great horse,
and carried a bottly of hay upon my head, now do you see sir, I fast hudwinckt,
that I could see nothing, perceiving the bear coming, I threw my hay into the
hedge and ran away

What from nothing;

I warrant you yes, I saw something, for there was tow load of thorns besides
my bottle of hay, and that made three

But tell me sir, the bear that thou did see,
Did she not bear a bucket on her arm;

Ha ha, ha, I never saw bear go a milking in all my life.
But ha^k you sir, I did not look so hie as her arm:
I saw nothing but her whit head, and her whit belly.

But tell me sir, where do thou dwell;

Why, do you not know me.

Why no, how should I know thee,

Why then you know no body, and you know not mee' I tell you sir I am the
goodman ^a^s son of the next parish over the hill

Goodman rats son why what is thy name,

why I am very near kin unto him.

I think so, but what is thy name?

My name, I have very pretty name I Will tell you what my name is: my name is Mouse,

what plain Monse.

I, plain mouse with out either welt or garden
But do you hea^e sir I am but a very young mouse,
For my ^aile is scarce grown out yet, look you here ^ls.

But I pray thee, who g^ue thee that name?

Faith ^ir I know not that, but if you would feign know, ask my fathers g^eate
horse, for he has bin half a year longer with my father then I have

This seems to be a merry fellow,
I care not if I take him home with me,
Mirth is a comfort to a troubled mind,
A merry man, a merry master makes.
How say thou sir, will thou dwell with me?

Nay soft sir, tow words to a bargain, pray you what occupation are you?

No occupation, I live upon my landes^

Your lands, a way, you are no master for me, why do you think that I am so
m^d, to go s^ke my living in the lands amongst the stones, briars, and bushes,
and tear my holy day appa^ell, not I by your leave

Why, I do not mean thou shall.

How th^n?

Why thou shall be my man, and wait upon me at the court.

What Is that?

Where the King lies.

What Is that same King a man or woman?

A man as thou arte^

As I am, ha^ke you sir pray you what kin is he to good man king of our parish
the church warden

No kin to him, he is the King of the whole land.

king of the land, I never see him.

If thou will dwell with me, thou shallt see him every day.

shall I go home again to be torn in pieces with bears, no not I, I will go
home and put on a clean shirt, and then go drown my self

Thou shallt not need, if thou will dwell with me, thou shall want nothing.

Shall I not? then hears my hand, i will dwell with you, And hark you sir, now you
have entertained me, I will tell you what I can do, I can keep my tougue from
picking and stealing, and my hands from lying and slaundering, I warrant you,
as well as ever you had man^ in all your life

Now will I to court with sorrowful heart, rownded with doubts, if Amadine do
live, then happy I: yea happy I if Amadine do^ live.

Now brave Lords, our wars are brought to end,
Our foes the foil and we in safety rest,
It us behoues to use such clemency in peace^
As valor in the warre^
It is as great honor to be bountiful at home,
As to be conquerers in the field.
Therefor my Lords the more to my content,
Your liking, and your countries safegarde,
We are disposde in marriage for to give
Our daughter to Lord Segasto hear,
Who shall succeed the diadem after me:
And raigue heereaft^r as I tofore have done
Your sole and lawful King of Arragon:
What say you Lordings, like you of my aduise^

And please your Majesty, we do not only allow of your highness pleasure,
but also vow fathfully in what we may to further it

Thanks good my Lords, if long Adr^stus li^e
Me will at full requite your cur^esies.
Tremelio in recompense of thy late valor done,
Take unto thee the Catalone a prince,
Lately our prisoner taken in the wars
Be thou his keeper, his ransom shallbe thine,
Weel^ think of it when leisure shall afforde:
Meanewhile do use him well, his father is a King.

Thanks to your Majesty, his usage shall be such,
As he thereat shall think no cause to grutce.

Then march we on to court, and rest our wearied limbs
But Collen, I have a tale in secret kept for thee:
When thou shall hear a watch word from thy king,
Think then some weighty matter is at hand
That highly shall concern our state,
Then Collen look thou be not far from me^
And for thy service thou to fore have done,
Thy truth and valor proud in every point,
I shall with bounties thee enlarge therefore:
So guard us to the court.

What so my sovereign does command me do^,
With willing mind I gladly yield consent

Tell me sir, how do you like your weapons;

O very well, very well, they keep my sides warm.

They keep the dogs form your shins very well do they not;

How, keep the dogs from my shins, I would scorn but my shins should keep the
dogs from them

Well ^irra, leaving idle talk, tell me:
Do thou know captain Tremelioes chamber;

I very well, it has a door

I think so, for so has every chamber^
But do thou know the man.

I forsooth he has a nose on his face.

Why so ha^h every on^

Tha^s more then I know.

But do thou remember the captain, that was here with the king even now,
that brought the young prince prisoner

O very well.

Go unto him and bid him come to me,
Tell him I have a matter in secret to impart to him,

I will master, master what is his name?

Why captain Tremelio.

O the meal man, I know him very well,
He brings meal every satturday: but hark you master must I bid him come to
you or must you come to hi

No sir, he must come to me.

Hark you master, how if he be not at home.
What shall I do then?

Why then leaust word with some of his folks.

Oh master, if there be no body within,
I will leave word with his dog.

Why can his dog speake^

I cannot tell, wherefore does he keep his chamber els^

To keep out such knaves as thou art.

Nay be lady then go your self.

You will go sir, will ye not;

Yes marry will I, O it is come to my head,
And a be not within, I Will bring his chamber to you.

What will thou pluck down the Kings house?

Nay be lady I Will know the price of it first.
Master it is such a hard name, I have forgotten it again I pray you tell me
his name

I tell thee captain Tremelio.

Oh captain treble knave, captain treble knave

How now sir, do thou call me?

You must come to my master captain treble knave

My Lord Segasto. did you send for me.

I did Tremel^o, sir^a about you^ business.

I marry, what is that can you te^le

No not well.

Marry then I can, straight to the kitchen dresser, to John the cook, and get
me a good piece of beef and brewis, and then to the buttery ^atch to Thomas
the butler, for a ^^c^e of bear, and there for an hour ileso be labor my
self, therefore I pray you call me not till you think I have done, I pray you
good master

Wel^ sir away^
Tremelio this it is, thou know the valor of Segasto
Spread through all the kingdom of Arragon,
And such as has found triumph and favors,
Never daunted at any time, but now a shepherd,
Admired at in court for worthynesse.
And Segastoes honor laid a side.
My will therefore is this, that thou do find some means to work the
shepheardes death, I know thy streng^h sufficient to perform my desire, and
thy love no other wise then to revenge my injuries

It is not the frowns of a shepherd that Tremelio fears.
Therefore account it accomplished, what I take in hane

Thanks good Tremelio, and assure thy self,
What I promise that will I perform.

Thanks my good Lord, and in good time
See where he comes, stand by a while.
And you shall see me put in practice your intented, driftes.
Have at thee swain, if that I hit thee right.

Vild coward, so without cause to strike a man.
Turn coward turn, now strike and do thy woorst.

Hold shepherd hold, spare him, kill him not,
ccursed villain, tell me what have thou done.
Ah Tremelio, trusty Tremelio, I sorrow for thy death,
And since that thou living, did prove faithful to
Segasto, so Segasto now living shall honor the dead corpse of Tremlio with
revenge
Blood thristy villain, borne and bredde to merciless murder,
Tell me how durst thou be so bold.
As once to lay thy hands upon the least of mine.
Assure thy self, thou shall be vsd according to the law.

Segasto cease, these threats are needless
Accuse not me of murder, that have done nothing but in mine own defense.

Nay shepherd reason not with me.
I Will manifest thy fact unto the King:
Whose doom will be thy death as thou deserust,
What hoe, Mouse come away.

Why how now, what is the matter.
I thougt you would be calling before I had done.

Come help away with my friend.

Why is he drunk, cannot he stand on his feet.

No, he is not drunk, he is slain.

Flaine, no by Lady he is not flaine.

He Is killed I tell thee.

What, do you use to kill your friends.
I will serve you no longer.

I tell thee the shepherd killed him.

O did a so, but master, I will have al his appa^el^ if I carry him away.

Why so thou shall.

Come then I will healpe, mas master I think his mother song looby to him he
is so heavy

behold the fickle state of man, always mutable, never at one.
Sometimes we feed on fancies with the sweet of our desires.
Sometimes again we feel the heat of extreme misery.
Now am I infauour about the court and country.
To morrow those favors will turn to frovvnes,
To day I live revenged on my foe,
To morrow I die, my foe revenged on me,

No passengers this morning, what not one.
A chance that seldom does befall.
What not one^ then lie thou there,
And rest thyselfe til I have further need:
Now Bremo since thy leisure so affords.
An endless thing, who knovves not Bremoes strength
Who like a king commander within these vvoods,
The bear, the boar, da^es not abide my sight,
But hastes away to save themselves by flight:
The crystal waters in the bubbling brooks,
When I come by does swiftly slide away,
And claps themselves in closets under banks,
Afraid to look bold Bremo in the face:
The aged oaks at Bremoes breath do bow,
And all things else are still at my command,
Else What would I?
Rent them in pieces and pluck them from the earth,
And each way else I would revenge my self,
Why who comes here with whom I dare not fight,
Who fights with me and does not die the death; not on:
What favor shows this sturdie stick to those,
That here within these woods are combataines with me?
Why death and nothing else but present death,
With restless rage I wander through these woods,
No creature here but fe^reth Bremoes force,
Man, woman, child, beast and bird,
And every thing that does approach my sight,
Ar^ fo^st to fall if Bremo once but frown,
Come cudgel come, my partner in my spoils,
For here I see this day it will not be,
But when it falls that I encounter any,
One pa^ suffised for to work my will.
What comes not one? then lets begone,
A time will serve when we shall better speed.

Shephard, thou have heard thine accusers,
Murder is laid to thy charge,
What can thou say, thou have deserved death;

Dread sovereign, I must needs confess,
I slew this captain in mine own defence^
Not of any malice but by chance,
But mine accuser has a further meaning.

words will not here prevail,
I seek for i^stice, and justice craves his death.

Shepherd thine own confession has condemned thee.
Sir take him away, and do him to execu^ion straight.

So he shall I warrant him, but do you hear master King, he is kin to a
monkie, his neck is bigger then is head

Com sir away with him, and hang him about the middle.

Yes forsooth I warrant you, come on sir, a so like a sheep biter a looks.

Dread sovereign and well-beloved sire.
On bended kees I crave the life of this condemned shepherd, which heertofore
preserved the life of thy sometime distressed daughter
K. preserved the life of my sometime distressed daughter
How can that be; I never knew the time
Whrein thou wast dist^est, I never knew the day
But that I have maintained thy state,
As best beseemd the daughter of a king
I never saw the shepherd until now,
How comes it then that he preserud thy life?

Once vvalkeing with Segasto in the woods,
Further then our accustomed manner was,
Right before us down a steep fall hill,
A monstrous ugly bear does hie him fast
To meet us both, now whether this be true,
I refer it to the cerdit of Segasto.

Most true and like your majesty.

How then?

The bear being eager to obtain his pray;
Made forward to us with an open mouth,
As if he meant to swallow us both at once,
The sight whereof did make us both to dread,
But specially your daughter Amadine,
W^o for I saw no succor incident
But in Segastoes valor, I grew desperate,
And he most cowardlike began to fly.
Left me distressed to be deuourd of him,
How say you Segasto is it not true?

His silence verifies it to be true, what then;

Then I amasded stressed all alone,
Did hie me fast to escape that ugly bear,
But all in vain, for why he reached after me,
And hardly I did often escape his paws,
Till at the length this shepherd came,
And brought to me his head.
Come hither boy, lo here it is, which I present unto your majesty.

The slaught^r o^ this bear deserves great ^ame.

The slaughter of a man des^rues great blame.

Indeed occasion oftentimes so falls out.

Tremelio in the wars. O King preserved thee,

The shepherd in the woods o king preserved me.

Tremelio fought when many men did yield.

So would the shepherd had he bin in field

So would my master, had he not r^n away^

Tremelioes force saved thousands from the ^oe^

The shepherds force have saved thousand, more.

Aye shipstickes, nothing else.

Segasto cease to accuse the shepherd,
His woorthynesse deserves a recompense,
All we are bound to do the shepherd good:
Shepherd, whereas it was my sentence, thou should die^
So shall my sentence stand, for thou shall die.

Thanks to your maistie.

But soft Segasto, not for this offense,
Long may thou live, and when the sisters shall decree
To cut in twain the twisted thread of life,
Then let him die, for this I set thee free,
And for thy valor I will honor thee.

Thanks to your maiestie^

Come daughter let us now depart, to honor the worthy valor of the shepherd
with our rewards

O master hear you, you have made a fresh hand now you would be ^lowe you,
why what will you do now? you have lost me a good occupation by the means,
Faith master now I cannot hang the shephe^rd, I pray you let me taken the
pains to hang you, it is but half an hours exercise


You are still in your knavery, but ^ith I cannot have his life I will procure
his banishment for ever. Come on ^irra


Yes forsooth I come laugh at him I pray you.

From Amadine and from her fathers court,
With gold and silver and with rich rewards,
Flowing from the banks of golden tresuries,
More may I boast and say but I,
Was never shepherd in such dignity,

All hayle worthy shepherd.

All rain lousy shepherd.

Welcome my frindes, from whence come you;

The King and Amadine greetes thee well,
And after greetings done, bids thee depart the court, shepherd begone.

Shepherd take law legs, fly away shepherd

Whose words are these? came these from Amadine?

Aye from Amadine.

Aye from Amladine.

Ah luckelesse fortune worse then Phaetons tale,
My former bless is now become my bale.

What w^lt thou poison thy self?

My former heaven is now become my hell.

The worst ale house that I ever came in, in all my life.

What shall I do.

Even go hang thy self half an nower.

Can Amadine so churelishly command.
To banish the shepherd from her Fathers court?

What should shepheardes do in the court.

What should shepherrdes do amongst us, have we not Lords enough on us in the
court

Why shepheardes are men, and kings are no more.

Shephe^rdes are men and masters over their flock

That's a lie who pays them their wages the^?

Well you are always interrupting of me,
But you are best look to him least you hang for him when he is gone.

And you shall hang for company,
For leaving me alone.
Shepherd stand forth and hear thy sentence,
Shepherd begone within three days in pain of,
My displeasure, shepherd begone, shepherd begone, begone, begone, begone,
shepherd, shepherd, shephear

And must I go, and must I needs depart?
Ye goodly groves partakers of my songs
In time tofore when fortune did not frown,
Power forth your plaints and wail a while with me
And thou bright sun my comfort in the cold,
Hide, hide thy face and leave me comfortless,
Ye wholesome herbs, and sweet smelling savors,
Ye each thing else prolonging life of man,
Change, change your wonted course,
That ^anting your aid, in woeful sort may die,

Arinea if any body ask for me,
Make some excuse till I return.

What and Segasto call.

Do thou the like to him, I mean not to stay long^

This voice so sweet my pining spirits reuiues

Shepherd, well met tell me how thou do.

I linger life yet wish for speedy death.

Shepherd, although thy banishment already be decreed and all against thy
will, yet Amadine

Ah Amadine, to hear of banishment is death,
I double death to me, but since I must depart, one thing I crave.

Say on with all my heart.

That in absence either far or near.
You honoor me as servant with your name.

Not so.

And why?

I honor thee as sovereign with my heart.

A shepherd and a sovereign nothing like.

Yet like enough where there is no dislike.

Yet great dislike or else no banishment.

Shepherd, it is only Segasto that procures thy banishment.

Unworthy wightes are most in ielosie.

Would God they would freethe from banishment, or likewise bamish me.

Amen say I, to have your company.

Well shepherd, since thou suffer this for my sake, with thee in exile also
let me live
On this condition shepherd thou can love.

No longer love no longer let me live.

O flat I loved one indeed, now love I none but only thee.

Thanks worthy princes I borne likewise,
Yet smother up the blast,
I dare not promise what I may perform,

Well shepherd, hark what I shall say,
I will return unto my Fathers court.
Therefore to provide me of such nescessaries,
As for our journey I shall think most fit,
This being done I will return to thee,
Do thou therefore appoint the place where we may meet.

Down in the valley where I slew the bear,
And there does grow a ^aire broad branched beach,
That ouershades a well, so who comes first
Let them abid the happy meeting of us both.
How like you this?

I like i^ very well.

Now if you please you may appoint the time,

Full three hours hence God willing, I will return.

The thanks that paris gave the grecian queen the like does Mucedorns yield.

Then Mucedorus forthreee hours farewell.

Your departure lady breeds a privy pain.

It Is well Segasto that thou have thy will,
Should such a shhephard, such a simple swain
As he, eclips thy credit ^amous through the court.
No ply Segasto ply; let it not in Arragon be saide^
A shephard has Segatoes honor won.

Wha^ hoe master will you come away;

Will you come hither I pray you, what is the matter?

Why, is it not past a leaven a clock.

How then sir.

I pray you com away to dinner:

I pray you come hither.

Here Is such a do with you, will you never come.

I pray you sir what news of the message I sent you about,

I tell you all the mess^s be on the table already,
There wants not so much as a mess of mustard half an novver ago.

Come sir, your mind is all upon your belly.
You have forgotten what I did bid you do,

Faith I know nothing, but you bad me go to breakefast.

Was that all;

Faith I have forgotten it, the very sent of the meat made me has forget it
quite

You have forgotten the arrant I bid you do.

What arrant, an arrant knave, or arrant whore;

Why thou knave, did I not bid thee banish the shepherd.

O the shephards bastard.

I tell thee the shepheardes banishment.

I tell you the shepherds bastard shall be well kept i will look to it my self
else, but I pray you come away to dinner

Then you vvil not tell me whether you have banished him or not.

Why I cannot say banishment and you would give me a thousand pounds to say so,

Why you horson slave, have you forgotten, that
I sent you, and another to drive away the shephard.

What an ass are you^ heers a stir in dee^de heeres message, arrant,
banishment, and I cannot tell what

I pray you sir, shall I know whether you have drove him away.

Faith I think I have, and you will not believe me ask my stafe.

Why can thy staff tell.
Why he was with me to.

Then happy I that have obtaind my will.

And happier I, if you would go to dinner.

Come sir, follow me.

I warrant you I will not loose an inch of you now you are going to dinner, I
promise you I thought seven year before I could get him away

God grant my long delaie procures no harm
Nor this my tarring frustrate my pretense,
My Mucedorus surely stays for me,
And thinks me over long, at length I come
My present promise to perform:
Ah what a thing is firm unfeigned love,
What is i^ which true love dares not tempt
My fat^er he may make bu^ I must match,
Segasto l^ues b^t Amadine must like,
Where likes he^ best c^mpulsion is a thrall,
No, no, the hearty choice is all in all,
The shephards virtue Amadine esteems.
But what me thinks my shephard is not come?
I muse at that, the hour is sure at hand,
Well here i will rest till Mucedorus come.

A hapie pray, now Bremo feed on flesh,
Dainties Bremo dainties thy hungry panch to fill,
Now glut thy greedy guts with luke warm blood,
Come fight with me, I long to see thee dead.

How can she fight that weapons cannot weeld?

What can not fight? then lie thou down and die.

What must I die?

What needs these words. I thirst to suck thy blood

Yet pity me and let me live a while.

No pity I, i will feed upon thy flesh,
I Will tear thy body peecemeale joint from joint.

Ah now I want my shephards company.

i will crush thy bones betwixt tow oken trees.

Have shephard have or else thon comst to lat.

i will suck the sweetness from thy marie bones.

Ah spare ah spare to shed my guiltless blood

With this my bat will I beat out thy brains
Down, down I say, prostrate thy self upon the ground

Then Mucedorus farevvel^ my hopedioi^s farevvel.
Yea farevvell life, and vvelcome present death,
To thee O God I yield my dying ghost.

Now Bremo play thy part,
How now what sudden chance is this.
My limbs do tremble and my s^evves shake
My vnvveakned arms have lost their former force:
Ah Bremo, Bremo, what a foil have thou,
That yet at no time ever vvast afraid
To dare the greatest gods to fi^ght with thee,
And now vva^tstrength for one down driving blovv
Ah how my courage fails when I should strike,
Some new come spirit abiding in my breast,
Shall I spare her Bremo, spare her, do not kill,
Says spare her which never spar^dany?
To it Bremo to it, say again.
I cannot weeld my weapons in my hand,
Me thi^kes I should not str^k so fair a one,
I think her beawtie has bewitched my sorce
Or else with in me altered natures course,
ay woman, will thou live in woods with me;

Feign would I live, yet loath to live in woods,

Thou shall not choose, it shall be as I say and therefore follow me.

It was my will an hour a go and more,
As was my promise for to make return,
But other business hindered my pretense.
It is a world to s^e when man appoints,
And purposelie one ce^taine thing decrees
How many things may hinder his inten^.
What once would wish the same is farthest off:
But yet thappoynted time cannot be past,
Nor has her pres^nce yet prevented we,
Well here i will s^aie, and expect her coming.

Some one or other is pursued no doubt
Perhaps some search for me, it is good to doubt the worst, therefor i will begone.

Hold him, hold him hold him, heers a stur in deed
Here came hew after the crier, and I was set close
At mother Nips house, and there I calde for three
Pots of ale, as it is the manner o^ us courtiers, now sir,
I had taken the maiden head of tow of them.
Now as I was lifting up the third to my mouth, there came hold him, hold him,
now I could not tell whom to catch hold on, but I am sure I caught one
perchance a may be in this pot, well i will see, mas I cannot see him yet, well
i will look a little ^urther, mas he is a little slave if a be here, why heers
no body, all this goes well yet: but if the old trot should come for her pot,
I marry there is the matter but I care not, i will face her out, and call her old
rustie dustie mustie ^ustie crustkie firebran, and worse then all that, and so
face her out of her pot: but soft here she comes


Come on you knawe where is my pot you knave?

Go look your pot, come not to me for your pot twe^e good for you.

Thou lie thou knave thou have my pot^

You lie and you say it, I your pot, I know what i will say

Why what will thou say.

But say I have him and thou darste,

Why thou knave. thou have not only my pot but my drink unpaid for.

You lie like an old I will not say whore.

do thou call me whore, i will cap thee my for pot.

Cap me and thou dare, searce me whether I have it or no.

How now sir, what is the matter;


Oh flies master flies.


Flies where are they?


Oh here master, all about your face.


Why thou lie I think thou art mad.


Why master, I have killed a duncart full at the least


Go to sir, leaving this idel talk give ear to me.


How, give you one of my ears? not and you were ten masters.


Why sir I bid you give ear to my words,


I tell you I will no be made a curtall for no man's pleasure


I tell thee attend what I say go thy ways straight and rear the whole town.


How rear the town even go your self, it is more then I can do, why do
you think I can rear a town, that can scarce rear a pot of ale to my head?
I should rear a town should I not


Go to the cunstable and make a privy search, for the shephard is run away
with the Kings daughter


How? is the shepherd run away with the kin^s daughter. or is the kings
daughter run away with the shepherd


I cannot tell, but they are both gone together


What a fool is she to run away with the shepherd, why I think I am a
little hansomer man then the shepherd my self, but tell me master, must I make
a privy search, or search in the privy


why do thou think they will be there;


I cannot tell.


Well then search every where. leave no place unsearched for them.


Oh now am I in office, uow will I to that old firbra^ds house and will not leave
one place unsearched, nay i will to her ale stand and drink as long as I can
stand, and when I have done i will let out all the rest, to se if he be not hid in
the barrel, and I find him not there, i will to the cubord, i will not leave one
corner of her house unsearched, ye faith ye old crust I will be with you now.


Now Mucedorns whither will thou go,
Home to thy father to thy native soil,
Or try some long abode within these woods;
Well I will hence depart and hie me home,
What hie me home said I? that may not be.
In Amadine rests my felicity
Then Mucedorus do as thou did decree,
Attire thee hermit like, within these grouees,
Walk often to the be^ch and view the well.
Make settles th^re and seat thy self thereon,
And when thou feel thy self to be a thrist,
Then drink a hearty draught to Amadine,
No doubt she thinks on thee,
And will one day com^ pleg thee at this we^l^
Come habit thou art fit for me,
No shepherd now, a hermit I must be:
Me thinks this fits me very wel^,
Now must I learn to bear a walking staff,
And exercise some gravity with^ll.

Heers throw the wods, and throw the wods, to look out a shepherd and a stray
kings daugter, but ^o^te who have we here, what art thou


I am an hermit.


An^emmet, I never saw such big emmet in all my life before.


I tell you sir I am an hermit, one that leads a solitary life within these
woods


O I know the now, thou art her that eats up all the hips and hawes, we could
not have one piece of fat bacon for thee all this year


Thou do mistake me, but I pray thee tell me what do thou seek in these
wood


What do I seek, for a stray Kings daughter run away with a shephard:


A stray Kings daught^r run away with a sh^pheaarde. Wherefore can thou
tell


Yes that I can, it is this, my master and Amadins walking one day abrod, nearer
to these woods then they wete used, about what I can not tell, but tovvarde
them comes running a great bear, now my master he plaide the man and run
away, and Amadine crying after him: now sir comes me a shepherd and strikes
off the b^ares head, now whether the bear where dead before or no I cannot tell
for bring twenty b^ars before me and bind their hands and feet and i will kill
them al: now euer^ince Amadine has bin in love with the sheph^ard, and for
good will she is even run away with the shepherd


What manner of man was a, can describe him unto me;


Scrib him aye I war^ant you that I can, a was a litt^l, low, broad, tall,
narrow, big well favored fe^low, a ie^kin of whit cloth, and buttons of the
same cloat


Thou discr^b^st him well, but if I chance to se any such pray you where sh^l I
find you, or what is your nam


My name is called master mouse,


Oh m^ister mouse, I pray you what of^ice might you ^e^r^ in the ^ourt?


M^rry sir I am a ^usher of the stable.


O usher of the table-


Nay I say rusher and i will prove mine office good, ^or look sir when any coms
from under ^he s^a or so, and a dog chance to blow his nose backewarde, then
with a whip I give him the good time of the day, and straw rushes presently,
therefore I am a rusher, a hie off^ce I promise ye


But where shall I find you in the Court^?


Why where it is best being, either in he ^itching a eating or in the butterie
drinking: but i^ you come I will provide for th^e a pe^ce of beef and brew is
knockle d^epe in ^at, pray you take pains remember master mouse.


Ay sir, I warrant I will not forget you.
Ah Amadine, what should become of the.
whither should thou go so long unknown.
with watch and ward each passage is beset,
So that she cannot long escape unknown:
Doubtless she has lost her self within these woods out
And wandering too and fro she seeks the well,
Which yet she cannot find, therefore will I seck he^s,

Amadine, how like you Br^mo and his vvoodes?

As like the vvoods of Bremoes cruelty,
Though I were dombe and could not answer him,
The beasts themselves would with relenting tears
Bewail thy savage and vnhumaine deeds.

My love, why do thou murmur to thy self?
Speak louder, for thy Bremo hears thee not.

My Bremo, no the shepherd is my love.

Have I not saved thee from sudden death,
Giving thee leave to live that thou might love?
And do thou whet me on to cruelty;
Come kiss me swe^e for all my favors past.

I may not Bremo and therefore pardon me.

See how she flings away from me;
I will follow and give a rend to her,
Deny my love, ah worm of beauty
I will chastise the^ com, com, prepare thy head upon the block

Oh spare me Bremo love should limit life,
Not to be made a murderer of him self
If thou will glut thy loving heart with blood,
Encounter with the lion or the bear,
And a like wolf pray not upon a lamb.

Why then do thou repine at me?
If thou will love me thou shall be my que^ne,
I will crown thee with a complet made of Iuorie,
And make the rose and lilly wait on thee,
I Will ^end the burley branches from the oak,
To shadow thee from buring sun.
The trees shall spread themselves where thou do go,
And as they spread, i will trace along with thee,

You may, for who but you?

Thou shall be ^ed with quails and partridges
With black birds, larkes, thrushes and nightingales.
Thy d^inke shall be goats milk and crystal water,
Distilled from the fountains and the clearest springs.
And all the dainties that the woods afforde.
I Will fre^ly give thee to obtain thy love.

You may, for who but you?

The day i will spend to recreate my love,
With all the plea^u^es that I can devise,
An^ (...)hy bedfellow,
An (...) thee in mine arms.

(...), ^o may not you.

The satyrs and the woodnimphs shall attend on the
And lull thee a sleep with musickes sound,
And in the morning when thou do awake
The lark shall sing good morn to my queen,
And whilst he singes i will kiss my Amadine.

You may, for who but you.

When thou art up, the wood lanes shall be strawed
With violets, cowslips and sweet marigolds.
For thee to trampel and to trace upon,
And I will teach thee how to kill the dear,
To chase the heart and how to rowse the roe^
If thou will live to love and honor me.

You may for who but you?

Welcomd sir, an hour ago I looked for such a gest
Be merry wench, we will have a frollike feast,
Heeres flesh enough for to suffice us both,
Stay sir, will thou fight or do thou yeel to die?

I want a weapon, how can I fight?

Thou wants a weapon, why then thou yeelst to die.

I say not so, I do not yield to die.

Thou shall not choose, I long to see thee dead

Yet ^pare him Bremo spare him

A way, I say, I will not spare him.

Yet give me leave to speak.

Thou shall not speak.

Yet give him leave to speak for my sake.

Speak on, but be not over long.

In time of yore when men like brutish beasts^
Did lead their lives in loathsome c^lles and woods
And wholly gave them selves to wi^lesse will,
A rude unruly rout, then man to man became
A present pray, then might prevailed,
The weakst went to walls,
Right was unknown, for wrong was all in all^
As men thus lived in his great outrage,
Behold one Orpheus came as poets tell,
And them `from rudenes unto reason brought,
Who led by reasonson some forsook the woods,
Insteade of ca^es ^hey built them castles strong,
Cities and towns were founded by them then,
Glad wrethey, they found such ease,
And in the end they grew to perfect amity
Waying their former wickedness,
They tearmd the time wherein they lived then
A golden age, a goodly golden age.
Now Bremo, for so I hear thee called.
If men which lived tofo^e as thou do now,
Wily in wood, addicted al^ to spoil,
Returned were by worthy Orpheus means,
Let me like Orpheus cause thee to return
From murder, bloodshed and like cru^ltie,
What should we fight be^or we have a cause
No, lets live and love together faithfully.
I Will fight for thee.

Fight form or die, or fight or else thou die.

hold Bremo hold,

Away I say, thou troublest me,

You promised me to make me your queenne.

I did, I mean no less.

You promised that I should have my will,

I did I mean no less.

Then save this hermits life, for he may save us both:

A thy request i will spare him, but never any after him
Say hermit what can thou do?

I Will wait on thee, sometime upon the queen, such sreuice shall thou shortly
have as Bremo never had


Come sirs what shall I never have you find out Amadine and the shepherd)

And I have bin through the woods, and through the woods, and could see nothing
but an emet

Why I see thousand emets, thou meanest a little one,

Nay that emet that I saw was bigger then thou art

Bigger then I what a fool have you to your man, I pray you master turn him
away

But do thou hea^e, was he ^ot a man.

think he was, for he said he did lead a saltseller life about the woods.

Th^n would say a solitary li^e about the woods

I think it was so indeed^

I thought what a fool thou art.

Thou art a wise man, why he did nothing but sleep since he went

But tell me Mouse, how did he go;

In a whit gown and a whit hat on his head, and a staff in his hand.

I thought so, it was a he^mit that walked a solita^ie life in the woods.

Well, get you to dinner, and after never leave seeking til you bring some
news of them, or i will hang you both

How now Rombelo, what shall we do now;

Faith i will home to dinner, and afterward to sleep^

Why then thou will be hanged.

Faith ^ care not, for I know I shall never f^nd them well i will once more abroad,
and if I cannot find them, i will never come home again

I tell thee what Rombelo, thou shall go in at one end of the wood and I at the
other, and we will meet both together at the midst

Content, lets away to dinner^

Unknown to any here within these woods
With bloody Bremo do I lead my life,
The monster he does murder all he meets,
He spares none and none does him escape,
Who would continue, who but only I
In such a cruel cutthroates company.
Yet Amadine is there how can I choose:
Ah silly soul how often times she sits
And sighs, and calls come shepherd come,
Svveete Mucedorus, come and set me free,
When Mucedorus pesent stands herby:
But here she comes, what nevves fair Lady as you walk. these vvoods.

Ah hermit, none but bad and such as thou know.

How do you like your Bremo and his vvoods;

Not my Bremo nor his Bremo vvoods;

And why, not yours, me thinks he loves you well

I like him not, his love to me is nothing wroth

Lady, in this methinkes you offer vvrong,
To hate the man that ever loves you best.

Ah hermit, I take no, pleasure in his love.
Neither yet does Bremo like me best.

pardon my boldness fai^e lady, since we both
May safely talk now out of Bremos sight,
Unfold to me if so you please, the full discourse
How, when and why you came into these vvoods,
And fell into this blodie burchers hands.

Hermit I vvil, of late a vvorthie shepherd I did love you.

A shephard lady, sure a man unfit to match with

Hermit this is true, and when we had.

Stay there, the vvild men comes
Refer the rest until another time.
What secret tale is this, what whispering have we here;
Villain I charge the tell thy tale again,

I needs I must, lo here it is again,
When as we both had lost the sight of thee
It greeud us both, but specially thy queen,
Who in thy absence ever fears the vvorst,
Least some misehance befall your royrll grace.
Shall my sweet ^ Bremo wander through the woods.
To^le to and fro for to redress my want,
Hazard his life and all to cherishe me,
I like not this quoth she
And thereupon craude to know of me
If I could teach her handle weapons well.
My aunswe^h was I had small skill therein,
But gladmost mighty king to learn of thee.
And this was all.

Whast so, none can dislike of this^
I Will teach you both to fight, but first my queen begin,
Here take this weapon, se^ how thou can use it.

This is to big, I cannot weeld it in my arm.

Is It so, we will have a knotty crabtree st^ffe for thee:
But sir tell me, what say thou^

With all my heart I willing am to learn.

Then take my stafe and see how can weeld it.

First teach me how to hold it in my hand.

Thou houldest it well, look how he does thou may the sooner learn.

Next tell me how and when it is best to strike.

It Is best to strike when time does ^erue, it is best to loose no time.

Then now or never is my time to st^ike.

And when thou strikest, be sure thou hit the head

The head;

The very head.

Then have at thine, so lie there and die,
A death no dout acording to desert.
Or else a worse as thou deseruest a vvo^se.

It glads my heart this tirants death to see.

Now lady it remains in you to end the tale you lately had begun, being
enterrupted by this wicked vvight
You said you loved a shepherd.

I so I do^, and none but only him.
And will do still as long as life shall last

But tell me lady, si^h I set you free,
What course of life do you intend to take?

I will disguised wander through the world
Til I have found him out,

How i^ you find your shepha^d in these woods^

Ah none so happy then as Amadine^

In tract of time a man may alter much,
Say Lady do you know your shepherd well?

My Mucedorus has he set me fre^?

he has set thee free.

And lived so long unknown to Amadine.

Ay that's a question where of you may not be resolved,
You know that I am banished from the court,
I know likewise each pas^age is be^et,
So that we cannot long escape unknown,
Therefore my will is this, that we return
Right throught the thickets to the wild man's cave:
And there a while live on his provision,
Until the search and n^rrow watch be past.
This is my counsel, and I think it best.

I think the very same.

Come lets begone.

Nay soft sir are you heere^ abots on you,
I was like to be hang^d for not finding you,
We would borrow a certain stray kings daughter of you, a wench, a wence sir
we wo^ld have

A wench o^ me i will make the eat my sword.

Oh Lord, nay and you are so lusty I Will call a cooling card for you, ho master,
master come away quickly

What Is the matter;

Look master, Amadine and the shepherd, oh brave

What minion, have I found you out;

Nay that's alie, I found her out my slfe.

Thou gadding huswife, what cause had thou to gad abroad,
When as thou know our wedding day so nie?

Not so Segasto, no such thing in hand, show your assurance, then i will answer
you

Thy fathers promise my assurance is.

But what he promised he has not performde^

It rests in thee for to perform the same:

No^ I.

And why;

So is my will and therefore even so.

Master with anon, none noe.

A wicked villant art thou here?

What needs these words we way them not?

We way them not proud shepherd, I skorne thy company.

We Will not have a corner of thy company.

I scorn not thee, nor yet the least of thine.

That's a lie, a would have killed me with his pugs nondo.

This stoutnesse Amadine contents me not.

Then seek an other that may you better please

Well Amadine, it only rests in thee
Without delay to make thy choice of three,
There stands Segasto, here a shepherd stands,
There stands the third, now make thy choice,

A Lord at the least I am.

My choice is made, for I will none but thee.

A worthy mate no doubt for such a wife.

And Am^dine, why will thou none but m^?
I cannot keep thee as thy father did,
I have no lands for to maintain thy state.
Mor^ouer if thou mean to be my wife,
Commonly this must be thy use,
To bed at midnight, up at four,
Drudge all day and ^rudge from place to place,
Whereby our da^li^ vittel for to win:
And last of all which is the worst of all,
No princes then but plain a shepherds wife.

Then god ge you god morrow goo^y shepherd

It shall not need if Amadine do live,
Thou shall be crowned king of Arragon,

Oh master laugh, when he is King then i will be a queen.

Then know that which nere tofore was known
I am no shepherd, no Arragonian I,
But borne of Royal blood, my fathers of Valentia
King, my mother q^eene, who for thy secret sake
Took this hard ^ask in hand.

Ah how I joy my fortune is so good,

Well now I see, Segasto shall not ^peede
But Mucedorus, I as much do joy
To see thee here within our Court of Arragon,
As if a kingdom had befalne me this time,
I with my heart surrender it to thee.
And look what right to Amadine I have.

What barnes door and borne where my father
Was cunstable^ abots on thee, how do thee.

Thanks Segasto, but yet you leueld at the crowne^

M^ister bear this and bear all.

Why so sir.

He sees sees you take a goose by the crown.

Go to sir, away, post you to the king,
Whose har^ is fraught with careful doubts,
Glad him up and tell him these good news,
And we will follow as fast as we may.

I go master, I run master.

Break heart and end my paled woes,
My amadine the comfort of my life,
How can I joy except she were in sight.
Her absence breeds sorrow to my soul
And with a thunder breaks my heart in twain.

Forbear thos^ passions gentle King,
And you shall see twill turn unto the best,
And bring your soul to quiet and to joy.

Such joy as death, I do assure me that,
And naught but death, unless of her I hear,
And that with speed, I cannot sigh thus long
But what a tumult do I hear within.

I hear a noise of ouer-passing joy
Within the court, my Lord be of good comfort.
And here comes one in have,

A King, a King, a King.

Why how now sir, what is the matter?

O it is nevves for a king'tis vvoorth money.

Why sir, thou shall have silver and gold if it be good.

O it is good, it is good, Amadine.

Oh what of her, tell me? and I wll make thee a knight

How a spirit? no by lady, I will not be aspirit^
Masters get ye away, if I be aspir^it, I shall be so lean
I shall make you all afraid.

Thou so^, the King means to make thee a ge^tleman.

Why I shall want parrell.

Thou shall want for nothing.

Then stand away, trick up thy self, here they come.

My gracious father pardon thy disloyal daughter

What do mine eyes be hold my daughter Amadine
Rise up dear daughter and let these my embrasing arms
Show some token of thy father joy,
Which ever since thy departure has la^guished in sorrow:

Dear father, never were your sorrows
Greater then my griefs,
Never you so deloate as I comfortless,
Yet nevertheless acknowledging my self
To be the cause of both, on bended knees
I humbly c^aue your pardon.

i will pardon thee dear daughter^ but as for him.

Ah father what of him,

Assure as I am a king, and wear the crown,
I will revenge on that accursed wretch.

Ye^ worthy prince work not thy will in wrath show favor.

I, such favor as thou deseruest.

I do deserve the daughter of a king.

Oh impudent, a shepherd and so insolent.

No shepherd I, but a worthy prince.

In far conceit, not princely borne.

Yes princely borne my father is a king.
My mother Queen, and of Valentia both.

What Mucedorns, welcome to our court,
What cause had thou to come to me disguisde?

No cause to fear, I caused no offense,
But this desiring thy daughters virtues for to see
Disguised my self from out my fathers court,
Unknown to any in secret I did rest,
And passed many troubles near to death,
So has your daughter my partaker bin,
As you shall know hereafter more at large,
Desiring you, you will give her to me,
Even as mine own and sovereign of my life
Then shall I think my travels are well spent.

With all my heart: but this.
Segasto claims my promise made to fore,
That he should have her as his only wife,
Before my counsel when we came from war
Segasto, may I crave thee let it pass.
And give Amadine as wife to Mucedorus;

With all my heart, were it far a greater thing,
And what ^ may to furnish up there rites,
With pleasing sports and pastimes you shall see.

Thanks good Segasto, I will think of this.

Thanks good my Lord, and while I live
Account of me in what I can or may.

And good Segasto these great cur^esies
Shall not be forgot.

Why ha^ke you master, bones what have you done?
What given away the wench you made me take such pains for, you are wise
indeed, mas and I had known of that I would have had her my self. faith
master now we may go to breakefast with a woodcoke pie

Go sir you were best leave this knauerie^

Come on my Lords, lets now to court
Where we may finish up the ioyfullest day
That ever hapt to a distressed King,
With mirth and joy and great solemnity,
We Will finish up these hymen's rightes most pleasant lie,

Hoe Lords at the first, I am one to, but hear master King by your leave a
cast, now you have done with them, I pray you begin with me

Why what would thou ^aue;

O ^ou forgot, now, a little apparel to makes
hansome what should Lo^des go so beggarly as I do^?

What I did promise thee, I will perform, attend^ on me, come le^s depart.
We Will wait on you with all our hearts.

And with a piece of my liver to.

How now Envy, what blushest thou all ready,
Peep forth, hide not thy head with shame,
But with a courage praise a woman's deeds,
Thy threats were vain, thou could do me no hurt
Although thou seem to cross me with despite,
^ouerwhel^de, and turnde vpside down thy block
And made thy self to stumble at the same.

Though stumbled yet not overthrown,
Thou can not draw my heart to mi^denesse,
Yet must I needs confess thou have don well,
And plaide thy part with merth and pleasant glee:
Say all this, yet can thou not conquer me,
Although this time thou have got yet not the conquest neither.
A double revenge another time i will have:

Then cai^ife cu^sed, stoop upon thy knee,
Yield to a woman, though not to me,
And pray we both together with our hearts,
That she thrice Nestors years may with us rest,
And from her foes high God defend her sti^l.
That they against her may never wooke thi^ will.

En^^e were he never so stout
Would beck and bow unto her majesty,
^ndeede Comedy thou have ouerrunne me now.
And fo^st me stoop unto a woman's swaie.
God grant her grace amongst us long may reign,
And those that would not have it so,
Would that by envy soon their hea^tes they might forgo.

The Counsel, Noble, and this Realm,
Lord guide it still with thy most holy hand,
The Commons and the subjects grant them grace^
Their prince to serve, her to obey, and ^reason to deface:
Long may she rain, in joy and great felicity,
Each Christian heart do say amen with me,


