ANother Tragedy? What will become
Of the soft Muse? She Will shortly have no room
On this transformed stage. Ladies shall not blush,
Nor smile under their fannes: nor he in plush,
That from the Poets labors in the pit
Informs himself for the exercise of wit
At Tavernes, gather notes. Stay, I should be
A Prologue, not a Satyr. You shall see
A piece from a rich subject drawn; but how
The workmanship will please, and you allow
The imperfect colors and the weak design,
Let your own judgments tell you, and not mine.
The Author warrants us the story's clear;
Unless to fit the Stage he does transfer
Some actions that were ones to other men:
The places sometimes changed too for the Scene.
Which is translated as the music plays
Betwixt the acts: wherein he likewise prays
You will conceive his battles done, and then
The method shall appear, in which his pen
Has smoothly dressed the argument. It Is free
As ever Play was from scurrility.
Nor need you Ladies fear the horrid sight:
And the more horrid noise of target sight
By the blue-coated Stage-keepers: our spheres
Have better music to delight your ears,
And not a strain that is old, though some would task
His borrowing from a former play. We ask
Your patience but two hours, by which time he
Shall either dye or live to Poesy.

Here Is the right use of victory, to tame
Our furies with soft case and wantonness,
After so many travels. Had our Hanniball
Possessed himself of Rome without a Capua,
The conquest had been poor.

These spoils of beauty,
And free ones too, that uncompel'd will run
To embrace a Soldier; rock him in her arms;
Sing him asleep, and with her icy fingers
K^mbing the knotted curles of his black hair
So long neglected, make her self the ravisher:
O^l' is Elysium.

Nay, to have such change
Of (...); as if their inventions
(...), busy to make our delights
The object of their care. Here we are feasted
With Chalcedonian Tuning; Rhodian guilt heads,
And more than Samian gluttony. We drink
No wine, but of Campania's Mascicus,
Or grape crowned Aulon. Boys more fair than he
That bears Jove's Cup, rapt on the duskie wings
O^'s sky-borne Eagle, serve the banquet up
In golden dishes, or Corinthian plate,
Luxuries chiefest.

To crown the entertainment,
Here sits a Lady, Hebe never blushed
A color like her check: and in her eye
A thousand Cupids move in wanton friskes,
To catch the gazers. There Is another decked
In the Seas riches, which the Negro dives for:
Her pearls reflection dimacing the dark tapers,
As if all light were borrowed from those Suns
Their orient roundnesse mockes us with. A third
Betrays through a transparent lawne the beauty
Of a complexion, white and red did never
Mix^a more perfect; and a shape exact
As Natures first Pandoras. The possession
After desire has made a preparation
In every sense to entertain these joys,
Can earth afford a Heaven, and this not be
The best hope ever faign'd?

Then to be clothed
In silks of Tyrian dye; tosleepe on down,
And waking claspe a Goddess in ones arms,
Lovely as Cytharea; revell sometimes,
And dance to th'Mermaides music, 'till the night
Is made one artificial day, inverting
The course of time and's actions: oh delights,
Beyond weak comprehension! We begin
To taste them without sense, did not diversity
Whet appetite anew?

Yet so much change
Should make invention barren: but it is fruitful,
Pregnant, and teemes as fast as it is delivered.
Delicious Capua!

Pleasures only storehouse!
Were I an Hanniball? and conquest quiet me
As fair as daylight spreads his crystal wings.
One Capua should ransom all.

What Is here?
She courts him with as earnest zeal, as Cynthia
Would her Endymion, or the gray-ey'd Morn
Her early Cephalus.

Now by my Sword.

Is that a Soldiers oath in Capua?
By the bright tresses of my Mistress hair,
Fine as Arachne's web, or Gosshimere:
Whose curles when garnisht with their dressing, show
Like that spunne vapor when it is pearl'd with dew.
Or by the Sunshine of her crystal eyes,
Wherein the God of Love his wet wings dry's
After his bathing in sad Lovers tears.
These are the only oaths a Soldier swears.
What should we do with swords?

Indeed it is true
Their bloody use has been so long neglected,
And for my part I am so cloyed with women,
Mine must be filled to powder, and prepared
To be their Physic: the greene-sicknesse else
Will not be cured by me.

Mine shall be drawn
To wear for pinnes: and that which often has reigned
The blood of Romans on my hilts and hand,
Wearied almost with slaughter, shall be touched
With trembling fingers, white as Othris snow;
Whilst the soft handler starts, if by mischance
The point but prick her skin, and must consult
With some learned unguentary to prevent
Th'invisible scarre. Why here we cannot quarrel
Amongst ourselves for wenches. There Is a Lady,
As mean a beauty heretofore has been
The ground of a sad war, or in a Camp
Sur'd up a mutiny: we cannot envy it,
That he, a common Soldier, valors ciphar,
One only pressed to make the number up,
Enjoves her wholly, and perhaps has change.

Nay, stands upon nice (...) for his reward;
And must be hired to pleasure, such as some
Would even through any danger to embrace.
Prithee observe..

Why should I be denied?
Am I not fair enough? My beauty fresh
As the new springs, when wanton Phoebus mounts
His ournish't chariot early to salute her,
And k^sse dew from her cheeks.

There are as faite
And free. A pension Lady must be thought of;
I cannot else be sportive.

Is tha all?
I Will full thy burgnet with Iberian gold
Stamped into medals; Sell my wanton treasury,
Rings, Jewels, Catkanets, e're thou shall want,
But what thy wish can covet.

This old buffe
Would be translated.

Into Persian mantles,
Richly embroydred; no rough pelt of thrumbes
To fight with weather. Shall be clothed in silks,
Such as may vye for touch with their softness
When it is calmest, and no violent gust
Does wave it into wrinckles.

I must eat too.

Nothing but choycest caudies, and drink wine
That shall have pearls dissolved in it. Come let us hasten
To our delights. I have prepared a bed
Of artificial Roses mixed with down;
Wherein our dalliance we will emulate,
The Cyprian Queen and her loved warrior,
When in her Ivory arms she did embrace
His Iron sides.

Soft Lady, there are yet
Stricter conditions. 'I is not come to that.
I must not be confined to times or place;
Nor to your single number. I must change
As I see cause.

Shall be thine own disposer.
He minister, and like a hand-maide wait
When thou will grace another; nor repine,
But with a patient longing.

On these terms
I feel a provocation. Come.

Did ease
Ever before produce such acts of shame?

No matter. It Is a better life than war
Affords her sons. A hard cold bed of earth:
Sleeps broken with a thousand apprehensions
Of danger; diet course, and seldom seasonable;
Hunger and thirst; and death each hour presented.
Let us translate our Carthage unto Capua;
We shall not need to toil in blood and sweat
For more enlargement.

How does he like this softness? it agrees not
With his rough nature.

Music every place
Surfets with this lasciviousness.

March on my merry mates
To Venus wars:
You need not fear your pates,
You shall receive no wounds nor scarres,
You may come naked to the fight:
We Will have no other vesle but night.
Only you must not see
The blushes of your enemy.
The loving battail's set,
And we began
To counter meet
With active striving who shall win.
I saint and yet me thinks you yield,
Both lose, and yet both win the sield.
Recover strength, and then
We Will to these pleasant wars again.
Bravely maintained and well come off on both sides.
Curse on this case. You Are well met noble Captains,
How does your courage brook this silken slavery?
Is It not an easy bondage to be tied
In bracelets of a wanton Ladies hair?
And chain your daring spirits to the awe
Of every glance her eye shoots? Tell me truly
How do the pleasures of this Capua
Relish upon your senses? are they not
Even what desire can shape?
They are my Lord
Most absolute.

And you are pleased with them?

They cannot be refused, being offered us
So ap^y after labor, as the fruits
And harvest of our pains. What stupid earth
Can be so void of apprehension,
As not to think them blessings?

That can Hanniball;
Who through the twarthy vizard age and cares
Have tanned his face with, blusheth at the change
Of Soldiers into women. Why in stead
Of Plume-crown'd crests wear you not tyres? and deck
Your necks with gemmes, in stead of arming them
With Corslets? Lay by all command, save only
To set your distaffe-servants taskes, and study
Lascivious dressings, not wars discipline?
Better employ invention how to court
A Mistress in the fashionable garb,
Than to contrive a useful stratagem
Where force prevails not.

Whom have we to sight with?
Lead us again to action, we will express
A courage doubled by this little rest:
And from the hopes of such another conquest
We will act wonders, to make victory
Dote on our valors.

You like Carthaginians
Speak from the sonles of men. Muster your Soldiers:
We will again to Rome, and with the terror
Of our approach make earthquakes in the hearts
Of her gown'd Senators; burn the proud trophies,
Adorn her Capitol, or make them scar-crowes:
Bury her high-ascending Towers in heaps
Of their own ruins; and till Tyber's died
With blood of his own children, not an arm
Shall cease from slaughter. Have we cut our way
Through Mountains, and thawed rocks of Ice for passage
To reach the head of Rome, and shall we not
Triumph in her rich spoils? Yes; we will triumph.
Or by the Genius of my native Carthage,
And the religious oath I made my Father,
When yet my youth had seen the progress but
Of nine suns through the twelve celestial mansions,
I Will level all the rugged Appennines;
And mount the humblest valleys, 'till their heads
Be wrapped in clouds; whence thunder shall not force me,
Till I survey the playnes of Italy,
Like earth manured chalkt with the bones of Romans,
After their slesh is buried in the gorges
Of Kites and Vultures.

Speak like Hanniball.

What Lady's that?

She Is of Salapia.

She Is lovely. What unusual passions
Soften me on a sudden? I me thinks
Could play with air, and wanton with the breath
Of such a Mistress: court her amorously,
And not mistake a phrase, nor fright her tenderness
With any repetitions of wars horrors.
Cease your rebellion thoughts. I must be man,
And keep my freedom.

Do observe his eye
How it is fixed?

What did creation mean
A woman for, but pleasure? Should not I
Pursue it then since it is the end of all
We either do or wish? it is actions soul
That makes it live. I must enjoy it this way.
Desire's a law set down by natures Counsel,
And not to be disputed.

So my Lord!
Example shall direct us: we may well,
If Anniball turn Courtier.

One at once.
Sweet gentlemen. Though I should covet change
At once l'de not admit plurality.

To you (fair storehouse of your sexes excellence)
I would direct the language of my heart.

It Is sure a noble dialect, my Lord,
That must express it.

Lady it can speak.
Nothing but passion. You have wounded it.
And from the self same eye that shot the dart
I must have balm to cure it.

Y' are my Lord
A conqueror; and may command the wills
Of all beneath you.

But I am your captive.
And in that pleasant bondage would abide,
Though I might force my ransom.

Violence
Would it become those virtues same proclaim's
To have possessed you: and I dare be confident
Nothing could tempt you to turn ravisher,
Though I should boast virginity.

Suspect
Of such an ill, wrong's your own innocence.
My love is zealous, and the passive flame
Fed with a pure desire. I would enjoy you
To mix our souls, not merely to delight
The wanton senses.

How can you, a man
Whom custom has habituate in th'extremes
Of cruelty, change nature? and perhaps
Your first, innate, and not a second, only
Borne out of use. Me thinks it is not possible
Your thoughts should be possessed of other objects,
Then what wars horror paint's with bloody colors.
Love and a Lady are for such as case
Has softened into women: Hanniball
Has nothing in him, but what is masculine:
So hardened too, that those weak sires can never
Alter his temper.

Yes; your eyes have done it.
Although my skin be horney, and my flesh
Almost insensible through daily weight
Of heavy arms, the substance of my heart
Is flexible, and takes impressions
Of love from your perfections. It not derogates
From the best difference in man's composition
To love: for that best speaks him man, and argues
He has a spirit capable of things
Worthy his being. Come then perfect me
With your addition: make my captivity
A conquest, and I Will fixc.

That were enough
To brand you with a lasting infamy.
You have designs for action. Should you stop
The prosecution of a war begun
With such success, and only for a woman,
TO would make you be the scorn of men; the subject
Of jesters libels. I could court your valor
As you are Hanniball: but as a lover
The thought of that cooles all affection.
Had I at Cannas been, or Thrasimenus,
Guirt in an Amazonian male, my head
Wrapped in an Iron tyara, and my hand
Armed with a sword, I would have kept the side
Of Hanniball, to dote upon those wonders
His conquering arm then acted.

As from water
Cast on bytumen, so from these sharp checks
My flame increases. You express a soul
Makes others valors but derivative
From yours; as if the spring of all flowed thence;
And we but drank our small proportions
From your abundance. Our embraces would
People the wasted world with Warriors.

Whence speaks your have? and what?

I come from Spain,
And bring important news; but sad.

Shall we
By change ride through the Zodiac of your pleasures,
And feast our selves in every house?

You still
Mistake the sign.

It Is not in Virgo sure.

Nor yet in Taurus, though I have a husband.
You two are Gemini: a pair of -- Captains.

She slouts us sure.

What should this courtship mean?
Maharball and Himulco that were charactered
For valiant Captains, turned sinock-souldiers?
And Hanniball?

The air of Capua
Has not so changed us, but we can preserve
Our modesties.

Oh miracle! that Capua
Has honest women in it.

Will Hanniball
Attend my message?

Have thou brought her pearls
Ravished from necks of richest Roman dames?
I Will pave the path we tread to Hymen's joy
With spovles of all the cities I have conquered.

Not of new Carthage; Sagunt; Locris; Tarracon.
All these are re-orecome by Scipio;
In Spain he only triumph's.

Does not Hannibal?
Mind the sad news? Revenge if nothing else
Should wing him to new conquest.

I perceive
Errors in my behavior. Court a woman,
When I should threaten vengeance! But she is fair.
Hang beauty: that and ease are the only engines
To ruin virtue. Ladies pray' withdraw:
The affairs of men are handling.

May they prove
Your honors more in valor th(...)n in love.

I am prepared: and if there were an accident
That did exceed in horror, praise or wonder,
Discourse it lively, that it may impresse
Something within to beget an act
Shall parallel it.

That must be new Carthage
Her siege and taking. When the Roman general
Approach't the walls, a cold fear shoke her Genius:
The earth groaning with weight of such a multitude.
His Navy likewise at that instant made
A cloud upon the Sea. So round about
The city was beguirt. Our resolution
Mix't with despair soon armed us; and the assault
Being sudden, we did do before consider:
Yet what we did thus with the walls height proving
Successful, we had respite to advice.
The Sea we thought sullicient to defend
That pait it washes, and directed all
Our force to th'Isthmus: where we sallied forth.
The enemy retir's; but out of policy
To draw us farther on. And now the Sun
Surveyed us from his height; when suddenly
A violent North-winde joining with the ebb
Swept all the channel dry. Of which the Romans
Being informed by certain Fishermen
Seize the opportunity, and freely pass
To the unmanned walls; entering without resistance.
What more they, being fully conquerors, did,
Need's no relation: custom shows it Hannibal.
The example made some other cities yield;
Some policy won; some force; some treachery
Deliv'rd up: all are possessed by Scipio.

Then Rome shall ransom them. Revenge is able
Out of a flinty cowardice to strike
The fire of valor, with that new supply
I do expect from Carthage we will to Rome,
And emulate this victory; nor let it
Be your affliction that blind chance has robbed
Your former labors of their due reward;
Rome will repair all.

Cozen what answer send's the Carthage Senate
To my demands? Thy looks speak discontent;
As if the business of thy errand choked
The unwilling passage. Utter it; my breast
Is proof against all misfortune.
I must then
Deliver a relation of ingratitude
Beyond example. Those whom you have made
Masters of wealth and honor, and released
Their palsied age from many a coward fear,
Not minding the rich benefits you have done them,
Deny your need relief. If you want aid,
They say your conquest's but a lying rumor:
Nor will they credit doubtful, testimonies
Of any presents. They not stick to call
The ground of this your war in Italy
Your own ambition, not their sa^ety: malice
Of Hannos faction having fra^n'd pretenses
To cloud the glory of your actions.
Which to confirm the more, see their command
That you should instantly withdraw your forces,
And to return to Carthage.

Not till now?
When in my tallons I had almost seized
Romes Eagle, and prepared my sharpened beak
To prey upon her hear?

It Is likewise feared
That Massanissa has forsaken Carthage.
So that unless some policy can win
Syphax unto us, we must never more
Expect Numidian aid. His Counsailours
Seem to desire it; for they wish your presence:
And that you will put th'instructions here contained
Into a sudden act.

Must I then leave
Rome unsubverted? So a man that strives
To make himself eternal by erecting
Of some stupendous monument, is forced
To his last quiet e're the work be perfect.
Leaving it but a lame and half design
Of his ambition.

Has not Hanniball
His forces here? Let Us forward with that strength
Which yet is left us; nor regard the ties
Their doting policies would chain us with.
Valor consists in hearts more than in number.
Let Us on to Rome.

No: passion shall submit
Unto my best part. Conquest of my self
Shall speak me more in this, then if my power
Had levelled her seven hills. I leave her only
To grow more worthy of my victory.
I will obey, though each unwilling step
Wounds me beyond the cure of common patience.
Commands of power must not be withstood.
Great actions make men great; good actions good.

'T will prove I fear lame policy to hault
Betwixt these factions, awed by two such spirits,
As never were stilled from envy or revenge.

Brave Hanniball; brave Scipio; great Carthage;
But greater Rome: whose Eagle eyes have gazed
Against the Sun of many a glorious triumph!
When the bright beams reflected from their riches
Have blinded daylight, as if heavens great eye,
Borrowed his only from them.

Carthage is
Oar ancient friend, and friendship long continued
Should not be easily lost.

A useful tenent
Where the condition's private; but in Kings
It does not hold. Wars chance is variable:
And he that now is victor may be conquered
Before his peace be settled. From example
We must consult our safety, more than from
A m^rall precept. Has not Scipio
Got Spa^^^ from Hanniball, and joined unto him
Massilia's King? Are not their armies flusht
With the rich spovles of Sagunt? and who knows
But they will transport then forces, and begirt
Carthage it self. It Is better that we yield
Freely to amity, than be compelled,
Than Scipio must be welcome.

But if fortune
Prosper my counterplot, he will be greeted
With an affront shall cloud his entertainment;
And dim the painted glory of that pomp
Your complement intends. Our youthful King
Must not direct our counsels; nor affairs
Of state be ordered by the affection
Of one so weak in policy, indulgent
To his own passions. Carthage is set down
By our experience for Numidia's love,
And shall possess it.

We may then consider,
The Carthaginian General is a man
Worn with employment into more decay
Of strength and years, than can give any hopes
Of a continuance. Romes green Champion
Is full of growing sap to make him spread.
Whilst the other like an aged Oak that long
Has fought with tempests, and withstood the rage
Of burning air, now yields to every gust.
A bough or arm, 'till one more violent
Shatters the dried limbs, or quite roots it up.
It Is better to provide for lasting state,
Then merely to prevent a present fate.
Then Scipio must be welcome.

But if Syphax
Would hear our reasons.

Crates you have been
Our worthy counselor, and by your wisdom
Stear'd government in a right course whilst yet
Our youth did want it: but we are now grown
Riper in judgment, and we can distinguish
The different grounds of any politic act.
Nor do we find it safe in rules of state
If Seipio be not welcome. What Is your have?

The Roman General is arrived, and entering.

And no faygn'd thunder to inform us of it
From the loud voice of slocking multitudes,
Should throng to bid him welcome?

He Is scarce known
To any but my self. His train is private,
Without due state: only some needful servants
To wait upon his person.

Were they his army,
I would exhaust my treasury to feast them:
And every common soldier should drink healthes
In his Corinthian Goblet, which should be
His largess likewise. Let our ministers
Fill the shrill throats of wars loud instruments.
And Dodonean brass be beaten deaf
Whilst it proclaims his welcome. Let the Sea
Echo the sounds to Sagant, and return
Their shoots again.

Never did Syphax joyful arms embrace
A guest of so rich value, in whose mind
Worlds of heroic virtues are congested
To make him up a worthy.
I Will not answer
Your kindness Syphax with a complement.
My tongue's not oyld with slattery. I have stolen
A little time from action, to inform
Numidia's King, how Rome, by my advice,
Has chosen him a favourer of her cause
That suffers by false Carthage. The success
Of my recovering Spain, has given new hopes
Unto her fainting spirits, that were near
Their last expiring by the massacres
The Carthaginian made. Six Consuls have
Already fallen: my Father, and mine Uncle;
Sempronius; Terentius and Flaminius;
And last Marcellus, who received his death
Even in the sight of Rome. Yet there is a Scipio
Surviv's to conquer him, or dye in th'enterprise.

And that brave Scipio shall not want what aid
My person, or my Kingdom can afford him.

Rome shall make great esteem of Syphax friendship
And when she shall be wrapped in silken wings
Of victory and peace, his statue crowned
Shall grace the triumph.

I should rather joy
To see him chayn'd a captive, though my se^^e
And family were sold to be his ransom,
In Carthage quarrel.

This cold entertainment
Does make me jealous.

See: how soon their eyes
Have found each other?

Sure it is Hanniball.
His name and nature's stamped upon his brow;
I in those wrinckles read it: valor mixed
With cruelty; to which ambition only
As the first wheel in engines moves the rest.
That eye he lost passing the fennes of Arnus;
And such a look his counterfeit is drawn with.
If there be treachery.

What would Hanniball?

Is It Hanniball? We are betrayed by Syphax.

What art?

Romes General, and thy enemy.

Ha! Scipio! Then the character report
Give's of him's false. He scorns ignoble ways
Of honor; to ore-come by treachery.

I thought the same of Hanniball.

And findst it.
It Is only thy conspiracy with Syphax;
Who makes his Court a privilege for that
Fame will proclaim with blushes.

Why this uproare?

Syphax thou art treacherous.

To Rome and Scipio.

To Hannibal and Carthage.

Now observe
How he will calm the tempest.

What to answer
From sudden doubts you both possess me with,
I cannot easily resolve. A jealousy
Is sometimes strengthened by th'excuse should kill it.
Yet if your confidence will give credit to
A Kings religious oath, by all that makes
The sacred difference in me I am free
From thought of ill to either. Your arrivals
Were unexpected; and if eithers danger
Be smothered in intent, you brought it with you:
Which I Will prevent, if all Numidia's strength
Can do it. Think not me perfidious,
For then I Will doubt you: since self cvills are
Most commonly the parents of suspicion.
But for your own mistrusts, you are safer here
Than in your own camps, guarded with a maze
Of your best soldiers.

It Is a satisfaction.
I bless the occasion makes us meet: my longings
Were violent to see thee Scipio.

Mine more to see thee Hanniball; but rather
Armed in the sield, prepared for an encounter,
Then here to parlee.

Doubt not such a greeting
When next we meet.

I needs must interpose,
And moderate this contention. Pray my Lords
Let me be powerful to dispose your tempers
For other mild impressions, that my Court
For entertaining two such enemies
At once, be made discourse for after-ages.
A banquet waits ye: music usher it.
Thus peace bids Soldiers welcome.

Syphax no.
Think of Romes cause, and let your feast be seasoned
With says to that. If thou prove treacherous,
Expect a vengeance, justice never yet
Gave severe execution to a greater.
I must be gone; the affairs of war attend me
When I have settled Romes peace, we will comply
In the effects: action 'till then must live
By blood and labor. Hanniball farewell:
Next greeting will be rougher.

Not to be calmed
With words. Grow strong; be still a conqueror,
Till I shall conquer thee.

Thou art but flattered
By an ambition vainer than thy dreams.
Ten Carthages and Hannibals will not weigh
Equal with the atchievment.

One Hanniball
And Carthage poys'd but in an equal scale
With twenty Romes, and twenty Scipios,
Shall weigh like lead' against feathers.

Proud insister
Upon his own slight merits! Remember Syphax
Thy vow has made thee Romes.

Which I Will preserve
As sacredly inviolate, as if
Eternal seals had ratified it. Usher
The Roman General forth.

Have words such power
Upon our General to deject him thus?

My brain is laboring.

I Will help to deliver it.

As giddy fancies when they do present
Delightful shadows, seem to please the sense
When it is quiet, and not capable
Of any object, 'till the dreamers joy
Suddenly wakes him, and the false impressions
Vanish to their first nothing, so have I
Flattered my hopes.

I prophecy success
Despite of Scipio. Syphax Counsailours
(Whose secret correspondency with us
Taught the great means by which their Masters love
Must be regained) a long experience
Confirms our friends: then prosecute it thoroughly.

My Lord' till now the accidents
Caused by the Romans presence did prevent us
From giving satisfaction to your doubts,
Which were but justly grounded. Our young King
Is full of's youthful passions, and so violant
In The prosecution ofthem counsel rather
Does set a keener edge upon his appetite.
We therefore give him way. But if we cannot
Reduce his actions to a rule of judgment,
We Will openly oppose him, or conspire
As against a tyrant that makes will his law.
See he is returned: be confident.

How! whispering!
I do suspect.

If Syphax dare be private.

Dare Hannibal! Had thou intents more blaek
Than ever night gave execution to,
Even in Carthage Senate house as well
As in mine own Court, I dare stand the encounter
Of single Hannibal. Withdraw.

They must not.
The wrongs thou have done Carthage must be witnessed:
That when same speaks them lowdest, partial men
Make not their incredulity an excuse
For what no satisfaction can restore,
Thy honor lost in infamy.

Thou tempt'st me
With these dark prefaces. Yet thy upbraydings
Do seem so frivolous, my patience rather
Laughs at their vainness. Clear my understanding
Without more circumstance, for yet my innocence
Knowesnot to accuse my self, unless for^giving
Thy saucy taunts a privilege.

What error
But to defend it self will strive (though vainly)
To mock truth out of truth? Well Syphax knows
The expectation of a state deluded
Cannot but trouble it. A King is more
Than a mean person, bounded with dimensions
Of the bare man. His actions are his peoples;
And what he does or suffers they must stand.
Consider then when Carthage shall call up
Revenge, and with all force pursue the injury
To satisfaction; when her soldiers
(Whom custom has made pitiless) shall plough
The wombes of teeming Mothers with their fauchions,
To prevent the issue that might vindicate
A father slain; make your Numidian Virgins
The ruins of their pleasure, and not leave
An altar to your gods, nor private Lar
That may defend a household from their violence:
When these (whose very repetition carry's
Horror enough to fright men into peace)
Shall happen --

When they shall! it rather seems
A positive threat. Tell Carthage were her power
Of an extent that limits could not bound
With any circumscription, I Would not fear it.
To dye for Rome were above victory.
Furnished ten thousand choice Numidian Horsemen
To wait on Scipio. Why are our commands
No more respected? I Will have execution
Forerunne my Edicts that concern the good
Of Rome and Scipio. Stand ye like dull statues
Fixed to their first foundations; when your diligence
Should borrow speed from winds, as if ye rid
On the contracted air to hasten it?

Full well their age wise with experience knows
To disobey a Kings unjust commands
Law and religion warrants. Syphax youth
Were fitter to court beauty, than to sit
At a states helm, and steer the various course
It Is subject to, by his green violent passions.
With which his bed e're this had been enricht,
Had Carthage found him kind: Fair Sophonisba.

That name has stattled him.

She from whose eyes
The amorous sun, resigning first his own;
Might be ambitious to derive new fires.
Yet she to be reserved for his embraces,
Who slights that honor all the neighboring Kings
Have been competitors for, and would lay down
Their Crowns to purchase; sell their very beings
To be translated into a possession
Of Sophonisba.

It begins to work.

Whence did the intent of this great honor to me
Derive it self?

From a desire of friendship
And league with Syphax: which his passionate love
To Rome and Scipio (that admits no reason)
Denying, I must publish the dishonor
Done to a Lady, at whose least command
A Nation shall be armed, led by such Captains
As in their emulation will declare
What mortals owe to her divine perfections;
That warrant her revenge as just a quarrel,
As ever stirred up valor in a conscience
Scruples had cowarded. Here my commission
Takes end, and I must go.

Stay Hanniball.
Strange passions war against my resolution;
And love begins to circle me in flames
E're my eye takes the fire. What Is Rome or Scipio
To Sophonisba? in whose richer beauty
Mor's comprehended, then the Macedonian
Could from his many conquests, and subversion
Of Monarchies boast himself owner of.
What Is a King's promise but a politic
(And that is allowed) evasion to gain time
For counsel with his will? I Will be for Carthage
To enjoy Sophonisba. I Am enflamed
From the report, and if my senses find
Truth answering fame, great Hannibal shall lead
Numidias power' against Rome, or any place
He has designed for conquest.

But if Syphax
Should again suffer Scipio's menacies
To fright his weakness out of this resolve I

My weakness! tempt me not with a suspect.
Let me have Sophonisba, or I Will make
A rape upon your Carthage, not on her,
For what delight's in violence? Enquire
The cause of that loud shout.

I come t'informe you.
A stately ship from her rich laden womb,
Has on our shore delivered such a train
Of glorious Virgins that attend on one,
Who lead's the rest --

No more; it is Sophonisba.

Receive her with religious ceremony.
Perfume the air with incence richer then
The Phoenix funeral pile. Let harmony
Breath out her soul at every artists touch.
Cover the pavement which her steps must hallow
With Persian Tapestry. How I am ravished
With th'expectation? and like somelight matter
Caught in a whirlwind, all my faculties
Are hurried forward.

Beauty no more the subject be
Of want on art to slatter thee:
Or in dull figures call thee spring;
Lilly or Rose, or other thing:
All which beneath thee are, and grow
Into contempt when thou do show
The unmatch't glory of thy brow.
Behold a sphere of Virgins move,
None among them less then Queen of Love.
And yet their Queen so far excels
Beauty and she are only parallels.
But it is not Sophonisba. Fairer yet.
Unhappy Syphax from whose eyes such wonders
Have been to long concealed. Which is the goddess?
Which Sophonisba?
Can thy sense distinguish?
See Syphax, thus I deigne to show thee that
Kings have been proud to worship.

E're I embrace
Let me admire. (...)each eye sit's a Cupid;
Who as he skip's about to shoot his darts.
Is himself fettered in the golden curles
That deck her brow. Elysium's but a fable.
And that eternity the Poets dream of
Serv's but to figure this.

Although my difference
Might challenge more, I Am not ambitious
Of shallow praise. My spirit must fly high
To catch at fame, not flattery.

Came you not
To love me then?

I did: but not to think
All your expressions (though they were extended
Beyond my wish) can merit it.

I am
A King; and you me thinks should court the fortune
With a glad readiness, to share my honors,
And to be made my equal.

Were you more,
I am above addition in my self:
And should be lessened if I did confine
A thought to any person, and the act
Included nothing but bare satisfaction
Of a desire. I will not let a smile
Fall loosly from me, but shall be attended
By actions worth their history; which read
Shall with the apprehension of my greatness
Amaze posterity.

Can Sophonisba
Be covetous of more then the earths honors?
When she shall sit encompassed in a ring
Of noble Matrons that shall deifie
Her beauty with their praises? When she shall
Be crowned with sparkling wreathesto blind the gazers,
As if a Constellation had been robbed
To make her shine. When in a Kings arms sleeping
All pleasures shall be minister'd, that Nature
And art in their contention strive to own,
And take their glory from.

I hei'r pretty baits
To catch an easy wanton, whose dull earth
A little varnish'to're does know it self
No farther then the superficial tincture
Discoverd in her glass. I have a soul
Greater then Syphax Kingdom: and to bound it
Would take from what I am. 'Twill be your honor
'Bove all that your ambition can direct you
To hope for (next eternity) If I
Vouchsafe to add unto your petty royalty
My greater self; and the addition be
Greater then you can purchase by your conquests.
It Is but her due when Sophonisba crav's
Worlds for her Kingdoms, their Kings for her slaves.
Should Syphax make a resignation
Of all he own's for me; 'twere but as if
He pared a mol-hill from the earth, to place
An Atlas in its stead.

Come Sophonisba
You must consent: there is fame in it that will give you
An everlasting being in the memory
O^ benefits your Country will derive from't.
Children shall first be taught to speak your name;
And from their aged grandsires learn your story.
Whose often repetition shall take from
The tediousness of age, and make them seem
As if they danced for joy, when palsies shake them.

Am I enslam'd, and shall I not enjoy?
Mock me not Lady into a despair.
You show me heaven, and shut the gates against me.
Make not a King, that daign's to be your servant,
A slave unto your cruelty.

To give
Syphax a satisfaction, your competitor
False Massanissa, he that shar's your Kingdom.
And would ingrosse it all, has long solicited
For Sophonisbas love.

Oh Massanissa.

He having now forsaken Carthage, she
Out of her piety to do her Country
A good, preferr's you: and that her revenge
May be pursued with greater violence,
Allow's her elfe your right; though she is a treasure
Might be disposed of to a more advantage
Of Carthage strength.

Will Sophonisba love then
If I fight Carthag's quarrel?

Yes; your fortune
Wh^^^^ it is at hight: but the least declination
Waving it to an ebb, I from that fall
Must mount to higher honors, if a gale
Meet it to raise me.

Massanissas person
It seems could limit your desires.

He was
A man made up of fire; no gross earth clogged
His spirit when 'twould mount to honors top,
And load same with his acts. Had he not falln
From Carthage, Sophonisba had but been
The price of his desert. And yet I love him.
Dear Massanissa!

She has overcome me.
I will be great; every days action
Shall raise me a step higher, and I Will take
You with me Lady: no; you shall lead me
The tribute I will pay for every kiss
Shall be a victory over your enemies.
Proud Rome shall find Syphax can be a Soldier,
When Sophonisba bid's him put on steel.

The not to be resisted power of beauty.
Carthage I will salute thee now with joy.
Nor shall the thought of thy ingratitude
Make me less willing to pursue thy good
Through a deep sea of vanquished. Roman's blood.

We Will feast, then fight. Who led by such bright eves
Would not match on to any enterprise?

Syphax so soon revolted I what weak man
Would mock away his safety? Chldren thus
Playing with fire to please their foolish sense
Are often burned and make their sport the instrument
Of their own danger. Massanissa yet
Is constant, and by this time has subdued him.
Success must follow those attemps that rise
From a just cause, and crown the enterprise.
Lelius what news?

I labor with the event;
Joy hinder's a delivery. Massanissa
Guirt in a conquest, greater never made
A triumph glorious, is returning back
To present Scipio with Numidias spoils,
And Syphax cativ'd.

It Is a joyful errant.
Just Nemesis, thy Grirfins have been swift,
And borne thee well to see the execution
Of a revenge upon perfidious Syphax.
Had thou failed in it, we justly might disclaim
Thy deity, and without fear of punishment
Profane thy altars: on whose marbles now
We Will pay a sacrifice of richest flame
Mixed with the blood of Kings, Discourse the progress
To this event.

When your successful policy
Had destroyed both the Camps of Asdrubal
And Syphax with devouring fire, whose flames
seemed to the distant gazers on it a prodigy
That threatened dissolution, and begot
Their greater fear, then when the Artilerie
Of heaven speak's lowdest through the burning air
To tell the world Jove's angry: When you retired
To Vtica to prevent an invasion
Intended by the Carthaginian Navy,
Which dark't the Sea (much like a clowd of Vulturs
That are convented after some great fight
To glut their ravenous gorges with the gore,
Thousands of soul-lesse men lie reeking in)
The mad Numidian King, in whom despair
Had kindled a new valor, gather's head.
And with a fresh supply of unmanned men
(For had they been such as experience
Had taught the useful order of a war
The End had again been doubtful) giv's us battle.
Their first assault made us retire; yet still
We kept the sudden form have put us in
For best advantage: 'till their heedlesse courage
Hurried them on, where our foot Legions
Observing their disorder (for they fought
In throngs so thick, that many times one striking
Wounded his fellow) giv's them new resistance.
At which they stop, mated with apprehension
Of their own danger: whom the incensed King
Mixing his threats with promises of honor
Labor's to bring one till his horse being killed
We took him prisoner, with two thousand more.
The rest not flame are fled.

Brave victory
Worthy th'atchievers, to whose memories
Eternal statues shall be raised, and trophies
Rich as Romes Capitol is glorious with.
But where is Massanissa?

He pretended
To visit Cirtha, Syphax chiefest City:
Which is delivered up.

I have new fears
That woman will again bewitch him. Know
The cause.

It Is Massanissa.

The Only wealth
I Would be possessed of. I embrace in thee
A boundless treasure.

Let not Scipio
Flatter me into pride for what is rather
Fortunes then mine.

The actions of thy virtue.
Fortun's an under power that is her self
Commanded by desert. It Is a mere vainness
Of our credulity to give her more
Then her due attribute; which is but servant
To an heroic spirit.

This example
Might instance proofs for her divinity.
All Is but endeavor until perfected
By the success, and that is fortunes only;
Desert shar's little in'r.

Let not thy modesty
Maintain such errors. To refuse just praise
Is an extreme worse then man's overweening
Opinion of himself. Great Massanissa
Shall have all honors due unto his conquest;
And wear triumphant Garlands; that false King
Chained to his Chariot from the gazers eyes
Inviting scorn, not pity.

It Is not manly
To insult over misery, to which
Thy self's as subject, and perhaps mai'st feel,
Chance mak's prosperity when it is at highest
But pastime to delight her giddy humor:
And will d ject the most seem possessour,
When she command's a restitution
Of her lent favors, that she may confer them
Upon another. This consideration
Might invite mercy.

When superior justice
Mak's us her instrument, should we be partial
I the execution, 'twere to mock the power,
And call down vengeance. Yet I grieve for Syphax
That he deserv's the punishment; whose weakness!
Suffered a piece of painted earth to tempt him
From his religion, and neglect the gods,
Whom he invok't for witness to that vow
A woman made him violate.

It Is my hope
She may deceive thee too, and with her charms
Bewitch the boasting Conqueror that is her slave
From's faith to Rome.

His madness will betray me
To a reproach

It tak's from mine own suffering
To see mine enemy in the same danger:
When he by his adulterous embraces
Receiv's the like infection int' his soul
That made me sick of virtue, and of all
But my disease.

Do you enjoy the Lady?

Yes: she is my wife.

Yoar act was somewhat rash;
Before her husbands death! Does the religion
You pay Numidia's gods warrant it law full?

Syphax is dead in his captivity.
Hislife was mine; which I but lent him only
For Romes great triumph.

We Will consult a little,
And then dispose you Syphax.

As your will
Advises you. It is the curse of greatness
To be it is own destruction. So we see
That mountain Cedars have the least defense
Against storms, when shrubs confront their violence.

When first you freely did commit your self
Unto my charge, and promised with a vow
My liking only should dispose your actions,
Either you loved them, or your slattery
Pretended admiration of some virtues
You thought possessed me. One I must confess
I glory to be master of, that is continence.
I have converst with beauties rich as Nature
Did ever make art proud to counterfeit;
Might have commanded some that conquest gave me:
Yet have I still kept out desire, but you
Have yielded to that passion does betray
A weakness in you, will obscure the glory
Of all your other goodness. Think how dangerous
It Is to a young man (on whose expectation
Opinions eye is six't) to mix his actions
With wanton pleasures, when his thoughts transfer
The wicked objects of his humorous sense
Unto his soul, that poison all her faculties,
And make them useless. Noble Massanissa,
Your good deeds sung by same are music to me:
Your errors I had rather you your self
Would silently consider, and reform,
Before with any show of least unkindnesse
You force me to reprove them.

Let not Scipio
Deny those errors an excuse. If nature
Had a like clothed men's dispositions,
And all did wear one habit of the mind,
You need not urge the example of your own
T'instruct another continence: for all
From a necessited and innate temperance
Would be as you are. Though I do not boast
Command over pleasures, I pursue them not
With an intemperate appetite, but make
Reason my guide, that tell's me to provide
For a succession, does become the judgment
Of a wise King. Posterity may well
Be called th'eternity of life: he never
Dy's that has issue; for which I have married
Her mine own conquest gave me.

Your own conquest!
Pray do not arrogate too much: you must not
Dispose Romes prisoners whilst you fight her quarrel.
The warr's not yours, though yours the victory.
She must attend her sentence from our Senate;
Which hardly will be partial to her beauty,
Though 'twere adulterated with more art,
Then e're lasciviousinesse was mistress of,
And rack 't invention for. Let Sophonisba
Be then delivered up.

Perhaps your self
After your boatted continence would have her
To be your own.

Is that your jealousy?
Weak passionate man, that through thy blinded reason
Foresee'st not thine own danger by the example
Of others misery, and yet art ripe,
To maintain grossest errors of thy will,
And seem discretions master. Had not Syphax
(Bewitch by magic of her wanton eye
Into a dotage) broke his faith with Rome,
He might have flourish't in his height of glory;
And still commanded over his Division.
Which Rome will add to Massanissas Kingdom
Yielding up Sophonisba.

You would seem
To give me mines, upon condition
I should restore the gold, reserving only
The earth to trample on. In Sophonisba
I have a treature mine own life shall ransom,
If she be forced away; and to consent
She should be yielded up to any Roman
Were worse then sacrilege, though I should tcare
The hallowed sta'ues of Nunsidias gods
Down from their altars, and convert their Temples
Into the loathsom'st uses of necessity.
Kings oaths are equal with decrees of Fate,
Those I have made I cannot violate.

Then I disclaim thee. There Is not so much danger
In a known foe, as a suspected friend.
To preventan incendium it is best;
To quench a brand before it fire the rest.

He Is angry, and I must not let it grow
To ripeness of his hate. I am resolved
To be the example of a constancy
Fame shall proclaim for wonder.

Come e're my wish could summon her. Her sight
Begins to shake the weak foundation
Of my resolves. Like stones shot from an engine
She ruin's with the battery of her eye
What my intents had built.
Why is my Lord
Thus clowdy? I expected entertainment
Of other difference; such as cheerful love
Present's desire with from the enterchange
Of smiles and amorous glaunces.

Sophonisba!
I was new entered into meditations
Of death, and other wretchedness, depend's
Upon mortality.

Is that the argument
Of your dejectedness? it shows too much
Of woman's weakness. Man should have a spirit
Above the fear any consideration
Can work within him. Death is but an entrance
To our eternity: and if our life
Merit a blessedness hereafter, we
Should run with joy to meet it.

But if one
Possessed of happiness beyond the hope
Of any greater; that denies another
Can be in expectation (more then what
His soul enjoy's already) apprehended
A separation from it by the malice
Of death, or other accident, 'twould force him
Weep silently within, though shame restrained
His outward tears.

This circumstance would seem
To prepare something that should have relation
Unto your self or me. Perhaps the Consul
Has urged that I should be delivered up
To Romes disposing. Massanissas vow
Made with religious ceremony cannot
If he respect the gods consent to it.
And rather then their tyranny should make me
Wretched a new, to my first earth return me,
The worst remains of Sophonisba.

Dare she
Dyethen to quit her fears?

And meet the instrument
With greater cherefalnesse, then fondest parents
Can show at the return of their decre child
From long captivity. This tender frame
Lodges a masculine and heroic spirit.
And if thy passionate love deny's thy self
To be the Actor in this benefit,
Give me thy sword; my own right hand shall guide
The point unto my heart: I Will without trembling
Open a passage for the crimson drops;
And smile to see them diaper the pavement,
As if it were some conceited workmanship
Made by the lookers sancie.

E're mine eyes
Should suffer such an object to offend
Their hitherto pleased sense, I would dissolve them
In their own humor. No Sophonisba;
This breath shall first wast into empty air,
And leave my naked bones i'th'hallow'd pile
E're I prove false to thee. Give me some wine:
I Will drink a bridal health to Sophonisba,
And mix it with Nepenthe. Here Is the juice
Will cause forgetfulness, and mock th'extremity
Of any adverse fortune.

Sure it is poison.
Will Massanissa leave me then unguarded
To Scipios violence? I have here no father
Nor uncle to defend me; not so much
As a poor tear by weeping to stir up
A Romans pity: I shall only dart
An anger from my burning eye, to show
The Carthaginian spirit I was borne with,
Which not with standing will not quit this part
From a captivity: this Scipios rage
Will hurry in his triumph to be gazed at,
And scorned by the course rabble. Do not then
By such a keeping of it break thy vow;
For it is no less to me. I must still want
The benefice of such a constancy.
For though himself live not to yield me up
I am exposed to it, and without least power
To make resistance. Let me then partake
That means of best security

Not to have
A Monument of lasting Adamant
Raised to my memory. No Sophonisba
This is no potion to preserve a beauty
In it is first green; or ripe it to a Summer;
Or prevent the Autumme; or return the Winter
Into a new Spring. This will pale the dye
Which thy cheek blusheth when it would cloth modesty
In a rich scarlet: make that Ivorie breast
(Now Loves soft bed whereon he play's the wanton,
And ambusheth himself to catch the flames
He shoot's at others from thy eyes) as cold
As Scythian sands, bleak't with continual freezing
Into a seeming crystal. Scipio dar's not
Insult over thee: thy face would check his malice
Into a silent admiration of it.
Or if he sin so much as to deject thee
With the least fear of ill, the gods themselves
Will leave their immortality to be
Each others rivals in thy love, and strive
Which should revenge thee best. This must not weaken
What is so powerful.

If my Lord be then
Resolved to leave me widdow'd, being yet
Scarce warm in his embraces, let me mix
A tear with his last drink, that he may carry
Something of Sophonisba with him.

That
Has in it sufficient virtue to convert
All the Thessalian, Pontick, Phasian aconites
Into pretervatives, and turn this draught
Into an antidote: which yet is powerful,
'Bove all that Art and Nature in conspiracy
Of mischief e're invented. We that are
Great, and yet subject to th'incertainty
Of Fortune, have this custom to prevent it.
We affect glory: and conclude no slate
That end's not in it self, is fortunate.
So --

Let my Lord first give me leave to breath
An errant over it; that when he is entered
Ely sium, throngs of Carthaginian Heroes
May bid him welcome, and inform themselves
From him of Sophonisba.

Do It then quickly.
I Will bear it, and command the King of night
Resign his ravished Queen to be thy handmaid.
Hell, I shall now be armed to meet thy horrors
With greater power then thine.

If there be Fate,
Why is it concealed? The revelation of t
Would make us strive to mock eternal providence,
Th'ingenious Artist that did form this cup
Foresaw not such a use often. Had he known
It should have minister'd death to a King,
His trembling hands could never have finished it
With such exactness. What so e're decree
Is written in the Adamantine Tables
Of Destiny, we must subscribe to. Time
Though he keep on his swift and silent pace,
Death's sure at first or last to win the race.
Pray keep out Scipio: I have almost ended.
So --

Ha! 'what has Sophonisbas madness done'?
Oh Aesculapius if thy deity
Be not a feigned one, then administer,
And show it powerful in restoring back
My Sophonisba to her former safety.
Numidia shall pay worship to none other
But thee and Phoebus. Altars shall be raised
Made of Iberian gold, and flame with incense
Until Arabia's richest earth grow's barren
Of gummes and spices.

Why does Massanissa
Invoke vain aid? The gods are merciful
In their denying it: and it is but justice
That I should dye; m'adulterous easiness
Deserved it, that without the least resistance
Left my yet living husband to embrace
His enemy. But it had warrant from
The end, my Countries good, and the first love
I bare thee Massanissa. Now let Scipio
Boast of his conquest; Sophonisba is
Her own subverter. It begin's to work
With a full strength: my blood would serve to heat
A Salamander, and convert his ice
Into a flame. Aetna's but painted fire
To that which burn's my marrow. Yet my looks
Are cherefull and erected. Victory
Was never met more joyfully, then I
Embrace that death prevents my misery.
My weak earth totters underneath a weight
That sink's it downwards: my still living spirit
Rid's upon clouds to reach Jove's highest sky.
Who fear not death, but in the worst part dye.

She Is dead. Sincke ye supporters of this fabric
Into your deep foundations; make them graves
For your own ruins, since there is not left
A weight worthy your bearing. She Is not dead:
Only she has translated her divinity
To it is own blessed abodes, and call's on me
To pay a mortals duty. Shallt have sacrifice,
And rich too. Kings out of devotion shall
Offer themselves in flames, and from their ashes
Rise glorious stars; whence learned curiosity
Deriving a new art, shall teach Astrologers
The virtues of an influence shall include
Secrets to make credulity astonished
At their presages. I will be their president;
And make this earth, already consecrated
With Sophonisba's precious feet, an altar.
Open thy crannies to receive my blood,
And from it is mixture spring a grove of Balsame.
Led by whose ravishing odor the new issue
Of every Phoenix shall neglect Panehaia,
To bring her mothers spicy death bed hither,
That Is likewise her own cradle. But this action
Should have more state, and ceremony. No.
A King's the Priest; a King's the Sacrifice;
His own sword whilst it is yet warm with his victory
Shall serve forth' axe, and so -- Shall I but dye then?
I Will live to pay her more then th'expiration
Of a short breath, and dye to all delights,
But what I can derive from her fair memory:
Which shall be treasured here; and by it is virtue
Revive to kill me; every life it giv's
Causing another death.

The Lady dead!

To Scipios malice.

Could not Massanissa
Acquit himself of one, but by committing
A greater folly! But I must not chide.
Most worthy Massanissa!

Keep your flattery.
I have no Sophonisba. Touch her not:
None but my self shall bear her to the pile.
The sacrilegious hand besides attempt's it
I will cut off. Your triumph shall not twice
Kill Sophonisba.

With best care attend him
Unto our Tent; least that his passion grow
Into a desperate frenzy, I must cure it
By counsel mixed with gifts. In that weak woman
Half Carthage strength is gone.

Our Spies inform
That the other half (which I conceive is Hannibal)
Intend's upon the event of one great battle
To hazard all. His Camp's already pitched
Near Zama: whence a messenger is sent
That show's the Carthaginian much desit's
To have some conference with you.

We Will dispose
Our Army thitherward. Me thinks I see
Victory crowned already clap her wings
Over our heads. What a strange circulation
Is in times accidents? From victory
Peace is derived; from peace security;
Thence lust; ambition: two maine grounds of jarres:
We fight for peace, and peace again breed's wars.

Pray' take no notice that we know the event
Of the late battle. I already have
Employed my Faction 'bout a peace, and Scipio
Is not far off. It shall not be the act
Of Hannibal to boast of. When we have
Betrayed him to the Romans, the conditions
Besides are casie.

Mind the public Bostar:
Do You think it not concern's you?

I was my riches
Made me a Senator: my wisdom never
Deserved the purple. Be you politic;
Let me preserve my state.

Your wealth! it is granted
Raised you to this high place. Necessity
May corrupt justice in a Magistrate:
Which to prevent, at least our jealousies,
Our Carthaginian custom in election
Of Senators, sometimes preferr's the rich
Before the best men. Take your seat.

To fill it:
Fear will not let me sleep.

Attend the Message:
It seems from Hannibal.

A worthy man.
He sent us home three bushels full of rings,
Of which I shared the most.

Before I speak,
Me thinks the air about me as the sound
Of my sad words does pass through it, should thicken
Into a clowd; then melt at every periode
Into a weeping rain, till none be left
To give us breath for sighs. Our Hannibal
Is vanquished by the Romans.

We shall then
Have no more wealth brought home, nor safely keep
What we possess already. Curse on chance
That mock's us thus. I Will never make her statue
Of gold hereafter, and by consequent
Never worship her: I have but cold devotion
Toward a wooden goddess.

It Is not fit
Evils remediless should be lamented.
From a misfortune something may arise
To prevent greater, if it be applied
With an exact consideration
O'all occurents that may make it useful.
Relate it then.

Before the battle joined
The worlds two Captains (for besides them none
Merit's the name in equal competition)
Met to have conference: where for a space
They stood astonished at each others presence:
And like two Comets tilting in the air
Against one another, shot prodigious flames
From eithers eyes; and with a counterchange
Of fierce and angry looks seemed to begin
An eagre fight: 'till Hannibal broke silence,
And moved a peace: Which Scipio (or suspecting it
To be but wonted policy, or confident
Both of his own strength and success) refused.
Then like two clouds swollen big with a mights tempest,
And hurryed forward by contrary winds,
Iusling each other, 'till their ribs being broken
The sulphurous issue slie's through the black air;
An inundation following that would fright
Natures Archeus from his quiet center;
To seek an Aetna or Vesaevus out
Where he might dry himself: so met the Armies.
And with a shout, that out-noys'd thunder, charged
Each other bravely; at their first encounter
Mixing their bloods in streams, that every way
Flowed like a tide. As yet the peaceful goddess
Inclined to neither part, 'till Massanissa
Brought up his right wing of Numidian horsemen,
And broke th'array; enforcing our first battle
Back to our second; when we were compelled
To fight against our own, least their retiring
Might put us out of order; 'till betwixt us
Dead bodies made a Bulwark; so that neither
We nor the Romans but by trampling on
Our fellows carcasses could strike a blow
Of any use. The Roman Legions now
O're-prest us with their number, and both wings
Of horsemen wheeled about t'assault our reere.
We then were compast; yet like angry Lions
Whom the toil hamper's, labored for our freedom;
But few escaped: five hundred only live
Of forty thousand, which to Adrumentum
Are fled with Hannibal: whence he intend's
To visit Carthage suddenly.

His welcome
If he fore-knew't would give him small encouragement.
Th'incertainty of war! Did Hannibal
Solicit peace? l'le seem to oppose it then,
Though it intend a good. The inborne malice
Bet wixt our families will not permit me
Allow his acts or counsel. By his greatness
Mine is eclipsed: and though this overthrow
May make him less in popular opinion,
His Faction yet is strong.

What mean you Bostar!

I Am dead; that horrible relation killed me
In'ere shall see addition to my heap,
Now Hannibal is conquered.

You have stored
Enough wealth to maintain another Army
That may bring home increase. Pray'let us use
Your state, we will spare your wisdom.

How Is that Hanno!
My state, and spare my wisdom. I Am a Senator,
And wear my gown as formally as you:
Can nodde and spet at the end of every sentence,
And number with my own Arithmetic
More somes of coin then thy whole family.
Part with my wealth l I Will rather dye, and purchase
Hell with it, if Pluto would but sell his Kingdom.
Yet sure it cannot be so rich as I am.
The judges there are just; bribes cannot buy
A partial sentence,

Ha! me thinks they should
Salute me, though I bring not victory.
When I presented them with wealth, their flatteries
Were greater then became them. Am I less
In merit now, then when success attended
My actions! glew'd unto their seats, and Hannibal
Entered. Grave fathers.

On sir: we are patient
To hear you speak.

But patient! he that stand's
Accused may challenge that, or justly tax ye
Of more then tyranny.

Are you so confident
You dare affront your Judges?

Ha! my Judges.
What envy though 'twere stilled from the black galls
Ofleane Erinnis Adders, can so blemish
My life or same, that from the least suspect
I might incur a sentence! Wa'st for this
I have through blood and sweat made Carthage great
As Rome her self; and had not politic dotage
Infected with your private avarice
(That would not spare me what my self bestowed
Upon your case) prevented it by calling
Me and my Army home, I had e're this
Made Rome your tributary; and am I
Returned now to be judge, because I have
After so many victories lost one battle!
The monstrous bi^th of your ingratitude
Were able to fright manhood from posterity,
And check all undertakings.

Whence did you
Receive commission to move peace with Scipio?

From mine own judgment that foresaw the danger
My power could not prevent.

It seems you were
Declm'd to coward.

There Is no privilege
Under your gown for that. Learn to know man;
Then be his judge.

Pray heaven he hurt not me.
Most valiant Hanniball.

I hate your slattery,
It Is mixed with scorn; and I will rather trample
Upon your purple.

Good my Lord forbear
Your violence. Consider but their persons
And dignities.

Should Jove himself provoke me
With a disgrace like this, l'de challenge him
To meet upon a cloud ram'd full of thunder:
And dart it at him, 'till with flames I had
Consumed the brass supporters of his heaven;
Tumbling him down with all his petty gods
Unto their first mortality.

The custom
Of Carthage government commands respect
Unto their difference.

Let the respect
Belikewise taught them that belongs to me.
And if my labor has maintained their ease.
In which they have both studied and established
Civil formalities, my rugged life
Did never practice, it may well excuse
A greater error. Who is my accuser?

Your self.

My self! my self will be my judge then:
And maketh'abus'd seat honored for a justice,
Which your corrupted souls would never suffer
Your power to execute. Look Carthaginians;
And if your reasons eyes can see the errors
Your blinded envy led it to, with blushes
Guide them to reformation. I that took
An oath at nine years old before the Altar,
When it was smoking with the horrid sacrifice
Of immolated men, to be Romes enemy,
And perfect what my Father had begun;
I that transferred the wealth of Spain to Carthage,
And through the frozen Alps melted my way
Into the fertile plains of Italy;
That waded with my army through the fennes
Of gloomy Arnus, in whose fogges I lost
One of my bodies comfortable lights;
I that o'rethrew six Consuls, and at Cannas
In one sight killed a hundred Roman Senators,
And thence presented Carthage with a prey
That might out-vye an Indian treasury
Crammed with the choycest wealth; I that abroad
Whilst here you bathed in pleasures made my body
Proose against a tempest, and endured the rage
Of more prodigious storms then ever frighted
Mortals into religion.

Yet at Capua
The fair Salapian Omphale could teach
Our Carthaginian Hercules to spin,
And mind his distaffe; else she would not smile
Upon him for his work.

Thy malice Hanno
Like to the broken some a rock beats back
Upon the angry maine, fowl's thine own bosom.
I am above it; and in spite of thee
Or all the battery of thy calumnies,
Will stand like a Colossus to be gazed at
By all beneath me, when the scorn of men
Shall lash thy envy with the whips of Satyrs:
Who vainly do attempt to ruin that
Is built for fame.

Nay you may keep your seat,
It well becomes you.

It becomes you better,
When your grave nod and formal hem strik's terror
Through the affrighted malefactors heart;
Who for some slight offense expects his judgment,
No less than banishment, or confiscation
Of all his substance; which is shared amongst you,
The public use neglected. But in vain
I tax your vices, when your souls are fullyed
With an ingratitude to me, that makes
All others white as innocence compared
With that black monster. Carthage I disclaim thee,
And rather then employ my power again
To raise thy head 'bove others, in thy ruins
I Will hide mine own. And but for reverence
I bear the ashes of mine ancestors,
I would my self plough furrows in thy womb,
And sow my faction only for the increase
Of mine own greatness.

Pray observe it Fathers.
He does affect the Monarchy; he would
Alter our government.

You are deceived.
You Are weak enough already; there is no need
Of a sedition to subvert your state.
Can ye resist the Romans, and make peace
Upon your own conditions?

You are betrayed my Lord; your safety needs
A sudden resolution. Scipio's entered
The Gates of Carthage.

Oh inhumane treachery!
But for preventing justice that will fall
Heavy upon you by some other instrument,
'Twere piety to wash corruption
From this abused place with your bloods; whose stains
Would yet infect the pavement, and remain
Like blushes in the marble to betray
The guilt ye died for. When the Romans practice
Their tyranny upon you, wish in vain
Ye had an Hannibal.

Your danger will not
Allow your passion vent. Pray 'fligh my Lord.

Into some desert to converse with beasts;
They Have grateful souls. Carthage me thinks an earthquake
Should palsy thy old joints, and shrink thy head
Into thy shoulders: or thy Genius wrap thee
In a perpetual cloud to hide the shame
Of this base act. Revenge, I Will court thee through
The ruin of mine own. Carthage shall see
Not mine from her, her greatness grew from me.
All those that love me follow.

Would we had
Ensnared him better: but his faction wanting
A head, it is strengthlesse. Let a crier publish
The sentence of his banishment, that Scipio
May take it for our act. We must comply
With all occasions that may make our peace
A useful good, no voluntary bondage.
We must receive the Romans with a show
Of less fear, then the straites of our necessity
Might excuse manhood for.

Now Carthaginians,
Although I am a conqueror, success
Swelis me no higher to prefer my self
Above what judgment warrants. I have strove
With all opposing reasons to forget
Your often breach of faith: which you are tax't with
By all men for a vice that the air you breath
Infects you with, as if the places nature
Enforced it from necessity. But custom
Must be concluded, is the most efficient
To cause that barbarous neglect of piety,
Which should be man's sole object. I am strengthened
Sufficiently against fear; since I can easily
Compel you to subjection. But preferring
A mild command before imperious rigor,
Declare your selves, and you shall find that we
Practice no cruelty.

Most worthy Roman
We might excuse the general, and confer
The guilt upon some private few, who led
By an ambition made this war without
Consent from us. Some we have justly punished;
And him, by whom (as by the first great mover)
The rest were hurried forward, we have banished,
To take from Rome all cause of after-jealousie.
His faction did prevent it, else we had
Yielded him up to Scipio. Peace is now
The thing we crave, and the conditions
No stricter then the Carthaginians
Would have proposed, had they been conquerours,
And Scipio su'd to them.

Can there be faith
In those that would betray their own! and such a one
As made the end of all his actions
Your greatness first, and when that failed your safety?
A man that more than figured Mars, and merited
A deifying by your gratitude.
Blush at it fame, and with thy hundred tongues
Till all are hoarse proclaim it. The conditions
Proposed shall stand, if but to punish this,
This monstrous act. Nature me thinks should throw ye
From her warm bosom with an angry motion
Of all the earths sinews, and not suffer ye
To suck her milk; but dry her fruitful womb
Into a barrenness, before such monsters
Should be again produced. As you perform
The strictest clause, and what afflicts ye most,
Call it not satisfaction for our injuries,
But punishment for your ingratitude
To Hannibal.

That will take from my suffering.
When those we hate in misery bear a part,
Envy grows fat by eating her own heart.

Lelius attend the Carthaginian Senators;
Survey the City, and see execution
Of all the league includ's. Does Scipio triumph,
And Massanissa hang the head! One article
Is that they shall restore to Massanissa
All that they have deprived him of.

They cannot
Restore my Sophonisba.

Still that passion!
I thought her memory had been washed away
With the large streams of blood so lately flowed
From his victorious sword. Come Massanissa
You shall enjoy a Roman Lady; one
That shall out-vye the glory of a sun
Throned in his cleerest sky, and make his light
Appear but as a shadow to her beauty,
One that shall comprehend within her self
All that was ever faign'd of other women,
And make their fables probable.

Rome has not
Another Sophonisba.

That the wealth
Of Romes best province might but ransom home
His lost command over passions.

A Spanish captive.

Did ever innocence
Look sweeter as if she were joy'd to make
This little frame her mansion. Why do you weep?
They shall not hurt you pretty one.

They say
They Will carry me to Rome.

Suppose they do;
Romans are full of gentleness, and mildly
Will entertain you; where you shall be taught
Civility of manners. Education
Clothing your mind in ornaments of virtue
Fitting your expectation, and your beauty
Rip't with mature age, Roman Knights shall court it.
Perhaps my self would take you to my bed.

Indeed you should not. You are a rough soldier;
Your looks would fright me.

Can you then deny
To cherish such a hope? You should enjoy
Delights above your wish. Your house should be
A court of pleasure. Spring should always dwell
Within your gardens, as it Tempe were
Translated thither. Virgins should attend you
Fair as the morning, when she ushers in
The day with blushes. Your bathes should be the dew
Gathered from Roses, and your garments soft
As the curled air, by mild Etesian winds
Made temperate, when the Sun rides on his Lion
To hunt heavens Dog up. You should sleep on down
Driven from Swannes white necks; be visited
By Matrons; ushered to solemnities;
And at the public shows outshine the glory
Of daylight with the luster of those jemmes
You should be decked in and a conqueror when
His head's wrapped in triumphant Laurel, couch it
Upon your lap.

He Is taken. Man's weak judgment,
That calls it vice in others, which himself
Is equally inclined to.

I nere heard
Of such fine things before.

The barren soil
That bred you is in fault. I must confess
Nature has in your yet imperfect beauty
Showed wonders to the world: you areth'epitome
Of her most curious labors; and if fortune
Should in so fair a book blurre any lest
Exact drawn line, her deity were cruel.
Your owne's a barbarous country, where civility
Has scarce a name. You cannot there expect
A value of your self, above the worship
Their eyes will give you, when they rudely gaze
Upon your form, and by the sense distinguish
The outward workmanship. We teach our souls
A glorious conversation with those virtues
That deck the inside of a beauteous frame,
And vary pleasures, honors, earths delights
To th'imitation of that infinite
And never dying part.

You Lucius
Did never court me thus. You Would only tell me
That I should be a Queen, when your old Father
Went to the lower Kingdom.

What is Lucius?

A Prince amongst the Celtiberians.
This Lady Nobly borne to me betrothed,
If Scipio will be merciful, l'de ransom.

You love her then?

Above my self: without her
My being is not perfect.

Blessed occasion.
Now Massanissa if example may
Rectify errors in thee, make my act
An imitable president. Young Prince
Receive her from my hands; withal the sum
Intended for her ransom as a dowry.
Love Rome and Scipio.

Nobleness above
The reach of praise. How shall I show my gratitude?

When he has made me Queen, He bid you welcome
To Lucius Court.

And Lucius when grown man
Will bring you Soldiers.

Seemed he not to love her?
And yet without least pause he gave her back
Being possessed. I am overcome; I see
Passion's the noble souls worst enemy
I Am all for action.

Massanissa is
Become himself again. Wherefore this music?

To gratulate your victory, and the peace
That gives them rest, the Soldiers have prepared
A slight solemnity: The Carthaginians
Mix with the Romans, though their heavy hearts
To part with so much treasure scarce admits it.

It Is seasonable: there is cause to joy,
Since Massanissa's new wed to my bosom,
And this young Ladies nuptials.
On bravely, on; the foe is met;
The Soldiers ranck't, the battle set.
Make the earth tremble, and the skies
Redouble echoes from your cries.
Blood puts a scarlet mantle on
The late green plain: they 'l stie anon.
Then follow; but your orders keep;
Take prisoners; set their ransomes deep.
Retreat. For same and the delight
That peace brings only Soldiers fight.
So you proportion pleasures, we give way to it.
Is Lelius yet informed of Hannibal?

That he is fled unto Antiochus,
Or else to Prusias of Bythinia.
His ends are doubtful.

If his discontent
Should anew whet his envy to attempt
Their aids, 'twould much disturb the Asian provinces.
We Will follow to prevent it. Lelius you
Shall carry our success unto the Senate,
And with it Syphax, and the Carthage pledges.
Come my souls half, we will hunt this Afric Lion
Into a stronger toil. Fame shall wait on us
Till we have loaded her, and that she see
Our triumph finished in his tragedy.

You Are welcome, though your fortun's ebbed. The memory
Of what you have bin should command respect
From good men to you. Virtue is not lessened
By want of a success; that is but a gloss
Fortune sets on her: Misery does make
Her inside glorious sometimes, when desertlesse,
And bastard actions as the heirs of chance
Shine in their superficies: but being searched
Are found like bladders, swollen with an enforcement
Of wind into them: which the least necessity
Or adverse fortune pricking, they dilate
Th'included air, and shrink into their first
Narrow dimensions: When true virtue bears
Her owners head above afflictions waves,
And steeres him into harbor.

You are noble,
And like a King with judgment value me.
My mind was never subjected: I have known
So much of both, that neither of the pastimes
Fortune delights her self with, can incline me
To height above a moderate, nor decline me
Below my self. Prosperity, adversity;
Both make one even scale, and weight being added
To either, shows the difference. He Is not man
Will be dejected or exalted. Every one
Should temper the condition of his state,
Such as the present makes it, with the fear
Or hope of after change: and when he labor's
In the extremity of one, or slowes
In The swelling height of the other, still his mind
Should be the same. Chance varies every way;
But virtues course is constant.

You express
A noble resolution, and your soul
Shows rich and glorious even through the clouds
Of your misfortune. There Is a readiness,
And a propens^ desire in me to aid you.
But circumstance must make it probable
Whether the causes justness may command
Th'attendence of success. For an attempt
That Is warranted by justice, cannot want
A prosperous end.

If to desend my Country.
Or to compel encroaching (...)
To satisfaction, such as would deprive us
Of the earth that nature in her legacy
Made our proportion be a justice, I
Did never injury; for these were only
The motives to my actions. Fame I know
Could not be silent, but she must inform
Even the remotest dwellers, how proud Rome
(Whose infant greatness by ambition nursed
Is now in growing, and will spread it self
If a prevention stay it not, beyond
All limits of the yet known world) insults
Over her neighboring Provinces. From Carthage
She has enfore't Sicilia (the worlds granary)
And other Hands: and her General
Swollen with his fortune, has attempted farther
To overslow all Afric. You may likewise
Expect he will encroach upon your Asia;
Antiochus being already vanquished,
And sled to Ephesus. If nothing else,
Your safety should invite you to take arms,
Though but defensive. States that never knew
A change but in their growth, which a long peace
Has brought unto perfection, are like steel;
Which being neglected will consume it self
With its ownerust. So does security
Eat through he hearts of states whilst they are sleeping
And lulled in her false quiet. Prusias therefore
Should dwell no longer in so great a danger.
If he will not be a Soldier, let him arm
His people; Hannibal will be their Captain,
And lead them unto actions that shall take
Fam. with the wonder, 'till I have made Rome
(Who like the earths issue heaps up hills on hills,
To raise her proud head) nothing. My right hand
Jove-like is armed with thunder, which shall sligh
Winged with prodigious slames of just revenge
To punish her impiety.

I could gladly
Cherish your resolutions, being grounded
On justice: but t'engage my self or people
In an uncertain war, before provoked
By enemies, were rashness that excuse
Could no way gloss to make it show an act
Worthy a man, much less a King.

You value
Those scruples more than a full weight of honor.
Heaven gave the difference to you but to be
The sigure of that power, that will exact
A just account of a Kings greater actions,
Then what inferiors owe to their creation.
Th'essentiall part of your eternity
Depends upon that point: and can you more
Express your self heavens minister, then when
You do the things agree with it?

Rome comply's
With us for peace. The violation
Of a religious oath, superior justice
Cannot but punish: else we might be bold
To call the worship of the gods no more
Than the issue of credulity, produced
To fright us with a name that had no power
But what our fears allowed it. Rome is yet
Our friend; and 'till she fall from honor, we
Must hold her dear.

In that consists your danger.
She Is mask't in policy, and like a Statesman
Without religion, steeres her course by shows
And mere appearance to what ever ends
Amoition points her. Be not then too rash.
Make not the greatness which is yet your own
Derivative from her. 'T will leave your name
A stain in times records, and blot the tables
That should preserve it.

Noble Hannibal
Be safe with us and confident. I expect
The Roman Legates; and if mediation
Or any practice which I can with honor
Assay to reconcile ye, may be useful.

To reconcile us! Time shall first run back
To his beginning, and the world return
To its first Chaos e're I will admit
Of such a word. L'et those that fawn upon
The smiles of peace and softness to delight
Their wanton appetites, practice their low
Effeminate souls in fears and passions.
Each thought of mine shall be a numerous Army
To lead' against Rome: in my imagination
I will fight with her still, though I want Soldiers.

Nobly resolved.

Ha! Scipio and Flaminius
Amongst the Roman Legates! there is some treachery.
Inform thy self Himulco. His pursuing
My course, imports no good, and my sad soul
Labors with a prophetic apprehension
Of something he intends. Beready thou,
Thou my last refuge.

Sudden clouds me thinks
Creep over your eyes. Though you be enemies,
Peace warrants gentle greeting. She is emblem'd
In Doves that have no gall. You Are here my guests,
And shall partake a courtly entertainment
Worthy such persons.

Hannibal I know
Has put of the rough habit which his mind
Was lately wrapped in: and since chance has made him
The subject of my conquest, in the peace
Rome has allowed his Country (the conditions
Being stricktly kept) all past contentions
Must lose their memory, and after strites
Be stisled in their first birth by prevention.
I must acknowledge my ambition
Bore my thoughts higher than my Countries good,
Or her enlargement only. Had my fortune
Captived the person of great Hannibal.
My triumph should out-vye all the rich pompes
That ever made Rome shine.

That person yet
Is free, and capable of new designs,
To make himself full owner of a glory
'Bove Scipio's conquest. It Is not thy success
Declines me the least step toward subjection
Of my still high built hopes: which being strongly
Propt with my resolutions, shall in time
Raise monuments of fame unto my actions.
Let not one chance exalt thee. Hannibal,
Though Carthage ownes him not, command's a world
Greater than her, or Rome.

But the dimensions
Are bounded with that strict necessity
They cannot be extended. Flatter not
Those hopes with expectation of a change
To any better than the now condition
Of thy subverted greatness: which being ruined
Beyond all reparation, thy attempts
To build it new, wanting materials,
Are vainer far than the Sycilian Dogs
Barking against the Moon.

Be not deceived
With too much confidence. The more they are pressed,
The more palms flourish. That that would make Scipio
Look downwards, lifts me up.

How thou art mocked
With selfe-opinion! Know I have a soul
So full instructed, it has power to temper
The difference of my fortune with that mean,
That even the highest glory to my self
Is but adversity, and an abject state
No less then is my present greatness. Man
From outward accidents should not derive
The knowledge of himself: for so he is made
The creature of beginnings over which
His virtue may command: Fortune and chance.
When he by speculation has informed
His divine part he is perfect; and 'till then
But a rough matter, only capable
Of better form. It often begets my wonder
That thou a rude Barbarian, ignorant
Of all art, but of wars, which custom only
Has (being joined to thy first nature) taught thee,
Should know so much of man.

I study man
Better from practice, than thou can from books.
Thy learning's but opinion, mine known truth;
Subject to no gross errors, such as cannot
Be reconciled, but by production
Of new and greater. Did thy learned Masters
Of Arts, with whom even armed thou have converst
Before a battle joined (if fame speak truth)
By their instructions show thee surer ways
To victory, than Fortune joined to valor,
And a full strength of men?

That which consists
In action only, and the event, depends
Upon no certain rule demonstrative,
Is fates, not reasons.

Fie, this strife sounds harshly,
Come Massanissa, you have shared your part
Of virtue and of fortune.

Least of virtue,
That left a just cause to support a wrong one;
Such was his fall from Carthage.

You being judge
In your own cause: but who will else subscribe
To such a partial sentence?

Pray' no more.
My Court looks like a Parliament of Soldiers;
Where war me thinks should be discoursed on; how
A battle should be ordered, or what form
Has most advantage. What men have you known,
Or History does mention, that exceoded
In the degrees of merit?

Alexander
The first best Captain.

Who the second?

Pyrrhus.

And who the third?

Doubtless my self.

What then
Am I that conquered Hanniball?

If I
Had conquered Scipio, I had then been first.

Did ever pride so swell the infected parts
Of a rich soul! Were not his mind corrupted
With that disease of virtue, I should covet
To join mine with it in an eternal fellowship;
And only here in outward enmity
Divide our bodies.

How art satisfied?
Am I yet safe?

My observation
Has been I fear too curious: for your danger
If any be intended wants all means
Of opposition. But my fear perhaps
Interprets worse than a consideration
Will from the circumstance; which yet has show
Of probability.

Why what have seen?

Armed troops guard all the passages by which
The house is entered.

I am then betrayed.
Can Kings be treacherous? have they mortal parts
Subject to that corruption stains with leprosy
The glorious brow of honor! Can creation
Be in her different works so negligent
As not to perfect them? She Is idle when
She makes Kings, should be like gods, less then men.
Prusias and Scipio, thus I mock your plots.
Be treacherous now; you shall have nothing but
Hannibals earth to work on.

What Is the meaning
Of this?

It Is poison surely that he takes.

Restrain him.

It Is too late.

Call our Physicians.

All help is vain as your conspiracy.
It was no juggling sop to wrap the senses
In slumbers like death, Colches never yielded
A juice more banefull. I went still prepared
Thus to overcome your malice; which discovered,
My death bears me above it.

Why should Hannibal
From the weak warrant of a bare suspicion
Be guilty of such barbarousnesse! By all
The hopes I have of good men's loves, or memory
Amongst their true valuing of desert, I ever
Restrained m'uncertaine thoughts their liberty
From being busy 'bout betraying Hanniball
By any practice honor might not father,
And gladly call his own.

Persuade thy flatterers
To credit it: Those that would deifie
The virtues in thy book, not of thy mind.
Practice has taught me how to read men's souls.
Do not I know then thy hypocrisy
Plasters the wounded credit of thy act!
But if thou healst it, there will be a scarre
To show posterity that what thou did
Was full of base corruption.

Thou did much
Lessen thy self in thy first fear; and now
By the ill-grounded jealousy of my virtue
Wilt make thy own taxt. From this Paedia
I have been truly moral; th'institutions
Have been my guides in every action
Which I did either as a man, or Prince.
Cyrus himself, to whom they were directed,
Pursued them not so strictly as I have.
Breath not thy soul forth then 'till thou art satisfied
Of my true innocence: for if thou dy'st
In thy suspicion, be assured it will
Disturb thy peace hereafter, and thy ashes,
As the pile hallows them, will fright thy ghost
With shapes of the dishonor thou unjustly
Would lay on Scipio.

Tell thy Philosophers
The earth has not a center; that the day
Is not illumined by the Sun; that fire
Is colder than the ever-frozen rocks
That bear the North-end of the earths Axeltree:
When they allow these paradoxes, I
Will credit Scipio. Work on thou brave minister
Of my last victory over my self.
Quench thy unnatural flames with my scortcht bowels.
Now thou have met a heat, which joined to thine
Makes all the frame like the bright forge, whence Jove
Has his artillery. My heatt, my heart;
Quench it Eridanus: but it would dry
Thy waters up. I Am wrapped in greater fires
Then the rash boy thou choak'st. Would this were Oeta;
That like the furious Thebane I might build
Mine own pile, and the flame as it ascends
Transform it self into a constellation;
Or fix in the upper region of the ay re
Like a perpetual comet to fright Rome
With his prodigious light. Me thinks an earthquake
Totters the aged fabric that so long
Has borne me on it, and the divided poles
Embrace to kiss each other. An inversion
Of natures order shall attend the fate
Of dying Hannibal. So Oaks eradicated
By a prodigious whirlwind, tear the earth
Through which their large roots spread themselves.
No less then the whole world to be my grave.

He Is dead: with him my glory. Scipio's acts (I Will have
Havenot another object worthy them,
Or his attempts.

Fame break thy trumpet now;
Deaf thy wide ears, and silence all thy tongues
Since he is dead, who with his actions wont
To ympe new feathers to thy broken wings,
And make thee sligh a pitch above the reach
Of common eyes.

Left that my honor suffer
In the suspicion of betraying him,
I will provide a lasting monument,
And fix his statue on it.

You Massanissa
I Will see established in your Kingdom. Carthage
Thy base ingratitude to him, whose merit
But justly challenged all that thou could own
Shall teach me a prevention. Solitude
Is the souies best companion. At Linturnum
My Country Villa I will terminate
My after life free from men's flatteries,
And fear of their lean envy. He that suffers
Prosperity to swell him 'bove a mean,
Like those impressions in the air, that rise
From dunghill vapors, scattered by the wind,
Leaves nothing but an empty fame behind.

Our strife is ended: yet in ones I spy
Peace smile, and war frown in another eye.
Being victorious I must not submit
To a dislike. Rather to him that writ
Our story, gratefully I would allow
One leaf of Laurel torn from mine own brow.
And with their fair opinion of it these
May make it a full Garland if they please.

