WIthout good meat and drink must Venus freeze?
Must I derive my flames and my desire
From Ceres and from Bacchus? shall the fire
That burns in hearts, and pays me solemn rites
Kindle from fullness and gorg^d appetites?
It shall not Son. Learn of thy Sea-borne mother
Never to borrow power from any other.
The virtue that is our own, who dares to claim?
Are not both Gods and men by thy sure aim,
When at their bosoms thou direct'st a Dart.
Wounded with passion past the cure of art?
Did not the god of Medicine himself want;
(When he was s^ruck by thee) a sovereign plant
To heal his hurt? nor did it rancor by
Abundance of choice cates and luxury?
'Twas merely thy effect. Why then should we
To Ceres or to Bacchus deity
Assign our rights?

In part we must; for they
Are aiders in our work, and therefore may
Share in the attributes of power. If wine
Did not the spirits and the blood refine,
Making them warm and active, I should throw
My shafts at rocks of ice, and from my Bow
The winged arrows of desire would fly
With empty and succeslesse battery.
If Ceres bounties flowed not, where should I
Find any flame to light my torches by?
Fullness and ease assist me more then all
The helps I have besides.

And therefore shall
They be preferred? Thou art a foolish boy.
Their base effects are lust; they love to joy
In what is sensual only. Our pure heat
Borrowes no activenesse from drink or meat;
It moves more in the soul. God Bacchus shall
Have his due attributes, and Ceres call
The plough, crookt sickle, flayle and many more
Her own admired inventions, and the store
She gathers for men's use. But should the mind
Make these her only objects, what a blind
And dangerous issue of effects would grow
From such a seed! high spirits strive to know
More then a common eye sees, and aspire
Still upwards like the Piramide of fire,
When earth tends to its center. We must move
More then the sense; else it is not perfect love.
Here Is Ceres and Lyaens.

We are told
By Maia's son that you intend to scould
With me and Bacchus.

I have cause to chide.
You Would rob me of my titles, and beside
Make it a gluttons tenent, there can be
No love without you.

And your Deity
Has summond us for this: it is very good.
I must confess you made your father wood
To ravish fair Europa. Having seen
Traynes of Arcadian Virgins on the green
Tread their chaste measures, or with nimble pace
Through the Parthenian groves, and thickets chase
A well-breathed Stagge, one of them straight-wayes must
Be tempted to her ruin by his lust:
And this employment Venus still is thine.

Ceres is madd still for her Proserpine:
Whose rape has made her queen of the Abyss.
Who to be so rewarded would not kiss
The black lips of hells king? and to his bed
Bring the short pleasures of a Maydenhead?
Repine not at it then.

I must whilst day
Has any light, or heavens bright eye a ray.
It was your sons great act to boast of; he
That suffers not th^infernals to go free
Of his diseases.

Rather Ceres mine:
For if the God had never tasted wine,
Not all the heat of his infernal fire
Could e're have thawed him into one desire;
Or kindled the least flame in his cold breast
Without my virtue.

It Is an idle jest.
Does Bacchus think he can with heat of wine
Light the bright flame of love, that is divine,
And burns not from such causes, but takes fire
From th'elementall part of pure desire
Unmixt with grossnesse? Thy effects are foul;
And motions of the sense, not of the soul.
Subscribe then to our power; my son and I
Must have the attributes.

Let him lay by
His quiver rather. Ceres means to be
The Queen of Love, and Bacchus deity
Include all that is Cupids.

First I Will leave
To be immortal, and my self bereave
Of all that I can claim above the sky,
Or under heavens archt roof, if destiny
May give it confirmation. Take a Dart
And aim it at her proud imperious heart
To show in thy revenge what thou can do.

I must not Mother. We Will refer it to
Another trial, and if Bacchus can
Confirm what he so saucily began
To argue, by example, we will deny
Nothing that is due unto his deity.

Content.

And see occasion has complied
Even with our wish. It cannot be denied
But these share both our bounties; have free use
Of all our gifts: and if you will not refuse
A trial from them --

Let them speak, whilst we
To their dispose refer the victory.

I say Christmas you are past date, you are out of the Almanac. Resign,
resign. Let the Oven give place to the Drying Pan, and Mine't-pies yield
superiority to pancakes and Fritters


Resign to thee! I that am the King of good cheer and feasting, though I come
but once a year to reign over baked, boiled, roast, and plum-porridge, will
have being in despite of thy lard-ship. Thou art but my fagge-end, and I must
still be before thee


But thou will never be beforehand. Thou art a prodigal Christmas; and
Shrovetide has seen thee many times in the Poultry


Do scorn my liberality, thou rasty bacon, tallow-faced scullion? Though
thou be as fat as a Flemming, I Will have Lent choke thee with a red-herring


I Will arm my self for that. In three days I can victual my garrison for
seven weeks: and it shall go hard but I will domineere in Lent despite of the
thin-chapt surgeon that makes men skillitons


As how?


At any Noblemans house, I can lick my fingers in a privy kitchen. Though I
be out of commons in the hall, there is flesh to be had sometimes in a chamber
besides a Landresse. The very three-penny ordinary will keep me in an upper
gallery, and I can be invisible even in the pye-house. Should all fail, the
wenches I got with child shall long, and have the Physicians ticket


Thou get children!


Yes more then Christmas, and better too: for thine are all unthrifts, whores,
or murderers. Thy son In and in, undid many a Citizen. Thou have a Daughter
called my Ladies hole, a filthy black slut she is; and Put is common in every
Bawdy house. It Is thought Noddy was none of thine own getting, but an
Aldermans, that in exchange cuckolded thee, when thou wast a Courtier. Thou
have one son bred up in the Country called Christmas gambolls, that does
nothing but break men's necks; and many more that would undo the
Commonwealth, were it not for the Groom porter


Do see these sirrah?


Ceres and Bacchus: I am their worshipper. Were Stews tolerated, and Venus the
Grand Bawd of them, without good meat and drink, your young Factors would
never be able to break their Masters or Mistresses, nor your shee-silke-worme
in Cheap care a button for her foreman


Venus being overcome, I hope will yield,
Now she is vanquished in the open field,
And her weak forces scattered: nor can they
Gather new head to make a second fray.

Yes: with this champion; and his fresh supply
I Will wage new war, and call back victory.

This leave thin-gut starveling, begot by a Spaniard* and nursed at the lower
end of Friday-street


Why thou Helluo of hens and bakon, th^^ ^^rder houst of collops and eggs;
thou that make the kitchen proclaim its employment through the
neighborhood, with the sent of thy Lard and crumpets, what can thou boast
often


Children, children, thou parcht starveling: thou can^t g^t nothing but
Anatomies


Children! I get more (I maintain not their lawfulness) then Christmas and
Shrovetide. Oh the virtue of Oysters, Lobsters, Sturgeon, Anchoves, and
Caveary. Why thou grout-headed bladder, puffed with the windiness of pared
apples coffered in batter: for every Brawne or hog, either Christmas or thy
self have demolisht; I have a thousand Herrings, despite of the Dutchmens
wastfull theft, let them rob the four Seas never so often. Besides, I couple
more then the Parson of Pancrace: I mean City woodcocks, with Suburb-wagtailes


Thou couple!


Who more? Is not S. Valentines day mine? are not Codds mine, thou codds-head,
and Maids mine? put them together thou will find they are things --


Thou art a thing of emptiness, and Lent was ever a Jack by conversion.


Such a Jack as can come aloft, and do Venus more credit then thy fullness.
Do not I share of Aries, Taurus, and Gemini; the Innes I lie at in my
progress. Yet no cuckold can deny but Aries and Taurus should follow Gemini.
And it follows, or should, that I having two fathers my self, should get most
children


Who were thy fathers prithee?


Devotion and Policy; and I have begotten Hypocrisy on a holy sister, that
despite of all Informers would have flesh, her belly full. Let Christmas and
Shrovetide eat and drink; I Will be for Venus, though I feed upon nothing but
herring-cobbs


Who Is now the conqueror? Will Ceres now
Subscribe unto my power? and Bacchus bow
To Cupids awefull strength?

Not till it is
Confirmed by better evidence then his.

Then mine ^ Observe.


See you these good fellows, that prefer the warm Sun, before the scrapps
which niggardly Christmas and Shrovetide feast them with; and would get a
better race under a hedge to people New England, then the Seperatists that
possess it. Whilst they entertain ye, I Will summon the Spring, and she shall
moderate

See, see a Metamorphosis,
The late gray field now verdant is.
The Sun with warm beams glads the earth,
And to the springing flowers
He gives a new and lively birth
By th'ayde of gentle showers.
The Lambs no longer bleate for cold,
Nor cry for succor from the old:
But friske and play with confidence
Like Emblemes of true innocence.
The cheerful birds their voices straine^
The Cuckow's hoarse for want of rain.
The Nightingale does sweetly sing,
To welcome in the joyful Spring.
Thus break my gloryes forth that late lay hid
Within the icye earth, and were forbid
By Winters nipping cold to show their heads
Above the snowy covering of their beds.
The winds not rugged now, but calm and fair,
Sweep flowery Gardens, and perfume the air.
The woods shrill Choristers (whose frozen throtes
Late wanted motion,) now have found their notes;
Strayning their little organes to sound high,
And teach men art from Natures harmony.
Come you to welcome me?

Yes lovely Maid;
And to have judgment from you, who most aid
In Loves great work.

Is there a strife between
The goddess of desire, and plenties Queen?
Will they subscribe, I Will moderate.

Content.


First hear my reasons; then my sentence: bent
Against neithers honors, for I must comply
Wi^^ ^^th as vertu^^. Venus Deity
Is powerful over all; and Ceres gives
Each that has being that by which he (...)
Yet many times excess perverts the end
Of pure intentions; and extremes extend
Their powers to undo those acts are free
In their own natures from impuritie*
Love ought to be Platonic, and Divine*
Such as is only kindled, and does shine
With beams, that may all dark effects con^roule
In the refined parts of the glorious soul.
Men do abuse your gifts, when they delight
Only to please their sensual appetite,
And heat the blood from ^ulnesse; whencethere grows
No perfect love, but such as only knows
The coursest difference, and therefore must
Presume to own no other name but lust.
In me let Temperance teach you to apply
Things to their best ends; and to rectify
All motions that intend effects, beside
What may run clear and current with theside
Of purest love: in which let all your jarres
Be reconciled, and finish your stern wa^res.

Thus we embrace in p^^ce.


And I (...) Spring
Will lead a moderate measure. Chirpers sing
Your choysest airs; and as our ears they great,
Unto the Music we will apply our feet.

That of all the seasons am the least,
Though first in time, and usher in the rest,
Impart my pleasures freely, ^ut desire
You Will not abuse them with excess. My quire
Shall sing as every fair one does ^ecome
A chaste Bride, her Epithal a^i^m.
Though they are short be plea^'d with these, to you
I yearly will return and bring you new.
The Spring being received into the Scaene it closes.


