ANd must I still be vexed! shall my gray age
Be played upon, as if I were a Page
To your fond Art, not Nature: did not live
But by the stipend which you yearly give.
Your owne's but forty shillings, and that price
Binds you to order me by sage advice
With Ticho Brach, and Ptolomy, so far
You dare out-doe a learned Albumazar.
And with Predictions cheat the faith of men,
That make your books their gods; and from your reign
Or drought foretold inhaunce the price of grain,
This is the end of your high practice.

We
Do all by just rules of Astrology.

Starre-gazing idiots, you Astrologers!
That understand not what the name inferres.
You have not enough Grammar to conceive
The words true Etymon; and therefore leave
Your vain replies, lest I apply them to
Another use.

What would Time have us do?


Not fright credulity with this years wonders;
Eclipses; tempests; frosts; snowes; storms and thunders.
And you that sad fates sadly do report
In borrowed Latin from the Innes a court;
Let not great Princes; Statesmen, and whole Nations
Suffer this year by your Prognostications:
As if you could the fates of all men teach,
When your conjecture has obtained the reach
Of probability: for which your ears
May stand in time as fixed stars on the spheres
Of some round pillory. 'Twill teach you how
It Is judgment to be silent, though you know.

Why Astraregunt homines.


It Is true:
Stars govern men; but Time shall govern you;
And regulate your studies: or he will be
No longer ruler over his Pentarchie.
You shall not stuff your annual books with rimes
Bought of the Ballad-mongers of the times;
In which (and that shows little Poetry)
He must enveigh against wine and venerie.
Prescribe the fittest time for cutting corns:
And when the Pigges should fear the gelders horns.
These are your ^abours; and by such as these
Each of you shows himself Philomates.
You likewise think it is grace your years works are
Fixed on the backside of some chalkie bar,
Where Is your own score, perhaps for Ale or Beer
You will not pay 'till the Platonic year.

Time Satyrs me.


Indeed Time cannot lie:
You know his Motto: (...).
It Is well that you can make the country Squire
For two pence yearly a Chronologer.
Tell him how long it is since the world began;
And since the Conquest every Monarchs reign.
Then with this store enabled he is complete;
Can welcome friends with talk as well as meat.
Before poor tenants have their rent to pay
The Landlord's skillful in the quarter day:
Knows every Terms returns, and when he is ti'de
By a Subpaena on his mare to ride
To London; where he only learnes to boast
How much his journey, and his law-sutes cost.

Time knows that we are scholars.


So you are;
And learned ones too: whose speculations dare
Reach at sublime things, when you cannot spy
What snakes of folly at your own feet lie.

What would Time have us then?


I Would have you be.
Not vain prescribers of men's destiny;
But Registers of actions, such as may
Challenge deserv'dly a peculiar day
To every owner. You me thinks should show
The executions done by The English bow,
When black Prince Eaward bravely did advance
His Ensigns through the very heart of France.
I will have all the world observe this day,
So glorious by the birth of him, that may
Fill volumes with his acts, and challenge more
Then all the great Heroes went before.

Such things as those Historians ought to day.


Be nothing, or be you Historians too.
Practice a reformation, or (fond Elves)
Changed into Satyrs you shall lafh your selves.

Is the gray dotard gone?
We are then alone:
Good fellows every one
Let Us call my hostess Ioane.

Well said rithmer* thy halting verses will hardly support the fat cripple any
longer that begs with them. Would we had some Ale


Hang this Time that would alter our profession, which is of equal antiquity
with him. Suppose we have abilities; must we use them as he please? No: let us
inspire our selves with Ale, and compile an everlasting Ephimerides


Where Is the stock-boy?
Do not mock boy:
Lest I knock boy
Your learned block boy*

Have thou none left of thy six years before hand? If the Stationers refuse
to trust, our books shall never more credit the Company with rubricks in the
title


We Will try all the houses in the Zodiac; and if they will not trust, we will
pull'downe the signs


Here is the sign of the Moon, the rendevous of our fraternity. If the worst
comes to the worst, we will pawn Time for the reckoning


By your favor we may more easily spend him.


Here comes she will fill us the comfortable liquor.


By the dozen?


By the score boy. Wilt not Hostess?


No indeed sir. I Will hazard no more upon your next years Almanac. You say
there is a man in the Moon drinks Claret; keep him company. The woman at the
Moon will keep her Ale for better customers


Shall we have no Ale then?


Not a cockle-shell full without money beforehand.


Here Is two groats; fetch every man his pot, and before we drink a health
we will curse thee


The Fox will fare the better.


May thou have always pennilesse guests like us, 'till thou pawn thy
petticoate to pay the Brewer, and thy glorious shelves shine not so much as
with an earthen platter. Instead of Shoelane hangings may the walls of thy
house be painted with chalk; and the figures of no more value then cyphars.
May thou weekly be subject to informers, and thy forfeited license be put to
the last use of wast paper


Stop your mouth sir.


Have thou brought Ale? cry thee mercy. Here Is a health to the Prince, whose
Birthday Time would have should be the whole subject of an Almanac


Let him give the conceit to a Poet; it may be worth a day to him.


Ha! has Circes given us an enchanted cup; or are our wives turned City
Witches? These are fine jestes


It Is your own idle humor makes you beasts.


Forgive us Time.


Nay dance a Horne-pipe now.
That done perhaps I Will crop your well-growne brow.

Ha! we are men again.


Hence: since you slight all counsel that is mine,
I Will employ others in my great design.

On, gently on; the sky is fair:
Arabian winds perfume the air,
As they the Eastern gardens sweep,
Or Amber floating on the deep.
Such sweets do here the sense bewitch.
The Phoenix pile is not so rich.
Here is a presence, from whose (...)
An influence awes all destini^s.
A Su^ue that can with on^ bright ^^y
Make where it shines (...)
Sing, sweetly sing. The chirpi^g bi^^^
Have got new notes, and better words.
What Nature wants Ar^ does supply,
And makes it perfect harmony.
Such ^ounds do^ here enrich the ears*
Above the Music of the Sp^^^^^s.
Here are presented to the tuft
Ripe fruits and early, that will last.
For such we banish Nect^r hence,
Here Is perfect May in every sense.
Welcome to Time thou comfort of the earth,
T^^t ^ith the warm do we giv'st a lively birth
To all her glories, which cold win^er late
Wrapped in his clouds of ice: she desolate
Vngarnisht then, wore nothing on her head
But snow and barrenness, nor was her bed
Covered with green: then heavens crystal eye
Seldom peep out of his bright canopie.
But now thou have unto the infant Spring
Given perfection; and thy blessings bring
The ^^^mers hopes on. Thou Times Queen shall be
Whilst Flora and Vertum^us wait on thee.
Thou own'st a glory yet tran^e^ (...) the (...)
Of these, as day light does the (...) ^ime of rest.
This day, that makes Time young, in hope to see
A thousand revol^tio^ (...) be (...)
Dissolved, to gaze o^ Trophies shall ado^^^
The Princes lif^, and (...) wa^ this day home*
Go my delig^^ (...) the (...)
Of all thy pleasures; to his graciou^ ^ye
Present the (...)

I (...) that are
Worthy his high acceptance^ they are far
Inferior to the things that should set forth
The fullness of his glory and his worth.
The pastimes which belong to me are rude,
Fitter for course ones, and the m^ltitude^
Yet (so the (...) may be pardoned) they
Shall enter to delight him as they ^^y.

He Is pleased with this Greatness^ and goodness (...)
At such proportion in his Pri^cely frame,
That every part of hi^, his heart, his eyes,
Express them in a due equallitye.
I have another to present him, then
We Will yield ^o change.

I Will never change whilst more
Keep registers of Time. And though it b^
Custom, that they do chiefly welco^e (...)
At my first entrance, this shall be my day
As the only one that trownes the pride of May.
I Will wear no other flowers upon my head
But the Deluce; with Roses, white and red;
And the stout Thistle: each of which implies
An Emblem full of sacred Mysteries.
The Lilly and the Rose are beauties flowers:
They deck; the Thistle shall defend his bowers.
The white and red Rose thornelesse, signify
A gentle rule: The Lilly, soveraigntie.
The Thistle strength and power to quell his foe^
That rudely dare attempt to gather those*
Besides, these several flowers do appertain
To Nations subject to his future reign.
And this is all poor May can strame her powers
To do; to make her Garland of his flowers.
And cause men yearly on this day to see
His name preserved unto posterity.
Time has some rich thing to pre^ent.

I have
(As Time is powerful) summond from the grave
Eight Princes all of Wales, whose histories
Shall be instruction, and their memories
Present Heroic actions so this mind,
That though their fortunes were not always kind,
Their virtues he shall strictly imitate,
And make those virtues awful over Fate.
Vertumnus you, and Flora you be gone.
And if their ayrie forms are quite put on
Let them appear; whilst lovely May and I
Listen to th'Birds and Natures harmony.

From The Earth whom^ honor long has slept*
And ^oblest dust (as treasur^ h^^e)
By hallowing clay has made it shine
More glorious then an Indian mine,
These brave Heroic shadows come
To sport in this Elysium.
For theirs and this do both agree
In all but the Eternity.
From the air, or from the Spheres above
As they in perfect concord move.
Let Music sound, and such is may
Equal his hope that rules the day.
Thus do we welcome you to night
Unto our Mansion of delight.
For yours and (...) do both agree
Inall but the Eternity.
OLd Time leaves all his blessings that he may
Here with this presence; and will every day
Confirm possession. Sadly sets the Sun
After his days course cheerfully was run.
The Moon looks pale; the Tapers dimnly burn:
The fear of your departure makes them mourn.
Sweet rest attend ye all: Good night it is late,
Many birth-dayes may you thus celebrate.

Time being received into the Scaene it closes.


