A subject, of no subject, we present, for Nobody, is Nothing:
Who of nothing can something make?
^t is a work beyond the power of wit,
And yet invention is ripe:
A morrall meaning you must then expect, grounded on lesser then a shadows
shadow
Promising nothing where there wants a tongue;
And deeds as few, be done by No-bodie:
Yet something, out of nothing, we will show,
To gain your loves, to whom our selves we owe.

MY Lord Martianus.


My Lord of Cornwell.


Morrow.


Morrow,


You are sad my Lord.


You melancholy.


So,
The state it self mournes in a robe of Woe.

For the decease of Archigalloes virtues,
I understand you Noble minded Cornwell,
What generous spirit draws this British air,
But droops at Archigalloes government.

And reason Martianus, when the Sun
Struggles to be delivered from the womb
Of an obscure Eclipse, does not the earth
Mourn to behold his shine envelloped,
O Corbonon when I did close thine eyes,
I gave release to Britains miseries.

Good morrow to Prince Elydure.


The same to you, and you, you are sad my Lords,
your hearts I think are frosty, for your blood
Seems crvsted in your faces, like the dew
In a September morn, how fares the king,
Have you yet bid good morrow to his highness.

The kings not stirring yet.


Yonder Is old Cornwell, come Vigenius,
We Will have some sport with him:

Brother content.


Good morrow to you brother Elydure.


God morrow to Cornwell.


Morrow old gray-beard.


My beards not so gray as your wits green.


And why so.


We shall ha you come out now with some reason that was borne in my great grand
sires time


Would you would prove as honest princes as your great graundsire was, or half
so wise as your elder brother was, there is a Couple of you, Sfoote I am ashamed
you should be of the blood royal


And why father vvinter.


You do not know your state, there is Elydure
Your elder brother next unto the King,
He plies his book, when shall you see him trace
Lascivious Archigallo through the streets,
And fight with common hacksters hand to hand,
To wrest from them their goods and dignityes.

You are to saucy Cornwell.


Bridle your spirit.


Your words are dangerous, good honest subject
Old reverent statesman, faithful seruitor,
Do not traduce the King, he is virtuous
Or say he tread somewhat besides the line
Of virtuous government, his regality
Brooks not taxation, kings greatest royalties
Are that their subjects must aplaud their deeds,
As well as bear them their prerogatives.
Are murall interponents twixt the world,
And their proceedings.

Well, well, I have served four kings,
And none of all those four but would have ventured
Their safeties on old Cornwels constancy,
But that's all one, now I am called a dotard,
Go to, though now my limbs be stark and stiff,
When Cornwels dead Brittayne I know will want
So strong a prop, Alas I needs must weep,
And shed tears in abundance, when I think
How Archigallo wrongs his government.

Nay, now you will fall into your techy humor.


My Lords, Princes I should have said, and after
Lords, I am the Usher and Harbinger unto the kings most
Excellent person and his Majesty.

Is fourth coming.


Or coming fourth, hard by or at hand, will you Put your gestures of
attendaunce on, to give his Majesty the Bon-ioure


Good morrow to our sovereign Archigallo.


Morrow.


Why do you frown upon your servants king,
We love you, and you ought to favor us:
Will you to Counsel. Heeres petitions,
Complaints and controversies twixt your subjects,
Appealing all to you.

Lets see those papers. A controversy betwixt the Lord Morgan and the Lord
Malgo, concerning their Tytles to the Southern Island. We know this cause and
what their titles be. You claim it by inheritance


My liege I do.


You by the marriage of Lord Morgans mother,
To whom it was left ioynture.

True gracious Sovereign.


Whose evidence is strongest, to which part
Inclines the censures of our learned Judges.

We come not here to plead before your grace,
But humbly to entreat your Majesty,
Peruse our evidence and censure it,
According to your wisdom.

What I determine then you will yield unto.


We will my Sovereign.


Then that Southern I Will
we take to our protection, and make you
Lord governor thereof.

I humbly thank your highness.


I hope your Majesty.


Reply not, I but take it to my self
Because I would not have dissension
betwixt two peers, I love to see you friends,
And now the Islands mine, your quarrel ends.
What Is next. A poor Nothern man's humble petition.
Which is the plaintiue?

I if it please your Majesty I was betrothed to this maid.


Is this true my Wench.


It Is very true and like your majesty, but this tempting fellow after that,
most felloniously stole my heart away fro me, carried it into the church, and I
running after him to get my heart again, was there married to this other man


It Is very true and like your majesty, though Raphe were once look for a
propper man, yet when I came in place it appeared otherwise: if your highness
note his leg and mine, there is ods, and for a foot, I dare compare, I have a
wast to, and though I say it, that should not say it there are faces in place
of Gods making


Thou art a proper fellow, and this wench is thine by lawful marriage.


Rafe you have your answer, you may be gone, your only way to save charges, is
to buy a halpenniwoorth of Hob-nailes for your shoes: Alas you might have
looked into this before, go silly Rafe go, away, vanish


Is not this Less a pretty Neat brown Wrench?


She is my liege, and mettell I dare warrant.


Fellow, how long have thou been married?


I was as they say coupled the same day that my country man Raphe begun the
law: for to tell your Majesty the truth, we are yet both virgins, it did never
freese betwixt us two in a bed I assure your grace


Did never lie with thy wife?


Never yet, but now your Majesty has ended the matter I Will be so bold as take
possession


Hark my wench, wilt leave these rusticke fellows and stay with me?


What will your highness do with me?


Why I Will make thee a Lady.


And shall I go in fine clothes like a Lady.


Thou shall.


I Will be a Lady then, that's flat, sweet heart farewell, I must be a Lady, so I
must


How now, how now, but hear you Si^.


Away you Clown, away.


But will your highness rob me of my spouse.


What we will, we will, away with those slaves.


Zounds, if ever I take you in Yorkshire for this.


Away you slaves.


My Lord, these general wrongs will draw your highness into the common hatred
of your subjects


What Is that to thee, old doting Lord forbear.
What Is here? complaints against one Nobody,
For overmuch releeuing of the poor,
Helping distressed prisoners, entertayning
Extrauagants and vagabonds, what fellows this?

My liege I know him, he is an honest subject
That hates extortion, usury, and such sins
As are too common in this Land of Britain.

I Will have none such as he within my kingdom,
He shall be banished.

Hear my advise my liege: I know a fellow
That's opposite to Nobody in all things:
As he affects the poor, this other hates them,
Loves usury and extortion. Send him straight
Into the Country, and upon my life,
Ere many months he will devise some means
To make that Nobody bankrout, make him fly
His Country, and be never heard of more.

What do thou call his name.


His name is Sombody my liege.


Seek out that Sombody, well send him straight,
What other matters stay to be decided
Determine you, and you, the rest may follow
To give attendance.

Alls naught already, yet these unripe ills
Have not their full growth, and their next degree
Must needs be worse then naught, and by what name
Do you call that?

I know none bad enough:
Base, vild, notorious, ugly monstrous, slavish,
Intolerable, abhorred, damnable;
It Is worse then bad, I Will be no longer vassaile
To such a tirannous rule, nor accessarie
To the base sufferance of such outrages.

You Will not endure it, how can you remedy
A mayme so dangerous and incurable?

There is a way; but walls have ears and eyes,
Your ear my Lord, and counsel.

I have ears
Open to such discourse, and counsel apt:
And to the full recovery of these wounds
Made in the sick state, most effectual,
A word in private.

Come brother, I am tyrde with reuelling,
My last Caranta made me almost breathless,
Does not the Kings last wench foot it with art?

Oh rarely, rarely, and beyond opinion.
I like this state where all are Libertines
But by ambitions pleasure and large will:
See, see, two of our strict lived Counselors
In secret conference; they cannot endure
This freedom.

Nor the rule of Archigallo,
Because it is subject to his liberty.
Are they not plotting now for some installement
And change of state: old gallants if you be
Twill cost your heads.

Bodies and all for me.
List them, such strict reproouers should not live,
Their austere censures on their kings to give.

He must be then deposd.


Ey, are you there, that word sounds treason.


Nay, but farther hear.


The King deposd, how must it be effected,
What strengths and powers can suddenly be levied,
Who will assist this business, to reduce
The state to better form and government?

Ey mary, more of that.


All Cornwells at my beck, Devonshire our neighbor
Is one with us, you in the North command.
The oppressed, wronged, dejected and suppressed,
Will flock on all sides to this innovation:
The Clergy late despisd, the Nobles scornd,
The Commons trod on, and the Law contemnd,
Will lend a mutual and combyned power
Unto this happy change.

Oh monstrous treason!


My Lord, we are betraide, and ouer-heard
By the two princes.

How, betraide.


Our plots discovered.


I Will help it all; do you but sooth me up,
Well catch them in the trap they lay for us.

I Will doot.


Now sir, the king deposd
Who shall succeed?

Some would say Elidure.


Tush, he is too mild to rule.
But there are two young princes, hopeful youths
And of rare expectation in the Land,
Oh would they daigne to bear this weighty charge
Betwixt them, and support the regal scepter
With joint assistance, all our hopes were full.

A Scepter.


And a Crown.


What if we made the motion? we have wills
To effect it, we have power to compass it.

And if I make refusal, heaven refuse me.


These Counselors are wise, and see in us
More virtue then we in our selves discern.
Would it were come to such election.

My honored Lord, well break it to those princes,
Those hopeful youths, at our convenient leisure.

With all my heart.


You that our footsteps watched,
Shall in the depth of your own wiles be caught.

A King.


And were a crown, a crown imperial.


And sit in state.


Command.


And be obeyed.


Our Nobles kneeling.


Servants homaging, and crying Aue.


Oh brother, shall we through nice folly
Despise the profferd bounty of these Lords?

Not for the world, I long to sit in state,
To purse the bounty of our gracious fate.

To entertain foreign Ambassadors.


And have our names ranckt in the course of kings.


Shadow us State with thy maiesticke wings.


Now sir, my brother Archigall deposde


Deposd! did you hear that my Lord.


For his licensious rule, and such abuses
As well pretend against him in parliament.

Oh monstrous brothers.


Oh ambitious youths.


Thus well divide the Land, all beyond Trent
And Humber, shall suffice one moitie:
The southpart of the Land shall make the the other,
Where we will keep two Courts, and reign divided,
Yet as dear loving brothers.

As vild traitors.


Then Archigall, thou that have sat in pomp
And seen me vassaile, shall behold me crowned,
Whilst thou with humble knees vail^t to my state.

And when must this be done, when shall my crown
Be parted and divided into halfes.
You reign on this side Humber, you beyond
The river Trent, when do you take your states,
Sit crowned and scepterd to receive our homage,
Our duty, and our humble vassalage.

I know not when.


Nor you?


Nor I.


But I know when you shall repent your pride.
Nor will we use delays in our revenge,
Ambitious boys, we doom you prisonment,
Your Palace royal shall a Iaile be made,
Your thrones a dungeon, and your scepters Irons,
In which well bound your proud aspiring thoughts:
A way with them, we will not mount our chair
Ti^l their best hopes be changd to black despair.

Hear us excuse our selves.


Or lets discover
Who drew us to this hope of sovereignty.

That shall our further leysures arbitrate,
Our ears are deaf to all excusiue pleas,
Come vnambitious brother Elidurus,
Help us to lavish our abundant treasures,
In masks, sports, reuells, riots, and strange pleasures.

But is it true the fame of Nobody,
For virtue, almes-deedes, and for charity,
Is so renownd and famous in the Country?

Oh Lord sir ey, hes talked of far and near,
Fills all the boundless country with aplause,
There lives not in all Britain one so spoke of,
For pity, good mind, and true charity.

Which Sombody shall alter ert be long.


You may my Lord being in grace at Court,
And the high favors of King Archigallo
Exile this petty fellow from the Land,
That so obscures the beauty of your deeds.

What does this Nobody?


You shall hear my Lord,
Come twenty poor men to his gate at once,
Nobody gives them money, meat and drink,
If they be naked, clothes, then come poor soldiers,
Sick, maymd, and shot, from any foreign wars,
Nobody takes them in, prouides them harbor,
Maintains their ruind fortunes at his charge,
He gives to orphants, and for widows buildes
Almes-houses, Spittles, and large Hospitals,
And when it comes in question, who is apt
For such good deeds, it is answered Nobody.
Now Nobodie has entertaind again
Long banished Hospitality, and at his board
A hundred lusty yeomen daily waits,
Whose long backs bend with weighty chynes of biefe,
And choice of cheer, whose fragments at his gate
Suffice the general poor of the whole shire.
Nobodies table's free for travelers,
His buttry and his seller open to all
That starve with drought, or thirst upon the way,

His fame is great, how should we help it?


My Lord, it is past my reach, it is you must do it,
Or't must be left undone.

What deeds of note is he else famous for?


My Lord I Will tell you.
His Barnes are full, and when the Cormorants
And welthy Farmers hoord up all the grain,
He empties all his Garners to the poor
Under the stretched prise that the Market yields,
Nobody racks no rents, does not oppress
His tenants with extortions. When the King
Knighted the lusty gallants of the Land,
Nobody then made dainty to be knighted,
And indeed kept him in his known estate.

The slaves ambitious* and his life I hate.


How shall we bring his name in public scandal?


Thus it shall be, use my direction.
In Court and country I am Sombody,
And therefore apt and fit to be employed:
Go thou in secret being a subtle knave.
And sow seditious slanders through the Land,
Oppress the poor, suppress the fatherless,
Deny the widows food, the starved relief,
And when the wretches shall complain their wrongs,
Being called in question, swear it was Nobody,
Rack rents, raise prises,
Buy up the best and choice commodities
At the best hand, then keep them till their prises
Be lifted to their height, and double rate,
And when the raisers of this dearth are sought
Though Sombody do this, protest and swear
It Was Nobody fore Judge and Magistrate:
Bring scandalls on the rich, raise mutinous lies
Upon the state, and rumors in the Court,
Backbite and sow dissension amongst friends,
Quarrels among neighbors, and debate among strangers,
Set man and wife at ods, kindred at strife,
And when it comes in question, to clear us,
Let every one protest and swear for one,
And so the blame will fall on Nobody.
About it then, if these things well succeed,
You shall prevail, and we applaude your speed.
See where he comes, I will withdraw and see,
The event and fortunes of our last policy.

Come on mine own servant, some news, some news, what report have I in the
country? how am I talked on in the City, and what fame bear I in the Court


Oh Master you are half hanged.


Hanged, why man?


Because you have an ill name: a man had as good almost serve no Master as
serve you, I was carried before the Constable but yesterday, and they took me
up for a strauagant; they asked me whom I served, I told them Nobody, they
presently drew me to the post, and there gave me the law of arms


The law of arms.


Ey, as much law as their arms were able to lay on, they tickled my
Collifodium, I rid post for a quarter of an hour, with switch though not with
spur


Sure Sombody was the cause of all.


I Will be sworn of that, Sombody tickled me a heat, and that I felt, but
Master, why do you go thus out of fashion; you are even a very hoddy doddy,
all breech


And no body. But if my breeches had as much cloth in them, as ever was drawn
betwixt Kendall and Canning street, they were scarce great enough to hold all
the wrongs that I must pocke^

Fie, fie, how I am slaunderd through the world.
Nobody keeps tall fellows at his heels,
Yet if you meet a crew of rogues and beggars,
Ask who they serve, they will answer Nobody.
Your Caualiers and swaggerers bout the town,
That dominere in Tauerns, swear and stare,
Urge them upon some terms, they will turn their malice
To me, and say they will fight with Nobody,
Or if they fight, and Nobody by chance
Come in to part them, I am sure to pay for it,
And Nobody be hurt when they escape scotfree:
And not the dastardst coward in the world
But dares about with me. What shall I do?

Do what thou will, before we end this strife,
I Will make thee ten times weary of thy life.

But do you hear Master, when I have served you a year or two, who shall pay
me my wages


Why Nobody.


Indeed if I serve Nobody, Nobody must pay me my wages, therefore I Will even
seek out Sombody or other, to get me a new service; but the best is Master
if you run away, you are easy to be found again


Why so sir?


Mary ask a deaf man whom he hears, heel straight say Nobody, ask the
blindest beetle that is whom he sees, and heel answer, Nobodie, he that
never saw in his life can see you, though you were as little as a moate, and
he that never heard, can hear you, though you tread as softly as a Mouse,
therefore I shall be sure never to loose you. Besides, you have one commodity
Master, which none has besides you, if you should love the most fickle and
inconstants wench that is in the world, she will be true to Nobody, therefore
constant to you


And thou say true in that my honest servant,
Besides, I am in great especial grace
With the King Archigallo that now reigns
In tyranny, and strange misgouerment,
Nobody loves him, and he loves Nobody.
But that which most torments my troubled soul,
My name is made mere opposite to virtue,
For he is only held peaceful and quiet,
That quarrels, brawles, and fights with Nobody,
He Is honest held that lies with Nobodies wife,
And he that hurts and iniures Nobody,
All the world says, ey that's a virtuous man.
And though a man have done a thousand mischiefs,
And come to prove the forfeit made to law,
If he can prove he has wronged Nobody,
No man can touch his life. This makes me mad,
This makes me leave the place where I was bred,
And thousand times a day to wish me dead.

And I Will pursue thee where so ere thou fliest,
Nor shall thou rest in England till thou die.

Master, I would wish you to leave the Country, and see what good
entertainment you will have in the City, I do not think but there you will be
most kindly respected, I have been there in my youth, there is Hospitality, and
you talk of Hospitality, and they talk of you bomination to see: for there
Master come to them as often as you will, four times a day, and they will make
Nobody drink, they love to have Nobody trouble them, and without good
security they will lend Nobody money. Come into Birchin Lane, they will give
Nobody a suit, choose where he list; go into Cheapeside, and Nobody may take
up as much plate as he can carry


Then I Will to London, for the Country tires me
With exclamations, and with open wrongs,
Since in the City they affect me so.

O Master, there I am sure Nobody may have any thing without money, Nobody may
come out of the Tavern without paying his reckoning at his pleasure


That's better then the Country. Who comes here?


Minion, where have you been all this night?


Why do you ask husband?


Because I would know wife.


I have been with Nobody.


It Is a lie good man, believe her not, she was not with me.


And who has layne with you to night?


Lie with me, why Nobody.


Oh monstrous, they would make me a whore-maister.


Well, I do not think but Sombody has been with you.


Sombody was indeed.


Gods life husband, you do me wrong, I lay with Nobody.


Well minion, though Nobody bear the blame,
Use it no more, least Sombody bide the shame.

I will endure no longer in this Clymate
It is so full of slanders, I Will to the City,
And there perform the deeds of charity.

Now you rascal, who have you been withal at the alehouse?


Sooth I was with Nobody.


Not with me.


And who was drunk there with you?


Sooth Nobody was drunk with me.


O intolerable! they would make me a drunkard to,
I cannot endure any longer, I must hence,
No patience with such scandals can dispense.

Well sir, if I take you so again, I Will so belabour you:
O neighbor good morrow.

Good morrow,


You are sad me thinks,


Faith sir I have cause, I have lent a friend of mine a hundred pound, and
have Nobodyes word for the payment, bill, nor bond, nor any thing to show


Have you Nobodies word, I Will assure you that Nobodie is a good man, a good man
I assure you neighbor, Nobodie will keep his word, Nobodies word is as good
as his bond


Ey, say you so, nay then lets drink down sorrow,
If none would lend, then Nobody should borrow.

Yet there is one keeps a good tongue in his head,
That can give Nobody a good report,
I am beholding to him for his praise:
But since my man so much commends the City,
I Will thither, and to purchase me a name,
Take a large house of infinite receipt,
There keep a table for all good spirits,
And all the chimneyes shall cast smoke at once:
There I Will give scholars pensions, Poets gold,
Arts their deserts, Philosophy due praise,
Learning his merit, and all worth his meede.
There I Will release poor prisoners from their dungeons.
Pay Creditors the debts of other men,
And get my self a name among Citizens,
That after times pertakers of all bliss,
May thus record, Nobody did all this.
Country farewell, whose slanderous tongues I sly,
The City now shall lift my name on hie.

Whether I Will follow thee with Swallows wings,
And nimble expedition, there to raise
New brawles and rumors to eclipse thy praise.
Those subtle, sly insinuating fellows
Whom Sombody has sent into the country,
To rack, transport, extort, and to oppress,
Will I call home, and all their wits employ
Against this public Benefactor, known
Honest, for all the rumors by us sown.
But howsoever, I am sworn his foe,
And opposite to all his meriting deeds,
This way must do, though my deuining thoughts
This augurie amidsts their changes have,
That Sombody will at length be proou'd a knave.

Good day to you both fair Ladies,
But fairest of them both my gracious Queen,
Good day to your high Majesty, and madam
The royal Lady of great Elidure,
My Sovereigns brother, unto you I wish
This morning prove as gracious and as good.

Those greetings from the Lady Elidure
Would pleasingly sound in our princely ears.

Such greetings from great Archigalloes queen
Would be most gracious to our princely ear.

What no good morrow and our grace so near.
Reach me my glove.

Whom speaks this woman to?


Why to my subject, to my waiting maid,
Am not I mighty Archigalloes queen?
Is not my Lord the royal English King,
Thy husband and thy self my seruitors?

Is my Coach ready, where are all my men
That should attend upon our awful frown,
What not one near?

Minion, my glove.


Madam, her highness glove.


My scarf is fallen, one of you reach it up.


You hear me.


Painted Majesty be gone,
I am not to be countercheckt by any.

Shall I bear this?


Be patient, I will school her.
Your excellence greatly forgets your self
To be so dutilesse unto the Queen,
I have seen the world, I know what it is to obey,
And to command. What if it please the Queen
That you her subject should attend on her,
And take her glove up, is it meet that I
Should stoop for yours? You're proud, fie, fie, you're proud.
This must not be twixt such two royal sisters
As you by marriage are; go to submit,
Her Majesty is easy to forgive.

Saucy Lord forbear, there is for your exhortation.


I cannot bear this, it is insufferable,
I Will to the King, and if he save thy life
He shall have mine: madness and wrath attend,
My thoughts are leueld at a bloody end.

She Is shadow,
We the true substance are: follow her those
That to our greatness dare themselves oppose.

Health to your Ladyship, I would say Queen
If I might have my mind, bir lady Lady.

I had a suit unto the King with this Lord
For the great office of high Seneshall,
Because of our good service to the state,
But he in scorn, as he does every thing,
Has taken it from us both, and gin't a fool.

To a Sicophant, a courtly parasite.


Bear witness Madam, I Will go tell the King
That they speak treason.

Pass upon our swords,
You old exchecker of all flattery,
I tell thee Archigallo shall be deposd,
And thou disroab'd of all thy dignity.

I hope not so.


See here the Counsels hands,
Subscribed to Archigallos overthrow.
The names of sixteen royal English Peers,
Joined in a league that is inviolate,
And nothing wants but Elidurus grant
To accept the kingdom when the deed is done.

Nay then I Will take your parts, and join with you*


We will not have a Clawbacks hand comixt
With such heroic peers.

I hope my Lady
Is not of their minds. My most gracious Queen,
What I did speak in reprehensiue sort,
Was more because her Majesty was present
Then any offense of yours, and so esteem it,
God knows I love your highness, and these Lords.

Which of you will persuade my Elidure
To take upon him Englands royalty.

Madam, we all have so importund him,
Laying unto his judgment every thing
That might attract his senses to the crown,
But he frost braind will not be obtaind
To take upon him this Realms government.

He is the very soul of lenity,
If ever moderation lived in any,
Your Lord with that rich virtue is possessed.

This mildnes in him makes me so despisd
By the proud Queen, and by her fauourits.

See maddam where he comes reading a book.


My Lord and husband, with your leave this book
Is fitter for an University
Then to be looked on, and the Crown so near:
You know these Lords for tyranny have sworn
To banish Archigallo from the throne,
And to invest you in the royalty:
Will you not thank them, and with bounteous hands
Sprinckle their greatness with the names of Earls,
Dukes, Marquesses, and other higher terms.

My dearest love, the essence of my soul,
And you my honored Lords, the suit you make,
Though it be just for many wrongs imposd,
Yet unto me it seems an injury.
What is my greatness by my brothers fall,
But like a starued body nourished
With the destruction of the other lymbes.
Innumerable are the griefs that wait
On horded treasures, then much more on Crowns:
The middle path, the golden mean for me,
Leave me obedience, take you Majesty.

Why this is worser to my lofty mind,
Then the late checks given by the angry Queen.

If you refuse it, know we are determined
To lay it else where.

On your younger brother,
And then no doubt we shall be awde indeed,
When the ambition of the elders wife,
Can scarsly give our patience any bounds:
England is sick of pride and tirrany,
And in thy goodness only to be curde.
Thou art called forth amongst a thousand men,
To minister this sovereign Ancidote,
To amend thy brothers cruelty with love,
And if thou will not from oppression free
Thy native Country, thou art vilde as he.

I had rather stay his leisure to amend.


Men, heaven, gods, devils, what power should I invoke,
To fashion him a new: thunder come down,
Crown me with ruin, since not with a Crown.

Long life unto the Kingly Elidure,
Trumpets proclaim it whether he will or no.

For that conceit Lords, you have won my heart,
In his despite let him be straight ways Crowned,
That I may triumph whilst the trumpets sound.

Carry me to my grave, not to a Throne.


Help Lords to seat him, nay help every one:
So should the Majesty of England sit,
Whilst we in like state do associate him.

Never did any less desire to reign
Then I, heaven knows this greatness is my pain.

Pain me in this sort great Lords every day,
It Is sweet to rule.

It Is sweeter to obey.


Live King of England long and happily,
As long and happily your Highness live.

We thank you Lords, now call in the deposd,
Him and his proud Queen, bring unto our sight,
That in her wrongs we may have our delight.

Betrayed, taken prisoner, and by those that owe
To me their duty, and allegiance:
My brother the usurper of the Crown,
Oh this is monstrous, most insufferable.

Good brother grieve not, it is against my will,
That I am made a King, pray take my place,
I had rather be your subject then your Lord.

So had not I, sit still my gracious Lord,
Whilst I look through this Tyrant with a frown,
Minion reach up my glove.

Think thou because
Thy husband can dissemble piety,
And therein has deposd my royal Lord,
That I am lesser in estate then Queen?
No thine own answer lately given to me,
I thus reuet, stoop thou proud Queen for me.

Nay, then as I did lately to her Highness,
I must admonish you, diected Lady
You do forget your self, and where you are,
Duty is debt, and it is fit since now
You are a subject, to bear humble thoughts:
Follow my counsel Lady and submit,
Her Majesty no doubt will pardon it.

There Is for your pains.


Which way so ere I go,
I have it here, whether it ebb or flow.

That pride of thine shall be thy overthrow.
And thus I sentence them.

Leave that to me?


No you are too mild, judgment belongs to me:
Thou Archigallo for thy tirranie,
For ever be excluded from all rule,
And from thy life.

Not from his life I pray.


He unto whom the greatest wrongs are done,
Dispatch him quickly.

That will I.


Or I.


And therein Lords effect my tragedy.


Why strike you not, oh it is a dangerous thing,
To have a living subject of a King:
Much treason may be wrought, when in his death,
Our safty is secured.

Banish him rather, oh sweet spare his life,
He is my brother.

Crowned, and pray thy wife.


Oh brother, if you roughly speak, I know
There is no hope but your sure overthrow,
Pray be not angry with me for my love:
To banishment since it must needs be so,
His life I give him whosoere says no.

What and his Ladies to.


I hers and all.


But I Will not have you banished with the King,
No Minion no, since you must live, be assured
I Will make thee meanest of my waiting Maids.

I scorn thy pride.


Farewell deceiving state,
Pride making Crown, my dearest wife farewell:
I have been a Tyrant, and I Will be so still.

Alas my brother.


Dry up childish tears,
And to these Lords that have invested you,
Give gracious looks, and honorable deeds.

Give them my Crown, oh give them all I have,
Thy Throne I reckon but a glorious grave.

Then from my self these dignities receive,
The Island wrested from you I restore,
See it be given them back Lord Sicophant.
The office of hie Seneschall bereft you,
My Lord of Cornwell to your grace we give.
You Martianus be our Treasurer,
And if we find you faithful, be assured
You shall not want preferment at our hands.
Mean time this office we impose on you,
Be Tutor to this Lady, and her pride
With your learnd principles whereof you are full
Turn to humility, or vex her soul,

Torment on torment, tutord by a fool.


Madam, it is her Highness will be pleased.


Young Peridurus and Vigenius, Lords
Release from prison, and because your King,
Is mightily affected unto York,
Thither dismiss the Court incontinent.

Shall it be so my Liege.


Are not we King.
His silence says it, and what we ordain,
Who dares make question of: this day for ever
Thorough our reign beheld a festival:
And tryumphe Lords that England is set free,
From a vild tyrant and his cruelty:

On to our funeral, it is no matter where,
I sin I know in suffering pride so near.

Ahem boy, Nobody is sound yet for all his troubles.


And so is Nobodies man for all his whipping, but Master we are now in the
City, wald about from slander, there cannot a lie come in but it must run
thorough brick, or get the goodwill of the warders, whose brown bills look
blew upon all passengers


O this City, if Nobody live to be as old again, be it spoken in secret, I Will
have fenst about with a wall of brass


Of Nobodies making, that will be rare.


I Will bring the Tems through the middle of it, empty Moore-ditch at my own
charge, and build up Paules-steple without a collection. I see not what becomes
of these collctions


Why Nobody receaues them.


I knave?


You knave: or as the world goes, Somebody receives all, and Nobody is blamd
for it


But is it rumord so thorough out the City.


Do not you know that? there is not an orphants portion lost out of the
Chamber, but Nobody has got it, no Corn transported without warrant, but
Nobody has done it, no goods stolen but by Nobody, no extortion without
Nobody: and but that truth will come to light, few wenches got with child, but
with Nobody


Nay that's by Somebody.


I think Somebody had a hand in it, but Nobody sometimes paies for the nursing
of it


Indeed I have taken into my charge many a poor infant left to the alms of
the wideworld, I have helped many a virtuous maid to a good husband, and nere
desird her maidenhead: redeemed many Gentlemen's lands, that have thankt Nobody
for it, built Pest-houses, and other places of retirement in the sickness time
for the good of the City, and yet Nobody cannot get a good word for his labor


It Is a mad world Master.


Yet this mad world shall not make me mad, I am
All spirit, Nobody let them grieve,
That scrape for wealth I will the poor relieve,
Where are the Masters of the several prisons:
Within and near adjoining to the City,
That I may spread my charity abroad.

Here they be Sir.


Welcome Gentlemen:
You are they that make poor men householders
Against their wills, and yet do them no wrong:
You have the actions, and the cases of your sides,
Whilst your Tenants in common, want money to fill them.
How many Gentlemen of less revenues then Nobody,
Lie in your Knights ward, for want of maintenance.

I am Sir a Keeper of the Counter, and there are in our wards above a hundred
poor prisoners, that are like nere to come forth without satisfaction


But Nobody will be their benefactor. What in yours.


As many as in the other prison.


There Is to release them. What in yours.


Double the number, and in the Gayle.


Talk not of the Gayle, it is full of limetwigs, lifts, and pickpockets.


Is it your pleasure Sir to free them all.


All that he in for debt.


Ten thousand pound, and ten to that will not do it.


Nobody Sir will give a hundred thousand,
Ten hundred thousand, Nobody will not have a prisoner,
Because they all shall pray for Nobody.

It Is great pity my Master has Nobody, and so kind a heart.


What outcries that?


That is the gallant, apprehend him straight,
It Is he that sowes sedition in the Land,
Under the color of being charitable,
When search is made for such in every Inn,
Though I have seen them housd, the Chamberlain
For gold will answer there is Nobody:
He ^or all bankrouts is a common bail^,
And when the execution should be serud
Upon the sureties, they find Nobody:
In private houses who so apt to lie,
As those that have been taught by Nobody,
Servants forgetful of their Masters friends,
Being asked how many were to speak with him
Whilst he was absent, they say Nobody,
Nobody breaks more glasses in a house,
Then all his wealth has power to satisfy:
If you will free this City then from shame,
Sease Nobody, and let him bear the blame.

Lay hold upon him.


What on Nobody, give me my sword, my morglay,
My friends, you that do know how innocent I am,
Draw in my quarrel, succor Nobody,
What Nobody, but Nobody remaining.

Yes Master, I Nobodies man.


Stand to me nobly then, and fear them not,
Thy Master Nobody, can take no wounds,
Nobody is no coward, Nobody
Dares fight withal the world.

Upon them then.
What has he escaped us.

He is gone my Lord.


It shall be thus, now you have seen his shape,
Let him be straight imprinted to the life:
His picture shall be set on every stall,
And proclamation made, that he that takes him,
Shall have a hundred pounds of Sombody,
Country and City, I shall thus set free,
And have more room to work my villainy.

What are they gonne, then City now adieu,
Since I have taken such great injury,
For my good life within thy government:
No more will Nobody be charitable,
No mote will Nobody relieve the poor,
Honor your Lord, and Master Somebody,
For Somebody is he that wrongs you all.
I Will to the Court the changing of the air,
May peradventure change my injuries,
And if I speed no better being there,
Yet say that Nobody lived every where.

I was a King, but now I am slave,
How happy were I in this base estate,
If I had never tasted royalty:
But the remembrance that I was a King,
Vnseasons the Content of poverty,
I hear the hunters music, here I Will lie,
To keep me out of sight till they pass by.

The stag is hearded, come my Lord
Shall we to horse and single him again.

Content, the King will chase, the day is spent
And we have killed no game, to horse, away.

Hearded, go single him, or couple straight,
He will not fall to day, what fellows this.

I am a man.


A banished man I think,
My brother Archigallo, is it not so.

It Is so, I am thy brother Elidure,
All that thou have is mine, the Crown is mine,
Thy royalty is mine; these hunting pleasures
Thou do usurp: ambitious Elidure
I was a King.

And I may be a wretch: poor Archigallo,
The sight of thee that were my Sovereign,
In this estate, draws rivers from mine eyes.
Will you be king again? if they agree
I Will redeliuer all my royalty,
Save what a second brother and a subject
Keeps in an humble bosom, for I swear
The Crown is yours that Elidure does wear.

Then give it me; use not the common sleights,
To pity one, and keep away his right.
See thou these rags, do they become my person?
O Elidure, take pity on my state,
Let me not still live thus unfortunate.

Alas, if pity could procure your good,
Instead of water, I Would weep tears of blood
To express both love and pity: say dear brother
I should vncrowne my self, the angry Peers
Will never let me reach the imperial wreathe
To Archigalloes head. There Is ancient Cornwell,
Stout Martianus, Morgan, and bold Malgo,
From whom you took the pleasant Southern I Will,
Will never kneel to you: what should I say,
Your tirannie was cause of your decay.

What shall I die then? welcome be that fate
Rather then still live in this wretched state.

Yonder Is the King; my sovereign you have lost
The fall of a brave stagge, he is dead my liege.
What fellows this?

Know him not Cornwell?


No my liege not I.


I am thy King.


It Is Archigallo man.


Thou art no king of mine, thou art a traitor,
Thy life is forfeit by thy stay in Britain.
Were thou not banished?

Noble Cornwell speak
More gently, or my piteous heart will break,
Lord Martianus, Morgan, and the rest,
I am a weary of my government,
And willingly resign it to my brother.

Your brother was a tyrant, and my knee
Shall never bow to wrong and tirannie.

Yet look upon his misery, his tears
Argue repentance; think not honored Lords
The fear of dangers waiting on my Crown
Makes me so willing to resign the same,
For I am loved I know, but justice bids
I make a resignation, it is his right,
My calls but usurpation.

Elidure,
If you are weary of your government,
Well set the Crown upon a strangers head
Rather then Archigallo. Hark ye Lords,
Shall we make him our King we did depose,
So might our heads be chopped of, I Will loose mine
Ere my poor Country shall endure such wrongs,
As that injurious tyrant plagues her with,

Keep still your Crown my Liege, happy is Britain
Under the government of Elidure.

Let it be so,
Death is the happy period of all woe.
The wretch that's torn upon the torturing wrack,
Feels not more de^^^^sh torment then my heart.
When I but call to mind my tirannie,
I record heaven my Lords, my brothers fight,
The pity that he takes of my distress,
Your love and true allegiance unto him,
Has wrought in me a reconciled spirit,
I do confess my sin, and freely say,
I did deserve to be deposd.

Alas good Prince, my honorable Lords,
Be not flint-harted, pity Archigallo,
I know his penitential words proceed
From a remorcefull spirit, I Will engage
My life upon his righteous government.
Good Cornwell, gentle Martianus, speak,
Shall Archigallo be your king again?

By heaven I not desire it.


See my Lords,
He Is not ambitious, as thou love me Cornwell,
As thou did love our Father, let his son
Be righted, give him back the government
You took from him.

What should I say? faith I shall fall a weeping:
Therefore speak you.

Lord Martianus speak.


What say these Lords that have been wronged by him.


Morgan and Malgo, all I have in Britain
Shall be engaged to you, that Archigallo
Will never more oppress you, nor impose
Wrong on the meanest subject in the Land.

Then we will embrace his government.


Says Malgo so?


I do my Lord.


What says Martianus?


Faith as my Lord of Cornwell.


I say that I am sorry he was bad.
And now am glad he is changed; his wickedness
We punished, and his goodness there is great reason
Should be rewarded; therefore Lords set on
To York then, to his Coronation.

Then happy Elidurus, happy day
That takes from me a kingdoms cares away.

And happy Archigallo that have rangd
From sin, to sin, and now at last am changd.
My Lords and friends, the wrongs that you have seen
In me, my future virtues shall redeem.
Come gentle brother, pity that should rest
In women most, is harbor'd in thy breast.

Come have you done your task, now do you see
What it is to be so proud of Majesty,
We must take up your glove, and not be thought
Worthy the name of Sister, thus you minx
I Will teach you ply your work, and thank me to,
This pains will be your own another day.

Insulting, ouer-proude, ambitious woman*
Queen I disdain to call thee, thou do wrong
Thy brothers wife, indeed thy Kings espousd,
And manger all thy tyranny I swear,
Rather then still live thus, I Will perrish here.

You are not wise, dejected as you are
To bandie braues against her Majesty,
You must consider you are now her subject,
Your tongue is bounded by the awe of duty,
Fie, fie, I needs must chide you, since I see
You are so saucy with her sovereignty.

Time was base spaniell thou did fawn as much
On me, as now thou striuest to flatter her:
O God, that one borne noble should be so base,
His generous blood to scandal all his race.

My Lord, if she continue these proud terms,
I give you liberty to punish her.
I Will not maintain my prisoner and my slave
To rail against any one that honors me.

Health to the Queen, and happiness to her
That must change states with you, and once more reign
Queen of this Land.

Speak that again, o I will bless my fate,
If once more I supply my former state.

Long may your highness live, your banished Lord
Is by his brother Elidurus seated
Once more in Britains throne.

O I could tear my hair, base Elidure
To wrong himself, and make a slave of me.

Now minion, I Will cry quittance with your pride,
And make you stoop at our imperial side*
But tell me Morgan by what accident
You met with my beloved Archigallo?

Even in the woods where we did hunt the stagge,
There did the tender hearted Elidure
Meet his distressed Brother, and so wrought
By his importunate speech with all his Peers,
That after much denial, yet at last
They yielded their allegiance to your Lord,
Whom now we must acknowledge our dread King,
And you our princely Queen.

Thou Screchowle, Raven, ugly throated slave*
There Is for thy news.

Restrain her good my Lord.


Fie madam fie, fore God you are too blame
In presence of my sovereign lady Queen
To be thus rude, it would become you better
To show more duty to her Majesty.

O monstrous, was not I thy Queen but now.


Yes, when your husband was my King you were.
But now the stream is turned, and the States current,
Runs all to Archigallo, blame not me,
Wisdom nere loved declined Majesty.

VVelcome from banishment my loving Lord,
Your kingly presence wraps my soul to heaven.

To heaven, and my kind brother Elidure,
Fair Queen we owe chief thanks for this our greatness,
Next them, these honorable Lords.

Great Queen,
Once more the tribute of our bended knees
We pay to you, and humbly kiss your hand.

So does Martianus.


And I.


And I.


Our brothers, by how much that name exceedes
The name of Lord, so much the more this duty
Deserves requital, thanks both, and thanks to all.

Set on there.


Madam, you are not wise to grieve at that
Heaven has decreed, and the state yielded to,
No doubt her Majesty will use you well.

Well say thou: no I look that she should treble
All the disgraces I have laid on her.
I shall turn Laundresse now, and learn to starch,
And set and poke, and pocket up such baseness
As never princess did: did you observe
What looks I cast at Elidure my husband?

Your looks declard the passion of your heart,
They were all fire.

Would they had burnt his eyes out
That has eclipsd our state and Majesty.

Bring hither the proud wife of Elidure,


It shall be done.


Our shoe string is untied, stoop minion, stoop.


I Will rather stoop to death thou moone-like Queen,
New changd, and yet so proud: there is those are made
For flexure, let them stoop, thus much I Will do,
You are my Queen, it is but a debt I owe.

Bring me the work there, I will task you to,
That by the hour spin it, I charge you do.

A distaffe and a spindle, so indeed
I told you this, Diana be my speed.

Yet for his Princely worth that made you Queen
Respect her as the wife of Elidure.

VVheres the Queen?


What news with Cornwell, why so sad my Lord?


Your husband on the sudden is fallen sick.


How; sick.


Now if it be thy will, sweet blessed heaven
Take him to mercy.

Do not hear her prayers heaven I beseech thee.


Madam, his highness.


Is he alive, or dead.


Dead madam.


O my heart.


Look to the Queen, let us not loose her to,
She breathes, stand of, where be those women there,
Good Queen that shall be, lends a helping hand,
Help to unlace her.

I Will see her burst first.


Now as you love me let no helping hand
Preserve life in me, I had rather die
Then loose the title of my sovereignty.

Take back your Distaffe yet, well stay our rage,
We will forbear our spleen for charity
And love unto the dead, till you have hearsd
Your husbands bones, conduct her Lords away,
Our pride though eager, yet for food shall stay.

Wilt please your high imperial Majesty
Command my service, I am humbly yours.

We do command what we well know you will do,
Follow the stronger part, and cleave thereto.

Once more our royal temples are ingirt
With Britains golden wreath, all seeing heaven
Witness I not desire this sovereignty,
But since this kingdoms good, and your Decrees,
Have laid this heaven load of common care
On Elidure, we shall discharge the same
To your content, I hope, and this Lands fame:
Our brother once interd, we will not stay,
But then to Troynovant we will speed, away.

Come fellow Porter, now the Court is here
Our gains will fly upon us like a tide,
Let us make use of time, and whilst there is plenty
Stirring in Court, still labor to increase
The wealth which by our office we have got.

Out of our large alowance we must save
Of thousands that pass by us, and our office,
we will give entertainment to Nobody.

My name is Nobody,


You are welcome sir, ere you peruse the court,
Taste the kings beer, here at the Porters lodge,
A dish of beer for master Nobody.

I thank you sir.


Here master Nobody, withal my heart,
A full Carouse, and welcome to our Office.

I thank you sir, and were your beer tems water,
Yet Nobody would pledge you, to you sir.

You are a stranger here, how in the City,
Have you bin long in town.

I sir, too long, unless my entertain
Had bin more pleasing, for my life is sought,
I am a harmless well disposed plain man,
That iniure none, yet what so ere is done
Amiss in London, is imposed on me,
Be it lying, secret theft, or any thing
They call abuse, it is done by Nobody,
I am pursued by all, and now am come,
To see what safety is within the Court
For a plain fellow.

You are welcome hither sir.
Methinkes you do look wild, as if you wanted sufficient Sleep.

O do not blame me sir,
Being pursued I fled, coming though Poules,
There Nobody kneeld down to say his prayers,
And was devout I wis, coming through Fleetstreet,
There at a tauern door two swaggerers
Were fighting, being attacht, it was asked who gave
The first occasion, it was answered nobody,
The guilt was laid on me, which made me fly
To the Thems side, desired a Waterman,
To row me thence away to Charing-crosse,
He asked me for his fare, I answered him
I had no money, what is your name quoth he,
I told him Nobody, then he bad me welcome,
Said he would carry Nobody for nothing.
From thence I went
To see the law Courts held at Westminster,
There meeting with a friend, I straight was asked
If I had any suit, I ansvvered, yes,
Marry I vvanted money, sir quoth he,
For you, because your name is Nobody
I will solicit law, and nobody
Assure your self, shall thrive by suits in Law,
I thankt him, and so came to see the court,
Where I am very much beholding to your kindness.

And Master nobody you are very vvelcome,
Good fellow lead him to the Hall,
Will you walk near the court.

I thank you sir.


Fie what a toil it is to find out nobody,
I have dogd him very close, yet he is got into the court before me.
Sir you have sworn to fight with nobody,
Do you stay here, and watch at the court gate,
And when you meet him challenge him the field,
Whilst I set Lime-twigs for him in all Offices,
If either you or I, but prosper right,
He needs must fall by policy or slight.

I would this roundman nobody would come,
I that profess much valor yet have none,
Cannot but be too hard for nobody,
For what can be in nobody, unless
He be so called because he is al spirit,
Or say he be all spirit, wanting limbs,
How can this spirit hurt me, sure he dies,
And by his death, my fame shall mount the skies.

By thy leave my sweet friend,
There Is for thy farewell.

Stay.


That's but one word, let two go to the bargain if it please you, why should I
stay


I challenge thee.


I may choose whither i will answer your challenge by your leave.


I Will have thee picturd as thy picture, unless thou answer me


For what sir, pray why would you have me printed.


For cowardice.


Methinkes your picture would do better for the picture of cowardice then
mine sir, but pray what is your will with me


Thou have abusd one Somebody,


So have my betters abusd Som-body in their time


I Will fight with thee for that.


Alas sir I am nobody at fighting, yet thus much let me tell you, nobody
cannot run away, I cannot budge


Prepare thee then, for I will spit thy body upon this weapon.


nay by faith that you cannot, for I have no body.


Thy bowels then.


They are the fairer mark a great deal, com on sir, come on


Have at thy belly.


You must either hit that or nothing.


I Will kill and quarter thee.


You Will hardly find my joints I think to quarter me,
I am so well fed, come on sir.

now thou art at my mercy.


What are you the better to have nobody at your mercy


I Will kill thee now.


I think you will sooner kill me then any body,
But let me rise again.

No I will let Nobody rise.


Why then let me sir, I am Nobody,


How now, O fates, O heavens, is not that my M.
what shall I do, be valiant* and reskue my sweet master,
Auant thou Pagan, Pug, what ere thou be,
Behold I come to set thy prisoner free.

Fortune that giddy Goddess has turned her wheel,
I shall be matched, thus will I gore you both. Hold captains,
not Hercules himself would fight with two, I yield.

It Was yoor best course, down vassal dawn, and kiss
My pumpe.

It Is base, O base.


Zounds, i will nail thy lips to limbo unless thou kis.


It Is done.


Thanks honest servant.


Zounds if I say i will doet, i will doet indeed.


For this i will carry thee into the Court,
Where thou shall see thy Master Nobody
Has friends will bid him welcome, so farewell,

Farewell master Braggart, farewell, farewell.


I Will follow, I shall meet with Somebody,
That will revenge, i will plot and ert be long
I Will be reuengd on Nobody for this wrong.

Your hopes are great fair brothers, and your names, shall if in this you be
aduisd by us
Be rankt in scroule of all the British kings,
Oh take upon you this so weighty charge,
To great to be dischargd by Elidure.

Dear sister Q. how are we bound to you,
In nearer bonds then a fraternall league,
For this your royal practice to raise us,
Unto the height of honor and estate,
Let me no longer breath a prince on earth,
Or think me worthy of your regal blood,
If we embrace not this high motion.

Embrace it brother, we are all on speed,
My princely thought inflamed with Ardency
Of this imperial state, and Scepterd rule,
My kingly brows, itch for a stately Crown,
This hand to bear a round Monarchall Globe,
This the bright sword of Justice, and stern aw,
Dear sister you have made me all on fire,
My kingly thoughts, beyond their bounds aspire.

How shall we quit your love, when we ascend
The state of Elydure.

All that I crave,
Is but to make the imperious Queen my slave,
That she that above Justice now commands,
May taste new thraldom at our royal hands.

The Queen is yours, the king shall be deposed,
And she disgraded from all Sovereignty.

That I might live to see that happy hour,
To have that stern commandresse in my power.

She Is doomd already, and at your dispos^,
And we prepared for speedy execution,
Of any plot that may avail our pomp,
Or throne us in the state of Brittany.

Here comes the Lords of this pretended league,
How goes our hope, speak valiant English Peers,
Are we in way of Sovereignty, or still stand we
Subjects unto the aw of Elidure.

Long live the valiant brothers of the King,
With mutual love to wear the British Crown,
Two thousand Soldiers have I brought from Wales,
to wait upon the princely Perydure.

As many of my bold confederates
Have I drawn from the South to swear allegiance,
to young Vigenius.

Do but call me king,
the charming Spheres so sweetly cannot sing.

To king Vigenius.


Oh but where is our Crown,
that make knees humble, when their sovereigns frown.

King Eliduras shall his state resign.


Say Morgan so, and Britains rule is mine.


king Peridure shall reign.


And sit in sta^e.


And thousand subjects on his glory wait.


Then they that lifts us to the imperial seat,
Our powers and will shall study to make great.

And thou that raisest us, as our best friend,
Shall as we mount the like degrees ascend.

When will you give the attempt.


Now royal sister.
Before the king have notice of our plot,
Before the Lords that love his government,
Prepare their opposition.

Well determined,
And like a king in Esse, now this night,
Lets make a hostile uproar in the Court,
Surprise the king, make ceazure of the Crown,
Lay hands upon the Counsel, least they escape
to leuy forces, those Lords
that serve the king, and with austere reproves,
punish the hateful vices of the Land,
Must not awe us, they shall not reign, we will,
those that applaud us, raise, despise us, kill,

I see a kind of state appear already
In thy maiestick brow, call in the soldiers,
Man the Court gates, barricade all the streets,
Defend the ways, the lands and passages,
And gi^t the palace with a treble wall
Of armed soldiers, and in dead of night,
When all the peeresly drowned in golden sleep,
Sound out a sudden and a shrill Alarm,
to maze them in the midst of horrid dreams.

The king and Crown is ours.


The Queen I claim.


It shall go hard, but I the shrew will tame,
trumpets and drums, your dreadful clamors sound.

Proclaim me captive, or a king new crowned,


Treason, treason.


thou art mine what ere thou be.


Prince Peridure.


I Cornwell and thy king.


He discords taught, that taught thee so to sing.


Who stops this passage.


Martianus we.


Vigenius.


Unto whom thou owe thy knee.


My knee to none* but Elidure shall bend.


Our reign beginning has when his lines end.


What traitrous hand dares interdict our way?


Why that dare ours, it is we command thee stale.


Are we not Queen?


Is It you, then happily met,
I have owed you long, and now I Will pay that dept.

Vild traitresse, dare, thou lay a violent hand on us thy Queen?


We dare command thee stand,
Thou wast a Queen, but now thou art a slave.

Before such bondage, grant me heaven a grave.


What seek ye Lords? What mean these loud
Alarums, in the still silence of this hunnied night?

King we seek thee.


And more we seek thy Crown.


Why Princely brothers is it not our own,
That it is ours we plead the law of kings,
The gift of heaven, and the antiquety on earth,
Election from them both.

We plead our powers and strength, we two must reign.


We were borne to rule, and homage we disdain.


Do not resign, good King.


How saucy Lord?


I Will keep still thy Crown.


I say that word shall cost old Cornwels life.


Tush this for care.
Tyrants good subjects kills and traitors spare.

Will thou submit thy Crown?


Dread sovereign, no.


He hates his own life that advises so.


I hate all traitors, and had rather die,
Then see such wrong done to his sovereignty.

Give up thy state to these two princely youths, and thy resigment shall
preserve thy life


Will thou so much wrong both thy self and wife?
Have lived a king, and can thou die a slave,
A royal seat, does ask a royal grave,
Though thousand swords thy present safety ring,
Thou that have bin a Monarche, dye a king.

Whether he live or dye, thou sure shall be no longer Queen, but Vassayle unto
me, I Will make ye now my drudge


How mynion, thine?


Thart no more Queen, thy husband must resign.


Resign, to whom?


I am one.


And I another.


Can be so base to see a younger brother,
Nay two young Boys plast in thy throne of state,
And thou their sudden in their trains to wait,
I Will dye before I endure it.

So shall all,
that do not prostrate to our homage fall.
Shall they not brother king?

They shall by heaven.


Come kill me first.


Nay make the number even,
And kill me to, for I am pleased to dye,
Rather then this endure.

The third am I.


Nay strike her first.


Rage give my fury way.


Strike valiant brother king.


Yet he are me, stay.


Be brief for Gods sake then,


O heaven, that men so much should covet care,
Septers are golden baits, the outsides fair:
But he that swallows this sweet sugared pill,
Twill make him sick with troubles that grow still:
Alas you seek to ease me being wearied
And lay my burden on your able loins,
My vnambitious thoughts have bin long tird,
With this great charge, and now they rest desird,
And see the kind youths coveting my peace,
Bring me of all these turmoiles free release.
Here take my Crown.

Will thou be made a stale,
Shall this proud Woman, and these boys prevail?
Shall I for them be made a public scorn,
Oh had thou buried bin, as soon as borne,
How happy had I bin.

Patienc sweet wife,
Think thou I praise my Crown above thy life,
No take it Lords, it has my trouble bin,
And for this Crown, oh give me back my Queen.

Nay shes bestowed on me.


Then what you please,
Here take my trouble, and resign your ease.

My Lords receive the crown of Elydure,
Fair hopeful blossoms of our future peace,
Happy am I, that I but live to see,
the Land ruld by your dubble Sovereignty.

Now let the king descend to be disposd of
At our high pleasure, come give me the Crown.

Why you the Crown, good brother more then we.


We Will prove it how it fits our kingly temples,
And how our brow becomes a wreath so fair.

Shall I see you crowned, and my self stand bare,
Rather this wreath maiestick let me try,
And sit inthrond, in pompious Majesty.

And I attend, whilst you ascend the throne,
Where had we right, we should sit crowned alone.

Alone, dare thou usurp upon my right.


I durst do much, had I but power and might,
But wanting that, come let us reign together,
both kings, and yet the rich crown worn by neither.

Content, the king does on our sentence wait,
To doom him, come lets take our dubble state,
What shall he live, or dye?

I know not how I should deserve to dye.


Yes to let two such usurpers live.


Nay Madam, now I needs must tell your grace,
You wrong these kings, forget both time and place,
It is not as it was, now you must bow,
Unto this dubble state i will show you how.

Base flattring groom slavish parasite,


Shall I pronounce his sentence.


Brother do.


Thy life we grant thee and that Woman's to,
But live divided you within the tower,
You prisoner to that princess.

In her power,
Oh dubble slavery.

Convey both hence.


My doomes seuerer then my small offense.


Come Minion, will you go.


To death, to hell,
Rather then in thy base subjection dwell.

Cornwell and Martianus you both see,
We are possessed of this imperial seat,
And you that were sworn liedgemen to the Crown,
Should now submit to us that owe the same,
We know without your grave directions,
We cannot with experience guide the land,
Therefore we will study to deserve your loves.

It Was not ambition, or the love of state,
that drew us to this business, but the fear,
Of Elidurus weakness whom in zeal,
To the whole land we have deposd this day,
speak, shall we have your loves?

My lords, and Kings,
It Is bootlesse to contend against heaven and you,
Since without our consent the kings desposd,
And we unable to support his fall,
Rather then the whole land should shrink,
You shall have my assystance in the state.

Cornwell and I will bear the self same state.


We now are Kings indeed and Britain sway,
When Cornwell and his brother Viue say

Receive our grace, keep still your offices,
Embrace these peers that raisd us to the throne,
Britain rejoice, and Crown this happy year,
Two sons at once thine in thy royal sphere.

And that's prodigious, I but wait the time
To see their sudden fall that swiftly clime.

My Lord much honor might you win your land
To give release unto your sister Queen,
Being a Lady in the land beloud.

You have aduisd us well, it shall be so.


Should you set free the Princess might not she
Make vprors in the land, and raise the Commons.
In the releasment of the Captive King.

Well counseld Cornwell, she shall live in bondage.


Renown your self by being kind to her.


Secure your state by her imprisonment.


We Will have the Queen set free.


We Will have her guarded,
With stricter keeping and seuerer charge.

Will you be braued by one that's but your equal,
Having no more then party government.

Or you be scornd by one to you inferior,
In general estimation of the land.

Set free the Princess, say the king commands.


Keep her in thraldom still, and captive bands.


We Will not be contermaunded.


Sir nor we.


Before I Will be half a king and contrould
In any regality, i will hazard all,
I Will be complete or none.

Before i will stand,
Thus for a Cipher with my half command,
I Will venture all my fortunes, how now pride,
Percht on my vpperhand.

By heaven well spyed.


It Is ours by right, and right we will enjoy.


Claimst thou pre-eminence, com down proud boy


Then lets try maistries, and one conquer all,
We climd at once, and we at once will fall.

They that love Peridure divide themselves upon their part.


That am I.


and I.


They that love us on this side.


I.


And I.


Then to the field, to set our sister free.


By all my hopes with her i will captive thee.


Trumpets and Drums, triumphant music sing.


this day a captive, or a complete king.


Sir you have sworn to manage these affairs,
Even with your best of judgment.

I have provided, you will let me share,
Of the Grand-benefit you get by dice,
Deceitful Cards, and other cozening games
you bring into the Court.

O rare, now shall I find out crab, some notable knavery

You shall have equal share with Somebody,
Provided, you will help to apprehend that Nobody,
On whom the guilt shall lie,
Of all those cheting tricks I have deuisd.

O the fates, treason against my m. person, but I believe
Somb. will pay fort, i will tickle your long wast for this in faith,

Give me some bales of dice. What are these?


Those are called high Fulloms.


I Will Fullom you for this.


Those low Fulloms*


They may chance bring you as hie as the Gallows.


Those Demi-bars.


Great reason you should come to the bar before the gallows.


Those bar Sizeaces.


A couple of Asses indeed.


Those Brisle dice.


It Is like they brisle, for I am sure they will breed anger


Now sir, as you have compast all the Dice,
So I for cards. These for the game at maw,
All saving one, are Cut next under that,
Lay me the Ace of Hearts, then cut the Cards,
O your fellow must needs have it in his first trick.

I Will teach you a trick for this in faith.


these for Premero cut upon the sides,
As thr other on the ends.

Mark the end of all this.


these are for post and pair, these for saunt,
these for new cut.

they will make you cut a fether one day,


Well, these dispersed, and Nobody
Attacht for all these crimes, shall be hanged.

I or else you shall hang for him,


Come, shals about our business.


Content, lets straight about it.


O my heart, that it was my fortune to hear all this, but beware a lucky man
whllst you live, Alas if I had not rescued my master, the swaggering fellow
would have made Nobody of him. Again if I had not ouerheard this treason to
his person, these Cunnicatching knaves, would have made less then Nobody of
him. For indeed they would have hanged him, but heeres my master, O sweet
master how cheer you


O excellent, admirable, and beyond comparison, I think my shape inchants them.


I think not so, for if I were a Lady, I should never abide you: but Master, I
can tell you rare news you must be apprehended, for a Cheater, a Cozener, a
Libiller, and I know not what


Not I, I am an innocent, no Cheater, no Cozener, but a simple honest man,
hunted from place to place by somebody


it is true sir, it is one some. that would attach you, therefore
Look to your self, but May. if you be took never fear,
I heard all their knavery, and I can clear you I warrant.

O have I found you, this is he my friends,
We have long sought, you know when it was inquird,
Who brought the false Dice, and the cheating cards
Into the court, it was answered Nobody.

( quoth tha) I am afraid you will prove the knave some.


Lay hold upon him, bear him to the prison.


To prison, say you well, if I be guilty this fellow is my partner take him to.


Are you confederate in this treason sir?


If I be not sir somebody is, but if I be guilty I must bear
If off with head and shoulders.

To prison with them, now the bird is caught,
For whom so long, through Britane have I sought.

I believe I have a bird in a box, shall caught you for all this.


Away with them I say.


In Arms well met, ambitious Peridure,


Vigenius thou salutes me with a title,
Most proper to thy self,

Art thou not proud.


Only to meet thee on this bed of death,
Wherein the Title to the English Crown,
Shall perish with thy self.

Fair is the end
Of such as die in honorable war,
Oh far more fair, then on a bed of down.

War is the soldiers harvest it cuts down.


The lives of such as hinder our renown.


Such as are apt for tumult.


Such as you,
That to our lawful Sovereign are untrue.

Blushes not Peridure to brave us so.


Blushes Vigenius at thy overthrow,
Who wast that told me he would submit.

It Was I my Lord.


Peace fool thou do forget,
It Is not an hour since, to our princely ear,
Thou said thou did desire us to forbear.

True my good Lord.


True that I sought to stay.


That I would basely my ritcht hopes betray.


I did it of mine own head to make you friends.


Still playing of the Sicophant.


What still.


A gloss I see to insinuate our good will.


That whosoever conquered, he might gain.


the favor of us both, that was his train.


But henceforth we cashiere thee from the filde.


Never hereafter bear a soldiers shield,
A soldiers sword, nor any other grace,
But what is like thine own, a doubble face.

Now I beseech Jove hear my prayer, let them be both slain in the battle.


If there be any other of his heart,
We give them free license to depart.

Cornwell hates flattery.


So does Martianus.


Malgo is resolute for all affairs.


And so is Morgan, for he scorns delays.


then where the field consists of such a spirit,
He that subdues conquers the Crown by merit.

that's I.


it is I.


Ryuers in blood declare it.


Grass turn to Crimson if vigenius spare it.


Air be made purple with our reaking gore.


Follow my friends.


Conquer or near give ore.


this way I saw vigenius on the spur.


I periduras, this way.


A strange fight, my Lord is breathless.


My dear Lord is dead.


True Brothers in ambition, and in death.


Yet we are enemies, why fight we not
With one another, for our generals loss.

To much blood already has been spent,
Now therefore since the difference in themselves,
Is reconsiled in eithers overthrow,
Let us be as we were before this Iar,
And joining hands like honorable friends,
Inter their bodies as becomes their state,
And which is rare once more to Elidure,
Who now in prison leads a wearied life,
With true submission offer Englands Crown.
Of all the charges of tumultuous fate,
This is most strange three times to flow in state.

Madam.


You are welcome, what new flatteries,
Are a coining in the mint of that smoth face?

Where is the Lady Elidor I pray.


Amongst my other waiting maids at work.


It Is well, yet Madam with your gracious leave
I wish it better.

What in love with her,
Can thou affect such a dejected wretch,
Then I perceive thy flattery is folly,
Or thout prove honest, loving one so poor.

I know not Madam what your highness gathers
Out of my troubled words, I love you well,
And though the time should alter, as I am sure,
It is impossible, yet I would follow
All your misfortunes with a patient heart.

I have seen too much of thee to credit thee.


Now in your height of glory use your servant,
now Madam, whilst the noble Peridure
That loves you dearer then the British Crown,
Whilst he is conqueror, use me to destroy
Your greatest enemy, and I will do it.

Thou will not.


Be it Elidure the king,
The prisoner I should say, I Would murder him,
To show how much I love your majesty.

Thou would not poison for me his base Queen,
Whom I so often have triumphed ore,
That torment now is her beatitude,
And tedious unto me.

no more, shes dead.


See where she comes, dispatch her presently,
For though the Princely Peridure be king,
His brothers death in time will make him odious
Unto his subjects, and they may restore
Mild Elidure again, and then I dye,

Withdraw, shes dead, as surely as you live.


What shall I never from this servitude
Receive releasant evermore be plagud,
With this insulting Queen? Is there no change,
no other alteration in the state
I know there is not, I am borne to be
a slave, to one baser then slavery

I will release you by a speedy death.


By death, alas, what tongue pronounst that word?
What my Lord weather-cocke? nay then I see,
Death in thy mouth is but base flattery.

By heaven I am sent to kill you.


By whose means.


By one that will avouch it when it is done.


not the proud queen.


Yes, but I am determined
in full amends for all my flattery,
to save your life, and kill her instantly.

Oh if a Devil would undertake that deed,
I card not though she heard me, I would say,
He were a star more glorious then the day.

And would you for that good deed pardon me.


And quite all former injury.


But let me tell your highness by the way,
the Queen is not so hasty of your death.

no, for she had rather have my life prolongd.


I do assure your highness on mine honor,
When I did say she sent me to destroy you,
I slaunderd her great mercy toward you,
For she had given me order to release you.

Oh monstrous lie.


believe it, for it is true:
And this moreover, she so much repents
Her former pride and hardness toward you,
that she could wish it never had bin done.

then I repent me of my wrongs toward her,
And in the stead of a reward proposd
to him that should destroy her, I do wish,
Death be his death, that undertakes the deed.

but will you not forget these princely words,
if any alteration should ensue.

not I, I in my oths am true.


Except once more the Lords crown Elydure.


though that should chance, i will hold my promise sure.


And you too Madam.


So thou muderst her.


Know that Lord periduras and his
brother, are in the battle slain, and by the nobles,
her husband Elidure raisd to the state,
setting aside all jesting, Queen believe it.
And truce with her, least she triumph again.

For Gods sake make us friends.


Good Lord how strange this reconciled foes behold each other.


Sister.


Kind sister.


Then make me your brother, say are you friends.


We are.


Then chance what can,
in this I have prooud my self an honest man.

The king your husband, madam new releast,
Desires your presence at his Coronation.

My Elydure a third time to be crowned.


True Madam, and expects your company.


And you knew this before.


No on mine honor.


Neither you Sister.


neither.


If you did My oath is past, and what I have lately sworn i will hold inuiolate,
here all strife ends, thy wit has made two proud shrewes perfect friends


A third time live our gracious sovereign
Monarch of England, crowned by these hands.

A third time Lords, I do return your love,
And wish it with my soul, so heaven were pleased,
My ambitious Brothers had not died for this,
But we have given them honorable graves.
And mournd their most untimely funeral,
My loved Queen, come seat thee by my side,
Partner in all my sorrows and my joys,
And you her reconciled Sister sit,
By her in second place of majesty,
It joys me that you have outworne your pride.

Methinks my gracious husband and my King,
I never took more pleasure in my glass,
Then I receive in her society.

Nor I in all my state as in her love.


My Lord of Cornwell, whose that whispers to you?
Or what is the news?

My liege, he tells me heeres a great contention
betwixt two noted persons of the Land
much spoke of by all states, one somebody
Has brought before your highness and this presence,
An infamous and strange opiniond fellow,
Called Nobody, they would entreat your highness,
To hear their matters scand.

We Will sit in person on their controversies,
Admit them Cornwell.

Is that strange monster took, so much renownd,
In City, Court, and Country, for lewd prancks.
It Is well, weel hear how he can purge himself.

now sirrah we have brought you before the king,
Where Is your heart now?

My hearts in my hose, but my face was never ashamed to show it self, yet
before king or Keyser


And where is your heart sirrah?


My hearts lower then my hofe, for mine it at my heel, but whersoeuer it is, it
is a true heart, and so is not somb


Health to your Majesty, and to the Queen,
With a heart lower then this humble earth
whereon I kneel. I beg against this fellow,
Justice my liege.

Against whom.


Against Nobody.


My liege, his words well suit unto his thoughts,
He wishes no man Justice, being composd
Of all deceit, of subtilty and slight,
For mine own part, if in this royal presence,
And before all these true judicial Lords,
I cannot with sincerenes clear my self,
Of all suggestions falsely coynd against me,
Let me be hanged up sunning in the air,
And made a scar-crow.

Lets hear his accusations,
And then how well thou can aquit thy self.

First, when this monster made his residence
Within the country, and dispersed his shape
Through every shire and country of the Land,
Where plenty had before a quiet seat,
And the poor commons of the Land were full,
With rich abundance and saciety,
At his ariue, great dearths and scarsity,
By ingrosing come, and racking poor men's rents.
This makes so many poor and honest Farmers,
to sell their leases, and to beg their bread,
this makes so many beggars in the Land.

I but what proof or lawful evidence
Can you bring forth, that this was done by him.

My Lord I tras't him, and so found him out,
But should your Lordship not believe my proof,
Examine all the rich and wealthy chuffes,
Whose full cramd Garners to the roofes are filled,
In every dearth who makes this scarsitye,
And every man will clearly quit himself,
Then consequently, it must be Nobody.
Base copper money is stamped, the mint disgrast,
Make search who does this, every man cleares one,
So consequently it must be Nobody.
Besides, whereas the nobles of the land,
And Gentlemen built goodly manner houses,
Fit to receive a King, and all his train,
And there kept royal hospitality,
Since this intestine monster Nobody,
Dwells in these goodly houses keeps no train,
A hundred Chimnies, and not one cast smoke,
And now the cause of these, mock-begger Hal,
Is this they, are dwelt in by Nobody,
For this out of the country he was chaste.

My royal liege why am I thus disgrast,
I Will prove that slandrous wretch has this al done.

It Is good you can acquit you, such abuses,
Grow in the country, and unknown to us:
nay then no marvel that so many poor,
starve in the streets and beg from door, to door.
Then sirrah purge you from this country blame,
Or we will make thee the worlds public shame.

now Nobody, what can you say to this.


My M. has good cards, on his side I Will vvarant him.


my Lord, you know that slanders are no proofs,
nor words without their present evidence,
If things were done, they must be done by somebody,
Else could they have no being. Is corn hoorded,
somebody hords it, else it would be dealt,
In mutual plenty throughout all the land,
Are their rents raisd, if Nobody should do it,
then should it be undone. Is
Base money stamped, and the kings letters forgd,
Somebody needs must do it, therefore not I,
And where he says, great houses long since built,
Lie destitute, and wast because inhabited,
By Nobody my liege, I answer thus,
If Somebody dwelt therein, I would give place.
Or would he but allow those chimnies fire,
They would cast clouds to heaven, the Kitchin-foode
It would relieve the poor, the sellers beer,
It would make strangers d^inke, but he commits
These outragies then lays the blame on me,
And for my good deed, I am made a scorn.
I only give the tired a refuge seat,
The vnclothd garments, and the starued meat.

How say you by this master Somebody. I believe
you will be found out by and by.

If this be true my liege, as true it is,
Somebody will be found an arrant cheater,
Unless he better can acquit himself.

Touch him with the city, since you have taken the foil in the Country.


Sirrah, what can you say to this?


What should I say my Lord, see hear complaints,
Made in the city against nobody,
As Well as in the country. See their bills,
Heeres one complains his wife has bin abroad,
And asking where she revels night, by night,
She answers she has bin with nobody.
Hears queanes maintaind in every suburb street,
Ask who maintains them, and it is nobody.
Watches are, beaten, and Constables are scoft,
In dead of night men are made drunk in tauernes,
Girls loose their maiden heads at thirteen years,
Pockets picked, and purses cut in throngs.

Enough, enough, does nobody all this?
Though he has cleard himself from country crimes,
He cannot escape the city.

Yes dread Queen,
I must confess these things are daily done,
For which I here accuse this Somebody,
That every where with slanders dogs my steps,
And cunningly assumes my borrowed shape,
Women lie out, if they be took and found
with somebody, then Nobody goes clear,
Else the blames mine, he does these faults unknown,
then slanders my chaste innocence for proof.
somebody does maintain a common strumpet
ith Garden-allies, and undid himself.
somebody swaggered with the watch last night,
was carried to the counter.
somebody once picked a pocket in this Playhouse yard,
Was hoysted on the stage, and shamd about it.

Ha, ha, has my master met with you.


Alas my liege, your honest No-bodie
Builds Churches in these days, and Hospitals,
Releeues the several prisons in the City,
Redeemes the needy debtor from the hole,
And when this somebody brings infant children,
And leaves them in the night at strangers doors,
Nobody fathers them, prouides them nurses,
What should I say, your highness love I crave,
That am all just.

Then somebodies a knave.


If neither city nor country will prevail to him, with the court ma.
somebody, and there you will match him


Then touching his abuses in the court.


I marry Nobody what say you to this,
See, here are dangerous Libils against the state,
And no name to them, therefore nobodies.

Besides strange rumors and false buzzing tales,
Of mutinous leesings raisd by Nobody.

False dice and Cheating brought even to the presence, and who dares be so
impudently knauish

Unless some fellow of your name and garb.


Cards of advantage with such cheating tricks,
Brought even amongst the noblest of the land,
And when these cosening shifts are once discovered,
There is no cheater found save Nobody.

How can thou answer these.


Even as the rest,
Are libels cast, if nobody did make them,
And no-bodies name to them, they are no libels,
For he that sets his name to any slander,
Makes it by that no libell, this aproues
He forgd those slanderous writs to scandal me.
And for false cards, and dice, let my great slops
And his big bellied dublet both be sercht,
And see which harbors most hypocrisy.

Let them both be sercht.


I Will take my leave of the presence.


nay M. sicophant we will have the inside of your pockets translated to, we will
see what stuffyng they have, I Will take a little pains with you


What have you there in nobodyes pockets.


Here are my liege bonds forfei^ by poor men,
Which he releast out of the usurers hands,
And canceld. Leases likewise forfeited,
By him repurchast. These peticions,
Of many poor men to prefer their suits.
Unto your highness.

Thou art Just we know,
All great men's pockets should be lined so.

What bumbast bears his gorge.


False Cards, false Dice;
The kings hand counterfeit,
Bonds put in suit to gain the forfitures,
forgd deeds to cheat men of their ancient land,
And thousand such like trashe.

Nay look you here, hears one that for his bones is pretily stuffed. Hears
fulloms and gourds: heeres tall-men and low-men Here tray duce ace, passedge
comes a pace


Mercy great King.


Mercy my Sovereign.


My liege you cannot to be severe in punishing,
Those monstrous crimes, the only stain and blemish
To the weale-publike.

Villains hear your doom,
Thou that have bin the oppressyon of the poor,
Shall be more poor then penury it self,
All that thou have is forfit to the Law,
For thy extortion I will have thee branded,
Upon the forhead with the letter F.
For Cheating whipped, for forging loose thine ears,
Last for a basing of thy Sovereigns Coin,
And traitrous impresse of our kingly seal,
Suffer the death of traitors. Bear him hence.

Since I must needs be martird grant me this,
That Nobody may whip, or torture me,
Or hang me for a traitor.

Away with him.


Or if needs I must dye a traitors death,
That Nobody may see me when I dye.

Hence with the traitor.


I know by your complexion you were ripe for the hangm^n, but now to this lean
Gentleman


Let me doom him, smoth spaniel, soothing grome
Slicke Oily knave, egregious parasite,
Thou turning vane, and changing Weather-cocke,
My sentence is thou shall be naked stripped,
And by the city beadles soundly whipped.

I Will make bold to see thexecution.


Well has the King decreed, now by your highness patience let Nobody borrow
a word or two of Euery-body


Here if you wonder why the king Elidurus bestows nothing on me for all my
good services in his land, if the multitude should say he has preferred Nobody,
Somebody or other would say it were not well done, for in doing good to
Nobody he should but get himself an il name. Therefore I will leave my suit
to him, and turn to you. Kind Gentleman if anybody here dislike Nobody,
then I hope Euery-body have pleased you, for being offended with nobody, nor
Anybody can find himself agrieued, Gentlemen they have a cold suit that have
nobody to speak in their cause, and therefore blame us not to fear, yet our
comfort is this, if nobody have offended you cannot blame Nobody for it, or
rather we will find Somebody heareafter shall make good the fault that
nobody has done, and so I crave the general grace of Euery-body

now forward Lords, long may our glories stand,
Three sundry times Crowned king of this fair land.




