COndemned soul Ate, from lowest hell,
And deadly rivers of the infernal (...),
Where bloudles ghostes in pains of endless date
Fill ruthles ears with never ceasing cries,
Behold I come in place, and bring beside
The bane of Tr^ie: behold the fatal fruit
Raught from the golden tree of Pr^s^rpi^^.
Proud Troy must fall, so bid the gods above,
And stately Iliums lofty towers be racet
By conquering hands of the victorious foe:
King Priams palace waste with flaming fire,
Whose thick and foggie smoke peircing the sky*
Must serve for messenger of sacrifice
Tappeaze the anger of the angry heavens,
And Priams younger son, the sheepeherde swain,
Paris th'unhappie organ of the Greeks.
So loath and weerie of her heavy load
The Earth complaynes unto the hellish prince,
Surcharged with the burden that she nill sustain.
Th'unpartiall daughters of Necessity
Bin aids in her ^ute: and so the twine
That holds old Priams house, the threede of Tr^^^
Dame Atrops with knife in sunder cutte^.
Done be the pleasure of the powers above,
Whose hestes men must obey: and I my part
Perform in Ida vales: Lordinges adieu,
Imposing silence for your task, I end,
Till just assembly of the goddesses
Make me begin the Tragedy of Tr^i^.
SILVANUS, either Flora does ^s ^^^ng
Or Faunus made us tarry all to long,
For by this morning mirth it should appea^
The Mus^s or the goddesses be near

My faune was nimble, Pan, and whipped apace
Twashappie that we caught him up at last.
The fattest fairest faune (...) the chase
I wonder how the knave could skip so fast.

And I have brought a twagger for the nonce
A bunting lamb: nay, pray you feel no bones.
Believe me now, my cunning much I miss,
If ever Pan felt fatt^r lamb then this.

Sirs, you may boast your flocks and herdes that bin both fresh and fair,
Yet has Siluanus walks ywis that stand in wholesome air.
And lo the honor of the woods, the gallant Oken-bowe,
Do I bestow laden with Acornes and with mast enough.

Peace man for shame, shall have both lambs and dames and flocks and herdes
and al
And all my pipes to make the glee, we meet not now to brawle.

There Is no such matter, Pan* we are all friends assembled hither*
To bid Queen Juno and her pheeres most humbly welcome hither.
Diana mistress of our woods, her presence will not want,
Her courtesy to all her friends we wot is nothing skant.

Ye Par, no farther yet, and had the starte of me,
Why then Pomona with her fruit comes time enough I see:
Come on a while* with country store like friends we vente^ forth,
Think Faunus that these goddesses will take our gifts in worth.

Yea doubtless, for shall tell thee dame, twere better give a thing,
A sign of love, unto a mighty person, or a king:
Then to a rude and barbarous swayne but bad and baselie borne,
For gently takes the gentleman that often the clown will scorn.

Say truly Faunus, I my self have given good tidie lambs,
To Mercury may say to thee, to Phoebus and to Jove:
When to a country mops forsooth, chaue offered all their dames,
And pypt and prayed for little worth and raunged about the grove.

God Pan that makes your flock so thin, and makes you look so lean,
To kiss in corners.

wel-sed we^ch some other thing you mean.

Yea jest it out till it go alone, but marvel where we mysse
Fair Flora all this merry morn.

some news see where she is.

Flora well met, and for thy taken pain,
Poor country gods thy debtors we remain.

Believe me, Pan, not all thy lambs and yoes,
Nor, Faunus, all thy lusty buckes and does,
(But that I am instructed well to know,
What service to the hills and dales I owe,)
Could have enforcet me to so strange a toil,
Thus to enrich this gaudie gallant foil.

But tell me wench have don't so trick in deed,
That heaven it self may wonder at the deed.

Not Iris in her pride and bravery,
Adornes her arche with such variety:
Nor does the milk white way in frostie night,
Appear so fair and beautiful in sight:
As done these fields, and groves, and sweetest bowres,
Bestrewed and decked with party collord flowers.
Alonge the bubling brooks and silver glyde,
that at the bottom does in silence slide,
The waterie flowers and lillies on the banks,
Like blazing cometes burgen all in ranks:
Under the Hathorne and the Poplar tree,
Where sacred Phoebe may delight to be:
The Primerose and the purple Hyacinthe,
The dayntie Violet and the wholesome Minthe.
The dooble Daisie, and the (...)
Of summer ^^oure* do (...)
And round about the valley as ye pass,
Ye may ne (...) peeping flowers the grass:
That well the mighty (...) and the rest,
May boldly think to be a welcome guest
On Ida h^lls, when to approve the thing,
The queen of flowers prepares a second spring.

Thou gentle Nymph^, what thanks shall we repai^
To thee, that ma^est our ^^^ldes and woods so gaie?

(...), when it is thy hap to see,
My workmanship, in portraying all the three,
First stately (...) with her port and grace,
Her roobes, her lawnes, her crounet and her mace:
Would make thee (...) this picture to behold,
Of yellow Ox^tips bright as bur^sht gold.

A rare device, and Fl^ra, well perdie,
Did painte her yellow for her iellozie.

Pallas in flowers of hue and collowers red,
Her plumes, her helm, her (...), her (...) he^^,
Her trayling tres^es that hang ^^aring round,
Of Iulie-flowers so grassed in the ground,
That trust me (...), who did the cunning see,
Would at a blush suppose it to be she.

Good Flora, by my flock twere very good,
To d^ght her all in red resembling blood.

Fair Venus of sweet Violetts in blue.
With other flowers infixt for change of hue,
Her plumes, her pendants, bracelets and her ringes,
Her dayntie fan and twenty other things:
Her lusty mantle wauing in the wind,
And every part in collor and in kind:
And for her wreath of roses she nil dare,
With Floras cunning counterfeit compare.
So that what living whight shall chance to see,
These goddesses, each placed in her degree,
Portrayed by Floraes workemanshipe alone,
Must say that Art and nature met in one.

A deintie draught to lay her down in blue,
The color commonly betokening true.

This piece of work compact with many a flower,
And well laid in at entrance of the bower,
Where Phoebe means to make this meeting royal.
Have I prepared to welcome them withal.

And are they yet di^mounted, Flora, s^ie:
That we may wend to meet them one the way.

That shall not need: they are at hand by this,
And the conductor of the train hight Rh^^is.
Juno has left her chariot long ag^e,
And has returned her Peacocks by her rain bow.
And bravely as becommes the wife of Jove*
Does honor by ^er presence to our grove.
Fair Venus she has let her sparrowes fly,
To tend on her and make her melody:
Her turtles and her swannes vnyoked be,
And flicker near ^er side for company.
Pallas ^ath set her Tigers loo^e to feed,
Commanding them to wait when she has need.
And Hitherward with proud and stately pace,
To do us honor in the Siluan chase
They marc^e like to the pomp of heaven above,
Juno the wife and sister of king Io^e,
The warlicke Pallas, and the Queen of love.

Pipe Pan f^r joy and let thy sheepeherdes sing,
Shall neue^age forget this memorable thing.

Cl^o the sagest of the sisters nine,
To do ^b^eruaunce to this dame divine,
(...) ad^e of learning and of chyualrie,
(...) ere aryued in fair assembl^e,
And wandering up and down th'unbeaten ways,
Ringe through the wood sweet ^onges of Pallas praise.

Ha^ke Flora, Fa^nus, here is melody,
A charm of birds and more then ordinary.

The silly birds make mirth, then should we do them wrong,
Pomona, if we nil bestow an Echo to their song.

O Ida, o Ida; (...)
This honor do^^ (...)

Ye country (...)
Bring down your (...) of welcome:
For honor (...) Ida*

Behold in sign of (...)
And signs of joyful well come bring.
For honor done to Ida.

The Muses give you melody to gratulate this chance,
And Phoebe chief of siluan chase commaunde^ you all to d^^nce.

The rouude in a circle our ^por^a^^ce must m^st be*

Hold hands in a hornepype all gallant in glee.

Reverence, reverence, most humble reverence.

Most humble reverence.

The God of sheepeheardes and his mate^,
With country chere salutes your states*
Fa^re, wise, and worthy as you be,
And thank the gracious Ladies three,
For honor done to Id^* The birds singe.
Venus, what shall I say, for though I be a dame divine,
This welcome and this melody exceedes these wits of mine.

Believe me, Iu^^, as I hight th^^ foueraigne of Love,
These rare delights in pleasures pass the banquets of king Jove.

Then* Venus, I conclude, it (...) may be seen,
That in her chaste and pleasant walks fair Phoebe is a Queen.

Divine Pallas, and you sacred dames,
Juno and Venus, honored by your names:
Juno, the wife and sister of king Jove*
Fair Venus, Lady president of ^oue:
If any entertaynment in this place,
That can afford but homely, rude and ba^e,
It pleaze your godheads to accept in gree,
That gracious thought our happiness shall be.
My mistress Dian, this right well I know,
For love that to this presence she does owe,
Accountes more honor done to her this day,
Then ever whilom in these woods of Id^.
And for our country god^, I dare be bold,
They make such cheer, your presence to behold,
Such iouysaunce, such mirth and merry meant,
As nothing else their mind might more co^^^^:
And that you do believe it to be so,
Fair goddesses, your lovely looks do show.
It rests in fine, for to confirm my talk,
Ye dayne to pass alonge to Dians walk:
Where she among her troop of maids attend^.
The fair aryuall of her vvelcome friends.

And we will wait with all observance due,
And do just honor to this heavenly crew.

The god of sheepheardes, Juno, ere thou go,
Intends a lamb on thee for to b^stovve.

Faunus, high raunger in Di^^as chase,
Presents a favvne to lady Venus grace.

Syluanus gives to Pallas deitye,
This gallant bow ^^ught from the Oken tree.

To them that does this honor to our fields,
Her mellovve apples poor Po^ona^ yeildes.

And gentle gods, these signs of your goodvvill
We take in vvorth, and shall accept them still.

An^ Flora, this to thee among the rest,
Thy workmanship comparinge with the best,
Let it suffize thy* cunninge to have,
To call king Jove from forth his heavenly bovvre:
Had thou a lover, Flora, ^redit me,
I think thou would beedecke him gallantly.
But vvende we on, and, Rhanis, lead the way,
That kens the painted paths of pleasunt Ida.

O^none, while (...),
Tell me what shall (...)
Thou have a sort of (...)
Dare say no Nymphe in (...)
Again, beside thy (...)
In telling them thou (...)
Then preethee sweet, afforde (...) thing,
Some toie that from thy (...).

Paris, my hearts contentment, and my choice*
Use thou thy pype, and I will use my (...),
So shall thy just request (...) be denied.
And time well ^pent and (...)

Well gentle Nymphe although ^hou do me wrong,
That can (...) pype (...) a song,
Me lift this once, (...)
This idle ta^ke (...).

And whereon then shall be my Roundetay:
For thou have hard my stoore long since, dare say,

How Saturn did divide his kingdom tho,
Jove, to Neptune, and to Dis below.

Against the gods and (...)
Phorcias ympe (...),
That tangled Neptune in he^ gold^n hair,
Became a Gorgo^ for her lewd misdeede,
A pretty fable Paris for to (...).
A piece of cunnig trust me (...),
That wealth and beauty alter men to stoone^.
Salmacis resembling ydlenes,
Turns men to women all through wantonness.
Pluto raught Queen (...) daughter thence*
And what did follow of that love offense.
(...) turned into the (...) tree*
That shev^es a my^ or of virginity.
Narcissus too^ing on his shade,
Reproues disdain, and (...).
Philo^^la^s (...),
What force in love, what wit (...).

They say because on earth they lived not well.
Ixio^s wheel, proud T^ntals payning woe.
Prometheus torment, and a many (...).
Danaus daughter^ ^lie their endless (...).
(...) does ask.
All these are old and known I know, yet if thou will have any,
Choose some of these, for trust me else (...) has not many.

Nay what thou will: but since my cunning not compares with thine,
Begin some Toy, that I can play upon this pipe of mine.

There is a pretty sonnet then, we call it Cupid^ curse:
They that do change old love for new, pray gods they change for worse.
The note is fine and quick withal, the dittie will agree,
Paris, With that same vow of thine upon our Poplar tree:

No better thing, begine it then, Oenone thou shall see
Our music, figure of the love that grows twixt thee and me.

Fair and fair and twice so fair,
As fair as any may be:

The fairest sheepeherd on our gre^e,
A love for any Lady.

Fair and fair and twice so fair,
As fair as any may be:
Thy love is fair for thee alone,
And for no other Lady.

My love is fair, my love is gaie,
As fresh as bine the flowers in May,
And of my love my roundylaye,
My merry merry merry roundelaie
Concludes with Cupids curse:
They that do change old love for new,
Pray Gods they change for worse.

They that do change, etc.

Fair and fair, etc,

Fair and fair, etc. Thy love is fair etc.

My love can pype, my love can sing,
My love can many a pretty thing,
And of his lovely praises ring
My merry merry roundelayes: Amen to Cupids curse:
They that do change, etc.

They that do change, etc.

Fair and fair, etc.

Sweet she epeherd, for Oenones (...) be cunning in this song*
And keep thy love, and love thy choice, or else thou do her wrong.

My vow is made and witnessed, the Poplar will not starte,
Nor shall the nymphe Oenones love from forth my breathing heart.
I will go b^ing the one thy way, my flock are here behind,
And I will have a loue^s fee: they say, vnkist, unkind.

But pray you tell me, Juno, was it so,
As Pallas told me here the tale of Ecch^.

She was a nympe indeed, as Pallas ^^ls,
A walker, such as in these thickets dwell^:
And as she told what subtle iugling prankes
She playde with Juno, so she told her thanke^:
A tatling tru^l to come at every call,
And now foresooth nor tongue nor life at all.
And though perhaps she was a help to Jove,
And held me chat, while he might court his love*
Believe me, dames, I am of this opinion,
He took but little pleasure in the minion.
And what so ere his scapes have been beside,
Dare say for him a never strayed so wide:
A lovely nutbrowne less, or lusty tru^l,
Have power perhaps to make a god a bull.

Gramercie gentle Juno for that jest,
I faith that item was worth all the rest.

No matter, Venus, how so ere you skorne,
My father Jove at that time wa^e the horn.

Had every wanton god above, Venus, not better luck,
Then heaven would be a pleasant parcke, and Mars a lusty bucke.

Tut Mars has horns to butte withal although no bull a shows.
A never needs to mask in nets, a fears no iellous froes.

Forsooth the better is his turn, for if a speak to loud,
Must find some shifte to shadow him, a net, or else a cloud.

No more of this, fair goddesses, unrip not so your shames,
To stand all naked to the world, that been such heavenly dames.

Nay, Pallas, that is a common trick with Venus well we know,
And all the Gods in heaven have seen her naked, long ago.

And then she was so fair and bright, and lovely and so t^^m,
As Mars is but for Venus tooth, and she will sport with him.
And but me list not here to make comparison with Jove,
Mars is no raunger, Juno, he in every open grove.

To much of this: we wander far, the skies begine to skowle,
Retire we to Dianas bower, the weather will be ^oule.

Pallas, the storm is past and gone, and Phoebus cleares the skies,
And lo, behold a ball of gold, a fair and worthy prize.

This posie wills, the apple to the fairest given be,
Then is it mine: for Venus hight the fairest of the three.

The fairest here as fair is meant, am I, ye do me wrong:
And if the f^y^est have it must, to me it does belong

Then Juno may it not enjoy, so every one says no,
But I will prove my self the fairest, er I lose it so.
The breyfe is this, (...).
Let this unto (...) fairest gyven (...),
The fairest of the three* and ^am she.
Detur Pulche (...)
The fairest (...).
Detur Pulcherrimae. (...)
The fairest of the three, and I am (...).

My face is fair, (...)
That all the gods in heaven (...),
Have made them choose (...) of the (...),
To be the wife of I^^e, and Queen of heaven.
Y^ then this prize be (...) to beautye,
The only she that wins this prize am I.

That Venus is the fairest* this does prove,
That Venus is the lovely Queen of love.
The name of Venus is in deed but bautye,
And men me fairest call, per excellencye.
If then this prize be but bequeathed to beautye,
The only she that wins this prize, am I.

To stand on terms of beautye as you take it,
Beeleue me, Ladies, is but to mystake it:
The beautye that this subtle prize must vvin,
No outvvarde beautye highte, but dvvels within.
And f^yfte^^ as you please, and you shall find,
This beautye, is the beautye of the mind.
This fayrenes, Virtue highte, in general,
That many branches has in special:
This beauty vvysdom hight, whereof am I,
By heaven appointed, goddess vvorthelye.
And look how much the mind, the better (...),
Does ouerpasse the body in deserte:
So much the mistress of those guyfts devine,
Excells thy beauty, and that state of thine.
Then if this prize be thus bequeathed to beautye,
The only she that vvins this prize, am I.

Nay, Pallas* by your leave, you wander clean,
We must not conster hereof as you mean:
But take the sense as it i^ plainly meant,
And let the fairest hate, I am content.

Our reasons ^ilbe infinite, I trow,
Unless unto some other point we grow.
For first here is none me thinks disposed to y^elde,
And none but will with words maintain the field.

Then if you will to avoid a tedious grudge,
Refer it to the sentence of judge,
Who ere he be that comes next in place,
Let him bestow the ball, and end the (...).

So can it not go wrong with me not at al.

I am agreed how ever it befall.
And yet by common doom, so may it be,
I may be said the fairest of the three.

Then yonder lo that sheepeherde swain is he,
That must be (...) in this controversy.

Juno, in happy time, I do accept the man,
It seems by his looks, some skill of love he can.

The nymphe is gone, and I all solitary,
Must wend to tend my charge, oppressed with melancholy.
This day (or else me fayles my sheepeherdes skill)
Will tide me passing good, or passing ill.

Sheepeherd, abash not, though, at sudden thus,
Thou be aryued by ignorance among us,
Not earthly but divine, and goddesses all three,
Iun^, Pallas, Venus, these our titles be.
Nor fear to speak, for reverence of the place,
Chosen to end a hard and doubtful case.
This apple lo (nor ask thou whence it came)
Is to be given unto the fairest dame.
And fairest is, nor she, nor she, but she,
Whom, sheepeherd, thou shall fairest name to be.
This is thy charge, fulfill without offense,
And she that winnes shall give thee recompense.

D^eade not to speak for we have chosen thee,
Since in this case, we can no judges be.

And, sheepeherd, say that I the fairest ame,
And thou shall win good guerdon for the same.

Nay, sheph^^^e, look upon my ^^a^ely grace,
Because the pomp that longs to (...)
They may not see* and think Queen Iuno^s name,
To whom old shepherds title works of fa^e,
Is mighty, and may easily suffize,
At Phoebus hand to game a golden p^ize.
And for thy meede, sithe I am Queen of riches,
Shepherde, I will r^vvarde thee with grea^e monarchies,
Empires, and kingdoms, heaps of massye gold,
Scepters and diadems, curious to behold,
Rich robes, of ^umpteous workmanship and cost,
And thousand things whereof I make no bo^st
The moulde vvhereon thovve treadest shall be of Tagus sands,
And Xanthus shall run liquid gold for the to vvash thy hands:
And if thou like to tend thy flock, and not from them to she,
Their fleeces shall be curled gold to please their masters eye.
And last, to set thy heart one fire, give this one fru^te to me,
And, s^epherd, lo this Tree of Gold will I bestow on thee.
The grovvnde vvhereon it g^o^s, the grass, the root of gold,
The body and the bark of gold, all (...) to behold,
The leaves of burnysht gold, the fruits that thereon grovve
Are diadems set with pearl in gold in gorgeous glistringe show:
And if this Tre^ of Gold, in lue may not suffize,
Require a grove of golden trees, so* Juno* bear the prize.

Me l^st not tempt thee with decayinge wealth,
Which is e^ba^et by want of lusty health:
B^t if thou have a mind to fly above,
Y crowned with fame near to the ^e^te of Jove:
If thou aspire to vvy^ domes worthiness.
Whereof thou may (...) see the brightness
If thou desire honor of chyuallrye,
To be renouned for happy victory,
To fight it out, and in the champaine feilde,
To shrovvde thee (...) pallas warlike sheilde,
To praunce on barbed steedes, this honor lo,
My self for guerdon shall on thee bestow.
And for encouragement, that thou may see,
What famous knights dame Pallas warriers be,
Behold in Pallas honor here they come,
Marching alonge with found of thundering drom.

Come sheepeherde, come, sweet sheepeherde look on me,
These been to hot alarams these for thee:
But if thou will give me the golden ball,
Cupide my boy shall hate to play withal,
That when so ere this apple he shall see,
The god of love himself shall think on the,
And bid thee look and choose, and he will wound,
Whereso thy fancyes object shall be found,
And lightly when he shootes he does not miss:
And I will give the many lovely kiss,
And come and play with thee on Ida here,
And if thou will a face that has no peer,
A gallant girl, a lusty minion trull,
That can give sport to thee thy bellyfull,
To ravish all thy beating veins with joy,
Here is a less of Venus court, my boy,
Here gentle sheepeherde, here is for thee a piece,
The fairest face, the flower of gallant Greece.
SI Diana nel cielo e vna stella
Chiara, e lucente piena di splendore
Che porge luc' all' affanato cuore:
Si Diana, nel ferno e vna dea,
Che deconforto all' anime dannate,
Che per amor son morte desperate:
Si Diana ch' in (...) e delle nimphe
R^ina, imperative d^ dol^^ f^ori
Tra bo^c^'e Selue da morte a pastori.
Io son un Diana dolce e rara
Chle con Le guardi Io posso far guerra
A Dian' infern' in ciel^, et in terra*

Most heavenly dames, was never man as I
Poor shepherde swain, so happy and unhappy:
The least of these delights, that you deuyse.
Able to wrape and dazzle human eyes.
But since my silence may not pardoned be,
And I appoint which is the fairest she,
Pardon, most sacred dames, sithe one not all,
By Paris doom must have this golden ball.
Thy beautye, stately Iun^, dame divine,
That like to Phoebus golden beams does shine,
Approues it self to be most excellent,
But that fair face that does me most content,
Sithe fair, faired^mes, is neither she nor she,
But she whom I shall fairest deem to be.
That face is hers that hight the Queen of Love,
Whose sweetenes does both gods and creatours move.
And if the fairest face deserve the ball,
Fair Venus, Ladies, bears it from ye all.

And in this ball does Venus more delight,
Then in her lovely boy fair Cupids sight.
Come shepherd comme, ^weete Venus is thy friend,
No matter how thou other gods offend.

B^t he shall rue, and ban the dismal day
wherein his Venus bare the ball away:
And heaven and earth just witnesses shall be,
I will revenge it on his progenye.

well Juno, whether we be leys^ or loathe,
Venus has got the aple from us both.

O gentle love, ungentle for thy deed,
Thou make my heart
A bloody mark
With pearcyng shot to bleed.
Shoot soft sweet love, for fear thou shoot amysse,
For fear too keen.
Thy arrows been,
And hit the heart, where my beloved is.
To fair that fortune were, nor never I
Shall Be so blessed
Among the rest
That love shall ceaze on her by simpathye.
Then since with love my prayers bear no boot,
This does remain
To cease my pain,
I take the wound, and dye at Venus foot.
Poor Colin woeful man, thy life forespoke by love,
What uncouth fit, what malady is this, that thou do prove.

Or love is void of physic clean, or loves our common wrack,
That gives us bane to bring us low, and let us medicine lack.

That ever love had reverence among silly sheepeheed swains,
Be^ike that humor hurtes the^ most that most might be their pains.

Hobin, it is some other god that chee^isheth her sheep,
For su^e thi^ love does nothing else but make our herdmen weep.

And what a hap is this I pray, when all our woods rejoice,
For Colin thus to be denied his young and lovely choice.

She hight in deed so fresh and fair that well it is for thee,
Colin and kind has been thy friend, that Cupid could not see.

And whether wendes you thriueles swain, like to the stricken dear,
Seeks he Dictamum for his wound within our forest here.

He wendes to greet the Queen of love, that in these woods does won,
With mirthles lays to make complaint to Venus of her son.

A Colin thou art all deceived, she dallye^ with the boy,
And winckes at all his wanton prankes, and thinks thy love a toy.

Then leave him to his luckles love, let him abide his fate,
The ^ore is ranckled ^ll to fa^re, our comfort coms to late.

Though Thestilis the Scorpion be that breaks his sweet assault,
Yet will Rhamnusia vengeance take, on her disdainefull fault.

Lo yonder co^^es the lovely Nymphe, that in these Ida vales,
Plays with Amyntas lusty bo^e, and coyes him in the dales.

The ^ot, me thinks her cheer is changed, her mirthfull looks are laid,
She frolicks not: pray god the lad have not beguide the maid.

Beguilde, disdayned, and out of love: live long thou Poplar-tree,
And let thy letters grow in length, to witness this with me.
A Venus, but for reverence, unto thy sacred name,
To steal a sylly maidens love, I might account it blame.
And if the tales be true I hear, and blushe for to receite,
Thou do me wrong to leave the playnes, and dally out of sight.
False Paris, this was not thy vow, when thou and I were one,
To raung and chaung old love for new: but now those days be gone.
But I will find the goddess out, that she thy vow may read,
And fill these woods with my lamentes, for thy unhappy deed.

So fair a face, so foul a thought to harbor in his breast,
Thy hope consumed, poor Nymphe, thy hap is worse then all the rest.

A sheepeherdes, you bin full of wiles, and whet your wits on books,
And wrap poor maids with pypes and songs, and sweet alluring looks.

Mispeake not al, for his amiss, there bin that keepen flocks,
That never chose but once, nor yet beguiled love with mockes.

False Paris he is none of those, his trothles doble deed,
Will hurt a many sheepeherds else that might go nigh to speed.

Poor Colin, that is ill for thee, that art as true in trust
To thy sweet smerte, as to his Nymphe Paris has bin unjust.

A well is she has Colin won, that nill no other love:
And woo is me, my luck is l^sse, my pains no pytie move.

Farewell fair Nymphe, since he must heal alone that gave the wound.
There grows no herb of such ef^ect upon dame natures ground.

Here is a Nymphe that sadly sittes, and she belike
Can tell some news, Pyracmon, of the i^lly swain we seek.
Dare wage my wings the less does love, she looks so bleak and thin,
And it is for anger or for grief: but I will talk begin.

Break out poor ha^te, and make complaint the mountain flocks to move,
What proud repulse and thanckles scorn thou have received of love.

She sings, nires, be hushed awhile.

Melponie, the muse of tragic songs,
With moornefull tunes in stole of dismal hue,
Assist a silly Nymphe to wayle her woe,
And leave thy lusty company behind.
Thou luckles wreath, becomes not me to wear
The Popl^r tree for triumph of my love.
Then as my joy my pride of love is left,
Be thou unclothed of thy lovely green.
And in thy leaves my fortune written be,
And them some gentle wind let blow abroad,
That all the world may see how false of love,
False Paris has to his Oenone been.

Good-day fair maid, werie belike with following of your game,
I wish thee cunning at thy will, to spare or s^rike the same.

I thank you sir, my gain is quick and ^ids a length of ground,
And yet I am deceived or else a had a deadly wound.

Your hand perhaps did swerve awarie. Oen. or else it was my heart.

Then sure a plied his fotemanship.

a played a raunging part.

You should have given a deeper wou^d.

I could not that for pity.

You should have eyd him better the^.

blind love was not so witty.

^hy tell me sweet, are you in love.

or would I were not so.

Ye mean because a do sye wrong.

perdie the more my woe.

Why mean ye love, or him ye loved?

well may I mean the^ both.

Is love to blame?

the queen of love has made him false his troth.

Mea^e ye indeed the queen of love.

eue^ wanton Cupids dame.

Why was thy love so lovely then?

his beauty hight his shame,
The fairest sheepeherde one our green.

is he a she^p^herd tha^.

And sometime kept a bleating flock.

enough, this is the man.

Wh^re woons he tha^?

about these woods: far from the Poplar tree.

What Poplar mean ye?

witness of the vows betwixt him and me.
And come and wend a little way and you shall see his skill.

Sirs tarry you.

nay let them go.

nay not unless you will.
Stay Nymphe, and hark what I say of him thou blamest so,
And credit me, I have a sad discourse to tell thee ere I go.
Know then, my pretty mop^, that I hight Mercury,
The messenge^ of heaven, and hither fly
To cease upon the man whon thou do love,
To summon him before my father Io^e,
To answer matter of great consequence,
And Jove himself will not be long from henc^.

Sweet Mercury, and have poor Oenons cries,
For Paris fault, ^peircest th'unpertiall skies.

The same is he, that jolly sheepeherdes swain.

His flock do gra^e upon Auroras plain,
The color of his coat is lusty green,
That would these eyes of mine had never seen,
His tycing curled ^ayre, his front of yvor^e,
Then had not I poor I bin unhappy.

No marvel wench, although we cannot find him,
When all to late the queen of heaven does mind him.
But if thou will have physic for thy ^ore,
Mind him who list, remember thou him no more:
And find some other game, and get thee gone.
For here will lusty suitors come anon,
To hot and ^ustie for thy dyeing vain,
Such as were monte to make their suits in vain.

I will go sit and pyne under the Poplar tree,
And write my answer to his vow, that every eye may see.

Sheepeherdes, I am content, for this sweet sheepeherdes sake,
A strange revenge upon the maid and her disdain to take.
Let Colins corpse be brought in place, and burned in the plain,
And let this be the verse. The love whom Thestilis has slain.
And t^ust me I will chide my sone for parciallitie,
That gave the swa^ne so deep a wound, and let her escape him by.

Alas that ever love was blind, to shoot so far ami^^e.

Cupid my son was more to blame, the fault not mine, but his.

O madam, if your self would daine the handling of the bow,
Albeit it be a task, your self more skill, more justice know.

Sweet sheepeherde* did thou ever love.

Lady, a little once.

And art thou changed.

fair queen of love I loved not al att^ce.

Well wanton, were thou wounded so deep as some have been,
It were a cunning cure to heal and rufull to be seen.

But tell me, gracious goddess, for a ^la^e and fal^e offense,
Has Venus or ^er son the power, at pleasure to dispense.

My boy, I will instruct thee in a piece of poetry,
That happly erst thou have not heard: in hell there is a tree,
Where once a day do sleep the souls of false foresweren lovers,
With open hearts, and there about in swarms the number ^ouers
Of poor forsaken ghostes, whose wings from of this tree d^ bear
Round drops of fiery Phlegiton to scorch false hearts with heat.
This pain did Venus and her son, entreat the prince of ^ell,
T'impose to such as faithles were, to such as loved them well.
And therefore this, my lovely boy, fa^re Venus does advise thee,
Be true and steadfast in thy love, beware thou do disguise thee.
For he that makes but love a jest, when pleases him to starte,
Shall feel those firye water drops consume his faithles heart.

Is Venus and her son so full of justice and feuerytye.

Pity it wear that love should not be lincked with indifferency.
How ever lovers can exclaim for hard success in love,
Trust me, some more then common cause that painful hap does move.
And cupids bow is not alone his triumph, but his rod,
Nor i^ he only but a boy: he hight a mighty god.
And they that do him reverence, have reason for the same,
His shaf^s keep heaven and earth in awe, and shape rewards for (...).

And has he reason to mantayne why Colin died for love.

Yea reason good I vvarrant thee, in right it might beehoue.

Then be the name of^^oue adored, his bow is f^ll of might.
His wounds are all but for desert, his laws are all but right:
well for this once me list apply my speeches to thy sense,
And The stilis shall feel the pain for loves supposed offense.
VVelladay VVelladay: Poor Colin thou art going to the ground.
The love whom Thestis has slain,
Hard heart, fair face fraughte with disdain:
Disdain in love a deadly wound.
Wound her sweet love so deep again,
That she may feel the d^eng pain
Of this unhappy shepherds swain,
And dye for love as Colin died. is Colin ^ied finis Cam^^n^^.

Shepherdes ab^de, let Colins corpse be vvittnes of the pain
That Thestilis endures in love* a plague for her dysdaine.
Behold the organ of ourvvrathe* this rusty churl is he,
She dotes on his y^^fauored face, so much accursed is she.

A poor unhappy Thestlis, unpitied is thy pain.

Her fortune not unlike to his whom cruel thou have slain.

The strange effects of my tormented heart,
Whom cruel love has woeful prisoner caughte,
Whom cruel hate has into bondage brought,
Whom wit no way of safe escape has taught,
Enforce me say in wittnes of my smarte,
There is no pain to foul disdain in hardy suits of love.
There is no pain etc.

Cruel, farewell. Shep Cruel, farewell.

Most cruel thou, of all that nature framed.

Most creull etc.

To kill thy love with thy disdain.

To kill thy love with thy disdain.

Cruel disdain so li^e thou named.

Cruel disdain etc.

And let me dye of Iphis pain.

A life to good for thy disdain.

Sith this my stars to me allot,
And thou thy love have all forgot.

And thou etc.

Now shepherds, bury Colins corpse, perfume his herce with flowers,
And write what justice Venus did amid these woods of yours.
How now, how cheeres my Lovely boy, after this dump of love.

Such dumpes, sweet Lady, as bin these are deadly dumpes to prove.

Cease shepherde, these are other nues, after this melancholye.
My mind presumes some tempest toward upon the speech of Mercury

Fair lady Venus, let me pardoned be
That have of long bin wellbeloued of thee,
If as my office bid (...) self first brings
To my swee^e Ma^ame these vnwellcome tidings.

What n^es, what tidings, gentle Mercury,
In mide^^ of my delites to troble me.

At Iunoes suit, Pallas assisting her,
Sithe both did join ^n suit to Jupiter,
Action is entered in the court of heaven,
And me, the swyf^est of the Planets seven,
With warant they have thence despatcht away,
To apprehende and find the man, they say,
That gave from them that selfsame ball of gold,
Which I presume I do in place beeholde,
Which man, unless my marks be taken wide,
Is he that sytts so near thy gracious ^yde.
This being so, it rests ^e go from hence.
Before the gods to answer his offense.

What tale is this, does Juno and her mate
Pursue this shepherde with such deadly hate.
As what was then our general agreement,
To stand unto they nil be now content.
Let Juno iet, and Pallas play her part,
What here I have, I woonne it by deserte:
And heaven and earth shall both confounded be,
Ere wrong in this be done to him or me.

This little fruit, if Mercury can spell,
Will send I fear a world of soul* to hell.

What mean these Ciclops, Mercury, is vulcan waxt so ^ine,
To send his Chim^yswe^pers forth, to fetter any fro^^de of mine.
Abashe not shepherd at the thing, my self thy bail will be,
He shall be present at the court of Jove I warrant thee.

Venus, give me your pledge*

my Cestone, or my fan, or both.

Nay this shall serve: your word to me as sure as is your oath,
At Dianas bower* and Lady, if my wit or pollycie
May profit him for Venus sake, let him make bold with Mercury.

Sweet Paris, whereon do thou muse?

The angrye heavens for this fatal iar,
Name me the instrument of dire and deadly war.

Why nymphe, what need ye run so f^st? what though but black I be?
I have more preetie knackes to please, then every eye does see*
And though I go not (...) upright, and though I am a (...),
To make me gracious you may have some other thing therewith.

Ye Vulcane, will ye so in deed may turn and tell him, trull,
He has a mystresse of his own to take his belly full.

Why sir, if Phoebes dainty nymphs please lusty Vulcans tooth,
Why may not Vulcan tread awry, as well as Venus does?

Ye shall not taynt your trothe for me: you wot it very well,
All that be Dians maids are vowed to halter apples in hell.

In Faith In Faith, my gentle mops, but I do know a cast,
Lead apes who list, that we would help t'unhaltar them as fast.

Fie fie, your skill is wondrous great, had thought the god of wine,
Had tended but his tubbes and grapes, and not ben haulse so fine.

Gramercie for that quirke, my girl. Bac. That's one of dain^i^s fru^pes.

I pray sir take it with all amiss, our cunning comes by lumpes.

Sh'ath capt his answer in the Q.

how says, a, has she so?
As Well as she that kapt your head to keep you warm below.

Yea then you will be cursed I see. Bac. best let her even alone.

Yea gentle gods, and find some other str^nge to harp upon.

Some other string, agreed Ifay^h, some other pretty thing,
Twere shame fair maids should idle be, how say you, will ye sing.

Some roundes or merry roundy lays, we sing no other songs,
Your melancholic noates not to our country mirth belonges.

Here comes a crew will help us trim.

Yea now our task is done.

Then merry Mercury more then time, this round were well begone.

A harletrie I warrant her.

a p^^^sh eluish shroe.

Have seen as far to come as near, for all her raunging so.
But, Bacchus, time well spent I wot, our sacred father Jove,
With Phoebus and the god of war^e are met in Dians grove.

Then we are here before them yet, but stay the earth does swell,
God Neptune to, (this hap is good) does meet the prince of hell.

What iarres are these, that call the gods of heaven and hell beloe.

I^ is a work of wit and toil to rule a sustie shroe.

Bring forth the man of Troie that he may hear,
Whereof he is to be araigned here.

Lo where a comes prepared to plead his case,
under conduct of lovely Venus grace.

I have not seen a more alluring boy.

So beauty hight the wrack of Priams Troy.

Lo^ sacred Jove, at Iunoes proud complaynte,
As e^st I gave my pledge to Mercury,
I bring the man whom he did late attaint,
To answer his indictment orderly:
And crave this grace of this immortal senate,
That ye allow the man his advocate.

That may not be, the laws of heaven deny,
A man to plead or answer by attorney.

Pallas, thy doom is all too peremptory.

Venus, that fauou^ is denied him flatly,
He is a man and therefore by out laws,
Him self, without his aid, must plead his cause.

Then bashe not, sheepeherde, in so good a case,
And friends thou have as well as foes in place.

Why, Mercury, why do ye not indite him.

Soft gentle, Juno, I pray you do not bite him.

Nay, gods, I troe you are like to have great silence,
Unless this parrot be commanded hence.

Venus, forbear, be still: speak, Mercury.

If Juno iangle Venus will reply.

Paris, king Priams son, thou art araygned of parciallitie,
Of sentence partial and unjust, for that without indifferency,
Beyond desert or merit far, as thine accusers say,
From them, to Lady Venus here, thou gave the pryze away.
What is thine answer?
Sacred and just, thou great and dreadful Jove,
And you thrice reverend powers, whom love nor hate,
May wrest awry, if this to me a man,
This fortune fatal be, that I must plead,
For safe excusall of my giltles thought,
The honor more makes my mishap the less,
That I a man must plead before the gods,
Gracious forbearers of the worlds amiss,
For her, whose beauty how it has enticet,
This heavenly senate may with me aver.
But since nor that, nor this may do me boot,
And for my self, my self must speaker be,
A mortal man, amidst this heavenly presence*
Let me not shape a long defense, to them,
That been beholders of my giltles thoughts.
Then for the deed, that I may not deny,
Wherein consists the full of mine offense,
I did upon command: if then I erde,
I did no more then to a man belonged.
And if in verdit of their forms divine,
My dazzled eye did swerve or surfeit more
On ^^nus face, then any face of their^:
It was no partial fault, but fault of his
Belike, whose eysight not so perfect was,
As might decerne the brightness of toe rest.
And if it were permitted unto men
(Ye gods) to parle with your secret thoughts,
There ben that sit upon that sacred seat,
That would with Paris err in Venus praise.
But let me cease to speak of error here:
Since what my hand, the organ of my heart,
Did give with good agreement of mine eye,
My tongue is void with process to mainta^ne.

A jolly sheepeherde, wise and eloquent.

First then arraign'de of parciallitie.
Paris replies vnguiltie of the fact*
His reason is, because he knew no more
Fair Venus Ceston, then dame Iunoes mace,
Nor never saw wise Pallas cristall shield.
Then as I looked I loved and likte attonce,
And as it was referd from them to me,
To give the pryze to her, whose beauty best
My fancy did commend, so did I praise
And judge as might my dazzled eye decerne.

A piece of art, that, cunningly pardie,
Refers the blame to weakness of his eye.

Now (for I must add reason for my deed)
Why Venus rather pleased me of the three:
F^^st, in the intrayles of my mortal ears,
The question standing upon beauties blaze,
The name of her that height the queen of love,
My thought in beauty should not be excelled.
Had it been destyned to majesty,
(Yet will I not rob Venus of her grace,)
Then stately Juno might have borne the ball.
Had it to wisdom bine entitled,
My human wit had given it Pallas then.
But since unto the fairest of the three,
That power, that threw it for my father ill,
Did dedicate this ball: and safest durst
My sheepeherdes skill adventure, as I thought,
To judge of form and beauty, rather then
Of Iunos state, or Pallas worthynes,
That learnd to ken the fairest of the flock,
And praised beauty but by natures aim:
Behold to Venus Paris gave this fruit,
A dayesman chosen there by full consent,
And heavenly powers should not rep^nt their deeds.
Where it is said, beyond desert of hers,
I honored Venus with this golden prize:
(Ye gods) alas what can a mortal man
Decerne, betwixt the sacred guiftes of heaven.
Or, if I may with reverence reason thus:
Suppose I gave, and iudgd corruptly then,
For hope of that, that best did please my thought,
This apple not for beauties praise alone:
I might offend, sith I was pardoned,
And tempted, more then ever creature was,
With wealth, with beauty and with chivalry:
And so preferred beauty before them all,
The thing that has enchaunted heau^n it self.
And for the one, contentment is my wealth:
A shell of salt will serve a sheep^e^de swayne,
A slender banquet in a homely skrip,
And water running from the silver spring.
For arms, they dread no foes that sit so low,
A thorn can keep the wind from off my back,
A sheepe-coate thatcht, a sheepeherdes palace high^*
Of tragic Muses sheepeherdes ^on no skill,
Enough is them, if Cupid ben displeased,
To sing his praise on slender oten pipe.
And thus, thryse reverend, have I told my tale,
And crave the torment of my guiltles soul
To be measured by my faultles thought.
If warlicke Pallas, or the queen of heaven
Sue to reuerse my sentence by appeal,
Be it as please your majesty's divine,
The wrong, the hurt not mine, if any be,
But hers whose beauty claymed the prize of me.

Venus, withdraw your sheepeherde for a space,
Till he again be called for into place.
Juno, what will ye after this reply
B^t doom with sentence of indifferency.
And if you will but justice in the cause,
The man must quited be by heavens laws.

Yea gentle Jove, when Iunoes suits are moved,
Then heaven may see how well she is beloved.

But, Madam, fits it majesty divine,
In any sort from justice to decline?

Whether the man be guilty yea or not,
That does not hinder our appeal, I troe?

Phoebus, I wot, amid this heavenly crew,
There be that have to say as well as you

And Juno, I with them, and they with me,
In law and right, must needefully agree:

I grant ye may agree, but be content
To doubt upon regard of your agreement.

And if ye marked, the man in his defense.
Said thereof as a might with reverence.

And did ye very well I promise ye.

No doubt, sir, you could note it cunningly.

Well, Juno, if ye will appeal ye may,
But first dispatch the sheepeherde hence away.

Then Vulcans dame is like to have the wrong.

And that in passion does to Mars belong.

Call Venus and the sheepeherde in again.

And rid the man that he may know his pain.

His pain, his pain, his never dying pain,
A cause to make to many more complain.

Sheepeherd, thou have ben hard with equity and law,
And for thy stars do thee to other calling draw.
We here dismiss thee hence, by order of our senate:
Go take thy way to Troie, and there abide thy fate.

Sweet shepherde, with such luck in love while thou do live,
As may the Queen of Love to any Lover give.

My luck is loss how ere my love do speed,
I fear me Paris shall but rue his deed.

From Ida woods now wends the shepherds boy,
That in his bosom caries fire to Troy.

Venus, these Ladies do appeal you see,
And that they may appeal the gods agree,
It rests then that you be well content
To stand in this unto our final indgment:
And if king Priams son did well in this,
The Law of heaven will not lead amysse.

But, sacred Jupiter, might thy daughter choose,
She might with reason this appeal refuse:
Yet, if they be unmoved in their shames,
Be it a stain and blemysh to their names:
A deed to far unworthy of the place,
Unworthy Pallas Lance, or Iunoes mace:
And, if to beauty it bequeathed be,
I doubt not but it will return to me.

Venus, there is no more ado then so,
It restethe where the gods do it bestow.

But, Ladies, under favor of your rage,
How ere it be, you play upon the vauntage.

Then d^mes, that we more freely may debate,
And here th'indifferent sentence of this senate,
Withdraw you from this presence for a space,
Till we have through^ly questioned of the cac^:
Dian shall be your guide, nor shall you need
Your selves to enquire how things do here succeed,
We will* as we resolve give you to know,
By general doom, how every thing does go.

Thy will, my wish, fair Ladies, will ye wend?

Beshrewe her whom this sentence does offend.

Now Jove be just, and gods you that be Venus freindes,
If you have ever done her wrong, then may you make amends.

Venus is fair, Pallas and Juno toe.

But tell me now without some more ado,
Who is the fairest she, and do not flatter.

Vulcan, upon comparison hanges all the matter:
That done the quarrel and the strife were ended.

Because it is known, the quarrel is pretended.

Mars. you have reason for your speech perdie:
My dame (I t^oe) is fairest in your eye.

Or (Vulcan) I should do her doble wrong.

About a toy we tarry here so long.
Give it by voices, voices give the odds:
A trifle so to to troble all the gods.

Believe me, Saturn, be it so for me.

For me. Pluto. for me Mars. for me, if Jove agree.

And gentle gods, I am indifferent:
But then I know whoose lykely to be shent.

Thryse reverend gods, and thou immortal Jove.
If Phoebus may, as him does much behoue,
Be licensed, according to our Laws,
To speak uprightly in this doubted cause,
(Sithe women's wits work men's vnceasinge woes)
To make them freindes, that now bin frendles foes,
And peace to keep with them, with us, and all
That make their title to this golden ball:
(Nor think ye gods my speech does derogate
From sacred power of this immortal senate,)
Refer this sentence where it does belong,
In this say I fair Phoebe has the wrong.
Not that (I mean) her beautye bears the prize:
But that the holly Law of heaven denies,
One god to meddle in an others power.
And this befell so near Diana^ bower,
As for thappeazinge this unpleasant grudge,
(In my conceyte) she hight the fittest judge.
If Jove comptroll not Plutoes hell with charms,
If Mars have souraigne power to manage arms:
If Bacchus bear no rule in Neptune sea
Nor Vulcans fire does Saturnes sithe obey:
Suppress not then, against law and equity,
Dianas power in her own territory:
Whose regiment, amid her sacred ^owers,
As proper height as any rule of yours.
Well may we so wipe all the speech away,
That Pallas, Juno, Venus has to say,
And answer that by justice of our laws,
We were not suffered to conclude the cause.
And this to me most egall doom appears,
A woman to be judge among her pheeres.

Apollo has found out the only mean,
To rid the blame from us and trouble clean.

We are beholding to his sacred wit.

I can commend and well allow of it.
And so derive the matter from us all,
That Dian have the giving of the ball.

So Jove may clearly excuse him in the case,
Where Juno else would chide and braule apace.

And now, it were some cunnning to divine,
To whom Diana will this pryze resign.

Suffizeth me, it shall be none of mine.

Vulcan, though thou be black, thart nothing fine.

Go bathe thee, Bacchus, in a tub of wine,
The balls as likely to be mine as thine.

Lo, Ladies, far beyond my hope and will, you see,
This thankles office is imposd to me:
Wherein if you will rest as well content,
As Dian will be judge indifferent,
My egall doom shall none of you offend,
And of this quarrel make a final end:
And therefore, whether you belief of loath,
Confirm your promise with some sacred oath.

Phoebe, chief Mistress of this siluan chase,
Whom gods have chosen to conclude the case,
That yet in balance vndecyded lies.
Touching bestowing of this golden prize.
I give my promise and m^ne oath withal,
By S^ix, by heavens power imperial,
By all that longes to Pallas deytie,
Her sh^lde, her lance, ensigns of chiuallrie,
Her sacred wreath of Olive, and of Baye,
Her crested helm, and else what Pallas may,
That where so ere this ball of purest gold,
That chaste Diana here in hand does hold,
Impartially her wisdom shall bestow,
Without mislike o^ quarrel any more,
Pallas shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert does there ab^de.

And here I promise and protest withal,
By Stix, by heavens power imperial,
By all that longes to Iunoes deity,
Her crown, her mace, ensigns of majesty:
Her spotles mariage-rites, her league divine,
And by that holy name of Proserpine,
That wheresoere, this ball of purest gold,
That chaste Diana here in hand does hold,
Impartially her wisdom shall bestow,
Without mislike o^ quarrel any more,
Juno shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert does there abide.

And lovely Phoebe, for I know thy dome
Will Be no other then shall thee become,
Behold I take thy dainty hand to kiss,
And with my solemn oath confirm my promise,
By Stix, by Jove's immortal emperie,
By Cupids bow, by Venus mirtle-tree,
By Vulcans gift, my Ceston, and my fan,
By this red rose, whose color first began,
When erst my wanton boy (the more his blame)
Did draw his bow awry and hurt his d^me,
By all the honor and the sacrifi^e,
That from Cithaeron and from Paphos rise:
That wheresoere, etc.
Venus shall rest, etc.

It is enough, and goddesses attend:
There wons within these pleasant shady woods,
Where neither storm nor Suns distemperature
Have power to hurt by cruel heat or cold,
Under the clymate of the milder heaven,
Where seldom lights Jove's angry thunderbolt,
For favor of that soueraygne earthly peer:
Where whystling winds make music among the trees,
Far from disturbance of our country gods,
Amids the Cypres springes a gracious Nymphe,
That honor Dian for her chastity,
And likes the labors well of Phoebes groves:
The place Elysium hight, and of the place,
Her name that gouernes there Eliza is,
A kingdom that may well compare with mine.
An ancient seat of kings, a second Troie,
Ycompast round with a commodious sea:
Her people are ^^leeped Angeli*
Or if I miss a lettre is the most.
She gives laws of justice and of peace,
And on her head as fits her fortune best,
She wears a wreath of laurel, gold, and palm:
Her robes of purple and of scarlet die,
Her veil of white, as best befits a maid.
Her ancestors live in the house of fame,
She gives arms of happy victory,
And flowers to deck her lions crowned with gold.
This peereles nymphe whom heaven and earth beloues,
This Paragon, this only this is she,
In whom do meet so many gifts in one,
On whom our country gods so often gaze,
In honor of whose name the Muses singe.
In state Queen Iunos peer, for power in arms,
And virtues of the mind Mineruaes (...)*
As fair and lovely as the queen of love:
As chaste as Dian in her chaste desires.
The ^ame is she, if Phoebe do no wrong,
To whom this ball in merit does belong.

If this be she whom some Zabeta call,
To whom thy wisdom well bequeathes the ball
I can remember at her day of birthe,
How Flora with her flowers strewed the Earth,
How e^erie power with heavenly majesty,
In person honored that solemnity.

The lovely graces were not far away,
They threw their balm for triumph of the day.

The fates against their kind begaune a cheerful song,
And vowed her life with favor to prolonge
Then first began Cupids eysight wexen dim,
Belike Elisas beauty blinded him.
To this fair Nymphe, not earthly but divine:
Contents it me my honor to resign.

To this fair Queen so beautiful and wise,
Pallas bequeathes her title in the prize.

To her whom Iunoes looks so well become,
The queen of heaven yeildes at Phoebus doom.
And glad I am Diana found the art,
Without offense so well to please desert.

Then mark my tale the usual time is nie,
When wont the d^nies of life and destiny,
In robes of cheerful colors to repair,
To this renowned Queen so wise and fair,
With pleasant songs this peereles nimphe to greet,
Clotho lays down her distaste at her feet.
And Lachesis does pull the thread at length,
The third with favor gives it stuff and strength
And for contrary kind affordes her leave,
As her best likes her web of life to weaue
This time we will attend, and in the mean while
With some sweet song the tediousnes beguile.

Humanae vitae filum sic voluere Parcae.

Humanae vitae filum sic tendere Parcae.

Humanae vitae filum sic scindere Parcae.

Clotho colum baiulat.

Lachesis trahit.

Atropos occat.

Viue diu foelix votis hominumque deumque:
Corpore, mente, libro, doctissima, candida, casta.

Clotho colum pedibus.

Lachesis tibi pendula fila.

Et fatale tuis manibus ferrum Atropos offert.
Viue diu foelix, etc.

Gracious and wise, fair Queen of rare renown,
Whom heaven and earth beloues amyd thy train,
Noble and lovely pe^eres: to honor thee
And do thee favor, more then may belong,
By natures law to any earthly wight,
Behold continuance of our yearly due,
Th'unpartiall dames of destenie we meet,
As have the gods and we agreed in one,
In reverence of Elizas noble name,
And humbly lo her distaffe Clotho yeeldes.

Her spindle Lachesis and her fatal reele,
Lays down in reverence at Elizaas feet.
Te tamen in terris vnam tria n^min^ Diuam
Inuita statuunt naturae lege sor^res,
Et tibi non alijs didicerunt p^rcere Parcae.

Dame Atrops according as her (...)
To thee fair Queen ^esigne^ her f^tall knife:
Live long the ^oble Phoeni^ of our age,
Our fair Eliza our Zabeta fair.

And lo beside this rare solemnity,
And sacrifice these dames are wont to do,
A favor far in deed contrary kind,
Bequeathed is unto thy worthynes.
She delivers the ball of gold to the Queens own hands
This prize from heaven and heavenly goddesses,
Accept it then, thy due by Dians dome,
Praise of the wisdom, beauty and the state,
That best becomes thy peereles excellency.

So fair Eliza, Venus does resign,
The honor of this honor to be thine.

So is the queen of heaven content likewise,
To yield to thee her title in the prize.

So Pallas yeeldes the praise hereof to thee*
For wisdom, princely state, and peerless beauty.

Viue diu foelix votis hominumque Deumque.
Corpor^, mente, libro, doctissima, candi^^, casta.

