GOd save you every chone both great and small
Of all degrees: right welcome by you all.
It is now long, at least as seems to me,
Since here such preace together I did see.
Would God we might each week through all the year
See such refort in Churches as is here.
Ye Gentlemen and Ladies, I ye pray
Give ear and harken what I have to say.
To hold your peace alonly I require.
What ween you (some will say) by that desire
We another can nor will away with that.
But yet you must, or else I tell you flat,
That both of us our labor lose together,
In speaking I, and you in coming hither.
Wherefore I crave but silence at your hand,
My words with patience for to understand.
Both great and small, alonly do but hear,
And I will tell you strange and wondrous geere.
Wherefore now harken: for the thing is great
Whereof I mind this present time to treat.
You think your selves perchance to be in place,
Where as you be not, now as stands the case.
For Lausan is not here, it is far hence.
But yet when need requires, I will dispense
With all of you, that hence within an hour
Each one may safely be within his bower.
As now this is the land of Palestine.
What? do you wonder at these words of mine?
I say yet further to you, see you well
Yon place? It is the house wherein does dwell
A servant of the living Gods, whose name
Hight Abraham the righteous man, the same
Whose lively faith has wo^ him endless fame.
Anon you shall him tempted see and tryde,
and touched to quick with grefs that shall betide.
And lastly you shall see him justified
By faith, for killing (in a certain wise)
Isaac his dearest son in sacrifice.
And shortly, you shall see strange passions:
The flesh, the world his own affections
Not only shall be showed in lively hew,
But, (which more is) his faith shall them subdue
And that it is so, many a faithful wight,
Anon shall bear me record in your sight.
First Abraham, and Sara you shall see,
And Isaac eke shall with them both agree.
Now are not these sufficient witnessings?
Who minds therefore to see so wo^drous things,
We pray him only talking to forbear
And unto us to give attentive ear,
Assuring him that he shall see and hear
No trifling toys, but grave and wo^drous geere,
And that we will his ears to him restore,
to use them as he lists as before.


ALas my God, and was there ever any,
That has indurde of co^bra^ces so many,
As I have done by fleeting too and fro,
Since I my native country did forgo?
Or is there any living on the ground,
Of benefits that has such plenty found?
Lo how thou make mortal men to see,
Thy passing goodness by calamity.
And as of naught thou made every thing:
So out of ill thou causest good to spring.
Was never wight so blessed at thy hand,
That could thy greatness fully Understand.
Full threescore years and thereto fifteen mo,
My life had lasted now in weal and woe.
According to the course in sundry wise
Appointed by thy heavenly destinies,
Whose will it was I should be bred and borne
Of parents rich in catell, coin, and corn.
But unto him that richest is in fee,
What joy or comfort could his riches be,
When he compeld, compelled was (I say)
To see, to serve, and worship every day,
A thousand forged gods in steed of thee,
Which madst ye heaven and earth which we do see?
Thou then eftsoons did will me to convey
My self from those same places quite away.
And I immediately upon thy call,
Left Parents, country, goods with gods and all.
Yea Lord, thou know I wist not whither the^
Thou would me lead, nor where me stay again:
But he that follows thee, full well may say,
He goes right: and while he holds that way
He never needs to fear that he shall stray.

In thinking and bethinking me what store
Of benefits I have had erst heretofore,
Of thee my God which ever have provided
To keep my mind and body undefiled,
And furthermore according to thy word
(Which I took then as spoken but in board)
Have blist mine aged time above all other,
By giving me the happy name of mother.
I am so ravished in my thought and mind,
That (as I would full feign) no mean I find
The least of all the benefits to commend,
Which thou my God do daily still me send.
Yet since alone with thee Lord here I am,
I will thee thank at least wise as I can.
But is not yuu my husband whom I see?
I thought he had bin further of from me.

Sara Sara, thy mind I well allow,
Naught have thou said but I the same auow.
Come on, and let us both give thanks together
For Gods great mercy since our coming hither
The fruit thereof as both of us has found:
Let praise and thanks from both of us resownd.

Contented Sir, how might I better do,
Than you to please in all you set me too?
And even therefore has God ordained me.
Agein, wherein can time spent better be,
Than in the setting forth of Gods dew praise,
Whose majesty does show it self always,
Above and eke beneath before our eyes?

Of truth no better can a man devise,
Than of the Lord to sing the excellence,
For none can pay him other recompense
For all his gifts which daily he does send,
Than in the same, his goodness to commend.

Come on then, let us now begin to sing
with hearts in one accord,
The praises of the souerein heavenly king
our only God and Lord.
His only hand does give us whatsoever
We have, or shall hereafter have for ever.
It is alonly he that does maintain
the he auen that is so hie,
So large in compass and in space so main:
and eke the starrie sky,
The course whereof he stablisht has so sure,
That ay withouten fail it does endure.
The skorching heat of summer he does make,
the harvest and the spring:
And winters cold that makes folk to quake,
in season he does bring.
Both wethers, fair, and foul, both sea and land,
Both night and day be ruled by his hand.
Alas good Lord! and what are we that thou
did choose and enterteyne
Alonly us of all the world, and now
does safely us maintain
So long a time from all the wicked rowtes
In town and country where we come throughouts
Thou of thy goodness drewest us away
from places that are given
To serve false gods: and at this present day
have wandringly us driven,
To travel still among a thousand dangers,
In nations unto whom we be but strangers.
The land of Egypt in our chiefest need
thou madst to have a care,
Thy servants bodies to maintain and feed
with fine and wholesome fare,
And in the end compelledst pharao,
Full sore against his will, to let us go.
Four mighty Kings that were already gone
away with victory,
I ouertooke and put to flight anon
before they could me spy.
And so I saw the feeldes all stained red
With blud of those which through my sword lay dead.
From God received well this benefit:
For he does mind us still,
As his dear friends in whom he does delight,
and we be sure he will,
Perform us all things in dew time and place,
As he has promised of his own free grace.
To us and unto our posterity
this land belongs of right,
To hold in honor and felicity
as God it has behight,
And we believe it surely shall be so,
For from his promise God will never go.
Now tremble you ye wicked wights therefore,
which sowed are so thick
Throughout ye world, and worship now such store
of gods of stone and stick,
which you your selves with wicked hands do carue,
To call upon and vainly for to serve.
And thou O Lord whom we do know to be
the true and living God,
Come from thy place, that we may one day see
the vengeance of thy roode
Upon thy foes, that they may come to nowght
With all their gods deuizd through wicked thowght.
Go to my Sara, that great God of ours
Has blist us, to the intent that we all hours
Should for his gifts which he alone does give,
Him serve and praise as long as we do live.
Now let us hence and chiefly take good heed,
We hazard not our son to much in deed,
By suffering him to haunt the company
Of wicked folk, with whom you see we be.
A new made vessel holds long the sent
Of that that first of all is in it pent.
A child by nature nere so well dispozed,
By bringing up is quite and clean transpozed.

Sir, I do hope my dewtie for to do,
Therefore the thing that we must look unto,
Is that Gods will may be fulfild in him.
Right sure I am we shall him weeld so trim,
And that the Lord will bliss him so: as all
Shall in the end to his high honor fall.

I go, I come, I travel night and day,
I beat my brains, that by no kind of way
My labor be in any wise misspent.
Reign God aloft above the firmament,
The earth at least to me does wholly draw,
And that mislikes not God nor yet his law.
As God by his in heaven is honored:
So I on earth by mine am worshipped.
God dwells in heaven, and I on earth likewize:
God makes peace, and I do wars deuize.
God reigns above, and I do reign below:
God causes love, and I do hatred sow.
God made the starrie skies and earthy clodds:
I made much more: for I did make ye godds.
God served is by Angels full of light:
And do not my fair Angels glister bright?
I trow there is not one of all my swine,
Whose grooyn I make not goldlike for to shine
These lechours, drunkards, gluttons ouerfedd,
Whose noses shine fair tipped with brazell redd,
Which wear fine precious stones upon their
Are my vpholders and my Cherubins. (skins,
God never made a thing so perfect yet,
That could the makers full perfection hit.
But I have made, (whereof I glory may)
A thousand worser then my self far way.
For I believe and know it in my thought,
therz but one God, and that my self am nowght.
But yet I know there are whose foolish mind
I have so turned quite against the kind,
That some (which now is common long agone)
Had lever serve a thousand gods than one*
And others have conceived in their brain,
That for to think there is a God is vain.
Thus since ye time ye man on mowld was made,
With happy luck I followed have this trade
And follow will (come loss or come there gain)
So long as I this habit may maintain,
I say this habit wherewithal as now
The world is unacquainted: but I vow
The day shall come it shall be known so rife,
Of every wight, both child, yea man, and wife,
That another town nor village shall escape free
From seeing it to their great misery.
O cowle, o cowle, such mischef thou shall wurk,
And such abuse shall underneath thee lurk
At high noone days: O Cowle, o Cowle I say,
Such mischief to the world thou shall convey,
That if it were not for the spitefulness,
Wherewith my heart is frawghted in excess:
Even I my self the wretched world shall rue,
To see ye things that shall through thee insew.
For I, than who, of all none worse can be,
Am made yet worse by putting on of thee.
These things shall in their time without all fail
Be brought to pass. As now I will assail
One Abraham, who only with his race
Withstands me, and defies me to my face.
In deed I have him often times assailed:
But ever of my purpose I have failed.
I never saw old fellow hold such tack.
But I will lay such load upon his back,
That (as I hope) ere long I shall him make
A son of mine. I know that he does take
The true Creator for his only hold
To trust unto: and that does make him bold.
In deed he has alliance with the true
Creator, who has promised him a new
Right wondrous things, according whereunto
He has already done, and still will do.
But what for that? If stedfastnes him fail
To hold out still: what shall his hope avail?
I trow I will so many blows him give,
That from his hold at length I shall him drive.
His elder son I fear not: and the other
Shall hardly escape these hands of mine: ye mother
Is but a woman: as for all the meynie
That serve him, they be simple sowles as enie
Can lightly be: there is a ragged stowt
Of silly shepherds, another skild nor stowt
Enough against my wily sleights to stand.
But hence I will and work so out of hand,
To have them, that unless I miss my mark,
Anon I will deceive their greatest Clarke.

What ever thing I do or say,
I weery am thereof streit way,
How meet so ever that it be,
So wicked nature reigns in me.
But most of all it me mislikes,
And to the heart with sorrow strikes,
That seeing God is never tyrde
In helping me, yea vndezyrde:
I also likewise do not streyne
My self, vnweerie to remain,
In dew and true acknowledgment
Of his great mercy to me sent,
As well with mouth as with my heart.

Abraham, Abraham.

Lord here I am.

Go take thine only deerebeloued son,
Even Isaac, and bring him to the place
which hight ye myrrh of God: which being done,
Slay him in sacrifice before my face:
And burn him whole upon a hill which I
Will show thee there, go hye thee by and by.

What! burn him! burn him! well I will do so:
But yet my God, the thing thou putst me to
Seems very strange and irksom for to be:
Lord, I beseech thee, will thou pardon me?
Alas, I pray thee give me strength and power,
To do that thou commaundest me this hour.
I well perceive and plainly now do find,
That thou art angry with me in thy mind.
Alas my Lord I have offended thee.
O God by whom both heaven and earth made be,
With whom intendest thou to be at war?
And will thou cast thy servant down so far?
Alas my son, alas, what shall I do?
This matter as kes advised looking too.

Hie time it is Sirs as I trow
We hie us packing on a row
To our companions where they be.

Even so thinks me.
For if we all together were
We should the lesser need to fear.

How Sirs, I pray you tarry. Will
You leave me so behind you still?

Good child abide you there,
Or else our master your father
And our mistress your mother may,
Be angry for your going away:
The time will come by Gods good grace,
That you shall grow and prove a pace:
And then ye shall perceive the charge,
Of keeping flocks in feelds at large,
What dangers come from hill and dale,
By ravening beasts that lie in stale,
Among the couerts of the wood,
To kill our cattle for their foodd.

And do ye think I would,
Go with you though I could,
Before I knew my fathers mind?

In deed a child of honest kind,
And well brought up, ought evermore
His fathers and his mothers lore
In all his doings to obey.

I will not fail it (if I may)
To die therefore: but will ye stay
A while until I run and know
My fathers will?

Yea, therefore go.

O happy is the wight
That grounds him self aright
On God, and makes him his shield:
And lets the worldly wize,
Which look above the skies,
Go wander where they list in field.
No rich, ne poor estate,
Can puff or yet abate,
The godly and the faithful heart:
The faithful goes free
Although he martred be
A thousand times with woe and smart.
The mighty God him leeds,
In chiefest of his needs,
And has of him a special care,
To make him to abide,
Even at the point to slide,
When worst of all he seems to fare.
Whereof a proof we see
Our master well may be:
For why, the more him men assail
And urge on every side:
Less fear in him is spyde,
And less his courage does him fail.
He left his native soil,
Hard famine did him foil,
Which drove him into Egypt land,
And there a king of might,
Took Sara from his sight,
Uniustly even by force of hand.
But streit on suit to God,
The King through Gods sharp rod,
Did yield to him his wife streit way,
And abraham never stayed,
But as the King him prayed,
Departed thence without delay.
And during this his flight,
He grew to so good plight,
That Loath to part away was feign:
Because, as stood the case,
To little was the place,
To keep the flocks of both them twain.
There fell a sodeyn jar
Between nine Kings through war,
Wherein five kings were put to flight,
And Loath him self, with all
His goods both great and small,
Away was carried clean and quite.
Our faithful Master streit,
On news of this conceit,
Made fresh pursuit immediately:
And having but as then
Three hundred eighteen men,
Did make the enmies all to fly.
And of the reskewd pray
The tenth to the priest did pay.
And having done each man his right,
Returned home anon,
With commendacion,
For putting so his foes to flight.
But another son he had,
Nor daughter him to glad.
Which thing when Sara did perceive,
She put her maid in bed,
To serve her husbands sted,
Because her self could not conceive.
So Agar bare a son
A thirteen years outronne,
Whose name is called Ismael.
And to this present day,
Our masters goods are ay
Increaced passing wondrous well.
Then for the covenants sake
Which God him self did make,
Between him and our master dear,
Our master and we all,
As well the great as small,
At once all circumcized were.
My fellows: God has showed himself to us,
So good, so loving and so gracious,
That I can never any thing yet crave
Ne small ne great, but that I much more have,
Than I desire. I would have gone with you
(As you do know) to see full feign: but now
Behold my father comes here at hand.

But it behooves us to understand,
That if God will us any thing to do,
We must streyt ways obedient be thereto,
And another strive nor speak against his will.

In deed Sir so I think and purpose still.
But yet I pray you think not strange, that I
Do take this matter some what heavily.

A good heart (wife) does show it self at need*

That's true: * therefore lets be sure in deed,
It is Gods will and mind we should do so.
We have but this child only and no mo
Who yet is weak: in him stands all the trust
Of all our hope, with him it falls to dust.

Nay rather in God.

But give me leave to say.

Can ever God his word once said unsay*
No no, and therefore be you out of dowt,
That God will keep * prosper him throughout.

Yea, but will God have us to hazard him?

No hazarding it is where God does guard him.

My heart misgiueth some mishappe

I another dread nor dowt of any hap.

There is in hand some secret enterpryze.

What ere it be, it does from God aryze,

At least, if what it were you wist.

I shall ere long, if God so list.

So long away the child will near abide.

For that our God will well enough provide.

Yea but the ways now full of dangers are.

Who dies in following God needs never care.

If he should dies, e^ farewell our good days.

God does foresett men's dying times always.

It were much better here to sacrifyze.

What ever you think, God thinks otherwise*

Well then Sir, since it must be so
The grace of God with both you go.
Adieu my son.

Good mother eke adieu.

My son obey thy father still,
And God thee save: that if it be his will
Thou may in health return right soon agein.
My child I can not me refreyne
But that I needs must kiss the now.

Good mother, if it should not trouble you,
I would desire you one thing ere I went.



Say on my son: for I am well content
To grant thee thy request.

I humbly do you pray
To put this greef away.
These tears of yours refreyne,
I shall return ageine
(I hope) in better plyght,
Than now I am in sight:
And therefore stay this greef and woe.

My fellows: we have now to go
Good six days journey ere we rest:
See that your cariages be pressed
And all the things that we shall need.

Sir, as for that let us take heed.
Do you no more but only show your will.

On then: and God be with you still.
The mighty God who of his goodness ay,
From time to time even to this present day,
So kind and gracious unto us has be,
Be helpful still both unto you and me.
Deal wisely howsoever that you fare:
I hope this journey which we going are
Shall be performed happily.

Alas alas full little wot I
When I shall see you all ageine.
The Lord now with you all remain.

Good mother God you guide.

Farewell.

God guide, and keep you through his grace.

Gowe on Sirs, let us hence apace.

But is not this enough to make me mad,
That whereas I make every man to gad,
And all the world to follow after me,
If they my finger do but hild up see,
And there withal set all things on a rore:
Yet for all that I never could the more
This false old fellow bring unto my lure,
For any thing that yet I can procure?
Behold he is departed from this place
Gods will full bent tobey in every case,
Although the matter never be so strange.
But yet it may be that his mind will change,
Or that he shall him sacrifyze in deed,
And so he shall if I may help him speed.
For if he do, then Isaac shall be dead,
Whereby my heart shall be delivered
Of that same fear least God in him fulfill,
The threate whereby he promised me to spill.
And if he change his mind, then may I say
The gold is won. for may I once so play
My part, as for to make him disobey
Almighty Gods commaundment, or repyne:
Then were he banished from the grace divine.
That is the mark whereat I always shoot,
Now hye thee Cowle, set forth the better foot:
Lets run apace, and by some cunning drift
Foil him in feeld, or put him to his shift.

My children: this is now the third day
That we have traueld making little stay.
Here must you tarry: as for me, I will
With Isaac go yet further onward still,
Unto a place from hence yet distant more
Which God almighty showed me before,
Where I must pray and offer sacrifyze
As he requires. Wherefore in any wyze
Abide you here, and stir not hence. But thou
Son Isaac shall go with me as now:
For God requires in this behalf thy presence.

Sir, since you forbid us we will not hence.

This bundle unto him betake,
And I the fire and knife will take.
We shall (God willing) come agein right soon
But in the mean while, wot ye what to done?
Pray ye to God both for your selves and us.
Alas, alas, was never wight, ywus.

We will not fail.

That had such need as I.
Well Sirs, I say no more but God be wy.

And with you too.

It greatly mazeth me,

And me likewyze.

And me too, for too see
Him so dismayed which has so stowtly borne
All haps that have befalne him heretooforne.

To say he is afraid of war
Debate, or strife, or any jar
It were no reason: for we know,
Abimelech the king did show
Such honor to our maisterward,
That he not only had regard
To visit him, but eke did knit
A leage with him which lasts yet,
And as for howshold matters, what
Can he desire which he has not?

He lives in outward peace and rest:
But age perchance does woork unrest.

Of zunnes he has but only one
But in the world mo such are none.
His cattle thryue in such great store,
As God does seem to give him more,
Than he him self can wish or crave.

Nothing ye can so perfect have,
But always sumwhat is amiss.
I pray to God him so to bliss,
As soon to cure this his disease.

Amen, say I, if it him please.

Sure I suppoze how ere the case does stand
He has this time some weighty thing in hand.

As howge as is the world we see
With all the things that in it be,
Yet nothing is so strong and sure,
That can for ever here endure.
Almighty God which all mainteynes,
Can nothing spy that ay remaynes,
Except him self: all else each one
Endure short time, and soon are gone.
The sun with bright and burning beams
Goes casting forth his cheerful gleames,
As long as day in sky does last.
Then darksom night does over cast,
All kind of things both foul and fair,
With coleblacke wings aloft in air.
And of the moon what shall we say,
Which never keeps at a stay?
Sometimes with horns she does appear:
Sometime half (...): now thick, now clear:
Anon with rownd and fulsom face
The night she fro the sky does chase.
The twincling stars above on hye
Run rolling rownd about the sky,
One while with wether fair and clear,
Another while with lowering cheer.
Two days together match, and ye
Them like in all points shall not see.
The one does pass more swift away,
The other longer while does stay.
The one, as though it did us spyght,
Bereeues us of the cheerful light:
The other with his color bright
Does joy our heart and dim our sight.
One burns the world with heat from skies,
With frost and cold another dies.
With purple, green, blew, white, and red
The earth earwhile is ouerspred.
Anon a blast of nipping cold
Maks freshest things look sear and old.
The rivers with their waters moist
Above their banks are often hoyst,
And pass their bownds with rage so far,
That they the plowmans hope do mar.
And afterward they fall within
Their chanells, ronning lank and thin.
And therefore whosoever does him grownd,
On awght that in the world is fownd,
Beneath or in the starrie skies,
I say I count him nothing wyze.
What then of him is to be said,
Whose hope on man is wholly stayed?
Each living creature subject is
To endless inconueniencis:
And yet among them all, the sun,
In all his course which he does run,
Beholds not a feebler wight,
Than man is in his cheifest plyght.
For he that is most wyze and stowt,
Is so beseeged rownd about,
And so assayld with vices strong,
That often he is thrown along.
What a fool is he, whose heart
Thinks to be free from woe and smart,
So long as he does live on mowld?
But if that any creature wowld
Be sure taccumplish that desire:
He must go set his heart more higher.
Whereof our master rightly may
A good example be that way.
The best I think that can be now espyde,
Is for too draw us one aside,
That each of us may by him self alone
Pray God to send our master which is gone,
A safe return with gladness. gowe.

I will not be behind I trow.

My father.

Alas a poor father am I.

Sir here is wood, with fire, and knyfe ready:
But as for sheep or lamb I see none here.
For you to offer.

O my son most dear,
God will provide. Abide thou here I say,
While I to God a little while do pray.



Good father go: but yet I pray you show
Me whereupon this greef of yours does grow,
Which does (I see) so greatly you appall.

At my return, my son, thou shall know all.
But in the mean time pray thy self here too*

It is good reason that I should so do.
And therewithal I will each thing address,
That first this wood may be in readiness.
This billet first shall gin the order here:
Then this, then that shall cloze together near.
Thus all these things are ready now and pressed.
My father shall provide for all the rest.
And now O God I will aside retire,
To pray to thee, as reason does require.

The more we live, the more we see, alas,
What life it is that in this world we pass.
Was never woman borne upon the mowld,
That for her husband or her issue could
Hirselfe with me in happiness compare.
But yet I have indurde such grief and care
These last three days since they went hence, yt well
I am not able for my life to tell,
Which of the twain has greater to me been,
The former joy, or present pain I meene
Which I have felt these last 3. days, since they
Have bin away: for another night nor day
Have I taken rest, because my mind does run
On nothing but my husband and my son.
And of a truth I was to blame as tho,
In that I suffered them away to go,
And went not with them. Of the six days three,
Alas but three my God, yet passed be,
And yet three mo my patience still must prove.
Alas my God which see me from above,
Both outwardly and inwardly always,
Uowtsafe to shorten these three years I say,
For were they much more shorter than they be,
They be not days, but months and years to me
My God, thy promis putts me out of dowt:
But if thou long delay the falling out,
I fear I shall have need of greater strength,
To bear the pain in holding out at length.
Wherefore my God, now grant thou unto me
I may with joy right soon my husband see,
And eke mine Isaac in mine arms embrace
Returned in health and saftie to this place.

O God my God, thou see my open heart,
And of my thowghts thou see each secret part,
So that my case I need not to declare.
Thou see, alas thou see my woeful care.
Thou only can me rid of my diseaze,
By granting me (if that it might thee pleaze)
One only thing the which I dare not crave.

An other song then this yet must we have*

What? what? and is it possible that Gods
Behest and deed should ever be at odds?
Can he deceive? even to this present day
He has kept towche in all that he did say.
And can he now unsay his word? no, no.
But yet it would ensew he should do so,
If he my son should take away as now.
What say I? O my God, my God, since thou
Do bid me, I will do it. Is it right
That I so sinful and so wretched wight,
Should fall to scanning of the judgments
Of thy most perfect pure commandments?

My case goes ill. O Cowle we must yet find
Some other way tassault this hagards mind.

It maybe that I have imagined
Amiss: the more it is examined,
The more the case seems strange. It was perchance
Some dream or wicked feend that at a glaunce
Did put this matter in my head for why,
So cruel offerings please not God perdye.
He cursed Cayne for killing of his brother:
And shall I kill mine Isaac and none other?

No no. Never do so.

Alas alas what meant I so to said?
Forgive me, Lord, and pluck me back agein
From this leawd race wherein my sin began go:
O Lord my God deliver me from this woe.
This hand of mine shall certainly him smight.
For since it is thy will, it is good right
It should be done. Wherefore I will obey.

But I will keep you from it if I may.

So doing I should make my God untrue.
For he has told me that there should insew,
So great a people out of this my son,
As over all the earth should spread and run.
And therefore if that Isaac once were killed,
I see not how this covenant could be hild.
Alas Lord, have thou made him the^ for nowght?
Alas Lord, is it vain that thou so often
Have promised me such things in Isaake,
As thou wooldst never do for others sake?
Alas and can the things repealed be,
Which thou so often have promised unto me?
Alas and shall my hope have such an end?
Whereto should then man's hope and trusting te^d?
The sum of all I minded to have said,
Is that to thee I heartily have prayed,
To give me issue: hoping that when thou
Had granted it, I should have lived now
In joy and pleasure: but I see full well,
The contrary to my desire befell.
For of my sonns, which were no mo but twayn,
To put away the one my self was feign:
And of the other (O hard extremitee)
Both father I, and tormenter must be,
Yea tormenter, yea tormenter, alas.
But art not thou the self same God, which was
Contented for too here me patiently,
When I did pray to thee so instantly,
Even in the midds of all thy wrath and ire,
When Sodom thou did mind to burn with fire?
Now then my God and King, will thou say nay,
When for my self I unto thee do pray?
Whom I begat him must I now deface.
O God, at leastwise grant me yet this grace.

Grace? in my book that word I never found.

Some other man my son to death may wownd
Alas my Lord, and must this hand of mine
To such a stroke against all kind declyne?
How will it towch his woeful mother near,
When of his violent death she needs shall here?
If I allege thy will for my defense,
Who will believe that thou will so dispense?
And if men do not credit it: what fame
Will fly abroad to my perpetual shame?
I shall be shund of all men more and less,
As pattern of extremest cruelnesse.
And as for thee, who will unto thee pray,
Or on thy word and promise ever stay?
Alas, may these hoar hears of mine abide
The sorrow that is likely to betide?
Have I already past so many dangers,
Have I so traueld countries that are strangers,
In heat and cold, in thirst and hunger still,
Continewally obedient to thy will:
Have I so long time lived lingringly,
Now in the end to dye unhappily?
O heart of mine, clyue, clyue, asunder clyue:
And linger here no longer time alive.
The speedier death, the lesser is the greef.

Now is he down, if God send no releef.

What said I? what intend I? O my God
Which did create and make me of a clod,
Thou art my Lord, and I thy servant true.
Out of my native country thou me drew.
How oftentimes have thou assured me,
That unto mine this land should lotted be?
And when thou gave me Isaac, did not thou
Most faithfully and constantly auow,
That out of him such offspring should be bred,
As should this land throughout all ouerspred?
Then if thou will needs take him now away,
What should I thereunto against thee say?
He is thine own, I had him of thy gift.
Take him therefore. Thou know best how to
I know thou will to life him rayze again,
Rather than that thy promis should be vain.
Howbeit Lord, thou know I am a man,
No good at all or do or think I can.
But yet thy power which ay is invincible,
Does to belief make all things possible.
Hence flesh, hence fond affections every chone:
Ye humane passions let me now alone.
Nothing to me is good or reasonable,
Which to Gods will is not agreeable.

Well, well, then Isaac shall dye: and we
What will insew thereof shall after see.
O false old hag, thou makste me soft to groan.

See where my son walks up and down alone.
O silie child! O wretched men, death often
Within our bosoms lodges him full soft,
When furthest of we take him for too be.
And therefore right great need always have we
To lead such life, as if we feign would die.
But wotest thou my son (alas) what I
Intend to say?

What pleases you good father.

Alas, that word does kill my heart the rather.
Yet must I better courage to me take.
Isaac my son: alas my heart does quake.

Father, me thinks that fear has you dismayed.

O my dear child: it is as thou have said.
Alas my God.

Sir if it may you pleaze,
Be bold to tell me what does you diseaze.

Ah my dear child, wist thou what thing it were
Mercy good Lord, thy mercy grant us here.
My son my son, beholdest thou this line.
This wood, this fire, and eke this knife of mine?
This geere my Isac serves all for thee.

Of God and nature enmie though I be:
Yet is this thing so hard a case to see,
That even almost it is a greef to me.

Alas my son.

Alas my father dear,
Upon my knees I humbly pray you here,
My youthful years to pity, if you may.

O of mine age the only staff and stay,
My derling, O my derling, feign would I
That I for thee a thousand times might dye:
But God will have it otherwise as now.

Alas my father, mercy I kry you.
Alas alas I want both tung and hand,
Against you in mine own defense to stand.
But see, but see my tears for natures sake,
None other fence I can or will now make
Against you. I am Isaac, none other
But Isaac, your only by my mother.
I am your son that through your self has life
And will you let it be bereft with knife?
Howbeit, if you do it to 'hey the Lord,
Then on my knees I humbly do accord,
To suffer all that ever God and you,
Shall think expedient for too do as now.
But yet what deeds, what deeds of mine deserve
This death O God, my God my life preserve.

Alas my son, God has commanded me
To make an offering unto him of thee,
To my great greef, to my great greef and pine,
And endless woe.

Alas poor mother mine*
How many deaths shall my death give to thee?
But tell me yet, my killer who shall be?

Who? my dear son! my God my God grant grace,
That I may die now present in this place.

O father mine.

Alas, no whit that name
Agrees to me. yet should we be to blame
If we obeyed not God.

Sir I am ready.

Who would have thought he would have bin so stedie?

Now then my father, well I see in deed
That I must dye. Lord help me at my need.
My God, my God, now strengthen thou my mind
And at thy hand such favor let me find,
That of my self I may the upper hand
Obtain, against this sodein death to stand.
Now bind me, kill me, burn me, I am pressed
To suffer all, since God so thinks it best.

Ah what a thing, a what a sight is here!
Mercy good God, now for thy mercy dear.

Thou Lord have made me and created me,
Thou Lord upon the earth have lodged me,
Thou have me given ye grace to knowledge thee:
Yet have I not so well obeyed thee
My Lord and God as dewtie does require:
Which me to pardon loud I thee desire.
And whereas I to you my Lord and father
Have not always such honor yielded rather,
As your great kindness did deserve to have:
Therefore forgiveness humbly I do crave.
My mother: she is now a great way hence,
Wherefore my God vowtsafe her thy defense,
And so preserve her through thy special grace,
As she no whit be trubbled at my case.
Alas, I go to deep and darksom night:
Farewell as now for ay all worldly light.
But sure I am I shall at Gods hand find
Far better things than these I leave behind.
Good father, I am ready at your will.

Was never child that spoke with better skill.
I am ashamde, and therefore take my flight.

Alas my son, before thou leave this light
And that my hand do give thvnkindly blow,
Upon thy mouth let me a kiss bestow.
Isac my son, let this same arm of mine
Which must thee kill, embrace this neck of thine

With right good will and hearty thanks.

Ye skies the great gods woork ay glistring in our eyes
Which well have seen how God (who still is true)
Did me with fruit by Isaac here indew:
And thou O land five times to me behight,
Bear witness that my fingers do not smight
This child of mine for hatred or for vengance,
But only for to yield my dew obeisance,
To that great God which has created me,
And all the things that live or move or be:
Who saues the good that put in him their trust,
And stroyes the bad that serve their wicked lust.
Bear witness that I faithful Abraham,
Through gods great goodness still so steadfast am
As notwithstanding all that humane wit
Can say or think, to make me now to flit:
In one belief I ever do remain,
That not one word of God does happen vain.
But now my hand, high time it is that thou
Do gather strength to execute thy vow.
That by thy killing of mine only son,
Thy deadly stroke may through my heart eke run,

What do I here?
Alas my father dear!

A, a, a, a.

I am at your will.
Am I now well? your pleasure then fulfill.

Did ever man so piteous case yet find?
Was ever any friendship yet so kind?
And was there ever yet so piteous case.
I dye my son, I dye before thy face.

Away with all this fear of yours I pray.
Will you from God yet longer time me stay?

Alas who ever yet so stowt a mind
Within so weak a body erst did find?
Alas my son I prey thee me forgive
Thy death. It kills me that thou may not live.



Abraham, Abraham.

My God here I am.

Into the sheath put up thy knife,
And see thou do not take his life,
Nor hurt the child in any wise.
For now I see before mine eyes,
What love thou bear to the Lord,
And honor unto him auord,
In that thou do so willingly
Thy son thus offer even to dye.

O God.

O God.

O Lord a man may see.
How good it is obedient for to be
To thee: the case is fitly furnished.
I will go take him tied by the head.

O Abraham.

Lord here I am.

Thus says the Lord, I promis thee
By my eternal majesty,
And by my Godhead: since that thou
Have showed thy self so willing now,
Me to obey, as to forbear
Thine only Isaks life: I swear,
That mawgre Satan to his face,
I will thee bliss and all thy race.
Considrest thou the lighsom sky,
And on the shore the gravel dry?
I will increace thine offspring more,
Than stars in heaven, or sand on shore.
Their enmies they shall overcome,
And of thy body one shall come,
By whom my blissing shall spread forth
On all the nations of the earth.
By him the treasures of my love
And mighty power, shall from above
Be sheaded down on all mankind,
Because thou have obeyed my mind.

SEE here the mighty power of earnest faith,
And what reward the true obedience payth
Wherefore ye Lords and Ladies I you pray*
When you from hence shall go agein away,
Let not this true and noble story part
Out of the mind and tables of your heart.
It is no lie, it is no peynted tale,
It is no feyned jest nor fable stale.
It is a deed, a deed right true, of one
That was Gods faithful servant long agone.
Wherefore ye masters and ye mistresses,
Ye Lords and Ladies all both more and less,
Ye rich and poor, ye sorry and ye sad,
And you also whose hearts with mirth are glad,
Behold, and look upon your selves each one,
In this so fair example here foregone.
Such are true glasses, showing to our sight,
The fair, the foul, the crooked, and the right.
For whosoever does unfeignedly indeuer
(As Abraham) to keep Gods sayings ever,
And (notwithstanding all the reasons which
His mind alleges backward him to twich)
Does still refer him self and all his deeds
To God: with much more happy issue speeds,
Than he can wish: for come there storms or winds,
Come greef, come death, come cares of sundry kinds,
Let earthquake come* let heaven and skies down fall,
Let dark confuzion ouercouet all:
The faithful heart so steadfastly is grownded,
As it abides ever vnconfownded.
Contrariwise the man that trust (...)
His own selfwit, thereafter for to do,
And stands in his own conceyt shall find,
The more he goes, the more he comes behind.
And every little puff and sodein blast
From his right course shall quite and clean him cast
Agein, his own selfwilled nature will
Him overthrow and all his doings spill.
Now thou great God which make us to know
The great abuses which do plainly show
The wretched world to be perverted quite,
Make all of us to take such warning by'te,
As each of us may fare the better by
The lively faith set forth before our eye
In Abraham that holy personage,
Whose doings have bin played upon this stage.
Lo masters here the happy recompense
Which God does give you for your gentle silence.

