THus from the Poet am I bid to say,
He knows what Judges sit to doom each Play,
(The overcurious Critic, or the wise)
The one with squint, the other with sunne-like eyes,
Shootes through each Scaene: the one cryas all things down,
The Other hides strangers faults close as his own.
Las! Those who out of custom come to geere,
(S^ng the full quire of the nine Muses here)
So carping, not from wit, but apish spite,
And fetherdignorance, thus our Poet does slight.
It Is not a gay suit, or distorted face,
Can beat his merit off, which has won grace
In the full Theater, nor can now fear
The teeth of any snakie whisperer:
But to the white, and sweet unclouded brow,
(The heaven where true worth moves) our Poet does bow;
Patrons of Arts, and Pilots to the Stage,
Who guide it (through all tempests) from the rage
Of envious whirle winds. O do you but steer
His Muse this day, and bring her tot'h wished shore,
You are those Delphicke powers, whom she will adore.

GIve leave: Lothario.

My Sovereign.

The news in brief: how replies Iacinta?
Will she be woman? will she meet our Arms
With an alternate roundure? will she do?

Nothing to the purpose my Liege, cold as Aquarius,
There she was borne, and there she still remains;
I cannot move her to enter into Pisces, I
Laid the flesh to her too, and the delights thereof, she leanes
Another way, and talks all of the spirit, I
Frighted her with spirits too, but all would not do:
She drew her knife, pointed it to her breast, swore
She would do something, but women's tongues are
Sometimes longer then their arms.

Enough, we have bethought another way.
This wooing application is too mild:
It Is better trust the mercy of a storm.
To have our way, then to be calmd for ever,
Short of the wished haven:
Now draw near, you told us of a hot invasion*
The barbarous and tawney Affricans,
Intend upon our confines.

True, my Liege.
Full threescore thousand are discryde in Arms,
Ready to pass the Streights of Gibbraltar,
Whose watery divisions, their Affricke bounds
(...)om our Christian Europe in Granado,
And Audalusia; they spread and flourish
Their silver moons, led as it is supposde,
By some blind guide, some Saintish Infidel,
That prophesies subjection of our Spain,
Unto the Moors.

They would deter us with their swarty looks:
Were they the same to their similitude,
Sooty as the inhabitants of hell,
Whom they nearest figure; cold fear should fly
From us as distant as they are from beauty:
They come to sacrifice their bloods to us,
If that be red, a m^re rubrum,
We Will make so high to quench their silver moons;
And on their carcasses an Is^mus make
To pass their straytes again, and forage there.

Your forward valor speaks you maiesticall,
But my dread Liege, does not your treasury
Grow thin and empty? so long have you held
A champion resolution against the Turk*
That Spain is wasted in her noble strength,
On which presuming, it is to be supp(...)
The Moore is thus encouraged.

And yet we undaunted Iulianus, our treasury is
A mine unscarcht, we have a Castle
Supposed enchanted, we will break the magic,
If spells there be, opethe forbidden doors
Which twenty of our predecessors have refus^e,
But added each a lock to guard it more,
Rather then our Soldiers shall want pay
To fight our battles nobly.

O my Lord, that is a dangerous secret, only known
To such as can divine futurities,
And they with fearful prophesies predict
Fatallevents to Spain, when that shall be
Broke up by violence: till fate has run
Her own wasting period; which out staide
Auspitiously they promise, that wreathes are kept
In the fore-dooming Court of destiny,
To bind us ever in a happy conquest.

Tut. fear frights us not, nor shall hope fool us
If need provoke, we will dig supply through hell
And her enchantments. Who c^n prefixe us
A time to see these incantations loosde?
Perhaps 'twill stay ten generations more,
When our blood royal may want succession,
If not; what boots it us (lost in our dust
And memory 500. years) that then this hidden
Work shall be; tush, the weakness of our predecessors
Shall not fright us, all is not deadly,
That looks dangerous.

I wish no life to see that day.

Nor I, so many Kings have feared that destiny.

Lord Iulianus, we commit to you
The charge of this great work against the Moors,
With title of Lord General, as you please,
Order this high affair; call to the field
An equal Army against those Affricans,
The bold and hardiest soldiers of our kingdom*
Scourge back again th^se halfe-nak'^ Infide^s
Into their sunburned Clymate; in thy heart
Be loyalty and courage, strength in thine arm:
With christian vaiour strike the heathens dead,
And for thy triumph, bring the Mulyes head.

This honor which your Majesty has given me,
Tho better it might fit another wearing,
Of abler limbs, wheretime has not defaced,
Nor half so many winters quenched his blood,
As a new spring it has revivde ag^^
This Autumn of my years; there is but one care
I leave behind me within the Court of Spain,
My poor Iacinta, mine, and only mine;
May she here thrive in honor, and in favors,
And I shall meet her with a victory,
(Heaven put before) as shall endow us both
In your high esteem.

That shall be our care noble Iulianus, to see her safe,
We love I^cinta more then you must know,
And for her sake we do remove you hence;
You may thank your daughter for this honor Sir,
If you knew our purpose.

I understand all this, whilst he wars abroad, his
Daughter must skirmish at home; Venus is in conjunction
With Mercury, wit and lechery are both in labor
At once alas poor mayden-head, thou art cast in faith,
And must to execution; virginity had thou bin
Molded in my compass, thou had escaped this pitfall.

On, to thy charge, prosper in thy high deeds;
Who aims at honor nobly, nobly speedes.

My heart and tongue, thus sentence to my fate,
In honor thrive, in baseness ruinate.

All help him on his speed: Lothario.
Have we not finely molded our design?
Times ancient bawd, opportunity attends us now,
And yet our flaming blood will scarce give leave
To opportunity.

I told your highness of a second bawd to time, and yet
Not times second neither, for time nere pattern'd her
A thing real, not a dumb moral, as time it self
Is, but a speaking thing, and one that speaks
Effectually; one that has wrackt more mayden-heads
In Spain, then she has years upon her reverent brows,
And yet she writes odd of threescore, an odd wench it is.

Thou nam'st her to me.

Malena.

And have instructed her?

I have prepared her fit for instruction my Liege; she
Waits her further confirmation from your Highness:
Oh every soldier has a double heart, when the King's in field.

Call her

By her right name; bawd, where art thou bawd?

If Words will serve, if not, by rapines force;
We Will pluck this apple from th'Hesperides.

This is the thing I told your Highness of.

A reverent one it is, and may be called schoolemistresse of her sex; if
Apelles had ever picturde forth experience, here might he take his pattern


Indeed my Liege, I have bin the pattern that a great
Many has taken out pictures by, I confess I have
Bin a greater friend to the Hospitals, then the Nunneries,
And I think it was the greater ch^^ity, because
They are the poorer, and more wretched places.

The very ipsissima of her sex, my Liege, as old as
She is, I will undertake she shall wrestle a fall
With the strongest Virgin in Spain, and throw her down too.

Thou must be my Lawyer (I Will fee thee well,)
And at the Bar of beauty plead a cause,
Which whether right or wrong, must needs be mine.

Indeed in rightful causes, weak Lawyers will
Serve turn, but the wrong had need have
The best Orators; I Am but a weak vessel, you
Know my Liege.

She Will hold out I warrant, hark you my Lieg,
This vessel is not hollow yet, it does not sound,
There Is metal in her, there is sack in this Tun,
That has eaten up a great deal of dead
Flesh in her time, lights, longs and bad livers.

Come, come, you must not plead an insufficiency.

I Will do my best my Lord.

Tush, in malo consilio foeminae vincunt viros.

Does he not abuse me my Liege?

Not at all, he says women overcome men in
Giving counsel.

Is there not a faulty word amongst them?

Thou art able to corrupt any good sense, with bad construction:
I say foeminae vincunt, that is, quasi vincere cunctos,
Ouercomes all men.

Go to, go to, there is a broad word amongst'm, vincunt
Quotha, is it spoke with a K, or a C? but in plain
Language I will do my best, if she be of my sex, I
Will show her the end of her function, men follow
The traditions of their forefathers, so should
Women follow the trades of their fore-mothers.

I see thou have persuasive oratory.
Here Is juice of liquorish, good for thy voice,
Speak freely, and effectually.

I will speak the words that have o'rethrowne a
Hundred in my time.

I was within compass then.

Let me have access to her, if she be flesh and blood,
I Will move her, I will not leave her till I turn her to a stone.

Unite your forces both, conquer in love,
I will reward as for a victory
Purchac't with blood from my worst enemy:
Effect, for ill things have their effects we see
Prosper, we will call it a prosperity.

You Will bring me to the place and party?

Prepared with all advantage. I will assist thee, thou
Destroyer of mayden-heads.

Your passions err my Lord, did you foresee
What may ensue; folly begets danger,
Nay often, their full effects, destruction;
You would not clothe the nobleness of your blood
In such base weeds, she is a beggar you doat on.

Thou Have spoke the worst thy malice can invent,
A beggar say? and better being so,
If a small Star could overshine the Sun,
And show his brightness in the solsticie,
Should it be blamed or praised? the feeble Vine
Brings forth sweet fruits, whilst the Cedars's barren;
Beggar is she, I Will poyse her graces with it,
And see how many infinites she will pull
The balance down, and yet that poverty
A goodness dis-esteem'd, she is fair,
Modest, lovely, wise, virtuous.

Nay, if you doat, I Will waste no more good counsel,
And what is her dower Sir?

Infinites, I named them to thee.

O she is fair, a fair dowry.

Chaste and virtuous.

Those are jewels indeed, but they will yield little.

They are not things of prise, they are far off,
And dear, yet Ladies send not for'em.

May not a league be taken for a time?
Defer this hasty match, you have employment
As a Soldier, the King has given you charge,
Approve your champion valor in the field,
If that remove not this domesticke trouble,
Retire upon your Uenus.

I Will prevent that venom,
This night I will be married to my sweet,
And then her memory enjoyed, shall strengthen
Mine arm against my foe, which else would droope,
Suspecting of her loss, I fear it now;
What eye can look upon her, but is captived
In the enchanted prison of her eyes.

Why you will be jealous in your absence then?

Away, away, thou do forget her virtues
Faster then I can name 'em; she is chastity
It self, and when a Shrine shall be set up
Unto that Saint, it shall be built upon
The marble that shall cover her.

Here comes the General.

No more, no more, thy fears are all follies, my Iacinta

I must not leave you thus.

Antonio? what unplum'd? you are a Soldier Sir,
And Soldiers should be forward; look ye
I have bright steel for the black Affricans;
I tell you Sir, I went not with more joy
Unto my maiden Bride, that Hymen night,
From whence I fetched this jewel of my heart,
Then now I do unto my second nuptials.
Oh it is a gallant Mistress, an old man
Is young again at sight of her.

Worthy Sir, your leading valor will centuple the hearts
Of all your followers; when set you forward?

Tush, we limit time to her best haste,
Three days will be the most, the longer stay
Looses the more advantage.

We shall be ready to attend your honor,
Hymen, this night I vow to thee, Mars be my
Morrowes Saint.

Here were a Saint fitting your orisons.

Blasphemy, speak that no more, the beggar,
(If you will so profane to speak her so)
Is gold refinde, compared unto this rubbish,
Diamond to Marble; my noble Lord
We Will leave you to hasten our attendance on you.

Farewell Antonio,
I Am in haste too, my preparations call me.

I call too, I beseech you hear me.

Thou Art a clog to me,
Me thinks thou should be reading over new fashions,
Conferring with your Tire-woman for fair dressings,
Your Ieweller has new devices for ye,
Fine labels for your ears, bracelets for wrists,
Such as will illustrate your white hand;
These are all Pedlars ware to me, Iacinta;
I am for Corslets, Helmets, Bills, Bows, and Pikes,
The thundering Guns, Trumpets tan tara,
The rattling sheepeskin, and the whistling Fife:
What Musicke's this to your ears? ha, farewell,
Farewell, and heaven bless thee.

Good heaven, how slightly
You o're-run my fears, you go to meet
With a full power, an armed foe abroad,
And leave me single to an enemy
That has both power and will to ruin me.

It Is treason that thou speak, and by the Saint
Of Spain, mend it, or I Will discover thee:
Wrong my dread Liege, my King, my Sovereign,
To say that he should doat upon your face,
Away, away, it is but your beauties pride,
So to belie it self thou art not fair,
Thou have no eye to attract Majesty,
To look upon it; say he speak love to thee,
'Twas but to try thee, perhaps 'twas my consent,
Will you enquire the hidden hearts of Kings?
He would not wrong thee for his kingdoms wealth,
Even for my sake, away you wanton fool.

There has bin ravishers, remember Tarquin.

There has bin chaste Ladies, remember Lucres:
I Will hear no more, my time and haste has bard me,
My blessing take, heaven and that shall guard thee.

You leave me in a tempest, heaven guide my fate,
Oh let me sink ere I be captivate.

I do not like this match, this gay outside
Is cloth of gold, within a ragged lining.

O poor comparison father, do they use to line cloth of gold with cloth of
gold; no, but with fine, gentle, and easy linings, and such my sister may be,
for tho I say it that should not say it, my sister has a good face, a white
neck, and a dainty hand, and that may serve for lining for the best cloth of
gold in all Spain


Cedars and shrubs cannot grow up together.

Away, away, speak not so like a Wood monger, I Will
Put you down with a caparison now, do we not use
To graft sweet apples upon crab-tree stocks, do we
Not use to enoculate your Malicatoon upon a Gooseberry?
Such is my sisters case now, say that the noble man
Would enoculate his Lordship upon my sisters yeomandry,
What hurt were in this? would it grieve you to be a
Lords brother, or this old woman to have her Lady
Daughter to ask, Grauam, how do you, will you ride
Abroad in your Croarch, or your embroderd side-saddle?

I, thou talk wildly boy, yet err'st not much
In my conceit, be content man, and add as meet it is,
Joy to content, your daughter shall be made a happy woman
By a noble marriage.

Happy say thou? oh it is as distant as the Moon from earth,
And has the like effects, it changes often,
So with a silver brow, greatness looks on us
Promising and lovely, but once grown full,
It brings swelling billows to o'rewhelme us.

Pray father talk no more of the moon, but of your son,
Not my self that am your son and heir, but of your
Son in law that shall be, my noble L. Antonio, Lord of
Barcelona, and his noble Lady my sister, that shall be.

'Twill well become her, what arms shall I give to make her gentle by?


Those we can buy of the Heralds, you know she
Has cryde Orenges the most of her time here in Civil,
Now a fine Orange for her crest, with Ciuillity
Written round aboud it would speaks wondrous well,
Then a Capon in a Scutchen with a gizard
Under his left arm, with his spurs upon his heels
Riding upon a Leman.

Away, away
Thy talks impertinent, what should a Capon
Do with a Leman?

I, you say well Father there indeed,
A Capon desires no Leman, and therefore
Well hope of both that neither the Lord
Prove himself a Capon, nor my Sister a Leman.

I, this thou touchest by a forced figure,
The perfect sense of all, thence grows my fear:
This love was first (...), and borne in lust
How long has he laid an unlawful liege
Against her Virgin honor, which had she yielded,
And been so lemond, she nere had bin profferd
The style of wife.

Peace, see they come.

I marry, here is a Lady now will wear her own hair.

Nay now no further protestations,
You have said enough to make me new, or ruin me,
And this my spirit, bids me prophesye
If you repent, as love might be ore sated
In its best desires; and any croffe event
Should fall upon this your unequal choice,
Yours is the crime, your handmaid must be blameless,
Since you have sought what I have not desirde,
And yet, you may avoid the fatal doom
(If any such there be) by throwing back
Your atchieu'de vassayle.

Teach me no error.
I will not learn it, sweetest, if you do.
Speak nothing now but of those holy rytes
Whose sacred hands must guide us to the path
Of your desired joys.

Here Is all the bar;
When these have given consent I am your own.

It shall be done in this acknowledgement.
Father and mother let me but call you so.

And brother eke also.

Yes brother too,
By this I claim them all, your daughter makes
Me your son, and yours.

And my brother.

I Will not forget that neither.

If you do, I will forget to call your Lady Sister.

Sir, I have questioned all the will in me,
And find it now resolved unto your wish.

You have my good will too brother.

Mine is wrought out through rocks of doubt and scare,
She is your own, I send her pilots like
Into an Argosey beyond her sterage.

I Will hand the helm with her, and there abide
Safety, or drowning.

She will be hated when the disdainful brows
Of noble greatness shall be shot against her,
The scorns and flowts she shall endure, will be
Fa(...) less content, then is the humble quiet she enioyes.

All those I will rebuke, and if she blush,
The beauty then will check their painted cheeks
With a rebounding shame upon themselves,
Let not more obstacles be mentioned,
Only let priuacie protect us yet
Although we scant the full solemnity
Due to thy wishes; Hymen which afterward.
Shall dare the largest blazon.

Call it mine Sir,
And then the smallest ceremony may serve.
All wants, are only wanting unto you
To give your greatness the due ornaments.

Shall your kind pains provide us of a Priest,
Whom my instructions shall direct you to.

Shall I? why who am I pray?

Yes, good brother do.

O you teach me sweet; yes good brother do.

O as a brother I will, I perceive these great men
Are some what forgetful of their poor kindred.

A Friar in Saint Austins Monastery
Ask for one Benedicke, my comends to him
Will bring him with thee, he is prepared for it.

I Will be the Clarke my self for the groat sake,
Which you know will arise out of the two and twenty.

Tush, I Will treble that wages.

Nothing grieves me but this wedding will be so still borne
We shall have no dancing at it, but I Will foot it
To the Priest howsoever, Fala, la, la, la:

How ere the kings employment in the wars
Calls on my person, I shall leave behind
My self in thee, and bear my self along
In thy sweet memory.

O Sir, you speak of swift divorce.

Relish to joy, a breathing from our pleasures,
Come, come, true love shall tie two hearts in one.

O happy prove.

COme old reverence, if ever thou had music in thee,
To inchant a maydenhead, now strike up.

You play well
On the Pandora, Sir I wonder your skill.
Fails to make her dance after it.

Tush, I give thee
The precedence, wire strings will not doote, it must be
A wind instrument that's governed with stopping of holes,
Which thou playest well on, my old Violl de gamb,
Come, thou shall have reward.

And what pay have you for pandership,

Little or nothing, it comes short of the ^^wd always.

A bawd, why what is a ^awd, pander?

Why bawd, I Will tell thee what a bawd i^.

Then pander I will tell thee what a pander is.

A bawd^ a thing that when the devil plays at (...), bawd
He turns up trump, because she is a help.

But the pandet playing with the devil robs the
To make his hand the stronger, and the cards being
The devils, he makes out a little heart (and that's all
He has) into the stock.

The devil vyes it with the bawd.

The pander being drunk sees the devil.

The devil plays on, and looses the bawd.

And takes away the knave (which is the pander)
With his five finger.

And fearing he has not tricks enough
Gives up his dealing to the bawd, so they shuffle again.

Enough of this game.

Well, the maidenhead is
In this enchanted Castle, thou must blow up,
Give fire old Linstocke, I confess I am repulst ith van;
If thou failst too the king comes with a murdering piece
In the rere, oh it is a royal service.

Well, leave it to me Sir.

She, she sallyes upon thee, As(...)beus, Corothus, and all the fiends of the
fles

Stand at thine elbow.

Bless ye fair Virgin:

From your age with a virgin Epitaph, if you
No better be then I esteem you.

T were pity
Indeed you should be a virgin to my age
Sweet beauty, you would be like a garment long laid by,
And out of fashion, which tho new, would not be worth a wearing:

Is that your companion
Parted with you?

No companion Lady,
But a friend of mine, as I hope he is of yours.

You Are both naught then, and neither friends of mine.
But here you have me prisoner in your power
If you have ought to speak to me out with it.

Ya're beloved Lady, and which is more,
Yea most,
Of a king beloude.

A good induction;
And all this I may deserve being a loyal subject.

Your loyalty may be mixed with his royalty,
If you will be ruled, understand, kings are not common things,
Nor are their actions common; all things are
Proper, and peculiar unto them, so Ladies
Whom they love, are commonly proper Ladies, who being
Proper, cannot be counted common.

It Is all
My pride, I Will be accounted proper.

Only to a king.

And common to all the world besides,
That were gross.

You wrest my meaning virgin, I would not have you be

A virgin, is not that your meaning?

Now you come to me;
It Is true: For what is a virgin? knew you as much
As I youde nere be a virgin.

I dare swear I shoud not.

A virgin? why it is as much as to say because
You were borne a child you shoud ever be so;
This were ridiculous. Virginity,
Why it is a Jewel kept in a Casket,
Which never opened, as good you never had it;
Shall musk be always kept in the Cod, how shall
The sweetness be tasted then? Virginity is
Like a false friend to you, which indeed is better lost then kept,

Out shame of women, thou the falsest art,
Be lost for ever looking on my face,
Or loose those instruments thou lookst withal,
Immodestyes in men are venial,
When women rebel against their weaker selves.
Out hag, turn thee into some other shape,
Or I shall curse my self for being one
Of thy bad sex.

Nay, I have done with you Lady,
If Flags of truce will not serve, you must look
For defiance, and here he comes that brings it with him.

All powers of goodness guard me.

Speak, is she pliant?

Stubborn as an Elephants leg, no bending in her,
You know what you have to do my Liege, trees that
Will not yield their fruit by gentle shaking, must
Be climde, and have it pulde by violence.

Give leave.

I would she would give leave as soon
As I, you shoud not be troubled to ^^ke a duty
From me, I would fall at your feet my Liege.

Why turn you from us Lady?

O my Liege,
I turn not from your face, but from your power,
You bring a frown, I dare not look upon.

Your thought^ instruct you ill, I do not frown, (...)
But smile upon you.

I crave your pardon, and bebd
My kbee, your true obedient servent, my life
I Will lay an offering at your feet, what more
Would you from your humble (...)

Nothing so much,
But for less them either, thy love ^^ire virgin.

Keeping that name, you have it ever.

What name?

A virgin, you have my prayers d^yly to heaven
For your long soveraignties, your honors health and victoryes.

It Is good, and will you deny your self, what you wish
From others? I would atchieve a victory from you.

Sir, I am not your foe.

Concluded well;
Approve your self a friend, the war is love,
Wherein we two must strive make it no war,
But yield it freely.

It is not love you seek;
But an Antipathy as dissonant
As heaven and hell, the music of the spheres.
Comparde with (...), and the (...) below.
Can lust be called ^^ve, then let men seek h^^^,
For there that (...) diety does dwell.

We come not to dispute of good, and bad,
Do as your sex has done, taste what is forbid,
And then distinguish of the difference,
I come not now to war with eloquence,
Those treaties are all past, if you embrace
Our profferd love, well pray; or call it lust,
If not, we speak a king to you, you must

Will you be a Rauisher?

Cal't as you please,
We have a burning fever, and the disease
You must lay balsum to.

Poison be it,
A serpentine, and deadly aconite,
Never survive to know what you have done,
But perish in the deed, or ere begun.

These blasts are Zephires breath, a gentle galt
When it blows high.

Then let my (...) prevail.

The sacrifice of fools, the proverbs s^^^ne,
None pitties women's ^^^res, but Idiots borne.

Remember what my Father does for you,
He Is gone to brandish against your enemies,
He Is fetching you honor home; while at home
You will dishonor him.

My purpose it was,
To send him forth the better to atchieve
My conquest here.

Tyranous unkingly.

Tush, I have no ears.

Hele be revenged.

Pity, not future fears.

Help, help, some good hand help:

There Is none within thy call.

Heaven hears.

Tush, it is far of.

See heaven, a wicked king, lust staynes his Crown,
Or strike me dead, or throw a vengeance down.

Tush heaven is deaf, and hell laughs at thy cry.

Be cursed in the act, and cursed dye.

I Will stop the rest within thee.

Not the messenger returned from the Castle
With answer from Al^^z^?

See my Lord, they come together.

Noble Iuli^^us, the dignity of general
You wear, be with your valor individual,
Till we have made it triple by our conquests,
Then let that threefold one, imp^le your brows,
And bear it to king Rod(...) in triumph.

Worthy Al^^za you must help your wishes
Ere they can take effect, your approved arm
Will be a good assistant, but I pray Sir,
How have you kept your Castle so unbruis'd?
The foe not far distant, have you not taken
Nor given? no sallying forth, no buffetting?

My Lord, we have been yet as quiet as in league,
Which makes me guess their number is not full,
They have not yet, unless with grim aspects
So much as frighted this my tender daughter.

Tender father, I pray let not your pity disparadge me,
I have seen a sword whipped out stark naked in my time,
And never squeakt; Do you think a Sarazi^s head,
Or a Blackamoores face can affright me, let me then
Be afraid of every chimney sweeper.

Good spirit yffaith;
Even such a soldier have I left behind,
I had much ado to keep her from the field,
Poor Iaci^^a, had I known such a sworn sister for her
I shoud almost have given her leave.

I Will tell you Sir,
Were there a band of buskind Amazons
That would tucke up their skirts, and strike indeed
My girl shoud wear bright Menalipp^^s belt
She shoud be foremost; and I Will venture her.

Is she such a striker, my Lord?

All at head,
No where else, believe me Sir, we hold it base.
To strike below the wast.

You fight high Lady.

So she does at heart I think,

So, so, to her batchelloure,
Antonio, L^zarelle, M^di^^, Come Al^^z^,
You and I must (...) more seriously upon our war intendmunts.

The general wrongs you to call you batchellour, Antonio.

Would he did not wrong me.

Have not you a Cord^^ke
A heart fever now, (...) Do you think there is
A Phoenix now, is there but one good face
In the world?

I see nothing in her face,
Prithee attempt to make her speak again.

Her tongue? nay if you like her tongue, you must needs
Like her tail, for the one utter^ the other^ Lady
What would you give now for Moors heads by the dozen?

I would buy by the score Sir.

And what a score then?

Chalk best for the score, every alewife knows that.

You talk of chalk, and I o^cheefe.

He Is in the last dish, pray take him away here.

I have not done yet, will you buy any ware of me?

What? proffered ware^^oh.

Give over, thou will be foiled else.

Why, here is a wench now, I had rather I Will with her
Wit, then with the best piece of flesh in Christendom,
I could beget young Mercuries on her, with
The very conceit: would you had had a good pair
Of eyes in your head.

They are false glasses, and will
Deceive me.
My Lords to arms, the foe discovered,
Marching amain upon you.

We are in readiness, our Councels broke,
Advice must be all blows, Lady to your hold,
And at advantage, see what these youths will do;
To gain your love, nobly for Spain speak dru^,
And if they call, answer for us, they come.

Descend thy sphere, thou burning Diety,
Haste from our shame, go blushing to thy bed,
Thy sons we are, thou ouerlasting b^ll,
Yet never shamde these our impressive brows
Till now; we that are stamped with thine own seal,
Which the whole ocean cannot wash away^
Shall those cold ^gue cheeks that nature moulds
Within her winter shop, those smoothe white ^kins,
That with a p^lsey hand she paint^ the li^^bes,
Make us recoyle.

Great Mully(...) haste,
Either give heart to our retyring troop
By a fresh onset, or haste to saftie by
Flight and baseness: B(...) slain,

Where Is our brother Mahu Mahomet?

Rounded with danger,
Where he behaves himself nobly Haldi(...)ay,
E^^ser, and five Alchaides more are gone
Up to his rescue, and if not more he dies.
Or is captiv'de.

Well partake either or both with him,
They are both noble, but too ^^sely fli^
Is to preserve life, and let honor die.
Fall then my flesh, so there survive my name,
Who flies from honor, follows after shame.

Antonio, now by the Saint of Spain
You have made your self remarkable to day,
Valor, exceeding valor, was not looked for
Which you have shown to day.

So nobly Sir, that I could wish my daughter
Were in love with you, and your virtues; would you
Requite it, her dowry should be 50 thousand crowns,
More then I ever meant it.

O heart, thou speak too late.
My Lords your praises, and your noble wishes
Makes me esteem my self behind hand with same
Here Is yet more work to do.

One Mully we have taken,
If Mumen fly not, he is his fellow-captive.

There my new fortunes shall their honor prove,
Then fare well war, next well war fair with love.

Medina, post to king Roderiqus, do thus and thus,
Tell our royal Master what work we have done him:
You see and know, and it need no relation,
Here are royal prisoners.

How will you use us?

As in captivity we wish our selves.

May we not be ransomde?

As from the king
We shall receive: as his pleasure returns us,
Mean time you shall have cause to blame
Your fortunes, not your conq(...)ours, where is (...)
The best deserver of this days honor.

Retirde to his tent.

Not wounded, is her

No my Lord, but weary.

So we are all,
Now we have time to rest, and get new breath,
We conquer to the life, and not to death.

Now Antonio, where is Margaretta now?

Here.

Whose that in your hand then?

I know not, look, it is gone.

Fie, you will take it up again, come, come, sl^ope,
This is Dio(...) characte^: a hand worth your heart,
Peruse it better, so, so, it is well.
Ladies fair hands must not be rejected so,
I did foresee this dangerous relapse,
You are in love.

With Marg(...).

With Di(...)
Nor do you shame it, rather cherish it.
It is a choice (...)ing your high blood;
What you have done, make (...) as a say
Unto your best desires.

O Lazarello!
Thou giv'st me poison to recure a wound
Already mortal.

Why this is speedlesse haste,
I know your sated pleasures would throw up
Their over-cloyde receipt, you have been noble
In your brave deeds of arms; who shall (...) it,
Your beggars issue? they are Antipathies,
How would it sound to hear poor Margaret say
Her Lord has brought home honor from the wars:
T'woud stain your worth to be so vainly boasted.
No, this Lady would multiply your praises with her phrase,
Lest Dionisa say that her Antonio
Won the palm of victory, then you are thronde,
And music gracing the solemnity.

One word confutes thee, ever into silence,
I am married.

A mistake in private, who knows that?

Margaretta,
And my self, besides a thousand witnesses within

Quit you those, and who dares speak it else?

Who dares not speak a truth.

Dares not, who dares?
What danger is more great then to speak truth?
If poor ones durst speak plain of great men's faults,
There needed no libelling.

I Will ch^^ke freedom;
Oh what a bed of (...) struggle within me.

Tush, they are but worms, and I Will give thee seed and reasons
To destroy'em; yo'are married.

A good physician;
Thou kill'st me quickly to haste me out of pain.

Tush, I must first draw the corruption forth,
And then apply the healing medi(...).

Persuade me to turn Turk, or Mo^^^ Mohammedan,
For by the lustful laws of M(...)
I may have three wives more.

And concubines besides; turn Moore?
Do you expect such counsel from your friend?
Wrong me not so, I Will show you a Christian way
At least a way dispensed with Christians,
Say you distaste your (...). as well you may,
When truth shall be (...)* and shame walk by,
Bearing a blushing (...) to light them both,
Mend then the cause before it take effect,
Annihillate your (...) that (...) cause,
It Is private yet, let it (...):
Allow your (...) (...),
She may be (...) to (...)
To embrac^ you, say she be called your whore
For some thing that may breed from what is done,
Better her shame then yours; a common thing:
Poor beauti^^ are proud of noble bas^ardie.

Fearful counsel.

Does your Margaret love you?

Beyond her life.

Good, marry Di(...), grief kills her, then are you a widower.

Horrible murder, twere less (...)
To kill at once, then by a ling^ing po^son.

Ha? poison? what white devil pr^^pted that?
Poison, brave, the very change of friendship, the trial
Of a friend^ love to death, would you (...) sure
Of a friends constancy, a swift poison will strike it dead.
And (...) the (...) way and (...) be (...)
Even in the (...) of love, (...), I dri(...) to you,
Or accept these gloves, the (...), the touch, the sight,
Tush, any sense will take it kindly.

I Will hear no more from thee thou studiest to make worse
A positive bad, by a vilde perfor(...).

Ha?
Look yonder, there is an eye speaker (...)
In very silence, where is poor Marg(...) now.

Oh my (...).

Look upon that face; well, you are my friend,
And by that (...) loves ^not, had I that face
But in reversion after your decease,
I think I should give you physic fort.

Worthy Sir,
My noble father entreats some words with you.

A happy messenges in (...) to him,
How shall I quit your (...)

I Will take my travel sort Sir.

It Is too little.

I (...) it too much Sir,
For I was loath to have travellde thus far, had not
Obedience tide me toot.

You Are too quick.

Too quick Sir, why what occasion have I given you
To wish me dead?

I cannot keep this pace with you, Lady,
I Will go speak with your father.

I pray stay Sir, I Will speak with you my self.

Before your father.

No, here in private by your self.

I Will stop my ears, Madam.

Why, are they running away from your head Sir?

I mean I Will seal them up from hearing, Lady.

You may, no doubt they have w^x ^'their own.

Venture thy (...) no f^^ther good (...),
She will endanger 'em, but Lady now I think on
Speak, is not this your hand?

I have three then it should seem,
For I have two of my own fingring.

This is your letter?

You know my mind then by this time.

If I may be your expositor, Lady, I think I do.

And how do you expound me Sir?

Kind and loving.

Kind and loving* it were a good commendations
For a sow and her pigs.

You ask me the reason why I inquired your age of your ^^^her.

It Is true Sir, for what have you to do ^ith my age?

I Would rather have to do with your youth Lady.

Who, my page?

Fie Madam, you are too apprehensive, too dexterious,
Your wit has two edges I pr(...)st.

What a cut would that give to a (...) crown.

My crown itches not (...), (...).

Yet you may scratch it though.

Come, come, your wits a good one, do not (...) it.

Unless it remove (...) of my (...),
For I must tire that.

I think you love me.

You and I may be of two opinion^,
I think not so now.

Come, your hand has betrayed you,
Do not you plainly say here, we two should be well matched?

^O strange, he steals half a text to uphold
His heresy; but what follows, we should be well matched
At a game of shittlecocke, the meaning i^,
For a couple of light headed things we could not be over matched;
He might have conceited that that could have but said
B to a battleder: but come Sir, you have said
Enough to me, will you go speak with my father?

This I Will add first, which I Will avouch unto
Your fathers face, I love you.

This I Will confirm to you,
And to my fathers face, but I Will not promise you,
Whether I blush or no, I do not hate you.

I Will follow you, yet give me leave ere you go
To give a gratitude unto your lip.

My lips do not stand in the high way to beg
A charity, as open as they appear to you.
You Will follow me Sir.

I cannot stay long after.

Soft I Am in your debt Sir, did you bestow a kiss on me?

I did so far presume.

Take it again --
So now I am out of your debt, hereafter never fear
To lend freely to one that pays so willingly.

Now Sir, what do you do?

I am dissolving an Enigma.

Let me help you, what is it.

I would saine know
What kind of thing a man's heart is.

Were you never
At Barbar Surgeons hall to see (...) dissection?
I Will report it to you, it is a thing framde
With diver^ corners, and into every corner
A man may entertain a friend, there came
The proverb, a man may love one well, and yet
Retain a friend in a corner.

Tush, it is not
The real heart, but the unseene faculties.

Those I Will decipher unto you, for surely
The most part are but ciphers; the heart indeed.
For the most part does keep a better guest
Then himself in him, that is the soul: now the soul
Being a tree, there are diverse branches spreading out of it,
As loving affection, suffering sorrows, and the like,
Then Sir, these affections, or sorrows, being but branches,
Are sometimes lopt off, or of themselves wither,
And new s^oot in their rooms. As for example;
Your friend dies, there appears sorrow, but it quickly
Withers, then is that branch gone, Again you love a friend,
There affection springs forth, at last you distaste,
Then that branch withers again, and another bud^
In his room, shall I give you history to this moral?

No, I can doot my self, oh M^rg^^att^.

So she is in the vocative case already, if she slide.
Into the ablative, she is thrush quite out of the numbers

I am lost Lazarell^.

I shall find you again
In D^^is^es arms.

Must I back slide.

If you can find in your heart, you must.

My hearts
A rebel to me.

Faith all your body
Will be accessory toot, I Am a friend.
Come, come, league with your thoughts, you are too nice.

How ill thou speak of good, how good of (...)?
It Is now concluded in me, I will on,
I must, although I meet destruction.
Down hill we run, (...) a ^low (...)
Easy discents to hell, (...).

QViet your tongue, or I Will take away your liberty,
Know you are under me, and my command.

Quiet my tongue? ^rt officer of hell!
Thou Iaylor to the devil, fleshly fiend,
I Will waken heaven and earth with my exclaimes,
Astonish hell for fear, the fire be doubled
In the due vengeance of my heinous wrong,
My heavy heinous wrong.

Forbear I say: you are a crack virgin,
And I Will bestow the widow alms on you
In charity, if you not hold your tongue.

Worst of humanity, hold thou thy tongue,
Shame thou to speak, my shame enforces me.

Come, come, my li^le (what shall I call thee)
For it is now doubtful what thou art; being neither
Maid, wife, nor (saving your reverence) widow.
Ha? Do spit at me? I Will have you spitted for this trick,
And I will turn you as you see, and moreover
I will have you.

O that I could spit out the spiders bladder,
Or the roads intrals into thee, to take part
And mix with the diseases that thou hearst,
And altogether choke thee, or that my tongue
Were pointed with a (...)y Pyramid
To strike thee through, thou bundle of diseases,
This storehouse of some shaggy meteor,
Some bl^^ing fire shon over thy (...) birth,
And laid up all her sad effects in that,
Gout^, aches, dropsies, and a hundred more,
For were not (...) to (...),
Thy own soul (...) would strangle thee.

Thou art a looser, and I do consider it,
Thou have lost a maydenhead, a shrewd crack:
A flaw that will hardly be soaderd again;
Some there be that can pass away these counterseits.
For current, as brass money may be taken
For silver, yet it can never be the same,
Nor restorde to his first purity, this I consider.
And bear, (but presume not too much to trouble
The poole of my patience, it may rise soul) it may.

O that thine eyes were worth the plucking out,
Or thy base heart, the labor I should take
In rending up thy bosom, I should but open
A vaule to poison me (detested wretch)
The hangmans man, basest degree of baseness,
Thou liv'st upon the lees and dregs of lust,
Thy soul is a hyrde hackney toward hell.
O Iulianus, my much honored father,
How is thy simple faith deluded now!
Thou had not so much thought of ill in thee,
To breed a bad opinion of a villain,
Tyrant, and ravisher; whilst thou art winning
Renown and honor from Spaines enemies,
Spain has dishonored and imprisoned me:
Thou understandst not this, unless the winds
Upon their fleeting convey hear it thee,
Some gentle vision tell thee in thy sleeps,
And heaven instruct thee with a waking faith,
True to believe thy slumbers; boil out my blood,
And at the briney limbecke of mine eyes
Distill my faculties; alone I Will tell
My sorrows unto heaven, my curse to hell.
And there (...) mix that wretch, from thence they rise,
Oh whilst I look on him, I loath mine eyes.

But that I have some kinder purpose, I would not
Be thus baited: I am given to the (...) as well
As the king my Master, I have some hope to ^^fte
This dish after him; but it is yet too hot for me,
It will cool, and then I will draw my (...), (...) have
A flash at it: this woman's two edgde tongue,
And this burden of flesh that I bear about me,
Has made me so heavy, I must take a ^^p.
Cob, boy, Cob, page.

Here Sir.

There is some thing gone
Into my ears, that troubles my brain, blow in
Some music to fetch it out again.

The best I can, my Lord.

And hark you, having done, ascend the Turret
And see if you can discover his Majesty
Coming to the Castle: this house he appointed
For his recreation, if you do, descend,
And give me (...)rning.

I will.
So I have luld my Lord asleep,
I see he takes my music hearily,
Therefore I Will sing no more: now to my Turret
To see if the king come, now he may take him napping.

There is no resting place within a prison
To make my sorrows less by recounting.
I throw 'um forth, but empty none (...) all;
Ha, asleep? I, security can sleep,
Griefs a true watchman: how the d(...)
Th(...) ^ell within hi(...), and what a (...) noise
Th(...)
I could with h^^ office (...)
But I have better tho(...) may give me
My release (...)
Of better release, no, I will not delay it,
I will keep back my sins from multitudes,
And I may fly for safety to my father.
There Is diverse ways, heaven instruct the privat'st.
And best for my escape: fare ill, not well,
Thou and thy lustful Master: from all but one,
This key now frees me, O! that I bear about,
Which none but mercies key can deliver out.

My Lord, I spy the king coming pri(...)ely
By himself, my Lord, one were as good attempt
To wake a watchman at three a clock in the morning,
My Lord, lend me your keys if you will not (...) your self:
Me thinks he should wake himself with (...), but (...) may be
The more noise makes him sleep the sounder; the best is,
I take it, the king has a private key to let in himself;
If he have, he will do his own work himself, and my Lord
For this time shall be an innocent pander,
In this act of sleep a harmless husband may be so
To his own wife, It Is as I guest, he is come
In of himself.

Where Is your Master?

H^^s h(...)
In his private meditation^, my L^i^^.

He was ever heavy, where is (...)?

Safe enough,
My Liege, she (...) my Lord into these (...)
With the very music of her tongue, but they (...) all disco^d^.

Command h^^ (...), her father (...),
He has a noble fortune to (...)ing (...)
Conquest and royal (...), I (...) not well
Requite him: therefore I (...)
What I return, how the villain snores!
Sleep on Sir, your sin will be the less, in being
My b^wd. Now where is she?

Alas my Lord,
I have been --.

Been impe, where have you been?

Seeking about all the corners in the Castle
For Iacinta.

Why, is she to seek slave?

I can neither hear nor see her any where.

Rogue, thou neither feast, nor he^r'st more if I see not her:

I Will go seek better, my L^ige, I doubt some legerdemaine,
But if I find not her within, I know the way out.

You dormouse, baby of fifty, bundle of security,
Awake Rogue, pocks of your heavy flesh, have thou no soul?

Mynnion, I Will clog your heels with irons for this,
Will you not let me rest by you?

Mischief open your eyelid(...) block, image.

I will tell the king, and he shall tickle you for this.

Sir death, I Will tickle you for this, ^oggerhead, where'^ I(...)?

O my Liege, is it your Mai^sty, I beseech you pardon me:
These after dinner-n^^^ are the rep^sts to my body.

Diseases devour your body, where'^ I(...)?

Safe, safe, my Liege, my k^y^s, wh^r^ he my keys,
Saw you my keys, my (...).

Confirmde, ^he has the keys, and is fled the castle,
Dog, hell-hound, thou shall be my (...), sl(...)
I Will drag this (...)ull (...) into his (...).

Nay but my (...).
And the (...) I ^old (...) by (...)
When I went to sleep, and my first dream told me
They were there still. My boy, my Cob, saw you my Cob, my Liege?

Dogs worry you both; search slave in every angle,
Send pursuit after her, if thou returnst her not,
Thou shall curse thy being.

If she be not above steeples,
Nor beneath hell, I Will find her, for so high
And low I can reach and dive, as heavy as I am.

If she escape us, and once reach her father,
Now in his height of honor, we know not how
He may receive his wrongs, nor the event;
We will command him distant from the Court,
And his prisoners sent to us; And this shall ha^^e
Before her possible speed, if she escape:
Well threaten his heads loss, if he deny 'um,
Those that do wrong, had need keep safety by 'um.

O that some striking air had blasted me
Before this poison entered at mine cares;
Married?

Madam, sweet Madam.

Madam! prithee mock me not, nor guard my folly
With such a linsie wolsie ornament.
Madam, is the mad dame, and thence mad woman:
Define it so and I will borrow still
That little of my store. A coat of tissue
If a fool wears it, is but a fools coat.
Such are my trappings; oh for t^me that's gone,
Equality, oh sweet equality,
Borne under Libra, thou have both right hands,
Without advantage, or priority.
Base ones made big by beauty are but slaves,
Their Lords nere truly bed but in their graves.
Hai a dangerous conceit, call my brother, Fid^lla.

Then let me council you, know he is open,
Plain, and rusticall, and alterd from his first condition,
What ever your purpose is, let it not appear to him.

Prithee be gone, and call him.
Am I despised so soon? wedlock unjust,
Unequal nuptials are not love, but lust:
Come back past time, oh it is a fruitless call,
I may repent, but find no help at all.
Now I forestall thee heaven ere I begin,
Forgive me, I must act some a heinous sin,
I must now be changde.

Lady sister, did your Madamship
Send for my worship?

I did send for you brother.

You may entreat me.

I hope so, I have a letter
To my Lord (brother) containing so much love
And secrecy; as I would trust none willingly
But your self for the delivery.

A letter sister!
I would not have you to take me for a Carrier,
Or a Porter to carry words, or letters more
Then it pleases me; yet in the way of a Nuntius,
Partly Ambassador, or so, I will
Travel for your sake.

Look you, this is all, brother.

Is this all sister?

Unless you will add another:
Commends by word of mouth*

By word of mouth?
It Was not well spoken sister.

Why brother?

Why what words are there, but words of the mouth?
Except it be words of the tail, which would sound but il^
In my Lord brothers cares: for words behind
A man's back are but wind, you know that.

But be most careful in the delivery, I entreat you brother;
You know our wedding is only known to us,
A thing conceald from wide mouthd rumor, then should you
Find him in company with Nobles of his own rank.

Tush, I can smell the rankest of them all.

Say amongst Ladies you shoud find him sporting
Dancing, kissing, or any such like wantonness,
Take heed your rude approach does not move him to any di^^^ste.

O my nowne sister, my nose is a little more a kin to you
Now then ever it was; you would have me be an informer
Of unlawful games, as Ticktack, whipper ginny, in and in.

No trust me brother, only to instruct you I speak;
For the least disparagement should chance to him
His pleasure forbidding it, would be a death to me,

Well sister, here is my hand, and my heart is some where
Here about me too, but I Would be loath to bring him
Forth to witness, but I will be very careful.

You undo me else brother.

Pha, do you think me for
A fool or your brother (sister)

Do not think
But at your return I shall be very thankful.

As for that, it is sufficient your Ladyship is my sister; oh ye little amiable
rogue you, a good face is a good dowry, I see sometimes; when we two tumbled
both in a belly together, little did our mother think which should have been
the Madam; I might have been cut the the other way iffaith, if it had pleased the
sisters three, if the Midwife had but known my mind when I was borne, I had
been two stone lighter; but much good do thee with thy good fortunes; farewell
honorable flesh and blood, I will deliver to my noble brother, pretty trim
Lady, I think we are eyde alike; fare thee well, I cannot choose but see thee
as long as I look^ upon thee.


Effect thy own content, paper and ink,
And then thou bringst the work into my hands.
Fudella.

Madam.

Thou love me Fudella.

Do you make a question ont Lady?

No, I rather
Speak it as acknowledgement, suppose I went
In the right noble way, to meet my foe
In The field, woudst be my second.

To my second life, Madam.

I do ^ntend no such viragoes part,
But in shape, a danger to thee far more worse,
But when it is done, the spacious world shall have to understand,
Spite of the low condition of my birth,
High spirits may be lodged in humble earth.

Sad still!

I am as I was ever Lady,
Full of retired thoughts.

You draw these backward
Should be coming on, and meet in nuptial pleasures.

All strive to be their own Physicians (Lady)
We know what is best and fittest to be done,
But who can follow it?

Till the disease be known
In vain it were to study remedy,
Pray what is your cause of sadness?

I have none, Lady.

Why are you not merry then?

You must find fault with my complexion for it,
Nature, perhaps, has not compounded me
Of equal portions; yet you discover
Diseases outward, I not feel within,
Me thinks I Am merry.

No, I have heard you sigh so violent,
They have wak't my slumbers with you in bed,
One gust following another, as you would breath
Out all your air together, there most be cause.

I know not how to win your good belief, Lady,
But if you will trust me; Lazarello come hither.

A murrin o the carrier brought me hither, I shall sit the worse this two
days, but I think I have requited his sides for it; Now to my letter, pat
yffaith, here is my noble brother; hum, I have a pestilent Lady to my sister,
she told me I should find him amongst Ladies; if she had said Lady she had
guest singular well yffaith, I will carry it as well as I can for my honorable
brothers credit


Fie, that is a lame excuse, you won not honor
Equal with your will, my self from the Castle saw you,
Most nobly do, I saw you unhorse three brave opposers,
You killed and captived many enemies.

Nay now sweet Lady
You make too strict an inquisition,
Men emulate in honor for the best.
Who would be second that can foremost (...)
For this a man may wrangle with (...) fate,
And grieve and envy at another fortunes.

Hum, hum, hum.

See you you fellow.

Waft him hence good Lazarell^, I am undone else,
Look here Dionisia, here is a jewel,
I never showed thee yet.

It Is a very pretty one,
Shall I have it?

With all my heart sweet.

He gives me aim, I am three bow^ too short,
I Will come up nearer next time.

When does the Army
March hence, Antonio?

Some three days hence.
I must prepare to go:

I Will go with you Antonio.

By no means sweet, I Will send for thee
With more harmonious music.

Indeed I must.

Come, come, indeed you shall not.

He wonnot off Sir.

A mischief carry him.

No! shall I have no notice taken of me!
I Will begin in another tone with you. Hum, hum, hum,
There was a Nobleman of Spain, Lady, Lady,
That went abroad, and came not again
To his poor Lady.
Oh cruel age, when one proud brother, Lady, Lady,
Shall scorn to look upon another,
Of his poor Lady.

How now, what fellow's this?

No man's fellow here, Lady, yet a good fellow too
In place where.

Who! this fellow, Lady! he that knows not him,
Knows not a man of mirth, this Doctor I tell you
Gives as good cure for the melancholy.
As the best Emperick in Spain, what ere he be.

I would he would practice on Antonio then.

Troth Madam it is a good plot, please you to walk
I Will man you to the Castle, leave them together,
It Is an equal match, if he make him not merry,
Heel most terribly trouble his melancholy.

Heel make me more sad I fear.

I had rather stay and partake some mirth.

I am no woman's fool (sweet Lady) it is two trades in Sivill; as your man's
Tailor, and your woman's Tailor: So your Lords fool, and your Ladies ^oole, I
am for the tongue, not for the bauble


Well Antonio, I Will leave you, and sir make him merry,
And I Will reward thee:

If I cannot make him merry, I know who can.

Who I prithee?

T will out.

Why my -- you can Lady.

Now you jest too broad sir.

That Is woman's jesting, Madam.

I was afraid he would have namde his sister.

I will make bold to be covered, brother thou know

Oh brother.

Look thee there is black and white for thee from the little honorable ra^^all
my sister, and a thousand commendations too without book, which I was bid to
tell thee by roat, if thou can read and hear all at once


Yes I can.


There Is honorable bones a breeding, my sister is the peevishest piece of
Ladies flesh grown of late, we have good sport at it to see her vex and fret,
she boxes me as familiarly as if I were her Cobbler, for talking to her, an
unnatural varlet, to strike her own flesh and blood, but I bear with her for
thy sake


I thank you fort, brother.


Nay, she cuts her lace, and eats raw fruit too, what sallet do you think she
longed for the other day


I know not:


For a what do call 'um? those long upright things that grow a yard above the
ground; oh Cuckoo pintle roots, but I got her her belly full at last


So it was well.


But the best lest was, she bit her shoemaker by the ear as he was drawing on
her shoes; and another time her Tailor for girding her too straight, he had a
long nose, but she did so pinch his bill; what, have thou good news brother


Very good brother, all I read are well.


Yes faith brother, we are in health, and drink to thine sometimes.


Brother, I would have your swift return.


It Was my sisters charge, she thinks of long things, poor heart.


I cannot give you the entertainment I would brother, but I pray you let this
provide for you


This is Hostess, Tapster, Chamberlain, and all, brother.


In the morning early my letter shall be ready for you.


I will lie in my boot all night, but I Will be ready as soon as your letter:
Bonos nocios, mi frater


Stay brother, one thing I must ask you,
And pray you tell me, What Is your thought of me,
Finding me in a Ladies company?

O brother, I would not have you think you have a fool to your kindred, what!
I understand these toys, there are foul, and there are fish, there are
wag-tayles, and there are Mermayds


Of what sort do you think she is?

Oh brother, definitions and distinctions! fie on 'um, come, I know flesh and
blood will be sporting. And I were a married man my self, I would not always
be at home, I would hawke, and hunt, and ride, there are diverse members in one
body, there are flesh days, and there are fish days, ^man must not always
eat one sort of meat


I see you are a wag brother.


Always let a married man get his own children at home if he can, if he have
a bit abroad for procreation or so --


Well good night brother, I pray hold a good opinion of me.


O Sir, I can wink with one eye like a gunner, shall I make my sister sick of
the yelow laundies? no, thought is free, whatsoever I speak^, I Will say nothing;
Vale, valete, valete, valetote.


I can dissemble mirth no longer.
Oh my afflicted soul, were thou capable
Of separation, thou woudst now be rent
Into a thousand pieces: (...).

Now Sir, you are full of news I Am sure.

Heavy and froward news: where is Dionisia?

At distance enough in the Castle; you may speak.

I am discovered, Margaretta knows of this
Her wrong, and my disloyalty.

It was no mystery,
And must be found, but how does she bear it.

Better then her birth,
As Well as my addition to her, nobly,
And if her hand does not belie her heart,
She Is glad that I have found an equal liking.

She has done as becomes her.

Yet with this request,
That I would not forsake her utterly,
But some times see her, it is articled too,
That twice a week sheed have my fellowship
By night, and private stealthes, the which obtainde,
Sheed loose the name of wife, and never shame
To be called my Concubine.

I, this is well,
Fine light pageant work, but now sure building,
This gilds a while, but will at length wash off again;
This roof must be raisde upon a sounder groundsill;
Give me your free bosom, you have one heart, and two ways,
Which may have the better part freely.

My conscience
And my affection war about this quarrel,
My conscience says the first, but my affection,
The second.

So then, you shoud
Love Margaretta, but do love Dionisia.

My heart's triangled, two points Dionisia^s,
And that downwards Margarets, and that is the smallest.

I thank you for this free delivery:
You seal your friendship to me, now let me build,
I ha'te, I Will rid your griefs at once; will you
But give consent.

To any fair condition.

No worse then Margarets request to you,
Or very little, return your letter, that
You will satisfy all her desire, appoint
Your first nights approach, and privately.

Night cannot hide it ever.

But hear me,
You shall not go, I will supply your place,
Not to blemish, but to preserve your honor:
Command your entertainment, so secret be,
As that no lights may lead you to your chamber,
Let me alone to counterfeit for once,
And once shall serve for all, if it but take,
And that she bed with me, not for the act,
For there your honor must be weighed, but company,
Shall serve the turn, then rise I and proclaim
Both our luxurious sin(...); how (...) she then
Claim any part in you?

It Is a strange extreame^

Ulcers must have co(...)sives to eat, not ^kinde,
Extremes must have extremes to co^pe withal.
It will not yield else.

I like it, and allow it;
It Is more then water that must fight with wild fire.
This passage shall be inst(...)ly preparde
With some of my wearin^^, brought as near my self
As art can make, this Ring to strengthen it,
I could subtract a third from my estate
To heal her injury, and quite blot out
That ^ain^s mine honor, being voyc't,
It must be curde; pardon heaven and Margaret,
There is an innate falling from what is good,
Which nothing can r^p^ire in's but our blood.

THat I should ten leagues be in scorn remov'de
From Court unto my co^ntrey house! for what?
It Is very strange; know you the cause?

Not I, my Lord.

I cry you mercy Sir, and my king mercy,
And I beshrew my ^ho^ghts for be(...)g troubled.
I know the can my self, his grace is wise,
For seeing me on a (...) of (...),
So eye-able to the world, the (...) slaves,
The multitude in their loud be(...)g voyce^,
Might add so much to me Sir, as might dim
His own proper (...), for such (...) see
The present (...), (...), or (...),
He gives me saf^ty (...), (...)
Himself much worth and honor, for Sir, what honor
Can subjects have, but is (...)
Due (...) their Crowne^, (...),
I do app(...) (...), (...)

Your prisoners must be sent (...) too my Lord.

Ha? my prisoners? (...) go^^ somewhat further,
Sir, I befe(...) yo^ this day (...)
Your self into our (...) nobly (...),
The (...) go (...) the (...) ^oo
This very night (...) ^^swer and conf^r^e
What he command^.

To morrow I must return.

You shall, (...) I pray be merry with us:
Command^d (...) ^he Co(...) my prisoners ^^nt for!
It Is strange; oh my forgetful m(...)ry!
I did not ask how my (...) (...):
But she forgets too, minds not me her father,
We Will mix 'um both together, but my prisoners!

Sir, here is a woman (forede by some tide of sorrow)
With tears entreats your pity, and to see you.

If any soldier has done violence to her,
Beyond our military discipline,
Death shall divide him from us, Fetch he^ in.
I have my self a daugh(...), (...) on whose face
But thinking, I must ne^d^ be pitiful:
And when I ha told my conquest to my king,
My poor girl then shall know, how for her sake
I did one pious act; is this the creature!

Yes, my Lord, and a sad one.

Leave us: a sad one!
The down-c^^^ loo(...), calls up comp^ssion in me,
A Coarse going to the gr^^e looks not more deadly,
Why kneelst thou! art thou wrongde by any soldier!
Rise, for this honor is not due to me.
Have not a tongue to read thy sorrows out!
This book I understand not.

O my dear father!

Thy father? who has wronged him?

A great Commander.

Under me!

Above you.

Above me? whose above a General?
None but the General of all Spaines Armies,
And that's the king, king R^d^^icke; he is all goodness.
He cannot wrong thy father.

What was Tarquin?

A king, and yet a (...)isher.

Such a sin
Was in those days a monster, (...) (...)it is common.

Prithee be plain.

Have not you Sir, a daughter?

If I have not, I am the wretchedst man
That this day lives: for all the wealth I have
Lives in that child.

O for your daughters s^ke then hear my woes.

Rise then, and speak 'um.

No, let me kneel still,
Such a resemblance of a daughters duty,
Will make you mindful of a fathers love:
For such my injuries must exact from you,
A you would for your own.

And so they do,
For whilst I see thee kneeling, I think of my Iacinta.

Say your Iacinta then (chaste as the Rose)
Coming on sweetly in the springing bud,
And never felt heat, to spread the Summer sweet:
But to increase and multiply it more,
Did to it self keep in its own perfu^e:
Say that some rapine hand had plucked the bloome,
Iacinta like that flower, and ravished her,
Defiling her white lawne of chastity,
With ugly blacks of lust; what would you do?

O it is too hard a question to resolve,
Without a solemn Council held within
Of man's best understanding faculties:
There must be love, and fatherhood, and grief,
And rage, and many passions, and they must all
Beget a thing called vengeance; but they must sit upon it.

Say this were done by him that carried
The fairest seeming face of friendship to your self.

We should fall out.

Would you in such a case respect degrees?

I know not that.

Say he were noble.

Impossible: th'acts ignoble, the Be can breed
No poison, though it suck the juice of hemlocke.

Say a king should doo'(...) were the(...) less done
By the greater power, does Majesty extenuate a crime:

Augment it rather.

Say then that Rod^ricke, your king and Master,
To quit the honors you are bringing home,
Had ravished your Iacinta.

Who has sent
A fury in this fowle-faire shape to vex me?
I ha seen that face me thinks, yet know it not:
How dare thou speak this treason, against my king?
Durst any man it^ world, bring me this lie,
By this, had been in hell; Rodoricke a Tarquin?

Yes, and thy daughter (had she done her part)
Should be the second Lucr^ce: view me well,
I am Iacinta.

Ha?

The king my ravisher.

The king thy ravisher! oh unkingly sound:
He dares not sure, yet in thy sullied eyes
I read a Tragic story.
O noble friends,
Our wars are ended, are they not?

They are Sir.

But Spain has now begun a civil war.
And to confound me only: see you my daughter?
She sounds the Trumpet, which draws forth my sword
To be revengde.

On whom? speak loud your wrongs,
Digest your choler into temperance:
Give your considerate thoughts the upper hand,
In your hot passions, twill assuage the swelling
Of your big heart; if you have injuries done you,
Revenge them, and we second you.

Father, dear father.

Daughter, dear daughter.

Why do you kneel to me Sir?

To ask thee pardon that I did beget thee,
I brought thee to a shame stains all the way
Twixt earth and Acheron: not all the clouds
(The skies large canopy) could they drown the S(...)
With a perpetual inundation,
Can wash it ever out, leave me I pray.

His fighting passions will be ore anon,
And all will be at peace.

Best in my judgment,
We wake him with the fight of his won honors:
Call up the army, and let them present
His prisoner^ to him, such a sight as that
Will brook no sorrow near it.

It Was a good Doctor that prescrib'de that physic
I Will be your patient Sir, show me my soldiers,
And my new honors won, I will truly weigh them,
With my full griefs, they may perhap^ o^^come.

Why now there is hope of his recovery.

Iacinta welcome, thou art my child still,
No forced stain of lust can alienate
Our consanguinitie.

Dear Father,
Recollect your noble spirits, conquer grief,
The manly way: you have brave foes subdued,
Then let no female passions thus orewhelm^ you.

Mistake me not, my child, I am not mad,
Nor must be idle; for it were more fit,
(If I could purchase more) I had more wit,
To help in these designs, I am grown old:
Yet I have found more strength within this arm,
Then without proof I durst ha boasted on.
Rodericke thou king of monsters could thou do this?
And for thy lust confine me from the Court,
There^ reason in thy shame, thou should not see me.
Ha! they come Iacinta, they come, hark, hark,
Now thou shall see what cause I have given my king:
Stand, pray stand all, deliver me my prisoners:
So (...) well, wondrous well, I have no friends
But these my enemies, yet welcome brave Moors,
With you ^le parley; first I defle you all.

How?

I am a vowed for to your King, to Rod^rique.

How Iulia(...)!

Nay we fear you not, here is our whole army;
Yet we are strong enough from fear or flight.

Make us understand a reason Iulianus,
If for disloyalty reason may be given
Of this your language.

(...) you (...)y Judges whom I make my foes?
Was my power placed above my mercy, or mercy
Above my power? went they not hand in hand?

Ever most nobly.

Ever, ever.

Why then should Rod^rique do this base deed?

You do distract us Sir, beseech you name it.

Behold this child of mine, this only mine,
I had a daughter, be she is ravished now.

Ravished?

Yes, by Rod^rique, by (...), tyr(...), Rod^rique:

O most abhorrid deed?

Join with me noble Spaniard^ in Revenge.

We will.

Have I your hearts?

Our ^^ves sh(...) ^eale it.

Then Prince^y (...), here I free thee,
And all thy valiant Moors: Will thou call back
Thy scattered forces, and incorporate
Their strengths with mine, and with me march through Spain,
Sharpning thy sword with vengeance for my wrong^?

Most willingly, to ^^nde me f^^^er to thee,
Plight me thy ravished daughter to my wife,
And thou shall see my indignation fly
On wings of Thunder.

O my secon^ hell,
A Christians arms embrace an infidel!

I Will not compel her heart, wo^e, win, and wed her:
Forced has she bin too much, -- My honored friends,
What We all thought to ha borne home in Triumph,
Must now be seen there in a Funeral,
Wrackt Honor being chief Mourner; here is the Hearse
Which we will all follow; -- Roderique we come,
To give thy lust a scourge, thy life a doom.

Sleeps he Fyd^lla?

Slumbringly Madam; he is not yet in his dead sleep.

It Is now his dying, anon comes his dead sleep.
For never shall he wake, until the world
Has Phoenix-like bin hid in his own ashes,
Fydella, take my strength into thine arms,
And play the cruel executioner,
As I will first instruct thee.

I am so far
From shrinking, Madam, that I Will gladly be
The Prologue to Ant(...)s Tragedy.

Ant(...)s Tragedy! that very Name
Should strike even sparks of pity from the flint:
Antoni^! husband A(...).

Remember there is another owes that Name.

I, that is that is the poison kills me; shall a strumpet
(For she is no better) rob me of a treasure
So dear to me as he was; yet her I pardon:
The master-thiefe lies here, and he must dye fort:
All mercy hence I banish. Justice look down
To see a woman's vengeance; thus I begin,
And follow thus and thus, now I am in,
Nothing shall pull me back.

Oh, oh.

He has passage yet for breath.

Here Is remedy for that, pull Fydella.

He would speak it seems.

Never; his tongue betrayed me once, I will
No more listen my temptations; hear he shall
A while, and that but deafly: Antoni^,
I was your wife, Lordly Ant^ni^,
And in that balance equaled with your self,
I was your handmaid, and you might have trod
On my humility, I had kissed your feet,
But with disdain thou trampledst on my throat,
As I do now on thine, and will deface
What nature built for honor, not deceit:
Our wedding was in private, so our divorce,
Yet this shall have as fre and open blazon
As a truth-speaking goodness; O my Fydella,
Thou little instrument of my revenge,
I would not have thee (for thy duty) lost,
There Is gold; hye thee to safety, fare thee well,
I must nere see thee more, this place will be --

Not too hot for me Madam; my complexion
Is natural to it: good fortunes follow you;
If I might counsel you, I would conceal it:
If you can fly, do not betray your self.

Fie, prithee away, thou will mar all the glory,
Conceal the deed? even to the bended brow
Of the stern Judge, I Will speak, and call for justice,
Proud of my glorious vengeance, I will smile
Upon my dreadful Executioner:
It Was that was first enacted in my breast,
She shoud not dare to kill, that dares not die,
It Is needy mischief, and he is basely bent
That dares do ill, yet fear the punishment.

SOme music.

Music Sir! it is all untunde,
Remember your proud enemies approach,
And your unreadinesse to entertain um.

If all be set upon a careless hazard,
What shall care do there?

Rouse you like a Lion,
And fright this heard of Foxes, Wolves, and Bears,
From daring to come near you: a Kings eye.
Has Magical charms in it to bind treason down,
They fight like thieves for spoil, you for your own;

O Piamentelli, there is within my bosom,
An army of Furies mustred, worse than those
Which follow Iulianus: Conscience beats
The Drum of horror up.

For what! a Meidenhead!
Pray be your self, and justify the act,
Stand on your guard, and royalize the fact
By your own dispensation.

Go call our friends together, if we have none,
Hire them with double pay, our self will search
And break those dangerous doors which have so long
Kept Spain in childish ignorance.

O good my Lord,
Forbear, there is fatal prophesies forbid you.

There Is fatal fooleries; tell me of prophesies!
Shall fear affright me? no; upon my life
It Is hidden treasure kept for needful hours,
And now it is come; it is gold must purchase soldiers;
Shall I not seek it then? alone I Will break
Open those forbidden doors, go muster men.

This I dread more then all our enemies,
If good proceed from this, no Magic Art
Shall fright me.

Or good, or bad, I Will throw the dice my self,
And take the chance that falls; thou art the first,
Hell wakens, yet I Will on, twenty at least
I must pass through before I break the spell,
If this door thither lead, I Will enter hell.

So now I me entered to the fatal chamber,
Show now thy full effects, ha? what sight's this?

It Is holliday in hell, the fiends are loose,
I have enfranchiz'd you, thank me Devils;
Was this the fatal incantation
That here was locked so many fearful ages,
And was it decreed for me to dislocate?
Fire consume you geomantick Devils,
Where borrowed you those bodies, you damned thieves?
In your own shapes you are not visible,
Or are you yet but fancies imaginary?
What Is he that me presents? I have not sent
My carcas forth, I am not sleeping now,
And my soul straid forth, I am my real self,
Must I be captived by a traitor so?
Devil thou playest me false; undiadem'd?
And such a sooty fiend inherit me?
Iacinta, too, that she-curse, must she have part?
Kneeling to them, here is a solemnity
In the Devils name; go reign in Sulphur, or in
Some frozen Labyrinth; this Kingdom's mine:
Thou there that me personat'st, draw forth thy sword,
And brandish't against hell, I Will show thee how?
What Magic binds me? what furies hold mine arm.
Piamentelli, Avilla, none succor me?

What ails you Sir?

My foes are come upon me.

Coming they are, but yet a league distant, Sir,

Zounds they are come, and have bin here with me.
Traitorous Iulianus, and his ravished daughter,
An army of Moors, of Turks and infidels.

Your fancies trouble you, they are but coming,
Too near in that, make up to your soldiers,
Full twenty thousand now will follow you and more.

The Moore's a coming, and the devil too that must
Succeed me in my last monarchy, take arms and fight,
The fiends shall know they have not played me right.

O for a private place to be hanged in; when all hope's gone, welcome
despair; which way soever the day goes, I Am sure this is my way; If the King
overcome, I shall be hanged for Iacintaes escape, if she rise, I fall in
recompense of her wrongs. All my grief is, I want an heir to have my purse
and clothes, one that would take the pains for me, an honest hangman were now
as good a companion as I would desire to meet with; I have lived a Lord, and I
would be loath to dye an executioner


Murder is come to light; Oh sister how have thou overthrown our honorable
house before it was well covered; oh ambitious sister, half a share in a Lord
would not content thee, thou would have all or none, now thou have none, for thou
have killed thy Lord and husband


I was a Lord, although a bawdy Lord.


I was a Lords brother, although a bawdy Lords brother.


O Lechery, how have thou puffed me up and undone me.


O Lechery, thou have battend me a while, and then spoild me.


Ha? what art thou?

Partly honorable, partly miserable.

Give me thy hand.

Give me thy halter then.

Art thou a hangman then?

I, and a mad one, but now I droope, and am ready to drop into the budget.


Look here is work for thee, here is clothes, and here is money, wout thou take
the pains to hang me


I have lived a Lords brother, and would be loath to die a hangman.


Do not desire to die, live till thou die of thine own accord.


It Is my desire, but I want a cord of mine own, prithee lend me thine.


Let me persuade thee to be charitable to thy self, spare thy self, and hang
me, I have been a Pander, know thou what a Pander is


In brief a knave; more at large thus;
He Is a thing that is poor,
He waits upon a whore,
When she is sick, he is sore,
In the streets he goes before,
At the chamber waits at door,
All his life a runs o'th score,
This I know, and know no more.

All this I Will add to it,
He wears long lock,
And villainous socks,
Many nights in the stocks,
Endures some knocks,
And a many of mocks,
Eats reversions of cocks,
Yet lies in the flocks,
Thrives by the smocks,
And dies with the pox.
All this I have been, and now desire to be hanged for it.

What have thou there?

A hundred marks, besides leases, and lands which I have wickedly gotten, all
which I will bestow on thee, if thou will take the pains to hang me


Hum? my brother is dead, and there is no way to raise our house again but by
ready money or credit; the hangman many times mounts above his betters; well I
will hang, but my conscience bears me witness, it is not for any good will I
bear unto thee, nor for any wrong that I know thou have committed; but
innocently for thy lands, thy leases, thy clothes, and thy money. And so come a
long with to me the next tree, where thou shall hang till thou art dead, and
stink above ground


With all my heart, my guts, my lights, my liver, and my lungs.


Fly, fly my Lord.

With what wings?

With wings of speed.
Your foes, Sir, conquer, and your souldies bleed,
The barbarous Moore is titled by your name,
The Spanish King; therefore your safest speed
Will be to Biscany, there you may find
New friends, new safety, and new kingly minds.

There is no friendship where there is no power,
I must crave now, oh poverty most poor,
To beg of them received mine al^es, before.
I have defended them:

They Will you releeve.

I Will make the proof: what do you call the man
Whose prowess in that rightful victory
Against the Moors did so much honor win?

A(...).

He was, and is, and may be, but not long?
This poisoned Iuli(...) has hatterd him.
Thou art my subject still Pia^^^telli.

Whilst I am Pia^^^telli.

Were thou gone,
I then might boast, I were a King alone,
For but thy self I do not know one subject,
Then subjects all, since you^^ not let me die,
I Will seek a weary life in Biscany.

Thou mutable piece of nature, do thou fly me?

Th'at^ frightfull to me.

I shall be more frightfull,
If thou repel a proferd arm of love,
There will rebound a hate blacker in Art
Then in similitude; forget me not,
Have not I chac't thy wronger from his ground,
And my triumphant self thy conqueror?
I am thy King.

I Will fear thee then?

Not love me!

The word is poisoned in thy very tongue,
Love thee? as I would love my ravisher.

Thy father shall repent.

He must, and will,
That ere he freed a captive infidel.

Look for a vengeance.

Yes, some barbarous one,
It Is natural to thee, base African,
Thine in side a blacker then thy sooty skin.
Oh Iulianus, what have thou done? thast sc^p't
The raging Lion, to wrestle with a Dragon,
He would have slain with a majesticke gripe.
But this with venom; better had bin thy fate
By him to fall, then thus, by such a ^^^^ound.

Bring forth that traitor, same that lustful whore.

What will thou monster?

Any thing that is monstrous.

Reward a traitor.

Traitor?

Be thine own judge,
What art thou but thy Kings, and Kingdoms ruin?
Was it thy hopes, that ever I should trust thee?
Traitors are poisoned arrows drawn toth'head.
Which we shoot home at mischief; being struck dead,
Then let the arrow be consumed in fire.
Have not betrayed thy King and Country basely

For thee (ungrateful, villainous Moore) I have,
I have deserved to die, but not by thee,
And I beseech thee, bloody Tyrant, hasten
My punishment.

That boon is easily g(...).

It Is now full glory to thee, to strike h(...)
Set the black character of death upon (...)
Give me a sentence horrid as thy self art,
Speak in thy barbarous language, thy last doom,
A tyrants Axe sends me ^o a ^^^st home.

Pluck out his eyes, and her exclaiming tongue,
She shall in silent sarrow then lead him,
Her eyes shall be his st^^^^^.

O spare her tyrant.
By her offense and wrong thou have aspirde,
Then tread not on her virtues, (...) enough
That I do suffer for the good (...) I did
To set thy (...) above my head:
Oh spare my child.

Entr^^t for me? forbear Sir,
Either be you dumb or let him not hear,
I shall have mental (...) for heaven,
Fuller effectual then this tongue (...).
And for the author of my (...) and (...),
I shall have (...).

O Justice, Justice, thou that ^ilst the throne
(...) Justice (...).
Give me thy sharpest (...).

Against (...)

My self the (...) (...).

(...).

Yes, and see, here is (...)
A(...) ghost! murdered by me, (...)

(...) and (...).
To kill my friend, (my (...) friend) (...).
Thou strangledst L(...)

O my hard (...)
My aim, was full at thee.

End thy just hate,
For I am parting from thee; see those two
That wronged thee are both wounded to the death,
With grief she, I by poison lose my breath.

Forgive him, but spare not me.

How came you wounded?
I clap my hands at this your tragedy,
My birth was base, but my revenge flew high.

A noble girl, a lusty stout Virago.

Iul^^^^^, for a wrong done to his daughter,
(The fatal Engine that has beat down Spain)
Revolted from his King, and set that Moore up,
Who now insults, being but a captive the^,
And cause in honest language I was just
In taxing this revole of (...),
He bid a soldier kill me, who re(...)ing (...),
He himself struck me; life was (...) thus long,
But for the clensing of my conscience:
I feel death p^ngs, forgive me both, and all,
Let my soul (...), (...) any body f^ll
With honor I got hon^^, (...) my (...) ^hr^ves,
Thus falls the wretched husband of two wiv^s

So, here is (...) of (...),
A wholesome example to all succ(...)*
Let every wise man take h^^d of two (...),
It Is ^^o (...) of the (...)
My self should break one of (...) hearts.
What should I call thee, widow, shall we marry one another now.
And beget Chimeraes, I do not think
That ever any one husband (...)
On us both (...)

Do (...) (...) (...) thing
Which should supply the place of (...) in (...),
Merely fantastical* are thy (...)
Such featherd follies, idle giggloto(...)*
Are these the rites due to a funeral?

Why? have never seen the sunshine of a rainy day?
Who does believe a widows tears to be her hearts sorrow?
Are they not then better spa'rd then derided?
Let me see then what thou dare do with wet eyes,
That I dare not answer with a smiling cheek?

What thou dare not second I dare do.

Begin, I Will pledge thee.

Thou dare not.

Try me.

Thus then I come to thee A(...);
Thou did forsake me living, being (...)
I will enjoy thy monu^^^^all bed.

I, have thou that resolution?
Me thinks a woman ((...) I am) should not out do me,
I must dye one day, and as good this day as another,
Whereabouts is my heart, I think all over my body,
I am all heart, and therefore cannot miss,
Some creatures dye singing, why not I merrily,
Make me room A(...) and (...),
We Will all tumble in one bed together,
I Will lie as close as she on thy left side,
And have as many kisses too, th^^'^ my bargai^^;
My sins are all upon thy conscience,
But I forgive thee, and (...) the Clarke to'^,
My soul will have (...) passage, my body I b^queath
To thee Aut^^io, I am your wife,
And will come to ^^d to you, thus I make unready,
Thus I lie down, thus kiss, and this embrace
I Will ever keep, I am (...) with play,
I needs must sleep for ever.

Excellent pasti^^^

It Is night with me for ever, where'^ this ty^ant?
Turn me but to him, and from th^se darkened eyes
I shall discover his Cymerian face,
For tho all is dark, yet still that is visible,
And nothing else to me; see ran here vil(...),
Look what a bloody pageant thou have made;
I borrow eyes to guide me of my child,
And her I Will lend a tongue to curse thee with.

Ha, ha, ha.

Thou l^^^^est at misery.
It Is well, thou give a gr^^e (...) my for(...),
Yet wherefore should thou glory in it? this work
Is none of thine, it is heavens merciful justice,
For thou ar^ but the (...),
The master (...), and th^se (...)
That did these bloody (...) upon'^,
Thy second slaves, and yet I more deserve,
I was a tra^ to^ to my lawful King,
And tho my w(...) (...)cked on (...),
I had no warrant signed for my revenge,
It Is the peoples sins that makes tyr^n^^ King^,
And such was ^^ne for thee, now I obey,
But my affliction teaches (...) too (...)
On bloody (...)ger, (...) up my (...).

(...)
Nor give thee living in captivity,
Thy body shall enjoy the general prison.
But thy soul set (...).

Thou art good in th^^, and no^^^.

Nay it shall nobler ^e in the perfor(...),
Give him weapons, thou art a soldier,
And shall end so; I Will be thy opp(...),
With od^ of eyes, but not of arms, I vow,
If thy dark aim hit in my face, I Will stand,
And die with thee, if not, fall by my hand.

Thou Wilt hurt my pen^^ence, for I shall bless
All the ill deeds (...) I have done for thee,
In this so noble end,

B^ pr(...) then.

One thing more of (...), be a prophet to me first,
For thou know what shall become of my poor Iacinta,
What end to her (...).

(...) end thou (...) know it.

O(...) it noble be, and honorable;
Her life has had (...) strokes of (...);
Oh let her end be sp(...)g.

(...) shall be noble too.

I (...) for her that has no tongue to beg,
And what (...) my saint yielding breath,
Shall all be spent in blessings over thee:
Farewell Iacinta, take my latest blessing,
I know thy soul returns a thanks to me,
Make haste to overtake me, if thou be stayed,
Think of Cl^^patra and Brutus wife,
There Is many ways to end a weary life.

Come Sir, I stand before you.

Thur I come,
Thy death I Will venture, but receive mine own,
So, I have my doom, and I have hit too.

Ha, ha, ha,

Laughest then (...) any (...)ed then.

O bloody homic^de, thou have slain thy daughter.

False villain, have thou then so mocked my woes,
To make me fatal butcher of my child?
W^^ she the target to defend thy body?
Forgive me my Iacinta, 'twas in me
An innocent act of blood, but tyranny
In that black monster: it is not much ill,
Better my hand then a worse arm should spill
Thy guiltless life; what art thou going yet?
Thy warm blood cooles, my sun begins to set,
Nature shrinkes backward to her former forms,
Our souls climb stars, whilst these descend to worms.
See tyrant, from thy further strokes we fly,
Heaven do thy will, I will not cursing die.

So, now we live beholding unto none
Upon this stayre we do ascend our thro^^,
Give us our title.

Long live Mulli(...) King of Spain.

Your silence it confirms, take hence their bodies,
Give them to Christians, and let th^^ bestow
What ceremonious sunerals they please.
We must pursue the flying R(...).
All must be ours, we will have no Kingdom sh^^er,
Let Chroniclers write, here we begin our reign,
The first of Moors that ^re was King of Spain.


