Dear Daughter, unto Father blind
a Staff of steady stay,
To weary Sire, a comfort great,
and Guide in all his way:
And whom to have begotten, I
may glad and joyful be:
Yet leave me now, thy hapless Sire,
thus plungde in misery.
Why seekst thou means, still to direct
my stalking steps aright?
Let me I pray thee headlong slide
in breaknecke tumbling plight.
I better shall and sooner find a way my self alone
To rid me out of all the thrall wherein I now am thrown.
Whereby both heaven shall eased be, and earth shall want the sight
Of me vile wretch, whom, guilt has made a most abhorred wight.
Alas, what little triffling trick has hitherto been wrought
By these my hands? what feate of worth or maistry have I sought?
In deed, they have me helped to pull mine eyes out of my head:
So that ne Sun, ne Moon I see, but life in darkness lead.
And though that I can nothing see, yet is my guilt and crime
Both seen and known, and poyneted at, (woe worth the cursed time.)
Leave of thy hold, let lose thy hand, good daughter, let me go:
Let foultring foot light where it will, let it (this once) be so.
I Will trudge, and run, I Will skudde, and raunge, I Will hasten to the hill
Of craggy stiepe Cytheron, there I hope to work my will.
Where erst Actaeon lost his life by strange, and uncouth death,
Whom vawling Dogs, and hunting Hounds bereft of vital breath:
Where once Agaue (bedlemlike) raungd up and down the wood
With Systers hers, enspired all with Bacchus raging mood.
And pleasing well her self in that her fact and mischief done,
Pitched on a Poale the grisly head of him that was her Son.
Where Zethus with his ruffling Crew of Gallantes young and stout
Dragd, hald, and pulled, the hateful corpse of Dirce, all about.
Where bushie bloudied brambles show which way the Bull her drew:
Nere where dame Ino from a Rock her self in Sea down threw.
So that poor mother though she meant t'auoyde one fault by flight:
Yet she thereby a worse procu^'d, while like a s^rly wight
She bother self and eke her son from Scyron hurled down
Entending both her self and him in foaming Sea to drown.
Oh happy, yea thryse happy they, that had so good an bap:
And whom such mothers pitiful carst daudled in their lap.
Yea yet there is in these same woods an other place to me
That's due by right, and rightly may me challenge as his fee.
Where I am Infant out was laid, al Fortunes to abide:
I thither will direct my course of try what may betyde.
I Will neither stop ne stay til that I be arrived there,
For guide I recke not, neither force for Stumbling any where.
Why stay I thus like dastard drudge to hasten unto it?
Since well I know it lotted is to be my grave and Pit?
Let me mine own Cytheron mount enjoy in quiet state,
It is mine old and ancient bower, appointed me by fate.
I pray thee be not discontent that I should (aged) die,
Even there, where life I should have lost in pueling infancy.
I yield me here with willing heart unto those tortures all
That erst to me were due, and which to others have befall:
To thee I speak O bloody mount, fierce, cruel, styepe and fell,
As well in that thou sparest some, as that thou some do quell.
This c^rton corpse, this sinful soul, this carcass here of mine
Long time agone by right good Law and propertye is thine.
Now yet at length perform the hest that erst enjoined was
To thee by those my parents both, now bring their doom to pass.
My heart even longs till I may s^ fully sati^^y
By this my death that their decree, that glad I am to die.
Ah Daughter, Daughter, why would thou thus keep me gaynst my mind?
In this so vile incestuous love? thou art but now to kind.
Oh stay me not I thee desire, behold, behold, I hear
My Fathers ghost to bid me come apace, and not to fear.
O Father mine I come, I come, now father cease thy rage:
I know (alas) how I abused my Fathers hoary age:
Who had to name King Laius: how he does fret and frye
To see such lewd disparagement: and none to blame but I.
Whereby the Crown usurped is, and he by murder slain.
And Bastardly incestuous brood in Kingly throne remain.
And lo^, do thou not plainly see, how he my panting Ghost
With raking paws does hale and pull, which grieves my conscience most?
Do thou not see how he my face bescratcheth tyrant wise?
Tell me (my Daughter) have thou seen Ghostes in such griefly guyse?
Antig I see and mark each thing full well. Good father leave this mind.
And take a better if you can: from this your self vnwynd.
O what a beastly cowardice is in this breast of mine?
Was I so stout and venturous in pulling out mine Eyes?
And shall all courage be employed against one only part
Of Body, and from other parts shall valor wholly start?
Let none of all these puling tricks nor any faint excuse
Thus daunt thy sprites, let no delay to baseness thee enduce:
Dispatch at once, why lingre I, as one that's loath to dye?
Why live I? is it because I can no longer mischieues try?
Yes that I can, wretch though I be: and therefore tell I thee,
Dear Daughter, that the sooner thou might hence depart from me.
Depart a maid and Virgin hence, for fear of after claps:
Since villainy to Mother shewde, its good to doubt mishaps.

No force, no power, no violence, shall make me to withdraw
My duty unto thee my Sire, to whom I vow mine awe.
I will not be disseuered, ne pulled from thy side.
I will assist thee, while that breath shall in this Breast abide.
My Brothers twain let them contend, and fight for Princelye swaye
Of wealthy Thebes: where whilom raignd King Labdacke many a day.
The greatest share and portion that I do look to have
Out of my Fathers Kingdom, is my Fathers life to save.
Him neither shall Etheocles my elder brother take
Away from me, who now by force the Thebane realm does rake.
Ne Polynices, who as now is Mustring men apace.
From Argos Land: with full intent his brother to displace.
No, though y^ world went all on wheels: though Jove should from above
Hurl flashing flakes upon the Earth, all shall not quayle my love.
No, though his thumping thunderbolt (when we together stand)
Should light between us, where as we are plighted hand in hand)
Yet will I never thee forsake, but held my handfast still:
Therefore its boateles father dear, to counter^aund my will
In this my full resolved mind. Forbid me if you please.
But surely I will be your guide in weal, woe, dole, and case.
And maugre al your sharp reprofes (though much against your mind)
I will direct your steps and gate, that you your way may find:
Through thick and thin, through rough and smoth I will be at an ynch
In hill and dale, in wood and grove, I Will serve at every pinch.
If that you go where danger lies, and seek your own annoy,
You shall well prove, that I to lead the dance will not be coy.
Advise your self therefore, of twain to which I guide shall be:
My count is cast, I am full bent with you to live and die.
Without me perish can you not: but with me, well you may,
It booteth not, in other sort to move me ought to say.
Here is an huyge Promontory that elboes into Sea
Let us from thence throw down our selves, and work our last decay,
If that ye will. Here also is a flinty Rock beside,
Which if you please shall serve our turns: Here beaten with the tide
Be craggy Cliffes, let us go to them: Here runs a gulphy stream
With force before it dryuing stones as big as mountain beam.
What say you? shall we drench our selves within this fomy Flood?
Go where you will, take which you list, do as you deem it good.
Conditionally that I may first receive the wound of death:
I recke no whit, I ready stand to yield up vital breath.
I neither draw you to nor froe: but even as best you think
So do, so deal. Would you so feign Deaths bitter cup to drink?
My lord and Father, take you death so great a boon to be?
If that you dye (this I assure) die first you shall me see.
If life in show more pleasant seem, if so you rather choose,
I am to wait upon you still and never will refuse.
But change this mind wherein you rest, take heart a grace, and show
The noble magnanimity that erst in you did flow:
Resist these panges, subdue these dumpes by valor of the mind,
Let manly courage qualify these your affections blind.
It Is great dishonor thus to yield your self to dolor thrall,
No storm of adverse hap thus ought a Princes heart t'appall.

This gear surmounteth far the reach of my capacity:
I am astonn'd, I feel my self rapt with an ecstasy,
Is this not wonder of so lewd, and of so cursed a tree
Such fruit to grow? of graceles Sire so good a child to see?
Is it not strange that in a house distaynd in villainy
Such noble show of towardnes and virtuous gifts should lie?
Let me some speech to thee direct, dame Fortune: how haps this
That here my daughter so unlike to wretched father is?
Degenerating from his steps, and with such virtue fraught,
As in her Fathers cursed house she never yet was taught?
Is it (I pray thee) credible, that out of ^ie should s^ring
Such issue, as should given be to any honest thing?
No truly, no: it cannot be (my fates full well I know)
None such, (unless to do me scart and mischief) would be so.
T'encrease the heap of mine annoy no strange effect shall want.
Dame Nature in her Creatures will new affectes emplant.
The River shall return his course to Fountain back again,
Dan Phoebus Lamp shall bring the Night, and Night shall day remain,
So that my grievous miseryes with surplusage may grow.
But be as it is: I for a while will play my part also,
And show some spark of piety, my fault to counteruayle:
With murtdroue knife, my woeful days to end I will not fail.
The only help for Oedipus, the only safe^y is
To rid himself, and so redeem that Hellish fact of his.
Let me take vengeance on my self for wrongs to father done,
Whose Death is yet vnexp^ate, by me his cursed son.
Why do thou shake and tremble thus thou hand, not good for ought?
Why flaggrest thou to stabbe him in, who Sire to spoil has brought?
That punishment which hither ^o by pulling out mine eyes
Thou have inflicted on me, is but as a sacrifyce,
Or guerdon due for villainy which I committed have
With mother mine. Now Daughter sloute, leave of pretenses brave,
Allege no g^oses: but with speed let go thy Fathers hand:
Thou make me die a lingering death within this loathed land.
Thou think I am alive, but I am dead long while ago:
To this my hateful Corpse at length the rytes of Burial show.
Thou meanest well, (I know) but yet therein thou do offend:
Though color for thy piety I see thou do pretend.
But piety it cannot be, to dragge thus up and down
Thy Fathrs Corpse unburied through City, Field, and Town.
For be that does enforce a man against his will to dye:
And he that stays him that would feign dye, most willingly,
Are both alike in equal fault, and stand in egall plight.
To hinder one that would be dead is m^^^h bring h^n^ou^right.
Yet not so great as the other is. I would be more content
To have my death commanded me, then from me to be ^ent.
Desist from this thy purpose (Maid) my life and death both are
To dispose at my liberty, with choice to spill or spare,
I willingly res^gnd the Crown of Thebane soil: yet I
Do still retain upon my self the entyre Soueraygntye*
If I may make account of thee as of a trusty fear,
And true compagnion at assayes: deliver even here
Into thy Fathers hand a Sweard: but tell me, do thou reach
The Sword embrewd in fathers blood, wherewith my sons empeach
The course of Law, possessing it and kingdom all by force?
Where so it is doubt is there none, but clean without remorse
There be the F^^^dgates opned wide, to al licencious lust.
And thriftlesse trades: I al my claim therein do rake in dust,
And clean forsake. Let both my Sons by Legacy enjoy
The same, wherewith they surely shall contriue non small annoy.
For me pyle rather up a stacke of wood set all on fire,
That I therein may thrust my self: that is my chief desire:
And make an end at once of all this carrion Tarkasse vile.
Where is the surging wau^^s Sea? why stay I all this while?
Bring me to some stiepe breaknecke fall: bring me where Ismene flood
With swift and horned course does run^^, bring me whereas my blood.
With goaryng push of savage beasts may out be let at once.
To some Gulf bring me, where the fall and tide may crush my Bones.
If needs thou will my guide remain, as often thou do me tell)
Bring me that am disposed to dye, where Sphiox that Monster fell
With double shape apposed them that passed by the way,
Propounding Riddles intricate, and after did them slay.
There would I be, that place I seek: thy Father thither bring
Into that Monsters Cabin dire thy Monstrous Father fling.
That though that Monster be dispatched, the place may be supplyde
With one as badde or worse then be: there will I far and wide
In terms obscure report and tell my heavy lucklesse lot.
The mysteries whereof the bearers, v^derstandeth not.
Give ear to that which I shall speak, mark thou Assyrian borne,
Consider this thou Thebane, where Duke Cadmus men were torn
And slain in wood by Serpents rage: where Dirce seely trull
In humble sort at Altar lies: aduert my tale at full
Thou, that in Lacedaemon dwelles, and honorst Castors grace,
And Pollux eake, two brethren twynnes. Find out this doubtful case.
Or thou that dwelst in Elis town or by Parnassus hill,
Or thou that till'st Baeotia ground, there reaping gain at will.
Hark, listen well, and flatly say, if ever heretofore
That murdrous monster Sphinx of Thebes that men in pieces tore,
In all his riddles asked the like, or of so strange a sort?
Or whether so insolubly his terms he cold report?
The Son in Law to Graundfather, the Riual of his Sire:
The Brother of his little Babes: to Brethren, father dire:
The Graundmother at every birth to Husband (graceles Elfe)
Brought forth a Son or Daughter, which was Nephew to her self.
How say you Syrs, in Ryddle dark, who has so good insight,
That able is the sense hereof t'vnfold and tell aryght?
As for my self, although the Sphinx I whylome put to foil:
Yet mine own heavy destenie I scarcely can assoyle.
Why do thou (Daughter) labor loose in vsyng further speech?
To alter this my stony heart why do thou me beseech?
I tell thee plain. I fully mean this blood of mynt to spill.
That long with Death has struggling kept: and thereupon I will
Descend to dark infernal Lake: for this same darkness blind
Of both mine eyes is nothing such, as fact of mine should find.
It were my Bliss to be in Hell in deepest dungeon fast:
Now that which should long since have been, I will perform at last.
I cannot be debard from Death: will thou deny me glaue
Or Sword, or knife? will thou no tool for mischief let me have?
Will thou both watch and ward each way, where danger lies in wait?
Shall such a sinful Caytife wretch as I, be keep so strait?
Will thou not suffer me with Coard to break my hateful Neck?
Can thou keep me from poisonous herbs? have thou them al at beck?
What shall it thee prevail to take for me such earnest care?
Death each where is: and ways to death in thousand corners are.
Herein has God good order taken, that every felie Foe,
May take away an others life, but Death he cannot so.
I seek not any tool to have: this desprate mind of mine
Can use the service of my hand, my threede of life t'vntwine.
Now hand, thy master at a pinch assist to work his feate,
Help him with all thy power and strength, t'exployt his purpose great.
I point thee not in this my Corpse unto one place alone:
Alas, each part of me with guilt is plaunch and ouergrowne.
In which soever part thou will, thy Massacre begin,
And seek to bring me to my death which way thou may it win.
In pieces crush this body all, this heart that harbors sin
Pluck out, out all my entrails pull, proceed, and never linne
To gash and cut my wezand pype. My veins asender scratch,
And make the Blood come spowting out, or use that other match,
Which heretofore thou used haste: dig where mine eyes erst stood:
And let these wounds gush out apace much mattry filth and blood.
Hale o^t of me this loathed soul that is so hard and stout:
And thou dear father Laius stand up and look about:
Behold where ever that thou standst: I Vmpyre do the make,
And eyed Judge of all my plagues that justly here I take.
My Fact so lewd, so horrible, so loathsome to be told
I never thought with any price or torments manifold
Could have full expiation: ne thought I it enough
To die this death: or in one part to be beslasshed through.
By piecemeale I am well content to suffer torments all
And even by piecemeale for to die: for plagues to plague me call.
Exact the punishment that is due: I here most ready stand
To satis^e with any death that law and right has scand.
My former smartes, when as mine eyes I raked out with paws,
Were but as tastes of sacrifice, somewhat to help my cause.
Come therefore (Father) near to me, and thrust this hand of mine
More nearer into every wound. It sw^ru'de and did decline
For fear, when first it took th'assay mine eyes to ransacke out.
I bear it still in memory, my eyes then star'de about
And seemed to dissuade the hand from doing of the charge
Whereto it was enjoined tho, and had Commission large.
Thou shall well think that OEdipus dissembleth not a whit^
But what his word has warranted, his deed has firmly quit.
Thy stoutnes then, was not so great when eyes thou pulledst out
As was thy man a^oden, when thou threwst them from thee round about.
Now, by those Gyeholes thrust thy hand into the very brain:
That part where death attempted was, let death be sought again.

Undaunted Prince, must noble Sire, with humble mind. I sue
That I your Daughter may be bold to use some s^eech to you:
And that you would with patience digest my poor ^duise:
My suite is not to draw your mind to things, that erst in price
You highly (...), me to the view of glittring Palace old*
Ne bravery of your noble Realm, scarce able to ^ee told:
But that you would these yrefull fittes, by trace of time now quaild,
With patient mind sustain and bear: this virtue never faylde
I^ any Prince of such a spright as in your noble Grace
Appears bright: it s^^th not that such should once abase
Themselves as thralles to Sorrows check (...) the conquest yield
To a^uerse (...) like (...)
It is no praise, sir, though perhaps you so your reckening cast
To make of life so small accoumpt, and thus to be aghast
At every wagging of a leaf, and combersome myschaunce:
No, no, it is virtue in such case high courage to advance.
And when things are at worst, to show true magnani^^itie:
Not like a Meycocke, cowardly at each alarm to flee.
He that has tried all fortunes spite and worldly wealth despisde,
And constantly has borne all bruntes that are to be deuisde,
Me thinks no cause has, why he needs to end his b^eething ^ayes
O^ wish himself in grave: for why, starcke crauens use such ways.
But as for him, that's drencht in dole and wrapped in carking care,
Whose pensius plight can be no worse, nor taste of sowrer fare,
That man has cause well pleas^^ to be: since he in safety stands,
And pykes has past, and now is free from fear of further bands.
Put case the Gods would wra^e the web of further woe to thee,
What more can any of them do thy grieves to amplify?
Nay, thou thy self, (although thou would) can add thereto no more,
Unless thou think thy self, to have deserved death therefore.
And yet, thou art not worthy death: my reason is, because
Through ignorance thou did a fact contrary to the laws.
And therefore Father think your self most guiltless in the case,
And (maugre Gods) stand on your guarde, my counsel sound embrace:
For doubtless you an innocent are deem'de and thought to be,
And are in deed: what makes you thus in dumpes and doleful glee?
What cause so great should so enchaunt your conscience, and your wits,
To seek your own decay and spoil? what mean faint hearted fits?
That thus in have you would so feign abandon this your life
And go to hell, where torment dwelles and grisly ghostes be ryfe.
You would not see Sun, Moon, ne Star: no more you can: your eyes
Are blind: you feign would leave your Court, and Countries miseries.
Why so you may, and so you do. These all are put to sack,
That now alive, as well as dead you feel of these the lack.
You flee from Mother, Wife, and C^ylde, you see no man ^lyue:
What more can death dispatch away but life does now deprive?
your lords, your knights, your courtly train, your kingly state and crown
Your graund Affairs, your weighty charge is gone and brought abowne.
From whom, from what, do you thus flee.

From none but from my self
Who have a breast full fraught with guilte: who, wretched caitiffe Elte
Have all embrude my hands with blood. From these apace I flee
And from the heavens and Gods therein: and from that villainy
Which I most wicked wretch have wrought. Shall I tread on this ground?
Or am I worthy so to do, in whom such tricks abound?
Am I to have the benefit of any Element?
Of Air for breath, of water moist, or Earth for nourishment?
O Slave forlorn, O beastly wretch, O Incestmonger vile,
O Varlet most detestable, O Peysaunte full of guile.
Why do I with polluted Fyst, and bloody paws presume
To touch thy chaste and comely hand? I foame, I fret, I fume
In hearing any speak to me. Ought I hear any tell
Or once of Son or Father speak, sith I did Father quell?
Would God it were within my power my Senses all to stop,
Would God I could these Ears of mine, even by the stumps to crop.
If that might be, then (daughter) I should not have heard thy voice.
I, I thy Sire, that thee be got by most incestuous choice.
Beegetting of thee, makes my crimes more then they were before:
Remorse thereof both gnaw and grype my conscience more and more.
Ofttymes that which mine Eyes not see, with Ears that do I hear,
And of my Facts before time done the inward wound I bear.
Why is there stay made of my doom? Why am I spard so long?
Why is not this blind head of mine thrown damned ghosts among?
Why rest I on the Earth, and not among infernal Sprightes?
Why pester I the company of any mortal Wightes?
What myschiefe is there more behind? to aggrauate my care?
My Kingdom, Parents, Children, Wit and Virtue quayled are
By sturdy storms of froward Fate: nothing remaynde but tears,
And they be dryde, and Eyes be gone: my hardened heart forbeares
Such signs of grace: leave of therefore, and make no more add:
A mind so mated with despair no suytes will slowpe unto.
I practice some strange punishments agreeing to my deed:
But what proportion can be found of plagues unto my meede?
Whose Fortune ever was so bad? I was in sooner borne,
But seely Infant Iudgde I was in pieces to be torn.
My mother in whose womb I lay, forth had not me yet brought
And yet even then I feared was: and straight my death was sought.
Some Babes soon after they be borne, by stroke of death depart:
But I poor soul, before my birth adjudged was to dart
Of death: some yet in Mothers womb, ere any light they see
Do taste the dint of hasty Fate, while Innocents they be.
Apollo by his Oracle pronounced sentence dyre
Upon me being yet unborn, that I unto my Sire
Should breastly parricide commit: and thereupon was I
Condemned straight by Fathers doom. My Feet were by and by
Launcde through, and through with yro^ Pins: hangde was I by ye Heels
Upon a Tree: my swelling plants the printe thereof yet feels:
As pray to Beasts, cast out also, to cramme their greedy Jaws
In Mount Cythaeron, and to fill the griping Vulturs Mawes.
Such Sauce to taste full like was I, was others heretofore
Descended of the royal Sangue, with smart (perforce) have bore.
But see the chance: I thus condemn'de by Dan Apollos hest
And cast to beasts by Fathers doom, and every way distressed,
Could find no death: no death on me durst seyze his lordly Pawe,
But fled from me, as though I had not been within his Law.
I verified the Oracle, with wicked hand I kilde
Mine own dear Father, and unawares his guiltless blood I spilde.
Shall any satisfaction redeem so vile an Act?
May any kind of Piety purge such a shameful fact?
I rested not contented thus. For Father being slain,
I fell in linkes of lawless Love with Mother: Oh what pain
And grudge of mind sustaynde I there? in thinking on the same,
To tell our wicked wedlock Yoke, I loath, I blush, I shame.
I may not well this gear conceal, I Will tell it: out it shall:
Though to my shame it much redound, it may augment my thrall.
I will display strange villainies, and them in number many,
Most beastlike parts, most lewd attempts, to be abhorr'de of any.
So filthy, and so monstrous, that (sure I think) no Age
Will them believe to have been done: so cruel was my rage,
That even each cutthroate Partrcide thereat may be ashamde
To hear it nam'de: and with disdain straight ways will be enflamde.
My hands in Fathers blud emb^rude to Fathers Bed I brought.
And have with Mother mine, his Wife, incestuous practyse sought.
To myschiefe adding mischief more: I wis my fault to Sire,
Is slender in comparison: my graceless fond desire
Could not be staide, till solemnly the marriage Knot was knit
Twixt me and Mother mine, alas for want of grace and wit.
How plungde am I in myschiefe still? how is the measure full
Of horrors vile, which do my mind and heart asunder pull?
And least the heap of these my woes might seem to be too skant,
My Mother (she my Wife that is) young issue does not want.
Can any crime in all the World more heinous be surmisde?
If any may: by wicked Impes the same I have deuisde.
My Realm and Crown I have resignde, which I received as hyre
For murdring most vunaturally the king, my Lord, and Sire,
Which Crown now since, twixt both my sons has kindled mortal war.
And all the country by the ears remains at deadly jar.
I know full well what destenies to this same Crown belonges.
None without Blood the same shall wear, and most accursed wrongs.
This mind of mine (who Father am) presageth many ills:
And gloomy days of slaughter dyre: the plot that murder wills.
Already is co^^u's and cast: all truth of word and deed
Is quight exild, al promise broke of pactes before decreed.
Etheocles, the one of my sons who now in princely throne
Beats all the sway, means still to keep the Diadem alone.
Poor Polynices th'o other son, thus being dispessest,
And kept by force from Kingly rule his humble suit addressed
Unto the Gods this wrong to wreake, this breach of league and oath
T'auenge and plague: he Argos soil end Greekish Cttyes both
Persuades t'assist him in this wary, this quarrel to maintain:
That he in Thebes (as promise was) might have his turn to raygne.
The ruin that to wearied Thebes shall grievously befall
And bring the pompous state thereof adowne, shall not be small.
Fire, sword, glaue, wounds, and thwacki^g thu^ps, shall light unto their share,
And that ere long: and mischieues worse (it any worse there are)
And this shall hap, that all the world may know it is the rac^
And issue of a curied Sire that darraygnes such a case.
Though other causes none there were to move you (sic) to live,
Yet is this one sufficient, that you by awe may drive
Your sons my Brethren tarring thus to unity and peace:
For you their Father only may their furies cause to tease.
You and none else may turn away thoccassons of this war:
These bransicke youths from further rage you only may dibarre.
By this your means the country shall their quiet peace enjoy
And Brethren jointly reconcild shall work no more ennoy.
If you therefore this mortal life thus to your self ^eny:
You many thousands shall vndge, whose states on you rely.

What? can thou make me to believe, that any spark of greece
Or love to Sire, or honesty in them has any place,
Which thirst for one on others blood, which after kingdoms gape,
Whose whole delight is villainy, werre, wurther, guile and rape?
Such hateful ympes on mischief set, such wicked Termagosites,
As to be sons of such a Sire with shame may wake their vauntes.
At one bare word to tell thee all: thy brethren two are bent
Upon all mischief, wayghing not what loosenes they frequent.
When flingbrayne rage ensots their heads, they care not they a rush
Upon what Deuelish vile attemptes they give the desprat push.
And as they are conceau'd and borne in most abhorred sort,
So still deuoyde of Grace they think all villainy but sport.
Their Fathers shame and wretched state moves them no whit at all,
To Country they no reckning make what massacre befall.
Their minds are ravished with desire ambitiously to raygne.
I know their driftes, and what they hope at length by shifts to gain.
And therefore since the case so stands I leyser had to die
With poasting speed while in my house there is none worse then I.
Ahlas, dear Daughter what ado do thou about me make?
Why lie thou prostrate at my knees? why do thou travail take,
To conquer my resolved mind with this thy spiced phraze
Of fair entreatie? these thy words my flynty heart amaze.
Dame Fortune has none other bayte to bring me to her lure
Then this alone: til now I still vnbanquisht did endure.
No Creatures words but thine alone could pearce this heart of mine,
Ne from a purpose resolute my settled mind butwyne.
Thou conquer can thaffections fond that in my breast do boil,
Thou teach grace to fathers house, and zeal to native soil.
Each thing to me delightful is which iumpeth with thy will:
Command me (Daughter) I thy hestes am ready to fufill.
Old Oedipus if thou enjoin, will pass the Aegaean Sea:
And flashing flakes of Aetna Mount, with mouth he dare assay.
He boldly dare object himself to raumping Dragons claw
Which raged, and sweld and venime spit apace, when as he saw
Dan Hercules away to steal his golden Aples all
In Gardens of Hesperides. At thy command, he shall
His Entrails offer unto iobbe of greedy Vulturs Byll:
At thy command, content he is in life to linger still.

Renowned Prince, of royal Race
and Noble lygne yspronge:
The Thebans dreading much the drife
of this your childrens thronge,
And warlicke garboyle now in hand,
most humbly pray your Grace
For Countries safety, down to set some order in the case.
They be not threats and menacies that thus their minds affright:
The mischief is more near then so: the Enmy is in sight.
For Polynices he that is your younger son of twain,
Does claim the crown, and in his turn in Thebes requires to reign
According unto couenaunts made: which quarrel to decite
He purposes the dene of sword, and mar^tall force to abide.
With him he brings a mighty Troop from every part of Greece,
Sir, seven Du^^ce, hesieging Thebes are minded it to fleese.
Help noble King, else are we like to perish man and child,
These bloody broils of civil war from us protect and shyelde.
Am I one like to stop the rage of any wicked act?
Am I one like to cause these Youths to leave their bloody fact?
Am I a master like to teach what laws of love do mean?
Should I not then from former quise digress in nature eleane?
They tread their Fathers steps aright, they play my lawless prankes:
Like Sire, like Sons, like Tree, like fruit: I con the^ hearty thanks:
By this I know them for my Sons, and praise their towardness:
I would they should by peevish parts, whose Sons they be, express.
Show forth you noble Gallante ympes, what metled minds you bear,
Show forth by deeds your valor great, let lofty sprights appear.
Surmount and dim my praises all, Eclypse my glory quight:
Attempt some enterprise in which your Sire may have delight
To have till now remaynd in life: hereof I have no doubt:
For well I know your practice is strange feats to bring about.
Your birth and ligne from whence you spronge, assures me of no less
Such noble Bloudes must needs atchiue some doughty worthiness.
Your Weapons and Artillery for war bring out with speed,
Consume with flame your native Soil, and desolation breed
In every house wirhin the Land: a hurly burly make
Confusedly of every thing. Make all the Realm to quake,
And in exile their days let end make level with the ground
Each fenced Fort and walled Town: The Gods and all confound,
And throw their Temples on their heads: Their Images deface,
And melt them all: turn vps^ down each house in every place.
Burn, spoil, make havoc, leave no jot of City free from fire,
And let the flame begin his rage within my Chamber dyre.

Sir, banish these impatient panges, let plagues of Common wealth
Entreat your Grace, since upon you stayth all their hope and health.
Procure your sons to reconcile themselves, as brothers ought,
Establishe peace between them both, let means of love be sought.

Oh daughter, see and well behold how I to peace am bent?
And how to end these garboyles all I seem full well content?
My mind (I tell thee) swelles with ire: within my entralles boyles
Abundaunt stoare of Choler fell: such restless rage turmoyles
My inward Soul, that I must yet some greater matter brew:
Which may the Realm enwrap in bale, and cause them all to rue.
That which my rash and heady sons have hitherto begone
Is nothing in respect of that which must by me be don.
This civil war is nothing like to that which I devise:
These trifling broils for such a Sea of harms cannot suffice.
Let brother cut the brothers throat with murthrous knife in hand:
Yet is not this enough to purge the mischieues of this lend.
Some heinous Fact, unheard of yet, some detestable deed
Must practisde he: as is to me. and mine by Fates decreed.
Such custom haunts our cursed race: such guise our house has caught:
My vise incestuous Bed requires, such pageaunts to be wraught.
To me your Father Weapons reach, my self here ^et me shrowde
In covert of these queachy wooddes: and let me be allowde
To lurk behind this Craggy Rock, or else my self to hyde
On backside of some thickset hedge: where lying vnespide,
I hearken may what marketfolkes in passing to and froe
Do talk: and what the country Clownes speak, as by way they go.
There (sith with eyes, I cannot see) with ear ^ yet may I bear
How cruelly my Sons by war do one the other tear.

A fortunate and happy Dame Agaue may be thought,
Who (though with bloody hands) her son to fatell death she brought,
And from the shoulders chopped his head, and bore the same about
In b^oudy hand, at Bacchus feast withau th'inspired rout
Of sacrificers, quartering poor Pentheus mangled lymmes:
Though this her cruel fact, somewhat her commendation dymmes:
Yet even in these her phrantick fits she stayde her self in time
From further harm, not adding more to aggrauate her crime.
My guilt were light, if I had not some others guilty made:
And yet is this but matter light: I took a biler trade.
For, Mother I am unto those that in all vice excel,
And who in most abhorred sins condignely bear the bell.
To all my woes and myseries there wanted only this,
That I should love my Countries foe, who Polynices is.
Three snowy Wynters passed are, and Summers three be gone,
Since be an exilde wretch abroad has lead his life in moan:
And sought his bread among the fremmd: till now compell'de perforce.
He craves relief of Greekish Kings, on him to have remorse.
He married has the Daughter of Adrastus, who at beck
Rules Argiue people, swaying them with awe of Princely check:
And he to advance his son in law to his most lawful right
Has with him brought from seven Realms a warlike Crew to fight.
What doom I should in this case give, which side I wish to win,
I cannot tell: my mind amazde, yet doubtful rests therein.
The One of my Sons (as right it is) requyres the Crown as due:
I know it so accorded was: his cause is good and true.
But in such sort, by force of Arms to rely maunde the same,
Is ill and most unnatural, herein he is to blame.
What shall I do, what may I say? I mother am to both:
And thus my Sons at deadly fewde to see I am full loath.
Without the breach of mother zeal I can no way devise:
For what good had I wish to the one, thence the others harm does rise.
But though I love them both alyke, yet sure my heart enclynes
To him that has the better cause: though wronged thus, he pynes:
As one by frowning fortune thrilde from pillar unto post:
His Credit, Country, friends, and wealth, and treasure being lost.
The weaker side I will support, and further al I can,
Most mercy always should vt shewde unto the oppressed man.

While (Madame) you wayme^ting here your heavy plaints declare
And waste the time, my Lords your Sons in taunged battle are:
Each Captains bright in Armor stands, the Trumpet sounds amain,
And Standard is aduanc'de, amid the thronge of either train.
In marshall ray full pressed to fight stand seven worthy Kings:
And each of them a warlicke troop of valiant Soldiers bringes.
With courage not behynd the best, the Thebanes march apace:
And like right ympes of Cadmus brood, do slash at Enmies face.
The Soldiers force and willingness on either side to fight,
Appears: in that they nothing less pretend them shameful flight.
See how their trampling to and froe, the dust to Skies does rear,
And what a Cloud of Smoke in Camp the horses make t'appeare.
And if my fear dismay me not: It all be true I see:
Me thinks I view their glittering glaues begoard with blood to be.
Me thinks I see the Voward thrill and shake their Pikes in hand:
Me thinks I see the Gydons gay, and Streamers where they stand:
Wherein is wrought by curtous skill, in Letters all of Gold
The Scotchion, Poeste, Name and Arms of every captain bold.
Make have, be gone, dispatch. (Madame) Cause Brethren to agree:
Betwyxt them stay this quarrel, least a slaughter great ye see.
So shall you to your Children love, to each side peace restoare:
The mothers mediation may heal up all the Soar.

POast, poast, be gone, and trudge for life:
Queen mother make no stay:
That twixt my Brothers, perfect league
and truce continue may.
You that be Mother to them both,
use your auctority:
Out of their hands their weapons wrest,
and make them wars defye.
Your bared Breasts which once they sucked,
hold out amid their Swords:
Bear of the brunt of all their blows, or end this war with words.
Thy talk I like, I will be gone: I Will go with might and main:
This head of mine I ieoperd will, between them to be slain.
In thickest thronge of all the Troops I purposd am to stand,
And try what grace, or curtesy rimaynes in either Bond.
If Brothers bear malicious minds each other to subdue,
Let them first onset give on we, and me to death pursue.
If either of them be endude with any spark of grace,
Or Natures laws or Filial awe does any whit embrace,
Let him at mothers suite lay down his Pikes and glaues of war,
And weapons of hastility let him abandon far.
And he that cancard stomach bears his Brother there to quell,
Forgetting Nature, let him first with me his Mother mell.
These headdy youths from further rage I seely Trot will stay:
I wittingly will not behold such mischief carry sway.
Or if I live to see the same, it shall not be alone.

The Standards are displayed in field, the Enemies are prone
To fall to fight: the clashing noise of weapons hear you may.
Much murder, death, and dreadful dule, cannot be far away.
Their stony hearts go mollify, with sugared terms persuade
Their wilful minds O Oueene, before they f^riously invade
The one the other: yonder see how they in armor bright
Bestirre themselves from place to place: (O dire and dismal sight.)
My trickling tears, my blubbring Eyes, may put you out of doubt
That all is true which I have said: look, look, how all the route
O^ either part does slowly march as loath (belike) to try
By dent of Swerd so strange a case: But both my brothers hie
Apace, to grapple force to force, and join with handy blows:
This day will breeede the bitter smart of ever during woes.

What whirlewynd swift might I procure to bear me through the air?
What monstrous flying Sph^^^ will help, that I were quickly there?
Of all the Birds Stimphalides (with wings so huge and large
That Phoe bur rays they shadowed quight) will any take the charge
To carry me to yonder place? what ravenous Harpye Burd
With ugly talantes all with flith, and dirty dung befurde,
(Which hungrestarud King Phineus, that had put out the Eyes
Of children his) will at this pinch a mean for me deuyse,
That I aloft may hoysed be, and with all speed be set,
Where yonder cruel armies two in open field be met?

She runs apace, like one of wit and senses all distract:
No Arrow swifter out of Bow: no Ship with Sail full thwackt
With wynd at will more way can make with motion such sh^e flies
As glyding Star whose leames do draw a Furrow long in Skies.
As much aghast she trottes apace: and now in Camp she stands:
Her presence and arrival there has parted both the Bands.
At mothers great entreaty made, the bloody broyle is hushed:
And where before with goring Glaue the one at the other pusht,
With full intent to kill and slay, appeased is now their ire
And they well pleased to bend to peace, as she does them require.
The Sword again in sheath is put, that lately out was drawn
To pash out Brains of Brothers Scull: she ceasseth not to fawn
Upon them both, their strife to stint: her gray and hoary hairs,
Her Snow white locks with tears besprent in ruthful sort she ^eates.
She Motherlike seeks how to link their hearts in one assent,
With brynish tears she wettes the cheeks of him that's malcontent.
That Child that staggryng long does stand, with mother to dispute,
May seem unwilling mind to bear to yield to Mothers suit.

Against me only turn the force
of wreckful Sword and Fire:
Let all the Youths with one accord
repay to me that hyre,
That earnde I have by due deserte:
let both the gallant Band
Of them that come from Argos soil,
and them of Thebane Land
Come run upon me all at once: let neither friend ne foe
Refrain a whit his bloody blade at this my womb to throw.
This womb, this womb, wherein I bare these wilful Brethren here
Beget by him that was my son, and eke my wedded fere.
Dismembre this my Body vile: cast all my lymmes abroad:
I am their mother: child wife throws for them I once abode.
You two, my sons, need I to speak, to will you leave your ire?
Is It not your parts, in such a case t'accomplish my desire?
Will you not plight the faithful league of true and perfect love?
Will you not royntly quarrels all at Mothers suit remove?
That this shall be as I request, come, give me both, your hands
While yet they vndystayned be, and clean from murder stands.
What crime you heretofore have done, against your will it was.
And all that spot which staynes your same, by Fortune came to pass.
This haynons Act, this frantic coil you can no wise excuse*
But wittingly and willingly sound counsel ye refuse.
It rests free within your choice: of these take which ye list:
If peace delight for mothers sake this brabling broyle untwist.
If such a lewd outrage as this more pleasant seem to be:
Behold, the same and greater too ye may commit on me.
Who being mother, here oppose my self between you twain:
Ere you do one an other kill, I needs must first be slain.
Take either therefore quight away this strange ungodly jar.
Or if you will not: me dispatch, who stay your wished war?
Ahlas in this my pensive plight to whom should I dyrect
My piteous plaint, and earnest suyte? to whom might I detect
Mine inward grief and throubed heart? which of them were I best
T'encounter first and fast embrace, to breed my surest rest?
I love them both even equally, affection like I bear
To either party: mother fond and parciall else I wear.
The one of them these three years space bath liu'de in banishment.
But it all couenaunts may be kept, as at the first was meant,
The other now as turn does fall, must trudge an otherwhile,
And learn to know what it is to live so long in like exile.
Wae worth this hapiesse heavy hap: shall I not live the day,
To see my sons together once in one self place to stay?
Shall never I behold them both to better concord bent?
Is all affection natural within them both so spent?
Then, Polynices, come thou first, embrace thy Mother dear?
Thou that have trauaild many amyle, and languisht many a year.
That many a storm abidden haste, and many a brunt sustainde,
And wearied long with sharp exile, from Mothers sight been wai^de:
Come unto me, and nearer stand, put up thy Sword again
Into thy shrath: thy shyuering Spear (that out of hand so feign
Would be dischargd at Brothers throat) within this ground stick fast.
This Shield of thine lay also down. It makes me sore aghast.
It is so big, it will not let this loving breast of mine.
To join and debonairely meet with that sweet heart of thine:
Take of thy he^met from thine head, the Thonge thereof vuty.
That I thy Vifuge may behold, and all thy face descry.
Why do thou backward turn thy head? and glauncest still thine Eye,
And take keep of brothers hand for fear of villainy?
Thy body all with these mine Arms I will defend and hyde?
If he attempt thy (...) to spill, his murthrdus blade shall glyde
First through these tender sides of mine: why standst thou so amazd?
Do thou distrust thy Mothers love? think thou her kindness razd?
Poly. I fear in deed, distrusting sore, Sire, Damme and all my kin:
And think that truthles treachery in hearts of all has bin.
Dame Natures jews are flung at heel, and naught esteemed be:
No faith in kindred planted is, ne true syncerity.
Since I by proof have seen and felt what hurly burly grows
Betwixt us Brethren: and from thence what Sea of mischief flows:
I may suspect no faster faith in Mother to remain:
Its not unlike, but she likewise will prankes as bad mayntaine.
Thy sword in hand fast clasped keep: On head thy Basnet tie:
On Left Atme hold thy Targat sure, and on thy Guard rely.
At all points armd prepared stand: all future doubts prevent:
Be sure to see thy Brother first t'vnarme himself content.
And now to thee Etheocles some speech I am to use:
Thou first wast cause of all this war, do not therefore refuse
Down first to lay thy brawling Blade, and yield to Reasons lore:
If name of peace so hateful be, if that thou any more
Entendst this war to prosecute, in this so savage sort,
Let mother yet this curtesy from thee (her son) extort
That some small time of trusty truce thou will with willing mind
Consent unto: til I my Son thy Brother most unkind
May after flight go kiss end oel, now first or last of all.
While I for peace entreaty make, you men unarmed I call
To listen unto that I say: thy Brother fears thee:
And thou fearst him: and I fear both. But this my fear you see
Is nothing for my self at all, but for th'auayle of both.
Why seem thou thy naked sword to put in sheath so loath?
Be glad to take the benefyte of any little stay:
In matters lewd it is wisdom good to stand upon delay.
You enter into such a war, wherein he speedeth best
That vanquished is: both of you fear to be by fraud distressed
Through practisd means and subtle plois of Brothers spiteful drift,
Or ouerteacht by policy of some devised shift.
But if deceive or be deceyu'd by him that is our Friend
We needs must be: in such a case we shall the less offend
In suffering wrong then doing harm: But fear thou not a whit,
You both from ambusht treacheryes your Mother will acquit.
What say you Sons: shall this request of mine with you preuayl^.
Or shall I curse my luckelesse faie, and on my Fortune rail*
And judge your Sire an happy man, in that he lives blind
And cannot see the thing which I behold with pensive mind?
In coming unto you, did I bring with me this intent,
To end these broils? or did I come to see some dyre event?
Etheocles, some what appeasde, has pitched his Spear in ground,
And not a weapon blood to sheed, in hand of his is found.
Now Polynices, unto thee my former suite I bring,
Regard thy Mothers mournful plight, and yield unto the thing
That she with tears entreates to have. O Son, at length I see,
I hold with hands, I kiss with mouth, I touch with joyful glee
This Face of thine, the sight whereof I wanted have so long:
And have more often wished for, then can be told with tongue.
Thou have from native Soil been ch^sde to Coaste of foreign king,
And crossed been with trouncing force of frowning Fortunes sting.
Thou many a Storm, and many a brunt in many a foming Sea,
In Wandering sort and banished guise, did oftentimes assay.
Thy Mother at thy Spousal^ feast was absent far away,
And could not do such nuptial Rytes as tell for such a day.
Into thy wedding Chamber she brought thee, ne yet thy Bryde,
Ne yet in solemn sort the house with herbs and odours plide:
Ne yet did with a Ryband white the wedding Torches tie,
As use and custom wills to be at such solemynitie.
Adrastus, Father to thy Wife, and father in law to thee,
With Daughter his, has not defraide much store of gold or Fee.
No Dower has he bestowde on her, her wealth was very small,
Of Cities, Lands, and Revenues he gave her none at all.
War, War: is it thou only had, by taking her to Wife:
In lieu of other gyfts, he helps to kindle all this Strife.
Thou Son in law art unto him, that is our Countries Foe:
Thy Native soil thou leauest, and to foreign Courts do go.
Thou feedest now at Strangers boarde, and make more accoumpt
Of new acquaintance got abroad; as though it did surmount
The friendship of thy country here: thou art a banished wight,
And live in exile, for no fault, but through thy brothers spite.
In thee appears resemblaunce plain of all thy Fathers Fate,
In which there ^acketh not so much as thoyse of wedded Mate.
Whom with as ill mischaunce and hap as ever Fathers was,
Thou haste in lucklesse hour and time of marriage brought to pass.
O Son, thy mothers only hope, for whom such care I take:
Whose sight, now after many years, does me most ^oyfull make.
For whom I have full many a time to Gods devoutly praide:
Whereas in deed, thy new return to me, may well be said
To take away as great a joy, and bring as great a grief,
As it to these mine aged years is comfort and relief.
I prostrate at the Oracle, besought Apollos Grace
To tell me, when I should not need to further fear thy case.
Who flowting this my fond demand, anon did flatly tell,
And spoke these words, which yet (I trow) I do remember well.
Thou fearst thy son, least harm he take, as is a mothers guise:
But thou I say more cause shall have, to fear him otherwise.
For if this war vnraisde had been I should thy presence lack:
And if thou were not, Thebane Land might free remain from Sack.
The sight of the does cost us all a hard and nipping price,
Yet does it like thy mother well: so that her sound advice
In this one thing thou follow will. Dispatch these Armies hence:
Even presently, while yet of blood there has not been expense.
So foul a Fact to be so near, is heinous out of doubt:
I shake, I quake to think thereon, in every Joint throughout.
My hair stands upright even for fear, two brethren thus to see
Aloof, and ready one to chop at the other, cruelly.
Howneere was I (poor Mother theirs, a bloudier act to have seen.)
Then father blind yet ever saw, or ever yet would ween?
And though my fear be ouerpast and the act vnbrought to pass:
My self yet do I wretched think, that done so near it was.
By all the throws for ten months space, in womb when I thee bare,
And for thy Sisters sake both twain, which shine in veri^e rare:
And by those Eyehoales of thy Sire* for which with wrekefull Pawe
He pulld his Eyes, because (unawares) he stained Natures law,
I thee beseech from Thebane Walls sent back these armed Bands,
Which threatening all our throats to cut, against our Country stands:
Yea though you presently depart: yet are you much to blame,
And there is due unto you both, a lot of during shame:
Because this Country round about has pestred been with power,
And troops of Soldiers stout and brave, it ready to deuowre.
With pensive hearts a mourning minds, these Eyes of ours have seen
Your prau^cing couriers with their Feet, spoil Theban Meadows green.
We often have seen your houlty Peers in warlike Chariot ride:
And often our houses to have brunt with wildfier have been spide.
And last of all* An act we saw (which even to Thebes is straung.)
Two Brethren warring mortally, all Natures bonds to chaung.
Each one in The Army saw this sight, the people witness be.
Your Systers two, and Mother I this all did plainly see.
Your Father, he may thank himself: that he did not behold
This lamentable spectacle and hauockes manifold.
Call now to thy remembrance here, thy Father OEdipus,
Whose doom, did Facts (by error done) even plague, and punish thus.
With Fire, and sword subvert not clean (good Son) thy country dear,
And Thebes whereof thou would be king) surcease with force to tear.
What Bedlem pang enchaunts thy mind? what might thy meaning be?
Thou claymst a Realm, which to subvert thou geeuest license free.
In seeking thus a countries rule: a country thou destroyest:
Which thou thine own would make, thou marr'st, and (as twere none) annoyesto.
Hereby thou hindrest much thy self, in yt thou make spoil,
And burnest up does Corn and Grass, and keep'st a shameful coil,
In cha^ing men out of their homes: (O desprate witless part)
What man alive, to waste his own, can thus find in his heart?
These things that thou co^maundest thus by rage of sword and flame
To be consum'de: an other man thou think does owe the same.
If thus for princely Chair you twain by The Ears your title try:
The state of Realm and Commonwealth will totter soon awry.
Seek it, while ye^ your Country stands unblemished by decay:
It so t'enioy, and so to reign, I coumpt the better way.
Ah, can thou f^^de in heart to burn, and spoil these houses brave?
The like whereof in all the world besides, thou can not have:
Can thou destroy and ruinate the noble Thebane wall,
To whose first building stones apace at Dan Amphions call
Came dancing of their own accord, through tunes of warbling harp:
And ^oucht themselves in order right upon the Turrets sharp,
Without all help of worckmans hand, or Pully up to draw
Such pieces as most weighty were? Will thou by lawless law
Throw down these worthy Monuments? will thou from hence convey
And carry with thee all these spoils? will thou such pageaunts play?
Thy Fathers old acquainted mates, will thou by force surpryze
And lead as captive where thou go in proud triumphing wise?
Shall these thy cutthroate Soldiers dragge and ^^le (...) mothers old?
Shall they, grau^d Matrons ried in chains, from (...) unfold?
Shall Thebane Maids, and Damselles chaste of fresh and lusty Age,
Be mingled with the raskal rout, and hamperd be in Cage?
Shall they as presents, forced be in dabbling dirt to toil
Unto the mynsing Mistresses, and Trulles of Argoa Soil?
Shall I thy seely Mother trudge with Pinyond hands behind?
Shall I this triumph of my Chiled to furnish be assignde?
Can thou with grudgelesse mind, behold thy Countreyfolkes arow,
Slain, mangled, spoylde, in pieces hewn, thus to their deaths to got?
Can thou bring in a deadly Foe, thy Country to subdue?
Shall streates of Thebes run all with blood? shall all ye Country rue
Thy coming home with flame and fire? have thou an heart so hard?
A breast so tipped with flint? a mind to rage so well preparde?
If thus thou fare, and swell with ire whiles yet thou art no King:
What will thou be in Princely throne, if thou should win the Ring?
Surceasse therefore and qualify this outrage of thy mind:
In thee let all thy Country, grace and Princely myldnes find.

Would you me have, my self so much to loyal duties yield,
As that I should a Pylgrims life like wandering Beast in field
Skud up and down from place to place, without both house and home,
And fleeing native soil, be forced in foreign Lands to roame?
What other plagues, could you award in justice unto me,
If I my faith or sacred Oath had broken caytifly?
Shall I bear all the punishment for that vile villains guile?
And shall he false deceiptfull wretch at my misfortunes smyle?
Shall he in wealth still flaunt it out, and keep this jolly coil?
Shall he for sins rewarded be? and I still put to foil?
Well, well, go to, be as be may: you bid me wander hence:
I am content: your hard decree t'obay is my pretense.
But tell me whyther shall I go? Assign me to some place:
Bylike, you would that brother mine should still with shameless face
Possess my stately Palaces, and revel in his ruff,
And I thereat to hold my peace, and not a whit to snuff,
But like a Country Mome to dwell in some poor thatched Cot:
Allow me poor Exyle such one: I rest content, God wot.
You know, such Noddyes as I am, are wont to make exchaung
Of Kingdoms, for poor thatched Cots, be like this is not straung.
Yea more: I, matched now to a Wife of noble ligne and race
Shall like a seely Dottipoll live there in servile case,
At beck and check of queenely Wife, and like a kitchen drudge
Shall at Adrastus lordly heels, (my Wives own Father) trudge.
From Princely Port to tumble down into poor servile state,
Is greatest grief that may betyde by doom of frouncing fate.

If that thou gape so greedely a Kingly Crown to wear:
And that thou can not rest content, till thou a Scepter bear:
Behold each quarter of the world affoordeth Kingdoms store.
No doubt thou may win some of them, if that thou seek therefore.
On one side here, lies Tmolus mount, a soil bethwact with Vines:
There runs Pactol^s noble stream with golden Send and mines.
On that side crookt Maeander glydes through midst of Phrygia fields:
On this side Hebrus swift of course much fruict to Thracia yeldes.
Nere thereunto lies Gargarus, renoumd each where for Corn,
And Trojan Xanthus swelling flood, that prick and price has borne.
There Sestos and Abidus stand in mouth of Ionian Sea,
Which now is called Hellespont: and here an other way
Are countries, which more Eastward lie. There Lycia full of Creekes
And Havens strong is situate: these kingdoms, he that seeks,
Is like to win: these would I have thee conquer with thy Sword:
These, these to win let King Adrast to thee his aid affoorde.
In some of these, let him thee make a King: in Thebes as yet,
Suppose thy father Oedipus in seat of King to sit.
Thy banishment much better is to thee, then this return,
Since all thy drift is cruelly to wast, to spoil, and burn.
Thy banishment reputed is to grow through others crime:
This thy return, in such a sort to Kingly state to clyme,
Is ill and faulty every way: with this thy warlicke crew
Thou shall do better Realms to seek, where bloody guilt ne grue.
Yea, this thy Brother, whom thou do pursue with deadly hate
Whose life, whose health, whose house thou do with curses dire rahate
Will aid thee with all p^wre he can: himself will also go
And serve in field for thine avail, gaynst him that is thy foe.
Advance thy power, march boldly forth to take this war in hand.
Wherein thy parents wish thee good, and will thy helpers stand.
A Kingdom got mischieuously, and snatched with grudge of mind,
More grievous is then exiles al, of what soever kind.
Of war, the doubtful hazardes all set down before thy sight,
And thoroughly weigh thuncertayne chance, that longes to martial ^ight.
Though all the power of Greece thou bring thy quarrel to maintain,
And though great armed multitudes of Soldiers thou re^ayne:
Yet chance of war still doubtful hanges, and hard it is to know,
Who carry shall the victory, thou or thy vowed foe.
Mars to no party tied in: what he decrees, shall be,
As chance allots, so falls it out: this dome abides free.
Sword, hope and fear makes equal those, betw ene whom otherwise
Great odds there is: blind Fortunes lot the case between them tryes.
Thy rash attempt with crime begone, gropes after doubtful gain:
And fond deuyses enterprisd often reap deserved pain.
Admit that all the God s in heaven did further thy request,
And to promote thy hot desire both willing were, and pressed:
Yet al thy friends are fled away, and al recoyled back,
And Soldiers here and there in Fields are come to deadly wrack.
Although thou joy hereat receive, although the spoils thou take
Of vanquished Brother, yet the palm of victory must slake,
And not to thee be given whole. What kind of war (alas)
Is this, think thou? is it not more strange then ever any was?
Wherein if he that victor is, joy therein any whyt,
Most execrable wickedness he (doubtless) does commit.
This Brother thine, who^ now so feign thou would bereave of breath,
I wis, if he were once dispatched, thou would bewale his death.
And therefore make no more ado, but cease from wicked bral,
Rid country out of trembling fear, and parents dole forestal.

What, shall my Brother for this vile and shameful breach of pacie
Go skotfree thus? shall he receive no guerdon for his fact?

Fear not my Son, he shall be paid, and paid again, I trow:
He shall be King and raygne in Thebes, his pain shall even be so.
A pain in grain I warrant him. And if thou doubtful be,
Let Graundsyre Laius and thy Sire examples be to thee.
Sir Cadmus will the same display, and Cadmus offspring all
Can witness be that none in Thebes yet raygnd without a fall.
None yet the Theban Scepter swayd, that has not felt the whippe.
And promise breach made most of them from regal Crown to skippe.
Now if thou will, thou may insert within this bedroll here
Thy Brother.

Mary, that I will, in shame has he no peer.
And unto me it seems a world of bliss to be a king
And dye with Kings.

Thy case does thee in rank of exiles bring.
Raygne King, but yet a loathed wight unto thy Subjects all.

For that I neither recke ne care what shall to me befall.
That Prince that fears disdaynful hate, unwilling seems to raynge.
The God that swayes the Golden Globe, together has these twain
Conioynd and coupled Hate and Rule: and him do I suppose
To be a noble King indeed, that can supplant his foes,
And Subjects cancred hate suppress. A King is often stayed
From doing many things he would, when Subjects love is wayed.
But unto them that do repyne to se him sit aloft,
He may more rigor boldly show, and pare their p^tes more often.
He that will love of Subjects win, with Elemency must raygne:
A King that is hated, cannot long in Kingly seat remain.
For Kingdoms Kings can best describe, what precepts needful are.
Mell thou in cases of Exile: for Kingdoms take no care.

To be a King, I would engage to force of flaming Fire,
Both Country, house, land, Wife, and Child, to compass my desire.
No Fee, to purchase Princely seat, ne labor coumpt I lost:
A Kingly Crown is never dear, what ever price it cost.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

