DEpartinge from the darkened dens
which Dicis low does keep,
Lo here I am sent out again,
from Tartar Dungeon deep,
Thyestes I, that wheather coast
to shun do stand in doubt,
Th'internall fie^des I fly, the foalke
of earth I chase about.
My conscience lo abhors, that I should heather passage make,
Appauled sore with fear* and dread my trembling sinews shake:
My fathers house, or rather yet my brothers I espy,
This is the old and antique porche of Pelops progeny.
Here first the Greeks on princes heads do place the royal crown,
And here in throne aloft they lie, that ietteth up and down,
With stately Scepter in their hand, eake here their courts do ly,
This is their place of banqueting, return therefore will I.
Nay: better were it not to haunt the loathsome Limbo lakes,
Where as the Stygion porter does advance with lusty crakes
His tryple gorge be hong with Mane shag hatry, rusty black:
Where ^xions Carcass linked fast, the whirling wheel does rack,
And rowleth still upon him self: where as full often in vain
Much toil is lost, (the tottring stone down tumbling back again)
Where growing guts the greedy gripe do gnaw with ravening bits.
Where parched up with burning thirst amid the waves he st^s,
And gapes to catch the flecting flood with hungry chaps beguilde,
That pays his parnefull punishment, whose feast the Gods defilde:
Yet that old man so stepped in years at length by trace of time,
How great a part belonges to me and portion of his crime?
Account we all the grisly ghostes, whom guilty found of ill,
The Gnosian Judge in Plutoes pyts does rosse in torments still:
Thyestes I in driery deeds will far surmount the rest,
Yet to my Brother yield I, (though I gorgde my bloody breast)
And stuffed have my pampred paunche even with my children three,
That crammed lie within my Rybs and have their Toumbe in me,
The bowels of my swallowed Babes, deuowred up I have,
Nor fickle Fortune me alone the Father does deprave,
But enterprysing greater guilte then that is put in bre,
To file my Daughters bawdy Bed, my lust she does alure.
To speak these words I do not spare, I wrought the heinous deed,
That therefore I through all my stock, might parent still proceed.
My Daughter driven by force of Fates and destenyes deuyne,
Does breed young bones, and lades her womb with sinful seed of mine.
Lo, nature changed vpside down, and out of order tornde
This myngle mangle has she made, (O fact to be forlornde)
A Father and a Grandsyre lo, confusedly I am,
My daughters husband both become, and Father to the same.
Those babes yt should my Nephews be, when nature rightly runs*
She being tumbled does confound, and mingle with my sons.
The crystal clearenesse of the day, and Phoebus beams so bright,
Are myxed with the foggy clouds, and darkness dim of night.
When wickedness had wearied us, to late truce taken was,
Even when our detestable deeds were done and brought to pass.
But valiant Agamemnon he graund captain of the Host,
Who bare the sway among the Kings, and ruled all the roste,
Whose flaunting Flag, and Banner brave, displayde in royal sort,
A thousand sail of sowsing ships did guard to Phrygian part,
And with their swelling shatling sails the surging seas did hide*
That beats on the banks of Troy, and flows by her side:
When Phoebus Carte the Zodiac ten times had aver run,
And waste the battred Walls do lie of Troy destroyde and woonne,
Returnde he is to yield his throat unto his traytresse Wife.
That shall with force of bloody blade bereue him of his life.
The glytering Swerd, the hewing Axe, and wounding weapons more,
With blood for blood new set abroche shall make the floor to flow.
With sturdy stroke, and boystrous blow, of pithy Pollaxe given
His beaten brains are pash^ abroad, his cracked Skull is reuen.
Now myschiefe marches on a pace, now falshoode does appear,
Now Butchers slaughter does approach, and muriher draws near.
In honor of thy natyue day Aegisthus they prepare
The sollemne feast with ^uncketing* and daynty tothsome fare.
Fie, what does shame abashe thee so, and cause thy courage quayle?
Why doubts thy righthand what to do? to smite why does it fail?
What he forecasting might suspect, why should thou take advise?
Why freteest thou, demanding if thou may it enterprise?
Nay: if a mother it beseem, thou rather may surmyse.
What now? how happens it that thus the sm^^ing summers night,
When Phoebus from Th'antipodes should render son the light,
On sudden chaung their turns with nights that last and linger long,
When wynters Boreas bitter blastes, does puff the trees among?
Or what does cause the glyding stars to stay still in the sky?
We wayght for Phoebus: to the World bring day now by and by.
O Fortune, that do fail the great estate of kings,
On slippery sliding seat thou placest lofty things
And setst on tottring sort, where perils do abound
Yet never ki^gdome calm, nor quiet could be found:
No day to Scepters sure does shine, that they might say,
To morrow shall we rule, as we have done to day.
One clod of crooked care another brings in,
One hurly burly done, another does begin:
Not so the raging Sea does boil upon the Sand,
Where as the southern wind that blows in Afryck Land,
One Wave upon another does heap with sturdy blast:
Not so does Euxine Sea, his swelling waves up cast:
Nor so his belching stream from shallow bottom roll,
That borders hard upon the ysyfrosen poall:
Where as Boots bright does twyne his Wayne about,
And of the marble seas does nothing stand in doubt.
O how does Fortune toss and tomble in her wheel
The staggring states of Kings, that readdy be to reele?
Feign would they dreaded be, and yet not settled (...)
When as they feared are, they fear, and live (...) woe.
The silent Lady night so sweet to man and beast,
Can not bestow on them her safe and quiet rest:
Sleep that does overcome and break the bonds of grief,
It cannot ease their hearts, nor mynister relief:
What castle strongly buylt, what bulwark, tower, or town,
Is not by mischyefes means, brought topsy turuye down?
What ramperd walls are not made weak by wicked war?
From stately courts of Kings does justice fly afar:
In pryncely Palaces, of honesty the lore,
And wedlock vow devout, is set by little store.
The bloody Bellon those does haunt with gory hand,
Whose light and vain conceit in painted pomp does stand.
And those Erinnys wood turmoyles with frensyes fits,
That ever more in proud and hauty houses sits,
Which ficle Fortunes hand in twinkling of an eye,
From high and proud degree drives down in dust to lie.
Although that skyrmishe cease, no banners be displayed
And though no wyles be wroughe, and pollecy be stayed,
Down paysed with their weight the massy things do sink,
And from her burden does vn^^able Fortune shrynke*
The swelling Sails puffed up with gale of westren wind,
Do yet mystrust thereof a rempest in their mind:
The threatening tops (that touch the clouds) of lofty towers
Be sonest paid, and bet with south wind rainy showers:
The darkesome wood does see his tough and sturdy Oak,
Well waynde in years to be clean over thrown and broke:
The lyhhtnings flashing flame out breaking in the Sky,
First lyghteth on the mounts, and hills that are most hy.
The bodies corpulent and of the largest syse
Are ryfest still to catch diseases when they rise.
When as the flock to grase, in pasture fat is put,
Whose Neck is larded best* his throat shall first be cut:
What Fortune does advance and hoysteth up on hye,
She lets it up to ^all again more grievously.
The things of middle sort, and of a mean degree,
Endure above the rest and longest days do see:
The man of mean estate most happy is of all,
Who pleased with the lot that does to him befall,
Does sail on silent shore with calm and quiet tide,
And dreads with bruised barge on swelling Seas to ride:
Nor launcing to the deep where bottom none is found,
May with his rudder search, and reach the shallow ground.
O Drowsy oreaming doting soul,
what comes in thy brain
To seek about for thy defense
what way thou may attain?
What ayels thy skittish waiward wits,
to waver up and down?
The fittest shift prevented is,
the best path ouergrowne
Thou might once mayntayned have
thy wedlock chamber chaste,
And eake have ruld with majesty, by faith conjoined fast:
Now nurtures lore neglected is, all right does clean decay
Religion and dignity with faith are worn away:
And ruddy shame with blushing cheeks so far god wot is past,
That when it would it cannot now come home again at last.
O let me now at randon run with bridle at my will:
The safest path to mischief is by mischief open still
Now put in practice, seek about, search out and learn to find
The wily traynes, and crafty guyles of wicked womankind:
What any devilish traiterous dame durst do in working woe,
Or any wounded in her wits by shot of Cupids bow.
What ever rigorous stepdame could commit with desperate hand,
Or as the wench who flaming fast by Venus poisoning brand,
Was driven by lewd incestuous love in ship of Thessail land,
To f^^t away from Colchos isle, where Phasis channel deep.
With stiuer stream down from the hills of Armenie does sweep.
Get weapons good, get bylbowblades or temper poison strong,
Or with some yonker trudge from Greece by theft the seas along:
Why do thou faint to talk of theft, exile or pr^ute flight?
These came by hap, thou therefore must on grea^ter mischief light.
O worthy Oueene among the Greeks that bears the swinging sway.
And borne of Ledas royal blood, what muttring do thou say?
What fury fell inforceth thee, bereaved of thy wits.
To rage and rave with bedlam brains, to fret withfranticke fittes?
Though madam thou do counsel keep, and not complain thy case,
Thine anguish plain appears in thy pale and wanny face.
Reveal therefore what is thy grief, take leisure good and stay,
What reason could not remedy, often cured has delay.

So grievous is my careful case which plungeth me so sore,
That deal I cannot with delay, nor linger any more.
The flashing flames* and furious force of fiery fervent heat,
Outraging in my boiling breast, my burning bones does beat:
It suckes the sappy marow out the juice it does convey,
It frets, it tears, it reuts, it gnaws, my guts and gall away.
Now feeble fear still eggs me on (with dolor being pressed)
And cankred hate with thwacking thumpes does bounce upon my breast
The blinded boy that lovers hearts does reaue with deadly stroke,
Entangled has my linked mind with leawd and wanton yoke:
Refusing still to take a foil, or clean to be confound:
Among these broils, and agonies my mind beseging round,
Lo feeble, weary, batred down, and under trode^ shame,
That wrestleth, strives, strugleth hard, and fights with the same.
Thus am I driven to diverse shores and beat frow bank to bank,
And tossed in the fomy floods that strives with courage cranke.
As when here wynd, and their the stream when both their force will try,
From sands allow does hoyst and rear the seas with surges hye.
The wal^ring wave does staggeryng stand not weting what to do,
But (houeryng) doubts, whose furious force he best may yield him to*
My kingdom therefore I cast of, my sceptor I forsake
As anger, sorrow, hope, me lead, that way I mean to take.
At all adventure to the seas I yield my beaten Barge,
At randon careless will I run, now will I roue at large
Whereas my mind to fancy fond dath gad and run astray,
It is the best to choose that chance, and follow on that way.

This desprat dotage does declare, and rashness rude and blind,
To choose out chance to be the guide and ruler of thy mind.

He that is driven to utter pinch and furthest shift of all,
What need he doubt his doubtful lot or how his luck befall?

In silent shore thou saylest yet thy trespass we may hyde,
If thou thy self detect it not, nor cause it be descryde.

Alas it is more blasd abroad, and further it is blown,
Then any crime that ever in this princely court was sown.

Thy former fait with pensive heart and sorrow thou dest rue.
And fondly yet thou go about, to set abroch a new,

It is a very folishnes to keep a mean therein.

The thing he fears he does augment who heapeth sin to sin.

But fire and swoard to cure the same the place of salve supply.

There is no man who at the first extremity will try.

In working mischief men do take the rediest way they find.

The sacred name of wedlock once revoke and have in mind.

Ten years have I been desolate, and led a widows life.
Yet shall I entertayne a new my husband as his wife?

Consider yet thy son and heir whom he of thee begot.

And eake my daughters wedding blase as yet forget I not.
Achilles eke my son in law to mind I do not spare,
How well he kept his vow that he to me his mother swear.

When as our navy might not pass by wynd nor yet by stream,
Thy daughters blood in sacrifyce their passage did redeem:
She sturd and brake the sluggish seas, whose water still did stand,
Whose feeble force might not hoyse up, the vessels from the land.

I am ashamed here withal, it makes me repyne.
That Tyndaris (who from the Gods does fecch her noble ligne
Should give the ghost t'asswage the wrath of Gods and them appease,
Whereby the Grekish navy might have passage free by seas.
My grudging mind still harpes upon my daughters wedding day,
Whom he has made for Pelops stock the bloody ransom pay.
When as with cruel countenance embrewd with gory blood,
As at a wedding alter side th'unpitiful parent stoodt,
It erked Calchas woeful heart, who did abhor the same.
His Oracle he rewd, and eke the back reflicting flame
O wicked and ungracious stock that winnest il with ill,
Tryumphing in thy filthy featse ncreasyng leaudnes still.
By blood we win the waueryng winds, by death we purchase war

But by this means a thousand ships at once released are:

With lucky fate attempt the seas did not the losed rout?
For Aulis I Will, th'ungracious fleet from port did tumble out:
As with a lewd unlucky hand the war he did begin,
So Fortune favored his success to thrive no more therein.
Her love as captive holds him whom captive he did take
Not moved with the earnest suite that could Achilles make,
Of Phoebus prelat Sminthicall he did retain the spoil:
When for the sacred virgins love his furious dreast does boil:
Achilles rough and thundering threats could not him qualify.
Nor he that does direct the fates above the starry sky.
To us he is an Augur just, and keeps his promise due,
But while he threats his captive truls of word he is not true.
The savage people fierce in wrath once might not move his spright,
Who did purloyne the kindled tents with fire blasing bright:
When slaughter great on Greeks was made in most extremest fight
Without a foe he conquered, with leanes pines away,
In lewd and wanto^n chamber tricks he spends the idle day,
And freshly still he fedes his lust, least that some other while
His chamber chaste should want a stews, that might the same defile.
On Lady Brises love ag aine his fancy fond does stand,
Whom he has got, that wrested was out of Achilles hand.
And carnal copulation to have he does. not shame,
Though from her husbands bosom he has snacht the wicked dame,
Tushe, he that does at Paris grudge, with wound but newly stroke
Eflamd with Phrygian Prophets love, his boiling breast does smoke.
Now after Troyan boties brave, and Troy orewhelm'd he saw,
Returned he is a prisoners spouse, and Pryams son in law.
Now heart be bold, take courage good, of stomach now be stowt,
A field that easily is not fought, to pitch thou go about.
In practice mischief thou must put, why hopst thou for a day,
While Priams daughter come from Troy in Greece do bear the sway.
But as for the poor sely wreth, a wayteth at thy place
Thy wyddow, virgyns, and Orest his fatherlyke in face,
Consider their calamityes, to come, and cake their cares,
Whom all the peril of the broyle does threat in thy affairs.
O cursed captive, woeful wretch why do thou loyter so?
Thy little brats a stepdame have whose wrath will work their wo^.
With gashing sword (and if thou can none other way provide),
Nor thrust it through another ribs then launch thy gory side,
So murder twain with brewed blood, let blood immixed be,
And by destroying of thy self destroy thy spouse with thee.
Death is not sawst with soppes of Sorrow if some man else I have,
Whose breathless corse I wish to pass with me to deadly grave.

Queen, bridle thine affections, and wisely rule thy rage,
Thy swelling mood now mittigate, thy choler ^ake assuage.
Way well the wayghty enterprise that thou do take in hand,
Tryumphant victor he retur^es of mighty Asia land
Auenging Europes injury with him he bringes away.
The spoils of sacked Pargamy a huge and mighty pray.
In bondage eake he leads the foalke of long assaulted Troy,
Yet dare thou by pollecie attempt him to annoy?
Whom with the dynt of glittring sword Achilles durst not harm,
Although his rash and desperate dickes the froward Knight did arm:
Nor Ajax yet more hardy man up yelding vital breath,
Whom frantike fury fell enforst to wound himself to death:
Nor Hector he whose only life procurde the Greeks delay,
And long in war for victory enforced them to stay:
Nor Paris shaft, whose conning hand with shot so sure did aim:
Nor mighty Memnon swart and black, had power to hurt the same:
Nor Xanthus flood, where to and fro dead carcasses did swim,
With armor hewd and therewith all some maimed broken limme:
Nor Symois, that purple wawmes with slaughter died-doth steare.
Nor Cygnus lilly white, the Son of fenny God so dear:
Nor yet the musteryng Thrasian host: nor warlike Rhesus king:
Nor Amazons, who to the wars did painted Quiuers bring,
And bare their hatches in their hands with Target and with shield,
Yet had no power with ghastly wound to foil him in the field.
Sith he such scouringes has escapt and plungde of perilles past
Entendest thou to murder him returning home at last?
And sacred alters to profane with slaughters so vnpure?
Shall Greec thaduenger let this wrong long vnreuengde endure
The grym and fearce coragious horse, the battayles, shoutes, and cries,
The swelling seas which bruised barks do dread when storms arise,
Behold the fields with streams of blood oreflowne and depely dround,
And all the cheualry of Troy in servile bondage bound,
Which Greeks have writ in registers. Thy stubborn stomach byud,
Suddue thy fond affections, and pacify thy mind.

THe cursed time that evermore
my mind did most detest,
The days that I abhorred have
and hated in my breast,
Are come, are come, that mine estate
will bring to utter wrack:
Alas my heart why do thou fail.
and faynting flyest back?
What do thou mean at first assalte
from armor thus to fly,
Trust this, the cruel Gods entend my doleful destenie,
To wrap thee in with perils round and catch thee in a band?
Endeuer drudge with all thy power their plagues for to withstand:
With stomach stout rebellious to fire and sword appeal
It is no plague, if such a death thy native destnies deal.

(O partners of my perils all begot of Leda thou)
Direct thy doings after mine, and unto thee I vow.
This drosel sluggish ringleader, this stout strong hearted fire,
S^l pay thee so much bldud again as she^ he bath in fire
How haps it that his trembling cheeks to be so pale and whight,
Lying aghast as in a trance with faynting face upright.

His conscience wedlock vow does prick and bringes him home again
Let us return the self same trade a new for to retain,
To which at first we should have stuck and ought not to forsake,
To co^enaunt continent a new let us our selves betake:
To take the trade of honesty at no time is to late:
He purged is from punishment whose heart the crime does hate.

Why whither will thou gad (o rash and unadvised dame?)
What do thou earnestly believe, and firmly trust the same,
That Agamemnons spousall bed will loyal be to thee?
That naught does underprop thy mind which might thy terror be?
His proud success puffed up to high with lucky blast of wind,
Might make so cranke, and set aloft his hawty swelling mind:
Among his pears he stately was ere Troyan turrets torn,
How think ye then his stomach stout by nature given to scorn,
In haughtines augmented is more in himself to joy,
Through this triumphant victory and conquest got of Troy?
Before his voyage Miceane King most mildly did he raygne,
But now a Tyrant truculent returned he is again.
Good luck and proud prosperity do make his heart so rise.
With what great preparation prepared solemn wys^,
A rabblement of strumpets come that clong about him al?
B^t yet the Prophetess of Thebe (whom God of truth we call)
Appears above the rest: she keeps the King, she does him guide:
Will thou in wedlock have a mate and not for it provide?
So would not she, the greattest grief this is unto a wife,
Her husbands mimon in her house to lead an open life.
A Queens estate cannot abide her peete with her to raygne,
Ind ielous wedlock will not her companion sustain.

Aegist in desprat mood again why see thou me a flote?
Why kindlest thou the sparks of ire in imbers covered hot
If that the victors own free will ^elease his captives care,
Why may not. I his Lady spouse have hope as well to fare?
One law does rule in royal throne, and po^ pous princclye Towers,
Among the vulgar sort, another in private simple bowers.
What though my grudging fancy force that at my husbands hand,
Sharp execution of the law I stubbernly withstand?
Recording this that haynously offended him I have:
He gently will me pardon grant who need the same to crave?

Even so on this condition thou may with him compound.
To pardon him if he again to pardon the be bound.
The subtle science of the law, the statutes of our land,
(That long ago decreed were) thou do not understand.
The Judges be malicious men, they spyght and envy us,
But he shall have them partial his causes to discus.
This is the chiefest privilege that does to Kings belong.
What laws forbidd^th other men, they do, and do no wrong.

He pardned Helen, she is wed to Menela again
Which Europe all with Asia did plunge alike in pain.

No Ladies Lust has ravished yet Atrides in his life,
Nor privily purloynd his heart betrothed to his wife.
To pick a quarrel he begins and matter thee to blame,
Suppose thou nothing have commit that worthy is of shame?
What boteth him whom Princes hate an honest life to frame?
He never does complain his wrong, but ever bears the blame.
Will thou repair to Spart and to thy country trudge aryght?
Will thou become a ronnagate from such a worthy wight?
Deuorcement made from Kings will not so let the matter escape.
Thou easest fear by fickle hope, that falsely thou do shape:

My trespass is disclosd to none, but to a trusty wight:

At princes gates fidelity yet never enter might.

I will corrupt and feed him so with silver and with gold.
That I by bribing bynd him shall no secrets to unfold:

The trust that hired is and bought by brybes and moneis fee,
Thy counsel to bewray again with brybes entyste will be

The remnaunt left of shamefastnes of those ungracious tricks,
Wherein of late I did delyght, my conscience freshly pricks.
Why kep'st thou such a busy stir and with thy flatring speech,
Enstructing me with lewd advise do wicked counsel preach
Shall I forsooth of royal blood with all the speed I can
Refuse the King of Kings, and wed an outcast banished man^

Why should you think in that Thiest was father unto me.
And Agamemnon Atreus son he should my better be?

If that be but a tryfle small, and nephew to the same.

I am of Phoebus lineage borne, whereof I do not shame.

Why makste thou Phoebus author of thy wicked pedagrew,
Whom out of heaven ye forced to fly when bridle back he drew,
When Lady Night with mantel black did spread her soden shade,
Why make thou the Gods in such reproachfulnes to wade?
Whose father has thee conning made by sleight and subtle guyle
To make thy kinsman Cockold while his wife thou do defyle.
What man is he whom we do know to be thy fathers mate,
Abusing lust of Lechery in such unlawful rate?
Auaunt, go pack thee hence in have, dispatch out of my sight
This infamy, whose blemish staynes this blood of worthy wight.

This is no new exile to me that wickedness do hannt,
But if that thou (O worthy Queen) command me to auaunt,
I will not only straight avoid the house the town and field
My life on sword at thy request I ready am to yield

This heinous deed permit shall I (most churlish cruel drab)
Against my will though I offend, the fault I should not blabbe:
Nay, rather come apart with me, and let us join our wits
To wrap our selves out of this woe and parlous threatening fits.

NOw chaunt it lusty laddes,
Apollos praise subborne,
To thee the frolic flock
their crowned heads adorn.
To thee King Inachs stock
of wedlock chamber void,
Brayd out their virgins locks
and thereon have employed
Their sauory garlandes green Itwist of laurel bow.
Draw near with us O Thebes our dancing follow thou.
Come also ye that drinck of Ismen bubling flood,
VVheras the Laurel treeful thick on banks does bood.
Eake ye whom Mando mild, the Prophetess divine,
(Foreseyng fate) and borne of high Tiresias lygne,
Has stird to celebrate with sacred use and right.
Appollo and Dian borne of Latona bright.
O Victor Phaebe unbend thy noked bow again.
Sith quie tnes and peace anew we do retain.
And let thy twanckling harp make melody so shril,
While that thy nimble hand stryke quauers with thy quill.
No curious descant I nor lusty music crave,
No jolly rumbling note, nor trouling tune to have.
But on thy treble Lute (according to thy use)
Stryke up a playnsong note as when thy learned muse
Thy lessons do record, though yet on baser string
It lyketh thee to play the song that thon did singe:
As when from fyery heaven the dint of lightning flue,
Sent down by wrath of Gods the Titans overthrew
Or else when mountains were on mountains heaped hie
That raise for Giauntes fell their steps into the sky,
The mountain Ossa stood on top of Pelion laid,
Olymp (whereon the Pynes their budding branches braide)
Down paised both: draw nere O Juno noble dame,
Both spouse of mighty Jove and sister to the same.
Thou that do rule with him made ioynter of his mace,
Thy people we of Greece give honor to thy grate.
Thou only do protect from per illes Aigos land,
That ever careful was to have thine honor stand,
Most supplient thereunto thou also with thy might
Do order joyful peace and battails fearce of fight
Accept O conquering Queen these branches of the bays
That Agamemnon here does yield unto thy praise:
The hollow boxen pype (that does with holes abound)
In synging unto the does give a solemn sound:
To thee the Damsels eake that play upon the stringes,
With conning harmony melodious music singes.
The matrons eke of Greece by ryper years more grave,
To thee the Taper pay that vowed often they have,
The Heyferd young and white companion of the Bull.
Unskillful yet by proof the paynful plow to pull.
Whose neck was never worn nor gald with print of yoke,
Is in thy temple slame receiving deadly stroke.
O Lady Pallas thou of most renoumed hap
Bred of the brain of Jove that smites with thunder clap.
Thou lofty Trojan towers of craggy knotty flint
Have bet with battring blade, and stroke with iaueling dint:
The elder matrones with the dames that younger be
Together in myngled heaps do honor due to thee,
When thou approaching nighe thy coming is espyde,
The priest vnbarres the gate, and opes the Temple wide:
By clustring thronges the flocks thine altars haunt apace,
Bedeckte with twisted crowns so trim with comely grace.
The old and ancient men well stepped and grown in years,
Whose feeble trembling age procures hory hayres
Obtaining their request crau de of thy grace divine,
Do offer up to thee their sacrify sed wine,
O bright Dian whose blase sheds light three sundry ways
VVemyndful are of thee, and render thankful praise,
Delon thy native soil thou did fyrmely bind,
That to and fro was wont to wander with the wind:
Which with foundation sure mayn ground forbids to pass
For Nauies (after which to swim it wonted was)
It is become a road defying force of wynd,
The mothers funeralles of Tantalus his kind.
The daughters seven by death thou victresse do account.
Whose mother Niobe abydes on Sipil mount
A lamentable rock and yet unto this hour
Her tears new gushing, out the marble old does power.
The Godhead of the Twins in sumpteous solemn wise,
Both man and wife adore with sauory sacrifyce,
But thee above the rest O father great and guide,
Whose mighty force is by the burninglightning tryde:
Who when thou gave a beck and d^dst thy head but shake
At once thextremest poales of heaven and earth did quake,
O Jupiter the root that of our lynage art.
Accept these offered gifts and take them in good part:
And thou O graundsire great to thy posterity.
Have some remorse, that do not swerve in chyualrie.
But yonder lo with stiuing steps the soldier comes amayne
In all post have, with token that good news declares plain
A Laurel branch, that hangs on his spear head he does bring
Eurybates is come, who has been trusty to the king.
SOre tired after many years
with travail and with toil
Scant credityng my self, the Gods
of this my natyue soil,
The temple, and the alters of
the saints that rule the sky,
In kumble sort with reverence
devoutly worship I.
Now pay your vows unto the Gods*
returned is again
Unto his country court, where wont he was to rule, and reign,
Prince Agamemnon, victor he, of Greece the great renoume.
The tidings of a message good unto mine ears is blown.
Where stays my spouse who^ longing for ten years I have out scand?
What does he yet sail on the seas, or he is come a land?
Yet has he fyxt and set his foot bauck stepping home again.
Upon the sandy shore, that long he wished to attayne^
And does he still enjoy his health enhauncte in glory great,
And painted out in pomp of prays whose fame the sky does beat?

Bless we with burning sacrifice at length this lucky day

And eke the Gods though gracious, yet dealing long delay:
Declare if that my brothers wife enjoy the vytall air
And tell me to what kind of Coast my sister does repair.

God grant, and give us better news then this that thou do crave
The heavy hap of fyghting floods forbiddes the truth to have,
Our scattred fleet the swelling seas attemptes in such a plight,
That ship from ship was taken clean out of each others sight.
Atrides in the waters wide torwoyld and straying far
More vyolence by seas sustaynd then by the bloody war
And as it were a conquered man escaping home al weete
Now brings in his company of such a mighty fleet,
A sort of bruised broken barks, beshaken, torn, and rent.

Show what unlucky chance it is that has our navy spent.
What storm of seas dispersed has our Captains hear and there

Thou willest me to make report of heavy woeful gear.
Thou biddest me most grievous news with tydinges good to part:
For vttring of this woeful hap my feeble mind does start.
And horribly appauled is with this so monstrous ill.

Speak out and utter it: himself with terror he does fill,
Whose heart his own calamity and carke does loath to know:
The heart whom doubted damage dulles with greater grief does glow

When Troyan buildings blasing bright did burn away and broyle,
Enkindled first by Grekish brand, they fall to part the spoil:
Repayring fast unto the seas again we come aboard,
And now the soldiers weary loins were eased of his sword,
Their bucklers cast aside, upon the hatches lie above.
Their warlike hands in practice put, and Oers learn to move:
Each little hindraunce seems to much to them in hasty plight,
When of recourse the Admiral gave watchword by his light,
And trumpet blast began to call our army from delay,
The painted Pup with gilded snowt did first guide on the way:
And cut the course, which following on a thousand ships did ryue,
Then first a wynd with pipling puffes our launcing ships did drive,
Which glyded down upon our sails the water being calm
With breath of western wynd so myld scant moved any walme.
The shyning seas bespred about with ships does glister bright,
And also couerd with the same lay hid from Phoebus light:
It does us good to gase upon the naked shore of Troy:
The desert Phrygian plots so bare to view w^e hop for joy:
The yeuth each one besturres themselves, and striking altogether,
They tough their oers and with their toil they help the wynd and weather
They ^ug and chearely row by course, the spir^ing seas up dash,
Against the ^atling ^ibs of ships the flapping floods do flash
The hory froth of wrestling waves which ores aloft does raise,
Do draw and trace a furrow through the marblefaced seas.
When stronger blast with belly swollen our h^ysted sails did fill,
They row no more, but let the Pup to go with wynd at will,
Their sheryng oers laid assyde our Pilot does espy,
How far from any land aloof our sails reculing fly,
Or bloody battles does display the threats of Hector stout,
Or of his rattling waggings tells, wherein he rode about.
Or how his gashed carkas slain and traynd about the field
To funeral flan es and obit rightes for coin again was yield.
How Jupiter embathed was al in his royal blood.
The frolic fish disposed was to mirth in Tyrren flood,
And fetching friskes both in and out plays on the waters brim,
And on his broad and fynny back about the seas does swim,
With gambals quick in ringes around and s^de to side enclynd,
Erwhyle he sportes afront the pup, and whips again behynd,
Now fidling on the snout before the dalying wanton route
With iocundary ioly tryckes does skip the fleet about.
Sometime he stands gasing on and eyes the vessels bright,
Now every shore is covered clean, and land is out of sight,
The parlous point of Ida rock in sight does open lie,
And that alone epsy we could with fyrmly fixed eye,
A duskye cloud of stifling smoke from Troy did smolter black,
When Titan from the weary necks the heavy yokes did slack.
The fading light did groueling bend, and down the day did shroud,
Against the Stars amounting up a little misty cloud
Came belching out in yrksome Iompe, and Phoebus galland beams
He spewd upon, bestayning them duct down in Western streams.
The Sun set swaruing in such sort with diverse change of face,
Did give us cause to have mistrust of Neptunes doubted grace.
The evening first did burnish bright, and paynt with stars the sky.
The wyndes were laid, and clean forsook our sails that quiet lie.
When cracking, rattling, rumbling noise, tusht down with thundering sway
From top of hills, which greatter stir does threaten and bewraye.
With bellowinges, and yellinges loud, the shores do grunt and groan,
The craggy clyues and roaring rocks do howl in hollow stone.
The bubling waters swelles vpreard before the wrestling wynd,
When suddenly the lowering light of Moan is hid and blind.
The glymsing stars do go to glade, the surging seas are tossed
Even to the skies among the clouds the light of heaven is lost.
More nights in one compacted are with shadow dim and black,
One shadow upon another does more darkness heap and pack,
And every spark of light consumed the waves and skies do meet,
The ruffling winds range on the seas, through every coast they fi^t.
They heave it up with violence, oreturnde from bottom low,
The western wynd flat in the face of Eastern wynd does blow.
With hurley burley Boreas set open his blasting mouth,
And girdeth out his boysteous breath against the stormy south,
Each wynd with all his might does blow, and works dangers deep,
They shake the floods, a sturdy blast along the seas do sweep.
That rolls and rumbles wave on wave, a northren tempest strong,
Abundance great of flacky snow does hurl our ships among.
The southwynd out of Libia, does rage upon a should,
And with the puissant force thereof the quicksandes up be rold,
Nor bydeth in the south which does with tempest lump and lower,
And force the flowing floods to rise by pouring out a shower.
The stubberne Eurus, Earthquakes made, and shoke the countries East,
And Eos cost where Phoebus first aryseth from his rest.
How violent Corus stretched and tare his yawning breast full wide?
A man would sure have thought the world did from his center slide,
And that the frames of Heaven broke up the Gods adowne would fall
And Chaos dark confused heap would shade and cover all.
The stream straue with the wynd, the wynd did beat it down again.
The springing sea within his banks can not it self contain,
The raging shower his trilling drops does mingle with the seas,
And yet in all this misery the find not so much ease,
To see and know what ill it is, that works their decay.
The darkness dim oppresses still and keeps the light away:
The blackfa^st night with Hellicke hue was clad of Stygian lake
And yet full often with glimsing beams the sparkling fire out brake,
The cloud does crack, and being rent the lightning leapeth out,
The wretches like the same so well it shyning them about,
That still they wish such light to have (although God wot but ill)
The navy swaying down it self does cast away, and spill.
One side with other side is cracked, and helm is rent with helm,
The ship it self the gulping seas do headlong ouerwhelme.
Erwhyle a greedy gaping gulf does sup it up amayne,
Then by and by ^ost up aloft it spewes it out again,
She with her swagging full of sea to bottom low does sink
And drencheth deep aside in floods her totring broken brinke.
That underneath a dosen waves lay drowned out of sight,
Her broken plankes swim up and down, spoyld is her tackle quight,
Both sail and Oers clean are lost, the main mast eke is gone.
That wonted was to bear upright the sail yard thereuppon,
The timber and the broken bordes lie on the waters brim,
When cold and shiuering fear in us does strike through every lim,
The wysest wits entocksicate dare nothing enterprise,
And cunning practice naught auayles when fearful storms arise,
The mareners letting duty slip stand staring all aghast,
Their scoping ores suddenly out of their hands are wrast.
To prayer then apace we fall, when other hope is none,
The Greeks and Troyans to the Gods alyke do make their moan.
Alack what succor of the fates may we poor wretches find?
Against his father Pyr^hus bears a spyteful cankred mind,
At Ayax grudge Ulysses does, king Menela does hate
Great Hector: Agamemnon is with Priam at debate.
O happy man is he that does lie slain in Troyan ground,
And has deserude by handy stroke to take his fatal wound,
Whom same preserves, taking up his tomb in conquered land
Those momes whose melting cowardes heart durst never take in hand
Or enterprise no noble act, those force of f^oods shall drown
But fate forbearing long, will take stout Brutes of high renoume,
Full well we may ashamed be, in such a sort to dye,
If any man his spyteful mind yet can not satisfye,
With these outrageous plunging plagues that down from Gods are sent,
Appease at length thy wrathful God again and take relent.
Even Troy for pity would have wept, to see our woeful case,
But if that in thy boiling breast black rancour still have place,
And that the Greeks to ruin run, it be thy purpose bent,
Why do these Troyans go to wrack? for whom thus are we spent?
Assuage the rygaur of the sea that threarning hills up reares:
This drenched Fleet the Troyan folk and Greeks together bears.
Then from their prayers are they put, their foultring tongues do stay,
The roaring seas does drown their voice and caryes their cries away.
Then mighty Pallas armed with the lepping lightning sire,
That teasty Jove does use to hurl prouokt to swelling ire,
With threatening Iaueling in her hand, her prowess means to try.
And eke her force whose boiling breast with Gorgon fits does fry,
Or what with Target she can do, and with her Fathers fire.
Then from the Skies another storm begins abroad to spyre,
But Ajax nothing yet dismaide all force withstandeth stout,
Whom when he spread his swelling sails with Cable stretched out,
She lighting down did wring him hard, and wrapped him in her flame,
And slang another flasshing dint of lightning on the same,
With all her force and violence her hand brought back again,
She tossed him out, as late that feate her father tought her plain.
Both over Ajax and his Pup she flies overthwart,
And renting man and ship, of both she bears away a part,
His courage naught abated yet he all to singde does seem,
Even like a slubberne ragged Rock amid the striving stream,
He traynes along the roaring seas and eke the waltering wave
By shouing on his bourly breast in sunder quite he drove,
The Bark with hand he caught, and on it self did ripe it over,
Yet Ajax fhyneth in the flood which darkness blind does cover.
At length attayning to a rock his thundering crakes were these,
I conquered have the force of fire and rage of fighting seas,
It does me good, to master thus the anger of the sky,
With Pallas wrath, the lightning flames and floods tumultyng hye.
The terror of the warlyck god once could not make me fly,
The force of Mars and Hector both at once sustaynd have I.
Nor Phoebus darts could me constrayne, from him one foot to shoon,
All these beside the Phrygians subdued we have, and won.
When other Mecocks flinges his darts shall I not them withhis stand?
Yea, what if Phoebus came himself, to pytch them with his hand?
When in his melancholy mood he boasted without mean.
Then father Neptune lift his heat about the waters clean.
The beaten rock with for led m^ce he undermining pluckte
From bottom loose, and suncke it down, when down himself he ducke.
There Ajax lay, by land, by fire, and storm of seas destroid
But we by suffering shypwrack; are with greater plagues a^oyd.
A subtyle shallow flood there is flowne on a stony should,
Where crafty Caphar out of sight the lurking rocks does hold,
Upon whose sharp and ragged tops the swelling side does flow,
The boiling waves do beat thereon still sweaing to and fro:
A turrret nodding over it does hang with falling sway,
From whence on either side from height prospect espy we may
Two seas: and on this hand the coast where Pelops once did raygne,
And Isthmus flood in narrow creek, reculing back again,
Does stop Ionian sea, least into Hellespont it run,
On the other part is Lemnon flood that fame by bloodshed won.
On the other side Calcedon to one does stand against this forte,
And Aulis I Will that stayde out ships that thither did resort.
This Castle here inhabyte does our Palimedes sier,
Whose cursed hand held in the top a brand of flaming fire.
That did alure our fleet, to turn on lurking rocks a right,
Entysing them with with blaze to come unto the light.
All into fitters shaken are the vessels on the should,
But other some do swym, and some upon the rocks are roulde.
And other ^lipping back again so to eschew the Rocks,
His bruised Ryb^, and rattling sides against each other knocks,
Whereby the other he does break, and broken is himself,
Then would they launee into the deep, for now they dread the shelfe,
This perk of troubles thau^ct to hap in dawning of the day.
But when the Gods (be^ought of us) began the rage to stay,
And Phoebus golden beams began a fresh to render light,
The doleful day discried all the damage done by night.

O whether may I now lament, and weep with wayling sad?
Or shall I else in that my Spouse returned is be glad?
I do rejoice, and yet I am compelled to bewail
My countries great calamity that does the same assail.
O Father great whose majesty does thundering Scepters shake,
The sowring Gods unto the Greeks now favorable make,
With garlands green let every head rejoicing now be crounde.
To thee the pype in sacryfice melodiously does sound,
And on thine altar lies slain an Heyferd lilly whight,
Before the same do present stand with hanging locks vndight,
A careful Troyan company in heavy woeful plight,
On whom from high the Laurel tree with spredding branch does shine,
Whose virtue has inspyred them with Phoebus grace divine,

ALas the cruel sting of love
how sweetly does it taste,
A misery is mortal man
annexed while life does last?
The pathe of mischief for to fly,
now since there is a gap,
And wretched souls be franckly calde
From every woeful hap,
By death, a pleasant port, for aye in rest them selves to shroude,
Where dreadful tumultes never dwell nor storms of Fortune proud:
Nor yet the burning fiery flakes of Jove the same does doubt,
When wrongfully with thwacking thumpes be raps his thunder out:
Here Lady Peace th'inhabitours does never put in flight,
Nor yet the victors threatening wrath approaching right to fight,
No whyrling westernwynde does urge the ramping seas to praunce,
No dusty cloud that raised is by savage Dimilaunce,
On horseback riding rank, by rank no fearce and cruel host,
No people slaughtred, with their towns clean ropsie turuey tossed:
While that the foe with flaming fire does spoil and waste the wall,
Untamed and unbridled Mars destroys and batters all:
That man alone who forces not the fickle fates a straw,
The vysage grim of Acheront whose eyes yet never saw,
Who never vewd with heavy cheer the vgsome Limbo lake,
And putting life in hasarde, dare to death him self betake.
That person is a Princes pear, and like the Gods in might,
Who knows not what death does mean is in a pitious plight
The ruthful ruin of our natyue country we beheld:
That woeful night, in which the roofes of houses ouerquelde,
In Dardans City blasing bright with flasshing fiery flames.
When as the Greeks with burning brandes enkindle did the frames,
That: Troy whom war and beedes of arms might not subdue and take.
As once did mighty Hercules, whose Ouyuer causde it quake,
Which neither he that (...) son, and son to Thetis was,
Nor whom Achilles loved to well, could ever bring to pass,
When glytesing bright in field he ware ^al^e armor on his back,
And counterfayting fearse Achill the Troyans drove to wrack.
Nor when Achilles he him self his mind from sorrow wrast,
And Troyan women to the walls did scuddyng leap in have.
In myserte she lost her proud estate, and fast renoume,
By being stoutly overcome, and hardly pulled down.
Years five and five did Troy resis^e, that yet (...) must,
In one nights space by destenie he laid in the dust.
Their fained gifts well have we tried that huge and fatal gin,
We light of credit, with our own right hand have haled in,
That fatal gift of Greeckes: what ^yme at entry of the gap
The hugye horse did shyueryng stand, where in the in selves did wrap
The captains close, in holow vautes with bloody war y^reight.
When lawfully we might have tryde, and serched their deceit:
So by their own contryued snares the greeks had bin confound:
The brazen bucklers being shook did give a clattring sound.
A privy whyspering often times came tyckling in our ear.
And Pyrrhus (in a murreynes name so ready for to hear.
The crafty council picked out of falsa Vlifsses brain,)
Did ^angle in the halow Vaut^^ that range thereof again.
But fearing and suspecting naught the hea^dy youth of Troy
Laid hands upon the sacred ropes, to hale and pull with joy,
On this side young Astyanax came guarded with his train,
On the other part Pollixena disponsed to be slain
Upon Achilles tomb, she coms with maids, and he with men,
A ioly flock with equal years as young as they were then.
Their vowed oblations to the gods in holy day attire,
The matrons bring and so to church repayreth euecry sire.
And all the city did alyke, yea Hecuba our queen
(That since the woeful Hectors death or now was never fene)
She merry is: O grief accursed, of all thy sorrows deep
For which that first, or last befell entendest thou to weep?
Our battred walls which heavenly hands ^cected have and framde?
Or else the burning temples which upon their Idols flamde?
Lamenting these calamyties we have not time and space,
O mighty parent Pryam we poor Troyans wayle thy case.
The old man's thratling throat I saw, (alas) I saw yborde
With cruel Pyrrhus blade, that scante with any blood was gorde:
Refrain your tears yt down your cheeks should tricle evermore
With woeful waylings piteously your pryuate friends deplore
My myseries refuse a mate, so much accursed as I:
To rewe my careful case, refrain your lamentable cry.
As for mine own distress to moorne, I shall suffice alone.

To mingle tears with other tears it does us good to moan:
In those the burning teary streams more ardently do boil,
Whom secret thoughts of lurking cares in privy breast turmoyle:
Though that thou were a Gossop stout, that brook much sorrow may
I warraunt thee, thou myghtest well, lament this sore decay,
Not sad and solemn Aedon that in the woods does singe
Her sugared Ditties finely tunde on sweet and pleasant stringe:
Recording Irys woeful hap in diverse kind of note,
Whom Progne though he were her child and of her womb begot,
For to reueng his fathers fault, she did not spare to kill:
And gave his flesh and blood for food the fathers Maw to fill.
Nor Progne who in Swallows shape: upon the rydges hye,
Of houses sits in Biston town bewayling piteously,
With chattering throat, of Tereus her spouse the cruel act,
(Who did by strength and force of arms a shameful brutishe fact.
Defile the sister of his wife, fair Philomel by name,
And eke cut out her tongue, least she should blab it to his shame)
Though Progne this her husbands rape lamenting very sore
Do wayle, and weep with piteous plaint, yet can she not deplore
Sufficiently, though that she would, our countries piteous plight:
Though he himself among the Swans sir Cygnus lilly whight.
Who dwelles in stream of Ister flood, and Tanais channel could,
His weeping voice most ernestly though utter out her would:
Although the morning Halcyons with doleful sighs do wayle,
At such time as the fighting floudes their Cyex did assail,
Or rashly wexing boulde attempt the Seas now laid at rest,
Or being very fearful feed their brood in tottring nest,
Although as squemishe hearted men those priests in bedlem rage,
Whom mother Cyble being borne on high in lofty stage,
Does move, to play on shalmes, Atys the Phrygian to lament,
Yet can not they this lot bewail, though brawn from arms they rent.
Cassandra, in our tears there is no measure to refrain,
Those miseryes all measure pass, that plunged us in pain.
The sacred fillets from thy heads, why do thou hale and pull?
They chiefly ought to worship God, whose hearts with grief be dull.

My fear by this affliction is clean abaled all,
Nor praying to the heavenly Ghostes for mercy will I call.
Although they were disposde to cha^e and fret in fus^ten fumes,
They nothing have me to displease, Fortune her force consumes.
Her spyte is worn unto the stumpes, what country have I left?
Where is my Sire? am I of all my systers quite bereft.
The sacred tombs and alter stones our blood have drunk and swylde,
Where are my brethren blessed knor? destroyed in the fylde.
All widow Wives of Priams sons may easly now behold,
The Palace void and cast of court of silly Priam old.
And by so many marriages so many Wyddowes are,
But only Hellen coming from the coast of Lacon far.
That Hecuba the mother of so many a pryncely wight,
Whose fruitful Womb did breed the brand, of fire blasing bright:
Who also bare the swinge in Troy, by practice now does learn,
New laws and guise of desteny in bondage to discern.
On her she takath heart of grace with looks so stern and wild,
And barketh as a bedlem bitch about her strangled child
Dear Polidor, the remnaunt left, and only hope of Troy,
Hector, and Priam to revenge, and to restore her joy.

The sacred Phoebus Prophet is with sudden silence hushed:
A quaking trembling shiuering fear throughout her Isms has rusht:
Her Face as pale as Ashes is, her Fillits stand vpryght,
The soft and gentle goldilockes starte up of her affright.
Her panting breathing breast stuffed up within does grunt and groan.
Her glaring bryghe and steaming Eyes are hither and thither thrown.
Now glauncing up and down they roll: now standing stiff they stare.
She stretches up her head more straight then commonly she bare,
Boult up she goes, her wrestling Jaws that fast together clinge,
She does attempt by diverse means, on sunder how to wringe.
Her mumbling words in gabling mouth shut up she does assuage,
As Menas mad that Bacchus aares does serve in furious rage.

How does it hap (O sacred tops of high Parnassus hill)
That me berapt of sense, with pricks of fury fresh ye fiill?
Why do you me with ghost inspyre, that am beside my wits?
O Phoebus none of thine I am, releasse me from the sits:
Infixed in my burning breasts the flames extinguish out,
Who forces me with fury fell to gad and trot about?
Or for whose sake inspyrde with spryte mad mumbling make must I?
Why play I now the Prophet cold, since Troy in dust does ly?
The day does shrynke for dread of war, the night does dim mine eyes.
With mantell black of darkness deep clean couerd is the skies:
But lo two shining Suns at once in heaven appears bright,
Two Grecian houses muster do their armies twain to fight.
Among the mighty Goddesis in Ida woods I see,
The fatal sheepherd in his throne as vmpier plast to be:
I do advise you to beware, beware (I say) of kings,
(A kindred in whose cancred hearts old privy grudges springes)
That country clown Aegisthus he this stock shall overthrowe,
What does this foolish despret dame her naked weapons show?
Whose crown entendeth she to crack in weed of Lacon land,
With Hatchet (by the Amazons invented first) in hand?
What face of mighty majesty be witched has mine eyes?
The conqueror of saluage beasts Marmarick Lion lies,
Whose noble neck is wurried with currish fange and tooth
The curlish snaps of eger Lyonesle abide he does.
Alack ye ghostes of all my friends why should ye say that I,
Among the rest am only safe, from perils far to ly?
Feign father follow thee I would, Troy being laid in dust.
O brother terror of the Greeks, O Troyans aid and trust.
Our ancient pomp I do not see, nor yet thy warmed hands,
(That fearce on Greekish flaming fleet did fling the fyry brandes)
But mangled members, schorched corpse, and sake thy valiant arms,
Hard pimond and bound in bands sustayning grievous harms:
O Troyolus, a match unfit encountering with Achill
(That mighty man of arms) to soon come unto thee I will.
I do delight, to sail with them on stinking Siygian flood.
To view the churlishe mastife cur of hell, it does me good.
And gaping mouthed Kingdom dark of greedy Ditis raygne.
The Barge of filthy Phlegethon this day shall entertayne,
Me conquering, and conquered, and Princes souls with all.
You flitering shades I you beseech, and cake on thee I call,
O Stygian poole (whereon the Gods their solemn oaths do take
Vnbolt a while the Brasne bars of darksome Lymoo lake.
Whereby the Phrygian folk in hell may Mic^an state behold.
Look up ye silly wretched souls, the fates are backward roulde.
The sqally sisters do approach, and deal their bloody strokes,
Their smultring taggots in their hands half bru^ie to ashes smokes.
Their vysages so pale do burn, with fyry flaming eyes:
A garment black their g^awed guts does gyrde in mourning g^yse.
Dire dread of night begins to howl, the bones of body bast
With lying long do rot corrupt in miry pudle cast.
Behold, the weary aged man his burning thyrst forgot*
The waters dalying at his lips to catch endeavors not:
But mourns for the funeral, that shall ensue anen.
The Troyan Prince his royal robes tryumphant puts on.

The furious rage clean ouerpast begins it self to slake.
And slyps away, even as a Bull that deadly wound does take
On gasshed neck afront the aares: come let us ease at last
Her lymbes, that of the spryte of God has felt the mighty blast.
Returning home again at length and crounde with Laurel bow
(A sign of worthy victory) is Agamemnon now.
The Wife to meet her Husband, does her speedy passage ply,
Returning hand in hand, and foot by foot most lovingly.

AT length I do arryue again
upon my native soil:
God save thee O dear loved Land,
to thee so huge a spoil
So many barbarous people yield:
the flower of Asia. Troy:
To bear thy yoke submits her self,
that long did live in joy.
Why does this Prophet (on the ground her sprawling body laid)
Thus reele and stagger on her neck, all trembling and dismayde?
Sirs, take her up, with Lycour warm let her be chearished.
Now peepes she up again, with drouping eyes sonke in her head:
Pluck up thy spryte, here is the port wished for in misery:
This day is festival.
At Troy so was it wont to be.

Let us to Th'alters worship give.

At Th'alters died my sire:
A, Pray we to Jove.

To love whose grace divine does me inspire?

Do thou suppose that Troy thou see?

And Priam eke I see.

Troy is not here.

where Helen is there take I Troy to be,

Fear not as maid to serve thy dame.

Nay fredome draws ny.

Take thou no thought how thou shall I^ue.

All cares for to defy,
Death gives a courage unto me.

Yet say I once again
There is no danger left, whereby thou might hurt sustain.

But yet much troublous danger both hang over thy head I wot.

What mischief may a victor dread?

Even y^ he dreadeth not.

Ye trusty meny of my men come carry her away,
Till of the spryte she ryd her self, least fury force her say
That may be prejudicial, her tongue she cannot frame.
To thee O Father flinging forth the lightnings flasshing flame,
That do disperse the clouds, and rule the course of every star,
And guide the Globe of Earth, to whom the boottes won by war
With triumph victors dedicate: to thee O Juno hight
The sister dear of doughty Jove, (thy husband full of might)
Both I and Greece with flesh and blood, and eke our vowed beast,
And gorgious gifts of Arabie, give worship to thy hest.

O GREECE by noble Gentlemen
in honor shyning clear,
O GREECE to wrathful IVNO thou
that art the darling dear,
Some jolly worthy lusty blood
thou fosters evermore,
Thou have made even the Gods, that were
a number odd before.
That puissaunt mighty Hercules a noble Impe of thine
Defer^ed by his travels twelve, rapt up in heaven to shine.
For whom the heavens did alter course, and Jupiter with all
Did iterate the hours of night, when dampishe dew does fall.
And charged Phoebus chariot swyfte to trot with slower pace,
And leasurely bright lady Moon thy homwarde Wayne to trace,
Bright Luci^er that year by year his name a new does change,
Came back again, to whom the name of Hesper seemed strange.
Aurora to her common course her reared head addressed,
And couching backward down again the same she did ares^,
Upon the shoulder of her spouse, whose years with age are worn
The east did feel, so felt the west, that Hercules was borne.
Dame nature could not clea^e dispatch, to utter in one night,
That boystous lad: the whyrling world did wayght for such a wight.
O babe whose shoulders underprop, the ample spactous sky,
In clasped arms thy prewesse did the crusshed Lion try.
Who from his fyry yawning throat sp^wes out his broyling brande,
The nimble hynde in Menall mount has known thy heavy hand*
The Bore has felt thy fyst, which did Arcadia destroy.
The monstrous conquerde Bull has rorde that Creta did anoy.
The Dragon dyre that breeding beast in Lerna poole he slew,
And chopping of one head forbad thereof to rise anewe.
With clubbed brusing battring batte he crankly did subdew.
(The brethren twins y^ tewde un Teate) whereof three monsters grew.
Of tryple formed Gerion the spoil into the east,
A drove of ECttell Hercules did fetch out of the weast.
Away from tyrant Diomede the Thracian horse he led,
Which neither with the grass that grew by Styrmon flood he fed,
Nor yet on Heber banks, but them the v^^layne did refresh
His greedy mounching cramming tades with aliaunts blood and flesh.
Their rawfed Jaws imbrewde were with the carmans blood at last,
The spoils and shaftes Hipolyte saw from her bosom wrast
As soon as he with clattring shaft the dusky cloud did smite,
The Stymphall bird that shadowed the sun, did take her flight.
The fertile tree that apples bears of gold, did fear him sore,
Which never yet acquayntaunce had with Tasters ^ooth before.
But whipping up with lively twigges into the air she fly^s,
And while the chinking plate does found then Argos full of eyes,
The watchman shrinking close for cold that sleep yet never knew,
Does hear the noise while Hercules with metal of yellow hew
Well laden packs away, and left the grove befliched clea^e.
The hound of hell did hold his tongue drawn by in tryple cheane,
Nor bark with any boughinge throat, nor could abide the heme,
Or color of the heavenly light, whose beams he never knew.
When thou were captain General, and did conduct our Host,
(They that) of Dardans Lygne, to come their Stock do falsely boste,
Were vanquished by force of arms and since they felt again
Thy Gray goose winge, whose bitterness to fear might the^ constrayne.
WIthin a revel rexe is kept,
as sore as ever was,
Even at the ten years siege of Troy:
What thing is this? (alas)
Get up my soul, and of the rage
auengmeent worthy crave:
Though Phrygians we be vanquished,
the victory we have.
The matter well is brought about:
up Troy thou rysest now,
Thou flat on floor have pulde down Greece, to ly as low as thou.
Thy Conqueror does turn his Face: my prophesying spright
Did never yet disclose to me so notable a sight:
I see the same, and am thereat, and busied in the broyle,
No vision fond fantastical my senses does beguile:
Such fare as Prygians feasts with on last unhappy night
At Agamemnons royal court full daintily they dight:
With purple hangings all adornde the brodred Beds do shine,
In old Assaracks goblets gylt they swincke and swill the wine.
The King in gorgyous royal robes on chair of State does sit,
And pranckt with pride of Pryams pomp of whom he conquered it.
Put of this hostile weed, to him, (the Queen, his Wife began say,)
And of thy loving Lady wrought wear rather this array.
This garment knit. It makes me loath, that shiuering here I stand.
O shall a King be murdered, by a banished wretches hand?
Out, shall Th'adulterer destroy the husband of the Wife?
The dreadful destinies approcht, the food that last in life
He tasted of before his death, their masters blood shall see,
The gubs of blood down dropping on the wind shall powered be.
By traytrous trick of trapping weed his death is brought about,
Which being put upon his head his hands could not get out*
The stopped poake with mouth set open his muffled head does hyde,
The mankind dame with trembling hand the swe^d drew from her side,
Nor to the utmost of her might it in his flesh she thrast,
But in the gieuing of the stroke she stayed all aghast,
He as it were a bristled Bore entangled in the net
Among the briars in busshy woods yet tries out to get.
With struggling much the shrinking bands more straightly he does bind.
He stryues in vain, and would sl^y of the snare that does him blind.
Which catches hold on every side. But yet th'entangled wreatch
Does grope about, his subtle foes with griping hand to catch.
But furious Tyndaris preparde the Pollaxe in her hand,
And as the priest to sacrifice at Th'alter side does stand,
And vewes with eye the Bullockes neck, ear that with Axe he smite,
So to and fro she heaues her hand to stryke and leauell right.
He has the stroke: dispatched it is: not quite fhopt of the head
It hangs by a little crop: here from the Carcass dead
The spouting blood came gusshing out: and there the head does lie,
With wallowing, bobling, mumbling tongue: nor they do by and bye
Forsake him so: the breathless coarse Aegist does all to coil:
And mangled has the gasshed corpse: while thus he does him spoil,
She puts to her helping hand: by detestable deed
They both accord unto the kind, whereof they do proceed.
Dame Helens sister right she is, and he Thyestes son:
Lo doubtful Titan stands still the day now being done,
Not knowing whether best to keep still on his wonted way,
Or turn his wheels unto the path of dyre Thyestes day.
O Thou whom of our Fathers death
the only help we have,
Fly, fly, from force of furious foes,
make have thy self to save:
Our house is ^opsey turuey tossed,
our Stock is cast away,
Our ruthful realms to ruin run, our kingdoms do decay.
Who comes here in Chariot swift thus galloping a main?
Brother, disguised in thy weed let me thy person feign.
O Bussard blind, what do thou mean from forrayne folk to fly?
Whom do thou shun? it does behoue to fear this family.
Orestes now be boulde, and set all shiuering fear a side,
The certain succor of a trusty friend I have espide.
WIth solemn Pomp I Strophilus
forsaking Phocis land,
Bearing a branch of Paulme, that grows
at Eli^, in my hand,
Returned back I am, the cause
that wild me heather wend,
Is with these gifts to gratefie
and welcome home my friend,
Whose valiant army shal^e, and shook
the tattred Troyan walls,
Who wearied with the ten years war, now flat on floor she falls.
What woeful wight is this that staynes her mourning face with tears,
And drowned deep in drousp dumpes oppressed is with ^eares?
I know full well this damsel is of Princes lynage borne.
What cause Electra has this joyful family to morn?
By treason that my mother wrought, my Father lies slain,
And drincking of their fathers cup the children do complain.
Aegist engroceth Caste^s got by fornication.

A lack that of so long a time, filicity is none.

I thee request even for the Jove my father thou do owe,
And for the honor of the crown, whose brute abroad both grow
In every coast: and by the Gods that diversely do deal,
Take into thy tuicion, convey away, and steal,
This poor Orest: such kind of theft is piety in deed.

Although that Agamemnoas death does teach me to take heed,
Yet will I undertake the same, and with all diligence
Orestes shall I go about with strength to have thee hence.
Prosperity requires faith, but trouble exacts the same,
Have here a price for those that do contend and wage in game.
An Ornament with comely grace ordaynde to deck the brow,
And let thy head be couerde with this green and pleasant bow.
And carry this victorious triumphant branch in hand.
God grant this Paulme that planted was in fertile Pisa land,
(Where solemn games were celebrate Jove's honor to express)
May both a sauegarde be to thee, and bring thee good success.
Thou that bestryds thy fathers steedes, as he before has done,
Go stryke a league of amity with Pylades my son.
Now nimble Nagges let Greece hereof recording testify,
With headlong scouring course amayne this traytrous country fly.

He is escapte and gone, and with unmeasurable might
The Chariot horse with rain at will do scud out of my sight.
Now free from peril on my foes attendaunce will I make.
And offer willingly my head the deadly wound to take.
The cruel conqueresse of her spouse is come, whose spotted weed
With sprinkels (sign of slaughter) do bear record of her deed.
Her goary hands new bathde in blood as yet they be not dry,
Her rough and churlishe rigorous looks the fact do notify.
Unto the Temple will I trudge. Cassandra suffer me,
Oppressed with egall grief, take part of sacrifice with thee.

O Thou thy Mothers Enemy,
ungracious saucy face.
After what sorre do thou a maid
appear in publyque plate?
I have with my virginity
the bowres of Baudes forsook.

What man is het, that ever thee to be a vyrgin took?

What your own daughter?

With thy mother more modest should,

Do you at length begin to preach, such godliness to me. thou be.

A marily stomach stout thou bast with swelling hawty heart.
Subdued with sorrow learn thou shall to play a woman's part.

A swerd and buckler very well a woman does beseem,
(Except I dote.)

Thy self do thou haylefellowe with us esteem?

What Agamemnoon new is this, whom thou have got of late?

Hereafter shall I tame, and teach thy gyrlish tongue to prate.
And make thee know, how to a Queen thy taunting to forbear.

The whilst (thou Wyddow) au^sware me directly to this gear.
Thy husband is bereued quight of breath, his life is done.

Enquter where thy brother is, so seek about my son.

He is departed out of Greece.

Go fetch him out of hand.

Fetch thou my father unto me.

Give me to understand,
Where does he lurking hyde his head? where is he shrunk away?

All plunge of perils past he is, and at a quiet stay,
And in another Kingdom where no harm he does mistrust,
This answer were sufficient, to please a Parent tust.
But one whose breast does boil in wrath, it cannot satisefy.

To day by death thou shall receive thy fatal destiny.

On this condition am I pleased, the Altar to forsake,
If that this hanc shall do the deed, my death when I shall take.
Or else if in my throat to bath thy blade, thou do delight,
Most willingly I yield my throat, and give thee leave to smite.
Or if thou will chop of my head in brutishe beastly guise,
My neck a waiting for the wound out stretched ready lies.
Thou have committed sinfully a great and grievous guilt.
Go purge thy hardened hands, the which thy husbands blood have spilt.

O thou that of my perils all do suffer part with me,
And in my realm do also rule with egall dignity,
Aegisthus, art thou glad at this? (as does her not behoue,)
With checks and taunts y^ daughter does her mothers malice move.
She keeps her brothers counsel close conueyde out of the way.

Thou mal^pert and w^tlesse wenche, thine cluishe prating stay,
Refrain those words unfit thy Mothers glowing cares to vex.

What shall the breeder of this broyle control me with his checks,
Whose fathers gutit has caused him to have a doubtful name,
Who both is to his sister, son, and Nephew to the same?

To snap her head of with thy swerd Aegist do thou refrain?
Let her give up the ghost: or bring her brother straight again:
Let her be locked in dungeon darck, and let her spend her days,
In Caves and Rocks, with painful pangues, torment her every ways.
I hope him whom she hidden has she will again discry,
Through being clapped in prison strong and suffering poverty
With yrksome and unsavory smells on every side annoyde,
Enforst to wear a wyddowes weed, er wedding day enioyde:
Put in exile and banishment when each man does her hate:
So shall she be by misery compeld to yield to late,
Prohibyted of wholesome air fruition to have.

Grant me my dome by means of death to pass unto my grave.

I would have granted it to thee, if thou should it deny.
Unskilful is the tyrant, who by suffering wretches die
Does end their pains.

what after death does any thing remain?

And if thou do desire to dye, the same see you refrain.
Lay hands s^is on this wondrous wretch, whom being carried on,
Even to the furthest corner of my jurisdiction.
Far out beyond Mycoenas land in bonds let her be bound,
With darkness diui in hiddeous hold let her be closed round.
This captive Spouse and wicked Queen, the Trull of Princes bed
Shall pay her pains, and suffer death by so^^ng of her head.
Come, hale her on, that she may follow, that way my spouse is gone,
Whose love from me entised was.

Do not thus hale me on.
I will before you take the way, these tidings first to tell
Unto my country men of Troy beneath in lowest hell.
How ouerquelmed ships each where are spread the seas upon:
And M^coene country conquerde, is brought in subjection.
He that of thousand captains was graunde captain general,
Come to as great calamity as Troy it self did fall,
Entrapped was by traytrous train, and whoredom of his Wife,
And by a gift received of her, deprived of his Life.
Let us not linger: on with me, and thanks I do you give.
I ^oy, that it might be my hap, thus after Troy to live.

Go to, prepare thy self to dye thou frantique raging wight.

The fransy fits of fury fell on you shall also light.

ALas ye hateful hellish Hagges,
ye furies foul and fell,
Why cause ye rusty rancours rage
in noble hearts to dwell?
And cancred hate in boiling breasts
to grow from age to age?
Could not the graundstres paynefull pangues
the childrens wrath assuage?
Nor famyne faint of pyning paunche, with burning thyrst of hell,
Amid the blackest stream of Sticks where poysning breathes do dwell.
Where vapors bile parbraking out from dampishe myry mud,
Increase the pains of Tantalus deserude by guiltles blood,
Could not thine own offense suffice Thyestes in thy Life,
To file thy brothers spousall Bed, and to abuse his Wife?
But after breath from body fled, and Life thy Lymmes has left,
Can not remembrance of revenge out of thy breast be reft?
What, yet have thou not laid thy lips, taiaste of Lethes floude?
Now afte death why do thou come to move thy son to blood?
Could cruel Ditis grant to thee thy pasporte back again?
To work this woe upon the world, and make such rigor raygne,
That Clytemnestra is become the fifty sister dyre
Of Danaus daughters, that did once their husbands death conspyre.
Lo here how fickle fortune gives but brytle fading joy.
Lot, he who late a Conqueror tryumphed over Troy,
Enduring many srtudy storms with mighty toil and pain
To sow the seed of fame, has reapt small fruit thereof again.
When as his honor budding forth with flower began to bloome,
(Alas) the stock was hewed down and sent to deadly doom.
And they that of his victory and coming home were glad,
To sudden mourning change their mirth with heaviness bestad.
The lusty pomp of royal court is dead: (O doleful day)
The people moan their princes death with woe and weal away:
With howling crying, wringing hands, with sobs, with sighs, and tears,
And with their fists they beat their breasts, they pull and hale their hears.
And as the sheep amassed run, and rampe about the field,
When as their shepherd to the Wolf his goary throat does yield
Even so as mad they rage and rave throughout Micoenas land,
Deprived of their Prince, they fear the bloody Tyrauntes hand.
While thus were woeful waylings hard in every place about,
The good Cassandra (come from Troy) to death is haled out.
Like as the Swan, who when the time of death approaches nigh,
By nature warned is thereof, and pleased well to dye,
Does celebrate her funeral with dirge and solemn song:
Even so the noble vyrgin who in woe has lived long,
Most joyful goes she to her death with mild and pleasant face,
Stout bouistring out her burly breast with pryncely port and grace.
Nothing dismayde with courage bold, and cheerful countenance,
On stage ordained for her death she began her self advance:
As though she had not thither come, to leave her loathsome life,
As though she had not come, to taste the stroke of fatal knyfe.
But even as it in brydale bed her journey were to meet
Corebus dear, not having mind of death, nor winding sheet,
When looking round on every side she took her leave of all,
From vapourde eyes of young and old the trickling tears do fall.
The Greeks them selves to grief are moude to see this heavy sight,
So pity pearst the headmans heart, that thrice about to smite
He stayde the smot: with shiuering hand yet once again he tried.
And from her shoulders stroke her head. And thus the vyrgin dyed.
But now the Greeks another cause of mourning have in hand:
Oresters, Agamemnon^ some, is forced to fly the land.
Among old rotten ragged Rocks there lies an ugly place.
A Dungeon deep, as dark as hell, unknown to Phoebus face.
An holow huge wide gaping hole, with way still bending down,
Whose mouth with venonous wythred weeds is hid and ouergrowne,
Where stinking smells come belching out from filthy durty dyke.
Where Verment vile do creep and craule, in hell is not the like.
Ilfauourde, foul misshapen bugges, do luck about this cave,
With dreadful sounds, and roaring noise withing the pit they rave.
Even heather is Electra sent, in darckenesse deep to lie,
In poverty, and comfortless without the light of sky,
Fast clogde with Iron boults and Chains, thus by her mother laid
In torments, till by her to death Orestes be betrayde:
Who (as Cassandra tells) shall revenge his fathers death,
Depryue with swerd th'adulterour, and Mother both of breath.
So after all these bloody broyle, Greece never shall be free:
But blood for blood, and death by turns, the after age shall see.

