O Gods whose grace does guide their ghostes
that joy in wedlock pure,
O Juno thou Lucina hight,
on whom the chary cure
Allotted is of those, that groan
in paynfull chyldhed bands,
O Pallas by whose heavenly art,
Sir Typhis cunning hands
Have learnde to bridle with his helm his newly framed boat,
Wherewith the force of fighting fluds he breaking rides a floate.
O God whose forked Mace does storms in rigor rough appeas,
And cause the ruffling surges couch amid the rampinge Seas:
O Titan who upon the swift and werling Hemisphaer
Deuides the cheerful day and night by egall turns t'appere,
O threefolde shapen Hecate that sendest forth thy light,
Unto thy silent Sacrifice that offered is by night,
By whom my Jason swear to me O heavenly powers all,
And ye on whom Medea may with safer conscience call,
O Dungeon dark, most dreadful den of everlasting night,
O dampened Ghosts: O kingdom set against the Gods aright:
O Lord of sad and lowering lakes, O Lady dyre of Hell,
(Whom though that Pluto stale by force yet did his troth excel
The ficle faith of Iasons love, that he to me does beave,)
With cursed throat I conjure you, O grisly Ghostes appear.
Come out, come out, ye hellish hagges, feuenge this deed so dyre,
Bring in your scrauing pawrs a burning brand of deadly fire.
Rise up ye hiddeous devilish Feendes, as dreadful as ye wear,
When unto me in wedlock state ye did sometime appear.
Work ye, work ye, the doleful death of this new wedded Wife.
And martyr ye this Father in law: depryue of breath and life
King Creons ruthful family: in plunge of passing pain
Torment ye me, that on my spoule do wish this woe to raygne:
Preserve my Iasons life, but yet let him be bayted out
A myching, roging, ru^nagate, in foreign towns about.
To pass from door to door, with care to beg his needy bread,
Not knowing in what harbring place to couch his curssed head:
A banished wretch, disdaynde of all, and still in fear of life,
Then let him wish ten thousand times for me again his Wife:
This famous gest whom every man will entertayne and have,
Let him be driven at strangers gates the table ctu^mes to crave.
And that my bitter bannings may with mischief most abound,
God grant in gulf of like distress his children may be drounde,
To synke in sorrows storms, that do their mother ouerflowe:
Now, now, I have, I have the full reueng of all my woe,
I have dispatched: my pyteous playnt and words in vain I lose:
What shall not I with vyolence get up against my foes?
And wring out of their wrested hands the wedding torch so bright?
Shall I not force the firmament to lose his shrinking light?
What does my Graundsirs Phoebus face this heavy hap behold?
And standing gasyng at this gear yet westwarde is he rolde,
On glystring chariot hoysted high, and keeps his beaten Race,
Amid the crystal colourde sky, why turns he not his Face,
Retyring fast into the East back up the day to twyne?
O Father Phoebe to me, to me, thy Chariot reins resign,
That I advanced up, about the marble skies may ride,
Bequearh thy bridle unto me, and give me grace to guide
Thy yoked prauncing teame, with yerking lasshe of burning whip,
That with thy fervent fyry beams on purple poale do skip.
Let Corynth country burnt to dust by force of flame and fire
Give place, that both the iumbled seas may join: whom to retire
It does compel, and dassheth of from bank on either side,
Least meet in one their channels might, whose streams he does divide,
No way to work their deadly woe I have but this at hand,
That to the wedding I should bear a ruthsull brydall brande,
Anoying Creons careless Court: when finished I have
Such solemn service, as that right of sacrafice does crave,
Then at the Aulters of the Gods my children shall be slain,
With crimsen colourde blood of Babes their Aulters will I stayne.
Through Lyners, Lungs, the Lights and Heart, through every gut, and gal,
For vengeance break away perforce, and spare no blood at all:
If any lusty life as yet within thy soul do rest,
It ought of ancient courage still do dwell within my breast,
Exite all foolysh Female fear, and pity from thy mind,
And as th'untamed Tigers use to rage and rave unkind,
That haunt the croking combrous Caves, and clumpred frosen cliues,
And craggy Rocks of Caucasus, whose bitter cold depryues
The soil of all Inhabitours, permit to lodge and rest,
Such saluage brutish tyranny within thy brazen breast.
What ever hurly burly wrought does Phasis understand,
What mighty monstrous bloody feate I wrought by Sea or Land:
The like in Corynth shall be seen in most outrageous guife,
Most hyddious, hateful, horrible, to hear, or see with eyes,
Most devilish, desperate, dreadful deed, yet never known before,
Whose rage shall force heaven, earth, and hell to quake and tremble sore,
My burning breast that rowles in wrath, and does in rancour boil,
Sore thrysteth after blood, and wounds with slaughter, death, and spoil,
By renting racked lyms from lyms to drive them down to grave:
Tush, these be but as Fleabytings, that mentioned I have:
As weyghty things as these I did in greener girlishe age,
Now sorrows smart does rub the gall and frets with sharper rage.
But since my womb has yielded fruict, it does me well behoue,
The strength and parlous puissaunce of weightier illes to prous.
Be ready wrath, with all thy might that fury kindle may,
Thy foes to their destruction be ready to assay:
Of thy deuorsement let the Price to match, and counterpayse
The proud and precious pryncely pomp of these new wedding days.
How will thou from thy spouse depart? as him thou followed have
In blood to bath thy bloody hands and traytrous lives to wast.
Break of in time these long delays, abanden now again,
This lewd alliance, got by guilt, with greater guilt refrain,
WHo has not wist that windy words be vain,
And that in talk of trust is not the ground,
Here in a mirror may he see it plain,
Medea so by proof the same has found.
Who being blind by blinded Venus Boy,
Her bleared Eyes could not behold her bliss:
Nor spy the present poison of her Joy,
While in the grass the Serpent lurked is,
The shaft that flew from Cupids golden bow,
With feathers so has dimd her daseld Eyes,
That cannot see to shun the way of woe:
The ranckling head in dented heart that lies,
So dulles the same, that can not understand
The cause that brought false Jason out of Greece,
To come unto her fathers fertile Land,
Is not her love, but love of golden Fleece.
Yet was his speech so pleasant and so mild,
His tongue so filde, his promises so fair,
Sweet was the fowlers Song that has beguilde
The seely byrd, brought to the limed snare.
Faith, in his Face, trust shined in his Eyes,
The blushing brow plain meaning seemde to show.
In double heart black treason hydden lies,
Dissembling thoughts that weaue the web of woe.
The honyed Lyppes, the tongue in sugar dept
Do sweet the poison rank within the breast,
In subtle show of painted sheath is kept,
The rusty knife of treason deemed least:
Life seems the bayte to sight that lies brim,
Death is the hook that vnderlies the same,
The Candell blase delights with burning trim,
The Fly, till she be burned in the flame.
Who in such shows least deemed any ills.
The hungry fyshe fears not the bayte to Brook,
Till up the line do pluck him by the gylls,
And fast in throat he feels the deadly hook.
Woe Jason, woe to thee most wretched man,
Or rather wretch Medea woe to thee,
Woe to the one that thus dissemble can,
Woe to the other that trained so might be.
Thoughtst thou Medea his eyes to be the glass,
Wherein thou might the Face of thoughts behold?
That in his breast with words so covered was,
As cancred brass with gloss of yealow gold?
Did thou suppose that nature (more then kind)
Had placde his heart his lying lyppes between,
His looks to be the mirror of his mind?
Faith in fair Face has sildome yet ben seen.
Who listneth to the flatering Maremaides note,
Must needs commit his tired eyes to sleep,
Yielding to her the taking of his boat,
That means unware to drown him in the deep.
What booteth thee Medea to betray
The golden Fleece, to fawning Isasons hand,
From Dragons teeth him safely to convey,
And fyry Bulls the warders of the land?
Why for his sake from father have thou fled,
And thrust thy self out from thy native soil?
Thy brothers blood what ayled thee to shed,
With Jason thus to travel and to toil?
Behold the meede of this thy good desarte,
The recompense that he to thee does give.
For pleasure, pain, for joy, most eger smarte,
With clogging cares in banishment to live.
Thou, and thy Babes, are like to beg and starve.
In Nation strange, (O miserable life)
While Jason from his promyses do swerve,
And takes delight in his new wedded Wife,
O Ground ungrate; that when the husband man
Has tilled it, to recompense his toil
No Corn, but Weeds, and Thystles render can,
To stinge his hands, that Fruict seeks of his Soil.
Such venom grows of pleasant colored flower:
Lo, Princes lo, what deadly poison sup
Of Bane, erst sweet, now turned into sower,
Medea drank out of a goulden Cup,
AYe me, (alas) I am undone,
For at the Brydall cheer,
The warble note of wedding song
resounded in mine ear.
Yet for all this scant I my self,
yet scant believe I can,
That Jason would play such a prancke,
as most vntha^ckfull man,
Both of my Country, and my Sire, and kingdom me to spoil,
And yet forsake me wretch forlorn, to stray in foreign soil.
O has he such a stony heart, that does no more esteem,
The great good turns, and benefits that I imployde on him?
Who knows, that I have lewdly used enchauntments for his sake,
The rigor rough, and stormy rage, of swelling Seas to slake.
The grunting fiery foming Bulls, whose smoking guts were stuffed,
With smoltring fumes, that from their Jaws, and nosthrils out they puffed.
I stopped their gnashi^g mou^ching mouths, I que^cht their burning breath,
And vapors hot of stewing paunch, that else had wrought his death,
Or feeds he thus his sansy, fond, to think my skill of charm,
Abated is, and that I have no power to do him harm?
Brstract of wits, with wavering mind perplexed on every part,
I tossed, and turmoyled am, with wayward crasy heart.
Now this, now that, and neither now, but now another way,
By diverse means I toil, that so my wrong reueng I may,
I would the wretch a brother had: but what? he has a Wife.
Go cut her throat, with ghastly wounds bereue her of her life.
On her i will work my deadly spite: her, her alone I crave,
To quit such bitter sowsing storms, as I sustained have.
If any graund no^orious guilt in all Pelasga Land
Be put in practice, yet unknown unto thy harming hand,
Thereof to get experience the time does now begin:
Thy former feats do bid thee take good hope, to thryue herein:
Let all thy guilts with thronging thick assemble thee to aid,
The golden Fleece (the chief Novel) of Colchis I Will betrayde.
My tender Brother eke, that with my Syer did me pursue,
Whom with his secret parts cut of, I wicked Virgin slew,
Whose shreaded and dismembered corpse, with sword in gobbits hewd,
(A woeful Coarse toth' Fathers heart) on Pontus ground I strewed.
How hory headded Pelias his wythred age to shyft
To greener years, for longer life: his daughters by my dryft
His members all and mangled flesh with licour scalding hot
Ysodden, and perboyled have, in seething brazen pot.
How often in heinous blood have these my cruel hands been dyed?
And never any guilt as yet by wrath inflamde I tried.
But now the parlous poysning wound of Cupids percing dart,
Does boil and rage within my breast, it ranckles at my heart.
But how could Jason it redress, whom fortunes froward will
Has yield unto another hand, at lust to save or spill?
O rage of rusty cancred mind, this sclaundrous talk amend,
If Fortunes grace will grant it thus, let him unto his end
Live still my Jason as he was: but if not Jason mine,
Yet caytife suffer Jason live, though Jason none of thine:
Who being mindful still of us some favor let him show,
For these good turns that our good will could erst on him bestow:
King Creon is in all the fault, and only worthy blame,
Who puffed up with Scepter proud, unable for to frame
His tickle mind to modesty, made breach twixt us again,
Whom Hymen's bands, and link of love had made but one of twain,
By whom eke from her tender brats the mother (wretch) is drawn,
He breaks the vow, that gaged is with such a precious pawn.
Seek after such a villaynes blood, in daunting pangs of smart
Let him alone be surely dowst, such is his due desert,
A dungell hept of Cinders burnt his Pallayce make I shall,
That Malea where in winding strights, the lingering ships due crall,
Shall gase on smolthring turrets tops turmoylde in crackling flame.
For godsake (Madame) I you pray your tongue to silence frame.
Eke hyde your privy languishing and grief in secret vain:
Who with a modest mind abides the Spurs of pricking pain,
And suffers sorrows patiently, may it repay again.
Who bears a privy grudge in breast, and keeps his malice close,
When least suspection is thereof, may most annoy his Foes.
He leeseth opportunity who vengeance does require,
That shows by open sparks the flame the heat of kindled fire.

Small is the grype of grief that can to reasons lore obey,
And sneking down with stealing steps can slyly slip away.
But they that thoroughly sowsed are with showers of greater pain,
Can not digest such corsyes sharp, but cast it up agaye:
Feign would I give them trouncing girds.

Good daughter dear assuage
Th'unbrydled sway, and boiling heat of this thy gyddy rage:
Scant may thou purchase quietness, although thou hold thy tongue.

The valiant heart dame Fortune yet durst never harm with wrong,
But dreading dastards down she drives.

It any courage dure,
And harbred be in noble breast, now put the same in ure.

The show of sturdy valiaut heart, at any time does shine.

No hope does in adversity thy way to escape assygne.

He that has none affiaunce left, nor any hope at all.
Yet let him not mystrust the luck of ought that may befall.

Thy Country clean has cast thee of, to let thee sink or swim,
As for thy husband Jason be, there is no trust in him:
Of all the wealth, and worldly mucke wherewith thou did abound:
No portion remaynes at all, whereby some help is found.

Medea yet is left, (to much) and here thou may espy
The Seas to succor us in flight, and lands aloof that ly:
Yea pron tools, with burning brands we have to work them woe,
And Gods that with the thunder dint shall ouerquell our foe:

Who wears y^ golde^crested crown him dred with awe ye should.

My Father was a King, yet I betrayed his Fleece of gould.

Can not the deadly vyolence of weapons make thee fear?

No, though such grisly Lads they were, as whilom did appear,
That bred of gargell Dragous teeth in holow gaping ground,
When mutually in bloody fight each other did confound.

The^ will thou cast thy self to death.

Would God ye I were dead.

Fly, fly to save thy life.

Woe worth the time that once I fled.

What O Medea.

Why shall I fly?

A mother dear art thou,
Fly therefore for thy childrens sake.

Ye see by whom, and how,
A wretched Mother I am made.

Thy life by flight to save
Do thou mistrust?

Nay, fly I will, but vengeance first i will have.

Then some shall thee at heels pursue, to wrecke the same again.

Perhap i will make his coming short.

Be still, and now refrain
O despret dame thy thundering threats, and slake your raging ire.
Apply, and frame thy froward will as time and tides require.

Full well may fortunes welting wheel to begging bring my state,
As for my worthy courage, that she, never shall abate.
Who bowncing at the Gates, does cause the creaking doors to Iar?
It is the wretch ( Creon his self,) whom princely power far
Has lift aloft, with lordly look, puffed up with pouncing pride,
That he may Corinth country, with the sway of Scepter guide.

NEdea that ungracious Imp, king Aetas wicked child,
Yet has not from our careful realm her lingering foot exilde.
Some naughty drift she goes about, her knacks of old we kno
Her iugling arts, her harming hands are known well long ago.
From who^ will she withhold her harm? whom will this cruel beast
Permit to live, from perrill free, in quietness and rest?
Clean to cut of this parlous plague it was our purpose bent,
But Jason by entreting hard, did cause us to relent.
At his request we granted have, her life she shall enjoy,
Let her acquit our country free from fear of all annoy:
Yea saufely let her pack her hence, in eger giddy fit,
With lumpish lowering look she comes in talk with me to knit:
Sirs keep her of and set her hence, least us she touch perhap,
And drive her back from coming nigh command her keep her clap.
And let her learn at length, how that her self submit she may,
The puissaunt payse and majesty of Princes to obey.
Run, hie thee quickly, trudge apace, have hence out of my sight
This horrible, most odious queen, this monstrous wicked wight.
My soueraygne liege, what greater crime have I or less offense
Commit against thy majesty, to be ex^led hence?

Alas, the guiltless woman does demand a reason why:

If thou be Judge indifferent, ordaynde my cause to try,
Consider then my doubtful case, and wey the ground of it:
If thou be king, command a Judge for such a matter fit.

The princes power thou shall obey, b'it either right or wrong.

The prosperous pride of wronging crowns cannot endeuer long.

Auaunt, and yell out thy complaynts at Colchis, get thee hence.

Full gladly will I get me home, if he that brought me thence,
Vouchsafe to bear me back again.

Alas, to late arise
Entreating words, when as decree is taken otherwise.

He that not hearing either part, pronounces his decree,
Unrighteous man accoumpted is, though right his sentence be.

While Pclias trusted to thy talk, from life to death he fell.
Go to, begin, we give you leave your goodly tale to tell.

That type of Regal majesty, that erst by Fortunes hand,
Advanced to I did attain, has taught me understand,
How hard a thing it is of wrath the rygour to assuage,
When burning heat of boiling breast in flames begins to rage.
Eke for th'aduan^cement of their power more to display in sight
Their kingly courage bolstred out with majesty of might.
They deem it does import asway, and has a greater grace,
Whom stately scepter causde to climbs aloft to prouder place.
To persevere with fansye fond, in that to reasons spyght,
Whose greedy choice attaynted first his mind with vain delight.
For though in pireous plyght I lie, thrown down to great decay,
With heavy hap, and ruthful chance, to miserable stay,
Thus hunted out from place to place, forsook and left alone,
A wyddow while my husband live, with cause to wayle and moan,
Perplexed in maze of misery, with cloying cares so ryfe,
Yet whylom I in golden trone have led in happy life.
By high and noble parentage my bright renown does shine.
From Phoebus take my Graundsire great deryued is my ligue.
Whear silver streamed Phasis flood his wasshing waves does shed,
Or with contrary croking ways his bathing channel spread,
What ever wandering coast stretched out is ^eft aloof behind,
From whence the roaming Scithyan Sea his channel forth does find,
Where as Maeotis fenny plashe with pure fresh water sprynges,
Does season sweet the briny Sea, that tide in thither brynges.
Eke all the coasts enuyroued and kept within the banks
Of Thermodon, where warlike troops, and armed wyddowes ranckes,
With painted bucklers on their arms hold all the land in fear,
With rigor rough of threatening sword, with force of denting spear.
So far to all these wandering coasts and countries round about,
My Fathers ample regiment at large is stretched out.
I being thus of noble Race, and in an happy plight,
With glorious gloss of pryncely pomp in honor shining bright,
Then pearelesse Pears my Spousall bed did seek and sue to have,
But those to be their loving Feeres, now other Ladies crave:
Rash, ticle, peuish, indiscreet, and wavering Fortunes wheel,
Has cast me out, the crusshing cares of banishment to feel.
In Scepter proud and hauty Crown fix thine affyaunce fast.
Since vpsidowne with welkin wheel, whole mounts of wealth is cast.
This Princes do possess, that should their royalty display,
Whose fame shall never razed be, with storm of lowering day,
To succor those whom misery in pit of pains does souse,
To shield and harber suppliaunts in roof of loyal house.
This only brought I from my Realm, the precious golden Fleece,
That Jewel chief, and eke the flower of Chyualry in Greece,
The sturdy prop, the Rampter strong the bulwark of your wealth,
And Hercules the boystrous Imp of Jove I kept in health.
It was by means of my good will that Orpheus did escape,
Whose harmony the liuelesse Rocks with such delight did rape,
That forced even the clottred lumpes with hobling pricked to praunce,
And eke the iocond nodding woods with footing fine to dance.
And that these heavenly twins Castor, and Pollux did not by,
My dew desert is doubled twice, since them preserved I.
Of Boreas blustering out with puffed Cheeks, his blasting Breath,
His wynged Sons I kept alive both Calais, and Zeath.
And Linceus that with pearcing beams, and sharper sight of Eye,
Could Nauies on the farther bank of Sicill shore espy.
And all the Mynians that did come the golden Fleece to win.
As for the Prince of Princes all, I will not bring him in.
With silence Jason will I pass, for whom though him I save,
Yet is not Greece in debt to me, no recompense I crave.
To no man him I do impute, the rest I brought again
For your ^^ayle, that you thereby some profit might attain.
But only on my Jason dear, him for my own loves sake
I kept in store, that he of me his wedded Wife should make.
None other fault (God wot) ye have to charge me with but this,
That Argo Ship by means of me returned saufely is.
If I a shamefast maid had not with Cupids bayte been caught,
If more my Fathers health to have then Iasons I had sought,
Pelasga land had been v^done, and feign to great decay,
The lusty valiant Capitaynes, had clean been cast away:
And ioly Jason first of all this now thy son in law,
The Bulls had rent his swalowed lims in fiery chomping iawe.
Let Fortune fight against my case as list her eluish will,
Yet never shall it grieve my heart, repent my deed I nill,
That I should for so many kings their reling honor save,
The guerden due that I for this my crime commit must have,
It lies Crecon in thy hand, if thus it lyketh thee,
Condemn my guilty ghost lo death, but render first to me,
My fault that forced me offend, then Creon grant I this,
Receiving Jason (cause of crime) I guilty did amiss.
Thou know that I was such an one when couring low I lay,
Before thy feet in humble wise and did entreating pray,
Thy gracious goodness me to grant some succor at thy hand.
For me a wreatch and wreatched Babes I ask within this land
Some cotage base, in outcast hole, some couching corner vile,
If from the town thou drive us out to wander in exile,
The some by place aloof within this realm let us obtar^e.

How I am none that tyrant like with churlish Scepter raygne,
Nor proudly or disdaynfully, with hawty courage hie,
With vau^ting foot do stamp them down that vndertroden lie,
And daunted are in careful bale, this plainly does disclose,
In that to me of late I such a son in law have chose,
Who was a wandering pilgrim poor, with sore afflictions freight,
Dismayde with terror of his foe, that lay for him in wayght.
Because Acastus having got the crown of Thessail land,
Requires in thy guilty blood to bath his wreackfull hand.
He does bewail that good old man his feeble father slain,
Whom weight of years with bowing back to stoop allow constrayne
The godly minded systers, all yblinde with misty vale
And cloking color of thy craft durst ventrusly assail.
That mount of myschiefe marvelous, to mangle heaw, and cut*
Their Fathers dear unjointed limbs in boiling Caldron put.
But for thy open guiltiness if thou can purge the same,
Straight Jason can discharge him self from blot of guilty blame.
His gentle hands were never staynde with goare of any blood.
Aloof from your conspyracie refrayning far he stood.
His harmless hands put not in ure with goary tools to mell.
But thou that setst on fire first these mighty mischiefs fell,
Whom shameless woman's wily brain and manly stomach stout
Do set a God, for to attempt to bring all ils about.
And no regard at all thou have, how sounding trumpe of fame
With ringing blast of good or ill do blow abroad thy name:
Get out and cleanse my fyled realm, away together bear
Thine herbs vn^ilde of sorcery, my Lyeges ryd fro fear.
Transporte thee to some other land, whereas thou may at ease
With odious noise of devilish charm, the troubled Gods disease.

If needs thou wylt have me avoid my ship to me testore,
Or else my mate with whom I first aryued on this shore:
Why do thou bid that by my self I only should be gone?
I came not heather at first without my company alone.
If this do thee aggryese, that brunt of wars thou shall sustain,
Command us both the cause thereof to shun thy realm again:
Since both are guilty of one art, why do thou part us twain?
For Iasons sake not for mine own, poor Pelias was slain.
Annex unto my traytrous flight the conquerde booty brave,
My hoary headded natural sier, whom I forsaken have,
With brothers bloody flesh that mangled was with caruing knife,
Or ought of Iasons forged lies he gabbes unto his wife.
These dreary deeds are none of mine, so often as I offend,
Not for mine own commodity, to come thereby in the end.

Time is expierd, by which thou ought to have been gone away,
With keeping such a chat, why do thou make so long delay?

Yet of thy bounty ere I go, this one boon will I crave.
Although the mother banished, so sore offended have,
Let not the vengeance of my fault through wrathful deadly hate,
Mine innocent and guiltless Babes torment in wreached state.

Away: with loving friendly grype thy children I embrace,
And as a father natural take pity on their case.

Even for the prosperous good encreace of fertile spousall bed,
Of Glauce bright thy Daughter dear, whom Jason late has wed.
And by the hope of fruictfull seed, whose flower in time shall bloome.
By th'onour of thy glystring crown, ythralde to fortunes doom,
Which she so full of chop and change, with ticle turning wheel
Whirls up and down, in staggring state makes to and fro to reele.
I thee beseech, since to exile I am departing now
O Creon but a little pawse for mercy me allow,
While of my mourning br^ts with kiss, my last farewell I take.
While gasp of failing breath perhap my shyuering lyms forsake.

With craft entending some deceit thou crauest this delay.

What falshode for so little time be cause of terror may?

No tot of time is short enough displeasure to prevent.

Can not one io^ to weeping Eyes, and trylling tears be lent?

Although against thy ernest suite unlucky dread do strive,
One day to settle thee away, content I am to give.

This is to much, and of the same somewhat abrydge ye may.

Make speed apace if from our land thou get thee not away,
Ere Phoebus horse with golden gleede their streaming beams do shed,
Of dawning lamp, thou art condemde to leese thy wretched head.
The holy day, and brydall both do call me hence away:
And wills me at the sacred aare of Hymeneus to pray.

Lavish of life and dreadlesse was the wight,
Attempting first in slender tottring Barge
With sliuing Ore theslyced wave to smite,
And durst commit the dainty tender charge
Of hazered life to inconstant course of wind,
That turns with change of chances evermore,
To view the land forsook aloof behind,
And shoouing forth the Ship fro safer shore,
And glauncing through the fomy Channel deep
On sunder cut with slender Stem the wave,
Twixt hope of life, and dread of death to sweep,
In narrow gut him self to spill or save:
Experience yet of Planets no man had,
They needed not the wandering course to know
Of Stars, (wherewith the painted sky is clad,)
Not Pleiads, (which return of sailing show)
Nor Hyads (that with showrs the Seas do beat)
No nor the stern Amaltheas horned head
(Who gave the lyppes of sucking Jove the Teate)
Were wont to put the blundering ships in dread.
They feared not the northern Isy wayne,
Which lazy old boots wieldes behind,
And twynes about, no name yet could they feign
For Boreas rough, nor smother western wind.
Yet Typhys bold on open seas durst show
His hoysted sails, and for the wyndes decree
New laws: as now full gale aloof to blow,
Now tackle turride to take side wind alee,
Now up to farle the crossayle on the mast,
There safe to hang, the topsayle now to spread,
Now missel sail, and drabler out to cast,
When dagling hanges his shottring tackle red
While stearsman stur, and busye never blin,
With pyth to pull all sails eke to display,
With tooth and nail all foree of wind to win,
To sheare the seas, and quick to scud away.
The golden world our fathers have possessed,
Where banysht fraud durst never come in place,
All were content to live at home in rest,
With horye head, gray beard, and surrowed face.
Which tract of time within his country brought.
Rich having little, for more they did not toil,
No vente for wares, nor Traficque far they sought,
No wealth that sprange beyond their native soil,
The Thessail ship together now has set,
The Thessail ship together now has set,
The World that well with Seas disseuered lay,
It biddes the fl^uds with Oars to be bet,
And streams unknown with shipwreck us to fray
That wicked Keele was lost by ruthful wrack
Ytossed through such perils passing great,
Where Cyane^ Rocks began rore as thunder crack,
Whose bouncing boult the shaken soil does beat.
The sowsing Surges dasshed every star,
The pesterd seas the clouds aloft berayde,
This scuffling did bold TYPHIS mind detarre,
His helm did slip from trembling hand dismayde.
The ORPHEUS with his drowping Harp was mum
Dead in her dumpes the flaunting ARGOS glee,
All hushed in rest with silence wexed dum,
What hardy heart astound here would not be?
To see at once each yawning mouth to gape,
Of Syllas gulf compact in wallowing paunch,
Of dogs, who does not loath her mongrell shape,
Her visage, breast, and hyddeous ugly haunch:
Whom erketh not the scoulde with barking still?
To here the Mermaydes dyre who does not quayle,
That lure the Ears with pleasant singing shrill
Of such as on Ausonius Sea do sail:
When ORPHEUS on his t^anckling Harp did play,
That erst the Muse Callio^ gave to him
Almost those Nymphs that wonted was to stay
The shyps, he causd fast following him to swim.
How dearly was that wicked journey bought?
MEDEA accursed, and eke the golden F^eece,
That greater harm then storm of seas has wrought
Rewarded well that voyage first of Greece.
Now seas controulde do suffer passage free,
The Argo proud erected by the hand
Of PALLA^ first, does not complain that she,
Conueyde has back, the kings unto their land
Each whirry boat now scuddes about the deep,
All stynts and wars are taken clean away,
The Cities frame new walls themselves to keep,
The open world lettes naught rest where it lay:
The Hoyes of Ind Arexis lukewarm leake,
The Perseans stout in Rhene and Albis stream
Does bath their Barks, time shall in fine out break
When Ocean wave shall open every Realm.
The wandering World at will shall open lie.
And TYPHIS will some nevve found Land suruay
Some trauelers shall the Countries far escrye,
Beyond small Thule, known furthest at this day.
WHy trotst thou fisking in and out
so rash from place to place?
Stand still, and of thine eger wrath
suppress the ruthful race,
The rigor rough of ramping rage
from burning breast out cast,
As Bacchus bedlem priests that of
his spryte have felt the blast,
Run frantic, hoyting up and down
with scitish wayward wits,
Not knowing any place of rest, so pricked with froward fits,
On cloudy top of Pindus Mount all hyd with Snow so chyll:
Or else upon the lofty riddge of braunched Nisa hill:
Thus starting still with frounced mind she walters to and froe,
The signs pronouncing proof of pangues her frensy Face does show
With glowing cheeks, and blood red Face with short and gasping breath,
She fetches deep ascending sighs from sobbing heart beneath,
Now blyth she smiles, each ru^bled thought in pondring brain she beats,
Now stands she in a mammering, now myschiefe sore she threats.
With chafing fume she burns in wrath, and now she does compain,
With blubbering tears a fresh byliue she weeps and wayles again.
Where will this lumpish load of cares with headlong sway allight?
On whom entendeth she to work the threats of her despite?
Where will this huge tempestious surge slake down it self again?
Enkindled fury new in breast begins to boil a main.
She secretly entendes no mischief small nor mean of s^se
To pass her self in wickedness her busy brains devise.
The token old of pinching ire full well ere this know I:
Some heinous, huge, outrageous great, and dreadful storm is nigh:
Her fiery, scowling, steaming Eyes, her hanging Groyne I see,
Her powling, puffed, frowning Face, that signs of freatting be.
O mighty Jove be guile my fear.
O wretch if thou desire,
What measure ought to payse thy wrath then learn by Cupids fire,
To hate as sore as thou did love, shall I not them anoy
That do unite in spousall bed, their wanton lust t'enioy?
Shall Phoebus fiery footed horse go lodge in western wave
The drowping day, that late I did with humble crowching crave,
And with such ernest busy suite so hardly granted was?
Shall it depart ere I can bring my deuylish dryst to pass?
While houering heaven does counterpaysed hang with egall space,
Amid the marble Hemispheares, while round with stinted race,
The gorgeous Sky above the Earth does spinning roll about,
Whiles that the number of the sands, lies hid vnserched out,
While dawning day does keep his course with Phoebus blase so bright,
While twinkling stars in golden traynes do guard the slu^bry night,
While Isle under propping poale with whyrling swyng so swift,
The shyning Bears vnbathde about the frosen Sky do lift,
While flushing floudes the frothy streams to rustling Seas do send,
To gird them gript with plonging pangues my rage shall never end.
With greater heat it shall reboyle, like as the brutishe beast,
Whose tyranny most horrible, exceeds all the rest,
What greedy gaping whyrle poole wide what parlous gulf vnmilde,
What Sylla coucht in roaring Rocks, or what Charybdes wild,
(That Sicill, and Ionium Sea by frothy waves does sup)
What Aetna bolking st^fling flames, and dusky vapors up,
(Whose heavy payse with stewing heat does smoldring crush beneath
Encelades, that fiery flakes from choked throat does breath)
Can with such dreadful menaces in sweeting fury fry?
No river swift no troubled surge of stormy Sea so hye,
Nor sturdy seas (whom ruffling winds with raging force to rore)
Nor puissaunt flash of fire, whose might by boystrous blast is more,
May bide my angers violence: my fury shall it foil:
His court I Will over hourle, and lay it leauell with the soil.
My Iasons heart did quake for fear of Creon cruel king.
And least the king of Thessaly would war upon him bring.
But loyal love that hardens hearts makes no man be afright.
But beete, that he convict has yield himself to Creons might.
Yet once he might have visited, and come to me his wife,
To talk, and take his last farewell, if danger of his life
In doing this (hard hearted wretch most cruel) he should fear,
He being Creons son in law, for him it ^efull were,
To have proroged somewhat yet my heavy banishment,
To take my leave of children twain one only day is lent:
Yet do I not complain, as though the time to short I thought,
As proof shall plain pronounce, to day, to day, it shall be wrought,
The memory whereof no tract of time shall wype away.
With malice bent against the Gods my wrath shall them assay:
And rifling every thing, both good, and bad, I will turmoyle.

Madame thy mind that troubled is, and tossed with such abroyle
Of swarming ills* thy vexed breast now set at rest again,
The penish fond affections all of troubled mind refrain.

Then only can I be at rest, when every thing I see
Thrown headlong topste turuey down to ruthful end with me.
With me let all things clean decay: thy self if thou do spill,
Thou m^ist drive to destruction what else with thee thou will:

It in this folly stiff thou stand, behold what after clappes
Are to be fearde, none dare contriue for Princes trayning trappes.

O Lucklesse lot of froward Fates, O cruel Fortunes hap,
Both when she list to smite, or spare, in woe she does us wrap
A like, the salve y^ God has given so often, to cure our grief,
More noyeth then the sore it self, and sends less relief:
If for her good deserts: o me, amendment I should make,
I hazard should my ventrous life to leese it for her sake.
If I will shun my dismal day, and will not for her die,
Then want the love of loyalty, O wretched man must I.
No dastards dread my stomach stout can cause to droupe and shrynke,
But mere remorse appaulleth me, when on my babes I think.
For why? when careful parents are once reft of life and breath,
Some after them their wretched seed are drawn to doleful death.
O Sacred righteousness (if thou enjoy thy worthy place
In perfect bliss of happy heaven) I call upon thy grace,
And thee for witness here allege, how for my childrens part
With pity pricked I have commit these things against my heart.
And so I think Medea her self the Mother rather had,
(Though frantickly as now she ^ares with rage of heart so mad
And does abhor with paynfull yoke of combrous cares to toil)
Her spousall bed, then that her seed should take the plunging foil.
I did determine in my mind, to go her to entreat
With gentle words, and pray her cease, in fervent wrath to freate.
And lo, on me when once she cast the beams of glauncing Eye,
Full blythe she leapes, she tumpes for joy, in fi^s she ginnes to fry.
Deep deadly blackish hate she seems in outward brow to bear,
And wholly in her frowning face does glutting grief appear.
I packing, packing, Jason am: this still to chop, and change
The fleeting soil of my abode, to me it is not strange.
The cause of my departure yet (to me is straung) and new.
I wonted was in followinge thee all places to eschew:
I will depart, and get me hence, to whom for helping hand
Entendest thou to send us forth, whom hence to fly the land
Thou do compel with thine alies? shall I repair again*
To Phasis flood, to Colchis Isle, or to my fathers raygne?
Or goary sweeting fields, that with my brothers blood do reeke?
What harbring lands aloof do thou command us out to seek?
What seas appoint ye me to pass? shall I my journey drive,
Upon the parlous hateful jaws of Pontus to arrive,
By which I did saufe conduct home kings valiant armies great,
Where roaring rocks with thundering noise the flapping waves do beat
Or on the narrow wrackfull shore, of Simplegades twain?
Or else to small Hiolcos town can I return again?
Or toil, the gladsome pleasant lands of Tempe to attain?
All places that I opened have unto thy passage free,
I shut them up against my self, now whether sendste thou me?
A banished wretch to banishment thou would have incline,
Yet to the place of her exyle, thou can not her assygne.
Yet for all that without delay I must depart and go:
And why? forsooth the king his son in law commands so.
Well: nothing will I stand against, with grypes of passing pain
Let me be scourgde, of my deserts such is the gotten gain.
Let Creon in his pryncely ruff lay to his heavy hands,
To whyp an whore in torments sharp, with iron gives, and bands
Let her be chaynd, in hydeous hole of night for aye her lock:
Let her be cloyed with pestring payse of restless rolling rock.
Yet less than I deserved have, in all this shall I find:
O thou discourteous Gentleman, consider in thy mind
The flamy puffes, and fiery gaspes of ghastly gaping bull,
And Aetas catell rych with Fleece of gorgeous golden wool,
That went to graze amid so great and mighty fears in field,
Of uncontrolled Nation, whose soil does armies yield.
Revoke to mind the deadly darts of sudden starting foe,
When ghastly warrior ( Tellus brood) to ground again did go,
Through slaughter red of mutual lance, to this yet further pass,
The lurched Fleece of Phrixes Ram, that all thine errand was.
And vgsome Argos slumberlesse, whom fast I causde to keep
His weary watching winking eyes with vnaquaynted sleep.
My brother eke, whose fatal twist of feeble life I shred,
And guilt that wrought so many guiltes when as with thee I fled.
The daughters whom I set on work entrapt in wily train,
To slay their sire, that shall not rise to quickened life again.
And how to travel other realms, I set mine own at naught.
By that good hope which of thy seed conceived is in thought,
Eake by thy stable Mansion place, and mighty monsters, that
Down beaten for thy health, I causde before thy feet to squat,
And by these drudging hands of mine vnspared for thy sake,
For dread of dangers over past that caused thee to quake,
By heavens above, and seas below, that witness bearers be,
To knitting of our marriage up, thy mercy veil to me.
Of all the heaps of treasure great so far of being fet,
Which Aetas savage Scythians did travel for to get,
From Ind, where Phoebus scorching blase does dye the people black.
Of all this gold which in our dowers we could not well compacke.
But trick and trym we garnished our groves with gold so gay,
I banished wretch of all this stuff gat naught with me away,
Except my brothers slaughtred flesh, yet I employed the same
On thee: the cares of countries health, my honesty and shame.
My Father, and my brother both has yielded place to thee,
This is the dowry that thou had my wedded spouse to be.
To her whom thou do abrogate restore her goods again*

When Creon in malicious mood had thought thee to have slain,
Entreated with my tears, exyle and life he gave to thee.

I took it for a punishment, but surely as I see
This banishment is now become a friendly good reward.

While thou have time to go, be gone, for most seueare, and hard
The kings displeasure ever is.

thus would thou dodge me out?
Thy hated trull cast of thou do, that please Creuse thou might.

Do thou Medea vpbrayde me with the breach unkind of love?

And slaughter vile, with treachery, whereto thou did me move.

When all is done what can thou say my guiltines to stayne?

Even whatsoever I have done.

Yet more this does remain:
That thy ungracious wickedness of harm should me accuse.

Thine, thine, they are, they are all thine what ever I did use,
Who that of lewdness reapes the fruict, is grafter of the same.
Let every one with infamy thy wretched Spouse defame,
Yet do thou only take her part, her only do thou call
A just and undefiled wight, without offense at all.
If any man shall for thy sake polute his hand with ill,
To thee let him an innocent yet be accounted still,

The life is loathsome that does work his shame who has it chose.

The life whose choice does work thy shame thou ought again to lose.

Let reason rule thy eger mind so vexed with crabbed ire,
And for thy tender childrens ease to be at rest require.

I do defy it, wholly I detest it, I forswear,
That brethren bred unto my barnes Creusas womb shall bear.

It will be trim, when as a Queen of majesty and might
Has issue, kin unto the seed of thee a banishe wight.

So cursed day shall never on my wretched children shine,
To mingle base borne basterdes with the blood of noble Lygue.
Shall Phoebus stock (that bears the lamp of heaven in starry throne)
Be macht with drudging Sisiphus that roules in hell the stone?

What meanest thou wretch, both thee and me in banishment to yoke?
I pray then hence.

When humbly I my mind to Creon broke,
He gave an ear unto my suite.

What lies in my might
To do for thee?

If no good turn, then do thy worst dispyght.

On this side with his swerd in hand king Creon does me ^carre:
On other part with armed host Acast does me detarre.

Medea eke to coape with these, that more apaull us may:
Go to, to skyrmishe let us fall, let Jason be the pray:

I yield whom sore adversities have tyerd with heavy sway.
Learn thou to dred thy luclesse lot that often does thee assay.

I evermore have ruled the swinge of fortunes wavering will.

Achastus is at hand, and nygh is Creon thee to spyll:

Take thou thy heels to escape them both, I do not thee advise,
That thou against thy father in law in traytrous arms should rise.
Nor in Achast thy cosens blood thy wounding hands to gore,
The vows unto Medea made, do trouble thee so sore.
While yet thou have not spilt there blood, yet fly with me away.

When armies twain their banners of defiance shall display,
And marching forth in field to fight seek battle at my hand,
Who then for us encounter shall their puissaunce to withstand?

If Creon and Achastus king encampe together shall.
Admit that these in one with them should join their powers all
My Countrymen of Colchis I Will, and AEtas lusty king,
Suppose the Scythians join with Greeks, to ground I will the^ bring,
Clean put to foil.

The puissaunt power of hawty mace I fear.

Take heed, least more thou do affect the same, then for to clear,
Thy self of Creons servile yoke.

Least some suspicion grow,
Of this our tatling long here let us make an end and go.

Now Jove hurl out thy flames and force thy thundering bolts to fly,
With fiery drakes bright brandishing disparst in burning sky:
Strain forth thy dreadful threatening arm, dispose in due array
The rossing dint of lightning flashe, that wrecke our quarrel may.
With rumbling crack of renting cloud cause all the world to quake,
And Ieuell not thy houering hand to stryke with fiery flake
Upon my pasht and crushed corpse, or Iasons Carcass slain:
For whether of us thou smight to death his due reward shall gain,
Thy thumps of thwacking boltes on us amiss they cannot light.

Fie, let thy mind on matters run that seem a modest wight.
And use to have more cheerful talk, if any thing thou crave,
Within my fathers house to ease thy flight, thou shall it have.

Thou know my mind bath can, and eke is wont, to do no less,
Then to contemn the brittell wealth that Princes do possess.
This, this shall be the only boon that at thy hand I crave,
As mates with me in banishment, my children let me have,
That resting on their sighing breasts my careful mourning head,
I may my crystal teary streams into their bosoms shed.
But as for thee, new gotten sons of wife new wed do stay.

I grant that unto thy request I wish I might obey:
But nature me with pity pryckes, that needs I must deny.
For though both Creon and Achast, in torments force me lie,
I could not yield unto their wills: on this my life does rest:
In times of tears, this is the joy of dull afflicted breast
For better far I can abide the want of vital breath,
And succor of my lymmes, or loose, the light of world by death.

What Jove unto his seely Babes is deeply graft in him?
This works well I have him tript, lo now there lies brim.
An open place whereby receive a venny soon he may.
Let me or I depart, unto my seely children say.
These lessons of my last adewe, and grant to me the space,
With tender grype of colling last their loving limbs to embrace:
This will be comfort to my heart: yet at the latter word
I ask no more but only that you should me this afoorde.
If eger anguish cause my tongue to cast out words unkind,
Let all thing fly, let nothing be engraued in your mind
But let remembrance otherwhyle of me to touch your thought,
Let other things be wypte away that byle of wrath has wrought.

I have forgotten every whit God grant thou may of shake,
These surging qualmes of frounced mind and milder may it make:
For quietness does work their ease that dented are with woe:

What is he slily slypt and gone? falls out the matter so?
O Jason do thou sneake away, not having mind of me,
Nor of those former great good turns that I have done for thee?
With thee now am I clean forgot: but I will bring about
That from thy careful sighing mind shall not be banished out:
Apply to bring this to effect, call home thy wits again,
And all thy wyly fetches far, each artificial train.
This is the perfect fruict that may to thee of mischief spryng,
To presuppose that mischief is not graft in any thing.
Scant have I opportunity for my pretensed guile,
Because we are mistrusted sore: but try I will the while
To set upon them in such sort, as none can deem my sleyght:
March forth, now venture on, fall to, both what lies in thy might.
And also what does pass thy power. O faithful nourse and mate
Of all my heavy heart breaking, and diverse cursed fate.
Come help our simple mean device. Remaining yet I have
A robe of Pall the present that our heavenly Graundsire gave,
Chief monument of Cholchis I Will, which Phoebus did beslow
On Aetas for a pledge, that him his father he might know.
A precious fulgent gorget eake, that bravely glytters bright,
And with a seemly shyning seame of golden thryds is dight,
Through wrought between the row of pirles do stand in borders round,
Wherewith my golden crispen Locks is wonted to be crou^d.
My little children they shall bear these presents to the Bryde,
That first with slibber slabbar sosse of chauntments shall be tryde.
Request the aid of Hecate in readiness prepare
The lamentable sacrifice, upon the bloody Aare.
Enforce the fires catching hold upon the rafters hye
With crackling noise of flamy sparks rebound in azur sky.

NOffers force, nor ru^bling rage of boistrus blustering wind,
No dart shot whirling in the skies, such terror to y^ mind
Can drive, as when y^ ireful wife does boil in burning hate
D^priued of her spousall bed, and comfort of her mate,
Nor where the stormy southern wind with dankish dabby face,
Of hoary winter sends out the gusshing showers apace.
Where veighment Isters waumbling stream comes waltring down amayne,
Forbidding both the banks to meet, and cannot often contain
Him self within his channels scoupe, but further breaks his way,
Nor Rodanus whose russhing stream does launch into the sea,
Or when amid the floured spring with hotter burning sun,
The winters snowes disolude with heat down to the ryuers run:
The clottred top of Haemus hill to water thin does turn,
Such desperate gogin flame is wrath that inwardly does burn,
And modest rule regards not, nor brydeis can abide,
Nor dreading death, does wish on dinte of naked blade to slide.
O Gods be gracious unto us, for pardon we do crave,
That him who tamde the scuffling waves, vauchsafe ye would to save.
But Neptune yet the Lord of Seas with frowning face will lower,
That over his second Scepter men to triumph have the power.
The boy that rashly durst attempt that great unwieldy charge
Of Phoebus everlasting Carte, and rouing out at large,
Not bearing in his recklesse breast his fathers warnings wise,
Was burned with the flames which he did scatter in the Skies.
None knew the costly glimsing glades, where straggling Phaeton rode,
Pass not the path, where people safe in former time have trod.
O fondling, wilful, wanton boy, do not dissolve the frame
Of heaven, since Jove with sacred hand has hallowed the same.
Who rowde with valiant Oars tough, that were for Argo made,
Has powled naked Pelion mount of thycke compacted shade.
Who entered has the fleeting rocks and serched out the toil
And tyring travels of the seas, and has on saluage soil
Knit fast his stretched Cable rope, and going forth to land.
To cloyne away the foreign gold with greedy snatching hand.
Unto the seas (because that he transgrest their laws divine)
By this unlucky end of his, he pays his forfeyte fine.
The troubled seas of their unrest for vengeance howl and weep.
Sir Typhis who did conquer first the danger of the deep,
Has yielded up the cunning rule of his unwieldy stern,
To such a guide, as for that use has need as yet to learn.
Who giving up his Ghost aloof from of his native land,
In forreyn more lies buried vile with durty soddes in sand.
He sits among the flitiring souls that strangers to him wear.
And Aulis Isle that in her mind her masters loss does bear,
Held in the Ships, to stand and wayle in croking narrow nocke:
That Orpheus Calliops son who stayde the running Brook,
While he records on heavenly Harp with twanckling finger sine,
The wind laid down his pipling blastes: his harmony divine
Procurde the woods to styr them selves, and trees in traynes along
Came forth with byrds that held their lays and listened to his song.
With lims on sunder rent in field of Thrace he lies dead.
Up to the top of Heber floude, eke haled was his head.
Gone down he is to Stygian dampes, which seen he had before,
And Tartar boiling pits, from whence return he shall no more.
Alcydes banging hat did bring the Northern laddes to ground.
To Achelo of sundry shapes he gave his mortal wound.
Yet after he could purchase peace both unto sea and land,
And after Ditis dungeon black rent open by his hand,
He living spread himself along on burning Oetas hill:
His members in his proper flame the wretch did thrust to spill:
His blood he brewd with Nestors blood, and lost his loathsome life
By traytrous gift that poisoned shyrt received of his wife.
With tuske of bristled groyning Bore Anceus lyms were torn.
O Meleagar (wicked wight) to grave by thee were borne
Thy mothers brethren twain, and she, for it with ruthful hand,
Has wrought thy doleful desteny, to burn thy fatal brand.
The rash attempting Argonantes deserved all the death
That Hylas whom Alcides lost bereft of fading breath.
That springall which in sowsing waves of waters drowned was:
Go now ye lusty bloudes, the Seas: with doubtful lot to pass.
Though Idmon had the calking skyll of destentes before,
The serpent made him leave his life in tomb of Liby shore.
And Mopsus that to other men could well their fates escry,
Yet only did deceive him self uncertain where to die,
And he that could the secret hap of things to come unfold,
Yet did not in his counrey Thebes. Dame, Theris husband oulde
Did wander like an outlawde man Our Palimedes sire
Did headlong whelm him self in seas. Who at the Greeks retire
From Troy, to rushe on rocks did them alure with wily light,
Stout Ajax Oleus did sustain the dint of thunder bright,
And cruel storm of surging seas, to quite the heinous guilt,
That by his country was commit, in seas he lies spilt.
Alceste to redeem her husbands Phereus life from death,
The godly Wife upon her spouse bestowed her panting breath.
Proud Pelias that wretch him self who bad them first assay
The golden Fleece that booty brave by ship to fetch away,
Perboylde in glowing cauldron hoate with fervent heat he fryes,
And fleering piece meal up and down in water thin he lies.
Enough, enough, revenged are O Gods the wrongs of seas,
Be good to Jason, doing that he did, his Eame to please.
MY shiuering mind amazed is, aghast, and sore dismayde:
My chillish lims with quaking cold do tremble all afraid,
Such plagu^s and vengeance is at hand, in what exceeding wis^
Do sharp assaults of greedy grief still more and more arise,
And of it self in smothering breast enkindlesse greater heat?
Often have I seen how ramping rage has forced her to freate.
With frantic fits, mad, bedlem wise, against the Gods to rail,
And eke bewitched ghosts of heaven in plunging plagues to trayle:
But now Medea beats her busy brain to bring to pass
A myschiefe greater, greater far, then ever any was.
Erewhile when hence she tript away astonished so sore,
And of her poison closset close she entered had the door:
She powers out her Jewels all, abroad to light she brings
That which she dreading ^athed long* most irksome ugly things:
She mumbling coniures up by names of ills the rabble rout,
In hugger mugger cowched long, kept close, vnserched out:
All pestlent plagues she calls upon, what ever Libie land,
In frothy boiling stream does work, or muddy belching sand:
What tearing torments Taurus breeds, with snowes vnthawed still
Where winter flawes, and hory frost knit hard the craggy hill,
She lays her crossing hands upon each monstrous coniurde thing,
And over it her magic verse with chat ming does she sing:
A mowste, rowste, rusty route with cancred Scales Iclad
From musty, fusty, dusty dens where lurked long they had,
Do craull: a wallowing serpent huge, his co^brous Corpse out drags,
In fiery foming blaring mouth his forked tongue he wags.
He stares about with sparkling eyes, if some he might espy,
Whom snapping at with stinging spit he might constrayne to die:
But hearing once the magycke verse he hushed as all a gast,
His body boalne big, wrapped in lumps on twining knots he cast.
And wambling to and fro his tail in linkes he rowles it round.
Not sharp enough (quoth she) the plagues and tools that hollow ground
Engenders for my purpose are, to heaven up will I call,
To reach me stronger poison down, to frame my feate with all.
Now is it at the very point, Medea thou assay,
To bring about some farther fetch, then common Witches may.
Let down, let down, that sprawling Snake that does his body spread,
As does a running brook abroad his mighty channel s^ed.
Whose swelling knobs of wondrous ^^se and buystrous bobbing bumpes
Does thumpe the great and lesser bear that feet his heavy lumpes.
The bygger bear with golden gleede the greekish fleet does guide:
But by the less the Sidon ships their passage have espide.
He that with pinch of griping fist does bruise the adders twain,
His strening hard and clasping hand, let him unknit again.
And crushe their squeased venom out, come further thou our charm
O flymy serpent Python, whom Dame Juno sent to harm
Diana, and Apollo both, (those heavenly spyrites twain)
With whom Latona traueling did groan with pynching pain.
O Hydra whom in Lerna poole Alcides gave the foil,
And all the noisome vermen vile that Hercules did spoil.
Which when on sunder they were cut with slysing deadly knyfe,
Can knit again their sodred parts, and so recover life.
Help wakefull Dragon Argos, whom first magic words of mine
Made Morpheus lock thy sleepy liddes, and shut thy slugring eyne.
Then having brought above the ground of Serpents all the rout,
Of filthy weeds the ranckest bane she pyckes, and gathers out,
That spryng on knotty Eryx hill where passage none is found,
Among the ragged Rocks, or what on Caucasus his ground
Does grow that still is clad in Coat of hoary moary frost.
That evermore vnmelt abydes, whose spattred fylde is soste
With gubbs of blood, y^ spowteth from Prometheus gaping maw,
Whose guts with twitching talent out the ghastly gripe does draw.
Or any other venomous herb among the Medes that grows,
That with their sheafe of arowes sharp in field do scare their foes.
Or what the light held Parthian to serve her turn can send,
Or else the rych Arabians, that dyp their arrows end
In poison strong: the juice of all Medea out does wrynge,
That underneath the frosen poale in Svveuia land does spring.
Whose noble state Hircinus wood does high enhaunce and rear*
Or what the pleasant soil does yield in pryme of smiling veare,
When nature byddes the byrd begin her shrowding nest to build,
Or when the churlyshe Boreas blast sharp winter has exilde,
The trym array of branch and bough to cloth the naked tree,
And every thing with bitter could of Snow congealed be.
In any pestilent flower on stalk of any herb does grow,
Or noisome juice does lie in rotten wrythen roots allow,
Has any force in breading bane, those takes she in her hand.
Some plaugy herbs did Athos yield that mount of. Thessayle land.
And other Pindus roches hye and some upon the top
Of Pingeus, but tender twigges the cruel Sithe did lop:
These Tigris river norisht up, that choakes his whyrlpoale deep
With stronger stream. Danubius those in fostring wave did keep.
Those did Hidaspus mynister, who by the parching zone
With lukewarm silver channel runs, so ryth with precious stone.
And Bethis son, who gave the name unto his country great,
And with his shallowe ^oarde against the Spanyshe seas does beat
This herb aboade the edge of knyfe in dawning of the day
Ere Phoebus Face began peep, bedect with glittring goulden spray
His slender stalk was suepped of in deep of silent night,
His corn was cropped, while she with charm her poysned nails did dight.
She chops the deadly herbs, and wrings the squesed clottered blood
Of Serpents out: and filthy birds of irksome miry mud:
She tempers with the same and eake: she brayes the heart of Owl
Foreshewing death with glaring Eyes, and moaping Vysage foul,
Of shryke Owl hoarce alive she takes the durty stinking guts,
All these the framer of this feate in diverse percels puts.
This has in it devouring force of greedy spoiling flame,
The frosen ysle dulling could engenders by the same.
She chauntes on those the magic verse, that works no lesser harm,
With bustling frantickely she stampes, and cease not to charm.
O Flittring Flocks of grisly. ghostes
that sit in silent seat
O ougsome Bugges, O Gobblins grym
of Hell I you entreat:
O lowryng Chaos dungeon blind,
and dreadful darkened pit,
Where Ditis muffled up in Clouds
of blackest shades does sit,
O wretched woeful wawling souls your aid I do implore,
That linked lie with gingling Chains on wayling Limbo shore,
O mossy Den where death does couche his ghastly carrayne Face:
Relesse your pangues, O spryghts, and to this wedding hye apace.
Cause ye the snaggy wheel to pawse that rentes the Carkas bound,
Permit Ixions racked Lymmes to rest upon the ground:
Let hungry bytten Tantalus with gawnt and pyned panche
Soupe up Pirenes gulped stream his swelling thyrst to staunche.
Let burning Creon ^yde the brunt and gyrdes of greater pain,
Let payse of slyppery slyding stone type over back again
His moylyng Father Sisyphus, among the craggy Rocks.
Ye daughters dyre of Danaus whom perced Pychers morckes
So often with labor lost in vain this day does long for you
That in your life with bloody blade at once your husband slew.
And thou whose aares I honored have, O torch and lamp of night,
Approach O Lady mine with most deformed vysage dight:
O three fold shape^ Dame that knitst more threatening brows then one,
According to the country guise with dagling locks undone
And naked foot, the secret grove about I hallowed have,
From dusky dry vnmoysty clouds the showers of rain I crave.
Through me the chinked gaping ground the soked seas has drunk.
And mayner stream of th'ocian flood beneath the earth is sunk,
That swelteth out through hollow gulf with stronger gushing rage.
Then were his suddy wambling waves whose power it does assuage
The heavens with wrong disturbed course and out of order quight,
The darkened son, and glimmering stars at once has showed their light,
And dre^ched Charles his straggling wayne has ducie in dasshing wave,
The framed course of roaming time racte out of frame I have.
So my enchauntments have it wrought, that when the flaming sun
In summer bakes the parched soil then has the twigges begun,
With sprowting blossom fresh to blome, and hasty winter corn
Has out of harvest seen the fruit to barnes on sudde^ borne.
Into a shallowe foorde his sture distreame has Phasi^ wast,
And Isters channel being in so many branches cast,
Aba^ed has his wrackfull waves, on every silent shore
He lies calm: The tumbled floods with thundering noise did rore,
When couched clo^^ the winde^ were not moving pippling soft,
With working wave the prauncing seas have swollen and leapt aloft,
Whereas the wood in alder time with thick and braunched bow
Di^ spread his shade on gladsome soil no shade remains now.
I rolling up the magic verse at noone time Phoebus stay,
Amyd the darkened Sky, when fled was light of drowsy day.
Eke at my charm the watery flocks of Heyaeds went to glade.
Time is it Phoeba to respect the service to thee made:
To the^ with cruel bloody hands these garlands green were twynde
Which with his folding circles nine the serpent rough did bind.
Have here Tiphoias flesh, that does in Aetnas Foruace groan,
That shoke with baitery violent king Jove's assaulted trone.
This is the Centaures poisoned blood which Nessus villayne vile
Who made a rape of Dianire entending her to fyle,
Bequethed her when newly wound he gasping lay for breath,
While Hercles shaft stack in his Ribs, whose lau^ce did work his death:
Behold the Funeral cinders here which up the poison dried
Of Hercules who in his fire on Oeta mountain dyed:
Lo here the fatal brand, which late the fatal sisters three
Conspyred at Meleagers birth, such should his des^ny be,
To save alive his brethyng corpse, while that might whole remain,
Which saufe his mother Althe kept, till he his uncles tw^yne,
(That from Atlanta would have had the head of conquered Bore,)
Had reft of ly^e whose spightfull death Althea took so sore,
That both she showed her feruentnesse in systers godly love,
When to revenge her brothers death mere nature did her move,
But yet as mother most unkind, of nature most vnmylde,
To hasten the untimely grave of her beloved child,
While Meleagers fatal brande she wasted in the flame,
Whose swelting guts and bowels moult consumed as the same,
These plumes the Harpyes ravening fowls for have did leave behind,
In hidden hole whose cloase access no mortal wight can find.
When fast from Zethes chasing them with speedy flight they fled.
Put unto these the feathers which the S^ymphal bird did shed,
Whom duskyng Phoebus dymned light sir Hercules did stynge,
And galied with the shafte, that he in Hydraes hyde did flynge.
You Aares have yield a clattring noise I know, I know of old,
How unto me my Oracles are wonted to be toulde,
That when ye trem^l^ng flower does shake then has my Gods great,
Vouchsafe to grant me my request as I did her entreat,
I see Dianas wagon swife, not that whereon she glydes,
When all the night in darkened Sky with Face full open she rydes:
With countnaunce bright and blandishing but when with heavy cheer,
With dusky shimmering wanny globe, her lamp does pale appear.
Or when she trots about the heavens with horsecheade rayned strayte,
When Thessayle Witches with (...) threats of charming her do bayte.
So with thy dumpish dulled blase, thy cloudy faynting l^ght,
Send out, amid the lowering sky, the heart of people smyght
With agonies of suddeyne dread, in straung and fearful wise,
Compel the precious brazen pannes with iarri^g noise to rise
Through Corinth country ^uery where, to shield the^ from t^ie harm,
Least headlong ^rawne thou be from heaven to earth by force of charm.
An holy solemn sacryfice to worship thee we make,
Imbrewed with a bloody turphe the kindled Torche does take
Thy sacred burning night fire at the dampishe mory grave.
Sore charged with thy troubled ghost my head I shaken have,
And ducking down my Neck allow with shryking loud have shrigh
And groueling flat on floor in trance have lain in deadmans plight.
My ruffled Locks about mine ears down dagling have been bownd.
Tuckt up about my temples twain with gladsome garland crownde*
A drery branch is offered thee from filthy Stigis flood.
As is the guise of Bacchus priests the Coribanthes wood,
With naked breast and dugges laid out I Will prick with sacred blad^
Mine arm, that for the bubling blood an issue may be made,
With trilling streams my purple blood let drop on Th'aulter stones.
My tender Childrens crusshed flesh, and broken broosed bones
Learn how to brook with hardened heart: in practice put the trade
To florishe fearce, and keep a coil, with naked glittring blade:
I sprinkled holy water have, the lance once being made,
If tired thou complaynest that my cries thee ouerlade,
Give pardon to my ernest suite, O Perseus sister dear,
Still Jason is the only cause that urges me to rear
With squeking voice thy noisome beams, that sting like shot of bo
So season thou those sawced robes to work Creusas woe,
Whert with when she shall pranke her self the poison by and by
To rot her inward mary out, within her bones may fry,
The secret fire bleares their eyes with gloss of yeallow gold,
The which Prometheus gave to me that fire fylcher bold.
On whom for robbery that he did in heavens above commit,
With massy payse great Caucasus th'unweldy hill does sit.
Where under with unwasted womb he lies, and pays his pain,
To feed the cra^ming foul with gubs of guts that grows again.
He taught me with a pretty sleyght of conning, how to hyde
The strength of fire close kept in, (...) may not be espyde,
This lively tinder Mulciber has forged for my sake,
That tempred is with brymstone quick at first touch and take.
Eke of my Cosen Phaeton a wyldefyer flake I have
His flames the monstrous staghard rough Chimera to me gave,
In head and breast a Lion grim, and from the Rump behind
He sweepes the flower with lagging Tayl^ of Serpent fearce by kind
In Rybbes, and Loins along his paunche yshaped like a Goat.
These Fumes that out the Bull perbrakte from fyry spewinge throat^
I gotten have and brayde it with Medusas bitter gall
Commanding it in secret sort to duske and co^er all:
Breath on these venoms Heca^e with deadly might inspyre,
Preserve the touching poulder of my secret covert fire,
O grant that these my cloked crafts so may bewitch their Eyes,
That lykelyhoode of treason none they may herein surmyse:
So work that they in handling it may feel no kind of heat:
Her stewing breast, her seathing veins, let seruent fire freate
And force her roasted pyning lymmes, to drop and melt away,
Let smoke her rotten broyling bones: inflame this bryde to day
To cast a light with gr^ater gleede on fryseled blasing hear
Then is the shyning flame that does the wedding torches bear.
My suite is hard, thryse Hecare a dreadful barking gave
From doleful cloud a sacred flash of flamy sparks she drove.
Each poisons pride fulfilled is: call forth my children dear,
By whom unto the cursed Bryde these presents you may bear:
Go forth, go forth my little Babes, your mothers cursed fruit,
Go, go, employ your pains with brybe and earnest humble suite
To purchase grace, and eke to earne you favor in her sight.
That both a mother is to you, and rules with Ladies might.
Go on, apply your charge apace, and hye you home again,
That with embracing you I may my last farewell attain.
WHat sharp assaults of cruel CVPIDS flame
With gyddie head thus tosseth to and froe,
This bedlem Wight, and diuelysh despret dame
What rouing rage her pricks to work this woe?
Rough rancours vile congeales her frosen face,
Her hawty breast bumbasted is with pride,
She shakes her head, she stalks with stately pace.
She threats our king more then does her betyde.
Who would her deem to be a banished wight,
Whose skarlet Cheeks do glowe with rosy red?
In faynting Face, with pale and wanny whyght
The sangayne hew exyled thence is fled
Her changing looks no color long can hold.
Her shifting feet still trauasse to and froe.
Even as the fearce and ravening Tiger old
That does unware his sucking whelps forgo,
Does rampe, and rage, most eger ferce and wood,
Among the shrubs and busshes that do grow
On Ganges stronde that golden sanded flood,
Whose silver stream through India does flow.
Even so MEDEA sometime wants her wits
To rule the rage of her unbridled ire,
Now VENUS Son, with busy froward fits,
Now Wrath, and Love enkyndle both the fire.
What shall she do? when will this heinous wight
With forward foot be packing hence away,
From Greece? to ease our Realm of terror quight,
And princes twain whom she so sore does fray:
Now Phoebus lodge thy Charyot in the West,
Let neither Raynes, nor Bridle stay thy Race,
Let groueling light with Dulceat night oppressed
In cloking Clouds wrapped up his muffled Face,
Let Hesperus the loadesman of the night,
In Western floode drench deep the day so bright.
ALl things are topsy turuy turnde,
and wasted clean to naught.
To passing great calamity
our Kingdom State is brought.
The Sire, and Daughter burnt to dust
in blendred Cynders lie.
What train has them entrapt?

Such as
are made for Kings to dye,
False traitrous gifts.

What privy guile could wrapped be in those?

And I do marvel at this thing and skant I can suppose
That such a mischief might be wrought by any such device

Report how this destruction and ruin should arise

The fyzzing flame most egerly does scour with sweeping sway
Each corner of the Princes court, as though it should obey.
Commanded thereunto so flat on flower the Palace falls:
We are in dread least further it will take the townishe walls.

Cast quenching water on it then to slake the greedy flame.

And this that seems very strange do happen in the same,
The water feeds the fire fast, the more that we do toil
It to suppress, with hotter rage the heat begins to boil:
Those things that we have gotten for our help it does enjoy.

Medea thou that do so sore king Pelops land anoy,
Twine hence in have thy forward foot, at all assayes depart
To any other kind of coaste.

Can I find in my heart
To shun this land? if hence I had first fallen away by flight,
I would have traueled back again, to gase at such a sight.
To stand and see this weddiug new, why stayst thou doting mind?
Apply, apply, thy sore attempt, that good success does find.
What great exployt is this, that thou of vengeance do enjoy?
Still art thou blinded witless wench with vale of Venus boy?
Is this suffisaunce for the grief? is root of rancour ded,
If Jason lead a single life in solitary bed?
Some netling, thorny, stinging plagues unpracticed devise:
Prepare thy self in redines and fall to on this wise:
Let all be fish that commes to Net, have no respect of right,
From mind on mischief fixed fast let shame be vanished quyte:
The vengeance they received at my little chyldrens hand,
Is nothing worth: in earnest ire ententiue must thou stand.
When heat of wrath begins to cool, cheer up thy self again:
Raise up those touches old that wonted were in thee to raygne,
That buried deep in breast do lie: and as for all the same
That yet is wrought: Of godliness let it usurp the name:
Do this, and I shall teach them learn, what tryfling cast it was,
And common practisde flimflam trick that erst I brought to pass.
By this my raging malady a preamble has made,
To show what howgier heaps of harms shall shortly them invade
What durst my rude unskillful hand assay that was of wayght?
Wha^ could the malice of a Gyrle invent her foes to bayte?
Still conuersaunt with wicked feats Medea am I made.
My blunt and dulled brains has so ben beat about this trade.
O so I joy, I joy, that I smote of my brothers head,
And slasht his members of: eake that from parents had I fled:
And filched have the privy fleece, lo Mars that sacred was.
It glads my heart that I to bring old Pelias death to pass:
Have set his daughters all on work: O grief pick out a way
Not any guilt thou shall with unacquainted hand assay
Against whom wrath entendest thou to bend thine Irefull might?
Or with what weapon do thou mean thy traiterous foes to smight?
I know not what my wrathful mind consulted has within,
And to be wray it to himself, I dare not yet begin.
O rash and unadvised fool, I make to hasty speed:
O that my Foe had gotten of his Harlots body Seed:
But what so ever thou by him enioyest, suppose the same
To be Creusas Babes, of them let her enjoy the name.
This vengeance, this does like me well good reason is there, why,
The last attempt of i^s, thou must with stomach stout apply.
A^as ye little seely fools that erst my children were,
The plaguing price of Fathers fault submit your selves to bear.
O, horror huge with sudden stroke my heart does ouercom:
With ycie dulling cold congealde my Members all benun^.
My shiuering lims appauled sore for ghastly fear do quake,
And banished rage of malice hoate begins it self to slake:
The hateful heart of wife against her Spouse has yielded place,
And pitious mothers mercy mild restores natures face.
O shall I shed their guiltless blood? shall I the frame unfold
Of that, which loving natures hand has wrought in me her moulde?
O doting fury change thy mind, conceive a better thought,
Let not this heinous savage deed by means of me be wrought.
What crime have they (poor fools) commit, for which they should abye?
Upon their Father Jason right all blot of blame should lie.
Medea yet their Mother I am worser far then he.
Tush let them frankly go to wrack no kith nor kin to me
They are: dispatch them out of hand: hold, hold, my babes they be
God wot, most harmless lambs they are, no crime nor fault have they
Alas they be mere innocents, I do not this denay:
So was my brother whom I slew: O false reuolting mind,
Why do thou staggring to and fro such change of fancies find?
Why is my Face be sprent with tears, what makes me falter so,
That wrath and love with striving thoughts do lead me to and fro?
Such fighting fancies bickringe storms my swaruing mind detarre,
As when between the wrestling winds is raised wrangling war,
Each where the tumbling wallowing waves, are hoyst and reared hye
Amid the iustling swolues of seas, that hot in fury frye:
Eue^ so my heart with struggling thoughts now sinks, now swells amain,
Wrath sometime chaseth virtue out, and virtue wrath again.
O yield thee, yield, a grising grief, to virtue yield thy place:
Thou only comfort of our stock in this afflicted case,
Come heather, come dear loved Impe, with colling me embrace,
While that by me your mother dear sweet Boys ye are enjoyed,
So long God grant your Father may you keep from harm vncloyed.
Exile and flight approach on me, and they shall by and by
Be pulde perforce out of mine arms, with vapourde weeping Eye,
Sore languishing with mourning heart, yet let them go to grave
Before their fathers Face, as they before their mothers have:
Now rancorus grief, with fiery fits begins to boil again,
The quenched coals of deadly hate do fressher force attain.
The rusty rancour harbred long within my cancred breast
Starts up, and stirs my hand anew in mischief to be pressed.
O that the rablement of brats which swarmde about the side
Of Niobe that scornful Dame, who perished by her pride
Had taken life out of his lymmes, O that the fates of heaven
A fruictfull mother had me made of children seven and seven.
My barreyne womb for my revenge has yielded little store:
Yet for my s^re and brother, twain I have, there needs no more:
Whom seek this rufflyng rowt of Feendes with gargell Visage dight^
Where will they deal their stripes, or who^ with whips of fire smight?
Or whom with cruel scorching brande and Stygian faggot fell,
With mischief great to cloy, entendes this army black of hell?
A chopping Adder began to hiss with wrethings wrapped round,
As soon as did the lasshing whyp flerte out with yerking sound.
Whom bumping with thy rapping post Megaera will thou crush?
Whose ghost does hear mishapt from hell with scatered members rush?
My slaughtred brothers ghost it is that vengeance coms to crave:
According to his dyre request due vengeance shall he have.
But flap thou fearce the fierbrandes full dassahed in mine Eyes,
Dig, rent, scrape, burn, and squeas them out, lo open my breast it lies,
To fighting furies bobbing strokes, O brother, brother bid
These royles, that preasse to worrey me, them selves away to rid.
Dawne to the s^lent souls allow not taking any care:
Let me be left hear by my self alone, and do not spare,
To bast, and capperclaw these arms that drew the bloody blade:
To quench the furies of thy sprite, that thus do me invade,
With this right hand the sacrifice on thaulter shall be made.
What means this sudden trampling noise? a band of men in Arms
Come bustling toward us, that me will cloy with deadly harms.
To end this slaughter set upon I will my self convey
Up to the garrets of our house, come Nurce with me away,
Bestow thy body hence with me from danger of our foes.
Now thus my mind on mischief set thou must thy self dispose,
Let not the flickering fame and praise in darkness be exilde
Of stomach stout, that you did use in murdering of thy child.
Proclaim in peoples ears the praise of cruel bloody hand.

If any faithful man here be, whom ruin of his land,
And slaughter of his Prince do cause in pens^ue heart to bleed,
Step forth that ye may take the wretch that wrought this deadly deed.
Here, here, ye ioly champions lay load with weapons here,
Have now, hoyst up this house, from low Foundation up it rear.

Now, now my Scepter guilt I have recovered once again:
My Fathers wrongs revenged are, and eke my brother slain:
The gouldens cattels Fleece returnde is to my native land,
Possession of my realm I have reclaymed to my hand:
Come home is my virginity, that whilom went astray.
O Gods as good as I could wisshe, O joyful wedding day,
Go shrowde thy self in darkness him, dispacht I have this feate:
Yet vengeance is not done enough, to cool our thristy heat.
O soul why do thou make delay? Why do thou doubting stand?
Go foreward with it yet thou may, while doing is thy hand:
The wrath that might should mynister does qualefy his flame:
The pryckes of sorrow twitch my heart attaynt with blusshing shame:
Through rygour of thy heinous gore, O wretch, what have thou done?
Though I repent a caityfe vile I am, to sle a my son:
Alas I have committed it, importunate delight,
Still egged on my froward mind that did against it fight:
And lo the vain coniect of this delight increases still,
This only is the thing, that wants unto my wicked will,
That Iasons eyes should see this sight as yet I do suppose,
Nothing it is that I have done, my travel all I lose,
That I employde in dyry deeds, unless he see the same.

Lo here she looks out, and leanes upon the houses frame,
That pitchlong hanges with falling sway: here heap your fires fast,
Whereby the flames that she her self enkindled, may her wast.

Go Jason, go the obit rights the windinge sheet and grave
Make ready for thy son, as last behooves him to have,
Thy spouse and eke thy father in law that are entomde by me
Received have the duties that to dead men's ghostes agree.
This child has felt the deadly stroke and lance of fatal knife,
And this with wailesome murder like shall lose her tender life.

By all the sacred ghostes of heaven, and by thy often exile,
And spousall bed, which breach of love in me did not defile,
Now spare, and save the life of him my child and also thine:
What ever crime committed is, I grant it to be mine:
Make me a bloody sacrifice to dew deserved death,
Take from my sinful guilty head the use of vital breath.

Nay since thou will not have it so as greeues thy pynched mind,
Here way to wreck my vengeance fell, my burning blade shall find.
Auaunt, now hence thou pesaunt proud employ thy busy pain,
To reap the fruits of virgins bed, and cast them of again
When mothers they are made.

Let one for dew revenge suffice.

If greedy thyrst of hungry hands that still for vengeance cries.
Might quenched be with blood of one, then ask I none at all,
And yet to staunche my hungry grief the number is to small,
If only twain I slay, if pleadge of love lie secret made,
My bowels I Will vnbreast, and search my womb with poking Blade.

Now finish out thy deadly deed, that enterprised is,
No more entreataunce will I use, yet only grant me this,
Delay awhyle his doleful death, that I may take my flight.
Least that mine eyes with bleeding heart should view that heavy sight.

Yet linger eger anguishe yet to slay this child of thine.
Run not to rash with hasty speed, this doleful day is mine:
The time that we obtained have of

we enjoy.

O vile malicious minded wretch my loathsome life destroy.

In craving this thou speakst, that I should show thee some relief,
Well goodinough, all this is done: O ruthful giddy grief,
This is the only sacrifice that I can thee provide,
Unthankful Jason hither cast thy coyesh looks aside.
Lo hear do thou behold thy wife? thus every wonted I,
When murder I had made, to escape, my way does open lie
That I may spring into the skies: the flying serpents twain
Subm^ted have their scaly Necks to yoke of rattling wayne,
Thon Father have thy sons again, I in the wandering Sky
In nymble wheeled Wagon swyfte, will ride advanced hye,

Go through the ample spaces wide, infect the poisoned Air,
Bear witness, grace of God is none in place of thy repair.


