WHAT furye fell enforces me
to fle, the unhappy seat,
That gaye and gasp with greedye law,
the fleeyng food to eat
What GOD to Tantalus the bowres
where breathing bodies dwell
Does show agayue? is ought found worse, then burning thyrst of hell
In lakes allow? or ^et worse plague then hunger is there one,
In vain that ever gapes for food? shall Sisyphus his stone,
That slipper restles rollyng payse upon my back be borne.
Or shall my lymmes with swifter swinge of whirling whele be torn?
Or shall my pains be Tytius panges th'encreasyng liver still,
Whose growing guts the gnawing gripes and tylthy fowls do fill?
That still by night repayres the panch that was deuourd by day,
And wondrous womb unwasted lies a new prepared pray
What ill am I appointed for? O cruel judge of sprites,
Who so thou be that torments new among the sowles delytes
Still to dispose, ad what thou can to all my deadly woe,
That keeper even of dungeon dark would fore abhor to know.
Or hell it self it quake to se: for dread whereof likewise
I tremble would, that plague seek out: lo now there does arise
My brood that shall in mischief far the grandsyers gilt out go,
And gyltles make: that first shall dare vnuentred ils to do.
What ever place remains yet of all this wicked land,
I will fill up: and never once while Pelops house does stand
Shall Minos idle be.
Go forth thou detestable sprite
And vex the Gods of wicked house with rage of furyes might.
Let them contend with all offense, by turns and one by one
Let swords be drawn: and mean of ire procure there may be none,
Nor shame: let fury blind inflame their minds and wrathful will,
Let yet the parents rage endure and longer lasting ill
Through childrens children spread: nor yet let any leisure be
The former faw^s to hate, but still more mischief new to see,
Nor one in one: but ere the gylt with vengeance be acquit,
Increase the crime: from brethren proud let rule of kingdom flyt
To runnagates: and swaruing state of all unstable things,
Let it by doubtful dome be toste, between thuncertaine kings.
Let mighty fall to misery, and myser clime to might,
Let chance turn thempyre vpsydowne both give and take the right.
The banyshed for gylt, when god restore their country shall.
Let them to mischief fall a fresh as hateful then to all,
As to themselves: let Ire think naught unlawful to be done,
Let brother dread the brothers wrath, and father fear the soon,
And eke the soon his parents power: let babes be murdered ill,
But worse begot? her spouse betrapt t^ treasons train to kill,
Let hateful wife a wait, and let them bear through seas their war,
Let bloodshed lie the lands about and every field a farr^:
And over conqueryng captains great, of countries far to see,
Let lust tryumphe: in wicked house let whoredom counted he
The light'st offene: let trust that in the breasts of brethren breeds,
And truth be gone: let not from sight of your so heinous deeds
The heavens be hyd, about the poale when shine the stars on hye,
And flames with woonted beams of light do deck the painted skyls.
Let darkest night be made, and let the day the heavens forsake.
Dysturbe the godds of wicked house, hate, slaughter, murder make.
Fill up the house of Tantalus with mischieues and debates,
Adorned be the pillars high with bay, and let the gates
Be garnysht green: and worthy there for thy return to sight.
Be kyndled fire: let mischyefe done in Thracia once, their light
More many fold, wherefore does yet the uncles hand delay?
Does yet Thyestes not bewail his childrens fatal day?
Shall he not find them where with heat of fyres that under glowe
The cawderne boyles? their limbs each one a pieces let them go
Disperste: let fathers fires, with blood of children fyled be:
Let deynties such be dressed: it is no mischief new to thee,
To banquet so: behold this day we have to thee releast,
And hunger starued womb of thine we send to such a feast.
With fowlest food thy famyne fill, let blood in wine be drowned,
And drunk in sight of thee: lo now such dishes have I found,
As thou would shonne, stay whither doste thou hedlong way now take

To pooles and floods of hell again and still declining lake,
And flight of tree full frayght with fruit that from the lips does flee,
To dungeon dark of hateful hell let leeful be for me
To go: or if to light be thought the pains that there I have,
Remove me from those lakes again: in midst of worser wave
Of Phlegethon, to stand in seas of fire beset to be.
Who so beneath thy poynted pains by destenyes decree
Do still endure who so thou be that vnderliest allow
The hollow den, or ruin who that fears and overthrow
Of falling hyl, or cruel cries that sound in caves of hell
Of greedy r^aryng Lions throats or flock of furyes fell
Who quakes to know or who the brandes of fire in dyrest pain
Half burnt throws of hark to the voice of Tantalus: again
That hastes to hell, and whom the truth has taught believe well me
Love well your pains, they are but small when shall my hap so be
To flee the light?

Disturb thou first this house with dire discord
Debates and battles bring with thee, and of the unhappy sword
Ill love to kings: the cruel breast str^ke through and hateful heart,
With tumult mad.

To suffer pains it seems well my part,
Not woes to work: I am sent forth like vepoure dyre to rise,
That breaks the ground or poison like the plague in wondrouse wise
That slaughter makes, shall I to such detested crimes, apply
My nephews hearts? ^ parents great of Gods above the sky
And mine (though sham'de I be to grant) although with greater pain
My tongue be vexed, yet this to speak I may no whit refrain
Nor hold my peace: I war^e you this least sacred hand with blood
Of slaughter dyre, or frans^e fell of fran^ke fury wood
The aulters stayne, I wll resist: And guard such gylt away.
With strpes why do thou me affryght? why threatst thou me to fraye
Those crallyn g snakes? or famine fyxt in empty womb, wherefore
Do thou reuyue? now fries within with thyrst enkmdled sore
My heart: and in the bowels burnt the boiling fl^me^ do glow.

I follow thee: through all this house now rage and fury throw
Let them be driven so, and so let either thirst to see
Each others blood full well has felt the coming in of thee
This house, and all with wicked touch of the degune to quake.
Enough it is, repair again to dens and loathsome lake,
Of flood well known, the sadder soil with heavy foot of thine
Agreeued is, see thou from syringes how waters do declyne
And inward sink? or how the banks lie void by drughty heat?
And hoatter blast of fyery wind the fewer clouds does beat?
The treese be spoyld, and naked stand to sight in withred woddes,
The barayne bows whose fruits are fled: the land between the floods
With surge of seas on either side that wonted to resound,
And ^earer foordes to seperat sometime with lesser ground,
Now broader spread, it hears how aloof the waters rise.
Now Lerna turns against the stream Phoronides likewise
His poares be stopped, with custom'd course Alpheus dryues not still,
His hollie waves, the trembling tops of high Cithaeron hill,
They stand not sure: from height adowne they shake their silver snow,
And noble fields of Argos fear, their former drought to know.
Yea Tytan doubts himself to rolie the world his wonted way,
And drive by force to former course the backward drawing day.
THis Argos town if any God be found,
And Pisey boures that famous yet remayn,
Or kingdoms else to love of Corinthes ground,
The double havens, or sundred seas in twain
If any love of Taygetus his snowes,
(By VVinter which when they on hills be cast:
By Boreas blastes that from Sarmatia blows,
With yearly breath the summer meltes as fast)
Where clear Alpheus runs with floude so cold,
By plays well known that there Olimpiks hight:
Let pleasant power of his from hense withholde
Such tunes of strife that here they may not light:
Not nephew worse then grandsier spring from us,
Or direr deeds delyght the younger age.
Let wicked stock of thirsty Tantalus
At length leave of, and weary be of rage.
Enoughe is done, and naught preuaild the just,
Or wrong: betrayed is Mirtilus and drownde,
That did betray his dame, and with like trust
Borne as he bare, himself has made renound
With changed name the sea: and better known
To mariners thereof no fable is.
On wicked sword the little infant thrown
As ran the chide to take his fathers kiss.
Unripe for thaulters offering fell down dead:
And with thy hand (O Tantalus) was rent,
With such a meat for Gods thy boordes to spread.
Eternal famine for such food is sent,
And thyrst: nor for those daynty meats vnmilde,
Might meeter pain appointed ever be
Vith empty throat stands Tantalus begylde,
Above thy wicked head their leanes to thee,
Then Phineys fowls in flight a swifter pray.
With burned bows declynd on every side,
And of his fruits all bent to bear the sway,
The tree deludes the gapes of hunger wide
Though he full greedy feed thereon would feign.
So often deceyu'de neglectes to touch them yet:
He turns his eyes, his jaws he does refrain,
And famine fixed in closed gummes does shet.
But then each branch his plenteous riches all,
Lets lower down, and apples from an hie
With lither leaves they flatter like to fall
And famine stir: in vain that bids to try
His hands: which when he has rought forth anon
To be beguyld, in higher air again
The harvest hanges and fickle fruit is gone,
Then thirst him greeues no less then hungers pain:
Wherewith when kindled is his boiling blood
Like fire, the wretch the waves to him does call,
That meet his mouth: which straight the fleeyng flood
VVithdrawes, and from the dried foorde does fall:
And him forsakes that follows them. He drinks
The dust so deep of gulf that from him shrinkes.

O Dastard, cowrde, O wretch, and (which
the greatest yet of all
To Tyrants check I compte that may
in weighty things befall)
O unrevenged: after guyltes
so great and brothers guyle.
And truth trod down do thou provoke
with vain complaynts the while
Thy wrath? already now to rage all Argos town throughout
In armoure ought of thine, and all the double seas about
Thy fleet to ride: now all the fields with fervent flames of thine,
And towns to flash it well beseemde: and every where to shine,
The bright drawn sword: all vuder foot of horse let every side
Of Argos land resound: and let the wounds not serve to hyde
Our ^oes, nor yet in haughty top of hills and mountains hye,
The builded towers. The people all let them to battle cry
And clear for sake Mycenas town who so his hateful head
Hides and defendes, with slaughter dire let blood of him be shed.
This princely Pelops palace proud, and bowres of high renown,
On me so on my brother to let them be beaten down,
Go to, do that which never shall no after age allow,
Nor none it whisht: some wischese great there must be ventred now,
Both fierce and bloody: such as would my brother rather long
To have been his. Thou never do enough revenge the wrong.
Exept thou pass. And feercer fact what may be done so dyre,
That his exceedes? does ever he lay down his hateful ire?
Does ever he the modest mean in time of wealth regard
Or quiet in aduerslty? I know his nature hard
Intractable, that broke may be, but never wilit b^nd.
For which are he prepare himself, or force to fight entend,
Set first on him, least while I rest he should on me arise.
He will destroy or be destroyed in midst the mischief lies,
Prepared to him that takes it first,
Does fame of people naught
Adverse thee fear?

The greatest good of kingdom may be thought
That still the people are constraynd their princes deeds as well
To praise, as them to suffer all.

Whom fear does so compel
To praise, the same his foes to be, does fear enforce agoyne:
But who indeed the glory seckes of favor true t'obtayne
He rather would with hates of each be praysd, then tounges of all

The trewer praise full often has hapt to meaner men to fall:
The false but unto mighty man what nill they let them will.

Let first the king will honest things and none the fame dare nill.

Where leeful are to him that rules but honest things alone,
There raynes the king by others leave.

And where y^ shame is none,
Nor care of right, faith, piety, nor holiness none stays,
That kingdom swarues.

Such holiness, such piety and faith.
Are private goods: let kings run one in that that likes their will.

The brothers hurt a mischief count though he be nere so ill.

It is but right to do to him, that wrong to brother were*
What heinous hurt has his offense let pass to pr^ue? or where
Refraynd the gylt, thy spouse he sta^e away for lechery,
And raygne by stelth: the ancient note and sign of ampery,
By frawde he got: my house by fraud to vex he never ceast:
In Pelops house there fostred is a noble worthy beast
The close kept Ram: the goodly guide of rych and fairest flocks.
By whom throughout on every side depend a down the locks
Of glittering gold, with fleece of which the new kings wonted were
Of Tantals stock their sceptors gylt, and mace of might to beat.
Of this the owner raygneth he, with him of house so great
The fortune flees, this sacred Ram aloof in safety shet
In secret mead is wont to grase, which stone on every side
With rocky wall inclosethe round the fatal beast to hyde.
This beast (aduentryng mischief great) adjoining yet for pray
My spoused mate, the traitor false has hence conuayde away
From hence the wrongs of mutual hate, and mischief all vpsyreng:
In exile wandered he throughout my kingdoms all along:
No part of mine remains safe to me, from traynes of his.
My feere deflourde, and loyalty of empire broken is:
My house all vexed, my blood in doubt, and naught that trust is in,
But brother foe What stayst thou yet? at length lo now begin.
Take heart of Tantalus to thee, to Pelops cast thine eye:
To such examples well beseemes, I should my hand apply.
Tell thou which way were best to bring that cruel head to death.

Through perst with sword let him be slain and yield his hateful breath.

Thou speak of the end: but I him would opres with greter pain.
Let tyrants vex with torment more: should ever in my rain
Be gentle death?

Does piety in thee prevail no whit?

Depart thou hence all piety, if in this house as yet
Thou ever were: and now let all the flock of furies dyre,
And full of strife Erinnis come, and double brands of fire
Megaera shaking: for not yet enough with fury great
And rage does burn my boiling breast: it ought to be repleate,
With monster more.

What mischief new do'ste thou in rage pro-uide?

Not such a one as may the mean of woonted grief abide.
No guilt will I forbear, nor none may be enough despite.

What sword?

To little that.

what fire?

And y^ is yet to

What weapon then shall sorrow such find fit to work thy will?

Thy estes self.

Then ire it self yet that is a greater ill.

I grant: a tombling tumult quakes, within my bosoms lo,
And round it rolls: I moved am and wot not whereunto.
But drawn I am: from bottom deep the roryng soil does cry
The day so fair with thunder soundes, and house as all from hy
Were rent, from roof, and rafters crakes: and lares turnde abought
Have wryde their sight: so bee'te, so bee'te, let mischief such be sought,
As ye O Gods would fear.

What thing seek'st thou to bring to pas
I note what greater thing my mind, and more then wont it was

Above the reach that men are wont to work, begins to swell:
And stayth with slothful hands. What thing it is I cannot tell:
But great it is. Bee'te so, my mind now in this feate proceed,
For Atreus and Thyestes both, it were a worthy deed.
Let each of us the crime commit. The Thracian house did see
Such wicked tables once: I grant the mischief great to be,
But done ere this: some greater guilt and mischief more, let ire
Find out. The stomach of thy son O father thou enspyre,
And sister eke, like is the cause: assist me with your power,
And drive my hand: let greedy parents all his babes deuowre,
And glad to rent his children be: and on their lyms to feed.
Enough, and well it is deuis'de: this pleases me in deed.
In mean time where is he? so long and innocent wherefore
Does Atreus walk? before mine eyes already more and more
The shade of such a slaughter walks: the want of children cast,
In fathers Jaws. But why my mind, yet dreadst thou so at last,
And faiut'st before thou enterprise? it must be done, let be,
That which in all this mischief is the greatest guilt to see,
Let him commit.

but what disceit may we for him prepare,
Whereby betrapt he may be drawn, to fall into the snare?
He wotes full well we are his foes.

He could not taken be,
Except himself would take: but now my kingdoms hops he.
For hope of this he would not fear to meet the mighty Jove,
Though him he threatened to deistroy, with lightning from above.
For hope of this to pass the threats of waves he will not fail,
Nor dread no whit by doubtful shelues, of Lybike seas to sail,
For hope of this (which thing he does the woorst of all believe,)
He will his brother see.

Who shall of peace the promise geeue?
Whom will he trust?

His evil hope will soon believe it well.
Yet to my sons the charge which they shall to their vuckle tell,
We will commit: that whom he would from exile come again,
And myseries for kingdom change, and over Argos raygne
A king of half: and though to hard of heart our prayers all
Him self despise, his children yet naught woting what may fall,
With travels tier'de, and apt to be entys, de from misery,
Requests will move: on the one side his desire of Imperie,
On the other side his poverty, and labor hard to see,
Will him subd^e and make to yield, although full stout he be.

His trauayles now the time has made to seem to him but small.

Not so: for day by day the grief of ill increases all.
It Is light to suffer miseries, but heavy them to endure.

Yet other messengers to send, in such affairs procure,

The younger sort the wrose precepts do easily harken to.

What thing against their uncle now, you them enstruckt to do,
Perhaps with you to work the like, they will not be a dread.
Such mischief wrought has often return'de upon the workers head.

Though never man to the^ the ways of guile and guilt have taught,
Yet kingdom will. Fear thou they should be made by counsel naught?
They are so borne. That whith thou car, ste a cruel enterprise,
And dyrely deemest done to be, and wickedly likewise,
Perhaps is wrought against me there.

And shall your sons of this
Disceipt beware that work you will? no secretnes there is
In their so green and tender years: they will your traynes disclose,

A privy counsel cloase to keep, is learnde with many woes.

And will ye them, by whom ye would he should beguiled be,
Them selnes begull'de?

May let the^ both from fault and blame be free.
For what shall need in mischiefs such as I to work entende,
To mingle them? let all my hate by me alone take end.
Thou leau'ste thy purpose ill my mind: if thou thine own sorbeare,
Thou sparest him. Wherefore of this let Agamemnon hear
Be mynister: and Client eke of mine for such a deed,
Let Menelaus present be: truth of th'uncertayne seed,
By such a pracktise may be tri'de: if it refuse they shall,
Nor of debate will bearers be, if they him uncle call,
He is their father: let them go. But much the fearful face
Bewrayes it self: even him that faynes the secret wayghty case,
Does often betray: let them therefore not know, how great a guyle
They go about. And thou these things in secret keep the while.

I need not warned be, for these within my bosom deep,
Both faith, and fear, but chiefly faith, does shet and closely keep.

THe noble house at length of high renown,
The famous stock of ancient Inachus,
Apeasd and laid the threats of brethren down
But now what fury styrs and drives you thus
Each one to thyrst the others blood again,
Or get by guylt the golden Mace in hand?
Ye little wot that so desire to raygne,
In what estate or place does kingdom stand.
Not riches makes a king or high renown,
Not garnisht weed with purple Tyrian die,
Not lofty looks, or head encloasde with cr^wne,
Not glyttring beams with gold and turrets hie.
A King he is that fear has laid aside,
And all affects that in the breast are bread:
Whom impotent ambition does not guide,
Nor fickle favor has of people led.
Nor all that west in mettalls mines has found,
Or channel clear of golden Tagus shows,
Nor all the grain that thresshed is on ground,
That with the heat of libyk harvest glowes.
Nor whom the flasshe of lightning flame shall be ate,
Nor eastern wind that smightes upon the seas,
Nor swelling surge with rage of vvynde repleate,
Or greedy Gulphe of Adria displease.
Whom not the prick of Soldiers sharpest spear,
Or poyncted pyke in hand has made to rue,
Nor whom the glympse of swoorde might cause to fear,
Or bright drawn blade of glyttring steel sub due.
Who in the seat of safty sets his feet,
Beholdes all haps how under him they lie,
And gladly runs his fat all day to meet,
Nor ought complaynes or grudgeth for to dye.
Though present were the Princes euerychone,
The scattered Dakes to chase that wonted be,
That shyning seas beset with precious stone,
And red sea coasts do hold, like blood to see:
Or they which else the Caspian mountains hye,
From Sarmats strong with all their power vvithholde:
Or he that on the floude of Danubye,
In frost a foot to travail dare be bold:
Or Seres in what ever place they lie,
Renownde with fleece that there of sylke does spring,
They never might the truth here of deny,
It is the mind that only makes a king.
There is no need of sturdie steedes in war,
No need with arms or arrows else to fight,
That Parthus woonts with bow to fling from far,
While from the field he falsely fayneth flight.
Nor yet to siege no need it is to bring
Great Guns in Carts to overthrow the wall,
That from far of their battring Pellets slyng.
A king he is that fears naught at all.
Each man him self this king dome geeues at hand.
Let who so list with mighty mace to raygne,
In tyckle top of court delight to stand
Let me the sweet and quiet rest obtain.
So set in place obscure and low degree,
Of pleasant rest I shall the sweetness knoe.
My life unknown to them that noble be,
Shall in the step of secret silence go.
Thus when my days at length are over past,
And time without all troublous tumult spent,
An aged man I shall depart at last,
In mean estate, to dye full well content.
But grievous is to him the death, that when
So far abroad the brute of him is blown,
That known he is to much to other men:
Departs yet unto him self unknown.

MY country bowres s^ long wished for, and Argos rytches all,
Cytese good that unto banished then, and Mysers may befall,
The touch of suyle where born I was, a gods of native la^d,
(If gods they be,) a sacred towers I see of Cycolps hand:
That represeat then all man's work, a greater majesty.
Renowned stad^s to my youth, where noble sometime I
Have not so seelde as once, the palm in fathers chariot won.
All Argos now to meet with me, and people fast will roon:
But Atreus to. yet rather lead in woods again thy flight,
And bushes thick, and hid among the brutyshe beasts from sight,
Like life to theyrs: where splendent pomp of court a princely pride,
May not with flattring fulgent face, allure thine eyes aside,
With whom the kingdom given is, behold, and well regard,
Beset but late with such mishaps, as all men couate full hard,
I stout and joyful was: but now again thus int fear
I am return. my mind misdoubtes, and backward seeks to bear
My body hence: and forth I draw my pace against my will.
With slothful step (what means this?) my father stands still,
And turns his face and holds him self, in doubt what thing to do.

What thing (my mind) con^drest thou? or else so long whereto
Do thou so east counsel wrest? will thou to things unsure
Thy brother and the kingdom trust? fearst thou those ills to endure
Now overcome, and mielder made? and trauayls do thou flee
That well were plaste? it thee auayls, a myser now to be.
Turn hence thy pace while leefull is, and keep thee from his hand.

What cause thee drives (O father dear) thus ro^ thy native land,
Now seen to shrynk? what makes thee thus from things so good at last
Withdraw thy self? thy brother comes whose tres be ouerpast,
And half the kingdom geues, and of the house Dy^acerate,
Repayres the parts: and thee restores again to former state.

The cause of fear that I know not, thou do require to hear.
I see nothing that makes me dread, and yet I greatly fear.
I would go on, hut yet my limbs with weary legs do slack:
And other way then I would pass, I am withholden back.
So often the ship that driven is with wind and eke with Ore,
The swelling surge resisting both beats back upon the shore.

Yet overcome what ever stays, and thus does let your mind,
And see what are at your return, prepar'de for you to find.
You may O father raygne.

I may but then when die I might.

Chief thing is power.

naught worth at al, if thou desire it naught.

You shall it to your children leave.

the kingdom takes not twain,

Who may be happy, rather would he myfer yet remain?

Believe me well, with titles false the great things us delight:
And heavy haps in vain are fearde. while high I stood in sight,
I never stinted then to quake, and self same sword to fear,
That hanged by mine own side was. Oh how great good it were,
With none to strive, but careless food to cate and rest to know?
The greater gyltes they enter not in cotage set allow.
And safer food is fed upon, at narrow boorde always,
While drunk in gold the poison is by proof well taught I say,
That evil haps before the good to love it likes my will.
Of haughty house that siandes aloft in tickle top of hill,
And swayes aside, the cyty low need never be affright:
Nor in the top of roof above, there shynes no Iuery bright,
Nor watchman noue defendes my sleeps by night, or gardes my rest:
With fleet I fish not, nor the sees I have not backwarde pressed,
Nor turn'de to flight with builded wall: nor wicked belly I
With taxes of the people fed: nor parcel none does lie,
Of ground of mine beyond the Getes: and Parthians far about:
Nor worshipped with frankincense I am, nor ( Jove shet out)
My Aulters decked are: nor none in top of house does stand
In garden treese, nor kindled yet with help of each man's hand,
The bathes do smoke: nor yet are days in slothful siumbers led,
Nor nights past forth in watch and wine, without the rest of bed.
We nothing fear, the house is safe without the hidden knyfe,
And poor estate the sweetenes feels, of test and quiet life.
Great kindome is to be content, without the same to live.

Yet should it not refused be, if God the kingdom give.

Not yet desierd it ought to be.

your brother byds you rain.

Bids he? the more is to be fearde: there lurketh there some train.

From whence it fell, yet piety is wont to turn at length:
And love vnfaynde, repayres again his erst omitted strength.

Does Atreus then his brother love? each Vrsa first on his.
The Seas shall wash and swelling surge of Seas of Sicylye
Shall rest and all assuaged be: and corn to rypenes grow
In bottawe of Ionian seas, and barkest night shall show
And spread the light about the soil: the waters with the fire,
The life with death, the wind with seas, shall friendship first require,
And be at league.

of what deceipte are you so dreadful here?

Of euerychone: what end at length might I provide of fear?
In all he can he hates me.

to you what hurt can he?

As for my self I nothing dread you little Babes make me
Afraid of him.

dread, ye to be deguilde when caught ye are:
To late it is to shoon the traytie in middle of the snare.
But go we on this (father) is to you my last request.

I follow you. I lead you not.

God turn it to the best
That well devised is for good: pass farth with cherefull pace.

ENtrapt in train the beast is caught
and in the snare does fall:
Both him, and eke of hated stock
with him the ofspryng all,
About the fathers side I see:
and now in saufety stands
And surest ground my wrathful hate:
now comes into my hands
At length Thyestes: yea he comes
and all at once to me.
I scant refrain my self, and scant may anger brydled be.
So when the Bloudhound feekes the beast, by step and quick of sent
Draws in the leame, and pace by pace to wind the ways he went,
With nose to soil does hunt, while he the Boar aloof has found
Far of by sent, he yet refraynes and wanders through the ground
With silent mouth: but when at hand he once perceiues the pray,
With all the strength he has he strives, with voice and calls away
His lingering master, and from him by force out breaks he.
When Ire does hope the present blood, it may not hydden be.
Yet let it hydden be. behold with ugly hair to sight
How yrkesomely deform'de with filthe his fowlest tace is dight,
How loathsome lies his Brarde unkempt: but let us friendship feign.
To see my brother me delights: give now to me again
Embracing long desired for: what ever strife there was
Before this time between us twain, forget and let it pas:
Fro this day forth let brothers love, let blood, and law of kind
Regarded be, let all debate be slakte in eythers mind.
I could excuse my self, except thou were as now thou art.
But ( Atreus) now I grant, the fault was mine in every part:
And I offended have in all, my cause the worse to be,
Your this days kindness makes: in deed a guilty wight is he,
That would so good a brother hurt as you, in any whit.
But now with tears I must entreat, and first I me submit.
These hands that at thy feet do lie, do thee beseech and pray,
That ire and hate be laid aside, and from thy bosom may
Be scraped out: and clear forgot. for pledges take thou these
O brother dear, these guiltles babes.

thy hands yet from my kneese
Remove, and rather me to take in arms, upon me fall
And ye O aids of elders age, ye little infants all,
Me clyp and coll about the neck: this foul attire forsake,
And spare mine eyes that pity it, and fresher vesture take
Like mine to see. and you with joy, the half of emperie
Dear brother take: the greater praise shall come to me thereby,
Our fathers seat to yield to you, and brother to rel^eue.
To have a kingdom is but chance, but virtue it to geeue.

A just reward for such deserts, the Gods (O brother dear)
Repay to thee: but on my head a regal crown to wear,
My loathsome life denies: and far does from the sceptor flee
My hand unhappy: in the mydst let leefull be for me
Of men to lurk.

this kingdom can with twain full well agree.

What ever is (O brother) yours, I count it mine to be.

Who would dame fortunes gifts refuse, if she him ^eyse to reign?

The gyfts of her each man it wotes, how soon they pass again.

Ye me depryue of glory great, except ye th'empyre take.

You have your praise in offering it, and I it to forsake.
And full persuaded to refuse the kingdom, am I still.

Except your part ye will sustain mine own forsake I will.

I take it then. and bear I will the name thereof alone:
The ryghts and arms, as well as mine they shall be yours each one.

The regal crown as you beseemes upon your head then take:
And I th'appoyncted sacrifice for Gods, will now go make.

Would any man it ween? that cruel wight
Atreus, of mind so impotent to see
Was soon astonished with his brothers sight,
Mo greater force then pietye may be:
Where kynred is not, lasts every threat,
Whom true love holds, it holds eternally.
The wrath but late with causes kyndled great
All favor brake, and did to battle cry,
When horsemen did resouude one every side,
The swoordes each where, then glystred more and more:
Which raging Mars with often stroke did guide
The fresher blood to shed yet thyrsting sore.
But love the sword against their wills does swage,
And them to peace perswads with hand in hand.
So sodeyne rest, amid so great a rage
What God has made? throughout Mycenas land
The harness clynkt, but late of cyuill strife:
And for their babes did fearful mother quake,
Her armed spouse to leese much fearde the wife,
When sword was made the scabberde to forsake,
That now by rest with rust was ouergrowne.
Some to repair the wales that did decay,
And some to strength the towers half overthrown,
And some the gates with gyns of Yrne to stay
Full busy were, and dreadful vvatch by night
From turret high did ouerlooke the town.
VVocrse is then war it self the fear of fight.
(Now are the threats of cruel sword laid down,
And now the rumor whists of battayles sown,
The noise of crooked trumpet silent lies,
And quiet peace returns to joyful town.
So when the waxes of swelling surge arise,
While Corus wind the Brutian seas does smight,
And Scylla soundes from hollow Caves within,
And Shipmen are with wafting waves affright,
Charybdis casts that erst it had drunk in:
And Cyclpos fierce his father yet does dred,
In AEtna bank that fervent is with heates,
Least quenched be with waves that ouershed
The fire that from eternal Furnace beats:
And poor Laertes thinks his kingdoms all
May drowned be, and Ithaca does quake:
If once the force of wyndes begin to fall,
The sea lyth down more mylde then standing lake.
The deep, where Ships so vvyde full dreadful were
To pass, with sails on either side out spread
Now fallne adowne, the lesser Boat does bear:
And leisure is to vewe the fyshes ded
Even there, where late with tempest bet upon
The shaken Cyclades were with Seas aghast.
No state endures the pain and pleasure, one
To other yeldes, and joys be soonest past.
One hour sets up the things that lowest be.
He that the crowns to princes does deuyde,
Whom people please with bending of the knee.
And at whose beck their battayles lay aside
The Meades, and Indians eke to Phoebus nigh,
And Dakes that Parthyans do with horsemen threat,
Him self yet holds his Sceptors doubtfully.
And men of might he fears and chances great
(That each estate may turn) and doubtful hour.
Oyee, whom lord of land and waters wide,
Of Life and death grauntes here to have the power,
Lay ye your proud and lofty looks aside:
What your inferior fears of you amiss.
That your superior threats to you again.
To greater king, each king a subject is.
Whom dawne of day has seen in pride to raygne,
Him overthrown has seen the evening late.
Let none rejoice to much that good has got,
Let none despair of best in vvorst estate.
For Clotho myngles all, and suffers not
Fortune to stand: but Fates about does drive.
Such friendship find with Gods yet no man might,
That he the morrow might be sure to live.
The God our things all tossed and turned quight
Rolls with a whyrle wind.

WHat whirlwynde may me headlong drive
and up in air me fling,
And wrap in darkest cloud, whereby
it might so heinous thing,
Take from mine eyes? O wicked house
that even of Pelops ought
And Tantalus abhorred be.
what new thing have thou brought?

What land is this? lythe Sparta here
and Argos, that has bred
So wicked brethern? and the ground of Corinth lying spread
Between the seas? or Ister else where wont to take their flight,
Are people wild? or that which woonts with snow to shine so bright
Hircana land? or else do here the wandering Seythians dwell?

What monstrous mischief is this place then guilty of? that tell,
And this declare to us at large what ever be the ill.

If once my mind may stay it self, and quaking limbs I will.
But yet of such a cruel deed before mine eyes the fear.
And Image walks: ye raging storms now far from hence me bear
And to that place me drtue, to which now driven is the day
Thus drawn from hence.

Our minds ye hold yet still in doubt: full stay.
Tell what it is ye so abhor. The author thereof show.
I ask not who, but which of them that quickly let us know.

In Pelops Turret high, a part there is of Pallece wide
That toward the south erected leanes, of which the utter side
With equal top to mountain stantes, and on the City lies,
And people proud against their prince if once the traitors rise
Has underneath his batiring stroke: there shynes the place in sight
Where wont the people to frequent, whose golden beams so bright
The noble spotted pillars gray, of marble do supporte,
Within this place well known to men, where they so ost resort,
To many other rooms about the noble court does go.
The privy Palaice vnderlieth in secret place alos,
With ditch full deep that does enclose the wood of priuiter,
And hidden parts of kingdom old: where never grew no tree
That chereful bows is wont to bear, with knife or lopped be,
But Tax, and Cypress, and with tree of Ho^me full black to see
Does beck and bend the wood so dark: alofte above all these
The higher oak does over look, surmounting all the treese.
From hens with luck the reign to take, accustomed are the kings,
From hens in danger aid to ask, and doom in doubtful things.
To this affixed are the gifts, the sounding Trumpets bright,
The Chariots broke, and spoils of sea that now Mirtoon hight,
There hang the wheels once won by craft of falser axel tree,
And every other conquests note, here leefullis to see
The Phrygian tire of Pelops head: the spoil of enmies here,
And of Barbarian triumph left, the painted gorgeous geere.
A loathsome spring stands under shade, and slothful course does take,
With water black: even such as is: of yrkesome Stygian lake
The ugly wave whereby art wont, to swear the gods on hye.
Here all the night the grisly ghosts and gods of death to erie
The fame reports: with clinkyng chains resou^ds the wood each where
The sprights cry out and every thing that dreadful is to hear,
May there be seen: of ugly shapes from old Sepulchers sent
A frarefull slocke does wander there, and in that place frequent
Worse things then ever yet were knowwne: ye all the wood full afce
With flame is wont to flash, and all the higher trees alofte
Without a fire do burn: and often the wood beside all this
With triple barkyng roares at once: full often the palaice is
Affright with shapes, nor light of day may on the terror quell.
Eternal night does hold the place, and darkness there of hell
In mid day reigns: from hens to them that pray out of the ground
The certain answers given are, what time with dredful sound
From secret place the fates be told, and dungeon roares within
While of the God breaks out the voice: whereto when entered in
Fierce Atreus was, that did with him his brothers children trayle,
Dekt are the aulters: wh^ (alas) may it enough bewail?
Behind the infants backs anon he knyt their noble hands,
And eke their heavy heads about he bound with purple bands:
There wanted there no Frankenfence, nor yet the holy wine,
Nor knyfe to cut the sacrifice, besprinkt with leuens fine,
Kept is in all the order due, Icast such a mischief great
Should not be ordered well.

who does his hand on sword then set?

He is him self the priest, and he himself the deadly verse
With prayer dyre from fervent mouth does sing and often rehearse.
And he at th'aulters stands himself, he them assygn'de to dye
Does handle, and in order set, and to the knyfe apply,
He lights the fyres, no rights were left of sacrifice undone.
The wood then quakt, and all at once from trembling ground anon
The Palace beckt, in doubt which way the payse thereof would fall,
And shaking as in waves it stood: from the air and therewithal
A blasing star that foulest train drew after him does go:
The wynes that in the fyres were cast, with changed licour floe,
And turn to blood: and twyse or thryse th'attyre sell from his head,
The Iuerye bright in Temples seem'de to weep and tears to shed.
The sights amas'de all other men, but steadfast yet always
Of mind, unmoved. Atreus stands, and even the Gods does fray
That threaten him and all delay forsaken by and by
To the aulters turns, and there withwall a side he looks awry.
As hungry Tygre wonts that does in gangey woods remain
With doubtful pace to range and roame between the bullocks twain,
Of either pray full-couetous and yet uncertain where
She first may byte, and roaring throat now turns the tone to tear
And then to the other straight returns, and doubtful famyne holds:
So Atreus dyre, between the babes does stand and them beholdes
On whom he poynctes to slake his ire: first staughter where to make,
He doubts: or whom he should again for second offering take,
Yet skills it naught, but yet he doubts and such a cruelty
It him delights to order well.

Whom take he syrst to die?

First place, least in him think ye might no piere to remain
To graundsier dedicated is, first Tantalus is slain.

With what a mind and count'nace, could ye boy his death sustain?

All careless of him self he stood, nor once he would in vain
His prayers leese. But Atreus fierce the sword in him at last
In deep and deadly wound does hide to hilts, and gryping fast
His throat in hand, he thrust him through. The sword the^ drawn away
When long the body had vphelde it self in doubtful stay.
Which way to fall, at length upon the uncle down it falls.
And then to th'aulters cruelly Philisthenes he tralles,
And on his brother throws: and straight his neck of cutteth he.
The Carcass keadlong falls to ground: a piteous thing to see.
The mourning head with murmr yet vucertayne does complain.

What after double death does he and slaughter then of twain?
Spares he the Child? or gilt on gilt again yet heayeth he?

As long maynd Lion scerce amid the wood of Armenie,
The drove pursues and conquest makes of slaughter many one,
Though now defiled be his tawes with blood and hunger gone
Yet slaketh not his yreful rage with blood of Bulls so great,
But slouthful now with weary tooth the lesser Calves does threat:
None other wise does Atreus rage, and swelles with anger straynd,
And holding now the sword in hand, with double slaughter stayud,
Regarding not where fell his rage, with cursed hand vnmild
He struck it through his body quite, at bosom of the Child
The blade goes in, and at the back again out went the same,
He falls and quenching with his blood the aulters sacred flame,
Of either wound at length he dies.

O'heynous hateful act.

Abho^re ye this? ye hear not yet the end of all the fact,
There follows more.

A fiercer thing, or worse then this to see
Could Nature bear?

why think ye this of gylt the end to be?
It is but part.

what could he wore? to cruel beasts he cast
Perhaps their bodies to be torn, and kept from fyres at last.

Would God he had: that never tomb the dead might over hyde,
Nor flames dissolve, though them for food to fowls in pastures wide
He had out thrown, or them for pray to cruel beasts would flinge.
That which the worst was wont to be, were here a wished thing,
That them their father saw vntowbd: but oh more cursed crime
Uncredible, the which deny will men of after time:
From bosoms yet alive out drawn the trembling bowels shake,
The veins yet breath, the scareful heart does yet both pant and quakes
But he the stringes does turn in hand, and destenies behold,
And of the guts the signs each one does vewe not fully cold.
When him the sacrifyce had pleaso, his diligence ^e^ puttes
To dress his brothers banquet now: and straight a fonder cuttes
The bodies into quarters all, and by the stoompes anon
The shoulders wide, and brawnes of arms be strikes of euerythune.
He lays abroad their naked limes, and cuts away the bones:
The only heads he kepes and hands to him committed once.
Some of the guts are broacht. and in the fyres that burn full ^oe
They drop, the boiling Itcour some does tomble to end froe
In moorning cawderne: from the flesh that ouerstandes alorft
The fire does fly, and skatter out and into chimney often
Up heat again, and there constraynd by force to tarry yet
Unwilling burns: the liver makes great nopse upon the spit,
Nor easily wot I, if the flesh, or fla^ies they be that bry,
But cry they do: the fire like pitch it fumeth by an by:
Nor yet the smake it self so sad, like flithy miste in sight
Ascends up as wont it is, nor takes his way upright,
But even the Gods and house it does with fylithy turn defise.
O pacient Phoebus though from hence thou backward flee the while,
And in the midst of heaven above do drown the broken day,
Thou fleest to late: the father eats his children, well away,
And limbs to which he once gave life, with cursed iaw does tear.
He shynes with ointment shed full sweet all round about his hear,
Replete with wine; and aftentymes so cursed kind of food
His mouth has held, that would not down. but yet this one thing good
In all thy yls ( Thyestes) is that them thou do not knoe,
And yet shall that not long andure, though Titan backward go
And chariots turn against himself, to meet the ways be went,
And heavy night so heinous deed to keep from sight be sent,
And out of time from East arise, so foul a fact to hyde,
Yet shall the whole at length be seen: thy ylles shall all be spide.

WHich way O Prince of lands and Gods on hie,
At whose vprise eftsoon of shadowd night
All beawty flees, which way turnst thou awrye?
And drawest the day in midst of heaven to flight?
Why do thou (Phoebus) hide from us thy sight?
Not yet the watch that later hour bringes in,
Does Vesper warn the Stars to kindle light.
Not yet does turn of Hespers whele begin
To loase thy chare his well deserved way.
The trumpet third not yet has blown his blast
While toward the night begins to yield the day:
Great wonder has of sudden suppers have
The Plowman yet whose Oxen are vntierd.
From woonted course of Heaven what draws thee backs?
What causes have from certain race conspierd
To turn thy horse? do yet from dongeon black
Of hollow hell, the conquered Gyantes prove
A fresh assaut? does. Tityus yet assay
With trenched heart, and wounded womb to move
The former yres? or from the hill away
Has now Typhoeus wound his side by might?
Is up to heaven the way erected hie
Of phlegrey foes by mountains set upright?
And now does Ossa Pelion ouerlye?
The wonted turns are gone of day and night,
The rise of Sun, nor fall shall be no more,
Au^ora dowish mother of the light
That wontes to send the horses out before,
Does wonder much again return to see.
Her dawning light: she wots not how to case
The weary wheels, nor manes that smoking be
Of horse with sweat to bathe amid the seas.
Himself unwonted there to lodge likewise,
Does setting son again the morning see,
And now commaundes the darkness up to rise.
Before the night to come prepared be.
About the Poale yet glowth no fire in sight.
Nor light Moon the shades does comfort yet
What so it be, God grant it be the night.
Our hearts do quake with fear oppressed great.
And dreadful are least heaven and earth and all
With fatal ruin shaken shall decay:
And least on Gods again, and men shall fall
Disfigurde Chaos: and the land away
The Seas, and Fyres, and of the glorious Skise
The wandering lamps, least nature yet shall hide.
Now shall no more with blase of his vprise,
The Lord of stars that leads the world so wide,
Of Summer both and Winter give the marks.
Nor yet the Moon with Phoebus flames that burns,
Shall take from us by night the dreadful carkes,
With swifter course or pass her brothers turns,
While compass less she fets in crooked race:
The Gods on heaps shall out of order fall,
And each with other mingled be in place.
The wryed way of holy planets all,
With path a slope that does divide the Zones.
That bears the signs, and years in course does bring,
Shall see the stars with him fall down at ones.
And he that first not yet with gentle spring,
The temperate Gale does give to sails, the Ram
Shall headlong fall a down to Seas again,
Through which he once with fearful Hellen svvam.
Next him the Bull that does with horn sustain
The systers seven with him shall ouerturne
The twins and arms of crooked Cancer all,
The Lion hot that wontes the soil to burn
Of Hercules again from heaven shall fall.
To lands once left the Virgin shall be thrown,
And leueld payse of balance sway allow,
And draw with them the stinging Scorpion down.
So likewise he that holds in Thessale bow
His swift well fethred arrows Chiron old,
Shall break the same and eke shall lose his shot
And Capricorn that bringes the winter cold
Shall ouerturne and break the water pot
Who so thou be: and down with thee to ground,
The last of all the signs shall Pisces fall
And monsters eke in seas yet never drounde,
The water gulf shall ouerwhelme them all.
And he which does between each vrsa glyde,
Like crooked flood the slipper serpent twynde:
And lesser Bear by greater Dragons side,
Full cold with frost congealed hard by kind,
And carter dull that slowly guides his waine
Unstable shall Boots fall from hye.
We are thought meet of all men whom again
Should hugy heap of Chaos ouerly.
And world oppress with ouerturned mass
The latest age now falls us upon.
With evil hap we are begot alas
If wretches we have lost the sight of son,
Or him by fraught enforced have to fly
Let our complayntes yet go and fear be pasts
He greedy is of life, that will not die
When all the world shall end with him at last.

Now equal with the Stars I go.
beyond each other wight,
With haughty head the heavens above,
and highest Poale I smite,
The kingdom now, and seat I hold,
where once my father raynd:
I now let go the gods: for all
my will I have obsaynde
^aoughe and well, ye even enough for me I am acquit
But why enough? I will proceed and fyl the father yet
With blood of his least any shame should me restrain at all,
The day is gone, go to therefore while thee the heaven does call
Would God I could against their wills yet hold the Gods that flee
And of revenging dish constrayne them witnesses to be:
But yet (which well enough is wrought) let it the father see.
In spighte of all the drowned day I will remove from thee
The darkness all, in shade whereof do lurk thy miseryes.
And guest at such a banquet now to long he careless lies,
With merry face: now eat and drunk enough he has at last
T'ys best him self should know his ylls ye servants, all in have
Undo the temple doors: and let the house be open all:
Feign would I see, when look upon his childrens heads he shall
What countenance he then would make, or in what words break out
Would first his grief, or how would quake his body round about
With spright amassed sore: of all my work the fruit were this
I would him not a miser see, but while so made he is,
Behold the temple opened now does shine with many a light:
In glitteryng gold and purple seat he sitees himself upright,
And staying up his heavy head with wine upon his hand.
He belcheth out, now chief of gods in highest place I stand,
And king of kings: I have my wish, and more then I could think.
He filled is, he now the wine in silver volle does drink
And spare it not: there yet remaynes a worser draught for thee
That sprung out of the bodies late of sacrifyces three,
Which wine shall hyde let the^ withal the hoordes be taken up.
The father (mingled with the wine,) his childrens blood shall sup.
That would have bronke of mine. Behold he now begins to strain
His voice, and synges, nor yet for joy his mind be may refrain,
OBeaten bosoms dullde so long with woe,
Lay down your cares, at length your greues rele^^
Let sorrow pass, and all your dread let go,
And fellow eke of fearful banishment,
Sad pouertye and ill in misery
The shame of cares, more whense thy fall thou haste,
Then whether skylles, great hap to him, from hye
That falls, it is in ferety to be plast
Beneath, and great it is to him again
That pressed with storm, or euylls feels the smart,
Of kyngedome lost the payses to sustain
With neck vnbowde: nor yet detect of heart
Nor overcome, his heavy haps always
To bear upright but now of careful carkes
Shake of the showers, and of thy wretched days
Away with all the miserable marks.
To joyful state return thy cheerful face.
Put fro thy mind the old Thyestes hence.
It is the wont of wight in woeful case,
In state of joy to have no confidence.
Though better haps to them returned be,
Thafflicted yet to joy it yrketh sore.
Why calst thou me abacke, and hyndrest me
This happy day to celebrate? wherefore
Bidst thou me (sorrow) weep without a cause.
Who does me let with flowers so fresh and gay,
To deeke my hayres? it lets and me withdrawes.
Down from my head the roses fall away:
My moysted hair with ointment over all,
With sudden mase stands up in wondrous wise,
From face that would not weep the streams do fall.
And howling cries amid my words arise.
My sorrow yet thaccustomd tears does love
And wretches still delyght to weep and cry.
Unpleasant playntes it pleases them to move:
And florisht fair it likes with Tyrian die
Their robes to rent, to wail it likes them still
For sorrow sendes (in sign that woes draw nic)
The mind that wots before of after ill.
The sturdy storms the shipmen over lie.
When void of wynd thasswaged seas do rest.
What tumult yet or countenance to see
Makste thou mad man? at length a trustful breast
To brother gene, what ever now it be,
Causeles, or else to late thou art a dred.
I wretch would not so fear, but yet me draws
A trembling terror: down mine eyes do shed
Their sudden tears and yet I know no cause,
Is it a grief, or fear? or else has tears
^ great joy it self.
Let us this day with one consent
(O brother celebrate)
This day my sceptors my confyrme,
and stablish my estate.
And faithful bond of peace and love
between us ratifye.
Enough with meat and eke with wine,
now satisfied am I.
But yet of all my joys it were a great increase to me,
If now about my side I might my little children see.

Believe that here even in thine arms thy children present be.
For here they are; and shall be here, no part of them fro thee
Sal be withheld: their loved looks now give to thee I will,
And with the heap of all his babes, the father fully fill.
Thou shall be glutted fear thou not: they with my boys as yet
The joyful sacrifyces make at board where children sit.
They shall be called, the friendly cup now take of curtesy
With wine vpfylde.

of brothers feast I take full willingly
The fynal gift, shed some to gods of this our fathers land,
Then let the rest be drunk, what is this? in no wise will my hand
Obey: the payse increases sore, and down mine arm does sway.
And from my lips the wafting wine it self does fly away,
And in deceived mouth, about my jaws it runs round.
The table to, it self does shake and leap from trembling ground.
Scant burns the fire: the air it self with heavy chere to slght
Forsook of son amassed is between the day and night.
What means this? yet more and more of backward beaten sky
The compass falls, and thicker mist the world does ouerly
Then blackest darkness, and the night in night it self does hyde.
All stars be fled, what so it be my brother God provide
And soones to spare: the Gods so grant that a^l this testmpest fall
On this vile head: but now restore to me my childreu all,

I will, and never day again shall them from thee withdraw,

What tumult tumbleth so my guts, and does my bowels gnaw?
What quakes within, with heavy payse I feel my self oppressed,
And with an other voice then mine bewayses my doleful breast:
Come nere my sons, for you now does thun happy father call:
Come nere, for you once seen, this grief would soon assuage and fall
Whence murmr they? (...) fathers at (...) embrace them quickly now
For here they are lo come to thee: do thou thy children know?

I know my brother: such a gylt yet can thou suffet well
O earth to bear? nor yet from hence to Stygian lake of hell
Do thou both drown thy selle and us? nor yet with broaken ground
Do thou these kingdoms and their king with Chaos rude confound?
Nor yet vprenting from the soil the bowres of wicked land.
Do thou Micenas ouerturne with Tantalus to stand,
And aunciters of ours, if there in hell be any one,
Now ought we both: now from the frames on either side anon
Of ground, all here and there rent up out of thy bosom deep:
Thy dens and dungons set abroad, and us enclosed keep,
In bottom low of Acheront above our heds aloft
Let wander all the gylty ghostes, with burning frete full often
Let fyry Phlegethon that drives his sands both to and fro
To our confusion over roon und vyolently flow
O slothful soil unshaken payse vn^^^^ yet art thou?
The Gods are sled:

but take to thee with joy thy children now,
And rather them enbrace: at length thy children all of thee
So long wished for (for no delay there stands now in me)
Enjoy and kiss embracing arms deuyde thou unto three.

Is this thy league? may this thy love and faith of brother be?
And do thou so repose thy hate? the father does not crave
His sons alive (which might have been without thy gylt) to have
And eke without thy hate, but this does brother brother pray:
That them he may entoom be restore, whom see thou shall straight way,
Be burnt: the father naught requires of thee that have he shall,
But soon forgo

what ever part r^t of thy children all
Remaynes, here shall thou have: and what remains not thou host.

Lie they in fields, a food out fleng for fleerug sowles to wast^
Or are they kept a pray, for wyld and brutish beasten to eat?

Thou have deaourd thy sons and fyld thy self with wicked meat.

Oh this is it that sham'de the Gods and day from hence did drive
Turned back to east, alas I wretch what waylinges may I give?
Or what complayntes? what woeful words may be enough for me?
Their heads cut of, and hands of torn, I from their bodres see,
And wrenched seete from broken thighs I here behold again
Tys this that greedy father could not suffer to sustain.
In belly roll my bowels round, and cloased crime so great
Without a passage stryues within and seeks away to get.
Thy sword (O brother) lewd to me much of my blood alas
It has: let us therewith make way for all my sons to pass.
Is yet the sword from me withheld? thy self thy bosoms tear,
And let thy breasts resound with strokes: yet wretch thy hand forbear
And spare the dead: who ever saw such mischief put in proof?
What rude Heniochus that dwells by ragged coast aloof,
Of Caucasus unapt for men? or fear to Athens,, who
Procustes wyld? the father I oppress my children do
And am oppressed, is any mean of gylt or mischief yet?

A mean in mischief ought to be when gylt thou do commit,
Not when thou quytst: for yet even this to little seems to me.
The blood yet warm even from the wound I should in sight of these
Even in thy laws have shed, that thou the blood of them might drink
That lived yet: but while to much to have my hate I think
My wrath beguyled is my self with sword the wounds them gave
I struck them down, the sacred fyres with slaughter vowde I have
Well pleaso, the carcass cutting then, and liueles lymmes on ground.
I have in little parcels chopped, and some of them I brounde
In boiling cauderns, some to fyres that burnte full slow I put,
And made to drop: their synewes all, and limbs a two I cut
Even yet alive and on the spitte, that thrust was through the same
I hard the liver wayle and cry, and with my hand the flame:
I otf kept in: but every whit the father might of this
Have better done, but now my wrath to lightly ended is.
He rent his sons with wicked gum, himself yet wotting naught.
Nor they thereof

O ye encloas'd with bending banks abought
All seas me hear, and to this gylt ye Gods now harken well
What ever place ye fled are to here all ye sprites of hell,
And here ye lands, and night so dark that them do ouerly
With cloud so black to my complayntes do than thy self apply.
To thee now left I am, thou do alone me miser see,
And thou art left without thy stars: I will not make for me
Peticions yet, nor ought for me require may ought yet be
That me should veil? for you shall all my wishes now foresee.
Thou guyder great of skies above, and prince of highest might,
Of heavenly place now all with clouds full horrible to sight,
Enwrap the world, and let the wyndes on every side break out:
And send the dreadful thunder clap through all the world about
Nor with what hand thou gyltes house and undeserved wall
With lesser bolt are wont to beat, but with the which did fall
The three vnheaped mountains once and which to hills in height
Stood equal up, the gyantes huge: throuw out such weapons straight,
And flyng thy fires: and therwithall revenge the drowned day.
Let flee they flames, the light thus lost and hid from heaven away,
With flashes fill: the cause (lest long thou should doubt whom to hit)
Of each of us is ill: if not at least let mine be it.
Me strike with tryple edged tool thy brande of flaminge fire.
Beat through this breast: if father I my children to desire
To lay in tomb or corpses cast to fire as does behoue,
I must be burnt if nothing now the gods to wrath may move,
Nor power from skies with thunder bolt none strikes the wicked men
Let yet eternal night remain, and hyde with darkness then
The world about: I, Titan naught complain as now it stands
If still thou hyde thee thus away.

now praise I well my hands.
Now got I have the palm. I had been overcome of thee,
Except thou sorrow'dst so but now even children borne to me
I count and now of bridebed chaste the says I do repair,

In what offended have my sous:

In that, that thine they were

Setst thou the sons for fathers food?

I do and (which is best)
The certain sons,

The gods that guide all infantes I protest.

What wedlock gods?

who would the gilt with gylt so quite again?

I know thy grief prevented now with wrong thou do complain:
Nor this thee yrkes, that sed thou art with food of cursed kind,
But that thou had not it prepared for so it was thy mind,
Such meats as these to set before thy brother wotting naught,
And by the mothers help to have, likewise my children caught:
And them with such like to slay: this one thing let thee,
Thou thought them thine.

the gods shall al of this reuengers be
And unto them for vengeance due my vows thee render shall

But vexed to be I thee the white, geeue to thy children all.

O King of Dytis dungeou dark,
and g^ysty Ghosts of hell,
That in the deep and dre adfull Den,
of blackest Tarrace dwell.
Where lean and pale dyseases lie
where fear and samyne are,
Where discord stands with bleeding brows,
where every kind of care,
Where furies fight in beds of steel, and hears of crauling snakes,
Where Gorgon grimme, where Harpyes are, and loathsome Lymbo lakes,
Where most prodigious ugly things, the hollow hell does bide.
If yet a mouster more myshapt then all that there do hyde,
That makes his brood his cursed food, ye all abhor to see,
Nor yet the deep Auerne it self, may bide to cover me,
Nor grisly gates of Putoes place, yet dare them selves to spread,
Nor gaying ground to swallowe him, whom Gods and day have sled:
Yet break ye out from cursed seats, and here remain with me,
Ye need not now to be affrayde, the Air and Heaven to see.
Nor triple headed Cerberus, thou needst not be affryght,
The day unknown to thee to see or else the loathsome light.
They both be sled: and now does dwell none other count'naunce here,
Then does beneath the fowlest face, of hateful hell appeete.
Come see a meetest match for thee, a more then monstrous womb,
That is of his unhappy brood, become a cursed tomb.
Flock here ye fowlest flendes of hell, and thou O graundsyre great,
Come see the glutted guts of mine, with such a kind of meat,
As thou did once for Gods prepare. Let torments all of hell
Now fall upon this hateful head, that has deserude them well.
Ye all be plagued wrongfully, your guiltes be small, in sight
Of mine, and meet it were your pange on me alone should light.
Now thou O graundster guiltless art, and meeter were for me,
With fleeing flood to be beguilde, and fruit of fickle tree.
Thou slewst thy son, but I my sons, alas, have made my meat.
I could thy famyne better bear, my pau^ch is now repleate
With food: and with my children three, my belly is extent.
O filthy fowls and gnawyng gripes, that Tytius be some rent
Behold a fitter pray for you, to fill your selves vppone
Then are the growing guts of him: four wombes enwrapt in one.
This pau^che at once shall stll you all: if ye abhor the food,
Nor may your selves abide to bathe, in such a cursed blood:
Yet lend to me your clinching claws, your pray a while forbear,
And with your tallons suffer me, this monstrous mawe to tear.
Or whirling wheels, with swinge of which Ixion still is rolde,
Your books upon this glutten gorge, would catch a surer hold.
Thou filthy flood of Lym bo lake, and S^ygian poole so dyre,
From chocked channel belche abroad. Thou fearful freate of fire,
Spue out thy flames O Phlegethon: and ouershed the ground.
With vomit of thy fyry stream, let me and earth be drownde,
Break up thou soil from bottom deep, and give thou room to hell,
That night, where day, y^ ghosts, where Gods were woo^t to reign, may dwell.
Why gapst thou not? Why do you not O gates of hell unfold?
Why do ye thus thinfernall stendes, so long from hence withholde?
Are you likewise affrayde to see, and know so wretched wight,
From whom the Gods have wryde their looks, and turned are to flight?
O hateful head, whom heaven and hell, have shoonde and left alone,
The Sun, the stars, the light, the day, the Gods, the ghosts be goue.
Yet turn again ye Skies a while, ere quight ye go fro me,
Take vengeance first on him, whose fault enforces you to flee.
If needs ye must your flight prepare, and may no longer bide,
But roll ye must with you forthwt, the Gods and Sun a side,
Yet slowly flee: that I at length, may you yet overtake,
While wandering ways I after you, and speedy journey make.
By seas, by lands, by woods, by rocks, in dark I wander shall:
And on your wrath, for right reward to due des^rts, will call.
Ye escape not fro me, so ye Gods, still after you I go,
And vengeance ask on wicked wight, your thunder bolte to throe.

