ALTHOUGH (GENTLE Reader) thou may perhaps think me arrogant, for that I
only among so many fine wits and towardly youth (with which England this day
florisheth) have enterprised to set forth in english this present piece of the
flower of all writers, Seneca, as who say, not fearing what grauer heads might
judge of me, in attempting so hard a thing, yet upon well pondering what next
ensues, I trust both thy self shall clear thine own suspicion, and thy
changed opinion shall judge of me more rightful sentence. For neither have I
taken this work first in hand, as once entending it should come to light (of
well doing whereof I utterly dispayred) and being done but for mine own
private exercise, I am in mine opinion herein blameles, though I have (to
prove my self) privately taken the part which pleased me best of so excellent
an author, for better is time spent in the best then other, and at first to
attempt the hardest writers, shall make a man more prompt to translate the
easier with more facility. But now since by request, and friendship of those, to
whom I could deny nothing, this work against my will extorted is out of my
hands, I needs must ^raue thy patience in reading, and facility of judgment:
when thou shall apparently se my witles lack of learning, prayng thee to
consider how hard a thing it is for me to touch at full in all points the
authors mind, (being in many places very hard and doubtful, and the work
much corrupt by the default of evil printed Books) and also how far above my
power to keep that Grace and majesty of style, that Seneca does, when both so
excellent a writer has past the reach of all imitation, and also this our
English tongue (as many think, and I here find) is far unable to compare with
the Latten: but thou (good Reader) if I in any place have swerued from the true
sense, or not kept the roialty of speech, meet for a Tragedy, impute the one
to my youth and lack of judgment: the other to my lack of Eloquence. Now as
concerning sondrye places augmented and some altered in this my translation.
First for as much as this work seemed unto me in some places imperfect,
whether left so of the Author, or part of it lost, as time deuoureth all
things, I wot not, I have (where I thought good) with addition of mine own
Pen supplied the want of some things, as the first Chorus, after the first
act beginning thus. O ye to whom etc. Also in the second Act I have added
the speech of Achilles Spright, rysyng from Hell to require the Sacrifyce of
Polyxena beginning in this wise. Forsakinge now. etc. Again the three last
staves of the Chorus after the same Act: and as for the third Chorus which in
Seneca begins thus, QVE VOCAT SEEDS? For as much as nothing is therein but a
heaped number of far and strange Countries, considering with my self, that
the names of so many unknown Countries, Mountains, Deserts, and VVoodes,
should have no grace in the English tongue, but be a strange and unpleasant
thing to the Readers (except I should expound the Historyes of each one,
which would be far to tedious,) I have in the place thereof made another
beginning, in this manner. O Jove that leadst. etc. Which alteration may be
borne withal, seeing that Chorus is no part of the substance of the matter.
In the rest I have for my slender learning endeavored to keep touch with the
Latten, not word for word or verse for verse, as to expound it, but
neglecting the placinge of the words, observed their sense. Take Gentle
Reader this in good worth with all his faults, favor my first beginninges,
and amend rather with good will such things as herein are amiss, then to
deprave or discommende my labor and pains, for the faults, seeing that I have
herein, but only made way to other that can far better do this or like,
desiryng them that as they can, so they would. Farewell gentle Reader and accept
my good will

THe ten years siege of Troy, who list to hear,
And of thaffayres that there befell in fight:
Read ye the works that long since written were,
Of all Thassaultes, and of that latest night,
When Turrets tops in Troy they blased bright
Good Clerks they were that have it written well
As for this work, no word thereof does tell.
But Dares Phrygian, well can all report,
With Dictis eke of Crete in Greekish tongue
And Homer tells, to Troy the Greeks resort
In scanned verse, and Maro has it song
Each one in writ has pend a stoary long,
Who doubts of ought, and casts care to know
These antique Authors, shall the story show,
The ruins twain of Troy, the cause of each,
The glittering helmes, in fields the Banners spread,
Achilles yres, and Hectors fightes they teach.
There may the iestes of many a Knight be read:
Patroclus, Pyrrhus, Ajax, Diomed,
With Troylus, Paris, many other more,
That day by day, there fought infield full sore.
And how the Greeks at end an engine made:
A hugie horse where many a warlike Knight
Enclosed was: the Trojans to invade
With Sinons craft, when Greeks had feigned flight,
While close they lay at Tenedos from sight,
Or how Eneas else as other say,
And false Antenor did the town betray.
But as for me I naught thereof endight,
Mine Author has not all that story pend:
My pen his words in English must resight,
Of latest woes that fell on Troy at end,
What final fates the cruel God could send.
And how the Greeks when Troy was burnt began wreake
Their ire on Trojans, thereof shall I speak,
Not I with spear who pierced was in field,
Whose throat there cut, or head ycorued was
Ne bloodshed blows, that rent both targe and shield
Shall I resight, all that I ouerpasse.
The work I wryght more woeful is alas,
For I the mothers tears must here complain,
And blood of babes, that giltles have been slain.
And such as yet could never weapon wreast,
But on the lap are wont to dandled be,
Ne yet forgotten had the mothers breast,
How Greeks them slew (alas) here shall ye see
To make report thereof ay woe is me,
My song is mischife, murder, misery,
And hereof speaks this doleful tragedy.
Thou fury fell that from the deepest den
Could cause this wrath of hell on Troy to light,
That worckest woe guide thou my hand and pen,
In weeping verse of sobbes and sighs to wryght,
As does mine author them bewail aright:
Help woeful muse for me besemeth well
Of others tears, with weeping eye to tell.
When battered were to ground the towers of Troy
In writ as ancient authors do resight,
And Greeks again repayrde to Seas with joy,
Up rises here from hell Achilles Spright,
Vengeance he craves with blood his death to quight.
Whom Paris had in Phoebus temple slain,
With guile be trapt for love of Polyxeine.
And wrath of hell there is none other price
That may assuage: but blood of her alone
Polyxena he craves for sacrifyce,
With threatninges on the Grecians many one
Except they shed her blood before they gone.
The Sprightes the hell, and depest pittes beneath,
O Virgin dear, (alas) do thrust thy death.
And Hectors son, Astyanax (alas)
Pore seely fool his Mothers only joy,
Is iudgd to die by sentence of Calchas
Alas the while, to death is led the boy,
And tumbled down from Turrets tops in Troy.
What ruthful tears may serve to wayle the woe
Of Hectors wife that does her child forgo.
Her pinching pange of heart who may express,
But such as of like woes, have borne a part?
Or who bewail her ruthful heaviness
That never yet has felt thereof the smart?
Full well they wot the woes of heavy heart.
What is to leese a babe from mothers breast,
They know that are in such a case distressed.
First how the Queen lamentes the fall of Troy,
As has mine author done, I shall it wryght
Next how from Hectors wife they led the boy
To die, and her complayntes I shall resight,
The maidens death then I must last endight.
Now who that list the Queens complaint to here.
In following verse it shall forthwith appear.
WHo so in pomp of proud estate,
or Kingdom sets delight:
Or who that joys in Princes court
to bear the sway of might.
Ne dreads the fates which from above
the wavering Gods down flinges:
But fast affiance fixed has,
in frail and fickle things:
Let him in me both se the Face,
of Fortunes ftattering joy:
And eke respect the ruthful end of thee (Oruinous Troy)
For never gave she playner proof, then this ye present see:
How frail and britle is the state of pride and high degree,
The flower of flowring Asia, lo whose fame the heavens refound,
The Worthy work of Gods above, is ba^ered down to ground.
And whose assaults they sought afar, from West with Banners spread
Where Tanais cold her branches seven, abroad the world does shed.
With hugie host and from the East, where springes the newest dea,
Where Luke warm Tygris channel runs, and meets the ruddy sea.
And which from wandering land of S^ythe, the band of widows sought:
With fire and sword thus battered be her Turrets down to naught.
The walls but late of high renown lo here their ruinous fall:
The buildinges burn, and flashingflame, swepes through the pallas al.
Thus every house full hie it smoakes, of old Assarackes land:
Ne yet the flames withholdes from spoil, the greedy Victors hand.
The surging smoke, the asure say, and light has hid away:
And (as with cloud beset) Troyes Ashes staynes the dusky day.
Through pearst with ire and greedy of heart, the victor from a far.
Does vtew the long assaulted Troy, the gain of ten years war,
And eke the miseryes thereof abhorres to look upon,
And though he se it yet scant himself, belieues might be won,
The spoils thereof with greedy hand, they snatch and bear away:
A thousand ships would not receive aboorde so huge a pray
The yreful might I do protest of Gods adverse to me,
My countries dust, and Troyan King I call to witness thee,
Whom Troy nowhydes, and underneath the stones art ouertrode:
With all the Gods that guides the Ghost, and Troy that lately, stood.
And you also you flocking Ghostes of al my children dear:
Ye lesser Sprightes what ever ill, has happened to us here.
What ever Phoebus watrish face, in fury has foresaid:
At raging rise from seas when erst, the monsters had him frayde.
In childbed bands I saw it yore, and wist it should be so:
And I in vain before Cassandra told it long ago.
Not false Ulysses kindled has these fires, nor none of his:
Nor yet deceyptful Sinons craft, that has been cause of this.
My fire it is wherewith ye burn, and Paris is the brand
That smoaketh in thy towers (O Troy) the flower of Phrygian sand.
But ay (alas) unhappy age, why do thou yet so sore,
Bewail thy Countries fatal fall thou knew it long before:
Behold thy last calamityes, and them bewail with wares:
Account as old Troys ouerturne, and past by many years,
I saw the slaughter of the King, and how he lost his life:
By The altar s^^e (more mischief was) with stroke of Pyrrhus knife.
When in his hand he wound his locks, and drew the King to ground,
And hid to hiltes his wicked sword, in deep and deadly wound.
Which when the ^ored King had took, as willing to be slaynt,
Out of the old man's throat he drew his bloody blade again.
Not pity of his years (alas) in man's extremest age:
From slaughter might his hand withhold, ne yet his ire assuage:
The Gods are witness of the same, and eake the sacrifyes,
That in his kingdom holden was, that flat on ground now lies.
The father of so many Kings Pryam of aunient name,
Vntombed lies and wants in blase of Troy: his funeral flame.
Ne yet the Gods are wreakt, but lo his Sons and daughters all,
Such Lords they serve as does by chance of lot to them befall.
Whom shall I follow now for pray? or where shall I be led
There is perhaps among the Greeks that Hectors wife will wed.
Some man desires Helenus spouse some would Antenors have,
And in the Greeks their wantes not some, that would Cassandra crave
But I (alas) most woeful wight whom no man seeks to choose,
I am the only refuge left, and me they clean refuse
Ye careful captive company, why stints your woeful cry?
Beat on your breasts and piteously complain with voice so hye,
As meet may be for Troyes estate, let your complayntes rebound
In tops of Trees: and cause the hills to ring with terible sound.
NOt folk unapt, nor new to weep (O Queen)
Thou vvilst to vvayle by practice are we taught,
For all these years in such case have we been,
Since first the Troyan guest, Amiclas sought
And saild the Seas, that led him on his way
With sacred ship, to Cibell dedicate
From whence he brought his vnrepyning pray,
The cause (alas) of all this dire debate,
Ten times now hid the hills of Idey be,
With snow of Silver hevv all over laid.
And bared is, for Troyan rages each tree,
Ten times in field, the harvest man afraid,
The spikes of Corn has reapt, since never day
His waylyng wantes new cause renewes our woe
Lift up thy hand, (O Queen) cry well away:
We follow thee, we are well taught thereto.
Ye faithful fellows of your casualty,
Untie thattyre, that on your heads ye wear,
And as behooves state of misery.
Let fall about your woeful necks your hair.
In dust of Troy rub all your arms about,
In slacker weed and let your breasts be tied
Down to your bellies let your limbs lie out,
For what wedlock should you your bosoms hyde?
Your garments loose, and have in readiness
Your furious hands upon your breast to knock
This habit well beseems our distress,
It pleases me, I know the Troyan flock
Renew again your long accustomde cries,
And more then erst lament your miseryes.
We bewail Hector.

Our hair we have untied, now euerychone,
All rent for sorrow of our cursed case,
Our locks out spreads, the knottes we have undone
And in these ashes stained is our face.

Fill up your hands and make thereof no spare,
For this yet lawful is from Troy to take
Let down your garments from your shoulders bare.
And suffer not your clamor so to slake.
Your naked breasts wait for your hands to smight
Now dolor deep now sorrow show thy might:
Make all the coasts that compass Troy about
Witness the souude of all your careful cry
Cause from the Caves the echo to cast out:
Rebounding voice of all your misery:
Not as she wontes, the latter word to sound
But all your woe from far let it rebound
Let all the Seas it hear, and eke the land
Spare not your breasts with heavy stroke to strike
Beat ye your selves, each one with cruel hand
For yet your wonted cry does me not like
We bevvayle Hector.

Our naked arms, thus here we rent for thee,
And bloody shoulders, (Hector) thus we tear:
Thus with our fistes, our heads lo beaten be
And all for thee, behold we hale our hear.
Our dugges alas, with mothers hands be torn
And where the flesh is vvounded round about
Which for thy sake, we rent thy death to morn
The flowing streams of blood, they spring thereout.
Thy countres shore, and destinies delay.
And thou to vvearied Trojans vvast an aid,
A wall thou vvast, and on thy shoulders Troy
Ten years it stood, on thee alone it staide,
With thee it fell: and fatal day alas
Of Hector both, and Troy but one there was.

Enough has Hector: turn yonr plaint and moan
And shed your tears for Pryame every chone.

Receive our plaintes, O lord of Phrigian land
And old twice captive king, receive our fear,
While thou were king. Troy hurtles then could stand
Though shaken twice, with Grecian sword it wear,
And twice did shot of Hercles quiver bear,
At latter loss of Hecubes sons all
And roges for kings, that hgih on piles we rear:
Thou father shut stour latest funeral.
And beaten down, to Jove for sacrifies.
Like liueles block, in Troy thy carkas lies.

Yet turn ye once your tears, another way,
My pryams death, should not lamented be.
O Troyans all, full happy is Pryame say.
For free from bondage, down descended he,
To the lowest Ghost: and never shall sustain
His Captive neck with Greeks to yoked be.
He never shall behold the Atrids twain
Nor false Ulysses ever shall he see*
Not he a pray for Greeks to triumph at
His neck shall subject to their conquestes bear
Ne give his hands to tie behind his back,
That to the rule of Scepters wonted wear,
Nor following Agamemnons chare, in band
Shall he be pomp, to proud Mycenas land.

Full happy Pryame is, each one we say
That took with him his Kingdom then that stood
Now safe in shade, he seeks the wandering way,
And treads the paths of all Elizius wood,
And in the blessed Sprightes, full happy he,
Again there seeks to meet with Hectors Ghost.
Happy Pryam, happy whosoever may see,
His Kingdom all, at once with him be lost.

O Ye to whom the Lord of Land and Seas,
Of Life and Death has granted here the power
Lay down your lofty looks, your pride appeas
The crowned King flees not his fatal hour.
Who so thou be that leadst thy land alone,
Thy life was limite from thy mothers womb,
Not purple robe, not Glorious glittering throne,
Ne crown of Gold redeemes thee from the tomb:
A King he was that waiting for the veil,
Of him that slew the Minotaure in fight:
Begilde with blacknes of the wonted sail
In seas him sonke, and of his name they hight.
So he that wild, to vvin the golden spoil
And first with ship, by seas to seek renown,
In lesser vvaue, at length to death began boil,
And thus the daughters, brought their father down:
Whose s^nges, the vvoodes has drawn, and rivers held,
And birds to hear his notes, did theirs forsake,
In piece meal thrown, amid the Thracian field,
Without return has sought the Stigian lake.
They sit above that hold our life in line*
And what we suffer down they fling from hie,
No carke, no care, that ever may untwine
The thrids, that vvoued are above the sky,
As witness he that sometime King of Greece,
Had Jason thought, in drenching seas to drown
Who escaped both death and gaind the Golden fleece,
Whom fates advance, there may no power pluck down
The highest God somety me that Saturn hight
His fall him taught to credit their decrees
The rule of heavens: he lost it by their might,
And Jove his son now turns the rolling Skies.
Who vveneth here to vvin eternal wealth,
Let him behold this present perfect proof.
And learn. the secret stop of chances stelth,
Most nere alas, when most it seems aloof.
In slipper joy let no man put his trust:
Let none despair that heavy haps has past
The svvete with sovvre she mingleth as she lust
Whose doubtful web pretends naught to last.
Frailty is the thride, that Clothoes rock has sponne,
Now from the Distaffe drawn now knapt in tvvaine
With all the world at length his end he won,
Whose works have wrought, his name should great remain
And he whose travels twelve, his name display,
That feared naught the force of worldly hurt,
In fine (alas) has found his fatal day,
And died with smart of Dianyraes shurt,
If prowes might eternity procure,
Then Priam yet should live in lyking lust,
Ay portly pomp of pride thou art unsure,
Lo learn by him. O Kings ye are but dust.
And Hecuba that wayleth now in care,
That was so late of high estate a Queen,
A mirror is to teach you what you are
Your wavering wealth, O Princes here is seen.
Whom dawne of day has seen in high estate
Before Suns set; (alas) has had his fall
The Cradels rock, appoyntes the life his date
From settled joy, to sudden funeral.
The Spright of Achilles added to the tragedy by the Translator.

FOrsaking now the places tenebrouse,
And deep dens of thinfernall region
From all the shadows of illusious
That wa^der there the paths full many one
Lo, here am I returned al alone,
The same Achil whose fierce and heavy hand
Of all the world no wight might yet withstand.
What man so stout of all the Grecians host,
That has not sometime craved Achilles aid,
And in the Troyans, who of prowes most
That has not feared to see my Banner splaide
Achilles lo, has made them all affrayde.
And in the Greeks has been a pillar post,
That stvrdy stood against their Troyan host.
Where I have lackt the Grecians went to wrack,
Troy proved has what Achills sword could do
Where I have come the Troyans fled a back,
Retyring fast from field their walls unto,
No man that might Achilles stroke fordoe
I dealt such stripes amid the Trojan route,
That with their blood I staynd the fields about.
Mighty Memnon that with his Persian band,
Would Pryams part with all might maintain,
Lo now he lies and knows Achilles hand
Amid the field is Troylus also slain.
Ye Hector great, whom Troy accounted plain
The flower of chiualry that might be found,
All of Achilles had their mortal wound.
But Paris lo, such was his false deceit,
Pretending marriage of Polixeine,
Behynd the altar lay for me in wait
Where I unawares have fallen into the train
And in Appolloes church he has me slain
Whereof the Hell will now just vengeance have,
And here again, I come my right to crave.
The deep Auerne my rage may not sustain,
Nor bear the angers of Achilles spright
From Acheront I rent the spoil in twain,
And though the ground I grate again to sight:
Hell could not hide Achilles from the light,
Vengeance and blood does Orcus pit require,
To quench the furies of Achilles ire.
The hateful land, that worse then Tartare is
And burning thrust excedes of Tantalus,
I here behold again, and Troy is this
O, travel worse, then stone of Sisyphus
And pains that pass the panges of Tityus
To light more loathsome fury has me sent
Then hooked wheel, that Ixions flesh does rent.
Remembered is allow where sprites do dwell
The wicked slaughter'wrought by wyly way*
Not yet revenged has the deepest hell,
Achilles blood on them that did him slay
But now of vengeance come the yrefull day
And darkest dens of Tartare from beneath
Conspire the fautes, of them that wrought my death.
Now mischief, murder, wrath of hell draws nere
And dyre Phlegethon flood does blood require
Achilles death shall he revenged here
With slaughter such as Stygian lakes desire
Her daughters blood shall slake the spirits ire,
Whose sonue we slew, whereof does yet remain,
The wrath beneath, and hell shall be their pain.
From burning lakes the furies wrath I threate,
And fire that naught but streams of blood may slake
The rage of wind and seas their ships shall beat,
And Ditis deep on you shall vengeance take,
The spirits cry out, the earth and seas do quake
The poole of Styx, ungrateful Greeks it seath,
With slaughtred blood revenge Achilles death.
The soil does shake to bear my heavy foot
And fearth again the sceptors of my hand,
The pooles with stroke of thunderclap ring out,
The doubtful stars amid their course do stand,
And fearful Phoebus hides his blasing brande
The trembling lakes against their course do flite,
For dread and terror of Achilles spright.
Great is the ransom ought of due to me,
Wherewith ye must the sprightes and hell appease,
Polyxena shall sacrifysed be,
Upon my tomb, their yreful wrath to please,
And with her blood ye shall assuage the seas
Your ships may not return to Greece again
Til on my tomb Polyxena be slain.
And for that she should then have been my wife,
I will that Pyrrhus render her to me,
And in such solemn sort bereave her life,
As ye are wont the weddinges for to see,
So shall the wrath of Hell appeased be,
Naught else but this may satisfy our ire,
Her will I have and her I you require.
ALas how long the lingering Gre^kes in haven do make delay,
When either war by seas they seek or home to pass their way.
Why, show what cause does hold your ships? and Grecian navy stays,
Declare if any of the Gods have stopped your homeward ways.

My mind is mai'd, my trembling sin was quake and are affeard,
For stranger news of truth then these
I think were never heard.
Lo I my self have plainly seen in dawning of the day,
When Phoebus first began to approach and drive the stars away.
The earth all shaken suddenly and from the hollow grownde:
My thought I hard with roaryng cry a deep and dreadful sound:
That shoke the woods, and all the trees ^ong out with thunder stroke,
From Ida hills down fell the st^kes, the mountain ^oppes were broke.
And not the earth has only quakt, but all the Sea likewise*
Achilles presence felt and knew, and high the surges rise.
The cloven ground Erebus pittes then showed and deepest dens,
That down to Gods that guide beneath, the way appeard from hence.
Then shoke the tomb from whence anon in flame of fiery light,
Appears from the hollow ca^es Achilles noble spright.
As wonted he his Thracian arms and bannars to disploy
And weild his weighty weapons well against thassaultes of Troy,
The same Achilles seemde he than that he was wont to be
Amid the hosts and eas^y could I know that this was he.
With carcass slain in furious fight, that stopped and filled each floude.
And who with slaughter of his hand made Xanthus r^^ne with blood,
As when in Chariot high he sat with lofty stomach stout.
While Hector both and Troy at once he drew the walls about.
Alowd he cride, and every coast rang with Achilles sound,
And thus with hollow voice he spoke, from bottom of the ground.
The Greeks shall not with little price redeem Achilles ire,
A princely ransom must they give, for so the fates require
Unto my ashes Polyxene spoused shall here be slain
By Pyrrhus hand, and al my tomb her blood shall ouerstayne.
This said, he straight sanke down again to Plutoes deep region,
The earth then cloasd, the hollow caves were vanished and gone
Therewith the wether waxed clear, the raging wyndes did slake,
The tombling seas began to rest and all the tempest brake.

WHat time our sails we should have spread,
upon Sygeon Seas,
With swift return from long delay,
to seek our homeward ways.
Achilles rose whose only hand,
has given Greeks the spoil.
Of Troia sore annoyde by him,
and leueld with the soil,
With speed requiting his abode
and former long delay*
At Scyros isle, and Lesbos both amid the Aegaeon sea.
Til he came here in doubt it stood of fall or sure estate,
Then though ye have to grant his will ye shall it give to late.
Now have the other captains all the price of their manhood,
What else reward for his prewesse then her al only blood?
A^e his deserts think you but light, that when he might have fled,
And passing Pelyus years in peace, a quiet life have led,
Detected yet his mothers crafts, forsook his woman's weed,
And with his weapons proved himself a manly man indeed:
The King of Mysya, Telephus that would the Greeks withstand,
Coming to Troy, forbidding us the passage of his land:
To late repenting to have felt. Achilles heavy stroke
Was glad to crave his health again where he his hurt had took
For when his sore might not be salud as told Appollo plain.
Except the spear that gave the hurt, restoared help again.
Achilles plasters cured his cuttes, and saved the King alive:
His hand both might and mercy knew te slay and then reuyne.
When Thebes fell. Eetion saw it and might it not withstand,
The captive King could naught redress the ruin of his land.
Lyrnesus little likewise felt his hand and down it fill,
With ruin ouerturned like from top of haughty hill.
And taken Bryseps land it is and prisoner is she caught
The cause of strife between the Kings is Chryses come to naught.
Tenedos isle well known by fame and fertile soil he took
That fostreth fat the Thracian flocks and sacred Cilla shook
What boots to blase the brute of him whom trumpe of fame does show,
Through all the coasts where Caicus flood with swelling stream does flow?
The ruthful ruin of these realms so many towns bet down,
Another man would glory count and worthy great renown.
But thus my father made his way and these his iourneyes are,
And battayles many one he fought whylewarre he does prepare.
As wished I may his merits more shall yet not this remain.
Well known and counted praise enough that he has Hector slain
During whose life the Grecians al might never take the town,
My father only vanquist Troy, and you have pluct it down.
Rejoice I may your parents praise and brute abroad his acts,
It seems the son to follow well his noble fathers factts,
In sight of Priam Hector slain, and. Memnon both they lay.
With heavy theere his parents wayld to moutne his dying day.
Himself abhord his handy work in fight that had them slain,
The Sons of Gods Achilles knew were borne to die again
The woman queen of Amazons that greu'd the Greeks full sore.
Is turned to flight then ceast our fear we dread their bows no more.
It ye well weigh his worthynes Achilles ought to have
Though he from Argos or Mycenas would a Virgin crave,
Doubt ye herein? allow ye not that straight his will be done.
And count ye cruel Pryams blood to give to Peleus son?
For Helen sake your own childs blood appeasd Dianas ire
A wonted thing and done ere this it is that I require.
The only fault of youth it is not to refrain his rage
The Fathers blood already sturres in Pryams wanton age:
Sometime Achilles grievous checkes I bare with pacient heart,
The more thou may the more thou oughtst to suffer in good part
Whereto would ye with slaughtred blood a noble spirit stayne?
Think what is meet the Greeks to do, and Troyans to sustain.
The proud estate of tyranny may never long endure.
The King that rules with modest mean of safety may be sure.
The higher step of princely state that fortune has us signd
The more behou'th a happy man humility of mind
And bread the change that chance may bring, whose gifts so sone be lost
And chiefly then to fear the Gods, while they the favor most.
In beating down that war has won, by proof I have been taught,
What pomp and pride in twinke of eye, may fall and come to naught.
Troy made me fierce and proud of mind, Troy makes me frayd withal.
The Greeks now stand where Troy late fell, each thing may have his fall.
Sometime I grant I did my self, and Sceptors proudly bear,
The thing that might advance my heart makes me the more to fear
Thou Priam perfect proof presentst thou art to me eftsoon:
A cause of pride, a glass of fear a mirror for the nones,
Should I accoumpt the sceptors ought, but glorious vanity
Much like the borrowed brayded hair, the face to beautify.
One sudden chance may turn to naught, and mayme the might of men
With fewer then a thousand ships, and years in less then ten.
Not she that guydes the slipper wheel of fate, does so delay:
That she to al possession grauntes, of ten years settled stay.
With leave of Greece I will confess, I would have won the town
But not with ruin thus extreme to see it beaten down.
But lo the battle made by night and rage of fervent mind,
Could not abide the brydling bitte that reason had assignd.
The happy sword once slaind with blood insatiable is,
And in the dark the seruent rage does strike thee more amiss.
Now are we wreakt on Troy so much let all that may remain.
A Virgin borne of Princes blood for offering to be slain
And given be to slain the tomb and ashes of the ded,
And under name of wedlock see the guiltles blood be shed,
I will not grant for mine should be thereof both fault and blame.
Who when he may, forbids not offense: does will the same.

And shall his sprights have no reward their angers to appeyse?

Yes very great, for all the world shall celebrate his praise,
And lands unknown that never saw, the man so praysd by fame,
Shall heat and keep for many years the glory of his name.
If bloodshed veil his ashes ought strike of an Oxes head,
And let no blood that may be cause of mothers tears, be shed.
What furious fransy may this be that does your will so lead,
This earnest careful sutte to make in travail for the dead?
Let not such envy toward your father in your heart remain,
That for his sacrifice ye would procure an others pain,

Proud tirant, while prosperity thy stomach does advance,
And cowardly wretch that shrinks for fear in case of fearful chance.
Is yet again thy breast enflamde, with brand of Venus might?
Will thou alone so often deprive Achilles of his right?
This hand shall give the sacrifice, the which if thou withstand.
A greater slaughter shall I make, and worthy Pyrrhus hand.
And now to long from Princes slaughter does my hand abide,
And meet it were that Polyxene were laid by Priams side.

I not deny, but Pyrrhus chief renown, in war is this,
That Pryam slain with cruel sword, to your father humbled is.

My fathers foes we have them known, submit themselves humbly,
And Pryam presently ye wot, was glad to crave mercy.
But thou for fear not stout to rule, lie close from foes up shit:
Whil thou to Ajax, and Ulysses, do thy will commit.

But needs I must, and will confess, your father did not fear:
When burnt our fleet with Hectors brands, and Greeks they slaughtred wear.
While loytring then a loofe he lay, unmindful of the fight.
In steed of arms with scratch of quill, his sounding harp to smight.

Great Hector then despising thee, Achilles songs did fear:
And Thessale ships in greatest dread, in quiet peace yet wear.

For why aloof the Thessale fleet, they lay from Troyans hands,
And well your father might have rest, he felt not Hectors brandes.

Well seems a noble king to give an other king relief.

Why have thou then a worthy king berieued of his life?

A poinct of mercy sometime is, what lives in care to kill.

But now your mercy moves you a virgins death to will.

Account ye cruel now her death whose sacrifice I crave.
Your own dear daughter once ye know, your self to th'aulters gave.

Naught else could save the Greeks from seas, but the only blood of her:
A king before his children ought, his country to prefer.

The law does spare no captives blood nor wil'th their death to stay

That which the law does not forbid, yet shame does often say nay.

The conqueror what thing he list, may lawfully fulfill.

So much the less he ought to list, that may do what he will.

Thus boast ye these as though in all ye only bare the stroke
When Pyrrhus loosed has the greeks, from bond of ten years yoke.

Has Scyros isle such stomaks bred?

No bretherns wrath it knoes.

Beset about it is with wave.

The seas it do enclose.
Thyestes noble stock I know and A^reus eke full well,
And of the bretherns dire debate, perpetual fame does tell.

And thou a bestard of a may de, defloured privily.
Whom (then a boy) Achilles gat, in filthy lecherr.

The same A chill that does possess, the reign of Gods above,
With Therys seas: with Aeacus sprights, the starred heaven with Jove

The same Achilles that was slain, by stroke of Par^s hand.

The same Achilles, whom no god, durst ever yet withstand.

The stoutest man I rather would his checkes he should refrain
I could them tame but all your bragges, I can full well sustain.
For even the captives spares my sword: let Calchas called be.
If destyntes require her blood, I will thereto agree
Calchas whose counsel ruled our ships, and navy hither brought,
Vnlookst the poale and have by art the secrets thereof sought,
To whom the bowelles of the beast, to whom the thunder clap,
And blasyng star with flaming train, betokens what shall hap.
Whose words with dearest price I bought, now tell us by what mean
The will of Gods agrees that we return to Greece again.

The fates apoint the Greeks to buy their ways with wonted price.
And with what cost ye came to Troy, ye shall repair to Greece
With blood ye came, with blood ye must from hence return again,
And where Achilles ashes lies, the virgin shall be slain,
In seemly sort of habit, such as maidens wont ye see,
Of Thessalie, or Mycenas else, what time they wedded be.
With Pyrrhus hand she shall be slain, of right it shall be so
And meet it is that he the son, his fathers right should do.
But not this only stays our ships, our sails may not be spread,
Before a worthier blood then thine, (Polixena) be shed,
Which thirst thirst the fates, for Praimes nephew. Hectors little boy:
The Erekes shall tumble hedlonge down, from highest tower in Troy.
Let him there die, this only way ye shall the gods appeas,
Then spread your thousand sails with joy ye need not fear the seas.

MAy this be true, or does the Fable feign,
When corpse is dead the Sprite to live as yet?
When Death our eyes with heavy hand does strain,
And fatal day our leames of light has shet,
And in the Tomb our ashes once be set,
Has not the soul likewise his funeral,
But still (alas) do wretches live in thrall?
Or else does all at once together die?
And may no part his fatal hour delay.
But with the breath the soul from hence does fly?
And eke the Clouds to vanish quite away,
As danky shade flees from the poale by day?
And may no jot escape from desteny,
When once the brand has burned the body?
What ever then the rise of Sun may see,
And what the West that sets the Sun does know.
In all Neptunus raygne what ever be,
That restles Seas do wash and ouerflow,
With purple waves still tombling to and fro.
Age shall consume: each thing that liuth shall die,
With swifter race then Pegasus does fly.
And with what whirle, the twyse six signs do fly,
With course as swift as rector of the Spheres,
Does guide those glistering Globes eternally.
And Hecate her changed horns repeares,
So drauth on death, and life of each thing wears,
And never may the man, return to sight,
That once has felt the stroke of Parcas might.
For as the fume that from the fire does pass,
With turn of hand does vanish out of sight
And swifter then the Northren Boreas
With whirling blaste and storm of raging might,
Driuth far away and puttes the clouds to flight,
So flees the sprighte that rules our life away,
And nothing taryeth after dying day.
Swift is the race we run, at hand the mark
Lay down your hope, that wait here ought to win,
And who dreads ought, cast of thy careful carke:
Will thou it wot what state thou shall be in,
When dead thou art as thou had never bin.
For greedy time it does devour us all,
The world it swayes to Chaos heap to fall.
Death hurtes the Corpse and spares not the spright,
And as for all the dens of Taenare deeepe.
With Cerberus kingdom dark that knows no light,
And streightest gates, that he there sittes to keep,
They Fancies are that follow folk by sleep
Such rumors vain, but feigned lies they are,
And fables like the dreams in heavy care.
O dreadful day, alas, the sorry time*
Is come of all the mothers ruthful woe,
Astianax (alas) thy fatal line
Of life is worn, to death straight shall thou go,
The sisters have decreed it should be so,
There may no force (alas) escape there hand,
There mighty love their will may not withstand,
To se the mother, her tender child forsake,
What gentle heart that may from tears refrain
Or whosoever fierce that would no pity take,
To see (alas) this guiltles infant slain,
For sorry heart the tears mine eyes do stayne
To think what sorrow shall her heart oppress,
Her little child to leese remediless,
The double cares of Hectors wife to wayle,
Good Ladies have your tears in readiness.
And you with whom should pity most prevail.
Rue on her grief: bewail her heaviness.
With sobbing heart, lament her deep distress,
When she with tears shall take leave of her son,
And now (good Ladies) hear what shall be done.
ALas ye careful company
why hale ye thus your hayres?
Why beat you so your boiling breasts
and stayne your eyes with tear?
The fall of Troy is new to you
but unto me not so,
I have foreseen this careful case
ere this time long ago
When fierce Achilles Hector slew and drew the Corpse about
Then then me thought I wist it well, that Troy should come to naught
In sorrows sonke I senceles am and wrapped (alas) in woe,
But sone except this babe me held, to Hector would I go
This seely fool my stomach tames amid my misery,
And in the hour of heauiest happes permittes me not to die,
This only cause constraynes me yet the gods for him to pray
With tract of time prolonges my pain, delays my dying day:
He takes from me the lack of fear the only fruit of ill.
For while he lives yet have I left whereof to fear me still.
No place is left for better chance with worst we are oppressed
To fear (alas) and see no hope is worst of all the rest.
What sudden fear thus moves your mind, and vexes you so sore?

Still still (alas) of one mishap there ryseth more and more,
Nor yet the doleful destenies of Troy be come to end.

And what more grievous chances yet prepare the Gods to send?

The caves and dens of hell be rent for Troyans greater fear
And from the bottoms of their tombs the hidden sprightes appear.
May none but Greeks alone from hell return to life again?
Would God the fates would finish soon the sorrows I sustain.
Death thankful were, a common care the Troyans all oppress,
But me (alas) amaseth most the fearful heaviness.
That all astonished am for dread, and horror of the sight:
That in my sleep appeard to me by dream this latter night.

Declare what sightes your dream has showed, and tell what does you fear

Two parts of all the silent night almost then passed were.
And then the clear seven clustered beams of stars: were fall to rest
And first the sleep so long unknown my wearyed eyes oppressed.
If this be sleep the astonished ma^e of mind in heavy mood,
When suddenly before mine eyes the spright of Hector stood.
Not like as he the Greeks was wont to battle to require:
Or when amid the Grecians ships, he threw the brandes of fire.
Nor such as raging on the Grees, with slaughtring stroke had slain
And bare indeed the spoils of him that did Achilles feign.
His countenance not now so bright, nor of so lively cheer,
But sad and heavy like to owres and clad with ugly hair
It did me good to see him though when shaking then his head:
Shake of thy sleep in have he said, and quickly leave thy bed:
Convey into some secret place our son (O faithful wife)
This only hope there is to help find mean to save his life.
Leave of thy piteous tears he said, do thou yet wayle for Troy?
Would God it lay on Ground full flat so ye might save the boy.
Up stir he said thy self in have convey him privily.
Save if ye may the tender blood of Hectors progeny
Then straight in trembling fear I wakt and rold mine eyes about
Forgettyng long my child pore wretch, and after Hector sought.
But straight (alas) I wist not how the Spright away did pass,
And me forsook before I could my husband once embrasse.
O child, O noble fathers brood and Trojans only joy,
O worthy seed of thauncient blood, and beaten house of Troy.
O image of thy father lo, thou lively bearst his face,
This countnaunce lo my Hector had, and even such was his pace.
The pitch of all his body such, his hands thus would he bear.
His shoulders high his threatening brows* even such as thine they were
O son: begot to late for Troy, but borne to soon for me,
Shall ever time yet come again, and happy day may be,
That thou may once revenge and build again the towers of Troy,
And to the town and Troyans both restore their name with joy?
But why do I (forgettyng state of present destenye),
So great things wish? enough for captives is to live only:
Alas what privy place is left my little child to hide?
What seat so secret may be found where thou may safely bide?
The tower that with the walls of go^s so valiant was of might,
Through all the world so notable, so flourishing to sight,
Is turnde to dust: and fire has al consumd'e that was in Troy,
Of all the town not so much now is left to hide the boy.
What place were best to choose for guile, the holy tomb is here,
That then mies sword will spare to spoil where sithe my husband dear.
Which costly work his father builte, king Pryame liberal:
And it up raisde with charges great, fo Hectors funeral.
Herein the bones and ashes both of Hector (lo) they lie,
Best is that I commit the son to his fathers custody.
A cold and fearful sweat does run, through o^t my members all,
Alas I careful wretch do fear, what chance may thee befall,

Hide him away: this only way has saved many more,
To make the enmies to believe, that they were dead before.
He will be sought: scant any hope remains of safenes,
The paise of his nobility does him so sore oppres:

What way were best to work: that none our doings might bewray

Let none bear witness what ye do remove them all away.

What if the enmies ask me: where Astianax both remain?

Then shall y^ boldly answer make that he in Troy was slain.

What shall it help to have him hid? at length they will him find.

At first the enmies rage is fierce, delay does slake his mind.

But what preuailes, since free from fear we may him never hide?

Let yet the wretch take his defense, me careless there to bide.

What land unknown out of the way what unfrequented place
May keep thee safe? who ayds our fear? who shall defend our case?
Hector, Hector that evermore thy friends did well defend
Now chiefly aid thy wife and child and us some succor send.
Take charge to keep and cover close the treasures of thy wife,
And in thy Ashes hyde thy son preserve in tomb his life.
Draw near my Child unto the Tomb, why fliest thou backward so?
Thou takst great scorn to lurk in dens thy noble heart I know.
I see thou art ashamed to fear shake of thy princely mind,
And bear thy breast as thee behoues as chance has thee assynd.
Behold our case: and se what flock remains now of Troy
The tomb: I woeful captive wretch and thou a seely boy,
But yield we must to sorry fates thy chance must break thy breast,
Go to, creep underneath thy fathers holy seats to rest.
If ought the fates may wretches help thou have thy sauegard there,
If not: already then pore fool thou have thy sepulchere.

The tomb him closely hides: but least your fear should him betray
Let him here lie and far from hence go ye some other way.

The less he fears that fears at hand, and yet if need be so,
If ye think meet a little hence for safety let us go.

A little while keep silence now refrain your plaint and cry,
His cursed foot now hither moves the Lord of Cephalie.

Now open earth, and thou my spouse from Stix rend up y^ ground,
Deep in thy bosom hyde thy son that he may not be found.
Ulysses comes with doubtful pace and changed countenance
He knittes in heart decetptful craft for some more grievous chance.

Though I be made the messenger of heavy news to you,
This one thing first I shall desire that ye take this for true.
That though the words come from my mouth, and I my message tell
Of truth yet are they none of mine ye may believe me well.
It is the word of all the Greeks, and they the authors be,
Whom Hectors blood does yet forbid their countries for to see.
Our careful trust of peace unsure does still the Greeks detayne,
And evermore our doubtful fear yet drawth us back again.
And suffers not our wearyed hands, our weapons to forsake,
In child yet of Andromacha, while Troyans comfort take.

And says your Augure Calchas so?

Though Calchas nothing said
Yet Hector tells it us himself, of whose seed are we frayde.
The worthy blood of noble men often times we se it plain,
Does after in their heirs succeed and quickly springes again.
For so the hornles youngling yet, of high and sturdy b^ste,
With lofty neck and braunched brow, does shortly rule the rest.
The tender twig that of the lopped stock does yet remain,
To match the tree that bare the bough, in time startes up again
With equal top to former wood the room it does supply,
And spreads on soil allow the shade, to heaven his branches hye.
Thus of one spark by chance yet left it happens so full often.
The fire has quickly caught his force and flamth again aloft.
So scare we yet least Hectors blood might rise er it be long,
Fear castes in all thextremity and often interprets wrong.
If ye respect our case ye may not blame these old soldiars
Though after years and months twice flue, they fear again the wars.
And other trauails dreadyng Troy, not yet to be well won,
A great thing does the Grecyans move, the fear of Hectors son.
Rid us of fear, this stays our fleet, and pluckes us back again,
And in the haven our navy sticks, til Hectors blood be slain.
Count me not feerce for that by fates I Hectors son require,
For I as well if chance it would Orestes should desire.
But since that needs it must be so, bear it with pacient heart:
And Suffer that which Agamemnon suffered in good part.

Alas my child would God thou were yet in thy mothers hand.
And that I knew what destentes thee held or in what land.
For never should the mothers faith her tender child forsake:
Though through my breast the enmies al, their cruel weapons struck.
Nor though the Greeks with pinching bands of iron my hands had bound,
Or else in fervent flame of fire beset my body round.
But now my little Child (pore wretch alas) where might he be?
Alas, what cruel desteny what chance has hapt to thee?
Art thou yet ranging in the fields and wandrest there abroad?
Or smothred else in dusty smoke of Troy: or ouertroad?
Or have the Greeks thee slain (alas) and laughed to see thy blood?
Or torn art thou with jaws of beasts? or cast to fowls for food?

Dissemble not, hard is for thee Ulysses to deceive,
I can full well the mothers crafts and subtilty perceive.
The pollecy of Goddesses Ulysses has undone.
Set al these feigned words assyde, tell me where is thy son?

Where is Hector? where all the rest that had with Troy their fall
Where Priamus? you ask for one but I require of all.

Thou shall constrained be to tell the thing thou do deny.

A happy chance were Death to her that does desire to dye.

Who most destres to die, would faynest live when death drawth on,
These noble words with present fear of death would soon be gone.

Ulysses if ye will constrayne Andromacha with fear,
Threaten my life for now to dye my chief desire it were.

With stripes with fire tormenting death we will the truth out wrest
And dolor shall thee force to tell the secrets of thy breast.
And what thy heart has depest hid for pain thou shall express,
Often times thextremity preuayles much more then gentleness,

Set me in midst of burning flame with wounds my body rent,
Use all the means of cruelty that ye may al invent.
Prove me with thirst and hunger both, and every torment try,
Pearce through my sides with burning yrons in prison let me lie.
Spare not the worst ye can deuyse (if ought be worse then this)
Yet never get ye more of me. I wot not where he is.

It is but vain to hyde the thing that straight ye will deteckt
No fears may move the mothers heart, she does them al neglect.
This tender love ye bear your child, wherein ye stand so stout,
So much more circumspectly warnth, the Greeks to look about.
Least after ten years tract of time and battle borne so far,
Some one should live that on our children might renew the war,
As for my self, what Calchas says, I would not fear at all
But on Telemachus I dread, the smart of wars would fall

Now will I make Ulysses glad and all the Greeks also,
Needs must thou woeful wretch confess declare thy hidden woe.
Rejoice ye sons of Atreus there is no cause of dread.
Be glad Ulysses tell the Greeks that Hectors son is dead.

By what assurance proves thou that? how shall we credit thee:

What ever thing the enmies hand may th^ea ^en hap to me
Let speedy fates me slay forthwith, and earth me hyde at ones
And after death from tomb again, remove ye: Hectors bones,
Except my son already now, do rest among the dead.
And that except Astianax into his tomb be led.

Then fully are the fates fulfild with Hectors childs disceace.
Now shall I bear the Grecians word, of sure and certain peace.
Ulysses why what do thou now^ the Greeks will every chone,
Believe thy words, whom creditst thou? the mothers tale alone.
Think thou for sauegard of her child the mother will not lie?
And dread the more the worse mischaunce to give her son to die?
Her faith she byndes with bond of oath, the truth to verify,
What thing is more of weight to fear, then so to swear and lie?
Now call thy crafts together al, bestirre thy wits and mind,
And show thy self Ulysses now, the truth herein to find.
Search well thy mothers mind: behold she weeps and wayleth out,
And here and there with doubtful pace, she raungeth al about,
Her careful ears she does apply to harken what I say,
More frayd she seems then sorrowful. Now work some wily way.
For now most need of wit there is and crafty pollecy,
Yet on^e again by other means I will the mother try.
Thou wretched woman may rejoice, that dead he is: (alas)
More doleful death by destenie for him decreed there was.
From Turrets top to have been cast and cruelly been slain.
Which only tower of all the rest does yet in Troy remain.

My spright failth me, my limbs do quake, fear does my wits co^founde
And as the Ise congeals with frost, my blood with could is bound.

She tre^bleth lo: this way, this way I will the truth out wreaste,
The mothers fear detecteth all the secrets of her breast:
I will renew her fear go sirs bestir ye spedely
To seek this enmye of the Greeks where ever that he lie.
Well done he will be found at length, go to still seek him out,
Now shall he dye. what do thou fear why do thou look about?

Would God that any cause there were yet left that might me fray,
My heart at last now all is lost has laid all fear away.

Sins that your child now has ye say already suffered death,
And with his blood we may not purge the hosts as Caschas says.
Our fleet pass not (as well inspired does Calchas prophecy)
Till Hectors ashes cast abroad the waves may pacify.
And tomb be rent now sins the boy has skapt his desteny.
Needs must we break this holy tomb where Hectors ashes lie.

What shall I do^^y mind distracted is with double fear.
On the one my son, on the other side my husbands ashes dear,
Alas which part should move me most, the cruel Gods I call
To witness with me in the truth, and Ghostes that guide thee all
Hector that nothing in my son is else that pleases me.
But thou alone God grant him life he might resemble thee:
Shall Hectors ashes drowned bee^hide I such cruelty,
To see his bones cast in the Seas? yet let Astyanax die,
And can thou wretched mother bide, thine own childs death to see?
And suffer from the hie towers top that headlong thrown he be?
I can and will take in goad part, his death and cruel pain,
So that my Hector after death be not removed again.
The boy that life and senses has may feel his pain and dye,
But Hector lo his death has plast at rest in tomb to lie
What do thou stay? determine which thou w^lt preserve of twain.
Art thou in doubt? save this: ^oe here thy Hector does remain,
Both Hectors be, the one quick of spright and drawing toward his strength
And one that may perhaps revenge his fathers death at length.
Alas I cannot save them both: I think that best it were,
That of the twain I saved him that does the Grecians fear.

It shall be done that Calchas words to us does prophecye,
And now shall all the sumptuous work be thrown down utterly

That once ye sold?

I will it all from top to bottom rend.

The faith of Gods I call upon Achilles us defend,
And Pyrrhus aid thy fathers right.

This tomb abroad shall lie:

O mischief, never durst the Greeks show yet such cruelty.
Ye strain the temples and the Gods that most have favored you,
The dead ye spare not, on their tombs your fury rages now.
I will their weapons all resist my self with naked hand,
The ire of heart shall give me strength their armor to withstand.
As fierce as did the Amazones beat down the Greeks in fight,
And Menas once enspierd with God, in sacrifyce does smyght,
With spear in hand, and while with furyous pace she treads the ground
And wood as one in rage she strykes, and feels not the wound:
So will I run on midst of them and on their weapons dye,
And in defense of Hectors tomb among his ashes lie.

Cease ye: does rage and fury vain of women move ye ought?
Dispatch with speed what I command, and pluck down al to naught.

O slay me rather here with sword rid me out the way,
Break up the deep Auern, and rid my destenies delay.
Rise Hector and beset thy foes, break thou Ulysses ire,
A spright art good enough for him, behold he casts fire.
And weapon shakes with mighty hand do ye not Greeks him see?
Or else does Hectors spright appear but only unto me

Down quight withal.

What will thou suffer both thy sons be slain,
And after death thy husbands bones to be removed again?
Perhaps thou may with prayer yet aprease the Grecians all.
Else down to ground the holy tomb of Hector, straight shall fall.
Let rather die the child pore wretch and let the Greeks him kill,
Then father and the son should cause the tone the others ill.
Vllisses, at thy knees I fall, and hm^bly ask mercy,
These hands that no man's feet else knew, first at thy feet they lie.
Take pity on the mothers case and sorrows of my breast,
Vochsafe my prayers to receive and grant me my request.
And by how much the more the Gods have thee advanced hie,
More easily stryke the pore estate of wretched misery.
God grant the chaste bed of thy godly wife Penelope,
May thee receive and so again Laerta may thee see,
And that thy son Telemachus may meet thee joyfully.
His graundstres y^ares, and fathers wit, to pass full happily.
Take ptty on the mothers tears, her little child to save,
He is my only comfort left, and the only to^ I have.

Bring forth thy son and ask.

COme hither child out of the dens to me,
Thy wretched mothers lamentable store,
This Babe Ulysses (lo) this Babe is he.
That stays your ships and fears you so sore.
Submit thy self my son with humble hand,
And worship flat on ground thy masters feet,
Think it no shame as now the case does stand:
The thing that Fortune wilth a wretch is meet,
Forget thy worthy stock of Kingly kind,
Think not on Priams great nobility,
And put thy father Hector from thy mind,
Such as thy Fortune let thy stomach be,
Behave thy self as captive bend thy Knee,
And though thy grief pearce not thy tender years,
Yet learn to wa^le thy wretched state by me,
And take ensample at thy mothers tears.
Once Troy has seen the weeping of a child,
When little Priam turnde Alcides threats,
And he to whom all beasts in strength did yield,
That made his way from hell, and brake their gates
His little enmies tears yet overcame,
Priam he said receive thy liberty,
In seat of honor keep thy Kingly name,
But yet thy Sceptors rule more faithfully.
Lo such the conquest was of Hercules.
Of him yet learn your hearts to mollify,
Do only Hercles cruel weapons please,
And may no end be of your cruelty?
No less then Pryam, kneeles to thee this boy,
That lies and asks only life of thee.
As for the rule and governance of Troy
Where ever ^ortune will there let i^ be.
Take mercy on the mothers ruthful tears
That with their streams my cheeks do ouerflow,
And spare this guiltles insantes tender years
That humbly falls at thy feet so low.
OF truth the mothers great sorrow,
does move my heart full sore.
But yet the mothers of the Greeks,
of need must move me more,
To whom t^ts boy may cause in time
a great calamtie.
May ever he the burnt ruins
of Troy reedifie?
And shall these hands in time to come, ereckt the town again?
If this be th only help we have, there does no hope remain
For Troy, we stand not now in case to cause your fear of mind,
Does ought avail his fathers force, or stock of noble kind?
His fathers heart abated was, he drawn the walls abought.
Thus evil haps, the haughttest heart at lengh they bring to naught,
If ye will needs oppress a wretch what thing more grievous were
Then on his noble neck he should the yoke of bondage bear?
To serve in life does any man this to a King deny?

Not Ulysses with his death, but Calchas prophecy.

O false inuentor of deceit and heinous cruelty,
By manhood of whose hand in war no man did ever dye.
But by disceipt and crafty train of mind that mischief seeks,
Before this time full many one dead is, yea of the Greeks,
The Prophets words and guilties Gods say thou my son require,
Nay: mischief of thy breast it is, thou do his death desire.
Thou night soldier, and stout of heart a little child to stay.
This enterprise thou takste alone and that by open day.

Ulysses manhood well to Greeks to much to you is known,
I may not spend the time in words, our Navy will be gone

A little stay, while I my last farewell give to my child,
And have with often embracing him my greedy sorrows filled.

Thy grievous sorrows to redress, would God it lay in me,
But at thy will to take delay of time I grant it thee.
Now take thy last leave of thy Son, and fill thy self with tears.
Often times the weeping of the eyes, the inward grief out weakes.

O dear, O sweet, thy mothers pledge, farewell my only joy,
Farewell the flower of honor left of beaten house of Troy.
O Troyans last calamity and fear to Grecians part
Farewell thy mothers only hope, and vain comfort of heart.
Often wish I thee thy fathers strength and half thy graundstres years
But all for naught the Gods have all dispoynted our desires.
Thou never shall in regal court thy sceptors take in hand,
Nor to thy people give decrees nor lead with law thy land.
Nor yet thine enmies overcome by might of handy stroke.
Nor send the conquerde nations all under thy servile yoke.
Thou never shall beat down in fight, and Greeks with sword pursew,
Nor at thy Charyot Pyrrhus pluck, as Achill Hector drew
And never shall these tender hands thy weapons weild and wrest,
Thou never shall in woods pursue the wyld and mighty beast.
Nor as accustomed is by guyse and sacrifice in Troy,
With measure swift: between the aulters shall thou dance with joy.
O grievous kind of cruel death that does remain for thee,
More woeful things then Hectors death the walls of Troy shall see.

Now break of al thy mothers tears I may no more time spend.
The grievous sorrows of thy heart will never make an end.

Ulysses spare as yet my tears and grant awhyle delay,
To close his eyes yet with my hands er he depart away.
Thou die but young: yet feared thou art thy Troy does wait for thee,
Go noble heart thou shall again the noble Troyans see.

Help me mother?

Alas my child why take thou hold by me?
In vain thou calst where help none is I can not succor thee.
As when the little tender beast that hears the Lion cry,
Straight for defense he seeks his damme, and crouching down does lie,
The cruel beast when once removed is the damme away,
In greedy ^aw with ravening bit does snatch the tender pray
So straight the enmies will thee take, and from my side thee bear.
Receive my kiss and tears pore child, receive my rented hair.
Depart thou hence now full of me, and to thy father go,
Salute my Hector in my name and tell him of my woe
Complain thy mothers grief to him if former (...) may move,
The sprightes: and that in funeral flame they leese not all their love.
O cruel Hector suffrest thou thy wife to be oppressed?
With bond of Grecians heavy yoke and lie thou still at rest?
Achilles rose: take here again my tears and rented hear,
And (all that I have left to send) this kiss thy father bear.
Thy coat yet for my comfort leave, the tomb has touched it
If of his ashes aught here lie I Will seek it every whit.

There is no measure of thy tears I may no longer stay,
Defer no further our return break of our ships delay.

O Jove that leadst the lamps of fire,
and deckst with flaming stars the sky.
Why is it ever thy desire
to care their course so orderly?
That now the frost the leaves has vvorn^
and now the spri^g does close the tree.
Now fiery Leo rypes the corn,
and still the soil should changed be?
But why art thou that all do guide,
between whose hands the poale does sway,
And at whose vvil the Orbs do slide, careless of man's estate alvvay?
Regarding not the goodmans case, nor caryng how to hurt the ill.
Chance bears rule in every place and turns man's estate at will.
She geues the wrong the upper hand the better part she does oppress,
She makes the highest lovv to stand, her Kingdom all is orderlesse.
O parfite proof of her frailty, the princely tovvres of Troybeat down,
The flovvre of Asia here ye see with turn of hand quight overthrown.
The ruthful end of Hectors son, vvho^ to his death the Greeks have led,
His fatal hour is come and gone, and by this time the Child is ded:
Yet still (alas) more cares increase, O Troyans doleful destenie,
Fast does approach the maids decease, and now Polixena shall die.
WHat ever woeful wedding yet,
were cause of funeral,
Of wayling, tears, blood, slaughter else
or other mischiefs all,
A worthy watch for Helena,
and meet for me it ware,
My wedding torch has been the cause
of all The Troyans care.
I am constraynd to hurt them yet,
after their overthrow,
The false and feigned marriages of Pyrrhus must I show.
And give the maid the Greeks attire and by my pollecy:
Shall Paris sister be betrayed and by disceypt shall die.
But let her be beguiled thus, the less should be her pain
If that unware without the fear of death: she might be slain.
What ceasest thou the will of Greeks, and message to fulfill?
Of hurt constraynd the fault returnth to th'auter of the ill.
O noble Virgin of the famous house and stock of Troy,
To thee the Grecians have me sent I bring thee news of joy,
The Gods rue on thy afflicted state more merciful they be,
A great and happy marriage lo, they have prepared for thee.
Thou never should if Troy had stood, so nobly wedded be,
Nor Priam never could prefer thee to so hie degree.
Whom flower of all the Grecians name the prince of honor hie,
That bears the Scepters over all, the land of Thessaly
Does in the law of wedlock chose, and for his wise require.
To sacred rightes of lawfu bed, does Pyrrhus thee desire:
Lo Thetis great with all the rest, of Gods that guide by sea.
Each one shall thee account as theirs and toy by wedding day.
And Peleus shall thee daughter call when thou art Pirrhus wife,
And Nereus shall account thee his the space of all thy life.
Put of thy monrning garment now, this regal vesture wear
Fogret henceforth thy captive state and seemly broyd thy hair.
The fall has lift thee higher up, and does thee more advance
Often to be taken in the war does bring the better chance
This ill the Troyans never knew in all their griefs and pain
Before this time ye never made us to rejoice in vain.
Troy towers give light, O seemly time for marriage to be made,
Who would refuse the wedding day that Helayne does persuade?
The Plague and ruin of each part behold do thou not see,
These tombs of noble men, and how their bones here scattered be?
Thy brydebed has been cause of this for thee all these be ded
For thee the blood of Asia both and Europe has been shed.
When thou in joy and pleasure both the fighting folk from far,
Have viewde: in doubt to whom to wish the glory of the war.
Go to, prepare the martages, what need the Torches light?
Behold the Towers of Troy do shine with brands that blase full bright.
O Troyans all set to your hands, this wedlock celebrate:
Lament this day with woeful cry and tears in seemly rate.

Though care do cause the want of wit, and reasons rule deny,
And heavy hap does ofttymes hate his mates in misery
Yet I before most hateful judge dare well defend my part,
That I of all your grievous cares sustain the greatest smart.
Andromacha for Hector weeps, for Priam Hecuba,
For only Paris privily bewayleth Helena.
A hard and grievous thing it is captivity to bear,
In Troy that yoke I suffered long a prisoner whole ten year.
Turned are the fates, Troy beaten down, to Greece I must repeare,
The native country to have lost is ill, but worse to fear.
For dread thereof you need not care your euilles all be past,
On me both parts will vengeance take al lights to me at last.
Whom each man prisoner takes God wot she stands in slipper stay,
And me not captive made by lot yet Paris led away.
I have been cause of all these wars, and then your woes were wrought,
When first your ships the Spartayn Seas and land of Grecia sought.
But if the Goddess wild it so that I their pray should be,
And for reward to her beautyes judge she had appointed me,
Then pardon Paris: think this thing in wrathful judge does lie,
The sentence Menelaus geues, and he this case shall try.
Now turn thy playntes Andromacha, and weep for Polyxeyne
Mine eyes for sorrows of my heart their tears may not refrain.

Alas, what care makes Heleyn weep? what grief does she lament?
Declare what crafts Ulysses castes, what mischief has he sent?
Shall she from height of Idey hill be hedlong tombled down?
Or else out of the turrets top in Troy shall she be thrown?
Or will they cast her from the clieues into Sygeon seas?
In bottom of the surging waves to end her ruthful days?
Show what thy countnaunce hides and tell the secrets of thy breast.
Some woes in Pyrhus wedding are far worse then all the rest.
Go to, give sentence on the maid, pronounce her desteny:
Delude no longer our mishappes, we are prepared to die.

Would God the'xpou^der of the Gods would give his dome so right
That I also on point of sword might leese the loathsome light,
Or at Achilles tomb with ^^ake of Pyrrhus hand be ^apne:
And bear a part of al thy fates O wretched Polixeyne.
Whom yet Achilles woeth to wed, and where his ashes lie,
Requires that thy blood be shed, and at his tomb to die.

Behold lo how her noble mind of Death does gladly hear,
She deckes her self? her regal weed in seemly wise to wear,
And to her head she settes her hand the broyded hair to lay,
To wed she thought it Death, to die she thinks a wedding day
But help (alas) my mother sounds to hear her daughters death,
Arise pluck up your heart and take again the panting breath.
Alack good mother how slender stay, that does thy life sustain?
A little thing shall happy thee thou art almost past pain.
Her breath returns: she does reuyue, her lims their life do take.
So see when wretches feign would die, how death does them forsake.

Does yet Achilles live (alas) to work the Troyans spite?
Does he rebel against us yet? O hand of Paris light.
The very tomb and ashes lo* yet thirsts for our blood,
A happy heap of children late on every side me stood.
It wearied me to deal the mothers kiss among them al.
The rest are lost, and this alone now does me mother call.
Thou only child of Hecuba, a comfort left to me.
A stayer of my sorry state and shall I now leese thee?
Depart O wretched soul, and from this careful carcas fly,
And ease me of such ruthful fates, to see my daughter die.
By weepyng wets (alas) my eyes, and stains them over al,
And down my cheeks the sodeine streams and showers af tears do fall.
But thou dear daughter may be glad, Cassandra would rejoice,
Or Hectors wife thus wed to be if they might have their choice.

We are the wretches Hecuba in cursed case we stand.
Whom straight the ship shall toss by seas into a foreign land.
But as for Heleyns grieves be gone and turned to the best,
She shall again her natyue country se and live at rest.

Ye would the more envy my state if ye might know your own,

And grouth there yet more grief to me that erst I have not known?

Such masters must ye serve as does by chance of lots befall.

Whose servant am I then become whom shall I master call?

By lot ye fall to Pyrhus hands you are his prisoner.

Cassandra is happy, fury saues perhaps and Phoebus her.

Chief king of Greeks Cassandra keeps and his captive is she.

Is any one among them all that prisoner would have me?

You chaunsed to Ulysses are his pray ye are become.

Alas what cruel* dyre and yrefull dealer of the dome.
What god unjust does so divide, the captives to their lords?
What grievous arbiter is he? that to such choice accordes,
What cruel hand to wretched folk, so evil fa^es has cast?
Who has among Achilles armor, Hectors mothers plaste?
Now am I captive, and beset with all calamity.
My bondage grieves me not, but him to serve it shameth me.
He that Achilles spoils has won, shall Hectors also have:
Shall barraine land enclosde with seas receive my boanes in grave?
Lead me Ulysses where thou wylt, lead me. I make no stay,
My master I, and me my fates, shall follow every way.
Let never calm come to the seas, but let them rage with wind,
Come fire and sword, mine own mischaunce and Priams let me find.
In mean time haps this deep distres my cares can know no calm:
I ran the race with Priamus, but he has won the Palm,
But Pyrrhus comes with swiftned pace and thretning brows does wrest.
What stayste thou Pyrrhus? strike thy sword now through this woeful breast.
And both at ones the parents of thy fathers wife now slay,
Murderer of age, likes thee her blood? he draw my daughter away
Defile the gods and stain the sprights, of hell with slaughtred blood,
To ask your mercy what auayles? our prayers do no good.
The vengeance ask I on your ships, that it the gods may pleas,
According to this sacrifice, to guide you on the seas.
This wish I to your thousand sails, Gods wrath light on them all,
Even to the ship that bears me, what ever may befall.

A Comfort is to man's calamity
A doleful flock of fellows in distres.
And sweet to him that mournes in misery
To here them wayle whom sorrows like oppre^
In deepest care his grief him bites the les,
That his estate bewayles not all alone,
But sees with him the tears of many one.
For still it is the chief delight in woe,
And joy of them that sonke in sorrows are,
To see like fates by fall to many more,
That may take part of all their woeful fare,
And not alone to be oppressed with care.
There is no wight of woe that does complain,
When all the rest do like mischaunce sustain.
In all this world if happy man were none,
None (though he were) would think himself awretch.
Let once the rich with heaps of Gold be gone,
Whose hundred head his pastors ouerretch,
Then would the poor man's heart begin to stretch.
There is no wretch whose life him does displease,
But in respect of those that live at ease.
Sweet is to him that stands in deep distress,
To see no man in joyful plight to be,
Whose only vessel wind and wave oppress,
Full sore his chance bewayles and weepeth he,
That with his own none others wrack does see
When he alone makes shipwreck one the sand,
And naked falls to long desired land.
A thousand sail who sees to drench in Seas,
With better will the storm has ouerpast
His heavy hap does him the less displease
When broaken boardes abroad be many cast,
And shipwrackt ships to shore they flit full fast,
With doubled waves when stopped is the flood,
With heaps of them that there have lost their good.
Full sore did Pirrhus Helens loss complain,
What time the leader of his flock of sheep,
Upon his back alone he bare them twain,
And wet his Golden locks amid the deep,
In piteons playnt (alas) he began to weep.
The death of her it did him deep displease,
That shipwreck made amid the drenching seas.
And piteous was the playnt and heavy mood
Of woeful Pyrrha and eke Deucalion
That naught beheld about them but the flould,
When they of all mankind were left alone
Amid the seas full sore they made their moan
To see themselves thus left alive in woe
When neither land they saw, nor fellows more.
Anon these playnts and Tro^ans tears shall quail,
And here and there the ship them toss by seas:
When trompets sound shall warn to hoyse up sail,
And through the waves with wind to seek their ways
Then shall these captives go to end their days
In land unknown: when once with hasty ore
The drenching deep they take and shun the shore.
What state of mind shall then in wretches be?
When shore shall sink from sight and seas arise?
When Idey hill to lurk aloof they see?
Then point with hand from far where Troia lies,
Shall child and mother: talking in this wise:
Lo yonder Troy, where smoke it fumeth hie,
By this the Troyans shall their country spy.
ODyre, fierce, wretched, horrible,
O cruel fates accurste,
Of Mars his ten years bloodshed blows
the wofulst and the worst.
Alas which should I first bewail?
thy cares Andromacha?
Or else lament the wretched age
of woeful Hecuba?
What ever man's calamityes
ye wayle for mine it is.
I bear the smart of al their woes each other feels but his
Who ever he, I am the wretch all happes to me at last.

Slain is the maid, and from the walls of Troy the child is cast.
But voth (as them became) they took their death with stomach stout.

Declare the double slaughters then, and tell the whole throughout.

One tower of all the rest ye know does yet in Troy remain,
Where Pryan wonted was to sit, and view the armies twain.
His little Nephew eke with him to lead* and from a far,
His fathers fightes with fire and sword to show on feats of war.
This tower, sometime well known by fame, and Troyans honor most.
Is now with captains of the Greeckes, beset on every coast.
With swift recourse and from the ships, in clustred heaps anon.
Both tagge and ragge they run to gase what thing should there be done
Some clime the hills to seek a place where they might see it best,
Some one the rocks a tiptoe stand to ouerloke the rest.
Some on their re^ples wear the pine, some beech, some crowns of bay,
For garlandes torn is every tree, that stands in they way,
Some from the highest mountains top aloof beholds all.
Some scale the buildinges half thurne, and some the ruinous wall.
Yea some there were (O ^^tichtee lo) that for the more despyghte.
The tomb of Hector sits upon beholders of the sight.
With princely pace Ulysses then past through the preased band
Of Greeks, King Priams little nephew leading by the hand.
The Child with vnrepyning gate past through his enmies hands,
Up toward the walls, and as anon in turrets top he stands,
From thence adowne his lofty looks he cast on every part,
The nearer death more free from care he seemd* and fear of heart.
Amid his foes his stomach swelles. and fierce he was to sight.
Like Tygere whel^e, that th^rats in vain with tue les chap to bight.
Alas, for pi^^y then each one, rue on his tender years,
And all the route that present were, for him they fhed their tears,
Yea not Ulysses them restraynd, but trickling down they sal,
And only he, wept not (poor fool) whom they bewailed al.
But while on Gods Ulysses called, and Calchas* words expound,
In midst of Pryams land (alas) the child leapt down to ground.

What cruel Calchas could or scith such slaughter rake in hand
Or by the shore of Caspyan Sea, what barbarous lawles land.
Busyridis to th'aulters yet no infantes blood has shed
Nor never yet were children slain for feast of Diomed.
Who shall alas in tomb thee lay, or hyde thy limbs again?

What limbs from such a headlong fall could in a child remain,
His bodies payse thrown down to ground, has batred al his bones.
His face, his noble fathers marks are spoyld against the stones.
His neck unjointed is: his head so dashed with flint stoane stroke*
That scattered is the brain about, the scul is al to broake.
Thus lies he now dismembered corpse, deformd and all to rent.

Lo herein does he yet likewise, his father represent.

What time the Child has headlong feign thus from the walls of Troy,
And at the Greeks the selves bewaild y^ slaughter of the Boy,
Yet straight return they back, and at Achilles tomb again
The second mischief go to work the death of Polixeine.
This tomb the waves of surging seas, beset the utter side,
The other part the fields encloase about, and pastors wide.
In vale enuyroned with hills, that round about do rise,
A sloape on height erected are the banks in Theater wise.
By all the shore then swarm the Greeks, and thick on heaps they prease
Some hope that by her death they shall their ships delay release.
Some other ^oy their enmies stock thus beaten down to be:
A great part of the people, both the slaughter hate, and see.
The Troyans eke no ^esse frequent their own calamityes
And all affrayd, beheld the last of all their miseryes.
When first proceeded torches bright as guise of wedlock is.
And author thereof led the way the Lady Tindaris.
Such wedlock ^ray the Troyans then, God send Hermiona
And would God to her husband so* restoard were Helena.
Fear mas^ each part, but Polixe^ne her bashful look down cast:
And more then erst her glittring eyes and beauty shyn'd at last.
As sweetest seems then Phoebus light, when down his beams do sway,
When stars again with night at hand oppressed the doubtful day.
Astonnted much the people were, and all they her commend,
And now much more then ever erst, they praised her at her end.
Some with her beauty moved were, some with her tender years:
Some to behold the turns of chance, and how each thing thus wears
But most them moves her valiant mind, and lofty stomach hie,
So strong, so stout, so ready of heart and well prepared to dye.
Thus pass they forth an^ bold before King Pirrhus goes the maid,
They pity her, they marvel her, their hearts were all affrayde.
As soon as then the hard hill top (where die she should) they trod,
And hie upon his fathers tomb the youthful Pyrrhus stood.
The manly maid she never shronke one foot, nor backward drew,
But boldly turns to meet the stroke, with sloute unchanged hew,
Her courage moves each one, and lo a strange thing monstrous like.
That Pyrbus even himself stood still, or dread, and dur^st not strike.
But as he had, his glittring sword in her to hills up done,
The purple blood, at mortal wound, then gushing ou^ (...) spoon.
Ne yet her courage her forsook, when dieng in that ^^ounde,
She fell as the'rth should her revenge with lieful rage to ground.
Each people wept the Troyans first with privy fearful cry,
The Grectans eake, each one bewayld her death apparently.
This order had the sacrifyce, her blood the tomb up drunk,
No drop remaynth above the ground, but down forthwith it sonke.

Now go, now go ye Greeks, and now repair ye safely home.
With careless ships and hoised sails now cut the salt sea foam.
The Child and Virgin both be slain, your battles finished are.
Alas where shall I end my age? or whether bear my care?
Shall I my daughter, or my nephew, or my husband moan?
My country else, or all at once? or else my self alone?
My wish is death that children both and virgins fiercely takes
Where ever cruel death does have to strike, it me forsakes,
Amid the enmies weapons all, amid both sword and fire,
All night sought for, thou fleest from me, that do thee most desire.
Not flame of fire, not fall of tower, not cruel enmies hand
Has rid my life, how near (alas) could death to Priam stand?

Now captives all with swift recourse repair ye to the says,
Now spread the ships their sayls abroad, and forth they seek their ways.


