THis sixtenth year of mine age (right honorable) renews a grateful memory
of your great goodness toward me: (for at Baptism your honor vouchsafed to
aunsweare for me): and causes me thus boldly to present these green and
vnmelowed fruicts of my first truailes unto you: as signs and testimonies of a
well disposed mind unto your honor. Albeit when first I undertook the
translation of this present Tragoedy, I minded nothing less, than that at any
time thus rudely transformed it should come into the Printers hands. For I to
none other end removed him, from his natural and lofty style, to our corrupt
and base, or as some men (but untruly) affirm it, most barbarous Language: but
only to satisfy the instant requests of a few my familiar friends, who thought
to have put it to the very same use, that SENECA himself in his Invention
pretended: Which was by the tragical and Pompous show upon Stage, to
admonish all men of their fickle Estates, to declare the unconstant head of
wavering Fortune, her sudden interchaunged and soon altered Face: and lively
to express the just revenge, and fearful punishments of horrible Crimes,
wherewith the wretched world in these our miserable days pyteously swarmeth.
This caused me not to be precise in following the Author, word for word: but
sometimes by addition, sometimes by subtraction, to use the aptest Phrases in
giving the Sense that I could invent. VVhereat a great number (I know) will be
more offended than Reason or VVysedome would they should be. Thus as I framed
it to one purpose: so have my friends (to whom I can not well deny any thing
that Frendshyps right may seem justly to require) wrested it to another
effect: and by this means blown it abroad, by ouerrash and unadvised
printing. By which fond deed I know undoubtedly I shall receive the poisoned
infamies, of a number of venomous tongues, Wherefore (right honorable) as I
give these the first Fruicts of my travail unto you: declaring therein the
great goodwyll and duty that I owe unto your Honor, for the noble disposition
of your virtuous mind: so am I driven humbly to require your strong aid, and
assured defense against the sclaunderous assaults of such malicious mouths,
which obtained: I shall be the better encouraged against an other time, to bestow
my travail in matters of far greater weighte and importance. In the mean
season (desiring your Honor to take these simple Attemptes of mine in good
part:) I leave you to the tuitio^ of the right high and mighty God: Who keep
you long in health, and grant you many happy years: with increase of Honor

All your Honors to command. Alexander Neuile.
BEHOLD HERE BEFORE THY Face (good Reader) the most lamentable Tragedy of that
most Unfortunate Prince O Edipus, for thy profit rudely translated. Wonder not
at the grosenesse of the Style: neither yet accounte the Inuentours Dylygence
dysgraced by the Translators Negligence: Who though that he has sometimes
boldly presumed to err from his Author, rouing at randon where he list:
adding and subtracting at pleasure: yet let not that engender disdaynefull
suspicion with in thy learned breast. Mark thou rather what is meant by the
whole course of the History: and frame thy life free from such mischiefs,
vvherevvith the World at this present is universally overwhelmed, The
vvrathfull vengeance of God provoked, the Body plagued, the mind and
Conscience in midst of deep devouring dangers most terribly assaulted. In
such sort that I abhor to write: and even at the thought thereof I tremble
and quake for very inward grief and fear of mind: assuredly persuading my
self that the right high and immortal God, will never leave such horrible and
detestable crimes unpunished. As in this present Tragoedy, and so forth in the
process of the whole hystory, thou may right well perceive. Wherein thou
shall see, a very express and lively Image of the inco^stant change of fickle
Fortune in the person of a Prince of passing Fame and Renown, midst whole fluds
of earthly bliss: by meare misfortune (nay rather by the deep hidden secret
Judgments of God) piteously plunged in most extreme miseries. The whole
Realm for his sake in straungest guise grievously plagued: besides the
apparaunt destruction of the Nobility: the general death and spoil of the
Co^minalty: the miserable transformed Face of the City, with an infinite number
of mischiefs more, which I pass over vnrehersed. Only wish I all men by this
Tragical hystory (for to that intent was it written) to beware of Sin: the
end whereof is shameful and miserable. As in the most unfortunate fall of
this unhappy Prince right plainly appears. Who by inward gripe of fearful
co^suming Conscience wretchedly tormented: beholding the lamentable state of
his vile infected Realms, wasted by the burning rage of privy spoiling
Pestilence, finds himself in tract of time, to be the only plague and misery
of the almost quight destroyed City. Whereupon calling together his Priests and
Prophets, and asking counsel of the Gods by them, for present remedy in those
evils, wherewith the Realm was than universally overflowed: answer was made
that the Plague should never cease, till king LAIVS death were thoroughly
revenged: and the bloody Murderer driven into perpetual exile. Which answer
received, OEDIPVS, far more curious in bowlting out the truth, than careful
of his own Estate: suddenly slides into an innumerable company of dreadful
miseries. For as soon as he had once the perfect vewe of his own detestable
deeds, and wicked misdemeanour cast before his eyes, together with the
unnatural killing of his Father LAIVS, the incestuous Marriage of his Mother
IOCASTA, the preposterous order of his ill misguyded life, with a hundred more
like mischiefs, which chaste and undefiled ears abhor to hear: fretting
Fury common enemy and torme^tor to corrupted co^scie^ces pricking him forvvard,
all inflamed with Frenzy and boiling in inward heat of vile infected
mind, he rooteth out his wretched eyes unnaturally, bereaueth his Mother her
life (though earnestly requested thereto) beastly, and in the end in most
basest kind of slavery, banished, dies miserably. Leaving behind him unto all
posterities, a dreadful Example of Gods horrible vengeance for sin. Such
like terrors as these requires this our present Age, wherein Vice has
chiefest place, and Virtue put to flight, lies as an abject, languishing in
great extremity. For the which cause, so much the rather have I suffered this
my base translated Tragoedy to be published: from his Author in word and verse
somewhat tra^sformed, though in Sense little altered: and yet oftentimes rudely
increased with mine own simple invention: more rashly (I confess) than
wisely, vvishing to please all: to offend none. But whereas no man lives so
uprightly, whom slaundring tongues leave vndiffamed, I refer my self to the
Judgment of the vvisest, little esteeming the prejudicial mouths of such
carping Marchau^ts, which suffer no men's doings almost to escape undefiled. In
fine, I beseech all to gether (if so it might be) to bear with my rudenes,
and consider the grosenes of our own Country language, which ca^ by no means
aspire to the high lofty Latinists style. Mine only intent was to exhort men
to embrace Virtue and shun Vice, according to that of the right famous and
excellent Poet Virgi

Discite insticiam moniti, and non temnere diuos. This obtained: I hold my
self thoroughly contented: In the mean season I end: wishing all men to shun
Sin, the plain (but most perilous) pathway to perfect infelicity

THe Night is gone: and dreadful day
begins at length t'appeere:
And Phoebus all bedim'^e with Clouds,
himself aloft does reere.
And glyding forth with deadly hue,
a doleful blase in Skies
Does bear: Great terror and dismay
to the beholders Eyes.
Now shall the houses void be seen, with Plague devoured quight?
And slaughter that the night has made, shall day bring forth to light.
Does any man in Princely throne rejoice? O brittle Joy,
How many ills? how fair a Face? and yet how much annoy
In thee does lurk, and hidden lies? what heaps of endless strife?
They judge amiss, that deem the Prince to have the happy life.
For as the Mountains huge and bie, the blustering wiudes withstand.
And craggy Rocks, the belching fluds do dash, and drive fro land:
Though that the Seas in quiet are, and calm on every side:
So kingdoms great all Winds and Waves of Fortune must abide.
How well shund I my Father dear Polybius Scepters late?
Exil'de, bereft of careful fear, in Pilgrims happy state:
I call the Gods to witness this, and Stars that glyde in Skies.
A Kingdom is befauln to me. I frare least thereof rise
A mischief, (mighty Jove,) to great I fear, alas I fear
Least these my hands have re^t the life, or thee my Father dear.
Apollo byds me this beware, and yet a mischief more Foretells.
Can any greater be than that you told before?
Of Father slain by sons own hand?

(O thrice unhappy state.)
With horror all dismaide I stand in dred of threatened fate.
I am ashamed my destinies foul (O Queen) to thunder out,
And openly to blase my fear my trembling mind does dout:
Yet out it goes. Phoebus me bids my Mothers Bed to fly.
As though that I her Son, with her incestuously should ly.
This fear, and only this me causde my fathers kingdom great
For to forsake. I fled not thence when fear the mind does beat.
The restless thought still dreds the thing, it knows can never chance.
Such fancies now torment my heart, my safety to advance,
And eke thine ever sacred laws (O Nature) for to keep
A stately Scepter I forsook, yet secret fear does creep
Within my breast: and frets it still with doubt and discontent,
And inward pangues which secretly my thoughts a sunder rent.
So though no cause of dred I see, yet fear and dred I all,
And scant in credit with my self, my thoughts my mind appall
That I cannot persuaded be though reason tell me no,
But that the Web is weauing still of my decreed woe.
For what should I suppose the cause? a Plague that is so general,
And Cadmus country wholly spoils, and spreds it self through all?
Should me, amongst so huge a heap of plagued Bodies spare?
And we alone amongst the rest reserude to mischiefs are?
O heavy hap. And bide I still alone the spoil to see?
Of Cities great, of men, of beasts, by plague that wasted be?
And thou amongst so many ils, a happy life to lead,
Could once persuade thy self (O wretch) without all fear or dread.
Of Phoebus secret Judgments to, and that in Kings estate?
Thou, thou, infected have the air, in such a filthy rate.
Thou art the only cause of woe: by thee these evils rise,
By thee to grave on such a sort, this wretched people plies.
The fiery flaming frying heat, afflicted hearts that wastes,
Is not relieude as wont it was by cold and pleasant blasts.
The gentle western winds have left with healthful puffes to blow,
And now the fiery Dog with blase of boiling heat does glow.
The Sun in Leo burns so hoate, and so the earth does broyle,
That fluds and herbs are dried up, and naught remaynes but soil,
So thoroughly schorcht and stued with heat, that moisture all is gone,
And now amongst so many fluds, remaynes alas not one.
The places dry are only seen the streams are drunken up.
And water that does yet remain: the soaking Earth does sup.
The Moon with clouds quight over cast, all sadly (...) she glides,
And doleful darksom shades of night the who^ world over hides.
No Star on high at all does shine, but black and (...) hue
Has ouershaded all the Skies, whence deadly mists ensue.
The corn that wonted was to grow and fruitfully to spring,
Now to the voyded Barnes naught else, but empty stalks does bring.
No part of all our kingdom is free from destruction:
But all together run and rush, to utter confusion.
The old men with the young (alas:) the (...) with the child
The plague consumes. Both man and wife, all beasts both tame and wild
Are spoiled by the Pestilence. No pomp at all remaynes,
That wonted was in Funeralles, to ease the mourners pains.
Alas this spoil of people made, by plague has dryde mine eyes:
And secretly within my breast, the grief it boiling fryes.
And that, that wonted is to hap, in most extremest ills:
My tearees are dry and glutting grief my wretched breast it fills.
The crased father bears the son, unto their dampish graves:
And after him with burden like, the Mother comes and raues:
And even lamenting as they stand, (...) both they fall,
And mourners new in like estate, for them (...) they call.
Who likewise in the midst of all their ^oyle and paynfull pain
Do drop into the grave they digd, and so the place do gain
That was prepar' de for others erst. A hell it were to here
The horror, and the miseries that every where appe^re.
A Tomb is made for noble men, fast on the people die,
And in, their burdens fling. Great Pieres all unregarded lie.
For lack of Graves, to Ashes clean their bodies some do wast*
And some half burnt do leave them there, and home away for have
They run, and more they fetch, and then wood, fire, grave, and all
Does want. And down for very grief the wretched mysers fall.
No prayers avail. No Art can help this raging Plague to appease:
For none almost is left alive each others woe to ease.
Before thine aulters here O God my feeble hands I hold,
Requiring all my destinies, at once with courage bold.
And that by death I may prevent, my Country pressed to fall.
For this, and only this (O God) upon thy name I call.
Let me not be the last that dies: The last that goes to Grave.
Grant this, and then (O mighty Jove) my full request I have.
O cruel Gods unkind: O more than thrice unhappy Fates:
That only me denied is, that lyghtes on all Estates.
I mean a speedy death (alas) these evils to prevent
And deadly woe (...) rage itorment.
Leave of thy blubb^ring (...) kingdoms foylde
With rotten plagues and (...) bile, and graves each where dispoylde.
All which diseases thou unhappy guest did bring with thee
Dispatch. Away. Gpe hence. At least, unto thy parents flee.

What boots it (...), great with piteous plaints to aggre^ate.
Stoutly to bear aduers^^, (...) estate.
When dred and danger most assay^* when cruel Cares do crush
Thy princely breast, ^spant thou most to bear and bide the push.
It is no poin^^ of courage slout to yield to fortunes frown.

Nay, Fear^^ could n^u^ cause me sloupe nor Fortune cast me down.
My manly winds was never thraule to vain and peau^^h fears,
But evermore in each (...) courage bears.
No not a thousand glister^^g swords, nor Mars himself in field.
Can once dismay my Countenuance, or cause my heart to yield.
The very Giaunts fierce and huge in fight withstand I dare.
That Monster Sohinx whose riddels through the world renowned are*
Could not dismay my deedles heart, nor cause my courage slide
For all the terrors I behold. I did that Fury bide.
I saw him belching G^bs of blood, I v^^wde full well the field
That all to (...) lay with blood, and bones quight ouerheelde.
And when y^ he on Mountains top with mouth full huge to see.
Stood gaping all with greedy Jaws to feed and pray on me,
Often fluttering with his fearful wings and shaking often his raise,
Began full like a Lion (...) with threats me to assail.
Of whom straight way the Riddell I, it rush^ into mine ^ares
With roaring sound His wings he claps, the Rock for have he tears.
Destring with my Bowels still his greedy Jaws to glu^:
But I full soon assoyled had the question that he put.
And all the subtle poincts there of, and twisted kno^s vntwinde.

What makes you wish for death to late, and wave your words in wind.
You might have died than (you know) for Sphinx so nobly slain.
This kingdom unto you, and yours for ever shall remain.

The ashes of that Monster vile, against us does rebel.
That vile misshapen loathsome Beast, that raging Feend of Hell.
Is cause of all the plague that does this mournful City smight.
Now only this remaynes alone, if Phoebus heavenly might,
Can any means invent for us, or way of mercy make:
Whereby these burning Plagues at length may happily chasice to slake.

O More then thrice renow^ied Stock
of ancient Cadmus Race.
O mighty Thebes City grear,
O heavy ruthful Case.
Lo now you lie all desolate,
with Plague devoured quight.
Both you and all your Husbandmen.
(Oh miserable sight.)
O foul and fearful Fate (alas) what causes all this aid?
O God whence springs this Pestylence that us (...) so?
No age, no shape, no form is sparde, but all confounded lie.
Thus happiest now y^ man I count, whose chance was first to dye.
For he has shund a thousand ^ils, which wretched Eyes have seen:
And mischiefs great that us do pr^sse from him are taken clean.
O God withhold thy fury great, thy Plagues from us re^du^.
Cease of afflicted Souls to scourge, who thee, (...) and ^oue.
Power down on them diseases foul, that them deserved have.
A Guerdon just for sin (Oh God) this this of thee we ^^aue,
And only this. We ask no more, the cause and all is thine,
A thing not used of Gods it is, from pity to declyne.
My heart does vant, and trembling cold through all my lims does run,
As often as I remembering, count the noble Stocks v^^un,
By death and dolfull destenies that overwhelmed lie,
And yet alas the people still to Grave do faster hye.
In long Array all in a rank by thousands on a^o^,
On every side, in every streate to burial fast, they go.
The seven broad wide open Gates, are not (...) forway,
But throngd the people pestred stand still in a fearful stay,
And in the mydst of all their toil with corses on their backs,
The number that before does poast the hinder number slackes*
The corses in the streates do lie and Grave on Grave is made.
But all in vain. For naught it boots the plague (...) bestayde.
The sacrifices don to Gods have to to ill success.
And such strange sights and signs do rise that naught else I can guess,
But that at hand with ghastly paws, is utter destruction,
With thousand ills accompayned and extreme confusion.
The sheep of rot by heaps as thick, as dogs do fall and d^e*
And belching out their wasted lunges, on ground do sprawling lie.
And I my self of late did see: (a sight unseen before,)
As our high priest stood sacrifising at the Temple door,
And struck with grievous bloody wound the golden horned Bull
When down with liueles lump he drop^ and members made full dull.
And all the woude wide bleeding gapes and black goars blood out spues.
And yet the blade vnsprinckled was. The blood it buying (...)
And bubbles on the ground. Alas what do these things por^end?
Oh mighty Jove at length vouchsafe some good and ha^^y end.
At length withhold thy h^^d (O God) and health unto us send.
Nothing (alas) remaynes at all, in wo^^ed old estate,
But all are tu^ed to p^^t down, quight void and desolate
The famting horse for (...) banck his burden tats.
And after on (...):
Who cries for help (...) that bide
Unkept: unknown ways and pathe do raunge and ouerstride.
The Bull (...) and me a^e in field all faintyng lies.
And, all his flock (...), fely Shephard dies.
The (...) his zatal breath expiers
And to the (...) hisfast ^esters.
The (...) do live in aretched peace.
The rage, and wrathful (...) founds of ramping Lions cease.
The vengeance (...) Bears are now as ^ame as sheep
The ugly Serpent that was wont* the Rocky Den^es to keep.
Often quaffing poisoned (...) in inward hea^. she boyles,
(...) for longer ly^e she toils.
The woods are (...) withfresh and lively hue*
The wonted shades are gone. All things are quight out of their Que:
No greenish grass on ground does grow, the earth no moisture soupes.
The Vine withoute^ (...) ^ap, his drowsy head down drowpes.
What shall I say? all (...) but of course,
And as they (...) wors and worse.
O mighty (...) yls?
When cease (...) ^loud thus fierce and raging spils?
I thinck but we almost alive, there do no men remain:
Whom (...) Darrs (...) on earth have left vnslayne.
I think (...) shades of hell where filthy fluds do flow,
Where plages and vile diseases too, where dreadful horrors grow,
And (...) mischiefs on us throw,
With Botch and bla^e of sundry kinds which sother^ blasts do blow,
And wrekful vexed hagges of hell do dreath and on us bring:
The angry feddes of hell I think their vengea^^ce, on us flinge
And out their mortal poison spue which they against us bear.
Lo see how greedy death on us with scowling eyes does leare.
See, see. Oh Jove how fast he throws his Darts. Not one he spares
But all confounds. His thretning force, withstand no Creature dares.
No doubt the lothsom Feryman the sinful souls that traynes
Through stinking fluds, his labor loths that he for us sustaynes.
Such press by plu^ps to him is made which still renews his pains.
But hark yet mo^sters more the^ these, the Fame abroad does fly
That hellishe Dogs with bawling sound were heard to howl and cry,
And y^ the ground with trembling shook, and under feel did move.
And dreadful blasing Comets bright were seen in Skies above.
And ghastly shapes of men besides, to wander on the ground.
And wood, and trees on every side, did fearfully resound.
Besides all this strau^g Ghosts were seen in places where they stood.
And Ryuers more then one or two, that ran all black goorb blood.
O cruel plague, O vile discase, far worse then speedy death.
O we unhappy thrice and more, who do prolonge our breath.
In these accursed days and times. But hark to me a while.
When first this Iothsome plague begins these Mysers to defile,
It takes them thus. A fearful Cold through al their bones does r^n,]
And Cold and Heat together mixed, their se^es all benome.
Than little loathsome marks appear, and all their bodies spot.
And all their members slaming glow, and burning fast do rot.
The Lights, the Lungs, the heart, the Guts, and all that inward lies.
And all the secret parts iscorcht, with deadly, I fire fries.
The blood all clotterd in their Cheeks, in cluster lies by lumps.
And it and heat together makes, great, straung, and ruddy bumps.
And blood and flesh congeled stands, in Face as stiff as stake.
And Eyes in head fast fixed set, and often trickling make.
And down apace whole fluds they steame, and clots and drops do trill,
And all the skin from of their Face, by flakes and scales does pill.
A thousand fearful sounds at once, into their ears do rush.
And loathsome blood out of their Nose, by stilling streams does gush.
The very anguish of their heart does cause them for to shake.
And what with pain and heal, and fear, their weried lims do quake.
Then some the running Ryuers haunt, and some on gro^nd ^ce (...).
And some again their thirst to slake, cold water gulping (...).
Thus all our country ^ost with plague in Griefy it waltering (...).
And still desiring for to dye, a thousand deaths it dies.
But God to hear them then is pressed: and death to none (...).
Besides all this, the church some do frequent: but not to pray,
But only for to glut the Gods, with that that they do say.
But who is this that comes to Court in have with poasting pace?
What? is it Creon that noble Prince (for deeds and stately race?)
Or does my mind oppressed with care things false for true contriue?
Creon it is long looked for, his sight does me reuyue.

FOr fear my body chilles, alas,
and trembling all I stand
In quakinge dread. I seek and toil,
these mischiefs to withstand.
But al in vain I spend my thoughts
it will not be, I see,
As long as all my senses thus
by cares distracted be.
My mind desirous still (Oh God,) the truth for to unfold,
With doubtful Dread is daunted so, that it can scant uphold
It self. O Brother bear, if way or mean of health thou know,
Declare it out and stick not all the truth to me to show.
The Oracle (most noble king) is dark, and hidden lies.

Who doubtful health to sick men brings, all health to the^ denies.

Apolloes use yt is the troth in darkesome dens to hold.

And Oedipus of Gods it has things hidden to unfold:
Speak out, tell all, and spare not man: all doubts I can discus.

Apollo then (most noble King) himself commands thus.
By exile purge the Princes seat, and plague with vengeance due
That haples wretch, whose bloody hands of late King Laius slew:
Before that this performed be, no hope of milder air:
Wherefore do this (O King) or else All hope of help despair.

Durst any man on earth attem pte, that noble Prince to slay?
Show me the man that I may him dispatch out of the way.

God grant I may it safely tell: the hearing was to terrible,
My senses all amassed are: it is a thing so horrible,
That I abhor to utter it (oh God) for fear I quake
And even at the very thought my lims begin to shake.
As Soon as I Appollos Church, had entered in affrayd,
Upon my face flat down I fell, and thus to him I prayed.
Oh God if ever thou did rue, on wretched misers state,
If ever men oppressed thou easd, or did their cares abate,
If ever thou in present need did present help declare,
If ever thou afflicted Hearts with cares consumd did spare:
Show now thy wonted elemency and pity known of yore.
Scant had I said: Refounding all the mountains thondring rore:
And filthy feendes spout out their flames out of their darksome caves.
And woods do quake, and hills do move, and up the surging waves
Do mount unto the skies aloft, and I amassed stand.
Still looking for an aunsweare at Apollos sacred hand.
When out with ruffled hair disguisd^th: Prophet comes at last:
And when that she had felt the heat of mighty Phoebus blast.
All puffyng out she swelles in rage, and pattring still she raues,
And scant she entered had into Apollos shyning caves,
When out a thundering voice does brust that is far above man's reach.
So dreadful seemed then to me the mighty Phoebus speech.
Than thus he spoke and thus at length into mine cares he rusht
While sprawling still the Prophet lay before the doors in dust.
The Thebane City never shall be free from plagues (quoth he,)
Except from thense the Kingkiller forthwith expulsed be:
Unto Apollo known he was, or ever he was borne.
Do this: or else no hope of health, to this, the gods have sworn.
And as for thee, thou shall not long in quiet state endure,
But with thy self wage war thou shall and war thou shall procure
Unto thy children dear: and crepe again thou shall into thy mothers womb.

Look what the Gods commanded have accomplished shall be.
Nor never shall these eyes of mine abide the day to see,
A King of kingdom spoyld by force, by guyle or crast suppressed.
A king to kings the prop ought be, and chiefest cause of rest:
No man regardes his death at all whom living he does fear,

Great cause makes me my Princes death conceal and closiy bear

Ought any cause of fear or grief, the duty for to let?

The threatening of the prophesyes, do still my breast beset.

Let us (since God co^maunds) forthwith some good atonement make
If any way, or means there be their wrathful rage to slake.
Thou God that sits on seat on high, and all the world do guide,
And thou by whose commandment the Stars in Skies do glide:
Thou, thou that only ruler art of Seas, of Floods, and all.
On thee and on thy Godhead great, for these requests I call.
Who so has slain king Laius, oh Jove I do thee pray.
Let thousand ils upon him fall, before his dying day.
Let him no health ne comfort have, but al to crushed with cares,
Consume his wretched years in grief, and though that death him spares
Awhyle. Yet mischiefs all, at length upon him light.
With all the evils under Sun, that ugly monster smight.
In exile let him live a Slave, the rated course of life.
In shame, in care, in peuury in danger and in strife.
Let no man on him pity take, let all men him reuyle.
Let him his Mothers sacred Bed incestuously defyle.
Lim him his father kill. And yet let him do mischiefs more.
What thing more heinous can I wish then that I wished before?
Let him do all those illes I say, that I have shund and past.
All those and more (if more may be) oh God upon him cast.
Let him no hope of pardon have: but sue and all in vain.
All hellish Furies on him light, for to increase his pain.
O Jove power down thy fury great, thy thu^dring thumpes out throw
Let Boreas boisterous blastes and stormy plagues upon him blow
Consume him quight. Fre^ out his guts with pockes and botches vile
Let all diseases on him light that wretched bodies fyle.
Let these and more (if more may be) upon that Monster fall.
Let Harpies paws and greedy paunche deu^ure his members all.
Let no man him regard: or seek his limbs in grade to lay:
But let him dye ten thousand deaths before his dying day.
By this my Kingdom I do swear, and Kingdom that I left
By all my Country Gods that been in Temples closely kept,
I swear, I vow, I do protest, and thereto witness take:
The Stars, the Seas, the Earth and all that ere thy hand did make.
Except that I my self forthwith this bloody monster find,
To wreake the wrath of God some way with solemyne oath I bind.
And so my father, Polybius his happy days out live.
And so my mother Merope, no marriage new contriue:
As he shall dye that did this deed, and none shall him excuse.
Whosoever he be here I protest for that he shortly rues:
But where this wicked deed was don Creon now tell me plain:
Both by what means? and where: and how Ring Laius was slain.
Creon. Passing through Castalia woods and mountayns heapt with suoe
Where groves and scrubs, and bushes thick and brambles sharp do groe.
A threepathd crooked way there is that diversely does go.
One unto Bacchus city bends that Phoce does hight,
The other to Olenius, forth stretches out aright:
The third that reaches through the vales and by the rivers lies
Tends down unto the Bancks whereby Ele^a, water plyes
There unawares (O piteous chance) a troup of thieves entraps
The noble prince, and murders him hence spring these great mishaps
which heap you realms with hideous woes and plagues on every side,
By just decree of heavenly powers which can no murder bide.
But see Tiresias where he coms with old and trembling pace.
I think Apolloes heavenly might have brought him to this place.
See where he comes* and Manto too, his steps directing stays
It Is he who for your grace (O king) and for your country prays

COme holy priest (to Phoebus next)
these doubtful aunswers Iose:
And whom that destnies will to dye,
Straightwayes to me disclose.
Renowned Prince, though still I stand
in silence du^me dismayde:
And though by inward fear of mind
my lingering tongue is stayde:
Yet pardon me (O noble Prince,) and give me leave a while.
From lack of sight springs Ignorance which power has to exile
Unspotted Truth from doubtful breasts. This thing full well you knoes,
But whither God and Country calls, with willing mind I go.
Let deadly fatal destentes, be boulted out at length.
O King if I of greener years had now my wonted strength:
This matter soon discust should be, and I would take in hand,
My self in presence of the Gods, in temple for to stand.
A mighty Ox all coulourd white, up on the Aulters rear,
Which never yet on weried neck, the crooked yoke did bear.
And Manto thou, O daughter mine, mine only prop and stay:
The secret hidden mysteries, and sacred signs out say.
M A. The beast before the Altar stands.

To Gods a prayer make,
And on the holy Aulters cke, some pleasant odors shake.

It Is done. And all the fires fieice, with incence bright do flame.

O Manto now what signs see thou? how do thy matters frame?
What? does the fire, the Sacrifice encompas round about?

Not so. But first it mounts alost, and straight it flasheth out.

Well Yet, how does the sacred flame all shining bright and clear
It self on high unto the Sktes, with sparkelting flakes v^reare?
Or doeh it often rebounding back, it self, from Skies unfold?
Or all with rumbling roaring noise, about the place is it rould?
Or dimmed with smoke, is it tossed from place, to place, now here, now theare?

Not one. But diverse, colors mixed the flame does with it bear.
Much like unto the Rainbow, which with sundry painted hues
Foreshewes unto the husbandmen the weather that ensues.
What color it wants, or what it has, to me is like uncertain.
Now is it black, now blue, now red, and even now again
Quight out it is. Yet once again, all fierce it flashing flames:
But lo, yet mischiefs more then this, vnluckely it frames.
The fire quight a sunder parts, and flame with flame does fight.
O father I abhor to see, this ugly loathsome sight.
The Wine to blud is turned quight, and all the Princes head,
With thick black clouds enco^past is, with smoke all ouerspred.
O father tell what this portends?

What should I tell alas?
My mind for fear astonished stands, and trembling cold does pas
Through all my lims. What shall I say? or where shall I begin?
O cruel Plagues, O wrekfull Gods, O vengeance due for sin.
Some dyre and blouddy deed (Alas) these hydeous signs declare.
What Is that the Gods would have reuealde, and yet do bid beware
To utter it? By certain signs their wrath is often descride:
Such signs appear, and yet they seem their fury great to hide.
They are ashamde: I wot nere what. Come hither, quickly bring
Some salt with thee, and it upon the sacrifice go fling.
What? are their looks pleasant and mild, and do they gently bide
The touching of thy sacred hands?

What may this thing betide?
The Bull (a wonder great to see) his head on hie he lifts
And turned still unto the East, from thence it always shifts,
Still lothing as he seems to me, of heaven to see the light,
Often scouling with his blearing eyes with gastely ruthful sight.

But does one blow the^ drive to ground, or more the one they have?

The Heifer as it seemde, enflamd with courage stout and brave
Upon the mortal Blade did rush, and there hirselfe destries:
When out the blood it foming spoutes, and mounts unto the Skies.
The brawny Bull twice stroke or thrice, with groueling groaning tyres,
And toyling up and down he moyles. And still to live desires.
And yet at length with much ado, his brutish breath expiers.

What? does the wound wide open gape, or is it closed up?
Or does the deepnes of the hole, the blood in soking sup?

Out of the wounded Heifers breast Black bluish waters rush.
As for the Bull, but little blood, out of his wounds does gush.
^t back rebounds, and from his Mouth and Eyes by streams ^oth flow.
But what these dreadful signs portend the Gods aloane doc know.

By this unhappy Sacrifice, great fears within me rise.
But tell me now: In the inner parts, what secret hidden lies?

O Father what means this (alas) that more then wonted guise
The Inwards stir? and shake my hands, and heauing often arise,
The blood by streams out of the veins, full straungly skips aloft.
The heart all schorcht and hidden lies, and strykes are seen full often,
Of Color very wan and pale: The chiefest parts do want.
The Liver bla^kish gall out spurts, and somewhat rising pants.
And that, that myschiefes great, to kingdoms does foreshow:
Tw^ heads are seen, and yet both heads one skin does ouerg^ow
And ouerheales them quight, But yet the skin, it is so thin
That easily one may discern what lies hid therein.
And that which horror does increase, a man may plainly see
How both the heart, the Lights, and Lungs, and all disturbed be.
The fearful noise and sound you here is not of beasts, but fire
That roaring on the Alters makes, presaging wrekefull ire
Of angry Gods who do foretell some purpose that they have,
For to revenge some foul misdeede that vengeance just does crave.
No part his proper place observes, nor keeps his order due:
But altogether quight disguisde, with an unwonted hue.
Misshapen, out of frame, transformde, displaced quight (alas)
What thing is that the Gods entend ere long to br^ng to pas?

Why than declare from whence, and why these deadly signs arise,
With courage stout I will it hear, it shall not once aggrise
By valiant mind. Extremest ils have power to banish fear.

You will wish that unhard which you so much desire to hear.

Yet sense the Gods will have him known tell me (I say) his name
That sieve your King.

Nor wing, nor womb of Bird or beast ye same
Can tell (O king) new sacrifice, new means we must invent.
From dreadful dark infernal damps some Fury must be sent
These mischifes great for to unfold. Or else King Ditis he,
That Empire keeps on gri^sly Ghosts, entreated needs must be
These things forthwith for to disclose. Tell who shall have the charge,
A King thou art, than may not thou go through those kingdoms large.

Than noble Creon thou shall go, this pain is first for thee:
Who must this crown and kingdom great enjoy after me.

THough that thy Face where sadness sits
in heavy mourning guise,
Naught else portend, but dedly griefs,
and mischiefs still to rise:
Yet tell some means whereby at length
the Gods we may appease,
And purchase^ to our Kingdoms wast,
some hope of health and ease.
Alas you bid me that disclose which fear does bid me hyde.

It that the Thebane Cities great, by doleful plagues destryde.
Perce not thy heart a: et ought thou* these Kingdoms for to rue,
Which were unto thy brothers house, of ancient title due.

You wish y^ thing to know, which you will wish unknown at length.

Why so? a simple remedy of little force and strength
Is ignorance of our estate when dangers us betyde.
But what? wi^t thou so great a good for common safety hide?

Irksome Medcines and perilous in s^cknes I abhor*

And I likewise at Subjects hands disdain to take a dorre,
Speak out with speed, or else by proof of torment thou shall find
How dangerous a case it is to gawle a Princes mind.

Kings often use to wish untold, which they bad tell before.

Go to, dispatch and cease in time to vex me any more.
Except that thou forthwith to me this ^einous deed ^isclose:
The gods I do protest, to death for all thou only goes.

O pardon me most noble king. O let me hold my pes,
Of all the gracis Princes grant, what favor may be less?

As though y^ silence hurts not more both king and countries weal:
Then spech often times: which subjects thoughts to Prices both reveal?
Dispatch at once, stir me no more thou know my guise of old.

Silence denied, what priuileage may s^lly Subject hold?

A iraytor he is, who stle^ce keeps, when king co^maunds to speak.

Then pardon my constrained speech, slth silence for to break
You me compel. A doleful tale (O king) my tongue must tell,
And which I fear your majesty will not interpret well.

Was ever man rebukt for that, that he was bid to say?

Well than since needs I must: I am contented to obey.
A wood there is from City far, enhaunst with stately trees:
Where many a plant, and her be does grow, which Phoebus never sees:
With ever during bushes green, the Typresse there does rise,
And puts his alde and leffty had withing the cloud Skies.
The ancient Time eaten Oak with crooked be^ded lims.
The Te^l tree flue: The Alder which in Neptunes kingdoms swims,
The Bays with bitter beries eke the Elmes dear f^iends to Vyn^^
And many a noble tree besides, as M^rtels, (...)
Amidst them all, one tree there is with large out (...)
Whose roaring sound, and craking noise the lesser woods (...)
And ouershades them all: a Tree of monstrous huge (...),
Beset with fearful woods: there is that dyre, and dreadful gate,
That leads to loathsome Lymbo Lake, and pyts that ever flow.
Where choked miry mud does stream with slimy course full flow.
Here when the priest was entered in with comely (...) pace,
He stayed not: No need there was, for night was still in place.
Than all the ground wide open gapes, and smouthe ring ^apours rise,
And fire and smoke, and styfling stink, mounts up unto the Shyes.
The Priest with wayling werde ^clad, his fatal red out ^ooke:
And entering in, in black Array, full often times it shook.
With heavy cheer and dolful pace: his hoary ha^re was twynde
With bows of mortal Ewe. A tree wherewith the mourners wind,
Their mourning heads, and Garlands make. In this guise all arayde,
The sacred Priest does enter in, with trembling lims dismayde:
Than in the Sheep and Oxen black, by backwarde course are drawn*
And odoures sweet, and Frankencence, on flaming fyres are thrown.
The beasts on burning, Altars cast, do quake with schorched lims:
And bloody streams with fire mixed, about the Aultars (...).
Than on the dark internal Gods, and him that rules them all:
With deadly shriking voice aloude, the Prophet gins to call.
And rouls the Magic verse in mouth, and hidden Arts does prove:
Which either power have to appease or else the Gods to move,
Their bloody streaming Lycours black, with broyling heat do boil:
And all the Beasts consume and burn. The Prophet than to toil
Begins* And mixed wine and Milk upon the Aultars throws.
And all the Dongeon dark, and wide with streamin^ bl^od it flows.
Than out with thundering voice again the Prophet calls and cries.
And straight as much with mumbling mouth he champs in secret wise
The trees do turn* The Rivers s^a^^. The ground with roaring shakes.
And all the world as seems to me, with fearful trembling quakes.
I am heard, I am heard, than out aloude the Priest began to cry:
When all the damp^ed fo^^les by heaps abroad outrushing fly.
Then woods with rumbling noise, do often resounding make.
And Heaven, and Earth together go. And bows and trees do crake.
And Thu^ders roore. And Lightnings flash. And waves aloft do fly.
And ground retyres: and Dogs do bawl: and Beasts are heard to cry.
And whyther long of Acheron, that lothsom Flud that ^lowes
All stinking streams: or of the earth, that out her Bowels throws,
Free place to Sprights to give: or of that fierce infernal Hound,
That at such times does bustling make with chayns, and railing sound.
The Earth al wide it open ga^es. And I did see on ground,
The Gods with color pale and wan, that those dark kingdoms keep.
And very night I saw in deed, and thousand shapes to creep,
From out those filthy stinking Lakes, and lothsom pits of Hell.
Where all the evils under Son, in darksom shades do dwell.
So quaking all for fear I stood with mind right sore apalde,
Whilst on those Gods with trembling mouth the Priest full often calde.
Who all at once, out of their dens did skip with grie^ly Face.
And Monsters grim, and stinging Snakes seemd wander in that place.
And all the fowlest Feendes of Hell, and Furies all were theare.
And all tra^sformed Ghosts and sprights, that ever Hell did bear.
With Cares, ahd all Diseases vile, that mortal mynds do crush,
All those, and more I saw out of those Dangeons deep to rush,
And Age I saw, with riueled Fa^e, and Need, and Fear, and Death.
And Fire, and flames, and thousand ills out fro those Pits to breath.
Then I was gone: and quight amazd. The wenche in worser case.
And yet of old, acquaynted with her Fathers Arts she was.
The Priest himself unmoved stood, and boldly cited out:
Whole Armies of king Ditis men, who clustring in a Rowt:
All flittring thin like Clouds, dispersed abroad in Air do fly.
And bearing sundry shapes and forms do sc^d about in Sky,
A thousand woods I think have not so many leaves on trees.
Ten thousand meadows fresh have not so many flowers for bees.
Ten hundred thousand rivers not so many Foul can show:
Nor all the drops and streams, and gulphes that in the Seas do flow*
If that they might be wayed, can sure so great a number make
As could those shapes and forms that flew from out of Limbo lake.
Both Tantalus and Zetus too, and pale Amphions Ghost:
And A gave, and after her ten thousand Sprightes do post.
Than Pentheus, and more and more, in like estate ensue:
Til out at length comes Laius with foul and grisly hue:
Uncomely breast in wretched plight with fylth all ouergrowne:
All perst with wounds, (I loath to speak) with blood quight ouerflown
A Miser right as seemd to me, and most of Misers all:
Thus in this case, at length he spoke, and thus began to call.
O Cadmus cruel City v^le, that still delightste in blood,
O Cadmus thou, which kinsmens death, accountst as chiefest good*
Tear out the bloody Bowels of your Children, learn of me,
Do that, and rather more, then you would bide the day to see
Like ills as late on me are light. Lo mothers love (alas)
Has causd the greatest misery that ere in Theba was.
The Country with the wrath of Gods at this time is not tossed.
Nor earth nor air infect is not the cause that all been lost.
No No. A bloody King is cause of all these mischiefs great:
A bloody wretch: A wretched child that sits in Fathers Seat:
And Mothers bed defyles (O wretch) and enters in again,
In places whence he came from once and doubleth so her pain,
Whilst that he ^ils the haples womb where in himself did lie
With graceles seed and causes her twice childbirthes pangues to try:
Unhappy Son, but Father worse and most unhappy he,
By whom the laws of sacred shame so sore confounded be.
For that that very bestes (almost) do all abh^rre to do,
Even of his mothers body he has brothers gotten two.
O mischief great: O dredful deed, then Sphinx, O mo^ster more:
Example unto ages all of Gods foretold before.
But I thee, thee, that Scepter boldst, thy Father will pursue,
And wreacke my self on thee and thine with plagues and vengeance due.
All restles rage of spite and paiue I will upon thee blow,
And all the furies foul of hell upon thee I will throw.
I will subvert thy Houses clean, for this thy loathsome lust:
I will do this thou wretch: And thee, and thine consume to dust.
Wherefore dispatch at once (I say) into exile drive your King.
That ground y^ first of all he leaves, with fresh grene grass shall spring.
And sweet, and pleasant Air, and healthful blasts shall rise,
And all the evils under Sun, that mortal men surprise:
The Pocks, the Piles, the Botch, the blaine, and death with him shall fly.
And with him mischiefs all shall pass, and Monsters under Sky.
And as for him I know he would depart with willing mind:
But I will clog his Fec^^, and hands, hss way he shall not find.
But groping with his aged staff, shall pass from place to place.
This shall he do. And none shall rue upon his ruthful case.
Rid you the Monster from the Earth, for Heaven let me alone.
No sooner said, but straight away, his dreadful Ghost was gone.
And fast by thousands after him, the other Sprights in hyde:
Than Cold and trembling fear began through all my bones to glyde.

The thing I always fearde, I see upon me now is laid:
But slender props they are (God wot) whereby your Treason is stayde.
Meropa my Mother dear, shall me from this defend:
Polybius eke shall purge me quight, from Actions all, that tend
To murder, or to incest vile, they both shall me excuse.
In such a case no means at all of trial I refuse.
Lay what you can unto my charge. No fault in me remayns.
The Thebanes long or I came here, of Laius death complayns.
My Mother yet alive, my Father still in like estate.
No, no, this is some dol^ishe drift, of yo^ false Prophets pate.
Or else some mighty God above, does bear me no good will,
And seeks by Plagues on me to wreke, his wrathful vengeance still.
Ah Sir I am glad at length I smell your drifts and fetches fine.
I know the whole confederacy your sleights I can untwine.
That beastly Priest, that blearayed wretch beelyes the Gods and me:
And thee thou Traitor in my place has promised king to be.

Alas would I my Sister of, her lawful kingdom spoil?
Think you such treason may have place in brothers breast to boil?
If that mine Oath could me not keep content with my degree:
But that contemning mean estate, I would cl^me aloft to be.
Yet should ill Fortune me deter, from such attempts I trow:
Whose guise it is on Princes heads, huge heaps of Ca^es to throw.
I would advise your grace betimes this charge from you to cast:
Least lingering long all unawares, you be oppressed at last.
Assure your self, in baser state, more safer you may live:
And shun a thousand Cares, and G^^ess: which Princes hearts do riue.

And do thou me exhort thou ^laue my kingdom for to leave?
O saythlesse head. O shameless heart, y^ could such treasons weaue?
Dare thou attempt thou villayae vile this thing, to me to break?
And fearst thou not in such a cause so boldly for to speak.

I would persuade them so (O King) who freely might possess
Their Realms such piteous cares I see, do Princes hearts oppress:
But as for you of force you must your Fortunes chainge abide.

The surest way for them that gape for kingdoms large, and wide,
Is first things mean, and rest, and peace, and base estate to praise:
And yet with Tooth and Nail, to toil to mount aloft always.
So often times, most restless beasts do chiefly rest commend.

Shall not my service long suffice my truth for to defend?

Time is the only means for such, as thou to work their will.

It is so sir, but as for me, of goods I have my fill.
A great resort. A pleasant life: from Princely cares exempt.
All these might (surely) me dissuade from such a foul attempt.
There is no day almost (O King) the whale year through out,
Where in some royal gyfts are not from countries round about
Unto me sent, both Gold, and pearls, and things of greater cost,
Which I let pass, least I should seem but vainly for to bost.
Besides the life of many a man has bin preserude by me.
In such a blis^ull state (O King) what can there wanting be?

(Good Fortune can no mean observe, but still she preaseth higher.)

Shall I than guiltless die (alas,) my cause and all vntryde?

Were unto you at any time my life, my deeds discride?
Did any man defend me yet? or else my causes plead?
And guiltless yet I am condemn'de to this you do me lead,
And me express example give, which I entend to take.
What measure you do meat to me, like measure must I make.

The mind which causeless dred appawls, true cause of fear bewraies
That conscience is not guiltles sure, which every blast dismates.

He that in midst of perilles deep, and dangers has been cast,
Does seek all means to shun like ills as he has ouerpast.

So hatreds rise.

He that to much does use ill will to fear,
Unskilful is: and knows not how, he ought him self to bear
In kings estate. For fear alone does Kingdoms chiefly keep.
Than he that thus does arm himself from fear all free may sleep.

Who so the cruel tyrant plays, and guiltless men does smight,
He dreadeth them that him do dread, so fear does chiefly light
On causers chief. A just revenge for bloody minds at last.

Come take this traitor vile away, In dongeon deep him fast
Enclose. There for his due deserts, let him abide such pain
And scourge of mind (as meet it is) false traitors to sustain.

SEt, see, the miserable State,
of Princes careful life.
What raging storms? what bloody broils?
what toil? what endless strife
Do they endure? (O God) what plagues?
what grief do they sustain?
A Princely life: No. No. (No doubt)
an ever duringe pain.
A state ene fit for men on whom Fortune would wreke her will.
A place for Cares to couch them in. A door wide open still
For griefs and dangers all that been to enter when they list.
A king these Mates must ever have, it boots not to resist.
Whole fluds of privy pinching fear, great anguishe of the mind:
Apparent plagues, and daily griefs. These playfayres Princes find.
And other none, with whom they spend, and pass their wretched days.
Thus he that Princes lives, and base Estate together ways:
Shall find the one a very hell, a perfect infelicity:
The other eke a heaven right, exempted quight from mysery.
Let OEdipus example be of this unto you all,
A Mirror meet. A Pattern plain, of Princes careful thrall.
Who late in perfect Joy as seem'de, and everlasting blis,
Triumphantly his life out led, a Myser now he is,
And most of wretched Misers all, even at this present time,
With doubtful waves of fear Itost, subject to such a Crime
Whereat my tongue amassed stays, God grant that at the last,
It fall not out as Creon told. Not yet the worst is past,

MY mind with doubtful waves of dread,
is tossed to and fro,
I wot not what to say (Alas)
I am tormented so.
For all the Gods on me do cry,
for pains and vengeance due.
They say that these my guiltless hands.
king Laius lately slew.
But this my conscience void of crime
and mind from mischief free:
To Gods untried, to me well known denies it so to be:
Full well I do remember ^^ce* by chance I did dispatch,
A man who sought by force with me presumptuously to match.
His purpose was (a fond attempt) my Chariot for to stay,
This I remember well enough, the strife was in the way.
And he a man well steept in years, and I a lusty blood,
And yet of mere disdain and pride in vain he me withstood.
But this from, Thebes far was done, a crooked three pathd way,
That was the place in which we fought: it hard by Phocis lay.
Dear Wife resolve my doubts at once, and me expressly tell.
How old was Laius the King when this mischaunce befell?
Was he of fresh and lusty years? or stricken well in age
When he was kilde? O ease my thoughts of this tormenting rage.
Betwixt an old man an a young: but nearer to an old.

Were there great Bands of men with him his Person to uphold?

Some by the way deceived were, and some deterd by pain.
A few by toil and labor long, did with their Prince remain.

Were any slain in his defense?

Of one report is rife,
Who constant in his princes cause full stoutly lost his life.

It is enough, I know the man that has this mischief done.
The number and the place agrees. The time untried alone
Remaynes: Than tell what time he died, and when that he was slain.

It Is ten years since: you now revive my chifest cares again.

THe Corinth people all (O King)
in Fathers place to rayn
Do call your Grace: Polybius does
eternal rest obtayn.
O God what Fortune vile does me
oppress on every side?
How do my sorrows still increase?
Tell how my Father did.

No sickness (sir) but very age did of his life him reaue.

And is he dead: in deed? not slain? what joy may I tonceaue?
How may I now triumph? the Gods to witness I do call,
To whom are known my hidden thoughts and secret workings al:
Now may I li^^ to skies my hands, my hands from mischief free.
But yet the chiefest ^a^se of fear remains still to me.

Your Fathers kingdom ought al dred out of your mind to drive.

That I confess. But secret thoughts my trembling heart do riue
With inward doubt of deep distress, my Mother I do fear.
This grudge is that continually my heart does rent and tear.

Do you your Mother fear? on your return that only slayes.

I fear not her: but from her sight, a godly zeal me frayes.

What will you her a Wydow leave?

Now, now, thou w^fi^st (...) heart.
This, this, and only this (alas,) is cause of all my smart.

Tell me (O king) what doubtful fear? does press thy princely breast:
Kings councils I can well co^ceale that ^en with Cares oppressed.

Least as Apollo has forefolde, I should a Marriage make
With mine own Mother: only this foul fear does make me quake.

Such vain and peuysh fears, at length from out your breast exyle.
Meropa your Mother is not in deed, you do your self beguil^.

What vauntage should it be to her adopted Sons to have?

A kingdom she shall gain thereby. Her Husband laid in grave.
The chiefest prop to s^ay her Realms from present confusion,
In children for to have: and hope of lawful succession.

What are the means whereby thou do these secrets understand.

My self (your grace) an Infant gave into your fathers hand.

Did thou me to my Father give? Who than gave me to thee?

A Sheparde str; that w^nted on Cytheron Hills to be.

What made thee in those woods to rau^ge? what had thou there to do?

Upon those Hills my Beasts I kept, sometime a Sheepeherde to.

What nots, what privy marks have thou, whereby thou do me kno?

The holes y^ through your feet are board from whence your name did gro.

Declare forthwith what was his name y^ gave me unto thee.

The kings chief Shephard than that was, delivered you to me.

What was his name?

O king old men's remembrance soon does fail:
Obliuton for the chietest part, does boary heads assail.
And drowns their former memory of things long out of mind.

What? can thou know y^ man by sight?

Perhaps I should him find,
And know by Face. Things over whelmd by time, and quight oppressed.
A small mark often to mind reuokes, and fresh renues in breast.

Sirs bid the Herdmen forth with drive their Beasts to Aulters all.
Away with speed, make have, the Master Sheepherds to me call.

Since that your des^ny this does hyde, and Fortune it detayue
And closely keep* let it be so, from opening that refrain.
That long canceald has hidden lain, that seek not to disclose*
Such things outsercht and found oftimes against the sercher goes.

Can any mischief greater be? than this that now I fear.

Advise you well remember first what weight this thing does bear:
That thus you go about to scarch, and slit with Tooth and Nail,
Observe the golden mean: beware bear still and equal sail.
Your Countries wealth (O King) your life, and all upon this lies.
Though you stir not, be sure at length your Fortune you escryes.
A happy state for to disturb does naught at all behoue.

When things be at the worst, of them a man may safely move.

Can you have ought more excellent? than is a Princes state?
Beware least of your Parents found it you repent to late.

No (father) no I warrant that: repent not I (I trow.)
I seek it not to that intent. I have decreed to know,
The matter at the full. Wherefore I will it now pursus.
Lo Phorbas: where he trembling coms, with comely aged h^^.
To whom of all the kings flack than, the care and charge was due.
Do thou his name, his speech his Face, or yet his person know?

Me thinks I should have seen his Face, and yet I cannot show
The places where I have him seen, small time brings such a chainge,
As well acquaynted Faces ost, to us appear still strainge.
This look is neither thoroughly known, nor yet unknown to me,
I cannot tell: I doubt it much, and yet it may be he.
In Laius time long since when he these Kindomes great did keep?
Wast thou not on Citheron hills chief Shepard to his sheep?

SOmetime a charge of sheep I had,
unworthy though I weer.
And did upon those hills chief rule
on other Shepards bear.
Know thou not me.

I cannot tell.

Did thou once give this man
A Child. Speak out, why do thou stay?
if so, declare it than.
Why do thou blush and doubting stand,
troth seeks no delay?

Things out of mind you call again, almost quight worn away.

Confess thou slave, orels I swear, thou that constrained be

In deed I do remember once, an Infant young by me,
Delivered was unto this Man: but well I wot in vain,
I know he could not long endure, nor yet alive remain.
Long since he is dead (I know it well) he lives not at this day.

Eo? God sorbid, he lives no doubt, and long may live I pray.

Why do thou say the child is dead, that thou this man did give?

With Irons sharp his feet were board, I know he could not live,
For of the sore a swelling rose, I saw the blood to gush
From out of both the wounds: and down by pouring streams to flush.

Now stay (O king) ^p farther now, you know almost the troth.

Whose child was ^^^tell ^^e forthw.

I dare not for mine Oath.

Thine Oath thou slave? Some fire here. I Will charm thine Oath and thee,
With fire and flames: except forthwith thou tell the troth to me.

O pardon me, though rade I seem, I seek nor to withstand name?
Your graces mind: (most noble king.) My life is in your hand.

Tell me y^ troth, what child, and whose, What was his Mothers

Born of your wife.

O gaping earth devour my body quight:
Or else thou God that (...) art of houses void of light,
To Hell my Saul with thunder boltes to Hell my Soul down drive.
Where griesly Ghosts in dark nesse deep, and endless pain do live.
For thee alone, these Plagues do rage. For thee these mischiefs rise.
For thee, the Earth lies desolate. For thee thou wretch the Skies
Infected are. For thee, for thee, and for the slithy lust,
A hundred thousand guiltless men, consumed are to dust.
O people throw: cast heaps of stones upon this hateful Head:
Bath all your swords within my breast: you furies ouershed
My restless thoughts, with raging woes and plungde in seas of pain.
Let me those ho^rrors still endure, which damned souls sustain.
You citizens of Stately Thebes vex me with torments dile.
Let Father, Son, and Wife, and all with vengeance me ^^rsue.
Let those that for my sake alone with plagues (...) be
Throw dar^s, cast stones, fling f^er* and slames, and tortures all on me.
O shame: O slander of the World: O hate of Gods above.
Confounder O of Nature thou to laws of sacred love,
Even from thy birth an open Foe. Thou did deserve to dye
As soon as thou wast born. Go, go, vnt^ the Court thee hye,
There with thy Mother (slave) triumph rejoice as thou may do.
Who have thy house increased with unhappy children so.
Make haste with speed, away, some thing thy mischiefs worthy find.
And on thy self wrecke all the spite of thy revenging mind.

FOrtune the guide of human life does al things change at will.
And stirri^g still, with restles thoughts our wretched mi^des does fill.
In vayn men strive their stats to keep when hidrous te^pests rise:
And blustering winds of dangers deep sets death before their eyis.
Who says he does her fauning feel? and chau^geth not his mind,
When fickle fight of Fortunes wheel does turn by course of kind.
These grievous plagues from private house to princely Thrones do flow,
And often their minds with cares they souse and thick upon the^ strew.
Whole heaps of grief and dyre debate, a woeful thing to see:
A Princely life to mysers state, converted for to be.
O OEdipus thy fatal fall, thy dreadful mischiefs right.
Thy dolfull state, thy mysery, thy thrice unhappy plight:
These things shall blase through all y^ world: what heart may the^ rejoice
At thy distress? I can no more: my tears do stop my voice.
But what is he that yonder stamps? and raging puffs and blows.
And often shakes his vexed head, some mischief great he knows.
Good sir your countnaunce does import some great and fearful thing,
Tell us therefore (if that you may) what news from Court you bring.

When OEdipus accursed wretch,
his fatal falls had spied,
To hell be damnd his wretched soul
and on the Gods he cried
For vengeance due. And posting fast
with frantic mood griesly hue,
Unto his dole full Court he went,
his thoughts for to pursue.
Much like a Lion ramping wild, his furtous head that shakes.
And roares with thundering mouth asowd, and often gnashing makes,
None otherwise this miser farde. A loathsome sight to see.
Besides himself for very rage, he still desires to dye.
And rolling round his wretched Eyes with vysage pale and wan:
Ten thousand Cursers out he powers. Himself the unhappiest man
Of all that live, he does account: as justly he may do.
A wretch, a slave, a cait^se vile. The cause of all our woe.
And in this case enflamd with spite he crtes, he stamps, he raues.
And boiling in his secret thoughts, he still desires to have
All torments under sun that may his Cares conceiude increase.
O wretched wight, what should he do? What man may him release?
Thus foming all for rage at mouth, with sighs, and sobs, and groans,
His damned head ten thousand times, as often his weryed bones
He beats. And often puffing makes, and roares, and swells, and sweats.
And on the Gods for death he calls, for Death he still entreats,
Three times he did begin to speak: and thryse his tongue did stay.
At length he cried out alowd: O wretch. Away, away.
Away thou monstrous Beast (he said:) will thou prolong thy life?
Nay rather some man strike this breast with struck of bloody knyfe.
Or all you Gods above on me your flaming fires outcast:
And dints of Thunderbolts down throw. This is my prayer last.
What greedy vile devouring Gripe, upon my guts will gnaw?
That Tigre fierce my hateful limbs will quight a lunder draw?
Lo, here I am you Gods: Lee, here, wreke now on me your will.
Now, now you fyry Feendes of Hell, of vengeance take your fill.
Send out some wild outrageous beast send Dogs me to devour.
Or else all ils you can devise, at once upon me power.
O woeful soul. O sinful wretch. Why do thou fear to dye?
Death only rids from woes thou know. Than stoutly Death defle.
With that his bloody fatal Blade, from out his sheath he draws.
And loud he rores, with thu^dring voice. Thou beast why do thou pawse?
Thy Father cursed caitife thou, thy Father thou have slain
And in thy Mothers bed have left an euerduring slain.
And Brothers thou have got: nay Sons thou lie: thy Brothers all
They are. Thus for thy monstrous lust thy Country down does fall.
And think thou than for all these ils enough so short a pain?
Thynkst thou the Gods will be apeasde, if thou forth with be slain?
So many mischiefs don: and is it enough one stroke to bydt?
Account'ste thou it sufficient pains, that once thy sword should glide
Quight through thy guilty breast for all? why than dispatch and dye.
So may thou recompense thy Fathers death sufficiently.
Let it be so: what mends unto thy Mother will thou make ^
Unto thy children what? these plagues (O wretch) how will thou slake?
That thus for thee thy country mastes? Ohe push shall end them all.
A proper fetch. A fi^e devise. For thee a worthy fall.
Invent thou monstrous beast forthwith: a fall even worthy for
Thy self invent: whom all men hate and loath, and do abhor.
And as dame Natures lawful course is broke (O wretch) by thee.
So let to such a mischief great, thy Death agreeing be.
O that I might a thousand times, my wretched life renew.
O that I might reuyue and dye by course in order dew.
Ten hundred thousand times and more: than should I vengeance take
Upon this wretched head. Than I perhaps in part should make
A meet amends in deed, for this my foul and lothsom Sin.
Than should the proof of pain reprove the life that I live in.
The choice is in thy hand thou wretch, than use thine own discretion.
And find a means, whereby thou may come to extreme confusion.
And that, that often thou may not do, let it prolonged be.
Thus, thus, may thou procure at length an endless death to thee.
Search out a death whereby thou may perpetual shame obtain:
And yet not dye. But still to live in everlasting pain.
Why stayst thou man? Go to I say: what mean these blubbring tears?
Why weepst thou thus? Alas to late. Leave of thy foolysh fears.
And is it enough to weep think thou? shall tears and wayling serve?
No wretch it shall not be. Thou do ten thousand deaths deserve.
Mine ey^es do dally with me I see, and tears do still out power.
Shall tears suffice? No, no, not so I shall them better scowre,
Out with thine Eyes (he said:) and than with fury fierce enflam'de.
Like to a bloody raging Feend and monstrous beast vntam, de.
With fiery flaming spotted Cheeks his breast he often beats.
And scratch, and tear his Face he does and Skin a sunder freats.
That scarce his eyes in head could stand so sore he them besets.
With furious fierce outrageous mind he stamps and cries alowd:
And roares and rayles, with ramping rage. Thus in this case he stood,
Perplexed, and vexed sore in mind, with deadly sighs and tears.
When suddenly all franticklike himself from ground he reares.
And rooteth out his wretched Eyes, and sight a sunder tears.
Than gnasheth be his bloody Teeth, and bites, and gnawes, and champs,
His Eyes all bathd and brude in blood, for fury fierce he stamps.
And raging more than needs (alas,) his Eyes quight rooted out:
The very holes in vain he scrapes so sore the wretch does dout:
Least sight should chance for to remain he rents and mangels quight
His Face, his Nose, his Mouth, and all whereon his hands do light
He rygs and ryues. Thus fowly rayd (alas) in piteous plight:
At length his head aloft he lifts, and therewith geues a shright.
And when he sees that all is gone, both light, and sight, and all.
Than schriching out: he thus begins upon the Gods to call.
Now spare you Gods, now spare at length my country pressed to fall.
I have done that you did co^ma^nd: Your wraths revenged be.
This wretched look, this mangled face, is fittest now for me.
Thus speaking, down the blackish blood by streams does gushing flow
Into his mouth. And clottred lumps of flesh the place does strew
Wherein he stands.
Beware betimes, by him beware, I speak unto you all.
Learn Justice, truth, and fear of God by his unhappy fall.
Man's life with tumbling fatal course of fortunes wheel is rowld,
To it give place for it does run all swifily vncontrowld.
And Cares and tears are spent in vayn, for it cannot be slayed:
Sith hi^ decree of heavenly powers perforce must be obayed.
What mankind byded or does on earth it comes from above,
Then wayling groans powrd out in grief do naught at all behoue.
Our life must have her pointed course, (alas) what shall I say.
As fates decree, so things do run, no man can make them stay.
For at our birth to Gods is known our latter dying day.
No Prayer, no Art, not God himself may fatal fates resist.
But fastened all in fixed court, unchanged they persist.
Such end them still ensues as they appointed were to have,
Than fly all fear of Fortunes c^ng, leeke hot to live a slave
Enthrald in bondage vile to fear. For fear does often bring
Destnies that dreaded ben and mischiefs feared upon us fling.
Yea many a man has come unto his fatal end by fear.
Wherefore set peuish fear aside, and worthy courage bear.
And thou that subject art to death. Regard thy latter day.
Think no man blessed before his end. Advise thee well and stay.
Be sure his life, and death, and all, be quight exempt from mysery:
Ere thou do once presume to say: this man is blessed and happy.
But out alas, see where he coms: a wretch withouten Guide,
Bereft of sight. Half spoyld of life: without all Pomp, and Pride
(That unto Kings Estate belong.)
WEll, well, it is done: more yet? No, no,
no mischiefs more remaynee.
My Fathers Rytes performed are.
What God on Mysers pains
That rues within this Cloud has rolde,
and wrapped my wretched Pate.
Ah sir: this is a life alone.
This is a happy State.
This is a case ene fit for thee,
for thee thou wretch, for thee.
From whose accursed sight the Sun, the Stars and all do flee.
Yet mischiefs more, who gives to do? The dreadful day I have
Escapt. Thou filthy Paracide: thou vile mischievous Slave.
Unto thy right hand naught thou owst, all things performed be.
O woe is me that ever I liu'de this lucklesse day to see.
Where am I now? Alas, alas, the light and all does me
Abhor: O wretched OEdipus this look is first for thee.
See, see, where Iocasta coms, with fierce and furious mood,
Quight past her self. For very rage she frets and waxes wood.
Much like to Cadmus daughter mad, who late her Son did kill.
Feign would she speak her mind: for sear (alas) she dares not: still
She stays, and yet from out her breast these ills have quight exilde
All shame fastnes. See how she looks, with cou^^'naunce fierce and wild.

Feign would I speak, I am afraid. For what should I thee call
My Son? doubt not. Thou art my Son. My Son thou art for all
These mischiefs great: alas, alas I shame my Son to see.
O cruel Son. Where do thou turn thy Face? Why do thou slay
From me. From me thy Mother dear? Why do thou shun my sight?
And leave me thus in misery, with Cares consumed quight.

Who troubles me? Let me alone. I thought not to be found:
Who now restores mine Eyes to me, Mother? or Mothers sound?
Our labor all is spent in vain, now may we meet no more.
The Seas divide those meetings vile that we have had before.
The gaping earth divide us both, the one from the other quight.
Still let our feet repugnant be. So shall I shun the light
That most of all me grieves. So shall I space obtain to wayle
These bleeding woes on every side, that do my thoughts assail.

The Destentes are in fault. Blame them, Alas, alas, not we.

Spare now. Leave of to speak in vain, spare now O Mother me,
By these Relics of my dismembered body I thee pray.
By mine unhappy Children pledges left. What shall I say?
By all the Gods I thee beseech. By all that in my name
Is good or bad, let me alone. Alas you are to blame
To trouble me. You see what hell my hapless heart does pain.
You see that in my Conscience ten thousand horrors rain.

O dying heart: O sindrownd soul. Why do thou faint alas?
Why do thou seek and toil in vain these ills to ouerpas?
What mean these sighs, and scalding tears? why do thou death refuse?
Thou mate of all his mischiefs thou, by whose means only rues
The law of nature all: by whom, Ah, Ah, confounded lies,
Both God, and man, and beast, and all that either lives or dies.
Die thou, dispatch at once thrust through thy vile incestuous breast:
Thou have none other means (alas) to set thine heart at rest.
Not thou, if God him self, if he his flaming fires should throw
On thee, or mischiefs all by heaps upon thy body strew
Could once for thy deserved ills due pains or vengeance pay:
Some means therefore to wreak Gods wrath upon thy self assay.
Death, death now best contenteth me, then seek a way to dye.
So may thou yet at length find end for all thy misery.
O Son lend me thy hand: since that thou art a Paracyde.
This labor last of all remaynes, this labor thee does bide.
Dispatch rid me thy mother dear from all my deadly woe
It will not be: no prayers avail. Thy self this deed must do.
Take up this sword. Go to, with this thy husband late was slain.
Husband? thou term'st him false: he was thy syer: O deadly pain.
Shall I quight through my breast it drive? or through my throat it thrust?
Can thou not choose thy wound? away: die, die, (alas) thou must.
This hateful womb then wou^d (O wretch) this, this with thine own hand
Strike, strike it hard: (O spare it not) since both a husband, and
(The same a Son it bare.)

Alas, alas, she is slain, she is slain, dispatched with a push:
Who ever saw the like to this: see how the blood does gush.
O heavy doulfull case: who can this dyrefull sight enduer
Which for the hideousness thereof might tears of stones procuer.

Thou God, thou teller out of Fates. On thee, on thee, I call,
My Father only I did owe, unto the Destnies all.
Now twice a Paracide, and worse than I did fear to be:
My Mother I have slain. (Alas) the fault is all in me.
O OEdipus accursed wretch, lament thine own Calamity,
Lament thy state, thy grief lament, thou Caitife borne to misery.
Where will thou now become (alas?) thy Face where will thou hyde:
O miserable Slave, can thou such shameful torments bide?
Can thou which have thy Parents slain? Can thou prolong thy life?
Will thou not dye? deserving Death: thou cause of all the grief,
And Plagues, and dreadful mischiefs all that Thebane City prease.
Why do thou seek by longer life, thy sorrows to increase?
Why do thou toil and labor thus in vain? It will not be.
Both God, and man: and beast, and all abhor thy Face to see
O Earth why gapst thou not for me^ why do you not unfold
You gates of hell me to receive? why do you hence withholde?
The fierce Infernal Feends from me, from me so wretched wight?
Why break not all the Furyes lose this hateful head to smight
With Plagues? which them deserved has (alas) I am left alone,
Both light, and sight, and comfort all from me (O wretch) is gone.
O cursed head: O wicked wight, whom all men deadly hate.
O Beast, what meanst thou still to live in this unhappy state?
The Skies do blush and are ashamd, at these thy mischiefs great
The Earth laments, y^ Heavens weep, the Seas for rage do freat.
And blustering rise, and storms do stir, and all thou wretch for thee.
By whose incest, and bloody deeds all things disturbed be.
Quight out of course, displaced quight, O cursed fatal day.
O mischiefs great, O dreadful times, O wretch, away, away.
Exile thy self from all men's sight, thy life half spent in misery,
Go end consume it now outright in thrice as great calamity.
O lying Phoebe thine Oracles my sin, and sheme surmount:
My Mothers death amongst my deeds; thou never did recount.
A meet Exploict for me that a^ to Nature deadly Foe.
With trembling fearful pace go forth, thou wretched monster go,
Grope out thy ways on knees in dark thou miserable Slave.
So may thou yet in tract of time due pains, and vengeance have,
For thy mischeuous life. Thus, thus, the Gods themselves decree.
Thus, thus, thy Fates: thus, thus, the skies appoint it for to be.
Then headlong hence, with a mischief hence, thou caitife vile away.
Away, away, thou monstrous Beast. Go, Run. Stand, stay,
Least on thy Mother thou do fall.
All you that wearyed bodies have, with stickenesse ouerprest.
Lo, now I fly: I fly away, the cause of your unrest.
Lift up your heads: a better state of Air shall straight ensewe
When I am gone: for whom alone, these dreadful myschiefs grew.
And you that now, half dead yet live in wretched misers case.
Help those who^ present torments press forth, hye you on apace.
For lo, with me I carry hence, all mischiefs under Skies.
All cruel Fates, Diseases all that for my sake did rise,
With me they go: with me both grief, Plague, Pocks, Botch, and all
The ills that either now you press, or ever after shall.
With me they go, with me: these Mates bin meetst of all for me.
Who am the most unhappiest wretch that ever Sun did see.


