WHat furye fell enforces me to flee thunhappie seat,
That gape and gasp with greedy iawe, the fleeyng food to eat?
What god to Tantalus the bowres where breathyng bodies dwell
Does show again? is ought found worse then burning thurst of hell
In lakes allow? or yet worse plague then hunger is there one,
In vain that ever gapes for food? shall Sisyphus his stone,
That slypper restles rollyng payse upon my back be borne?
Or shall my lymmes with swy^^er swing of whirlyng wheel be torn?
Or shall my pains be Tityus panges thencreasyng liver still,
Whose growyng guts the gnawyng grypes and fylthie fowls do fill?
That sryll by night repayres the panche that was deuowrde by day,
And wondrows womb unwasted lythe a new prepared pray.
What ill am I appointed for? O cruel judge of syrights,
Who so thou be that torments new among the souls delights
Still to dyspose, add what thou can to all my deadly woe,
That keeper even of dungeon dark would sore abhor to knot,
Or hell it self it quake to see: for dread wheroflykewyse
I tremble would, that plague seek out: Lo now there does arise
My brood, that shall in mischief far the grandsiers gylt out go,
And gyltles make: that first shall dare vnuentred ylls to do.
What ever place remains yet of all this wicked land,
I will fill up: and never once while Pelops house does stand
Shall Minos idle be.
go forth thou de^estable spright,
And vex the gods of wicked house with rage of furies might.
Let them contend with all o^fence, by turns and one by one
Let swoordes be drawn: and mean of ire procure there may be none,
Nor shame: let fury blind inflame their minds and wrathful will,
Let yet the parents rage endure, and longer lastyng ill,
Through childerns childern spread: nor ye^ let any leisure be
The former fawte to hate, but still more mischief new to see,
Nor one in one: but ere the gylt with vengeante be acquyt,
Increase the crime: from brethern proud let rule of hyngdome flyt,
To runagat^s: and swaruyng state of all unstable things,
Let it by doubtful dome be toste, between thuncertayne kings.
Let mighty fall to misery, and myser clyme to might,
Let chance turn thempyre up so down both give and take the right.
The banyshed for gylt, when god restore their country shall,
Let them to mischief fall a fresh: as hateful then to all,
As to them selves: let Ire think naught unlawful to be done.
Let brother dread the brothers wrath, and father fear the soon,
And eke the soon his parents power. let babes be murdered ill,
But worse begotte: her spouse betrapt in treasons train to kill,
Let hateful wife awayte. and let them bear through seas their war,
Let blood shed lie the lands about and every feelde afar:
And over conqueryng captains great, of countries far to see,
Let lust tryumphe: in wicked house let whoordome coun^d be
The lightst offense: let trust that in the breasts of bre^hern breeds,
And truth be gone: let not from sight of your so heinous deeds
The heavens be hyd, about the poale when shine the startes on hye,
And flames with woonted beams oflight do deck the painted sky.
Let darkest night be made, and let the day the heavens forsake.
Dysturbe the gods of wicked house, hate, slaughter, murder make.
Fill up the house of Tantalus with mischieues and debates.
Idorned be the pyllers high, with baye and let the gates
Be garnysht green: and worthy there for thy return to sight,
Be kyndled fire: let myschiefe done in Thracia onse, there light
More manyfolde. wherefore does yet the uncles hand delaie?
Does yet Tyestes not be wayle his childerns fatal day?
Shall he not find them where with heat of fyres that under glowe
The cawdern boyles? their lymmes each one a pieces let them go
Dysperste: let fathers fires, with blood of childern fyled be:
Let deynties such be dreste: it is no myschiefe new to thee,
To banquet so: behold, this day we have to the releaste,
And hunger starued womb of thine we send to such a feast.
With fowlest food thy famyne fill, let blood in wine be drownde,
And droonke in sight of thee: lo now such dyshes have I found,
^s thou wou^st shonne. stay whither doste thou ^dlong way now take?

To pooles and floodes of hell again, and still declynyng lake,
And flight of ^ree full freight with fruit that from the lyppes does flee,
To dungeon dark of hateful hell Let leefull be for me
To g^: or if to light be thought the pains that there I have,
Remove me from those lakes again: in mydst of worser wave
Of Phleghethon to stand, in seas of fire besette to be.
Who so beneath thy poynted pains by destenies decree
Dooste still endure, who so thou be that vnderliest allow
The hollow den, or ruin who that fears and overthrow
Of falling hill, or cruel cries that sound in caves of hell
Of greedy roaryng lions throats, or flock of furies fell
Who quakes to know, or who the brandes of fire, in dyrest pain
Half burnte throws of, hark to the voice of Tantalus: again
That hastes to hell. and (whom the truth has taught) bel^ue well me
Love well your pains, they are but small. when shall my hap so be
To flee the light?

disturb thou first this house with dyre discord:
Debates and battles bring with thee, and of the unhappie swoorde
Ill love to kings: the cruel breast stryke through and hateful heart,
With tumulte mad.

To suffer payne^ it seems well my part,
Not woes to work: I am sent forth like vapor dyre to rise,
That breaks the ground, or poison like the plague, in wondrowse wise
That slaughter makes. shall I to such detested ^rymes, apply
My nephews hearts? o parents great of gods above the sky,
And mine, (though shamde I be to grant,) although with greatter pain
My tongue be vexte, yet this to speak I may no whit refrain,
Nor hold my peace: I warn you this, least sacred hand with blood
Of slaughter dyre, or fransie fell of (...) fury wood
The aulters stayne, I will resyste: And guard such gylt away.
With strypes why dooste thou me affryght? why threaist thou me to fraye
Those crallyng ^uakes? or famyne fyxt in empty womb, wherefore
Dooste thou reuyue? now fryes within with thyrst enkyndled sore
My heart: and in the bowels burnte, the boylyng flames do glowe.

I follow thee: through all this house now rage and fury throw.
Let them be driven so, and so let either thyrst to see
Each others blood. full well has ^elte the cummyng in of thee
This house: and all with wicked touch of the begun to quake.
Enough it is. repair again to denns and loathsome lake,
Of floode well known. the sadde^ soil with heavy foot of thine
Agreeued is. seeste thou from spryngs how waters do decline
And inward synke? or how the banks lie void by droughtie heat?
And whotter blast of fyrie wind the fewer clouds does beat?
The treese be spoyllde, and naked stand to sight in withred woodds,
The barayne bows whose fruits are fled: the land between the floodds,
With surge of seas on either syd^ that woonted to resounde,
And nearer foordes to separate sometime with lesser ground,
Now broader spredde, it hears how aloof the waters rise.
Now Lerna turns against the stream, Phoronides likewise,
His poares be stopp^e. with customde course Alpheus drives not still,
His hollie wau^s. the tremblyng topps of high Cithaeron hill,
They stand not sure: from height adowne they shake their silver snow,
And noble feeldes of Argos fear, their former drought to know.
Yea Titan doubts him self, to roll the world his woonted way,
And drive by force to former course The backwarde drawyng day.

THis Argos town if any God be found, and Pisey bowres that famous yet
remain
Or kingdoms else to love of Corinthes ground, the double havens, or soondred
seas in twain
If any love Taygetus his snowes, (by winter which when they on hills be cast,
By Boreas blasts that from Sarmatia blows, with yearly breathe the summer
melts as fast,
Where clear Alpheus roons, with floude so cold, By plays well known that
there olimpikes hight
Let pleasant power of his from hense withholde such turns of strife, that
here they may not light
Nor nephew worse then grandsier spryng from us, or dyrer deeds delight the
younger age
Let wicked stock of thyrstie Tantalus, at length leave of, and weary be of
rage
Enoughe is done, and naught preuailde the just, or wrong: b^trayde is
Myrtilus and drownde
That did betray his dame: and with like trust borne as he bare, himself has
made renound
With changed name the sea: and better known to mariners thereof no fable is.
On wicked swoorde the little infant thrown, as ran the child to take his
fathers his
^nripe for thaulters offryng fell down dead: and with thy hand (o Tantalus)
was rent
With such a meat for gods thy boordes to spread. eternal famine for such
food is sent
And thyrst: nor for those deyntie meats vnmilde, might meeter p^ne appointed
ever be
With empty throat stands Tantalus beguilde, above thy wicked head there
leanes to thee
Then Phineys fowls in flight a swifter pray. with burdned bows declinde on
every side
And of his fruits all bent to bear the swaie, the tree deludes the gapes of
hunger wide
Though he full greedy, feed thereon would feign, so often disceyude neglects
to touch them yet
He turn^s his eyes, his jaws he does refrain, and famine fi^ in closed gumms
does shet
But then each branche his plenteous riches all, letts lower down: and apples
from on hi
With lyther leaves they flatter like to fall, and famine stir: in vain that
bidds to tri
His hands: which when he has rought forth anon to be beguilde, in higher
air again
The harvest hangs, and fickle fruit is gone. then thirst him greeues no less
then hungers pain
Wherewith when kindled is his boylyng blood like fire, the wretch the waves to
him does call
That meet his mouth: which straight the fleeyng flood withdrawes, and from
the dried foorde does fall
And him forsakes that follows them. He drinks the duste so deep of gulphe
that from him shrinkes
O Dastarde, cowrde, o wretch, and (which the greatest yet of all
To tyrants check, I count that may in weighty things befall,)
O unrevenged: after gilts so great, and brothers guyle,
And truth tr^de down, dooste thou provoke with vain complaynts the while
Thy wrath? alredie now to rage all Argos town through out
In armor ought of thine, and all the double seas about
Thy fleet to ride: now all the feeldes with fervent flames of thine,
And towns to flasshe it well beseemde: and every where to shine,
The bright drawn sword: all under foot of horse let every side
Of Argos land^ resounde: and let the woods not serve to hyde
Our foes, nor yet in haughty top of hills and mountains hie,
The builded towers. The people all let them to battle cry,
And clear forsake Mycenas town. who so his hateful head
Hydes and defends, with slaughter dyre let blood of him be shed.
This pryncely Pelops palaice proud and bowres of high renown,
On me so on my brother too, let them be beaten down.
Go to, do that which never shall no after age allow,
Nor none it whisht: some mischefe great there must be ventred now,
Both fierce and bloody: such as would my brother rather long
To have been his. Thou never dooste enoughe revenge the wrong,
Except thou pass. And feercer fact what may be done so dyre,
That his exceedes? doothe ever he lay down his hateful ire?
Doothe ever he the modest mean in time of welthe regard?
Or quiet in aduersitee? I know his nature hard
^ntractable, that ^roke may be, but never will it bend.
For which ere he prepare him self, or force to fight entende,
Se^ first on him: least while I rest he should on me arise.
He will destroy or be destroyde, in midst the mischief lies,
Preparde to him that takes it first.
Doothe fame of people naught
Adverse thee fear?

The greatest good of kingdom may be thought,
That stil^ the people are constraynde their princes deeds as well
To praise, as them to suffer all.

Whom feat^ does so compel
To praise, the same his foes to be, doothe fear enforce again:
But who in deed the glory seeks of favor true tobtayne,
He rather would with hearts of ^che be praysde, then tongues of all.

The tr^ praise full often has hapt^ to meaner men to fall:
The false but unto mighty man. what ^ill they, let them will.

Let first the king will honest things, and no^ the same dare nyll.

Where leefull are to him that rules but honest things ^lone,
There raygnes the king by others leave.

And where that shame is none,
Nor care of right, faith, (...), nor holiness none staythe,
That kingdom swarues.

Such holiness, such p^tie, and fay the,
Are private goods: let kings run on in that that likes their will.

The brothers hurt a myschiefe count, though he be near so ill.

It is but right to do to him, that wrong to brother were.
What heinous hurt has his offense let pass to prove? or where
Refraynde the gilt? my spouse he stale away for ^echerie,
And raygne by stelthe: the ancient note and sign of impetie,
By fraud he got: my house by fraud to vex he never ceaste.
In Pelops house there fostred is a noble worthy beast,
The close kept R^mme: the goodly guide of r^tche and fairest flocks.
By whom through out on every side depend a down the locks
Of glittryng gold, with fleece of which the new kings woonted wear
Of Tantalls ^locke their sceptors guil^ and mace of might to bear.
Of this the owner reigns he: with him of house so great
The fortune fleethe: this sacred Ra^^ a loofe in saftie shet,
In secret meade is wont to grase, which stone on every side
With rockie wall encloseth round the fatal beast to hyde.
This beast (aduentryng mischi^fe great) adioynyng yet for pray
My spoused mate, the traitor false has hens conuayde awa^e.
From hens the wrongs of mutual hate, and mischefe all up sprung:
In exile wandered he, through out my kingdoms all a long:
No part of mine remains safe to me, from traynes of ^is.
My feerce deflourde, and loyalty of empire broken is:
My house all vexed, my blood in doubt, and naught that trust is in,
But brother foe. What staiest thou yet? at length l^ now begin,
Take heart of Tantalus to the, to Pelops ca^t thine eye:
To such examples well beseemes, I should my hands apply.
Tell thou which way were best to (...) that cruel head to death.

Through perste with swoorde let him be (...) and yield his hateful breathe.

Thou speakst of the end: but I him would oppress with greter pain.
Let tyrants vex with torment more: should ever in my rain
Be gentle death?

Does (...) in thee preua^ no whit?

Depart thou hens all piety, if in this house as yet
Thou ever werie: and now let all the flock of furies dyre,
And full of strife Erinnys come, and double brandes of fire
Megaeta shaking: for not yet enough with fury great
And rage does burn my boylyng breast: it ought to be repleate,
With monster more.

What mischefe new
(...) thou in ^age provide?

Not such a one as may the mean of woonted gree^ abide.
No gilt will I forbear, nor none may be enoughe despite.

What sword?

To little that.

what fire?

And that is yet to light.

What weapon then shall sorrow such find fit to work thy will?

Thyestes self.

Then ire it self yet that's a greater ill.

I grant: a tomblyng tumulte quakes, within my bosoms lo,
And round it rolls: I moved am and wot not whereunto.
But drawn I am: from botome deep the roryng soil does ^rie
The day so fair with thounder soundes, and house as all from hie
Were rent, from roof, and rafters craks: and lares turnde abought
Have wryde their sight: so beete, so beete, let mischief such be sought,
As ye O gods would fear.

What thing see^e thou to bring to pas?
I note what greater thing my mind, and more then wont it was
Above the reatche that men are wont to work, begyns to swell:
And staythe with slothful hands. What thing it is I can not tell:
But great it is. Beete so, my mind now in this feate proceed,
For Atreus and Thyestes both, it were a worthy deed.
Let each of us the crime commit. The Thracian house did se
Such wicked tables once: I graunt^ the mischief great to be,
But done ere this: some greater gilt and mischief more, let ire
Find out. The stomak of thy son o father thou e^spyre,
And sister e^e, like is the cause: assist me with your power,
And drive my hand: let gredy parents all his babes deuowre,
And glad to rent his children be: and on their lyms to feed.
Enough, and well it is deuysde: this pleases me in deed.
In mean time where is he? so long and innocent wherefore
Does Atreus walk? before mine eyes alredie more and more
The shade of such a slaughter walks: the want of children cast,
In fathers jaws. But why my mind, ^et dreadst thou so at last,
And fayn^st before thou enterprise? it must be done, let be.
That which in all this mischefe is the greatest gilt to se,
Let him commit.

but what disceyte may we for him prepare,
Whereby be^rapt he may be drawn, to fall into the snare?
He wotes f^ll well we are his foes.

He could not taken be,
Except him self would take: but now my kingdoms hops he.
For hope of this he would not fear to meet the mighty Jove,
Though him he thretned to destroy, with lightnyng from above.
For hope of this to pass the threats of waves he will not fail,
Nor dread no whit by doubteull shelues, of Lybike seas to sail.
For hope of this (which thing he does the woorst of all believe,)
He will his brother see.

Who shall of peace the promise geeue?
Whom will he trust?

His evil hop^ will soon believe it well.
Yet to my sons the charge which they shall to their uncle tell,
We will commit: that home he would from exple come again,
And miseries for kingdom change, and over Argos raygne
A king of half: and though to hard of heart our prayers all
Him self despise, his children yet naught w^tyng what may fall,
With travels ^ierde, and apt to be e^tysde from misery,
Requests will move: on the one side his desire of Imperie,
On ^hother side his poverty, and labor hard to see,
Will him subdue and make to yield, although full stout he be.

His trauells now the time has made to seem to him but small.

Not so: for day by day the grief of ill increases all.
Tys light to suffer miseries, but ^euy them to endure.

Yet other messengers to s^nde, in such affairs procure.

The younger sort the worse precepts do easelie harken to.

What thing against their uncle now, you them enstru^te to do,
Perhaps with you to work the like, they will not be a dred.
Such mischie^e wrought has of^e returnde upon the workers head.

Though neu^r man to them the ways of guil^ and gil^ have taught,
Yet kingdom will. Fearst thou they should be made by counsel ^aught?
They are so borne. That which thou (...) a cruel en^erpryse,
And dyrely deemest do^ne to be, and wickedly likewise,
Pe^haps is wrought against me there.

And shall your soons of this
(...) be ware that work you will? no secretnes there is
In their so g^eene and tender ye^es: they will your traynes disclose.

A privy counsel cloase to keep, is lea^nde with many woes.

And will ye them, by whom ye would he should beguiled be,
Them selves beguilde?

Nay let the^ both from fault and blame be free.
For what shall need in mischiefs such as I to work entende,
To myngle them? let all my hat^ by me alone take end.
Thou leauste thy purpose ill my mind: if thou thine own forbear,
Thou sparest him. Wherefore of this let Agamemnon hear
Be minister: and client eke of mine for such a deed,
Let Menelau^ present be: truth of (...) seed,
By such a pracktise may be tried: if it refuse they shall,
Nor of debate will bearers be, if they him uncle call,
He is their father: let them go. but much the fearful face
Bewrayes it self: even him that faynes the secret wayghtie case,
Does often betray: let them therefore not know, how great a guyl^
They go about. And thou these thy^gs in secret keep the while.

I need not warned be, for these within my bosom deep,
Both faith, and fear, but chiefly ^aythe, does shet and closely keep.

THe noble house at length of high renown, the famous stock of ancient
Inathus
Appeasoe and laid the threats of brethern down. but now what fury (...) and
(...) you thus
Each one to thyrst the others blood again, or get by gyl^ the golden man in
hand
Ye little wo^e that so desire to ^ne, in what estate or place does kingdom
stand
Not (...) make a king or high renown, not (...) weed with purple ^an ^ie,
Not (...) looks, or head (...) with crown, not g^yng (...) with gold and
(...)
(...) king he is, that fear has laid aside, and all (...) that in the breast
are bred
^home impotent ambition does not guide, nor fickle favor ^he of people led.
Nor all that west in metalls mines has found, or ^hanell (...) of golden
Tagus shows
Nor all the grain that (...) is on ground, that with the heat of (...)
^uest glowes
Nor whom the (...) of lightnyng flame shall beat, nor eastern wind that
(...) upon the seas
Nor swellyng surge with rage of wind repleate, or gr^edie (...) of (...)
displease
Whom not the prick of soldiers sharpest spear, or poynted pyke in hand
has made to ^ue
Nor whom the glympse of swoorde might cause to fear, or bright drawn blade
of glyttryng steel subdue
Who in the seat of (...) his feet, beholdes all happs how under him they lie,
And gladly runs his fatal day to meet, nor ought complaynes or grudgeth
for to dye
Though present were the princes every chone, the scattered Dakes to chase that
woonted be
That shynyng seas beset with precious stone, and red sea coasts do hold,
like blood to see
Or they which else the ^an mountains hye, from Sarmats strong with all their
power withholde
Or he that on the floude of Danubye. in frost a foot to travail dare be
bold
Or Seres in what ever place they lie, renounde with fleece that there of sylke
does spryng
They never might the truth hereof deny, it is the mind that only makes a
king
There is no need of sturdie steedes in war, no need with arms or arrows
else to fight
That Parthus woontes with bow to fling from far, while from the feelde he
falsely fayneth flight
Nor yet to siege no need it is to bring, great goons in carts to ouer^ we
the wall
That from far of the yr battryng pellettes (...). a king he is that fears
naught at all
(...) man him self this kingdom geeues at hand. let who so list with
myghtie mace to ^ygne
In ^yckle top of court delyght to stand. let me the sweet and quiet rest
obtain
So set in place obscure and low degree, of pleasant rest I shall the
sweetness kno^
My life unknown to them that noble be, shall in the step of secret silence
go
Thus when my da^es at length are (...), and time without all troublous tumulte
spent
An aged man I shall depart at l^, In mean estate, to dye ^ull well content.
But grievous is to him the death, that when so farr^ abroad the ^ruyte of him
is blown
That known he is to much to other men: departs yet vnt^ him self unknown.
MY country bowres so long wysht for, and Argos rytches all,
Chief good that unto banysh^ me^, and mysers may b^ll,
The touch of soil where borne I was, and gods of natyu^ land,
(If gods they be,) and sacred towr^ I see of (...) h^nde:
That represent then all man's work, a greater majesty.
Renowned stadies to my youth, where noble sometime I
Have not so seelde as onse, the palm^ in fathers charyot won.
All Argos now to meet with me, and people fast will roon:
But A^eus to. yet rather lead in woods again thy flight,
And bushes thick, and hyd among the brutyshe beasts from sight,
Like life to theyrs: where splendent pomp of court and princely pride,
May not with flattryng fulgent face, allure thine eyes aside.
With whom the kingdom given is, behold, and well regard,
Bese^ but late with such mishaps, as all men count full hard,
I stout and joyful was: but now again thus into fear
I am returnde. my mind mysdontes, and backward seeks to bear
My body hens: and forth I draw my pase against my will.
With slothful step (what (...) this?) my father stands still,
And turns his face and holds him self, in doubt what thing to do.

What thing (my mind) consyderst thou? or else so long whert^
Dooste thou so easy counsel wrest? wylt thou to things unsure
Thy brother and the kingdom trust? fearst thou those ils tendure
Now overcome, and mield^ made? and trauayls dooste thou flee
That well were plaste? it the ^yles, a myser now to be.
Turn hens thy pace while leefull is, and keep thee from his hand.

What cause the dryues (o father dear) thus from thy native land,
Now seen to shrynke? what makes thee thu^ from things so good at last
Withdraw thy self? thy brother comes whose ^res be ouerpast,
And half the kingdom geues, and of the house ^ylacerate,
Repayres the parts: and thee restores again to former state.

The cause of fear that I know not, thou dooste require to hear.
I see nothing that makes me dread, and yet I greatly fear.
I would go on, but yet my lymmes with we^y legs do slack:
And other way then I would pass, I am withholden back.
So often the ship that driven is with wind and eke with ore,
The swellyng surge resistyng both, beats back upon the shore.

Yet overcome what ever stays, and thus does let your mind,
And see what are at your return, preparde for you to find.
You may o father reign.

I may but then when die I might.

^heefe thing is power.

naught worth at all, if thou desire it naught.

You shall it to your children leave.

the kingdom takes not twain.

Who may be happy, rather would he myser yet remain?

Believe me well, with titles false the great things v^ delight:
And heuye happes in vain are fearde, while high I stood in sight,
I never styn^ed then to quake, and self same swoorde to fe^re,
That hanged by mine own side wa^, Oh how great good it were,
With none to strive, but careless food to e^te and rest to know?
The greater gylts they enter not in cotage set allow:
And safer ^oode is fed upon, at narrow boorde always,
While droonke in gold the poison is: by proof well taught I say,
That evil happs before the good to love it lykes my will.
Of haughty house that stands alofte in tickle top of hill,
And swayes aside, the city low need never be affryght:
Nor in the top of roof above, there shynes no Iuery bright,
Nor watcheman none defendes my sleeps by night, or gardes my rest:
With fle^te I fyshe not, nor the se^ I have not backwarde pressed,
Nor turnde to flight with builded wall: nor wicked belly I
With taxes of the people fed: nor parcel none does ly,
Of ground of mine beyond the Getes: and Parthians fa^ about:
Nor worshipped with francausence I am, nor (Jove she^ out)
My Aulters decked are: nor none in top of house does stand
In garden treese, nor kyndled yet with help of each man's hand,
The bathes do smoke: nor yet are days in slothful slumbers led,
Nor nights paste forth in watch and wine, without the rest of bed.
We nothing fear, the house is safe without the hydden knyfe,
And poor estate the sweetenes feels, of rest and quiet life.
Great kingdom is to be content, without the same to live.

Yet should it not refused be, if god the kingdom give.

Not yet desyerd it ought to be.

your brother byddes you rain.

Bydds he? the more is to be fearde: there lurketh there some train.

From whens it fell, yet piety is woonte to turn at length:
And love vnfaynde, repayres agayn^ his erste omitted strength.

Does Atreus then his brother love? each Ursa first on hye,
The seas shall wash, and swellyng surge of seas of S^ylye
Shall rest and all assuaged be, and corn to rypenes grow
In botome of Ionian seas, and darkest night shall show
And spread the light about the soil: the waters with the fire,
The life with death, the wind with seas, shall frendshyp first require,
And be at league.

of what deceit are you so dreadful here?

Of every chone: what end at length might I provide of fear?
In all he can he hates me.

to you what hurt can he?

As for my self I nothing dread: you little babes make me
Afraid of him.

dread ye to be beguylde when caught ye are?
To late it is to shoon the train in myddle of the snare.
But go we on, this (father) is to you my last request.

I follow you. I lead you not.

god turn it to the best,
That well devised is for good, pass forth with cherefull pace.

ENtrapt in train the beast is taught and in the snare does fall:
Both him, and eke of hand sto^ with him the ofspryng all,
About the fathers side I ^e: and now in safety stands
And surest ground my wrathful hate: now comes into my han^
At length Thyestes: ye he comes and all at ones to me.
I scant refrain my self, and scant may anger brydled be.
So when the bloodhounde seeks the beast, by step and quycke of sent
Draws in the leame, and pace by pace to wind the ways he went,
With nose to soil does hunt, while he the boar aloof has found
Far of by sent, he yet refraynes and wanders through the grounds
With sylent mouth: but when at hand he once perceiues the pray,
With all the strength he has he strives, with voice and calls away
His lyng^ing master, and from him by force out breaks he.
When Ire does hope the present blood, it may not hydden be.
Yet let it hydden be. behold, with vglye hear to sight
How yrkesomely defourmde with fylthe his fowlest face is dyght,
How loathsome lies his bearde unkempt: but let us friendship feign.
To see my brother me delights: give now to me again
Embrasyng long desired for: what ever strife there was
Before this time between us twain, forget and let it pas:
Fro this day forth let brothers love, let blood, and law of kind
Regarded be, let all debate be slakte in eythers mind.
I could excuse my self, except thou werte as now thou art.
But Atreus) now I grant, the fault (...) mine in ^uery part:
And I offended have in all. my cause the worse to be,
Your this days kindness makes: in deed a gyltie wight (...) he,
That would so good a brother hurt as you, in any whyt.
But now with tears I must entreat, and first I me submit.
These hands that at thy feet do lie, do thee beseech and pray,
That ire an^ hate be laid aside, and from thy bosom may
Be scraped out: and clear forgot. for pledges take thou these
O brother dear, these gyltles babes.

thy hands yet from my kneese
Remove, and rather me to take in arms, upon me fall.
And ye o aids of elders age, ye little infantes all.
Me clyppe and colle about the neck: this foul ^yre forsake,
And spare mine eyes that pity it, and fresher vesture take
Like mine to see. and you with joy, the half of emperie
Dear brother take: the greater praise shall come to me thereby,
Our fathers seat to yield to you, and brother to relieve.
To have a kingdom is but chance, but virtue it to geeue.

A lust reward for such deserts, the gods (o brother dear)
Repaye to the: but on my head a regal crown to wear,
My loathsome life denies: and far does from the sceptor flee
My hand unhappy: in the mydst let leefull be for me
Of men to lurke^

this kindome can with ^wayne full well agree.

What ever is (o brother) yours,
I count it mine to be.

Who would dame fortunes gyfies refuse, if she him raise to raygne?

The gyfts of her each man it wotes, how soon they pass again.

ye me depry^ of glory great, except ye the ^mpyre take.

You have your praise in offryng (...), and I it to forsake.
And full persuaded to refuse the kingdom, am I still.

Except your part ye will sustain mine own forsake I will.

I take it then. and bear I will the name thereof alone:
The ryghts and arms, as well as mine they shall be yours each one.

The regal crown as you besemes upon your head then take:
And I thappointed sacrifice for godds, will now go make.

Would any man it ween? that cruel wight Atreus, of mind so impotent to see
Was soon astonished with his brothers sight. no greater force then pietee may
be
Where kynred is not, lasts every threate, whom true love holds, it holds
eternallye
The wrath but late with causes kyndled great all favor brake, and did to
battle cry
When horsemen did resounde on every side, the swoordes each where, then
glystred more and more
Which ragyng Mars with often stroke did guide the fresher blood to shed yet
thyrstyng sore
But love the sword against their wills does swage, and them to peace
persuades with hand in hand
So sodeyn^ rest, amyd so grea^e a rage what god has made? throughout Mycenas
land
The harnes clynkt, but late of cyuill strife: and for their babes did
fearful mothers quake
Her armed spou^e to leese much fearde the wife. when swoorde was made the
scabberd^ to forsake
That now by ^est with rust was ouergrowne. come to re^ayre the walls that did
decay
And some to strength the ^owres half overthrown, and some the gates with
gyns of yrne to stay
Full busy were, and dreadful watch by night from turret high did ouerlooke
the town
Worse is then warte it self the fear of fight. now are the threats of
cruel swoorde laid down
And now the rumor (...) of battayles sown, the noise of crooked trumpet
sylent lies
And quiet peace returns to loyfull town. so when the waves of swelling
surge arise
While Corus wind the Brutian seas does smight, and Scylla soundes from
hollow caves within
And shipmen are with waftyng waves affryght, Charybdis casts that erst it had
droonke in
And Cyclops fierce his father yet does dred, in Actna bank that fervent is
with heates
Lest quenched be with waves that ouershed the fire that from eternal furnace
beats
And poor Laertes thinks his kingdoms all may drowned be, and Ithaca does
quake
If once the force of wyndes begin to fall, the sea lythe down more myide then
standing lake
The deep, where ships so wide full dreadful were to pass, with sails on
either side out spre
Now fallne adowne, the lesser boat does bear: and leisure is to vewe the
fyshes de
Even there, where late with tempest bette vppone the shaken Cyclades were with
seas aghast
No state endures, the pain and pleasure, one to other yeldes, and joys be
sonest past
One hour settes up the things that lowest be. he that the crowns to
princes does deuyde
Whom people please with bendyng of the knee, and at whose beck their
battayles lay asyd
The Meades, and Indians eke to Phoebus nigh, and Dakes that Parthians do with
horsemen threate
Him self yet holds his sceptors doutfullye, and men of might he fears and
chances great
(That each estate may turn) and doutfull hour. o ye, whom lord of land and
waters wide
Of life and death grauntes here to have the power, lay ye your proud and
lofty looks aside
What your inferior fears of you amys, that your superior threats to you
again
To greater king, each king a subject is. whom dawne of day has scene in pride
to raygne
Him over thrown has seen the euenyng late. let none rejoice to much that
good has got
Let none despair of best in worst estate. for Clothos myngles all, and
suffers no
Fortune to stand: but fates about does drive. such friendship find with
gods yet no man might
That he the morrow might be sure to live. the god our things all tossed and
turned quigh
Rolls with a whirle wind.
WHat whirlwinde may me hedlong drive and up in air me flyng,
And wrappe in darkest cloud, whereby it might so heinous thing,
Take from mine eyes? o wicked house that even of Pelops ought
And Tantalus abhor^ed be.
what new thing have thou brought?

What land is this? lythe Sparta here, and Arges, that has bred
So wicked brethern? and the ground of Corinth liyng spread
Between the seas? or Ister else where wont to take their flight,
Are people wild? or that which woontes with snow to shine so bright
Hircana laud? or else do here the wandryng Srythians dwell?

What monstrous mischefe is this place then guilty of? that tell,
And this declare to us at large what ever be the ill.

If once my mind may stay itself, and quakyng limbs I will.
But yet of such a cruel deed before mine eyes the fear
And Image walks: ye ragyng storms now far from hens me ^eare
And to that place me drive, to which now driven is the day
Thus drawn from hens.

Our minds ye hold yet still in doubtful stay.
Tell what it is ye so abhorte. The author thereof show.
I acke not who, but which of them: that quickly let us know.

In Peloppes Turret high, a part there is of palaice wide
That to ward the southe erected leanes, of which the utter side
With equal top to mountain stands, and on the city ^es,
And people proud against their prince if once the traitors rise
Has underneath his battryng stroke: there shines the place in sight
Where wont the people to frequent, whose golden beams so bright
The noble spotted pillars graye, of marble do supporte.
Within this place well known to men, where they so often resort,
To many other rooms about the noble court does go.
The privy Palaice vnderlieth in secret place aloe,
With ditche full deep that does (...) the wood of priuetee,
And hidden parts of kingdom old: where never grew no tree
That cherefull bows is wont to bear, with knife or lopped be,
But Tax, and Cypress, and with tree of holm^ full black to se
Does beck and bend the wood so (...) alofte above all these
The higher oak does ouerlooke, surmountyng all the treese.
From hens with luck the ^ne to take, accustomde are the kings,
From hens in danger aid to ask, and doom in doubtful things.
To this affixed are the gifts, the soundyng (...) bright,
The Chariots broke, and spoils of sea that now Myrtoon hight,
There hang the wheels once won by craft of falset axell tree,
And every other conquests note: here leefull is to see
The (...) tire of Pelops head: the spoil of enmies here,
And of Barbarian triumph left, the painted gorgeous geere.
A lothesome spryng stands under shade, and slothful course does take,
With water black: even such as is, of ^some Stygian lake
The ugly wave, whereby are wo^, to swear the gods on hie.
Here all the night the grisly ghosts and gods of death to cry
The fame reports: with clinkyng chains resoundes the wood each where,
The sprights (...) out: and every thing that dreadful is to hear,
May there be seen: of ugly shapes from old Sepulchers sent
A fearful flock does wander there, and in that place frequen^
Worse things then ever yet were known: ye all the wood full often
With flame is wont to flas^e, and all the higher trees alofte
Without a fire do burn: and often the wood beside all this
With triple barkyng roares at once: full often the palaice is
Affright with shapes, nor light of day may once the terror quell.
Eternal night does hold the place, and darkness there of hell
In mid day reigns: from hens to them that pray, out of the ground
The certain answers given are, what time with dreadful sound
From secret place the fates be told, and dongeon roares within
While of the God breaks out the voice: whereto when entered in
Fierce Atreus was, that did with him his brothers children trayle,
Dekt are the ^ultets: who (alas) may it enoughe bewail?
Behind the infants backs anon he knyt their noble hands,
And eke their heavy heds about he bound with purple bands:
There wanted there no Frankensence, nor yet the holy wine,
Nor knife to cut the sacrifice, besprinkt with leuens fine.
Kept is in all the order due, least such a mischief grette
Should not be ordered well.

who does his hand on swoorde then set?

He is him self the priest, and he him self the dedly verse
With prayer dyre from fervent mouth does sing and often rehearse.
And he at thaulters stands him self, he them assygnde to die
Does handle, and in order set, and to the knife apply,
He lights the fyres, no rights were lefts of sacryfice undone.
The wood tken quakte, and all at ones from tremblyng ground anon
The Palaice beckte, in doubt which way the payse thereof would fall,
And shaking as in waves it stood: from thayre and therwithall
A blasyng star that foulest train drew after him does go:
The wynes that in the fyres were cast, with changed licourfloe,
And turn to blood: and twyse or thryse that tire fell from his head,
The Iucrie bright in Temples seemde to weep and tears to shed.
The sights amasde all other men, but steadfast yet always
Of mind, unmoved Atreus stands, and even the godds does fray
That threaten him, and all delay forsaken by and bye
To thaulters turns, and therwithall a side he looks awrye.
As hungry tygre woonts that does in gangey woods remain
With doubtful pace to range and roame between the bullocks twain,
Of either pray full covetous, and yet uncertain where
She first may bite, and roryng throat now turns the tone to tear
And then to ^hother straight returns, and doubtful famine holds:
So Atreus dire, between the babes does stand and them beholdes
On whom he points to slake his ire: first slaughter where to make,
He doubts: or whom he should again for second offryng take,
Yet skylls it naught, but yet he doubts, and such a cruelty
It him deligths to order well.

Whom take he first to die?

First place, least in him think ye might no piete to remain
To grandsier dedicated is, first Tantalus is slain.

With what a mind and countnaunce, could the boy his death sustain?

All careless of him self he stood, nor once he would in vain
His prayers leese. But Atreus fierce the swoorde in him at last
In deep and deadly wound does hide to hilts, and gripyng fast
His throat in hand, he thrust him through. The swoorde then drawn away
When long the body had vphelde it self in doubtful stay,
Which way to fall, at length upon the uncle down it falls.
And then to thaulters cruelly Philisthenes he tralles,
And on his brother throws: and straygh^ his neck of cutteth he.
The carcass hedlong falls to ground: apite^us thing to see,
The mournyng head, with murmr yet uncertain does complain.

What after double death does h^ and slaughter then of twain?
Spares he the child? or gilt on gilt again yet heapeth he?

As long maend Lion feerce amid the wood of Armenie,
The drove pursues and conquest makes of slaughter many one,
Though now defiled be his jaws with blood, and hunger gone
Yet slaketh not his Irefull rage, with blood of bulls so great,
But slothful now, with weery toothe the lesser calves does threate:
None other wise does Atreus rage, and swells with anger straynde,
And holdyng now the sword in hand^ with double slaughter staynde,
Regardyng not where fell his rage, with cursed hand vnmilde
He struck it through his body quight: at bosom of the child
The blade gothe in, and at the back again out went the same.
He falls, and quenchyng with his blood the aulters sacred flame,
Of either wound at length he dies.

O heinous hateful act.

Abhor ye this? ye hear not yet the end of all the fact,
There follows more.

A fiercer thing, or worse then this to see
^ould nature bear?

why think ye thi^ of gilt the end to be?
It is but part.

what could he more? to cruel beast^ he cast
Perhapps their bodies to be torn, and kept from tyres at last.

Would god he had: that never tomb^ the dead might over hyde,
Nor flames dissolve, though them for food to fowls in pastures wide
He had out thrown, or them for pray to cruel beasts would flyng.
That which the worste was wont to be, were here a wisshed thing,
That them their father saw ^utombde, but oh more cursed crime
Uncredible, the which deny will men of after time:
From bosoms yet alive out drawn the tremblyng ^owells shake,
The veins yet breathe, the fearful heart does yet both pante and quake:
But he the stryngs does turn in h^nde, and destenies behold,
And of the gutts the signs each one does vewe no^ fully cold.
When h^ the sacrifice had pleased, his diligence he putts
To dress his brothers banquet now: and straight a s^onder cutts
The bodies into quarters all, and by the stoompes anon
The shoulders wide, and brawnes of arms, he strikes of every ^hone.
He la^es abroad their naked lymms, and cutts away the bones:
The only heds he keeps, and hands to him committed ones.
Some of the gutt^ are broachte, and in the fyres that burn full sloe
They drop: the boylyng liccout some does tomble to and f^oe
In moornyng cawdern: from the fless^ that over stands (...)
The fire does f^. and scatter out, and into chimney of^e
Up heapt again, and there (...) by force to ^ary yet
Unwillyng burns: the lyuet makes great noise upon the spit,
Nor easily wot I, if the fless^, or flames they be that cry,
But cry they do: the fire like pitc^ it fumeth by and by:
Nor yet the smoke it self so sad, like (...) miste in sight
Ascends up as wont it is, nor takes his way upright,
But even the Gods and house it does with filthy fume defyle.
O pacient Phoebus though from henc^ thou backward flee the while,
And in the midst of heaven above dooste drown the broken day,
Thou fleeste to la^: the father eats his children well away,
And lymmes to which he onse gave life, with cursed iawe do^he tear^.
He shynes with ointment shed full sweet all round about his heat,
Replete with wine: and often times so cursed ^ynde of food
His mouth has held that would not down^ but yet this one thing good
In all thy ylls (Thyestes) is, that them thou dooste not (...).
And yet shall that not long endure, though Titan backward go
and chariots turn against him self, to meet the ways he went,
And heavy night so heinous deed to keep from sight be sent,
And out of time from east arise, so foul a fact to hide,
Yet shall the whole at length be seen: thy ills shall all be spide.

Which way O prince of lands and godds on hie, at whose vprise eftsoon of
shadowde nigh
All beauty fleethe, which way turnst thou awrie? and drawste y^ day in midst
of heaven to flight
Why dooste thou (Phoebus) hide from us thy sight? not yet the watch that later
hour bryng^ in
Does ^esper warn the stars to kindle light. not yet does turn of Hespers
wheel begi
To loase thy chare his well deserved way. the Trumpet third not yet has
blown his blast
While toward the night begins to ^elde the day. great wonder has of sudden
suppers have
The Ploweman, yet whose oxen are vntierde. from woonted course of heaven what
draws thee back
What causes have from certain race conspi^de to turn thy horse? do yet from
dongeon black
Of hollow Hell, the conquerde Giants prove a (...) assaute? does Tityus yet
assa
With trenched heart and wounded womb to move the former yres? or from the hill
awa
Has now Typhoeus wound his side by might? is up to heaven the way ^rected hie
Of phlegrey ^oes by mountains set upright? and now does Ossa Pelion ouerlie?
The woonted turns are gone of day and night. the rise of sun, nor fall shall be
no more
Aurora dewysh mother of the light that woonts to send the horses out before,
Does wonder much again returnde to see her dawnyng light: she wottes not
how to eas
The weary wheels, nor manes that smokyng be of horse with sweat, to bathe
amyd the seas
Him self unwonted there to lodge likewise, does setting Sun again the
morning see
And now commaundes the darkness up to rise, before the night to come prepared
be
About the poale yet glowthe no fire in sight: nor light of Moon the shades
does comfort yet
What so it be, God grant it be the night. our hearts do quake with fear
oppressed great
And dreadful are least heaven and earth and all with ^atall ruin shaken shall
decay
And least on gods again, and men shall fall disfigurde (...): and the land
awa
The ^eas, and ^yres, and of the glorious (...) the wandryng lamps, least
nature yet shall hide
Now shall no more with blase of his vprise, the lord of stars that leads
the world so wide
Of Summer both and winter give the marks. nor yet the Moon with (...) ^ames
that burns
Shall take from us by night the dreadful carkes, with swyfter course or pass
her brothers turns
While compass less she fetts in crooked race: the Gods on heaps shall out
of order fall
And each with other myngled be in place. the wr^ed way of holly planetts all,
With pathe a sloape that does divide the Zones, that bears the signs and
years in course does bryns
Shall see the stars with him fall down at ones. and he that first not yet
with gentle spryng
The temper^te gale does give to sails, the Ram shall he^long fall a down
to seas again
Through which he once with ^atfull hellen swamme. next him the Bulle that
does with horn sustayn
The systers seven, with him shall ou^rturne the (...), and arms of crooked
cancer all
The Lion whot, (that woonts the soil to burn) of Hercul^s, again from
heaven shall fall
To lands once left the virgin shall be thrown, and leuelde payse of balance
sway allow
And drowe with them the styngyng Scorpion down. so likewise he that holds in
Thassale bow
His swifte well fethred arrows Chiron old, shall break the same and eke
shall leess his shot
And Capricorn that brynges the winter cold shall ouerturne, and break thy
water pott
Who so thou be: and down with thee to ground, the last of all the signs
shall Pisces fall
And monsters eke in seas yet never drounde, the water gulphe shall over whelme
them all
And he which does between each Ursa glyde, like croaked floode, the slipper
serpent twynde
And lesser Beat by greater Dragons side, full cold with frost congealed
hard by kind
And carter dulle that slowly guides his wayne, unstable shall boots fall
from hie
We are thought meet of all men whom again, should hugy heap of Chaos over
lie
And world oppress with over turned mas. the latest age now falls us upon.
With evil hap we are begotte alas, if wretches we have lost the sight of
son
Or him by faught enforced have to fly. let our complaynts yet go, and fear
be past
He greedy is of life, that will not die when all the world shall end with
him at last
Now equal with the starr^ I go, beyond each other wight, with haugh^ie h^d
the heavens about, and highest Poa^ I smight
The kingdom now and ^eate I held, where once my father raynde.
I now let go the godds: for all my will I have obtaynde.
Enoughe and well, ye even enoughe for me I am a^quit.
But why enoughe? I will proceed, and fill the father yet
With blood of his: least any shame should me restrain at all,
The day is gone: go to therefore, wh^e thee the heaven does call.
^o (...) god I could against their wills (...) hold the gods that flee,
and of reuengyng disshe, constrayne them witnesses to be:
But yet (which well enoughe is wrought,) let it the father see.
In spite of all the drowned day, I will remove from thee
The darkness all, in shade whereof do luck^ thy myseries.
And guest at such a banquet now to long he careless lies,
With merry face: now eat and drunk enough he has: at last
Tys best him self should know his ylls. ye servant all, in haste
Und^ the temple doors: and let the house be open all:
^ayne would I see, when look upon his childrens heds he shall
What countenance he then would make: or in what words break out
Would first his grief, or how would quake his body round about
With spright amassed sore: of all my work the fruit were this.
I would him not a myser see, but while so made he is.
Behold the temple opened now, does shine with many a light:
In gly^ryng gold and purple seats he sytt^ him self vpryght,
And staiyng up his heavy head with wine, upon his hand,
He belcheth out. now chief of gods, in highest place I stand,
and king of kings: I have my (...) and more then I could think:
He tylled is, he now the wine in silver bull doche drink.
And spare (...) not, the ye^ (...), (...) woorser draught for (...)
That sproong out of the bodies late of sacrifyces ^ee,
Which wine shall hyde: (...) therwithall the boordes be taken up.
The father (myngled with the wine) his childrens blood shall sup,
That would have droonke of^. behold, he now begyns to (...)
His voice and syngs, nor yet for ^oye his mind he may refrain.
Obeaten bosoms dullde so long with wo^, (...) down you^ (...), at l^gth
your greues rele^t
Let sorrow pass, and all your dread let go, and fellow eke of fearful
banyshment
Sad pou^ and ill in myserye the shame of cares. more whense thy ^ll thou haste,
Then whether, skylls. (...) to him, from hye that falls, it is in (...) be
(...
Beneth. and great it is to him again that pressed with storm, of (...) feels
the smart
Of kingdom lost the payses to sustain with neck vnbowde: nor yet deiect of
heart
Nor overcome, his heavy happs always to bear vpryght. but now of careful
carke
Shake of the showers, and of thy wretched days away with all the miserable
marks
To joyful state return thy cheerful face. put fro thy my^de the old (...)
hence
It is the woo^ of wight in woeful case, in state of joy to have no confydence.
Though better (...) to them returned be, thafflicted yet to joy it yrketh sore.
Why calste thou me ^backe, and hyndrest me this happy day to celebrate?
wherefore
Bydst thou me (sorrow) weep without a cause? who does me let with flowers so
fresh and gay
To deck my hears? it lettes, and me withdrawes. down from my head the roses
fall away^
My moysted (...) with ointment over all, with sodeyne mase stands up in
woondrows wise
From face that would not weep the streams (...) fall. and howlyng cries amyd
my words arise
My sorrow yet tha^omde tears does love. and wretches still delight to weep
and cry
Unpleasant playntes it pleases them to move: and florysht fair it lykes with
(...) die
Their robes to rent: to w^yle it lykes them still. for sorrow, sends (in sign
that woes draw nigh
The mind, that wottes before of after ill. the sturdye storms the shipmen
ouerlye
When void of wind thasswaged se^s do rest. what tumult yet or countenance
to se
Makste thou mad man? at length a trustfull bre^t to brother ge^ue, what ever
now it be
(...), or else to late thou art a dred. I wretch would not so fear, but
yet me draw
A trembling terror: down mine eyes do shed their sodeyne tears, and yet I
know no cawse
Is it a grief, or fear? or else has (...) great ^oy it self?
LEt us this day with one consen^ (o brother) celebrate.
This day my steptor^ may confyrme and stablyshe my estate,
And faythf^ll bond of peace and love between us (...).
Enough with meat and eke with wine, now satysfyde am I.
But yet of all my joys it were (...) great increase to me,
If now about my side I might my little children see.

Believe that here even in thine arme^ thy children present be.
For here they are, and shall be here, no part of them fro thee
Shall be withhelde: their loved looke^ now give to the I will,
And with the heap of all his babes, the father fully fill.
Thou shall be glutted, fear thou not: they with my boys as yet
The joyful sacrifyces make at boorde where children sit.
They shall be callde: the friendly cup now take of curtesy
With wine vpfylde.

of brothers feast I take full wyllyngly
The fynall gift, shed some to gods of this our fathers land,
Then let the rest be droonke. whates thi^? in no wise will my hand
Obey: the payse incre^seth sore, and down mine arm does swaye.
And from my lypps the waftyng wynt it self does fi^e away,
And in deceived mouth, about my jaws it runs round:
The table to, it self does shake, and leap from tremblyng ground.
Scant burns the fire: the air it self with heavy ^here to sight
Forsook of sun amassed is between the day and night.
What means this? yet more and more of backewarde beaten sky
The compass falls: and thicker mist the world does ouerlye
Then blackest darkness, and the night in night it self does hyde.
^ll stars be fled: what so it be, my brother god provide
And soons to spare: the gods so grant that all this tempest fall
On this vile head. but now restore to me my children all.

I will, and never day again shall them from the withdraw.

What tu^ulte tumbleth so my guts, and does my bowels gnawe?
What quakes within? with heavy payse I feel my self oppressed,
And with an other voice then mine ^wayles my dole^ull breast.
Come near my soons, for you now does th'unhappie father call:
Come near, for you once seen, this grief would soon assuage and fall.
Whence murmr they?

with fathers ^rmes embrace them quickly now,
For here they are lo come to thee: dooste thou thy children know?

I know my brother: such a gylt yet can thou suffer well
o earth to bear? nor yet from hens to Stygian lake of hell
Dooste thou both drown thy self and us? nor yet with broken ground
Dooste thou these kingdoms and their king with Chaos rude confound?
Nor yet vprentyng from the soil the bowres of wicked land
Dooste thou Mycenas ouerturne? with Tantalus to stand,
And auncyters of ours, if there in hell be any one,
Now ought we both. now from the frames on either side anon
Of ground, all here and there rent up, out of thy bosom deep
Thy dens and dungeons set abroad, and us enclosed keep,
In botome low of Acheront: above our heddes alofte
Let wander all the gyltie ghosts, with burning frete full often
Let fyry Phlegethon that dryues his sands both to and froe,
To our confusion ouetroon, and vyolently floe.
O slothful soil unshaken payse, unmoved yet art thou?
The gods are fled.

but take to thee with joy thy children now,
And rather them embrace: at length thy children all, of thee
So long wy^ for, (for no delay there stands now in me,)
Enjoy and kiss, embracyng arms deuyde thou unto three.

Is this thy league? may this thy lous and faith of brother be?
And dooste thou so repose thy hate? the father does not crave
His soons alive (which might have been without the gylt,) to have:
And eke without thy hate, but this does brother brother pray:
That them he may ent^mbe, restore, whom see thou shall straight way
Be burnt: the father naught requyres, of the that have he shall,
But soon forgo.

what ever part yet of thy children all
Remaynes, he^e shall thou have: and what remains not, thou haste.

Lie they in feeldes, a food out floong for fleeyng fowls to waste?
Or are they kept a pray, for wild and brutyshe beasts to eat?

Thou have deuou^de thy soons, and fyld^ thy self with wick^d meat.

Oh this is it that shamde the gods: and day from hens did drive
Turnde back to east. alas I wretch what waylynges may I give?
Or what complayntes? what woeful words may be enough for me?
The^r heads cu^e of, and hands of torn, I from the^r bodies see,
And wrenched fe^te from broken thyghe^, I here behold again.
^ys this that greedy father could not suffer to sustain.
In belly roll my ^owels round, and closed crime so great
Without a passage stryues within, and seeks away to get.
Thy swoorde (o brother) lend to me: much of my blood alas
It has: let us therewith make way for all my soons to pas.
Is yet the swoorde fro me withhelde? thy self thy bosoms tear.
And let thy breasts resounde with strokes: yet wretch thy hand forbear,
And spare the dead. who ever saw such mischief put in proof?
What rude Heniochus, that dwells by ragged coaste aloof,
Of Caucasus unapt for men? or frare to Athens, who
Procustes wild? the father I oppress my children do
And am oppressed, is any means of gylt or mischief yet?

A mean in myschiefe ought to be, when gylt thou dooste commyt,
Not when thou quytst: for yet even this, to little seems to me.
The blood yet warm even from the wound I should in sight of thee
Even in thy sawes have shed, that thou the blood of them might drink
That lived yet: but while to much to haste my hate I think,
My wrath beguyled is. my self with swoorde the wounds them gave,
I struck them down, the sacred fyres with slaugh^er vowde I have
Well pleased, the carcass cuttyng the and lyutles lymms on ground
I have in little parcelles chopped, and some of them I drownde
In boylyng cawderns, some to ^yres that burnte full slow I put,
And made to drop: their synewes all and lymms atoo I cut
Even yet alive, and on the spytte that thrust was through the same
I hard the liver wayle and cr^e, and with my hand the flame
I often kept in: but every wh^ the father might of this
Have better done, but now my wrath to lightly ended is.
He rent his soons with wicked gum, him self yet wotyng naught,
Nor they thereof.

o ye, encloa^ with bendyng banks abought
All seas me hear, and to this (...) ye godds now harken well
What ever pla^ ye fl^dde are to: ^eare all ye sprights of hell,
and here ye lands, and night so (...), that them dooste ouerlye
With cloud so black, to my complaynts do thou thy self apply.
To thee now left I am, thou dooste alone me myser see,
And thou art left without thy startes: I will nut make for me
P^ions yet. nor ought for me r^quyre, may ought yet be
That me should veil? for you shall all my wyshes now fo^esee.
Thou guyder great of skies above, and prince of highest might,
Of he (...) place, now all with clouds full hortible to sight,
Enwrappe the world, and let the wyndes on every syd^ break out,
And send the dreadful thunder clappe, through all the world about.
Not with what hand thou gyltles house and undeserved wall
With lesser volte art wont to beat, but with the which did fall
The three vpheaped mountains once, and (...) to hylls in height
Stood equal up, the ^yantes huge: throweout such weapons straight,
and flyng thy ^yres, and therwithall revenge the drowned day.
^et flee thy flames, the light thus lost and hyd from heaven away,
With flashes fill: the cause, (least long thou should douts whom to hit,)
Of each of us is ill: if not at least let mine be it,
Me stryke: with tryple edged soole thy brande of flaming fire
Beat through this breast: if father I my children do desire
To lay in tomb, or corpses cast to fire as does be houe,
I must be burnt: i^ nothing now the gods to wrath (...) move,
Nor power from skies with thunder bolte none strykes the wyched men.
Let yet eternal night remain, and hyde with darkness then
The world about: I (Titan) naught complain, as now it stands,
If still thou hyde thee thus away.

now praise I well my hands,
Now got I have the palm: I had been overcome of thee,
Except thou sorowdst so: but now even children borne to me
I count, and now of brydebed cha^e the faith I do repeat.

In what offended have my soons?

In that, that thine they wear.

Setst thou the soons for fathers food?

I do, and (which is best)
The certain soons.

the gods that guide a ^infantes, I protest.

what wedlock gods?

who would the gylt with gylt so ^yght again?

I know thy grief prevented now with wrong, thou dooste complain:
Nor this thee yrkes, that fed thou art with food of cursed kind,
But that thou had not it preparde: for so it was thy mind,
Such meats as these to ^ette before thy brother wo^yng naught,
And by the mothers help, to have likewise my children caught,
And them with such like death to slaye: this one thing l^tted thee,
Thou thoughtst them thine.

the gods shall all of this reuenge^s be:
and unto them for vengeance due, my vows thee render shall.

But vexed to be I thee the while, ^eeue to thy children all.

O King of Dytis dungeon dark, and grysly ghosts of hell,
That in the deep and dreadful denns, of blackest Tartare dwell,
Where lean and pale diseases lie where fear and famyne are,
Where discord stands with bleedyng brows, where every kind of care,
Where furies fight in bedds of steel, and hears of crallyng snakes,
Where Gorgon grymme, where Harpies are, and loathsome Lymbo lakes,
Where most prodigious vglye things, the hollow hell does hyde,
If yet a monster more myschapte then all that there do bide,
That makes his brood his cursed food, ye all abhor to see,
Nor yet the deep Auerne it self, may bide to cover me,
Nor grysly gates of Plutoes place, yet dare them selves to spredde,
Nor gapyng ground to swallowe him, whom godds and day have fled:
Yet break ye out from cursed seats, and here remain with me,
Ye need not now to be affrayde, the air and heaven to se.
Nor tryple headid Cerberus, thou needst not be affright,
The day unknown to thee to see, or else the loathsome light.
They both be fled: and now does dwell none other countnaunce here,
Then does beneathe the fowlest face, of hateful hell appear.
Come see a meetest match for thee, a more then monstrous womb,
That is of his unhappy brood, become a cursed tomb.
Flock here ye fowlest feendes of hell, and thou O grandsier great,
Come see the glutted gutts of mine, with such a kind of meat,
As thou did once for godds prepare let torments all of hell
Now fall upon this hateful head, that has deserude them well.
Ye all be plagued wrongfully, your gylts be small, in sight
Of mine, and meet it were your pangs on me alone should light.
Now thou O grandsier giltles art, and meeter were for me,
With fleeyng flood to be beguilde, and fruit of fickle tree.
Thou slewst thy son, but I my sons, alas have made my meat.
I could thy famyne better bear, my panche is now repleate
With food: and with my children three, my belly is extent.
O filthy fowls and gnawyng gripes, that Tityus bosom reut
Behold a fitter pray for you, to fill your selves vppone
Then are the growyng gutts of him: four wombes enwrapt in one.
This panche at ones shall fill you all: yfye abhor the food,
Nor may your selves abide to bathe, in such a cursed blood:
Yet lend to me your clinchyng claws, your pray a while forbear,
And with your tallons suffer me, this monstrous mawe to tear.
Or whirlyng wheels, with swing of which
Ixion still is rolde, Your hooks upon this glutted gorge, would catch a
surer hold
Thou filthy flood of Lymb^ lake, and Stygian poole so dyre,
From choked channel belche abroad. thou ferfull freate of fire,
Spue out thy flames O Phlegethon: and over shed the ground.
With vomit of thy fyrye stream, let me and earth be drownde.
Break up thou soil from botome deep, and give thou room to hell,
That night, where day, that ghosts, were gods were wont to reign, may dwell.
Why gapste thou not? Why do you not O gates of hell unfold?
Why do ye thus thynfernall feendes, so long from hens withholde?
Are you likewise affrayde to see, and know so wretched wight,
From whom the godds have wryde their looks, and turned are to flight?
O hateful head, whom heaven and hell, have shoonde and left alone,
The Sun, the Starts, the light, the day, the Godds, the ghosts be gone.
Yet turn again ye Skies a while, ere quight ye go fro me,
Take vengeance first on him, whose fault enforces you to f^.
If needs ye must yo^ flight prepare, and may no lenget bide,
But roll ye must with you forth with, the Gods and Sun a side,
Yet slowly flee: that I at length, may you yet overtake,
While wandryng ways I after you, and speedy journey make.
By seas, by lands, by woods, by rocks, in dark I wander shall:
And on your wrath, for right reward^ to due deserts, will call. ye escape not
fro me so ye Godds, still after you I go
And vengeance ask on wicked wight, your thunder bolte to throe.
IMPRINTED AT London in Fletestrete, in the house late Thomas Berthelettes.

Cum priuilegio adimprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. LX.


