O Lord of Ghostes whose fyrye flashe
(that forth thy hand does shake)
Does cause the trembling Lodges twain
of Phoebus Carre to quake,
Raygne reachlesse now: in every place
thy peace procurde I have
Aloof where Nereus locks up land
Empalde in winding Wave.
Thwack not about with thunder thumpes, the rebel kings be down,
The ravening tyrauntes Scepterlesse, are pulled from their crown:
By me all daunted is whereon, thy boults thou should bestow.
And yet O Father, yet the Heavens are still withhelde me froe,
At all assayes I serve, as might an Impe of Jove behoue,
And that thou ought to Father me, my stepdame well does prove.
Why do thou linger in delay, is Heaven of us afraid?
Seem we so awful, fell, and fierce? and wherefore are we staide?
And cannot Atlas boysteous back on stouping shoulder tough,
Uphold the payse of Hercules, and heaven well enough?
What is it sier? what is it Jove that thee so much detarres?
What may thee force keep back thy son from scaling of the Stars
For death has let me pass again from dungeon dark to thee.
When mischiefs fell and monsters all destroyde and spoiled be
That either Land, or Seas, or Air. Or hell engender could
Arcadian Lion none to raunge in saluage Nemea wolte.
The Stymphall Foul has chased bin with Bow, and Brusell boulte.
No nimble heart of Menalus does lie in hill nor houlte
The Dragon daunting with his blood has goarde the goulden grove.
And Hydra has his courage coolde, and Diomedes drove
Whose puffed paunches pampred were with stoare of strangers blood
That scoarde the Coaste and barren banks of cruel Heber flood
I slaughterd them, and that the force of foe might well be seen.
I prowlde away the boottes of the proud Amazon Queen,
Of silent shades in glummy Goulphes the dreadful doomes I saw.
On Cerber black the Tartar Tike the son did shine with awe,
And he with steaming Goggle eyes has glyed upon the soon:
Anteus yawnes, and gapes no more whose gasping breath to done.
A front his alters Busir fell was knocked unto the ground,
By him whose hand gave Gerion his deep and deadly wound
And slew the mighty Bull that was to hundred hearts a dread,
All noyous plagues I spoiled have that ever Tellus bread,
And daunted by my hand they lie: the Gods now need not free:
The world to answer Iunoes ire, no monsters now can get.
Now show thy valiant son his sire, or set him in the clouds,
Thou shall not need to be my guide, my self will climb the shrowdes.
Do thou my passage but allow, and I shall find away,
But if thou dread, that monsters more the earth engender may,
Have on each monster hideous, to show it self in time,
While Hercules has his aboade beueath the heavenly Clyme.
For who encounter shall the fiendes? who is it that Grecia has,
That may be meet, to bide the brunt of mighty Iunoes wrath?
My praise burtes not my health: my fame does fly, from land to land:
The ysy poale does know me, where the northern bear does stand:
The easterlings encombred with the gleede of scorching sun.
The south, where Phoebe by crooked clear of Tropic Crab does ru^ne:
In every coast O Titan where thou do thy self reveal.
How I have met thee face to face, to thee I do appeal.
Aloof beyond the compass of thy light I set my foot,
And never could thy blaze so far his glymsinge glory shoot.
As I have forced the honor of my triumphs for to streatch,
The day it self has had his stint, within my trauells reatch
Dame Nature faylde, the world was shogd beside his center dew,
And ougsome night in shimmering shade, from dungeon darck I drew.
And cankred Chaos lodged aloafe encountered me awayne:
Yet from the deep I gat to ground, whence none returns again.
We straue against the Ocean storms, I balasen the keele
Fraught with my weight, that wrestling waves could not compel it reele.
What heaps of hazardes tempted I through all the open air,
To qualify thy wedlocks wrath can mischief none repair
The earth would loath such baggage bred as I would match by might,
Yea monsters none are to be found, the fiendes do shun my sight.
And Hecules for want of fiendes against him self did rage
What eluishe creatures cursed did I with naked arm assuage.
Was ever any peuish thing so big upon the ground
That coapt with me, but that my hand alone did it confound.
Not hither to from vermin vile through faynting fear I leapt
In babish years, not when to me in Cradell laid they leapt:
Each thing that was commanded me, at ease I did obey:
Thus free from paynefull toil to me there never past a day.
What vermin have I vanquished, no king commanding it?
My courage cloyes me more then all the wyles of Iunoes wit.
But what avails me to rid mankind of fickle fear?
The Gods yet cannot raygne in rest: while up the world does pear,
New rid of furious fiendes, it sees a loft in starry skies
The cruel creatures all, that erst on earth did fore aggrise.
Dame Juno has transport the elues The scorching Crab does creep
Abouth the burning zone, and loofe at Africa does keep
The Tropic line: and Harvest fat he feeds with parching heat:
To Virgo, Leo turns the time, and in a reaking sweat.
He buskling up his burning Mane, does dry the dropping south.
And swallows up the slabby clouds in fyry foming mouth.
The Vrchins all are creapt to skies, and have prevented me:
I Conqueror from Earth to Heaven, my trauells all may see:
These gargle Faces grim on heaven, Dawe Juno first did set:
As though thereof the terror might to skies my passage let:
Although she scatter them in Skies, or make the Heavens forlorn
More then y^ Earth, or hellike Goulphes, (whereby y^ Gods are sworn)
Yet room for Hercles shall be made, if after monsters quelde,
Or battles fought, or hellike hound in Chains as captive held,
If all exploytes cannot prevail, in skies a place to gain,
Then soukt up be the midland Sea twixt Barbary, and Spain,
That either shore may join in one, with channel none between
There will I dam the running stream, that Sea shall none be seen*
Or as for Corinth out shot land that tweene two seas does lie,
It shall give way to ^yther stream, that through the same shall fly.
And when the seas on passage have, the Fleet of Athens town
May floate in Channel new: thus shall the world turn tops^downe:
Let Ister turn his stream, and Tanaus slow another way:
Grant Jove a placket, grant, whereby the Gods uphold I may.
Discharge thy thunder dint. where I shall keep due watch, and ward,
If either to the ysy poale thou bid me have regard,
Or burning zone, here let the Gods full safe all force defy:
Prince Paean purchased has an house amid the cristall sky,
And well deserved he the temples of Pernassus hill,
For slaughter of a Dragon made? how often recovering still
In Hydra poison Python lay? with Bacchus Perseus strong
By less desert then Hercules, have crept the Gods among.
But all the East (a mighty coast) to bond is brought, by him.
Whom Juno spightes, how stearne a bug was snaky Gorgon grim?
What Impe is he, begot between my stepdame dyre and thee,
Whose praised pains have purchaste him a place in heaven to be?
The heaven that on my shoulders I have hoisterd up I crave:
But Lycas, (partner of my pains) dispatch our triumph brave.
Display in pomp the ruin of Euritus house, and Crown:
And for the sacrifice with speed strike yet the Bullocks down,
Where as the Aare (that does adnaunce the Church of Cenei Jove.)
Lies open to Euboca sea: that wrackfull wave does move.
THe Gods in bliss that man does cou^teruaile,
That can at once both Grave, and glory gain,
Death upon death the whilst does him assail
Whose wretched life is lingered on in pain,
With frowning fate in spurning spighte who shiues,
And sets the Keele of gaping goulphe at naught,
Will not submit his captive hands to gives,
As dishe of dishonor in triumph to be brought:
Like careful caytife he shall never droupe,
Whelmed in storming thoughts of sower annoy
Whose stomach scorns, for dawnting death to stoop,
Though seas amid the deep in hoysted hoy
Drive him aloof, when as a southern gale
Beats Boreas back, or eastern puff again
Recoiles the western wind, and seems to hale
From deepest sands the surges torn in twain.
Tht broken planckes to catch he scrambles not
Of wracked bark, as one that hopes to have
Amid the Channel deep a landing plot,
When dismal death appears in every wave
He cannot suffer shipwreck all alone:
With pined karrayne coarse, and streams of tears,
And with our country dust our heads upon,
Powldring our locks, we languishe out our years.
Neither flashing flame, nor thumping thunder crack
Will once dawnt us: O death thou do pursew,
Where fortune fawnes: but where she works wrack,
Thou shunnest those, that would thee not eschew,
We stand not in our razed country wall,
Whose ground shall now be ouergrowne (alas)
With bramble, and bryer, and down the temples fall:
While mucky sheepecotes are planted in their place.
And now the frostifaced Greek (alas)
This way, this way, with all his drove of Neat
By so much of AEchalia must pass,
As heapt on ashes gloweth still with heat.
The Tessayle sheepherd sitting by the way
On iarringe Pype shall play his country ryme,
Singing with sighs alack, and weladay,
Thus to bewail the sorrows of our time.
Ere time shall roll the race of many a year,
It will be asked, where erst the town did stand?
O well was I, when as I lived a leare,
Not in the barren balkes of fallow land,
Nor in Thessalia on the foodelesse cliues,
But now among rough Trachin craggy Rocks,
And ougly shrubs necessity me drives,
Whose flaming tops detarres the feeding Ox.
And in the way less woods vntrode before
All comfortless, afright and in a maze
Needs must I trot alone, that would abhor
The saluage beasts, that on the mountains graze
But better lot (if any Dames may have)
They over Inach wambling stream shall row,
Or shroud in Dirce Walls, where Ismen wave
With feeble force of shallow fourde does flow.
The hawty Hercles mother here was wed,
What Scythian crag, what stones engendered him?
What Rocky mountain Rhodope thee bred,
Of Tyrant, Titans race a cu^sed lim?
Stipe Athos hill, the brutish Caspia land.
With teate unkind fed thee twixt rock and stoane:
False is the tale, wherewith thou bearst in hand,
Two nights for thee thy Mother dear did groan.
While lingering stars long lodged in purple sky:
The shepherd star his course did enterchaunge
With the load star, and up the Moon does sty,
That couched Phoebe durst not the Welkin raunge,
No Lance can pearce his monsters ruggy skin,
The blunted Iron tried it with thumping thwack,
And Steel is not so tough: on naked skin
A swerd was brast, and stones rebounded back.
The force of fate he utterly defies,
And toughly timberd as he is of lim
He does contriue, how quarrels may arise,
That death might prove his febled force in him
The quaries could not enter to his flesh,
Nor yet the bow with Scythian steule drawn deep,
No nor the glaues, with which Sarmacians fresh,
Hot skirmishes in th'ysy Clyme do keep.
No nor the Parthian better Archer far,
Then Creete, who parcht with Phae^tons soultring flame,
Under the Equinoctial rayseth werre,
Gaynst the easterling discomfetinge the same.
He with his body did batter down the wall,
Of Oechalie: nothing may him withstand:
By valiant prowess he has conquered all:
It Is won before, that he does take in hand:
The howgy Briar that fifty paunches had,
The hawty Giges with hundred arms likewise,
That clamb up Thassayle hills as Giant mad,
When rebels rage would take from love the skies,
Such steaming Eyes, such ghastly visage foul,
Such Gargle face, such countnaunce glaring grim,
Wherewith stearne Hercles glowningly does scowle,
Those Gyaunts had resembling plainly him.
Thus greatest bliss is prone to greatest bale
There wants no woe whose cup we have not taste
We wretched women have with countnaunce pale.
But careful caytiffe I
do not bewail forlorn
The sweeping flames, nor Idolles, with
their taitred Temples torn:
Nor that the Fathers burn
together with their Sons,
That Gods, and men, that tombs and Church,
at once to ruin runs.
Upon the common care
wec do not power our playnt,
For Fortune wills us turn our tears with other woes attaynt:
And thus my frowning face allotteth unto me
Another kind of wretchedness, that must lamented be:
What shall I first beweepe? Or chiefly what complain?
And to bewail them all at once, would mitigate my pain.
Alas that but on breast Dame Nature did me frame,
That blows agreeing to my grief might bounce upon the same.
With weeping Sipill rock, br^^se ye my balefull breast,
Or on Eridanus silent shore in sorrows let we rest,
Where as the mourning troop of Nymphs do hale their hears.
To wayle the death of Phairon, with showers of dropping tears.
Or else in Sicill rock cause me encoucht to dwell,
Where Scilla Hag with howling noise, and barking big does yell.
Or else in Lynnets shape let me tell on my tale,
And weep with Adon in the woods, or turnde to Nightingale
As Lady Philomele, records with weeping lay
In shade of hawly Ismar hill upon a tender spray,
With soking sighs her grief, O Gods: and me addight
In shape, that may be suetable vnso my playntiffe plight.
And of my piteous moan let craggy Trachin sound,
Since Myrra saw the tears where in Dame Venus eyes were drownde,
That she for Adopis with smoky sighs did shed,
And Halcion might wayle at will her loving Ceyx dead:
The Lady Tastalis get life to weep alone,
And Philomele did change her shape, and earnefully did move
Her tender Itis death: (alas) why are not yet
With flickering Feathers fit for wings, my naked arms beset?
O happy shall I be, and happily be bleast,
When in the woods as in an house I make my shrowding neast,
And sitting like a bird upon my country ground
In doleful harmony shall tune the cares, that me confound.
That thus the people fond may talk how they have seen
In piteous likeness of a Bird, the Daughter of a Queen.
I careful caytiffe, I, beheld my Fathers fate,
When in the Court a deadly club did Pale him on the pate,
And sprawling on the floor with brains pasht out he lay,
Alas if fates would let thy Coarse beshrynde in pit of Claye,
What flowing tears (O Syer) would I on thee bestow?
And could I brook it Toxeus, to see thy death with woe?
That were vnwand^ in years, and take in pits vnpaysde,
Upon whose naked Cheeks the pregu^^ (...) hayres had raysor.
Why should I parents dear your fates with tears detest,
Whom death with hand ind^fferent has taken hence to rest:
My Fortune seeks my tears, due is mine own distress,
Now as a captive must I dawnce attendaunce more and less,
Upon my Ladies rock: and twyst her threde yspoon,
Woe worth my beauty, for the which in dread of death I run.
And for thy sake alone my stock has lost his life,
While that my syer Denies me to Hercles as his wife
And did for fear refuse his stepfather to be,
But to our Laydes balefull bower as Captives hence go we:
WHat furious fits of ramping rage
does boil in Women's brain,
When in one roof both wedded wife
and Harlor do remain?
Both Scylla, and Charibdis gulf
no danger like it have,
That raging roll on Sicill shore
by heaps the wrestling wave.
Ne saluage beast so bad there is,
that betters not the same.
For brute no sooner blew abroad the captive Harlots name,
And that the beauty of Iolas countnaunce shyned brym,
As does the day, when marble skies, no filthy fog does dim:
Or like the glimse of twinkling star, that in the welkin bright
Displayes abroad his shooting beams amid the frosty mght:
But Deianira Hercles Wife all bedlem like does stand,
And scowleth as the Tiger wild which couched on the sand
In shade of rock does shrowde his whelps, and buskells up in hesse,
Espying him that of his young both come to make the waste:
Or like as Menas ouercharg with Bacchus licour sixeete
With Iuy bunche on thurled Darte from place to place does fleet:
She makes a pawse, in doubt where to she might derect her pace,
Then frantickly as on bestraught, she (...) from place to place
In Hercles douse. thus was she rayt in rage of flaming ire,
The house to narrow was, to cool the despret dames desire.
She runs in, she ^rots about, she makes a soddayne stay.
The mallady in frowning face it self does plain display.
No galling grief remaynes at heart. The tears gush from her Eyes,
Nor in on kind of temper still in frenly sits she fryes:
Her glowning looks with fury fell do change her former hew,
Now glaring stand her steaming Eyes, and palenesse does ensew
The ruddy color in her Cheeks: the anguish of her heart
Drives out her dolors deep, to show them selves in every part:
She languisheth, she moanes for help, she wayles her froward fate,
And all the house an Echo makes resounding her estate.
Lo headlong to and froe she hies, and running still about
Goes mumbling, and the secrets of her mind she mutters out:
Oh Juno Spouse to Jove, what part of heaven soever thou keep,
Raise up some saluage beast, against lewd Hercules to creep,
That I shall think sufficient: If any combrous snake
With breeding he do craule, more big in alt the slimy lake,
That may not take a foil: or if that ought do yet remain,
So ougsome, grisely, cursed, and grim, so fraught with filthy bayne,
That he may loathe to look thereon, that may his sight appaule.
Undo their Dens, from hydeous hoales procure such vermin craule.
Or if that flendes can none befounde, then couture thou my ghost
To what thou ^tst: this soul of mine can welt abide the most:
Some vucouth shape, some ghastly face, such one bestow on me,
Whereby the horror of my pangues may counteruayled be.
My boiling breast cannot conceive the vengeance, I would try:
Why serchest thou the corners far, of lands aloof that lie?
And turnst y^ world thus vpside down? why seekst thou harm of hell?
To trance him, furious fl^irndes enough within this breast do dwell:
Make me thine instrument of hate: his stepdame I will be,
And thou may work the overthrow of Hercules by me:
Appoynct my hand to any thing. Why do thou make delay?
Use thou my frensy, as the means to compass his decay.
The mischief shall be brought to pass, what ever thou will crave:
Why stand ye musing still thereon? contrived all I have:
Thou may forbear thy malice now: thy rancour shall suffice,
To bring this wretch unto his end, my self can well devise.
My Foster gyile, of rauing mind, these dreary playnts assuage,
Forbear this heat, and brydell yet the rigor of thy rage:
Behave thy self for such an one, as men may worthy judge
The noble Spouse of Hercules.

Shall Iole (slavish drudge)
Bring basterd brethren to my Babes? of her that is a slave
Shall Jupiter the God of heaven forsooth a daughter have?
The flashing flames, and fighting floodes shall toyne together first.
The northern bear to Marble seas shall stoop to quench his thyrst.
Yea vengeounce, vengeance, will I have, though on thy back thou wyeld
The boysteous heavens, and all the world do peace unto thee yield:
There is a thing shall stinge thee worse then Hydra hissing Snake,
The corsey cursed of angry Wife. Does any fiery Flake
Vpthrowne from Etnas boiling Foarge, so sowse the beaten skies?
More then all things that thou have daunt, my ghost shall thee aggryse.
Shall thou prefer a seruill Trull before thy wedded Wife?
For fear of many monsters more I tendered still thy life,
And now for to increase my care. I see no monsters lurk,
And now steps in an hateful whore, (which more my mind does vrke)
To cumber us, as ill as fiendes. O Father thou of might,
The shield of Gods: and Titan thou, that bearst the Lamp of light,
I only unto Hercules a loyal wife abod,
And to an Harlots use are turnde my prayers made to God:
The fruit of my felticity a Strumpet does obtain,
And for an Harlots love ye Gods have hard my prayers vain:
Is Hercules returnde for her? O grief not yet content.
Devise some tearing torments, seek some pangues, and punishment.
Let Juno learn of me, what force a woman's fury has.
She knows not how in deep despite, to use her harming wrath.
For me you did these batrtayles wage: for my sake Acheloe
Did let his streaming blood amid his wamblinge waves to floe.
When snarling Adders shape he took, and to the boysteous Bull
He gieuing up his sloughy shape did bend his malice full.
And thus thou foylde a thousand foes by conquest of this one:
Yet presently thou plunged art, and that by me alone:
A prisoner now must be prefer de before thy loyal wife.
I Will none of that: but even the day that first begins the strife,
And to our wedlock brings the breach, shall be thy dismal day,
And knap in twain the fatal twist where on thy life does stay:
What means this? my mind relents. My malice breaks his rage:
O wretched grief why do thou faynte? thy spite will thou assuage?
With fealty of a faithful Wife do thou thy conscience charge?
Why lets thou not my boiling ire for to increase at large?
Why do thou slake thy frying fits? this mallady still survive.
Even now I able was with him for maistership to strive.
In deed I have not craved aid: yet Stepdame Juno will,
To weilde my hands to work his wrack, be here assistant still:

What treachery entendest thou mad bedlem to commit?
Thy husband will thou murder wreatch? whose flickering fame does flit:
From east to west: whose bright renown the earth could not contain
But raysde aloft, from marble Skies it does rebounde again:
The mother Earth shall ryfe in arms for to revenge his grave.
His former Stepsiers stock hereby the overthrow shall have:
And all Aetolia royal blood will feel an vtterfall:
In quarrel of thy Hercules the world conspier shall.
Then silly wight how many plagues shall thou alone abide?
But be it that from the face of man thou might thy body hyde.
Yet Jove the lightning leames of heaven does hold in armed hand,
Behold the flying fyry flakes in ranckes all ready stand:
And threatening thunders thumping thick do bounce out all the day.
Deaths dungeon (that thou do defy) full duly scaare thee may.
For there his Uncle vmpyre sits: Myche where thou may vnspyde.
And every where thou shall perceive the Gods to him (...).

I grant it despert deed, whereto despair now does me drive.

Die sure thou shall.

And die I will, (as presently I live)
The loyal spouse of Hercules. And ere this night do pass,
Day shall not see that Deianire a living Wydow was.
Nor of my spousall head an whore shall get the interest.
The dawning day shall sooner make the morning peer in West,
Unto the eastwarde Indians the ysy poale shall melt,
And freezing Scithian first shall fry with flames that he has felt
Of Phoebus fervent wheel: ere me Thessalia Trulls shall see
Diuorst: my brydall blase shall with my blood iquenched be:
And either let him murdered be, or take away my Life.
So soothly let him count among the foiled flendes his Wife.
Among Alcides labors let me reckned be as on.
His love in heart I hold, until the utter gasp be gone.
Thus vndiuorst (not vureuengde) I will to Hercles tomb.
It Iole be with child by him, i will tear it from her womb,
And rent it with these paws of mine. Yea in the wedding place,
I flying at her fearce will set my tallantes in her face:
Let him not spare in raumping rage a sacrifyce to make
Of me upon his wedding day, when he his Trull does take,
So that I falling down may light on Jones senceles coarse
He dies a happy man, that first has quelde his foes by force.

O wretched might why do thou thus increase thy fuming heat:
And feed thy fury wittingly least hap should thee defeat.
He loved Lady Iole, but while her fathers crown
Stood florishyng in royal state and were not bartred down,
And as unto the daughter of a King be suter was,
But when from type of hawty pomp she did to thraldom pass
He shook her of hot love was coold, and now her bitter bale
Would not allow the wrack ^^ kele to bear to hie a sale:
Vnleeful things that should be shund we gredely desire.
But matters meeter for our state we seldom do require.
The pytying of adversity does often enkindle more
The fervent fittes of love, and this perhappe does urge him sore,
To see her reaft of natyue soil, it may his fancy touch,
Her hair not tuct with tresses trim, nor dect with golden ouche
Perhap the man with pity pricked does love her for her carc.
Unto his noble heart to pity prisoners it is not rare.
The sister dear of Priamus (fair Lady Hesyon) he
Did cause to Thelamon the Greek in wedlock knit to be:
Account how many wives before, and maidens did he love,
And raung'd abroad to cool the rage that Venus brand did move.
Fair Auge maid of Arcadye ententiue set to lead
Dianas drunce, by force of him did leese her maiden head.
And yet no token could she show nor pledge of any jove,
What shall I speak of any more, or does it me behoue,
To pra^e what prankes he played with fifty daughters in one night.
And yet how soon of such a pange he over came the might,
He set much store by Omphale of Lidia land the Queen,
When like a guest on Timolus the mount he has been seen.
He was so prict with Cupids dart, and caught in Venus trap,
That tucke in woman's weed he sat with distaf in his lap
And spoon the flax with sombling fyst, and rudely thumbde the threede
And flong from him the syons case the price of noble deed.
With tresses trick on plaited locks he wayled as a maid
With myrre his ftiseled poale was smeard, and curied bush was brayde,
Thus every where as fancy flits, the fondling dotes in love.
But in such sort as easily he can the same remove.

But they whom fickle fancies (...) have taynt, do learn at last
In link of love by tract of time to fix affiaunce fast.

Trow ye that he this captive queen, and on whom he do see
The daughter of his deadly foe, will more esteem then thee?

As gladsome groves at Prime of spring in beauties pride are seen
When fresshest warmth the naked twigges does clad in pleasant green.
But when could Boreas boysteous blast the pipling puffes does stop
Of south wind sweet, rough winter powles the naked busshes top:
The barewoode with misshapen stumpes does show a withered Face,
Even so my beauty marching forth a season on his Race
Still fades away, and evermore abates his glimsing gloss,
And what so ever was in me, by care is come to loss.
And that which erst by fansy fed the greedy gazing eyes,
Is fallen away by bearing child: so often it droupes, and dies.
And since I came to mothers state. I faded fast away.
And wrinckled age with furrowed face steps in with quick decay.
But yet this bondmaydes ^eauter fresh her sorrow better brooks.
Her comely countnaunce crazied is with lean and wanny looks.
And yet for all her kark and care amid her deep ^istresse.
She bears a glimse of beauty bright, and favor nothing less.
Her heavy hap, and frowning rate can nothing from her pluck.
Save Scepter from her royal hand by all this lowering luck.
By means of this first faynting fear did lodge within my breast,
That makes me wake the weary nights, and leese my kindly rest.
In all men's eyes at first I seemde to be a blessed Wife.
And Ladies all at our estate repining very ryfe
Did wyshe my watch in spite of fate what S^eps^er shall I hope
As match in majesty to Jove within the heavenly coape?
Dear fosterdame whom shall I make my feere in spowsall bed?
Although Euryst that Hercules to all these toils has led,
Do link with me in bridal bands, my state shall be impayrde.
It Is small worth to deserve to be to kingly wedlock rayrde.

But Issue is the thing that does in marriage kindell love.

And Issue is the thing that does in marriage malice move.

This while the bondmayde to thee for present shall be braught

Lo he ^etreth up and down with pryncely pore full haught,
And buckles fast about his Loins the lively Lions case,
Who does inuest the wretched with the right of kingly mace,
D^posing those from honors type that late so lofty sat.
And pestereth his puissaunt paws with huge dvnweildy bat,
Of whose exploytes, and maarciale acts the Seres sing aloof,
And all enclosde in Ocean sea thereof have perfect proof
Is now became an amorous knight: the honor of his name
Does nothing touch his conscience, to tender once his ^ame.
He roueth through the world, as on that does no whit esteem,
Although that men as soon to Jove shall him unworthy deem.
Nor like the man whose credit through the towns of Greece is great.
He seeks to compass his des^er, to work a Lovers feate.
With single Dames is his delight: If any him deny,
Then to attain his lawless lust by rigor does he try.
With men he fares frantickly, to others smart and blame
He win^ his Wy^es, his folly frail is cloackt by virtues name.
The noble City Oechalie is made a razed town.
The Sun twixt morn and even did set, in one day up, and down*
One day did see it stand in state, the same did see it fall.
These bloody broils, and wasting wars of Love proceeded all,
As often as parents unto him deny their daughters dear,
So often I warrant them they need his wrathful fury fear.
So often a man with Hercules shall be at deadly food:
As he denies his stepfather to be by joining blood.
If he may not be son in law, then does he rage, and rave:
Why do these guiltless hands of mine still keep him from his grave,
Till he dissemble frantic fits, to bend his aiming bow,
And deaths wound on my child, and me with bloody hands bestow?
Thus hawty Hercules was wont his wedlockes to deuorce.
Yet naught there is, that law of guilt on him might have recorse.
He makes the world blame Juno, for the ills he has commit.
O rigor, of my rage why do thou quallify my fit?
Now must thou set thy hands on work, to it while thy hands be hot.

Thy husband will thou slay?

Him who^ his Leman lewd has got.

But yet, he is the son of Jove.

And so Alemenas son.

With stroke of steel?

With stroke of steel if it cannot be done,
Then for to bring his death to pass, i will set for him a snare.

What kind of madness may it be that makes thee thus to fare?

Such as my husband has me taught.

Will thou thy spouse destroy,
On whom y^ stepdames spite yet had no power to work annoy?

The wrathes of heavenly minds do make the^ blessed on who^ they light
So does not spite of mortal men.

Oh silly wretched wight
For bear thy rage, and fear the worst, man's force may not assail
Him, that against the power of hell, and death could once prevail.

I Will venture on the dint of swerd.

Thy wrath (dear foster child)
Is greater then the crime, that has thy Hercules defilde.
With egall malice measure saultes. Alas why do thou bring
So great and sore, a penalty upon so swale a thing?
Let not thy grief be greater, then the sorrow thou sustaynes.

Set you it light that with our wedlock linkt an harlot raygnes ^
Nay rather think it still to much, that does thy sorrows breed.

And is the Jove of Hercules revolt from thee in deed?

It Is not revolt, dear foster Dame, fast in my bones it sticks:
But ire boyles hoate in burning breast, when love to anger pricks.

It is almost a common guise, that wedded wives do haunte,
Their husbands hearts by magic Art, and witchcraft to enchaunte.
In winter could I charmed have the woods, to make them sprout.
And forced the thunder dint recoyle, that has bin boulting out.
With waltring surges I have shook the seas amid the calm.
I smoothed have the wrestling waves, and land down every walme.
The dry ground gaped has like gulphs, and out new springs have gusht.
The roaring rocks have quaking sturd, and none therest has pusht.
Hell glounimy gales I have brast cape, where grisly ghosts all hushed
Have stood and aunswering at my charm the goblins grim have scoulde.
The threefolde headed hounde of hell with barking throats has houlde.
Thus both the seas, the land, the heavens, and hell bow at my beck.
Noone day to midnight, to and froe turns at my charming check.
At my enchauntment every thing declynes from natures law.
Our charm shall make his stomach stoop, and bring him more in awe.

What herbs do grow in Pontus sea? Or else on Pindus hill?
To trownce this machelesse champton, where shall I find the ill?
The magic vearse ^uchaunts the Moon from Starry skies to ground,
And fruictfull harvest is thereby in barren winter found.
The whisking flames of lightning leames often sorcery does stay.
And noonetyde ropsy tur^y ^ost does dim the dusky day.
And leave the welkin to the stars, and yet not cause him stxsoupe.

The Gods them selves by charm of love have forced bin to droupe.

Perhap he shall be won by one, and yield to her the spoil.
So love shall be to Hercules the last and latest toil.
By all the host of heavenly powers, and as thou see me fear,
The secrets that I shall attempt, in council see thou bear:

What may it be, that thou would have me keep so secretly?

No broyle of blades, no prive cote, no fiery force perdye:

I you assure I can conceal, if mischief none be meant.
For then the keeping close of it is sure a lewbe intent.

Then look about, if none be here, our council to betray:
Look round about, on all sides cast thy countnaunce every way.

Behold the place is safe enough from any listening ear.)

Beside the place of our estate there is a secret nooke,
A covert corner for our talk, that sonneshyne never took.
Neither at morn, nor evening tide, when Titans blaze does quench.
And he in ruddy western wave his ^iry wheels does drench.
There secret lies the privy proof of Hercules amorous thought,
I Will tell thee all dear foster dame: This witchcraft Nessus taught,
Whom Ixion engendered of a mysty grouing cloud,
Where Pindus hauiy hill his top among the stars does shrowde,
And other stipe does heave his Crest about the ryding rack
When Achelous over laid, with many a thumping thwack
Of Hercles club, did shift him self to every kind of shape,
And trial made of all his sleights none served to escape,
At length he turnde him self into the likeness of Bull.
And so was fowly vanquished in form of horny scull.
(While Hercules being Conqueror did me his Wife enjoy.)
Returning home to Greece again, it happened Even lake
To ouerflow the drowned marshe and channel to forsake,
And strongly streamde to seas he runns, and swells above his banks.
And Nessu^ used to pass the poole, and search the croking crankes
As Ferryman demaundes his fare, and bare me on his back,
And wading forward brake the Waves, and surges of the lake.
At length yet Nessus waded out unto the farther shore,
Yet Hercules had swam but half the river and no more:
And plyde it hard to cut the stream: but when espied had he,
That Hercules was far behind, Madam (quoth he) to me.
(Be thou my booty, and my wife, and clasping me about)
Away he flings, and Hercules besturres him mauger Wave:
Though Ganges gulf and Ister stream (quoth he) thou traitor slave
Might roon in on, yet shi^ to escape them both, well could I make,
And in thy have a shaft shall soon they running over take:
And ere he spoke the word, his arrow flew out of his bow,
And wrought a wound in Nessus ribbs, he could no farther go.
It sped him sure, to look for death. He cried, well away.
The baggage running from the wound reserved as he lay,
And putting it into his hoof the which undoing, he
In cutting yt with his own hand, did give it unto me.
And thus at latter gasp he said, the witches have me toulde,
That love may charmed be by this, to have and keep his hold.
The conning witch dame Michale did teach Thessalia dames,
Who only forced the Moon to stoop to her from heavenly frames.
Therefore (quoth he) at any time when hateful whores abuse
Thy spoufall bed, or waueryng man do haunt to any stews
Then with this salve annoint his shyrtes, and let it see no son,
But keep it close in corners dark, the blood then shall not shonne
His strength: and thus full suddenly he left his talk with rest:
And deadly sleep with senceles death his feeble lims oppressed.
Thou Dame to whom in hope of trust my secrets all bewray,
On, that the poison soakt into the vesture bright, it may
Preace through his limbs, unto his heart, and sink through every bone,

I will dispatch it all in have, make thou thy earnest moan
Unto the God, whose tender hand his steadfast darts does weild,

I thee beseech that art of earth and heaven in honor held.
And thou that shakest burning boltes, thou cursed and cruel boy,
Whose eluish weapons make thy mother fear thy sharp annoy.
Now arm thy hand with speedy shaft not of the slender sort,
But biggest boultes, with which as yet thou have assault no fort,
We need no little shaft that may stir Hercules to love
Bring cruel hands and force thy how his depest draught to prove
Now, now draw forth thy shaft wherewith thou caused cruelly
The burning breast of Jove by fy^tes of seruent love to frye.
When as the God his thonder bolt and lightning laid assyde,
Began boalne with bumpes on fo rehead big: and throught the wave he hid,
And swam with Europ on his back in shape of horny Bull.
Now power down love, and therwithall let Hecles heart be full.
If Ioles beauty kyndle heat and Hercles heart does move,
Quench thou these coals, and force him glow with us in lawful love.
Full often the thunder thumping Jove has stouped to thy yoke:
And him that weildes the moary mace of black Auerne to smoke.
Thy flames enforce, and ^ake the Lord of glummy Stigian lake:
But only match thou Hereules, and of him triumph take
O Jove, whose wrath more wrackful is then yreful Iunoes might.
The charm is made in perfect force is al our medcine right,
Wherein the shirt shall steeped be that wearyed many wighte.
Whose hands on Pallas distasse spoone the weary Web with pain.
And it for Hercules avail shall brincke up all the bane.
And with my charm I Will strengthen it. But lo ye in the nick
Defte Lycas comes here at hand who will dispatche it quick:
But tell him not what force it has least he the guilt betray.

Alas that faith to kings dwells not in howses of estate:
Have Lycas here this shirt, the which my hands have spun of late,
While Hercules at randon roues, and ouershot with wine
Does rudely dandle on his lap the Lidiane Lady fine.
Now doates he after Iole: but this his boiling rage
That burns in his breast I will with curtesy assuage,
For curtesy conquers canckred churles. See thou my spouse desire,
He spare the Shirt, until he set the Franckinfence on fire,
And offer up his sacrifice, and wear his Garlond gray
Of Popler boughs on wreathed ^^ckes. And I will go my way
To The royal Gods, and will beseeke the cruel Cupids dame.
Ye ladies and companions that with me heather came,
Now force the fountaynes of your tears from watered eyes to roon,
To wayle our Country Calydon on every side undone.

O DEIANIRE dear daughter of our King
OENEVS late, to see thy frowning fates
Woe after woe thus down on thee to fling,
It irks our hearts, that were thy foster mates.
O woeful wight it pitieth us to see,
Thy wedlock in this tickle state to be.
We Lady, we, that with thee wonted were
With flapping Oar on Acheloe to row,
When having past the spryng time of the year,
With Channel smoth he newely wexeth low,
And makes again his swelling surges calm,
And boobling runs at Ebb withouten walme.
Through weal and woe we still with thee remain,
And now what grief so ever thou fear in mind,
Account thou us as partners of thy pain,
For commonly when Fortune turns the wind.
And makes thee bear thy beaten Sail but low,
Then friendship ebbes, where it before did flow.
And who so guydes the sway of golden mace,
Though people thick do haunte his stately court,
And in at hundred gates do preace a pace,
Yea though that thou mayntaine so great a port,
To ga^de thee with this garrison, yet shall
Thou scarcely find one faithful heart of all.
In painted porche, and gates of gilded bowers
The lurcking hagge Eryn her tuskes does whet:
And sturring s^rife with quarreling face she lowers.
The portly doar ^^ es no s^^ner o^pe are set,
But treason black, pale envy deep deceight,
With privy knyfe of murder step in straight.
And when the Prince appears in open place,
To show him self before his subjects sight,
Swelling despite attends on his grace:
As often as dawning day remoues the night,
And every time the sun at West goes down,
They look another man should claim the Crown.
Few hearts love kings, not few their kingly might:
The glorious show of courtly countenance
Bewitcheth many: where one sets his delight
How next the king he may him self advance.
That through high streets he may as lord of rule
With lofty looks, ride mounted on his Mule.
Ambitious heat enflames his hawty breast.
Another would his greedy hunger staunch
With gubbes of goulde, (and though he it possessed)
Rich Arabie serves not his pyning paunch,
Nor western India (aworlde for to behoulde)
Where Tagus flows with streams of glittring goulde.
The covetous charle, the greedy gnoffe in deed,
In whom from cradell nature so it plants,
No hourded heaps his endless hunger feed.
In plenty pines the wreatch, in wealth he wantes.
Some other fondlings fansy thus does guide,
To fawn on kings, and still in court to bide.
As one disdayning like a Country mome
And crooked clown, the plowe to follow still:
Although the dingthryfte daily keep at home
A thousand drudges, that his land do Till:
Yet wantes his will and wissheth wealth therefore,
Only to waste on other men the more.
Another claweth and flattreth fast the King,
By clymbing up to tread down every wight:
And some at least to blookam Feast to bring.
And thus he strives to arm himself with might
In blood: but of their ship does Fortune fail,
When safe they think to floate with highest sail.
Whom Moon at morn on top of Fortunes wheel
High swayed has seen, at fullness of renown,
The glading sun has seen his Scepter reele,
And him from high fall topsey turuey down.
At morn full merry, blithe, in happy plight,
But whelmde in woes and brought to bale ere night.
These sildome meet hoare hayres and happy days:
The Lord that lies on stately crimsen bed
Sleeps more in fear, then snoring drudge, that lays
Upon the country clod his drowsy head.
In goulden roofes, and hauty courts they keep,
Whose dreadful dreams do make them starte in sleep.
The purple roabes lies waking many a night,
And slombers not, when homely rags do rest.
O if as at a Grate espy we might
The sorrows, shrined in a Princes breast.
What pangues, what storms, what terror, O what hell
In sighing hearts or proud estates does dwell?
The Iryshe Seas do nener roar so ruff,
When wrestling waves, and swelling surges ryfe,
That hoysted are with sturdy northern puff,
As fearful Fansyes do their minds aggryse.
But he sighs not, nor combred is with care,
Whom Fortune has bequeath'de a slender share.
In wooden dishe and black beche Bole he swills,
And heaues it not to mouth with quaking hand.
With homely fare his hungry Mawe he fills,
And leares not back for fear of those that stand
With naked swerdes: but Kings in goulden cup
Wine blent with blood (most dreadful draughts) do sup.
In dainty dishe the poison bayte is laid,
And treason lurkes amid the sugared wine
A^ every bit they quake, and are a frayde,
The sword will fall, that hanges but by a twyne,
And ever as he liftes his head, and drynkes,
The rebels Knyfe is at his throat he thinks.
Such flattring joys these happy worldlinges have.
Their outward pomp pretends lusty lives.
When inward^ly they drowpe, as does the slave
That pines in pangues fast clogde in goulden guies.
Strive not in have, to climb the whirling wheel,
For hasty climers often in haste do reele.
Mean dames defy both peareles and glittring spanges,
And goulden chains with rubies rich beset,
Nor at their ears do massy Iewelles hang
With turkey stones: nor pranked proud they iet
Iu murrey gowns: nor does the wool they wear
Of Crymsen dye the costly color bear
Neither in Tissew, nor silken garments wrought
With needle, nor embroadred Roabes they go:
And yet this state is free from Jealous thought,
Their wedding is not unto them their woe.
When thousand storms in Ladies hearts do dwell
By wedlock breach, that breeds their noysom hell.
Who so he is that shunnes the middle way,
Shall never find fast footing any where.
The wilful lad that needs would have a day.
And wayghty charge of Fathers charyot bear:
While he from wonted ways his Iades does iaunce,
Among strange stars they pricking forward praunce,
Enforcing them with Phoebus flames to frye,
Whose roaming wheels refuse the beaten rutt:
Thus both himself, and all the Cristall sky
In peril of the soulthring fire he put.
So hawty minds that clymbe above their skill,
Do work their own decay, and others ill.
While Daedalus in flying through the air
Did keep the midst between the sky and ground
He could in safe to Italy repair,
And gave no gulf his name by being dround.
But Icarus presumes to mount on hie,
And stryues above the fethered fowls to fly.
And scorns the guyding of his fathers train.
And in his flight will coape to lofty son:
Which molt his wings so down he drops again
Into the seas, whereby his name they woone
Thus proud attemptes of hauty clyming hier
Receive shrewde falls to quit their fond desire.
Let other mount aloft let other sore,
As happy men in great estate to sit.
By flattring name of Lord I set no store:
For under shore my little keele shall flitt:
And from rough wyndes my sails feign would I keep,
Least I be driven into the dangerous deep.
Proud Fortunes rage does never stoop so low
As little roades, but them she ouerflyes
And seeks amid main seas her force to show
On argosies, whose tops do reach the skies
But lo, here comes our Lady Deianire,
Straught of her wits, and full of furious ire,
ALas through all my quiueryng joints
a running fear does rest,
My staryng hair stands stiff upright
and in my quaking breast
Deep terror dwelles, and eake my heart,
with dread amazde does pant,
With swelling veins my liver beats,
as when the wynd does want
Asswagd in calmy day, and yet
the raging Seas do rore
Whose wrestling waves were raised aloft
by Southren blastes before.
So yet my wits be tocksicate, although my fear be gone:
Thus God turmoyles us when he means to cloy the unhappy one.
Thus proud attempts bedasht at length,
Oh wretch, O careful wight,
What mischief may it be wherewith thou art so sore affright.

The shirt with Nessus ban^ imbrewde no souer hence was s^nt,
And wretched woman that I am toth closet straight I went.
(My mind mistrusts I know not what, and treason dath surmyse)
And Nessus by the heat bewrayed, that faynted was the blood:
The God foreshewed that here the force of all the treason stood:
For by good hap the fomy glede no foggy cloud does dim.
But with full power of burning beams he shyned blasing brim.
Scant yet I can for feeble fear unlock my fastened ^^wes,
The scorching heat does d^ye away, and up by force it draws
The soaked blood that being laid amid the frying flame
And boiling heat of shyning son did shrink before the same:
Wherein the shyrt was steept, and all the royal robe imbrewde:
I cannot show the villainy wherewith it was indewde:
For as the Eastern wynd does force the winter snow to melt,
Or lukewarm South when in the spring from Mimas mount they swelt
As Lucas else that fronters on Ionian sea, a land
Does break the wave the beaten surge lies foaming on the strand
Or by the warmth of heavenly heat the frankincense does drop
So all the venim wastes away, and melts every croppe.
And while I wonder still hereon the wonder shrynkes away
But with a froath it spo^^es the ground, and there the poison lay,
It rotts the cloth: my woman boalne and sweld does follow me,
And shakes her head* my son as one astonished I see:
And hying hither all in have declare what news ye bring.

GO mother go, seek out aloof
if place of bydyng dwell
Beyond the ground both goulfe and stars
beyond both heaven and hell,
Fly mother far beyond the bounds
of Hercules his toil
A mischief great I know not what
within my breast does boil:

Unto the royal temples of dame Iunoes triumph hie
These will allow the sanctuary though other it deny

What heavy hap is it that may annoy my guiltless ghost

Oh mother, O that diamond of the world that pillar post
Whom fate as Jove's lieuetenaunt hear have placed for the nones
Is dead: and Nessus burning bane deuouers Hercles boanes
The daunter of the brutish beasts he conquering knight before
Is conquered now: he mournes, he walls, what ask ye any more

We wretches love the order of our wretchedness to hear,
Tell me the state now of our stock what countnance does it bear:
O stock, O sylly wretched stock now shall I be esteemd,
A widow now, a cost of now, and now a beggar deemd.

Thou do not languish all alone for Hercules yes dead:
For whom the eyes of all the world have cause their tears to shed.
Count not thy fate allotted thee alone: now all our kind
Do howl and mourn for him whom thou beway lest in thy mind,
Thou suffrest grief, the smart whereof belonges to every land
Although the sower ^ast thereof first happen to thy hand
Thou careful caytiffe do not wayle for Hercules alone.

Speak, speak, how nigh to Deathward was my dear Alcides go^?

Death whom in his own empire he had conquered before,
Did shrink from him and fate durst not allow a deed so sore,
And Clotho she perhap put out her rock with trembling arm
As one that hastening Hercles death, did fear to do such harm,
O day, O dismal day, and shall even Hercules the great
Pass thus to death, and silent shades and to a worser seat

Is he think you already dead or may I dye before)
Speak on, if yet he be not dead

Euboea that does rise,
With hauty crest ringes every where, and Caphar rock likewise
Deuydeth Hellespontus sea and turns that side to south,
Whereas it bides the boysteous blastes of Boreas wyndy mouth:
Euripus bendes his wandering stream and winds in creakes about
His crooked course seuentymes and does as often break it out:
While Phoebus drencht his wecye teame amid the Western wave
(Here on a rock above the reach of clouds a temple brave)
Of Caenaei Jove show bright while all the beasts for sacrifice
At th'alter stood, and through the wood the noise began to rise,
Of all the herd: then of he put he matterd Lions case,
And likewise did discharge him of his houge and heavy mace
And easde his shoulder from the burden of his quiver light.
Then tuckt in your attire he shone among the people bright
With ougly locks, and on the alter made the fire flame
Receive (quoth he) these fruits (O sire) though fire send the same
And not the harvest Sith: but let with frankincense good store
The fire burn that far the rich Arabyan therefore
Does gather out of Saba trees for Phoebus sacrifyce
The earth (quoth he) is now at peace, so be both sea and skies
All beasts be conquered, and I am victor come again.
Lay down thy lightning leames (O Jove) in fear thou need not reign
In midst of his prayers thus whereat I was aghast,
He fell to sighs and grievous groans, and all the skies at last
With dreadful crying loud he filles Even as the braynsick bull.
When with the axe in wound he scapes does fill the temples full
Of roaring noise.
Or as the thunder thrown from heaven does rumble in the skies,
Even so the seas and stars of heaven does Hercles shake with cries
Both Calpe clyue, and Cyclas isle well hard his yellyng have,
Here Caphat rocks there all the woods thereof an Echo gave.
We saw him weep, the people thought his former franucke fyttes
Had now again as erst they did bereave him of his wi^tes
His servant scatter then for fecare, while he with flaming eyes,
Al staryng stands with tleaming looks among them all he pryes
For Lyca: him alone he does pursew, who in his arm
With trembling hand the alter held and escaped all the harm,
By dying first for faynting fear, and while Alcyde* held
The quaking Carkas in his hand thou shall (quoth he) be queld
And beaten with this fist of mine, O Gods eternal raygne*
Wretch Licas kills Hercules, and has his conqueroure slain,
But ^o another slaughter yet: for Hercules again
Killes Lycas: thus the sacrifyce of Gods with blood they stayne,
With Lycas thus his labors and thrown up to heaven they say,
That with his dropping blood the clouds he stained all the way.
Even as the pitched dart of Get with pith does score the skies,
Or as the whirling sting of Creete does make the p^ller rise:
So swift he mounted up to heaven, but down his body dropte,
And as his Carkas fell, among the rocks his neck it chopped.
The grave prepared for their corpse (quoth Hercules) bestill,
I am no brainsteke frantic man, but lo this defpret ill
More noylome is theu rage or wrath, it caleth much my will
To wrecke my rage upon my self, his mallady he scant
Bewryes: but fares frantt^kly: and he himself does rent
His limbs, and ryflyng them, with mighty hand a sunder tears,
And strives to strip him self of all th'apparell that he wears,
And only this was it, of all the things that I do know,
That past the power of Hercules yet stands he pulling so
And plucketh of his limbs withal the vesture does not linne
To bring of lumpes of filthy flesh the shyrt sticks to the skyne
But what should ayl^ the poy^on rank none knows what, nor why
And yet there is good cause it er of: now grouelyng does he lie
And beats his face against the ground to water now he hyes,
But water cannot cool his heat, and now to shore he plyes.
And for his sucoure seckes to seas, at lengri, his men him calth
We holding him (alas the whilst were able him to match
Now in a keele amid the seas we launched were aloof,
And Hercles payse was hosted with a little southern puff
My Ghost then left my careful coarse and darkness dimd my sight
Why stay I wreche? why does this dreary deed make me afright.
Her coapefellow dame Juno does reclayme, and Jove his son,
The world must render him* then do as much as may be done,
And boar my body with a sword such sower sauce is dew
To her, whose cursed caytiffe hand her love so lightly slew.
O Jove with fire and lightning flash destroy thy wretched Niece.
Let not thy mighty hand be armed with a slender piece.
Let brast the boult from skies wherewith thou would Hydra burn.
If Hercles had not bin thy son thereof to serve the turn
Strike me with v^couth pestilence, and with such weapon smite,
As may be far more yrkesome plague then all my stepdames spite.
Drive forth those deadly darts that erst young Phaethon overthrew
When be full crancke in fiery carte, about the heavens flew:
For thus by slaying Hercules, eake Nations slain I have
What need thou Deianire of Gods a tool of death to crave.
Now trouble not thy stepster Jove, think scorn may Hercles wife
To wish for death, for to her heart her hand shall set the knyfe
Dispatch then quickly with the blade, yet let thy blade alone,
For who with weapon ends their life it is long ere they be gone
I will be headlong hurled from a rock as hie as skies.
The Oeta hill this shall be it, where first the son does rise,
Thence will I throw my body down, the edge of brasten rock
Shall cleave my corpse, and every crag shall give a broosing knock.
My hand shall hang torn by the way the rugged mountain side
Shall with the gushing bubbles of my dropping blood be did
On death were vengeance small, though small yet may it be delayde.
What despret death I should attempt it makes my heart dismayde:
Alas, alas that Hercles swerd within my chamber stuck
Then well were I if for to dye on that it were my luck.
It is enough if one right hand do bring us both to grave.
Come near, come near ye Nations, now let all people have
In readiness, both stone and fire the same to throw at me,
Now hold your hands, and take ye to your tools for I am she
That of your succor spoiled you now cruel Kaysars may
All uncontrolled tyrantlike, in kingdoms weilde the sway,
Now every mischief may start up, and not rebuked be.
The alters now shall up again that wonted wers to see
A bloody offering like him self in kind that offer should.
Thus have I made the guilty gap to let in bloodshed boulde
I render you to tyrants kings, bugges, beasts, and grysely devils.
By taking him away that should revenge you of these euilles.
O spouse thou of the thunderer and can you yet forbear
Will thou not fling thy flames from heaven as did thy brother dear?
Dispatch me hence sent up to Jove, will thou not me destroy
The greatest praise that thou might win then shall thou not enjoy
Nor lusty tryumphe: I am she that bear the name to be
The daughter of the man that would in prowes caape with thee.

Why will thou stayne thy stock which has vntaynted been before,
This il procedes of ygnorance although it be full sore:
He is not gylty that committes the gylte not with his will.

Well may he err of ignorance that favors his ill
And spares himself: my self of death most worthy I do deem.

He does condemn himself to dye that needs will guylty seem.

Death can deceive no one but such as innocents may be.

Will thou forsake the glorious son?

The son forsakes me.

Wretch will thou cast away thy life.

Yea though it be to death,
I follow will my Hercules

He has both life and breath

When he perceived him ouermatcht he hastened his decay.

Will thou forgo thy son, and eake prevent thy dying day?

Her self has lived long enough who buried has her child.

And will thou follow on to death thy spouse

yea Ladies mild
Before their husbands use to dye.

Thy self thou do accuse
Of guylt if thou condemn thy self.

No gylty one does use
To take reuengemente of themselves.

But those are pardoned (...)
That do oftend of ygnoraunce and not of peuish will
Who will condemn the deed he does?

Each man does seek to shun
His lot when spite of frowning fate against him seems to run.

And he for whom thou languishest, with arrow slow his wife
Hight Megara, and did destroy his tender childrens life.
When as a braynsicke beast in hand he tossed his knarrye mace,
That squeasde the snake in Lerna lake before his fathers face.
He played thryse the murderer, himself yet he forgave
And for the heinous gylt he did when frenzy made him rave
He purgde himself in Cynips spring toward the Southern poale
And in the water bathed his hand again to make him hoale.
Now whether will thou caytiffe wretch, why do thou dam thy hands

In condemnation of these the ghost of Hercles stands.
I mean to plague the treachery.

Your Hercules well I know,
Perhap he will be hear again and master al his woe:
Then shall your slaked grief unto yobr Hercules give place.

They say the serpents poison does deuowen him apace
The poison of his wicked Wyle his lusty lims destroys.

And think ye it to be the serpents bane that him annoyes,
That he cannot escape who bare the brunt of it alive,
And how to pare of Hydraes heads he could full well contryue
When as the victour stood with grinning teath amid the mood,
And all his body slauerde foul with venomous spit and blood,
And shall the Centaur Nessus goare against the man prevail
That made thy pithy strength it self of Nessus for to quayle.

In vain ye rescue her that is of purpose set to dye
Therefore I have determinde with my self this life to fly
And long enough he lived has that may with Hercles dye.

I do beseech thee humbly for this gray and hoary head,
And for these pappes that as thy Mother have thee nourished,
Remove the fervent sits that cage within thy boiling breast,
And suffer not these despret thoughts of death in thee to rest.

Who would persuade a wretch to live. He has a cruel heart?
And though that death be unto me a great and grievous smart:
Yet unto other some it is an e^s^ing of their pain.

O wreatch excuse thy handy work, and say at last again,
It Is ignorance that did the deed, and not the wilful Wife.

It wilt be quit whereas the infernal ^^endes shall stint the strife
And quit my guilty ghost: my conscience does my hands condem.
But Pluta Prince of glummy goulph shall purge from slaughter them:
Before thy banks I will appear forgetful Lethes Lake,
And being then a doleful ghost my husband will I take.
But thou that wields the scepter black of dark internal skies
Apply thy toil: the heinous guilt that nons durst enterprise,
This ignorance has ouercom, Dame Juno never dare
To take away our Hercules. Thy plunging plagues prepare,
Let Sisiphs stone on my neck force my stouping shoulders shrynke,
And let the fleeting licour from my gaping gums to synke.
Yea let it mock my thyrsty throat when as I mean to drink,
And thou that rackes Ixion King of Thessayle O thou Wheel,
My heinous hands deserved have thy swinging sway to feel,
And let the greedy gripe scratch out these guts on either side,
If Danaus pitchers cease: by me the rome shall be supplide.
Set open hell, take me Medea as (...) of thy giult.
This hand of mine, then both of thine more cruel blood has spilt
More then thou did as in respect of mother to thy thylde.
Or loking to thy brothers ghost whose gore has thee defylde,
Have with the Lady thou of Thrace for such a cruel wife,
And the Althe that burnt the brand of Meleagers life.
Receive thy daughter now, deny me not thy babe to be:
Why such a one should quayle by you, some reason let us see:
Ye honest matrons that enjoy the groves of holy wood
Against me shut the heavens, or such whose hands with husbands blood
Have been imbrewde, if any of the fifty sisters dyre
Defying honest duty all that wedlock did require:
But desprat dames with goary blades stood armde: in me let them
See and allow their bloody hands that other will condem.
I will go get my self among the troop of cruel wives
But they will shun such gylty hands as shred their husbands lives.
O valiant spouse, a guil^^sse ghost, but gylty hands I have
Ah silly woman, woe is me, that given light credit have
O traitor Nessus while I meant by Centaures subtle charm
To draw from Iole Hercles love my self sustain the harm.
Hence Phoebus hence, and thou O slickring life of her that lackes
Her Hercules and give day to wretches in their wrackes.
This is a dismal day: to thee Small penance yield I will
And life with all: my woeful fate shall I continue still
Deferryng death, O spouse that of thy hand I may be slain,
And does their any spark of life yet in thy breast remain?
Or can thy hand yet draw the bow Sarmacian shaft to cast,
Do weapons cease, and have thy feeble hands given up at last
Thy bow? but if thy hardy wife to thee a tool may reach
I long to perysh of thy hand, mine hour yet will I stretche
Like gyltlesse Licas mangle me disperse in other towns
My corpse, and hurl me (...) world beyond the trauayles bownes.
Trounce me like monster Arcadie or ought that did rebel,
And yet thou shall do naught but that becommes an husband well.

I pray you mother spare your self, forgive your fatal lot,
If ye offend of ygnoraunce, then blame deserve ye not

If thou regard true honesty, thy wretched mother slay.
Why trembles thus thy fearful hand, why lokest thou away?
Such sin shall be a sacrifyce why dastard do thou fear?
I spoylde thy father Hercules, this hand, this hand aleare
Has murdered him whereby I have done thee a more despyte,
Then joy I did, in that my womb did bring thee first to light.
If yet thou know not how to kill, then practice first on me.
If as thou like within my throat thy blade shall sheathed be^
Or if to paunch thy mother soon thou mean to take in hand
To yield her dreadlesse ghost to thee thy mother still shall stand,
It shall not wholly be thy deed, by thee it shall be done,
And caused by my will to be. Art thou Alcides soon
And all affrayd? so shall thou never great exployts atchieue
Nor pass the world such feats of arms and sleightes for to contriue.
If any monster should be bred thy fathers courage show,
And to it with vnfeareful arm, lo ouerchargde with woe
My breast lies bare unto thy hand. Stryke, I thy gylt forgive
The f^endes infernal for their sin thy soul shall never grieve.
What yerking noise is this we hear* what hagge here have we fownd^
That bears about her writhen locks these ugly adders wound,
And one her yrksome temples twain her blackysh ^innes do wagge.
Why chase ye me with burning brandes Megera filthy hagge*
Alcides can but vengeance ask, and that I will him get
But have the judges dyre of hell for yt in counsel set
But of the dreadful dongeon doors I see thunfoulding leaves
What ancient sier is he that on his tatred shoulder heaues
Th'un weiloy stone that borne toth top again does downward reele
Or what is ^e that spraules his lims upon the whirling wheel
Lo hear stood ougly Tisiphon with stern and ghastly face,
And did demand with steaming eyes the manner of the case.
O spare thy strypes Megera spare, and with thy brandes away,
The Offense I did was meant in love, but whether do I sway
The ground does sink, the roof does crack, whether went this raging route,
Now all the world with gasing eyes stand staring me about
On every side the people grudge and call for their defense.
Be good to me O nations whither, shall I get me hence?
Death only is my load of rest there may my sorrows bide
I do protest the fiery wheels that Phoebus charyot guide.
That hear I dye and leave the world, there is Hercles yet behind.

Away she runs aghast: aye me, she has fullylde her mind,
For purposed she was to dye and now remaynes my will
For to prevent her that by force her self she shall not kill
O mise rabble pretty, if I my mother ^aue.
I sim a gaynst my father then, but if unto the grave
I let her go, then toward her a trespass soul there lies.
And t^hus (alas) on either side great mischief does aries,
And needs her purpose must be stayde I Will hie and take in hand
To stop her despret enterprise and mischiefy to withstand.

FVll true the dytty is
That holy ORPHEUS sang,
On Thracian harp with sound whereof
the Rocks of Rodop rang,
That nothing is creat
For ever to endure.
Dame Natures birds each on must stoop
when death throws out the lure.
The head with Crispen locks,
or goulden hayres full:
In time has borne an hoary bush,
or bin a naked scull.
And that which tract of time
does bring out of the grain,
Old SATVRNE sharps his Sith at length
to reap it down again.
Though PHOEBVS rise at morn,
with glistring rays full proud,
He runs his race, and ducketh down
at length in foggy Cloud.
Toth Gaetans ORPHEUS sang
such kind of melody.
And how the gods themselves were bound
to laws of destiny.
The God that does the year.
By egall parts dispose,
How fatal web in every clyme
are daily spunne he shows.
For all things made of moulde
The ground again will gape,
As Hercles preaches plain by proof
that nothing can escape.
For shortly shall ensue
Discarge of Natures Law
And out of hand the gloming day
of doom shall onwarde draw
Then all that lies within
The scorching Libicke clyme,
The poale antarticke of the South.
shall ouerwhelme in time.
Poale articke of the North
Shall iumble, all that lies
Within the Axeltree, whereon,
dry BORES blasinge flies
The shiuerynge Sun in Heaven
Shall leese his fadyng light
The Palace of the frames of Heavens
shall run to ruin quight.
And all these blockish Gods
Some kind of Death shall quell,
And in confused CHAOS blind
they shall for ever dwell,
And after ruin made
Of Goblin, Hegge, and Elfe,
Death shall bring final destenye,
at last upon it self.
Where shall be then bestowde
The world so huge a mass,
The beaten hye way unto hell
is like away to pass,
To lead unto the Heavens
That shall be laid flatt:
The space between the Heaven and earth,
enough think ye is that?
Or is it not to much
For worldly miseryes:
VVher may such heaps of sins be lodgd
what place above the skies?
Remaynes, but that the sea
With Heaven and lowest Hell,
Three Kingdoms cast in one are like
within one roof to dwell.
But hark what roaring cry,
Thus beats my fearful ear
But lo its Hercules that yelles
it is Hercules I hear.
Retire, retire thy breathing breasts,
O Titan blasing bright,
Unfold thy mysty mantle black
of dim and darkesome Night:
And dash this dreary day wherein
I Hercules must die.
With blemishblack of filthy fogge defyle the griesly sky:
Pre^^ en^ my stepdames naughty mind. Now should I have resignde,
(O Father) my inheritance of Plutoes dungeon blind
Heaven frames should here and there be brast, and either poale should crack
Why sparest thou the stars and le^st thy Hercles go to wrack?
Now Jove look round about the heavens, and if thou can espy
On giant heave the Thessaill cliues against thassalted sky
Vnburdned be Enceladus of hugye Osir hill,
And hurled be on Hercules the mighty mountain still
Proud Pluto shall vnbarre the gates of black and glummy cave
Yet maugre all their might (o Father Jove) I will thee save
From fury of thy ^oes, and set thee up again in skies,
Yet lo Jove, lo, her that on earth thy thunderdint supplies,
And for to be liuetenaunt of thy boultes on earth was borne,
Is sent to burning Limbo lake in torments to be torn
The stern Enceladus again in ramping rage shall rise
And hurl the weighte (that now does cro^de him down) against the skies,
Thus by my death they shall presume to conquer heaven all
But ere that day upon my corse compel the heavens to fall
Break down, break down, the welkin that thou suffrest to decay,
O son of thunder thumping Jove no shadows do thee fray,
Now Ossa mount of Thessalie shall Pelion hill down crush
And Athos pilde on Pindus top his bushy head shall push
Among the starry skes thereby above the craggy rocks.
Typhoeus up shall clyme, and thumpe with store of ba^tryng knockes
Iuarmen stone in Tyrren sea from thence eake shall he beat
The smoaky forge of Aetna mount, that glowes with stewing heat
Enceladus not overthrown yet with the thunder crack
Shall hew the mountain side in twain, and trusse it on his back
The signs of heaven shall follow thee* and go with thee to wrack

I that returnde from dens of death, and Stigian stream defied
And ferryed over Lethes lake, and dragd up, chaind, and tide
The tryple headded mastiffe hownd, when Tytans teeme did start
So at the ougly sight that he fell almost from his cart.
Even I whose pith the kingdoms three of Gods full well have known
Lo yet mine end I daunted am by death and overthrown
But yet no bloody blade against my riued rybbes does crash
It is no rock that unto death my bruised bones does pash
Nor as it were with O sir hill that cloven were in twain,
Nor with the sway o^ all the mountain falling am I slain.
The glaring eyed giant grym does not now squeaze my coarse
With paise of Pindus roch and thus not feling enmyes force
I conquered am and yet alas this coarsie frets me more
O feeble force of man: he whom no might could match before
Withouten any conquest made does end his latter day,
Without exployt or feat of arms my self I pass away.
O mighty vmpier of the world and all ye Ghostes above
That witness how in quarrel good my right hand ever strove
O all ye lands, O earth alas, may it your mercy please
To spoil the spiteful sting of death that dauntes your Hercules
Fie fie, what shame is it to us what filthy fate we have?
A woman proud shall boast her bane brought Hercles to his grave
Then what are they whose mortal mayme Alcides weapon gave
If thus with sway invincible my fatal wheel do run
And need must on this shameful rock my fatal twist be spunne:
As by a woman's cursed hand my blood should thus be shed
Yet Iunoes malice migh have powrd this vengeance on my head,
So might a woman's deadly band have brought me to my beer:
But pet a woman wellding sway amid the welkin clear
But this seemde ouerprowde attempt for Gods to take in hand
The paples dame in Scithia borne where pight on hie ^o^h s;tand
The Apeltree whereon the underpropped poales do sway*
It might as well have been her hap to take my breath away,
What woman's might may master me Queen Iunoes hateful foe
Fie stepdame fie the fowler shame by this to thee does grow?
Why do thou triumph in this day? why did dame Tellus breed
Such parlous bugges thy humor rank of color hoate to feed?
A mortal woman's peauishe spite does pass thy rancour rough,
Thou say thou cannot have revenge on Hercules enough
Then are we twain y^ pass thy power the Gods may blushe for sham?
To see their malice ouermacht by such a mortal dame.
Would God the ramping Lions pawe that noyed Neme wood,
Had fillde his greedy mounching Jaws with plenty of my blood:
Or while the twining snakes had hembde me in by hundreds thick,
Why might not Hydra swallow up my wrinched body quick?
Why was it not the centaures hap my silly flesh to gnawe?
Or that I bound on Tantalls rock should gape with greedy Iawe?
In vain to catch the fleeting food when deep from Tartar soil,
Where at the Gods aggrized were, I did purloyne the spoil.
And from the darck infernal Styx I got again to light,
Or Ditis dungeon all the stops and stays I conquerde quight.
Death shranke from me in every place that I a noble knight
At length might end my days in shame, and in dishonor spoylde
Oh Jove the creatures terrible thou know that I have foylde
The threefolde shapen mastiffe curre whom up I draggde in chain,
He starring from the sunnewarde could not hale me back again.
The sheepherdes churlishe rabble that aloof in Iber he
Under the Spanishe fervent clyme could never master me.
Nor serpents twain that unto me in tender cradell creapt.
Aye woe is me that valiant death so often I ouerleapt:
What honor shall I dye withal?

Behold how death and hell
Cannot appaule the verteous mind that of deserving well.
By guiltless conscience warrant has the death that does him spoil,
Irkes not as thus of such an one to take this filthy foil.
If with this torment life were lost, his mind should much be ^asde,
As with vnwe^ldy Gyauntes sway he had his body squeasde.
Or Titans burden with his monsters all he would abide.
Or wish of raging Giants rent in pieces to have did,
And if thy d^lefull death because that monster none is left.
Who may be worthy thought by whom Alcides life be reft?
But thine own hand to do the deed.

Aye me and wellaway,
What Scorpion scrapes within my Mawe? what cralling Crab I say
With crooking cleaze to comber me, from scorching zone returns,
And boat within my boiling bones the seathing Marowe burns.
My River whilom rank of blood my rotting Lunges it tawes,
And teareth them in shattred gubs, and filthy withered flawes.
And now my Gall is dried up my burning Liver glowes.
The stewing heat has stulde away the blood, and Jove he knows
My upper skin is scorcht away and thus the Cankar strong
Does eat an hole that get it may my wretched Limbs among,
And from my frying Ribs (alas) my Liver quite is rent.
It gnawes my flesh, deuowers all, my Carkas quite is spent,
It soakes into the empty bones, and out the juice it suckes
The bones by lumps drop of while it the joints a sunder pluckes
My corpulent Carkes is consumde of Hercules every Iim
Yet stauncheth not the festring ^ot that feeds fast ^n him
O what a tingling ache it is that makes me thus to smart,
O bitter plague, O pestilence that gripeth to the heart.
Lo Cittes, lo what now remaynes of Hercules the great.
Are these the arms that did with stripes the roaring Lion beat?
And in Nemea wood did tear him from his hary case
Might this hand bend y^ bow from clouds the Stimphall foul to chase?
Are these the shankes that coapt the heart who shifting pace full often?
Did bear his braunched head ypranckt with garlond gay aloft?
Was Cal^e craggy cliue of these my feeble clowches broake?
To raise a dam in ^eas that did their foamy channel choke.
Had these arms pith the breath of Kings, of Beasts, and bugs to stop?
Or might these shoulders tough the payse of heaven underprop?
Are these the lusty Lims and Neck that shrank not at the payse?
Are these hands that I against the weltring heavens did raise?
Alas whose hands shall now perforce from hence hell Iaylo^^ lead?
Alas the noble courage erst that now in me is dead.
Why call I Jove my Father great of whom my stock should rise?
Why by the Thunderer make I my challenge to the skies?
Now, now Ampitrio is my ster all men may it avouch.
Come out thou murreyn foul that do within my bowels couch.
Why do thou thus with privy wound my careful Carkas foil?
What gulf under the frozen Clyme in saluage Scithian soil
Engendered the^? what water Hag did spawne thee on the shore?
Or stony C^lpe Rock in Spain that borders on the Moare:
O yrksome ill, and art thou not the Serpent that does sting
With crest on ougly head, or else some other lothly thing,
Or spronge of Hydraes blood, or left here by the hellick hound.
Art thou no plague? and yet a plague in whom all plagues abound?
What ghastly countnaunce cariest thou (alas) yet let me know?
What kind of mischief may thou be that do torment me so?
What saluage sore, or murreyn strange, or uncouth plague thou be?
With open combat face to face thou should encounter me.
And not thus ranckle in my flesh, nor soake into the sap.
By sowltring heat within my bones thy boiling bane to wrap,
And in the mid thereof to fry the Maroe that does melt.
My iagged skin is ripped, and out my smoaky Bowels swelt.
From bursten Paunch my self do flea the skin with grasping pawse,
And from the naked boanes do tear the mangled flesh by flawes,
I searched for thee through my Mawe, yet further do thou creep,
And festring farther in my flesh have gnawne an hole more deep.
O mischief match to Hercules, what grief could make me greet?
Whence flow these streams of trilli^g tears y^ down my cheeks do fleet
The time has bin no plunging pangues could cause our courage quail,
That never use with cristall tears our anguish to bewail.
Ah, fie, I am ashamde that I should learn these tears to shed:
That Hercules in weeping wise his grief has languished:
Who ever saw at any day in any time or place?
All bitter brunes I bare with dry, and eake vnreky face
The manhood that so many ills has maistred heretofore,
Has yielded only unto thee, to thee thou Cankar sore.
Thou first of all have straynde the tears out of my weeping eyes
Thy gargle face thy visage man that does me sore aggrise.
More towgh then mossy Rocks, more hard then Gads of sturdy sleele,
Or roaming stream of Simplegade, whereby this smart I feel
Has crushed my cracking Jaws, and wrong the streaming tears from me.
O wielder of the Welkin swifte, lo, lo the Earth does see
How Hercules does weep and wayle, and to my greater pain
My Stepdame Juno sees the same, behold, behold again
My Lunges do fry, the scorching heat preuayleth more, and more.
Whence fell this thunder Boult on me that burns in me so sore?

Who stoupeth not when grief does gal? more tough the^ Aem of Thrace
Whas whilom hawty Hercules, and did no more gieue place
Then does the marble axelltree, his Lims he now does yield
To paynefull pangues: and on his Neck his aching head does wielde,
And tossing still from side to side, he bendes with hugy sway,
And often his noble heart does force his trilling tears to stay.

O Father with thy heavenly Eyes,
Behold my wretched plight,
For never HERCULES till now
bid crave thy hand of might,
Not when as Hydraes fruictfull heads
about my Lyms were wound,
Nor when I lock in Lakes allow
fought with th'inferdall hownde,
These hideous fiends I foylde, with kings, and tyraunts proud likewise.
Yet in these broils I never looked for succor to the skies.
This hand did still avouch the vow, no thunder for my sake
Did glitter in the holy heavens, this day has hid me make
Some suite to thee, and of my boones yet heeres the first and last,
One only Thunder boult I crave at me O Jove to cast.
Count me a Giaunt of my self, I can no less devise,
While Jove I thought of promise true, I spaarde the starry skies.
Be thou either a cruel sier, or pity if thou have,
Yet lend thy son thy help, and get the glory of my grave:
Preventing this my dreary death, of this if thou do skorne,
Or that thy hand abhor the guilt, from Sicill cliue suborne
The soultring Giaunts that in hand high Pindus mount can weilde,
Or Ossa that it hurlde on me I may therewith bequielde,
Brast up hell Gates, and let Bellone scourge me with Iron rod,
And let in arms encounter me the mighty Martial God,
My brother I acknowledge him but by my s^epdames side,
And Pallas thou my sister take, let at thy brother slide
A thirling Darte. O stepdame mine with humble suite I crave
A wound of thee that woman's hand may bring me to my grave.
Why do thou feed thy fury now as one whose wrath were end
And satisfied? what seek ye more? I stoop, I yield, I bend.
Thou see Alcides humbly laid, where as unto this day
That ever I entreated thee, no Land, no Beast can say,
Now do I need thy deadly wrath to rid me of my pain,
And now thy rankour is appeasde, thy hate is quenched again,
And thus thou sparest me my life, when as I wish to dye:
O Earth will none make me the fire wherein my bones may fry?
Nor reach a blade to Hercules, convey ye all from me?
So let no country Monsters breed when I shall buried be,
And let none wayle the loss of me if (...) more arise,
God send another Hercules to succor Earth and skies.
But as for me on every side ding out my broosed brain,
And crash with sturdy stroke of stones my cursed Scull in twain
And rid my torments: will thou not? O world to me unkind,
And are so soon our benefits forgotten in thy mind.
Even to this bower with bugs and beasts thou had (...) over laid
Had not I bin: good people cause his torments to bestayde
That succored you: time gives you leave to recompense my pain,
If ye with death will guerden me, I ask none other gain.
Where shall I wretched mother of Alcides wish to be?
Where is my child? where is my son? If sight deceive not me
With gasping mouth, and panting heart lo where he sprawling lies.
Where as (alas) in raging heart of boiling fits he fryes,
He groves, all is dispacht, dear child let me Alcides mine
Embrace thy pining lims: with kiss enfoulde my arms in thine
Where are the lims? where is the neck that bare the skies alone?
What thus has mangled thee that all thy corpse is waste and gone?

I am your Hercles mother dear, whom thus ye see here lost.
Acknowledge me all though God knows I seem but as a ghost.
Why do you turn your face away and mourning visage mylde.
Are ye ashamde that Hercules should counted be your child?

What world has bred this uncouth bug? what land engendered it?
Or else what monstrous mischief may on thee triumphing sit?
Who is it that conquers Hercules?

By treason of his Wife
Thou see how wretched Hercules do leese his lothed Life.

To overthrow my Hercules, what treason has the might?

That which a wrathful Dame does seek to case her of her spite.

How has this pestilence gotten to thy Lims and bleeding bones?

I^to a Shyrt the woman had conuayde it for the nonce.

Where is the Shyrt for nothing but thy naked coips I see?

The vesture by the poison rank de^owred is with me.

And can such poison be contrived?

I think within my guts,
That hideous Hydra hissing Snake his slowghy body puts,
A thousand plagues of Lerna Poole within my Bowelles rampes:
What raging dear is this that drives up all Sicilia dampes?
What E^me of Hell forbids the day to pass the boiling ^one?
O Ma^es amid the greedy gulphes and pooles let me be thrown.
What Ister can my Carkas cool? no not the Ocean main
Of these my stewing vapors may the raging quench again?
(Al moisture of my limbs in these my fits are fryde away)
The juice will sone be soaked up, what president of hell
Let me return from under ground again with Jove to dwell
He ought to have retaynd me still, receive me once again
Into thy dungeon dark that hell may in this pickle plain
Behold the man that conquered yt, no booty bring I will
Away with me: why do thou quake for fear of Hercles still.
Set on me death coragiously for now I may be kilde

Now stint thy tender tears that down thy checkes so long have trild,
And master this thy mallady compel thy sorrows sloupe.
And show that in these plunging panges Alcides did not droupe,
And as it has been can thy guyse force death and hell to shri^ke.

If ougly grested Cau^asue. In chain of yrone link
Should bynd me as ag^oning pray the greedy grype to feed
Yet from mine eyes it should not strain a broken tear indeed
If wandering Symplegads would me wish either rock assail,
To bide the brunt of double wrack my courage would not quayle.
Let Pindus tumbled be on me, houge Aemus let me have
Or Athos rock in Thracian seas that breaks the weltring wave,
And bode the boultes of thondring Jove although thunweildy mass*
Of all the world should fall on me and might be brought to pass
That Phoebus flaming apeltree should burn upon my grave
No uncouth cry should force the mind of Hercles thus to rave.
Let meet a thousand savage beasts and rent me al atonce
Let Stymphal ^oules with houling hoarse lay strokes upon my bones
Or scrowling bull on the other side strike on with head and horn
Or else of other serpents wild let al my parts be ^orne
With roaring earthquakes, hougy lumpes be puffed upon me
With griping grief let all my limbs to nothing pyned be
Although I be to powder crushed I will with patience peace
In spite of beasts or brusing blows my sighs and tears shall seace

It is not son the woman's bane that in thy bones does boil
But festring tears and broosing knockes of thy continual toil
The wrinches old with aching panges begin to smart anew.

O where is death where is he now? of all that I do rue:
Can any witness what it is? let death now bend his bow
A naked hand is strong enough to make me stowpe full low
Let any wight in all the world attempt to set on me
I warrant him, approach let him, Ah wretched might I be
This wayward agony has take his perfect wits away.
Have hence his tools, and eake his shaftes for danger hence co^uay.
His ruddy gills that glow like fire some mischief do pretend.
To shrowde my self (alas) into what corner shall I wend?
This mallady a frensy is, this only is the mean
To conquer Hercules, why then do I as doting quean^
Thus fall to tears and seek to shrynke, may be that he will have,
Alcmenas hand to give the stroke, to bring him to the grave.
But dye he in a Murreynes name, ere I for cowarde will
Such deadly penance be enioynde, that on my doings still,
His baynous hand may vaunt it self, lo how the pangues full deep,
With stuggling ceast, do hind the purple veins with deadly sleep,
And beating sore lift up and down his faint and panting breast:
If I O Gods of this my noble Child be dispossessed:
Be gracious yet, and for the world some lusty champion save.
Rid his annoy and let his limbs again their courage have.

O Dismal day, O anguishe, O
the heaper up of ill.
Jove's Son is flayne, his Daughter dies,
his Nephew lives still.
First by the Stepdames treason, is
the Son to ruin brought.
The Daughter likewise trapt in traynes,
and thereby come to naught.
What hoary head in change of tunes, or teanour of his age
Has seen, that Fortunes frowning Face has sturd such stormy rage.
One doleful day bereaueth me (alas) of parents twain.
But least I speak to spite the Gods, I will somewhat refrain.
I lost a Father, Hercules this only I complain.
O noble Impe of Hercules, (alas) my Nephew dear,
That do of wretched Alcmens Son the lively feature bear.
Refrain my child thy wayling words, this quiet sleep perhap
Will overcome these plonging fits. But lo? lo in my lap.
He does begin to strive again, his fits begin a fresh.
Sleep gieuing up the feeble ghost to ranckle in the flesh.

What means Thrachin craggy crest to show before mine eyes?
Or now forsaking man am I aduaunst above the skies.
Why do the heavens provide for me? the father Jove I see,
And eake my stepdame Juno dire appeased now with me.
What heavenly harmony is this that sounds in mine ear.
Dame Juno calls me son in law, I se the palace clear
(Of crystal skies and beaten rakes of Phoebus flaming wheel)
I see the dumpish moary den of glowming lady night
Here he commands darkness dim to show it self in sight.
What means this, who is it that the heavens against me sparres?
And am I thus O father mine brought down again from stars.
Even now Appolloes sowltring car did fume about my face
So nie I past the pinch of Death, lo Thrachin top in place
Who brought me back to ground again, beneath me erst it lay
And all the world was under me, thou smart were worn away,
Thou forcest me confess the same. Ah mercy, mercy now.
In stead of farther vengeance do these humble words allow.
Lo Hillus, lo thy mothers gifts such presents she preparde
Ah, might my trunchion punch her puddinges once as whilom farde
The haughty Lady Amazon well trounsed for her pride
On thedge of ysy Caucasus afront the mountain side.
O noble lady Megara were thou my wretched wife,
When rapt in rage of frantic fittes, I rest thee of thy life
Give me my batt and bow in hand, my wrestes I will imbrew.
And force ye all your brages on me with blemish black to rue.
Thus let of Hercules exployts a woman be the last.

Forbear O Sire thy hateful threats, she has it, all is past.
The vengeance that ye seek on her already has her spedd.
With wound received at your hand my mother lies dead

O blinded anquish: dye she should of Hercles furious hand)
Thus Licas has his marrow lost the heat of burning breast
Will have me on the breathless coarse for to revenge the rest
Why does she not yet feel her force both let her want a grave
And on her cursed flesh to feed let beasts her carcass have.

The silly woman was more woe then ye that bide the smart.
Ye will release some part hereof for pity in your heart.
For grief of you with her own hand, alas her self she slew
Thus more then ye do ask of her, she does her doing rewe
Yet is it not your Wyfes misdeede that brought you to this plight.
No nor my mothers traytrous hand has wrought this deep deceit.
This treason Nessus did contriue whom ye did pay his hire,
With arrow shot into his Ribs for rape of Deianire.
Thus father with the Centaures blood your shyrt was sore embrewde.
At Nessus hand the vengeance of your deed thus have ye rewde.

He has his will: all is dispacht, our Fates themselves display.
This is the day of death to me. Thus erst to me did say,
A charmed Oak, and all the wood that range with yetling noise
Of Parnass hill the Temples shook, and thundered out this voice.
The dead man's hand whom thou before have slain,
O Hercules shall murder thee again.
Thou having mot the space of gulf and ground,
And deapth of hell, hear shall thou be confound.
I therefore do bewail no more, such should our ending be.
That Hercles conquerde after him no man alive may see.
Now let me dye a manly death, a stout and excellent,
And meet for me: this noble day shall valiauntly be spent.
Fell all the Timber on the ground hew down all OEta wood.
Let coals deuower Hercules, let fire fry his blould.
But ere I dye thou noble Impe of Peans royal race.
This doleful duty do for me: See that an whole day space*
My funeral fire flaming burn. And now my tender Hill,
The last peticion of my mouth make unto thee I will.
Among the captive Ladies, one there is, a noble Dame,
Of royal blood, Euritus Child, Iole is her name:
Accept her to thy spousall Bed, whom victour I vnkind^
Have trained from her native home and but my heart, and mind
Poor silly maid I gave her naught, and now she shall me lose.
Lo thus the wretched woman walls her still increasing woes.
But let her foster that she has conceived as Jove's ally,
And child to me, be it thine by her that erst begot have I:
And as for thee dear mother mine your dreary dole forgo,
Your Hercules shall live: do not vain tears on him bestow:
My manhood made a strumpet thought a Stepdame unto thee,
But if that either Hercles birth show her unsure to be,
Or be a man my ster or else be falsified my kin.
Now let Jove's (...) cease, and let my mothers slander ^in,
I have deserved a father well that have aduaunst so hye
The glory of the rolling heavens, of nature tramde was I.
To work the wondrous praise of Jove, and Jove him self does Joy,
To have the name of Hercules, begetting such a boy.
But pardon now my strayned tears, but you as Jove his niece.
Shall as a stately matrone be among the Dames of Greece.
Though Juno with the thunderer in spousall chamber lies
And in her heavenly hand does weilde the scepter of the skies,
When ever bare she such a Babe, and yet though heaven she hold
In heart against a mortal man she fosters malice oulde,
For spighte that borne of woman's womb becounted thus I should.
Go Tican go, run out thy Race, thee only I forsake.
I that went with thee foot by foot now to the infernal lake.
And Ghostes, I go yet with this praise to'ch pit down will I pass
That Hercules of open foe yet never foiled was.
But he in open combats brought his conquests all to pass.

O Titan crowned with blas^ing bush whose morning moystures make
The Moon her foamy bridell from her tired teame to take.
Declare to the Easterlinges whereas the ruddy morn does rise.
Declare unto the Irishmen aloof at western Skies.
Make known unto the Moors annoyed by flaming axentree.
Those that with the ysy Wayne of Archas pestred be.
Display to these that Hercules to the eternal ghostes is gone
And to the bauling mastriffes den from whence returns none.
With dusky dampe of filthy fog O Titan choke thy blaze,
With lowering light of wanny Globe on woeful wordlings gaze,
And let thy head be muffled up with clouds and darkness dim.
For Hercles sake, when shall thou find, or where the like to him?
(O wretched world to whom will thou henceforth thy woes complain,)
If any scattring pestilence on ear^h shall be renewde,
By benom rank, from poison mouth of scaly Dragon spewde:
If any Bore of Arcadie shall comber all a wood,
And tear the trauelers flesh with tuske embrewed in goary blood:
If any champion rough of Thrace with heart more hard in breast,
Then are the ysy rocks, where as the frozen Bear does rest,
Shall trample thick his stables foul with blood of slaughterd men,
When people quake for fear of war, who shall assist them then?
If wrathful Gods for vengeance will fo^he monsters to be bread?
Lo now enfebled all of force his Karkasse lies dead,
Whom Natures moulde had made a match to thu^dring Jove in strength.
Hale out (alas) and let your playnt be heard to towns at length.
Let women beat their naked arms, and wring their trembling hands,
Untrusse their hair, and from their locks pluck of their binding bands.
Boult up, and lock the Temple gates of Gods, and ^ape be none,
But despret Iunoes Chapple doares. O Hercles thou art gone
To Lethes lake, and stream of Stix, from whence no Keele again
Shall bring thee back: O silly soul thou go to remain
Among the grisely goblins grymme: from whence thou whilom came
With triumph sooner daunted death, and conquest of the same.
With ghastly face, and karrayne arms, and neck that yeeldes to weight,
Thy ghost returns, but Carons boat then shall not have her freight.
As balased with thy only payse, and yet shall thou not bide
Among the rascal sprites, but sit on bench by Eacus side,
And with the Judges twain of Creete as Umpier there to be,
Appoynting pains to souls that may to their desartes agree.
From slaughter hold your guiltless hands, bath not your blades in blood.
Ye states, that bear high sail on earth, and floa^e in worldly good:
It merits praise a maiden sword vndipt in goare to bear,
And while thou rain, to keep thy realm from cruel doings clear.
But virtue has a pryuiledge to pass unto the skies.
To The top of frosen Apell tree O Hercules will thou rise?
Or where the sun with scorching blaze his burning beams does rest?
Or will thou be a shyning star amid the lukewarm west?
Where Calpe Rock is heard with roaring noise of wrestling wave?
What place amid the azur sky entendest thou to have?
What place shall be in all the heavens from hurley burley free?
When Hercules amid the stars shall entertained be?
Let Jove appoint thy byding from the ougly Lion far,
And burning Crab* least thou with grysely countnaunce do the^ skarre.
And make the trembling stars in heaven for fear to break array
And Titan quake: while spring does prank with flowers y^ tender spray.
Then hasty winter strip the trees of all their branches green.
Or sudden Summer decked with leaves in busshy woods be seen.
And from the trees the Apples fall, the harvest being done:
No age on earth shall wipe away the fame that thou have woone.
As far as Sun, or Stars can shine, thy glorious name shall go.
Amid the botome of the Sea first Corn shall sprout, and grow,
And brackish Seas his waters salt to water fresh shall change:
And fixed star of ysy bear from Clime to Clyme shall raunge,
And sink into the frozen poole against his kindly sway,
Ere people cease the honor of thy triumphs to display:
O soueraygne Jove we wretched wightes this boon of thee do crave,
No monstrous beasts, no noisome plagues, hereafter let us have:
With bloody champions let the earth encombred be no more:
Cast down the hauty sway of Courts: if ought annoyaunce sore
Shall cloy the earth, a champion to be our shylde we cave,
Whom as an honor of the Crown his ruefull realm may have.
(That still will keep his swerd from being taint with guiltless blood.)
But lo what means this rumbling noise? Ioe Hercles ster does groan,
And sigheth for his son: is it the Gods that wayle, and moan.
Or is it Iunoes fearful shrike, whom Hercles does aggrise,
That seeing him for fear she roares, and r^nneth from the skies.
Or else did Atlas faltring feet with feeble sturring stumble?
And shrinking from his tottring weight thus force the Gods to rumble?
Or scared he the wauling ghostes, the which to fear he drove?
Or Cerberus brast his gingling Chains with buskling in his cave.
It is not so: but lo where Philoctetes does appear,
And Hercles famous shaftes to him bequeathed does he bear.
OF Hercules most heavy haps
Good youngman make report
How did he bear it at his death?
In such a cheerful sort
As no man lives.

And could he with
so sweet and merry look,
The scorching panges and torments of
his ending fire brook?

That there was any heat at all his face did not bewray,
Who prou'de that power might force al things to stoop and to obey,
That under son untamed be.

Where did the noble knight,
Among the wrestling waves of sea display his matchless might:

That mischief witch all only yet the world knew not before,
Even fire has bin conquered as beasts, and monsters more
Among the toils of Hercules the fire is crept in.

Declare us how the flaming force of fire could he win.

As soon as he with smarting hand the Oeta hill had grypte,
And forthwith from ye braunched Beeche ye shrinking shade was wipte:
And felled from the stump it lies, a Pyne tree hard he bendes,
That crakes the clouds, and down from skies his hawty head he sende^
The Rock did totter ready for to reele, and with the sway
It tumbleth down, a little grove withal it bears away.
A spreading Oak of Chaon big, whose leaves did ever rush,
And dimde the sun, and did beyond the wood his branches push.
It being hewde does crack, and eake in twain the wedges knappes:
The steel startes back and thus the tool of Iron bides the rappes,
And flies out of the Logge, at length at roore it shogde and shook,
And falling down full lythly the overthrow it took.
Forthwith the place lost all his light, the byrds scaard fro their nest
Do foare about the cropped wood, and holes wherein to rest,
And chirping with their weary wings about the plot they flicker
In every tree the ringing strokes were multiplied thicker.
The holy Oaks in hugy hand the Iron Axe did feel.
No timber on the stallen stocks might escape the hewing steel,
Thus all the wood upon a pile is heapt, and one by one
The Logges are laid as high as heaven that Hercules thereon
Might have a narrow room: his burning bones for to bestow.
On Pynetree top, and towghest Oak the fler begins to glowe.
And on the stumped willowe flamth, and thus the forest wide
Does make the Kill* the Popler wood all Hercles blocks does hyde.
But as the puissaunt Lion when his fits do vex him sore,
Lies wallowing on his back, and through the forest loud does rore.
So fares he, who would have thought he had to burning gone?
As one that climbs to heaven, not fire, he was to look upon
When up he stepped on Oera mount and gazed on his Kill.
Being laid aloft he brake the block, so heavy was he still.
The shyues yet could not bear his wayght he calling for his bow
Did say to me, have Philocktet, on thee I it bestow,
This same is it that Hydra with his swarming heads did know.
This did fetch down the stimphall fowls, and all that we have daunt,
Go thou with this let victory, and happiness thee haunt,
For never shall thou shute against thy foes with these but speed.
If at a bird amid the clouds thou aame she dies indeed.
These certain shaftes shall bring thy mark down from the azur sky,
This bow shall not deceive thy hand, full often I did it try,
And made it meet to bear a shaft, and cast his leauell dew.
Thine arrows shall not fail thine aame if that thou nock them true,
I ask but only this of thee, put fire to the Stack,
Bestow on me my funeral flame to bring me to my wrack.
This knarry Club (quoth he) the which no hand shell ever loss
Shall only with his Hercules in fire go to loss,
This also (quoth he) should thou have if thou could weild the same,
Beside his master let it lie to help toward the flame.
And then beside him down he lays the Lions vayry skin
To burn with him: the shaggy case hid all the pyle within.
The people sobde, and none there was but sorrow straynde his tears.
The mother mad for egar grief her breast all bare she bears,
And naked down toth Nauill stead displayes her tender teates.
And languishing with wringed hands her naked dugges she bears
And cries out upon the Gods on Jove himself she ca^es,
Her shriking rang through all (...) place so womanlike she yalles*
Be still (quoth he) good mother: force your showers of tears to cease.
Your dreary dole disgraceth much the death of Hercules.
Wayle secretly unto your self: why make ye Juno glad,
To se that you a weeping day with store of tears have had?
(It does her good to see her bawdes, to stand with weeping eyes.)
Forbear, forbear your malady, it is deadly sin for ye,
To tear the tears, and rent the womb, that first did foster me.
And as he blustred giving gruntes when carst he led in chain
The hownd about the towns of Greece what time he came again
Tryumphing over conquered hell defying Plutoes might,
And dreadful desteny: so on the fire he lay upright.
What conqueror ever sat in coatch with such a chereful grace?
What tyrant did control his folk by law with such a face?
How hushed was al thing at his death? himself he could not weep
And also we had clean forgot the wound of sorrows deep
None does lament him at his death now were it shame to wayle:
Alemen (whom nature ought to move) her tears now do her fail.
And thus as ill as was the son the mother stood almost.

But at his burning did he not call on the heavenly host,
Remembering Jove to hear his suite.

As on in deep despair
He lay, and staryng up so rould his eyes into the air
To spy if Jove look down to him from any turret hye.
Then with his hands displayed to heaven (quoth he) where so thou lie,
And lokest down to se thy son, this same, this same is he,
Whom one day eeked with a night engendered has to thee
If East and West if Scithia, and every burning plot,
That parched is with glowing glede of Phoebus fire hot
Does sing my praise? and if the earth full satisfyde with peace
If languishing and wayling words in every town do cease.
If none their alters do imbrew with any guiltles gore,
Then Jove let my vncaged spirit have heaven for evermore.
As for thinfernall dens of death they do not me detarre?
Nor scouling Plutoes dungeon darck, but Jove I do abhor.
Unto those ghastly Goblins as a stlly shade to go.
Since I am he whose conquering hand gave them their overthrow.
Withdraw these foggy clouds of night, display the glimsyng light
That Hercles broyld with flying flames the Gods may have in sight
And if thou do deny (O fire) the stars and heaven to me
To give me them against thy will thou shall constrained be,
If glutting grief do stop thy speech, the Stygian goulphes set oape,
And let me dye, but first declare within the heavenly coape,
That thou accepst me as thy soon: this day it shall be wrought,
That to be raysd aloft to stars, I may be worthy thought.
Thou have done little for me yet: it may be doubted well
Whether Jove did first beget his son, or damnd him first to hell.
And (quoth he) let my stepdame see, how well I can abide
The scorching heat of burning brandes: for fire then he cride,
And says to me O Philoctet in have upon me throw
The burning logges, why quakest thou? do dastard thou forslow,
For fear to this wicked deed? O coward peasant slave,
Thou art to weak to bend my bow, unmeet my shaftes to have
What aylest thou to look so pale? and as thou see me lie
With cherefull look courageously do thou the fire plye.
Behold me wretch that broyle and burn my father opes the Skies
And unto me son Hercules come, come away he cries.
O father Jove (quoth he) I come: with that I waxed pale
And toward him a burning beam with might and main I hale:
But back from him the billets fly and tumbling out they leap,
And from the limbs of Hercules down falls all the heap.
But he encrocheth on the fire as it from him does shrink.
That many mountains whole were set on fire a man would think
No noise was hard, and all was hushed, but that the fire did hiss
In Hercles glowing paunch when as his liver burning is.
It boysteous giant Typhus had amid this fire been thrown,
These torments would have straind his tears and forced him sigh and groan.
Or tough Euceladus that tossed a mountain on his back.
But Hercles lifted up himself amid his fyres all black,
With smoke besmeard his corpse half burnt in shiuers, gube and flawes,
And down the throat his gasping breath and flames at once he draws
Then to Alemen he turned himself: O mother mine (quoth he)
Should ye so stand at Hercles death? should you thus wayle for me?
And thus between the fire and smoke, upright and stiff he stands.
And neither stoupes nor leanes awrye, but moves and stirs his hands,
With all his lively gestures still, and thus he does persuade.
His mother leave the langusshing, and mourning that she made.
And did encourage all his men t'encrease the fire than
As though he were not burning, but would burn some other man.
The people stood astonished, and scant they would believe
That fire had any force on him, or that it did him grieve.
Because his chereful look had such a majesty and grace.
And never wild us meue the fire that he might burn apace,
(And now when as he thought, he had endured pangues enough,)
And stoutly bode the brunt of death, the blocks he does remove,
That smothering lay, to make the^ burn: then downward does he shoue
And where the stewing heat did chiefly scorch, and burn most hot,
That way he thrusts his frying lims, and thither has he got.
(With steaming countnaunce vnapaulde his mouth now does he fill)
With burning coals, his comely Bearde the^ blazed about his cheeks:
And now when as the sparkling fire unto his visage seeks,
The flame lickt up his s^^ged hair, and yet he did not wink:
But open kept his staring eyes But what is this? my think
Alomene comes yonder as a woeful wight forlorn,
With sighs and sobs, and all her hair befrounced rent, and torn.
And bears the remnaunt in her Lap, of Hercules the great.

Learn Lordings, learn to fear and dread
th'unwelldy fatal force.
This little dust is all that's lef^
of Hercles hugy coarse.
That boysteous Giaunt is consumde
unto these ashes small
O Titan what a mighty mass
is come to naught at all.
Aye me an aged woman's lap all Hercules does shrowde,
her lap does serve him for a grave, and yet the champion proud,
With all his lump stils not the room. Aye me a burden small
I ^eele of him to whom whole heaven no burden was at all.
O Hercules, bear child, O son the season whilom was,
That thou to Tartar pits, and sluggish deus aloof did pass
For to repasse: from deep of hell when will thou come again?
For to put loyne the spoils thereof, or bring from captive chain
To life thy friendly Theseus. But when will thou return
Alone: can flaming Phelegethon thy ghost in torments burn:
Or can the masti^^e Dog of hell keep down thy woeful sprite?
Where then might I come see thy soul and leave this loathed light?
When shall I rap at Tartar gate? what Jaws shall me deuower?
What death shall d^wnt me: go thou to hell, and have no power
To come again: alas why do I wast, the day in tears and (...)
O wretched life why do thou last thou should droupe and saint,
And loath this dreary day: how: can I bear to Jove agay^e
Another noble Hercules, what son may I obtain
So valiunt to call me thus ( Alcmena mother mine)
O happy spouse Ampliterio twyse happy have thou been
In entering at the dens of death, and through the noble son
The Deutis arthy presents quake to see thee thither come.
Though thou but forged father were to Hercules of late
Whether shall old beldam go whom many kings do hate:
If any prince remain with blody breast and murdring mind
Then woe to me: if groaning babes be any left behynd,
That sorrow for their parents deaths now, now for Hercles sake
Their malice let them wrecke on me, on me dyre vengeance take
If any young Bustris be, I fear the Persians sore
Will come and take me captive hence in chains for evermore.
If any tyrant feed his horce with gubbes of strangers flesh
Now let his pampred iades unto my Carksse fall a fresh.
Perhap dame Iun^ coueteth on me to wrecke her yr^.
And e^vs of her burning breast will turn the flaming fire
Her wreckful hand does loyter now since Hercules is slain.
And now to feel her spurning spyte as harlot I remain.
My valyant son is cause of this my womb shall barrayne be,
Least I shoul bear another child as hardy as was he.
Oh whether may Alcmena go? or whether shall she wend?
What country or what kingdoms may my careful head defend
Where may I couch my wretched coarse, that every where am knownde
If I unto my native soil repair among mine own,
Euristeus is of Argoe lord thus woefully forlorn.
I will to Thebes where I was wed, and Hercules was borne:
And where with Jove I did enjoy dame Venus dear delight.
O blessed woman had I been and in most happy plight,
It Jove with flash of lightning leams and blasing flakes of fire
Had smolthred me as Semele was sowst at her desire.
Would God that Hercles while he was a babe had rypped been
Out of my womb, then wretchedly I should not this have seen
The pangues and torments of my son, whose praise does cou^teruaile
Even Jove: then had I learnd that death at length might him assail,
And take him from my sight: O child, who will remember thee?
For now unthankfulness is great in men of each degree:
(...), for thy (...) I do not know where entertaynd to be).
The ^word* of the Cleonies I will attempt and fire
Whom from the Lion resc^wde he and made the monster dye,
Or shall I too the Archadians go where thou did sle^ the boar
Where thy renown remain (...) of great exploytes before,
The parlous (...) Hydra hear was slayue there fell he dead,
That with the flesh of slaughtred men his greedy horses fed
And yondes were the Stimphall burdes compelde to leave the say
And tamed by the handy toil, now does the Lion fry,
And belketh (...) fumes in heavens while thou lie in thy grove
O if mankind but any spark of thankful nature have
Let all men prcace to succor me Alcmene thy mother dear.
What if among the Thracians I venture to appear,
Or on the (...) of Hebet flood? thy prowess every where
Has succored all these soylts: for erst in Thrace thou did put down
The fleshy meangres of the King and put him from his crown,
By slaughter of the saluage printe the people live in peace,
Where did thou deny thy help to make tormoyling cease?
Unhappy mother that I am a shryne where may I have
To shrowde thy coarse: for all the world may strine about thy grave
What temple may be meet to shryne thy relics safe for aye,
And hallowed bones? what nations unto the ghost shall pray?
O noble son what sepulchere what hearse may serve for thee?
The world it self through flying flame thy fatal tomb shall be:
Who takes here this payse from me his ashes which I bear
Why loath I them? embrace his bones keep still his ashes here,
And they shall be a shield to thee his dust that thee defend,
To see his shadow, princes proud for fear shall stoop and bend
O mother of noble Hercules forbear your dreary playnt:
His valiant death thus should not be with femal tears attaynt.
Ye should not languish thus for him, nor count him wretched man
In dying, who by noble mind prevent his destny can.
His cheuatry forbyddeth us with tears him to bewail:
The stately stomach does not sloupe: they sigh whose hearts do fail.

(I Will moan no more: behold, behold. most wretched mother I)
Have lost the shield of land end sead, where glittring Phoebe displayes
With whirling wheels in foamy gulphes, and red and purple rays
The loss of many sons I may lament in him alone.
Through him I lifted Kings to frown, when crown my self hadnone
Aid never any mother liude, that neded less to crave.
Of Gods, then I. I asked naught while I my son might have.
What could not Hercles tender love like on me to bestow?
What God would once den^^ to (...) or what he held me froe,
I was in my power to ask and have. If Jove would ought deny,
My Hercules did bring to pass I had (...) by.
What mortal mother ever bare and lost so dear a son?
Erst down the cheeks of Niobe the (...)
When of her dear and tender brattes she wholly was hereuen,
And did bewa^le with strayned sighs her children seven and seven
And yet might I compare this one (my Hercles) unto those
And I in him as much as she in all her imp^s die lose.
The mothers that are mourning dames do lack on h^d and chief,
And now Alcmene shall be she depriude of all releese,
Cease woeful ^^thers cease, if that among you any are
Constrayne to shed your streaming tears by force of peas^ue care^
Ye Lady whom lamenting song of women fourmed rocks,
Give place unto my gluttyng grief, beat on with burning knockes
Ye hands upon my riueled breast, alas am I alone
Enough for such a funeral to languish and to move,
Whom all the world shall shortly need? yet steech thyfeble arms
To thumpe upon thy sounding breast thy grief with boleful (...)
And in despyte of all the gods power put thy woeful erye
And to receive thy flowing tears thy warry cheeks apply.
Bewail Alcmenas woeful state: the son of Jove bewail,
Whose birth did cause the du^ay day in kindly course (...) fail.
The East compact two nights in one: Lo, to, a greater thing
Then glorious day the world has lost now let your forrowes ring,
Yet people al whose lowryng lords he draw to dens of death
Their blades (that reckt with guiltles (...)) he (...) into the sheath.
Bestow on hin your Crystal tears, which he deserved wellt
Howl out ye heavens, ye mardle seas, and goulphes with gronings yell.
O Crete Dear darling unto Jove For Jove of Hercles ro^e,
Ye hundred cities beat yont arms: my son, for evermore
Is gone among the gries^y ghostes, and shimmering shades of hell
Lament for him ye woeful mightes, that here on (...) do dwell,

WHy Mother wayle you me an (...)
(...) ho^t of hell?
Or (...) of death, since I
among (...) Spheres do dwell?
Forbear, forbear, to moan for me
for virtue opened has
To me the passage to the Stars:
and set me in the path,
That guides to everlasting Life,
whence co^s this dreadful sound?
Whence roares this thundering voice. y^ does against mine ears rebosid,
And bids me to shine my tears? I know it now I know,
The darksome dunge^^^ daunied are, and Demies of Lakes allow.
O Son art thou ret^rnd to the from Stygian gulf again?
And can thou twice of ougly death the con quest thus obtain?
And brast the balefull prisons twice, of glum and ghastly night.
Aga^^st (...) thus by might?
May any escape from (...) thou stape alone?
Has hell no power to hold thy sprite, when breath from breast is gone?
Or else has Pluto baalde thee out, for fear least thou alone
Should cloyne his Scepter from (...) hand, and pluck him from his front?
For I am sure I saw thee laid upon the burning trees:
And from thy Corpse the slame and sparks against the welkin flies:
That sure thou wast to po^ldee burn, and feeble life was lost:
But sure the deepes and pits of (...) did not lock up thy ghost.
Why were the devils alrayde of thee? why quaked Ditis grim?
And did thy noble ghost seem such a ghastly bug to him?

The dampy (...) of Cocitas could not keep me from light.
Nor Carons fusty musty Barge iramsported has my sprite,
Now Myther (...) more once have I seem the (...) of hell,
And all the (...) that dwell.
That mortal moulde I took of you to naught the flames have fried:
Heaven has the substance that I took of Jove: in fire yours died.
And therefore rawse your playntius teare^, which parents use to shed,
When wretchedly they wayle their sons, that dastardly are dead.
Thus vulgar varlets weep: Ioe virtue hopes the Stars to get:
But faynting fear (...) on death, from heaven where I am set,
You hear my voice: Euristeus now shall bide the deadly push
With charyot sway his cracked scull ye shall on sunder crush
Now must I hence advance my Ghost up to the rolling skies
Once more I daunt the deuilles, and do the goblins grim aggrise

But stay awhile my son: he fades and shrinketh from my sight
Aduaunst he is among the stars: does this my charmed Spirit
Dote in a trance and or do I dream that I have seen my son
A troubled mind can scante believe the things he sees done.
But now I see thou art a God possessing heaven for aye.
I see it sure. I will to Thebes thy triumphs to display.

LO virtue scapes the ghastly shades of hell,
Ye noble peers that shine in virtue bright
Dire desteny cannot constrayne you dwell
Among the glowming glades of ougly might,
Nor sink your fame in loathsome lakes of spyte.
But when deaths day draws on the gasping hour,
You purchased glory shall direct your right
To find the passage to the heavenly bower.
When flesh does fall, and breathing body dies
Then (Fame the child of Virtue) does arise.
But sluggish sottes that sleep their days in sloth,
Or give their golden age to loath some lust.
Them and their names the wretches bury both,
When as their bones shall shryned be in dust:
The clay shall cover their carkases forlorn,
As though such kaytisses never had been borne.
But if that ought of memory they have.
In thafter age it shall be filthy shame.
The gnawing worms torment not so in grave
Their rotten flesh, as tounges do tear their name,
That daily killed to further mischief lives.
Lo both the fruits, that vice and virtue gives.

