THe noble courtesies I have received
At Lisbone worthy friend, so much engage (...)
That I must dye endebted to your worth,
Unless you mean to accept what I Have studied.
Although but partly to discharge the sum*.
Due to your honored love.

How now Sebastiano will you forfeit
The name of friend then I did hope our love
Had outgrowne complement.

I speak my thoughts,
My tongue and heart are relatives, I think
I have deserved no base opinion from you;
I wish not only to perpetuate
Our friendship, but to exchange that common name
Of friend, for

What? take heed, do not profane;
Would thou be more then friend? It is a name,
Virtue can only answer to, could thou
Unite into one, all goodness whatsoever
Mortality can boast of, thou shall find,.
The circle narrow bounded to contain
This swelling treasure; every good admits
Degrees, but this being so good it cannot:
For he is no friend is not s ^perlative,
Indulgent parents, brethren ^, kindred, tied
By the natural flow of blood; alliances,
And what you can imagine, is to light,
To weigh with name of friend: they execute
At best, but what a nature pron ^^^e'm to,
Are often less then friends, when ^ they remain
^ur kinsmen still, but friend is never lost.

Nay then Antonio you mistake, I mean not
To leave of friend, which with another title
Would not be lost, come them I Will tell you Sir,
I would be friend and brother, thus our friendshi ^
Shall like a diamond set in gold not loose
His sparkling, but show fairer; I have a pair
Of sisters, which I would commend, but that
I might seem partial their birth and fortunes
Deserving noble love; if thou be free
From other fair engagement, I would be proud
To speak them worthy, come shall go and see them*
I would not beg them suitors, fame has spread
Through Portugal their persons, and drawn to Ave ^o.
Many affectionate gallants.

Cata ^lina and Berinthia

The same.

Repo ^t speaks loud their beauties, and no less ^
Virtue in either well, I see you strive
To leave no (...) where you mean to honor,
I (...) otherwise escape the censure
Of ^ne ungrateful, but by waiting on you
Home to ^^ero

You shall honor me,
And glad my noble Father, to whom you are
No stranger, your own worth before, has been
Sufficient preparation.

Ha?
I have not so much choice Sebastiane,
But if one S ^ster of Antonios,
May have a commendation to your thoughts,
I will not spend much Art in praising her,
Her virtue speak it self, I shall be happy,
And be confirmd you brother, though I miss
Acceptance at Avero.

Still you out do me, I could never wish
My service better placed, at opertunity
I Will visit you at Eluas, in the mean time
Lets have to Avero, where with you I Will bring
My double welcome, and not fail to second
Any design.

You shall teach me a lesson
Against we meet at Eluas Castle sit.

What gallants ^irra are they newly entered?

Count de Monte Nigro my Lord, and Don Valasco,

Give your observance then, I know their business;
Catalina and Berinthia are the stars
Direct them hither, Gaspars house shall give
Respect to all, but they are two such Jewels,
I must dispose maturely, I should else
Return ingratitude upon the heavens
For leaving me such pledges, not am I,
Like other fathers carried with the stream
Of love toth youngest, as they were in birth
They had my tenderness, Catalina then
Is eldest in my care, Berinthia
Her child's part too, both fair and virtuous;
But daughters are held losses to a family,
Sons only to maintain honor and stem
Alive in their posterity, and I now think on it,
My son Sebastiano has been slow
In his return from Lisbone, oh that boy
Renewes my age with hope, and has returned
My care in educa ^ion, weight for weight
With noble ^^ai ^ty, will beloved ^^th best
O ^h Dons in Spain and Portugal, whole loves
Do often threten his absence to such length
As (...) has been.
(...) ^eres my eldest daughter
With her amorous Count, I Will not be seen,

You have been absent long my noble Count,
^eshrew me but I dreamt on you last night.

Ha ha, did you so, I tickle her in her sleep I perceive;
Sweet Lady I did but like the valiant beast,
Give a little ground, to return with a greater
(...), now by my fathers sword
And gauntlet thart a pretio ^s piece of virtue,
But p ^ethee what did dream of me last night?

Nay it was an idle dream, not worth the repitition,

Thou dreamst I warrant thee, that I was fighting
For thee up to the knee ^ in blood, why I dare do it,
Such dreams are common with Count de monte
Nigro, my sleeps are nothing else but rehearsals of
Battles and wounds and ambuscadoes, Donzell Delphebo
Was (...) of valor, R ^sicbeere a pu ^fe;
My dreams deserve to be ith Chronicles,

Why, now my dream is out,

What?

I dreamt that you were ^ighting.

So.

And that in single combat, for my sake
You slew a giant, and you no sooner had
Re ^cued my honor, but there crept a pigmee
Out of the earth, and killed you.

Very likely, the valliantst man must dye,

What by a pigmee?

I, that's another giant, I remember Hercules
Had a conflict with them, oh my Dona
^atalina I well would I were so happy once to
Maintain some honorable duel for thy sake, I shall
Nere be well, till I have killed some body; fight, it is true
I have never yet flesht my self in blood* no body
Would quarrel with me, but I fi ^de my spiri ^ prompt
If occasion would but wink at me, why not (...) has
Nature given me these brawny arms, this manly bulk,
And these Collossian supporters nothing but to ^ling
The sledge, or pitch the bare, and play with
Ax ^etrees; if thou love me, do but command me
Some worthy service; pox a dangers I weigh 'em (...)
More than fleabitings, would some body did hate that
Face, now I wish it with all my heart.

Would you have any body hate me?

Yes, I Would hate 'em, I Would but thrust my hand into their
Mouth down to the bottom of their bellies, pluck
Out their lungs and shake their insides outward.

Noble Sir, you need not heap more protestations,
I do believe you love me,

Do you believe I love, and not accept it?

Yes I accept it too, but apprehend me
As men do gifts, whose acceptance does not
Bind to per ^orme what every giver craves;
Without a stain to virgin modesty
I can accept your love, but pardon me,
It is beyond my power to grant your suite.

Oh you too much subject a natural gift,
And make your self beholding for your own:
The Sun has not more right to his own beams,
With which he gildes the day, nor the Sea lord
Of his own wa ^es.

Alas, what is it to own a passion
Without power to direct it, for I move,
Not by a motion I can call my own,
But by a higher r ^pture, in obedience
To a father, and I have yet no freedom
To place affection, so you but endeere me
Without a merit.

Here my sister.

And Don Valasco, how now, are thy arrows feathred?

Well enough for roving.

Roving I thought to.

(...) hope fair.

(...) home then, Valasco I have
(...) my miseris with a paper of verses, see she
(...) 'em.

(...) make em thy self

(...) money did, what an idle question is that? as tho we
That are great men, are not furnished with stipendary
(...) am sure for my own part I can buy 'em
Cheap (...) can make 'em a great deal, would
You have learning have no reward, she laughs
(...) am glad of that.

They (...)our o ^ a true Poeticke fury.

Do you smell nothing, something has some savor.

But this li ^^ my think has more more feet than the rest.

(...) run the better for that Lady, I did it a purpose.

But here is another lame.

That was my conceit, my own invention, lame
Halting ^^^ses, there is the greatest Art, besides I
T (...)hy give you to understand, that I am valiant,
(...) legs and arms at all times and make 'em
Go halting home that are my enemies, I am
An ^ambographier now it i ^ out.

For honors sake what is that?

One of the sourest versifiers that ever crept out of
(...) when I set on it. I ^^n make any body hang himself
With (...) Iambick ^, I can fetch blood with Asce ^p ^ads
(...)st ^^ad ^ with hexameter and pentameter, and
Yet I have a trimeter (...) for thee my Dona Catalina

Conclude a peace sir with your passion.
I am sorry love has been unkind to you.
To p (...) at me, who, till the first have knit
The sacred knot of marriage am forbid
To think of love.

But I cannot desist,
I am in love with every thing you say,
This your denial as it comes from you
Bids me still love you, pardon fair Berinthia,
Valasco has not power to rule himself;
Be you less fair, or virtuous, perhaps
I may abate my service.

Old Gaspars house is honored by such guests,
Now by the tomb of my progenitors,
I envied, that your fame should visit me
So often without your person, Sebestiano
Has been long happy in your noble friendship,
And cannot but improve himself in virtues,
That lives so near your love.

Don Antonio de Riviero.

The same.

With whose noble worth
You often have filled discourse, thought your self happy
In his choice friendship; if his body carry
So many graces, it is heaven within,
Where his soul is.

Sebastiano, thou have largely recompene'd
Thy tedious absence, you shall dishonor me,
Unless you think your self as welcome here,
As at your Eluas Castle, Vilarezo
Was once as you are sprightly, and though I say it
Maintained my fathers reputation,
And honor of our house with actions
Worthy our name and family, but now,
Time has let fall cold snow upon my hairs,
Ploughed on my brows the furrows of his anger
Disfurnishd me of active blood, and wrapped me
Half in my sear cloth, yet I have mind
That bids me honor virtue, where I see it
Bud forth and spring so hopefully,

You speak all nobleness, and encourage me
To spend the gre ^nenesse of my rising years
So to (...), that at last I may
Be old like you.

Daughters speak his welcome, Catalina.

Sir, you are most welcome.

(...) she says he is most welcome, he were
Not best love her, she never made me such a reverence
For all the kisses I have bestowed upon her since
I first opened my affection, I do not like this
Follow, I mus be fair to use doctor Sharkins cunning,

I ^ we ^e not truly noble to affront him;
My blood boyles in me, it shall I cool again,
The place (...) venerable by her presence,
And I may be deceived, Valasco then
Keep (...) with thy fears.

How now Antonio, where have thou loft thy self?
Struck dead with Ladies eyes? I could star-gaze
For ever thus, oh pardon love, against whom
I often have profaned, and mockd thy fires,
Thy flames now punish me, let me collect:
They are both excellent creatures, there is
A Majesty in Catalin ^s eye, and every part carries ambition
Or Queen upon it, yet B ^rinthi ^s
(...) something more than all this praise, though she
Command the world, this has more power ore me*
Here I have lost my freedom, not the Queen
(...) could thus have wounded poor Antonio'
(...) speak to her; Lady I Am an Novice, (...) in love.

It may be so.

She ^ests at me, yet I should be proud to be
Your servant.

I entertain no servants that are proud.

Divine Berinthia!

She checks my rudeness that so openly
I ^eeme to court her, and in presence too
(...) that have engaged themselves perhaps
(...) already.

Come let us in, my house spreads to receive you,
Which you may call your own, I Will lead the way.

Please you walk Sir.

It will become me thus to wait on you.

Does not the fool ride us both?

What fool? both, whom?

That fool, both us, we are but horses and may
Walk one another for ought I see before the door, when he
Is alight and entered, I do not relish that same
Novice, he were not best gull me; hark you Don
Valasco, what shals do?

Do, why?

This Antonio is a suitor to one of 'em.

I fear him not.

I do not fear him neither, I dare fight with him, and
He were ten Antonios, but the Ladies Do ^, the Ladies.

Berinthia, to whom
I pay my love devotions, in my ear
Seemd not to welcome him, your Lady did.

I but for all that he had most mind to your (...),
And I do not see but if he pursue it,
There is a possibility to scale the fort, Ladies
Minds may alter, by your favor, I have less
Cause to fear o'th two; if ht love not Catalin ^
My game is free, and I may have a course in
Her Park the more easily.

It Is true, he preferred service to Berinthia,
And what is she then to resist the vows
Antonio if he love, dare heap upon her?
He Is gracious with her father, and a friend
Dear as his bosom to Sebastiano,
And may be is directed by that brother
To aim at her, or if he make free choice,
Berinthias beauty will draw up his soul.

And yet now I think on it, he was very sawey
With my love to support her arm, which she
Accepted too familiarly, and she should
But love him, it were as bad for me, for tho he care
Not for her, I am sure she will never abide me after it,
By this hilts I must kill him, there is no remedy,
I cannot help it.

I Will know my destiny.

And I my fate but here he comes.

The strangest resolution of a father
I ever heard, I was covetous
To acquaint him with my wishes, praid his leave
I might be servant to Berinthia,
But thus he briefly answered, until
His eldest daughter were disposed in marriage
His youngest must not love, and therefore wished me
Unless I could place Catalina here,
Leave off soliciting, yet I was welcome,
^u ^fed on nothing but Berinthia,
From whose fair eyes love threw a thousand flames
unto Antonio ^ heart, her cheeks bewraying
As many amorous blushings, which brake out
Like a forced lightning from a troubled cloud,
Discovering a restraint, as if within
She were at conflict, which her color only
Took liberty to speak, but soon fell back,
And as it were checked by silence.

I Will stay no longer, sir a word with you, are you desperate?

Desperate, why sit?

I ask and you be desperate, are you weary of your
Life, and you be, say but the word; some body can tell
How to dispatch you without a physician, at a minuits warning.

You are the^ noble Count de monte Nigro.

I care not a Spanish fig what you count me, I must
Call you to account sir; in brief the Lady
Dona Catalina is my mistress, I do not mean to be bass ^ed
While this tool has any steel in it, and I have some
Metal in my self too.

The Dona Catalina? do you love her?
She is a Lady in whom only lives
Natures and Arts perfection, borne to shame
All former beauties, and to be the wonder
Of all succeeding, which shall fade and wither
When she is but remembered.

I can endure no more, Diablo, he is mortally in love
With Catalina.

It Is so, he is taken with Catalinaes beauty.

Sir I am a servant of that Lady, therefore eat up
Your words, or you shall be sensible that I am Coun ^
De monte Nigro, and she is no dish for Don Antonio.

Sir I will do you right.

Or I will right my self.

He did direct those praises unto me
This does confirm it.

He cannot so soon alter,
I shall discover a passion through my eye^*

Thou show thy self a noble Gentleman, the
Count is now thy friend.

Does it become me sir, to prosecute
Where such a noble Count is interessed,
Upon my soul I wish the Lady yours,
Here my suite falls, with tender of my service^;
Would you were married, nay in bed together
My honorable Count.

Your face is cloudy sir, as you suspected
Your presence were not welcome; had you naught
But title of a brothers friendship, it were
Enough to oblige us to you, but your worth
In Catalinaes eyes, bids me proclaim you
A double acceptance.

Oh you are bounteous Lady.

Sir --

Do not fear me,
I am not worthy your opinion,
It shall be happiness for me to kiss
This Ivory hand,

The whilst I kiss her lip and be immotall.

Antonio my father is a rock,
In that he first resolved, and I account it part of my
Own unhappiness, I hope you hold me not suspected,

I were unworthy such a friend, his care
Becomes him nobly; has not younder Count
Some hope of Catalina.

My father thinks that sister worthy of
More than a bare Nobility.

I Will back to Eluas noble sir,
This entertainment is so much above
Antonio ^ merit, if I leave you not
I shall be out of hope to --

Nay then you mock me sir, you must not leave me
Without discourtesie so soon, we trissle time,
This night you are my guest, my honored Count,
My Don Val ^sco.

Yes my Lord, we will follow.

Ha I am resolved, like Barge-men when they row.
I Will look auother way then that I go.

ANsilv ^ yon observe with curious eye
All Gentlemen that come hither, what is your opinion.
Of Don Antonio?

My opinion Madam, I want Art.
To judge of him.

Then without Art your judgment.

He is one of the most accomplished Gentlemen
Ansilva ere beheld, pardon Madam.

Nay, it does not displease, 'yare not alone,
He has friends to second you, and who do think
Is cause he tarrries here.

Your noble father will not let him go.

And can thou see no higher? then thou art dull.

Madam, I guess at something more.

What?

Love?

Of whom?

I know not that.

How not that? Thou Would bring thy former truth
Into suspicion, why it is more apparent
Then that he loves.

If judging eyes may guide him,
I know where he should' choose, but I have heard
That love is blind.

Ha?

Virtue would direct him Madam unto you, I know not his
Obedience, I shall repent if I offend.

Tha'rt honest, be yet more free, hide not a thought that may concern it.


Then Madam I think he loves my Lady Berinthia;
I have observed his eyes roll that way,
Even now I spied him
Close with her in the Arbor, pardon me Madam.

Thou Have done me faithful service, be yet more vigilant,
I know thou speakst all truth, I do suspect him,
My sister, ha? Dare she maintain contention?
Is this the duty binds her to obey
A fathers precepts, it is dishonor to me.

Madam, here is a pretty hansome stripling new alight,
Enquires for Don Antonio.

Let me see him, 'twill give me good occasion to be
My own observer;
Whom would you sir?

I am sent in quest of Antonio.

He speaks like a Knight errant, he comes in quest,

I have heard it a little virtue in some Spanniels to
Quest now and then Lady.

But you are none.

My Mr. cannot beat me from him Madam, I am one of
The oldest appurtenances belonging to him, and yet I
Have little moss in my chinne.

The more to come, a witty knave.

No more wit then will keep my head warm, I beseech you amiable Virgin help my
Master Antonio to some intelligence that a servant of his waits to speak with
him from his sister Madona Castabella


It shall not need sir, I Will give him notice my self,
Ansilva Entertain time with him.

A promising young man.

Do you wait on this Lady?

Yes sir.

We are both of a tribe then, though we^e differ in our sex, I beseech you
tax me not of immodesty, or want of breeding, that I did not salute you upon
the first view of your person, this kiss be as good as presse-mony to bind me
to your service


'Yare very welcome, by my virginity.

Your virginity a good word to save an oath, for all she made me a curs ^e, it
was not good manners to leave me so soon 'yare very welcome by my virginity;
was she afraid of breaking, it may be she is cracked already, but here she is
again


May I beg your name sir?

No beggar sweet, would you have it at length, then
My name is Signior Baltazaro Clear Mautado,
But for brevities sake they call me Diego.

Then Signior Diego once more you are welcome ^.

Bazelez manes Signiora, and what my tongue is not able to express, my head
shall; it seems you have lived long a Virgin


Not above seven or eight and thirty years.

By Lady a tried Virgin, you have given the world
A large testimony of your virginity.

I should be thu ^ a disobedient daughter
A Fathers Hests are sacred.

But in love
They have no power, it is but tyranny,
Plain usurpation to command the mind
Against its own election; I am yours,
Vowed yours for ever, send me not away
Shipwrack'd in the harbor, say but you can love me,
And I will wait an age, not wish to move
But by commission from you, to whom
I render the possession of my self:
Ha? we are betrayed, I must use cunning,
She lives in you, and take not in worse sense;
You are more gracious, in that you are
So like your eldest sister, in whom lives
The copy of so much perfection,
All other seeme^ to imitate.

Does he not praise me now?

But here she is,
Madam, not finding you in the garden,
I met this Lady.

I came to tell you
A servant of yours attends with letters from
Your sister Madona Castabella.

Diego what news?

Sir, my Lady remembers her love, these letters inform you the state of all
things


What serious conference had you sister with that Gentleman.


Would you had heard them sister, they concerned your Commendations.


Why should he not deliver them to my self.

It may be then
You would have thought he flattered.

I like not this rebound,
It Is fairest to catch at fall.

Sister, I hope
You have no suspicion, I have courted
His stay or language on my life no accent
Fell from me, your own ear would not have heard
With acceptance.

It may be so, and yet I dare acquit you,
In duty to a Father, you would wish me
All due respect, I know it.

Diego.

Sir.

You observe the waiting creatures in the black,
Hark, you apprehend me.

With as much tenacity as a servant.

I hope sir, now we shall enjoy you long ^*

The gods would sonner be sick with Nectar, than Antoni ^
Crow weary of such fair society;
But I am at home expected, a poor sister,
My fathers care alive, and dying was
His Legacy, having out-staid my time
Is tender of my absence.

My Lord Antonio means to take his leave.

Although last night you were inclined to go,
Let us prevail this morning.

A servant of his, he says, brought letters
To hasten departure.

Why sir, will you rob us of your master.

Not guilty my Lord.

Sir, if you will needs go, we will bring you on your way.

I humbly thank your honor, I Will not be so trouble some.

Would you were gone once, I do not mean to trouble my self so much I
warrant thee


I have now a charge upon me, I hope it may
Excuse me, if I hasten my return.

It Is fair, and reasonable, well sir, my son
Shall wait on you oth' way, if any occasion
Draw you to Avero, lets hope you will see us,
You know your welcome.

My Lord the favors done me, would proclaim
I were too much unworthy not to visit you,
Often as I see Avero; Madam I part with some unhappiness
To lose your presence, give me leave I may
Be absent your admirer, to whose memory
I write my self a servant,

Pox on your complement, you were not best write
In her table-bookes.

You do not know
What power you have over me, that but to please you
Can frame my self to take a leave so soon.

What think you of that my Lord?

Why, she says she has power to take her leave
So so ^e, no hurt ath' world in it, I hope she is an
Innocent Lady.

The shallow rivers glide away with noise,
The deep are silent, fare you well Lady.

I told you he is a shallow fellow.

I know not what to think on it Berinthia.

Gentlemen happiness and success in your desires.

I Will see you a league or two.

By any means, nay sir.

Diego.

My Lord I have a suite to you before I go.

To me Diego, prithee speak it.

That while other Gentlemen are happy to devide their affections among the
Ladies, I may have your honors leave to bear some good will to this Virgin:
Cupid has thrown a dart at me, like a blind buzzard as he was, and there is no
recovery without a cooler; if I be sent into these parts, I desire humbly I may
be ^ould to rub acquaintance with Mistress Ansilva


With all my heart Diego.

Madam, I hope y ^u will not be an enemy to a poor
Fly that is taken in the fl ^me of the blind god.

You shall have my consent sir.

But what say a Ansilva, have thou a mind to a husband?

I fear I am too young seven years hence were time enough for me.


She Is not full forty yet sir.

I honor the Antiqu ^tie of her maidenhead, thou
Mistress of my heart.

Come lets away Diego our horses --

We Will bring you to the ga ^e.

Yes, we will bring him out of doors, would we were shut of him.


Hay ho, who would have thought I should have benne in love with a stripling,
have I seen so many maiden-heades snffer before me, and must mine come to the
block at forty years old, if this Diego have the grace to come on, I shall
have no power to keep my self chaste any longer; how many maids have been
overrunne with this love? but ^eres my Lady


Sir, you love my sister.

With an obedient heart.

Where do you think Don Antonio has made choice
To place his love?

There where I wish it may grow older in desire,
And be crowned with fruitful happiness.

Has your aff ^ction had no deeper root,
That it is rent up already, I had thought
It would have stood a Winter, but J see
A Summer storm has killed it, fare you well sir.

How Is this, a Summers storm!
Lady by the honor of your birth,
Put off these clouds, you maze me, take off
The wonder you have put upon Valasco,
And solve these riddles.

You love B ^rinthia.

With a devoted heart, else may I die
Contempt of all mankind, not my own soul
Is deerer to me.

And yet you wish Antonio may be crowned
With happiness in his love, he loves Birinthia.

How?

Beyond expression, to see how a good nature
Free from dishonor in it self, is backward
To think another guilty, suffers it self
Be poisoned with opinion, did your eyes
Empty their beams so much in admiration
Of your Berinthias beauty, you left none
To observe your own abuses,

Does not Antonio dedicare his thoughts
To your acceptance, it is impossible,
I heard him praise you to the heavens, above 'em;
Made himself hoarse but to repeat your virtues
As he had been in ecstasy; love Birinthia?
Hell is not blacker than his soul, if he
Love any goodness but your self.

That lesson he with impudence has read
To my own ears, but shall I tell you sir?
We are both made but properties to raise
Him to his partial ends, flattery is
The stalkeing horse of policy, saw you not,
How many flames he shot into her eyes
When they were parting, for which she paid back
Her subtle tears, he wrung her by the hand,
Seemed with the greatness of his passion
To have been over borne, Oh cunning treachery!
Worthy our justice, true be commended me;
But could you see the Fountain that sent forth
So many c ^zening streams, you would say Styx
Were Christ all to it, and wast not to the Count,
Whom he supposed was in pursuit of me;
Nay, whom he knew did love me, that he might
Fire him ^he more to consummate my marriage
That I disposed he might have of access
To his beloved Berinthia, the end
Of his desires I can confirm it, he praid
To be so happy with my fathers leave
To be her amorous servant, which he nobly
Denied, partly expressing your engagements;
If you have least suspicion of this truth:
But dee' think she love you?

I cannot challenge her, but she has let fall
Something to make me hope, how think you she is
Affected to Antonio?

May be
Luke warm as yet, but soon as as she is caught,
Inevitably his, without prevention.
For my own part I hate him in whom lives
A will to wrong a Gentleman, for he was
Acquainted with your love, 'twas my respect
To tender so your injury, I could not
Be silent in it* what you mean to do
I leave to your own thoughts.

Oh stay sweet Lady, leave me not to struggle
Alone with this universal affliction;
You speak even now Berinthia would be his
Without prevention, oh that Antidote,
That Balsome to my wound.

Alas I pity you, and the more, because
I see your troubies so amaze your judgment,
I Will tell you my opinion sir oth' sudden;
For him, he is not worth Valasco's anger;
Only thus, you shall discover to my Father,
She promised you her love, be con ^ident
To say you did exchange faith to her; this alone
May chance assure her, and if not I hav't:
Steal her away, your love I see is honorable,
So much I suffer when de sert is wounded,
You shall have my assistance, you apprehend me,

I am devoted yours, command me ever.

Keep smooth your face, and still maintain your worship
With Berinthia, things must be managed
And struck in the maturity, noble sir; J ^wish
You only fortunate in Berinthias love.

Words are too poor to thank you, I look on you
As my safe guiding star.

But I shall prove a wandering star, I have
A course which I must finish for my self.
Glide on thou subtle mover, thou have brought
This instrument already for thy aims,
Sister, I Will break a Serpents egg betimes,
And tear Antonio from thy very bosom,
Love is above all law of nature, blood,
Not what men call, but what that bides is good.

Be not so careful Cooze, your brothers well.
Be confident if he were otherwise
You should have notice, whom has he to share
Fortunes without you? all his ills are made
Less by your bearing part, his good is doubled
By your communichaing.

By this reason
All is not well, in that my ignorance
What fate has happened, bars me off the portion
Belongs to me sister, but my care
Is so much greater, in that Diego whom
J charged to put on wings, if all were well,
Is dull in his return.

His Master happily has commanded him
To attend him homewards, this is recompensed
Already, look they are come;
You Are welcome sir.

Oh sister, ere you let fall words of welcome,
Let me unlade a treasure in your ear
Able to weigh down man.

What treasure brother, you amaze me,

Never was man so blessed,
As heavens had studied to enrich me here,
So am I fortunate.

You make me covetous.

I have a friend.

You have a thousand sir, is this your treasure?

But I have one more worth then millions,
And he does only keep alive that name
Of friendship in his breast, pardon Villandros,
It Is not to strain your love, whom I have tried,
My worthiest cozen.

But where is this same friend, why came he not
To Eluas with you, sure he cannot be
Dear to you Brother, to whom I am not indebted
At least for you.

I have many dear friends too, my Tailor is one
To whom I am indebted

His Commission
Stretched not so far, a Fathers tie was on him,
But I have his noble promise, er't be long,
We shall enjoy him.

Brother I hope
You know how willingly I can entertain
Your bliss, and make it mine, pray speak the man
To whom we owe so much.

Twere not charity to starve you thus with shadows,
Take him and with him in thy bosom lock
The Mirror of fidelity, Don Sebastiano.

I often have heard you name him full of worth,
And upon that relation have laid up,
One dear to my remembrance.

But he must be dearer Castabella, hark you sister,
I have been bold upon thy virtue, to
Invite him to you, if your heart be free.
Let it be empty ever, if he do not
Fill it with noblest love, to make relation,
What zeal he gave of a worthy nature,
At our last parting (when betwixt a son,
And friend he so divided his affections
And out did both) you would admire him: were
I able I would build a temple where
We took our leave,
The ground it self was hallowed
So much with his own piety, Diego saw it.

Yes sir, I saw, heard, and wondered.

Come I will tell you all, to your chamber sister,
Diego* our plot must on, all time is lost
Until we try the mooving.

If the plot please you sir, let me alone to play my part
I warrant you.

Come Castabella, ^ and prepare to hear
A story not of length but worthy your ear.

You have not dealt so honorably sir,
As did become you, to proceed so fa ^e
Without my knowledge, give me leave to tell you
You are not welcome.

My Lord I am sorry,
If I have any way trangrest, I was not
Respectlesse of your honor, nor my fame,
Valasco shall be unhappy, if by him
You shall derive a stain, my actions fair,
I have done nothing with Berinthia,
To merit such a language, it was not ripe,
For me to interrupt the father, when I knew not
What grace I hold with her.

Hell on her grace, is this her duty? ha,
I can forget my nature if she dare
Make so soon for feit of her piety;
Oh where is that same awful dread of Parent,
Should live in children; it is her ambition
To out run her sister, but I Will curb her impudence,

Retire your self, this passion must have way,
This works as I would have it, fear nothing sir,
Obscure.

I Will cloister her, and starve this spirit
Makes her deceive my trust; Catalina
Upon thy duty I command thee, take
Her custody on thee, keep her from the eye
Of all that come to Averro, let her discourse
With pictures on the wall, I fear she has
Forgot to say her prayers, is she grown sensual?

But my Lord.

Oh keep thy accents for a better cause, ^
She has contemd us both, thou caust not see
What blemish she derives unto our name.
Yet these are sparks, he has a fire within,
Will turn all into flames, where is Valasco?

Good sir, a much afflicted worthy Gentleman,
At your displeasure.

Thou art too full of pity, nay thou art cruel
To thy own fame, he must not have access
To prosecu ^e, it was my doting sin,
Of too much confidence in Berinthia,
Gave her such liberty, on my blessing punish it,
Twill be a virtuous act, the snow I thought
Was not more innocent, more cold, more chaste
Why my command bound her in ribs of ice,
But she is dissolved, to thee I Will leave her now,
Be the maintainer of thy Fathers vow,

Why I am undone now,

Nothing less, this conflict
Prepares your peace, I am her guardian,
Love smiles upon you, I am not inconstant,
Having more power to assist you, but away,
We must not be discri'd, expect ere long
To here what you desire.

My bliss I remember.

Berinthia, you are my prisoner, at my leisure
I Will studdy on your fate, I cannot be
Friend to my self, when I am kind to thee.

VVElcome honest Diego, your Master Antonio is in health I hope.

He commanded me, remember his service to you, I have obtaind his leave for a
small absence to perfect a suite I lately commenced in this Court


You follow it close me thinks Berinthia, I see this cloud
Vanish already, be not deject d,soon
I Will know the depth ont* should the world forsake thee,
Thou shall not want a brother dear Berinthia.

This is my Lady Berinthia, prithee let me show
Some manners, Madam my Master Antonio speaks his
Service to you in this paper: alas Madam, I was but
Half at home, and I am returned to see if I can recover
The the other piece of my self, so, was it not a reasonable
Complement.

Antonio, he is constant J perceive.

So, we are alone, sweet Mistress Ansilva, J am bold
To renew my suite, which least it should either
Fall or depend too long having past my declaration,
I shall desire to come to a judgment.
My cause craves noching but justice,
That is, that you would be mine; and now since
You self is judge also, I beseech you be not partial
In your own cause, but give seatence for the plaintiff, and
I will discharge the fees of the Court on this fashion.

Here is a haven yet to rest my soul on,
In midst of all unhappiness, which I look on,
With the same comfort a distressed Sea man
A ^arre off, viewes the coast he would enjoy,
When yet the Seas do toss his reeling bark,
Twixt hope and danger, thou shall be conceald.

Here Is my Lady Berinthia.

What care I for my Lady Berinthia, and she thinks
Much, would she had one to stopp ^ her mouth.

But I must observe her, upon her fathers displeasure,
She is committed to my Ladies custody, who has made
Me her keeper, she must be locked up.

Ha locked up.

Madam, it is now time you would retire to your own Chamber.


Yes, preth ^e do A ^silva in this gallery,
I breathe but too much air, oh Diego you will have
An answer I perceive, ere you return.

My journey were to no purp ^se else Madam* I apprehend her ^ i will wait an
opport ^nity, alas poor I ady, is my sweet heart become a j ^ylor, there is
hope of an office without money


Diego I spy my Lady Catalina coming this way, pray shroud your self behind
this cloth, I would be loath she should ice us here together, quickly, I
hear her treading


Ansilva.

Madam.

Who Is with you?

No body Madam.

Was not Diego with you, Antonioes man?

He went from me Madam half an hour ago,
To visit friends in the City.

He has not seen Berinthia I hope.

Unless he can pierce stone walls Madam, I am sure*

Direct Don Valasco hither by the back stairs,
I expect him.

I shall Madam.

H ^, what is this? a Letter to Berinthia* from whom
Subscribed? Antonio, what devil brought this hither?
Furies torment me not, ha, while I am Antonio* expect
Not I can be other then thy servant, all my thoughts
A ^e made sacred with thy remembrance, whose hope
Sustaines my life, oh I drink poison from these fatal accents,
Be thy soul blacker then the ink that stains
The cursed paper, would each drop had fallen
From both your hearts, and every Character
Been tex ^d with blood, I would have tired mine eyes
To have read you both dead here, upon my life
Diego has been the cunning Mercury
In this conveyance, J suspect his love
Is but a property to advance this suite.
But I will cross um all;
Don Valasco, you are seasonably arrived,
I have a Letter for you.

For me?

It does concern you.

Ha.

How do you like it sir?

As I should a Punyard sticking here, how came
You by it?

I found it here by accident oth'ground,
I am sure it did not grow there, I suppose
Diego, the servant of Antonio
Who colourably pretends affection
To Ansilva, brought it, he is the agent for him.
Now the design appears, day is not more conspicuous
Then this cunning.

I am resolved,

For what?

Antonio or I must change our air,
This is beyond my patience* sleep in this
And never wake to honor, oh my fates,
He takes the freehold of my soul away,
Berinthia, and it, are but one creature,
I have been a tame fool all this while,
Swallowed my poison in a fruitelesse hope,
But my revenge, as heavy as Jove's wrath,
Wrapped in a thunderbolt is falling on him,

Now you appear all nobleness, but collect
Draw up your passions to a narrow point
Of vengeance, like a burning glass that fires
Surest ith smallest beam, he that would kill,
Spends not his idle fury to make wounds,
Far from the heart of him he fights withal,
Look where you most can danger, let his head
Bleed out his brains, or eyes, aim at that part
Is dearest to him, this once put to hazard,
The rest will bleed to death.

Apply this Madam.

The time invites to action, i will be brief,
Strike him through Berinthia.

Ha.

Mistake me not, I am her sister,
She is his heart, make her your own, you have
A double victory, thus you may kill him
With most revenge, and give your own desires,
A most confirmed possession, fighting with him,
Can be no conquest to you, if you mean
To strike him dead, pursue Berinthia,
And kill him with the wounds he made at you,
It will appear but justice, all this is
Within your fathom sir.

It Is some divinity hangs on your tongue.

If you consent Berinthia shall not see,
More suns till you enjoy her.

How dear Madam.

(...) you shall steal her away*

Oh ^hen'

Provide
(...) friends, but let it not be known
Upon your honor, I assist you in it.
And after (...) when soft s ^eepe has charmed
All senses (...) the Garden gate.
Which shall to open for you, to know her chambe ^
A candle shall direct you in the Window,
(...) shall attend too, and provide
To give you entrance, thence take Berinthia,
And soon convey her to what place you think
(...) and most convenient, in small time
You may pr ^cure your own conditions*
But sir you must engage your self to use her
With honorable respects, she is my sister,
Did not I think you noble, for the world
I would not run that hazard.

Let heaven forsake me then, was ever mortal
S ^ bound to woman's care, my mothers was
Half paid her at my birth, but you have made me
An everlasting debtor.

Select your friend, bethink you of a place
You may transpose her.

I am all wings.

So, when gentle physic w ^ll not serve, we mus ^
^pply more active, but there is
Yet a ^eceipt behind; Va ^as ^oes shallow,
And will be planet struck, to se ^ Berinthia
Dye in his arms: it is so, yet he himself
Shall carry the suspicion, if art,
Or hell can furnish me with such a poison,
^leepe thy last sister, whilst thou live I have,
No (...) in my s ^lfe, my rest thy grave.

Go thy ways, and the devil wants a brerder thou
Art for him, one spirit and her self are able to furnish
Hell and it were unprovided; but I am glad I heard all
I shall love hangings the better while I live:
I pereeive some good may be done behind em*
But i will acquaint my Lady Berinthia,
Here Is her chamber I observed: Madam, Madam
Berinthia,

Whose there?

It Is I Diego, I am Diego.

Honest Diego, what good news,

Ya ^e undone, undone lost, undone for ever; it is time now to be serious.


Ha,

Where Is my Master Antonioes Letter.

Here, where, ha, alas, I fear I have lost it.

Alas you have undone your self, and your sister, my Lady Catalina has found
it, and is mad with rage, and envy against you; I overtheard your destruction,
she has showed it to Don Valasce, and has plotted that he shall steal you
away this night, the doors shall be lest open the hour after twelve


You amaze me, it is impossible.

Do not cast away your self, by incredulity, upon my life your fate is cast,
nay more, worse then that


Worse?

You must be poisoned too, oh she is a cunning devil, and she will carry it so,
that Valasco shall be suspected for your deat ^, what will you do


I am overcome with amazement?

Madam remember with what noble love my Master Antonio does honor you, and now
both save your self, and make him happy, how


I am lost man.

Fear not, I will engage my life for your safety,
Seem not to have knowledge or suspicion, be careful
What you receive, least you be poysond, leave the
Rest to me, I have a crotchet in my pate s ^all spoil
Their music, and prevent all danger I warrant you,
By any means be smooth, and pleasant, the devils
A knave, your sisters a Traitor, my Master is your noble
Friend, I am your honest servant, and Valasco shall
Shake his ears like an annimall.

It is not to be hoped for.

Then cut of my ears, slit my nose, and make a devil of me, shall I about it
say, it is done


Any thing thou art honest, heaven be near,
Still to my innocence, I am full of fear.

Spur cut and away then.

Scarabeo.

Sir.

Is the door tongue tide, scrue your self half out a ^ one of the crevices,
and give me notice what patient approathes me


I can run through the key hole sir.

This ^ucus bears
A lively tincture, oh the check mnst blush
That wears it, their deceived that say
Art is the ape of nature.

Sir.

Who is it?

My Ladies apronstrings, Mistress Ansilva her chambermaide.

Admit her.

How now raw head and bloody bones, where is the
Doctor Sharkino? oh here he is.

How does your virtuous Lady.

In good health sir.
Where Is the Fucus, and the Powder.

All is prepared here.

To see what you can do, many make legs, and you make faces sir.


Variety of faces is now in fashion, and all little enough for some to set a
good face on it, oh Ladies may now and then commit (...) and have some color
for it, but these are but (...) of our art, the things we can prescribe to be
taken inwardly, are pretty curiosities, we can prolong life


And kill too can you not?

Oh any that will go to the price.

You have poisons I warrant you, how do they look* pray lets see one.


Oh natural and artificial, Nessas blood was milk
To em, an extraction of Todes and Vipers, look
Here Is a parcel of Claudius Caesar's posset,
Given him by his wife Agrippina here is some of
Hannibals medicine he carried always in the
Pummell of his sword, for a dead lift, a very active
Poison, which passing the Orifice, kindles
Strait a fire inflames the blood, and makes th ^ marrow
Fly, have you occasion to apply one.

In Troth we are troubled with a rat in my Ladies Chamber.


A Rat, give him his bane, would you destroy a City, I have probatinus of
Italian Sallets, and our own Country figs shall do it rarely, a Rat, I have
scarce a poison so base, the worst is able to kill a man, I have all sorts,
from a minute to seven years in operation, and leave no marks behind em, a
Rats a Rat


Pray let me see a remover at twelve hours, and I would be loath to kill the
poor thing presently


Here, you may cast it away upon it, but it is a disparagement to the poison.


This will content you.

Because it is for a Rat you shall pay no more, my service to my Lady, my
poisons howsoever I give them, variety of operations are all but one. Scarabeo


Sir here is a Gallant enquires for Dector Sharkino

Usher him in, it is some Don.

Is your name Signior Sharkin ^ the famous Doct ^r.

They call me Sharkino.

Do you not know me?

Your gracious pardon.

(...) Monte Nigro.

Your honors sublimity does illustrate this habitation*
Is there any thing wherein Sharkino may express
(...) service? if ought within the circumference
Of a medicinal or Mathematical science,
May have acceptance with your cel ^itude,
^t shall devolve it self.

Devolve it self, that word is not in my Table book; what are all these
trinkets


Take (...) I beseech your hon ^ur, they are dangerous, this is the devis (...),


A pox oath devil, wh ^t have I do with him,

It is a dreadful circle of conjuration, fortified
With sacred characters against the power
Of inferra ^l spirits, within whose round I can tread
Sa ^ely, when hell burns round about me.

Not unlikely.

Will you see the devil sir?

Ha, the devil? not at this time, I am in some have,
Any thing but the devil I durst fight with all, hark
You Doctor, letting these things pass, hearing
Of your skill, I am come in my own p ^rson, for
A fragment of your art, hark you, have you any
(...) to procure love sir?

All the degrees of it this is ordinary.

Nay I would not have it too strong, the Lady I intend it for, is pretty well
taken already, an easing working thing does it


Here ^ a powder whose ingrediences were fetchd
From Arab ^^ the happy, a sublimation of the Phoenix
Ashes, when she last burned her self, it bears the
Colo ^r of sinamon, two or three souples put into
A cup of wine, fetches up her heart (...) can scar ^e
Keep it in, for running out of her mouth to you
My nob ^e Lord.

That, let me have that, Doctor I know it is dear,
Will that gold buy it?

Your honor is bountiful, there needs no circumstance, Minister it by whom
you please, your intention binds it to operation


So, so Catalina, I will put your mornings draught
In my pocket --
Doctor, I would not be seen.

Please you my Lord obscure your self behind these hangings then, till they
be gone, I Will dispatch'em the sooner; or if your honor think fit, it is but
clouding your person with a simple cloak of mine, and you may at pleasure
pass without discovery, my Anotomy shall wait on you


Prithee come back yet.


Oh by any means go laynes.


Do thou think it possible that any man can tell where thy things are, but
he that stole 'em, he is but a juggling imposter, a my conscience, come back
again


Nay now we are at furthest, be not ruled by him, I know he is a cunning man,
he told me my fortune once when I was to go a journey by water, that if I
escaped drowning, I should do well enough, and I have iiv'd ever since


Well I will try, I am resolved; stay, here he is Pedro, you are acquainted
with him, break the ice, he is alone


Bless you Mr. Doctor; sir presuming on your Art, here is a fellow of mine,
indeed the Butler, for want of a better; has lost a dozen of Dyaper spoones,
and half a dozen of silver Napkins yesterday, they were seen by all three of
us in the morning between six and seven set up, and what spirit of the
Buttery has stollen'em before eight, is invisible to our understanding


He has delivered you the case right: I beseech you sir do what you can for a
servant, that is like to be in a lamentable case else, here is a gratuity


Now we shall see what the devil can do, hey, here is one of his spirits I
think


Between 7 and 8. the hour; the 1 Luna, the 2 Saturn, the 3 Jupiter, the 4
Mars, the 5 Sol, the 6 Ven ^s, the 7 Mercury, ha then it was stolen, Mercury is
a thief, your goods are stolen


Was Mercury the thief, pray where dwells he?

Mercury is above the Moon man.

Alas sir it is a great way thither.

Did not I tell you you would be gulled.

Well you are a servant, I Will do something for you; What will you say, if I show
you the man that stole your Spoones and Napkins presently, will that satisfy
you


I Will desire no more, oh good Mr. Doctor.

If he does that, i will beleve he has cunning.

Go to, hears a glass.

Lo you there now.

Stand your backs North, and stir not till I bid you;
What see you there?

Here Is nothing.

Look again, and mark, stand yet more North.

Now I see somebody. 1 And I.

Mark this fellow mu ^fled in the cloak, he has stolen your spoones and
Napkins, does he not skulke


^Foote it is strange, he looks like a thief, ^this Doctor ^ see is cunning.


Oh rogue how shall's come by him, oh for an Officer,

Yet stir not,

Oh he is gone, where is he?

Be not too rash, my Art tells me there is danger in it, you must be blinfold
all, if you observe me not, all is to no purpose, you must not see till you be
forth a doors, shut your eyes, and lead one another, when you are abroad open
them and you shall see again


The thief?

The same, then use your pleasures, so, be sure you see not, conduct them
Scarabeo


Oh Mr. Doctor I have got this opportunity to come to you, but I cannot stay,
here is my water, pray sweet Mr. Doctor, tell me, I am in great fear that I have
lost --


What?

My maidenhead sir, you can tell by my water.

Do not thou know?

Oh I do some what doubt my self, for this morning when I rose, I found a
pair of breeches on my bed, and I have had a great suspicion ever since, it is
an evil sign they say, and one does not know what may be in those breeches
sometimes; sweets Mr. Doctor, am I ^ maid still or no, I would be sorry to
loose my maiden head ere I were aware, I fear I shall never be honest after it


Let me see Vrina meretrix; the color is a strumpet, but the contents deceive
not, your maiden head is gone


And is there no hope to find it again?

You are not every body, by my Art, as in other things that have been stolen,
he that has stolen your maiden head shall bring it again


Thank you sweet Mr. Doctor, I am in your debt for this good news; oh sweet
news sweet Mr. Doctor


Cry your honor mercy, good my Lord.

Out you slaves, oh my toes.

What ails your Lordship?

Doctor, I am out of breath, where be these worms crept, I was never so abused
since I was swadled: hark you; those 3. Rogues that were here even now, began
to lay hold of me, and told me I must give them their Spoones and Napkins; they
made a thief of me, but I think I have made their flesh jelly with kickes
and bastinadoes; oh I have no mercy when I set on it, I have made e ^mall poor
John's, impudent varlets; talk to me of Spoones and Napkins


Alas one of them was mad, and brought to me to cure him.


Nay they were all mad, but I think I have madded them; I fear J have kicked
two or three out of their lives; alas poor Wretches I am sorry for it now, but
I have such an humor of beating and kicking when my footes in once: hark you
Doctor, is it not within the compass of your physic to take down a man's
courage a thought lower; the truth is, I am apt of myself to quarrel upon the
least affront in the world, I cannot be kept in, chains will not hold me:
totherday for a less matter than this, I kicked half a dozen of high Germans,
from one end of the street to the other, for but offering to shrink between
me and wall; not a day goes over my head but I hurt some body mortally; pox a
these rogues, I am sorry at my heart I have hurt them so, but I can not forbear


This is strange.

How? I can scarce forbear striking you now, for saying it is strange; you
would not think it: oh the wounds J have given for a very look; well hark
you, if it be not too late, I would be taken down, but I fear it is impossible,
and then every one goes in danger of his life by me


Take down your spirit, look you, dee see this inch and a half, how tall a
man do you think he was? He was twelve cu ^its high, and three yards compass
at the waste when I took him in hand first, i will draw him through a ring ere I
have done with him: I keep him now to break my poisons, to eat Spiders and
Toades, which is the only dish his heart wishes for; a Capon destroys him,
and the very sight of beef or mutton makes him sick; look, you shall see him
eat his supper, come on your ways, what say you to this Spider? look how he
leapes


Oh dainty.

Here, saw you that? how many legs now for the hanch of a Toade.


Twenty, and thank you sir, oh sweet Toade, oh admirable Toade.


This is very strange, I nere saw the like, I never keew Spiders and Toades
were such good meats before; will he not burst now


It shall nere ^well him, by to morrow he shall be an inch abated, and I can
with an other experiment plumpe him and highten him at my pleasure; i will warrant
i will take you down my Lord


Nay but dee here, do I look like a Spider-catcher, or Toade-eater.


Far be it from Shirkino, I have gentle pellets for your Lordship, shall melt
in your mouth, 'and take of your valor insensibly; Lozenges that shall comfort
your stomach, and but at a week restrain your fury two or three thoughts;
does your honor think I would forget my self, I show you by this Rat what I
can do by Art: your Lordship shall have an easy composition, no hurt in the
world in it; here take but half a dozen of these going to bed, e're morning; it
shall work gently, and in the virtue appear every day afterward


But if I find myself braking out into fury, I may take them often; here is for
your pellers of Lozenges, what rare physic is this? I Will put it in practice
presently, farewell Doctor


Happiness wait on your egregious Lordship, my physic Shall make your body
soluble, but for working on your spirit, believe it when you find it; with any
lies we must set forth siour'mples and compositions to utter them: so this is a
good days work; lean chaps lay up, and because you have performed hamsomly,
there is some silver for you, lay up my properties: It Is night already, thus we
knaves will thrive, when honest plainness know not how to live


Art sure she has taken it?

As sure as I am alive? she never eat with
Such an appetite, for I found none left, I would
Be loath to have it so sure in my belly, it will work
R ^rely twelve hours hence.

Thus we work sure then, time runs upon
The appointed hour, Valasco should rid me of all my
Fears at once, upon thy life be careful to direct
Him at his first approach, I am sick till she
Be delivered; be secret as the night, i will to my
Chamber, be very careful.

Art sure thou have the time right.


Doubt not, yonder is her chamber, the light speaks it; softly.


Whose there? Vallasco?

I.

That way, make no noise, things are prepared, softly
So, so, this is good I hope and weight too, my Lady
Berinthia will be sure enough anon, I shall nere
Get more higher, I had much ado to persuade her
To the spice, but I swore it was a cordial my Lady
Used her self, and poo ^e fool she has ^wallowed it
Sure.

Madam fear not I am your friend.

Who are you?

Stop her mouth, away.

So, so, they are gone, alas poor Valasco I pity thee,
But we creatures of polliticke Ladies must hold the
Same byas with our Mistresses, and it is some policy
To make them respect us the better, for fear our
Teeth be not strong enough to keep in our tongues:
Now must I study out some tale by morning to salute
My old Lord withal.

Ansilva?

Some body calls me, who is it?

It is I Valasco

What comes he back for? I hope the poison does
Not work already, where have you disposed her.

Disposed whom?

My Lady Berinthia.

Let me alone to dispose her, prithee where is the light?
Show us the way.

What way?

The way to her chamber? come, I know what
You are sick of, here each minute is an age till
I possess Berinthia.

This is pretty, I hope my lady is well.

Well?

My Lady Berinthia sir.

Do you mock me?

I mock you?

I shall grow angry, lead me to
Berinthias chamber, or --

Why sir, were not you here even now, and hurried
Her away, I have your gold well fare all good tokens;
I have performed my duty already sir, and you had my
Lady.

I am abused you are a cunning Devil, I hear and had
Berinthia, tell me, or with this pistol, I will soon
Reward thy treachery, where Berinthia?

Oh I beseech you do not fright me so, if you were
Not here even now, here was another that called
Himself Valasco, to whom I gave access, and
He has carried her away.

Am I awake? or do I dream this horror:
Where am I? who does know me, are you friends
Of Don Valasco?

Do you doubt us sir?

I doubt my self, who am I

Our noble friend Valasco,

It Is so, I am Valasco, all the Furies
Circle me round, oh teach me to be mad,
I am abused, infufferably tormented,
My very soul is whipped, it had been safer
For Catalina to have played with Serpents.

Thou talkest of wonders, where is Valasco?

He was here even now.

Who named Valasco?

It Was I, Catalina, here.

Could you pick none out of the stock of man
To mock but me, so basely?

Valasco be your self, resume your virtue.
My thoughts are clear from your abuse, it is
No time to vent our passions, fruitless rages,
Some has abused us both, but a revenge
As swift as lightning shall pursue their flight:
Oh I could fear my brains, as you respect
Your honors safety, or Berinthias love;
Haste to your lodging, which being nere our house,
You shall be sent for; seem to be raised up,
Let us alone to make a noise at home,
Fearful as thunder; try the event, this cannot
Do any hurt, you Ansilva shall
With clamors wake the household cunningly,
While I prepare my self.

I will suspend awhile.

Help, help, thieves, villains, murder my Lady:
Help oh my Lord, my Lady, murder thieves help.

What fearful cry is this, where are you?

Here oh I am almost killed.

Ansilva where art hurt?

All over sir, my Lady Berinthia is carried away
By Ruffians, that broke into her chamber, alas
Sees gone.

Whether? which way?
My sister Berinthia is violently taken out of her
Chamber, and here is Ansilva hurt, see look about,
Berinthia sister.

How Berin. gone ^ call up the servants,
Ansilva, how wast?

Alas Madam, I have not my senses about me, I am so
Frighted, vizards, and swords, and pistols, but my
Lady Berinthia was quickly seized upon, she is gone.

What villains durst attempt it?
I fear Valasco guilty of this rape.

Run one to his lodging presently, it will appear
I know he loved her, oh my Lord, my sister Berinthias lost,

How? foot my physic begins to work, i will come to you presently.


Where Is Diego? he is missing, run one to his chamber, here is Valasco.


It is apparent sir, Valascoes noble.

Berinthias stolen away.

Ha?

Her Chamber broken op ^, and she taken thence thy ^ night.


Confusion stay the these.

So, so, as you were saying, Berinthia was stolene ^ Way by some body, and --


Diego is not in his chamber.

Did break open the door?

I did, and found all empty.

How, Diego gone? that's strange, oh it workers again, I Will come to you
presently


I do suspect --
This some plot of Antonio,
Diego, a subtle villain,
Confirms himself an instrument by this absence;
What think Ansilva?

Indeed I heard some of them name Antonio.

Seb.

Ha?

It Is true upon my soul, oh false Antonio.

Unworthy Gentleman.

Let ^one have the honor to revenge, but I the wronged
Val ^sco, let me beg it sir.

Antonio, boy up before the day,
Upon my blessing I command thee post
To Eluas Castle, summon that false man
To quit his shameful action, bid him return
Thy sister back, whose honor will be lost
For ever in it, if he shall dare deny her,
Double thy Fathers spirit, call him to
A strickt account, and with thy sword enforce him,
Oh I could leap out of my age me thinks,
And combat him my self ^be thine the glory,
This stain will never wash off, I feel it settle
On all our blood, away, my curse pursue
This disobedience.

I had an interrest in Berinthia,
Why have not I commission, I have a sword,
Thirsleth to be acquainted with his veins;
It is too mean a satisfaction
To have her rendered, on his heart I Would write
A most just vengence.

Sir she is my sister, I have a sword dares tent
A wound as far as any; spare your valor

I have a trick to be rid of this fool, my Lord
Do you accompany my brother, you
I know are va ^lant.

Any whither, I Will make me ready prese ^tly.

My most unhappy sister.

Oh I could surfeit, I am confident
Antonio has her, it is revenge beyond
My expectation, to close up the eyes
Of his Berinthia, dying in his arms,
Poisoned maturely, mischief I shall prove
Thy constant friend, let weakness virtue love.

THe welcom'st guest that ever Eluas had
Sister, Villandras yare not sensible what treasure
You po ^^esse, I have no loves, I would not here divide.

Indeed Madam, yare as welcome here, as are my mother was.


And you are here as safe, as if you had an army for your Guard.


Safe armies, and guard; Berinthia ya ^e a Lady,
But I mean not to court you: guard ^notha, here is
A Toledo, a ^d an old arm, tough bones and sinews,
Able to cut off as stout a head as wags upon a shoulder,
Thart Antonios guest, welcome by the old bones
Of his Father, thou have a wall of bra ^^e about thee
My young D ^ffodill.

Nor think my noble cozen means you any dishonor here.


Dishonor, it is a language I never understood, yet
Throw off your fears Berinthia, yare in the power
Of him that dares not think
The least dishonor to you.

True by this busse jerkin, that has looked ith face o ^ an Army, and he lies
like a termagant, denies it, Antonio is Lord of the Castle, but i will command
fire to the gunnes, upon ^ any Renegado that confronts us, set thy heart at rest
my gilloflower, we are all friends I warrant thee, and he is a Turk that does
not honor thee from the hair of thy head, to thy pettitoes


Come b ^ not sad.

Put on fresh blood, yare not cheerful, how do you?

I know not how, nor what to answer you,
Your loves I cannot be ungrateful to,
Yare my best friends I think, but yet I know not
With what consent you brought my body hither.

Can you be ignorant what plot was l ^id
To take your fair life from you.

If all be not a dream, I do remember
Yo ^r servant Diego told me wenders, and
I owe you for my preservation, but --

Sh ^ote not at Buts, Cupids an atcher, here a fair mark, a f ^oles bolts
soon shot, my names Sforza still, my double Daisie


It is your happiness you have escaped the malice of your sister.


And it is worth
A noble gratitude to have been quit,
By such an honourer as Antonio is
Of fair Berinthi ^.

Oh but my Father, under whose displeasure I ever sink,

You are secure

As the poor Dear that being pursuid, for safety
Gets up a rock that over hangs the Sea,
Where all that she can see, is her destruction,
Before the waves, behind her enemies
Promise her certain ruin.

Feign not your self so hapless my Berinthi ^,
Ralse your dejected thoughts, be merry, come,
Think I am your Antonio.

It is not wisdom
To let our passed fortune, trouble us,
Since were they bad the memory is sweet,
That we have past them, look before you Lady,
The future most concerns.

You have awaked me, Antonio pardon,
Upon whose honor I dare trust my self,
I am resolved if you dare keep me here,
T'expect some happier issue.

Dare keep thee here? with thy consent, I dare
Deny thy Father, by this sword I dare,
And all the world.

Dare, what giant of valor dates hinder us, from daring to slit the weasands
of them that dare say, we dare not do any thing, that is to be dared under
the poles, I am old Sforza, that in my days have scoured rogues faces with hot
bals, made em cut cross capers, and sent them away with a powder, I have a
company of roaring bulls upon the walls, shall spit fire in the faces of any
ragamus ^ian that dares say, we dare not fight pell mell, and still my name is
Sforza


Sir your noble friend don Sebastionc is at the castle gate

Your brother Lady, and my honored friend,
Why do the gates not spread themselves, to open
At his arrival Sforza, it is Berinthiaes brother,
Sebastiano the example of all worth
And friendship, is come after his sweet sister,

Alas I fear.

Be not such a coward Lady, he cannot come
Without all goodness waiting on him, Sforza,
Sforza I say, what precious time we lose,
Sebastiano, I almost lose my self
In joy to meet him, break the iron bar ^
And give him entrance.

I Will break the walls down, if the gates be too little.

I much desire to see him.

Sister, now he is come, he did promise me
But a short absence, he of all the world
I would call brother, Castabella more
Then for his sisters love, oh he is a man
Made up of merit, my Berinthia
Throw off all clouds, Sebastianoes come.

Sent by my Father to --

What, to see thee? he shall see the^e he^re.
Respected like thy self, Berinthia,
Attended with Antonio, begirt with armies of thy servants
Oh my friend.

It Is yet in question sir, and will not be
So easily proved.

No sir, we will make you prove your self our friend.

What face have you put on? am I awake?
Or do I dream Sebastiano frowns.

Antonio I come not now to Complement,
While you were noble, I was not least of them
You called your friends, but you are guilty of
An action that destroys that name.

Bones a your Father, does he come to swagger,
My name is Sforza then.

No more,
I guilty of an action so dishonorable
Has made me unworthy of your friendship;
Come you are not in earnest, it is enough I know
My se'fe Antonio.

Add to him ungrateful.

It Was a foul breath delivered it, and were any
But Sebastiano, he should feel the weight
Of such a falsehood.

Sister you must along with me.

Now by my Fathers soul, he that takes her hence
Unless she give consent, treads on his grave,
Sebas ^iano, you are unnoble then,
It Is I that said it.

So it seem ^.

Antonio, for here I throw of all
The ties of love, I come to fetch a sister,
Dishonourably taken from her father;
Or with my sword to force thee render her:
Now if thou be a Soldier redeliver,
Or keep her with the danger of thy person ^,
Thou ca ^st ^ot be my brother, till we first
Be allied i ^ blood.

Promise me the hearing,
And that have any satisfaction,
Becomes my fame.

So, so, he will submit himself, it will be our honor.

Were in your power, would you not account it
A precious victory, in your sisters cause,
To dye your sword with any blood of him,
S ^v'd both her life and honor?

I were ungrateful.

You have told your self, and I have argume^nt to prove this.


Why would you have me think, my sister owes to you such preservation?


Oh Sebastiano,
Thou do not think what devil lies at home
Within a sisters bosom, Catalina,
(I know not with what worst of envy) laid
Force to this goodly building, and through poyso ^
H ^d robbed the earth of more then all the world,
Her virtue.

You must not beat my resolution off
With these inventions sir.

Be not cozend,
With your credulity, for my blood, I value it
Beneath my honor, and I dare by goodness,
I ^ such a quarrel kill thee: but hear all,
And then you shall have fighting your heart full.
Valasco was the man, appointed by
That goodly sister to steal Berinthia,
And Lord himself of this possession,
Just at that time; but hear and tremble at it,
She by a cunning poison should have breathed
Her soul into his arms, within two hours,
And so Valasco should have borne the shame
Of thest and murder; how do you like this sir.

You amaze me sir.

It Is true by honors self, hear it confirmed,
And when you will, I am ready.

Pity such valor should be imployd,
Upon no better cause, they will inform him.

Hark you sir, dee think this is true?

I dare maintain it.

That's another matter, why then the case is
Altered, what should we do fighting, and lose
Our lives to no purpose.

It seems you are his second.

I am Count de Monte Nigro.

And my names Sforza sir, you were not best to co ^e here to brave us, unless
you have more legs and arms ^t home, I have a saza shall pick holes in your
doublet, a ^d firke your shankes, my gallimau ^ry


I cannot but believe it, oh Berinthi ^,
I am wounded ere I fight.

Holds your resolve yet constant* if you have
Better opinion of your sword, then truth,
I am bound to answer, but I would I had
Such an advantage against another man,
As the justice of my cause, all valor fights
But with a sail against it.

Take a time to inform your father sir, ^my noble
Cozen is to be found here constant.

But will you back with me then?

Excuse me brother, I shall fall too soon
Upon my sisters malice, whose foul guilt
Will make me expect more certain ruin,

Now Sebestiano
Puts on his judgment, and assumes his nobleness,
Whilst he loves equity.

And shall I carry shame
To Villarezoes house, neglect of father,
Whose precepts binds me to return with her,
Or leave my life at Eluas, I must on,
I have heard you to no purpose, shall Berinthi ^
Back to Avero.

Sir she must not yet, it is dangerous.

Choose thee a second then, this Count and ^
Mean to leave honor here.

Honor me sir.

It Is done, Sebastiano shall report
(...) just and noble, Sforza swear
Upon my Sword, oh do not hinder me
If victory crown Sebastianoes arm.
I charge thee by thy honesty restore
This Lady to him, on whose lip I seal
My unstained faith.

Vmh, it is a rare physician, my spirit is abated.

Brother.

Brother.

And wilt ^hou be dishonourd?

Oh do not wrong the Gentleman, believe it
Dishonor nere dwelt here, and he has made
A most religious vow, not in a thought
To stain my innocence, he does not force me
Remember, what a noble friend, you make
A most just enemy, he saved my life,
Be not a murderer, take yet a time,
Run not your self in danger for a cause
Carries so little justice.

Faithsir, if you please take a time to think on it, a month or two or three,
they shall not say but we are honorable


You gave him to my heart a Gentleman, Seb whisp.
Complete with goodness, will you rob the world
And me at once, alas I love him.

Never man fought with a lesser heart, the conquest
Will be but many deaths, he is her brother,
My friend, this poor girls joy.

With all my heart, I Will post to Avero presently.

Let it be so Antonio.

Alas pore Castabella, what a conflict
Feast thou within thee, their fight wounds thee,
And I must die, who ere has victory:

Then friend again, and as Sebastiano,
I bid him welcome, and who loves Antonio
Must speak that language.

Enough, not a Masty upon the Castle wall ^
But shall bark too, I congratulate thee, if thou
Beelest friend to the Castle of Eluas, and still my name
Is Sforza.

Well said my brave Adelautado, come Sebasti ^^^,
And my Birinthia by to morrow we shall know
The truth of our felicity.

What are the Nobles more than common men ^
When all their honor cannot free them from
Shame and abuse; as greatness were a mark
Stuck by them but to give direction
For men to shoot indignities upon them?
Are we called Lords of riches we possess,
And can defend them from the ravishing hand
Of strangers, when our children are not safe
From thieves and robbers, none of us can challe ^ge
Such right to wealth and fortuues of the world,
Being things without us; but our children are
Essential to us, and participate
Of what we are: part of our very nature,
Our selves but cast into a younger mold,
And can we promise, but so weak assurance
Of so near treasures. O Villarezo shall
Thy age be trampled on, no, it shall not,
I will be known a father, Portugal
Shall not report this infamy unrevenged,
It will be a bar in Vilarez ^es arms
Past all posterity;
Come Cat ^lina, thou will stay with me,
Prepare to welcome home Sebastiano,
Whom I expect with honor, and that baggage
Ambitious girl Berinthia.

Alas sir; censure not her too soon,
Till she appear are guilty.

Here Is thy virtue still,
To excuse her Catalina, no believe it,
Shes naught, past hope, I have an eye can see
Into her very heart, thou art too innocent.
Valasco welcome too, Berinthia
Is not come home yet, but we shall see^ her
Brought back with shame; and is it not justice ha?
What can be shame enough?

Your daugh ^er sir?

My daughter? do not call her so, she has not
True blood of Vilarezo in her veins;
She makes her self a bastard, and deserves
To be ^ut off like a disordered branch,
Disgracing the fair tree she springs from.

Lay not so great a bourthen on Berinthia,
Her nature knows not to degenerate;
Upon my ^ life she was not yielding, to
The injurious action; if Antonio
Have played the thief, let your reven ^e fall there,
Which were I trusted with, although I doubt not
Sebastianoes f ^^y; he should feel it
More heavy than his Castle, what can be
Too just for such a sin?

Right, right Valasco, I do love thee fort,
It Is so, and thou shall see I have a sense
Worthy my birth and person.

'T will beco ^e you; but I marvel we heare^ nothing
Of their succes ^e at Elu ^s. by this time
I would have sent Antonio to warm
His fathers ashes, do you not think sir?
Sebastiano will not be remiss,
A gentle nature is abused with tales,
Which they know how to color; here is the Count.

How, the Count? I sent him thither to be rid on him;
The fool has better fortune than I wished him,
But now I shall hear that which will more comfort me,
My sisters death most certainly.

My Lord, I have rid hard, read there, your son
And daughter is well.

Ha, well?

Madam.

How does my sister?

In good health, she has commendations to you
In that letter.

And is Antonio living?

Yes, and remembers his service to you,

Has he then yielded up Berinthia?

He will yield up his ghost first, I know not we were
Going to flesh baste one another, I am sure but the
Matter of felony hangs still, who will cut it down;
I know not, Madam there is notable matter against you.

Me?

Upon my honor there is, be not angry with me,
No less than theft and murder, that letter is charged
Withal, but you will clear all I make no question, they Talk of poisoning.

Am I be ^ray'd?

Well, I smell, I smell.

What do you smell?

It was but a trick of theirs to save their lives,
For we were bent to kill all that came against us.

Catalina read here, Valasco, both of you,
And let me read your faces, ha? they wonder.

How ^ this, I steal Berinthia?

I poison my sister.

This does amaze me.

Father, this letter says I would have poisoned my poor sister, innocence
defend me


It will, it shall, come Jacquit you both,
They must n ^t thus fool me.

Madam I thought as much, my mind gave me, it
Was a l ^e, yes, you look like a poysoner, as much
As I look like a Hobbyhorse.

Was ever honest love so abused, have I
So poor reward for my affection.

It shall be so.

Madam I know not how the poison came in, but I
Fear some have betrayed our plot.

And how came you off my noble Count.

As you see without any wounds, but much against
My will I was but one, Sebastiano, that was the
Principal, took a demurre upon their allegation:
It seems, and so the matter is raked up in the Embers.

To make a greater fire, were you so cold
To credit his excuse, Antonio,
I should not have been so frozen,
As you love honor and revenge, give me
Some interest now, and if I do not
Show my self faithful, let Valasco have
No name within your memory, let me beg*
To be your Proxy sir, pity such blood,
As yours should be ignobly cast away;
Maddam speak for me.

No, J had rather lost this fool.

And you can get their consents.

You cannot sir in honor now go back.
J shall not think you love me, if my father
Point you such noble service to refuse it.

You hear what she says.

Count Monte nigro.

I am all fire with rage.

Valasco, you may accompany the Count,
There may be employment of your valor too;
Tell me at your return, whether my son
May prove a soldier, here is new warrant for
Antonioes death, if there be coldness urge it,
It Is my desire, i will study a better service.

I shall.

Away then both, no complement, I wish you eithe ^
Had a Pegasus, be happy, my old blood boyles, this
Must my peace secure, such sores as these must
Have a desperate cure.

This honor Madam of your self and brother,
Make me unhappy, when I remember, what
I came for, not to feast thus but to fight.

Pity true friendship should thus suffer.

Ha?

Music.

Some conceit of Sforza the old Captain*
Lets entertain it, some soldiers device,
A mask of Soldiers.
^odamercy Sfor ^^.

To your stations now my brave brats of Millitary
Discipline, enough, Sforza honors you, look to your
Charge Bullies, and be ready upon all occasions,
My invincible dub a dub knights of the Castle,
Qui vala.

We must speak with Don Sebastiano.

Must? Thou Art a Mushrumpe, mustin the Castle of El ^^^,
Monte nigro gives a letter.

Friends; Sforza.

W ^at, courting Ladies, by this time 'twas expected
You would have courted fame sir, and woed her to you;
You shall know me better.

I doubt you will never be better, ^ou shall now owe me
More than you shall account for.

Or else my curse, that word cries out for death.

My feats perplexe me.

Madam I do wonder
You can forget your honor, and reslect
On such unworthiness, wherein has Valasco
Showed you less merit.

Sir it becomes not me
To weigh your worths, nor would I learn of you
How to preserve my honor.

Sister.

Villandra ^.

Then J must take my leave, for I am sent for,
I am sorry for your fate, Madam I am exepected
By a father your virtue has made me yours.

Oh admirable physician ^

Sfor ^^, there is no remedy, but by all honor do it,
Sister, I am to wait on him, oh my poor girl
(...) be with thee, for a
(...) my absence.

You may w ^lke sir.

A ^^onio I must but now look on, you were
Bes ^ take (...) to out live him.

(...), I know not with what soul
^ draw my sword against thee

An ^onio I am driven in a storm
To (...) my self on thee, if not, any curse --
We must on sir.

Rare man of art Sharkino.

Guard thee Count.

Treacherous Sfor ^a, have thou brought us hither, to be stroke dead?


Hold Gentlemen, give me audience.

What Is the matter my Lord.

(...) I had forgot my self,
This is my ague day.

How?

Yes a sextile ague, look you, do you not see me shake, (...) Doctor, it will
be as much as my life is worth if ^ should fight a stroke


Hell on such baseness, v ^cele engage no more;
Let our ^words try it out.

Sebast ^^o hold, thart not so ill be friended,
Exchange a person, i will leap the battlement.

Withal my heart, I am sorry it happens so ^^for ^nately, oh rare phis ^tian!


Good cozen grant it.

What faies (...).

I conjure you by all honor.

It is granted;

He shall nor go.

Me ^e him my Lord, you will become his place of a
Spectator best.

Sebastiano brother.

Antonio, here me.

Guard thee Valasco then.

O brother spare him for my sake.

Sebastiano every wound thou give him,
Draws blood from me.

Sebastiano, remember he is thy friend.

Antonio it is my brother, with whose blood
Thou dyest thy sword.

When thou liv'st again shall be more honorable
Sebastiano do you observe the advantage,
Yet think upon it.

It is not in my power. I value not the odds.

Hold, Antonio, is this thy love to me, it is not noble.

So thy death makes the scale even.

Antonio hold, Berinthia dies.

Sebastiano, Castabella sinkes for sorrow, murder, help
I will leap down.

Where art Berinthia, let me breath my last upon thy lip, make haste, least I
die else


Antonio before tho ^ dyest cut off my hand, art wounded mortally?


To die by thee is more then death, Sforza be honest,
But love thy sister for me, I me past hope,
Thou have undone another in my death.

Antonio stay oh cruel brother*

Berinthia thy lip farewell, and friend, and all the world.

The gate is open, I am sworn to render.

He Is not dead, his lips are warm, have you no balsome, a Surgeo ^; dead, some
charitable hand send my soul after him

Away, away.

It will be easy to die,
All life is but a walk in misery.

MY friend, my noble friend, that had deserved
Most honorably from me, by this hand
Divorced from life, and yet I have the use ont,
Haplesle Sebastiano; oh Berinthia,
Let me for ever lose the name of Brother,
Will thou not curse my memory, give me up
To thy just hate a murderer.

Ha, this must not be Sebastiano,
I shall be angry if you throw not off
This mellancholly, it does ill become you,
Do you repent your duty, were the action
Again presented to be done by thee:
And being done, again should challenge from thee
A new performance, thou would show no blood
Of Vilarezoes, if thou did not run
To act it, though all horror, death and vengeance
Dogged thee at thy heels; come I am thy Father,
Value my blessing, and for other peace
I Will to the King, let me no more see thee cloudy.

That was his Father.

No more, farewell, be all silence.

Sir.

He Is newly gone that way, may soon ore take him

My business points at you sir.

At me, what news? thou have a face of horror, more welcome speak it.


If your name be Don Sebastiano, sir
I have a token from a friend.

I have no friend alive boy, carry it back,
It Is not to me, I Have not another friend
In all the world.

He that has sent you sir this gift, did love you,
You Will say your self he did.

Ha, name him prithee.

The friend I came from was Antonio.

Thou lie, and thart a villane, who has sent thee
To tempt Sebastianoes soul to act on thee
Another death, for thus afrighting me.

Indeed I do not mock, nor come to afright you
Heaven knows my heart, I know Antonioes dead,
But it was a gift he in his life designed
To you, and I have brought it.

Thou do not promise cozenage, what gift is it?

It is my self sir, while Antonio lived, I was his boy,
But never did boy loose so kind a Master, in his life he
Promised he would bestow me, so much was his love
To my poor merit, on his dearest friend,
And named you sir, if heaven should point out
To overlive him, for he knew you would
Love me the better for his sake, indeed
I will be very honest to you, and
Refuse no service to procure your love
^^d good opinion to me.

Can it be
Thou were his boy, oh thou should hate me then,
Thou Art false, I dare not trust thee, unto him
Thou show thee now unfaithful to accept
Of me, I killed him thy Master, it was a friend
he could commit thee to, I only was,
Of all the stock of men his enemy,
His cruellest enemy.

Indeed I am sure it was, he spoke all truth,
And had he lived to have made his will, I know
He had bequeathed me as a legacy
To be your boy; alas I am willing sir
To obey him in it, had he laid on me
Command, to have mingled with his sacred dust,
My unprofitable blood, it should have been
A most glad sacrifice, and 'thad been honor
To have done him such a duty sir, I know
You did not kill him with a heart of malice,
But in contention with your very soul
To part with him.

All is as true as Oracle by heaven,
Do thou believe so?

Indeed I do.

Yet be not rash;
T ^is no advantage to belong to me,
I have no power nor greatness in the Court,
To raise thee to a fortune, worthy of
So much observance as I shall expect
when thou art mine.

All the ambition of my thoughts shall be
To do my duty sir.

Besides, I shall afflict thy tenderness
With sollitude and passion, for I am
Only in love with sorrow, never merry,
Wear out the day in telling of sad tales,
Delight in sighs and tears; sometimes I walk
To a Wood or River purposely to challenge
The bouldest Echo, to send back my groans
In The height I break them, come I shall undo thee.

Sir, I shall be most happy to bear part
In any of your sorrows, I nere had
So hard a heart but I could shed a tear
To bear my Master company.

I will not leave thee if thou wilt dwell with me
For wealth of Indies, be my loved boy,
Come in with me, thus I Will begin to do
Some recompense for dead Antonio.

So I will dare my fortune to be cruel,
And like a mountanous piece of earth that suckes
The balls of hot Artillery, I will stand
And weary all the gunshot; oh my soul
Thou have been too long icy Alps of snow;
Have buried my whole nature, it shall now
Turn Element of fire, and fill the air
With bearded Come ^s, threatening death and horror
For my wronged innocence, contemned, disgrac ^d,
Nay murdered, for with Antonio
My breath expired, and I but borrow this
To court revenge for justice, if there be
Those furies which do wait on desperate men,
As some have thought, and guide their hands to mischief.
Come from the womb of night, assist a maid
Ambitious to be made a monster like you;
I will not dread your shapes, I am disposed
To be at friendship with you, and want naught
But your black aid to seal it.

First i will lock up thy
Tongue, and tell thee my honorable meaning, so,
To tell you the truth, it is a love-powder, J had it of the
Brave Doctor, which I would have thee to sugar
The Ladies cup withal, for my sake wo't do it:
And if I marry her shat find me a noble
Master, and thou shall be my chief Gentlewoman
In Ordinary; keep thy body loose, and thou shall
Want no gown I warrant thee; wo't do it.

My Lord, I think my Lady is much taken with your
worth already, so that this will be superfluous,

I Nay think she has cause enough, but I have a great
Mind to make an end on it, to tell you true, there are
Half a dozen about me, but I had rather she should have
Me than an other; and my blood is grown so boisterous
For my body, that's another thing; so that if thou will
Do it Ansilva, thou will do thy Lady good service,
And live in the favor of Count de Monte Nigr ^;
I will make thy children kin to me, if thou wo't
Do It.

I am your honors handmaid, but --

Here Is a Diamond, prithee wear it, be not modest.

It Is done my Lord, urge it no further.

But be secret too for my honors sake, we great men
Do not love to have our actions laid open to the
Broad face of the world, I Will get thee with child,
And marry thee to a Knight, my brave Ansilva, take
The first opportunity.

Jf there be any virtue in the powder, prepare to
Meet your wishes my noble Lord.

Thy Count de monte nigro expect to be a Lady.

Ansilva.

Madam.

Nay you need not hide it, I heard the conference,
And know the virtue of the powder, let me see it
Or i will discover all.

I am undone.

No, here take it again, i will not prevent
My sisters happiness and the Counts desire,
I am no Tell-tale good Ansilva giv't her,
And heavens succeed the operation,
I beg on my knee; fear not Ansilva,
I am all silence.

Indeed Madam, then she shall have it presently.

Sir, if the opportunity I use
To comfort you be held a fault, and that
I keep not distance of a servant, lay it
Upon my love; indeed if it be an error
It springs out of my duty.

Prithee boy be patient;
The more I strive to throw off the remembrance
Of dead Antonio, love still rubbes the wounds
To make them bleed afresh.

Alas they are past,
Bind up your own for honors sake,
And show love to your self, pray do not lose your reason,
To make your grief so fruitless; I have procured
Some music sir to quiet those sad thoughts,
That makes such war within you.

Alas good boy, it will but add more weights
Of dullness on me, I am stung with worse
Than the Tarantula, to be cured with music
'T has the exactest unity, but it cannot,
Accord my thoughts.

Sir this your couch
S ^emes to invite so small repose;
Oh I beseech you taste it, i will beg
A little leave to sing;
Sweet sleep charm his sad senses, and gentle
Thoughts let fall your flowing numbers, here round
About hover cae ^estiall Angels with your wings
That none offend his quiet, sleep begins
To cast his nets over me too, i will obey,
And dream on him, that dreams not what I am.

Nature does wrestle with me, but revenge
Does arm my love against it, justice is
Above all tie of blood Sebastiano
Thou art the first shall tell Antonioes ghost
How much I loved him.

Oh stay thy hand Berinthia? no
Thou Have don't, I wish thee heavens forgiveness, I cannot
Tarry to hear thy reasons, at many doors,
My life runs out, and yet Berinthia
Does in her name give me more wounds then these,
Antonio, oh Antonio, we shall now
Be friends again.

He Is dead, and yet I live, but not to fall
Less then a conftellation, more flames must
Make up the fire that Berinthia
And her revenge, must bathe in.

Sebastiano, sister.

murder.

There Is wildfire in my bowels, sure I am poisoned;
Oh Berinthia.

Ha, ha.

Help me to tear Ansilva, I am poisoned by
The Count and this fury.

Ha, ha.

Do you laugh hereat.

Yes queen of hell to see thee
Sink in the glory of thy hope for bliss:
But art sure the art poisoned, ha?

Nay I have my part on it, I did but sip, and my belly
Swelleto ^; call you this love-powder, Count Monte
Nigro has poisoned us both.

You Are a pair of witches, and because
I Will keep your potion working, know you are both
Poisoned by me, by me Berinthia,
Being thus tormented with my wrongs,
I armed my self with all provision
For my revenge, and had in readiness
That faithful poison which in the opportunity
I put upon Ansilva for the exchange
Of the amorous powder; oh fools, my soul
Ravish thy self with laughter, politsion
My eldest devil sister, does the heat
Offend your stomach, troth charity, a little charity
The Only Antidote, that's cold enough:
Look here is Sebastiano;
Now horror strike thy soul, to whose fearelesse heart
I sent this punyard, for Antonioes death;
And if that piece of thy damnation
Ansilva had not don't, I meant to have writ
Revenge with the same point upon thy breast;
But I do surfeit in this brave prevention:
Sleep, sleep Antonioes ashes, and now open
Thou marbell chest to take Berinthia
To mingle with his dust.

I have not so much heart as to curse, must I die?

Here my Lord, alas he is dead, my Sebastiano

Catalina.

I am poisoned.

Ha, Defend good heaven, by whom.

I am poisoned too.

Rack not my soul amazement, it is a dream sure.

Your Love-powder has poisoned us both.

What will become of me now, I would I were hanged
To be out of my pain, by this flesh, as I am a Count.
I bought it of the Doctor for good love-powder;
But Madam I hope you are not poisoned in earnest.

The devil on your fooleship, oh I must walk
The dark foggy way that spits fire and brimstone,
No physic to restore me? send for Sharkino, a cooler
A cooler, there ^ a Smiths forge in my belly, and the
Devil blows the Bellows, Snow-water, Berinthia
Has poisoned me, sink by mine own engine;
I must hence, hence, farewell, will you let me die so?
Confusion, torment, death, hell.

I am glad with all my heart that Berinthia has
Poisoned her, yet --

Oh it becomes thee bravely, hear me sir.
Antonioes death and my dishonours now
Have just revenge; I stabbed Sebastiano, poy ^oned my sister,
Oh but they made too soon a fury of me,
And split the patience, from whose dreadful breach
Came these consuming fires, your passions fruitless;
My soul is reeling forth I know not whether;
Oh father my heart weeps tears, for you I dye, oh see
A maids revenge with her own Tragedy.

Ansilva, oh thou dull wretch, hell on thy cursed
Weakness, thou gave me
The poison, but I lick earth, hold, a gentleman
Usher to support me, oh I am gone, the poison
Now has torn my heart in pieces, Moritur.

I am Planet struck, a direful Tragedy, and have
I no part in it: how do you like it, ha? wast not
Done toth' life? they are my own children; this was
My eldest girl, this Berinthia the Tragedian,
Whose love by me resisted, was mother of all this
Horror; and there is my boy too, that slew Antonio
Valiantly, and fell under his sisters rage, what
Art thou boy?

I Will tell you now I am no boy,
But hapless Castabella, sister to
The slain Antonio, I had hoped to have
Some recompense by Sebastianoes love,
For whose sake in disguise I thus adventured
To purchase it, but death has ravished us,
And here I bury all my joys on earth.

Sweet lady, here is Count de Monte nigro alive
To be your servant.

Hence dull greatness.

Were you a friend of Sebastiano then?

I Will give you testimony.

No, I believe you, but thou can not be my daughter;
It Is false, he lies that says Beriathia
Was author of their deaths, 'twas Villarez ^,
A fathers wretched curiosity, dead, dead, dead.

And I will leave the world too, for I mean
To spend the poor remainder of my days
In some Religious house, married to heaven,
And holy prayers for Sebastianoes soul,
And my lost brother.

Will you so?

I pray let Castabella have the honor
To enshrine his bones, and when my breath expires,
For sorrow promises I shall not live
To see more Suns, let me be buried by him
As near as may be possible, that in death
Our dust may meet, oh my Sebastiano,
Thy wounds are mine.

Come I am armed, take up their bodies, Castabella you
Are not chief mourner here, he was my son,
Remember that, Berinthia first, she was the
Youngest, put her in the pithole first, then Catalina;
Strew, strew flowers enough upon em, for they
Were maids; now Sebastiano, take him
Up gently, he was all the sons I had; now
March, come you and I are twins in this days
Unhappiness, we will match together, follow close
We Will overtake em, softly, and as we go,
We Will dare our fortune for another woe.


