NOw such a murmuring to rise upon so trifling a thing,
In all my life never saw I before:
And yet I have been Officer this seven year and more*
The Tyler and his wife are in a great rage,
Affirming their Daughter to be under age.

Art thou the Collector of the Kings task?

I am Tyler why do thou ask?

Because thou go beyond the Commission of the King,
We grant to his Highness pleasure in every thing:
Thou have thy task money for all that be here,
My Daughter is not fourteen years old, therefore she goes clear.

And because thou say so, I should believe thee.

Choose whether thou will or no, thou gettest no more of me.
For I am sure thy Office does not arm thee with such authority.
Thus to abuse the poor people of the Country.
But chiefest of all vilde villain as thou art,
To play so unmanly and beastly a part,
As to search my daughter thus in my presence.

Why base villain, will thou teach me what to do?
VVilt thou prescribe me mine office, and what belonges thereto?

What villain, do strike me? I swear by the rood,
As I am Jack Straw, thou shall buy it with thy blood.
There lie and be well paid for thy pain.

O help, help, the kings officer is slain.

How now Jack Straw, does any body abuse thee?

Alas Wat, I have killed the kings officer in striking rashly.

A small matter to recover a man that is slain,
Blow wind in his tail, and fetch him again.

Content thee, it is no matter, and Jack Straw god a mercy,
Herein thou have done good service to thy country:
Were all inhumaine slaves so served as he,
England would be civil, and from all such dealings free.

By gogs blood my masters, we will not put up this so quietly,
We owe God a death, and we can but die:
And though the fairest end of a Rebel is the gallows.
Yet if you will be ruled by me,
VVele so deal of ourselves as well revenge this villainy,

The king God wot knows not what is done by such poor men as we,
But well make him know it, if you will be ruled by me:
Here Is Parson Ball an honest Priest, and tells us that in charity,
We may stick together in such quarrels honestly.

What is he an honest man? the devil he is, he is the Parson of the Town,
You think there is no knauerie hid under a black gown,
Find him in a pulpit but twice in the year,
And I Will find him forty times in the alehouse tasting strong bear.

Neighbors, neighbors, the weakest now a days goes to the wall,
But mark my words, and follow the counsel of John Ball.
England is grown to such a pass of late,
That rich men triumph to see the poor beg at their gate.
But I am able by good scripture before you to prove,
That God does not this dealing allow nor love.
But when Adam delued, and Eve span,
Who was then a Gentleman.
Brethren, brethren, it were better to have this community,
Then to have this difference in degrees:
The landlord his rent, the lawyer his fees.
So quickly the poor man's substance is spent,
But merrily with the world it went,
When men eat berries of the hauthorne tree,
And thou help me, I Will help thee,
There was no place for surgerie,
And old men knew not usury:
Now it is come to a woeful pass,
The Widow that has but a pan of brass,
And scarce a house to hide her head,
Sometimes no penny to buy her bread,
Must pay her Landlord many a groat,
Or it will be pulled out of her throat:
Brethren mine so might I thrive,
As I wish not to be alive,
To see such dealings with extremity,
The Rich have all, the poor live in misery:
But follow the counsel of John Ball,
I promise you I love ye all:
And make division equally,
Of each man's goods indifferently,
And rightly may you follow Arms,
To rid you from these civil harms.

Well said Parson so may it be,
As we purpose to prefer thee:
We will have all the Rich men displaste*
And all the bravery of them defaste,
And as rightly as I am Jack Straw,
In spite of all the men of Law,
Make thee Archbishop of Caunterberie,
And Chauncellor of England or I Will die.
How say thou Wat, shall it be so?

I Jack Straw, or else I Will bide many a foul blow.
It shall be no other but he,
That thus favors the Communaltie,
Stay we no longer prating here,
But let us roundly to this gear,
It Is more than time that we were gone,
VVele be Lords my Masters every one.

And I my Masters will make one,
To fight when all our foes be gone,
Well shall they see before well lack,
VVele stuff the Gallows till it crack.

I hope we shall have men inow,
To aid us herein Wat, how think thou?

Tag and rag thou needst not doubt.

But who shall be Captain of the Rowt.

That shall you two for all our Kentish men.

Fellow Captain welcome lets about it.

A greed fellow Captains to London.

Here Is even work toward for the Hangman, did you ever see such a crew,
After so bad a beginning, what is like to ensue?
Faith even the common reward for Rebels, Swingledome swangledome, you know as
well as I
But what care they, ye hear them say they owe God a death, and they can but
die
It Is dishonor for such as they to dye in their bed,
And credit to cape: under the Gallows all save the head:
And yet by my say the beginning of this Riot,
May chance cost many a man's life before all be at quiet:
And I faith I Will be amongst them as forward as the best.
And if ought fall out but well, I shall shift amongst the rest,
And being bu^ a boy, may hide me in the throng,
Tyborn stand fast, I fear you will be laden ere it be long.

And yet Lord Archbishop your Grace does know,
That since the latest time of Parliament,
Wherein this task was granted to the King,
By general consent of either house,
To help his wars which he intends to France,
For wreake and just recovery of his right,
How slow their payment is in every place,
That better a King not to command at all,
Than be beholding to ungrateful minds.

Lord Treasorer it seems strange to me,
That being won with reason and regard,
Of true succeeding Prince, the common sort,
Should be so slack to give or grudge the gift,
That is to be employed for their behoof,
Hard and unnatural be the thoughts of theirs,
That suck the milk, and will not help the Well,
The King himself being now but young of age:
If things should fall out otherwise than well,
The blame does fall upon the Counselor,
And if I take my aim not all awrie,
The Multitude a Beast of many heads,
Of misconceiuing and misconstruing minds,
Reputes this last benevolence to the King,
Given at high Court of Parliament,
A matter more requirde for private good,
Than help or benefit of common weal,
Wherein how much they wrong the better sort,
My conscience bears witness in the cause.

My Lords, because your words not worthles are,
Because they stand on reasons surest ground,
And tend unto the profit of the King,
Whose profit is the profit of the Land,
Yet give me leave in reverence of the cause,
To speak my mind touching this question:
When such as we do see the peoples hearts,
Expressed as far as time will give them leave,
With hartines of their benevolence,
My thinks it were for others happiness,
That hearts and purses should together go:
Misdeeme not good my Lords of this my speech,
Since well I wot the Noble and the slave,
And all do live but for a Common weal,
Which Common weal in other terms, is the Kings.

The Justices and Sheriffs of Kent, sends greetings to your Honors here by
me

My Lords, this brief does openly unfold,
A dangerous task to us and all our trains,
With speed let us impart the news unto my Lord the King,
The fearful news that whilst the flame does but begin,
Sad policy may serve to quench the fire:
The Commons now are up in Kent, let us not suffer this first attempt too
far

My friend what power have they assembled in the field.

My Lord a twenty thousand men or there about.

See here the peril that was ^ate foreseen,
Ready to fall on this unhappy Land:
What barbarous minds for grieuance more than needs,
Unnaturally seeks wreake upon their Lord,
Their true anointed Prince, their lawful king:
So dare this blind unshamefast multitude,
Lay violent hands they wot not why nor where:
But be thou still as best becomes thee,
To stand in quarrel with thy natural Liege,
The Sun may sometime be eclipst with Clouds,
But hardly may the twinkling stars obscure,
Or put him out of whom they borrow light.

I marry Wat this is another matter, me thinks the world is changed of late,
Who would live like a beggar, and may be in this estate.

We are here four Captains just, Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, Hob Carter, and
Tom Miller
Search me all England and find four such Captains, and by gogs blood I Will be
hanged

So you will be nevertheless I stand in great doubt.

Captain Straw, and Captain Tyler, I think I have brought a company of
Essex men for my train
That will never yield, but kill or else be slain.

And for a little Captain I have the vantage of you all,
For while you are a fighting, I can creep into a quart po^ I am so small.

But Masters what answer made Sir John Morton at Rochester,
I heard say he would keep the Castle still, for the Kings use.

So he did til I fetched him out by force, and I have his wife and children
pledges, for his speedy return from the King, to whom he is gone with our
message


Let him take heed he bring a wise answer to our worships, or else his
pledges goes to the pot

Captain Straw, how many men have we in the field,

Marry Captain Carter, about fifty thousand men.

Where shall we pitch our tents to lie in safety.

Marry Hob upon Blacke-heath beside Greenwich, there well lie,
And if the King will come thither to know our pleasures so it is: if not, I
know what well do

Gogs blood Jack, have we the cards in our hands?
Lets take it upon us while we have it.

I marry, for you know not how long you shall hold it.
Fifty thousand men they have already in Arms that will draw together,
If we hang together as fast, some of us shall repent it.

This strange unwelcome and unhappy news,
Of these unnatural Rebels and unjust,
That threaten wrack unto this wretched Land,
Aye me affrights my woman's mazed mind,
Burdens my heart, and interrupts my sleep,
That now unless some better tidings come,
Unto my son their true anointed King.
My heavy heart I fear will break in twain,
Surcharged with a heavy load of thoughts.

Madam, your Graces care in this, I much commend,
For though your son my Lord the King be young,
Yet he will see so well unto him self,
That he will make the prowdest Rebel know,
What it is to move or to displease a King,
And though his looks bewray such lenity,
Yet at advantage he can use extremity:
Your Grace may call to mind that being a king,
He will not put up any injury,
Especially of base and common men,
Which are not worthy but with reverence,
To look into the Princely state of Kings,
A King sometimes will make a show of courtesy,
Only to fit a following policy:
And it may be the King determines so,
That he will try before he trust a foe.

True Madam, for your Graces son the King,
Is so well ruled by diverse of his Pieres,
As that I think the prowdest foe he has,
Shall find more work than he will take in hand,
That seeks the downfall of his Majesty:
I hope the Council are too wise for that,
To suffer Rebels in aspiring pride,
That purpose treason to the Prince and state.
In good time, see where my Lord the King,
Does come accompanied with the Bishop and Lord Treasorer.

I marvel much my Lords what rage it is,
That moves my people whom I love so dear,
Under a show of quarrel good and just,
To rise against us thus in mutinies,
With threatening force against our state and us:
But if it be as we are given to know,
By Letters and by credible report,
A little spark has kindled all this fire,
Which must be quenched with circumspect regard,
Before we feel the violence of the flame:
Mean while, sweet Lady Mother be content,
And think their malice shall not iniure you,
For we have tools to crop and cut them off,
Ere they presume to touch our Royal self,
And thus resolve, that you secure shall be,
What hard mishap soever fall to me.
Health and good hap befall your Majesty.

My Lord here is a messenger from Kent,
That craves access unto your Majesty.

Admit him near, for we will hear him speak,
It Is hard when twixt the people and the King,
Such terms of threats and parlies must be had,
Would any Gentleman or man of worth,
Be seen in such a cause without offense,
Both to his God, his Country, and his Prince,
Except he were enforced thereunto?

I cannot think so good a Gentleman,
As is that Knight Sir John Morton I mean,
Would entertain so base and vild a thought:
Nor can it sink into my woman's head,
That were it not for fear or policy,
So true a bird would file so fair a nest,
But here he comes, O so my longing mind,
Desires to know the tidings he does bring.

The Commons of Kent salute your Majesty,
And I am made their unhappy messenger:
My Lord, a crew of Rebels are in field,
And they have made commotions late in Kent,
And drawn your people to a mutiny:
And if your Grace see not to it in time,
Your Land will come to ruin by their means,
Yet may your Grace find remedy in time,
To quallifie their pride that thus presume.

Who are the Captains of this Rebel rowt,
That thus do rise against their anointed King?
What be they men of any worth or no?
If men of worth, I cannot choose but pity them.

No my good Lord, they be men of no great account,
For they be none but Tylers, Thatchers, Millers, and such like.
That in their lives did never come in field,
Before this mutanie did call them sorth:
And for security of my back return,
Upon this message which I showd the King,
They keep my wife and children for a pledge,
And hald me out from forth my Castle at Rochester,
And swore me there to come unto your Majesty,
And having told you their minds,
I hope your Grace will pardon me for all:
In that I am enforced thereunto.

How many men have they assembled in the field?

I think my Lord about twenty thousand men,
But if your Grace would follow my advice,
Thus would I deal with these Rebellious men,
I would find time to parley with some of them,
And know what in their minds they do intend,
For being armed with such treacherous thoughts,
They may perform more than your Grace expects.

With speed return to those unnatural men,
And see Sir John you greet them thus from us,
Tell them that we our self will come to them,
To understand their meaning and their minds:
And tell them if they have any evil sustaind,
Our self will see sufficient recompense:
Go good Sir John, and tell them upon the Thames,
Our self will meet with them,
There to confer concerning their avail,
Do so Sir John and kindly recommend us to them all.

We shall fulfill your graces mind in this,
And thus I take my Conge of your Majesty,
VVishing your Grace thrice Nestors years to reign,
To keep your Land, and guard your Royal Train,

Farewell good Knight and as thou dare remember them though they forget
themselves

Your grace herein is very well aduisd,
With resolution fitting your degree,
Your Grace must show your self to be a King,
And rule like Gods visgerent here on earth,
The looks of Kings do lend both life and death,
And when a King does set down his decree,
His sentence should be irreuocable,
Your grace herein has shown your Princely mind,
In that you hate to pray on carren flesh,
Such prays befits not Kings to pray upon,
That may command and countermand their own.
I hope my Lord this message so will prove,
That public hate will turn to private love.
And therefore I say my Lord you have answered well,
The task was given your Grace by Act of Parliament,
And you have reason to demand your dew.

My Lords I hope we shall not need to fear,
To meet those men that thus do threaten us.
We will my Lords to morrow meet with them,
And hear my Lords what it is that they demand.
Mother your Grace shall need to take no care,
For you shall in our Tower of London stay,
Till we return from Kent to you again.
My Lord see every thing prepared for us:
And Mother thus I leave your Majesty,
You to the Tower, and I must hence to Kent,

My Lord if so you please take my advise herein,
That speaks in love and duty to your grace:
I shall in every matter privilege your Majesty and all your Lordly train.
I mean against your Manor of Greenewich town,
And so amidst the stream may houer safe,
Mean while they send some few and chosen men,
To give your Grace to understand their minds,
And thus my Lord I have adventured,
To show your Majesty my mind herein.

IT is good to make provision, for peradventure we shall lack victuals and
we lie in camp on Black Heath long
And in faith as long as this Goose lasts well not starve:
And as many good fellows as will come to the eating of her, come and welcome.
For in faith I came lightly by her,
And lightly come lightly gone,
We Captains are Lords within our selves,
And if the world hold out we shall be Kings shortly.

The rest of my fellow Captains are gone before to Grenewich to meet the
King
That comes to know our minds,
And while they be about it:
I Will make good cheer, with my Goose here,
What Is the Goose flowne away without her head.

Here Is a stir more than needs,
What means the King thus to abuse us?
And makes us run about his pleasure, and to no end.
He promised us to meet us on the water,
And by Lady as soon as we came at the water side,
He fair and flat turns his Barge and away he goes to London.
I tell thee Wat we will not put up this abuse.

By gogs blood Captain Straw, we will remove our camp, and away to London
roundly
And there well speak with him, or were know why we shall not.

God amarcie Wat and ere we have done,
We will be Lords every one.

Gentle Jack Straw, in one line let us draw,
And well not leave a man of law.
Nor a paper worth a hawe,
And make him worse than a dawe,
That shall stand against Jack Straw.

Me thinks you might do well to answer the King,
In the name of the whole company:
Some dossen or twenty men for the nonce, that may deliver the minds of you all
in few words

Sir John Morton you are an Ass, to tell us what we have to do,
Hold your prating you were best.

I tell thee Sir John thou abusest us*
But lets to London as fast as we can.
My Lords if all our men are come unto the shore,
Let us return again into the Town
These people are not to be talked withal,
Much less with reason to be ordered.
That so unorderly with shrikes and cries,
Make show as though they would invade us all.
I have not heard nor read of any King*
So ^^gently o^ his people entertaind.

Sir John what was the cause the King returned so soon,
And with such (...) so quickly took the shore.

Bargeman the King had reason for the same, warrant thee he was not ^ll aduisde.

I think he meant to have commenst some talk with that (...)

He meant so indeed Spencer but you heard how it fell out*

Not well I held my stearne so hard.

It Was thus, the King and all his company,
Being rowd with Ores so far as Greenewich Town,
It was a world to see what Troops of men,
Like Bees that swarm about the honey hiue.
Began strew the grauill ground and sandy plain,
That filled the Air with cries and fearful noise.
And from the water did an echo rise:
That pearst the years of our renowned King,
Affrighting so his heart with strong conceit,
Of some unhappy grievous stratigene;
That trust me with my ears I heard him say,
He thought they would have all like Spaniels,
Taken water despretly and (...) him.
So did they all yfare like (...) men,
That time he thought to speed away apace,
And take the best advantage of the place.

Indeed I could not greatly blame his Majesty,
My self was not so scarde this seven year:
My thought there was sufficient mouths enough,
At highest tide to have drawn the Thames dry.

Spencer ere it flow thrice at London bridge,
London I fear will hear of worser news.

Neighbors you that keep the gates, let the Kings liege people in, or we
(...) be feign to aid them with bals of wild fire or some other devise, for
they have spoilde all Southwarke* let out all the prisoners, broke up the
Marshalsea and the Kings bench, and made great havoc in the Burrowe here

Therefore I pray you let them in.

Porter open the gate, if thou love thy self, or thine own life, open the
gate

You have a certain spare Goose came in to be roasted,
She is enough by this.

What means these wretched miscreants,
To make a spoil of their own country men:
Unnatural Rebels what so ere,
By foreign foes may seem no whit so strange.
As Englishmen to trouble England thns
Well may I term it insest to the Land.
Like that foul lawles force and violence,
Which Cyneris did offer to his child.
O happy time from all such troubles free,
What now alas is like to be the end of this attempt,
But that so long as they are glutted all with blood, they bath therein.
Sir here it is set down by our Captains that as many of you as cannot say
bread and cheese, in good and perfect English, ye die for it, and that was the
cause so many strangers did die in Smithfield

Let me hear you say bread and cheese.
Brocke and Keyse.

SIr Newton, and Lord Mayor, this wrong that I am offered,
This open and unnatural injury,
A King to be thus hardly handled,
Of his own people and no other foes,
But such as have bin brought up and bred in his own bosom,
Nourished with his tender care,
To be thus robbed of Honor and of friends,
Thus daunted with continual frights and fears,
Haled on to what mishap I cannot tell:
More heard mishap than had of like bin mine,
Had I not marked bin to be a King.

It shall become your Grace most Gracious Lord,
To bear the mind in this aflicted time,
As other Kings and Lords has done before,
Armed with sufferance and magnanimity,
The one to make you resolute for chance,
The other forward in your resolution:
The greatest wrong this rowt has done your Grace,
Amongst a many other wicked parts,
Is in frighting your worthy Lady Mother,
Making foul slaughter of your Noble men,
Burning up Books and (...) of records,
D^^^cing houses of (...),
Saint I^^es in Smithfie^d, the Sauoy and such like,
And beating down like wolves, the better sort,
The greatest wrong in my opinion is,
That in Honor does your person touch,
I mean they call your Majesty to Parle,
And over bear you with a multitude,
As if you were a vassal not a King:
O wretched minds of vild and barbarous men,
For whom the heavens have secret wreake in store:
But my Lord with reverence and with pardon too,
Why comes your Grace into Smithfield near the crew,
Unarmed and guarded with so small a trai^e.

If clemency may win their raging minds,
To civil order, I Will approve it first.
They shall perceive I come in quiet wise,
Accompanied with the Lord Mayor here alone,
Besides our Guard that does attend on us.

May it please your Grace that I shall raise the streets,
To Guard your Majesty through Smithfield as you walk.

No Lord Mayor, twill make them more outrageous,
And be a mean to shed a world of blood:
I more account the blood of Englishmen than so,
But this is the place I have appointed them
To hear them speak and have adventured,
To come among this foul varulie crew:
And lo my Lords, see where the people comes.

My Masters this is the King, come away,
It Is he that we would speak with all.

Newton, desire that one may speak for all;
To tell the sum of their demand at full.

My Masters you that are the especial men,
His Majesty requires you all by me,
That one may speak and tell him your demand,
And gently here he lets you know by me,
He is resolved to hear him all at large.

I good my friends, I pray you heartily,
Tell us your minds as mildly as you can:
And we will answer you so well to all,
As you shall not mislike in anything.

We come to revenge your Officers ill demeanor,
And though we have killed him for his knauerie,
Now we be gotten together, we will have wealth and liberty

It is enough, believe me if you will,
For as I am your true succeeding Prince,
I swear by all the Honor of my Crown,
You shall have liberty and pardon all,
As God has given it and your lawful King.

Ere well be pincht with poverty,
To dig our meat and vittels from the ground,
That are as worthy of good maintenance,
As any Gentleman your Grace does keep,
We will be Kings and Lords within our selves.
And not abide the pride of tyrranie.

I pray thee fellow what countryman art thou?

It skils not much, I am an Englishman.

Marry Sir he is a Kentishman, and has bin my scholar ere now.

Little good manner has the villain learnd,
To use his Lord and King so barberously.

Well people ask you any more,
Than to be free and have your liberty.

Then take my word I promise it to you all,
And eke my general pardon now forth with,
Under seal and Letters pattents to perform the same.
Let every man betake him to his home,
And with what speed our Clarks can make dispatch,
Your pardons and your Letters pattents,
Shall be forth with sent down in every shiere.

Marry I thank your Grace, Hob Carter and the Essex men will home again, and
we take your word

We believe you all, and thank you all,
And presently we will commandment give,
That all this business may be quickly ready.

I tell thee Wat, this is not that that I would have,
I come for more than to be answered thus,
And if the Essex men will needs be gone,
Content, let them go suck their Mams at home,
I came for spoil and spoil I Will have.

Do what thou will Jack, I will follow thee.

How and if it be to the Gallows.

Why that is the worst.

And I faith that is sure, but if you will be ruld by me,
Trust not to his pardon for you die every Mothers son.
But Captains, go forward as we have be gone.

My Masters the boy speaks wisely,
I have red this in Cato, ad cum silium antiquam voceris.
Take good counsel while it is given.

Content boy we will be ruld by thee.

Why how now Captain Miller, I perceive you take no care which way the world
goes

I faith Nobs I have made a bonfire here of a great many of Bonds and
Indentures and Obligations, faith I have bin amongst the ends of the Court, and
among the Records, and all that I saw either in the Guild Hall or in any other
place, I have set fire on them, but where have thou bin


I have bin with our Captains, Straw and Tiler, at Saint Jones in smithfield,
but Sir: I can tell you news, Captain Carter is gone home, and all our
Essex men, and I fear we shall all be hanged, therefore look you to your
self, for I will look to my self


Well if we shall be hanged it is but a folly to be sorry,
But go to it with a good stomach.
Rydle me a ridle, what is this,
I shall be hanged, I shall not be hanged.

What does that fellow?

It seems Madam, he disputes with himself,
Whether he shall be hanged or no.

Alas poor soul, simple enough God wot,
And yet not so simple as a great many of his company.

If it be as we are let to understand,
My Lord the King has given them general pardon.

So he has, and they like honest men are gone homwards, or at least the most
part of them, but worse in mine opinion is their haps that tarry longest


But peace here is the Kings Mother, she can do much with the King, I Will treat
her to beg my pardon of the King wisely, I Will go to her, humbly unto your
worships, a pore Captain Thomas Miller, requesting your favorable bequest,
touching the permission of destray, toward the said Captain Miller, which in
blunt and flat terms is nominated, Sursum cordum, alis dictus hangum meum,
from which place of torment God us all deliver, and grant us to be merciful
while we live here together: Now Sir, understanding your worship is the Kings
Mother, lamentably in the behalf before spoken, to stand between me and the
Gallows or to beg my pardon, in which you shall not only save a proper
hansome tall fellow and a stout Captain, but also you shall purchase the
prayers of all the ale wives in the town, for saving a mault-worme and a
customer to help away their strong ale


What means the fellow by all this eloquence?

It seems he fears he shall be hanged,
And therefore craves your Graces favor in his behalf.

Alas poor fellow, he seems to be a stark nidiot.
Good fellow if thou will go beg thy pardon of the King,
I will speak for thee.

Will you in faith, and I will give you a tawdrie lace.

Madam here comes an unruly crew lets be gone.

The King and his Nobles think they may sleep in quiet,
Now they have given us a little holy water at the Court,
But there is no such matter, we be no such fools
To be bobd out with words and after come to hanging:
Wat do the thing thou comst for,
If thou will be ruld by me, well not leave it so.

Ran tara have at all my boys.

Say thou so my heart, then farewell my pardon:
For I Will do as ye do, hang together for company.

Neighbors and friends never yield,
But fight it lustilie in the field:
For God will give you strength and might,
And put your enemies to flight:
To stand against them day and night,
For of mine honesty your quarrels right.

O Parson Ball, before you all,
If all fall out not well, by following thy counsel,
And that by listening to thy talk,
To the Gallows we do walk:
Parson Ball I will tell thee.
And swear it of mine honesty,
Thou shall be hanged as well as we.

Peace here comes the King I trow.

What company be those Newton we do see?
Be them of those that promised us to part?

Even part of those my good and Gracious Lord,
That promised your highness to depart.

Why then I see they stand not to their words,
And sure they should not break it so with me,
That have so carefully remembered them:
This is a part of great ingratitude.

And it like your Majesty the Essex men,
With far more better minds have parted company,
And every man be taken him to his home.
The chiefest of these Rebels be of Kent,
Of base degree and worse conditions all,
And vowed as I am given to understand,
To nothing but to havoc and to spoil.

Lord Mayor, if it be so I wot,
It is a dangerous and unnatural resolution.
I pray thee Newton go and speak with them,
Ask them what more it is that they require.

My Masters, you that be the chiefest of the rout,
The King entreats you kindly here by me,
To come and speak with him a word or two.

Sir, if the King would any thing with us,
Tell him the way is indifferent to meet us.

You are too many to be talked with all,
Besides you owe a duty to your Prince.

Sir, give me the sword thou wearest there,
Becomes it thee to be armd in my presence.

Sir I wear my weapon for mine own defense,
And by your leave will wear it yet a while.

What will thou villain, give me it I say.

Newton give it him if that be all the matter,
Here take it and much good do it thee.

Villain I say, give me the sword thou bear up,
For that's the thing I tell thee I assect.

This sword belongs unto my Lord the King,
It Is none of mine, nor shall thou have the same:
Proud Rebel were but thou and I alone,
Thou durst not ask it thus boldly, at my hands,
For all the wealth this Smithfield does contain.

By him that did for me, I will not dine,
Till I have seen thee hanged or made away.

Alas Lord Mayor, Newton is in great danger,
And force cannot prevail amongst the rowt.

Old Rome I can remember I have read,
When thou did flourish for virtue, and for arms,
What magnanimity did abide in thee:
Then Walworth as it may become thee well,
Deserve some honor at thy Princes hand,
And b^utifie this dignity of thine,
With some or other Act of consequence:
Villain I say whence comes this rage of thine,
How dare thou a dungell bastard borne,
To brave thy Sovereign and his Nobles thus.
Villain I do arrest thee in my Princes name,
Proud Rebel as thou art take that withal;
Learn thou and all posterity after thee,
What it is a servile slave, to brave a King.
Pardon my Gracious Lord for this my fact,
Is service done to God, and to your self.

Lord Mayor for thy valiant Act in this,
And Noble courage in the Kings behalf,
Thou shall perceive us not to be ungrateful.
Our Captain is slain, our Captain is slain.

Fear you not people for I am your King,
And I will be your Captain and your friend.

Pleases your Grace for to with draw your self.
These Rebls then will soon be put to foil.

Soldiers take heart to you and follow me,
It is our God that gives the victory:
Drag this accursed villian through the streets.
To strike a terror to the Rebels hearts,
London will give you power and arms,
And God will strengthen you and daunt your foes:
Fill Smithfield full of noise and joyful cries,
And say alowd God save our Noble Prince.

LOrd Mayor and well beloved friends,
Whose readiness in aid of us and ours,
Has given just trial of your loyalty,
And love you bear to us and to our land:
Since by the help and mighty hand of God,
These foul unnatural broils are quieted,
And this unhappy tumult well appeasd:
Having as law and duty binds us too,
Given both dew praise and sacrifice of thanks,
Unto our God from whom this goodness comes:
Let me now to your counsel recommend,
And to your sad opinions generally,
The end of all these great and high affairs,
This mighty business that we have in hand
And that I may in brief unfold my mind,
My Lords I would not yet, but mercy should,
Against the law in this hard case prevail:
And as I gave my word unto you all,
That if they then had left their mutiny,
Or rather had let fall their wrongful Arms,
Their pardon then should have bin general,
So will I not; yet God forbid I should,
(Though law I know exact it at my hands)
Behold so many of my country men,
All done to death and strangled in one day,
The end is this, that of that careless rout,
That has so far unnaturally rebeld,
The chief offenders may be punished:
And thus you know my mind, and so my Lords proceed,
I pray you and no otherwise.

Since mercy in a Prince resembles right,
The gladsome sunshine in a winters day,
Pleases your Grace to pardon me to speak:
When all the hope of life and breathing here,
Be taken from all this rowt in general,
If then at instant of the dying how^e,
Your Graces Honorable pardon come,
To men half dead, killed wholly in conceit,
Then think I, it will be more Gracious,
Than if it offered were so hastily:
When third of life is almost ^ret in twain,
To give it strength breeds thanks, and wonders too.

So many as are taken within the City,
Are fast in hold to know your Graces will,

There is but one or two in all the rowt,
Whom we would have to die for this offense,
Especially that by name are noted men:
One is a naughty and seditious Priest,
They call him Ball, as we are let to know,
A person more notorious than the rest,
But this I do refer to your dispose.

Pleases your Grace they have bin rid apace,
Such special men as we could possibly find,
And many of the common rowt among:
And yet suruiues this Ball that cursed Priest,
And one Wat Tiler, leader of the rest:
Whose villainies and outrageous cruelties,
Have bin so barbourously executed:
The one with malice of his traitorous taunts,
The other with the violence of his hands,
That gentle ruth nor mercy has no ears,
To hear them speak, much less to pardon them.

It is enough, I understand your minds,
And well I wot in causes such as these,
Kings may be found too full of clemency:
But who are those that enter in this place.

Pleases it your Grace, these be the men,
Whom Law has worthily condemnd to die,
Going to the place of execution:
The foremost is that Ball, and next to him,
VVat Tyler, obstinate Rebls both,
For all the rest are of a better mould,
Whose minds are softer than the foremost twain:
For being common soldiers in the camp,
Were rather led with counsel of the rest,
Deserving better to be pitied.

Morton to those condemned men we see,
(...) this a Pardon to them all:
Excepti^g namely those two f^rmost men.
I mean the Priest and him they call VVat Tyl^r.
To all the rest free Pardon we do send,
And give the same to understand from us.

MY friends and unhappy Countrymen, whom the laws of England, have worthily
condemned unto death for your open and unnatural Rebellion against your
lawful Sovereign and anointed Prince. I am sent unto you from the Kings
most excellent Majesty to give you to understand, that notwithstanding this
violence which you have off^red to your selves, in running furiously into the
danger of the law, as mad and frantickemen upon an edged sword: yet
notwithstanding I say, that you have gathered rods to scourge your own selves,
following desperately your lewd and misgouerned heads, which have hale^ you on
to this wretched and shameful end which is now imminent over you all, that
must in strangling cords die like dogs, and finish your lives in this miserable
reprochful sort, because you would not live like men: But far v^like your
selves unlike Englishmen, degenerate from your natural obedience, and nature
of your country, that by kind brings forth none such, or at least brooketh
none such, but spits the^ out for bastards and recreants: notwithstanding I
say, (this torment wherein you now live looking every hour to suffer such a
shameful and most detestable death, as does commonly, belong to such horrible
^ff^nders) yet it has pleased the King of his accustomed goodness to give you
your lives, and freely to forgive you your faults sending by me general
Pardon to you all, excepting one only accursed and seditious Priest, that so
far swar^ed from the truth, and his allegiance to his Prince, and one Wat
Tiler, whose outrage has bin noted so outrageous in all his actions as for
ensample to all Englishmen hereafter, his Majesty has thought good to account
him and this Parson, (first sturrers in this tumult, and unnatural rebelling)
the greatest offenders that now live to grieve his Majesty: and thus I have
delivered the message of the King, which is in effect, general pardon to you
all, and a sentence of death unto the two Archrebels, John Ball, and Wat Tyler:
For which great Grace, if you think your selves any thing bound to his
highness (as infinitely you are) let it appear as far forth hereafter as you
may, either by outward signs of duty, or inward loyalty of hearts expressed,
and to begin the same, in sign of your thankefulnes, say all God save the King



Well then we know the worst,
He can but hang us, and that is all,
Were Jack Straw a live again,
And I in as good possibility as ever I was,
I would lay a surer trumpe,
Ere I would lose so fair a trick.

And what I said in time of our business I repent not,
And if it were to speak again,
Every word should be a whole sermon,
So much I repent me.

Away with the Rebels suffer them not to speak,
His words are poison in the ears of the people,
Away villain, stain to thy country and thy calling.

Why Morton are you so lusty with a pox,
I pulled you out of Rochester Castle by the powle.

And in recompense I will help to set your head on a pole.

Pray you lets be powlde first.

Away with the Rebels.
As gave your Grace in charge I have delivered,
Your highness pleasure amongst the prisoners,
And have proclaimed your Graces pardon amongst the^ all
Save only those two unnatural Englishmen,
O might I say no English nor men,
That Ball and Tyler cursed Rebels both,
Whom I commanded to be executed:
And in your highness name have freed all the rest,
Whose thankful hearts I find as full repleat,
With signs of joy and duty to your Grace,
As those unnatural Rebels hateful mouths
Are full of foul speeches, and dishonorable.

It is no matter Morton let them bark,
I trow they cannot bite when they be dead.
And Lord Mayor for your valiant act,
And dangerous attempt in our behalf,
To free your country and your King from ill:
In our behalf and in our common weal,
We will accept it as the deed deserves,
And thank you for this honorable attempt.

What subjects hearts could brook the rage of theirs,
To vaunt in presence of their Sovereign Lord,
To brave him to his face before his Pieres,
But would by policy or force attempt,
To quell the raging of such furious foes?
My Sovereign Lord, it was but my duty done,
First unto God, next to my lawful King,
Proceeding from a true and loyal heart,
And so I hope your Grace esteems thereof.

To the end this deed shall rest in memory,
Which shall continue for ever to the end:
Lord Mayor I Will adioyne to thy degree,
Another Title of a lasting fame.
Kneel down William Walworth and receive,
By mine own hand the order of Knighthood:
Stand up Sir William first Knight of thy degree,
But hence forth all which shall succeed thy place,
Shall have like honor for thy Noble deed.
Besides that Time, shall nere abridge thy fame,
The City arms shall bear for memory,
The bloody dagger the more for Walworths honor:
Call forth your Harrold and receive your due.

My Gracious Lord this honorable Grace
So (...) desert, since what I did
My du^^e and alleagaunce bad me do,
Binds me and my successors evermore,
With sweet encouragement to the like attempt.
(...) Majesty and all, our Royal Pieres,
Shall find your London such a store (...) still,
As not (...) command our wealth,
But loyal ha^ts the trea^ure of a Prince,
Shall grow like grains sown in (...) ^oyle,
And God I praise that with his holy (...)
Has given me heart to free my Prince and ^^nd.

Then since these dangerous broiles are over past,
With shedding of so little English blood.
It Is for the fame and honor of a Prince,
Well to reward the Actors of the same,
So many of thy brethren as accompanied thee,
In Smithfield here about this bold attempt,
When time shall serve I Will Knight them as thou art
And so Lord Mayor, Newton, Morton and the rest,
Accompany us to guard us to the Tower,
Where well repose and rest our selves all night.

Printed at London by John Danter, and are to be sold by William Barley, at
his shop in Gracious street over against Leaden Hall. 1594


