OUR long time rumor'd Hog, so often crossed
By unexpected accidents, and tossed
From one house to another, still deceiving
Many men's expectations, and bequeathing
To some lost labor, is at length got loose,
Leaving his servile yoake-sticke to the goose,
Has a Knights license, and may rauage at pleasure,
Spite of all those that envy our Hogs treasure:
And thus much let me tell you, that our Swyne
Is not as diverse Crittickes did define,
Grunting at State affairs, or inuecting
Much, at our City vices; no, nor detecting
The pride, or fraud, in it, but were it now
He had his first birth, wit should teach him how
To tax these times abuses, and tell some
How ill they did in running often from home,
For to prevent (O men more hard then flint)
A matter that shall laugh at them in print:
Once to proceed in this play we were mindlesse,
Thinking we lived among Jews that loved no swines flesh:
But now that troubles past, if it deserve a hiss,
(As questionless i^ will through our amiss,)
Let it be favored by your gentle sufferance,
Wisemen are still indu'd with patience,
We are not half so skild as strowling Players,
Who could not please here as at Country faiers,
We may be pelted off for ought we know,
With apples, eggs, or stones from thence below;
In which we will crave your friendship if we may,
And you shall have a dance worth all the play,
And if it prove so happy as to please,
We Will say it is fortunate like Pericles.

HOe, Whose within here?

Ha ye any money to pay you knock with such authority sir?


What if I have not, may not a man knock without money sir?


Seldom, women and Seriaunts they will not put it up so sir.


How say you by that sir, but I prithee is not this one Atlas his house a
Porter


I am the rent payer thereof.


In good time sir.


Not in good time, neither sir, for I am behind with my Landlord a year and
three quarters at least


Now if a man would give but observance to this fellows prating, a would weary
his ears sooner then a Barber, dee hear sir, lies there not one Haddit a
gentleman at this house


Here lies such a gentleman sir whose clothes (were they not greasy) would be
speak him so


Then I pray sir when your leisure shall permit, that you would vouchsafe to
help me to the speech of him


We must first crave your oath, sir that you come not with intent to molest,
perturbe, or indaunger him, for he is a gent. whom it has pleased fortune to
make her tennis ball of, and therefore subject to be struck by every fool
inro hassard


In that I commend thy care of him, for which friendship here is a slight reward,
tell him a Country man of his, one Lightfoote is here, and will not any way
despair of his safety


With all respect Sir, pray command my house.


So, now I shall have a sight of my Cosen gallant, he that has consumed 800.
pound a year, in as few years, as he has cares on his head: He that was wont
never to be found without 3, or 4, pair of red breeches, running before his
horse, or coach. He that at a meal, has had more several kinds, then I
think the Arc conteyn'd: He that was admired by niters, for his robes of
gallantry, and was indeed all that an elder brother might be, prodigal, yet
he, whose unthriftiness kept many a house, is now glad to keep house in a
house, that keeps him the poor tente of a porter, and see his appearance, I Will
seem strange to him


Cosen Lightfoote how do, welcome to the City,


Who calls me Cosen, where is my Cosen Haddit, he is surely putting on some rich
apparel, for me to see him in. I ha bin thinking all the way I came up, how
much his company will Credit me


My name is Haddit Sir, and your kinesman, if parents may be trusted, and
therefore you may please to know me better, when you see me next


I prithee fellow stay, is it possible thou should be he, why he was the
generous spark of men's admiration


I am that spark Sir, though now raked up in ashes,
Yet when it pleases fortunes chops to blow
Some gentler gale upon me, I may then,
From forth of embers rise and shine again,

O by your versifying I know you now sir, how do, I knew thee not at first,
thart very much altered


Faith and so I am, exceeding much since you saw me last, about eight hundred
pound a year; but let it pass, for passage carried away the most part of it,
a plague of fortun


That'st more need to pray to fortune then curse her, she may be kind to thee
when thou art penitent, but that I fear will be never


O no, if she be a woman, she will ever love those that hate her, but cozen thou
art thy fathers firstborn, help me but to some means, and I Will redeem my
mortgaged lands with a wench to boot


As how I pray thee?


Marry thus, Hog the Usurer has one only daughter.


Is his name Hog, it fits him exceeding well, for as a hog in his life time
is always denouring, and never commodious in aught till his death, even so is
he whose goods at that time may be put to many good uses


And so I hope they shall before his death, this daughter of his, did, and I
think does loueme, but I then thinking my self worthy of an Empress, gave
but slight respect unto her favor, for that her parentage sem'd not to equal
my high thoughts, puffed up


With Tobacco surely,


No but with as bad a weed, vain glory.


And you could now be content, to put your lofty spirits into the lowest pit of
her favor: Why what means will serve man, Sfoote if all I have will repair
thy fortunes, it shall fly at thy command


Thanks good Coze, the means shall not be great, only that I may first be
clad in a generous outside, for that is the chief attraction, that draws
female affection; good parts without any abilements of gallantry, are no more
set by in these times, then a good leg in a woollen stocken: No, it is a
glistering presence and audacity brings women into fools felicity


Yaue a good confidence Coze, but what deendien your brave outside shall effect.


That being had well to the Usurer where you shall offer some slight piece of
land to mortgage, and if you do it to bring our selves into cash, it shall be
nere the farther from you, for here is a project will not be frustrate of this
purpose


That shall be shortly tried, He instantly go seek for a habit for thee and
that of the richest too, that which shall not be subject to the scoff of any
gallant, though to the accomplishing thereof all my means goes: Alas what is a
man unless he wear good clothes


Good speed attend my suite, here is a never seen Nephewe kind in distress,
this gives me more cause of admiration then the loss of xxxv. settings
together at Passage. I when it is performed, but words and deeds are now more
different then Puritans and Players


Here Is the Player would speak with you.


About the Iigge, I promised him, my pen and ink, I prithee let him in,
there may be some Cash rim'd out of him


The Muses assist you sir, what at your study so early.


O chiefly now sir for) aurora musis amicat)


Indeed I understand not latin sir.


You must then pardon me, good M. Chaunge-coate, for I protest vntee it is so
much my often converse, that if there be none but women in my company, yet
cannot I forbear it


That shows your more learning sir, but I pray you is that small matter done I
entreated for


A small matter, you will find it worth Megge of Westminster, althouh it be but a
bare Iigge


O lord sir, I would it had but half the taste of garlic.


Garlic stinkes to this, prove that you have not more whores to see this,
then ere Garlic had. say I am a boaster of mine own works, disgrace me on
the open stage, and bob me off with nere a penny


O lord sir, far be it from us, to debar any worthy writer of his merit;
but I pray you sir, what is the title you bestow upon it


Marry that which is full as forceable as Garlic, the name of it is who buys
my four ropes of hard Onions, by which four ropes is meant four several kind
of livers, by the onions hangers on, as at some convenient time I will more
particularly inform you in so rare a hidden and obscure a mystery


I pray let me see the beginning of it, I hope you have made no dark sentence
in it, for I Will assure our audience commonly very simple idle-headed people, and
if they should hear what they understand not, they would quite forsake our
house


O nere fear it, for what I have writ is both witty to the wise, and pleasing
to the ignorant; for you shall have these laugh at it far more heartily that
understand it not, then those that do


Me think the end of this staff is a foot too long.


O no, sing it but in tune, and I dare warrant you.


Why hear ye,

And you that delight in truls and minions,

Come buy my four ropes of hard S. Thomas onions: Look you there S. Thomas
might very well have been left out, besides, hard should have come next the
onions


Fie no, the dismembring of a rhyme to bring in reason shows the more efficacy
in the writer


Well as you please, I pray you sir what will the gratuity be, I would content
you as near hand as I could


So I believe,

Why M. Change-coate, I do not suppose we shall differ many pounds, pray make
your offer, if you give me too much, I will most Doctor of Phicke like restoare


You say well, look you sir, there is a brace of angels, besides much drink of
free cost if it be liked


How M. Change-coate a brace of angels besides much drink of free cost if it
be liked, I fear you have learned it by heart, if you have powdered up my plot
in your sconce, you may home sir and instruct your Poet over a pot of ale, the
whole method on it, but if you do so iuggle, look to it Shrouetuseday is at
hand, and I have some acquaintance with Bricklayers and Playsterers


Nay, I pray sir be not angry, for as I am a true stagetrotter, I mean
honestly and look ye, more for your love then otherwise, I give you a brace
more


Well, good words do much, I cannot now be angry with you, but see
henceforward, you do like him that would please a new married wife, show your
most at first, least some other come between you and your desires, for I
protest had you not suddenly shown your good nature, another should have had
it though t'ad bin for nothing


Troth I am sorry I gave you such cause of impatiency, but you shall see
hereafter if your invention take, I will not stand off for a brace more or
less, desiring I may see your works before another


Nay before al others, and shotly expect a notable piece of matter such a Iigge
whose tune with the natural whistle of a carman, shall be more rauishing to
the ears of shopkeepers then a whole consort of barbors at midnight


I am your man for it, I pray you command all the kindness belongs to my
function, as a box for your friend at a new play although I procure the hare of
all my company


No I Will pay for it rather, that may breed a muteny in your whole house.


I care not, I ha played a Kings part any time these ten years, if I cannot
command such a matter twere poor in faith


Well Master change coat you shall now leave me, for I Will to my study, the
morning hours are precious and my muse meditates most upon an empty stomach


I pray sir when this new invention is produced let not me be forgotten.


I Will sooner forget to be a Iigge maker.


So here is four angels I little dreampt of Nay and there be money to be gotten
by foolery, I hope fortune will not see me want

What was my country cose here since.

Why did he promise to come again seeing how the case stood wye.


Ye and to advance my down fallen fortunes Atlas.


But ye are not sure a meant it ye when he spoke it.


No nor is it in man to conjecture rightly the thought by the tongue.


Why then i will believe it when I see it, if you had been in prosperity when a
had promised you this kindness


I had not needed it.


But being now you do, I fear you must go without it.


If I do Atlas be it so, I Will ene go write this rhyme over my beds head.

Undone by folly, fortune lend me more,
Can thou, and wilt not, pox on such a where,
And so i will set up my rest, but see Atlas here is a little of that that dambs
Lawyers, take it in part of a further recompense


No pray keep it, I am conceited of your better fortunes, and therefore will
stay out that expectation


Why if you will you may, but the surmounting of my fortunes is as much to be
doubted, as he whose estate lies in the lotterie, desperate


But nere despair sfoote why should not you live as well as a thousand others,
that were change of taffety, whose means were never anything


Yes cheating, theft, and pandarising, or may be flattery, I have maintained
some of them my self, but come have aught to breakefast


Yes there is the fagg end of a leg of mutton,


There cannot be a sweeter dish, it has Cost money the dressing.


At the barbours you mean.


This is the green, and this the chamberwindow, and see appointed light stands
in the casement, the ladder of ropes set orderly, yet he that should ascend,
slow in his have, is not at yet come hither

Were any friend that lives but Carracus
I Would try the bliss which this fine time presents.
Appoint to carry hence so rare an heir,
And be so slack sfoote a does move my patience,
Would any man that is not void of sense
Not have watched night by night for such a prise,
Her beauties so at tractiue, that by heaven,
My heart half graunts to do my friend a wrong,
Forgo these thoughts for Albert be not slave
To thy effection do not falsify
Thy faith to him, whose only friendships worth
A world of women, he is such a one,
Thou can not live without his good.
A is and was ever, as thine own hearts blood,
Sfoot see she beckens me for Carracus,
Shall my base purity, cause me neglect,
This present happiness, I will obtain it,
Spite of my tymerous Conscience, I am in person,
Habit and all so like to Carracus,
It may be acted, and near called in question.

Hist Carracus ascend.
All is as clear as in our hearts we wished.

Nay, if I go not now, I might be gelded in faith.
Albert ascends, and being on the top of the ladder, puts outs the candle.

O love why do so.


I heard the steps of some coming this way,
Did you not hear Albert pass by as yet.

Nor any Creature pass this way this hour.


Then he intends just at the break of day,
To lend his trusty help to our departure:
It Is yet two hours time thither, till when lets rest,
For that our speedy flight will not yield any.

But I fear we possessing of each others presence, shall ouerslip the time,
will your friend call


Just at the instant, fear not of his Care:


Come then dear Carracus, thou now shall rest,
Upon that bed, where fancy often has thought thee;
Which kindness until now, I nere did grant thee,
Nor would I now, but that thy loyal faith
I have so often tried, even now,
Seeing thee come to that most honored end,
Through all the dangers, which black night presents,
For to convey me hence and marry me.

If I do not do so, then hate me ever,


I do believe thee, and will hate thee never.


How pleasing are the steps we lovers make,
When in the paths of our content we pace,
To meet our longings: what happiness it is
Man to love. But oh, what greater bliss
To love, and be beloved: O what one virtue,
Ere raignd in me, that I should be inricht,
With all Earths good at once, I have a friend,
Selected by the heavens, as a gift,
To make me happy, whilst I live one earth,
A man so rare of goodness, firm of faith,
That Earths Content must vanish in his death.
Then for my love, and mistress of my soul,
A maid of rich endowments, beautified
With all the virtues nature could bestow
Upon mortality, who this happy night
Will make me gainer of her heavenly self,
And see how suddenly I have attaind,
To the abode of my desired wishes;
This is the green, how dark the night appears.
I cannot hear the tread of my true friend,
Albert, hist Albert, he is not come as yet,
Nor is thappointed light set in the window.
What if I call? Maria, it may be
She feared to set a light, and only harkeneth
To hear my steps, and yet I dare not call,
Least I betray my self, and that my voice,
Thinking to enter in the ears of her,
Be of some other heard: no I will stay
Until the coming of my dear friend Albert.
But now think Carracus, what the end will be
Of this thou do determine, thou art come
Hither to Rob a father of that wealth,
That soly lengthens his now drooping years,
His virtuous daughter, and all of that sex left,
To make him happy in his aged dayeas,
The loss of her, may cause him to despair,
Transport his nere decaying sense to frenzy,
Or to some such abhorred inconvenience,
Whereto frail age is subject, I do too il in this,
And must not think but that a fathers plaint,
Will move the Heavens, to power forth misery.
Upon the head of disobediency.
Yet reason tells us, parents are oreseene,
When with two strict a reine they do hold in,
Their child's affections, and control that love,
Which the high powers divine inspires them with,
When in their shallowest judgments they may know
Affection crossed, brings misery and woe:
But whilst I run contemplating on this,
I softly pace to my desired bliss,
I Will go into the next field, where my friend,
Told me the horses were in readiness.
But do not stay, what if you find not Albert,


I Will then return alone to fetch you hence,


If you should now deceive me, having gained, what you men seek for.


Sooner i will deceive my soul, and so I fear I have.


At your first call I will descend.


Till when, this touch of lips be the true pleadge, of Carracus constant true
devoted love


Be sure you stay not long, farewell,
I cannot lend an ear to hear you part,

But you did lend a hand unto my entrance.
How have I wronged my friend, my faith full friend,
Robbed him of what is more precious then his blood,
His earthly heaven th'unspotted honor,
Of his soule-ioying Mistres, the fruition of whose bed,
I yet am warm of, whilst dear Carracus,
Wanders this cold night, through th'unsheltering field,
Seeking me treacherous man, yet no man neither,
Though in an outward show of such appearance,
But am a Devil indeed, for so this deed.
Of wronged love and friendship rightly makes me,
I may compare my friend, to one that is sick,
Who lying on his deathbed, calls to him,
His dear'st thought friend and bids him go,
To some rare gifted man that can restore,
His former health, this his friend sadly hears,
And vows with protestations to fulfill,
His wished desires, with his best performance,
But then no sooner seeing that the death,
Of his sick friend, would ad to him some gain.
Goes not to seek a remedy to save,
But like a wretch hides him to dig his grave,
As I have done for virtuous Carracus,
Yet Albert be not reasonlesse, to endanger,
What thou may yet secure, who can detect,
The crime of thy licentious appetite,
There ones pace it is surely Carracus.

Not find my friend, sure some malignant plannet,
Rules ore this night, and envying the content,
Which I in thought possess, debarres me thus,
From what is more then happy, the loved presence of a dear friend and love,

It Is wronged Carracus by Alberts baseness,
I have no power now to reveal my self,

The horses stand at the appointed place,
And nights dark couerture, makes firm our safety,
My friend is surely fallen into a slumber,
On some bancke hereabouts, I will call him,
Friend, Albert, Albert.

What ere you are that call, you know my name.


I, and thy heart dear friend:


O Carracus, you are a slow pac't lover.
Your credit had been touched, had I not been:

As how I preethee Albert:


Why I excusd you to the fair Maria;
Who would have thought you else, a slack performer.
For coming first under her chamber window,
She heard me tread, and called upon your name,
To which I answered with a tongue like yours:
And told her, I would go to seek for Albert,
And straight return.

Whom I have found, thanks to thy faith, and heaven.
But had not she a light, when you came first?

Yes but hearing of some Company,
She at my warning, was fore't to put it out:
And had I bin so too, you and I too had still bin happy.

See we are now come to the chamber window.


Then you must call, for so I said I would,


Maria.


My Carracus, are you so soon retournd?
I see, you will keep your promise.

Who would not do so, having past it thee,
Cannot be framd of aught but treachery:
Fairest descend, that by our hence departing,
We may make firm the bliss of our content.

Is your friend Albert with you?


Yes, and your servant honored Lady.


Hold me from falling Carracus.


I will do now so; but not at other times.


You are merry sir:
But what do you intend with this your scaling ladder,
To leave it thus, or put it forth of sight?

Faithts no great matter which:
Yet we will take it hence, that it may breed
Many confusd opinions in the house
Of your escape here: Albert you shall bear it:
It may be you may chance to practice that way;
Which when you do, may your attempts so prove
As mine have done, most fortunate in love.

May you continue ever so:
But its time now to make some have to horse:
Night soon will vanish: O that it had power
For ever to exclude day from oureies,
For my looks then will show my villainy:

Come fair Maria the troubles of this night,
Are as forerunners to ensuing pleasures,
And noble friend although now Carracus
Seems in the gaining of this beauteous prise,
To keep from you so much of his loved treasure,
Which ought not be mixted, yet his heart
Shall so far strive in your wished happiness,
That if the loss and ruin of it self can but avail your good

O friend, no more, come, you are slow in haste,
Friendship ought never be distrust in words,
Till all her deeds be finished, who looking in a book,
And reads but some part only, cannot judge
What pray so the whole deserves, because his knowledge
Is grounded but on part, as thine friend is
Ignorant of that black mischief I have done thee.

Carracus I am weary, are the horses far?


No fairest, we are now even at them:
Come, do you follow Albert?

Yes I do follow, would I had done so ever,
And nere had gone before.

What has not my young lord Wealthy been here this morning?


No in very deed sir, is a towardly young gentleman, shall a have my young
Mistress, your daughter, I pray you sir


I that a shall Peter, she cannot be matched to greater honor and riches in
all this Country; yet the peevish girl makes coy of it, she had rather affect
a Prodigal, as there was Hadit, one that by this time cannot be otherwise then
hanged, or in some worse estate, yet she would have had him, but I praise my
stars she went without him though, I did not without 's lands 'twas a rare
mortgage Peter


As ere came in parchment, but see, here comes my young lord.


Morrow father Hog, I come to tell you strange news, my sister is stolen away
to night, it is thought by Nigromancy, what Nigromancy is, I leave to the readers
of the seven champions of chistendome


But is it possible your sister should be stolen, sure some of the household
servants were confederates in it


Faith, I think they would have confessed then, for I am sure my lord and father
has put them all to the bastinado twice this morning already, not a
wayting-woman but has been stowed in faith


Trust me a says well for the most part.


Then my lord your father is far impatient.


Impatient, I ha seen the picture of Hector in a Haberdashers shop, not look
half so furious, he apprares more terrible then wild fire at a play. But
father Hog, when is the time your daughter and I shall to this wedlock
druggery


Troth my lord when you please, she is at your disposure, and I rest much
thankful that your Lordship will so highly honor me, she shall have a good
portion my lord, though nothing in respect of your large revenues; call her in
Peter, tell her my most respected lord Welthies here, to whose presence I will
now commit her, and I pray you my Lord, prosecute the gain of her affectation
with the best affecting words you may, and so I bid good morrow to your lordshi


Moreover, father Hog, to prosecute the gain of her affectation with the
best affecting words, as I am a Lord, a most rare phrase: well I perceive age
is not altogether ignorant, though many an old Justice is so

How now Peter is thy young mistress up yet?


Yes indeed she is an early stirrer, and I doubt not hereafter, but that your
lordship may say she is abroad before you can rise


Faith and so she may, for it is long ere I can get up when I go soxt to bed;
but Peter has she no other suitors besides my self


No and it like your lordship, nor is fit she should.


Not fit she should, I tell thee Peter, I would give away as much as some
Knights are worth, and that is not much, only to wipe the noses of some dozen or
two of Gallants, and to see how pitifully those percels of man's flesh would
look when I had caught the bird, which they had beaten the bush for


Indeed your lordships conquest would have seemed the greater.


Foot, as I am a Lo. it angers me to the guts, that no body has been about her.


For any thing I know, your lordship may go without her.


An I could have inioin'd her to some pale faced lovers distraction, or been
envied for my happiness, it had been somewhat


But see where she comes, I knew she had not power enough to stay another
sending, for o lords! what are we? our very names enforce beauty to fly, being
sent for aside

Morrow pretty Beck: how do?

I rather should enquire your lordships health, seeing you up at such an early
hour: was it the tooth-ake, or else fleas disturbed you


Dee ye think I am subject to such common infirmities? nay, were I diseased
I Would scorn but to be diseased like a lord isaith: but I can tell you news,
your fellow virgin-hole player, my sister is stolen away to night


Intruth I am glad on it she is now free from the jealous eye of a father; do
not ye suspect, my lord, who it should be that has carried her away


No, nor care nor, as she brewes, so let her bake, so said the ancient
proverb, but lady mine that shall be, your father has wished me to appoint the
day with you


What day my lord?


Why of marriage, as the learned Historiographer writes hymen's hollidaies, or
nuptial Ceremonious rites


Why, when would you appoint that my lord?


Why let me see, I think the Tailor may dispatch all our vestures in a week:
therefore, it shall be directly this day sennight


God give you joy.


Of what I pray you impudence, this fellow will go near to take his oath that
he has seen us plighted faiths together, my father keeps him for no other
cause, then to outsweare the truth My lord not to hold you any longer in a
sooles paradise, nor to blind you with the hopes I never intend to accomplish,
know I neither do, can, or will love you


How, not love a lord; o indiscreete young woman! Indeed your father told me
how unripe I should find you: but all is, one unripe fruit will ask more
shaking before they fall, then those that are, and my conquest will see me the
greater still


Before god is a most unanswerable lord, and holds her toot in faith.


Nay ye could not a pleased me better, then seeing you so invincible, and such
a difficult attaining to, I would not give a pin for the society of a female
that should seem willing, but give me a wench that has disdainefull looks

For it is denial whets on appetite,
When proferred service does allay delight.

The fools well read in vice, my lord, I hope you hereafter will no further
insinuate in the course of your affections, and for the better withdrawing from
them, you may please to know, I have irreuocably decreed never to marry


Never to marry, Peter I pray bear witness of her words that when I have
attained her, it may add to my fame and conquest


Yes indeed an't like your lordship.


Nay, ye must think Beck I know how to woe, ye shall find no bashful
university man of me


Indeed I think y'ad nere that bringing up, did you ever study my lord?


Yes faith that I have, and the last week too, three days and a night together.


About what I pray?


Only to find out, why a woman going on the right side of her husband the day
time, should lie on his left side at night; and as I am a lord, I never knew
the meaning on it till yesterday, Mallapert my fathers Butler being a witty I
ackanapes told me why it was


Berlady, my lord, it was a shrewd studdy, and I fear has altered the property
of your good parts, for i will assure you I loved you a fortnight a go far
better


Nay, it is all one whether you do or no, it is but a little more trouble to bring
ye about again, and no question but a man may doot; I am he, it is true as your
father said, the black Ox has not trod upon that foot of yours


No, but the white Calfe has, and so I leave your lordship.


Well go thy ways, thou art as witty a marmaled eater, as ever I conuerst with;
now, as I am a lord, I love her better and better, i will home and Poetise upon
her good parts presently, Peter here is apreparatiue to my further applications,
and Peter be circumspect in giving me diligent notice, what suitors seem to be
pee-ping


I Will warrant you my lord, she is your own, for i will give out to all that comes
near her, that she is betrothed to you, and if the worst come to the worst, I Will
swear it


Why god-a-mercy, and if ever I do gain my request, Thou shall in brauer
clothes be shortly dressed

Have the fates then conspired, and quite bereft
My drooping years, of all the blessed content
That age partakes of, by the sweet aspect
Of their well nurtured issue; whose obedience,
Discreet and duteous haueour, only lengthens
The thread of age; when on the contrary,
By rude demeanor and their headstrong wills,
That thred's soon rauel'd out: O why Maria
Could thou abandon me now at this time,
When my gray head's declining to the grave!
Could any Masculine flatterer on earth
So far bewitch thee, to forget thy self,
As now to leave me? Did Nature soly give thee me,
As my chief inestimable treasure,
Whereby my age might pass in quiet to rest:
And art thou proved to be the only curse,
Which heaven could throw upon mortality:
Yet i will not curse thee, though I fear the fates
Will on thy head inflict some punishment,
Which I will daily pray they may withold;
Although thy disobediency deserves
Extremest rigor, yet I wish to thee
Content in love full of tranquillity.
But see where stands my shame, whose indiscretion
Does seem to bury all the living honors,
Of all our ancestors but it is the fates decree,
That men might know their weak mortality.

Sir, I cannot find my sister,


I know thou can not, it were to rare to see
VVisdome found out by ignorance.

How father, is it not possible that wisdom should be found out by ignorance;
I pray then how do many Magnificoes come by it


Not buy it son, as you had need to do,
Yet wealth without that, may live more content,
Then wits enioyers, can debard of wealth,
All pray for wealth, but I nere hard yet,
Of any but one, that ere praid for wit,
He Is counted wife enough in these vain times,
That has but means enough to we are gay clothes,
And be an outside of humanity, what matters it a pin,
How indiscreet so ere a nature all be,
So that his wealth be great, that's it does cause
VVisdome in these days; so give fools applause,
And when gay folly speaks, how vain so ere,
VVisdome must silent sit, and speech forbear.

Then wisdom will sit as mure as learning among many Courtiers, but father I
partly suspect that Carracus has got my sister


With Child, I fear ere this.


Berlady and that may be true, but whether a has or no, its al one, if you
please, I Will take her from under his nose in spite ons teeth, and ask him no
leave


That were to headstrong, son, we will rather leave them to the will of heaven.

To fall or prosper, and though young Carracus
Be but a gentleman of small reuennews;
Yet lie deserves my daughter for his virtues,
And had I though she could not be withdrawn
From th'affecting of him, I had ere this
Made them both happy by my free consent
Which now I wish I had granted, and still pray
If any have her, it may be Carracus.

Troth and I wish so too, for in my mind he is a gent. of a good house, and
speaks true lattine


To morrow son, you shall ride to his house
And there enquier of your sisters being,
But as you tender me, and your own good
Use no rough language sauouring of distaste,
Or any uncivil terms.

Why do ye take me for a midwife,


But tell young Carracus these words from me,
That if he has with safeguard of her honor,
Espousd my daughter, that I then forgive
His rash offense, and will accept of him,
In all the fatherly love, I owe a child.

I am sure my sister willbe glad to hear it, and I cannot blame her, for
she will then enjoy that with quietness, which many a wench in these days does
scratch for


Come son, i will wright to Carracus, that my own hand may witness, how much I
stand affected to his worth


By this light Coze, this suite does rarely: the tailor that made it, may hap
to be saved, ant be but for his good works, I think I shall be proud of em,
and so I was never yet of any clothes


How not of your Clothes, why then you were never proud of any thing, for
therein chiefly consists pride: for you never saw pride pictured, but in gay
attire


True, but in my opinion, pride might as well be portraied in any other shape,
as to seem to be an affector of gallantry, being the causes thereof are so
several and diverse, as some are proud of their strength, although that pride
cost them the loss of a limb or two, by ouer-daring, likewise some are proud
of their humor, although in that humor, they be often knocked for being so, some
are proud of their drink, although that liquid operation, cause them to wear
a night cap 3. weeks after, some are proud of their good parts, although they
never put them to better uses, then the enjoying of a common strumpets company,
and are only made proud by the favor of a waiting woman, others are proud --


Nay, I preethee Coze, enough of pride, but when do you entend to go yonder to
Covetousness the Usurer, that we may see how near your plot will take, for the
releasing of your mortgaged lands


Why now presently, and if I do not accomplish my proiects to a wished end, I
wish my fortunes may be like some scraping tradesman, that never embraces true
pleasure, till he be threescore and ten


But say Hogs daughter, on whom all your hopes depend by this be betrothed to
some other


Why say she were, nay more, married to another, I would be near the further
of them effecting of my intents, no Coze, I partly know her inward disposition,
and did I but only know her to be woman kind, I think it were sufficient


Sufficient, for what.


Why to obtain a grant of the best thing she had, Chastity, Man it is not
here, as it is with you in the Country, not to be had without fathers and
mothers good will, no, the City is a place of more traffic, where each one
learnes by example of their elders, to make the most of their own, either for
profit or pleasure


It Is but your misbeleeuing thoughts, makes you surmise so, if women were so
kind, how haps you had not by their factors kept your self out of the claws
of poverty


O but Coze, Can a ship sail without water, had I had but such a suite as
this, to set my self a floate, I would not have ^^ar'd sincking but come, no
more of need, now to the Usurer, and though all hopes do fail, a man can want
no living, So long as sweet desire reigns in women


But then your self must able be in giving.

Conscience thou horror unto wicked men,
When will thou cease thy all afflicted wrath,
And set my soul free from the laborinth
Of thy tormenting terror; O but it fits not,
Should I desire redress or wish for comfort,
That have committed an act so inhumane,
Able to fill shames spacious Chronicle.
Who but a damned one, could have done like me,
Robbed my dear friend, in a short moments time
Of his loves high pri'zd Iem of Chastity:
That which so many years himself has staid for;
How often has he as he lay in bed,
Sweetly discourst to me of his Maria?
And with what pleasing passions a did suffer
Loves genle war-siege, then he would relate
How he first came unto her f^ire eyes view;
How long it was ere she could brook affection,
And then how constant she did still abide:
I then at this would joy, as if my breast
Had simpathi'zd in equal happiness;
With my true friend: but now when joy should be,
Who but a damned one would have done like me:
He has been married now at least a month:
In all which time I have not once behold him; This is his house:
I Will call to know his health, but will not see him,
My looks would then betray me for should he ask
My cause of seeming sadness, or the like;
I could not but reveal, and so pourd on
Worse unto id, which breeds confusion.

To what intent dee knock sir.


Because I would be heard sir, is the Mr. of this house within?


Yes marry is a sir, would you speak with him?


My business is not so troublesome:
Is a in health with his late espoused wife

Both are exceeding well sir.


I me truly glad ont, farewell good friend.


I pray you lets crave your name sir, I may else have anger.


You may say, one Albert riding by this way, only inquired their health.


I will acquaint so much.


How like a poisonous Doctor have I come,
To enquire their welfare, knowing that my self
Have given the portion of their nere recovery;
For which I will afflict my self with torture ever:
And since the earth yields not a remedy,
Able to salve the sores my lust has made,
I Will now take fare-wel of society,
And th'aboade of men to entertain a life
Fitting my fellowship, in desert woods;
Where beasts like me consort, there may I live,
Far off from wronging virtuous Carracus;
There Is no Maria that shall satisfy
My hateful lust, the trees shall shelter
This wretched trunk of mine, upon whose back.
I will engraue the story of my sin,
And there this short breath of mortality,
I Will finish up in that repentant state;
Where not th'allurements of earths vanities
Can ere ore-take me, there is no baits for lust,
No friend to ruin, I shall then be free
From practicing the art of treachery;
Thither then steps where such content abides,
Where penitency not disturbed may grieve,
Where on each tree and springing plant, I Will carue
This heavy motto of my misery.
Who but a damb'd one could have done like me?
Carracus farewell, if ere thou see me more,
Shall find me curing of a sole-sicke sore.

Why thou base villain, was my dearest friend here, and could not make him
stay


Sfoote sir, I could not force him against his will, an a had been a woman.


Hence thou vntuter'd slave.

But could thou Albert come so nere my door, and not vouchsafe the comfort of
thy presence

Has my good fortune caused thee to repine?
And seeing my state so full repleate with good,
Can thou withdraw thy love to lessen it?
What could so move thee, was 't because I married?
Did thou imagine I infringed my faith,
For that a woman did participate
In equal share with thee? Cannot my friendship
Be firm to thee, because it is dear to her;
Yet no more dear to her then firm to thee:
Believe me Albert; thou do little think,
How much thy absence gives cause of discontent,
But i will impute it only to neglect,
It is neglect indeed when friends neglect
The sight of friends, and say it is troublesome;
Only ask how they do, and so fare well:
Showing an outward kind of seeming duty,
Which in the rules of manhood is obsern'd
And think full well they have perform^d their task,
When of their friends health they do only ask,
Not caring how they are, or how distressed,
It is enough they have their loves expressed,
In bare enquiry, and in these times too
Friendships so cold that few so much will do:
And am not I beholding then to Albert,
He after knowlede of our being well,
Said he was truly glad on it: o rare friend!
If he be unkind how many more may mend;
But whether am I carried by unkindness?
Why should not I as well set light by friendship,
Since I have seen a man whom I late thought,
Had been composed of nothing but of faith,
Prove so regardlesse of his friends content.

Come Carracus I have sought you all about,
Your servant told me you were much disquieted
Prithee love be not so, come walk in,
I Will charm thee with my lute from forth disturbance.

I am not angry sweet, though if I were,
Thy bright aspect would soon alay my rage;
But my Maria, it does something move me,
That our friend Albert so forgets himself.

It may be 'ts nothing else, and there is no doubt
Hele soon remember his accustomed friendship
He thinks, as yet, peradventure that his presence
Will but offend, for that our marriage rites
Are but so newly past.

I will surmise so too, and only think,
Some serious business hinders Alberts presence:
But what ring's that Maria on your finger?

It Is one you lost love, when I did bestow
A jewel of sarre greater worth on you.

At what time fairest?


As if you knew not, why dee mak't so strang^^


Yare disposed to riddle, pray lets see it,
I partly know it, where wast you sound it?

Why in my chamber that most gladsome night
When you enricht your love by my escape.

How, in your Chamber?


Sure Carracus I will be angry with you
If you seem so forgetful, I took it up
Then when you left my lodge and went away,
Glad of your conquest for to seek your friend:
Why stand you so amazed, sir I hope that kindness
Which then you reaped, does not prevail
So in your thoughts, as that you think me light.

O think thy self Maria what thou art:
This is the ring of Albert treacherous man,
He that enjoyed thy virgin chastity:
I never did ascend into thy chamber;
But all that cold night through the frozen field,
Went seeking of that wretch, who nere sought me;
But found what his lust sought, for dearest thee.

I have heard enough my Carracus to bereave me of this little breath, she
sounds


All breath be first extinguishe, within there ho?


O Nurse see here, Maria says she will die.

Marry, God forbid, oh Mris. Ms. Ms. she has breath yet, she is but in a
trance, good sir take comfort she will recover by and by


No, no, she will die Nurse, for she said she would, an she had not said so, tad
been another matter, but you know Nurse she nere told a lie, I will believe
her, for she speaks all truth


His memory begins to fail him, come lets bear
This heavy spectacle from forth his presence,
The heavens will lend a hand, I hope, of comfort, Exeu^t Ca. manet.

See how they steal away my fair Maria,
But I will follow after her as far,
As Orpheus did to gain his souls delight,
And Plutoes self shall know, although I am not
Skilful in music, yet I can be mad,
And force my loves enioyment in despite
Of hels black fury; but stay, stay Carracus,
Where is thy knowledge, and that rational sense,
Which heaven; great Architect endued thee with?
All sunk beneath the weight of lumpish nature?
Are our diuiner parts no noblier free,
Then to be tortured by the weak assailements
Of earth-sprung griefs? why is man then accounted
The head commander of this universe,
Next the Creator, when a little storm
Of natures fury straight ore'whelmes his judgment,
But mines no little storm, it is a tempest
So full of raging selfe-consuming woe,
That naught but ruin follows expectation:
Oh my Maria, what unheard of sin
Have any of thine Ancestors enacted,
That all their shame should be powered thus on thee;
Or what incestuous spirit, cruel Albert
Left hels vast womb for to enter thee,
And do a mischief of such treachery.
Oh Nurse, how is it with Maria?
If ere thy tongue did utter pleasing words,
Let it now do so, or hereafter ere be dumb in sorrow.

Good sir take comfort, I am forced to speak
What will not please, your chaste wise sir is dead.

It Is dead indeed, how did you know it was so Nurse?


What sir?


That my heart was dead, sure thou have served
Dame natures self, and know the inward secrets
Of all our hidden powers, i will love thee for it;
And if thou will teach me that unknown skill,
Shall see what wonder Carracus will do;
I Will diue into the breast of hateful Albert,
And see how his black soul is round incompast
By fearful fiends, oh I would do strange things,
And know to whose cause Lawyers will incline,
When they had fees on both sides, view the thoughts
Of for-lorne widows when their Knights have left them;
Search through the guts of grearnes, and behold
What several sin best pleased them, thence I Would descend
Into the bowels of some pocky sit:
And tell to leachers all the pains he felt,
That they thereby might warned be from lust,
Troth twill be rare, i will study ^^ presently.

Alas! he is distracted, what a sin
Am I partaker of by telling him,
So cursed an untruth? But 'twas my Mistress will
Who is recouer'd, though her griefs never
Can be recouer'd, she has vowed with tears
Her own perpetual banishment, therefore to him
Death was not more displeasing, then if I
Had told her lasting absence.

I find my brains too shallow far for study,
What need I care for being a Rethmetitian,
Let Citizens sons stand and they will for Ciphers;
Why should I teach them and go beat my brains,
To instruct unapt, and vnconceauing dolts,
And when all is done, my art that should be sam'd,
Will by gross imitation be but shamed,
Your judgment Madam?

Good sir walk in, we will fend for learned men that may alay your frenzy.


But can Maria so forget her self,
As to debar us thus of her attendance?

She is within sir, pray you will you walk to her.


Oh is she so, come then lets softly steal
Into her chamber, if she be a sleep
I Will laugh shall see enough, and thou shall weep,
Softly good long coat, softly.

Cease now thy steps Maria, and look back
Upon that place, where distressed Carracus
Has his sad being, from whose virtuous hosome,
Shame has constrained me fly nere to return:
I will go seek some unfrequented path,
Either in desert woods or wilderness,
There to bewail my innocent mishaps,
Which heaven has justly powered down on me.
In punishing my disobediency.
Oh see my brother

Ho you, three foot and a half, why Page I say, sfoot is vanished as suddenly
as a dumb show, if a lord had lost his way now so a had been served, but let
me see; as I take it, this is the house of Carracus, a very fair building, but
it looks as if twere dead, I can see no breath come out of the chimnies; but I
shall know the state on it by and by, by the looks of some seruing-man: What no
within here


Good sir, you have your arms at liberty, wilt please you to withdraw your
action of battery


Yes indeed, now you have made your appearance, is the liuing-giuer within sir?


You mean my Master sir?


You have hit it sir, praised be your understanding, I am to have conference
with him, would you admit my presence


Indeed sir he is at this time not in health, and may not be disturbed.


Sir, an a were in the pangs of childe-bed, I Would speak with him.


Upon what cause gay-man?


Sfoote I think a be disturbed indeed, a speaks more commanding then a
Constable at midnight

Sir, my lord and father, by me a lord, has sent these lines enclosed, which
show his whole intent


Let me peruse them, if they do portend
To the States good, your answer shall be sudden,
Your entertainment friendly; but if otherwise,
Our meanest subject shall divide thy greatness,
You Would best look to it Ambassador.

Is yous Mr. a Statesman friend?


Alas no sir, a understands not what a speaks.


I but when my father dies, I am to be called in for one my self, and I hope
to bear the place as gravely as my successors have done before me


Ambassador, I find your Masters will
Treats to the good of somewhat, what it is
You have your answer, and may now depart.

I will relate as much sir, fare ye well.


But stay, I h^^^ forgotten quite our chief'st affairs,
Your Master further writes some three lines lower,
Of one Maria that is wife to me,
That she and I should travel now with you
Unto his presence.

Why now I understand you sir, that Maria is my sister, by whose conjunction
you are created brother, to me a lord


But brother lord we cannot go this journey.


Alas no sir, we mean to ride it, my sister shall ride upon my nagge.


Come then we will in, and strive to woe your sister,
I ha not seen her sir, at least these three days,
They keep her in a Chamber, and tell me
She Is fast a sleep still, you and i will go see,

Content sir.


Madmen and fools agree.


When you have got this prise, you mean to lose me.


Nay pree thee do not think so, if I do not marry thee this instant night,
may I never enjoy breath a minute after; by heaven I respect not his pelf,
thus much, but only that I may have wherewith to maintain thee


O but to rob my father, though a be bad, the world will think ill of me.


Think ill of thee, can the world pity him, that nere pitied any, besides
since their is no end of his goods, nor beginning of his goodness; had not we
as good share his dross in his life time, as let Controversy and Lawyers
deuowre it ats death


You have prevailed, at what hour is it you entend to have entrance into his
chamber


Why just at midnight, for then our apparition will will seem most fearful,
you will make away that we may ascend up like spirits


I will, but how many have you made instruments herein?


Faith none, but my cosen Lightfoote and a plaier.


But may you trust the player?


Oh exceeding well, well give him a speech a understands not, but now I think
out, what is to be done with your Fathers man Peter


Why the least quantity of drink, will lay him dead asleep; But hark, I
hear my father coming, soon in the evening i will convey you in


Till when, let this outward ceremony, be the true pledge of our inward
affections

So, this goes better forward then the Plantation in Virginia: but see here
comes half the west Indies, whose rich mines this night I mean to be
ransackin


Then you will seal for this small Lordship you say, To morrow your money shall be
rightly told up for you to a penny


I pray let it, and that your man may set contents upon every bag.


Indeed by that we may know what we steal without labor, for the telling ont
ore; how now gent. are ye agreed upon the price of this earth and clay


Yes faith Mr. Haddit the gent, your friend here makes me pay sweetly for it
but let it go, I hope to inherit heaven ant be but for doing gentlemen
pleasure


Peter.


Anon sir.


I wonder how Haddit came by that gay suite of clothes, all his means was
consumed long since


Why sir being undone himself; a lives by the undoing or by-lady, it may be by
the doing of others, or peradventure both a decayed gallant may live by any
thing, if a keep one thing safe


Gentlemen, I Will to the Scriueners to cause these writings to be drawn.


Pray do sir, we will now leave you till the morning.


Nay, you shall stay dinner, i will return presently; Peter some bear here for
these worshipful gentlemen


We shall be bold no doubt, and that old penny-father you will confess by to
morrow morning


Then his daughter is certainly thine, and condiscends to all thy wishes.


And yet you would not once believe it, as if a females favor could not be
obteyn'd by any, but he that wears the Cap of maintenance

When 'ts nothing but acquaintance and a bold spirit,
That may the chiefest prize among all of them inherit,

Well thou have got one deserves the bringing home with trumpets, and falls to
thee as miraculously as the 1000. pound did to the Tailor, thank your good
fortune, but must Hogs man be made druncke


By all means: and thus it shall be effected, when a comes in with beer, do
you upon some slight occasion fall out with him, and if you do give him a
cuffe or two, it will give him cause to knowy'are the more angry, then will I
slip in and take up the matter, and striving to make you two friends, well make
him druncke


Its done in conceit already, see where a comes.


Wilt please you to taste a cup of September bear gentiem.


Pray begin, well pleadge you sir.


Its out sir. Li. then my hand in sir.


Why goodman hobby horse, if we out of our gentility offered you to begin,
must you out of your rascality needs take it


Why how now sirs, what is the matter.


The gentleman here falls out with me, upon nothing in the world but mere
courtesy


By this light but a shall not, why Cozen Lightfoote.


Is his name Lighfoote, a plague on him, a has a heavy hand.


Peace be here: for I came late enough from a madman.


My young Lord, God save you.


And you also: I could speak it in lattine, but the phrase is common.


True my Lords, and what is common, ought not much to be dealt with all: but I
must desire your help my Lord to end a Controversy here, between this
gentleman my friend, and honest Peter, who I dare besworne is as ignorant as
your Lordshippe


That I will, but my masters thus much i will say vntee, if so be this quarrel
may be taken up peaceably, without the indangering of my own person, well, and
good, otherwise I will not meddle therewith, for I have been vexed late enough
already


Why then my Lord if it please you, let me, being your inferior, decree the
cause between them


I do give leave, or permit.


Then thus I will propound a reasonable motion; how many cuffes Peter did this
gent. out of his fury make thee partaker of


Three at the least sir.


All which were bestowed upon you for beginning first Peter.


Yes indeed sir.


Why then here the sentence of your suffering, you shall both down into Master
Hogs seller Peter, and whereas you began first to him, so shall he there to
you, and as he gave you three cuffes, so shall you retort of in defiance of
him, three black Iackes, which if he deny to pledge; then the glory is thine,
and he accounted by the wise discretion of my Lord here a flincher


A very reasonable motion.


Why so, this is better then being among madmen yet.


Were you so lately with any my Lord?


Yes faith, I Will tell you all in the Seller, how I was taken for an Ambassador,
and being no sooner in the house, but the mad man carries me up into the
garret for a spy, and very roundly bad me untruss, and had not a courteous
serving man conveyed me away whilst he went to feteh whips I think in my
conscience: not respecting my honor a would a breecht me


By Lady, and it was to be feared; but come my Lord well hear the rest in the
seller

And honest Peter thou that have been grieved,
My Lord and I, will see thee well relieved.

How full of sweet content had this life been,
If it had been embraced but before
My burthenous conscience was so fraught with sin;
But now my griefs oresway that happiness:
O that some lecher or accursed betrayer:
Of sacred friendship, might but here arrive,
And read the lines repentant on each tree,
That I have carved to express my misery:
My admonitions now, would sure eonuert,
The sinfulst creature; I could tell them now,
How idely vain those humanes spend their lives,
That daily grieve not for offenses past,
But to enjoy some wantons company;
Which when obteyn'd, what is it, but a blot,
Which their whole lives repentance scarce can clear:
I could now tell to friend betraying man,
How black sin is hateful treachery,
How heavy on their wretched souls it will fit,
When fearful death does plant his siege but nere them,
How heavy and affrightfull will their end
Seem to appeach them, as if then they knew,
The full beginning of their endless woe
Were then appointed; which astonishment
O blessed repentance keep me Albert from!
And suffer not despair to ouer-whelme,
And make a ship-wracke of my heavy soul.
Whose here, a Page: what black disasterous fate
Can be so cruel to his pleafing youth?
So now Maria, here thou must forgo
What nature lent thee to repaie to death;
Famine I thank thee, I have found thee kindest,
Thou set'st a period to my misery.

It is Maria that fair innocent,
Whom my abhorred lust has brought to this;
I Will go for sustenance: and O you powers!
If ever true repentance wan acceptance,
O show it Albert now, and let him save
His wronged beauty from untimely grave.

Sure some thing spoke, or else my feebled sense
Has lost the use of its due property;
Which is more likely, then that in this place,
The voice of humane creature should be heard;
This is far distant from the paths of men,
Nothing breaths here but wild and ravening beasts,
With ayry monsters, whose shaddowing wings do seem
To taste a vale of death in wicked livers;
Which I live dreadlesse of, and every hour
Strive to meet death, who still unkind auoids me:
But that now gentle famine does begin
For to give end to my calamities.
See, here is carved upon this trees smooth bark,
Lines knit in verse, a chance far unexpected;
Assist me breath a little to unfold, what they include.
I that have writ these lines, amone, whose sin
Is more then grievous; for know, that I have been
A breaker of my faith, with one whose breast
Was all composed of truth: but I digrest.
And fled, them brats of his dear friendships love,
Clasping to falsehood did a vilane prove,
As thus shall be expressed: my worthy friend
Loved a fair beauty, who did condescend
In dearest affection to his virtuous will
He then a night appointed to fulfill
Hymen's blest-rites, and to convey away
His loves fair person, to which peerless pray
I was acquainted made, and when the hour
Of her escape drew on, then lust did power
Enraged appetite through all my veins.
And base desires in me let loose the reins
To my licentious will, and that black night
When my friend should have had his chaste delight,
I feigned his presence, and by her, thought him
Robbed that fair virgin of her honors Iem:
For which most heinous, crime upon each tree
I write this story that men's eyes may see,
None but a damned one would have done like me.
Is Albert then become so penitent,
As in these deserts to deplore his facts,
Which his unfeigned repentance seems to clear:
How good man is, when he laments his ill?
Who would not pardon now that man's misdeeds,
Whose griefs bewail them thus, could I now live,
I Would remit thy fault with Carracus:
But death no longer will afford repreeue
Of my abundant woes: wronged Carracus farewell,
Live, and forgive thy wrongs, for the repentance
Of him that eaus'd them, so deserves from thee;
And since my eyes do witness Alberts grief,
I pardon Albert in my wrongs the chief.

How pardon me, O sound Angelical,
But see! she faints, O heavens now show your power,
That these distilled waters made in grief,
May ad some comfort to affliction:
Look up fair youth, and see a remedy.

O who disturbs me, I was hand in hand,
VValking with death unto the house of rest.

Let death walk by himself, if a want company,
There Is many thousands boy, whose aged years
Have taken a surfeit of earths vanities,
They will go with him, when he please to call,
To drink my boy thy pleasing tender youth
Cannot deserve to dye, no, it is for us,
Whose years are laden by our often sins,
Singing the last part of our blessed repentance,
Are fit for death, and none but such as we,
Death ought to claim; for when a snatcheth youth,
It shows him but a tyrant; but when age,
Then is a just, and not composed of rage.
How fares my lad?

Like one embracing death withal his parts,
Reaching at life but with one little finger;
His mind so firmly knit unto the first,
That unto him the latter seems to be
What may be pointed at, but not possessed.

O but thou shall possess it.
If thou did fear thy death but as I do,
Thou would take pity, though not of thy self,
Yet of my aged years; trust me my boy,
Tha'st struck such deep compassion in my breast,
That all the moisture which prolongs my life,
Will from my eyes gush forth, if now thou leau'st me.

But can we live here in this desert wood,
If not, i will die, for other places seem,
Like tortures to my griefs, may I live here?

I, thou shall live with me, and I will I tell thee
Such strange occurrents of my fore-past life,
That all thy young sprung griefs shall seem but sparks
To the great fire of my calamities;
Then i will live only with you for to hear,
If any humane woes can be like mine;
Yet since my being in this darkesome desert,
I have read on tre^^ most lamentable stories.

It Is true indeed, there is one within these woods
Whose name is Albert, a man so full of sorrow,
That one each tree he passes by he earues,
Such doleful lines for his rash follies past,
That who so reads them, and not drowned in tears;
Must have a heart framed forth of Addamant.

And can you help to the sight of him?


I when thou will, bele often come to me,
And at my Cave sit a whole winters night,
Recounting of his stories, I tell thee boy
Had he offended more then did that man,
Who stole the fire from heaven, his contrition
Would appease all the gods, and quite reuert
Their wrath to mercy; but come my pretty boy
VVele to my Cave, and after some repose,
Relate the sequel of each others woes.

What a way have I come, yet I know not whither,
The ayers so cold this winter season,
I Am sure a fool, would any but an ass
Leave a warm matted chamber and a bed,
To run thus in the cold, and which is more,
To seek a woman, a slight thing called woman,
Creatures, with curious nature framed as I suppose,
For rent receauers to her treasury;
And why I think so now, I Will give you instance;
Most men do know that natures self has made them,
Most profitable members, then if so.
By often trading in the common wealth
They needs must be inricht, why very good,
To whom ought beauty then repaie this gain
Which she by natures gift has profited;
But unto nature? why all this I grant,
Why then they shall no more be called woman,
For I will style them thus, scorning their leave,
Those that for nature do much rent receive.
This is a wood sure, and as I have read,
In woods are Eccho's which will answer men,
To every question which they do propound:

O are you there, have at ye then in faith,
Echo can tell me whether men or women
Are for the most part damb'd?

Of both indeed, how true this Echo speaks,
Echo, now tell me if among 1000. women,
There be one chaste, or none?

Why so I think, better and better still:
Now further Echo, in a world of men,
Is there one faithful to his friend, or no?

Thou speak most true, for I have found it so;
Who said thou wast a woman Echo lies,
Thou could not then answer so much of truth,
Once more good Echo,
Was my Maria false by her own desire,
Or wast against her will?
Troth't may be so, but can thou tell,
Whether she be dead or not?

Not dead.

Then without question she does surely live: But I do trouble thee too much,
therefore good speak truth, farewell


How quick it answers, o that Conncellors
Would thus refolue men's doubts without a fee.
How many country Clyents then might rest
Free from undoing, no plodding pleader then
Would purchase great poffessions with his tongue;
Were I some demy-god, or had that power,
I Would straight make this Echo here a judge;
He Would spend his judgment in the open court,
As now to me, without being once solicited
In's private chamber, it is not bribes could win
Him to o're-sway men's right, nor could he be
Lead to damnation for a little pelf;
He would not harbor malice in his heart,
Or envious hatred, base dispight or grudge,
But be an upright, just, and equal Judge;
But now imagine that I should confront
Treacherous Albert, who has raised my front.
But I fear this idle prate has
Made me quite forget my cinque pace. he daunceth.

I heard the Echo answer unto one,
That by his speech cannot be far remote
From of this ground, and see I have discried him:
Oh heavens! its Carracus, whose reasons seat
Is now usurped by madness, and distraction;
Which I the author of confusion
Have planted here, by my accursed deeds.

O are you come sir, I was sending the Tauerne-boy for ye, I have been
practicing here, and can do none of my lofty tricks


Good sir, if any spark do yet remain
Of your consumed reason, let me strive.

To blow it out, troth I most kindly thank you,
Here Is friendship to the life; but father whay-beard,
Why should you think me void of reasons fire,
My youthful days being in the height of knowledge?
I must confess your old years gains experience;
But that is so much orer-ul'd by dotage,
That what you think experience shall effect,
Short memory destroies, what say you now sir?
Am I mad now, that can answer thus
To all intergatories?

But though your words do savor sir of judgment,
Yet when they derogate from the due observance
Of fitting times, they ought not be respected,
No more, then if a man should tell a tale
Of fained mirth in midst of extreme sorrows.

How did you know my sorrows sir?
What though I have lost a wife,
Must I be therefore grieved; am I not happy
To be so freed of a continual trouble?
Had many a man such fortune as I,
In what a heaven would they think themselves?
Being releast of all those threatening clouds,
Which in the angry skies, called women's brows,
Sit ever menacing tempestuous storms:
But yet I needs must tell you, old December,
My wife was clear of this; within her browe,
Sh'ad not a wrinkle nor a storming frown;
But like a smooth well polishe Inory.
It seemed so pleasant to the looker on,
She was so kind, of nature so gentle,
That if sh'ad done a fault she would straight go die for it:
Was not she then a rare one?
What weep'st thou aged Nestor?
Take comfort man, Troy was ordained by fate
To yield to us, which we will ruinate.

Good sir walk with me, but where you see
The shaddowing Elmes, within whose circling round
There is a holy spring about incompast,
By dandling siccamores and viol^es,
Whose waters cure all homane maladies:
Few drops thereof being sprinkled on your temples,
Reuiues your fading memory, and restores
Your senses lost unto their perfect being.

Is it clear water sir, and very fresh?
For I am thirsty; gives it a better relish
Then a cup of dead wine with sties in it?

Most pleasant to the taste, pray will you go.


Faster then you I believe sir.


I am walked forth from my preferuers cave,
To search about these woods, only to see
The penitent Albert, whose repentant mind
Each tree expresses: o that some power divine
Would hither send my virtuous Carracus;
Not for my own content, but that be might
See how his distressed friend repents the wrong,
Which his rash folly, most unfortunate
Acted against him and me, which I forgive
A hundred times a day, for that more often
My eyes are witness to his said complaints,
How the good Hermit seems to share his mones,
Which in the day time he deplores'mongst trees,
And in the night his Cave is filled with sighs;
No other bed does his weak limbs support
Then the cold earth, no other harmony
To rock his cares asleep, but blustering winds,
Or some swift Current, headlong rushing down
From a high Mountains top, pouring his force
Into the Oceans gulf, where being swallowed,
Seems to be wail his fall with hideous words:
No other sustentation to suffice
What Nature claims, but raw vnsauowry roots,
With troubled waters, where untamed beasts,
Do bathe themselves:
Ay me! what things are these?
What pretty harmless things they seem to be?
As if delight had no where made abode,
But in their nimble sport.
Yonder Is the courteous Hermit, and with him
Albert it seeemes, o see it is Carracus,
Joy do not now confound me.

Thanks unto heavens and thee thou holy man,
I have attained what does adorn man's being,
That precious Iemme of reason, by which soly,
We are discerned from rude and brutish beasts,
No other difference being twixt us and them.
How to repay this more then earthly kindness,
Lies not within my power, but in his
That has indu'd thee with celestial gifts,
To whom I Will pray, he may bestow on thee
What thou deserve, blessed immortality.

Which unto you befall, thereof most worthy:
But virtuous sir, what I will now request
From your true generous nature, is, that you would
Be pleased to pardon that repentant Wight
Whose sinful stories upon you trees bark,
Your self did read, for that you say, to you
Those wrongs were done.

Indeed they were, and to, a dear wife lost;
Yet I forgive him, as I wish the heavens
May pardon me.

So does Maria to.


Lives my Maria then? what gracious plannet
Gave thee safe conduct to these desert woods?

My late mishap (repented now by all,
And therefore pardoned) compelled me to fly,
Where I had perished for want of food,
Had not this courteous man awak't my sense,
In which, deaths self had partly interest.

Alas Maria! I am so far indebted
To him already, for the late recovery of
My own weakness, that it is impossible
For us to attribute sufficient thanks,
For such abundant good.

I rather ought to thank the heavens Creator,
That he vouchsaf't me such especial grace,
In doing so small a good, which could I howerly
Bestow on all, yet could I not assuage
The swelling rancor of my fore-past crimes.

O sir, despair not for your course of life
(were your sins far more odious then they be)
Does move compassion and pure clemency
In the al-ruling Judge, whose powerful mercy
Oreswayes his justice, and extends it self
To all repentant minds, he is happier far
That sins, and can repent him of his sin;
Then the self iustifier, who does surmise
By his own works to gain salvation,
Seeming to reach at heaven and claspe damnation:
You then are happy, and our penitent friend,
To whose wished presence please you now to bring us,
That in our gladsome arms we infold
His much esteemed person, and forgive
The injuries of his rash follies past.

Then see false Albert prostrate at your feet,
Desiring Justice for his heinous ill.

Is it you Alberts self that has preserved us?
O blessed bewailer of thy misery!

And woful'st liver in calamity.


From which, right worthy friend, its now high time
You be releast, come then you shall with us,
Our first and chiefest welcome my Maria,
We shall receive at your good fathers house;
Who, as I do remember, in my frenzy
Sent a kind letter which desired our presence.

So please you, virtuous pair, Albert will stay,
And spend the remnant of this weary some life
In these dark woods.

Then you neglect the comforts heaven does send,
To your abode on earth, if you stay here
Your life may end in torture, by the cruelty
Of some wild ravenous beasts, but if among men
When you depart, the faithful prayers of many
Will much avail, to crown your soul with bliss.

Loved Carracus, I have found in thy converse
Comfort so blessed, that nothing now but death,
Shall cause a separation in our being.

Which heaven confirm.


Thus by the breach of faith, our friendships knit
In stronger bonds of love.

Heaven so continue it.


So, have you laid the keys of the outward doors under my boulster?


Yes forsooth.


Go your way to bed then.
I wonder who did at the first invent
These beds, the breeders of disease and sloth,
A was no soldier sure, nor no scholar,
And yet a might be vety well a Courtier;
For no good husband would have bin so idle,
No Usurer neither; yet here the bed affords
Store of sweet golden slumbers unto him;
Here sleeps command in war, Caesar by this
Obtained his triumphs, this will fight man's cause,
When fathers, brethren, and the neer'st of friends
Leaves to assist him, all content to this
Is merely vain, the lovers whose affections
Do simpathize together in full pleasure,
Debarred of this their summer sudden ends,
And care the winter to their former joys,
Breath's such a cold blast on their Turtles bills;
Having not this, to shrowed him forth his storms,
They straight are forced to make a separation,
And so live under those that rule ore this.
The Gallant, whose illustrious outside draws
The eyes of wantons to behold with wonder
Her rare shaped parts, for so he thinks they be,
Decked in the roabes of glistering gallantry:
Having not this, attendant on his person,
Walks with a clowdy brow, and seems to all
A great contemner of society;
Not for the hate he bears to company,
But for the want of this ability:
O silver! thou that art the basest captive
Kept in this prison: how many pale offenders
For thee have suffered ruin; but o my gold
Thy sight's more pleasing, then the seemly locks
Of yallow hair'd Apollo, and thy touch
More smooth and dainty, then the downe-soft white
Of Ladies tempting breast, thy bright aspect
Dimm's the great'st luster of heavens Waggoner.
But why go I about to extol thy worth,
Knowing that Poets cannot compass it;
But now give place my gold for here is a power
Of greater glory and supremacy
Obscures thy being, here sits enthroniz'd
The sparkling diamond, whose bright reflection
Casts such a splendour on these other Iemmes,
Among which he so maiesticall appears,
As if -- now my good angels guard me.

Melior vigilantia somno.
Stand not amazed good man, for what appears
shall add to thy content, be void of fears,
I am the shadow of rich Kingly Cressus,
Sent by his greatness from the lower world
To make thee mighty, and to sway on earth
By thy abundant store, as he himself does
In Elysium; how he reigns there,
His shadow will unfold, give thou then ear.
In Vnder-ayre where fair Elizum stands
Beyond the river styled Acharon,
He has a Castle built of Adamant;
Not framed by vain enchauntment, but there fixed,
By the all burning hands of warlike spirits,
Whose windows are composed of purest crystal,
And decked within with oriental pearls:
There the great spirit of Cressus royal self,
Keeps his abode in joyous happiness;
He is not tortured there as Poets feine
With molten gold and sulphrie flames of fire,
Or any such molesting perturbation;
But there reputed as a demy-god,
Feasting with Pluto and his Proserpine,
Night after night with all delicious cates,
With greater glory then seven kingdoms states.
Now further know the cause of my appearance,
The kingly Cressus having by fames trumpe,
Heard that thy loved desires stand affected
To the obtaining of abundant wealth,
Sends me his shade, thus much to signify,
That if thou will become famous on earth,
Heel give to thee even more then infinite;
And after death with him thou shall partake
The rare delights beyond the stigian lake.

Great Cressus shadow may dispose of me to what he pleases.


So speaks obediency.
For which i will raise thy lowly thoughts as high,
As Cressus were in his mortality;
Stand then undaunted whilst I raise those spirits,
By whose laborious task and industry,
Thy treasure shall abound and multiply.

What would then Cresus list to fill
Some mortals cofers up with gold,
Changing the silver it does hold:
By that pure mettle ift be so,
By the infernal gates I swear,
Where Radamanth does dominere:
By Cresus name and by his castle,
Where winter nights he keeps wassell;
By Demogorgon and the fates,
And by all these low country states;
That after knowledge of thy mind,
Ascarion like the swift pac't wind,
Will fly to finish thy command.

Take then this silver out of hand,
And bear it to the River Tagus,
Beyond th'aboade of Archi Magus;
Whose golden sands upon it cast,
Transform it into gold at last:
Which being effected straight return,
And sudden too, or I will spurn
This truncke of thine into the pit,
Where all the hellish furies sit,
Scratching their eyes out quick begone.

Swifter in course then does the Sun.


How fairest thou mortal be? not terrified
At these infernal motions, know that shortly
Great Cressus ghost shall in the love he bears thee,
Give thee sufficient power by thy own worth,
To raise such spirits.

Cressus is much too liberal in his favor,
To one so far desertlesse as poor Hog.

Poor Hog, O speak not that word poor again,
Least the whole apsetree of Cressus bounty,
Cracked into shiuers overthrow thy fortunes,
For he abhorres the name of poverty,
And will grow sick to hear it spoke by those.
Whom he intends to raise; but see the twilight
Posteth before the Chariot of the Sun,
Brings word of his approach:
We must be sudden, and with speed raise up
The spirit Bazan: that can straight transform
Gold into pearl; be still and circumspect.

I am no Fencer, yet at length
From Plutoes presence and the Hall,
Where Proserpine keeps festival,
I Am hither come and now I see,
To what intent 'Ime rai'sd by thee;
It is to make that mortal rich,
That at his fame men's ears may itch;
When they do hear but of his store.
He has one daughter and no more;
Which all the lower powers decree,
She to one Wealthy wedded be;
By which conjunction there shall spring,
Young heirs to Hog whereon to fling:
His mass of treasure when a dies,
Thus Bazon truly prophesies:
But come my task I long to rear,
His fame above the Hemy-spheare.

Take then the gould which here does lie.
And quick return it by and by;
All in choice pearl whither to go,
I need not tell you, for you know.

Indeed I do, and Hog shall find it so.


Now mortal there is nothing does remain,
Twixt thee and thine abundance, only this
Turn thy eyes westward, for from thence appears
Ascarion with thy gould, which having brought
And at thy foot surrendered, make obeisance;
Then turn about and fix thy tapers westward,
From whence great Bazon brings thy orient pearl;
VVho'le lay it at thy feet much like the former.

Then I must make to him obeisance thus.


Why so, in mean time Cressus shade will rest
Upon thy bed, but above all take heed,
You suffer not your eyes to stray aside,
From the direct point I have set thee at:
For though the spirit do delay the time,
And not return your treasure speedily.

Let the loss light on me, if I neglect
I ouerslip what Cressus suit command.

So now practice standing, though it be nothing agreeable to your hogs age, let
me see among these writings is my nephew Haddits mortgage; but in taking that
it may breed suspect on us, wherefore this box of Jewels will stand far
better and let that alone, it is now break of day, and nere by this the
marriage is confirmed betwixt my Cosen and great Cressus friends daughter here,
whom I would now leave to his most weighty cogitatio

So gentle sir adue, time not permits
To hear those passions and those frantic fits;
Your subject to when you shall find how true,
Great Cressus shade has made an ass of you.

Let me now ruminate to my self why Cressus should be so great a fauorer to
me, and yet to what end should I desire to know I think it is sufficient, it
is so, and I would a had been so sooner, for he and his spirits would have
saved me much labor in the purchasing of wealth; but then indeed it would have
been the confusion of 2. or 3. Scriueners, which by my means have been
properly raised: but now imagine this only a trick whereby I may be guld; but
how can that be? are not my doors locked, have I not seen with my own eyes the
ascending of the spirits? have I not heard with my own ears the inuocations
wherewith they were raised? could any but spirits appear through so firm a
sloore as this is? it is impossible: But hark, I hear the spirit Ascarion
coming with my gould, O bountiful Cressus; I Will build a temple to thy
mightiness


O Peter, how long have we slept upon the hogshead?


I think a dosen hours my Lord, and it is nothing, I Will undertake to sleep
sixteen, upon the receipt of two cups of muskadine


I marvel what is become of Haddit and Lighfoote?


Hang'em flinchers they sluncke away as soon as they had druncke as much as
they were able to carry, which no generous spirit would a done in deed


Yet I believe Had. had his part, for to my thinking the seller went round with
him when a left us, but are we come to a bed yet? I must needs sleep


Come softly by any means, for we are now upon the threshold of my masters
chamber, through which i will bring you to Mistress Rebeckaes lodging, give me your
hand and come very nicely


Where art Peter.


Where Is this noise Peter can tell?


I hear the voice of my adopted son in law.


Why Peter wilt not answer me?


O my Lord above, stand still, I am fallen down at least 30. fathom deep, if
you stand not still till I recover and have lighten a candle, you are but a dead
man


I am robbed, I am undone, I am deluded, whose in my chamber?


It Is I, the Lord your son that shall be, upon my honor I came not to rob you.


I shall run mad, I shall run mad.


Why then it is my fortune to be terrifide with madmen.


Where are you my Lord?


Here my Lady? where are you rogue when thieves break into my house?


Breaking my neck in your service a plague ont.


But are you robbed indeed father Hog, of how much I pray?


Of all, of all; see here, they have left me nothing but 2. or 3. roles of
parchment, here they came up like spirits, and took my silver, gold, and
Jewels; where is my daughter


She Is not in the house sir? the street doors are wide open.


Nay it is no matter where she is now? shele scarce be worth a 1000. pound and
that's but a tailors prise


Then you will not have her sir?


No as I hope to live in peace.


Why be it so, be it so, confusion cannot come in a more fitter time on all of
us: O bountiful Cressus, how fine thy shadow has devoured my substance


Good my Lord promise him to marry his daughter, or a will be mad presently,
though you never intend to have her


Well father Hog, though you are undone, your daughter shall not be, so long
as a Lords can stand her in any stead: come you shall with me to my Lord and
father, whose warrants we will have for the apprehending of all suspicious
lives, and though the labor be infinite, you must consider your loss is so


Come, i will do any thing to gain my gold.


Till which be had, my fare will be but cold.


Now Mr. Parson we will no further trouble you, and for the tying of our true
love knot, here is a small amends


It Is more then due sir, yet i will take it all,
Should kindness be dispis'd, good will would fall.
Unto a lower ebb, should we detest
The grateful giuers gift,

It Is true indeed, good morrow honest Parson.


Yet if you please, sir John will back surrender
The overplus of what you now did tender.

O by no means, I pree thee friend, good morrow.


Why if you please Sir John to me restore,
The overplus i will give it to the poor.

O pardon sir, for by our worships leave,
We ought to give from whence we do receive.

Why then to me sir John.


To all a kind good morrow.


A most fine Vicar, there was no other means to be rid of him: but why are you
so sad Rebecka


To think in what estate my father is?
When he beholds that he is merely guld.

Nay be not grieved, for that which should rather give you cause of content,
for 'twill be a means to make him abandon his avarice, and save a soul almost
incurable: but now to our own affairs, this marriage of ours must not yet be
known least it breed suspicion, we will bring you Rebeck a unto Atlas his
house, whilst we two go unto the old Lord Welthies, having some acquaintance
with his son in law Carracus, who I understand is there, where no question
but we shall find your father proclaiming his loss, thither you shall come
some what after us, as it were to seek him, where I doubt not but so to order
the matter, that I will receive you as my wife, from his own hands


May it so happy prove.


Amen say I, for should our last trick be known, great Cressus shade would
have a coniured time ont


It Is true, his Castle of Addamant would scarce hold him: but come this will be
good cause for laughter hereafter

Then well relate how this great bird was pulled,
Of his rich feathers, and most finely guld.

More welcome Carrucus, then friendly truce
To a besieged City all distressed;
How early this glad morning are you come
To make me happy, for pardon of your offense
I Have given a blessing, which may heaven confirm,
In trebble manner on your virtuous lives.
And may our lives and duty daily strive,
To be found worthy of that loving favor,
Which from your reverent age we now receive,
Without desert, or merit.

Room for a desirer of Justice, what my sister Maria;
Who thought to have met you here?

You may see brother, unlooked for guests proof often troublesome.


Well, but is your husband there any quieter then a was?


Sir, I must desire you to forget all injuries, if, in not being my self, I
offered you any


I Will see that peace concluded.


Which I agree to, for patience is a virtue father Hog.


Was it you son that cride so loud for justice?


Yes marry was it, and this the party to whom it appertains.


O my most honored lord I am undone, robbed this black night of all the wealth
and treasure, which these many years I have howerly labored for


And who are those have done this outrage to you?


Oh knew I that, I then my lord were happy.


Come you for Justice then, not knowing against whom the course of Justice
should extend it self

Nor yet suspect you none?

None but the devil.


I thought a was a Cheater, ere since I heard two or three Templers swear at
dice the last Christmas, that the devil had got all


My kind acquaintance. Joy to thy good success.


Noble, and freeborn Haddit, welcome.


Mr. Hog good-day.


For I have had a bad night on it


Sickness is incident to age, what be the writings ready to be sealed, we
entreated last day


Yes I think they are, would the Scriuiner were paid for the making them.


A shall be so, though I doote my self, is the money put up as I appointed?


Yes it is put up, confusion cease the receivers.


Heaven bless us all, what mean you sir?


O sir, I was robbed this night of all I had,
My daughter to is lost, and I undone.

Marry, God forbid, after what manner I pray.


O to recount sir will breed more ruth,
Then did the tale of that high Trojan Duke,
To the sad fated Carthagenian Queen.

What exclamations that?


What you will grieve at Coze,
Your worshipful friend M. Hog is robbed.

Robbed, by whom or how?


O there is the grief, a knows not whom to suspect.


The fear of hell oretake them whatsoere they be: but where is your daughter, I
hope she is safe


Thanks heaven, I see she is now so, where have thou been my girl?


Alas sir, carried by amazeme^t, I know not where, pursued by the robbers
forced to fly as mad affright, through all the City streets to seek redress,
but that lay fast asleep in all men's houses, nor would lend an ear to the
distressed


O heavy accident, but see you grieve too much,
Being your daughter's found, for the other loss;
Since it is the will of heaven to give and take,
Value it as nothing, you have yet sufficient
To live in blessed content, had you no more
But my small mortgage for your daughter here;
Whom I have ever loved in deer'st affection,
If so you please so much to favor me,
I will accept her spite of poverty,
And make her iointure of some store of land,
Which by the loss of a good aged friend
Late fell to me, what is it a match or no.

It is.
Then I Will have witness on it, my lord and gent.
Please you draw near, to be here witnesses
To a wished contract, twixt this maid and I.

We all are willing.


Then in the presence of you all, I give my daughter freely to this gent. as
wife, and to show how much I stand affected to him for dowry with her, I do
back restore his mortgaged lands, and for their loves I vow, ever hereafter
to detest, renounce, loath and abhor all slavish avarice

Which does ascend from hell, sent by the devil,
To be amongst men the actor of all evil.

A blessed conversion.


A good far unexpected, and now gentlemen,
I do enuite you all to feast with me
This happy day, that we may altogether
Applaud his good success, and let this day be spent,
In sports and shows with gladsome merriment:
Come blessed converted man wcele lead the way,
As unto heaven I hope we shall.

Heaven grant we may.


Come my Maria and repent^nt friend,
We three have tasted worst of misery,
Which now add joy to our felicity.

We three are happy we have gained much wealth,
And though we have done it by a trick of stealth,
Yet all I trust are pleased, and will our ill acquit,
Since it has saved a soul was hells by right.

To follow after then, our lot does fall,
Now rhyme it Peter.

A good night to all.


NOW expectation has at full received
What we late promised, if in ought we have pleased,
It Is all we sought to accomplish, and much more
Then our vveake merit dares to attribute
Unto it self, till you vouchsafe to dayne
In your kind censure, so to gratify
Our triuiall labors: --
If it has pleased the judicial ear,
We have our Authors wish, and void of fear
Dare ignorant men, to show their worst of hate.
It not detracts, but adds unto that state
Where desert florisheth.
We Will rest applouded in their derogation,
Though with an hiss they crown that confirmation:
For this our Author says, ift prove distasteful,
He only grieves you spent two hours so wast-full:
But if it like, and you affect his pen,
You may command it when you please again.

