THere were two brethren Citizens of Athens, the one called Chremes the other
Phania. Chremes being to travel into Asia left the charge of his then only
daughter Basibula an infant with his brother Phania. Shortly after his
departure out of Attica, Phania also to avoid the rage of war growing hot in
Greece, shipped himself thence with his little niece, directing his course
toward the place where he supposed Chremes abode: but suffering shipwreck was
cast with the little one, upon the shore of the Isle of Andros, where getting
entertainment of a poor Islander he shortly after died. His host after his
decease, changes the child's name from Pasibula into Glycerium; and having bred
her up for some years in equal education with his own natural child called
Chrysis, himself also dies. Chremes in the Interim had returned to Athens,
and there had another daughter named Philumena: And all this while supposed his
brother and his other daughter to have long since perished at sea. Chrisis
being left fatherless and poor leaves Andros, and taking Glycerium with her
sails to Athens; where they dwell together as reputed sisters. Chrisis turns
harlot: her lovers draw along with them to her house one Pamphilus son of
Simo an ancient Athenian Citizen. Pamphilus falling in love with Glycerium gets
her with child, and affianceth himself to her. Chremes upon a public fame of
Pamphilus his virtues treates with Simo for a match between their children
Pamphilus and Philumena: and a marriage is agreed upon between the two old
fathers, Pamphilus being not made acquainted. Chrysis soon after dies, at
whose funerals Pamphilus occasionally discovered signs of very ardent
affection to Glycerium; which Chremes hearing of, renounceth him for son in
law as one apparently besotted and entangled with extraordinary love to a
straggling strumpet (so ignorantly he styled the issue of his proper loins)
Pamphilus (now first hearing of the determined match) is glad such marriage is
disappointed. Simo frets at it. And now is the prefixed day of marriage come,
being the day containing the argument of this Coinedie. Simo makes show to all
the people of his family, as if the marriage were on this day to be
solemnized, and this he did out of a foxlike subtlety to feel his sons
inclination to marriage, and upon his refusal to have just occasion of
complaint against him, which hitherto he had not. And if his son should
declare readiness to entertain the match, he then thought it would prove no
such difficult matter to cuerrule Chremes; and so the business to go on as it
was first determined. Simo having thus proiected matters, meets his son; and
wills him to pray to the gods for success upon his marriage instantly to be
acomplished. The son at his fathers salutation stands thunderstrucken,
ignorant what course to take for prevention. Dauus comes to him in this
distraction, at what time one Charinus was with him. This Charinus was a young
man inflamed with the love of Philumena, the intended bride; and was now in a
manner desperate, when he understood that Pamphilus was that day to marry her:
Pamphilus assuers him of his purposed resolution to the contrary. This was the
theme of their discourse when Dauus came upon them. Dauus (now) was Simoes
servant, a fellow of good reach: and he upon grounds reasonable had conceived
his old masters fetch in this pretended marriage, which (having sent away
Charinus) he opens to Pamphilus: resolving him that in all likelihood the old
man did but cast out a hook to catch at his inclination to Glycerium: wishing
him therefore without all scruple to promise his father all obedience and
readiness in embracing this faced marriage; he further intimates, that no
hazard was likely hereby to ensue: for that Chremes having once openly refused
him, would not (at least so suddenly) intertaine him for a son in law.
Pamphilus puts the advice in execution. Simo and Dauus venture either of them
upon the hazard, but Simo his luck carries it. For Chremes is won to a new
consent, and now is Pamphilus in danger to be cast upon a present marriage,
where he never intended. What may Dauus how do? author of a counsel not so
unlikely as unlucky? Chance presents him occasion, and he has good brain to
make use of the least offered occasion: what is that? Glycerium is brought to
bed: the newborn child is by her maid, but by Dauus direction) laid at Simo's
door: and this is done just when Chremes must of necessity see it: Dauus
further so carries the matter, that Chremes understands who is father, who is
mother to the child. These things instly moan Chremes to a second renunciation:
Hence great stirie arises: Crito a man of Andros (arrived at Athens upon news
of Crysis her death, being next heir to her estate) ends all; by discovering
Glyceriums freedom and parentage. Pamphilus marries Glycerium now again
known by her first name Pasibula; Charinus marries the other sister Philumena

SImo An old man careful of his son, whom he loved at first for his
reported virtues: and after he once doubted his carriage, showed his greater
love in his care of him. In the first Seen he carries himself mild in
discourse and behavior: and still after increases in angry mood, till at
length he grows to rage and passion

Pamphilus. Son to Simo, a well qualified young man and faithful lover.

Dauus Servant of the family, subtle wife, consident.

Dromo. Another servant, only used for Dauus punishment.

Sosia. Snno's freed-man, a protaticke person brought in only, to whom the
ground of the argument might be opened

Chremes. an old man of a quiet and tranquil spirit.

Glycerium. Daughter of Chremes not presented on the Stage; neither speaks but
within doors in labor of childbirth

Lesbia. Her midwife.

Misis. Hermaid-seruant.

Charinus. A young man, simple and ignorant.

Byrrhia. His man for wit above his master. Discreet.

Crito. A stranger of Andros, poor yet honest, wise and of a good spirit and
stomach

Our Poet first setting his mind to write,
Deemd this the sole maine charge upon him laid,
To please the people with the plays he made:
But now he finds that he misreckond quite.
For, that he cannot (Prologue wise) now lay
The argument of this his play aright,
Is causd by an old rank'rous Poets spite;
Who drutes him to clear faults, leave the meant way.
Now pray observe their cauellings: those plays
Andria and Perinthia, which Menander wrote,
(Know one, know both) not much unlike in plot,
Are different yet both in their style and phrase.
He not denies that from Perinthia
Those things which seemd convenient in the same,
He (as his own) has drawn into the frame,
And course of this presented Andria.
This is the thing they challenge: and they braule
That in such sort a cleanely Comedy
Should not be hotch-potchd. These men verily
While much they seem, show they know naught at all:
Who him accusing draw his presidents
Nauius, Plautus, Ennius, in like crime,
To whose mistakings he would rather climb,
Then follow these men's obscure diligence.
I further wish'hem hence soorth keepe'hem still;
And cease with evil language him to sting;
Lest their ill doing in their ears do ring.
Spectators kind, of you we crave good will;
In silence shown and kind attention;
That without prejudice our play y'ould hear:
Thence you may fully know, if it rest clear,
That all our future purposd action
Of new made plays be to be banished quite;
Without aduentring your hereafter sight:
YOu sirs have those things in: away I say.


draw near; I am to speak with you.


I think th'errand given;
your meaning is
I look to those things careful cookery.

No: it is another matter.


Pray say on
What it is, my art may further do for you.

Here Is need of no such art, in what I purpose;
But of those parts which I have ever noted
To dwell in thee; trust, and true secrecy.

I wait your pleasure.


Since I bought thee first
Being then a yongling, in what gentle sort,
In what due course, thou ledst thy service with me,
Thy self well know: and for I found thee careful
In thy employments, the best good I had
To answer it, I gave thee; liberty.

I ^^^re it sir in mind.


And I repent nor.


(...) is my hearts joy Master, if I did
Or (...) can do, ought to your satisfaction;
And further owe you thanks that you acknowledge
I well accepted: yet it troubles me,
For this remembrancing your benefit,
Seems to vpbraid me, as forgetting it.
Pray in one word acquaint me with your pleasure.

I will; but first I tell thee of this thing,
This which thou think is no meant marriage.

Why make you as it were then?


Thou shall hear
From the beginning all: and by that means
Shall better know my Sons forepassed life,
My present purpose, and thy future charge.
My Son having past his childhood Sosia
Has now more scope allowed him; before
How could one know or fist his disposition,
While tender age, sear, tutors awed him?

Sir, you say right.


What almost all youth do,
To set their mind on one some chosen course;
That to breed Hearse, this Hounds, and both to hunt,
A third to study of Phylosophie:
He none of these followed professedly,
Above the rest: but yet all moderately.
I ioyd at it.

Sir, not without good cause:
"For to oredoe no one thing, in my sense
"To man's life is of chiefest consequence.

Such his behavior; all those gently
To bear and forbear, that he kept withal;
Apply himself to please and humor all;
Cross none, nor proudly seek to ouertop
His young companions: so that easily
He got him friends and praise; yet without envy.

He bare him wisely: for in this times state
Sweet yielding procures friends; blunt truth gets hate.

Mean while a certain woman three years since
Drawn by her wants and kindreds negligence,
From Anaros Isle came to our neighborhood;
Of passing beauty, flouring womanhood.

I sear this Andrian woman bodes no good.


She at the first a sparing chaste life led;
At Rock and Loome, hard labord to get bread:
But when a first, a second, a third came;
Tendering their loves, gifts promised with the same,
(As all our natures are prone commonly
From labor unto wanton liberty)
She stooped to lure, began the gainful trade.
By those that then chief love unto her made,
My Son was drawn along occasionally
To banquet with 'hem; keep 'hem company.
I to my self -- Sure the young fry is taken:
H'as caught the poisoned bait; with it, his bane.
These lovers servants passing to and fro
I every morning watch; and calling to
One that I spied, thus question; Prithee lad,
Who yesterday yond Chrysis company had?
So was the Andrian called.

Sir. I conceive you.


The answer was, Phoedrus, or Nicerate,
Or Clinias (for at that time those three
Her jointly loved.) I reply presently,
And what did Pamphilus? what? (answers he.)
He staked his share, and supped: this gladded me.
At other times I cast more news to learn;
Still nothing found that did my Son concern.
I thought him now proofe-temper'd against excess,
Great pattern of a settled staidness.
For he that deals with natures of this kind,
Yet thereby grows not slagg'ring in his mind;
To such a man's own hands thou may be bold
To leave the free reigns of his life in hold.
As this gave me most satisfying pleasure,
So all tongues talked my good, proclaimed my treasure,
In having such a qualified Son.
What should I make further relation?
Chremes our neighbor drawn by this same bruit,
Freely comes to me; and makes earnest suit
To place his daughter, yea his only one
With a large dowre as wife unto my Son:
I agreed the marriage, on his motion;
And this the day, it is appointed on.

What barie now stops? why in very deed
According to the show, it not proceed?

I Will tell thee: few days after this befell,
Our neighbor Chrysis died.

That Is chanced well.
You have reuin'd me; I much doubted her.

With Chrysis lovers still my Son comes there
Alike her funeral looks to; alike cheer
Sometimes of sadness shows, sometimes alike
Weeps with 'hem: I his carriage well did like
Thus argued I; Her death how tenderly
For very small acquaintance does he take?
What, if himself had loved her? what for me,
What will he do for me, his Fathers sake?
All this I thought in my simplcitie,
Merely the functions of humility,
And of kind heart. Why leng then I my tale?
My self for his sake tend the funeral.
Dreaming as yet no evil.

Ha! what means this?


I Will cause thee know. The dead corpse is brought out;
Along we go; now there amidst the throng
Of wonten, I a maiden very young
Perchance espied; of person --

Perhaps handsome.


I, and of countenance Sosia so delightsome,
So modest, fair, that nothing might her stain:
Who for she seemed to me, in all the train
Most to lament; and was above the rest
Of sweet and comely personage and face.
I pressed near to the Maids, asked what she was:
They told me Chrysis sister. Instantly
It struck me cold at heart. Oh God! thought I,
Hence grew his tears: his tenderness she breeds.

How I do fear whither your tale proceeds.


The Funeral goes on: we attend the same
To th'Sepulchre she is come: into the flame
She Is put: all weep. The maid I named late
Approacht the fire, as careless, desperate;
To her evident danger: here my frighted Son
Well showed his long concealed affection
So close dissembled: to her hies he fast,
And both his arms folding about her wast,
My dear Glycerium says he, how do? say,
What cause have thou to make thy self away?
Then she (that all their indeard love might spy)
Cast her self on him, weeping tenderly.

How? what do you say?


Home I get me straight,
Enraged and fretting; yet no cause of weight
Appeard to me to chide him: he might plead,
What foul fact have I done? what merited?
Or wherein faulted, Father? one that sought
To burn her self, I hindered (as I ought)
And saved her life. It were a fair reply.

You weigh things well; for if deservedly
He may be chidden which helped life to save,
Who hurts or spoils one, what should that man have?

Next day comes Chremes to me, urging thus,
Oh case to be lamented! Pamphilus
(I find clear) holds yond stranger harlotrie
In place of a just wife: this earnestly
I do deny, he stiffly holds. In fine,
I so part with him, as one utterly
Denies to give his Daughter to my Son.

Chid you not Pamphilus yet?


Nor yet I saw
A grounded cause to build a chiding on.

Why I pray?


Thus my Son might urge his law:
Your self sir set a limitation
To this my course: the time is coming on,
I must my self to another will apply:
Let mead interim mine own satisfy.

For what cause then of blaming will you (...)


If for loose love he shall dome to marry
That is the first occasion that I seek
Against him; and the present way I make
By this self marriage, if he show mislike
Is hereby true pretense of blame to take.
Besides, if wicked Dauus have a foot
Any contriuement, that he now consume
His stock of knauerie whilst it cannot hurt
Who (I imagine) tooth and nail will practice,
And that with purpose rather to cross me
Then please my Son.

Why should you so conceive?


Make thou a question? evil minds, ill manners.
Whom if in any thing I shall discover --
But what need talk? if happily it fall
(As I do wish) my Son be nothing backward,
It only rests, that I persuade with Chremes:
Which I hope may be wrought. Now, be it your charge
Well to bear up this seeming marriage;
Fright Dauus; observe my Sons carriage;
And note their consultations.

It Is enough; I Will see to 't: shall we in.


Go before, I follow.
There is no question, my Son would decline
This marriage; that I marked in Dauus sear,
When he had heard tht wedding did go forward.
But he himself comes forth.

I Marld if this would end so, and still doubted
Whereto my Masters caline remissness tended:
Who when he saw his Son could have no wife,
Never made word to us on it; nor gave sign
Of being troubled at it.

Now he will
Talk to you on it; and as I do suppose
To your no little cost.

This was his cunning,
To lead us on in saire fools paradise;
And in our secure dreaming take us napping,
Having no time to cast prevention.
A fox in faith.

What is it the knave talks on?


My Master, and vnheeded!


Dauus --


Ha, what is the affair?


Come you hither to me.


What now trow is in working?


What faist thou?


What sir the business?


Do thou demand that?
Folk talk my Sonne's in love.

That birladie
Concerns the world to think on.

Do mark me
In what I say or not?

Oh, yes sir well.


But now of this for me to make inquiry
Were no kind Fathers part. What hitherto
H'as done, I pass not: while the time permitted
I gave him way to take his course and pleasures:
His years now call for a new life, new manners.
Henceforward Dauus I require, or rather
(If the word may befit me) I request thee,
Retriue my Son from this loose liberty.

What may this mean?


All these loose libertines
That wantonly do love, cannot endure
To hear of wiuing.

So indeed they say


Beside, if such one chance to light upon
Some patron of his inclination,
His raw green sickly mind he commonly
Wonts to the worser part still to apply.

Troth sir I understand you not.


How, not?


No verily: I am your plain man Dauus;
No riddle-teller, cunning Oedipus.

Thould'st then in plain terms have me speak my mind?


Yes, pray at any hand sir.


If I find
That thou to day use any cunning crotchet,
Whereby to hinder this intended wedding;
Or feign would show thy wits sine nimblenesse:
When I have first well whipped thee, in the Mill
I Will thrust thee, to thy very dying day:
With this prouiso and condition,
If ever I thence free thee, I Will grind for thee.
What, vnderstand'st me yet, or not yet neither?

Yes clearly now; y'haue used no round-abouts,
But come to the matter roundly.

In ought else
Save this, I better could endure a slighting.

Pray sir good words yet.


Make thou a jest on it?
I know thee to a hair: but I do tell thee,
Least thou should rashly venture. Do not say
But thou have had fair warning given thee: look to it.

Upon my faith now Dauus here is no leisure
Left thee, to rest or dream upon the matter;
For ought I gather of the old man's purpose
Touching this wedding. which not wisely helped
Me or young Master undoes utterly.
Not can I judge my best course, him to succor,
Or lean to the old man's counsel: forsake him?
I doubt his life; assist him? the others threats;
Whom to over reach it is hard. First h'as discouerd
All of their love: then keeps hard watch over me,
Least I should lead some trumping card in the way:
Which if he find, I Am lost: or else at pleasure
Heel take occasion, be it right, be it wrong;
And to the Mill I shall be tumbled headlong.
To all these hazards comes another mischief:
This Andrian woman, be she his wise, or lemman,
Is great with child by him. Now, it is worth nothing
To hear their bold adventure: none can judge it
Fond lovers fancy, but mere frenzy rather:
For whether boy or girl she shall bring forth,
They have resolved to keep and nourish it.
Besides they coin a pretty cunning fable,
Among themselves, that she is free Atticke borne.
There was long since (say they) an ancient Merchant
Shipwrackt on Andros Island; who there died;
And that with him then saved, Chrysis Father
Took up a little girl. Conceited fiction!
To me it seems unlikely: yet they sooth
Themselves in the tale. But see Mysis coming
From out Glyceriums house. I Will to the Market
To seek out Pamphilus: for fear his Father
Vnwates do press him with this business.

GOod God Archillis, I do hear you woman:
You would have Lesbia fetched; upon my word
She is a drunken gossip, and vnheedie:
And one scarce fit to whom you may commit
A woman in first childbirth: Yet He fetch her.
Note you the old ones importunity!
None but her pot companion will serve turn.
But I pray God grant this a good delivery:
And that the Midwife rather may elsewhere
Neglect, then here. But what may be the cause
I Pamph' us see so much disquieted?
I fear what it may be. I Will stay a while
To know the reason of his troubled gesture.

IS this kind dealing? courteous attempt?
Is this a Fathers carriage?

What is that?


Oh gods and men your faith! what can be said,
Neglect, disgrace, or scorn, if this be none?
Say he had meant to marry me to day;
Ought I not have foreknowne it? ought I not
Have bin made privy to it?

Out alas,
Wretch that I am, what do I hear him talk of?

What should I think of Chremes? who denied
To trust me as a husband with his daughter?
Changes he mind, because I rest unchanged?
That he should still thus obstinately indeauor
Me most accursed to divorce and sever
From my Glycertam? which, if it fall out,
I am undone for ever. Amongst men
Was ever yet found out one more disgraceful?
More every way unhappy then my self?
Men, gods assist me! is there left no way
For me to shun Chremes affinity?
How many ways have I bin scorned? refused?
(All done, all ended) the other day cast of
Ain now again required: and why so?
Unless (I guess) h'has some deformed piece,
Which when he cannot fasten upon any,
He seeks to (...) on me?

This talk of his
Kills me poor wretch with sear.

For what should I
Now of my Father speak? Oh God! that he
So weighty a thing should do so carelessly.
Passing now by me in the Marketplace,
Go, get you home, says he; and fit your self:
This day you must be married Pamphilus.
To m^ his words seemed of such sound and sense,
As he had said, get home and hang thy self.
I stood confounded at it. Do you think
I had a word to utter? any excuse?
Though foolish, false, unsitting? I stood dumb.
Yet had I known't before, what could I do?
If any now should ask me, I would surely
Use other course, then (as I did) keep silence.
But now what first thing shall I enter on?
So many cares, several distraction,
Puzzles my mind: love, pity of her, fear
About this marriage so loathed, so near:
Then the respect I owe my Father, who
So mildely has me suffied hitherto
Without restraint to run my own free race,
In every course I listed: with what face
May I now cross his pleasure? wretched me!
I know not what to rest on.

I poor woman
Doubt the end of this irresolution.
But now it is very needful that I draw him
To speak with her; or else of her
Find some discourse to him. Whilst yet his mind
Hangs wavering, every little moment turns it.

Who is it talks hereabout? Mysis well met.

Pamphilus and you.


How does my dearest?


How does she? marie sir in pangs of travail:
And many troublous thoughts come in her mind
About this day, once purposed for your wedding.
She further doubts, least you may mind to leave her.

May I be thought to mind a thing so foul?
And through my fault suffer mine own dear soul
To be abused? trusting her heart, her life
To me? whom I have made my dearest wife?
May I permit her chaste well trained mind
Enforced by foul want to change it kind?
No, I will never do it.

If it lay
In you, I need not fear: but how you may
Be forced by your Father, is the doubt.

What Mysis do thou think me such a love?
So ungrateful further? so inhumane, bestiall?
That nor acquaintance, love, or shame, at all
May move or prompt me to keep plighted faith?

One thing I know, that she deserved has
That you should mind her.

Should mind her Mysis?
Even now the very latest words of Chrysis
Touching Glycerium, rest imprinted here;
Here at my heart. Her last hour drawing near,
She called for me: I came to her: all you
Voided the room: being alone we two
She thus began. Kind Pamphilus you see
Glyceriums youth and beauty; verily
Two weak unsafe guards (as your self perceive)
To keep her ch^ste, guard the small stock I leave.
Wherefore by this right hand I crave of thee,
By thy good nature, thy fidelity:
I adjure thee by her here vnfriendednesse
Thou would not leave her: do not part from her.
If as a brother I thee still respected,
If she of all men has thee best affected,
As she in all things sought thy full contentment
In true observance, due obedience.
I leave thee as a friend, a guardian, Father,
A husband to her. All the little wealth
I leave behind, I trust to thy disposing.
Then her hand taking, in my hand she clasped it;
And forthwith died. I then there recein'd her;
Received will keep.

Indeed sir I hope so.


But why do now come from her?


I am sent
To fetch the Midwife.

Oh, I prithee hasten.
And hear you? see you mention not a word
About the marriage: least it may perhaps
Add to her weakness.

I do mind it sir.


What say thou Byrrhia? must she then to day
Be married unto Pamphilus?

Yes sir.


How do thou know it?


But ene very now
Dauus so told me in the Marketplace.

Accursed, wretched me! how hitherto
My thoughts have waited upon hope and fear?
But hope now being fled, my fainting spirits
Wasted with care, yield to confusion.

Pray, for Gods love Charinus, since that things
Cannot be as you would, seek to desire
What you may compass.

There is nothing else
In all the world I wish, but Philumen.

But how much better were it, to endeavor
To vnlodge this idle love out of your heart,
Then thus to talk of that which adds more fuel
To this your bootlesse vain affection?

All men in health can easily prescribe
To the sick patient good directions.
If thou were in my case thy mind would alter.

Well sir then do your pleasure.


But lo yonder
Where Pamphilus is. I do mean to venture
All trials yet, ere I do fully perish.

What means he now to do?


I will request,
Beseech him, open to him all my love.
I hope I may obtain of him at least,
For some few days to put the wedding of.
I trust in th'Interim somewhat may be done.

That somewhat is just nothing.


Byrrhia,
What think thou of it? shall I go to him?

What else? if he will yield to nothing, yet
Let him suspect, you have good mind to horn him
If he shall marry her.

Away lience varlet,
With this thy lewd suspicion.

Charinus,
God save you.

And you also Pamphilus.
I was a coming to you, with desire
To crave hope, help, health, counsel at your hands.

Troth I have neither place for counsel left,
Nor means to help. but what is the matter man?

Are you to day to marry?


So they say.


If you do Pamphilus, I can assure you,
This is the last day you shall ever see me.

How so?


I shame to tell it, Birrhia prithee
Declare the matter to him.

Yes, I will.


What is it?


Sir, he loves your wise that shall be.


Troth he and I are of two several minds:
I can assure thee. Prithee hearken hither
Charinus; have not had to do with her
More, then thy man here talks of.

Pamphilus,
No of my troth. I am. Oh, how I wish thou had.

Now I entreat thee by our friendship, love;
First that you would not marry her at all.

I Will (what I can) avoid it.


If It full so,
You cannot shun it, or do else affect it --

Affect it?


Yet defer it of awhile,
That I may void hence somewhere, and not see it.

Charinus, now hear me. I do not think it
At any time a part of honesty,
When one deserves naught, to expect for thanks.
I Would rather shun this match then thou obtain't.

You put new life into me.


If thou can now,
Or this this thy man here; work, invent, fashion,
Take all the course you can to make her thine:
I will find means, that mine she shall not be.

I have enough.


And in good time I see
Danus, whose counsel I rely upon.

But thou dull head can nothing cast about
Worth knowing. Can you leave us?

Yes, and gladly.


GOod God! what good news bring I?
But where^row may I find Pamphilus out?
To ^^d his fears, and sill his heart with comfort.

He is iocund, at what I know not.

Tut, man, it is, nothing.
The mischief now afoot, he yet not hears of.

Who if he have heard of this prepared wedding --


Do you not hear him?


I guess verily
Hunts all the town ore for me, like a madman.
But where shall I look for him? to what place
First bend my course?

Why speak you not unto him?


I Will get me hence, and seek him.


Dauus, stay:
Come hither.

Who is it calls? Oh Pamphilus,
I sought you: you here too Charinus? brave.
Both in the nicke. You Are the men, I looked for.

Oh Dauus I me undone.


Tut, list to me.


I am for ever lost.


Your fear I know.


My life now lies at stake.


Yours I know too.


I must be married.


That I also know.


I, but this very day.


You weary me
With news, that I am perfect in already.
You fear to have her; you to miss her.

Thou Have it.


I that is the point.


Well, and I say the point
Has then no danger in it. Observe me.

For Gods sake rid me quickly of this fear.


Lo, I fice thee. Chremis now is not minded
To trouble you with a wife.

How do know it?


Your Father took me by the sleeue even now,
And told me this day he would marry you:
Adding much more, which now is no time to talk on.
Presently hastening to acquaint you with it,
I ran to the Marketplace: there missing you
I got to a high raised ground, and round about
Looked to epsy you; could not. Then by ch^^ce
I saw Charinus servant, Birrhia:
Of him I asked, he said he had not seen you:
It vexed me: still I cast what I should do.
Returning thence, a certain realousie
By circumstances bred came in my mind.
V^ph! here is small roast; the old man sad, a wedding?
It scarce hangs well together.

Whereto this?


I bie me straight to hremes; thither come,
I note a silent stillness at the door.
Now, this gave me good heart.

Well said, go on.


Somewhile I there continue: all that while
I saw no creature passing out or in;
No matron there; no decking of the house;
No stir; I nearer came, and peeped in.

I know they are good conjectures.


Do such things
Think you agree unto a nuptial day?

In troth I think not Dauus.


Do you say, think?
You construe things not well: the case is plain.
Besides, thence going I met Chremes servant
With herbs and small sprots for the old man's supper.

Dauus, through thee I am now rid of care.


Nay of my faith not so.


Why man prithee?
For thou conclud'st, he will not give her him.

Conceited pate! as if it therefore followed,
If he not have her, you must marry her.
Unless you looked toot, make your suit, and means
T'her fathers friends, you may hap hop wiuelesse.

Thou promptst me well; I Will go about it straight.
Though ought this hope have faild me: fare ye well.

What means my father then?
Why doubles he?

I Will tell you. If he now should chafe at you,
Cause Chremes will not let you have his daughter,
Himself may see he plainly injured you:
If he should press you on, before he knew
How your mind stood inclined to the match.
But if you shall stiffely deny to wed her;
Then he will justly lay the blame on you:
Then shall we have a coil on it.

What would have me
To undergo this marriage?

Pamphilus,
He is your Father: and it will be hard
To Oppose him: this your sweet heart too (you know)
Is friendlesse here. Heel find cause easily
To thrust her out o'th'towne.

Out o'th town man?


And speedily too.


Counsel me then Dauus.
What I should do.

Tell him you will marry her.


How?


What Is the matter?


Should I tell him so?


Why not?


I nere will deo't.


Deny me not.


Persuade me not.


Note, what hence will follow.


To be shut out from her, mewed up to this.


No, no such thing. I guess your father thus
Will say to you: my purpose Pamphilus
Is that this day you wed: then answer you,
Sir, I am ready: pray you tell me now
For what cause can he chide you? by this means
His settled plots you shall disorder clean:
Your self yet run no hazard; for the thought
Is groundless, vain, that Chremes may be wrought
To give his daughter: nor do you let fall
Your course, least he his purpose should recall.
Tell you your Father that you like the Bride:
That, when he would, he have no cause to chide.
And for the dangerous passage that you fear;
I Will steare your course, and waft you over clear.
No man will give his daughter as a wife
To one discouerd of your wanton life.
Heel with some poor man rather seek to place her,
Then suffer you to iniure or disgrace her.
But if your father see you quiet take
This his command, you shall him retchlesse make.
At leisure heel seek out some other wife,
Mean time your fathers death may end the strife
Or some like good chance happen.

Think thou so?


There is no doubt in the world on it.


Take you heed to what you lead me.


Will you sir be quiet?


I Will tell my father as thou bidst me: but
There must be care had, he by no means know
she is with child by me; for I have promised
To give it breeding.

Oh bold enterprise!


She begged this promise of me, as assurance
That I would not forsake her.

I Will look toot.
Your Father's here: let him not note you sad.

I Come to observe their carriage, note their plots.


He thinks now surely, you will refuse to marry:
And comes from some lone place premeditate,
Thinking to puzzle you with a set speech:
Therefore collect your self.

Well, as I can.


In this thing Pamphilus you shall take my word,
You shall not now change two cross sillables,
If you but say, you ready are to marry.

MY Master willed me (all things else set of)
Pamphilus watch: and learn what course he takes
About the Bride. This caused me dog him hither:
And lo, where he is with Dauus. To my task.

I see 'hem both together.


Now sir look toot.


Pamphilus.


Look you back as on the sudden.


Oh, you my father?


I, that is well carried.


As I late told thee, it is my purpose Son
That thou this day be married.

Now I fear
His answer on our side.

Sir, or in this
Or in what else I wait upon your pleasure.

Ha!


Mute.


What said he?


Thou do now my Son
As well becomes thee, when so graciously
Thou yeeldst to what I crave.

Was I not right?


My Master (as I hear) has lost his wife.


Get you now in that when the time requires,
We be not driu'n to stay for you.

Yes sir.


That in nothing one man may trust another!
It is an old said saying, and as common,
All to themselves wish best. My self have seen
The maiden, and remember her a fair one.
Which makes me better bear with Pamphilus,
If he himself had rather nightly bed her,
Then let my Master. I Will bear back this news:
That he may pay me well, for my ill tidings.

MY Master thinks now I have some device
A foot: and that, for that end I stay here.

What is it, thou talkest Dauus?


Eene just sir.


What, nothing? ha?


Indeed sir nothing, I.


I sure did look to hear some news from thee.


I know it is chanced quite besides his aim:
That Is it which nettles him.

Is It possible
I get thee tell me a truth?

Most readily.


Doos this same wedding grieve him any thing,
By reason of the acquaintance that he holds
With yonder stranger?

Truly I think not.
Or if it do, the matter of his trouble
Will be at most two or three days disquiet:
(Conceive you sir?) then it will clearly vanish.
For with himself h'as taken a due account,
And set all clear that way.

I do commend him.


Whilst he had leave, and his green youth did suffer'r
He wencht a little; but yet privately:
He ever had a care to keep his name
Untouched; as did become a wise young man.
Now marriage fits, he frames his mind that way.

And yet me thought he appeared somewhat sad.


Nothing about this business; but there is cause
That makes him somewhat angry with you.

What?


A trifle.


What is it?


Nothing.


Tell me what?


He says you are ouerniggardish in Cost.


Who, I?


That you have scarce disbusd ten groats
In your provision for his wedding supper:
What (says he) is this like a Sons nuptials
Whom chiefly of my fellow batchelors
May I inuit (quoth he) to such a banquet?
And to speak that which may be said herein;
Intruth you are too too sparing, I liked not.

Hold your tongue.


I have gald him.


I will see
That all shall be well carried. What means this?
What is it this old fox-hunt does hammer on?
If there be any knauerie, his pare forged it.

I, Indeed Lesbia you have said aright:
A woman hardly finds a faithful lover.

Belongs this maid to the Andrian here?


Yes sir.


But this kind Pamphilus


What is it she says?


Has given her full assurance --


Out alas!


Would either he were dease now or she dumb.


That son or daughter, he will foster it.


Oh Jupiter! what news is this I hear?
All is lost utterly; if she speak truth.

You do describe a young man honest natured.


Oh, the best natured gentleman -- but pray,
Follow me in, for fear she stay for you.

Yes I follow.


What help for this now, trow?


What, is he mad? a loose land loping strumpet?
Oh! I have it: old dulhead (as I was)
I fearce at length could hit on it.

What has he hit on, says he?


This first knauish practice
Of my man here is now thus put upon me:
She is to be in child birth, to flight Chremes.
Glycerium within doors. Juno, Lucina help; save me, I pray thee.

Horda such speed? ha, ha, ridiculous
As soon as are she heard me at the door,
The throws come on: scarce fitly a'my word,
You rank and place your times scarce sitly Dauus.

I sir?


Or have your Actors mist their Cues?


I know not what you mean, sir.


If this fellow
Had set upon me, being unprovided
In a true marriage oh, what pageants
Would he have played me? Let him now make sure
His own adventure; ^m^ith port secure.

AS yet Archillis I do note in her
All usual matters, and good signs of health
First see her cleansd, and then deliver her
That drink, in measure as I gave in charge:
I Will be here straight again: as God shall help me.
She has brought Pamphilus a goodly boy.
If it please God, may it live to be a man:
Seeing the father is of disposition
So honest; and makes conscience to wrong
This good young woman.

Who did ever know thee
That would not swear, this thy contriuing now?

Pray, what?


She cannot in the house give order,
For what is needful to the childebed woman:
But coming forth a doors, proclaims ith'strect
Her mind to them within: what? what sir Dauus
Slight you me so? or deem'st me now at length
Such a fine easy property, thou may
So plainly pass thy iugling tricks upon me?
At least yet, it was circumspectly carried;
And showed your awe, if'twere discovered.

Troth his own cunning cheats him now; not I.


Did I not forewarne thee? threaten further
If thou should dare attempt this? have thou yet
Stood in fear often? has it in ought prevailed?
Think thou I do believe this woman here
Has had a child now by my Pamphilus?

I now find his mistaking, know my course.


Why speak thou not?


What talk you of your thinking?
As if you had had no notice of the matter?

I notice?


Why good sir, tell me I pray
Found you of your self that this was counter faited?

I Am flouted.


Come, come, it has bin told you:
How else a Gods name could you dream of it?

How? cause I well did know thy qualities.


You think it then a thing of my direction.


I, and I know it is.


Truly sir I see
You thoroughly do not know me.

Not I, thee?


But when I seek to tell you any thing,
You straight suppose, I put some trick upon you.

It Is false.


So that I dare scarce speak to you.


This one thing I am sure on; here is no child born.


Are you so sure? yet sir notwithstanding
They straight will lay a child before your door.
I tell you on it aforehand, for your knowledge:
Least you should say hereafter, Dauus plots
And cunning managed all. I very feign
Would work my self out of your jealousy.

How know it?


I have heard so and believe it.


They are many and those grounded circumstances,
Which my conjectures build on. Nere before
Named she her self with child by Pamphilus;
And that is false, unless my judgment err:
But seeing now a wedding is preparing,
A midwife straight is sent for, by the maid,
Who was to bring a young borne child with her.

Unless you see a child, the wedding still
Stands fairly.

I but, sir tell me this,
When thou had found they plotted this among them, her?
Why told you not it straight to Pamphilus?

Pray, but my self then who has drawn him from
We know how fondly he did dote upon her:
Now he desires a wife to live withal.
In fine, trust me with this whole business:
Yet pursue you, to make the marriage up;
And I do hope the Gods will further it.

Nay, get you in; there see you stay my coming:
And have such things as need in readiness.
He has not drawn me yet to give full credit
To this he says; nor to conclude all true.
But I regard it little: the maine thing
I rest on, is the promise of my Son.
I Will now go speak with Chremes, and desire
He would bestow his daughter: that obtaind,
Why should I linger? and not now this day
Finish the match a foot? doubtless my Son
Will stand to his word: if not, what hinders me
But I may force him? and in good time see
Where Chremes is, Chremes good time of day.

OH! you are the man I sought for.


And I you.


You Are come as I would wish: a many men
Have pressed unto me; who report as heard
From you, that on this very day your Son
Should wed my daughter. Now I come to see
Whether or you or they be from their wits?

Pray list a while, and I will satisfy
This doubt: and withal acquaint you further
What suit I have unto you.

I attend.
Say what you please.

Chremes I request you
For love of God; and for the unfeigned friendship
Which in our youth begun along together
Has grown up with our years; by the respect
You bear your only child; for my Sons cause
Chief power of whose preserving lies in you,
Lend me your furtherance in this business,
That the match this day meant may so go on.

Oh! I pray crave it not, as if 't were fit
I should in this thing listen to your suit?
Think you me alterd from the man I was,
When late I made you promise? if 't may be
For both our welsares, take my daughter to you
But if hereby more harm then good will follow
To either of us by it, then I pray
Cast for the common good: as if my daughter
Were yours, I father to your Pamphilus.

Nay, that is my meaning Chremes: and I do
Crave nothing of you but upon such terms:
Nor would I ask it of you, if the case
It felse did not require it.

Why, how is it?


There Is jar between Glycerium and my son.


I hear.


So great, I hope't will sunder them.


A tale.


In very deed it is so


Indeed
It will just so (as I shall tell thee) prove;
The iarres of lovers give fresh life to love.

I, but I pray you let us prevent that,
Whilst his loves flame is smotherd by abuse:
Before this harlots leaud designs, false tears
Reduce his sickly mind to passion,
Lets marry 'hem.

I have good hope,
Fair wedlock and a wives experienced love
Will easily pluck him out of these feared ils.

You think so: but I deeme't impossible
That either they will always live together,
Or I may endure their iarring.

How do you know,
Unless you make a trial?

But 'twere hard
For me to make such trial in my child.

Why, all the inconvenience which can happen
Should the worst fall (which I pray God forbid)
Were at the most a separation.
In counterpoise now weigh the benefits
That will ensue, if my son prove reclaimed:
First you restore to your friend his son: your self
Gain a fast son in law: your child a husband.

Why, if you think it so commodious,
For my part I will be no hindrance to it.

I justly always held you my best friend.


But as to that you said.


What?


Marry how know you
There Is now debate between 'hem.

Dauus self
(who is their Counsels inward secretary)
So told me; and withal aduisd me further
To haste the marriage with all speed I could.
Think you he would do thus, but that he knows.
My son desires it likewise? you your self
Shall heat him. Ho there, one call Dauus forth.
But lo, I see him coming out a doors.

I Was a coming to you.


What Is the matter?


Why is the bride not sent for? it grows late.


Do you now hear him? I will tell thee Dauus,
I lately had thee in some jealousy;
That thou did take the course most servants hold,
By seeking to delude me in the matter.
Of Pamphilus wanton loving.

Who, I sit?


I thought so: and for that I kept from you
A secret, I Will now utter.

What was that?


I Will tell thee; for I almost now do trust thee.


At length you find what servant you have of me.


This was not to have bin a marriage


What, no.


But I therefore counterfaited,
That I might feel your minds.

What is it you say?


Just as thou hear'st.


La ye; I could never,
Think such a matter: oh fine cunning plot?

List this; when hence I bad thee get thee in,
Chremes came fitly to me.

Are we troe
Not lost for ever?

I told all to him
Thou late toldst me.

What hear I?


Begged of him,
And scarce at length won him to give his daughter.

I am undone.


What say?


Excellently done.


Now he is not backward.


I Will straight get me home,
And leave word all be had in readiness!
Thence give you notice.

Now I prechee Dauus,
Since thou alone have wrought this marriage for us --

Yes sure, I was the only worker.


Do now
Endeavor further to reclaim my son.

Yes truly, I will look toot carefully.


Thou may now do it, whilst his mind is vexed.


Pray take no Care.


Look toot then:
But where now is he himself?

It Is marle but he is at home.


I Will too him then, and to himself deliver
All I told thee.

I am now just nothing.
What hinders, but I fairly take my way
Directly to the mill, and fall a grinding?
Entreaty may do nothing; I have drawn
All things to such confusion: first deceived
My Master: then have headlong thrust his son
Upon a marriage, that he looked not for:
And clean against his will: and this to day
To be made up, by my alone procurement.
Pray mark the end of cunning: had I sat still,
No evil in the world had happened.
And see where he is. I am a mere dead man.
Would I had any means to break my neck now.

Where is the villain has undone me?


I Am a plain castaway.


But I confess
It Is justly fallen upon me; since I am
So idle, vain, and inconsiderate:
Ought I to trust my whole state to a slave;
A prating slave? I have my follies hire:
But unrevenged he nere shall escape with it.

I Will nere doubt tempest, if I escape this storm.


But now what answer shall I make my father?
Shall I deny to marry, who but now
Consented to it? with what impudence
May I dare do it? neither with my self
Know I what course to take.

Troth nor I, neither
But I am canuassing my brains about it.
I Will tell him I Will forthwith find out some means
A little to put off his threatened vengeance.

Oh --


I Am spide.


Oh, you sir, honest fellow
Come nearer: what say to me? do you see now
How I am puzzled through your goodly counsel?

I Will presently make all clear.


Thou make clear?


Pamphilus indeed I will.


I, as erewhile.


Nay, I hope better


Trust thee pillorie?
Or thou make good a case perplexed, lost?
See what a suresby I have trusted too;
Who from a quiet state I late stood in,
This day have thrust me on a marriage:
Did I not tell thee it would thus fall out?

You did.


What have then deserved


Hanging.
A little yet let me collect my self.
I Will straight find out some help.

Oh me accursed:
Why want I time to plague thee as I would?
This scarce will serve my danger to prevent,
Permits me not pursue thy punishment.

MAy't be believed? or may it once be talked on?
That any should be so selfe-wild perverse,
As to take pleasure in another harms?
Or think his own gain sweeter, if procured
By others disadvantage? oh good God!
Is this a brood of men? Men let them be;
Worst are they of the generation.
They show a little tricksey modesty,
Not to deny a craved courtesy:
But when performance comes, they then declare
(Nature will show it self) what men they are.
They are ashamed a little, but in trial
Their temper bursteth forth to flat denial.
Then shall you hear their shameless Oratorie --
Pray who are you? are what at least to me.
Why yield my love to you? good sir attend,
I am unto my self the nearest friend.
Touch them with faith and troth, they blush no whit:
So that when no constraint inforceth it,
They make some scruple; when it comes to the pinch,
Then at the proof your hollow friend does flinch.
But what is my best course? shall I to him straight,
And with him this his wrong expostulate?
And ply him with harsh terms? but some may say,
What good shall I procure my self that way?
Yes much: I shall both chafe him, and give ease
To my grieved heart.

Charinus, less God please
To succor us, I have both thee and me
Against my will undone unwarily.

Unwarily: is that word now thought on?
Y'haue broke your promisd faith.

As how, I pray?


Seek you again with fair words to abuse me?


What means this?


After I said I loved her,
You must needs like her too. Oh me accursed,
That scantled out your dealing by mine own!

You are mistaken.


Seemed your content not full,
Unless you fooled, and with false hope traind on
A wretched lover? much good do ye; take her.

I take her? oh I perceive thou know not
In what a gulf of misery I am plunged:
What pecke of troubles this my torturer
Has brought me to, by harkning to his counsel.

No marle: he takes his president from you.


You would not say this, if you fully knew
Or me, or her I Have set my fancy on.

Yes, I do know; you were at hot high words
Late with your father; and have angered him,
Because he cannot make you marry her.

Nay, which discouers thou less know my grief,
This marriage never was prepared for me:
Nor did now any force me to a wife.

I know it your own will forced you.


Tarry, yet thou know not all.


I know thou'st marry her.


Why do you thus torment me? hear but this
He never ceased to be urgent on me,
That I should tell my father I would marry:
To entreat, persuade, till he had drawn me to it.

What man did this.


This Dauus.


Dauus?


Dauus brings all things out of square.


What the inducement?


I nothing know, except this one thing only,
That I well see the Gods are much displeased
With me, for listening to him.

Did you thus Dauus?


I did.


Ha, what faist thou caitife?
The gods give thee a death futing thy doings.
Sir tha, but tell me; say that all his foes
Had laid their heads together for a plot
To yoke him to a wife, what stratagem
Could they have framed more speeding then this was?

I am deceived, but faint not.


I, I know it.


It thriu'd not this way, we will attempt some other.
Unless you judge because at first we sped not,
There Is no means jest us to salve up the mischief.

Nay more, I well believe if thou watch for it,
Of one thoult make me out a double marriage.

I (Pamphilus) by reason of my bondage
Owe you thus much: to do, go, night and day
To endeavor all I may, with my lives hazard,
For your advantage: it is yet your part
To bear with me, if things come cross my hopes:
My plots fail; yet I use all carfulness:
Your self else frame things wiseher, discharge me.

I crave thou leave me in that state thou fou^dst me;


I will.


But't must be straight.


How now! hist, stay.
Glyceriums door did creake.

That Is naught to thee.


I am a forging.


How, is it now to forge.


But I will giu't you fashioned presently.


Where ere he be, I Will find your Pamphilus
And bring him with me straight;
Mean while good heart vex not your self.

Mysis?


What Is the matter?
Oh, was it you Pamphilus? you are well met.

What news?


My Mistress prays you of all love
To come to her: she longs to speak with you.

I am a sorlorne wretch: the mischief spreads.
That she and I should both be thus perplexed
By means of thee? for I am therefore sent for
Because she hears my wedding is prepared.

From which how easily had you now bin quiet,
Had he bin quiet?

Yes, so, go on:
If of himself he be not vexd enough,
Urge him on further.

I indeed it is that
Does now afflict her.

Mysis, I do swear
By all the Gods unto thee, I will never
Forsake her: no, though I were sure thereby
To undergo the whole worlds enmity.
I did desire her; have obtaind her; see
That we both iumpe in minds, and quality.
Farewell to all that seek us two to sever:
But death none takes her from me.

I recover


I do desire (if it may be so borne up)
My father should not think I am the cause
The marriage holds not: if that cannot be,
I Will take the next course: that he may perceive
I cross it. What kind of man do think me.

Faith every way as wretched as my self.


I cast for help.


I, thou have a good heart.


And will effect it for you.


'T must be now.


Why, I have it now.


What is it?


You mistake;
It is for him, not you.

I am content.


Say, what wilt do?


I have scarce day enough
To finish it I fear: and think me not
At leisure therefore now, to tell you it.
But get y'hence both; you, now but hinder me.

I Will visit her here.


And you, whither you?


Will thou I tell thee truth?


Nay see, he makes a prologue to a tale.


What do for me?


Oh impudent! is it not enough I give thee
Some hours; by putting off his marriage?

Yet Dauus --


Well, what?


That I may have her. --


Ridiculous!


Yet if thou can do ought --
Come home to me.

To what end should I come?
I nothing have to help thee.

I but if --


Well, I will come.


If thou can think of ought
I Will be at home.

Mysis, while I go hence
Stay here a little for me.

To what end?


It Is needful now, thou do so.


Make have then.


I will be here straightway again with thee.


THat no one holds any thing in certain?
Your help good Gods! I thought this Pamphilus
Had bin my Mistresses firm, chiefest good;
Took him to be her friend, her lover, husband;
Ready at all essaies to stand to her:
And yet what grief sustaines she now through him?
Hence sure more ill she reapes then good from him.
But here comes Dauus.
What Is that prithee friend? the child?
Whither do bear it?

MYsis, now I
need thy readrest memory and wit
In this I go about.

What art to do?


Take the child from me straight, and lay it down
Before our door.

What on the bare ground pray?


Take a few strewings from the altar there --
And lay 'hem under.

Why do not thou thy self?


That if perchance my Master urge my oath
It Was not my doing, I may safely swear it.

I understand you: but pray tell me whence
This now new tender conscience comes upon thee?

Stir you more quick; that you may further know
What it is I have in hand. Oh Jupiter!

What?


The father of the bride is come on us. leave the course which I at first
intended


I know not what you talk on?


My self too
Will make as if I came from the right hand.
Have you a care now as occasion serves
You mark my talk, and suit your words to mine.

I understand nothing you go about:
But if in any thing you need my help
Or see more then my self, I here will stay,
That I may be no hindrance in your way.

Having prepared all in readiness
Was needful to my Daughters marriage,
I now return to will 'hem send for her.
But what is here? so help me God, a child!
Weman, laid you this child here?

Where is he?


Do not answer me?


Woes me, out of sight.
Alas, Dauus has left me: and is gone.

Faith of the Gods!
What coile's yond'at the Market?
What throng of wranglers braule there? and beside
Corn bears excessive price. I know not now
What other words to use.

For Gods sake man
Why left you me alone here?

Hoida what
Denice is this? you Mysis, whence this child?
Or who here laid it?

Are you in your wits,
To ask me that?

Of whom else should I ask,
That see none else here?

I marle whence it is.


Wo^^ tell me.


Au!


Come here, of my right side.


Thou Art mad did not your self?


Look thou beware
Thou utter not a word, but what I ask thee.

Do You threaten me?


From whence is it? speak out.


From you.


Ha, ha, he, is it news, if women
Of your condition do grow impudent?

This maid belongs to the Andrian, as I think.


Seem we such fitting persons to you, troe
That you should play on us?

I came in time.


Therefore with speed take you the child away
Ilence from our door: yet stay, see thou stir not
One inch out of this place.

The Gods confound thee
That me poor woman frightst thus.

Do I speak to thee, or not?


What would you?


Asked thou still?
Say, tell me whose child it is thou have laid here?

Do not you know?


Talk not of what I know,
But tell me that I ask.

It Is of your house


Whose, of us?


Pamphilus.


Ha, what, Pamphilus?


Is It not?


I always rightly shunned this match.


Oh notable vile practice!


Why exclaimst thou?


Which child did not my self see yesternight
Brought late to you?

Oh most audacious fellow


It Is truth, I saw Canthara thick stuffed out.


I thank the Gods yet, that some City wives
Were present at the labor.

She not knows
Him (I assure thee) for whose cause she plots this.
She thinks if Chremes see a child laid here,
Heel'e not bestow his daughter: yes of truth,
For this the rather.

Faith but he will not though.


Now therefore, for thy knowledge, take it hence
Or I will tumble it in the high way;
And further lay thee by it in the kennell.

Thou certainly art drunk.


One cunning pranke
Treads on another heel. I hear it whisperd
She Is a freeborn Athenian.

Ha!


And that
He shall be fore'd by law to marry her.

Why sir I pray you, i^ she not freeborn?


I had almost unawares iested my self
Into a dangerous mischief.

Who talks here?
Oh Chremes you are come in happy time.
Pray listen sir --

I have heard all already.


How all say you?


I, from the beginning all.


Have you pray heard it? see their villainies!
It Is fit she were hence hurried to the rack.
This is the man I talked of: do not think
You play your tricks on Dauus.

Oh wretched me!
Indeed (good old Sir) I have spoke no falsehood.

I know all to the full: but is your Master
Simo within?

Yes Sir.


Rogue hand me not.
Troth if Glycerium know not of all this --

Attend you fool, thou know not what is done:
This the brides father: by no other means
Could he be made to know what we would have him.

Why then you should have told me on it.


Do think
There no great difference, when a thing is carried
The natural way, and when premeditate.

It Is told me Chrysis dwelt in this same street:
Who rather chose here leaudly to grow rich,
Then in her Country honestly live poor:
She dead, the Law has cast her state on me.
But now I see some I may question:
God save you.

Oh good God whom do I see?
Is not this Crito, Chrisis Cozen German?
It Is he.

Oh Mysis! you are well met.


The Gods
Prosper you Crito.

Chrysis then is -- well?


Yes truly she has left us, to th'wide world.


And you, what shift do you make? any thing well?


We? faith even according to the proverb;
Live as we can, since cannot as we would.

Glycerium -- what, has she yet sound her parents?


I would she had.


What not yet? I came hither
In an unlucky hour: for had I known it
I sure would never have stirred a soot this way.
She always was both said and deemed her sister
And holds all that was hers: now for me their
To follow law suits being here a stranger,
How easy and commodious 'tmay be
Rife precedents of other men do warn me.
Besides, I judge by this she has got her self
Some friend and patron: for when she came thence
She had well-neere attained to ripe years
Men will cry out I am a sycophant,
A beggar laying claim to others right:
Withal, my self list not impouerish her:

Good Crito, you still hood your ancient course.


Bring me unto her, since I am come hither,
I may at least yet see her.

Yes I will.


I Will follow yet the old man shall not see me.


Mysis and Crito enter Glyceriums house and Dauus follows them.

SImo enough, I have enough tried your friend ship:
Venturd sufficient hazard, pray now leave
Entreating. Whilst I seek to pleasure you
I almost trisled my childs lise away.

Nay, but I earnestly beg and crave Chremes,
This your good turn now late begun in words
You would in deeds make up.

Note how unjust
You grow, through earnestness to work your aims:
You nor consider bounds in courtesies,
Nor yet what it is you crame: for if you did,
Yould cease to load me with these injuries.

What iniuties?


Oh, do you question them?
You wrought me to bestow my only child
To one entangled in a strangers love:
A wild young youth abhorring marriage:
To most sure discord, marriage as insure;
That by her grief and sorrow I might physic
Your riotous son: this y'obtain'd: I went on,
Whilst things permitted: now that the case not brooks it,
You must brook my denial. It Is affirmd
This stranger is fice borne; has a child by him:
Leave troubling us.

By all the Gods I beg
You would not bend your mind to trust these people,
Whose best advantage it is, to make him worst.
These things are only seign'd and fashioned
To dash the wedding: take away the cause
Moves them to this, they will straight way leave contrining.

You Are wide: My self saw a maid scolding here
With Dauus.

I know it.


I but this was done
In good sad earnest; neither of them both
Knowing that I was near.

I do believe it
And Dauus late told me it would be so.
I know not how I did forget to tell you,
As I had meant.

I Will you now rest quiet --


See, here is Dauus.


Whence comes he?


Through my furthrance and this guests.


What new mischief?


Man, time, coming fitter, I never saw.


Who is it, the rogue so praises?


All Is now secure.


Cease I to speak to him?


My Master! what is my course?


Oh Simo, oh our Chremes,
All things are now in readiness within.

Thou Have looked too 't well.


When you please, send for her.


It Is very well; but that course now here fails us.
But may I know, what thou had there to do?

I Sir.


I, Sir.


Me mean you?


Yes, mean thee.


I went in but now --


As if I ask 't thee, when?


Together with your son.


Is my son there?
I wretch am set o'th rack. Diddst not hangman
Tell me, they were at deadly odds together?

They are.


What does he there then?


He? what think?
I warrant railing at her.

Nay but Chremes
I Will tell you now of a strange accident.
I know not what old man is newly come,
Note him, a man both confident and wise,
When you shall see him, you will much value him.
A grave austerity rests on his face;
And in his words dwell faith.

What news bring'st thou?


No other, then I heard that man report.


And what doo's he report?


That he doo's know
Glycerium here, a free Athenian borne.

Hoe Dromo, Dromo.


What Is the matter?


Hear me.


If thou speak one word more -- Dromo.


I do beseech you hear me.


What would y'haue?


Hoist in this fellow here, hence speedily.


Whom?


Dauus.


Why?


For it is my pleasure.
Away with him I say.

What have I done?


In with him.


If you shall find I have ly'de
In any thing, then kill me.

I Will hear nothing.
I Will streightway put thee into motion.

Though that I said the truth?


Though -- see you
I Will be kept bound; and hear you, bound all four.
I Will show thee, what it is to abuse a Master,
If I but live this day: and teach the other
What it is to cross a father.

Oh, I pray you rage not so much.


Chremes do not, seeing
How unkindly he deals with me, pity me?
That I should toil and care for such a son?
But Pamphitus you, come you out Pamphilus:
Does any shame possess thee?

Who called me?
I am lost, it is my father.

What say now?
Thou of all --

Oh, rather go to th'point man:
And spare ill speaking.

As if any thing
Can be spoke ill enough of such a one?
But Sirrah say, is your Glycerium now
Free borne of Athens?

So they say of her.


Do they say so? Monstrous audaciousnesse!
Considers he his words? grieves at his deeds?
Or shows his color any note of shame?
That he should be of such deboshed manners,
That clear beyond all precedent of freemen,
Against the form of law, in opposition
Of me his father, he should bend to have her
Though 't reach to the highest pitch of infamy?

Oh me most wretched!


Do thou now at length
Perceive that Pamphilus? that word of old
Of old that word then truly sitted thee,
When first thou setst thy heart to please thy self;
Though at what rate soever compassed.
But wherefore do I thus? why yex my soul?
Why waste my self away? why do I grieve
My old and fainting age with his youths follies?
Shall I endure the penance of his faultings?
No, let him have her; I, God speed him well;
Yes, let him keep with her.

Oh my father --


Why call'st me father? as if thou had need
Of me to be thy father? a house, wise,
Children are had maugre thy fathers will:
Fellows are hired shall bear her up freeborne.
Y'haue got the mast'tie.

I beseech you father,
May I have leave to utter a few words.

What wilt say to me?


Vet hear him Simo.


I hear him: what is it Chremes I should hear him.


Permit him tell you.


Well, tell he: I permit


I do confess I love this woman here
If it be faulty, I confess that too.
Further I yield me up to your full pleasure,
Lay any task, any command upon me.
Will you I marry that, leave this? I will
Endure it as I may. But this one thing
I beg of you, that you would not imagine
That this old man is by my means brought in
Suffer me clear my self, and fetch him hither
Into your presence

Fetch him.


Let me pray.


He craves but reason, grant it.


I pray sir.


Well, I do: I wish Chremes ought be proved,
So that I find he doos not iuggle with me.

Slight accusation in a sons offense
Suffices for a father.

CEase to entreat.
Each of the reasons you have used, persuade me
To your request? either your own self cause,
Or for it is a truth, or cause I wish
All furtherance unto Gl ceriuns.

Do I not see Crito of Andros there?
It Is he. Crito you are here well met:
You have bin long a stranger here: what chance
Has brought you now to Athens.

An occasion.
But is this Simo?

Yes.


Ask you for me?
Do You hear sir, is it you that do affirm
Clycerium to be free borne of Athens?

Are you one, do deny it?


Is 't eene so?
Come you so well prepared too?

Wherefore?


Do thou use question? think thou to escape
Fairly thus of with 't? seek thou to work on
The easy natures of unguided youth,
Perverting our well nurtured children?
Winning their hearts with fawning promises.
And this, in Athens.

Are you in your wits?


And harlot-loues knit'st up in marriage?


If you knew this man Simo thoroughly,
You would not judge so: he is an honest man.

An honest man; to come iumpe in the instant
Of dosing hands, and nere seen here before?
Chremes, may such a man be credited?

If I not doubted to displease my father
I easily could prompt him to that point.

Cauelling sycophant --


How?


Forbear Crito;
It is his temper.

Let him regard his temper:
If he will vent his pleasure upon me
He shall be forced to hear what will displease him.
Trouble I his matters? or yet care for'hem?
Cannot you bear your own ils patiently?
For my part, it may instantly be known
Whether 't be false or true, you heard me say
A certain man of Athens, now long since
Shiprackt at sea, was cast on Andros Isle;
And with him this Glycerium, then a child:
He being poor had harbor at the house
Of Chr si, father.

He begins a tale.


Pray give him leave.


Does he disturb me thus?
He that entertaind him was my kinsman:
Of him I then heard, that this shipwrack'd man
Was an Ithenian.

Pray, what was his name?


His name so suddenly? Pha -- Pha-nia.


Oh, my heart!


Yes sure, I think it was Phania.
This I well know, he named himself of Ramnes.

O Jupiter!


A many more in Andros
Then heard it.

I beseech the Gods, it prove
According to my hopes: but pray you Crito,
What said he of the child, that it was his own?

No.


Whose then?


The daughter of his brother.


It Is certainly mine own.


What do you say?


What say you?


Pamphilus give heed to this.


Why think you so?


That Phania was my brother.


I knew him well, and know that he was so.


He flying hence to avoid the rage of war,
Trauaild toward Asia in pursuit of me;
And feared withal to leave the child behind:
Since whence, now I hear the first news of him.

I scarcely feel my self: my mind's so tossed
Twixt fear, and hope, and joy, and wondering,
At this so great, so sudden happiness.

In truth I much rejoice, she is found yours.


I do believe you father.

But there rests
One scruple yet, which somewhat troubles me.

You are worthy now of hate, with these your scruples


What is 't?


The name agrees not.


She had sure
Another being young.

What was it Crito?
Can thou remember?

I am thinking on 't.


Shall I permit his tardie memory
To slacken my joys current, being able
Herein to give my self a remedy?
No, I will not: hark you hither Chremes;
The name you doubt of is Pasibula.

That Is it.


It Is right.


I heard it of her self
At least a thousand times.

I believe Chremes,
You think we all joy at it.

As may the Gods
Assist me, I do think so.

What rests father?


The case it self now reconcileth us.


Oh my most loving father and you Chromes
Change nothing in the wife I now possess?

The cause is just, your father so agreeing.


Thus much --


Yea marry --


Her dowre Pamphilus I make ten talents.


I accept of it.


I Will forthwith see my daughter: Crito, pray
Go with me; for I think she knows me not.

Why cause you not your wife be brought to us?


You warn me well, I Will eene give Dauus charg out.


He cannot now effect it.


Pray why so?


Has more and greater charge upon himself.


What?


He Is bound.


He Is not bound rightly father.


No; I did will him be bound otherwise.


Pray order he be loosd.


Well, be it so.


But good sir, haste.


I Will in and see it done.


Oh happy, oh this prosperous blessed day.


I Come to see how Pampirlus speeds, and lo.


Some man perhaps may think I feed on dreams:
But now I please to think all real truth.
I on this ground judge the Gods lives eternal,
Because heir pleasure's certainly their own
For I my self have gaind immortal state,
If with this joy no grief ere intermeddle
But who might I now wish especially
Here at this time, to tell the tidings to?

What joy is that he talks of?


I now see
Dauus our man: there is no living one,
I rather would have had. I know he will?
Full truly joy in the true joy I feel.

Where is this Pamphilus trow?


Dauus Dau. Who Is that?


It Is I.


Oh Pamphilus!


Thou know not what has befallen me?


True: yet know, what has chanced me.


And so do I.


Why this happes just oth'fashion,
That you my ill luck learn, ere I your good.

Glycerium has found out her parents.


Good.


How Is that?


Her father our chief friend.


Who is it?


Chremes.


Oh brave!


Nor now is any stay,
But that I take her home forthwith to wife.

Dreams he trow, of things he desires waking?


Now Dauus, for the child?


Leave of I pray:
The gods sure purpose him their minion.

I am a made man, if these things be true
I Will speak to'hem.

O Charinus,
Thou come in a fit time.

Oh happy news.


Have heard ont then?


Yes all: pray think on me,
Now in the height of your felicity.
Chremes is now your own, and I do know
Hele yield to any thing you motion.

I mind it. But 't would now be ouer-long
Here to attend, till he come forth to us.
Follow me in; he is with Glycerium.
Get you home Dauus, hasten; and procure
Some that may bear her hence: why stand'st thou so?
Why staiest thou still?

Sir I Will go presently.


I Note you sit with kind attention bent,
As pleased with what has passed; and expect
The further issue of our argument;
And on the marrage now your minds reflect.
We pray you cease such expectation;
For we have done: the bride you do conceive
But newly brought to bed; night coming on
Women shall bear her hence, at Sionoes leave.
Chremes hs younger daughter Philumen
Charinus gets, at sure of Pamphilus.
Crito of Andros, who has been the mean
The long lost child should be discouerd thus,
What course he now shall take to obtain his right
In Chrysis goods, I here not mention will;
Nor in leede can I: I have no insight
In law points, triable at Mars his hill.
Yet knowing Chremes nature tractable,
Seeing withal he has dealt liberally
In portion, so that amph lus is able
To bear the loss, though-common honestic
Did not exact it I not doubt they will
Use the poor stranger well. Me you have scene heis
Venture to binding, grinding in the Mill:
That fell on me, this was approaching near.
I purpose further in their joy to sue
My present freedom: Pamphilus love I have,
Glyceriums also; both I think of due:
My Masters chase is off I only crave
Your furtherance in the matter; which if gaind,
I have good hope: for I have heard it sed
By men in the Periclaean laws well read,
If I make you my friends, my sute's obtaind:
For they have told me my discharge now stands
not upon whispering voices; but clapped hands.

