A Citizen of Athens dwelling at Sunium a port-towne of Attica having two
children, Chremes a Son, and Pamphila a daughter, had his daughter stolen
away by Pirates when she was of such tender age that she could only tell her
own and parents names. After this the Athenian died. The Pirates sold the child
to a Merchant of Rhodes, who gave her to a Strumpet which he loved. This Harlot
had a daughter called Thais, somewhat elder then Pamphila: Which children she
so brought up together, that all men of Rhodes did repute them for Sisters.
Thais in process of time took to her mothers trade of life; and yielding up
her self to a strangers devotion, was by him carried to Athens; where he dying
left her good means. He thus dead, she was taken up by one Thraso asouldier: he
also having a while accompanied her, had occasion of travail into Caria. Mean
while the mother of Thais died at Rhodes: Her goods fell to a brother, who
(with them) exposed to sale the abouenamed Pamphila, just upon the time wherein
the soldier passed that way. Her youth and beauty induced the soldier
(ignorant of all passages) to buy her, as a fit gift to bestow on Thais at his
return to Athens. But she before that time (whores do not live in expectation,
nor upon the means of one man only) had intertaind the love of one Phaedria a
young gentleman, son of an ancient Athenian Citizen. She also had by this
time gained some inkling of the parentage of Pamphila, and that one Chremes a
genteleman of Athens was in good likelihood uaturall brother to the maiden: for
better discovery whereof, she had had conference with him (a loofe off)
touching the matter. The soldier returns to Athens bringing Pamphila along
with him, (her maidenhead is questiond by Terence, Act. 1. Sen. 2. in these
words etiamne amplius? To avoid matter unfitting for the grace of the Comedy,
but she was (beyond any contrary supposable conjecture) a maiden: for a child
might sillip this soldier out of his courage; and foolerie was all the
allurement he could use to her) and being thus returned, he finds Phaedria
entered into Thais her books: out of which if he be not clean wiped, Pamphila
is not for her, as the soldier affirms. Terence has set out this Thais as
none of the worst of that course of life; and withal of good discretion in her
carriage. A Dilemma is now put upon her; love and consideration are the two
horns: she must venture the goring by one of them. Love pleades first, and
this is natural to her blood; and Phaedria besides deserves it. I but he may
be tendered a wife; his appetite cloyd his father workeher displeasure.
Resolute love in spite of these premises has down the co^^lusion On the
other side a reputed sister, that sister has good friends, those friends able
to strengthen her unsettled fortunes; if by her means the one be restored to
the other: Thus pleades Consideration. Wisely therefore she keeps the middle
way for barring Phaedria her company for abrace of days (telling him why) she
aims to gull the soldier of the wench by this courtesy; and then to recall
Phaedria to his former contentment. Phaedria assents, leaves the City. gives
withal charge to Parmeno his fathers man, for bringing an Eunuch to Thais in
his absence: Phaedria gone, Thraso also sends Pamphila to her by Gnato a
Parasite. In the passing of the maiden thither, Chaerea a younger brother of
Phaedria spies her, falls in love with her, dogs her, by accident loses
her, chafes with himself at it: then to Parmeno coming upon him, discouers his
mind and whereto carried. Parmeno informs him of an Eunuch by his brother
Phaedria sent, and by him forthwith to be conveyed to the very house where the
maid abides. So that by shifting clothes with the Eunuch he may undiscovered
be brought to her; the Eunuch nor he having ever before been seen by Thais
or any of her family Chaerea follows the advice, is brought thither, rauisheth
the maiden. Much coil hence arises, Pamphila at length being found to be
freeborne, Chaerea marries her; Thais is taken into protection by the father of
the two brothers. The Soldier for mirth and cost sparing is admitted among
them, by Gnatoes persuasion, with the consent of Phaedria

SEnex, an old man not named by Terence; father of two sons: himself being
retired to his Country Grange, at his return to the City finds that either
of his sons have played Rex in his absence: his nature sudden and fiery

Phaedria one of his sons, a young man entangled with the love of a harlot:
well qualified and straggling with his faulty inclination

Chaerea. Another of the old man's sons, an early Cock of the game: the heat
of his youthful blood violently caries him on to a rape: either he was passed
an Ephebus, or Grammarians mistaken in the word, or else Terence has been
very bold in the part of Chaerea lustful, heady, headstrong

Parmeno, Scruant of the family, wise and discreat while he gives advise; when
he undertakes employment diligent and faithful

Thais, A strumpet of a sweet and pleasing disposition: graceful in language,
in manners free and indifferently modest. Terence (in a word) has striued in
her person to set out a tolerable harlot

Pythias maid to Thais. A busy prattling house-wife.

Dorias another of her maids, of clean contrary temper: an idle meacocke.

Chremes, A young country gentleman. Clownish of manners, very timorous and
fearful

Sophrona an old nurse, she hardly huddles over the stage: And all the news I
hear from her, is this one word, Moueo

Amipho a young gentleman of good demeanor, familiar.

Thraso. Gnato. These I couple: for what good Mus^que makes a trumpet without
its ecco. The first a Parat, the other a fellow clawing his poll. The soldier a
bragging sot, of necessity therefore a Cowheard; the other a Clawbacke rubbing
his proud itch. The Parasite thus far wise, that he can make use of his
foolish Master: for he pickes matter of mirth and means out of him

Sanga a Cook, by consequence inclining to sauciness. Malepert.

IF there be any who their studies frame
To give good men contentment, displease none;
In their fair rank our Poet files his name:
If any further hold opinion,
That harsh uncivil terms to procure shame
To any man, be here ungently sown;
Let him think so a Gods name: but with all
He lets them know, what ever words do pass,
Do not on such as free inuectiues fall;
But forced replies of him first wronged was:
To utter the man's name not need I shall:
One, shrewdly tossed, leaudly glossed has
Many Greek comedies: and by that mean
In that tongue good, in Latin marred clean.
'Twas he who but ere-while presented you
Menanders Phas^^. to name it is enough:
But in the Treasure, there you saw him show
rare work emanship, exceeding his rich stuff.
One man another for found gold did sue:
(Our Orators are but a glimmering snuff
To this bright Poets shining Oratory.)
Now in that case iudiciously he wrought
The per^^e at the bar, then defensorie,
To plead first, for the gold inquestion brought;
Before the plaintiff vrgd his injury;
or reason showed why he by action sought
Recovery of that gold: or how the same
into the comb of his dead father came.
I wish him henceforth, he himself not flatter;
Or think (his plays being passd) he stands secure
This will be unsafe refuge for the matter
I have against him: which (I him assure)
Is kept in store: and (cease he not to scatter
His tales abroad our scandal to procure;
As he begins; and leave to urge us on)
Yet hull t shall be produced to public view.
This Eunuch now a foot for action
Being by the Aediles bought, he hard did sue.
To be at sight of the relation.
The Overseers come, the Actors drew
To the rehearsal. I beseech you now,
But hear, what he has challenged and how,
My man baules out in roar, a pilferer
No Poet has now tenderd you a play:
And yet in all the same, no one word neither
Of's own, for's money tenderd. Why, I pray?
Why out of Nauius, Plautus, (choose you whether)
All is purloind that you shall hear to day.
And going on, the envious point he plies;
That this is stale stuff in each author named:
That either of them in their Comedies
The soldier and flatterers part have framed:
And that both thence are hither brought he cries.
Which, if 't be such a fault as must be blamed;
Our Author says disknowing led him on:
No purposed filching practice thought upon.
That this is so, may by you straight be tried:
Menanders Flatterer has a Parasite,
Which Colax called is; there is beside
A braggart Soldier: that he did indite
Those personages thence is not denide,
To fill his Eunuch: but that he did wit
That this had ever been the argument
Of Latin plays before he utterly
Denies. If this now be so insolent,
To assume the persons used formerly
By other Poets; why is suffrance lent
To frame a servant running hastily?
To fashion harlots wonton? matrons chaste?
Soldiers to vant? parasites cramming fast?
Why of false children are drabbes brought to bed?
Why the old Master cheated by his slave?
Why are not love, hate, jealousy yet dead?
There is no sentence (to conclude) we have,
Which has not formerly been uttered.
It is but reason therefore, if we crave
Notice be taken; and our course pardoned:
If what in precedent the ancients gave,
New Poets modestly have followed.
Pray lend your favor, and attentive ear;
That you our Eunuchs news may fully hear.
What should I then resolve on rot to go?
Not now at least, being so kindly sent to?
Or rather this way bend, my settled course,
Not to endure these scornful tricks of Whores?
She shut me out of doors; now sends for me.
Go? never I, should she sue earnestly.

Sir, surely if you can do as you say,
Twere your most worthy, your most manly way.
But if beginning, you so go not one,
And faintly bearing loves assliction,
When you are not sought to, when you are at square
Shall then come creeping to her; and declare
Your ardent love, whose flames you cannot bear;
You are gone: shall be her pipe to play upon,
When you are sound at her devotion.
And therefore master timely yet consider,
That such a thing as holds in it neither
Reason, nor measure; such vniuly thing
Cannot be brought to reasons governing.
In love these vicious humors settled are;
Suspicious, wrongs, enmities, truces, war,
New league again: Now this uncertainty
To draw to certain, were like mystery,
As if one should a project venture on
To make a man mad with discretion.
And what you now here to your self in passion
Do utter, shall I brook this base queanes fashion?
Who hugges you would soldier? bars her door on me?
Not caring? I Will die first: she it shall see
What manner man she has to do withal.
These your high words, these hot terms tragical
With one false tear shall allay easily;
Which (rubbing of her eyes most pitifully)
She hardly shall force from'hem: and anon
You Will tender your own accusation,
And stoop to her set penance.

Oh my hard fate!
I clearly find my self unfortunate;
And her a wicked strumpet. I do fry
In flames of love to one I loathing fly:
Knowing and seeing fall; alive, awake:
Nor see my course.

To what course should you take,
But seek to gain your liberty now lost,
At what low rate you may? if little cost
Will not procure it, then at the utmost price;
And do not vex your self.

That thy advise?


If you be wise, and to loves misery
Ad not: what'thas, strive to bear moderately.
But she comes forth; our householdes known decay.
For what we ought to have, she sweepes away.

VVoes me, I fear Phaedria has taken it hard
And worse then I did mean it, he was bard
His entrance here last day.

Oh Parmeno,
How I do shake and shudder every part
At sight of her.

I pray Sir take good heart.
Approach that fire, you will be warmd thoroughly.

Who Is that? oh, were you my Phaedria so nigh?
Why staid you here? why entered not straight way?

But nere a word of's shutting out last day.


Why art silent?


Yes indeed I confess
Your house is still open to my free access:
And I the fan'rite.

Pray no more of this.


Why no more of it? o, o, Thais, Thais,
I would our loves were like; that this might thee
equally trouble, as it troubles me;
Or that I could not weigh thy injury.

I prithee sweet heart Phaedria do not grieve
Troth it was not that I love any alive
More then thy self, I did it: but the case
(As things fell out) so to be carried was.

Why, I believe her; as things came about,
The poor kind soul for mere love shut him out.

Say you so Parmeno? Leave that: and hear
Wherefore I now sent for you.

Well. I hear.


But pray say first, can this your man keep counsel?


Who, I? exceeding well. But hear you Thais?
I pass my word to you, with this prouiso,
All truth I hear I hold in exlently:
If lie, or toy, or fable, out it goes:
I Am full of chinckes then, I leake every where:
If therefore you will have counsel kept, speak truth.

My mother borne at Samos, dwelt at Rhodes.


This may be well conceald.


There a merchant
Bestowed a little girl upon my mother,
Stolen hence from Athens.

Was the child freeborne?


I think so; do not know the certainty.
Her self did tell father and mothers name;
Country or other signs to be known by.
She knew not; nor indeed was it possible
By reason of her tender age she should.
The Merchant thus much added, that he heard
The Pirates say of whom he bought the child,
That it was brought from Sunium. My mother
Having received it, bred it, taught it so
In every thing, as if it had been her own:
And indeed most reputed her my Sister.
Long after I left Rhodes, in company
Of a then stranger, whom alone I kept to,
And hither came. That stranger dying, gave
All the now goods unto me, which I have.

Either of these is false, twill out.


Why so?


Because that neither were you satisfied
With him alone, nor yet had all from him:
Good and great part of it, my Master brought you.

I grant thee but permit me to go on
Whither I aim. Since that, a soldier
Who had begun to love me, travailed
To Caria: after which I grew into
Acquaintance with your self. And you well know.
That I since then have held you inwardly:
Made you my bosoms only Secretary.

Neither will this be hushed by Parmeno.


o do you make a doubt ont?


Pray attend.
My mother there at Rhodes deceased late;
Her covetous brother, heir to her estate,
Nothing the wench was fair, and skilled well
In Music; hoped her at good rate to sell:
So forth he brought her, sold her to my friend
Who then there was; and fully did intend
To give the maid to me: Yet nothing knew
Of all the passage I have told to you.
He coming home, and understanding too,
That in my love you likewise have to do,
He frames excuses to keep back the maid.
For (says he to me) could he get belief
That he in my account should be held chief,
And you put by? or stood he not afraid
I having got her from him, presently
Would then forsake him; he would give her me?
But this he doubts. Yet I do rather guess
He fancies her.

Has he yet done no more?


No surely: for my self have (Phaedria)
Upon that point sisted her narrowly.
For many reasons I desire to get her;
First for she is deemd my sister: then beside
That to her friends I may the maid deliver.
My self do here a lovely woman bide,
Having nor kinsemen here nor yet fast friend;
Wherefore I seek to win some Phaedria,
By this good turn, I to the wench intend.
For my more ready working, I do pray
Thy help dear heart. The manner of my plot
Is, by your free consent for some few days
He may enjoy my love. Answer you not?

Oh woman wickedst of all thy race!
Should I reply ought to thy filthy doings?

o our brave young Master! I commend him.
He'es vexed at length: now sir you are a man.

The issue of the tale I could not find:
Small girl stolen hence; my mammy as her own
Bred it; deemd sister; have a childing mind
To hea't; and to put it where it is known.
Whereto does this your tale now wheel about?
But that thou loust me less then yonder loute,
And jealous art thy sweet pigsme doos toute
On her, thee of his greazie grace cast out?

I jealous of it?


What else troubles thee?
Is he alone a giver? did ere see
My bounty slight or slack? when late you said
You had a great mind to an Aethiop maid;
Did not I, laying all else care aside,
Cast out for one? and Eunuch too beside
Thou wishedst; cause great Ladies have
Such creatures; I found one; yesterday gave
Twenty pounds for'hem. Now despised by thee,
I yet retain this in my memory:
For these my kindenesses thou slightes me.

Why speak you Phaedria in this angry manner?
Though I desire her, and think may obtain her
Best this way: rather yet then have a foe
Of you, I Will do as you will have me do.

Would that word truly from thy heart were brought;
Rather then me thy foe if I but thought
That this was spoke without dissembling,
I could my self frame to bear any thing.

How quickly one poor word has tamed him?


do I poor soul speak it dissemblingly?
What thing did you ere crave though reastingly
At my hand, but you had it? I of you
Cannot obtain leave for a day or two.

If only two, and that if they prove not twenty.


Indeed but two, or --


Or I wait nothing.


Tshall be no more: pray yield this liberty.


Well: Thais I must do as you will have me.


Deservedly I love you.


It Is well done
I Will to the country, and there pine a lone
For these two tedious days: I am resolved so.
Thais must be obayd. You Parmeno
See those brought hither straight.

Yes sir.


Thais
Farewell for two days.

And you Phaedria.
Command you all else?

What else should I say
With this same soldier present absent be:
Days nights thy love, fix thy desire on me:
Thy longings, dreams, thy hopes, delights, and mi^.
Fix upon me: be all with me: in fine
Be thy soul mine, as mine is truly thine.

Woes me; perhaps he hardly credits me,
But judges me by other wantons trade:
But I that best know my own priuitie,
Know I have now no kind of leazing made:
And that I love, no man more heartily
Then Phaedria here: and that what I have said
Or done, is only for to help the maid:
I hope I have well nigh discovered
Who is her brother: a young man well bred.
He promised to visit me this day.
I Will get me in, and for his coming stay:

AS I late bad, see those be hither brought.


I will.


But carefully.


It shall be done.


And speedily.


I Warrant you.


Is this Sufficient?

Good God* What need you ask so?
Would you could find some good commodity,
As easily as all this will be lost.

My self, to my self dearer, am lost too.
Do not so thwartly intertaine the charge.

No: but will see it done. Would you ought else?


Grace this my present with what words thou can
And what thou can, disgrace my rival from her.

I had thought o'that, though you had not
Mentiond it.

I Will to the country, and there keep.


I Judge so.


But hear'st?


What say y'?


Do judge I may fettle
There to abide without returning back,
For all the time of my enjoined penance?

You? troth I think not: either I imagine
You Will pace again back to her presently;
Or want of sleepeith' night will force you hither,

I Will work to weariness, that I may force sleep.


Put this into your task you will watch weary.


A way fool, thou talk idly Parmeno:
I sure must weed this my effeminate mind;
My self Louercoker. Can I not
(If need should be) for bear her company,
Yea, for three days together.

Wonderful!
For three whole days? advise sir what you do.

The word shall stand.


Oh you good gracious gods!
What disease call you this? is it not strange
That none should know him the same thing to be,
That erst he was? who late more stayed then he?
More temperate? less vain? but who comes here?
How! troth us the soldiers Parasite
Gnato; who with him brings the maid along.
As present unto Thais. Oh rare sight!
Sweet countenance! it is marle but I shall have
Course entertainment of her here to day
With my decrepit Eunuch. Why her face
Puts down the Mistress; Thais self does pass.

OH you immortal gods! how far one man
Outstrips another? and what difference is
Twixt men of brain, and fools? this argument
Comes to my mind on this occasion.
To day I met one, of my rank and place;
No niggard pinch-gut: but one, took delight
To havoc out his state in dainty morsels.
I note him rugged, nastie, drooping grown;
Beset with rags and age. Why how now fellow,
Say I to him, what does this dressing mean?
Marry, says he, poor creature having lost
All I enjoyed, see to what state I am driven?
Acquaintance, friends, all do abandon me.
Here I began (measuring my own estate)
To hold him in contempt; and school him thus:
What, idle drone, have thou so framed thy course
That no hope's left thee? have thou sent thy wits
After thy wealth? do not observe me
One of thine own rank and condition?
What clothing, coulor, neatness,, plight of body
Have I? have every thing though nothing have:
And naught possessing, yet do nothing want.
I but (sighs out my fellow) I poor caitise
Cannot endure to be a ieasting stock,
Nor suffer stripes for money. What, I prithe
(Reply I) should be gotten that way, think?
Thou art clean wide: in former times, of old,
Such kind of fellows, shifted out a living:
This a new way of birding found by me.
There are a sort of men that feign would show
To have rare parts; and yet are nothing so.
I follow these; to these my self apply;
Not to make them sport by my foolerie,
But my own sport of them I smile on these,
Withal admire their wits: what ere they please
To say I do commend it: if straight way
They do the very selfsame thing unsay,
I praise that too: ought say they, ought deny?
The same I say, deny for company.
In fine, I on my self impose this law:
Their humors at all hands to sooth and claw:
And this is now found the most thriuing way.

Troth a fine fellow: he of fools mintes madmen.


While thus we talk, we reach to the market place:
The joyful Victlers haste to meet me there;
Fish-mungers, Butchers, Saulsagemakers, Cooks,
And Fishermen: people to whom I had been
both beneficial, while my state stood good;
And since it was sunk: and still advantage them.
These me salute, inuit me home to dine:
Do welcome me. The Hungerstarued fellow
I named, seeing the account men made of me,
And that I fared so well, so easily;
Humbly besought me he might learn the trade.
I bade him follow that if 't may be wrought,
Lake as professed Philosophers have sought
To keep their names up in their sectaries,
According to their doctrines qualities:
Epicures, Cynickes, Stoickes, Platonickes:
So these my followers be styled Gnatonickes.

Do you not note what ease and trusting to
Other men's roast, may work a man to do?

Yet why thus loyter I, and not convey
This maid to Thais; and her further pray
To come to supper? but see Parmeno
The soldiers Riuals servant, at her door.
He Is melancholy: all is well. Sure the folk here
Are frostie witted: I am now determind.
To play upon the fool.

By this their gift
They think that Thais now 's their own cocke-sure.

Gnato does greet his chief friend Parmeno.
With wishes of much health. What do man?

Stand.


I see it, but feast ought here does trouble thee?


Yes, thee.


I do believe it; but ought else?


Why askst?


Because y' are sad.


Not I truly.


No, be not. But what thinks thou of this maid?


Thus you now mean, that we are cashierd hence,
Las, all things fusser intercourse of change.

Parm'no: for these six whole months together.
I Will set thee at rest from trudging up and down
Or watching to day break: make I thee happy?

Me? wounder sully!


So I use my friends.


I do commend you for it.


I detain you:
Perhaps you were to go some whither else.

No whither, I.


Then I pray a little
Lend me your furtherance: work my entrance here.

Well sir go on. Your passage now lies saire
By reason of this maid you bring with you.

Would ye have any called to you out of the house?


Let but two days be passed over once;
And you that have the happy readiness
With your least singer now to open the doors,
I Will make you many a time hereafter knock
And kick your heels against'hem to no purpose

What do you still attend here Parmeno?
Pray, are you placed there sentinel, to watch
Least any private messenger should run
Between the soldier and Thais hither.

Conceitedly! but indeed they must be
Things extraordinary, that may please
The soldier. But my Masters younger son
I spy a coming hither: I do marvel
What it is has drawn him out of the Pyreum:
For there at this time he is public Custos.
It Is not for nothing. And he com's in haste:
And (why God knows) his eyes about doos cast.

I Am undone she is no where to be seen:
And I that lost sight of her am lost too.
Where may I search? where hunt? whom ask? what way
Take? I have no direction; but I have this hope left
Where ere she be, she cannot be long hid.
Beautiful face! hence forward I do blot
Out of the table of my fantasy
All other women: and do fall to loath
These common beauties.

Mark this yonker too?
I know not what he talks to himself of love.
Oh my most unfortunate old master!
Why this is such a hotspurre, if he take
To wenching once, you will think his brothers course
mere tricks and gambads in comparison
Of what his furious rage will venture on.

Oh all you gods and goddesses confound
That same old dotaid stayed me on my way.
Lee them plague me too, that did deigne to stay:
And further would not slight him. But behold
Here Is Parmeno: well met.

Why are you sad?
Or about what so earnest? whither going?

Troth I not know, nor whither, nor bout what;
I am so utterly beside my self.

Why how comes this?


I am in love man.


How?


Now Parmeno make proof, what dwells in thee.
Thou know thou oftentimes have promised me,
Bidding me think of something I desired;
And thou would show how thou could pleasure me.
And this thou offerdst, when I secretly
Brought to the seller all our victuals to thee.

Peace idlesbee


Now on my part it is found
What I desire: let me thy promise find.
Besides it is an action of that value,
Whereon thou may spend thy best sweat and labor.
This wench is nothing like our City Mammats,
Whom their mothers strive to make low shoulderd;
And lace hard in, to make 'hem appear slender;
If any grow a little fleshlier
Sh's termed a champion; straightway dieted:
That be they of natural temper ere so good,
They tanner 'hem to form of reeds or rushes:
And therefore they are made much on.

What on yours?


Face af a rare proportion.


Excellent!


Color her own plumpe body; full of mettle.


Her years?


About sixteen.


The very prime.


Procure her me by force stelth, or entreaty;
I weigh not which way, so I may ento, her.

Of what condition is she?


Troth I know not.


Of whence.


Nor that.


Where dwells she?


As little, that.


Where saw you her?


Passing a long the street.


How lost?


That was chafing with my self
Tust now as I came hither: neither think
There Is any living on, to whom good happes
Offering well at first, do end more thwartly.

What mischief has falue out?


Oh me accursed!


Why, what is the matter?


Ask thou? know thou not.
My fathers kinsman, Archidemides?
A man much of his years?

What else?


Whilst I
Follow the maiden, he comes just upon me.

Unseasonably of my word.


Nay verily
Vnluckely. The word unseasonable
Fits other chances better Parmeno.
I may swear safe, this six or seven months
last past, I nere happend to see the man;
But now when least I would, or had less need.
Seems it not strange, how think thou?

Yes, y' faith.


As distant as he was he huddled to me,
Bow-bent, palsey-handed, blabber-lipt, cough-strangled:
Ho, ho, stay, Chaerea (says he) Chaerea stay;
Chaerea to thee I speak: knows thou my errand?
What is it, say I to him? marry -- marry --
And half an hour after grunties to me
I have a trial to be heard to morrow --
And what of that, say I? he answers me
see that thou tell thy father carefully,
That he remember to be early ready
To plead my cause. This our dialogisme
Took up an hour of time, I asked what else?
No more sares he. I left him; looking backward
To spy the maid, she ith mean time had turned
down this way to our street.

It Is ten to one
But he means her, that was now brought to Thais.

When I come hither, she is not to be seen.


Did any company attend the wench?


Yes, a Parasite and a maid servant.


It Is she Cast of your care: all now is quiet.


Thou talkest from the purpose.


Nay, but mind the business now in hand:


Say do know her? or saw her?


Saw, know her, know where she is?


Oh my sweet Parmeno know her?


I do know her.


And where she is?


Here, brought to the harlot Thais,
And given her for a gift.

Who is so potent
To give such gifts?

Thraso the soldier,
Your brother Phaedria's rival.

Thou declar'st
But a hard case my brother stands in then.

Yould say so indeed, if you had seen the present Which he prouides to send
in counterpoise


Prithe, what is it?


An Eunuch.


What, that driule,
That filthy fellow he brought yesterday?
The old man-woman?

I, the very same.


Hele be coited out of doors with his present.
But I nere knew, this Thais was our neighbor

She has not long been.


I Am a fellow of nothing.
Strange, I should nere have seen her? but do hear?
Is she so fair, as she is reported for?

Yes sine.


But not to be compared to mine?


It Is otherwise.


I prithe Parmeno
Work that I may obtain her.

I Will see toot:
I Will study for your furtherance and help. Command you me ought else?

Whether now go thou?


Home; to convey those servants unto Thais.
As late your brother chargd me.

Oh blessed Eunuch!
Who is to be there placed in that house.

Wherein so blessed


Wherein, demandest thou?
That ever has so fair a fellow servant
To look on; talk to: under the same roof
Be still with her; sometimes take meals with her?
Sometimes sleep nigh her?

What if now your self
May be made happy?

Wherein Parmeno?


Say. Tak's clothes

His clothes? what thence Will follow?


I Will lead y' in 's stead.


I note.


I Will say y' are he.


I apprehend thee


You may then enjoy
The benefits, which now you said he should;
be present, eat, touch, play, and lie close by her:
Seeing (...) 'hem do know you, what you are.
Beside your face and years are such, you may
Pass easily for an Eunuch.

Excellent.
I never in my lise heard better counsel.
Let Us in; and help to dress me presently.
Lead me, carry me, with all speed thou can.

What mean? troth I but reasted.


Thou wast's time in prating.


I have cast my self away.
What have I done wretch? whither thrust you me?
Will you now force me? Sir I warn you stay.

Let Us go.


Persist you?


I am fully bent toot.


Foresee, if th'course be not to hot for us.


It Is not I warrant thee, let us on.


I, but
This bean will sure be threshed on my shoulders.
Oh it is a heinous practice we attempt.

A hamous sigge: is that a heinous practice,
If I be brought in a baudie house,
And there return their own upon these gibets
And plagues of men? which always hold om youth
In such contempt, and always work our torment?
If I do now put a like trick upon 'hem,
As we by them are still guld? or else rather
Is It fit, we still take their wrongs patiently?
I say it is fit I put the jest upon her.
Who Will blame me that shall hear on it? every man
Will say, I fitted 'hem a peniworth

What means all this? If you be so resolved
You may go on. But pray you sir hereafter
Lay not the fault on me.

I will not.


You Command me then?


Command, charge and compel.


I Will nere (decline then) your authority.
Follow.

The powers divine prosper our course.


DId Thais (say thou) give me such great thanks?


Huge thanks sir.


And glad say? ha?


Not so much for the gifts worth, as that it came From you: that is her hearts
pride sir


I come forth to see
How time serves for conueiance of my present.
But lo the soldier.

My kind destenie
Sure of a child bestowed this gift upon me,
That all I do becomes most acceptable.

Truly I note so much.


The King himself
Still used to give me singular great thanks
For all I did; to other men not so.

The man that has brain in him does derive
Often times the glory earned by others sweat
Upon himself: a thing that is rife in you.

Thou have it.


Therefore the King still wore you --


I,


In his eye.


True: gave the oversight
Of all his forces, all his plots to me.

Rare!


Then, if weariness at any time
Of men, or tediousness of business
Possessed him; when he minded to be private,
Would -- as it were -- thou feelst me?

Yes when he would
Unload his mind -- as twere -- of care.

Yes, then
He would retire with me alone to banquet.

o strange! you do describe a rare choice King.


I, he is a man of very few men's stamp.


Rather of none's if he converse with you.


All men envied me; closely snapt at me;
I thus regard'hem; all (I say) bare me ill:
But one most deadly, whom the King had made
Orescer of his Indian Elephants.
He at a time being over sawsie with me,
What said I to him, take you boldness Strato,
Because you have command over the beasts?

So help me God, an exlent witty jest:
Oh singular! this was a wipe unto him.
Ah! and what he?

Struck dumb.


How could he choose?


Your faith good gods! desperate fellow, caitife,
Churchrobber.

I but what think thou Gnato.
Of that same jest, wherewith I girded once
A youth of Rhodes being at dinner with me?
Did I nere tell't thee?

Never: I pray tell it.
I have heard it told above a thousand times.

This Rhodian I speak of, a raw young strippling
Sat once at banquet with me: when by chance
I had my harlot with me: This green nouice
Began to speak broad: how now impudence,
Say I to him, art thou thy self hare-haunched
And hunt'st for ven'son.

ha, ha, he.


How is it?


Conceited, clearly, smooth, not to be mended
For Gods love was it your jest? I thought it old.

Have heard it?


Often, abroad it bears the bell
For a prime witty one.

It Was mine.


Alas,
Rash headless youth.

Now the gods confound thee.


For Gods sake what did he?


Blasted. All there
Were ready every man to burst with laughter:
And in conclusion all began now fear me.

I could not blame'hem.


But do hear were
Best I cleard my self to Thais, of this maid:
For that she stands in jealousy I love her?

At no hand: rather strive to increase her doubt.


Why?


Ask you? find you not, if any time
She do commend or mention Phaedria,
How it does vex you?

Yes.


To prevent that
This is your only remedy. When she
Names Phaedria to you, do you presently
Name Pamphila: if she at any time
Say, let us have home Phaedria to banquet,
Reply you, call in Pamphila to sing:
In fine, give like for like, to nettle her

I, if she loved me, this might further Gnato.


Seeing she expects and loves what you do give her,
She long since loves you; you have long since
Easily got the starte how you may grieve her.
She Will always stand in aw, least any time
Upon offense taken you will bestow elsewhere
That benefit, she now doos reap from you

It Is right thou say. Strange, 't came not to my Mind?


That is a jest indeed; because you bent not
Your mind out or else Thraso what rare strain
Had it produced, if minted in your brain.

ME thought, I ene now heard the soldiers tongue
See where he is: Thraso my friend, well met.

Oh my dear Thais, my delight, how do thou?
Do you a little love me for your Ministrell?

What a sweet proper handsell has he given her
At the first onset.

Much for your deserving:


Then let us to supper. Why here stay you?


Mark the other Wiseacre too. A man may judge
He was of a man's getting.

When you please,
I am in readiness.

I Will go toward 'hem,
And make as if I now but new came forth.
Are you to go forth any whither Thais?

o Parmeno, well done: yes indeed to day.
I am to go abroad.

Pray whither?


See thou not
The man There?

Yes, withal his presence irkes me.
Those presents from my Master Phaedria
Are ready when you please.

What stay we for?
Why ^et not hence?

Pray sir grant truce a while,
I may surrender up some trifling presents, I also may
Imparle and treat with her.

Some goodly present
Sure: nothing like mine.

The matter self will
Show that. Ho there, bid those two I gave in charge,
Come quickly forth.
Come you here forward. This same wench was brought
From Aethiopia.

Some three half penie purchase,


Scarce that.


Where are you Dorus.
Come you hither. Here is an Eunuch for you: mark
How sweet faced, of what a blooming age.

Now
As God help me a handsome youth.

What say
You to him Gnato? What fault find thou? or what
Objects thou Thraso? hushed both: sufficient
Commendation. Prove him in learning, song or
Wrestling: such knowledge fitteth free-horne youth to
Have, I Will make it clear appear he is perfect in.

For need, vnwarm'd with wine I could that Eunuch


And he that sends you these, doos not require
That you should only live to pleasure him;
For his sake, bar all else your company;
Nor bragges his battles, nor shows forth his scarres;
Nor stands betwixt you and your benefit
As one doos, I could name: but at such times
When he may be injurious to none,
Your self disposed, and time convenient;
If then admitted, he rest's satisfied.

This shows he serves some poor and forlorn Master.


For no man sure that could procure another
Would endure this.

Sir., hold thou thy peace,
Whom I do judge under all names of baseness:
For thou that fram'st thy self to claw that thing,
I think may feed on fire.

Do we yet go?


I Will have but in these first; and leave some charge
Among my servants, what I would have done;
And come out to you straight.

I Will depart hence.

Gnato do you stay for her.

I, for it fits not
A general walk with his mistress in the streets.

What should I use a many words to thee?
Thou art much like thy Master.

Ha, Ha, he.


What is it thou laughst at?


That which now you said,
And the other jest broke on the Rhodian
Came to my mind: But Thais is come forth.

Run you before and get at home all ready.


Content.


You Pythias have a special care,
If Chremes chance to call here, you entreat him
To stay; if that he cannot fitly do,
That he would come again some other time:
If neither that he can, bring him to me.

I will forsooth.


But what, what was it else
I was about to say? Oh, have a care
Unto the maiden, see you? and keep home.

Let Us go.


Wenches attend and follow me.


The more I do reuolue things in ^y mind
Still the more likely arguments, find
That Thais here aims some shrewd trick against me;
I see she works on me so cunningly.
When first she sent for me (if any one
should then have asked me the occasion
Of business twixt us twain, I knew not^^ng
To Answer) being come, with hammerit
She fashiond out pretenses of my stay^
She had performd religious rites that day
Unto the gods, and would communicate
A Weighty secret to me: (I then straight
Grew jealous, all this was some cunning strain^,
She fits down by me; cause of talk does frame
I seeming cold, her speech to this point came,
How long 'twas since my Parents had been dead
Long since I told her: then she questioned
If I had land at Sunium? and how far
It lay from sea? this (I think) likes her:
She hopes to work it from me. at the last
She drew to this, if I had no young sister
From that place stolen a many years now past?
Who then was with her at the time we mist her?
What things she had about her? or if any
Could know her? why should she these questions move
unless (as is the impudence of many)
She feign her self would that my sister prove,
Of old so young hence lost? should she survive,
Her years at most reach not above sixteen;
Thais is elder then my self, I ween.
She craved me again come to her: let her drive
The matter, and her business to some head;
Or leave this sending: i will not be troubled,
To listen her third errand. Ho, within --

Who Is that?


One Chremes.


Oh fine little pleasant pa^e.


I still affirm, I am laid for to be caught.


Thais did earnestly request you would
Return to morrow.

I go into the Country.


Pray y'


I say I cannot.


Then remain here
A while till she come back.

No by no means.


Why my kind Chremes?


Hence you harlotrie


If such be your determination,
I pray step over to her where she is.

I care not if I do.


Darias go straight
And leads is gentleman to his soldiers.

SOme youths of us agreed on yesterday
A feast in Common among us (...) Chaerea
We made our Steward, rings were given, time, place
Set down; time's past, where it appointed was
Nothing is ready, he not to be seen,
I know not what to say out, what to ween.
Now all the rest have laid the task on me
To seek him; therefore now I Will first go see
If he be gotten home. But who is that
Comes out of Thais house? is it he or not?
It Is he. What creature's he become? what means
This his attire? what evil bodes his staring?
I cannot enough wonder, or conjecture.
But what so ere it be, I Will aloof stand;
And angle for the secret now in hand.

IS none about the doors? Not one. Doos none
come yet behind me neither? No not one.
May I not now at pleasure vent my joy?
Oh Jupiter! now truly is the time
I easily could brook to part with life:
Least some ensuing wretchedness thereof
Should hap to sour my present happiness.
No curious inquisitor now meet me?
That up and down would hant me, weary me,
Kill me with tedious questions, why I skippe thus?
Why am so iocund? Whither I am going?
Or whence do come? in what place got these clothes?
What is my aim? whither I Am mad or sober?

I Will to him, and obtain the thanks of him
He so desires to part with. Chaerea,
Why in such rapture man! whence this attire?
Why art so pleasant? or what aymst thou at?
Art in thy wits? Why starest thou so upon me?
Why speak not?

Oh happy day? o friend well met.
There Is no man living, I would rather see
At this time then thy self.

I prithee, say
What is the matter!

Nay truly I pray thee
Give me the hearing. Know thou not her here
My brother is in love withal?

Yes Thais:
As I do guess.

The same.


So I remember.


A certain maid was given her to day.
What need I blazon or set out to thee
This maidens matchelesse beauty, Anripho?
Thou know me choice in such disciphering.
She did inflame my heart.

What say?


thou wilt say
She from the whole sex bears the Bell away,
If ever thou shall see her. What need words?
I began to love her: by good chance there was
At home an Eunuch which my brother had
bought for this Thais, not then sent to her.
Here our man Parmeno an odd inckling gave me
Of a device, which quickly I laid hold on.

What


If you would silent keep, you would
Know sooner.
First to change clothes with him, then cause my self
To be conveyed for him.

What for the Eunuch?


Yes.


What advantage should you win thereby?


Make then a question? I should see, should hear,
Should be with her I loved, Antipho.
Was it a slight cause, or a trifling reason?
I was brought to her; when she had received me
She gladly led me home: commits the maid --

To whom? To thee?


To me.


a fine safeguard.


She charge me that no man come to her;
Commands me further, I not start from her;
But that alone I keep with her alone,
In a close chamber: I say, yes forsooth;
Upon the ground looking demurely.

Gaitise.


I am to go now forth (says she) to banquet,
And with her leads along her maiden servants;
(A few young nouice wenches left behind
To attend upon the maid) these presently
Prepare for her to Bathe. I wish them haste
While they make things in readiness, the maid
Sits in a closet, looking on a table:
Wherein was painted, how that Jupiter
Once ray'nd in Danaes lap a golden showie.
I looked upon the piece too: and because
He had in former times played the like prankt,
My spirits were the more encouraged:
In that a God had taken human shape,
And in gold dew dropping himself through tiles
Had closely, finely, wantond with his lemman
And which of th'Gods had done't? matie the same
Who shakes with thunder heavens high arched frame
Should I wormeling (then) make scruple of it?
I did not, but embraced it willingly.
When this I cast in mind, the maid mean while
Is called for in, to wash: goes, bathes, returns;
And afterward they lay her in her bed:
I waiting stand if they'ld bid me do ought.
One comes to me, and says, you sir Dorus
Take you this fan; and thus fan wind upon her^
When we have washed, you (if you will) wash too.
I take it with sad countenance.

At that time
I would have seen that bashful face of thine
How thou great Ass did stand holding a fan

She had scarce spoken it, when all together
I surring out of the room, depart to Bathe;
And make such noise, as servants commonly
Are went to do, when Masters are from home
Mean while a flumber seases on the maid.
I privily (thus) on the fannes side do leere,
And look about too, if all else be clear:
I saw all safe, and hoited fast the door.

What then?


What then fool?


I confess it.


Should I let slip such opportunity,
So profferd, short, wished and not hoped for?
I had been then indeed such as I showed for.

It Is true thou say. But in the mean while what is done
Cconcerning our repast?

why all is ready.


Thou art careful: where? at your house?


No at Discus
Our free-mans.

It Is far hence, let us make more haste
Go shift your clothes.

Where should I go to shift?
I Am lost; from whom I stand as banished;
I doubt my brother may be now within:
Fear also, least my father be returned
Out of the country.

Go we to our house,
That Is the next place, where you may shift your self.

The advice is good, lets go: withal I mind
To take thy counsel, how I may my love
Further enjoy.

Content, our wits will prove.


SO help me God, I somewhat doubt poor creature
By things I saw, least the enraged soldier
Should raise some broile; and do my Mistress wrong.
For presently as soon as Chremes came
The late given young maids brother; she requests
The soldier, he would cause him be called in:
He grew in sum, but yet durst not deny her.
She further moves his inuitation
Unto their banquet: (this my Mistress did
To keep him there; because as yet the time
Served not to tell him things concerned his sister.
The soldier willd him sit; yet grumblingly.
He placed, my mistress frames discourse to him:
The soldier thought a rival had been brought
Under his nose, and minding to cry quittance
Called out, ho, one of you fetch Pamphila
To sing to us; Thais cries out, at no hand:
What her to a banquet? He would have it so.
Hence grew the matter to a down right braule:
My mistress privily took of her jewels,
And gave 'hem me in secret to bring thence.
This is a certain sign, whereby I know
Shee'^ slip thence, when she spies fit time thereto

AS I upon my journey passing was,
A thronging troop of busy thoughts do press
Into my mind; as ought it comes to pass
To men whose souls some trouble seized has:
And every thing in the worse sense I guess.
What need much talk? while these dumpes me possess
Vnheeded I was passed the town I meant to,
And was gonne far beyond it; when at last
Perceauing it I back returned fast:
And being scarce come unto the torn which went to
The town, there staid; and in my mind thus cast,
Two whole days must I this place be pent to
Alone without her? Why is that such a matter?
It Is nothing: Nothing? What, if not come at her
To touch her? must I yet be barred her sight?
If that be crossed, is this to be lost quite?
To climb the lowest, first step of loves lather
Were somewhat yet. But why in such affright
Comes Pythias forth? and why so hastily?

Wretch that I am, where shall I find this fellow?
Where this ungodly wicked fellow find?
That he should dare attempt a piece of work
So monstrous, so audacious!

I am lost,
And doubt what this may mean.

Besides, yet further
The vilaine not alone defiled the maid;
But rent the poor souls linen, tore her hair.

How Is this?


Whom if I now could light upon,
How I would fly upon the eyes of the witch?

I cannot guess what coile has here besalne
Since my departure. I Will go to her. How now?
What is the matter? why such haste? Who is it
Pythias, thou lookst for thus.

Oh Phaedria,
Whom seek I? Sir I pray you get you hence
Where you deserve, with your conceited presents.

What may this mean?


Ask you? what fine Eunuch
Was that you sent? what stir has he here made us?
H'has ravished the young maid, the soldier
Bestowed upon my Mistress.

Ha! what this?


I am undone.


Thou art drunk.


I would
To God that all that hate me, were as drunk as I am.
Dorias. For Gods love Pythias what strange hap was this?

Thou Art mad. How could an Eunuch do such things?


I know not what he was, but what h'has done
The case it self does show. The wench she weeps.
And when one asks her, dare not utter why.
The honest fellow too's not to be found.
Beside I fear, he is run away with somewhat.

You make me wonder, where the lazy bones
Should have conueid himself: unless penhaps
He be retired back to our house again.

Pray, see if he be there.


You shall know straight.


I am to seek, good God sweet Pythias
I have not heard so strange and accident.

Yes, I had heard that they loved woman
Dearly, but could do nothing. And forgetful beast
I never thought ont: else I had mewd him up,
And nere h'trusted her unto his keeping.

COme out o'doores mischieuos rogue; come out.
what draw you backward? come forth runaway
Ill purchased commodity come forth.

For Gods sake sir.


Mark how the Hangman
Wries his choppes a'toneside? sir, what is the scope
Of this your coming back? the mystery
Of this your changing clothes? your answer sirrah?
If I had stayed nere so little Pithias,
I had not found him there: he had prepared
Ready for packing.

Have you got him then?


Got him? what else?


Upon my faith that is well.


I troth that is passing well.


Where is he?
Phae ask?
See him not?

See pray? whom?


Why this.


Wha'ts he?


He that this day was brought you.


None of us
Ere saw this fellow, till now Phadria.

Nere saw?


for Gods love. (Phaedria) did you
Think,
That this was brought.

Yes for I had no other.


Fie, there is between 'hem no comparison.
That was a fair and comely vizadgd youth.

You thought so then cause he had other clothes on:
Those off, you think him now ill favored.

Au! pray sir cease: as if the difference.
Were small between 'hem? here to day was brought
(Phaedria) a youth you would ha'longd to look on:
This an old, creping, dreaming, dropsy, dotard;
Complexiond like a Weazell.

How, how this?
Chrochets? you make me searse know what I do.
Sirrah come near me did not I buy you?

Yes forsooth.


Now command him answer me.


Put forth your question.

came thou here to day?
You see he does deny it: but the other
Came to us, hither brought by Parmeno,
Some sixteen years of age.

Resolve me this;
First, by what means got you the clothes you wear?
Silent? monster of men, speakst not? Dorus. Chaerea
Came home.

My brother?


Yes.


When?


But this day.


How long since?


Even now.


And
Who was with him?

Parmeno


Had thou ever before seen him?


No, nor yet ere before had heard him named.


How then did know him to have bin my brother
Dorus. Parmeno said so. He gave me these clothes.

I Am lost.


himself withal straight put on
Mine.

You think me now not drunk; nor that I have li'd.
It Is now most clear the poor Wench is deflour'd.

Fie beast, beleeu'st him?


What need I
Believe him?
The matter self proclaims it.

sirrah you,
Come hither (here you) yet a little nearer:
So, It Is well. Tell me again, did Chaerea
Take your clothes.

Yes.


And put 'hem on himself?


Yes


And was brought for you to Thais?


Yes sir.


Great Jupiter! oh wicked shameless fellow


Woes me; you scarce believe yet we a^^ abu'sd.


It Is marle now, but thou credit's what he says?
I Am at my wits end -- Sirrah do thou hear?
(Deni't being askd again) can I no way
Work a truth from thee? ha? did see my brother?

Not I intruth.


No truth, I see, vnforc'd
Can be got from him. Come, come in with me.
Now say things straight deny 'hem? (beg of me.)

For Gods sake sit


Will you get in? Dorus
Hoy hey.

I know no means else how to shift away.
I stand in a fair case, if such a knave
As thou, may thus befoole me at his pleasure.

I know sure as I lieue, 't was Parmeno.
Complotted this.

Yes doubtless.


Ere I sleep
I Will find a mean how to cry quittance with him.
But what think best we should do, Dorias?

Touching the wenchd'ye mean.


Yes, it't be best
To utter or conceal't. Dorias If you be wise,
Know ought, know naught, touching the Eunuch self,
Or her abuse: so shall you keep from blame;
And do her a good turn. You may say only,
Dorus is run away.

I Will eene do so.


But see I not Chremes vonder? Thais straight
Will be here with us.

Wherefore think you so?


Because when I came thence, they grew to brall.


Bear in the jewels: I Will of him learn all.


I, I, assure as heaven, I was but played on.
The wine ore wrought me: yet while I was sitting
Me thought I was excedingly well temperd,
but rising found both feet and brains to sail

Who Is that? Oh Pythias how much
Fairer
Now seemst thou then crewhile.

You in good sooth
Are pleasanter by saire.

It Is true and old,
Spare wine and dainties, sportfull lusts grows cold.
Is It long, since Thais came?

Has she already
Then left the soldier?

oh yes long age.
And there has been great falling out between 'hem.

Did she say nothing, you should follow her?


Nothing, but at her parting winkd on me.


What, was not that sufficient Item man.


I knew not that the meant so much, but that
The soldier helpd my dull conceiving her;
For out o'doores he thrust me: see where she is
I marvel where it was, I over went her.

I guess he will be here straight, with intent
To take her from me; let him come on then:
But if he lay on little singer on her,
I Will claw his eyes out. I can so far bear
His fopperies, and swollen bumbasted words
Whilst that they be but words: come they to deeds once,
I Will ferrit him.

I was here long since Thais.


Oh Chremes, I lookd for you. Know you not
That all this brabble has been about you?

Me? how? as if I broacht it?


Yes because
While I do seek to render to your hands
Your long lost sister, this insued thereon.

Where Is that my sister?


Here at home with ^e.


Ha!


Why what is the matter? Shee'has been
Brought up
As fits her self and you.

What is it you say?


That which is truth: freely give her you.
Demanding nothing at your hands for her.

I give and owe you Thais many thanks
As you have well deserved.

But beware
Chremes, you lose her not, ere you receive her:
For this is she the soldier comes to get
By maine force from me. Pythias get you in,
And fetch the little cofer with the tokens^

Do you see him coming Thais?


Mistress
Where is it?

Ith'leatherne hamper: Makst thou no more haste queen?


What forces dooes he bring with him? oh me.


Are you afraid friend?


A way, I afraid?
No man a live less.

I it is fit you be not.


T'sh, I do doubt what man you take me for.


No, but consider, he you are to deal with
Is a mere stranger, of less means, less known,
Less friended here then you.

All this I know:
But yet it is folly to admit an evil
Which may be well prevented. I had rather,
We seek aforehand to prevent a wrong,
Then to return a suffered injury.
Do you get in; and then make fast your doors;
Whilst I haste over to the market place.
I will have some assistants by, in the tumult.

Stay.


It Is the safest course.


Pray stay.


Pray leave.
I Will be here straight again.

Chremes this needs not,
Acquaint him only that she is your sister,
Which you a small girl lost; and now do know her:
Show him the proving tokens.

Here they are.


Here take 'hem, if he offer violence,
Summon him to the law: conceive you me?

Yes very well.


See you utter it with courage.


I warrant you.


Pull up your cloak there, to you.
I Am in a fair case: why, this man I make
My Champion, needs another him to back.

Brook such a base assront? I Will die first, Gnato.
Simatio, Donax, and Syriscus follow:
The house I Will first dismantle --

Aright course.


Take thence the maid my hostage --


Very Good.


Make Thais feel my vengeance --


Excellent.


Donax come you here hither with your leauer,
Into the heart of my battalion:
Simatio fall you there on the left winge.
Wheel you about Syriscus to the right.
Draw out some more: where is Sanga the Centurion
With His band of the black guard.

Here ready Captain.


Where are thy arms drone? will thou enter fight
With thy moppe there? that thou have brought it hither?

sir I but know the courage of my Chiestaine,
Or soldiers fury, that the day would cost
Much blood shed, brought it here to cleanse the gore.

Where are the rest there?


what (a murraine) rest?
Samnio alone keeps home, to look to the house.

Do you rank these; I Will march behind the Van.


Note sirs his wisdom! having ranked the rest,
Himself retireth to safe place for shelter.

'Twas Pyrthus usual practice.


Thais, see you
What he intends? that sure's the safest way,
To lock up doors.

This fellow (lassure thee)
Thou deem'st a man of spirit is a gull;
A pure great goosecappe: nere make doubt of him.

What thinks thou Gnato.


I could wish you had
A sling stone here, to gall 'hem a loose off:
They'ld straight forsake their Castle.

But I see
Thais her self.

Let Us straight rush in upon them.


Forbear: A discreet general should cast
To win his aims by treaty, ere he put
The hazard unto battle. How do know
But she may do my biddings, vncompell'd?

Oh you good Gods! what it is to be distreeter
I nere come to you, but I do depart
Much betterd in my judgment.

Thais, first
Answer me this, when I bestowd on you,
The maid, assure you not your company
To me for certain days.

Well, what o'that?


Ask thou what? that broughst before mine eyes
Thy lover? (what have thou to do with him?)
And with him sneak'st from me?

It was my pleasure.


Restore now therefore Pamphila, unless
You Will have me force her from you.

How, to thee
Restore her? or dare thou lay hands on her?
Thou? of all --

Have care good sir, you know not
What kind of man you speak so grossly to.

Will you get hence? know you how stands your case?
If you disturb us here, I Will give you cause
To think upon this time, this place, and me:
Whilst you have day to live;

I pity you,
That seek to make so great a man your so.

I Will crack your crown sir if you get not hence.


How whelpe, what say?


Why what art thou?
What mean?
What business have thou with her?

Thou shall know
First I affirm the maiden is free borne.

How?


Free of Athens.


Hoida!


And my sister.
I therefore now forwarne thee soldier,
Thou use no force against her. Thais, He go
And fetch her Nurse Sophrona hither straight;
And show her these remembrances.

Do thou
Forewarne me that I should not touch my own?

I say I do forewarne thee.


Here you sir,
You have good action of deceit against him.

Said I enough?


Say you so Thais too?


Seek one to answer.


What Is our course
Now Gnato?

Why let us retreat: she will straight come after you,
Crouching and kneeling.

Think so?


Nay
That Is sure.
I am acquainted with these women's humors:
Sue, they are squeamish; if you keep off, they sue.

Thou deem'st aright.


Shall I dismiss the
Army?

I, when thou please.


Sanga, as fits good soldiers,
Cast now your eyes back on the household chimnels

My mind was long ago among the platters


Thou Art careful,


All follow me this way in.


COntinuest drabbe to talk in riddles to me?
I know, I know not, heard so, he is gone,
I was not by --. Will thou not in plain terms
Tell me the matter? the maids clothes are torn,
She weeps and silent keeps, the Eunuch gone.
Why this? what is chanced? speak not?

Woes me
Poor soul!
What should I say? they say he was no Eunuch.

who then?


This Chaerea here.


which Chaerea?


This younger brother unto Phaedria.


What say witch?


I have found it certain so.


Why what a gods name had he here to do?
Or why was hither brought?

I cannot tell,
But that I guess he loved Pamphila.

I find my self accursed wretch undone,
If this be true thou vtterst. Is It for that,
The wench so weeps?

I think so.


Think so hegge?
Was this the charge I left you at my parting?

What should I do? I left 'him both alone
As you did bid.

Unlucky queen, thou left's
A lamb to the woolfe: oh I am ashamed,
So to be played on. What man have we here?

Mistress, for Gods love peace; we are well
W'haue caught
The man.

Where is he?


Look to your left hand.
Do you not see him?

Yes.


Call out for help;
To lay hold on him with all speed you can.

What shall's do with him fool?


What do, ^'you ask?
Pray mark if when you wistly eye the fellow,
Has not a ashamelesse leere?

No, has he not.


Note with what confidence my man struts too.


AS I but now to Antiphoes did come,
His father and his mother were at home;
As if it had been so plotted so that in
I could not enter butt I must be seen.
Whilst here about the door a while I stay,
One that I knew came but into my way:
I him espying hastily betook
Me to my heels; and fled into a nooke
Was unfrequented: so from place to place
Posted, till I to death nigh wearied was:
And this I did, least any should me know.
But is not this Thais, I see? it is she:
I stick ith'mire; nor know I what to do.
But what care I? what dare she do to me?

Let Us to him. O, you are well met honest Dorus.
Tell me, did run away?

Mistress I did.


And was it well done, think thou?


no forsooth.


Think to go with it scot free so away?


Forgive me but this one fault, if I ever
Commit the like again, then kill me for it.

Did fear my curstness?


No.


What Feardst thou then?


I feared your maid here would tell tales of me.


What had thou done?


A (...).


Impudence
A trifle? is it a trifle in thine eye
To take a freeborne maid, and ravish her?

I took her for my fellow servant.


Fellow?
I searse can hold my singers from his ears.
Monster art come again, to flout us too?

Get you hence Bedlam.


Pray forsooth, why so?
I think I ow't the gallows, if I do
As I do threaten; and the rather too,
Because he does confess he is slave to you.

No more of this. Chaerea, you have committed

An act fair unbeseeming that fair port
Your self and friends here bear; say the scorn fitted
And to my course of life did rustly sort:
Yet for your own worth you should have forborne.
Nor truly know I now what course to frame
Touching the maid; you have disorderd so
All my proceedings, I cannot return
Her to her friends, as I desird the same;
And as was fitting for the maid to go:
So that both maid and friends I might have made
Beholding to me, by the course I laid.

Thais, but now I hope henceforth will grow
Fast love between us: oftentimes you know
From bad beginnings, slight occasion,
Great love has had its deriuation.
What, if some higher powers did thus decree?

In such sense I do take it verily;
And so do wished.

Pray one thing reckon right
No purposd scorn, but loves imperial mihght
Then swayd my passions.

I believe 'twas so;
And truly therefore pardon you the rather:
I am not (Chaerea) of such stubborn nature,
Nor so vnskild as loves power not to know.

So help me God as I now grow in love
With you to Thais.

Then mistress I perceive
You ought to watch him.

O, I dare not prove.


In Troth le trust thee for just nothing.


Leave.


Thais, I do commend, commit my self
To your protection; beg your help herein;
Desire, beseech you will stand my Patroness.
I cannot live if I not marry her.

But if your father --


Tsh, what? I know he will --
So she be known freeborne.

If you please stay
A little, the maids brother will be here;
He went to call the nurse that nur'st her young:
You may be by at her acknowledging.

Yes, I will stay.


And in the mean time will You.
(Till he do come) we go into my house?
It Is better then at door here waiting stand.

With all my heart.


Pray what do you mean to do?


In what?


Do You ask? mean you for all this yet
To let him come again into the house?

Why not?


Take my word for it, h'le adventure
Some second battrie.

Prithee hold'thy chat.


Ha'you not had sufficient trial of him?


I will not, Pythias.


I Will not trust you, Chaerea.
Unless you be kept out.

But (Pythias)
Thy self shall be my keeper

Troth not I:
I Will neither trust thee with the custody
Of any thing, not keep thee yet my self.
So get you hence.

Her brother's fitly come.


I Am lost, pray let us in, I would not (Thais)
He see me in this habit in the street.

Why, art ashamed?


Yes truth.


Yes truth? alack!
A maiden bachelor I warrant you.

Go in before, I follow. Pythias
Tarrte you here, to bring in Chremes with you.

WHat, can I think of no plot, no device,
No trick to erie quittance with this rascal?
That foisted in this counterfeit among us?

Pray move your joints a little nimbler ruise.


I moan sir.


I, I see it; but nothing forward.


Have you yet shown the tokens to her sir?


Yes, all.


What says she, pray? remembers them?


Yes perfectly.


In troth you bring good news,
For Ido wish the maid well. Pray go in;
My mistress long since did expect your coming.
But see the honest fellow Parmeno,
I think I have found a trick to nettle him,
As I would wish. I Will first go in and hear
The maids acknowledgement; and again come forth
To fright the rogue with a fine penny worth.

I Now scout out, to see what Chaerea has done:
Who if he have the business cleanely handled,
Good gods! What glorious palm have I then won?
For to omit, that I a cafeintangled
Have wound out fairly to his hand; have wrought,
Have compassed his love, his wench, a maid
He so did dote on: and yet cost him naught,
(No purse expense, no trouble, hazard made;)
And from a greedy harlot. Then again
(Which I indeed account my Masters prise)
That I have found him out a ready mean,
To learn these strumpets manners and full guise:
Which ripely understood, he may for ever
Detest their courses: when abroad they git,
None are more neat and sweet in their behavior,
They mince and pick upon each dainty bit;
(With their friend eating such is their demeanor.)
And then to note their greedy ravening,
Their sluttishnesse, their penury at home;
What nastie Cormorants they are alone;
Out of stale porrage musty bread devouring:
These things are youths true cordialls being known.

Rogue for thy deeds and words I Will plague thee so.
Thou shall not for our wrongs hece scot-free go.
Your mercy oh good gods' oh cruel practice!
Alas poor youth! but o that cursed vilaine!
That vilaine Parmeno, that brought him hither!

What may the matter be?


It pitties me;
Therefore I hasted out of doors, poor woman:
Because I would not see it. Oh, what example
(Say the) they do intend to make of him?

o God! What strange stirre's this? am not I lost, trow?
I Will to her. What means this flight, Pythias?

Do ask audacious fellow? whilst thou soughtst
To put a trick upon us, thou have undone,
Have vterly undone that pretty youth,
Thou broughtest us for an Eunuch.

why, what is cha^c'd?


Do know the maid was sent us is free borne?
And has a brother here of great account?

I know it not.


But she is proved so: this poor youth
Has ravished her; which when her brother heard of.
Coming in furious heat --

What did he do?


First piteously has bound him.


Ha, has Bound him?


I, although Thais beggd the contrary.


What say


And now he further threatens
To use him in such sort, as is the wont
To be performed upon adulterers.

Upon what confidence dare he venture
So heinous an attempt?

Why, is 't so heinous?


Is It not the heynousest that can be thought on?
Who ever saw any one apprehended
For an adulterer in a bawdie house?

I know not that.


But that thou may know it
I tell thee (Pythias) it is my Masters son.

What, is it I pray?


Therefore let Thais look then,
She suffer him sustain no injury.
But why do I my self not reseue him?

Parmeno consider what you go about.
Lest you not help him, and yet cast away
Your self forever. For they do imagine
That all is done is of your practicing.

What shall I do then wretch? or what contriue.
But lo, I see my old Master newly come
Out of the country: were I best acquaint him
What is befalne or not? I Will tell him, sure;
Though I do know, I shall pay soundly for it.
But I must doot, that he may help his son.

I, thou do wisely. I Will go in. Deline.
Every thing to him, as it chanced in order.

MY Country grange yields this commodity,
I find no irk somnesse in field, or city:
I can shift place, being of either weary.
But is not yond our Parmeno? it is he.
Who wait you here for before Thais door?

Who Is that's oh Master' you are welcome home.


Who wait'st thou here for?


I Am undone, my Tongue
Falters for scare.

How Is this? why shakst thou so?
Tell me, 's all well here?

Master first I crave
You would conceive the matter as it stands:
That what so ere has happend, has not come
Through any fault of mine.

Say, what it is?


Indeed you urge the question orderly:
I should have first opend the cause to you.
Phaedria bought an Eunuch to bestow
upon her here

Upon whom here?


Thais.


Bought say thou? I am certainly undone.
What cost he?

Twenty pound.


All Is lost.


Chaerea doos love a minstrell wench here.


Ha! Besides
What, loves say thou? doos he already know
What a whore means? is he got to town too?
One mischief broodes another.

Pray you sir
Do not so eye me. This he dooes not do
upon my setting on.

Sirtha, leave talk
Touching thy self. If I live (pillorie)
Ile-but unfold first the whole business to me.

Chaerea was brought to Thais for that Eunuch.


How! for an Eunuch?


Yes sir, afterward
They have taken him for an adulterer;
And bound him.

Oh, I Am undone for ever.


Pray note (good sir) these strumpets insolence.


Is there yet any further mischief left,
Or ill vnutterd.

This is all.


Why stay I
From breaking in upon 'hem?

There Is no doubt
But I incur some famous punishment:
But since I must do it of necessity,
I joy yet I shall work these queanes some mischief.
For the old man long has sought occasion
To plague'hem soundly: now at last has found one.

TRroth for this many aday there has not chanced
An accident more pleasant then this now;
To see the old man come in so mistaken:
'T was sport to me alone of all the rest,
Who knew the ground of the error. ha, ha, he.

What is it she laughes at?


I Am come forth to
With Parmeno, but where a Gods name is he?

Doos she seek me?


See where he is, I Will to him meet


What news with thee now Giglet?


Ha, ha, he.


What meanst thou? why this laughter? go thou on?


Ha, ha, ha, he. Oh-oh-I burst, I faint
With laughing at thee.

Wherefore?


do thou ask?
Upon my troth I never in my life
Knew a more errand fool, nor ever shall.
Ha, ha, ha, he -- it cannot be expressed
What pastime thou have made us yond' within:
And yet (good truth) at first I took thee for
A very wise and cunning pated fellow.

Why what is the matter?


What at the first dash
Oughtst thou to credit every thing I said?
What did thou think the brane exploit too little,
The rash youth ventred through thy setting on;
unless thou further diddst discover him
unto his father? prithe, tell me one thing;
What think thou Cherea thought, when now his father
Found him so fine dressed in an Eunuchs habit?
How is it? see thou yet, thou art ripe for hanging?

How? what say thou pestilent queen, diddst lie then?


Ha, ha, ha, he.


And keep'st a laughing still too?
Think thou it is such fine pastime (harlotrie)
To make a scorn of me?

o yes; sport a life.


I, if perchance thou carry't away, scotfree.


Indeed la?


I Will cry quittance of my credit.


Yes sure. We shall have, time yet, Parmeno:
For thee, thou art to be trussed up presently;
Who fleshest heedlesse youth in vilanie
And then betraist him to discovery.
Father and son will both make thee an example.

I am a dead man.


Look you' this y'haue got
For the Eunuch you late vsherd home to us.
Farewell.

Unlucky I am caught just like a rat,
Traced by my noise, mine own vnheedie chart

What do we now? on what hopes? or with what Purpose
Do we come hither? what intend you Traso?

Who, I to yield my self to Thais mercy,
Do all she shall inioyne.

What is it you say?


Why Hesse, then the valiant Hercuies,
Who condiscended to serve (...)?

I like the precedent Wo^ld I yet might see
Her crack your crown once with her pantefle.
What news? her door opes.

what new mischief's this?
I nere saw this man yet: what may it mean,
That he comes forth so hastily and iocond?

OH loving countriemen, lives any man
More happy then my self? troth, I think none
The Gods have shown all their full might on me,
On whom so suddenly so many chances,
So many prosperous chances meet in one.

Why is he grown so merry?


Oh my dearest,
My kindest Parmeno' first fashioner,
Contriuer, finisher, of all my fortunes;
All my contentments. Know thou Parmeno
What joy I am in? hear thou my Pamphila
Is found to be free borne?

Yes; I have heard so.


Made sure to me?


As God shall help me, I Am Glad ont.


do y' hear him what he says?


I joy beside
My brother Chedria's love is now fair settled:
We Are made one house; Thais has given up her self
Unto my fathers kindness and protection:
She Is now our own.

Then she is all your brothers.


That Is most certain.


Then (that is other cause
The sculdier is cashierd hence.

now I prithee (of joy)
Give thou my brother notice of this news,
Where ere he may be found; and speedily.

I Will seek for him at home.


Do thou now Gnato
Make any doubt, but I am lost for ever?

Sure I judge so


What should I first count on?
Whom chiefly praise? or him that counseld me
Or yet my self that venturd the performance?
Or shall I not yield fortune share of praise,
Which guided these things thus? Which in one day
Has closed up so many, so great things,
And all so timely orderd? or the easy
And pleasant disposition of my father?
Oh I beseech thee, gracious Iu^^ter.
Continue to us this our happiness

Your faith good Gods! What things above belief
Has our man told me? but where is my brother?

Here.


I am lad --


I well believe you, brother
There is none living more deserving love
Then this your Thais: she is a furtherer
To all our family

Why, how now brother,
Commendst thou her to me?

I am undone:
The lesser hope I have, the more I love.
Help Gnato at a pinch; my trust's in thee.

What would you have me do?


Win by entreaty,
By money. I may hold some place near Thais.

It Is a hard task.


Come, I know thee Gnato.
If once thou vndertak'st a thing -- work this,
And name but what reward or gift thoult have
And thou shall hau't.

Say you so?


I, and will Perform it.


If I perform it, I require your house
Do ever open rest at my command,
Be you within or not: that though unbidden
I still have room and welcome given me

Here is my hand thou shall.


Then I will settle
To the attempt.

Whom hear I here? o Thraso!


God save you.


Thou perhaps hear'st not the News?


Yes, I know all.


Why do I see you then
Here in these quarters?

Sir as resting only
Upon your love.

Know thou not, what to rest on?
I tell thee soldier, if I here hence forward
Do take thee in this street; thou art a dead man:
It will avail you little then to say
You sought some man, or were to pass this way.

Nay good sir this not fitteth.


I have said it.


I know you are not of such boistrous temper.


It shall so stand.


Pray yet first give me hearing
Of a few words; which when I shall have said
As you do like it, grant it.

Well, let us hear.


Thraso remove your self a little of.
First I most earnestly request you both
Thus far to credit me; that what herein
I do, is chiefly for my own sake meant:
But if the same may likewise further you,
Twere simpleness in you not to admit it.

What is it?


I think fit, you take unto you
This rival soldier.

How say? take him to us?


Pray but consider this; you Phaedria
Do surely love your Thais company,
And to fare well: little you have to give her,
And she of force must be supplied largely.
Now then to serve her turn, and spare your cost,
There Is none can be more fitting, or more useful
Then is this soldier: first has where withal,
And then there is none more lavish the's a fool
A prating babbling fool, a dolt, a block,
will snore you out whole days, and nights together.
And for the fear that she may hap to love him,
That Is needelesse: you may pelt him out at pleasure:

What were we best to do?


Then add this too;
(Which I account a thing of greatest moment.)
None fares more richly, none more daintily.

Its mar'le but we have need at any hand
Of this same fellow.

That Is my judgment too.


You take the right course. One thing more I beg,
I may be made one of your company:
I have been long now rolling of this stone.

We admit thee.


Yes, and freely.


Phaedria,
And haeria in requital, twixt you both
I tender him to slout, and feed upon.

We like it.


He deserves it^


Thraso, now
You may draw near at pleasure.

Gnato, say
How stands my case?

How? these men knew you not
After I told, hem your conditions,
Praised you according to your deeds and virtues;
I won my suit.

It was well done, I thank thee
I never yet could come in any place
But all men doated on me.

Said I not:
How graceful was his tongue for eloquence?

Thou left'st out nothing. Pass we this way hence.


AThens and Rome full many ages hence
Have through Menanders, Plautus, Lerence Art
(In several names but sounding to one sense)
Seen this our Eunuch, graced the slatterers part.
Those Greek and Latin plays had their desert,
Earning loud plaudits from their audience.
Our English Author (h'has no Poets name,
Nor (says he) may he dare such style to take)
Puts me upon the brunt to stand the blame:
Himself not venturing his approach to make,
Nor to your censure his raw skill to stake.
He thinks me now wrought, past all fear and shame.
But I the name and nature here cast off:
I see amongst you no proud soldier,
No self blown bladder, I may prick or scoff.
Our Nation is not guilty of the former,
Nor could I well play the flatterer:
No maile if I the name now seek to dosse
Yet though I dosse the fawn; still bend I low,
Craving your gentle pardon for us all,
And thank you for your patience hitherto
So kindly shown to us in general.
Oh, would you deigne some further grace withal
Upon our swouning writer to bestow;
He dies in fear least you mislike his pain,
Your well clapped hands call him to life again.

