SIrs, have in these things: dispatch. Sosia stay thou here. I will speak a
word or two with thee


I know your mind alredie, you would have these things well handled.


Nay, it is an other manner of matter.


What is it sir? that my science can stand you in more stead than this comes
to


There is no need of that science, for this matter which I am now about: But
faithfulness and secrecy, which I always noted to be in thee, are the
sciences I have need of now


I long to know what is your will with me.


Thou wotst how reasonable and easy a bondage thou had with me, ever since
the time I bought thee of a little one: and by cause thou did thy service
honestly, and with good will, lo, of a Bondslaue I made thee my free man, so
as I rewarded thee with the very best thing I had


I remember it well.


I repent me not of that I did.


Master, I am glad if I have done, or do, any service that may please you, and
I thank you with all my heart that you take it in good worth: But yet this
speech of yours troubles me: for this manner of ripping up things past, is as
it were an vpbrayding to one unmindful of a good turn done him: but speak
at a word what is your will with me


So will I do, only this I tell thee first and foremost: This marriage which
thou weenest to be certain, is but a fained marriage


For what cause do you pretend it than?


Thou shall hear all the matter from the beginning, so shall thou understand
both my sons life, and my purpose, and also what I would have thee do in this
behalf. When my son grew to man's estate, it lay in his power to live more
at randon, for till than, how could a man know his nature, or discern his
disposition, while as tender years, fearefullnesse, and his Master, kept him
under


It is true Sir.


That which all young men for the most parts do applying their minds to some
kind of study or other, as either to horses, and horsmanship: or to keep
hounds for hunting, or to study Philosophy: he gave himself specially, to
none of these things more than other, and yet was reasonably well seen in
them all: I was glad of it


And good cause why, for I hold it a very commodious matter in a man's life,
Not to go too far in any thing


In this sort was the manner of his life, even gently to bear, and take all
in good worth, at all men's hands that he kept company with: betaking himself
to do as they did, and to follow their studies and exercises: Not thwarting
any man, nor at any time putting forth himself before his companions, so as a
man might full easily purchase praise, and not be envied, and also furnish
himself with friends


He took him to a wise course of living, for now a days, Flatry gaynes
Friends, and Truth gets Foes


In the mean time, a certain woman of excellent beauty, and in the flower of
age, came from Andros, (now three years since) to dwell here, in our
neighborhod, being thereto driven thorough very poverty, and the small
reckning that was made of her among her own kindred


Alas I fear me, that this woman of Andros, might be cause of some evil.


At the first, she lived chastely, sparingly, and hardly, earning her living by
wool and web. But afterward resorted, now one lover, and then an other,
promising reward unto her, and as all are naturally given full soon to leave
of labor and follow lust, even so this woman accepted the offers, and then she
began the gain

They which then loved her (as it fell out) carried my son thither, in
company with them. I straight way imagined with my self: without doubt he is
caught for a bird: he has his errand: I watched their Pages betimes in the
morning, as they were wont to come thence, or go thither: I oftimes asked, ho
Sir boy, tell me if thou be a good fellow, who yesterday had his pleasure of
Chrysis, (for so was the name of her of Andros.


I perceive you.


They would say, either Phedria, or Clinia, or Niceratus: for these three than
loved her all at once. But what did Pamphilus, hah? (What, said they) Mary he
supt and paid his share. I was well apaid of this. In like sort, I made
inquiry at an other time, and could not find, that Pamphilus was any way
touched with dishonesty. Therefore I thought I had sufficient trial of him, and
that he was a notable Pattern of Chastity: for he that has to do with men of
such conditions, and yet is not moved in mind that way, one would think he
might full well have the rule and ^uyding of his own life. Now over and besides
that this lyked my self well, lo all other men also, even with one censent,
gave all the commendations that might be, and praised my happy state, in that I
(...) a son, endued with so good wit and government. What need I make many
words? Chremes stird up by this good report, came of him self unto me, to
the end to match his only daughter in marryage to my son, and that with a
^ry large dowry: I was well pleased withal: promysd him my son: and this
very day was appointed for the marryage


Why than what lets, that it is not made accordingly?


That shall thou hear: shortly after within few days that these things were
a doing, this Chrysis our neighbor dyed


O happy chance, you have now made me glad, for still I doubted the woorst of
that Chrysis


Than specially my son used thither, ever and anon in company with those which
loved Chrysis: he was as busy as the best, in setting forth the buryal: being
all this while very sad: and now and than, would even shead tears with them
for company: well, this also lyked me welinough: for thus thought I: he that
upon small acquaintance and familiarity, takes this woman's death so grievously
at the heart? what if he had loved her himself? or how would he take on for me
his father? so as I took all this to have proceeded of a good nature, and
gentle heart. To be brefe, I my self likewise for his sake go forth to the
burial, mistrusting no ill in the world


O what followed?


Thou shall know by and by. The Coars is brought forth: we pass along with
it: Anon I chuance to cast mine eye (among the women there) upon an od young
damsel, of such favor


What, so good?


Yea Sosia, of such modest and sober countenance and so passing beautiful to
look too, as there could not possibly be more in a woman: who than to my
seeming, made greater sorrow than any of the rest: And for that she excelled
all the other women, bearing a face worthy an honest woman and well borne, I
get me to the waiting maids and ask what she might be: They tell me that
she is sister unto Chrys^ That went by and by, to the very heart of me. Out
alas, this is it I wist not of: hence grew those tears of his: here is she
whom he pitied so


O how greatly I fear whereto your tale tends.


Well, on goes the coars still: we follow after: we are come to the place of
burial: it is put into the fire: They weep. In the mean space, this sister
whom I told you of, rusht headlong to the flame with no small ieopardy: whereat
my son Pamphilus being sore frighted, did than lo, bewray his love which he
had cunningly cloked and kept secret all this while: he runs unto her, and
takes her about the middle: My sweet heart Glycerie (quoth he) what do you?
why go you about to cast away your self? with that, she cast her self
weeping, and leaning upon him so familiarly, as a man might easily perceive
their old accustomed love


What, say you so?


I return thence angry and disquieted in mind, and yet had I not cause
sufficient to chide him: for he might have said: father what have I done? What
punishment have I deserved? or wherein have I offended? The maid which wilfully
would have thrown her self into the fire, I stayed and saved her life: This
were an honest excuse


It is well considered of you: for if you would chide him which helped to save
ones life, what would you do to him that wrought ones harm or mischief


The next day following, Chremes came to me exclaming what a shameful Act it
was, that Pamphilus (as he had found out for certenty) used this strange
noughtie pack even as his wife: I straight way denied that there was any such
matter, he earnestly affirms that it was so: well, in the end I parted from
him, as one then utterly refusing to match his Daughter to my son


Did you not then rebuke your Son for it?


No, nor this was not cause great enough to rebuke him.


How so I pray you?


He inought have answered thus: Father you your self have set a time when
these things shall cease: ywis it is not long hence that I must live after an
others pleasure: suffer me than, now in the mean while to live as I list my
self


What occasion then is left to rebuke him?


Mary, if for cause of this love he shall refuse to take a wife, Than lo, for
that offense will I first correct him to begin with all. And now my endeavor is
this, that by means of this fained marriage, I may have unfeigned cause to
rebuke him, if he do not agree to it: And with all that the naughty knave
Dauus, if he have any subtle device, may spend it now, while his craft can do
no harm: whom I verily believe will labor with tooth and nayl, to the
uttermost that in him lies, and so much the rather that he may work me a
displeasure, than for any care he has to follow my sons fancy


Why so?


Ask you why so? An ill mind, an ill meaning: whom if I shall perciue, But
what need I use many words, and if so be it, all do fall out as I would, that
there be no let or delay in my son Pamphilus: Than rests that I entreat
Chremes for his Daughter, and that I hope to bring to pass well enough. Now is
it thy part to set on a good face in faining this same marriage: to make Dauus
thoroughly afraid, and to be a watch over my son, espying what he does, and
whereof Dauus and he do consult together


You have said enough. I will see to it: we may now go in.


Go thou first, I will come anon.


THere is no doubt of this, but that my Son will refuse to have a wife: I
noted such fear er while in Dauus, as soon as he hard that there was a
marriage toward: but lo where he comes forth himself


I meruailed if this matter should pass away so, and still I feared whereto my
Masters long gentleness would grow at length: who after he heard that she whom
he thought of, should not be given in marriage to his son, did,
(notwithstanding) never speak word to an^ of us, nor yet was any thing
moved at it





His purpose was to have us brought under hand into fools paradise, to the
end that now hoping the best, and having cast of all fear, we should
suddeinly be taken napping, in such sort, as we might not have time to
bethink us how to prevent the marryage. A subtle fox I warrant him


What prates this Gallowelapper?


Good Lord my master is here, and I saw him not till now.


Dauus?


Now, what is the matter?


Come your way hither to me.


What a Devil will he have?


What is that thou talkest of?


Whereof should I talk?


Ask thou whereof? Sir, the report is that my son is in love.


Yea no doubt the world cares much for that.


Nay, but do thou mind what I speak to thee or not?


Yes truly I mind it well enough.


Well, for me now to go search and fifth out that matter, were but the part of a
hard father: for what he did heretofore, pertaynes nothing at all to me: so
long as he took time convenient for it, I suffered him to fulfill his desire.
Now it is high time for him to lead an other life, and change his manners.
And therefore I require, or if it be reason I desire thee Dauos, that now at
length he do return into the right way


What mean you by this?


All men that be in love, can ill away to have wives appointed them by others.


So they say.


Then if one take a knave for his scholmaister in that behalf, The love sick
mind of the scholar is by him commonly applied to all naughtines


Truly I understand you not.


No, do thou not?


No, I am plain Dauus, and not Oedipus [the reader of Riddels.]


Will thou then that I speak the rest of my mind plainly.


Yea a Gods name.


If I shall perceive that thou go about to work any deceyte this day, to the
end to break of this marriage, or that thou will therein show how sly and
crafty a companion thou art: I will kudgill thee well and thriftely, and then
cast thee into the grinding house to grind till thou die: with this covenant
and condition, that if I take thee out thence, then I my self to grind in thy
place. What, have thou understood me now? or do thou not yet understand
this neither


Yes full well, you went now very plainly to the matter, and nothing about the
bush


I could rather bear any abuse at thy hands, than be deluded in this matter.


Yet good words I pray you sir.


What, do thou laugh me to scorn? I see I am not a whit deceived in thee:
But I tell thee this, that thou be not over rash, and that thou may not
hereafter say but thou had a fair warning


IN good earnest Dauus it is no time now to be flow and fluggish, so far as I
perceived of late by the old man's speech touching the marriage: which if it be
not cunningly provided for and prevented, will cast either me or my master
clean under foot: And yet I wot not in the world what to do: whether I shall
help Pamphilus, or else listen after the old man. If I leave him helples, I
fear me yt will cost him his life: Contrariwise, if I aid and further him,
than stand I in fear of the old man's threatening, whom yt is a hard matter to
beguyle: for first and foremost, he knows certeynlie of this same love, and
being at deadly fewd with me, he watches least I go about some guile to hinder
the marriage: if he shall see any such matter by me, I am utterly undone: or
if the Toy take him in the head, he will find some cause or other, and so be
it right or wrong, he will tumble me headlong into the grinding house: Now over
and besides these mischeeues, this comes also in the very ^icke: This same
woman an of Andros whether she be wife to Pamphilus, or but his love, I know
not, but great with child she is by him: And it is a world to hear their
presumption: They fare as they were lunaticke, and not love sick, for be it
boy or gyrle that she shall be delivered of, they are determined to bring it
Glycerie is a free borne woman of Athens: There was a good while since (say
they) a certain old Merchant which suffered shipwreck at the I Will of Andros,
who afterward died there: and that she being then a small succourles child
cast on the shore, should (forsooth) be fostred by Chrysis father: A trim
fable. In good faith me thinks it soundes nothing like troth, and yet this
feigned devise pleases them well. But lo where Mysis comes forth from her. Now
will I go get me hence to the market place to meet with Pamphilus, least his
father come upon him unawares with this marriage matter


ARchillis, I heard you a pretty while since, bid that Lesbia should be brought
hither: In very truth she is a drunken harebraynd woman, and far unfit to take
charge of a woman in travail of her first child: yet nevertheless I will
bring her: See how ernest the old Trot is, to have her here, and all because
she is a drinking Gossip of hers. God grant my Mistres safe and speedy
deliverance, and that any other miscarry under the hands of the Tipsie
Midwiefe, rather than she: But what is the matter that I see Pamphilus so much
out of quiet, I fear me all is not well: I will stay, and know whither this
his trooble of mind, bring not some heavy news


IS this a point of good nature, or a kindly deed? Is this the part of a
Father





O the faith of God and man, what can be greater spite than this? he had
purposed with himself to marry me to a wife to day: ought not I have known so
much before hand? had it not bin meet to have made me privy to it long ere
this





What means Chremes, who having once denied to give me his daughter to wife,
does he now change his mind in that, because he sees me still one manner of
man? Does he deal so ouerthwartly, to thend to part me from Glycerie,
forlorn man that I am? which, if it come to pass, I am clean cast away.
Alas, alas, is there any man living so rest of all grace and good fortune as my
self? O Lord God, shall I by no means be able to avoid the Aliance of
Chremes? How many ways am I despised and set at naught? All things were done
and past, and so, I that was refused am sought for again, and wherefore,
without it be as I suspect, they cloak some secret fault in her, and because
she cannot be shifted to any other, they would thrust her on me





But what should I now say of my father? is it fit he go so carelessly to woork
about so great a matter? who passing by me crewhile at the market place, spoke
to me in this sort: Pamphilus; thou must be married to day: Get the home and
make thee ready. It seemed to me he said, Get thee away quickly and hang thy
self. I was utterly amazed: Think ye that I could bring forth one word, or
make any excuse for my self, were it wrong, falls, or never so foolish? I
became quite dumb. But had I wist so much before, if one should now ask me,
what would I then have don, surely somewhat I would have don, rather than do as
I did. But now whereto shall I first betake me? I am cumbred with so many
cares, which diversely hale my mind to and fro, what with love and pity
toward this woman, The grief I conceive of this marriage, and the shame I
incur with my father, who hitherto so gently suffered me to do what I would,
(and shall I now gainesay him?) That woe is me, I wot not what to do





Who talks here? O Mysis, welcome.


God save you master Pamphilus.


How does thy mistres?


Do you not know? she is in labor with child: And for this the silly woman
takes care and thought, because heretofore your marriage was appointed to be
made as this day: Moreover she is in great fear least you will forsake her


O Lord, should I find in my heart to do so? Alas poor soul, should I suffer
her to be deceived thorough me, which committed her whole trust unto me, and
even put her life in my hands? Shall I deal so by her (whom I have entirely
loved as my wife) that through need and necessity her chaste behavior and well
ordered life should be corrupted and changed? No, I will never do it


I would not fear at all, if it lay only in you, but I fear how you will be
able to hide the brunt of your father


What, do thou think me so faint hearted, or moreover, so unkind, or
discourteous, or so cruel, as that neither our daily familiarity, nor love, nor
yet very shame, can move me nor put me in mind to keep promise with her


This one thing I wot well: she has deserved that you should be mindful of
her


That I should be mindful of her? O Mysis Mysis, those words of Chrysis
remain yet printed in my mind, which she spoke unto me, as touching
Glycerie: Being near the point of Death, she calls me to her: I came, and
after you were gone aside and no body left but we two: thus she began: Friend
Pamphilus, you see of what beauty and years this same maiden is: neither are
you to be told, what inconvenience these two things are unto her, both for
saving her honesty and her stock: And therefore I pray you by this right hand
of yours, and your honesty: I beseech you also on your faith and troth, and in
respect of the solitary state of this maiden, that you will neither part her
from you, nor forsake her: even as I have loved you as mine own brother, and
as she always esteemed you alone above all men living, and was in all things
ready at your commandment. I bequeath you to her, as husband, friend, tutor,
and father. These our goods I commit unto you, and charge you with them of
trust. Hereupon she delivered Glycerie unto me in way of marriage, and by and
by gave up the Ghost: I received Glycerie of her, and having once received her,
I will keep her still


Truly I hope no less.


But why art thou come from her?


I go for the midwife.


Hye thee apace: and hearst thou me? beware thou speak not one word of the
marriage, least that also increase her grief


O, I understand you.


BYrria, what say thou? shall she be married this day to Pamphilus?


Yea, even so.


How know thou?


I heard it of Dauus but a little while since, at the market place.


Woe is me unhappy man, for as my mind was held between hope and fear ever
till now: so now that all hope is past, even worn and wearied with care, it is
utterly dismayed


I pray you Sir for Gods sake, since you cannot have what you would, that you
will have what you may


There is nothing that I will have but Philumena.


Alas how much better were it for you, to seek to wear this love out of your
mind, than to utter forth such speeches, whereby your desire is kindled more
and more in vain


We can all lightly when we are in health, give good counsel to such as are
sick: But if thou were in my case, thou would sing me a new song


Well, go too then, do as you list.


But to where I see Pamphilus, I am determined to prove all manner of ways
before I dye


What will he now do?


This same man will I entreat, him will I earnestly beseech, to him will I
discover my love: I believe I shall get him to put of the marriage, at least,
for a few days longer: and in the mean space I hope somewhat may be done


That somewhat, will prove just nothing.


But how think thou Byrria, were I best go to him or not?


Yes, what else? though you obtain nothing at his hands, that yet he may
think you ready to make him cuckold, if he do marry her


Go get thee hence knave, with a mischief to thee for thy peevish suspicion.


I see Carinus: God speed sir.


O Pamphilus, God save you: I come to you requesting at your hands, hope,
health, help, and counsel


In good faith I am neither a meet man to give counsel, nor yet have
wherewith to help an other: but what is your matter


Do you marry to day?


So the talk goes.


Pamphilus if you do so, then shall you never see me alive after this day.


Why, how so?


Alas I fear to utter it: I pray thee Byrria do thou tell it him.


I will.


What is it?


He is in love with your Bride.


Now in good faith he is not of my mind: but come near and tell me Carinus,
has there been any further matter between you and her


O, Alas Pamphilus, no.


Mary sir I would there had.


Now I heartily beseech you, even for the love and friendship betwixt you and
me: first and foremost, that you do not marry her at all


Truly I will do my best endeavor.


But if you may not otherwise choose, or that this marriage be according to
your own heart


According to my heart?


Yet at least wise, prolong it for a day or two, while I get me away
somewhither, that I may not behold it


Nay but listen to me now Carinus, I hold it in no wise the part of an honest
man, to pike a thank where none is due unto him: God wot I am more desirous to
be rid of this marriage, than you are to obtain it


You have revived my spirits.


Now if either your self, or Byrria here, can do ought in the matter, be
doing, feign, find out and procure the means that you may have her: I for my
part will so handle the matter, as she may not be married to me


I have my desire.


Oh, in very good time do I see Dauus, whose advise I use altogether.





Yes truly, and that with a very good will.


O Good God, what good news do I bring with me, But where shall I now find
Pamphilus, that I may release him from that fear he is in, and fill his heart
with joy





It is nothing to any purpos, he has not yet understood of this mischief.


Whom I verily believe, if he have yet hard of the marriage prepared for him.





That he is beside himself, seeking for me all the Town over. But where shall
I seek for him, or whither shall I now first go





Well, I go my ways.


Dauus, come hither, stay.


Who calls me? O my Master Pamphilus, you are the man I look for. Well met
Carinus: I find you both in good time, even you two I would speaks with all


Dauus, I am a forlorn man.


But yet listen to me a little.


I am cast away.


I wot what you fear.


Truly and my liefe is in hazard in very deed.


I wot also what you fear.


I must be married.


And that I know too.


Yea but too day.


You dull me with too many words, and yet I know the matter already. You fear
least you must marry Philumena: And you (Carinus) take care how you may marry
her


Thou have hit the nail on the head.


That same is it.


And in that, is there no danger at all: I warrant you.


I pray thee for Gods sake, ryd me presently out of this fear, poor wretch
that I am


Lo, I put you out of fear, Chremes will not at this time give you his
daughter to wife


How know thou so much?


I know it full well: your father met me erewhile and told me that he would
marry you this day to a wiefe, besides many things else, which now is no time
to rehers. By and by I hasted me and ran every foot to the market place, to
tell you of this: and when I could not find you there, I got me up, on a high
standing, and looked round about me, you were no where to be seen. By chance
I spied Byrria this man's servant, I ask him for you, he said he saw you not.
This troubled me: Then I bethink me what to do: and as I was returning thence,
I fell to mistrust whether there were any marriage toward or no, I remembered
there was very small provision of meat: he himself was very sad: The
marriage was to be made on the soddeyn, This did not hang well together


What of all this?


I presently got me to Chremes house, and being come thither, there was no body
sturring about the door, I was glad of that


You say well.


Tell on.


I stay there a while, and could see no body either going in, or coming out, I
went my ways in, and looked narrowly, there was never an elderly woman, no
tryming up of the house, no stur or preparacion


I grant you, it is great likelihood.


Nay but do these things seem to agree with a marriage matter?


No Dauus, as I guess.


Guess say you? you take your mark amiss: The matter is out of al doubt:
Moreover, as I was coming thence, I met with Chremes boy, carrying potherbs
and a halpwoorth of small fish for the old man's supper


Dauus, I am ryd out of danger this day by thy means.


Truly but you are never the nearer.


How can that be? for surely Chremes will not give his daughter in marriage to
him


O wise woodcok, as though it must needs follow, if he give not his Daughter to
him, that therefore you shall marry her: unless you see better unto it, and
unless you make suit to the old man's friends, you do but throw your cap in
the wind


You advise me well, I will go thither, although in good faith, this hope has
deceived me already more than once or twice. Farewell


WHat means my father then? why does he dissemble with us?


Mary I shall tell you, if so be it he be now in a chafe because Chremes will not
marry his daughter unto you: Then lo, may he think with himself that he does
you wrong: But yet he will think it no wrong at all, before such time as he
shall perceive how your mind is settled toward marriage. But if you shall
refuse to marry, then will he lay all the fault upon you, and then will be old
stir and hurleburly


What would thou have me to do? that I should yield to marry?


O master consider, he is your father, it is hard to withstand him: Moreover
this Glycerie is a love woman, he will quickly pick a quarrel against her, and
so turn her packing out of town


May he turn her away?


Yes, out of hand.


Then I pray thee Dauus what shall I do?


Say to your father that you will marry.


Alas.


Why, what is the matter?


Should I say so?


Why not?


I will never do it.


Never deny it.


Never do thou persuade me to it.


Do but consider what will follow of this.


This will follow, that I shall be shut from Glycerie, and tied up to this
woman


Not so: Mary I wene your father will say thus much to you: I will have you to
marry a wife to day. You shall say, I will: And then I pray you what cause
shall he have to chide you? By this means you shall make all his devises which
now are of force, to be then altogether frivolous: and that without any danger
to your self: for this is without all question, that Chremes will not marry
his daughter unto you: And for more surety, you shall not cease to use
Glyceries company still as you have done, least happily he should alter his
mind. Tell your father that you are willing to marry, so as when he would be
angry with you, he may have no cause: for as for that vain hope of yours
(imagining thus with your self: Tush, it is no danger for me to withstand my
father, No man will marry his daughter unto a man of my manners) I shall
easily put you out of that hope: he will find out a poor and mean marriage
for you, rather than he will suffer you to be spilt by harlots. But if he shall
perceive that you are well content with this marriage, you shall make him
reckles of the matter, he will seek an other wife for you at leisure, and in
the mean space some good fortune will fall


Do thou think so?


Nay surely there is no doubt of that.


Yea, but take heed whereto thou perswadest me.


What, are you not yet resolved?


Well, I will say so to my father: but we must take heed, that he understand
not of the child I have by Glycerie, for I have promised to bring it up


O notable hold deed.


She earnestly besought me to give her my faith and troth on this, that so
she might be sure I would not forsake her


Well, it shall be cared for. But your father is here hard by, beware that he
do not find you sad


I Come again to see what they are a doing or consulting.





I will do as well as I may.


Master, credit me in this: I say unto you that your father will not give
you one evil word to day, if you do but say that you will marry


MY master gave me commandment, that setting all business aside, I should
watch Pamphilus this day, to thend I might learn what he did as touching the
marriage: and that is the matter I am now come after him hither: but lo where
he is with Dauus, here hard at hand. I will do that, that I come for








Pamphilus.





Oh father.


Well handled of you.


I will have thee to be married to day, as I told thee before.





Neither in this thing, nor in any thing else, shall you find any let or delay,
in me





He has never a word more to say.


What did he answer?


Thou do as becomes thee, in that I obtain with thy good will, ye thing
which I require at thy hands


did not I say true?


As far as I here, my master is like to leap beside his wife.


Now go thy ways in, that there be no tarrying for thee when need is.


I go.


Is there no trust to be put in any man, for any thing in the world? Every man
wishes more good to himself than to an other. I my self have seen that same
maiden, and I remember she was of a good lovely favor: Therefore I blame not
Pamphilus so much though he had leauer, lie colling of her himself a nights,
than that my Master should: well, I will go show all to my Master, that for
these ill news he may give me ill language





What says Dauus?


Truly even as much now as before.


What, is it nothing thou say?


Nothing at all.


But I had hoped to hear somewhat.





Can thou tell me truth?


Why, nothing readier.


Is my son any thing grieved at this marriage, in respect of the love and
familiarity betwixt him and this strange harlatry


No certainly, or if he be, his grief is but for two or three days (perceive
you me?) and than it is don: for he will take a right course with himself,
as touching that matter


I commend him for it.


While he might, and while it stood with his youthful years, he gave himself
to love: nor then neither, but secretly: for he took heed that it should not
at any time bring him to ill name, even as became a manly man to do. Now it is
meet for him to have a wife, he has settled his mind on marriage


Me thought that he was somewhat sad.


Not a whit for this matter, but there is some cause why he is not well pleased
with you


What is that?


A trifling matter.


What is it, I say?


Nothing in effect.


But yet tell me what it is?


He says that there is too much niggardnes used in this matter.


What, by me?


Yea by you. He scarcely (quoth he) bestowed forty pence in cates, and does
he seem to marry his son to a wife: what man of calling (of my friends and
equalles) shall I bid to my wedding feast, as the case now stands? And you
likewise, here be it spoken, are too much sparing indeed, which I do not
commend in you


Sir hold you your peace.


I have moved his patience.


I will see those things cared for well enough: but what is the meaning of
this? what is it that this deceitful knave goes about? surely if any thing
happen otherwise than well, even that same varlet is the chief woorker of it


Lesbia, it is very true as you say: one shall hardly find a man that is
faithful and true of his word to a woman


This maid belongs to her of Andros, how say thou?


She does so.


And yet this young man Pamphilus.





Was as good as his word.


What?





For were it man child or woman child that my mistres were delivered of, he
took order for the nursing of it


O the king of heaven, what is this I hear? Why, all is past help, at least
if it be true that this maid tells





Yea of an excellent good nature: But do you follow me in presently, that she
need not to stay for you


I come after you.





What means this? does he dote so much on this strange harlat indeed? Now I
perceive how this gear cottens: I scarce found it out now at last, foolish man
that I am





That knave seeks to abuse me with this falsehood first and foremost. They feign
that this queen is brought a bed, to thend that so they may drive Chremes from
giving his daughter


Juno Lucina, help and save me I beseech thee.


Whup hoyda: what in all the have? see a foolish devise: as soon as she heard
me at the door, she straight falls in labor: Dauus, this was not half
cunningly contrived of thee, each thing in his due time


What, by me?


Why make you it so strange, have you forgot your scholar?


I wot not what you say.


If this knave had set his craft a broche against me unawares, and in a
marriage meant in good earnest: what prancks would he than have played me,
trow you? But now, be it upon his peril: as for me I am safe


HItherto Archillis I see all good signs of health in her, that are usual and
ought to be in a woman in her case: Now first and foremost, cause you those
things to be washed, and then give her that drink, and the same quantity that I
apappointed for her. I will come back again hither by and by. Before god
there is a jolly bouncing boy borne unto Pamphilus: Now I pray God send him
long to live, because he has so honest a man to his father, who had care and
conscience not to deal amiss with this kind hearted young woman


And who that knew thee, would not judge this also to be a craft of thy budget.


And what is that, I pray you?


Dauus, am I so little set by of thee? Or I pray thee, do I seem so fit a
man, for thee to seek to beguile, with such manifest fraud and falsehood? At
least wise thou do thy diligence, so as I may well seem to be put in fear
by thee: Surely if I had known it before





Why, did I not give thee straight charge to the contrary? did I not threaten
thee with punishment, that thou should not do it? did it fear thee a whit?
what has it booted? Shall I now give thee credit in this: that she there, is
brought a bed of child by Pamphilus





Do thou not answer me?


What should you give me credit? as though it was not told you before, that
these things would come so to pass


Did any body tell me so?


Why than, did you of your self, find that this is a fained matter?


He laughes me to scorn.


No doubt it was told you before, for how else should it come upon you to
suspect it


How? marry because I knew thee.


As who should say, it was done by my devise.


Yea I am well assured of that.


Well sir, you do not yet thoroughly know what manner of man I am.


Do not I know thee knave?


But when I begin to tell you any thing, you straight way think that I go
about to beguyle you


That is a lie.


So as in good faith, now a days, I dare not scarce open my lips to you.


This one thing I am sure of, that here is no woman delivered of child.


Have you understood so? But nevertheless ere it be long, the child shall be
brought here and laid before the door: Master, I tell you of it now before
hand, that you may certainly know what will follow: least hereafter you should
say, that this was don by the counsel or craft of Dauus: And I would in any
wise, that this evil opinion which you have of me, were clean out of your
mind


How came thou to know this?


I heard it, and I believe it be true.


There be many things mo than one, which cause me to conjecture as I do: Even
now, is the first time that this queen declared her self to be with child by
Pamphilus, which is but a false devise. Moreover, now that she sees preparation
at home for the wedding, the maid forsooth, in all have is sent for the midwife
to come to her, and withal to bring also a child with her


Well, without that it come so to pass that you do see the child with your
own eyes, nothing will hinder the course of this marriage


What say thou? when thou once vnderstoodest that they purposed such a
matter, why did thou not than presently tell it unto Pamphilus


Why than, who else has withdrawn him from these harlots but my self? for
certeynly we all know how exceedingly he loved this woman. Now he is desirous
to have a wife, and as for that matter, let me alone withal: yet
nevertheless go you on forward still with this marriage as you do: and I hope
God will prosper it


Very well, go thy ways in, stay there till I come: and provide what is
needful. Chremes: I will entreat him for his daughter to my son in
marryage, and if I do obtain her, why should I make any more daying for the
matter, but marry them out of the way? for as touching my sons promise, I
have no doubt at all, if he shall refuse to perform it, but I may full
rightly compel him to it. But lo yonder where Chremes himself comes toward
me, even in as good time as may be


GOD save you neighbor Chremes.


O sir, you are the only man I sought.


And I you.


You com as well as I could wish: There have some bin with me, which told me
they heard you say that my daughter should this day be married to your son:
Now the matter I come for, is to see, whether you, or they, do dote


Hear me a word, or two, and you shall soon know both what I desire of you,
and also what you require of me


I hear you, go too, speak your mind.


Chremes I beseech you for Gods sake, and for our frendships sake begun betwixt
us from our childehood, and grown together with our years: I beseech you as
you love your only daughter, and as you tender my son, whom it lies in you
cheefely to save or to spill, yt you will help me now in this matter, and like
as the marriage should have bin, that so now, it may be made up betwixt them


Tush, never pray me so much, as though you could not obtain this at my hands
but by much praying: Do you think me now an other manner of man, than I was
then, when I promised my daughter unto you? If it be a matter profitable for
both parts, that this marriage be made, then cause her furthwith to be sent
for. But if there grow of this, more harm than good, as well to the one as to
the other: Then my desire is, that you will consider of the matter
indifferently for both parts, even no otherwise than if she were your daughter,
and that I were father unto Pamphilus


Yea Chremes, even so is my meaning, and therefore do I request that it may be
effected. Neither would I request it at your hands, if the matter if self did
not give me good occasion


What may that be?


Mary sir, my son and Glycerie are fallen out.


I hear you.


Nay, but so far fallen out, as I hope they may be quite set a sunder.


Tush, it is but a Tale.


Nay, without dowt it is as I say.


Yea forsooth, thus, as I shall tell you, The falling out of Lovers, is a
Renewing of Love


Alas, I pray you then, let us now prevent that, while time is, and while his
hot love is alaid with bitter words: Let us couple him to a wife, before that
this naughty parks shrewd crafts, and fained tears, do woork again his
louesick mind, unto pity and compassion: I hope (Chremes) that being once
reclaimed, by means of good company and honest wedlock, he will afterward, with
cas, wind himself out of these mischeefs


It seems so to you, but I think it neither possible for him to continue with
this wife, nor yet for me to be able to endure it


How can you know that, until you have made trial of it?


Yea mary, but it is a shrewd matter to make that Trial upon my daughter.


Well yet, the very worst and uttermost of all, can be but a divorce or
separation, if any such matter should happen, as God forbid it should: But
contrariwise, if by this means he do amend and become a new man, see than how
many commodities ensue: First and foremost, you shall restore to your friend his
son: next, you shall find a sure son in law to your self, and lastly, a
stayed husband to your daughter


What? say you so? If you be persuaded that this is expedient, I for my part,
will not have you hindered of any good turn that I may afford you


Chremes, not without good cause have I always set most store by you of any
man


But what said you erewhile?


What?


How came you to know, that they be at jar between themselves?


Even Dauus himself, the chief of their privy Council, did tell it me. And
he likewise persuades me to hasten this marriage, as much as I may: Think you
he would have done this, unless he were sure that my son desires the same?
You shall hear him your self, by and by. Holo sirs, call me out Dauus hither.
But see yonder where he comes forth of him self


I was coming to you.


well, what is the matter?


Why is not the bryde sent for? it waxes now very late.





Alas sir, should I have don such a deed?


I was of that belief, and therefore fearing such a matter, I kept secret from
my son and thee, that which now I will tell thee


What is it?


Thou shall know, for now in a manner, I begin to have some trust in thee.


At last then, you know what manner of man I am.


This marriage, was not meant to have bin made indeed.


What, was it not?


No, but I feigned it of purpose, that I might thoroughlie try you.


What, is it true sir?


It is even so as I tell thee.


See, I could never perceive so much. O notable policy.


Nay but listen to me, as soon as I bade thee go hence in, this man met me in
excellent good time





I show him all that thou toldst me erewhile.





I entreat him for his daughter, and with much a do I obtain her.


I am utterly undone.


Hah, what say thou?


I say it is excellently well don.


Now is there no let or delay on this man's behalf.


I will straight go hence to bid every thing be made ready, and so bring word
hither again


Now Dauus I pray thee, since thou alone have brought this marriage for me to
pass


Yea truly, I, and none else.)


That thou will yet moreover labor my sons amendment.


In deed I will do what I can.


Thou may now well do it, especially while he is netteled at the heart.


Well, set your mind at rest.


Go to then, But where is he now?


It is marvel if he be not at home.





I am a forlorn creature, what shall keep me but that I must go hence
straight into the grinding house to prison? No prayer or entreaty will serve, I
have now brought all out of frame: I have deceived my master: I have forced a
marriage on my Masters son: I was the cause yt the marriage shall be made to
day, even quite unhoped for of ye old man, and clean contrary to the mind of
Pamphilus. See these goodly crafts of mine: had I not busied my self, there
had happened no harm at all:


WHere is that same mischeeuous varlet, which has clean undone me?


Now Lord have mercy upon me.


And yet I confess, this that has happened, is even good enough for me, when I
would be so sottish, and so very a dolt, as to commit my whole estate and
welfare unto a prating villain. Therefore I reap a just reward for my folly.
But he shall never escape scotfree with it





But what may I now say to my father? shall I now refuse marriage, and yet
promised erewhile that I would marry? with what face dare I do that? I wot not
what to do with my self





Oh.


Now he sees me.


Come hither you honest man: how say you sir, see you not how I (poor soul)
am bestad by means of your devises


But I will remedy it by and by.


Will thou remedy it?


Yes certainly master Pamphilus.


Yes, even as thou did of late.


Nay rather better, I hope.


O, should I credit thee vile hangman? can thou recover a matter full of
trouble, and past all hope of help? Out alas, what a sure stay had I of thee,
who this day, out of my greatest quietness, have forced me into a marriage
spite of my teeth? did I not tell thee it would come thus to pass


You did so.


What then art thou worthy of?


Hanging. But yet suffer me a little to come to my self, I will straight way
seek out some help


Alas that I have not leisure to punish thee as I would: it is now time for me
to see to my self, and not to be avenged of thee


IS this a thing credible, or worthy to be spoken of, that there should be
so much perverseness in any man, as to delight in evil, and to seek his own
commodity, even by the discommodity of an other? Is this kind of people to be
trusted? Nay certainly, those are the very worst kind of people, who are
somewhat shamefast in denying a Request, but afterward, when time requires
performance of their promises, Then of necessity, they bewray themselves and
faulter, and yet the matter it self drives them then to a flat denial: Then
is their speech void of all shame and honesty, as thus: who are you sir? What
friend of mine are you? why should you desire my sweet heart? O sir, hear you
me, I love you well, but my self better. Nevertheless, if you ask where is
truth and trustines of promis, they are never a whit ashamed. Now they are not
a frayd to deny, when as they ought to perform: And yet are they then afraid,
when they should not. But what shall I do? Is it best that I go to him, to
taunt and take him up for this injury? I shall give him shrewd words his
fill: But one may say to me, thou shall be never the near: yes very much:
without doubt I shall anger every vain in his heart, and withal shall ease
mine own mind


Carinus, I have unawares (without God help us) even clean cast away both you
and my self


Yea, unawares: is it so indeed? Now at last you have got an excuse: Tush,
thou have broken thy faith and promis


Why, what excuse now at last?


What, woldst thou yet again deceive me now, with those subtle speeches of
thine


Why, what is the matter with you now?


Mary after I had told you that I was in love with Philumena, forsooth it
pleased you to like her well for your self: Woe is me woeful wretch, who
esteemed the honesty of thy mind by mine own


You mistake the matter.


Why, and do thou not think this yet a joy perfect enough for thee, unless
thou may make a tame fool of me that am in love, and feed me with vain
hope? well, take her to thee


Should I take her? Alack, full little do you know, in how great troobles I am
wrapped, unhappy man that I am: and what care and anguish, this my Tormentor
has put me to, with his devises


Why, is that such a marueill? he takes ensample by you.


Well, you would not say this, if you knew either me, or my love.


I know you were at words with your father of late, and that is the matter he
is now displeased with you, but yet he could not co^pel you to marry her to day


Yea and by how much the more you are ignorant of my heaviness: This same
marriage was not meant or intended for me, neither did any man motion, now at
this time, to procure a wife for me


I wot well, you are compeld to it even of your own free will.


Abide, you wot not yet how the case stands.


Yes certainly, I wot full well that you will marry her.


Why do you thus kill my heart? hear me what I shall say to you: he never
ceased, preassing, persuading, and praying me so long, till at last he
enforced me to say unto my father, that I would marry her


What man did this?


Dauus.


What, Dauus?


Yea, he brought all out of square.


Wherefore did he so?


I wot not in the world, without that God were highly offended with me, in
that I followed his counsel


Dauus, Did thou do this?


Yes.


Hah, what say thou villayne? Now I pray God give thee a mischeeuous end as
thou have deserved. Why I pray thee tell me, if all the enemies he has in the
world would have wished to force a marryage upon him, what other counsel
could they have given him than this


Well, I am deceived, but not discouraged.





The matter came not well to pass this way, now we will take an other course,
unless you be of opinion, that because it had ill success at the first: that
therefore this evil may not now be remedied at the last


Yes mary may it, for I verily believe if thou do bend thy whole endeavor unto
it, thou will make for me two marriages of one


Master Pamphilus, this I owe unto you of duty, as being your servant: even
day and night to labors to my uttermost with might and maine, and to hazard my
life to do you good withal: it is your part, if ought has happened otherwise
than was looked for, to pardon me. Be it that my doings prosper not: Why yet I
do my true intent: Or find you some better remedy your self, and let not me
either make or meddle withal


That is it I desire: set me again in the same state thou foundest me.


I will.


But it must be don by and by.


Alas, but yet stay a little, Glyceries door creaks.


That is nothing to thee.


Yet I would know.


What, still more staying?


Well, I will presently find you out a devise for this.


Wheresoever your friend Pamphilus be, I will furthwith seek him out, and bring
him with me: In the mean time (dear heart) do not you vex your self with
thought


Mysis?


Who is there? O master Pamphilus, you meet me in very good time.


What is the matter with thee?


My mistres bad me pray you for Gods sake, if you love her, that you will come
to her, now out of hand. She says that she longs much to see you


Out alas, I am a forlorn man? This mischief begins now again a fresh: Is
it meet that both I and she (silly souls) should be thus vexed and disquieted
thorough thy means? for dowtles that is the cause she now sends for me,
having understood of the marriage I am toward


Concerning which matter truly, full easily might we have bin at quiet, if
this knave had not busted himself


Go too, if he be not mad enough of himself, do thou prick him forward.


Truly forsooth, and even that is the cause that the woeful woman is in sorrow
for


Mysis I swear to thee by all the Gods, that I will never forsake her, no not
if I wist, I should have all men living mine enemies for it. I have desired
this woman in my heart: She is fallen to my lot: we are alike in manners and
condition: farewell they, that would set us two a sunder. There shall none part
her from me, but only death


I am now come to my self.


No not the answer of God Apollo can be truer than this. Mary I would feign
(if it may be) that my father shall not think, that I withstood the going
forward of this marriage: But if it may not be, then will I go the plain way
to woork, that he may think that I did withstand it. What manner of man do I
seem


Even as forlorn a creature as my self.


I seek for counsel.


Thou art a valiant man.


Dauus I know whereabout thou go.


Well, certainly I will bring this to pass for you.


It is more than time it were don.


I have it but even now to do.


What is it?


That thou deceive not thy self, I have it for this man's behoof, and not for
thine


That is sufficient for me.


Tell me I pray thee, what is that thou will do?


I fear me, this day will skant serve me to do my business: Think not than,
that I am now at leisure to discourse: Therefore get ye both away hence, for
ye do but trouble me


I will go see Glycerie.


And what will you? whither away hence?


Will thou have me say the truth?


Nay, now he begins to tell me some long tale.


But what shall become of me?


Why thou shameless man, is it not well for thee, that I gain thee one little
days respite, in that I do prolong his marriage


O Dauus, yet notwithstanding.


What then?


That I may attain to marry her.


See a fool.


Well, look thou come hither to me, if so he thou may do any good in the
matter


To what end shall I come? I can do nothing.


But yet if thou may do ought.


Well, go too, I will come.


If thou may do any thing, thou shall find me at home.


Mysis do thou stay here a little for me, till I come forth again.


Wherefore?


For a thing that must needs be don.


Hye thee apace.


I tell thee, I will be here again by and by.


WHat, can one be sure of nothing in this world? O Lord God, I still thought,
that this Pamphilus was my mistres cheifest joy, as being her friend, her lover,
her husband, and one ready to serve her turn in all assayes. But now (alack
forlorn woman,) what grief takes she for his sake? without doubt there is
more harm in this, than there was good in the other. But lo, Dauus comes
forth. Abide fellow, what is that, I pray thee? whither away carriest thou the
child


Mysis, now must I needs have thee show thy ready wit and cunning in this
matter


Where about go thou?


Take this same child of me quickly, and lay it down before our door.


What I pray thee, on the bare ground?


Take thee some herbs of this alter, and straw under it.


And why do not thou do it thy self?


Because if perhaps I shall be driven to swear to my master, that I laid it
not there: That then I may swear with a safe conscience


I perceive you. But yet tell me, I pray thee, how is it come upon thee to be
so holy now of late


Go too, bestir thee, that thou may know further of my mind, what I will
do. O good Lord


Why, what now?


The Brides father is come, and has prevented me. Now I leave of my purpose
which I first intended


I wot not what thou say.


I will now make as though I came this other way on the right hand: See that
thou be ready to answer and uphold my talk, in every point as shall be
needful


I perceive not at all, what thou intendest to do. But if there be any thing
that my help may stand you in stead, or that thou see further into the matter
than I do: I will stay here, least you should be hindered of any benefit by
my default


NOw that I have made all things in a readiness for my daughters marriage, I am
come again that I may cause her to be sent for. But what have we here? In good
faith it is a child: woman did thou lay this same child here





What, will thou not answer me?


Alack he is no where in sight, woe is me (poor wench) the fellow is gone his
ways, and left me here





I pray you sir, why did you leave me here all alone?


How now, what tale is this of a roasted horse? Nay but hear thou me Mysis,
whose child is this? or who brought it hither


Art thou well in thy wits, that ask me this question?


Whom then should I ask, seeing here is no body else?





Will thou not tell me what I ask?


Ahlas.


Come thy way hither on my right hand.


Thou rauest, dydst not thou thy self? --


Hushed, be not so hard for thy ears as to speak one word more than I shall
ask thee


Thou raylest.


Whence is this child? speak out aloud.


From among you.


Ha ha ha, it is a wonder no doubt, if a hoore play a shameless part.


Andros for ought I can perceive.


Do we seem such fit copesmates for you to mock and dally withal?





Bestur thee quickly, and take a way the child hence from the door.


I pray God a very vengeance light on thee, that so do terrify me, poor
wretch that I am


Do I speak to thee or not?


What would thou?


And do thou yet ask me what? I pray the whose child have thou laid here?
Tell me


Do not thou know?





It is yours among you.


Which of us owes it?


Pamphilus.


Pamphilus child?


Why I pray thee and is it not?





O notable prank worthy of punishment.


What exclaming make thou?


Why, did not I see this same child brought unto you yesterday in the evening?


O thou brazen faast fellow.


Canthara with her clothes tuckt about her, carrying somewhat in her lap.


In good faith yet I thank GOD with all my heart, that there were some free
women of the city, at my mistres deliverance


Without doubt she knew not him, for whose cause she takes this matter in
hand. If Chremes shall see this same child, laid here before the door, then
will he not give his daughter in marriage: Ah, in good sooth he will give her
so much the sooner





Now be thou well assured of this, that if thou do not take away the child, I
will by and by spurn it into the midst of the street, where I will trample thee
also in the dirt


In good sadness fellow, thou art not well in thy wits.


One deceitful devise bringes an other to light: I hear now such whispering
among them, that this same Glycerie is free borne of Athens





So as he shall be driven by law to marry her.


Why I pray thee, and is she not free of this City indeed?


I see I was well nigh fallen into a shrewd sporting game unawares.


Who talks here? O Chremes, you come, in as good time as may be: hear me
what I shall say


I have heard every word already.


What, have you hard all this talk?


I tell thee I hard all from the beginning.


I pray you and have you hard it in deed? fie, out upon these lewd pranks:
Now should this same queen be had hence into Bridewell. This same is the man
thou do mock: think not then, that thou mockest Dauus


Alas for me unhappy wench that I am: In good sooth, old father, I have told
nothing but truth


I know the whole matter already: but is Simo within.


Yes.


Glicerie, [neuer credit me.]


Why thou foolish wench, thou perceiuest not what is don.


What should I perceive?


This man is the brides father: it might not otherwise be compassed, to make
him understand these things that we would have him


Why then, thou should have told me so before.


I pray thee now, and do thou think but small difference between that, that
one does in good earnest, and that which is done for the nones


IT was told me, that here in this street, dwelt Chrysis, who chose rather
in this town to gather goods with dishonesty, than to lead an honest poor
life, in her own country. By whose death, those same goods, by right of law,
are come to me. But I see now of whom I may enquire. God speed you


I pray you whom do I see? Is not this Crito, cousin germain to Chrysis? it is
even he


O Mysis, God save you.


And you too good Crito.


Alack for pity, and is Chrysis dead indeed?


Yea truly forsooth, we poor souls are undone by her death.


Why, what do you? how goes the world with you here, all well?


What we? Truly (as the proverb goes) We do as we may, since we may not as
we would


How fares Glycerie, has she found out yet who be her parents here?


Would God she had.


Why than, and has she not yet? Than in an il hour am I come hither. For in
good faith if I had known this, I would never have set foot forward in this
journey. For she has ever bin held and reputed for Chrysis own sister. She is
in present possession of all that ye other had. And now, for me a stranger to go
follow suits and brables in law, how easy and profitable a matter were that for
me here to do, even the examples of others do foreshew me. Besides that, I
cannot but think, that she has now some friend and defender, for she was of
meetely good age and stature, when she went from us. I should be exclaimed upon
to be a beggarly fogger, greedily hunting after heritage. And moreover, it
were no reason to spoil her of that she has


O Gaffar Crito, in good sooth full well do thou keep thy old wont still.


Well, since I am come hither, bring me to her, that I may yet see her.


With a very-good will.


I will follow these, but I would not for any thing, that the old man should
now see me


WELL neighbor Simo, you have now had trial enough and enough again, of my
love and friendship toward you. I began to enter into danger far enough for
you. Now at length cease your entreating: for while I bent my self to follow
your fancy, I had well nigh cast away my daughter


Nay rather (neighbor Chremes) I most instantly request and beseech you, that
you will now perform in deed, the good turn that ere while you promised me
on your word


See how unreasonable you are, respecting your own desire: so you may bring to
pass what you would have, you neither regard a mean in courtesy, nor yet
consider what you request at my hands: for if you did, you would (now at last)
give over to surcharge me with your unreasonableness


With what unreasonableness?


Why, and do you ask me with what? mary sir, you enforced me thus far, that to
a loose young man entangled in love with a strange harlot, and utterly
misliking marriage, I should give my daughter to wife, to be in daily discord,
and uncertain state of wedlock, to thend that with her trauail, and trooble, I
might heal your sons diseas. You obtained this at my hands, and I went about
it while there was any boot: now it boots not, you must therefore bear with
me. They say, that same woman is free born of this City. She is delivered of
a child. Seek to us no further


I beseech you for Gods sake, not to give your mind to credit those, whose
greatest profit grows by my sons lewdest living: All this, is but forged
and framed for the nones, by reason of this marriage: when the cause why they
do this, is once taken away, Then they will cease


You are diceyued, for I my self saw her maid chiding and brawling with Dauus.


I grant you.


Nay but in right good earnest, when as neither of them both was aware of my
being there


I believe it well, and that they would do so, Dauus fortolde me a pretty while
since, but I wot not how, otherwise than I meant, I forgot to tell you so much


AT my word, now (at length) set your heart at rest:


Dauus is.





What thorough my help, and yonder stranger.





I have not seen a meeter man, a more seasonable coming, nor a fitter time.





Now all is out of danger.


Why do I linger to speak to him?





O, all haill to you honest man.


Now master, and master Chremes, all things be in a redines within.


O it is trimly don of you.


Now send for him when you will.


Very well surely: that is the cause forsooth he is now absent: Nay but
answer me to this, what business have thou there?


Who, I?


Yea.


What, I?


Yea, you sir.


I went in but even now.


As though I asked how long ago it was.


Your son and I went in together.


Why than, and is Pamphilus within? I am still vexed unhappy man that I am. Why
thou hangman thou, did not thou tell me that they are fallen at debate


So they are.


What makes he there than?





Nay but master Chremes, you shall here me tell you of a notable strange matter:
I wot not what old man is come yonder even now, but to look to, he is a
substantial and wary man: if you saw his face, you would take him for a
right honest man. In his countenance is sad gravity, and his words do sound
of truth


What tidings bringst thou?


Nothing forsooth but what I hard him say.


And what says he, I pray you?


Mary that he knows Glycerie to be a free born woman of Athens.


Dromo, Dromo.


What is the matter?


Dromo.


Why, here me sir.


If thou speak one word more -- Dromo.


I beseech you here me.


What would you have sir?


Hoyse up this knave on thy back, and carry him in as fast as thou can.


Whom?


Dauus.


Wherefore?


Because I will have it so, take him away I say.


What have I don sir?


Away with him.


If you do find that I told you any lie, kill me forth right.


I will not here one word: I shall set thee in a beat by and by, I warrant
thee


What, notwithstanding I say nothing but Troth?





Tush man, be not in so great a rage.


O Chremes, do you not pity me, to see what reverend regard my son has
toward me? and that I should take so much trauaill for such a son? Well go to
Pamphilus: Come out here Pamphilus, Is there no shame in thee


WHo calls me? O I am undone, it is my father.


What say thou? thou arrand --


Fie, go to the matter, and cease your evil language.


Yea as though there could be any name to ill for this fellow. Now sir, do
you say the same too? Is Glycerie free bone of this City


So it is reported.


So it is reported? O wonderful impudency, does he consider what he says,
think you? is he any thing sorry for his misdeede? Nay but see, does his
color any whit change, or show any sign of shamefastnes? is it meet he
should be so unruly, as that contrary to the custom of his cuntrimen, contrary
to law, and contrary to the mind of his father, he do labor to have that
same naughty pack, even to his utter infamy and reproach


Woe is me, forlorn man that I am.


O Pamphilus, Pamphilus, do thou now perceive that, and never before? Long
since ywis, long since, when thou gave thy mind so lewdly, as that by one
mean or other thou must fulfill thy lust: lo, even that very first day, had
this bin truly said of thee. But what mean I? why do I vex and disquiet my
self? why do I consume my self with care? why do I wear my old age, with
sorrowing for his madness? is it, that I should suffer punishment for his
faults? Nay rather, let him have her: and farewell he: let him live with her
and spare not


My good father.


What my good father? as who should say, you have any need of this father:
why, you have got you house, and wife, and children, and all maugre your
fathers heart. There be also those brought, which affirm that same queen to be
free borne of this city: well, you shall have the victory


Father, may I speak a word or two?


What will thou say to me?


O Simo, yet hear him.


I hear him Chremes? what should I hear him?


Why man, yet give him leave to speak.


Well go too, he may speak, I let hm not.


Father, I confess I love that same woman: and if that be an offense, I
confess that also. I submit my self into your hands father, lay upon me
what charge you will: command me. Is it your pleasure I should marry a wife?
will you have me forgo this woman? well, I will bear all as I may. Only this
I beseech you, not to believe that this old man is come hither by my
appointment. Give me leave to clear my self, and that I may bring the man
here before your face


That thou may bring him here?


Yea Father, suffer. me.


He craves but reason, give him leave.


Let me obtain this much at your hands.


I am content. Chremes, I yield to any thing, so that I find not my self to
be deceived by this fellow


Small punishment contents a father, for a great offense in his son.


CEas to pray me, any one of these respects, shall cause me to do it: as
either for your own sake, or for that the matter is truth, or in respect that
I wish well to Glycerie


What, is it Crito of Andros that I do see? Truly it is he indeed. Welcome
Crito: what make you at Athens, being here such a stranger


It is so fallen out. But is this Simo?


This same is he.


What, is it for me thou ask? why sir, do thou say that Glycerie is
free borne of this City


Do thou deny it?


What, and art thou come so well provided indeed.


Why so?


Ask thou why? shall thou do this, and escape unpunished? do thou toll
here into thy snare, young men void of experience, and honestly brought up? Art
thou he that feedest forth their minds with intysing and fair promising


Abide, art thou well in thy wits?


And do thou make marriages betwixt them and the harlots that they are in
love withal





Simo, if you knew this man thoroughly, you would not think so of him: this is an
honest man


May this fellow be an honest man? comes he this day so iump in the very time
of this marriage: and could he come never before now? why Chremes, is this a
man to be believed


Were I not afeard of my father, I could tell him that which would satisfy him
in this point well enough


Hah fogging knave.


What?


O Crito bear with him, this is his fashon.


Nay let him consider what he is: As for me, if he proceed to call me at his
pleasure, he shall hear that, that shall be little to his lyking. Do I let
that same marriage? or do I ought at all pass for it?

Andros, together with that same Glycerie, as than a little child. This man
being than in need and necessity: by chance first arrived at the house of
Chrysis father


Now he begins a fable.


Suffer him to go on.


What, even so indeed? he interrupts me.


Go on with your tale.


Moreover, he which received him into his house, was my Cousin: there did I
hear the man himself say, that he was of Athens: and in that house he died


What was his name?


would you know his name so quickly? Phania.


Out alas to day.


In good sooth, I take it, his name was Phania. This I am well assured of, that
he said he was a Rhamnusian


O the King of heaven.


Yea Chremes, there were than many other in Andros, which hard him say the same.


Would to God it were no otherwise than I hope for. But tell me this Crito,
what said he than as touching the girl? did he say that she was his daughter


No.


Whose than?


His brothers daughter.


Without dowt she is mine.


What say you?


Nay what say thou?


Listen to this gear Pamphilus.


What think you of this?


That same Phania was my brother.


I knew the man, and I wot well he was your brother.


He flying hence, for fear of the war, takes his way after me into Asia, and
than he was afraid to leave her here behind him. Since which time, I never hard
what became of him till now


I am well nigh beside my self, my mind is so whelmed, with fear, hope, Joy,
and with wondering at so great, and so sodeyn good hap


Now in good faith, I am glad that by many proofs she is found to be your
daughter


Father I believe it well.


But there remains yet one doubt, which sore troubles me.


You are well worthy to be hated for your peevish precisenes: you make a doubt
where all is as plain as a pack staf


What is that you doubt of?


Her name falls not out right.


Truly she had an other name, when she was a child.


What name? Cannot you remember it Crito?


I am calling it to mind.


Shall I suffer this man's memory to be a hinderance unto my wished joy, when as
I may help my self in this point? no, I will not suffer it. Lo you hear
Cremes, the name you seek for, is Passibula


That same is she.


Is it even she.


she has told it me her own self a thousand times.


Chremes, I wene you believe that we all rejoice at this.


Yea so God me help, do I believe it.


Father, what remains now to be don?


The matter it self has reconciled me a good while since.


O an excellent father. Chremes alters nothing as touching my wife, but that
I may still enjoy her, as I have don


Mary and good cause why. Unless your father say otherwise.


Only, as touching the dowry.


Yea marry, that.


Pamphilus her dowry is five hundred pound.


I accept it.


I will now hye me to my daughter, and you Crito, go with me: for I believe she
never knew me


And why do you not rather cause her to be brought hither to you?


You put us well in mind, I will presently cause Dauus to go about that matter.


He cannot.


How so?


Mary because he has a great matter of his own, which touches him nearer.


What is that?


He lies bound in prison.


Father, then is he wrongfully bound.


Not so, I commanded it.


I beseech you, command that he be let loose.


Go to, be it so.


But make have than.


I go in straight way.


O Blisfull and happy day that this is.


I I am come forth, to see what Pamphilus is a doing: but lo where he is.


Perhaps some body would think that I skant believe this to be true, but I will
have it to be true, as it is in deed. I suppose that therefore the life of the
Gods is everlasting, because pleasures do properly belong unto them: for mine
own part, I am in heaven al ready, if so be it, no grief of mind do
intermingle with this joy. But now what man should I most specially desire to
meet withal, to whom I might show all that has happened





Lo, I see Dauus: There is no man living that I would fayner have: for I am
sure that he, of all other, will unfeignedly rejoice at my joy and gladness


whereabout here, is Pamphilus?


Dauus.


What man is that?


It is I.


O my master Pamphilus.


Thou wotst not what has happened to me.


Very true, but I wot well what has happened to my self.


And so do I too.


Yea it came to pas after the common course of the world, that you knew of the
evil that happened to me, sooner than I knew of the good that happened to you


My sweet love Glycerie, has found out who be her parents.


O happy chance.





Her father is a very special friend of ours.


Who is that?


Chremes.


You say well.


Neither is there any let or tariance, but that I may marry her out of hand.





Now moreover Dauus, as touching the child.


Tush let it alone, God does specially provide for it above all other children.





What man is there? O Carinus, you come to me, even as well as heart can wish.


It is well.


What, have you heard the matter?


Yes every whit: Go to, have some respect of me, now in the time of your
prosperity: I know that Chremes is now yours altogether, and will do all that
you will have him do


I wot it full well: but it would be too long for us, to tarry and look for
his coming forth

Therefore follow me along this way: he is now within with Glicerie. Dauus go
thou thy way home: hye thee, go for company to bring her away hence. Why do
thou stand still? why go thou not


I am going.




Now clap hands, and rejoice.



