FEllow colleagues, since it has pleased our King,
Renowned Edward, of his special favor
To sphere us in this height of eminence,
And maks us rulers over Scotland,
Lets show our selves worthy the dignities
Conferred upon us.

That Is not by lenity,
For howsoere the armed hand of war
Has made them ours, they are a Nation
Haughty and full of spleen, and must be managed
With straighter reins and rougher bitts.

Ahlas,
I find them easy, tractable and mild,
Authority may with a slender twine
Hold in the strongest head, then what needs tyranny,
Use rein or bitt, by this all doubts are cleared,
It Is always better to be loved then feared?
And by your leave, Sir Thomas,
We have good reason to defend our own.

You are as clear of danger, and as free from foes.

As he that holds a hungry wolf by the ears,
The principles are true, trust not thy wife
With secrets, nor thy vassal with thy life,
Sound example proves it.

And private policy confirms it, I could urge reason why, show cause,
wherefore, and speak to purpose whereby, but my betters are in place, I know
them to be pregnant, and a ready wit's worth all


For our own safeties then, and Englands honor,
Let not us lose what our King hardly won.

To that effect called we this solemn meeting,
To which we have summoned diverse: chiefly Wallace,
Late Sheriff of Air, which office tho the King
Conferred on me, the haughty Scot thinks much
To tender up, observe his insolence.

Presumptuous Groom, this is a seat for Eagles,
And not for Haggards.

Selbie it is a seat,
I, and my Grandsires Grandsire have enjoyed
And held with worship, and till Edwards hand
Remove me from't, Wallace will still posses't.

Proud Wallace dares not.

Selbie, both dares and do,
And must, and will, tho subject unto Edward,
I Am Selbies equal both in birth and place:
Tho in mine Office, Edward joined you with me,
He never made you ruler over me.

You Will find he did, read that Commission,
And tell me then, if Selby or your self,
Be Sheriff of Air.

To what my King commands
I humbly bend, resigning on my knee
Both Staff and Office.

Which thus Selby breaks
Over thy head, and now proud Sir acknowledge
Selby your Ruler, and with your place resign
Your Castle and your Lands.

That Is not inserted in your Commission.
What the King has given I surrender,
For my Lands they are still mine own,
Were purchased with the sweat of my deer Ancestors,
And ere I lose a pole, a foot, I or the smallest turfe a silly
Lark may build on, I Will lose life.

At your own choice, either your lands or life,
Or both.

Or neither, royal Edwards mercy
Sits above Selbies malice.

Surly Groom,
Mercie's for subjects, by what Evidence,
Charter or Service do you hold your Land?

Selby by none, that title which I had
I have given my son, a boy of that proud temper,
As should he hear thy insolent demand,
Would pluck thee from thy seat, and lay thy head
A satisfaction at his fathers feet,
But heavens forbid it, Selby thus it stands,
Thou have my Office, and my son my Lands.

He must show how he holds 'em.

So he can,
And Selby will show evidence sufficient,
Mine, my dear Fathers, and my Grandsires sword.
He wears good evidence about him Selby,
And will upon the least occasion
Both show and prove it lawful.

If the sword be your best plea, you have but a naked title,
And by our authority we here command
You and your son at our next general meeting,
To bring in your Surrender, or undergo
The penalty of traitors.

Oh you the patrons of poor injured subjects,
Do Graham justice, Selbies riotous son
Assisted by a crew of dissolutes!
Has stole my only daughter, and intends
A violent Rape, or which more cuts my soul
A forced marriage.

Inconsiderate fool,
The boy affects her, and with my consent
Intends a lawful marriage, it is a favor
Her betters sue for.

Oh let u'm hate, my blood
Shall never enter league nor hold alliance
With him that hates my Country.

Rest your thoughts,
He has her, if he likes her he shall wed her,
And Graham as a dowry shall enjoy
Thy present state, revenues, goods and lands,
Fret out thy soul, he shall.

Shall?

I, Sir shall,
It Is the highest favor conquest can afford,
For a slave to join alliance with his Lord,
And Wallace see present surrender made
Or look for storms.

So say I too, and it is not the least part of policy, neither.


Will have my Lands.

Enforce me give a dower.
Misery decre'd above comparison.

Complain unto the King.

The King alas.
I have heard a story how the subtle Fox
Having stole a Lamb, the family of sheep
Drew a petition, and with full consent
Prefrr'd it to the Lion, he employed
'Bout earnest and more serious business,
Appoints the Bear Commissioner, to take up
This bloody difference; the Bear impannels
A partial jury all of Wolves, they choose
The Fox their Foreman, they consult and find
The sheepish Nation guilty, and with general breath,
Cast, judged, condemned, and sentenced all to death.

Men should have souls.

But tyrants being no men,
Have consequently none; complaints in slaves,
Are like to prayers made over dead men's graves,
Nor heard, nor pitied, heaven has imposed a curse,
Which suffrance in time may cure, complaints make worse.

Then as it is lets bear't, win heaven to friend
He that begins knows when and how to end.

Mask her, come Peg hide your Scottish face.

Why shild I hayd my Scottis face, my Scottis face is as good as yare English
feace, it is a true Scotties feace


I know it is sweet Peggy, and because it is not a picture for every Painter to
draw forth, let this curtain be pind before it


Hang yare flee-flaps, na Scottis woeman is asheamed a that luke, that the
master painter abuife guifes her, whare mun I gang and now, fay, fay, fay, what
lossell am I that am hurrand thus till and fra with sweards and wapins, whay
mun backerd men gang fencing and flourishing about me, am I yare may game


No Peggy, thou art my prisoner, but here is thy jaile.

Are ye my jalor? what kin bin you to the hangman? senu you? whare's he? wha
is that foul loone amang you, that mun be my hangman


Here Is no man here your hangman, or your jailor.

Wha then be you?

Your friends that hold you only in bonds of love.

I reckand mickle your luife, fay upon sike luife, the awd fellon thief,
luifand the true man's siller as you luifand me, I Would rather be a Scutchmans
whore, then an Englishmans waife, and be dreave toth' Kirk with helters


Tell me what proud Scot loves thee, what Scot dare touch thee now thou art
Selbies


Hang thee, hang thee foul meazel'd lowne,
What Scuttishman darres guiff my luif understood
My case, on Gads dear earth you sud no farther gange
As butchers kie toth the grund he sud you bange.

All mildness is in vain, take some rough course.

Toth' Church, away, I Will marry her there by force.

Away with her.

Yonder Is Wallace, and's true.

The Devil and's dambe be it, budge not.

O my luife these Sotherne Carles mickle wrang against me warcke, and now wad
force me gang until the Kirk, and marry Selby, Wallace my Io not I


Vnhand that beauteous prize, proud slave, it is mine.

Slave! thou art a villain Selby.

Are ye so brave.

Look to my wench.

Kill 'em.

We are no Stares to die by dozens.

Back, the quarrels mine, and if one single Scot proud'st of your swarm dares
answer me, step forth


Your first man I Sir.

Hark Gentlemen, let not so slight a shower,
Which yet lies hid and wrapped in one poor cloud,
Be by rough winds (raiz'd up by you) dispersed
Into a general storm, to many eyes
Of Scots and English shoots, quick lightning forth
Already, but your absence will allay
Those fires which else must kindle, get then away,
Take shelter in yon tavern.

Agreed.

Look to my Peggie.

Guard my love, he and I will only exchange cold words.


Now Sir, your cold words.

This Scotch Lasle I love.

Is that all?

Yes.

I love her too, can any words more cold,
Strike to your heart?

Is she your wife?

No.

She Is your whore.

Vmh, neither.

She gangs with me then.

But the dew lekens not whither,
If you can win her, wear her, she is wholly mine.

She is?

She is, our Less are not English common,
I Am right Scotch bred, till death stick to a woman.

And to the death thou shall, no more but this,
Thou shall bear from me Scot.

When?

Instantly.
Make time Sir, of your weapon, time, and place.

This Whinyard.

This.

Our swords do now agree, and of one length and scantling.
Why should not we, if we must Surgeons
Have to morrow or anon
If not as good now, it is the English fashion
To swagger it out, and then drink and then fight
And kill in cold blood having slept sound all night,
And oftentimes all gash'd, the seconds fall,
When home in whole skins come the principal.
So about words, the Lawyer wrangling stands,
And loses in mean time his clients lands.

Do teach me fencing too in thy own school?
I Will beat thee or be beaten, one draws short breath.

I feel no sickness.

Yet thou art near thy death.

At it so hotly.

Kill him, it is fair.

Inglorious conquest, for King Edwards crown,
I Would trample on no enemy were he down.
There -- if thou art well, part.

I Will die, or in thy heart blood wash this infamy.

Mercy on my soul.

He Is slain.

Away.

Shift for your selves, 'twill prove a stormy day.

Search, call for Surgeons, follow the murderer.

Wa is me, ligs my luife on the cawd ground,
Let me come kiss his frosty mouth.

What Scot is it?

Oh, it is young Selby!

Ha'my son, who slew him?

That fatal hand of Wallace.

Follow the villain.

Ize jocund and weel now.

Lay upon her fast hold.

Hang me I reck not.

Away with her to prison.

Not all the blood and treasure we have spent
Like zealous prodigals in Palestine,
Goes half so near our heart, as that proud France,
Knowing our merit should bar us of our due.

France dares not.

Yet he does.

'Twas not demanded.

How, not demanded? thinks the bold Lord Percy,
That Grimsby dares not (lawfully employed) demand.

But not command.

Yes command, Percy.

Grimsby, thou can do well in Garrison.
Wear shamoys for a grace, project for blood,
Make eight days to one week, turn executioner,
And hangman like send fifty in one morning,
To feed the Crows, and live upon dead pay.

He Is a man worse then dead that --

Stop thy throat or --

What?

I Will cut it.

Cut throat.

It Is a trade,
By which few prosper, and yet thou art made.

A man as good as --

A hangman.

A foul blot
Lies in your throat.

Thy foul-mouth, wash it Scot.

In Percies blood I Will washed.

Grimsby you lean
To hard upon our sufferance, and noble Percy.
Our honored second in all inward combats,
Thou have too many worthy parts of man,
To throw thy self on this unequal ha^zard,
Grimsby thou standst so much degreed below him,
Both in descent and eminent quality,
The many favors we have graced thee with,
Blush to have been conferred upon a man
No better tempered.

May it please my Sovereign
Confirm his grant touching --

The Crown of Scotland,
Save other time, Grimsby thou have raised
A storm which showers of blood can hardly lay.

Dread Liege,
If all the youthful blood that I have spent,
And wealthy honors that my sword has won
Waving the Christian Standard in the face
Of the proud Pagan, in the holy Land,
Merit the name of hangman, Grimsby casts
Them and himself at royal Edwards feet,
And like an out worn soldier, humbly begs,
No pension (but look Percy) nor yet office
But leave to leave the Court, and rich in stars
To lose more blood, or win more worth in wars.

We will not lose thee Grimsby, valiant Percy,
If love in us, or loyalty in you,
Have any power.

My Sovereigns pleasure sits above my private passions.

Then join hands,
Our subjects both the native of two Lands.

Friends Grimsby.

Friends in show,
But in my breast bloody revenge lies ambush't.

Gracious Liege.

Thou Art no Musician, Bruce, thou keep'st false time,
We strike a bloody lachrymae to France,
And thou keep'st time to a Scotch ligge to arms.

Edward will be more kind to Christians.

Let Christians be more honest then to Edward,
In expedition of this holy war,
When France in person was enjoined to march,
To work his safety we engaged our own,
Casheer'd his fainting soldiers, and on promise,
Of so much gold at our return, supplied
The French designs our self, and is our love,
And loss of blood, half which at least had dropped
Out of French bosoms, quittant with owe none,
Pillage and play the free-butter for more,
The news.

Dread Sovereign, Scotland is infected
With a most dangerous surfeit, it breaks out
In strong rebellion.

This is your Kingdom Bruce.

I have no hand in it tho.

Should have no head, did we but think it,
Whose the chief?

One Wallace, a fellow meanly bred,
But spirited above belief.

Some needy borderer.
How is our bosom parted, is their power
Of any strength? Bruce, leavy powers for France;
If we but thought thee touched in it, warlike Percy,
Beaumont and Sebastian fetch him in
Or with a second and more fatal conquest
Ruin that stubborn Nation.

Gracious Edward,
Tho war has made them subjects, heaven defend
Subjects should make 'em vassals.

We conceit you,
If any officer of ours transgress
Our will, or go beyond his bounds prefix't
We Will have his head, he our high worth depraves,
That our free subjects seek to make his slaves.

We do not.

See we find it not.

Let Ellianor win so much favor as to march along
Tho conquered, alas we are neighbors of one clime,
And live like them subject to change and time.

Royal Edward,
Though Wallace and some spleenfull dissolutes
Wronged with the yoke of bondage cast it off.
Let not the whole Land suffer.

Nor do we wish it Grimsby, should the fates
But turn the wheel we might with them change states,
Be Scotlands subjects, let but Rebellion kneel,
We Will wear soft mercy, and cast off rough steel.

I Will undertake it.


Let messengers be sent,
To question the proud Rebel, and if Grimsby
Fail in his plot, Northumberland and Clifford
Shall second him in arms, so slight a fo
Must not detain us from our French designs,
Our Queen has all our breast, and tho we might
Justly perhaps confine your liberty,
Bruce, we enlarge it, giving you command
In our French wars, observe him nearly Lords,
I have read this maxim in state policy.
Be sure to wear thy danger in thy eye,
France lights a Comet, Scotland a blazing Star,
Both seek for blood, we will quench um both with war.

Prithee good Wallace.

Ill betides his soul,
That speaks of goodness, thinks or meditates
Of any goodness more then how to free
Imprisoned Peg.

But hear me.

Castle wears but a slender bolt of brick.

Turned mad!

And say the moat be fifty fathomes deep,
Fifty times fifty, say it reach through to hell,
Wallace will swim't.

Swim't, yes so wilt thrust an ox into an Eg-shell,
And roast it by Moonshine, but why should Wallace?

Why should proud Selby, though his forward son
Were justly slain, imprison Peg?
Poor Lamb she is no murderer.

In my conscience she never drew weapon
In anger in her life.

Not at sharp I think, but by your leave it is thought,
She has practiced in private; put Wallace to foil, and made
Him lie at his hanging ward many a time and often.

Where Is my son?

With Peggie, father, manacles of grief,
Hang heavy on my senses.

Shake 'em off.
Show thy self worthy him that thou call'st father,
Or Peggie dies.

What thunderclap was that?
Able to waken death or shake the shroud
From off a dead man's shoulders, Peggie dies,
Should thunder speak it, Wallace would swear it lies,
Who spoke that, fatal Nuntio?

His breath.
That gave thee being, Haslerigs returned.

Whence, from the Devil?

From England, and this instant
But thou come in, and yield thy self, her life
Dissolves to air.

The charitable Angels waft her to heaven.

Resolve you then to lose her?

How shall we save her, singly as I am
I will oppose me against the town of Lavercke,
Swim the vast moat, and with my trusty sword
Hew down the Castle-gates, dishinge the doors,
File off her irons, and through a wall of steel
Attempt her rescue.

It Is impossible.

Impossible, what is the news from Englands?

Grimsby the firebrand of his Country
Comes to ensnare you, on the heel of him
Treads a huge army led on by the Queen,
Percy and Clifford.

Torture and death itself cannot divide us.

Sir John Graham, you shall be the engine
Our policy must work with, straight give out
That hearing of the English expedition,
Our faction is dissolved.

Whats's this to Peggies rescue?

Much, this rumor
Blown through the Land will stay the English forces,
And give us time and means to strengthen ours,
That once in act, repair to Hasterig,
Selby and Thorn, urge Peggies innocence,
And for her freedom and your own make faith,
To yield me prisoner, 'twill be no doubt excepted,
Your self once pardoned, and your daughter free.

What rests for Wallace?

Prosper'd destiny,
If the great cause we undertake be good,
'Twill thrive, if not, be it washed in VVallace blood.

Is it by general Proclamation voic'd
That but proud VVallace yield, Peg Graham dies,

The Cryers are all hoarse with balling of it.

It Is time for providence to stir the King,
(I know not upon what complaints) pretends
This rank Rebellion rather, took his root
From wrongs in us, then treacheries in VVallace.
And sends his forces rather to examine
And question our demeanours, then their treasons.
We must prevent it, how think you, Sir Jeffery?

Troth even as you think, policy must prevent it.

Sir John Graham craves conference with the Commisioners.

Admit him.
A man, me thinks, of your experience,
Respect and education should not link
Your self in such a chain of counterfeits.

Nor have I Lords, but for your best advantage,
And Englands good, traitors and dottrels,
Are sold for all alike, he that will take them
Must seem to do as they do, imitate
Their vicious actions, strive to take upon him
Their idle follies, join companies, and drive
Them into a net suspectlesse.

So did not Graham.

Speak not before your knowledge, you detain
My only daughter prisoner, will Selby
And his colleagues free her and pardon me,
If I dissolve the brood of traitors
And give up Wallace in bands?

Let Us daughter be produced.
And the execution for awhile deferred,
Though in her cause Selby has lost a son
And with him all content, so deer I tender
The peace of Scotland and my Sovereigns good,
As give the traitor to the hand of Law
And with her life take thine.

Good policy.

Aye trow, ye mean not Wallas his devoire,
And dowty valor merits mare repute nor
Sike fawe language.

A foul traitor,
I have converst with Wallace, thrown my self
Into his bosom, mingled thoughts with him,
And find him neither worthy of thy love,
Nor my alliance.

Fay, sa, not sea, my bunny Wllace luifes me.

Yes as a Politician does a knave
For his own ends, hearing thy death proclaimed,
But he come in, I told him on it, he smiled.
I urged thy love and constancy, still he smiled,
And to confirm't he basely has cut off
All his associates, and given up himself
Wholly to me.

Hawd rherefor cherritie, and wad ye give
Him to his faes, that gave
His blood to your protect?

I will and have,
For thine enlargement and my own I have,
No more, here comes the Rebel.

Traitorous man,
Is this thy love? these thy deep promises?
Art thou their Aspies? See Selby here is the hand
Cleft thy sons heart.

For which base villain I Will see thee hanged.

Thou know not thy own eyes,
May feed the Crows as soon as mine, Toads and Snakes
May dig their lodgings in thy breast,
And Devils make faggots of thy bones first,
But my sentence.

Here, Graham, for thy service,
We enlarge thy beauteous daughter.

A mild exchange,
Angels approve it.

Next, thee to thy Lands and Offices we restore.

And what for Wallace?

Race him from your thoughts.

Rac'd been his name forth the
Whayte buke of life that speaks it.

Hence.

Dear Wallace, thoe ane shrude
Hawd not our bands, wees meet in yander cloud,
Whare na fell Southern nowther can extrude,
Nor bar na fra celestial pulchritude,
Aid gange thy gate, till heaven, and as we flay,
Like turtle Dowes weese bill and find good play.

Rare resolution, what weak heart would faint,
Having so constant a companion?
Selby my soul's bound on a glorious voyage,
And would be freed out of this jayle of flesh,
Then hinder not my voyage.

It Is not policy, we will rather set it forwards.

Raise a Gallows fifty foot high,
ye shall not go by water, we will send you up a nearer way.

All Is one,
Axe, halter, famine, martyrdom, or fire,
All are but several passages to heaven,
Let my soul go the furthest way about,
Come tired with tortures, shooting out my heart,
The deepest wounds, like strong Certificates
Find kindest welcome.

Stay the execution, and having read this Warrant, know
It Is the Queens pleasure, you send in this traitor
Under my conduct to the English Camp:
Rebellion of this nature must be searched,
With sharper torture.

I outdare the worst,
He is no man that is afraid of death,
And Wallace his resolve shall outlive breath.

It Is but short-lived else, first see him bound and hud-winckt,
Then leave him to my care.

Bear with this Rebel, my love.

My service.

And my policy to the good Queen and Ladies.

Come Wallace, now your pride draws near the fall.

Why Grimsby, if I fall,
It Is but to gather stronger force to rise,
For as a ball's thrown down to raise it higher,
So death's rebound shall make my soul aspire
The glorious clouds, so long I die secure.
Death cannot threat more then I dare endure.

No not a man more then my private followers,
The Queen enjoins it.

Farewell, valiant Grimsby, and farewell danger.

Policy and all.

The traitors fled, and Wallace thus suppressed,
My sons bloods paid, and his wronged ghost at rest.

And the whole land at quiet, where is Sir John Graham?
We Will join him partner in Commission,
'Twill be a means to make our party strong,
And keep down mutinies, search out old Wallace,
And hang the Carle at his own door, Sir Ieffrey,
Place tables in the streets, bonefires, and bells,
Since without cause they murmur, let u'm know
That with their knees we will make their proud hearts bow.
Sir Jeffrey, be you Master of the Feast,
You keep the purse, if money fall out short,
Send out for more, you have commission for it.

What talk of Conscience? thou art an apparent rebel.

How can he be a rebel was nere subject?
What right has Edward to the Crown of Scotland
(The sword except) more than my self, or Grymsbie?

What greater right then conquest?

Then what cause,
Iuster thou mine? respected Country man,
Thou have been nobly valued, and held rank
With best deservers, look upon the wounds
And mortal stabs of that distressed breast
That gave thee suck; see thy poor brethren slaves,
Thy sisters ravished, and all outrages
That bloody Conquest can give license to,
See this, and then ask Conscience if the man
That with his blood seeks general reformation
Deserves the name of Traitor,
Whither do lead me?

To Northumberland
And Beaumont.

Butchers do your worst,
Torture, I spit defiance in thy face,
And death, embrace thee with as kind a narme
As if thou were.

Thy Father.

And thy waife.

In heaven or in a slumber, who resolves me?
Speak, am I dead, or living? or asleep?
Or all, or both, or neither? tell me fate.
Me thinks I see my Father, warlike Graham,
The Friar, what Peggie too? I prithee joye
Do not ore-flow my senses, dearest friends
Pegg, Father, Coming, Mentith, Graham, see
I am new molded, and here stands the creature
That by a warrant granted from the Queen
Formed me from out a second Chaos breathed
New life, new motions, new dimensions,
To tell the story were to shame the world,
And make all mankind blush.

May luive.

Our prayers.

And all our friendship like a coat of steel
Stand betwixt him, and danger.

All join hands,
Thus like a mountain Cedar Wallace stands
Amongst a grove of friends, not to remove
For Edwards thunder, nor the frown of Jove,
I Will hew the yoke from off my countries neck,
Or never house, this religious Friar
Is a full witness to the sacred bond
Twixt heaven and me, which on my part I Will keep,
Or pay the forfeit with my blood.

Heaven shield
Many a tall wood oak been felled
Ere Wallace stoop, heed Gentrid saw
Theke sword shall keep in mickle aw,
Fell Sotherne folk, many a cry,
Fray cradled barns, e're he shall fly,
Nurses sighs, and mothers tears
Shall swell the clouds, till thy own blood,
Prove false thilk Crag sall nere lig dead.

Shall Wallace live till his own blood prove false,
Why, that can never be till palsy age
Has thrust his icy fingers through my veins,
And frozen up the passages of blood.

The town of Lavercke, peopled only with English pride
And overjoyed with thy surprizall are made drunk with mirch,
Bonefires, bells, banquets, and the devil and all
Invite our swords to their sad funeral.

Close with advantage, put your selves in Arms,
And cease their forfeit lives, this holy Frien
Shall first bestow a matrimonial band
Of our united love, and then my sword
Like winged lightning shall prepare a way,
To Lavercks doom.

Nea marry, stay a wheane,
Dip not thy winyard in the weambe
Of Lavercks town, for giffe thou gange,
Thouse weark thy lives friend mickle wrang,
Thouse come back seafe, but barn I fear,
Ise never blinck upon thee meare,
Kneel till thy Sier his benuson crave,
Next duty bin till dig her grave,
Kiss, kiss thy Peg, for well a near,
Thase amerous twins sall nere kiss mare,
Till in deaths arms they kiss, thilke state
Stands writ in heaven and sealed by fate.

Then fate dissembles with me, this the second time
She has by vision summoned me to arms,

Whom have you there?

Seeking the cave for shelter,
See whom kind fare has given us.

Treacherous Wallace,
The doting wizzard, and dissembling woman
Chief cause of this Rebellion, now revenge,
Clothe thee in crimson, and prepare to feast,
We Will tune such dismal music, as shall dint,
Smiles in thy shallow cheeks.

Alas, for wae,
What gars this Iewde? what ill intend ye man?

To make rebellion fatherless,
And murder a madding widdower.

Oh, spare mine age.

Pity my beauty.

My religion.

Like pity, as thy barbarous son bestowed
On my boys life, i will print upon thy bosom.

Like pity as thy husband pitilesse,
Took on the widows tears, and Orphans cries
That kissed his, and hung about his knees
At Lavercks massacre, I Will show on thee.

Thus fell my son,
And thus the father of his murderer falls.

Thus withered the pride of Laverck,
And thus fades the flower that caused their ruin.

Thus religious cries
Were stopped with steel, and thus religion dies.

Wallace, revenge me as thou art my son.

Revenge thy wait,

Revenge Religion.

Thunderbolts and fire rampire your throats,
The slaves grown infinite,
And moves in every place at once,
Shift for your selves:
Proud Wallace recking in the blood of Lavercke,
Like a fierce tiger nursed in humane spoil,
Pursues the slaughter, the barren hills lie strewed
With mangled limbs, such as the gentle night
Rescue from death, fall in the morning flight,
Then fly or fall for company,
Fly from a rebel, but fate keep true course,
We Will ebb like floods, to flow with stronger force.

Pursue the slaughter, whilst I, salvation shield me.
Friar Gertrid answer me, what barbarous hand
Has cast my friend into this cold dead sweat,
Resolve me gentle Father, fellon death,
Tha'st acted sacrilegious burglary, and told my father.

Wallace.

No excuse.

Ay sea husband.

Entreat not, ye are guilty both.
And parties in the dearest robbery,
Then though my wife and father (mercy fate,)
Play not the tyrant with me, do not try
My senses bore their weak ability,
Cease to afflict me, or I shall turn Rebel,
And breathe invectives against thy power.

O my dear Wallas for the luive waife,
For siuve of awe sawles, and thy daying waife,
Lift to my latter accens, and attend
Of all thy joys the derne and dismawe end.

Torture above indurance,
King of dreams dissolve my vision.

Wallace is awake.

O if I be, let my soul never sleep,
In the blessed bosom of my Ancestors,
Till I have drawn a sea of purple tears
From forth the bosoms of the murderers,
Dear Peggie, father, Gertrid, which way, where
How, when, what means, what cause shall I devise
To find it out, and venge your tragedies?

I Will teach ye how,
Selby and Haslerigg been the fell bloodhounds
Whae have hunted laife until thick toils of death,

Are they turned hangmen?

Religious cries, beauteous entreats, and reverend well-awayes
Could not win grace or favor,
Wallas revenge my death,
And for a favor keep my hindmost breath.

And house it here.

Where Is VVallas? never eye
Saw such a ruthlesse massacre.

Yes Grimsby,
VVallace can show a massacre will prove
Thine but a may game.

Terrible and strange!

Do start at this? then see a spectacle
Of force to stay the motion of the spheres,
Or strike the Sun dead in the browe of heaven,
Look, and like men short from the browe of thunder,
Fall seneeles, death wounds not so deep as wonder.

Whose bloody act was this?

The bloody acts
Contrived and plotted by experienced villains.

Who were the authors?

Judge, they all spoke English,
Death best becomes that Dialect,
The first was bloody Hasleriggs, the second
More villaine-like was Selbyes, but the third
All had a hand in.

English Ambassadors.

They are welcome, let not one sullen browe
Be seen in all this fiery firmament.

Welcome, your business?

Far more like a Prince,
Then a base rebel looks the Northern traitor.

Thus to a rebel from a royal King,
If VVallace will confess himself a traitor,
And for his bloody outrages and thefts,
Crave mercy, and submit himself to Edward,
There Is hope of life.

Still charitable English.

It Is not he sure,
This looks not like a man should shake a kingdom.

This it he shall deny,
Rape, murder, ruin, all the sons of war
Stands striving for the prey, and once let loose,
Shall not be checked, nor taken up, till rage
Be tired with murder, and thy self in chains
Hanged like a villain.

This is all perfect English, have ye yet spoke?

We have.

Then we begin,
And to a tyrant thus says a loyal subject,
If Edward will confess himself a tyrant,
And kingly fellon, and make good such theft
As he and his have practiced, sue his peace
By yielding up his and himself to VVallace,
There Is hope of life, this if he shall deny
Rape, murder, ruin, all the brood of war
Shall Be let fly, and never be lured of
Till they be gorged, and bated with the heart
Of the proud King himself.

Now speaks a man
Would thrust Jove from Olympus.

Calm your spleen,
For now speaks mercy, if your Countries wrongs
Grow from abuse in Edwards substitutes,
You shall have equal hearing, and the wrongs
Punished in the deservers.

This should not be English,
Or if it be King Edward is no tyrant.

What answers VValace?

First pray pardon me,
If like the working of a troubled sea
My bosom rose in billows, for though the winds
That raised the storm be down, yet the dear ruins
Lie still in view, a father, and a wife,
Age, beauty, and religion, for thee
Thousands shall weep, as many wives
Shed purple tears for thee, as many Churchmen
Offer their reeking souls in sacrifice,
Court, City, Church, the Chamber of your King,
The Chair of State shall be no privilege.

This was not Edwards act.

Yet such as Edward
Placed in commission, oh it was a churlish storm,
And wretched I like a forlorn surviver
Left to interre their dear remembrances.

Good gentleman.

But bid relentlesse Edward
Send in the pirates Haslerigg and Selbye,
And in their hands letters of Murt subscribed,
To make me Master of my own revenge,
Or like a Ball wrapped in a cloud of fire,
Ruin shall fall upon his palace top,
Pierce through the roof, and in his chair of State
Solicit Justice.

Into his Princely ears I Will give your wrongs.

Will VValace here advise?

Yes.

Then be ruled by Grymsby.

Thanks for thy kindness. Lords Ambassadors,
Such we esteem you, may we crave perusal
Of your commission?

VVallace shall command it.

Mountfort and Glascott, what third fellow's that?

One of our followers.

Good, his name is not inserted,
One call out a headsman.

Ambitious rebel, know I am a Prince,
And nephew to the Queen.

Were thou the King,
Having no portion in the Embassy,
I Would have thy head, go on, and strike it of,
A second cut his tongue out, and a third
Thrust out their eyes, and put their followers to the sword.

VVallace will be more mild.

VVallace will be more just
Then see the Law of Arms disgraced
Sound Drums and drown their cries.
Revenge beats at heavens gates for tyrannies.
So now our tragic Muse jets on the stage,
You that for seeing baseness want your sight,
Bear with this present our indeer'd, commends
Back to the Queen, and say so much we tender
Her sacred honor, weed not see it wronged
Even in her Nephew, you that for sparing speech
In honors cause are justly mute, conduct
This eyelesse messenger, abuse not our intent
In the delivery, make speedy haste,
Lest we be there before you, share in like wrong,
Lend him your eyes, and borrow you his tongue,
If any question you about your harms,
Say Wallace did it in the right of Arms.

This will affright the English.

Honored Grimsby,
This and ten thousand, thousand more extremes
Cannot appease my anger, you that love me
See those I loved inhum'd, my self disguised,
Will be their Convoy to the English Camp,
And see their usage.

'Twill be an act of danger.

The fitter him that undertakes it, Wallace
Would hold himself not worthy of his fate
Should he bawke danger, dissuade not, I will on
Were certain death against my bosom bent,
There Is gain in blood it is honorably spent.

And such I fear will thine be, honored friends
See those remayns of honorable love
Cradled in earth, that once performed take Arms
To venge their deaths, Mentith, I attend
The coming of some special friends by oath,
Bound to assist us, hark how their friendly drums
Chide them for loytring.
Honored Douglas, welcome,
Welcome Mackbeth, and doughty Wintersdale,
Not, unto men more, driven in needful want,
Could you have brought supply.

The better welcome,
Gold to rich men, and treasure to the wealthy,
Are known companions, where is our General,
The hopeful VVallace?

Gone in quest of death,
Firm as his fate, cause he sees danger shuns him,
He Is gone to seek it in the English tents.

So Hercules sought honor out in Hell.
He not deserves, the name of General,
Dares not face danger, and outdo the Devil.

And such a man is VVallace, yet least worth
Bears him beyond his strength, bring up your powers
For present charge, his thoughts are tragical,
And full of blood, active, and violent all.

You that best know 'em, feed 'em, all that is ours,
For Scotlands good call VVallaces and yours.

Whare man? till the English Camp senu you, gad sides you gang as I have seen
money a your Contrymen like rank riders amble up westward, you gang the wrang
wey man, you sall luse and ye play at shoolagroate, have ye na linckers


Ahlas I want my eyes, but have a tongue,
He sees, but cannot speak.

Blyncke at smaw faults then, make me the thridman, and here is a bunny noise of
Fiddlers to gang fra winehouse to winehouse, a blind harper, a mute Cornet, and
an old Scotch bagpipe worn toth' stumps


Are you a Scotch man Sir?

Ye marry am I, boddy and sawle a true Scotchman borne, but a true liegeman,
hang him that does not luife your King, and your Countryman, what good victales
is that which thilke bonny man that haz glazen windows to his lindging has tied
up in his wallet there


It Is the head of a young murderd gentleman.

What senn you man! a man's scalpe, I doubt ye be three fawse knaves liggand
yare heads together about na gudenes, a traitors head is it not


No, but we have met with villaynes worse then traitors.
VValace your countryman, that bloody hangman
Mangled us all three thus.

VValas my Countryman, ay say upon him,
Fawe lymmerlike wad I had his head here too,
Ized bear it by my sawle toth' English Camp
Or near gang farther.

Twold be a glorious fight there.

And you could see it ye sulled sea so man, VVallace
Cut of my shancks too, cause I ran away from him
To serve your good Prince, hark man, I wear
Na shooen but wodden clampers.

Of charity lead us to the English Camp,
Ye shall besides thanks be most royally paid.

Gan^alang man it is hard by now, a man's head
I deempt the pure man had gaugand lang to law
And sae was thrust out of doors by head and shoulders.

No law was ere so cruel as Wallas is.

Ne marry? na law sa cruel, fay man fay, I luick'd upon a man a law not lang
since that sent an awde man and his wife, and many barnes a begging, he had
better a slizand their weazond pipes, and cut their heads off, but whay was a
sa bludy minded think ye


I cannot judge.

Marry man, to get possession of the pure man's house, but there was a cat
ganged beyond the man a law


A cat go beyond a lawyer? how?

I Will tell you how, the man a law being got in, the Cat outreach'd him, and
leaped to the top oath lindging, and standand on the tyles, the man a law
scoarning any ane to be abuife him, offer to fling and dingand down the poor
puscatt, but she meawed at him, and cried hawd thou foul lowne hawd, as thou
thrusts out this poor man and his barnes, sa there is ane abuife sall thrust
out thee, stay blind man, here comes soldiers


Stand que voula, spies about our trenches?

And see they have knocked some man down sir,
You that carry two faces under a hood,
What are you?

He must be pressed, he will not speak.

What art thou I charge thee? have thou near a tongue
In thy head? give the word.

He has no tongue indeed sir.

Two heads and near a tongue, what are you?
That like a blind ^sse stand still, and cannot tell us so.

I Am blind indeed,
Conduct us to the Lords in the English Camp.

How Lords, are you Ladies that you long for Lords?

Do you take us for gulls to go tell the Lords here is a dumb man would speak
with them, what are you sir? come halt not, lets not find you in two tales
you are best


Ize a Scotch man sir, ye shall near find me in two tales.


A Scotch man sir, do you know where you are sir?
Your blew bonnet on before an English scull,
Where Is your leg sir, when an Officer speaks to you?

My leg sir is not in my galligaskin and flop as yours is, I'ze a pure Scotch
soldier out at heels, and am glad to bestirr my stumps, guide these good men
you are wranged Countrymen, wha that fawse traitor Wallace has misusand in sike
wise


Wallas, oh slave!

I shall live (fellows in arms out at Elbows)
To give fire to my piece with a burnt ynch of match
Made of that rascals fat of mawegut.

By my sawle sir wad I might come
To The making of sike a match.

Here Is my hand, because thou say so,
Thou shall be by when I make him give fire to my touchhole.

The Lords are going to view the trenches.

Every man to his parrapet,
To your trenches you tatterd roagues!

Its well done fellows.

Cry your Lordship mercy,
This blind buzzard here cannot see,
Whither will you march headlong my friend?

What men are these?

I leave them to your Honors sifting,
I have fortifications to look too.

There Is drinking money, hence to your works.

Bless your honors.

What men are these, I ask, will no man speak?

Hear and in hearing wish the sound unheard,
Youthful Sebastian nephew to the Queen
Longing to see the man famed for the excess
Or goodness and of badnes, seeing unjoyned
In honored Embassy disguised attempted
The rebel Wallaces presence.

Glascot and Mountford.

Who did this damned villainy?

Our message told,
The traitor newly set on fire with madness,
Showing the mangled bodies of a Friar,
His wife and father, burst out into flames
Hye hot and violent, In which fierce rage
Revolted Grimsby knew Sebastian
(Tho Herald like he went disguised) and seized
Him and us for three intelligencing spies,
Cut off his head, his tongue, and Glascots eyes.

Hang up this, provide for these, trufle him up.

What sen ye man?

What slave, what Turk that murders his own brethren
Durst play the tyrant thus? hang all the Nation
Whom we have taken to mercy, I Will not spare
Fathers, nor mothers, nor their bawling barnes,
fire their houses, hang up this tike first.

Ah bonny men, I met um play and at bo-peep, and gangand out a their way, and
sall I be hanged for my good deeds of charrity, I'ze a poor Scutch soldier,
and am ron away from that Rebel Wallas, to feight and for your good Prince, ah
he is a good King, and you are all bonny men, I'ze follow ye all to the death, and
to the Devil, and any man dare gang so far for all my clutches, giffe I clutch
Wallace, he is near carry it till hell nor heaven


If he do, may Percies name be crossed
Out of the roll of men.

So much swears Clifford.

Sneak not away sir, you are not gone yet.

I ken it vary weel.
I'ze not gangan to hanging yet.

Yet though a traitor, thus much let me speak
For absent VVallace, were the case your own,
Or one that is baser having any spirit,
A murdered father and a bleeding wife,
Mangled before him, would strike fire in snow,
Make loyalty turn traitor, and obedience
Forget all duty.

But our Nephews death
And the disgrace done our Ambassadors.

They then put off their title, and put on
The name of spies, when in their companies,
They take disguised observers.

By my sawle the English are gallant men.

No snare to entrap this Wolf?

How Northumberland, entrap a fo?
Sure it is no English word,
Clifford at least was never acquainted with it.
Give him fair summons, dare him to the field,
And trap him then.

Ah bony man!

His being a traitor warrants it, dispatch
A second message with acknowledgment
Of former wrongs to our Ambassadors,
With promise of a friendly enterview
Early to morrow, impartially to hear
Their wrongs, and mildely minister redress.

Ensnare him so and spare not, for you will find I fear,
That Selby, Haslerig, and the rest
Lay yokes too heavy on the Nations neck.

If they do punish 'em.

Punish 'em, sdeath hang 'em.

Shall we agree to have such message sent
To allure this bloody Tygre into the net
And waking then or s^^eping kill him.

No.

All stratagems are lawful against a fo.

Do what you will, but my consent is no.

I Will venture to the Rebel.

Do good Beaumont, Scotchman dare thou conduct him as his guide?


But return sir, or the next time we take ye
You Are Crag shall pay for it.

I'ze not run away fra ye, giffe I do hang me and drae me, cum bully Joe, I
dare not gang to the Scottis Camp, th'yle sa slay upon me, Ise near cum back
again, but lze bring you where ye shall see that Lowne VVallace


That Is all I wish; lead on.

Marry sall I, luke to your self,
Ise thrust you into the Dewles chops.

For getting out let me scuffle.

Consult for present execution.

What is, what should, what can this Wallace be?
Whom fame limbs out for such a gallant piece,
And is so curious in her workmanship,
No part deforms him,
Yet Wallace is a Rebel, his chief scandal
Is poverty of Gentry, by my sword
Were no impeach to my dear Ancestors,
I well could spare him some of my unused titles,
Or would at martial gaming so I might lose
And Wallace win so much of Cliffords honor,
Our stocks might be alike, but I exceed,
This night he is betrayed, he shall not,
I Will turn traitor first he shall not,
Call Beaumont back, or else by Cliffords honor,
An oath which I esteem above my life,
I will turn traitor, and reveal your plots,
Call him back.

Is Clifford mad?

No Percie's lunatic, suppose he be a traitor
And discipline of the field allow the act,
What honor is it for a herd of yours
To worry a sleeping Bear? go call him back.

See he comes uncalled.

The news.

News call you it, let no Scot come near your tents,
Wallace sends you this token.

Ha, how, Wallace.

Was that the traitor?

By Mars his helm, a complete Warrior,
I so love his worth, I Will court it with my sword.

Had you but stood in distance of his thunder,
For, we parted just where our trenches ended,
You'de have sworn the God of War had spoke,
Quoth he, tell Percy, he shall not need.
To hunt me in my tent, I Will rouse him in's own,
And bids me give you this wooden stumpe,
And swears to make you wear it,
If you dare stand him in the field.

Base Rebel, why durst he not stand here?

None prayed him stay,
It Was manners being not welcomed to get away.

He sends, commends to Clifford, with this wish,
That if at this great match of life, and death,
He chance to lose the smallest part of honor
His sword may joyn't, he knows best how to use it.
At my return from France, quoth he, this vow
Which I have promised shall be surely paid,
Our Country overtopt with tyranny,
Makes us fly thither for succor, Aeolus,
Let favorable winds and tides assist me,
That spoak, revolted Grimsby and his powers
Met him in Arms, what further he intends,
Hark their Drum tells, here my Commission ends.

Lets send him commendations too, beat ours.

Set down Bolt, I can bear with thee no longer.

No more can I bear any longer with you, Sir Ieffry, but what a reeling
drunken sot is this sea, that casts up such gobbets as this, is this a windfall
or no now sir Ieffery? your Worship knows both the tags and points of the law


Yes sure it is a windfall, for as we walked upon the shore, we saw the ship
split, this fell out, the winds were the cause, therefore it must needs be a
windfall


Well some body has had but a bad fish-dinner to day.


The Seas have crossed them that sought to cross the Seas, and therefore for my
part I Will never meddle with these waterworks


Nor I, lets be more wise then a number of gallants, and keep the land that is
left us, did you ever see such gambols as the waves made sir Ieffery


Never since I wore the nightcap of Justice, and that this her dudgeon dagger
was a my side


Did you note what puffing the winds made till they got great bellies, and then
how sorely the ship fell in labor


Did hear what a doleful cry they made,
When their maine yard was split?

Alas sir, would it not make any man roar that had but an inch of feeling or
compassion in his belly to have his main yard split, and how the mariners
hung by the ropes like Saint Thomas Onyons


I saw it Bolt with salt eyes.

So that you may see at sea however the wind blows, if a man be well hung,
he is cock sure


But Bolt what do thou think this to be?

A matter of some weight as I take it.

I hope it is gold it is so heavy, and 'twas going out of the Land.


Like enough, for gold goes now very heavily from us, and silver too, both red
chincks, and white chincks fly away, but sir Ieffery, if this be gold, how
rich is the sea, think ye, that has innumerable such sands


More rich then the land, and more fat.

So it had need, for the land looks with a lean pair of cheeks, yet it has an
excellent stomach, it digests any thing


Then it is like the sea, for all is fish that comes to net there.


I Will tell you the mystery of that, look what mouths gape at land, the self
same gape at sea, all the land is one kingdom, and all the sea another


And people in it.

And people in it (right worshipful) but they all go Westhod, as there are good
and bad here, so there are good and bad there, gulls here, gulls there, as
great men here eat up the little men: so Whales feed upon the lesser fishes


Belike then the watery common wealth are ill governed.


No bravely, for heroical Hector Herring is King of fishes.


So.

Rich cobs his good subjects, who at Yarmouth lay down their lives in his
quarrel, sword-fish and Pike are his guard


On.

Fresh Cods the gallants, and sweet slipper the Knights, whiting-mopps the
Ladies, and Lillie-white-mussels the wayting-gentlewomen


Dangerous meat to take too much of.

But who the pages?

Shrimps.

No, no sir, perriwinckles are the pages, perriwinckles.


No Justices among them?

Yes sir Ieffery, Thornebacks are the Justices, Crabs the Constables, whom if
you butter with good words, it is passing meat at midnight


Ah, ha.

Dogfish are Iaylors,
And Stockfish the poor common people.

Indeed they live hardly.

But sir they are beaten to it, then have you wet Eeles for whores, and great
Oysters for Bawds


Why great Oysters Bawd?

Because for the most part they are stewed.

Very good.

Lastly, because no Kingdom can stand without laws, and where law has her
eyne, there Lawyers and Pettifoggers swarm, therefore the Lawyers here are
sharks, and gudgeons the poor Clyents


Wa ho to sol fa, sol fa.

Hark.

Peace Bolt.

Nay peace you good sir Ieffery, peace, peace.

Sol la, sol la sol la sol la.

Some Faulconers teaching his Hawke pricksong, Shall I mock him in's own key.


Do.

Sol fa sol fa, here boy.

Here boy, wa ha ho ho,
All hail to you two.

And all snow to you sir.

Sir what art thou that wishest all the hail to light upon us two?


Answer wisely to my master,
For he is a Justice of peace, and you will be smelt out.

I am a drowned rat.

A Rat?

Do you take sir Ieffrey for a Rat-catcher,
You Will tell a sweet tale for your self anon.

Pox rot you, I am shipwrack't,
Give me some meat.

Shall I make his Mittimus? he begs sir.

I'ha met more then my match, Neptune and I,
Wrestling for falls, he got the masterie,
I Am with his beating bruised, weary, cold, weak,
Liquor'd soundly.

He Is drunk.

Yet so thirsty scarce can speak,
If ye be men, help me to food and fire.

What Countryman art thou sir?

A Scot, give me some victuals pray.

No mind but of thy belly.

Sir, sir, you are a Scot, and I a true English Justice.

Not a word of Latin, neither Justice, nor Clarke.

Peace Bolt in the Kings name, I charge thee, if you will eat bread earn bread,
take up this luggage, sir, follow me home to my house, thou shall have good
bread, good drink, and good fire, up I command thee


I am necessities slave, and now must bear.

Must! nay, shall: are not the English your good Lords and Masters?


Well they are.

Do you grumble sir, on sir Jeffrey.

Have an eye to him Bolt, lest he give us the slip,
And were you in this terrible storm at Sea say you?

Over head and ears, sir.

If the execution had been upon the land Sir Ieffrey, as 'twas upon the Sea,
your worship had been in a worse pickle then he


Why Knave? why?

Because he that has a bad name is half-hang'd,
And your worship knows, ye have but an ill name.

Thou Varlet is not wise good?

Yes, come along porter, wise is good.

And is not acre good?

Yes passing good.

Why should Wiseacre being put together be naught then?


Is not Plumb-porridge good, Sir Ieffrey?

Yes.

Would I had this trunk full of 'em.

Peace Greedi-gut, Plum-porridge is good, and Bag-pudding is good, but put them
together, and they are filthy meat


Well, that is true.

Right sir.

How now?

Hunger is good, and two Woodcocks are good, But the feathers of those two
Woodcocks must be plucked first


Hold I charge thee.

Y are a scurvy Justice, yare man's an Ass, and you another with a velvet
foot-cloth on your back, I ken ye vary weel, and Ise knock ye vary we will, if
any thing be worth victales, it goes down here


The Devil choke you, if you be a man of your word.


Wiseacres, if you would fain know who has got this trash from ye, it is I,
Wallace the Scot


Wallace.

Fly sir Ieffrey,
He calls us Woodcocks, let us fly and raise the Country.

Do You ye grumble? raise the Devil and spare not.
Were thou a chest of gold, I Would give thee all for victuals,
Hunger, they say, will break stone walls,
Your chops are not so hard,
Ye shall burst tho with iron ribs ye were barred,
-- victuals -- wine too, -- few justices do feed the hungry thus, o these
VViseacres are the bravest fellows, specially English VViseacres


I Will now be my own carver, misery and age
Want and despair have brought me to deaths door,
And shall I not enter? yes I will, this key
Shall do it, is death so surly, may a poor man
Speak sooner with a King then speak with him
When he has most need of him, ugly lean slave,
So I may see him, no matter for a grave.

How now, what do look for?

For that which a quarter of the world
Wants, a tree to be hanged upon.

Art weary of thy life?

Yes all men are of their old wives, my life has gone up and down with me
this threescore and odd years, it is time to be weary on it I think now


And when tha'st hanged thy self, whither do think to go then?


To the Linnen-draper.

What Linnen-draper?

The richest in the world, my old Grandmother the Earth, how many pair of
sheets has she had, think ye, since Adam and Eve lay together, It Is the best
Inn to lie at, a man shall be sure of good linen


Who dwells hereabouts?

One upon whom all the poor in the Country cries out.


Whose that?

Scarcity, dearth, penury, famine, hunger, I have not known that man lives by
food these four days, and therefore I Will descend to the Antipodes, because
I Will kick at this world


Stay, famine shall not kill thee, sit and eat
Thy belly full, thy cares in good wine drown,
By my own fall I pity others down,
Is It not good cheer?

Brave, I thank you for it, how many beggars does a rich man eat at his table
at one meal, when those few crummes are able to save a man's life, how came you
sir into this fearful nest of Screech-owles and Ravens


Cast up by the Sea, I was shipwrack'd and lost all my company.


Would I had been one of 'em, I have lost more then you have done, I have lost
all that I had but my sins, and they hang so heavy on my eyelids, I can
scarce look so high as the brimmes of my hatt to heaven, I have such a mind
downwards, I have almost forgot who dwells over my head


Look up, be not afraid, there reigns no tyrant,
Wud thou had been with me at sea.

So wud I.

Had thou an Atheist been, and God not known,
Thou Had found him in the deep, there he is best shown,
He that at Sea is shipwrackt, and denies
A Deity (being there saved) damned lives and dies,
Man no where in the twinkling of an eye
Is thrown so near to hell, or raised so high
Toward heaven, then when he is tossed upon the waves
It must be a hand omnipotent there that saves,
But how came you sir hither?

I was banished from England (but that grieves me not)
But I killed an old man, he was called Wallace.

Ha?

Wallace, and me thinks he is still at mine elbow.

Elbowe? idle: Selby my fathers murderer?
Think not upon it, sit eat heartily
Thy last, sit down, I say, never to rise,
Drink wine, drink deep, let thy soul reele to hell.

I am almost dead with cold.

I Will fetch dry sticks,
And with two flints kindle fire, beat out his brains:
O that physic had the power to make thee young,
I Would fetch thee drugs from the utmost of the world,
And then would arm thee, or, into thy veins
Half my own blood I Would power, to lend thee strength,
That I might kill thee nobly.

Be quiet, I Will pay thee.

How now?

A slumber took me, and me thought old Wallace
Clapped me upon the shoulder with one hand,
And with the other pointed to his wounds,
At which I started, spoke, but know not what,
I Am cold at heart.

I Will seek for fire.

I thank ye, if what I utter ye tell to any, I am a dead man,
You have me at your mercy, and may betray me.

Not I, eat and get strength, I Will seek for fire,
Unless I be a devil (tho I have cause
To kill thee) yet my quick hand shall eschew it,
Thy careless confidence does bind me to it,
This mercy which I show now is for Gods sake,
In part of payment of his shown to me,
If I should kill thee now, thou owe me nothing,
Live, and be still my debtor, I shall do thee
More harm to give thee life, then take it from thee,
Heaven in my fathers blood who is chief sharer,
Shall strike for me a revenge more just and fairer.

Selby, Selby,
How like a Churl thou feed'st alone,
And greedy art to fatten misery -- Selby?

Here.

Look I have found a jenniting tree.

Where stands it?

I Will not tell thee; see brave food.

Lets taste it.

Not a paring, what have there?

The dole of plenty.

Good old Rogue I thank thee,
I have a stomach like a Lawyer,
Lets eat fruit when we have filled our bellies.

Not a bitt.

Ha?

Not a paring of cheese.

I must.

Thou shall not, I pay thee in thy own coin.

Thy doting age is almost at her journies end,
My youth having far to go needs more provision,
And i will have this --

Hands off

You Dog, you old Devil.

I thank thee, thou have cut the thread in two,
Of all my woes, heaven pardon us both, adue.

Selby, no water from the hallowed Fount,
Touched thee, thou art so fatal, Selby, dead!
Gods building which has stood this threescore years,
This has defaced, would it were up again
With ruin of mine own, I never knew
Partners but one still the other overthrew,
Thou and I did set up with one stock of care
I have undone thee, and now all is my share,
It Is not so sinful nor so base a stroke
To spoil a Willow as an old reverend Oak,
From me thou art gone, but i will from hence nere fly,
But sit by thee, and sigh, and weep, and die.

Stand, that is he who turns his tail to us, which is as much as to say, A fart
for your Worship


Down with him.

Peace, it is a wild Bull we come to set upon, and therefore let those Dogs
that can fasten bite soundly


My hearts, we come not to bait an Ass in a Bears skin, but a Lion in his own
skin, he is a traitor


How know we that?

Thus, he hides his face, and we are not to back a traitor, Sir Jeffrey,
you will get between me and the Gallows, if I strike him down


I Will enter into a Recognizance to hang before thou shall hang.


If you see my heart begin to faint, knock you me down to put life into me.


Fear nothing.

Be damned both gods and men the act detest,
Oh heaven; wipe this sin out for all the rest.

Your sins are wiped out sir, your Scottish score is paid sir.


Is he down?

He sprawles, stay there is one asleep by him,
Shall I kill the lice in his head too?

No, wake not a sleeping Mastive, the Kings in the field, Lets post to him,
Bolt, thou shall be a Knight as deep as my self, for this manly deed, as ye go
through the Country, cry aloud, the traitor's dead


Cry it out at the Cross, and at the old Palace,
That Bolt was the man that brained lusty Wallace.

The traitor's dead, the traitor's dead, etc.

Thou shall have fire anon old man, ba', murdered?
What should thou be? the face of Haslerig,
It Is he, just heavens ye have bestowed my office
Upon some other, I thank ye that my blood
Stains not my hand, however both did die
(In love or hate) both shall together lie,
The Coffin you must sleep in is this Cave,
Whole heaven your winding sheet, all earth your grave,
The early Lark shall sadly ring your Knell,
Your Dirge be sung by mournful Philomell,
Instead of flowers and strewing herbs take these,
And what my charity now fails to do,
Poor Robin-redbrest shall, my last adue,
I have other streams to swim through, or calm
Venture, it is brave when danger's crowned with palm.

Upon this field-bed will we lodge this night,
The earth's a soldiers pillow, here pitch our tents.

Up with our tents.

To council, beat a Drum.

Beat it for action then, and not for words,
Upon our Spear points our best counsel fits,
Follow that (noble General) up with no tents
If you dare hold me worthy to advise,
But with an easy march move gently on.

You speak against the Scholership of war.

Now their Beef-pots, and their Cans,
Are tossed in stead of Pikes, their Arms are thrown
About their Wenches middles, there is their close feight,
Let us not lose the forelock in our hands,
Of us they dream not, yet we are as freeborn
As the English King himself, be not their slaves,
Free Scotland, or in England dig our graves.

A Wallace, A Wallace, A Wallace!

Rugerosse, what cry is this?

Of the whole Army,
Grown wild twixt joy and admiration,
At the sight of Wallace.

Ha.

That dreadlesse Soldier,
For whom all Scotland shed a sea of tears
As deep as that in which men thought him dead,
Sets with his presence all their hearts on fire,
That have but sight of him.

A Wallace, A Wallace.

Entreat him hither.

Do You hear the English march? they are at hand.

Now Grimsby, they for Pikes are tossing Cans.

I am glad our thunder wakes 'em.

Shall we on?

Whether is it best to stop 'em in their march,
Or here to make a stand and front 'em.

Stand.

Or else retire back to the spacious Plain
For battle far more advantageous.

And so retiring be held runawayes.
Here stands my body, and ere this English Wolves
Stretch their jaws never so wide, from hence shall drive
I Will rather lie here fifty fathom deep,
Now at this minute, then by giving back
One foot, prolong my life a thousand years.

Then let us die or live here.

Arm, arm.

Fall back? not I, death of my self is part,
I Will never fly my self, here is no false heart:
Lets in our rising be, or in our falls
Like bells which ring alike at Funerals,
As at Coronations, each man meet his wound,
With self-same joy as Kings go to be crowned,
Where charge you?

In the battle, valiant Grimsby
Is General of our Horse, the infantry
By coming is commanded, Mentith and you
Shall come up in the Rear.

The Rear.

Yes.

No, sir.
Let Mentith, Wallace shall not.

He may choose.

Were I to hunt within a Wilderness
A herd of Tigres, I would scorn to cheat
My glories from the sweat of others brows,
By encountering the fierce beasts at second hand,
When others strength had tamed him, let me meet
The Lion being new rowz'd, and when his eyes
Sparkle with flames of indignation,
I have not in the Academe of War
So often read Lectures, chief now to come lag,
I Will have the leading of the Van or none.

Then none, you wrong us all,
Men now are placed, and must not be dishonored.

So, dishonored.

Charge in the Rear for Gods sake, now to stand
On terms of worth hazards the fate of all.

Well be it so then, the Rear, see you yon hill,
Yonder i will stand, and tho I should see Butchers,
Cut all your throats like sheep, I will not stir
Till I see time my self.

Your pleasure, on,
Each Leader spend his best direction.

Which is the fellow?

I am the party sir.

Stand forth before the King,

Nay, he is no sheep-biter.

Did thou kill Wallace?

Yes marry did I sir, if I should be hanged here before ye, I would not deny
it


How did thou kill him? hand to hand?

Hand to hand, as Dog-killers kill dogs, so I beat out his brains I Am sure.


Me thinks, thou should not look him in the face.

No more I did, I came behind his back and felld him.

Art thou a Gentleman?

I am no gentleman borne, my Father was a poor Fletcher in Grubstreet, but I
am a gentleman by my place


What place?

A Justices Clarke, sir Jeffery Wiseacres.

My man, if it please your Majesty, an honest true Knave.


Give to sir Wiseacres Clark an hundred pounds.

I thank your grace.

God confound all your foes at the same rate.

But if this Wallace, sir, be alive now,
You and your hundred pounds shall both be hanged.

Nay I will be hanged ere I part from my money,
Who pays, who pays?

Charge, charge.

The news brave Clifford.

The daring Scot fuller of insolence then strength Stand forth to bid us
battle


Throw defiance back down their throats, and of our Heralds
Northumberland the honor shall be thine, tell'um
We come to scourge their pride with whips of steel,
Their City has from Justice snatched her sword
To strike their Sovereign, who has turned the point
Upon their own breasts, tell 'em this.

I shall.

Where Is noble Bruce?

Here.

I have a message, but it is more honorable, sent to you too,
The Herald says that Wallace dares ye, his
Spite is all at you, and if your spirit be great
As his, you find him in the rear.

Hang up that wiseacres, and the fool his man.

My master, not me sir, I have a Recognizance of him
To stand betwixt me and the gallows.

A Kings word must be kept, hang 'em both.

One word more good Sir, before I go to this geere,

If a Kings word must be kept, why was it not kept, when he gave me the 100.
li. wipe out one, I Will wipe out the other


That jest has saved your lives, let me see you fight to day.


Bravely like Cocks.

Now Wallace look to your coxcombe.

Move on.

We have fleshed them soundly.

I would not wish to meet with braver spirits.

Stay, Bruce, what is yonder on the hill?

They are Collors.

Why do they mangle thus their Armies limbs?
What Is that so far off?

Sure it is the Rear, where burns the black brand,
Kindles all this fire, I mean the Traitor Wallace?

What turned Coward?
A dog of so good mouth, and stand at bay?
If in this heat of fight we break their ranks,
Press through, and charge that devil, Bruce thy self.

To hell if I can chase him.

Charge up strong, hark, brave,
Let now our hands be warriors, not our tongues.

They fly, they fly.

The English shrink, knit all our nerves
And fasten Fortunes offer.

Keep steedy footing, the day is lost if you stir,
Stir not, but stand the tempest.

I cry on.

And I.

So do not I, this starting back is but an English earthquake, which to dust,
shakes rotten towers, but builds the sound more strong


Lets on, and dare death in the thickest throng.

Did I not give you warning of this whirpoole
For going too far?

We are all dead men, yet fight
So long as legs and Arms last.

In how quick time
Have we about you built a wall of brass?
Had he whom here you call your General
A Soldier been remarkable of great breeding,
And now to be caught with lyme-twigs?

Keep our ground.

If we must fall, fall bravely.

Wound for wound.

Exeunt King and Bruce pursuing the Scots.

Take breath, I would not have the world robbed of two such spirits, poast to
the King, and tell him that the noblest Hearts of the whole heard are hunted to
the toil

Ask whether they shall fall, or live for gain.


I shall.
Charge.

For honors sake come down, and save thy Country.


Whose is the day?

It Is Edwards, come rescue
Our General, and the noble Grimsby.

Who?

Our General and stout Grimsby are enclosd
With quick-sets made of steel, come fetch them off,
Or all is lost.

Is the day lost?

Lost, lost.

Unless the day be quite lost, I Will not stir.

It Is quite lost.

Why then descend amain, art sure it is lost?

Yes.

Then we will win it again.

How now?

The King proclaims that man a traitor
That saves when he may kill.

Charge them black day,
The Lion hunts a Lion for his prey.
A fight.

Too late.

Why then farewell,
I Will make what haste I can to follow thee,
Bruce, Bruce, I am here, it is Wallace calls thee,
Dares thee.

Tho I nere stoopt unto a traitors lure,
I scorn thine, why do thou single me,
Yet turnst thy weapon downward to the earth?

Lets breathe and talk.

I Will parley with no traitor but with blows.

Ye shall have blows your guts full,
I am no traitor.

Why against thy Sovereign lifts thou then thy sword?


You see I lift it not.

Tell Edward so thy King.

Longshancks was never Sovereign of mine,
Nor shall whilst Bruce lives, Bruce is my Sovereign,
Thou art but bastard English, Scotch true borne,
Thou Art made a mastive amongst a heard of wolves,
To weary those thou should be shepherd of.
The fury of the battle now declines,
And take my counsel, though I seem thy foe,
Wash both thy hands in blood, and when anon
The English in their Tents their deeds do boast,
Lift thou thy bloody hands up, and boast thine,
And with a sharp eye note, but with what scorn,
The English pay thy merit.

This I Will try.

Dare thou alone meet me in Glasco-moore,
And there I Will tell thee more?

Thou have no treason toward me?

Here Is my hand,
I am clear as innocence, had I meant treason
Here could I work it on thee, I have none.

In Glasco-moore I Will meet thee, fare thee well.

The time.

Some two hours hence.

There I will untie
A knot, at which hangs death or Soveraigntie.

We have swet hard to day.

It Was a brave hunting.

Sit, some wine
Away in the field all fellows, whose is this?

It was my Coat at Arms, but now it is yours at legs.


Away, why give thou me a cushion?

Because of the two, I take you to be the better man.


A soldiers coat shall never be so base
To lie beneath my heel, thou art in this place
My fellow, and companion, a health to all in England.

Let it come.

Is not this he that killed VVallace?

No sir, I am only he that said so,
As you sit, so did I lie.

Sir, where is your master?

My master is shot.

How shot, where?

In The back.

Oh he ran away.

No, my Lord, but his harness Cap was blown off, and he running after it to
catch it, was shot between neck and shoulders, and when he stood upright he
had two heads


Two heads how?

Yes truly, his own head and the arrow head, it was twenty to one that I had
not been shot before him


Why prithee?

Because my Knights name being Wiseacres, and mine Bolt, and you know a fools
bolt is soon shot


He has pind the fool upon his masters shoulder very handsomely.


Sir, go seek your master, and bid him take order for burying of the dead.


I shall Sir, and whilst he takes order for the burials of the dead, i will take
order for the stomachs of the living


How fought to day our English?

Bravely.

How the Scots?

The pangs of war are like to childbed throws
Bitter in suffering, but the storm being past,
The talk, as of escaped shipwreck sweet, does taste,
The death of the Scotch General went to my heart,
He had in him of man as much as any,
And for ought I think, his blood was poorly sold
By his own Countrymen, rather then sought by us.
Had not the Rear where Wallace did command,
Stood and given aim, it had bin a day
Bloody and dismal, and whose hard to say,
Sir, you shall give me leave to drink a health
To all the valiant Scots.

Clifford, I Will pledge thee, give me my bowl.

Sir, I remembered Wallace in my draught.

I did not, so this cup were Wallace Skull,
I Would drink it full with blood, for it would save
The lives of thousands.

I for your Kingdoms would not pledge it so.

I would, no matter how a traitor falls.

Percy, ten thousand Crowns should buy
That traitors head, if I could hav't for money.

I would give
Twice twenty thousand Crowns to have his head
On my swords point cut from him with this arm,
But how in the field, nobly, hand to hand, not this straw
To a hangman that should bring it me.

Let that pass,
Where Is Bruce, our noble Earl of Carrick?

I saw him not to day,

I did, and saw his sword
Like to a Reapers Sith, mow down the Scots.
Here he comes.

Brave Armory, a rampant Lion within a field all Gules,
Where have been Bruce?

Following the execution which we held
Three English miles in length.

Give him some wine, art not thirsty?

Yes for Scottish blood, I never shall have
Enough on it, the Kings health.

Let come.

How greedily you Scot drinks his own blood!

Ha, ha, ha.

If he should taste your bitterness, 'twere not well.

What Is that ye all laughed at?

Nothing but a jest.

Nay, good Sir tell me.

An idle jest, more wine for Bruce.

No more, I have drunk too much,
Wallace and I did parlee.

How in words?

No Percy, I Am no prater, 'twas with swords,
Your laughing jest was not at me?

Sir, no.

Bruce would fain quarrel,

I ha done sir.

Peace, what Trumpet's that?

From the enemy sure.

Go learn.

I come from Wallace.

So Sir, what of him?

Thus he speaks.
He bids me dare you to a fresh battle, by to morrowes sun,
Army to Army, troup to troup, he challenges,
Or to save blood, fifty to fifty, shall the strife decide,
Or one to one.

A Herald to the traitor.
Go and thus speak, we bring whips of steel,
To scourge Rebellion, not to stand the braves
Of a base daring vassal, bid him ere that Sun
Which he calls up be risen, pay it and save
His Country and himself from ruin, charge him on his head,
To make his quick submission; if he slow the minutes,
We Will proclaim in thunder his and his Countries ruin,
Go be gone, Arm.

Arm, Arm.

A Land that is sick at heart must take sharp pills,
For dangerous physic best cures dangerous ils.

As you are a soldier, as y' are noble
I charge you and conjure you to unclaspe
A book in which I am graveld.

Perhaps I cannot.

Yes, if you dare you can.

Dare? Clifford dares
Do any thing but wrong and what is not just.

Then tell me sir, what was that bitter scorn,
Which I like poison tasted in my wine?

I care not if I do, because I love virtue even in
My enemy, the bowl of wine kissing your lip.
Behold, quoth one how eagerly you Scot,
Drinks his own blood.

You Scot drinks his own blood, which Scot?

Best wake some Oracle.

Who brake the jest upon me?

Pray pardon me.

The Oracle I Will wake is here, oh Wallace,
I never had eyes till now, they were closed up
By braving English, witchcraft drinks his own blood,
England my stepdame take my bitter curse,
Thy own nails tear thy own bowels, oh my parent
Dear Scotland, I no more will be a goad,
Pricking thy sides, but if ere I draw a sword,
It shall be double-edg'd with blood and fire,
To burn and drown this Kingdom and this King.

My General
Charged me in privacie to give you these.

Thanks noble Clifford, what did he bid thee say?

Nothing but so.

A pair of Spurs, Bruce nere was runaway,
Twelve silver pence, oh bitter scorn, with Judas,
I have betrayed my Master, my dear Country,
And here is the emblem of my treachery,
To hasten to some tree, and desperate die,
Twelve sterling silver pence, sterling, ha sterling,
It Is a limb of Scotland, spurs for flight,
Clifford, i will thither, comment I wrong or right.

Stay noble Grimsby, ere he further pass
One of us certify our General,
Perhaps he will not admit him to his presence.

It Is like so, stay him here, that pains be mine.

Let Ruge-crosse bring his pleasure.

Come agreed.

You bring from Longshanks some strange message now.


At least he sends his Gauntlet.

Gauntlet, no the English
Fight not two days together, but like swaggerers,
A fray being made up with a wound or so,
The man whose throat before should have been cut,
Is a sworn brother, now we have mall'd your Nation,
Thei'le fawn on us like Spaniels, will they not?

And that is thy errand, is it not?

Commonly, when English see at cuffs they are too weak, they fall to fishing,
and then bait the hook with mercy, and the Kings pardon, at which who bites
has his swallowing spoiled for ever, there is no Scot but scorns to hang his
hope on your Kings promises, be it nere so smoothly gilded


He gilds none sir.

I warrant he would pawn half his Dominions to shake hands with Wallace, and be
friends


Had he but him in's Court, he would outshine
His capring gallants, be would dote on him,
As Jupiter did on Ganymede, and make him
His chief Minion.

He does already so really dote upon him, it is not yet the age of one hour
since my Master swear to give ten thousand Crowns to Scot or English, that were
so bold to bring him Wallace's head


The English Herald.

Ten thousand Crowns.

Would make a fair show in our purses Jack.

I could pick out five thousand heads,
That I durst boldly sell him at that rate.

Ten thousand Crowns.

I and Court wind-falls too,
Some English Earldome or so, here is none but friends,
Should you betray the conference, I care not,
I would deny it, and I would oresway
Your proofs tho near so massy.

It shall not need, believe me worthy Mentith.
What here you look is safe.

Shall we earne this English gold, ten thousand crowns?


My hand.

They are ours, he is dead.

No more, he comes.

I am to him no vassal, he is a tyrant,
So tell him, ere his frown shall bend my knee,
This shall be hanged upon the gallow tree,
For my appearance tell him this, I Will dyne
On Christmas day next in his English Court,
And in his great Hall at Westminster, at's own board,
We Will drink Scotch healths in his standing cups of gold:
His black Iackes hand in hand about his Court
Shall march with our blew bonnets, we will eat nothing
But what our swords shall carve, so tell his Soldiers,
We Will sit like Lords there whilst they rail like slaves,
Go with Scotch threats, pay back your English braves.

You Will make the English mad.

A brave defiance.

Defiance,
Lets mad them more, they shall not sleep to night,
Good Grimsbie beat a drum, let bon-fires shine
Through all our army, as if our Tents were burnt,
And we dislodged, but recollect our troops
Into an ordered body, some thing we will do
To make our Chronicles swell with English rue.

A Drum, call a Drum.

Oh sir John Mentith I have cracked the Ice,
To a design, which if it will succeed,
England no more shall strike, nor Scotland bleed.

Com. Lets be partakers, dear sir.

What will you say, if I win Bruce from the English?


The happiest day that ever shone on Scotland.

And crown him King?

That Is the up-shot must crown all, I Am to meet him
Before one hour grow old in Glasco-moore.

How meet him?

As I am, both come alone, no words to any.

Our lips are sealed.

Will you ride, or go on foot?

No more, I Will ride.

We Will pass the wood on foot.

Jack Mentith, I do laugh to think what face,
Longshancks will make, when he shall hear what guests
Will dine with him in's Court on Christmas day.

What face? he will kill the Herald sure.

Oh! some charm for me to be invisible there, and see him.


For my part, of ten thousand crowns by this hand,
I do wish you there.

For as many of mine, I swear.

Time may come,
In his Exchequer we may share twice that sum.

Hence, hye you before, keep close in the wood,
Break forth if you spy treason, if not, not.

Good.

Ha, if what thou seem thou art, step forward, speak,
I have faced more horrid terror.

Whare do gang?

What Is that to thee?

Thouse not lest and lang,
Two wolves will suike thy bluide, by the third night,
I charge thy sawle meet mine, thy death is dight.

Thou art a lying spirit.

Bruce been thy bane,
Gif on thou gang luke not turn back again,
Wallace beweere, me thinks it thee should irke,
Mare need have thou to serve God in the Kirk.

Stay, if thou have a voice thou art blood and bone,
As I am, let me feel thee, else I Will think thee
A sorcerous imaginary sound:
Stand me, thou art some English damned witch,
That from a reverend Friar has stolen his shape
To abuse me -- stay -- art gone? no Hagge I will not.
It spoke sure, told me Bruce should
be my bane, -- cannot -- shall not,
heaven knows such things only.
That eye has shot me throw, wounds me to death,
I know that face too well, but it is so ghastly,
I Will rather with my nails here dig my grave,
Then once more behold thee.
Part from me vexed spirit, my blood turns to water,
I beseech thee affright me not -- it is gone.

Alace Scotland to wham salt thou complain,
Alace, fra mourning wha sall the refayne?
I thee beseekand for him died on tree,
Come not nere Bruyce, yet Bruyce sall not hurt thee,
Alace, alace, no man can stand against fate.
The dampe dew fra the heaven does gyn to faw,
I to my rest mim gange ere the Cock crawe.

It was my wife, what horror meet I here?
No Armor in the world can hold out fear.

We stay for your direction.

Whom did you meet?

No body.

Saw ye nothing?

Not any thing.

It Was my brains weakness then,
I have seen strange sights, that anon I Will tell;
If Grimsbie we meet never more, farewell.

Ha, I am struck dumb, oh man's slippery fate!
Mischiefs that follow us at our backs we shun,
And are struck down with those we dream not on.

I have beside with Wallace sheriff of life,
Held private conference, who in Longshancks name,
Who swears to me we shall have good preferment,
Beside the promised gold.

Peace, Wallace comes.

Is the Bruyce come?

It is not yet his hour.

Who came along with you?

My footboy only, who is tying up my horse.

Him must I kill.
I Will look if Bruce be in sight yet --

Do.

You Are sad.

My mind is shaken but the storm is over,
What cry is that?

Be armed, Bruce with a force comes to betray thee,
From some villains hand thy footboy is murdered.

Murdered? Bruce shall repent this deed.

So shall thou, away with him.

Help to disguise me Soldier, in exchange
Take these for thine, and here is some gold to boot.

If I be not hanged, my Lord, in all my bravery,
I care not.

Phew, I warrant thee,
Seal up thy lips and eyes, thou neither see
Nor can tell where I am.

Not I my Lord.
Oh my poor wronged country, pardon me heaven,
And with a feather plucked from mercies wing,
Brush off the purple spots, that else would grow,
Like freckles on my soul.

My Lord, here comes company.

Here quick mine own again, and get thee gone.

Sir Soldier, saw thou the Earl of Huntington?

Huntington?

The Lord Bruce, I mean.

Who calls for Bruce?

Muffled up, and alone, I Will to the King.

Do, sir be gone.

Whither's Percy gone? he asked for Bruce.

There Is great inquiry for you.

By whom?

The King has a fresh command for Bruce.

For me? he may command his Subjects.

True, and Huntington is one.

Is none.

No Subject?

None that dare oppose your King, Oh my impostum'd spleen,
Will fly into their faces, what command
Has England now?

Fresh powers are to be levied,
Which Bruce of Huntington must lead.

Against whom?

Against proud Wallace, against the Scots.

I will not, I Am not his Butcher,
Against the Scots I will not fight.

How, will not?

No, will not Clifford.

Peace.

My Lord, I dare not,
In this last battle I received some wounds
That yet bleed inward, I will no more banquet strangers
With my native blood.

Bruce speaks not like a subject.

English Edward commands not like a King,
Thrice honored Clifford, I Will trust you with my bosom.

No, you shall not.
My virgin honor is so chaste, it shall not
Keep company with a disquiet bosom,
Nor talk with discontents.

It shall not, I will but,
Spare me, the air has ears no more,
You sent to me, I will but tell bold Clifford
Not a word,
My thoughts owe as much honor as their Lord.
Within traitor, traitor.

A mutiny, what noise is it?

Mentith, a Knight of Scotland.

Keep him off.

What come thou for?

Common my countryman and I have brought
A jewel to your Highness, which if 'twere right
As it is known counterfeit, 'twere worth a kingdom,
Wearied with war, and pitying the deep wounds
Which fainting Scotland bears upon her breast,
And knowing that the only sword which gashes
Her tender sides, is gripped in Wallace hands,
I in my love to peace, and to the safety
Of two great Nations, am the man that laid
Snares to entrap this monster, that devoures
So many thousand lives, the Rebell's taken.

Where is he?

I have brought him to your English Camp,
Force would not do it, but policy, we struck the Stagge
To the ground, and thought him dead, but heaven put back
The blow of purpose, he is now come to life,
From an astonishment when we thought him dead,
To the end the world may see the public shame
Of an Arch-traytor.

Mentith has won fame,
And honor by this act, fetch in this devil.

Thou will have Englands thanks, but Scotlands curse,
Thou never have done better, never worse,
Damned Judas to thy Countryman and friend.

Where am I?

Here with Bruce.

Bruce my Sovereign?
My blood is sold, this is not Glasco-moore,
Some villain has betrayed me.

Speak to your countrymen, Common and Mentith.

Common and Mentith?
Something it was that made the modest night
Look angry on the world, I this was it,
And this was it that cleft my fathers grave,
And raised him from his monumentall bed of earth
To give me gentle warning, this was it,
That made my star, when all the rest looked pale,
Blush like a fiery Meteor, can Heaven wink at this?

It can, it does, and at far greater mischiefs.

Not of thy acting?

Yes of mine.

Not here.

Here or in Hell.

Why then go act them there,
Boast of them there, in that black Kingdom tell
That by a true subject a base Rebel fell.

What Is that?

Your Scotch jeweller is slain,

By whom?

By Wallace.

Hear me speak King Edward.

Good my Liege hear him,

Clif. I have vowed,
Neither to hear nor see him, drag him hence,
Mine eye shall nor be so compassionate
To view him, least I pity him: hang, draw, and quarter him.

First hear me speak,

Drag him hence, and let that heart, those limbs,
Which were the motives to rebellious war
Be torn asunder, cast upon that ground,
Which he with unkind steel so often did wound,
Away with him.

Farewell, to all the World,
I ha met death too often to fear him now,
Only it grieves me that I have not freed
Scotland my native soil from tyranny,
Bruce, thou have a Kingdom, lose it not.

Stop his throat.

I go to one too,
And on my grave, when death has there down laid me,
Be this my Epitaph, mine own betrays me --

Let him have noble trial.

He shall have the trial of an Arch-traitour,
Percy and Clifford take hence Bruce.

Me hence?

You hence sir, from this hour I swear,
Never to see thee Earl of Huntingdon,
Hark Clifford, and Northumberland, awa

What is King Edwards meaning?

Your head shall feel our meaning, see it dispatched.

You may.

My honored Lord, although untimely death,
Has taken hence one engine of that work,
That brought that Rebel Wallace to his end.
Seeing our Countries peace, and Englands good,
Is by his death made perfect and complete,
I doubt not but the promised reward
Of full ten thousand Crowns shall now remayn,
To the Survivor.

Comin, I perceive
It was reward, not love that acted it,
But you shall have your due, of that anon.
I told thee Bruce, that thou upon thy head,
Should feel our meaning, and that all the world,
May know we value honor above conquest,
Having a power able to turn all Scotland
Into a Chaos, here twixt both our Armies,
Give us thy oath of fealty, and wear
Both Crown and title of thine Ancestors.

England is full of honor, Bruce does bend
To thy command.

Give him his oath of fealty,
With him those Lords which are his Countrymen.

Stand back, a Serpent shall not with his breath
Infect our Kingly ears, die slave, for he
That would betray his friend shall nere serve me.

What has Bruce done?

A sacrifice of honor and revenge, no traitors hand
Shall help to lift a Crown up to my head,
Thou did betray, then die unpitied.

Brave Bruce, I Will love thee for this honored act,
Thou have performed a noble piece of justice:
Now shall the Ghost of Wallace sleep in peace,
And perfect love shall twixt these Lands increase.
He has his full reward for his foul treason,
Drag hence the slave, and make him food for Crows.
The Lamp that gave Rebellion light, has spent
The oil that fed it, all our spears are turned
To Palms and Olive branches, all our stars
Are now made whole, peace is the balm of wars.


