I Know that this worshipful Audience,
Is at this time together congregate:
Of our practice to have intelligence,
And with the same them selves to recreate.
God grant us grace the same well to publicate.
But for them that have slept at Parnassus:
This faculty is more meet for them then for us
Pandite pierides vestro sacra ostia vita.
Open your holy doors O pleasant Muses,
Direct our tungs to speak eloquently:
Virtues to praise and to touch abuses,
Dividing either of them plain and directly.
That it may appeer to all our Audience evidently.
That this matter which we now go about:
By your inspiration was first found out.
Oh that with some grace you would us inspire,
And dele with us as with Orpheus you dealt:
Then should all affections have their desire,
For through his Music he made stones to melt,
No kind of pain in Hell then the souls felt.
For he played so pleasantly with his Harp:
That they forgate their pains grievous and sharp.
Tantalus forgate his hunger and thirst,
Sisiphus loft of rolling his Stone:
Ixion tormented among the wurst,
Forgate his wheel that he was hanged on.
The woman Belides left woork anon:
Whose labor was continually to fill a Tun:
Whereout by clefts the licour still does run.
These fables wherefore do I call to mind?
Truly because I desire with all my heart:
That our English Meeter may be of such kind,
Both to leave all greeuousnes and smart.
And also to be pleasant in every part.
That those which come for recreation:
May not be void of their expectation.
Poets fained Mercurius to have wings,
both on his head and on his heels also:
For lively and swift he was in all things,
Appeering rather to flee then to go:
Of him they fain many goodly things mo.
But for our purpose this shall serve this season:
and why I speak, you shall know the reason.
Mercurius is the God of eloquence,
By whom I understand the ministers of talk:
Such must have the wings of intelligence,
In their heds before their tungs to far do walk.
The danger of rash speech they must wisely calke.
When, where, and to whom they speak they must note:
Before that any thing pass out of their throat.
As Mercurius has wings upon his head,
So has he wings on his heels ready to fly:
When affections stands in reasons sted,
Reporters of tales use eft soones to lie,
The heels affections do also signifye.
The wings do always reason comprehend:
Which unto Virtue ought to condescend.
Few words to wise men are sufficient,
Without a cause I give not this monition:
Unto good men it is plain and euidient,
That many men have that lewd condition.
By their evil words to bring good men into suspicion.
By their indiscreet talk they do much harm:
Because they want reason their tungs to charm.
Let this pass and go we to the Argument,
Which we will declare in words general:
Now such as have a learned judgment,
Know that among the Poets comicall,
In breef sentence it was usual.
To show the whole contents of the Comedye:
In the argument which did well verily.
But our tungs has not so comely a grace,
In that point, as has the Latin and Greek:
We cannot like them our sentences eloquently place,
That our Poets to their Orators may be like
As they know well which for such matters do seek.
But to do our best, indeed we will not neglect:
Trusting that wise men the same will accept.
Our title is Enough is as good as a feast,
Which Rethorically we shall amplyfye:
So that it shall appeer both to most and least
That our meaning is but honesty,
Yet now and then we will dally merrily.
So we shall please them that of mirth be desirous:
For we play not to please them that be curious.
For a Preface I fear I am to long
But I have said that I will say now:
The Worldly man is frolike lusty and strong,
Who will show his qualities before you,
Stowt he is and in any wise will not bow.
Behold yonder he comes into this place:
Therefore thus I finish our simple Preface.

BEcause I am a man indewed with treasure,
Therefore a worldly man men do me call:
In deed I have riches and money at my pleasure,
Yea, and I will have more in spite of them all.
A common saying better is envy then rueth,
I had rather they should spite then pity me:
For the old saying now a days proves truth,
Naught have naught set by as daily we see.
I wis I am not of the mind as some men are,
Which look for no more then will serve necessity:
No against a day to come I do prepare,
That when age comes I may live merrily.
Oh says one enough is as good as a feast,
Yea, but who can tell what his end shall be?
Therefore I count him wurse then a Beast,
That will not have that in respect and see.
As by mine own Father an example I may take,
He was belooued of all men and kept a good house:
Whilst riches lasted, but when that did slake,
There was no man that did set by him a Louse.
And so at such time as as he from the world went,
I mean when he dyed he was not worth a grote:
And they that all his substance had spent,
For the value of xij. pence would have cut his throat.
But I trow I will take heed of such,
They shall go ere they drink when they come to me:
It does me good to tell the chinks in my hutch,
More then at the Tauern or ale house tobe.

God cares for his as the Prophet David does say,
And preserves them under his merciful wing:
The Heavenly I mean, that his will do obey,
and observe his holy commandments in all thing.
Yet not for our sakes, nor for our deserving.
But for his own name sake openly to declare:
that all men here on Earth ought to live in his fear.

This same is one of our jolly talkers,
That prattleth so much of Heaven and Hell:
Oh, I tell you these are godly walkers,
Of many strange things they can tell.
They pass men yea Angels they excel,
Sir, are you not called the Heavenly man?
I have been in your company ere now but I cannot tell when

Yes certainly Sir, that is my name,
Unworthy of any such title I do confess:
God grant that I may deserve the same,
And that my faults I may amend and redress.
Therefore now the truth do you here express,
Is not the Worldly man your name?

Yea in deed Sir, I am the very same.

From the Heavenly man I cannot be long absent,
Which in Gods promises has his consolation:
Considering that he always is content,
Patiently to suffer Gods visitation.
For understand you? my name is Contentation.
Whom the worldly man does mock and deride:
And will not suffer him once in his mind to abide.

This same is the Grandsire of them all,
This is he that will through water and fire:
Good reasoning betwixt us now hear you shall,
For to follow him he will me ernestly require,
But he shall be hanged or he have his desire.
You are welcome Sir, saving my quarrel in deed:
You have reported of me much more then you need.

Nothing but truth Sir, certainly I have said,
Often times I have cou^celled you your covetousness to leave
But my words as feathers in the wind you have waid,
And stuck to them as Glue to the water does cleave.
But take heed the reward thereof you shall receive.
Once again I advertise thee to be content:
And give thanks to God for that he has thee sent.

I pray you be you content for I am pleased,
And meddle you no more with me then I do with you:

To be angry without a cause, without mends must be eased
We will be more ernest then ever we were now.
Woe (says our Savior) to those that are rich,
Which therein only have their consolation:
He curses them not be cause they have much,
but because they receive it not with contentation.
Building therewith to them selves a good foundation,
That is to lay here on Earth treasure great store:
to purchase a kingdom that lasts ever more.

Passion of me masters, what would you have me to do?
You are fond fellows indeed as ever I knew:
If I should not take pains, ride, run and go
For my living, what thereof would ensue?
A beggar should I dye, masters this is true,
Then my wife and children that I leave behind:
I fear me at your hands, small releef should find.

I have been yung (says David) and now am old,
Yet the righteouse forsaken I never did see:
Nor their seed begging Bread I did not behold,
Therefore your mind to the Prophets does not agree,
Cast all thy burden and care (says Christ) on me.
And I will provide to keep thee from danger and strife:
Only seek thou to live a godly and good life.

When Solon was asked of Cressus the King,
What man was most happy in this vale terestrial:
To the end he seemed to attribute that thing,
When men be assosiate with treasures selestiall.

By the beginning no man can judge the same Solon does say,
That any man is happy that bears breath:
But yet by the end partly judge we may,
For true happiness (says he) consists after death.

If this be true as undoubtedly it is,
What men are more wicked, wretched and miserable:
Then those that in riches account their bliss,
Being infected with Ambition that sickness incurable.

The treasure of this world we may well compare,
To Circes the Witch with her crafty cawtilitie:
Wherewith many men's minds so poisoned are,
That quite they are carried to all infidelity,
They are coniured so in deed and bewitched so sore,
That treasure is their trust, yea, hope and delight:
Enough serves them not til that they have more,
So against Contentation they still strive and fight.

Though the Worldly man do follow their lust,
Crying on Earth is our felicity and pleasure:
Yet God does so rule the hearts of the Just,
That their study is, chiefly to get Heavenly treasure.

Friends I take you both for honest men,
I promise you I would be glad to do for the best:
Mary then I take care which way and when,
I may get treasure therewith to live in rest.
Oh, me thinks it is a very pleasant thing,
To see a great heap of old Angels and Crowns:
When I have store of money I can be merry and sing,
For money as men say wins both Cities and towns.

Alas why should you not have that in estimation,
Which God has prepared for his deer elect:
Should not our minds rest in full contentation,
Having trust in that treasure most high in respect,
Saint Paul whom the Lord so high does erect.
Says, it passes the sense, our memoryes and mind:
Much less can our outward eyes the same find.
As for the treasure that you possess here,
Through ficklenes of Fortune soon fades away:
The greatest of renown and most worthy Peer,
Sometime in the end falls to misery and decay.
Record of Dionisius a King of much fame,
Of the valiant Alexander, and Ceaser the strong:
Record of Tarquinus which Superbus had to name:
And of Heliogabalus that ministered with wrong,
To resite them all it would be very long.
But these be sufficient plainly to prove:
How soon and uncertainly riches does remove.

It is true, and therefore a mind well content,
Is great riches as wise king Solomon does say:
For we have seen of late days this canker pestilent
Corrupting our Realm to our utter decay.
Ambition I mean which chiefly does reign,
Amongst those who should have been example to other:
Yea we see how the Breethern they did disdain,
And burned with fire, the Child with the mother.
It is often seen that such monstrous Ambition,
As spares not to spil the blood of the innocent:
Will not greatly stick to fall to sedition,
The determinations of God thereby to prevent,
But God I trust shall disapoint their intent.
And overthrow the power of fading treasure:
And cause us al to wish for the heavenly pleasure.

O you ancient men whom God has furnished with fame,
Be ye always mindeful to walk in the ways of the Just,
And ad ever more virtue to your honest name,
And at no hand be over come with couetouse or lust,
But in Gods holy promise put confidence and trust.
And then double felicity at the last we shall possess:
And then in all Earthly doings God shall give good success
Ye poor men and commons walk in your vocation,
Banish fond fantasyes which are not convenient:
Settle your minds with enough to have contentation,
Considering that that leads to treasures most excellent,
For these are uncertain, but they are most parmanent.
Your necessity apply with treasure, faith and trust:
And you shall have enough always among the Just.

And indeed enough is as good as a feast,
Good Lord how your words have altered my mind:
A new heart me thinks is entered in my breast,
For no thought of mine old in me I can find.
I would to God you would take me in your company,
And learn me how I may be an heavenly man:
For now I perceive this world is but vanity,
Let a man therefore make of it as much as he can.

Do you speak as you think? and as you mind do you say?
Could you be content to lead the rules of a godly life?

I do mean it truly and I will study them night and day,
For I regard neither treasure, Children nor wife.

Give me your hand then together let us depart:

And I will wait on you sir, with all my heart.

When Couetouse is busy,
Then we three be all merry,
for he does trimly invent:
To make us fine frolike cheer
Be vitailes never so deer,
and all our money clean spent
Therefore we spare for no cost
We ca^ be trusted of our host
For shillings xx. and one:
Couetouse has a good wit,
He finds a mean to pay it,
when all our money is gone.
Therefore trole the boule to me,
With huf child and have to thee,
the longest liver pay all:
Our trust is in Couetise,
For he is prudent and wise,
therefore money cannot fall.
Oh Couetouse prudent Prince,
All strong walls you do convince
and rulest them every one:
Thou do drive many a drift,
And make for us much shift,
when all our money is gone.

AT Black heath feeld where great Golias was slain,
The Moon lying in child bed of her last Son:
The Tiborne at warwick was then King of Spain,
By whom the land of Canaan then was wun.
It happened between Peterborow and Pentecost,
About such time as Iuy was made of Wormwood:
That Childs woork in Basil wood with fire was lost,
And all through the treason of false Robin Hood.
That saw Sir Guy of Warwick, and Colebrand,
Which fought against the Sun and stopped his light:
Yea (quoth Hobgoblin) let me take them in hand,
Children, children not able to resist my might
A wunderful bloodshed was in those days,
For Saint Steephen fought against the golden Knight:
In so much that Peeter was fain to give his Keys,
To those God knows that had to them no right.
With the greef of that, all the Saints in Heaven,
Proclaimed open wars at Barnard in the feeld:
They fought from six of the clock to eleven,
Or ever the Traitors would give over and yield.
But to say there was triumph, in faith there was,
Saint Steephen the yunger was made Captain of the Guard:
Wunderful it was to see such things he brought to pass,
As I am sure the like of them ye never heard.
By gisse (quoth Saint Steephen) it was time to trudge,
Friar Francis took his flight to Paul's steeple:
In faith he was even with them for an old grudge,
For he carried away the Wethercock in spite of the people.
Then was I dubbed Knight at Kinistone,
And made Officer of all Courts and laws:
I gave Offices and livings many a one,
Mary in deed you may say, it was for a cause.
In faith the same day that Midsommer was married,
I never laughed better in my life:
For even sudainly away Saint Vncumber carried,
Both the Bridgroome and the Bride his wife.
No remedy on Gods name but I must bear them company,
Cheer, in faith there was, cheer in houles:
And who was minstrel but Saint Anthony,
He made melodye for all Christen souls.
A quarter of a year we tarried there in the tent,
Wherein we had Capricorn baked like red Deer:
I tarried so long til I was shent,
Jesus how they cried out of me there.
Well, I must abroad among my friends,
Every hour til I come they think a day:
I will go among then to fulfill their minds,
Fare ye well Gossip I must needs away.

What brother Couetouse? whether away so fast?
I saw you not by the Mass, til I was almost past.

What mine own Brother Temeritie:
I rejoice to see you, I swear by the Trinity.

For thee we three have taken great thought,

Lord, how far about for you we have sought?

And I pray you where have you three sought for me?

In the Kings bench and in the Marshalsee.
Yea, and in all the Countees, and at Newgate:
For these are places meet for thine estate.

I perceive well it must be my chance:
Abooue all your kinsfolk you to inhaunce.
Your place is at Saint Thomas awatrings:
Or else at Wapping beyond Saint Katherins.
There will I dub you Knights of the Halter:
Among your mates there strongly to talter.

You are to blame in faith Precipitation:
For you began this fond communication.

You are Knaves to use such salutation:

Why Brother we speak for your consolation.

Speak what you will, even with you I can make.
Speak you in mirth, and in mirth I do it take.
But by the mas and if you go about me to flowt:
I will make the better of all you three a Lout.

No Sir, no, we came not hither you to molest:
Our business I tell you is very ernest.

By Gods ares true, if now we make not shift:
We are all four like to have a great lift.

If ever Couetouse were in danger of punishment:
He stands now at the point of banishment.

Sancte Blaci, you make me much to muse:
Passion of me Sirs, why what news?

I think the day of Judgment be now at hand:
For it was never thus since the world did stand.
The worldly man has forsaken Couetouse clean:
And unto Contentation, and Enough he does lene.

What does he? Benidicite is this true?

Yea faith, he is quite becommen a new.
More over with the heavenly man he is associate:
Where he studieth ye rules of godly life erly and late.

Body of me Precipitation, fetch me my gown:
My Cap, and my Chain, I will to the Town.
Mary Sir, in deed it is time to stir Coals:
I will go near to fetch some of the^ out of their holes.

Haste makes waste Brother Couetouse ye wot:
No loo^^e so soon cold, as that is most hot.
I warrant you the worldly man will soon be weary:
For they will not suffer him once to be merry.
And verily he is inclined to be naught:
therefore think not that by the^ he will long be taught

Now by the mass, of one that should have sapie^ce,
I never heard none utter such a foolish sentence.
Know you not that when so ever a Sinner does repent:
That God forgiueth him his wickedness incontinent.

True in deed as here tofore has been seen:
Many have been made heavenly that worldly have been.

Here is your Gown, your Chain and your Cap:

Body of me, but for shame thou should bear me a rap.
Whoreson th^^f, the Devil in Helthee choke:
What meanest thou foolish knave to bring my Cloak.

Why my brother is blind, I hold you a Crown:
Body of me he knows not a Cloak from a Gown.

Tush masters he was stirring in the morning betime:
At four of the Clock in a S^ller he was saying of Prime.

I blame him not though betimes he steer:
For he is made Ale cunner in our Parish this year.
His pains is so great in tasting o^ drink:
That many times his eyes into his head do sink.
And then he looks prestly as narow as a Crow:
I tell you he can scarce reed the letters of his Crosrowe.

Body of me, you are Knaves all three:
Take Gown, Chain, Cap and all for me.
I will be eue^ with you all I swear by Gods mother:
Choose you shift how you can one for an other.
I warrant you I shall be able to shift for my self:
Or else you may say I were a foolish elf.

Why brother, you said you would all things well take:

Yea but I would not have you your fool me to make.
For you know well enough that of you all three:
I am worthy the governor and Ruler to be.
Couetouse (says the wise man) is the root of all evil:
Therefore Couetouse is the cheifest that comes from ye devil.
But this is that Knave I mean Precipitation:
But I will be even with him I swear by the Passion.

I am sorry by my truth that you are so sore offended:
What Sir, if a fault be made it shall be amended.

Nay faith I am an Ale cunner, or some drunken fool:
I am no better but your courage I will cool.
That witless knave to, Inconsideration,
He was beginner of this disputation.
But it is no matter once or Christmas day:
I will be even with you, be as be may.

What worshipful M. Couetouse are you angry with me?
I am sorry for it man, what can I more be?
^ang me up by the neck like a strong thief:
If ever I speak any word that shall put you to greef.

I would do for you Sirs, for I love you all three,
Mary then I look that as I am you should accept me

By my troth Brother, I dare say none of us all:
But that to do as you bid us, ready find you shall.

Mary then on good feloship let us like friends agree:

Why abooue all things that desire we.

Will you help then to make me gay?

As you will wish it, so we will you array.

Will you concent to show unto me reverence?

Yea, at all times we will show to you our obedience

Will you take me for your master and head?

Yea mary Sir, for so it stands us in sted.

And do you say as you think in very deed?

Yea, that shall you prove in all time of need.

First to help on my gown some pains do you take
And then I will see what curtsie you can make.

It is trim indeed, by the mass in that Gown:
Me thinks you be worthy to be Mayor of a town.

Say you so? then how like you this countenance?

Very comely and like a person of great governance

Then all is well, come, come do your duty:

O worthy Prince Couetouse we humbly salute ye.

Body of me, that same will mar all:
When in company I come if Couetouse you do me call

Therefore it is best for us all to change our names:

Or else paraduenture we shall come to shames.

Well, hold your peace, then let me alone:
And I will devise names for you every one,
Sira, nay you gape at me:

What shall my name be?

You will have it or I have it, will ye?
Sira, thy name shall be.

What I pray you?

A shame take thee unmannerly Lout:
Thou came so hastily thou have put me out,
Nay, that maid looks on me:
Come hither Inconsideratio^, I have a name for thee

Have you Sir? I pray you what shall it be?

Nay by the mass, it is gone again:

And I would know it I tell you very fain.

Yea, but you must tarry til I have it:

I tell you my Brother has a brave wit.

A shame take the^ I have them now all three:
Come hither brother I will tell you what your name shall be.
You know ye men now a days to reason do trust:
Therefore Reason, your self from hence forth name you must.
Temeritie, I know well thy quality:
Thou art heady, thou shall be called Agilitie.
I study a name for Precipitation if it may hit:
Let me see, by my truth, yt shall be called Ready wit.

An excellent name in deed, for I am ready and quick with a pen:
For before I see one I can condemn ten.
I pass not for any man's matters or cause:
money and wit shall govern the Laws.

Well masters I have chosen names for each one of you:
But mine own name I know not I make God a vow.
How if I call my name Wit or Policy?

Mary Sir, that agrees to your nature exceedingly.

Truth, for what shall the worldly man do with you three?
Except to maintain you, he take in me.
Little worth is Reason, ready wit and Agillitie:
Except to maintain them there be a Policy.
Sirs you tell me the worldly man is converted:

Yea faith that for ever from us he is departed.

For ever (quoth he) ha, ha, ha, no, no I warrant thee I
What this geer means full well I do espy.
Tush he purposes to go both to heaven and to hell:
And feth news from thence to the people to tell.
He will be a Prophet that was wunt to be a devil:

But his prophecy I think will prove but evil.

Well no more words, enough is as good as a feast:
They say it is perelouse with edge tools to jest.

Now Sirs I will tell you, this is all my drift,
To get the worldly man hither by some shift.
Temeritie thou shall with him thy self acquaint:
And what thou can do, to him forth you shall paint
Virtue is made an error by Temeritie:
For stoutly he stands against the verity.
For Temeritie learned men do say:
Is a quality to do all things without delay.
So that if thou may get into his habitation:
He will soon be weary of enough and contentation.
Then with him shall woork Precipitation:
Who is of this property and inclination.
To see and to do all with out forecast:
Not thinking of things to come or of things past.
Therefore after that Temeritie does once enter:
Thou shall put thy service in aduenter.
Then Inconsideration shall get into his mind
Who is a quality much of the same kind.
He waieth neither the time, person nor place:
Neither (as they say) the tail nor the the face
Thus if you three within him once be placed:
You shall see yt Enough of him shall soon be disgraced
Under the name of Policy to enter I do not dout:
And I being entered Enough shall be cast out.
For where Couetouse in any place does remain:
There content with enough cannot abide certain.
So that he shall run hedling into the pit:
Doing all things hedling without modesty or wit.
Lo, here to you my mind I have disclosed:
All have I said that I have now purposed.

By the faith of my body it is worthyly devised:

In all the haste go thou and be thou disguised.
Mary now there comes an other thing to my remembrance
Are none of you acquainted with ghostly Ignorance?

What he pardy? he is my ghostly Father:

I would speak with him so much the rather.
For diverse causes that I do consither:
My brother and thou shall depart hence together.
Look you make you trim as fast as you can:
And then in haste seek to speak with the worldly man.
Inconsideration to ghostly Ignorance, thou shall resort:
And this message from me to him thou shall report.
First that he name him self devotion:
And we will help him to dignity and promotion.
Charge him not to be out of the way:
For we porpose to send for him this present day.

For as much as you put your trust and confidence in me:
What I can do for you, or it be long you shall see.

Where to find ghostly Ignorance I am sure:
Seldom or never at home at his own cure.

No, the Sermons that ghostly ignorance has made:
Has almost brought all ye Parishes in England out of trade

Well, hye you a pace, that you were gone:
Precipitation and I will tarry here alone.

Fare well Couetouse til we meet again:

That shall not be long if our purpose we obtain.

Nay hear you? God be with you, will you begone?
Body of me you are no better then knaves every one.
Fare well Couetouse? nay fare well good Lob:
You have even as much manners as has a Dog.
Plain Couetouse? this is according to promise is it not?
Well what I intend to do for it, I wot what I wot.

I cry you mercy right worshipful Master couetise,
Most prudent, politic, sapient and wise.

Pardon us by my truth, it was but forgotten:

Nay I take it even thus, soon ripe soon rotten.
I am no body with you, but by him I swear:
I look the greatest stroke amongst you to bear.

Enough is as good as a feast, we are warned I trow
From hence forth our duties I warrant ye we will show,
We take our leave of you noble prince Couetise:
The King, Emperor, yea the God of all vice.

Oh worthy visage, and body well compact:
Oh goodly man in wit, work and fact.
We simple creatures do show to you obedience:
Being minded to depart under your patience.

Yea mary, this is some what like the matter:

Crafty knaves, how they can a fool flatter.

Fare ye well both, give me your hands one after an other:
I love ye as deerly as the Children of my mother.
How say thou Precipitation? how likest thou this matter?

By my truth I will tell the truth, Yea and not flatter.
I perceive well enough what here in you do mean:
You will not leave til you have marred him clean.
Not only riches singular and private:
But also public weals you will spolyate.
For I perceive by your former monition:
That through ghostly Ignorance you will destroy devotion.
I mean true faith, in Gods love and hope:
And cause him in clear Sun shine, for light to grope.

Thou think as truth is in very deed:
I intend no less if my device may likely speed.
There will I begin and if error once rage in religion:
I warrant thee in public well will soon be division.

Well, what you intend to me does not appertain:
My nature is to rage where haste does reign.
And what causes haste? but only Temeritie:
That makes fools hardy with Security.
Precipitation forth does this worldly man lead:
So that all his affairs be done rudely on head.
Then Inconsideration both night and day:
Shall promp him forward nothing at all to wey.
Neither to consider his beginning:
Neither at the end what shall be the winning.
So that if all we do our proper nature and kind:
He shall not regard who shall the profit find.

Lupus est in fabula, no more words.

I never fear any such kind of burdes.
This is the worldly man I suppose indeed:

To woork wisely with him I see we had need:

I find it true as the wise king Saloman does say,
It is better to have a little with the fear of the Lord
Then to have much treasure and yet go astray,
I mean to decline from Gods holy word.
The proverb says enough is as good as a feast,
He that has enough and cannot be content:
In my judgment is worse then a Beast,
For he wants a good conscience mind and intent.

The Chariot of Couetouse as Barnard does write,
On four wheels of vices is carried away:
And these be the four vices that he does resite,
Contempt of God, forgetfulness of death each day.
Faint courage, and ungentleness he does say.
These be the wheels that to aduersityes cart does belong:
These have perswations to begile men many and strong.
The same Chariot has two horses which does it draw,
The one named Raueny and the other nigardship:
Their Carter is Desire to have, who always does claw,
By fraud or guile one an other to nip,
This Carter has two cords to his Whip.
The one is Appititite and felicity for to get:
The other is called Dread and fear to forlet.

When this Chariot go^e in the ground of man's mind,
He is not once able to think a good thought:
For Couetouse does the heart so much to lucre bind,
That he judges all things to be vain and naught,
Except some gain or profit thereby be brought.
I my self am able to say it, for I do it know:
To have gotten money I studied to deceive high and low
But thanks be to God the Father of all might,
Which will not the death of Sinners as Scripture does say
It has pleased him to open unto me the the true light,
Whereby I perceive the right path from the broad way,
Therefore I am content my self for to stay.
With Enough which brings me to quiet in body and mind:
Yea. and all other commodityes there with I do find,

Godliness is great riches if a man can be content,
When God has sent him plenty and Enough:
Let us praise him for our food and raiment,
And live godlyly all our lives through,
For we must tread the paths of death so sharp and rough.
And then shall we be sure to carry as little away:
As we brought with us thus Saint Paul does say.

Body of me he is meruelouse forgone:
We shall have somewhat to do with him anon.

It was il luck that he came not alone.
I would that beggarly knave in Hell were.

Well let me alone I will go near,
To cause him of his company to be weary:
I have done as great acts thrice this year,
I am not to learn to row in Illirans Fery.
I will go to him and thou shall wait upon me,
Thou shall hear what a take to him I will tell:

If thou speed well now I dare promise the,
The Devil will give thee the Crown of hell.

God speed you Sir, I pray you might I be so bold,
As to have a word or two with you in your ear?

Yea, hardely my friend say what you would.
Your mind unto me you may boldly declare.

I pray you are you not acquainted with this gentleman?
I would fain speak with him a word or twain alone:
I beseech you help me to my request if you can,
For I have haste on my way I must needs be gone.

If you had required a greater thing of me,
I would have done it for you I tell you certain:
Sir, one of yonder men which you do see,
Would speak with you alone very fain.

I will go to him and know his mind:
is it you that would speak with me my friend?

Yea forsooth sir?

What say you to me?

Oh Sir, oh good Sir, oh, oh, oh my heart will break:
Oh, oh, for sorrow God wot I cannot speak.

What is the matter? wherefore weep you thus?

Pure love causes him, Sir I wus.
I am sure that be looues you at the heart.

I thank him truly it is undeserved on my part.
Gentle friend I pray you cease your lamentation:
Sure it is a strange thing to see a man weep on this fasion.

I cannot choose, oh, oh, I cannot choose:
Whow? I cannot choose if my life I should loose.
To hear that I hear, oh well it is no matter:
Oh, oh, oh, I am not he that any man will flatter.

To hear what you here, why what hear you of me?

Mary sir he hears ye wunderfully changed you be

I am so in deed, for that I give God the glory:
And if you be my friend for my change you are not sorry.
I trust I have chosen all for the best:
For my former wickedness I hate and detest.

Whow, nay I would to God that were the worst:
But I shall have il will, I think I am accursed.

I judge him not to be of a discrete mind:
That for the truth will be angry with his friend.
The talk of talkers tungs I do not much way:
Yet I pray you heartily tell me what they say.

Couetouse, couetouse, every man says you be:
A shame take them all prattling knaves for me.
I am of such a nature as no man is but I:
To hear my friend il spoken of I had rather dye.
Yea wisse man, you are called even so:
All the country of you speak both shame and woe.
He was wunt (says one) to keep a good house:
but now (says an other) thereis no liui^g for a mouse

If this be the wurst, for their talk I do not care:
Let them say so still hardely and do not spare.
I trust I have chosen with Mary the better part:

Oh yet good Sir, this greeueth him to the heart.

Yea God wot, it is none other, it is none other:
I love you as well as mine own borne brother.
Think you yt it greeueth me not to hear each boy and Girl:
To say that the worldly man is become a Churl?

He had need to live very sircumspectly:
That would take upon him to please all men directly
Behold Enough.

Nay hear you, this greeueth me worst so God me save:
They say you keep company with every beggarly knave

Where I keep company they have naught to do:
As near as I can into none but honest company I go.
See you, I pray you Enough.

Nay but hear you, is Enough his name?

Yea in deed, it is even the very self same.

Saint Dunstone, a man would not judge it by his cote:
Now truly I would not take him to be worth a grote,
Hark you, hark you, in faith know you not me?

No truly that I wot of, I did you never see.

That is maruail in deed the truth for to tell:
I dare say your father knew us both very well.

Did you never hear him speak of one Policy?

Yes that I have sure an hundred times verily.

I am he verily and this your friend Ready wit:
With whom to be acquainted for you it is fit.

Truth in deed as Seneca says wittily:
The wise man and not the rich is void of misery.

Policy and ready wit: now the truth is so,
There is no man living that can spare you two.
I trust God works for me happily in deed:
To send me all such things whereof I have need.
For without a ready wit, who can answer make?
Without a policy all commodityes will slake.
A ready wit will soon gather and conceive:
What he shall forsake and what he shall receive.
Teuely now I remember a saying of Tully the divine:
Where he does both wisdom and learning define.
Learning makes yung men sober (says he)
And it causes old men of good comfort to be.
Policy is the riches and possession of the poor:
Yea, it garnisheth the rich with goodly adore.
So that there is no frate calling or degree:
That may conveniently without you be.
Give me your hands for you are welcome heartily.
I am exceeding joyful of your good company.
Enough, I beseech you bid my friends welcome hither:
For from hensfoorth we must dwell all together.

Be not rash in taking of a friend Aristotle does say:
Nor when thou haste taken him, cast him not away.
Admit not thy friend either high or low:
Except his behavior to others thou do know.
For look how before he has served his other friend:
Even so will he serve thee also in the end.

Your parables truly I do not well understand:
Except you mean I should have no friends but you by me to stand

Enough is as good as a feast, well you wot:
More then enough: a man needs not.
Whether it be lands, money, friends or store:
if he have enough: what needs he any more?

I perceive that against us two you do grutch:
Can a man of policy and ready wit have to much?
The noble king Solomon was rich and had wisdom great store
Yet he seassed not daily to pray to God for more.

Get thee store of friends (says Cicero) for it is deemed:
A true friend more then Kinsfolk is to be esteemed.

It is an old proverb and of an ancient time:
Which says, it is not all Gold, that like Gold does shine.
No more are all friends that freendship pretend:
As it approved with many in the end.

Yea enough, but I am sure that this policy:
And this ready wit are my friends verily.

Are we? ye faith there of you may be sure:
We are they which your wealth shall procure.
Enough is not enough without us two:
For having not us, what can enough do?
Enough is maintained by wisdom and policy:
Which is contained of a ready wit naturally.

Having a ready wit and of polycy the skill:
You need not to care for this enough except you will.
There is another enough which is invisible:
Which enough, to want is impossible.
As for this Enough is enough I cannot deny:
But this enough serves but even competently.
You have no more now then does your self serve:
So that your poor Breethern for all you may sterue
But enough that comes by us twain:
Is able your self and many other to sustain.

Your words are even as true as the Gospel:
As one named Reason of late to me did tell.
You may be more heavenly says he having riches:
Then if you had nothing the truth to express.
and I find his words true for when alms I would give
I have not wherewith the needy to relieve.
Enough I have for my self I cannot say nay:
But I would I had more to succor the needy always

These words proceed from a couetouse mind:
And from a worldly lust which does you blind.
was not ye poor widow for her offering praised more
Then all they yt offered of their superfluity and store.
The sacrifice of God as the prophet David does say
Is a broken heart and a good mind always.

He says well by Lady, yea and like an honest man,
But yet Sir, riches to be good, well prove I can.
For every man is not called after one sort:
But some are called to prophecy, some to preach and exhort.
And he by that means Heaven joys to win:
But every man knows not that way to walk in.
Therefore every man (as his vocation is) must walk:
I am sure that against this you will not talk.

The greatest bosters are not the best giuers:
Nor the ernest preachers are the best livers.
As sucre increases riches and honor,
So couetouse inlargeth daily more and more.
I know so^e in this realm which once were content
With poorly enough which God to them had sent.
Wishing of a good conscience as they said verily:
That God would once again restore the verity.
If it please thee good Lord (said they) thy word to us again send
And then truly our Couetouse lives we will amend.
But since it has pleased God, them to wealth to restore:
They are ten times more Couetouse then they were before.
Yea hedling without all consideration:
They for Couetouse make some laws in that nation.
Such bying and selling of Leaces and benifices:
Such doubling of wares to extreme prices.
So shamefully Gods ministers they poule and shave:
That not half enough to live upon they have.
But it is an old saying and a true certainly:
it will not out of the flesh yt is bred in ye bone verily.
The worldly man will needs be a worldly man still:
Well choose you I will let you alo^e do what you will.
I cannot think but those that of me hold scorn:
Will be glad of me or ever the year be half worn.

Mary fare well? adieu to the devil:
Body of me, he would make me his driuil.

You may see what a trusty friend he is:

A beggarly knave I warrant you by the bliss.
And even so he and they went about me to make:
Within a while I should have gone to the hedge for a stake.

I warrant you that you should have proved shortly:
They would not have lost you one grote nor penny.
I maruail you would tarry with them any time or season:
You are old enough I trow to be ruled by reason.

A shame take them all, I have spent on them xx. pound:
That I had of money and of mine own good ground.
I am a shamed of my self so God me save:
Because I have sold almost all that ever I have.
My friends and companions when I go in the street:
So God help me, I am a shamed with them to meet.

Passion of me it was time to look about:
They would quite have undone you, or else without dout.
But I trow, I trow, if you will be ruled by me:
What I will do for you, or ere it be long you shall see.
A thousand, thousand, thousand ways I can invent:
To fetch in double as much as you have spent.

Be ruled by you? yes here I do you both embrace:
As mine own mind to follow all my lives space.
For I tell you plain I am weary of their Schole:

It is time for you, else they would have made you a fool.

I perceived no less in deed hy the talk of Reason:
But so it should have come to pass in season.

And do you my brother Reason perfitly know?

Yea, and with him one called Agililitie I trow.
Reason came to me, and mihi flectere mentem he said:
Sola solet ratio dux sida sophorn est it cannot be denaid.
To nature and Reason he does open injury,
Which of other men council does seek:
God has given men Reason and their wits Policy,
To forsake that is il, and to take that he does like.

And believe you not these words to be very true?

Yes, and I have thought on them xx. times since I tell you.
Oh Sirs me thinks if I had money and treasure again:
In faith I would be a lively lad I tell you plain.
Heavenly man (quoth he) let them be heavenly for me:
The best heaven is me thinks is rich for to be.

In faith it shall cost me and my friends a fall,
But you shall be twice as rich as you were before:
We will do it to spite them even with all,
Though we do hundreds wrong therefore.
I have set some aloft in a high place,
Which had rather dye I dare well say:
Then one inch of their state should fall or abace,
But rather to clime up higher if they may.
Whow, of this world I rule the whole state,
Yea faith I govern all laws, rites and orders:
I, at my pleasure raise war, strife and debate,
And again I make peace in all Costs and borders
Nay, yet a much more maruail then that,
Behold, see you this little pretty hand?
This is an Arm of steel for it overthrows flat,
The strongest walls and towers in a whole land,
Power I have laws to alter and make,
And all laws made are guided by me:
All that is done, is done wholly for my sake,
What strength I have by this you may see.
More over I have in this little hand,
The hearts of all men and women upon Earth:
I rule them both by Sea and by land,
Plenty I make and I make also derth.
Whow, it is wunderful that is done by policy,
While you live take heed strive not aginst policy:
The best of them all are glad of Policy,
Yea in Westminster hall they use much policy.

Prudentia noset omnia, says the noble man Tully
Policy knows all things both good and il truly.
Oh Policy, what meant I from reason and thee to stray?
Never will I forsake you nor yours after this day.
Oh help me Policy, help me to some money:
Whose taste I love better then the taste of honey.

Since worthy policy you have entertained:
Now none of his instruments must be disdained.

Disdained? no faith let him teach me what he will:
And I will do it, if it were mine own father to kill.

Say you so? by the mass give me your hand:
Come go with me, let us no longer idle stand.

Oh how hard a thing and difficult it is,
For them that in their riches do trust:
To enter into the kingdom of Heaven or blis,
The words of our Savior to be true grant we must,
it is as easy for a Cammel through an Nedles eye to thrust?
As for him that on riches has fixed his mind:
The way to eternal salvation to find.
Example heerof you see with your eyes,
Of the worldly man given to vain pleasure:
He promised you heard, from sin to arise.
And said he would not love neither money nor treasure.
But as he ought to love it, that is in a due measure.
But behold how quickly his promise he has broke:
Whereby he kindles Gods wrath against him to smoke.
For now has he entertained to him Temeritie
Precipitation and heady Inconsideration:
These cause him to woork all things hedely,
And covet to be had in reputation.
Then couetouse disguiseth him self on such a fashion.
That as Seneca says, he does good to no man:
But hurt, and most to him self as time shall prove when.

Alaz, alaz, to whom should I make my moan?
For ever and a day cham quite undone.
My Londlord is zo couetouse as the devil of hell:
Except chil give him such a shameful rent.
As cham not able, away ich must incontinent.
Chaue dwelt there this zix and therty year:
Yea these vorty, ich may tell you well near.
And ich never paid abooue yearly viue pound:
And by our Lady, that to be enough chaue vound.
Well, now I must give him even as much more:
Or else ich must void the next quarter or bevore.
Oh masters, is not this even a lamentable dhing?
To zee how Londlords their poor tenants do wring.
And they are not zo couetouse to ask another, ich believe:
But a zorte of vooles are as ready to give.
And espetially Strangers, ye a shameful zorte:
Are placed now in England and that in every Port.
That we, our wives and Children, no houses can get:
Wherein we may live, such price on them is zet.
Chad thought a while a go my Londlord would not have done thus
For he said he would be a heavenly man I wus.
But zoule, the Devil is as Heavenly as he:
Three times wurse then he was be vore as var as I can zee.

Body of me, this would make a man to swear:
A shame take them mary, that ever they came there.
Nay by gisse I thought he would not be heavenly long:
For that to his nature were clean contrary and wrong.
Yonder are such a sort of Ruterkins lively and ioly:
That all that can be gotten is little enough for their belly.
Soul we woork, we labor, and that night and day:
Yet can we scant have meat and drink the truth to say.
And that which we have, is il enough for Dogs:
And we are served with all, like a many of Hogs.

What servant? I pray thee what news with thee?

By my truth Father Tenant even as you see.
Kept like no man's servant, but rather like a slave:
That I am weary of my life I tell you so God me save.
My master takes on like the Devil of hell:
There was never one so hasty, cruel and fell.
But so couetouse Lord, Lord you will not believe:
I think all his mind and study to bribery he does give.

Now a pestlence take him, vile cankard Churl:
He is neither good to man, women, boy nor girl.
Is this the heavenly man? a shame take him else:
Body of me, in all wickedness he now excelles.
And if a thing come in his head be it good or il:
Without all wit or reason, do it he will.
But so couetouse, Lord I think if he might choose:
The dropping of his nole he would not loose.
Every week truly, nay then every day:
He must have account how many Eggs his hens lay
Why? there was never seen such a miser as he:
That the plague cut the throat of him for me.
I have wrought for him this half year by the week:
And now my work is done my money is to seek.
If I and all mine should starve for money:
Of him I dare say I should not get one penny.
A shame take him, how well the Scripture of him is waid:
Which says sleep not til the Hireling thou have paid.

I see well that I complain not of him alone:
But others as well as I, have good cause to moan.
Well Servant, weeping will not help this geer:
But God will plague him for it, I do not fear.

I told you Hireling how you should be served:

What Servant, thou look as though thou were starued.

He looks as lustely, freshly and as well:
As all the Servants that with his master do dwell.

His master? why? he is no better then a thief:
For so that he may have it, he cares not who suffer greef.

Nay by the mass that words is but to true:
So that his riches increases he cares not who rue.

I know the occasion of all this geer:
But I would not for twenty pound it should come to his ear
He says, that he will never leave his extorsion:
Til of riches he have gotten an innumerable portion.
He will build, plant, set, and sow:
Til such a fame of him abroad there grow.
That there is none like to him in all the Country:
And so by that means he shall come to authority.

But lightly those that come to authority after that rate:
Do end their lives in some miserable and unhappy state.

thou fool (says Christ) this night will I fetch thy soul from thee:
And then who shall have the things that thine be?
Well, let him alone, I hope all will prove for the best:
Even as he leads his life so shall he find rest.

Peace, peace for Gods sake, look where the Steward comes:
Body of me Sirs, which way shall I run?

God speed you, what mean you? would you speak with me?

Yea Sir, even to desire your worship my vreend vor to to be.
Ich have a zertain petition to your maship to move:
And ich desire you to be my vreend in it vor Gods love.

What is the matter? let me know it at once:
I have somewhat else to do then hear to tread the stones.

By my truth Sir I beseech you vor me to speak a good word:
To your good master and my Londlord:
Ich have dwelt in his house this vorty years almost,
And thereupon chaue bestowed much money and cost.
And now ich hear zay ich must double my rent:
Or else void out of it and that incontinent.
I beseech you vor Gods sake on me take some pity and bone:
If I be put out for ever I cham undone.
Oh good Sir, I know that you may do much:

By my truth I can do nothing here in:
And so God help me I esteem no such matters worth a pin.
Ber Lady Sir you have had it a fair season:
And yt a man should make what he can of his own it is reason
I warrant you, therbe inow that that rent will give:

But they shall never thrive on it then I believe.
Ich know what he may do with the house and ground:
He may chance to vinde rent enough of viue pound.

Well, care not you for that, if you he a wise man:
You were best to get one better chepe where you can
For I know that so much for it, have he may:
Yea, if it stood empty even this present day.

Well Sir, yet me thinks there should be a conscience
I think God hates such couetouse, sir by your patience.

Thou art a foolish fellow, here of to me to complain:
For I meddle with no such matters I tell you plain.

Good gentleman, God save your life I pray to our lord:
May I be so bold to speak with you (gentleman) one word:

Whether the Devil will thou? into mouth me think.
Fo Gods ames, how he smelles all of drink.

Nay by my truth Sir, I drink none other drink to day:
But a little fleet milk mingled with whay.
For so God help me if for drink or meat I should dye:
I have not one farthing, any therewith to bye.
And by my truth Sir, this is my suit at this time:
I served your master in making Brick and lime.
Half a year together not missing one day:
And by my truth all my wages is yet for to pay.
And if it please you heerin to show me some pleasure:
The same to my power with like I will measure.

Body of me, what a beggarly knave is heear?
Why, can thou not forbere thy money one year?

No by my truth Sir, for I have no lands:
Nor nothing to live upon, but only my hands.
I beseech you be good to me.

Why? I meddle not with such things yt do know

Yes Sir, you are master Steward I trow.

No faith I am but master receiver:
I take in all, but by gisse I am no payer.

Your master has a great sort of receivers in deed:
But not one to pay the Hireling his true meed.

What worthy policy? what make you here to day?

About your affairs I have business this way.
And behold Sir as I traueled the Street:
With these two fellows I chanced for to meet.
Who told me that they had an ernest suit to you
One for his house that he dwells in now.
Wherein (he says) you go about to do him much wrong:
For he says that he has dwelt in it very long.
The other said, you owe him a piece of money:
he wrought with you half a year and had never a penny
And thus they took on with me before you did come:
And now have I showed you the whole circumstance and some.

Mary hang them Villains have I naught to do:
But to stand and reason matters with them two?
Hear you tenant, in few words you know my mind
According as I have told you, so you shall me find.
Other provide money your lease to renew:
Or else you shall out incontinent this ts true.

Oh Londlord me thinks this is to much extremity:
Alas upon mine age take you some pittye.
Cham old and have many Children and much charge:
I trust lendlord ich shall vinde you better at large.

I cannot tell what I should do more believe me:
Many Landlords would not do as I do by thee.
For I am content for money yt should have it before an other:
I can do no more for thee if thou were my brother.

Thou must be answered father, there is no remedy:
By Saint Anne me think he speaks very resonably.

This reasonable speaking comes from an unreasonable mind:
Woe be to him that to such inconveniences shall a man bind.

If it please you Sir, help me to my money if you may:

No by my faith Sir, you get it not to day.
You thall tarry my leisure, I will pay you when I see cause:

You are happy Sir, in your hands you have the laws.
But by gisse if I had any thing that would do you pleasure:
You should have it when you would and not tarry my leisure.
Well I believe verily that the prayers of the poor and his cry:
Shall ascend into the ears of the Lord God on hye.
And he will plague all those that righteousness withstand:
And as the Prophet says, root their posterity out of ye land.

Well Hireling, let us depart this place:
It prevails not us of him to crave any grace.

No more shall it preuail him the Scripture says in deed:
To ask mercy of the Lord when he stands in need.

Ha, ha, ha, I must laugh, so God me save:
To see what a sort of suitors now a days we have.

I warrant you if you will be ruled by Reason and policy:
You shall have all the world to sue to you shortly.

A common saying the Fox fares the better and not ye worse:
When that the good wife does him ban and curse.
So what care I though to curse me the people do not cease?
As long as by them my riches does increace.
Oh policy, how glorious my buildings do shine?
No gentleman's in this country like unto mine.
Sira what shall I do? I must make my barnes more great:
For I have not rowme enough to lay in my Rye and whete.

Set men a woork with it as soon as ye can:
If you lack rowme, make more you may than.

By gisse I will, they shall in hand to morrow:
I thank you policy I need nothing to borowe.
Sir, the little tenament that by my house does stand:
I would I could get that to, even out of hand.
I want a little buttrye to lay in my drink:
And that would serve the turn handsomely I think.
And to say the truth it is not meet that such a beggar as he:
Should dwell so near under the nose of me.

Who the Devil put that into your mind?

Mary even that did reason my trusty friend.

I have been about it my self all this week:
Ready wit all the Laws for to delay does seek.
We will have it I warrant you by hook or by crook:
Tush I warrant you for such od ends daily we look.

O thou Earth, Earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord:
Know thy self to be no better then Clay or dust:

Se that thy life to Gods truth do always accord:
For from earth thou cammest and to earth thou must.

What is the matter? why what aile ye? why look you so about

I heard a terible noise, surely without dout.
Which pronounced the words of the Prophet Jeremy:
Saying Earth, Earth, turn thee speedyly.

Why, and are you afraid, and amassed at that?
I see well you have a heart like a Gnat.

That Servant that diligently does fulfill,
And watches at all times for the coming of his master:
And does in the mean season apply his will,
Of his masters goods, there be no spoil nor waster.
That servant shall be sure to be a Taster.
Of Gods blessings and joys everlasting:
Where as is all consolation and nothing wanting.
But that servant that lives idly without care,
And looks not diligently upon his Office:
His master shall come sudenly or he be aware,
And s^all minister to him according to justice.
The portion of Ipocrites shall be his.
Into utter darkness cast him out will he:
Where as weeping and gnashing of teeth shall be.

Oh Sira, mary Gods blessing on his heart:
Full honestly he teaches you Sir, their part.

These be the words of the holy Scripture:
Declaring the difference between ye just and vnpure
Good Lord I would know what those words do mean

Your Chaplain can tell you, for he is very well seen.

I pray you policy, call him to me he^^er:
But look that you come again both together.

Yes that we will I warrant, you need not to fear:
We will be here again or a Horse can lick his ear.

By my truth me thinks I begin to war sick:
In sending away my counceller, I was somewhat to quick.
Well, I will sit me down and say to sleep here:
Til they into this place again do appeer. Oh my head.

It is even I that upon thee does blow,
Filling thee with plagues and sundry disease:
What I am, indeed I will learn thee to know,
For I am not afraid thee to displease.
Thou shall depart from thy house and land,
Thy wife and Children beggars thou shall leave:
Thy life thou shall loose even out of hand,
And after death thy just reward receive.
Thy il gotten goods shall not thee deliver.
Thine costly buildings shall nothing preuail,
Thy odours, thy sweet smelles and thou shall perish together,
Thy rings, thy bracelets, and Gold chains shall fall.
Strangers and those whom thou did never know,
Shall possess that, which by frawd thou have got:
Thy seed from of thy ground God will overthrow,
Because at his Prophets preaching thou amenddest not.
Thou sleep in death as the Prophet David does say,
Out of which sleep when thou shall awake:
Thou shall perceive thou must needs away,
And that on thee God will no mercy take.
I am the plague of God properly called,
Which comes on the wicked sudainly:
I go through all towns and Cittyes strongly walled,
Striking to death and that without all mercy.
Here thou wicked couetouse person I do strike,
Which once on the plowe had taken hold:
But willingly again thou rannest in the Dike:
Therefore thy plague shall be doubled seven fold.

Come Sir Nicolas, come sir Nicolas, come Sir Nicolas come

Cham faint by gisse, would ich had a little more buni.

A pestilence take thee, haste thou not enough yet?

No, I can drink a Galon and eat never a bit.

Come in ye knaves name you must expound a matter

I can expound good ale from fair water.

Tush fellow thou must expound a piece of Scripture

I can do it as well as any Bishop I am sure.
I have spouted with the Geneuians xx. on a row:

And thou were to good for them all I trow.

Was I? yea faith that I was you shall under stand
With a piece of Lattin I set them all one dry land.

And I pray thee heartily what was it? let me hear:

Thou shall if you wilt promise to give me a pot of beer
Magistrorum clericium inkepe miorum
Totus perus altus yongus et oldus
Multus knauoribus et quoque fasorum
Pick pursus omnius argentus shauus and polus.
Let me see what they are all able to say to this.

For out of deuteronomy a worthy piece of learning it is.

A man may as much edyfying out of my lattin take:
As ye may out of exposicio^s yt many ministers make

Even as thou say, in faith much of a kind:
For they place the scriptures as feathers in ye wind.
Peace body of me, our master is a sleep:

Mary it was time indeed for us silence to keep.

Oh I would if I could, but now it is to late:
Hold thy peace I pray thee and do me no more rate.

To whom speak you to Sir? to him or to me?

There is no remedy now man, and that thou do see.

Passion of me Sira, he dreameth me think:

Is there no remedy, but to hell I must needs sink?

For my life Deuosion he is haunted with the Mare:

Nay it is some wurser thing truly I fear.

I hold a Crown he is not very well:

So me thinks for he dreameth of going to Hell.

We will wake him out of that troublesome sleep:

Good Lord see thou not? behold how he does weep

How do you good master? is he a sleep or a wake?

Oh good Lord, how my heart does ache.
Oh sick, sick, never so sick in my life berfore:
Good Lord, policy I think I shall never go ho^e more.

Mary God forbid, why where is your greef?

All the parts of my body wants releef.
Oh Devotion, I have such pains in my head:
That truly, truly, I wish my self even dead.

Me thought you dremed, for to your self you did talk

In deed Sir, I dreamed I had a great journey to walk.
Oh what great pains and torments I thought my self in:
Lying in fire which to burn did never lin.
And me thought before me the plague of God did stand:
Ready to strike me with a Sword in his hand.
And ever I asked him what was the cause:
He answered that I was a transgressor of Gods Laws.
But Lord how sick I am, and how terible is my pain:
No place in my body, but sickness therein does reign.
I like not these foolish dreams, policy my friend:

Tush a straw, upon them never set your mind.
He that to dreams gives any confidence or trust:
Without dout very unquietly live he must.

Oh sick, sick, sick, oh my head, oh my back:

What would you have Sir? tell us what you lack.

Is it not best that I call hither a Physician?
That he may of your sickness declare ye disposition.

Oh yea, yea, do so good devotion, I pray thee devotion
Gods blessing on thy heart, for thy witty motion.
Depart I pray thee with as much haste as may be:

It shall not be long or he be here, you shall see.

Oh policy sick, never so sick, oh hold my head:
Oh sira, what shall be come of all my goods when I am dead?

Dead? body of me, do you rocken to dye this year?
Hold your peace I warrant you, ye need not to fear.
Lo, see you not how the worldly man shows his kind?
As sick as he is, on his goods is all his mind.

Oh policy if I might not dye, what a fellow would I be
In all this country should be none like unto me.
S^ca, what a goodly Warret have I made in my hall?
But yet my banquiting house pleases me best of all.
Oh, oh, alas what a pang is this at my heart?

Body of me Aqua vitae, Vinagre, needs help he will depart.
Saint Vncumber be with us, and the blessing of S. Anthony:
Help, help our Lady of Walsingham and all her holy company

Why? how now? what is the matter? how does he Policy?

Body of me help, he is gone else and that verily

Stand away foolish knave and let master Physician come:

Master Flebishiten, should I say, M. Physician, I pray you look in his bum

By your leave my masters, me thinks it is no time to jest:
Stand back I pray you, and do not me molest.
Passion of me masters, count you this a play?
One of you quickly bring me hither a Key.
Some drink, Aqua vitae, if it may be got:
With speed let us have some drink that is hot.

Nay, I told you before he was past remedy.

No there is life in him, yet I see verily.
Run I pray you and fetch such things as we lack:
Some drink and a pillow to lay at his back.

Here is drink and all things ready at hand:

Give me rowme I pray you, out of my light stand.

Jesus mercy, lo how busy master Phesicion is:
Here you Sir? is it not best you look on his pis.

Good fellow be content, I pray thee heartily:
Thou art disposed to jest me think verily.

Good fellow? goodman whoball, I will make you change your note
Before that for your labor you get the value of a grote.

What how worldly man, in Gods name I say:
Look up for the love of God, do not like a beast decay.

Who is there? what art thou that call me?

Mary Sir, master Flebishiten, Physician is come and it was he

Oh sirs, sirs, I fear me all this labor is in vain:
You might have let me go, I was well out of my pain.
Oh master Physician, how think you? what say you to me?

By my truth there is no remedy but one, that I can see.
You must put your will to Gods will I can say no more:

Why? foolish Physician he knew that well enough before.

What say thou? is there no remedy but I must dye?

No Sir by my truth, as far as I can see or espy.
God may do much, for he is omnipotent:
But you are past help in this world in man's judgment.

What the devil do thou here? then get thee away:

Depart Physician, and thou haste no more to say.

I trust then, Sir you will content me for my pains taking:

You shall have a new lofe, at the maids next baking.

Go thy ways I pray thee and trouble not my mind:
For these news, to give thee any thing, in my heart I cannot find

Good Lord have mercy on thee, belike it is to late to amend:
In wickedness thou have lived, even so thou will end.
Gentleman, I trust you will not see me loose my labor:

Gentleman go as you came, you are not so much in my favor

A common saying in deed, that is like unto like:
A wicked M. for wicked servants, God must needs strike

Oh Sirs, is there no remedy? what shall I say?
Is it not best I set all things at a stay?

Yes make sure woork of that while as you be here:

It is time in deed, for death in you does appeer.

Once you know that I am greatly in def:
And now every one will strive, their own for to get.
Bid my wife therefore get a letter of administration, as soon as she may
And then as she lists, my Criditors she may pay.
In deed I have enough to pay every man his:
But by Lady I cannot tell what mine own shall mis.
Commend me to her, and bid her take no thought:
But in any wise let her (as near as she can) for go naught.

By my truth this is wunderfully well invented:
As you have said, I warrant you it shall be frequented.

Your mind in this thing undoubted is not il:
Now as for other things it is best you make a will.

It shall be (Devotion) even as thou haste said:
Write quickly for of my life I am afraid.
Oh must I needs dye? oh must I needs away?

Here is Ink and Paper, what shall I write?

In the name, first of all do thou in dite.

In the name, in, in, in, in the name, what more?

Of, of, of, of, what more?

Body of me, down with the paper, away with the Ink:

P^ssion of me Couetouse he is gone me think.
Hold, hold him, let us see if any life in him be:

Nay hold him that will, the Devil hold him for me:

Passion of me he is dead, how shall we do now?

Can thou not tell? no more can I, I make God auow.
Sira here was a trim end that he did make:
Thou never heardst him the name of God in his mouth take.

Tush, God: a straw, his mind was other ways occupied:
All his study was who should have his goods when he dyed.
Indeed all men may perceive his mind to be corrupt and il:
For God would not suffer him to name him in his will.
A strange matter, when men have given over God:
They may be sure to be scurged with his sharp rod.

This is the end always where I begin:
For I am the root of all wickedness and sin.
I never rest to teach and instruct men to evil:
Til I bring them both body and soul to the Devil.
As we have done this worldly man here as you see:
Come therefore Ignorance, wait thou upon me.
The Devil and I, thou shall see will not leave:
Til we have made the greatest part to us to cleue.
Come, let us go hence, here is no more to be said:
Farewell my masters our parts we have played.

Oh, oh, oh, oh, all is mine, all his mine,
My kingdom increases every hour and day:
Oh, how they seek my magestie divine,
To come to me they labor all that they may.
The worldly man (quoth he) nay the diuilish man than,
For more wickedness and mischeef then he did use:
I my self indeed never devise can,
Oh at his ioly wisdom I must needs muse.
How cunningly put he his money to usury?
Yea, and that without offense of any law:
He was not to learn any kind of bribery,
Whereby wicked gains to him he might draw.
An abominable drunkard, a stinking Lecherer,
A filthy Sodomit, a corrupt canscience within:
A privy slanderer, and a subtle murderer,
To be short, a very dunghill and sink of sin.
Oh my boy Couetouse, I may thank thee of all this
Thou nousledst him in all mischeef and vice:
Therefore shall thou be sure to have my bliss:
For abooue all other thou indeed art most wise.
Thou teach the worldly man, a leacemonger to be,
To oppress the poor and of his riches him to defraud:
Wickedly to use the laws he learned of thee,
Therefore indeed thou art worthy of much lawd.
All you worldly men, that in your riches do trust,
Be merry and iocond, build Palaces and make lusty cheer:
Put your money to Usury, let it not lie and rust,
Occupye your selves in my laws while ye be here.
Spare not, nor care not, what mischeef you frequent,
Use drunkenness, deceit, take other men's wives:
Pass of nothing; one hour is enough to repent,
Of all the wickedness you have done in your lives.
Oh if you will thus after my Laws behave,
You shall have all things as this worldly man had:
Be bold of me, what you will to crave,
And dout you not but with you I will play the loouing lad.
Yea, and after death I will provide a place,
For you in my kingdom for ever to reign:
You shall tare no wurse then does mine own grace,
That is to lie burning for ever in pain.
Come on mine own Boy, go thou with me,
Thou have served me duly, and hate me never:
Therefore now for thy pains rewarded shall thou be:
In ever lasting fire that burns for ever.

He that touches pitch, shall be defiled with the same,
And he that keeps company with those that be vicious:
Shall at the length grow like unto the same,
Working things wicked and pernicious,
Even so it is also to be associate with the righteous.
For he that haunteth and keeps honest company:
Cannot choose but live according to the same actually.
Example, the Jews being conversant with the Heathen,
Drank of their superstition and idolatry:
And by that means fell from the true God of Heaven,
To worshipping of Blocks which was mere blasphemy.
Likewise it is at this day verily,
Christen men are seduced by keeping of il company:
And brought from the very truth to hypocricy.
And who are those that are thus deceived?
Even such as are not content when to are well:
They be not thankful for that they have received,
But ever they think still more and more to excel,
Contentation from their minds they do expel.
And under the pretense of reason, wit and policy:
They covet to run to mischeef and sin hedely.

Like as Gold and silver is tried in the fire,
So faithful men in the furnace of adversity be proved:
The heavenly must not live as flesh and lust does desire,
But heavenly things of heavenly men be looued.
With no kind of temptation he must be moved.
Be it sickness or poverty, or what so ever of God is sent:
The heavenly must take it patiently and be therewith content

Enough is as good as a feast, where contentation does dwell,
For where he remains is the spirit of God with rest:
The unquiet mind of the couetouse does grutch and swel,
And to live with enough he does abhor and detest.
The greedy gasping of Couetouse does him so molest.
That to be rich he all his whole mind does set:
Nothing regarding how the same he does get.

Pithagoras says, that a man of Couetouse desire,
Cannot be contented nether with abundance:
For the more he has, the more still he does require,
Wherefore such persons provoke God to vengeance,
Example of the worldly man, late of remembrance.
Whose wicked life offended the Lord so excedingly.
That his heavy plagues came upon him sudenly.

God grant his end, example may be,
To all men how their riches they shall use:
Make not that thy God, which should be servant unto thee,
For in so doing thou do it greatly abuse.
I pray God (I say) that our couetouse we may refuse,
And one of us to love an other, for that pleases God dest:
So shall we be sure to inheret the good land of rest.

By Gods great goodness I am sent unto thee,
Rest is my name wherein the heavenly shall abide:
Happy are those persons that come unto me,
For I being present all troubles I do divide.
With joys I am adorned, yea on every side,
Which are prepared for the heavenly from the beginning:
And given unto them for a reward of their godly living.

Thanks be given to thee O Father omnipotent,
Thy mercyes Lord, and not my deserts truly:
Has caused those joys to me to be sent,
Grant me grace therefore to praise thy name duly.
Thy goodness appears to me every day newly.
Whilst breath and life prolong my days:
My mouth shall not cease thy holy name to praise:

Enough is as good as a feast, here let us stay,
We have troubled our audience, that let us remember:
Let us conclude therefore, but first let us pray,
That it will please God in mercy our good mistres to tender,
Our faith to stablish wherein we be slender.
That at the last day when the trump shall blow:
For to be heavenly men the Lord may us al know

First let us call to God for Jesus Christ's sake,
Long to preserve Elizabeth our most noble Queen
Good Lord grant her highness the heavenly path to take,
And that all bye ways, of her highness may be seen.
Encreace her wealth, prolong her health, preserve her life:
That long she may rule this realm, without debate or strife.


