HOw do thou like the lovely Euphrata?


I did not mark her.


Then thou did not mark
The fairest Saxon Lady in mine eye,
That ever breathed a maid.

Your mind now known,
I Will say she is the fairest in the world,
Were she the foulest.

Then those can dissemble.

You know I cannot, but dear Constantine,
I prithee tell me first, what is that Lady?
That wonder of her sex, called Euphrata,
Whose daughter is she?

I cannot blame thee Otho.
Though thou be ignorant of her high worth,
Since here in Saxon we are strangers both,
But if thou cal'st to mind, why we left Mead,
Read the trice reason in that Ladies eye,
Daughter unto the Duke of Saxony,
She unto whom so many worthy Lords,
Veiled Bonnet, when she past the Triangle,
Making the pavement Ivory where she trod.

She that so lightly touched the marble path,
That leads from the Temple to the presence.

The same.

Why that was white before,
White Marble Constantine, whiter by odds
Then that which lovers term the Ivory hand,
Nay then the Lilly, whiteness of her face.

Come, thou art a cavilling companion,
Because thou see my heart is drowned in love,
Thou will drown me too, I say the Lady's fair,
I say I love her, and in that more fair,
I say she loves me, and in that most fair,
Love does attribute in Hyperbolies,
Unto his Mistress the creation of every excellence,
Because in her his eyes do dream of perfect excellence,
And here she comes.
Observe her, gentle friend.

Welcome sweet Constantine.

My Euphrata.

Thy Euphrata, be thou my Constantine,
But what is he a stranger, or thy friend?

My second self, my second Euphrata,
If thou be mine, salute her gentle Otho.

An humble and a true devoted heart,
I tender to you in a minds chaste kiss.

Welcome to me, since welcome to my friend.

A beautiful, an admirable Lady,
I think it is fatal unto every friend,
Never to love, until his friend first love,
And then his choice; but sooner will I tear
Out of this breast, mine affection with my heart.

Hearing sweet Constantine thou were so nere me,
I came as I were winged to gaze on thee.

And would to heaven there were no barin time
To hinder me from thy desired sight,
But thousand suitors eyes do watch my steps,
And hark I hear some trampling, how now Iulia?

Madam, the Lord Montano spying you,
To leave the presence, and to enter here,
Has ever since waited your coming forth,
And will not be denied until he see you.

Of all my suitors, most importunate.

What is he love?

Of very noble birth.
But my affection is not tied to birth,
I must dispense with this kind conference,
For some small time, until I rid him hence,
Therefore within my closet hide thy self,
Your friend shall Iulia guide into the garden,
Where through a private door, but seldom used,
He may at pleasure leave us and return,
Deny me not, I prithee Constantine,
Thou have my heart, and would thy birth were such,
I need not fear t'avouch thee for my Love.

Madam, I take my leave.

Farewell dear friend,
Return as soon as may be, farewell Love.

Now guide Montano hither.

Gracious Madam, I have seen the noble Palsgrave,
The Prince of Milleine, and the Palatine of the Rheine,
With diverse other honorable suitors,
Mounted to ride unto their several places.

Of me they took their farewell yesternight.

What means your grace to be so unkind to all?
You drive away good fortune by disdain.

Why are you grieving too?

I am your subject;
The meanest that did humbly seek your love,
Yet not the meanest in affection,
And I am come to take my farewell too.

Why then farewell.

So short with them that love you.

Your journey may be great for ought I know,
And it is an argument of little love,
To be the hinderer of a traveller.

My journey Madame is unto my house,
Scarce half a league hence, there to pine and die,
Because I love such beauteous cruelty.

God speed you sir.

Nay then I will not leave you:
Madam, it is thought, and that upon good ground
You have shrin'd your affection in the heart
Of some (what ere he be) noble, or base,
And that's the cause you lightly censure all.

Who thinks it?

I do Madame, and your father.

It is upon my vowed chastity.

What devil made you swear to chastity,
Or have you taken that oath only for a term.

A term, what term?

A term of some seven years,
Or peradventure half the number more.

For term of life.

You have sworn to be forsworn,
He was no well disposed friend of yours,
That gave you consaile to forswear such beauty,
Why it is as if some traveiler had found
A mine of gold, and made no use of it.
For term of life; why then die presently,
So shall your debt to nature be far less;
Your tyranny over man's yielding heart
Be less condemned: oh you were made for man,
And living without man, to murder men:
If any creature be so fortunate
That lives in grace of your all gracious self,
Though I am well persuaded it is not I
I vow by all the rites of virtuous love,
Be he ignoble, of the basest sort,
To please you Madame, I Will renounce my suite,
And be a special mean unto your father,
To grant your hearts affection, though I die.

Now Lord Montano you come near my heart,
And were I sure that you would keep your word,
As I am sure you love me by your deeds,
I might perchance deliver you my thoughts.

By heaven, and by your beauteous self I will.

Then Constantine come forth, behold thy friend.

Madame what mean you, to reveal our love?

This is a very stubborn Gentleman,
A Gentleman, a pesant, Saxony affords not one more base.

He does me wrong, that terms me meaner then a gentleman.

I term thee so.

Why how now Lord Montano, you do forget your oath.

And you your self,
Your Princely father, and the Dukedomes honor.
To chain your liking to a groom so base.

He lies that calls me groom.

O God, forbear,
His Excellence, your father's coming hither.

He comes in happy time, to know the cause,
Why such great Princes have bin made your scorn.

What will you tell him?

Will I? let me die
Contemned of heaven, in public obloquie,
If I reveal not this lascivious course.

We are undone.

Hence with this prating Maid,
If thou have any anger in thy breast,
Toward this Lady, turn it all on me,
She is a woman, timorous by her kind,
I man-like borne, and bear a man-like mind.

I Will try your courage -- draw.

As thou fear my frown,
As thou have hope to thrive in thy new choice,
As thou respect'st the favor of the gods,
Welfare in any action thou intends,
Do not reveal unto my fretfull father
This humble choice that my high birth has made.

Why then forswear him.

Sooner set thy feet
Upon my breast, and tread me to the ground.

As thou art any thing more then a beast.
Do not procure my Lady such disgrace.

Peace bawd, I Will have no conference with you.

He cannot hurt me, it is my Love I fear,
Although my father be as stern as war,
Inexorable like consuming fire,
As jealous of his honor, as his crown,
To me his anger is like Zephires breath,
Cast on a bank of summer violets:
But to my Love, like whirlewinde to a boat,
Taken in midst of a tumultuous sea.
Alas he comes, Montane, prithee peace,
Courage sweet Love.

I see our love must cease.

Not if my wit can help,
It shall go hard but I Will prevent the traitor.

Hear me my Lord.

Hear me my gracious father.

Hear me my liege, there is treason in your Court,
I have found a peasant in the Princess closet,
And this is he that steals away her honor.

This villain gracious father it is that seeks
To rob me of mine honor, you your daughter.

Now as you are a right heroike Prince,
Be deaf unto your daughters fair words.

Be deaf to him, as you regard your self.

What strange confusion's this, that cloyes our hearing?

Speak beauteous sister, who has done thee wrong?

Her self.

This traitor.

Lord Montano.

He.

Villain thou dyest.

Stay, she means Constantine,
He that I found infolded in her closet,
Reaping the honor, which a thousand Lords
Have failed in seeking, in a lawful course.

He does me wrong my gracious sovereign.

He wrongs my Lady, an't please your grace.

I Will tell the truth.

Or rather let me tell it.

Lascivious love is ever full of sleights.

Villains that seek by treason their desires,
Want no suggestion to beguile a truth.

Isay, I found this peasant in her closet,
Kissing, embracing, and dishonouring her.

I say, an'c please your gracious Excellence.
I found this Gentleman within my closet,
There set by subornation of this Lord,
And here appointed to dishonor me,
Speak, is it not true?

True, if it please your grace.

What say you strumpet?

Since my Lady says so,
I say and't please your Excellence.

Speak woman.

It Is very true.

O monstrous forgerie.

O more then falsehood to become so smooth,
In such a dangerous action.

This is strange,
Montano seek the ruin of my daughter.

Because I would not yield unto his suite,
Which he in rapefull manner often has sought,
He set this Gentleman to do me shame,
Intending by exclaimes to raise the Court,
But that repentance in my waiting Maid,
And of his sorrowful self, revealed the plot.

O ye gods, how am I over-reacht!

I know the young man to be well descended,
Of civil carriage, and approved faith,
How ere seduced to this enterprise.

My conscience would not propagate that plot.

Nor mine my Lord, though gold corrupted me.

Clean from the byas wit, by heaven rare wit,
I Will tell another tale, if they have done.

What can thou speak vild traitor,
Thou see thou art prevented in thy plot,
And therefore desperately coin'st any thing,
But I am deaf to all such stratagems.

Will you not hear me?

Forgeries and lies,
My daughters honor is of that high prize,
That I prefer it before a traitors brain,
Let it suffice, we know she has denied thee,
And some denied (like devils) turn their love,
Into excrutiation of themselves,
And of the parties whom they have beloved;
Revenge begins where flatteries do end,
Being not her husband, thou will be no friend.
Thus is thy policy by heaven prevented,
Therefore henceforth, we banish thee our Court,
Our Court? our territory, every place,
Wherein we bear the state of Royalty:
Urge no reply, the fact is plainly proved,
And thou art hateful where thou were beloved.

My gracious Lord.

We can afford no grace,
Stay there, and read thy ruin in my face.

I go, contented with this heavy doom
'Twas mine own seeking, fair, and wise adieu,
Deceit has killed conceit, you know it is true.

An upright sentence of an act so vilde.

Remove this waiting virgin from your chamber,
But let this gentleman attend on me,
The best may be deceived by treachery.

Then so my gracious father may this maid.

Then let her keep her place, beware of gold,
Honor's too precious to be baselie sold.
Now to our dying friend, his grace of Mead,
Daughter prepare you, you shall ride along,
For to that end we came, come son to horse,
Ere we come there, our friend may prove a coarse.

It Was well done both, this action rarely fell,
Where women try their wits, bad plots prove well.
1. Come away fellow louse, thou art ever eating,
2. Have I not need, that must feed so many
Cannibals, as will wait on me whether I will or no?
3. Here Is one in my neck, I would'twere on thy shoulder.
1. Keep it your self, I have retainers enough of mine own.
2. But, whether are you going now?
1. Why, are you our King, and do not know that?
2. Your King? I am a very rognish King, and I have
A company of lousy subjects.
2. But look about my ragged subjects here comes some body,
1. O the devils, shall we ask them an alms?
2. Why not, now the rats have eaten up their brother Bishop, they will be more
charitable, your vecation you slaves
3. For the Lord sake be pitiful to a company of poor men.

What cry is this? beggars so near the door
Of our deceased brother; whip them hence,
Or bring the Mastiffe forth, worry them,
They are lazy drones, it is pity such should live.
1. I told you my Lord how we should find them: whip us,
Lead the way sovereign, we will none of your whipping.

Hence with these dogs, what make they near this house?
2. He will be eaten with rats too, he looks like a piece of cheese already.

You Rogues.

Good brother stay your self from wrath,
Think on the Bishop and his odious death.

What odious death I pray?

Eaten with Rats,
Whilst he was living, for the wrong he did
Unto the poor, the branches of our God.

It Is true, and therefore call the poor again,
Come hither friends, I did forget my self.
Pray for me, there is some silver for thy wants.
2. Now the Lord bless you, and keep your good fate.
From being Mouse-eaten, we came thinking
We should have some dole at the Bishops funeral,
But now this shall serve our turn, we will
Pray for you night and day.

Go to the back gate, and you shall have dole.

O the Lord save thee.

These Beggars pray and curse, both in a breath,
Oh wherefore should we fawn upon such curres,
The mice of mankind, and the scorn of earth?

So said our brother.

And he was a Bishop,
Had read the Scripture, and knew what he said.

But he has brought that saying with his death,
With such a loathsome and notorious death,
As while the World's a World, 'twill speak of Mead.

The Lord Archbishop of Mead, and die by Rats.

He did proclaim relief unto the poor,
Assembled them unto a private Barn,
And having locked the door, set it on fire,
Saying, hee'de rid the country of such Mice,
And Mice and Rats have rid him from the World:

Well, I Will not hurt the poor so publicly,
But privately I Will grind their very hearts,
Torture them living, and yet have their prayers,
And by such means, that few or none shall know it.

In such a course Alfred would wind with you,
For though I counsail'd you to be more calm,
It Was not in pity of their poverty,
But to avoid their clamor, to give nothing,
Will make them curse you: but to threaten them,
Fly in your face, and spit upon your beard,
No devil so fierce, as a bread-wanting heart,
Especially being baited with ill terms,
But what course can you take to plague these dogs?

Why, buy up all the corn, and make a dearth,
So thousands of them will die under stalles.

And send it unto foreign nations,
To bring in toies, to make the wealthy poor.

Or make our land bear wood instead of wheat.

Enclose the commons, and make white meats dear.

Turn pasture into Park grounds, and starve cattle,
Or twenty other honest thriving courses;
The meanest of these, will beggar half a Kingdom.

I have a commission drawn for making glass,
Now if the Duke come, as I think he will;
Twill be an excellent means to lavish wood,
And then the cold will kill them, had they bread.

The iron Mills are excellent for that,
I have a pattent drawn to that effect,
If they go up, down goes the goodly trees,
I Will make them search the earth to find new fire.

We two are brothers, and the Duke's our brother,
Shall we be brothers in Commission?
And I Will persuade him to authorize thee
His substitute in Mead, when he enioyes it.

Death I Will get thee Regent under him
In Saxony, to oppress as well as I,
And we will share the profits, live like Kings,
And yet seem liberal in common things.

Content, what though the Rats devoured our brother?
Was not a Prophet murdered by a Lion?
King Herod died of Lice, worms do eat us all,
The Rats are worms, then let the Rats eat me,
Is the dead course prepared?

Embalmed and coffined,
The City keys delivered to my hands,
We stay but only for his Excellence.

The Duke is coming if it please your honors.

And he is welcome, let the trumpets found.

Welcome, thrice welcome our renowned brother,
Lo at thy feet, the Citizens of Mead,
By us their Agents, do lay down the keys,
And by this crownet, and sword resigned,
The state Maiestique to your Princely hands,
Descended to you, by our brothers death.

Then with your loves, and persons we receive it,
Is then our brother the Archbishop dead?

Too true my Lord.

I am sorry for my Uncle.

And of a death so public by report.

Devoured by Rats, in strange and wondrous sort.

Could not this palace seated in the Rheine,
In midst of the great River, (to the which
No bridge, nor convay, other then by boats,
Was to be had) ree him from vermin Rats?

Against their kind, the land Rats took the water
And swomme in little armies to the house,
And though we drowned, and killed innumerable,
Their numbers were like Hydra's heads increasing,
Ruin bred more until our brother died.

The house is execrable, I Will not enter.

You need not fear my Lord, the house is free,
From all resort of Rats, for at his death,
As if a trumpet founded a retreat,
They made a kind of murmr, and departed.

Sure 'twas the hand of heaven, for his contempt
Of his poor creatures: but what writs are those?

Commissions (if it please your grace) for glass
For iron Mines, and other needful things.

Our self invested in the government
The Cities care, shall lie upon your care.

Alfred our brother may awaite your grace seven,
in Saxony, so please you to command.

We are now but three, that lately have bin
We have cause to love each other, for my part,
Between you both, we give a brothers heart,
Here, or at Saxonis, command at pleasure,
I wear the corronet, be yours the treasure.

We thank our brother.

Where Is my son Fredericks?

Father, the state of Mead desire your grace.
To take the pains to pass unto the Senate.

What glove is that son Fred. in your hand!

I found it if it please your Excellence,
Near to the state-house, the imbroiderie
Is very excellent, and the fashion rare.

I have not seen a prettier form of hand?
Daughter let us see, is it not too big for you?

Sure it is some admirable work of nature,
If it fit any hand that owes this glove,
If all the rest do parallel the hand.

Will it not on?

Not for a diadem,
I Will try no longer, lest I shame my self.

Try Iulia.

My hand's bigger then my Ladies.

I cannot tell, but in my mind I feel
A wondrous passion of I know not what.

The imbroidered glove may be some child's no woman's

I should mistrust as much, but that this place
Bears greater compass then a childish hand,
I must command it.

Willingly my Lord.

Then to the state-house brothers lead the way.
First our instalement, then a funeral day.

Yonder she goes, the mirror of her sex,
Stay beauteous Euphrata.

Otho, what Iulia?

Here Madam, what is your will.

Call Constantine,
Tell him, his dear friend Otho is returned.

I will.

Stay Iulia.

Do as I bid you, go.

I had rather have a word or twain with you.

I have heard him often enquire for thee his friend,
I have heard him sigh, I have seen him weep for thee,
Imagining some mischief, or distress
Had fallen thee since the closets separation.

And what a slave am I to wrong this friend.

Where is he?

Here.

The welcom'st man alive,
Unkind, how could thou stay from me so long?

I have bin ill at ease, pray pardon me,
But I rejoice to see my friend so well.

Some Ladies love has made him melancholy.

She has read the letter that I lately sent her,
In a pomegranat, by those words I hope.

Why speak you not, is it love, or melancholy?

If upon love my grief is melancholy.

I Will have the best Physicians here in Mead.
Assay by art to cure that malladie.

Against mellancholy minds your only Physic
Our Saxon doctors hold that principle,
Now I remember you did lately send me
A choice pomegranate, fetch it Iulia,
Some of those grains well stirred in Gascoine wine,
Is present remedy.

Madam, I Will none
Of all fruits, that I hate.

And commended it so highly by the messenger that brought it.

It Was well remembered, you shall take a grain.

You will but vex me.

So his melancholy
Does make him froward with his dearest friend,
It Is well done Iulia, quickly cut it up,
And bring a cup of wine, or let me do it.

I see I shall be plagued with mine own wit:
Being ashamed to speak, I writ my mind,
Were you my friends, you would not martyr me
With needless physic, fie upon this trasn,
The very sight is loathsome.

Take it up.
But let me see, what letter's that that dropped,
Came it from you, or from the Spanish fruit.

It Is all the grains that the pomegranate had.

Then there is some treachery within these grains,
I Will break it up,
And it is directed to my Euphrata.

What may the tenure be, I pray thee read it.

O fall upon me some wind-shaken turrer,
To hide me from the anger of my friend,
O from his frown, because he is my friend,
Were he an enemy, I would be bold.
But kindness makes this wound; o this horror,
The words of friends are stronger then their power.

Withdraw good Iulia.

'Pray what is it love?

It Is love indeed to thee, but to my heart
Every loose sentence is a killing dart.
I brought this Gorges to my hearts delight.
And he has drowned his senses with the sight,
Except thy self, all things to him were free,
Otho, thou have done me more then injury,
Well may thou fix thy eye upon the earth,
This action fith breeds a prodigious birth,
It is so monstrous and against all kind,
That the lights splendour would confound thy mind.

I have offended, prithee pardon me.

What cause did move thee?

Her all-conquering sight.

Could thou usurp upon my well known right?

Think I am flesh and blood, and she is fair.

Think how I love thee.

There proceeds my care.

Our amity has bin of ancient days,
During which time, wronged I thee any ways?

Never.

But rather I have done thee good.

I grant you have, o rather shed my blood,
Then number the kind deeds between us past,
For this unkindnesse here I love my last.

He does repent, and will renounce his suite,

I do renounce it.

O thou can not do it.

Suffer me stay a while in her fair sight,
'T will heal my wound and all love banish quite.

The sight of the beloved, makes the desire
That burnt but slowly, flame like sparkling fire.
As thou do love me, take thee to some place,
Where thou may nere see her, nor I thy face.

By what is dear betwixt us, by our selves,
I vow henceforth ten thousand deaths to prove,
Then be a hinderance to such virtuous love.

Break heart, it is for thy sake.

When I am dead,
O then forget that I have injured.

O hell of love.

Or rather hell of friends.

Firmly till they love.

Then thus all friendship ends.

Good brother hear some Music, twill delight you.

I Will call the Actors, will you see a play?

Or gracious father, see me run the race,
On a light footed horse, swifter then wind.

I pray forbear.

This mood will make you mad,
For melancholy Vshers frantic thoughts.

It makes hot wreaking blood turn cold and dry,
And drithe and coldness are the signs of death.

You do torment me.

Is it any thing
That I have done, offends your grace?

Or comes this hidden anger from my fault?

Here Is none but gladly would resign his life,
To do you pleasure, so please you to command.

In Faith you are too blame to vex me thus.

Then grounds this sorrow on your brothers death?

Or rather on the glove I lately found.

A plague upon the glove, what is that to me,
Your prating makes me almost lunatike.
As you respect my welfare, leave me, leave me,
The sooner you depart, the sooner I
Shall find some means to cure my malady.

Our best course is to be obedient.

Farewell,
Was ever slave besotted like to me,
That Kings have loved, those that they never saw,
Is nothing strange, since they have heard their praise,
Birds that by painted grapes have bin deceived,
Had yet some shadow to excuse their error,
Pigmalion that did love an Ivory Nymph,
Had an Idea to delight his sense,
The youth that doted on Minerva's picture,
Had some contentment for his eye
But love, or rather an infernal hagge,
Envying Saxons greatness and his joys,
Has given me nothing but a trifling glove,
As if by the proportion of the case,
Art had the power to know the jewels nature,
Or Nymph, or goddess, woman, or fair devil
If any thing thou art within my brain,
Draw thine own picture, let me see thy face,
To doat thus grossly, is a gross disgrace.
I hear some Music, o ye Deities.
Send you this heavenly consort from the spheres?
To recreate a love-perplexed heart.
The more it founds, the more it refreshes,
I see no instruments, nor hands that play,
And my dear brothers durst not be so bold,
It Is some celestial rapture of the mind,
No earthly harmony is of this kind,
Now it does cease, speak who comes there?

Father.

From whence proceeds the Music that I heard?

The beauteous and the famous Curtezan,
Allied unto the banished Montano,
Admired Valontia, with a troop of youths,
This day does keep her yearly festival,
To all her suitors, and this way she past
Unto her Arbor, when the Music plaide.

Admired Valentia, Curtezans are strange
With us in Germany, except her self,
Being a Venetian borne, and priviledg'd,
The state allows none here.

Twere good for Mead she were unpriuiledgd
And sent to Venice.

Of all the faces that mine eye beheld,
Hers is the brightest.

Is she then so fair?

O beyond all comparison of beauty.

Upon her hand,
Father I saw the fellow to your glove.

What the imbroidred glove you lately found?

Fellow to that.

Then let it be restored,
What should a Prince retain a strumpets glove?
O ye eternal powers, am I ensnared
With the affection of a common trull,
Where Is your commissions that you would have signed,
It Is time I had a president in Saxony,
Receive our signet, and impresse them straight,
I Will remain here in Mead, some little time,
Brother have care my Dukedom be well ruled,
Here I put over my affairs to you,
My son I leave unto the joys of youth,
It Is pity that his mind should be oppressed
So soon with care of governments,
Go to your pleasures, seek your sister forth,
Send Constantine to us, so leave me all,
I am best accompanied with none at all.
Either the Plannets that did meet together,
In the grand consultation of my birth,
Were opposite to every good infusion,
Or only Venus stood as retrograde,
For but in love of this none loving trull,
I have been fortunate even since my birth,
I feel within my breast a searching fire,
Which does ascend the engine of my brain,
And when I seek by reason to suppress
The heat it gives, the greaters the excess:
I loath to look upon a common lip.
Were it as corrall as Aurora's cheek,
Died with the fair virmillion sun:
O but I love her, and they say she is fair,
Now Constantine.

Your grace did send for me.

Lend me your habit in exchange of mine,
For I must walk the City for a purpose.

Withal my heart, my habit and my self.

In any case, watch at the privy chamber.
If any ask for me, say I am not well,
And tho it be my son, let him not enter.

I will.

Be careful gentle Constantine,
Now fair Valentia, Saxon to thy bower,
Comes like a Jove to rain a golden shower.

Prosper kind Lord, what ere the action be,
Counsels of Princes should be ever free.

Torches and Music there, the room's too dark.

Prithee Niece
Abandon this lascivious unchaste life,
It is the only blemish of our house,
Scandal unto our name, a Curtezan,
O what is more odious in the ears of men!

Then why do men resort to Curtezans,
And the best sort; I scorn inferior grooms.
Nor will I deny to draw aside my mask,
To any meaner then a Noble man.

Come, can you dance: a caper and a kiss,
For every turn, I Will fold thee in my arms,
And if thou fal'st although no a kin we be,
That thou may light fall soft, I Will fall under thee,
Oh for the lightness of all light heel'd girls.
And I would touch the Ceeling with my lips,
Why art thou sad Montano?

On just cause,
You know I am banished from my native country.

This city is Mead, thou art of Saxony.

But this belongs unto the Saxons Duke:
By the decease of the departed Bishop.

Fear not, thou art as safe within my house,
As if perculliz'd in a wall of brass.
Where Is Vandermas?

Madam did you call?

What noble man is that, a suitor to you?

An excellent Pander, a rare doore-keeper.

I had thought he had bin a gentleman at least.

Because of his attire?

True.

O the attire, in these corrupted days, is no true sign
To show the gentleman; peasants now wear robes
In the habiliments of noblemen.
The world's grown naught, such judgment then is base,
For Hares and Asses we are the Lions case.

It Is very costly and exceeding rich.

Riches to me, are like trash to the poor,
I have them in abundance, gold's my slave,
I keep him prisoner in a threefold chest,
And yet his kindred daily visit me.

Lord how diligent
Is this rich clothed fellow!

Were he proud,
And should but dare to stand still when I call,
I Would run him through with a killing frown.

Why then belike his service is for love.

Why so are all the servants that attend me,
They keep themselves in satin, velvets, gold,
At their own charge, and are diligent,
Days, months, and years, to gain an amorous smile.
Look on my face with an indifferent eye.
And thou shall find more music in my looks,
Then in Amphions Lute, or Orpheus Harp,
Mine eye consists of numbers like the soul,
And if there be a soul, it is in mine ey,
For of the harmony these bright stars make,
I comprehend the forms of all the world,
The story of the Sirens in my voice,
Is only verified, for Millions stand
In chanted, when I speak, and catch my words,
As they were orient pearl to adorn their ears,
Circe is but a fable, I transform
The virtuous, valiant, and the most precise,
Into what form of mind my fancy please,
Thou might be proud great Lord of my abundance,
For in this beauty I shall more renown
Our noble progeny, then all the pens
Of the best Poets that ere writ of men.
Unto your health, a health, let Music sound,
That what I taste, in Music may be drowned.
So, fill more wine, we use to drink up all,
Wine makes good blood, and cheeres the heart withal.

Madam, at such time as I heard you call,
A gentleman it seems of good descent,
Humbly did crave access unto your honor,

What did he give?

A brace of bags of gold.

He shall have liberty to enter straight.
But first enrich the chamber with perfumes.
Burn choice Arabian Drugs more dear then
Waters distilled out of the spirit of Flowers,
And spread our costly Arras to the eye.
My self sufficiently do shine in jems,
Where such fair coated Heralds do proceed,
It seems he is honorable and of noble same.

Shall I behold this suitor?

At the full,
At pleasure pass through every spacious Room,
Be he a Prince, I Will know his high descent.
Or proudly scorn to give him his content,
What drum is that?

A Mask sent by a friend.

Belike our self must know the mystery,
Tell them we are prepared to see the Mask,
And bid the other noblemen come near,
Thus am I hourly visited by friends,
Beautie's a counselor that wants no fee,
They talk of circles and of powerful spells,
Here Is heavenly art, that all black art excells,

I Will walk into the farther gallery.

Sir you are welcome what so ere you be,
I guess your birth great by your bounteous fee.

Your humble servant bound by a sweet kiss.

I give you freedom gentle Sir by this.

I know your mind, first censure of the sport,
Then you and I will enter Venus Court.

More then immortal, o more then divine,
That such perfection should turn Concubine.

That voice is like unto the Saxon Dukes,
I fear he has heard I lived here in this place,
And he is come to do me more disgrace,
Montano hide thy self till he be gone,
His daughter thirsts for my destruction.

Come sit by me, the Maskers are at hand,
Where are my Maids, to help to make the dance?

What shall we have a Mumming? here is my jewel.

Thou art a jewel most incomparable,
Malicious heaven, why from so sweet a face
Have you exempt the mind adorning grace?

More gold, for this is mine, I thank ye dice

And so are all that do behold thy beauty,
Were she as chaste as she is outward bright,
Earth would be heaven, and heaven eternal night,
The more I drink of her delicious eye,
The more I plunge into captivity.

Have I won all? then take that back again,
What scorn my gift, I see you are gentlemen,
No, is it not possible that I may know,
Unto whose kindness this great debt I owe?
Well, I Will not be importunate, farewell,
Some of your gold let the torch-bearers tell.

Beauteous Madona, do you know these galants?

I guess them of the Duke of Saxons Court.

My subjects, and so many my corrivalls,
O every slave is graced before his Prince.

Are you not well sir, that your color fades.

If I be sick, it is only in the mind,
To see so fair, so common to all kind.
I am grown jealous now of all the world,
Lady how ere you prize me, without pleasure,
More then a kiss, I tender you this treasure.
O what is a mint spent in such desire,
But like a spark that makes a greater fire?
She must be made my Duchess, there it goes,
And marrying her, I marry thousand woes.
Adieu kind Mistress, the next nevves you hear,
Is to sit crowned in an Imperial crown.

Either the man dislikes me, or his brain,
Is not his own to give, such gifts in vain.
But it is the custom in this age to cast
Gold upon gold, to encourage men to waste,
Lightly it comes, and it shall lightly fly.
Whilst colors hold, such presents cannot die.

But this is strange, that I should have her honor?
So far from Court, pray whither were you riding?

Unto your manor, heard you not the news.

What news?

This morning by the break of day,
His excellence sent to me by a post,
Letters, by which the pillars of the state
Should be assembled to a Parliament,
Which he intends my Lords, to hold in Mead.

When if it please your honor?

Instantly, withal the have that winged time can make.

Sooner the better,
It Is like the realms affairs are of some weight.

I will be there to night,
And so I take my leave.

We take our leaves.

Farewell my honored friend,
There is within my brain a thousand wiles,
How I may heap up riches, o the sight
Of a gold shining Mountain does exceed,
Silver is good, but in respect of gold,
Thus I esteem it.

How now my friends, what are you?
1. Poor petitioners.

Stand farther then, the poor is as unpleasing Unto me as the plague.
2. An't please your good Lordship, I am a Merchant and gladly would convay a
thousand quarters of wheat and other grain over the sea, and here is a hundred
pounds for a commission


Thou art no beggar, thou shall have it my friend, Give me thy money.
3. I an't please your honor have a commodity of good broad cloth, not past
two hundred, may I ship them over, and there is a hundred pounds


Thou shall have leave.
1. Although I seem a poor petitioner,
My Lord I crave a warrant to transport
A hundred Cannons, fifty Culverings,
With some slight armours, halberts, and half pikes,
And there is as much as any of the rest.

Away Cannibal, would thou ship ordnance?
What though we send unto the foes our corn,
To fatten them, and cloth to keep them warm,
Lets not be so forgetful of our selves
As to provide them knives to cut our throats,
So I should arm a thief to take my purse,
Have thou no other course of Merchandise?
Thou should get gold, twill yield thee ten in the hundred
On bare exchange, and raise the price with us,
Make us for want, coin, brass, and pass it current,
Until we find profit to call it in,
There are a thousand ways to make thee thrive,
And I Will allow of all be it nere so bad,
Excepting guns to batter down our houses.
1. Letters of Mart I humbly then entreat,
To cease on Rovers that do scour the seas.

And on our friends too, if thou can do it cleanly,
Spare none, but pass it very closely,
We will be loath to sift thy Piracie.
But open care to hear what they complain,
Have thou a Letter?
1. Ready drawn my Lord,
And here is a brace of hundred pounds for you.

It Is very well, I think I shall be rich,
If daily tenants pay me rent thus fast,
Give me your licenses, they shall be sealed,
About an hour hence, here attend our pleasure.

We thank your Lordship.

O vild catterpillers,
And yet how necessary for my turn,
I have the Dukes seal for the City Mead,
With which I Will sign their warrants,
This corn and twenty times as much
Already covertly convai'd to France,
And other bordering Kingdoms near the sea,
Cannot but make a famine in this land,
And then the poor like dogs will die apace,
I Will seem to pity them, and give them alms,
To blind the world, it is excellent policy,
To rid the land of such, by such denice,
A famine to the poor, is like a frost
Unto the earth, which kills the paltry worms,
That would destroy the harvest of the spring,
As for the which, I count them painful men
Worthy to enjoy what they can get,
Beggars are trash, and I esteem them so,
Starve, hang, or drown themselves, I am alive,
Loose all the world, so I have wit to thrive,
But I must to the Parliament, and then
I Will have a clause to beggar some rich meu.

Princes and pillars of the Saxon State.

You are the elected, speak for the Court,
Stay Lord Alberto, we usurp your office,
Who had the charge to fetch Valentia.

I gracious Lord, and when I gave the charge,
A sudden scare by palenesse was displar'd
Upon her rosy cheek, the crimson blood,
That like a robe of state did beautify
The goodly buildings with a two fold grace,
From either side shrunk downwards to her heart,
As if those summons were an adversary,
And had some mighty crime to charge her with,
Millions of thoughts were crowded in her brains,
Her troubled mind, her abrupt words described,
She did accuse her self without accusers,
And in the terror of a soul perplexed,
Cried out, the Duke intends to cease my goods,
Cause I am noted for a Concubine,
I did reply such comfort as beseemes,
But comfortless I brought her to the Court.

Then she attends our pleasure?

Mighty Lord in the next Room.

You are careful Constantiue,
Conduct her in, and Lords give me your thoughts,
What think ye we intend to Valentia?

Her self has read my sentence in the speech,
That Constantine delivered to your grace.

What should my noble father think,
But that she is a strumpet, and in that,
A blemish to the state wherein she lives.

She is rich in jewels, and has store of treasure,
Got by the slavery of that choice beauty,
Which otherwise admires her to the world.

Confiscate all her goods unto the Crown,
Thereby disburdening many heavy taxes.
Imposed upon the commons of the land.

Public example make her to all such
Offenses in that kind are grown too common,
Less shameless now were the beauteous dames
Of Mead and Saxony, when the sufferance
Has at this instant made them good my Lord,
Enact some mighty penalty for lust.

How wide these Archers shoot from the fair aim
Of my affection: bring Valentia in.

The duty that in general I do owe
Unto your excellence and to this Court,
I pay at once upon my bended knee.

Behold her Princes with impartial eyes,
And tell me, looks she not exceeding fair?

If that her mind coher'd with her fair face,
She were the worthy wonder of this age.

I never saw a beauty more divine,
Grossly deformed by her notorious lust.

Fairness and wantonness have made a match
To dwell together, and the worst spoils both.

She is doubly excellent in sin and beauty.

That they speak truth my conscience speaks,
But that I love her that I speak my self:
Stand up divine deformity of nature,
Beauteous corruption, heavenly seeing evil,
What Is excellent in good and bad stand up,
And in this Chair prepared for a Duke,
Sit my bright Duchess, I command thee sit:
You look I am sure for some apology,
In this rash action; all that I can say
Is that I love her, and will marry her.

How, love a Lais, a base Rodophe,
Whose body is as common as the Sea
In the receipt of every lustful spring?

The elements of which these orbs consists
Fire, air, and water, with the good we tread
Are not more vulgar, common, popular
Then her imbracements.

To inch^yne the thoughts
Unto this dissemblance of lascivious love
Were to be married to the broad rode way,
Which does receive the impression of every kind.

Speech does want modesty to set her forth
In her true form, base and contemptible,
The very hindes and peasants of the land
Will be Corrivals with your excellence,
If you espouse such a notorious Trull.

We shall have lust a virtue in the Court:
The ways of sin be furthered by reward:
Panders and Parasites sit in the places
Of the wise Counselors and hurry all.

Father as you are princely in your birth,
Famous in your estate, beloved of all
And (which ads greatest glory to your greatness)
Esteemed wise: Show not such open folly,
Such palpable, such gross, such mountain folly,
Be not the Byword of your neighbor Kings,
The scandal of your Subjects, and the triumph
Of Lenos mathrens and the hateful stews:
Why speak you not that are his brother friends,
You that do wear the Liveries of time,
The silver cognizance of gravitie?
Shall none but young me school? the reverent old
Birds teach the Dam, stars fill the glorious spheres
Of the all lightning Sun, speak whilst you may,
Or this rash deed will make a fatal day.

You have said too much, encourage none to speak
More then have spoke; by my royal blood,
My mind's established not to be withstood,
Those that applaude my choice give us your hands,
And help to tie these sacred nuptial bands.

What likes your excellence, likes me well.

And I agree to what my Sovereign please.

These are no brothers, they are flatterers,
Contrary to themselves in their own speech,
You that do love the honor of your Prince
The care and long life of my father,
The hereditary right derived to me,
Your countries Welfare and your own renown,
Lend me your hands to pluck her from the throne.

Princes forbear, I do not seek the match,
It is his highness pleasure I fit here,
And if he love me it is no fault of mine,
Behoues me to be thankful to his Grace,
And strive in virtue to deserve this place.

Thou speak too mildly to these hare braind youths:
He that presumes to pluck her from the chair
Dies in the attempt, this sword shall end all care.

Why, she is notorious.

But she will amend.

It Is too far grown to have a happy end.

The dangerous the disease greater's the cure.

Princes may seek renown by ways more sure,
She is dishonest.

Honestie's unseen,
She Is fair, and therefore fit to be a Queen.

But virtue is to be preferred ere lust.

Those that are once false shall we never trust?

Wise men approve their actions by the trial.

I say she is mine in spite of all denial.
Bring me the Crown.

To set upon her head?
Friends draw your swords first strike the strumpet dead.

My guard, my guard.

For shame put up your swords.

For shame great Rulers leave your flattering words.

It Is madness in the King, and worse in you.

Though you prove traitors we will not prove untrue.

Will you dismiss this Strumpet to the stews,
Or our allegance in this act refuse.

Do what you dare, the election still shall stand.

Woe and destruction then must rule the land.
Come Lord Rinaldo, valiant Alberto come,
We have friends enough to grace a warlike Drum.
Hark how the Commons do applaud our cause,
Lascivious Duke, farewell father, oh vilde,
Where Queanes are mothers, Frederick is no child.

My guard pursue them, and alive or dead,
Cut off the cause by which these cries are bred,
Come my fair Duchess first unto the Church,
There sollemnize our nuptials, then unto our arms,
A little rough breath over bears these storms.

The Duke's besotted now we are secure,
This match makes well for us, we may command,
And on them lay the abuses of the land.

Excellent good, we are like to have wars indeed,
But in the mean the poor will starve for bread,
We must share proffits howsoere things go
Winner, or looser, neither is our foe,
For mutually we will bear our selves in all,
Or taking part lean to the strongest wall.

My father married to a Concubine,
Then he will pardon though I marry thee,
And howsoe'r, about it presently,
The rather for Montano is repealde
Because of his alliance to Valentia.

I am ready gentle love and glad in mind
That my fair Euphrata will prove so kind.

Come my dear Constantine perform this right,
And arm in arm thus will we sleep to night.

You that are careful of your countries weal,
Fellow compere, Supporter of the State,
Let us embrace in steel, our cause is good,
What mind so base that would not shed his blood
To free his country from so great an ill,
As now reigns in it by lascivious will,
Our friends to war, and for my part,
Ere lust bear sway I Will gladly yield my heart.

I hear the Duke is strong.

Suppose him so,
And be advised strongly to meet the foe:
I had rather you should think him ten thousand strong,
Then find it so to our destruction,
An enemy thought many and found few,
When our first courage fails gives us a new.

That Is the Dukes Drum.

They are welcome to their death,
The ground they tread on covers them with earth.

The enemy sends forth a Champion,
To encounter me, I heard him use my name,
The honor of the combat shall be mine.

Come boy retreat not, only I intend,
With thy life's loss this bloody war to end.

My natural father in my blood I feel,
Passion more powerful then that conquering steel.

Why do thou pause base boy thy Soveraigne's come,
To inter the life I gave thee, in this tomb.

My father, oh my father: nature be still,
That I may have my fame, or he his will.

What do thou fear thy cause, is it now so evil?

I am possessed with a relenting devil;
Legions of kind thoughts have surpised my sense,
And I am too weak to be mine own defense.

Thou art a coward.

And you make me so:
For you come charmed like a dishonored foe,
You have conferred with spirits, and taken their aids
To make me weak, by them I am betrayed,
My strength drawn from me by a slight,
What other means could hold me from the fight?

I have no spells about me.

It Is untrue,
For natural Magique you have brought with you,
And such an exorcisme in your name,
That I forbear the combat to my shame:
But that I am no coward, from your host
Elect two of the valiantst that dare most,
Double that number, treble it, or more,
I have heart at will t'encounter with a score.
Or had your self come in a strange attire,
One of us twain had lost his living fire.

I Will try your valor: see audacious boy,
Thou art incompast with a world of foes,
Montano, Alfred Vandermas and all,
My Duchess comes too to, behold thy fall.
If thou have spirit enough, now crave her aid,
Never was poor ventrous soldier worse apayd.

My desire now from the sky of stars,
Dart all your Deity, since I am beset,
In honorable wise pays all Natures debt.

Our anger long ago, renowned Lords,
Is satisfied in fair Valentias love.
Behold our proud son and these traitorous crew,
That dares confront us in the field of Mars.

You have been too patient, my beloved Lord,
In calming these tumultuous jarring spirits:
Scourge them with steel, and make the proudest know,
It Is more then death to have their Prince their foe.

Bloody constraints beseemes where duty fails,
And Oratory ceasing, force prevails.

Peace would do better, so it pleased your son.

In her allurements first begun,
Banish her from the land, and I Will resign.

Learn thine own duty traitor, I know mine.

Then there is no banishment.

None but by death.
Thy head is forfeit for that daring breath.

Submit degenerate and presumptuous Lord.

When we are ignorant to weild a sword.

Never shall noble knee bend to this ground,
As long as that vile strumpet lives crowned.

I cannot stay to hear my love deprau'd,
In few words is it peace, or shall we fight,
Till our deep wounds shall dampe the heavenly light,
Make the air purple with the reaking gore.

Fight whilst life serves you, we will nere give ore,
The grass green pauement shall be drowned in blood,
And yet I Will wade to kill her in the flood.

Alarm Drum, madness is on their side,
All virtuous counsel is by them defied.
Upon our part strike Drums, Trumpets proclaim,
Death most assured to those that have their shame.

Why do traitors sound retreat so soon?

Behold the cause.

Valentia prisoner?

The firebrand of this tumultuous war,
The original from whence your subjects blood
Flows in abundance of this spacious play.

And what of all this?

That thy life's too mean
To satisfy the unworthiest of the Camp,
For the effusion of a loyal drop.

Means Frederick then to kill his fathers heart,
In fair Valentia's death?

Not touch your hand, other
Then humble as becomes a son:
But she shall suffer for enchanting you.

I am a Duchess, set my ransom down.

A duchess! whence proceeds that borrowed name?
Of what continuance? scarcely has the Sun
Beheld thy pride a day, but does decline,
Shaming to view a crowned Concubine.

In mine own honor Frederick,
I command thou set a ransom on Valentia.

What honor's that? your Dukedomes interest?
Your princely birth? your honorable fame?
All these are blemished with a strumpets name.

Be not so cruel to bereave her life,
'Twill draw upon thee a perpetual scar:
Thy fathers curse, and a continual war.

Oh do not threaten, Frederick is so mild,
He will not prove such a degenerate child:
I cannot blame him though he rise in arms,
'Twas not in hate to me, but in disdain,
That I should sell my royalty so vain,
But did he know the value of the iem,
He would not crase it for a Dyadem:
That she was common her own words approve,
But many faults are covered where men love,
As thou respects my blessing and good days,
Restore her Frederick and augment her praise.

Restore her?

Never.

Albert Thou were kind and I never wronged thee,
Do not change thy mind.

You do abase your honor to entreat.

How can I choose my affection is so great.

Your power is strong, the enemy is but weak.

In her destruction all my powers will break,
As thou do hope of kindness in thy choice,
If ere thou love, give ear unto my voice,
Turn not aside thy eye, the fears I feel,
Makes me to bow where it is thy part to kneel:
Lo vassailelike, laying aside command,
I humbly crave this favor at thy hand,
Let me have my beloved, and take my state,
My life I undervalue to that rate:
Crave any thing that in my power does lie,
It Is thine, so fair Valentia may not dye.

My soul is grieved, and it appalls my blood,
To see my father pusseld in such mood:
Yet shall she dye, I Will do as I have said
With mine hand, I Will chop off the Stumpets head.

Kill her my Lord, or let me have the honor.

Tigers would save her, if they looked upon her,
She is so beautiful, so heavenly bright,
That she would make them love her for the sight,
Thou art more rude then such if thou proceed,
In the execution of so vilde a deed:
Remember one thing, I did never love,
Till thou my Frederick broughtst that fatal Glove:
That and the Owners name thou did descry,
Only for that cause let not my love dye.

O gods!

Cannot my kneeling serve, my tears prevail.
When all helps fail me, yet this will not fail:
Proffer thy weapon to her beauteous side,
And with her heart, my heart I will divide:
Entreaty I Will urge none more then are past:
And either now relent or here is my last.

Stay, if I should relent; will you agree,
To sign our general pardon presently?

By heaven I do, I freely pardon all,
And a reward I give in general.

Then take her, you deserve her were she better,
Making your Crown and life to be her Debtor.

Welcome a thousand times, welcome sweet wife:
Never more dear then now, I have sold thy life.

This more then kindness I turn back to you,
Doubling my chaste vow to be ever true.

Then here the wars end, are our fightings mande:
Yet by your leave I Will stand upon my Guard.

Take any course you please, City, or Town,
My royal word I Will keep by this my Crown.

Then thus I Will take my leave.

Since we must part,
Farewell my Son, all farewell with my heart.

It Was well my Lord, 'twas a good policy,
To gain your bride, I hope your grace did not mean,
To be thus overrulde by a proud Son.

Why think you he intends some treachery?

Why not, and did release Valentia.
To blind your eyes; he that could be so proud,
To rise in arms against his natural Father,
Has courage to do more when he sees time.

But I have pardoned that offense by oath.

It were no perjury to make him know,
He is your Son, and sons a duty owe:
This sequestration will in time aspire,
Unto a flame shall set your Realm on fire:
War when a Subject has the means of will,
It Is not enough to say he has no will.
For will is altered by the place and time,
And he that is once up, knows the way to clime:
I speak perchance like a prophetique fool,
But these are wise can counsel, with your bride
Wisdom advises timely to provide.

What thinks my love of Frederickes reconcilement?

That he has spirit enough to be a traitor:
But I am be holding to him for a life,
And he may brag he gave your grace a wife:
A good old man, he could not choose but feel,
For shame some small remorse, to see you kneel,
Pray God he gave me not into your hand.
That he might be the ruin of your land.

Thinks my love so? but brothers what is your censure?

I am no Politician.

Neither I.
We are both content to live quietly.

He may be a villain though he be my Son.

Why not, and work your ruin like a foe;
Had he meant well, why did he leave you so?
Your noble heart was free from all deceit,
But he is retirde to do some dangerous feate,
When Subjects stand upon their guard look to it,
They have some plot in hand and they will do it.

What course is readiest to prevent such mischief?

Pluck up the fulsome thistle in the prime;
Young trees bend lightly but grow strong in time:
Were I the worthiest to advise your honor,
You should pursue him with your spredding bands,
Swifter in march then is the lightning flame,
And take him tardy whilst his plots are tame;
Now to charge on his army questionless,
Would drive them all into a great distress,
If not confound them, having taken your Son,
You may be as kind, and do as he has done:
So shall he know himself, and be less proud.

The counsels good.

And it shall be allowed.
You that do love me, see the host prepared,
To scare those traitors that our lives have scarde:
Our armie's many, but their power is free;
Besides they are traitors, all with us are true:
Sound Drums and trumpets, make the world rebound,
Hearten our friends, and all our foes confound.

Base cowards, traitors, how am I surprizde
With these bonds? I am a Prince by birth,
And princely spirits disdain such clogs of earth;
Let go you slaves.

First know your fathers pleasure.

You are too bold.

But you shall keep a measure.

Thou blood of common Concubines must I,
Be bound by thee, and heir of Saxony?

It is our pleasure.

Have you caught him so?
Now shall you wait the mercy we will show:
I was too base to be your fathers wife.

But he shall sue to thee to save his life.

Periurde, ungrateful, unnatural,
Is this the Pardon given in general.

We Will talk of that hereafter, make him fast.

Help Vandermas, our self will ayding be,
To keep in awe such senseless treachery.

My help and all to prison there till death,
Remain in duresse.

Rather stop my breath,
Strangle me with these cords, prison to me
Is twenty deaths, I will have liberty:
Now as you are a father be more kind,
You did not find me in so stern a mind:
And you forgetful of the life I saved:
Shall a Dukes Son by treason thus be slau'd?
If you suspect my love, grant me the fight,
I dare in single combat any knight,
Any adventurer, any pandorus hind,
To prove my faith of an unfeigned mind.

Away with him.

I see my death's set down,
And some adulterous heir must wear that Crown:
To entreat a Rodophe, I had rather dye,
Then have my life lodged in such infamy:
If all my fortunes on her words depend,
Let her say kill me, and so make an end.

Why stay you?

Good my Lord.

Peace untaught Groom:
My heart's so great that I Would forerun my doom:
There Is no release meant, you have vowed I see,
To dam your souls by wilful perjury.
Yet that I am my self let these words show,
To die is natural, it is a death I owe,
And I will pay it with a mind as free,
As I enjoyed in my best liberty.
But this assure your self, when all is done,
They Will kill the father, that will kill the son.

What Is to be done now?

Seal unto his death;
Your warrant nere the sooner takes effect:
'Twill be a means to make him penitent,
And pardon's meet for such as do repent.
Seeing his fault, he will taste your mercy best,
When now he proudly thinks he is oppressed.

A Warrant shall be signed, and unto thee
I do commend it: deal not partially,
If he be sorry, and in true remorse
Cancel the Writ, else let it have full force.
Had I ten sons, as I have only this,
They should all die ere thou deprived of bliss:
So great is my affection, my fair wife,
That to save thine I Would frankly give my life.
Come, we will about it strait, all time seems long,
Where thou have found flight cause to fear my wrong.

That writ I Will take, and a conclusion try,
If he can love he lives, if hate me, die.
For howsoere I seem to scorn the man,
He Is somewhat dear in my affection.
Here comes your brothers.

May it please your grace,
By chance entering into Saint Mary's Church
This morn by break of day, I espied
That that I know will vex your Excellence:
Your daughter Euphrata is married
To the ambitious beggar Constantine.

My daughter married my Chamber-squire!

Your Excellence did banish me the land,
Because I did suspect her with that fellow.

He shall be tortured with the extremest plague
For his presumption -- Have you brought them,
That I may kill them with a killing look.

Without direction we have ventured to lay upon them
Your strict command, and they attend.

Bring the presumptuous.

Forward Constantine, our Rites are done,
Thou art my husband: do not fear his eye,
The worst it can import is but to die.

Base and degenerate.

He is a Gentleman,
'Twas base in you to wed a Curtizan.

Her brothers spirit right, bold and audacious.

Then I am no bastard, wherefore should I fear,
The knot is sacred, and I hold it dear.
I am wedded unto virtue, not to will,
Such blessed unions never bring forth ill.
If I offend in disobedience,
Judge of the power of love by your offense.
Father, you have no reason for this ire,
Frown whilst you kill us, desire is desire.

A Curtezan? has that ambitious boy
Taught you such Rethoricke? you shall taste like joy.
I will not reason with you, words are vain,
The fault is best discerned in the pain.
Your hasty marriage has writ down his death,
And thy proud words shall seal it with thy breath.
By what is dearest to me, here I swear,
Both of your heads shall grace a fatal beer:
Take them to prison, I Will not hear a word,
This is the mercy that we will afford,
Since they are grown so proud, next morn begun,
Let them be both beheaded with my son.

Short and sweet, Euphrata, the doom is fair,
We shall be soon in heaven, there ends my care.
I scorn entreatie, and my dear I know,
All such slavery thou hate so.
'Twill be a famous deed for this good man
To kill all is children for a Curtezan.

Will thou die with me?

Would I live in heaven?
Thou art now too high for me, death makes us even.

Look to your dukedom, those that have our fall,
Have by their avarice almost hurried all.
There Is a whole Register of the poores cry,
Whilst they are reading them, embrace and die.

Bear them away.
And now let us read these Writes.
What Is here? complaints against my worthy brothers,
For corn transported, Copper money stamped,
Our subjects goods ceaz'd, and I know not what.
A plague upon this busie-headed rabble,
We will have tortures made to awe the slaves,
Peace makes them ever proud, and malapert.
They Will be an Overseer of the State.

And plead reformation to depose you.

True my fair Duchess, but I Will cut them short.
Rule still dear brothers: take these to the fire,
Let me read somewhat that augments desire,
Authors and golden Poems full of love,
Such the Petitions are that I approve:
So I may live in quiet with my wife,
Let fathers, mothers, children, all lose life.
If thou have issue, in despite of fate,
They shall succeed in our Imperial state.
Come sweet to dancing, then to sport and play,
Till we have ruled all our life away.

O pitiful condition of a Realm,
Where the chief ruler is ore-rul'd by pleasure,
Seeing my friend surpised in this disguise,
I followed him to meet the consequence:
And to my grief I see his marriage rites
Will cut him short of all this earths delights.
What Is that to me, when Constantine is dead,
I have some hope to attain her Nuptial bed.
But she is doomed as well as he to die,
Can the Duke act his daughters Tragedy.
It is impossible, he will relent,
And I Will persuade her freely to repent.
Yet it is most likely that he will agree
He is so far spent in vild tyranny.
The commons hate him for the wrong he has done,
(By his brothers means) the Nobles for his son.
Famine spreads through the land, the people die,
Yet he lives senseless of their misery.
Never were subjects more mislead by any,
Nor ever Sovereign hated by so many.
But Constantine, to thee I cast an eye,
Shall all our friendship end in enmity?
Shall I that ever held thee as my life,
Hasten thy death, that I may get thy wife,
Or love or friendship, whether shall exceed,
I Will explain your virtue in this following deed.

Have you the instruments I gave in charge?

We have.

And resolution fitting for the purpose?

All things are ready with our faithful hearts.

And she that undertakes so great an act,
As I intend, had need of faithful hearts,
This is the prison, and the jailer comes
In happy time, where is traiterous Frederick?

What is your highness pleasure with the Prince?

Look there if you can read?

O heavenly God, what do I read, a warrant for his death?

Resign your keys, go weep a di^ge or twain,
But make no clamor with your lamentation.

I dare not prophecy what my souse fears.
Yet I Will lament his tragedy in tears.

Often have I seen a Nobleman arraigned,
By mighty Lords the pillars of the land,
Some of which number his inclined friends,
Have wept, yet past the verdict of his death,
So fares it with the Prince, were I his jailer,
And so affected unto Fredericks life,
The fearefull'st tyrant, nor the cruelst plagues,
That ever lighted on tormented souls,
Should make me yield my prisoner to their hands.

Madam, he knows his duty and performs it,

Setting aside all duty, I would die,
Ere like a woman weep a tragedy.
It Is baseness, cowardice, duty? o slave,
Had I a friend, I Would dye in my friends grave.
But it sorts well for us, Hindes will be Hindes,
And the Ambitious tread upon such minds,
Wait whilst I call you in the jaylors house.

We will.

My Lord, Prince Frederick.

Woeful Frederick,
Were a beseeming Epitaph for me,
The other tastes of too much soveraigntie.
What, is it you? the glory of the stews.

Thy mother Frederick.

I detest that name,
My mother was a Duchess of true fame,
And now I think upon her when she died,
I was ordained to be indignified,
She never did incense my Princely Father
To the destruction of his loving son,
Oh she was virtuous, truly natural,
But this step-divell does promise our fall.

Why do thou rail on me? I am come
To set thee free from all imprisonment.

By what true supersedeas, but by death,
If it be so, come strike me to the earth,
Thou need no other weapon but thine eye,
It Is full of poison, fix it and I Will die.

Uncharitable youth, I am no serpent venomed,
No basiliske to kill thee with my sight,

Then thou speakst death, I am sorry I mistook,
They both are fatal, there is but little choice,
The first inthral'd my father, the last me,
No deadlier swords ever used enemy,
My lot's the best, that I dye with the sound,
But he lives dying in a death profound.
I grow too bitter being so near my end,
Speak quickly, boldly, what your thoughts intend.

Behold this warrant, you can read it well.

But you the interpretation best can tell:
Speak beauteous ruin, twere great injury,
That he should read the sentence that must dye.

Then know in brief, it is your fathers pleasure --

His pleasure, what?

That you must loose your life.

Fatal is his pleasure, it is to please his wife,
I prithee tell me, did thou ever know,
A Father pleased, his son to murder so?
For what is it else, but murder at the best,
The guilt whereof will gnawe him in his breast,
Torment him living, and when I am dead,
Curse thee, by whose plot I was murdered?
I have seen the like example, but o base,
Why do I talk with one of thy disgrace:
Where are the officers? I have lived too long,
When he that gave me life, does me this wrong.

That is thy fathers hand, thou do not doubt?
And if thou should I have witness to approve it,
Yet tho it be his hand, grant to my request,
Love me, and live.

To live so I detest, love thee?

I, love me, gentle Frederick, love me.

Incestuous strumpet cease.

Oh thou dealest ill.
To render so much spleen for my good will.

Torment far worse then death.

I Will follow thee,
Dear Frederick like thy face be thy words fair.

This monstrous dealing doubles my deaths care

What shall I call thee to allay this ire?

Why call me son, and blush at thy desire.

I never brought thee forth.

Art thou not wife unto my father?

Think upon thy life,
It lies like mine, only in gentle breath,
Or that thy father's dead, and after death,
It Is in my choice to marry whom I will.

Any but me.

O do not think so ill,
Rather think thou art a stranger not his son,
Then it is no incest tho the Act be done,
Nature unto her self is too unkind,
To buzze such scruples into Fredericks mind,
It Was a device of man to avoid self love,
Else every pleasure in one stock should move,
Beauty in grace part never from the kin.

If thou persever as thou have begun,
I shall forget I am my fathers son,
I shall forget thou art my fathers wife,
And where it is I must die, abridge thy life.

Why did not kill me being thy prisoner then,
But friendly did deliver me a jemme?
Unto thy father, were not thou did love me.

Be yond all sufferance, monster thou do move me,
'Twas for my fathers sake, not for thine own,
That to thy life's loss, thou had thoroughly known,
But that relenting nature playde her part,
To save thy blood, whose loss had slain his heart,
And it repents me not he does survine.
But that his fortune was so ill to wive,
Come kill, for, for that you came; shun delays,
Lest living, I Will tell this to thy dispraise,
Make him to hate thee, as he has just cause,
And like a strumpet turn thee to the laws.

Good Frederick.

It Is resolved on, I have said.

Then fatal Ministers I crave your aid.
Come Vandermas, Montano, where is your cord?
Quickly dispatch, strangle this hateful Lord,
Or stay, because I love him, he shall choose,
The easiest of three deaths that we may use,
The halter, poison or bloodshedding blade.

Any of them.

This Aconite's well made, a cup of poison,
Stuffed with dispatching simples, give him this,
And he shall quickly leave all earthly bliss.
There, take it Frederick, our last gift of grace,
Since thou must die, I Will have thee die apace.

O happy means given by a treacherous hand
To be my true guide to the heavenly land.
Death steals upon me like a silken sleep,
Through every vain do leaden rivers flow,
The gentlest poison that I ever knew,
To work so coldly, yet to be so true,
Like to an infant patiently I go,
Out of this vain world, from all worldly woe,
Thanks to the means, tho they deserve no thanks,
My soul begins t'ore-flow these fleshly banks,
My death I pardon unto her and you,
My sins God pardon, so vain world adieu.

Ha, ha, ha.

He Is dead, why does your highness laugh?

Why Lord Montane, that I love to see,
He that has saved my life, to die for me.
But there is a riddle in this Princes death,
And I Will explain it on this floor of earth.
Come, to his sisters execution go,
We have variety of joys in woe,
I am sure you have heard his Excellence did swear,
Both of their heads should grace a Kingly bear,
Upon a mourning hearse let him be laid,
He shall be intombed with a wived maid.

Bring forth the prisoners, where is my beauteous Duchess,
That she may see the ruin of her foes,
She that upbraided her with slanderous words,
She that in scorn of due obedience,
Has matched the honor of the Saxons blood,
Unto a beggar, let them be brought forth,
I will not rise from this cribunall seat,
Till I have seen their bodies from their heads.

Here comes the Duchess with proud Fredericks hearse

So set it down, why have you honored it
With such a sable coverture? a traitor
Deserves no cloth of sorrow, set it down,
And let our other offspring be brought forth,
My beauteous lovely and admired love,
Come sit by us in an imperial chair.
And grace this state throne with a state more fair.

My gracious Lord, I hope your excellence
Will not be so forgetful of your honor,
Prove so unnatural to your loving daughter,
As to bereave her of her life,
Because she has wedded basely against your will,
Though Frederick dyed deservedly, yet she
May by her loves death clear her indignity.

She and her love we have sentenced to die,
Not for her marriage only, tho that deed
Crowns the contempt with a deserved death,
But chiefly for she raild against thy worth,
Vpbraided thee with terms so monstrous base,
That naught but death can clear the great disgrace,
How often shall I charge they be brought forth?
Were my heart guilty of a crime so vilde,
I Would rend it forth, then much more kill my child.

O that this love may last, it is sprung so hie,
Like flowers at full growth, that grow to die.

What means these sable vailes upon their faces,

In sign they sorrow for your high displeasure,
For since the hour they were imprisoned,
They have lived like strangers, hood-winkt, together,
You may atchieve great fame victorious Lord,
To save the lives of two such innocents.

It Is pretty in thee my soul loved Duchess,
To make this Princely motion for thy foes,
Let it suffice, the'are traitors to the state,
Confederators with those that sought my life,
A kin to Frederick that presumptuous boy,
That durst bear arms against his natural father.
Are they more dear then he? off with their vailes.

O yet be merciful unto your daughter.

You make me mad, headsman dispatch I say.
They are doomed to die, and this the latest day.

Then let him strike, who ever traitors be,
I am sure no treason lives in her or me.

How now, what is here? Otho and Iulia.
Am I deluded, where is Euphrata,
And that audacious traitor Constantine?

Why fled.

To whom?

To safety, here was none,
I can resolve you of the circumstance.
Betwixt the noble Constantine and I,
Noble I call him, for his virtuous mind,
There was a league of love so strongly made
That time wants hours, and occasion cause,
To violate the contract of our hearts,
Yet on my part the breach did first appear,
He brought me to behold his beauteous love,
The fair Euphrata, her Angel sight,
Begat in me the fire of private love,
I that before did like her for my friend,
Now to deceive him, sought her for my self,
But my device was known unto my friend,
And worthily he banished me his sight.

What Is this to their destruction, seek them forth.

They are far enough for suffering such a death,
I well considering my unfriendly part,
Bethought me how to reconcile my self,
Unto my hearts endeared Constantine,
And seeing him carried to the prison, we
Followed, and found means for their liberty.

Are they escapt then?

Both in our disguise,
And we stand here to act their tragedies,
It they have done amiss, on us
Impose the Law.

O let our suites prevail,
I ask to dye for my dear Ladies sake.

I for my friend.

This friendly part does make
My heart to bleed within me, and my mind
Much perplexed, that I have been so unkind,
What second funeral march is that I hear?

Health to this presence, though the news,
Impairing health I bring unto this presence,
The bodies of the drowned Constantine,
And the fair Euphrata, behold them both.

Of drowned Constantine and Euphrata,
Declare the manner, and with killing words;
Temper thy words, that it may wound my life.

Passing the Rhine bordering upon the tower,
From whence it seems they lately had escapt,
By an unskilful Guide their gundelet
Encountered with an other, and the shocke
Drowned both the vessayles, and their haplesseliues:
Their bodies hardly were recovered,
But known we brought them to your excellence,
As to a father that should mourn for them.

Unto a tyrant, do not call me father,
For I have been no father to their lives:
The barbarous Canniball that never knew
The natural touch of humane beauty
Would have been far more merciful then I:
Oh tyranny the overthrow of Crowns,
Kingdoms, subversion, and the deaths of Kings.
Lo here a piteous object so complete,
With thy intestine and destroying fruit,
That it will strike thee dead, oh Euphrata.
Oh princely Frederick, never dear to me
Till now, in you I see my misery
My son, my daughter, virtuous Constantine.

What means this grief my Lord, these are the traitors,
That you in justice sentenced to dye.

A treacherous son, and a rebellious daughter.

Those that did seek to take away your life.

Bereave you of your Crowns prerogative.

Hence from my sight, blood thirsty Counselors.
They never sought my life, but you have sought it,
Virtuous Alberto, and Rinaldo:
Had I given ear to them and to my son,
My joys had flourished that now are done.

Yet for my sake, allay this discontent.

It Is for thy sake, thou vilde notorious woman,
That I have past the limits of a man,
The bonds of nature.
'Twas thy bewitching eye, thy Sirens voice,
That throws me upon millions of disgrace,
I Will have thee tortured on the Rack;
Pluck out those basiliske enchaunting eyes,
Tear thee to death, with Pincers burning hot,
Except thou give me the departed lives
Of my dear children.

What am I a Goddess,
That I should fetch their flying souls from heaven,
And breath them once more in their clay cold bodies?

Thou art a witch, a damned forceresse;
No goddess but the goddess of black hell,
And all those devils thy followers:
What makes thou on the earth to murder men?
Will not my sons and daughters timelesse lives,
Taken away in prime of their fresh youth
Serve to suffice thee?

O you are mad my Lord:

How can I choose,
And such a foul Erynnis gase on me,
Such furious legions circle me about,
And my slain Son and Daughters fire brands,
Lying so near me, to torment my soul,
Extremity of all extremities.
Take pity on the wandering sense of mine,
Or it will break the prison of my soul:
And like to wild fire, fly about the world,
Till they have no abioing in the world:
I faint, I dye, my sorrows are so great,
Oh mortality renounce thy seat.

The Duke I fear is slain with extreme grief:
I that had power to kill him, will assay hence forth,
My utmost industry to save his life.
Look up my Lord, it is not Valentias voice,
That Courtezan, that has betrayed thy honor:
Murdered thy children, and almost slain thee:
I am thy son, I am Prince Frederick;
If thou have any liking of that name,
Look on my face, I come to comfort thee.

The name of Frederick is like Hermes wande,
Able to charm and uncharme sorrowful men,
Who named Frederick?

I pronounced his name,
That have the power to give thee thy lost Son:
Had I like virtue to restore the other:
Behold my Lord, behold thy headless Son
Blessed with a head, the late deceased living,
As yet not fully wakened from the sleep:
My drowfie potion kindled in his brain,
But much about this hour the power should cease,
And see he wakes.

O happiness it is he.

Embrace him then, but never more embrace me.

Where am I, in what dungeon, where is my grave?
Was I not dead, or dreamt I, I was dead,
This am I sure that I was prisoned.

Thou art deceived my Son, but this deceit
Is worth commendations, thank my Duchess,
Her discretion reedified thy life,
But she has pron'd her self a gracious wife.

She tempt me to lust, wait in my grave?

'Twas but to try thy faith unto thy father,
Let it suffice, his hand was at thy death,
But it was my mercy that proclaimed thy breath.

To heaven and you I render worthy thanks.

O lived my Euphrata and Constantine,
How gladly would I all my grief resign.

On that condition: and with this besides,
That you are pleased to pardon us and them,
We do refer our persons to your mercy.

My daughter, my dear son in law,
Virtuous Alberto, then my friend,
My joys are at the highest, make this plain,
How these saved drowned, as Frederick has bin slain.

Presuming on the example of these friends,
And know we are all actors in this plot,
Boldly presented your presence with this mind,
If pardoning them, your grace would pardon us,
If otherwise, this was the joy of either,
That death's less painful, when friends die together.

We do receive you all into our favor,
And my fair Duchess my unkind divorce,
Shall be confounded with a second marriage,
I here receive thee once more as my wife.

You have your children, I have paid that debt,
You have divore'd me, therefore I am free,
And henceforth I will be at liberty.

There Is no divorce can part thee from thy Lord.

Like to unkindnesse there is no divorce.
I will no more be won unto your bed,
But take some course to lament my life mislead.

Can thou live better then in sacred wedlock?

Wedlock to me is unpleasing, since my Lord
Has broke the band of marriage with unkindnesse.

Entreat her children, Frederick, Euphrata,
Let me not loose the essence of my soul,

Divine Valentia, mirror of thy sex,
The pride of true reclaimed incontinence,
Honor of the dishonoring, yield I pray,
And be merciful, pity my fathers smart,
Since thy last thraldom has near cleft his heart.

'Twas for his children that his spleen did rise,
Anger, a torture haunting the most wise,

O no I am a murderesse, an Erinnis,
A fury sent from Limbo, to affright
Legions of people with my horrid sight.

What do you mean, be won by their entreaties.

It Is madness in you to be thus perverse.

Who ever speaks, base wretches be you dumb,
You are the catter pillars of the state,
By your bad dealings he is unfortunate,
Thou honorable true beloved Lord,
Hearken to me, and by thy ancient love,
I charge thee banish these realme-sucking slaves,
That build their palace upon poor men's graves,
O those are they, that have wronged both you and me,
Made this blessed land, a land of misery.
And since by too much loving your grace, has fallen
Into a general hatred of your subjects,
Redeem your lost estate with better days,
So shall you merit never dying praise,
So shall you gain lives quietness on earth,
And after death a new celestial birth.

Unto thy wisdom I refer their doomes,
My self my Dukedom, and my crown,
Oh were there any thing of higher rate,
That, unto he I Would wholly consecrate.

This kind surrender shows you are a Prince,
Worthy to be an Angel in the world
Of immortality:
Which these cursed creatures never can attain,
But that this world may know how much I hate,
This cruel base oppression of the poor:
First I enjoin you for the wrongs you have done,
Make restitution, and because your goods,
Are not sufficient so to satisfy;
I do condemn your bodies to the Mines,
Where live like golden drudges all your lives:
In digging of the metal you best love:
Death is your due, but for your noble race,
This gentle sentence I impose on you,
The Duke succeeding shall behold it done.

Who Is that my love?

Kind Freaericke your son,
The interest that your grace has given to me,
I freely do impart.

We do agree to what my Duchess please:

The state is thine:
Thy Uncles sentence Frederick shall be mine.

Bear them away, what you have said shall stand,
Whilst I have interest in this new given land.

We do receive our judgments with a curse.

Learn to pray better, or it shall be worse:
Lords see these worms of kingdoms be destroyed:
And now to give a period to my speech:
I do entreat your grace, if that your love
Be not grown cold; but that your heart desires
The true society of a chaste wife:
Be pleased to undergo a further doom,
We have lived too lightly, we have spent our days,
Which should be dedicated to our God,
In soul destroying pleasure, and our sloth
Has drawn upon the Realm a world of plays:
Therefore hereafter let us live together,
In some removed cell or hermitage,
Unto the which, poor travelers mislead,
May have direction and relief of wants.

A hermetary life is better then a kingdom,
So my Valentia bear me company.

If my dread Lord will for my sake endure,
So strickt a calling, my bewitching hairs,
Shall be made napkins to dry up the tears,
That true repentance wringeth from our hearts,
Our sins we will number with a thousand sighs:
Fasting shall be the Steward of our Feast:
Continual prayer in stead of costly cates,
And the Remainder of our life a school,
To learn new lessons for the land of heaven:
The will where power is wanting is good payment:
Grace does reject no thoughr, though nere so small,
So it be good, our God is kind to all:
Come my dear Lord, this is a course more kind:
No life like us that have a heavenly mind.

O let me be a servant in that life.

With all my heart, a Partner let him be,
There Is small ambition in humility.

Frederick farewell, dear Euphrata adue,
Remember us in prayer, as we will you.

A happy change, would all that step awry,
Would take like course in seeking piety.

Two humble suites I crave of my best friend:
First pardon for my rashness in your love,
Next this most loyal Virgin for my wife.

With all my heart if Iulia be pleased.

I have no power to disobey your grant.

Then she is yours.

Alberto.
The offices belonging to our Uncles,
We do derive to you for your good service,
In our late wars, and in our sisters love.
And now set forwards, Lords let us be gone,
To solemnize two marriages in one.

ENcouragement unto the valiant,
Is like a golden spur upon the heel
Of a young Knight, like to a wreath of Bay
To a good Poet: like a sparkeling Crown,
Unto a Kings Son. Honor and renown
Is the efficient and persevering cause
Of every well deserved action.
Take away some record, encouragement,
And the World's like a Chaos, all delight
Buried, unborne in everlasting night.
Even so it fares with us and with the rest,
Of the same faculty, all merely nothing,
Without your favor, every labor dies,
Save such whose second springs comes from your eyes:
Extend your beams of love to us at full;
As the Sun does unto the Eastern clime:
And England may bring forth like India,
As costly spice, as oriental Iems:
The earth's all one, the hear refines the moulde:
And favor makes the poorest ground yielde gold.

