FResh Mayas son, fine witcrafts greatest God,
Herrald of heaven, soul charming Mercury:
Tell, for thou witst, why these celestial powers
Are thus assembled in Boeotia.

Plenty srich Queen, cheerer of fainting souls,
Whose Altars are adornde with ripend sheaues.
Know that security chief nurse of sin,
Has bred contempt in all Boeotia.
The old are scorned of the wanton young,
Unhallowed hands, and hearts impurer far,
Rend down the Altars sacred to the Gods.
Heaven is long suffering, and eternal Powers
Are full of pity to peruersest men:
which made the awful Ruler of the rest,
Summon this meeting of the heavenly States:
The first was Jupiter, Juno with him,
Next Mars and Venus, him I know you knew not,
His Harness is converted to soft silk*
His wars are only wantonings with her,
That scandalizeth heaven and heaps worlds hate,
Apollo next, then Bacchus belly-God,
And horned Vulcan forger of heavens fire,
The last poor Cynthia making woeful moan,
That she is left sweet virgin post alone.
I am but messenger, and must not denounce
Til the high senate of the Gods decreeit,
But sacred Ceres, if I may divine,
In heaven shall Venus vaunt but little time.

So pleased it mighty Jove the doom were just,
Amongst that holy train what needs there lust.

I see a sort of wondering gazing eyes,
That do await the end of this conceit,
whom Mercury with wauing of his rod,
And holy spells inioines to sit and see,
th'effectuall working of a Prophecy.

And Ceres sheds her sweetest swetes in plenty,
That while ye stay their pleasure may content ye.
Now do I leave thee Mercury, and will into take my place,
Do what thou can in wanton lusts disgrace.

Ceres I will, and now I am alone
will I advise me of a messenger
That will not faint: will not said I?
Nay shall not faint sent forth by Mercury.
I am resolud, the next I meet with be it he or she,
To do this message shall be sent by me.
Hey down down a down a down,
hey down down a down a,
Our beauty is the brauest Less in all the town a*
For beauties sweet sake, I sleep when I should wake,
she is so nut brown a.
Her cheeks so red as a cherrie, do make my heart full merry*
So that I cannot choose in cobling of my shoes,
but sing hey derrie derrie down derrie.

Go too Raph you will still be singing love songs its your fashion.

Content your self wife, it is my own recantation,
No love song neither, but a carrol in beauties condemnation

well year best leave singing and fall to work by and by
while I to buy meat for our dinner to market do hie.

And you were best leave your scolding to, and get you away.

And I come to you Raph, I Will course ye as I did a saturday

Course me snowns, I would thou durst come out of door,
And thou do I Will knock thee on the head thou arrant thou.
was not this lustily spoken? I warrant she dare not come out

I Will see what yeele do, where are ye goodman Lout?

O no body tell her that I am under the stool.

where is this prating Ass, this dizzardly fool.

why here I am Dame, lets see what thou can say,
Bestirre your Distaffe, do the worst ye may.

Alas that ever I was borne to see this sight,
My Raph is transformed to a wicked spright.

She lies in faith, I am here under the stool.

Let me alone Raph, hold thy peace thou fool*
I am a sprite indeed, a fiend which will pursue thee still,
Until I take a full revenge of all thy proffered ill*
And for thy former dealings to thy husband has bin bad,
I charm thee and inchaunt thee queen,
Thou henceforth shall be mad:
And never shall thy foolish brain cut off this frantic fit,
Till with thy hand unwillingly thou murder do commit.

Nay she is mad enough already,
For she will do nothing with me but fight,
And ye make her more mad, shele kill me out right.

Make me mad Raph, no faith Raph,
Though thou be a devil and a spright,
Nere toll the bell, I Will not be gossippe,
The child shall not be christened to night.
Go to the back-house for the boy,
Bid the tankerd bring the conduit home.
I Will buy no plumme porredge,
I Will not be made such a mome.
And because thou have a fine rod Raph,
I Will look in thy purse by and by:
And if thou have any money in it,
well drink the Devil dry, Devil dry, etc.

Out of doubt she is mad indeed,
See what a coil she does keep,

Raph she shall trouble none of us, I Will charm her fast a sleep.

Come Raph, lets go sleep, for thou must mend
Queen Guiniuers shoes to morrow.
I have a pillowe of my own, I Will neither beg nor borrow.

So sleep thy fill, now Raph come forth to me.

Come forth quoth he marry God bless us.
Now you have made my wife mad what shall become of me?

Fear not come forth, I mean no hurt to thee.

Well I Will trust you for once, what say ye.

Raph hie thee home, and thou shall find upon thy bed
Attire that for a prophets suit shall stand thee in good stead
A prophet thou must be and leave thy work a while.

A Prophet speaker? Ha, ha, ha, here is a coil.
What are you, I pray?

I am Mercury the Messenger of the Gods.

And I am Raph Cobbler, twixt us there is some odds.
But hear ye God Markedy, have you tetoritie
To take a free man of his company,
And hinder him to be your Prophet speaker,
And when ye set him a work give him nothing for his labor.

I must charm him asleep, or he will still be prating.
I Will please thee well, I pre thee Raph sit down.

Now I am set, would I had a pot of ale.

We will have twain, but first attend my tale.
Not far hence stands Mars his Court,
to whom thus see thou say,
Mars though thou be a Cock of the game,
that wontst to croe by day,
And with thy sharpened spurs
the crauen Cocks did kill and slay:
Since now thou do but prune thy wings,
and make thy feathers gay:
A dunghill Cock that croes by night,
shall slilie thee betray,
And tread thy Hen, and for a time
shall carry her away.
And she by him shall hatch a Chicke,
this Country to decay.
And for this pretty Pullets name
thou shall the better learn:
When thou shall only letters five
within one name discern,
Three vowels and two consonants,
which vovvels if thou scan,
Does sound that which to every pa^^
conducteth every man.
Then call to mind this Prophecy,
for that's the bastards name:
Then rouse thy self, then reach thy sword,
and win thy wonted fame.
Now Raph awake, for I have done
the task for which I came.

Heigh ho, wake quoth you, I think it is time,
for I have slept soundly:
And me thought in my sleep this was God Markedy,
that had chaunted my wife mad for good cause why.
Above me thought I saw God Shebiter,
that marlously did frown,
With a dart of fire in his hand
ready to throw it down.
Below me thought there were false knaves
walking like honest men very craftily:
And few or none could be plainly seen
to thrive in the world by honesty.
Me thought I saw one that was wondrous fat,
Pick two men's purses while they were striving for a gnat.
And some that dwelt in streets were large and fair,
Kept back shops to utter their baddest ware.
What meddle I with trades? Men masters and maids,
Yea and wives too and all are too too bad,
Be iudgd by my wife, that was never well till she ran mad.
But O the Baker, how he played false with the balance,
And ran away from the takers tallants.
The Bruer was as bad, the Butcher as ill,
For its their trick to blow up lean meat with a quill*
And with the stroke a Butcher gave an ox
that loud bellowing did make,
I lost sight of all the other tricks,
and so suddenly did wake.
But now must Raph trudge about his prophetation,
Faith ye shall hear me troll it out after my fashion.

Thus have I served in my Princes wars,
Against the Persian and the Asian Powers:
The cole-blacke Moore that revels in the Straights
Have I repelled with my loss of blood.
My scarres are witness of my hard escapes:
My wrinckles in my face (made old by care,
When yet my years are in their chiefest prime)
Are glasses of my grief, lights of my languor,
That live disgracde, and have deserved honor.

I am the admiredst in Boeotia,
By honoring me thou shall obtain preferment.

Unto the Gods and Prince do soldiers honor,
And were thou one of these, I would adore thee.

I am of power more than all the Gods
To sit and rule the hearts of all degrees.
They have in me content, as thou shall see
A present instance in these entering men.

Hail to Contents diuinest exelence.

Content our sweetest good, we do salute thee*

Though last I am not least in duteous kindness
To thee Content although thou be no God,
Yet greater in account than all of them.

But if ye knew his name were Olygoros, which signifies Contempt, you would not
mistake him, and name him Content


O Mas scholar be patient, for though you like not my name, you love my
nature: and therefore Gentlemen forward with the discourse intended at our last
meeting: and in that conference this Gentleman a soldier, I presume will make
one


Being a soldier, his company is fit for any honest gentleman, and therefore
welcome into our company


I thank you sir.

(...) may say to you with some surplusage: my wood they bring me home, my hay
and corn in harvest: their cattle, servants, sons, and selves, are at my
command


O iure, quaque iniuria.

Nay and you speak Latin, reach me my last.
Hark ye mas Scholar, harkeye.
The time shall come not long before the doom,
That in despite of Room,
Lat in shall lack,
And Greek shall beg with a wallet at his back.
For all are not sober that goes in black.
Go too scholar, there is a learning for your knacke.

At my list can I rack their rents, set them to fines, bind them to forfets,
force them to what I please. If I build, they be my laborers: if bargain, on
them I build: and for my good look they are content to endure any travel


But for all this ill and wrong,
Mark the Cobblers song.
The hie hill and the deep ditch,
Which ye digd to make your selves rich,
The chimnies so many, and alms not any,
The widows woeful cries,
And babes in street that lies,
The bitter sweat and pain
That tenants poor sustain,
Will turn to your bane I tell ye plain,
When burning fire shall rain,
And fill with botch and blaine
The sinew and each vain.
Then these poor that cry,
Being lifted up on hie,
When you are all forlorn,
Shall laugh you loud to scorn.
Then where will be the scholars allegories,
Where the Lawier with his dilatories,
Where the Courtier with his bravery,
And the money monging mate with all his knauerie*
Bethink me can I no where else,
But in hell where Dives dwells.
But I see ye care not yet,
And think these words for me unfit,
And guess I speak for lack of wit:
Stand aside, stand aside, for I am disposed to spit.

Be quiet Cobbler, lets hear the Scholar speak!


I give him retoritie: to it.


What the Courtier dreamingly possesses, the Country Gentleman with cursses,
and the Soldier with cares: I quietly enjoy without control. In my study I
contemplate what can be done in batels, and with my pen hurt more than
thousands do with pikes, I strike him that sees me not


I thought you were a proper man of your hands to come behind one.


I see the height of heaven.


But thou make no have thither.


I view the depth of hell.


Is there any room in hell for cursed wives and Cobblers shops.


Content is my landlorde, peace and quiet are my companions, I am not with the
Courtier bound to dance attendance; nor with the Countriman bind I others to
attend on me. I possess pleasure more than mortal, and my contemplation is
only of the life immortal


But you would be glad to creep in credit in the Court Scholar, and not be
curious of the means, for all your coyness


I will not acquaint you sir with my intent, for they are fools that in secret
affairs are too familiar, know this, that I intend to awaite occasion


Faith Master Scholar yet it stands not with your protestation.


Nor with you Soldier to be thus blunt after your rude fashion.


Alas sir, you must needs be exelent: for Piers and Plain your poor tenants
pray for ye: their bread and cheese is seldom denied to any, when your small
beer is scarce common to many. You know what will be made of a fat ox as well
as the Grasier, of the tallowe as well as the Butcher, of a tod of wool as
well as the Stapler


What has any man to do what I do with mine own?


I alls thine own that comes in thy hands.


Sir you would make enough of it in yours to.


I master Courtier, that's to deal as you do.


This soldier is as rough as if he were in the field*


Where you would be as tame.


Has a proud heart though a beggars habit.


Where I frequent this habit serves my turn: and as goodly a sight were it to
see you there in your silks, as the scholar skirmishing in his long gown, or
the country Gentleman riding on a fat Ox with a mole spade on his neck


What, riding running, brauing, bralling,
I see ye pass not for a Prophets calling:
Therefore I will not be so mad,
To cast Pearls to swine so bad.

Prithee Raph stay a little.

Little little seeing God, I shall see you in a spittle.

Your disputation being done Gentlemen, which has highly contented me? what
will ye now do


Marry we will all to the eighteen pence Ordinary, how say ye Gentlemen?


No sir, not I, it is too dear by my faith.

Why you shall be my guest for this once. How say you master soldier?


No sir I must turn one of your meals into three.
And every one a sufficient banquet for me.

Faith and you had kept your news until now, ye should have bin my guest*
for your talk would have serud well for the table


That's a practice of thine own art: it makes thy company borne withal,
where otherwise thou were no fit guest, for tales at some tables are as good as
testerns


Nay then I perceive ye grow chollericke, come sirs,

Why Gentlemen, no farewell to your little God.

Suffice it without vain Ceremonies we show our selves dutiful.

It Is enough, fare ye well.

Now soldier, what will thou do?

Faith sir as I may.

VVilt thou serve me, and do as I will thee, and thou shall not want.


No: for if thy name be Contempt as the Scholar said, I abhor and defy thee.


Even as the child does wormeseed hid in Raisons, which of it self he cannot
brook: so thou can not abide my name, but love my nature: for proof,
wanting living ra^^st on the City, greeust at the country, yea grudgest at the
King himself: thou say thou art going to thy Patron Mars with a suplication
for bettring thy estate, and how, by war: where how many rapes, wrongs and
murders are committed, thy self be judge, all which thou esteemest not off, so
thy own want be supplied


Contempt herein thou reasonest like thy self,
Base minded men I know there are in field,
That do delight in murder, rape and blood,
As there are tares in corn and weeds with flowers,
And envious snakes among the fleeting fish:
But for the noble soldier, he is just
To punnish wrongs, protect the innocent,
Weaken the tyrant* and confirm the right,
Want cannot make him basely mutinous,
Wealth cannot make him proudly insolent,
In honorable thoughts dwell his content,
And he is foe to all that love contempt.

Then Sateros thou art no mate for me

No, Vpstart scorners are fit slaves for thee.

Clio a pen.

Both pen and quill I miss.

One Estridge pen yet in my penner is,
Quickly take that and make a pen for me.

The feathers of a gluttonous bird show what the we^rers be.


Melpomine lend me a pen.

Mine pierce too hard for your writing.

Quickly a pen, ha, ha, fond foolish men.

Fool? no fool neither though none of the wisest Dame,
But a Prophet one of Merlins kind I am.

Art thou a Prophet, what is thy name?

Raph Cob.

^er, speak out.

Ye ha it in faith.

A pen a pen in have,
That I may write this Pageant ere it be past.

Comes there a Pageant by, I Will stand out of the green men's way for burning my
vestment


A pen good Clio, fie how ye make me stay.

Make shift awhile you shall have this straight way.

If I had a pen as I have none,
For I use no such tool,
Thou should have none an it,
For at my first coming thou caldst me fool.

A pen a pen, it will be gone incontinent.

Hold there is thy pen.

But are you the Gods of the Scriueners, that you make pens so fast trow we.


O sisters shift we are betrayed,
Another man I see.

A silly man at your command,
Be not afraid of me.

No, no, it is the soldier, heel do ye no hurt I warrant ye.


To see a man come in this place,
It is so strange to us,
As we are to be held excusde,
That are amazed thus.
But art thou a soldier?

Yea Lady.

The better welcome unto me.

Not so to me.

And what am I?

Be whist a while, I Will tell thee by and by.

That's some mends yet for calling of me fool.

Thanks Ladies for your courtesies, but the sight of three such Goddesses on the
sudden, has driven me into certain muses


certain muses.

Especially being alone so sollitarie in this wood.

In this wood.

Hark soldier some body mocks thee.

Mocs thee.

Mocks me much.

Much.

Hold thy peace good Raph.

Good Raph.

Raph, that's my name indeed,
But how shall I call thee?

I call thee.

Do thou: Mas and I Will come to thee, and I knew where thou art.


Thou art.

Art: faith and thou be as pretty a wench as any of these three, my mad wife
shall never know that I play a mad part


Part.

Part: I Will come.

Come.

Faith and I will, have at thee.

Thus are we well rid of one that would have troubled our talke^ and this
artificial echo, has told thee what we are: certain muses dwelling in this
wood, in number twice so many more as we be here


Your names good Ladies?


Mine Melpomine, hirs Clio, this that writes Thalia.

Might I without offense entreat three things,
I should be greatly bound.

We will not deny thee three things, that can participate to thee thousands.


First would I request of this Lady, whether she write with this Estridge
quill of purpose, or for want of other


Somewhat for want, but especially of purpose: the men which now do minister
me matter to write, are nere of the nature of the Estridge: who having the
body of a bird, has the head of a beast: she is greedy, devouring and
disgesting al things, and builds her neast in sand: so are my worldlings,
bodied and feathered as birds to fly to heaven, but headed as beasts to
imagine beastly things on earth: down to the which their Cammels necks do
draw their very noses: greedy are they devouring the Orphans right, and
disgesting the widows wrongs, Foolish, forgetful and froward, building their
nest on sand, which the wind of heavens wrath or water of worldly affliction
does scatter and wash away. Thus art thou answered for the first, demand the
rest


Next Ladies why do you twain stand idle,
and let Thalia take the pain.

On geeres and gests the world is only set,
For me there is no work no tragic s^ene,
Battles are done, the people live in rest,
They shed no tears but are secure past mean.

Why lend you not Thalia then some pens?

My pens are too too sharp to fit her style,
I shall have time to use them in a while.

But gentle Clio, me thinks your ink is dry.

It may be well, I have done writing I,

What did you register when you did write?

The works of famous Kings, and sacred Priests,
The honorable Acts of ^eaders brave,
The deeds of Codri, and Horatij.
The love Licurgus bore to Spartans state,
The lives of ancient Sages and their sawes,
Their memorable works, their worthy laws.
Now there is no such thing for to indite
But toys, that fits Thalia for to write.

A heavy tale good Lady you unfold,
Are there no worthy things to write as were of old.

Yes diverse Princes make good laws,
But most men over slip them.
And diverse dying give good gifts,
But their executors nip them.

Tisiphone is stepping to the stage, and she has sworn to whip them.


The third and last thing I require is if you can:
show me the mighty Mats his court.

Walk hence a slight shoot up the hill,
And thou shall see his castle wall.

Ladies the gifts that I can give,
Is humbly thrice to thank you all.

Farewell pore soldier.

Thalia now we are alone, tell us what pageant it was you called for pens even now
so hastily, to end


It Was thus: You know the Gods long since sent down,
Pleasure from heaven to comfort men on earth,
Pleasure abuzde in country Court and town,
By speeches, gestures, and dishonest mirth,
Made humble suit that he to heaven might pass
Again, from world where he so wronged was.
His suit obtaind, and ready he to clime,
Sorrow comes sneaking and performs his deed,
Snatches his Roabe, and ever since that time,
It Is pain that masks disguisde in pleasures weed*
The Pageant's thus, with cost and cunning trim,
That worldlings welcome Pain in steed of him.
Loath was I that vnpend one jot of this should go,
Because I smile to see for weal, how sweetly men swill woe.

Woe is the first word I must write, beginning where you end.
I have incke enough and pens good store.

Perhaps the world will mend.

I would it would.

Why if it should you fail in your account.

Then you perhaps will have some work.

Tush come lets mount the Mount.

VVaha how, wa how, holla how whoop: Did no body see the mocking sprite, I am
sure I have followed her up and down all this day crying and calling while my
throat is hoarse again. I Will conjure her too but it is in vain, for knowledge
has knocked that in the brain, but be it devil or be it spright, I Will call
again to have a sight. Ya ha how: Nay I Will call again


Again, I and again too, I trow,
What night and day no rest but row?
Come if thou will go over Styx,
For if thou stay a while I think,
There will come so many my boat will sink,

Over stix I and over stones,
Here Is a question for the nonce,
Why what art thou I pray thee tell?

Why Charon Ferriman of hell.

Why what a devil do I with thee?
Three or four within: A boat, a boat, a boat.

Hark what a coile they keep, come if thou will to hell with me.

A boat, a boat, a boat.

This should be the voice of a woman, comes women thither too.

why men and women every hour, I know not what to do.

A Boat, a Boat, a Boat.

This should be the voice of some great man.

Why Popes and Prelates, Princes and Judges more than I number can,
But the covetous misers they fret me to the gall,
I think they bring their money to hell,
For they way the devil and all.

Mas and may well be, for there is little money stirring on the earth.

Charon a boat, a boat, I Will pay thee well for thy hire.

Why what art thou that makst such have?

The Ghost of a gray Friar.
So troubled with Nuns as never Friar was,
Therefore good Charon let me be first,
That over the Foord shall pas.

Come sir, thou hearst what a calling they keep will thou go?

Why Charon this calling makes thee mad I guess,
Why I am no spirit but living Raph,
And God Markedie sends me of business.

Tush, if thou be sent of God, we cannot hold thee farewell.

Yet gentle Charon carry me?

Thee? Why what art thou, that living suest to go to hell?

The wretchedst man of wretches most that in this wretched world does dwell:
Dispisde, disdainde, starude, whipped and scornd,
Pressed through despair my se^fe to quell,
I therefore covet to behold if greater torment be in hell:
All the voices, A boat, a boat, a boat.

I come, I come.

Nay I prithee let them tarry and harken to the pore.

Codrus I cannot help thee now, and yet I wish thee well,
There Is scarcely room enough for rich,
So that no pore can come to hell.
But when the ditch is dug down as clean as is the wall
That parted hell and purgatory, then if thou chance to call:
Because I see as thou art pore thou art impatient,
To carry thee quickly unto hell Codrus ^le be content.
And now the time will not be long, for there is commission gone*
For workeme^, that have power to make Elysium and Limbo one,
And there are shipwrights sent for too, to build me up a bigger bote,
A boat said I? nay awhole hulke:
And that the same may safely flote,
Cocytus, Lethe, Phlegecon
Shall al be dug into Styx:
For where one wont to come to hell,
I tell thee now comes five or six.
For ignorance that wont to be,
Is wilful blindness now become.
So thou must come when room is made,
I tell thee yet there is no room.

I pre thee tell me one thing.

That I will Raph what is the matter?

Charon why does thy face look so black, and thou use so much the water?

O, night was my mother, this is her mark,
I cannot wash it off. Codrus farewe^l.

Charon Adieu.

Botesman?

Hagh.

There Is a scoff, that's a waterman indeed.
Well I must to God Mars for all this,
I would I could meet my soldier again.

Even as the Eagle soars against the sun,
And spite of Phoebus shine, pries in his face:
Even as the swordfish meets the mighty VVhale,
And puts the hugie monster to disgrace,
So Emnius thoughts intending to aspire
Sore against the sun, and fleet in wrathful ire:
The Duke the sun that dazles Emnius eyes,
The Duke the hugie VVhale that ouer-beares me,
But I will gaze and blind him too ere long,
And play the swordfish though he little fears me.
The less suspected sooner shall I strike him,
And this my reason is for I mislike him
His Daughter with enticing words is woone mine own,
But I disdain her were she fairer far:
Tush it is for rule I cast and Princely throne,
The state of Prince, brighter than brightest star.
And who does hinder Emnius but the Duke?
And therefore who should perish but the Duke?
Shortly a solemn hunting he entends,
And who but I^s put in chie^est trust?
Well I Will be trusty if my Pistol hold,
In love and kingdoms Jove will prove unjust.
He dead, I wed his Heir and only Daughter,
And so shall win a Crown by one man's slaughter.
Suppose he have been kind, liberal and free,
Why I confess it, but its my desire,
To be as able to bestow as he,
And till I can my heart consumes in fire.
O sovereign glory, chiefest earthly good,
A Crown! to which who would not wade through blood.
Then ruthles of his life do I resolve.
To wait my time till I have wrought his end,
He dies, the Duke shall die, and Emnius reign,
Were he my father or a dearer friend.
Tears shall not hinder, prayers shall not entreat me,
But in his throne by blood I soon will seat me.

Art thou one of God Mars his train?
Alas good father thou art lame,
To be a soldier far unlusty,
Thy beard is gray thy armor rustie*
Thy bill I think be broken too.

Friend make not thou so much ado^,
My lamenes comes by war,
My armours rustines comes by peace,
A maimed soldier made Mars his Porter,
Lo this am I: now questioning cease.

And what are you? A Painter with your pensill and your colors brave?

No Painter but a Herrald sirrah to decipher a Gentleman from a knave.

Pray sir, can ye Gentleman and knave it both in one man, and ye can sir, I
pray you do it in me

Indeed I cannot in thy self,
For all is knave that is in thee.

Sing one two and three, sing after me,
And so shall we right well agree.

Sir take no heed what he does say,
His foolish humor you do see,
But tell me pray are you a Herrald.

I am.

I should have rather took you to have been,
Appelles prentise, you were with colors so provided.
In ancient times have Heralds been esteemd,
And held companions for the greatest Kings.
Augustus Caesar made a law, so did Antonius too,
That without Herralds grave advice Princes should nothing do.

Well then was then, these times are as they be.
We now are feign to wait who grows to wealth,
And come to bear some office in a town.
And we for money help them unto Arms,
For what cannot the golden tempter do?

A lamentable thing it is, but tell us I entreat,
Where might we find adored Mars.

From hence sir you to Venus Court must pass,
Adowne the hill, the way is steep, smooth, sleeke as any glass*
Go by the door of Dalliance, and if you there him mis
Ask Nicenes for she best can tell where her fair Lady is?
Both day and night the doors are open,
The strongest closet door is but of feathers made,
Rush boldly in, stand not to ask and never be afraid.

At Venus Court sir do you say that Mars is to be found?

Gentleman we have told ye truth although unto our hearts it be a wound,
For searching as we bid you sir,
No doubt a wondrous hap,
But you shall find God Mars a sleep,
On Lady Venus lap.
This one thing more, you cannot come
The way you thither pass:
It Is dangerous, the hills too sleep and slipperie all as glass.
Take this of me, the fairest way from Venus Court is beggerie.
There are more ways, but they are worse and threaten more extreamitie.

I that's for such as thither pass,
Of pleasure and of will:
But these for other purpose go,
Doubt therefore sir no ill.

I thank you both that have us warned by your skill.

I and I Will end with a Prophecy for your good will:
You think it is a pleasant jest,
To tell the times of peace and rest,
But he that lives to ninety nine,
Into the hundreds shall decline,
Then shall they speak of a strange time:
For it will be a woondrous thing,
To see a Carter lodge with a King.
Towns shall be unpeopled seen,
And markets made upon the green:
This will be as true I tell ye all,
As Cobblers use the thread and nall.
And so because that all men are but mortar,
I leave the paltrie Herrald and the Porter.

I pre thee come away, Gentlemen with thanks I take my leave.

Adieu good sit.

Farewell unto you both.

Come Lady Love, now bore we Mars, thou mine I thine beloude.

Ah my Contempt it will be spide too soon,
So shall our pleasures have a bitter end.
Provide some place for I am big with child,
And clean undone if Mars my guilt epsy.

Sweet Venus be assurde, I have that care
But you perchance will coylie scorn the place.

What its some Abbie or a Munnerie?

No they abound with much hypocrisy.

Is it a Gentleman's or a Farmers house?

Too much resort would there bewray your being.

Some Husbandmands, some Inn, some cleanly alehouse.

Neither of these, a Spittle lovely Love.

What where foul Lazers and loathed Lepors lie,
Their stink will chooke thy Venus and her babe.

Why gentle Venus I entreat ye be not over nice,
What think ye as the Proverb goes that beggars have no lice?
Procters them selves in every Spittle house,
Have things as neat, as men of more account.

But I have seen even very mean men's wives,
Against their childbirth so provide for,
As all their husbands wealth was scarce the worth
Of the fine linnin used in that month.
And shall not Venus be as kindly used.

It must be as we may, I Will go provided
And spy my time slily to steal thee hence.

Away for Mars is come,

Welcome God Mars, where has my love bin all this while?
Walking about th garden time for to beguile.
VVheras between nisenes your maid and newfangle your man,
I heard such sport as for your part, would you had bin there than.
Quoth nicenes to new fangle thou art such a Jack,
That thou deuisest forty fashions for my Ladies back.
And thou quoth he art so possessed with every fantike toy,
That following of my Ladies humor thou do make her coy,
For once a day for fashion sake my Lady must be sick,
No meat but mutton or at most the pinion of a chicke,
To day her own hair best becomes which yellow is as gold,
A perriwigs better for to morrow, blacker to behod.
To day in pumps and cheuerill gloves, to walk she will be bold.
To morrow cuffes and countenance for fear of catching cold.
Now is she barefast to be seen, straight on her muffler goes,
Now is she hufft up to the crown, straight nulled to the nose.
These seven years trust me better sport I heard not to my mind*
The Dialogue done, then down came I my Lady Love to find.

And thou have found her all alone, half sickly by ill hap
Sit for a while Mars and lay thy head upon my lap,
I see my folks behind my back have much good talk of me.

And so they have.

They are too Idle: soft Mars do you see,

I see some saucy mates press in: Now sirs what would you have?

Be not offended sir, we seek God Mars.

Why and Mars have you found sir, what is your will with him?

Are you he I cry you mercy, I promise you I took you for a morris dauncer
you are so trim

What says the villain?

If thou be Mars, the cause which makes me doubt, is that I see thy body lapt
in soft silk which was wont to be clad in hard steel, and thy head so
childishlie laid on a woman's lap. Pardon I humbly beseech thee, the plainnes of
thy poor servant, and vouchsafe to read my poor petition


Rough shaped soldier enemy to love,
Why do thou thirst so much for bloody war,
wherein the strong man by a stronger queld,
Or reached far off by dastard darters arm,
Breathes forth his spirit with a booteles cry,
Leaving behind ^is earths anatomy:
By war the Infant trampled under steeds,
Holds to his mother out his feeble hand,
And she is ravished while her yongling bleeds.
Yet to abide deaths stroke does quaking stand.
The twice forced virgin like the wounded lamb,
Dejected at the mercy of the woolfe,
Holds up her throat in vain to bloody men,
That will not kill her while her beauty stays,
But stab her when her tears her fair decays:
Away thou bloody man, vex not my Lord,
By war true love is hindered and undone,
And Ladies laps left empty of their loves,
whose heads did beautify their tender knees.

You need not plain your laps full enough:

Fair Venus be propitious I will fight
To maintain true love and defend the right,

On that condition soldier I am won,
Receive this favor, Mars let it be done.

Sateros, I have received thy supplication, and sorrow I cannot as I would give
thee immediate comfort. If I should oppose my self against the Gods, they would
soon set fire on my seat, Six double us there are, three at liberty, three
imprisoned, and one their keeper: at liberty, wilines, wrong and wantonness, in
prison, are war wreake and woe, their keeper is wonder; who once giving way
to liberty for those he holds; shall set thee and thy fellows on work: in
mean time go thou to the Duke of Booetia, commend us to him, when he can he
will employ thee I am sure, let that be thy answer for this time, and so good
Sateros be contented


I humbly take my leave adored Mars,
Prove a good night Raven Venus I entreat.

Farewell pore soldier wear that for my sake*

Of both your Godheads dutious leave I take.

And when go you sir?

Who I? Good Lord there hangs a matter by.

why what are you? get gone or I will send thee gone*

I pray you bear a while, gentle master mine,
And you shall hear my in speech I warrant?

Go too sir fool, lets hear what you can say.

And shall I warrant ye to your cost my Lady do-little*
Mars though thou be a Cock of the game,
that wontst to croe by day,
And with thy sharpened spurs
the crauen Cocks did kill and s^ay:
Since now thou do but prune thy wings,
and make thy feathers gay:
A dunghill Cock that croes by night,
shall slilie thee betray,
And tread thy Hen, and for a time
shall carry her away.
And she by him shall hatch a Chicke,
this Country to decay.
And for this pretty Pullets name
thou shall the better learn:
When thou shall only letters fin^
within one name discern,
Three vowels and two consonants,
which vovvels if thou scan,
Does sound that which to every place
conducteth every man.
Then call to mind this Prophecy,
for that's the bastards name:
Then rouse thy self, then reach thy sword,
and win thy wonted fame.
Now have I done the task for which I came,
And so farewell fine Master and nice Dame.

A dunghill cock to tread my hen?
Break forth ye hangrie powers,
And fill the world with bloodshed and with rage.

My Lord, my Love.

Venus I am abusde.

Why will ye trust a fool when he shall speak,
And take his words to be as Oracles?

But he has tucht me near, and I Will revenge.

Aye me!
Revenge true Lovers wrongs immortal powers,
And nere let Lady trust a souldiet.

Why faintst thou Venus? why art thou distressed?
Look up my love, speak Venus, speak to me.

Nay let me die, since Mars has wronged me.

Thou have not wronged me, Mars believes it not.

Yes, yes, base Cobblers utter Oracles,
And al are sooth fast words against pore Love,

I will believe no words, they are all false:
Only my Venus is as bright as heaven,
And firmer than the poles that hold up heaven.

Now comes your love too late, first have you slain
Her whom your honny words cannot recure again.

I will do penance on my knees to thee,
And beg a kiss, that have bin so unkind,

And know you not, unkindness kills a woman?

I know it does? sweet forgive my fault:

I will forgive ye now ye beg so hard,
But trust me next time I Will not be entreated.

Now have thou cheard my drooping thoughts sweet love,
Let me lay down my head upon thy knee,
Sing one sweet song, thy voice will ravish me.

Folly come forth.

Anon forsooth.

Bid Nicenes, New fangle, Dalliance and the rest bring forth their Music Mars
intends to sleep

I will forsooth.

I think in deed that I shall quickly sleep,
Especially with Music and with song.

Svveet are the thoughts that harbor full content,
Delight full be the joys that know no care:
The sleeps are sound that are from dreams exempt,
Yet in chief svveetes lies hid a secret snare,
Where love is wacht by prying jealous eyes,
It fits the loved to be wary wise.
Peep, peep, Maddam he is a sleep*

Sleep on secure, let care not tuch thy heart,
Leave to love her, that longs to live in change,
So wantons deal, when they their faires impart
Rome thou abroad for I intend to range:
Yet wantons learn to guide your rouling eyes,
As no suspect by gazing may arise.

Hold on your Music, Folly leave thy play,
Come hither lay his head upon thy knee.
Fie what a loathed load was he to me.
Come my Content, lets dance about the place,
And mock God Mars unto his sleepie face.

Venus agreed, play us a Galliard.

Why sings not Venus? her love I to hear,
Sweet let the Fife be further from mine ear,
Nay let the Fife play, else the Music fails.
What still so nere my ear, sweet Venus sing.
Sing: where is she?
Out fool, what doos my head upon thy knee?

Forsooth my Mistress bid me.

Where Is Venus, speak ye ribalds, harlots, fools,
And never speak again except I see her:
Mars is impatient, find out Venus soon.
Or perrish slaves, before my angry wrath.

Nay a lady, Folly will live for all you.

Away ye fool, tell Venus of my rage.
And bid her come to Mars that now begins,
To doubt the Cobblers Prophecy.

My Lord we cannot find her any where.

Hence villains, seek the garden, search each place,
Mars will not suffer such abhord disgrace.
Where Is Venus Folly, prithee tell me fool?

Forsooth she is lun away wid a man called Contempt.

What has Contempt robbed mighty Mars of love?
Hence fools and flatterers, fly you from my sight.
Mars with a kindled fire begins to burn,
Away ye hell hounds, Ministers of shame,
Vanish like smoke, for you are lighter far,
Against wantonness proclaim I open war.
Unconstant women I accuse your sex,
Of Folly, lightness, treachery and fraud,
You are the scum of ill, the scorn of good,
The plague of mankind, and the wrath of heaven,
The cause of envy, anger, murder, war,
By you the peopled towns are deserts made:
The deserts filled with horror and distres.
You laugh Hiena like, weep as the Crocodile,
One ruin brings your sorrow and your smile,
Hold on in lighnes, lust has kindled fire,
The trumpets clang and roaring noise of Drums,
Shall drown the echoes of your weeping cries,
And powders smoke dim your enticing eyes.
These wanton ornaments for maskers fit,
Will Mars leave off, and suit himself in steel,
And strumpet Venus with that vile Contempt.
I will pursue unto the depth of hell.
Away with pity, welcome Ire and Rage,
Which naught but Venus ruin shall assuage.

Well do I like your reasoning Gentlemen,
You for your learning, Sa^eros for Act,
The learned is preferrde, the soldier shall not want,
But Sateros, ye must forbear a while,
I cannot yet employ ye as I would:
Mean time attend the Court you shall have pay
To my abillitie and your content.

Thanks to your highness.

Scholar lead him in.
Be kind to him he is a soldier.
Attend upon us to our hunting Sateros,
We must have pleasant war anon with beasts.

When will these fellows make an end.

Depart my friends, I have a little business
With this poor man that does attend to speak with me.
Fellow what is it thou will now reveal?

You are the Duke of all this land,
And this I wish ye understand;
That Princes give to many bred
Which wish them shorter by the head.
You have a Courtier Emnius namde, whose flattering tongue has many blamde.
He lowteth low does fawn and kneel,
Your worthy meaning for to feel.
And quaintly romes your person nie, willing to see it fall and die.
You have a Daughter fair and trim,
He loves her and she loves him.
Yet as the Fox does win the Kid,
So are his secret treasons hid:
He dares not once his passions move,
For fear your highness should reprove.
Yet is it not your Daughter dear,
That he desires so fair and clear:
He coueteth your dignity,
And therefore this intends he.
Today you mean to hunt in wood,
And for he does pretend no good:
He has with shot intended ill,
And means your noble Grace to kill:
I that desire for to explain,
The manner of your Graces pain.
Give counsel ere the deed be done,
That you may al deceiving shun:
I see that Emnius comes nie,
My protestation quickly try.
And if you find as I have said,
That you should be by him betraide:
Remember Raph the Cobling knave,
You warning of this mischief gave,
So leave I you to search the slave.

My honorable Lord, the train attends,
All things are ready for your highness sport:
And I am sent from other of estate.
To pray your Grace to have your wonted presence.

Emnius they must attend a while,
For I have secrets to impart with thee:

Say on my Honorable Lord to me.

Thou ^^^wit we must unto the wood.

True my most Gracious Lord.

Suppose there were a traitrous foe of mine,
What would thou do to rid me from my fear?

Die on the traitor, and prepare his grave,
Before he should one thought of comfort have.

But tell me Emnius, did thou see a tree,
That bore fair fruit delighting to the eye,
And by the straightnes of the trunk they grow too hie*
would thou oppose thy self against the tree,
And work the downfall ere the fall should be.

I would regard no hight to claim the fruit
That should content me, but attempt to clime
The highest top of hight, or fall to death,
Alone and naked to obtain my will.

I am right joyous you are so resolude,
Such Courtiers should become a noble Prince.
But tell me Emnius had I any foe,
That secretly attempted my distress,
what secret weapon have ye to prevent?

Only my sword my Lord, that is my rest,
My resolution to defend your Grace.

And have you not a Dag to help me too.

A Dag my Lord?

I mand ^^ie it not,
I know ye have a Dag preparde for me.

I have a Dag not for your Majesty.

Yes Emnius pour thy self into thy self,
And let thy own eyes be thy hearts true witness.
wearst thou this Dag to iniure any beast?
Bearst thou these bullets for a foemans life?
Or art thou bent against thy loyal Lord,
^o reaue his life that gives thee life and breath?

Against beasts my Lord does Emnius like to deal,
He is not so beastly and abhominate,
As he delights to joy in treachery,

So smiles Hiena, when she will be guile,
And so with tears deceiues the Crocodile.
Are not these tools prepared for my end?
Speak ill intending man, Ah Emnius?
Have I for this maintained thy estate,
Affoorded all the favors I could yield,
To be rewarded with ingratitude,
with murder, treachery, and these attempts?
And all in hope to win my realm and child.
I will not show thy sin unto the world,
But as thou did intend, so shall thou fall.
Receive thy death, desertfull man of death,
And perrish all thy treacherous thoughts with thee.

welcome my death, desertfull I confess,
Heavens Pardon my intent, your highness bless.

Heavens pardon thy intent, and so do I,
Be true hereafter, now thou shall not die.
Come follow us Emnius, learn to know this lore,
Murder of meanest men brings shame, of Princes more.

O that same Cobling Rogue that rauing runs,
And madding aims at every hid intent,
Reueald this practice, but I Will stab the slave,
and he once dead the Dukes death will I have.

Be it known unto all people, that whereas Venus alias lust, has long
challenged a pre-eminence in heaven, and been adored with the name of a
Goddess, the Sinode of the Gods being assembled, in regard of her adulteries
with Mars, discovered by Phoebus, when in the face of heaven, they hoth were
taken in an iron net: wherein her wrong to Vulcan was apparent; and since that,
many other escapes considered. But lastly and most especially, her public
adultery she has committed with that base monster Contempt they have all
consented, and to this decree firmed; that no more shall Venus possess the
title of a Goddess, but be utterly excluded the compass of heaven: and it
shall be taken as great indignity to the Gods to give Venus any other title than
the detested name of lust, or strumpet Venus: And whosoever shall adore
Contempt or intertaine him, shall be reputed an enemy to the Gods. More, it is
decreed that war shall be raised against Booetia, and victory shall not fall
on their side, till the Cabin of Contempt be consumde with fire. Given at
Olimpus by Jupiter and the celestial Synod


Ill tidings for my Lady these.

Ill news pore babe for thee.

What who are these?
I take ye to be two of Venus virgins, are ye not?

Faith she is a pure virgin indeed,
For the child she had by Venus chaplin,
Is a big boy and follows the Father.

And so are you a maid too, are ye not?
For the girl you had by Mars his Captain,
She Is dead, and troubles not the Mother.

Then I perceive ye be both maids for the most part,

well for our maidenheads it skill not much.
For in the world I know are many such.

I Mercury I pray let that go,
we are fair Venus maids, no more but so.
And in our Ladies cause we do entreat
To know, if that be true thou did proclaim?
Or was it spoken but of policy,
To fright us whom thou knewst to be her maids.

As true as neither of you both are maids
So true it is, that I have uttered.
The sentence is set down, Venus exilde,

Aim poor babe for thee.

Whose child is that you bear so tenderly?

My Ladies child, begotten by contempt.

O is it so, and whether bear you it?

To nurse.

To whom?

Unto security.

Is it a boy or girl, I pray ye tell?

A girl it is.

Who were the godmothers?

We two are they.

Your names I crave.

Mine Ru and hers is Ina.

And whether name I pray ye bears the girl?

Both hers and mine.

And who is godfather?

Ingratitude that is likewise the grandfather.

Ruina otherwise called Ruin the child,
Contempt the father, Venus alias lust the mother,
Ru and Ina the godmother^,
Ingratitude the Oodfather and grandfather,
And Security the nurse,
Heeres a brood that all Booetia shall curse.
Well damsels hie you hence, for one is coming nigh
Will tread your young one under foot.

It Is Mars, O let us fly.

Now Mars thou seem like thy self,
Thy women's weeds cast off,
Which made thee be in heaven a scorn,
On earth a common scoff.

O Mercury how am I bound to thee,
That blazest forth this strumpets just reproof?
O could I find the harlot or her brood,
I would revenge me of indignities:
Now Mercury, I mind a prophecy
A simple fellow brought me on a day,
When wantonning upon her knee I lay,
How that a crauen cock should tread my^e^,
And she should hatch a chicke this country to dec^y,
The bastards name he told me too,
But it was riddle-wise,
Help me to search it Mercury,
I know thee quick and wise,
When I should only in a word
Five letters just discern
Three vowels and two consonants,
The name I soon should learn:
But those same vowels he did bid*
That I should duly scan,
And they would signify the way
That guides every man.
Have thou not heard of such a thing?

Yes, and did send that prophecy,
And even as thou came hither
The bastard and the godmothers
Were in this place together.

Were they in deed, where are they now?
I Will search, I Will follow them.

Be patient Mars, they will be quickly found*
Ruina is the bastards name. R.N. the consonants,
V. ^. and A. the vowels be, and Via is the way.

Now have I found it Mercury, thou have resolud (...)
I will raise war, I will aduenged be,
Go with me Mercury, thou my revenge shall see.

I will go and do my best for thee.

It Is true o Duke, that I do say,
He still would make thy ly^^ away,
He is too frolike and too lusty,
Thou too simple and too trusty,
Wars shall in thy land begin,
For pride, contempt, and other sin,
Nothing shall appease heavens ire,
Til the cabin of Contempt be set on fire
And wantonness with lewd desire,
Be trampled under foot as mire,
The Cobbler has no more to say,
But for the peoples sins, good princes often are ta^e away.

Well, God a mercy fellow, go thou in.

He raues my Lord, its ill aduisd of you
To suffer him so near your princely excellence.

His presence breeds me no offense.

What Raph, Raph, so fine you will not know your wife
What a gilden sword and a silver knife?
There, there Raph put it up.
Why so?
What so? Why where am I?

Faith where ye ha made a fair piece of work.

Lay hold on them, what violence is this,
To have one murdered even before our presence?

What cause had thou to kill this Gentleman?


None in the world, I never knew him I.


No faith she is mad, and has been ever since I was a prophet, and cause she
saw a dagger without a sheath, she even put it up in his belly


Why what acquaintance have thou with this woman?

O Lord sir, she has bin acquainted with me a great while, with mine ears,
with every part of me, why it is my wife


The lykelyer may it like your grace of his consent,
Twere good they both did suffer punishment.

Commit them both, but she has long bin mad,
It may be heaven reserud her to this end.

Come sir, you and your wise must go to ward,
Till you be tried for cleerenes or con^ent.

O sir, whether you will I am content,
God Merkedy has serud me pretily,
Has made my wife mad, and said she should not be well,
Till by her hand a traitor fell,
And I must even be hanged for company.

I do not guess the woman guilty of this crime,
But the just heavens in their severity,
Have wrought this wreake for Ennius treachery.

Here is a messenger my gracious Lord,
That brings ill tidings to your quiet state.

What are they fellow, let us hear the^ speak. Spare not

The Argiues and the men of Thessaly,
With mighty powers are come upon your coast,
They burn, wast, spoil, kill, murder, make no spare,
Of feeble age, or harmless infant youth,
They vow to triumph in Booetia,
And make your Highness vassal to their will,
They threaten mightily, their power is mighty,
The people fall before them as the flowring grass
The mower with his sith cuts in the meade,
Help your poor people, and defend your state,
Else you, they, it, will soon be ruinate.

I will provide as far as heavenly powers,
And our abilities shall give consents;
I Will to the temple and power forth my prayers,
Mean while let Sateros be called for,
To muster up the people with all speed,

Now see I that this simple witted man,
This poor plain Cobbler truly did divine,
The Gods when we refuse the common means
Sent by their oracles and learned priests,
Raise up some man contemptible and vile,
In whom they breath the pureness of their spirits,
And make him bold to speak and prophecy.
Welcome friend Sateros, you are fitly come,
The Duke intends that you shall lead to field
The powers of Boaetia against his foes,
Are you prepared, and willingly resolud?

Why you s^ by your pen can do as well
I know it is nothing but Facsimile.

Soldier, stand not on that, discharge your duty,
The country needs our service and our counsel,
I Will do my best, and do you your endeavor,
For public quiet and Booetias honor.

Well I forget your scorns given me in peace,
And rate all envy at an humble price,
I Will do my duty, do not you neglect,
Arms will not Art, Art should not arms reject.

A blessed concord, I will to the Duke,
And leave thee Sateros to thy glorious war.

O sir, I have bin seeking ye all day,
And greatly do I praise my fortune thus to meet ye.

In good time sir, be brief I pray.


You do remember me I hope.


Not very well I promise ye.


Lord sir, and you be aduisde, I was one of them that reasoned before
contempt, when you defended war, another a^te, one the court, and I the
country


I remember in deed such a reasoning, before that vile monster Contempt, but
you I have forgot


O Lord sir yes, by that token we went afterward to the Ordinary.


True, true, now I call ye mind, by this token I was not able to reach
commons, and so was cashierd out of your company


It Was against my will In Faith: ye saw I was another man's guest.


Its no great matter. But what is your business with me now, that you seek for me
so hastily


Marie sir there is wars toward, do ye not hear on it?


That's to too sure.


And I fear by reason of my wealth I shall be chosen for a Captain over some
Companies


And what of that?


Why I have no skill, and therefore would hyre you to serve in my place. I Will
please ye well


The Duke wantes men sir, and therefore must ye serve your self, though not
as a captain, yet in a place fitting your person. You offer me moneie, why man
I Will deal kindly with ye, ye shall have some of me, bear take it, be not nice.
In the Dukes name I charge ye with horse and furnitu^e to be ready to morrow
by break of day, for the business asks speed


But I hope ye will not deal so with me?


But I am sure I will, therefore dispatch on peril of your life.


Why what alife is this, that such as I must serve? Ashame on wars for me
that ere they were


Why now fellows, what are you?


What soldier, do not you know me?


Yes Raph but what are these?


Faith certain pu-fellowes of mine, that have bin mued up, and now the
exclamation goes we shall have wars, we are all set at liberty, and sent to you
to be traild up


Why were in prison?


I faith I prophesied so long, that I had like to have bin hanged. My wife killed
the courtier man, that would have killed me and the Duke to, but I Will be a prophet
no longer that's flat, after I have done being a soldier, I Will to cobling
again


So do thou well: But fellow tell me why were thou in.


Faith sir for nothing but riding another man's horse.


That was but a small matter.


A thing of nothing, for when he had stolen him, he were as good ride him as
lead him in his hand


Faith that's even the truth on it.


I think you all have bin of such condition*
But now betake you to another course,
The Duke has given you life and liberty,
Where otherwise your deed^ deserved death,
If now you do offend under my charge,
Look for no favor but the martial law,
Death on the next tree without all remission,
And if ye like not this I will return ye
From whence ye came to bide the doom of law,
Speak, will ye live and serve as true men should?

I, I, I.

I am sure ye take me for none of they number.

No Raph, thou shall be still with me,
I have an host of worthy soldiers
Ready to march, to them now will I go,
Heavens and good fortune quell our furious foe.

Away thou strumpet, scandal of the world,
Cause of my sorrow, author of thy shame,
Follow me not, but wander where thou will,
In uncouth places loathed of the light,
Fit shroude to hide thy lustful body in,
Whose faire's distaind with foul adulterous sin.

Ah my Content, prove not so much unkind,
To fly and leave thy love alone behind,
I will go with thee into hollow caves,
To desert to the dens of furious beasts,
I will descend with thee unto the grave,
Look on me love let me some comfort have.
Contempt still turns from Venus.
What not a word to comfort me in woe?
No look to give my dying heart some life?
Nothing but frowns, but lowres, but scorns, disdaines?
Woe to my pleasures that have brought these pains.
Have I for this set light the God of war,
Against whose frowns nor death nor heaven can stand,
Have I for this procurde the angry Gods
To make me exile from all blessedness.
Have I for this lost honor and renown,
Become a scandal to the vulgar world,
And thus to be repaide^ ah break my heart,
Had all these evils fallen upon my head,
And millions of more harms than heaven could heap,
Yet all were nothing, had not my Content,
Rewarded me thus vilie with Contempt.

Shape of co^lusion, mirror of deceit,
Fair form with foul deformities defilde.
Know that I am Contempt in nature scornful,
Foe to thy good, and fatal to thy life*
That while ^ioyde in glory and account,
Disdainde all virtue, and contemnd all vice.
Good, bad* were held with me of equal price.
And now the waning of my greatness comes,
Occasiond by thy love, whom Mars aspected,
And I that all despisde am now rejected.
For which I thee reject, disdain and hate,
VVishing thee die a death disconsolate.

Yet once regard me as a thing regardles,
Thou art the abiects wretch alive esteemed,
I worse than vileness in the world am deemed:
I scornd, thou hated, each like other being,
Live we together void of other being.

Lightness of lightest things that vaunt of life,
Sprung from the froathie bubbles of the sea:
Leave to solicit him that loathes thy looks,
Spitting upon thy f^ces painted pride
I will forsake thee, and in silence shroud
This loathed trunk despised and abhord,

So flies the murderer from the mangled lims,
Left limles on the ground by his fell hand.
So runs the Tiger from the bloodles pray,
Which when his fell stomach is of hunger stancht.
Thou murdrer, Tiger, glutted with my fair,
Leaust me forsaken, map of grief and car^*
O what is beauty humbled to the base,
That never had a care of civil thought?
O what is favor in an obscure place?
Like unto Pearls that for the swine are bought:
Beauty and favor where no virtue bides,
Proves foul, deformd, and like a shadow glides.
Ah that my woe could other women warn,
To love true wedlock or the virgins life:
For me too late, for them fit time to learn,
The honor of amaid and constant wife,
One is adorde by Gods with holy rites,
The last like Lamps both earth and heaven lights.
But the foul horror of a harlots name,
Even of the Lecher counted as a scorn:
Whose forhead bears the mark of hateful shame,
Of the lust-louer hated and forlorn.
O such is Venus, so shall all such be
As use base lust, and foul adultery.

Immortal mouer of this glorious frame,
That circles us about with wonder great,
Receive the offerings of our humble hearts
And bodies prostrate on the lowly earth.
Our sins has drawn the fury of thy wrath,
And turned our peace to misery and war:
But if repentant souls may purchase grace,
We crave it humbly, and intend to live,
Hereafter more reformd than we have done.
For pride, we entertain humility:
For our presumption, due obedience:
Love for Contempt, and chastity for lust:
The Cabin of Contempt does burn with ^ire,
In which our sins are cast, and there consume.
Hear us ye heavenly powers, help ^e require,
And be propitious to the penitent.

Rise from the humble earth my Noble Lord,
Rise up ye Priests, Princes, and people rise,
And hear the gladsome tidings I unfold,
Of happy peace and glorious victory.

For that sweet voice offered to us by man,
Cast sweetest incense into holy fires,
And while they burn, tell on thy happy news,
That we may ^eare and honor heavenly Powers.

When Sateros my Lord had brought your power,
In view of our presuming enemies:
And equal place was chosen for the field,
He sent a Herrald, willing them restore,
The wrongs that in Booetia they had done,
And leave the Country, turning to their home,
Or else resolve on doubtful chance of war.
They proud, ambitious, covetous of gain,
Returned an answer filled with disdain.
Then was the signal given, and stremar^red,
Menacing blood on either side aduanc^e.
Drums, Fifes, and ^rumpets drowned the cries of men,
That each where fell before their Foe-mens swords,
Mars there showd ruthles rage on either part,
And murder ranged through every rank.
Dust dimd the suns light, and the powders smoke,
Seemd like thick Clouds in air congluminate.
Thus was seven hours consumde, and doubtful chance
Sometime with us, sometime with them abode:
Till at the length our General gave charge
To found retreat, which made the hopeful Foe,
Pursue regardlesse our retyring bands,
That being knit together in firm rank,
A fresh pursude their straggling followers.
Then fell their glory like the ripened corn,
Before the Cickle and the Reapers hand:
In brief, some fled, most slain, and many taken
Have left the honor to Booetia.

To heavens and Sateros return we thanks,
For thy reward receive this recompense:
Our selves will forward to salute our friends,
That fought for honor of Booetia.
Sound Drum and Trumpet notes triumphantly,
Heavens have the honor for this victory.

Thus Sateros have we assisted thee,
Our true sworn soldier, worthy man at Arms,
And the Booetian Duke has heaven appeasde,
By firing false Contempt and loathed lust.
Mercury the son and messenger of ^oue
With me shall pass unto my warlike house.
Go thou unto the Duke with all thy train,
That longs to see thee, and requi^e thy pain.

To mighty Mars and wary Mercury
Poor Sateros gives thanks and vows his duty.

Are ye here in faith? here is two on ye,
Raph Cobbler may curse the time that here knew your company*

What mine man?

I yours, what reason had you to make my wife mad? I and so mad to kill one?
and then make me a Prophet


It was the secret judgment of the Gods, Sateros speak to the Duke to think
on him, and to remit her fault


It shall be done.

Is this the Prophet?

I that it is, that told you your own when it was.

Sateros use him well.

Nere doubt you that: are ye bemembred since ye told him, if ye set your self
against the Gods they would drive you out of heaven


Well what of that?

Faith at that time the world might well have affoorded you a Cart to ride in.


Go too Rap* cease.

I, I, and great folk do amiss,
Poor folk must hold their peace.

Mars shall we hence?

I, farewell Sateros.

VVelcome brave soldier, welcome to you all,
Joy stops my words, I cannot speak my mind,
But in this triumph pass we to the Court,
Where you shall all receive your due de^eits.

Thanks Noble Lord.

What shall I do then, and my wife?

I will provide for thee, and pardon her.

Faith then farewell the Court;
For now I Will not run and ride, nor no more abide,
But since my mad wife, has changde her mad life,
I Will even leave to be a Prophet speaker,
Take clouting leather and naule, and fall to my old trade of the gentle craft
the Cobbler

I Raph that will be fittest for us.

Come Sateros let me yet honor thee,
To whom the heavens have given great victory,
And took in worth our worthles sacrifice,
Wherein Contempt and L^st with old ingratitude,
Have perished like Fume that flies from fire.
March forward brave and worthy man at Arms*
Thy deeds shall be rewarded worthily:
Embrace the Scholar, live you two as friends,
For Arms and Learning may not be at jar,
Counsel preuents, counsel preuailes in war.

My thoughts are free from hate, let me not live,
When soldiers fail good Letters to defend.

Let every Scholar be a Soldiers friend,
As I am friend to thee and so will rest.

I so live, and ye are blessed.
How say thou Zelote is not that life best.

Then with due praise to heaven let us depart,
Our State supported both by Arms and Art.


