GEntles of both sexes, and all sorts, I am sent to bid ye welcome, I am but
insteade of a Prologue: for a she prologue is as rare as an Usurers Alms: non
reperitur in vsu, and the rather I come woman, because men are apt to take
kindelye any kind thing at a woman's hand; and we poor souls are but too
kind, if we be kindly entreated, marry otherwise, there I make my
Aposiopesis: the Author has indeed made me an honest merrye wench, one of his
humorists, yet I am so much beholding to him, I cannot get me a husband in his
play that is worth the having, unless I be better half of the suitor my self:
and having imposed this audacity on me, he sends me hither first for exercise I
come among ye all: these are the Contents, that you would hear with patience,
judge with lenity, and correct with smiles, for the which our endeauours shall
show it self like a tall fellow in action: if we shall join hands, a
bargain

As a lowely earnest, I give this courtesy before, And in conceit I give ye
twenty more

Nay, but Accutus, prithee what misshapen vizard of Melancholy have thou
mask't thy self in? thou lookst as thou were changing thy religion: what? is
there a breach in thy Faith? come, declare, and let me set thy wits on work,
to amend it


Ha ha ha!


Pretty: a man's well aduisd to offer good counsel, and be laughed at for his
labor: we shall shortly have no Counselors but Physicians, I spend my breath
to thee, and thou answerest me some half an hour after in a sembreue, or like
to a Sexton with a Sobeitor Amen


Condemn my Stars then.


I should wrong am then, as thou do with a false indictment, I know it took
not, being at thy birth, thou have been merry, thou have sounded hoopes,
swallowed whiffes, walked late, worn favors, seen whore sons: thou can
feel and understand, come, thou have been a sinner: unload, discharge,
vntune, confess, is venus dominatrix? art not in love


Yes, I love God and my neighbors.


Then either for Gods sake or thy Neighbors, or both, be smothe, and
participate, is it not some vnderlayer, some she Cammell that will bear as much
of her belly, as three beasts on their backs? some Lanthorne-maker, I Will hold
thy head: come, up with it


Prithee I hate none, but heaven hate me if I be in love with any.


Off with these clogs, then break prison, and get out of this melancholy
Jail, hark how the general noise does welcome from the Parthian wars, each
spirit's iocund, fraught with glee, then wrong not thine with this dull
meditation


Oh! how do they then wrong my meditation? my thoughts are with themselves at
a counsel, til with noise and thou with continual talk, have driven them to
a nonplus


Then make me of thy counsel, and take my advice, for i will take no denial, I Will
not leave thee til the next new Almanackes be out of date: let him threaten the
sharpest weather he can, in Saint Swithin week, or it snow on our Ladies face,
i will not budge, i will be thy midwife til thou be delivered of this passion


Partake then, and give me the belief: think thou or know thou any of this
opinion, that, that moving marish element, that swells and swages as it please
the moon, to be in bigness equal to that solid lump that brings us up


I was sure thou were beyond the Antipodes: faith I am of that faith I was
brought up in, I have heard my Father say, and i am sure his Records came from
his Father, that the Land and Sea are in nature thus much alike; the own
grows by the Sun, the other by the Moon, both by Gods blessing; and the Sea
rather the greater, and so think I


Good: there we have a farther scope, and hold the sea, can (as a looking
glass) answer with a mere smile any moving shape upon the earth


Nay, that is most certain, I have heard of Sea-horses, Sea-calues, and
Sea Monsters


Oh, they are monstrous mad, merry wenches, and they are monsters Graccus,
they call them Sea-maides or Mermaides singing sweetelye, but none dares trust
them, and are very like our Land-wenches, devouring Serpents from the middle
downward


Thou have even given me satisfaction: but have thou this by proof?


Not by my travels (so God help me) marry i will bring ye forty Sailors will
swear they have seen them


In truth!


In truth or otherwise.


Faith they are not unlike our land monsters, else why should this Maximilian
Lord, for whom these shoots and noyses befits thus, forsake his honors, to
sing a Lullabye

These seeming Saints, alluring evils,
That make earth Erebus, and mortals devils.

Come, thou art Sea-sicke, and will not be well at ease til thou have taken a
vomit, up with it


Why in faith I must, I can not soothe the world
With velvet words, and oily flatteries,
And kiss the sweatie feet of magnitude,
To purchase smiles, or a dead man's office,
I cannot hold to see a rib of man
A moytie of it self, command the whole
Bafful, and bend to muliebritie
Of female scandals; observe, do but observe,
Here one walks ore-growne in weeds of pride,
The earth wants shape, to apply a simile,
A body prisoned up with walls of wire,
With bones of whales, somewhat allied to fish
But from the wast declining, more loose does hang,
Then her wanton dangling lascivious lock
That's whirld and blown with every lustful breath.
Her neck in chains, all naked lies her breast,
Her body lighter then the feathered crest.
Another powtes and scoules, and hangs the lip,
Even as the banckrout credit of her husband,
Cannot equal her with honors liuerie,
What does she care, if for to deck her brave,
He Is carried from a Gate House to his grave.
Another in a railing pulppet key,
Draws through her nose the accent of her voice,
And in the presence of her good man Goat,
Cries fie, now fie upon these wicked men.
That use such beastly and inhumane talk:
When being in private, all her studies warn,
To make him enter into Capricorn.
Another as she goes, treads a Canarie pace,
Iets it so fine, and minces so demure,
As mistress Bride upon her marriage day:
Her heels are Cork, her body Atlas,
Her Beauty bought, her soul an Atomus.
Another with a spleen devoured face,
Her eyes as hollow as Anatomy:
Her tung more venom then a Serpents sting,
Which when it wagges within her chap-faln jaws,
Is noise more horrid then a cry of hounds
With open mouths, pursuing of their game,
Wants she but rich attire or costly diet,
With her the Devil can nere live in quiet.
Yet these are weaker vessels, heaven does know,
Lay on them ought but ease, you do them wrong:
They are as weak as water, and indeed as strong,
And then like mighty ships, when pellets sincke,
To them lay more men, she will never shrink.

Mistress, that face wants a fresh Gloss.


Prithee dib it in well Bos.


Pigmaleon, Pigmaleon, I conjure thee appear,
To work, to work, make more Marble Ingles,
Nature, thou art a fool, Art is above thee:
Beelzebub, paint thy face, there is some will love thee.

Rare, Mistress, heeres a cheek like a Camelion or a blasing Star: you shall
here me blaze it, here is two saucers sanguine in a sable field, pomegranet, a
pure penda^t, Ready to drop out of the stable, a pin and web argent in hair de
Roy


And a fools head in the Crest.


In the Crest? oh sweet Vermilion mistress! it is pity the Vermilion Worms
should eat thee, i will set it with precious stones and ye will


Enough sweet Bosse, throw a little water to spurt's face and lets away.


Hold up, so sir now away: oh Mistress your scantling, most sweet mistress most
derydent star


Then most rydent stars fair fall ye.


Nay sure it is the Moon her self, for there is her man and her Dog before.


I sir, but the man is not in the moon, and my bushis before me, ergo not at my
back, et ergo, not moon sir


What Is your will sir?


That you would leave us.


Leave you, zoundes sir, we scorn their companies, come, they are still, do
not open to them, we have no Conies to catch


Away, keep no distance, even both together,
For wit, ye may be Coacht together.
What sleeke browde Saint can see this Idiotisme,
The shape and workmanship of omnipotency,
To be so blind with drugs of beastliness,
And will not bend the browe, and bite the lip,
Trouble his quiet soul, with venom spleen,
And fear least the all ouer-seeer,
Can without vengeance, see these ignomies.

Why therefore are they belooued like Sargeants, and entertained like Beggars,
think thou but any honorable Gate but will be shut against these
Butter-flies


Oh Graecus! thou beguil'st opinion,
The Gates of great men stand more wide
To entertain a fool, then Cresus arms,
To hug his Golden God: and faster bard
Against necessity, then Dives entrance
At Olympus gate.

Fa, la, sol, lasol: Boy a Glass;


It Is but one and all sir.


Angels protect us, what have we hear?


Ye have a good memory Sir, for they are five minutes ere windefall of your
Glass


Sir, be credible, it is ballanst to be a superlatiue politic custom in these
hours to dwell in shallowe accoutrements, as a defense for the ability of his
pursse, from the infringed Oath of some impudent face, that will borrowe a
gentlema^s revenues, if he be vestally adornd: I Will tell you sir, by this
bright Horrison --


A word I pray ye sir ere ye go any further: Boy my Tables?


Your Tables are ready Sir, and all the men ye keep which is indeed half a
Boy, Scillicet, Videlicet


I pray ye let me request that oath of you.


A graceful inquiry, and well observed: Sir my company shall make ye copious
of novelties, let your Tables befriend your memory: write, by this bright
Horrison


Here Is none but only I, sing: Boy, how like thou my head of hair?


Your Glass may flatter ye, but truly I will not, your head is not a hair
better then it should be


Is there any scarcity of hair Boy?


Somewhat thin, and yet there is more hair then wit.


How Boy?


Then wit of man can number sir, take it in the right sense I pray ye.


Most ingenious!


O muffle, muffle good Graccus, do not taint thy sense,
With sight of these infectious animalles,
Least reason in thee have the upper hand
To govern sense, to see and shun the sight:
Here Is new discovered sins, past all the rest,
Men strive by practice how to swear the best.

I have quoted it sir, by this bright Hoar, Hoar son, pronounce ye sir.


Horison


Horison the Widows mite Sir?


Not for the Soldans crown sir.


Indeed ye shall, by this bright horison ye shall, believe me if I swear, I
think my self beholding, for I know it to be no common oath


Were it common, it past not these doors: Sir, I shift my oaths as I wash my
hands, twice in the artificial day, for in dialoguising, it is to be observed,
your sentences must ironically, metaphorically, and altogether figuratively
mixed with your morning oaths


Faith it is very true.


That he neither knows what he says, nor thou understand.


As for example, by this illuminate welkin.


Oh excellent! it shall down to.


There Is another Ducket, he vtters his oaths apace.
Sure this Villain has no soul, and for gold
Heel damme his body too, he is at peace with hell,
And brings his Merchandise from thence to sell.

I have here two Mistresses, but if the best were chosen out, if Poliphemus
the other eye were out, his choice might be as good as Argus broad waking, so
difficult is the difference


Boy, sleep wayward thoughts.


Sir.


Is it not now most amyable and fair?


Yes sir God be praised.


What meanst thou Boy?


The weather sir.


I mean my hair and face Boy.


Twere amiable if it would not alter.


Wherefore, I often repair it.


Me thinks that should wear it the sooner.


Not so Boy, for to trim the Hair well, is a rare quality: to be rarelye
quallified is to be wise, apply Boy


That you are wise in trimming your hair Master?


Right, to be wise is to be rare, for it is rare to see a wise man.


True Master: but if you will see a fool look in your Glass master.


Go to, I must correct you Boy.


You can correct no more then is your own, I am but half yours to command, if
you steal away any part that is not your own, you are so far in danger as
the striking of an other man's servant


By this illuminate welkin most sincere and singular, as a small remembrance.


Not for to win the fair Angelica.


By this illuminate Welkin ye shall now.


Sir, I do not bestow it for that I think you have need of it, for if you
had, by this bright Horizon I would not give it, for I know it is no credit to
give to the poor, by this illuminate welkin, I have (since I took upon me
this fleshie desire of a Gentleman) thrown out of a window for a huntsvp, when
I had as leef have heard the grinding of a Mustard Mill, for those are things
are here too day and gone to morrow: this will stick by a man, and do him
credit where ere he goes


I, when the fool is clad in clay,
It will stick sore unto thy soul for aye.

Signior Scillicet, I assure you I have discovered the most queint and
newfound device for the encounter of the Ladies at the enteruiew, it is in
pricke-song


That Is excellent and rare.


I, for prick-song to Ladies is most pleasant and delightful, as thus for
your congie, All hayle to my belooued: then for your departure, sad despair
does drive me hence: for all must be to effect


Nay, prithee raise no quarrels.


I can hold no longer, hear you sir, are not you a fool? and you an Ass?
and you a knave


zoundes an Ass?


A Fool?


A Knave without respect?


I, for an Ass can bear, a Fool abide, and a Knave deserve:


Help, help!


Prithee lets away.


Fools oftentimes brings wisemen to trouble, Farewell, another time i will pay ye
double.


Bring your Clubs out of doors, there go in my fine hosts, i will talk to the
proudest: what knaves are in the street, my door is my door, my house is my
castle, go in dame Helena, let thine host alon with this: he that knocks at
my hobby, while I have Ale in my house, shall pay for a Surgeon: the honest
shall come in, the knaves shall go by: bring Clubs I say


Nay sir, the hear is past, they that did it have took them to their heels,
for indeed here are of us --


Away with your Clubs then, welcome my brave Bullies, my Guests shall take no
wrong, but welcome my Bullies


Indeed sir I am a man of few words, I have put up a little blood shed, marry
I hope it shall be no stain to my manhood, if I keep it out of my clothes


He shall pay for the bloodshed, my guestes shall take no wrong: mine Host will
spend his Cruse as frank as an Emperor: welcome my brave bullies


Sir, be pacificall, the fellow was possessed with some critique frenzy, and
we impute it to his madness


Mad! by Gods slid if he were as mad as a weauer, I can hardly put it up:
for my blow: I care not so much, but he called me fool: slid if I live till I
dye, the one of us shall prove it


Some profane Villain, i will warrant him.


Do you think I may not have an action against him?


There Is so many swaggerers, but alas, how felye out?


By the welkin I gave him not a foul word: first he calls me fool, then he
makes a full blow at my body, and if by good chance I had not warded it with
my head, he might have spoild me


There, there, my fine fil-pots: give the word as you pass: anon anon sir,
anon: here and there in the twinkling, look well to the bar, there again
my little Mercuries, froath them up to the brimme, and fill as it is needful:
if their pates be full of Wine, let your Pottles be three quarters, trip and
go, here and there: now any brave Lad wash thy wounds with good Wine: bid
am welcome my little Sybil: put sugar in his hole there, I must in to my guests,
sleep soundly till morning: Canarie is a Jewel, and a Fig for
Browne-bastard.


Gentlemen, ye are welcome, though my husband be a little talkatiue, yet truly
he is an unreasonable honest man, ye shall find his words and his sayings all
one


I think no less, yet I would desire to enter as time and place shall serve.


I Will lead the way forsooth.


Nay pray ye Hostess a word, I say little, but i am sure I have sustained the
most wrong; by this light, I had rather he had broke my head in three places, I
pray you lend me a brush, he has put my hat quite out of fashion


That shall ye sir, a brush there hoe!


Salve, sis saluus, I pray ye which of you five is the Hostis of the house?


That's easily discernd, for four wear breeches.


Nere the sooner for that my diminitiue youth, for women now adays wear
breeches as well as men, mary the difference lies in the bawble


Well sir, to open the ttuth I am the Hostess.


The fruit is known by the Tree at the first view, as the Author writes
learnedly, come, basilus manus


This kissing becomes a Gentleman, i will use it suret


Secondly, Mistress Hostess, I would know what lodging ye have for my Lady and
her train


What will serve your turn sir?


I Will call my self to account and specify thus: my Lady and her Dog that is
two visible: then there is the Dog and my Lady, that is four invisible: then
there is my Ladies dog and I quoth the dog, that is six: then there is
sequence of three, viz. the Dog and I and my Lady: then there is a pair of
Knaves, viz the Dog and my self, and my Lady turned up: viz my Lady sequence
of three: a pair of knaves, and my Lady turned up to play upon, we can have no
less then five beds


Truly you must lie close together, (the Servants I mean) for I am so thrust
with Guest I an hardly spare so many


Faith we will lie together as close as we can: there is my Lady and her dog lie
al together, and I at the beds feet, and there is all our family of Love


How far is your mistress behind?


The truth is, the fatal sisters have cut the thread of her Corke-shoe, and
she is stepped aside into a Cobblers shop to take a true stitch, whether I mean
to send my self as a Court of Guard to conduct her: but see, oh, inconstant
fortune! see where she comes solus


Bos, you serve me well to let me wait upon my self.


Of two evils the least is to be chosen, I had a care of your puppie being
less then your self


Gentlewoman you have an excellent Ch: I have an appetite as a man would say.


What Is your will sir?


Truth will to light, and the truth is, I have an appetite to kiss you.


This point would become a Gentleman sure, I pray who trimmed it so?


My man forsooth.


Sir, I desire your acquaintance, it is excellent rare.


You would have said so, had you seen it an hour since.


Heeres game for me,
I hunt for fools, and have sprung a couey.

Gentles, please you draw near? lead the way into the chambers.


Bos is the name of a thing may be seen, felt, heard, or understood, and the
nominative case goes before, my Mistress the Verb, my mistress requires an
accusative case to follow, as vsus feminae pro^ptus facit. Exeunt al but Hosti


Oh fie vpont, who would be an hostis, and could do otherwise? Lady, as the
most lascivious life, conges and kisses, the tire, the hood, the rebato, the
loose bodyed Gown, the pin in the hair, and every day change, when an Hostis
must come and go at every man's pleasure: and what is a Lady more then another
body? we have legs and hands, rolling eyes, hanging lips, sleek brows, and
cherie cheeks, and other things as Ladies have, but the fashion carries it
away.


There, there my little Lacky boys, again, again, my fine fil-pots, where is
my fine Hostis? come, come my little dido, set your corks on a creaking, my
knaves are unthrifty, dance not your canaries, here, up and down, look about
to my Guests I say


I, I have much joy, an Hostess!


What, abides my Penenelope? here stand thy Ulysses, i will tarry with thee still,
thou shall want for no cost, i will buy thee a brave whistle, look about to my
Guestes I say


I, Hostesses will be known shortly as their Signs, still in one
weather-beaten suite, as though none wear hoodes but Monks and Ladies: and
feathers, but fore-horses, and Waiting Gentlewomen: or chains but prisoners
and Courtiers: no Perywigges but Players and Pictures, but the weakest must to
the wall still


Tush tush, these are toies, i will none of these Flip-flaps, i will have no ^oping,
no puffes, nor no Cobwebs: no busks nor burbarrels: thou shall wear thine own
hair, and fine cloth of Sheepskins: thy color shall be Dowlas, as white as a
Lilly: i will kiss these chop-cheries, thou shall go Gossip at Shroue-tide,
look about to my Guests then.


I, it was my hard fortune to be an Hostess, time was I might have done
otherwise


Why how now Woman, a'th old disease still? will it never be better? cannot a
Woman find one kind man amongst twenty? ah the days: I have seen, when a
Woman's will was a law: if I had had a mind to such a thing, or such a thing,
I could have had it, but twa's never better since men were Purse-bearers


Mine is eene the vnnaturallist man to his Wife


Truly, and commonly are all such fat men: i will tell thee Gossip, I have buried
six, I six husbands, but if I should live to have as many more, as I know not
what may happen, but sure i would never have such a fat man: they be the most
unwieldy men, that women shall not want a sore stomach that is troubled with them
I warrant her


And he maintains me hear like I know not what.


I, and what say, they are their wives head, well, if he be the head, she is
the body, and the body is to bear the head, and the body is to bear the
pursse


They cannot miss us, yet they regard us not.


Miss us! no faith, but would all women were of my mind, they call us the
weaker vessels: they should find vessels of us, but no weak vessels I warrant
them


Mistress my Master, calls for ye.


Go, i will come anon, he is not so hasty to give me what I want I warrant ye,


No, would he were, little thinks the husband what goes through the wives
hand, washing, wringing and rubbing, up early, down late, and a thousand
things they look not too


And yet they must have the government of all.


And great reason they have for it, but a wise man will put in a Woman's hand,
what? she will save that he spends


You have a pretty Ruff, how deep is it?


Nay this is but shallowe, marry I have a Ruff is a quarter deep, measured
by the yard


Indeed by the yard!


By the standard, you have a pretty set too: how big is the steel you set it
with


As big as a reasonable sufficient --


Mistress, my Master would desire you to come in.


What? she shall not come yet, if you lay down the bucklers you lose the
victory


By my troth I must go, we shall have such a coil else.


A coil! why have you not a tongue in your head? faith if ye win not all at
that weapon, ye are not worthy to be a Woman, you hear not the news abroad


No, what news?


No, I warrant ye, you never come abroad, this is to be troubled with a fat
man, he never comes abroad himself, nor suffers his wife out of his sight: ye
shall ever have a fat Host, either on his be^ch at the door, or in his chair
in the chimney, and there he spits and spaules a room like twenty Tobacco
takers, oh fie on them beasts


But I prithee what news?


Oh woman! the most hard favored news, and without al conscience, they say
there is a statute made any woman that buries her husband, is not to marry
again of two months after


A teadious time by Lady, a month were enough.


I half a month, winter nights are long, and cold, i will tell ye, I have buried
six, and I thank my good fortune, I ever knew the next ere the other was in
his winding sheet


Mistress, my master is angry, and the Guests call for their Hostess.


Go, I come, Gossip when shall I see you age^?


Nay, when shall I see you abroad, sildome i am sure.


I must needs away, God buy you Gossip.


God buy ye, Gods so, I have forgot wherefore I came: a word ere you go, the
party ye wott on commendes him unto ye, he that met the other party in the
white felt, the yellowe scarf, and the round Venetian, when the other party
kissed you, and I broake the jest on him: when he said, kisses kindeles Coals,
and love searches


Oh! I remember him, yes faith, he is pretty well set: he has the right
trick with the tongue in his kiss, and he dances reasonably comely, but he
falls heavy


He savors of a kind of Gallant, but not of a Courtyer.


Well, we will have a night ont, god be with ye Gossip.


God buy ye.


Not yours nor her own Terentia, yours in modesty Flauia,
See Tulley what an active passive love has plaide,
I love, and am again beloved, but at the shrine
Where I do offer up my Cordial sacrifice,
I am returned with peremptory scorn,
And where I stand but as a gazer,
Viewing all alike, I am pursude
With violent passions a speaking eye
Binds favors, and now discovering lines,
Thy counsel now dear friend, for at
Thy direction stands my thrall or freedom.

Oh my Lord, affection is unlimited,
Daring all dangers, having nor tipe nor
figure, but beyond all art,
Then tie not that (great Lord) to Tullies awe,
Fancy forsweares all reason, love all law.

How well thy power can shun, that which
I follow with obedience, too true in faith,
Thou might as well put out the eye of day,
Or cover sin from heaven, or to erect
A tower of sand, on the uncertain surge,
Or any thing that were more inficient,
Then to remove one doting thought of mine
From her disdain, thy aid dear Tulley.
Be thou an Orratour for Lentulus,
My tongue stands tund to a harsher method,
Breath in her ears those Organs of receite,
A quintessence distild of honny words,
And charm with a beguiling lullabye,
Her free consent to thine and my request.
Which done, that is done, which is my sole delight,
Which done, that is done, that I can never quite.

All which to me are problematique mines,
Obscurde enigmaes, and to my studies
Incognite language: yet if my powers,
Have power to cloth my tongue in love,
I Will be a Lover, and in love so plead,
As if that Tully loved Terentia.

Thanks sweet Cicero, this day we dine with old Flamiuius,
The forward Father of my Aukeward love.
His willing mind does strive to make the peace,
Betwixt our discord thoughts: his free consent
Is given to Lentulus, there Tulley takes on hold,
And when a Sun of thy intent shines fair,
On set loves fort, with polliticke assaults,
And conquer conquest in obtaining that,
Where victors are repulst: but see,
Our talk has ouer-tane our way, see old Flaminius
Comes to welcome us,
With him a look, look the bright orient verge,
At the vprising of Auroraes shine.

And my good Lord, you are happily met.

Heartily welcome: young Tullie welcome to, ye come well to ease my charge,
these Ladies find fault with their Guardian, I go too softly for them: old
blood is stiff, and young Ladies will not bear with age: I resign, I resign
to you that follow


If they admit us for their Guardian,
We Will dare dangers ere we part from them.

Why well said my Lords, Soldiers will not fly indeed, I have seen the day
I could have cracked a tree of yew, made my bowstring, whisper in mine care if
they twang: tossed my pike lustilye: it is since the siedge of Parthia, bith' mas a
great while, I was lusty then, at the service was done there, yet I love the
discourse: come my Lord, I choose your company, leave Tulley to the Ladies, he
can tell them tales of Venus and Adonis, and that best pleases them. Now I
must here of raps and blows, and Bills and Guns, and swords and bucklers: I
loved it once, come, our Cooks are backward, discourse will begette stomachs,
you are like to tarry long for lean Cates.


Now gentle Tulley, advocate my suite,
Her fore-amazing person makes me mute.

I Will bear these Ladies company,
If they shall deem acceptance.

With interest of thanks to Cicero,


Faith I like not this ods of female, an equallitie were better: yet of both
twere fitter the woman should undergo the odds, I had rather a said three men
to one woman, then two women to one man: heeres Tulley addressed to Terentia,
Terentia drawing near to Tully: here is small comfot left for Flaeuia, well
gentles, i will leave ye to the Goddess: so ho my Lords, take me with ye


Nay, stay good Flauia,
You Will not loose the sight of Lentulus.

Nor you of Tulley, come if you tell, i will blab.


But sweet Lady, Tully is not here.


But Cicero is, his nere friend, that is as good.


He was Lady, till he changed his habit, by putting on the office of an
unskillful Seruingman, intending to guard Terentia to her fathers house


Then Flauia must guard her self: well, use good words, and good action, and
stalk well before your Lady, she is kindey faith, and a litele thing will
please her


Will it please Flauia to partake?


Oh fie, twere an injury, I could brook my self therefore, i will leave ye, but be
brief, stand not on points, cut them all first, and if ye fall to kissing,
kiss not to long for fear ye kiss the post.


Go to, you will still be a wagge Flauia.
But what says Tulley to Terentia?

Lady I must maintain my former argument,
Tullie's not here, but here is Tullies friend,
For ere I speak, I must entreat, you will
Transform poor Tulley into Lentulus.

I have no power of Metamorphosing,
If Tulley be not here, you must conceal,
I cannot make of Tulley Lentulus.

Nor can the world make Cicero so worthy,
Yet for an hour discourse a Pesants shape,
Nay represent the person of a king.
Then in the person of great Lentulus,
I do salute Sunne-bright Terentia,
Lady, vouchsafe a Saint-like smile on him,
From that angel form, whose honored mind
Lies prostrate lowly at Terentias feet,
Who has put off a Golden victors honor,
And left the Parthyan spoil to Lepido,
Whom many Ladies have bedeckt with favors,
Of rich esteem, oh proud! he deignd to wear them,
Yet guiftes and giuers he did slight esteem.
For why? the purpose of his thoughts were bent,
To seek the love of fair Terentia.
The choce is such, as choiser cannot be,
Even with a nimble eye his virtues, through
His smile is like the Meridian Sol,
Discerned a dancing in the burbling brook:
His frown out-dares the Austerest face,
Of war or Tyranny: to sease upon
His shape might force the Virgin huntresse
With him for ever live a vestall life,
His mind is virtues ouer-matcht, yet this and more
Shall dye, if this and more want force,
To win the love of fair Terentia,
Then gentle Lady, give a gentle dome,
Never was breast the Landlord to a heart,
More loving, faithful, or more loyal,
Then is the breast of noble.

Tullie.


Lentulus!


And why not Tullie?


It stands not aptly.


It wants a sillible.


It does.


Then noble Cicero.


That's too dear.


Gentle is as good,
Then say the best of gentle Cicero.

Good Lady wrong not your honor so,
To seat unworthy Tulley with your worth,
Oh look upon the worth of Lentulus,
Let your fair hand be beam unto the balance,
And with a stedded peyze, lift up that beam,
In on the scale, put the worth of Lentulus
His state, his honors, and his revenues,
Against that heavy wait: put poverty,
The poor and naked name of Cicero,
A partner of unregarded Orators,
Then shall you see with what celeritie,
One title of his worth will soon pull up,
Poor Tullies dignity.

Just to the height of Terentias heart,
Where I will keep and Character that name,
And to that name my heart shall add that love,
That shall wey down the worth of Lentulus.

Dear Madam.


Speak still if thou will, but not for him,
The more thou speak, the more augments my love,
If that thou can add more to infinite,
The more thou speak, the more decreaseth his,
If thou can take away, ought from nothing,
Think Tulley, if Lentulus can love me,
So much and more, Terentia does love thee.

Oh Madam!
Tulley is poor, and poor is counted base.

Virtue is rich and blots a poor disgrace.


Lentulus is great, his frowne's my woe,
And of a friend he will become my foe.

As he is friend, we will entreat his love,
As he is great, his threatenings shall not make me love.

Your fathers grant, makes Lentulus your Lord,


But if thereto his daughter not accord,
That grant is canceled, fathers may command,
Life before love, for life to true love's paund.

How will Flaminius brook my poverty?


Well, when Flaminius see's no remedy,
Lord how woman like are men, when they are woe'd?
Tully, weigh me not light, nere did immodest blush
Color these cheeks, but ardent.

Silence sweet Lady, here comes Flauia.


Fie, fie, how teadious ye are: yonder is great looking for Tulley, the old
Senate has put on his spectacles, and Lentulus and he are turning the leaves
of a dog-hay, leaves of a worm eaten Chronicle, and they want Tullies
judgment


About what sweet Lady?


To know what year it was the showers of rain fell in April:


I can resolve it by rote Lady, it was that year the Cuckoo sung in May: another
token Lady, there reigned in Rome a great Tyrant that year, and many Maids
lost their heads for using flesh on Fish days


And some were sacrificed as a burnt offering to the Gods of Hospitallitie,
were they not


You Are a wag Flauia, but talk and you, must needs have a parting blow.


No matter so we stand out and close not.


Or part fair at the close and too 't again.


Nay, if we should too 't again Terentia would grow jealous.


Ladies, I take my leave,
And my love.

Take heed ye sigh not, nor look red at the table Tully.


Your shoe wrings you Lady.


Go to, ye are a wanton Flauia.


How now Terentia, in your nine Muses?
There Is none must plead in your case but an Orator.

I want one indeed Wench, but thou have two, and the gentle destinies may send
thee three, nere blush: for smoke and the fire of a woman's love cannot be hid.
oh a fine tongue, dipped in Helicon, a comedian tongue is the only perswasiue
ornament to win a Lady, why his discourse is as pleasant --


As how I prithee?


And keeps as good decorum; his prologue with obedience to the skirt, a rough
Scene of civil Wars, with a clapping conclusion, perhaps a Iigge, if not
the Tragicomicall Tale of Mars and Venus, then must she take the Tale by the
end, where he defending Mars, and she Venus, must fall from billing to biting,
from biting to blows, to get the supremacy


A good policy to praise Cicero,
For fear I rob you of your Lentulus.

Faith a Soldier is not for thy humor, now I cry a Warrier, he fights
stoutlye in a field bed, discharges his work sure, under his Curtains would I
fight, but come, our Lovers melt while we meditate; thou for thy scholar, I
for my fouldier: and if we cannot please them so, we will shake off this loose
habit, and turn Pages to please their humors.


Come Accutus, discharge your follower let us leave rubbing a while, since the
by as runs so much the wrong way: Sir, these bowls which we roll and turn
in our lower spher, are by use made wodden worldlings right for every one
strives who shall lie nearest the mistress


They post indeed, as their nature is, in an even way, but they are cowards,
they will abide no danger, they rub at every mole-hil, and if they tire in going
up a hill, they retire and come back again


Well, let them alley, bet all, then to rest, away, begone.


S foot Graccus, heeres a couple of our old gamsters, oh for quick conceit
to beget a jest: here is two that either a man must be acquainted or quarrel
with, and of two evils i will chose the latter, I hope to make it the lesser: if I
should be acquainted, the fool will haunt me: if I quarrel, I may be so blessed
as to be rid of a fool


I have a woman's wit for a sudden stratageme.


No by my troth, by this bright horrison --


An excellent Cuckoo, he keeps his note in Winter.


I have no appetite at all to live in the country any more: now as they say, I
have got a smacke on the City, slid I think (as the proverb goes) I was
wrapped in my mothers mock the day I was begotten, I thank the Goddess Cupid
for it, I am so favored of the Women, my hosts loves me execrably


Good reason, fools make good sport.


Sever, sever, ere we be discovered.


Sir, the respective regard of your well governed parts do challenge a
mellifluous species of enduement, or contumelious estimation


Gentles, God save ye, well ouer-taken Gallants.


Welcome by the welkin.


It Is a very pleasant weather.


Sir, the air is frugall.


Is that Gentleman of your Company?


Our company sir, no, we are no companions for lame Soldiers.


Propper man, pity he is so regardles: a good leg, it seems he has some
grief in it


Nay, and he be lame i will talk to him, there is so many lusty knaves walks now
a days, will not stick to give a man hard words, if he be not disposed to
charity: hark ye sir, I understand ye are a propper man, and that you have a
good leg


And what of that Sir?


What of that? slid he answers me like a sturdy beggar already: by the five
elements or senses; I ask ye for no hurt, i would bestow my charity as frank as
--


Stoop and look out, zoundes a Gentleman cannot come by a misfortune in
service or so, but every fool will ride him take that --


Sir, stay, i will combat thee in his defense.


Sir, be pacificall, the impotent must be lightly regarded.


Give me leave Gentlemen, i will follow him.


Nay, I pray you be malco^tented, I have no great hurt: but in revenge he is a
rascal for using me so, he may thank God, discretion governed me, it is well
known I have always been a man of peace, i will not strike ye the least mouse in
anger, nor hurt the poorest Conney that goes in the street, for I know of
fighting comes quarrelling, of quarrelling comes brawling, and of brawling
grows hard words, and as the learned puerelis writes, it is good sleeping in a
whole skin


Sir, your discretion shall govern me at this time, your name I pray ye sir?


My name is signior Scillicet.


Even so sir? nay sir, I do not forget your Argument.


Save ye sir, saw you not a Gentleman come this way even now, somewhat hurt in
the one of his Legs


He went by even now sir, is he a friend of yours?


A dear friend, and a propper Gentleman sir.


By the horison he is a propper man indeed, he gave me the time of the day, as
he went by: I have a gallon of wine for him at any time, If ye see any thing
in me worth commendations, I pray ye commend me to him


I will sir, twere best you gave me good words, but i will try ye farther yet,
fare ye well sir


I pray you remember me to him, you see my anger is over already.


Sir, I did not note ye, what fellow was that?


Sir, he is a friend of his, that struck me even now.


Would ye not strike him? lets follow.


Indeed ye shall not, I hate it.


I will not be barren of my armorie, in my future perambulation for the lower
element


You are to patient in wrongs sir, Zoundes I know not how to pick a quarrel.


Sir, the grievous youth is inwardlye possessed with a supple spirit, he can
brook impugnying, but it is adverse to my spirit if I were armed


Save ye gallants, saw ye not a fellow come halting this way of late?


Has he done any hurt, or is he a friend of yours?


He Is a Rascal, and i will maintain him so.


He Is a very Rascal indeed, and he used me like a knave: if ere I meet
him I shall hardly put it up, I have it in black and blew to show here


Say I breath defyance to his front.


Challenge him the field.


Do think heel answer me? i will challenge him at the pich-forke, or the
Flaile, or i will wrestle a fall with him for a bloody nose, any weapon I have
been brought up in, i will --


What will ye? here he is, you minime that will be friend with friends, and
foe with foes, and you that will defy Hercules, and out-braue Mars, and fears
not the Devil, pass bladder, i will make ye swell


By Gods-lid if I had known it had been you, I would not have said so to your
face.


Away with your Champion, go.


This was excellentlye performd, in faith a better breathing then a game at
bowls


They Will give you the good salve any time this month, for I am sure they have
saluing enough for so long


I pity the fool in faith, but the the other Horseleach, I wish his blows
trebled: I conuerst with him, but a Rogue so stuffed with a lybrary of new
minited words, so tearing the sense, I never met with


But now we have spoilde our determinate dinner at my hostess of the Hobbye,
we shall now be known


That holds well still, I am taken for a proved friend, and thou shall be
disguised till I have wrought a league by virtue of a pottle of Canarie


Content, mine Host shall be accessarie, and i will be a seruiter to observe
miracles


They are good subjects for idle hours: but soft what second course is entering
here


For I did but kiss her: Bos, how like thou my relish?


Oh Sir, relish but your licour as you do your song, you may go drunk to bed
any day in the week


Sister awake, close not, etc. does my face hold color still?


I, and you would but scauiage the pauilion of your nose.


I marry Accutus how likst thou this Gentlewoman Gallant?


A good states man, for common wealth of Brownists, the Rogue hates a Church
like a Counter


I, and if my Lady Argentile were dead, he would rather live upon alms then
fall to work


So: he might have tolleration,
What, shal's close with them?

In any case, but in some mild embrace, for if we should continue thus rough,
we should be shund like an Appoplex


Gallants, the fortune of the day runs with ye, what all at (...) chance? how
is it? how is it


Sir, I think it was you bestowd some abuse of me the other day.


Which I would wipe out of your memory with satisfaction of a double courtesy.


I accept it in faith sir, I am not prone to anger, I assiste ye the following
night knew not my anger: your acquaintance Signior


Fie, without ceremony; lets yoke this triplicity as we did in the days of
old, with mirth and melody


I, say you so? then Coll her and clip her, and kiss her too, etc.


The triplicitie, here is those has sup: at an ordinary.


This gallant humors.


But the other walks a loose.


The triplicitie, here is those has cracked Glasses, and drawn blood of a
Tapster


The visitation of your hand sir.


The Triplicitie, will colors change?


Sir, take no offense I beseech ye, we gave only satisfaction for an old
injury, but in the degree of amity your self sits in the superlatiue


Not so sir, but in respect.


What kind is your Dog of Sir?


Very kind to any thing but his meat, that he deuours with great alacrity.


Where was he bred?


In a Bitch.


What country?


A kind of Mungrill, he will carry, but not fetch, marry he is to be put to
a dancing school for instruction


The trick of the rope were excellent in him, and that i will teach him if I
miss not my mark: come Gallants, we waste time, the first Tavern we ariue
at, we will see the race of an houre-glasse


Can ye a part in a Song?


Very tollerably.


We Will have a catch then, if with sol, sol, la: Gentlemen, have you any good
herb? you have match boy


Your pipe shall want no fire sir.


Oh without ceremony: now Graccus, if we can but pawn their senses in Sack
and Sugar, let me alone to pursue the sequel


Follow it, away.


Come, come, bring them out of the air: alas good hearts, what rogorous
villain would commit with him? i will tell ye Gosip, he is eene as kind an
animal, he would not wrong them in faith


Tush, fear nothing woman, I hope to make him so again: alack, alack, how
fell you out, all at head? oh Butcher! are ye hurt in another place


Did he not throw you against the stones?

If he did, do not conceal, I dare say you gave them not a foul word.


By the illuminate welkin not a word till my mouth was full of blood, and so
made my words foul


Is not this Gentleman hurt to?


Only the extrauagant Artire of my arm is bruised.


See, see, the extrauagant of his arm is bruised to, alas how could ye quarrel
so


I will demonstrate, in defense of the generous youth, I did appugne, my
adverse let violently fly


Ah good hearts! would I had stood between you when he let fly so violently.


We void of hostile arms.


I, if they had had horses, they had saved their arms.


Be capable, I mean, void of armorie.


Until ye had had armor on.


Had I been accompained with my Toledo, or morglay --


I, your Dog or Bitch:


Continue I beseech, I mean my sword, sole lie my sword:


Or solely your sword, better a bad tool then none at all.


In the concourse.


Nay, the concourse will light on him for it I warrant.


I, for the tuition of my Capital, did mount my Semisphere three degrees, that
as a strong and stony guard did defend my Capital


It Was well ye kept him out, for if he had entered on your stony Guard, he would
have spoilde your Capital


In fine being mortally assaild, he did preambulate or walk off.


Yes faith, he did preambulate, and walk me finely.


Good hearts, how many were there of them?


About the number of seven.


I there was seven.


Or eight.


Or eight.


Rather more.


I more at least I warrant ye.


A less ye cannot choose but be more hurt, but i will search you thoroughly be
assured


And if she cannot help ye, few can, she knows what belongs to a Tent or a
bruise, and experience is good in those cases


I have a concupiscent form of trust in your skill, it will malladise.


I fear not, put both your concupisences in me for that matter.


The generous will disburse coynage for satisfaction of your metaphisicall
endeavor


Yes, yes, I will discharge all.


We make no doubt of that, come into a chamber, ye shall lie down a while,
perhaps you will be stiff anon, then you shall use your legs, the more you
strive with it, the better, alas good hearts.


Sol, sol, la, Tapster, give attendance Gentlemen, I hope all we are friends,
the welkin is sky color still, and men must grow by degrees, you must pardon
me, I must sp -- speak my mind


The uttermost of your mind at this time cannot be offensive.


The friar was in the sol, sol, draw the the other quart, I hope you are not
angry gallants? and ye come to my lodging, ye shall be welcome, my Hosts
shall bid you welcome: she is a good wench, if I say the word, she will fa --
full fill it


Sir drawer, for the other that's a sleep, let him so remain: for the Dog
let him be bound to a post for his appearance, till I take order for his
undoing


The fool and the Dog shall both take rest at your command Sir.


Gentlemen, I hope we are all friends, sol, sol, shals have a catch?


I, come come, every one catch a part.


Hey good boys in faith, now a three man's song, or the old down a down: well,
things must be as they may, fills the other quart, muskadine with an egg is
fine, there is a time for all things, bonos nocthus.


Good night to you sir.


So, now Graccus see, what a polluted lump,
A deformed Chaos of unsteady earth
Man is, being in this ill kind vnma^d, seeming something
Bestiall man, brutish animal: well it is thus decreede
He shall be what he seems, that is dead.
For what in him shows life, but a breathing air,
Which by a free constraint it self ingenders
In things without life: as twixt a pair of bellows
We feel a forcible air, having of it self
Force and being, no more is this breathing block,
But for his use in kind: give out in some bursse or congregation
Among the multitude, Philantus death.
Let all the customarie rights of funeral,
His knell or what else be solemnly observed,
I Will take order for his winding sheet:
And further, to furnish it with further suertie,
I Will have a potion, that for twenty hours,
Shall quench the motion of his breath.
Go, spread, let me alone to effect it.

I Will sow it I warrant thee, thou talkst of bursse, I have away worth ten on it,
i will first give it out in my Barbers shop, then at my ordinary, and that is as
good as a broad: and as I cross Tiber, my waterman shall attach it, heel send
it away with the tide, then let it come out to an Oyster wenches ear, and
she will cry it up and down the streets


Let Us first secure him from eyes, and at night he shall be portered to our
chamber: so, now away


Oh a couple that would spread early, let us give it for loves sake.


Call, call,


Hem, hem.


A pox on your hemmings, do you think we care for your hemmings,


It Is some stinking troublesome knave I warrant ye.


Hang him, regard him not, there is hemming indeed like a Cat, (God bless us)
with a burre in her throat.


S'hart, how we are ripped up for this?


Oh man, this hemming is the most hatefulst thing, there is not the most
public punck, nor worme-eaten bawd that can abide it, and honesty would
run mad to hear it, but come, we wast, time, it is now about the mid of
day, we must sow arethmatike by the hours, that let the morrowes height
Philantus awake again, at which time he shall be on his Hearse, and all the
Guestes of the Hobbye invited to accompany his ghost, when being awake
himself, and all shall see, if drunkenness be not mad mystery


But I prithee practice some milder behavior at the ordinary, be not al
madman


Push, i will be all obseruatiue, and yet in faith I grieve to see this double
guarded age, all side coat, all fool, fie, thou keep the sports from the
mark, away, and retunre what news is now in progress


I have the newest, Terentia Daughter to the old Senate, though Lentulus left
the field to come to her, yet she has forsaken him in the open field, and
she is for our young Orator Tully, she has vowed by Venus leg, and the little
God of Love, he shall be her captain, she will serve under him till death us
depart, and thereto I plight thee my troth


More Ladies Terentias, I cry still,
That prise a Saint before a Silken fool,
She that loves true learning and pomp disdaines,
Treades on Tartarus, and Olimpus gains.

I marry, but then would learning be in colors proud, proud, then would not
four nobles purchase a benefice, two Sermons in a year


I Graccus, now thou hitst the finger right,
Upon the shoulder of Ingratitude:
Thou have clapped an action of flat felony
Now ill be tide that partial judgment,
That doomes a farmers rich, adultus,
to the supremacy of a Deanrie.
When needy, yet true grounded Discipline,
Is governed with a thread bare Vycarage.

I, thou speak well of their sides that are liberally ouerseene in the
sciences, I take no hold on it, but were all men of thy mind, then would every
Schoolemaister be a Senate, and there would never come Cobbler to be Constable
again


Enough, enough Graccus, let silence seal up
Our secret thoughts, and liberty say,
Virtus sola summa gloria,
Quae format homines, vera honor.

Go to I say, urge no more, it is Tavern talk, for Tauerners Table talk for
all, the vomit of rumor: what news says one? none so new as this, Tully shall
be married to Terentia: what news says another? the same, the same, whose
consent have ye? not mine, I deny it, I must know of it, i will have a hand, go
to, no more


Gentle sir,
Lay not that leaden load of foul reproach,
Upon so weak a prop, what is done is past recall,
If ought is done, unfitting to be done,
The worst is done, my life must answer it.

I, you shall answer it in the Senate house, the Emperor shall know it: if
she be my child, I will rule her, i will bridle her: i will curb her: i will rain
her, if she will not, let her go, starve, beg. hang, draw, sinck, swim
she gets not a do it, a deneire, i will not own her


Reverend Sir be more patient.


I am impatient: I am troubled: I am vexed: I am scoft: I am pointed at: i will not
endure it: i will not abide it: i will be revenged, I will: of her: of you both: proud
boy: wanton giglot, a spyring hautie, know your equals, she is not for ye, if
ye persist, by my holy maker you shall answer it, look to it, you shall, you
shall indeed


I shall, I must, I will, I will indeed,
Even to the greatest I will answer it:
If great men's ears be open to innocence,
If greatness be not partial with greatness,
Even to the greatest I will answer it,
Perhaps some shallowe censurer will say,
The Orator was proud, he would climb too hie,
But heaven and truth will say the contrary.
My greatest grief is, I have my friend betraide,
The treason's done, I, and the Traitor's free,
Yet innocent Treason needs not to flee,
His loyalty bids me abide his frown,
And he has power to raise, or hurl me down.

What ailes my Tully, wherefore look thou sad?
What discontent has stopped the crimson current
Which ran so cheerfully within that brow,
And makes it sullen like a standing poole?
Tell me, who is it has wrong my Cicero?

Oh wrong him not.


Who is it then that wrongs my Tully so?
What has Terentia ought offended thee?
Do thou recall thy former promises?
Do thou repent thee of --

Oh wrong me not.


What has my Father done this injury?
There, there, thy thoughts accord to say it is so,
I will deny him then, he is not my father,
He Is not my friend will envy Cicero.

Wrong not thy self.


What heavy string do thou divide upon?
Wrong not him, wrong not me, wrong not thy self,
Where did thou learn that doleful mandrakes note,
To kill the hearers? Tully,
Can thou not endure a little danger for my love?
The fiery spleen of an angry Father,
Who like a storm will soon consume it self,
I have indurde a thousand iarring hours,
Since first he did mistrust my fancies aim:
And will endure a thousand thousand more,
If life or discord either live so long.

The like will I for sweet Terentia,
Fear not, I have approved armor on,
Will bide the brunt of popular reproach,
Or whatsoever.

Enough Tully, we are discovered.


Ye faith, are ye at it? what is there never a loving tear shed on neither
side? nor you? nor you? Tullies are red, come, come ye fools, be more brief,
I would have buried three husbands before you will be married


Why lives Flauia a Virgin still?


Because I have vowed virginity til I can get a husband


Why Flauia you have many suitors.


Oh I am laden with suitors: for indeed I am feign to bear with any of them,
I have a dumb show of all their pictures, each has sent in his several
shadow, and I swear I had rather have them then the substance of any of them


Can you not describe them in action?


Yes, and their action: I have one honest man of the age of forty five or
there about, that trauerses his ground three mile every morning to speak to
me, and when he is come; after the saluting ceremony of how do you Lady, he
falls to calculating the nativity of the Moon, prognosticating what fair
weather will follow, if it either snow or rain, sometime with a gentle pinche
by the fingar, intermixed with the valley of sighs: he falls to discoursing
of the prise of pease, and that is as pleasing to me as a stinking breath


A good description.


Another bringes Letters of commendation from the Constable of the Parish, or
the Churchwarden, of his good behavior and bringing up, how he could write
and read written hand: further, desiring that his Father would request my
Father that his Fathers Son might marry my Fathers Daughter, and heel make
her a ioynter of a hundred pound a year, and beget three or four fools to
boot


Better and better.


Vsus promptus facit.
Faemina ludificantur viros, well, forward,

I have another, that I prise derer then the rest, amost sweet youth, and if
the wind stand with him I can smell him half a mile ere he come at me,
indeed he wears a Musk-cat, what call ye it about him


What do you call it?


What ye will, but he smells better then burnt Rosemarie, as well as a
perfuming pan, and every night after his first sleep, writes louesicke
sonnets, railing against left handed fortune his foe, that suffers his sweet
heart to frown on him so


Then it seems you grant him no favor.


Faith I dare not venture on him for fear he should be rotten: give me
nature, not art


Here comes Lord Lentulus.


Swift danger now ride poaste through this passage, health to your honor.


And happiness to you.


It Is heaven dear Lord, but --


Tush, tush, on earth, come, come, I know your suite, it is granted sure what
ere it be


My suit craves death for treason to my friend.


The Traitor lives while I have breath to spend,
Then let me die to satisfy your will.

Neither in faith, kneel not, rise, rise, I pray
You both confess you have offended me.

We do, we have.


Then for this offense, be this your doom,
Tulley must die, but not till fates decree
To cut your vital thread, or Terentia
Find in her heart to be your Deathes-man?

Faith the Fates may do as they may, but Terentia will never find in her
heart to kill him, she will first bury him quick


The like is doomde to fair Terentai,
How say you both, are ye content?

My thoughts are plunged in admiration.


But can your honor bury such a wrong?


I can, I can, here Tully, take Terentia,
Live many happy years in faithful love,
This is no more then friendships laws allow,
Think me thy self another Cicero.

Twere better my Lord, you did persuade her to think you another Cicero, so you
might claim some interest in her now and then


That I would claim with you, fair Lady, hark in your ear, nay, I must
conclude with you


Y'oule not bite my Lord?


No, of my faith my Lady.


Thus far my love, our hopes have good success,
One storm more past, my griefs were much the less.

Friendship it self has been more prodigal,
Then a bold face could beg upon a friend.

Why then, there is a bargain.


Strike hands upon the same, I am yours to command.
I Will love with ye, i will lie with ye, i will love with all my heart,
With all my strength, with all my power and virtue:
Sealed and delivered in the presence of us:

Marcus, Tullius, and Cicero.
Then you deliver this as your act and deed?

I do, and seal it with this --


Why well said, it is done, see, we begin but now,
And are as ready to go to Church as you:
What needs further ceremony?

Yes, a little matrimony.


I Lady, come Tully and Terentia,
One day shall shine on both our Nuptials,
Fear not, i will quench the fire of your Fathers heat
With my consent.

I prithee appoint the time.


About a week hence love.


Oh, it is too intolerable long.


Then four days.


Four days is four times four and twenty hours that is too long too.


We cannot sooner be ready:


Yes and unready too, in a day and a half.


Well then two days.


Til then we will feed on conceit, Tully thank me but for your company, I
would not tarry so long: come Tully since we shall be married all at one
time, we will go to bed so, and he shall be master of the Cockpit, that bids
his Gossips first.


Nay quick Graccus, least our hour fore-stall us, i will in and deal for your
disguise, tarry thou, and give mine host a share of our intent, marry charge
him to keep it as secret as his Garbage. He undoes our drift and clothes the
fool in sackcloth during his life


I Will warrant thee i will manage it with as good judgment as a Constable his
charge


And I mine as a watchman his office.


Better I hope: well about it.


There, there, my little lackey boys, give the word as ye pass, look about to
my guests there, score up at the Bar there; again, again my fine Mercuries; if
you will live in the faculty, be ruled by instructions: you must be eyed like a
Serieant, an ear like a Belfounder, your conscience a Schoolemaister, a knee
like a Courtier: a fool like a Lackey, and a tongue like a Lawyere, away,
away, my brave bullies: welcome sweet Signior, I cannot bow to thy knee. I Am
as stout and as stiff as a new made knight, but if I say the word mine Host
bids the Cobbler --


May I crave a word of you mine Host?


Thou shall, whisper in mine ear, I will see and say little, what I say, du^s
the mouse and welcome my bullies


By the torrid zone (sweet heart) I have thought well of you ever since I loved
ye, as a man would say (like a young dauncer out of all measure) if it please
you in faith, any thing I have promised you, i will perform it to a hair, ere to
morrow night


I wounder I can hear no news of my man and my puppie.


Do you think sweet heart, to be married by day light or by torch-light.


By night is more Lady-like, i will have a crier to cry my puppie sure.


What think ye if we had an offering?


That were most base in faith.


Base, slid I cannot tell, if it were as base as a sag but i will be sworn it is as
common as a whore, it is even as common to see a Basin at the Church door as a
box at a Playhouse


It greeues me not so much for my man, as for my puppie, my man can shift for
himself, but my poor puppie, truly I think I must take Physic even for
fear sweet heart


Tut, tut, I warrant thee, i will be as close as a bawd, i will keep mine own
counsel, be merry and close, merry heart lives long, let my guests take no
wrong, and welcome my bullie.


There Is none meant believe it sir.


Signior, by the welk in well met, what, all three so luckely?


Gallants, saving the Ceremony,
Stroke your hair up and admire, for swear sack.

Forswear Sack, slid not for the spending of two farms more, if they were
come into my hands once


I say be astonished, and forswear sack, for by the cumbustion influence of
sack five men lie breathless, ready to be folded in the terrestiall element


Five slain with Sack, is it possible?


These eyes are testators.


Nay then it is so.


Sir, you have not heard of a puppie in your travels.


No, indeed, Gentlewoman.


Five believe me Sir.


Five of one, oh devil! what limme of him but a complete Villain,
A tongue prophaner then Idolatry:
His eye a Beacon, fixed in his place:
Discovering illes, but hood winckt unto grace,
Her heart a nest of vice, kept by the Devil,
His good is none at all, his all, is evil,

Oh the father, Gallants, yonder is the most hard favored news walks the
streets, seven men goeing to their graves that dyed with drinking and
bisseling


Good still, nay, then I see the devil has some power over a woman more then a
man, seven! t'wll be more anon


Now I beseech Bacchus my puppie has not over seen himself.


This is very strange.


And as true a report I assure you.


Out al as, where is my Gosip? oh woman! have you not heard the news?


Yes, I have heard on it.


Oh woman, did your childs child ever see the like, nine men to be buried
too day, that drunk healthes last night


Better and better, goodness never mends so fast in the carrying: nine!


They say one is your guest Philantus,


And all I dare swear, whom i will revive again


Well, he was a propper man in faith.


I, and had good skill in prick-song, yet he had a fault in his humor, as none
are without (but Puritans:) he would swear like an Elephant, and stamp and
stare (God bless us) like a playhouse book-keeper, when the actors miss
their entrance


Nay hark ye sir, I can brook much injury, but not that, meddle with me, but
not with my trade, she is mine own, she is meus, tuus, suus, no man's else, I
assure ye we are sure together


Sure ye are together sir, but is your wife, your trade? you mean to live upon
your wife then


The fool has some wit though his money be gone.


Sir, I hope ye are not offended, I assure ye would be loath to offend the
least hair of your caput, sissiput, or occiput


Occiput: what mean you by occiput?


The former part of your head.


The former part of your head, why I hope I have not an occiput, in the former
part of my head, Signior Sernulus, what means be by it


The signification of the word only a mounts to this, the former part of your
head


The fool is iealious, prithee feed it.


S'lid I cannot be so sussified, I pray you Signior what means he by occuput?


No hurt veriely, only, the word signifies, and the reason is (says Varro)
being a great deriuer from originals it is called occiput, for that the former
part of the head looks likest the Ox


Likest the Ox, by gad, if ere I come to talk with that Varro, i will make him
show a better reason for it


But howsoever, it proceeded from me all in kindenes.


Sir, I accept it so, for I tell ye I am of a mollifying nature, I can strut,
and again in kindness, I can suffer a man to break my head, and put it up
without anger


I claim that privilege sir, I think I offended you once that way.


I love ye then for it sir, yet I cannot remember that ever a Tapster broke my
head, yet I call to mind I have broke many Tapsters heads


Not as a Tapster, for I but borrow this habyt.


The fruit is known by the tree, by gad I knew by your aporn ye were a
gentleman, but specially by your flat cap


I call to memory, let us unite with kind embrace.


Now well fare your hearts, by my truth it is joy to a woman, to see men kind,
faith you courtiers are mad fellows, you care not in your humors to stab man
or woman that stands in your way, but in the end your kindenes appears


You can resolve us sir, we hear of great revels to be at Court shortly.


At the marriage of Lentulus, and the Orator: very true.


Might not a company of Wives be beholding to thee for places that would be
there without their husbands knowledge if need were


A moitie of friendship that, i will place ye where ye shall sit and see all.


Sit, nay if there were but good standinges, we care not.


S'foot Graccus we tarry too long I fear, the hour will over take us, tarry
thou and inuit the Guests, and I Will go see his course mounted


About it.


Whether goes that Gentleman?


About a needful trouble: this gentleman
Has at the charges of his charity,
Preparde to inter, a friend of his,
Though lately entertaind a friend of yours.
Acquaintance to you all, Philantus: and would desire
You would with him accompany his ghost
To funeral, which will be presently on his journey.

Of his charge, dyed he not able to purchase a Winding sheet?


Twere sin to wrong the dead, you shall hear the inventory of his pocket.




What was his suite worth?


His suit was cold, because not his own, and the owner caused it to be
restored as part of recompense, having lost the principal


What, are they ready: the Corse is on his journey hetherwards.


Tush, two women's tungs give as loud report as a camp royal of double cannons.


Tut, tut, thou art welcome, Cornutus is my neighbor, I love him as my self,
tha'st a shrowe to thy wife, gave her tongue to much string, but let mine Host
give thee counsel, heel teach thee a remedy


No, no, my good Host, mum, mum, no words against my wife, she is mine own,
one flesh and one blood, I shall feel her hurt, her tongue is her own, so are
her hands, mum, mum, no words against your wife


Tut, tut, thou art a fool, keep her close from the poticarie, let her taste
of no licoras, twill make her long winded: no plums, nor no parseneps, no
pears, nor no Popperins, she will dream in her sleep then, let her live upon
Hasels, give her nuts for her diet while a toothe's in her head: give her
cheese for disgestion: it will make her short winded, if that will not serve, set
fire to the pan, and blow her up with Gunpowder


I, I, mine Host, you are well employed to give a man counsel against his
wife, they are apt enough to ill I warrant ye


Mum, mum, my sweet wife, I know the world well enough, I have an ear, but I
hear not: an eye, but I see not: what is spoake against thee, I regard not: mum,
mum, I know the world well enough


I, and twere more seemly you were at your own house too, your wife cannot
go abroad but you must follow, husbands must be fringed to their wives
Petticoates, I pray you tarry you, i will go home


Not so my sweet wife, I am gone, I am vanished, mum, mum, no anger shall stir
thee, no words, I know the world well enough


Twere better by thrice deuce-ace in a week every woman could awe her husband
so well as she


Is It possible, sfoot well, I thought it had been but a fable all this while,
that Iole should make great Hercules spit on his thombes, and spin, but now I
see, if a man were as great as Caesar, Julius, or Augustus, or both in one, a
woman may take him down


Gossip, faith i will use a little of your counsel, but my husband is so fat, I
fear I shall never bring him to it


Now gentles, you that can prepare a few tears to shed, for now enters a sad
scene of sorrow


Man is flesh, and flesh is frail,
The strongest man at length must fail,
Man is flesh, and flesh is grass,
Consuming time as in a glass.
Now is up, and now is down,
And is not purchased by a Crown.
Now seed, and now we are sown,
Now we wither, now are mowen,
Frater noster here does lie,
In panpertate he did die.
And now is gone his viam longam,
That leads unto his requiem aeternam
But dying needy, poor and bare,
Wanting to discharge the Friar,
Unto his grave, he is like to pass,
Having neither Dirge nor Mass.
So set forward, let him go,
Et benedicamus Domino.

And then to Apollo, hollo trees, hollo, Tapster a few more clothes to my
feet


Oh heavens!


Gentles, keep your places, fear nothing: in the name of God what art thou?


My Hearse and winding sheet: what means this? why Gentles I am a living man.


Spirit thou lie, thou deludest us.


Conjure him Friar.


In nomino Domini, I thee charge,
Responde mihi here at large.
Cuium pecus whence thou art:
Et quam obrem, thou make us start,
In spiritus of the gloomy night?
Qui Venis huc us to affright
Per trinitatem I there charge thee,
Quid tu vis hic to tell to me.

Why gentles, I am a living man Philantus, what instance shall I give ye? hear
me, I have sight, understanding, I know mine hosts, I see that Gentlewoman, I
can feel


Feel this Gentlewoman! s'ild if ye were ten Ghosts, i will not endure it.


Spirit thou deludest us.


Why, what should I say? will ye hsare my voice, here is none but --


Nay, that's a lie, then it is a living spirit, i will have about with him.


Oh sir, meddle not with shadows, spirit thou lie,
I saw thee dead, so did many more:
We know ye wandering dwellers in the dark,
Have power to shape you like mortallitie,
To beguile the simple, and deceue their souls,
Thou art a Devil.

Sweet Gent, behold I am flesh and blood, here is my flesh feel it.


By my troth methinkes he should be alive, I could find in my heart to feel
his flesh


Try with your Rapier Accutus, if he bleed he lives.


If I bleed I die, sweet Gentlemen draw no blood.


How shall we know thou art flesh and blood then?


Take heed Accutus heel blast thee.


What instance shall I give ye? I am Phylantus, he that must needs confess he
was drunk in your companies last day, sweet Gentlemen conceive me aright


Why true, true, that we know, and those swilling bowels,
Death did arrest thee, many saw thee dead,
Else needles were these rites of funerals,
And since that time till now, no breath was known.
Fly from you: and twenty times the houre-glasse,
Has turned his vpside down: and twenty times
The nimble current sand has left his upper room,
To ly beneath, since spark of life appeard,
In all which time, my care imploide it self,
To give the rights of burial: now if you live,
Who so glad as I?

Sir, your love has shown it self abundant, but the cold air is a means
to deuorce me from your companies: mine host let me crave passage to my chamber


Out of my doors knave, thou enterest not my doors, I have no chalk in my
house, my posts shall not be guarded with a little sing song, si nihil attuleris
ibis Homere for as


Ha, how now man? see now any errors?
Nay, this is no thing: he has but shown
A pattern in himself, what thou shall find
In others: search through the Globe of earth
If there among twenty, two thou do find
Honester then himself, i will be buried straight,
Now think what shame it is to be vilde,
And how vilde to be drunk: look round, where?
Nay look up, behold you Crystal palace,
There sits an vbiquitarie Judge,
From whom arcana nulla abscondita.
That see's all and at pleasure punishes,
Thou can not escape scot free, how can thou?
Why senseless man, in that, sin will betray
His father, brother, nay, him himself: fears not
To commit the worst of evils: secure, if
Thunder boults should drop from heaven, dreading
Nor heaven nor hell: indeed hss best state
Is worse then least, prised at highest rate.

This critique is hoarsh, unsavory, and reproofeful, avoid him.


He speaks well, but I like not his dispraysing of drunkenness: it is Physic
to me, and it makes me to sleep like a good horse, with my nose in the
maunger, come sweet heart


Signior Philantus I pray ye a word.


How now, whispering? s'foot if they should give our purpose another cross
point, where are we then? note, note


Here take the key, convey your self into the Chamber, but in any case take
heed my husband see you not


Fear not: gentles, be thanks the guerden of your love, till time give better
ability,


Ha! nay s'foot, I must claw out another device: we must not part so, Graccus
prithee keep the scene til I fetch more actors to fill it fuller


But prithee let me partake.


Not till I return, pardon me,


By my troth gossip I am half sick of a conceit


What woman? passion of my heart, tell me your grief?


I shall go to court now, and attired like an old Darie woman, a Ruff,
holland of eight groates, three inches-deepe of the old cut, and a hat as
far out of fashion as a close placket


Why I hope your husband is able to maintain you better: are there not nights
as well as days? does he not sleep some times? has he no pockets about him?
cannot you search his breeches? any thing you find in his breeches is your
own


But may a woman do that with safety?


I and more, why should she not? why what is his is yours, what is yours, your
own


The best hope I have is, you know my Guest Mistress Gettica, she has pawnd her
Jewels to me already, and this night I look for her Hood, and her tyer, or if
the worst chance, I know I can entreat her to wear my clothes, and let me
go in her attire to Court


Or if all fail, you may hire a good suite at a Jews: or at a broakers, it is a
common thing and specially among the common sort


To search through my house, I have no Varlets no knaves, no stewd prunes, no
she fiery phagies, my Chambers are swept, my sinkes are all scowred, the
honest shall come in, the knaves shall go by, yet will I master Constable, go
search through my house, I care not a sheep skin


We are compeld to do it mine host, a Gentleman is robbed last night, and we are
to search every privy corner


Mine host is true Metal, a man of reputation, a true Holefernes, he loves
juice of grapes, and welcome master Constable.


Graccus, how likst thou this?


Excellent, for now must he needs fall into the Constables hands: and if he
have any grace, it will appear in his face, when he shall be carried through the
street in a white sheet twill be a good penance for his fault


Now fortune favor that my husband find him not


Heel be horn mad, and never able to endure it: why woman if he have but as
much man in him as a Maribone, heel take the burden upon his own neck, and
never discover yo


Alas here they come, lets away Gossip.


Fortune my foe, why do, etc.


Oh fie, that is bitter, pre the go comfort him.


Faith he should be innocent by his garment: Signior, I grieve for this, but if
I can help, look for it


I thank ye sir.


We must contaminate our office, pray regard us as little as ye can.


Me thinks this should put him quite out of tune: now so, let him go, now to
mine Host, there is he, and he, and h^e, there is she, and she, i will have about
with all: and critiques, honnys sweetest, mixed with gal.


Go to, there is knaves in my house, I know of no Varlets, I have an eye has
his sense, a brain that can reach, I have been called Politician, my wife is my
wife, I am her top, i am her head: if mine Host say the word, the Mouse shall
be dun


Not so my sweet Host, mum, mum, no words against your wife, he that means to
live quiet, to sleep in clean sheets, a Pillowe under his head, his diet
dressed cteanely, mum, mum, no words against his wife


Thar't a fool, thar't a fool, be ruled by mine host, show thy self a brave
man of the true seed of Troy; a gallant Agamemnon, tha'st a shrew to thy wife,
if she cross thy brave humors, kick thy heel at her huckle bone


Gentles, most happily encountered, how good hap has turned two labors into
one, I was addressed to both, and at once have met both, sure I must entreat
that you must not deny


Say on my sweet bullie, mine Host will attend thee, speak roundly to the
purpose and welcome my bullie


Marry thus: there are are great revels and shows preparde to beautify the
nuptials of Lentulus and Tully, in which the Citizens have the least share,
now would but you and some others that I shall collect, join hands with me in
some queint jest

Our show shall deserve grace, and brave the rest.


I have thee brave spirit, tha'rt of the true seed of Troy, lets be merry and
wise, merry hearts live long mine Host, my brave Host with his neighbor
Cornutus shall be two of the Maskers, and the Morris shall be daunc'd


Not so mine Host, I dare not do so, t'wil destemper my wife, my house will be
unquiet, mum, mum, I know the world well enough


Thou shall go says mine Host, merry hearts live long, welcome bully, mine
Host shall make one, so shall my Cornutus, for if I say the word the mouse shall
be dun.


Save ye mine Host, heeres a parcel of Corn was directed to be delivered at
your house


What ware my little Atlas, what ware is it?


I know not, but i am sure it is as heavy as a horse and --


I think it is a barrel of oil, for it spurg'd at my back.


It was oil, for I drew the Tap.


What Bos, what makst thou here?


Oh charadeum soboles magnum bouis increm entum! Bos art there there?


As sure as you are there Signior.


Bos, will ye not forsake your Cabin?


Oh sir, he that has not a tilde house must be glad of a thatcht house: may I
crave a suite of you signior


What suite Bos?


What you please, beggars must not choose.


Bos is grown mystical, he is too dark.


I speak hebrew indeed like Adam and Eve, before they fell to spinning: not a
rag


What, naked Bos?


As ye see, will ye hear my suite signior?


Drunk and his clothes stolen, what thief would do it?


Any thief sir, but no true man.


Well Bos, to obtain a suite at my hands, and to do some penance for your
fault, you shall here maintain an argument in the defense of drunkenness: mine
Host shall hear it i will be your oppoment, Acutus moderator: will thou do it


A mad merry prig, all good spirits, will thou do it Bos?


I Will do it.


Seat ye, here is my place, now Bos propound.


Drunkenness is a virtue.


Your proof.


Good drink is full of virtue,
Now full of good drink is drunk,
Erge, to be drunk is to be virtuous.

I deny it, good drink is full of vice,
Drink takes away the senses,
Man that is senseless is vicious,
Ergo, good drink is full of vice.

I deny it still, good drink makes good blood,
Good blood needs no Barber,
Ergo, it is good to drink good drink.

He holds ye hard Graccus.


Heeres stronger proof, drunkenness ingenders with two of the morrall
virtues, and six of the lyberall sciences


Let him prove that and I Will yield.


A mad spirit in faith.


A drunkard is valiant and lyberall, heel outface Mars, brave Hercules, and
fears not the Devil, then for the most part he is liberal, for heel give all
the clothes off his back, though he weep like a Widow all the day
following: nay, for the sciences, he is a good physician he vomits himself
rarely, and will give any man else a vomit that looks on him (if he have not
a very good stomach) perfect in Geomitrie, for he hanges in the air by his
own conceit, and feels no ground: and he is all musical, the world turns
round with him, every face in the painted cloth shows like a Fairie dancing
about him, and every spar in the house a minstrell


Good: forward.


Then he is a good Lawyer, for he is never without a fiery facies, and the
least Capias will take his habeas Corpus: besides, another point of a Lawyere,
heel rail and rave against his dearest friends, and make the world think they
are enemies, when the next day they will laugh, be fat and drunk together: and a
rare Astronomer, for he has stars twinkling in his eyes, in the darkest
night, when a wise man discernes none in the firmanent, and will take great
pains in the practice: for lay him on his back in the open fields ouernight,
and you shall be sure to find him there in the morning: have I sed well, or
shall I give you a stronger proof? an honest man will be as good as his word:
Signior Graccus is an honest man, Ergo I must have a new suite


The moderator concludes so, Graccus is ouerthrown so far as the damage of a
suite, so away with him, come, our fire will out, strip us, mine Host and you
we expect your companies, we must crave absence a while, better to furnishe
our purposes: the time of the day to ye


Farwell my good bullies, mine Host has sed and the mouse is dun.


Come Gossip, by my troth I cannot keep my hood in frame.


Let me help ye woman.


Sir, we shall be troublesome to ye.


Oh urge not that I pray ye.


I pray ye what show will be here to night? I have seen the Babones already,
the City of new Niniuie, and Julius Caesar acted by the Mammets


Oh gentlewoman, those are shows for those places they are used in, marry here
you must expect some rare device as Diana bathing her self, being discovered
or occulated, by Acteon, he was tra^figured to a heart, and werried to death
with his own dogs


That's pretty in good truth, and must Diana be naked?


Oh of necessity, if it be that show.


And Acteon too? that's pretty in faith.


Now gallant Bridegroomes, and your lovely Brides,
That have ingeminate, in endless league,
Your troth-plight hearts in your nuptial vows,
Tied true love knots, that nothing can disolue,
Till death that meager purseuant of Jove,
That Cancels all bonds: we are to clowdie,
My spirit a typtoe nothing I could chid so much,
As winged time that gins to free a passage,
To his turrent glass, and crops our daylight
That mistie night will summon us to rest,
Before we feel the burden of our ey-lids.
The time is teadious, wants variety,
But that I may show what delightful raptures,
Combats my soul, to see this union,
And with what boundles joy I do embrace it,
We here command all prison gates fly open,
Freeing all prisoners, (traitors all except,
That poor men's prayers may increase our days,
And writers circle ye with wreathes of bays.

S'foot Accutus lets lay hold of this, to free our captive.


Content; i will prosecute it.


Dread sovereign, heaven witness with me,
With what bended spirit I have attainde
This height of happiness: and how unwillingly,
Till heavens decree, Terentias love, and your
Fair consents, did meet in one, to make
Me Lord thereof: nor shall it add one scruple,
Of high thought to my lowly mind.
Tully is Tully, parentage poor, the best,
An Orator, but equal with the least.

Oh no doubt Accutus, be the attempt,
My peril, his royal promise is past
In that behalf: my sovereign, this Gentleman's
Request, takes hold upon your gatious promise,
For the releasement of a prisoner.

My promise is irreuocable, take it: but what is he and the quality of his
fault


A gentleman, may it please your grace, his fault suspicion, and most likely
innocent


He has freedom, and I prithee let him be brought hither
Perhaps in his presence we shall win some smiles,
For I have noted often in a simple brain
(Only striving to excel it self)
Has corrupted language that has turned
To pleasant laughter, in iuditious ears;
Such may this prove, for now me thinks
Each minute, wanting sport does feeme
As long and teadious, as a fever: but who does know
The true condition of this Accutus?

My Liege, of him something my knowledge,
Can discover, his spirit is free as air,
His temper temperate, if ought's uneven,
His spleen ways down lenity: but how
Stird by reproof, and then he is bitter, and like
His name, Acute, vice to him is a foul eyesore.
And could he stifle it in bitterest words, he would,
And who so offends, to him is parallel,
He will as soon reprove the Caedar state,
As the low shrub.

Nay good Accutus let me not enter the presence:


Oh sir, I assure you your presence will be more acceptable in the presence at
this time, then a far ritcher present: May it please your majesty, this is
the man


Let him stand forward.


Alas we shall see nothing, would I were near now he stands forwards.


What qualities has he Accutus?


Few good ones (may it please you) he handles a comb well, a brush better, and
will drink Down a Dutchman, and has good skill in pricksong


I, i will be sworn, he had when he was my Guest,


Please it your Majesty to command him?


Oh, we can no otherwise so well be pleased.


I beseech your Majesty, I cannot sing.


Nay, your denial will breed but greater expectation of your skill.


I, I, please it your grace to hear? now he begins.


My love can sing no other song, but still complains I did her. etc. I beseech
your Majesty to let me go


With all our heart, Acutus give him liberty.


Go, and for voice sake ye shall sing Ballads in the suburbs, and if ever
hereafter ye chance to purchase a suite by what your friends shall leave ye, or
the credit of your friend, be not drunk again, and give him hard words for his
labor.


What, is it effected Graccus?


I have wrought the fool, Scilicet comes alone, and his Lady keeps the women
company


Tush, we will have a room scantly furnished with lights that shall further it.


What sound is that?


I, would ye so feign enter? i will further it: please it your Majesty to accept
what is not worth acceptance? here are a company to Gratulate these nuptials,
have prepared a show, I fear not worth the sight, if you shall deem to give
them the beholding of it


Else should we wrong their kindness much: Accutus, be it your care to give them
kindest welcome, we cannot recompense their loves without much beholdings


Now for the cunning vizarding of them, and it is done.


Now we shall behold the shows.


Acteon and his Dogs I pray Jupiter.


Sli'd there is one bird I do not like her voice.


By my troth me thought one should be my husband, I could even discern his
voice thorough his vizard


And truly by his head one should be mine.


And surely by his ears one should be my sweet heart.


Accutus, you have deserved much of our love,
But might we not break the law of sport so far,
As to know to whom our thanks is due,
By seeing them unmasked, and the reason of their habits?

Most willingly my Sovereign, i will cause their return.


Oh excellent! now we shall see them unmasked.


In troth I had good hope the foremost had been Acteon when I saw his horns.


Sure the middlemost was my husband, see if he have not a wen in his forehead.


God bless thee noble Caesar, and all these brave bridegroomes with their fine
little dy-doppers, that look before they sleep to throw away their maiden
heads: I am host of the Hobbie, Cornut is my neighbor, but well pull of his
bopeeper, thou't know me by my nose, I am a mad merry grig, come to make thy
grace laugh, sir Scillicet my guest, all true canaries that love iuce of
grapes, god bless thy Majesty


How now mine Host?


Ha, ha, I spy a jest, ha ha, Cornutus, Cornutus.


Nay mine host, heeres a moate in your eye to.


Sl'id I hope they have not served me so: by the torrid you are an ass, a flat
Ass, but the best is I know who did it, it was either you or some body else,
for I was in no company of mankind else, by gad I remember it as well as if it
were done now


Tou shall answer it to my liege, i will not be so misused, ye have a wrong
element, there is fire in my face, we will mount and ascend

I Am misusd the mad comrades have plaide the knaves,
Justice my brave Caesar.

I Will answer ye mine Host: pardon great Caesar,
The intent was merriment, the reason this:
A true brow bends, to see good things amiss,
Men turned to beasts, and such are you mine Host
See you this, this represents a beast,
That cannot see his shame, and such are you mine Host.
I Will show you else, you are a Goat, look here!
Now come you, this is yours, you know it, do you not?
How old are you? are you not a Goat now?
Shall I teach thee how to use a wife and keep her?
In the rank of goodness link her to thy soul,
Divide not indiuidium, be her and she thee,
Keep her from the Serpent, let her not Gad
To every Gossips congregation,
For there is blushing modesty laid out,
And a free reyne to sensual turpitude,
Given out at length and lybidinous acts,
Free chat, each giving counsel and sensure.
Capream maritum facere, such art thou Goat,
Be not so secure: and you my graund Cornutus,
Thou Ram, thou see thy shame a pent-house
To thy eyebrows: do not glory in it, do?
Thou Wilt lie in a Trucklebed, at thy wives bed feet,
And let her go a Gossiping while thou sweepest the ktchin,
Look, she shall witnesses against thee.

My wife there? I must be gone then.


Oh fie, betray not thy self so grossly.


I Pray ye pardon me.


I dare not.


I sir, but afterward may come after claps,
I know the world well enough.

Mischief of the Devil, be man not all beast, do not lie, -- both sheets
do not


I warrant this fellow has as many eyes as a Lamprey, he could never see so
far into the world else


And thou pure ass, mere ass, thy ears become thee well in faith


I think you meant to make a Musition of me, you furnish me with a good ear.


Thou deserudst it, thou't make thy self a Cucckold be it but for company
sake, thou have long ears, and think them horns, thy conceits cuckolds
thee, thou art iealious if thou see thy wives -- With another man's palm

And fool, thy state in that sense is the best: thou art claspt with
simplicity, (a great badge of honesty) for she poor fool has paund her
clothes to redeem thy unthriftiness: be Iealious no more, unless thoult wear
thine ears still, for all shall be well and you shall have your puppie again


Shall I? by my troth I shall be beholding to you then.


Now to ye all, be firmaments to stars,
Be stars to Firmaments, and as you are
Splendent, so be fixed, not wandering, nor
Irregular, both keeping course together,
Shine not in pride, and gorgeous attire,
When clouds do fail, the pole where thou art fixed.
Obey, cherish, honor, be kind enough,
But let them wear no changeable stuff,
Keep them, as shall become your state,
Comely, and to creep ere they go.
Let them partake your joys, and weep with you,
Curle not the snarles that dwell upon these brows,
In all things be you kind of all enough,
But let them wear no changeable stuff.

Fore God a mad spirit.


Will ye believe, what such a biscuit brained fellow as this says? he has a
mouth like a double cannon, the report will be heard all ore the town


I warrant he ran mad for love, because no good face could endure the sight
of him, and ever since he railes against women like a whot shot


Nay, nay, we must have all friends.
Iarring discords are no marriage music,
Throw not Hymen in a cuckstoole, dimple
Your furrowed brows, since all but mirth was meant,
Let us not then conclude in discontent.
Say, shall we all in friendly strain
Measure our paces to bed-ward?

Will Terentia follow?


If Tully be her Leader.


Good bloods, good spirits, let me answer for all, none speak but mine Host,
he has his pols and his aedypols, his times and his tricks, his quirkes and
his quilits, and his demise and dementions, God bless thee Noble Caesar, and
all these brave spirits, I am Host of the Hobby, Cornutus is my neighbor:
Graccus a mad spirit, Accutus is my friend, Sir Scillicet is my guest, al mad
comrades of the true seed of troy, that love juice of Grapes: we are all true
friends, merry hearts live long, let the Pipers strike up i will dance my
cinquepace, cut a loft my brave capers, whirle about my toe, do my tricks
above ground, i will kiss my sweet hostess, make a courtesy to thy grace, God
bless thy Majesty, and the Mouse shall be dun


Come wife, will you dance?


I Will not dance I, must you come to the Court to have horns set on your head?
I could have done that at home


I, I, be ruled at this time, what, for one merry day well find a whole moon
at mid-sommer


Gentles, we thank ye all, the night has spent his youth, and drowsy
Morpheus bids us battle

We will defy him still, we will keep him out
While we have power to do it, sound your lowdest noise,
Set forward to our chamber.

Advance your light.


Good rest to all.


God give your grace God night.



