NAy Rapier, come forth, come forth I say, I Will give thee a crown, though it
be but a cracked one: what wilt not? art so hard to be drawn forth Rapier


S'foot thou shall know that Rapier dares enter: nay Backe-Sword.


Whose this behind me?


It Is Dagger sir; what will you never leave your quarrelling?


Well Sword, Dagger has defended you a good many times; but it is no matter,
another time shall serve: shall I get you out Sword alone, that I may have you
Single-sword


Yes if you will be single Rapier too.


Nay Sword, put the Case of Rapiers aside, that there were two of them, I hope
you were able to buckle with them


I Will tell you what, if I go into the Field with him, hang Sword up if I do
not cut Rapiers points, and lash him when I have done: nay, you shall find
Sword mettle to the very back: 'sfoot, my teeth be an edge at him


If you offer but to thrust toward him Rapier, I Will strike you down.


Hang him, I defy him base Spaniard.


Defy me? sirrah Sword, Rapier spits i'thy face: dare meet me in the
fields, crauenly Capon


Capon?


I Capon, so I say sir.


Why any man may see that thou art well carved Sword; and yet me thinks that
Rapier should not speak of that, for it is an hundred to one if he be not gilt
too


Well Rapier, if thou go into the fields with me, I Will make a Capon of you
before I have done with you, you shall nere come home uncut I Will warrant you


Nay, you shall find Sword a notable Cutter.


He a Cutter? alas he nere went into the fields yet, but he was soundly hackt
before he came ou


Nere talk you of hacking, for it is a hundred to one if you have not the
Foyle-Rapier


'Sfoot if you be so Short-Sword, Rapier nere fears you: come a long.


Nay nere go, for if you do, I Will send one after you, which shall scowre you
both. The Cutler can do it. I have seen him handle you both bravely


The Cutler, Alas we are the best Friends he has, and if it were not for us,
the Cutler might soon shut up his shop


Alas Sword, you need not talk of his shutting up of Shop, and if it had not
been for him, you had broken by this time Sword, Nay, nere talk: For you know
he can hold your nose to the Grind-stone, when he list

And as for you Rapier, you know he brought you up first, and if you had
stayed with him still, it might have been better for you


Better for me? Alas he knew not how to use me.


He used you too well indeed: for when you were with him he furnished you with
Siler and every thing, but now you are worn out of all fashion. You are even
like a Lapwing, you are no sooner Hatched Rapier, but you run abroad
presently from him


Yet I scorn to run away from him.


But it were more wisdom then to stand: For the Cutler is a man as well Armed
as any man I know, and has as good skill ins weapons


Ha Sword, is the wind in that Door? Faith now I see which way you stand
bent Sword, you had rather sleep in a whole skin, then go into the Fields
to try your self


Sir, Sword has been proou'd before now, and yet heel prove himself again
with you, if you dare follow him


Do you hear Sword? If you go, look for Dagger at your backs presently;
For I am a Justice of Peace, and am sworn to keep and defend the Peace


Sir, we will fight, and do you take it in Dudgeon Dagger if you please: if
you once offer to hinder us, I Will so Pummell you Dagger, that you were never
better Pummeld in your life; And howsoever, I hope there is Law against you as
well as others, and Rapier can put up a Case against you


Alas I care not if you were both Plaintifes against me, you shall find
Dagger your Defendant I Will warrant you: I, and if need be, I could put up an
Action of Battery against you


What talk you of Law? Sword scorns to have any other Law then Martial law,
and that upon you Rapier


Away Sword, the Time was indeed when thou wast a notable Swash-buckler, but
now thou art grown old Sword


I, you do well, to excuse his Cowardice.


Why Sir, it is well known that Sword has flourisht in his days.


Flourisht? in faith Sir I, I have seen Sword hang with nothing but Scarffes ere
now


With Scarffes? with a Halter, if he had been well seru'de, For he is a notable
Thief


A Thief?


I, a Thief. Did you nere hear of Cutting-Dicke, this is the very same man.


Nay Rapier, nere hit Sword ith teeth with that: for you know you were both
Indicted for treason before now, and were in danger to be hanged, and drawn too,
and had escapt well if you had not been quarterd


I hope knows how to keep his quarters


You are a crafty Fox Sword: It were well if you knew how to keep your
friendship too, for Gentlemen and Friends should not fall out


Rapier a Gentleman?


A Gentleman? and has Arms.


But me thinks Sword by the very sounding of his Name should be the better
Gentleman, and has the better Arms too: for if the truth were well known,
Rapier has but one arm


Sword bear Arms? He Is a base companion. Alas I have known you bear a
Basket Sword


If you look ith book of Armorie, I Will warrant you, you shall find Sword of
more antiquity then you Rapier: He deriues his Pedigree from Morglay, Beuis
of South-hamptons sword; and that from S. George his sword, that killd the
Draggon


I, the draggon in Sussex, the other day: But I Will warrant you Rapiers of as
good a blood as he for his heart


Byth mass, I think indeed, you are both well sanguind. Your both of one
blood, only there is this difference, that sword coms of the elder brother, and
you Rapier of the yo^ger


And oftentimes the younger brother proves the better Soldier.


Nay, Dagger will defend you both for good Soldiers.


Rapier a Soldier? When did you ere know Rapier fight a Battle?


Yes Rapier is a Soldier, and a Man as well Armed at all points as any one.


No, no, its Sword that is the notable Soldier; Why, there is none of all you
Captains could do any thing in War without him


I hope Rapier has not been at Fencing-Schoole all this while for nothing.


Alas there is none Master of Defense but Dagger: But yet if you speak of
Soldiers, the'rs Bow, Bill, and Gunne, worth twenty such as we are


Indeed they say that Bow has bin an old Soldier.


Yet he is not fit for a Soldier, any man may bend him as he list.


And as for Bow-string, I dare undertake to whip him my self.


Then let me alone to tickle Bows ownes nocke in faith.


But what say you to Bill? he is a notable sturdy villain.


Bill, I Will pay him soundly, if ere I reach him.


Its more then you can do, I Am affraide; For Bill's a Tall-fellow ons hands,
and will quickly be Wood: and then there is Gunne, such another Bouncing-fellow
too


Gunne, Alas he is Nobody: any little Boy will make him roar.

I have made him go off 'oth Fields, a good many times my self.


Well, is Gunne No-bodie? I Am sure heel give some blows sometimes.


Its' nere but when Powder ouercharges him, then indeed heel be somewhat hot
oath matter


I think that Powder is a vile bragger, he does nothing but crack.


Faith I know not what Soldier he is, but they say, He Is an excellent
pollitician


He a Pollitician?


Why, he has an excellent wit?


Pish, Its nothing but a flash.


I Am sure I can remember since he was a Parlement-man.


He a Parlement-man: For what Shyre?


Nay ber-lady, it was for the whole Country.


I wonder they should choose him: Why he does every thing on the sudden.


Oh he plottes shrevvdly. If they had not looked too it, He had undermined the
whole parlement-house


I but he is Nobody now-adayes, He Is blovvne up long ago.


Well, if either you, or any body else should meet with Powder, yet its a
hundred to one, if he meet not with his match


Nay, you should let him alone Dagger, and you should see that Swords' as
notable a bragger as Powder. He thinks he shall nere be matched too: but he
shall, and ouer-matcht too, by Rapier; I vvarrant him. Come Sword, after your
long Parley, Dare you go into the Fields


Dare I? You shall soon see that: Go, and I Will follovv you.


Well said, desperate Dicke. Sword, You may be ashamed to offer it. You know
you are tvvo-handed- Sword, and Rapier has but one hand (unless I help him)
to do any good vvithall, and yet youde have him go into the Fields with you.
Come, there is neither of you shall go. Do not you know that Duells are put
down

You Will be bound to the Peace ever heere-after, if you strike but one stroke.
Therefore you had best let me decide your controversy for you


Why, you are a backe-Friend to us both Dagger.


Nay, you know I Am equally allied to you both, and therefore shall prove an
impartial Judge: How say you, will you be ruled by me


Nay let him choose, Rapiers at a good point, whether he will or no.


Why are are you so long Sword before you speak?


Are duells put down? Then I am forc'de to be Friends: Speak then.


Then in brief it shall be thus. Sword, you shall bear Chief force ith
Camp, and be made General of the Field, to bear sway every where. As for you
Rapier, since Duells are put down, you shall live quietly and peaceably here
'ith Court, and go every day in Velvet: You shall be Friends with every one,
and be on every ones side, that if occasion serve, and Sword be absent, so
that matters are driven to a push, Rapier shall be the only man to perform a
Combat: And I my self will back you both, as occasion shall serve

How say ye, are ye content?


We are.


Then go before to my House, to the Dagger in Cheap: and there we will conclude
all


A Long-Sword.


Our weapons drawn, and yet no hurt ye find,
Did Dagger then defend unto your mind?
He that defended others not long sense,
At last he dares not stand ins own defense;
But this he hopes, with you it will suffize,
To crave a pardon for a Scholars Prize.


