THough I a goddess glance through th'azure round,
Whilst the eie-feather'd birds my coach do move:
And am with radiant stars heavens Empress crowned,
The sister, and the wife of thundering Jove.
And though I banquet in the Aetheriall bowres,
Where Ambrosie and Nectar serves for meat:
And at the meeting of the immortal powers,
Am still advanced unto the highest seat:
Yet by those glorious shows of boundless bliss,
My martred mind can no way be relieved,
Since immortality affords but this,
That I may ever live being ever grieved.
In vain, vain mortals seek for help at me,
With Sacred odours on my Altars thrown:
What expectation can they have to see,
One venge their wrongs, that cannot venge her own?
Might Pallas once drown thousands in the seas.
And metamorphose Diomedes mates?
And must mine enemies always live in ease,
As me to spite, appointed by the fates?
Of all the dying race that lives below,
With such indignities none could comport,
As wound my breast, whom gods and men do know
To be abusde by Jove in many a sort.
Though known to me, from others if concealde,
His faults might breed me grief, but yet not shame:
Where lo, now both through heaven and earth reuealde,
Each standerous Theater does his scorn proclaim.
If heavenly souls divinely lived aloft,
Th'inferior world would imitate them then:
But humaniz'd by hanting mortals often,
Where men should grow like gods, gods grow like men.
My painted Iris in her beauties pride,
Smiles not on Phoebus with so many hues:
As Jove in diverse shapes himself can hide,
When he poor maids by Cupid spurred pursues.
He Danae in a golden shower deceiude,
And did a Swanne in Ledaes bosom light,
Then being a Bull Agenors daughter reau'd,
And Io made a Cow to mock my sight.
But would to god that with such wanton dames,
He still to sport would as with me remain,
Not able then t'imbrace celestial flames,
All like the drunkards mother might be slain.
Then such a troop as Rhea^ bosom stores,
Would not hold him and me at endless iarres:
The heavens are pestred with my husbands whores,
Whose lights impure, do taint the purest stars.
All injuries are heavy to digest,
Yet th'actors greatness does some grief remove:
Of whom to suffer wrong it shames one least;
If I were wrongde, I would be wrongde by Jove.
But (ah) this long has tirraniz'd my breast,
A man, a boy, a shepherd, yea and worse,
The Phrygian firebrand, the adultrous guest,
That first wrought wrong by fraud and then by force.
He, he, was he whose verdict moved me most,
Whilst it on Ida wronged my beauties right;
No wonder too though one all judgment lost,
That had three naked goddesses in sight.
And yet I know were not his wandering eyes,
The Ciprian bribde by some lascivious smiles,
My pompous birds in triumph through the skies,
Had borne the gold that often her nymphs beguiles.
Am not I she whose greatness is admirde,
Whom Jove for wife, whom thousands court for love?
Whom haughty Ixion once t'imbrace desirde,
Yet with a cloud deluded did remove.
What needed me a matter to submit,
Where my authority might have auailde?
Whilst though I promisde wealth, and Pallas wit,
Yet with a young man Venus gift preuaild.
But how durst he t'ones pleasure thus give place,
Where two contemnd their honor would repair?
Is not our Sex impatient of disgrace?
Of which there is none, but loves to be thought fair.
T'auenge my self no kind of pain I sparde,
And made his greatest gain his greatest loss:
As Venus gave him Helen for reward,
I gave him Helen for his greatest cross.
Nor did he long her love with joy enjoy,
Whose faithless flames his country did confound:
Whilst armies armed, for her did Troy destroy,
And leuel'd Neptunes labors with the ground.
Whilst Simois seem'de to be a burial field,
Whose streams as streets were with dead bodies pau'd
All Xanthus plain as turnde t'a sea did yield
A flood of blood, from Heroes wounds received
By brauing thousands once though much esteemed,
By dust and blood deformed, of Hector slain
(Nor like Patrocius by the sword redeemed)
The body basely was bought back again.
Then by the same man's son that killed his son,
The old Priamus surprizde sighed forth his breath:
And being most harmed where he for help had run,
Whilst taking The Altar, taken was by death;
Though wrestling long t'auoide the heavens decree,
By the enemies sword being parted from the light,
He that l^u'de Helen, and was loath de by me,
Di'd as a sacrifice to appease my spite.
Last having lived (if misery be a life)
T'entombe all hers, that high mishaps had tried
Though once being both, nor mother then, nor wife,
The fertile Hecub', as being barren did.
Thus by those means it would have seemed to some,
That my scornde beauty had bin highly vengde:
But whilst they were ore-com'd they did ore-come,
Since they for better states their states have changde.
I in one part, that people did confound,
But did enlarge their power in every place:
Al warlike nations through the world renowned,
Now from the Phrygian ruins raise their race.
And yet two traitors that betraide the rest,
(O heavens, that treason thus should prosper whiles)
Of the Dardanian race did chance the best,
More happy then at home in their exiles.
Did not Antenor stealing through his foes,
Near to the Euganian mountains build a town,
Of which some nurslings once shall seek repose
Amidst the waves, and in the depths sit down?
Their city spousing Neptune, shall arise
The rarest commonwealth that ever was.
Whose people, if as stowt, as rich and wise,
Might boast to bring miraculous things to pass.
Then false Aeneas (though but borne to obey)
Did of a fugitive become a King:
And some of his near Tibers streams that stay,
Would all the world to their obedience bring.
Their ravenous Eagles soaring over all lands,
By violence the imperial prey have won:
That bastard brood of Mars with martial bands,
Have conquered both the mansions of the Sun.
Their course by mountains could not be controlde,
No, Neptune could not keep his bosom free.
Th'antartike heat, nor yet the artike cold,
No limits to their legions could decree.
O of that city there could come no good,
Whose rising walls with more than barbarous rage,
The builder first bathed with his brothers blood,
Which their prodigious conquests did presage.
That town has often my soul with anguish filld,
Whose newborn state often triumphed over my wrath:
Like my old foe that in his cradle killd,
The serpents that I sent to give him death.
By Sabins, Albans, Tuscans often assailde,
Even in her infancy I tossde Romes state:
Yet still Laomedons false race preuailde,
And angry Juno could do naught but hate.
Then when the gallant Gauls had vanquished Rome,
That basely bought her liberty with gold:
A banished man Camillus chauncde to come,
And her imballanc'd state redeemde of old.
Great Hanniball our common cause pursude,
And made his bands within their bounds remain,
With Consuls and with Praetors bloods imbrude,
At Thrasimene and at Cannes slain.
In Romans minds strange thoughts did fear infuse
That did attend the taking of their town:
But he that vanquish could, not victory use,
Was by their brazen destiny thrown down.
O what a torrent of Barbarians once,
Inunding over the Alps their walls did bost,
Whilst Teutons and the Cimbers big of bones,
Like giants marched a more than monstrous host.
But though from unknown parts to ruin Rome,
I led those troops that all the world admirde,
Yet did the tyrant Marius them overcome,
And I in vain to venge old wrongs aspirde.
By baser means I likewise sought her harms,
Whilst Ianus church imported never peace,
I raisde up abject Spartacus in arms,
That near eclipsde Romes glory with disgrace.
Though I that all the world for help have sought,
From Europe, Affrike, and from Asia thus:
Gauls, Carthaginians, and Cimbers brought,
Yet did the damage still redound to us.
Of heaven and earth I all the powers have proved,
And for their wrack have each advantage watched:
But they by foreign force could not be moved,
By Romans, Romans only may be matched.
And I at last have kindled civil war,
That from their thoughts which now no reason bounds,
Not only laws, but Natures laws does bar,
The son the sire, the brother brother wounds.
Whilst th'Eagl^s are opposde to th'Eagles so,
O what contentment does my mind contain:
No wround is wrong bestowed, each killes a foe,
What ever side does lose I always gain.
But this my soul exceedingly annoyes,
All are not subject to the like mis-hap:
The war helps some as others it destroys,
And those that hate me most, have still best hap.
Whilst with their blood their glory thousands spend,
Ah, ones advancement aggrauates my woe:
That vaunts himself from Venus to descend,
As if he claimd by kind to be my foe.
I mean the man whose thoughts naught can appease
Whilst them too high a blind ambition bends,
Whom as her minion Fortune bent to please,
Her rarest treasures prodigally spends.
Not only has he daunted by the sword,
The Gauls, the Germans, and the Egyptians now,
But of all lords pretends to be made lord,
That who command the world to him may bow.
Thus dispossessing princes of their thrones,
Whilst his ambition nothing can assuage:
That the subjected world in bondage groans,
The prey of pride, the sacrifice of rage.
Men rail on Jove, and sigh for Saturnes time,
And to the present still The Age past prefer:
Then burden would the gods with every crime,
And damn the heavens where only the earth does err.
Though Jove as stupid still with Cupid sportes,
And not the humor of proud Caesar spies:
That may (if forcing thus the worlds chief forts)
More powrefull than the Titans scale the skies.
Yet lest he thrall him too that none free leaves,
We from the bounds above must him repel:
To brawle with Pluto in th'vmbragious caves,
There since he will be first made first in hell.
What? with that tyrant I will strait be even,
And send his soul to the Tartarian grove:
For though Ione be not jealous of his heaven,
Yet Juno must be jealous of her Jove;
And though none in the heauem would do him ill,
He raise up some in the earth to haste his death;
Yea though both heaven and earth neglect my will,
Hell can afford me ministers of wrath.
I Will cross Cocytus and the smoking lakes,
To borrow all my brothers damned bands:
The Furies armed with firebrands and with snakes,
Shall plant their hell where Rome so stately stands.
Whilst by my fury Furies furious made,
Do spare the dead to have the lilting pined:
O with what joy will I that army lead?
Naught than revenge more sweet t'a wronged mind.
I Will once make this a memorable age,
By this high vengeance that I have conceived:
But what though thousands die to appease my rage?
So Caesar perish, let no soul be saved.

WE should be grieved to offend the gods,
That hold us in a balance still;
And as they will,
May weigh us up or down,
Those that by folly engender pride,
And do deride
The terror of th'eternalls rods,
In seas of sin their souls do drown.
And others but abhor them as unjust,
Those that religion want deserve no trust.
How dare frail flesh presume to rise?
Whilst it deserves heavens wrath to prove,
On th'carth to move,
Lest that it opening straight,
Give death and burial both at once:
How dare such ones
Look up unto the skies,
For fear to feel the thunders weight?
All the elements th'immortalls will attend,
And are as prompt to plague as men to offend.
None scapes some plague that gods displease:
Then whilst he Bacchus rites did scorn,
Was Pentheus torn:
The Delians high disdain
Made Niobe though turned t'a stone,
With tears still moan,
And Pallas spite to appease,
Arrachne weaues loathd webbes in vain.
Heaven has preparde or ever they begin,
A fall for pride, a punishment for sin.
Lo Juno yet does still retain,
That indignation once conceived,
For wrong received,
From Paris as we find,
And for his cause, bent to disgrace
The Troyan race,
Does hold a high disdain,
Long laid up in a lofty mind,
We should abstain from irritating those,
Whose thoughts (if wronged) not till reuengde repose:
Thus those for Paris fond desire,
That of his pleasures had no part,
For them must smart,
Such be the fruits of lust.
Can heavenly breasts so long time lodge,
A secret grudge,
Like mortals thrall to ire,
Tilll Justice whiles does seem unjust?
Of all the furies that afflict the soul,
Lust and revenge are har dest to control:
The gods give them but rarely rest,
That do against their will contend,
And plagues do spend
That fortunate in naught
Their sprites being parted from repose,
May still expose
Th'vpbraiding troubled breast,
A prey to each tyrannicke thought:
All selfe-accusing souls no rest can find,
What greater torment than a, troubled mind:
Let us adore the immortal powers,
On whose decree, of every thing
The State does hing,
That far from barbarous broiles,
We of our life this little space
May spend in peace,
Free from afflictions showers,
Or at the least from guilty toiles,
Let us of rest the treasure strive t'attaine,
Without the which naught can be had but pain.
NOw have my hopes attained th'exspected haven,
In spite of partial enuies poisnous blasts:
My fortune with my courage has proou'd even,
No monument of miscontentment lasts.
Those that corriualld me, by me orethrowne,
Did by their falls give feathers to my flight:
I rather in some corner live unknown,
Than shine in glory, and not shine most bright,
What common is to two, rests no morerare,
No Phaenix is in all the world save one:
Grieved of my deeds that any claims a share,
Would God that I had acted all alone.
And yet at last I need to mourn no more,
For envy of the Macedonians praise;
Since I have equalld all that went before,
My deeds in number do exceed my days.
Some erst, (whose deeds rest registered by fame,)
Did from their conquests glorious titles bring:
But greatness to be great must have my name,
It Is more to be a Caesar than a King.
Those warlike nations that did nations spoil,
Are by thy legions now, to our laws made thrall;
What can not virtue do by time and toil,
True magnanimity triumphs over all.

Th'outragious Gauls that in most monstrous swarms,
Went wasting Asia, thundering down all things;
And marching over the Macedonians arms,
Did insolently make and unmake kings.
Those Gauls that having the worlds conq'rors foild,
As if the world might not have matched them then,
Would sacrilegiously have Delphos spoild:
And warrd against the gods, contemning men,
Yea those whose ancestors our city burned.
The people that the Romans only feared:
By me Romes nursling matched and orematchtmurn'd,
So what they first eclipsd again they cleared.
Then as to subjects having given decrees,
I left the Gauls their rash attempts to rue:
And wounding Neptunes bosom with winged trees,
The world divided Britains did subdue.
The Germans from their birth inurde to war,
Whose martial minds still haughty thoughts have bred,
Whilst neither men nor walls my course could bar,
Masked with my banners saw their Rhene run red,
And th'orientall realms amidst of late,
My coming and orecomming was but one:
With little pain so Pompey was called great,
That warrd with those whose glorious days were gone:
But what though thousands setones praises forth,
For fields which shadows and not swords obtaind;
Yet th'easie rate but vilifies the worth,
No glory without labor can be gained.
From dangers past my comfort now proceeds,
Since all difficulties I did ore come:
And in few words to comprehend my deeds,
Rome conquered all the world, and Caesar Rome.

Lo, those that striu'de your virtue to suppress,
And were opposde to all your actions still:
Whilst laboring but too much to make you less,
Have made you to grow great against your will.
Great Pompeys pomp is past, his glory gone,
And austere Cato by himself lies killd:
Than dastard Cicero more you honors none,
Thus all your foes are with confusion filld.
The Senators whose wrath could not b'affwag'd,
Long to your prejudice their power abusde,
Till at their great ingratitude enraged,
I said our swords would grant what they refusde.
When having escaped, endangered, and despisde,
That Curio' and I did to your camp resort,
In old bare gowns like some base slaves disguisde,
All sighed to see us wronged in such a sort.

The Inhabitants of heaven that know all hearts,
They know my thoughts as pure as are their stars:
And that constrainde I came from foreign parts,
To seem uncivil in the civil wars.
I mooude that war which all the world bemones,
Being vrgde by force to free my self from fears:
Still when my hand gave wounds, my heart gave groans,
No Romans blood was shed, but I shed tears.
But how could any cleuated spright,
That had for honor hazarded his blood;
Yet yield by froward foes outrageous spite,
To be defrauded of the expected good.
When as a multitude of battles won,
Had made Romes Empire, and my glory great;
And that the Gauls (often vanquishde) had begun
To Embrace the yoke that they disdainde of late.
Then pompous Pompey, my proud son in law,
And Cato, that still crossde what I designde,
From favoring me the people did withdraw,
And unto me a successor assignde.
Not that he should succeed in dangerous broils,
But even through envy, as they had ordained,
That he might so triumph of all my toils,
And rob the glory that I dearly gained.
Could one with such indignities comport,
That values honor deerer then the light?
No, (whilst my soul rests sovereign of this fort)
None shall have power to rob me of my right.
And yet by Jove, that all the world commands,
T'vse any violence I did mislike:
And offered often t'abandon all my bands,
If that my enemies would have done the like.
But the tumultuous multitude that still
As waves with winds are carried with conceits,
With naught but my disgrace would bound their will,
And I committed all unto the fates.
Yet when at Rubicon I stood perplexed,
And weighed the horror of my high attempt,
My soul was with a thousand fancies vexed,
Which resolution buried in contempt.

Naught in a captainc more confounds his foes,
Then sudden resolutions swift effects;
For so surpised ere they their thoughts dispose,
All good advice prodigious care neglects.
Though when you marched toward Rome, your power
The sudden news so thundered in each ear: (was small,
That (as if heaven had fallen upon them all,)
They bred amazement, and th'amazement fear,
Some secret destiny as then appeared,
Does guide mensactions and their judgments bounds,
Them whom huge armies could not once have fearde:
A shadow or a rumor whiles confounds.
Is It that th'encroaching danger dulles their sprits.
And does prevent their resolutions power,
Or that some destiny distracts their wits,
When heavens determined have their fatal hour?
Pompey the great that was grown aged in arms,
And had triumphed over all the worlds three parts
(Being quite discouraged with imagined harms)
Fled Rome, though without reach of the enemies darts.
Then as t'a torrent all gave place to you,
Rome whom she called a rebel made her Lord:
Your successor Domitius forced to bow,
Did trust your favor more than fear your sword.
When in the Iberian bounds you did arrive,
There th'aduersarie that did vaihely vaunt,
Had all the advantage that the ground could give,
And wealth of vittailes that with us were scant.
Yet the celeritie that you had used
Did so discourage their disordered band,
That (as Jove in their breasts had fear infusde,)
They had no strength against our strokes to stand.
And when Romes general with brave Legions storde
Seemed to possess all that his soul requirde,
Whilst us t'ouerthrow both famine and the sword,
The sea, the land, and all in one conspirde;
Then for your offices they did contend,
As those that of the victory were sure:
And where they might the affairs of state attend
In Rome, for lodgings fondly did procure.
Yet memorable now that day remains,
When all the world was in two armies ranged:
That Mars went raging through the Aemathian plains,
And to dispaires high expectations changed.
That famous field when the Pompeyans lost,
(As Lions do their prey) you did pursue
The scattred remnant of that ruined host,
On which new heads still like to Hydra grew.
Though victory in Affricke fatal seem'de
To any army that a Scipio led;
Yet you showed there, for worth in war esteemed
That Rome a better then a Scipio bred:
And all our enemies were confounded thus,
That us in number ever did surmount;
But Caesar and his fortune were with us,
Which we did more than many thousands count.

The sweetest comfort that my conquests gave,
It was the mean how to do many good;
For every day some Romans life I save,
That in the field to fight against me stood.
Thus may my mind be judged by the event,
That (even when by my greatest foes assailde)
To win the battle never was more bent,
Then promptto pardon when I had preuailde.
Not covetous of blood of spoils nor harms,
I (though being victor) did insult over none,
But laid aside all hatred with my arms,
A foe in fight, a friend when it was gone.
I like the praise of clemency, more then
Of force, that with affliction the enemy lodes,
For force proves often the worst thing that is in men,
And clemency the best thing in the gods.
Stern Cato, but by Cato that would die,
And either death or life, if given disdained;
O, I envy thy death that did envy,
The glory that I saving thee had gaind'.
Yet I to rents and dignities restore
Even those that my destruction had designde:
And O, it does delight my mind far more
By benefits then by constraint to bind.

I would have all my foes brought to their ends.


I rather have my foes all made my friends.


Their blood whom I suspect'd should quench all strife.


So might one do that liked of naught but life.


Still life would be redeemde from dangers forth.


Not with a ransom then it self more worth.


Than life to man, what thing more dear succeeds?


The great contentment that true glory breeds.


Men by all means this blast of breath prolong.


Men should strive to live well, not to live long.
And I would spend this momentarie breath,
To live by fame for ever after death*
For I aspire in spite of fates to live.

I fear that some too soon your death contriue.


Who dare but lodge such thoughts within their minds.


Those that the shadow of your greatness blindes.


The best are bound to me by gifts in store.


But to their country they are bound far more.


Then loath they me as the enemy of the state?


You as th'vsurper of the same they hate.


I by huge battles have enlarged their bounds.


By that they think your power to much abounds.


Yet I from doing wrong refrain my will.


They fear your power, because it may do ill.


The present state still miscontentment brings
To factious minds affecting matters strange,
That burdens to themselves irke of all things;
And so they change, regard not what they change:
In populous towns where many make repair,
(Whose confluence by conference all things touch)
They further than their bounds extend their care,
The idle that do nothing, must think much.
Lo, Rome (though wasted all with civil wars,
Whilst private grudge pretended public good;
And that equality engendring iarres,
Did prove too prodigal of Roman blood;)
Yet having through huge toils attained to rest,
That it by yielding the one may banish tears:
It if constrained disdaines t'imbrace the best,
This word necessity so wounds the ears.
And th'insolent with vile seditious words,
That trembled whilst they heard the trumpets sound:
Stir now their tongues, as we did then our swords,
And what Mars sparde, make Mercury confound.
The people thus in time of peace agree,
T'abase the greatest still, even in that form
As in calm days they do disbranch the tree,
That shrouded them of late against a storm.
But now I looked for liberty to bost,
That once my deeds triumphed had over envy:
As all dark shadows do evanish most,
Then when the Sun shines highest in the sky:
And though their hatred deeply they disguise,
Yet they conceal not so their souls desires:
But that their spite rest sparkling through their eyes,
And bosts to burst out once in open fires.

Since first (great Caesar) I discernd thy worth,
On all thy actions I did still attend:
And therefore what some whisper, I Will speak forth,
T'admonish freely it becomes a friend.
Since first men did suspect that you aspire
T'a Monarchy, the government to change;
They in their souls your ruin do conspire,
And their affections far from you estrange.
Since chaste Lucretia by proud Tarquin stained,
Washed with her blood the violated bed,
Whilst by his power supreme Rome was constrained
All things to obey, that his cursed brain had bred.
This government which some tyrranick call,
It sounds so odious in the peoples ears,
As Tyrants vild, that they detest them all
Whose greatness gives them any cause of fears.

I not affect the title of a king,
For love of glory, or desire of gain,
Nor for respect of any private thing,
But that the state may by my travels gain.
You know Sibillaes books that never fail,
In many minds have an opinion bred:
That over the Parthians Rome cannot prevail,
Till by a sovereign prince her bands be led.
For as confusion is the fruit we find
Of those affairs that diverse thoughts dispose;
So sovereignty matched with a gallant mind,
Breeds reverence in ones own, fear in his foes.
And, O it greeues me that these steps of ours,
Have trod so often on many a millions necks,
Whilst yet the Parthian vilipends our powers,
And all our victories vnuanquish'd checkes.
Ah, should a General of the Roman race
Be by Barbarians killd, and not revenged?
And should his ensigns, signs of our disgrace,
Rest in the rank of conquered relikes ranged?
No, no, wretch'd Crassus, now thy self content,
I Will pacify thy ghost with Parthians spoils:
For still my boiling fancies have bin bent
T'ore-match th'vnmatch'd, and daunt th'vndaunted soiles

With victories being cloyd, will you not then
Your saftie once, more then new wars respect?

No, though I have surmounted other men,
My fancies yet do greater things affect:
In emulation of my self at last,
Even enuiouslie I look on mine own deeds;
And bent to make the new surpass things past,
Now to my mind old praise no pleasure breeds.

The world has seen thee (great man) for Romes good,
In danger often of many a dangerous shelfe:
Whilst for her glory thou engaged thy blood,
Of others careful, careless of thy self.

Though whilst in th'April of my blooming age,
I from the vulgar rate redeemd my name,
Some with my deeds did burden youths hot rage,
And an ambitious appetite of fame.
Yet since the coldness of declining years
Bosts to congeale the blood that boild of late,
Whilst else my life the sun of glory cleares,
That now of all the world remain most great.
I cannot covet that thing which I have,
I have all honor that can be requirde.
And now (as the only wanted thing) would crave,
To taste the pleasures of a life retyrde.
But only now t'aduance the state I strive,
For, O neglecting th'ecchoes of renown
I could content my self unknown to live
A private man, with a Plebeian gown.
Since (Anthony) thus for the state I care,
And all delights that nature loves disdain:
Go, and in time the peoples minds prepare,
That as the rest, I may the title gain.
Yet indirectly at the first, assay
To what their doubtful minds do most incline:
But as without my knowledge, that they may
All mark your mind, and yet not think of mine.

DId I survive th'impetuo us Sillaes rage,
And in a torrent of destruction stood:
Whilst tyrants did make Rome a tragic stage,
Through a voluptuous appetite of blood?
Escaped I confusion in a time so bad,
Of liberty and honor once to taste,
That bondage now might make my soul more sad,
By the remembrance of my fortunes past?
What though I once (when first by same made known)
From Catilines strange treason did preserve
This town, that is still endangerd by her own,
Since first the world from equity did swerve?
A spark of that conspiracy remains,
Not yet extinguished to have our state imbroyld;
That now on Rome flames of confusion raines,
Thus one was sparde that we might all be spoild.
O worthy Cato, in whose wondrous mind,
Three rarely matched things Nature did reveal:
Wit, honesty, and courage which designde
A citizen for Platoes commonweal.
Whilst courteous Pompey did things as a friend,
Thou as a wiseman spoke, and still foretold,
To what all Caesar's deeds would turn in the end,
If that his pride were not in time controlde.
And had we him as wisely thou aduisde,
Given to the Germans whom he had injured:
We had not now bin thus like slaves despisde,
To see Romes glory, and our own obscured.
But yet I may disbending former cares,
A space comport with that proud tyrants powers;
Age gives assurance by my witherd hairs,
That death will seal my surety in few hours.
Yet ye whose youth and sprite might have attaind
Those dignities that Caesar has undone:
O ye have lost as much as he has gaind,
Whose rising hopes must be retrenched so soon.
Though innouations at the first seem strange,
Yet often experience approbation brings:
And if with upright thoughts we weigh this change,
On it the safety of our city hings.
As in the depths dashed with redoubling waves,
A ship by different minds rests more imbroilde,
So was our city plag'd with diverse laws,
By th'all-confounding multitude turmoilde.
As whilst the one sickness diverse drugges are used,
Whose powers repugnant in digestion jar:
The Impatient patients fancies rest confusde,
So did we long distressd with civil war.
But now great Caesar from tempestuous winds,
Romes scattred ruins recollects of late:
A Pilote meet to calm tumultuous minds,
A doctor fit for a distemperd state.

The state from storms secure by drowning proves,
Now whilst despair does doubtful fears appease:
He with the life th'infirmitie remoues,
Thus is the physic worse than the disease.
This commonweal (as whiles the world did spy)
Though some proud sprites in civil wars inuolu'd,
Yet like black clouds that would obscure the sky,
Their tumid humors suddenly dissolved.
And no disgrace to our government redounds,
But to the ambitious that had it abusde:
Who (had their power like Caesar's wanted bounds)
Had whilst they ruled a greater rigor used.
There in all parts are people of all kinds,
And as aduauncde some bad men did abide,
Of power their equals, and of better minds,
Some always virtuous were to curb their pride.
But since that sacred liberty was lost,
The public power t'a private use one turns:
And as his lawless ways did always bost,
The common weal by violence ore-turnes.

Though what you burden Caesar with were true,
Him of all crime Necessity has cleared:
That was foes force t'eschew, forcde to pursue,
Whilst by contempt t'attempt great things being cheerd:
To the enemies envy more obliged he rests,
Then to his own wit that no such courses scand,
Till by being barrd from using of requests,
Not looked for means were offered to command.
All to mount high his haughty thoughts did tempt,
True worth disdaines to suffer open wrong:
And a great courage kindled by contempt,
Must by revenge be quenched whilst rage makes strong.

O Decius, now a wrong account you cast,
The Intent; and not the event defines the mind:
Tread back the steps of all his actions past,
And at the mark he hit all aimed we find
As by some sprite inspirde proud Scilla said,
That there in Caesar many Marians were:
And Rome was warned in time to be afraid
Of the euill-girded youth, with smoothe-comb'd hair.
Then when (as still to quietness a foe,)
The memory of Marius he renewd:
By re-erecting tyrants statues so,
His thoughts all bent to tyranny were viewd.
That people-pleaser might have bin perceived,
By courteous complements beneath his rank;
That lauishing forth gifts the world deceived,
And to gain more than his, of his proou'd frank.
Though naught at all indulgent to his wife,
By prostrated pudicitie disgracde:
Yet did he save th'adultrous Clodius life,
To soothe the multitude whose steps he tracde.

These be the means by which ambition mounts,
Without most humble, when most high within:
And as it fled from that thing which it hunts,
Still wasting most, when most it minds to win.

And he that still strived tyranny to embrace,
Was thought conioynd with Catilin to be;
And had wise Catoes counsel taken place,
Had with the rest received his death by me.
Yet having suncke himself in some men's souls,
He with his partial faction suting often:
Did get the consulship which naught controules,
And matching pride with power did look aloft.
To flatter them that now must flatter him,
His power t'aduaunce unlawful laws preuaild:
And those to cross that scornd he so should clime,
He furnished was with Force, where Reason faild.
But yet because he could not well b'assur'd,
T'act all alone according to his will;
To govern France he craftily procurde,
So to be strengthened with an army still;
As Rome first warred at home till being made strong,
She thought her self of power the world t'orecome:
So Caesar warred against strange nations long,
Till that he thought his might might conquer Rome.
Then having all that force or fate assigns,
He cause of coffeehouse did pretend;
So to dissemble fore-conceiu'd designs,
One soon may find a fault that seeks to offend.
But when he first in a prodigious dream
His mother seemde incestuously to use:
It might have shown to his eternal shame,
How he the bounds that bare him went to abuse.

And yet I think avoiding threatened harms,
He was constraind t'imbarke in civil broiles:
Did he not covenant to quit his arms,
As not desirous of his countries spoils?

Durst he with those that had his charge confind,
Stand to prescribe conditions as their mate;
Where to have attended and obeyed their mind,
It was his duty, and their due of late.
What? what? durst he, whom borne to obey the law,
The people all did willingly promote;
The sword which they bad given, against them draw,
When it was sharpened first to cut their throat?
That had not com'd which all our anguish breeds,
If he vnforcde, when as his charge expirde,
Till that the Senate censurde had his deeds,
Had from his province peaceably retirde.
No, he has but betrayed his native town,
Those bands by which she did him first prefer;
T'extend her borders, and his own renown,
Those has he used to tyrannize over her.
My passions (ah transported as you see,
With an excessive love to my dear soil,)
Have made my tongue of my hearts-store too free,
By flaming forth what in my breast does boil.

That Ceasars part might justly be excusde,
Lo, with the cause alleadgd his course accords:
Of which th'humanitie that he has used,
A testimony to the world affords.
Though forcde to fight, he always had great care,
To save our Citizens as each man knows;
And bade his captains still all Romans spare,
But on Barbarians bodies spend their blows.
Of th'aduersaries after bloody strife,
When of the might have made some captives smart:
Not only was he liberal of their life,
But pardond them still to take Pompeys part.
Even at th'infortunate Pharsalian field,
When he securely might have used the sword:
He both did spare all the enemies that would yield,
And them to rents and dignities restord.
Then when th'Aegyptians so t'obtaine relief,
Brought to his sight pale Pompeys bloodlesse head;
He testified with tears his inward grief,
And gracde his statues after he was dead.
Those his proceedings might appear t'approue,
That he against his will maintained this war;
And to his country bears a tender love,
That could comport to reine his rage so far.

Those counterfeited favors which he show,
According to ones custom that aspires,
Were spent on many as the world might view,
T'insinuate himself in their desires.
But where he thus spared some, he spoild' whole hosts
And the Barbarians all to Rome not wrought
Such harm as he that of his goodness boasts,
Yet her best men has to confusion brought.
The great man that of no mishap could pause,
But still preuaild, whilst warring without right,
Armd for the common weal in a good cause,
With Caesar did unfortunately fight.
From Lesbos fled with his afflicted wife,
Three base-born grooms (can fortune change so soon)
Stood to consult upon great Pompeys life,
And did what thousands durst not once have done.
Then he whose knees had often been kissd by kings,
(Most highly happy, had he did in time)
By one of his own slaves with abject things,
Had his last funerals framde (O monstrous crime)
T'entombe Romes greatest captain all alone,
The Roman that arrived with reason said,
The fatal glory was too great for one,
And to have part of that last honor staid.
The tears bestowd by Caesar on his head,
Forth from a guilty mind remorce had thrown,
Or else he wept to see his enemy dead,
By any others hands than by his own.
Then constant Cato that even death did scorn,
The rare arch-tipe of an accomplished man,
That lived as not t'himselfe but t'all men borne,
Moved by his tyranny to ruin ran.
He justly whilst more just, himself more strong
Then Caesar thought, that for no Justice card,
And since discovering what he cloakd so long,
Said right, that Caesar and not he was snarde.
Thus Caesar conquered all but Catoes mind,
That would not by a tyrants tollerance breathe:
But in such sort his famous course confinde,
Than Caesar's life more glorious was his death.
Those great men thus brought to disastrous ends,
The author of their death make me despise,
That whilst t'vsurpe the authority he tendes,
By treading down all good men strives to rise.
Now made most great by lessening all the great,
He prowdly does triumph in Rome, over Rome.
And we must seem t'applaud the present state,
Whose doubtful breath depends upon his doom.
Yet had I not enlargde my griefs so long,
To you whom Caesar does pretend to love;
Were nor I know touched with the common wrong,
A just disdain all generous minds must move.

Had Caesar willingly resignd his arms,
And rendered Rome her liberty at last,
When as from foes he feared no further harms,
But had repaird his just displeasures past.
More then for all the love that's showed to me,
He should have had an Altar in my breast:
As worthy for his virtuous decdes to be
Feared by the bad, and honored by the best.
But since though conquering all the world by might,
He to himself a slave would make Rome thrall;
His benefits are loathsome in my sight,
And I am grieved that he deserves to fall.
My fancies move not in so low a sphere,
But I disdain that one over Rome impires;
Yet it is best, that with the time we bear,
And with our power proportion our desires.
Though I dissembled first your mind to try,
And told what Fame to Caesar's praise relates;
Yet was I pleased that more were grieved than I,
All mis-contented men are glad of mates.

Since tyranny all liberty exiles,
We must our selves no more our selves disguise;
Then learn to mask a mourning mind with smiles,
And seem t'extoll that which we most despise.
Yet all our deeds not Caesar's humor please,
That (since mistrusted once) esteems us still
When dumb disdaineful, flatterers when we praise,
If plain, presumptuous, and in all things ill.
Yea we, whose freedom Caesar now restraines,
As his attenders all his steps must trace;
And know, yet not acknowledge his disdaines,
But still pretend to have interest in his grace.
Though all my thoughts detest him as a foe,
To honor him a thousand means I move;
Yet But to save my self, and plague him so,
No hate more harms than it that looks like love.
His pride that through prepostrous honor swells,
Has by the better sort, made him abhorrd;
The gods are jealous, and men envious else,
To see a mortal man so much adord.

Well, Cicero let all means be entertaind,
That may imbarke us in his bosoms depths,
Till either willingly or then constrained,
He justly quite what he unjustly keeps.

This life of ours is like a Rose,
Which whilst it beauties rare array,
Does then enjoy the least repose
When virgin-like it blush we see:
Then is it every hand the prey,
And by each wind is blown away:
Yea though from violence escaped free,
(Whilst time triumphs, it leads all thralles)
Yet does it languish and decay.
O Whilst the courage hottest boiles,
And that our life seems best to be,
It is with dangers compast still,
Whilst it each little change appalles,
The body force without whiles foiles,
It th'owne distemprature whiles spoils:
Of which, though none it chance to kill:
As nature fails the body falls,
Of which, save death, naught bounds the toils.
What is this moving tower in which we trust?
A little wind closd in a cloud of dust.
And yet some spirits though here being pent,
In this frail prisons narrow bounds,
With what might suffice not content,
Do always bend their thoughts too hie,
And aim at all the peopled grounds,
Then whilst their breasts ambition wounds,
Though feeding as bent straight to die.
They build as they might always live,
Being famishd for fames empie sounds:
Of such no end the travels ends,
But a beginning gives whereby
They may b'imbroild worse then before,
For whilst they still new hopes contriue,
Th'exspected good more anguish sends
Then the possessde contentment lends,
Like beasts that taste not, but devour.
They swallow much, and for more strive,
Whilst still their hope new hap attends:
And how can sueh but still themselves annoy,
That know to conquer, but not how t'enioy?
Since as a ship amidst the depthes,
Or as an Eagle through the air,
Of which their way no impression keeps,
Most swift when seeming least to move:
This breath of which we take such care,
Does toss the body every where,
That it may hence with haste remove:
Life slippes and sleeps always away,
Then whence, and as it came goes bare,
Whose steps behind no trace does leave.
Why should heauen-banish'd souls thus love
The cause, and bounds of their exile,
Where they as restless strangers stray,
And with such pain why should they reaue
That which they have no right to have:
Which with them selves within short while,
As summers beauties must decay,
And can give naught except the grave,
Though all things do to harm him what they can,
No greater enemy then himself to man:
Whilst often enuiron'd with his foes
That threatened death on every side,
Great Caesar parted from repose,
As Atlas underneath the stars
Did of a world the weight abide.
But since a prey t'excessiue pride,
More then by all the former wars,
He now by it does harmde remain
And of his fortune does defide
Made rich by many a Nations wrack,
He breaking through the liquid bars,
In Neptunes arms his minion forced,
Yet still pursude new hopes in vain.
Ah, would the ambitious looking back,
Of their inferiors knowledge take,
They from huge cares might be deuorc'd,
Whilst veiwing few more wealth attain,
And many more than they to lack.
Lo, the only plague from men that rest does reaue,
Is valuing what they want, not what they have.
Since thus the great themselves inuolue
In such a laborinth of cares,
Whence none to escape can well resolve,
But by degrees is forward led
Through waves of hopes, rocks of dispaires:
Let us anoyd ambitions snares,
And far from storms by envy bred,
Still seek securely a humble rest,
With minds where no proud thought repaires,
That in vain shadows does delight:
Thus may our fancies still be fed
With that which Nature freely gives.
Let us iniquity detest,
And hold but what we owe of right,
The Eyes treasure is th'al-circling light:
Not that vain pomp for which the earth strives,
Whose glory but a poysnous pest,
T'orethrow the soul delights the sight,
Ease comes with ease where all by pain buy pain:
Rest we in peace, by war let others reign.
NOw, Brutus now, we need no more to doubt,
Nor with blind hopes our judgment to suspend:
Lo, all our exspectations are worn out,
For now it is time t'attempt, and not to attend.
The Imperious people that did the earth appall,
Ah vanquishde by their victories at last,
Are by their too much liberty made thrall,
Since all their strength but serves themselves to cast.
And we that once seemd borne t'aime at great things,
Of the worlds mistress mighty minions once,
That might have labored to give laws to kings,
Laws from a king, must look for now with groans.
For such of Caesar is the monstrous pride,
That though he domineers else at this hour,
And to his clients kingdoms does divide,
With an vnlimitd tyrranicke power.
Yet of Dictator he disdaines the name,
And seeks a tyrants title with the place:
Not for his honor, no, but for our shame,
As only bent to brag of our disgrace.
I thought to see that man (as others are)
Walk reapparrel'd with a private gown,
As one that had unwillingly made war
T'hold up himself, not to cast others down.
So Silla, though more inhumane then he,
Whilst having all to what his heart aspirde,
The sovereignty resigned, and set Rome free
When all such exspectation was expirde.
By Caesar's worth we must think that he too,
Will liberty restore to our troubled state:
When first the world has viewd what he might do,
His thoughts are generous as his mind is great.
And though some insolences escape him whiles,
His dying fury sparkles but a space:
Naught th'inspirations quite of Mars exiles,
Till one be used with th'innocencie of peace.
Those that by violence did t'all things tend,
Scarce can themselves t'a quiet course conform:
Their stately carriage and frank words offend,
Whilst peace cannot comport with wars rude form.
I hope that Caesar settling civil broils,
When disaccustomde is intestin rage:
Will strive to mitigate his countries toils,
Bent all those flames that burned his breast t'asswage.

Thus of his course you by your own conceived
As if like thoughts of both did bound the will:
Ah, honest minds are with least pain deceiu*d:
Those that themselves are good dream not of ill.
But of bad minds to sound th'vnsound device,
Their inclination must your judgment sway:
The square of virtue cannot measure vice,
Nor yet a line that is straight a crooked way.
So Caesar may prevail t'vsurpe the state,
He cares not by what violence nor slight:
O, one may soon deceive men and grow great,
That leaves religion, honesty and right,
When as the Senators (no more their own)
Came to that Tyrant whom ambition blinds,
And showde him by what honors they had shown,
To gratify his greatness grateful minds.
He in a chair imperiously being placed,
Not daign'd to rise nor bow in any sort:
As both of them had but their due embraced,
When he a hautie, they an humble port.
But if he thus, ere we be thoroughly thrall'd
Dare so disdainfully such great men use:
When in a regal throne by us installed
Then will he break that which he now does bruise.
Was he not first that ever yet began,
To violate the sacred Tribuns place;
And punished them for punishing a man,
That had transgressde the laws in time of peace?
The laws thar do of death all guilty hold,
Whose actions seem to tirranie inclinde:
So earnest were our ancestors of old,
To quensh the light of tyrants ere it shinde:
And shall our Nephews (heirs of bondage) blame
Us dastard parents that their hopes deceived,
That saw, that suffered, that suruiu'd such shame,
Not leaving dead, what we being borne received?
By Caesar's friends to an assembly brought,
The Senators intend to call him king.

I Will not be there.


But what if we be sought
T'assist as Praetors such a public thing?

Then i will resist that violent decree;
None of Romes crown shall long securely bost,
For ere that I live thrall'd, i will first die free:
What can be kept when liberty is lost?

O with what joy I swallow up those words,
Words worthy of thy worth, and of thy name:
But Brutus be not fearde, this cause affords
Thee many mates in danger, few in fame.
When Anthony proud Caesar's Image crowned
The people by a silent sorrow told,
In what a depth of woes their thoughts were drowned
That Comet of confusion to behold.
What do those scroules thrown in thy chair import,
Which what thou art to thy remembrance brings?
Be those the fancies of the inferior sort?
No, none but noble minds dream of great things.
Of other Pretors people look for shows,
And distributions whose remembrance dies:
Whilst bloody fencers fall with mutual blows,
And Affricks monsters made t'amaze their eyes.
But from thy hands they liberty attend,
A glory hereditarie to thy race,
And following thee their blood will frankly spend,
So thou succeed in thy great parents place;
That Romes redeemer once did Tarquin foil,
Though from his birth obeyed, and without strife,
Where thou should but the aspiring tirant spoil,
That would t'extinguish'd tyrrany give life.

I weigh thy words, with an afflicted heart,
That for compassion of my country bleedes,
And would to God that I might only smart,
So that all others escaped the evil that succeeds.
Then never man himself from death did free
With a more quiet and contented mind,
Then I would perish, if I both could be
To Caesar thankful, and to our country kind.
But though that great man's grace toward me enlargde
May challenge right in my affections store:
Yet must the greatest debt be first dischargde,
I ow him much, but to my country more.
This in my breast has great dissension bred;
I Caesar love, but yet Romes enemy hate:
And as Jove lives, I could be moved to shed
My blood for Caesar, Caesar's for the state.
I for my fathers death loathde Pompey long,
Whilst just disdain did boil within my breast,
Yet when he warred to venge the common wrong,
I ioynde with him because his cause was best.
A mind t'vsurpe if Caesar now reveal.
I will in time precipitate his end
Thus being still bent t'aduance the Commonweal,
I helped a foe, and now must hurt a friend.

Least of his favor thou the poison prove,
From swallowing of such baits (dear friend) beware:
No tyrant (trust me) can entirely love,
Nor none that for himself does only care.
He by such courtesies does but intend
T'imbase thy virtues, undermine thy mind,
And thy suspected courage to disbend,
Yea (though with silken bonds he would thee bind.)
This of all tyrants is the common tread,
To wreake all those in whom most worth he finds:
Or (whilst that terrors toss his jealous head,)
T'vse subtilties t'amuse the greatest minds:
As when we for the Pretorship did strive,
Then both were held in hope that so deceived
We others harms might study to contriue,
Through emulation and disdain conceived.
Thus subtle Caesar by such sleights has toyld
To sow dissension, that we both may pause
Of private wrongs; and by such means imbroil'd,
Still courting him, neglect the common cause.
But naught from others must our thoughts estrange,
That must in time the tyrants course restrain:
Let other men lament, we must revenge,
I scorn to bear a sword and to complain.

Though Caesar (now) I must conspire thy fall,
My heart toward thee, yet never harbor'd hate:
But (pardon me) who ever make it thrall,
From bondage Brutus must redeem the state,
Of this my course what ever others judge,
Here I protest it is for good designed;
My thoughts are guilty of no private grudge,
For reason, and not fury moves my mind.
Nor is it ambition that inflames my breast,
With a prodigious appetite to reign,
That when I have made Caesar Plutoes guest,
I in his rowme a monarch may remain.
No, if that glory did my fancies charm,
To which blind-folded tyrants do aspire;
I needed not to do, nor suffer harm,
But with less pain might compass my desire.
For if I would but temporize a space,
Till Time, or Death diminish Caesar's might.
He thinks that I deserve t'enioy his place,
And I could make my day succeed his night.
Yet do I not endeere my self so much,
That I Will seek honor by my countries shame,
But O, I would (my zeal to it is such)
To save it from reproach seem worthy of blame.
Yea so, that I may free with honored wounds,
My soil than is my soul more dear to me:
I care not strait to be barred from the bounds,
That at so dear a rate I would set free.

What man does breath of Mars his martial race,
But will with Brutus sacrifice his blood,
And chargde with arms ere tyranie take place,
Dare venture all things for his countries good?
Can any judgment be deceived so far,
But that it else most clearly may behold,
How that this change Rome greatness strait will mar,
And raze the trophies that she reared of old.
Of old in Rome all those that once had worn
The peace-importing gown, or warrelike shield,
Of dignities as capable being borne,
Durst aim at all that liberty could yield.
Those in affairs to deal that would set forth,
Were not discouraged by their birth, though base,
And poverty could not hold back true worth,
From having honor both by war and peace.
Then emulation violently driu'd
All gallant minds t'attempt great actions still;
That in the love of venue riualls lived,
Whilst Glory in their bosoms balm did still.
Fabricius first was from the plow aduauncde,
The rudder of the commonwealth to hold;
Yet by no means his private wealth enhauncde,
As rich in virtue still, as poor in gold.
Rude Marius too, to match red Mars in fame
Forth from the vulgar dross his race removed,
And lo, of Cicero the ridiculous name,
As famous as the Fabians now has proved.
Each abject mind disdaind to be obscure,
When still preferrement followd lofty cares,
And that one might by dangers past procure,
Fame to himself, and honor to his heirs.
But since that state by Caesar is oreturn'd,
Whilst all our lives depend upon ones lips;
Of breasts that once with love of glory burned,
From soaring thoughts this course the feathers clips.
Advancement now attends not on desert,
But on the opinion of a flattred mind;
That to th'applauding hireling does impart,
High honors that true worth can hardly find.
To these all tyrants most addicted prove,
Whom without reason they have raisde too hie,
As thinking those that stand but by their love,
To entertain the same all means must try.
Where they whose virtue reapes a due reward,
Not building only on th'aduauncers grace,
Do by deserts not gain so great regard,
Whilst they maintain, as they obtain their place.
And if a worthy man to work great things,
Winged with th'vsurpers favors raise his flight.
The highest course to him most harm still brings,
That till he fall, can not have leave to light.
Those that by force would have the affection moved,
When willingly men hold such gallants dear.
They rage that any should be freely loved,
Whose virtue makes their vice more vile appear.
The man that now to be preferrd aspires,
Must with effronted flatteries servile form,
Still soothing Caesar, seal all his desires,
And in some shadow lurk t'auoyde a storm,
A number else of that proud rebels foes,
Grieved to behold the occasion of their grief.
Strive in obscurity t'entombe their woes,
So waiting, and not working for relief.
But we whose lofty minds disdain to lowre,
As those that seek but their own safety thus;
When shall we spend an indignations power,
That's worthy of true Romans, and of us;
Since no indignity resolved t'indure,
I see our minds do simpathize in this,
Should we by suffering seek to live secure,
Whose action must amend what is amiss?
No, no such abject thought must stain our breast,
To cure calamity but by discourse,
Whilst but like beasts, affecting food and rest,
Where men by reason should direct their course.
Like those of other parts secure from strife,
If Caesar had bin borne, or chusde our Prince,
Then those that durst attempt to take his life,
The world of treason justly might convince.
For still the states that flourish for the time,
By subjects should b'inuiolable thought;
And those no doubt commit a monstrous crime,
That lawful sovereignty profane in ought.
And we must think (though now being brought to bow,
The Senate king, a subject Caesar is,
The Authority that violating now,
The world must damn as having done amiss.
We will (dear Cassius) for our countries sake,
Our selves expose to danger, or to death;
And let us now advise what course to take,
Whilst naught bur the air can bear away our breath.

I think this matter needs not many words,
Since but one deed can bound the common shame;
In Caesar's body we must sheathe our swords,
And by his death our liberty reclame.
But since his fortune did confound them all,
That in the fields to match him did begin;
Whilst he by thousands made their bands to fall,
With hoarie legions always used to win.
As Pompeys, Scipioes, and Petreius ghosts,
In lightlesse shades may by experience tell,
That after th'ouerthrow of their numbrous hosts,
All famous (though infortunately) fell,
And since provided for the Parthian wrarre,
His army in arms attends on his decree,
Where we sequestered from such forces far,
Would, if suspected, strait prevented be;
With some few friends, whom all things now t'assay,
A love to us, or to their country binds,
We to his wrack must walk another way,
Whilst ere our tongues, our hands do tell our minds.
Now when most high, and therefore hated most,
Th'assembled Senate seeks to make him king;
We must go give the blow before we boast,
And him to death, Rome out of bondage bring.

In all this course I only one thing blame,
That we should steal, what we may justly take,
By clothing honor with a cloak of shame,
Which may our cause (though good) more odious make.
O, I could wish, with honorable wounds
T'affront Romes enemy in the battles dust;
No sweeter music than the Trumpets sounds,
When Right and Valor keep a consort just.
Then free if quick, else dead for naught being feared,
I always once contented might remain;
What tomb t'a man more glorious can be reared,
Than mountains made of them that he has slain?
But how are my transported thoughts grown such,
That they disdain a measure now t'admit?
As bent not what to do, but to do much,
I on the throne of Glory strived to sit.
No, to the state me from my self I give,
Free from particular respects, t'expose
My life and all for it, and whilst I live,
So that it gain, I care not what I lose.
I Will never rest till he for ever rest,
That gives my country such a cause of grief;
And that to effect no form I will detest,
Nor for my fame endanger Romes relief.
But (worthy Cassius) ere we further do,
Let us the minds of our familiars feel,
Of which I hope to have assistance too,
Who will not hazard for his countries weal.

Now whilst my soul rests ravished in a trance,
I think I see great Rome her courage raise,
Bent to beat the air with songs, the earth with a dance,
And crown thy virtues with deserved praise.

MY dearest half, my comfort, my delight,
That only seru'st to sweeten all my sowres,
Thou in my bosom used t'vncharge thy spright,
And in my presence sparde afflictions powers.
Still when domestike broiles disturbde thy rest,
Whilst by thy self thou labord for relief,
Thou with calm words disguisde a stormy breast,
Lest I had bin infected with thy grief:
For such of me was thy respective care,
No cause of miscontentment was made known,
But with affections colors painted fair,
All that might make me glad, was gladly shown.
What makes thee then thy courage thus to lose,
That thou can look so sad, and in my sight?
Lend me (dear love) a portion of thy woes,
A burden being divided does grow light.
I see the Roses fading in thy face,
The Lillies languish, Violets take their place.
Thou have (dear Lord) prevented my design,
Which was to ask of thee, what makes me pale;
It Phoebus had no light, could Phoebe shine?
No, with the cause of force th'effed must fail.
The mirror but gives back as it receives,
A just resemblance of th'obiected form:
And such impression as th'engrauer leaves,
The wax retains still to the stamp conform.
O I Am the mirror that reflects thy mind,
According to the influence of thine eyes,
I take the state in which thy state I find,
Such is my color as thy countnance dies.
Then how can I rejoice whilst thou art sad,
Whose breast of all thy crosses is the scroule?
I am still as thou art, if grieved, or glad,
Thy bodies shadow, th'essence of thy soul.
On that great planet that diuides the years,
As the increase of the inferior fields depends;
And as it does euanish, or appears,
In the earths cold bosom life begins, or ends:
Sun of my soul, so I subsist by thee,
Whose course rests to thy secret motions thrall,
For when thou art from cloudie fortunes free,
I rise in joys, but if thou faint, I fall.

This countnance with my custom but accords,
That as you know yet never from my birth,
Light gestures used joined with lascivious words,
Nor yet ridiculous fashions that move mirth.
My melancholious nature feeds on cares,
Whilst smotherd sorrow by a habit smokes,
A thoughtfull breast that's burdend with affairs,
Does make a silent mouth, and speaking looks.
As for my palenesse it imports but good,
Th'abasing of the body mounts the mind:
Where fatness com'd from food, but serves for food,
In fattest bodies leanest sprites we find.
Ah, since I saw th'abhorr'd Thessalian bounds
All drenched with blood of Senators and kings:
(As if my soul yet smarted in their wounds,)
A secret sorrow oftentimes me stings.
But since thy famous father with strange blows,
In the most hideous form affronted death,
To him my mind a sad remembrance owes,
Which sorrow shall exact still whilst I breath.
Yet am I grieved to have given thee cause of grief,
That thought some new mis-hap did me dismay;
To such old soars it is worst to give relief,
But time in end may wear my woes away.

Why should thou so from me thy thoghts conceal?
From thine own soul that in thy bosom sleeps,
To whom, though shown, thou do them not reveal,
But in thy self more inwardly them keepst?
And thou can hardly hide thy self from me,
That straight in thee each alteration spy,
I can comment on all that comes from thee,
True love still looks with a suspicious eye.
Rests not within our bosom every thought,
Tuned by a simpathy of mutual love?
Thou marrst the music if thou change in ought,
Which straight by my distemperature I prove.
Soul of my soul, unfold what is amiss,
My mind some great disaster does divine,
And even excuse my couriousnesse in this,
Since it concerns thy state, and therefore mine.

I wonder that thou do thy frailty show,
All women are by nature curious still;
And yet till now thou never craved to know,
More then I pleased t'impart of my free will.
Naught save the wife a man within the walls,
Nor naught save him without fits her to embrace:
And it is unseemly though it sometime falls,
When any sex usurps another place.
Dear, their wounted course thy cares inure;
I may have matters that import the state,
Whose opning up might my disgrace procure,
Whose weight would for thy weakness be too great.

I was not (Brutus) matched with thee, to be
A partner only of thy boorde and bed,
Each servile whore in those might equal me,
That did her self to naught but pleasure wed;
No, Portia spousde thee with a mind to abide
Thy fellow in all fortunes, good, or ill.
With chains of mutual love together tide,
As those that have two breasts, one heart, two souls, one will.
With sacred bands whom holy Hymen binds,
They tweene them should communicate all things;
Yea both the bodies labors, and the minds,
Whence either pleasure or displeasure springs.
If thus thou seek thy sorrows to conceal
Through a disdain, or a mistrust of me;
Then to the world what way can I reveal,
How great a matter I would do for thee.
And though our sex too talkatiue be deemed,
As those whose tongues import our greatest powers,
For secrets still bad treasurers esteemed
Of others greedy, prodigal of ours;
Good education may reform defects,
And I this vantage have t'a virtuous life,
Which other minds do want, and mine respects:
I Am Catoes daughter, and I Am Brutus wife;
Yet would I not repose my trust in ought,
Still thinking that thy cross was great to bear,
Till that my courage was t'a trial brought,
Which suffering for thy cause can nothing fear.
For first t'experience how I could comport,
With stern afflictions spirit-enfeebling blows,
Ere I would seek t'assault thee in this sort,
To whom my soul a duteous reverence owes.
Lo, here a wound, which makes me not to smart,
Though by my self being made, to make me known,
Since thy distress strikes deeper in my heart,
Thy grief (life's joy) makes me neglect mine own.

Thou must (dear love) that which thou sought receive,
Thy heart so high a sail t'a tempest bears,
That thy great courage does deserve to have
Our enterprise entrusted to thine ears.
Thy magnanimity preuailes so far,
That it my resolution must control:
And of my bosom does the depths vnbarre,
To lodge thee in the center of my soul.
Thou see in what a state the state now stands,
Of whose strong pillars Caesar spoiled the best:
Whilst by his own preventing others hands,
Our famous father fell amongst the rest.
That insolent usurper does presume
To re-erect detested Tarquines throne,
Thus the worlds mistress all-commanding Rome,
Must entertain no minion now but one.
The Old blood of Mars that marks to what he tends,
Swells with disdain, their countries scorn to see,
And I Am one of the number that intends
By his death, or mine own, to be made free.

And without me can thou resolve so soon
T'assay the dangers of a doubtful strife?
As if dispair'd and always to b'vndone,
Being tired of me, yea tired of thy life.
Yet since thou thus thy rash design has shown,
Leave Portias portion, venture not her part:
Endanger naught but that which is thine own,
Go where thou like, I will hold still thy heart.
But lest by holding of thy best part back,
That the other perish t'aggrauate my groans,
That would be so thonght guilty of thy wrack,
Take all thy treasure to the Seaes at once.
Like the Asian Monarks wife that with short hairs,
(Sad signs of bondage) past still where he past,
To wear away, or bear away thy cares,
I Will follow thee, and of thy fortune taste.
These hands that were with my own blood imbrued,
To strike another may more strength afford:
At least when thou by the enemy art pursu'de,
I Will set my self betwixt thee and his sword.
But if too great a privilege I claim,
Whose actions all should be disposde by thee:
Ah, pardon me (dear Brutus,) do but blame
These my excessive sorrows, and not me.

Thou ask'st what thou should give, forgive dear mate,
This ventrous course of mine, which must have place,
Though it make fortune tyrant of our state,
Whose fickle footsteps virtue grieves to trace.
And wonder not, though this toward thee I prove,
Since private passions now all power have left;
For I regard not glory, profit, love,
Nor no respect that does import me most:
So to the land of which I hold my life,
I may perform the work that I intend,
Let me be called unkind unto my wife:
Yea worst of all, ingrate unto my friend:
But as th'instinct of nature makes us know,
There are degrees of duty to be past:
Of which the first we to th'immortalls owe,
The next to our Country, and to our friends the last.
Proud tyrants from his native bounds to drive,
Did the author of my race with ardent zeal,
Make those to die whom he had made to live,
And spoild himself to advance the commonweal?
To raise the state which Caesar now ore-throwes,
That bred so many brave men whilst it stood,
He with the Tyrant interchanging blows,
Most gloriously did offer up his blood.
And did that man t'oppresse the common fo,
Then damn his sons to death? and with dry eyes?
And is his successor degenerd so,
That he in abject bondage basely lies?
No, his posterity his name not stains,
That t'imitate his steps does yet draw near;
Yet of his spirit in us some spark remains,
That more then life our liberty hold dear.

Then prosecute thy course, for I protest,
Though with some grief, my soul the same approues:
This resolution does become thy breast,
Where in the sphere of honor virtue moves.
And do this interprise no more defer,
What thee contents, to me contentment brings;
I to my life thy saftie do prefer,
But hold thy honor dear above all things.
It would but let the world my weakness see,
If I sought my delights, not thy desires:
Though it give grief, and threaten death to me,
Go follow forth that which thy fame requires.
Though nature, sex, and education breed
No power in me, that is with my purpose even;
He lend assistance to th'intended deed,
If vows and prayers may penetrate the heaven:
But difficulties huge my fancy finds,
Save the success naught can defray my fear:
Ah, Fortune always frowns on worthy minds,
As hating all that trust in ought save her.
Yet I despair not but thou may prevail,
And by this course to appease my present groans,
I this advantage have which cannot fail,
I Will be a freemans wife, or else be nones.
For if all prosper not as we pretend,
And that the heavens Romes bondage do decree,
Straight with thy liberty my life shall end,
Who have no comfort but what comes from thee.
My father has me taught what way to die,
By which if I be barred t'encounter death,
Another means (though far more strange) I Will try,
For after Brutus none shall see me breathe.

Thou for my cause abandoned others else,
But now forsakst thy self t'adhere to me,
That of thy passions thus the power repells,
And with thy mind discords with mine t'agree.
I Will since by thee approou'd securely go,
And vilipend the dangers of this life,
Heavens make my enterprise to prosper so,
That I prove worthy of so worthy a wife.
But ah! of all thy words those grieve me most,
That bost me with th'abridgement of thy days;
What? though I in so good a cause were lost,
None flies the appointed fate that for him stays.
Do not defraud the world of thy rare worth,
But of thy Brutus the remembrance love,
And from so fair a prison break not forth,
Till first the fates have forcde thee to remove.

I fear the heavens have our confusion sworn,
Since this illage can with no good accord;
Thou and my father (ah) should have bin borne,
When Virtue was aduauncde, and Vice abhorrd.
Then ere the light of virtue was declinde,
Your worth had reueren^de bin, not thrown away,
Where now ye both have but in darkness shinde,
As stars by night, that had bin suns by day.

My treasure, strive to pacisie thy breast,
Lest sorrows but sinistrously presage,
That which thou would not wish, and hope the best,
Though virtue now must act on Fortunes stage.

THan liberty of earthly things
What more delights a generous breast?
That does receive,
And can conceive,
The matchless treasure that it brings;
It making men securely rest,
As all perceive,
Does none deceive,
Whilst weighed with doubts none balanced hings,
But feared for naught, does what seems best:
Then men are men when they are all their own,
Not but by others badges when made known.
Yet should we not mis-spending hours,
A freedom seek, as often it falls,
With an intent,
But to content
These vain delights and appetites of ours,
For then but being made greater thralles,
We might repent,
Our not being pent
In stricter bounds by others powers,
Whilst fear licentious thoughts appalles:
Of all the tyrants that the world affords,
Ones own affections are the fiercest Lords.
As Libertines those only live,
That from the bands of vice set free,
Vile thoughts cancel,
And seek t'excell
In all that does true glory give,
From which when as no tyrants be,
Them to repel,
And to compel
They deeds against their thoughts to strive,
They blestare in a high degree,
For such of same the scroules can hardly fill,
Whose wit is bounded by another will.
That Rome from Tarquins yoke redeemde,
Who first obtaind,
And then maintaind
Their liberty so dearly loved;
They from all things that odious seemd,
Though not constraind,
Themselves restraind,
And willingly all good approved,
Bent to be much, yet well esteemd;
And how could such but aim at some great end,
Whom liberty did lead, and glory attend?
They leading valorous legions forth,
Though wanting kings, triumphed over kings,
And still aspird,
By Mars inspired
To conquer all from South to North;
Then lending Fame their Eagles wings,
They all acquired,
That was required,
To make them rare for rarest things,
The world being witness of their Worth:
Thus those great minds that domineered over all.
Did make themselves first free, then others thrall:
But we that hold naught but their name,
From that to which they in times gone,
Did high ascend,
Must low descend,
And bound their glory with our shame.
Whilst on an abject tyrants throne
We basely attend,
And do intend,
Us for our fortune still to frame,
Not it for us, and all for one:
As liberty a courage does impart,
So bondage does disbend, else break the heart.
Yet O who knows but Rome to grace,
Another Brutus may arise,
That may effect
What we affect:
And Tarquins steps make Caesar trace,
Though seeming dangers to despise,
He does suspect,
What we exspect,
Which from his breast has banished peace,
Though fairly he his fears disguise:
Of tyrants th'iniurie revenge affords,
All fear but theirs, and they fear all men's swords.
Dear cousin, Cassius did acquaint mine ears,
With a design that tossed my mind a space,
For when strange news a strangers breath first bears,
Then should not trust t'each rash report give place.
I would not then discover what I thought:
Lest he t'entrap my tongue a snare had framed,
Till I with thee t'a conference first was brought,
Whom he for patron of his purpose namde.
One should beware to whom his mind he leaves,
In dangerous times when tales by walls are told,
Men make themselves most miserably slaves,
Of those to whom their secrets they unfold.
As Cassius told thee pitying Romes distress,
That to our disgrace in bondage does remain,
We straight intend what ever we profess,
With Caesar's blood to wash away this stain.
Though for this end a few sufficient are,
To whom their virtue courage does impart,
Yet were we loath to wrong thy worth so far,
As of such glory to give thee no part.
Since both this cause, and that thy name thee bind,
In this aduentrous band to be comprisde,
There needs no rhetoric to raise thy mind,
That t'execute which thou should have deuisde.

I thought no creature should my purpose know
But he whose intrest promisde mutual cares,
Of those to whom one would his secrets show,
No greater pledge of trust than to know theirs.
As when two meet being masked (though whiles near friends)
With them as strangers no respect takes place,
But when that friendship one of them pretends,
Then the other likewise does vncloude his face:
So as thou first, I Will now at last be bold
My breast with the same birth long great has gone,
Yet I t'another durst it not unfold,
Nor yet attempt to compass it alone.
But since this course, of which I long did pause,
On such great pillars now so strongly stands,
Whose countanaunce may give credit t'any cause,
It has my heart, and it shall have my hands.

To Our enterprise propitious signs are sent,
So that the gods would give us courage thus,
For all that ever heard of our intent,
Would willingly engage themselves with us,
Let other men discourse of virtuous rites,
Ours but by th'action only should be shown,
Bare speculation is but for such sprites,
As want of power or courage keeps unknown,
In those that Virtue view when crowned with deeds,
Whose beauties through the glass of glory shinde,
Sh'a violent desire t'imbrace her breeds,
As th'adamant to th'yrne being to the mind.
What though a number now in darkness lies,
That are too weak for matters of such weight,
We that are eminent in all men's eyes,
Let us still hold the height of honor straight.

Whilst that our faction might be strangthned thus
I labord much to purchase all their powers,
Whom hate toward Caesar, love to Rome, or t'vs,
Might move t'imbarke in those great hopes of ours.
By sickness being imprisoned in his bed,
Whilst I Ligarius spide whom pains did prick,
When I had said with words that anguish bred,
In what a time Ligarius art thou sick.
He answered straight as I had physic brought,
Or that he had imagined my design,
If worthy of thy self thou would do ought,
Then Brutus I am whole, and wholly thine.
Since Caesar causde him be accusde of late,
For taking Pompeys patt, yet at this hour,
He (though absolu'd) does still the tyrant hate,
For being endangerd by his lawless power.
Whilst it exasprates thus such great sprites spites,
Heaven of our course the progress does direct,
One inspiration all our souls incites,
That have aduisdly sworn this fact to effect.

So I with Cicero did confer at length,
Who I perceive the present state detests,
And though that age deminisht have his strength,
In him a will t'auenge his country rests.

That man whose love still toward his country shind,
Would willingly the commonwealth restore,
Then he I know, though he conceales his mind,
None Caesar more dislikes, nor likes us more.
Yet to his custody I Will not commit,
The secrets of our enterprise so soon,
Men may themselves be oftentimes not fit,
To do the things that they would wish were done,
He still being timorous, and by age grown worse,
Might chance to lay our honor in the dust,
All cowards must inconstant be of force,
With bold designs none fearful breasts can trust.
Then some of ours would hold their hands still pure,
That ere they be suspected, for a space
Amidst the tumult may remain secure,
And with the people mediate our peace.
But who than Tullius fitter for that turn,
Whose eloquence is used t'enchant their ears?
His banishment they in balcke gowns did mourn,
Whose age and merits each one reurence bears.

Those studious wits that have through dangers gone,
Would still be out, ere that they enter in;
Who must of many things, resolve of none,
And thinking of the end, cannot begin.
The mind that looks no further than the eye,
And more to Nature trusts, than unto Art,
Such doubtful fortunes fittest is to try,
A furious actor for a desprate part.
We have enough, and of the best degree,
Whose hands are to their hearts, their hearts t'vs true,
And if that we seek more, I fear we be
TO act close too many, if disclosde, too few.
Let us advise with an industrious care,
Now ere the tyrant intercept our minds;
The time, the place, the manner, when, and where,
That we should trust our treasure to the winds.
And since our fortunes in the balance hing,
Let every point be circumspectly weight'd,
A circumstance, or an indifferent thing,
May whiles mar all for not being well conueigh'd.

As for the time, none could be wished more fit,
Than this that's present to perform our vow,
Since all the people must allow of it,
Moved by a recent miscontentment now.
When represented in his triumph past,
Great Catoes mangled entrails made them weep,
And desprate Scipio whilst he leaped at last,
To seek a Sanctuary amidst the depth.
Then all those great men that in several parts,
Bent for Romes freedom Caesar did overthrow,
Did by their pictures pierce the peoples hearts,
And made a pitteous (though a pompous) show.
So that they did conceive a just disdain,
To be vpbraided in so strange a sort,
Whilst he that only by their loss did gain
Of their calamity but made a sport.
But yet his purpose grieves them most of all,
Since that he strives to be proclaimd a King,
And not contents himself to make us thrall,
But to perpetual bondage would us bring.
Thus whilst the people are with him displeasde,
We best may do that which to our part belongs;
For after this they may be best appeased,
If whilst their wrath does last we venge their wrongs.
And since we naught intend but what is right,
Whilst from our country we remove disgrace:
Let all be acted in the Senates sight,
A common cause, and in a common place.
Let those whose guilty thoughts do damn their deeds
In corners like Mineruaes birds abide:
That which to our country good, t'vs glory breeds,
May by the lights of heaven and earth be tryde.
The Senators by our ensample moved,
Pleased with this action that imports them too,
To have the yoke of tyrranie removed,
May at the least authorize what we do.
So all the Senators were said of old,
To have king Romulus amongst them torn:
That than to tyrranize was grown to bold,
And from his first humanity had worn.

Yea, what though Caesar were immortal made
As Romulus, whose deity him reuiues?
It Is easier as a God to adore him dead,
Then as a king to obey him whilst he lives.

That place indeed, most for our glory makes,
A Theater worthy of so great an act*
Where in their sight from whom most power he takes,
We of the tyrant vengeance may exact.
But I must recommend unto your mind,
A course (though strict) of which we must allow,
Least it ore-throw all that we have designed,
Being past recovery, if neglected now,
There is Antonius Caesar's greatest friend,
A man whose nature tyrranie affects,
Whom all the soldiers do delight to attend,
As one that naught but to command respects.
I fear that he when we have Caesar slain,
To the other faction furnish still a head:
So when we end, we must begin again,
Against one living worse then he that is dead.
And in my judgment, I would think it best,
When sacrifiz'd the proud usurper lies,
That that seditious enemy of rest,
Should fall with him with whom he first did rise,
Thus of our liberty we now may lay,
A solid ground that can be shak'd by none:
Those of their purpose that a part delay
Two labors have, that might have had but one.

I cannot Cassius condescend to kill
(Thus from the path of Justice to decline)
One faultlesse yet, lest after he prove ill,
So to prevent his guiltiness by mine.
No, no, that neither honest were, nor just,
Which rigorous form would but the world affright:
Men by this mean our meaning might mistrust,
And for a little wrong damn all that is right;
If we but only kill the common foe,
Our zeal to our country must acquire due praise:
But if like Tyrants tyrannizing so,
We will be thought that which we raze to raise.
And where we but intend t'aduance the state,
Though by endangering what we hold most dear;
If slaying him as armed e by private hate,
We to the world still partial will appear.
Ah, ah, we must but too much murder see,
That without doing evil cannot do good:
And would the gods that Rome could be made free,
Without th'effusion of one drope of blood.
Then their is hope that Anthony in end,
When first our virtue does direct the way:
Will leagued with us the liberty defend,
And being brought back will blush for going astray.

Well Brutus, I protest against my will,
From this black clowd, what ever tempest fall,
That mercy but most cruelly does kill.
Which thus saues one, that once may plague us all.

When Caesar with the Senators sits down,
In this your judgments generally accord;
That for affecting wrongfully the crown,
He lawfully may perish by the sword.
No greater harm to our purpose can be brought,
Then by protracting of the appointed time,
Least that which acted would b'a virtue thought,
Be (if prevented) consterd as a crime.
Can one thing long in many minds be pent?
No, purposes would never be delaid
That are interpreted but by the event,
If prospering reason, treason if betrayed.
There may amongst our selves some man remain,
Whom if afraid, his pardon to procure,
Or if being greedy for the hope of gain,
Time to disclose his consorts may allure.
Then ruin for our recompense we reap,
If ought our course by being abortiue mar,
For if discovered once, we cannot escape,
As Tyrants ears hear much, their hands reach far.

The breast in which so deep a secret dwelles,
Would not be long chargde with so weighty cares,
For I conjecture by appearance else,
Mo privy are to our minds then we to theirs:
Even but of late one Casca came to see,
That curious was to have our purpose known,
And said to him that which thou bidst from me,
To me by Brutus has at length bin showen.
Then by some things that he had learned before,
He of our course deep in discourse did fall,
Till Casca thinking that he had known more,
Scarce kept his tongue from staggering out with all.
Then Laena to us once came in like sort,
And wished that our design might prosper well;
Yet us to haste did earnestly exhort,
Since others told what we refusde to tell:
Whilst strangers rest familiar with our mind,
And ere to our knowledge thus to our counsel rise,
Make forward fast, or we will come behind.
F^^^e winged with breath most violently flies.

Their words but from uncertainties burst forth,
For whilst considering of their bondage thus:
Of Caesar's tyrranie, and of our worth,
They think this should be done, and done by us:
Such coniurations to confirm of old,
Some drinking others bloods; swore on their swords,
And cursing those that did their course unfold,
Used imprecations, execrable words.
And yet then this though voluntarily vowed,
Free from all bonds, save that which virtue binds,
More constantly no course was still allowed.
Till now that the end must manifest our minds.
And since so many frankly keep their faith,
Still what they first designed t'accomplish bent:
No doubt in spite of fickle fortunes wrath,
But the success shall yield our souls content.
Might some few Thebans from the Spartans pride,
By diverse tyrants deaths redeem their town?
And one Athenian that his virtue tryde,
By thirty Tyrants ruins win renown?
And to the Greeks are we inferior grown,
That where they have so many tyrants spoild,
There cannot one be by us all orethrowne,
Whose state yet brangling may be soon imbroyld?
O I Am resolved, and with my thoughts decree,
What ever fortune either sweet or sour,
I shall my soil from tyranny set free,
Or then my self free from the tyrants power.

By Lepidus invited this last night,
Whilst Caesar went to suppe, and I with him,
Of all deaths shapes to talk we took delight,
So at the table to beguile the time.
And whilst our judgments all about were tried,
Straight Caesar (as transported) to the rest
With a most sudden exclamation cride,
O, of all deaths unlooked for death is best.
For from our selves it steals our selves so fast,
That even the mind no fearful form can see,
Then is the pain ere apprehended past,
All sowres ere tasted would disgested be.
The threatened destiny thus he diuinde,
It would appear divinely being inspirde,
For now I hope that he shall shortly find,
That form of death which he himself desirde.

Whilst of our band the fury flames most hot,
And that their will t'atchiue this work is such,
Lest Caesar's absence disappoint the plot,
Which would of some abate the courage much,
It (Decius) were exceedingly well done,
That to his lodging you addressd your way,
Him by some means to further forward soon,
Lest by some sudden chance allured to stay.

There where the Senate minds this day to sit,
Stand all prepared t'approach where danger dwells,
And for the sacrifice when all is fit,
I Will bring an offering consecrated else.

LOng-lookt for time that should the glory yield,
Which I through Neptunes trustlesse reign have sought,
And through the dust of many a bloody field,
As by all dangers worthy to be bought.
Thy coming now those lowering shadows cleares,
That did th'horizon of my hopes ore-cast,
This day defrayes the toils of many years,
And brings the haru'st of all my labors past.
The Senators a messenger have sent,
Most earnestly entreating me to come,
And hear my self discernd by their consent,
To wear a crown over all excepting Rome.
Thus they devise conditions at this hour,
For him, of whom Mars has made them the prey;
As subjects limite could their sovereigns power,
That must have mind of naught but to obey.
But having pacifide those present things,
I mind to lead my valorous legions forth,
To th'orientall realms, adoring kings
That can exhibit honors due to worth.
Than swim my thoughts in The Ocean of delight,
Whilst on the pillow of soft praise reposde,
Those eyes to gaze upon my glories light,
That envy opened, admiration closde.
Ah, though your fancies great contentment find,
Whilst thus the world your virtue does advance,
Yet a prepostrous terror stings my mind,
And boasts me with I know not what mischance,
My wavering hopes oreballanc'd are with fears,
That to my soul sinistrous signs impart,
And ominous rumors so assault mine ears,
That they almost make breaches in my heart.

What, do debattelld Pompeys followers strive
To recollect their ruins from the dust?
Dare they that only by my tollerance live,
More to their strength than to my favor trust?
Or do thou fear his sons dejected state,
That steals infamous flying through those floods,
Which his great father, Admiral of late,
Did plant with ships til all their waves seemd woods?
Then makes his brothers death his courage more,
Since by them straited in a bloody strife,
I, that in all the battles given before,
Did fight for victory, then fought for life.
Or whilst to march toward Parthia I prepare,
Does a suspicion thus afflict thy sprite,
For Crassus fortune feared that perished there,
Th'opprobrious prey of the Barbarians spite?
To those same bands that Cassius thence brought back,
A place amongst my legions I Will allow,
Whose foes shall find whilst they avenge the old wrack
Though the same sheep, another shepherd now.
Do not imagine matters to bemone,
For whilst there stands a world, can Caesar fall?
Though thousand thousands were coniurd in one,
I, and my fortune might confound them all.

No, none of those my mind does miscontent,
That vndisguisde still like themselves remain,
Unlooked for harms are hardest to prevent,
There is no guard against concealde disdain,
But in whom further can your trust repose,
Whom danger now over all, by all attends,
Where private men but only fear their foes,
Often kings have greatest cause to fear their friends,
For since being trusted fittest to betray,
Those unto whom ones favor force affords,
May for his life the worst ambushments lay,
Whilst falsest hearts are hid with fairest words.
And some report (though privately) yet plain,
That Dolabella and Antonius now,
By your destruction do pretend t'obtaine,
That which you keep by making all men bow.

No corpulent sanguinians make me fear,
That with more pain their beards than th'enimies strike
And do themselves like th'epicurians bear,
To Bacchus, Mars, and Venus borne alike.
Their hearts do always in their mouths remain,
As streams, whose murmuring shows the course not deep
Then still they love to sport, though gross and plain,
And never dream of ought but when they sleep.
But those high sprites that hold their bodies down,
Whose visage lean their restless thoughts records,
Whilst they their cares depth in their bosoms drown,
Their silence fears me more than the others words.
Thus Cassius now and Brutus seem to hold
Some great thing in their mind, whose fire whiles smoks
What Brutus would, he vehemently would,
Think what they like, I like not their pale looks.
Yet with their worth this cannot well agree,
In whom of virtue the image seem to shine,
Can those that have received their lives from me,
Prove so ingrate again as to take mine?
Dare Cassius me pursue new hopes to have,
At the Helespont that fortune feared to try,
And like a dastard did his Galleys leave,
In all (save courage) though more strong than I?
Shall I suspect that Brutus seeks my blood,
Whose safety still I tendered with such care,
Who when the heavens from mortals me seclude,
Is only worthy to be Caesar's heir?

The corners of the heart are hard to know,
Though of those two the world the best does deem,
Yet do not trust too much th'externall show,
For men may differ much from what they seem.
None often more fierce than those that look most mild,
Impiety sometime appears devout,
And that the world the more may be beguilde,
Whiles Vice can clothe it self with Virtues cote.
Though that they have long since laid hatred down,
By benefits bestowed, you might attend,
There Is no respect can counterpoise a crown,
Ambition has no bounds, nor greed no end.
Through vindicatiue hate, and emulous pride,
Since some your person, some your place pursue,
All threatened dangers to prevent provide,
Being wise in time, lest out of time you rue.

No armor is that can hold treason out.


T'affright your foes with bands be backed about.


So dastard tyrants strive themselves to bear.


It better is to give, than to take fear.


No stronger guard than is the peoples love.


But naught in the earth does more inconstant prove.


Guardes showing fear t'inuade me men might tempt.


Guardes would put them from hope, you from contempt.


My breast from terror has bin always clear.


When one fears least, often danger lurkes most near.


It Is better once to die, than still fear death.


But worst of all to fall by the enemies wrath.


I Will not dis-taste my present pleasures so,
By apprehending what may chance to come,
This world affords but too much time for woe,
Whilst crosses come contentment to overcome.
By joys in time we must embrace relief,
That when they end, we in some measure may,
By their remembrance mitigate the grief,
Which still attends all those on the earth that stay.
I think the Senate is assembled now,
And for my coming does begin to gaze,
I Will go condignely once t'adorne my brow,
And feast mine ears by drinking in due praise.

Stay, stay (dear Lord) retire thy steps again,
And spare one day to prorogate whole years,
Let not this ominous day begin thy reign,
That fatal and unfortunate appears.
An Astrologian through the world renownde,
Thy horoscopes just calculation lays,
And does affirm as he by signs has found,
That th'Ides of March do boast to bound thy days.
Walk not this days where harms may be received,
Since by no great necessity being forede,
For though his judgment may be far deceived,
In things that touch thy life, suspect the worst.

Whilst I reformed the Calender by fits,
That long disordred the order of the year;
I waded through the depths of all their wits,
That of the stars the mysteries make clear.
Those pregnant sprites that walk betwixt the poles,
And lodge at all the zodiackes several signs,
Do read strange wonders wrapped in th'azure scroules,
Of which our deeds are words, our lives are lines.
By speculation of superior powers,
Some Natures secrets curious are to know,
As how celestial bodies rule over ours,
And what their influence effects below.
Yea they sometime may strange conjectures make,
Of those whose parts they by their birth do prove,
Since naturally all inclination take,
From Planets then predominant above.
And yet no certainty can so be had,
Some virtuously against their stars have strived,
As Socrates that grew, (though borne but bad,)
The most accomplished man that ever lived.
But of the hour ordained to close our lights,
No earth-clogd soul can to the knowledge come;
For O the destinies far from our sights,
In clouds of darkness have inuolu'd our doom.
And some but only guess at great men's falls,
By bearded comets, and prodigious stars,
Whose sight-distracting shapes the world appalles,
As still denouncing terror, death, or wars.
The time uncertain is of certain death,
And that fantastike man far past his bounds,
He is too bold that with ambiguous breath,
Not speaks of things to come, whose deeps none sounds

But this all day did my repose extort,
And from my breast of cares a tribute clam'd,
Now vilipend not that which I Will report,
Though but a dream, and by a woman dreamd.
I thought (alas) the thought yet wounds my breast,
Then whilst we both as those whom Morpheus weds,
Lay softly buried with a pleasant rest,
I in thy bosom, thou within the beds.
Then from my soul strange terrors did withdraw
Th'exspected peace by apprehended harms;
For I imagined, no, no doubt I saw,
And did embrace thee bloody in mine arms.
Thus whilst my soul by sorrows was surchargde,
Of which huge weight it yet some burden bears;
I big with grief two elements enlargde,
The Air with my sighs, the water with my tears.

That which I heard, with thy report accords,
Whilst thou all seemd dissolved in grief at once,
A heavy murmuring made with mangled words,
Was interrupted often by tragic groans.
The memory, but not the judgment makes
The Impression thus of passions in the brain,
For what the soul most suffers when it wakes,
With it asleep it does turmoyld remain.
From superstitious fears this care proceeds,
Which still would watch over that which thou do love,
And in thy mind melancholy thus breeds,
Which does those strange imaginations move.

Ah, in so light account leave off to hold
Those fatal warnings that the heavens have made,
Which by all means most manifest unfold,
What dangers huge do hing above thy head.
He with the sacred garlands that divines,
By th'entrailes of the consecrated beast,
Sees in the sacrifice sinistrous signs,
And I entreat thee do not hence make haste.

When I in Spain against young Pompey went,
Thus the diuiner threatened me before,
Yet did I prosecute my first intent,
Which with new laurells did my brows decore.

And yet you hardly there as whiles I hear,
From dangers (far engagde) redeemd your life,
But now more monstrous tokens do appear,
And I suspect far worse than open strife.

Lest I too much seem wedded to my will,
As one that others counsels scorns t'alow,
With jealous eyes I Will search about me still,
And even mistrust my self to trust thee now.
Yet if I stay the Senators deceived,
May my beginning straight begin to hate,
So might I perish seeking to be saved,
By flying, many fall upon their fate.
But here one comes that can resolve me much,
With whom I use t'aduise affairs of weight:
Whence comst thou Decius, that thy haste is such?
Is ought occurred that craves our knowledge straight?

I come to tell you how the Senate stays,
Till your exspected presence bless their sight,
And the conclusion yet of all delays,
Till that your approbation make it right.
T'accomplish your contentment they intend,
And all their thoughts seem at one object bent,
Save that they do amongst themselves contend,
Who you to please shall strangest ways invent.

Than that no treasure to my soul more dear,
Which straight t'enioy from hence I long to part,
But yet I know not what arrests me here,
And makes my feet rebellious to my heart.
From thee (dear friend) I never do conceal
The waightiest secrets that concern me most:
And at this time I likewise will reveal,
How heavens by signs me with destruction bost:
To superstition though not being inclinde,
My wife by dreams does now presage my fall:
It a Sooth-sayer likewise has diuin'd,
The sacrifice prodigious seems t'vs all;
So that till this disastrous day be gone,
All company I purpose to disuse.
And to the Senators I Will send some one
To paint my absence with a fair excuse.

Do not repose on superstitious signs,
You to suspect the people thus to bring,
Whilst soueraigne-like you limit their designs,
Seem not a tyrant seeking to be king.
How can we satisfy the worlds conceit,
Whose tongues still in all ears your praise proclames?
O! shall we bid them leave to deal in state,
Till that Calphurnia first have better dreams?
If that this day you private would remain,
The Senate to dissolve your self must go,
And then incontinent come back again,
When you have shown toward it some reverence so.

With thy advise (as powrefull) I agree,
The Senators shall have no cause to grudge:
A little space, all part apart from me,
And i will be shortly ready to dislodge.
WHence come this huge and admirable change,
That in my breast has uncouth thoghts infused?
Does the earth then erst yield terrors now more strange,
Or but my mind less courage then it used?
What spiteful fate against my state contends,
That I must now t'vnlook'd for plagues give place,
By foes not moved, yet feared amongst my friends,
By war secure, endangered but by peace?
T'encounter me when strongest troops did come,
Then did my heart the highest hopes conceive:
I warred with many, many to overcome,
The greatest battles, greatest glory gave.
As the enemies number still my courage grew,
Often have I through the depths of dangers past,
Yet never did those boundless labors rue,
To have none greater first, none equal last.
When as the Gauls feared by their neighbors falls,
Had from the fields, no, from my fury fled,
And hid themselves with arms, their arms with walls,
Whilst I my troops t'inclose Alexia led:
Then though there swarmed forth from the bounds about,
Huge hosts to compass me, enflamed with wrath,
That the besieger being besieged about
Seemed drawn with danger in the nets of death.
Yet I that could not with the pride comport,
That those Barbarians by vain bosts bewrayd,
Did reassault th'assaulters in such sort,
That words by wounds, wounds were by death repayd,
Of those within the town t'asswage their toils,
Till being ore-com'd their coming was not known:
Who straight vpbrayded by the barbarous spoils,
Did yield themselves with the others as ore-throwne,
Then whilst with liquid legions tumid bosts,
The trident-bearer strived my spoils to bear:
Though threatened thrice amidst his humid hosts,
I always scorned t'acquaint my self with fear.
I used those Pirates that had me surpised,
Still as my servants thundering threatenings forth,
And gave them money more than they deuisde,
Grieved to be rated at too little worth.
Yet gathering ships, I signed not long the shore,
But traced their printles steps through th'vnpau'd way:
And taking them, as I had vowed before,
By naught but death their ransom would defray.
Then when without th'aduise of others minds,
Iventred through the hoarie waves by night,
Whilst in a little bark against great winds,
That even the Pilote looked not for the (...)
The roaring waves themselves seemed to divide,
That in their gravel I might choose a grave.
And in a crystal arch above me bide,
That I of me a tomb might worthy have.
Whilst dangers seemed to merit Caesar's death,
As Neptune raisde his head, raisde my heart;
And showing what I was with constant breath,
T'amazde Amiclas courage did impart,
Was I not once amidst large Nilus flot,
Whilst me to wound a wood of darts did fly,
Yet swim'd so careless of my enemies shot,
That in my hand I held some papers dry?
With open dangers thus in every place,
I whilst being compassed both by sea and land,
Did vndismaid look horror in the face,
As borne for naught but only to command.
But since a world of victories have filled,
With Trophies Temples, Theaters with my praise,
That bathed with balm from th'oyle of glory stilled,
With friends in peace I looked to spend my days.
The chambers music now affrights me more,
Then once the trumpets sound amids the field,
And gowns (though signs of peace) worse, then before
The pompous splendor of a flaming shield.
Those thoughts of late that had disdained to doubt,
Though I alone had marched amongst my foes,
Lo, whilst amongst my friends I Am backed about,
Do greater dangers now then th'eies disclose.
If ought t'assemble any number brings,
I insurrections fear from common wrath;
Yea, if two talk apart of private things,
Straight I suspect that they conspire my death.
When sudden rumors rise from vulgar smoke,
Whilst th'^^^^ motions roll my restless eyes;
I at each corner for ambushments look,
And start astonished least some tumult rise.
When rising Titans beams renew the earths toiles,
I still despair to re-enioy the night,
And when mine eyes th'all-couering darkness spoils,
I never look to enrich them with the light.
For when that light with darkness makes a change,
To flatter mortals with a dream of rest,
What ougly Gorgons, what Chimeraes strange,
Do bost the little world within my breast?
The Appointed time to appease impetuous cares
Does double mine, that view most when being blind:
I apprehen'd huge horrors and dispaires,
Whilst the outward object not distract my mind.
What comfort of my conquests now remains?
Where is the peace pursude by many a strife?
Have I but taken pain t'abound in pains,
And sought by dangers for a dangerous life?
Is this the period of aspiring powers,
In promisde calmes to be most plagued by storms?
Lurk poisnous serpents under fairest flowers.
And hellish furies under heavenly forms?
It will not grieve my ghost below to go,
If circumuented in the wars I end,
As bold Marcellus by Romes greatest foe,
That gave his ashes honor as a friend.
Or like Epaminondas prosperous death,
O would to God I had amidst th'alarmes
Being chargde with recent spoils, bin spoiled of breath,
Whilst I toward Pluto might have marched in arms.
Yet t'end this life that naught but toils affords,
I Will pay to death the tribute that he owes,
Straight with my blood set some come die their swords,
My body shall be barred to embrace their blows.
But ah, how have the furies seaz'd my breast,
And poisoned thus my sprit with desperate rage:
That with their horrid serpents barred from rest,
Naught can imagined be my toiles t'asswage.
No, Atropos, yet spare my thread a space,
That ere I to the Stigian streams go down,
I may of honor have the highest place,
And if I fall, yet fall beneath a crown.
Whilst I would bend my ears t'applauding shoutes,
My thoughts divided are within my breast,
And my tossde soul does flote between two doubts,
Yet knows not on what ground to build her rest.
The Senators they have this day designde,
To show the world how they esteem my worth;
Yet do portentuous signs perturb my mind,
By which the heavens would point my danger forth;
The gods from me with indignation gone,
Have charactred in every thing my death,
And must both heaven and earth conspire in one,
To quench a little spark of still-tossde breath?
My saftie would that I should stay within,
Till this disastrous day give darkness place:
But honor hunts me forward to begin,
To reap the glory of my painful race:
And I Will advance in spite of threatened broils,
For though the fates effect that which we dream,
When death retires from forcing those frail spoils,
Though breathless, i will be breathed over all by fame.

WHat furie' is this that filles the breast,
With a prodigious rash desire,
Which banishing their souls from rest
Does make those live that high aspire,
Whilst it within their bosom boyles
As Salamanders in the fire,
Or like to serpents changing spoils
Their witherd beauties to renew:
Like Vipers with unnatural toiles,
Of such the thoughts themselves pursue,
That for all lines themselves do square,
Whilst like Camelions changing hue,
They only feed but on the air.
To pass ambition monstrous matters brings.
And (save contentment) can attain all things.
This active passion does disdain
To match with any vulgar mind,
As in base breasts where terrors reign,
To great a guest to be confinde;
It does but lofty thoughts frequent,
Where it a spacious field may find,
It self with honor to content,
Where reuerenc'd fame does lowdest sound:
Those at great things that t'aime are bent,
(Far lifted from this lumpish round)
Would in the sphere of glory move,
Whilst lofty thoughts which naught can bind,
All riualls live in virtues love:
On abject preyes as The Eagle never lights,
Ambition poisons but the greatest sprights.
And of this restles vultures brood,
If It grow not to too great a flame,
A little spark may whiles do good,
Which makes great minds affecting fame,
To suffer still all kind of pain:
There fortune at the bloody game,
Who hazard would for hope of gain.
Were not burned by a thrist of praise:
The learned lo, t'a higher strain,
Their wits by emulation raise,
As those that hold applauses dear:
And what great mind at which men gaze,
It self can of ambition clear,
Which is being rated at the highest price,
A generous error, a heroicke vice.
But when this frenzy flaming bright
Does so the souls of some surprise,
That they can taste of no delight
But what from sovereignty does rise;
Then huge affliction it affords,
Such must themselves so to disguise,
Prove prodigal of courteous words,
Give much to some, and promise all,
Then servile seem, to be made Lords,
Yea first being made to many thrall,
Must pity impart if not support,
T'all those that crushed by fortune fall,
And grieve themselves to please each sort:
Are not those wretch'd that over a dangerous snare
Hing but by hopes, being balanced in the aier?
Then when they have the port attainde,
That was through Seas of dangers sought,
They (lo) at last but loss have gainde,
And by great trouble, trouble bought.
There minds are married still with fears,
T'engender many a jealous thought,
With searching eyes and watching ears,
To learn that which they grieve to know.
The breast that such a burden bears,
What huge afflictions toil t'orethrow:
Thus princes are as all perceive,
No more exalted than brought low,
Of many a Lord, to many a slave.
That idol greatness which the earth does adore,
Is conquered with great pain, and kept with more
He that to this imagined good,
Did through his countries entrails tend,
Neglecting friendship, duty, blood,
And all on which trust can depend,
Or by which love could be conceived,
Does find of what he did attend,
His exspectations far deceived;
For since suspecting secret snares,
His soul has still of rest bin reau'd.
Whilst squadrons of tumultuous cares,
Forth from his breast extort depth groans:
Thus Caesar now of life despaires,
Whose hap his hope exceeded once,
And who can long well keep an evil won state?
Those perish must by some whom all men hate.
A Regenerous Romans so degenerd now,
That they from honor have estrangde their hands?
And used with burdens do not blush to bow,
Yea (though being broken) shake not off their bands.
This glorious work was worthy of your pain,
Whose best ye may by others dangers have,
But what enchaunts you thus that ye abstain,
That (which ye should have taken) to receive?
Where be those inundations of delight,
That should burst out through thoughts ore-flow'd with joy,
Whilst emulous virtue may your minds incite,
That which we conquered have, at least t'enioy?
Or quite conformd unto your former state,
Do still your minds of servitude allow,
As broken by adversity of late,
Not capable of better fortune now?
Lo, we that by the tyrants favor stood,
And grieved but at the yoke that you outrag'd,
Have our advancement, riches, rest, and blood,
All liberally for liberty engaged.
Thou like thy great progenitour in this,
Have glory to thy self, t'vs freedom brought,
Than liberty what greater treasure is?
Small with it much, without it much seems naught.
But pardon us (heroicke man) though we
T'a high perfection hardly can aspire,
Though every man cannot a Brutus be,
That which we cannot imitate, w'admire.
At this strange course with too much light made blind
We our opinions must suspend a space,
When any sudden chance dismayes the mind,
The judgment to the passion first gives place,

What wonder now though this most barbarous deed,
Have with amazement closde your judgment in,
Which O I fear shall great confusion breed,
When Caesar's toiles did end, Romes did begin.
The most suspicious minds had not believed,
That Romans reuerenc'd for their worth by us,
Would have presumde to kill, yea, or to have grieved,
A inviolable hallowd body thus.
Who would but once have dreamd of such despite?
What strange hostility in time of peace,
To slay, though not accusde, against all right,
A sacred man, and in a sacred placed

If Caesar as a Citizen had liu'de,
And had by law decided every strife,
Then I would grant those treason had contrived,
That went without a law to take his life.
But to pervert the laws, subvert the state,
If all his trauells did directly tend,
Then I must say, we did no wrong of late,
Why should not tyrants make a tragic end?

Since destinies did Caesar's soul enlarge,
What course can we for his recovery take?
Ah, th'vnrelenting Charons restless barge
Stands to transport all over, but brings none back.
Of life's frail glass when broken, with vain groans
What earthly power the ruins can repair?
Or who can gather up when scatterd once,
Ones blood from the earth, or yet his breath from the air?
Let us of those that pass Obliuions flood,
B'obliuious still since hope of help is gone,
And spend our cares where cares may do most good,
Lest Rome wail many, where she wailes but one.

Still concord for the commonweal were best,
To reconcile divided thoughts again,
Then discord to great towns no greater pest,
Whose violence no reverence can restrain.
Yet oftentimes those wary wits have erred,
That would buy wealth and ease at any cost,
Let honesty to profit be preferred,
And t'a vile peace, war when it wounds us most.
But seeking peace what surety can we find?
Can faithless men give faith just fears to stay?
No sacred band impiety can bind,
That swears for trust, seeks trust but to betray.
What helped it Caesar that we all had sworn,
His body still from dangers to redeem,
Those that are once perjured hold oaths in scorn,
All are most frank of what they least esteem.

None needs in states that are from tirants free,
Loathde execrations to confirm his will,
Where willingly men would with good agree,
And without danger might despise all ill.
All odious oaths by those are only craved,
Whose suit from reason does a warrant want,
Whilst all deceivers feared to be deceau'd,
Seek of men thralld what none being free would grant
When Caesar had preuailde in Libia and Spain,
His fortune building on his countries wrack,
Of liberty a shadow to retain,
We gave him all that he was bent to take.
The Senate had reserved naught but a show,
Whose course to it by Caesar was imposde,
That lifted up by bringing others low,
Of offices and provinces disposde.
Then that our witherd hopes might never spring,
When bent to abide the Parthians wooden shower,
He for five years disposde of every thing,
Even in his absence leaving us no power.
O how some aggrauate our deed with hate,
That durst by violence his body strain,
Though consecrated by constraint of late,
Yea but reputed holy, yet profane,
And do forget how he (a wondrous case)
Did violate the tribune ship to our scorn,
Which our forefathers (free) in time of peace,
Aduisdly had inviolable sworn.
Did he not once appropriate (swollen with wrath)
The public treasure to his private use,
And to the sacred Tribune threatened death,
That did resist, grieved at so great a'abuse?
Tweene Romans and a tyrant what auailes
A covenant whilst right rests troad on thus?
Who can build further when the ground first fails?
Could we save him that sought to ruin us?

So absolutely good no man remains,
Whose natural weakness never him beguiles,
Even virtues die from vice may take some stains,
And worthy minds foul imperfections whiles.
As in fine fruits or weeds fat earth abounds,
Even as the laborers spend or spare their pain,
The greatest sprites disdaining vulgar bounds,
Of what they seek the highest height must gain.
They, that the crown of glory may b'enioyd,
As only borne to be in action still,
Had rather be (than idle) evil employed,
Great sprites must do great good, or then great ill.
The glorious Sun that golden rays do arm,
The treasure of the world that does most good,
Whilst on a time misgouernd did much harm,
Till th'ouerbold Coachman fell amidst a flood.
Then whilst he by the rules of reason lived,
When lawfully elected by the State,
What glorious deeds by Caesar were atchiu'd,
Which all the world as wonders must relate.
But when of right he buried all respects,
As blind ambition had bewitched his mind,
What harm ensude by pitiful effects.
We at the first, he at the last did find.
Whilst like Narcissus with himself in love,
He with our bondage banqueted his sight,
And for a while uncertain joys to prove,
Would sauce with all our sorrows his delight,
How could such gallant virtuous men as those,
That of their countries weal are jealous still,
But stowtly to all storms their states expose,
So th'authour of their infamy to kill?
But since our freedom flows from Caesar's blood,
Let us embrace that which too long we lack,
Peace gives to Justice power, and it t'all good,
Where war breeds wrong, and wrong al kind of wrack.
This city has experienced with great pain,
Th'all-burdning troubles of intestine strife,
Which by her ruins registered remain,
Since first the Gracchi gave contention life.
When Silla once and Marius (mad through pride)
Seemd but to strive who most tyrannicke proved,
What memorable miseries were tried
From Romans minds can never be removed.
Then last by Caesar and his son in law,
What thousands ghosts to Pluto were dispatchd?
Ah that the world those hosts divided saw,
Which joined in one no world of worlds had matchd.
Yet with this wit that we have dearly bought,
Let us abhor th'apparance of such broiles,
Lest when we have our selves to ruin brought,
In end Barbarians bear away our spoils.

Rome to those great men hardly can afford,
A recompense according to their worth,
That by a tyrants ore-throw have restord,
The light of liberty that was put forth.
Yet by due praises with their merits even,
Let us illustrate their illustrous minds,
And to their charge let provinces be given;
Still virtue grows when it preferrement finds.

Those barbarous realms by whose respective will,
Of Caesar's conquests monuments are shown,
As if they held them highly honored still,
That warrd with Caesar though they were orethrowne.
Can this disgrace by their proud minds be borne,
Whilst we dishonor whom they honor thus,
And shall we not (whilst as a tyrant torn,)
Give him a tomb that gave the world to us?
Must his decrees be all reducde again,
And those degraded whom he gracde of late,
As worthy men unworthily did gain
Their rooms of reputation in the state?
If as a tyrant we him damn so soon,
And for his murd'rers do rewards devise,
Then what he did, must likewise be undone,
For which I fear a foul confusion rise.

Ah (great Antonius) sow not seeds of war,
And if thou always do delight in arms,
The haughty Parthians yet undaunted are,
Which may give thee great praise, and us no harms.
Detest in time th'abhominable broiles,
For which no conqueror to triumph has com'd,
Whilst this wretch'd town (which still some party spoils)
Must loathe the victor, and lament th'orecomd,
And shall we still contend against all good,
To make the yoke where we should bound abide?
Must still the commons sacrifize their blood,
As only borne to serve the great men's pride.

Whilst I the depths of my affection found,
And read but th'obligations which I owe,
I find my self by oaths, and duty bound,
All Caesar's foes, or then my self t'orethrow.
But when I weigh what to the state belongs,
The which to plague no passion shall get place,
Then I with grief digesting private wrongs,
War with my self to give my country peace.
Yet whilst my thoughts of this last purpose muse,
I altogether dis-assent from this,
That we should Caesar's fame, or body abuse,
By torturing tyrants as the custom is.
Lest guilty of ingratitude we seem,
(If guerdoning our benefactors thus)
Great Caesar's body from disgrace redeem,
And let his acts be ratified by us.
Then for the public weal of which we pause,
Toward those that have him killd t'extend regard,
Let them be pardond for their kinsmens cause,
Remission given for evil is a reward.

We stand not dashed like malefactors here,
With a dejected and remorcefull mind,
So in your presence supplicants t'appeare,
As who themselves of death do guilty find;
But looking boldly with a lofty brow,
Through a delight of our design conceived,
We come to challenge gratefulness of you,
That have of us so great a good received.
But if ye will suspend your thoughts a space,
Though not the giuers, entertain the gift,
Do us reject, yet liberty embrace,
To have you free, lo, that was all our drift.
So Rome her ancient liberties enjoy,
Let Brutus, and let Cassius banished live,
Thus banishment would breed us greater joy,
Than what at home a tyrants wealth could give.
Though some misconster may this course of ours,
By ignorance or then by hate deceived,
Yet truth depends not on opinions powers,
But is it self how ever misconceiu'd.
Though none themselves t'acknowledge us would daigne,
Our merit of it self is a reward,
Of doing good none should repent their pain,
Though neither getting guerdon nor regard.
I Will venture yet my fortune in the field,
With every one that Rome to bondage draws:
And as for me, how ever others yield,
I Will naught obey but reason and the Laws.

What fools are those that further travel take,
For that which else they past recovery know?
Who can revive the dead, or bring time back?
At least no mortal that remains below.
Great Pompey (now) for whom the world still weeps,
Lies low, neglected on a barbarous shore;
Selfe-slaughtred Scipio flotes amidst the depthes,
Whom it may be sea monsters do devour.
Of Libian wolves wise Cato feasts the wombes,
Whose death of worth the world defrauded leaves:
Thus some that merited Mausolean tombs,
Not have a title grau'd upon their graves.
And yet may Caesar that procured their death,
By brave men slain be buried with his race:
All civil war being banished with his breath,
Let him now dead, and us alive have peace.
We should desist our thoughts on things to set,
That may harm some, and can give help to none,
Learn to forget that which we can not get,
And let our cares be gone, of all that is gone.
Those that would strive all crosses to ore-come,
Must to the present time conform their course:
And doing the best for that which is to come,
Not meddle with things past but by discourse.
Seek not the thing which does not good being found,
Since Caesar now is dead, how ever dead;
Let all our grief go with him to the ground,
For sorrow best becomes a lightlesse shade.
It Is best that reconioynde with mutual love,
We physic for this wounded state prepare:
Neglecting those that from the world remove,
All men on earth for earthly things must care.

O how those great men friendship can pretend,
By soothing others thus with painted winds,
And seem to trust, where treason they attend,
Whilst love their mouth, and malice filles their minds.
Those but to them poor simple souls appear,
Whose countnance does discover what they think,
That make their words as is their meaning clear,
And from themselves can never seem to shrink.
Lo how Anthonius faines to quench all iarres,
And kindly the conspirators t'imbrace,
Yet as he furthered first the former wars,
It Is feared he now be enemy to peace.
Now where Calphurnia stays our steps adresse,
By this last sudden chance her loss was chief:
All visit should their neighbors in distress,
To give some comfort, or to get some grief.

WHen darkness last imprisond had mine eyes,
Such monstrous visions did my soul affright,
That my dejected sprite still stupid dies,
Through terrors then contracted in the night.
A melancholious cloud so dimmes my breast,
That it my mind fit for misfortune makes,
A lodging well disposde for such a guest,
Where naught of sorrow but the impression lackes.
And I imagine every man I see
(My senses so corrupted are by fears)
A Herald to denounce mishaps to me,
That should infuse confusion in mine cares.
O there he comes to violate my peace,
In whom the object of my thoughts I see:
Thy message is charecter'd in thy face,
Which by thy looks directed is to me:
Thy troubled eyes rest rouling for releife,
As lately frighted by some ougly sight,
Thy breath does pant as if being big with grief,
And feared to bring some monstrous birth to light.
The man of whom the world in doubt remained,
If that his mind, or fortune was more great,
Whose valor conquered, clemency retained
All nations subject to the Roman state;
Him fraud harmed more then force, friends more then, foes
Ah, must this sad discourse by me be made?

Stay; ere thou further go defray my woes,
How does my love? where is my life? Nu^. Dead. Call. dead.

Though apprehending horrors in her mind,
Now since she has a certainty received,
She by experience greater grief does find,
Till borne, the passions cannot be conceived.
When as a high disaster force affords,
O how that tyrant whom affliction bears,
Bars theares from comfort, and the mouth from words.
And being obdur'd cannot dissolve in tears.

Ah, since the lights of that great light are set,
Why does not darkness spread it self over all?
At least what further comfort can I get
Whose pleasures had no period but his fall.
O would the gods I always might confine
Aetna' in my breast, and The Ocean in mine eyes,
That t'entertaine so great a grief as mine,
Thence might sufficient furniture arise.
Yet I disdain though by distress ore-throwne,
By such external means to seek relief:
The greatest sorrows are by silence shown,
Whilst all the senses are shut up with grief:
But misery does so tyrannicke grow,
That it of sighs and tears a tribute claims:
Ah, when the cup is full it must ore-flow,
And fires that burn must offer up some flames.
Yet though that thy last words my last might be,
Which are deep sunk within a melted heart,
Of my lives death report each point to me,
That I for every circumstance may smart.

What fatal warnings did fore-go his end,
Which by his stay to frustrate some did try?
But he that scorned excuses to pretend,
Was by the Destinies drawn forth to die.
Whilst by the way he chanced t'encounter one
That had his deaths-day named, he to him said;
Now th'Ides of March be com'd, but yet not gone,
Straight tho'other answered, and still constant staide.
Another brought a letter with great speed,
Which the conspiracy at length did touch,
And gave it Caesar in his hand to read,
Protesting that it did import him much.
Yet did he lay it up where still it rests,
As do the great whom happy the earth reputes,
That grieved to be importuned by requests,
Of simple supplicants neglect the suits:
Or he of it the reading did defer,
Still troubled by attendanrs at the gate,
Whilst some to show their credit did confer
To flatter some, for something some t'entreat.
Not only did the gods by diverse signs
Give Caesar warning of his threatened harms,
But did disturb all th'aduersaries designs,
And to their troubled thoughts gave strange alarmes.
A Senator that by some words we find,
To the conspiratours (though none of theirs)
Had shown himself familiar with their mind,
Then chanced to deal with Caesar in affairs.
That sight their souls did with confusion fill,
For thinking that he told their purposde deeds;
They straight themselves, or Caesar thought to kill
A guilty conscience no accuser needs.
But marking that he used (when taking leave)
The gesture of a suter that gave thanks,
They of their course did greater hopes conceive,
And ranged themselves according to their ranks.
Then Caesar marched forth to the fatal place,
Near Pompyes theater where the Senate was,
Where when he had remained a little space,
All the confederates flocked about. Calph. Alas.

First for the form Metellus Cimber craved,
To have his brother from exile restored;
Yet with the rest a rude repulse received,
Whilst it they all too ernestly implored.
Then Cimber that in strife with him did stand,
Did draw the gown over Caesar's sacred head:
But the first blow was given by Cascaes hand,
Which on his neck a little wound but made.
Then Caesar starting whilst the stroke he spied,
By strength from further striking Casca stayde:
Whilst both the two burst out at once and cried,
The One traitor Casca, the other brother aid.
Then all the rest against him did arise
Like desperate men, whose fury force affords,
That Caesar on no side could set his eyes,
But every look r'encountred with some swords.
Yet as a Lion when by nets surprisde,
Stands struggling still so long as he has strength;
So Caesar, as he had their power dispisde,
Did with great rage resist; till at the length
He thus cried out (when spying Brutus come)
And thou mya son? then grief did back rebound,
Naught but unkindness Caesar could ore-come,
That of all things does give the deepest wound.

Ah, when unkindness is where love was thought,
A tender passion breaks the strongest heart,
For of all those that give offense in ought,
Men others hate, but for th'vnkinde they smart.

Ah, taking then no more delight in light,
As which would then his life have bitter framed:
Or then from Brutus blow t'absent his sight,
As of so great ingratitude ashamed.
He with his gown being covered first over all,
As one that neither sought, nor wished relief;
Not wronging majesty in state did fall,
No sigh consenting to betray his grief.
Yet (if by chance or force I cannot tell,)
Even at the place whereas his statue stood,
As craving Pompcy pardon Caesar fell,
That in revenge it might exhaust his blood.
But when his corpse abandond quite by breath
Did Fortunes frailties monument remain,
That all might have like interest in his death;
And guilty alike, look for like praise or pain.
Then Cassius, Brutus, and the rest began
With that great Emperors blood t'imbrue their hands:
What beast in the earth more cruel is than man,
When over his reason passion once commands?

Whilst brutish Brutus, and proud Cassius thus
Romes greatest Captain under trust deceived,
Where was Anthonius (since a friend to us,)
That he not lost himself, or Caesar saved?

The whole conspirators remainde in doubt,
Had he and Caesar joined, to be undone;
And so causde one him t'entertaine without,
Who feigned a conference till the fact was done.
Then knowing well in such tumultuous broils,
That the first danger always is the worst,
He fled in haste, disguisde with unknown spoils,
For rage and for disdain being like to burst.

The Senators that were assembled there,
When they beheld that great man brought t'an end,
What was their part? to what inclined their care?
I fear affliction could not find a friend.

Of those that in the Senate House did sit,
As grieved so sad an object to behold:
Or feared what further murdrers might commit,
Each toward his house a several way did hold.
This act with horror did confound their sight,
And unawares their judgment did surprise,
When any hasty harms unlooked for light,
The resolution has not time to rise.
That man on whom the world did once rely,
By all being reuerenc'd, and adored by some,
Had none to attend him left, but two and I.

To what an ebb may fortunes full whiles come*
Why should men following on the smoke of pride,
Leave certain ease to seek a dreamed delight,
Which when they have by many dangers tried,
They neither can with safety keep, nor quite?
The people that by force subdude remain,
May pity those by whom oppressd they rest.
They but one tyrant have, where as there reign,
A thousand Tyrants in one tyrants breast.
What though that Caesar once commanded kings,
Whose only name whole nations did appall?
Yet now (let no man trust in worldly things)
A little earth holds him that held it all.

Ah, had he but believed my faithful cares,
That to have his state established always strived:
Then scaping this conspiracy of theirs,
He honorde still, and I had happy lived.
Did I not spend of supplications store,
That he within his house this day would waste,
As I by dreams aduertis'd was before,
Which showed that was to come, which now is past:
Whilst the soothsayers sacrifiz'd did find,
A beast without a heart their altars stain:
By that presage my soul might have diuin'd
That I without my heart would soon remain.
But all those terrors could not terrors give,
To that great mind whose thoghts could not be tamed;
But by his fortune confident did live,
As him to obey the heavens had all things framed.
Yet though he ended have his fatal race,
T'insult for this let not his murdrers strive,
For, O I hope to see within short space,
Him dead adored, and them abhorred alive.
Though now his name the multitude respects,
Since murdering one that had held him so dear,
Whilst the inward thoughts each outward thing reflects,
Some monstrous shape to Brutus must appear.
Just Nemesis must plague proud Cassius soon,
And make him kill himself from hopes estranged;
Once all the wrongs by foes to Caesar done,
May by themselves be on themselves revenged.

Some for the earths sovereign Fortune strive to prove
As heavens their course confusdly did advance,
Naught comes to men below, but from above,
By providence, not by a staggering chance.
Though to the cause that last foregoes the end,
Some attribute the event of every thing,
That cause on other causes does depend,
From heaven to earth that chaind together hing.
Of those decrees that heavens for us appoint,
Who-euer them approues, or yet disprooues,
No mortal man can dissappoint a point,
But as they please here mooues, or hence remooues.
We when once com'd the worlds vain pomp to try,
Led by the fates, to our iournies end must haste,
For when first borne, we striaght begin to die,
Life's first day is a step unto the last.
And is there ought more swift than days and years,
Which wear away this breath of ours so soon?
Whilst Lachesis to no request gives ears,
But spinnes the threedes of life till they be done.
Yet foolish worldelings following that which flies,
As if they had assurance still to breathe,
To frail preferrement fondly strive to rise,
Which but a burden weighes them down to death.

There Is none of us but must remember still,
How that the gods by many a wondrous sign,
Did show as 'twere how that against their will,
The destinies would Caesar's days confine.
A monstrous star amidst the heaven has been,
Still since they first against him did conspire,
The solitary birds at noone were seen,
And men to walk enuirond all with fire.
What wonder though the heavens at such a time,
Vpbraide the earth with apparitions strange,
Then whilst intending such a monstrous crime,
Unnatural men make natures course to change.

Though all such things seem wonderful to some,
They may by reason comprehended be,
Yet if ought more than common custom come,
It th'ignorant with wondering eyes must see.
Those bastard stars not heritours of the air,
Are first conceived below, then borne above,
And when fore-knowing things sprites take most care,
And by illusions superstition move.
Yet this no doubt a great regard should breed,
When Nature has brought forth a monstrous birth,
Where men in secret characters may read,
The wrath of heaven, and wickedness of earth.
The Naturalists, and th'Astrologians skill,
May whiles r'encountring manifest like care,
Since the one looks back, and the other forward still,
The One may tell what, and the other why things are.

Shall sorrow through the waves of woes to sail
Have still your tears for seas, your sighs for winds,
T'affliction what do base complaints avail?
A higher course becomes heroicke minds.
None are orecom'd save only those that yield,
Though they from froward fortune blows have borne.
Let Virtue be t'Aduersitie a shield,
No greater grief to grief than the enemies scorn.
This makes your foes but laugh to see you weep;
At least these tears but for your self bestow,
And not for that great sprite, whose spoils heavens keep,
For he no doubt rests deified ere now.

I only wail my life, and not his death,
That now amongst th'immortalls does repose,
And shall so long as I have blood or breath,
To furnish forth those elements of woes.
I care not who rejoice, so I lament,
That do to darkness dedicate my days,
And since the light of my delight is spent,
Shall have in horror all Apolloes rays.
I will retire my self to wail alone,
As do the trusty Turtles for their mates,
And my misfortune always bent to moan,
Will spurn at pleasures, as empoisond baits.
No second guest shall press great Caesar's bed,
Warmd by the flames to which he first gave life,
I think there may be greater honor had,
Being Caesar's widow, than another wife.
This had afforded comfort for my harms,
If I (ere chancde abandond thus to be,)
Had had a little Caesar in mine arms,
That represented had his sire to me.
Yet does that idol which my thoughts adore,
With me of late most strictly match remain,
For where my arms but held him whiles before,
Now in my heart I shall him still retain.
That (though I have no precious things t'impart)
Thy deity may by me b'acknowledgde often,
Still offering up my thoughts upon my heart,
My sacred flame shall always mount aloft.

WHat fools are those that do repose their trust,
On what this mass of misery affords?
And bragging but of th'excrements of dust,
Of lifelesse treasures labor to be lords:
Which like the Sirens songs, or Circes charms,
With shadows of delight hide certain harms.
Ah whilst they sport on pleasures icie ground,
Often poisond by prosperity with pride,
A sudden fall does floating joys confound,
Of those that stumble after th'eielesse guide,
That so inconstantly her self does bear,
To hope the unhappy, happy have cause to fear.
The fortunate that bathe in floods of joys,
To perish whiles amidst their pleasures chance,
And mirthlesse wretches wallowing in annoyes,
Often by adversity themselves advance:
Whilst fortune bent to mock vain worldlings ears
Does change dispaires in hopes, hopes in dispaires.
That gallant Grecian, whose great wit so soon
Th'innumerable army did overcome,
Were not he was undone, had bin undone,
And if not banished had not had a home:
To him fear courage gave (what wondrous change,)
And many doubts a resolution strange.
He that told one that then was fortunes child,
As if with horror to congeale his blood,
That Caius Marius being from Rome exilde:
Wretch'd on the ruins of great Carthage stood:
Though both being plag'd by grief, and by disgrace
The consulship regained, and di'd in peace.
And that great Pompey (all the worlds delight,)
Whom of his theater then th'applauses pleased,
Whilst praise-transported eyes endeerd his sight,
That by youths toiles should have his age then easde:
He by one blow of fortune lost far more,
Then many a battle conquered had before.
Such sudden changes so disturb the soul,
That still the judgment ballancde is by doubt,
But on around, what wonder though things roll,
And since within a circle turn about?
Whilst heaven on earth strange alterations brings,
To scorn our confidence in worldly things.
And chancde there ever accidents more strange,
Than in this stormy bounds where we remain?
A shepheardes Staff did here t'a Scepter change,
The nurceling of a woolfe over men to reign:
A little village grew a mighty town,
Which whilst it had no king, held many a crown.
Then by how many sundry sorts of men,
Has this great state bin ruled? though now by none,
Which first obeyed but one, then two, then ten,
Then by degrees returned to two, and the one,
Of which three states their ruin did abide,
Two by twoes lusts, and one by two men's pride.
What reuolutions huge have happened thus,
All by a secret violence being led,
Though seeming but by accident to us,
Yet in the depths of heavenly breasts first bred;
As arguments demonstratiue to prove,
That weakness dwells below, and power above.
Lo Caesar, though being burdend in short space,
Both with strange nations, and his countries spoils,
Even when he seemd by war to have purchasde peace,
And roses of sweet rest from thorns of toiles:
Then whilst his mind and fortune raise most hie,
Has bin constraind the last distress to try.
What warnings large were in a time so short,
Of that dark course which by his death now shines?
It speechless wonders plainly did report,
It men reueald by words, and gods by signs:
Yet by the chains of destinies being bound,
He saw the sword, but could not escape the wound.
O what a curtine over our knowledge hings!
Whiles closde, whiles opened by th'aetheriall host,
Which makes us sometime sharp to see small things,
And yet quite blind when as we should see most:
That curious brains may rest amazde at it,
Whose ignorance makes them presume of it.
Then let us live, since all things change below,
When raisde most high as those that once may fall,
And hold when by disasters brought more low,
The mind still free what ever else be thrall:
Those Lords of Fortune sweeten every state,
That can command themselves, though not their fate.

