Back from th'umbragious bounds still robbed of rest
Must I return, where Phoebus gildes the fields,
A ghost not worthy to be Plutoes guest,
Since one to whom the world no burial yields.
O what a great disgrace is this to me,
Whose trophies the earth in every corner keeps,
That I (contemned) cannot transported be,
A passenger through the sulphurean deepes.
Dare churlish Charon, though not used to bow,
The raging torrent of my wrath gain estand?
Must I succumb amidst hells dungeons now,
Though over the world accustomed to command?
But it may be that this has wrought me harm.
What bloodlesse ghosts stray on the Stygian bancke,
Whose falls (made famous by my fatal arm)
Whose falls (made famous by my fatal arm)
Gave terror often to many a martial rank?
Yet for a prey exposde to ravenous beasts,
Could never have the honor of a tomb.
But (though for such rude guests too precious feasts)
Were basely buried in their brutish womb.
Thus as it seems the horiour of such deeds
With like indignity attends my sprite,
What stormy breast this thirst of vengeance breeds,
T'accuse for that which valor did acquit.
Ah might Alcmenaes son (as worthy of Jove)
Once force the infernal fortes of endless night,
T'encounter Dis in the Tartarian grove,
And draw forth th'ougly Cerberus to light.
Then leading Theseus through the cauerns dark,
That would have forced the inferior regions Queen,
By violence used he th'auernall bark,
As Conqueror of the pallide Empire seen.
And may not I down in the center sit?
Their renting the earth (as thence when vapors rise)
T'inlarge the imprisoned souls, the pitchy pit,
That once the light may lighten lightlesse eyes.
What though I from th'aetheriall circles swerue,
Whom in this state it may be some mistake,
May not the voice of Alexander serve
To make the earth tremble, and the depths to shake?
Or shall I go above with new alarmes,
To spoil the princes of the peopled round?
And turn back, backed with squadrons all in arms,
T'affright the ghosts that are beneath the ground.
But (ah) what comfort can I find above,
Where those whom I advanced, lo now in the end
The titles of my offspring strive t'improue?
And to my chair by violence ascend.
Ingratitude torments my troubled sprite:
Would God therefore, that with a body stored,
I might return t'enioy the days clear light.
My back with arms, my hand charged with a sword,
As when I entered in a populous town.
To war alone with thousands in my wrath,
Whilst (prizing honor deerer than my Crown)
Each of my blows gave wounds, each wound gave death.
Then thundering vengeance on rebellious bands
I would make them redeem my grace with groans,
Where now my Ghost hedgd in with horror stands:
Less gracd then those whom I commanded once.
And yet thaduancement by those captains had,
Whom first my Ensigns did acquaint with same,
Does make my soul a thousand times more sad,
Then all the sufftings that the hels can claim.
O now I see what all my minions blindes,
My funerals to perform that none takes pain,
My state betraying me distracts their minds,
That have forgot all love, but love to reign.
But Ptholomie does yet by time intend
Back t Alexandrta to transport me once:
Not moved by love; no, for an other end,
In hope my fortune will attend my bones.
And must I then so great a trouble have,
That lately had all thearth, and all thearths store,
For some few footes of earth, to be a grave
Which mean men get: and great men get no more?
Though many a thousand at my sign did bow,
Is this the end of all my conquests then,
To be barrd from that little circuit now,
The benefit that's common unto men?
But of it all that once was thrall to me,
Lest that a little part my body bound,
I think all thearth my fatal bed should be,
That still all confines scornd but the azure round.
O blind ambition! great minds viprous brood,
The scourge of mankind, and the foe to rest,
Thou guilty art of many a millions blood,
And whilst I raignd, did reign within my breast.
This to my soul but small contentment brings,
That I some Cities reard, and others razd:
And made Kings captives, captives to be Kings:
Then whilst the wondering world did stand amazed,
All that but now torments me after death,
Which raisde my fame on pillars, that were rare.
O costly conquest of alittle breath,
Whose flattring sounds, both come and go with the air!
Can I be he that thought it a disgrace,
Once to be made with other mortals even,
That would be thought of an immortal race,
The offspring of great Jove, the heir of heaven?
I by all1 means the peoples minds did move,
To Have Altars (as a god) with offerings stored;
Till of his glory Jove did jealous prove,
All Princes should be reuerenc'd, not adored.
Ah whilst transported with a prosperous state,
I toiled t'exalt my throne above the stars,
That pride of mine, the thunderer bent t'abate,
Did wound my fame with most infamous wars.
Made I not grave Calistines to smart,
That did disdain a dying flesh to adore?
And bent t'unknow my knowledge, by vain Art
Though known a man sought to b'imagin'd more.
All feared t'incurre the danger of my wrath:
Which as a sleeping Lion, none durst wake.
Mine anger was the messenger of death,
That many a time made armies all to quake.
So much Ambition did my thoughts engage,
That I could not abide my fathers praise:
But (though my friend) killed Clitus in a rage,
That in my presence Philips fame durst raise.
Thus though that I mine enemies did abate,
I made my greatest friends become my foes,
Who did my barbarous insolences hate,
And for the like afraid, waild others woes.
Those tyrannies which thousands chanced to see
As inhumane a multitude admirde:
And feared to be familar more with me,
As from an odious tyrant stood retirde:
Yea there were many too that did conspire,
By base ambushments whiles t'entrap my life.
Of all my labors, lo this was the hire,
Those must have store of toiles, that toil for strife:
And I remember that amidst my joys,
Even whilst the chase of armies was my sport,
There wanted not a portion of annoyes
To counterpoise my pleasures in some sort.
Of those in the earth most happy that remain,
(As aged experience constantly records)
The pleasures far exceeded are by pain,
Life greater grief then comfort still affords.
What rage and sorrow seaz'd upon my soul,
Whilst big with hopes a battle bent to prove!
That sudden sickness did my course control,
Which Cidnus cold imbracings chanced to move.
From the Physician then (though deemed for ill)
I took his drink, and gave th'inuectiue lines.
Then whilst he red did drink, yet eyd him still,
And by accusing looks searched guilty signs.
Not that suspicious fears could make me sad.
This was the ground whence did proceed my pain,
Lest death that victory prevented had,
Which I was sure (if present once) t'obtaine.
But when that I extended had my state,
From learned Athens to the barbarous Indes,
Still my tumultuous troops my pride did hate,
As monstrous mutinies unmasked their minds.
I (so my name more wonderful to make)
Of Hercules and Bacchus past the bounds.
And (whilst that Memnons sun burnt bands did quake)
Did write my worth in many a Monarchs wounds,
Kings were my subjects, and my subjects kings:
Yet my contentment further did require,
For I imagind still more mighty things,
And to a greater greatnesle did aspire,
The compass of the carriere of the sun,
By many a famous victory I wan:
Yet wept that there were no more worlds to win,
As all had been to little for one man.
Was I not honored as a God by some,
Whilst what I interprizd it still preuaild?
Whom I assaild I always did ore-come,
No project of my fancies ever faild.
This made me thought immortalizd to be,
Which in all minds amazement yet contracts,
For I led Fortune, Fortune followed me,
As forced to attend the greatness of my acts.
Yet I have found it a more easy thing,
To conquer all the mansions of the wind,
Then mine own self; and of my passions king
To order the disorders of my mind.
What comfort justly could my soul receive
Of all my conquests past, if that even then
Whilst I triumphed, (to wrath and wine as slave)
I escaped not scandal more then other men.
Ah, seazing without right on every state,
I but my self too great a Monarch made:
Since all men gapt to get the golden bate,
Which by my death seemd easy to be had.
Whilst from humanity too much deuorc'd
My deeds all hearts with fear and horror filled:
I whom the force of foes yet never forced,
Was by my friends most fraudulently killed.
But now I see the troublous time draws near,
When they shall keep my obsequies with blood.
No wonder too, though such a warriors biere,
At last do swim amids a scarlet flood:
For as my life did breed huge broils over all,
My death must be the occasion of great cumbers,
And it does best become a strong man's fall,
To be renowned by ruining of numbers.
The snaky-tressed sisters shall not need
T'vse fatal firebrands, loathsome Plutoes pestes,
Or poisonous inspirations, so to bred,
A thirst of murder in transported breasts.
Yet my ambitious ashes once may shine
T'enflame my Minions minds with strange desires:
If of their spirits each keep a spark of mine,
To waste the world, their breasts may furnish fires.
The beauties once of the earth shall all look red,
Whilst my lieuetenants through that pride of theirs
With unkind arms, huge streams of blood do shed,
By murdering of mine heirs to be mine heirs.
Is this the gain of greatnesses did I pine
To be made eminent, to be overthrown,
To ruin first my self then root out mine;
As conquering others, but to lose mine own?
O happy I, but happier far my race,
If with my fathers conquests still content,
I managed had the Aemathian power in peace,
Which was made lawful by a long descent.
Then far sequestered from Bellonaes rage,
I had the true delites of nature tried,
And aged with honor; honored in my age
Had left my scepter to my son and dyed,
And he succeeded had t'a quiet state,
Which then because less great had bin more sure.
And not exposd to envy, nor to hate,
That do against the greatest States conjure.
But since they mind t'enearth mine earthly part;
Which now no badge of majesty reraines.
To roaring Phlegeton I must depart,
Far from the lightsome bounds of th'ayrie Plains.
And must I there, that did the world surmount,
(Arrested by the Monarke of the Ghosts)
To Radamanthus render an account,
Of all the deeds done by my ravenous hosts?
There whilst with Minos Aeacus sits down,
A rigorous Judge in Hells most horride court.
Though far before his Nephew in renown,
He will not with one of his race comport.
O what pale troops of ghosts are gathered here,
That were of bodies spoild by my decree!
And first the wronged Parmenio does compeere,
From whom I naught, but who did much from me,
At the tribunal of Tartarian powers:
He aggrauates a ingratitude too great.
And (whilst the infernal tyrant foming lowres)
All whom I wronged for vengeance stand t'intreat:
Yet guilty thoughts torment me most of all.
No sprite can be by plaging Furies pind,
(Though charged without with snakes, within with gall)
As by the slings of a remording mind.
If it be true that drowsy Laethes streams
Drown in obliuions deepes all things at last,
There let me bury far from Phoebus beams
The loathed remembrance of my Labors past.

What strange adventures now
Distract distressed minds,
With such most monstrous storms?
When silence seems t'allow
The peace that Nature finds,
And that tumultuous winds
Do not disturb with storms,
An vniuer sall rest:
When Morpheus has represt,
The Impetuous course of cares,
And with a soft skepe b^ndes
Those tyrants of the breast,
That would spread forth most dangerous snares,
T'inuo'ue the afflicted in dispaires.
Huge horrors then arise,
Which the elements do mar,
With most disastrous signs;
Armed squadorns in the Skies,
With Lances thrown from far,
Do make a monstrous war,
Whilst Fury naught confines:
The Dragons vomit fire,
And make the stars retire
Out of their orbs for fear:
Some of those warriors are
To satifie their ire,
That th'azure buildings not forbear,
But seem the cristall Towers to tear.
Amidst the air fierce blasts
Do boast with blustering sounds,
T'vndoe this mighty frame,
Which (whilst the tempest lasts)
Does rent the stately roundes,
To signify what wounds
Strait t'all her of-springs shame,
Shall burst the earths veins with blood.
And this all-circkling flood
(As it were the heavens to drown)
Does pass the appointed bounds,
And all the scaly brood,
Rear roaring Neptunes foamie crown,
Whilst the earth for fear seems to sincke down.
Those that the earth chargde, what horror?
Their ashie lodgings leave,
To re-enioy the light,
Or else some panicke terror
Our judgment does bereave,
Whilst first we misconceiue,
And so preiudge the sight;
Or in the bodies stead,
The genius of the dead
Turns back from Stix again,
Which Dis will not receive,
Till it a while engendring dread;
Give whilst it does on the earth remain,
To others fear, and to it self pain.
These fearful signs foreshow,
The doubtful world t'appall,
What plagues are to succeed;
When death had laid him low,
That first had made us thrall,
We heard that strait his fall,
Our liberty would breed:
But this proves no relief
For many (O what grief)
The place of one supply;
And we must suffer all;
Thus was our comfort brief:
For rarely does th'vsurper die,
But others will his fortune try.
WHateie not big with tears can view this host?
Which has in one (ah) as the end does prove?
A King, a Captain, and a Brother lost:
Crowned, followed, tried, by right, for worth, in love.
I think amongst us all there is not one,
Whom diverse favors do not justly bind,
To Appease that Heroes ghost, though from us gone,
With all th'oblations of a thankful mind.
Ah, had the Fates been subject to my will,
Such clouds of sorrow had not darkened life,
But we had had great Alexander still,
And he those kingdoms that procure this strife.
Yet heavens decrees can never be recalld,
And thoughts of harms past help breed double pain:
Though being to grief a space by passions thralld,
The living must embrace the world again.
As one whose interest in his life was chief,
I of his death have cause to curse the effects:
But will not frustrate so the general grief,
To wail apart particular respects.
Though the air be plenish'd yet with plaintiue sounds
Of widdow'd hopes that wedded have despaires:
Yet Time must cicatrize our inward wounds,
And to the public weal draw private cares.
Let us give physic to the sickened state,
That at this present in great danger stands:
Whilst grudging subjects that our greatness hate,
Would enfranchize their violated lands.
Those that are thralld by force to be made free,
Praecipitate themselves in dangers still;
And this th'instinct of Nature seems to be,
What realm not scorns to attend a strangers will?
From forced obedience naught but hate proceeds,
The more we have subdude, the more our foes:
A sovereign head this states huge body needs,
That might make us securely to repose.
And who more meet t'enioy that great man's place,
Wh'of those whose states he took, received the hearts:
Then one descended from th'illustrous race,
Whose birth both worth and right to reign impartes.
If heaven enrich Roxana with a son,
That longed-for birth a lawful sovereign brings,
And till that course of doubtful hopes be done,
Let some appointed be to rule all things.
Though Macedonians tuned minds not scorn,
That to Alexander strangers should succeed,
Can men obey a babe, a babe not borne?
What fancies strange would this confusion breed?
This could not well become our grave foresight,
A doubtful birth to attend so long in vain,
That may b'abortiue, and though brought to light,
Through Natures error made not apt to reign.
But if affection carry us so far,
That of that race we must be ruled by some:
Though neither being practiced in peace nor war,
As those that have indeed by kind overcome.
Then have we Hercules the eldest son,
That to our great Prince was by Barsines borne:
Who fourteen years of age has else begun
His princely birth by virtues rare t'adorne.

Might not the Macedonians all b'asham'd,
If rendered vassalles thus t'a barbarous brood?
What? should we bear the yoke that we have framd,
To buy disgrace have we bestowde our blood.
Our ancestors whose glory we obscured,
Would get some vantage of their Nephues thus:
They warrd that peoples wrack to have procurd,
And have we ward to make them Lords over us?
Ah, bury this as a'xecrable thing,
And let this purpose be no more pursude,
For though they were begotten by our king,
Yet were they borne of those that we subdude.
Obraue Leonides, I like thy strife,
That with so few perforrnd so glorious things:
And death preferrd before th'infamous life,
That bondage still from a Barbarian brings.
Those loathed t'accept a stranger for their Lord,
And with their blood gave flame t'an unknown field,
Yet we would honor them that they abhorrd,
And though being victors to the vanquished yield.
For where-to tended that renownd attempt,
Which makes the Persians yet abase their brow;
But even to our countries scorn in a contempt.
To take by force that which we offer now.
Was this the scope of all our conquersts then,
Of our own captives to be made the prey?
No, let us still command like valerous men,
And rule our Empire by some other way.
May we not use this policy a space,
Till better wits some better means devise?
Lest dangerous discords do disturb our peace,
Still when we would of serious things advice.
Let a maiesticke Senate gathered be,
And them amongst the Imperial chare of state:
That of the authority all signs may see,
Then whilst we compass that respected seat.
There those that were in credit with the king,
Whose merits in men's minds have reverence bred:
Shall in their judgments balance every thing,
How kingdoms should be ruld, how Armies led.
And what the greatest part has once approved,
To that the rest must obliged be t'incline:
All th'armie by this harmony being moved,
Will execute what ever we design.
This concord would prove happy for us all,
Since it each state in greatest surety renders:
And by this means our Macedony shall,
In place of one have many Alexanders.

Though silence I confess becomes me best,
That am a stranger, and the less believed:
Yet since a partner of your toils I rest,
I must unfold my mind, a mind that is greeeu'd.
And think you that a babe repaires our loss,
How are the deep est judgments thus beguild?
This in all Countries has bin thought a cross,
Woe to that soil whose sovereign is a child.
Nor would these great men as is thought agree,
They be too many bodies for one mind:
Ah, pardon Ptolomie, it can not be,
This union would all disunite I find.
Thus would all th'armie from good order swerve,
When many might forgive, all would offend:
As thinking well though they did death deserve,
There Is none so bad but some man will defend.
And when so many kings were in one court,
One court would then have many humors too:
Which fostring factions for each light report,
Would make them jar as neighboring princes do.
No, let this strange opinion be suppressd,
Whilst equals all, all would unequal be:
So that their minds by jealousy possessd,
From pale suspicion never could be free.
But ah, what needs contention at this time,
T'obscure a matter that was made so clear:
And doye now account it for no crime,
T'impugne his will that once was held so dear?
When that great Monark marched t'encounter death,
Whist all his captains were assembled there:
And did demand whilst he might use his breath,
Whom he himself adopted for his heir.
Then that such doubtful questions should not need,
As loving valor more then his own race:
He that t'a brave man, brave men might succeed,
Said, let the worthiest have the worthiest place.
Nor did he speak this in a secret part
With Sphinx his phrase, a greater doubt to have moved:
As breathing thoughts in each ambitious heart,
To have his worth in Vulcans furnace proou'd
For whilst ye hedged the fatal bed about,
With an impartial care distracted long:
Then he amongst you all did choose one out,
That for so great a burden seemed most strong.
He to Perdiccas did present the ring
That used to seal the secrets of the state:
By which it seemd that he designed him king,
Ad so would seize him of the highest seat.
Thus made this worthy man a worthy choice,
That no new troubles might the state deforme:
And all the world now justly may rejoice,
That thus prevented was a'mpetuous storm.
For if this had not been his latest will,
Ye Mars his Minions should have lived at jar:
Whilst emulation amongst equals still,
Had made the trumpet sound t'intestine wars.
What huge disorders threatened to burst forth,
If that our sovereign had no prince designd:
That often has been a witness of our worth,
And can weigh virtue in a virtuous mind.
I see consenting signs applaud my speech,
Rise, do Perdicas that which they decree,
Whilst modesty does majesty impeach,
Though thou crau'st not this crown, this crown craves thee.

I wonder not though thus Perdicas shrink,
T'accept so mighty a charge amidst th'alarmes:
The Sun must make Nictimine to wink,
This Scepter weighes too much for so weak arms.
The Gods will never grant, nor men agree
That such a one should domineer over us.
Though vulgar minds might yield his thrales to be,
Those that his betters are scorn to how thus.
He prays us all Roxanaes birth to attend,
Which though it came to pass as some expect:
He can exchange or cause be brought t'^n end,
As bent t'allow all means when one effect.
Thus would he temporize though to our great scorn,
Till time assist t'accomplish his designs:
No kings Perdicas likes but babes unborn,
He labors well in undiscovered mines.
I need not now insist to tell at large,
What brave men be amids this martial band,
That better do deserve so great a charge,
Both for their skill and courage to command.
Yet are the best not worthy to succeed,
To that rare man that never can be matched:
Whose memory must make our minds to bleed,
Whose aduersar's for this advantage watched.
But if that great man did consent so soon,
That our obedience should be thus abused:
Of all that ever he desird to have done,
I think this only ought to be refusd.
Th'vndanted band whose worth the world often proved,
Then whilst their glory shined through silver shields:
By all that monarchs merits not being moved,
As conquered, would have left the conquered fields.
And if that they contemned a princes throne,
To whom his ancestors their scepter brought,
What reverence would they bear to such a one,
That all this time was as their equal thought?
To those that over their equalles raise their state,
Advancement envy breeds, and envy hate.
If such with all would rest familiar still,
This in contempt the authority it brings:
And if they second not their subjects will,
Men cannot bear with them as with borne kings.
Our lofty bands some lofty mind must tame,
Whose princely birth does procreate regard:
Whose country may confound each sland'rous claim,
As one with whom none else can be compared.
There Is Alexanders brother, Philips son,
That always was a partner of our pain;
Can there be any else below the sun,
Over Macedonians that deserves to reign?
And I must wonder what so strange offense,
Has forfeited his title, maimed his right:
That any now with a disguised pretense,
Dare wrong him thus, even in his peoples sight.

None needs to wonder much though we negle
One whose election might procure our shame:
His mothers baseness Justice might object,
Whom bastardie secludes from such a claim.
But yet had nature purged the spot she made,
We with his birth the better might comport:
Whilst father-like in all affairs he had,
Given proof of parts that might the state support.
He falsifies his race of wit so weak,
That all his inward wants are soon perceiud:
All of his judgment in derision speak,
By which great things can hardly be conceiud.
And though his body might from pains be sparde,
Whose constitution is not very strong,
But with infirmities so far impairde
That it aline cannot continue long:
Yet since in state he never has bin schoold,
His ignorance would rack him still with fears:
Whiles he that ruled still needing to be ruled,
Spoke but with others tongues, heard with their ears.
A inconstant king great confusion makes,
Whom all mistrust, and most amidst a Camp:
Whilst soft like wax, he each impression takes,
And does for frivolous things still change the stamp.
Ah, should our lives depend upon his breath,
That of himself cannot discern a crime:
But doomes by informations men to death,
Then barren pity yields when out of time.
Thus whilst some always must his judgment sway,
That still does harbor in another head:
Of Sicophants this prince may be the prey,
That where they list, thauthoritie will lead.
And being but base, that they may be the best,
Such still will toil that we may be ore-throwne:
And some-time may the credulous king suggest,
To taint our fame, lest it obscure their own.
What grief were this tvs, whilst such as those,
Might make their vantage of thall-powrefull breath,
And that our actions ballancd by our foes,
Were guerdond with disdain, or else with death?

Since private hopes your judgment do bewitch,
I Will leave this counsel where no good can please:
Come follow me all those that would be rich,
Few have regard (poor soldiers) of your ease

That shall prove best which first I went about,
Though some would wrest my words from what I thought
The malice of Meleager now bursts out,
Like flaming fires that burn themselves to naught.
Thus naughty minds that never dream but ill,
Do conster every thing t'a crooked sense:
What I proposde t'aduance our country still,
He would interpret it as an offense.
And this vnreuerent parting hence of his,
Has t'a1l his former wrongs yet added one,
By his seditious words incensed ere this
The soldiers arc to sack the treasures gone.

Then let us all of one accord conclude,
That Alexanders hoped for race must reign:
So shall w'establish still th'annointed blood,
Whose government both glory gave, and gain.
And let us now before we part, appoint
Who govern shall till that the Babe be borne:
And circumspectly put all things t'a point,
That the success our counsels may adorn.

I hear a tumult made amongst the tents,
And Arideus is proclaimde a King,
To which the inconstant multitude consents,
That build on all that changes best do bring.
The footmen all are t'indignation moved,
That in the assembly they got not a seat:
That our proceedings they might have approved,.
As knowing all that did concern the States.
Their Princes memory rests soon despisde,
That they dare thus revolt, and vnconstrain'd:
Save but by too much liberty entisde,
Which makes the giver still to be disdaind.
The want of discipline all things confounds,
Their deeds want order and their pride all bounds.

And dare they then against that fortress rise,
Where Alexanders colors once are reared:
Or violate the walls where-as he lies,
May not his shadow serve to make them feared?
What, how comes this? and dare they then presume
T'encounter their commanders and in arms?
Arms, arms, just wrath these rebels must consume,
Our countenance will dash them, sound th'alarmes.

LO here a great and a most sudden change,
All men for mirth were like to have gone mad,
So that of late it would have been thought strange,
In all this city to have seen one sad.
Each wall resounded some melodious song,
To ravish curious ears with rare delight:
Strange tapestries were stretched the streets along,
And stately objects made t'amuse the sight.
As if his conquests gloriously to crown,
Of all the world a Parliament to hold:
He came with pomp to this imperial town,
The height of all magnificence t'vnfold.
Here Glory in her richest robes aray'd,
Should have shown all that greatness could expect:
Yet were our hopes even at the height betrayed,
To death those trophes Fortune did erect.
A tragic end this triumph quite confounds.
All our applauses are turned to complaints,
Our music marred by melancholious sounds,
Spoiled by the Cypress, lo the Laurel faints.
To funeral shrikes our showts of joy we turn,
Our gorgeous garments must give place to grief:
We that so much reioyc'd, far more must mourn,
Days spent with woe are long, with pleasure brief.
This greatest anguish breeds when one compares
The time that present is, with it that is past:
And ponders the particular dispaires.
That all heroicke minds with woe do waste.
These two between what diffrence find we forth,
The rising Sun, and it that is declinde?
Where is that bright Zodiac of all worth,
From whence the light of Valor only shinde.
Now desolation spreades it self over all,
A solitary silence grief allows:
Ah as being bruisd by that great Monarkes fall,
How many malcontents abase their brows.
A strange suspicion has possessd the streets,
Whilst every man his neighbors fall conspires:
When unawares one with another meets,
As strait suspecting treason he retires.
Of rumors strange all ears are greedy grown,
Which (though all doubtful) move the mind to ruth:
And as all hearts have idols of their own,
What they conjecture all affirm for truth.
The heaven with wrathful eyes our actions views
As it toward us that high disdain does bear,
Lo all men's heads are heavy for evil news,
And though we know not what, yet still we fear.
For since the widdow'd world does want a head,
Each member now does labor to be chief:
Which whilst they diverse ways the body lead,
May a beginning give t'an endless grief.
Some like the fool that thunder feigned like Jove,
Would make their same like Alexanders sound:
And to bring others low, or t'be above,
Would either govern all, or all confound.
Then some vain wits that only would seem wise,
Whilst by prepostrous fancies being deceived,
Do every thing that is not theirs despise,
And perish would, or them another saved.
A number too that all things do content,
What each one thinks, are still resolved to do:
They make a choice, then do the choice repent,
And strait repent of that repentance too.
The public weal is spoi'ld by private hopes,
Whilst many thus the highest honor claim:
This variance gives their fancies freest scopes,
Its best to fish within a troubled stream.
See how dissension has dissolved so soon,
All kind of order and confusion brought:
This discord has our council quite undone,
Whilst one would have done all, all have done naught.
Though that Perdiccas (as it would have seemed)
As being devoted to the sacred blood:
Sought (by that means more virtuous to b'esteem'd)
His Princes honor, and his Countries good.
Yet having his companions in contempt,
He sought by subtle means himself t'aduance,
And so to shadow his disguisde attempt,
Aimed at the imperial place as but by chance.
He care pretends that none th'vnborne beguile,
As by the heavens for th'orphans weal reserved:
Yet wanting of a King naught but the style;
He would not want that when the occasion served.
And Meleager with the like respect,
To cross Perdiccas counterfets a love
To bastatd Philips right, though in effect,
His purpose is but the others to disprove.
And so providing, that his enemy fail,
He cares not much what Emperor they proclaim:
And his design with many may prevail,
The cloak of right apparrells any claim.
They whose descent their titles does disclose,
Being borne in possibility to reign,
Must be preferred by reason unto those,
That of all right without the bounds remain.
The furious footmen insolently stout,
Bent to maintain a title, brau'd our band:
And indignation thundering threatenings out,
Would with our blood have did this barbarous land.
O what indignity would this have bin,
Whilst those that we subdude with such great toiles,
Had in this sort their victors vanquished seen,
And without pain possess their spoylers spoils.
Thus darkning all that we had done before,
(Our swords being stained by ignominious wounds)
We of our conquests could have kept no more,
But burialls base (if those) in the enemies bounds.
O what excellency consists in one,
More than in many as witnesses this hour!
Some with a word or look does more alone,
Than thousands joined with policy and power.
When squadrons armed with ensigns all displaid,
As those that of their Prince all reverence lost,
His generous course to have obstinately stayed,
Did best t'abandon him when busied most.
Then of disorder yielding bitter fruits,
They boldly marched before the imperial tent,
And charged their sovereign with unlawful suits,
As t'innouations violently bent.
They by no band of duty more detaind,
First grudgde, grew factious next, then rebels plain:
Like waters by industrious means restraind,
Which if their dams once break forth floods do rain.
But of th'vntainted tipe of matchless worth,
Whom imitate none may, al must admire:
Through just disdain when fury sparkled forth,
Th'astonish'd troops all trembling did retire.
His stately countenance calmed tumultuous sounds,
Lightning forth majesty through clouds of wrath:
That even as if his words had given them wounds,
They prostrated themselves exspecting death.
Those lofty bands that were of late so proud,
That they disdained to attend their Emperors will:
Then by his sight being at an instant bowed,
Did beg for license but to tarry still.
And yet what wonder though he wanne all hearts,
That to his sacred presence did repair,
With that accomplishment of virtuous parts,
As large in him, as in all others rare.
Whiles when we come to meet as each man sees,
In this maimed state bent t'entertaine some life,
Still having in contempt all our decrees,
The soldiers are not stayed from civil strife.
And who can call that valorous Prince to mind,
That any reverence unto virtue bears:
But he must be constrained, or prove unkind,
To offer up a tribute of some tears.

His death of sorrow makes my soul the prey,
Though many thought that I for it had longed:
For if by those that he rests bound to obey,
One can be wronged, then I indeed was wronged.

Fame to mine ears by diverse tongues did bring,
T'a danger huge how you were once exposde,
But specifide not each particular thing,
Which by your self I long to hear disclosde.

When sage Calistines for no request,
With superstitious customs could comport:
But with frank words all flattery did detest,
He was abusde, and in a barbarous sort.
So plaging him (no doubt) the king did ill,
Yet to prosperity we must impute
Those fatal faults that follow Fortune still,
As being of all great minds a bastard fruit.
We should in kings, as loath their states to tuch,
Speak sparingly of vice, praise virtue much.
But I whose soul that wise man dearly loved,
Whilst spying his perfections thus injured:
To tender passions by compassion moved,
Would his relief have willingly procured.
But when my credit faild, all hope being past,
That I could purchase grace in any sort:
I gave him desperate physic at the last,
That if his life was evil, it might be short.
The king enraged that I had thus presumde,
To limite his revenge by sudden death:
That by a Lion I should be consumde,
Did throw my doom out of the depths of wrath.
But when with rolling eyes the Lion roard,
He by my strength as strengthlesse was orethrowne:
Which to the king whose mind did then remord,
My courage and my constancy made known.
So that incontinent I was set free,
By this rare proofeesteem'd amongst the strong:
And with a mind from inward rancor free;
As he his wrath, so I forgot my wrong.
For whilst alone he through a forest ranged;
If it had bin but so, to purchase fame:
Some by that means had former wrongs revenged,
Bent like Erostratus t'acquire a name.
Yet that which others did attempt in vain,
And tirde by travel, of a surffet did,
I did perform him bringing back again,
Whil^t I did run as swift as he could ride.
And of that deed my sprite rests well apaide,
For since that time my sovereign held me dear,
Which afterward he to the world bewraid,
Whilst in this form his favor did appear.
When unawares he chanced my brow to wound,
To stay my blood that strived to die his lance:
My temples with his diadem he crowned,
A happy sign, though coming but by chance.
And O! who knows but once before I die,
That the success may second the presage?

What hinders us our fortune now to try?,
And for a diadem our cares t'engage?
Those bended minds that aim at greatness still,
Grown popular by th'armie to be praisde:
Do wind themselves in every man's good will,
And would seem humble that they may be raisde.
What counterfeited friends seal trustlesse bands,
Whilst in the general cause that each pretends,
Though never joining hearts, all join their hands,
And work one way, yet work for diverse ends?
Yea those whose thoughts intend to attend the state,
Have purchasde powers, being purposde for the fields,
With jealous minds their riualls bent t'abate,
Whilste ^^lls all, now none t'another yields.
Yet with suspended thoughts all doubtful stand,
And their designs t'accomplish do forbear,
Lest all the rest joined by a general band,
March him t'orethrow that first gives cause of fear.
But he may prosper best whom burning thirst
Of government enflames at first t'aduaunce:
Some to be second, doubting to be first,
Will make their hopes depend upon his chance.
And by a battle when that one preuailes,
There will ^ich hopes at a'easie rate be sold:
For of that faction first whose fortune fails,
Even all will strive who shall be first to fold.
All this to me great cause of fear affordes,
I est that we two protract the t^me too long:
And wounded be before we draw our swords,
If those we not prevent that would us wrong.

No chance of late has brought me so to bow,
But I exspect a part of those great hopes:
Yet in my mind a judgment most allow,
That over a dangerous ditch aduis'dly leapes.
There are to our charge some provinces assigned,
Whose peaceful states we manage must awhile:
Till all attempt that which they have designed,
Whilst from the world each the other does exile.
Then living but like those whose force is small,
From which the world no great thing can exspect:
We shall profess a favor to them all,
And an indifferency pretend t'affect.
Yet shall not then our thoughts have leave to sleep,
But subtilties must circumspectly frame:
The mighty men at variance still to keep,
So always strengthening us, and weakening them.
And when the occasion stricter dealing claims,
We shall make war with some ere it b^^ong:
Like cunning Wrestlers at th'Olympicke games,
That exercise themselves to be more strong.
And when themselves have thus prepared the way,
Whilst that their pomp does bear a lower sail:
For at the last their force must much decay,
Since all must always loose, though one prevail.
Then prompt t'atchiue that which we now contriue,
By ruining the remnant that remains:
We may possess the state for which they strive;
Thus they the toiles, and we shall get the gains.

O happy was that guiltless age,
In which Astraea lived below:
And that Bellonaes barbarous rage
Did not all order quite orethrow.
Then whilst all did themselves content
With that thing which they did possess,
And gloried in a little rent,
As wanting means to make excess.
Those could no kind of want bemone,
For craving naught they had all things:
And since none sought th'emperious throne,
Whilst none were subjects, all were kings:
O to a true bliss their course was set,
That got to live, not lived to get.
Then Innocence naked lived,
And had no need nor thought of arms,
Whilst spightfull sprites no means contrived,
To plague th'vnprouident with harms.
Then snaring laws did not extend
The bounds of reason as they do:
Strife being begun where it should end,
Clearing one doubt t'ingender two.
Then customs but by conscience stood,
By which dark things were soon discerned,
Whilst all behoou'd there to be good;
Whereas no evil was to be learned:
And how could any then prove naught,
Whilst virtue by example's taught?
Then mortal minds all most pure,
Free from corruption lasted long:
Whilst armed with innocence sure,
When none did know how to do wrong:
Then stingd with no suspicious thought,
Men mischief did from none exspect:
For that which in themselves was not,
In others they would not suspect.
And though none did stern laws impart,
That might t'vse virtue men compel,
Each in the table of his heart
Had grau'd a law of doing well:
And all did wickedness forbear,
Through a free will, and not for fear.
The first that spoiled the public rest,
And did disturb this quiet state,
It Was Avarice the greatest pest
That ever past the infernal gate:
A monster very hard to daunt,
Lean, as dried up with inward care,
Though full of wealth for fear of want,
Still at the borders of despair.
Scarce taking food to have nature eased,
Nor for the cold sufficient clothing.
She with her riches never pleased,
Thinks all has much, she has nothing.
This daughter of stern Pluto still,
Her fathers dungeon strives to fill.
That monster-tamer most renowned,
The great Alcides, Thebes glory.
That for twelve several labors crowned,
Was famous made by many a story.
As one that all his time had toiled,
To purge the world of such like pests,
That robbers robbed, and spoilers spoiled,
Still humbling hautie tyrants crests:
He by this monster once or'e-throwne,
Did pass in Spain his strength to try:
And there took more then was his own,
What right had he to Gerions ky?
Thus avarice the world deceiues,
And makes the greatest conquerors slaves.
Ah, when to afflict the world with grief,
This poore-rich monster once was borne,
Then weakness could find no relief,
And subtlety did conscience scorn:
Yet some that labored to recall
The bliss that gilded the ancient age,
Did punishment prepare for all,
That did their thoughts to vice engage.
And yet the more they Laws did bring,
That to be good might men constrain,
The more they sought to do the things,
From which the laws did them restrain:
So that by custom alterd quite,
The world in evil does most delight.
NOw fortune smyle upon my rising state,
And seems to promise more then I require:
Lo by degrees my glory does grow great,
And by their death that did my death conspire.
Proud Meleager that disdained to bow,
And my advancement always did mislike,
Has with his blood sealed my assurance now,
T'astonish those that would attempt the like.
Yet of his fall the form my mind appalls,
At the altar of the gods without regard:
We were too rash to violate those walls,
Which the most impious persons would have spared
Lascivious Ajax by Mineruaes spite,
Erst for profaning such a sacred place,
On the Capharian rocks did loose the light,
And all his navy to his great disgrace.
We should not irritate celestial powers,
Then all beginnings are considered most:
And by this sacrilegious act of ours,
I fear that we the hearts of some have lost.

Let others seek t'obserue such points as those,
I Am not so scrupulous, for I protest
Over all, and by all means i will kill my foes,
And then there-after dispute of the rest.
They wrong the Gods that think their church should be
As a refuge for male-factors still:
For with their justice this can not agree,
Who guard th'euill-doers guilty are of ill.
Was he not stained with many a moonstrous crime?
And like the Salamander in the fire,
Did love to live in trouble all his time,
And alterations always did require.

One humorous head that does in braules delight,
May poison thousands with the gall of spite.

As still seditiously affecting strife,
He but abused the credit of his king.
And sent some of his slaves to take my life,
Such bitter envy did his stomach sting.

I saw, how that advanced before your band,
You first did check, then chase them in the end:
And with what mighty courage you did stand
Our Sovereigns corpse (though dead) bent to defend.

He but a dastard is t'a foe that yieldes,
And in no conflict has his fortune tried:
We (if by time not ventring to the fields)
Like beasts being sacrificed had simply dyed.
But when without we masters did remain,
Lest Babylon had straight bin barred from food:
I those rebellious squadrons did constrain,
Even to our advantage concord to conclude.
Th'agreement that gave me a great relief,
Made my competetour his mark to miss:
For when I came, though he before was chief:
The shadow of my greatness darkened his.

Yet in this treaty all the world may see,
The Opinion of the multitude prevailed:
He whom they did elect our prince must be,
And our design has altogether failed.
But how comes this? that every captain gets,
A certain realm assigned now to his charge:
And with a warlike army forward sets,
The limits of his government t'enlarge?

I by my means have every great man crowned,
That from my greatness great things might proceed:
Yet to make my authority renowned,
The doing likes me better than the deed.
I this division chiefly did procure,
To make the court from other great men free:
That so my credit might remain more sure,
And they by such great gifts engaged to me.
For him that has them thus to honor brought,
They must be bound to hold in high account:
And I have not advanced them thus for naught,
They be the means by which I mind to mount.

O but your fancies may be much deceived,
There is no bond that binds ungrateful minds:
I fear th'aduancement that they thus received,
Have shown them ways to sail by other winds.
So long of late as they had need of you,
To seem your constant friends they kindly sought:
But since their greatness gives them freedom now,
They do disdain what may abase them ought.
To those all great men frankest friends do prove,
Whom without cause they always favor still:
And can not be as it were compelled to love,
Those whose deserts do challenge their good will.
This would preiudge the freedom of their state,
That any might claim interest in their hearts:
No, kings can hold of none their kingly seat,
None must vpbraid them with so great deserts.
And in my judgment you have greatly errd,
Them thus t'exalt whose states you would surprise:
Their common custom is that are preferrd,
That they may stand, not to let others rise.

I Will make their breasts such jealous thoughts embrace,
That every one shall seek his mate t'ore-throw:
And then I purpose to supply their place,
When by such sleights the highest are brought low.
This subtle course rests by experienee tried,
The strongst else is to confusion gone:
I long to learn how Leonatus died,
Not that I mind his funerals to bemone.

That prince magnanimous whom all admire
Through his accustomed clemency proclaimed:
That banishd Graecians might to Greece retire,
Save only such whom murder had defamed.
At this, some Grecian great men were common'd,
Whose partial grudge occasioned their exile:
Lest the others restitution should have proved,
A means to have brought their state t'a lower style.
And th'indignation that they had conceived,
Did burst out in rebellion for a time:
The which the king deep in his mind engrau'd,
And thought by Athens spoils t'avenge that crime.
But since that death ministered them relief,
Grown bold to prosecute their proud attempt:
To Athenians and the Aetolians were the chief,
That brought Antipater first in contempt.
And being by them constrained to quit the field,
He in a little town enclosed at last:
Was once reduced in dangers near to yield,
And stain the glory of his actions past.
But yet by accident as whiles it falls,
It Is better to be fortunate then wise:
An unsuspected shaft thrown from the walls,
The Athenian captain happened to surprise.
Then did Antipater his courage rear,
That had almost his staggering hopes betrayed:
And yet not altogether freed from fear,
He sent to Leonatus seeking aid.
And he that seemed his friendship much t'affect,
Did careful of his countrie-men appear:
But if he had prevailed some do suspect,
Antipater had bought his succors dear.
Yet by the effect his purpose bent to show,
What ever that he was, he seemed a friend:
But when the Athenians did his coming know,
T'encounter him they did directly tend.
And though their thoughts in depths of doubts did fleet,
They, whilst alone, to match him thought it best:
Then whilst they marched aduentrous troops to meet,
Hard was the welcome of th'vnwelcome guest.
For when both th'armies were t'a battle brought,
And all the fruits of valor did afford:
Rash Leonatus like a Lion fought,
Bent to prove worthy of his wonted Lord.
But whist he bravely did his charge acquit,
He lost himself that others came to save:
And by their Captains fall discouraged quite,
His scatred troops great damage did receive.
Yet when the news to Antipater were told
Of their mishap that come for his releife:
He not one sign of sorrow did unfold,
A little gain does mitigate great grief.
For he did know, though then his foes prevailed,
That this great fight infeebled had their host:
And then he took to him which much auai'ld,
Those beaten bands that had their Captain lost.
Yet that in which he did most comfort find,
Was his delivery from a secret foe:
Which did with jealousy torment his mind,
Though outwardly not seeming to be so,

Thus we that underneath one ensign warrd,
Slept in one tent, and all one fortune proved,
And with a friendship then that never iarrd,
As Pilades and mad Orestes loved.
Since wanting now a Lord. that all be Lords,
We lo renounce all kind of kindness now:
And secret rancor budding in discords,
Even every one does the others ruin vow.
Such is the sacred famine of a crown,
That it to satisfy before we fail,
What stands within our way, all must go down,
And bands of blood or friendship naught avail.
These glory-rauish'd souls that would be great,
Will pretermit no means although unjust:
(...) of copartners in the state;
(...) there can be no trust.
(...) Well, I perceive Antipater does tend,
(...) power, t'attaine that sacred prey:
(...) of late augmented now in the end,
Through every danger once may make a way.
And Alexander sometimes spoke at large,
Then whilst Antipater with Agis strived,
That he without the limits of his charge,
More like a king than a Lieutenant lived.
Anti^onus, and Ptholomie in arms
Are ioy'nd in one, our ruin bent to breed:
I fear that friendship procreate our harms,
Unless their spite prevented be with speed.

I Will lodge you now Eumenes in my breast,
And let you see the ground of my designs:
Since that we both alike must toil or rest,
As those whose course one planet now confines.
Since at his death, I by our dying Lord
Was in his place appointed to succeed,
And that my fortune does a means afford,
How that I compass may what he decreed,
To leave that place I cannot well agree,
As if I wanted courage to command:
I Will take that which the fates do throw on me:
For if without a throne, I cannot stand.
And those that would perform difficult things,
Must not regard what way, so they prevail;
Of slight, then force a greater furtherance brings,
The Fox must help if that the Lion fail.
So for Antipater a snare to have laid,
His daughter I in marriage did require:
That so the time might but have bin delayed,
Till that I had accomplished my desire.
For with the shadow of pretended love,
And hope of that affinity to come:
I from his bounds was minded to remove,
A warrelike troop wherewith himself t'orecome.
But to deceive deceivers, it is most hard,
He quickly did mistrust th'intended wrong:
And from my messengers his ears he barred,
As did Ulysses from the Sirens song.

This to your state, I think, might much import
If to your self you chose a virtuous mate:
Whose beauty pleasure, birth might bring support,
And both concur in one to bless your state.
If you to make your high designs more sure,
By Hymen's means with some your self alie:
Thus of some Prince you may the power procure,
That will conioynd with you one fortune try.
What grief were this if you have hap t'attaine,
That fair Idea which your fancies frame:
If after you of yours none do remain,
That may enjoy your conquests, and your name.
Kings live most sure, that of their own have heirs,
Whose sacred persons none dare seek to wound:
Since though they die, yet there rest some of theirs,
That are t'auenge their death by nature bound.

Noght rests untried that might enlarge my might
I mind to match my self with such a one:
That if she have my power to prove her right,
May be thought worthy of the Aemathian throne:
I with Olympias have deuisde a thing,
That may assure her state, and make mine strong:
The which I hope shall prove a prosperous spring,
From whence may flow great things ere it belong.
By Cleopatra may a means be caught,
That our designs t'a glorious end may bring:
I mean she whom her father Philip matched,
With Alexander of the Epirots King.
He having heard great Alexanders fame,
In emulation of that monarkes praise:
Went with his troops the Etrurians bent to tame,
Which enterprise did but abridge his days.
In marriage with that widdow'd Queen combinde,
If that her mother thus our course assist;
Whilst I effect that which I have designed,
Who dare presume my purpose to resist?
For whilst this friendship does my name renown,
It may my thoughts from further fear seclude:
Since having thus a title to the Crown,
As one engraffde within the royal blood.

I fear that this your purpose to prevent,
A number now take arms all in one form:
As those that have discouerd your intent,
And by the lowering clouds foreknow a storm.
For lo how many else together run,
That for our ruin wonderfully thirst.

Where do you think that we should then begin
And exercise hostility at first?

Though we our selves in strangers thrones instal,
And having Asia to subjection brought:
Make Nilus, Indus, and Euphrates thrall,
Yet all those victories would serve for naught.
Whilst martial Macedonie living free,
The spring that still will power new armies forth,
Does not acknowledge you her king to be,
Nor has not proou'd your military worth.
To those that would pursue a Prince in arms,
His chiefest realm the greatest vantage gives:
Where if the war hold out, it is with his harms,
Since that within his bowels the enemy lives.
And wars protracted with a peoples loss,
Do from their sovereign alienate their love:
They lose their hearts whom fortune once does cross,
And foild at home can no where else remove.
He that has Macedonie, has the best,
Which of our Monarchy the Mistress is:
That conquered has courageously the rest,
And but depends on Mars as only his.
If you were Lord of that undaunted soil,
And by Olympias conntenaunc'd but a while:
Strait from Antipater all would recoile,
And him as traitor to the state exile.
To you that are a Macedonian borne,
If matched with Cleopatra great in powers:
The Macedonians gladly would be sworn,
And if commanding them, then all were yours.

Yet this opinion partly I disprooue,
Which would not (as you think) our troubles end:
For if that we from hence our force remove,
And to the Aemathian bounds directly tend.
There must at first a doubtful war be proou'd,
With those brave bands whose valor is well known:
Of whom Craterus dearly is beloved,
That bound to Antipater are all his own.
And though indeed as kindly to those parts,
My friendship is affected to by some:
Yet others have preoccupi'd their hearts,
And will discredit us before we come.
Then whilst that we the Macedonians boast,
And leave those realms unarmed that else are ours:
Strait Ptolomie, when strengthened is his host,
May enter Asia and supplant our powers.
I by my judgment willingly would take,
The course that seems to make our state most sure:
It dangerous is to have foes behind our back,
That unawares our ruin may procure.
My purpose is, though yet to none made known,
That Egypt first shall burdend be with war:
For if that Ptolomie were once orethrowne,
Then that from Greece all hope of help would bar.

Hold still with you those of the sacred blood,
Whom to protect you always must pretend:
The countnance of the great may do much good,
Whom still though weak, the world delights to attend.

LEt sorrow then even tyrannize my soul,
Whose rage with reason now no measure keeps:
What of my tears the torrent can control,
Since flowing from afflictions deepest deeps?
How can my breast but burst whilst sobs rebound?
Since once the seat of ioys now not the same:
May not huge horrors press me to the ground,
In thinking what I was, and what I am.
I was a great man's wife, a greaters mother,
Even she to whom the heavens their best did give:
Yet I, even I, more plagued than any other,
In dungeons now of desolation live.
My son that was the glory of his time,
Stain of times past, and light of times to come:
(O frail mortality, O sliderie slime,)
Though having all orecom'd, death did overcome.
And I (dejected wretch) whose dying eyes,
He was by Natures custom bound to have closde:
Was not to shut his stars with th'iuorie skies,
That tapestried where majesty reposde.
But ah! his falling in a foreign part,
Has (if it can b'enlargde) enlargde my grief:
Else I on him would melted have my heart,
And spent my self to have purchasde his relief.
Yet though I was not present at his death,
He shall not be defrauded of my tears:
But for his funeral fires my flaming breath
Does smoke, and to his ghost a tribute bears.
Ah, to what corner rolls my watery sight?
Where it not finds some matter to bemone:
O foolish eyes! why loose ye not your light?
Since that your treasure is to ruin gone.
Once of all Queens I might the fortune scorn,
To whom just love that great man did engage:
Whose match in worth the world has never borne,
Nor never shall enrich another age.
When those perfections whiles transport my mind
Which admiration only does dilate:
I Am woe that me the destinies designde,
To be the partner of his glorious state.
And I repent that to his sight I past,
Though highly gracde on a festival day:
A feast that many a time must make me fast,
And with slow woe that flying mirth defray.
Then if my fortune had not blinded me,
But ah! whose judgment had it not bereaved?
Whilst the worlds Monarke daignd to like of me,
I had the event of my high flight conceived.
He of the Asian Prince whose state did then decline,
Had both the wife and daughters at his will:
Whose beauties glory would have darkened mine,
Yet free from snares retainde his fancies still.
Then when my father chose out from the rest,
Those virgins all whom Fame affirmd for rare:
Though having viewd them all, he loved me best,
Then thought most fortunate (if not most fair.)
And when his martial nobles were dismayed,
That he himself with captives had alide:
He by that means (as love had dited) said,
Took from the vanquished shame, from victors pride.
Then me as Empress all did entertain,
Though his inferior far in all respects:
Till I from him by death diuorcde remain,
Whom with his son now all the world neglects.

Although this will but aggrauate my woe,
From whom the Fates all comfort now seclude:
Yet do I reverence his remembrance so,
That of my son to hear it does me good.
And daughter now, to double my distress,
Make me at length acquainted with his death:
That sorrow may each part of me possess,
Sad news mine ears, tears eyes, and sighs my breath.

Though grief to me scarce liberty affordes,
To Express the passions that oppress my mind:
Yet would affection wrestle out some words,
To speak of him that all my joys confind.
When he had conquered all that could resist,
A monarchy not equal with his mind:
Still in his haughty course he did insist,
And searched out The Ocean other worlds to find.
But when from it his navy was redeemde,
He stood in doubt where trophies next to rear:
For all the world for him too little seemde,
His mind could more conceive than nature bear.
Then ah this Emprour purposde was in the end,
At Babylon his glories height to show:
Where all the world his coming did attend,
As Jove above, he only raignde below.
When he drew near that then thrice Monarks seat,
All th'Astrologians by their skill foretold,
What dangers there were threatened to his state,
The which elsewhere might better be controld.
But he that was not capable of fear,
And could not muse of misaduentures then:
Causde through that town him self in triumph bear,
Backd with more kings, than other kings with men.
There as a god in all his subjects sights,
Which mirth with mourning I must still record:
He spent, or lost a time in all delights,
That a successful fortune could afford.
Till Thessalus, for mischief but reserved,
Once to his house invited him to dine:
Where false Cassander at the table served,
And as he used, with water mixed his wine.

Alas, alas, and so it proou'd in the end,
But who could fear a benefited friend?

The creatures al esteemde of greatest worth,
That either are in the earth, the sea, or the air:
In Persia, Arabia, or the Ind's brought forth,
That walk, that swim, that fly, that grow, were there.
Then when that reason drunk with pleasure slept,
Which all things did abundantly afford:
And whilst that naught save music measure kept,
With Ceres, Bacchus only was adored.
But when the King beginning was to drink,
As strangely moved he thundered forth a groan:
And from the table suddenly did shrink,
As one whose strength was at an instant gone.
Then when he softly was t'a chamber led,
That Death a title to his body claimde:
The sorrowing soldiers swarmd about his bed,
With looks, once fierce, then for compassion framde.
But he whom victory had still arrayd,
This battle with the rest bent to make even:
Did look like one whom all the world obayd,
And boasted shortly then to take the heaven.
Then that he comfort might the afflicted bands,
He stretched them out to kiss respected parts:
More by the Sword than Scepter honored hands,
On which it seemde they melted all their hearts.
Last, unto them those generous words he told,
Yet to my life my death does bring no blot:
Thus to die young in years, in glory old,
Of all our family it is the lot.
And since that no mo worlds now rest t'orecome,
It Is time to die: I did an Empire found,
And lived and raignde; it is done for which I come,
Now my great ghost must go beneath the ground.
Then having thus dischargde all debt of life,
He with a countnance constant even in death:
As too victorious of that fatal strife,
All the air perfuming spent the imperious breath.
But when that it once through the camp was known.
That from the world that world of worth was gone,
What anguish was it cannot well be shown,
I had my part, yet had not all alone.
O let that day which makes my days all night,
Be registered amongst the dismal days:
Whose inauspicious and lugubrious light,
The world with some disaster still dismayes.
And Babylon, cursed be thy fatal towers,
Once seat of Monarchs, mistress of all the earth:
But from hence-foorth a slave to foreign powers,
Still burdened be thy bounds with blood and dearth.

You need not use those execrations more,
Though Babylon of breath that prince deprived:
Yet as an Oracle had told before,
In Macedonie was his death contrived.
TO Antipater it was told, how diverse times
The king against him had been moved to wrath:
And doomed, as guilty of opprobrious crimes,
His son in law Lincestes unto death.
And he had heard the king did strictly try,
How his Lieutenants had their places used:
Still making all as traitors strait to die,
That had the same in any sort abusde.
Then he that private was to his own misdeeds,
Had learnd by others what he might exspect:
As whose ambitious breast in pride exceeds,
And always did a sovereignty affect.
But when Craterus was named to his place,
And he in his required the wars to attend:
He thought that it was but a means to embrace,
To plague his pride with a deserved end.
Then to prevent that, which I think was still
More feared by him, then purposde by the king:
With guilty thoughts best exercisde in ill,
He sought what might to death his sovereign bring.
And this the traitor compassde at the last,
As I alas, have learnde (although too late)
When to my son, his son Cassander past,
As to congratulate his prosperous state.
Then in his company he did retain,
A poison powrefull where it was employed:
Whose violence no metal could restrain,
But in a horses hoof was still conueigh'd.
He, and his brother then the advantage watchde,
And for their prince a cup of poison made:
Thus he that never was by the enemies matchde,
Does by the treason of his friends lie dead.

And could, or durst those traitors be so bold,
The glory of the world to undermine:
But ah, Madam, Antipater of old,
Against your greatness always did repine.
And I remember on a time he sent
A Messenger, of mind to make you bow:
That to your son a letter did present,
Full of inuectiues to discredit you.
The king whilst reading what it did comprise,
Did with a scornful smile to Hephestion say:
In writing of such things he is not wise,
Which straight one mothers tear will wash away.

My son indeed I many a time aduisde,
How that disloyal man strived to be great:
But as a woman's wit, mine was despisde,
And wrested still unto the sense of hate.
Yet of my son I thought the deeds were such,
That t'admiration com'd they past envy:
And that none durst his sacred person touch,
On which the daunted world did whole rely.
How often have I those bitter throws allowde,
By which I brought that demi-god to light?
And well I might of such a birth be proud,
That made me glorious in the peoples sight.
Though diverse too, as I have sometime known,
T'estrange his love from me did ways t'prepare:
Yet were their slights by duteous love ore-t hrowne,
And I respected with a reverent care.
His tender love toward me was much extolde,
Then when he sought t'establish a decree:
That I amongst th'Imortalls might b'enrold,
And as t'a Goddess, honors done to me.
Ah, how can I this tragic time survive,
That lost a son so great, a son so kind?
And the only means that make me now to live,
Is with revenge, hope t'entertaine my mind.

His love toward you no doubt behoou'd t'abound
(By nature parents of their own are loved)
But those toward whom he by no bond was bound,
Of his humanity the fruits have proved.
His clemency did make his state more sure,
Then all the terrors rising from his name:
Which whilst he lived did public love procure,
And after death a never dying fame.
The Unhappy Sisigambis taking heart
Of her own natural son, the death suruiu'd:
And to Alexander did that love impart,
The which was due to Darius whilst he lived.
But when the tidings wounded had her ears,
That from the world was robde that glory of men:
Then suddenly dissoulde in floods of tears,
She hated life as never spoilde till then.
And with her widdow'd-nephew at her feet,
That of Hephestion did the death bewail:
Her soul amidst a sea of woes did fleet,
Whose forces as ouer-whelmde began to fail.
Then barrde from food she groueling did abide,
Till that the course of life t'an end was run:
Thus she suruiude her son, yet with him did,
In whom she found the affections of a son.

If but by hearing of his dolorous end,
A stranger (once his captive) did for grief.
Ah, shall his mother on new hopes depend,
As such a loss might look for some relief?
And so I will, for twere a great disgrace
To me the mother of the all conquering man:
Like other women to give fortune place,
And yield to misery as many can.
Though grief at first must molifie me once,
(Else as unnatural I might be admirde)
Yet will I not still burst my breast with groans,
Than that of me more courage is requirde.
I Will not degener from my generous kind,
(Faint-hearted hindes brought never Lion forth)
Nor yet a mother of an abject mind,
Had never borne a monarch of such worth.
And, O, who knows, but once the time may come,
That I t'auenge my self a means may have?
And may against these traitors yet move some,
That with their blood may bathe their sou'raignes grave.
Now on Perdiccas repose my trust,
That with Eumenes would our wrongs redress:
Their valor ventring in a cause so just,
Does by appearance promise good success.

Lo, now of late delivered of a son,
I to these captains scarce dare make it known:
That else to part his kingdoms have begun,
And might, by killing him, make all their own.
Ay me (Madam) this makes me most to pause,
That still the ambition of those great men fear:
Lest by pretending but a public cause,
They seek themselves the authority to bear.
Ah, they of my young babe as moved with ruth,
Would but be Tutors first, and traitors then:
Void of obedience, duty, love, or truth,
No deerer things then diadems to men.

As those whose courage cannot be dismaide,
Let us a faction study now to find:
And whilst that pity does procure for aid,
Go tune the peoples passions now to our mind.
Unless their love have perishde with his life,
Of Alexander, in a high degree:
I think the son, the mother, and the wife,
Must of the Macedonians reuerenc'd be.
And this does with disdain my soul consume,
That Arideus amongst other wrongs:
And proud Euridice his wife presume,
To usurp those honors that but t'vs belongs.
O they shall find my fortune not so changde,
But I am able yet t'abate their pride:
What? what? Olimpias must be reuengde:
That (save her self) a Queen disdaynes to abide.

Lo how all good decayed
And evils begin t'abound,
In this skie-compasst round:
There is no kind of trust
For mankind whilst it strayes,
In pleasure-paued ways
With floods of vice is drowned,
And does far from refuge
In endless shadows lodge:
Yet strives to rise no more,
No doubt as most unjust,
The world once perish must:
And worse now to restore,
Then that it was before,
When at the last deluge,
Men by Ducalion once,
Were made again of stones.
And well this wicked race
Bewrayes a stony kind,
That bears a stubborn mind,
Still hardened unto sin.
Lo, now in every place
All virtuous motions cease.
And sacred faith we find
Now far from the earth is fled,
Whose flight huge evils has bred,
And fills the world with wars,
Whilst impious breasts, begin
Still to let treason in:
Which common concord marres,
Whilst all men live at iarres,
And nets of fraud do spread
Th'vnwarie to surprise,
Too witty, but not wise:
Yet those that in deceit
Their confidence repose,
A deerer thing do lose
Then can by guile be gained.
Which being repented late,
Brings ruin to their state,
Whilst purer spirits disclose
Wherewith their breasts are stord:
For though they would remord,
They get not trust again;
But having honor stained,
And covenants prophain'd
Are held in high disdain,
And do in end remain
Of all the world abborr'd;
Not trusty when they should,
Not trusted when they would.
But ah, our Nobles now,
Lo, like Lisander still,
So that they get their will,
Regard not by what way,
And with a shameless brow,
Do of the effect allow,
Even though the means were ill.
Which all the world may see
Disgraces their degree,
That should not learn to lowre,
But throw base sleights away.
What can brave minds dismay?
Whose worth is as a tower
Against all fortunes power,
Still from all fraud being free?
These keep their course unknown,
Whom it would shame if shown:
Who not from worth digress
T'vse sleights that fear imparts.
Do show heroicke hearts,
The which would rather far
An open hate profess,
Then secretly suppress,
Honor scorns fearful arts.
But those that do us lead,
As for dissembling made,
Even though that they intend
Amongst themselves to have war,
Seem in no sort to jar,
But friendship do pretend,
Not like their Lord that's dead,
That trusting to his worthy,
Still what he meant spoke forth.
The great men not for naught
Do seek the peoples love:
And them their deeds t'approue,
Do labor still t'allure.
But Perdiccas it is thought
Too sparingly has sought
Our minds toward him to move,
As one that still conceits
He may command the fates:
His pride so great is grown,
That none can it endure:
Yet stands his state unsure,
Since odious to his own,
He must b'at last ore-throwne
Whose humor each man hates:
Pride does her followers all,
Lead headlong to a fall.
TOugh stormy discord and tumultuous wars
Do fire the minds of men with flames of rage,
That having hautie thoughts as heaven has stars,
Their indignation nothing can assuage.
Yet lo, amongst the soldiers wauing bowres,
The Heralds cries, whiles calmes the trumpets sounds,
And peace dare inter-pose her unarmed powers,
To limit for a time Bellonaes bounds.
And whilst of fury they suspend the effects,
The seeming-friended foes have conference whiles,
And each shows the other what his soul affects,
A shadow of the bliss that Mars exiles.
Thus men magnanimous amidst the field,
Dare to the assurance of their enemies trust:
And loathing what disloyalty does yield,
Not violate their vows, nor prove unjust.
Though Love be past, yet Truth should still remain,
I virtuous parts even in my foes applaud;
A gallant mind does greater glory gain,
To die with honor than to live by fraud.
And why Eumenes as mistrusting me,
Else standing on your reputation long,
Did you disdain to come (as all men see)
T'a greater than yourselfe, and the one more strong.
Though we not come to plead our birthright here,
Let him (but warriors take not so their place)
In whom best signs of nobleness appear,
Be thought extracted of the noblest race.
Most noble he that still by virtue strives,
To leave his name in minds of men engrau'd;
And to his offspring greater glory gives,
Than of his ancestors he has received.
Erst we by birth in war not marshalld stood,
As at the table upon Iuorie beds;
A soldiers worth consists not in his blood,
But in the blood of the enemies that he sheds.
What ever others of my lineage try,
I am Eumenes, and I scorn t'accord,
That there can be a greater man than I,
While as I have a heart, a hand, a sword.

Lo, when prosperity too much preuailes,
Above the judgment thus of vulgar minds,
As little barges burdend with great sails,
They leap aloft being swollen with fortunes winds.
And as adversity the sprite refines,
From out the dross of pride, and passions base:
That virtue in affliction cleerest shines,
And makes one all the ways of wit to trace.
So good success does make the judgment die,
Then whilst the fortunate their ease do take:
And lulld asleep in Pleasures meadows lie,
As fatted for the slaughter, ripe to shake.
Yet this the nature is of gallant men,
To rest (being in no state too much inuolu'd)
When prospring best most wary and humble then;
If crossd, then more courageous and resolved.
What though your first attempts renowned are,
By which you in two fields victorious stood,
And did orethrow two thunderbolts of war,
That lost their lives amidst a scarlet flood?
Yet is that course of victory controlde,
And you have tried what force your force exceedes:
Then let not withered Laurels make you bold,
As still reposing on your bypast deeds.
For by the same t'an indignation moved,
The Macedonians all abhor your name;
That at that time so proud a conqueror proved,
And with their great men's slaughter winged your fame.

No fortune past so puffes up my conceit,
That it contempt of further danger brings:
Nor am I so dejected now of late,
But I intend to do far greater things.
He by prosperity made never proud,
That knows the frailty of this earthly frame,
Can hardly by adversity be bowd;
The Sun (although eclipsd) remains the same.
Think not that worth consists in the success,
As th'essence did on th'accidents depend:
The fault of fortune makes it not the less,
On which oft-times the hardest happes attend.
For Fortune bears not still the badge of worth,
Nor misery the signs of gallant minds:
Which yet still like themselves are sparkeling forth,
In every state some tokens of their kinds.
Now at this time o're-match'd by numbrous powers,
I kept my courage, though I lost the field:
And vaunt no more of it, for some few hours
May once to me the like advantage yield.
And it is not long since that to Fortune dear,
The world had never me but victor spide;
Though I protest before th'immortalls here,
Moved by Necessity, and not by Pride.
Proud Neopolemus that traitor still,
Not worthy of a Macedonians name,
Bent to betray the host, and me to kill,
Had labord long to his eternal shame.
But of Craterus I lament the fall,
Whom for his virtue I did dearly love,
And was constrained; (I Jove to witness call,)
For my defense that last refuge to prove.

How fortuned you your forces to dispose,
So well t'auoyd that storm of threatened harms?
For then you had to deal with mighty foes,
That were in war grown hoarie under arms.

When faithless Neoptolemus did spy,
That all his treason was to our knowledge brought,
To the enemies camp he suddenly did fly,
A foolish traitor that was false for naught.
There he informde, or mis-informde my foes,
That haughty through my victories of late:
I in my tent did carelessly repose,
Though not by force, yet to b'orecomd by fate.
And further then to Antipater he told,
That if the Macedonians at that time,
The countnance of Craterus might behold,
They willingly would yield themselves to him.
Now they had labord earnestly before,
That I abandon would Perdiccas part:
And did protest, that they would give me more,
Than yet I had, or hoped for in my heart.
But Love borne free, cannot be thrald, nor bought,
More than a shameful peace I likde just strife:
To generous minds more dear than honor naught,
And ere I leave my faith, I Will lose my life.
Thus being despaired that I would prove their friend,
They sought in time t'orethrow me as their foe,
Where love could not begin, that hate might end,
And came in haste bent to surprise me so.
But I that knew Neoptolemus-his slight,
Did him against the Macedonians bend:
And to conceal Craterus from their sight,
T'encounter him, causde troops of strangers tend.
This policy which none could justly blame,
I with my self in secret did conspire:
And had my shirt bin privy to the same,
It should have bin an offering to the fire.
When once that the first game of death was past,
I Neoptolemus did toil to find,
And he me too, which happned at the last,
Two will do much to meet, being of one mind.
Then whilst we met for whom both th'armies warred,
Whose fortune then depended on our hands,
All was performd that force or fury dared,
Bent by revenge t'abate each the others bands.
And yet the heavens would not betray my trust,
Foul treason never had a fairer end:
The gods smilde on my cause because it was just,
And did destruction to the traitor send.
For forcde by him whose force he did despise,
Though fighting fiercely long he lost his breath:
As one more strong than true, more stowt than wise,
Whose greatest honor was his honest death.
But weakened with huge wounds, almost I diu'd
In seas of blood, being quite from knowledge straide,
Yet by so great a victory revived,
My courage grew more than my strength decaid.
I having finished thus this fatal strife,
Came where Craterus nere his course had run:
Even in the confines placde twixt death and life,
Whilst the one was gone and the other not begun.
He with great valor had resisted long,
As all Briareus hands had moved his sword:
And did his Masters memory no wrong,
Being with his courage, not his fortune stored.
What life refusde t'obtaine by death he sought,
For life and death are but indifferent things:
And of themselves not to be shund, nor sought,
But for the good or the evil that either brings:
With endless glory bent t'exchange his breath,
Of desprate valor all the power was proved:
And for great Captains no more glorious death,
Then to die fighting with a mind unmoved.
When this days toiles were drawn unto an end,
Whilst th'armies courage with their captain fell,
That I might safely show my self a friend,
I went where death his senses did cancel.
And whilst I told how both to be betrayed,
By Neoptolemus were brought about:
My woe with tears I to the world bewraid,
Mild pity and true kindness must burst out.
Ah, if the news of this my good success,
Had comd in time unto Perdiccas ears:
He might have lived their pride now to repress,
That by his fall were first deuorcde from fears.

The humor of that man was too well known,
Could he have parted other men from pride:
That was becomd a slave unto his own,
And for the same forcde by his followers, did.

The proud must still be plagued by prowder ones,
There must be had sharp steel to smoothe rough stones.

No vice than pride does greater hate procure,
Which foes do scorn and friends can not endure.

Yet majesty must not it self deiect,
A lofty carriage does procure respect.

A haughty gesture shows a tyrants heart,
All love a courteous countnance void of Art.

Yet manners too submisse as much condemnd,
Do make kings scornd and captains be contemnd.

A humble port, kind looks, words smooth, and soft,
Are means by which great minds may mount aloft.

Those are indeed for such as raise their flight,
They may do more whose course is at the height,
A imperious form an empire must defend,

Thus hastened was Perdiccas to his end.

That worthy man had many fair designs,
But virtue still by envy is pursude:
Though as a candle in the night best shines,
It in a vicious age may best be viewd.
There was a man that scornd secure delights,
As prodigal of pains, attemptiue, bold:
A strict obseruer of all th'antient rites,
And th'vncorrupted discipline of old.
He loved to have the soldiers of his band,
Chusd at the musters, not in markets bought:
And would not flatter where he might command,
More meet t'enioy, than seek that which he sought.
But soldiers now in this degenerd age,
Are fawnd on by faint minds, bribde in such sort:
That having still the reins loosd to their rage,
They cannot with so straight a course comport.
For that which was misfortune known to all,
Their malice as misgouernement did cite:
All things must help the unhappy man to fall,
They thus spewd forth the poison of their spite,
For hating his frank form and naked words,
By that occasion whetting their desires:
They in their captains body sheathd their swords,
A deed which even barbaritie admires.
Those traitorous troops may spot the purest bands,
If for a fact so vile they be excusde:
This will set swords in all our soldiers hands,
Against us, and not for us to be used.

I would be glad that soldiers never thought,
But that thing which their Generals first conceived:
Much less t'attempt against their bodies ought,
The which by them as sacred should be saved.
Nor like I captains that like blustering winds
Would over their troops triumph as tyrants still,
Without regard to merits, or to minds,
As carried headlong with a blinded will.
From selfe-presumption first pride borrowes might,
Which with contempt being matchd, both do conspire,
And twixt them bring base cruelty to light,
Th'abhorred offspring of a hated sire.
Such of Perdiccas was th'excessiue pride,
The vice from which that viler vice proceeds,
That it strange ways for his advancement tried,
And did burst forth in most prodigious deeds.
The murder of Mel^ager first began
To tell what tyrants harbourd in his heart,
To whom faith given, nor yet the church he wan,
Though sacred both no safety could impart.
And being by him constraind to quite the field,
The guiltless Capadocians desprate bands,
Chose rather than to that proud victor yield,
To perish by the power of their own hands.
Yet what against his foes he did perform,
From martial minds might plead for some excuse,
Whilst vindicatiue thoughts that wronged do storm,
In th'irritated mind did fury infuse.
But yet why sought he in a servile sort
T'extend his tyranny, even toward his friends,
That could not with disdainful forms comport?
More than an enemies yoke a friends offends.
And when of late by Ptolomie constraind,
He brought his bands with disadvantage back:
How by the same his government was staind,
The world can witness by his armies wrack.
But Hate being judge, each error seems a crime,
Then whilst the present aggrauates what is gone:
His soldiers moved by fortune, and the time,
Did by his death venge all their wrongs in one.

As noughtsmells well to a distemperd taste,
So to conceits preoccupied before:
Even good seems bad in them that they detest,
Men must mislike when they can like no more.
To you that loathed Perdiccas and his state,
What came of him could never yet seem good:
And I not wonder though your soul did hate
One that had right and power to take your blood.
For fled from him to whom you once belongd,
His trumpet still breathed terror in your ear:
Then all men hate those whom they once have wronged,
And by no means can love them whom, they fear.

That which you speak of hate, in love I spy,
Love cannot find an imperfection forth:
But does excuse, extenuate, or deny
Faults where it likes, with shadows of no worth.
I left Perdiccas, but did him no wrong,
That first to take my life all means did prove:
I told to Antipater, how he so long
Had bin abusde by a pretended love.
For as I frankly love, whilst loved again,
If me the ingrate ingrately do aquite:
Straight kindling fury with a just disdain,
I by love past proportion, then my hate.
And yet Eumenes, I commend thy mind,
That to defend thy friend have proved so free;
And since in love so constantly inclinde,
I would contract a friendship firm with thee.
Then where that now thy state has bin brought low,
Since spoilde of him in whom thou did repose:
Whilst aided by our power thou great may grow,
And raise thy hopes of kingdoms to dispose.

I Will be your friend, whilst friend to right you rest,
For without virtue friendship is but vain;
Which cannot build in a polluted breast,
Whose impious thoughts do sacred things profane.
So long as th'oath is kept that once was sworn,
Both to Alexanders self, and t'all his race,
Still shall this sword for your defense be borne,
But in my heart they hold the highest place.
And do not thus as over one vanquished vaunt,
Nor think me thrall'd though once by chance ore-thrown
Whilst there is a world adventurers cannot want,
I Will toss all states t'establish once mine own.

ANd must we buy our pomp at such a rate,
That bear the authority, or whom it bears?
O, O! how thornie are the ways of state,
With open dangers pau'd and secret fears?
Each of our steps is waited with some snare,
Whilst from our selves we all repose repel:
And through the waves of greatness tossde with care,
Do seek a haven, whose heaven is but a hell.
Whilst Eolus and Neptune joined in all,
With winds and waves beat the earth and bost the skies:
The tumbling mountains do not rise and fall,
Though each of them another does surprise;
As do the aspiring potentates with doubt,
Tossd through the wauing world on stormy thorns,
That are as in a circle hurlde about,
Ascending and discending both at once.
Lo, some whose hope would by their birth have seemed
Within the compass of contempt confinde:
Have from the vulgar yoke themselves redeemde,
To doefarre more than such could have designed.
And some to whom the heavens mishaps will give,
Though on their breath the breath of thousands hings
Lo, whiles brought low, cannot have leave to live,
Made less then subjects, that were more than kings.

Thus some without appearance do procure,
The most respected place where greatness stays:
And some whose states seemed once t'all eyes secure,
Thrown from their fortunes height lose glorious bays.
My father, lo, t'attaine the imperial place,
Marched through impossibilities of late:
And greater then the greatest, for a space,
Was Monarch of the Macedonian state.
But I his son, that as some would suppose,
Might keep with ease, that which he got with pain:
Can by no means my restles thoughts repose,
Such raging tyrants over my fancies reign.

And yet I think you have an easy part,
To whom your father did his state resign:
For it may make you smile that made him smart,
Some press the grape, and others drink the wine.

I Will not believe that ever any ill,
Was bred for me within my fathers breast;
Since children must suppose their parents will,
(Though seeming bad) still purposde for the best.
And yet my fathers ghost must pardon me,
Though when from us he minded to remove:
I think the tenor of his last decree,
Show lack of judgment, or at least of love.
For what base course had ever bin begun,
To make me seem unworthy of his place,
That he preferred a stranger to his son,
And sought t'obscure the glory of his race.
Thus since in such a sort he did neglect,
The son that should his name from death exempt:
As dis-regarded for some great defect,
All other men may have me in contempt.
But ere his age expirde the expected date,
He saw my brows with Laurel boughs arrai'd:
And spied my skill in war, and wit in state,
Which grew as much as the other man's decai'd.
Nor can my courage so be brought to bow,
But Polispercon shall experience soon:
That in my fathers will1, I will allow,
Not what he did, but what he should have done.
And since by him high dignities were won,
I mind to prosecute what he began:
For such a fathers greatness from his son,
Takes the security of a private man.
Lo, Polispercon by our power repeld,
From Macedonie has retirde dismaide:
And for the fear of us has bin compeld,
T'engage his glory for another aid.
Let him not think the shadow of the kings,
Can match my power with these his borrowed bands,
For his faint flight that is framed with others wings,
Will never bear him from Cassanders hands.
And though Olimpias countnanc'd once his cause,
As from Epirus brought to ruin me:
Now of her own mishap she most must pause,
Since brought by us of late t'a low degree.

And yet Olimpias had a good success,
When first she touched the Macedonian bounds:
Whilst Polispercon prowdly did repress
All those that durst resist with words, or wounds.
Though Philip and Euridice his Queen,
T'encounter with their troops in time arriu'de:
Yet when the Macedonians had her seen,
As their own Queen to honor her they striu'de.
And hapless Philip being constrainde to yield,
There for a kings did take a captives state:
And his wretch'd mate (though flying from the field)
Was followed by their forces, and her fate.
Then thus her husband and her self gave place,
Whose brows of late the imperial badge had borne:
But then thrown down in The Ocean of disgrace,
A prey t'a woman's pride, the butt of scorn.

Those were the means that did them first entrap,
But have you heard how after they were thrall:
To plague the world with honor and mis-hap,
Th'enragde Olimpias tyrranizde over all.

Some doubtful rumors did frequent each ear,
Such as rash fame confusedly durst unfold:
But yet conceald, by favor, or for fear,
The certainty to us has not bin told.

When thus the famished tygresse did surprise
Those miserable souls, (as in a dream)
Her heart at first seemde scarce to trust her eyes,
She surfetted her sight so with their shame.
But when she saw by reason of her power,
That she might safely let her rage burst out:
She causde about them both to build a tower,
Within whose walls they scarce could turn about.
And in that dungeon as entombed they stood,
With high disgrace t'asswage more high disdaines:
Far from all comfort whilst a little food
Their life prolonged, but to prolong their pains.
But Pity for th'vnfortunate contendes,
As Envy still prosperity controules:
The Macedonians doubtful of their ends,
Would sometime murmr for those marterd souls.
The peoples grudge Olimpias did perceive,
And to prevent what fury might effect,
She strait resolved life's remnant to bereave,
From weakened powers that did no less exspect.
And when some barbarous Thracians bent for blood,
As she appointed in the excess of spite:
Had murdered Philip and his Queen imbrude,
With purple streams that spoiled her husbands spright.
She sent to her, whose soul in grief did sink,
As messengers of death to assault her breast:
A sword, a cord, and an empoison'd drink,
A Tirants presents, yet a wretches best.
Those when the Queen perceived, unmoved she spoke
As one that had embraced some great relief:
Fit gifts for her to give, for me to take,
Since she exceeds in hate, and I in grief.
And tell the tirant that I gladly die,
That th'irritated gods t'auenge my death,
May thunder forth that judgment, which I spy
With blood must choke that bloody woman's breath.
Then looking on her Lord that there lay slain,
Once partner or his joy, then of his woe:
Whilst that his roses did her lillies stain,
She kissed his wounds as taking leave to go.
And lest her resolution were betraide,
Her snowie neck (not used with such a chain)
She binding with her belt, di'd vndismaide,
And if she sighd, she sighd but for disdain.

This barbarous act my breast with grief does sting,
Can spite so much transport the meekest kinder?
And yet in the earth there is no more cruel thing,
Then malice raging in a woman's mind.

But yet this sacrifice could not assuage,
The boiling thoughts of her unbounded will:
For entering thus she rioted in rage,
(As dogs that once get blood would always kill.)
Each light occasion kindling still her wrath,
The sovereignty she shamefully abusde:
And put my brother Nicanor to death,
Though for no crime condemned; no, not accusde.
Yea more, her hate extended toward the dead,
Whose cruelty no flood of blood confined,
The monument that to Iolas was made,
She razed and rent his ashes with the wind.
To be Cassanders friend was such a crime,
As none could escape that ever favored me.
Thus huge disorders did abound a time,
Where nothing lawful is, all things are free.
Then when I heard of this outrageous pride,
That made my native soil contemned to be:
I those indignities could not abide,
The shame whereof redounded most to me.
So that at last, moved by my countries care,
As much as by particular respects:
I with great speed an army did prepare,
To punish, or prevent the like effects.
But when I was to Macedonie comd
To fortify a town she did dissigne:
Which by my valor quickly was ore-comd,
Whilst famine forcde the fortress to resign.
Then pride unto necessity gave place,
Her lofty courage was constraind to bow:
So that she rests depending on our grace,
To be disposde as it shall please us now.

This chance the world to wonder may invite;
Lo, there a Queen that had (though now distressde)
The rarest fortune, and the greatest spirit,
That ever any of her sex possessd.
The widowed Empress that first warrde with the Indes,
Nor stout Tomiris, though most gallant seen:
Nor all the Amazons borne with martial minds,
Had never stouter stomakes then this Queen.
Her lives first progress did but prove too sweet,
Whom all the earths treasures once concurred to bless:
But now sad soul, trod under fortunes feet,
Her misery no creature can express.

Those were but fortunes gifts that made her great
All was without her-selfe that made her praisde:
Her imperfections did but stain the state,
To which another merits had her raisde.
For when she first with famous Philip matched,
Then her behauior was not free from blame:
But even though she with Argos eyes was watched,
As it was supposde she forfeited her fame.
At least, her husband feared for some disgrace,
From her himself had publikly deuorc'd:
And entertained another in her place,
Which, for the time, to suffer she was forced.
Yet this in the end did his destruction breed,
For which her spightfull thoughts had labored long,
She was acquainted with Pausanias deed,
And spurred him to perform th'intended wrong.
She sought, that by such means t'ambitious will,
Her husbands murder might enlarge the raines,
Whilst with authority she did all the will,
Of which too late the afflicted realm complains.
Long suffered for the greatness of her son,
She played the tirant safely as she pleased:
But by the course that I have else begun,
I hope those whom she plagued shall now b'appeasde.

Yet of Olimpias, though abasde by you,
The sight her son, and husband will revive:
And so may make the Macedonians now,
For her relief strange courses to contriue.
Of those whose greatness does regard extort,
Th'afflictions must entender every mind:
And still the affections of the vulgar sort,
Are headlong led, too cruel, or too kind.

O, but I can precipitate her fall,
Even by the means that might support her most:
For pity shall spoil pity, whilst they all,
Sigh for their friends that through her pride was lost.

As those to whom all other things are free,
Must have their life, and reign both of one date:
So private men that pass their own degree,
Can hardly turn to take their former state.
Thus you commit your fortune to the fates,
None can retire that enters in such things:
For those that ought attempt against great states,
Must die as traitors, or else live as kings.
And though you would but some disorders stay,
You deal with those that borne not to be thrall
As torrents bear away what stoppes their way,
And either must do nothing, or do all.
No, keep not such, to sigh when they are gone,
That scorn to take the thing that they should give;
For all must die, that dare but touch a throne,
Those that might take their life, they must not live.

Since in this course that I can once but err,
I shall be sure ere she herself withdraw.

And yet what surety can you have of her?
Can Laws bind them that are above the Law?
It Is hard t'establish concord twixt the two,
Where the one must hate, and the other always fear.

O but I mind to use the matter so,
That both from hence shall further strife forbear.

What can her freedom and your peace procure?


Death both can make her free, and make me sure.


And would you do such evil to shed her blood?


I, to others evil, so that it do me good.


The Macedonians will abhor this wrong.


And yet obey me if be most strong.


But who shall have the realm amidst those broils?


Who ever winnes the field must keep the spoils.


So to possess the realm you have no right.


But I have more, so long as I have might.


This state does to it self an heir afford.


All kingdoms rights are pleaded by the sword.


The people all will grudge against your state.


But dare not stir whilst fear exceeds their hate.


And in their hearts they will detest you too.


Think what they will that have not power to do.


What though Olympias in a little space,
May lose her power, together with her breath?
Yet there remains another of her race,
That is by nature bound t'auenge her death.

The Impetuous streams of a tempestuous flood,
That drownes all the old, not yeeldes the young relief?
What fool that of his foes victorious stood,
Would spoil an army, and yet spare the chief?
No, since I must my self with murder stain,
I Will by the roots raze all the royal race,
So that no power shall spring from thence again,
T'oregrow my greatness, and my plants displace.
The strength has left great Alexanders arm,
Whose mothers fatal thread is now near spunne;
And I have means to keep my self from harm,
Both of Roxane, and her tender son.
But since this course may serve our states t'aduance,
By which a ground for great designs is lay de;
I must entreat you now what ever chance,
To lend your approbation, though not aid.

I Will be your friend, yet wish you would refrain,
From doing this; but ere you be undone,
Since that I by your guiltiness may gain,
I Will suffer that which I would not have done.

CAn I be she whom all the world admirde?
As being the happiest Queen that raignd below?
Whom all the planets have to plague conspirde,
Of fickle fortunes course the effects to show.
No, it is not I, naught could my course control,
Nor force me thus to attend another will:
Since I despise this prison of my soul,
Where it disdains to abide in bondage still.
Ah, whilst I did on the outward pomp rely,
My state the power of higher powers did tempt,
My state that once bred reverence and envy:
Though now it breed but pity and contempt.
Olimpias once high as Olimpius stood,
The wife of Philip Alexanders mother:
That matched Alcides and Achilles blood,
T'ingender one more worth than both together.
Am I the woman whose maiestike state
Seemde once so happy to deceived conceits?
I, I am she, and never yet more great,
Than at this present, in despite of Fates.
A double bondage long did burden me,
I to my self, my self to fortune thrall:
But now captivity has set me free,
That could not rise till first I had a fall.
The sprite that's with prosperity benumbed,
Scarce like it self can to the world appear:
When Virtue has Adversity ore'com'd,
Then shines true greatness in her highest sphere.
Our glory now I see consists no more
Without our-selues in eie-betraying shows,
But in the breasts inestimable store,
That neither Time entombes, nor Power orethrowes.
O never were my thoughts enlargde till now,
To mark my self, and quintessence my mind,
For long a prey to pride, I know not how,
A mist of fancies made my iudgemcnt blind.
As those that dream sweet dreams, awakt, at last
Do find their error when their eyes find light,
Freed from the slumbring of my fortune past,
I now arise to judge of all things right.
That cloud of pomp whose smoke me shadowd once,
Lo now remoou'd vnmaskes my life too late:
And now I see, that scepters, crowns, and thrones,
Are burdnous badges of a dangerous state.
O happy woman, of true pleasure sure,
That in the country leadst a guiltless life:
From Fortunes reach retirde, obscure, secure,
Though not a Queen, yet a contented wife.
Thy mate more dear to thee than is the light,
Though low in state, loves in a high degree:
And with his presence still to bless thy sight,
Does scorn great courts whilst he lives courting thee.
And as thou woundst him not with hid disgrace,
He with no jealous thought torments thy breast:
Thus both lie down to rest, and rise in peace,
Then if they strive, they strive who should love best.
But though thou have not as the mighty ones,
Thy neck surchargde with chains (ah chains indeed)
Nor cares weighd down with oriental stones,
Nor robes, whole worth may admiration breed.
So wantst thou that which we have ever had,
Sad miscontentments, jealousy, and spite:
And though thy back be not with purple clad,
Thy thoughts are clad with innocencies quite.
As Birds, whose cage of gold the sight deceiues,
Do seem to sing whilst they but wail their state:
So with the mighty matched, made glorious slaves,
We happy seem whilst we but curse our fate.
That bliss whose show in us vain eyes do please,
Makes thee indeed a true contentment breathe,
Thou spendst thy youth in mirth, thy age in ^ase,
And know not what it is to die till death.
Ah since I lived, I have done naught but die,
Still when I seemde most blessed, then most accursed:
Since on frail greatness first I did rely,
How often has my swollen breast bin like to burst?
The Fates with Fortune from my birth conspirde,
To make my life a pattern of their might:
For both my parents from the world retirde,
When I was scarcely com'd t'inioy the light.
The world may judge how I was justly grieved,
Whilst angry Philip sought for my disgrace,
(A thing which once I scarce could have believed)
And unto Cleopatra gave my place.
Then though I long as desprate of relief,
For his offense afflicted had my mind:
Yet did his sudden death augment my grief,
He was my husband, though he was unkind.
And when my sons rare trophies, and renown,
With wonder filld the world, and me with joy:
Those as himself that strived to throw his down,
Did to supplant my state their powers employ.
Yet stood my courage when my fortune fell,
And still I toilde distracted from repose:
Those that had him betrayed from the earth t'expell,,
And with their blood to register my woes.
And my designs a time so prosperd too,
That some of them did try by torments strange,
All what a woman's just disdain could do,
Whilst spurred by jealousy, spite and revenge.
But this arch-traitor ruler of the rest,
That thirsts to drink the blood of all our race:
Even then when my design succeeded best,
Did compass me with ruin and disgrace.
Such was the tenor of my fortune past,
Whose least mis-hap had made another burst:
First orphan'd, widdow'd, and vnchilded last,
A daughter, wife, and mother all accursed.
Heavens plague Cassander, let that base wretch try,
That Jove his judgment but a while deferres,
And let his wife bewail as well as I,
I murderd for my son, and she by hers.
Even as th'incestuous. Thehans monstrous brood,
So may thy sons contend with mutual wounds:
And never let thy house be free from blood,
Till quite excluded from th'vsurped bounds.
Thus notwithstanding of my wonted power,
To me, save wishes, nothing does remain:
But though condemned to die, yet at this hour
Should I begin to curse, and to complain?
No no, that custom best becomes poor souls,
Whose resolution cannot climb more hie:
But I whose courage that base course controules,
Must still triumph what ever state I try.
Death is an open haven t'each storme-tossde mind,
Since the end of labor, th'entrie unto rest:
Death has the bounds of misery confinde,
Whose sanctuary saues the afflicted best.
To suffer whiles with a courageous heart,
It merits far more praise than deeds most known,
For in our actions Fortune has a part,
But in our sufferings, all things are our own.
Lo now I loathe the world and worldly things,
Of which I have both proou'd the best and worst:
Yea th'apprehended death great comfort brings,
And has no cross but that it should be forced.
O hear me now (dear son) if that thy ghost
May leave the Elysian fields to look on me:
Of all things else this does content me most,
That from this time I may remain with thee.
And blush not son to see thy mothers end,
My death in glory with thy life shall strive:
It Fortune as a captive shall attend,
That as thy fellow followd thee alive.

AH, ah, though man since the image of great Jove,
And th only creature that gives Reason place,
Made to make faith below of powers above,
Should seek his heavenly progeny to prove,
By still resembling most the immortal kind,
Yet makes the world our better part so blind,
That we the clouds of vanity embrace,
And from our first excellency decline.
This does extinguish that celestial grace,
Which should make souls to burn with virtues love,
Whose fancies vice luxuriously now feasts,
Vice is the Circe that inchaunts the mind,
And does transform her followers all in swine:
Whilst poisond pleasures so corrupt our tates,
That of halfe-gods we make our selves whole-beasts.
And yet of ruthlesse Plutoes raging host,
The vice that does transport presumptuous hearts,
And makes men from the gods to differ most.
It Is cruelty, that to the sufferers cost
And actors both, must oftentimes b'appeasd.
The gods delight to give, and to forgive,
By pardoning more than by plaging pleased.
And why should men excogitate strange arts,
T'extend their tyranny as those that strive
To feed on mischief still, though the Author smarts
Often for the deed of which himself did boast,
Whilst whence the blow first come the grief does turn,
For that by which the mind at first was easde,
May it in end the greatest burden give.
Often those whose cruelty makes many mourn,
Do by the fires that they first kindled burn:
Of the other tyrants that extort the mind,
With pleasure some delight it in such sort,
That first the honnie, then the gall we find;
And others, though from Honors court declinde
Some comfort yielde, though base by hope of gain:
And though some make us to be loathed of one,
We by their means another love obtain.
But cruelty, with which none can comport,
Makes the author hated when the deed is gone.
Often even by those whom it did most support,
As that which alienates men from kind,
And as humanity the mind inchants,
So savage souls that from the same resraine,
More fierce than fiercest beasts are loved of none.
With barbarous beasts one with less danger hants,
Than with the man whose mind all mercy wants;
Yet though the mind of man, as strong, and rude,
Be ranish'd, whiles with violent desire,
And must, if sir'd with rage, be quench with blood.
How can this tender sex whose glory stood
In having hearts iuclinde to pity still,
Delight it self by any barbarous deed?
For Nature seems in this to have used her skill,
In making women's minds, though weak, entire,
That weakness might love, and devotion breed,
To which their thoughts, if pure, might best aspire,
As aptest for the impression of all good:
But from the best to worst all things do wear,
Since cruelties from feeble minds proceed:
In breasts where courage fails, spite, shame, and fear
Make envy, hate, and rigor rule to bear.
Our Queen Olimpias, that was once so great,
And did such monstrous cruelties commit:
In plaging Philip, and his Lady of late.
Lo, now being brought to taste the like estate,
Must take such entertainment as she gave.
And it is good reason that it should be so;
Such measure as we give we must receive,
Whilst on a throne she did superblie sit,
And with disdainefull eyes looked on her foe,
As but being vanquished by her power and wit.
Not mindful of th'ineuitable fate.
O, the Imortalls that command above,
Of every state in hand the rudder have:
And as they lie, can make us stay or go:
The grief of others should us greatly move,
As those that sometime may like fortune prove.
But as experience with rare proofs has shown,
Do look on others, we have Linx- his eyes:
Whilst we would have their imperfections known,
Yet like blind Moles can never mark our own.
Such clouds of selfe-regarde do dim our sight,
Why should we be puffde up by a'cnemies fall?
Since what the day does on another light,
The same the morrow may our state surprise.
Those that on this inconstant constant ball,
Do live enuiron'd with th'all-circkling skies,
Have many means whereby to be ore-throwne,
And why should dying wordlings swollen with wroth,
So tyrranize over an afflicted wight?
Since miseries are common unto all,
Let none be proud that draws a doubtful breath;
Good hap attends but few still till their death.
LOng have I now invr'd the eyes of my mind,
On natures labors curiously to look:
And of all creatures finding forth the kind,
Strange wonders read in th'vniuersall book.
I mark the world hy contraries maintainde,
Whose harmony does most subsist by strife:
Whilst of all things within the same containde,
The death of one still gives another life.
But as all things are subject unto change,
That partners are of th'elementall powers:
So rould about with reuolutions strange,
The state of man rests constant but few hours,
For what does fame more frequently report,
Then of our sudden rising; and our falls?
I think the world is but a tennis-court,
Where men are tossde by fortune as her balls.
And never any age shewde more than this,
The wavering state of soule-ennobled wights;
That soar too high to seize on th'ayrie bliss,
Whilst lowest falls attend the highest flights.
The matchless Monarch that was borne it seemed,
To show how high mortality attaines:
Has not from death the adored flesh redeemed,
But pain has made an end of all his pains.
And these brave bands that furnished fame with b^eath,
Whilst all the world their valorous deeds did spy:
Rest now confounded (since their sovereigns death)
Like Poliphemus having lost his eye:
And they are like that teeth-ingendred brood,
That took their life out of a monster dead:
Whiles each of them pursues for others blood,
Since the great Drag ons death that was their head.

So change all things that subject are to our sight;
Disorder order breeds, and order it,
Next night comes darkness, and next darkness light.
This never changing change transcends our wit.
Thus poverty and riches, sickness, health:
Both honor and dishonor, life and death,
Do so depend on other, that by stealth,
All go and come as th'accidents of breath.
T'ech worldly state the heavens a height appoint,
Where when it once arriues it must descend:
And all perfections have a fatal point,
At which excellency it self must end.
But as all those that walk on the earth are crossde
With alterations, happning often and strange:
The greatest states with greatest storms are tossde,
And sought of many must make many a change.
Nor speak I this by speculation now,
As gathring credit out of ancient scroules: souls.
No, I have lived at court and I know how,
There Is naught on the earth more vexed, then great men's souls.
Thral'd to the tirant honor, whilst they moan
Their plaints to subjects ears ashamed t'empart:
They must bear all the weight of woes alone,
Where others of their grief lend friends a part.
Their rising us above to such a height,
Which seems their best is worst, whilst since being lords:
They never hear the truth that comes to light,
When frank society speaks naked words.
Whilst sadness, whiles seems majesty, time tells
How dear they buy their pomp with loss of rest:
Some feign three furies but in all the hells,
And there is three thousand in one great man's breast.

I think all monarchies are like the Moon,
Which whiles eclipsd, whiles under cloud, whiles clear,
Grows by degrees, and is when full, undone;
Yet Aeson like renewed does re-appeare.
For so the first, but small, begin to shine,
And when they once their spherick form obtain,
Do then begin to languish and decline;
Yet fallen in other realms, do rise again.
The Assyrians once made many a nation bow;
Then next, all power was in the Persians hand:
And lo, the Macedonians monarchs now
Amongst themselves divided cannot stand.

A secret fate, alternantly all things
Does in this circle circularly lead:
Still generation from corruption springs,
To the end that some may live, some must be dead.
Each Element another strength deuours;
The Air to the fire succumbes, the fire to rain:
The water strives to drown all the earth with showers,
Which it by vapors vomites out again.
Thus with a gordian knot together bound,
All things are made, vn-made, and made again:
Whilst ruin founds, perfection does confound,
And norhing in one state does long remain.
But naught in the earth more dangerously stands
Than sovereignty, that is rated at such worth,
Which like the stormy deities blustering bands,
Does fly from East to West, from South to North.

A long experience now makes this noght strange,
Though mighty states whose reins one only leads;
Be whiles distracted and constrained to change,
As too great bodies for so little heads,
Since every Commonwealth where all men's wits
Do join in one, to increase the public ease,
Is subject often to feauers, and to fits,
Which Physic whiles, whiles poison must appease.
For (ah) the multitude more rash then wise,
A Hyhra-headed beast whilst naught it binds,
Does passionately praise, or else despise,
As some prepostrous fancies move their minds.
Often vice and virtue have like danger bred,
Whilst envy the one procured, and the other hate:
By jealousy, or emulation dred,
Those ruined are by it that raisde the state.

Whilst some their betters, others equals scorn,
The government that is popular decaies:
And when it dies the Monarchy is borne,
Whose violence disorders broiles alaies.
It from corruption does continue clean,
As freest from infirmities we find:
Still whilst it humbly high, does hold a mean,
Twixt tyranny, and too remiss a mind.
But though th'one-headed state may flourish long,
Whilst the one knows to command, the rest to obey:
Whilst guerdon follows goodness, vengeance wrong,
That virtue cherisht is, vice made decay.
Yet (if naught else) time does great states overcome,
Heavens have confinde all by some fatal hour:
And there may many misaduentures come
To dissipate the most united power.
For huge mishaps a monarchy may mar,
When once prosperity begins t'expire:
To further which, whiles strangers must make war,
And whiles seditious subjects may conspire.
As jealousy, or else ambition moves,
All Princes would suppress aspiners still:
And then a subjects course most dangerous proves,
When either fear or hope transports his will.
But though to the beginning, and to the end
Great states are guided by a secret fate:
Yet their designed destrudion does depend,
Still, either on contempt, or else on hate;
Of those the first kings lack of courage breeds,
Which makes the ambitious minds t'attempt more bold:
And the other does attend tyrannike deeds,
By violence to have violence controld.

Yet never did so many Monarks fall,
By foreign battles, nor intestine broiles,
As by themselves, that seeming free, were thrall,
Whilst smooth-tong'd minions gloried of their spoils.
Those that have reigned by choice, by birth, or worth,
Or yet through others errors, or their crime,
Often suffer ougly vices to burst forth,
Which virtues colors gilted till that time.
Men are descipherd best then whilst they rest
Most high aduaunc'd being free from hope or fear:
That which is eminent is marked best,
And highest fortunes hardest are to bear.
Low fortunes cloak the faults that some commit,
Whilst imperfections the earth perfections deemes,
Stupiditie seems patience, fear seems wit,
Will constancy, and softness goodness seems.
But when in the worlds theater one must stand,
A public actor placed in all men's sight:
And swaies the sign of power, and in his hand
Does hold the balance both of wrong and right;
Then he for every action that is his,
The censure of a thousand tongues must have,
Not only damned for doing of things amiss,
But for not doing of all that all men crave.
O, he but undermines the sovereign state,
That cares not who be weak so he be strong:
More studious for himself then for the state,
Or if for it that he may hold it long.
For where Jove him for all men's good ordaines,
He thinks both them and theirs made him to please,
As if a charge of weight, a place of pains,
Were but a bed of rest, a haven of ease.
The worlds great weight that Atlas shoulders bear,
Is not so weighty all to weigh one down,
As that which on his head a king does wear.
There is no burden heavier than a crown.
The Aegean waves more easy are to appease,
Then are their thoughts whose mind for state prepares:
Can they have rest that toil for all men's ease?
The purple ever must be lined with cares.

Good kings are like the fire, which flaming bright
Does waste it self, to serve another turn:
And sovereignty is like fires glancing light,
Which if but viewed, delights, if touched, does burn.
I like for warmness to stand Vulcan by,
More than to burn amidst the Lemnian flame:
And rather in the Cedars shadow lie,
Than on the top to stand the wind-gods game.
All th'eie-attracting pomp, and splendrous shows
Do merit scorn, though they amazement breed:
The world them pity more then envy owes,
That to seem happy would be wrech'd indeed.
For alterations strange attend a throne;
As if the sphere of fortune were a crown,
The great still tossde, like Sisiphus his stone,
Whilst highest up, rest readiest to fall down.
Of this what greater proof can Fame afford,
Then mighty Philips memorable fall:
That daunted had the Grecians by the sword,
Though not till then t'a stranger being made thrall?
He, he, then whilst he solemnized with state,
His daughters marriage, suddenly was lost:
So that it seemed that Monarchs days to date,
That Hymen's torch gave light to Plutoes post.
Then when that I conceiude with grief of heart
The miseries that proper were to court:
I thought them happy that retired apart,
Could never know such things, but by report.
I might have lived with Alexander still,
To virtuous men, whose savors were not scarce:
Yet rather chose, though having both at will,
To Obey with Pallas, then command with Mars.
And whilst he toiled over others Lord to be,
I labored over my self to be made Lord:
Yet made as great a conquest too as he:
My pen shall be as famous as his sword.

And had I willingly engaged my rest,
The way to trace, that to vainglory tends:
I might have lived respected with the best,
As one of Alexanders chiefest friends.
For though of him that I did merit naught,
He entertainde my friendship till his death:
And when he once our cities ore-throw sought,
At my request he pacified his wrath.
Then once to me a mass of gold he sent,
And offered too a stately Asian town
Which I refusde, pleased more with my poor rent,
Than he with all the treasures of a crown.
I told, that such a sum but served, to make
Him a corrupter, me corrupted thought:
And foul for him to give, for me to take,
If used, shamde both, vnusde, did serve for naught.
But all those baits I never daign'd to touch,
Lest I that all my life had liude so free
Might be possessed too much; possessing much,
If taking riches, it had taken me.
No, I would rather learn to live on less,
Then for superfluous furniture to strive:
Who seeks out substance t'entertaine excess,
Does live t'vse it, not it that he may live.
My fortune does afford sufficient means,
That may preserve all Natures powers in force:
And he that on a golden scepter leanes,
Can not have more, but may well use it worse.
Ah, since abundance but abuses brings,
Why seek men more then serves to have Nature easde?
And why should men toil for so many things,
Since Nature with alittle can be pleased?

Lo how the heavens, whose love toward man exceeds,
Have made his body strong, his mind divine:
And have made the earth to furnish all his needs,
Lest downe-weigh'd cares might make his thoughts decline.
So that he has a means to raise his flight,
If winged with Virtue, and may mounting hie,
Aspire t'approach to the celestial light,
And deifie himself before he die.
Yet does he strait forgo that glorious way,
To toil for things that the earth vnforc'd affords:
The which his wants first framed were to defray,
But by himself are of his life made Lords.
O how unworthy of the worth of man,
Are many labors that delight him most,
Since that corruption boldly first began,
To make men nourish vice at virtues cost.
And now what has great Alexander gained
By endless labors, and excessive cares?
Of whom lo now it is only said he reigned,
But death unto himself, worse to his heirs.
Lo, for the guiltless blood that he has spilled;
The partners of his conquests do begin
To die by the same swords by which they killed,
And all his offspring expiates his sin.

Such is the revolution of all things,
The wheel of Fortune still must slippery prove,
And chiefly when it burdend is with kings,
Whose states as weightiest most must make it move.
Yet Alexander I must say was blessed,
That over the world a victor always ranged:
And having ended all his wars, in rest,
Did die in time before his fortune changde.
And for his favor which I often did try,
Whilst earnestly he labord me t'aduaunce:
Whilst earnestly he labord me t'aduaunce:
I Am sorry that himself so soon did die,
And that his offspring has so hard a chance.
His successors have set all Greece on fire,
Of which I fear to perish by some spark:
For Polipercon does my death conspire,
And who can escape that's made a great man's marker?
But for my countries cause I Will give my blood,
Whilst safely praisde all follow virtue can:
But when with danger threatened to do good,
That's only worthy of a worthy man.
Nor do I tender so this puff of breath,
But I could be contented it t'expell:
A mind that is resolved triumphs over death,
He has lived long enough that has lived well.

I Doubt not now (great heroes) but ye all
What ever miscontentment ye pretend
Do rest well pleased, since those by me made thrall,
That might have made you end, have made an end.
Loathe not the means, if ye allow the effect,
For though by this I have a realm obtained:
It yields you more, whose course none can suspect,
I Am only guilty, and ye all have gained.
Yet to pursue my life they first began,
For my defense this last refuge I proved:
Naught than himself is nearer unto man,
All men with their own dangers are most moved.
And had not proud Olimpias did in time,
By offering up her blood to work my peace:
Then mine had been the harm, and hers the crime,
I but prevented her a little space.
And if her offspring had suruiu'd her death,
Whose rising could not but procure our fall:
Ye, now that naught but sovereignty do breathe,
Had breathed obedience, or not breathed at all.
You from a dangerous yoke have us relieved,
Which I suspect we had experienced soon:
And why then should we labor to seem grieved
At that thing done, which we wish not undone?
No, since that all for soueraignety do strive,
And have once tasted what it is to reign:
There Is none of us but rather die, than live
To Embrace a subjects servile state again.
And though perchance with Alexanders son,
If heir both of his fathers worth and state:
We might have most respected places won,
As special pillars of the Princes seat.
Yet though more great than others, as before,
It would have grieved us, less then one to fall:
The fall from first to second grieves one more,
Then from the second to the last of all.
Our old renown to us had ruin brought,
And would have made us odious to remain:
It Is dangerous for a subject to be thought,
One that desires, or yet deserves to reign.
When any tempest threatened had his throne,
He would have sought assurance at our cost:
For when that jealousy has seizd on one,
The greatest virtues are suspected most.
Yea though we could to quite our state consent,
Us from suspicion naught but death could purge:
Still greatness must turmoile, or then torment,
If borne, a burden, if laid down, a scourge.

But When we have within bur bosom weighed
The ruin of all Alexanders race;
Whom without blushing we might have obeyed,
By right succeeding in our sovereigns place.
How can our souls but highly be ashamed,
That one inferior both to them and us,
Does seek by wrong that which by right they claimed,
And by their orethrow would b'exalted thus?
Nor need I more as in suspense remain,
To mask my meaning with ambiguous words:
No, no, our words may as his deeds be plain,
Which fame, (and without whispring) now records
Ye hear how that Antigonus of late,
Whose thoughts winged with ambition soar too high:
Does strive above us all t'aduaunce his state,
And on his former fortune does rely.
Since to his hands Eumenes was betraide,
Lo, quite transported by prepostrous pride,
As if in naught addicted now to our aid,
He has laid all regard of us aside.

Thus Time the truth of all things does proclaim,
Man is a crafty creature, hard to know,
That can a face for every fortune frame,
No trust in mortalles, nor no faith below.
Whiles as our own particulars do move,
We what we wish for most, seem to mislike:
And often of others do the course disprove,
Whilst we want naught but means to do the like.
Then whilst Perdiccas did attempt before
To make the rest that were his equals thrall,
Who than Antigonus detested more,
The Ambitious mind of one that would have all?
But since Perdiccas and his faction fell,
Whom he as traitors to the state pursude:
He in his place succeeding to rebel,
Has what he seemde t'vndo again renude.
And yet I many a time have musde of this,
How from the world he did Eumenes send.

How? But by treason as his custom is,
False at the first, and cruel at the end.

I know, that after diverse doubtful fights,
He has orethrowne Eumenes at the last:
But by what stratagems or treacherous slights,
I would be glad to hear how all has past

Antigonus was at the first afraid,
To match Eumenes by plain force in fight:
And the refuge that fear affordes assaide,
For valor frank bent t'vse some wary slight.
Amongst Eumenes troops, their minds to prove
He scattred letters with allurements stored:
By promisde treasures, and protested love,
To move some one that might betray his Lord.
But he being wise, his troops in time aduisde,
To clear their virtue by their enemies vice:
And gave them thanks that would not be entisde,
To sell their faith at such a bloody price.
Then said, that The Author of those scroules was he,
That when they spide such practices again,
They still would take them always but to be,
Their Captains trial, not their enemies train.
Thus by the means that should have him entrap'd,
His adversary did deluded stay:
For both he from the present danger escaped,
And to prevent the like preparde a way.
Then when this traitorous policy had failed,
And that there had some doubtful conflicts past:
Antigonus that had at one prevailed,
As having had some vantage at the last:
He with Eumenes did procure to speak,
And as the one vanquished offered him good will:
But he whose mind could not be brought to break,
Would never talk but as to his e^uall still.
For when a band between them made, did bear
That he to Antigonus should help impart,
He did reform that form, and would first swear,
With Alexanders offspring to take part.
Thus where they his submission did attend,
Imperiously conditions he imposde:
So that there after to procure his end,
Still the other by all means his mind disposde.
And shortly of his bands a vain debate,
For his confusion fit occasion brought:
Still, as small things by concord do grow great.
By discord great things are reduced to naught,
TO Eumenes whilst he fortunately lived,
That th'haugh tie Agiraspides gave place,
With him for state two of their captains strived.
And would not his authority embrace.
Such was that spite of theirs to have him spoild,
That though of valor he rare wonders proved,
And often by force Antigonus had foild,
Yet from their mind it could not be removed:
For being by them allurde all the other bands,
To get some baggage that they lost again,
Did give their captain bound to the enemies hands,
So darkening all their glory by one stain.
And though Eumenes trusting to new hopes,
By flying labored a relief to have found,
He was prevented by his traitrous troops.
And like to some base fugitive was bound,
Scarce could his stormy stomach bent to break,
Daigne then t'entreate those that had him betraide,
Yet having hardly purchasde leave to speak,
He stretched them forth his fetterd hands and said;
Lo here th'apparrell that your General wears,
Since with your faith his liberty was lost:
Yet he those bands not given by the enemy bears,
But by his own in whom he trusted most.
And must he thus be led that should you lead?
Is this the triumph that I should receive,
For all my victories thus to be made,
Of captain, captive, of a conqueror, slave?
How often (my soldiers) have ye all of late,
To me by solemn oaths sworn to be true?
But it becomes not one in a'abiect state,
With lofty words his Masters to pursue.
Nor crave I further favor at this hour,
Then strait to bathe your weapons in my breast;
Let not my life be in mine enemies power,
Lo all that your commander does request.
(...) Antigonus does take no care,
(...) get my body, so he get my head:
And he regardes not, neither when, nor where,
No* in what sort I die, so I be dead.
But if through horror of so vile a deed,
Your eyes look down, your hair erected stands,
Which in your minds this much remorce does breed,
That with your hearts ye will not stain your hands:
Then as your captain, since not force I may,
I Will as your friend entreat, that now in time
I may but have a sword, my self to slay,
So you t'excuse whilst partner of your crime.
But when he saw that words could not assuage
Their barbarous thoughts, that nothing could control:
Then having turned his courage all in rage,
He thus flamed forth the fury of his soul.
O damned rascals, that have lost all faith,
Whom neither duty nor yet merit binds:
How often was Alexander moud to wrath
By those your mutinous and malicious minds?
And, O what could I at those hands attend,
That yet were smoking with Perdiccas blood;
Of those that by like treason did intend,
With old Antipaters to have been imbrude?
Heaven thunder on you from th'aetheriall rounds,
And make you live a'abominable band;
Base vagabonds, barred from your native bounds,
Then die detested in a barbarous land.
And as ye have the world with murder filld,
So may your blood by the same swords be shed:
By which ye have more of your captains killed
Than of your foes, from whom like beasts ye fled.
But neither courteous, nor outrageous words
Could change his soldiers from their first intent,
That forward led their captain chained with cords,
A sacrifice prepared for the enemies tent;
Where being arriude, to the end he soon might end,
He asked what stayed Antigonus to go,
By setting of him free to win a friend,
Or by his death to rid him of a foe.
And straight Antigonus did haste his fall,
By this great magnanimity, not moved:
And the Agiraspides dispersde over all,
As murderers murder from the world removed.
Thus often have traitors bin dispatchde by time,
By those whom their vpbraiding looks dismay:
For the remembrance thus of The Authors crime,
Can but by th'Actors death be wiped away.
Now claims Antigonus when fame does feast,
In rank above his sovereigns self to sit:
For Alexander did subdue all the east,
And he has conquered them that conquered it.

No doubt, since he that great advantage wan,
He has within himself high things designde:
For whilst prosperity transports a man,
Naught seems difficult to the ambitious mind.

Of those in whom he did suspect a spirit,
Whose courage served his courses to resist,
He has himself by diverse means made quite,
In others wreakes his saftie does consist.
Thus martial Pithon that no danger sparde,
Whom Alexander held in high account:
Did at the last receive a hard reward,
For helping him Eumenes to surmount.
His spirit t'attemp and power fit to perform.
Made jealousy Antigonus torment:
And yet he feigned to love him for the form,
Till that his court he moou'de him to frequent:
Where whilst he did mistrusting naught abide,
He publicly in all the peoples sight:
(Though seeming justly) damned iniustly di'de,
No viler wrong then wrong that looks like right.
Thus diverse governors within short space,
Their government, or then their life have lost:
And others are preferred unto their place,
That did depend upon his favor most.
Often likewise me, he labored to surprise,
And policy was used, to have me ore-throwne:
But I, whom Pithons danger had made wise,
Learned by his ruin to prevent mine own.
To save my life abandoned is my state,
And I have fled with danger as ye see,
That you may know, how that man does grow great,
Whose pride may plague you all, as well as me.

Then let us be resolved, what course t'intend;
Lest out of time being wise we rue too late.

It Is better to pursue then to defend.


It Is good to quench a fire ere it grow great.


Then let us send to Antigonus in haste,
To redemand th'vsurped bounds again;
Since in this war we did our treasures waste,
We should be likewise partners of the gain.
But if against our suit his ears he bar,
And do with scornful words contemn our claim,
Then may our Messenger denounce the war,
And we shall shortly intimate the same.

A mutual band must made amongst us be,
To make one fortune common to us all:
And from henceforth we must all four agree,
To stand together, or together fall.
And since the princely buds for which we cared,
How ever dead, are dead; what ere we do
T'engender so toward us the more regard,
We with the state must take the title too.
And we must both be crowned, and known forkings,
The Diadem is greatness strongest tower:
All vulgar judgments lean on the outward things,
And reverence state, where they obey but power.

IS there a heaven? and are their heavenly powers,
To whose decree terrestrial things are thrall?
Or strives the tirant that begets the hours,
To triumph over eternity and all?
Lo, nature trauells now, being big with change,
Since mortals all humanity have lost;
And in the old Chaos, or some mass more strange
To re-entombe their essence all things bost.
Can reasonable souls from reason barred,
Even strive which most in cruelty exceeds?
What eye has seen, or yet what ear has heard
Such monstrous accidents, prodigious deeds?
The Arrabian robbers, nor the Scithians wild,
That with the savage beasts (as barbarous) haunt,
With such foul facts have not themselves desil'd,
As those that of civility do vaunt.
Since Grecians are grown barbarous as we find,
Where can faith have a corner free from spot?
O careless heavens, wretch'd earth
What loads thy mind?


Amultitude of murders.


What?


What not.


We know that since our sovereign lest to breath,
The Earth has been bathde with many a scarlet flood,
Perdiccas did procure Meleagers death,
And his own soldiers drowned his breath with blood.
The Athenians prey, Leonatus did remain,
And by Eumenes subtlety dismayde,
Craterus and Neoptolemus were slain,
Then by his own Eumenes did betrayed.

Man with his skill against his knowledge strives,
Where death his way attends, that way he tends,
And to Atropos the fatal rasor gives,
To cut the thread on which his life depends.
When the Asian victour after all his wars,
To visit Babylon had bent his mind:
Both I, and others, studious of the stars,
Did show that there his ruin was designed.
To his successors too we often have shown,
The means by which their fate might be controld;
Yet was our skill contemnde, and they ore-thrown,
As we foretold, and as they now have told.

They have told much, and yet I must tell more;
Their news were evil, yet were they not the worst,

And have the heavens reserved mo plagues in store,
As if we yet were not enough accursed?

As the earth in pride, the heavens in plagues abounds,
Our highest hopes have perished but of late.

Then wound our ears by hearing others wounds,
That pity now may tread the steps of hate.

Our Queen Olimpias ravished by revenge,
All Macedony did with murders fill;
Which from her part the people did estrange,
Whilst naught but rigor limited her will.
So that when fierce Cassander sought her wreake,
She did mistrust the Macedonians minds:
And for the time the nearest strength did take,
There till the storm was past to attend fair winds.
But soon Cassander did the town enclose,
And as she held him out, did hold her in,
That like a captive guarded by her foes,
She knew not by what way a way to win.
And when their life's provision did decay,
Then did bare walls but small refuge afford:
She Scilla escaped to be Charibdis prey,
That fell on famine flying from the sword.
Strait like pale Ghosts faint soldiers did remain,
Whose bowels hunger like a Harpie tears:
And with courageous words, the Queen in vain
Did raise their spirit; (the belly has no ears.)
All then began to languish, and to fade,
As if being tir'de to bear themselves about;
Legs failed the body, and the neck the head,
Then whilst the flesh fell in, bones bursted out:
And when that th'ordinarie meats were spent,
Then horses, dogs, cats, rats, all served for food;
Of which no horror th'eater did torment,
For all that was not poison, then seemed good.
Some mouths accustomed once with dainty meats
Wished what they often had loathed, i will crumbs, foul floods
And Ladies that had lived in pompous states,
Fed, as brought up with wolves amidst the woods:
Yea, nursed by those whom they themselves had nursed,
Often then by the of springs death th'engendrer lived;
And which was worst, whilst breasts were like to burst
None comfort could, for all themselves were grieved.
Such was their state, no friend bewaild bis friend,
No wife her husband, nor no Sire his son;
For apprehending their approaching end.
All with compassion of them selves were won.
The dead men's smell empoison'd them that lived,
Whilst first made faint by a defrauded womb:
Heaps were of breath and burial both deprived,
That all the town in end was but a tomb.

Life is the subject of distress and grief
That still ministers matters to bemone;
And only but by death can have relief,
To live and to be wretch'd are both but one.
Yet foolish worldlings tossde with endless care,
Though at too dear a rate would still buy breath;
And following after feathers thrown through the air,
Like life (though wretch'd) more then a happy death.

When thus the world Olimpias plagued did spy,
All sought Cassander, though for several ends.

As from a pest all from the unhappy fly,
Th'eclipse of Fortune threatens loss of friends.

And she considering that she could not long
Hold out the siege, since vittailes were grown scant,
Did send (as weak) for peace t'intreat the strong.

What cannot time and travel sometime daunt?


Then did Cassander know that need constrained
Her so to bow as strangely being diseasde:
And though he her request not quite disdained,
Th'agreement was appointed as he pleased.
For all the favor that she could procure,
Was leave to live a private person still;
And yet of that she could not be made sure,
Which did depend upon her enemies will.
Then whilst Cassander fought his enemies ends,
There wanted not strange troops with him to abide;
Yet might have many followers, and few friends:
Friends by the touchstone of distress are tried.

But though the Queen was rendered in this sort,
With protestation to have her life preserved.
The tyrant with her spirit could not comport,
But from his faith for her confusion sweru'd.
The Macedonians were together brought,
There to consult what did concern their Queen;
But when of them a number deeply thought,
Both what she was, and what she once had been;
Even as Cassander had subborn'd them all,
Their parents came whom she had damned to death,
And did her rigor to remembrance call,
By which the multitude was moved to wrath.
Whilst from their brazen breasts all ruth was barred,
They did conclude, their Queen behou'd to die.

Durst subjects damn their sovereign, and not heard?
So still may clouds obscure the worlds bright eye.

Yet did Cassander put (all sleights t'assay)
A mask of pity on a cruel mind,
And offered her a ship to fly away,
As if to death against his will assign'de.
Nor Was this course for her deliverance framed,
But only as by chance that she might drown:
So for her death that he might not be blamed,
But only Neptune, that had thrown her down.
Yet she a princess of a mighty spright,
Whose lofty courage nothing could ore-come,
Said, ere she escaped by such a shameful flight,
That she would hear the Macedonians doom.
But when Cassanders counsel was contem'nd,
Lest that the multitude had changed their mind,
When they remembered whom they had condemned,
And warily weighed what rashly they designed.
To rid her soon from pain, and him from fear,
He sent some bands from pity most estranged;
Yet she against fortune did a banner bear,
And not her heart, no, not her countenance changed.
She constant still, though mon'd, would never moan,
Whose stately gesture scorned their foul attempt:
And did unite her virtues all in one,
To grace disgrace, and glorify contempt.
She on two Ladies shoulders leaned her arms,
And with a Majesty did march toward death:
Like Alexander once amidst th'alarmes,
As if in triumph bent t'abandon breath.
The height of virtue admiration brings,
At this great magnanimity amazed:
As spying The Image of their auncieat kings,
Or then some goddess; all the soldiers gazed.
But ah, some bosted by the tirant strived
To spoil (unnatural) natures fairest frame;
And th'Alabaster balls between they driu'd
Th'vnwilling swords, that strait grew red for shame.
Then she in worth, that would her self excel,
Would neither word, nor tear, nor sigh forth send;
But spread her garments over her whilst she fell,
As jealous of her honor still to the end.

O strange barbaritie, most monstrous deed,
Could men a woman, subjects kill their Queen?
And could her fortune past no pity breeds?
Who ever gave the wound has not her seen.
The ougly Authors of those odious evils,
Feared for deserved plagues must still be sad,
His breast t'a hell, his thoughts all turned to devils,
Through horror of himself must make him mad.

And yet the plague of these detested times.
Has wrought more mischief t'aggrauate our groans.

No end in sin, crimes are maintained by crimes
Who fall in The Ocean touch the bottom once,
The path of honor has but narrow bounds,
On which who steps attentive must remain.
It Is raisde so hie above the vulgar grounds,
That who thence fall can never rise again.

Thus now Cassander since he cannot win
True reputation, but lives tainted still,
Imbarkt in mischief sails the depths of sin,
So, if not loved as good, yet feared as ill.
Though by his means his ruthlesse eyes have seen,
Fates (as it were from Fortunes bosom) rend
His King by poison, by the sword his Queen;
In wickedness t'exceede himself in the end:
He prospring in impiety, grew proud,
And murdered both his masters son and wife:
Thus he that all the world by birthright owed,
Could hold no part of it, no not his life.
Yet could Roxanes death not ease his mind,
Nor her young son too soon made Plutoes guest:
But bent t'vndoe all Alexanders kind,
That to revenge the rest there might none rest.
By treason he (as all his deeds are done,)
Causde Hercules his brothers steps to trace:
That was great Alexanders bastard son,
And th'onelie remnant of that great man's race.
Lo thus Cassander the enemy to all good,
Whose soul so much for Macedonie longs:
Has to the Scepter swimd through seas of blood,
Yet, O weak right that's builded but on wrongs!

O how ambition does abuse the great,
That with enough not pleased still strive for more:
Lo how our Sovereign seemde to raise his state,
Yet made it but to fall whilst starved with store.
And since his trophies reard in several fields,
Both him and his have to confusion brought:
Then what is all the good that greatness yieldes,
Which makes it self seem much to be made naught?
Thus though the mountains make a mighty show,
They are but barren heaps borne up aloft,
Where plains are pleasant still, though they lie low,
And are most fertile too, though troad on often.
Greatness is like a cloud in th'ayrie bounds,
Which the earths base vapors have congeald above:
It brawles with Vulcan, thundering forth huge sounds, fear,
Yet melts, and falls there whence it first did move.

Since that worlds conq'ror then whilst free from
Weighed with his greatness down so soon was dead,
What makes each of his captains strive to bear,
The diadem that crushed so strong a head?
O when my mind is ravished through the stars,
To search the secret secrets of the fates:
What treasons, murders, mutinies and wars,
Are threatening once t'orethrow th'vsurped seats.
And false Cassander that betrayed his Lord,
And spoild the princely race in mischief chief:
A traitor, both of heaven and earth abhorrd,
Shall live but with disgrace, and die with grief.
His sons, in wickedness himself t'exceede,
Shall make the woman die that made them live:
Then when being drunk with blood, to death shall bleed
And none of theirs their funerals shall survive.
Then when ambition should be coold by age,
Lysimachus shall by Seleucus die:
Nor shall Seleucus long enjoy the stage,
But by like violence shall breathless lie.
And subtle Ptolomies degenerd race,
Long only famous for infamous things:
Shall end, and once to the enemies pride give place,
Whilst a lascivious Queen confusion brings.
Antigonus shall be in battle killd,
His son a captive perish with disgrace:
And after that it Greece with blood has filld,
In end, destruction does attend that race.
The last in power, though of their line not bred,
A niggard and a dastard beaten down:
Shall through a strangers town a captive led,
Bound of the Macedonians the old renown.

WHat damned furies thus toss mortals minds
With such a violent desire to reign?
That neither honor, friendship, duty, blood,
Nor yet no band so sacred is as binds
The ambitious thoughts that would a kingdom gain:
But all is buried in black Laethes flood,
That may the course of sovereignty restrain,
Which from the breast does all respects repel:
And like a torrent cannot be gainstoode:
Yea many would a Scepter so t'obtaine,
In spite of all the world, and Jove's own wrath,
March through the lowest dungeons of the helles:
And underneath a diadem would breathe,
Though every moment threatened them with death.
Yet though such restless minds attain in the end
The height to which their haughty hearts aspirde,
They never can embrace th'imagin'd bliss,
Which their deluded thoughts did apprehend,
Though by the multitude they be admirde,
That still to power do show themselves submisse;
Yet by the soul still further is requirde,
That should seal up the accomplishment of joy:
Thus does a partial judgment aim amiss,
At things that stand without our reach retired:
Which whilst not ours as treasures we define,
But not the same whilst we the same enjoy.
Some things afar do like the Glow-worme shine,
That looked to near have of that light no sign.
No charge on the earth more weighty to discharge,
Than that which of a kingdom does dispose.
O those that manage must the reins of state,
Till that their ghost b'imbarkt in Charons barge,
Do never need to attend a true repose.
How hard is it to please each man's conceat?
When gaining one they must another lose.
Thus hardly kings themselves ca^ euenly bear,
Whom if severe, as cruel subjects hate,
Contempt dare to the mild it self oppose.
In time who spare as niggardes are despisde,
Men from too frank a mind exactions fear.
Though in all shapes as Proteus being ^^sguisde,
Kings by some scandal always are surprisde,
Yet one might well with every thing comport,
That on the opinion only does depend,
If further danger followed not by deeds.
But every monarke lo in many a sort,
Death does disguisd in diverse shapes attend,
Of some by mut'nous swords the life forth bleedes,
By unsuspected poison others end,
Which whilst they always labor to prevent,
A thousand deaths within their breasts life breeds.
Lo, this is all for which the great contend.
Who (whilst their pride hemselues and others spoils)
With their dominions do their cares augment.
And O vain man, that toils to abound in toiles;
Though still the victory the victor foiles.
Thus Alexander still himself dis^asde,
Whilst he t'vndoe his state did wale prepare,
Which when made most, diminisht most remaind,
Where with his fathers bounds had he bin pleased,
He might have left our crown in peace to his heir;
That by his conquest naught but death has gaind:
Yet for no pains a number now does spare,
To work for that by which his wreake was wrought,
Which (though from it they rage to be restraind:)
Would (if possessed) their pleasures but impair:
Yet they by hurme of others seek the thing,
That by their harm of others will be sought;
To him and his, each of them death would bring,
That it might once be said he was a King.
We may securely sitting on the shore,
To see the great (as tossd on The Ocean) groan,
Learn by their toiles t'esteeme much of our rest,
For this does thousands with affliction store.
That as th'vnhappiest in the world do moan,
If they but chance to view some few more blessed,
Where if they would but mark how many a one
More wretch'd than they in misery does live;
It would strait calm the most unquiet breast.
The cottage whiles is happier than the throne,
To think our own state good, and others ill,
It could not but a great contentment given
There much consistes in the conceit and will,
Since t'vs all things are as we think them still.

