WHat thundering power grow'n jealous of my state
With such hostility my troops o're-throwes,
And armed with lightning, breathing flames of hate,
Big with disdain, high indignation shows
Whilst soothed with self conceits ashamed to doubt,
In greatness shadow I securely slept,
Lo change-affecting Fortune wheels about,
And ruins all that me from ruin kept.
Thus I, whose only name amazed my foes,
Whom the earth adored, as Monarche, once over all,
Am so degraded now, and sunk in woes,
That who admired my might, admire my fall.
Ah then indeed I fell, when gallants stood,
And Phoenix-like renewed their life by death,
Who having sealed their force and faith with blood,
Would rather die, then draw a borrowed breath.
Yet I, but then not I, viewed not avenged,
Those monstrous mountains of my subjects slain,
Although my conscience has my courage cleng'd,
And knows what valor was employed in vain.
Through greatest dangers death I did pursue,
Till heaps of slaughtred bodies barred my way,
And changed my Chariot to a scarlet hue,
Ere wounded honor could be drawn away.
O how I envy yet their happy Ghostes,
Who died whilst hope of victory remained,
And in the presence of two famous hosts
Left bloody records that they died unstained?
Shall I survive that soule-ouerwhelming shame,
To be the eternal stain of Persians praise?
No rather let me die, and let my name,
Be quite exstinguish'd with my hateful days.
Starre-bosting Babylon blush to behold
One called thy King surmounted and abated:
How may thy Towrs but tremble, when it is told,
Thy Prince entreats, whom Princes erst entreated?
Not vassal-like; I will not yield to this:
Were all my Empire to a period come,
Yet none shall vaunt that ever I was his:
Hearts holding courage are not all o're-come.
This tongue inured still to command does scorn
To breath base words, to escape a minutes pains.
Let them obey, who to obey were borne:
For Darius this indignity disdaines.
Since I was once judged worthy to command,
Shall I return to be a base entreater?
No, whilst a sword yields homage to this hand,
I Will not acknowledge in the world a greater.
Brave spirits, who now possess the pleasant bowers,
And glorious gardens of th'Elisian plain,
(For if deserts may move the infernal powers,
That happy shade your shadows must contain)
Those fields where-as your praises are set forth
Do bury but your bodies, not your fame:
Men shall adore the relickes of your worth,
And rear immortal Trophies to your name.
I Will sacrifize as incense to your souls,
His dying sighs, and sorrowing parents tears,
Who now, while none his insolence controules,
Our conquered ensigns in his triumph bears.
For it may ease your Ghostes to hear his groans,
Whilst the earth ouer-burdend sends rebounding back
A plaintiff Echo from the woods and stones,
To sound through all the air his armies wrack.
Why spend I speeches to disturb your rest?
What idle disputations do I hold?
A mighty furour has enflamed my breast,
And burns me, till I be aueng'd seuen-fold.
Did I that strong Cadusian first affront,
Who durst advance himself to brave our bands,
Then turned applauded, and in high account,
Charged with his spoils the honor of my hands?
And could I then all kind of doubt remoouing,
Aduenter only to an Armies shame?
And should I now that ancient praise disprouing,
With squadrons compast loose that glorious name?
Blind fortune, O, thy stratagems are strange:
Thou wrak'st my greatness, wound'st mine honor to,
And having made my state the stage of change,
Have acted all inconstancy could do.
Lo I, who late of swarming troops did bost,
Am spoiled of all in whom I then reposed,
And those imprisoned, whom I fancy most,
Are to the insulting victours pride exposed.
O torment but to think, death to believe,
That any may command my dearest part,
And wretched I notable to relieve
The Jewel of mine eye, joy of my heart.
Dear object of my thoughts, my life, my love,
Sweet source of my delights, my one, my all,
Bright Image of excellencies above,
What? do thou breath, and come not when I call?
And can I be, and not be where thou art?
Has heaven the force me from thy face to bar?
Or are my hands grown traitors to my heart,
That they should shrink from doing what it dare?
O could my mind but distribute a space
These emulating thoughts that toss my breast,
Among those pointles Ciphers that spend place:
Then I alone might animate the rest.
Since in this great disgrace I chanced to fall,
Now nothing rests to raze my fame forlorn,
But to do desperately, and hazard all.
I Will live with praise, or by my death fly scorn.
Some prosperous issue afterward may purge
This crime, with which the event would burden me,
This crime, that carries with it self a scourge:
No greater torment than the want of thee.
But what hope rests to re-obtaine that treasure,
Which auaritious tyrants once possess?
Another now disposes at his pleasure
Of all my wealth: how can I look for less?
Now, not till now, I deem my state in danger,
When I imagine how my best beloved
Must entertain my enemy a stranger,
I being far from offering aid removed.
A host of furies in my breast I find,
Which do my soul with dreadful horrors fill,
And foster in my melancholious mind
Strange apprehensions that affright me still.
And this surmiz'd disgrace, grown thoroughly strong,
Reads hourly in my ears a hateful scroule
Of an imagined, yet recureles wrong,
Such poisoned thoughts like serpents sting my soul.
Blind love beguiles me not, sharpe-sighted fears
Find great apparances for to suspect thee:
Would God I had no heart, nor eyes, nor ears,
To think, to see, or hear thou should neglect me.
This aggrauates the wight of my despair,
When doubt objects, t'annull loves fast defense,
How he is young and feirce, she young, and fair,
He bent to offend, and she exposd t'offence,
From which I fear both cannot long abstain:
Her beauty is sufficient to allure:
His bravery is sufficient to obtain.
Captains will force, and captives must endure,
O Alexander, tender my renown,
Although thou travel to usurp my throne.
I rage to have ariuall in my Crown:
But in my love I can comport with none.
Lode her not with disgrace, and me with grief,
Least so thou rob her honor, and my life:
Spare in this point t'ouercharge me with mischief:
In all things else let arms decide our strife.
But where does fury thus transport my spirits,
With light belief my best half to mistrust?
Dear, pardon, I trespass to wrong thy merits,
Whom I have still found faithful loving just.
Pure chaistitie does then most firmly stand,
When fortified it is with wedlockes band.
Yet let me doubt, or let me leave to love:
To fear the worst it is affections part.
I Will not mistrust thy truth? yet it may prove,
Thy face betray thy faith, thy hap thy heart.
But on thy love approou'd my hope relyes,
This does dissolve suspicions power to naught.
I will repel reports, as slanderous lies,
Which second not thy virtue, and my thought.
Though virtues foe, and worth-enuying fortune,
Has wronged my valor with an evil success;
Life of my life, yet must I thee importune,
Join not with her to double my distress.

O More then miserable mind,
That of all things it self worst knows,
And being through presumption blind
Is puffed up with every wind,
Which fortune in derision blows.
Such one no stable bliss can find,
Whose heart is guided by his eye,
And trustes unto betraying shows,
Which seem not as they be.
Often short prosperity,
Breeds long adversity:
For who abuse the first, the last o're-throwes.
A dead security all care exiles:
It Is no small danger to be happy whiles.
Who on himself too much depends,
A makes an Idol of his wit,
For every favor fortune sends,
Self-flatterer himself commends,
And will no sound advise admit,
But at himself begins, and ends,
And never takes a moments leisure,
To try what fault he may commit,
But drunk with frothes of pleasure,
Thirstes for praise above measure,
Imaginary treasure,
Which slowly commes, and soon away does flit:
And what is most affected at this time,
Succeeding ages may account a crime.
A Potentate that is respected,
And by his subjects thought a God,
Thinks, as his name on high erected
Has what he list at home effected,
It may like wonders work abrod.
O how his folly is detected!
For though he sit in Royal seat,
And as he list his vassalls lod;
Yet others that are great.
Live not by his conceate,
Nor ponder what he threat,
But plague his pride often ere he fear the rod.
There are rare qualities required in Kings:
A naked name can never work great things.
They who themselves too much esteem,
And vainly vilipend their foe,
Often find not fortune, as they deem,
And with their treasure would redeem
Their error past: Behold even so
From blame who can our King exeeme,
Who his adversary to scorn,
Thought he who in his name did go
The laurel should have worn,
His triumph to adorn?
But he with shame has shorn
The fruits of folly ever ripe with woe.
An enemy (if it be well advised)
Though he seem weakt, should never be despised.
But what? the Minions of our Kings,
Who speak at large, and are believed,
Dare boast of many mighty things,
As they could fly, though wanting wings,
And deeds by words might be atcheeued,
But time at length their lies to light,
Their sovereign to confusion brings.
Yet so they gain, they are not greeue'd,
But charm their Princes sight,
And make what is wrong seem right.
Thus ruin they his might,
That when he would, he cannot be relieved.
More kings in chambers fall by flatterers charms,
Then in the field by th'aduersaries arms.
All that the success has approved
By Charidemus was foreshowne:
Yet with his words no man was moved:
For good men first must be removed,
Before their worth can well be known.
The King would hear but what he looued,
And what him pleased not did despise.
So were the beeter sort o'er-throwne,
And Sycophants unwise,
Who could the truth disguise,
Were suffered for to rise,
That him, who raised them up, they might cast down.
Thus Princes will not hear, though such deceive them,
Things as they are, but as themselves conceive them.
Behold, the heavens with a benign aspect,
To prosper this brave enterprise intend,
And with propitious stars seem to direct
This great beginning to a glorious end.
Who would be famous must of force aspite:
All those astonished, who my troops do view,
Doubt of those two which most they should admire;
My coming, or my conquering with so few.
So mighty minds t'atchieue great actions bent
Force Fortune often to favor them in all:
Where baser breasts deuining evil event,
Through superstitious fears procure their fall.
O how I wonder, when I call to mind
That monstrous camp, which not so much as doubted!
Dim seemed the Sun, while-as their armor shind
Men had not heard the thunder, whilst they shouted.
Th'auant-courours, that came for to examine,
When they so mean my nombers had perceau'd,
Did think them small to satisfy the famine,
That their huge host of daughter had conceau'd.
And yet in end this proved a poisoned food,
Which of their own to their confusion yeeldes
Mountains of murdered corpse, and seas of blood:
Un buried bodies buried all the fields.
So now that few, whom they contemned so far,
(See how mortality it self deceaues)
Have far ouer-match'd their multitudes in war,
And made the world waste to people the graves.
Then, dear Parmenio, since the fates afforde
So fair an entry to our first designs,
Let us go prosecute with dint of sword
That fortune, which the heavens our hopes assigns.
This high attempt, as we would wish succeeds.
What hosts have we ouerthrow'n? what cities razed?
Lo, populous Asia trembles at our deeds,
And martial Europe does remain amazed.
Proud Greece, whose spirits often preast to skorne the skies,
A prostrate supplicant before thee falls:
Rebellious Thebes, that durst thy power dispyse,
Lies now entombed within her broken walls.
That sea-impyring Tire, reposing much
In liquide Castles, and a wauing maine,
Has ratified thy forces to be such,
That nothing can resist thy just disdain.
No doubt the ancient Graecians ghosts are glad
To see the fierce Barbarians brought so low;
Yet are for envy of thy fortune sad,
And though vnbo-died blush at this overthrow.
Miltiades by all men was admired,
Who once in Greece their flying troops pursued:
And he that with a stratageme retired,
And Salaminaes straites with blood imbrued.
But yet for all the Captains of that age
The Eastern Monarckes empire was enlarged,
Who coming to their country, wars to wage,
The sea with ships, the land with armies charged.
He with more swarms of me^, then th'Autumns clusters,
Dried rivers up, and marched on Neptunes back;
By measure, not by number made his musters,
And did attempt the mountains plain to make.
Then Europe feared for to beforc'd to bow,
Wil'st the earth did groan to bear so great an host?
But thou have come, seen, and ouercom'd them now
Even in the bounds wherein their might was most.
That hautie foe, who vilipended often
Our predecessors armies, and our own,
Now laid as low, as he was once aloft,
With his disgrace must make thy valor known.
He cannot but acknowledge his distress
In laboring first to have his friends restored:
This message (potent Prince) imports no less:
By his request thy conquest is decor'd.
For the recovery of his captived Queen
He offered has innumerable gold;
And would present a treasure to be seen
More, as they say, then Macedon may hold.
My counsel is that you accept those offers,
And render her, as th'auncient custom binds;
Who would make war must not have empty coffers:
For hope of gain moves mercenarie minds.
And further, if those Princesses do tarry,
It sumptuous is to entertain their state.
Women, and babes are cumbersome to carry;
The One young in years, and the other in conceat.

If I were come to traffic in this land,
And like a greedy merchant to embrace
Before all hope of glory gain in hand,
This your inuild opinion might have place.
But soon I surfeit of such melting things,
And famish but for fame, and crowns of Kings.

So, were I Alexander, would I do.


If I Parmenio were, so would I to.


Their ransom would defray your soldiers fee.


I Will rather without ransom set them free.


The good is lost that is done unto a fo.


The greater glory to o'recomme him so.


Gold is the God that conquers in all parts.


True magnanimity does ravish hearts.


Rich treasures serve for th'arters of the war.


No, but courageous hearts that all things darre.


The want of wages makes a mutinous band.


But who dare disobey, when I command?


Why should you, Sir, contemn so rich a treasure?


A noble spirit with praise no gain does measure.


But who delites in such an airie store?


If I be singular, I ask no more.


Although that you conceive no such suspision,
Yet I hear how your soldiers often exclame,
They sacrifize their bloods for your ambition,
And perish to perpetuate your name.
And yet, without regard what they endure,
You compass all the empire of the East,
And more within your mind: this may procure
Some sudden tumult, when you fear it least.
Retire in time, while as the heavens are clear:
You have performed, performed, and that right sone,
More the^ your own could hope, your foes could fear,
Or then the world can credit, when it is done.
Your worth in war is wonderfully shown,
And to the terror of all Asia tryde:
Now let your skill in peace be likewise known,
And for the maint'nance of your state provide.
Good government the same of Kings does raise
No less then conquest made of Realms and towns:
It Is harder far, and does deserve more praise
To guide, then get: to keep, then conquer crowns.
Your glory in her hiest sphere is placed,
And may not move except it be more low:
And if it once descend to be disgraced,
Each artizan your statues will o're-throwe,
For in the war, as you may well perceive,
No little part depends upon fame:
If we but once the least affront receive,
The world will gather to exstripe our name.
Then tempt not Fortune further then you need,
Let reason bridle this aspyring thought:
Least, whilst your hopes with trophies faind you feed,
A moment turn your travels all to naught.
Let Darius be a lively patron now
Of th'euer-changing course of states and crowns:
That Prince to whom the Orient once did bow,
His desolation only now renounes.
He scarcely loat length become content
To call you King, though twice put in dis-order:
In dowry with his daughter does present
The famous Euphrates, to be your border.
Or otherwise he condiscends to give
Great store of Gold, or what your self desires,
If that his mother, wife, and children live,
To have them rend'red, as he often requires.
And let not vain ambition blind your eyes:
Remember what strange nations will embrace him,
Whom scarce he knows by name, or never sees,
Where if he fled, your troops would tire to chase him.

Peace, peace Parmenio, now thou make me rage,
With these words vn-worthy of our ears:
It seems the coldenesse of decaying age,
Has killed thy courage with a frost of fears.
Did I abandone thee my native soil,
And shaddow'd with my Ensigns vnknow'n coasts;
That after infinite distress and toil,
Whilst in contempt of us our foe yet boastes,
I should retire, effecting naught at last,
But sharpened a desire, t'augment my merits,
Then die in discontemment, when it is past
The time, that should have pacified my spirits?
No, I will reign, and I will reign alone:
From this desseigne my fancy never wanders,
For as the heavens can hold no Sun but one:
The earth cannot contain two Alexanders.
The ample circuit of this spacious round
Seems insufficient to confine my thought:
And o would God there could more worlds be found,
That many might t'adorne our deeds be brought.
O, I could wish that The Ocean were firm land,
Where none but hideous Giants had retreat,
Such as at Phlegra field in striefe did stand
Against the Gods for the Etheriall seat.
These could encourage martial minds to strike,
Who being won would yield eternal praise:
I conquer men; but many did the like:
And after-ages may my equal raise.
But since none such my triumphs are to grace,
Such as there are I Will to subjection bring:
And here I swear no kind of ease to embrace,
Till all the world adore me for their King.
If you or any else that live in dreede
With-drawe your selves, your Princes part despysing;
Remember always in his greatest need
Ye fly to stop his honor in the rising.
Pass home, and live like men in prison pent:
I measure not my courage by my numbers.

Your Majesty misconsters my intent:
You know what I have thold, what cares, what cumbers,
And all for you: I to your eyes appeal,
Which well can witness what my hands have wrought.
All that I spoke, proceeded of a zeal
And not of cowardice, or fear of ought.
Nor match I vile repose with honest pains:
My courage is nor yet become so cold:
That wounted vigor has not left my veins,
Which spurd my spirit in youth, though I be old.

It Is not enough that you your self be so:
To be the same you should the rest exhort.
Is he returned, who was ordained to go
And view the Captives, what does he report?

As we were since by some of them instructed,
While they as yet not of support dispair'd,
And to a tent were courteously conducted,
Which we of purpose caused to be prepared;
Even in the way one fortuned to espy
The Diadem that Darius erst had borne,
Which on the earth so abiectly did lie,
As each thing his calamine would scorn.
Then they imagined, from his royal head,
Whose dignity it some-time did decore,
None could it cast, except himself were dead:
And if so were, they longed to live no more.
When they had entered in the tent to weep,
Leonatus came and at the entry knocked:
They stood so still, he thought an yornie sleep
Had locked their eyes, or else that he was mocked.
At length by force he made a patent way,
And was advanced them lovingly to greet;
When lo, these dolorous Ladies prostrate lay,
And with a flood of tears bedewed his feet.
Then sobbing said, we not refuse to die:
Let us entombe first Darius like a King:
Then when that we his latter honor see,
Death cannot but a great contentment bring.
This so they urged, as he could scarce persuade
That Darius was not dead as they supposed,
But lived, in hope through dangers Seas to wade
And in the power of other Realms reposed.
And further he protested on your part,
That they might look for clemency and grace.
Thus after that I had asswag'd their smart,
It seemed they longd to see my Sovereigns face.

Of my good will they may themselves assure:
I never war'd with such as were subjected:
And if my presence may their ease procure,
Straight to their tent my steps shall be directed.

OF all the passions that possess the soul,
None so disturbes vain mortals minds
As this Ambition, that so blindes
The sense of man, that nothing can control
Nor curb their thoughts who will aspyre.
This raging vehement desire
Of seueraignty no satisfaction finds,
But in the breasts of men does ever roll
The restless stone of Sisiph to torment them.
And as his heart, who steal'd the heu'nly fire,
The vulture gnawes, so does Ambition rent them:
Had they the world, the world would not content them.
This race of Ixion to embrace the clouds,
Contemn the state wherein they stand,
And would all but themselves command,
As one desire is quenched another buds:
When they have trauel'd all their time,
Heaps blood on blood, and crime on crime,
There is a hier power that guides their hand.
More happy he whom a poor cottage shroudes
Against the tempest of the threatening heaven,
He stands in fear of none, none envy him:
His heart is upright, and his ways are eauen,
Where others states are still twixt six and seven.
That damned wretch up with Ambition blow'n,
While-as he turns the wheel about,
Whiles cast within, whiles cast without,
In striving for the top is still thrown down.
Those that delight in climbing hie
Often with a precepice do die:
So do the stars sky-climbling worldlings flout.
But this disease is fatal to a croune;
Kings, who have most strive most t'augment their bounds;
And if they be not all, they can not be:
Which to their damage commonly redounds.
Too great a state her proper weight confounds.
The Ambitious toyling to enlarge their state
Themselves exceedingly deceive,
In hazarding the hap they have
For a felicity that they conceate.
Though their dominions they incres,
Yet their desires grow never les:
For though they conquer Climats, more they crave.
This is the misery of being great.
Such eye-beguyling pomp is all but fume;
Such glorious shows disguise the minds distres;
And who to conquer all the earth presume,
A little earth shall them at last consume.
And if it fortune that they die in peace
(A wonder wondrous rarely seen)
Who conquer first; their empire cleene
Is ruined by some persons of their race:
Who coming to the crown with rest,
And having all in peace possessed,
Do straight forget what bloody broils have been
Before their Fathers could attain that place.
As The Ocean flows, and ebbes states rise and fall:
And Princes, when their actions prosper best,
For fear their greatness should oppress the small,
Are of some hated, and eny'd of all.
We know what end the mighty Cyrus made,
Whom, while he strived to conquer still,
A woman did most vildlie kill,
And in a bloody vessel rold his head;
Then said, Content thy self with blood:
Thou still did famish for such food:
Now quench thy thirst of blood with blood at will.
Some of his successors, since he was dead
Have reigned a space with pomp, and yet with pain.
Now all their glory cannot do us good.
What they so long have labored to obtain,
All in an instant must be lost again.
Lo, Darius once so magnified by fame,
By one whom he contemned overcome,
For all his bravery now made dombe,
With downe-cast eyes must signify his shame.
Who puffed vpwith pernicious pride
Think still to have fortune on their side,
They cannot escape to be a pray to some.
They spend their prosperous days as in a dream,
And as it were in fortunes bosom sleeping,
They in this dull security abide,
And of their doubtful state neglect the keeping,
Whilst gaist lie ruin comes upon them creeping.
Thus the vicissitude of worldly things
Does to our eyes it self detect,
When heavenly powers exalt, deiect,
Confirm, confound, erect and ruin Kings.
So Alexander mighty now,
To whom the vanquished world does bow.
With all submission, homage, and respect
Does fly a borrowed flight with Fortunes wings:
Nor enters he his dangerous course to ponder,
Yet, if that Fortune bend her cloudie browe:
All those, who at his sudden success wonder,
May gaze as much to see himself brought under.
O Dismal day detested by the light,
And would to God (but God neglects our case)
The world were wrapped in a Cymerian night,
That no proud eye might gaze on our disgrace.
Why did the heavens reserve my feeble age,
To go to grave with infamy and grief?
Could nothing but my shame their wrath assuage
Thus offered upon the altar of mischief?
Ah, have I spent my youth in pomp and pleasure,
And had my springtime graced with pleasant flowers,
That th'Aurumne, which should reap the So^mers treasure,
Might be disastred with such stormy showers?
And did smooth calmes, and sun-shines of delight
Make all my voyage through the world a sport;
That tossed with a tempest of despite
I now might perish entering at my port?
Yet for all this, were I exposed alone
Th'accursed object of heavens plaguing-armes,
I should not think I had just cause to moan,
When I but waild mine own, not others harms.
Ay me, on those, whom more then life I love
The state-disturbing blastes of Fortune fall:
Yet each of them some several sorrows move,
But wretch I suffer ship-wracke in them all.
I suffered, when I saw Oxatres slain,
My loving son, and most entirely loved:
died in Darius, when he tried in vain,
What fates would do, yet still their hatred proved.
Ah, do the destinies extend my breath
For further evil? O extreme cruelty,
To use so many instruments of death,
Against one burthend with calamity.
Yet Jove, if this may dis-en-flame thine ire,
Let all thy lightning light upon mine head:
To be consumed with a celestial fire
Some comfort were, since that I must be dead.
Leave mother these immoderate laments
To me the very source, and seat of sorrow,
Whose days are burdened with so sad events,
That hell it self may of my torments borrow.
Lo, the dear Lord and treasure of my thought,
Whose presence I my Paradise esteemed,
To such a headlong praecipice is brought,
That with the world his glory dead is deemed.
Ah, on what prop can I repose my trust,
When first the greatness of his state I ponder;
Next how his Diadem drencht in the dust
Was Fortunes Trophee, and all Asias wonder?
He whose imperious speech the world respected,
And as an oracle had in regard,
Now vanquished and contemptiblie neglected
Can scarcely as a supplicant be heard.
And yet I know this more his mind afflicts,
Then does the ruin of his rigall state,
That him my sight another interdicts,
Who am the sovereign of his souls conceat.
Shall he, pure quintessence of my best part,
Then only testify the love he bears?
No, by mine eyes I will distill my heart,
And for his sake dissolve my self in tears.
Would God my breast like Cristall were transparent,
That all the world might see my sinceare mind,
And that my loyal thoughts were all apparent,
Whose great affection cannot be confinde.
They have imprisoned only my poor eyes,
And banished them from th'obiect of their joy:
My fiery heart with winged fancies flies
And where thou go does still my steps conuoy.
Thy Queen is such, as whilst thou draw'st this air,
In counting ciptiues men may still accept her:
For whilst thou liust, how can thy spouse despair,
Whom thou prefer'st even to thy soul and scepter?
Yet flatter I my self that am accursed:
The apprehension, which with grief I cherish,
Of thy mishap may serve to make me burst.
Ah, ah I faint, I feel my spirits perish.

Help, help allace, allace, the Empress falls.


O doleful day of darkness; world of woes.


This grievous spectacle my spirit appalles:
Heaven, earth, and all are now become our foes.

I may more justly moan then any other,
Whose ears have heard the hard hap of my father;
Whose eyes behold the anguish of my mother,
Whom both do load with all the woes of either.

What inhumaine humanity is this,
With such a cruel pity to oppress;
To bring pale ghostes back from the fields of blis,
Yet to be plunged in The Ocean of distress?
O unkind kindness that by saving slayes,
And would with louelesse love my love control.
Ah, of this odious Sun th'unhappie rays
Do clear mine eyes but to confound my soul.

Dear daughter, strive your passions to restrain,
Least that the torrent of your grief grow such,
That it both carry you to'agroundlesse maine,
And him o'rewhelme for whom, ye mourn so much.
No doubt but he, if we rest captives thus,
Disdaining these indignities of ours,
T'auenge himself in re-obtaining us
Will hazard all his Oriental powers.
But ah, what comfort can a wretch afforde,
Whose care-worne bread the word of woe contains?
Yet though my heart would feign impugn my word,
I hope-lesse speak of hope, to appease her pains.

Such consolations now came not in season,
Since we must hold our grief the greatest good:
Dissemble not your sorrow, we have reason
Yea to sigh out our sprites and weep our blood.

I wail my son. Stat. Reg. And I my husbands fall.


I wail my father, and in him us all.


No woe like mine, mine cannot be releeu'd.
I wail his woe, who should my woe assuage,
Who lives by me, by whom I should have lived,
Sport of my youth, and pillar of mine age.

No woe like mine, who faithful to my pheere
For love of him all others had forsaken.
But what a pheere? my self, or one more dear:
Yet from my self my self by force am taken.

No woe like mine, who borne a Monarkes child
Thought that my birth good hap should heap upon me:
Yet all my expectations are beguiled,
And what I hoped in most has most undone me.

I mourn for him who in my womb was formed.


I mourn for him in who^ love me transformed.


I mourn for him by whom I formed was.


Shall I not see my self in that clear glass?


Ah! shall I never in his joy rejoice?


Ah! shall I never here his cheerful voice?


Would God from death my death might him exeeme.


would God my life my lives life might redeem.


Would God the life he gave him life might give.


Must these gray hairs my sons green youth survive?


I will prevent him and not live to languishe.


Can I remain behind to live in anguishe?


But whiles our wretched state we justly moan,
We may lament this infant too a space,
Who in mishap inferior were to none,
If he could apprehend his tragic case.

O then how can my heart but burst a-sunder,
Whom nature moves most to bemone his harms?
I think I see the hosts of heaven all thunder
On me, my spouse, and this babe in my arms.
Dear image of my self, in whom I live,
Thy shape shames not the greatness of thy Sire,
But of thy birth clear evidence does give:
Thy soure-sweete sight adds coals to my desire.
Thou that should comfort most, torme^t'st thou me?
Huge hosts of passions now my soul assembles.
O how I grieve! and yet am glad to see
Thee, though not him, whom thy sweet face resembles,
Go, bear this babe from hence: a wound too deep
Makes in my breast compassion of his part:
Yet let him stay; I joy to hear him weep:
This motherly affection melts my heart.
Of many woes this last is not the least,
That vn-begun thy glory must be ended;
Thy fortunes Sun, my Son, set in the East,
While thy faire-rysing all the world attended.
Ah! must this innocent taste of mishap,
Whose tender age cannot discern his state,
And be thus plagued, yea in his nurses lap
Inherit woe by birth? Ah cruel fate.
If thou could hope, what great hopes have thou lost
That art defrauded of so fair a throne?
Ah in thy cradle must I see thee crossed,
Whom I designed so great when we were gone?
Yet happy hapless child, thou can not know
From whence the fountain of our sorrow flows,
Nor what it is for to be hie, or low,
Nor on what thorn the rose of honor grows.
Yet have thou felt the prick before the smell.
Is this the benefit thy birthright brings
Here in constrained captivity to dwell?
Then better not be borne, then come of Kings.
O what a noise is that that does affright me?
I trow to interrupt these tears of mine,
Least that such sad lamentings should delight me,
They will not let me plain, yet make me pine.
Or is it some that does condole our case,
And commes with pity moved to see us pyn'd,
And to behold how we can death embrace,
Death sovereign salve of a diseased mind?

By many signs we may our selves assure,
It Is Alexander, whom we longed not for.

What? ah I die! and must my eye endure
Th'vpbraiding object which I most abhor?

Suppress such speeches now, least all go wrong.
We are enuiron'd with outrageous hosts:
And weakness must give place unto the strong:
For Victours rage, when as the vanquished bostes.
I will entreat him to, not for my self
(Mine olde-age is become to death a debtor)
But that you may eschew this wrackfull shelfe,
Whose flower pot faded yet deserves better.

No, if you needs will sue, sue for my grave:
I will not be indebted to him living:
I rather death should once the maistrie have,
Then I should die so often with death still striving.

RIse mother, rise, remove those causles fears:
I come to appease nort to procure your woe:
The honor which I owe those aged hears
Permits me not to see you prostrate so.

Most gracious Prince, forgive me if I er'd,
In taking him for you, that stands by.

I find no fault to see my friend preferred
Even to my self: this is another I.

My sorrows so confounded have my mind,
That scarce I know my self, much less another:
My soul in such an agony I find,
As if some mighty mountain did me smoother.

I pray you, mother, set those plaints apart:
They vex me more then stern Bellonaes broiles.

This tender name of mother wounds my heart,
Pronounced by him who of that name me spoils.
I was (woe that I was) a mother late
Of two fair sons, fair sons lights of my life:
Now the one is dead, and in a worse estate,
Does the other live involu'd in woe and strife,
Like th'auncient trunk of some dis-branched tree,
Which Eols rage has to confusion brought,
Dis-arm'd of all those impes that sprung from me,
Vn-profitable stock I serve for naught.

I serve for naught, since him I cannot serve,
Whose sight may only my dead joys revive.
I with the famine of all comfort sterue,
Since I want him for whom I wished to live.
I live without my half, without my whole,
Prodigious monster, whom the world admires:
I want the point, the Pilote, and the Pole,
That drew, addressed, and governed my desires,
Now tossed with storms in The Ocean of despair
By ruin only I attend relief,
Threatened above with pitchie clouds of care,
Threatened below with swelling gulfes of grief.
My soul seems to presage disastrous chances,
And varying with her self has never peace:
My hare oppressed falls into deadly trances:
My eyes must grace the ground of my disgrace.
Hell has assembled all her horrors here:
Ah, in the concaue of this cursed breast,
As in the dark Tartarian groves, appear
A thousand shadows to bereave my rest.

Fair Princess, spare those passionate complaints
Which may augment, but not amend your harms:
This voice, which with your woe the world acquaints,
Does move me more, then all the Persians arms.
Madame, take courage, be affraide of none:
You may expect what help I can afforde:
I swear by Jove's inviolable throne,
And do protest by my imperial word,
That neither I, nor any wight shall wrong you.
Yea more then this, I lay my faith in paund,
You shall be honored here as does belong you:
And, as it were, in your own Court command.

Ah how can I command, whilst I am thrall?
What can I have who wanting one want all?

Though it seem glorious in some victors sight
To Abuse their captives, and triumph in ill:
The larger grow the limits of my might,
The more I strive for to restrain my will,
The save guard of my favor shall extend
Not only toward you, but toward all your train.
I shall have care that who on me attend
From offering wrong you, or yours refrain.
If any prease t'impugne what I appoint,
Or would in ambush for your honor lie,
Or discontent you but in any point,
As Alexander lives, that wretch shall die.

O what a host of evils, where ere I go,
Are still encroaching on my down-cast state?
And must I be beholden to my foe,
Who does divide me from my royal mate?
Should he help me who would extermine him?
Cursed be my heart, if it betray him thus.
Eternal shadows mot these eyes first dim,
Ere such a light be grateful unto us.
I hold not of my self; Lord, I am thine:
Thy love was sow'ne not in a barren field,
But in a fertile ground: this heart of mine
To thee, my dear, no small increase does yield.
Yet this good fortune does misfortune bring;
My constancy shall now be clearlie known:
Another might have loved a happy King:
But I will love thee though thou be ore-throwne.

Feign would I strive to comfort in some measure
This mourning Queen, and mitigate her pain;
Whose woe does make my victory no pleasure,
But has ensowr'd the sweetness of my gain.

Most mighty King, thou do deserve indeed
That, as for Darius, we should pray for thee,
Who do so far in clemency exceed,
That thou bewailst our loss no less then he.
Thou have not only by thy worth surmounted
All other Kings in dignity alone,
And benefits of Fortune most accounted,
But in all virtues worthy of a throne.
Thou do vouchsafe on me (more then I crave)
The title of a Queen, and mother still:
But I confess my self thy humble slave,
Whose life has now no limits but thy will.
I have all that imagined good forgote,
Which greatness gave: I Will look no more so sadly:
But will allow of this my present lot,
And bear the burden of my bondage gladly.
If that this wretched woman here were free,
Who has no heaven except her husbands face,
I could content my self (great Prince) to be
The meanest hand-maide that attends your grace.

You may command me, as I were your Son,
Whose duteous love shall prove no less entire.

Heavens recompense the court'sy thou have done
Which all succeeding ages shall admire.

Those captived Princesses have pierced my soul,
Who even amid'st our heaven have found a hell.

What stoic brow his passions could control,
As not to weep, if he re-marked well
The tears of these fair Ladies causing wonder,
Who need not challenge nature of her duty;
But borne to bring, although they be brought under,
Give grief a grace for to apparel beauty,
Sir, such a victory has not been seen
As you have gained, whose greatness well appears;
The largest kingdom, and the fairest Queen,
That Asia vaunted of these many years.
Durst Ledaes or Agenors brood compare
With that sweet Queen, the honor of her kind?
But as she is above all other fair,
As far her daughters make her go behind.
It seemed at first that sorrow had been sleeping
While as these Virgins in their Grand-dames bosom
With weeping beauty, and with beauties weeping
Did with a hail of pearl blast beauties blossom.
So large a power is to no Prince allotted,
As to loves Empire in their face confynd.

O how is my Hephestion thus assotted?
Dare folly seek t'assault so brave a mind?
Dare Cupid enter in an armed camp,
And Mars own minions thus presume to danton?
Must his soft seal steele-wearing stomachs stamp,
And make them tributaries to that wanton?

We dare resist (whilst many a thousand dies)
Against th'inuasion of a world of men:
Yet if in yuorie orbs two Sunnie eyes
Assault the soul at unawares, O then
Some secret sympathy, some vn-knowne motion
So charms the mind, that vain are all defenses.
The heart drunk with the eyes contagious potion
Corrupts the spirits and poisons all the senses.

But I in my conceat do skorne all such:
No, I resolve to be a thrall to none:
Yea, ere I but abase my self so much,
I Will rather die ten thousand deaths in one.
Should I be bound with vile affections chains,
As one obliuious of my former same?
This resolution still my soul retains,
To balance nothing with a noble name.
O what a great indignity is this
To see a Conqueror to his lust a slave?
Who would the title of true worth were his
A mind surmounting every vice must have.
The brauest trophee ever man obtained
Is that, which over himself himself harh gained.

I joy, my sovereign, that as you excel
Not only men, but Mars himself in arms:
So you by virtues might the power repel
Of beauty, love, and Cithereas charms.
Your virtue bright, whose rays shine in your words
And thence to hearts center are reflected;
Now over my self such power to me affords,
That with fond love I loath to he infected.

NOw since, Narbazanes, we are come hither,
Let us accomplish what we have intended:
And join our wit, our force, and all together,
That it may be no sooner known then ended.
You see occasion call us, whilst we sleep,
And point us out the way to be advanced;
Yea blames our sluggishnesse that cannot keep
The course of things which for our weal have chanced
The heavens abhor our King, and strive t'vndo him:
Nothing does prosper that he enterprises:
Some new disaster daily falls unto him:
Some cross o'er-thwarts all things that he devises.
In no strict limits should our thoughts be bounded
Whom so great happiness seems to importune:
For since our King is like to be confounded,
Upon his fall we both may build our fortune.

I shall not fail for to perform my part:
I of your words exceedingly allow:
Honor, and wealth are the idols of my heart,
Which if I may obtain, I care hot how.
And yet I would we had some fair pretense.
Our countries care must seem our souls to comber:
This seeming zeal must shadow our offense:
For such a show will satisfy a number.
Let us be well advised, ere we resolve:
And then endeavor t'execute it soon.
If we our selves once in this work involue,
And then not finishe it, we are undone.

He has sent one to Alexander late
To speak of peace, but did the same in vain:
And now involu'd in a despaired estate,
Barred from accord, he cannot wary sustain.
His purpose is his Captains to conuene,
To ask of them some counsel for his saftie:
A time more fit for us could not have been.
Who mind to compass Kings must: needs be crafty.
For to atchieue that which we think to do,
A course more fit we by no means could find,
Then crooked seeming-vpright counsel to
Disguise our practices, and mask our mind.
We will advise him to renounce a space
His state to some one, whom he may desire
But for the fashion to accept his place,
And as himself a certain time impyre.
Whose better fortune may perchance bring back
That which his ever ebbing bears away:
Then he again his Diadem shall take,
And as before the regal scepter sway.

Well then amongst our selves, t'auoid, debate
Which undermines so many a mighty action.
I will prefer you to the imperial seat.
And to approve the same will frame my faction.

All that is one, which of us two receive it,
Since every thing does equally belong us:
I Will take it for the form, not that I crave it,
For we will part his Empire all among us.
But if he condescend to this we crave,
Which at the first unfolding would seem good:
Let him not think us two such fools to leave
That which so many Monarkes buy with blood.
Who once advanced would willingly go down,
And not love in authority to stand?
It Is not the custom so to quite a Crown,
When one has known how sweet it is to command.
This name of faith but to get credit feigned,
If it were balanced with a kingdom, straight
In them whose consciences are most restrained
It Would soon succumbe, a scepter has such weight.

Yet to betray our King we have no reason:
When I muse on the attempt it makes me sorry:
Our name stained with this odious style of treason
Shall leave our successors more shame, then glory.
We first must end all our designs with pain,
Then reign with fear, and live securely never;
As in a dream a space with pomp remain,
Then die disgraced, infamy for ever.
The sacred title of a Sovereign King
Does strike a terror in my troubled thought,
And majesty, t'amaze my mind, does bring,
Whose aspect only has great wonders wrought.

To idle sounds, and frivolous reports
Give thou a pasporte, for they last not long:
And all that thou alledgest naught imports.
A Crown may cover any kind of wrong.
What heinous thing so odious is by nature,
That for a Kingdom has not been committed:
To be a King let me be called a traitor;
Faith, if for ought, for this may be omitted.
Those are but feeble brains, which fancies lode
With timorous dreams, that bare surmising brings.
Who fear vain shadows must not come abroad.
Too warie-wits dare never work great things.
If our brave project happily succeed,
(As now I doubt not but it shall do soon)
We straight will find enough t'applaud our deed,
And sooth us up in all that we have done.

To have the time and manner then praefixt,
Command the Bactrians all themselves to arm,
And to attend till we advertise next,
Prompt for all perils at the first alarm.
Then through the Camp a rumor we will spread,
That hopeless Darius has dispairdlie gone
With violence to dwell amongst the dead,
And seem therefore excessiuelie to moan.
The Persians we with promises must feed,
So to disarme him of his native powers:
Then we will apprehend himself with speed:
For while that he is free nothing is ours.
That we may seem to use him with respect,
(As to the state of such a Prince pertaines:)
We will not this last ornament neglect;
He shall be bound, but bound with golden chains.
To Alexander after we will send,
And offer Darius in his hands to appease him;
Then crave his favor, that he will defend
Us as his friends, who have done all to please him;
If his good will we cannot thus procure,
And he us with extremity pursue;
With Darius death we will our states assure,
Then raise fresh forces, and the wars renew.

Let us henceforth for nothing be dismaide,
But strive our selves courageouslie to bear:
This dangerous action would not be delai'd,
Least time work his assurance, and our fear.

Time, through Jove's judgment just,
Huge alterations brings:
Those are but fools that trust
In transitory things,
Whose tails bear mortal stings,
Which in the end will wound.
And let none think it strange,
Though all things earthly change
In this inferior round.
What is from ruin free?
The elements which be
At variance (as we see)
Each other do confound:
The earth and air make war:
The fire and water are
Still wrestling at debate:
All those through cold and heat,
Through drouth, and moisture iar:
No wonder though men change and fade,
Who of those changing elements are made.
How dare vain worldlings vaunt
Of fortunes goods not lasting,
Evils that our wits enchaunt,
Exposed to loss and wasting.
Lo we to death are hasting,
Whilst we these things discuss.
All things from their beginning,
Unto an end are running:
Heaven has ordained it thus.
We hear how heaven does thunder;
We see the earth burst asunder;
And yet we never ponder,
What this imports to us.
Those fearful signs do prove,
That th'angrie powers above
Are moved to indignation
Against this wretched nation,
Which they no longer love:
What are we but a puff of breath,
Who live assured of nothing but of death?
Who was so happy yet,
As never had some cross:
Though on a Throne he sit,
And is not used with loss,
Yet fortune once will toss
Him, when that least he would.
If one had all at ones
Hydaspes precious stones,
And yellow Tagus gold,
All th'Orient all treasure,
And every earthly pleasure,
Even in the greatest measure,
It should not make him bold.
For while he lives secure,
His state is most unsure.
When it does least appear,
Some heavy plague draws near,
Destruction to procure.
We may compare the earths glory to a flower,
That flourishes and fades in an hour.
In what we most repose
We find our comfort light:
The thing we soonest lose
That Is precious in our sight.
For honor, riches, might
Our lives im paund we lay:
Yet all like flying shadows,
Or flowers enambling meadows,
Euanish and decay.
Long time we toil to find
Those idols of the mind,
Which got we cannot bind
To Abide with us one day.
Then why should we presume
On treasures that consume,
Difficile to obtain,
Difficile to retain,
A dream, a breath, a fume;
Which vex them most who them possess,
Who starve with store, and famish with excess.
AH, must I poison now my Princes ears
with the worst news that ever burthe^'d fame?
Had I as many tongues, as I have tears,
All would not serve my sorrows to proclaim.

Great signs of grief I in thy face discern:
Spare not for to report this heavy cross
To one, I fear, whom it does most concern.
Is It death, disgrace, destruction, treason, loss?
Tell on the sum of honor at the first:
With no ambiguous words my pain prolong:
It Is comfort to a wretch to know the worst:
And I have learned to be unhappy long.
What least I speak, and yet suspect too much,
Is It some ludibrious message of my skorne,
Which must wound me? but ah no torment such,
As this to them who that disgrace have borne.

She was not wronged, as you have misconceiu'd.
The Gods have had a care for to preserve her:
Such favor of the victour she received,
As of her subjects that were bound to serve her.
But what a vollie does my voice prepare
Of woes to charge your ears, woes full of dread?
Would God ere I the sum thereof declare,
That I might die in saying she is dead.
Cursed caitiue, was it not enough, allas,
That I beheld her die, and would have died,
But that I must armed with sad tidings pas
To wound all them that hear what I have spied?
See how he fares shot with these words of mine,
As one become the pray of grief, and death.

Yet does the Sun on my affliction shine,
And sees the air infected with my breath.
And can I live, and look them in the face,
That have my ignominious o're-throw seen?
And how I vanquished, vanquished with disgrace
Engaged at once my kingdom, and my Queen?
Heaven bruise me all to powder with thy thunder,
That I no more may in the world remain
The object of thy wrath, and Fortunes wonder;
Spoiled of all hope; yet kept for greater pain.
Ah! art thou dead, and do I lieu behind thee?
Thy faulty husband think thou so to fly?
If it be thus, then I know where to find thee.
This only greeues me that too late I die.
O Alexander, what such heinous ill
Have I done thee, that thou requit'st me thus?
Whom of thy friends, or kindred did I kill?
This cruelty comes undeserved of us.
Think that thou had just causes to make war:
Yet upon women should thy wrath be wroken?
This Tirrannie shall all thy Triumph mar,
And ever shall to thy reproach be spoken.

Sir, without cause you guilty him esteem.
I know her death did grieuouslie displease him:
A wondrous thing (which few, or none would deem)
He took it so, that nothing could appease him.
Even as my Sovereign now, so then he smarted;
And when he came to ease your mothers grief,
As if that his own mother had departed;
He seemed to need, not for to give relief.

If any sparks of that respect remain,
Which should with reason move thy mind to ruth,
I pray the Tiriotes now be plain,
Or else strange torments shall exact the truth:
I loath to let this question escape my mouth,
Which both I blush to crave, and long to know,
Is It possible so insolent a youth
Did never tempt the treasure which I owe?
Could this imperious Prince in flower of age
Have such a peerless beauty in his power,
And yet not seek to quench his ardent rage
With the destruction of her honors flower?
Spare not to tell upon what deadly shelfe
My joy is perished quite, and I defaced.
The fear of evil is worse then the evil it self:
I'ts to die twice, to die, and die disgraced.

Let not those loue-bred fears abuse your thought:
By all the world no fable I contriue.
If I speak partiallie, or lie in ought,
Earth open up, and swallow me alive.
He whom your Grace so wrongfully suspects,
No, not in thought, has once your Queen abused,
But as his sister still in all respects,
As chastely, and as honorably used.
When fortune first our warlike troops had scattered,
And with great slaughter put them all to flight;
We, whom she late so lovingly had flattered,
Were made the patterns of that changlings might.
For having found a Crown troad on the ground.

O lasting shame that cannot be recur'd.


We straight imagined that some cruel wound
Had killed my Lord, and wail'd it as assured.

Would God I then had died, as I desired,
So to have prevented those ensuing harms;
Before my honor and my hap expired,
With Crown on head, and with my Queen in arms.

But Alexander having heard our cries
Sent one t'enquire the occasion of our woe;
Who finding whence our error did arise,
Gave full assurance that it was not so.
Then he himself unto our tent resorted,
And with most courteous speeches full of love
Your mother, wife, and children often exhorted
Such vain surmized terrors to remove.
With protestation that they should expect
No harm of him their courage to appale:
Each thing he did accordingly direct,
That no man might endomage them at all.
Thus having them against all dangers armed
(I think for fear, for who would not have feared
Least such an Angels graces had him charmed)
He never more before her face appeared.
Or was it virtue that would fly the sting
Of trustlesse pleasures that abuse the sense?
So continent a victour, and a king
Was never seen. He fled what caused offense.
He does his fame above all things prefer,
And will not be where it may blemish find,
Nor give his eyes commodity to err,
Nor suffer impure thoughts to stain his mind.
He stayed till that fair face had lost all vigor,
And with the colors of pale death was painted.

Injurious heaven that with such hellish rigor
The purest work that nature made has tainted.

When he beheld death triumph in that face,
Which late had triumphed over a Monarcks heart,
He mon'd no less her miserable case,
Then you that lost in her your better part.
And when some days his dolor had ou'r-come,
Her funerals solemnly to decore
He used such honor, as might well become
The Persian pomp in prosperous times before.

O supreme power that of Empires disposest,
And ratifiest thy will with fearful thunder,
Who, as thou please, placest, and de-posest
Uncertain worldlings whiles above, whiles under,
I pray thy Deity in my souls distress,
If that the inhabitants of heaven can hear
The plaints of those who this low point possess,
Or that the immortal can give mortals ear,
Vouchsafe this my last suit for to fulfill:
Establish first this scepter in my hand:
But if through my deserving, or thy will
The race of Cyrus must no more command;
And if thy heavenly breast such hate contracts,
That I must needs my Diadem forgo:
Let him succeed who proves in all his acts
So just a Victour, and so mild a foe.

IF Fortune had joined me with dastard minds,
Who to a noble death base life preferred,
I should not harrengue here unto the winds,
But be content to have my fate deferred.
O, I repent I proou'd your worth too much,
Who still have followed me in all estates.
I rather should, then doubt that you are such,
Prease to prove worthy of so worthy mates.
Ye only rest of all that I conducted,
Of whose great force and faith, which many sing,
I by two fights, and flights have been instructed:
Yet having you I think my self a King.
He has placed traitors in my towns most ample,
Not that he honors them (he hates their humor)
But to seduce you to by their example,
Then bannish all for every little rumor.
Ye have not to my Fortune had regard,
But freelie-follow'd my evil fortuned wars:
Which, though that I might not, Jove would reward,
And all the world extol you to the stars.
How long shall I a vagabond remain,
And fly a stranger who my right would reaue?
Since by one battle we may re-obtaine
All that we lost, or loose all that we have.
Like those vile traitors, whom I will arraigne
To hold me up, shall I go cast me down?
Must Darius only by entreatie reign?
No, none has power to take, or give my Crown.
I shall not my authority sur-viue,
Nor will I proffer a submissiue breath:
My hand shall hold a scepter while I live:
My head shall bear a Diadem till death.
If those frank thoughts that do possess my soul,
Such flames of virtue kindled have in you;
A Macedonian never shall control
Our noble acts, nor laugh to see us bow.
My state may testify frail Fortunes change:
May she not him o're-whelme, as well as me?
At least our hands bear death, if not revenge:
For who can stop a stout heart for to die?
Think of your ancestors, I you exhort,
Who made the Grecians tributaries ever;
And of whose wondrous acts men do report
Great things, the fame whereof shall perish never.
Shall future ages in your praise be dombe,
Whilst they your Fathers memory adore?
I am resolved, my Triumph, or my Tomb
A Laurel, ora Cipresse shall decore.

What vain amazement does disturb our spirits?
Let us consult no further but go to.
He, who the Persians wonted worth inherites,
Will not rest long aduising what to do?
Come let us with our best attire and arms
Accompany our King to this last strife:
Through bloody squadrons, and through hot alarmes
By slaughter only we must look for life.
And when our host, as I hope shall prevail,
Our country shall have peace, we praise of right:
And if our Fortune, not our courage, fail,
We die with honor in our Sovereigns sight.
Let us, if vanquished, be ashamed to be.
A glorious death may greater honor give.
Do to o're-come, and yet not fear to die.
It Is needful that we fight, not that we live,

My words will first your Majesty displease:
Yet duty makes me speak where silence spilles:
The fine Phisician cures a sharp disease
With some sour potion that corruption killes.
The skillful Pilote when he fears a storm,
To save the ship will cast out precious things:
Yet I persuade you not in any form
To further, but to stay what ruin brings.
We war against the Gods, we cannot speed:
To all our actions Fortune is opposed.
We must of force some other way proceed:
So have the heavens of our affairs disposed.
Dear Sir, give over the government and style
To some more happy man, not in effect?
But cloth him with your shadow for a while,
Till he your Realms half ruined re-erect.
When he has clam'd this tempest now so hot,
And settled Asia with a good success?
He will your kingdoms lost with what he got
Restore: appearance promises no less.
All Bactria yet abides at your command:
The Indians, lo, would die to do you good:
Yea many thousand thousands armed stand,
Bent for your pleasure to bestow their blood.
What? should we rush like beasts to needless strife?
Be well prepared, and then pursue that stranger:
Brave minds should death despise not lothing life.
Base cowards crave to die for fear of danger.
But virtue, to have no support over past,
Will first on all means possible be thinking:
And when that all is proou'd, death is the last,
To which it is enough to go not shrinking.
Now for the time let Bactria be our seat,
To Bessus for the form your Crown resign:
Who, when he once has re-aduanc'd you state,
Shall quite all sovereignty at the first sign.

Wretch, trauellest thou thy sovereign to betray?
Such treason dare thou to our ears impart?
Such treason under trust? Stay traitor, stay:
I Will sheath my sword even in thy traitorous heart.

Sir, you must strive to have this passion broken.
Consider what they are, what is the time:
It may be they through ignorance have spoken:
In thought, and not in word, consists a crime.
Since to affront your enemy you go,
You must not stir for every little object:
But tolerate your own, to offend your foe.
For now i'ts time time to love not lose a subject.
I shall get trial upon what pretense
This ou'r-sight in advise has been committed.
If through simplicity, not for offense,
He must be pardoned and his speech remitted.

I wish that it were so. I take no pleasure
To ruin them that would my fortune cherish.

Your grace will grant me mercy in some measure.
First hear, and if I fail then let me perish.
I call the Gods to witness of my case,
Who can decipher every secret thought:
If I intended treason toward your Grace,
Straight where I stand let me be turned to naught.
I counseled but according to my skill:
It was my upright mind that made me bold.
I rue my wit not answered to my will:
Yet zeal what it conceiues must needs unfold.
We should beware to speak in great affairs,
Where words are damned, or balanced by the event.
For if things fail, the fault is still thought theirs
Who gave th'aduise, though of a good intent.
I fall before your feet here for refuge:
Then let me not be without cause rejected:
At least, examine first before you judge:
I Will rather die absolu'd, then live suspected.

Your fond opinion first was to be feared,
Which seemed indeed sinistriouslie inclind:
For at the first your speech to me appeared
Th'envenom'd birth of some malicious mind.
But since you purge you so, I Will not araigne you,
Not further call your loyalty in doubt:
But in the same degree of grace retain you,
That you were in before these words brake out.
I think that Patron looks with speaking eyes,
As if his mind were mightily perplexed:
Come, Patron, tell what in thy bosom lies,
Wherewith thou seem so wonderfully vexed.

Sir, I would speak in privy, If I could,
That which the affection of my soul affordes:
It must be sealed with silence, and I would
That none were present to report my words.
Of fifty thousand Greeks four only rest,
Companions in all perils with your host:
Alike with you delighted and distressed:
As faithful now as when you florish'd most.
Where you remain we must remain with you:
All kind of fortunes have us joined together.
Appoint our tents for your Pauilion now;
And we will guard you, if that you come thither.
We have abandoned Greece, our native soil:
We have no Bactria to be our retreat:
Our hope is all in you: those that would spoil
Us of your person ruin all our state.
Would God that all your army did their due:
To use more words the occasion is not fit.
I should not urge you, if your own were true,
Your custody to strangers to commit.

What sudden accident does this dismay you
That you such inconveniences forecast?

Sir, Bessus and Narbazanes betray you*
This day to you, or them will be the last.
They feign repentance only to dissemble,
Till every thing be for the fact prepared.
Their friends in have do all their force assemble,
And once ere night mind to invade your guarde.

I credit you: but yet I cannot wrong
My subjects so, to think of them the worst:
Shall I leave them who followed me so long?
By doing so to make my self accursed.
I will awaite on what the heavens will offer,
For who can stand when fates his fall conspire?
Among mine own I willingly will suffer.
I live too long if they my death desire.

Take heed, Sir, to this subtile-witted Greek:
The Grecian faith to all the world is known.
I am enform'd he by all means does seek
To win his grace who has your state o're-throwne.
And marvel not though mercenarie men,
Who sell themselves, sell all: believe them never.
They have no God but gold, nor house: how then
Can they be constant that are changing ever?
Although that he pre-occupie you thus,
And others who themselves abuse your Grace:
Faith shall be found inuiolate in us,
When our accuser dare not show his face.

Who hope to have of Alexander gain,
Or honor to be false, they have no reason:
No man on earth does traitors more disdain,
Nor more seuearly will b'aueng'd on treason.

Well, Sir, you shall see shortly what we are:
I will go see your Ensigns all displaied.

It Is better now since things are gone so far,
Then seem for to mistrust, to be betraide.
Lo Artabazus, I have acted here
My part of greatness, and my glass is run.
Now Patrons speech does evident appear.
I see my end, yet can it no way shun.

The Bactrians only meddled have with this.
Go to the Graecians camp, when that is done.
And when your danger once divulged is,
The Persians all will follow after soon.

And what if I were gone to patrons Tent,
And guarded with the Greeks as you desire:
He has but thousands four that are well bent;
They thirty thousand that my fall conspire.
And doing this I should their deed excuse,
In giving them a motion who have might.
They may indeed my lenity abuse:
But by my deed they shall pretend no right.

O deplorable Prince, who can but weep
To see thee now reduced to this estate?

Retire you all, and seek your selves to keep:
I here attend the issue of my fate.
I know ye wonder all how I can stand,
Down from the top of all contentment thrown,
And not die desperately by mine own hand.
I Will die through others guilt, not through mine own.
None of you all have falsified your troath,
But with me loyal still to the end ye abide.
Now I you all disburth^n of your oath:
Leave me alone, and for your selves provide.

O Wretched Monarchy, vain mortals choice,
The glorious st^p to a disgrace-full fall:
Our power depends upon the peoples voice,
And to seem sovereign needs we must serve all.
Yet blown, like blathers, with ambitions wind,
On envied scepters weaklie we rely:
And calling not our frail estate to mind,
Not only earth, but heavens themselves defy.
This hellish hag our restless mind does toss,
While carried with a popular applause,
T'enlarge our limits with our neighbors loss,
We of our own confusions are the cause.
And when th'ecclipse comes of our glories light,
Then what auailes th'adoring of our name:
A mere illusion made to mock the sight,
Whose best was but the shadow of a dream?
Let greatness of her glascie scepters vaunt;
Not sceptours, no, but reeds, soon brus'd soon broken:
And let this worldly pomp our wits inchant.
All fades, and scarcely leaves behind a token.
Those golden Palaces, those gorgeous halles,
With fourniture superfluouslie fair:
Those stately Courts, those sky-encountring walls
Evanish all like vapors in the air.
O what affliction jealous greatness bears,
That still must travel to hold others down;
Whilst all our guardes not guard us from our fears?
So greevous is the burden of a Crown.
Where are they all who at my feet did bow,
While I was made the idol of so many?
What joy had I not then? what have I now?
Then honored of all, now scarce of any.
Our painted pleasures but apparel pain:
We spend our days in dread, our lives in dangers,
Balls to the stars, and thralles to Fortunes reign,
Known unto all, yet to our selves but strangers.
A golden Crown does cover leaden cares:
The Scepter cannot lulle their thoughts a-sleepe,
Whose breasts are fraught with infinite dispaires,
Of which the vulgar wits sounds not the deep.
The Bramble grows, although it be obscure;
While mighty Cedars feel the blustering winds:
And mild Plebeian spirits may lieu secure,
While mighty tempests toss imperial minds.
What are our days, but dreams, our reigns but tra^ces,
Whilst brainsick reaving with our Fortunes fever.
We still are vexed with changes and mischances,
Till death us both from life and scepter sever?
The vanity of greatness I have proou'd,
And been the wonder of each gazing eye:
Now that deceauing shadow is remoou'd;
And I my wretched state too late epsy.
Now bound with chains, (which though they be of gold,
Diminish not my thraldom ought the more)
When this preposterous honor I behold,
It but vpbraides me what I was before.
And what was I before (though to each eye
The form of my affliction was not known)
But fettred in effect, while I seemed free,
And in a labyrinth of labors thrown?
Was I not bound to serve then all men's humor,
Or to be censured with some Critic story;
Still clogged with cares, as slought for every rumor.
O glorious bondage, burthen-able glory.
That dignity which deified me late,
And made the world do homage to my name,
Now cannot succor my accursed state,
But has with my misfortune fethered same.
My best was but a momentarie blis,
Which leaves behind this everlasting sting,
That of all woe no woe is like to this,
To think I was, and am not now a King.
No man with me in all accomplished joys,
That satisfy the soul, could once compare:
No man may match me now in sad annoyes,
And all the miseries that breed despair.
Thrice Fortune did my gallant troops entrap,
And I to fall did desperately stand;
Yet could not be so happy in mishap,
As for to have died by some renowned hand.
But for my greater grief, disgrace, and scorn,
(The minds of men so apt are to deceive)
They whom aloft my favors wings have borne,
Even they made me their master thus a slave.
Ah, did not death in prison from me reaue
The sacred sovereign of my souls desires,
I wretch not being present to receive
The last cold kiss that might assuage my fires?
Yet o thrice happy thou, that have not lived
To bear a burden of this great disgrace.
More then a thousand deaths this had thee grieved,
To know I died, and died in such a case.
Ah, do the pledges of our mutual love
(The only comfort that the fates have left me)
Rest imprisoned yet? And may I not remove
My mother thence? then is all bliss bereft me.
My pains are more then with my pleasures even,
Since first I in authority did enter.
Was I exalted once up to the heaven,
To be cast headlong down to mischiefs center?
My ample Empire, and my Princely birth,
My great magnificence, and vain excess,
All cannot yield my mind one minutes mirth,
To ease me now in this extreme distress.
Lo here, reduced unto the worst of illes,
Past help, past hope, and only great in grief,
I wait upon two abject vassals wills,
And dare not, no, not think upon relief.
Death would I scorn (my course must once have ru^)
If I had first repaired mine honors breach,
Whose wounds so thrill my soul, as vnbegun
The life I wish that does my fame impeach.
This mortal veil I willingly resign,
Since to an end my days the destinies bring:
Nor will I so from Majesty decline,
As to do ought vn-worthie of a King.

SOme new disasier day lie does for show
Our coming ruin: We have seen our best.
Now fortune bent us utterly t'ore-throw,
Throws down our King from her wheels top so low,
As by no means his state can be redrest.
And since his foes by arms have him oppressed,
His friends, and servants leave him all alone.
Few have compassion of his state distressed:
Yea, false to him them selves do many show.
So foes and f^ined friends conspire in one;
Frail Fortune, and the fates with them agree.
With axes all run on this falling tree.
This Prince in prosperous state has florish'd long,
And never dreamed of any evil success,
But was well followed while his state was strong:
Him flattering Sirens with a charming song
Strived to exalt: while-as he did possess
This earthly dross, that with a vain excess
He might reward their mercenary love.
But now when fortune drives him to distress,
His favorites whom he remained among,
With foes and fortune straight their faith remove.
And who for gain to follow him were wont,
They after gain by his destruction hunt.
O more then happy ten times were that King,
Who were unhappy but a little space,
So that it did no utter ruin bring,
But made him prove (a profitable thing)
Who of his train, did best deserve his grace;
Then could, and would of those the best embrace,
And fly such vultures as devour him living;
That these whom he found faithful might have place.
O how this does a generous stomach sting,
To see some graced for craft and lies contryuing?
This is the grief that bursts an honest heart;
Lords favor commes by chance, not by desert.
Those Minions to whom Princes do extend,
Above their worth, immoderate good will,
To the disgrace of good men, show in end
They only in prosperity depend
Not upon them, but on their Fortune still.
Which if it change, they change. the^ though they fill,
Their hopes with honor, and their chests with coin
Yet if they fall, or their affairs go ill,
Those whom they raised, will not with them descend,
But with th'ascending Sun will straight way join.
And do forget all that they gave before,
For that of them they can expect no more.
The truth hereof in end now has the event
In Bessus, and Narbazanes approved:
On whom their Prince so prodigally spent
Affection, honor, titles, treasure, rent,
And all that might each honest mind have moved
So bountiful a Prince for to have loved,
Who so beningly tendered their estate.
Yet they to him vile traitors now have proved:
By them he is in-chain'd, disgraced and shent;
So as he well may rue, although too late,
That he such sly Camelions changing hew
Preferred to servants dutiful and true.
But though a while those traitors speed,
No doubt the heavens once vengeance will exact:
The very horror of this heinous deed
Does make the hearts of honest men to bleed:
Yea, even the wicked hate this barbarous act:
The heavens no hier choler can contract,
Then for th'invasion of a sacred King:
Who, as it were, out of the stars extract,
Should fear and reverence inferiors breed,
To whom from him both health and wealth does spring.
But though on earth men should neglect this wrong,
Heavens will those traitors plague ere it be long.
WHat story or what fable can record
Of such a nombrous troop so strangely lost?
I know they quaked to know it was my Lord,
Whose name alone is worth another host.
It scarce seems credible in many parts:
But traitors fear though all the world would back the^.
They were but bodies destitute of hearts:
More prisoners they were then men to take them.
Who would believe so few durst strive to find
So great an army, and the army shrinkes
What is impossible to a brave mind?
True valor dare attempt all that it thinks

In this encounter for to have had the best
It would content more then a common thought:
But since we want the chief, what of the rest?
I would be satisfied in all, or naught.
Those traitors thought to have finished all the war
With giving me their Lord, whom they had bound:
But I distrust not mine own force so far,
As for to build upon so base a ground.
Although indeed that Darius did me wrong,
I will not suffer others to oppress him.
I keep him for my self: he does belong
To me alone: none other should distress him.
Whilst he did only in himself confide,
I labored by all means to make him bow:
But since his hard estate abates that pride,
Turned is my fury to compassion now.
Although he often contemned me by his letter,
Yet I am grieved to see him so deceived.
If he had but acknowledged me his better,
'Twas not his blood, nor kingdom that I craved.
And if those traitors have not killed him straight,
Yet his delivery shall my name renoune:
I would not loose a subject of such weight,
By which my clemency might be made known:

Sir, now your coming cannot do him good.


What al are fled? none have my force withstood?


Yet Darius cannot be redeemed again.


Why, have they set him free? or is he slain?


Now has he got a liberty at last
With no less ransom then his dearest breath.

Then is all Asias expectation past.
Tell on at length the manner of his death.

The boiling ardour of th'ascending Sun
Had caused in me a moisture parching drouth,
Which made me from the way a little run,
To find some fountain to refresh my mouth,
Their where a source her liquors softly scatters,
Which shaddow'd was from Titans parching beams,
I coold my thirst with the cold crystal waters.
Which seemed to murmur that I forced their streams.
When lo I saw (a lamentable sight)
Two wounded horses draw a bloody coache,
All clad with skins in most uncomely plight,
Which narrowly t'espy I did approach.
One was within, who could not long escape
The doubtful passage of the infernal gates:
Yet majesty triumphing over mishap,
He seemed to threaten fortune; and the Fates,
And as not to so basse a fortune borne,
While all his blood abundantly deval'd,
Burst forth into these words in Fortunes scorn,
As one whose courage could not be appal'd,
You gaze to see, and have good cause wherefore,
A man, no man; a King, no King; what monster?
Now less then naught, who once was both, and more:
Which few now by my present state would conster.
And yet amidst my evils I must rejoice,
That this last comfort does fore-goe my end:
I speak to one that understands my voice,
And not in vain my dying-speeches spend.
I am, but how? in name, but not in power,
That wretched Darius (which I should suppress)
Once happy, as you heard, but at this hour
The very pattern of extreme distress;
Then a while pawsing after thus proceeded:
Tell Alexander these last words from me:
Although my hatred still toward him exceeded,
Yet I am forced far in his debt to die.
I thank him highly for his great good will,
My mother, wife, and children so preserving.
Pray him t'vse them that rest as gently still
For his own goodness sake, not my deserving.
They to his foe pertain, and yet he strives
To have them honored now, as in times past:
But those who held of me both lands and lives,
Of land and life have me deprived at last.
I pray you on my part entreat him thus
Not to permit that unrevenged below
My ghost do wander. By his care of us
That men his Justice, and their fault may know.
Beside the honor, which he shall acquire
In plaguing them that have betraide my trust;
Men shall his magnanimity admire,
And fear to offend him whom they find so just.
Lo, all my pomp is past, my time expired:
My wealth evanished like watrie bubbles.
Over many a mighty people I impyr'd:
Yet has my life been but a stage of troubles.
And since my glass is run, my glory gone,
And I dead to the world, the world to me;
I wish that all parts of the earths globe in one
May condescend his subjects for to be.
Then drouping down, faint, bloodles, and half dead,
He prayed to give him water that stood by.
(A small request by such a Monarcke made)
Which when that he had got: yet, ere I die,
This cross must come (said he) t'vndoe me quite:
Though most parts of the world once homage ought me;
I have not now the power for to requite
This little benefit that thou have brought me.
But Alexander shall reward thee well;
And him the heavens, who has not done amiss,
To those that have been mine: his foe must tell
That undeserved courtesy of his.
Though none have power his pleasure to control;
If he entreat them well whom he retains;
It will procure no small rest to my soul,
And make him famous, while the world remains.
When my sprit parts out of this tent of clay,
Entreat some with my burial to take order;
Least churlish Charon force me for to stray
An vn-respected ghost on Stygian border.
Let first my corpse be carried to my mother,
Who may it with my ancestors entombe:
And, as she has more cause then any other,
May wail this woeful burden of her womb.
In pledge of that affection, which I bear
Thy Sovereigns worth, whom now I must see never,
Have here a Princes hand, I hold him dear,
And recommend me to his grace for ever.
I scarce had got his hand, or touched his vesture,
When like a torch whose wax and week is spent,
Somewhat perplexed, yet with a princely gesture,
He died in peace: his sprit appeared content.

Who could refrain from tears to hear declared
The desolation of this wretched wight:
Have subjects slain their prince who^ strangers spared?
Us has he fled, that perish thus he might?
I for his fall am wonderfully sorry,
Who Nestors age was worthy to have attained:
I envy death, because it robbed the glory,
Which I in giving him his life had gained.

Since death has put a periode to his woes,
The favor that toward him you thought t'extend,
Convert to furour now against his foes.
For your designs can have no fairer end.
So shall you both attain perpetual praise,
And win their hearts who see their Lord revenged,
Then reap no little profit in your days,
To have the country of such vipers cleng'd.
If but one virtue should adorn a King,
It should be Justice: many great defects
Are vaild thereby; whereas each virtuous thing
In one that is unjust, the world suspects.

Although your counsel, or yet his request
Had not the power to penetrate my ears:
A generous stomach could not well digest
So great a wrong: my mind it hardly bears.
My spirit impatient of repose disdaines
That they so long this infamy surviue.
But I will punish with most greevous pains
The horrid treason that they did contriue.
What? do they think, deceau'd with some illusion.
That Bactria is a bulwark for my ire?
Fly where they list, they cannot escape confusion:
My wrath shall follow like consuming fire.
Heaven cannot be a sanctuary for them:
I dare to force the infernal caves adventer:
The Earth cannot keep them safe, if I abhor them:
I Will search them out though they were in the center.
And having gotten once those malefactors,
Betwixt the bending boughs of two strong trees,
Unto the eternal terror of all traitors,
They shall dismembered be before my eyes.

Sir, may it please your Grace to take some care,
That some his funeral offices perform.

Go presently and every thing prepare
According to the military form.

THis look, alas, has fraught my soul with fears,
Speak, for my life does on thy lips depend:
Thy countenance (ah) a doleful coppie bears
Of some sad summons to denounce my end.
Starve not my ears with famish for thy words:
That swallowed yet may make my heart to burst.

Madame the message that my'soule affordes
Must once be known, and once known still accursed,

Be not a niggard of evil news.


And why?


Fame will tell the world.


But first to you.


Tell sone.


Your son is dead.


The^ let me die.


Her joys and pleasures are all perished now.


Why opens not the earth for to devour
A cursed caitiue, that all joy has lost?
The longer that I live, my grief grows more:
Borne I am to mischief, kept to be crossed.
Would God this body in mishappes abounding
Were covered with some mountain of huge weight;
Or else that The Ocean over these fields inunding
Might make my burial in her bosom straight.
O Alexander, have thou robbed his life,
Yet entertained me still in hope to find him?
Why did thou not first kill this poor old wim
Who was not worthy to have lived behind hi?
Ah, tended all thy courtesy to this,
That I should live till thou have slain my son?

You wrong that worthy Prince: for he and his
Came him to help, who was ere then undone.

What impious hands durst one that wore a crown,
And was thereof most worthy, murder so?

Two who^ himself raised up have cast him down:
More faithful then his own he found his foe.

Tell on thy message, message of my death,
And load my mind with all mischief and horror:
That in sad sighs I may dissolve my breath,
Whilst thou relat'st these tidings full of terror.

When Alexander eftsoons back had sent
Th'Ambassadours that peace had sought in vain,
A general muster, then to try the event
Of doubtful Mars, King Darius did ordain,
And in one battle to adventure all
Intending, caused his will to be proclaimed,
While two vile traitors did conspire his fall,
Who Bessus, and Narbazanes were named.
These two in counsel did discover first
Some portion of the poison of their heart:
Which caused the King suspect, but not the worst.
Yet with a sword he sought to make them smart.
But having escaped the first brunt of his rage,
With tears of Crocodiles they so lamented,
As they his indignation did assuage,
Whilst in appearance only they repented.
They came to Artabazus, honest man,
Who judged of others by his upright mind,
And could not, or through bounty would not scan
What they with craft and malice had desing'd.

A sinceare mind is ever least suspicious:
They think all faulty who themselves are vicious.

They urged him with the King to interceede.
That in his favor he would give them place;
With promise that by some notorious deed
Of arms they would seek to deserve his grace.
He in their favor first enform'd the King,
The battle would bear witness of their truth;
Then both before his majesty did bring,
Who was by their submission moved to ruth.
Their hands streatchd up to heaven, and humbled knees,
Their tears like those the Crocodiles do shed,
Woe in their face, and pity in their eyes
Did for compassion and for mercy plead.
The king of nature mild, prompt to receive them,
While they dissembledly were thus complaning,
Not only of his lenity forgave them,
But wept in earnest too while they were faining.
Then as he used, his danger now not feeling,
He mounted to his Coach: they came behind
With a submissiue voice most humbly kneeling
To him, whom shortly they were bent to bind.
The Grecian Captain followed them with speed,
Who being called, and asked what he desired,
Solicited the King to take good heed
Of those that had against his life conspired.
He told him how he had their treason tri'de,
And seen the Bactrians to a tumult bent;
Then prayed him for his safety to provide,
In going with him to his trusty tent.
The King grow'n careless, and his safety shunning
Refused this offer on affection grounded.
Or with some powerful fate his fall fore-running,
Was carried headlong thus to be confounded.
The Greek past thence dispairing of his safety,
Who thus recur elesse help and health refused.
Then Bessus did begin with speeches crafty
To purge himself, and errors past excused.
The King then Artabazus did command
T'approch, and Patrons speech at length reported:
He then did doubt what danger was at hand,
And to go with the Greek his Grace exhorted.
But when he found this resolution placed,
Within his breast, no peril for to fly:
With mutual tears each other they embraced,
Parting like two, that living went to die,
Now silent night in pitchie vapors cled
Had mustred mists, and marched unto the West,
A shadowie horror over the earth was spread,
The Santinelles were set, and all at rest.
When a strange terror troubled all the host:
The multitudes did murmr in all parts:
They did resemble ships in storms near lost,
Whilst each to the other cause of fears imparts.
Those who their King appointed were to guarde
All shrunk away to corners none staid there:
And having to his danger no regard
His better-fortunes Minions fled else where.
The desolation then was wondrous great:
With a few Eunuchs Darius left alone
Did enter deeply to reuolue his state,
And thus be-spake them; who did for him moan.
Depart in peace and for your selves provide,
Least ye be likewise with my ruin caught:
I will the issue of my fate abide:
They hearing this, as of their wits distraught
Went howling through the host with dolorous cries:
This made the King as dead to be bewaild.
And in the army did a rumor rise,
That he had killed himself, when all hope failed.
The Persians grieved, while these things did occur,
Did first encourage all their country bands
To help their Prince: but yet they durst not stir
For fear of falling in the Bactrians hands.
Even in the time when this confusion was
The traitors, to defer the fact no more,
Did to their sovereigns own Pavilion pass,
And rooke, and bound him, whom they served before.
He, who in golden coach superbelie rode,
Was cast in one for bassest carriage used:
And who of late was honored like a God,
By servants as a bond slave was abused.
Those royal hands to bear a scepter borne
Were bound with chains: this also much did grieve him
That fortune his adversity would scorn
With golden bands, that served not to relieve him.
Then Alexander, having heard in end
That Darius came not forward to affront him,
To find him out did all his forces bend,
Not doubting but he eftsoons would surmount him.
But being at the last at length informed
How he was made a Captive to his own,
At this indignity he highly stormed,
And swore he would avenge it by his crown.
Out of his host he did select a few,
Who were best horsed, whose equipage was light:
With whom his foes he did so fast pursue,
That, ere they could suspect, he came in sight.
The traitors troubled with this he had done
Came to the Cart wherein the King was carried,
And bad him mount on horse back, and flee soon,
Least that his foe should take him if he tarried.
He looked aloft, and cried aloud: this day
The Eternal Iusticer sees through the stars:
I will not with such perjured rebels stay,
And fly from him, who moou's but honest wars.
Then those in whom impiety aboundes,
Throw'd darts at him who^ they should have defended
And hurt the horses with an hundredth wounds.
While they performed the Parricide intended.
Their hands were feeble, as their hearts untrue:
For when their foes began them once to comber,
The traitors first, then all the traitorous crew
Fled them, who were inferior far in number.
But to the confines of deaths kingdom brought
The King retired out from the way aside,
More wounded with ingratitude then ought,
Did fly the world whose follies he had tri'de.
Scarce was the lasting last diuorcement made
Twixt soul and body whilst that the eyes grew dim
When Alexander came, and found him dead,
Who long had labored for to have ruined him.
Yet with the vesture which himself then wore
He covered the dead corpse, and not eschew'd it;
But even with tears his coffin did decore,
To the great wonder of all them that viewed it.
And having waild his death above all measure,
For to have his funerals made in Princely wise
He bids you spare no cost, but use his treasure,
And them, as best becommes, to solemnise.
He has his body hither sent by me,
That the last honors you to him may do:
He thinks they so shall best accomplished be,
And who him bare shall see him buried to.

Behold how grief has her of sense berest,
And choked her breath with super-abounding groans,
No will or power to live is to her left,
Since all her weal evanish'd is at ones.

Ah shall I see (no let me first be blind)
That body breath-lesse, which I brought to light?
Where would my soul a force sufficient find
To Endure the dolor of that deadly sight.
O flintie hardened heart, that wilt not break
With the remembrance of so many woes,
Why part'st thou not, faint sprit, that whilst I speak,
In opening of my lips mine eyes might close?
This heritage of death, this withered stock
Is but a receptacle of dispaires:
A torture to it self, a stumbling block,
Whose aged furrows fertile are in cares.
What helps it now to have been made the mother
Of one who to such dignity did clim?
More miserable now then any other,
I live to wail my death, who di'd in him.
Aye me, malicious Fates have done me wrong:
Who came first to the world should first depart.
It not becommes the old t'ou'r-liue the young:
This dealing is praeposterous and ou'r-thwart.
Ah, why should death so indiscreet be found
To save a caitiue, and confound a Prince:
My halfe-dead body, weighed down to the ground,
Through grief is grow'n ripe for the grave long since.

WHat makes vain worldlings so to swell with pride,
Who came of earth, and to the earth return?
So hellish furies with their fire brands burn
Proud and ambitious men, as they deui^e
Them from themselves, and so turmoile their minds,
That all their time they study still
How to content a bound-lesse will,
Which never yet a full contentment finds.
Who so this flame within his bosom smothers
Does many fantasies contriue,
And even forgets himself a-liue,
To be remembered after death by others.
Thus while he is his pains are never ended;
That while he is not, he may be commended.
What can this help the happiness of Kings,
So to subdue their neighbors, as they do,
And make strange nations tributaries to?
The greater state the greater trouble brings.
Their pompes and triumphs, stands them in no stead:
Their Arches, Tombs, Piramides hie,
And Statues are but vanity:
They die, and yet would live in what is dead:
And while they live, we see their glorious actions
Often wrested to the worst: and all their life
Is but a stage of endless toil and strife,
Of tumults, vprores, mutinies, and factions.
They rise with fear, and lie with danger down:
There is no burden weightier then a Crown.
And as Ambition Princes undermines;
So does it those that under them rule all.
We see in how short time they rise, and fall;
How often their light eclipsed but dimly shines.
They study by all shifts and slights to move
Their Prince of their deserts t'account:
And when they by his favor mount,
O what a danger is it to be above?
For straight exposed to hatred, and despite,
With all their skill they cannot march so even,
But some opprobrious scandal will be given:
For all men envy those that have most might.
And if the King dislike them once, then straight
The wretched Courtiers fall with their own weight.
Some of a poorer Spirit, who would be praised,
And yet have not wherefore to be esteemed,
What they are not indeed would feign be deemd,
And indirectly labor to be raised.
This crew each public place of honor haunts,
And changing garments every day
While they would hyde, do but bewray
With outward ornaments their inward wants.
And men of better judgment justly loath
Those, who in outward shows place all their care,
And deck their bodies, while their minds are bare,
Like to a shadow, or a painted cloth.
The multitude, who but th'apparrell notes,
Does homage not to them, but to their cotes.
Yet Princes must be served, and with all sorts,
Some both to do, and counsel what is best:
Some serve for Ciphers to set out the rest,
Like live less pictures, that adorn the ports.
Fair palaces replenished are with fears:
Those seeming pleasures are but snares:
The Royal Robe does cover cares,
The Assyrian dye dear buyth he, that it bears.
Those dainty delicates, and far fetched food
Often through suspicion savor out of season:
Embrodered beds and tapesteries hatche treason:
The golden goblets mingled are with blood.
Such glorious gorgeous shows do serve for naught:
All cannot calm the tempest of the thought.
O happy he, who far from fame at home
Does sit securely by a quiet fire,
Who has not much, and does not much desire,
Nor curious is to learn who go, or come,
For satisfied with what his father left
His mind he measures by his store,
And is not pyn'd to gape for more;
Nor eats ought that iniquity has reft:
He has his little cleanly, and in peace,
And looks not with suspicious eye.
No poison comes in Cups of tree:
No treason harbors in so poor a place.
No troublous dream does interrupt his sleep:
A quiet conscience does his cottage keep.
He does not study often what storms may blow:
His poverty cannot be much impaired:
He fears no foreign force, and craves no guarde:
None coueteth his spoil, none looks so low:
Where as the great are commonly once crossed,
As Darius has been in his flower,
Or Sisigambis at this hour,
Who has escaped long, and now at length is lost.
But how commes this that Potentates often fall,
Forced to confess the afflictions of their soul?
There is some hier power that can control
The Monarchs of the earth, and censure all,
Who once will call their doings to account,
Their pride repressing, who t'oppresse were prompt.
W. A.

