COme Vallen. lets to Sir God-fries house,
I know there will be reueling to night
This is his birth day: and he welcoms all,
Fair Anabell his daughter is my love,
There shall thou see the Idol of my thought,
Fair Bristows miror and my hearts delight.

Friend Challener, I wonder at thy humor,
To dote so much over this female kind,
That charms thy senses makes thy eye sight blind.

Thou art an enemy to women still,
I prithee what does best agree with thee.

To see my hounds, to chase the fallow dear,
to see my fathon strike the partridge dead.
to hear my horse Careere, to drink full healths,
and not live puling for an nounce of Beauty,

I love to see my hounda as well as thee,
My horse, my fa^^on, and healthes when time serves,
But above all my mistress I prefer,
She is the Fewel^ that does heat my blood,
And therefore Vallenger, for my sake go
and see, the gallants will be here to night,

Y says you bind me to a mighty task
I Will see your Lady, and your Ladies mask,
then prithee peace here will we keep our stand.

For by the Drum the Maskers are at hand.


Now gentlemen, your welcome to my house,
Good master Challener and your honest friend,
So are you all young gallants every one,
But we forget our selves, boddy of me,
Where be these Ladds, what shall we have
No dancing after dinner? Ho, up with the tables,
If they have dined within, and come
young Ladds now to your dance again.

False tongue that spoke such blasphemy before,
That I dispraised, now does my soul adore.

How do thou like my love now Vallenger.

O she is divine and I become her thrall.

Does Bristow yield her fellow, prithee speak,

A thousand, I must hence or else my heart will break.

What means my friend in such a humor go,
I Will know the cause before I leave him so,

Gentlemen I thank you all,
Lets in to supper the the cheer be small,

Vallinger thou art a traitor to thy friend.

Not to my friend but always to my foe.

Why do thou love the faint I do adore.

To anger thee I swear to love her more.

I loved her first, when thou did love di^daine.

I love her now, therefor thy love is vain.

For swear to name her el^e thou art my foe.

For wear my Anabell, hence dotard go,

Prepare thee Vallener it is decreed.
For Anabell, or thou or I must bleed?

On Sir it is welcome pare not but thrust home.

Some Gracious Body help me I am slain.

Who^e that which calls for help, gods pity wife,
The Gentleman, lies bleeding here that came
with master Challen.
I pray Sir peake who has hurt ye thus.

The villen Chalener has almost slain me.

Challener, why I thought you had bin friends.
What was the matter Sir may I know it?

About your daughter, and while she was dancing
I praised her gesture and her comely grace,
But Vallenger most like a liberal villain,
Did give her scandelus Ignoble terms,
Which I rebuked him for whereupon,
We drew our weapons, I by chance being down,
The coward villain thus has wounded me.

How say you wife, did not I say so much,
He was a Cutter and a swaggerer,
He have my child, no, no, he aims amiss,
Go presently make search thrughout the City,
Where ere you find him carry him straight to prison,
Look to him, come Sir, since your hurt
Was about my girl, you shall not from
my house till you are through whole.
(...) (...) (...) And for the motion which you made to me,
Touching my child, I promise you truly Sir,
I do not know the man in Bristo,
That I affect more then I do your self,

Sir I have ^ound it, and I wish I may
Make ^ati^^action ^or your good regard,
And loving care that you have had o^ me,
So plea^e you Sir to know your daughters mind,
Which way her maiden thoughts are most inclind,

From whom the Letter.

From your ^ather Sir,

Come hither wi^e, daughter a word with you,
I know that once thou did love Challener,
But he is fled, thou ^eest a wagering ^ellow,
Tell me my girl will thou be ruled by me,
And i will provide a man fit ^or thy turn.

Faith who^oeuer you shall think meet.

Why that's well sed my wench, there spok an angel
Look yonder what ^aist thou to young Vallenger,
He is a man as twere complete o^ wax,
His ather is an honorable knight,
A Challener, a very stock to this,
Love him my girl, say as I say, do.

I never heard a ^ather labor more,
To win his daughter that was won before.

Daughter what ^ay you to your ^ather.

Why wi^e I know what she would ^ay already,
She has loved Challener. And would think,
Her ^ond in leaving him ^o soon to choose another,
And thinks we would be angry,
If she loved Vallenger, tut v^e thy mind

Father, I know the^e words are all but jests,
Dispose even as it likes you best.

Well ^ed my girl then Vallenger is he,
What ^ay you Ellen do you not agree.

What liks you two, i^ never Cross,
Mine is the care, but yours is the loss.

Now master Vallenger, good news a gods name
From whence is that letter Sir may I know,

You may Sir God-Frey, this letter is from my
Father Sir, who to morrow comes to Bristoe,
And means to soiorne here all the winter time.

He shall be welcome, I would my hou^e
Were thought fit for his entertainment,
But on, so may I call you now,
And if that you agree how say you Sir.

Sir I wish it were to night before to morrow,
And by your daughters leave, seal it with this kiss.

Wel^ed hearts you will never be younger,
Lets in to get all things in readiness.

Good master Chambers, your welcome Sir to
London, how far our friends at Bristo Mal. chambers,

M. Challener, all well, your friends at Bristo,
Would be glad to see you.

Indeed I dare ^weare that I have some friends
There, but among all, how does young Vallenger?

O the man you hurt.

Even he.

Exceeding well, he is at Sir God-freys house,
And is on thur^day next to be espou^ed,
To beutious Anabell the old knights daughter.

Is It posible?

It Is as I tell you Sir,
But master Challener I am in ^ome have,
And pleases you soon to come and sup with me,
I Will tell you then the matter more at larg.

Fair Anabell married to Vallenger,
The news does run like yse through all my veins,
Is Anabell married to Vallenger?
A ^aithles woman, trothles, and unkind,
Won with a word o labor, lost like wind.
O I could rend my flesh, and teace my hair,
Married to Vallenger, what to my ^oe?
By heaven if all my wealth were in the ^ea,
And I le^t De^prate, ^uckerles, and bare,
It would not half ^o much have gauld my heart,
As this ^ame news, this ^atall deadlines.

What cheer you master never be ^o sad,
Tut let her go more wenches may be had.

No none like her, but I will straight from hence,
With my own per^onage I will di^pence?
I prithee Jacques get me a Docters weed,
For unto Bristow will we with all speed,
There will we ^ee the Bridegroom and the Bride,
Get straight post horses, for this night i will ride,
And presently get me a Docters tire,
Till I am at Bristow, each part is one fire.

Did Master Herbert then ^end you to me.

How think you, he told me he set it in the letter.

Do thou know what he has written here.

Not I, nor I greatly do not care.

Here he desires me as ere I tendered him
That I would entertain thee as my man.

You may i^ you will, i^ you will not you may choose,

I prithee what is thy name?

Blunt.

Blunt name? Blunt nature?
Here my ^rend does write,
Tho he be ^omwhat stoburne in his words,
Yet he is of confirmed honesty,
Well Blunt I entertain you Sir,
How now, sweet love, whose that.

Mary ^weet heart it is Sir godfreys man,
That comes to bid us to his daughters marriage.

I Sir my name is ^rog: good man Frogs son
O Frog Hall, that am^ent from my master,
To desire you and the Gentlewoman,
To make a step to walk, or as it were to
Come, or approach, to dinner? This is all Sir.

Do you hear Sir, is this my mistres.

I Blunt.

Is she not a Whore? she looks like one?

Peace Sirrah on your li^e.

What ^auste merchant have you got there,
Frog break his pate?

No by my says, he is like one would ^ooner break mine.

Well Frog tell thy Master I will not fail.

Sweet heart shall (...) go in this gown?

The time is to short to make another.

^s not that gown good enough ^or a whore?

By heaven if you maintain this Ra^call slave,
To abuse me, keep him and let me go.
Before an honest servant, let him.

Go to, peace sirrah, no more.

I have done sir: Harbeit, whether will thou?
Thy love unto thy friend makes thee forget
thy self, therefore no more.

I prethy sweet lam content thy self,
This fellow was sent me from a special friend
Tho he be blunt yet is very honest.

I could be content to love him well enough,
So he could afford me better words.

Well I will speak no more what shall offend you
Lets go sweet heart, therefore blunt come go you along,
Sir godfrey stays, therefore we do him wrong,

Thou wrongest thy self, god send thee to amend
And would do further were not for thy friend.

Sir Godfrey vmphreuile, and my honored Sister.
My bony bryde, and this fair company,
How it glades old Eustace vallenger
To^ee this good ocasion of our mirth.
Had my old true hearted Sara lived,
To have seen the maraige o^ her dear son
And in so good and worship^ull a stock,
As old vmphrevilles: well it was a woman
Few such live now: you old foolish eyes
Will you be watring still.

she was a wi^e and virtuous gentle woman
The poor will say so.

I hope my child will imitate her steps,

Come anaball thou now must be my wife,
My huswife, and my house keeper, and all,
I know thou have bin brod up for a hu^wife,
Thy husbands a wild boy I confess.
But let him stay and keep thee company
Or by the holy roode he roostes not here.
But brother, here is an Itallian docter that's commended to us by especial
friends
Whom we must intertaine with good regard.
Ho, who e with in there?

Do you call Sir?

Fie, Fie, Ned you trifle out the time.

Sir I was welcoming this gentleman,
This Gentelwoman, and this docter,
Being strangers here in Bristow.

Signeor Iulio I understand your called sir.

That is my name Sir.

Right reverent Docter your most welcome hither,
My hou e, or what el e, is at your command.

The like say I sir, be bold thereof

Most honored knights whatsoever lies in me,
Command my best indeuer.

Commistresse Florance you must know
That your come to Bristow.
And must now help to grace our Bride,

With all my heart Sir Eustace at her ^eruice

Sir, master Sentloe is the man I chu e,
To intertaine the bryde, he gives me leave
To welcome Mistres Florance.

Come brother you and I Will confer with M. Docter.

What on your wedding day and change,
Is your brides beauty les esteemd then mine,

The Be that Sucks the bitter Hemlock flouers,
When that he comes to taste the Violet
Does count his former food as trash and weeds
Thou art the Violet the bitter Hemlock she,
I blind before, but now mine eyes does see.

I ouerhard thee, thou base Vallenger.
That such an angel should endure the evil,
To link her ^el^e to that in^atiat devil

Come we discourse to long, we shall have
Time enough for conference.

What will you be so Coy,

Y ^aith you men are so deceytfull,
That she is a ^oole will credit what you say,

Why Ned what meanest thou

Sir but one word with Master Docter, I com,
Well I will Compa^^e thee whatsoever befall.

Well since the bride does give me leave.
I Will be so bold as to have a Dance.

Docter, a word.

With me Sir, I with thee.

Men o^ thy sort are sworn to secrecy,
But further me and keep my counsel.
In that which I shall here impart to thee,
And I Will give thee a Hundred pounds in gould.

Sir here is my hand, whatsoever lies in me,
You shall command my heart and secrecy,
It is enough then Docter thus much know,
Tho happily it may seem stranng to thee.
That on my marriage day I should transgress
So far as now I must reveal to thee,
But think it is love, blind love that leads me on,
That conquers Gods, and much more mortal men.

Delay not (...) but speak your mind at full.

Then thus in Brief Anabel is my wife,
But florence is the Mistress of my heart,
I love her Docter, Do thou conseaue me now,

How would you I should help you in her love,
Why now thou come unto the very maine.

Thou know her sweet heart Sentlo, he is the let.

And what way would you have him removed.

Why poisoned man, a little dram will doote.

Poisoned Sir, alas you know it is death.

I if it be known but that shall never be,
Speak honest Doctor will thou doote for me,

Sir for your sake although it touch me near,
Heers my handile doote.

Cut Docter never fear.
Gold will salve all, and that thou shall not want.

Sir I Will strech mine art to do you good,
Tho ventring so it cost my dearest blood,

thanks gentle Docter go to florence straife,
With in this hour I Will in the garden wait,
there bring her alone, Sentloe is sure,
And as for Anabal her thoughts be pure,
Sentloe once dead, Docter thou know my mind,
Faith anabell she stays not long be hind,
Good Docter fail not, I must now to dinner,

Now heaven forgive thee thy pernicious sins
I poison Sen^loe, now the lord forsend.
that such a thought should enter in my breast,
Blessed be the time I took a Docters shape,
For by this means Sentloe his death shall escape,
And lovely Anabell her life set free,
False Vallenger shall be deceived by me,
And that deceit is lawful kind and just,
That does prevent his murder and his lust,
And tho I have fair Anabels love lost,
Yet Vallenger shall in this ^ute be crossed.

Come douse. Now we have time and place as
They say, I prithee v^e me with no delay,
But still say, do not ^ay you will not have me,
Now because I am none of your burgers,
But Douce as I am hasty yet I am not the hastiest,
And though I am resty, Yet I am not lousy,
And of one that cannot talk much,
So I love to speak little, for as that
Worthy Philosopher Hector ses, the words
Of the wise do offend the foolish, so
Douce in few words and in tedious talk,
Tell me when is this day.

What day Frog.

What day Frog? do thou ask what day,
why Douce this day of wedlock Douce,
This day of going together Douce,
This day of wearing out sheets and
Throwing down blanckets Douce.

I says Frog you know I have little,
And for your own part your as poor as Job,

But not so scabed I thank God Douse,
Well, I see you regard not the wisdom
But the wealth, not the man: but the money,
O Dowse, Dowse, much have thou to answer for.

Besides I think you do not love me.

Not love thee, why I cannot dress my masters
Horses for thinking o^ thee: I cannot dream ^or
Sleeping o^ thee: but for a certainty,
I love thee indeed, when (...) go to bed
And pluck o^ my shoes, there you may smell
Love out of me: and then (...) sigh and then I pause,
And ^ay that Dowce is the only cause.

Well Frog, I have but iested all this while
Y says Frog hadest thou bin ruled by me,
Thou hadest not bin Froging out of the well
So long: but Frog it was thy fault.

The more is to come Dowce, then you will
Have me, we shall to this geere?

I sweet heart, name you the time,
The ^ooner the better.

So say I dowse, for as the old ^aying is,
He that has a good dinner, knows better the way
To ^upper: but ^ows^, we will be married a sunday,
And that we will be ^poken to be liberal,
We Will give ten grotes to the poor: with this
Prouisso, that if we need it, we will have our ten groats agin.

^ but afterward will you not prove unkind?

How dowse unkind?
When tinkers leave to drink good ale,
And Soldiers of their weapons fail,
When pedlers go without there pack,
And water is more dear then sack,
When Shomakers drinks that is small,
And Lawiers have no tongues at all,
When Fencers leave of giving knocks,
And youngmen hate fair Maidens smocks,
When drunkerds scorn a copar nose,
And Botchers nere mende lousy hose,
Or when the cat shall hate a mous^.
then Frog shall prove unkind to Dowse,
and so sweet heart lets go and wed,
and after to dinner and then to bed.

Go Sirrah at the back door,
Bring mistress Anabel, make have away.

I warrant you Sir.
Well Vallenger if all things fall out right:
You shall have little cause to thank
The Docter, but here he comes.

How now Docter, what will Florence come,

She will be here Sir, presently, and see
You can no sooner speak but she is come.

Go Sirrah, do you tend at door,
Let none come in unless I call to you.

I will, straight fetch Sentloe, to this match,
Are you there Docter, y says i will be even with you.

Sweet mistress welcome.

vallenger now by this light
Thou art the welcomest man in Christendom.

Thanks gentle mistress, but how if Sentlo come.

Hang him I never loved him in my life,
Only I gull the Rascal for his money.

The more villain vallenger
To leave his true wife for a common stall.

Now by this hand, I wonder vallenger,
What delight thou take in such a wife,
But that she is somewhat wise, and modest,
But to content a gallant spirit indeed,
By this light she is a very block to me.

hang her, I care not for her, our fathers made the match
Now with a diuill what whirle wind blew you hither?
How now minks, what make you here.

I hard my Vallenger was all alone,
If I offend thee love, i will straight begone,
yet I had rather stay and if you please.

Vallenger, what makes your minion here,
What are you ieallious huswife with a pox?

I pray you gentlwoman be not offended,
Please you my husband and all shall be mended.

Gosip get home, or I shall set you packing.

I have a trick and if it fall out right,
Shall move her patience ere she part from hence.

thou art to me, as body to the soul,
My life is death without thy company.

By my troth here is an excellent rebato.
Would I had such a one.

Likes it thee mistress?
Here take it, a worse will serve your furne.

Withal my heart, here mistress take ^t,
at home I have a better, please you to go
With me i will give it you.

Heeres a wonderful good fashiond gown,
I Would ride my horse twenty milles for such another.

Huswife, uncase, a worse will serve your turn.

All that I have sweet Vallenger is thine,
and what is thine, thou boldly may bestow,
Give all I have, only reserve thy self.
and gentlewoman pity my estate,
think that I am a woman as your self,
Had you a husband that you loved so dear,
And see another rob you of his heart,
Would it not grieve you? Yes I know it will,
But yet I pray, for My sake use him kind,
I am sure heel deserve it at your hands,

Go, get you hence, or else i will send you packing.

I will sweet love, and where so e^e thou art,
God send thee never a less loving heart.

vallenger, your a villain to use me thus.

Sentlo, the villain I throw back again,
And will maintain mine honor with my sword,
Draw vallenger, one of our deaths is nigh.

Go too, put up vallenger, or i will make you.

Well sentlo another time shall ^erue for us.

I prithee gentle love be patient.

Out ye Whore come not in my sight,
For if thou do by heaven i will martyr thee.

Caulest thou me whore, now by this light
I Will have thee murdered, and if gold can do it.

Gold can do much, but devil can do more,
Here is a true pattern, of a common whore.
Mistress what means my master to part in such a rage.

For^ooth the Gentleman is Iellious,
But I would quickly rid him of that Fever,
And if thou would Blunt but con^ent with me.

What is if Mistress, it shall go hard
Shall make me stack in what man profit you,
Although you still thought that I loved you not.

Now Blunt I see it, and will report thy love,
And for asigne here take this purse of gold,
And now but mark the issue of my purpose.
Thou See that Sentloes coin: begins to wear,
And Vallenger is even now on the spur,
And for my sake will empty all his treasure,
And what I have I will impart to thee,
But murder Sentlo, then is Florence free.

Mistress if this should be done,
a crash of your office were not cast away.

Fear not Blunt we w^ll not stick for that.

Then heeres my hand, before the sun go down,
I Will do the deed Sentlo shall shortly die.

The deed being done come presently to me,
And we will frollick in his tragedy.

O Sentlo, were not for thy friend,
How many dangers hadest thou fallen into,
The mischi^f^ now abroach I did foretell,
For by my means thy life in safety dwelles.

O my dear daughter how could he use thee thus?

My son rob thee of thy fair O^naments.

And for a strumpets love, O God, O God.

Split soul a sunder, that thy sons so vild.

Give me my child (Sir Eustice) as she is,
A virtuous maid dishonored by thy ^on.

Give me my ^on, that I may punish him,
For wronging this ^aire slower thy worthy child.

Alack good knight, I make my moan to thee,
And thou in true love can but pity me.

Alas good knight, my griefs so iumps with thine,
That as I weep ^or thee, so pity mine.

Where is my child, where is my Anabell?

Here wife, let us hold hands, and in three parts,
Lets sing around, and so weep out our hearts.

How could the wretch (dear ^oule) abu^e thee so.

Call him not wretch, he is wretched but by me.
In me consists the cause of all this woe,
Fair Florence is the mistress of his heart,
To her I am but as a Counterfit,
Rather I am an ethyop, ^oule, deformed
And therefore hated of my Vallenger.

O Beauteous maid, blemish not thy name,
Thou art Heavenly bright, and she as black as hell.

Should any but my Anabell say so,
Tho age has set his foot upon my back,
I would maintain thy Beauty,
Swear thou were fair,
Nay more then that, defend it with my sword.

Sir God-frey, ^o would I, by heaven I would,
I, were against that fugetiue my son,
Fugetiue in forsaking of his wife
To lead the race of an intemprat life.

Here me but one word, gentle master Docter,
The Lord be with the virtuous Challener where ere he
Be, Sir he should have had my child,
Good honest Gentleman he should,
And I repent me twenty hundred times,
So my goodman forsooth would needs
Make up the match with this same unthrift,
And now you see how he does use my child, alas.

This is ^ome comfort in this depth of woe,
Thy virtue is preferred before thy foe,
Why then tell them boldly who thou art,
No be still the Docter, hold thy course begun,
There is more a foot, then will in have be done.

Brother, it shall be so, he shall not have
A grave room of my Land.

He spends no goods of mine upon his trull.

Cut off all maintenance, that is the way
To make him see his sin.

O say not so, dear father heel repent,
And I shall have a husband o^ new birth.

Girl, thou art to foolish, so are we to long,
Sufferance in this may grow to further wrong.

To further wrong indeed, for Vallenger
Has hired me to poison Anabell.

What his true hearted wife?

Delay is worse to danger, credit me,
And by that plot Sentlo must likewise die.

Blessed be the hour that ever you camst to bristo.

A Docter of more honesty there lives not.

Were he our son a thousand times,
We must not let him be a murderer.

Good Father let it suffice you know it,
And may prevent it follow it then no further.

O thou that rules the lotery of life,
Why should a bad man have a virtuous wi^e,
Or a bad wife, have a husband that is good,
Do thou delight in contraryeties,
Then Wherefore do we strive for virtue still,
When we are maistred by a greater will,
Come good old man, come myrror of true wives,
O let my heart with your hearts simpathise,
although I am no kinsman to lament,
In your distres i^^gruf^ as deeply spent.

Docter, brother, what is to be done.

Gods me we must go apprehend him strait.

There is no dallying in a matter of such wait,
And therefore let us not be slack in this,

No, no, brother with your men,
Beset you Sentloes house he may be there,
I and my men, will post another way,
No place shall be unsought,
But we will have him.

Good mother stay them
T^is their journey forth,
May breed some mischief,
Therefore call them back again.

Thou art to foolish girl, let them go,
thou seeks his love, that is thy mortal foe.

O thou art framd of constancy thy self,
Challener what a jewel did thou loss,
By shoing it unto thy faithles friend,
and how like dross does he account of it,
Come virtuous maiden wipe those crystiall eyes,
thou weeps for love of him which love defies,
Lets in to counsel what may best relieve,
Where tears and sorrow gives men cause to grieve.

What spightfull fortune Vallenger is this,
this villain Docter has betraide my trust,
and to my father all my plots revealed,
Who flat denies me succor or relief,
I dare not I be seen within the city,
For then there is no way but straight to prison,
I Will call to mistress Florence I know that she is kind,
to her i will show my grief and my sick mind,
Ho, mistress Florence.

Whose there, sweet Vallenger is it thee,
Why do thou look so sad, how faires my dear?

Y says never worse, but all my hopes in thee,

What is it sweet I will not do for thee?

My Father and my wife knows all my drift,
And all enraged, threatens to be reuengd,
And will not let me have no maintenance,
But swears to plague me for my wickedness.

Is the wind in that door,
What would you have me do?

To let me live with thee a little space,
Until I have obtained my Fathers grace,
Then what I have sweet mistress shall be thine.

And what shall I do, beg the while,
No Vallenger your deceived in me,
think you that i will be privy to your plotes,
to bring my self in danger of the Law,
Go to your wife and cherish her at home,
I do not like these wanton humors I.

I hope sweet Florence that you do but jest.

Be shrow my heart then, do not take it so,
Pray leave my house, least your father come.

Give me house-roome Florence but to night,

Not an hour, shall I have my reputation
Touched for thee, if you linger here,
I Will send for the Officers to discharg my self.

It is even thus, well what remedy:
Lie in the fields wretch, there despair and die.

Pray God that Sentloe be not murdered now,
T^en all my hopes are lost.

How now Blunt what news?

Sentlo has drunk his last, the deed is done.

Then are we undone Blunt?

Why, wherefore.

The poor dejected Vallenger was here,
As dry as dust not left a single doyt,
His father vows to follow law of him,
Well, would that Sentlo were alive again.

It Is done, and therefore now there is no help.

Yes Blunt, there is help, but mark a woman's wit,
Vallenger is but new gone out of doors,
Go follow him, and mark where he lies down,
And if thou see he is inclinde to sleep,
Lay Sentloes murdered body hard by him,
Pluck out his sword, and all be bloody it,
And then cry murder as if he did the deed,
About it Blunt, do not the same neglect,
And then we two are free from all suspect.

Fear not this shall be done effectually.

Then farewell, come to me when it is done,
Mean while i will home, and stur not out of door.

The devil take thee for a filthy whore,
Thou art apt enough in murder, and in lust,
But like a stone in any thing is honest,
Well, ere to morrow many things will chang,
That dead men should revive, it would seem strange,
Now after Vallenger I mean to go,
To see in what place he does himself bestow.

I wonder that I am so dull and heavy,
My feet does stumble, as I go along,
Mine eyes hangs down, as if I had not slept
This twenty days, pray god it be for good.
Still more and more: well, I must needs lie down,
And make my pillow of the grass and ground.

How yrkesome is the day unto my eyes,
My cheeks do blush for to behold the skies,
Methinks the heavens does frown upon my sin,
And to repentance bids my heart begin,
the earth do burn my feet with scorching fire,
Because that all as hot was my desire,
So heaven and earth, my practice does confound,
Yet must I be beholding to the ground,
My grief is here, sleep does follow sorrow,
here rest thy wretched carkas till to morrow.

This way he went, and here he is laid to sleep,
And Sentlo by him, this is excellent:
Now Harbart since thou have don him all this good,
For once be a littell lavish of thy blood.

The Potion I gave sentloe to drink,
Does make him seem to all as he were dead,
And yet his time is not come to wake:
Now will I raise the wach. Murder, murder.

What noise is that affrites mine ears
With murder, I laid me down to sleep,
What Is here: My sword drawn out and blody
And here is a gentleman new murdered,
Some villain surely that has don this deed,
Has laid this murdered body here by me,
So by that means himself might be thought free.
If it be so, why then most hapie I,
that hates to live, and has such means to die.

Se here is the murdered body, and here the murdrer,
I chardge you in the kings name
Deliver up your weapons: And go along with us
With all my heart, see there my weapons are,
And carry me wheresoere you please

Go to prison with him presently,
the rest bring in this murdered body.

God save you sir, I here it rumored,
a gentleman is slain.

I sir a proper man, and here he lies.

O noble sentloe dostly so low,
Break heart assonder that thy friend is slain.

Sir, do you know the gentleman.

Yes sir, he was my loving friend,
And we at oxford fellow Pupels were,
Then good sir let me in kindness crave,
That as I allwaies loved him in his life,
so I may have his body at his death.
That I may give him Cristian burial,

With all my heart, weel leave him with you sir,
and I am sorry fer for your heaviness.

So this goes well, once
I Will be blont again.
For now the times draws on of his awake.

I never slept more soundly in my life,
But stay, how comes my hands so blody,
So is my face, me thinks, stay here is my man.
Why how now blont why stares thou so upon me,

are you alive sir,

Did thou set any body to kill me.

Not I sir but wicked Florance did,
And hadest bin slain, had it not bin for me,
Sentloe behold thou Harbert and thy friend,
That thus has waited on thee like thy man,
To save thee from a thousand miseries,

I am a masd, and know not what to say
O my dear Harbart: O my loving friend.

Leave of imbracments till some other time,
The king is com to Bristow, newly landed,
Come as we go along I Will tell thee all,
Things wonderful that yet thou dreamst not off.

All hail thou blessed bosom of my peace,
Richard finds instance of his home return,
Bristow, thou hapie rode where first Island,
Does welcome me now from the holy land.
Send word to London of our safe ariuall,
While we awhile in Bristow here repose us.

Fame with her brazen trump has born this tidings hither.

And Bristow with their Citizens express,
Their gladness by their tryumphe, at your safety.

And we with you will put these triumphs on,
But for this unlucky accident,
Which makes old Eustice and Vmphreuil sad
Which grieves me for the noble gentlemen.

By blessed Saint Paul my liedg I cannot brook it
to see my child, my air, my Anabell,
this here: what a wretch was this?
Now by saint Charity if I were judge,
a halter were the least should hamper him.

Tho nature wrassels with my stayed reason,
and wills me plead for mercy for my son,
yet justice with impartial wings directs,
My thoughts from pity, and my words for right,
My liedg to make an entrance to your fame,
Regard Vmphreviles wrong, punish my son,
I cannot lose him better then by law,
Nor is he lost that does example give,
Of sweet amends to such as leudly live.

Virtue commends thy course, and patience his,
In both I pity, what you both desire,
If justice could be glased with pitties wings,
Call for the prisoner, let us crown the time,
With justice, for these honorable men.

Have mercy Richard, mercy in a king,
Is like the peereles Diamond set in gold,
he out of envy and of fury speaks,
I out of love and passion plead for him.

What pleasing advocate has pity raised,
To plead the prisoners cause, himself not there.

One that does bear the greatest grief of all,
The haples wife of woeful Vallenger.

Why thou art wronged, therefore should claim,
Reueng for thee, and justice for thy husband.

Reuedg for me my Lord, nay that cannot be,
unless a strange deuission may be had,
For I that am as nearly knit to Vallenger
as body to the soul, cannot suppose
an injury, But think his loss,
To be my misery and chiefest cross.

Has he not sought thy blood thou foolish girl?

He sought no more then I can freely give,
and sacrefise to death so he may live.

Did he not keep a harlot to despite thee.

And if he mend that fault he soon may right me.

He gave thy ornaments to deck his trull.

And my consent did ratefie his gift.

Well he hates thee.

To try my patience, all that he did or gave,
Or did contriue conserneth me,
his act was my allowance.
Now since my self, accuse not, but excuse.
Since she that was supposed to be wronged,
Does right that wrong, be just and set him free,
For I protest I know no injury.

She knows no injury, my Lord she lies,

Sir God-frey since your daughter does
Remit his fault, methinks you should forgive him,

Forgive him, no not I the wretch shall never bost,
That he has braued old God-frey in a just
And honest cause. I Will touch him I,
I and tuch him to the quick,
No less then for his neck verse will I touch him,
Docter stand forth and to my prince and peers,
Say what thou know of Sentloes bloody death

Then this I bow before your Majesty,
That Vallenger corrupted me by gold,
to poison Anabel, and Sentloe to.

Intents are nothing till they come to acts.

and mistress is not Sentloe dead in act.

Sentloe is dead, my masters bloody death,
should quicken justice in your majesty.

thou shall have justice to thy own content.

O how I grieve to see her brinish tears,
Water the Crimson roses of her cheeks.

Had not my wit prevented this before,
Nor you nor she, had never sorrowed more.

You come my son: what said I? No my shame:
O let his blood my liege redeem the same.

Young Vallenger thou art here,
Accu^ed for Anabell,
And murdering Sentloe that is dead,
Speak, art thou guilty. I or not.

Guilty in both my Lord, and here for both
Ready to pay the penallty of my life,
Tho in my soul and conscience I am clear,
Of Sentloes death, yet welcome happy lot,
That so shall rid my life of that foul spot.

Alas poor soul, how grief and his disgrace,
Does make him desprate, behold his face.
From thence speaks truth, as from an Orackle,
That he is innocent, tho his words accu e him.

Well Vallenger atend thy sentence.

Pronounce not sentence yet, right royal king.

What lawful stay can thou impart to us.

A stay to straighten justice and the truth,
My conscience charged with this heinous crime,
Makes me con^esse tho to my hearts true grief,
That by thinticements of lewd Florence and her guists,
I should have murdered Sentlo, my dear master,
I therefore think that through her wickedness
She is the cause of all these villainies.

Post officers, and fetch her to our presence.

A weak delay to hinder my strong faith.

I ever thought that Harlot would be one.
See how that bold ^ace ieats it like a bride.

Health to the king, good fortune to the peers.

A boulder queen there liude not this many years.

My pearcing judgment, through the brittle glass,
Of that frail beauty, does deserne her loosenes,
Lady stand forth.

I entertain that name most royal king,
And boldly come here to clear my self,
Of any thing that shall be laid against me.

You are here acused as accessarie,
Unto Sentloes death, speak are you guilty I or no.

Does this disgraced son of that proud man,
Charg me with these surmises before the king.

Thou have not murdered him, but my renown,
His death, this hand my death of fame does wound.

Thus lust makes young men's missery her law.

Who then dares tuch my reputation?

Look there on thy accuser, that is he.

This corish lump of flesh, this shaghaird slave,

Aplie thy speech proud woman to the place,
Speak reverently in presence of the King.

Lady we stand not upon words,
But one the proffe, and estimate of right,
Sirtha, stand forth: and freely speak the truth.

The wretch my Lord that never did offend,
Fears not to die, I charge thee Florence
Of my masters death: Moreover, I charg thee
That with this purse of massy gold
Thou did bribe me,
To murder Sentloe, Sentlo that is dead.

I bribe thee, with what false-hood do thou urge me.

Let Vallenger be asked what purse this is,
Look on it Ladies, mark it, for you know it.

This purse was mine.

This purse I gave to Florence.

Then with this purse, we holdly may conclude
that she did bribe Blunt to murder Sentloe.

Look on her face my Lord, her couller changes.

Am I discride, shall yonder corish slave,
By blabing tongue bring me to infamy,
No tho I assure my death, i will further his.

Your answer Florence, what debate you there*

My answer shall be resolute and true,
Worthy the valor of a woman's mind,
To bad for thee, thou lump of infamy.

Nothing but badnes is from bad derived.

Most mighty king, I freely do confess,
That cursed Blunt consented to murder Sentloe,
This is the truth of all, live I or die.

Lewd is her life my Lord, and lose her tongue.

Well take them aside,
In Florence I observe her impudence,
In Vallenger despair, in Blunt remorce,
In these three last front terror,
Call them again, attend your sentence all,
First Vallenger, thou soughtest to poison Anabell thy wise,
Since by aparent proffe Sentlo is slain,
Our sentence is respective for thy good,
A noble death: the loss of thy lewd head,
Blunt, and this honest Florence,
Both for committing and concealing murder,
Must one the gallows die, this is our sencence.

No act is proved in me right royal king.

Her words approve thy act, thy act her will.

My faults is in consealment, not attempt.

His fault is murder, hang us all my Lord.

Harbart for all your kindness to my son,
I Will see you shortly caper in a cord.

See then you hang us closely, then my Lord
To kis in death, as we have kissed in life.

Bost not thy shame, nor shame thou womanhood,

Alack good god, how holy is she grown,
she loves the flesh, yet dares not make it known.

I do embrace the law, as plea^ed to die,
Father forgive the follies of my youth,
Vmphrevill, let me bear to heaven
Upon the wings o^ my unfeigned repentance,
My sorrow here indented in my tears,
And thou endued wonder of thy ^exe,
Forgive the wrongs that I have done to thee,
That I may go with peace unto my death.

Away with them,
To morrow ^ee execution be per^ormd,

O mercy Richard, show some mercy,
Will Vallenger in silence loss his son,
And harder then the Penerian rocks,
Never be perst,
Although the Father will not, Richmond plead:
And if that Richmond dare not, Liestor speak,
O see the time fleets hence with Swolloes wings,
Time runs: O Gracious king be merciful.

Lady I cannot break the limits of the law,
A wilful murder must be paid with death,
Yet bring me a man that willingly will yield
Sufferance of death, to save young Vallenger,
And he shall live, else hope no further grace:
Atend our further pleasurs at the court.

This is some comfort, happy Anabell,
Now show thy ready and thy woman's wit.

How shall he live in one will die for him,
Well Vallenger, i^ thou have such a friend:
Thou art happy, but I mean to see the end.

Thus like a friar I have disguised my self,
To see my dear friend, that has saved my life,
And that same strumpet that
Would have caused my death.
A harlots love, is like a chimney smoke,
Quiuering in the air between two blasts of wind,
Borne here and there by either of the same,
And properly to none of both inclind,
Hate, and despair, is painted in their eyes,
Deceit, and treason, in their bossome lies:
Their promises, are made of brittle glass,
Ground like a phillip, to the finest dust,
Their thoughts like streaming rivers swiftly pass,
Their words are oil, and yet they geather rust,
True are they never found, but in untruth:
Constant in naught, but in inconstancy:
Devouring cankars of man's liberty,
But stay: I am at the prison gate,
Where are you keeper, let me speak with you?

Who knocks there?

A friar come to confess your prisoners.

Stay i will bring them to you presently.

Health to this place: sir, let me speak with you.
Do you not sorrow inward at your heart,
For your loose life you have so wanton spent.

Yes: from my heart Sir, and do think it long,
That this vild life of mine does breath so long.

Do not despair, although your death be nie,
Heaven look upon you with a Gracious eye.

Now gentlewoman: let me speak with you,
Now good fellow, what would thou have with me?

To confess truly your offenses past.

Well: shall I confess one thing truly to thee,

One thing, and every thing.

Why then I confess truly that before
This time never confessed any thing truly,
But in brief father i will tell thee,
All that I couseaned, I de^rauded:
Those I have slandered, I have defamed,
Whom I hated, I loved not:
And this has bin the manner of my life.

Are you not sorry for that you have done.

No by my troth, nere a whit at all.

I hope your mind will chang before you die.

Perhaps you know so much: trust me, not I.

God turn your heart: friend let me speak with you,
The time draws near of execution,
What is it meet I go along with you?

I gentle Sentloe, and thy self shall see,
The deference twixt lust, and chastity

You must bring the prisoners away,
the king and peers are already set.

Say we make all the speed we may.

Come noble hearts, lets fearles march away,
A little hanging will dispatch us all.

Sir Godfrey, and Sir Eustice vallenger,
Your Silver hairs should teach you patience.

My ledge, God be my record I do not repine,
Alack good knight, thou weeps in vain,
But now there is no help.

I, I, my Sovereign justice on my son,
He has deserved death, and let him have it.

Sir godfrey, has your daughter yet
Found out a man will die for Vallenger,
Such was our promise in regard of her,
And since our word is past, we grant it him.

No, no, my Sovereign, I have hard,
A man urged by nes^esity to lead his friend,
Or to redeem his person with his own,
But to find one will die for a friend,
This age we live in does not now a lord.

Dispose young Vallenger the first to death,
That done, send hence the other to their sentence domd

Ere I a^end this stage where I must act,
The latest period o^ this life of mine,
First let me do my deuty to my prince.
Next unto you, to much by me offended,
Now step, by step, as I a^^end this place,
Mount thou my soul into the thrown o grace,
I my o^fence might be ^orgiuen on earth,
I would ask pardon of my dread king.
My parents, and my wife,
That must forgive me,
But my hateful life
Has so be bloted and besmered my fault,
That when I come to ask the last forgiveness,
They will not list my suit,
Nor yet regard it.

Stay: here is one will die for vallenger.

Nay here is one will die for Vallenger.

Be blind mine eyes, O virtuous Challener.
Come to redeem his enemy from death.

O Challener, by the deep wrongs that I have done to thee,
O hide thy face, thy looks are far more keen,
Then is the axe, must strike the fatal stroke:
For thee sweet youth, thou can aledge no reason
Why thou should die for me,
Be just O king.
No torment worse, then fruitles lingering.

Dispatch them executioner: dispatch.

Stay executioner: do me justice king,
thy word is past that vallenger shall live,
If any one will loose his life for him,
And that will I: i will die for vallenger,

Nay here is one, that for the love he bears,
to Anabell, but not to him, will die for vallenger.

My plea was entered first, my claim must stand.

Tell me but what thou art, rash yongman,
that dares enter into this place before me:
humannity does teach thee thou ever should
Give place unto thine elders, in all asaies,
how rude then and unmannerly art thou,
To forget this common courtesy,
that parents teach their children every hour.

Sir, in humanity I must confess,
So much as you aledge but not in death.
the grave is as the public theater,
the room being taken up, by them first enter,
the second sort must sit but as they come.
Besides you say you die for anabell,
She nere deserved death: therefore give your ple^
to him that has true title for the same.

That's not by thee fond girl,
Kneel Eustice, kneel, do not acept
Against her folly, do not good my ledge.

Why you amaze me, what is the matter?

Why my ledge, this is my child, my anabell?
Came in this disguyse,
to save his life, that was the spoil of hers,
Now aforegod girl thou art much to blame.
What is that other?

My Lord, this is virtuous Challener,
Come to redeem his enemy from death.

a conflickt of exceeding consequence,
and much renownes that worthy gentleman,
tho let me tell you we are much displeasd,
that anabell should baffel thus our laws,
We asked a man, and she a woman to delude us.
therefore we are content her husband have his life,
But she shall lay her head upon the block,
and she shall have no executioner,
But vallenger him self, shall strike it off:
this is our sentence, and we will not chang.

pray god thou do not king, for I accept it.
Come Vallenger, that happy hand of thine,
Shall aue thy li e and make an end o^ mine.

To strike the stroke, to murder Anabell,
First let my soul sinck to the pit o^ hell.

A man the executioner of his wi e,
Is so vnhumaine that a mortal eye
Would even be bloodshed to behold the same,
There ore dread king let me die or both,
But to de^end ^o scandelus an act:
And as ^or thee, I hate thee Vallenger,
And could be well content withal my heart,
To be thy deaths man ^or thou hate me,
Besides, yet Valenger consider this,
Having a wi^e ^o fair as Anabell,
Beloved of me thy foe, and ^o intierly,
That I do offer up my li e for hers,
Should mercy pardon now what law does threaten,
Thou must immagin if that we too live,
I still should go about to murder thee,
To enjoy thy wi^e, whom I ^o much do love,
therefor beg of the king that only I may die,
to save her honor, and thy in^amie.

Hark you huswi^e, do you hear all this:
Does not your heart melt at this amiss.

Melt Blunt yes, and does weep brinish tears,
to see what ^ames them, and does me confound,
Here is a glass for such as lives by lust,
See what it is to be honest, what it is to be just,

Why this is well: now Sovereign hear me speak,
I^ he that is ^upposed slain does live,
Then ^riendly may we reconsile the^e iars,

Our law does light on none, but guilty crimes:
And that it punishes as justice wills.

Why then vouchsa^e all in this princely presence,
This gentleman and I brought all to pass,
He in a Docters shape, has saved the life
O^ my friend Sentloe, and o Anabell,
I in like sort have aued Vallenger,
And Sentloe which by me should have bin slain,
I saved him by an honest policy.
And now alive present him to your sight,
To make a pleasing end o^ these sad sightes.
This breaths new life into my hated heart.

Sweet beauteous lettes the causer of my smart,
Forget in me, what I have done amiss,
And seal my pardon with one balmy kiss
My soul repents her lewd impyetie.

My bloods dear solace, and my best content,
My only dear esteemed Vallenger,
Not all the world being turned into pleasure,
Could give my soul such sweet contented treasure,
Thou art more dear, more pleasing to my mind,
then at the first: before thou prouest unkind,
it is insident for young men to offend,
And wives must stay their leasures to amend.

This kind contryssion of young vallenger,
More joys my heart, then rest to trauelers,
Live long together, and may never fate,
this new joined league of marriage separate.

The like say I, to thee that now has tried,
A friends firm faith, that nothing can divide.

the which I will indeuer to deserve,
And not so much as once in thought to swerue.

Since all things sorteth to this happiness,
And pining care, is turned to ioy^ull mirth,
I will be partner in your meryment,
Away with that same tradgike monument,
For that same Florence there, because we see,
she ^orrowes something for her follies past,
Let her be had among the Conuertines.
And as her faults shall vanish or else stay,
Let her be v^ed accordingly. Away with her,
Glad parents, and glad friends,
In Bristow here a while our selves will stay,
And spend some sportfull hours to crown your joy
After so many troubles, and tyerd annoy.


