FRom blisfull Bowres of fair Elizian fields,
(The happy harbor of Jove's dearest Dear)
From thence these Worthies (noted by their shields
Are (by my conduct) thus arrived here.
I Fame that with a trice, do ouer-fill
The Worlds wide ears with what I please to say,
Have brought them thus, as it were against the hill
Of highest Lets, to celebrate this Day!
This Day, that I so far have famouzed
That not a nooke of Earths huge Globe but knows,
How in great Britain it is solemnized
With divine Offices, and glorious Shows.
Then for th'encrease of this triumphant Mirth,
I Will invoke the Gods Ambassador,
To be the President of Heaven to Earth;
And, from the Gods, salute your Governor.
Then come great Nuntius of the immortal Gods,
From that all-swaying Senate of their State;
Come, I inuoke thee, with thy charming-rod
In glory come, this Day to celebrate.
The nine-fold Orbs of Heaven, my words do pierce;
Descend then, Tongues-man of the Universe.

COme down thou mighty messenger of bliss,
Come: we implore thee,
Let not thy glory be obscured from us
Who most adore thee:
Then come, O come great spirit
That we may joyful sing,
Welcome, O welcome to earth
Jove's dearest darling.
Lighten the eyes thou great Mercurian Prince,
Of all that view thee,
That by the luster of their optic sense
They may pursue thee:
Whilst with their voices
Thy praise they shall sing,
Come away
Jove's dearest darling.

Down from the Throne of the immortal Gods,
From out the glorious euer-during Heavens,
And from the sacred Powers celestial
From thence I come, commanded by them all
To visit Him whose rare report has rung
His erned fame on earth has pierced the sky,
Ascending up unto the highest Heavens;
And therewithal procured the sacred Senate
In great regard to hold his worthiness:
For which intent, They all (with one accord)
To manifest the Love to Him they owe,
Have sent me Mercury, their Messenger,
To bring him joyful tidings of the same.
And to this place, directed by their Powers,
I am ariu'd (in happy time I hope)
To find this happy God-beloued Man.
And lo behold on sudden where I spy
This Favorite so fauor'd of the Gods:
I will salute him with such courtesy
As best beseemes a wight of such account.
All hail to thee high Justice Officer;
Mercury, Nuntius to the Powers divine,
Has brought thee greetings from their Deities.
And know (dear Sir) thy deeds and good deserts,
Thy well disposed Nature, Mind, and thought,
Thy zealous care to keep their Laws divine,
Thy great compassion on poor wights distressed,
Thy prudence, justice, temperance, and thy truth,
And, to be brief, thy virtues general,
Have moved them all from Heaven, with one assent,
To send Me down, to let thee understand
That thou art highly in their Favors placed:
And, for the more assurance of the same,
Lo here a Favor favorably sent
From them, by me, to thee, that thou may know
Thy virtues here shall there rewarded be
With endless joy, and perfect happiness.
Receive the same, returning naught but thanks,
Which is as much as they require of thee,
My message done, my task thus brought to end,
I must return and to the Heavens ascend.

Hail sage Spectators, hail ye reu'rend Sires,
Hail younger Brutes, whose worth self Worth admires.
Whose ardent Loves both to the place, and us,
Constraines our Loves to entertain ye thus.
Welcome ten thousand times ye blisfull criew,
Whose light lends luster to the vulgar view.
Whose several virtues, linked with several Graces,
Deserves the Best, of our best Loves embraces.
The Roman Curtius Romes great Favorite,
(Whose daring Death did her from scathe acquit)
Was never more Welcome to the Romans sights,
Then are your selves, to these our choice delights.
To which kind purpose our desire intends
To entertain you as our fastest friends,
With such Olympian sports as shall approve
Our Best devotion, and sincearest Love.
Such entertain as best beseemes your Rancks,
We Will strive to give you with our hartiest thanks.
And so, to please your nicer appetietes,
VVee'le feast your pains with Pleasures honied Sweets.
The rarest viands Choice it self affords,
Shall over abound upon our bounteous bords,
And in the midst of all our Iouiall solace,
VVee'le suck sweet Nectar from the Paps of Pallas.
VVee'le cozen France of those delitious Vines,
VVhere-hence they draine their brain-enchanting VVines
To cheer our hearts, and make you frolique so
As you shall swim in joy, though sunk in woe.
VVee'le Banquet you with such variety
Of dulcet Fruits, whose sweet Satiety
Shall seem so pleasing; as it shall entice
The Gods themselves to surfeit on their juice.
Our best Pauilions, in their best attire,
Remonstrate shall how much we do desire,
To satisfy your Expectations eyes,
With all that Art can possibly devise.
VVee'le paue our Streets, with that Eye-pleasing sand,
Which is of power whole Kingdoms to command:
And for your more delight perfume we will
The Air: nay, it sweet Aires shall ouer-fill.
Our verdant Pastures three pil'd green in grain
Shall wear, to honor so your entertain.
And round about the Meadows as ye go,
For peeping flowers the Grass shall scarsely show
What may be done, and willing hearts can do
Shall be effected with advantage too.
We Will furrow up those pety hills or heights,
That lie but in the way of our delights:
And with the Surplusse of this surquedrie,
Fill up the places that too lowly lie
Within the list or prospect of that place,
Assigned this Triumph and triumphant Race.
What e're our more then strained vtmost-All,
Can possibly perform; perform we shall.

ILlustrious Britain, stately Seat of Kings,
Whose boundless glories inequiualent,
Do so reflect on Fames oriental wings.
That over the world they spread their blandishment.
Whose influence (past compass of conceit)
Endarts such Sunbeams to obscurer places,
That all the world by that resplendant light,
Deriues from her their most peculiar graces.
Whose royal, clement, chaste, and bounteous King,
(King; O too base a style for his great worth)
Such radiant luster to the Earth does bring,
That like the Sun it cheeres the total North.
Then yield him honor Kings that glorious be;
Veil to this (next the highest) great King of Kings:
Who by his virtues graceth your degree,
And to the same immortal glory brings.
Great Britains Greatness (wonder of the North:
Admired of All whom virtues height admires)
We do ascribe unto thy Match-lesse worth,
Surmounting praise, to mount thy virtues higher.
And while me (Britain) Neptune shall embrace,
I Will ruin those, that spite thee, or thy Race.

Renowned Camber, Britains true repose,
Whose ardent zeal to her admired Prince,
Has ever been approved to friends and foes
To sacrifice her blood in his defense.
With high-swolne words of vaunt to thunder forth
How much we dare to do in this respect,
Were more then merely idle; since our worth
Shall show it self in such words true effect.
Our hopeful Prince whilst Cambers Race does Breath,
Shall they with fast united might,
In his just cause will their best Swords vnsheathe
Against the stout'st Opposer of his Right.
We scorn that Wales such weaklings should afford,
That dare not bravely front the eagerst foe
At any Weapon (Pistol, Pike, or Sword)
And (like stout Warriors) give him bloe for bloe.
But to our Prince (Great Britains matchless Heir)
As humbly low, as is his Greatness high,
Our lives we will prostrate with our best Deuoire,
To do what may undo the Enemy.
Whose Grace is thought upon this present day,
Which day Saint George has blisfully created,
To take his Birthright; with such great joy,
As such a day was never consecrated.
To memorize which more then blisfull Feast,
We are incited by the love we owe him,
The same to celebrate, or at the least
Our great, great joy most thankfully to show him.
Then naught remains but that we all do pray,
God bless Prince HENRY Prop of Englands joy.

SAint George for England, is the Patron Knight,
Whose euer-conquering, and all-daring hand,
Did put whole Hoasts of Heathens foes to flight,
That did the vigor of his strength with-stand.
He that did ever live (a Champion stout)
With such undaunted holy-high resolve,
That through the earth his fame did fly about,
Which shall not die till heaven and earth dissolve.
Against the Heathen folk his force he proved,
By which he did decline their highest pride:
For which of heaven and earth he was beloved,
And made a glorious Saint when as he did,
Upon a hideous Dragon (whose thick scales
Like shields, that naught could pierce by force nor Art
Did Bulwark him) so fast his Faulchion falls,
That he through them made way unto his heart.
Whose rare atchiuements and whose rich renown
(Flowing from matchless Magnanimity)
Still makes them owners of great Britains Crown,
As in this day to crown his memory.
Whose Fames bright Splendour, rarely to depaint
In colors rich according to his worth,
Would try the tongue of Hermes, since this Saint
Thus travels Britains glory to bring forth,
Many a Monster he by force subdude,
And many a fiend incarnate he suppressed,
Whose Sword did still mow down their multitude,
So to imbarne them in hells restless rest.
When lo at length returning to the soil,
Wherein he first received his vital breath,
He spent his time religiously awhile,
Till Death had slain him, who now conquers Death:
So, Britains when they fight with cheer, they say,
God and Saint George for England to this day.

TO bring glad news of future happy years,
Peace is the Nuntius that such tidings bears.
Who while the Scotch the English fair entreat,
And me embrace withal, I Will make them great.
No foreign Nation shall affront their force
As long as I direct them in that course.
All rash dissentions and litigious braules,
I shall expel from their unshaken walls.
All civil Mutinies shall then surcease,
And Peace shall bring them everlasting Peace.
Inueterate hate so will I turn to love,
As with one motion both shall jointly move.
Brother with brother, nay, the foe with friend,
For mine and thine shall never more contend.
No massacre nor bloody stratageme,
Shall stir in Peaces new Jerusalem.
No civil Discord, nor Domestic strife
Shall e're annoy their Peace, much less their life,
For (like to Olive branches) they shall bear
Fruit that gives love an appetite to bear.
Which mutual concord datelesse shall endure
As long as love can Peace to love procure.
I Will bind their Loves with true Loves Gordian knot,
That rude Dissentions hands undo it not:
And with a VVreath of euer-during Baies,
Crown all your brows with peace-procured praise,
I Will rend the close-mouth'd rage of emulous strife,
And wound Distraction, with Connexions knife.
And when damned Malice comes but once in sight
I, with a vengeance, will suppress her straight.
I Will send pale Envy down to hell with speed,
Where she upon her Snakes shall only feed.
And with some poisonous and inuenom'd Toade,
Her much more poisonous self shall make aboade.
Which being done I Will send that base infection
(Whose only virtue is but base) Detraction
Her to associate; where they both shall live
As long as hell can life with horror give:
And thus shall Peace their joy perpetuate,
That love (in love) to stay this blessed State.

SInce Plenty still co-operates with Peace,
Plenty shall bless your basket of increase.
From whose abundant never exhausted store,
You shall receive much more then had before,
I Will stuff your Barnes up to the throat with grain,
Which shall all yours, and others still sustain.
I Will fructify the earth with rarest fruits
Of sundry shapes, and several kind of suites,
So as the Soil (that bears seed timely sown)
Under the burden of their weight, shall groan.
In all abundance I will rear your Beasts,
Which shall maintain your over abounding Feasts,
Fish, foul, herbs, grass, and all things whatsoere,
Shall at your door be cheap, and nothing dear
I Will sink into the concaues of earthes molde,
And there hence pull and cull her purest gold,
And then will diue into the Ocean Deepes,
To raise the Treasure which their Neptune keeps.
I Will freight your ships with such o're-fraighting store,
That greediness her self shall seek no more.
No scarsity shall in your Land be found,
As long as I with Nature till your ground.
What shall I say? your life-supporting staff,
The staff of bread; I Will throw abroad like chafe.
Then see how graciously the Highest has sent ye
Peace, in all fullness, in all fullness Plenty.

Hiss.

Why how now Envy? do thou hiss at Phoebus?

Yes; and at Cinthia too, if she anger us.

Your reason Envy?

Why? My reason's this,
To hear a Cat cry mewe, who can but hiss.

Out hissing Scorpion:

Out ye filthy Fool,
Envy has wit, to set such Apes to school.

Malicious Monster, thou incarnate Diu'll,
Whose base condition, is the source of evil.
Thou envious Bandogge, speak and do thy worst,
He that regards it; is the most accursed

And he that thinks that Love can e're be wise,
Has neither judgment, wisdom, wit, nor eyes.

Say thou abortiue, men-detested slave,
Whose only virtue is, but to deprave
Man's best proceedings, speak thou squint-eide Monster,
What is the cause which makes thee still misconster?

Because I hate to hear a want-wit preach
Beyond wits bounds, and wisdoms boundless reach:
To see a superficial Sot make show
Of deeper skill then wit it self does know.

What is the solace Envy counts deep?

Marie to see a Wolf devour a Sheep.
To see men-diuels breeding still dissension
Is sport (me thinks) beyond all comprehension:
Or else a rich man hunger-pin'd with want,
To see an Army (when their food is scant)
Eat their own excrements; O this is sport
For Envy, that without this is all amort.
To see a drove of Drunkards like to Swine
Swilling their souls, in soule-o're-whelming wine.
To see a City burnt, or Barnes on fire,
To see a Son the Butcher of his Sire.
To see two Swaggerars eagerly to strive,
Which of them both shall make the Hangman thrive.
To see a good man poor, or wise man bare,
To see dame Virtue ouer-whelm'd with care.
To see a ruined Church, a Preacher dumb,
A Kings child perish in the Mothers womb.
To see a Miser, who to have his pelf,
Will take a rope and (desperate) hang him self:
To see a virgin by a varlet used,
Till she by him to death be so abused.
Or else to see a Father suck the blood
Of his own Spawne, O! these would do me good.
But to behold a rank of rustic Boys
Showing as childish people childish toys
To grace a day with; O it grates my gall
To hear an apish Kitling catterwall.
Is it not harsh to hear a Marmeset squeake
Upon a stage a most unjointed speak?
And then to hear some ignorant Baboone,
Swear that this Monky did surmount the Moon.
When as the Infants best is too too bad,
And which to hear would make a wiseman mad.

Thou damned Infection; damned from thy birth.
Abhorred of heaven, and odious to the earth,
How can thou ever hope to merit grace,
When thy delight is but detraction base?
But since there is no sign of grace in that
Damned face of thine, which hell does wonder at,
Love shall conjure thee; that from this time forth,
Thou never frequent this Island of the North.
Diue to the depth of deepest Stigian flood;
There suck thou Snakes, and Snakes there suck thy blood.
Or sink thou quite to the infernal deep,
Where crawling Scorpions may about thee creep.
And there among those vermin vile beneath,
Belk up that poison which thou here do breath.
Go, I conjure thee, least I make thee feel
The keenest edge of Wraths revenging steel.
Burden the earth no more, thou hateful Toade
With such a pondrous earth-anoying load,
Go with a vengeance go, and never retire,
But we are out Time in everlasting fire.

O I could grind and grate thee with my teeth,

No more thou Monster; hence be gone forthwith;

Confusion, death, plague, pestilence, and piles,
Confound their souls who at mine anguish smiles,
Yet, ere I go, I Will bid the best farewell,
Hoping ere long to meet their Ghosts in hell.

Go ugly Monster, Loves Misanthropos,
Sink down to tortour and continual woes.
Heaven excludes thee; Earth abhors thy sight,
And greeues to bear the burden of thy weight.
Sink to her center, there is thy Native rest,
And never more be seen to spot her breast:
So, have thee hence; and henceforth I Will direct
My speech to those, whom I do best affect:
Love bids you welcome that are come in love,
To see our sports that Envy does reprove.

Envy auaunt, thou art no fit Compeere
T'associate these our sweet Consociats here.
Joy does exclude thee, who (to thy disgrace)
Here spets Defiance in thy ugly face.
And that is more; thy everlasting shame
Shall be still blasted by the Trumpe of Fame:
The powerful tongue of facund Mercury,
Shall to the world display thy Infamy.
Chester abhors thy presence; Britain hates thee;
And for a damned fury, Camber takes thee.
Peace, as a Herrald, shall proclaim to All,
That thou art damned by Iustice-Generall.
Plenty detests thy base Society,
Who scorns thy hell-bred gross impiety.
And last of all; My Love, in Loves defense
In spite of Envy, shall send Envy hence.
Wherefore auaunt; that all the I Will may sing,
Now Enuies gone, in peace w'enioy our King.

WIth rich Characters of resplendant gold,
Fame has your names within her book enrold:
Which till Time stays his course shall glitter bright,
Maugre Detractiou and fell Enuies spite.

IN sign of victory which thou have gained,
This VVreath by thy fair front shall be sustained.
Whose green leau'd branches unto Fame shall tell
That thou did best deserve the better Bell.

TO crown thy Temples with a second vvreath,
Lo here does Camber unto thee bequeath
This fragrant Garland: since thou did excel
The best that ran but at the second Bell.

THou that by either cunning, or by chance,
Did take the Ring with thy thrice happy Lance:
Here take of me (to raise thy virtues up)
This vvreath of Balm, and pollisht silver cup.

And so we all in all your several Graces,
Will with fames o're-fill all times and places.

NO Action, though admired for Excellence,
No Practice, though of highest pre-eminence
That can escape the Poliphemian eye
Of Envy, that for ever looks awry:
Yet notwithstanding on your Loves depending,
Whose patient ears excludes all reprehending.
We here submit our selves in humblest wise,
Before the bar of your judicious eyes,
What we present unto your dainty ears
Is freed from scandalls: so is free from fears.
Only your Loves which are our fairest marks,
Must muzzle Envy, when the Fury barks
Unto the best, we doubt not but our best
May purchase favor; and for all the rest
We do expect but this poor kindness from them,
That they would speak but what shall well become them.
This being granted: Chester does inuit
Each noble worthy, and each worthy Knight,
To close their stomach with a small repast,
Which may content a temperate curious taste.
Measure our ardent Loves, with such kind measure,
As we afford you sport, and give you pleasure:
And so we will leave you with this solemn vow,
That whilst we breath, our hearts shall honor you.
IF any Reader shall desire to know
Who was the Author of this pleasing show:
Let him receive aduertizement hereby
A Sheriff (late of Chester) AMERIE.
Did thus perform it; who for his reward,
Desires but Love, and competent regard.

ROBERT AMERIE.



