NO fleet of foet, nor swift of wyng,
nor skarce the thought in breast:
Nor yet the Arrowe out of Be,
nor Wind that s^ld does rest.
Compaers with me quick worlds report,
that some calls Flying Faem:
A bruet of prays, a blast of pomp,
a blazer of good naem.
The only lawd that kings do seek,
a Joy to ^atch estaet:
A welcome friend that all men loves,
and noen a live does haet.
Saluets the Queen of raer renown,
whose goodly gifts deuien:
Throw Earth and Air with glory great,
shall pass this tromp of mien.
And knowing of thy coming here,
my duetty had me go:
Before unto this present place,
the nues thereof to shoe.
No soenner was pronownst the name,
but Baebs in street began leap:
The youth, the age, the rich, the poer,
came runnyng all on heap.
And clappyng hands, cried maynly out,
O blessed be the owre:
Our queen is coming to the town,
with princely trayn and power.
Than collors cast they oer the wawls,
and decked old howsis gaye:
Out flue the bags a bout afayrs
that long a hording lay.
A sid they set thear townishe trashe,
and works of gredy gayen:
And tornd thear toils to sports and mirth,
and warlike pastimes plain.
As shall be seen to morn in feeld,
if that your highness pleas:
Whear duly haeth deuiesd by art,
a shoe on land and seas
To utter matter yet unknown,
that shall explayned be:
By such dom sights and shoes of war,
as thear your grace shall se.
Thus subjects means to honor prince,
whoes sight they have enjoyed
Moest glad hit is thear hap to have,
thear saruice so employed.
Than FAEM flang up a great Garland, to the reioysyng of the beholders.

At the next Gaet, and near her highness lodgyng stoed.iij. other boys, called
Salutacion, Gratulacion, and Obedient goodwil, and.ij. of these boys spoke as
follows, and all they three drue their swords when it was named, the hoel staet
is reddie to defend (against all dissencions) a pesable Prince.

ALl hayll, O plant of grace,
and speshall sprout of faem:
Most welcome to this Western coest,
O Perll and princely daem.
As lo, a custom is,
whear humble subjects dwells:
When Prince aprocheth near their view,
for joy to ryng their bells.
So all that bears lief,
in Bristow now this day:
Salutes the Queen from deepth of breast,
with welcome every way.
And we poer silly boys,
that came from skoell of laet:
Rejoice and clap our hands withal,
as members of thy staet.
Our duties here to shoe,
and further moer in deed:
Thear is a cause wh^arfore we say,
thy helpyng hand we need,
(...) is O mighty Queen,
in wa^ of mirth and sport:
A master moud ^ween Peace and war,
and therefore buylt a Fort.
Dissenshon breeds the brawll,
and that is Pomp, and Pried:
The Fort on law and order stands,
and still in peace would bied.
The Wars is wicked world,
as by his fruet is seen:
The Fortres representith peace,
and takes thy part O Queen.
It seems the Gods have sent,
in this great quarrel now:
A noble Judge that shall with speed,
decied the matter throw.
YEa suer this is a fien,
that all the gods above:
Taks part with us and freely here,
does men and childern love,
In such a sharp conflyet,
to send to suer a stay:
That shall surseace Bellonas brags,
and end our fearful fray.
A sottell Snack of laet,
with sopple sugared words
Haeth sleely crept in breasts of men,
and drawn out naked swords
And with his wrangling taells,
haeth sto^rd up strife enough:
And drawn the merchant from his traed,
and plowman from the ploughe
Disenshon is his naem,
that all this mischeef breeds
Who still with dross and roemish dregs,
blind peoples humor feeds:
And maks them mortal sick,
and sway somtims a sied:
With wicked wars, and wilful brawls,
that should with peace abied.
But yet O pee^les Prince,
a true and loyal flock:
Against the proud presomtuous minds,
are b^nt to stand the shock.
And swears by sacred Gods,
not o^n within this soyll:
But reddy a^r with l^sse of lief,
to give thy foes a foyll.
For pr^^f the feeble youth,
and ba^bs of tender aeg:
Daer draw their swords, in this attempt,
to corb disorders raeg.
Sens Englands hoep is com,
to payse these things in breast:
We daer not stay her longer here,
whose travel craves rest.
YEt if the Prince would stay, or if men might make choice
Of oen no bigger than my self, to speak in Cities voice
I would declaer in deed, what deep desire they have,
To spend their goods, their lands? lius, her staet in peace to s^^e
But sens the time is sh^r^, and Prince to lodging goes
I say god bles our Qu^en yt gius, the whit ^ fair ^ed ^o^s.
After these speeches wear ended.iij. hondreth Soldiors well appointed, waited
on her highness to her lodgyng, and thear she being settled, they shot of thear
pieces in passing good order, at which warnyng the great Artillery went of, a
hundred and.xxx. cast peecis, and so the watch charged, and a hundredth shot
appointed for her Guard, her highness rested that night, whear she lay all the
season in sir John Yongs house.

A Fort was made beyond the water in a ground fit for that purpose, and to the
saem as a frind (called Feeble Pollecie) joined a littell Bastillion, builded on
a hill, which was not strong by reason of the weak mayntenance belonging there
unto, to the which piel the Soldiers of the main fort did repair, now must be
understood that dissension passing between wars and peace (wars being placed
in sight) had sertayn speeches as follows, which speeches could not be said in
the heeryng of the prince, wherefore they wear put into a boek, and presented as
here after you shall kno.

Dissencion to the City to move them to arms, has his speeches as these
things wear don in action.

The Sunday next the Queen went to the College, to here a Sarmond, whear thear
was a speetch to be said and an Imme to be song, the speech was left out by
an occasion unlooked for, but the Imme was song by a very fien boy.

YOu subjects that desierd to se,
this gladsom preshos Ieam:
Behold lo here the only Joy,
and iuwell of the Ream.
A Prince in deed of princely mind,
that Princis loves and fears:
Whose passing head, yea all the staets,
of christen princis bears.
And thoroughly sees and lo^ks into,
as though a man might say:
Here ^s the toutchstoen for the Gold,
the Pillar, Prop, and stay.
Of eury region far or near,
that to us neyghbors aer:
How mutch is this poer College bound,
in naked buildyngs baer.
For to receive so bright a Star,
as clouds can skarce contayn:
Who for to se so small a Sell,
has taken so great pain.
The P^^ps and Organs of our hearts,
shall yield thee thank therefore:
By sound of Psalm, and sollemp Immes,
yea could poer Preests do moer.
The Music that thy Chapel maks,
should be so sweet and shrill.
Might ^ull a sleep the Musis all,
and sha^k Pernas^es hill.
O Happy ower o^ blis,
O College thou do se:
Th^ll^do ^on, the substance com,
(...) does sh^en on thee.
Away you bosum S^a^ks,
that sowes dissenshon here:
Go make your neasts, whear Serpents breed,
this soyll and coest is clear.
Enchant no man with charms,
ye shall receive check maet:
If that you play with paltring pawns,
before so great a staet.
She hates H^dras heds,
and lous the harmles mind
A foe to vice, a friend to grace,
and bent thereto by kind
Which grace and grashos god,
now gied her whear she goes:
With treble grace throw troblous time,
to tread on all her foes.
A skafold the next day was set up full over against the Fort, and the Prince
being placed, the speeches should have bin spoken for the better understanding
of the devised triumph, so you must here the speeches or else shall you be
ingnorant of the hoel matter.

O People vayn, that spends in peace your days
To prowl about, for pens and piuish pealf
And maks no count, of Faem and poblik prays
So eatch man lives, like Prince within him self.
And so posses, the pleasuers on this mold,
The Iuwels brave, the gay and glittryng gold,
You cae^ not what, great glory elders won
Nor who at first, the worthy wars begone.
You sleep and snort, in sweet perfumed sheets,
And hug your heds, in harb^r warm and gay,
Whearby in deed, ye have such heavy spreets,
You can not se, the goodly sunny day,
(...) though the clouds, the Son, the Moen and al
Wear reddy now, upon your heds to fall,
You would not, move, nor seek your selus to save
On dross and dong, such deep desiers you have.
You here not how, the enmies at your noes,
Aer up in aerms, and ^awls your cowards still
You caer not mutch, abroed how matters goes
When that at hoem, ye want no wealth nor will
Clap corrage on, and cast long gowns asied
Pluk up your hearts, and fling down pomp and pried
Make Idell hands, and heds in heels that lurk
For worthy lawd, com forth and learn to work.
A corslet fien, is worth ten skarlet goowns
A blast of faem, sormounts all things you wear
Call lusty ladds, to spend your spared crowns
The wars aproetch, it is time the bo^es wear thear
If you a bied* at hoem till Canno^s roer
The plaester coms, to laet to salve the soer
Break down the banks, that hol^s the water in
First ^^rik thy foe, and so the brawll begin
Put fire to straw, and make the fornayes hot:
And bid them cry, that borns thear fingers first
Yea cast on wod, to boyll the brows pot
And let them starve, that wants to coell thear thirst:
When world is wield, and all is set a gog
A man's a man, and than a dogs a dog:
Advise you now, my dwelling is not here
I must pack hens, another stern to steer.
Give ear good maets, and mark full well,
the tidings that I bring:
For I will be a larum bell,
that in your earres shall ring.
A pestlens peall of rumor slrang,
that flies throw many a land:
The plain report whearof remain^
in me dissenshons hand
If I keep cloes that I do knoe,
and stoer no clapper now
The hargaboz, the bill and boe,
will seartch your corraeg throw
Trust this for troeth that peace is bent,
to trus up soldiors all:
Wealth will no wars, peace is so proud,
the people fears no fall.
They bragg and boest thear treasuer can,
to^n eatch thing how they list:
For eury staet is wone with wealth,
as hawk stowps don to fi^t.
A mas of gold will porchace peace,
and make w^eld wantons taem:
If wars wear wod and waxed mad,
and hot as fiery flaem:
P^ace ruells the ear^h, and wrings thear thombs
th^^ raging revel maks:
Yea play what gaem ye list they say,
that peace does swep the staeks:
P^ace is the prince that gouerns all,
and says a fig for war:
Yea peace will put you all in pownd,
and make you stand at bar.
Peace calls you roges, and swashing dicks,
that stand upon your braues:
A swarm of wasps, a flok of wolus,
a neast of theeus and knaves
That lius by spoyll and morthers viell,
and triumps still in bloed.
And have such hot and greedy minds,
you thirst for neibors goed.
The Trompets loud that slaughter sownds,
and drums with rombling noyes:
Was never maed for men of peace,
but rather fit for boys.
They say whoes childhoed liks fond bruets,
and lous such trifling toys:
Will you that kingdoms conquered have,
be now subdued by peace
Shall seuill swams to loethsom gaiell,
lead men lik dogs in leace.
Shall p^^rsh peace and people weak,
oer com the soldiour stout:
Shall ^ortrarrs lewd lik rebels raill,
and manhoed wax a lowt
Ah fie for shame set hand onsword,
in your behalf I bloeshe.
Bid trompet sownd advance the piek,
and give proud peace a poesh.
On thoes words was wars in such a stoer that you might se the feeld all
over spread with soldiors, and so they martched down a hill and maed a goodly
shoe full against the littell fort (called Feeble pollecie) and repolsing in all
the soldiers of the same* wan it with great fury, and so rased it and
ouerthrue hit down to the earth.

The mayn Fort in the meean whiel did send such suck or as they might, but
preuaylyng not, they wear in like sort driven back, and their Fort beseged, and
mutch ado about the saem, which drove out that day, and than by Tortchlight
the Prince from her Skaffold, went to her lodgyng, and in the mean season some
fire works wear seen, and so the watch was charged.

The second day was thear maed a nue aproetch to the mayn Fort, for a better
order of war and to the aid of the Fort, came diverse gentilmen of good
calling from the Court, which maed the shoe very gallant, and set out the
matter mutch.

Now sarued the tied and up the water from Kyngroed came three brave Galleys,
chasing a Ship that came with Vittayls to the Fort, the Fort seeing that their
exstremitie within was great, sent a Gentilman to the Prince for aid, who
brought her a boek couerd with green Velvet, which vttred the hoell substance
of this device, the gentilma^ had a spech of his own making, as follows, after
he had swam over the water in some danger Cloes and all, he spaek his part to
the Prince.

ESkaept from waltryng waves,
from sword and fire, and enmies slight:
From storms and sturdy flaws,
from roeryng shot and fearful fight.
I com to quiet land,
whear noble Prince does pastims view:
And bring a boek in hand,
of all the shoes, and matter true.
That must by practies pas,
before your highness as it fauls:
And suerly sent I was,
by those that keeps your warlike wauls.
To crave your curteys aid,
in their defense that peace desiers:
Whoes staet is maed afraid,
by falls dissenshons kindled fires.
As your poer people have,
throw peace possessed great gayn and good:
So still such peace they crave,
as may avoid the loss of blood.
As here I came a mayn,
so have I promesd if I may:
For to retorn again,
throw salt sea foem the saem self way.
So he departed, and all this while the business was great about the fort,
(which hazarded the gentilmans lief) and in a wonders bravery the ^royll
continued, with a shoe of fight on Land and Sea, till the very night
approtched, at which time the Prince partted and stoed maruelously well
contented with that she had seen.

Now must you conceive that Wars (with blodsheds, mizeries, and other horly
borlees) waxt a weery and that neither the Fort, nor the wickedness of the world
(which Wars represented) was desirous of further trobuls, but rather glad to
have the matter taken up in any reasonable conditions, for the which purpose was
devised that Persuasion should go and tell his taell, and unfold what follies
and conflicts rises on Civil broyls, and what quietness coms by a mutual love
and agreement. This persuasion had a speech, as hereafter follows.

NO greef so great, nor soer so mutch,
but finds at length some rest:
As Wars begins by wrath of God,
so Peace is counted blessed.
Yet Wars is suer, a needful thing,
for man's offense, A scorge:
A Salve to heal the sinful soul,
and for the staet A porge.
That skowrs the body of the Realm,
and kyngdoms all t^row out:
And leaves vnseartcht no member suer,
that walks this world about.
Wear not the woe that wars does bring,
sweet peace should seem full sower
The net^ls sharp and wiked weeds,
sets forth a pleasant flower.
By si^nes pangs we judge what health,
and quiet rest is worth
And out of pain is pleasuer found,
as Gold from dros coms forth.
The harms, the haps, and cruel claps,
that wars and Cannon bryngs:
Maks Princis seek the fear of god,
and subjects kno thear kings
Though peace in deed dispiseth wars,
as plainness falshed haets:
Yet warlik people aer enbraest,
and liekt of all estaets.
The knief that cuts the finger soer,
in sheath about is born:
The sword that takes away the life,
makes peace whear it is worn*
The are that heaweth down the tree,
is needful for man's lief:
Thus prove I as man's help or harms,
remains in sword and knif?
So wars whear they aer used well,
keeps world in fear and awe:
And shoes moer terror by his raeg,
than al your ruells of law.
Sens Cayn slew Abell wars haeth bin,

And soldiors has bin wagid well,
as world of wars sto^d need:
Than sna^r not for the faem they snatch,
nor b^^ll to her thear bru^t.
When broyls have sown ill seeds of caer,
peace reapes from wars good fruet.
And learns a lesson worthy gold,
which Peace holds deer of price:
And maks thereof a mirror bright,
to view and sift out vice.
The Battayll ends whear conquest coms,
and when great charge is spent:
For peace the post with Pakket goes,
Embastars else aer sent?
To knit the knot and make a Leag,
thus all the brawls that be:
Do bend to peace, and Wisdoms boe,
how ear foels bolts do flee.
Whearfore agree with Wars in haest,
you se what quarrels aer:
And how that Wars bryngs woe and waest,
and leaves a kingdom baer.
The people spoyld, the howsis bornt,
the friends and neighbor slain:
The giltles plaegd and eatch man wronged,
whear rage and war does rayn.
Dissension first that called to mind,
our old foerfathers faem:
(And ripped out seams of patched prays,
skarce worth the noet or naem.)
Brought Peace and War in this vproer,
our ruels such brawle denies:
Our traed does stand on Civil lief,
and thear our glory lies.
And not on strief the ruen of staets,
a storm that all destroys
A heavy bondage to eatch heart,
that fredoms fruet enioyes.
Our orders maks the roister meek,
and plucks the proud on knees
The l^f and st^bborne kno the yoek,
and roets up rotten trees.
That may ^iect a fruetfull feeld,
what can be sweet or sownd:
But in that soil whear for offense,
is due correction fownd.
We make the s^uill laws to shien,
and by example mield.
Reform the rued, rebuek the bold,
and tame the country wyeld
We venture goods and lius ye knoe,
and trauill seas and land.
To bring by trafick heaps of wealth,
and treasuer to your hand
We aer astay and stoer house boeth,
to kingdoms far and near.
A cawse of plenty throw foersyght,
when things war scarce and deer:
And thoghe our joy, be moest in peace,
and peace we do maintain.
Whear on to prince and realm throw out,
does ries great wealth and gain:
Yet have we soldyars as you see,
that stoers but when we pleas
And sarus our torns in howshold things,
and sits in shop at eas.
And yet daer blaed hit with the best,
when cawse of country coms
And calls out courage to the fight,
by sound of warlike Droms.
We Merchants keep a mean unmixed,
with any tarryng part^:
And bring boeth Treble and the Baess,
in order still by art.
A Soldier shall be liked well,
if his dezarts be such:
A noble mind for noble acts,
shall suer be honored mutch.
But if men glory all in wars,
and peace disdayns in deed:
We skorn with any Siroep sweet,
their humor sour to feed:
And blessed be God we have a Prince,
by whom our peace is kept:
And under whom this City long,
and land has safly slept.
From whom liekwyes a thousand gifts,
of grace enjoy we do:
And feell from God in this her raygne,
ten thousand blessyngs to.
Behold but how all secrets f^en,
of falshed coms to light:
In these her days, and God taks part,
with her in troeth and right.
And mark how mad Dissenshon thriues,
that would set wars abroetch:
Who sets to saell poer peoples lives,
and gets but viell reproetch.
And endless shaem for all their sleights:
O England joy with us:
And kis the steps whear she does tread,
that keeps her country thus.
In peace and rest, and perfait stay,
whearfore the god of peace:
In peace by peace our peace presarue,
and her long lief encreace.
This was to be don and put in exersies befoer the Queen came to the knittyng up
of the matter but persuasion being dismissed, the battry was planted befoer the
FORT, and they within so straightly enclosed, that they must needs abied the
mercy of the Sword and Cannon.

At which instant, in the after noen that present day the Prince was in her
Skaffold to behold the sucksesse of these offers of war, and so went the
Battry of and the as^aut was given in as mutch order as might be, the enemy
was three times repolsed, and beholding nue suckors coming from the Court to
the Forts great comfort, the enemy agred on a parley whearin was rehersyd that
the cortain was beaten down, and the fort maed sawtable, and yet the enemy to
save the lives of good Citizens and Soldiors thearof, would give them leave to
depart with bag and bagaeg, as order of wars required. To the which the Fort
maed answer, that the Corttayns nor Bulwarks was not their defense, but the
corrage of good people, and the force of a mighty prince (who saet and beheld
all these doyngs) was the thing they trusted to, on which answer the enemy
retired, and so conditions of peace wear drawn and agreed of, at which peace
boeth the sides shot of their Arttillery, i^ sien of a triumph, and so ^^yinge
God save the Queen, these triumphs and wa^l^k pastimes finished, the Prince
likyng the handlyng of these causes very well, sent i^ hundredth crowns to
make the Soldiers a banquet. Now here is to be considered that the Prince went
into the Gallees and so down to Kyngroed, aer these things wear brought to an
end.

At her highness departuer a gentilman in the confiens of the Towns liberties
spaek this speech that follows.

OUr Joy is joined with grievous groens,
Our triumph tornd to tears:
The brantch whoes blosoms gladness brought,
a bitter berry bears.
In house and street whear mirth was hard,
is moen and moorning noies:
The summer day is dimd with clouds,
eclypsed aer our joys.
The loedstar leaus our wished cowrs,
and clims the heavens hie:
Our sofrant will no longer lord,
in walls of Brislow lie.
No marvel sins our barrain soil,
and ground of groes deuyce:
Haeth yielded no thing that might pleas,
a prince of so great price.
Our deuties aer not half dischargd,
no thoghe we kissed the grownd:
And prostraet fall full flat on face,
whear her foet steps aer fownd.
The Persians daer not cast up eyes,
nor loek upon thear king
Shall Christians then presuem to preace,
on such a Sacred thing.
And tho no part of duties bownds
^ nod forbid I say:
But that the lords anointed should,
be honored eury way.
Long lo^kt this C^^te for a prince,
long ^e^s and many a year:
A ^ing or Que^n beheld this town,
short time she ta^yes here.
Good fortuen follow thee O Queen,
god gieb thy doings all:
A world of threfold blessed happ,
upon thy kingdom fall.
As loeth to taek our heavy leave,
as leave our lius in deed:
A due dee^ lady of this land,
the living Lord thee speed.
Some of these Speeches could not be spoken by means of a Schol^maister, who
envied that any stranger should set forth these shoes.


