THis puzles my belief: the sickly Moon
Has not yet twice expired her usual (...)
Since you did mingle Souls, and can (...)
That she so soon recoyles from grace
Harmonious quiet of your bed?

My Dear
Meruolle she is lost: As well may I
Collect the scattered winds into a bag,
Or from the watery surface scrape the gilt
Reflections of the Sun, as bring her heart
Within the quiet list of wives that will
Obey and love.

Can the Duke (her Uncle)
Give an encouragement to her revolt,
Maintain the females Charter against the male?

Him, and his supreme title she still (...)
To justify the glory of her birth,
And then recites the Vilages and wealth,
She brought to me for dowre, in parallel
With what I formerly possessed, she does
Affront my memory with stories of
My lean and niggard fate, and urging then
Her vast supplies, does challenge leave to call
Her pride and rigor just.

This grief is of
Sad quality!

The heart hangs heavy on
The strings, when it alone contains the cause
And knowledge of its weight: for troubled winds
In their dispersion loose their strength; so griefs,
Whilst they are revealed, diminish from themselves.
But the calamities, that do perplex
The Nuptial bed, are of a property
Recluse, and must be hidden even from friends:
For on such secrets Fame does feed with fierce,
And meagre appetite* and as swift Fame
Does travail with them, they increase. So much
Comerce I have with humane Arts, that I
Can steep my Gall in my own tears; and make
That salt which she intended bitter; Show
Her crime to spring, not from poisoned malice,
But from the feminine mistakes of wit:
For modern Courts now preach, wit does reside
In Ladies subtle riots, and their pride.

Behold your brother (sir) whose safe return,
This morn I mentioned to your ear --

Thy growth
Has so orereach'd my sight, that I Am estranged
To my best blood: and but, thy figure in
My heart I wear (by which my memory's
Enform'd) I should not know I had thee here --

I reckon this the chief delight I have
Received on Earth. And (sir) your love is of
Such sovereign quality, a little soon
Will ouercharge my sense. Give but a part
To me, the rest confer upon my friends --
Who, though in witherd habits, do deserve,
Society with Kings: for never yet,
Did bolder Soldiers listne to the Drum.

Gentlemen, ye shall enrich my knowledge --

Noble Signior, unprofitable love
Is all our wealth --

But we will contriue our selves
For your best use. --

I Have said, consider them
Within; their weeds are ouergrowne and cheap.

Brother (how ere wise fate may answer it)
Me thinks, these your own robes are not o'th right
Tyrian die; nor has the rich weight of your
Tall Plume the Estridge robbed of both her wings.

Even thus (sir) poor, and with small victory
Am I returned from our cast Troops. Our pay
Rests in Areres, and Pisa's lost: But you
(I hear) have fond a Jewel, that contains
All price and luster; and you do wear it
In your bosom: (a noble wife) whose birth
And beauty, are alike vnuallu'd as
Her dowre. This I encounterd on
The Lips of Fame; and I made haste to share
In your success, and put your bounty to
The test.

Florello, I have lost my sleep.
Things differ much from the sincerity
Of their first growth: Alteza has forgot
Th'allegiance of a wife, she does practice
How with her riot to impouerish States,
And by her lofty pride, to justify
The immortality of flesh: This Theme
Is sad; but I will give you cause t'expect
The utmost strength and power of my relief.

You teach my feeble wants a confidence.


If you a while obscure your self (for fear
Your poverty increase her scorn) you shall
Perform a rational request. Our young
Fair Sister, is conceald for the same cause.

Your mention does anticipate my love.
Is our fair Sister well?

She does enjoy
Rare beauty, and much health.

I hear your wife.


You and your friends, move back, and be not seen.


Try Signior Allidore, Antonio's son:
Vtruuio, or the rich Pirracco.
Gritalin, or old Contarini of
Placentia --

Madam, your husband has
Protested against your credit, even to these.

Slave, go force an answer more delightful.


I obey you Madam.


Is It come to this?
I Will be a crooked Spinster first, and with
My spittle and my flax procure my bread.

What is the cause my Princess thus delight^
In frowns? Anger sits on her brow like age.

Hence, I see thee, and my eyes shrink into
My skull: the Rauen's not so ominous and black.

Yet urge the cause (my Love) why your
Defiance is so violent and loud?

A Millainois showed me to day for sale,
Bright and spacious Jewels; but in the dark,
Your pusill malice has betrayed my faith,
With Merchants. You have now my credit wrought
So low, and cheap; I cannot stand deposd
For th'triuiall loan of forty thousand crowns.

I would suruay a list of all your wants,
That I may so have power to hasten the
Redress: Do you dislike your properties
Of house, your Vestments, or service of your
Table; Give but a name unto thy wish?

I would have my Orchard -- pau'd with Aggats.


O, and your garden walls raisd high, t'hedge in
Paraquetos, and th'rhetoricall Dawe?

Thou have a rude heart, and a blisterd tongue!


Well, the first day of your conjunction Sir,
I little thought you would have vsd her thus.

Charintha's become her Sisters Pupil.


And I perceive a masculine itch beneath
Her left eye; she longs to taste man.

Come Love,
Be gentle as thy bridal smiles: for by
Thy self I swear, my speech did purpose naught*
To tempt thy spleen. Lend me thy melting hand!

There -- it is to reach back the heart I gave ye --

You spirits that secure the property
Of humane love, be still official here!
Why should we not for ever thus remain,
Incorporate, and conioyn'd. It Is sympathy,
And love, that gives the world continuance
And life. Each species Love preserues. It Is love
That makes the eternal Wisdom thus forbear
The silly crimes of dull humanity:
And suffers us, like each delighted fly,
To play the triuiall wantons in his eye.

You preach of love, but your obedience would
More pleasure me.

This argues thy revolt!
And is a stratagem against nature.
Thou would usurp the Charter of the male,
It Is my confession, that thy dowre was vaste
And opulent, and such as may support
Thy titles, and thy birth, with all the pride
And cunning of magnificence. Let my
Sincere phrase instruct thy heart. Reassume
The blushes of thy youth; with timorous
Modesty behave thy gesture and thy tongue,
And then, thou shall stand up exemplary
To all triumphant Courts: the envy of
The Eastern Queens: th'Astrologers mistake,
Who shall direct their Optics unto thee,
As to a new and unknown Star.

Sister! --

The small Musitions of the air (whom Queene^
With mimicke falconrie do perch upon
Their fists) shall be thy food. Thy maids shall eat
Young Pelicanes, and Squirils hearts.

Exc'lent!


Thy beuiridge shall be propheticke, and
Divine; for thou shall drink that sovereign dew,
That hangs upon the frighted Lillies cheek,
And brewed with Sirens tears, such as they shed
In real obsequies.

O bounteous Sir! --

The soft entraile o'th Persian worm, th'Ermines
Palefur, shall cloth thy limbs.

More precious still!


Those gums and spices which the Arabian bird,
Collects to make her tragic piles, shall be
Thy winter fuel*

Pretty Sir, proceed!


Thou shall have Marmasets, and Dwarfs, the male
And female too, to procreate in thy house;
That thy delights may ever be renewed.
Thy Jewels shall increase, as if the loved
Indies were thy Quarrie. The Almighty Sun
Shall rise, and see a nobler day break from
Thy Cabinet, then yet the illustrious East
Ere knew.

But how will you perform these hopes?


The miracle, and power, do both consist,
In my large wealth.

Death on my Tribe! Your wealth?


I, my sweet Love.


Your wealth?


This iteration
Scarce will delight, if it be negative.

Can thou persist in such accursed schism?


Did you not then intend, when you endowed
Me with your wealth, that I should call it mine?

By heaven not I. I forfeited the love
O'th'great Duke (my Uncle) to marry thee;
That were a thing shrunk from thy fate, and lost
Unto the lips and eyes of men; but yet
In most assured hope, that thou would prove,
An humble and obedient husband.

Thou Art more impudent, then the Basiliske,
Who stares in the blessed face of man, until
He kill him with his eyes.

Hear Altamont!
For I will give solemnity unto
A vow, that shall for evermore, divide
Thee from my bed --

Dear Madam hold! Each sense
Of mine does blush, that can perceive, your wild,
Rebellious wrath. Has not the Church named him
Your husband, and your Lord?

M'opinions of
The Church, I Will tell to the Conclaue, not to you --

Is this the help, Divinity gave man?
Snuff the Moon, she burns dim. The Spheres are now
Ill tuned, and aged nature backward reeles.

Thy anger's vain. Here I do banish thee
My bed: And we will never more embrace.

Rebellious fiend.


I now divide my house:
This side is mine, with the dimensions that
Dependence have on this square frame: for here
My family and I will rule. That side
You, and your meagre ragged train possess.
Thou may henceforth my neighbor, but no more
My husband be. Charintha, come away --

I must pursue, lest she her anger make
Too loud, so we inuit the public scorn.

Is not thy brothers wife a pure tame hen?
How do thou like her noise?

Were she but mine,
I Would teach her keep a noise too after death.

How so?


I Would strippe her skin over her ears and
Make a drum on it.

She was borne in a storm!


And begot sure with the Boeswayns whistle.


Meruolle, you have named Charintha,
As a precious Virgin, of nature most
Remiss, a quiet tongue, and such a heart,
As might become an able sacrifice,
T'expiate the whole world?

This I esteemed
My justice on her merits, but it seems
Her Sisters documents ore rule her now.
Her dowry is of ample rate, and may
Deserve the chief of our Italian youth.

What Is Dandalo, that sues to her for love?


Dandalo, the Count of Millaine? A thing
Co^posd of spicery and starch! Nature
Contrived him in her sleep. If's ignorance
Might answer for his sins; he would account
Amongst his wealth, the land he has in Heaven.

I heard you say, she never saw him yet.


Never Sir: He wooes her by his letters.
She desiring a personal suruay
Ere prosecution of the suit, he sent
Her word, he would make's address by stealth; but we
Expect him not ere'th'birth of the next Moon.

Will his ariuall be so long delayed? --
Brother! -- How thriues your patience ore your wife?

Some Philosophicke hope remains: the storm
Cannot last, because it is still more violent.
Sh'ath taken Caroch for the Palace, and means
Strait to disgrace me to the Duke
By her complaints.

Her veins oreflow with Gall!


Florello, I desire thou wilt not appear
Before her eye, until thy habit's changed.
My present power sums but a thousand crowns,
Which I have brought, and prostrate to thy use --

Sir it is fit your blessings were encreasd;
And that your wife had read your worth.

My Art betrays my hopes, or I have found
A remedy to cure her pride: your help
Meruolle, I must crave, and with swift speed:

Rossa, Molard, (friends to my Soul and Brain)
Advance your subtle Eyes! The sovereign mine
Behold, that makes the solemn Patriarch dance,
And the anointed King to skippe, as does
His limber Dwarf.

Yellow as foot of Kite!


Shall we be tender natured, and divide?


This is the portion will procure us all
High dignity and place. Rossa, you must
Find cause to number these -- Go, ransom out
Our captive weeds, and the rich habit I
From Pisa brought: whilst you (Mollard) with the
Assistance of these few -- procure us fit
Materials to adorn, and put in bright
Aspect our Corpse. Enquire for Pearls: Stones of
The cunningst soil, we will like them, and disburse.

Is there some aged vessel now asleep
In the Docke, that will pay for her calking?

Florello, must we stop the public leakes?


Ere long we shall be great, be able to
Advance with smiles, and with our frowns destroy.
You Rossa, I Will create a Magistrate.
Go practice the austeere Cough. Pale dilinquents
Thou shall learn to ieere, and to sleep ore men
Condemned.

The calling (Sir) I do vouchsafe.


Thou (my Molard) shall rule in Villages,
Grow popular, and mistake the Laws. Thou shall
Delight in the Kallender: the Rubricke days
Thou shall observe, and then destroy thy beef.
Whilst thy dull earthie Tennants feed until
They smell.

My Launcepresado then shall sop
His Crust in Cider and in wine!

And my
Dread Corporal shall sin no more for Leekes,
His Girdle and his socks he shall vnpawne.

The solitary Hostess shall no more
Boil the Carrion meat that she must trust,
In her own tears; Nor with a Requiem bring
The service up, as if it were the Haunch
Of her dead Husband.

I am entire flame!


The Geographicke Captain shall no more
Study the Town Map, that is dark walks may be
Contrived through slender Allies and through Lanes,
To escape his hungry Creditors abroad.

Thy Province is Chaldea, thy Father
Was a Rabby!

And thy Aunt a Sybill!


These are the victories of wit: by wit
We must atchieue our hopes; which to refine
And purify, with paces doubled let us
Descend a Marble vault, there taste the rich
Legitimate blood of the mighty Grape.
It Is precious as the milk of Queens; such as
Would teach dull Saturn laugh. It magnifies
The heart, and makes the agill spirits dance,
It drownds all thoughts adulterate and sad;
Inspires the Prophet, makes the Poet glad.

I Have received a mandate from the Duke,
That will (I fear) increase her insolence.
Like an old Tyrant he bestows his threats;
As if his anger did obey his will,
Not justice, nor the Laws.

Does your wife know
This preparation you have made to cure
Her haughtiness?

All is discouerd to
Her ear: the news has taught her boil her heart
In her own blood. She now weeps vinegar;
Boasts of revenge, as if the Thunder were
Her own.

It Were fit your pretty Agent here,
Received instructions how to shape her garb
And port, just as th'imployment does require.

Her knowledge is already satisfied.
Alteza's threats shall only move her scorn.

I will perform my best in your behalf*
But I do fear I am not valiant Sir.

O, you! that call your sins your duty, that
Obey your Ladies riots out o'zeale! --

Signior! --

Her honors spittle you preserve
As a Restoratiue for your salt itch

I beseech ye --

You third in Bracelets too,
The Pearls that drop from her authenticke nose.

What mean you Sir?


To cleave you from the scalpe
Unto the twist: to make nine skittles of
Your bo^es, and wind your heratstrings 'bout my thumb --

O mercy Sir! So rotten are my Limbs
That when you stretch your Cheeks and blow on me,
I strait am scattered into sand --

Coward!
Creep strait into my Houreglasse then, and there
Eternally distinguish fatal time --

What slave disturbs the quiet of my Ear?


Nere look Sir! I serve my Lady; and I
Do scorn to yield --

Do You bristle Porcupine? --

Take heed! -- I have the mallady of France --

Stay Altamont! withdraw thy violence!
If thou disorderst but a hair, that does
Belong to th'Eyebrow of my meanest Groom,
I will proclaim my superiority
And rule i'th'Streets.

Hell cannot miss thee long!


Insult beneath thy own low Roof! This part
O'th'House does call me sovereign

Retire!


Is that the Piece you have so magnified,
She you boast of for your pastime Royal?

She clips the gray and shiuer'd wings of Time
to make him slow; that our embraces like
Succeeding minutes then, may add unto
Their length. Let me engender on thy lips --

So our progeny may still be kisses --

A meek and gentle heat, whilst thus we bill
We imitate the sober lust of Doves --

That kiss (Sir) was so powerful and moist,
That you have robbed my Lips of all their wealth!

Take back thy wealth again! --

Are ye so hot? --

Thy Lips are thin and lanke ( Alteza) as
The Lids that close thine Eyes. Hers gently swell
Like Eastern fruit, and are more soft then is
The fleecy Air that clothes the Infant Morn.

Pray a word! Is there in this Pagentry
Ought like to truth? Discover your intent!

I Will make my anger equal unto thine,
And my revenge above them both. This bright
Auspicious Maid shall govern in my bed.
She is my Concubine: the Off spring of
Her womb shall triumph here, maugre thy sight:
Whilst envy does consume thy flesh until
Thy body lighter grow then thy loose mind.

How well my Stars behave their influence?


Meruolle, go! my Mistress guide unto
Those lodgings that oreuiew the Garden mount.

If you retard your presence whilst the Sun
(In's race) fill up one Hour, you will find before
Your next reuiew, that grief has made me old,
And I shall look more like a Matron then
A Bride; so much your absence mortifies.

Thou art to every sense I have, a Spell.
Conduct her strait (Meruolle) to some Throne!

Then are the vows, the Ecclesiasticke rites
With which the zealous Priest obliged us to
Peculiar heat, to abstinence from change,
And various love, quite cancelled by your lust?

Accuse thy pride!


Thou art a perjured man!


Go, thou art as light as feathers, or the Air,
were but an Attome individual placed
With thee in balance even, it would hoise thee up
To th'Cloudes.

Thy breath is fulsome as that steame
Which Toades when they engender vaporate.

Alteza, bath in penitential tears
Thy leprous heart, or when the Elements
Are mixed and the sad day ariues, that doomes
The world unto eternity of joy,
Or pain, thou shall (like to a glimmering Lamp)
Be hung upon the sootie walls of Hell.

I smile at thee, and thy thin Arts; like to
Some homely Village Leuite, thou do preach
Of terrors strange, to keep dull faith in awe:
I pray stay; I am not angry Sir.

No?


I practisd all this while how t'indanger
your spleen (Sir) not my own* which if my powers
Prove just, I shall, perform ere long.
Niente, send the party in --

More wrath!


A slow device (Sir) but of my own Brain.


Who art thou?


A keen Guest, invited here --

To what?


To taste -- your wives Gammons.


Bold slave! be in thy speech more evident.


I am come to get your children for you.


Do You want a cleerer paraphrase? He is
My servant Sir, my stallion if I please.
A Courtly implement, and much in use
Among Ladies of my growth and Title.

O my cold Blood! My patience will be wrought
So low, that I shall learn t'mike a Heifer.

Since I Am so aptly furnished with delight,
Your Concubine may fearelesse walk about
The house, and share the wholesome Sun in peace.

Thy tongue I do neglect: but you (sir) shall
Ere long complain of your mortality:
The minutes you must waste on Earth are few.

This I consider Sir, and therefore make
Such haste to mingle with your wife; that the
Kind world may have some issue from my Loins.

If this prove true, let Babes piss out my Eyes --

Hold Altamont, or else I wound thy heart --

If you advance one inch beyond that rush
I Will amble through the Streets, and blow your Dirge
With the great Horn that grows upon your Brow.

If there be Gall in Heaven, the general Bag
Is opned, and it falls in Showers!

S'light Sir;
I come t'ease the labor of your Body;
And you want courtship to return me thanks.

Hang him Ingrate!


But what hereafter I
Perform, shall be for your good Ladies sake,
And not for yours.

Pray (sir) let us interchange
A little breath: withal (if you consent)
We Will put our Swords to a more quiet use --

Now Sir, you power sweet Cassia in my Broth.
My Blood affects to skirmish more
With Ladies then with men. What would you speak?

My true opinion sir concerning you.
I know you do but countrfeit this lust,
This lawless heat. You purpose not to abuse
the Charter of my Bed,

Who told ye so?


I read it in your noble feature and
Your looks. You have Religion in your shape.
And can it be, you should so soon commit a crime
So much unwholesome to the Angels sight?
Let me now make a forfeiture of Eyes,
If ever I beheld a man that is more obliged
To Nature for his Limbs: A carnal frame
So full of equal strength I never saw.

The better shaped I am (Sir) the more cause
You Will find, to love the Issue I shall get
Upon your wife.

Do not belie thy own
True merits and comport! Th'adulterate fire
Did nere inflame thy sober heart, I know
Thou scornst to do it.

Not I believe it Sir!
Sir I will do it. Is your Lady fruitful?
I would be loath t'loose my labor on her?

Pestilence! and blood!


Fling a danger from
Thy arm, I Will summon strait (with Trumpet and
with Drum) the world to hear thy infamy --

O fie! You an Italian Sir, and thus
Behave the knowledge of disgrace with loud
And popular dislike?

Nay it becomes
You finely, does it not?

You think because
You Are cursed, we will allow you short Horns: I Will graft
Upon your head a pair so tall, they shall
Go near to prick the very Planet (Sir)
Thet ruled at your nativity.

He sleeps.


Signior, go! take down a Cushion, and pray*
You cannot choose but know the frailty of
The times: the surfeits of the womb, and how
Great Ladies do relieve their Appetites.
Your own confession of my parts commends
Your wife in her sage choice. There be that sin
With feeble vshers and the witherd Dwarf.

He wants a judgment to consider this.


I merit better looks Sir, that must thrash
All night for ye, and without wages Sir!

Dead as a monument! Let us leave him! --

Had he the Devil for's Physician chose,
He could nere have come by the like Cordial. --

You swelling mountains (that oreuiew the Earth)
Fall now, make me eternally unseen!
Philosophy contract thy meek sage brow:
Let Patience be no more thy Saint. As soon
Give medicines to the dead, teach statues how
To walk, and angry winds to sleep in the North.
As soon bid empty Lions play with Kids;
And to the shaggie Scythian say, Go weep
As Virgins do, when they their Loves interre:
The blind and shuffled Elements that first
In Chaos strove, were not so opposite
As this Religious frost unto my heat.
Patience, thou art more fond then teeming wives,
Tamer then sseepe! Divinity which calls
Our anger sin, and courage pride, has sent
This silly Cherubine on Earth, Patience,
(The Cowards sword) which only does disarme
Dull sleep, that neither can nor would do harm.

Florence knows me well: I Am called Sciolto,

I needs must sing my vshers praise: he made
A most discreet election of a man.

Your mercy and your kindness (Lady) thus
Advance my shape; your pleasure was I should
despise your husbands frowns, and I behau'd
My self with terror masculine: but now
We are peculiar and reserved, I know
Humility, a soft and quiet garb;
A distance that shall well become the state
So eminent and rich a beauty claims.

Sir, that we do expect, and then you shall
Ore take our noble Sense, with newer love.
Our husband is a trifle, such as can
No way disturb your peace or safety here.

Madam, store me with arms and weapons to
Resist his personal assault, and I
Shall need no more protection then my self.

Active and bold! Niente thou have made
A choice out-parallels the world.

Madam,
See his horse veins: they are large as Conduit pipes;
His Sinnews are like Cables.

Las! not mine!
It Is true, that if I like my Opposite,
I have a trick te give an easy fall,
And stand to it stiffly too when I ha'done --

I will assure your Ladyship, the Bawdes
Give him good report.

Do they Niente?


He Is great with Ladies of all ages, all Degrees.


Excuse me Sir, they are great by me!


As how Sir?


Madam -- They are all wi'child!


How Signior? Is your appetite so strong?


Blame the humorous Planets that orerule
The blood. Ere yet this present Month expires;
(Let Us see -- I,!) Some three and forty Ladies
(Or there about) will quicken with male Twins.

All of your begetting?


So wise Fame sings.
I will make bold to gather my first fruits --

Stay my pregnant Signior! Our love is not
Yet ripe: there is a larger distance too
Belongs unto our Lips.

How dear Lady?


I am too proud to have my favors soon
and easily conferred. Such smiles are cheap.
I mean to procreate by prescription Sir,
Make my lust as physical as my meals.

Death, I Am Suitor unto Gallens widow!
Madam, I know it not becomes the high
Demeanure of your birth to dance (just like
A Kid) to th'musicke of each wind that blows.
Ere you admit of dalliance I should use
Some industry of Tongue, and flexure of
the pliant Ioints, to court and woo consent.

And can your rudeness covet then where your
Safe wit and knowledge warnes your abstinence?

Only a little t'recreate the Chine --

Keep back, if you will continue life. When I
Am pleased to be delighted Sir, I can
command the function of your Limbs.


Sister, I come. Throw him to his chamber --

Have no good book, whose comfortable use
may fill the expense of time?

What would you read?


Any o'th Moderns. Rablays in the praise of
Midwiues. Aretine on copulation.
Or th'Odes of Theophile unto his whore.

My Usher in my closet can appoint
Your choice of these.

Think on the frailty of
The flesh; and be not long unmerciful --


Away; I come, I come.


The Millaine Count (my Suitor) is ariu'd.


Signior Dandolo! Why it is yet a month
Ere he should meet your expectation here.

It Is he Madam, and such a he as must
Be only likened to himself.

More rich,
And gaudie then the East. So lib'rall too,
That you would think he Natures Steward were.
He gives amongst m^ slaves, as if unto
Ambassadors he did cast Donatiues.

Milk him (my Charintha) often I have preached
Unto thine Ear a sou'raigntie ore man.
Take all he gives, it is princely fashion now.
Could but thy acceptance beggar him,
Thy little wit were ever magnified.

You know I am o'th'wits, I have bin sworn
To beggar Suitors, and ieere my husband.

Which is the Lady that I come to woo?


My name's Charintha --

Present me thy Lips!
I say advance --

You are not understood --

My Lord, I scarcely own desert enough
T'intice this Jewel from your Cabinet.

A Stone, a Stone! the thing grows, I Have enough --

So free? I am Charintha's Sister Sir --

It may be so. A fine house, fine Town too!
Were Florence mine, I would not give it for
The best winter Seat my father left me.

It Is Sir, the ambition of my love, that you
Would know me for Charintha's Sister! --

I shall. Rossa, remember it!


My Lord!


I must know her for Charintha's Sister.


Is there no trick in ceremony Sir,
To give your memory a better hint?

Kiss none but thee! A device i'th'blood! but
Princes have one toy or other still, t'make
Their descent known. -- There, a Diamond that,
And that a Ruby. --

What means your Lordship?


They Are none of mine. I have enough, weare'em --

Your Lordship binds my great acknowledgement.
In The leisure of a wink, he will give away
An Empire.

I Am Charintha's woman Sir --

Who can help it? Mistress, will thou not bid
My servants welcome? They Are rich Choughs, th'aue store
Of Villages, and plough'd Earth.

Their judgment is
So kind (Sir) as to know they may command
The house.

We thank your Ladyship.


This is my Parasite, and this my Pimpe.
I Have a Fool, a Dwarf too at home. I made
My iaunt too early by a month, or else
My Train had been enlarged.

They Are rarely fixed,
If they import as much as you denominate.

I keep my parasite to cure the dull
Melancholy of State. He does admire
My wit and Beard. He says I cannot sin.
Princes would still be sad out for such worrmes.

But how (Sir) does your Pimpe adhere to use?


He is as pertinent to Lords as lust.
My Fool I keep to laugh at me. My Dwarf
Is for my wife. I do intend she shall
Affect the Court, and then she will quickly learn.
To make the Toy useful.

My Lord, be pleased
To walk, and use the advantage of the Air.

I Have Instruments distinct, that take a charge
O'th several quarters of my Frame, My Dwarf
Does dress me up unto the knees, and when
His stature leaves his reach, young Virgins then
(The Issue of decayed Barons) do begin
And govern to the Navel. Whilst upwards
Barbars, Painters, and Parasites are used.

But will your Lordship walk and see the spring?
We have a Garden where it ever dwells.

And shall we be delighted and entranced?


We Will sacrifice the utmost of our wealth
And love, to express your welcome Sir.

Wilt'I faith.
There Is a Saphyre Chain: Tie thy Monkie in it --
Take it; for by this hand I am in haste
And cannot offer twice.

If you should chance
(My honored Lord) to drop those trifles here,
I would be mannerly, and reach'em up.

I will give thee a Bushel of Seed-Pearle
To imbroider thy Petticoate.

This way --

Your Lordship has forgot to leave notice for
Those Princes in diguise that shall by chance
Demand ye at the gate.

Who does he mean?


A leash of Germane Dukes that walk in Rugge.
I should consult with'em'bout subversion
Of a State or two; but I Am not yet at
Leisure.

My Lord, they shall be answered so.


Your hypocrisy wants a little Art.


Your bounty will impouerish us too soon.


Ye both do lie, I weaue my cunning close.
Fortune, redeem the credit of thy Eyes.
Thou will (if thou art partial now and kind)
But wink on me, though to the world thou art blind.

THis is the truth, therefore consider now
my Fate. Hah! Sciolto!

What makes he there.


It Is Sciolto, the brute Adulterer,
He whom I lately mentioned in my speech.
A slave more salt then is the Balticke ware,
More hot then hell, a Satyr or a Goat.

And shall be still so (Sir) unless your wife
Dismiss her pride, and vouchsafe to cool me.

Devils and death, I Am murderd through the Ear --

Take discipline awhile, Know if there be
A boisterous motion vsd, I have for each
Of you a round Synamon Plumme, and they
Shall enter your nice stomachs the wrong way --

Though thou were hardy as the Lions race;
And armed with all th'Artillery on Earth,
I durst assault thee as I am; but so
I cannot satisfy Revenge.

Sciolto, now my memory begins
To know you better: for your riots bold
And loud demeanure in this City has
Been long observed. I wonder much y'imploy
Your precious minutes in a course so vile.

What, as to copulate and increase kind?
It has been a vocation ever since
The Sun spied man thus crawling on the Earth --

But what excuse can thou in honor urge,
for wearing such aduantagious defense,
Against his just and single violence?

I have an odd humor, not to be killed.


O Alteza, had but my name been hid
Beneath some fold in the voluminous
Dark book of Fate, I might have missed of my
Creation then, so I should nere have seen
Thy face.

My curses (Sir) have cause t'assault
Her more then yours: for she has starved me here
With want of natural delight. My free
Large growth and tincture of my hair denote,
My constitution cannot suffer me,
To wear a surplesse, or proceed Eunuch.
Though I should bath and swim in Iulips Sir,
I Have still unruly heat about my Chine.

A Salamander that does feed and cloth
It self with flame, was thy Progenitor.

Have I not equal reason to complain?
In three Hours not so much as a dry kiss.
The Old amorous Deacon that embraced his Cow
Was not so destitute.

Fine calumny!


A Negro might be useful now, although
Sh'ad but one eye, and that fixed on her heel.

I Will strew upon thy food the teeth of Snakes,

Signior, presume no more upon a fond
Easy nature. I have been abstinent
Too long. Haste, and with pliant steps present
Your wife; Ot else I Will assure ye you shall seek
Some other man to Cuckold ye for me.

Sciolto, this is barbarous!


I Will shoot
Thy heart with needles, small as splinters of
A hair that thou may die, and yet not know
That thou art killed.

I thank ye (Signior) but
We Florentines do sleep like Leuorites,
With our Eyes open: how ere, I could vouchsafe
To shoot you now, and prevent your kindness. --

Sciolto, hold. If either charge do miss,
He that suruiues, shall grind thy marble heart,
Between his teeth --

I meant not to give fire.
There is a trick of gravity in the state
Called Law. Besides, you dead, the children which
I chance to get upon your bucksome wife,
I should go near to keep at my own charge.

Africa breeds no monster like to thee.


I Will to my chamber now, and fortify
There, I remain (during the pleasure of
Your wife) your Tenant (Signior) in fee tail. --

It is a cunning, and promiscuous slave.
This story of Alteza's abstinence,
He does but counterfeit, to gull my sight.

Had the Devil himself crep't into flesh,
And undertook this service to your wife,
She had possessd, the weaker Instrument.
He has in 's Veins, a most intemperat blood
His valor's so renowned, that all the smooth,
The curled, and silken Nobles of the Town,
Do homage to his Sword; and by such Acts
As these, he glorifies his truant youth.

Thy faith was jealous, I seduced thy ear
To share untruths: but now, thou know too much.

It Was my suspect of Fame, and dispersement
Of your deep wrong, that manacled till now,
Your hands. My temperate Lectures cease. Obey
Revenge, and I will follow it, until
My wealth, and life, are forfeyted to Law.

Hah! will thou? O my quickened heart (entombed
Before within my breast) will thou? This, this
Then is the direful night, wherein I Will give
A strict and cruel justice to Revenge.

This then is the night, wherein my bold love
Shall merit me the eternal name of friend.

Come swear, swear now (on this victorious sword)
Thou will obey th'iniunctions of my wrath,
And yet in personal act, not move, but when
My will appoints a mixture of thy strength.

My choice Religion, and the honors of my blood,
I here do pawn to ratify the vow --

Now work my iniurd spirits, till you make
Dull sorrow rise in nimble flame. Anger,
Is blood, pow'rd, and perplexed into a froth,
But Malice is, the wisdom of our wrath.

Your Lordships letters were of a prompt style!


This orient Roape is yours, and you must wear't;
I sickne else, and grow a villager
In Elysium!

Your bounty choakes my thanks.


Take it. Afflict me Fame, if ere I knew
His parallel; he woes at Neroe's rate.

Madam, there is a new Dand^lo, a new
Count, lighted at the Gate, and craves entrance.

That Is rare in faith; have I a shadow walks
Without leave of the Sun?

A conspiracy.


Did not Meruolle say, it would be a month,
Ere he ariu'd?

Be bold and meet your chance^


Stand firm, and stiffely on your sinews then,
Avouch me still, for the true Dandolo.

Charintha, it is some stratagem; but if
He Jewels bring, and in a hand as large,
And open as yon'easy snypes, thou have
Ill luck if thou constrain him not to loss.

I Will smile no longer then these rich sparkles
Shine in my Eyes.

The Lady that is named
Charintha here, must be reueald; for Il'd
Exallt her Lips, and make'em known to mine.

S^light, this is the great Cham. Hark ye, Signior --

My Lord, I pray afford him leave to speak.


What, is that saucy Groom? Does he sell Eggs?


I Will show ye my Trade; A poor sword-man, I --

Sir you destroy the quiett of my House:
He shall have safety here, and leave to speak.

I Am called Charintha Sir; proceed to speech.


I Will first do special grace unto your Lip --
My Pen has wooed you often; but now by stealth
Thus single I Am arui'd, a Moon before
The time I did prefix.

I sir, the cause.


It Was Winter when I specified the date
Of my aproach, and then my blood was cold;
But now the spring is come, Things would couple.
These (Lady) are very serculare Pearl --

I sir, and in such Toys, she much delights:
Allthough her modesty be loath, to make
Her fancys known. Would you had brought some few
To mach'em.

Do you affect'em Lady?


I rejoice in all the works of Nature!


I am instructed then.


As how, dear Sir?


That I did ill, to leave my Pearls behind.


Sister this Hulke, is neither rigged, nor fraught,

I Will have no more of him, he is too costiue.


Sir a word. Me thinks you look, like raw Porke.


Has not this house the privilege of peace?


Ladies, this Impostor steals my Titles,
And my name, I ask leave, to punish him.

We Will not protect his crimes, use your justice.


Unless you are an Estridge, Sir, and can
Digest steel, cool your lungs, and calmely wayt
Th'inquiry I shall urge.

Hence, and be dead!


Molard, reveal how long thou have bin Pimpe,
To the family of the Dandolos?

About some thirty years (Sir.) I Have procured
Both time and place, for your good Fathers game,
Ere since he was capable of woman.

He vsd the Trade (Sir) in his infancy.


I scare could walk, when I began't: the first
I brought him was my Nurse.

Can point, at ought
He did some two and twenty years ago?

Distinctly Sir. I know that Gentleman,
He was got, on a Tripewife of Lucca.

O th'action of my fathers loins!


My lord?


I Am an old ^ew at Genealogies.
This fellows descent I know now, and where
He took 's creation too. By chance thus have
I met forty of my Fathers Bastards.
They Are poor, and put me often to charge. Brother,
Welcome. -- Rossa, give him a Quardecus.

Bid Kings wind silk, and Princes measure oats.


Your train of Parasite, Pimpe, Fool and Dwarf,
Speak you at first, to be the true young Lord.

Yet the other has some marks, that do belong
Unto a Count, o'th last edition too:

Do You think you are the Count?


I do, think it, Sir.


Thought's free.


He should be a Venetian,
By'th' wit, and policy of his courage.

Beauties, were you^ hands clean, they should be kil^ (...).


Bold illegitimate.


Sir, -- you shall know,
No man ere got me, but my own Father.

Besognia speak in my behalf; I Will give
Thee a Pearl then, big as a Pompeon.

Which, when your Lordship does, I Will return ye
A pointed Diamond, big as a Steeple.

Y'on thrifty counterfeit, has much perplexed
Your servants wit.

My Lord. Lets in, and ieere.


Slow method fools obey. To the stars advance
His head, who thus resists the power of Chance.

Like to my Genius he does move about
The house. Our souls are surely near allied --

Calls he her, his concubine? By this hand
There Is not a Prince in all the East, has such
Another. This Altamont still gripes'em
In the flank; he knows to choose his cattle.
Be thou pleased, O young and wholesome Lady!

The Garden (Signior) does contain more walks,
As pensatiue in shade as this. I do
Beseech you, change your path, and leave me here.

The fumes of spicery? you must not now --

My vows have promised you the ample truth
Of my intelligence. Behold, whom there,
Sciolto keeps in amorous whisper.

Hah, Scoperta! Libid'nous Girl, what makes
She with that Horse?

Shall I disturb their speech?


No, let them Knit and generate; my words
Shall never penetrate her Ear until
I am revenged for what my Eyes have seen.

There is a general tainture in the Sex.


She is proscribed, I Have filled her in the List
With those that taste to Night a bitter fate.
Away, away. This object ruins all
My faculties.

I sigh my first salute
Was so intempratly performed. But O!
The justice of my Stars! My love is now
Revenged upon my lust. With pure chaste flame
I Court the Mistress unto Altamont;
One here reserved for sinful use. Stay, stay! --

If I am seen, my life is forfeited --

Have thou not heard my vows, whose violence
And number well might satisfy suspect
in wayward Kings.

How dare I traficke thus
For love with thee: when thy accounts with Heaven
Are yet not cleared that lust betrayed thee to?

With what advice of modesty can thou
Accuse my blood; when in this Mansion thou art
Contained for the like sin?

Were I well known
Unto the quality of thy new love,
I would reveal my self, and take from thy
Belief the false opinion of my guilt.

If ere I practice impious heat again,
Some long armd Fiend that in the Center dwells
Reach at my foot, and pull me into flames.

Bear witness Immortality and Truth
That I Am official here but by pretense,
My Veins are cold and chaste as Northern snow.

Thy name, and then my doubts I will forsake?


Scoperta is my name. I Sister am
To Altamont; not Mistress of his lust.

O dire affinity! my love is now
Allied unto my hate. Yet Altamont
Nere merited my wrath. It is the wit
The policy of sin, to hate those men
We have abusd. When first I spied the grace
And lusture of thy shape; me thought I loved,
And my sick heart enform'd me love was good:

And you when I beheld, I said to Heaven,
O make but his immortal part like to
The Garment Nature clothes it in, and h^lle
Remain a Type, from whom shall be derived
The Prophets, and the Kings that rule the Earth.

Her beauties so increase; that they do make
My comprehension poor.

I should have used
More leisure and nice Art, when I did give
My love away.

O stay, until my vows
Afford a larger warrant of my faith --

Our new society must not be seen.
But if thy love be free from carnal Arts,
(Such as the curled Youth of Italy
Do use) make me thy sudden stealth* Early,
(Ere the succeeding Sun ariue i'th'East)
Appear beneath my Casements view, and I
Will follow thee along the spacious World.

Go noble Maid, were thou divided from
My reach, by Sheets of Elementall fire,
By streams of recking blood, by purple mists
(Which Cannons in their acclamation breath)
Or winds (when met to blow each other from
The Earth) yet I would pull thee to my Heart.
False lust, I take of thee eternal leave --

Convey those odors thither, and disperse
The costly smoke, about the room.

I shall.


Place soft and easy fingered Lutes, behind
The Arras; voices feminine and young.
And spread the Cowch, with the green Persian Quilt.

All is prepared.


For what are these designd?


I feel a slothful grudging in my veins,
And therefore mean to solace with a male.
Brush thy Beard, and follow me. --

Now am I
As rascally a sinner, as ever.

Why comst thou not?


O Love! A little grace.


Is not thy blood well? Kiss me Sciolto.


Shall we be wrapped in curlings intricate?


We Will have our artificial heates, and with our own
Panting cool us to new, and younger strength.

And shall we 'tweene two shady Poplars hang
In The Indian-Net, whose slippery closures may
Entangle us so fast, we n'ere shall be
Untied again*

We Will grow as in one skin.


Yes, much! Not an inch. --

I want thy meaning.


And shall my action more. It mightiness
And state, taught me to fast from flesh; and now,
I am well pleased to make it perpetual Lent.

I like this well. My Male is witty grown.


Go, kneel to your husband, and beg from him
Lawful recreation: My self intend
To purchase a few Beads, and turn Vot'ry.
She Will nere move hence, 'till I Have enraged her spleen.

What motive (Sir) persuades ye, use me thus?


Why -- ye are not handsome.


Trim prodigy!


Question your Glass! Your Face was carved -- out of
A Blew Cabidge; and it is contracted now
To one, oblique Wrinkle.

Villain, thou lie.


Thy aged skull in stead of hair
Oregrowne with Moss, and looks as if t'had binne,
A Thousand years entoomb'd.

Adders, and snakes.


Thy sollitary Teeth, in distance stand
Like the decayed Arches of a Bridge.

Better, thou had binne unborn.


Wilt not yet go?
Thy Fingers are all crook'd, like the Tallans
Of a Griffon. Thou walkst on Cloven-feete.

Hoa! Niente.


Thy Bones are pil'd acrosse*
Much like the Sticks on a Coniurers fire.

Are my Grooms dead? what hoa! I Will impound ye. --

It must not be. For with these two (of which
I mean to rob your armorie) there shall
Be passage forced broad enough for a Teeme
Of Southern Elephants. Farewell Oister! --

Where are my Grooms, my slaves? injurious wolf.
Bark at my precious feature, and thus strew
My beauty ore, with infamy and dust?
Strike my green youth, with Epethites of age?
My Altamont nere used me thus. He often
Compared me to the Stars, m'Eies to Eastern light,
When day smiles at her birth. O! I could curse
The giddie judgment of my blood; that thus
Seduced me to forsake that Saint, and mix
My knowledge with this Devil. He Is fled too,
Untouched by my revenge. Niente, hoa!

It Is Alteza, I know her sinful voice, --

O Sir, if anguish, or distress, can make,
An humble heart, behold your Lady now;
That shortens thus, her stature, at your feet. --

What may this forced humillitie portend?


Sciolto (cruel as the winds in March)
Has struck, my womanhood, with tyranie,
And scorn. Can Fate present so large a test,
Of your true love, (both to your self, and me)
As that you minister revenge upon
His Life. Go, and salute his recreant Heart
With your bright Steel, and then obedience claim
Repleate with fond Idolatry, and love.

The Fiends are surely married too; for there is
Noe torment like a Wife! false Alteza.

So ill I merit charity: that all
My passions argue cunning and pretense.
This is a wise hypocrisy, to hide
Thy lust, or snare me in some guilt, whereby
The Duke may claim my life, and thou receive
More quiet space, t'inioy Sciolto's limbs.

Those angry spirits that reside below,
In flaming Ouens, are not more cruel in
Their envy, then am I in hate to him.

So soon, do steep him in thy gall, whom thou
Have washt'i'th warm distilments of thy heart.

If ere I knew him, with more guilt, then what
My wishes and my thoughts containd; let wrath
Then make me her experiment, to try
How much of pain, mortality can hear.

Thy perjured attestations cease; for though
The hours are few, since first you did confer,
Yet you had both the pregnant thrift, to make
The time aduantagious to sin.

Express,
Some mercy in your faith, and hear me speak.

Keep thy denial 'tweene thy blisterd lips.
I^ vtterd' thou art dead.

Love is no more.


Do weep? I sooner thought to have seen the Flin^
Supple as Sponge; th'obdurate Diamond melt
At the Glow-wormes pale eye.

How has the pride
Of Courts misse-led my youth, that you should think
I Have lost, all tender complements of grace?

Thou were a Virgin sweet, so precious in
Thy frame, that with the cordage of thy hair
Thou might have fetterd Kings. Thy voice has marred
The beauties of the night. When thou did sing
The quiet stars, would fall asleep and wink.
Thou art all discord now: thy glorie's dark;
Thy thin, and Rosiall blood, i^ turned to Ink.

I have outliu'd the help of penitence,
And benefit of hope.

Often have I sai'd
Let Us leave the false, the buisie world and sleep
Beneath our vines; Nature (not cunning) then,
Augments our wealth; the dew of heaven is cheap,
Nor need we pay for'th Suns warm light, If kind
Divinity allow t'each humane soul
A star; our issue w'ele increase, until
The bright and numerous throng be all imploi'd.

But I am sterill as a wilderness,
My name, is sickness to your memory.

Witness you silent powers, the crime is not
Derived from me. T'explaine my innocence,
Know, she that here I housd, t'affront thy pride,
Was my chaste sister, not my Concubine.

Then you are loiall still, t'oth Marriage vow.


But; she treds the slimie path. Scoperta,
Is now thy R^uall in Sciolto's lust.

All springs from the ambition of my guilt. --

Although thy penitence be rash, it does
Become thee well, and thou have qui^e dissolved
The stony corners of my heart. This night
I purposd thee a cruel death, but now
Rise, and continue mortal still -- I Will lay
My mercy on thy Lip, and for it take
My last farewell --. I Will never see thee more.

This is a mercy that confounds the will
And strength of all my gratitude. O sad
Decree. You have diuorc'd me from your Eyes.

Two neighboring Lillies whom rude winds disperse
Amongst restless dust, may sooner meet upon
Their stalks again, and kiss each other in
A second growth, then we our loves renew.

Take heed (Sir) how you prophecy! For my
Humility with moist contrition joined,
May hope to wash my leprous stains away.

O no! my jealousy is grown so sick, that my
Suspect enformes me, it will nere be cured.

I creep thus to my Toombe, indebted for
Your love, till all the drowsy world shall rise
To general Accounts; and then my want
Of earlier gratitude will make my Debt
A sin --

O triuiall property of life!
Some do attend the mighty war, and make
Divinity their yoke; till for the sport
Of Kings th'augment the number of the dead.
Some walk in slipprie paths of Court, and feed
On silent smiles; the gravity of mirth.
Some travail in the search of humane Arts,
But knowledge is reserved: She sits so high
In Clouds, we cannot reach her with our Eye:
Or if with patient steps we to her climb,
Death says we cannot reach her with our time.
For witherd age ariues, when numbering on
Our griefs not years; the tedious space of life
We strait accuse. For life is like the spanne
Forced from a gowtie hand; which, as it gains
Extent, and active length, the more it pains.

MY journey was by stealth, else I had brought
With these, Legions of Dukes to speak my birth.

My Lady'gins t'enquire (Sir) after sleep,
For it grows late.

My corporal method
I will disorder, ere I Will miss her view.
This British Groate is thine; traficke for Pinnes.

Make the Devil your Factor; There Is a Stock
To set up with.

No bribes? I am beloved.


Brother, I wish you would avoid my haunts.
It Is not for my credit, nor yet for our
Dead fathers, thus to make your person known,
Being you are illegitimate begot,
By the motion of the evil Spirit.

Go, let that fellow die.


Why, let him Sir.


Were we his heirs, w'had cause to hasten his Decease.


Do You walk like Neptune in a mask,
Attended on by two o'th calm Winds?

They Are Nobles of a supreme race. This is
Stocccata called, and that Punto. They both
Are come to warrant my creation good
Upon the Gauntlet of a Giant or a Whale.

Maintain your birth -- Were you my fathers Bawdes?


Alas, you are young (Sir) you know not us!
We cannot swell and rant like things that would
Be rather heard then felt: but we can thrust
Our Whineards home, with joy and quiet too.

Sweet heart; you are not read i'th'rudiments
Of wrath. You shall perceive some that are loud
And active with their Lungs; Courage in them
You may suspect: but when you see a cool
And silent anger like to ours, then keep
Your wandering hands at home. Soft Sir, beware!

Stay, woo't thou kill him (Punto) or shall I?


I Have buisnesse now of a more serious garb.
Dispatch him thy self. Early to morrow
I Will do as much for thee on the two Zwits.

Do You make no more o'th'Infants of the Earth? --

Fie Sir. Draw your weapon in a Ladies
Chamber? You still displaie a courage ill
Brought up, most vainlie nurturd (Sir) beleeue't.

Forbid it Heaven; but you should have free space
T'imploy your best strength in your defense.
But Sir, it is sober patience makes us safe.
If now on eithers Haunch you did confer
A kick; our secret wisdom would direct
Us how to bear it for the time, and in
Our own advantage too.

Is It possible?


Hear Sir th'aduice of an old shot. I Have hit
The mark more then once in my time, and tamed
Many a mad Boy too. If either of's
Vouchsafe to greet ye with a hand or foot,
Take it, and be thankful: le^t by return
Of wrath, worse do ensue.

Not I beleeue't.


He Is young, Stoccata, carue him gently up! --

They take me for a Capon. What Weapons
Fight ye with, Demiculuering or Drake?

Steel of Toledo is all we manage --

What then remains but Rossa and Molard,
Assault you two, I, my bastard Brother --

Come Sir, --

We Will ierke you with our iron Rods --

Keep your sword warm, it 'longs to the scabbard --

O Sir, your valor still imports some want
Of a discreet and temperate breeding.

Tumultuous fights the vestments mar.


His bounty nere will give me cause t'aduance
My wit: he grows much troublesome.

Lady! behold two Worthies here; Dragons
In fight. They come to preach my birth.
They Are known to Fame.

Fame blew'em from her Breech!


I say they are Potentates; and they do awe --

The Chrysome Babe.


Signior, you still forget
The quiet and the courteous ways of spleen.

I will try your polliticke patience Sir --

You see we still are calm --

He has but thin
Philosophy that cannot suffer this --

You marmalet Count deserves as much too.


I do oppugn the motion with my scorn.


Do You scorn (Sir) to be kicked?


Pardon me Sir!
I say it alowd; The prowdest wight on Earth
Shall not kick me, excepting your dear self.

I have priuacies (Madam) for your Ear! --

You, and your fierce Champions strait remove;
Craule hence, and be not visible again:

Enhaunce our pay, we will kill him in the da^ke.


Agreed, Six Duck^ts you shall number more.


The neighbors say, forty Seriants wait his
Departure hence, who give him a new name.

Hah! What do they call him?


Florello, and
Report him brother unto Altamont.

My Eyes are infom'd, Two Faces more allied
In all deuotes of view I have not seen.
The younger brother unto Altamont;
Fantastic too as Winds, and sillier then
A silenced Priest. Fate had much preferred me.

Madam, it must be he. I Have taken a strict
Suruay of's Nose; it is so like Altamonts.

He is already so exhaust, that his
Wise bounty can no more be Argument
For wit: And now to have this plea for his
Dismission is above my joy. Signior! --

Sweet Love, I have been bold to give away
One or two of thy Farms to these my Foll'wers,
They are kind wretches both, and love thee well.

Indeed?


Yes says, They bid me rather then
Thou should thus pine for love to marry thee.

Stand off! More distant yet.


Would view my Limbs? --

When you do make your Christianity
More known, you must be called Florello*

Hah!


Forty blew Fiends wait to arrest you in
Your passage home.

Madam, I am traduced.


Could your abusiue Arts make choice of none
But me? Be sure this visit is your last.

I must not, dare not, leave ye, till I Have cleerd
The errors in this callumnie --

Return,
Or you affront my power, and I shall think
Your love, is, as your person, counterfeit.
The strength of all my Charity affoords
You but this Key, which in my Orchard Gate
You may employ, and free you from th'Arrest.
Besognia, I Will to bed. --

A sober truth.
Sums I owed when I embarked for Pisa. --

Now shall I, like a melancholy worm,
Feed on raw Roots. --

Sing Canticles of woe!
I must even go tagge points in a Garret. --

This Key, with rescue o'th'young Rapiers of
The Law will bring us home.

No moneis Sir?


Faith we must all disrobe, our Vestments old
Stitch on again, and morgage these to raise
A Sum that may assist my librrtie.

Creep in our Rags of Tinder, in our thin
And dustie webs again.

I feel a heard
Of small cattle graze on my left shoulder. --

O my forward bounty! There Is but sick hope
My Jewels will return; since custom shows;
What Ladies thus from there dull Suitors get
They do preserve as Tribute to their wit.

The longer moitie of the Night's unspent.


Since time grew old, he slowly finds his steps
In The dark: by day he swifter moves. Get thee
To bed; The Casements of thine Eyes are shut;
Impris^ning their dear Light.

Madam, good night.


Come my Sciolto, and confirm the virtue of
Thy faith; or I disperse my Soul in Sighs,
And make this Chair my easy monument.

All are departed that to Charintha
Made visit: Your Servants have begun
Their sleep, and Guards are placed upon the Gates.

Are my bold Instruments in ambush laid,
And scattered for the best advantage of
Their concealed action, and their view?

They are.


Expect me then beneath the Garden Mount.


You swelling Clouds choke my afflicted sight*


The Stars like scatterd embers fall. The Tears
Of men do meet in Seas, and Seas orewhelme
The Earth. The Amazed Herds howl to the Sun
For help; whose Beams suck moisture up, till he
Has made the flood his draught; but vomits all
In Showers again; such as Deucalion saw!

Nature (it seems) is frighted from her health.


Behold my Coral hands, they seem to blush
With guilt of humane sacrifice. Me thinks
I look like to a Memphian Priest, that had
Dissection made of Hecatombs to appease
Their false Divinity. Alteza's dead.

I want pretense to sooth my faith: Else I
Would hope your hands deprived her not of breath?

Fathers that feed on Sons, and Sons that drink
Their mothers blood, reach not that cruelty
Which her stern guilt did throw into my Breast.

May some kind Saint, weep over your Soul until
With holy dew, he wash this sin away.

Thou do mis-spend thy vestall charity.
In The sollitary age of Night I come,
To find those Angels that have business now
On Earth, in Synod here with thee: hoping
I shall receive reward for my just Act.

The hours that gave her opportunity
To err, were known so few; that my belief
Concludes her guiltless of the actual sin.

Before the hindmost part of her vexed Soul
Forsook her thrilling Lips, she did confess,
Sciolto had performed all circumstance
That does engender Man. Sciolto too,
Confirmed her attestation as a truth.

Be deaf (sweet heaven) to this. Did Sciolto
Iterate her foul speech?

He did, which I,
Ore heard, and forced a passage to his Heart.
From its warm Throane, I snatched the aching Lump,
And threw it straight unto a hungry Fiend.

Is he dead too? The Genius of the world
Is sick, all Forms must cease.

Do weep for him?


O Sir, should I restrain the flux, my Eyes
Would drop from their loose Stringes instead of Tears.

This obsequie, does make Compassion sin.


O Sciolto. Art thou so early fled,
To taste eternity, and unknown fate.

Stint thy hoarce Dirge, pernicious Whore. I had
Some hope, the interuiew that you inioy'd
Might be enforced by his unruly strength:
But now, I find it was with thy consent
Procured. Y'haue struggled in each others lust.
All now is evident as light.

I bring
My innocence, to'th'cleere suruay of Heaven.

Though dull, to Men of harsh, strict discipline,
Yet know, I have some cunning in my rage.
I came to fright this secret from thy Heart:
M^ Hands I did not bath in humane blood,
Alteza, and Sciolto are alive.

This joy will make my Heart dance in my Breast. --

Sink into The Earth, where sorrow dwells. Ere yon --
Dim Morn shall add one Hour unto her Age,
Scioltos Soul shall take a doubtful flight:
It only stayed to mingle company
With thine. My anger was so just, I Would
Not prosecute thy life; until my doubts
Were cleared. Go, go, and number over thy Beads.

Is there in all your veins, no drop (vnmix'd
With Gaul) that from our Mother is derived,
And so may tempt compassion from your Breast?

Alteza mournes, as if t'expiate
A Nation with her grief. Had thou reueald
Such penitence, it might have softened my
Decree. But thou art sour and stern of Soul.

No mercy, for our Noble Mothers sake?


M^ Mother when she lay, a cold pattern for
The figure on her Toombe, spent her last breath
In praise of thee. Quoth she; For my sake use
Thy Sister well: th'acqaintance that she has
In Heaven is great. In The blossom of her growth
She shall ore'come the Eyes of men, and in
Her Age, she shall have skill in Prophecy.
But O false lore! Our Mother kind, (whom I
A Sybill held) thou now have proou'd a Witch.

I am too weak to force from your belief
Mistakes so strong.

Go pray, the Hours are swift:
I Have purposd thee a prisoner here till my
Return. -- This is a sickly Rhume* and not
Compunction in my Eyes. --

The last of all
My merits shall be called obedience to
Your will: If you do owe a kindness to
Your self; think on Religion and the Laws.

Nature do thou direct my spleen. The Laws
Are sinfullie contrived. Justice should weigh
The present crime, not future inforence
On Deeds. But now they cheapen blood: it is spilt
To punish the example, not the guilt.
Religion too, on our Italian Earth,
Grows like the Cedar big and high; but yields
No fruit. The abject race of men she does
Confound with hope, and bids them not obey,
T'augment humility, but her own sway.

Your strength does but entangle ye the more.


I Will not be trus'd (Sir) like a Pullet thus --

Leave nothing that can minister defense.
Disarme him of his Pinnes.

Pare my nails too. --

You shall be angerd strait, till you bestow
The time to bite'm off. Soon as we spied
You scaling ore the Orchard wall; we guessed
The hopes of your visit. There have been snares
Laid for your feet, ere since you left the House. --

There is some danger in this chance, my dull
Heart beats with slow, and ominous leisure. --

Pale Planet shine! It must be he. My Ears
Persuade me they oretooke his voice. Sir, Sir! --

Hah! Scoperta? A cruel destiny
Ha^^ murdered all our joy. endeavoring an
Add (...) for stealth of thee, I was surprised,
Disa^md; even here 'ith presence of my Stars.

There Is not a Star in all the Firmament
Belongs to us.

O none! Or if there be,
Their influence is so weak that at
This distance Babes may blow'em out. Sure ou^
Creation we have took unknown to Fate.

Our love was of too nimble growth unless
Philosophy give hope, that after death
We may converse; this is the last of all
Our interuiewes.

That fatal Prophecy
Will shake my Soul from out my flesh; and like
Some tame Hermit I shall unwounded die.

The word that is heard abreuiates our discourse
And li^e: the Sand that limits both is fallen
Into the reach of number now: and I
Have spent with thee the hasty time prefixed
For a devout employment of my Beads.
The murderers are within.

Grimme wild horror!
Have thou no weapons there that I may use
T'anihilate their vigor and their shape?

Unto thy Lips I Would throw a kiss; but with
The strings of my poor solitary Lute
They'^e bound my hands! --

O my hot rage! I could
Spit fire till I enkindle yonder Grove,
Raising a flame that might perplex the Earth,
And make'em think Heaven had dropped a Planet.

And I could weep until I quenched that ^^ame,
And drew suspicion that a second Flood
Was come to drown mortallitie again!

This sudden elevation of the Soul*
Presageth death: as if it practiced how
To rise, and climb ere she begins her flight.

Whence is that noise?


I Will be as calm as are Arabian winds.
Scoperta, stay; Unheard we will converse. --

They come, they come, dear love, for evermore farewell*

O for the Giant race, to help me heave
Those Mountains up; that I might bury this
Proud Structure and my self! Yon burly Oak
(Whose Roots reach hell) I Will manage till I pownd
And batter all the Marble into Flower. --

You have oreheard, what will your knowledge grieve.


Her Soul is ill prepared*

I gave command
They should awhile delay her death, lest want
Of leisure might destroy her penitence.

Remain within the summons of my call:
And leave me here. I charge thee by thy Vow,
And our friendships dear use, that thou depart.

Speak what thou art?


Some call me Altamont.
I Have seen thee walk armd like a Magazin*
With small Artillery entrenched: but thou
Art fitly now prepared for sufferance.

Not thy tame sacrifice, but victory
I Will be. For naked as I am I will
Resist my death; and since vnfurnish'd to
Revenge, yet I shall trouble thy best strength. --

Sciolto, though, thou merit treachery*
And opposition that, by darkest stealth,
(...) of thy luxurious soul,
Yet I will give thee fair and equal Game.

False tyranie!


Stay. This I will perform*
And it is to know the rigor of thy might,
What wondrous flame and spirits do possess
Thy spacious Breast.

There Is relish of intent!


I Would learn the providence and justice of
My Fate; try if they will let me fall before
Th'incounter of thy beastiall strength; thou that
Augments't thy sins t'orecome the memory
Of Heaven: in silly hope, th'accompts may be
Unwillingly surua^'d, because they are long.
Receive thy Sword. --

Miracle of bounty!


If whilst we struggle in the pride of hope
Thou can so weaken my defense, that I
Become disarmed; thy liberty is gained.

With solemn penitence I could accuse
My crimes against thee: but griefe's akinne to fear.
This great demeanu^e of thy spleen diuides
The Intent of Gratitude. I know not which
T'affoord thee most, my envy, or my love.

The moon has now put on her brightest Robe;
My anger too, does carry fire enough
To light us to the charge* Guard well thy Heart. --

A little respite give, -- Must we needs ^ight?


You then would cosen me of my revenge? --

Yet stay! -- Know I do love thy Sister well.


Mark (sweet Heaven) with what exalted triumph
He boasts the foul remembrance of his sin. --

Stiff as a column! --

The Arcadian wrastler told
Young Theseus so; but he did yield as if
His sinnewes had binne made of silk. So fierce? --

I Will work thy strength so low, that Virgins shall
Have power to shakle thee with spinners Thrids --

Thus I will bore thy flesh, till thou become
Transparant as a Sieve --

This closure has
Entangled us, let us make another charge?

Even thus divided Billows part, that they
May meet in greater foame --

Will thou not bleed?
Not yet? -- I skirmish with unbodied Air.

Thy guillt betrai's thy hand unto mistakes,
And thus my iniurd Spirits greet thy life --

That Wound gapes like to a yawning Giant.


So hot is thy lascivious blood, that as
I sprinkle it, it scaldes my hands --

I reele
Before thy breast, and stumble at a Wart --

Thy Sword's my Captive now. Meruolle, hoa!


^ have some courage yet, le^t in my Teeth,
If thou art kind, come nearer with my Throat --

O the Celestial powers are just. See there,
He bleeds like to a Spring, that borders on
The Rubicke Sea, whilst I remain vntuch'd.

Has he not lost the benefit of breath?


Stop all his wounds, and give him time to spend
The rest of's moisture in repentant Tears --

My wounds closed up, what means this courtesy?


That thou might leisure have to pray. Be sure

Unto a powerful length; you strangle him.

Can thy young honor stoop to such low flight?


Unto resistance equal, I exposd
My strength, to try thy courage and my fate.
This was my iusti^e to my self: justice
I Will give to thee: Thy crimes do merit death.

O sooth my last ambition then* be thou
My Executioner.

Thou art disarmed,
Thy blooming honors now are withered on
Thy Crest. I should deprive my Anger of
Her fame, to be thy active opposite.

Scoperta, stay. My Soul shall houer strait
With thine. Stay for me in the Milky-path.

Let Italy avowch the just demean
Of my revenge. Dull Britains know no wrath.
Th'vnskillfull youth, that equal Duel give
To him that first incensd the blood; but tempt
The courtesy of Fate, such take delight
To stroke abuse, pay Injuries, with right.

This way (Sir) leads unto your Grave. You shall
Have space, to gain some friendship with the Saints --

A sudden frost congeales my Heart; I shrink
Like crooked Age; I am unwieldy on
My joints, as if my veins were empty grown. --
Wounded. His point has stollne into my Breast.
Oh help. I Have yet some use for life. Th'nice search,
I made to know Heaun's secret justice is
Aueng'd. (Bold Earth!) I weep into the Sea,
And sigh t'augment the winds. Repentance is
An immateriall Salve, it cures th'vnsound
Diseased Soul, but not the Bodies wound.

A Guard upon my Gates, and have they there
Binne placed ere since the first ariuall of
The Night?

Meruolle keeps the Keys, ho^le let
No servant be awake about the house.

The Sun begins to bath i'th'Mornings Tears*
Have thou Lucio called, and bid Pytho mix
With him in a sad Song?

I have Madam.


No more ( Niente) shall thou service do
For me: last night I told thee I had lost
My vanity: that courtly Lady serve
Who finds it first. But least thy wants augment
Thy Sins, my charity affoords thee this --

Well I Am resolved to mend, or become worse.


THis Lady, ripe, and calm, and fresh,
As Eastern Summers are;
Must now forsake both Time, and Flesh,
T'adde Light to some small Star.
Whilst yet alive, each Star decayed*
She may relieve with Light:
But Death leads Beauty to a shade
More cold more dark, then Night.
The saucy faith of man does blind
His pride, 'till it conduce
To Destine all his abject kind
For some Eternal use.
But ask not Bodies (doomed to die)
To what abode they go;
Since Knowledge is, but sorrows Spy,
It is not safe to know.
Howl, howl, until you wake the inhabitants
Of Graves! till you disquiet all the Spheres;
And put harmonious Nature out of tune,

What means this fatal summon, that does make
Amazement cold, as is Iberian Ice.

Great Altamont (your Lord) who still was prompt
To curb th'incitements of your wrath; threw wise
Advantage from his reach, and struggled with
The bold Sciolto, in an equal war.

Down holy flame. When Hope does sicken so,
I would not have the power to prophecy.

The surly Lion, and the testy Bore,
Did nere maintain, resistance with like fierce
And ruinous return of strength: for from
Their Eyes such Lightning flew, that Villagers
(Whose early labors tilled the Earth) did think
Rash Phaeton did scourge the fiery Teeme
Again. Sciolto chipp'd* gagged with wounds;
Did bleed away his strength. This his false Sword
Your Husband bade me prostrate at your feet --
And it is the last memorial of his love.

Ambiguous History! He conqueror,
Yet this the last memorial of his love!

Wise Heaven did mock your Altamont: for whilst
Ore joyed with victory, he spies in's Breast
A large deep wound, and thence his Soul took flight.

O my poor Lord! how soon have thou begun
Thy immortality. The hasty Spark
So vp^ard mounts, and then no more is seen.

I'th'last remainder of his dying speech,
He briefly told his Testament; which does
Contain employments sad, and such as you
Must actuate strait. To please his Ghost, show now
A little loyalty and love, Rise, and
Be conducted by my slow steps. I will
Inform your knowledge all that he enioyn'd

The Obedience which I ^canted to his life,
Unto his memory I Will strictly pay.

You have a loss that does out-speake complai^^*
If sweet and pliant discipline of Courts,
If feats of mighty War, or sober A^ts
Advance th'esteeme of humane quali^ie;
It Is fit your Altamont we strive to raise,
Above the charity or skill of praise*

Who did assist your passage to this walk?


Meruolle Sir, with whom we used your name.
Do you observe the Count, and his two lean
Ianizaries?

What in captivity?


Certain stratagems (Sir) have binne leuel'd
Against the Prerogative of your li^e ro^all.
Molard. Ere since the h^pe of day* they wai^ed your
Descent from the Cloister Bridge: but doubting
Their own courage, and meeting us disguised,
Thus in our original weeds; they would
Have bribed us for two Pistolets t'assist
The prosecution of your death. Our Grace
And strength bound them to their good behavior.

They walk like Caterpillars on a Leaf. --
Yield me the cause why you contrived my death.

Good faith (Sir) for no harm.


Give me a Knife! --

Here is one belonged to Hans van Geulicke.


Take your self solemnly aside and cut
Your Throat! do it strait, and neatly too, you had best.

The motion I d^slike, it is dangerous.


Have you three throats, can you revive as often
As you are killed, to take new punishment,
That thus you mutiny against kind reason?

These thousand years 't has b^n observed, th'eldest
Brothers of her house (Sir) could nere endure
To cut their Throats.

It Is fit (dear Count) that you
Must die; I Am else unjust unto my self.

With sapi^nt Arts, we will project to save
Th'reputation of your i^stice.

As how?


I will promulgate I am dead, and both,
My Champions here shall sw^^r't.

Well venture one
Commandment to save another sir.

This cannot satisfy. How ere (Sir Count)
If you will patiently accept your death.
I Will furnish ye with Guides, for your last iaunt.
You Punto, and Stoccata too! No more
Of your phylosophie. Fix Brow, to Brow,
Knock out, each others Brains, and show your Lord
The way, unto th'Elizian-Field. Do it
At first encounter too; For I Am in haste --

Slight Sir, I nere was in Elysium, I.
Nor should I find the way thither, though Signior
Argos, lent me Nintie Nine of his Eyes.

Then Punto shall be conduct to ye both.


Good Signior, any courtesy but this
You may command. You still do most presume
Upon the calmest, and th'easie Nature.

They all are forfeittures to th'Law. If you will
Bestow'em but as prisners unto us,
They shall suffer, or give us large ransom.

How? a ransom? Th^se Two are poorer then
Carthusian-Monkes: lean as a Romish Lent.
Slaves, who pretend sickness, that they may lie
In Hospitalls to steal the Sheets. Achornes
They eat, such as Westphalia-Hoggs do scorn.

The Count (Sir) will untie his Strings for'em.


Ransom, I Will give: for I do hate to die.


The ransom must
Be small. Shuffle'em together: and pack
'Em hence. I will not hear a syllable
Of thanks. Rossa, see'em horsed for Millaine.

O dismal change! does your victo^^ous Sword
Hang now on aged Belt of Bandeleere?
Is your high Plume moulted to a sprigge, small,
As if 'twere made o'th wing of a Beetle.

Who can resist the frowns of destiny?
My suffrance gives my merits their reward.

Your speech was wont to be in a more high
Exalted Key: loud as a Gulf! Your heart
Was full of ligges, and your feet did wander
Even like Autumns dust.

Affect so much
Humility as may employ your thoughts
With more compassion on my ru'nou^ fall.

I threw on you perpetual banishment.


I Am come to manifest the sin of my
Disguise* though it proceeded more from hope
T'inioy your person then your wealth. Witness
Each nimble Register of humane Thoughts!

'Has got a sweet and powerful way in speech.


This is my real ^hape, in which I do
Appear, a thin and witherd Soldier borne,
I'th'later age of war: When glorie's sick,
And honor triuiall as the spleen of Babes.

He was not wont to use this Dialect.


Grant now (thou beauteous wealth of Italy)
An expiation for my crimes; For know,
I would be clean when I shall dedicate
My future vows to th'absent Altar of
Thy Heart: lest I do loose the use of my
Idolatry; and make repentance sin.

Do all harmonious gifts reside within
Such course and humble weeds?

Destroy me not
With scorn: I know you Ladies most delight
I'th'fraile surface of the body, in name,
And gilded pomp, which was the fatal cause
I practiced them on you:

Y' endeere the worst
Of fashion unto us, by making it
A custom in your selves. If men did not
Provide such follies for our sight, we knew
Not where to find their use, for they digest
Them first, then they become our nourishment.

Vain men. We alter our creation so
With female shapes, that Heaven scarce knows its stam^
And Nature (that distinction still commands
T'each Sex) forgets the work of her own hands.

I nere beheld a feature masculine
Till now: had you but thus appeard unto
My first suruay, I might have loved in haste,
And yet excused the rashness of my eyes.
I ginne to feel some danger in my stay.

Ere you depart, a small memorial from
Your hands, I crave, to wear upon my crest,
That it may tempt kind fate to look on me,
When I in glorious battle strive; and
I will absent my self for evermore.

I nothing keep for such sad use, as to
Deprive me of so sweet a miracle.

Grant my request, or I Will pursue your steps

If you continue still to beg, I fear
My bounty will prove rash: and I shall give
So much of love, as you can never repay. --

O my auspicious stars! Should I not now
Make use of your good influence, I were
Unworthy of your care. --

The choice you make
Can nere deserve your chaste and lawful fire
She is Florello of a heart and strain
Too insolent for nuptial happiness:

Thou have bin called my friend. But if thy spleen
Continue a dislike of her, I Will blow thee from
My memory, and with my chiefest strength
I Will punish thy missetake --

A des'late grief
Will more become thy breast then this proud rage.
Thy brother's dead, and his decease caused by
Her sisters pride.

My sisters husband dead.


Into my ^ares thou have a horror powered
That has already stiffened every hair
On my amazed skull into a Reed.

Will thou neglect to cherish the swift growth
Of our new loves?

Like to her sister she
But counterfeits a passionate esteem,
That thy fond Nature she might tempt beneath
Her rule. If Altamont be dear unto
Thy thought, leave her, and straight attend his Hearse,
That in the Chapel waits thy obsequie.

The inspired Needle's not more true unto
The North, the Sun to his diurnall race,
Nor Rivers to the Maine; then I to thee.

Sorrow and love, my senses do divide.
If I remain with thee, then only love
I serve, if with sad fleps, I tread the way
Unto my Brothers Hearse, I both obey.

Thou do requite the skornes which I did throw
On thy first love. My destiny must needs
Be tragic now: since the contracted scope
Of all my joy, rests in diseased hope.

Behold the Throne, your Lord commanded me
Prepare: and here you must be pleased to sit. --

Can this advancement ought refer to your
Delight, or to my Lords last Testament?

Justice has laid her sword within your reach:
And you have power to sh^ath it so; that where
You execute, you may a murder do,
Or sacrifice. Bring the delinquents in.

Sciolto and Scoperta still alive?


Thy spirit Altamont ascended with
The love of all my chiefest orizons.

These two were by your husbands jealousy*
And hate, ordaind for death: but ere that we
Could actuate his will; his noble breast
Received a wound, that bad him strait provide
For 's own eternity. The last of all
His speech, referd them both unto your power.
You may appoint them live or die: and I Am
Obliged by vow, to see performed what you
Command.

O dire, sinister accident!


Your Jewels, and your wealth, I have packed up,
To ease our flight, when we have finished
This usurpation of the Laws. Let them
Enjoy their eyes; that they may know their Judge.

Hah, Sciolto!


Scoperta, O my Girl!


Keep them divided from each others reach*


I thought thy beauties had been dark and cold,
And thou had (ere this) begun an easy sleep
Within thy silent Grave.

And I supposed thee fled
A Harbenger to Heaven: with purpose to
Bespeake my Billet near to thine.

Since this sad night, did blind the drowsi^ world,
They thus have manacled my strength. They'ue watched
My hardy violence so tame, that now
Each featherd Forrester roosts in my Beard.

We cannot (Sir) be mortal long; therefore
Receive a hope our sufferance will cease.

Sciolto, now requite the leisure I
Have given thy penitence, by rendering straight
Unto the world, how far thou did corrupt
These Ladies with thy guilt. For know, I still
Persuaded Altamont thy lust inioi'd
No more, then what concerned wishes or hope.
And I was vsher'd to the belief of this,
By knowledge of those secret spies which he
Employed to watch your personal remooues,
About the House: whose labors ever missed
Of finding that success he prophesied.

I do confess m'imagination once
Did sin against them both: but if it ere
Extended unto act; let me lose Heaven*

If Altamont were now alive, he would
Permit this utterance clear his faith. Madam,
You hear that he Scoperta vindicates
By oath; though his own crime does carry an
Import more evident, and black; but yet
When you behold his feature, and his youth,
Your mercy may conceive it were pity that
He should so soon depart from time and flesh.

Sir, you have skill to know my womanhood
Is weak as ignorance, or sleep. Why should
You seat me here, thus to dispose of Law:
That never knew any justice, but revenge.

Your sentence I am bound to execute.


Have I not heard you say, my Husband did
Ordain them both for death? It Would ill become
The duty of my knowledge t'alter his
Decree.

Keep your intent, I will usurp
The office of your tongue. Mutes, strangle them.

If in thy functions, gentle Nature claim
An interest, let us embrace, and use
Solemnity, before we do forsake
Each others view.

I grant what you
Request: make your performance short; whilst I
Reveal m'opinions (Lady) to your ear.

O Scoperta! this is the last of all
Our busy dreams; what we possess is but
Imaginary now: Thy shadow I,
Embrace, not thee: for like to it, thou wilt fly
From my enioyment, and no more be seen! --

So much of various fate, so soon expres'd
Two lovers yet nere knew; since simpathy
First dwelt on Earth.

Ere long we must be cold,
Cold, cold my Love, and wrapped in stubborn sheets
Of lead: hows'd in a deep, a gloomy vault;
Where no society will mix with us,
But what shall quicken from our tainted limbs.

Whilst still there is noise, and business in the world;
Whilst still the wars grow loud, and battles join;
Whilst Kings their Queens salute in Iuory beds.

But O! how many Ages may succeed
In Heavens dark Calendar; ere we again
Material be, and meet in our warm flesh?

And whether that our souls, when they are preferred
To taste eternity will ever think
Upon the bargains of our humane love,
Is unto me a desolate suspense.

Phylosophie does seem to laugh upon
Our hopes, and wise Divinity belies
Our knowledge, with our Faith: jealous Nature,
Has locked, her secrets in a Cabinet,
Which Time nere saw: and he that in it prys
Unto Religion forfeites his bold Eyes.

Our Reason frights our Senses to distrust.
My Lips do beage from thine a Legacy --

O sad acomp^. How is my bounty now
Exhaust: This is the last I ere shall give --

Blind them again and stay their deaths awhile.
Madam, your knowledge is already taught
Scoperta's innocence. Sciolto's deed
Stands nere your punishment; but distant far
From remedy. Mark, his goodly feature.
With what magnificence he is built? Besides
This Morn* his Uncle too (the wealthiest of
Our Senators) is dead, and has bine pleased
T'intitle him his Heir.

Should I not chide?


Think how you loved him once. He will (to save
His life) d^scard Scoperta's interest,
And marry you: a happiness complete
For both

Hah?


Slaves. Stretch now your Cordage out,
Pull till my Eyes do^ starte like Bulletts from my Skull,
Murdering where they fly --

Hold. hold. -- Did my
dead Lord bid you perform, what I decree?

He did: and I asured it with my Vows.


Hear then without resistan^ of my breath,
Sciolto is condemned by Law; as known
The fatal Instrument that did deprive
My Lord, of precious life; so he must die.
It Were fit my care affected mercy in
Scoperta's dome; she is Sister to my Lord:
But her sweet innocence does make her safe.
She must remain among the living still;
And in her rome, I do condemn my self.
For my stern pride, was the original cause
Of this black Tragedy. Kind (...)
Esteem your Vows, see my edic^ (...)*
And give me pri^iledge first to (...)
its wrath --

This carries wonder in it

I Will not resign these bonds of Death, unless
Sciolto share in the compassion too --

Give me your pardon (gentle Maid). I have
Deprived you of a Brother that deserved
More Pyramids, then all th'Egiptian Kings.
Instead of him, receive my prayers, my wealth.
When over his Hersse you raise a Monument,
And fix my Marble-Figure near to his,
Create me weeping. -- I shall go, with so
Much sorrow, to my Grave, that being dead,
My Ashes will have power to penetrate
The Stones. Release this pious Lady and
Perform your execution upon me --

Away you dreadful Ministers of death.
The Laurel Sprigge, the Myrtle nicely wreathed
In Coronets, my Love deserves; for she
Is grown too good for Earth. --

My Altamont. --

This deceit brings wonder, great as our joy.
They that divide us now, must use the strength
Of swelling floods, and help of Thunder too --

Put all thy beauties on again, and smile
At the return of our long absent love:
My wound is closed, and will hau^ instant cure --

The Earth groaned at my fall, so heavy are
My sins, so much they did increase my weight.

Rise gently like a flame, from incense sprung.
Meruolle, to appease my jealousy
Ordained me this disguises that I might hear
How in your s^ntence you behau'd your love
To me: Had thou continued false, I had
Increased the anger of thy fate: but now
Thou art indeer'd unto my heart again. --

Sir, I have hope my future loyalty
Will manifest, your mercy well bestowed. --

Scoperta, thou wilt excuse the carriage of
My doubts, I looked on thee with th'eies of love,
And love is still too strict in her suruay. --

My memory wou^d sin, should it record
Ought that might nourish my dislike of you:
You made me taste of sorrow, not of wrath.

It Is I, that have most ^eedfull use of your
Kind charity: forget my errors past,
And to oblige my future gratitude
Give Hymen leave to know your sister for
My wife. ^y Uncles death has lent me power
Still to maintain her in such quality
As shall become my dear respects to you,
The greatness of her virtue, and her blood.

Take her, and be as tender of her health,
As Heaven has over thy wounds; which in their cure
Express much miracle. -- My io^'s so swell
My breast, that I do find there is danger in
Delight. How blessed Meruolle are thy Arts?

Some Angels care assisted the success.


Not Altamont's return to life, nor yet
Sciolto's and Scoperta's glad repriue
Nor all the joys in reconcilement of
Your loves expressed, can my cold senses please:
Florello is unkind. --

The little God
Has lately pricked her with his baudy shaft.

Tell me Charintha, is thy love sincere:
Such as in the simple youth of Nature is
Exchanged by lovers with a harmless plight?

It is sincere, as holy Hermits vows,
And true, as their confession at their death^.

Appear Florello, and receive thy doom.


It was Meruolle's care thus to assure
Thy Mistress real love, and constancy
Ere thou should give too much of thine away.
But now receive her from Alteza's hand. --

Charintha, thy election is so safe
Thou never wilt repent the judgment of
Thy sight. He cannot be so near allied
Unto the blood of Altamont, but he
Must needs participate in virtue too.

We will embrace each other until Age,
Deprive our courteous sinews of extent. --

The gentle Turtle shall direct us how
T'augment our loves; the Eagle to renew
Our youth, and we will strive to imitate
The crooked Vine in our increase. --

Joy, joy!
The firmament is now unmasked, and each
Of us, has found his star.

My Loved Sister,
I have orchear'd the story of your griefs,
And from this noble Signior, I must beg
A faith indeer'd, the name of Brother too.

You shall be precious to my eyes as day.


The great Dandolo and his Giant whelps
Are mounted on a Mule.

Naked they ride
As scoutes of Tartary they are victual'd with
A single egg.

What are these, walking Drums?


They Are such your knowledge shall affect: they must
Enjoy what I atchieue. Dull men, o'war,
The Trophie of my victory behold,
She Is mine: bow, and do homage to her lip. --

Still thou do mourn ( Alteza) like a Dove.
Hark, hark how the Roman-Organ seems
T'inuoke the Thracian Lire; the Cymbals of
Judea, call Castilian-Cornets forth,
And German-Viols wake the Tuscan Lute*
The sacred noise attend, that whilst we hear,
Our souls may dance into each others ear.


