Divine invention, O how I could hug,
And like an amorous Lover court thy beauty,
That crownst me King of pleasures! were my brain
Fordg'dout of vulgar metal without fire,
And sprightly motion, my big-swolne hopes,
Had been still-borne, but when dejected minds,
Out slept the golden pleasure of the night:
My serious meditations have out-watch'd,
The glorious tapers that attend the Moon:
I turned my thoughts into a thousand shapes:
Molded the fashion of ten thousand plots,
Liked and disliked so many, that my brain
The mother of Invention grew barrayne,
Almost past bearing, still my laboring thoughts
Conceived a yet more strange and quaint Idea,
Gave it proportion, and I brought it forth:
And that blessed infant of Invention
Beyond all hope has my contentment won,
And that is Loves heaven I love a face more fair
Then Cinthe as hue that seems above compare,
But hell, her husband with a jealous eye
Vshers her steps, oh wedded slavery!
This tender rose, whom artles marriage,
Has grafted on a nettle (testy age)
Have I vngrafted, made himself untie
The knot of wedlock: thanks sweet industry.
And here a comes, that which most heaps my fame,
His wit's well spoken of.

This wit's a sprightly thing*

For such as haue't.

It not alone does bring,
Public applause, but knowledge in the law*
Teaches to speak in distance.

How the daw
Scoures ore his rustie phrases? honored Count,
How grows your plot?

My thriuing fortunes mount
Above suppose, even to my hearts content:
We are diuorc'd.

My hopes are preualent.

You know the cause on it, two sufficient men
Swore her a harlot, and the partial Bench
Inspirde by my good Angels (Angels wings
Sweep a clear passage to the seat of Kings)
Sealed our divorce.

But does her brother swallow
This gross abuse?

Abuse, away, away.
They know me rich Horatio, chinke, chinke:
Whilst this holds out* my cause shall never sincke.

See where a comes, his sad complexion wears,
Griefs mourning livery, he is clothde in tears.

Whence springs this sorrow?

For my sisters shame,
My sister, oh my sister, whose repute
Hung like a Jewel on her sexes forehead.

And what of her?

She is, o no she was
Pure as the Diamond, clear as crystal glass,
But now, O hell, her credit is more foul,
Then speckled scandal, or black murders soul.

I cannot think it.

But I know it too true,
She was my wife and by her means, my head
Was fay rely tupt and you will buy a Lantern:
Bespeake my sconce, it is ready hornd and all.

Not yet, but I Will take order that it shall.

And are ye parted?

What a question's that?
Shall I wear cracked rings, Diamonds with a flaw,
I Will carry coals and you will, no horns, I know the law.

Is this your grief?

This is enough, to make
Patience tu^nerussin, she that was the pattern,
To whose proportion all our courtly dames,
Cut out their actions, she to fall^a sign --

More will fall shortly.

Her shame --

Grows here, who ever broacht the wine,
The butt stands here, my forehead bears the sign,

It merrits none, the shame's nor yours nor his,
That foot's even made that never treads a miss,
Beauty came first from Heaven, Prometheus,
Stole it to make proud women bewteous,
Now, stolen goods thrive not: women steal from men
Then blame not them to seek their own again.
Kings have for this been felons, and it is proved,
He never was divine that never loved.

I find no law for this.

Custom you prove,
And what is more Ancient then to pilfer louet

A quillet well applide.

Then bury grief,
If this be fellonie, my self's a theife.

A nimble wit, just of the length ofmine.
But come my leidge, forget, it so will I,
Our infant griefs must be old men and die,

Not whil st her fault suruiues,
What news with thee.

I bring your honor comfortable news,
Your sonne's returned from Pisa,

A comes ill,
And yet I hope his blessed arrive will kill
This monster grief.

He is a toward Prince.

Toward enough, and yet most strangely weaned
And wedded from this worlds society.

A pa^lous youth, sharp and sattyricall,
Would a but spend some study in the law,
A would prove a passing subtle Barrister.

Has a quick wit.

And a speaks Latin too,
Truly and so few Lawyers use to do.

Health to this honored presence: passing good!

Welcome sweet Prince.

Thanks: superpassing good!
But honored father, see how he proceeds:
Learning was first made pilot to the world,
And in the chair of contemplation,
Many degrees above the turning clouds
Held in his hand the nine-leaf'd marble book,
Drawn full of silver lines and golden Stars.

But Son?

But father, it was learnings place,
Till empty outsides, shadows daubed with gold
Plucked him down headlong, then alost his wits,
And ever since lives Zany to the world,
Turns Pageant-Poet, toyler to the press,
Makes himself cheap* detested, hist and stale,
To every bubble and dull Groom.
Who for his outsides gawdie, will presume
To make poor wit a hackney to his pride.
And with blunt rolled Iestes spur-gall his side
Till his soul bleed, O, I am more then mad,
To see mere shadows censure and control,
The substance, worthier both in sense and soul

Fie Polymetes, though therobe of learning,
Sit comely on a Prince, yet weane thy thoughts
From this strict contemplation, and embrace
Public assemblies, knightly exercise.

How Is that? to swear and give the sunden stab?
Sell Lands to purchase fashions? O it is base!
Bought gentry, should true-borne worth disgrace.

Practice to hunt.

No, some that use that sport
Giu't ore, being scarce one hair the better for it.

Then practice Revels.

Revels sprightly play,
Yet every year, some revel all away.

All these are triuiall: Prince, be a Lawyer:

Of all Land monsters, some that bear that name,
Might well be sparde, whose vultur Avarice
Deuours men living: they of all the rest,
Deal most with Angels, and yet prove least blessed.

Wrong not the Law.

I cannot, it is divine:
And i will compare it to a golden chain,
That linkes the body of a commonwealth,
Into a firm and formal Union.
It holds the sword, with an impartial hand,
Curbs in the raines of an unruly land,
It Is twined to Justice, and with holy zeal,
Rightly determines the poor man's appeal.
And those that are laws true administers,
Are fathers to the wronged, heauen's Iusticers.

Fore-god it is true, right properties of the Law
But under favor, and with due respect
Of that unvalued perle, and the professors,
Your self and such lacke-Latin Advocates
Infect the heart, and do their best to change
The true intent of sanctimonious law.
Turn Church yards Champions, and make the ground grown rank w th
Grandsires flesh
Bear corn to feed the Son.

Will this be suffered?
But Polymetes, in thy stay at Pisa,
When heardst thou of thy Sister?

Much to late,
The reason, with your patience i will relate.
Beauteous Emilia, whom I never saw,
But in the Rhethorique of discoursiue tongues
In Sancta Monta, neighbor to Sardinia,
Where silver Arno in her Crystal bosom,
Courts the fresh bancks with many an amorous kiss.
My Sister (as the country custom claimed)
With all the choycest virgins of the Land,
Met at the Temple* half a league remote,
From all resort of people, which was decked
With all the Relics, and the choicest lemmes,
Marcellis, Pisa, or Ligorne could yield.

What followed this rich preparation?

Whilst they securely ^end their Orizons,
Three armed Galleys of the faithless Turks,
At this advantage set their men on shore,
Enterd the Temple, and prophande their shrines,
On the high Altar sacrifiz'd the Priests,
Disray'd the Temple of the golden robes,
Murdered the matrons, ravished the Maids,
And dragging them by the disheueld hair,
Did with their ravished bodies fill their boats,
Amongst the rest, Emilia whom report
Called by no name but only beautiful,
Was ravished, slain, or taken prisoner.

O Polymetes! thy discourse confounds,
Thou healst old hurts, yet give us deeper wounds,
But words are air, see our armed Galleys manned,
And in them place as many of our Knights
As loved Emilia and their Sovereigns health.
I Will unto Pisa, and till our return,
Because our widowed Duke-dome shall not mourn.
Be thou her minion, and possess her chair,
Fill that with honor, it will fill thee with care,
Vrgeno denialls, Genowaes a dew,
We leave old greefes, and go in quest of new.

Better and better, now my hopes are fit,
The Duke thus gone, what tongue so bold dares say
I wronged my wife?

That dares Horatioes.

Thou art my self, we both have but one bosom
One tongue, one soul, two bodies and one heart.

I know it my Lord.

It Is true, but let that pass,
We two are one.

I know your honor's wise.

And I know thee
For no small fool, twa's simple policy,
And not without some counsel of the law,
That not withstanding my wives near alliance
Unto the Duke, I purchac'd a divorce.

What was the cause?

I tell thee, the most wrong
Was this, my Avarice thought she lived too long.
I know one man has coffind up six wives
Since she was mine, and by the poorest, purst
A brace of thousand pounds: still good in Law,
Men must be rich, by thrift our treasures rise,
Give me the man's knave rich, take you poor wise,
But close, cock sure i will feed me fat with sport,
Gull all, f^ole all, why? I have Law-tricks for it.

How Justice Slender glories in the plot,
Which to deceive him, my full brain begot?
But to his wife, true virtue though disgraced,
She Is now half wooed because she is thought unchaste
Her sexes credit, or discredit thriues
In the outward shape and fashion of their lives,
and be a woman's virtues nere so strong.
Her honor's weighed upon discourses tongue.
Be her same sullied, were her thoughts as bright
As Innocence, the world would count her light.
For though among women, most are beauteous,
They that please time are counted virtuous,
And in this hope, i will to the Countess go,
She Is counted light, Love grant I find her so.

Welcome to Genea Madam, and to make a short cut of our long travel, faith
tell me, how do you feel your self since you came a shore


Feel my self? why with my hands, what an idle question's that?


Then pray be you better occupied in your answer: but Madam, do you remember
what a multitude of fishes we saw at Sea? and I do wonder how they can all
live by one another


Why fool, as men do on the Land, the great ones eat up the little ones, but
Ioculo, I am great, passing great, and ready to lie down


Do Madam, and i will stand by and do my good will to deliver you.


Man's death of what?


Why of your Maidenhead Madam and if you please, or rather of the huge birth
of knauerie you are in travel of


And insooth Ioculo at this time I stand in some need of a witty Mid-wif: but
may I trust thee


Above the girdle-stead, and below the knee Madam without any danger, why
Madam, you know at our first meeting in the Turks Galleys, where we were both
prisoners, and in a manner strangers, I rested faithful when we counterfeited
ourselves lunaticke to escape their fury I proved not false when we were cast
naked a shore: I stood firm to you, and never since left your company: now
having had these trials of me abroad, neues mistrust my secrecy at home


I will credit thee, and now receive this embrion of knauerie, briefly as I
deliver it. I understand since our private arrival here at Genoa, that the
Duke my father hearing of my surprisal from Monta sancta, attended with a
hundred Knights, is gone to seek a needle in a bottle of Hay


Or rather to catch a quick Eele by the --


Teeth, as I have done you sir?


Nay, and you break iestes a my teeth once, I have done with you.


If the breaking of the jest kept your teeth whole, it was well broken: but to
the purpose; as well to try what mettle our Genow aies wits are made of, as
also to put my Brothers humor to the test, I intend to dance a pretty change
with my name (for by nothing else I am sure they can know me, being in my
infancy carried to my Aunts at Pisa) then instead of Emilia, call me Tristella


Agreed, but what man in the mist is this?


I know not yet, lets walk, and take occasion to confer with them.


Yet keep without eye-shot so long as you can


O most Divine!


Tobacco? the best in Europe, 't cost me ten Crowns an ounce by this vapor.


Art not ashamed?


Of your foppish humor? yes by this Element villanou^ly ashamed, poxon't, leave
it, you are a scholar, go but to antiquity, read the Chronicles, you may
find some of your Ancestors chronicled for winning a Wenches favor for
loosing their armor, but few for wit and Schollership: Soldiers and Scollers
could never set their horses together, especially in this kicking age: but who
comes here? one she-Satyre or other to pitch up her Tent, cast down her
gauntlet and proclaim thee coward for not stabbing her, when she gave thee
the most plain apparent and open lie


Ioculo, we are fallen into their eyes.


They Will hardly see their way then, for we are shrewd moats, but all is one, i will
give occasion of quarreil, answert you as you can


Your reason Sir?


To make thee recoile, or with the Soldier to fall off, is it your country
manner to corriue a leader, being upon or before present service as I am


Pardon me sir, I did not see your charge.
Would I had never seen her, for her eye
Has set my thoughts in a strange mutenie.

What, in love Iulio?


No Prince, love's in me,
I like a slave endure loves tyranny.

Madam, your Brother.

Slave to all slaves be he that snares his eye,
In a weak Sirens Cob-web flattery.

God save fair sweet.


Amen, from such as you.


You had said for such, had your tongue gone true.


Why then belike I lie.


I would you did, within my Curtens.


Marry love forbid.


Nay, love is willing, for he cries lets go:


Then love has two tunges, for he tells me no,
so pray let us part.

What, and our lips not meet?


Now fie upon it, like Broom-men in the street?
You Are a young wooer, or else much to rude,
To show this kindness fore a multitude,
But by the blush that colors ore your face,
You would scarce do it in a more private place.

This same strange thing in the likeness of a woman,
Tastes of much wit, though I not love her sex,
I Will arm my thoughts to crack a jest with her.
What, graueld lulio?

No, but run a Land:
Is your wits shipping any better mand?

Yes, will you board it?


No, I dare not venture:


Make but a shot in jest and you may enter.


You are a Scholar.


I have seen some Schools.


You came not ore in the last fleet of Fools.


You took my room up.


I pray take it again,
We Will have no women fools sail amongst men.

Your wit's much currish.


Why 't bites not you,
It feeds on fools flesh, so wisemen adicu

Please you accept the curtsie of the town?


I need not, I have curtsies of mine ownes
there is one for you.

How chance your wit's so free?


Only to out-goe Iadish company.


Here are none such.


Take heed, for if you tire,
She Will keep her pace and leave you in the mire.

A woman's feature, but a Scholars tongue
In quick discourse, Philosophers nere wondered
More at the strange conception of the winds,
Then I admire how she attained this wit:
Did not true learning make the soul divine,
She has spoke enough to make me conuertine.

My loves are sound, and wait but your reply,
A short lined accent, either no or I.

I am not too seueare, nor yet so kind,
To fall for eucrie idle puff of wind.
But farewell, i will take counsel of my pillow,
Pity fresh youth should wither in green willowe.

Appoint the place sweet, i will not miss mine houte.


At the three fools.


I Will meet.


And make up four.


Sweet words, kind looks, what? and a parting kiss.
Words, looks and lips cry all, the wenche is his.
I am possessed devil, love persuades my mind,
That if to him, to me she will prove more kind.
What Is Iulio made of? had thou soul or sense,
Thou would not prentise thy affections,
Nor tie thy fortunes to a strangers love.

A little liking my Lord, a ierk a trick or so, but no pure love I protest, but
be impartial, cast of the furd-gowne of hate, and fpeake out of the naked
Doublet and hose of judgment: is she not worthy to be beloved? nay, might not
she and I live passing well together


Yes, if to live in bondage be no hell,
I think you two, might do exceeding well.

Well my Lord, because i will be no example of self-will, i will break off our
meeting at the three Fools, and send for her to Court, where i will put al my
love into one quart of Maligo, and your melancholy humor into another, and he
that has done last, shall for penance give her a kick a the lips, and a pipe
of Tobacco be my witness, that is all the love I bear her


Well Iulio,
How ere you iuggle, if you do agree,
You must be pleased to wear the keepers fee. Exennt

Sir, I do not love to double with a woman if my friend, much less with you
my most upright and straight Connt, my young Lord (as I told you) is turned
absolute prodigal


How prodigal?


Marry thus prodigal, to frequent ordinaries is his ordinary practice, rubs
out whole weeks together in bowling. Allies, bandies away his pocket full of
French-Crownes in a morning, and counts it a pretty sport to procure heat


Thou telst me wonders, he that but last day,
Was never seen to walk without a book,
Writ against pleasure, and make bitter jests
Of honest recreation, turned dissolute,
I see no reason for it, the law and I,
(I tell you plainly Adam) think you lie.

Think as you will sir, there is not a trick used in the town that deserves
damnation, but he desires to deal in it, it is pity a was not made a tradesman,
he loves to follow his occupation a life, and that which makes him doubt most,
he is in love with the Indian punck Tobacco


Punke! how the fool that does not know it slanders a leaf, nicknames a
stranger herb


No herb a grace I hope sir.


Nor good thrift neither,
Yet there s one dunce, a kind of plodding Poet,
S(...)care's it was not in the first creation,
Because he finds no ballad argument,
To prove old Adam a Tobacconiste,

I think none a the name lout's it, I have heard old Adam was an honest man,
and a good Gardener loved Lettice well, Sallets and Cabbage reasonable well,
yet no Tobacco: Again, Adam Bell a substantial outlaw, and passing a good
Archer, yet no Tobaconist. Further, Diogenes, whose propper name might be Adam
for ought I know, loved Carretts well, Leeke porredge* passing well, yet no
Tobacco: to conclude, my great Grandfathers Grandfathersfather, and my self
all Gardners, yet could not abide this Chimney-sweeper Tocause, bacco


They did not: take me with you, what is the They were al plain folks, and did
not know the laws


They were plain indeed, and thereof grew the prouer be, plain dealing is a
Jewel


But he that uses it shall die a beggar.


That addition was made by some Lawyer or Poet, to avoid which, they cannot
endure plaine-dealing should have a hand in any of their actions


Touch no man's function, there are ierks and tricks
Spurn not the law, for if you do, it kicks.

So will a spur-gald Jade sir, but to all these misdemeanors, a maintains a
private punck, one Tristella that he had in way of reuersion from Iulio, a
twindger, a mere Horsleach, one that will suck out the brains of his
treasury, and make a mere skin of his wealth, I, out of my Love reprehended
his error, and he in a fury kick't me out of doors, and discharged me of his
service


I like not this, it is neither right nor straight done with no law-trick, nor no
good conceit, but here a comes


With Autumn in his bosom, pray God she shake not down his leaves, and leave
him to make the Duke his father a bald reckoning


Peace and observe.


Though I be a stranger to you,
Yet am I well acquainted with your humor.
A Lady cannot live about the Court
Without the envy of your Epigrams,
If she be pleasant, she is counted light,
If ruddy, painted, if her ruffes be thick,
They ask much poaking.

Trust me, love has killed
That worme-wood humor, bring th'auth oritie
Of one true tongue to prove my poesse,
Ever wronged woman.

And you will do it again?


That Is a good wench.


I pray who ought that pen?
That in a stammering Iambick vain,
Glanced at Emiliaes loose and gaudie train.
And broke broad jests upon her narrow heel,
Poak't her Rebatoes, and suruaid her steel,
tide her fringed garters, bought her words by weight

Still good in law, and an upright conceit.


Do you not know that man?


Suppose I do?


You did but flout them, and you will flout me too
You wondered not Cornelia being so fair,
Would be beholding to her Laun dress haite.

I know not this.


True, nor that Florymell,
Became a Pages habit passing well,
Vside single Rapier, took the rouse and swore,
Of all land Beasts she could not brook the Bore,
Nor that Count Lurdo, coming to a fray,
Brought not the worth of one poor hair away.

More then his own.


That jest comes near to me,
It Is our-growne now, a wants authority.

Nor that Melina whom your Muse renownes
Wore out as many suitors as new gowns.
And the same day that she was married,
Upon her finger wore her maidenhead.
In likeness of a Dyamond.

Indeed twa's sed,
That for Ring Melina sold her head.

But you are all Ouids.


They are bawdie mates,
Touch Lawyers too, indeed abuse all states,

Poets are wanton, and no doubt enjoy,
Their fair Corynnaes, though perhaps less coy.

Suppose some do?

Each one in this agrees to scandal us.


And talk of Lawyers fees.


Grant me but love, and with my utmost power,
I will defend your sexes stainlesse honor:
And with my pen dipped in the juice of gall,
Be his souls terror, that hereafter shall,
Cast ynke at honors garments, or aspire
To name your sex with an unhallowed fire.

I take your word.


Then seal it with a kiss.


That kiss my Lord deserves an Epigram*


Sit down good Uncle.


An unbidden guest
Should bring a stool along.

A woman's jest.


You mean a lie, for women use to lie.


But not like Scholars by authority.


Yet they may produce lying authority, and so cannot Poets,


Nor Lawyers neither.


Are you a Lawyer?


In Faith Madam, he has sit on the skirts of law any time this thirty years.


Then he should be a good Trencher-man by his profession.


Your reason Adam.


I knew one of that faculty in one term eat up a hole Town, Church, Steeple
and all


I wonder the Bells rung not all in his belly.


No sir, he sold them to buy his wife a Taffety
Gown, and himself a velvet Iacket.

What a proved Jack was that? but I wonder at Lawyers for one thing, many of
them use to take their fees aforehand


For a two-folde policy, one is they were commonly greedy, the other for
fear if their Clyents follow their Counsel long, they will not be worth a fee


It Is well said Lady, you do well to jest with an oldeman.


A says true, for if you should jest too much with a young man, it might prove
earnest, and so the fruits of your ieasts make you both a shamed on it


Well said Adam, but leaving at a full jest, Uncle, what earnest business
brought you hither


Your honors sudden Metamorphosis,
Told by your trusty Servant, and confirmd
By public rumor.

Why what says Goody Fame, and my trusty Servant


This is the worst my Lord that you expend
Your treasure on that Ladies maintenance.

S'foot say I do, what, has the worme-eaten bawd Fame: or ere a pander-like
fool else to do with it? give her maintenance, why she is of my nere
affinity, should I see my she affinity go in tatters? I allow my Servant
rags, and I were worse then a Jew, if I should suffer my she affinity to go
naked


Law takes your part, and if your pursse grow short
Rather then spend the public treasury,
I Will lend your Grace a brace of thousand pounds,
Provided this, that as our Booke-men write
I have security.

A Lawyer right?


Security? Leases and old rents, Castle and Towne-ships, able men, good
security, Towns are no Starters, they will hold out wind and weather


I crave no more, let me have pawnes and use.


How? Lords turn Usurers? those that should
punnish broke age deal upon pawnes?
If it were once his own,
Hee'de lend him money on his Duke-domes crown

But faith Uncle tell me, what think you of this
Lady? would she not make a pretty peart Duchess?

She Is fair, nor do I discommend your choice
I wish her yours, a private friend or so,
I know mad Ierks, and know that Law allows,
Princes their private pleasures, and my self
Will do my best to gain your honors love,
I will not absolutely say there are,
But there may be, if so your honor please,
Sellers and Vaults, which from your private Garden
May under ground lead to your bedchamber.
Whither, I will not name my self, but some close friend,
May unsuspected bring your beauteous Lady.

Lord what a broaking Advocate is this?
He was some Squiers Scriuenor, and has scrapt
Gentilitie out of Atturneys fees*
His bastard actions prove him such a one,
For true worth scorns to turn Camelion.

Madam* my Uncle out of tender-loue,
Better to shun all scandalous suspect,
That might attend on our vnsuiting Iodes
Will lodge you at his house, whither at times --

Your Grace may have access.


It Is so indeed.


Is there a back way?


And a private door,
A secret vault, and twenty odd tricks more.

A Stoue?


And Arbors with sweet violet Beds,
That have bin pressed to death with maiden-heads,
Where you may sport and breath, and take a rouse

Pe rdy, this Lawyer keeps a bawdie house,
I shall be ready to deceive you all.
My Lord, your Law-plot's, most judicial.

Bnt who comes here? some one of your cast clyents.

Gods me, the Countess.


Mum, I cannot stay,
There Is a clowd rising, drives my Sun away.

Is this your wife?


Madam, it is she that was.


That was and is not? how comes that to pass?


I cannot tell, God and his conscience knows


And the world sees Colossus on my brows,
Hercules Pillars, here 's non vltra writ.

Not in brass Characters?


No, horns more fit.


Has not the Law diuorc'd and made a bar twixt our affections? were not thou
content to take a pention


Which you still detain.


Good wit, Law-trickes and firm, you may complain.


Complain I do, I kneel before the throane and sue for Justice, but yet can
purchase none

Complain I do Cosen.


Away.


O, as you are a Prince, and you a virgin.

I was one long since,
This is no place for passion, dry your eyes,

Grief nails me to the ground, I cannot rise,
I Will grow immodest, justice is exild,
And so shall duty, patience turn wild,

Come, leave the Bedlam.


Do, for wit and Law know she is a fool,


A couple quoth Iack-daw.


Madam.


Who calls?


Madam.


Horatio.


In passion Lady.


Discontent or so.


Be not, be counsaild, do not let despair,
Like the rank cancker bred by sultrie air.
Eat this young Rose of beauty in the bud:
But in the April Sun of youthful blood
Let the sweet blossom ripen, thrive and grow,
To those full joys which none but Lovers know.

The man talks idely, tell me I am fair,
Lovely and young.

You are, by love you are,
Not fair, you are: Leanders paramour:
Compared with you was a swarth Blackamour
Your hair is softer then the Colchean Fleece,
Your well lim'd features, natures master piece
Your eyes too Dyamonds, set in purer molde
Then rocks of currall, or the Indian gold.
In thy smooth chin there is an Iuorie pit,
Where blushing Venus and young Cupid sit,
Feathering of golden shafts, the wounding heads,
Made of thy ^mber tresses finest threads.

You will not buy me sure you praise me so.


Yet fair, i will bid fair for you ere I go,


He that bids fair for me deceiues his eye.


By heaven a does not.


Wilful perjury, what means all this?


This my discourse intends,
Were husbands Saints, some wives would have close friends.

Some bad perhaps, but --


Husbands but for it, true, woot? prithee woot thou?


What?


Vd's Hartlings do?


Do what?


Loue-tricks quickly, woo't thou prithee.


No, I prize my credit.


Credit? life a man,
What talks of credit? art not known a strumpet?

You do me wrong.


Damnation, what a gloss,
This gilded copper, Diamond of glass,
What strange show it makes? i will give you a colot
Your face was nere worse painted, then i will paint
Your Wain-fcot credit, you are a private bit,
Kept for some great made Dives. Red hot scandal
Suck the native color of your souls
As it has scorched thy credit, shriueld Baw'd,
Sponge, Lemon-pill, and more irrelishable
Then ore-dride Stock Fish, fie.

Upon thy shame.


Thy husband, O thy husbands bow-leg'd fame
Death I shall hate thee.

O for honor do.


Swear thou art my strumpet.


I Will endure that to.


Shall not deny't, heart, can not.


Yes, I can.


Do It for thy life, thy soul, basse curtezan.


Farewell, if friendship be at such a rate,
Before i will purchased, i will live still in hate.

Heart, a new fashion,
A Lady poor, beautiful and chaste? clean
From the bias of Custom: to be poor, painted,
And proud is as common in Genoa, as felt and feather
In the fortunate Island: but chaste and poor,
As singular and rare, as Conscience with the Anabaptist.

Come hither Boy, did never owe me service


Yes Madam, more then ever I paid you honestly, and were a not my Master.


Thy Master, who?


Horatio, he that puts chastetie to the quick, and honor to the stab, but i will
show him the nature of a right Frenchman, deny him homage, for swear
allegiance, and come behind hand in cash keeping, and with his own pursse
maintain you against him


Thy purpose briefly.


In balde sentences, your noted wrongs are pitied.


Pittyed, by whom?


By me, lodgings prepared and diet, which I humbly tender your honor, as first
payment of the ancient debt, my service owes you


But is the lodging private?


At mine own mothers, and though I say it, she keeps an honest house, though
my father be a Cittiz^n


Of what profession?


Neither fool nor Physician, but an ingenious Pothecarie.


And what resort?


Very civil and most quiet resort, patients, the house is set round with
patients twice or thrice a day, and because they will be sure not to want drink,
every one brings his own water in an Vrinall with him


Does a use physic too? that is beyond his warrant.


O Lord Madam, better men then he strain curtes^ie with their warrants in
this age, besides, you being musical, shall meet much content, for my mother
lodges three or four Knights and Ladies Daughters that practice music and
needle work, and will no doubt be exceeding proud of your company, wilt please
you walk


Thou art the Star, by whom my fate is led, My shame's so public, i would feign
hide my head


CVrrant in Law, and how encountered you. Wiu. I Will tell you my good Lord (I
thank my bringing up, I can talk, I use not to have my tongue to seek when it
should pleasure any man, especially my good Lord) I told her what a credit it
was to have a man of great credit, and that which is more, a skillful Lawyer
that can stand out in her case at a dead life, and one that if need were, could
make a crazy action sound, I put her in mind what it was to have such a one to
her sweet heart


Thou speakst but right, for so I am indeed.

You are, I urged it, and she confessed to me that the very first night she saw
you she dreamed on you, and wished you in her bed, and her bed in the midst of
the River


How, ith the River?

Yes for sooth,

In the middle of the tide.

Yes in her dream.

Good,
But she does love me.

Believe it my Lord she does, martie you must think I drew her and drew her,
and wrought her and wrought her, till I made her as plyant and, trac table as
wax, marry with all, she is as constant as Lucretia, and will not for a
thousand pounds, till she has the law of her side


I sound her meaning, first i will gull my Nephew.


Her intent right, she intends to make a Gull of the Prince, and an absolute
Goose of you


Still good in Law, i will fetch him ore of all,
Get all, pursse all, and be possessed of all,
And then conclude the match, marry at least,
When can you tell? I Will use her as a hand
To pick the Princes coffers, and for reward
To prison, marry her, for tricks can do it, (actions.
The worlds squint-eyd, and dares not pry into our
Here lies her walk (my Lute Win) she shall see,
Youthe's leaden footed in respect of me.

Win, prithee give the Fiddler a testar and fend him packing, what a scraping
the rongue keeps? does a think the Count keeps a Tavern or a Bawdie-house?
my good Lord! beseech your honor pardon me


No harm sweet Love, how do thou like this Caper?


Passing well my Lord, will you never leave these coltish tricks? but to the
matter: I sent you my resolution by your Maid, have you received it


I have, and it holds current,
Then tender me possession.

Of what?

Of thy chaste love.

Not too much have for that, you have a wife.

I had one.

And still have.

Thy love shall quickly wed her to her grave, I nere did love her.


When she was a maid
You swore you did, how soon poor youth's betrayed
To helpless ruin* do you love me?

I faith.

For how long?

Till death.

O deadly lie.
I Will tell you just how long, love's bred in the blood,
Prospers as long as beauties in the bud.
When beauty withers, lustful love grows cold,
And ere it be half ripe, it is rotten old.
If you have me, you must not put on yellowes,
I Will have my felfe, my servant and my fellows.
My love, my liking, and a second me,
I love to relish sweet variety:
Your old wife moved you, I shall vex you more.
Take Coach with Gallants even a sore your door.
Take Rings, give bracelets wouen of my hair,
Which to spite you, my Servants arm shall wear.
I Will in your prefence sit upon his knee,
Exchanging kisses if you speak to me.
I Will pont in scorn, cry mew, and look aside,
At which, if you but frown, i will roundly chide,
I am not as I seem, dissembling wit
Is my best means.

Square to my humor fit.

I was a Beggar borne.

And so was I.

Traded in lust and gainefull brothelrie.

The fitter for my turn, I was a man
Borne to no hopes, but a few shreds of wit
A Grammar Scholar, then a Scriuenor.
Dealing for private use twixt man and man,
and by close broake age set them at debate:
Incenst them unto Law, which to maintain,
I lent them money upon Lands and Plate,
After the rate of seauen-score in the hundred.
Then did I learn to countefeit men's hands,
Noble-mens arms, interline Evidences,
Make false conueyances, yet with a trick,
Close and cock-sure, I cony-catch'd the world.
Having scraped pretty wealth, I fell in League
With my first wife, and (though I say it my self)
She had good doings, her back commings in
And private goings out, raised me aloft:
I followed cases of the law abroad,
and she wae merry with her friends at home.

Did you nere take her kissing?

Twenty times.

Were you not Iealious?

Never nothing less.

Yet saw her kiss with Strangers.

Kiss and play.

And were you a Cuckold.

Cuckold by this light.

What? a wittall.

And a Wittall too.

And knew't?

And knew't.

And sufferd it.

I did.

It went attirde in gold, a golden Crest,
Is a brave fashion, and accounted best.

Madam, my Lord.

What news?

The Prince.

The Prince.

And Iulio.

Which way?

Where?

From thence.

That way the vault, from thence the private door, as I stood Centinell at the
further end of the Vault, they being unacquainted with the turnings, came
g^oping and feeling, as commonly men will do especially in a strange place, and
as I am true sinner, had I not spyed the Diamo^d on his finger (twinne, to this
a my conscience) they had been upon me in the dark ere I had been aware of
them


The Prince.

And Iulio.

Quick away.

What plot?

Behind the Arras? escaped behind the Arras.

Behind the Arras.

Close, cock, sure, be wise,
They only thrine that best can temporize.

A rare vault by this light, and never devised without the advice of a grand
Jury of Bawdes, a word with your lips Tris


As god mend me Prince you smell bawdie.

Since I came into thy company Win. And how is it Tris? fore-God a pretty
lodging


And very fair hangings.

Passing good workman-ship, what story is this Tris?


Why my Lord? the Poetical fiction of Venus kissing Adonis in the violet bed.


Fore-god it is true, and mark where the Cuckoldly knave Vulcan stands sneaking
behind the brake bush to watch a*m


A pretty conceit Iulio, do see Vulcan with the horning parenthesis in his
forehead! I hit indirectly upon the leaft pap at three passes for a hundred
Crowns


Not for a hundred.

Is It a match?

It Is done, where will you take your stand?

Here, any where, heart has the Arras an ague, it trembles so?


No, Vulcans fearful.

And with a fear it comes, have at the Cuckkold.


Oh!

Hark, the Arras is in labor.

Mas I heard something groan.

I Will be the Midwife and help to deliver it.

Sweet Prince.

Hark Wench, I smell Bores grease.

Will you but hear me?

Now excuse what trick? She whispers to him.

How? but a Picture? i will try that presently,
If you love me, disfigure it not, I esteem it only for
the lively workmanship.

Then let me have a sight on it.

Upon condition you will neither deface it with weapon, nor soil it with your
breath --


On my Virginities maidenhead we will not discover Lurdo behind the Arras.


Heart a the Devil, your Uncle.

O forbear, fore God passing good workman indeed.


Mark but the glance of his eye.

The hanging of his neither lip.

The blush of his cheek.

The curle of his hair.

The pit of a chin.

What a smooth hand a has?

Long fingers like a Lady.

Not so much but a seal Ring.

Arms and all, viz a tame Gudgeon.

And the fool swallows it rarely, and you mark him.


Is the numbe Ass insensible of Scoffs?
I Will touch him nearer, yet mine eye deceiues me,
And this be not Count Lurdoes counterfeit.

You may soon know that my Lord.

As How?

If it be his, a has the Gowte in his left foot,

The very same, his sh oe is cut and all, Farewell Tris, and yet i will startle
him a little better before we leave him, fore-god it is so like him, I doubt,
wether it be the shadow or his substance


A block.

A shadow.

A mere senseless stone.

Then it is a counterfeit.

An absolute counterfeit, what do you mean?


Marry many Counterfeits walk in the likeness of good money, and so may this
do, which to prevent i will nail him to a poast, for fear a pass current on
your lips in my absence, and so deceive me


I Will swear a shall not, gentle Prince be short,
Length kills the heart of the most feeling sport.

Well Maiden, I am content, this jest shall repriue your head for this once,
but beware the next encounter, come Ariadnes clew, will you unwind, and light
us through this vault of darkness, and there is your Naulum


Thank you my Lord, and your business stand this way at midnight, i will let you
in by this token, and take this from me, when you come again, bring the Lady a
Diamond, or some pretty and foolish stone, for I ca^ tell you these same
paultrie stones are in high request amongst Ladies, especially such old mowsers
as I have been in my time, and as I say when you come, be not ashamed to
knock, and if I come not knock lustely, and again, and never give over
knocking till you hear my hem, did you never know Wins hem


Never.

Why have thou a private hem?

Have I? In Faith sir I, few Gallants ith the town that are of any standing at
all, but are acquainted with my hem, but come close my Lord, close, and besure
the next time you come you do not forget to knock lustily


My Lord.

My Love, my life, oh thou art made
Out of the soul of wit, and thy conceits,
Of the best fashion.

Did you taste the jest?

Divinely, oh divinely, tart and quick,
Pleasing, yet not teadious I was wrapped

In a knaves skin.

My senses were entranced.

Into a fools Paradise.

Oh my sweet Phoenix, out of thy ashes.

Is your love so hot, you mean to burn me*

Oh fit honnyed me,
And then their numnesse, did thou never read
Of any Lawyer came to be Duke?

Never, but I have heard of a Cuckold that was an Usurper.


Why such a one would I be.

What, a Cuckold?

Yes, and an Usurper too.

So you are for you Lawyers usurp more crowns then half a Country.


Ulysses, Tully, Lawyers, but no Dukes.

Menelaus and Vulcan were Cuckolds but no Lawyers.


Fore-mee tistrue, but now I do remember naught to that purpose:


The most lustful Goats
Wear gilded horns, and go in Velvet Coats.

Whatnewes Win?

Faith ordinary household news, yonder is a wel-fac'd Gentleman craves a may
change a word with you


His name?

Horatio.

Leave us to confer.
A trusty friends, the souls high Treasurer.

In dumps Horatio? what, my second self clowded with passion?

O my honored Lord, Our souls and our affections are made all of one fashion
now the slightest wrong that scars the reputation of my friend, stabs daggers
to my heart


I know it true, and I can proou't,
Our loves are twins,
But to the wrong, dares any idle tongue
Bark at our greatness?

Yes.

Their names?

Your wife.

My wife? the manner?

Among her lustful Mates,
She shame's not to give out, that by your greatness,
knowledge, credit, and friends in highest place,
You have diuorc'd her without due desert.

We must demurie of this, i will have a trick
By way of Habeas Corpus to remove
This talking Gossip, come Hotatio,
Some project, how? what course for her remove:

I cannot counsel, but fore-god my Lord,
My lodgings mightily annoyed with rats,
That eat my papers and deface my books
How should I rid them.

Easily, poison them,
And well remembered, this she Rat my wife,
That eats and tears the leaves of my repute,
Shall taste like speeding Physic in thine ear,
Can temper poison?

Yes.

And kill a Rat.

That she shall never swell on it.

Mum for that,
This she Rat is a Devil.

A Limb of Satan.

Envy.

Destruction.

Malice.

Ratsbane do it?

Ere my disgrace get age, rare tricks and I will fool the world, woo't, do it?


The Rate shall die.

Quick pretty Damsels, that your task were done The fore-noones eldest minutes
almost run


Then the glass runs to fast.

I think not so,
Had thou my cares, thoudst think it ran too slow.

I have my task forsooth.

So have not I.
Yet with these sands my sorrows run away
I turn them with the glass, the glass is run,
Yet my hudge mass of cares is scarce begun,
Here Is a fault, little one what work make you.

True stitch forsooth.

Then see you work it true.

Pray madam teach me to take out this knot Of hearts ease.

Hearts ease, I have almost forgot,
I could have wrought it well when I was young:
But in good sadness, I have had none long.
What Is that?

A branch of Rue.

A common weed, of all herbs else I work that well indeed, how chance your
flower is behind the glass


Indeed I Will get it up:

Indeed alas.
I cannot chide with her, yet tyrant care,
At my entreat will not one sight forbear:

Why sigh you madam?

Oh I grieve to see,
Youth run to cath at their own misery.
You are like April or Rose buds in May,
You never wither, till the wedding day,
Even so did I, so pretty souls will you,
Youth wears mild Hearts ease, marriage bitter Ru^.

Be not so sad, good madam, do b ut smile,
We Will have a song sad sorrow to beguille.

Save you fair Ladies, madam, my business leads me to you.


If in your ancient suite,
My cares are deafned and my utterance mute.

Your ear, be wood, what should beget this coins
Were I a stranger, or some City Gull
I would comend thee, but I know the world.
Lodging is costly, maintenance asks charge:
Thou art diuorc'd and have no other help,
But thy bare comings in: accept my Love,
I w ill allow thee twenty pound a quarter.
To buy thee Pinnes.

Leave this ymodest suite.
Or by my honor --

Come, these words of course
My fame, mine honor, and my dear respect:
Are but like Ignes fatui to delude,
Green and vnseason'd wits, pry thee be kind,
A gilded slip carries as fair a show,
As perfect gold, guilt honor may do so

But put your slip to trial, the slight gold,
Is soon rubd of:

Come, thy distinctions sold
Let not thy April bewty like a Rose,
Fade in the bud, and ripened pleasures lose,
My sword thy honor: thy estate my purse,
Shall man an d strenghten,

I detest that course.

Your husband has a sweet heart:

For his ill.
Shall I turn traitor and mine own fame kill?

It Is* dead already, every idle tongue, Stabs it to death.


I have the greater wrong.

Thou wrongst thy self and spurnst thy proper good
Am I not youthful see my wanton blood
Daunceth within my veins, and blushing, Courts
Thy generous bewty to more amorous sports,
You shall not choose.

hands of.

I love the e dear.

I hate thee deadly.

Do thou?

Shall I swear?

No, i will believe thee Phoenix of thy sex,
I glory in thy virtues, and reveal,
What by my oath I promisd to conceal.
Your iealious husband vrgde me to this try all,
Pawning his oath upon your strict deny all,
all bastard Iealosie should be exilde,
and ancient love entirely reconsilde.
I touched your heart, and now I find it true,
I Will give you notice, i will impoison you.

Thou speak all comfort.

I was made of hope. and rich perfourmance waits upon my words.


Father of my fair fortunes, whose rich love begets this reuniting covenant,

When comes this long expected sealing day?

To morrow, the hour eight.

Certain?

As life.

Then follow me to feast,
Thy news Horatio is the Welcomest guest.

Swell heart, hold bosom, yield not to relent,
and yet her beauty, colorable trash,
Her virtues, vengeance Hypocritical,
I love her, fury, poison, Hidraes gall,
Impatience man me, black damnation
Usher my practice, poison play thy part,
and do my latest greetings to her heart.
We all must down, yet here the difference lies.
Many for sins, she for her virtue dies.

T Tristella.

My Lord?

Good wine needs no bush, nor a good face payting thou art favor of thy
self, and what thou cost is not under a color


I know no other paynter but one, and her name is modesty, and she sometimes
throws a blush into my face to make my pale cheeks red, but else you shall
never take me for an Aldermans poast


Why an Aldermans poest?

Mark but where great poasts are newly painted, you shall see much egresse and
regresse in and out, and where you see a face newly okered, it is a sign there is
great traffic, and much stirring to and fro


Come sit, sit, nay nearer, nearer, nearer yet.

Then I shall sit upon your skirts.

Iulio and Horatio, what shal's have to supper?
I am now in the spending vain.

Then God for me* what make I so near?

Good action, you shall not remove, I learnt that phrase of mine uncle, boy,
know what Adam has bespoken for our palates

Where there a banquet to be had,
More rate and dear, then that Vitellius made:
It should be served in, but Horatio,
What shall we eat that is costly, and that is rare?

A roated Phoenix were excellent good for that Lady.


Andf why for that Lady.

Fare ech'd and dear bought, is good for you know hwo.


For Ladies.

I for Ladies.

Then the most cheap stuff, and next to hand is good for you know who.


For knaves.

I for knaves.

Adam what have you ready.

Sir you may have a Calves head.

here is a Gentleman has one in his hat already, no more. Calves head I pray
thee


Have any Pheasants or Partriges?

No, but if your Lord-shipe will have a dish of Woodcocks.


No for God-sake, they are the stalest meat with me of any, for I never sit to
meat with these gallants, but there is Woodcocks clean through the table


Then unless you will have a Dotrell or a Gull.


A Gull? why which of these Gent. woot thou serve in? do you not hear how Adam
flouts you


I mean a Sea-gull bakt.

I in any case lets have that, I have fed my wit on many a land-Gull, once let
me banquet my self of a Sea-gull, some Sea Captain, I lay my life that has a
desire to sup with me, but such as thou have, I prithee be brief


Lay the table in the withdrawing room.

I will sir, your honor can have no Larks I Will assure you.


And why?

Two Citizens sons and a Poet bought up all ith town, flung away the bodies
only to have a pie made of the brains


A sign either they lackd brains, or else they did it because they would
bear a brain


T was told me that the young Lord Polymetes Was entered here.


He that so told thee fellow told thee true.

I cry your Lordship mercy, let this letter
Supply th* un willing office of my tongue,
And be the sad reporter of my news.

What ominous news can Polimetes daunt?
Have we not Hyren here?

Ovid not all thy Metam orphosis
Can show such transformation, oh my God!
It is not possible, (is this my son?)
A has mistook himself, my life a has,
For the seven liberal sciences; a reads,
The seven black deadly finnes.
Must you needs son turn over these linen leaves
having such store of paper? this is miraculous.

News, news my hearts will make your iocund souls dance in your bosoms,
now which joyful tongue amongst you all cries first God save the Duke? God
save Duke Polymetes


The news is not so happy.

Tush look here.

My Lord I Am sorry for your he auinesse.

Thou should have said so to a Porter that is heavy laden.
But come, sit, sit in council, let us deuize
How to spend all this countlesse mass of wealth,
My father has bequeathed me at his death,
Quite from the popular and vulgar garb,
We will be ode in all things, and retain
No common humor in our large expense.

An honorable mind, and were your father
A live to note these hopeful parts in you,
How would it move him and surprise his heart?
But now my lord: my message being done,
I must return i am glad I have found your son.

For thy good news take that along with thee,
Look here Tris, would not these
Make notable states-me^? methinks state steals upon me.

And I have known some steal state.

Then they came never trnely by it as I do, but pergite porro, methinkes I
could make an indifferent careless Duke


And I could make a notable Courtier, methinks I am begging already.


O mine Uncle would make an Excellent Court spaniell, he would sent out offices
and conceald lands, a hundred mile of, and a were my casheere but twenty
years, I durst change livings with him


But what employment for Horatio?

O, he would make a good grumbling surly politician, thou shall be my
politician


I shall never be loved.

Not loved, your reason?

I hate the base and rascal multitude,
I cannot nod, ride bare-head through the streets,
Nor wreath my body like a Cable Hat-band
To every Peddler and mechannick Townes-man,
I hate the poor, am envious at the rich,
Love none.

Yes, women.

Faith after a sort, I love a good smooth face*

Then you love mine.

And forty more.

I muse yoe do not marry.

I would to night, upon condition
That I might bury her to morrow, God Boy.

Fill him some wine.

I cannot drink, god boy.

It is not poisoned.

Hum, I cannot tell,
The Countess drunk and did.

Come, come.

Farewell.

Still in the b^gs of Melancholy, pax on it, it is staler then Tobacco, not so
much but the singing Cobbler is grown melancholy, and correctes shoes in
humor, fie ont, come sit, we must talk about many matters, Riuo, I Will be
singular, m^ Royal expense shall run such a circular course that the Rascal
spawne of Imitators shall split their wooden brains, and sink their wealth in
the Gulf of prodigality, and yet like a bad Archers shaft, fall fixescore
short of their aim, my expense shall be royal and peculiar


I Will fashion you a course.

Divinely, come.

Divinely indeed, serve God, live honestly* relish not Atheism.


That's clean out of the fashion indeed.

Then good.

Because out of the fashion, set down that Adam

It Is done*

I hau't my Lord, I haue't in faith.

Nay quickly, how?

We Will keep no Pages.

Excellent, that is clean out of the fashion for Pages, that is good, that
stands, down with it Adam


It Is done sir.

We Will use no great Horses.

How shall we ride then?

On Mules and she Asses.

Down with that Adam.

But, for my train, for a Page with Pages,

Maintain a hundred Gallants at your heels,
Live in the Country, entertain again
Into the Court, long-banish'd hospitality,
Who since the first great hose with Codpeeces grew out of fashion near durst
show his head


Another, set it down, i will spend after forty po d a day, i will see which of my
cheuerill braind immitators dares follow my fashion: sblood I cannot drink
Tobacco two days, but the third the Church wardens and fidemen are at it in
the Alehouse in sermon time, I cannot wear a suit half a day but the Tailors
Iournyman creepes into it: I cannot keep a block private, but every Citizens
son thrusts his head into it: I cannot keep a wench but every grand-Iurors
son in the Country imitates me, I care not if I make it petty treason for any
man to kiss under ten pound a Kiss


Oh my Lord, twill never pass ith the Lowerhouse, they will not loose their
liberty of kissing


Then keep a leash of Wenches.

As common as cracking of nuts, not a seruingman, but does as much.


Fore-god I hau't, peculiar I haue't.

What is it Iulio?

Your honor shall keep no wenches at all.

No wenches? what shall become of me then?

I must be round with you Tris, you must pack, many women they say are common,
and i will entertain nothing that sauors of Community, I will not diuulge


Nay, but hark you my Lord, though you maintain me, you do not lie with me,
and I think that is the newer fashion


Fore-god the newest of all, for there is not a gallant maintains his wench but
a will lie with her, down with that Adam


It Is done.

My Lord my Lord, the Duke your father with a great train is coming.


From heaven or hell.

That Is more then I know, but by the faith of a page, or the word of a Gent.
which you will, he is ariu'd and in great state entered the City


Zounds where is the slave that brought the falsereport of his death?


But art sure it is my father?

Or else your Mother did you the more wrong, shift for your selves, for he is
come


My father alive and come home, heart a me what shift? come home and find the
Court turned Alehouse Dicing-house, Dancing school, I am undone horse and
foot


Some Rosasolis or Aqua mirabilis ho, for our general coward's in a swoune.


I know you are a hot shot in a feather-bed Tris, but that will uot serve turn
now, therefore fall off, the enemy is too strong, deed Tris, every Lamb to
his fold, and Cony to her Borough, for the old Fox is abroad no, wilt not
be? why then God a mercyes brain

Cedant arma togae, my gown and books boy, some sudden devise to keep him
back half an hour, and win my good opinion for ever


And I do not, let me die of the bastina^ do.


Lords, make a stand, I wonder that our Son glads not our wished arrival with
his presence


No doubt my Lord, his honorable care,
Is not acquainted with your sudden landing.

We take it so, and whilst our self in person
Enquire the cause, attend us in the Hall,
Little thinks he his father is so near,
But unexpected, i will go startle him,
And put his wit unto the present try all.

where is the Prince?

my most honored Lord?
In private conference with an English poast.

An English poast?

An English post my Lord: the effect of his letters I know, not but I heard him
begin a most strange discourse


Of what I prithee?

Please your honor take a turn or two, I shall relate (quickly my Lord)
heereports there fell such an Inundation of waters in the month of July, about
the third of dog-dayes, that the Owers and Scullers that use to work in the
Thames, rowd over houses and landed their faires in the middle I Will of Paul's


Is It possible?

Very easily possible (sfoot quickly) and more the fishermen that rid between
Dover and Calis, took red spurlin, and she Mackerell in the midst of the
Exchange, which made mutton so cheepe and stale, that it is thought the better
half of the townsmen will run horn mad about it


It cannot be.

Not be? why look you sir,

Nay.

But hear the conclusion, just on Saint Lukes day coming shall be a
twelue-month, Westminster and Winchester, drinking a quart of wine together on
Salisbury-playne fell into hard words and strange terms, there was thou knave
and I knave, and such foul words, as if tow young Barristers had been
breathing their wits for a wager, (sfoot make an end) now it was thought
Westminster stood most upon his terms, yet in the end Winchester got one of
his best terms from him spite on his teeth, which so vexed Westminster, that
it grew to a deadly fewd, which was so hottly pursude that the taking up of the
matter cost many broken heads


How.

So sir, (sfoot not done yet?) and had not Charing-crosse a tall bow legd Gent:
taken up the matter, it is thought Westminster stones would have bin too hot for
some of them: and in parting the fray, Charing-crosse got such a box of the
ear, that he will carry it to his deathsday, some say a got a wry neck by
parting the fray, marry Winchester says flatly, a got a creeck in his neck,
with looking westward for Termers


Thou should have told me.

Of the English poast* why look you my Lord, the poast coming in poast-hast
to show his duty to the Prince, stumbled at a post that lay in his way and
broke his sinister shanck, and so I break of my discourse and bid your honor
welcome home


What a strange tale is here? of slouds and hills of Charing-crosse, Terms*
and I know not what? and when I loo'd for the conclusion

A breaks of all and leaves me in a Cloud.

There is some trick in it, honord*Iulio?

Health to my Sovereign.

How fares our Son?
Have your inducements drawn him from his humor?

Faith my Lord I have done a childs part, and almost spent a childs part, to
draw him to society, but it is labor lost


What is his business with the English poast?

The English poast my Lord? your grace is merry.


His boy informd me a held conference,
Bout serious matters with an English poast.

Alas my Lord, the boy is lunatique.

How lunatique? and a fo^e god me thought
A told a mad discourse, but the occasion.

I t^ll you my Lord, coming a bruptly as your honor o^ any else may do to the
Princes chamber, about some ordinary service, a found him in his study, and a
company of botlno^'d Devils dancing the Irish hay about him, which on the
sudden so startled the poor boy, as a clean lost his wits, and ever since
talks thus idle, as your Excelence has heard hi


But tell me does my son converse with Devils?


As familiarly as you and I, they are his only company keepers, when a has
been duld at his study, I have known a Devil and he play at Ticktack for
phillips, by the whole day together


It Is passing strange, but may we without danger go near his study?


At yonr honors spleasure,

See where a sits, be Patient and observe.

prevented still? now by Medusass snakes,
And black Erinnis ever burning lamp,
If all the skill in pyromantique rules,
Deep Eromancy, or the precious soul,
Of Ge man*ique spells and Characters
Graven in the sur fase of our mother earth,
Can work this strange atcheiuement,

How his brain sweates in pursuit of learning


Oh attend.

The first house is vulgariz'd, the Horoscop or Angle of the Orient, and his
Ascendant betokens beginning of life, Merchandise, marriage and --


Lets break him off.

So please your excellence.

The second and third house, the third House is cadent from the Angle of the
Orient, and Ascendant to the Angle Septent^ionall, signifying Fathers Sisters
and Daughters absent and lost, Daughters and fathers lost: here then I find my
demand, the Maid lost my Sister, thus then I proportion my figure, there I
place my witnesses, and here my Judge, and thus proceed to the Invocation


Renowned Prince, Prince Polymetes, zoundes Prince.


Discourteous Iulio, give my studdie leave.

Heart not a ^ot, the Duke your father.

I Will make my father joyful by my toil,
Had not thy folly interiupted me,
My hopes ere this had met their period.

Your princely father.

O torment me not with his remembrance.

S'blood he is safe returned.

O would a were, then should not Genoaes Crown,
For want of strong supportance be pressed down.
I(...) not enough, that like a harmeles Prince
Spending my hou^es in Contemplation,
I let you hold the raines of government.
Unfit for me, my father has a deep
And searching judgment that can brush and sweep
such idle brayn'd and antique Parasites,
Forth of his presence, pray your absence,

I can but smile to sue how Protheus like,
They turn the shape of their discourse and project,
Thinking to lead me in an idle maze,
after their folly, well, I Will temporize,
and note the issue, come my Lords let us in,
His humour's grounded, and like subtle fire:
The more suppressed, it mounts so much the hier.

Why so, this jest came smoothly of and was not soild in the working


That boy is worth his weight in pearl, did mark what a tale of a Cock and a
Bull, he told my father whilst I made thee and the rest away, by a bill of
Convey anee at his back


And I did simple Knights seruire in persuading the Duke the boy was lunatique.


it was admirable, does not this jest deserve to be chronicled?


No by my troth, yet I must needs say, some as bad have bin, for how soever our
practice pass current with your father for the present, our villanyes must
needs break* forth, they are so notorious and public


No matter let*am, have not we brayns? brayns and they be well mincde are sauce
for any meat, let mine uncle turn Turxe and break forth, let the whole town
turn cuckold and blow their horns in our disgrace, I have brains, let the
Sun and the seven Stars be opposed, I have brayns for that too my present
wit shall giue*am all the lie in their throats, and may ntayne it at pocket,
dagger, and pistol when I have done


A mourner boy? what solemn funeral,
Has hung that sable livery on thy back?

Her death my Lord that has cut out the like,
For both your honors, the Countess is deceast.

Then will my uncle be a hauy mourner.
But how the manner of her death?

I Will eell your honor that hereafter and give you the ground of an admirable ie
ast


And we play not true moals and work it out of the ground, let me dye of the
greene-sicknsses


The ground then comes?

No I Will tell you that in private, the life of a jest thriues in the first
revealing, it concerns the manner of your avnts death and a law-trick of your
uncle


Come to the solemperites, and weep at least those being ended well receive y
our jest.


What is a man? heart a the Devil mere fools,
His rich invention, Machiuilian plots:
Idle illusiue antic fantasies.
Apelles grapes, I had as full a brain,
Fertile invention and as forward hopes,
As man could father, or his wit bring forth:
Yet in a minute in bubles age,
The venomdfury of a bitter spleen,
Confounded all, forgetful that I was,
Women are molded out of bashfulnesse:
And must be drawn to kindness by degrees.
All this I knew.

Neither the Law nor I,
Know any reason why Horatio.
But mum, Law-tricks as closely as I can,
Mine ear shall drink his meditation.

Had she ^uruiu'd Time --

Might have found us out,
Good, firm in Law, I am a fool to doubt,
His constant secrecy.

But now she is dtad.

The deepest wit could not have bettered,
Our smooth conueyance, but upright and straight,
Unknown, unseen, i will work upon conceit.

Had she been living, golden promises,
The smoothe Atturneys to a Lovers tongue
Might have in time solicited my suite,
Guiftes might have pleaded, mournful Elegies,
Told her my passions, had she been composde
Of steel or flint, nay, made of women's hearts,
The most obdurate mettle, Time and Art,
But she is dead, oh hell! and in her tomb.
My hopes are buried.

My conceited brain,
Has an odd crotchet called me back again.

To all these bad misfortunes should the Corn^ use any tricks?


Ha? a talks of tricks,
Of count and tricks, for tricks and count are twinns.

Yet I regard not.

I am right and straight.

Say a complain?

Suppose he tell the Duke he gave the poison.

He contrived her death and cannot wrong me,

Fie, I fear him not,
He does but father, what my brain begot.

This comfort yet which many want I have,
To follow my fair fortunes to the grave.

OH, shall I venture? ha, shall I enter?
Shield me Appollo, the ground is so hollow
That every step I tread upon it,
Methinkes it sings a dead man's Sonnet.
Fates, oh Fates be honest Drabs,
Fear gives me ten thousand stabs,
I dare not further it is wilful murder,
Thus late to tread the cloister vaults.
For though i am small, I have great men's faults,
Then gentle Fates, take some remorse,
I watch an honest, kind, quick course.
Grant that no Hobgoblins fright me,
No hungry devils rise up and bite me:
No Vrchin, Elues, or drunkards Ghoasts,
Shoue me against walls or posts,
O grant I may no black thing touch,
Though many men love to meet such.
But here is the tomb, my hopes suffizing,
I watch a dainrie Duckes vprising,
Her cheeks now are chilly, as is the pale lilly, (Roses)
But when her eye vncloses, they will look like two fair
A light my master? or some spright,
Yet What need Devils have candlelight,
It Is he, all hid, i will not be seen,
For once this tomb shall be my screene.

I cannot rest, my guilt keeps open mine eyes.
My passion rips my bosom, and my blood
Is turned to poisoned water, and so swells,
That my vexed soul, endures a thousand hels.
If I chance slumber, then I dream of Serpents,
Toades, altogether, and such venomous evils,
As hale me from my sleep like forked Devils,
Midnight, thou Aethiope, Empress of black souls,
Thou general Bawd to the whole word, I salute thee,
Wishing thy poison dropped upon my brain,
For my so rude, so rash, so heedeles murder,
In the ambition and the height of lust,
Not giving my blood liberty to cool.
To poison such a beauty, O black Fate!
Thus many killd, too soon repent too late.
Soft, stay, this sames the chilly monument,
That huggs her body in his marble arms.
Thou gentle soul of my deceased love?
O, were but possible to enjoy thy voice,
Thy sweet Harmonious voice, I should be blessed,
But Eene to dally with thy silables,
O tomb.

No tomb but Cesterne filled with tears.

O heart!

No heart, but sink of grief and fears.

Countess, soul shadow, shadow speak again*

Speak again.

What should I speak, my hate, or thy huge wrongs?


Hudge wrongs.

Hudge wrongs indeed, but charitable soul,
What ransom shall I pay thee for thy life?

Thy life.

My life?

(...) life.

Discourteous air,
My blood is frozen with despair.

Despair.

Pardon forgive me, shall I go?

I go.

But shall your hate pursue me, I or no?

No.

Adieu my grief and i will go sleep.

Pray God my tongue can my hearts counsel keep

Ha? are you vanished? let me see, a may be fallen a sleep against some pillar,
for i will be sworn a talked very idely, Abut decessit euasit erupit, I would
fain know that Wag that can put me down for a woman's Ghoast extempore,
especially if it were to be performde under a tomb cloth, but here lay the
desperate venture, had she chaunc'd to have risen, and spoke before her qu, as
about this time she must tise, or my sleepie drink plays, the drowsy
companion with her

Heart a me, my master again, what cross points are these? I see I must
betake me to my late refuge


It was no Ghoast, subtle opinion,
Working in man's decayed faculties,
Cuts out and shapes illusiue fantasies,
And our weak apprehensions like wax,
Receive the from, and presently convey
Unto our dull immagination.
And hereupon we ground a thousand lies,
As that we see Devils rattling their chains,
G^astes of dead men, variety of spirits,
When our own guilty conscience is the hell.
and our black thoughts, the Cauerns where they dwell:
Yet sure this was her shadow, for I hear
Her last words sound still dancing in mine ear.
Then gentle soul* if thou be yet vnthronde,
Answer one question and no more.

No more?

May my hearts true repentance satisfy,
My wi^ful* murder, your reply.

I.

Thanks, thousand thanks, and so farewell.

Farewell.

The bane of murder is despair and hell.

Was ever poor little knave put to his last trumps as I am? what shall I do
now* my heart goes pit a pat in my belly like a pair of washing beetles,
should a return again now, as my hand to a Lobsterpye a will, all the Fat were
in the fire, but hark it is one a clock, and just about this minute she should
play the wagtaile and stur


What trance was this? where am I?

Oh she speaks, Fates and be good girls keep my master away, and let his man
have a little sport with his mistress


What place is this? am I in heaven or no.

No.

What voice is that? is this place earth?

Earth.

Earth? how came I hither? do I live again?

Live again.

What voice is that? a woman or some youth?

Youth.

My fears will murder me, my powers are frighted.

Ahlas poor stirring ghost art over sprighted.

Boy.

mestresse.

Tell me.

all and more anon.
The sleepy drink has played the honest man,

What sleepy drink? how came I in this tomb?

I Will tell you that in a more private room,
Away I Will tell you a strange wonder,
Then wintes lightning, or Christmas thunder,
Then to my fathers trip and go,
Nimble prevention ont runs woe.

No more of mourning brother, we have laid
Our timelesse sorrows in a quiet grave,
When men interre their comfort let them weep:
Not when their crying charm is laid to sleep.

Great Duke mine eyes are not thus great with tears,
For our griefs funeral, but that her shame,
And future scandal will out live her name,

Come let mirth kill it, and to your discourse,
Is our son grown unto that height of riot
Your speeches intimate.

I know the law, if I have wronged the Prince,
I stand in compass of a praemonire,
And he by writ of ad quod dampnum may,
sue his recovery, I know the law.

Nay his own letter partly graunts as much,
But note his subtle reason, here a writs,
That of set purpose a laid by himself,
And played the part of a wild prodigal,
Only to put your love unto the test,
On which advantage to igrese his wealth,
You did indea^e him to society,
Of careless wantons and light Curtezans,
Made secret vaults and cellers under ground.

Non tenet in bocardo I demurre,
Do but send out your Jterum summoneas,
Or capias vt legatum to attach,
And bring him viua voce tongue to tongue,
And vi and armis I Will revenge this wrong.

Leave that to trial, here a further written,
That by his skill and practice in black Art,
He has found out and by much toil redeemd,
My daughter from the Turkish servitude.

Redeemde your daughter* an apparent error,
Which you by way of melius inquiren dum.
May soon discuse, he ran some home your daughter
As sure as I made cellers under ground,
Or played his pandar.

How so ere it prove,
I mean to try the utmost of his wit,
To see how quaintly he can bear himself:
But who comes here.

Marry my good Lord, this is the green bur, that stuck so close to the young
Princes sleeue, the shoemakers cutting knife, that fitted his boots to the
prodigalls last


If I be Compos mentis, this is she,
Must play your daughters part, my Lord be ware,
Work close cock sure, I se the gin the snare.

Most reverend father.

Father? now it fits,
Ware an old Fox, Duke I have brains I have wits.

Immodest impudent and shameless girl,
Is It not enough thou have misled my son,
And wrong his reputation?

How wronged him father? I must needs say I have played Will with the wispe with
my brother and have led him up and down the maze of good fellowship, till I
have made his wit and his wealth both turn sick but for any other wrong, I
appeal to himself, my uncle honest Iulio, where is a? and all the rest of
this good Audience, therefore pray good father


Out of my sight, thou art no child of mine,

You Are the more beholding to some of your neighbors, tut man look on me
well, here is your now ne nose, and thick kissing lip up and down, and my
mother were living, she would never busse you more, till you confessed I were
your daughter


What an audatious naughty pack is this?
Have her before a Justice, Adam.

Do, with all my heart good father, send me to a Justice, for apretty woman
with a smooth tongue and an Angels voice, can do much with Justice in this
golden age, but thus much before I go, if Justice will not p^ouide me a better
father, I Will have you, or I Will give the beadle of the ward a fee to cry, a new
father a new, as they do oysters at Call^is


Brother cre you acquainted with this woman?

I must needs say that at my nephews suite,
I gave her a months lodging and her diet.
But Nada veritate in bare truth,
and bona side without circumstance,
Splendente Sole the bright Sun nere saw,
A wench more capable of wit and law,
And how soere she is with bewty graced,
I dare engage mine honor she is chaste,

I give your words good credit, yet it is tare,
to find a woman wanton, chaste and fair,
But now unto my son, whose powerful art,
Strives to vngiue his sisters servitude.

Thanks He eat, thou have insphearde my hope
In a gold circle, o were my father here,
This fight would of his age bate twenty year.

What sight my son.

Lend me your watery eye,
That swims in passion for my sisters loss,
And in this book prospectiue, let it read,
Apleasing lecture.

I conceive two shapes.
A civil merchant and a bewteous maid.
Their pace is speedy and my slower eye,
Cannot keep way with their celerity.

That maid's my sister, whom on magiques wing,
To this fair presence, my rich Art shall bring,
Prepare to meet them, for this minutes age,
sends with my charm their airy pilgrimage.

Where are are we now? how strange (...) were we borne
Upon the pinions of the fleeting air,
And where dismounted? unto what great Prince
Christian or Pagan longs this mansion.

Are we in any sociable place?
Or in the Cell of some Magitian,
Who by his skill in hellish exorcismes,
Made us his thrall?

I can forbear no longer,
Welcome thrice welcome.

Welcome?

Whence?

To whom?

to me.

Thy father.

and thy friends.

do not beguile us, O Demetrio?
We are betrayed, see the Magtiian,
That by his cunning and strong working charms,
Brought us unknown.

^^to thy fathers arms,
Welcome Emilia, with this Iuory chain,
I sphaere my hopes and in thy bosom rain,
These tears of comfort, then embrace thy friends.
Thy Brothers Art all further difference ends.

Your City.

Genoa*

And your reverend name.

Ferneze.

Father.

Yes the very same,
I do remember when she went to nurse,
What a cursed vixen twa*s, but now she is grown.

Not past all goodness, yet I hope s^r: but in faith Brother wast you that brought
us from Turkey a cockhorse? and your Genoan hackneye be so quick paced you shall
have more of our Custom

Lay by discourse, what Gentleman is that comes vninuited to our feast of joy.


Pray welcome him father, he is a Genoan merchant, that with much suite
ransomed me from the Turk


My hopes redeemer welcome, but proceed
Unto the doubtful fortunes of my child:
It Was told me she was stolen from Monta sancta.

You help my memory, thence she was stolen,
And for her beauty, chosen Concubine
To the lascivious Turk, but by much suit,
And meditation of some special friends,
I bought her freedom with a thousand marks*

Which we will repay with ample interest,
Once more we will bid you welcome, and to set
A smoother gloss upon our merryment,
There Is a quick Wench that only lives by wit,
Who understanding I had lost my Daughter,
Borrowed thy habit, and Usurps thy name,
One call her in, now Daughter make thee sit,
To combat and dismount her active wit.

A parlous Girl, her wits a mere Snaphaunce,
Goe's with a fire lock, she strikes fire from stones,
She knows the Law too, a mere murdering piece,
Fight low, lock close, she speaks mere* lightning Niece.


How now father, have you put on your considering Cap, and bethought you? or
shall I proceed and trauerse my writ of errors


Ha, writ of errors? Law-trickes, words of Art Demurrs and quillets.


All not worth a pin, will you bethink you father?


I have bethought me, and to let thee see,
The true proportion of thy impudence,
Behold my Daughter, whom thon personat'st.

How, yout Daughter?

Yes minkes, his Daughter.

My niece, and I will make it good.

Prittie in faith, have ye any more of these tricks? I may be out-fac'd of my
self with a Card often, but in faith Uncle, the best knave 'ith bunch, nor all
the law in your Budget cannot do it, and as for you Sisley bumtrinkets, i will
have about with you at the single Stackado are you a woman


No.

What then?

A Maid.

If his tongue falter, all our plots bewraide.

If a true maid, lend a true maid your hand.

Both hand and heart

The like of me command,
Now I conjure thee by the love
Y^u bear Dian^es frien^ Grove,
By Cupids bo ve, and go den arrow,
Venus Dove, and chirping Sparrow,
By all those vo(...)es, the listening winds,
Hear when Maids v^claspe their minds.
By those sweet oaths men use in bed,
Beseeging of a Maiden head.
I do conjure you fore these Lords,
To answer truly to my words.

By these and more, by all the scapes
Of amorous Jove and Phoebus rapes,
By Lovers sweet, and secret meetings,
Hand embracings and lip-greetings,
I promise you before these Lords,
To answer truly to your words.

Where were you borne?

In Genoa.

Your name?

Emilia.

Lie not.

Twere open shame
to lie before so many.

In what Art were you instructed?

That Is not in my part.

Say music.

Quickly*

I was taught to sing,
Unto the Lute, and Court each amorous string
With a soft finger.

Good, how many springs
Lived you in Monta Santa?

Zoundes this stings.

How many?

Nine.

Zoundes ten.

Ten fops.

Nay quick

Twixt nine and ten*

Right, answer.

In The nick.

Your age?

What?

Any thing.

Come, fie, you linger.

I am just as old.

As what?

my little finger.

You dally

Sixteen.

Eighteen.

Eighteen fools,

Nay and you prompt we will hiss you forth the schools.


Come your reply, nay quick your certain age,

I am just as old as -- true Emilaes page.

A page?

Disguisde?

Wrapped in a woman's smock?

I Am in a wood.

And I can spring a cock,

Woodcock of our side:

And you bill so fair,
Make a clear glade, I Will single forth a pair.

Fie her wit scaldes.

We shall have change of weather.

Cocks of one hen, come prince, lets hold together.


I thought we should find a Counterfeit of you

Then nail me to your lips with a kiss, and make me current payment.


What, young Orlando? how dooes Charing-Crosse?
Is Westminster yet friends with Winchester?

Zoundes Iulio now.

Alas my Lord, it was a mere device to --

Make your Highness merry, when I heard
You were returned without your wished Adventure.

Oh Master Merchant, you aduenturd well,
To cheat your self thus of a thousand marks,

How now my Lord?

Nay, i will but see your breast, mine eyes desire,
No lower object.

Go to, read your errors.

I cannot now return, non est inuenta,
Brother embrace your child, your second heir,
I found firm witness in her bosom bare.

Art thou Emilia?

Emelia, your Daughter, once a Turkish prisoner

Receive a joyful blessing rise and say,
What wit or power freed thee.

Dear father, the manner both of my enlarging and captiuing i will relate, when
more convenient time and place shall incite me, but upon this occasion, pray
give me leave to put my brother beside his mela^chol


I prithee do so.

Why how now Student? grand Magitian,
Puritan, come, you never plaide the Wag,
You know not Winefrides hem, nor the Counts vault.

A'mort man? what, can Polymetes daunt?
Has a not Hyren here?

Zoundes all will out, brains --

Now for a hundred dozen of Larkes to make a pie of the brains.


Well, done it was, and out it must.

Why how now Polymetes in a dumpe?
Where Is your Venetian Merchant and your Sister?

Who? Emilia? why look you here father, do you think I knew her not? ask
the Boy and Iulio, do you think I would have maintaind her as I did but only
for affinities sake? what said I at first Nuncle? did I not urge affinities?
and you would see me hanged say and I did not urge affinity


And yet you pleaded hard for a nights lodging

Only to try thy honesty by this Element, ask my uncle else?


He Is a sweet womanist.

No more a that, niece you are a wag.

Well said old water Ratt,
But that my brother Coniurer should fail,
In the black Art. --

In the black Pudding: pish,
Of all arts else, only the law is firm.

And yet that danceth changes every Term.

Well ieston gallants, and uncle, you that make a pish at the black Art, my
books to the piece of Arras, where Venus and Adonis stood kissing and the
cuckoldly pandar Vulcan watched them, and all your by ways to boot, I raise up
my Aunt your late wife in the same proportion, habit and gesture, she usually
wore in her life time


Do that, I Will swear there is virtue in thy Art.

And if I do not, say Philosophy is foolery, Logique legerdemaine, and
Coniuring mere couicatching, as indeed it is

And now by virtue of this wand,
Each in his circle keep his stand,
Now Belioll and Astaroth,
Sole commanders of the North,
By H^cates head, E^innis snakes,
S^ix and all infernal Lakes,
I charge you kneel to Proserpine,
And by her license all divine
Dismiss the Countess from those shades,
Where pleasure springs and never fades.
Festina, ci^o, c^tius, come
free Tenant of Elysium.

The Count look, pale.

why starts Horatio?

What writ the shadow?

That, these lines will show,
Horatio, base Horatto poysond me,
I was your sister, right mine injury.

Horatio?

Yes, Horatio poisond her
Revenge it Duke be a true Irsticer.

Reueng't I will, degenerous homicide,
What reason led thee to so damned a deed?

I loved her, wood her, my hot love denide
Changde into hate, I poisoned her, she did.

Sounds this like truth.

And if you think I lie,
Ask Lurdo, his damb'd tongue will answer I.

Had he a hand in it?

No, I will demurre.

Revenge it Duke, be a true Iusticer.

He gave the poison.

And you laid the plot

Knit up two villains in one riding knot.

What quillet now?

At non plus.

Senceles, mute?
Silence cries guilty, a lets fall the suite.

Our sentence guilty,

Then be this your doom,
You shall be clos'de aline in her dead tomb.

Urge a reprieue:

Our punishment defer,

No, we must be an upright Iusticer;
To the execution.

Do, the world shall prove
My heart's as bold to die as twa's to love.

Birlady so is not mine, i would give my goods,
For a good habous Corpus, to remove me
Into another Country.

Leave demurrs,
Close them into that grave, that dead man's Inn,
Pity true virtue should be lodged with sin.

Make room dear Madam, law this leave dothgiue
To die by thee with whom I could not live,

And wronged Countess though I hated thee,
I come to take my latest sleep with thee.

Kind thou art welcome, and shall ever have,
My arms thy winding sheet, my breast thy grave.

Sister?

Aunt?

Madam?

My much wronged wife?

Justice great Duke, give me my husbands life,
Both his and his, if your demand be why,
See she surniues for whose death they should die.

Alive.

Vnblemish't.

S'blood I gave her poison.

I could tell your honor a tale in your ear to the contratie, I must needs
say your will was good, but my father being your drug-seller, instead of a
deadly poison, gave you a sleepie potion, do you remember the Ecc^o at the
tomb? though I played the knave with you, I did like an honest man with her


Thou did stiudeede, and i will requite thee well.

How now Uncle? what think you of Schollership now?


As of the law, good as it may be vsd,
But to my wife.

Brother, i will speak your part,
Receive her, love, and lodge her in your heart.

Nocte dieque.

What shall I do then?

Justice shall merce thee, and by our command
We banish thee the Court, though not our Land,
Your course is virtuous, let your honor grow
Till age has clothed you in a robe of snow.
Lastly, thy merit is not triuiall,
That turned to mirth a Scene so tragical.

Who would have thought, such strange events should fall
Into a course so smooth and comicall?
Who would have thought such treachery could rest,
In such a smoothe and virtuous seeming breast?
Who would have thought a bud of this young growth,
Should out of present wit ore-reach us both?
And to conclude, who would have thought the ear
Of your mild patience would so gently bear
With these our weak deserts? which if they please you ought
It Is less then we desire, more then we thought.


