ARe you then traveling to the temple of Eliza?


Even to her temple are my feeble limbs traveling. Some call her Pandora: some
Gloriana, some Cynthia: some Delphaebe, some Astraea: all by several names to
express several loves: Yet all those names make but one celestial body, as
all those loves meet to create but one soul


I am one of her own country, and we adore her by the name of Eliza.


Blessed name, happy country: Your Eliza makes your land Elysium: but what
do you offer


That which all true Subjects should: when I was young, an Armed hand; now I am
crooked, an upright heart: But what offer you


That which all strangers do: two eyes struck blind with admiration: Two
lips (proud to sound her glory:) Two hands held up full of prayers and
praises: What not, that may express love? what not, that may make her beloved


How long is it since you last beheld her?


A just year: yet that year has seemd to me but one day, because her glory
has been my howrely contemplation, and yet that year has seemd to me more
then twice seven years, because so long I have been absent from her. Come
therefore, good father, lets go faster, least we come too late: for see, the
Tapers of the night are already lighted, and stand brightly burning in their
starrie Candlestickes: See how gloriouslly the Moon shines upon us.


Peace fool: tremble, and kneel: The Moon say thou?
Our eyes are dazzled by Elizaes beams,
See (if at least thou dare see) where she sits:
This is the great Panthaeon of our Goddess,
And all those faces which thine eyes thought stars,
Are Nymphs attending on her deity.
Prithee begin, for I want power to speak.

No, no, speak thou, I want words to begin.

Alack what shall I do? come thou with me,
And weepst now thou beholdst this Majesty?

Great land-lady of hearts, pardon me.

Blame not mine eyes, good father, in these tears.

My pure love shines, as thine does in thy fears:
I weep for joy to see so many heads
Of prudent Ladies, clothed in the liuerie
Of siluer-handed age, for serving you,
Whilst in your eyes youths glory does renew:
I weep for joy to see the Sun look old,
To see the Moon mad at her often change,
To see the Stars only by night to shine,
Whilst you are still bright, still one, still divine:
I weep for joy to see the world decay,
Yet see Eliza flourishing like May:
O pardon me your Pilgrim, I have measurd
Many a mile to find you: and have brought,
Old Fortunatus and his family,
With other Cipnots (my poor country men)
To pay a whole years tribute: O vouchsafe,
Dread Queen of Fayries, with your gracious eyes,
T'accept theirs and our humble sacrifice.

Now i will beg for thee too: and yet I need not:
Her sacred hand has evermore been known,
As soon held out to strangers as her own.

Thou do encourage me: I Will fetch them in,
They have no princely gifts, we are all poor,
Our offerings are true hearts, who can wish more?
OF Loves sweet war, our timorous Muse does sing,
And to the bosom of each gentle dear,
Offense her Artles tunes, borne on the wing
Of sacred Poesy. A benumming fear,
(That your nice souls, cloyd with dilicious sounds,
Will loath her lowly notes) makes her pull in
Her fainting pineons, and her spirit confounds
Before the weak voice of her song begin.
Yet since within the circle of each eye,
(Being like so many Suns in his round Sphere)
No wrinckle yet is seen, she will dare to fly,
Borne up with hopes, that as you often do rear
With your fair hands, those who would else sink down,
So some will deigne to smile, where all might frown:
And for this small Circumference must stand,
For the imagind Sur-face of much land,
Of many kingdoms, and since many a mile,
Should here be measurd out: our muse entreats,
Your thoughts to help poor Art, and to allow,
That I may serve as Chorus to her scences,
She begs your pardon, for she will send me forth,
Not when the laws of Poesy do call,
But as the story needs, your gracious eye
Gives life to Fortunatus history.


SD, ho, ho, ho, ho.


within, Ho, ho, ho, ho,


There boy.


There boy.


And thou be a goodfellow, tell me how thou cal'st this wood.


This wood.


I this wood, and which is my best way out


Best way out.


Ha, ha, ha, that's true, my best way out, is my best way out, but how that out
will come in, by this Maggot I know not, I see by this we are all worms meat:
well, I am very poor and very patient, Pati^^^e is a virtue: would I were not
virtuous, that's to say, not poor, but full of vice, (that's to say, full of
chinckes) Ha, ha, so I am, for I am so full of chinckes, that a Horse with one
eye may look through and through me, I have sighed long, and that makes me
windy: I have fasted long, and that makes me chaste, marie I have prayed
little, and that makes me I still dance in this coniuring circle: I have
wandered long, and that makes me weary; but for my weariness, anon I Will lie
down, in stead of fasting i will feed upon Nuts, and in stead of sighing will
laugh and be lean, Sir, Echo


Sir Echo.


Here Is a Nut.


Here Is a Nut.


Crack it.


Crack it.


Hang thy self.


Hang thy self.


Thou Art a knave, a knave.


A knave, a knave,


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Why so, two fools laugh at one another, I at my little tattle gammer echo,
and she at me. Shortly there will creep out in print some filthy book of
the old boarie wandering Knight, meaning me: would I were that book, for then
I should be sure to creep out from hence: I should be a good soldier, for I
trauerse my ground rarely, marry I see neither enemy nor friends, but
Popiniayes, and Squirrels, and Apes, and Owls, and Dawes, and Wagtailes, and
the spite is that none of these grasse-eaters can speak my language, but this
fool that mockes me, and swears to have the last word (in spite of my teeth)
I, and she shall have it because she is a woman, which kind of cattle are
indeed all Echo, nothing but tongue, and are like the great bell of S.
Michaels in Cyprus, that keeps most rumbling when men would most sleep


a pox on thee for mocking me.


a pox on thee for mocking me.


Why so, Snip snap, this war is at an end, but this wilderness is world
without end, to see how travel can transform: my teeth are turned into Nut
crackers, a thousand to one I break out shortly, for I am full of nothing, but
waxing kernels, my tongue speaks no language but an Almond for Parrat, and
crack me this Nut: If I hop three days more up and down this cage of
Coockooes nests, I shall turn wild man sure, and be hired to throw Squibs
among the Co^minaltie upon some terrible day. In the mean time to tell truth
here will I lie. Farewell fool


farewell fool.


Are not these comfortable words to a wise man? All hail Signior tree, by your
lean i will sleep under your leaves, I pray bow to me, and i will bend to you, for
your back and my brows must, I doubt, have a game or two at Noddie err I
wake again: down great heart, down. Hey, ho, well, well


Fortune smiles, cry holyday,
Dimples on her cheeks do dwell,
Fortune frowns, cry wellada,
Her love is heaven, her hate is hell:
Since heaven and hell obey her power,
Tremble when her eyes do lowre,
Since heaven and hell her power obey,
When she smiles, cry holy day.
Holy Day with joy we cry
And bend, and bend and merrily,
Sing Hymns to Fortunes deity,
Sing Hymns to Fortunes deity.
Let us sing, merrily, merrily, merrily,
With our song let heaven resound,
Fortunes hands our heads have crowned,
Let us sing merrily, merrily, merrily.

Accursed Queen of chance, what had we done,
Who having sometimes like young Phaetons,
Ryd in the burnisht Chariot of the Sun,
And sometimes been thy minions, when thy fingers
Weaned wanton loue-nets in our curled hair,
And with sweet iugling kisses warmed our cheeks:
Oh how have we offended thy proud eyes,
That thus we should be spurnd and trod upon,
Whilst those infected limbs of the sick world,
Are fixed by thee for stars in that bright Sphere,
Where in our Sun like Radiance did appear.

Accursed Queen of chance, damned forceresse.

Most powr'full Queen of chance dread soueraignnesse.

No more* curse on: your cries to me are Music,
And fill the sacred roundure of mine ears,
With tunes more sweet then moving of the Spheres:
Curse on: on our celestial brows do sit
Un numbered (...), which then leaps from their throne,
When they see Peasants dance and Monarchs groan.
Behold you not this Globe, this golden bowl,
This toy called world at our Imperial feet?
This world is Fortunes ball wherewith she sports.
Sometimes I strike it up into the air,
And then create I Emperors and kings:
Sometimes I spurn it: at which spurn crawles out
That wild beast multitude: curse on you fools,
It Is I that tumble Princes from their thrones,
And gild false brows with glittering diadems,
It Is I that tread on necks of Conquerours,
And when like Semi-gods they have been drawn,
In Iuorie Charriots to the capitol,
Circled about with wonder of all eyes,
The shouts of every tongue, love of all hearts,
Being swollen wit their own greatness, I have pricked
The bladder of their pride, and made them die,
As water bubbles (without memory)
I thrust base cowards into Honors chair,
Whilst the true spirited Soldier stands by
Bare headed, and all bare, whilst, at his skarres
They skoffe, that nere durst view the face of wars.
I set an Idiots cap on virtues head,
Turn learning out of doors, clothe wit in rags,
And paint ten thousand Images of Leame,
In gawdie silken colors* on the backs
Of Mules and Asses I make asses ride,
Only for sport, to see the Apish world
Worship such beasts with sound idolatry.
This Fortune does, and when this is done,
She sits and smiles to hear some curse her name,
And some with adoration crown her fame.

True center of this wide circumference,
Sacred commaundresse of the destinies,
Our tongues shall only sownd thy excellence.

Thy excellence our tongues shall only sound.

Thou painted strumpet, that with honied smiles,
Openest the gates of heaven and criest, Come in,
Whose glories being seen, thou with one frown,
(In pride) lower then hell tumblest us down.

Ever for ever will we banne thy name.

How sweet your howlings relish in mine ears?
Stand by; now rise, behold, here lies a wretch,
To vex your souls, this beggar i will advance
Beyond the sway of thought, take instruments,
And let the raptures of choice Harmony,
Through the hollow windings of his ear,
Carry their sacred sounds, and wake each sense,
To stand amazed at our bright Eminence.

Oh, how am I transported? Is this earth?
Or blessed Elysium?

Fortunatus, rise.

Dread Goddess, how should such a wretch as I
Be known to such a glorious deity?
Oh pardon me: for to this place I come,
Lead by my fate, not folly; in this wood
With weary sorrow have I wandered,
And three times seen the sweating Sun take rest,
And three times frantic Cynthia naked ride,
About the rustie highways of the skies
Stuck full of burning Stars, which lent her light
To Court her Negro paramour grim night.

This travel now expires: yet from this circle,
Where I and these with fairie troops abide,
Thou can not stir, unless I be thy guide.
I the worlds Empress am Fortune my name,
This hand has written in thick leaves of steel,
An everlasting book of changelesse Fate.
Showing whoo's happy, who unfortunate.

I feuerie name (dread Queen) be there writ down.
I am sure mine stands in Caracters of black,
Though happiness her self lie in my name,
I am sorrows heir, and eldest son to shame.

No, we are sons to shame, and sorrows heirs.

Thou shall be one of Fortunes minions:
Behold these four chained like Tartarian slaves,
These I created Emperors and Kings,
And these are now my basest underlings:
This sometimes was a Germane Emperor,
Henry the fifth, who being first deposed,
Was after thrust into a dungeon,
And thus in silver chains shall rot to death.
This Frederick Barbarossa Emperor
Of Almaine once: but by Pope Alexander
Now spurned and trod on when he takes his horse,
And in these fetters shall he die his slave.
This wretch once wore the diadem of France,
(Jews the meek) but through his childrens pride,
Thus have I caused him to be famished,
Here stands the very soul of misery
Poor Basazet old Turkish Emperor,
And once the greatest Monarch in the East;
Fortune her self is said to veiw thy fall,
And grieves to see thee glad to lick up crommes
At the proud feet of that great Scithian swain,
Fortunes best minion, warlike Tamberlaine:
Yet must thou in a cage of Iron be drawn
In triumph at his heels, and there in grief
Dash out thy brains.

Oh miserable me.

No tears can melt the heart of destiny:
These have I rained and exalted those:
These hands have conquered Spain, these brows fill up
The golden circle of rich Portugal.
Uiriat a Monarch now, but borne a shepherd.
This Primislaus (a Bohemian king)
Last day a Carter: this Monk Gregory
Now lifted to the Papal dignity,
Wretches, why gnaw you not your fingers off,
And tear your tongues out, seeing your selves trod down,
And this Duch-Botcher wearing Munsters crown?
John Leyden borne in Holland poor and base,
Now rich in Emperie and Fortunes grace.
As these I have aduaunc'd, so will I this*
Six gifts I spend upon mortality,
Wisdom, strength, health, beauty, long life, and riches,
Out of my bounty: one of these is thine,
Choose then which likes thee best.

Oh most divine:
Give me but leave to borrow wonders eye,
To look (amazed) at thy bright majesty,
Wisdom, strength, health, beauty, long life and riches,

Before thy soul (at this deep Lotterie)
Draw forth her prize, ordained by destiny,
Know that here is no recanting a first choice.
Choose then discreetly (for the laws of Fate,
Being graven in steel, must stand inuiolate)

Daughters of Jove and the unblemished night,
Most righteous Parce, guide my Genius right,
Wisdom, strength, health, beauty, long life, and riches.

Stay, Fortunatus, once more hear me speak,
If thou kiss wisdoms cheek and make her thine,
She Will breath into thy lips divinity,
And thou (like Phoebus) shall speak Oracle,
Thy heauen-inspired soul, on wisdoms ^^^ngs,
Shall fly up to the Parliament of Jove,
And read the Statutes of eternity,
And see what is past, and learn what is to come.
If thou lay claim to strength, Armies shall quake,
To see thee frown: as Kings at mine do lie,
So shall thy feet trample on Emperie;
Make Health thine obiest, thou shall be strong proof,
Against the deep searching darts of surfeiting.
Be ever merry, ever reuelling,
Wish but for beauty, and within thine eyes,
Two naked Cupids amorousty shall swim,
And on thy cheeks i will mix such white and red,
That Jove shall turn away young Ganimede,
And with immortal arms shall circle thee.
Are thy desires long life? thy vital thread
Shall Be stretched out, thou shall behold the change
Of Monarchies, and see those children die,
Whose great great Graundsires now in cradles lie.
If through Golds sacred hunger thou do pine,
Those gilded wantons which in swarms do run,
To warm their slender bodies in the sun,
Shall stand for number of those golden piles,
Which in rich pride shall swell before thy feet,
As those are; so shall these be infinite.
Awaken then thy souls best faculties,
And gladly kiss this bounteous hand of Fate,
Which strives to bless thy name of Fortunate.

Old man, take heed, her smiles will murder thee

Old man, she will crown thee with felicity.

Oh, whither am I wrapped beyond my self?
More violent conflicts fight in e'rie thought,
Than his whose fatal choice Troyes downfall wrought.
Shall I contract my self to wisdoms love?
Then I lose riches: And a wiseman poor,
Is like a sacred book that's never read,
To himself he lives, and to all else seems dead.
This age thinks better of a gilded fool,
Then of a thread bare Saint in wisdoms school.
I will be strong: then I refuse long life,
And though mine arm should conquer twenty worlds,
There Is a lean fellow beats all conquerours:
The greatest strength expires with loss of breath.
The mightiest (in one minute) stoop to death.
Then take long life, or Health: should I do so,
I might grow ugly, and that tedious Scrole
Of Months and years, much misery may enrole:
Therefore i will beg for beauty; yet I will not,
The fairest cheek has oftentimes a soul
Leaprous as sin it self; then hell more foul.
The wisdom of this world is Idiotisme,
Strength a weak reed: Health sickness enemy,
(And it at length will have the victory.)
Beauty is but a painting, and long life
Is a long journey in December gone,
Tedious and full of tribulation.
Therefore dread sacred Empress make me rich,
My choice is store of gold; the rich are wise.
He that upon his bark rich garments wears,
Is wise, though on his head grow Midas ears.
Gold is the strength, the sinnewes of the world,
The Health, the soul, the beauty most divine,
A mask of Gold hides all deformities;
Gold is heavens physic, life's restoratiue,
Oh therefore make me rich: Not as the wretch,
That only serves lean banquets to his eye,
Has Gold, yet starues: is famisht in his store:
No, let me ever spend, be never poor.

Thy latest words confine thy destiny,
Thou shall spend ever, and be never poor:
For proof receive this purse: with it this virtue,
Still when thou thrusts thy hand into the same,
Thou shall draw forth ten pieces of bright gold,
Current in any Realm where then thou breathest;
If thou can dribble out the Sea by drops,
Then shall thou want: but that can nere be don.
Nor this grow empty.

Thanks, great deity.

The virtue ends when thou and thy sons end,
This path leads thee to Cyprus, get thee hence;
Farewell, vain covetous fool, thou will repent,
That for the love of dross thou have despised
Wisdoms divine embrace, she would hane borne thee
On the rich wings of immortality;
But now go dwell with cares and quickly die.

We dwell with cares, yet cannot quickly die.

But now go dwell with cares and quickly die? How quickly? if I die to morrow,
i will be merry to day: if next day, i will be merry to morrow: go dwell with
cares? Where dwells care? Hum ha, in what house dwells care, yt I may choose an
honester neighbor? In princes courts? No, among fair Ladies, neither, there is
no care dwells with them: but care how to be most gallant. Among gallants the^?
Fie, fie, no: care is afraid sure of a guilt Rapier, the sent of Musk is her
prison. Tobacco choakes her, rich attire presses her to death. Princes, fair
Ladies and gallants, have amongst you then, for this weteide wench Care dwelles
with wretches: they are wretches that feel want, I shall feel none if I be
never poor, therefore care I casheire you my company. I wonder what blind
Gossip this minx is that is so prodigal, she should be a good one by her open
dealing: her name's Fortune: Its no matter what she is, so she does as she
says. Thou shall spend ever, and be never poor: Mass, yet I feel nothing
here to make me rich, here is no sweet Music with her silver sound. Try
deeper* h^ G^d be here: Ha, ha, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, good, just
ten. Its gold sure, its so heavy, try again, 1, 2, etc. Good again, just
ten, and just ten. Ha, ha, ha, this is rare a leather mint, admirable: an
Indian mine in a Lambs skin, miraculous: I Will fill three or four bags full
for my sons, but keep this for my self. If that lean tawnie face
Tobacconist death, that turns all into smoke, must turn me so quickly into
ashes, yet I will not mourn in ashes, but in Music, hey old lad be merry.
Here Is riches, wisdom, strength, health, beauty, and long life. (If I die not
quickly, sweet purse I kiss thee, Fortune, I adore thee, Care, I despise
thee, death, I defy thee


S'hart, why how now: two knights of the post?


I, master, and we are both forsworn, as all such wooden knights be, for we
both took an oath (mary it was not corporal) you may see by our cheeks, that
we would not fast twenty four hours to amend, and we have tasted no meat
since the clock told two dozen


That lackes not much of twenty four, but I wonder when that half faced
Moon of thine will be at the full


The next quarter, not this, when the sign is in Taurus.


Ho that's to say, when thou eat'st bull beef. But Shadow, what day is to day?


Fasting day.


What day was yester-day?


Fasting day too.


Will tomorrow be so too?


I, and next day too


That will be rare, you slave:
For a lean diet makes a fat wit.

I had rather be a fool and wear a fat pair of cheeks.


Now am I prowder of this poverty, which I know is mine own, then a waiting
gentlewoman is, of a frizled groatesworth of hair, that never grew on her
head: Sirrah Shadow, now we can all three swear like puritans at one bare
word: this want makes us like good bowlers, we are able to rub out and shift in
every place


That's not so, we have shifted our selves in no place this three months:
marry, we rub out in every corner, but here follows no amendment either of
life or of liuerie


Why, brother Ampedo, art thou not yet tired with riding post? Come, come,
light from this logger-headed Jade, and walk a foot, and talk with your
poor friends


Nay by my troth he is like me; if his belly be empty, his heart is full.


The famine of Gold gnawes his covetous stomach, more then the want of good
victuals: Thou have looked very deuilishly ever since the good Angel left thee:
come, come, leave this broad brim fashions, because the world frowns upon
thee, wilt not thou smile upon us


Did but the bitterness of mine own fortunes
Infect my taste, I could paint ore my cheeks
With ruddy-coloured smiles: it is not the want
Of costly diet or desire of gold,
Enforce this rupture in my wounded breast.
Oh no, our Father (if he live) does lie.
Under the Iron foot of misery,
And (as a Dove gript in a Faulcons claw)
There pant'th for life being most assured of death.
Brother, for him my soul thus languisheth.

It Is not for my old Master that I languish.

I am not enamoured of this painted Idol,
This strumpet world; for her most beauteous looks
Are poysned baits, hung upon golden hooks,
When fools do swim in wealth, her Cynthian beams
Will wantonly dance on the silver streams:
But when this squinteide age sees virtue poor,
And by a little spark sits shiuering,
Begging at all, relieved at no man's door,
She miles on her (as the Sun shines on fire)
To kill that little heat, and with her frown
Is proud, that she can tread poor virtue down:
Therefore her wrinckled brow makes not mine sour,
Her gifts are toys, and I deride her power.

It Is not the crab-tree faced world neither that makes mine sour


Her gifts toys: well brother virtue, we have let slip the ripe plucking of
those toys so long, that we flourish like Apple trees in September, (which
having the falling sickness) bear neither fruit nor leaves


Nay by my troth, master, none flourish in these withering times, but Ancient
bearers and trumpettors


Shadow, when thou prouest a substance, then the tree of virtue and honesty,
and such fruit of heaven shall flourish upon earth


True, or when the Sun shines at midnight, or women fly, and yet they are
light enough


It Was never merry world with us, since purses and bags were invented, for now
men set lime twigges to catch wealth: And gold, which ryseth like the sun out
of the East Indies, to shine upon every one, is like a Conte taken napping in a
Pursenet, and suffers his glistring yellow face deity to be lapt up in
Lambskins, as if the innocence of those leather prisons, should dispense with
the Cheuerill consciences of the Iron hearted Iaylers


Snudges may well be called Iaylers: for if a poor wretch steal but into a
debt of ten pound, they lead him straight to execution


Does it not vex thee, Shadow, to stalk up and down Cyprus, and to meet the
outside of a man, lapt all in Damask, his head and beard as white as milk,
only with coniuring in the snowie circles of the field Argent, and his nose as
red as Scarlet, only with kissing the ruddie lips of Angels, and such an
Image to wear on his thumb, three men's livings in the shape of a seal King,
whilst my brother virtue here


And you his brother Uice.


Most true, my little lean Iniquity, whilst we three, if we should starve,
cannot borrow five shillings of him neither in word nor deed: does not this
vex thee, Shadow


Not me; it vexes me no more to see such a picture, then to see an Ass laden
with riches, because I know when he can bear no longer, he must leave his
burden to some other be ast


Art not thou mad, to see money on Goldsmithes stalles, and none in our purses?


It mads not me, I thank the destinies.


By my poverty, and that's but a threed-bare oath, I am more then mad, to see
silks and veluets, lie crowding together in Mercers shops, as in prisons,
only for fear of the smell of wax (they cannot abide to see a man made out
of wax) for these Satin commodities have such smooth consciences, that they will
have no man give his word for them, or stand bownd for their coming forth,
but vow to lie till they rot in those shop Counters, except Monsteur money
bail them. Shadow, I am out of my little wits to see this


So is not Shadow: I am out of my wits, to see fat gluttons feed all day
long, whilst I that am lean, fast every day: I am out of my wits, to see our
Famag^sta fools, turn half a shop of wares into a suite of gay apparel,
only to make other Idiots laugh, and wisemen to cry who is the fool now? I am
mad, to see Soldiers beg, and cowards brave: I am mad, to see Scholars in
the Brokers shop, and Dunces in the Mercers: I am mad, to see men that have no
more fashion in them then poor Shadow, yet must leap thrice a day into three
orders of fashions: I am mad, to see many things, but horne-mad, that my mouth
feels nothing


Why, now shadow, I see thou have a substance:
I am glad to see thee thus mad.

The sons of Fortunatus had not wont,
Thus to repine at others happiness:
But fools have always this loose garment wore,
Being poor themselves, they wish all others poor,
Fie, brother Andelocia, hate this madness,
Turn your eyes inward, and behold your soul,
That wants more then your body: burnish that
With glittering Virtue: and make Idiots grieve,
So see your beauteous mind in wisdom shine,
As you at their rich poverty repine.

Peace, good virtue, Shad here comes another Shadow

It should be a Camelion: for he is all in colors.

Oh, it is my Father, With these tears of joy,
My love and duty greet your fair return:
A double gladness has refresht my soul;
One, that you live, and one, to see your fate
Looks freshly howsoever poor in state.

My father Fortunatus, and thus brave?

It Is no wonder to see a man brave, but a wonder how he comes brave.

Dear Andelocia and son Ampedo,
And my poor servant Shadow: plume your spirits
With light-wingd mirth: for Fortunatus hand
Can now power golden showers into their laps,
That sometimes scorned him for his want of gold.
Boys, I am rich, and you shall never be poor;
We are gold, spend gold, we all in gold will feed,
Now is your father Fortunate indeed.

Father, be not angry, if I set open the windows of my mind: I doubt for all
your bragging, you will prove like most of our gallants in Famagosta, that have
a rich outside, and a beggarly inside, and like Mules wear gay trappings, and
good Ueluet foote-clothes on their backs, yet champe on the Iron bitte of
penury, I mean, want coin: You gild our ears with a talk of Gold, but I
pray dazell our eyes with the majesty of it


First will I wake your senses with the sound
Of golds sweet music: tell me what you hear?

Believe me, Sir, I hear not any thing.


Ha, ha, ha. S heart, I thought as much, if I hear any gingling, but of the
purse strings yt go flip, flap, flip, flap, flip, flap, would I were turned
into a flip-flap, and sold to the Butchers


Shadow: I Will try thine ears, hark do rattle?


Yes, like three blew Beans in a blew bladder, rattle bladder, rattle: your
purse is like my belly, the ones without money, the other without meat


Bid your eyes blame the error of your ears:
You misbeleeuing Pagans, see, here is gold,
Ten golden pieces: take them, Ampedo.
Hold, Andelocia, here are ten for thee.

Shadow, there is one for thee, provide thee food.


Stay, boy: hold, Shad. here are ten for thee.


Ten master? then defiaunce to Fortune, and a Fig for famine.


Now tell me, wags, has my purse gold or no?

We the wags have gold, Father; but I think there is not one Angel more
wagging in this sacred Temple; why this is rare: Saddow, five will serve thy
turn, give me the other five


Nay, soft master, liberality dyed long ago: I see some rich beggars are
never well, but when they be craving: My ten Ducats are like my ten fingers,
they will not ieopard a joint for you: I am yours, and these are mine if I part
from them, I shall never have part of them


Father, if heaven have blessed you once again,
Let not an open hand disperse that store;
Which gone, life's gone: for all tread down the poor.

Peace, Ampedo: talk not of poverty,
Disdain, my boys, to kiss the tawnie cheeks
Of lean necessity: make not inquiry,
How I came rich: I am rich, let that suffice;
There are sour leathern bags trust full of gold:
Those spent, i will fill you more: go lads, be gallant:
Shine in the streets of Cyprus like two stars,
And make them bow their knees that once did spurn you;
For to effect such wonders gold can turn you:
Brave it in Famagosta, or else where,
I Will travel to the Turkish Emperor:
And then i will revel it with Prester John,
Or banquet with great Cham of Tartarie,
And try what frolic Court the Souldan keeps;
I Will leave you presently: tear off these rags.
Glitter, my boys like Angels, that the world
May (whilst our life in pleasures circle comes)
Wonder at Fortunatus and his sons.

Come, Shadow: now we will feast it royalty.


Do, master, but take heed of beggerie.


You ministers of Virtue, Uice, and Fortune,
Tear off this upper garment of the earth,
And in her naked bosom stick these trees.

How many kingdoms have I measured,
Only to find a Climat apt to cherish
These withering branches? but no ground can prove
So happy, (ay me) none do virtue love;
I Will, try this soil; if here I likewise fade,
To heaven i will fly, from whence I took my birth,
And tell the Gods, I am banished from the earth.

Virtue, I am sworn they foe: if there thou plant,
Here opposite to thine, my tree shall flourish,
And (as the running wood-bind) spread her arms,
To choke thy withering boughs in their embrace,
I Will drive thee from this world: were Virtue fled,
Uice as an Angel should be honored.

Servants of this bright devil and that poor Saint.
Apply your talk whilst you are laboring:
To make your pains seem short our priest shall sing.

Uertues branches wither, virtue pines,
O pity, pity, and alack the time,
Uice does flourish, Uice in glory shines,
Her gilded boughs above the Cedar clime.
Uice has golden cheeks, O pity, pity,
She in every land does monarchize.
Virtue is exilde from every City,
Virtue is a fool, Uice only wise.
O pity, pity, Virtue weeping dies.
Uice laughs to see her faint (alack the time)
This sinckes: with painted wings the other flies,
Alack that best should fall, and bad should clime,
O pity, pity, pity, mourn, not sing,
Uice is a Saint, Virtue an underling.
Uice does flourish, Uice in glory shines,
Uertues branches wither, Virtue pines.

Flourish or wither, Fortune cares not which,
In eithers fall or height our Eminence
Shines equal to the Sun: the Queen of chance
Both virtuous souls and vicious does advance.
These shadows of your selves shall (like your selves,)
Strive to make men enamoured of their beauties,
This grove shall be our temple; and henceforth
Be consecrated to our deities.

How few will come and kneel at virtues shrine?

This contents virtue, that she is called divine.

Poor Virtue, Fortune grieves to see thy looks
Want cunning to entice: Why hang these leaves,
As loose as Antumnes hair (which every wind,
In mockery blows from his rotten brows?)
Why like a drunkard art thou pointed at?
Why is this Motley-scorne set on thy head?
Why stands thy Court wide open, but none in it?
Why are the Crystal pauements of thy temple,
Not worn, not trod upon: All is for this,
Because thy pride is to wear base attire,
Because thine eyes flame not with amorous fire.

Virtue is fairest in a poor array.

Poor fool, it is not this badge of purity,
Nor Sibi sapit, (painted on thy breast,)
Allures mortality to seek thy love.
No: now the great wheel of thy Globe has run,
And met his first point of creation.
On Crutches went this world but yester-day,
Now it lies bedridden; and is grown so old,
That its grown young, for it is a child again,
A childish soul it has, it is a mere fool:
And sooles and children are well pleased with toys:
So must this world, with shows it must be pleased.
Then Virtue, buy a golden face like Uice,
And hang thy bosom full of silver Moons,
To tell the credulous world, As those increase,
As the bright Moon swelles in her pearled Sphere,
So wealth and pleasures them to heaven shall rear.

Virtue abhorres to wear a borrowed face.

Why have thou borrowed then that Idiots hood?

Fools placed it on my head that knew me not,
And I am proud to wear the scorn of fools.

Mourn in that pride and die; all the world hates thee.

Not all, i will wander once more through the world:
Wisdom I know has with her blessed wings
Fied to some bosom: if I meet that breast,
There i will erect my temple, and there rest.
Fortune nor Uice, shall then ere have the power,
(By their loose eyes) to entice my Paramour;
Then will I cast off this de formitie,
And shine in glory, and triumph to see
You conquered at my feet, that tread on me.

Virtue begins to quarrel: Uice, farewell.

Stay, Fortune, whilst within this Grove we dwell,
If my Angelical and Saint-like form
Can win some amorous fool to wanton here,
And taste the fruit of this alluring tree,
Thus shall his saucy brows adorned be,
To make us laugh.

It will be rare: adieu.

Foul hel-bred fiend, Virtue shall strive with you,
If any be enamoured of thine eyes,
Their love must needs beget deformities.
Men are transformed to beasts, feasting with sin;
But if (in spite of thee) their souls I win,
To taste this fruit, though thou disguise their head,
Their shapes shall be re-metamorphosed.

I dare thee do thy worst.

My best i will try.

Fortune shall judge who winnes the sovereignty.

The world to the circumference of heaven,
Is as a small point in Geometry,
Whose greatness is so little, that a less
Cannot be made: into that narrow room,
Your quick imaginations we must charm,
To turn that world: and (turned) again to part it
Into large kingdoms, and within one moment,
To carry Fortunatus on the wings
Of active thought, many a thousand miles.
Suppose then since you last beheld him here,
That you have saild with him upon the seas,
And leapt with him upon the Asian shores,
Been feasted with him in the Tartars palace,
And all the Courts of each Barbarian kings:
From whence (being called by some unlucky star,)
(For happiness never continues long)
Help me to bring him back to Arragon;
Where for his pride (Riches make all men proud)
On a slight quarrel, by a covetous Earl,
Fortune's dear minion is imprisoned:
There think you see him sit with folded arms,
Tears dropping down his cheeks, his white hairs torn,
His legs in rusty fetters, and his tongue
Bitterly cursing that his squint-eide soul
Did not make choice of wisedome's sacred love;
Fortune (to triumph in unconstancie),
From prison bailes him; (liberty is wild)
For being set free, he like a lusty eagle,
Cuts with his ventrous feathers through the sky,
And lights not till he finds the Turkish court.
Thither transport your eyes, and there behold him,
Revelling with the Emperor of the East;
From whence (through fear) for safeguard of his life,
(Flying into the arms of ugly night,)
Suppose you see him brought to Babylon;
And that the Sun (clothed all in fire) has rid
One quarter of his hot celestial way
With the bright morning, and that in this instant,
He and the Sultan meet, but what they say,
Listen you, the talk of Kings none dare bewray.

Art thou that Fortunatus, whose great name,
Being carried in the Chariot of the winds,
Has sild the Courts of all our Asian Kings,
With love and envy, whose dear presence ties
The eyes of admiration to thine eyes?
Art thou that Jove that in a shower of gold
Appearedst before the Turkish Emperor?

I am that Fortunatus, mighty Souldan.

Where is that purse which threw abroad such treasure?

I gave it to the Turkish Soliman,
A second I bestowed on Prester John,
A third the great Tartarian Cham received:
For with these Monarchs have I banquetted,
And rid with them in triumph through their courts,
In crystal Charriots drawn by Unicornes.
England, France, Spain, and welthy Belgia,
And all the rest of Europs blessed daughters,
Have made my covetous eye rich in the embrace
Of their celestial beauties; now I come
To see the glory of fair Babylon.
Is Fortunatus wel-come to the Sultan?
For I am like the Sun, if Jove once chide,
My gilded brows from amorous beaven I hide.

Most welcome; and most happy are mine arms
In circling such an earthly deity:
But will not Fortunatus make me blessed
By sight of such a purse?

Ere I depart,
The Sultan shall receive one at my hands:
For I must spend some time in framing it,
And then some time to breathe that virtuous spirit
Into the heart thereof, all which is don
By a most sacred inspiration.

Wel-come, most welcome, to the Soldans court;
Stay here, and be the King of Babylon,
Stay here, and I will more amaze thine eyes
With wondrous sights, then can all Asia.
Behold you tower, there stands mine Armourie,
In which are Corsiets forged of beaten gold,
To arm ten hundred thousand fighting men,
Whose glittering sqaudrons when the Sun beholds,
They seem like to ten hundred thousand Jove's,
When Jove on the proud back of thunder rydes,
Trapt all in lightning flames: there can I show thee
The ball of gold that set all Troy on fire;
There shall thou see the skarfe of Cupids mother,
Snatched from the soft moist Iuorie of her arm,
To wrap about Adonis wounded thigh;
There shall thou see a wheel of Titans care,
Which dropped from heaven when Phaeton fired the world:
I Will give thee (if thou will) two silver Dooues
Composed by Magic to divide the air,
Who (as they fly) shall play their silver wings,
And give strange music to the Elements,
I Will give thee else the fan of Proserpine,
Which in reward (for a sweet Thracian song,)
The black-browd Empress thre^^ to Mopheus,
Being come to fetch Euridice from hell.

Has ever mortal eye beheld these wonders?

Thine shall behold them, and make choice of any,
So thou will give the Souldan such a purse.

By Fortunes blessed hand (who christened me,)
The mighty Souldan shall have such a purse,
Provided I may see these prizelesse wonders.

Leave us alone: never was mortal ear
Acquainted with the virtue of a Jewel,
Which now i will show, (out-valuing all the rest.)

It is impossible.

Behold this Casket, --
Fettered in golden chains, the Lock pure gold,
The key of sollide gold, which my self keep,
And here is the treasure that's containd in it.

A course felt Hat? is this the precious Jewel?

I Will not exchange this, for ten Diadems.
On pain of death, none listen to our talk.

What needs this solemn coniuration?

O, yes, for none shall understand the worth
Of this inestimable ornament,
But you: and yet not you, but that you swear
By her white hand, that lent you such a name,
To leave a wondrous purse in Babylon.

(...) I will not violate,
But now vn^^ (...) of this Hatte.

I (...); if they do, they die.

None lis^^^ (...) what needs this jealousy?

You see it is (...) in show; did I want Jewels,
Gold could beget them, but the wide worlds wealth
Buys not this Hat; this clapped upon my head,
I (only with a wish) am through the air,
Transported in a moment over Seas,
And over lands to any secret place;
By this I steal to every Princes court,
And hear their private councels and prevent
All dangers which to Babylon are meant.
By help of this I often see armies join,
Though when the dreadful Aluarado sounds,
I am distant from the place a thousand leagues,
Oh, had I such a purse and such a Hat,
The Souldan were, of all, most fortunate.

Oh, had I such a Hat, then were I brave.
Where Is he that made it?

Dead, and the whole world
Yields not a workman that can frame the like.

No does? by what trick shall I make this mine?
Me thinks, me thinks, when you are borne over Seas,
And over lands, the heaviness thereof
Should weigh you down, drown you, or break your neck.

No, it is more light then any Hat beside:
Your hand shall peise it.

Oh, it is wondrous heavy.

Fie, ya're deceau'd: try it upon your head,

Would I were now in Cyprus with my sons.

Stay, Fortunatus* stay, I am undone.
Treason, Lords, treason, get me wings, i will fly
After this damned Traitor through the air.

Who wrongs the mighty king of Babylon?

This Fortunatus, this fend wrongs your king.

Lock the Court gates, where is the devil hid?

No gates no grates of Iron imprison him,
Like a Magician breaks he through the clouds;
Bearing my soul with him, for that Iewellgon,
I am dead, and all is dross in Babylon.
Fly after him, it is vain, on the winds wings,
Heel ride through all the Courts of earthly kings.

What is the Jewel that your grace has lost?

He dies that troubles me: call me not king;
For i will consume my life in sorrowing.

Shadow? what have I lost to day at dice?


More then you will win again in a month.


Why sir, how much comes it to?


It comes to nothing, Sir, for you have lost your wits, and when a man's wistes
are lost, the man is like twenty pounds worth of Tobacco, which mounts into
the air, and proves nothing but one thing


And what thing is that, you Ass?


Marry sir, that he is an ass that melts so much money in smoke.


Twere a charitable deed to hang thee a smoking.


I should never make good bacon, because I am not fat.


I Will be sworn thy wit is lean.


Its happy I have a lean wit: but master, you have none; for when your money
slipped away, that went after it, and ever since you have been mad, here com's
your brother; borrow a dram of him.


Brother, all hail.


There Is a rattling salutation.


You must lend me some more money: Nay never look so strange, and you will
come off, so: if you will bar me from square play, do: come come, when the
old traveler my Father comes home, like a young Ape, full of fantastic
tricks, or a painted Parrat stuck full of outlandish feathers, haele lead
the world in a string, and then (like a hot shot) I Will charge and discharge all


I would be loath, master, to see that day: for he leads the world in a string
that goes to hanging


Take heed I turn not that head into the world, and lead you so?
Brother wilt be? Hay any ends of Gold or Silver?

Thus wanton reuelling breeds beggerie.
Brother, twere better that you still lived poor.
Want would make wisdom rich: but when your Coffers
Swell to the brim, then riot sets up sails,
And like a desperate vnskild Mariner
Drives your vnsteddie fortunes on the point
Of wrack inevitable; of all the wealth,
Left (by our Father, when he left us last)
This little is unspent, and this being wasted,
Your riot ends; therefore consume it all,
I Will live; or dying, find some burial.
Thanks for my crowns.

Shadow, I am villainous hungry, to hear one of the seven wise Masters talk
thus emptily


I am a villain, master, if I am not hungry.


Because i will save this gold, sir Shaddowe, we will feed our selves with
Paradoxes


Oh rare: what meat's that?


Meat, you gull: it is no meat: a dish of Paradoxes is a feast of strange
opinion, it is an ordinary that our greatest gallants haunt nowadaies, because
they would be held for Statesmen


I shall never fill my belly with opinions.


In despite of sway-bellies, gluttons, and sweet mouthed Epicures, I Will have
thee maintain a Paradox in commendations of hunger


I shall never have the stomach to do it.


See thou this Crusadd? do it, and turn this into a feast


Covetousness and lechery are two devils, they will tempt a man to wade through
deep matters: I Will do it though good cheer conspire my death, for speaking
treason against her


Fall to it then with a full mouth.


Oh famine, inspire me with thy miserable reasons. I begin, master.


O miserable invocation.


Silence.


There Is no man but loves one o l these three-beastes, a Horse, a Hound, or a
Whore; the Horse by his goodwill, has his head ever in the maunger; the Whore
with your ill will has her hand ever in your purse; and a hungry Dog eats
durtie puddings


This is profound, forward: the conclusion of this now.


The conclusion is plain: For since all men love one of these three monsters,
being such terrible eaters, therefore all men love hunger


A very lean argument.


I can make it no fatter.


Proceed, good Shadow; this fats me.


Hunger is made of Gunpowder.


Give fire to that opinion.


Stand by, lest it blow you up: hunger is made of Gunpowder, or Gunpowder of
hunger; for they both eat through stone walls; hunger is a grindstone, it
sharpens wit, hunger is fuller of love then Cupid, for it makes a man eat
himself; hunger was the first that ever opened a Cooks shop; Cooks the first
that ever made sauce; sauce being lickerish, lickes up good meat; good meat
preserues life: Hunger therefore preserues life


By my consent thou should still live by hunger.


Not so, hunger makes no man mortal: hunger is an excellent Physician: for he
dares kill any body: hunger is one of the seven liberal sciences


O learned? Which of the seven?


Music, for she will make a man leap at a crust: but, as few care for her six
sisters, so none love to dance after her pipe: Hunger, master, is hungry and
covetous, therefore the Crusado


But have thou no sharper reasons then this?


Yes one: the dagger in Cyprus had never stabd out such six penie pipes, but
for hunger


Why, you dolt, these pies are but in their minority.


My belly and my purse have been twenty times at daggers drawing, with
parting the little vrchins


Peace, Idiot, peace, my Father is returned.


Touch me not, boys, I am nothing but air, let none speak to me, till you
have marked me well


Now speak your mind.


Uillaine, why have thou chalkt my Fathers back?


Only to mark him, and to try what color air is of.


Regard him not, Ampedo: Andelocia, Shaddowe: view me, am I as you are, or am I
transformed


I thought travel would turn my father, mad man or fool.


How should you be transformed I see no change.


If your wits be not planet stricken, if your brains lie in their right place,
you are well enough; for your body is little mended by you fetching fegaries


Me thinks, father, you look as you did, only your face is more withered.


That's not my fault, age is like love, it cannot be hid.


Or like Gunpowder a fire, or like a fool, or like a young no uice new come
to his lands; for all these will show of what hause they come: now sir, you may
amplify


Shadow, turn thy tongue to a shadow, be silent: Boys be proud, your Father
has the whole world in this compass, I am all felicity, up to the brummes.
In a minute am I come from Babylon, I have been this half hour in Famagosta


How? in a minute, father? Ha, ha, I see travelers must lie.


It Is their destiny: the Fates do so conspire.


I have cut through the air like a Falcon; I would have it seem strange to
you


So it does, Sir.


But it is true: I would not have you believe it neither


No more we do not, Sir.


But it is miraculous and true: desire to see you, brought me to Cyprus; i will
leave you more Gold, and go visit more Countries


Leave us gold enough, and we will make all Countries come visit us.


The frostie hand of age now nips your blood,
And strowes her snowle flowers upon your head,
And give you warning that within few years,
Death needs must marry you: those short lines minutes,
That dribble out your life, must needs be spent,
In peace not travel: rest in Cyprus then.
Could you suruaie ten worlds, yet you must die;
And bitter is the sweet that's reapt thereby.

Faith father, what pleasure have you met by walking your stations?


What pleasure, boy? I have reueld with kings, daunc'd with Queens, dallied
with Ladies, worn strange attires, seen fantastic^^s, conuerst with
humorists, been ravished with divine raptures of Dorick, Lidian and Phrigian
harmonies, I have spent the day in triumphs, and the night in banquesting


Oh rare: this was heavenly.


Me thinks it was horrible.


He that would not be an Arabian Phoenix to burn in these sweet fires, let him
live like an Owl for the world to wonder at


Why, brother, are not all these vanities:


Uanities? Ampedo, thy soul is made of lead, too dull, too ponderous to mount
up to the incomprehensible glory, that travel lifts men to


My old masters soul is Cork and feathers, and being so light does easily
mount up


Sweeten mine ears, good father, with some more.


When in the warmth of mine own countries arms
We yawn'd like sluggards, when this small Horizon
Imprisoned up my body, then mine eyes
Worshipped these clouds as brightest; but, my boys,
The glistring beams which do abroad appear,
(In other heavens) fire is not half so clear.

Why, sir, are there other heavens in other countries?

Peace, interrupt him not upon thy life.

For still in all the Regions I have seen,
I scorned to crowd among the muddie throng
Of the rank multitude, whose thickened breath,
Like to condensed Fogs do choke that beauty,
Which else would dwell in every kingdoms cheek.
No, I still boldly stepped into their Courts,
For there to live it is rare, O it is divine;
There shall you see faces Angelical,
There shall you see troops of chaste Goddesses,
Whose star-like eyes have power, (might they still shine)
To make night day, and day more christalline.
Near these you shall behold great Heroes,
White headed Counselors and Iouiall spirits,
Standing like fiery Cherubins to guard
The Monarch, who in God-like glory sits.
In midst of these, as if this deity
Had with a look created a new world;
The standers by, being the fair workmanship.

Oh how my soul is rapt to a third heaven.
I Will travel sure, and live with none but kings.

Then Shadow must die among knaves; and yet why so? in a bunch of Cards,
knaves wait upon the kings


When I turn king, then shall thou wait on me.


Well, there is nothing impossible: a dog has his day, and so have you.


But tell me, father, have you in all courts
Beheld such glory, so maiesticall?
In all perfection? no way blemished?

In some Courts shall you see ambition
Sit piecing Dedalus old waxen wings,
But being clapped on, and they about to fly,
Even when their hopes are busied in the clouds,
They melt against the Sun of majesty,
And down they tumble to destruction:
For since the heavens strong arms teach kings to stand,
Angels are placed about their glorious throne,
To guard it from the strokes of Traitrous hands.
By travel, boys, I have seen all these things,
Fantastic complement stalks up and down,
Trickt in outlandish Feathers, all his words,
His looks, his oaths, are all ridiculous,
All apish, childish, and Italianate.

I know a medicine for that malady.

By travel, boys, I have seen all these things.

And these are sightes for none, but gods and kings.

Yes, and for Christen creatures, if they be not blind.

In these two hands do I gripe all the world.
This leather purse, and this bald woollen Hat
Make me a Monarch: here is my Crown and Scepter.
In progress will I now go through the world.
I Will crack your shoulders, boys, with bags of gold
Ere I depart; on Fortune's wings I ride,
And now sit in the height of humane pride.

Now, fool, thou lie; where thy proud feet do tread
These shall throw down thy cold and breathless head.

O sacred deity, what sin is done
That deaths Iron fist should wrestle with thy son?

Thou art no sonnne of Fortune, but her slave:
Thy Cedar has aspired to his full height.
Thy Sun like glory has advaunc'd herself
Into the top of prides Meridian,
And down amain it comes. From beggerie
I plumed thee like an Estrich, like that Estrich
Thou have eaten Metals, and abusde my gifts,
Have played the Ruffian, wasted that in ryots,
Which as a blessing I bestowed on thee.

Forgive me, I will be more provident.

No, endless follies follow endless wealth.
Thou had thy fancy, I must have thy fate,
Which is, to die when the art most fortunate.
This inckie thread thy ugly sins have spun,
Black life, black death: faster that it were don.

Oh, let me live, but till I can redeem.

The destinies deny thee longer life.

I am but now lifted to happiness.

And now take I must pride to cast thee down.
Had thou chosen wisdom, this black had been white,
And deaths stern browe could not thy soul afright.

Take this again; give wisdom to my sons.

No, fool, it is now too late; as death strikes thee,
So shall their ends sudden and wxetched be.
Jove's daughters (righteous destinies) make haste,
His life has wastefull been, and let it waste.

Why the pox do thou sweat so?


For anger to see any of Gods Creatures have such filthy faces as these
Semsters had that went hence


Semsters? why, you ass, they are destinies.


Indeed, if it be ones destiny to have a filthy face, I know no remedy but
to go maskt and cry, Woe worth the Fates


Why droopes my father? these are only shadows,
Raiz'd by the malice of some enemy,
To fright your life, over which they have no power.

Shadows? I defy their kindred.


O Ampedo, I faint* help me, my sons.


Shadow, I pray thee run and call more help.


If that desperate Don Dego death has taken up the Cudgels once, here is never a
Fencer in Cyprus dare take my old masters part


Run, villain, call more help.


Bid him thank the destinies for this.


Let him shrincke down, and die between your arms,
Help comes in vain. No hand can conquer Fate,
This instant is the last of my life's date.
This Goddess (if at least she be a goddess)
Names her self Fortune: wandering in a wood,
Half famisht, her I met. I have, quoth she,
Six gifts to spend upon mortality,
Wisdom, strength health, beauty, long life and riches,
Out of my bounty one of these is thine.

What benefit did from your choice arise?

Listen, my sons: In this small compass lies,
Infinite treasure: this she gave to me,
And gave to this, this virtue, Take (quoth she)
So often as from hence thou drawst thy hand,
Ten golden pieces of that kingdoms coin,
Where er'e thou live, which plenteous sure shall last,
After thy death, till thy sons lives do waste.

Father, your choice was care, the gift divine.

It had been so, if riches had been mine.

But has this golden virtue never faild?

Never.

O admirable; heare's a fire
Has power to thaw the very heart of death,
And give stones life, by this most sacred death,
See brother, here is all India in my hand.

Inherit you (my Sons) that golden land.
This Hat I brought away from Babylon,
I robbed the Souldan of it, it is a prize
Worth twenty Empires. In this Jewel lies.

How, father? Jewel? call you this a Jewel? It Is course Wool, a bald fashion,
and greasy to the brim; I have bought a better Felt for a French crown forty
times: Of what virtuous block is this Hat, I pray


Set it upon thy head, and with a wish,
Thou in the moment on the winds swift wings,
Shall be transported into any place.

A wishing Hat, and a golden mine?

O Andelocia, Ampedo, now death
Sounds his third sommons: I must hence: these Jewels
To both I do bequeath; divide them not,
But use them equally; never bewray
What virtues are in them; for if you do,
Much shame, much grief, much danger follows you.
Peruse this book: farewell: behold in me
The rotten strength of proud mortality.

His soul is wandering to the Elysium shades.

The flower that's fresh at noone, at Sunset fades. Brother, close you down
his eyes, because you were his eldest; and with them close up your tears,
whilst I (as all younger brothers do) shift for my self: let us mourn,
because he is dead, but mourn the less, because he cannot revive: the honor
we can do him, is to bury him royally, lets about it then, for i will not melt
my self to death with scalding sighs, nor drop my soul out at mine eyes,
were my father an Emperor


Hence, hence, thou stop'st the tide of my true tears. True grief is dumb,
though it has open ears


Yet God send my grief a tongue, that I may have good utterance for it: Sob
on, brother mine, whilst you sigh there, i will sit and read what Story my father
has written here


I can get none, I can find none: where are you, master? Have I taken you
napping? and you too? I see sorrows eyelids are made of a Dor-mouse skin,
they seldom open, or of a misers purse, that is always shut: So ho, master


Shadow, why how now? what is the matter?


I can get none Sir, it is impossible.


What is impossible? what can not get?


No help for my old master.


Have thou been all this while calling for help?


Yes sir: he scornd all Famagosta when he was in his huffing, and now he lies
puffing for wind, they say they scorn him


The poison of their scorn infects not him;
He wants no help. See where he breathles lies:
Brother, to what place have you borne his body?

I bear it? I touched it not.


Nor I: a leaden slumber pressed mine eyes.


Whether it were lead or lattin that haspt down those winking casements, I
know not, but I found you both snorting


And in that sleep (me thought) I heard the tunes
Of sullen passions apt for Funerals,
And saw my Fathers liuelesse body borne
By Satyrs: O I fear that deity
Has stolen him hence, that Snudge his destiny.

I fear he is risen again, did not thou meet him?


I sir? do you think this white and red durst have kissed my sweet cheeks, if
they had seen a ghost? But, master, if the destinies, or Fortune, or the
Fates, or the Fayries have stolen him, never indite them for the Felony: for
by this means the charges of a Tomb is saved, and you being his heirs, may
do as many rich Executors do, put that money in your purses, and give out he
dyed a beggar


Away, you Reague, my Father die a beggar?
I Will build a Tomb for him of massy Gold.

Me thinks, master, it were better to let the memory of him shine in his own
virtues (if he had any) than in Alablaster


I shall mangle that Alablaster face, you whore son virtuous vice.


He has a Marble heart, that can mangle a face of Alablaster.


Brother, come, come, mourn not, our Father is but slept to agree with Charon
for his boat hyre to Elysium. See, here is a Story of all his travels; this
book shall come out with a new Addition: I Will tread after my Fathers steps;
i will go measure the world, therefore lets share these Jewels, take this or this


Will you then violate our Fathers Will?


A puritan? keep a dead man's Will? Indeed in the old time, when men were
buried in soft Church-yardes, that their Ghosts might rise, it was good but,
brother, now they are imprisond in strong Brick and Marble, they are fast:
fear not: away, these are fooleries, gulleries, trumperies; here is this or
this, or I am gone with both


Do as you please, the sin shall not be mine.
Fools call those things profane, that are divine.

Are you content to wear the Jewels by turns? I Will have the purse for a year,
you the Hat, and as much gold, as you will ask; and when my pursourship ends, i will
resign, and cap you


I am content to bear all discontents.

I should serve this bearing Ass rarely now, if I should load him, but I will
not, though conscience be (like Physic) seldom used, (for so it does least
hurt) yet i will take a dram of it: this for him, and some gold: this for me: for
having this mint about me, I shall want no wishing Cap: gold is an Eagle, that
can fly to any place, and like death, that dares enter all places

Shadow, will thou travel with me?


I shall never sadge with ye humor because I cannot lie.


Thou dolt, we will visit all the kings courts in ye world.


So we may, and return dolts home, but what shall we learn by travail?


Fashions.


That's a beastly disease: me thinks its better staying in your own country.


How? In mine own country? like a Cage-birde and see nothing?


Nothing? yes you may see things enough, for what can you see abroad that is
not at home? The same Sun calls you up in the morning, and the same man in the
Moon lights you to bed at night, our fields are as green as theirs in summer,
and their frosts will nip us more in winter: Our birds sing as sweetly and our
women are as fair: In other countries you shall have one drink to you, whilst
you kiss your hand, and ducke, heel poison you: I confess you shall meet
more fools, and asses, and knaves abroad then at home (yet God be thanked we
have pretty store of all) but for Punckes, we put them down


Prepare thy spirits, for thou shall go with me,
To England shall our stars direct our course,
Thither the prince of Cyprus (our kings son)
Is gone to see the lovely Agripyne,
Shadow, we will gaze upon that English dame,
And try what virtue gold has to inflame.
First to my brother, then away lets fly,
Shadow must be a Courtier ere he die.

If I must, the Fates shall be served: I have seen many clownes Courtiers,
then why not Shadow? Fortune, I am for thee.


Be gone: leave that with me, and leave me to my self, if the king ask for
me, swear to him I am sick, and thou shall not lie, pray thee leave me


I am gone, Sir.

This music makes me but more out of tune O, Agripyna.


Gentle friend, no more.
Thou say love is a madness, hate it then,
Even for the names sake.

O, I love that madness,
Even for the names sake.

Let me tame this frenzy,
By telling thee thou art a prisoner here,
By telling thee she is daughter to a king,
By telling thee the king of Cyprus son
Shines like a Sun between her looks and thine,
Whilst thou seem but a star to Agripyne:
He loves her.

If he do: why so do I.


Love is ambitious and loves majesty.


Dear friend, thou art deceiuued, loves voice does sing As sweetly in a
beggar as a king


Dear friend, thou art deceyu'd: O bid thy soul
Lift up her intellectual eyes to heaven,
And (in this ample book of wonders) read,
Of what celestial mold, what sacred essence,
Her self is formd, the search whereof will drive
Sounds musical among the iarring spirits,
And in sweet tune set that which none inherits.

I Will gaze on heaven if Agripyne be there:
If not: Fa, La, la, Sol, la, etc.

O, call this madness in, see from the windows
Of every eye Derision thrusts out cheeks,
Wrinckled with Idiot laughter; every finger
Is like a Dart shot from the hand of scorn,
By which thy name is hurt, thine honor torn.

Laugh they at me, sweet Galloway?

Even at thee.

Ha, ha, I laugh at them, are not they mad,
That let my true true sorrow make them glad?
I dance and sing only to anger grief,
That in that anger, he might smite life down
With his Iron fist: good heart, it seems then,
They laugh to see grief kill me: O, fond men,
You laugh at others tears, when others smile,
You tear your selves in pieces: vile, vile, vile,
Ha, ha, when I behold a swarm of fools,
Crowding together to be counted wise,
I laugh because sweet Agripine's not there,
But weep because she is not any where,
And weep because whether she be or not,
My love was ever and is still forgot: forgot, forgot, forgot.

Draw back this stream, why should my Orleans mourn?


Look yonder, Galloway, do thou see that Sun?
Nay good friend, stare upon it, mark it well,
Ere he be two hours elder, all that glory
Is banished heaven, and then (for grief) this sky,
That Is now so iocund, will mourn all in black,
And shall not Orleans mourn? Alack, alack,
O, what a Savage tyranny it were,
T'inforce care, laugh and woe: not shed a tear?
Dead is my love, I am buried in her scorn,
That is my Sunset, and shall I not mourn?
Yes by my troth I will.

Dear friend forbear,
Beauty (like sorrow) dwells every where.
Race out this strong Idea of her face,
As fair as hers shines in any place.

Thou art a Traitor to that white and red,
Which sitting on hex cheeks (being Cupids throne)
Is my hearts sovereign: O when she is dead,
This wonder (Beauty) shall be found in none.
Now Agripyne's not mine, I vow to be
In love with nothing but deformity.
O fair Deformity, I muse all eyes
Are not enamord of thee: thou did never
Murder men's hearts, or let them pine like wax,
Melting against the Sun of thy destiny,
Thou art a faithful nurse to Chastity,
Thy beauty is not like to Agripynes,
For cares, and age, and sickness hers deface,
But thine's eternal: O Deformity,
Thy fairenes is not like to Agripynes,
For (dread) her beauty will no beauty have,
But thy face looks most lovely in the grave.

See where they come together hand in hand.


O, watch sweet Galloway, when their hands do part, Between them, shall thou
find my murdered heart


By this then it seems a thing impossible, to know when an English Lady loves
truly


Not so, for when her soul steals into her heart, and her heart leapes up to
her eyes, and her eyes drop into her hands, then if she say, Here Is my hand,
she is your own, else never


Here Is a pair of your prisoners, lets try their opinion.


My kind prisoners well encountered, the Prince of Cyprus here and my self have
been wrangling about a question of love: My Lord of Orleans, you look lean,
and likest a lover; Whether is it more torment to love a Lady and never enjoy
her, or always to enjoy a Lady, whom you cannot choose but hate


To hold her ever in mine arms whom I loath in my heart, were some plague,
yet the punishment were no more then to be enjoined to keep poison in my hand,
yet never to taste it


But say you should be compeld to swallow ye poison.


Then a speedy death would end a speeding misery: But to love a Lady and never
enjoy her, oh it is not death, but worse then damnation; It Is hell, it is


No more, no more, good Orleans, nay then I see my prisoner is in love too.


Me thinks, soldiers cannot fall into the fashion of love.


Me thinks, a Soldier is the most faithful lover of all men else: for his
affection stands not upon complement: his wooing is plain homespun stuff:
there is no outlandish thread in it, no Rethoricke: a Soldier casts no figures to
get his mistress heart, his love is like his valor in the field, when he pays
downright blows


True, Madam, but would you receive such payment?


No, but I mean, I love a Soldier best, for his plain dealing.


That's as good as the first.


Be it so, that goodness I like: for what Lady can abide to love a Spruce
silken face Courtier, that stands every morning two or three hours learning
how to look by his Glass, how to speak by his Glass, how to sigh by his
glass, how to court his Mistress by his Glass. I would wish him no other
plague, but to have a Mistress as brittle as glass


And that were as bad as the horn plague.


Are any lovers possessed with this madness?


What madmen are not possessed with this love? yet by my troth, we poor women
do but smile in our sleeves to see all this fopperie: yet we all desire to see
our lovers attirde gallantly, to hear them sing sweetly, to behold them
dance comely and such like; but this apish monkie fashion of effeminate
niceness, out upon it: Oh, I hate it worse then to be counted a scould


Indeed men are most regarded, when they least regard themselves.


And women most honored, when they show most mercy to their lovers.


But is it not a miserable tyranie, to see a Lady triumph in the passions of a
soul languishing through her cruelty


Me thinks it is.


Me thinks it is more then tyranny.


So think not I: for as there is no reason to hate any that love us, so it
were madness to love all that do not hate us: women are created beautiful,
only because men should woo them: for twere miserable tyranny to inioyne
poor women to woo men: I would not hear of a woman in love for my fathers
kingdom


I never heard of any woman that hated love.


Nor I: but we had all rather die then confess we love; our glory is to
hear men sigh whilst we smile, to kill them with a frown, to strike them dead
with a sharp eye, to make you this day wear a feather, and to morrow a sick
nightcap: Oh, why this is rare, there is a certain deity in this, when a Lady
by the Magic of her looks, can turn a man into twenty shapes


Sweet friend, she speaks this but to torture me.


I Will teach thee how to plague her: love her not.


Poor Orleans, how lamentably he looks: if he stay, heel make me surely
love him for pure pity. I must send him hence, for of all sorts of love. I
hate the French: I pray thee, sweet prisoner, entreat Lord Longauile to come
to me presently


I will: and esteem myself more then happy, that you will employ me.


Watch him, watch him for Gods sake, if he sigh not or look not back.


He does both: but what mystery lies in this?


Nay, no mystery, it is as plain as Cupids forehead: why this is as it should
be: And esteem my self more then happy, that you will employ me: my French
prisoner is in love over head and ears


Its wonder how he scapes drowning.


With whom think you?


With his keeper, for a good wager: Ah, how glad is he to obey? And how proud
am I to command in this Empire of affection? Over him and such Spungy-liuerd
youths, (that lie soaking in love) I triumph more with mine eye, then ever he
did over a Soldier with his sword. Is It not a gallant victory for me to subdue
my Fathers enemy with a look? Prince of Cyprus, you were best take heed, how
you encounter an English Lady


God bless me from loving any of you, if all be so cruel.


God bless me from suffering you to love me, if you be not so formable.


Will you command me any service, as you have done Orleans:


No other service but this, that (as Orleans) you love me, for no other reason,
but that I may torment you


I will: conditionally, that in all company I may call you my tormenter.


You shall: conditionally, that you never beg for mercy. Come, my Lord of
Galloway


Come, sweet Madam.


The Ruby-colourd portals of her speech
Were closde by mercy: but upon her eye,
(Attired in frowns) sat murdring cruelty.
She Is angry, that I durst so high aspire.
O, she disdaines that any strangers breast
Should be a Temple for her deity:
She Is full of beauty, full of bitterness.
Till now, I did not dally with loves fire:
And when I thought to try his flames indeed,
I burnt me even to cinders: O, my stars,
Why from my native shore did your beams guide me,
To make me dote on her that does deride me?

Hold him in this mind, sweet Cupid, I conjure thee. O, what music these
hey-hoes make? I was about to cast my little little self into a great love
trance for him, fearing his heart had been flint: but since I see it is pure
virgin wax, he shall melt his belly full: for now I know how to temper him.


Never beg mercy? yet be my tormenter.
I hope she heard me not: doubtless she did:
And now will she insult upon my passions,
And vex my constant love with mockeries.
Nay, then i will be mine own Physician,
And our face love, and make her think that I
Mournd thus, because I saw her standing by.
What news, my Lord of Cornwall?

This fair Prince,
One of your Countrie-men, is come to Court,
A lusty gallant brave in Cyprus I Will,
With fifty bard Horses prawncing at his heels,
Backed by as many strong limbd Cypriots.
All whom he keeps in pay: whose offered service,
Our king with Arms of gladness has embraced.

Borne in the I Will of Cyprus? what is his name?

His servants call him Fortunatus son.

Rich Fortunatus son? Is he ariu'd?

This he bestowed on me.

And this on me.

And this bounteous hand enforced me take.

I prize this Jewel at a hundred Marks,
Yet would he needs bestow this gift on me.

My Lords, whose hand has been thus prodigal?

Your countrieman my Lord, a Cypriot.

The gallant sure is all compact of gold,
To every Lady has he given rich Jewels,
And sent to every servant in the Court
Twenty fair English Angels.

This is rare.

My Lords, prepare your selves for reueling,
It Is the kings pleasure that this day he spent
In royal pastimes, that this golden Lord,
(For so all that behold him, christen him)
May taste the pleasures of our English court.
Here comes the gallant, shining like the Sun.

For these your royal favors done to me,
(Being a poor stranger) my best powers shall preue,
By Acts of worth, the soundnes of my love.

Herein your love shall best set out it self,
By staying with us: if our English I Will
Hold any object welcome to your eyes,
Do but make choice, and claim it as your prize.

I thank your grace: would he durst keep his word,
I know what I would claim: Tush, man, be bold,
Were she a Saint, she may be won with gold.

It Is strange I must confess, but in this pride,
His Father Fortunatus (if he live)
Consumes his life in Cyprus: still he spends,
And still his Coffers with abundance swell,
But how he gets these riches none can tell.

Hold him in talk: come hither, Agripyne.

But what intic'de young Andelociaes soul
To wander hither?

That which did allure,
My sovereigns son, the wonder of the place.

This curious heap of wonders, (which an Empress
Gave him) he gave me, and by Uenus hand,
The warlike Amorato needs would swear,
He left his country Cyprus for my love.

If by the sovereign Magic of thine eye,
Thou can inchant his looks to keep the circles
Of thy fair cheeks, be bold to try thy charms,
Feed him with hopes, and find the royal vein,
That leads this Cypriot to his golden mine.
Here Is Music spent in vain, Lords, fall to dancing.

My fair tormentor, will you lend a hand?

I Will try this strangers cunning in a dance.

My cunning is but small, yet whoo'le not prove
To shame himself for such a Ladies love?

These Cypriots are the devils that torture me.
He courts her, and she smiles, but I am borne,
To be her beauties slave, and her loves scorn.

I shall never have the face to ask the question twice.


What Is the reason? Cowardlynes or pride?


Neither: but it is the fashion of us Cypriots, both men and women, to yield at
first assault, and we expect others should do the like


Its a sign, that either your women are very black, and are glad to be sped,
or your men very fond, and will take no denial


Indeed our Ladies are not so fair as you.


But your men more ventrous at a breach then you, or else they are all dastardly
soldiers


He that fightes under these sweet colors, and yet turns coward, let him
be shot to death with the terrible arrows of fair Ladies eyes


Nay Insultado, you must not deny us.


My Corocon es muy pesada, my Anima muy atormentada, Espagnoll, no haze musica
in Tierra Inglesa.


Sweet Insultado let us see you dance.
I have heard the Spanish dance is full of state.

Verdad Signor: la danza spagnola, es muy alta,
Maiestica, y para Monarcas: vuestra Inglesa,
Baxa, Fantastica, y muy humilde.

Does my Spanish prisoner deny to dance? He has sworn to me by the cross
of his pure Toledo, to be my servant: by that oath (my Castilian prisoner) I
conjure you to show your cunning, though all your body be not free, I am sure
your heels are at liberty


Nolo quire contra dezir: vuestra oio haze conquesto a su prisionero: Oyes, la
pauyne Hispanola, sea vuestra musica y grauidad, y maiestad: Pay, dadime
Tabacca, Ton^a my capa, e my espada. Mas alta, Mas alta: Desuiaios, Desuiaios,
Companieros, Mas alta, Mas alta.


Thanks, Insultado.

It Is most excellent.

The Spaniards dance, is as his deeds be, full of pride.

The day grows old, and what remains unspent,
Shall be consumed in banquets, Agripyne,
Leave us a while, if Andelocia please,
Go bear our beauteous daughter company.

Fortune I thank thee: now thou smil'st on me.

This Cipriot bears a galla^t princely mind.
My Lord, of what birth is your countryman?
Think not, sweet Prince, that I propound this question,
To wrong you in your love to Agripyne:
Our favors grace him to an other end.
Nor let the wings of your affection droope,
Because she seems to shun loves gentle lure.
Believe it on our word, her beauties prize
Only shall yield a conquest to your eyes.
But tell me what is this Fortunatus son?

Of honorable blood, and more renownd
In foreign kingdoms (whither his proud spirit,
Plumed with ambitious feathers, caries him)
Then in his native Country. but last day,
The father and the sons were through their riots,
Poor and disdainde of all, but now they glister,
More bright than Midas: if some damned fiend
Fed not his bags, this golden pride would end.

His pride we will somewhat tame, and curb the head
Of his rebellious prodigality:
He has invited us, and all our Peers,
To feast with him tomorrow, his provision,
I understand may entertain three kings.
But Lincoln, let our Subjects secretly
Be chargde on pain of life that not a man
Sell any kind of Fuel to his servants.

This policy shall clip his golden wings,
And teach his pride what it is to strive with kings.

Withdraw a while:
None filled his hands with Gold, for we set spies,
To watch who fed his prodigality:
He hung the Marble bosom of our Court,
As thick with glistring Spangles of pure gold,
As ere the spring has slucke the earth with flowers.
Unless he melt himself to liquid gold,
Or be some God, some devil, or can transport
A mint about him, (by enchanted power)
He cannot rain such shewers: with his own hands
He threw more wealth abroad in every street,
Then could be thrust into a Chariot:
He Is a Magician sure, and to some fiend,
His soul (by infernal covenants) has he sold,
Always to swim up to the chin in gold.
Be what he can be, if those doting fires,
Wherein he burns for Agripinaes love,
Want power to melt from him this endless Mine,
Then (like a slave) we will chain him in our Tower,
Where tortures shall compel his sweating hands
To cast rich heaps into our treasorie.

I have found the sacred spring that never ebs.
Leave us:
Till you have sworn by Englands royal crown,
To let me keep it.

By my Crown I swear,
None but fair Agripyne the Iem shall wear.

Then is this mine: see, Father, here is the fire,
Whose gilded beams still burn, this is the Sun,
That ever shines, the tree that never dies,
Here grows the Garden of Hesperides,
The outside mockes you, makes you think it is poor,
But entering it, you find eternal store.

Art sure of this? How did thou drive it out?

Fear not his waking yet, I made him drink
That soporiferous Juice which was composd,
To make the Queen (my Mother) relish sleep,
When her last sickness sommond her to heaven.
He sleeps profoundly: when his amorous eyes
Had singde their wings in Cupids wanton flames,
I set him all on fire, and promised love:
In pride whereof, he drew me forth this purse,
And swore, by this he multiplied his gold.
I tried and found it true: and secretly
Commanded Music with her silver tongue,
To chime soft lullabies into his soul,
And whilst my fingers wantond with his hair,
(T'intice the sleepie Juice to charm his eyes)
In all points was there made a purse, like his,
Which counterfeit is hung in place of this.

More then a second kingdom have thou won.
Leave him, that when he wakes he may suspect,
Some else has robbed him, come dear Agripyne,
If this strange purse his sacred virtues hold,
We Will circle England with a wast of Gold.

These English occupiers are mad Trojans: let a man pay them never so much,
they will give him nothing but the bag. Since my master created me steward over
his fifty men, and his one and fifty horse, I have rid over much business,
yet never was gald, I thank the destinies: Music? O delicate warble: O these
Courtiers are most sweet triumphant creatures. Seignior, Sir: Monsieur: sweet
Seignior; this is the language of ye accomplishment: O delicious strings: these
heavenly wyre-drawers have stretched my master even out at length: yet at length
he must wake: master


Wake me not yet, my gentle Agripyne.


One word Sir, for the billets, and I vanish.


There Is heaven in these times: throw the musicians Abounteous largess of three
hundred Angels.


Why sir, I have but ten pound left.


Ha, Shadow? where is the Princess Agripyne?


I am not Apollo, I cannot reveal.


Was not the princess here, when thou came in?


Here was no Princess but my princely self.


In faith?


No in faith, Sir.


Where are you hid? where stand you wantoning? Not here? gone in faith? have you
given me the slip? well, it is but an amorous trick and so I embrace it: my
horse, Shadow, how fare my horse


Upon the best Oats my vnderiteward can buy.


I mean, are they lusty, sprightly, gallant, wanto^, fiery?


They are as all horses are, Caterpillars to the Commonwelth, they are ever
munching: but Sir, for these billets, and these fagots and bauins


S'hart what billets, what fagots? do make me a Woodmonger?


No sweet Seignior, but you have bid the King and his Peers to dinner, and he
has commanded that no Woodmonger sell you a stick of wood, and that no
Collyer shall cosen you of your measure, but must tie up the mouth of their
Sackes, least their Coals kindle your choler


Is It possible? is it true, or have thou learnt of the English gallants to gull?


He Is a gul that would be taught by such guls.


Not a stick of wood? Some child of envy has buzd this stratagem into the
kings ear, of purpose to disgrace me: I have invited his majesty, and though
it cost me a Million, i will feast him: Shadow, thou shall hyre a hundred or two
of Carts, with them post to all the Grocers in London, buy up all the Cynamon,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Licorish and all other spices, that have any strong heart, and
with them make fires to prepare our Cookerie: Ere Fortunatus son look red
with shame
Heel dress a Kings feast in a spiced flame.



This diuice, Sir, will be somewhat a kin to Lady Pride, twill ask cost.


Fetch twenty Porters, i will laid all with gold.


First, master, fill these bags.


Come then, hold up, how now? tricks, new crochets, Madam Fortune? Dry as an
Eele-skin? Shadow, take thou my Gold out


Why Sir, here is none in.


Ha, let me see: O here is a bastard cheek,
I see now it is not mine: it is counterfeit,
It Is so: slave thou have robbed thy master.

Not of a penny, I have been as true a steward.

Uengeance on thee and on thy stewardship.
Yet wherefore curse I thee? thy leaden soul
Had never power to mount up to the knowledge
Of the rich mystery closde in my purse.
Oh no, i will curse my self, mine eyes i will curse,
They have betrayed me, I will curse my tongue,
That has betrayed me: I Will curse Agripyne,
She has betrayed me: Sirens cease to sing,
Your charms have taken effect, for now I see,
All your enchantments were, to cosen me.

What shall I do with this ten pound, Sir?

Go buy with it a Chain and hang thy self.
Now think I on my Fathers prophecy.
Tell none (quoth he) the virtue, if you do,
Much shame, much grief, much danger follows you.
With tears I credit his divinity.
O fingers, were you upright Justices,
You would tear out mine eyes: had not they gazde
On the frail color of a painted cheek,
None had betrayed me: henceforth i will defy
All beauty, and will call a lovely eye,
A Sun whose scorching beams burn up our joys,
Or turn them black like Ethiopians.
O women, wherefore are you borne men's woe,
Why are your faces framed Angelical?
Your hearts of spunges, soft and smooth in show,
But touched, with poison they do ouer-flow.
Had sacred wisdom been my Fathers Fate,
He had died happy, I lived fortunate.
Shadow, be are this to beauteous Agripyne,
With it this message, tell her, i will reprove
Her covetous sin the less, because for gold,
I see that most men's souls too cheap are sold.

Shall I buy these spices to day or to morrow*

To morrow? I, to morrow thou shall buy them,
To morrow tell the Princess I will love her,
To morrow tell the king, i will banquet him,
To morrow, Shadow, will I give thee gold,
To morrow pride goes bare and lust acold.
To morrow will the rich man feed the poor.
And vice to morrow virtue will adore,
To morrow beggars shall be crowned kings,
This No-time, morrowes-time, no sweetness sings:
I pray thee hence: bear that to Agripyne.

I Will go hence, because you send me: but i will go weeping hence, for grief that
I must turn villain as many do, and leave you when you are up to the ears
in adversity.


She has robbed me, and now i will play the thief,
I Will steal from hence to Cyprus, for black shame.
Here (through my riots) brands my lofty name.
I Will sell this pride for help to bear me thither,
So pride and beggerie shall walk together:
This world is but a School of villainy,
Therefore i will rob my brother, (not of gold,
Nor of his virtues, virtue none will steal:)
But (if I can,) i will steal his wishing Hat.
And with that, wandering round about the world,
I Will search all corners to find misery,
And where she dwells, i will dwell, languish and die.

Gentels, if ere you have beheld the passions,
The combats of his soul who being a king,
By some usurping hand has been deposde
From all his royalties: even such a soul,
Such eyes, such heart swollen big with sighs and tears,
The star-crost son of Fortunatus wears.
The thoughts crowned him a Monarch in the morn,
Yet now he is bandyed by the Seas in scorn,
From wave to wave: his golden treasures spoil
Makes him in desperate language to entreat,
The winds to spend their fury on his life:
But they (being mild in tyranny) or scorning
To triumph in a wretches funeral,
Toss him to Cyprus. O what treachery
Cannot this Serpent gold entice us to?
He robs his brother of the Souldans prize,
And having got his wish (the wishing Hat)
He does not (as he voud) seek misery,
But hopes by that to win his purse again,
And in that Hope from Cyprus is he fled.
If your swift thoughts clap on their wonted wings,
In Genoway may you take this fugitive,
Where having cozened many Iewellers,
To England back he comes, step but to court,
And there (disguizde) you find him bargoning
For Jewels with the beauteous Agripyne,
Who wearing at her side the virtuous purse,
He claspes her in his arms, and as a Raven,
Griping the tenderhearted Nightingale,
So flies he with her, (wishing) in the air,
To be transported to some wilderness:
Imagine this the place: see here they come.
Since they themselves have tongues, mine shall be dumb.

What devil art thou that affrightst me thus,
Haling a Princess from her fathers court,
To spoil her in this savage wilderness?

Indeed the devil and the pick-purse should always fly together, (for they
are sworn brothers:) but Madam Covetousness, I am neither a devil as you call
me, nor a Iewellers as I call my self, no, nor a Iugler, yet ere you and I
part, we will have some legerdimain together: do you know me


I am betrayed: this is the Cypriot.
Forgive me, it was not I that changde thy purse,
But Athelstane my Father, send me home,
And here is thy purse again: here are thy Jewels,
And I in satisfaction of all wrongs.

Talk not you of satisfaction, this is some recompense that I have you, it is
not the purse I regard: put if off, and i will mince it as small as pie meat: the
purse? hang the purse: were that gone, I can make another, and another, and
another, I and another: it is not the purse I care for, but the purser: you, I
you. Is It not a shame that a kings daughter, a fair Lady, a Lady not for Lords,
but for Monarchs, should for gold sell her love, and when she has her own
asking, and that there stands nothing between, then to cheat your sweet
heart? O fie, fie, a she cony-catcher? You must be dealt soundly with


Inioyne what pains thou will, and i will endure them, so thou will send me to my
fathers court


Nay gods lid, you are not gone so: set your heart at rest, for I have set up my
rest, that except you can run swifter then a Heart, home you go not: what
pains shall I lay upon you? Let me see: I could serve you now but a slipperie
touch: I could get a young King or two, or three of you, and then send you
home, and bid their grand-sire king nurse them: I could pepper you, but I will
not


O, do not violate my chastity.


No, why I tell you I am not given to the flesh, though I savor (in your nose)
a little of the devil, I could run away else, and starve you here


If I must die, doom me some easier death.


Or transform you (because you love picking) into a Squirell, and make you
pick out a poor living here among the Nut trees: but I will not neither


What will my gentle Andelocia do?


Oh, now you come to your old byas of cogging.


I pray thee Andelocia, let me go:
Send me to England, and by heaven I swear,
Thou from all kings on earth my love shall bear.

Shall I in faith?


In faith, in faith thou shall.


Here, god a mercy: now thou shall not go.


Oh God.


Nay do you hear Lady? cry not you are best: no nor curse me not: if you
think but a crabbed thought of me, the spirit that carried you in mine arms
through the air, will tell me all: therefore set your Sunday face vpont. Since
you will love me, i will love you, i will marry you, and lie with you, and beget
little Iuglers: marie home you get not: England you will say is yours: but
Agripyne, love me, and I will make the whole world thine


I care not for the world, thou murdrest me,
Between my sorrow, and the scalding Sun
I faint, and quickly will my life be done,
My mouth is like a Furnace, and dry heat
Drinks up my blood. Oh God, my heart will burst,
I die, unless some moisture quench my thirst.

S'hart now I am worse then ere I was before:
For half the world I would not have her die.
Here Is neither spring nor ditch, nor rain, nor dew,
Nor bread, nor drink: my lovely Agripyne,
Be comforted, see here are Apple trees.

Clime up for Gods sake, reach me some of them.

Look up, which of these Apples likes thee best?

This has a withered face, it is some sweet fruit.
Not that, my sorrows are too sour already.

Come hither, here are Apples like gold.

O, I for Gods sake, gather some of these.
Ay me, would God I were at home again.

Stand farther, least I chance to fall on thee.
Oh here be rare Apples, rare red-cheekt Apples, that cry come
kiss me* Apples, hold your peace, i will teach you to cry.

O England, shall I never behold thee more?

Agripyna, it is a most Sugared delicious taste in ones mouth, but when it is down,
it is as bitter as gall


Yet gather some of them. Oh, that a Princess
Should pine for food: were I at home again,
I should disdain to stand thus and complain.

Here Is one Apple that grows highest, Agripyna, and I could reach that, i will
come down


Make have, for the hot Sun does scald my cheeks.


The sun kiss thee? hold, catch, put on my Hat, I will have yonder highest
Apple, though I die for it


I had not wont be Sunburned, wretched me.
O England, would I were again in thee.

Swounds Agripyna, stay, O I am undone,
Sweet Agripyna, if thon hearst my voice,
Take pity of me, and return again*
She flies like lightning: O she hears me not,
I wish my self into a wilderness,
And now I shall turn wild: here I shall famish,
Here die, here cursing dye, here rauing die,
And thus will wound my breast, and rent mine hair.
What hills of Flint are grown upon my brows?
O me, two forked horns, I am turned beast,
I have abuzde two blessings, wealth and knowledge,
Wealth in my purse, and knowledge in my Hat,
By which being borne into the Courts of kings,
I might have seen the wondrous works of Jove,
Acquirde Experience, Learning, Wisdom, Truth,
But I in wilderness tottred out my youth,
And therefore must turn wild: must be a beast,
An ugly beast: my body horns must bear,
Because my soul deformity does wear.
Lives none within this wood? If none but I
Live here (thanks heaven) for here none else shall die.

See where my new-turnd devil has built his hell.

Virtue, who conquers now? the fool is taken.

O sleepie sin.

Sweet tunes wake him again.

Uice sets too heavy on his drowzy soul,
Music sweet concord cannot pierce his ear.
Sing and amongst your Songs, mix bitter scorn.

Those that tear Virtue, must by Uice be torn.
Virtue stand aside: the fool is caught,

Laugh to see him, laugh alowd to wake him,
Follies nets are wide, and neately wrought,
Mock his horns, and laugh to see Uice take him.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, laugh, laugh in scorn,
Who Is yt fool? the fool, he wears a horn.
Virtue stand aside, mock him, mock him, mock him

Laugh alowd to see him, call him fool.
Error gave him suck, now sorrows rock him,
Send the riotous beast to madness school.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, laugh, laugh in scorn,
Who Is the fool? the fool, he wears a horn.
Virtue stand aside: your school he hates.

Laugh alowd to see him, mock, mock, mock him.
Uanitie and hell keep open gates,
He Is in, and a new nurse (Despair) must rock him.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, laugh, laugh in scorn,
Fool, fool, fool, fool, fool, wear still the horn.

O me, what hell is this? fiends, tempt me not.
Thou glorious devil hence. Oh now I see,
This fruit is thine, thou hatt deformed me:
Idiot avoid, thy gifts I loath to taste.
Away: since I am entered madness School,
As good to be a beast, as be a fool.
Away, why tempt you me? some powrefull grace
Come and redeem me from this hideous place.

To her has Andelocia (all his life)
Sworn fealty, would thou forsake her now?

Whose blessed tongue names Andelocia?

Hers, who (attended on by destinies)
Shortened thy Fathers life, and lengthens thine.

O sacred Queen of chance, now thorten mine,
Else let thy deity take off this shame.

Woo her, it was she that set it on thy head.

She laughes to see me metamorphosed.

Woo me and i will take off this ugly scorn.

Woo me, and i will clap on another horn.

I am beset with anguish, shame and death.
O bid the Fates work fast, and stop my breath.

No Andelecia, thou must live to see
Worse torments (for thy follies) light on thee.
This golden tree, which did thine eyes entice,
Was planted here by Uice: lo, here stands Uice:
How often have thou sued to win her grace?

Till now, I never did behold her face.

Thou did behold her at thy fathers death,
When thou in scorn did violate his will,
Thou did behold her, when thy strecht-out arm
Caught at the highest bough, the loftiest vice,
The fairest Apple, but the fowlest price.
Thou did behold her, when thy lickerish eye
Fed on the beauty of fair Agripyne,
Because thou had gold, thou thoughtst al women thine,
When look thou off from her? for they whose souls
Still revel in the nights of vanity,
On the fair cheeks of Uice still fix their eye.
Because her face does shine, and all her bosom
Bears silver Moons, thou wast enamord of her.
But had thou upward looked, and seen these shames,
Or viewd her round about, and in this glass
Seen Idiots faces, heads of devils and hell,
And read this ha, ha, he, this merry story,
Thou would have loathd her: where, by loving her,
Thou bearst this face, and wearst this ugly head,
And if she once can bring thee to this place,
Loud sounds these ha, ha, he, she will laugh apace.

O, re-transforme me to a glorious shape,
And I will learn how I may love to hate her.

I cannot re-transforme thee, woo this woman.

This woman? wretched is my state, when I,
To find out wisdom, to a fool must fly.

Fool, clear thine eyes, this is bright Arete,
This is poor Virtue, care not how the world
Does crown her head, the world laughes her to scorn,
Yet Sibi sapit, Virtue knows her worth.
Run after her, she will give thee these and these
Crowns and Bay-garlands: (honors victories:)
Serve her, and she will fetch thee pay from heaven,
Or give thee some bright office in the stars.

Immortal Arete, Virtue divine,
O smile on me, and I will still be thine.

Smile thou on me, and I will still be thine:
Though I am jealous of thy Apostasy,
I Will entertain thee: here, come taste this tree,
Here Is Physic for thy sick deformity.

It Is bitter: this fruit I shall never digest.

Try once again, the bitterness soon dies.

Mines sweet, taste mine.

But being down it is sour,
And mine being down has a delicious taste.
The path that leads to Uertues court is narrow,
Thornie and up a hill, a bitter journey
But being gone through, you find all heavenly sweetes,
The entrance is all flintie, but at the end,
To towers of pearl and crystal you ascend.

O delicate, O sweet Ambrosian relish,
And see, my ugliness drops from my brows,
Thanks beauteous Arete: O had I now
My Hat and purse again, how I would shine,
And gild my soul with none but thoughts divine.

That shall be tried, take fruit from both these trees,
By help of them, win both thy purse and Hat,
I will instruct thee how, for on my wings
To England shall thou ride; thy virtuous brother
Is (with that Shadow who attends on thee,)
In London, there i will set thee presently.
But if thou lose our favors once again,
To taste her sweetes, those sweetes must prove thy bane.

Uice, who shall now be crowned with victory?

She that triumphs at last, and that must I.

Lincoln, how set'st thou her at liberty?

No other prison held her but your court,
There (in her chamber) has she hid her self
These two days, only to shake off that fear,
Which her late violent rapture cast upon her.

Where has the beauteous Agripyna been?

In heaven or hell, in or without the world,
I know not which, for as I often have seen
(When angry Thamesis has curld her locks,)
A whirlwind come, and from her frizeld brows,
Snatch up a handful of those sweatie pearls,
That stood upon her forhead, which awhile,
Being by the boystrous wind hung in the air,
At length has flung them down and raizd a storm.
Even with such fury was I wherryed up,
And by such force held prisoner in the clouds,
And thrown by such a tempest down again.

Some soul is damned in hell for this black deed.

I have the purse safe, and anon your grace
Shall hear this wondrous history at full.

Tell me, tormenter, shall fair Agripyne,
Without more difference be now christend mine?

My choice must be my Fathers fair consent.

Then shall thy choice end in this Cyprus prince.
Before the Sun shall six times more arise,
His royal marriage will we solemnise.
Proclaim this honored match, come Agripyne,
I am glad thou art here, more glad the purse is mine.

Buy any Apples, feene Apples of Tamasco, feene Tamasio peepeins: peeps feene,
buy Tamasco peepins


Damasco apples? good my Lord Montrosse,
Call yonder fellows.

Sir Coster-monger.


Who calls: peeps of Tamasco, feene peeps: I sat it is de sweetest apple in de
world, it is better den de Pomewater, or apple John


By my trat Madam, it is reet Tamasco peepins, look here else.


I dare not say, as de Irishman my countrieman say, taste de goodness of de
fruit: No fayt it is farie teere mistress, by Saint Patrickes hand it is teere
Tamasco apple


The fairest fruit that ever I beheld,
Damasco apples, wherefore are they good?

What is your price of half a score of these?


Half a score, half a score? dat is doos many mester.


I, I, ten, half a score, that's five and five.


Feeue and feeue? By my trat and as Creeze save me la, I cannot tell, wat be de
price of feeue and feeue, but it is tree crown for one Peepin, dat is the preez
if you take em


I fat, it is no less for Tamasco.


Three crowns for one? what wondrous virtues have they?


O, it is feene Tamasco apple, and shall make you a great teale wise, and make
you no fool, and make feene memory


And make dis fash be more fair and amiable, and make dis eyes look always
lovely, and make all de court and country burn in desire to kiss di none
sweet countenance


Apples to make a Lady beautiful?
Madam that's excellent.

These Irishmen,
Some say, are great dissemblers, and I fear,
These two the badge of their own country wear.

By my trat, and by Saint Patrickes hand, and as Creez save me la, it is no
dissembler: de Irish man now and den cut di countrie-mans throat, but yet in
fayt he love di countrie-man, it is no dissembler: dis feene Tamasco apple can
make di sweet countenance, but I can take no less but three crowns for one,
I wear out my naked legs and my footes, and my tods, and run hidder and didder
to Tamasco for them


As Creez save me la, he speaks true: Peeps feene,


I Will try what pawer lies in Damasco fruit.
Here are ten crowns for three, So fare you well.

Lord Longauyle, buy some.


I buy? not I:
Hang them, they are toys, come Madam, let us go.

Saint Patricke and Saint Peter, and all de holy Angels look upon dat fash and
make it fair


Ha, ha, ha, she is sped, I warrant.


Peace, Shadow, buy any peepins, buy.


Peeps feene, feene Tamasco apples.


Came not Lord Longauyle to buy some fruit?


No fat, master, here came no Lords nor Ladies, but di none sweet self.


It Is well, say nothing, here is six crowns for two: You say the virtues are to
make one strong


Yes fat and make sweet countenance and strong too.


It Is excellent, here: farewell, if these prove,
I Will conquer men by strength, women by love.

Ha, ha, ha, why this is rare.


Peace, master, here comes another fool.


Peeps feene, buy any peepes of Tamasco?


Did not the Lord Montrosse return to you?


No fat, sweet master, no Lord did turn to us: Peepes feene.


I am glad of it: here are nine crowns for thee: What are the virtues besides
making fair


O, twill make thee wondrous wise.


And dow shall be no more a fool, but sweet face and wise.


It Is rare, farewell* I never yet durst woo.
None loves me: now i will try what these can do.

Ha, ha, ha. So, this is admirable, Shadow, here end my torments in Saint
Patrickes Purgatory, but thine shall continue longer


Did I not clap on a good false Irish face?


It became thee rarely.


Yet that's lamentable, that a false face should become any man.


Thou art a gull, it is all the fashion now, which fashion because we will keep,
step thou abroad, let not the world want fools: whilst thou art commensing thy
knauerie there, i will proceed Doctor Dodipoll here: that done, thou Shadow and
I will fat our selves to behold the transformation of these fools: go fly


I fear nothing, but that whilst we strive to make others fools, we shall
wear the Coxcombes our selves, Pips fine etc.


S'hart, here is my brother whom I have abuzde:
His presence makes me blush, it strikes me dead,
To think how I am metamorphosed.
Feene paepins of Tamasco etc.

For shame cast off this Mask.

Whilt thou buy any pips?

Mock me no longer
With idle apparitions: many a land
Have I with weary feet and a sick soul
Measurd, to find thee; and when thou art found,
My greatest grief is, that thou art not lost:
Yet lost thou art, thy fame, thy wealth are lost,
Thy wits are lost, and thou have in their stead,
With shame and cares, and misery crowned thy head.
That Shadow that pursues thee, filled mine ears
With sad relation of thy wretchedness,
Where is the purse, and where my wishing Hat?

Where? and where? are you created Constable, you stand so much upon
Intergatories? the purse is gone, let that fret you, and the Hat is gone, let
that mad you: I run thus through all trades to ouer-take them, if you will be
quiet, follow me, and help, if not, fly from me, and hang your self: will thou buy any pippins?


O, how I grieve, to see him thus transformd?
Yet from the circles of my jealous eyes,
He shall not start, till he have re-possest
Those virtuous Jewels, which found once again,
More cause they never shall give me to complain.
Their worth shall be consumed in murdring flames,
And end my grief, his riot, and our shames.

In spite of sorcerie try once again,
Try once more in contempt of all damned spells.

Your majesty fights with no mortal power.
Shame and not conquest, hangs upon his strife.
O, touch me not, you add but pain to pain,
The more you cut, the more they grow again.

Is there no art to conjure down this scorn?
I, never knew Physic yet against the horn.

See, prince of Cyprus, thy fair Agripyne
Has turn her beauty to deformity.

Then I defy thee, Love, vain hopes, adieu,
You have mocked me long; in scorn i will now mock you.
I came to see how the Lord Longauyle
Was turned into a monster, and I find
And object, which both strikes me dumb and blind.
To morrow should have been our marriage morn,
But now my bride is shame, thy bridegroom scorn.
O tell me yet, is there no Art, no charms,
No desperate Physic for this desperate wound?

Al means are tried, but no means can be found.

Then England, farewell: hapless maid, thy stars,
Through spiteful influence set our hearts at wars.
I am infor'st to leave thee, and resign
My love to grief.

All grief to Agripyne.

Adieu I would say more, had I a tongue
Able to help his master: mighty king,
I humbly take my leave, to Cyprus I,
My fathers Son, must all such shame defy.

So does not Orleans, I defy all those,
That love not Agripyne, and him defy,
That dares but (...) her half so well as I.
O pardon me, I have in sorrows Iayle,
Been long tormented, long this mangled bosom
Has bled, and never durst expose her wounds,
Till now, till now, when at thy beauteous feet,
I offer love and life, O cast an eye
Of mercy on me, this deformed face
Cannot affright my soul from loving thee.

Talk not of love, good Orleans, but of hate.

What sentence will my love pronounce on me?

Will Orleans then be mad* O gentle friend.

O gentle, gentle friend I am not mad:
He Is mad, whose eyes on painted cheeks do doat,
O Galloway; such read beauties book by roate.
He Is mad, that pines for want of a gay flower,
Which saves when grief does blast, or sickness lowre,
Which heat does wither, and white ages frost
Nips dead: such fairenes, when it is found, it is lost,
I am not mad, for loving Agripyne,
My love looks on her eyes, with eyes divine,
I doat on the rich brightness of her mind,
That sacred beauty strikes all other blind,
O make me happy then, since my desires
Are set a burning by loves purest fires.

So thou will bear her far from England sight,
Enjoy thy wishes.

Lock me in some cave,
Where staring wonders eye shall not be guilty
To my abhorred looks, and I will die
To thee, as full of love as misery.

I am amazde and mad, some speckled soul
Lies pawnd for this in Hell, without redemption,
Some fiend deludes us all.

O unjust Fates,
Why do you hide from us this mystery?

My Lord Montrosse, how long have your brows worn
This fashion? these two feather-springs of horn?

An Irish kerne sold me Damasco apples,
Some two hours since, and (like credulous fool)
He swearing to me that they had this power,
To make me strong in body, rich in mind,
I did believe his words, tasted his fruit,
And since have been attirde in this disquize.

I fear that villain has beguild me too.

Nay before God he has not cozend you,
You have it soundly.

Me he made believe,
One apple of Damasco would inspire
By thoughts with wisdom, and upon my cheeks
Would cast such beauty, that each Ladies eye,
Which looked on me, should love me presently.

Desire to look more fair, makes me more soul,
Those apples did entice my wandering eye,
To be enamord of deformity.

This proves that true, which often I have heard in schools,
Those that would seem most wise do turn most fools.

Here Is your best hope, nene needs to hide his face,
For horned foreheads swarm in every place.

Now Chester, what Physicians have thou found?

Many, my liege, but none that have true skill
To tame such wild diseases: yet here is one,
A Doctor and a Frenchman, whom report
Of Agripynes grief has drawn to court.

Cure her, and Englands treasorie shall stand,
As free for thee to use, as rain from heaven.

Cure me and to thy Coffers I will send,
More gold from Scotland then thy life can spend.

Cure Longauile, and all his wealth is thine.

He Monsieur Long-villaine gra tanck you: Gra tanck your mashestie a great
teale artely by my trat: where be dis Madam Princeza dat be so mush tormenta? O
I eshu: one, 2: an tree, 4 and 5, seez horn Ha, ha, ha, pardona moy prea wid
al mine art, for by my trat, me can no point shose but laugh, Ha, ha, ha* to
mark how like tree bul-beggera, dey stand. Oh, by my trat and fat, di diuela
be whoreson, scurme, paltry, ill sauore knave to mock de Madam, and
gentill-home so: Ha, ha, ha, ha


This Doctor comes to mock your majesty.


No by my trat la, but me loua musha musha merymant: Come Madam, prea-artely
stand still, and letta me s^ele your dis horn, O it is pretty horn, dis be
facile, easy for pull de vey but Madame dis O he grand, grand horn,
difficill, and very deep, it is pertious, a grand Laroone. But Madam, prea be
patient, we shall take it off vell


Thrc^ have we parde them off, but with fresh pain, In compass of a thought
they rise again


Its true, it is no easy mattra, to pull horn off, it is easy for pull on, but
hard for pull off, some horn be so good fellow, he will still inhabit in de
man's pate, but it is all one for tat, I shall snap away all dis: Madam trust dis
down into your little belly


Father, I am in fear to taste his physic.
First let him work experiments on those.

I Will sauce you for your infidelity.
In no place can I spy my wishing Hat.

Thou learned Frenchman, try thy skill on me,
More ugly then I am, I cannot be.

Cure me, and Montrosse wealth shall all be thine.


It Is all one for dat: shall do presently; Madam, prea mark me: Monseiur,
shamp dis in your two shaps, so, now Monsieur Long-villaine, dis so: now dis,
fear noting, it is eshelent medicyne: so, now cram dis into your guts, and
belly: So, now snap away dis whoreson four diuela; Ha, ha, Is no point good?


This is most strange.
Wast painful Longauyle?

Ease took them off, and there remains no pain.


O try thy sacred Physic on me.


No by my trat, it is no possibla, it is no possibla, al de mattra, all de ting,
all de substance, all de medicyne, be among his and his belly* it is no possibla,
till me prepare more


Prepare it then, and thou shall have more gold From Englands Coffers, then thy
life can wast


I mush buy many costily tings dat grow in Arabia, in Asia, and America, by my
trat it is no possibla, till anoder time, no point


There Is nothing in the world, but may for gold
Be bought in England, hold your lap i will rain
A shower of Angels.

Fie, fie, fie, fie, you no credit le dockature? Ha, but vel, it is all one for
tat: it is no mattera for gold: Uel, vel, vel, vel, vel, me have some more, prea
say noting, shall be presently prepara for your horns

She has my purse, and yonder lies my Hat,
Work brains, and once more make me fortunat.
Uel, vel, vel, vel, be patient Madam, presently, presently, be patient, me
have two, tree, four and five medicines for de horn: presently Madam, stand
you der, prea wid all mine art, stand you all der: and say noting, so: nor
look noting dis vey: so, presently, ppesently Madam, snip dis horn off wid de
rushes and anoder ting by and by, by and by, by and by, prea look none dis
vey, and say noting.


Let no man speak, or look, upon his life.
Doctor, none here shall rob thee of thy skill.

So, taka dis hand: winck now prea artely wid your two nyes: why so.

Would I were with my brother Ainpedo.


Help, Father, help, I am hurried hence perforce.


Draw weapons, where is the princess, follow him,
Stay the French Doctor, stay the Doctor there.
Cornwall and some other run out, and enter presently.

Stay him, sh'art who dare stay him? it is the devil
In likeness of a Frenchman, of a Doctor.
Look how a rascal kyte having swept up
A Chicken in his claws, so flies this hell-hound
In the air with Agripyne in his arms.

Count every man upon his swiftest horse.
Fly several ways, he cannot bear her far.

These paths we will beat.

And this way shall be mine.

This way, my Liege, i will ride.

And this way I:
No matter which way, to seek misery.

I can ride no way, to out-runne my shame.


Yes, Longauile, lets gallop after too,
Doubtless this Doctor was that Irish devil,
That cozend us, the medicine which he gave us,
Tasted like his Damasco villainy.
To horse, to horse, if we can catch this fiend,
Our forked shame shall in his heart blood end.

O how this mads me, that all tongues in scorn,
Which way so ere I ride, cry, Ware the horn.

O gentle Andelocia pity me,
Take off this infamy, or take my life.

Your life? you think then that I am a true Doctor indeed, that tie up my
lining in the knots of winding sheets: your life? no, keep your life, but
deliver your purse: you know the theifes salutation, Stand and deliver. So,
this is mine, and these yours: I Will teach you to live by the sweat of other
men's brows


And to strive to be fairer then God made her.


Right, Shadow: therefore vanish, you have made me turn Iugler, and cry
hey-passe, but your horns shall not repasse


O gentle Andelocia.


Andelocia is a Nettle: if you touch him gently, heel sting you.


Or a rose, if you pull his sweet stalk, heel prick you.


Therefore not a word, go, trudge to your Father: sigh not for your purse,
money may be got by you, as well as by the little Welsh woman in Cyprus, that
had but one horn in her head, you have two; and perhaps you shall cast both:
as you use me, mark those words well, as you use me, nay, you are best fly, i will
not endure one word more. Yet stay too, because you entreat me so gently, and
that i will make some amends to your Father, although I care not for any King in
Christendom, yet hold you, take this Apple, eat it as you go to court, and
your horns shall play the cowards and fall from you


O gentle Andelocia.


Nay away, not a word.


Ha, ha, ha, etc. Ware horns.


Why do thou laugh, Shadow?


To see what a horn plague follows coueteousnesse and pride.


Brother, what mysteries lie in all this?


Tricks, Ampedo, tricks, devises, and mad Herogliphickes, mirth, mirth, and
melody. O, there is more music in this, then all the Gammoth ares, and Sol fa
Res, in the world; here is the purse, and here is the Hat: because you shall be
sure i will not start, wear you this, you know his virtue; if danger beset you,
fly and away: A sort of broken-shind limping legd Iades run hobling to seek
us: Shadow, we will for all this have one fit of mirth more, to make us laugh
and be fat


And when we are fat, master, we will do as all gluttons do, laugh and lie
down


Hie thee to my chamber, make ready my richest attire, i will to Court presently.


I Will go to Court in this attire, for apparel is but the shadow of a man, but
shadow is the substance of his apparel.


Away, away, and meet me presently.


I had more need to cry, away to thee.
Away, away with this wild lunacie,
Away with ryots.

Away with your purity, brother, you are an Ass, why does this purse spit out
gold but to be spent? why lives a man in this world, to dwell in the Suburbs of
it, as you do? Away foreign simplicity, away: are not eyes made to see fair
Ladies: hearts to love them? tongues to court them, and hands to feel them?
Out you Stock, you stone, you logs end: Are not legs made to dance, and shall
mine limp up and down the world after your cloth-stockin-heeles? you have the
Hat, keep it, anon i will visit your virtuous countenance again, adieu, pleasure
is my sweet mistress, I wear her love in my Hat, and her soul in my heart: I
have sworn to be merry, and in spite of Fortune and the blacke-browd
destinies, i will never be sad.


Go, fool, in spite of mirth, thou shall be sad.
I Will bury half thy pleasures in a grave
Of hungry flames, this fire I did ordain
To burn both purse and Hat: as this does perish,
So shall the other: count what good and bad
They both have wrought, the good is to the ill,
As a small Pible to a mighty hill.
Thy glory and thy mischiefs here shall burn,
Good gifts abuzde to man's confusion turn.

This is his brother; Soldiers, bind his arms.

Bind arms and legs, and hale the fiend a way.

Unciuill: wherefore must I taste your spite?

Art thou not one of Fortunatus sons?

I am, but he did never do you wrong.

The devil thy brother has, villain, look here.

Where is the beauteous purse and wishing Hat?

My brother Andelocia has the purse,
This way heel come anon to pass to court,
Alas, that sin should make men's hearts so bold,
To kill their souls for the base thirst of gold.
The wishing Hat is burnt.

Burnt? Soldiers bind him.
Tortures shall wring both hat and purse from you,
Uillaine, i will be revenged for that base scorn,
Thy hell-hound brother clapped upon my head.

And so will Longauyle.
Away with him.

Drag him to yonder tower, there shackle him,
And in a pair of Stocks, lock up his heels,
And bid your wishing Cap deliver you.
Give us the purse and Hat, we will set thee free,
Else rot to death and starve.

Oh tyranny, you need not scorn the badge which you did bear:
Beasts would you be, though horns you did not wear.

Drag hence the cur: come noble Longauyle,
One's sure, and were the other fiend as fast,
Their pride should cost their lives: their purse and Hat
Shall be both ours, we will share them equally.

That will be some amends for arming me.

Peace, Longauyle, yonder the gallant comes.

You Are well encountered.

Thanks, Lord Longauyle.

The king expects your presence at the court.

And thither am I going.

Pips fine, fine apples of Tamasco, ha, ha, ha.

Were thou that Irishman that cozend us?

Pips fine, ha, ha, ha, no not I: not Shadow.

Were not your Apples delicate and rare?

The worst that ere you sold; Sirs, bind him fast.

What, will you murder me? help, help, some help.

Help, help, help.

Follow that Dog, and stop his balling throat.

Uillaines, what means this barbarous treachery?

We mean to be revenged for our disgrace.

And stop the golden current of thy wast.

Murder, they murder me, O call for help.

Thy voice is spent in vain, come, come, this purse,
This wel-spring of your prodigality.

Are you appointed by the king to this?

No, no, rise, spurn him up: know you who is this?

My brother Ampedo? Alas, what fate
Has made thy virtues so unfortunate?

Thy riot and the wrong of these two Lords,
Who (causeless) thus do starve me in this prison.

Strive not you are best, villains, lift in his legs.

Traitors to honor, what do you intend?

That riot shall in wretchedness have end.
Question thy brother with what cost he is fed,
And so assure thou shall be banquetted.

In want, in misery, in woe and care,
Poor Ampedo his fill has surfeted:
My want is famine, bolts my misery,
My care and woe should be thy portion.

Give me that portion, for I have a heart
Shall spend it freely, and make bankrowt
The proudest woe that ever wet man's eye.
Care with a mischief? wherefore should I care?
Have I rid side by side by mighty kings,
Yet be thus bridled now? I Will tear these fetters.
Murder, cry murder, Ampedo, alowd.
To bear this scorn our Fortunes are too proud.

O folly, thou have power to make flesh glad,
When the rich soul in wretchedness is clad.

Peace, fool, am not I Fortunes minion?
These bands are but one wrincle of her frown,
This is her Evening mask, her next mornes eye
Shall ouer-shine the Sun in majesty.

But this sad night will make an end of me.
Brother, farewell, grief, famine, sorrow, want,
Have made an end of wretched Ampedo.

Where is the wishing Hat?

Consumed in fire.

Accursed be those hands that did destroy it,
That would redeem us, did we now enjoy it.

Wanton farwell, I faint, deaths frozen hand
Congeales life's little River in my breast.
No man before his end is truly blessed.

O miserable, miserable soul.
Thus a foul life makes death to look more foul.

Thus shall this golden purse divided be,
One day for you, another day for me.

Of days anon, say, what determine you,
Shall they have liberty, or shall they die?

Die sure: and see, I think the elder's dead.

I, murderers, he is dead. O sacred wisdom,
Had Fortunatus been enamored
Of thy celestial beauty, his two sons
Had shind like two bright Suns.

Pull hard, Montrosse.

Come you to strangle me? are you the hangman?
Hell Hounds you are damned for this impiety.
Fortune, forgive me, I deserve thy hate,
My self have made myself a reprobate:
Virtue, forgive me, for I have transgrest
Against thy laws, my vows are quite forgot,
And therefore shame is fallen to my sins lot.
Riches and knowledge are two gifts divine.
They that abuse them both as I have done,
To shame, to beggerie, to hell must run.
O conscience hold thy sting, cease to afflict me.
Be quick, tormentors, I desire to die.
No death is equal to my misery.
Cyprus, vain world, and Uanitie farewell.
Who builds his heaven on earth, is sure of hell.

He Is dead: in some deep vault lets throw their bodies.

First let us see the purse, Lord Longauyle.

Here it is, by this we will fill this tower with gold.

Frenchman, this purse is counterfeit.

Thou lie.
Scot, thou have cozend me, give me the right,
Else shall thy bosom be my weapons grave.

Villain, thou shall not rob me of my due.

Lay hands upon the murderers, strike them down.

Surrender up this purse, for this is mine.

I^e these two devils, of some powers divine?

O, see, see, O my two masters, poor Shadows substances; what shall I do?
whose body shall Shadow now follow


Peace, Idiot, thou shall find rich heaps of fools,
That will be proud to entertain a Shadow.
I charm thy babbling lips from troubling me.
You need not hold them, see, I smite them down
Lower then hell: base souls, sincke to your heaven.

I do arrest you both my prisoners.

Stand not amazde, you gods of earth, at this,
She that arresteth these two fools is Uice,
They have broke Virtues laws, Vice is her serfeant,
Her Iayler and her executioner.
Look on those Cypriots, Fortunatus sons,
They and their Father were my minions,
My name is Fortune.

O dread deity.

Kneel not to me: if Fortune list to frown,
You need not fall down, for shaele spurn you down*
Arise, but fools, on you i will triumph thus.
What have gaind by being covetous?
This prodigal purse did Fortunes bounteous hand
Bestow on them, their ryots made them poor,
And set those marks of miserable death,
On all their pride, the famine of base gold
Has made your souls to murders hands be sold,
Only to be called rich But Idiots see
The virtues to be fled, Fortune has causd it so,
Those that will all deuowre, must all forgo.

Most sacred Goddess.

Peace, you slatterer.
Thy tongue but heaps more vengeance on thy head.
Fortune is angry with thee, in thee burns
A greedy covetous fire; in Agripyne
Pride like a Monarch revels, and those sins
Have lead you blindfold to your former shames,
But Virtue pardond you, and so does Fortune.

All thanks to both your sacred deities,

As for these Mettall-eaters, these base thieues,
Who rather then they would be counted poor,
Will dig through hell for gold, you were forgiven
By Virtues general pardon; her broad seal
Gave you your lives, when she took off your horns.
Yet having scarce one foot out of the Iayle,
You tempt damnation by more desperate means,
You both are mortal, and your pains shall ring
Through both your ears, to terrify your souls*
As please the Judgment of this mortal king.

Fair Empress of the world, since you resign
Your power to me, this sentence shall be mine,
Thou shall be torturd on a wheel to death,
Thou with wild horses shall be quartered.

Ha, ha, weak Judge, weak judgment, I reuerse
That sentence, for they are my prisoners,
Embalme the bodies of those Cypriots,
And honor them with princely burial,
For those do as you please, but for these two,
I kiss you both, I love you, you are my minions,
Untie their hands, Uice does repriue you both,
I set you free.

Thanks, gracious deity.

Be gone, but you in liberty shall find
More bondage then in chains, fools, get you hence,
Both wander with tormented conscience.

O horrid Judgment, that's the hell in deed.

Come, come, our death never ends if conscience bleed.

O miserable, miserable men.

Fortune triumphs at this, yet to appear,
All like my self, that which from those I took,
King Athelstane I will vestow on thee,
And in it the old virtue I infuse:
But, king, take heed how thou my gifts do use.
England shall never be poor, it England strive,
Rather by virtue, then by wealth to thrive.

Virtue? alas good soul, she hides her head.

What envious tongue said, Virtue hides her head?

She that will drive thee into banishment.

She that has conquers thee; how dare thou come,
Thus trickt in gaudy Feathers, and thus guarded,
Which crowned kings and Muses, when thy foe
Has trod thus on thee, and now triumphs so?
Where Is virtuous Ampedo? See, he is her slave,
For following thee this recompense they have.

Is Ampedo her stane? Why that's my glory.
The Idiots cap I once wore on my head,
Did figure him, those that (like him) do muffle
Virtue in clouds, and care not how she shine,
I Will make their glory like to his decline:
He made no use of me, but like a miser,
Locked up his wealth in rustie bars of sloth:
His face was beautiful, but wore a mask,
And in the worlds eyes seemd a Blackamore.
So perish they that so keep virtue poor.

Thou art a fool to strive, I am more strong,
And greater then thy self, then Virtue fly,
And hide thy face, yield me the vict^^^rie.

Is Uice higher then Virtue: that's my glory,
The higher that thou art, thou art more horrid,
The world will love me for my comlynesse.

Thine own self loves thy self: why on the heads
Of Agripyne, Montresse and Longauyle,
(English, Scot, French) did Uice clap ugly horns,
But to approve that English, French and Scot,
And all the world else, kneel and honor Uice,
But in no Country, Virtue is of price?

Yes, in all Countries Virtue is of price.
In every kingdom some diuiner breast
Is more enamord of me then the rest.
Have English, Scot, and French bowd knees to thee?
Why that's my glory too, for by their shame,
Men will abhor thee and adore my name.
Fortune, thou art too weak, Uice thou art a fool,
To fight with me, I suffered you awhile,
T'ecclips my brightness, but I now will shine,
And make you swear your beautie's base to mine.

Thou art too insolent, see here is a court
Of mortal Judges, lets by them be tried,
Which of us three shall most be deifide.

I am content.

And I.

So am not I.
My Judge shall be your sacred deity.

O miserable me, I am undone.

O stop the horrid monster.

Let her run.
Fortune, who conquers now?

Virtue, I see,
Thou will triumph both over her and me.

Empress of heaven and earth.

Why do you mock me?
Kneel not to me, to her transfer your eyes,
There sits the Queen of Chance, I bend my knees,
Lower then yours: dread goddess, it is most meet,
That Fortune fall down at thy conquering feet.
Thou sacred Empress that commandst the Fates,
Forgive what I have to thy handmaid don,
And at thy Chariot wheels Fortune shall run,
And be thy captive and to thee resign
All powers which heavens large Patent have made mine.

Fortune thou art vanquished: sarred deity,
O now pronounce who winnes the victory,
And yet that sentence needs not, since alone,
Your virtuous presence Uice has ouer-throwne,
Yet to confirm the conquest on your side,
Look but on Fortunatus and his sons
Of all the wealth those gallants did possess,
Only poor Shadow is left comfortless,
Their glorye's faded and their golden pride.

Only poor Shadow tells how poor they died.

All that they had, or mortal men can have,
Sends only but a Shadow from the grave.
Virtue alone lives still, and lives in you,
I am a counterfeit. you are the true,
I am a Shadow, at your feet I fall,
Begging for these, and these, my self and all.
All these that thus do kneel before your eyes,
Are shadows like my self, dred Nymph it lies
In you to make us substances. O do it,
Virtue I am sure you love, she woes you to it.
I read a verdict in your Sun-like eyes,
And this it is: Virtue the victory.

All loudly cry, Virtue the victory.

Virtue the victory: for joy of this,
Those self same himnes which you to Fortune sung
Let them be now in Uertues honor rung*

Virtue smiles: cry hollyday,
Dimples on her cheeks do dwell,
Virtue frowns, cry wellada,
Her love is Heaven, her hate is Hell.
Since heaven and hell obey her power,
Tremble when her eyes do lowre.
Since heaven and hell her power obey,
Where she smiles, cry hollyday,
Hollyday with joy we cry,
And bend, and bend, and merrily,
Sing hymns to virtues deity:
Sing hymns to Uertues deity.
NAy stay, poor pilgrims, when I entered first
The circle of this bright celestial Sphaere,
I wept for joy, now I could weep for fear.

I fear we all like mortal men shall prove
Weak (not in love) but in expressing love.

Let every one beg once more on his knee,
One pardon for himself, and one for me,
For I intie'd you hither: O dear Goddess,
Breathe life in our nombd spirits with one smile,
And from this cold earth, we with lively souls
Shall rise like men (newborn) and make heaven sound
With Hymns sung to thy name, and prayers that we
May once a year so often enjoy this sight,
Til these yo^g boys change their curld locks to white,
And when gray-winged Age sits on their heads,
That so their children may supply their Steads,
And that heavens great Arithmetician,
(Who in the Scales of Number weyes the world)
May still to forty two, and one year more,
And still add one to one, that went before,
And multiply four tennes by many a ten:
To this I cry Amen.

Amen, Amen.

Good night (dear mistress) those that wish thee harm,
Thus let them stoop under destructions arm.

Amen, Amen, Amen.

Tho. Dekker.

