At the top of the Hill going to Bissam, the Cornets sounding in the Woods, a
wild man came forth and uttered this speech

I Followed this sound, as enchanted; neither knowing the reason why, nor how
to be rid of it: unusual to these Woods, and (I fear) to our gods
prodigious. Syluanus whom I honor, is run into a Cave: Pan, whom I envy,
courting of the Shepherdess: Envy I thee Pan? No, pity thee, an eie-sore to
chaste Nymphs; yet still importunate: Honor thee Syluanus? No, contemn thee:
fearful of Music in the Woods, yet counted the god of the Woods. I, it may
be more stout, than wise, asked, who passed that way? what he or she? none
durst answer, or would vouchsafe, but passionate Echo, who said She. And
She it is, and you are She, whom in our dreams many years we Satyrs have
seen, but waking could never find any such. Every one has told his dream
and described your person, all agree in one, and set down your virtues: in
this only did we differ, that some said your Pourtraiture might be drawn,
other said impossible: some thought your virtues might be numbered, most said
they were infinite: Infinite, and impossible, of that side was I: and first in
humility to salute you most happy I: my untamed thoughts wax gentle, and I
feel in my self ciuility, A thing hated, because not known, and unknown,
because I knew not you. Thus Virtue tameth fierceness, Beauty, madness. Your
Majesty on my knees will I follow, bearing this Club, not as a Saluage, but to
beat down those that are


At the middle of the Hill sat Pan, and two Virgins keeping sheep, and sowing
in their Samplers, where her Majesty stayed and heard this

Pretty souls and bodies too, fair shephardisse, or sweet Mistress, you know
my suite, love, my virtue, Music, my power, a godhead. I cannot tickle the
sheep gutts of a Lute, bydd, bydd, bydd, like the calling of Chickins, but
for a Pipe that squeeketh like a Pigg, I am he. How do you burn time, and
drown beauty in pricking of clouts, when you should be penning of Sonnets?
You are more simple then the sheep you keep, but not so gentle. I love you
both, I know not which best, and you both scorn me, I know not which most.
Sure I am, that you are not so young as not to understand love, nor so wise as
to withstand it, unless you think your selves greater tha^ gods, whereof I am
one. How often have I brought you Chestnuts for a love token, and desired but
acceptance for a favor. Little did you know the misterye, that as the husk
was thornye and tough, yet the meat sweet, so though my hyde were rough and
unkempt, yet my heart was smooth and loving: you are but the Farmers daughters
of the Dale, I the god of the flocks that feed upon the hills. Though I cannot
force love, I may obedience, or else send your sheep a wandering, with my
fancies. Coyness must be revenged with curstness, but be not agaste sweet
mice, my godhead comes so fast upon me, that Majesty had almost ouerru^n
affection, Can you love? Will you


Alas poor Pan, look how he looks Sister, fitter to draw in a Harvest
wayne, then talk of love to chaste Virgins, would you have us both


I, for often I have heard, that two Pigeons may be caught with one bean.


And two Woodcocks with one sprindge.


And many Dotterels with one dance.


And all fools with one fair word.


Nay, this is his meaning; as he has two shapes, so has he two hearts, the one
of a man wherewith his tongue is tipped, dissembling; the other of a beast,
wherewith his thoughts are poisoned, lust. Men must have as many loves, as
they have hart-strings, and study to make an Alphabet of mistresses, from A.
to Y. which makes them in the end cry, Ay. Against this, experience has
provided us a remedy, to laugh at them when they know not what to say, and
when they speak, not to believe them

Not for want of matter, but to know the meaning, what is wrought in this
sampler


The follies of the Gods, who became beasts, for their affections.


What in this?


The honor of Virgins who became Goddesses, for their chastity.


But what be these?


Men's tongues, wrought all with double stitch but not one true.


What these?


Roses, Egle^tine, harts-ease, wrought with Queens stitch, and all right.


I never hard the odds between men's tongues, and weomens, therefore they may
be both double, unless you tell me how they differ


Thus, weomens tongues are made of the same flesh that their hearts are, and
speak as they think: Men's hearts of the flesh that their tongues, and both
dissemble, But prythy Pan be packing, thy words are as odious as thy fight and
we attend a fight which is more glorious, then the sun rising


What does Jupiter come this ways?


No, but one that will make Jupiter blush as guilty of his unchaste iugglings,
and Juno dismaide as wounded at her Majesty. What our mother has often told
us, and fame the whole world, cannot be concealed from thee; if it be, we will
tell thee, which may hereafter make thee surcease thy suite, for fear of her
displeasure, and honor virginitye, by wondering at her virtues


Say on sweet soul?


This way comes the Queen of this Islande, the wonder of the world, and
natures glory, leading affections in fetters, Virginities slaves: embracing
mildnes with Justice, Majesty's twinns. In whom nature has imprinted beauty,
not art painted it; in whom wit has bred learning, but not without labor;
labor brought forth wisdom, but not without wonder. By her it is (Pan) that
all our Carttes that thou see, are laden with Corn, when in other countries
they are filled with Harneys, that our horses are led with a whipp: theirs
with a Lance, that our Rivers flow with fish, theirs with blood: our cattle
feed on pastures, they feed on pastures like cattle: One hand she stretches
to France, to weaken Rebels; the other to Flaunders, to strengthen Religion;
her heart to both Countries, her virtues to all. This is she at whom Envy
has shot all her arrows, and now for anger broke her bow, on whom God has
laid all his blessings, and we for joy clappe our hands, heedlesse treason
goes hedlesse; and close treachery restless: Danger looks pale to behold
her Majesty; and tyranny blusheth to hear of her mercy. Jupiter came into the
house of poor Baucis, and she vouchsafes to visit the bare Farms of her
subjects. We upon our knees, will entreat her to come into the valley, that our
houses may be blessed with her presence, whose hearts are filled with quietness
by her government. To her we wish as many years, as our fields have ears
of corn, both infinite: and to her enemies, as many troubles, as the Wood has
leaves, all intolerable. But whist, here she is, run down Pan the hill in
all have, and though thou break thy neck to give our mother warning, it is no
matter


No, give me leave to die with wondering, and trippe you to your mother. Here I
yield all the flocks of these fields to your highness: green be the grass
where you tread: calm the water where you row: sweet the air, where you
breathe: long the life that you live, happy the people that you love: this is
all I can wish. During your abode, no theft shall be in the woods: in the field
no noise, in the valleys no spies, my self will keep all safe: that is all I
can offer. And hear I break my pipe, which Apollo could never make me do;
and follow that sound which follows you


At the bottom of the hill, entering into the house Ceres with her Nymphs in
an harvest Cart, meet her Majesty, having a Crown of wheat-ears with a
Jewel, and after this song, uttered the speech following

Swel Ceres now for other Gods are shrinking,
Pomona pineth,
Fruitless her tree;
Fair Phoebus shines
Only on me.
Conceit does make me smile whilst I am thinking,
How every one does read my story,
How every bough on Ceres lowreth,
Cause heavens plenty on me powers,
And they in leaves do only glory,
All other Gods of power bereuen,
Ceres only Queen of heaven.
With Robes and flowers let me be dressed.
Cynthia that shines,
Is not so clear,
Cynthia declineth,
When I appear,
Yet in this I Will she reigns as blessed,
And every one at her does wonder,
And in my ears still fond fame whispers,
Cynthia shall be Ceres Mistres,
But first my Carre shall riue asunder,
Help Phoebus help my fall is sudden,
Cynthia, Cynthia, must be sovereign.
GReater then Ceres, receive Ceres Crown, the ornament of my plenty, the
honor of your peace, here at your highness feet, I lay down my feined deity,
which Poets have honored, truth contemned. To your Majesty whom the heavens
have crowned with happiness, the world with vvonder, birth with dignity, nature
with perfection, we do all Homage, accounting nothing ours but what comes
from you. And this much dare we promise for the Lady of the farm, that your
presence has added many days to her life, by the infinite ioies she
conceyues in her heart, who presents your highness with this toye and this
short prayer, poured from her heart, that your days may increase in happiness,
your happiness have no end till there be no more days


At her Majesty's entrance into the Castle, an old Shepherd spoke this saying.

VOuchsafe to hear, a simple Shephard, shephards and simplicity cannot part,
your highness is come into Cotshold, an vneue^ country, but a people, that carry
their thoughts level with their fortunes, low spirits, but true hearts,
using plain dealinge, once counted a Jewel now beggary, these hills afoorde
nothing but cottages, and nothing can we present to your highness, but
shephards. The country healthy, and harmeles, a fresh aier, where there are noe
dampes, and where a black sheep is a perilous beast, no monsters, we carry our
hearts, at our tongues ends, being as far from dissembling, as our sheep from
fierceness, and if in any thing, we shall chance to discover our leudnes, it
will be in over boldness, in gazinge at you, who fills our hearts with joy, and
our eyes with wonder, as for the honorable Lord and Lady of the Castle, what
happiness they conceive, I would it were possible for them selves to express,
then should your Majesty see, that al outward enterteinment, were but a
smoke rising from their inward affections, which as they cannot be seen,
being in the heart, so can they not be smoothred, appearing in their
countenance, this lock of wool Cotsholdes best fruit, and my poor gift, I
offer to your highness, in which nothing is to be esteemed, but the whitenes,
virginities color, nor to be expected but duetye, shepards religion


Sunday, Apollo running after Daphne, a Shepherd followed uttering this.

Nescis temeraria; nescis,
Quem fugias; idioque fugis.
A short tale, but a sorrowful, a just complaint, but remedelesse, I loved,
(for shephardes have their Saints) long I loved (for beauty binds prentices)
a Nymph most fair and as chaste as fair, yet not more fair, then I unhappy,
Apollo who calls him self a god (a title among men, when they will commit
injuries) term themselves gods, pursued my Daphne with bootelesse love, and
me, with endless hate, her he woed; with fair words, the flatteries of men,
with great gifts, the sorceries of gods, with cruel threats, the terrefiing
of weak damsels Nec prece nec pretio nec mouet ille minis. me; he terrified
with a monstrous word metamorphosing, saying that he would turn me into a
woolfe and of a shepherd make me a sheepe-biter, or into a Cockatrice and
cause mine eyes which gazed on her, to blind hers which made mine dazell, or to
a molde that I should hear his flattering speech, but never behold her fair
face, tantaene animis caelestibus irae? sometimes would he allure her with
sweet music, but harmony is harsh when it is lusts broaker, often with
promise of immortality, but chastetye is of it self immortal, ever pursuing
her with swiftnes, but virtue tying wings to the thoughts of Virgins, swiftnes
becomes surbated; thus lived he twixt love and ielousy; I twixt love and
danger; she twixt fear and virtue. At last and alas, this day I fear of all
my joys the last, I cannot as a Poet (who describing the morning, and before
he tell what it is, make it night,) stand on the time, love coyneth no
circumloquutions, but by the sun, a Shepheardes Dial, which goes as true as
our hearts, it was four of the clock, when she flying from his treason was
turned into a tree; which made me stand, as though I had been turned into a
stone, and Apollo so enchanted as wounded with her loss, or his own crueltye,
the fingers which were wont to play on the Lute, found no other instrument
then his own face, the goulden hair the pride of his head pulde off in
locks and stamped at his feet, his sweet voice, turned to howling; and there
sits he, (long may he sorrow,) wondering, and weeping, and kissing the
laurel, his late love, and mine ever. Pleases your Majesty to view the
melancholy of Apollo, my distress, and Daphnes mischance, it may be the sight
of so rare perfection, will make him die for grief, which I wish, or Daphne
return to her old shape, which must be your wounder; if neither, it shall
content me that I have revealed my griefs, and that you may behold his


This speech ended, her Majesty saw Apollo with the tree, having on the one
side one that sung, on the other one that plaide

SIng you, play you, but sing and play my truth,
This tree my Lute, these sighs my notes of ruth:
The Laurel leaf for ever shall be green,
And chastety shall be Apolloes Queen.
If gods may dye, here shall my tomb be plaste,
And this engraven, fond Phoebus, Daphne chaste.

After these verses, the song.

MY heart and tongue were twins, at once conceived,
The eldest was my heart, borne dumb by destenie,
The last my tongue, of all sweet thoughts bereaved,
Yet strung and tunde, to play hearts harmony.
Both knit in one, and yet asunder placed,
What heart would speak, the tongue does still discover,
What tongue does speak, is of the heart embraced,
And both are one to make a new found lover:
New found, and only found in Gods and Kings,
Whose words are deeds, but deeds nor words regarded:
Chaste thoughts do mount and fly with swiftest wings,
My love with pain, my pain with loss rewarded:
Engraue upon this tree, Daphnes perfection,
That neither men nor gods, can force affection.

The song ended, the tree riued, and Daphne issued out, Apollo ran after,
with these words

NImpha mane, per me concordant carmina neruis.
Fair Daphne stay, too chaste because too fair,
Yet fairer in mine eyes, because so chaste,
And yet because so chaste, must I despair?
And to despair, I yielded have at last.
Shepherd possess thy love, for me too cruel,
Possess thy love, thou know not how to measure,
A dunghill cock does often find a Jewel,
Enjoying that, he knows not to be treasure.
When broomy bearde, to sweep thy lips presume,
When on thy neck, his rough hewn arms shall move,
And gloate on thee with eyes that drizell reume,
When that his toothlesse mouth shall call thee love,
Noght will I say of him, but pity thee,
That btauty might, but would no wiser be.

Daphne running to her Majesty vttred this.

I stay, for whether should chastety fly for succor, but to the Queen of
chastety, by thee was I enterred in a tree, that by craft, way might be made
to lust, by your highness restored, that by virtue, there might be assurance in
honor: these tables, to set down your praises long since Sibillas prophesies I
humbly present to your Majesty, not thinking, that your virtues can be
deciphered in so slight a volume, but noted; the whole world is drawn in a
small map, Homers Illiades in a nutshel, and the riches of a Monarch, in a
few ciphers, and so much ods, betwext explaining of your perfections, and the
touching, as is betwixt painting and thinking, the one, running over a little
table in a whole day, the other over the whole world in a minute, with this
vouchsafe a poor virgins wish, that often wish for good husbands, mine, only
for the endless prosperity of my sovereign


The verses, written in the tables which were given to her Majesty.

LET fame describe your rare perfection,
Let nature paint your beuties glory,
Let love engraue your true affection,
Let wonder write your virtues story,
By them and Gods must you be blazed,
Suffices men they stand amazed.

