VOVCHSAFE dread sovereign, after so many smooth speeches of Muses, to hear a
rough hewn tale of a soldier, we use not with words, to amplify our
conconceites, and to plead faith by figures, but by deeds, to show the
loyalty of our hearts, and to make it good with our lives. I mean not to
recount any service, all proceeding of duty, but to tell your Majesty, that I
am past al service, save only devotion. My horse, mine armor, my shield, my
sword, the riches of a young soldier, and an old soldiers relics, I
should here offer to your highness, but my four boys have stolen them from
me, vowing themselves to arms, and leaving me to my prayers, fortune gives
success, fidelitye courage, chance cannot blemish faith, nor truth prevent
destinye, whateuer happen, this is their resolution, and my desire, that their
lives may, be employed wholly in your service, and their deaths, be their
vows sacrifice. Their deaths, the rumor of which, has so often affrighted
the Crow my wife, that her heart, has been as black as her feathers. I know
not whether it be affection, or fondnes, but the crow thinks her own birds
the fairest, because to her they are dearest. What ioies we both conceive,
neither ca^ express, suffices they be, as your virtues, infinite. And
although, nothing be more unfit to lodge your Majesty, then a crows neste,
yet shall it be most happy to us, that it is by your highness, made a Phoenix
neste. Quicolor ater erat, nunc est contrarius atro. Vouchsafe this trifle,


On Sunday, her Majesty going to the garden, received with sweet Music of
sundry sorts, the old Gentleman meeting her, said thus

PArdon dread Sovereign, the greatness of my presumption, who having nothing to
say, must follow still to wonder, but saft, some news out of Irelande


MY deuty humbly remembered. It is said, the wind is unconstant, I am glad
it is, otherwise had not I heard that, which I most wished, and least looked
for. The wind blowing stiffly in the weste, on the sudden turned easterly, by
which means I received letters, that her Majesty would be at Rycort,
nothing could happen to me more happy, unless it were my self to be thereto
do my duty. But I am a stranger in mine own country, and almost unknown to
my bestfrends, only remembered by her Majesty, whose late favors, have made
me more than fortunate. I should accu^ot my ten years absence a flatt
banishment, were I not honored in her Majesty's service, which has bound all
my affections, prentises to patience. In all humility, I desire this Dart to be
delivered, an Irish weapon, and this wish of an English heart, that in whose
heart faith is not fastened, a Darte may. I can scarce write for joy, and it is
likely, this lacque cannot speak for wondering. If he do not, this is all that
I should say, that my life is my duties bondsman, duty my faiths sovereign


The Dart delivered, a skipper coming from Flaunders, delivered another
letter, with a key of gold, set with Diamonds with, this motto in dutch, I
only open to you

MY duty remembered, The enemy of late has made many braueadoes, even to the
gates of Ostend, but the success was only a flourish. My self walking on the
Ra^parts, to over see the Sentenels, descryed a pink, of whom I enquired,
where the Court was, he said he knew not, but that the 28. of September, her
Majesty would be at Rycort. I was ouer-ioyed, and in making haste to remember
my duty, I had almost forgot it, for I was shipping my self for England, with
this Skipper, but to come without leave, might be to return without welco^e.
To signify that my heart is there, I most humbly entreat, that this Key may be
presented, the Key of Ostende, and Ostend the Key of Flaunders, the wards are
made of true hearts, treachery cannot counterfeit the Key, nor treason her self
pick the lock. None shall turn it, but who^ her Majesty commands, none can.
For my self, I can but wish, all happiness to her highness, and any occasion,
that what my tongue delivers, my blood may seal, the end of my service, that in
her service, my life may end


The Key delivered, a french page came with three other letters, the one written
to the lady Squemish, which being mistaken by a wrong superscription, was read
before her Majesty. In the second was enclosed a sword of gold, set with
Diamonds and Rubyes, with this motto in french, Drawn only in your defense.
In the third was enclosed a trunchio^ set with Diamo^ds, with his motto in
Spanish, I do not command but under you

Fair Lady and sweet Mistress, I seldom write, because I write not well, if I
speak, you say I chatter, because I speak so fast, and when I am silent, you
think me careless. You say love cannot be in soldiers, I swear it is, only
this the difference, that we prove it by the sword, others, by their Sonets
theirs ink, black for cold, ours blood, read for heat. Often have you
told me, that I know not what love is, and often have I told you, that this
it is, that which makes the head ache, and the heart to; the eyes ielous, and the
ears to, the liver black, and the Splen to, the veins shrink and the purse
to. Wit is but loves wier drawer, making of a short passion an endless
persuasion, yet no more metal. You object, that I have many Mistrisses, I
answer, you have ten times as many servants, and if you should pick a
quarrel, why should not I bring my Mistresses into the field against your
servants? But inconstancy is a soldiers scarre, it is true, but the wound came
by constancy; what a patient virtue is staidnes? like a nail in a door, rusty,
because never removed, I cannot be so superstitious as these nice lovers, who
make the pax of their mistress hands, it is flat popery. I would not purchase love
in fee simple, a lease of two years to me were tedious. I mean not, to have my
tongue ringed at my Mistress ear like a Jewel, always whispering of love, I am
no earewigg, nor can I endure still to gaze on her face, as though my eyes were
bodkins to stick in her hair. Let me have my love answered, and you shall
find me faithful, in which if you make delays, I cannot be patient, the
wind calls me away, and with the wind, away shall my affections


MY duty to your L. remembered etc. Being ready to take shipping, I heard
that her Majesty would honor Ricort, with her presence, which wrought no small
content, but to have made it full, I wished I might have seen it. In this place
is no choice of any thing, whereby I might signify my dutiful affection, but
that which a Soldier makes his chiefest choice, a sword, which most humbly I
desire to have presented to her highness. With this protestation pourde from my
heart, that in her service, I will spend the blood of my heart. Eloquence and I,
am vowde enemies, loialty and I, sworn brothers, what my words cannot effect,
my sword shall


MY duty humbly remembered, the same time that I received letters that her
Majesty would be at Ricort, the wind served for Britaigne, I was over ioied
with both, yet stood in a mamering whether I should take the opportunity of
the wind, which I long expected or ride post to do my duty, which I most
desired, necessitye co^troled affection, that bid me unless I could keep the
wind in a bag, to use the winds when they blew, I obaide yet, wishing that
they would turn for a while, to serve my turn, being unfurnished, of al fit
presents. I would have this my excuse that cheapside is not in my Ship, and
therefore have nothing to offer but my Trunchio^ the honor which I received of
her Majesty, by whom I am only to be commanded, and ever else let me be only
miserable and ever


These Letters read, and the presents delivered, the old man kneeling down
ended thus

THat my sons, have remembered their duties, it is my hearts comfort, that
your Majesty accepts the^, their hearts heaven. If fortune, and fidelity had
bin twins, they might have been as rich, as faithful, but this is the
Iubyle of my life, that their faithes, are without spot, and your Majesty I
hope, confident, without suspicion. Among my ioies, there is one grief, that
my daughter, the Mistress of a Moole hill, has so much forgotten; that most she
should remember, duty. I doubt not her excuse, because she is a woman, but
fear the truth, of it, because it must be to her sovereign. For my self, my
crow, and all our birds, this I promise, that they are all; as faithful in
their feathers, as they were in their shells


This being done, there was swcete music, and two sonnets which ended, her
Majesty went in.

On mu^day morning, as her Majesty was to take horse, a messenger, coming out
of Iersey, and bringing a Daysie of gold, set with Rubies, delivered it to her
Majesty with this speech

AT length, though very late, I am come, from the Lady of the Moold hill,
sent long since, but the passage troublesome, at every miles end, a lover, at
every sentence end a lie, I staide to hear, the conclusions, and found
nutbrowne gyrles to be cheapned. But none to be bought, but the amyable. Thus
much for my excuse, now for my Mistress, who hearing that your Majesty would
enter this cabbine, was astonished, with joy, and doubt, joy, for so great
honor done to her father. Doubt, by what means she might show her duty to
your Majesty. At the last, sitting upon the top of a moole hill, she espied, a
red Daysie, the fairest flower, that barren place does yield, which, with all
humility she presents to your Majesty, it has no sweetenes, yet many
virtues, her heart no tongue, but infinite affections, In you she says are all
virtues, and toward you all her affections



