The third day should have been presented to her Majesty, the high
Constable of Cotsholde but the weather so unfit, that it was not. But this it
should have been, one clothed all in sheepes-skins, face and all spoke this by
his interpreter

MAy it please your highness, this is the great Constable and commandadore of
Cotsholde, he speaks no language, but the Rammish tongue, such sheepishe
governors there are, that can say no more to a messenger then he, (Bea), this
therefore, as signifying his duty to your Majesty, and al our desires, I am
commanded to be his interpreter, or shepherds star, pointing directly to
Cotshold, and in Cotshold, to Sudley, made us expect some wonder, and of the
eldest, ask some counsel, it was resolved by the ancientst, that such a one
should come, by whom all the shepherds should have their flocks in safety,
and their own lives, all the country quietness, and the whole world
astonishment: our Constable commands this day to be kept holliday, all our
shepherds are assembled, and if shepherds pastimes may please, how joyful
would they be if it would please you to see them; which if you vouchsafe not,
as pastimes too mean for your Majesty, they mean to call this day the
shepherds black day; in all humility we entreat, that you would cast an eye
to their rude devices, and an ear to their harshe words, and if nothing
happen to be pleasing, the amends is, nothing shall be tedious


After this speech her Majesty was to be brought among the shepherds among
whom was a King and a Queen to be chosen and thus they began

CVT the Cake, who has the bean; shall be King, and where the peaze is, she
shall be Queen


I have the peaze, and must be Queen.


I the bean and King, I must cammaunde.


Not so, the Queen, shall and must command, for I have often heard of a King
that could not command his subjects, and of a Queen that has commanded
Kings


I yield, yet is it within compass of my authority to ask questions and
first I will begin with you in love, I mean Shepheardes love, for I will not
meddle with Gentlefolkes love, which is most constant, the man or the woman


It is no question, no more then if you should ask whether on a steep hill, a
square stone, or a globe stood most steddye


Both loving, which is most loving?


The woman if she have her right, the man, if he be his own Judge.


Why does the man ever vvoe the woman, the woman never the man?


Because men are most amorous and least chaste, women careless of fond
affections, and when they embrace them, fearful. But unless your questions
were vviser, I command you to silence. You sir, that sit as though your
wits were a vvoole-gathering will you have a question, or a commandment


No question of a Queen, for they are hard to be answered, but any
commandment, for that must be obeyed


Then sing, and you sir, a question, or commaundment?


A commaundment I, and glad that I am?


Then play:


I have plaide so long with my fingers that I have beaten out of play al my
good fortune

Herbs, words, and stones, all maladies have cured,
Herbs, words, and stones, I used when I loved,
Herbs smells, words, wind, stones hardness have procured,
By stones, nor words, nor herbs her mind was moved;
I asked the cause, this was a woman's reason,
Among herbs are weeds, and thereby are refused,
Deceit, as well as truth speaks words in season,
False stones by foiles have many one abused,
I sight, and then she said my fancy smoaked,
I gazed, she said my looks were follies glauncing,
I sounded dead, she said my love was choked,
I started up, she said my thoughts were dancing,
O sacred love if thou have any Godhead,
Teach other rules to win a maidenheade.

Well song, and well plaide, seldom so well among shepherds, but call me the
Cutter of Cotsholde, that looks as though he only knew his leripoope, amorous
he is, and wise, carrying a sheep eye in a calves head


Will you 3 questions, or 3 commaundments?


Half a dozen of each. My wits work like new bear, and they will break my
head, unless it vent at the mouth


Sing,


I have forsworn that since cuckow-time, for I heard, one sing all the summer,
and in the winter was all balde


Play on the Lute.


Taylers craft, a knock on the knuckles, will make one fast a fortnight, my
belly and back shall not be retainers to my fingers


What question shall I ask?


Any so it be of love.


Are you amorous?


No, but fantastical.


But what is love?


A single Accidens. In love there are eight parts.

These contain all, till you come to the rules, and then in love, there are
three concords.


The fool bleeds, it is time to stopp his vain, for having wet his foot, he
cares not how deep he wades. Let us atte^d that, which we most expect. the
starr, that directs us hither, who has in Almanacke


What mean you, a starmonger, the quipper of the firmament, here is one. I
ever carry it, to know the hye ways, to every good town, the faires, and
the fair weather


Let me see it. The seventh of September, happiness was borne into the world, it
may be the eleventh is some wonder. The moon at the full, it is true, for Cynthia
never shined so bright, the twelfth the weather inclined to moisture and
shepherds devises to dryenes, the thirteenth, summer, goes from hence, the
sign in virgo, viuat clarissimae virgo. The diseases shall be melancholies, some
proceeding of necessity, some of superfluity, many shall be studying how to
spend what they have, more, beating their brains to get what they want. Malice
shall be more infectious then the pestilence, and Drones more favored then Ants,
as for Bees, they shall have but their labor for their pains, and when their
combs be full, they shall be stilde; the war shall be, twixt hemlocke and honey.
At four of the clock this day, shall appear the worlds wonder that leads
England into every land, and brings all lands into England


Then espying her Majesty, he and all the shepherds kneeling, concluded thus.

THis is the day, this the hour, this the star, pardon dread Sovereign,
poor shepherds pastimes, and bold shepherds presumptions. We call our
selves Kings and Queens to make mirth, but when we see a King or Queen, we
stand amazed. The sun warmes the earth, yet loses no brightness; but shows
more force, and Kings names that fall upon shepherds, loose no dignity, but
breed more fear. Their pictures are drawn in colors, and in brass their
portraytures engraven. At chests, there are Kings, and Queens, and they of
wood. Shepherds are no more, nor no less, woodde^. In Theaters, artificers
have plaide Emperors, yet the next day forgotten, neither their duties nor
occupations. For our boldenes in borrowing their names, and in not seeing your
Majesty for our blindness, we offer these shepherds weeds, which, if your
Majesty vouchsafe at any time to wear, it shall bring to our hearts comfort,
and happiness to our labors



