Strew, Strew.

The Muskadine stays for the bride at Church,

The Priest and himens ceremonies tend
To make them man and wife.

By my maidenhead a joyful time, i will paue their
Way with flowers.

While I perfume.

Some say this widdow's rich.

I will not say as poor as Job, but as bare as January, when the trees look
like a girl, whose color comes and goes as frost doos in the milk


It Was wont to be a rich widow and a poor knight, but now false, a knight rich
and the widow poor


How ever honor is most rich, no matter who is poor.


I would my fortune were no worse

Thine may be better.

So much if it be thy will, if ever knight were gul'd, be it in me, in me I pray.


What are the waits of London come?

Yes sir.

Play in their highest key then.

sound Hoboyes.

Make the Gods dance* cause Ioniall mirth
Music in heaven for this earthes marriage
Is a triumphant concord to us all,
To me it is seal^d by promise for his daughter,
Who in our blood shall simpathize, says I,
She shall be ours, bedded, although some
Mennace a riualship, yet the sure card
Gives the trick ours, and we shall win,
Since in my mother it does first begin.

Good morrow sir.

A good one to thy self, to us it is seasond,

A marriage sir?

I and a good one friend.

Because it is rich.

Good reach at stars, in faith it is true.

In whom sit, if I may be bold.

A knight of More-clack to a London widow.

My burdned soul says I, a Knight of Moreclack to the widow Humil, just, it is
she


By this the blessing of the holy rights,
Rellishes in them, they are married, at least
Fair for it, I must witness to it, farewell.

How ignorance pleades nonage, in his eye
He knows me not, it is not the Lions kind,
Whose nature challenges right property.
Of perfect being, if it were,
Humil would Humill know, that him begot,
To be what now he is married again,
And her first husband living, blame her not,
It Is my own project, thank my letters,
That falsifide our deaths black funeral,
Into her mornefull hearing, follow it,
Think on thy soul, divide that bitter band,
Knit by the closure of a mutual hand.

I rest ye sir.

At whose suit Wat?

At the bridegroomes, i will not a foot further till I have eaz'd my shoulders.


No nor I, we are asses right, we carry prouender, but are not the better for it.


As how?

Thou't not believe breads bread, till it be tasted, I say to thee, in this
trunk is prouender


be an ass till thou prove it.

Here Is money which will buy it.

O by a figure, I say to thee thou art an ass.
How?

By thy burden.

No otherwise, that's not so good.

Because thou have ears.

Are all asses that have ears?

Are all truncks laden with money that are heavy?

indeed I confess in that I am an ass, but I think so.

By such a surmise thou make it prouender.
We are watermen, and think because we see a man coming, and that I am his
first man, heel be my first fare, when another gets him


Come, you are bookish.

And thou blockish, say rights right, and no more.

Se sirrah Mr. Tutch, what an officer?

Yes, he is booking in, Mr. Tutch, salve, sis salve.

Iubio tesalucre, aue.

He hears us not.

Let me see Capons, Turkeis, Small-birds, Beefes,
Muttons, Partridge, Plouer, Wood cocks.

Meaning us, good morning, and many sir.

And many Mr. Tutch.

Are ye come water-squirts, are ye come?

And why sir, water-squirts?

Because you shoot water, and so do they, but ha ye that will do it, my dainey
element dashers


Do It and stand to it Mr. Tutch. if we might spend it sir.


Well said honest knaves, bear in, but say where^ John in the hospital, and's
nurse


At hand sir.

It Is well, away, and Tutch tutch the tippes of their tongues, with our seller
suckets


I Will tutch the tippes of their tongues, and their tongues tippes, i will baste
their bellies and their lips til we have ierk't the cat with our three
whippes


Married? it is ended, and the next pull mine.
At a fair fleece, a golden one, the eldest daughter is my hope, what then
rests in it, O you winged lap-wings, farthest cry, when we come nearest to it.
Quando pecus omnia sub vmbra ruminat antiquos paulilum vocitamus amores


It Is done too late to ask why so.
Tardie intrusion as a Cipher plaste.
Fills but up room, while substance in the other
Makes number precious, I am that round O,
Which with a sigh, as sad as is my soul,
Grieve all too late, what now befits my moan,
But black despair, and die in it do,
To make thy self known, but represents
Mellow fruit falling into danger, o I am that
Rotten ruined, and vnrellisht substance,
Which on my own vpgrowing tree falls off,
By the times negligence, undone I am,
Would I had did indeed, and not in word.
These il tuned words like discords sounded harsh
And yet were thought true music, well, well,
I Will take my stand, and as she passes by
Note if her glories dash not all my hopes
With base forgetfulness of what she was,
My picture can she not forget, may be,
Old love may yet live in this newborn Lady.

I am wonder strocken in my self,
O you all-seeing, pardon my attempt,
My second choice has laid siege to my soul,
And my disloyalty has in that witness
Slain the concurrances of after joy,
Even so he looked that had my maiden heart,
Even such was he, whose far estranged death
Gave me this license of ill liberty,
To do, and undo, O forgive me then,
Weak in my sect, my fault to the best of men.

New wedded Lady, and our mornings bride,
What is it that troubles ye?

A loss but being small.

No matter for the loss.
You find a purchase, equals any cross.

Let it go then.

she knows me and this constant accident
Subscribes to it, how can she excuse,
This double deed, this false neglect of love?
O women how you dally in your trust,
How quickly you forget late living life,
And bury the remembrance in your smiles
All ye this morning for the dead to sigh,
And shed your tears in bosom of new choice
How have I sifted your loose difference,
For ever being president against all.
Glad am I at this opportunity,
Who landed me even in the jaws of fear
Swallowing my destiue happiness
To utter ruin of herself and me
If the unconstant air whistle abroad,
That Humil lives, then Humils widow dies
In desperate scandal, rackt and tormented,
In the remembrance of old wretchedness,
Which to prevent, plots cunningly contrived
Must buckler my repute so weakly wiu'd.

Lost her glove?
So she makes known.

I Will find it to my everliving glory,
And the next triumph, wear it in my ^elme
Daring all gallants in defense to approve,
S. William Vergirs Lady owes this glove.

If my good fortune challenge such account,
To find it by my friend or industry,
I Will prick it on a pole, and with my lance,
Curuet with nimble speed, in course of arms,
And as I snatch it by a curious pass,
Cry in loud echo, here is for her love,
Who on her wedding day did loose this glove.

The Bride, our new made mother lost her glove.

I sister, so she says.

I Will seek no further, for it is in vain.

Especially when quicker eyes then ours,
Arch in the brows of loves two votaries,
Lord how they will brag to find it questionles,
Twill prove a ransom of a thousand kisses,
Amorous glaunces, modest courtesy,
O how these flaterers can insinuate,
And stretch an inch of length to an el of wide
Heeres much in office for a little pay.
A glove God wot.

I sister, so they say, go to ye wanton you
He that shall marry thee, is matched in faith,
To English rash, or to a Dutch snap-haunce,
You will strike fire with words --

Who I? now as I live sweet Moll.
If Filbon marry me, as by this light.

And wincke.

It Is hard to iuggle with the devil, we maids
So simper in each others quantity
As we know fashion ere it be deuiz'd
Forswear you one, and I Will forswear --

The other, just even so,
Shall I be plain with thee --

You Will answer, no

I. Tab. No I. Mary. I no.

I know you will not, therefore let him go;
I love my Filbon as men love good clothes,
Put them on every day.

And I love Toures as I love my sleep,
Embracing thus, folding most dearly.

Your lover nightly, as you wish him yearly.

In troth in such a sort:

As children play with stones, to make them sport.

You make me blush Tabitha.

At the thing ye wish,
Plague on the cat that loves nor milk nor fish.
We are all maidens pictures, feign we would,
Yet we cry away away, when away we should.

Yet again.

Never yet.
Ever so when so our matters fit.

They are returned, a glove or no.

No, but the glove I sought not, I ha found.

Where is it man?

You Are the glove, which still I seek to wear
Make me happy, match it to a pair.

Be these for ever matches.

How can ye find the glove was never lost?

By seeking you that lost not what we find.

Indeed a willing loss, is loss of gain,
Where loving finders pity loosers pain,
I will not say, enjoy so much the rather,
Because gift giver cries out on the father.
But if I durst, I would, till when.
Vnmatch our gloves, each take his own again.

It is inacted by the brides fair word,
Who finds her glove, is this days governor.
To manage all our pastimes in the house,
And thou art he, the only conqueror,
Of prize and honor, then enjoy it.

You give and I receive, is this my office?

Signed and delivered.

I take it on me, music triumphs come,
Since fortune cast her favors in my fist,
I Will be most prodigal.
Yet with modesty I am a Citizen.
Unlooked for welcome, and vnthinking come,
To receive honor in a states man's room.
Yet to this presence I will still address,
Love, pains and duty in this business.

In this is fortune blind, whose deeds are dangers,
Giving her graces not to friends but strangers.

Prove on my fortunes how so ere they stand,
I hold my fairest fortune in my hand.

The like do I.

And all the fairest fortunes I would prove,
Is only this, to enjoy my dearest love.

The like I wish.

All happiness live in thy choice, in hers
All mischiefs, horror, les our self participate in tender of our choice,
freely delivered in the fight of heaven


What news?

The wedding dinner breaths his last.

And we will visit it; on forward there.

So fair and fortunate to be thus false,
Wedded to two. O you all wondering eyes,
Gaze till your fire flame, your eie-balles drop
In moist imagination of this act,
Before the first be dead to wed a second. o

Why writ you dead in your last letters?
Sick was I, and no likelihood of life.

What then, was that a just excuse
To varnish over this base counterfeiting? no,
I Will make it known.

I care not, I will thus excuse it,
All opposite of injury was yours,
Putting to teast our weakness by your letters,
Which carrying credit, woman in her will,
Guiltless is causer of this open ill.

Had I been thus aduiz'd, but all too late
Acquainted with your speed, I had prevented what now is past and done.


Why did you not? Baud to your own misdeede,
Three quarters guilty of this accident,
That might and would not stop the hazard,
Will ye now heap up miracle,
And make it worse in note, by adding to it
A bauins blaze, it is not so soon extinct,
Being fierce of flame, quensht must it be,
By watercourse of sounder policy.

I am from my self in this, what shall I do?
O I am mad, and mischief mennassis unwitting of all purpose.

Why did I cast my glove,
Proclaimed the finder stickler of our sports,
But to a point prevailing practice?

I know not how.

Leave all to me, women that wade in sin,
Have their wits-charter to authorize it,
And they have antidotes that to digest,
Which better judgments lose themselves in, let me alone.

To ly with him the while.

It Is true to ly with him, but not in sheets,
To use the flourish of a woman's skill,
In winds and turnings, other lying,
My new made husband iniures not the old,
As I am simply false, I will be found
Constant to death, knowing my business
Is to heal up the fractures of the time,
And to salve virtue in her taint of ill.

I build on this.

Some month.
While I possess the glory of my name;
Attendances according, marry our son
Unto his eldest daughter, that is the point
Of all: regaine my ioynter next,
It Is not amiss to satisfy your debts.
These two atchieu'd, the third is bedding,
And if this brain beguile him not of that,
Say I am single: no, since blame sits nie,
Behooues give care to use true policy.

Our son.

Aside.

Mother the noble guest expects ye,
The present meeting doos neglect it self
Where our fair bride is wanting,
Pray come in, you do them wrong.

I am not well, and this commanding air
Retains my health, I came to fetch it,
Wherefore inricht with what was ours before,
We yield fresh duty and attend them.

Will you be mindful of our marriage, mother?
Begin so happily in yours.

I shall endeavor in it, come.

Close and hushed, not a fly stirring,
While they feed hungerly, we, that loves detie
Doos proclaim pardon to presume, and speak,
Challendge liberty, now by my maidenhead.

Swear not love.

Can you forbid my oath? Sir I will swear, and till I lack it, say, naught
shall confine me, I had rather feast in fancies pittance, then to seed gagged
with attention, soothing every bit with curiosity: no, I can fill my belly in
a minute, satisfy my stomach in a breath: Lovers digest their sighs, and
chow their spleen, while other appetites fall hungry toot, and let them
greedily graze on


What Is all this?

Lovers talk any thing.

I understand ye not.

I would not that you should, for I speak Greek.

Regard her not, for she talks, Id'ly Filbon.

Be you aduiz'd then sister, I Am a fool.
Yet not so simple but I talk by rule,
I say, dine they that list, I will not, for my dish
Dressed to my hand is here, here let me feed,
It Is the maids modicum, God send us speed.

In that I claim a part,
Who ever feeds this dish has Mary's heart.

So then said I well, ye wicked thing.

Mot as I am of Lovers union,
Contracted to a sollitarie life.
By thus retayning singlenes of heart:
Changing all doubts that the world affords
But one, so to thy sweetest self,
Which only art idea of my thoughts:
I vow a reconciled amity,
Which violated, doos command my life
To yield his intrest to the shade of death,
May be, your father alienates our choice,
And shows as sunshine threatening rain,
To the all-hoping harvest present.
Which to make clear, the honorable word
And fatherly regard in present office
Have past their speed in our attention.
I know your father will receive their onset
Soldier-like, ioying the siege begun,
Which tho resisted, bids them gladly come.

Pause in that trust, give ear.

Sound proclamation,
It is inacted by the bride and bridegroom,
And by our self chief in authority,
That all receive their pleasures
From the most high in this assembly
To the lowest, all pastimes are made free,
Dancing, carding, dicing reuelling.
And other dues oftimes fit merriments,
-- Unto the bride and bride-groomes health.

The days short, and the night's

Stop there.

I will, to pleasure thee,

There take your places.
And in your sweetest key of music strokes
Sound pleasant melody, echo those sounds
Which true-loue-hearts, in concords chiefest grounds
Have their blessed being, use art in times,
Which may give welcome to our noblest guests.

We are betrayed, young Humill is at hand,
Dance, and excuse it so.

Sound music there.

Content, a dance, and in again.
Content, no dance, yet in again.

It is ungently don to snatch her so.

I snatch but that which promise says is mine,
Have I offended?

I.

Right what is wrong.

Here,
Or where you dare, go seek in Brainford, go.

Brainford?

Put up, or I shall be offending unto one,
Against the brides son, dare ye?

I repent not what is done, come you with me.

So slaves by violence do hurry hence,
The rights of --

Peace, we on you do impose command.
Yield duty in it: hall, a hall there.
Music sound, and to the bride do consecrate this round.

Squire of the day, cul out your gadding bucks.
Select your light-heel'd does, open your Labits,
Turn them to the toiles; we that are Venus Huntsmen may partake the sports.


You Are a gallant woodman sir.

My son for one.

And mine the other.

Good my daughters for them both,
A course or so, go too, lead on, the bucks that have employment for these
does, are not these giddy gamsters, i will be the Forester and look to it


Hear you that?

A lightning before heat.

Your fathers air is harrald to his tongue.

A knows the coat, but thinks not who shall wear it.


There Is two and two.

A coople more, too makes no show, our measure is for three.


Why then the bride.

And bridegroom.

O sir, pardon me.
My ioints were oild to pleasure, but now, not.

Then I with her.

You! O, your authority commands her.

Hark.

It gives his luster light.

My warrant wins, where his dos loose the right.

My son in law grows bold.
Good again, here is much to do in love,
One simply stands, not challenging his own:
And reason, Mary, chance is yet unknown
No, nor in you sir, though my son,
Words past contriue, but after deeds cry done.

Brook'st thou this disgrace.

O sir, no remedy, what Justice lives so free.
And to her own is friending,

I am mad to think on it boy, but -- *

How Goddes-like the elder of the two,
Stations the measure, it is a Iouiall sight,
Where beauty gilds the pauement with her light.
How sullen Saturn took her by the hand.
With frosty feeling, in whose joy touch,
She shrunk her hold, but with a jealous eye,
She glanst on me, fearful that standers by
Should be inricht with it: now she smiles me fair,
Guilding my torture with an after hope.
Thus moroliz'd, I season on my right,
Her love thus challenged by inferior might.

After this dalliance here comes other sport.
Pray ye attend him gallants: How now John?
Tar di venientis John, you must be whip't.
Quaeso preceptor, non est tibi quid.

This silly sot, my Lord, so please you hear him,
Vtters much hope of matter, but small gain.
An old wife nursed him, which we call blind Ales.
She dying, left him to the cities keeping.
Which in their Hospital they thus nursed up.
Amongst the bounties of their other deeds:
Many besides, now you shall hear his fellow
Ask him such questions as his simplenes
Answers to any: sir let me hear ye.

John, how many parts of speech be there?

Eight, the vocative, and ablative, caret nominatiuo o,

What say you to reddish Jack?

That it does bite, Ha, ha, ha.

Where ha you been Jack?

At Powles friend.

Who saw you there?

Mr. Deane Nowel, O he is a good man truly.

What did a give thee Jack?

A groat, look here else.

What will it do with it?
Carri't home to my Nurse.

I Will give thee a point Jack, what will it do with it?

carri't home to my nurse.

I Will give thee a fools head Jack, what wilt do with it?

Carri't home to my nurse,

Carry a fools head, what a fool are thou?

Should I go home without it? whose fool now?

Who toles the bell for John?

I know not,

When did a?

Ene now,

Hoo Jack hoo,

My Nurses chickin. Ha, ha, ha.

A silly ignorant, is a ever so?

Never otherwise, a cleanly Idiot, what is put on him in his morning ries, is as
you see it. This old woman is his Nurse


So please your honor you are sent for to the Court,
The Court goes from Richmond to White Hall.

We will attend her, kind sir William Vergir.
Our times bridegroom to your self and you.
We wish as we have ever done, all love,
And for our present entertainment rest indebted to your bounty, if a Courts
amends have in it power of satisfaction, you command it, this acknowledged
ever, your poor acquaintance but an honorable friend


We will attend your coach.

Sir, be mindful of our servant Filbon.
What wants in him to weie down love with gold,
Our savors shall supply.

It Is a light weight, their portions if they, poize no better, will to the
worlds belief, grow less not greater, but let them pass, I weie them as they
are. Come Nurse, follow us John


Wipe your nose, fie a slouen still, look ye be mannerly, hold up your chinne,
let me see ye make your holiday leg, so my chucking, that is a good lamb, do
not cry for any thing, John if ye do


No Nurse, grace a God, Grace a Queen.

Shreeke no more in my ear, I pre-thee peace, I grant I made such promise:
but what then, shall I for that so set her on the rack, when her fair
fortunes look a better way, with the small proffer of your giddie son, no:
you shall pardon me


You Will let me have my ioynter yet.

Yes that, three hundred by the year it is thine,
But for your son to wed my eldest daughter.

Why, he does merit her in my accord, and it is no wrong in you, to dip her
blood in the self dye that we are in


I grant his merit, but her shining value made golden glittering, by my
vantings looks to a higher promintoria, from which four, when your son
gazes, it affrights him, yields him plannet stroke


He shall not have her then.

Believe it wife.

He shall.

Ha.

I will not bed with you till then.

What?

I ha said it, and when posture of our word takes his bace being, I will die
the death, into our wedding sheets shall mischief come, before my body
break your word with me, even on your wedding day


Nay then up with the lists, again it shall not be.

I care not, think you I do, keep your word in that, when I break mine.


No more, be stranger to my bed, do do. Have
I of nothing made thee much and will thou --

Yes I will, have you of protestations, oaths, and vows made these loose
fractures: lawful be it then for me to shun the make-peace bed, since strife
sets such division betwixt man and wife, I am most firm in it


Very well, it is not amiss.

The night draws on, it is time to part.

At your pleasures gentlemen.

Your gallant daughters will be next.

Or not at all, for I am past it now.

And we are praid unto, our sons are gentlemen,
what rests then, but we sail nearer to the point?

What point?

Of marriage past, betwixt us in our promises.

Indeed to one I promised her weight in gold, unto the other which I love as
dear, her weight in silver, now gentlemen what goods have you to equal these
large promises


Why all we have.

But twill not serve,
The big auouchments of my promises
Controlles you all, and all men's else, ye all,
Under degrees of Earls, Lords, or as Potent
To toule them on I echo these large sommes.

Unvalued must your sommes be to such choice,
Honor looks high above such petty price.

Look honor high as heaven,
Our earthly reach does leauell in that eye,
And with the imbellishment of richer worth
I Will by, and out-by the imprisond scope,
Of reaching blood, what will not value do
Where strong abillitie dos reach his hand,
And they have beauty too, which joined to riches
Will proffer fair: tho not so quaint
As courtly dames or earths bright treading stars,
They are maids of More-clacke, homely milke-bole things,
Such as I love and feign would marry well.

It was a promise in you to be kind.

I Will forward with that promise, you love my eldest. --


With my soul.

And pity to divide that love, then hearken me,
when she is dead and lives again, she is yours, not till then,

Then never but in death.

You love my youngest daughter.

And will ever.

Pray ye do: but when you are from your self a woman, she is yours in
marriage


Woman to woman joined twere wonderful, but in more maze of wonder I should be,
what I do challenge to participate, and from my self live to divide in other


Faith not till such a wonder.

Is It not enough to scandal thy true word?
But are we slighted thus with santasies,
Impossibilities, dead and alive again,
Manhood infuzd in woman: it is not generous.

Come son upon my blessing
Take from thy eyes thy heart adoring shine,
Offer no more thy altar bearing thoughts
To one so gyant-like, whose reach sits hie,
Above the compass of a gentill eye.

you have your answers, gallants.

We like it not.

Nor will we so except it.

Fore-warnd come near my house,
Rapes, fellonies, and what may else be thought on,
I will with heavy impositions
Surcharge ye with, if not with pistol shot,
I will defend my self and these I keep.

Live I to hear this?

Convey them from him, let us.

In disguise.

Or not at all.

That way or none*

James, when I put thee from my thought, let me be hud wincht from all,
fortune, thy pertaking gentleness is such, as I do love thee, troth I do


God continue this good league.

Wot'st what news?

No.

The lovers are expulst, and my fair hopes shine the clearer: what wilt say
when I do marry this Knights eldest daughter


That you are then possessed.

She is mine contracted in her fathers word.

New broken sir.

Ha.

It Is true your mother challenged it: but he as angry as the raging morn, whose
choler breathing shakes high battlements, puts her off with a pause of
contrary, I know it sir, her ioynter is subscribed too, which else to do,
sooner should earth to heaven presume a progress, then the grant make firm
what the antecedent challenges, your mother upon this abandons from his bed,
vowing bold absence, he enraged, gives way to all malign and stubborn fashion
of contempt, such a cloze to day never had practice, such a wedding night, till
this sad first never had purchase: you shall well agree them sir, to atone
this jar, use means I pray you, it will become ye, well, when wrangling
wrestles with such violent injury, it is the sons office


It Is the devils office and not mine, to hell obedience, if he break his word.


You had a father loved ye better.

He loud me as a king in a play, his servant who were seeing him gives kind
applause, but small utility: my father in my child-hoode loud and left me to
the worlds eye, in bold necessity, I thank him for it, since he di'de my
mother has her chance, mine wants the proof, stand by times minion and
inconstancy, oh


Have patience.

Yes, whereunto? since all my hopes ly level
With despair, such milk-sops in whose breasts,
Lingers a lagging hope, to the^ is patience sufferable;
But to me, horror, and hels black motions tickles
Me on to mischiese, and I will --

So.
Now swims upon the maine, such shipwrack-soules,
As the winds rage splits on the rocks of danger.
I, my wife, and son all three, now heave, and
Fear of sinking, makes us timorous.
Should we be sheluing on the shallow beach,
The seas rough gusts might scatter our intents,
So idle purchase might be gathered up,
from our so sudden shipwreck: No my state
Stands yet secure: though maimed yet is not foiled:
But salu'd by wise occasion may make good
This sudden ouerflow of tide and flood.

Where had this bread and butter?

The crow did give it me.

But take heed the kite take it not from thee.

I Will choke first.

John shal's play at counter-hole i*th cloister?

I ha nere a counter.

I Will give thee one for a point.

Do, and i will play hose go down, O sir, Willy is a good man truly, here is good
custard and capon, and good bread and butter too


Now John, i will cry first.

And i will cry lagge. I was in hoblies hole.

I ha won this John, now for another.

I Will hate again will I will o.

What Is the matter, making my sweet lamb cry?
Come John we must to London, on with your clean muckender, and take leave of
sir William and his Lady. Gods me your point, where is it John


The crow has it, and did win it at counter hole.

I Will whip ye for it, take him up, loose your point lamb, fie, up with him
sirrah


Good Nurse now, no more truly o, o

Where Is this suck-egge, where is Jack a boy:
Come ye moveable matron, where is this tugegge,
away away.

I Will take leave of S. William and go away.

Now my John iuggler, your nose is like Lothbery conduit, that always runs
waste


What Is his name John?
Sternigogilus, ha, ha.

What?

Agoggle eye, a wanton eye, a madcap, so a means.

Wat?

Hollo.

Trim boat. turn head, we are at hand muschrumpe,
We come boy, we come.

Come John, our leave is taken.

Have ore the sea to florida, and was not good King
Solomon, Tom Tyler.

O well sung Nightingale, a board a board there, ha rip there.


Boy, you understand me, though the liquor have renst me, remember your
business boy


Yes master.

It Is rare to be a tinker boy, work enough, wench enough, and drink enough,
is it not boy

I Master.

Boy where shal's have doings, I Will clout any woman's cauldren, boy.


Master, tincke on it is time, for we ha nere a penny.

Pawn budget boy, I Will ring in boy, hay any work for a tinker, a ti, ti,
tinker


By my maidenhead it is he, the merry tinker of Twitnam boy, is it not?


Yes flower in the frying pan, he stops holes well* it is he,

Has his old songs still, has he not?

Yes, and new to boot.

And be not these tinkers knaves? upon their backs they bear a long pick,
with a staff in the end

He shall ha work, I Will break way for him, and
Call out the gentlewoman to hear him sing.

Let them all say what they can dainty come thou to me.
We shall ha work master.

Draw boy, homo armatus, boy, I Will pepper your pans,
Where Is my dog boy?

your Dame has him, and will meet you at Putney.

Indeed what is a tinker with out's wench, staff and dog.


Is this the tinker you talk on?

I madame of Twitnam, I have seen him lick out burning fire brands with his
tongue, drink two pense from the bottom of a full pottle of ale, fight with a
Masty, and stroke his mustachoes with his bloody bitte^ fist, and sing as
merrily as the sobrest Querester


Come tinker, stop, mend.

I Will tickle your holes.

He Is out of tune for singing now.

Out of tune and temper too, thus can dainty liquor do. Sing boy.


Relish master, relish, a note above eta master, Sol. fa, me, re.

A maiden sitting all alone,
Unto her self she made great moan,
Sorrow set upon her cheek,
And she looked green as any leeke:
Her friends did ask her cause of care;
But she cried out in her despair.
O stone, stone ne ra, stone na ne ra, stone.

Cold comfort in a stone.

Docters came her pulse to feel,
And Surgions with their tools of steel,
To dig, to delue, to find her pain,
But all they did it was in vain,
Still on her back this maiden lies,
And with an open throat she cries.
O stone, stone na ne ra, stone ne na ne ra stone.

Better and better by my slipper.

Old wives they made answer thus,
Green sickness was most dangerous.
And oate-meale eating is afood,
That never yet did maiden good.
Tut, tut, tut, it is nothing so,
Still she cried out with pain and woe.
O stone, stone ne na ne ra, stone ne na ne ra, stone
Till she was delivered of a chopping boy, and all
was as I am, Omne been.

What a disfiguring diet, drunkenness,
Lays upon man, a beastly appetite.
Lingers the body where such glutnous means,
Swelters in surfeit of desire and ease.
I am an enemy to my self, to think,
That man is slave so to continual drink.

Knight, feast, knight, a good celler keeper knight.
I Will cusse thy daughter knight.

Howes that?

Shals not busse knight, shals not neb?

Thou art in the straits Moll, and the pirots shot will sincke thee, therefore
yield


I am thy Toures, being thus disguisd,
am come to steal thee, then be sudden Moll.

Nay then in faith.

Knight shals drink at door like beggars? no, i will in knight see thy seller, is
thy seller in dept, knight dare he not show his face? your black iacks are my
elder brothers, knight, shals notshake hands with our brothers knight


Follow him, look he steal nothing.

Tinckers steal naught but drink and maidenheads,
I Will watch him for one, if you allow loss of the other.

Where Is Tutch?

Sir.

Who wait you on?

On the world sir.

And what says the world to ye?

To me sir.

To you sir, what a message? letters, ha, daughter i will be your secretary, nay
hide not, iuggle not with me, i will once be secret to your thoughts, in faith I
will


It Is a card of lace sir, which he bought me.

I bone-lace sir.

Bone-lace subscribed too like a letter, lace weau'd of ten bones, is it so? even
so

O Tutch.

O mistres now am I tried on my own tutch,
I am true metal one way, but counterfeit an other:
O life no life, but mess of public wrong,
Day turn to night, for I ha lived too long.

From Filbon.

Yes from Filbon, woe to the day, time, and hour.


Wherefore.

That I brought this news from your lover therefore.


Pull off your coat.

I need not sir, it is ready to fall off, yet if I do, it is the time of year,
the fall of leaf sir, and serving men do drop their coats, there sir


Begone, come no more near my house, if thou do thou art a fellone, are you
the carrier, are ye indeed, must love make you his mercury, must Filbon send
by you? my own betray my own, to him, your a knave, they shuffle ye about,
i will deal the cards and cut ye from the deck, you understand me, go


Gang is the word, and hang is the worst, we are even, Iowe you no service,
and you owe me no wages, short tale to make, the summers day is long, the
winter nights be short, and brickill beds dos hide our heds, as spittell fields
report


Wife coope up our ginnie hen, that wants this treading, you gossip, to your
closser, Filbon shall, if we want will, yes yes what else


Come daughter.

I deny Filbon to his face, bring me to him, I will justify that all his
actions are like apricocks, they dangle and love them


You do.

Alas sir, mistres Marie is with the Tincker gone, and at the back door horst,
I see the gelding, it was a dapple gray


Hell and damnation.

Death and torture.

Christmas gambuls, father, shooing the wild mare.

Am I a jest to laugh at now, indeed, indeed.

O not so fast sir, I am for your race, and will out strip ye, if ye run no
faster, speak what was this tincker


Tincker sir.

I, thy master.

My master is a knight, who Ioue-like in the shape of such a thing, came to see
Daunie in this shoure of gold


Toures was it?

Etiam, ita, ego I sir.

Now fortune at the fairest, go with thee, thou have been coming in this
stratagem, and I do give thee joy with all my heart


You do huswife.

Wishing a whirle-winde in the like disguise.
Fetch me hence smoothly, I am lawful price.

Where Is James?

At London.

I will thither too, since the devil drives I am the second, lock her up, safe
be it your charge


What for this counselor, concealing rape and ruin of your child?


Whip him.

I shall never endure it.

Unless you do betray this trust, and tell us to what cabbinet he has
conducted her


To Putney, o to Putney sir, where they will be married.

At my parsonage, God amen, no other hospital to shadow them but mine, am I
the patron of so hard mischance, that my own of my own shall consin me, i will
thither, son your company


No, i will to Richmond sir, prevent them there.

No sir, you shall with me, that's the next office, for your self, delaying
due, in other all things ready, you will then serve your self, nor he nor you
shall carue so to your appetites


Your pleasure sir.

For my sake turned away.

Yes, my master turns a new leaf, and so must I sir, it was for your letters
sake


Is there no hope?

What do you call it when the ball sir hits the stool?

Why out.

Even so am I, out, out of all hope ever to come in to crum my portage at his
table sir


Welcome to mine, then honest Tutch, but speak thy mind, think thou she
will continue firm


Firm sir, yes, unless you take her for a join stool. she will continue firm,
she seeds on ye, dreams on ye, hopes on ye, and relies on ye, telling her
father what a friend you are, protesting and molesting to the hole house of
your good parts, vowing to God and man if she have not you, she will have
nothing: for any man's pleasure, she will not line if not for yours


I stand resolved.

She wishes that ye should, or she will not trust to ye.

Son feast thou young Toures?

Not since our last repulse in love, since when I stand affected unto singlenes
of life


Then art thou stable in my thoughts, but let me whisper to thee boy, young
Toures in a Tanckers habit has her stolen, to whom his hearty adorations were
to this hour consecrate, she is gone, and her old doting father got to
complain him at the court, how twill work I know not


Like wax; she will take any impression, sir she.

Like a tincker say ye?

Certainly even so.

It Was my own project father, he applauded it, knowing my fashion of that
counterfeit, to be so sure, as no man could forgo me


But himself sir, it is a point of law, arraigne him upon ipse facto.


And art thou stepped beyond me? where to night thou slepst: soft be thy pillow:
easy be thy rest, and may thy bed be


Mortal down, thistle soft,
She laid her self under to keep him aloft,
And ever she said, come turn thee to me,
And was not this bonny less Mary Ambre?

Mary indeed she has resigned to me hard choice,
Near am I but as arrows a far of,
Seems to the shooter neighbor to the mark,
Till it prove otherwise, so I
Furthest from favor am, though seeming nie.

Change your mark, shoot at a white, will say, come stick me in the clout sir,
her white is black, it is crept into her eye, and wenches with black eyes the
white's turned up are but as custards, though they seem stone cold, yet
greedily attempted, burning hot, and such a wench is she sir


I know she loves me.

Most affectionately burns in desire for ye; but key cold through her father,
she stands to freeze while others are appointed to thaw the Ice, not you


I must use policy.

The only man, I will assist you sir,

I thank thee, and I will prevail in it.

I think sir, if I see my house to night, there will come warrants to make
open way to their recovery, thinking they are with me, whom I protest I have,
not seen, and unacquainted with her subtle stealth, am now as clear as is
the babe newborn, I neither knew of it, nor where they are, I do beshrow
their hearts, right I have in him for it


sleep in my house then, so my word shall make your answer stronger, I have a
son, I wish him so possessed, but not with violence, yet say he do climb
high, and reatch the top bough with a stricter course, I knowing not the manner
nor the means, acquites me, and God give, them joy, my oath is clear, and
that is my warrant


Sir, I will trouble you to nigh, by this sad time his moan does challenge
comfort, and the council whose loves he has so often visited, heartned on by
the Earl of Tumults means, they will add present purpose as he begges it


but if the Earl know of my sons discharge, signed by his careless answer,
it would allay his hot endeavors with a cold responsall; but cease that, the
time shall come -- --


It Is mine, the cause and all, pine let me in them, if the son of hope shine
as a troubled meatuare in the sky; it is our fates fortune, and no matter cause
no remedy


True vantings of resolve, it is late, and custom challenges no right in me, to
be so hurtful to my self, the euenings air is raw and cold


Filbon follow us, be you more temperate.
You see what hurry threatenings this misdeede
Wounds deep are dangerous, though they hardly bleed

Sir, I am lessond,

As the boys at school?
Practice their knowledge by contrary rule.

O I am slain with wonder.
Has this life left in it a little breath,
To blow out treason, reeke ye clouds of shame,
Putrify all imagination, hold her at stearne,
There let her sink, never to win again,
Homers recovery, shall I say and think it?
O --
Have I not been in bed to night, and so
Talk idly wanting sleep, or rose from rest,
As many troubled do, acting like life,
Awaking dead, for in that flattering fear,
Perchance her reputation may be saved.
No I am certain in my fear, it is true,
In yond black closset lies a wicked woman,
(I will not say my mother, that names lost)
In the twind brazings of the slave her man.
In James his arms, and shall I suffer it?
O --
To blab, it were to harould out my shame,
In quartered scutchin of black obloquie,
To murder one were most imparciall;
Again to turn hills on this sin,
Would write me baude, but to be nobly satisfide
Is a content licensed from equity.
The knight shall know it, I will write to him,
Startle his bold imagination with pale fear,
Rose his reuengefull spirit on them both,
And make me hopeful of his love neglected,
Forgive me world, heavens justice puts me on,
And though a son, I Will punish both or none.

You that bind up in secrets of the night,
Days benefits going to rest;
As peaceful birds, lodged in a sanctuary.
Smile at our Courtiers care, whose industry,
Rules in the silent and all shadowing night,
Suites that are breathles in a troubled day.
Have their abiding in our cares at night.
Hard censured, and atton'd by late advice,
Saluing the worlds scares, as we would your care
Knew we the burden of it.

With us the morn is mated with the moon
And we are retrograde to what you do.
Esteeming conscience, benefit and good.
Challenged in service of our country:
Sir though our blood affirm us labor free,
It binds thee more to busy industry,
Wonder not at our late vpsitting therefore.

Your humors toil in our extremities,
But we unthankful merit contrary,
Think it a want and weakness in our kind,
I post and labor in a toil my self,
Seeking my own: midnight to me is noone,
And all the hours of dull past night,
Sunshine eclipses, that do much molest me,
Pardon me that am so tedious.

Seeking your own.

My eldest daughter is conuei'd from me,
Hurried away, as thieves by violence
Convey their booties from the true man's store.
Auditor, Toures son has done this deed,
A rescue noble Lords.

Rescue and right, challeng the benefit.

A warrant for a general search,
Restraints for Cinck-ports, and all passages,
That theenish water does dispoile us of.

It shall be signed in the morning,
Draw the contents as you affect the means,
And let attendance urge the early act.

Good night.

God morrow is it not?

Betwixt them both.
The moral of my misery seeking too late,
That to recover which I lost too soon.

And yet in each you stand indifferent.

I must, till perfected by you,
Either late loss, or timely victory,
Recovering what I fear is past advantage.

Hope the best sir, things at worst,
Season in their decay, as children mend,
Bent in their eye to ruin, yet they pause
Resting in grace, does reobtaine at will,
Opinion in rash judgment, dooming ill.

Good rest, for we go to it.

The peace of happiness be with ye,
I will retire me to my Inn, and wish.
Hours as short as momentary breath,
For till the morning, minutes hours be,
And hours years, such is reuengd to me,
Might I enjoy it?

Sir.

My man, a midnight messenger, what is thy haste in leathe sleept, speak is
that all one? one all, that we call daughter, gone too, is she


No sir.

Wherefore starest thou so wildly, say, weart thou asleep and wakened? come
to us here without thy better part? and sent abroad, leaving thy wits at home


Your son sir, in all haste sends you his talles, wishes your wit and
judgment suddenly, read and regard sir


Give the torch, if you will see my mother and your wife, fellow'd in bed make
haste, James your man writes on your pillow etc. my eyes are witnesses to their
adultery


What Is the news?

Plague on these iauntings, once we shall be old, and then this trotting life
will linger in our bones, all hours are our nights, we dally with our own
destruction


It cannot be, or if, or if, what if? if it be so I am undone, poisoned am I
with fair promises, no marvel tho you do forswear my bed, if yet again, if
what make I here when treason is at home, away


The bird that greets the dawning of the day,
Signs with his wings, the midnights parture,
And the sleetie deaw moistning the cheeks
Of morrowes welcome: gives earnest of the morn:
Yet all secure, adultrate lust dos sleep,
And I the hatched young of this trodden hen,
Stands Centinell to her idolatry.
Blow you sweld winds and crack the battlements,
Rouse their incestious luxury with fear
Of what is to come, yet that were my mishap,
No silent air fan on them bawdie breath.
That as they reeke in their licentious love,
Devil may seal sure, and Morpheus so pleased,
May to their pastime add affliction
Delivered by the hand of him that's wronged,
And stands indebted to his desteny:
Yet are they as the hour, whose sandy minutes
Runs out at pleasure till the period comes,
Fast sleeping, and enjoy their quiet,
Rouse the black mischief from thy ebben cell,
Land in the bosoms of this twin in lust,
Him whose heapt-wrong calls vengeance to be just.

Lock fast that door and leave me. Give me your light, Son Humil?


Father.

Thou see I am obedient at thy call. Exit servants.
I come as messengers that bring their bale,
Signed in their looks, be well advised,
Thou make a challenge goes beyond all grace,
Should it befalse.

It is my love to you that makes me step
Heart-deepe in disobedience to my mother.
Wretch that I am to think her so,
It makes me desperate of prioritie,
Fore thinking my beginning to be bace,
Conceau'd in such mistrust and frailty,
My front has that impression still,
Adding a blush to my distemperature,
And I am crest-salne in sanguinitie,
Pray ye believe me, would it were not so.

Enough watch and be secret, I will enter,
Sit as the night raven or the skreeking owl,
Over my portall, menasing ill chance
To all within: for death is to my blood
A blessing, while this feuor killes,
Almost my intellect or better part,
Yet she is thy mother, and no son but hates
His own disgrace so highly merrited,
And I believe thee.

Sir, truth is truth, my conscience and religion
Binds up in me, and since I do proclaim
Detraction from my blood, by her misdeede,
Give me leave to report a fly a fly,
If it offend the virtue of mine eye.

It Is true.
And yet me thinks it should not be,
How hardly will this scandal take impression,
Where resolved christianity dos dwell?
But I will try the gold, perhaps it is base,
Who knows the hearts affection by the face.

Scarlet is scarlet, and her sin blood red,
Will not be washed hence with a sea of water,
Is this my hand, or is the fire fire?
whose scorching heat dissolues rele^ting metal,
When as it tries the substance; yes, and I
Make known my mother is an alien,
From my blood, so to fall off, and perish
Even in her pride of bliss, damned be the slave
That so attempts her spotless chastity
To ruin, I know that yet smooth look,
Plotted, contrived, and won her with devise,
She never knew a double character till now,
But single singler she ever ruled,
Even modesty her self, Vesta resignd to her,
And virtue hand in hand at barly-breake,
Ran the swift course, none but a hound of hell,
Hunted this fawn of fortune to his kennell,
But my mother, forgetting her degree,
Dos captiuate love, life and liberty,
By one deeds practice, wicked, nay far worse,
Fatal disgrace, honors created course.

Fool, fool, fool.

Ha.

Light bubble swell and break, would thou believe all this, and give a
gloss to slanders cruelty: ripening reproach it self with thy fond ear, o
Humil, Humil


Sir.

Thou arta villain, and have cast up hills against heaven it self: when
sons unto their mothers are so false, O where is grace? hud winekt from
honor, shamed to show her face


Is it not so?

Trust thy own eyes, go, thou shall see a sight
Will melt thy stubborn spleen in pity,
Sweetly she sleeps, whose innocent respect
Smiles in her dreams, the childlike govern,
Laughing loud in their simplicity,
While waking, mischief seeks that to undo,
Which true required, stands centinell unto,
Go and return with shame.

With shame, devil of mischance what is this?
Did I not see their cutted guilt look big?
Was I in trance of my belief, ha, was I?
Can be no iugling in it: can there?

No thou art constant as the northren star,
And I as giddy as the untamed Leopard,
That sees no means but dire destruction,
Flinging his foame to poison in his way
Man's mischief, plotted to his overthrow:
Heto'd me true, o that I live to think so,
Or they so wretched to deserve the thought,
Soundly they slept, whose slu^bers killed me waking,
Yet to recover half slain reputation,
Done have I, what to purpose practices
If it prevail, our honor so reserved
Will kick at all malignant cruelty
That taints our name with ever living skorne,
Fortune be for me, I will that recover,
Which devil him self cries guilty too, my fame
The flight it wings, imps feathers of renown,
That left all is lost, my birthright tumbles down,

Sir I am sorry.

How can they excuse such wanton looseness, know they I stand here to thunder
vengeance on their luxury


My mother's fast asleep, and I awake, am in a transiue maze, unwitting how to
make my peace with God her self and you


why are they not together?

Not in bed.

Thou should with Argos hundred eyes,
Search in the chinkes and corners round about,
It cannot be but she is extant there, ha, is she not?

I am confounded in the search, please your justice be my torture, I have
murdered innocence, sorrow is not the way, death is the least, I challenge
cruelty and urge the exactest point of peril, slave that I am to live


A son, a son, to do so to a mother.

Fare ye well, rather then be a witness of my wrong,
I will not see my self in it, go thou worse then,
I Will sacrifice to the diuill, that tempted thee, all thy
Distempered thoughts, cry mercy to her sects.
To spotless innocence be free, say all thy treasons,
Build on slippery ice, and thou art frozen cruelty,
Sir, for your wrongs, if you remit black torture it is
My hell, and I appeal to stern rigor, O you sonues,
Whose true obedience shines in majesty.
While mine more ugly then is vulcans tithye.
Smells ranker then despised Hemlocke
Curse and ban him, I am your subject to it
And every mother, whose snow innocence,
Feels soft and tender, as the down on palm,
Rate my rebellion with a blisseles name,
And for my sake give misaduenture aim.
Guide 'hem to me, say I am such a son,
Through whom a mother is so soon undone,

Let me not see the while thou live away,
Let thy repentance show it self in this,
Not to be seen where thou have done amiss.
Catiue depart.

I will; this tongue that slandered,

Be her slander still.

It is too much already, was I bewitched,
That thus at hud-man blind I dallied
With her I honored? o you times how have you
Nursed me, but no more, Humil has branded on his
Mothers name, an Aethyops blackness, and
A spotted stain, forgive me that and all.

What need I to afflict revenge on him
That on himself exasperates, farewell thou pride
Of sons, who to a father in supposition only and
by law, art all so loving, that thy mother dalling
With wa^tones as girls with gauds, thou not respects
The womb that brought thee forth, but ill attempting
So, and so thou rumorst, as the fault ripe in act,
Is blown to air, and though her son thou
Vtter'st what they were, thou shall not loose by it
Now it fits, I challenge from the offense some right,
And add confine to this adultery
Wife, wife, rise and come forth.

Call ye sir?

Yes, take my closset key, let forth your lover,
Give me some ease by way of reason yet, and it will
Allay our discontent, O God so new to marriage, and
So stale, could thou so soon revolt, so soon, ha?

I must acknowledge all.

O No, some better looze,
This will but add to mischief torture
Use patience now be reconciled to fear,
Be doue-like humble, and leave that to me.

How can I, when the brand is on my brow,
But by exclaim, give ease to torture,
My brain is scared, and I am liueles in it?

Kneel not.

A sentence, let us die.

No marvel though you vow this abstinence
When deputed by him, you shun my bed,
You do deserve your iointer well,
To admit a fellow in a true man's place,
I thank ye for it, yes.

Sir.

No, no words I know you can allege,
The devil has scripture for his damned ill,
And this dos neighbor it, go and attire ye.
Be smilefull, and express no grief in sithes,
Rather be tickling sportfull, topt in pleasure.
Then daunted any way, that me concerns.
To use the mad-mans guise, but I am past it,
Since what is done, no reference has to wish,
I am for credit sake, supportable, all is well,
Content am I to be senseable, and feel my
Fortunes as I may, ranking my self with such,
As sometime lived in my repute most base,
Faith all is well believe it, I am satisfied:
I know you do repent, and that is my remedy,
Other amends I look not for, In, and attire ye,
But stay you with me.

I am obedient.

Go thou shame, never till now possessed,
And in a breath confounded, sir, you see your wrongs
Shine through the herne, as candles in the eve,
To light out others, think you this misdeede,
Merits salvation?

I must acknowledge contrary.

Will thou for all this spite, yet use me kindly in the next?


Command me sir.

No^ (...) the second, this mistake me not,
Ratl. to bind thee from it, if he^e after,
Fashion of frailty summon us to fear
I must be plain, and therefore thus:
Look when soever I hold up this finger,
Signing my lips with it, and cry begone,
Even then be speedy to depart the land.
If not, all power of mischief that I can, I will
and so resolve.

Sir, I am ready to the minute.

It may be, other reasons will restrain me
As causeless motives, nor seeing guiltiness.
In needy sequences perhaps our heart will in it self bake truce with this
mischance, or if it do not, yet attend our spleen, it will be better for ye


In humble duty.

Go, give coppies of good countenance to our friends, think an is well, for
so it is, I that am all in grief, am all in suffering, I forgive the reason,
Fare ye well

What I will do, is ba^d up in this closer,
The key that opens it, is my revenge.
Turned by a hand whose palm dus itch with fire
Til al consume, a cuckold, cuckold William s^r is
Its even so, would I were yet the ^ast or least,
But not by thousands go too then, am I all alone, in this
Who is it that tongue calls man
That is assured of his wives conditions*
None, or if any, there the Phoenix lives
Vnfellow'd, be his fate renowned while mine
Is mockery, and a Iestiue stock, to all that knows me.
O you stars blaze fire, till this abuse be quenthd
By my desire.

Hark ye Morris.

I Sir.

Where is Tailer? dudge me, will knog his pad,
What is chirken with cold button done, say you.

Excellent, this is welsh indeed, O my honest Tutch.

Sause box, rowly powly, am I not your master?

You are sir, pray ye pardon me.

You must have your left eye Diamiter wise,
Fixed on my right heel, and all the offices,
A servant owes in duty to his Master, perform
As naturally as if the forty shilling time
Were come, left I leave talking welsh, and crack your pate in English.


I shall obey sir.

Fairest of beauties, love her seemly self,
For thy two eyes are Cupids, which do shoot
From thy inamor'd bow, shafts all of gold,
Headed with metal of immortal proose.
In thy fair bosom lives two hearts relenting,
Thine penetrable, through attoning pity,
Mine longing by desire to scale the fort
Of loves fair presence, make me happy,
Sign to my suit, but ye, for it is thy censure
Makes me thus bold, pronounce fair judgment,
Either of life or death, I that plead love,
Doubly devoted, challenge from thy dietie
A maiden answer, let it come bright fire,
To try the substance of my loves resolve.

Sir, in sooth and verity believe me,
That I am fair it is credible, but to shoot
Arrows, whose heads have such immortal proof,
It Is most erroneous and false, sfoot your a puritan,
A citizen I Am sure, her canuas curran bags,
Stuffed with sweet sinnomon and cloves,
Good sir you are deceau'd in me, ^e country plain
Without this nicetie, and do you love me, yes?
Then crave an answer without ceremony,
Fetched from proud Ovid in his Art amandi.
I do not like it I.

Ples you Latie.

Sir and you, tell me of Cupids eyes,
shot from inamord bows with hearts relenting, doubly devoted, and I know not
what


Ples you firgen.

No sir no, give me plain courtesy,
Drawing on loves white hand a glove of warmth,
Not cheuerell, stretching to such profanation,
You overthrow loves dietie in this,
And putrify his altars with bad breath.
I am a dairy huswife, no such wanton,
So easily flattered with far fetched replies.
Yet I esteem this worthless person free,
And tho not fair, yet something fortunate.

Harg ye now Latie.

Sir cry you mercy.

Was a knight, marg you, of Englise in Wales, welse blood, and it is no mock in
en to marry in welse blood, is it


Sir all the smiles a modest maid, can in this kind make proffer of, are
youres, in your fair welcome, blame me not, though his unkindness made me
negligent in your kind entertain


Neglect me so.

Wives unto Citizens are trades-mens daughters,
I am a blood of gentle composition,
My mind dos equal it, I must be coacht.
Banckqueted every where, courted abroad,
At home flattered, for my private use,
I must have fancies, playfellowes, as apes,
Monkies, baboones, mufs, fannes, receipts,
Costly abilliments of several suites,
Will ye give this? it will break you sir,
And crack your credits fair condition, no,
Citizens would, but cannot answer so.

Harg you, marry with her, and God dudge me, all is yours, was a knight have
land, and a great deal of rishes, will maintain you well, say you


This gentleman or this, before a Citizen, you sir pardon me I will ha none.


Then whom you will, call you this modesty to be so waspish? given to slight
men off with inciuillitie, give me leave to remember


What you please, all the world except one or two, my eye motes that trouble
but my sight. Filbon for me, man else but mere illusion and idolatry, vain
worship, images of molten metal, which to dross dissolud, appear as nothing
to my judgment, but his worth beyond compare, gentle and suffering as the
silent air, that tho it brook the buffets of base breath, yet in it self it is
heavenly, free from earth


Harg you, was knight in house called Sir William Perger.


Verger sir?

Morris was say true, give a ducket, look you tucke it, is mark, mark you
that, and mark is 13 shillings four pence, good currants money, and how do
you? well, when was sir Robert Morgan, mik you latie, grace a God


You sir.

Was I lie pray you?

Think you Master Auditor, knew nothing sir.

Upon my soul I think it.
I did wind him subtly as hounds the game,
New got on foot, for instance he lamented often his sons proceedings,
neglecting his own house, lest you in quest of her should search it, believe
me sir I tell you what I know


It Is likely, sons in these doting days
Will from their fathers alienate, differ still
From loves obedience, and in hearts affection,
Join hand to hand, though beggary neighbor it,
And let them go.

Sir I am free then from your fear.

I good sir Henry I was wrong informed,
I am your parron in all love.

Long may ye line, so sir I find you gentle,
And a good benefactor to poor scholars,
We ha few such, many we rather have,
That sell the Church rights, then maintain them,
And in my next stanze, I shall tickle them.

Speak conscience and no more.

Nay as for that sir pardon me,
I seldom exercise without that thought,
What my text leads me to, I will pronounce,
Mauger the devil of judgment.

Soft.

Bless you gallant knight, a merchant sir,
Of London am I, my estate secure, and so it please you covet this fair maid
in marriage, nothing else


Know you him Sir Rafe?

Not well sir, but by guess, he is indifferent rich, has broke three times,
made his head hole by means, and that say I, as this world shapes, is secure
policy, what think you sir


I do not think it so, though common practice finds it furthering shifts, do
the devil resemble, and banckrout bacenesse makes good credit tremble, like it
not


Plese you Aunt, harg you now, knight was love this firgin, and God will, must
make her wife, shall be her laty, go in Wales, great worship God willing


O know this knight, he was created the other day.

Sir Rober Morgan, o sir, such a one, whose reputation reaches to the best,
merits a good conjunction, were my daughter, she should have him, o beware
when majesty shines in a man's estate

They long stand firm, spread wide regenerate
And though base borne, yet honor makes them swell,
Like clusterd grapes, till mature sweetness brings,
Lussio us conclusion.

I have some mind to him, sir you receive
Kind welcome, let it store your thoughts with
Those sweet motions lovers wish to enjoy, she may,
perchance, all things concluded on, before ye.

Was a clad man, Morris fetch trunck of parrel
was lie here a four week, will not out now.
Was welcome, plague on you, was love ye.

Sir, as for you, being city proud, my daughters look sits on a Courtiers
brow, what say my girl


O sir, a Courtier on my life, I love to sit up late,
Ly long in the morning, rot with sweet meats, and
To play at shuttle-cock, me thinks the games now
In my narmes, in any hand a Courtiers wife and
Why not? his black iet shows best about
Beauties neck, and I am proud of such
A suter, if I understand not his welche, like
A good piece of ord^nance, I shall ly fast upon the
Bulwark, and discharge my obedient English
Must be a Lady sir.

Yet welcome sir, let it not grieve you.

Signior no, you are welcome to the wife I woo,

And mistres, might I be the man to strike the stroke.

You, or else none, sir Henry.

Troth she says true, but listen me for that, come Gallants enter with me, we
will feast, there is little labor lost, where trial bids presumption scyrre the
coast


Right to a hair, it is mine, and I must do it
I see my fees, my rich advantage, sirrah boy,
Shall we have work, in faith and shall we?

Conclude, i will busy him, Sir Rafe.

Son, you see to what a happy issue this disguise
Speaks fair, you know the plots, boldly proceed,
It Is ours in action, but your own the deed, I must
Shun all suspicion by my presence, look to it boy.
If thou failest now, for ever loose thy joy.

Ha, ha, master, I a Welchman, a Hangman.

A trick now on my maidenhead, I did mistrust it, Come leave the rest to me,
this Priest shall marry us incontinent


I, if I were the Welchman.
Because your father gave him light thereto.
Therefore come sirrah, we will shift clothes, meet us at Putney as my father
shall mistrust ye


I will, excusing your departure till anon,

do gentle love.
Heaven on our venture smiles, this to approve.

O it cannot choose.
Fathers are fortunate in this good news.
Go ye drones, ye do not love the hiue,
There Is honey in it, it is a sweet thing to win.

I must break the ice for ye, if I slip up to the chinne, now you will pull
me out, save me from drowning mistress


Fear it not.

I would be loath betwixt Welsh and English, to be hanged, mistress, I
cannot live on the bargain, come sir, I Will shift with them, and now I must
shift with you


I clothes, good Tutch.

And use me no worse being your man, then I used you, being mine.


O better, better.

O love, thou art a beggar, yet I am thy debtor.

Set down the heauiest load
That ever true affection underwent,
To you it is like the Anchor of your ship,
Heavy at first, but easly waied seems light,
To me, that not supports her bodies weight,
It Is heart deep in the burden, and too po^derous
Sad, heavy is that load, whose leaden poize,
Is as a sullen sorrow, too, too pressing.

Sir, I would wish you to be brief.

Dig ho this golden beach, whose glittering sands
Shows with the sun* as Dyamonds set in gold,
Fitly intombs a jewel of much worth,
Whose living beauty staind all lapidary.

She was most gentle which was worth all riches.

And this nights tempest did a cruel deed,
To take from me a vallue of such price.

Sir, though our seas kill women with their frowns us their bug-beare threats
are womanish, and so we leave them


Leaving your self and all, sometime,

Even so, no safer in our beds,
Or on the land, but under deaths black stroke,
And he that is the surest, sits in state,
Dyingly tended by the hand of Fate.

And yet me thinks death should not
Take her from me, being scarce mine own.
But newly wed, never bedded yet.
So that the Ceremony burning bright,
Himen yet has his tapers flaming red.
And the bold boastings of that good man's breath.
That all religiously made one of two.
Hardly disgesled in the freezing cold,
Little I thought the priests word being, ever,
Should find his period in so short a time.

Sir, but the gift was given ye on condition,
Till death depart, better or worse,
Me thinks this Catechizing little needs,
To humane guiding, and to you the less
Knowing what openly you do confess.

Bear w'e me master, he that pines in grief,
Lives as you sailors do, thinking at sea,
Every storm ends, when flattery flouts ye,
So to our loue-sick sorrow comes a calm,
By ease of fancies, when it is furthest,
And many times the weapon that does wound,
Is salve, and Surgeon both, to make all sound.

Are ye ready sir?

All sitted, let me take my last farewell,
I am all gelly in my tears and sighs,
Wasted by waiting her untimely loss,
So long I did consume in drops of woe,
That contrary I laugh to think it so.
He that weeps much, having no tears to spend,
Smiles out the rest, but inwardly does rend,
O God that I ventring so hard a chance,
Should loose my dice, before my hand be out,
It Is even so, in all things man intends
The loss is ours, the winnings not our friends.

For charity be briese, should the wind
Turn his beak into the southern side
Our ship would leave us, dally not with grief,
Once and no more, let sorrow rule as chief.

Then thus, and this the last,
Moll, I take leave yet on thy hersed self,
Dead self, and self slain. Moll d^cest
I am thy morning music, call thee up,
To wedded rights, I lead thee to the Church,
And there receive thee, dine with thee at noone,
Dance all the after day, bring thee at night
Into the wedding chamber, this is it.
And here I leave thee to thy virgen slumber,
Never attempted, as thy birth bestowd,
Madam beginning, take it in thy end,
So live thus die, only my married friend,
And nothing else, gone art thou to a power,
Which will with welcomes take thee, left I am
To the worlds cross, thy father who enraged,
Will bitterly revenge thy death on me,
But I will prove his martyr, se-thee Moll,
Fool that I am to say so, here is all,
Gowns, tire, all abilliments of thine,
No rag shall rest remembrant in my view.
To stir the imbers of thy dying fire,
I kiss thy key cold corse, and with this key,
Lock thee for ever up, farewell, farewell,
My mouth the Church, my voice thy
Parting knell. All cares that live and hear
This bell to toule, Christian-like bid peace unto
her soul.

Amen, be speedy mates, see ye not, look
The blewnesse of you cloud dos threaten wind,
If it rise fair, we shall be lodgd in France,
But not where please the fates.

A board, a board, heie.

Hollo, linger no time aboard, you hear
With me ho, will the rest stay? how a year?
O God that man should leave behind,
And live, the love of soul and mind.

Sir, welcome to Scillie,
Where I command my brothers friends have welcome,
But now my flattery gets you on this beach,
Where you prospectiuely see many countries,
Learn this of me, where danger shootes her string,
We in our neighbor neerenesse ought to fear:
But armed by our foresight, make bold resist
Aginst the brags of foreign enemies.

I have not seen a better glass to look in,
What country call you you, whose cliffes are as the clouds
smoke, and all shadowing mists?

Sir that is France, a fair beseeming friend,
On yonder continent stands Ireland,
On this side Britain, and on that side Garsie,
Islands besides of much hostillitie,
Which are as sunshine, sometimes splendious,
Anon disposed to altering frailty.
We that all neighbor must so strength our being,
As fearelesse we may frolic yet not seeing.

I understand ye sir.

Now let my longing have content in you,
With the report of them you lately saw,
My brother Vergir and his children,
Is he a widower still at More-clacke?

Married sir unto a London cast a way,
One whose decayed husband left to live,
(Though poorly) yet your brothers Lady.

It is his choice, and I subscribd to it,
But for his daughters sir?

Alas, in them is he unhappy,
One is haild from him by stolen practices,
The other lives as though she were not his,
A goodly gentle woman, but her own in heart,
She will be gone to, for her government
Stands upon will, as men stand on the beach,
Seeing the sea wherein they must be dround,
Yet fearelesse venture on the ruthelesse maine,
She will regardlesse of her father, marry,
And dos as most, long for the misery,
Signd to them in their cradles.

Sorry am I.
Ha, what scrambled ends heap up confusedly?
New digd and ripped up is this plot of ground,
Some Shipwreck on my life, hid to deceive
The Queen and me of our advantages.

Likely sir,
And see our sudden coming scared from hence,
In the new ending, such as pil'de this heap,
Behind them have they left their implements
Which did the theft, what think ye sir if we
Redig the ground, should we depart and leave it?
At midnight would they fetch their borrowings.

I like your purpose, i will make one.

What do you think it is sir?

No body buried, it is sure some goods,
wrackt on the sea, money or rich commodity.

Tobacco then.

It Is likely, for with us men smoke there lands thorough their nostrels, shall I
tell ye sir, it is a commodity may well be spared


Good luck a gods name, sir it is a truncke.

Lift sir.

It Is quick, it heau'd as I heau'd it.

In Faith I think so to, in heart of hope I will be all so bold, as to break
way


Ha.

If you be men and borne of that weak sex,
Which I my self profess, being woman,
Pity the living sorrow of a maid,
Buried for dead, but back again recal'd,
By the divinity of heavenly power,
Amaze not, I am creature, flesh and blood,
Not as I see me, a pale and earthly Ghost,
The story when you hear it shall make plain,
The woeful chance of life so lately slain.

I had acquaintance with this voice, my cousin.

It Is she, sir, it is Mistress Mary Virger, I know her.

My name recalles my memory,
And I am such a creature, oh,
My uncle, where am I? return again,
Death thou art wanton in a lovers pain.

Cousin I will not question the particulars,
The time calls on a present comfort,
And your life half spent,
Makes true necessity delay no longer,
Therefore come, as leisure we shall hear,
The dying story of your misery.
How ever, glad I am that such a chance,
La^ded in Scilly not in neighboring France.

If ever you used speed, be swift as lightning,
Shoot as the stars in their celestial spears,
Go and return as Paris did from Greece,
With that immatchles Hellen, tell the Priest
It must be done, he will believe your haste,
Because it was quickened with the former grant,
And promised by the knight himself.

Let me alone to make the way, follow you son.

And if I do not let me loose my prize.

Where Is the knight?

Busy with one, who comes as coniur'd up from Cupids quiver, stricken deep in
love, he is a Pothecary


I know him his mother was a.

Peace.
Him will I busily attend, go you dispatch while I detain the father, if this
prove, it is comicke pleasure in the school of love


We must be quick and sudden, come.

Slip like your Eele.

If any man know any lawful cause why these two may not marry, now speak, or
else for ever mumb, I am gone y faith


Master, remember, you ha my tongue.

yes, and thou mine, let me alone to counterseit,

Think on your oath.

Sir, if I do not, let me dye.
When I have poisoned her with this confection:
Be you cloudy killed with sorrow, it is a skin,
Will draw to purpose on the straitest glove,
But then your promised reward.

My daughter and my goods,
I have no other son but you, all is thine,
Question not the reason, why this is,
For I have many, and amongst them one
Sites all the rest, that known to thee,
Will rather hasten death, then pity it.
Go, I will bid my guests, for to this feast:
Shall she have noble poison, twill cause fear,
Use less suspicion, and my mortal hate,
Shall it self kenuell in the pride of state.

give order for the banquet,

within there.

Sir, what is your will?

To murder thee,

She dies sir, if I live, I am a Pothecary.
And can knead the paste to purpose, she is gone
Had she a thousand lives laid up in one.

Wife, I must have thee paint,
And set a gloss upon this lovely front,
To move, and to attract all eyes look as the sonmer,
Which glads all hearts with his bloud-creasing spring:
Use thy best graces, though most proudly
I will have it so, fit thee to all state,
Decked in thy choicest ornament, shine glo-worme,
In the noone of night, for at this supper.
I will have more then all our friends,
Music several, Masks and Reuellings.
In which thou shall be mounted as the bride,
And I the jolly Bridegroom, will tend on thee,
As duty and the time commands me.

Whereof comes this cost?

Examine not, but lay your best end now to it
Council with this Pothecary which I sent for
To the business, pray ye use your art:
For I am bent to this consumption,
Where Is our servant James?

Within sir, shall I call him?

No, I will wait on him, for it is my duty.
Such as would spend in feasts, are but the slaves,
To attend the pleasures of consuming knaves.
And I am one of those, he is the flower
That I must crop too in this fatal hour.
Pray ye appoint sir, she will fit you well,
My purse shall puruey what you shall determine,
What we will be wastful sometime, and our own,
We vncontrol'd may dispose of: it is our love,
Rather our destiny, hate ioin'd to this brow,
A horn that draws on death, no matter how.

Sir, in my closset serve your self with sugers, there are spices of the
purest, use them in this cost, what else you want, please you command, they
shall attend you


I want virtue in a mother, are you one?

I am a mother to an absent son,
But not to virtue wanting, wrong me not.

Wrong not yourselfe.

I never will.

You have.

Humil, O my shame and not my son.
By thee a mother is made miserable.

By me black finne? no by thy own neglect, made perfect by my true
intelligence, and how ever cunning masqu'd and don'd the vissard that so
mussled me, I knew not who was in the bed


Your eyes were witnesses.

And holy ones.

Found you the man you loo'kt for?

No, it was a subtle strain, so hudwink't truth,
I am a traitor if I did not see James your man fast in your arms.


Thou art a traitor then, if any James were there, he was no man of mine, he
was thy father


Marvel not, at leisure I will tell thee all,
His late return, the trick to place him here,
My stay, and his continuing in this house, which
Known, thou will no sin account, to keep our own.

O you prophetique Fairies, how dally you,
In concaues of our hearts, shamed at my error
I thought for ever to be from your sight,
But thinking, truth was blinded, I forethought
Some following business, thus I altered
Coming as one disguised to save her life,
Damned for that fact.

My life?

You must be poisoned at this feast,
It Is I must do the deed, o mother,
How are you blessed in my return from travel,
I that to light bring your offense, so thought,
Must be the pardon at your judgment brought.

Ah me.

No more, much secrecy calls on us,
Acquaint me with my father, plead my guilt.
We shall with cunning so unfold this business,
That our hopes shall strengthen as they perish,
No idle practice, but a serious toil,
Must bring home conquest from this long wished spoil.

If I lock up this treason, let me perish,
No sir, my breast is yet an vncorrupt and holy house,
That harbors in it, naught but honesty, and to do
This wrong to my patron, per deum atque hominem fidem.

No matter if you tell it now, it is done, finis men
Say, concludes the ancient work, and this
Though newly done, cries so be it.

If keep secrets, can be but offense, and so it is now,
May be, I loose my place, but there is a friend which
Turning calls detraction, at his heels lives hope,
Whose cunning quicknes every fault to favor.

Why true, and we shall as we may excuse it,
It Was a deed done in welch^ you understood it not.

Let me alone to buckler thee sir Henry.

Can ye ward your self?

This was a pass, it was Fencers play, and for the after venny, let me use my
skill


How ever girl, thou art my daughter now,
What thou shall loose in father, from thy own,
Thou uncontrolled shall find as much in his,
And I am he.

And I acknowledge both this in my Lord, my head, my husband, at whose bed I am
obedient, at whose board I am obedient: all in all, I am the wife of Filbon,
whose rough Welsh, has got a constering English, parse it boy, Nounes,
Pronounes, Verbs, Aduerbs, and God give thee joy


With vocative o, your father hears it.

And ablative caret, takes his daughter.

Then in pluraliter, ah has a son.

So singular and plural all is done.

If ever you were swift be nimble now, what hay married, tide this knot?


I, and the earnest blow given, fear it not.

Sir, I have set my hand to it, sealed the deed,
Pray God it cancel not in me.

Then part, and every one be silent.
There is a feast appointed at the knights.

Our marriage dinner, is it?

A gallant one, much cost is threatened. And the good old knight vnbuckles from
his back, the liberal load of honor, dos proclaim triumphs, and welcome
unto all, calls for his wife, charges her care, commands his servant James to
inuit his guests, which in a roll stands quoted, there is a new come
pothecarie, and he bribes, even grace her self in this assembly, and dos
promise his furtherance in the business, on the sudden you are mist, daggers
and devils the knight cries where is my daughter? one up ascends to search the
chambers, another runs to seek for this lost daughter. I knowing more then
much in this her absence, singled my self to warn you of his search, hither
will he come, for he fears young Filbon, missing the futers, calling for the
merchant, I answered not (being absent) in this heat: the welsh man, where is
he? none can be found, cries out he knows not what, and all his word is now, a
plott, a plott, a plott


What will ye do?

Kiss and part, till fit occasion of our next salute, Filbon farewell, my
husband think on me, I am thy treasure but thou bear the keie


I will home.

And I will see the rest, what will you sir do?

Nay I ha done enough, I am undone in my self, Hei mihi quod nullos, I must
do this deed, it was I pauca the rest, I Will home sir, I


What rests for welsh sir Robert Morgan, by God was cragge de pen, and the
hangman calls to me, da hum a, da hum a


I will be at this feast in some disguise.

I Will fit ye sir, it is here, I am tutch right, hic and vbique, every where.


Now smlles the instant, and wrathes wrinckles seem,
As smoothed curles upon a wanton stream,
My hopes grow big, and their diliuery,
Is by our midwife time brought to true birth,
I will not be a pointing stock tot'h world,
No, if this gossip rumor publish it,
It shall be christened with revenge and death,
Why when, are we grown sluggards now?
Tardy in bounty, shall we niggard it?

Be quick, carry those sweet meats in,
Bid them that in this business have to do,
That they attend this rich confectionary,
With no common care, the cost commands more love
And duty, sir we are fitting to occasion,
Would all your guests were come.

It Is the feasts duty to attend,
Thou art a willing mischief, have thou fitted
our purpose to the proof?

Have I, think you I am flacke?
Pusht on with hope of beauty and reward,
She dies had she a life more dear.
Then the last spring, sole comfort of the year.
But I will cover and prepare.

Do, do, my daughters thine, my goods, my all,
Blessed beginning to my sorrows fall.
Where Is my Lady?

Here.

That one so heavenly fair should earthly be,
Slave to misfortune, bace in luxury.

Sir for to please your eye, I am thus quaint,
Good faith I am ashamed in my self.

How and a woman.
Come blaze thy affections to immodesty,
And tho thy virtues contradict the deed,
Be Venus wanton, smile, with Helens eye,
For I will have it so.

I was not so brought up: I shall endeavor, tho my cheeks put on sensuable die
of other bashfulnesse


Sir your honorable guests are come.

Nay then you wrong me most of all,
Show not these signs of fear, all is past,
And I am dead in old remembrance,
Troth I am, forget it, as I do, say on.

Coches so fill the pauements of your door,
That scarce can passage give the footmen way,
It Is not amiss you go to meet them sir.

Why well said, spoke with courage, and I will,
Iouiall like a bridegroom, Lady you see,
They wait on us, and all attend on thee.

Worthless I am, but since it is your will,
I borrowe light from sunshine of your beams,
Who glisters so, gives splendour nothing proud,
Dark'ned by fear, half hidden in a cloud.

Nay hand in hand in faith James pardon me,
That dally with the darling of your heart.

Even so, but little thinking such a thing,
Small gain springs from that toil, where industry
Sweats in the brows of others victory.

Father be mindful, this presuming knight,
Plays with the flame, burns in the candlelight,
When we shall furnish to disfurnish him,
Of what he yet enioies.

Humil, it is cunningly contrived,
and I attend it.

For charity be swift.
Place your plate, and pile your vitriall boales
Nest upon nest, These for wines and bear,
The other tend the call of altering diet,
Sirrah, quoth he, we shall ^t I trow,

Not well, James be gone.

Sir, you shall pardon me, unless with her being not well.


Ha.

Think you I will; what leave my country, sir.
Upon a slight, a trifle, it is more dear to me.

Wast not thy promise?

Pughe.

Pughe.

Madame, lean on me, I Will bring you to your chamber.

Pre-thee daughter, faith I Am passing ill,
Your honor and the rest must bear with us,
It Is nothing usual, a queasie fit.

The mother.

No, the husband.
Good faith I am not woman sick, though woman
But earnest ill, clogged at the very stomach with
A sudden calm, I fear me it is my death.

Nurse help to bring her to her closset, do.

Excellent fit, supported by ^tod.

Plague on it, shall I be left alone, master make haste? But it is my deed, I am
author of this shift, he is where he would be now, I Am where I should be too,
but not well backed, yes now I am


Besecke ye pardon me.

I am wronged, and to this company,
I make it known by coming of thy daughter:
Is my son made her indored husband, shall I
Suffer it, call you this courtesy, it is simple craft?
Cloak't under thy denial, is this well to ingrast with us unknown, and so to
join yon^ers to heirs, he is my only all, and married unto thy daughter


Ha, Married? Nurse, how is it within?

She Is very ill sir, and I fear.

That your disguise is known, come iuggle not, call you this Nurse? O thou
dissembling boy


Are you mar^ied*

Sir I must needs confess it, he is my husband, and the reason?


No matter for the reason, I ha done, God boy ye, Conicatcht by a trick, and
so persuaded, good


I am abused.

Yes questionless you are, I have all right.

You have no wrong sir, I to affirm your word,
When I was woman, and from man I should, and now,
I trust my shape dos challendge but your promise.

I p^aid but John come kiss me now says she, I am Tutch your quondam servant
sir, thrust out to thrust them in, a lawful marriage is no mockery sir, I
counterfeited welsh, to join this constring English


What at a gaze sir William? cannot be recald.

No, no, more mischief, nay come all together, welcome.


Thank ye sir.
My son returned, surrenders to your doombe his life, for yours so lately
lost, deputed in your daughter, for she is dead sir, buried in the i will of
Scillie


Not amiss, what is the next Pagan? all the craft of this is known.


Sir had I too hearts to melt this frozen fear, would thaw with passion, the
drops distilled from our tormented brain, witnessed by these sailers that
interred her, knows how I parted with her when she did


Is mistress Mary dead?

She is.

Well, shall I have Justice for her death?

Command it sir.

To prison with him them, for she is murdered, Sir cause you knew your rapine
and your theft, tied to your runnaway legs that clog, you were uncertain of
her portion and our love, therefore to rid that fear, you rid me thus of her
(to me) most dear, my own, my only eldest of my daughters, oh


I Will be his bale.

Sir tell not me of bale, for my assurance pleads in his life, and he shall die.


You have no president for that.

Yes, remember Donningtons man, Grimes,
Who for an heir so stolen and married,
Was hanged, and the sergeant at arms
For assisting them, did loose his place,
If this were done, your theft will hardly escape.

I thought of that indeed.

Murder, murder, murder.

Ha, by whom?

By this fair counterseit of husband, here is my witness, and the deputy in
such a mischief


Nay then.

My wife is made away, poisoned here, and you that should be just are witnesses.


We follow, speak, explain this mystery.

Your wife sir.

Yes, supposd for dead, as risen from my grave,
I came to More-clacke, but a little late,
Even when the lying Priest did call her thine,
She knew it, and devised with her glove,
To repossesse me of the house she chalengd.
so honored, I slept with my own, but thought the contrary, you know what
happened, that son that so betrayed his parents thus disguisd, fearing ensuing
mischief, wrought by you to have poisoned his dear mother, it was your biding,
therefore murder, but the will of heaven bad otherwise, and yet she lives, wife
what say you


That al is so.

And I affirm it true, my shape cast off dos answer* sir in few.


Pretty in faith, no marvel you forswore my bed,
When you had substance for a property,
Sir you must have your own, who can deny it?
And I must as the story runs be mum,
Foold in my self by my own slights undone.
But what is this to my daughter, where is she?

Here sir.

Brother Vergir.

Brother George from Scillie, what is the news?

That your dear daughter dead and buried sir, by miracle was thus preserved,
which at more leisure I shall manifest: pray ye forgive her fault, come there is
some wanton blood left yet, says I, ye will I know, and wrongs past all
remedy, the world must undergo


My Toures, the dead do^ live, I am thy wife, Mary.

Or her ghoast, a shadow or a substance.

Sister I will teach ye a medecin to make a shadow substance, ly with him to
night, as I will with my Filbon, and by the morning think but what is past,
and you will reckon rightly you, hele hold you three to one my medicine's true


Me thinks I have a tickling in my blood crosses all anger, malediction hence,
hence, thou ill tempered Fear, this comicall event seasons the true applause;
since welcome is the word, in faith, I know not what to say, feign I would, and
yet a lazy lagging apprehends with doubt, but well I know not what, in me, it
lies to punish or to pardon I will be general ly laughed at, once insooth I will.
I am a widdower, gallants, and you meet at marriages, and funerals, so think
it pray ye, I abridge all complement, bar all opponents, and resolve to
favor you, you, you, and challenge from your lou, persuasion to this purpose,
since our fate makes us the worlds fond Idiot, be it so youth, and your fortune
was prodigious to it, and my best of spirit, binds up in this, all is but
thanklesse merit


Then Epilogue am I,
Imagine all the world were in your house,
And hearing this report with wondering bra ine,
I thus excuse it, Gentlemen you see how fortune
Favors in extremity, if any botcht up ill, have
Show of good, and is not in thee sequel understood,
Yet bear with all, as this old Knight has done,
Loosing a wife redoubled in a son, what you shall
Want in idugement, seeing this, think every
Act is subject to amiss, so said, so done, will
Bring to true delight, hands meeting thus,
To sign this blessed night.


