Captain, your friend's preferred, the Princess has her,
Who, I assure my self, will use her nobly;
A pretty sweet one it is indeed.

Well bred Sir,
I do deliver that upon my credit,
And of an honest stock.

It seems so Captain,
And no doubt will do well.

Thanks to your care sir;
But tell me Noble Colonel, why this habit
Of discontent is put on through the Army?
And why your valiant father, our great General,
The hand that taught to strike, the Love that lead all;
Why he, that was the father of the warte,
He that begot, and bred the Soldier,
Why he sits shaking of his Arms, like Autumn,
His Colors folded, and his Drums cased up,
The tongue of war for ever tied within us?

It must be so: Captain you are a stranger,
But of a small time here a soldier,
Yet that time shows ye a right good, and great one,
Else I could tell ye hours are strangely alterd:
The young Duke has too many eyes upon him,
Too many fears it is thought too, and to nourish those,
Maintains too many Instruments.

Turn their hearts,
Or turn their heels up, heaven: It Is strange it should be.
The old Duke loved him dearly.

He deserved it;
And were he not my Father, I durst tell ye,
The memorable hazzards he has run through
Deserved of this man too; highly deserved too;
Had they been less, they had been safe Putskie,
And sooner reached regard.

There you struck sure sir.

Did I never tell thee of a vow he made
Some years before the old Duke dyed?

I have heard ye
Speak often of that vow; but how it was,
Or to what end, I never understood yet?

I Will tell thee then: and then thou will find the reason:
The last great Muster, ('it was before ye served here,
Before the last Dukes death, whose honored bones
Now rest in peace) this young Prince had the ordering,
(To Crown his fathers hopes) of all the Army:
Who (to be short) put all his power to practice;
Fashioned, and drew 'em up: but alas, so poorly
So raggedly and loosely, so unsouldier'd,
The good Duke blushed, and called unto my father,
Who then was General: Go Archus speedily,
And chide the Boy, before the soldier find him,
Stand thou between his ignorance and them,
Fashion their bodies new to thy direction;
Then draw thou up, and show the Prince his errors.
My Sire obeyed, and did so; with all duty
Informed the Prince, and read him all directions:
This bred distaste, distaste grew up to anger,
And anger into wild words broke out thus:
Well Archus, if I live but to command here,
To be but Duke once, I shall then remember,
I shall remember truly, trust me, I shall,
And by my Fathers hand; the rest his eyes spoke.
To which my Father answered (somewhat moved too)
And with a vow he sealed it: Royal sir,
Since for my faith and fights, your Icorne and anger
Only pursue me; if I live to that day,
That day so long expected to reward me,
By his so ever noble hand you swore by,
And by the hand of Justice, never Arms more
Shall rib this body in, nor sword hang here, sir:
The Conflicts I will do you service then in,
Shall be repentant prayers. So they parted.
The time is come; and now you know the wonder.

I find a fear too, which begins to tell me,
The Duke will have but poor and slight defenses
If his hot humor reign, and not his honor:
How stand you with him, Sir?

A perdue Captain,
Full of my fathers danger.

He has raised a young man,
They say a slight young man, I know him not,
For what desert?

Believe it, a brave Gentleman,
Worth the Dukes respect, a clear sweet Gentleman,
And of a noble soul: Come, let us retire us,
And wait upon my father, who within this hour
You will find an altered man.

I am sorry for it sir.

Is It not a handsome wench?

She is well enough, Madam:
I have seen a better face, and a straiter body,
And yet she is a pretty Gentlewoman.

What think thou Petesca?

Alas, Madam, I have no skill, she has a black eye,
Which is of the least too, and the dullest water;
And when her mouth was made, for certain Madam,
Nature intended her a right good stomach.

She has a good hand.

It Is good enough to hold fast.
And strong enough to strangle the neck of a Lute.

What think ye of her color?

If it be her own
It Is good black blood: right weather-proofe
I warrant it.

What a strange pace she has got?

That Is but her breeding.

And what a manly body? me thinks she looks
As though she would pitch the Bar, or go to Buffets.

Yet her behaviour's utterly against it,
For me thinks she is too bashful.

Is that hurtful?

Even equal to too bold: either of 'em Madam
May do her injury when time shall serve her.

You discourse learnedly, call in the wench.
What envious fools are you? Is the rule general,
That women can speak handsomely of none,
But those they are bred withal?

Scarce well of those Madam,
If they believe they may outshine 'em any way:
Our natures are like oil, compound us with any thing,
Yet still we strive to swim of the top:
Suppose there were here now,
Now in this court of Mosco, a stranger Princess,
Of blood and beauty equal to your excellence,
As many eyes and services stuck on her;
What would you think?

I would think she might deserve it.

Your grace shall give me leave not to believe ye;
I know you are a woman, and so humored:
I Will tell ye Madam, I could then get more gowns on ye,
More caps and feathers, more scarfs, and more silk stockings,
With rocking you a sleep with nightly railings
Upon that woman, then if I had nine lives
I could wear out: by this hand ye'would scratch her eyes out.

Thou art deceived fool;
Now let your own eyes mock ye.
Come hither girl: hang me and she be not a handsome one.

I fear it will prove indeed so.

Did you ever serve yet
In any place of worth?

No Royal Lady.

Hold up your head; sie.

Let her alone, stand from her.

It shall be now,
Of all the blessings my poor youth has prayed for,
The greatest and the happiest to serve you;
And might my promise carry but that credit
To be believed, because I am yet a stranger,
Excellent Lady, when I fall form duty,
From all the service that my life can lend me,
May ever-lasting misery then find me.

What think ye now? I do believe, and thank ye;
And sure I shall not be so far forgetful,
To see that honest faith die unrewarded:
What must I call your name?

Alinda Madam.

Can ye sing?

A little, when my grief will give me leave, Lady.

What grief can thou have wench?
Thou art not in love?

If I be Madam, it is only with your goodness;
For yet I never saw that man I sighed for.

Of what years are you?

My mother often has told me,
That very day and hour this land was blessed
With your most happy birth, I first saluted
This worlds fair light: Nature was then so busy,
And all the Graces to adorn your goodness,
I stole into the world poor and neglected.

Something there was, when I first looked upon thee,
Made me both like and love thee: now I know it;
And you shall find that knowledge shall not hurt you:
I hope ye are a Maid?

I hope so too, Madam;
I am sure for any man: and were I otherwise,
Of all the services my hopes could point at,
I durst not touch at yours.

The great Duke, Madam.

Good morrow, sister.

A good day to your highness.

I am come to pray you use no more persuasions
For this old stubborn man: nay to command ye:
His sail is swelled too full: he is grown too insolent,
Too self-affected, proud: those poor slight services
He has done my father, and my self, has blown him
To such a pitch, he flies to stoop our favors.

I am sorry sir: I ever thonght those services
Both great and noble.

However, may it please ye
But to consider 'em a true hearts servants,
Done out of faith to you, and not selfe-fame:
But to consider royal sir, the dangers;
When you have slept secure, the midnight tempests,
That as he marched sung through his aged locks;
When you have sed at full, the wants and famines;
The fires of heaven, when you have found all temperate,
Death with his thousand doors --

I have considered;
No more: and that I will have, shall be.

For the best,
I hope all still.

What handsome wench is that there?

My servant, sir.

Prithee observe her Burris.
Is she not wondrous handsome? speak thy freedom.

She appears no less to me sir.

Of whence is she?

Her father I am told is a good gentleman,
But far off dwelling: her desire to serve me
Brought her to the Court, and here her friends have left her.

She may find better friends:
Ye are welcome fair one,
I have not seen a sweeter: By your Ladies leave:
Nay stand up sweet, we'll have no superstition:
You have got a servant; you may use him kindly,
And he may honor ye:
Good morrow sister.

Good morrow to your Grace. How the wench blushes?
How like an Angel now she looks?

At first jumpe
Jumpe into the Dukes arms? we must look to you,
Indeed we must, the next jump we are journeymen.

I see the ruin of our hopes already,
Would she were at home again, milking her fathers cows

I fear she will milk all the great Courtiers first.

This has not made ye proud?

No certain, Madam.

It was the Duke that kissed ye.

'Twas your brother,
And therefore nothing can be meant but honor.

But say he love ye?

That he may with safety:
A Princes love extends to all his subjects.

But say in more particular?

Pray fear not:
For virtues sake deliver me from doubts, Lady:
It Is the name of King, nor all his promises,
His glories, and his greatnsse stuck about me,
Can make me prove a Traitor to your service:
You are my Mistress, and my noble Master,
Your virtues my ambition, and your favor
The end of all my love, and all my fortune:
And when I fail in that faith --

I believe thee,
Come wipe your eyes; I do: take you example --

I would her eyes were out.

If the wind stand in this door,
We shall have but cold custom: some trick or other,
And speedily.

Let me alone to think on it,

Come, be you near me still.

With all my duty.

This is the heaviest march we e're trod Captain,

This was not wont to be: these honored pieces
The fiery god of war himself would smile at,
Buckl'd upon that body, were not wont thus,
Like Relics to be offered to long rust,
And heavy-ey'd oblivion brood upon 'em

There set 'em down: and glorious war fare well;
Thou child of honor and ambitious thoughts,
Begot in blood, and nursed with Kingdoms ruins;
Thou golden danger, courted by thy followers
Through fires and famines, for one title from thee,
Prodigal mankind spending all his fortunes;
A long farewell I give thee: Noble Arms,
You ribs for mighty minds, you Iron houses,
Made to defy the thunderclaps of Fortune,
Rust and consuming time must now dwell with ye:
And thou good Sword that knewst the way to conquest,
Upon whose fatal edge despair and death dwelt,
That when I shook thee thus, fore-shew'd destruction,
Sleep now from blood, and grace my Monument:
Farewell my Eagle; when thou flew'st, whole Armies
Have stoopt below thee: At Passage I have seen thee,
Ruffle the Tartars, as they fled thy fury;
And bang 'em up together, as a Tassell,
Upon the streach, a stock of fearful Pigeons.
I yet remember when the Volga curled,
The aged Volga, when he heaved his head up,
And raised his waters high, to see the ruins,
The ruins out Swords made, the bloody ruins;
Then flew this Bird of honor bravely, Gentlemen;
But these must be forgotten: so must these too,
And all that tend to Arms, by me for ever.
Take 'em you holy men; my Vow take with 'em,
Never to wear 'em more: Trophies I give 'em,
And sacred Rites of war to adorn the Temple:
There let 'em hang, to tell the world their master
Is now Devotions soldier, fit for prayer,
Why do ye hang your heads? why look you sad friends?
I am not dying yet.

Ye are indeed to us sir.

Dead to our fortunes, General.

Youll find a better,
A greater, and a stronger man to lead ye,
And to a stronger fortune: I am old friends,
Time, and the wars together make me stoop, gentlemen,
Stoop to my grave: my mind unfurnished too,
Empty and weak as I am: my poor body,
Able for nothing now but contemplation,
And that will be a task too to a Soldier:
Yet had they but encouraged me, or thought well
Of what I have done, I think I should have ventured
For one knock more, I should have made a shift yet
To have broke one staff more handsomely, and have dyed
Like a good fellow, and an honest soldier,
In the head of ye all, with my sword in my hand,
And so have made an end of all with credit.

Well, there will come an hour, when all these injuries
These secure slights --

Ha! no more of that sirrah,
Not one word more of that I charge ye.

I must speak sir.
And may that tongue forget to found your service,
That Is dumb to your abuses.

Understand fool,
That voluntary I sit down.

You are forced sir,
Forced for your safety: I too well remember
The time and cause, and I may live to curse 'em,
You made this vow, and whose un-noblenesse,
Indeed forgetfulness of good --

No more,
As thou art mine no more.

Whose doubts and envies --
But the devil will have his due.

Good yentle Colonel.

And though disgraces, and contempt of honor
Reign now, the wheel must turn again.

Peace sirrah,
Your tongue's too saucy: do ye stare upon me?
Down with that heart, down suddenly, down with it,
Down with that disobedience; tie that tongue up.

Tongue?

Do not provoke me to forget my vow, sirrah,
And draw that fatal sword again in anger.

For heavens sake, Colonel.

Do not let me doubt
Whose Son thou art, because thou can not suffer:
Do not play with mine anger; if thou do,
By all the loyalty my heart holds --

I have done sir,
'Pray pardon me.

I pray ye be worthy of it:
Beshrew your heart, you have vexed me.

I am sorry sir.

Go to, no more of this: be true and honest,
I know ye are man enough, mold it to just ends,
And let not my disgraces; then I am miserable,
When I have nothing left me but thy angers.

And't please ye sir, the Duke.

Now, what is all this?
The meaning of this ceremonious Emblem?

Your Grace should first remember --

There Is his nature.

I do, and shall remember still that injury,
That at the Muster, where it pleased your greatness
To laugh at my poor souldiership, to skorne it;
And more to make me seem ridiculous,
Took from my hands my charge.

O think not so Sir.

And in my Fathers sight.

Heaven be my witness
I did no more, (and that with modesty,
With love and faith to you) then was my warrant,
And from your Father sealed: nor durst that rudeness
And impudence of scorn fall from my haviour,
I ever yet knew duty.

We shall teach ye:
I well remember too, upon some words I told ye,
Then at that time, some angry words ye answered,
If ever I were Duke, you were no soldier.
You have kept your word, and so it shall be to you.
From henceforth I dismiss ye; take your ease sir.

I humbly thank your Grace; this wasted body,
Beaten and bruised with Arms, dried up with troubles,
Is good for nothing else but quiet, now sir,
And holy prayers; in which, when I forget
To thank high heaven for all your bounteous favors,
May that be deaf, and my Petitions perish.

What a smooth humble cloak he has cased his pride in?
And how he has pulled his claws in? there is no trusting --

Speak for the best.

Believe I shall do ever.

To make ye understand we feel not yet
Such dearth of valor, and experience,
Such a declining age of doing spirits,
That all should be confined within your Excellence,
And you, or none be honored, take Boroskie
The place he has commanded, lead the Soldier;
A little time will bring thee to his honor,
Which has been nothing, but the worlds opinion,
The soldiers fondness, and a little fortune,
Which I believe his sword had the least share in.

O that I durst but answer now.

Good Colonel.

My heart will break else: Royal sir, I know not
What you esteem men's lives, whose hourly labors,
And loss of blood, consumptions in your service,
Whose bodies are accquainted with more miseries,
And all to keep you safe, then Dogs or slaves are.
His sword the least share gained?

You will not fight with me?

No Sir, I dare not,
You are my Prince: but I dare speak to ye,
And dare speak truth, which none of their ambitions,
That be informers to you dare once think of;
Yet truth will now but anger ye: I am sorry for it.
And so I take my leave.

Even when you please Sir.

Sirrah, see me no more.

And so may you too:
You have a house in the Country, keep you there Sir,
And when you have rull'd your self, teach your son manners.
For this time I forgive him.

Heaven forgive all:
And to your Grace a happy and long rule here.
And you Lord General, may your fights be prosperous.
In all your course, may Fame and Fortune Court you.
Fight for your Country, and your Princes safety;
Boldly, and bravely face your enemy,
And when you strike, strike with that killing virtue,
As if a general plague had seized before ye;
Danger, and doubt, and labor cast behind ye,
And then come home an old and noble story.

A little comfort sir.

As little as may be:
Farewell, you know your limit.

Alas, brave gentleman.

I do, and will observe it suddenly:
My grave; I, that is my limit: it is no new thing,
Nor that can make me start, or tremble at it,
To buckle with that old grim soldier now:
I have seen him in his sowrest shapes and dreadfull'st;
I, and I thank my honesty, have stood him:
That audits cast: Farewell my honest soldiers,
Give me your hands. Farewell, farewell good Ancient,
A stout man, and a true, thou art come in sorrow.
Blessings upon your swords, may they never fail ye.
You do but change a man: your fortunes constant;
That by your ancient valors is tied fast still:
Be valiant still and good; and when ye fight next,
When flame and fury make but one face of horror,
When the great rest of all your honor's up,
When you would think a spell to shake the enemy,
Remember me: my prayers shall be with ye.
So once again farewell.

Let Us wait upon ye.

No, no, it must not be: I have now left me
A single fortune to my self, no more,
Which needs no train, nor complement: good Captain,
You are an honest and a sober gentleman,
And one I think has loved me.

I am sure on it.

Look to my boy he is grown too headstrong for me,
And if they think him fit to carry Arms still,
His life is theirs: I have a house in the Country,
And when your better hours will give ye liberty
See me: you shall be welcome. Fortune to ye.

I Will cry no more, that will do him no good,
And 'twill but make me dry, and I have no money:
I Will fight no more, and that will do them harm;
And if I can do that I care not for money:
I could have cursed reasonable well, and I have had the luck too
To have 'em hit sometimes: Whosoever thou art,
That like a devil did possess the Duke
With these malicious thoughts; mark what I say to thee,
A plague upon thee, that is but the Preamble.

O take the pox too:

They Will cure one another:
I must have none but kills, and those kill stinking:
Or look ye, let the single pox possess them,
Or pox upon pox.

That Is but ill in the Arms sir,

It Is worse in the legs, I would not wish it else:
And may those grow to scabs as big as Mole-hils,
And twice a day, the devil with a Currie-combe
Scratch 'em, and scrub em. I warrent him he has 'em.

May he be ever lowzie.

That Is a pleasure,
The Beggars Leacherie: sometime the Soldiers:
May he be ever lazy, stink where he stands,
And Maggots breed in's brains.

I marry sir,
May he fall mad in love with his Grandmother,
And kissing her, may her teeth drop into his mouth,
And one fall cross his throat, then let him gargell.

Now, what is the matter?

Where Is the Duke pray gentlemen?

Keep on your way, you cannot miss.

I thank ye.

If he be married, may he dream he is Cuckol'd,
And when he wakes, believe, and swear he saw it:
Sue a divorce, and after find her honest:
Then in a pleasant Pigsty with his own garters,
And a fine running knot, ride to the devil.

If these would do --

I Will never trust my mind more,
If all these fail.

What shall we do now Captain?
For by this honest hand I Will be torn a pieces,
Unless my old General go, or some that love him,
And love us equal too, before I fight more:
I can make a shoe yet, and draw it on too,
If I like the leg well.

Fight? it is likely.
No, there Will be the sport boys, when there is need on's.
They think the other Crown will do, will carry us,
And the brave golden coat of Captain Cankro

What a noise his very name carries?
It Is gun enough to fright a nation,
He need no soldiers: if he do, for my part,
I promise ye, he is like to seek 'em: so I think you think too,
And all the Army: No honest brave old Archas,
We cannot so soon leave thy memory,
So soon forget thy goodness: he that does,
The scandal, and the scumme of Arms be counted.

You much rejoice me: now you have hit my meaning:
I durst not press ye, till I found your spirits.
Continue thus.

I Will go and tell the Duke on it.


No, no, he will find it soon enough, and fear it,
When once occasion comes: Another Packet.
From whence friend come ye?

From the borders sir.

What news sir, I beseech ye?

Fire and sword gentlemen;
The Tartar's up, and with a mighty force,
Comes forward like a tempest, all before him
Burning and killing.

Brave boys; brave news boys.

Either we must have present help --

Still braver.

Where lies the Duke?

He Is there.

'Save ye gentlemen.

We are safe enough, I warrant thee:
Now the time's come.

I now it is come indeed, and now stand firm boys,
And let 'em burn on merrily.

This City would make a marvelous fine bone-fire:
It Is old dry timber, and such wood has no fellow.

Here will be trim piping anon and whining,
Like so many Pigs in a storm,
When they hear the news once,

Here Is one has heard it already,
Room for the General.

Say I am fallen exceeding sick oth' sudden,
And am not like to live.

If ye go on Sir,
For they will kill ye certainly: they look for ye.

I see your Lordships bound, take a suppository,
It Is I Sir; a poor cast Flag of yours. The foolish Tartars
They burn and kill, and 't like your honor, kill us,
Kill with Guns, with Guns my Lord, with Guns Sir.
What says your Lordship to a chick in sorrel sops?

Go, go thy ways old true-peny;
Thou have but one fault, Thou art even too valiant.
Come toth' Army gentlemen, and let us make them acquainted.

Away, we are for ye.

Why whither run ye fools, will ye leave my Lady?

The Tartar comes, the Tartar comes.

Why let him,
I had thought you had feared no men: upon my conscience
You have tried their strengths already: stay for shame.

Shift for thy self Alinda.

Beauty bless ye:
Into what Grooms Feather-bed will ye creep now?
And there mistake the enemy: sweet youths ye are,
And of a constant courage: are you afraid of foyning?

O my good wench, what shall become of us?
The Posts come hourly in, and bring new danger;
The Enemy is past the Volga, and bears hither
With all the blond and cruelty he carries,
My brother now will find his fault.

I doubt me.
Somewhat too late to Madam: but pray fear not,
All will be well I hope. Sweet Madam shake not.

How came thou by this spirit? our Sex tremble.

I am not unacquainted with these dangers:
And you shall know my truth; for e're you perish,
A hundred swords shall pass through me: it is but dying,
And Madam we must do it: the manner's all:
You have a Princely Birth, take Princely thoughts to ye,
And take my council too; go presently,
With all the haste ye have, (I will attend ye)
With all the possible speed, to old Lord Archas,
He honors ye: with all your art persuade him,
('I will be a dismal time else) woo him hither,
But hither Madam; make him see the danger;
For your new General looks like an Ass;
There Is nothing in his face but loss.

I Will do it,
And thank thee sweet Alinda: O my Jewel.
How much I am bound to love thee: by this hand wench
If thou were a man --

I would I were to fight for ye.
But haste dear Madam.

I need no spurs Alinda.

The Lord General sick now? is this a time
For men to creep into their beds? what is become Post
Of my Lieutenant?

Beaten, and 't please your Grace.
And all his forces sparkled.

That Is but cold news.
How now, what good news? are the soldiers ready?

Yes, sir, but fight they will not, nor stir from that place
They stand in now, unless they have Lord Archas
To lead 'em out: they rail upon this General,
And sing songs of him, scurvy songs to worse tunes:
And much they spare not you sir: here they swear
They Will stand and see the City burnt, and dance about it,
Unless Lord Archas come before they fight for it.
It must be so sir.

I could wish it so too:
And to that end I have sent Lord Burris to him;
But all I fear will fail: we must dye gentlemen,
And one stroke we will have for it.
What bringst thou Burris?

That I am loath to tell: he will not come sir.
I found him at his prayers: there he tells me,
The enemy shall take him, sit for heaven:
I urged to him all our dangers, his own worthes,
The Countries ruin: nay, I kneeld and prayed him;
I se shook his head, let fall a tear, and pointed
Thus with his finger to the ground; a grave
I think he meant; and this was all he answered.
Your Grace was much too blame.
Where Is the new General?

He is sick poor man

He Is a poor man indeed Sir:
Your Grace must needs go to the soldier.

They have sent me word
They will not stir: they rail at me,
And all the spite they have --
What shout is that there?
Is the enemy come so near?

I have brought him Sir;
At length I have wooed him thus far.

Happy sister;
O blessed woman!

Use him nobly brother;
You never had more need: And gentlemen,
All the best powers ye have, to tongues turn presently,
To winning and persuading tongues: all my art,
Only to bring him hither, I have uttered;
Let it be yours to arm him: And good my Lord,
Though I exceed the limit you allowed me,
Which was the happiness to bring ye hither,
And not to urge ye farther: yet, see your Country,
Out of your own sweet spirit now behold it:
Turn round, and look upon the miseries,
Of every side the seares: o see the dangers;
We find 'em soonest, therefore hear me first sir.

Next hear your Prince;
You have said you loved him Archas,
And thought your life too little for his service:
Think not your vow to great now, now the time is,
And now you are brought toth'test, touch right now soldier,
Now show the manly pureness of thy mettle:
Now if thou be that valued man, that virtue,
That great obedience teaching all, now stand it.
What I have said forget, my youth was hasty,
And what you laid your self forgive, you were angry.
If men could live without their faults, they were gods Archas.
He weeps, and holds his hands up: to him Burris.

You have showed the Prince his faults:
And like a good Surgeon you have laid
Tha^ to 'em makes 'em smart: he feels it,
Let 'em not sester now sir: your own honor,
The bounty of that mind, and your allegiance,
Against which I take it, heaven gives no command sir,
Nor seals no vow, can better teach ye now
What ye have to do, then I, or this necessity:
Only this little's left: would ye do nobly,
And in the eye of honor truly triumph?
Conquer that mind first, and then men are nothing.

Last, a poor virgin kneels: for loves sake General,
If ever you have loved; for her sake, sir,
For your own honesty, which is a virgin,
Look up, and pity us, be bold and fortunate.
You are a Knight, a good, and noble soldier,
And when your spurs were given ye, your sword buckl'd,
Then were you sworn for virtues cause, for beauties,
For chastity to strike: strike now, they suffer:
Now draw your sword, or else you are recreant,
Only a Knight in the heels, in the heart a Coward:
Your first vow honor made, your last but anger.

How like my virtuous wife this thing looks, speaks too?
So would she chide my dullness: fair one I thank ye:
My gracious sir, your pardon, next your hand:
Madam, your favor, and your prayers: gentlemen,
Your wishes and your loves; and pretty sweet one,
A favor for your Soldier.

Give him this wench.

Thus do I tie on victory.

My Armor,
My horse, my sword, my tough staff, and my fortune,
And Olin now I come to shake thy glory.

Go brave and prosperous, our loves go with thee.

Full of thy virtue, and our prayers attend thee.

Laden with victory, and we to honor thee.

Come home the son of honor,
And I Will serve ye.

No news of Archas yet?

But now, and't please ye
A Post came in, Letters he brought none with him,
But this delivered: He saw the Armies join,
The game of blood begun, and by our General,
Who never was acquainted, but with Conquest,
So bravely fought, he saw the Tartars shaken,
And there he said he left 'em.

Where Is Boroskie?

He is up again, and't please ye.

Sir, me thinks
This news should make ye lightsome, bring joy to ye,
It strikes our hearts with general comfort.
Gone? What should this mean, so suddenly?
He Is well?

We see no other.

Would the rest were well too,
That put these starts into him.

I Will go after him.

'T will not be fit Sir: h'as some secret in him
He would not be disturbed in: know you any thing
Has crossed him since the General went?

Not any.
If there had been, I am sure I should have found it;
Only I have heard him often complain for money;
Money he says he wants.

It may be that then.

To him that has so many ways to raise it,
And those to honest, it cannot be.

He comes back,
And Lord Boroskie with him.

There the game goes,
I fear some new thing hatching.

Come hither Burris,
Go see my Sister, and commend me to her,
And to my little Mistrisse give this token;
Tell her I Will see her shortly.

Yes, I shall sir.

Wait you without: I would yet try him further.

'Twill not be much amiss: has your grace heard yet
Of what he has done in the field?

A Post but now
Came in, who saw 'em join, and 'has delivered,
The enemy gave ground before he parted.

It Is well.

Come, speak thy mind man: it is not for fighting
And noise of War I keep thee in my bosom;
Thy ends are nearer to me; from my childhood
Thou brought me up: and like another nature,
Made good all my necessities: speak boldly.

Sir, what I utter, will be thought but envy
Though I intend, high heaven knows, but your honor,
When vain and empty people shall proclaim me --
Good sir excuse me.

Do you fear me for your enemy?
Speak on your duty.

Then I must, and dare sir.
When he comes home, take heed the Court receive him not,
Take heed he meet not with their loves, and praises,
That glass will show him ten times greater Sir,
And make him strive to make good that proportion,
Then ere his fortune bred him, he is honorable,
At least I strive to understand him so,
And of a nature, if not this way poisoned,
Perfect enough, easy, and sweet, but those are soon seduced sir;
He Is a great man, and what that pill may work,
Prepared by general voices of the people,
Is the end of all my council: only this sir,
Let him retire a while, there is more hangs by it
Then you know yet: there if he stand a while well,
But till the Soldier cool, who, for their service
You must pay now most liberally, most freely,
And shewrd your self into 'em; it is the bounty
They follow with their loves, and not the bravery.

But where is the money? how now?

Sir the Collonell,
Son to the Lord Archas, with most happy news
Of the Tartars overthrow, without here
Attends your graces pleasure.

Be not seen sir,
He Is a bold fellow, let me stand his thunders,
Toth' Court he must not come: no blessing here sir,
No face of favor, if you love your honor.

Do what you think is meetest; I Will retire sir.


Conduct him in sir -- welcome noble Collonell,

That Is much from your Lordship: pray where is the Duke?

We hear you have beat the Tartar.

Is he busy sir?

Have ye taken Olin yet?

I would feign speak with him,

How many men have ye lost?

Does he lie this way?

I am sure you fought it bravely.

I must see him.

You cannot yet, ye must not, what is your Commission.

No gentleman of the Chamber here?

Why pray ye sir?
Am not I fit to entertain your business?

I think you are not sir; I am sure ye shall not.
I bring no tales, nor flatteries: In my tongue sir,
I carry no fork'd stings.

You keep your bluntness.

You are deceived: it keeps me: I had felt else
Some of your plagues ere this: but good sir trifle not,
I have business to the Duke.

He Is not well sir,
And cannot now be spoke withal.

Not well sir?
How would he have been, if we had lost? not well sir?
I bring him news to make him well: his enemy
That would have burnt his City here, and your house too,
Your brave gilt house, my Lord, your honors hangings,
Where all your Ancestors, and all their battles,
Their silk and golden battles are descipher'd:
That would not only have abused your buildings,
Your goodly buildings sir, and have drnnke dry your butteries,
Purlcin'd your Lordships plate, the Duke bestowed on you,
For turning hansomely o'th toe, and trimmed your Virgins,
Trimmed 'em of a new cut, and't like your Lordship,
It Is ten to one, your wife too, and the curse is
You had had no remedy against these Rascals,
No Law, and't like your honor; would have killed you too
And roasted ye, and eaten ye, ere this time:
Notable knaves my Lord, unruly Rascals:
These youths have we tide up, put muzzels on 'em,
And paired their nails, that honest civil Gentlemen,
And such most noble persons as your self is,
May live in peace, and rule the land with a twine thread.
These news I bring,

And were they thus delivered ye?

My Lord, I am no penman, nor no Orator,
My tongue was never oiled with Here and't like ye,
There I beseech ye, weigh, I am a soldier,
And truth I covet only, no fine terms sir;
I come not to stand treating here; my business
Is with the Duke, and of such general blessing --

You have overthrown the enemy, we know it,
And we rejoice in it; ye have done like honest subjects,
You have done handsomely and well.

But well sir?
But handsomely and well? what are we juglers?
I Will do all that in cutting up a Capon.
But handsomely and well? does your Lordship take us
For the Dukes Tumblers? we have done bravely sir,
Ventured our lives like men.

Then bravely be it.

And for as brave rewards we look, and graces,
We have sweat and bled for it sir.

And ye may have it,
If you will stay the giving. Men that thank themselves first,
For any good they do, take off the luster,
And blot the benefit.

Are these the welcomes,
The Bells that ring out our rewards? pray heartily,
Early and late, there may be no more enemies:
Do my good Lord, pray seriously, and sigh too,
For if there be --

They must be met, and fought with.

By whom? by you? they must be met and flattererd.
Why, what a devil aild ye to do these things?
With what assurance dare ye mock men thus?
You have but single lives, and those I take it
A Sword may find too: why do ye dam the Duke up?
And choke that course of love that like a River
Should fill our empty veins again with comforts?
But it ye use these knick knacks,
This fast and loose, with faithful men and honest,
You Will be the first will find it.

You are too untemperate.

Better be so, and these too, then unthankful:
Pray use this old man so, and then we are paid all.
The Duke thanks ye for your service, and the Court thanks ye,
And wonderful desirous they are to see ye;
Pray heaven we have room enough to march for May-games,
Pageants, and bonfires for your welcome home Sir;
Here your most noble friend the Lord Boroskey,
A Gentleman too tender of your credit,
And ever in the Dukes ear, for your good Sir,
Crazie and sickly, yet to be your servant,
Has leapt into the open air to meet ye.

The best is your words wound not, you are welcome home Sir.
Heartily welcome home, and for your service,
The noble overthrow you gave the Enemy,
The Duke salutes ye too with all his thanks Sir.

Sure they will now regard us.

There Is a reason:
But by the changing of the Colonels countenance,
The rolling of his eyes like angry billows;
I fear the wind's not down yet, Ancient.

Is the Duke well Sir?

Not much unhealthy,
Only a little grudging of an ague,
Which cannot last: he has heard, which makes him fearful,
And loath as yet to give your worth due welcome,
The sickness has been somewhat hot in the Army,
Which happily may prove more doubt, then danger,
And more his fear then fate: yet howsoever,
An honest care --

Ye say right, and it shall be;
For though upon my life it is but a rumor,
A mere opinion, without faith or fear in it;
For Sir, I thank heaven, we never stood more healthy,
Never more high and lusty; yet to satisfy,
We cannot be too curious or too careful
Of what concerns his state, we will draw away Sir,
And lodge at further distance, and less danger.

It will be well.

It will be very scurvy.
I smell it out, it stinks abominably,
Stir it no more.

The Duke Sir would have you too,
For a short day or two, retire to your own house,
Whither himself will come to visit ye,
And give ye thanks.

I shall attend his pleasure.

A trick, a lousy trick: so hoa, a trick boys.

How now, what is that?

I thought I had found a Hare Sir,
But it is a Fox, an old Fox, shall we hunt him?

No more such words.

The soldier's grown too saucy,
You must tie him straiter up.

I do my best Sir;
But men of freeborn minds sometimes will fly out.

May not we see the Duke?

Not at this time Gentlemen,
Your General knows the cause.

We have no plague Sir,
Unless it be in our pay, nor no pox neither;
Or if we had, I hope that good old Courtier
Will not deny us place there.

Certain my Lord,
Considering what we are and what we have done;
If not, what need ye may have, 'twould be better,
A great deal nobler, and taste honester
To use us with more sweetness; men that dig
And lash away their lives at the Carts tail,
Double our comforts; meat, and their Masters thanks too,
When they work well, they have: Men of our quality,
When they do well, and venture for it with valor,
Fight hard, lie hard, feed hard, when they come home Sir,
And know these are deserving things, things worthy,
Can you then blame 'em if their minds a little
Be stirred with glory? it is a pride becomes 'em,
A little seasoned with ambition,
To be respected, reckoned well, and honored
For what they have don: when to come home thus poorly,
And met with such unjointed joy, so looked on,
As if we had done no more but dressed a horse well;
So entertained, as if I thank ye Gentlemen,
Take that to drink, had power to please a soldier?
Where be the shouts, the bells rung out, the people?
The Prince himself?

Peace: I perceive your eye Sir
Is fixed upon this Captain for his freedom,
And happily you find his tongue too forward;
As I am Master of the place, I carry,
It Is fit I think so too, but were I this man,
No stronger tie upon me, then the truth
And tongue to tell it, I should speak as he does,
And think with modesty enough, such Saints
That daily thrust their loves and lives through hazards,
And fearelesse for their Countries peace, march hourly
Through all the doors of death, and know the darkest,
Should better be canonized for their service:
What labor would these men neglect, what danger
Where honor is, though seated in a billow,
Rising as high as heaven, would not these soldiers,
Like to so many Sea-gods charge up to it?
Do you see these swords? times Sith was never so sharp Sir;
Nor ever at one harvest mowed such handfuls:
Thoughts never so sudden, nor belief so sure,
When they are drawn, and were it not sometimes,
I swim upon their angers to allay 'em,
And like a calm depresse their fell intentions;
They are so deadly sure, nature would suffer --
And whose are all these glories? why, their Princes,
Their Countries, and their Friends? Alas, of all these,
And all the happy ends they bring, the blessings,
They only share the labors, a little joy then,
And outside of a welcome, at an upshot
Would not have done amiss Sir; But howsoever
Between me and my duty, no crack Sir
Shall dare appear: I hope by my example
No discontent in them: without doubt Gentlemen,
The Duke will both look suddenly and truly
On your deserts: Methinks 't were good they were paid Sir.

They shall be immediately; I stay for money;
And any favor else --.

We are all bound to ye;
And so I take my leave Sir; when the Duke pleases
To make me worthy of his eyes --

Which will be suddenly,
I know his good thoughts to ye.

With all duty,
And all humility, I shall attend Sir.

Once more you are welcome home: these shall be satisfied.


Be sure we be: and hansomely.

Wait you on me sir.

And honestly: no juggling.

Will ye come sir?

Pray do not doubt.

We are no Boys.


Well sir.

Here Is money from the Duke, and 't please your Lordship.

It Is well.

How sour the Soldiers look?

Is It told?

Yes: and for every company a double pay,
And the Dukes love to all.

That Is worth a ducket.

You that be Officers, see it discharged then,
Why do not ye take it up?

It Is too heavy:
'Body of me, I have strained mine arm.

Do ye scorn it?

Has your Lordship any dice about ye? sit round Gentlemen.
And come on seven for my share.

Do you think sir,
This is the end we fight? can this dirt draw us
To such a stupid tamenesse, that our service
Neglected, and looked lamely on, and skewd at
With a few honorable words, and this, is righted?
Have not we eyes and ears, to hear and see Sir,
And minds to understand the slights we carry?
I come home old, and full of hurts, men look on me
As if I had got 'em from a whore, and shun me;
I tell my griefs, and fear my wants, I am answered,
Alas it is pity I pray dine with me on Sunday:
These are the sores we are sick of, the minds malladies,
And can this cure 'em? you should have used us nobly,
And for our doing well, as well proclaimed us,
To the worlds eye, have showed and fainted us,
Then ye had paid us bravely: then we had shined sir,
Not in this gilded stuff but in our glory:
You may take back your money.

This I feared still.

Consider better Gentlemen.

Thank your Lordship:
And now I Will put on my considering cap:
My Lord, that I am no Courtier, you may guess it
By having no suit to you for this money:
For though I want, I want not this, nor shall not,
Whilst you want that civility to rank it
With those rights we expected; money grows sir,
And men must gather it, all is not put in one purse.
And that I am no Carter, I could never whistle yet:
But that I am a Soldier, and a Gentleman,
And a fine Gentleman, and't like your honor,
And most pleasant companion: all you that are witty,
Come list to my ditty: come set in boys,
With your Lordships patience.
How do you like my Song, my Lord?

Even as I like your self, but 'twould be a great deal better,
You would prove a great deal wifer, and take this money,
In your own phrase I speak now sir, and it is very well
You have learned to sing; for since you prove so liberal, To refuse such
means as this, maintain your voice still
Twill prove your best friend.

It Is a singing age sir,
A merry moon here now: I Will follow it:
Fidling, and fooling now, gains more then fighting.

What is it you blench at? what would you ask? speak freely.


And so we dare: a triumph for the General.

And then an honor special to his virtue.

That we may be preferred that have served for it,
And crammed up into favor like the worshipful,
At least upon the Cities charge made drunk
For one whole year; we have done 'em ten years service;
That we may enjoy our lechery without grudging,
And mine, or thine be nothing, all things equal,
And catch as catch may be proclaimed: that when we borrow,
And have no will to pay again, no Law
Lay hold upon us, nor no, Court control us.

Some of these may come to pass; the Duke may do 'em,
And no doubt will: the General will find too,
And so will you, if you but stay with patience: I have no power.

Nor will: come fellow Soldiers.

Pray be not so distrustful.

There are ways yet,
And honest ways; we are not brought up Starues.

If your Lordship
Have any silk stockings, that have holes i'th'heeles,
Or ever an honorable Cassock that wants buttons,
I could have cured such malladies: your Lordships custom
And my good Ladies, if the bones want setting
In her old bodies --

This is disobedience.

Eight pence a day, and hard Eggs.

Troop off Gentlemen,
Some Coin we have, whilst this lasts, or our credits,
We Will never sell our Generals worth for sixpence.
Ye are beholding to us.

Fare ye well Sir,
And buy a pipe with that: do ye see this skarfe sir?
By this hand I Will cry Brooms in it, birchen Brooms sir,
Before I eat one bit from your benevolence.
Now to our old occupations again.
By your leave Lord.

You will bite when ye are sharper; take up the money.
This love I must remove, this fondnes to him,
This tenderness of heart; I have lost my way else.
There is no sending man, they will not take it,
They are yet too full of pillage,
They Will dance for it ere't belong:
Come, bring it after.

How now, refused their money?

Very bravely,
And stand upon such terms it is terrible.

Where Is Archas?

He Is retired Sir, to his house,
According to your pleasure, full of duty
To outward show: but what within --

Refuse it?

Most confidently: it is not your revenewes
Can feed them sir, and yet they have found a General
That knows no ebb of bounty: there they eat Sir,
And loath your invitations.

It Is not possible,
He Is poor as they.

You Will find it otherwise.
Pray make your journey thither presently,
And as ye go I Will open ye a wonder.
Good sir this morning.

Follow me, I Will do it.

But do you think my brother loves her.

Certain Madam,
He speaks much of her, and sometimes with wonder,
Often wishes she were nobler borne.

Do you think him honest?

Your Grace is nearer to his heart, then I am,
Upon my life I hold him so.

It Is a poor wench,
I would not have her wronged: methinks my Brother --
But I must not give rules to his affections;
Yet if he weigh her worth --

You need not fear Madam.

I hope I shall not: Lord Burris
I love her well; I know not, there is something
Makes me bestow more then a care upon her:
I do not like that ring, from him to her;
I mean to women of her way, such tokens
Rather appear as baits, then royal bounties:
I would not have it so.

You will not find it,
Upon my troth I think his most ambition
Is but to let the world know 'has a hansome Mistress:
Will your Grace command me any service to him?

Remember all my duty.

Blessings crown ye:
What Is your will Lady?

Anything that is honest;
And if you think it sits so poor a service,
Clad in a ragged virtue, may reach him,
I do beseech your Lordship speak it humbly.

Fair one I will: in the best phrase I have too,
And so I kiss your hand

Your Lordships servant.

Come hither wench, what art thou doing with that Ring.

I am looking on the posie, Madam.

What is it?

The Jewels set within.

But where the joy wench,
When that invisible Jewel's lost? why do thou smile so?
What unhappy meaning have thou?

Nothing Madam,
But only thinking what strange spells these Rings have,
And how they work with some.

I fear with you too.

This could not cost above a Crown.

'Twill cost you
The shaving of your crown, if not the washing.

But he that sent it, makes the virtue greater.

I and the vice too Madam: goodness bless me:
How sit it is for my finger.

No doubt you will find too
A finger fit for you.

Sirrah, Petesca,
What will thou give me for the good that follows this?
But thou have Rings enough, thou art provided:
Heigh ho, what must I do now?

You Will be taught that,
The easiest part that e're you learned, I warrant you.

Ay me, ay me.

You will divide too, shortly,
Your voice comes finely forward.

Come hither wanton,
Thou art not surely as thou say.

I would not:
But sure there is a witchcraft in this Ring, Lady,
Lord how my heart leaps.

'Twill go pit a pat shortly.

And now methinks a thousand of the Dukes shapes.

Will no less serve ye?

In ten thousand smiles.

Heaven bless the wench.

With eyes that will not be denide to enter;
And such soft sweet embraces; take It from me,
I am undone else Madam: I 'm lost else.

What ailes the girl?

How suddenly I 'm altered?
And grown my self again? do not you feel it?

Wear that, and I Will wear this:
I Will try the strengthon't.

How cold my blood grows now?
Here Is sacred virtue:
When I leave to honor this,
Every hour to pay a kiss,
When each morning I arise,
Or I forget a sacrifice:
When this figure in ray faith,
And the pureness that it has,
I pursue not with my will,
Nearer to arrive at still:
When I lose, or change this Jewel,
I lie me faith, and heaven be cruel.

You have half confirmed me,
Keep but that way sure,
And what this charm can do, let me endure.

Carry your self discreetly, it concerns me,
The Duke's come in, none of your froward passions,
Nor no distastes to any: Prithee Theodor,
By my life, boy, 'twill mine me.

I have done Sir,
So there be no foul play he brings along with him.

What Is that to you?
Let him bring what please him,
And whom, and how.

So they mean well --

'Is't sit you be a Judge sirrah,

It Is sfit I feel Sir.

Get a banquet ready,
And trim your selves up hansomly.

To what end?
Do you mean to make 'em whores?
Hang up a sign then,
And set 'em out to Livery.

Whose son art thou?

Yours Sir, I hope: but not of yonr disgraces.

Full twenty thousand men I have commanded,
And all their minds with this, calmed all their angers;
And shall a boy of mine own breed too, of mine own blood,
One crooked stick --

Pray take your way, and thrive in it,
I Will quit your house; if taint or black dishonor
Light on ye, it is your own, I have no share in it.
Yet if it do fall out so, as I fear it,
And partly find it too --

Have thou no reverence?
No duty in thee?

This shall show I obey ye:
I dare not stay: I would have showed my love too,
And that you ask as duty, with my life sir,
Had you but thought me worthy of your hazzards,
Which heaven preserve ye from, and keep the Duke too:
And there is an end of my wishes, God be with ye.

Stubborn, yet full of that we all love, honesty,
Lord Burris, where is the Duke?

In the great chamber Sir,
And there stays till he see you, ye 'have a fine house here.

A poor contented lodge, unsit for his presence,
Yet all the joy it has.

I hope a great one, and for your good, brave Sir.

I thank ye Lord:
And now my service to the Duke.

I Will wait on ye.

May this be credited?

Disgrace me else,
And never more with favor look upon me.

It seems impossible.

It cannot choose Sir,
Till your own eyes behold it; but that it is so,
And that by this means the too haughty soldier
Has been so crammed and fed, he cares not for ye;
Believe, or let me perish: Let your eyes
As you observe the house, but where I point it,
Make stay, and take a view, and then you have found it.

I Will follow your direction: welcome Archas,
You are welcome home brave Lord, we are come to visit ye,
And thank ye for your service.

'Twas so poor Sir,
In true respect of what I owe your Highness,
It merits nothing.

Are these fair ones yours Lord?

Their Mother made me think so Sir.

Stand up Ladies:
Beshrew my heart they are fair ones; methinks fitter
The luster of the Court, then thus live darkened:
I would see your house Lord Archas, it appears to me,
A hansome pile.

It Is neat but no great structure;
I Will be your Graces guide, give me the keys there.

Lead on, we will follow ye: begin with the Gallery,
I think that is one.

It Is so, and't please ye Sir,
The rest above are lodgings all.

Go on Sir.

The Duke gone thither, do you say?

Yes marry do I,
And all the ducklings too: but what the'l do there. --

I hope they will crown his service.

With a Custard;
This is no weather for rewards; they crown his service?
Rather, they go to shave his crown: I was rated,
As if I had been a dog had worried sheep, out of doors,
For making but a doubt.

They must now grace him.

Mark but the end.

I am sure they should reward him, they cannot want him.

They that want honesty, want any thing.

The Duke is so noble in his own thoughts.

That I grant ye,
If those might only sway him: but it is most certain,
So many newborn slyes, his light gave life too,
Buzze in his beams, flesh slies, and Butterflies,
Hornets, and humming Scarrabs, that not one honey Be
That Is laden with true labor, and brings home
Increase, and credit, can escape rifling,
And what she sucks for sweet, the turn to bitterness.

Shall we go see what they do, and talk our minds to 'em?


That we have done too much, and to no purpose.

Shall we be hanged for him?
I have a great mind to be hanged now
For doing some brave thing for him; a worse end will take me
And for an action of no worth; not honor him?
Upon my conscience even the devil, the very devil
(Not to belie him) thinks him an honest man,
I am sure he has sent him souls any times these twenty years,
Able to furnish all his fishmarket.

Leave thy talking
And come, let us go to dinner and drink to him,
We shall hear more ere supper time: if he be honored,
He has deserved it well, and we shall sight for it:
If he be ruined, so, we know the worst then,
And for my self I Will meet it.

I never fear it.

They are handsome rooms all, well contrived and fitted,
Full of covenience, the prospects excellent.

Now will your Grace pass down, and do me but the honor
To taste a Country banquet?

What roome's that?
I would see all now; what conveyance has it?
I see you have kept the best part yet; pray open it.

Ha? I misdoubted this: it is of no receipte sir,
For your eyes most unfit --

I long to see it,
Because I would judge of the whole piece: some excellent paintings,
Or some rare spoils you would keep to entertain me
An other time, I know.

In troth there is not,
Nor any thing worth your sight: below I have
Some fountains, and some ponds.

I would see this now.

Borosky, thou art a knave; It contains nothing
But rubbish from the other rooms and unnecessaries:
Will It please you see a strange Clock?

This, or nothing:
Why should you bar it up thus with defenses
Above the rest, unless it contained something
More excellent, and curious of keeping:
Open't, for I will see it.

The keys are lost sir;
Does your grace think if it were fit for you,
I could be so unmannerly?

I will see it, and either show it --

Good sir --

Thank ye Archas,
You show your love abundantly,
Do I use to entreat thus? force it open,

That were inhospitable: you are his guest sir,
And with his greatest joy, to entertain ye.

Hold thy peace fool; will ye open it?

Sir, I cannot.
I must not if I could.

Go break it open.

I must withstand that force: Be not too rash Gentlemen.


Unarme him first, then if he be not obstinate,
Preserve his life.

I thank your grace, I take it:
And now take you the keys, go in and see Sir;
There feed your eyes with wonder, and thank that traitor,
That thing that sels his faith for favor.

Sir, what moves ye?

I have kept mine pure: Lord Burris there is a Judas,
That for a smile will sell ye all: a Gentleman?
The Devil 'has more truth, and has maintained it;
A whores heart more belief in it.

What Is all this Archas?
I cannot blame ye to conceal it so,
This most inestimable treasure.

Yours Sir.

Nor do I wonder now the soldier sleights me.

Be not deceived; he has had no favor here Sir,
Nor had you known this now, but for that pickthank,
That lost man in his faith, he has revealed it,
To suck a little honey from ye has betrayed it.
I swear he smiles upon me, and forsworn too,
Thou cracked, uncurrant Lord: I Will tell ye all Sir:
Your Sire, before his death, knowing your temper,
To be as bounteous as the air, and open,
As flowing as the Sea to all that followed ye,
Your great mind sit for war and glory, thriftily
Like a great husband, to preserve your actions,
Collected all this treasure: to our trusts,
To mine I mean, and to that long-tongu'd Lords there,
He gave the knowledge, and the charge of all this,
Upon his deathbed too: And on the Sacrament
He swore us thus, never to let this treasure
Part from our secret keepings, till no hope
Of subject could relieve ye, all your own wasted,
No help of those that loved ye could supply ye,
And then some great exploit afoot; my honesty
I would have kept till I had made this useful;
I showed it, and I stood it to the tempest,
And useful to the end 'twas left: I am cozened,
And so are you too, if you spend this vainly;
This worm that crept into ye has abused ye,
Abused your fathers care, abused his faith too:
Nor can this mass of money make him man more,
A stea'd dog has more soul, an Ape more honesty:
All mine ye have amongst it, farewell that,
I cannot part with it nobler; my hearts clear,
My conscience smooth as that, no rub upon it,
But O thy hell.

I seek no heaven from you Sir.

Thy gnawing hell Boroskey, it will find thee:
Would ye heap coals upon his head has wronged ye,
'Has ruined your estate? give him this money,
Melt it into his mouth.

What little Trunck's that,
That there of the top, that is locked?

You Will find it rich Sir,
Richer I think then all.

You were not covetous,
Nor wour to weave your thoughts with such a coursenes;
Pray rack not honesty.

Be sure ye see it.

Bring out the Trunck.

You Will find that treasure too,
All I have left me now.

What Is this a poor gown?
And this a piece of Seneca?

Yes sure Sir,
More worth then all your gold, yet ye have enough on it,
And of a Mine far purer, and more precious:
This sels no friends, nor searches into counsels,
And yet all counsel and all friends live here Sir,
Betrays no faith, yet handles all that is trusty;
Wilt please ye leave me this.

With all my heart Sir.

What says your Lordship to it?

I dare not rob ye.

Poor miserable men, you have robbed your selves both;
This gown, and this unvalu'd treasure, your brave Father,
Found me a child at school with, in his progress,
Where such a love he took to some few answers,
Unhappie boyish toys hit in my head then,
That suddenly I made him thus as I was;
For here was all the wealth I brought his Highness:
He carried me to Court, there bred me up,
Bestowed his favors on me, taught me Arms first,
With those an honest mind; I served him truly,
And where he gave me trust, I think I failed not;
Let the world speak: I humbly thank your Highness,
You have done more, and nobler, eased mine age Sir;
And to this care, a fair quietus given:
Now to my Book again.

You have your wish Sir,
Let some bring off the treasure.

Some is his sir.

None, none my Lord: a poor unworthy reaper,
The harvest is his graces.

Thank ye Archas.

But will not you repent Lord? when this is gone,
Where will your Lordship? --

Pray take you no care sir.

Does your Grace like my house?

Wondrous well Archas,
You have made me richly welcome.

I did my best sir,
Is there any thing else may please your Grace?

Your daughters
I had forgot, send them to Court.

How Is that Sir?

I said your daughters; see it done: I Will have 'em
Attend my sister, Archas.

Thank your Highness.

And suddenly.

Through all the ways I dare,
I Will serve your temper, though you try me too far.

I wonder we hear no news.

Here Is your fathers servant,
He comes in haste too, now we shall know all sir.

How now?

I am glad I have met you sir; your father
Entreats ye presently make haste unto him.

What news?

None of the best Sir, I am ashamed to tell it,
Pray ask no more.

Did not I tell ye Gentlemen?
Did not I prophecy? he is undone then.

Not so Sir, but as near it --

There Is no help now;
The Armye's scattered all, though discontent,
Not to be rallied up in haste to help this.

Plague of the devil; have ye watched your seasons?
We shall watch you ere long.

Farewell, there is no cure,
We must endure all now: I know what I Will do.

Nay there is no striving, they have a hand upon us,
A heavy, and a hard one.

Now I have it,
We have yet some Gentlemen, some boys of mettle,
(What, are we bob'd thus still, colted, and carted?)
And one mad trick we will have to shame these vipers;
Shall I bless 'em?

Farewell: I have thought my way too.

Were never such rare cries in Christendom,
As Mosco shall afford: we will live by fooling,
Now lightings gone, and they shall find and feel it.

No more: it must be so; do you think I would send ye
Your father, and your friend --

Pray Sir be good to us,
Alas, we know no Court, nor seek that knowledge;
We are content like harmles things at home,
Children of your content, bred up in quiet,
Only to know our selves, to seek a wisdom
From that we understand, easy, and honest;
To make our actions worthy of your honor,
Their ends as innocent as we begot 'em:
What shall we look for Sir, what shall we learn there,
That this more private sweetness cannot teach us?
Virtue was never built upon ambition,
Nor the souls beauties bred out of braverie:
What a terrible Father would you seem to us,
Now you have molded us, and wrought our tempers
To easy and obedient ways, uncrooked,
Where the fair mind can never lose, nor loiter,
Now to divert our Natures, now to stem us
Roughly against the tide of all this treasure?
Would ye have us proud? it is sooner bred, then buried;
Wickedly proud? for such things dwell at Court Sir.

Would you have your children learn to forget their father,
And when he dies dance on his Monument?
Shall we seek virtue in a Satin gown,
Imbroider'd virtue? faith in a well-curl'd feather?
And set our credits to the tune of green sleeves?
This may be done; and if you like, it shall be.
You should have sent us thither, when we were younger,
Our Maiden-heads at a higher rate, our Innocence
Able to make a Mart indeed: we are now too old Sir,
Perhaps they will think too cunning too, and slight us,
Besides we are altogether unprovided,
Unfurnished utterly of the rules should guide us:
This Lord comes licks his hand; and protests to me:
Compares my beauty to a thousand fine things;
Mountains, and fountains, trees, and stars, and goblins;
Now have not I the fashion to believe him,
He offers me the honorable courtesy,
To lie with me all night, what a misery is this?
I am bred up so foolishly alas I dare not,
And how madly these things will show there.

I send ye not,
Like parts infected, to draw more corruption;
Like Spiders to grow great, with growing evil:
With your own virtues seasoned, and my prayers,
The card of goodness in your minds, that shows ye
When ye sail false; the needle touched with honor,
That through the blackest storms, still points at happiness:
Your bodies the tall barks, rib'd round with goodness;
Your heavenly souls the Pilots, thus I send you;
Thus I prepare your voyage, sound before ye,
And ever as you sail through this worlds vanity,
Discover sholes, rocks, quicksands, cry out to ye,
Like a good Master tack about for honor:
The Court is virtue's school; at least it should be;
Nearer the Sun the Mine lies, the mettels purer:
Be it granted, if the Spring be once infected.
Those branches that flow from him must run muddy;
Say you find some sins there, and those no small ones,
And they like lazy fits begin to shake ye:
Say they affect your strengths, my happy children,
Great things through greatest hazards are achieved still,
And then they shine, then goodness has his glory,
His Crown fast rivited, then time moves under,
Where, through the mist of errors, like the Sun,
Through thick and pitchie clouds, he breaks out nobly.

I thank you Sir, you have made me half a soldier,
I will to court most willingly, most fondly.
And if there be such stirring things amongst 'em,
Such travelers into Virginia,
As fame reports, if they can win me, take me:
I think I have a close ward, and a sure one;
A honest mind I hope, it is petticote-proofe,
Chain proof, and jewell-proof: I know it is gold proof,
A Coach and four horses cannot draw me from it:
As for your hansome faces, and filed tongues,
Curled Millers heads; I have another word for them,
And yet I Will slatter too, as fast as they do,
And lie, but not as lewdly: Come, be valiant sister,
She that dares not stand the push of the Court, dares nothing,
And yet come off ungrased: Sir, like you,
We both affect great dangers now; and the world shall see
All glory lies not in man's victory.

Mine own Honora.

I am very fearful,
Would I were stronger built? you would have me honest?

Or not at all my Viola.

I Will think on it,
For it is no easy promise, and live there;
Do you think we shall do well?

Why what should aile us?

Certain they will tempt us strongly: beside the glory
Which women may affect: they are hansome gentlemen,
Every part speaks: nor is it one denial,
Nor two, nor ten: from every look we give 'em,
They Will frame a hope: even from our prayers, promises,

Let 'em feed so, and be fat: there is no fear wench,
If thou be fast to thy self.

I hope I shall be:
And your example will work more.

Thou shall not want it.

How do you Sir, can you lend a man an Angel?
I hear you let out money.

Very well Sir,
You are pleasantly disposed: I am glad to see it,
Can you lend me your patience, and be ruled by me?

Is It come to Patience now?

Is t not a virtue?

I know not. I never found it so.

That Is because
Thy anger ever knows, and not thy judgment.

I know you have been rifl'd.

Nothing less boy:
Lord what opinions these vain people publish?
Rifl'd of what?

Study your virtue patience,
It may get Mustard to your meat. Why in such haste sir,
Sent ye for me?

For this end only, Theodore,
To wait upon your sisters to the Court;
I am commanded they live there.

Toth' Court sir?

Toth' Court I say.

And must I wait upon 'em?

Yes, it is most fit ye should, ye are their brother.

Is this the business? I had thought your mind sir
Had been set forward on some noble action,
Something had truly stirred ye. Toth' Court with these?
Why they are your daughters sir.

All this I know sir.

The good old woman on a bed he threw.
Toth' Court?

Thou art not mad.

Nor drunk as you are:
Drunk with your duty sir: do you call it duty?
A pox of duty, what can these do there?
What should they do? Can ye look Babies sisters
In the young Gallants eyes, and twirle their Band-strings?
Can ye ride out to air your selves? pray sir,
Be serious with me: do you speak this truly?

Why did thou never hear of women
Yet at Court boy?

Yes, and good women too, very good women,
Excellent honest women: but are you sure sir,
That these will prove so?

There Is the danger brother.

God a mercy wench, thou have a grudging of it.

Now be you serious sir, and observe what I say,
Do it, and do it handsomely: go with 'em.

With all my heart sir; I am in no fault now;
If they be thought whores for being in my company;
Pray write upon their backs, they are my sisters,
And where I shall deliver 'em.

Ye are wondrous jocund,
But prithee tell me, art thou so lewd a fellow,
I never knew thee fail a truth,

I am a soldier,
And spell you what that means.

A Soldier?
What do thou make of me?

Your Pallat's down sir.

I thank ye sir.

Come, shall we to this matter?
You will to Court?

If you will please to honor us.

I Will honor ye, I warrant: I Will set ye off
With such a luster wenches: Alas poor Viola,
Thou art a fool, thou criest for eating white-bread:
Be a good huswife of thy tears, and save 'em,
Thou will have time enough to shed 'em sister.
Do you weep too? nay then I Will fool no more.
Come worthy sisters, since it must be so,
And since he thinks it fit to try your virtues,
Be you as strong to truth, as I to guard ye,
And this old gentleman shall have joy of ye.

Burris take you ten thousand of those Crowns,
And those two chains of Pearl they hold the richest,
I give 'em ye.

I humbly thank your grace;
And may your great example work in me
That noble charity to men more worthy,
And of more wants.

You bear a good mind Burris;
Take twenty thousand now: Be not so modest,
It shall be so, I give 'em: go, there is my ring for it.

Heaven bless your Highness ever.


You are honest.

They Are coming now to Court, as fair as virtue:
Two brighter stars never rose here.

Peace, I have it,
And what my Art can do; the Duke --

I am gone,
Remember.

I am counseled to the full sir.

My pretty Mistress, whither lies your business?
How kindly I should take this, were it to me now?

I must confess immediately to your grace,
At this time.

You have no address, I do believe ye,
I would ye had.

'Twere too much boldness Sir,
Upon so little knowledge, less deserving.

You Will make a perfect Courtier.

A very poor one.

A very fair one sweet: come hither to me.
What killing eyes this wench has? in his glory
Not the bright Sun, when the Sirian star reigns,
Shines half so fiery.

Why does your grace so view me?
Nothing but common handsomeness dwells here sir,
Scarce that: your grace is pleased to mock my meanness.

Thou shall not go: I do not lie unto thee,
In my eye thou appear'st --

Dim not the sight sir,
I am too dull an object.

Can thou love me?
Can thou love him will honor thee?

I can love,
And love as you do too: but 'twill not show well:
Or if it do show here where all light lustres,
Tinsell affections, make a glorious glistering,
Twill halt in the handsome way.

Are ye so cunning?
Do think I love not truly?

No, ye cannot,
You never traveled that way yet: pray pardon me,
I prate so boldly to you.

There Is no harm done:
But what is your reason, sweet?

I would tell your grace,
But happily --

It shall be pleasing to me.

I should love you again, and then you would hate me.
With all my service I should follow ye,
And through all dangers.

This would more provoke me,
More make me see thy worthes,
More make me meet 'em.

You should do so, if ye did well and truly.
But though ye be a Prince, and have power in ye,
Power of example too, ye have failed and falter'd.

Give me example where?

You had a Mistress,
Oh heaven, so bright, so brave a dame, so lovely,
In all her life so true.

A Mistress?

That served ye with that constancy, that care,
That loved your will, and wooed it too.

What Mistress?

That nus'rd your honor up, held fast your virtue,
And when she kissed increased, not stole your goodness.

And I neglected her?

Lost her, forsook her,
Wantonly slung her off.

What was her name?

Her name as lovely as her self, as noble,
And in it all that is excellent.

What was it?

Her name was Beau-desert:
Do you know her now sir?

Beau-desert? I not remember --

I know you do not:
Yet she has a plainer name; Lord Archas service;
Do you yet remember her? there was a Mistress
Fairer then women, far fonder to you sir,
Then Mothers to their firstborn joys: Can you love?
Dare you profess that truth to me a stranger,
A thing of no regard, no name, no luster,
When your most noble love you have neglected,
A beauty all the world would woo and honor?
Would you have me credit this? think ye can love me,
And hold ye constant, when I have read this story?
Is It possible you should ever favor me,
To a slight pleasure prove a friend, and fast too,
When, where you were most tied, most bound to benefit,
Bound by the chains of honesty and honor,
You have broke and boldly too? I am a weak one,
Armed only with my fears: I beseech your Grace
Tempt me no further.

Who taught you this Lesson?

Woeful experience Sir: if you seek a fair one,
Worthy your love, if yet you have that perfect,
Two daughters of his ruined virtue now
Arive at Court, excellent fair indeed sir,
But this will be the plague on it, they are excellent honest.

I love thy face.

Upon my life ye cannot.
I do not love it my self Sir, it is a lewd one,
So truly ill Art cannot mend it; 'sod if 'twere handsome,
At least if I thought so, you should hear me talk sir
In a new strain; and though ye are a Prince,
Make ye Petition to me too, and wait my answers;
Yet of my conscience I should pity ye,
After some ten years siege.

Prithee do now.

What would ye do?

Why I would lie with ye.

I do not think ye would.

In Troth I would wench.
Here, take this Jewel.

Out upon it that is scurvee.
Nay, if we do, sure we will do for good fellowship,
For pure love, or nothing: thus you shall be sure sir
You shall not pay too dear for it.

Sure I cannot.

By'r Lady but ye may: when ye have found me able,
To do your work well, ye may pay my wages.

Why does your Grace start back?

I have seen that shakes me:
Chills all my blood: O where is faith or goodness?
Alinda thou art false, false, false thou fair one,
Wickedly false; and (woe is me) I see it.
For ever false.

I am glad't has taken thus right.

I Will go ask my Lady, sir.

What?

Whether I shall lie with ye, or no: If I find he -- willing -- r
For look ye sir, I have sworn, while I am in her service --
('It Was a rash oath I must confess.)

Thou mockst me.

Why, would ye lie with me, if I were willing?
Would you abuse my weakness?

I would piece it,
And make it stronger.

I humbly thank your highness,
When you piece me, you must piece me to my Coffin:
When you have got my Maidenhead, I take it,
It Is not an inch of an Apes tail will restore it;
I love ye, and I honor ye, but this way
I Will neither love nor serve ye:
Heaven change your mind sir.

And thine too:
For it must be changed, it shall be.

They are goodly gentlewomen.

They are,
Wondrous sweet women both.

Does your Lordshid like 'em?
They are my sisters sir; good lusty Lasses,
They Will do their labor well, I warrant ye
You Will find no bed-straw here sir.

Thank ye brother.

This is not so strongly built: but she is good mettle,
Of a good stirring strain too: she goes tith sir.
Here they be gentlemen must make ye merry,
The toys you wot of: do you like their complexions?
They be no Moors: what think ye of this hand gentlemen?
Here Is a white Altar for your sacrifice:
A thousand kisses here. Nay, keep off yet gentlemen,
Let Us start first, and have fair play: what would ye give now
To turn the globe up, and find the rich Moluccas?
To pass the straights? here (do ye itch) by St. Nicolas,
Here Is that will make ye scratch and claw,
Claw my fine Gentlemen, move ye in diverse sorts:
Pray ye let me request ye, to forget
To say your prayers, whilst these are Courtiers;
Or if ye needs will think of heaven, let it be no higher
Then their eyes?

How will ye have 'em bestowed sir?

Even how your Lordship please,
So you do not bake 'em.

Bake 'em.

They are too high a meat that way, they run to gelly.
But if you will have 'em for your own diet, take my counsel,
Stew 'em between two feather-beds.

Please you Colonel
To let 'em wait upon the Princess?

Yes sir,
And thank your honor too: but then happily,
These noble Gentlemen shall have no access to 'em,
And to have 'em buy new clothes, studdy new faces,
And keep a stinking stir with themselves for nothing,
'Twill not be well in faith: they have kept their bodies,
And bin at charge for Bathes: do you see that shirt there?
Way but the moral meaning, 'twill be grievous:
Alas, I brought 'em to delight these gentlemen,
I weigh their wants by mine: I brought 'em wholesome,
Wholesome, and young my Lord, and two such blessings
They will not light upon again in ten year.

It Is fit they wait upon her.

They are fit for any thing.
They Will wait upon a man, they are not bashful,
Carry his cloak, or untie his points, or any thing,
Drink drunk, and take Tobacco; the familiarst fools --
This wench will leap over stools too, and sound a Trumpet,
Wrestle, and pitch the Bar; they are finely brought up,

Ladies, ye are bound to your brother,
And have much cause to thank him:
I Will ease ye of this charge, and to the Princess,
So please you, I Will attend 'em.

Thank your Lordship:
If there be e're a private corner as ye go Sir,
A foolish lobbie out oth' way, make danger,
Try what they are, try.

Ye are a merry gentleman.

I would feign be your honors kinseman.

Ye are to cursed sir.

Farewell wenches, keep close your ports, you are washed else.


Brother bestow your fears where they are needful.

Honor thy name is, and I hope thy nature.
Go after, Gentlemen, go, get a snatch if you can,
Yond'old Erra Pater will never please 'em.
Alas I brought 'em for you, but see the luck on it,
I swear I meant as honestly toward ye --
Nay do not cry good gentlemen: a little counsel
Will do no harm: they will walk abroad in the evenings,
Ye may surprise 'em easily, they wear no Pistols.
Set down your minds in Meter, flowing Meter,
And get some good old linen woman to deliver it,
That has the trick on it: you cannot fail:
Farewell gentlemen.

You have frighted off these flesh-flies.

Flesh-flies indeed my Lord.
And it must be very stinking flesh they will not seize on.

Your Lordship bid me bring this Casket.

Yes. Good Colonel
Commend me to your worthy father, and as a pledge
He ever holds my love, and service to him,
Deliver him this poor, but hearty token,
And where I may be his --

Ye are too noble;
A wonder here my Lord, that dare be honest,
When all men hold it vicious: I shall deliver it,
And with it your most noble love. Your servant.
Were there but two more such at Court, 'twere Sainted,
This will buy brawn this Christmas yet, and Muscadine.

Broom, Broom, the bonnie Broom,
Come buy my Birchen Broom,
In The wars we have no more room,
Buy all my bonnie Broom.
For a kiss take two;
If those will not do,
For a little, little pleasure,
Take all my whole treasure:
If all these will not do it,
Take the Broom-man to boot.
Broom, Broom, the bonnie Broom.

The wars are done and gone,
And Soldiers now neglected, Pedlers are,
Come maidens, come alone,
For I can show you handsome, handsome ware.
Powders for, for the head,
And drinks for your bed,
To make ye blithe and bonney.
As well in the night we soldiers can fight,
And please a young wench as any.

I have fine Potato's,
Ripe Potato's.

Will ye buy any Honesty, come away,
I sell it openly by day,
I bring no forced light, nor no Candle
To cozen ye; come buy and handle:
This will show the great man good,
The Tradesman where he swears and lies,
Each Lady of a noble blood,
The City dame to rule her eyes:
Ye are rich men now: come buy, and then
I Will make ye richer, honest-men.

Have ye any cracked maiden-heads, to new leach or mend?
Have ye any old maiden-heads to sell or to change?
Bring 'em to me with a little pretty gin,
I Will clout 'em, I Will mend 'em, I Will knock in a pin,
Shall make 'em as good maids again,
As ever they have bin.

What means all this, why do y' sell Brooms Ancient?
Is it in wantonness, or want?

The only reason is,
To sweep your Lordships conscience: here is one for the nonce.
Gape sir, you have swallowed many a goodlier matter --
The only casting for a crazie conscience.

Will your Lordship buy any honesty? 'twill be worth your money.


How is this?

Honesty my Lord, it is here in a quill.

Take heed you open it not, for it is so subtle,
The least puff of wind will blow it out oth' kingdom.

Will your Lordship to taste a fine Potato?
'Twill advance your withered state.

Fill your honor full of most noble itches,
And make Jack dance in your Lordships breeches.

If your daughters on their beds,
Have bowed, or cracked their maiden-heads;
If in a Coach with two much tumbling,
They chance to cry, fie, fo, what fumbling;
If her foot slip, and down fall she,
And break her leg 'bove the knee,
The one and thirtieth of February let this be taken,
And they shall be arrant maids again.

Ye are brave soldiers; keep your wantonness,
A winter will come on to shake this wilfulness.
Disport your selves, and when you want your money --

Broom, Broom, etc.

You must not be so fearful, little one,
Nor Lady you so sad, you will never make Courtiers
With these dull sullen thoughts; this place is pleasure,
Preserved to that use, so inhabited;
And those that live here, live delightful, joyful:
These are the Gardens of Adonis, Ladies,
Where all sweets to their free and noble uses,
Grow ever young and courted.

Bless me heaven,
Can things of her years arrive at these rudiments?
By your leave fair gentlewoman, how long have you bin here?

Faith much about a week.

You have studied hard,
And by my faith arrived at a great knowledge.

Were not you bashful at first?

I, I, for an hour or two:
But when I saw people laughed at me for it,
And thought it a dull breeding --

You are governed here then
Much after the men's opinions.

Ever Lady.

And what they think is honorable. --

Most precisely
We follow with all faith.

A goodly Catechism.

But bashful for an hour or two?

Faith to say true,
I do not think I was so long: for look ye,
It Is to no end here, put on what shape ye will,
And sour your self with never so much austeritie,
You shall be courted in the same, and won too,
It Is but some two hours more; and so much time lost,
Which we hold precious here: In so much time now
As I have told you this, you may lose a servant,
Your age, nor all your Art can e're recover.
Catch me occasion as she comes, hold fast there,
Till what you do affect is ripn'd to ye.
Has the Duke seen ye yet?

What if he have not?

You do your beauties too much wrong, appearing
So full of sweetness, newness; set so richly,
As if a Council beyond nature framed ye.

If we were thus? say heaven had given these blessings,
Must we turn these to sin-oblations?

How foolishly this Country way shows in ye?
How full of phlegm? do you come here to pray Ladies.
You had best cry, stand away, let me alone gentlemen,
I Will tell my father else.

This woman's naught sure,
A very naughty woman.

Come, say on friend,
I Will be instructed by ye.

You Will thank me for it.

Either I or the devil shall: The Duke you were speaking of.


It Is well remembered: yes, let him first see you,
Appear not openly till he has viewed ye.

He Is a very noble Prince they say.

O wondrous gracious;
And as you may deliver your self at the first viewing.
For look ye, you must bear your self; yet take heed
It be so seasoned with a sweet humility,
And graced with such a bounty in your beauty --

But I hope he will offer me no ill?

No, no:
It Is like he Will kiss ye, and play with ye.

Play with me, how?

Why, good Lord, that you are such a fool now.
No harm assure your self.

Will ye play with me too?

Look babies in your eyes, my pretty sweet one:
There Is a fine sport: do you know your lodgings yet?

I hear of none.

I do then, they are handsome,
Convenient for access.

Access?

Yes little one,
For visitation of those friends and servants,
Your beauties shall make choice of: friends and visits:
Do not you know those uses? Alas poor novice;
There Is a close Cowch or two, handsomely placed too.

What are those I pray you?

Who would be troubled with such raw things? they are to lie upon,
And your love by ye; and discourse, and toy in.

Alas I have no love.

You must by any means:
You Will have a hundred, fear not.

Honesty keep me:
What shall I do with all those?

You Will find uses:
Ye are ignorant yet, let time work; you must learn too,
To lie handsomely in your bed a mornings, neatly dressed
In a most curious VVastcoat, to set ye off well,
Play with your Bracelets, sing you must learn to rhyme to,
And riddle neatlie; study the hardest language,
And it is no matter whether it be sense, or no,
So it go seemlie off. Be sure ye profit
In kissing, kissing sweetly: there lies a maine point,
A key that opens to all practick pleasure;
I Will help ye to a friend of mine shall teach ye,
And suddenly: your Country way is fulsome.

Have ye schools for all these mysteries?

O yes,
And several hours prefixed to study in:
Ye may have Kalanders to know the good hour,
And when to take a jewel: for the ill too,
When to refuse, with observations on 'em;
Under what Sign it is best meeting in an Arbor,
And in what Bower, and hour it works; a thousand,
When in a Coach, when in a private lodging,
With all their virtues.

Have ye studied these?
How beastly they become your youth? how bawdily?
A woman of your tenderness, a teacher,
Teacher of these lewd Arts? of your full beauty?
A man made up in lust would loath this in ye:
The rankest Leacher, hate such impudence.
They say the devil can assume heavens brightness,
And so appear to tempt us: sure thou art no woman.

I joy to find ye thus.

Thou have no tenderness,
No reluctation in thy heart: it is mischief.

All Is one for that; read these and then be satisfied,
A few more private rules I have gathered for ye,
Read 'em, and well observe 'em: so I leave ye.

A wondrous wicked woman: shame go with thee.

What new Pandoras box is this? I Will see it,
Though presently I tear it. Read Thine Viola,
It Is in our own wills to believe and follow.
Worthy Honora, as you have begun
In virtues spotless school, so forward run:
Pursue that nobleness, and chaste desire
You ever had, burn in that holy fire;
And a white Martyr to fair memory
Give up your name, unsoil'd of infamy.

How Is this? Read yours out sister: this amazes me.

Fear not thou yet unblasted Violet,
Nor let my wanton words a doubt beget,
Live in that peace and sweetnessr of thy bud,
Remember whose thou art, and grow still good.
Remember what thou art, and stand a story
Fit for thy noble Sex, and thine own glory.


I know not what to think.

Sure a good woman,
An excellent woman, sister.

It confounds me;
Let 'em use all their arts, if these be their ends,
The Court I say breeds the best foes and friends.
Come, let us be honest wench, and do our best service.

A most excellent woman, I will love her.


MAdam, the Duke has sent for the two Ladies.

I prithee go: I know thy thoughts are with him.
Go, go Alinda, do not mock me more.
I have found thy heart wench, do not wrong thy Mistress,
Thy too much loving Mistress: do not abuse her.

By your own fair hands I understand ye not.

By thy own fair eyes I understand thee too much,
Too far, and built a faith there thou have ruin.
Go, and enjoy thy wish, thy youth, thy pleasure,
Enjoy the greatness no doubt he has promised,
Enjoy the service of all eyes that see thee,
The glory thou have aimed at, and the triumph:
Only this last love I ask, forget thy Mistress.

Oh, who has wronged me? who has ruined me?
Poor wretched Girl, what poison is slung on thee?
Excellent virtue, from whence flows this anger?

Go, ask my Brother, ask the faith thou gav'st me,
Ask all my favors to thee, ask my love,
Last, thy forgetfulness of good: then fly me,
For we must part Alinda.

You are weary of me;
I must confess, I was never worth your service,
Your bounteous favors less; but that my duty,
My ready will, and all I had to serve ye --
O heaven thou know my honesty.

No more:
Take heed, heaven has a justice: take this ring with ye,
This doting spell you gave me: too well Alinda,
Thou knew'st the virtue in it; too well I feel it:
Nay keep that too, it may sometimes remember ye,
When you are willing to forget who gave it,
And to what virtuous end.

Must I go from ye?
Of all the sorrows sorrow has -- must I part with ye?
Part with my noble Mistress?

Or I with thee wench.

And part stained with opinion? Farewell Lady,
Happy and blessed Lady, goodness keep ye:
Thus your poor servant full of grief turns from ye,
For ever full of grief, for ever from ye.
I have no being now, no friends, no Country,
I wander heaven knows whither, heaven knows how.
No life, now you are lost: only mine innocence,
That little left me of my self, goes with me,
That Is all my bread and comfort. I confess Madam,
Truly confess, the Duke has often courted me.

And powered his soul into thee, won thee.

Do you think so?
Well, time that told this tale, will tell my truth too,
And say ye had a faithful, honest servant:
The business of my life is now to pray for ye,
Pray for your virtuous loves; Pray for your children,
When heaven shall make ye happy.

How she wounds me?
Either I am undone, or she must go: take these with ye,
Some toys may do ye service; and this money;
And when ye want, I love ye not so poorly,
Not yet Alinda, that I would see ye perish.
Prithee be good, and let me hear: look on me,
I love those eyes yet dearly; I have kissed thee,
And now I Will do it again: farewell Alinda,
I am too full to speak more, and too wretched.

You have my faith,
And all the world my fortune.

I would feign hear
What becomes of these two Wenches:
And if I can, I will do 'em good.
Do you hear my honest friend?
He knows no such name:
What a world of business,
Which by interpretation are mere nothings,
These things have here? 'Masse now I think on it better,
I wish he be not sent for one of them
To some of these by-lodgings: me thought I saw
A kind of reference in his face to Bawderie.
He has her, but it is none of them: hold fast thief:
An excellent touzing knave. Mistress
You are to suffer your penance some half hour hence now
How far a fine Court Custard with Plumbs it
Will prevail with one of these waiting gentlewomen,
They are taken with these soluble things exceedingly;
This is some yeoman oth' bottles now that has sent for her,
That she calls father: now woe to this Ale incence.
By your leave sir.

Well sir; what is your pleasure with me?

You do not know the way to the maids lodgings?

Yes indeed do I sir.

But you will not tell me?

No indeed will not I, because you doubt it.


These are fine gim-cracks: hey, here comes another,
A Haggon full of wine in's hand, I take it.
Well met my friend, is that wine?

Yes indeed is it.

Faith I Will drink on it then.

Ye may, because ye have sworn sir.

It Is very good, I Will drink a great deal now sir.

I cannot help it sir.

I Will drink more yet.

It Is in your own hands.

There Is your pot, I thank ye.
Pray let me drink again.

Faith but ye shall not.
Now have I sworn I take it. Fare ye well sir.

This is the fin'st place to live in I e're enterd.
Here comes a gentle woman, and alone; I Will to her.
Madam, My Lord my Master.

Who Is your Lord sir?

The Lord Boroskie, Lady.

Pray excuse me:
Here Is something for your pains: within this hour sir,
One of the choice young Ladies shall attend him:
Pray let it be in that Chamber juts out to the water;
It Is private and convenient: do my humble service
To my honorable good Lord, I beseech ye sir;
If it please you to visit a poor Lady --
You carry the 'haviour of a noble Gentleman,

I shall be bold.

It Is a good aptness in ye.
I lie here in the Wood-yard, the blew lodgings sir;
They call me merrily the Lady of the -- Sir;
A little I know what belongs to a gentleman,
And if it please you take the pains.

Dear Lady, take the pains?
Why a horse would not take the pains that thou requir'st now,
To cleave old crab-tree? one of the choice young Ladies:
I would I had let this Bawd go, she has frighted me;
I am cruelly afraid of one of my Tribe now;
But if they will do, the devil cannot stop 'em.
Why should he have a young Lady? are women now
Oth' nature of Bottles, to be stopped with Corks?
O the thousand little furies that fly here now?
How now Captain?

I come to seek you out sir,
And all the Town I have traveled.

What Is the news man?

That that concerns us all, and very nearly:
The Duke this night holds a great feast at Court,
To which he bids for guests all his old Counselors,
And all his favorites: your Father's sent for.

Why he is neither in council, nor in favor.

That's it: have an eye now, or never, and a quick one,
An eye that must not wink from good intelligence.
I heard a Bird sing, they mean him no good office.

Art sure he sups here?

Sure as it is day.

It Is like then:
How now, where have thou been Ancient?

Measuring the City:
I have left my Brooms at gate here;
By this time the Porter has stole 'em to sweep out rascals.

Brooms?

I have been crying Brooms all the town over,
And such a Mart I have made, there is no trade near it.
O the young handsome wenches, how they twitter'd,
When they but saw me shake my ware, and sing too;
Come hither Master Broom-man I beseech ye:
Good Master Broom-man hither cries another.

Thou art a mad fellow.

They are all as mad as I: they all have trades now,
And roar about the streets like Bull-beggers.

What company of soldiers are they?

By this means I have gathered
Above a thousand tall and hardy soldiers,
If need be Colonel.

That need's come Ancient,
And 'twas discreetly done: go, draw 'em presently,
But without suspicion: this night we shall need 'em;
Let 'em be near the Court, let Putskie guide 'em;
And wait me for occasion: here I Will stay still.

If it fall out we are ready; if not we are scattered:
I Will wait ye at an inch.

Do, farewell.

Are the Soldiers still so mutinous?

More then ever,
No Law nor Justice frights 'em: all the Town over
They play new pranks and gambols: no man's person,
Of what degree soever, free from abuses:
And durst they do this, (let your grace consider)
These monstrous, most offensive things, these villainies,
If not set on, and fed? if not by one
They honor more then you? and more awed by him?

Happily their own wants.

I offer to supply 'em,
And every hour make tender of their moneys:
They scorn it, laugh at me that offer it:
I fear the next device will be my life sir;
And willingly I Will give it, so they stay there.

Do you think Lord Archas privy?

More then thought,
I know it Sir, I know they durst not do
These violent rude things, abuse the State thus,
But that they have a hope by his ambitions --

No more: he is sent for?

Yes, and will be here sure.

Let me talk further with you anon.

I Will wait sir.

Did you speak to the Ladies?

They Will attend your grace presently.

How do you like 'em?

My eyes are too dull Judges.
They wait here sir.

Be you gone then: Come in Ladies.
Welcome toth' court sweet beauties; now the court shines,
When such true beams of beauty strike amongst us:
Welcome, welcome, even as your own joys welcome.
How do you like the Court? how seems it to you?
Is It not a place created for all sweetness?
Why were you made such strangers to this happiness?
Barred the delights this holds? the richest jewels
Set never so well, if then not worn to wonder,
By judging eyes not set off, lose their luster:
Your Country shades are faint; blasters of beauty;
The manners like the place, obscure and heavy;
The Rose buds of your beauties turn to cankers,
Eaten with inward thoughts: whilst there ye wander.
Here Ladies, here, you were not made for Cloisters,
Here is the Sphere you move in: here shine nobly,
And by your powerful influence command all:
What a sweet modesty dwells round about 'em,
And like a nipping morn pulls in their blossoms?

Your grace speaks cunningly, you do not this,
I hope sir, to betray us, we are poor triumphs;
Nor can our loss of honor add to you sir:
Great men, and great thoughts, seek things great and worthy,
Subjects to make 'em live, and not to lose 'em;
Conquests so nobly won, can never perish;
We are two simple maids, untutored here sir;
Two honest maids, is that a sin at Court sir?
Our breeding is obedience, but to good things,
To virtuous and to fair: what would you win on us?
Why do I ask that question, when I have found ye?
Your Preamble has pow'rd your heart out to us;
You would dishonor us; which in your translation
Here at the Court reads thus, your grace would love us,
Most dearly love us: stick us up for mistresses:
Most cerraine, there are thousands of our Sex sir
That would be glad of this, and handsome women,
And crowd into this favor, fair young women,
Excellent beauties sir: when ye have enjoyd 'em,
And sucked those sweets they have, what Saints are these then?
What worship have they won? what name you guess sir,
What story added to their time, a sweet one?

A brave spirited wench.

I Will tell your grace,
And tell ye true: ye are deceived in us two,
Extremely cozend sir: And yet in my eye
You are the handsomst man I evet looked on,
The goodliest gentleman; take that hope with ye;
And were I fit to be your wife (so much I honor ye)
Trust me I would scratch for ye but I would have ye.
I would woo you then.

She amazes me:
But how am I deceived?

O we are too honest,
Believe it sir, too honest, far too honest,
The way that you propound too ignorant,
And there is no meddling with us; for we are fools too,
Obstinate, peevish fools: if I would be ill,
And had a wantons itch, to kick my heels up,
I would not leap into th'Sun, and do it there,
That all the world might see me: an obscure shade sir,
Dark as the deed, there is no trusting light with it,
Nor that's that lighter far, vainglorious greatness.

You will love me as your friend?

I will honor ye,
As your poor humble handmaid serve, and pray for ye.

What says my little one; you are not to obstinate?
Lord how the blushes: here are truly fair souls:
Come you will be my love?

Good sir be good to me,
Indeed I Will do the best I can to please ye;
I do beseech your grace: Alas I fear ye.

What should thou fear?

Fie sir, this is not noble.

Why do I stand entreating, where my power --

You have no power, at least you ought to have none
In bad and beastly things: armed thus, I Will dye here,
Before she suffer wrong.

Another Archas?

His child sir, and his spirit.

I Will deal with you then,
For here is the honor to be won: sit down sweet,
Prithee Honora sit.

Now ye entreat I will sir.

I do, and will deserve it.

That Is too much kindness.

Prithee look on me.

Yes: I love to see ye,
And could look on an age thus, and admire ye:
Whilst ye are good and temperate I dare touch ye,
Kiss your white hand.

Why not my lips?

I dare sir.

I do not think ye dare.

I am no coward.
Do you believe me now? or now? or now sir?
You make me blush: but sure I mean no ill sir:
It had been fitter you had kissed me.

That I Will do too.
What have thou wrought into me?

I hope all goodness:
Whilst ye are thus, thus honest, I dare do any thing,
Thus hang about your neck, and thus dote on ye;
Bless those fair lights: hell take me if I durst not --
But good Sir pardon me. Sister come hither,
Come hither, fear not wench: come hither, blush not,
Come kiss the Prince, the virtuous Prince, the good Prince:
Certain he is excellent honest.

Thou will make me --

Sit down, and hug him softly.

Fie Honora,
Wanton Honora; is this the modesty,
The noble chastity your onset showed me,
At first charge beaten back? Away.

Thank ye:
Upon my knees I pray, heaven too may thank ye;
Ye have deceived me cunningly, yet nobly
Ye have cozened me: In all your hopeful life yet,
A Scene of greater honor, you never acted:
I knew Fame was a liar, too long, and loud tongued,
And now I have found it: O my virtuous Master.

My virtuous Master too.

Now you are thus,
What shall become of me let Fortune cast for it.

I Will be that fortune, if I live Honora,
Thou have done a cure upon me, counsel could not.

Here take your ring sir, and whom ye mean to ruin,
Give it to her next; I have paid for it dearly.

A Ring to her?

Why frowns my fair Alinda?
I have forgot both these again.

Stand still sir,
Ye have that violent killing fire upon ye,
Consumes all honor, credit, faith.

How Is this?

My Royal Mistress favor toward me,
Woe-worth ye sir, ye have poisoned, blasted.

I sweet?

You have taken that unmanly liberty,
Which in a worse man, is vainglorious feigning,
And killed my truth.

Upon my life it is false wench.

Ladies,
Take heed, ye have a cunning gamster,
A handsome, and a high; come stoar'd with Antidotes,
He has infections else will fire your bloods.

Prithee Alinda hear me.

Words steept in honey,
That will so melt into your minds, buy Chastity,
A thousand ways, a thousand knots to tie ye;
And when he has bound ye his, a thousand ruins.
A poor lost woman ye have made me.

I Will maintain thee,
And nobly too.

That Gin's too weak to take me:
Take heed, take heed young Ladies: still take heed,
Take heed of promises, take heed of gifts,
Of forced feigned sorrows, sighs, take heed.

By all that is mine, Alinda --

Swear
By your mischiefs:
O whither shall I go?

Go back again,
I Will force her take thee, love thee.

Fare ye well Sir,
I will not curse ye; only this dwell with ye,
When ever you love, a false belief light on ye.

We Will take our leaves too sir.

Part all the world now,
Since she is gone.

You are crooked yet, dear Master,
And still I fear --

I am vexed,
And some shall find it.

It Is strange
To me to see the Court, and welcome:
O royal place, how have I loved and served thee?
Who lies on this side, know thou?

The Lord Burris.

Thou have named a gentleman
I stand much bound to.
I think he sent the Casket sir?

The same Sir.

An honest minded man, a noble Courtier:
The Duke made perfect choice when he took him.
Go you home, I shall hit the way
Without a guide now.

You may want something sir.

Only my horses,
Which after Supper let the Groom wait with:
I Will have no more attendance here.

Your will sir?

You are well met here sir.

How now boy,
How do thou?

I should ask
You that question: how do you sir?
How do you feel your self?

Why well, and lusty.

What do you here then?

Why I am sent for
To Supper with the Duke.

Have you no meat at home?
Or do you long to feed as hunted Dear do,
In doubt and fear?

I have an excellent stomach,
And can I use it better
Then among my friends boy?
How do the wenches?

They do well enough sir,
They know the worst by this time: pray be ruled sir,
Go home again, and if ye have a Supper
Eat it in quiet there: this is no place for ye,
Especially at this time,
Take my word for it.

May be they will drink hard;
I could have drunk my share Boy.
Though I am old, I will not out.

I hope you will.
Hark in your ear: the Court's
Too quick of hearing.

Not mean me well?
Thou art abused and cozened.
Away, away.

To that end sir I tell ye.
Away, if ye love your self.

Who dare do these things,
That ever heard of honesty?

Old Gntleman,
Take a fools counsel.

It Is a fools indeed;
A very fools: thou have more of
These flams in thee, these musty doubts:
Is It fit the Duke send for me,
And honor me to eat within his presence,
And I, like a tal fellow, play at bo-peep
With his pleasure?

Take heed
Of bo-peep with your pate, your pate sir,
I speak plain language now.

If 'twere not here,
Where reverence bids-me hold,
I would so swinge thee, thou rude,
Unmanner'd knave; take from his bounty,
His honor that he gives me, to beget
Saucy, and sullen fears?

You are not mad sure:
By this fair light, I speak
But what is whispered,
And whispered for a truth.

A dog: drunken people,
That in their Pot see visions,
And turn states, madmen and children:
Prithee do not follow me;
I tell thee I am angry:
Do not follow me.

I am as angry
As you for your heart.
I and as wilful too: go, like a Wood-cock,
And thrust your neck in the noose.

I Will kill thee.
And thou speakst but three words more.
Do not follow me.

A strange old foolish fellow: I shall hear yet,
And if I do not my part hiss at me.

Believe me fellow here will be lusty drinking.
Many a washed pate in wine I warrant thee.

I am glad the old Generall's come: upon my conscience
That joy will make half the Court drunk. Hark the Trumpets,
They are coming on; away.

We Will have a rowse too.

Come seat your selves: Lord Archas sit you there.


It Is far above my worth.

I Will have it so:
Are all things ready?

All the Guards are set,
The Coutt gates shut.

Then do as I prescribed ye.
Be sure no further.

I shall well observe ye.

Come bring some wine: here is to my sister gentlemen;
A health, and mirth to all.

Pray fill it full sir.
It Is a high health to virtue: here Lord Burris,
A maiden health: you are most fit to pledge it,
You have a maiden soul, and much I honor it.
Passion of me, ye are sad man.

How now Burris.
Go to, no more of this.

Take the rowse freely,
'Twill warm your blood, and make ye fit for jollity.
Your graces pardon: when we get a cup sir,
We old men prate a pace.

Mirth makes a banque^;
As you love me no more.

I thank your grace.
Give me it; Lord Boroskie.

I have ill brains sir.

Damnable ill, I know it.

But I Will pledge sir
This virtuous health.

The more unfit for thy mouth.

Come, bring out Robes, and let my guests look nobly,
Fit for my love, and presence: begin downward.
Off with your cloaks, take new.

Your grace deals truly
Like a munificent Prince, with your poor subjects,
Who would not fight for you? what cold dull coward
Durst seek to save his life when you would ask it?
Begin a new health in your new adornments,
The Dukes, the Royal Dukes: ha, what have I got
Sir? ha! the robe of death!

You have deserved it.

The livorie of the grave? do you start all from me?
Do I smell of earth already? Sir look on me,
And like a man; is this your entertainment?
Do you bid your worthiest guests to bloody Banquets.
A Guard upon me too? this is too foul play
Boy to thy good, thine honor; thou wretched Ruler,
Thou son of fools and flatterers, heir of hypocrites,
Am I served in a hearse that saved ye all?
Are ye men or devils? do ye gape upon me,
Wider, and swallow all my services?
Entombe them first, my faith next, then my integrity,
And let these struggle with your mangy minds,
Your seared, and sealed up consciences, till ye burst.

These words are death.

No those deeds that want rewards, sirrah,
Those Battles I have fought, those horrid dangers,
Leaner then death, and wilder then destruction,
I have marched upon, these honored wounds, times story,
The blood I have lost, the youth, the sorrows suffered,
These are my death, these that can never be recompensed,
These that ye sit a brooding on like Toads,
Sucking from my deserts the sweets and favors,
And render me no pay again but poisons.

The proud vain soldier thou have set --

Thou lie.
Now by my little time of life lie basely,
Maliciously and loudly: how I scorn thee?
If I had sweld the soldier, or intended
As act in person, leaning to dishonor,
As ye would feign have forced me, witness heaven,
Where clearest understanding of all truth is,
(For these are spightfull men, and know no piety)
When Olin came, grim Olin, when his marches,
His last Incursions made the City sweat,
And drove before him, as a storm drives Hail,
Such showrs of frosted fears, shook all your heart strings;
Then when the Volga trembled at his terror,
And hid his seven curled heads, afraid of bruising,
By his armed horses hoofes; had I been false then,
Or blown a treacherous fire into the soldier,
Had but one spark of villainy lived within me,
Ye'ad had some shadow for this black about me.
Where was your souldiership? why went not you out?
And all your right honorable valor with ye?
Why met ye not the Tartar, and defied him?
Drew your dead-doing sword, and buckl'd with him?
Shot through his Squadrons like a fiery Meteor?
And as we see a dreadful clap of thunder
Rend the stiff hearted Oaks, and toss their roots up:
Why did not you so charge him? you were sick then,
You that dare taint my credit slipped to bed then,
Stewing and fainting with the fears ye had,
A whoreson shaking fit oppressed your Lordship:
Blush Coward knave, and all the world hiss at thee.

Exceed not my command.

I shall observe it.

Are you gone too? Come weep not honest Burris,
Good loving Lord, no more tears: It Is not his malice,
This fellows malice, nor the Dukes displeasure,
By bold bad men, crowded into his nature,
Can startle me: fortune never razed this Fort yet:
I am the same, the same man, living, dying;
The same mind to 'em both, I poize thus equal;
Only the juggling way that told me to it,
The Judas way, to kiss me, bid me welcome,
And cut my throat, a little sticks upon me.
Farewell, commend me to his grace, and tell him,
The world is full of servants, he may have many:
And some I wish him honest: he is undone else:
But such another doting Archas never,
So tried and touched a faith: farewell for ever.

Be strong my Lord: you must not go thus lightly.

Now, what is to do? what says the Law unto me?
Give me my great offense that speaks me guilty,

Laying aside a thousand petty matters,
As scorns, and insolences both from your self and followers,
Which you put first fire to, and these are deadly,
I come to one maine cause, which though it carries
A strangeness in the circumstance, it carries death too,
Not to be pardoned neither: ye have done a sacrilege.

High heaven defend me man: how, how Borosky?

Ye have took from the Temple those vowed Arms,
The holy Ornament you hung up there,
No absolution of your vow, no order
From holy Church to give 'em back unto you
After they were purified from war, and rested
From blood, made clean by ceremony: from the Altar
You snatched 'em up again, again ye wore 'em,
Again you staind 'em, staind your vow, the Church too,
And robbed it of that right was none of yours sir,
For which the Law requires your head, ye know it.

Those Arms I fought in last?

The same.

God a mercy,
Thou have hunted out a notable cause to kill me:
A subtle one: I dye, for saving all you;
Good sir remember if you can, the necessity,
The suddenness of time, the State all stood in;
I was entreated to, kneeled to, and prayed to,
The Duke himself, the Princes, all the Nobles,
The cries of Infants, bedrid fathers, virgins;
Prithee find out a better cause, a hansomer,
This will undo thee too; people will spit at thee,
The devil himself would be ashamed of this cause;
Because my have made me forget the ceremony,
The present danger every where, must my life satisfy?

It must, and shall.

O base ungrateful people,
Have ye no other Sword to cut my throat with
But mine own nobleness? I confess, I took 'em,
The vow not yet absolved, I hung 'em up with:
Wore 'em, fought in 'em, gilded 'em again
In the fierce Tartars bloods; for you I took 'em,
For your peculiar safety, Lord, for all,
I wore 'em for my Countries health, that gron'd then:
Took from the Temple, to preserve the Temple;
That holy place, and all the sacred monuments,
The reverent shrines of Saints, adored and honored,
Had been consumed to ashes, their own sacrifice,
Had I been slack, or staid that absolution.
No Priest had lived to give it; my own honor
Cure of my Country murder me?

No, no sir,
I shall force that from ye, will make this cause light too,
Away with him: I shall pluck down that heart sir.

Break it thou may; but if it bend, for pity,
Dogs, and Kits eat it: come I am honors Martyr.

Exceed my warrant?

You know he loves him not.

He dares as well meet death, as do it, eat wildfire,
Through a few fears I mean to try his goodness,
That I may find him fit, to wear here Burris;
I know Boroskie hates him, to death hates him,
I know he is a Serpent too, a swollen one
But I have pulled his sting out; what noise is that?










Upon my life the Soldier, sir, the Soldier,
A miserable time is come.

Oh save him,
Upon my knees, my hearts knees, save Lord Archas,
We are undone else.

Dares he touch his body?

He racks him fearfully, most fearfully.

Away Burris,
Take men, and take him from him; clap him up,
And if I live, I Will find a strange death for him:
Are the Soldiers broke in?

By this time sure they are sir,
They beat the gates extremely, beat the people.

Get me a guard about me; make sure the lodgings
And speak the Soldiers fair.

Pray heaven that take sir.

Give us the General, we will fire the Court else,
Render him safe and well,

Do not fire the Cellar,
There Is excellent wine in it Captain, and though it be cold whether,
I do not love it mul'd; bring out the General,
We Will light ye, such a bonefire else; where are ye?
Speak, or we will toss your Turrets, peep out of your hives
We Will smoke ye else: is not that a nose there?
Put out that note again, and if thou dare
But blow it before us: now he creepes out on's but rough.

Give us the General.

Yes, Gentlemen;
Or any thing ye can desire.

You musk-cat
Cordevan-skin, we will not take your answer.

Where is the Duke? speak suddenly, and send him hither.


Or we will so fry your buttucks.

Good sweet Gentlemen --

We are neither good, nor sweet, we are Soldiers
And you miscreants that abuse the General,
Give fire my boys it is a dark evening,
Let Us light 'em to their lodgings.

Good brother be not fierce.

I will not hurt her,
Fear not sweet Lady.

'May do what you please sit,
I have a sorrow that exceeds all yours,
And more, contemnes all danger.

Where is the Duke?

He Is here; what would ye Soldiers? wherefore troop ye
Like mutinous madmen thus?

Give me my father.

Give us our General.

Set him here before us,
Ye see the pledge we have got; ye see these torches;
All shall to ashes, as I live, immediately,
A thousand lives for one.

But hear me?

No, we come not to dispute.


By heaven I swear he is rackt and whipped.

Oh my poor father!

Burn, kill, and burn.

Hold, hold I say: hold Soldiers,
On your allegiance hold.

We must not.

Hold:
I swear by heaven he it a barbarous Traitor stirs first,
A villain, and a stranger to obedience,
Never my Soldier more, nor friend to honor:
Why did you use your old man thus? thus cruelly
Torture his poor weak body? I ever loved ye.

Forget me in these wrongs, most noble Archas.

I have balm enough for all my hurts: weep no more sir,
A satisfaction for a thousand sorrows:
I do believe ye innocent, a good man,
And heaven forgive that naughty thing that wronged me.
Why look ye wild my friends? why stare ye one me?
I charge ye as ye are men, my men, my lovers,
As ye are honest faithful men, fair Soldiers,
Let down your anger: Is not this our Sovereign,
The head of mercy, and of Law? who dares then,
But Rebels scorning Law, appear thus violent?
Is this a place for Swords? for threatening fires?
The reverence of this house dares any touch,
But with obedient knees, and pious duties?
Are we not all his Subjects? all sworn to him?
Has not he power to punish our offenses?
And do not we daily fall into 'em? assure your selves
I did offend and highly, grievously,
This good sweet Prince I offended, my life forfeited,
Which yet his mercy, and his old love met with,
And only let me feel his light rod this way:
Ye are to thank him for your General,
Pray for his life, and fortune: sweat your bloods for him.
You are offenders too, daily offenders,
Proud insolences dwell in your hearts, and ye do 'em,
Do 'em against his peace, his Law, his Person;
Ye see he only sorrows for your sins,
And where his power might persecute, forgives ye:
For shame put up your Swords, for honesty,
For orders sake and whose ye are, my Soldiers,
Be not so rude.

They have drawn blood from ye sir.

That was the blood rebel'd, the naughty blood,
The proud provoking blood; it is well it is out boy;
Give you example first; draw out, and orderly.

Good brother do.

Honest and high example,
As thou will have my blessing follow thee,
Inherit all mine honors: thank ye Theodore,
My worthy son.

If harm come, thank your self sir;
I must obey ye.

Captain, you know the way now:
A good man, and a valiant, you were ever,
Inclind to honest things: I thank ye Captain.
Soldiers, I thank ye all: and love me still,
But do not love me so you lose allegiance,
Love that above your lives: once more I thank ye.

Bring him to rest, and let our cares wait on him;
Thou excellent old man, thou top of honor,
Where justice, and obedience only build,
Thou stock of virtue, how am I bound to love thee?
In all thy noble ways to follow thee?

Remember him that vexed him sir.

Remember?
When I forget that villain, and to pay him
For all his mischiefs, may all good thoughts forget me.

I am very sore,

Bring him to bed with ease Gentlemen,
For every stripe I Will drop a tear to wash 'em,
And in my sad repentance --

It Is too much,
I have a life yet left to gain that love sir.

HOw does Lord Archas yet?

But weak and't please ye,
Yet all the helps that art can, are applied to him;
His heart's untouched, and whole yet; and no doubt sir,
His mind being found, his body soon will follow.

O that base knave that wronged him, without leave too;
But I shall find an hour to give him thanks for it;
He Is fast I hope?

As fast as irons can keep him:
But the most fearful wretch --

He has a conscience,
A cruel stinging one I warrant him,
A laden one: But what news of the Soldier?
I did not like their parting, 'twas too sullen.

That they keep still, and I fear a worse clap:
They are drawn out of the Town, and stand in counsels,
Hatching unquiet thoughts, and cruel purposes:
I went my self unto 'em, talked with the Captains,
Whom I found fraught with nothing but loud murmurs,
And desperate curses, sounding these words often
Like trumpets to their angers: we are ruined,
Our services turned to disgraces, mischiefs,
Our brave old General, like one had pilfer'd,
Tortured, and whipped: the Collonells eyes like torches,
Blaze every where and fright fair peace.

Yet worse sir:
The news is current now, they mean to leave ye,
Leave their allegiance: and under Olins charge
The bloody Enemy march strait against ye.

I have heard this too sir.

This must be prevented,
And suddenly, and warily.

It Is time sir,
But what to minister, or how?

Go in with me,
And there we will think upon it: such blows as these,
Equal defenses ask, else they displease.

Lord, what a coile has here been with these Soldiers?
They are cruel fellows.

And yet me thought we found 'em
Hansome enough; I Will tell thee true Petesca,
I looked for other manner of dealings from 'em,
And had prepared my self; but where is my Lady?

In her old dumps within: monstrous mellancholly;
Sure she was mad of this wench.

And she had been a man,
She would have been a great deal madder, I am glad she is shifted.

'Twas a wicked thing for me to betray her,
And yet I must confess she stood in our lights,
What young thing's this?

Good morrow beuteous Gentlewomen:
Pray you is the Princess stirring yet?

He has her face.

Her very tongue, and tone too: her youth upon him.

I guess ye to be the Princess women.

Yes, We are sir.

Pray is there not a Gentlewoman waiting on her Grace,
Ye call Alinda?

The devil sure in her shape.

I have heard her tell my Lady of a brother,
An only brother that she had: in travel --

'Mas, I remember that: this may be he too:
I would this thing would serve her.

So would I wench,
We should love him better sure: sir, here is the Princes,
She best can satisfy ye.

How I love that presence!
O blessed eyes how nobly shines your comforts!

What Gentleman is that?

We know not Madam:
He asked us for your Grace: and as we guess it,
He is Al ndas Brother.

Ha? let me mark him:
My grief has almost blinded me: her brother?
By Venus, he has all her sweetness upon him:
Two silver drops of dew, were never liker.

Gracious Lady --

That pleasant pipe he has too.

Being my happiness to pass by this way,
And having as I understand by Letters,
A sister in your virtuous service Madam --

O now my heart, my heart aches.

All the comfort
My poor youth has, all that my hopes have built me,
I thought it my first duty, my best service
Here to arive first, humbly to thank your Grace
For my poor first, humbly to thank your nobleness,
That bounteous goodness in ye.

It Is he certainly.

That spring of favor to her; with my life Madam
If any such most happy means might meet me,
To show my thankfulness.

What have I done fool?

She came a stranger to your Grace, no Courtier;
Nor of that curious breed besits your service,
Yet one I dare assure my soul, that loved ye
Before she saw ye; doated on your virtues;
Before she knew those fair eyes longed to read 'em,
You only had her prayers, you her wishes;
And that one hope to be yours once, preserved her,

I have done wickedly.

A little beauty,
Such as a Cottage breeds, she brought along with her;
And yet our Country eyes esteemed it much too:
But for her beauteous mind forget great Lady
I am her brother, and let me speak a stranger,
Since she was able to beget a thought, 'twas honest,
The daily studdy how to fit your services,
Truly to tread that virtuous path you walk in,
So fired her honest soul, we thought her Sainted;
I presume she is still the same: I would feign see her,
For Madam, it is no little love I owe her.

Sir, such a maid there was, I had --

There was Madam?

O my poor wench: eyes, I will ever curse ye
For your credulity. Alinda.

That Is her name, Madam.

Give me a little leave sir to lament her.

Is she dead Lady?

Dead sir, to my service.
She is gone, pray ye ask no further,

I obey Madam:
Gone? now must I lament too: said ye gone, Madam?

Gone, gone for ever.

That Is a cruel saying:
Her honor too?

Prithee look angry on me,
And if thou ever lovedst her, spit upon me;
Do something like a brother, like a friend,
And do not only say thou love her --

Ye amaze me.

I ruined her, I wronged her, I abused her;
Poor innocent soul, I flung her; sweet Alinda,
Thou virtuous maid, my soul now calls thee virtuous.
Why do ye not rail now at me?

For what Lady?

Call me base treacherous woman.

Heaven defend me.

Rashly I thought her false, and put her from me,
Rashly, and madly I betrayed her modesty,
Put her to wande, heaven knows where: nay, more sir,
Stuck a black brand upon her.

'Twas not well Lady,

'Twas damnable: she loving me so dearly,
Never poor wench loved so: Sir, believe me,
'Twas the most dutious wench, the best companion,
When I was pleased, the happiest, and the gladdest,
The modestest sweet nature dwelt within her:
I saw all this, I knew all this. I loved it,
I doated on it too, and yet I killed it:
O what have I forsaken? what have I lost?

Madam, I Will take my leave, since she is wandering,
It Is fit I know no rest.

Will you go too sir?
I have not wronged you yet, if you dare trust me,
For yet I love Alinda there, I honor her,
I love to look upon those eyes that speak her,
To read that face again, modesty keep me,
Alinda, in that shape: but why should you trust me,
'Twas I betrayed your sister, I undid her;
And believe me, gentle youth, it is I weep for her:
Appoint what penance you please: but stay then,
And see me perform it; ask what honor this place
Is able to heap on ye, or what wealth:
If following me will like ye, my care of ye,
Which for your sisters sake, for your own goodness --

Not all the honor earth h'as, now she is gone Lady,
Not all the favor; yet if I sought preferment,
Under your bounteous Grace I would only take it.
Peace rest upon ye: one sad tear every day
For poor Alindas sake, it is fit ye pay,

A thousand noble youth, and when I sleep,
Even in my silver slumbers still I Will weep.

Have ye been with 'em?

Yes, and 't please your Grace,
But no persuasion serves 'em, nor no promise,
They are fearful angry, and by this time sir,
Upon their march to the enemy-

They must be stopped.

I, but what force is able? and what leader --

How now, have you been with Archas?

Yes, and't please ye,
And told him all: he frets like a chased Lion,
And calls for his Arms: and all those honest Courtiers
That dare draw Swords.

Is he able to do any thing?

His mind is well enough; and where his charge is,
Let him be never so sore, it is a full Army.

Who commands the Rebels?

The young Collonell,
That makes the old man almost mad: he swears sir,
He will not spare his Sons head for the Dukedom.

Is the Court in Arms?

As fast as they can bussell,
Every man mad to go now: inspired strangely,
As if they were to force the Enemy,
I beseech your Grace to give me leave.

Pray go sir,
And look to the old man well; take up all fairly,
And let no blood be spilt; take general pardons,
And quench this fury with fair peace.

I shall sir,
Or seal it with my service; they are villains;
The Court is up: good sir, go strengthen 'em,
Your Royal sight will make 'em scorn all dangers;
The General needs no proof.

Come let us go view 'em.

It Is known we are up, and marching: no submission,
No promise of base peace can cure our maladies,
We have suffered beyond all repair of honor:
Your valiant old man's whipped; whipped Gentlemen,
Whipped like a slave: that flesh that never trembled,
Nor shrunk one sinew at a thousand charges,
That noble body rib'd in arms, the Enemy
So often shook at, and then shunned like thunder,
That bodies torn with lashes.

Let Us turn head.

Turn nothing Gentlemen, let us march on fairly,
Unless they charge us.

Think still of his abuses,
And keep your angers.

He was whipped like a top,
I never saw a whore so laced: Court schoole-butter?
Is this their diet? I Will dress 'em one running banquet:
What Oracle can alter us? did not we see him?
See him we loved?

And though we did obey him,
Forced by his reverence for that time; is it fit Gentlemen?
My noble friends, is it fit we men, and Soldiers,
Live to endure this, and look on too?

Forward:
They may call back the Sun as soon, stay time,
Prescribe a Law to death, as we endure this.

They will make ye all fair promises.

We care not.

Use all their arts upon ye.

Hang all their arts.

And happily they will bring him with 'em.

March apace then,
He is old and cannot overtake us.

Say he do.

We Will run away with him: they shall never see him more:
The truth is, we will hear nothing, stop at nothing,
Consider nothing but our way; believe nothing,
Not though they say their prayers: be content with nothing,
But the knocking out their brains: and last, do nothing
But ban 'em and curse 'em, till we come to kill 'em.

Remove then forwards bravely; keep your minds whole,
And the next time we face 'em, shall be fatal.

Peace to your Grace; take rest sir, they are before us.


They are sir, and upon the ma^ch

Lord Burris,
Take you those horse and coast 'em: upon the first advantage,
If they will not slack their march, charge 'em up roundly,
By that time I Will come in.

I Will do it truly.

How do you feel your self sir?

Well, I thank ye;
A little weak, but anger shall supply that;
You will all stand bravely to it?

Whilst we have lives sir.

Ye speak like Gentlemen; I Will make the knaves know,
The proudest, and the strongest hearted Rebel,
They have a law to live in, and they shall have;
Beat up a pace, by this time he is upon 'em,
And sword, but hold me now, thou shall play ever.

Stand, stand, stand close, and sure;
The horse will charge us.

Let 'em come one, we have provender sit for 'em.

Here comes Lord Burris sir, I think to parley.

You are welcome noble sir, I hope to our part.

No, valiant Collonell, I am come to chide ye,
To pity ye; to kill ye, if these fail me;
Fie, what dishonor seek ye? what black infamy!
Why do ye draw out thus? draw all shame with ye?
Are these sit cares in subjects? I command ye
Lay down your arms again, move in that peace,
That fair obedience you were bred in.

Charge us?
We come not here to argue.

Charge up bravely,
And hotly too, we have hot spleenes to meet ye,
Hot as the shames are offered us.

Look behind ye.
Do you see that old man? do you know him Soldiers?

Your father sir, believe me --

You know his marches,
You have seen his executions: is it yet peace?

We Will dye here first.

Farewell: you will hear on's presently.

Stay Burris: this is too poor, too beggarly a body
To bear the honor of a charge from me,
A sort of tatterd Rebels; go provide Gallowses;
Ye are troubled with hot heads, I Will cool ye presently:
These look like men that were my Soldiers
Now I behold 'em nearly, and more narrowly,
My honest friends: where got they these fair figures?
Where did they steal these shapes?

They are struck already.

Do you see that fellow there; that goodly Rebel?
He looks as like a Captain, I loved tenderly:
A fellow of a faith indeed.

He has shamed him.

And that that bears the Collors there, most certain
So like an Ancient of mine own, a brave fellow,
A loving and obedient, that believe me Burris,
I am amazed and troubled: and were it not
I know the general goodness of my people,
The duty, and the truth, the steadfast honesty,
And am assured they would as soon turn devils
As Rebels to allegiance, for mine honor.

Here needs no wars.

I pray forgive us sir.

Good General forgive us, or use your sword,
Your words are double death.

Good noble General.

Pray sir be merciful.

Weep out your shames first,
Ye make me fool for company: fie Soldiers,
My Soldiers too, and play these tricks: what is he there?
Sure I have seen his face too; yes, most certain
I have a son, but I hope he is not here now,
'Would much resemble this man, wondrous near him,
Just of his height and making too, you seem a Leader.

Good sir, do not shame me more: I know your anger,
And less then death, I look not for.

You shall be my charge sir, it seems you want foes,
When you would make your friends your Enemies:
A running blood ye have, but I shall cure ye.

Good sir --

No more good Lord: beat forward Soldiers:
And you, march in the rear, you have lost your places.

You shall not be thus sullen still, with me sister
You do the most unnobly to be angry,
For as I have a soul, I never touched her,
I never yet knew one unchaste thought in her:
I must confess, I loved her: as who would not?
I must confess I doated on her strangely,
I offered all, yet so strong was her honor,
So fortified as fair, no hope could reach her,
And whilst the world beheld this, and confirmd it,
Why would you be so jealous?

Good sir pardon me,
I feel sufficiently my follies penance,
And am ashamed, that shame a thousand sorrows
Feed on continually, would I had never seen her,
Or with a clearer judgment looked upon her,
She was too good for me, so heavenly good sir,
Nothing but heaven can love that soul sufficiently,
Where I shall see her once again.

No more tears,
If she be within the Dukedom, we will recover her:
Welcome Lord Burris, fair news I hope.

Most fair sir,
Without one drop of blood these wars are ended,
The Soldier coold again, indeed ashamed sir,
And all his anger ended.

Where Is Lord Archas?

Not far off sir: with him his valiant son,
Head of this fire, but now a prisoner,
And if by your sweet mercy not prevented,
I fear some fatal stroke.

I hear the drums beat,
Welcome, my worthy friend.

Stand where ye are sir,
Even as you love your Country, move not forward,
Nor plead for peace, till I have done a justice,
A justice on this villain; none of mine now,
A justice on this Rebel.

O my Brother.

This fatal firebrand --

Forget not old man,
He is thy son of thine own blood.

In these veins
No treachery e're harbored yet, no mutiny,
I never gave life to lewd and headstrong Rebels.

It Is his first fault.

Not of a thousand sir,
Or were it so, it is a fault so mighty,
So strong against the nature of all mercy,
His mother were she living, would not weep for him,
He dare not say he would live.

I must not sir,
Whilst you say it is not fit: your Graces mercy
Not to my life applied, but to my fault sit,
The worlds forgiveness next, last, on my knees sir,
I humbly beg,
Do not take from me yet the name of father,
Strike me a thousand blows, but let me dye yours.

He moves my heart: I must be sudden with him,
I shall grow faint else, in my execution;
Come, come sir, you have seen death; now meet him bravely.

Hold, hold I say, a little hold, consider
Thou have no more sons Archas to inherit thee.

Yes sir, I have another, and a nobler:
No treason shall inherit me: young Archas
A boy, as sweet as young, my brother breeds him,
My noble brother Briskie, breeds him nobly,
Him let your favor find: give him your honor.

Thou have no child left Archas, none to inherit thee
If thou strikst that stroke now: behold young Archas;
Behold thy brother here, thou bloody brother,
As bloody to this sacrifice as thou art:
Heave up thy sword, and mine is heaved up: strike Archas,
And I Will strike too, as suddenly, as deadly:
Have mercy, and I Will have mercy: the Duke gives it,
Look upon all these, how they weep it from thee,
Choose quickly, and begin.

On your obedience,
On your allegiance save him.

Take him to ye,
And sirrah, be an honest man, ye have reason:
I thank ye worthy Brother; welcome child,
Mine own sweet child.

Why was this boy concealed thus?

Your graces pardon:
Fearing the vow you made against my brother
And that your anger would not only light
On him, but find out all his family,
This young boy, to preserve from after danger,
Like a young wench, hither I brought; my self
In the habit of an ordinary Captain
Disguised, got entertainment, and served here
That I might still be ready to all fortunes:
The boy your Grace took, nobly entertained him,
But thought a Girl, Alinda, Madam.

Stand away,
And let me look upon him.

My young Mistress?
This is a strange metamorphosis, Alinda?

Your graces humble servant.

Come hither sister:
I dare yet scarce believe mine eyes? how they view one another?
Do thou not love this boy well?

I should lie else,
Trust me, extremely lie sir.

Did thou never wish Olimpia,
It might be thus?

A thousand times.

Here take him:
Nay, do not blush: I do not jest; kiss sweetly:
Boy, ye kiss faintly boy; heaven give ye comfort;
Teach him, he will quickly learn: there is two hearts eased now.

You do me too much honor sir.

No Archas,
But all I can, I will; can you love me? speak truly.

Yes sir, dearly.

Come hither Viola, can you love this man?

I Will do the best I can sir.

Seal it Burris:
We Will all to Church together instantly:
And then a use for boys; stay, bring Boroskie.
I had almost forgot that lump of mischief.
There Archas, take the enemy to honor,
The knave to worth: do with him what thou will.

Then to my sword again; you to your prayers;
Wash off your villainies, you feel the burden.

Forgive me ere I die, most honest Archas;
It Is too much honor that I perish thus;
O strike my faults to kill them, that no memory,
No black and blasted infamy heareafter --

Come, are ye ready?

Yes.

And truly penitent, to make your way straight?

Thus I wash off my sins.

Stand up, and live then,
And live an honest man; I scorn men's ruin's:
Take him again, Sir, try him: and believe
This thing will be a perfect man.

I take him.

And when I fail those hopes, heavens hopes fail me.

You are old: no more wars Father:
Theodore take you the charge, be General.

All good bless ye.

And my good father, you dwell in my bosom,
From you rise all my good thoughts: when I would think
And examine time for one that is fairly noble,
And the same man through all the straights of virtue,
Upon this silver book I Will look, and read him.
Now forward merrily to Hymen's rights,
To joys, and revels, sports, and he that can
Most honor Archas, is the noblest man.


