LEt us make use of this stolen privacy,
And not loose time in protestation, mistress,
For twere in me a kind of breach of faith,
To say again I love you.

Sweet speak softly
For though the venture of your love to me,
Meets with a willing, and a full return:
Should it arrive unto my Fathers knowledge;
These were our last discourse.

How shall he know it?

His watching cares are such, for my advancement,
That every where his eye is fixed upon me:
This night that does afford us some small freedom,
At the request and much entreaty of,
The mistress of the house, was hardly given me:
For I am never sufferd to stir out,
But he has spies upon me, yet I know not
You have so won upon me, that could I think
You would love faithfully (though to entertain
Another thought of you, would be my death)
I should adventure on his utmost anger.

Why, do you think I can be false?

No faith,
You have an honest face, but if you should --

Let all the stored vengeance of heavens justice --

No more, I do believe you, the dance ended,
Which this free woman's ghests have vowed to have
Ere they depart, I will make home, and store me
With all the Jewels, Chains, and gold are trusted
Unto my custody, and at the next corner,
To my Fathers house, before one at the farthest,
Be ready to receive me.

I desire
No bond beyond your promise, let us go in,
To talk thus much before the door, may breed,
Suspicion.

Here are company too.

Away,
Those powers that prosper true and honest loves
Will bless our undertakeings.

It Is my wish Sir.

Nay, Sir, excuse me, I have drawn you to,
Too much expense already in my travel:
And you have been to forward in your love;
To make my wants your own, allow me manners
Which you must grant I want, should I increase,
The bond in which your courtisyes have tide me:
Be still consuming you, give me leave
To take mine own ways now; and I shall often
With willingness come to visit you, and then thank you.

By this hand I could be angry, what do you think me?
Must we that have so long time, been as one
Seen Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, and their wonders
Been bedfellowes, and in our various journey
Mixtall our observations, part (as if
We were 2. Carriers at 2. several ways,
And as the forehorse guides, cry God be with you)
Without or complement, or cerimony?
In travelers that know transalpine garbes,
Though our designs are near so serious, friend,
It were a capital crime; it must not be,
Nay what is more, you shall not, you ere long
Shall see my house, and find what I call mine
Is wholly at your service.

It Is this tires me,
Sir I were easily wooed if nothing else
But my will lay in the choice, but it is not so
My friends and kindred that have part of me,
And such on whom my chiefest hopes depend,
Justly expect the tender of my love
After my travel, then mine own honesty
Tells me it is poor, having indifferent means
To keep me in my quallity and rank,
At my return to tire another bounty,
And let mine own grow lusty, pardon me.

I will not, cannot, to conclude I dare not:
Can any thing conferred upon my friend
Be burdensome to me? for this excuse
Had I no reason else you should not leave me,
By a travelers faith you should not, I have said,
And then you know my humor, there is no contending.

Is there no way to escape this Inundation?
I shall be drowned with folly if I go:
And after 9. days men may take me up,
With my gall broken.

Are you yet resolved?

Wood you would spare me.

By this light I cannot
By all, that may be sworn by.

Patience help me,
And heaven grant his folly be not catching:
If it be, the towns undone, I now would give
A reasonable sum of gold to any sheriff,
That would but lay an execution on me,
And free me from his company; while he was abroad,
His want of wit and language kept him dumb:
But Balaam's Ass will speak now without spurring.

Speak, have I won you? --

You are not to be resisted.

Be ready I entreat you the dance done,
Besides a liberal reward I have,
A bottle of sherry in my power shall beget
New crotchets in your heads.

Tush fear not us, we will do our parts.

Go in,

I know this fellow.
Belong you to the house?

I serve the Mistress.

Pretty, and short, pray you sir then inform her,
Two Gentlemen are covetous to be honored,
With her fair presence.

She shall know so much,
This is a merry night with us, and forbid not
Welcome to any that looks like a man:
I Will guide you the way.

Nay follow, I have a trick in it.

Come where is this masque? fairest for our cheer,
Our thanks and service, may you long surviue,
To joy in many of these nights.

I thank you.

We must have music too, or else you give us,
But half a welcome.

Pray you Sir excuse me.

By no means Lady.

We Will crown your liberal feast,
With some delightful strain fitting your love:
And this good company.

Since you enforce it,
I will not plead the excuse of want of skill
Or be, or nice, or curious, every year,
I celebrate my marriage night; and will
'Till I see my absent husband.

It Is fit freedom.

Richardo thou art dull --

I shall be lighter,
When I have had a heat.

Now Sir, the news?

Mistress there are 2. Gentlemen.

Where?

Complementing who should first enter.

What are they?

Heaven knows, but for their strangeness, have you never seen a Cat wash her
face


Yes.

Just such a stir they keep if you make but have,
You may see 'em yet before they enter.

Let 'em be what they will, we will give them fair
Entertain, and gentle welcome.

It shall be so.

Then let it be your pleasure.

Let Us stand a side and you shall see us have
Fine sport anon.

A fair society, do you know these Gentle women?

Yes.

What are they?

The second is a neighbors daughter, her name is Viola.
There is my kinsmans wife, Portia her name, and a
Friend too.

Let her -- what is she that leads the dance?

A Gentlewoman.

I see that.

Indeed?

What?

A Gentlewoman.

Udsfoote, good Sir what is she that leads the dance?

My Mistress.

What else?

My Mistress, Sir.

Your Mistress? a pox on you, What a fry of fools are here? I see it is treason
to understa^d in this house; if nature were not better to them, then they can
be to themselves, they would scant hitt their mouths; my Mistress? Is there any
one with so much wit in 's head, that can tell me at the first sight, what
Gentlewoman that is that leads the dance


It Is my wife.

Hum.

How do thou like her?

Well, a pretty Gentlewoman.

Prithee be quiet.

I would I could
Let never any hereafter that is a man,
That has affections in him and free passions,
Receive the least tie from such a fool as this is,
That holds so sweet a wife, it is lamentable to consider truly
What right he robbs himself of, and what wrong
He does the youth of such a Gentlewoman?
That knows her beauty is no longer hers,
Then men will please to make it so, and use it
Neither of which lies freely in a husband,
O what have I don, what have I don, Coxcomb?
If I had never seen, or never tasted
The goodness of this kix, I had been a made man,
But now to make a Cuckold is a sin
Against all forgiveness, worse then a murder;
I have a Woolfe by the ears, and am bitten both ways.

How now friend, what are you thinking of?

Nothing concerning you, I must be gone.

Pardon me, I Will have no going sir.

Then good sir give me leave to go to bed,
I am very weary and ill tempered.

You shall presently, the dance is done.

Mistress, these are the gentlemen.

My husband will come home, dear sir.

She Is fair still, O that I were a knave or durst be one,
For thy sake coxco^be; he that invented honesty, undid me.

I had you had not known me, you are merry it is well thought,
And how is it with these worthy Gent?

We are glad to see you here again

Oh Gent, what ha'you lost? but get you into travells,
There you may learn, I cannot say what hidden virtues.

Hidden from you I am sure,
My blood boyles like a furnace,
She Is a fair one.

Pray entertain this Gent. with all the courtesy,
Fitting my most especial friend.

What this poor house may yield,
To make you welcome dear sir command
Without more complement.

I thank you:
She Is wise and speaks well too, oh what a blessing
Is gone by me near to be recovered?
Well, it was an old shame the Devil laid up for me, and now has hit me home;
if there be any ways to be dishonest and save my self yet, -- No it must not
be, why should I be a fool to -- Yet those eyes would tempt another Adam,
how they call to me, and tell me -- Sfoote they shall not tell me any thing,
sir will you walk in


How is it Signior?

Crazie a little.

What ayle you sir?
What Is in my power pray make use of, sir.

It Is that must do me good, she does not mock me sure,
An't please you nothing, my disease is only weariness.

Come Gent. we will not keep you from your bedds too long.

I ha some business, and it is late, and you far from your lodging.


Well.

Come my dear Mercury, i will bring you to your chamber, and then I am for you,
Maria, thou art a new wife to me now, and thou shall find it, ere I sleep


And I, an old ass to my self, mine own rod whips me, -- good sir no more of
this, it is tedious, you are the best guide in your own house -- go sir --

This fool, and his fair wife have made me frantic
From two such physickes for the soul, deliver me.

Well, you must have this wench then.

I hope so, I am much o'th bow hand else.

VVood I were hanged, it is a good loving little fool that dares venture her
self upon a coast she never knew yet, but these women, when they are once
thirteen, god speed the plough


Faith they will venture further, so their lading then a Merchant, and through as
many storms, but they will be franghted, they are made like Carrecks only
strength and storage


Come, come, you talk, you talk.

We do so, but tell me Richardo, woote thou marry her?


Marry her? why what should I do with her?

Pox, I thought we should have had all shares in her like lawful prize.


No by my faith sir, you shall pardon me, I lancht her at my own charge
without partners, and so i will keep her


What Is the hour?

Twelve.

What shall we do the while? it is yet scarce eleven.

There Is no standing here, is not this the place?

Yes.

And to go back unto her fathers house, may breed suspicion lets slip into a
Tavern, for an hour, it is very cold


Content, there is one hard by, a quart of burnt sack will recover us, I am as
cold as Chri^^mas, this stealing flesh in the frosty weather, may be sure 'ith
eating, but sure the woodmen have no great catch on it; shalls go


Thou art the strangest lover of a tavern, what shall we do there now? loose
the hour and our selves too


Loose a pudding; what do thou talk of the hour; will one quart muzle us?
have we not ears to hear, and tongues to ask the drawers, but we must
stand here like bawds to watch the minutes


Prithee content thy self, we shall scout here, as though we went a haying,
and have some mangey prentice, that cannot sleep for scratching, over ear us,
come will you go sirs? when your love fury is a little frozen, you will come to
us


Will you drink but one quart then?

No more I faith.

Content.

Why then, have with you, but letts be very watchful

As watchful as the belman, come I Will lead, because I hate good manners, they
are too tedious.

The night is terrible and I enclosed
With that my virtue and my self hate most,
Darkness; yet must I fear that which I wish,
Some company, and every step I take
Sounds louder in my fearful ears to night
Then ever did, the shrill and sacred bell
That rang me to my prayers; the house will rise
When I unlock the door, were it by day
I am bold enough, but then a thousand eyes
Warn me from going, might not God have made
A time for envious prying folk to sleep
Whilst lovers met, and yet the sun have shone?
Yet I was bold enough, to steal this key
Out of my fathers Chamber, and dare yet
Venture upon mine enemy, this night,
Armed only with my love, to meet my friend.
Alas how valiant, and how fraid at once
Love makes a Virgin? I will throw this key
Back through a window, I had wealth enough
In Jewels with me, if I hold his love
I steal them for; farewell my place of birth,
I never make account to look on thee again;
And if there be as I have heard men say,
These household gods, I do beseech them look
To this my charge, bless it from thieves and fire,
And keep till happily my love I win
Me from thy door, and hold my Father in.

No more for God sake, how is the night boy?

Faith sir it is very late.

Faith sir you lie, is this your jack in the clock-house? will you strike sir?
gi's some more sack, you varlet


Nay, if you love me, good Vberto go,
I am monstrous hot with wine.

Quench it again with love, Gent. I will-drinke one health more, and then if
my legs say me not shamefully nay, I will go with you, give me a singular
quart


Of what wine sir?

Of Sack, you that speak confusion at the bar, of sack I say, and every one
his quart, what a devil letts be merry


You shall sir.

We will sir, and a dried tongue.

And an Olive, boy, and a whole bunch of fiddlers, my head swimmes plaguely, vds
precious I shall be claud


Pray go, I can drink no more, think on your promise, it is midnight Gentlemen.


O that it were dum midnight now, not a word more, every man on's knees, and
betake himself to his saint, here is to your wench, seigneour, all this, and
then away


I cannot drink it.

It Is a toy, a toye, away wo't.

Now dare I speak any thing, to any body living, come whers the fault? off
with it


I have broke my wind, call you this sack? -- I wonder who made it? he was a
sure workman, for it is plaguey strong work, is it gone round


It Is at the last out of my way, good boy, is the moon up yet?


Yes sir.

Where is she boy?

There sir.

We shall have rain and thunder, boy.

When sir?

I cannot tell, but sure we shall, boy.

The Gent. is wine wise.

Drawer?

Here sir.

Can you procure?

What sir?

A whore or two or three as need shall serve, boy?

I, a good whore were worth money, boy.

I protest sir we are all together unprovided.

The mor's the pity, boy, can you not vize us where my child?


Neither, in troth sir.

Why where were you brought up boy? no juggling of a whore? no aim my boy?


It cannot sink in my head now, that thou should marry, why should thou
marry, tell me


I marry? I Will be hanged first: some more wine boy.

Is she not a whore translated? and she be, lets repair to her.


I cannot tell, she may be an offender; but signior Silvio I shall scratch your
head, indeed I shall


Judge me I do most jest with thee, what an she were inverted with her heels
upward, like a traitors Coat? what care I


I, hang her, shall we fall out for her?

I am a little angry, but these wenches, did you not talk of wenches?


Boy lend me your candle.

Why Sir?

To set fire to your rotten feeling, you will keep no
Whores, Rogue, no good members;

Whores Sir?

I, whores, Sir, do you think we come to lie with your hogsheads?


I must beat the watch, I have longed for it any time this three weeks.


VVee'le beat the town too, and thou will, we are proof boy; shall we kill
any body


No but we will hurt 'em dangerously.

Silu. Now must I kill one, I cannot avoid it, boy easily before there with
your candle; where is your Mistress


A bed, Sir.

With whom?

With my Master.

You lie Boy, she is better brought up then to lie with her husband, has he not
cast his head yet? next year he will be a velvet-headed Cuckold


You are a merry Gentleman, there Sir, take hold


This is the place I have out told the Clock,
For have, he is not here. Richardo? no;
Now every power that loves and is beloved:
Keep me from shame to night, for all you know
Each thought of mine is innocent, and pure,
As flesh and blood can hold: I cannot back;
I threw the key within, and ere I raise
My Father up, to see his daughters shame,
I Will set me down, and tell the Northern wind,
That it is gentler then the curling West;
If it will blow me dead, but he will come;
I faith it is cold; if he deceive me thus,
A woman will not easily trust a man. Hark what is that?

Thou Art over long at thy pott, tom, tom, thou art over long at the pott tom.


Bless me! whose that?

Whoo!

There Boys.

Darkness be thou my cover, I must fly,
To thee I have for help --

They have a light,
Wind if thou love a virgin blow it out,
And I will never shut a window more,
To keep thee from me.

Boy?

Sir.

Why Boy?

What say you Sir?

Why boy? art thou drunk boy?

What would you Sir?

Why very good, where are we?

I, that is the point.

Why Sir, you will be at your lodging presently.

I Will go to no lodging Boy.

Whether will you go then Sir?

I Will go no farther.

For Gods sake Sir, do not stay here all night.

No more I will not boy, lay me down, and roll me to a whore.


And me.

There spoke an --

Then set your foot to my foot, and up tails all.

That is Richardo, what a noise they make?
It Is ill don on 'em: here Sirs, Richardo?

What Is that Boy?

It Is a wench Sir, pray Gent. come away.

O my dear love! how do thou?

My sweet heart? even as thou see.

Where Is thy wench?

VVher's this bed worm?

Speak softly for the love of heaven.

Mistress get you gone, and do not entice the gent. now you see thei're drunk,
or I Will call the watch, and lay you fast enough


Alas what are you? or what do you mean?
Sweet love where is the place?

Marry sweet love, even here, lie down I Will feese you.

Good god! what mean you?

I Will have the wench.

If you can get her.

No I Will lie with the wench to night, and she shall be yours to morrow.


Let go the wench.

Let you go the wench.

O Gent. as you had mothers!

They had no mothers, they are the sons of bitches

Let that be maintained.

Marry then.

Oh bless me heaven!

How many is there ons?

About five.

Why then lets fight three to three.


Content.

The watch? the watch? the watch? where are you?


Where are these cowards?

There Is the whore.

I never saw a drunken man before,
But these I think are so.

Oh!

I mist you narrowly there.

My state is such, I know not how to think,
A prayer fit for me, only I could move,
That never maiden more might be in love.

Where are they, boy?

Make no such have sir, they are no runners.

I am hurt, but that is all one, I shall light upon some of ye,
Pedro thou art a tall Gent. let me kiss thee.

My friend.

Your friend? you ly.

Stand further off, the watch, you are full of fleas.

Gent either be quiet, or we must make you quiet.

Nay good Mr. Constable, be not so Rigorous.

Mr. Constable lend me thy hand of justice.

That I will sir.

Fie Mr. Constable what golls you have? is justice so blind she cannot see to
wash your hands? I cry you mercy Sir; Your gloves are one


Now you are up Sir, will you go to bed?

I Will truckle here Boy, give me another pillow.

Will you stand up and let me lay it on then?

Yes.

There hold him two of ye, now they are up be going Mr. Constable


And this way, and that way, tom.

And here away and there away tom.

This is the right way the others the wrong.

The others the wrong.

Thou art over long at the pott tom, tom.

Lead valiantly sweet Constable, whoop! ha Boys!

This wine hunts in their heads.

Give me the bill, for I Will be the Sergeant.

Look to him Sirs.

Keep your Ranks you Rascals, keep your Ranks.

I Cannot sleep for thinking of this Asses wife, I Will be gone presently, there is
no staying here, with this Devil about me? hoe, this is the house of sleep,
hoe? again there is foot the darkness, and this love together, will make me
lunaticke; ho


Who calls there?

Pray take the pains to rise and light a candle.

Presently,

Was ever man but I in such a stocks? well this shall be a warning to me, and a
fair one too, how I betray my self to such a dunce, by way of benefit


Did you call?

Yes, pray do me the kindness sir, to let me out and not to enquire why, for
I must needs be gone


Not to night, I hope sir.

Good sir to night, I would not have troubled you else, pray let it be so.


Alas sir, my Master will be offended.

That I have business? no I warrant ye.

Good sir take your rest.

Pray my good friend let me appoint my own rest.

Yes sir.

Then show me the way out, I Will consider you.

Good Lord, sir.

If I had not an excellent tempered patience, now should I break this fellows
head, and make him understand 'twere necessary; the only plague of this house
is the unhandsome love of servants, that near do their duty in the right
place, but when they muster before dinner, and sweep the table with a wodden
dagger, and then they are troublesome too, to all men's shoulders, the Woodcocks
flesht again, now I shall have a new stir


Why how now friend? what do you up so late? are you well? do you want any
thing? pray speak


Only the cause I rise for.

What knaves are these? what do you want? why sirrah?

Nothing in the world, but the keys to let me out of doors; I must be gone, be
not against it, for you cannot stay me


Begone at this time? that were a merry jest.

If there be any mirth in it, make you use on it, but I must go.


Why for loves sake?

'Twill benefit your understanding nothing to know the cause, pray go to bed,
I Will trouble your man only


Nay Sir you have raised more, that has reason to curse you, and you knew all,
my wifes up, and coming down too


Alas it will be a trouble, pray go up to her and let me disturb no more, it is
unmannerly


She Is here already; sweet heart: how say you by this Gentleman? he would away
at midnight


That I am sure he will not.

Indeed I must.

Good Sir let not your homely entertainment press you to leave your bed at
midnight; if you want, what my house or your town may afford you, make it your
own fault if you call not for it pray go to bed again; let me compel you, I am
sure you have no power to deny a woman; the air is piercing, and to a body
beaten with long travel, 'twill prove an ill Physician


If she speak longer I shall be a knave, as rank as ever sweat for it; Sir if
you will send your wife up presently, I will either stay with you, do you mark,
me or deliver you, so just a cause, that you your self, shall thrust me out of
doors, both suddenly and willingly


I would feign hear that faith, pray thee go up sweet heart, I have half
persuaded him, besides, he has some private business with me


Good night Sir, and what content you would have, I wish with you.


Could any man that had a back ask more? o me! o me!

Now deal directly with me: why should you go?

If you be wise do not enquire the cause, 'twill trouble you:


Why? prithee why?

Faith I would not have you know it, let me go, 'twill be far better for you.


Who Is that, that knocks there? is it not at the street door?


Yes sir.

Who Is there, cannot you speak?

A poor distressed maid, for gods sake let me in.

Let her in and me out together, it is but one labor, it is pity she should
stand in the street, it seems she knows you


There she shall stand for me, you are ignorant; this is a common custom of
the Rogues that lie about the loose parts of the City


As how?

To knock at doors in dead time of night, and use some fained voice to raise
compassion, and when the doors are open, in they rush, and cut the throats of
all and take the booty, we cannot be too careful


As ever you had pity let me in, I am undone else.

Who are you?

My name is Viola, a Gentlewoman, that ill chance has distressed, you know my
father


Alas of god we'll let her in, it is one of the Gentlewomen were here in the
evening, I know her by her name, (poor soul) she is cold I warrant her, let
her have my warm Bed, and I Will take her fortune; come, pray come


It is not Viola that is certain, she went home to her fathers, I am sure,


Will not you be so good to let me in?

I Will be so good to have you whipped away if you stay a little longer: She Is gone
I warrant her, now let me know your cause for I will hear it, and not repent
the knowing


Since you are so importunate, I Will tell you, I love your wife extremely.


Uery well.

And so well that I dare not stay.

Why?

For wronging you, I know I am flesh and blood, and you have done me
friendships infinite and often, that must require me honest and a true man, and
I will be so or I Will break my heart


Why, you may stay for all this, me thinks.

No, though I wood be good, I am no saint, nor is it safe to try me, I deal
plainly


Come I dare try you, do the best you can.

You shall not when I am right again, I Will come and see you, till when, I Will use
all Countries and all means, but I will loose this folly, it is a Devil


Is there no way to stay you?

No, unles you will have me such a villain to you as all men shall spit at me.


Does she know you love her?

No I hope not, that were recompense fit for a Rogue to render her.


If ever any had a faithful friend I am that man, and I may glory in it, this
is he, that ipse, he that passes all Christendom for goodness, he shall not
over go me in his friendship twere recreant and base, and I Will be hanged first,
I am resolved, go thy ways, a wife shall never part us, I have considered and
I find her nothing to such a friend as thou art; I Will speak a bold word, take
your time and woe her, you have overcome me clearly, and do what is fitting
with her, you conceive me, I am glad at heart you love her: by this light,
never stare upon me for I will not fly from it, if you had spoken sooner, sure
you had bin served; Sir, you are not every man, now to your task, I give you
free leave, and the sin is mine if there be any in it


He will be hanged before he makes this good, he cannot be so innocent a
Coxcombe, he can tell ten sure, if I had never known you as I have done, I
might be one, as others perhaps sooner, but now it is impossible there is too much
good between us


Well thou art even the best man -- I can say no more, I am, so over joy'd, you
must stay this night, and in the morning go as early as you please, I have a
toy for you


I thought this pill would make you sick.

But where you mean to be I must have notice,
And it must be hard by too, do you mark me?

Why? what is the matter?

There is a thing in hand.

Why? what thing?

A sound one, if it take right, and you be not peevish We two will be -- you
would little think it; as famous for our friendship --


How?

If God please, as ever Damon was and Pytheas or Pylades, and Orestes, or any
two that ever were: do you conceive me yet


No by my troth Sir; he will not help me up sure.

You shall anon, and for our names, I think they shall live after us, and be
remembered while there is a story; or I loose my aim


What a vengeance ailes he? how do you?

Yes faith, we two will be such friends as the world shall ring off.


And why is all this?

You shall enjoy my wife.

Away, away.

The wonder must begin, so I have cast it, 'twill be scurvy else, you shall not
stir a foot i'nt, pray be quiet 'till I have made it perfect


What shall a man do with this wretched fellow? there is no mercy to be used
toward him, he is not capable of any pity, he will in spite of course be a
Cuckold, And who can help it? must it begin so needs Sir? -- think again


Yes marry must it, and I my self will woe this woman for you, do you perceive
it now? ha


Yes now I have a little sight in the matter; o that thy head should be so
monstrous, that al thy Servants hatts may hang upon it! but do you mean to do
this


Yes certain, I will woe her, and for you, strive not against it, it is the
overthrow of the best plott that ever was then


Nay I Will assure you Sir, I Will do no harm, you have too much about you of your
own


Have you thought of a place yet?

A place?

I a place where you will bide, prithee no more of this modesty, it is foolish,
and we were not determinde to be absolute friends indeed, 'twere tolerable


I have thought, and you shall hear from me.

Why? this will gain me everlasting glory; I have the better of him, that is my
comfort, good night.


Good night, well go thy ways, thou art the tydiest wittall this day I think
above ground, and yet thy end for all this must be mottly.


It Is bitter cold; a plague upon these Rogues, how wary they are grown? not a
door open now, but double bard, not a window, but up with a case of wood like
a spice box, and their locks unpickable, the very smithes that were half
venturers, drink penitent single Ale, this is the Iron age, the Ballad sings
of; well I shall meet with some of our loose Linen yet, good fellows must not
starve; here is he shall show you God a mighties dog bolts, if this hold


Faith thou art but too merciful, that is thy fault thou art as sweet a
thief, that sin excepted ever sufferd, that is a proud word and I Will maintain
it


Come prithee let us shogg off, and brouze an hour or two, there is ale will make
a Cat speak, at the harrow, we shall get nothing now, without we batter, it is
grown too near morning, the Rogues sleep sober, and are watchful


We want a Boy extremely for this function kept under for a year, with
milk and knott-grasse; in my time I have seen a boy do wonders Robbin the
red Tincker had a boy Rest his soul he sufferd this time 4. years for two
spoones, and a Pevvter Candlestick, that svveet man had a Boy as I am Curstend
Whore, would have run through a Cat hole, he would have boulted such a piece
of linen in an evening --


Well, we will have a Boy, prithee lets go, I am vengeance cold I tell thee.


I Will be hanged before I stir without some purchase by these ten bones, I Will
turn she ape and untile a house, but I Will have it, it may be I have an humor
to be hanged, I cannot tell


Peace, you flead whore, thou have a mouth like a Bloodhounde, here comes a
night shade


A Gentlevvoman whore, by this darkness I Will case her to the skin.


Peace I say.

What fear have I endured this dismal night?
And what disgrace if I were seen and known?
In which this darkness, only is my friend,
That only has undone me; a thousand curses
Light on my easy, foolish childish, love,
That durst so lightly lay a confidence
Upon a man, so many being false;
my weariness, and weeping makes me sleepie, I must lie down.

What Is this? a prayer, or a homily, or a Ballad of good council? she has a
gown, I am sure


Knock out her brains and then she will near byte

Yes I will knock her, but not yet, you? woman?

For gods sake what are you?

One of the grooms of your wardrobe, come uncase, uncase; byr lady a good
Kersey


Pray do not hurt me sir.

Lets have no pity, for if you do, here is that shall cut your whistle.


Alas what would you have? I am as miserable as you can make me any way.


That shall be tryde.

Here, take my gown if that will do you pleasure.

Yes marry will it, look in the pockets Doll, there may be birds.


They are flown a pox go with them, I Will have this Hatt, and this Ruff too,
I like it, now will I flourish like a Lady, brave I faith boy


You Are so gentle people to my seeming,
That by my truth I could live with you.

Could you so? a pretty young round vvench, well bloudded, I am for her,
thieves


But by this I am not, cool your Godpiece, Rogue, or I Will clap a spell upon it,
shall take your edge off with a very vengeance


Peace horseflesh, peace, I Will cast off my Amazon, she has walked too long, and
is indeed notorious, she will fight and scould, and drink like one of the
worthies


Vds precious you young contagious whore must you be ticing? and is your flesh
so wrank sir, that two may live upon it? I am glad to hear your cortall grown
so lusty; he was dry foundered the other day, we he my pampered lade of Asia


Good woman do not hurt me, I am sorry that I have given any cause of anger.


Either bind her quickly and come away, or by this steel I Will tell though I
trusse for company; now could I eat her broyld, or any way, without vinegar, I
must have her nose


By any thing you love best, good sir, good woman.

Why her nose Dorithy?

If I have it not and presently and warm, I loose that I go withal.


Wood the Devil had that thou go withal, and thee together, for sure he
got thy whelps if thou have any, she is thy dear dad, whore! put up your
cutpurse; an I take my swich up, twill be a black time with you else sheth your
bung whore


Will you bind her? we shall stand here prating and be hang both.


Come I must bind you, not a word, no crying.

Do what you will, indeed I will not cry.

Hurt her not, if thou do by Ale and Bear I Will clout thy old bald brain pan,
with a piece of brass, you bitch incarnate


O God to what am I reserved, that knew not
Through all my childish hours and actions
More sin then poor imagination,
And too much loving of a faithless man?
For which I am paid, and so, that not the day
That now is rising to protect the harmless,
And give the innocent a sanctuary
From thieves and spoylers, can deliver me
From shame, at least suspicion --

Sirrah lead down the horses easily, I Will walk a foot till I be down the
hill, it is very early, I shall reach home betimes. How now, whose there


Night that was ever friend to lovers, yet
Has raised some weary soul, that hates his bed
To come and see me blush, and then laugh at me.

H'ad a rude heart that did this.

Gentle sir,
If you have that which honest men call pity,
And be as far from evil as you show;
Help a poor maid, that this night by bad fortune
Has been thus used by Robbers.

A pox upon his heart that would not help thee, this thief was half a
Lawyer, by his bands, how long have you bin tied here


Alas this hour, and with cold and fear am almost perished.


Where were the watch the while? good sober Gent. they were like careful
members of the City, drawing in diligent ale and singing catches, while Mr.
Constable contrived the tosts: these fellows would be more severely punished
then wandering Gypsies, that every stat^te whipps, for if they had every one two
eyes a piece more, three pots would put them out


I cannot tell I found no Christian to give me succor.

When they take a thief, I Will take Ostend again; the whorsons drink opium in
their Ale, and then they sleep like topps; as for their bills, they only serve
to reach down Bacon to make Rashers on; now let me know whom I have done this
courtesy too, that I may thank my early rising for it


Sir, All I am, you see.

You have a name I Am sure, and a kindred, a father, friend or something that
must own you; she is a handsome young wench; what Rogues were these to Rob her


Sir you see all I dare reveal,
And as you are a Gent press me no further;
For there begins a grief whose bitterness
Will break a stronger heart then I have in me,
And twill but make you heavy with the hearing,
For your own goodness sake desire it not.

If you would not have me enquire that, how do you live then?

How I have lived, is still one question,
Which must not be resolved --
How I desire to live, is in your liking,
So worthy an opinion I have of you,

Is in my liking? how I pray thee? tell me, in faith I Will do you any good lys in
my power; she has an eye would raise a bedrid man; come leave your fear and
tell me, that's a good wench


Sir I would serve --

Who would thou serve? do not weep and tell me.

Faith sir even some good woman, and such a wife if you be married, I do
imagine yours


Alas! thou art young and tender, let me see thy hand, this was near made to
wash or wind up water, beat clothes, or rub a floor, by this light, for one
use that shall be namelesse, it is the best wanton hand that ere I look on


Dare you accept me sir, my heart is honest,
Among your virtuous charitable deeds,
This will not be the least.

Thou can in a Chamber.

In a Chamber sir.

I mean wait there upon a Gentlewoman,
How quick she is, I like that mainely too;
I Will have her, though I keep her with maine strength
like a besieged town, for I know I shall have the enemy before me within a
week

Sir I can sow too, and make pretty laces,
Dress a head handsome, teach young gentlewomen,
For in all these I have a little knowledge.

It Is well, no doubt I shall increase that knowledge; I like her better still,
how she provokes me; pretty youngmaid you shall serve a good Gentlewoman,
though I say it that will not be unwilling you should please me, nor I
forgetful if you do


I am the happier.

My man shall make some shift to carry you behind him, can you ride well?


But I Will hold fast for catching of a fall.

That Is the next way to pull another on you, I Will work her as I go I know
she is wax, now, now, at this time could I begett a worthy on this wench


Sir for this Gentleness, may heaven requite you tenfold.


It Is a good vvench how ever others use thee, be sure I Will be a loving master
to thee, come.


I hope I am vvilde enough for being known I have writ a letter here, and in
it have abused my self most bitterly, yet all my fear is not enough, for that
must do it, that must lay it on, I Will vvin her out in the flint, 'tvvill be more
famous, now for my language


Now Sir who would you speak with?

Where be thy Mastres man? I would speak with her.
I have a letter.

Cannot I deliver it?

No by my trot and fait can thou not man.

Well Sir I Will call her to you, pray shake your ears without a little.


Cran a Cree do it quickly; this rebbell tongue sticks in my teeth worse then a
toughe hen, sure it was nere known at Babell, for they soul'd no apples, and
this was made for certain at the first planting of Orchards it is so crabbed


What Is he wood speak with me?

A kill kenny ring, there he stands Madam.

What would you have with me, friend?

He has a letter for other women, will thou read it.

From whence?

De Cross creest from my Master.

Who is your Master?

I pray do you look.

Do you know this fellow?

No Maddam not I; more then an Irish footman stand further friend, I do not
like your roperunners, what stallion Rogues are these, to wear such dovvsetts,
the very Cotton may commit adultery


I cannot find whose hand this should be, I Will read, to the beauteous wife of
Don Antonio, sure this is some blind scrib -- well now what follows


Pray God it take, I have given her, that will stir her conscience, how it
works with her; hope if it be thy will let the flesh have it


This is the most abhorred, intolerable knavery, that ever slave entertained,
sure there is more then thine own head in this villainy, it goes like practiced
mischeife, disabled in his body? o good God, as I live he lies fearfully, and
basely, ha? I should know that Jewel, it is my husband, come hither shat, are
you an Irish man


Sweet woman a Cree I am an Irish man.

Now I know it perfectly; is this your trick Sir? I Will trick you for it; how
long have you served this Gentleman


Please thee a little day, o my Mac dermond put me to my mastree, it is don I
know


By my faith he speaks as well as if he had been lousy for the language a
year or two; well Sir, you had bin better have kept your own shape as I will
use you, what have I don that should deserve this trial, I never made him
cuckold to my knowledge, Sirrah com hither


Now will she send some Jewel, or some letter
I know her mind as well; I shall be famous.

Take this Irish bawd here.

How?

And kick him till his breeches and breech be of one color a bright blew
both


I may be well swing'd thus, for I dare not reveal my self, I hope she does
not mean it, o hone o hone, o St. Patricke, o a Cree, o sweet woman


No turn him and kick him o the other side, that is well

O good waiting man, I beseech thee good waiting man, a pox fire your legs.


You Rogue you enemy to all, but little breeches how dare thou come to me with
such a letter


Prithee pity the poor Irishman, all this makes for me, if I win her yet, I
am still more glorious


Now could I weep at what I have don, but I Will harden my heart again, go shut him
up, 'till my husband comes home, yet thus much ere ye go, sirrah thatched head,
would not thou be whipped and think it justice? well Aquavitae Barrel, I will
bounce you


I pray do, I beseech you be not angry.

O you hobby headed Rascal, I Will have you flead, and trossers made of thy skin
to tumble in, go a way with him, let him see no sun, 'till my husband come
home, sir I shall meet with you for your knavery, I fear it not


Will thou not let me go? I do not like this.

Away with him.

Come I Will lead you in by your Jack a lent hair, go quietly or I Will make your
crupper crack


And do you hear me sirrah? and when you have done, make my Coach ready.


Yes forsooth.


Lock him up safe enough I Will to this Gentleman,
I know the reason of all this business, for I do suspect it,
If he have this plott, I Will ring him such a peale, shall make his ears deaf
for a month at least.

Am I not mad? can this weak tempered head,
That will be mad with drink, endure the wrong
That I have done a virgin and my love?
Be mad, for so thou ought, or I will beat
The vvalls and trees, down with thee, and will let
Either thy memory out or madness in,
But sure I never loved fair Viola:
I never loved my Father nor my Mother,
Or any thing but drink; had I had love;
Nay, had I known so much charity,
As would have saved an Infant from the fire,
I had bin naked, raving in the street:
With half a face, gashing my self with knives,
Two hours ere this time.

Good morrow Sir.

Good morrow Gentlemen, shall we go drink again?
I have my wits.

So have I but they are unsettled ones, would I had some porrige.


The tavern boy was here this morning with me
And told me that there was a Gentlewoman,
Which he took for a whore that hung on me:
For whom we quarreled, and I know not what.

I faith nor I.

I have a glimmering of some such thing.

Was it you Silvio,
That made me drink so much? 'twas you or Pedro.

I know not who.

We were all apt enough.

But I will lay the fault on none but me,
That I would be so entreated, come Silvio,
Shall we go drink again, come Gentlemen,
Why do you stay, let us never leave off now,
Whilst we have Wine and throats, I Will practice it,
Till I have made it my best quality;
For what is best for me to do but that?
For Gods sake come and drink; when I am named
Men shall make answer, which Richado mean you?
The excellent drinker? I will have it so,
Will you go drink?

We drunk too much too lately.

Why there is then the less behind to drink,
Let Us end it all, dispatch that, we will send abroad,
And purchase all the Wine the world can yield,
And then drink it off, then take the fruits of the earth,
Distill the Juice from them, and drink that off;
We Will catch the rain before it fall to ground,
And drink off that that never more may grow;
We Will set our mouths to Springs, and drink them off,
And all this while we will never think of those
That love us best, more then we did last night.
We will not give unto the poor a drop
Of all this drink, but when we see them weep,
We Will run to them, and drink their tears off too,
We Will never leave whilst there is heat or moisture,
In this large globe, but suck it cold and dry,
Till we have made it Elementall earth,
Merely by drinking.

Is It flattery to tell you, you are mad?

If it be false,
There Is no such way to bind me to a man;
He that will have me, lay my goods and lands,
My life down for him, need no more, but say
Richardo thou art mad, and then all these
Are at his service, then he pleases me,
And makes me think that I had virtue in me,
That I had love, and tenderness of heart,
That though I have committed such a fault,
As never creature did, yet runinng mad,
As honest men should do for such a crime,
I have expressed some worth, though it be late:
But I alas have none of these in me,
But keep my wits still like a frozen man,
That had no fire within him.

Nay good Richardo leave this wild talk, and send a letter to her, I Will deliver
it


It Is to no purpose; perhaps she is lost last night,
Or she got home again, she is now so strictly
Looked to, the wind can scarce come to her, or admit
She were her self; if she would hear from me,
From me unworthy, that have used her thus,
She were so foolish, that she were no more
To be beloved.

Sir, we have found this nightgown she took with her.

Where?

Where? where? speak quickly.

Searching in the Suburbs, we found a Tinker and his whore, that had in it a
sap-house, whom we apprehended, and they confessed they stole it from her


And murdered her?

What aile you Man?

Why all this does not make me mad.

It does, you would not offer this else, good Pedro look to his sword.


They do deny the killing of her, but swore they left her tied to a tree, in
the fields, next those Suburbs that are without our Ladies gate, near day, and
by the rode, so that some passinger must needs unty her quickly


The will of heaven be done? Sir I will only entreat you this, that as you were
the greatest occasion of her loss, that you will be pleased to urge your
friends, and be your self earnest in the search of her; if she be found, she
is yours, if she please, I my self only, see these people better examined, and
after follow some way in search, God keep you Gentlemen.


Alas good man!

What think you now of me, I think this lump
Is nothing but a piece of fleagme congealed
Without a soul, for where there is so much spirit
As would but warm a flea, those faults of mine
Would make it glow and flame in this dull heart,
And run like molten gold through every sin,
Till it could burst these walls and fly away.
Shall I entreat you all to take your horses,
And search this innocent?

With all our hearts.

Do not devide your selves till you come there,
Where they say she was tied, I Will follow too,
But never to return till she be found.
Give me my sword good Pedro, I will do
No harm believe me with it, I am now
Far better tempered, If I were not so,
I have enough besides, God keep you all,
And send us good success.

WHo is it? can you tell?

By my troth Sir I know not, but it is a Gentlewoman

A Gentleman I Will lay my life you puppy, h'as sent his wife to me: if he have,
fling up the bed


Here she is Sir.

I am glad I found you Sir, there take your letter and keep it till you have
another friend to wrong, it is too malicious false to make me sin, you have
provoked me to be that I love not, a talker, and you shall hear me

Why should you dare to imagine me
So light a huswife, that from four hours knowledge
You might presume to offer to my credit
This rude and ruffian trial, I am sure
I never courted you, nor gave you tokens,
That might concern assurance, you are a fool.

I cannot blame you now, I see this letter
Though you be angry, yet with me you must not,
Unless you will make me guilty of a wrong,
My worst affections hate --

Did not you send it?

No upon my faith, which is more, I understand it not; the hand is as far from
my knowledge, as the malice


This is strange.

It is so, and had been stranger, and indeed more hateful,
Had ^, that have received such courtesies, and owe so many
Thanks, done this base office.

Your name is at it.

Yes, but not my nature, and I shall hate my name worse then the manner, for
this base broking; you are wise and virtuous, remove this fault from me; for on
the love I bear to truth and goodness, this letter dare not name me for the
author


Now I perceive my husbands knavery, if my man can but find where he has been,
I will go with this Gentleman whatsoever comes on it: and as I mean to carry
it both he and all the world shall think it fit, and thank me for it


I must confess I loved you, at first, however this made me leave your house
unmannerly, that might provoke me to do something ill, both to your honor and
my faith, and not to write this letter, which I hold so truly wicked, that I
will not think on it


I do believe you, and since I see you are free, my words were not meant to
you, but this is not the half of my affliction


It Is pity you should know more vexation; may I enquire?

Faith Sir I fear I have lost my husband.

Your husband? it cannot be: I pity her, how she is vexed?

How now? what news? nay speak, for we must know.

Faith I have found at length by chance where he has been

Where?

In a blind out-house in the Suburbs, pray God all be well with him.


Why?

There are his clothes, but what is become of him, I cannot yet enquire.


I am glad of this; sure they have murtherd him, what shall I do?


Be not so grieved before you know the truth, you have time enough to weep,
this is the sodainst mischief; did you not bring an Officer to search there,
where you say you found his clothes


Yes, and we searched it, and charged the fellow with him: but he like a rogue,
stubborn rogue, made answer, he knew not where he was; he had been there, but
where he was now, he could not tell: I tell you true I fear him


Are all my hopes and longings to enjoy him,
After this 3 years travel, come to this?

It is the rankest house in all the City, the most cursed roguy bawdi-house?
hell fire it


This is the worst I heard yet; will you go home? I Will bear you company, and
give you the best help I may: this being here will wrong you


As you are a Gentleman, and as you loved your dead friend, let me not go
home, that will but heap one sorrow on another


Why purpose any thing and I Will perform't; I am at my wits end too.


So am I, O my dear Master!

Peace you great fool.

Then good Sir carry me to some retired place, far from the sight of this
unhappy City, whether you will indeed, so it be far enough


If I might council you, I think 'twere better to go home, and try what may be
done yet, he may be at home before you, who can tell


O no, I know he is dead, I know he is murdered; tell me not of going home, you
murder me too


Well, since it pleases you to have it so, I will no more persuade you to go
home, I Will be your guide in the Country, as your grief does command me, I
have a Mother dwelling from this place some 20. miles, the house though homely,
yet able to show something like a welcome: thither I Will see you safe with all
your sorrows


With all the speed that may be thought upon; I have a Coach here ready, good
Sir quickly; I Will fit you my fine husband


It shall be so; if this fellow be dead, I see no band of any other man, to tie
me from my will, and I will follow her with such careful service, that she
shall either be my Love or Wife; will you walk in


I thank you Sir, but one word with my man, and I am ready; keep the Irish
fellow safe, as you love your life, for he I fear has a deep hand in this,
then search again, and get out warrants for that naughty man, that keeps the bad
house, that he may answer it, if you find the body, give it due burial;
farewell. You shall hear from me, keep all safe.


O my sweet Mr!

Man-a-cree, the Devil take thee, will thou kill me here, I prithee now let me
go seek my Mr. I shall be very cheel else


Do you hear man-a-cree, i will cree your coxcombe, and you keep not still, down
you rogue


Good sweet fact serving-man, let me out I beseech de, and by my trot I will
give dye Worship 2. shillings in good argott, to buy die Worship pippines


This rogue thinks all the worth of man consists in Peepins; by this light I Will
beat rebellion out of you for ever


Will thou not hear me man? is fet, i will give thee all I have about me.


I thank you Sir, so I may have picking work,

Here is five shillings man,
Here is a cudgel, a very good one.

How now, what is the matter, where is the Irishman.

There, a with take him, he makes more noise alone there, then ten Lawyers can
do with double and a scurvy Case


Let him out, I must talk with him.

Will thou give me some drink, o hone? I am very dry man.


You shall have that shall quench your thirst, my friend.


Fate do thou mean man.

Even a good tough halter.

A halter? o hone!

Sirrah you are a mischievous rogue, that'^ the truth.

No fet I am not.

Shall I knock out his brains? I have killed dogs have been worth three of
him for all uses


Sirah, the truth on it is, you must with me to a Justice. O Roger, Roger.


Why, what is the matter William?

Heavy news Roger, heavy news, God comfort us.

What is it man?

What Is the matter now? I am e'ne weary of this way, wouldl were out on it.


My Mr. sure is murdered, Roger, and this cursed rogue fear has had a hand
in it


No fet not.

Stand away, i will kicked out of him: come sirrah, mount, i will make you dance, you
Rascal, kill my Master? If thy breech were cannon proof, having this good
cause on my side, I would encounter it; hold fair, Shamrocke


Why how now sirs? you will not murder me indeed.

Bless us Roger!

Nay, I am no spirit.

How do you Sir, this is my very Master.

Why well enough yet, but you have a heavy foot of your own; where is my wife?


Alas poor sorrowful Gentlewoman, she thinks you are dead, and has given over
housekeeping


Whether is she gone then?

Into the Country with the Gentleman your friend Sir, to see if she can wear
her sorrows out there; she weeps and takes on too too --


This falls out pat; I shall be everlasting for a name: do you hear? upon your
lives and faiths to me, not one word I am living, but let the same report pass
along, that I am murdered still; I am made for ever


Why Sir?

I have a Cause Sir that is enough for you; well, if I be not famous, I am
wronged much; for any thing I know I will not trouble him this week at least,
noe, let them take their way one of another


Sir, will you be still an Irishman.?

Yes a while.

But your Worship will be beaten no more?

No I thank you William.

In truth Sir, if it must be so, I Will do it better then a stranger.


Go, you are Knaves both, but I forgive you, I am almost mad with the
apprehension of what I shall be, not a word I charge you.


Come pretty soul, we now are near our home,
And whilst our horses are walked down the hill,
Let thou and I walk here over this Close:
The foot-way is more pleasant, it is a time
My pretty one, not to be wept away,
For every living thing is full of love;
Art not thou so too? hah?

Nay, there are living things empty of love,
Or I had not been here, but for my self!
Alas, I have too much.

It cannot be, that so much beauty, so much youth and grace should have too
much of love


Pray what is love? for I am full of that I do not know.

Why, love fair maid is an extreme desire,
That Is not to be examined but fulfilled,
To ask the reason why thou art in love,
Or what might be the noblest end in love,
Would overthrow that kindly rising warmth,
That many times slides gently over the heart,
'Twould make thee grave, and staid thy thoughts would be,
Like a thrice married Widow, full of ends,
And void of all compassion, and to fright thee
From such enquiry, whereas thou art now
Living in ignorance, mild, fresh, and sweet,
And but sixteen, the knowing what love is,
Would make thee six and forty.

Would it would make me nothing, I have heard
Scholars affirm the world is upheld by love,
But I believe women maintain all this,
For there is no love in men.

Yes, in some men.

I know them not.

Why, there is love in me.

There Is charity I am sure toward me.

And love; which I will now express, my pretty maid,
I dare not bring thee home, my Wife is foul,
And therefore envious, she is very old,
And therefore Jealous; thou art fair and young,
A subject fit, for her unlucky vices.
To work upon, she never will endure thee.

She may endure
If she be ought, but Devil, all the friendship
That I will hold with you; can she endure
I should be thankful to you? may I pray
For you and her, will she be brought to think
That all the honest industry I have
Deserves brown bread? if this may be endured,
She Will pick a quarrel with a sleeping child,
E're she fall out with me.

But trust me she does hate all handsomeness.

How fell you in love with such a creature?

I never loved her.

And yet married her?

She was a rich one.

And you swore I warrant you, she was a fair one then too.


Or believe me I think I had not had her.

Are you men all such? wood you wood wall us in a place
Where all we women, that are innocent,
Might live together.

Do not weep at this,
Although I dare not for some weighty reason
Displease my Wife, yet I forget not thee.

What will you do with me?

Thou shall be placed
At my man's house, and have such food and raiment
As can be bought with money: these white hands
Shall never learn to work, but they shall play
As thou say they were wont, teaching the strings
To move in order, or what else thou will.

I thank you Sir, but pray you cloth me poorly,
And let my labor get me means to live.

But fair one, you I know do so much hate
A foul ingratitude, you will not look
I should do this for nothing.

I will work as much out as I can, and take as little
That you shall have as duly paid to you
As ever servant did.

But give me now a trial on it, I may believe
We are alone, show me how thou will kiss
And hug me hard, when I have stolen away
From my too clamorous Wife that watches me,
To spend a blessed hour or two with thee.

Is this the love you mean? you would have that
Is not in me to give, you would have lust.

Not to dissemble, or to mince the word,
It Is lust I wish indeed.

And by my troth I have it not for heavens sake use me kindly.
Though I be good, and show perhaps a monster,
As this world goes.

I do
But speak to thee, thy answers are thy own,
I compel none, but if thou refuse this motion,
Thou art not then for me, alas good soul?
What profit can thy work bring me.

But I fear: I pray go, for lust they say will grow
Outrageous being denied, I give you thanks
For all your courtesies, and there is a Jewel
That Is worth the taking, that I did preserve
Safe from the robbers, pray you leave me here
Just as you found me, a poor innocent,
And Heaven will bless you for it.

Pretty maid I am no Robber nor no Ravisher,
I pray thee keep thy Jewel, I have done
No wrong to thee, though thou be virtuous
And in extremity, I do not know,
That I am bound to keep thee.

No sir, for gods sake if you know an honest man in all these countries, give
me some directions to find him out


More honest then my self good sooth I do not know; I would have lain with
thee with thy consent, and who would not in all these parts, is past my memory,
I am sorry for thee, farewell gentle maid, god keep thee safe.


I thank you sir, and you;
Woman they say, was only made of man,
Me thinks it is strange they should be so unlike,
It may be all the best was cut away
To make the woman and the naught was left
Behind with him, I Will sit me down and weep,
All things have cast me from 'em but the earth;
The evening comes and every little flower
Droops now, as well as I.

Good Madg lets rest a little, by my troth I am weary, this new pail is a
plaguey heavy one, would Tom were hanged for choosing it, it is the antowardst
fool in a Country


With all my heart, and I thank you too, Nan.

What true contented happiness dwells here,
More then in Cities? wood to God my father
Had lived like one of these and bred me up
To milk and do as they do: me thinks
It Is a life that I wood choose, if I were now
To tell my time again, above a princes; maids for charity
Give a poor wench one draught of Milk
That weariness and hunger have nigh famisht.

If I had but one Cows Milk in all the world, you should have some on it; there
drink more, the cheese shall pay for it, alas poor heart! she is dry


Do you dwell here abouts?

No, would I did.

Madge if she do not look like my cosen Sue o'th more lane as one thing can
look like another --


Nay Sue has a hazell eye, I know Sue well, and by your leave not so trim a
body neither, this is a feate bodied thing I tell you


She laces close by the mass I warrant you, and so does Sue too.


I thank you for your gentleness fair maids.

Drink again pray thee.

I am satisfied, and heaven reward thee for it, yet thus far I will compel you
to accept these trifles, toys only that express my thanks, for greater
worth, I Am sure they have not in them; indeed you shall, I found them as I came


Madge, look you here Madge.

Nay I have as fine a one as you, mine is all gold and painted, and precious
stone in it; I warrant it cost a crown wench


But mine is the most sumptuous one that ere I saw.

One favor you must do me more, for you are well acquainted here.


Indeed we will do you any kindness sister.

Only to send me to some honest place, where I may find a service.


Vds me, our Dorithy went away but last week and I know my Mistress wants a
Maid, and why may she not be placed there? this is a likely wench I tell you
truly, and a good wench I warrant her


And it is a hard case if we that have served four years a piece cannot bring
in one servant, we will prefer her; hark you sister, pray what is your name


Melvia.

A feate name in faith, and can you milk a Cow? and make a merry-bush? that is
nothing


I shall learn quickly.

And dress a house with flowers? and serve a pigg? this you must do, for we
deal in the dary, and make a bed or two


I hope I shall.

But be sure to keep the men out, they will mar all that you make else, I know
that by myself; for I have been so touz'd among them in my days, come you shall
even home with us and be our fellow, our house is so honest, and we serve a very
good woman, and a Gentlewoman, and we live as merrily, and dance a good days
after even-song, our wake shall be on Sunday; do you know what a wake is? we
have mighty cheer then, and such a coil, 'twould bless ye; you must not be so
bashful, you will spoil all


Let Us home for Gods sake, my Mistress thinks by this time we are lost, come
we will have a care of you, I warrant you; but you must tell my Mistress where you
were borne, and every thing that belongs to you, and the strangest things you
can devise, for she loves those extremely, it is no matter whether they be true
or no, she is not so scrupulous; you must be our sister, and love us best, and
tell us every thing, and when cold weather comes we will ly together, will you do
this


Yes.

Then home again a gods name, can you go apace.

I warrant you.

HOw now, any good news yet?

Faith not any yet.

This comes a tippling; would 'twere treason an^ pleased God to drink more then
three draughts at a meal


When did you see Richardo?

I crossed him twice to day.

You have heard of a young wench that was seen last night?


Yes.

Has Richard hard of this?

Yes and I think he is ridden after, farewell I Will have another round.


If you hear any thing, pray spare no horse-fleshe
I Will do the like.

Do.

Sir, I did think 'twas you by all discriptions.

It Is so,
I took her up indeed, the manner how
You have heard already, and what she had about her,
As Jewels, gold and other trifling things:
And what my end was, which because she slighted,
I left her there in the feildes.

Left in the feildes? could any but a Rogue
That had despised humanity and goodness,
God, law and credit? and had set himself
To loose his noblest part, and be a beast,
Have left so innocent, unmatched a virtue,
To the rude mercy of a wilderness?

Sir If you come to rail, pray quit my house,
I do not use to have such language given;
Within my doors to me; for your wench,
You may go seek her with more patience,
She Is tame enough I warrant you.

Pray forgive me.
I do confess my much forgetfullnesse;
And weigh my words no farther I beseech you,
Then a mere madness; for such a grief has seized me
So strong and deadly, as a punishment,
And a just one too,
That it is a greater wonder I am living,
Then any thing I utter; yet let me tell you thus much,
'Twas a fault for leaving her
So in the fields.

Sir I will think so now, and credit me,
You have so wrought me with your grief, that I
Do both forgive and pity you:
And if you will please to take a bed this night here;
Too morrow I Will bring you where I left her.

I thank you, no, shall I be so unworthy,
To think upon a bed, or ease or comfort,
And have my heart stray from me God knows where,
Cold and forsaken, destitute of friends,
And all good comforts else, unless some tree
Whose speechless charity must better ours,
With which the bitter east winds made their sport
And sung through hourly, has invited her
To keep off half a day? shall she be thus,
And I draw in soft slumbers? God forbid.
No, night and bitter coldness I provoke thee,
And all the dewes that hang upon thy locks,
Showers, hailes, snowes, frosts, and two edged winds that prime
The maiden blossoms, I provoke you all,
And dare expose this body to your sharpness,
'Till I be made a land mark.

Will you then stay and eat with me?

You Are angry with me, I know you are angry,
You would not bid me eat else; my poor Mistress,
For ought I know thou art famish't, for what else
Can the feilds yield thee, and the stubborn season,
That yet holds in the fruit? good Gentle Sir,
Think not ill manners in me for denying
Your offered meat, for sure I cannot eat
While I do think she wants; well I Am a rascal;
A villain, slave, that only was begotten,
To murder women and of them the best.

This is a strange affliction.
If you will accept no greater courtisy, yet drink Sir.

Now I am sure you hate me, and you knew
What kind of man I am, as indeed it is fit,
That every man should know me to avoid me.
If you have peace within you Sir, or goodness
Name that abhorred word drink no more unto me,
You had safer strike me.
I pray you do not, if you love me do not.

Sir, I mean no ill by it.

It may be so,
Nor let me see
None sir, if you love heaven;
You know not what offense it is unto me,
Nor good now, do not ask me why:
And I warn you once again, let no man else speak often,
I fear your servants will be prating to me.

Why Sir what aile you?

I hate drink, there is the end on it,
And that man that drinks with meat is dambn'd
without an age of prayers and repentance,
And there is a hazard too; good Sir no more,
If you will do me a free courtisy;
That I shall know for one, go take your horse,
And bring me to the place where you left her:

Since you are so importunate I will;
But I will wish Sir you had stayed to night
Upon my credit, you shall see no drink.

Be gone the heating of it makes me giddy,
Sir will you be entreated to forbear it,
I shall be mad else.

I pray no more of that, I am quiet,
I Will but walk in and away straight.

Now I thank you,
But what you do, do in a twinkling, Sir.

As soon as may be.

Is this the wench? you have brought me some catch I warrant;
How injuringly she looks upon the matter?

Yes forsooth this is the maiden.

Come hither, wood you serve?

If it shall please you to accpt my service I hope I shall do something that
shall like you, though it be but truth, and often praying for you


You are very curious of your hand me thinks,
You preserve it so with gloves, let me see it;
I marry, here is a hand of march-pane wenches:
This pretty palm never knew sorrow yet;
How soft it is I warrant you, and supple:
OF my word this is fitter for a pocket to filch withal
Then to work, I fear me little one,
You are no better then you should be; go too.

My Conscience yet is but one witness to me,
And that heaven knows is or mine innocence,
It Is true, I must confess, with shame enough,
The time that I have lead yet never taught me
What it was to break a sleep, or to be weary.

You can say well: if you be mine, Wench, you must do well too, for words are
but slow workers, yet so much hope I have of you, that I Will take you so you will
be diligent, and do your duty: how now


There is a messenger come from your son
That brings you word he is returned from travel,
And will be here this night.

Now joy upon thee for it, thou art ever
A bringer of good tidings, there, drink that:
In troth thou have much contented me, my son?
Lord how thou have pleased me, shall I see my Son
Yet e're I dye? take care my house be handsome,
And the new stools set out, and boughs and rushes,
And flowers for the window, and the Turkey Carpet,
And the great parcel salt, Nan, with the Cruets,
And prithee Alexander go to the Cook,
And bid him spare for nothing, my son's come home,
Who Is come with him?

I hear of none yet, but a Gentlewoman?

A Gentlewoman? what Gentlewoman.

I know not but such a one there is, he says.

Pray God he have not cast away himself
Upon some snout-faire piece, I do not like it.

No sure, my Master has more discretion.

Well, be it how it will, he shall be welcome.
Sirs, to your tasks, and show this little novice
How to bestir her self, I Will sort out things.

We will forsooth, I can tell you my mistress is a s^irring woman.


Lord how she will talk some times? it is the maddest cricket --


Me thinks she talks well, and shows a great deal of good huswifry, pray
let me deck the chambers, shall I


Yes you shall, but do not scorn to be avis'd sister, for there belongs more
to that then you are aware on; why would you venture so fondly upon the
strowings? there is mighty matters in them I Will assure you, and in the spreading
of a bough pot, you may miss if you were ten years elder, if you take not a
special care before you


I will learn willingly, if that be all.


Sirrah where is it they say my young master has been?


Faith I know not, beyond the sea, where they are borne without noses.


less bless us! without noses? how do they do for handkerchers?


So Richard says, and sirrah, their feet stands in their foreheads.


That's fine by my troth, these men have pestilence running heads then; do they
speak as we do


No, they never speak.


Are they cursend?


No they call them Infidells, I know not what they are.


Sirrah we shall have fine courting now my young master is come home, were you
never courted sister


Alas I know it not.


What is that courting sirrah?


I can tell, for I was once courted in the matted chamber, you know the party
Madge, faith he courted finely


Pray thee what is it?


Faith nothing but he was some what figent with me, faith it is fine sport, this
courting


Where be the Maids there?


We shall be hanged anon, away good wenches, and a care you dight things
handsomely, I will look over you.


If your sorrow will give you so far leave, pray think your self most welcome
to this place, for so upon my life you are, and for your own fair sake, take
truce a while with these immoderate mournings


I thank you sir, I shall do what I may;
Pray lead me to a chamber.

Presently,
Before your blessing mother, I entreat ye
To know this Gentlewoman, and bid her welcome,
The virtuous wife of him that was my self
In all my travells.

Indeed she is most welcome, so are you son
Now all my blessing on thee; thou have made me
Younger by 20 years, then I was yesterday,
Will you walk in? what ails this Gentlewoman?
Alas I fear she is not well, good Gentlewoman.

You fear right.

She has fasted over long,
You shall have supper presently o'th board.

She will not eat I can assure you mother,
For Gods sake let your maid conduct her up
Into some fair becoming Chamber
Fit for a woman of her being and
As soon as may be,
I know she is very ill, and wood have rest.

There is one ready for her, the blew chamber.

It Is well, I Will lead you to your Chamber door
And there I Will leave you to your quiet, Mistress.

I thank you Sir, good rest to every one,
You Will see me once again to night I hope.

When you shall please, I Will wait upon you Lady.

Where are these maids attend upon the Gentlewoman, and see she want no good
thing in the house? goodnight with all my heart forsooth, good Lord how you are
grown? is he not Alexander


Yes truly he is shot up finely god be thanked.


An ill weed Mother will do so.


You say true Sir, an ill weed grows a pace.


Allexander the sharp, you take me very quickly.


Nay I can tell, Allexander will do it, do you read madcapp still?


Some times forsooth.


But faith son what countries have you traveld?


Why many, Mother, as they lay before me, France, Spain, Italy and Germany, and
other Provinces that I am, sure you are not betterd by, when you hear of them


And can you these tongues perfectly?


Of some a little, Mother.


Pray spout some french son.


You understand it not, and to your ears 'twill go like an unshod cart upon
the stones, only a rough unhandsome sound


Faith I would feign hear some french.


Good Sir speak some french to my Mistress.


At your entreaty Allexander, I will, who shall speak to?


If your worship will do me the favor Sir, to me.


Mounseir, Poultron, Coukew, Cullione, Besay, Man cur.


Awe Mounseir.


Ha, ha, ha, this fine indeed, gods blessing 'on thy heart Son, by my troth thou
art grown a proper Gentleman, cullen and pullen, good god what aucey words
they use beyond the seas, ha, ha, ha


Did not you swear right?


Yes good Allexander, if you had done so to
But good Mother I am very hungry and have rid far to day and am fasting.

You shall have your supper presently my sweet Son.


As soon as you please, which once ended,
I Will go and visit you sick gentlewoman.

Come then.


I have ridden like a fury to make up this work and I will do it bravely ere I
leave it, this is the house I am sure


Whood you speak with Sir?


Marry Sir I would speak with a Gentlewoman, came this night late here from
the City, I have some letters of Importance to her, I am a Post Sir and would
be dispatched in have


Sir, cannot I deliver 'em? for the truth is she is ill and in her chamber.


Pray pardon me I must needs speak with her, my business is so weighty.


I Will tell her so, and bring you present word.


Pray do so, and I Will attend her, pray god the grief of my imaginde death
spoil not what I intend, I hope it will not


Though she be very ill, and desires no trouble,
Yet If your business be so urgent, you may come up and speak with her.

I thank you Sir, I follow you.


What should this fellow be in the name of heaven that comes with such Post
business? sure my husband has revealed himself, and in this have sent after
me, are you the Post my friend


Yes for sooth Mistress.


What good news have thou brought me gentle Post?
For I have woe and grief too much already.

I would you had less, Mistress, I could wish it, beshrow my heart she moves me
cruelly


Have I found you once more Iugler? well Jewel, thou have only vetrtue in
thee, of all I read of yet; what ears has this ass to betray him with? well,
what is your business then


I have brought a letter from your servant, Mistress, in have.


Pray give it me, I hope the best still.


This is the upshot and I know I have hit it,
Well if the spirits of the dead do walk, I shall
Hear more of this one hundred years hence.

By any means you must have special care, for now the City is possessed for
certain, my Master is made away, which for ought I know is a truth indeed;
good Mistress leave your grief and see your danger, and let that wise and noble
Gentleman with whom you are, be your right hand in all things


Now do I know I have the better on it by the languishing of her eye at this
near instant, it is still simming in her blood, in coining somewhat to turn
Mercury I know it


He is my husband, and it is reasonable he should command in all things, since
he will be an ass again the hair at his one peril be it, in the morn you
shall have a packet, 'till I must entreat you stay, you shall not loose by it


I do not doubt it, Mistress; I Will leave you to your rest and wait your
pleasure


Do, and speak out the Gentleman of the house, bid him come to me presently.


Who, Mr. Mercury?


Do you know him, post?


Only by sight forsooth, now I remember your servant wild me to let you know
he is the only man, you and your fortunes, are now to rest upon


Prithee no more, I know all this already.


I Will take my leave now, I am made for ever.


Good night I am provided for you my fine youth


I Will make thee have more care.


Good Mistress pardon me.


Thou't near be good I warrant thee, can your fine fingers hold no faster?


Indeed it was against my will.


Allexander, let us see the glass, as, I am true kirsome woman, it is one of
the crystal glasses my cozen sent me and the baggage has broake it where it
cannot be mended, Allexander, can Humfrey mend this think you


No truly this will near be mended.


T^uly I meant but to wash it for the Gentlewoman, that is sick above, and
shaking out the water, knocked it against the paile side


Did you so? be sure I Will stop it, 'twill make a good gap in your quarters
wages, can tell you


I pray forgive me, and let me have no wages this first quarter.


Go whimling, and fetch two or three grating loaves out of the kitching, to
make gingerbread of, it is such an untoward thing.


She Is somewhat simple indeed, she knew not what a kimnell was, she wants good
nurture mightily


My Son tells me, Allexander, that this young widow means to sojourne here,
she offers largly for her board, I may offer her good cheer, prey thee make a
step in the morning down to the parsonage for some Pigions? what are you mad
there; what noise is that? are you at bowls within? why do you whine


I have done another fault, I beseech you sweet Mistress ofrgive me.


What Is the matter.


As I was reaching for the bread that lay upon the shelfe, I have thrown down
the minct meat, that should have made the pyes to morrow


Get thee out of my house thou filthy destroying Harlot, thou, I Will not keep
thee an hour longer


Good Mistress beat me rather for my fault as much as it deserves, I do not
know whether to go


No I warrant thee, out of my doors.


Indeed I Will mend, I pray speak you for me.


If thou had hurled down any thing but the pie meat, I would have spoake
for thee, but I cannot find in my heart now


Art thou here yet? I think I must have an officer to thrust thee out of my
doors, must I


Why you may stop this in my wages too,
For Gods sake do, I Will find my self this year;
And let me stay.

Thou't spoil ten times as much, I Will cudgel thee out of my doors.


I am assured you are more merciful,
Then thus to beat me and discharge me too.

Do thou dispute with me, Allexander carry the prating hilding forth.


Good Mistress hear me I have here a Jewel,
My Mother left me and it is something worth:
Receive it and when all my faults together
Come to the worth of that, then turn me forth,
'Till then I pray you keep me.

What giggombob have we here? pray god you have not pilfer'd this some where;
thou art such a puling thing, wipe your eyes, and rise go your ways, Allexander,
bid the Cook mince some more meat, come and get you to bed quickly that you
may up betime in the morning a milking or you and I shall fall out worse yet


She has hurt my arm; I am a fraid, she is a very angry woman, but bless him
heaven that did me the most wrong, I am a fraide Antonious wife should see me,
she will know me


Melvia.


I am coming, she is not angry again I hope.


Now what am I the better for enjoying
This woman that I loved? so all I find,
That I before immaginde to be happy:
Now I have done, it turns to nothing else
But a poor pitied and a base repentance,
Udsfoote I am monstrous angry with my self:
Why should a man that has discourse and reason,
And knows how near he looses all in these things,
Covet to have his wishes satisfied;
Which when they are, are nothing but the shame
I do begin to loath this woman straingly,
And I think justly too, that durst adventure,
Flinging away her modesty to take
A stranger to her bed, her husbands body
Being scarce cold in the earth for her content,
It was no more to take my senses with,
Then if I had an idle dream had in sleep
Yet I have made her promises: which grieves me,
And I must keep 'em too, I think she hunts me:
The Devil cannot keep these women off,
When they are fletched once.

To bed for gods sake Sir, why do you stay here?
Some are up in the house, I hard the wife,
Good dear sweet heart to bed.

Why I am going? why do you follow me?
You would not have it known I hope, pray get you
Back to your chamber, the doors hard by for me,
Let me alone I warrant you, this it is
To thresh well, have got a customer,
Will you go to bed?

Will you?

Yes I am going.

Then remember your promise you made to marry me.

I will, but it was your fault, that it came
To this pinch now, that it must need remembrance:
For out of honesty I offered you
To marry you first, why did you slack that offer?

Alas I told you the inconvenience of it,
And what wrong it would appear to the world
If I had married you in such post have
After his death: beside, the foolish people
Would have been bold to have thought we had lain
together in his time, and like enough imagined
We two had murdered him.

I love her tongue yet,
If I were a Saint
A gilded Saint, and such a thing as this
Should prate thus wittily and feelingly
Unto my holiness, I cannot tell,
But I fear shrewdly I should do something
That would quite scratch me out of the Kallender,
And if I stay longer talking with her,
Though I am mad at what I have done already,
Yet I shall forget my self again;
I feel the Devil
Ready to hold my stirrup; pray to bed, god-night.

This kiss, god-night sweet Love,
And peace go with thee: thou have proved thy self
The honestest man that ever was enticed
To that sweet sin as people please to call it,
Of lying with another Wife, and I,
I think the honestest woman without blushing,
That ever lay with another man, I sent my husband
Into a Cellar, post, fearing, and justly,
He should have known him, which I did not purpose
Till I had had my end.
Well, now this plot is perfect, let him brag on it.

BIrlady Sir you have rid hard that you have.


They that have business must do so I take it.


You say true, when set you out my friend?


About ten a clock and I have rid all night.


By the mass you are tough indeed, I have seen the day, I would have rid too
with the proudest of them and fling dirt in their faces, and I have don't with
this foolish boy sir many a time; but what can last always? it is done, it is
done now Sir, age, care, and office, brings us to our footecloathes, the more
the pity


I believe that Sir, but will it please you to read the business?


My friend I can read an I can tell you when.


Would I could too Sir, for my have requires it.


Whence comes it do you say?


Sir from the City.


O from the City it is a reverent place.


And his justice be as short as his memory,
A Dudgion Dagger will serve him to mow down sin withal,
What clod pole Commissioner is this?

And by my faith governed by worthy member,
Discreet and upright.

Sir they are beholding to you, you have given some of them a commendations,
they were not worthy of this twenty years


Go to go to, you have a merry meaning, I have found you sir in faith, you are a
wag, away, fie, now I Will read Your letter


Pray do sir; what a misery it is,
To have an urgent business, wait the Justice,
Of such an old Tuff taffity that knows not,
Nor can be brought to understand more sense,
Then how to restore suppressed Alehouses,
And have his man compound small trespasses,
For ten groates.

Sir it seems here your business is of deeper circumstance then I conceived it
for; what do you mean Sir


It Is for mine own ease I Will assure your Worship.


It shall not be in faith friend, here I have it,
That one Antonio a Gentleman, I take it so,
Yes it is so, a Gentleman is lately thought to
Have been made away, and by my faith upon a
Perles ground too, if you consider; well, there is
Knavery in it, I see that without spectacles.

Sure this fellow deals in revelation he is so hidden,
Go thy ways, thou will sick a bench spit as formally,
And show thy agot, and hatched chain
As well as the best of them.

And now I have considered, I believe it.


What Sir?


That he was murdered.


Did you know him?


No.


Nor how it is supposed.


No, nor I care not twopence, those are toys and yet I verily believe he was
murdered, as sure as I believe thou art a man, I never failde in these things
yet, wear a man that is beaten to these matters, experience is a certain
concealed thing that fails not; pray let me ask you one thing, why do you
come to me


Because the letter is addressed to you, being the nearest Justice.


The nearest? is that all?


I think it be Sir, I would be Ioth you should be the wisest.


Well Sir, as it is, I will endeavor in it; yet if it had come to me by name,
I know not, but I think it had been as soon dispatched as by another, and
with as round a wisdom, I, and as happily, but that is all one: I have borne
this place this thirty years, and upwards, and with sufficient credit: and
they may when they please, know me better; to the nearest? well


Sir, it is not my fault, for had I known you sooner --


I thank you Sir, I know it.


I Will besworne you should have played for any business now.


And further, they have specified unto me, his Wife is sorely suspected in
this matter, as a maine cause


I think she be Sir, for no other cause can be yet found.


And one Mercury a traveller, with whom they say directly she is run away,
and as they think this way


I knew all this before.


Well Sir, this Mercury I know, and his breeding, a neighbors child hard by,
you have been happy Sir in coming hither


Then you know where to have him Sir?


I do Sir, he dwells near me.


I doubt your Worship dwells near a Knave then.


I think so; pray put on: but it is a wonder
To see how graceless people are now given,
And how base virtue is accounted with them
That should be all in all as says a wise man.
I tell you Sir, and it is true, that there have been such murders, and of
late days, as 'twould make your very heart bleed in you, and some of them as
I shall be enabled I will tell you, it fell out of late days


It may be so, but will it please you to proceed in this?


An honest Weaver, and as good a workman as ere shot shuttle, and as close:
but every man must dye; this honest Weaver being a little mellow in his Ale,
that was the evidence verbatim, Sir, God bless the mark, sprung his neck
just ^n this place: well Iarvis, thou had wrongs, and if I ^^ve some of the
best shall sweat fort, then a wench --


But Sir you have forgot my business.


A sober pretty maid about 17. they say, certainly howsoever it is shuffled,
she burst her self, and fondly, if it be so, with Furmety at a Churching, but
I think the Devil had another agent in it: either of which if I can catch
shall stretch for it


This is a mad Justice that will hang the Devil; but I would you would be
short in this, before that other notice can be given


Sir I will do discreetly what is fitting; what, Antonio?





Put on your best coat, and let your fellow Mark go to the Constable and bid
him aid me with all the speed he can, and all the power, and provide pen and
ink to take their Confessions, and my long sword, I cannot tell what danger
we may meet with; you will go with us


Yes, what else? I came to that end to accuse both parties.


May I crave what you are?


Faith Sir one that to be known would not profit you, more then a mere
Kinsman of the dead Antonio's


It Is well, I am sorry for my neighbor, truly, that he had no more grace,
'twill kill his Mother; she is a good old woman, will you walk in? I Will but
put my Cloak on, and my Chain off, and a clean band, and have my shoes
blackt over, and shift my Jerkin, and we will to our business, and you shall see
how I can bolt these matters


As soon as't please you Sir.


This is the place; here did I leave the Maid
Alone las^ night drying her tender eyes,
Uncertain what to do, and yet desirous
To have me gone.

How rude are all we men,
That take the name of Civil to our selves?
If she had set her foot upon an earth
Where people live that we call barbarous;
Though they had had no house to bring her too,
They would have spoiled the glory that the spring
Has decked the trees in, and with willing hands
Have torn their branches down, and every man
Would have become a builder for her sake.
What time left you her there?

I left her, when the Sun had so much to set,
As he is now got from his place of rise.

So near the night she could not wander far;
Fair Viola?

It is in vain to call, she sought a house
Without all question.

Peace, fair Viola?
Fair Viola? who should have left her here
On such a ground? if you had meant to loose her,
You might have found there were no Inches here
To take her name and carry it about,
When her true Lover came to mourn for her,
Till all the neighboring valleys and the hills,
Resounded Viola, --
And such a place,
You should have chose --
You pity us because
The dew a little wets our feet,
Unworthy far to seek her in the wet;
And what becomes of her? where wandered she,
With 2 showers raining on her, from her eyes
Continually, abundantly, from which
There Is neither tree nor house to shelter her;
Will you go with me to travel?

Whither?

Over all the world.

No by my faith, I Will make a shorter journey
When I do travel.

But there is no hope
To gain my end in any shorter way.

Why, what is your end?

It is to search the earth,
Till we have found two in the shapes of men,
As wicked as our selves.

'Twere not so hard to find out those.

Why, if we find them out,
It were the better; for what brave villainy,
Might we 4. do? we wood not keep together:
For every one has treachery enough
For 20. Countries, one should trouble Asia,
Another should sow strife in Africa;
But you should play the knave, at home in Europ,
And for America let me alone.

Sir I am hones^e^,
Then you know how to be, and can no more
Be wronged but I shall find my self a right.

If you had any spark of honesty,
You would not think that honester then I,
Were a praise high enough to serve your turn:
If men were commonly so bad as I,
Thieves would be put in Callenders for Saints;
And bones of murderers would work miracles.
I am a kind of knave, of knave so much --
There is betwixt me and the vilest else,
But the next place of all to mine is yours.

That last is she, it is she.

Let us away, we shall infect her, let her have the wind,
And we will kneel down here.

Wenches away for here are men.

Fair maid I pray you stay.

Alas, again?

Why do you lay hold on her? I pray heartily let her go.

With all my heart, I do not mean to hurt her.

But stand away then for the purest bodies
Will soonest take infection, stand away,
But for infecting her my self, by heaven,
I would come there and beat thee further off.

I know that voice and face.

You are finely mad, godbwy Sir, now you are here together, I'e leave you so,
god send you good luck, both when you are soberer, you will give me thanks.


VVilt thou go milk? come.


Why do not come?


She nods, she is a sleep.


What, were up so early?


I think your man's mad to kneel there, nay come away ves body, Nan, help she
looks black 'ith face, She Is in a sound


And you be a man com hither, and help a woman.


Come thither? you are a fool.


And you a knave and a beast that you are.


Come hither? 'twas being my now so near,
That made her sown, and you are wicked people,
Or you wood do so too, my venom eyes
Strike innocence dead at such a distance,
Here I Will kneel for this is out of distance.

Thou Art a prating Ass there is no goodness in thee,
I warrant, how do thou?

Why? well.


Art thou able to go?


No, pray go you and milk, if I be able to come
I Will follow you, if not I Will sit here,
'Till you come back.

I am loath to leave thee here with you wild fool.


I know him well, I warrant thee, he will not hurt me.


Come then Nan.


How do you? be not fearful, for I hold my hands
Before my mouth and speak, and so
My breath can never blast you.

'Twas enough to use me ill, though you had never sought me too mock me to, why
kneel you so far Off, were not that gesture better used in prayer, had dealt
so with you, I should not sleep, till God and you had both forgiven me


I do not mock, nor lives there such a villane
That can do any thing contemptible,
To you, but I do kneel because it is,
An action very fit, and reverent,
In presence of so pure a creature,
And so far off, as fearful to offend,
One too much wronged already.

You confess you did the fault, yet scorn to come,
So far as hither to ask pardon for it;
Which I could willingly afford to come,
To you to grant, good Sir if you have
A better love, may you be blessed together,
She shall not wish you better then I will,
I but offend you; there are all the Jewels
I stole, and all the love I ever had,
I leave behind with you, I Will carry now
To give another, may the next maid you try
Love you no worse, nor be no worse then I.

Do not leave me yet for all my fault,
Search out the next things too impossible,
And put me on them when they are effected,
I may with better modesty receive
Forgiveness from you.

I will set no penance,
To gain the great forgiveness you desire:
But to come hither and take me and it,
Or else I Will come and beg so you will grant,
That you will be content to be forgiven.

Nay I will come since you will have it so,
And since you please to pardon me I hope
Free from infection, here I am by you;
A careless man, a breaker of my faith,
A loathsome drunkard and in that wild fury:
A hunter after whores I do beseech you,
To pardon all these faults, and take me up
An honest sober and a faithful man.

For gods sake urge your faults no more, but mend,
All the forgiveness I can make you is,
To love you which I will do and desire,
Nothing but love again, which if I have not,
Yet I will love you still.

O women that some one of you will take,
An everlasting pen into your hands:
And grave in paper which the writ shall make,
More lasting then the marble monuments,
Your matchless virtues to posterityes:
Which the defective race of envious man,
Strive to conceal.

Me thinks I would not now for any thing,
But you had mist me, I have made a story,
Will serve to wast many a winters fire
When we are old, I Will tell my daughters then,
The miseryes their Mother had in love:
And say my girls be wiser, yet I would not
Have had more wit my self, take up those Jewels,
For I think I hear my fellows coming.

How do thou now?

Why? very well I thank you, it is late shall I have home?


I prithee we shall be shent soundly.

Why does that railing man go with us?

I preythee speak well of him, on my word,
He Is an honest man.

There was never any so one's complexion, a Getleman?
I Would be ashamed to have such a foul mouth.

How now Alexander, what Gentleman is this?


Indeed forsooth I know not, I found him at the market full of woe, crying a
lost daughter, and telling all her tokens to the people; and wot you what? by
all subscription in the world, it should be our new maid Melvia, one would
little think it, therefore I was bold to tell him of her Mistress


Melvia? it cannot be, fool, alas you know she is a poor wench, and I took
her in upon mere charity


So seemed my daughter when she went away, as she had made her self.


What stature was your child of, Sir?


Not high, and of a brown complexion, Her hair aborne, a round face, which
some friends that flattered me, would say 'twould be a good one


This is still Melvia, Mistress, that is the truth on it.


It may be so I Will promise you.


Well, go thy ways, the flower of our town, For a hand and a foot, I shall
never see thy fellow


But had she not such toys, as bracelets, rings, and Jewels?


She was something bold indeed, to take such things that night she left me.


Then belike she run away?


Though she be one I love, I dare not lie, she did indeed.


What think you of this Jewel?


Yes, this was one of them, and this was mine, you have made me a new man, I
thank you for it


Nay, and she be given to filching, there is your Jewel, I am clear on it: but
by your leave Sir, you shall answer me for what is lost since she came hither,
can tell you there lie things scattering in every place about the house


As I am virtuous, I have the lyingst old Gentlewoman to my Mistress, and the
most malicious, the Devil a good word will she give a servant, that is her
old rule; and God be thanked they will give her as few, there is perfect love on
both sides, it yearns my heart to hear the wench misconstrued, a careful
soul she is i will besworne for her, and when she is gone, let them say what
they will, they may cast their Capps at such another


What you have lost by her, with all my heart
I Will see you double paid, for you have saved
With your kind pity two that must not live
Unless it be to thank you; take this Jewel,
This strikes off none of her offenses, Mistress,
Would I might see her.

Alexander, run, and bid her make have home, she is at the milking Close; but
tell her not by any means whoe's here, I know she will be too fearful


Well, we will have a posset yet at parting, that is my comfort, and one round, or
else i will loose my will


You shall find Silvio, Vberto, and Pedro enquiring for the Wench at the next
Town, tell them she is found, and where I am, and with the favor of this
Gentlewoman, desire them to come hither


I pray do, they shall be all welcome.


By your leave forsooth you shall see me find the parties by a slight.


who is that? Mr. Justice? how do you Sir.


Why very well, and busy, where is your son.


He Is within Sir.


Hum, and how does the young woman my Cozen that came down with him.


She Is above, as a woman in her case may be.


You have confessed it? then sirrah call in the Officers; she is no Cousen of
mine; a mere trick to discover all


To discover? what?


You shall know that anon: I think you have over reached you; o welcome, enter
the house, and by virtue of my warrant which you have there, seize upon the
bodily persons of those whose names are there written, to wit, one Mercury, and
the wife of one Antonio


For what.


Away I say,
This Gentleman shall certify you for what.

He can accuse my Son of nothing, he came from travel but within these two
days


There hangs a tale.


I should be sorry this should fall out at any time: but especially now Sir;
will you favor me so much, as to let me know of what you accuse him


Upon suspicion of murder.


Murder? I defy thee.


I pray GOD he may prove himself innocent.


Fie, say not so, you show your self to be no good Commonwealths man: for the
more are hanged, the better it is for the Commonwealth


By this rule you were best hang your self.


I forgive your honest mirth ever: O, welcome, welcome Mark.
Your pen, ink, and paper to take their examinations.

Why do you pull me so? I Will go alone.


Let them stand, let them stand quietly, whilst they are examined?


What will you examine us of?


Of Antonio's murder.


Why, he was my friend.


He was my husband.


The more shame for you both; Mark, your pen and ink.


Pray God all be well, I never knew any of these Travelers come to good; I
beseech you, Sir, be favorable to my Son


Gentlewoman hold you content, I would it were come to that?


For gods sake mother why kneel you to such a pig bribe fellow? he has
surfetted of geese, and they have put him into a fit of Justice, let him do his
worst


Is your paper ready?


I am ready Sir.


Accuse them Sir, I command thee to lay down accusations against these persons
in behalf of the State, and first look upon the parties to be accused, and
deliver your name


My name is Curio, my murdered Kinsman
If he were living now, I should not know him,
It Is so long since we saw one another.

My cozen Curio?


But thus much from the mouths of his servants, and others, whose examinations
I have in writing about me, I can accuse them of; this Mercury, the last night,
but this last, lay in Antonio's house, and in the night he rose, raising
Antonio, where privately they were in talk an hour, to what end I know not:
but of likelihood, finding An^onio's house not a fit place to murder him in,
he suffered him to go to bed again, but in the morning early, he trained him
I think forth, after which time he never saw his home; his clothes were found
near the place where Mercury was, and the people at first denied they saw him:
but at last he made a frivolous tale, that there he shifted himself into a
foote-mans habit: but in short, the next hour this woman went to Mercury, and
in her Coach they posted hither; true accusations, I have no more, and I will
make none


No more? we need no more, Sirrah, be drawing heir Mittimus before we hear
their answer. What say you Sir? are you guilty of this murder


No Sir.


Whether you are or no, confess, it will be the better for you.


If I were guilty, your Rhetoric could not fetch it forth: but though I am
innocent, I confess, that if I were a stander by, these circumstances urged,
which are true, would make me doubtless believe the accused parties to be
guilty


Write down, that he being a stander by, for so you see he is, does
doubtlessely believe the accused parties, which is himself, to be guilty


I say no such thing.


Write it down I say, we will try that.


I care not what you write, pray God you did not kill him for my love, though I
am free from this, we both deserve


Govern your tongue I pray you, all is well, my husband lives, I know it, and I
see him


They whisper, sever them quickly I say Officers why do you let them prompt one
another, Gentlewoman, what say you to this, are not you guilty


No as I hope for mercy.


But are not those circumstances true, that this Gentleman has so shortly and
methodically delivered


They are; and what you do with me I care not,
Since he is dead, in whom was all my care:
You knew him not.

No an't bin better for you too, and you had never knew'd him.


Why then you did not know the worlds chief joy
His face so manly, as it had been made,
To fright the world, yet he so sweetly tempered;
That he would make himself a natural fool,
To do a noble kindness for a friend,
He was a man whose name I Will not out live,
Longer then heaven whose will must be obay'd;
Will have me do.

And I will quit thy kindness.


Before me she has made the tears s^and in mine eyes, but I must be austere
Gentlewoman, you must confess this murder


I cannot Sir, I did it not, but I de sire to see those examinations which this
Gentleman acknowledges to have about him, for but late last night I received
letters from the City, yet I heard of no confession, then


You shall see them time enough I warrant you, but letters you say you had,
where are those letters


Sir they are gone.


Gone? whether are they gone?
How have you disposed of 'em?

Why Sir they are for women's matters, and so I use 'em.


Who writ em?


A man of mine.


Who brought 'em?


A Post.


A Post? there was some great have sure, a ha where is that Post?


Sir there he stands.


Does he so? bring hither that Post, I am afraid that Po^t will prove a
knave; come hither Post, what? what can you say con^erning the murder of
Antonio


What Is that to you?


O Post, you have no answer ready have you? I Will have one from you.


You shall have no more from me then you have, you examine an honest Gentleman
and Gentlewoman here, it is pity such fools as you should be in the
commission


Say you so Post, take away that Post, whip him and bring him again quickly,
I Will hamper you Post


It Is Antonio, I know him now as well, what an irregular fool is this?


Whip me? hold off.


O good Sir whip him, by his murmuring he should know some thing of my husbands
death; that may quit me, for gods sake fetched out


Whip him I say.


who 'ist dares whip me now?


O my loved husband.


My most worthy friend? where have you been so long?


I cannot speak for joy.


Why, what is the matter now, and shall not law then have her course?


It shall have no other course then it has I think


It shall have other course before I go, or I Will beat my brains, and I say it
was not honestly done of him to discover himself before the parties accused
were executed that law might have had her course, for then the kingdom
flourishes


But such a wife as thou, had never any man, and such a friend as he, believe
me wife, shall never be a good wife, love my friend, friend love my wife, hark
friend


Mark. if we can have nothing to do, you shall swear the peace of some body.


Yes Sir.


By my troth I am sorry my wife is so obstinate, sooth if I could yet do thee
any good, I wood, faith I wood


I thank you Sir, I have lost that passion.


Cousen Curio, you and I must be better acquainted.


It is my wish Sir.


I should not have known you neither, it is so long since we saw, we were but
children then: but you have showed your self an honest man to me


I would be ever so.


Look you, whoe's there.

Say nothing to me, for thy peace is made.

Sir, I can nothing say,
But that you are her Father, you can both
Not only pardon, when you have a wrong,
But love where you have most injury.

I think I shall hear of no hanging this year, there A Tinker and a Whore
yet, the Crier said that robbed her, and are in prison, I hope they shall be
hanged


No truly sir, they have broke prison.

It Is no matter, then the Jailer shall be hanged.

You are deceived in that to sir, 'twas known to be against his will, and he
has got his pardon, I think for nothing, but if it does cost him any thing,
'Ile pay it


Mark up with your papers, away.

O you shall stay dinner, I have a couple of brawling neighbors, that I Will
assure you will not agree, and you shall have the hearing of their matter


With all my heart.

Go, Gentlemen, go in.

O Viola, that no succeeding age,
Might loose the memory of what thou were,
But such an overswayed sex is yours,
That all the virtuous actions you can do,
Are but as men will call them, and I swear,
It Is my belief that women want but ways;
To praise their deeds, but men want deeds to praise.


