SIr i am no Boy, i am deep in one and twenty,
The second yeare's approaching.

A fine time
For a youth to live by his wits then I should think,
If e're he mean to make account of any.

Wits Sir?

I wits Sir, if it be so strange to thee,
I Am sorry I spent that time to get a Fool,
I might have employed my pains a great deal better;
Thou know all that I have I ha got by my wits,
And yet to see how urgent thou art too;
It grieves me thou art so degenerate
To trouble me for means, I never offered it:
My Parents from a Schoole-boy, past nineteen once,
See what these times are grown too, before twenty
I rusht into the world, which is indeed
Much like the Art of Swimming, he that will atteine to it
Must fall plumpe, and duck himself at first,
And that will make him hardy and adventurous,
And not stand putting in one foot and shiver,
And then draw the other after, like a quake-buttock;
Well he may make a padler in the world,
From hand to mouth, but never a brave swimmer,
Borne up by the chin as I bore up my self*
With my strong industry that never fayl'd me;
For he that lies borne up with Patrimonies,
Looks like a long great Ass that swims with bladders,
Come but one prick of adverse fortune to him
He sinkes, because he never tried to swim
When wit plays with the billows that choackt him.

Why is it not a fashion for a Father Sir,
Out of his yearly thousands, to allow
His only son a competent brace of hundreds,
Or such a toy?

Yes, if he mean to spoil him,
Or mar his wits he may, but never I
This is my humor Sir, which you will find constant;
I love wit so well because I lived by it,
That i will give no man power out of my means to hurt it,
And that is a kind of gratitude to my rayser,
Which great ones often forget; I admire much
This Ages dullness, when I scarce writ man,
The first degree that e're I took in thriving,
I lay intelligencer close for wenching,
Could give this Lord or Knight a true Certificate
Of all the Maiden-heads extant, how many lay
Amongst Chamber-maids, how many amongst Exchange Wenches,
Though never many there I must confess,
They have a trick to utter ware so fast;
I knew which Lady had a mind to fall,
Which Gentlewoman new divorc'st, which Tradesman breaking,
The price of every sinner to a hair,
And where to raise each price; which were the Tearmers
That would give Velvet Petty-coates, Tissue Gowns,
Which Pieces, Angels, Suppers, and Half crowns;
I knew how to match and make my market,
Could give intelligence where the Pox lay ledger,
And then to see the Letchers shift a point,
'Twas sport and profit too; how they would shun
Their adored Mistress chambers, and run fearfully,
Like Rats from burning houses, so brought I
My Clyents a the game still safe together,
And noble Gamesters loved me, and I felt it:
Give me a man that lives by his wits say I,
And never left a Groat, there is the true Gallant.
When I grew somewhat pursie, I grew then
In men's opinions too, and confidences,
They put things called Executorships upon me,
The charge of Orphans, little senseless creatures,
Whom in their Childe-hoods I bound forth to Felt-makers,
To make 'em lose and work away their Gentry,
Disguise their tender natures with hard custom,
So wrought 'em out in time, there I rizze ungently,
Nor do I fear to discourse this unto thee,
I Am armed at all points against treachery,
I hold my humor firm, if I can see thee thrive by
Thy wits while I live, I shall have the more courage
To trust thee with my Lands when I dye; if not,
The next best wit I can hear of carries 'em:
For since in my time and knowledge so many rich Children
Of the City conclude in beggary, i would rather
Make a wise stranger my Executor, then a foolish
Son my Heir, and to have my Lands called after my
Wit, thou after my name; and that is my nature.

It Is a strange harsh one, must I still shift then?
I come brave cheates, once to my trade again,
And i will ply't harder now then e're I did for it,
You Will part with nothing then, Sir?

Not a jot Sir.

If I should ask you blessing e're I go Sir,
I think you would not give't me.

Let me but hear thou liv'st by thy wits once
Thou shall have any thing, you are none of mine else,
Then why should I take care for thee?

'Thanke your bounty.

So wealth love me, and long life, I beseech it,
As I do love the man that lives by his wits,
He comes so near my nature; i am grown old now,
And even arrived at my last cheat I fear me,
But 'twill make shift to bury me, by daylight too,
And discharge all my Legacies, it is so wealthy,
And never trouble any Interest money:
Iv'e yet a Niece to wed, over whose steps
I have plac'st a trusty watchful Gardinesse,
For fear some poor Earl steal her, 't has bin threatened
To redeem morgag'd Land, but he shall miss on it;
To prevent which, I have sought out a match for her,
Fop of Fop-hall, he writes himself, I take it,
The ancient, st Fop in England, with whom i am privately
Compounded for the third part of her Portion,
And she seems pleased, so two parts rest with me,
He Is come; Sir Gregory, welcome, what is he Sir?

Young Cunningham, a Norfolk Gentleman,
One that has lived upon the Fops, my kindred,
Ever since my remembrance; he is a wit indeed,
And we all strive to have him, nay, it is certain
Some of our name has gone to Law for him;
Now it is my turn to keep him, and indeed
He Is plaguey chargeable as all your wit, are,
But I will give him over when I list,
I ha used wits so before.

Hope when you are married Sir you will shake him off.

Why what do you take me to be, old Father i'Law that shall be, do you think
i will have any of the Wits hang upon nie after I am married once? none of my
kindred ever had before me; but where is this Niece? is it a fashion in London to
marry a woman and never see her


Excuse the niceness Sir, that care's your friend,
Perhaps had she Been seen, you had never seen her;
There Is many a spent-thing called an't like your honor,
That lies in wait for her at first snap, she is a Countess,
Drawn with six Mares through Fleet-streete, and a Coachman,
Sitting Bare-headed to their Flaunders buttocks,
This whets him on.

Pray let us clap up the business Sir,
I long to see her, are you sure you have her,
Is she not there already? Hark, O hark.

How now, what is that Sir?

Every Caroach goes by,
Goes even toth' heart of me.

I Will have that doubt eased Sir,
Instantly cased, Sir Gregory, and now I think on it
A toy comes in my mind, seeing your friend there,
We Will have a little sport, give you but way to it,
And put a trick upon her, I love wit pretiously,
You shall not be seen yet, we will stale your friend first,
If It please but him to stand for the Anti-maske.

Puh, he shall stand for any thing, why his supper
Lies in my breeches here, i will make him fast else.

Then come you forth more unexpectedly
The Mask it self, a thousand a year jointure,
The cloud your friend will be then drawn away,
And only you the beauty of the Play.

For Red and Black I Will put down all your Fuller
Let but your Niece bring White, and we have three Colors.

I Am given to understand you are a Wit Sir.

I Am one that Fortune shows small favor to Sir.

Why there you conclude it, whether you will or no Sir;
To tell you truth, i am taken with a wit.

Fowlers catch Woodcocks so, let not them know so much,

A Pestilence mazard, a Duke Humphrey spark
Had rather lose his Dinner then his Jest,
I say, I love a wit the best of all things.

Always except your self.

Has gin't me twice now,
All with a breath, I thank him; but that I love a wit
I should be heartily angry; cuds, my Niece,
You know the business with her,

With a woman?
It Is even the very same it was i am sure
Five thousand years a go, no fool can miss it.

This is the Gentleman I promised Niece,
To present to your affection.

'Ware that Arrow.

Deliver me the truth now of your liking.

I Am spoiled already, that such poor lean Game
Should be found out as I am.

Go set too her Sir -- ha, ha, ha.

How noble is this virtue in you Lady,
Your eye may seem to commit thousand slaughters
On your dull servants, which truly tasted
Conclude all in comforts.

Puh.

It rather shows what a truth worth can make,
Such as yours is.

And that is not worth a groat,
How like you him Niece?

It shall appear how well Sir,
I humbly thank you for him.

Hah? ha, good gullory, he does it well in faith,
Light, as if he meant to purchase lip-land there:
Hold, hold, bear off I say, slid your part hangs too long.

My joys are mockcries.

You Have ^^th expressed a worthy care and love Sir,
Had mine own eye been set at liberty,
To make a public choice (believe my truth Sir)
It could not ha done better for my heart
Then your good providence has.

You will say so then,
Alas sweet Niece, all this is but the scahbard,
Now I draw forth the weapon.

How?

Sir Gregory,
Approach thou Lad of thousands.

Who calls me?

What motion's this? the Model of Ninivie?

Accost her daintily now, let me advise thee.

I was advised to bestow dainty cost on you.

You were ill advised, back, and take better counsel;
You may have good for an Angel, the least cost
You can bestow upon a woman Sir
Trebles ten Counselors Fees, in Lady-ware,
You Are over head and ears ere you be aware,
Faith keep a Batchelour still, and go to bowls Sir,
Follow your Mistress there, and prick and save Sir,
For other Mistresses will make you a slave Sir.

So, so, I have ray lerrepoop already.

Why how now Niece, this is the man I tell you.

He, hang him Sir, I know you do but mock,
This is the man you would say.

The Devil rides I think.

I must use cunning here.

Make me not mad, use him with all respect,
This is the man I swear.

Would you could persuade me to that;
Alas, you cannot go beyond me Uncle.
You carry a lest well I must confess,
For a man of your years, but --

I Am wrought beside my self.

I never beheld comeliness till this minute.

O good sweet Sir, pray offer not these wards
To an old Gentlewoman.

Sir.

Away fifteen,
Here Is fifty one exceeds thee.

What Is the business?

Give me these motherly creatures, come, never smother it,
I know you are a teeming woman yet.

Troth a young Gent. might do much I think Sir

Go too then.

And I should play my part, or I were ungrateful.

Can you so soon neglect me?

Hence, i am busy.

This cross point came in luckely, impudent Baggage.
Hang from the Gentleman, art thou not ashamed
To be a Widows hinderance?

Are you angry Sir?

You're welcome, pray court on, I shall desire
Your honest wise acquaintance; vex me not
After my care and pains to find a match for thee,
Lest I confine thy life to some out chamber,
Where thou shall waste the sweetness of thy youth,
Like a consuming light in her own socket,
And not allowed a male creature about thee;
A very Munckey thy necessity
Shall prize at a thousand pound a Chimney-sweeper
At fifteen hundred.

But are you serious Uncle?

Serious.

Pray let me look upon the gentleman
With more heed, then I did but hum him over
In haste, good faith, as Lawyers Chancery sheets;
Beshrew my blood a tolerable man,
Now I distinctly read him.

Hum, hum, hum.

Say he be black, he is of a very good pitch,
Well anckled, two good confident calves, they look
As if they would not shrink at the ninth child;
The redness in the face, why that is in fashion,
Most of your high bloods have it, sign of greatness marry;
It Is to be taken down too with May butter,
I Will send to my Lady Spend-tayle for her Medicine.

Lum te dum, dum, dum, de dum.

He Is qualified too, beleve me.

Lum to dum, de dum, de dum.

Where was my judgment?

Lum te dum, dum, dum, te dum, te dum.

Perfections covered mess.

Lum te dum, te dum, te dum.

It smoakes apparently, pardon sweet Sir
The error of my Sex.

Why well said Niece,
Upon submission you must pardon her now Sir.

I Will do it by course, do you think i am an ass Knight?
Here Is first my hand, now't goes to the Seal Office.

Formally finished, how goes this Suit forward?

I Am taking measure of the widows mind Sir,
I hope to fit her heart.

Who would have dreamt
Of a young morsel now? things come in minutes.

Trust him not widow, he is a younger Brother,
He Will swear and lie; believe mo he is worth nothing.

He brings more content to a woman with that nothing,
Then he that brings his thousands without any thing,
We have presidents for that amongst great Ladies.

Come, come, no Language now shall be in fashion,
But your Love-phrase the bell to procreation.

Pax, there is nothing puts me besides my wits, but this fourth,
This lay illiterate share, there is no conscience in 't.

Sir, it has ever been so where I have practiced, and must be
Sill where I am, nor has it been undeserved at the years
End, and shuffle the Almanac together, vacations and
Terme-times one with another, though I say it, my wife is a
Woman of a good spirit, then it is no lay-share.

Faith for this five year, Ego possum probare, I have had
A hungry penurious share with em, and she has had as much
As I always.

Present or not present?

Residens aut non residens, perfidem.

And what president's this for me? because your Hic and hac, Turpis and Qui
mihi discipulus brains (that never got any thing but by accidence and
uncertainty) did allow it, therefore I must, that have grounded conclusions of
wit, hereditary rules for my Father to get by


Sir be compendious, either take or refuse, I will bate no token of my wives
share, make even the last reckonings, and either so unite or here devide
company


A good resolution, profecto, let every man beg his own way, and happy man be
his dole


Well, here is your double share, and single brains Pol, edipo, here is toward, a
Caster ecastor for you, I will endure it a forthnight longer, but by these just
five ends --


Take heed, five's odd, put both hands together or severally they are all odd
unjust ends


Medeius sidius, hold your tongue, I depose you from half a share presently
else, I will make you a participle and decline you, now you understand me, be
you a quiet conjunction amongst the undeclined; you and your Latin ends shall
go shift, Solus cum solo together else, and then if ever they got ends of gold
and silver enough to serve that Gerundine maw of yours, that without Do will
end in Di and Dum instantly


Enough, enough, here comes company, we lose five shares in wrangling about one.


My Father, put on Priscian, he has Latin fragments too, but I fear him not,
i will case my face with a little more hair and relieve


Tush Nephew (i will call you so) for if there be
No other obstacles then those you speak of
They are but powder charges without pellets,
You may safely front 'em; and warrant your own danger.

No other that I can perceive ifailh Sir, for I put her to it, and felt her as
far as I could, and the strongest repulse was, she said, she would have a
little Soldier in me, that (if need were) I should defend her reputation


And surely Sir, that is a principle
Amongst your principal Ladies, they require
Valor either in a friend or a husband.

And I allow their requests in faith, as well as any woman's heart can desire, if
I knew where to get valor, I would as willingly entertain it as any man that
blows


Breathes, breathes Sir, that is the sweeter phrase.


Blows for a Soldier, in faith Sir, and i am in
Practice that way.

For a Soldier, I grant it.


Slid i will swallow some bullets, and good round ones too, but i will have a little
Soldier in me


Will you on and beg, or steal and be hanged.


And some Scholar she would have me besides,
Tush, that shall be no bar, it is a quality in a
Gentleman, but of the least question.

Salvete Domini benignissimi, munificentissimi.


Salvete dicis ad nos? fubeo te salvere,
Nay Sir, we have Latin and other metal in us too,
Sir, you shall se talk with this fellow now.

I could find in my heart to talk with him too,
If I could understand him.

Charissimi, Doctissimiq. Domini, ex abundantia,
Charitatis vestrae estote poopitii in me junenem,
Miserum, pauperem, and omni consolatione exulem.

A pretty Scholar by my faith Sir, but i will to him again.


Does he beg or steal in this Language can you tell Sir?
He may take away my good name from me, and I never
The wiser.

He begs, he begs Sir.


Ecce, ecce, in oculis lacrymarum flumen, in ore
Fames, sitisq. ignis in vultu, pudor and impudentia,
In omni part necessitas and indigentia.

Audi tu bonus socius, tu es Scolasticus, sic intelligo,
Ego faciam argumentum, mark now Sir, now I fetch
Him up.

I have been fetched up a hundred times for this,
Yet I could never learn half so much.

Audi, and responde, hoc est Argumentum, nomen est
Nomen, ergo, quod est tibi nomen, Responde nunc,
Responde argumentum meum. Have I not put him to it Sir?

Yes Sir, I think so.


Step in, the rascal is put out of his penned speech,
And he can go no farther.

Cur non respondes?


Oh Domine, tanta mea est miseria.


So he is almost in again.


Vt nocte mecum pernoctat egestas, luce quotidie
Paupertat habitat.

Sed quid est tibi nomen, and quis dedit? Responde
Argumentum.

Hem, hem.


He Is dry, he hems, on quickly.


Courteous Gentlemen, if the brow of a Military face may not be offensive to
your generous eye balls, let his wounds speak better then his words, for some
branch or small sprig of charity to be planted upon this poor barren soil of
a Soldier


How now, what Arms and Arts both go a beging?


Such is the poast-progresse of cold charity now a days, who (for heat to her
frigid limbs) passes in so swift a motion, that two at the least had need be to
stay her


Sir, let us reward um I pray you and be gone, if any quarrel should arise
amongst us, I am able to answer neither of them, his Iron and Steel tongue is
as hard as the tothers Latin one


Stay, stay Sir, I will talk a little with him first,
Let me alone with both, I will try whether they
Live by their wits or no; for such a man I love,
And what? you both beg together then?

Conjunctis manibus, profecto, Domine.

With equal fortunes equal distribution, there is not the breadth of a swords
point uneven in our division


What two qualities are here cast away upon two poor fellows, if a man had um
that could maintain um, what a double man were that, if these two Fellows
might be bought and sodden, and boiled to a jelly, and eaten fasting every
morning, I do not think but a man should find strange things in his stomach


Come Sir, join your charity with mine, and we will make up a couple of pence
betwixt us


If a man could have a pennyworth for his penny, I would bestow more money
with 'em


Save you Gentlemen, how now? what are you encountered here? what fellows are
these


'Faith Sir, here is Mars and Mercury, a pair of poor Planets it seems, that
Jupiter has turned out to live by their wits, and we are e'ne about a little
spark of charity to kindle um a new fire


Stay, pray you stay Sir, you may abuse your charity, nay make that goodness
in you no better then a vice, so many deceivers walk in these shadows now a
days, that certainly your bounties were better spilt then reserved to so lewd
and vicious uses; which is he that professes the Soldier


He that professes his own profession Sir, and the dangerous life he has led
in it this pair of half score years


In what services have you been Sir?


The first that flesht me a soldier Sir, was that great battle at Aleazar in
Barbary, where the noble English Stukely fell, and where that royal Portugal
Sebastian ended his untimely days


Are you sure Sebastian dyed there?


Faith Sir, there was some other rumor hoped a-amongst us, that he wounded
escaped, and touched on his Native shore again, where finding his Country at
home more distressed by the invasion of the Spaniard then his loss abroad,
forsook it, still supporting a miserable and unfortunate life, which (where he
ended) is yet uncertain


By my faith Sir, he speaks the nearest same of truth in this.


Since Sir, I served in France, the Low Countries, lastly, at that memorable
Skirmish at Newport, where the forward and bold Scot there spent his life so
freely, that from every single heart that there fell, came home from his
resolution a double honor to his country


This should be no counterfeit, Sir.


I do not think he is, Sir.


But Sir, me thinks you do not show the marks of a Soldier, could you so
freely escape, that you brought home no scarres to be your chronicle


Sir, I have wounds and many, but in those parts where nature and humanity bids
me shame to publish


A good Soldier cannot want those badges.


Now am not I of your mind in that, for I hold him the best soldier that
scapes best, always at a Cocke-fencing I give him the best that has the fewest
knocks


Nay i will have a bout with your Scholar too,
To ask you why you should be poor (yet richly learned)
Were no question, at least you can easily
Answer it; but whether you have learning enough,
To deserve to be poor or no (since poverty is
Commonly the meed of Learning) is yet to be trye'd;
You have the Languages, I mean the chief,
As the Hebrew, SyriacK, Greek, Latin, etc.

Aliquantulum, non totaliter, Domine.


The Latin I have sufficiently tried him in,
And I promise you Sir he is very well grounded.

I will prove him in some of the rest.
Tois miois fatherois iste Cock-scomboy?

Kay yonkeron niggitton oy fouleroi Asinisoy.


Cheateron ton biton?


Tous pollous strikerous, Angelo to peeso.


Certainly Sir, a very excellent Scholar in the Greek.


I do note a wondrous readiness in him.


I do wonder how the Trojans could hold out ten years Seige (as it is reported)
against the Greeks, if Achilles spoke but this Tongue? I do not think but he
might have shaken down the walls in a seventh-night, and never troubled the
wooden horse


I will try him so far as I can in the Syriack.
Kircom bragmen, shag a dou ma dell mathou.

Hashagath rabgabash shobos onoriadka.


Colpack Rubasca, gnawerthem shigshag.
Napshamothem Ribsbe bongomosh lashemech nagothi.

Gentlemen I have done, any man that can, go further,
I confess my self at a Nonplus.

Faith not I Sir, I was at my farthest in my natural Language, I was never
double-tongu'd I thank my hard fortune


Well Gentlemen, it is pity (walk further off a little my friends) I say, it is
pity such fellows so endowed, so qualified with the gifts of Nature and Arts,
yet should have such a scarcity of fortunes benefits, we must blame our
Iron-hearted age for it


It Is pity indeed, and our pity shall speak a little for 'em;
Come Sir, here is my Groat.

A Groat Sir? oh fie, give nothing rather, 'twere better you rayl'd on um for
begging and so quit your self, I am a popre Gentleman, that have little but my
wits to live on


Troth and I love you the better, Sir.


Yet i will begin a better example then so, here fellows, there is between you,
take Purse and all, and I would it were heavier for your sakes, there is a pair
of Angels to guide you to your lodgings, a poor Gentleman's good will


Gratias, maximas gratias, benignissime Domine.


This is an ill example for us, Sir, I would this bountiful Gentleman had not
come this way to day


Pox, we must not shame our selves now, Sir, i will give as much as that
Gentleman, though I never be Soldier or Scholar while I live; here friends,
there is a piece, that if he were divided would make a pair of Angels for me
too, in the love I bear to the Sword and the Tongues


My largess shall be equal too, and much good do you, this bounty is a
little abatement of my wit though, I feel that


May soldiers ever defend such charities.


And Scholars pray for their increase.


Fare you well Sir, these fellows may pray for you, you have made the
Scholars commons exceed to day, and a word with you, Sir, you said you lived
by your wits, if you use this bounty you will beggar your wits believe it


Oh Sir, I hope to increase 'em by it, this seed never wants his harvest, fare
you well, Sir.


I think a man were as good mere with a reasonable Thief, as an unreasonable
Beggar sometimes, I could find in my heart to beg half mine back again, can
you change my piece my friends


Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis.


My Gold is turned into Latin,
Look you good fellows, here is one round
Shilling more that lay concealed.

Sir, away, we shall be drawn farther into damage else.


A pox of the Fool, he live by his wits? if his wits leave him any money but
what he beggs or steals very shortly, i will be hanged for him


This breakfast parcel was well fetched of in faith.


Tush, a by-blow for mirth, we must have better purchase, we want a fourth for
another project that I have ripened


My wife, she shares, and can deserve it.


She can change her shape, and be masculine.


It Is one of the free'st conditions, she fears not the crack of a Pistol, she
dares say stand to a Grazier


Probatum fuit, profecto, Domine.


Good, then you Sir Bacchus, Appollo shall be dispatched with her share, and
some contents to meet us to morrow (at a certain place and time appointed) in
the masculine Gender, my Father has a Nephew, and I an own Cosen coming up
from the University, whom he loves most indulgently, easy Master Credulous
Oldcraft, (for you know what your mere Academique is) your Carrier never
misses his hour, he must not be robbed (because he has but little to lose) but
he must join with us in a devise that I have, that shall rob my Father of a
hundred pieces, and thank me to be rid on it, for there is the ambition of my
wit to live upon his professed wit, that has turned me out to live by my wits


Cum hirundinis alis tibi regratulor.


A male habit, a bag of a hundred weight, though it be counters (for my
Alchimy shall turn 'em into Gold of my Fathers) the hour, the place, the
action shall be at large set down, and Father, you shall know, that I put my
portion to use, that have given me to live by
And to confirm your self in me renate,
I hope you will find my wits legitimate.

NAy Lady.

Put me not in mind on it prithee,
You cannot do a greater wrong to women,
For in our wants, it is the most chief affliction
To have that name remembered; it is a title
That misery works us by, and the worlds malice,
Scorn and contempt has not where with to work
On humble Callings; they are safe, and lie
Level with pity still, and pale distress
Is no great stranger to 'em; but when fortune
Looks with a stormy face on our conditions,
We find affliction work, and envy pastime,
And our worst enemy then that most abuses us,
Is that we are called by, Lady, O my spirit,
Will nothing make thee humble? I am well methinkes,
And can live quiet with my fate sometimes,
Until I look into the world again,
Then I begin to rave at my stars bitterness,
To see how many muck hills placed above me;
Peasants and Droyles, Caroches full of Dunghills,
Whose very birth stinkes in a geenerous nostrill,
Glistring by night like Glow-wormes through the High-streets,
Hurried by Torch-light in the Foot-mans hands
That show like running Fire-drakes through the City,
And I put to my shifts and wits to live,
Nay sometimes danger too; on Foot, on Horseback,
And earne my supper manfully ere I get it,
Many a meal I have purchased at that rate,
Fed with a wound upon me, stamped at midnight.
Hah, what are you?

Now you rnay tell your self Lady.

Oh Mr. Priscian, what is the project,
For you never come without one.

First, your Husband,
Sir Ruinous Gentry greetes you with best wishes,
And here has sent you your full share by me
In five Cheates, and two Robberies.

And what comes it too?

Near upon thirteen pound.

A goodly share.
'Twill put a, Lady scarce in Philip and Cheyney,
With three small Bugle Laces, like a Chambermaid,
Here Is precious lifing.

'Lasse you must consider, Lady,
It Is but young Term, Atturnies ha small doings yet,
Then Highway Lawyers, they must needs ha little,
Wee'ne had ho great good luck to speak troth Beauty,
Since your stout Lady-ship parted from 's at Hye-gate,
But there is a fair hope now for a present hundred,
Here Is man's Apparel, your Horse stands at door.

And what is the virtuous plot now?

Marry Lady,
You like a bvave young Gallant must be robbed.

I robbed?

Nay then --

Well, well, go on, let us hear Sir.

Here Is a sealed bag of a Hundred, which indeed
Are Counters all, only some sixteen Groates
Of white money in the mouth on it.

So, what Saddle have I?

Mounsieur Laroon's the French-mans.

That again,
You know so well itis not for my stride,
How often have I complained on it?

You nay have Jockey's then, the little Scotch one,
You must dispatch.

I Will soon by ready Sir,
Before you ha shifted Saddles, many women
Have their wealth flow to 'em, I was made I see
To help my fortune, not my fortune me.

My ways are Goblin-led, and the night Else
Still drawee me from my home, yet I follow,
Sure it is not altogether fabulous,
Such Haggs do get dominion of our tongues
So soon as we speak, the Enchantment binds;
I have dissembled such a trouble on me,
As my best wits can hardly clear again;
Piping through this old Reed, the Gardianesse,
With purpose that my harmony shall reach
And please the Ladies ear, she stops below,
And echoes back my love unto my lips,
Persuaded by most violent arguments
Of self-love in her self; I am so selfe-foole,
To do at upon her hunder'd-wrinckl'd face;
I could beggar her to accept the gifts
She would throw upon me; 'twere charity,
But for pitties sake I will be a niggard
And undo, her, refusing to take from her;
I Am haunted again, if it take not now
I Will break the Spell.

Sweet Cuningame, welcome;
What? a whole day absent? Birds that build Nests
Have care to keep 'em.

That Is granted,
But not continually to sit upon 'em;
Less in the youngling season, else they desire
To fly abroad, and recreate their labors,
Then they return with fresher appetite
To work again.

Well, well, you have built a nest
That will stand all storms, you need not mistrust
A weather-wrack, and one day it may be
The youngling season too, then I hope
You Will never fly out of sight.

There will be pains,
I see to shake this Bur off, and sweetest,
Prithee how fares thy charge? has my good friend
Sir Gregory the countenance of a Lover?

No by my troth, not in my mind, me thinks
(Setting his Worship aside) he looks like a fool.

Nay in faith, never divide his Worship from him for that
Small matter; Fool and Worship are no such
Strangers now adays, but my meaning is,
Has he thy Ladies countenance of love?
Looks she like a welconie on him? plainly,
Have they as good hope of one another,
As Cupid bless us, we have?

Troth I know not,
I can perceive no forwardness in my charge,
But I protest I wish the Knight better
For your sake, Bird.

Why thanks sweet Bird, and with my heart I wish,
That he had as strong and likely hope of her
As thou haste of me.

Well, he is like to speed
Never the worse for that good wish, and i will tell you
Bird (for secrets are not to be kept betwixt us two)
My charge thinks well of you.

Of me? for what?

For my sake, I mean so, I have heard her
A hundred times since her. Uncle gave her
The first bob about you, that she'de do somewhat
For my sake if things went well together,
We have spoke of doors and bolts, and things and things,
Go too, I Will tell you all, but you will find
Some advancement for my sake I do believe.

Faith be not sparing, tell me.

By my Lady
You shall pardon me for that, 'twere a shame
If men should hear all that women speaks behind
Their backs sometimes.

You must give me leave yet,
At least to give her thanks.

Not that neither,
She must not take a notice of my blabbing,
It is sufficient you shall give me thanks,
For it is for my sake if she be bountiful,
She loves me, and loves you too for my sake.

How shall I knowing this but be ingrate,
Not to reapy her with my dearest duty.

I, but you must not know it, if you tell
All that I open to you, you will shame us both;
A far off you may kiss your hand, blush, or so,
But I Will allow no nearer conference.

Whoope! you will be jealous I perceive now.

Jealous? why there'e no true love without it, Bird,
I must be jealous of thee, but for her,
(Were it within my duty to my Master)
I durst trust h er with the strongest tempter,
And I dare swear her now as pure a Virgin
As e're was welcomed to a marriage bed,
If thoughts may be untainted, hers are so.

And where is the cause of your fear then?

Well, well;
When things are past, and the wedding Torches
Lighted at matches, to kindle better fire,
Then I Will tell you more.

Come, come, I see further,
That if we were married you'de be jealous.

I protest I should a little, but not of her,
It is the married woman (if you mark it)
And not the maid that longs, the appetite
Follows the first taste, when we have relisht
We wish cloying, the taste once pleased before,
Then our desire is whetted on to more,
But I reveal too much to you, in faith Bird.

Not a whit 'faith, Bird, betwixt you and I,
I am beholding for bettering of my knowledge.

Nay you shall know more of me if you will be ruled,
But make not things common.

Vd' so, your Lady?

I, it is no matter, she will like well of this,
Our familiarity is her content.

This present from Sir Gregory?

From my Master, the Worshipful right Sir Gregory Fop


A Ruff? and what might be his high conceit
In sending of a Ruff?

I think he had two conceits in it forsooth, too high too
Low, Ruff high, because as the Ruff does embrace yout
neck all day, so does he desire to throw his Knightly arms.

But then I leave him off a nights.

Why then he is ruff low, a ruffian, a bold adventerous errant to do any rough
service for his Lady


A witty and unhappy conceit, does he mean
As he seems to say unto that reverence?
He does woo her sure.

To tell you truth Lady, his conceit was far better then I have blazed it yet.


Do you think so, Sir?

Nay I know it forsooth, for it was two days ere he compassed it, to find a
fitting present for your Ladyship, was sending once a very fine Puppy to you


And that he would have brought himself.

So he would indeed, but then he altered his devise, and sent this Ruff,
requesting withal, that whenever it is foul, you (with your own hands)
would bestow the starching of it


Else she wooes him, now his eyes shoots this way; And what was the reason for
that Sir


There lies his maine conceit, Lady, for says he, In so doing she cannot choose
but in the starching to clap it often between her hands, and so she gives a
great liking and applause to my present, whereas if I should send a Puppy; she
ever calls it to her with Irist, hiss, hiss, which js a fearful disgrace,
he drew the devile from a Play, at the Bull the other day


I marry Sir, this was a rich conceit indeed.

And far fetched, therefore good for you Lady-

How now? which way look you, Bird?

At the Fdole Bird shall I hot look at the Fool?

At the Fool and I here? what need that? pray look this way.

I Will fit him aptly, either i will awake
His wits (if he have any) or force him
To app^are (as yet I cannot think him)
Without any, Sirrah, tell me one thing true
That I sahall ask you now, Was this devise
Your Masters own? I doubt his wit in it;
He Is not so ingenious.

His own I assure you, Madam.

Nay, you must not lie.

Not with a Lady, i would rather lie with you then lie with my Master, by your
leave in such a case as this


Yet again your eye?

The Fool makes mirth in faith,
I would hear some.

Come, you shall hear none but me.

Come hither friend, nay come near me; did
Thy Master send thee to me? he may be wise,
But did not she it much in that; men sometimes
May wrong themselves unawares, when they least think on 't;
Was Vulcan ever so unwise, to send Mars
To be his spokesman when he went a wooing?
Send thee? heigh-ho, a pretty rolling eye.

I can turn up the white and the black too, and need be, forsooth.


Why, here is an amorous nose.

You see the worst of my nose, forsooth.

A cheek, how I could put it now in dalliance,
A pair of lips, oh that we were uney'd,
I could suck Sugar from 'em, what a beard's here?
When will the Knight thy Master have such a
Stamp of manhood on his face? nay, do not blush.

It Is nothing but my flesh and blood that rises so.

Death, she courts the Fool.

Away, away, it is sport, do not mind it.

Give me thy hand, come be familiar;
I, here is a promising palm; what a soft
Handful of pleasure's here, here is Down compared
With Flocks and quilted Straw, thy Knights fingers
Are lean mattrice rubbers to these Feathers,
I prithee let me lean my cheek upon it,
What a soft pillow's here?

Hum, umh, hu, hum.

Why there is a courage in that lively passion,
Measure thee all over, there is not a limb
But has his full proportion; it is my voice,
There Is no compare betwixt the Knight and thee,
The goodlier man by half, at once now
I see thee all over.

If you had seen me swim the other day on my back, you would have sed you had
seen, there was two Chambermaids that saw me, and my legs by chance were
tangled in the flags, and when they saw how I was hanged, they cried out, O
help the man for fear he be drowned


They could do no less in pity, come, thine arm, we will walk together.


Blindness of Love and Women, why she dotes upon the Fool.


What Is that to you, mind her not.

Away you Burre.

How Is that?

Hang of Fleshook, fasten thine itchy claspe
On some dry Toad-stoole that will kindle with thee,
And burn together.

Oh abominable,
Why do you not love me?

No, never did?
I took thee down a little way to
Enforce a Vomit from my offended stomach,
Now you are up again I loath thee filthily.

Oh Villain.

Why do thou not see a sight
Would make a man abjure the sight of women.

Ha, ha, ha, he is vexed; ha, ha, ha,
Ha, ha, ha.

Why do thou laugh?
Because thou laugh'st, nothing else in faith.

She has but mocked my folly, else she finds not
The bosom of my purpose, some other way
Must make me know; i will try her, and may chance quit
The fine dexterity of her Lady-wit.

Yes in troth, I laughed to think of thy Master,
Now, what he would think if he knew this?

By my troth I laugh at him too, faith Sirrah, he is but a fool to say the
truth, though I say it that should not say it


Yes, thou should say truth, and I believe thee;
Well, for this time we will part, you perceive something,
Our tongues betray our hearts, there is our weakness,
But pray be silent.

As Mouse in Cheese, or Goose in Hay in faith.

Look, we are cut off, there is my hand where my lips would be.


I Will wink and think 'em thy lips, farewell.


Now Gardionesse, I need not ask where you have been.

O Lady, never was woman so abused

Do thou hear Lady sweetheart, I had forgot to tell thee, if you will I
will come back in the Evening


By no means, come not till I send for you.

If there be any need, you may think of things when I am gone, I may be
conveyed into your chamber, i will lie under the bed while midnight, or so, or you
shall put me up in one of your little boxes, I can creep in at a small hole


These are things I dare not venture, I charge you on my love never come till I
send for you


Verbum insapienti, it is enough to the wise, nor I think it is not fit the
Knight should know any thing yet


By no means, pray you go now, we are suspected.

For the things that are past, let us use our secrets.

Now i will make a firm trial of your love,
As you love me, not a word more at this time,
Not a syllable, it is the seal of love, take heed.

Hum, hum, hum, hum --
Hum's loath to depart.

So, this pleasant trouble's gone, now Gardianesse,
What? your eyes easing your heart, the cause woman?

The cause is false man, Madam, oh Lady,
I have been gub'd in a shining Carbuncle,
A very Glo-worme, that I thought had sire in it,
And it is as cold as Ice.

And justly served,
Would thou once think that such an erring Spring
Would dote upon thine Autumn?

Oh, had you heard him
But protest.

I would not have believed him,
Thou might have perceived how I mocked thy folly,
In wanton imitation with the Fool,
Go weep the sin of thy credulity,
Not of thy loss, for it was never thine,
And it is gain to miss it; were thou so dull?
Nay yet you are stupid and incapable,
Why thou were but the bait to fish with, not
The prey, the stale to catch another Bird with.

Indeed he called me Bird.

Yet thou perceiv'st not,
It is your Niece he loves, would thou be made
A stakling Jade? it is she, examine it,
I Will hurry all awry, and tread my path
Over unbeaten grounds, go level to the mark,
Not by circuler bouts, rare things are pleasing,
And rare's but seldom in the simple sense,
But has her Emphasis with eminence

My Niece? she the rival of my abuse?
My flesh and blood wrong me? i will Aunt her for it;
Oh opportunity, thou blessest me
Now Gentlewoman, are you parted so soon?
Where Is your friend I pray? your Cuningame?

What say you Aunt?

Come, come, your Cuningame?
I am not blind with age yet, nor deaf.

Dumb I am sure you are not, what ayld you Ant?
Are you not well?

No, nor sick, nor mad, nor in my wits, nor sleeping, nor walking, nor nothing,
nor any thing; I know not what I am, nor what I am not


Mercy cover us, what do you mean Aunt?

I mean to be revenged.

On whom?

On thee, Baggage.

Revenge should follow injury,
Which never reached so far as thought in me
Toward you Aunt.

Your cunning, minion,
Nor your Cuningame can either blind me,
The gentle Beggar loves you.

Beseech you,
Let me stay your error, I begin to hear,
And shake off my amazement; if you think
That ever any passage treating love
Has been betwixt us yet commenc't, any
Silent eye-glance that might but sparkle fire,
So much as brother and sister might meet with,
The lip-salute, so much as strangers might
Take a farewell with, the commixed hands,
Nay, but the least thought of the least of these;
In troth you wrong your bosom, by that truth
(Which I think yet you durst be bail for in me,
If it were offered ye) I am as free
As all this protestation.

May I believe this?


If ever you will believe truth: why, I thought he had spoke love to you, and if
his heart prompted his tongue, sure I did hear so much


Oh falsest man, Ixions plague fell on me,
Never by woman (such a masculine cloud)
So airy and so subtle was embraced.

By no cause in me, by my life dear Aunt.


I believe you, then help in my revenge,
And you shall do it, or loose my love for ever,
I Will have him quitted at his equal weapon,
Thou art young, follow him, bait his desires
With all the Engines of a woman's wit,
Stretch modesty even to the highest pitch;
He cannot freeze at such a flaming beauty;
And when thou have him by the amorous gills,
Think on my vengeance, choke up his desires,
Then let his banquettings be Tantalisme,
Let thy disdain spurn the dissembler out;
Oh I should clime my stars, and sit above,
To see him burn to ashes in his love.

This will be a strange taste, Aunt, and an
Unwilling labor, yet in your injunction
I am a servant to it.

Thou Wilt undertak't?


Yes, let the success commend it self hereafter.


Effect it Girl, my substance is thy store,
Nothing but want of will makes woman poor.

Why Pompey, thou art not stark mad, art thou?
Will thou not tell me how my Lady does?

Your Lady?


Did she receive the thing that I sent her kindly, or no?


The thing that you sent her, Knight, by the thing that you sent, was for the
things sake that was sent to carry the thing that you sent, very kindly
received, first, there is your Indenture, now go seek you a servant: secondly,
you are a Knight: thirdly and lastly, I am mine own man: and fourthly, fare
you well


Why Pompey? prithee let me speak with thee,
I Will lay my life some Hair has crossed him.

Knight, if you be a Knight, so keep you; as for the Lady, who shall say that
she is not a fair Lady, a sweet Lady, an honest and a virtuous Lady, I will
say he is a base fellow, a blab of his tongue, and I will make him eat these
fingers ends


Why here is no body says so Pompey.


Whatsoever things have past between the Lady and the other party, whom I will
not name at this time, I say she is virtuous, and honest, and I will maintain
it, as long as I can maintain my self with bread and water


Why I know no body thinks otherwise.


Any man that does but think it in my hearing, I will make him think on it
while he has a thought in his Bosom; shall we say that kindnesses from Ladies
are common? or that favors and protestations are things of no moment betwixt
parties and parties? I say still, whatsoever has been betwixt the Lady and the
party which I will not name, that she is honest, and shall be honest,
whatsoever she does by day or by night, by light or by darkness, with cut and
long tale


Why I say she is honest.


Is she honest? in what sense do you say she is honest, Knight?


If I could not find in my heart to throw my Dagger at thy head, hilts and
all, I Am an ass, and no Gentleman


Throw your Dagger at me! do not Knight, I give you fair warning, it is but
cast away if you do, for you shall have no other words of me, the Lady is an
honest Lady, whatsoever reports may go of sports and toys, and thoughts, and
words, and deeds, betwixt her and the party which I will not name; this I give
you to understand, That another man may have as good an eye, as amorous a nose,
as fair a stamped beard, and be as proper a man as a Knight, (I name no
parties) a Servingman may be as good as a Sir, a Pompey as a Gregory, a Doodle
as a Fop; so Servingman Pompey Doodle may be respected as well with Ladies
(though I name no parties) as Sir Gregory Fop; so farewell.


If the fellow be not out of his wits, then will I never have any more wit
while I live; either the sight of the Lady has gaster'd him, or else he is
drunk, or else he walks in his sleep, or else he is a fool, or a knave, or
both, one of the three I Am sure it is; yet now I think on it, she has not used
me so kindly as her Uncle promised me she should, but that is all one, he says
I shall have her, and I dare take his word for the best Horse I have, and
that is a weightier thing then a Lady, I Am sure on it.


Nay, I am your own, it is in your pleasure
How you will deal with me; yet I would entreat,
You will not make that which is bad enough,
Worse then it need be, by a second ill,
When it can render you no second profit;
If it be coin you seek, you have your prey,
All my store, I vow, (and it weighs a hundred)
My life, or any hurt you give my body,
Can enrich you no more.

You may pursue.


As I am a Gentlewoman, I never will,
Only we will bind you to quiet behavior
Till you call out for Bail, and on the other
Side of the hedge leave you; but keep the peace
Till we be out of hearing, for by that
We shall be out of danger, if we come back,
We come with a mischief.

You need not fear me.


Come, we will bestow you then.


Why law you Sir, is not this a swifter Revenue then Sic probas ergo's and
igitur's can bring in? why is not this one of your Syllogismes in Barbara? Omne
utile est honestum


Well Sir, a little more of this acquaintance,
Will make me know you fully I protest.

You have (at first sight) made me conscious
Of such a deed my dreams never prompted, yet
I could almost have wished rather ye'ad robbed me
Of my Cloak, (for my Purse it is a Scholars)
Then to have made me a robber.

I had rather have answered three difficult questions,
Then this one, as easy as yet it seems.

Tush, you shall never come to further answer for it;
^an you confess your penurious Uncle,
(...) his full face of love, to be so strict
(...) Nigard to your Commons, that you are feign
To size your belly out with shoulder fees?
With Rumps and Kidneyes, and cues of single Beer,
And yet make Dayn^y to feed more daintily,
A^ this easier rate? fie Master Credulous,
I blush for you.

This is a truth undeniable.

Why go to then, I hope I know your Uncle,
How does he use his Son, nearer then you?

Faith like his Jade, upon the bare Commons,
Turned out to pick his living as he can get it;
He would have been glad to have shared in such
A purchase, and thankt his good fortune too;
But mum no more -- is all safe, Bullies?
Secure? the Gentleman thinks him most happy in his loss,
With his safe life and limbs* and redoubles
(...) first vow, as he is a Gentleman,
Never to pursue us.

Well away then,
Disperse you with Master Credulous, who still
Shall bear the purchase, Priscian and I
Will take some other course: You know our meeting
At the Three Cups in Saint Gyles, with this proviso,
(For it is a Law with us) that nothing be opened
Till all be present, the looser says a hundred,
And it can weigh no less.

Come, Sir, we will be your guide.

My honesty, which till now was never forfeited,
All shall be close till our meeting.

Tush, I believed,
And then all shall out; where is the thief that is robbed?

Here Master Old^raft, all follows now.

'Twas neatly done, wench, now to turn that bag (...) counterfets to current
pieces, and actum est


You are the Chemist, we will blow the fire still,
If you can mingle the ingredients.

I will not miss a cause, a quantity, a dram,
You know the place.

I have told her that, Sir.

Good, turn Ruinous to be a Constable, I Am sure
(...) not beards of all sorts, from the
Worshipful Magistrate to the under Watchman;
because we must have no danger of life,
(...) cleanly cheat, attach Credulous,
(...) cause is plain, the theft found about him;
^^en fall I in his own Cozens shape
(...) ^eere accident, where finding him distressed,
^ w^^h some difficulty must fetch him off,
With promise that his Uncle shall shut up all
With double restitution: Master Constable, Ruinous
His mouth shall be stopped; you, Mistress rob theef^,
Shall have your share of what we can pull my father of;
Is It plain enough?

As plain a cozenage as can be, says.

Father, I come again, and again when this is
Past too, Father, one will beget another;
I Would be loath to leave your posterity barren,
You were best to come to composition Father,
Two hundred pieces yearly allow me yet,
It will be cheaper (Father) then my wit,
For I will cheat none but you, dear Father.

WHy now you take the course Sir Gregory Fop:
I could enforce her and I list, but love
That Is gently won, is a man's own for ever,
Have you prepared good music?

As fine a noise, Uncle, as heart can wish*

Why that is done like a Suitor,
They must be wooed a hundred several ways,
Before you obtain the right way in a woman,
It Is an odd creature, full of creeks and windings.
The Serpent has not mo^e; for she has all his,
And then her own beside came in by her mother.

A fearful portion for a man to venture on.

But the way found once by the wits of men,
There is no creature lies so tame again.

I promise you, not a house-Rabbit, Sir.

No sucker on 'em all.

What a thing's that?
They Are pretty Fools I warrant, when they are tame
As a man can lay his lips to.

How were you bred, Sir?
Did you never make a fool of a Tenants daughter?

Never in faith, they have made some fools for me,
And brought 'em many a time under their aprons.

They could not show you the way plainlier, I think,
To make a fool again.

There Is fools enough, Sir,
Less they were wiser.

This is wondrous rare,
Come you to London with a Maidenhead, Knight?
A Gentleman of your rank ride with a Cloak-bag?
Never an Hostess by the way to leave it with?
Nor Tapsters sister? nor head Ostlers wife?
What no body?

Well mocked old Wit Monger,
I keep it for your Niece.

Do not say so for shame, she will laugh at thee,
A wife never looks for it, it is a Batchellors penny,
He may giv't to a beggar-wench, in the progress time,
And never called to account for it.

Would I Would known so much,
I could have stopped a beggars mouth by the way,
That railed upon me 'cause I Would give her nothing --
What, are they come?

And placed directly, Sir,
Under her window.

What may I call you Gentleman?

A poor servant to the Violl, I Am the Voice, Sir.

In good time Master Voice.

Indeed good time does get the mastery.

What Countryman Master Voice?

Sir, borne at Ely, we all set up in Ely,
But our house commonly breaks in Rutland Shire.

A shrewd place by my faith, it may well break your voice,
It breaks many a man's back; come, set to your business.

Feign would I wake you, Sweet, but fear
I should invite you to worse cheer;
In your dreams you cannot fare
Meaner then Music; no compare;
None of your slumbers are compil'de
Under the pleasure makes a child;
Your day-delights, so well compact,
That what you think, turns all to act:
I Would wish my life no better play,
Your dream by night, your thought by day.
Wake gently, wake,
Part softly from your dreams;
The morning flies
To your fair eyes,
To take her special beams.

I hear her up, here Master Voice,
Pay you the Instruments, save what you can,
To keep you when you're cracked.

Who should this be?
That I Am so much beholding to, for sweetness?
Pray Heaven it happens right.

Good morrow Mistress.

An ill day and a thousand come upon thee.

'Light that is six hundred more then any Almanac has.

Comes it from thee? it is the mangiest Music
That ever woman heard.

Nay say not so Lady,
There Is not an itch about 'em.

I could curse
My attentive powers, for giving entrance to it;
There is no boldness like the impudence
That Is locked in a fools blood, how durst you do this?
In conscience I abused you as sufficiently
As woman could a man; insatiate Coxcombe,
The mocks, and spiteful language I have given thee,
Would a' my life have served ten reasonable men,
And rise contented too, and left enough for their friends.
You glutten at abuses, never satisfied?
I am persuaded thou devour'st more flouts
Then all thy body's worth, and still a hungered!
A mischief of that mawe; prithee seek elsewhere,
In Troth I am weary of abusing thee;
Get thee a fresh Mistress, thou'^ make work enough;
I do not think there is scorn enough in Town
To serve thy turn, take the Court Ladies in,
And all their women to 'em, that exceed 'em.

Is this in earnest, Lady?

Oh unsatiable!
Do thou count all this but an earnest yet?
I Would thought I Would paid thee all the whole sum, trust me;
Thou't beggar my derision utterly
If thou stai'st longer, I shall want a laugh:
If I knew where to borrow a contempt
Would hold thee tack, stay and be hanged thou should then,
But thou'st no conscience now to extort hate from me,
When one has spent all she can make upon thee;
Must I begin to pay thee hire again?
After I have rid thee twice? faith it is unreasonable.

Say you so? I Will know that presently.

Now he runs
To fetch my Uncle to this musty bargain,
But I have better ware always at hand.
And lay by this still when he comes to cheapen.

I met the Music now, yet cannot learn
What entertainment he received from her.

There Is some body set already, I must to it, I see,
Well, well, Sir Gregory.

Hah, Sir Gregory?

Where e're you come you may well boast your conquest.

She Is lost in faith, enough, has fortune then
Remembered her great boy? she seldom fails 'em.

He was the unlikeliest man at first, me thought,
To have my love, we never met but wrangled,

A pox upon that wrangling, say I still,
I never knew it fail yet, where er't came;
It never comes but like a storm of hail,
It Is sure to bring fine weather at the tail on it,
There Is not one match amongst twenty made without it,
It fights in the tongue, but sure to agree in the haunches.

That man that should have told me, when time was,
I should have had him, had been laughed at pitteously,
But see how things will change?

Here Is a heart feels it -- O the deceitful promises of love!
What trust should a man put in the lip of woman?
She kissed me with that strength, as if sh'ad meant
To have set the fair print of her soul upon me.

I would have sworn 'twould never have been a match once.

I Will hear no more, I Am mad to hear so much,
Why should I aim my thoughts at better fortunes
Then younger brothers have? that is a Maid with nothing,
Or some old Soap-boylers Widow, without teeth,
There waits my fortune for me, seek no farther.

You tell me things, Sir Gregory, that cannot be,
She will not, nor she dares not.

Would I were whipped then.

I Will make as little show of love, Sir Gregory,
As ever woman did, you shall not know
You have my heart a good while.

Heard you that?

Man will insult so soon, it is his condition,
It Is good to keep him off as long as we can,
I Have much a do, I swear; and love in the end
Will have his course, let Maids do what they can,
They are but frail things, till they end in man.

What say you to this, Sir?

This is somewhat handsome.

And by that little wrangling that I feigned,
Now I shall try how constant his love is,
Although't went sore against my heart to chide him.

Alas poor Gentlewoman.

Now you are sure of truth,
You hear her own thoughts speak.

They speak indeed.

Go, you're a brainelesse Coxe, a Toy, a Fop,
I Will go no farther then your name, Sir Gregory,
I Will right my self there; were you from this place,
You should perceive I Am heartily angry with you,
Offer to sow strife 'twixt my Niece and I?
Good morrow Niece, good morrow.

Many fair ones to you, Sir.

Go, your'e a Coxcombe. How do Niece this morning?
An Idle shallow fool: Slep'st thou well, Girl?
Fortune may very well provide thee Lordships,
For honesty has left thee little manners.

How am I banged a' both sides?

Abuse kindness? Will It take the air to day Niece?

When you please, Sir,
There stands the Heir behind you I must take,
(Which I Would as live take, as take him I swear.)

La' you; do you hear't continued to your teeth now?
A pox of all such Gregory's; what a hand
Have I with you?

No more y'feck, I have done, Sir:
Lady, your Scarfe's fallen down.

It Is but your luck, Sir,
And does presage the Mistress must fall shortly,
You may wear it, and you please.

There Is a trick for you,
You Are parlously beloved, you should complain.

Yes, when I complain, Sir,
Then do your worst, there I Will deceive you Sir.

You are a Dolt, and so I leave you, Sir.


Ah sir, Mistress, were you caught in faith?
We overheard you all; I must not know
I have your heart, take heed a that, I pray,
I knew some Scarf would come.

He Is quite gone, sure:
Ah you base Coxcomb, could thou come again?
And so abused as thou wast?

How?

'Twould have killed
A sensible man, he would have gone to his Chamber,
And broke his heart by this time.

Thank you heartily.

Or fixed a naked rapier in a wall,
Like him that earned his Knighthood e're he had it,
And then refused upon it, ran up to the hilts.

Yes, let him run for me, I was never brought up to it,
I never professed running in my life.

What art thou made on? thou tough villainous vermin,
Will nothing destroy thee?

Yes, yes, assure your self
Unkind words may do much.

Why, do thou want 'em?
I Have e'ne consumed my spleen to help thee to 'em,
Tell me what sort of words they be would speed thee?
I Will see what I can do yet.

I Am much beholding to you,
Your'e willing to bestow huge pains upon me.

I should account nothing too much to rid thee.

I wonder you would not offer to destroy me,
All the while your Uncle was here?

Why there thou betray'st thy house, we of the Old-Crafts
Were borne to more wit then so.

I wear your favor here.

Would it might rot thy arm off: if thou knewst
With what contempt thou have it, what hearts bitterness,
How many cunning curses came along with it,
Thoud'st quake to handle it.

A pox, take it again then;
Who'd be thus plagued of all hands?

No, weare't still,
But long I hope thou shall not, it is but cast
Upon thee, purposely to serve another
That has more right to it, as in some Countries they convey
Their treasure upon Asses to their friends,
If mine be but so wise and apprehensive
As my opinion gives him to my heart,
It stays not long on thy desertlesse arm;
I Will make theee're I have done not dare to wear
Any thing of mine, although I give't thee freely;
Kiss it you may, and make what show you can,
But sure you carry't to a worthier man,
And so good morrow to you.

Hu hum, ha hum;
I have not the spirit now to dash my brains out,
Nor the audacity to kill my self,
But I could cry my heart out, that is as good,
For so't be out no matter which way it comes,
If I can dye with a fillip, or depart
At hot cockles, what is that to any man?
If there be so much death that serves my turn there.
Every one knows the state of his own body,
No Carrion kills a Kite, but then again
There Is Cheese will choke a Daw; time I were'dead in faith,
If I knew which way without hurt or danger.
I am a Maiden-Knight, and cannot look
Upon a naked weapon with any modesty,
Else 'twould go hard with me, and to complain
To Sir Perfidious the old Knight again,
Were to be more abused; perhaps he would beat me well,
But never believe me;
And few men dye a beating, that were lost too:
Oh, here is my friend, i will make my moan to him.

I cannot tear her memory from my heart,
That treads mine down, was ever man so fooled
That professed wit?

O Cuningame?

Sir Gregory?
The choice, the Victor, the Towns happy man?

Sniggs, what do mean? come I to thee for comfort, and do abuse me too?


Abuse you? how Sir?
With justifying your fortune, and your joys?

Pray hold your hand, Sir i have bin bold enough,
You come with a new way now; strike me merrily,
But when a man's sore beaten a both sides already,
Then the least tap in jest goes to the guts on him;
Wilt ha the truth? i am made the ranckest ass
That e're was borne to Lordships.

What? no Sir;

I had not thought my body could a yielded
All those foul scurvie names that she has called me,
I wonder whence she fecht 'em?

Is this credible?

She pined this scarf upon me before her Uncle,
But his back turned, she cursed me so for wearing on it,
The very brawne of mine arm has ak'd ever since,
Yet in a manner forced me to weare't still,
But hoped I should not long; if good luck serve
I should meet one that has more wit and worth
Should take it from me, 'twas but lent to me,
And sent to him for a token.

I conceit it, I know the man
That lies in wait for it, part with it by all means,
In any case, you are waylaid about it.

How Sir? waylaid?

Pox of a Scarf say I,
I prize my friends life 'bove a million on 'em,
You shall be ruled, Sir, I know more then you.

If you know more then I, let me be rid on it,
Less it is not for my wearing, so she told me.

No, no, give me't, the knave shall miss his purpose,
And you shall live.

I would, as long as I could, Sir.

No more replies, you shall, I Will prevent this,
Pompey shall march without it.

What, is it he?
My man that was?

Call him your deadly Enemy;
You give him too fair a name, you deal too nobly,
He bears a bloody mind, a cruel foe, Sir,
I care not if he heard me.

But do you hear, Sir?
Cannot sound with reason she should affect him?

Do you talk of reason? I never thought to have heard
Such a word come from you; reason in love?
Would you give that, no Doctor could e're give?
Has not a Deputy married his Cooke-maid?
An Aldermans Widow one that was her turn broach?
Nay, has not a great Lady brought her Stable
Into her Chamber: lay with her Horse-keeper?

Did ever love play such Jades tricks, Sir?

Oh thousands, thousands: Beware a sturdy Clown ere while you live, Sir;
It Is like a huswifery in most Shires about us;
You shall have Farmers widows wed thin Gentlemen,
Much like your self, but put'em to no stresse;
What work can they do, with small trap-stick legs?
They keep Clownes to stop gaps, and drive in peggs,
A drudgery fit for Hindes, e'ne back again, Sir,
You Are safest at returning.

Think you so, Sir?

But how came this Clown to be called Pompey first?


Push, one good man Caesar, a Pump-maker kersen'd him;
Pompey he writes himself, but his right name's Pumpey,
And stunke too when I had him, now he is cranke.

I Am glad I know so much to quell his pride, Sir,
Walk you still that way, I Will make use of this,
To resolve all my doubts, and place this favor
On some new Mistress, only for a try,
And if it meet my thoughts, I Will swear it is I.

Is Pompey grown so malepert? so frampell?
The only cutter about Ladies honors?
And his blade soonest out?

Now, what is the news, Sir?

I dare not say but good; oh excellent good, Sir.

I hope now you are resolved she loves you, Knight?

Cuds me, what else Sir? that is not to do now.

You would not think how desperately you angered me,
When you belyed her goodness; oh you vexed me,
Even to a Palsy.

What a thing was that, Sir?

It Is, that it is; as I have hope of sweetness, the Scarfe's gone;
Worthy wise friend, I dote upon thy cunning,
We two shall be well matched, our Issue male, sure
Will be borne Counselors; is it possible?
Thou shall have another token out of hand for it;
Nay since the way's found, pity thou should want, in faith,
O my best joy, and dearest.

Well said, Niece,
So violent fore your Uncle? what will you do
In secret then?

Marry call me slave, and rascal.

Your Scarf -- the Scarf I gave you --

Mass that is true Niece,
I never thought upon that; the Scarf she gave you- Sir?
What dumb? no answer from you? the Scarf?

I was waylaid about it, my life threatened;
Life's life, Scarfe's but a Scarf, and so I parted from't.

Unfortunate woman! my first favor too?

Will you be still an ass? no reconcilement
Twixt you and wit? are you so far fallen out,
You Will never come together? I tell you true,
I Am very lowsily ashamed on you,
That Is the worst shame that can be;
Thus bayting on him: now his heart's hook't in,
I Will make him, e're I have done, take her with nothing,
I love a man that lives by his wits a life;
Nay leave, sweet Niece, it is but a Scarf, let it go.

The going of it never grieves me, Sir.
It is the manner, the manner --

O dissembling Marmaset! if I durst speak,
Or could be believed when I speak,
What a tale could I tell, to make hair stand upright now?

Nay, Sir, at your request you shall perceive, Uncle,
With what renewing love I forgive this?
Here Is a fair Diamond, Sir, I Will try how long
You can keep that?

Not very long, you know it too,
Like a cunning witch as you are.

You Are best let him have that too.

So I were, I think, there were no living else,
I thank you, as you have handled the matter.

Why this is musical now, and Tuesday next
Shall tune your Instruments, that is the day set.

A match, good Uncle.

Sir, you hear me too?

Oh very well, I Am for you.

What e're you hear, you know my mind.

I a -- on it, too well, if I do not wonder how we two shall come together, I Am
a bear whelpe? he talks of Tuesday next, as familiarly as if we loved one
another, but it is as unlikely to me, as 'twas seven year before I saw her; I
shall try his cunning, it may be he has a way was never yet thought on, and it
had need to be such a one, for all that I can think on will never do it; I
look to have this Diamond taken from me very speedily, therefore I Will take it
off a my finger, for if it be seen, I shall be waylaid for that too


OH torture! torture! thou carriest a sting i'thy tail,
Thou never brought good news i'thy life yet,
And that is an ill quality, leave it when thou will.

Why you receive a blessing the wrong way, Sir,
Call you not this good news? to save at once Sir
Your credit and your kinsmans life together;
Would it not vex your peace, and gaul your worth?
TO have one of your name hanged?

Peace, no such words, boy.

Be thankful for the blessing of prevention then.

Le' me see, there was none hanged out of our house since Brute,
I have searched both Stowe, and Hollinshead.

O Sir.

I Will see what Polychronicon says anon too.

'Twas a miraculous fortune that I heard on it.

I would thou would never heard on it,

That Is true too,
So it had never been done; to see the luck on it,
He was even brought to Justice Aurums threshold,
There had flewen sorth a Mittimus straight for Newgate;
And note the fortune too, Sessions a Thursday,
Jury cul'd out a Friday, Judgment a Saturday,
Dungeon a Sunday, Tyburne a Monday,
Miseries quotidian ague, when it begins once,
Every day pulls him, till he pull his last.

No more, I say, it is an ill theme: where left you him?

He Is in the Constables hands below in the Hall, Sir,
Poor Gentleman, and his accuser with him.

What Is he?

A Judges Son, it is thought so much the worse too,
He Will hang his enemy, an't shall cost him nothing,
That Is a great privilege.

Within there?

Sir?

Call up the folks in the Hall. I had such hope on him,
For a Scholar too, a thing thou never wast fit for,
Therefore erected all my joys in him;
Got a Welsh Benefice in reversion for him,
Deane of Cardigan, has his grace already,
He can marry and bury, yet never a hair on's face;
Like a French Vicar, and does he bring such fruits to Town with him?
A thief at his first lighting? Oh good den to you.

Nay, sweet Sir, you are so vexed now, you will grieve him,
And hurt your self.

Away, I Will hear no counsel;
Come you but once in seven year to your Uncle,
And at that time must you be brought home too?
And by a Constable?

Oh speak low, Sir,
Remember your own credit, you profess
You love a man a' wit, begin at home, Sir,
Express it in your self.

Nay, Master Constable,
Show your self a wise man, against your nature too.

Sir, no Dish-porridgement, we have brought home
As good men as ye.

Out, a North-Brittaine Constable, that tongue
Will publish all, it speaks so broad already;
Are you the Gentlewoman?

The unfortunate one, Sir,
That fell into the power of merciless thieves,
Whereof this fellow, whom I Would call your kinsman,
As little as I could, (for the fair reverence
I owe to fame and years) was the prime villain.

A wicked prime.

Nay, not so loud, sweet father.

The rest are fled, but I shall meet with 'em,
Hang one of 'em I will certain, I have swore it,
And 'twas my luck to light upon this first.

A Cambridge man for this? these your degrees, Sir?
Nine years at University for this fellowship?

Take your voice lower, dear Sir.

What Is your loss, Sir?

That which offends me to repeat, the Money's whole, Sir,
It Is in the Constables hands there, a sealed hundred,
But I will not receive it.

No? not the money, Sir,
Having confessed it is all?

It Is all the Money, Sir,
But it is not all I lost, for when they bound me,
They took a Diamond hung at my shirt string,
Which fear of life made me forget to hide;
It being the sparkling witness of a Contract
'Twixt a great Lawyers daughter and my self.

I told you what he was; what does the Diamond
Concern my Cozen, Sir?

No more did the Money,
But he shall answer all now.

There Is your conscience,
It shows from whence you sprung.

Sprung? I had leapt a thief,
Had I leapt some of your alliance.

Slave!

You prevent me still.

'Slid, son are you mad?

Come, come, I Will take a legal course.

Will you undo us all? what is your demand, Sir?
Now we are in's danger too.

A hundred Mark, Sir,
I will not bate a doit.

A hundred rascals.

Sir, find 'em out in your own blood, and take 'em.

Go take your course, follow the Law, and spare not.

Does fury make you drunk? know you what you say?

A hundred dogs dungs, do your worst.

You do I Am sure; whose loud now?

What his own asking?

Not in such a case?

You shall have but three score pound; spite a your teeth,
I Will see you hanged first.

And what is seven pound more man?
That all this coyle's about? stay, I say, he shall have it.

It is your own, you may do what you please with it;
Pardon my zeal, I would ha saved you money;
Give him all his own asking?

What Is that to you, Sir?
Be sparing of your own, teach me to pinch
In such a case as this? go, go, live by your wits, go.

I practice all I can.

Follow you me, Sir,
And Master Constable come from the knave,
And be a witness of a full recompense.

Pray stop the Constables mouth, what ere you do. Sir

Yet again? as if I meant not to do that my self,
Without your counsel? As for you, precious kinsman,
Your first years fruits in Wales shall go to rack for this,
You lie not in my house, I Will pack you out,
And pay for your lodging rather.

Oh fie Cozen,
These are ill courses, you a Scholar too,

I was drawn into it most unfortunately,
By filthy deboyst company.

I, I, I,
It Is even the spoil of all our youth in England;
What were they Gentlemen?

Faith so like, some on 'em,
They were even the worse again.

Hum.

Great Tobacco swivers,
They would go near to rob with a pipe in their mouths.

What, no?

Faith leave it Cozen, because my rascals use it,

So they do meat and drink, must worthy Gentlemen
Refrain their food for that? an honest man
May eat of the same pig some Parson dines with,
A Lawyer and a fool feed of one Woodcock,
Yet one never the simpler, the other never the wiser;
It Is not meat, drink, or smoke, dish, cup, or pipe,
Co-operates to the making of a knave,
It Is the condition makes a slave, a slave,
There Is London Philosophy for you; I tell you cozen,
You cannot be too cautelous, nice, or dainty,
In your society here, especially
When you come raw from the University,
Before the world has hardened you a little,
For as a buttered loaf is a Scholars breakfast there,
So a poacht Scholar is a cheaters dinner here,
I have known seven of 'em supt up at a Meal.

Why a poacht Scholar?

Cause he powers himself forth,
And all his secrets, at the first acquaintance,
Never so crafty to be eaten in the shell,
But is outstript of all he has at first,
And goes down glibb, he is swallowed with sharp wit,
Stead of Wine Vinegar.

I shall think, Cozen,
A' your poch't Scholar, while I live.

Master Credulous,
Your Uncle wills you to forbear the House,
You must with me, I Am charged to see you placed
In some new lodging about Theeving Lane,
What the conceit's, I know not, but commands you
To be seen here no more, till you hear further.

Here Is a strange welcome, Sir.

This is the World, Cozen;
When a man's fame's once poisoned, fare thee well Lad.
This is the happiest cheat I e're claimed share in,
It has a two fold fortune, gets me coin,
And puts him out of grace, that stood between me,
My fathers Cambridge Jewel, much suspected
To be his Heir, now there is a bar in's hopes.

It chinks, make haste.

The Goat at Smithfield Pens.

Zo, zo, zufficient. Master Cunningame?
I never have ill luck when I meet a wit.

A wit's better to meet, then to follow then,
For I have none so good I can commend yet,
But commonly men unfortunate to themselves,
Are luckiest to their friends, and so may I be.

I run over so much worth, going but in haste from you,
All my deliberate friendship cannot equal.

It Is but to show that you can place sometimes,
Your modesty a top of all your virtues.
This Gentleman may pleasure me yet again;
I am so haunted with this broad brim'd hat,
Of the last progress block, with the young hat-band,
Made for a sucking Devil of two year old,
I know not where to turn my self.

Sir?

More torture?

It Is rumor'd that you love me.

A my troth Gentlewoman,
Rumour's as false a knave as ever pist then,
Pray tell him so from me; I cannot feign
With a sweet Gentlewoman, I must deal down right.

I heard, though you dissembled with my Aunt, Sir,
And that makes me more confident.

There Is no falsehood,
But paies us our own some way, I confess
I feigned with her, 'twas for a weightier purpose,
But not with thee, I swear.

Nor I with you then,
Although my Aunt enjoined me to dissemble,
To right her spleen, I love you faithfully.

Light, this is worse then 'twas.

I find such worth in you,
I cannot, nay I dare not dally with you,
For fear the flame consume me.

Here Is fresh trouble,
This drives me to my conscience, for it is foul
To injure one that deals directly with me.

I crave but such a truth from your love, Sir,
As mine brings you, and that is proportionable.

A good Geometrician, shrew my heart;
Why are you out a' your wits, pretty plumpe Gentlewoman,
You talk so desperately? it is a great happiness,
Love has made one on's wiser then another,
We should be both cast away else;
Yet I love gratitude, I must requite you,
I shall be sick else, but to give you me,
A thing you must not take, if you mean to live,
For a' my troth I hardly can my self;
No wise Physician will prescribe me for you.
Alas your state is weak, you had need of Cordials
Some rich Electuary, made of a Son an Heir,
An elder brother in a Cullisse, whole,
'T must be some wealthy Gregory, boiled to a Jelly,
That must restore you to the state of new Gowns,
French Ruffs, and mutable head tires,

But where is he, Sir?
One that is so rich will never wed me with nothing.

Then see thy conscience and thy wit together,
Would thou have me then, that has nothing neither?
What say you to Fop Gregory the first yonder?
Will you acknowledge your time amply recompensed?
Full satisfaction upon loves record?
Without any more suit, if I combine you?

Yes, by this honest kiss.

You Are a wise Clyent,
To pay your fee before hand, but all do so,
You know the worst already, that is thee best too.

I know he is a fool,

You Are shrewdly hurt then;
This is your comfort, your great wisest women
Pick their first husband still out of that house,
And some will have 'em to choose, if they bury 20.

I Am of their minds, that like him for a first husband,
To run youths race with him, it is very pleasant,
But when I Am old, I Would always wish a wiser.
You may have me by that time; for this first business,
Rest upon my performance.

With all thankfulness.

I have a project you must aid me in too.

You bind me to all lawful action, Sir,
Pray wear this scarf about you;
I conjecture now --

There Is a Court principle for it, one office must help another;
As for example, for your cast a Manchits out a'th Pantry,
I Will allow you a Goose out a'th Kitchen.

It Is very sociably done, Sir, farewell performance,
I shall be bold to call you so.

Do, sweet confidence,
If I can match my two broad brim'd hats;
It Is he, I know the Maggot by his head;
Now shall I learn news of him, my precious chief.

I have been seeking for you in the bowling Green,
Inquired at Nettletons, and Anthonies Ordinary,
T'ha's vexed me to the heart, look, I Have a Diamond here,
And it cannot find a Master.

No? That Is hard in faith.

It does belong to some body, a -- on him,
I would he had it, does but trouble me,
And she that sent it, is so waspish too,
There Is no returning to her till't be gone.

Oh, ho, ah sirrah, are you come?

What Is that friend?

Do you note that corner sparkle?

Which? which? which Sir?

At the West end a'the Collar.

Oh I see it now.

It Is an apparent mark; this is the stone, Sir,
That so much blood is threatened to be shed for.

I pray?

A tun at least.

They must not find't I Am then, they must
Go where it is to be had.

It Is well it came to my hands first, Sir Gregory,
I know where this must go.

Am I discharged on it?

My life for yours now.

What now?

It Is discretion, Sir,
I Will stand upon my Guard all the while I have it.

Troth thou take too much danger on thee still,
To preserve me alive.

It Is a friends duty, Sir,
Nay, by a toy that I have late thought upon,
I Will undertake to get your Mistress for you.

Thou will not? wilt?

Contract her by a trick, Sir,
When she least thinks on it.

There Is the right way to it,
For if she think on it once, she will never do it.

She does abuse you still then?

A -- damnably,
Every time worse then other; yet her Uncle
Thinks the day holds a tuesday; say it did, Sir,
She Is so familiarly used to call me rascal,
She Will quite forget to wed me by my own name,
And then that marriage cannot hold in Law, you know.

Will you leave all to me?

Who should I leave it to?

It Is our luck to love Neeces; I love a Niece too.

I would you did in faith.

But mine is a kind wretch.

I marry Sir, I would mine were so too.

No rascal comes in her mouth.

Troth, and mine has little else in hers.

Mine sends me tokens,
All the world knows not on.

Mine gives me tokens too, very fine tokens,
But I dare not wear 'em.

Mine Is kind in secret.

And there mine is a hell-cat.

We have a day set too.

'Slid, so have we man,
But there is no sign of ever coming together.

Tell thee who it is, the old woman's Niece.

Is It she?

I would your luck had been no worse for mildness;
But mum, no more words on it to your Lady.

Foh!

No blabbing as you love me.

None of our blood
Were ever bablers.

Prithee convey this Letter to her,
But at any hand let not your Mistress see it.

Yet again Sir?

There Is a Jewel in it,
The very art would make her dote upon it.

Say you so?
And she shall see it for that trick only.

Remember but your Mistress, and all is well.

Nay if I do not hang me.

I believe you;
This is the only way to return a token,
I know he will do it now, cause he is charged to the contrary.
He Is the nearest kin to a woman, of a thing
Made without substance, that a man can find again,
Some petticoat begot him, I Will be whipped else,
Engendring with an old pair of pawnde hose,
Lying in some hot chamber over the Kitchen,
Very steame bred him,
He never came where Rem in Re e're grew;
The generation of a hundred such
Cannot make a man stand in a white sheet,
For it is no act in Law, nor can a Constable
Pick out a bawdy business for Bridewell in it;
A lamentable case, he is got with a man's Urine, like a Mandrake.
How now? hah? what prodigious bravery's this?
A most preposterous Gallant, the Doublet sits
As if it mocked the breeches.

Save you, Sir,

Has put his tongue in the fine suit of words too.

How does the party?

Takes me for a Scrivener. Which of the parties?

Hum, simplicity betide thee --
I would feign hear of the party; I would be loath to go
Further with her; honor is not a thing to be dallied withal,
No more is reputation, no nor fame, I take it, I must not
Have her wronged when I Am abroad, my party is not
To be compelled with any party in an oblique way;
It Is very dangerous to deal with women;
May prove a Lady too, but shall be namelesse,
I Will bite my tongue out, e're it prove a Traitor.

Upon my life I know her.

Not by me,
Know what you can, talk a whole day with me,
You Are never the wiser, she comes not from these lips.

The old Knights Niece.

'Slid he has got her, pox of his heart that told him,
Can nothing be kept secret? let me entreat you
To use her name as little as you can, though.

'Twill be small pleasure, Sir, to use her name.

I had intelligence in my solemn walks,
'Twixt Paddington and Pancridge, of a Scarf,
Sent for a token, and a Jewel followed,
But I acknowledge not the receipt of any,
How e're it is carried, believe me Sir,
Upon my reputation I received none.

What, neither Scarf nor Jewel?

'Twould be seen
Some where about me, you may well think that,
I have an arm for a Scarf, as others have,
And dare to hang a Jewel too, and that is more
Then some men have, my betters a great deal,
I must have restitution, where e're it lights.

And reason good.

For all these tokens, Sir,
Pass in my name.

It cannot otherwise be.

Sent to a worthy friend.

I, that is to thee.

I Am wronged under that title.

I dare swear thou art,
It Is nothing but Sir Gregory's circumvention,
His envious spite, when you are at Paddington,
He meets the gifts at Pancridge.

Ah false Knight?
False both to honor, and the Law of Arms?

What will thou say if I be revenged for thee?
Thou sit as witness?

I should laugh in state then.

I Will fobb him, here is my hand.

I should be as glad as any man alive, to see him well fob'd, Sir; but now you
talk of fobbing, I wonder the Lady sends not form according to promise? I have
kept out a Town these two days, a purpose to be sent for; I am almost starved
with walking


Walking gets men a stomach.

It Is most true, Sir, I may speak it by experience, for I have got a stomach
six times, and lost it again, as often as a traveller from Chelsy shall lose the
sight of Paul's, and get it again


Go to her, man.

Not for a Million, enfringe my oath? there is a toy called a vow, has past
between us, a poor trifle, Sir; Pray do me the part and office of a
Gentleman, if you chance to meet a Footman by the way, in orange tawny
ribbands, running before an empty Coach, with a Buzzard in the Poope on it, direct
him and his horses toward the new River by Islington, there they shall have me
looking upon the Pipes, and whistling.


A very good note; this love makes us all Monkeyes,
But to my work: Scarf first? and now a Diamond? these
Should be sure signs of her affections truth;
Yet I Will go forward with my surer proof.

Is It possible?
Nay here is his Letter too, there is a fine Jewel in it,
Therefore I brought it to you.

You tedious Mongrill! Is It not enough
To grace thee, to receive this from thy hand,
A thing which makes me almost sick to do,
But you must talk too?

I have done

Fall back,
Yet backer, backer yet, you unmannerly puppy,
Do you not see I Am going about to read it?

Nay these are golden days, now I stay by it,
She was wont not to endure me in her sight at all,
The world mends, I see that.

What an ambiguous Superscription's here?
To the best of Neeces. Why that title may be mine,
And more then here is:
Sure I much wrong the neatnessed of his art;
It Is certain sent to me, and to requite
My cunning in the carriage of my Tokens,
Used the same Fop for his.

She nodded now to me, 'twill come in time.

What Is here? an entire Rubye, cut into a heart.
And this the word, Istud Amoris opus?

Yes, yes, I have heard him say that love is the best stone-cutter.


Why thou saucy issue of some traveling Sow-gelder,
What makes love? thy mouth? is it a thing
That ever will concern thee? I do wonder
How thou dare think ont? have thou ever hope
To come in the same room where lovers are;
And escape unbrain'd with one of their velvet slippers?

Love tricks break out I see, and you talk of slippers once,
It Is not far off to bed time.

Is it possible thou can laugh yet?
I would have undertook to have killed a spider
With less venom far, then I have spit at thee.

You must conceive,
A Knight's another manner a piece of flesh.

Back, Owls face.

Do, do.

It Is my Uncles voice, that:
Why keep you so far off, Sir Gregory?
Are you afraid, Sir, to come near your Mistress?

Is the proud heart come down? I looked for this still.

He comes not this way yet: Away, you dog-whelp;
Would you offer to come near me, though I said so?
I Will make you understand my mind in time;
Your running greedily like a hound to his breakfast,
That chops in head and all to beguile his fellows;
I Am to be eaten, Sir, with Grace and leisure,
Behavior and discourse, things that never trouble you;
After I have pelted you sufficiently,
I tro you will learn more manners.

I Am wondering still when we two shall come together?
Tuesday's at hand, but I Am as far off, as I was at first,
I swear.

Now Cuningame, I Will be revenged at large:
Lady, what was but all this while suspicion,
Is truth, full blown now, my Niece wears your Scarf.

Hah?

Do but follow me, I Will place you instantly
Where you shall see her courted by Cuningame.

I go with greediness; we long for things
That break our hearts sometimes, there is pleasures misery,

Where are those gad-flies going? to some Junket now;
That some old humble-bee toles the young one forth
To sweet meats after kind, let 'em look to it,
The thing you wot on, be not mist or gone,
I bring a Maidenhead, and I look for one.

Yes, yes.

Too manifest now, the Scarf and all.

It cannot be, you're such a fearful soul.

I Will give her cause of fear e're I part from her.

Will you say so? Is It not your Aunts desire too?

What a dissembling groane's that? she will forswear't now.


I see my project takes, yonder is the grace on it.

Who would put confidence in wit again,
I Am plagued for my ambition, to desire
A wise man for a husband, and I see
Fate will not have us go beyond our stint,
We are allowed but one dish, and that is Woodcock,
It keeps up wit to make us friends and fervants of,
And thinks any thing's good enough to make us husbands
Oh that whores hat a' thine, a' the riding block,
A shade for lecherous kisses.

Make you doubt on it?
Is not my love of force?

Yes, me it forces
To tear that sorcerous strumpet from th'imbraces.

Lady?

Oh thou have wronged the exquisit'st love --

What mean you Lady?

Mine, you will answer for it.

Alas, what seek you?

Sir, mine own with loss.

You shall.

I never made so hard a bargain.

Sweet Lady?

Unjust man, let my wrath reach her,
As you owe virtue duty; your cause trips you,
Now Minion, you shall feel what loves rage is,
Before you taste the pleasure; smile you false, Sir?

How can I choose? to see what pains you take,
Upon a thing will never thank you for it?

How?

See what things you women be, Lady,
When clothes are taken for the best part of you?
This was to show you, when you think I love you not,
How you are deceived still, there the Moral lies,
'Twas a trap set to catch you, and the only bait
To take a Lady nibling, is fine clothes;
Now I dare boldly thank you for your love,
I Am pretty well resolved in it by this fit,
For a jealous ague always ushers it.

Now blessings still maintain this wit of thine,
And I Am an excellent fortune coming in thee,
Bring nothing else I charge thee.

Not a groat I warrant ye.

Thou shall be worthily welcome, take my faith for it,
Next opportunity shall make us.

The old Gentlewoman has fooled her revenge sweetly.

Less it is her part, she knows her place so well yonder;
Always when women jumpe upon three score,
Love shoves 'em from the chamber to the door.

Thou art a precious she-wit.

FRiend, met in the harvest of our designs,
Not a thought but's busle.

I knew it man,
that made me provide these needful Reapers,
Hooks, Rakers, Gleaners; we will sing it home
With a melodious Horne-pipe; this is the Bond,
That as we further in your great affair,
You Will suffer us to gleane, pick up for crumbs,
And if we snatch a handful from the sheafe,
You will not look a churl on's.

Friend, we will share
The sheaves of gold, only the Love Aker
Shall be peculiar.

Much good do you, Sir,
Away, you know your way, and your stay; get you
The Music ready, while we prepare the dancers.

We are a consort of our selves.

And can strike up lustily.

You must bring Sir Fop.

That Is perfect enough.

Bring all the Fops you can, the more the better fare,
So the proverb runs backwards.

I Will bring the Ladies.

Do so first, and then the Fops will follow;
I must to my father, he must make one.

While I dispatch a business with the Knight,
And I go with you. Well sed, I thank you,
This small Banquet will fusnish our few Guests
With taste and state enough; one reach my Gown,
The action craves it rather then the weather.

There Is one stays to speak with you Sir.

What is he?

Faith I know not what, Sir, a fool I think,
That some Brokers shop has made half a Gentleman;
Has the name of a Worthy too..

Pompey? is it not?

That Is he, Sir.

Alas poor fellow, prithee enter him, he will need too,
He shall serve for a Witness. Oh Gramercy:
If my friend Sir Gregory comes, you know him,
Entertain him kindly. Oh Master Pompey, how is it man?

'Snailes, I Am almost sstarv'd with love, and cold, and one thing or other;
Has not my Lady sent for me yet?

Not that I hear, sure some unfriendly Messenger Is employed betwixt you,


I was never so cold in my life, in my conscience I have been seven mile in
length, along the new River; I have seen a hundred stickle bags; I do not
think but there is gudgeons too; 'twill never be a true water


Why think you so?

I warrant you, I told a thousand Millers thumbs in it,
I Will make a little bold with your Sweetmeats.
And welcome Pompey.

It Is is a strange thing, I have no taste in any thing.

Oh, that is Love, that distasts any thing but it self.

It Is worse then Cheese in that point, may not a man break his word with a
Lady? I could find in my heart and my hose too


By no means Sir, that breaks all the Laws of Love.

Well, i will never pass my word without my deed to Lady, while I live again, I
would feign recover my taste


Well, I have news to tell you.

Good news, Sir?

Happy news, I help you away with a Rival your Master bestowed


Where for this plumbs sake --

Nay listen me.

I warrant you, Sir, I have two ears to one mouth,
I hear more then I eat, i would never row by Queen Hive
While lived else.

I have a wife for him, and that shall witness the Contract.


The old one I hope, it is not the Lady?

Choke him first, it is one which thou shall see,
See him, see him deceived, see the deceit, only
The injunction is, you shall smile with modesty.

I Will simper in faith, as cold as I am yet, the old one I hope.


Sir, here is Sir Gregory.

Ud' so shelter, shelter, if you be seen
All Is ravell'd out again; stand there private,
And you will find the very opportunity
To call you forth, and place you at the Table.
You are welcome Sir, this Banquet will serve,
When it is crowned with such a dainty as you
Expect, and must have.

Tush, these sweetmeats are but sauce to that,
Well, if there be any honesty or true word in a dream,
She Is mine own, nay, and changed extremely,
Not the same woman.

Who? not the Lady?

No, not to me, the edge of her tongue is taken off,
Gives me very good words, turned upside down to me,
And we live as quietly as two Tortusses, if she hold on
As she began in my dream.

Nay, if Love send forth such Predictions,
You are bound to believe 'em, there is the watchword
Of her coming, to your practiced part now,
If you hit it, Aequus Cupido nobis.

I will warrant you Sir, I will give arms to
Your Gentry, look you forward to your business,
I am an eye behind you, place her in that Chair,
And let me alone to grope her out.

Silence, Lady, your sweet presence illustrates
This homely roof, and as course entertainment;
But where affections are both Host and Guest,
They cannot meet unkindly, please you fit,
Your something long stay made me unmannerly,
To place before you, you know this friend here,
He Is my Guest, and more especially,
That this our meeting might not be too single,
Without a witness to it.

I came not unresolved, Sir,
And when our hands are clasped in that firm faith
Which I expect from you; fame shall be bold
To speak the lowdest on it: oh, you graspe me.
Somewhat too hard friend.

That Is Loves eager will,
I Will touch it gentlier.

That Is too low in you,
Less it be doubly recompensed in me.

Puh, I must stop my mouth, I shall be choakt else.

Come, we will not play and trifle with delays,
We met to join these hands, and willingly
I cannot leave it till confirmation.

One word first, how does your friend, kind Sir Gregory?


Why do you mention him? you love him not?

I shall love you the less if you say so, Sir,
In troth I love him, but it is you deceive him,
This flattering hand of yours does rob him now,
Now you steal his right from him, and I know
I shall have hate for it, his hate extremely.

Why I thought you had not come so weakly armed,
Upon my life the Knight will love you for it,
Exceedingly love you, for ever love you.

I, you will persuade me so.

Why he is my friend,
And wishes me a fortune equal with him,
I know, and dare speak it for him.

Oh, this hand betrays him, you might remember him in some courtesy yet at
least


I thank your help in it, here is to his health
Where e're he be.

I Will pledge it were it against my health.

Oh. oh, my heart hops after twelve mile a day, upon a good return, now could
I walk three hundred mile a foot, and laugh forwards and backwards


You Will take the Knights health Sir,

Yes, yes forsooth, oh my sides! such a Banquet once a week, would make me
grow fat in a fortnight


Well, now to close our meeting, with the close
Of mutual hands and hearts, thus I begin,
Here in Heavens eye, and all loves sacred powers,
(Which in my prayers stand propitious)
I knit this holy hand fast, and with this hand
The heart that owes this hand, ever binding
By force of this initiating Contract
Both heart and hand in love, faith, loyalty,
Estate, or what to them belongs, in all the dues;
Rights and honors of a faithful husband,
And this firm vow henceforth till death to stand
Irrevocable, sealed both with heart and hand.

Which thus I second, but oh, Sir Gregory.

Again? this interposition's ill, believe me.

Here in Heavens eye, and all Loves sacred powers
I knit this holy hand fast, and with this hand
The heart that owes this hand, ever binding
Both heart and hand in love, honor, loyalty,
Estate, or what to them belongs in all the dues,
Rights, and duties of a true faithful wife;
And this firm Vow henceforth till death to stand,
Irrevocable sealed both with heart and hand.

A full agreement on both parts.

I, here is witness of that.

Nay, I have over-reacht you Lady, and that is much,
For any Knight in England to overreach a Lady.

I rejoice in my deceit, I am a Lady
Now, I thank you Sir.

Good morrow Lady Fop.

'Snailes, i am gulled, made a worshipful ass, this is not my Lady.


But it is Sir, and true as your dream told you,
That your Lady was become another woman.

I Will have another Lady Sir, if there were no more Ladies in London, blinde-man
buffe is an unlawful Game


Come, down on your knees first, and thank your stars.

A fire of my stars, I may thank you I think.

So you may pray for me, and honor me,
That have preserved you from a lasting torment,
For a perpetual comfort; did you call me friend?

I pray pardon me for that, l did miscall you, I confess.


And should I receiving such a thankful name
Abuse it in the act? should I see my friend
Bafful'd, disgraced, without any reverence
To your title to be called slave, rascal?
Naay cursed to your face, fooled, scorned, beaten down
With a woman's peevish hate, yet I should stand
And suffer you to be lost, cast away?
I would have seen you buried quick first,
Your spurrs of Knighthood to have wanted rowels,
And to be kicked from your heels; slave, rascal?
Hear this tongue?

My dearest Love, sweet Knight, my Lord, my Husband.

So, this is not slave and rascal then.

What shall your eye command, but shall be done,
In all the duties of a loyal wife?

Good, good, are not curses fitter for you? were not better
Your head were broke with the handle of a fan,
Or your nose bored with a silver bodkin?

Why, I will be a servant in your Lady.

Pox, but you shall not, she is too good for you,
This contract shall be a nullity, i will breake't off,
And see you better bestowed.

'Slid, but you shall not Sir, she is mine own, And I am hers, and we are one
another lawfully, and let me see him that will take her away by the Civil
Law, if you be my friend keep you so, if you have done me a good turn, do not
hit me in the teeth with it, that is not the part of a friend


If you be content --

Content? I was never in better contention in my life,
I Will not change her for both the Exchanges, New or the Old;
Come, kiss me boldly.

Give you joy, Sir.

Oh Sir, I thank you as much as though I did, you are beloved of Ladies, you
see we are glad of under women


Ladies? let not Ladies be disgraced, you are as it were a married man, and
have a Family, and for the parties sake that was unnam'd before, being Pese-cod
time, I am appeased, yet I would wish you make a ruler of your tongue


Nay, no dissension here, I must bar that,
And this (friend) I entreat you, and be advised,
Let this private contract be yet concealed,
And still support a seeming face of love
Unto the Lady; mark how it availes you,
And quits all her scorns, her Uncle is now hot
In pursuit of the match, and will enforce her
Bend her proud stomach, that she shall proffer
Her self to you, which when you have flouted,
And laughed your fill at, you shall scorn her off
With all your disgraces trebled upon her,
For there the pride of all her heart will bow,
When you shall foot her from you, not she you.

Good in faith; i will continue it, i would feign laugh at the old fellow too, for he
has abused me as scurvily as his Niece, my Knight-hood's upon the spur, we will
go to Bed, and then to Church as fast as we can


I do wonder I do not hear of the Lady yet.

The good minute may come sooner then you are aware of,
I do not think but 'twill e're night yet as near as it is.

Well, I will go walk by the new River in that meditation, I am over shoes
I Am sure upon the dry bank, this gullery of my Master will keep me company
this two hours too, if love were not an enemy to laughter I should drive away
the time well enough; you know my walk Sir, if she sends, I shall be found
angling, for I will try what I can catch for luck sake, I will fish fair for it

Oh Knight that thou should be gulled so; ha, ha, it does me good at heart,
But oh Lady, thou take down my merry part. Exit

Friend.

Here friend.

All Is afoot, and will go smooth away,
The woman has conquered the women, they are gone,
Which I have already complained to my Father,
Suggesting that Sir Gregory is fallen off
From his charge, for neglects and ill usage,
And that he is most violently bent
On Gentries wife (whom I have called a widow)
And that without most sudden prevention
He will be married to her.

Foot, all this is wrong,
This wings his pursuit, and will be before me; I am lost for ever.

No, stay, you shall not go
But with my Father, on my wit let it lie,
You shall appear a friendly assistant,
To help in all affairs, and in execution
Help your self only.

Would my belief
Were strong in this assurance.

You shall credit it,
And my wit shall be your slave if it deceive you.
My Father --

Oh Sir, you are well met, where is the Knight your friend?

Sir, I think your Son has told you.

Shall I stand to tell't again? I tell you he loves,
But not my Kins-woman, her base usage,
And your slack performance which he accuses most
Indeed, has turned the Knights heart upside down.

I Will curb her for it, can he be but recovered,
He shall have her, and she shall be dutiful,
And love him as a wife too.

With that condition Sir,
I dare recall him were he entered the Church,
So much interest of love I assure in him.

Sir, it shall be no loss to you if you do.

I, but these are words still, will not the deeds Be wanting at the recovery,
if it should be again


Why here fool, I am provided, five hundred in earnest,
Of the thousands in her Dower, but were they married once,
I Would cut him short enough, that is my agreement.

I, now I perceive some purpose in you, Father.

But wherefore is she then stolen out of doors to him?

To him? oh fie upon your error, she has another objett, believe it Sir.


I never could perceive it.

I did Sir, and to her shame I should speak it,
To my own sorrow I saw it, dalliance,
Nay dotage with a very Clown, a Fool.

Wit and wantons? nothing else? nothing else?
She love a Fool? she will sooner mate a fool
Of a wise man.

I, my friend complains so,
Sir Gregory says flatly she makes a fool of him,
And these bold circumstances are approved;
Favors have been sent by him, yet he ignorant
Whither to carry 'em; they have been understood,
And taken from him, certain Sir, there is
An unsuspected fellow lies concealed,
What, or where e're he is, these slight neglects
Could not be of a Knight else.

Well Sir, you have promised (if we recover him Unmarried) to salve all these
old bruises


I Will do my best Sir.

I shall thank you, costly Sir, and kindly too.

Will you talk away the time here Sir, and come behirtde all your purposes?


Away good Sir.

Then stay a little good Sir, for my advise,
Why Father are you broke? your wit beggered,
Or are you at your wits end? or out of
Love with wit? no trick of Wit to surprise
Those designs, but with open Hue and Cry,
For all the world to talk on? this is strange,
You were not wont to slubber a project so.

Can you help at a pinch now? show your self
My son, go too, I leave this to your wit,
Because i will make a proof on it.

It Is thus then,
I have had late intelligence, they are now
Buxsome as Bachus Froes, revelling, dancing,
Telling the Musicks numbers with their feet,
Awaiting the meeting of premonisht friends,
That Is questionless, little dreading you,
Now Sir, with a dexterous trick indeed, sudden
And sufficient were well, to enter on um
As something like the abstract of a Masque;
What though few persons? if best for our purpose
That commends the project.

This takes up time.

Not at all, I can presently furnish
With loose disguises that shall fit that Scene.

Why what wants then?

Nothing but charge of Music,
That must be paid you know.

That shall be my charges, i will pay the Music,
What e're it cost.

And that shall be all your charge,
Now on, I like it, there will be wit in it Father.

I will neither distrust his wit nor friendship,
Yet if his master brain should be o're-throwne
My resolution now shall seize mine own.

Nay, let us have Music, let that sweet breath at least
Give us her ayrie welcome, 'twill be the best
I fear this ruined receptacle will yield,
But that most freely.

My welcome follows me,
Else I am ill come hither, you assure me
Still Mr. Cuningame will be here, and that it was
His kind entreaty that wished me meet him.

Else let me be that shame unto my Sex,
That all belief may fly um.

Continue still
The Knights name unto my Gardianesse,
She expects no other.

He will, he will assure you
Lady, Sir Gregory will be here, and suddenly
This Music fore-ran him, is it not so consorts?

Yes Lady, he stays on some device to bring along
Such a labor he was busy in, some witty device.

'Twill be long e're he comes then, for wit's a great Labor to him.


Well, well, you will agree better one day.

Scarce two I think.

Such a mock-begger suit of clothes as led me
Into the fools pair of Dice, with dewze ace,
He that would make me Mistress Cun, Cun, Cunnie,
He Is quite out of my mind, but I shall never
Forget him while I have a hole in my head,
Such a one I think would please you better,
Though he did not abuse you.

Fie, speak well of him now,
Your Niece has quitted him.

I hope she has,
Else she looses me for ever; but for Sir Gregory,
Would he were come. I shall ill answer this
Unto your Uncle else.

You know it is his pleasure
I should keep him company.

I, and should be your own
If you did well too, Lord, I do wonder
At the niceness of you Ladies now a days,
They must have Husbands with so much wit forsooth.
Worship and wealth were both wont to be
In better request I Am sure, I cannot tell,
But they get never the wiser children that I see.

La, la, la, la, Sol, this Music breathes in vain,
Me thinks it is dull to let it move alone,
Let Us have a female motion, it is in private,
And we will grace't our selves how ever it deserves.

What say you Gardianesse?

'Lasse i am weary with the walk,
My jaunting days are done.

Come, come, we will fetch her in by course, or else,
She shall pay the Music.

Nay, i will have a little for my money then.

Hark? upon my life the Knight; it is your friend,
This was the warning-peece of his approach.

Ha? no words but mum? well then,
We shall need no counsell-keeping

Cuningame?

Yes, fear nothing.

Fear? why do you tell me of it?

Your Unckles here.

Aye me.

Peace.

We have caught 'em.

Thank my wit Father.

Which is the Knight think you?

I know not, he will be found when be speaks,
No Mask can disguise his tongue.

Are you charged?

Are you awake?

I Am answered in a question.

Next change we meet, we loose our hands no more.

Are you prepared to tie 'em?

Yes,
You must go with me.

Whether Sir? not from my charge believe me.

She goes a long.

Will you ventur and my Uncle here?

His stay's prepared for.

It Is the Knight sure, i will follow.

How now, the Music tired before us?

Yes Sir, we must be paid now.

Oh, that is my charge Father.

But stay, where are our wanton Ladies gone?
Son, where are they?

Only changed the room in a change, that is all sure.

I Will make 'em all sure else, and then return to you.

You must pay for your Music first, Sir.

Must? are there musty Fiddlers? are Beggars choosers now?
Ha? why Witty-pate, Son, where am I?

You were dancing e'ne now, in good measure Sir,
Is your health miscarried since? what ayle you, Sir?

Death, I may be gulled to my face, where is my Niece?
What are you?

None of your Niece, Sir.

How now? have you loud Instruments too? i will hear
No more I thank you, what have I done tro
To bring these fears about me? Son, where am I?

Not where you should be, Sir, you should be paying
For your Music, and you are in a maze.

Oh, is it so, put up, put up, I pray you,
Here Is a crown for you.

Pish, a crown?

Ha, ha, ha, a crown?

Which way do you laugh? I have seen a crown
Has made a Consort laugh heartily.

Father,
To tell you truth, these are no ordinary
Musicians, they expect a bounty
Above their punctual desert.

A -- on your Puncks, and their deserts too.
Am I not cheated all this while think you?
Is not your pate in this?

If you be cheated,
You are not to be Indicted for your own goods,
Here you trifle time to market your bounty
And make it base, when it must needs be free
For ought I can perceive.

Will you know the lowest price, Sir?

That I will Sir, with all my heart.

Unless I was discovered, and they now fled
Home again for fear, I am absolutely beguiled,
That Is the best can be hoped for.

Faith it is somewhat too dear yet, Gentlemen.

There Is not a Denier to be bated, Sir.

Now Sir, how dear is it?

Bate but the the other ten pound?

Not a Bawbee, Sir.

How? bate ten pound? what is the whole sum then?

Faith Sir, a hundred pound, with much a do,
I got fifty bated, and faith Father, to say truth,
It Is reasonable for men of their fashion.

La, la, la, down, a hundred pound? la, la, la,
You are a Consort of Thieves, are you not?

No Musicians Sir, I told you before.

Fiddle faddle, is it not a robbery? a plain robbery?

No, no, no, by no means Father, you have received
For your money, nay, and that you cannot give back,
It Is somewhat dear I confess, but who can help it?
If they had been agreed with before hand,
'Twas ill forgotten.

And how many shares have you in this? I see my force,
Case up your Instruments, I yield, here, as robbed and
Taken from me, I deliver it.

No Sir, you have performed your promise now, which was, to pay the charge of
Music, that is all


I have heard no Music, I have received none, Sir, There Is none to be found in
me, nor about me


Why Sir, here is witness against you, you have danced,
And he that dances acknowledges a receipt
Of Music.

I deny that Sir, look you, I can dance without Music, do you see Sir? and I
can sing without it too; you are a consort of Thieves, do you hear what I do


Pray you take heed Sir, if you do move the Music again, it may cost you as
much more


Hold, hold, i will depart quietly, I need not bid you farewell, I think now, so
long as that hundred pound lasts with you


Ha, ha, am I snapt in faith?
Oh, Sir, Perfidious.

I, I, some howling anotherwhile, Musick's too damnable dear.


Oh Sir, my heart strings are broke, if I can but live to tell you the tale I
care not, your Niece my charge is --


What, is she sick?


No, no Sir, she is lustity well married.


To whom?


Oh, to that cunning dissembler, Cuningame.


I Will hang the Priest, first, what was he?


Your Kinsman Sir, that has the Welsh Benefice.


I saved him from the Gallows to that end, good, is there any more?


And Sir Gregory is married too.


To my Niece too, I hope, and then I may hang her.


No Sir, to my Niece, thank Cupid; and that is all that is likely to recover me,
she is Lady Fop now, and I am One of her Aunts I thank my promotion


I hate performed your behest Sir.


What have you performed Sir?


Faith Sir, I must excuse my Cosen in this act,
If you can excuse your self for making him
A Priest, there is the most difficult answer
I put this practice on him as from your desire,
A truth, a truth Father.

I protest Sir, he tells you truth, he moved me to it in your name.


I protest Sir, he told you a lie in my name, and were you so easy Mr.
Credulous to believe him


If a man should not believe his Cosen Sir, whom should he believe?


Godden to you good Mr. Cosen Cuningame,
And your fair Bride, my Cosen Cuningame too,
And how do you, Sir Gregory, with your fair Lady?

A little better then you would have had me, I thank you Sir, the days of
Puppy, and Slave, and Rascal are pretty well blown over now, I know Crabs
from Verjuyce, I have tried both, and thoud'st give me thy Niece for nothing
i would not have her


I think so Sir Gregory, for my sake you would not.


I would thou had escaped her too, and then she had dyed of the green
sickness, know this, that I did marry in spite, and I will kiss my Lady in
spite, and love her in spite, and beget children of her in spite, and when I
dye they shall have my Lands in spite; this was my resolution, and now it is
out


How spightfull are you now, Sir Gregory?
Why look you, I can love my dearest Husband,
With all the honors, duties, sweet embraces,
That can be thrown upon a loving man.

-- This is before your Unckles face, but behind his back in private you will
show him another tale


You see Sir, now the irrecoverable state of all these things before you, come
out of your muse, they have been but wit weapons, they were wont to love the
play


Let me alone in my muse a little Sir, I will wake to you anon.


U'd so, your friend Pompey, how will you answer him?


Very well, if you will but second it, and help me.


I do hear strange stories, are Ladies things obnoxious?


Oh, the dissembling falsest wretch is come.


How now Lady?


Let me come to him, and in stead of love
Let me have revenge.

Pray you now, will you first examine, whither he be guilty or no.


He cannot be excused,
How many Messengers (thou perjured man)
Have thou returned with Vows and Oaths? that thou
Would follow, and never till this unhappy hour
Could I set eye of thee, since thy false dye
Drew my heart to it? oh I could tear thee now,
In stead of soft embraces, pray give me leave --

Faith this was ill done of you Sir, if you promised otherwise.


By this hand, never any Messenger came at me since the first time I came into
her company; that a man should be wronged thus


Did not I send thee Scarfes and Diamonds?
And thou returnd'st me letters, one with a faife heart in it.

On fie to receive favors, return false-hoods, and hold a Lady in hand --


Will you believe me Sir? if ever I received Diamonds, or Scarf, or sent any
Letter to her, would this Sword might never go through me


Some bad Messengers have gone between you then.


Take him from my fight, if I shall see to morrow.


Pray you forbear the place, this discontent may impair her health much.


Foot, if a man had been in any fault 'twould never have grieved him, Sir, if
you will believe


Nay, nay, protest no more, I do believe you,
But you see how the Lady is wronged by it;
She has cast away her self it is to be feared,
Against her Unckles will, nay, any consent,
But out of a mere neglect, and spite to her self,
Married suddenly without any advice.

Why who can help it? if she be cast away she may thank her self, she might
have gone further and fared worse; I could do no more then I could do, 'twas
her own pleasure to command me that I should not come till I was sent for, I
had been with her every minute of an hour else


Truly I believe you.


Night and day she might have commanded me, and that she knew well enough; I
said as much to her between her and I, yet I protest she is as honest a Lady for
my part, that i would say if she would see me hanged, if she be cast away I cannot
help it, she might have stayed to have spoke with a man


Well, 'twas a hard miss on both parts.


So 'twas, I was within one of her, for all this cross luck, I was sure I was
between the Knight and home


Not gone yet? oh my heart! none regard my health?


Good Sir, forbear her sight a while, you hear how ill she brooks it.


Foolish woman, to overthrow her fortunes so; I shall think the worse of a
Ladies wit while I live for it -- I could almost cry for anger, if she should
miscarry now, 'twould touch my conscience a little, and who knows what love
and conceit may do? what would people say as I go along? there goes he that the
Lady dyed for love on, lam sure to hear on it in the streets. I shall weep
before hand; foolish woman, I do grieve more for thee now then I did love thee
before; well, go thy ways, would thou spare thy Husbands head and break
thine own heart? if thou had any wit, I would some other had been the cause
of thy undoing, I shall be twitted in the teeth with it, i am sure of that,
foolish Lady.


So, so, this trouble's well shook off, Uncle, how dee? there is a Dowry due,
sir


We have agreed it, sweetest,
And find your Uncle fully recovered, kind to both of us.

To all the rest I hope;


Never to thee, nor thee, easy cosen Credulous,
Was your wit so raw?

Faith yours Sir, so long seasoned
Has been faulty too, and very much to blame,
Speaking it with reverence, Uncle.

Yes faith, Sir, you have paid as dear for your time as any man here.


I Sir, and i will reckon it to him. Imprimis, The first preface cheat of a pair
of pieces to the Beggars, you remember that I was the example to your bounty
there, I spoke Greek, and Syriacke, Sir, you understand me now. Next, the
Robbery put upon your indulgent Cosen, which indeed was no Robbery, no
Constable, no Justice, no Thief, but all Cheaters; there was a hundred Mark,
mark you that. Lastly, this memorable 100. pounds worth of Music, this was but
cheats and wit too, and for the assistance, this Gentleman to my Cosen (for
which I am to have a Fee) that was a little practice of my wit too, Father;
will you come to composition yet, Father


Yes faith Sir, do, two hundred a year will be easier then so much weekly, I
do not think he is barren if he should be put to it again


Why this was the day I looked for, thou shall have't,
And the next cheat makes it up three hundred;
Live thou upou thy ten pound Vicarage,
Thou get'st not a penny more, here is thy full
Hire now.

I thank you Sir.

Why there was the sum of all my wit Father,
To shove him out of your favor, which I feared
Would have dis-inherited me.

Most certain it had,
Had not thy wit recovered it; is there any here
That had a hand with thee?

Yes, all these Sir.

Nephew, part a hundred pound amongst 'em,
I Will repay it; wealth, love me as I love wit;
When I dye,
I Will build an Almes-house for decayed wits.

I Will entertain one in my life time; Scholar, you shall be my Chaplain, I
have the gift of twenty Benefices, simple as I am here


Thanks my great Patron.

Sir, your Gentry and your name shall both be raised as high as my fortunes can
reach 'em, for your friends sake


Something will be in my present power, the future more,
You shall share with me.

Thanks worthy Gentlemen.

Sir, I would beg one thing of you?

You can beg nothing of me.

Oh Sir, if she begs, there is your power over her.

She has begged me for a fool already, but it is no matter,
I have begged her for a Lady that she might have been,
That Is one for another.

Nay, but if she beg --

Let her beg again then.

That your man Pompeyes Coat may come over his ears back again, I would not he
should be lost for my sake


Well, it is granted, for mine own sake.

I Will entreat it Sir.

Why then it is granted for your sake.

Come, come, down with all weapons now, it is
Music time,
So it be purchased at an easy rate;
Some have received the knocks, some given the hits,
And all concludes in love, there is happy wits.


