SHamount, welcome; we have mist thee long,
Though absent but two days: I hope your sports
Answer your time and wishes.

Very nobly sir:
We found game worthy your delight my Lord,
It was so royal.

I Have enough to hear on it,
Prithee bestow't upon me in discourse.

What is this Gentleman Coz? you are a Courtier,
Therefore know all their insides.

No farther then the Taffitie goes good Coz,
For the most part, which is indeed the best part
Of the most general inside: marry thus far
I can with boldness speak this ones man's Character,
And upon honor pass it for a true one;
He has that strength of many merit in him,
That it exceeds his Sovereigns power of gracing;
He Is faithfully true to valor, that he hates
The man from Casars time, or farther off,
That ever took disgrace unrevenged:
And if he chance to read his abject story,
He tears his memory out, and holds it virtuous,
Not to let shame have so much life amongst us;
There is not such a curious piece of courage
Amongst man's fellowship, or one so jealous
Of honors loss, or reputations glory:
There Is so much perfect, of his growing story.

'Twould make one dote on virtue as you tell it.

I have told it to much loss, believe it Coz.

How the Duke graces him? what is he brother?

Do you not yet know him? a vainglorious coxcombe,
As proud as he that fell for it:
Set but aside his valor, no virtue,
Which is indeed, not fit for any Courtier;
And we his fellows are as good as he,
Perhaps as capable of favor too,
For one thing or another, if 'twere looked into:
Give me a man, were I a Sovereign now,
Has a good stroke at Tennis, and a stiff one,
Can play at Equinoctium with the Line,
As even as the thirteenth of September,
When day and night lie in a scale together:
Or may I thrive as I deserve at Billiards;
No otherwise at Chesse, or at Primero:
These are the parts required, why not advanced?

Trust me, it was no less then excellent pleasure,
And I Am right glad 'twas thine. How fares our kinsman?
Who can resolve us best?

I can my Lord.

There if I had a pity without bounds,
It might be all bestowed -- A man so lost
In the wild ways of passion, that he is sensible
Of naught but what torments him?

True my Lord,
He runs through all the Passions of mankind,
And shifts 'em strangely too: one while in love,
And that so violent, that for want of business,
He Will court the very Prentice of a Laundresse,
Though she have kib'd heels: and in's melancholy again,
He will not brook an Empress, though thrice fairer
Then ever Maud was; or higher spirited
Then Cleopatra, or your English Countess:
Then on a sudden he is so merry again,
Out-laughs a waiting woman, before her first Child:
And turning of a hand, so angry --
'Has almost beat the Northen fellow blind;
That is for that use only; if that mood hold my Lord,
'Had need of a fresh man; I Will undertake,
He shall bruise three a month.

I pity him dearly:
And let it be your charge, with his kind brother,
To see his moods observed; let every passion
Be fed even to a surfeit, which in time
May breed a loathing: let him have enough
Of every object, that his sense is rapt with;
And being once glutted, then the taste of folly
Will come into his relish.

I shall see
Your charge my Lord most faithfully effected:
And how does noble Shamount?

Never ill man
Until I hear of baseness, then I sicken,
I am the healthful'st man in the Kingdom else.

Be armed then for a fit,
Here comes a fellow
Will make you sick at heart, if baseness do it.

Let me be gone: what is he?

Let me tell you first,
It can be but a qualme, pray stay it out sir,
Come, you have borne more then this.

Borne? never any thing
That was injurious.

Ha, I am far from that.

He looks as like a man as I have seen one:
What would you speak of him? speak well I prithee,
Even for humanities cause.

You Would have it truth though?

What else sir? I have no reason to wrong heaven
To favor nature; let her bear her own shame
If she be faulty.

Monstrous faulty there sir.

I Am ill at ease already.

Pray bear up sir.

I Prithee let me take him down with speed then.
Like a wild object that I would not look upon.

Then thus: he is one that will endure as much
As can be laid upon him.

That may be noble:
I Am kept too long from his acquaintance.

O sir,
Take heed of rash repentance, you are too forward
To find out virtue where it never settled:
Take the particulars first of what he endures;
Videlicet, Bastinadoes by the great.

How!

Thumps by the dozen, and your kicks by whole sale.

No more of him.

The twinges by the nostril he snuffes up,
And holds it the best remedy for sneazing.

Away.

Has been thrice switz't from seven a clock till nine,
Yet with a Cart-Horse stomach fell to breakfast,
Forgetful of his smart.

Nay, the disgrace on it;
There is no smart but that: base things are felt
More by their shames then hurts Sir, I know you not,
But that you live an injury to nature:
I Am heartily angry with you.

Pray give your blow or kick, and begone then:
For I never saw you before, and indeed,
Have nothing to say to you, for I know you not.

Why would thou take a blow?

I would not sir,
Unless 'twere offered me; and if from an enemy --
I Would be loath to deny it from a stranger.

What, a blow?
Endure a blow? and shall he live that gives it?

Many a fair year -- why not sir?

Let me wonder!
As full a man to see too, and as perfect --
I prithee live not long --

How?

Let me entreat it:
Thou do not know what wrong thou do mankind,
To walk so long here; not to dye betimes.
Let me advise thee, while thou have to live here,
Even for man's honor sake, take not a blow more.

You should advise them not to strike me then sir,
For I Will take none I assure you, less then are given.

How feign would I preserve man's form from shame,
And cannot get it done? however sir,
I charge thee live not long.

This is worse then beating.

Of what profession art thou, tell me sir,
Besides a Tailor? for I Will know the truth.

A Tailor? I Am as a good a Gentleman --
Can show my arms and all.

How black and blew they are?
Is that your manifestation? upon pain
Of pounding thee to dust, assume not wrong fully,
The name of Gentleman, because I am one,
That must not let thee live.

I have done, I have done sir,
If there be any harm, beshrew the Herald,
I'em sure I ha not been so long a gentleman,
To make this anger: I have nothing no where,
But what I dearly pay for.

Groom begone;
I never was so heart-sick yet of man.
Enter Lady, the Dukes sister, Lapets wife.

Here comes a cordial Sir from the other sex,
Able to make a dying face look cheerful.

The blessedness of Ladies --

You Are well met sir.

The sight of you has put an evil from me,
Whose breath was able to make virtue sicken.

I Am glad I came so fortunately. What was it sit?


A thing that takes a blow, lives and eats after it,
In very good health; you have not seen the like Madam,
A monster worth your sixpence, lovely worth,
Speak low Sir; by all likely-hoods it is her husband,
That now bestowed a visitation on me. Farewell sir.

Husband? is it possible that he has a wife?
Would any creature have him? 'twas some forced match,
If he were not kicked toth' Church oth' wedding day,
I Will never come at Court. Can be no otherwise:
Perhaps he was rich, speak Mistress Lapet, was it not so?

Nay, that is without all question.

O ho, he would not want kickers enough then;
If you are wise, I much suspect your honesty;
For wisdom never fastens constantly,
But upon merit: If you incline to fool,
You are alike unfit for his society;
Nay if it were not boldness in the man
That honors you, to advise you, troth his company
Should not be frequent with you.

It Is good counsel sir.

Oh I am so careful where I reverence,
So just to goodness, and her precious purity,
I am as equally jealous, and as fearful,
That any undeserved stain might fall
Upon her sanctified whiteness, as of the sin
That comes by wilfulness.

Sir, I love your thoughts,
And honor you for your counsel and your care.

We are your servants.

He Is but a gentleman oth' chamber, he might have kissed me:
Faith, where shall one find less courtesy, then at Court?
Say I have an undeserver to my husband:
That Is never the worse for him: well strange lipt men,
It Is but a kiss lost, there'll more come again.

Look who comes here sir, his love fit's upon him;
I know it, by that set smile, and those congies.
How courteous he is to nothing? which indeed,
Is the next kin to woman; only shadow
The elder Sister of the twain, because it is seen too.
See how it kisses the forefinger still;
Which is the last edition, and being come
So near the thumb every Cobbler has got it?

What a ridiculous piece, humanity
Here makes it self?

Nay, good give leave a little sir,
You Are so precise a manhood --

It afflicts me
When I behold unseemelinesse in an Image
So near the Godhead, it is an injury
To glorious Eternity.

Pray use patience sir.

I do confess it freely precious Lady,
And loves suit'is so, the longer it hangs
The worse it is; better cut off sweet Madam;
O that same drawing in your nether lip there,
Foreshewes no goodness Lady: make you question on it?
Shame on me but I love you.

Who is it sir,
You are at all this pains for? may I know her?

For thee thou fairest, yet the falsest woman,
That ever broke man's heart strings.

How? how is this sir?

What, the old trick of Ladies? man's apparel,
Will It nere be left amongst you? steal from Court in it?

I see the fit grows stronger.

Pray let us talk a little.

I can endure no more.

Good, let us alone a little:
You are so exact a work: love light things somewhat sir.

They Are all but shames.

What is it you would say to me sir?

Can you be so forgetful to enquire it Lady?

Yes truly sir.

The more I admire your stintinesse:
What cause have I given you, illustrious Madam,
To play this strange part with me?

Cause enough,
Do but look back sir into your memory,
Your love to other women o lewd man,
'Tas almost killed my heart, you see I Am changed with it,
I have lost the fashion of my Sex with grief on it,
When I have seen you courting of a Dowdie;
Compared with me, and kissing your forefinger
To one of the black-guards Mistresses: would not this
Crack a poor Ladies heart, that believed love,
And waited for the comfort? but 'twas said sir,
A Lady of my hair cannot want pitying:
The Countries coming up, farewell to you sir.

Whither intend you sir?

A long journey sir:
The truth is, I Am with child, and go to travel.

With child? I never got it.

I heard you were busy
At the same time sir, and was loath to trouble you.

Why, are not you a whore then, excellent Madam?

O by no means, 'twas done sir in the state
Of my belief in you, and that quits me,
It lies upon your falshod.

Does it so?
You shall not carry her though sir, she is my contract.

I prithee thou four Elements ill brued,
Torment none but thy self; away I say
Thou beast of passion, as the drunkard is
The beast of wine; dishonor to thy making,
Thou man in fragments.

Hear me precious Madam.

Kneel for thy wits to heaven.

Lady, I Will father it,
Who ere begot it: it is the course of greatness.

How virtue groans at this?

I Will raise the Court, but I Will stay your slight.

How wretched is that piece?

He Is the Dukes kinsman sir.

That cannot take a passion away sir,
Nor cut a fit, but one poor hour shorter,
He must endure as much as the poorest beggar,
That cannot change his money; there is the equality
In our impartial essence:
What Is the news now?

Your worthy brother sir, has left his charge,
And come to see you.

O the noblest welcome
That ever came from man, meet thy deservings:
Methinkes I Have all joys treasure in mine arms now,

You are so fortunate in prevention brother,
You always leave the answerer barren sir,
You comprehend in few words so much worth --

It Is all too little for thee: come thou art welcome,
So I include all: take especial knowledge pray,
Of this dear Gentleman, my absolute friend,
That loves a Soldier far above a Mistress,
Thou excellently faithful to 'em both.
But love to manhood, ownes the purer troath.

THere should be in this gallery -- on they are here,
Pray sit down; believe me sir I Am weary.

It well becomes a Lady to complain a little
Of what she never feels: your walk was short Madam,
You can be but afraid of weariness;
Which well employes the softness of your Sex,
As for the thing it self, you never came to it.

You Are wonderously well read in Ladies sir.

Shall I think such a creature as you Madam,
Was ever borne to feel pain, but in travel?
There Is your full portion,
Besides a little toothache in the breeding,
Which a kind husband too, takes from you Madam.

But where do Ladies sir, find such kind husbands?
Perhaps you have heard
The Rhumaticke story of some loving Chandler now,
Or some such melting fellow, that you talk
So prodigal of men's kindness: I confess sir,
Many of those wives are happy, their ambition
Does reach no higher, then to love and ignorance,
Which makes an excellent husband, and a fond one:
Now sir, your great ones aim at height, and cunning,
And so are often deceived, yet they must venture it;
For it is a Ladies contumely sir,
To have a Lord an Ignorant; then the worlds voice
Will deem her for a wanton ere she taste on it:
But to deceive a wise man, to whose circumspection,
The world resignes it self with all his envy;
It Is less dishonor to us then to fall,
Because his believed wisdom keeps out all.

Would I were the man Lady, that should venture
His wisdom to your goodness.

You might fail
In the return, as many men have done sir:
I dare not justify what is to come of me,
Because I know it not, though I hope virtuously;
Marry what is past or present, I durst put
Into a good man's hand, Which if he take
Upon my word for good, it shall not cousen him.

No, nor her after?

It may hap so too sir:
A woman's goodness, when she is a wise,
Lies much upon a man's desert, believe it sir,
If there be fault in her, I Will pawn my life on it,
It Is first in him, if she were ever good,
That makes one; knowing not a husband yet,
Or what he may be, I promise no more virtues,
Then I may well perform, for that were cousenage.

Happy were he that had you with all fears,
That Is my opinion, Lady.

What say you now sir?
Dare you give confidence to your own eyes?

Not yet I dare not.

No?

Scarce yet, or yet:
Although I see it is he. Why can a thing,
That Is but my self divided be so false?

Nay do but mark how the chair plays his part too:
How amorously it is bent.

Hell take thy bad thoughts,
For they are strange ones. Never take delight
To make a torment worse. Look on 'em heaven,
For that is a brother: send me a fair enemy,
And take him; for a fouler fiend there breathes not:
I will not sin, to think there is ill in her,
But what is of his producing.
Yet goodness, whose enclosure is but flesh,
Holds out often times but sorrily. But as black sir,
As ever kindred was: I hate mine own blood,
Because it is so near thine. Live without honesty,
And may thou dye with an unmoistned eye,
And no tear follow thee.

You Are wondrous merry sir; I would your Brother heard you.

O my sister
I would not out oth' way, let fall my words Lady,
Por the precizest humor.

Yea, so close.

They Are merry, that is the worst you can report on 'em;
They Are neither dangerous, nor immodest.

So sir,
Shall I believe you, think you?

Who Is this Lady?

O the Dukes Cosen; he came late from travel sir.

Respect belongs to him.

For as I said Lady,
They Are merry that is the worst you can report of em:
They Are neither dangerous, nor immodest.

How Is this?

And there I think I left.

Abuses me.

Now to proceed, Lady; perhaps I swore I loved you,
If you believe me not, you are much the wiser.

He speaks still in my person, and derides me.

For I can cog with you.

You can all do so.
We make no question of men's promptness that way.

And smile, and wave a chair with comely grace too,
Play with our Tastle gently, and do fine things,
That catch a Lady sooner then a virtue.

I never used to let man live so long
That wronged me.

Talk of Battalions, woo you in a skirmish;
Divine my mind to you Lady; and being sharp set,
Can court you at half pike: or name your weapon,
We cannot fail you Lady.

Now he dies:
Were all succeeding hopes stored up within him.

O fie, in the Court sir?

I most dearly thank you sir.

It Is rage ill spent upon a passionate madman.

That shall not privilege him for ever sir:
A madman call you him? I have found too much reason
Sound in his injury to me, to believe him so.

If ever truth from man's lips may be held
In reputation with you, give this confidence;
And this his love-fit, which we observe still,
By's flattering and his finenes: at some other time,
He Will go as slovenly as heart can wish.
The love and pity that his Highness shows to him,
Makes every man the more respectfull of him:
Has never a passion, but is well provided for,
As this of Love, he is full fed in all;
His swinge as I may term it: have but patience,
And ye shall witness somewhat.

Still he mocks me:
Look you, in action, in behavior sir;
Hold still the chair, with a grand mischief to you,
Or I Will set so much strength upon your heart sir --

I feel some power has restrained me Lady:
If it be sent from love, say, I obey it,
And ever keep a voice to welcome it.

THou Deity, swift winged love,
Sometimes below, sometimes above,
Little in shape, but great in power,
Thou that make a heart thy Tower,
And thy loop-holes, Ladies eyes,
From whence thou strik'st the fond and wise.
Did all the shafts in thy fair quiver
Stick fast in my ambitious liver;
Yet thy power would I adore,
And call upon thee to shoot more.
shoot more, shoot more.

I prithee hold though, sweet Caelestiall boy;
I Am not requited yet with love enough,
For the first arrow that I have within me:
And if thou be an equal archer Cupid,
Shoot this Lady, and twenty more for me.

Me sir?

It Is nothing but device, fear it not Lady;
You may be as good a maid after that shaft Madam,
As ere your mother was at twelve and half:
It Is like the boy that draws it, 'tas no sting yet.

It Is like the miserable maid that draws it -- aside.
That sees no comfort yet, seeing him so passionate.

Strike me the Duchess of Valois in love with me,
With all the speed thou can, and two of her women.

You shall have more.

Tell 'em I tarry for 'em.

Who would be angry with that walking trouble now
That hurts none but it self?

I am better quieted.

I Will have all women-kind struck in time for me
After thirteen once:
I see this Cupid will not let me want,
And let him spend his forty shafts an hour,
They shall be all found from the Dukes Exchequer;
He Is come already.

O turn thy bow,
Thy power we feel and know,
Fair Cupid turn away thy bow:
They be those golden Arrows,
Bring Ladies all their sorrows,
And till there be more truth in men,
Never shoot at maid again.

What a felicity of whores are here?
And all my concubines, struck bleeding new:
A man can in his life time make but one woman,
But he may make his fifty Queanes a month.

Have you remembered a Priest honest brothers?

Yes sister, and this is the young gentleman,
Make you no question of our faithfulness.

His growing shame sister provokes our care.

He must be taken in this fit of love Gentlemen.

What else sir? he shall do it.

Enough.

Be cheerful wench.

Now by the stroke of pleasure, a deep oath,
Nimbly hopt Ladies all; what height they bear too?
A story higher then your common statures;
A little man must go up stairs to kiss 'em:
What a great space there is
Betwixt loves dyning Chamber, and his Garret?
I Will try the utmost height -- the Garret stoopes methinkes;
The rooms are made all bending, I see that,
And not so high as a man takes 'em for.

Now if you will follow me sir, I Have that power,
To make them follow you.

Are they all shot?

All, all sir, every mothers daughter of 'em.

Then there is no fear of following; if they be once shot,
They Will follow a man to the devil -- As for you sir --

Me sir?

Nay sweet sir.

A noise, a threatening; did you not hear it sir?

Without regard sir, so would I hear you.

This must come to something, never talk of that Sir,
You never saw it otherwise.

Nay dear merit --

Me above all men?

Troth you wrong your anger.

I will be armed my honorable Letcher.

O fie sweet sir.

That devoures women's honesties by lumps,
And never chawst thy pleasure.

What do you mean sir?

What does he mean t'ingrosse all to himself?
There Is others love a whore, as well as he sir.

Oh an' that be part o'th fury, we have a City
Is very well provided for that case;
Let him alone with her, sir we have women
Are very charitable to proper men,
And to a Soldier that has all his limbs;
Marry the sick and lame gets not a penny:
Right women's charity, and the husbands follow't too:
Here comes his highness sir.

I Will walk to cool my self.

Who Is that?

The brother of Shamont.

He Is Brother then
To all the Courts love, they that love discreetly,
And place their friendlinesse upon desert:
As for the rest, that with a double face
Look upon merit, much like fortunes visage,
That looks two ways, both to life's calmes and storms,
I Will so provide for him, chiefly for him,
He shall not wish their loves, nor dread their envies.
And here comes my Shamont.

That Ladies virtues are my only joys,
And he to offer to lay siedge to them?

Shamont.

Her goodness is my pride; in all discourses,
As often as I here rash tongued gallants,
Speak rudely of a woman, presently
I give in but her name, and they are all silent:
O who would lose this benefit?

Come hither sir.

It Is like the gift of healing, but diviner;
For that but cures diseases in the body,
This works a cure on fame, on reputation:
The noblest piece of Surgery upon earth.

Shamont; he minds me not.

A Brother do it?

Shamont I say. Gives him a touch with his switch.


Ha?
If he be mortal, by this hand he perishes;
Unless it be a stroke from heaven, he dies for it.

Why, how now sir? 'twas I.

The more's my misery.

Why, what is the matter prithee?

Can you ask it sir?
No man else should; stood forty lives before him
By this I would have opened my way to him;
It could not be you sir, excuse him not,
What ere he be, as you are dear to honor,
That I may find my peace again.

Forbear I say.
Upon my love to truth, 'twas none but I.

Still miserable?

Come, come, what ailes you sir?

Never sat shame cooling so long upon me,
Without a satisfaction in revenge,
And heaven has made it here a sin to wish it.

Hark you sir?

O you have undone me.

How?

Cruelly undone me;
I have lost my peace, and reputation by you:
Sir pardon me, I can never love you more.

What language call you this sirs?

Truth my Lord, I Have seldom heard a stranger. --

He is a man of a most curious valor,
Wondrous precise, and punctual in that virtue.

But why to me so punctual? my last thought
Was most entirely fixed on his advancement:
Why, I came now to put him in possession
Of his fair fortunes: what a mis-conceiver it is?
And from a Gentleman of our Chamber merely,
Made him Vice Admiral; I was settled in it,
I love him next to health: call him Gentlemen;
Why would not you, or you have taken as much,
And never murmured?

Troath, I think we should my Lord,
And there is a fellow walks about the Court,
Would take a hundred of 'em.

I hate you all for it,
And rather praise his high pitched fortitude,
Though in extremes for niceness: now I think on it,
I would I had never done't. -- Now sir, where is he?

His suit is only sit to be excused.

He shall not be excused, I love him dearelier:
Say we entreat him; go, he must not leave us.
So virtue bless me, I nere knew him parraleld;
Why, he is more precious to me now, then ever.

With much fair language, w'ave brought him?

Thanks -- Where is he?

Yonder sir.

Come forward man.

Pray pardon me, I Am ashamed to be seen sir.

Was ever such a touchie man heard of?
Prithee come nearer.

More into the light?
Put not such cruelty into your requests my Lord,
First to disgrace me publicly, and then draw me
Into men's eyesight, with the shame yet hot
Upon my reputation.

What disgrace sir?

What?
Such as there can be no forgiveness for,
That I can find in honor.

That Is most strange sir.

Yet I have seartch'd my bosom to find one,
And wresled with my inclination,
But 't will not be: would you had killed me sir,
With what an ease had I forgiven you then?
But to endure a stroke from any hand
Under a punnishing Angels, which is justice,
Honor disclame that man, for my part chiefly:
Had it been yet the malice of your sword.
Though it had cleft me, 'thad been noble to me;
You should have found my thanks paid in a smile
If I had fell unworded; but to shame me,
With the correction that your horse should have,
Were you ten thousand times my royal Lord,
I cannot love you never, nor desire to serve you more.
If your drum call me. I am vowed to valor,
But peace shall never know me yours again,
Because I Have lost mine own, I speak to dye sir;
Would you were gracious that way to take off shame,
With the same swiftness as you power it on:
And since it is not in the power of Monarchs
To make a Gentleman, which is a substance
Only begot of merit, they should be careful
Not to destroy the worth of one so rare,
Which neither they can make; nor lost, repair.

You Have set a fair light sir before my judgment,
Which burns with wondrous clearnes; I acknowledge it,
And your worth with it: but then sir, my love,
My love -- what gone again?

And full of scorn my Lord.

That language will undo the man that keeps it,
Who knows no difference twixt contempt and manhood.
Upon your love to goodness, gentlemen,
Let me not lose him long: how now?

The game's at height my Lord.

Confound both, thee and it: hence break it off;
He hates me brings me news of any pleasure:
I felt not such a conflict since I could;
Distinguish betwixt worthiness and blood

I I heartily commend your project Gentlemen,
'Twas wise and virtuous.

'Twas for the safety
Of precious honor sir, which near blood binds us to:
He promised the poor easy fool there marriage,
There was a good maidenhead lost in the belief on it,
Beshrew her hasty confidence.

O no more sir,
You make her weep again; alas poor Cupid:
Shall she not shift her self?

O by no means sir:
We dare not have her seen yet, all the while
She keeps this shape, it is but thought device,
And she may follow him so without suspicion,
To see if she can draw all his wild passions,
To one point only, and that is love, the maine point:
So far his highness grants, and gave at first,
Large approbation to the quick conceit,
Which then was quick indeed.

You make her blush insooth.

I fear it is more the flagg of shame, then grace sir.

They both give but one kind of color sir:
If it be bashfulnesse in that kind taken,
It is the same with grace; and there she weeps again.
In truth you are too hard, much, much too bitter sir,
Unless you mean to have her weep her eyes out,
To play a Cupid truly.

Come, have done then:
We should all fear to sin first; for it is certain,
When it is once lodged, though entertained in mirth,
It must be wept out, if it ere come forth.

Now it is so well, I Will leave you.

Faithfully welcome sir,
Go Cupid to your charge; he is your own now;
If he want love, none will be blamed but you.

The strangest marriage, and unfortunat'st Bride
That ever humane memory contained;
I cannot be my self for it.

Oh Gentlemen?

How now sir, what is the matter?

His melancholy passion is half spent already,
Then comes his angry fit at the very tail on it,
Then comes in my pain gentlemen; 'has beat me e'ne to a Cullis.
I am nothing, right worshipful, but very pap,
And jelly: I have no bones, my body's all one business,
They talk of ribs, and chines most freely abroad in the world,
Why, I have no such thing; who ever lives to see me dead
Gentlemen, shall find me all mummie good to fill galipots
And long dildo glasses: I shall not have a bone to throw
At a dog.

Alas poor vassal, how he goes?

O Gentlemen,
I am unjoynted, do but think of that:
My breast is beat into my mawe, that what I eat,
I am feign to take it in all at mouth with spoones;
A lamentable hearing; and it is well known, my belly
Is driven into my back.
I earned four Crowns a month, most dearly Gentlemen,
And one he must have when the fit's upon him,
The privy purse allows it, and it is thriftinesse,
He would break else some forty pounds in casements,
And in five hundred years undo the Kingdom:
I have cast it up to a quarrel.

There Is a fellow kicked about court, I would
He had his place brother, but for one fit of his indignation.

And suddenly I have thought upon a means for it.

I Prithee how?

It Is but preferring Brother
This stockfish to his service, with a letter
Of commendations, the same way he wishes it,
And then you win his heart: for of my knowledge
He has laid wait this half year for a fellow
That will be beaten; and with a safe conscience
We may commend the carriage of this man in it;
Now servants he has kept, lusty tall feeders,
But they have beat him, and turned themselves away:
Now one that would endure, is like to stay,
And get good wages of him; and the service too
Is ten times milder Brother, I would not wish it else.
I see the fellow has a sore crushed body,
And the more need he has to be kicked at ease.

I sweet Gentlemen, a kick of ease, send me to such a Master.


No more I say, we have one for thee, a soft footed Master,
One that wears wool in's toes.

O Gentlemen, soft garments may you wear,
Soft skins may you wed,
But as plump as pillowes, both for white and red.
And now will I reveal a secret to you,
Since you provide for my poor flesh so tenderly,
'Has hired mere Rogues, out of his Chamber window,
To beat the Soldier, Mounsier Shamonts Brother.

That nothing concerns us sir.

For no cause Gentlemen,
Unless it be for wearing shoulder points,
With longer taggs then his.

Is not that somewhat?
Billakin sir, the difference of long taggs,
Has cost many a man's life, and advanced other some,
Come follow me.

See what a gull am I:
Oh every man in his profession;
I know a thumpe now, as juditiously,
As the proudest he that walks, I Will except none;
Come to a tagge, how short I fall? I Am gone.

I have been ruminating with my self,
What honor a man loses by a kick:
Why, what is a kick? the fury of a foot,
Whose indignation commonly is stamped
Upon the hinder quarter of a man;
Which is a place very unfit for honor,
The world will confess so much:
Then what disgrace I pray, does that part suffer
Where honor never comes, I Would feign know that?
This being well forced, and urged, may have the power
To move most Gallants to take kickes in time,
And spurn out the duelloes out of the kingdom,
For they that stand upon their honor most,
When they conceive there is no honor lost,
As by a table that I have invented
For that purpose alone, shall appear plainly,
Which shows the vanity of all blows at large,
And with what ease they may be took of all sides,
Numbering but twice one the Letters Patience
From C.P. to E. I doubt not but in small time
To see a dissolution of all bloodshed,
If the Reformed Kick do but once get up:
For what a lamentable folly it is,
If we observ't, for every little justle,
Which is but the ninth part of a sound thump,
In our meek computation, we must fight forsooth, yes,
If kill, I Am hang'; if I be killed my self,
I dye for it also: is not this trim wisdom?
Now for the Con, a man may be well beaten,
Yet pass away his fourscore years smooth after:
I had a father did it, and to my power
I will not be behind him.

O well met.

Now a fine punch or two, I look for it duly.

I Have been to seek you.

Let me know your lodging sir,
I Will come to you once a day, and use your pleasure sir.

I Am made the fittest man for thy Society:
I Will live and dye with thee: come show me a Chamber;
There is no house but thine, but only thine,
That Is fit to cover me: I Have took a blow sirrah.

I would you had indeed: why, you may see sir;
You Will all come to it in time, when my booke's out.

Since I did see thee last, I Have took a blow.

Pha sir that is nothing; I have took forty since.


What? and I charged thee thou should not?

I sir, you might charge your pleasure,
But they would giv't me, whether I would or no.

Oh I walk without my peace, I Have no companion now;
Prithee resolve me, for I cannot ask
A man more beaten to experience,
Then thou art in this kind, what manner of blow
Is held the most disgraceful, or distastefull?
For thou do only censure 'em by the hurt,
Not by the shame they do thee: yet having felt
Abuses of all kinds, thou may deliver,
Though It be by chance, the most injurious one.

You put me to it sir; but to tell you truth,
They Are all as one with me, little exception.

That little may do much, let us have it from you.

With all the speed I may: first then, and foremost,
I hold so reverently of the Bastinado sir,
That if it were the dearest friend in the world,
I Would put it into his hand.

Go too, I Will pass that then.

You Are the more happy sir,
Would I were past it too:
But being accustomed to it, It is the better carried.

Will you forward?

Then there is your sowce, your wherrit, and your dowst,
Tuggs on the hair, your bob of the lips, a whelpe on it,
I nere could find much difference: Now your thumpe,
A thing derived first from your Hemp-beaters,
Takes a man's wind away, most spitefully:
There Is nothing that destroys a Collicke like it,
For It leaves no wind in the body.

On sir, on.

Pray give me leave, I Am out of breath with thinking ont.

This is far off yet.

For the twinge byth' nose,
It Is certainly unsightly, so my tables says,
But helps against the headache, woundrous strangely.

Is It possible?

O your crushed nostrils slakes your opilation
And makes your pent powers flush to wholesome sneezes.

I never thought there had been half that virtue
In a wrung nose before.

O plenitude sir:
Now come we lower, to our modern kick,
Which has been mightily in use of late,
Since our young men drank Coltsfoot: and I grant you,
It Is a most scornful wrong, cause the foot plays it;
But mark again, how we that take it, requite it
With the like scorn, for we receive it backward;
And can there be a worse disgrace retorted?

And is this all?

All but a lugg byth' ear,
Or such a trifle.

Happy sufferer,
All this is nothing to the wrong I bear:
I see the worst disgrace, thou never felt'st yet;
It is so far from thee, thou can not think on it;
Nor dare I let thee know, it is so abject.

I would you would though, that I might prepare for it,
For I shall have it at one time or another:
If It be a thwacke, I make account of that;
There Is no new fashioned swappe that ere came up yet,
But I Have the first on 'em, I thank 'em for it.

Have thou inquired?

But Can hear nothing Madam.

If there be but so much substance in thee
To make a shelter for a man disgraced,
Hide my departure from that glorious woman
That comes with all perfection about her:
So noble, that I dare not be seen of her,
Since shame took hold of me: upon thy life
No mention of me.

I Will cut out my tongue first,
Before I Will loose my life, there is more belongs to it.

See there is a Gentleman, enquire of him.

For Mounsier Shamont Madam?

For whom else sir?

Why, this fellow dares not see him.

How?

Shamont Madam?
His very name's worse then a feavour to him,
And when he cries, there is nothing stils him sooner;
Madam, your Page of thirteen is to hard for him,
'Twas trid in the wood-yard.

Alas poor grieved Merit!
What is become of him? if he one fail,
Virtue shall find small friendship: farewell then
To Ladies worths, for any hope in men,
He loved for goodness, not for Wealth, or lust,
After the worlds foul dotage, he nere courted
The body but the beauty of the mind,
A thing which common courtship never thinks on:
All his affections were so sweet and fair,
There is no hope for fame if he despair.

Good morrow to you again most heartily sir,
Cry you mercy I heard you not, I was somewhat busy.

He takes it as familiarly, as an Ave,
Or precious salutation: I was sick till I had one,
Because I am so used to it.

How ever you deserve, your friends and mine, here
Give you large commendations in this Letter,
They say you will endure well.

I Would be loath
To prove 'em liers: I Have endured as much
As mortal pen and Ink can set me down for.

Say you me so?

I know and feel it so sir,
I have it under black and white already;
I need no pen to paint me out.

He fits me,
And hits my wishes pat, pat: I was nere
In possibility to be better manned,
For he is half lamed already, I see it plain,
But take no notice on it, for fear I make
The Rascal proud, and dear, to advance his wages;
First let me grow into particulars with you;
What have you endured of worth? let me hear.

Marry sir, I Am almost beaten blind.

That Is pretty well for a beginning,
But many a milhorse has endured as much.

Shame of the millers heart for his unkindnesse then.

Well sir, what then?

I Have been twice thrown down stairs, just before supper.


Puh, so have I, that is nothing.

I but sir,
Was yours pray before supper?

There thou posest me.

I marry, that is it, 't'ad been less grief to me,
Had I but filled my belly, and then tumbled,
But to be flung down fasting, there is the dolor.

It would have grieved me, that indeed: proceed sir.

I have been plucked and tugged bith' hair of the head
About a gallerie, half an Acre long.

Yes, that is a good one, I must needs confess,
A principal good one that, an absolute good one,
I have bin trod upon, and spurned about,
But never tugged byth' hair, I thank my fates.

O it is a spiteful pain.

Peace, never speak on it,
For putting men in mind on it.

To conclude,
I Am bursten sir: my belly will hold no meat.

No? that makes amends for all.

Unlesse't be puddings,
Or such fast food, any loose thing beguiles me, I Am nere the better for it.

Sheepheads will stay with thee?

Yes sir, or Chaldrons.

Very well sir:
Any your bursten fellows must take heed of surfets:
Strange things it seems, you have endured;

Too true sir.

But now the question is, what you will endure
Hereafter in my service?

Any thing
That shall be reason sir, for I Am but froath;
Much like a thing new calv'd, or come more nearer sir,
You Have seen a Cluster of Frog-spawns in April,
E'ne such a starche am I, as weak and tender
As a green woman yet.

Now I know this,
I will be very gently angry with thee,
And kick thee carefully.

O I sweet sir.

Peace, when thou art offered well, lest I begin now.
Your friends and mine have writ here for your truth,
They Will pass their words themselves, and I must meet 'em.

Then have you all:
As for my honesty there is no fear of that,
For I have never a whole bone about me,

Think upon love, which makes all creatures handsome,
Seemly for ey-sight; go not so disfusedly,
There are great Ladies purpose sir to visit you.

Grand plagues, shut in my casements, that the breaths
Of their Coach-mares reek not into my Nostrills;
Those beasts are but a kind of Bawdy forerunners.

It is not well with you,
When you speak ill of fair Ladies.

Fair mischiefs, give me a nest of Owls, and take 'em;
Happy is he say I, whose window opens
To a brown Bakers chimney, he shall be sure there
To hear the Bird sometimes after twilight:
What a fine thing it is me thinks to have our garments
Sit loose upon us thus, thus careleslely,
It is more manly, and more mortifying;
For we are so much the readier for our shrouds:
For how ridiculous were, to have death come,
And take a fellow pinned up like a Mistress?
About his neck a Ruff, like a pincht Lantern,
Which Schoole-boyes make in winter; and his dublet
So close and pent, as if he feared one prison
Would not be strong enough, to keep his soul in;
But's Tailor makes another:
And trust me, for I know it when I loved Cupid,
He does endure much pain, for the poor praise
Of a neat sitting suit.

One may be handsome sir,
And yet not pained, nor proud.

There you lie Cupid,
As bad as Mercury: there is no handsomeness,
But has a wash of Pride and Luxury,
And you go there too Cupid. Away dissembler,
Thou take the deeds part which befooles us all;
Thy Arrow heads shoot out sinners: hence away,
And after thee I Will send a powerful charm,
Shall banish thee for ever.

Never, never,
I am too sure thine own.

HEnce all you vain Delights,
As short as are the nights,
Wherein you spend your folly,
There Is naught in this life sweet,
If man were wise to see it,
But only Melancholy,
O sweetest melancholy.
Welcome folded Arms, and fixed eyes,
A sigh that piercing mortifies,
A look that is fastened to the ground,
A tongue chained up without a sound.
Fountain heads, and pathlesse Groves,
Places which pale passion loves:
Moonlight walks, when all the fowls
Are warmly housed, save Bats and Owls;
A midnight Bell, a parting groan,
These are the sounds we feed upon;
Then stretch our bones in a still gloomy valley,
Nothing's so dainty sweet as lovely melancholy.

So, so, the Wood-cock's gin'd;
Keep this door fast brother.

I Will warrant this.

I Will go incense him instantly;
I know the way to it.

Will It not be too soon think you,
And make two fits break into one?

Pah, no, no; The tail of his melancho
Is always the head of his anger, and follows as close,
As the Report follows the powder.

This is the appointed place, and the hour struck,
If I can get security for's truth,
I Will never mind his honesty: poor worm,
I durst lay him by my wife, which is a benefit
Which many masters have not: I shall have no maid
Now got with child, but what I get my self,
And that is no small felicity: In most places
They Are got by the men, and put upon the Masters:
Nor shall I be resisted when I strike,
For he can hardly stand; these are great blessings.

I want my food, deliver me a varlet.

How now: from whence comes that?

I am allowed a Carcass to insult on;
Where Is the villain?

He means not me I hope.

My maintenance rascals; my Bulk, my exhibition.

Bless us all,
What names' are these? would I were gone again.

A Curse upon thee for a slave,
Art thou here, and heard'st me rave?
Fly not sparkles from mine eye,
To show my indignation nigh?
Am I not all foame, and fire?
With voice as hoarse, as a Towne-crier?
How my back opes and shuts together,
With fury, as old men's with weather?
Could thou not hear my teeth knash hither?

No truly sir, I thought t'had been a Squirrell,
Shaving a Hazle-nut.

Death, hell, fiends, and darkness,
I will thrash thy mangy carcass.

O sweet sir.

There cannot be too many Tortures,
Spent upon those louzie Quarters.

Hold, oh.

Thy bones shall rue, thy bones shall rue,
Thou nafly, scurvie, mongrill Toad,
Mischief on thee;
Light upon thee,
All the plagues
That can confound thee
Or did ever reign abroad:
Better a thousand lives it cost,
Then have brave Anger spilt or lost.

May I open mine eyes yet, and safely peep?
I Will try a groan first -- oh -- Nay then he is gone.
There was no other policy but to dye,
He would have made me else. Ribs are you sore?
I was never beaten to a tune before.

Lapet.

Again?

Look, look, he is flat again,
And stretched out like a Coarse a handful longer
Then he walks trust me brother. Why Lapet.
I hold my life we shall not get him speak now.
Monsieur Lapet; it must be a privy token,
If any thing fetch him, he is so far gone.
We come to pass our words for your man's truth.

O gentlemen you are welcome: I have been thrasht in faith.

How? thrasht sir?

Never was Shrove-tuesday Bird
So cudgel'd gentlemen.

Pray how? by whom sir?

Nay that I know not.

Not who did this wrong?

Only a thing came like a walking song.

What beaten with a Song?

Never more tightly, gentlemen:
Such crotchets happen now and then, methinks,
He that endures well, of all waters drinks.

YEs, yes, this was a Madman, sir, with you,
A passionate Madman.

Who would have looked for this sir?

And must be priviledg'd? a pox privilege him:
I was never so dry beaten since I was borne,
And by a litter of rogues, mere rogues, the whole twenty
Had not above nine elbowes amongst 'em all too:
And the most part of those left handed rascals,
The very vomit, Sir, of hospitalls,
Bridewells, and Spittle-houses; such nasty smellers,
That if they would been unfurnished of Club-Trunchions,
They might have cudgel'd me with their very stinks,
It was so strong, and sturdy: and shall this,
This filthy injury, be set off with madness?

Nay take your own bloods council sir, hereafter,
I Will deal no further in it: if you remember,
It was not come to blows, when I advised you.

No, but I ever said, 'twould come to something,
And it is upon me, thank him: were he kin
To all the mighty Emperors upon earth,
He has not now in life three hours to reckon;
I watch but a free time.

Your noble brother, sir, I Will leave you now.


Soldier I would I could persuade my thoughts
From thinking thee a brother, as I can
My tongue from naming on it: thou have no friend here,
But fortune and thy own strength, trust to them.

How? what is the incitement, sir?

Treachery to virtue;
Thy treachery, thy faithless circumvention:
Has Honor so few daughters, never fewer,
And must thou aim thy treachery at the best?
The very front of virtue? that blessed Lady? the Dukes sister?
Created more for admirations cause,
Then for loves ends; whose excellency sparkles
More in divinity, then mortal beauty;
And as much difference 'twixt her mind and body,
As 'twixt this earths poor center and the Sun:
And could thou be so injurious to fair goodness,
Once to attempt to court her down to frailty?
Or put her but in mind that there is weakness,
Sin, and desire, which she should never hear of?
Wretch, thou'st committed worse then Sacrilege,
In the attempting on it, and oughtst to dye for it.

I rather ought to do my best, to live, sir;
Provoke me not; for I Have a wrong sits on me,
That makes me apt for mischief; I shall lose
All respects suddenly of friendship, Brotherhood,
Or any sound that way.

But 'ware me most;
For I come with a two-edged injury;
Both my disgrace, and thy apparent falsehood,
Which must be dangerous.

I courted her, sir:
Love starve me with delays when I confess it not.

There Is nothing then but death
Can be a penance fit for that confession.

But far from any vicious taint.

O sir,
Vice is a mighty stranger grown to courtship.

Nay then the fury of my wrong light on thee.

Forbear, the Duke's at hand.
Here, hard at hand, upon my reputation.

I must do something now.

I Will follow you close sir.

We must entreat you must not; for the Duke
Desires some conference with you.

Let me go,
As you are gentlemen.

Faith we dare not sir.

Dare ye be false to honor, and yet dare not
Do a man justice? give me leave --

Good sweet sir.
H'as sent twice for you.

Is this brave, or manly?

I prithee be conformed.

'Death --

Peace, he is come in troth.

Oh have you betrayed me to my shame afresh?
How am I bound to loath you?

Shamont, welcome,
I sent twice.

But my Lord, he never heard on it.

Pray pardon him, for his falsenesse, I did Sir,
Both times; I Would rather be found rude then faithless.

I love that bluntness darely: has no vice,
But is more manly then some others virtue,
That lets it out only for show or profit.

Will It please you quit me sir, I Have urgent business?

Come, you are so hasty now: I sent for you
To a better end.

And if it be an end,
Better or worse, I thank your goodness for it.

I Have ever kept that bounty in condition,
And thankfulness in blood, which well becomes
Both Prince and Subject, that where any wrong
Bears my impression, or the hasty figure
Of my repented anger, I Am a Law
Even to my self, and doom my self most strictly
To Justice, and a noble satisfaction:
So that, what you in tenderness of honor,
Conceive to be loss to you, which is nothing
But curious opinion, I Will restore again,
Although I give you the best part of Genoa,
And take to boot but thanks for your amends.

O miserable satisfaction,
Ten times more wretched then the wrong it self;
Never was ill better made good with worse:
Shall it be said that my posterity
Shall live the sole heirs of their fathers shame?
And raise their wealth and glory from my stripes?
You have provided nobly bounteous sir,
For my disgrace, to make it live for ever,
Out-lasting Brass or Marble:
This is my fears construction, and a deep one,
Which neither argument nor time can alter:
Yet I durst swear, I wrong your goodness in it sir,
And the most fair intent on it, which I reverence
With admiration, that in you a Prince,
Should be so sweet and temperate a condition,
To offer to restore where you may ruin,
And do it with justice, and in me a servant,
So harsh a disposition, that I cannot
Forgive where I should honor, and am bound to it.
But I have ever had that curiosity
In blood, and tenderness of reputation,
Such an antipathy against a blow,
I cannot speak the rest: Good sir discharge me,
It is not fit that I should serve you more,
Nor come so near you; I Am made now for privacy,
And a retired condition, that is my suit,
To part from Court for ever, my last suit.
And as you profess bounty, grant me that, Sir.

I would deny thee nothing.

Health reward you; sir.

He Is gone again already, and takes hold
Of any opportunity, not riches
Can purchase him, nor honors, peaceably,
And force were brutish: what a great worth's gone with him,
And but a gentleman? well, for his sake,
I Will nere offend more those I cannot make:
They were his words, and shall be dear to memory.
Say I desire to see him once again;
Yet stay, he is so well forward of his peace,
'Twere pity to disturb him: he would groan
Like a soul fetched again; and that were injury,
And I Have wronged his degree too much already.
Call forth the gentlemen of our chamber instantly.

I shall my Lord.

I may forget again,
And therefore will prevent: The strain of this
Troubles me so, one would not hazard more:

Your will my Lord?

Yes; I discharge you all.

My Lord --

Your places shall be otherwise disposed of.

Why sir?

Reply not, I dismiss you all:
You Are gentlemen, your worths will find you fortunes;
Nor shall your farewell tax me of ingratitude,
I Will give you all noble remembrances,
As testimonies against reproach and malice,
That you departed loved.

This is most strange, sir.

But how is your grace furnished, these dismis'd?

Seek me out Grooms.
Men more insensible of reputation,
Less curious and precise in terms of honor,
That if my anger chance let fall a stroke,
As we are all subject to impetuous passions,
Yet it may pass unmurmur'd, undisputed,
And not with braver fury prosecuted.

It shall be done, my Lord.

Know you the cause sir?

Not I kind gentlemen, but by conjectures,
And so much shall be yours, when you please.

Thanks sir.

We shall in the mean time think our selves guilty
Of some foul fault, through ignorance committed.

No, it is not that, nor that way.

For my part.
I shall be dis-inherited, I knew so much.

Why sir, for what?

My sire's of a strange humor,
He Will form faults for me, and then swear 'em mine,
And commonly the first begins with leacherie.
He knows his own youths trespass.

Before you go,
I Will come and take my leave, and tell you all sirs.

Thou were ever just and kind.

That Is my poor virtue sir,
And parcel valiant; but it is hard to be perfect:
The choosing of these fellows now will puzzle me,
Horribly puzzle me; and there is no judgment,
Goes true upon man's outside, there is the mischief:
He must be touched, and tried, for gold or dross;
There is no other way for it, and that is dangerous too;
But since I Am put in trust, I will attempt it:
The Duke shall keep one daring man about him:
Soft, who comes here? a pretty bravery this:
Every one goes so like a gentleman,
It Is hard to find a difference, but byth' touch.
I Will try your metal sure.

Why what do you mean sir?

Nay, and you understand it not, I do not.

Yes, would you should well know,
I understand it for a box of the ear Sir.

And of my troth, that is all I gave it for.

'Twere best it be so.

This is a brave Coward,
A jolly threatening Coward; he shall be Captain:
Sir, let me meet you an hour hence in the Lobby.

Meet you? the world might laugh at me then in faith.

Lay by your scorn and pride, the're scurvy qualities,
And meet me, or I Will hox you while I have you,
And carry you gambril'd thither like a Mutton.

Nay, and you be in earnest, here is my hand
I will not fail you.

It Is for your own good.

Away.

Too much for your own good, sir, a pox on you.

I prithee curse me all day long so.

Hang you.

I Will make him mad; he is loath to curse too much to me;
Indeed I never yet took box oth' ear,
But it redounded, I must needs say so --

Will you be gone?

Curse, curse, and then I go.
Look how he grins, I Have angered him toth' kidnyes.

Was ever such a prigging coxcombe seen?
One might have beat him dumb now in this humor,
And he would have grind it out still:
O here is one made to my hand,
Methinks looks like a Craven;
Less pains will serve his trial: some slight justle.

How? take you that sir:
And if that content you not --

Yes very well sir, I desire no more.

I think you need not;
For you have not lost by it.

Who would have thought this would have proved a gentleman?
I Will never trust long chins and little legs again,
I Will know 'em sure for gentlemen hereafter:
A gristle but in show, but gave his cuffe
With such a fetch, and reach of gentry,
As if he had had his arms before the flood;
I have took a villainous hard task upon me;
Now I begin to have a feeling on it.
O here comes a tried piece, now, the reformed kick.
The millions of punches, spurns, and nips
That he has endured? his Buttock's all black Lead,
He 's half a Negro back-ward; he was past a Spaniard
In eighty eight, and more Egyptian-like;
His Table and his Book come both out shortly,
And all the Cowards in the Town expect it;
So, if I fail of my full number now,
I shall be sure to find 'em at Church corners,
Where Dives, and the suffering Ballads hang.

Well, since thou art of so mild a temper,
Of so meek a spirit, thou may live with me,
Till better times do smile on thy deserts.
I am glad I am got home again.

I am happy in your service, sir,
You Will keep me from the Hospital.

So, bring me the last proof, this is corrected.

I, you are too full of your correction, sir.

Look I have perfect Books within this half hour.

Yes sir.

Bid him put all the Thumps in Pica Roman,
And with great Tees, (you vermin) as Thumps should be.

Then in what Letter will you have your Kicks?

All in Italica, your Backward blows
All in Italica, you Hermophrodite:
When shall I teach you wit?

O let it alone,
Till you have some your self sir.

You mumble?

The Victuals are locked up;
I Am kept from mumbling.

He prints my Blows upon pot-paper too, the rogue,
Which had been proper for some drunken Pamphlet.

Monsieur Lapet? how the world rings of your sir?
Your name sounds far and near.

A good report it bears, for an enduring name --

What luck have you sir?

Why, what is the matter?

I Am but thinking on it.
I Have heard you wish this five year for a place.
Now there is one fallen, and freely without money too;
And empty yet, and yet you cannot hav't.

No? what is the reason? I Will give money for it,
Rather then go without sir.

That Is not it, sir;
The troth is, there is no gentleman must have it
Either for love or money: it is decreed so;
I was heartily sorry when I thought upon you,
Had you not been a gentleman I had fitted you.

Who I a gentleman? a pox I Am none, sir.

How?

How? why did you ever think I was?

What? not a gentleman?

I would thou would put it upon me in faith.
Did not my Grandfather cry Coney-skins?
My father Aquavitae? a hot gentleman:
All this I speak on in your time and memory too;
Only a rich Uncle died and left me chattells,
You know all this so well too --

Pray excuse me, sir, have not you Arms?

Yes, a poor couple here.
That serve to thrust in wild-fowle.

Heralds Arms,
Symbols of gentry, sir: you know my meaning;
They Have been shown and seen.

They have.

I fex have they.

Why I confess, at my wives instigation once,
(As women love these Heralds kickshawes naturally)
I bought 'em: but what are they think you? puffs.

Why, that is proper to your name being Lapet.
Which is La fart, after the english letter.

The Herald, sir, had much a do to find it.

And can you blame him?
Why it is the only thing that puzzles the devil.

At last he looked upon my name again,
And having well compared it, this he gave me,
The two Cholliques playing upon a wind instrument.

An excellent proper one: but I pray tell me,
How does he express the Cholliques?
They are hard things.

The Cholliques? with hot trenchers at their bellies,
There Is nothing better, Sir, to blaze a Chollique.

And are not you a gentleman by this sir?

No, I disclaime't: no belly-ake upon earth
Shall make me one: he shall not think
To put his gripes upon me,
And wring out gentry so, and ten pound first.
If the wind instrument will make my wife one,
Let her enjoy't, for she was a Harpers Grandchild:
But sir, for my particular, I renounce it.

Or to be called so?

I sir, or imagined.

None fitter for the place: give me thy hand.

A hundred thousand thanks, beside a Bribe sir.

You must take heed
Of thinking toward a gentleman, now.

Pish, I am not mad, I warrant you: nay more sir,
If one should twit me in the teeth that I Am a gentleman,
Twit me their worst, I am but one since Lammas,
That I can prove, if they would see my heart out.

Marry in any case keep me that evidence.

Here comes my servant, Sir, Galoshio,
Has not his name for naught, he will be trod upon:
What says my Printer now?

Here Is your last proof Sir.
You shall have perfect Books now in a twinkling.

These marks are ugly.

He says, sir, they are proper:
Blows should have marks, or else they are nothing worth.

But why a Peel-crow here?

I told 'em so sir:
A Scar-crow had been better.

How Slave? look you Sir,
Did not I say, this Whirrit, and this Bob,
Should be both Pica Roman.

So said I Sir, both Picked Romans,
And he has made 'em Welsh Bills,
Indeed I know not what to make on 'em.

Hay-day; a Souse, Italica?

Yes, that may hold Sir,
Souse is a bonaroba, so is Flops too.

But why stands Bastinado so far off here?

Alas you must allow him room to lay about him, sir.

Why lies this Spurn lower then that Spurn, sir?

Marry this signifies one kicked down stairs, sir,
The other in a Gallerie: I asked him all these questions.

Your Books name?
Prithee Lapet mind me, you never told me yet.

Marry but shall sir: it is called The up-rising of the kick,
And the downfall of the Duello.

Bring that to pass you will prove a happy member,
And do your Country service: your young bloods
Will thank you then, when they see foure-score.

I hope
To save my hundred Gentlemen a month by it,
Which will be very good for the private house.

Look you, your Table's finished sir already.

Why then behold my Masterpiece: see, see, sir,
Here Is all your Blows, and Blow-men whatsoever,
Set in their lively colors, givers, and takers.

Troth wondrous fine, sir.

Nay, but mark the postures,
The standing of the takers I admire more then the givers,
They stand scornfully, most contumeliously, I like not the^,
Oh here is one cast into a comely figure.

My Master means him there that is cast down headlong.

How sweetly does this fellow take his Dowst?
Stoops like a Cammell, that Heroic beast,
At a great load of Nut-megs; and how meekly
This other fellow here receives his Whirrit?

Oh Master here is a fellow stands most gallantly,
Taking his kick in private behind the hangings,
And raising up his hips to it. But oh, sir,
How daintily this man lies trampled on?
Would I were in thy place, what e're thou art:
How lovely he endures it?

But will not these things, sir, be hard to practice, think you?


Oh, easy, sir: I Will teach 'em in a Dance.

How? in a dance?

I Will lose my new place else,
What ere it be; I know not what it is yet.

And now you put me in mind, I could employ it well,
For your grace, specially: For the Dukes cozen
Is by this time in's violent fit of mirth,
And a devise must be sought out for suddenly,
To over-cloy the passion.

Say no more, sir,
I Will fit you with my Scholars, new practitioners,
Endurers of the time.

Whereof I am one sir.

You carry it away smooth; give me thy hand, sir.

Ha, ha, ha.

Hark, hark, how loud his fit's grown.

Ha, ha, ha.

Now let our sister lose no time, but ply it
With all the power she has.

Her shame grows big, brother;
The Cupids shape will hardly hold it longer,
'Twould take up half an Ell of China Damask more,
And all too little: it struts per'lously:
There is no tamp'ring with these Cupids longer,
The mere conceit with woman-kinde works strong.

Ha, ha, ha.

The laugh comes nearer now,
'Twere good we were not seen yet.

Ha, ha, ha.
And was he bastinado'd to the life? ha, ha, ha.
I prithee say, Lord General, how did the Rascals
Entrench themselves?

Most deeply, politickly, all in ditches.

Ha, ha, ha.

It Is thought he will never bear arms in the field again,
Has much ado, to lift 'em to his head, sir.

I would he had.

On either side round Truncheons played so thick,
That Shoulders, Chines, nay Flanks were paid toth' quick.

Well said Lord General: ha, ha, ha.

But pray how grew the difference first betwixt you?

There was never any sir; there lies the jest man;
Only because he was taller then his brother;
There Is all my quarrel to him; and me thought
He should be beaten for it, my mind so gave me, sir,
I could not sleep for it; Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Another good jest quickly, while it is hot now;
Let me not laugh in vain: ply me, O ply me,
As you will answer't to my Cozen Duke.

Alas, who has a good jest?

I fall, I dwindle in it.

Ten Crowns for a good jest: have you a good jest, sir?

A pretty moral one.

Let Us have it, what ere it be.

There comes a Cupid
Drawn by six fools.

That Is nothing.

Help it, help it then.

I have known six hundred fools drawn by a Cupid.

I that, that, that is the smarter Moral: ha, ha, ha.
Now I begin to be Song-ripe methinks.

I Will sing you a pleasant air, sir, before you ebb.

Oh how my Lungs do tickle? ha, ha, ha.

Oh how my Lungs do tickle? oh, oh, ho, ho.

Set a sharp Jest
Against my breast,
Then how my Lungs do tickle?
As Nightingales,
And things in Cambrick railes,
Sing best against a prickle.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Ho, ho, ho, ho, ha.

Laugh.

Laugh.

Laugh.

Laugh.

Wide.

Loud.

And vary.

A smile is for a simpering Novice.

One that never tasted Caveare,

Nor knows the smack of dear Anchovis.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.

A gigling waiting wench for me,
That shows her teeth how white they be.

A thing not fit for gravitie,
For theirs are foul and hardly three.

Ha, ha, ha.

Ho, ho, ho.

Democritus, thou ancient Fleerer,
Now I miss thy laugh, and have since.

There you named the famous Geerer,
That ever geer'd in Rome, or Athens.

Ha, ha, ha.

Ho, ho, ho.

How brave lives he that keeps a fool,
Although the rate be deeper?

But he that is his own fool sir,
Does live a great deal cheaper.

Sure I shall burst, burst, quite break thou art so witty.


It Is rare to break at Court for that belongs toth' City.

Ha, ha, my spleen is almost worn to the last laughter.


O keep a corner for a friend, a jest may come hereafter.

Twinge all now, twinge, I say.

Down derry.

Not angry Law, nor doors of Brass shall keep me
From my wrongs expiation, to thy Bowels,
I return my disgrace; and after turn
My face to any death that can be sentenced.

Murder, O murder, stop the murderer there --

I am glad he is gone; h'as almost trod my guts out;
Follow him who list for me, I Will have no hand in it.

Oh 'twas your luck and mine to be squelch'd Mr.
Has stamped my very Puddings into Pancakes.

O Brothers, oh, I fear it is mortal: help, O help,
I Am made the wretched'st woman, by this accident,
That ever love beguiled.

We are undone Brother,
Our shames are too apparent: Away receptacle
Of Luxury, and dishonor, most unfortunate,
To make thy self but luckie to thy spoil,
After thy Sexes manner: lift him up Brother;
He breathes not to our comfort, he is too wasted
Ever to cheer us more: A Surgeon speedily;
Hence; the unhappiest that ere stepped aside,
She Will be a Mother before she is known a Bride.

Thou had a most unfortunate conception,
What ere thou prov'st to be; in amidst of mirth
Comes ruin, for a welcome, to thy birth.

This is a beautiful life now; privacie
The sweetness and the benefit of essence:
I see there is no man, but may make his paradise;
And it is nothing, but his love, and dotage
Upon the worlds foul joys, that keeps him out on it:
For he that lives retired in mind, and spirit,
Is still in paradise, and has his innocence,
Partly allowed for his companion too,
As much as stands with justice: here no eyes
Shoot their sharp pointed scorns upon my shame;
They know no terms of reputation here,
No punctual limits, or precise dimensions;
Plain downright honesty is all the beauty
And elegancy of life found amongst shepherds;
For knowing nothing nicely, or desiring it,
Quits many a vexation from the mind,
With which our quainter knowledge does abuse us;
The name of envy is a stranger here,
That dries men's bloods abroad, robs health and rest,
Why here is no such fury thought on: no, nor falsehood,
That brotherly disease, fellow-like devil,
That plays within our bosom, and betrays us.

Oh are you here?

La Nove, it is strange to see thee.

I have rid one horse to death,
To find you out, sir.

I am not to be found of any man
That saw my shame, nor seen long.

Good, your attention:
You ought to be seen now, and found out sir,
If ever you desire before your ending
To perform one good office, nay a dear one,
Man's time can hardly match it.

Be It as precious
As reputation; if it come from Court
I will not hear on it.

You must hear of this, Sir.

Must?

You shall hear it.

I love thee, that thou wilt dye.

'Twere nobler in me,
Then in you living: you will live a murderer,
If you deny this office.

Even to death sir.

Why then you will kill your brother.

How?

Your Brother sir:
Bear witness heaven, this man destroys his brother
When he may save him, his least breath may save him:
Can there be wilfuller destruction?
He was forced to take a most unmanly wrong,
Above the suffering virtue of a Soldier,
Has killed his Injurer, a work of honor;
For which, unless you save him, he dies speedily
My conscience is discharged, I Am but a friend,
A Brother should go forward where I end.

Dies?
Say he be naught, that is nothing to my goodness,
Which ought to shine through use, or else it loses
The glorious name it is known by: he is my brother;
Yet peace is above blood: Let him go; I,
But where is the nobleness of affection then?
That must be cared for too, or I Am imperfect,
The same blood that stood up in wrath against him,
Now in his misery runs all to pity;
I Would rather dye than speak one syllable
To save my self: but living as I am,
There Is no avoiding on it, the worlds humanity
Expects it hourly from me: curse of fortune,
I took my leave so well too: Let him dye,
It Is but a brother lost; so pleasingly,
And swiftly I came off, 'twere more then irksomeness,
To tread that path again; and I shall never
Depart so handsomely: But then where is posterity?
The consummation of our house and name?
I Am torn in pieces betwixt love and shame.

Good morrow fellow Poltrot, and Moulbazon,
Good morrow fellows all.

Mounsieur Lapet?

Look, I Have remembered you, here is books a piece for you.

O sir, we dearly thank you.

So you may;
There Is two impressions gone already sirs.

What no? in so short a time?

It Is as I tell you sir,
My Kick sells gallantly, I thank my stars.

So does your Table; you may thank the Moon too.

It Is the Book sells the Table.

But it is the Bookseller
That has the money for 'em, I Am sure o'that.

'Twill much enrich the Company of Stationers,
It Is thought 'twill prove a lasting benefit,
Like the Wise Masters, and the Almanacks,
The hundred Novells, and the Book of Cookerie,
For they begin already to engrosse it,
And make it a stock-book, thinking indeed
'Twill prove too great a benefit, and help,
For one that is new set up: they know their way,
And make him Warden, ere his beard be gray.

Is It possible such virtue should lie hid,
And in so little paper?

How? Why there was the Carpenter,
An unknown thing, an odoriferous Pamphlet,
Yet no more Paper, by all computation,
Then Ajax Telamon would use at once,
Your Herring proved the like, able to buy
Another Fishers Folly, and your Pasquill
Went not below the mad-caps of that time,
And shall my elaborate Kick come behind think you?

Yes, it must come behind, it is in Italica too,
According to your humor.

Not in sale, varlet.

In sale, sir? it shall sail beyond 'em all I troe.

What have you there now? oh, Page, 21.

That Page is come to his years, he should be a serving-man.


Mark how I snap up the Duello there:
One would not use a dog so,
I must needs say; but's for the common good.

Nay sir, your Commons seldom fight at sharp,
But buffet in a warehouse.

This will save
Many a gentleman of good blood from bleeding sirs,
I have a curse from many a Barber Surgeon;
They Would give but too much money to called in;
Turn to Page 45. see what you find there.

O out upon him,
Page 45. that is an old thief indeed.

The Duke, clap down your Books; away Galoshio.

Indeed I am too foul to be in the presence,
They use to shake me off at the chamber door still.

Good my Lord, grant my suit; let me not rise
Without the comfort on it: I have not often
Been tedious in this kind.

Sister, you wrong your self,
And those great virtues that your fame is made of,
To waste so much breath for a Murderers life.

You cannot hate the offense more then I do, sir,
Nor the offender, the respect I owe
Unto his absent brother, makes me a suitor,
A most importunate sister; make me worthy
But of this one request.

I am deaf
To any importunacy, and sorry
For your forgetfulness; you never injured
Your worth so much, you ought to be rebuked for it:
Pursue good ways, end as you did begin,
It Is half the guilt to speak for such a sin.

This is loves beggerie right, that now is ours,
When Ladies love, and cannot show their powers.

La Nove?

My Lord.

Are these our new attendants?

We are my Lord, and will endure as much
As better men, my Lord, and more I trust.

What Is he?

My Lord, a decayed Gentleman,
That will do any service.

A decayed one?

A renounced one indeed; for this place only.

We renounce him then, go, discharge him instantly.
He that disclaimes his gentry for mere gains,
That man's too base to make a vassaile on.

What says the Duke?

Faith little to your comfort sir,
You must be a gentleman again.

How?

There Is no remedy.

Marry, the fates forfend: never while I breath sir.

The Duke will have it so, there is no resisting.
He spide it in your forehead.

My wife's doing.
She thought she should be put below her betters now,
And su'd to have me a gentleman again.

And very like sir:
Marry I Will give you this comfort when all is done,
You Will never pass but for a scurvey one,
That Is all the help you have: come show your pace.

The heaviest gentleman that e're lost place;
Bear witness I am forced to it.

Though you have a courser title yet upon you,
Then those that left your places, without blame,
It Is in your power to make your selves the same:
I cannot make you gentlemen, that is a work
Raised from your own deservings; merit, manners,
And in-borne virtue does it. Let your own goodness
Make you so great, my power shall make you greater;
And more t'encourage you, this I add again,
There Is many Grooms now exact Gentlemen.

Me thinks it is strange to me to enter here:
Is there in nature such an awful power,
To force me to this place? and make me do this?
Is man's affections stronger then his will?
His resolution? was I now resolved
Never to see this place more? Do I bear
Within my breast one blood that confounds the other?
The blood of love, and will, and the last weakest?
Had I ten Millions, I would give it all now,
I were but past it, or 'twould never come;
For I shall never do it, or not do it well,
But spoil it utterly betwixt two passions.
Yonder Is the Duke himself, I will not do it now,
Had twenty lives their several sufferings in him.

Who Is that went out now?

I saw none, my Lord.

Nor you?

I saw the glimpse of one my Lord.

What ere it was, methought it pleased me strangly,
And suddenly my joy was ready for it.
Did you not mark it better?

Troth my Lord,
We gave no great heed to it.

'Twill not be answered,
It brings me hither still; by maine force hither:
Either I must give over to profess humanity,
Or I must speak for him.

It Is here again:
No marvel 'twas so pleasing, it is delight
And worth it self, now it appears unclouded.

My Lord --
He turns away from me: by this hand
I am ill-us'd of all sides: it is a fault
That fortune ever had, to abuse a goodness.

Methought you were saying somewhat.

Mark the Language,
As coy as face; I see 'twill nere be granted.

We little looked in troth to see you here yet.

Not till the day after my brothers death, I think.

Sure some great business drew you.

No insooth, sir,
Only to come to see a brother dye sir,
That I may learn to go too; and if he deceive me not,
I think he will do well in it of a soldier,
Manly, and honestly: and if he weep then,
I shall not think the worse on's manhood for it,
Because he is leaving of that part that has it.

Has slain a noble gentleman, think on it, sir.

I would I could not sir.

Our Kinsman too.

All this is but worse sir.

When it is at worst,
Yet seeing thee, he lives.

My Lord --

He lives,
Believe it as thy bliss, he dies not for it:
Will this make satisfaction for things past?

Oh my Lord --

Will it? speak.

With greater shame to my unworthiness.

Rise then, wee're even: I never found it harder
To keep just with a man: my great work's ended.
I knew your brothers pardon was your suit, sir,
How ever your nice modesty held it back.

I take a joy now, to confess it, sir.

My Lord --

Hear me first, sir, what e're your news be:
Set free the Soldier instantly.

It Is done, my Lord.

How?

In effect: 'twas part of my news too,
There Is fair hope of your noble kinsmans life sir.

What say thou?

And the most admired change
That living flesh e're had; he is not the man my Lord;
Death cannot be more free from passions, sir,
Then he is at this instant: he is so meek now,
He makes those seem passionate, was never thought of:
And for he fears his moods have often disturbed you sir,
He Is only hasty now for his forgiveness,
And here behold him sir.

Let me give thanks first: our worthy Cosen --

Your unworthy trouble sir;
For which, with all acknowledged reverence,
I ask your pardon; and for injury
More known and wilful, I have chose a wise,
Without your counsel, or consent, my Lord.

A wife? where is she sir?

This noble Gentlewoman.

How?

Whose honor my forgetful times much wronged.

He Is madder then he was.

I would have sworn for him.

The Cupid, cosen?

Yes, this worthy Lady, sir.

Still worse and worse.

Our sister under pardon, my Lord.

What?

Which shape Love taught her to assume.

Is It truth then?

It appears plainly now below the waste my Lord.

Shamont, did ever read of a she- Cupid?


Never in fiction yet: but it might hold sir;
For Desire is of both Genders.

Make that good here:
I take thee at thy word, sir.

O my Lord,
Love would appear too bold, and rude from me,
Honor and admiration are her rights,
Her goodness is my Saint, my Lord.

I see,
You Are both too modest to bestow your selves:
I Will save that virtue still; it is but my pains: come,
It shall be so.

This gift does but set forth my poverty.

Sir, that which you complain of is my riches.

Soldier, now every noise sounds peace, thou art welcome.

Sir my repentance sues for your blessed favor,
Which once obtained, no injury shall lose it;
I Will suffer mightier wrongs.

Rise, loved and pardoned;
For where hope failed, nay Art it self resigned,
Thou'st wrought that cure, which skill could never find;
Nor did there cease, but to our peace extend;
Never could wrongs boast of a nobler end.


