ALvarez pardoned?


And returned.


I saw him land
At St. Lucars, and such a general welcome
Fame, as harbinger to his brave actions,
Had with the easy people, prepared for him,
At if by his command alone, and fortune
Holland with those low Provinces, that hold out
Against the Archduke, were again compelled
With their obedience to give up their lives
To be at his devotion.

You amaze me,
For though I have heard, that when he fled from Civil
To save his life (then forfeited to Law
For murdering Don Pedro my deer Uncle)
His extreme wants enforced him to take pay
In The Army sat down then before Ostena,
'Twas never yet reported, by whose favor
He durst presunt to entertain a thought
Of coming home with pardon.

It Is our nature
Or not to hear, or not to give belief
To what we wish far from our enemies.

Sir it is most certain the Infantas letters
Assisted by the Archdukes, to King Philip
Have not alone secured him from the rigor
Of our Castillian Justice, but returned him
A free man, and in grace.

By what cursed means
Could such a fugitive arise unto
The knowledge of their highnesses? much more
(Though known) to stand but in the least degree
Of favor with them?

To give satisfaction
To your demand, though to praise him I hate,
Can yield me small contentment, I will tell you,
And truly, since should I detract his worth,
'T would argue want of merit in my self.
Briefly, to pass his tedious pilgrimage
For sixteen years, a banished guilty-man,
And to forget the storms, th'affrights, the horrors
His constancy, not fortune overcame,
I bring him, with his little son, grown man
(Though 'twas said here he took a daughter with him)
To Ostends bloody seige that stage of war
Wherein the flower of many Nations acted,
And the whole Christian world spectators were;
There by his son, or were he by adoption
Or nature his, a brave Scene was presented,
Which I make choice to speak of, since from that
The good success of Alvarez, had beginning,

So I love virtue in an enemy
That I desire in the relation of
This young man's glorious deed, you would keep your self
A friend to truth, and it.

Such was my purpose;
The Town being often assaulted, but in vain,
To dare the prow'd defendants to a sally,
Weary of ease, Don Inigo Peralta
Son to the General of our Castile forces
All armed, advanced within shot of their walls,
From whence the muskateers played thick upon him,
Yet he (brave youth) as careless of the danger,
As careful of his honor, drew his sword,
And waving it about his head, as if
He dared one spirited like himself, to trial
Of single valor, he made his retreat
With such a slow, and yet majestique pace,
As if he still called lowed, dare none come on?
When suddenly from a posterne of the town
Two gallant horsemen issued, and o're-took him,
The army looking on, yet not a man
That durst relieve the rash adventurer,
Which Lucio, son to Alvarez then seeing,
As in the vant-guard he sat bravely mounted,
Or were it pity of the youths misfortune,
Care to preserve the honor of his Country,
Or bold desire to get himself a name,
He made his brave horse, like a whirle wind bear him,
Among the Combatants: and in a moment
Dischar'd his Petronell, with such sure aim
That of the adverse party from his horse,
One tumbled dead, then wheeling round, and drawing
A faulchion swift as lightning, he came on
Upon the other, and with one strong blow
In view of the amazed Town, and Camp
He struck him dead, and brought Peralta off
With double honor to himself.

'Twas brave:
But the success of this?

The Camp received him
With acclamations of joy and welcome,
And for addition to the fair reward
Being a massy chain of gold given to him
By young Peralta's Father, he was brought
To the Infantas presence kissed her hand,
And from that Lady, (greater in her goodness
Then her high birth) had this encouragement
Go on youngman; yet not to feed thy valor
With hope of recompense to come, from me,
For present satisfaction of what is past,
Ask any thing that is fit for me to give,
And thee to take, and be assured of it.

Excellent princess.

And styled worthily
The heart blood, nay the soul of Soldiers.
But what was his request?

That the repeal
Of Alvarez, makes plain: he humbly begd
His Fathers pardon, and so movingly
Told the sad story of your uncles death
That the Infanta wept, and instantly
Granting his suit, working the Archduke to it,
Their Letters were directed to the King,
With whom they so prevaild, that Alvarez
Was freely pardoned.

It Is not in the King
To make that good.

Not in the King? what subject
Dares contradict his power?

In this I dare,
And will: and not call his prerogative
In question, nor presume to limit it.
I know he is the Master of his Laws,
And may forgive the forfeits made to them,
But not the injury done to my honor;
And since (forgeting my brave Uncles merits
And many services, under Duke D' Alva)
He suffes him to fall, wresting from Justice
The powerful sword, that would revenge his death,
I Will fill with this Astrea's empty hand,
And in my just wreake, make this arm the Kings,
My deadly hate to Alvarz, and his house,
Which as I grew in years, has still increased,
As if it called on time to make me man,
Slept while it had no object for her fury
But a weak woman, and her talked of Daughter:
But now, since there are quarries, worth her sight
Both in the father, and his hopeful son,
I Will boldly cast her off, and gorge her full
With both their hearts: to further which your friendship,
And oaths will your assistance, let your deeds
Make answer to me; useless are all words
Till you have writ performance with your Swords.

Go fetch my work: this ruff was not well starched,
So tell the maid, 'thas too much blew in it,
And look you that the Partrich and the Pullen
Have clean meat, and fresh water, or my Mother
Is like to hear on it.

O good Sir Jacques help me: was there ever such an Hermaphrodite heard of?
would any wench living, that should hear and see what I do, be wrought to
believe, that the best of a man lies under this Petticoate, and that a
Cod-peece were far fitter here, then a pind-Placket


You had best talk filthily: do; I have a tongue
To tell my Mother, as well as ears to hear
Your ribaldry.

May you have ten women's tongues that way I am sure: why my young Mr. or
Mistress, Madam, Don or what you will, what the devil have you to do with
Pullen, or Partrich? or to sit pricking on a clowt all day? you have a better
needle, I know, and might make better work, if you had grace to use it


Why, how dare you speak this before me, sirrah?


Nay rather, why dare not you do what I speak? -- though my Lady your mother,
for fear of Vitelli and his faction, has brought you up like her daughter, and
h'as kept you this 20 year, which is ever since you were born, a close prisoner
within doors, yet since you are a man, and are as well provided as other men
are, me thinks you should have the same motions of the flesh, as other
Cavaliers of us are inclined unto


Indeed you have cause to love those wanton motions,
They having hope you to an excellent whipping,
For doing something, I but put you in mind of it,
With the Indian maid, the governor sent my mother
From Mexico.

Why, I but taught her a Spanish trick in charity, and holp the King to a
subject that may live to take grave Maurice prisoner, and that was more good to
the State, then a thousand such as you are ever like to do: and I will tell you,
(in a fatherly care of the Infant I speak it) if he live (as bless the babe,
in passion I remember him) to your years, shall he spend his time in pinning,
painting, purling, and perfuming as you do? no, he shall to the wars, use his
Spanish Pike, though with the danger of the lash, as his father has done, and
when he is provoked, as I am now, draw his Toledo desperately, as --


You will not Kill me? oh.


I knew this would silence him: how he hids his eyes?
If he were a wench now, as he seems, what an advantage
Had I, drawing two Toledos, when one can do this?
But oh me, my Lady: I must put up: young Master
I did but jest. O custom, what have thou made of him?

For bringing this, be still my friend; no more
A servant to me.

What Is the matter?


Here,
Even here where I am happy to receive
Assurance of my Alvarez return,
I will kneell down: and may those holy thoughts
That now possess me wholly, make this place
a Temple to me, where I may give thanks
For this unhop'd for blessing Heavens Kind hand
Has poured upon me.

Let my duty Madam
Presume, if you have cause of joy, to entreat
I may share in it.

It Is well, he has forgot how I frighted him yet.


Thou shall: but first kneel with me Lucio,
No more Post bumina now, thou have a Father,
A Father living to take off that name,
Which my too credulous fears, that he was dead,
Bestowed upon thee: thou shall see him Lucio,
And make him young again, by seeing thee,
Who only had a being in my Womb
When he went from me, Lucio: O my joys,
So far transport me, that I must forget
The ornaments of Matrons, modesty,
And grave behavior; but let all forgive me
If in th'expression of my souls best comfort
Though old, I do a while forget mine age,
And play the wanton in the entertinement
Of those delights I have so long despaired of.

Shall I then see my Father?


This hour Lucio;
Which reckon the beginning of thy life
I mean that life, in which thou shall appear
To be such as I brought thee forth: a man,
This womanish disguise, in which I have
So long concealed thee, thou shall now cast off,
And change those qualities thou did learn from me,
For masculine virtues, for which seek no tutor,
But let thy fathers actions be thy precepts;
And for thee Zancho, now expect reward
For thy true service.

Shall I? you hear fellow Stephano, learn to know me more respectively; how
do tnou think I shall become the Stewards chair ha? will not these slender
hanches show well with a chain, and a gold Nightcap after supper when I take
the accounts


Haste, and take down those blacks, with which my chamber
Has like the widow, her sad Mistress, mourned,
And hang up for it, the rich Persian arras,
Used on my wedding night: for this to me
Shall be a second marriage: send for Music,
And will the cooks to use their best of cunning
To please the palate.

Will your Ladyship have a Potato-pie, it is a good stirring dish for an old
Lady, after a long Lent


Be gone I say: why sir, you can go faster?


I could Madam: but I am now to practice the Stewards pace, that is the reward I
look for: every man must fashion his gate, according to his calling: you fellow
Stephano, may walk faster, to overtake preferment: so, usher me


Pray Madam, let the wascoat I last wrought
Be made up for my Father: I will have
A cap and boote-hose suitable to it.

Of that.
We Will think hereafter Lucio: our thoughts now
Must have no object, but thy Fathers welcome,
To which thy helfe --

With humble gladness Madam.


Where lost we Syaevedra?

He was met
Entering the City by some Gentlemen
Kinsmen, as he said of his own, with whom
For complement sake (for so I think he termed it)
He was compelled to stay: though I much wonder
A man that knows to do, and has done well
In the head of his troop, when the bold foe charged home,
Can learn so suddenly to abuse his time
In apish entertainment: for my part
(By all the glorious rewards of war)
I had rather meet ten enemies in the field
All sworn to fetch my head, then be brought on
To change an hours discourse with one of these
Smooth City fools, or tissen Cavaliers,
Then only Gallans, as they wisely think,
To get a Jewel, or a wanton Kiss
From a Court-lip, though painted.

My Love Clara
(For Lucio is a name thou must forget
With Lucio bold behavior) though thy breeding
In The camp may plead something in the excuse
Of thy rough manners, custom having changed,
Though not thy Sex, the softness of thy nature,
And fortune (then a cruel stepdame to thee)
Imposed upon thy tender sweetness, burdens
Of hunder, cold, wounds, want, such as would crack
The sinews of a man, not borne a Soldier:
Yet now she smiles, and like a natural mother
Looks gently on thee, Clara, entertain
Her proffered bounties with a willing bosom;
Thou shall no more have need to use thy sword;
Thy beauty (which even Belgia has not altered)
Shall be a stronger guard, to keep my Clara,
Then that has bin, (though never used but nobly)
And know thus much.

Sir, I know only that
It stands not with my duty to gainsay you,
In any thing: I must, and will put on
What fashion you think best: though I could wish
I were what I appear.

Endeavor rather.
To be what you are, Clara, entering here
As you were borne, a woman.

Let choice Music
In the best voice that ere touched humane ear,
For joy has tide my tongue up, speak your welcome.

My soul, (for thou giv'st new life to my spirit)
Myriads of joys, though short in number of
Thy virtues, fall on thee; Oh my Eugenia,
The Assurance, that I do embrace thee, makes
My twenty years of sorrow but a dream,
And by the Nectar, which I take from these,
I feel my age restored, and like old AEson
Grow young again.

My Lord, long wished for welcome,
It Is a sweet briefnesse, yet in that short word
All pleasures which I may call mine, begin,
And may they long increase, before they find
A second period: let mine eyes now surfeit
On this so wished for object, and my lips
Yet modestly pay back the parting kiss
You trusted with them, when you fled from Civil
With little Clara my sweet daughter: lives she?
Yet I coul'd chide my self, having you here
For being so coveteous of all joys at once,
'Tenquire for her, you being alone, to me
My Clara, Lucio, my Lord, my self;
Nay more then all the world.

As you, to me are.

Sit down, and let me feed upon the story
Of your past dangers, now you are here in safety
It will give relish, and fresh appetite
To my delights, if such delights can cloy me.
Yet do not Alvarez, let me first yield you
Account of my life in your absence, and
Make you acquainted how I have preserved
The Jewel left locked up in my womb,
When you, in being forced to leave your country,
Suffered a civil death.

Do my Eugenia,
It Is that I most desire to he are,

Then know

What voice is that?
If you are noble Enemies,
Oppress me not with odds, but kill me fairly,
Stand off, I am too many of my self.

Murder, murder murder, your friend my Lord,
Don Syavedra is set upon in the Streets, by your enemies
Vitelli, and his Faction: I am almost killed with looking on them.

I Will free him, or fall with him: draw thy sword
And follow me.

Fortune I give thee thanks
For this occasion once more to use it.

Nay, hold not me Madam; if I do any hurt, hang me.

Oh I am dead with fear! let us fly into
Your Closet, Mother.

No hour of my life
Secure of danger? heaven be merciful,
Or now at once dispatch me.

Follow him
Leave me to keep these off.

Assault my friend
So near by house?

Nor in it will spare thee,
Though 'twere a Temple: and I Will make it one,
I being the Priest, and thou the sacrifice,
I Will offer to my uncle.

Haste thou to him,
And say I sent thee:

'Twas put bravely by,
And that: and yet comes on, and boldly rare,
In the wars, where emulation and example
Join to increase the courage, and make less
The danger; valor, and true resolution
Never appeared so lovely: brave again:
Sure he is more then man, and if he fall;
The best of virtue, fortitude would dye with him:
And can I suffer it? forgive me duty,
So I love valor, as I will protect it
Against my Father, and redeem it, though
It Is forfeited by one I hate.

Come on,
All is not lost yet: You shall buy me deerer
Before you have me: keep off.

Fear me not,
Thy worth has took me Prisoner, and my sword
For this time knows thee only for a friend,
And to all else I turn the point of it.

Defend your Fathers Enemy?

Art thou mad?

Are you men rather? shall that valor, which
Begot you lawful honor in the wars,
Prove now the parent of an infamous Bastard
So foul, yet so long lived, as murder will
Be to your shames? have each of you, alone
With your own dangers only, purchased glory
From multitudes of Enemies, not allowing
Those nearest to you, to have part in it,
And do you now join, and lend mutual help
Against a single opposite? has the mercy
Of the great King, but newly washed away
The blood, that with the forfeit of your life
Cleav'd to your name, and family like an ulcer,
In this again to set a deeper dye
Upon your infamy? you will say he is your foe,
And by his rashness called on his own ruin;
Remember yet, he was first wronged, and honor
Spurred him to what he did, and next the place
Where now he is, your house, which by the laws
Of hospitable duty should protect him;
Have you been twenty years a stranger to it,
To make your entrance now in blood? or think you
Your countryman, a true born Spaniard, will be
An offering fit, to please the genius of it?
No, in this i will presume to teach my Father,
And this first Act of disobedience shall
Confirm I am most dutiful.

I am pleased
With what I dare not give allowance to;
Unnatural wretch, what will thou do?

Set free
A noble Enemy: come not on, by --
You pass to him, through me: the way is open:
Farewell: when next I meet you, do not look for
A friend, but a vowed foe; I see you worthy,
And therefore now preserve you, for the honor
Of my sword only:

Were this man a friend,
How would he win me, that being my vowed foe
Deserves so well? I thank you for my life;
But how I shall deserve it, give me leave
Hereafter to confider.

Quit thy fear,
All danger is blown over: I have Letters
To the Governor, in the Kings name, to secure us,
From such attempts hereafter: yet we need not
That have such strong guards of our own, dread others;
And to increase thy comfort, know, this young man
Whom with such servent earnestness you eye,
Is not what he appears, but such a one
As thou with joy wilt bless, thy daughter Clara.

A thousand blessings in that word.

The reason
Why I have bred her up thus, at more leisure
I will impart unto you: wonder not
At what you have seen her do, it being the least
Of many great and valiant undertakings
She has made good with honor.

I Will return
The joy I have in her, with one as great
To you my Alvarez: you, in a man
Have given to me a daughter: in a woman,
I give to you a Son: this was the pledge
You left here with me, whom I have brought up
Different from what he was, as you did Clara,
And with the like success; as she appears
Altered by custom, more then woman, he
Transformed by his soft life, is less then man.

Fortune, in this gives ample satisfaction
For all our sorrows past.

My dearest Sister.

Kind brother.

Now our mutual care must be
Employed to help wronged nature, to recover
Her right in either of them, lost by custom:
To you I give my Clara, and receive
My Lucio to my charge: and we'll contend
With loving industry, who soonest can
Turn this man woman or this woman, man.

Boy: my Cloak, and Rapier; it fits not a Gentleman of my rank, to walk the
streets in Querpo


Nay, you are a very rank Gent. Signior, I am very hungry, they tell me in
Civil here, I look like an Eele, with a man's head: and your neighbor the
Smith here hard by, would have borrowed me the other day, to have fished with
me, because he had lost his angle-rod


Oh happy thou Lazarillo (being the cause of other men's wits) as in thine own:
live lean, and witty still: oppress not thy stomach too much: gross feeders,
great sleepers: great sleepers, fat bodies; fat bodies, lean brains: No
Lazarillo, I will make thee immortal, change thy humanity into dietie, for I
will teach thee to live upon nothing


Faith Signior, I am immortal then already, or very near it, for I do live
upon little or nothing: belike that is the reason the Poets are said to be
immortal, for some of them live upon their wits, which is indeed as good as
little or nothing: But good Master, let me be mortal still, and let us go to
supper


Be abstinent; show not the corruption of thy generation: he that feeds, shall
die, therefore he that feeds not, shall live


I; but how long shall he live? there is the question.


As long as he can without feeding: did thou read of the miraculous maid in
Flanders


No, nor of any maid else; for the miracle of virginity now adays ceases, ere
the virgin can read virginity


She that lived three year without any other sustenance then the smell of a
Rose


I heard of her Signior; but they say her guts shrunck all into Lute-strings,
and her neather-parts cling'd together like a Serpents Tail, so that though
she continued a woman still above the girdle, beneath yet she was monster


So are most women, believe it.


Nay all women Signior, that can live only upon the smell of a Rose.


No part of the History is fabulous.


I think rather no part of the Fable is Historical: but for all this, sir, my
rebellious stomach will not let me be immortal: I will be as immortal, as
mortal hunger will suffer: put me to a certain stint sir, allow me but a red
herring a day


O'dedios: would thou be gluttonous in thy delicacies?


He that eats nothing but a red herring a day, shall near be broyl'd for the
devils rasher: a Pilcher, Signior, a Surdiny, an Olive, that I may be a
philosopher first, and immortal after


Patience Lazarillo; let contemplation be thy food a while: I say unto thee,
one Peaze was a Soldiers provant a whole day, at the destruction of Jerusalem.


I; and it were any where, but at the destruction of a place i will be hanged.


Signior Pachieco Alasto, my most ingenious Cobbler of Civil, the bonos noxios
to your Signiorie


Signior Metaldi de forgio, my most famous Smith, and man of mettle, I return
your courtesy ten fold, and do humble my Bonnet beneath the Shooe-soale of your
congie: the like to you Signior Mendoza Pediculo de vermim, my most exquisite
Hose-heeler


Here Is a greeting betwixt a Cobbler, a Smith, and a Botcher: they all belong to
the foot, which makes them stand so much upon their Gentry


Signior Lazarillo.


Ah Signior see: nay, we are all Signiors here in Spain, from the Jakes-farmer
to the Grandee, or Adelantado: this botcher looks as if he w're dowgh-bak'd a
little butter now, and I could eat him like an oaten-Cake: his fathers diet
was new Cheese and Onions when he got him: what a scallion fac'd-rascall it is


But why Signior Pachieco, do you stand so much on the prioritie, and
antiquity of your quality (as you call it) in comparison of ours


I; your reason for that.


Why thou Iron-pated Smith: and thou wollen-witted Hose heeler: hear what I
will speak indifferently (and according to Ancient writers) of our three
professions: and let the upright Lazarillo be both judge, and moderator


Still am I the most immortally hungry, that may be.


Suppose thou will derive thy pedigree, like some of the old Heroes, (as
Hercules, Aeeas, Achilles) lineally from the Gods, making Saturn thy great
Grandfather, and Vulcan thy Father: Vulcan was a God


He Will make Vulcan your Godfather by and by.


Yet I say Saturn was a crabbed block-head, and Vulgan a limping horn-head,
for Venus his wife was a strumpet, and Mars begat all her Children; therefore
however, thy original must of necessity spring from Bastardie: further, what
can be a more deject spirit in man, then to lay his hands under every ones
horses feet, to do him service, as thou do? For thee, I will be brief thou
do botch, and not mend, thou art a hider of enormities, viz. scabs,
chilblaines, and kibed heels: much proane thou art to Sects, and Heresies,
disturbing state, and government; for how can thou be a sound member in the
Commonwealth, that art so subject to stitches in the anckles? blush, and be
silent then, Oh ye Machanick, compare no more with the politic Cobbler: For
Cobblers (in old time) have prophesied, what may they do now then, that have
every day waxed better, and better? have we not the length of every man's foot?
are we not daily menders? yea, and what menders? not horse-menders


Nor manners-menders.


But soule-menders: Oh divine Cobblers; do we not like the wise man spin our
own threads, (or our wives for us?) do we not by our sowing the hide, reap the
beef? are not we of the gentle craft, whilst both you are but crafts-men? You
will say you fear neither Iron nor steel, and what you get is wrought out of
the fire, I must answer you again, though all this is but forgery, You may
likewise say, a man's a man, that has but a hose on his head: I must likewise
answer, that man is a botcher, that has a heel'd-hose on his head: to conclude
there can be no comparison with the Cobbler, who is all in all in the
Commonwealth, has his politic eye and ends on every man's steps that walks,
and whose course shall be lasting to the worlds end


I give place: the wit of man is wonderful: thou have hit the nail on the
head, and I will give thee six pots for it though I near clinth shoe again.


Who Is this? Oh our Alguazier: as arrant a knave as E're wore out head under
two offices: he is one side Alguazier


The other side Sergeant.

That Is both sides carrion I am sure.

This is he apprehends whores in the way of justice, and lodges 'em in his own
house, in the way of profit: he with him, is the Grand-Don Vitelli, 'twixt whom
and Fernando Alvarez the mortal hatred is: he is indeed my Dons Bawd, and does
at this present lodge a famous Curtizan of his, lately come from Madrill


Let her want nothing Signior, she can ask:
What loss, or injury you may sustain
I will repair, and recompense your love:
Only that fellows coming I mislike,
And did fore-warn her of him: bear her this
With my best love, at night i will visit her.

I rest your Lordships Servant.

Good even, Signiors:
Oh Alvarez, thou have brought a Son with thee
Both brightness, and obscures our Nation,
Whose pure strong beams on us, shoot like the Suns
On baser fires: I would to heaven my blood
Had never stained thy bold unfortunate hand,
That with mine honor I might emulate
Not persecute such virtue: I will see him
Though with the hazard of my life: no rest
In my contentious spirits can I find
Till I have grateside him in like kind.

I know you not: what are ye? hence ye base Besegnios.


Mary Catzo Signior Alguazier, do'ye not know us? why, we are your honest
neighbors, the Cobbler, Smith, and Botcher, that have so often sat snoaring
cheek by joll with your signiorie in rug at midnight


Nay, good Signior, be not angry: you must understand, a Cat and such an
Officer see best in the dark


By this hand, I could find in my heart to shoe his head.


Why then know you Signior; thou mongrill begot at midnight, at the Goal gate,
by a Beadle, on a Catch-poles wife, are not you he that was whipped out, of
Toledo for perjury


Next, condemned to the Galleys for pilfery, to the bulls pizell.


And after called to the Inquisition, for Apostacy.


Are not you he that rather then you durst go an industrious voyage being
pressed to the Islands, skulk'd till the fleet was gone, and then earned your
royal a day by squiring puncks, and puncklings up and down the City


Are not you a Portuguize borne, descended of the Moors, and came hither into
Civil with your Master, an errant Tailor, in your red Bonnet, and your Blew
Jacket lousy: though now your block-head be covered with the Spanish Block,
and your lashed Shoulders with a Velvet Pee


Are not you he, that have been of thirty callings, yet never a one lawful?
that being a Chandler first, professed sincerity, and would sell no man Mustard
to his beef on the Sabbath, and yet sold Hypocrisy all your life time


Are not you he, that were since a Surgeon to the Stews, and undertook to
cure what the Church it self could not, strumpets that rise to your Office by
being a great Dons Baw'd


That commit men nightly, offencelesse, for the gain of a groat a Prisoner,
which your Beadle seems to put up, when you share three pence


Are not you he, that is a kisser of men, in drunkenness, and a berrayer in
sobriety


Diabolo: they will rail me into the Gallyes again.


Yes Signior, thou art even he we speak of all this while: thou may by thy
place now, lay us by the heels: it is true: but take heed, be wiser, pluck not
ruin on thine own head: for never was there such an Anatomy, as we shall make
thee then: be wise therefore, Oh thou Child of the night! be friends and shake
hands, thou art a proper man, if thy beard were redder: remember thy
worshipful function, a Constable though thou turn'st day into night, and night
into day, what of that? watch less, and pray more: gird thy bears skin ( viz.
thy Rug-gowne) to thy loyes, take thy staff in thy hand, and go forth at
midnight: Let not thy mittens abate the talons of thy authority, but gripe
theft and whoredom, wheresoever thou meet'st 'em: bear'em away like a tempest,
and lodge 'em safely in thine own house


Would you have whores and thieves lodged in such a house?


They ever do so: I have found a thief, or a whore there, when the whole
Suburbs could not furnish me


But why do they lodge there?


That they may be safe, and forthcoming: for in the morning usually the thief
is sent to the Goal, and the whore prostrates her self to the Justice


Admirable Pachieco.


Thou Cobbler of Christendom.


There is no railing with these rogues: I will close with them, till I can cry
quittance: why Signiors, and my honest neighbors, will you impute that as a
neglect of my friends, which is an imperfection in me? I have been Sand-blinde
from my infancy: to make you amends, you shall sup with me


Shall we sup with'ye sir? OF my conscience, they have wronged the Gentleman
extremely


And after supper, I have a project to employ you in shall make you drink, and
eat merrily this month: I am a little knavish: why and do not I know all you
to be knaves


I grant you, we are all knaves, and will be your knaves: But, oh, while you
live, take heed of being a proud knave


On then pass: I will bear out my staff, and my staff shall bear out me.


Oh Lazarillo, thou art going to supper.


Pray be not angry.

I am angry, and I will be angry diablo': what should you do in the Kitchen,
cannot the Cooks lick their fingers without your overseeing? nor the maids make
pottage, except your dogs-head be in the pot? Don Lucio, Don Quot-queane, Don
Spinster, wear a Petti-coate still, and put on your smock a' monday: I will
have a badie of clouts made for it, like a great girl: nay, if you will needs
be starching of Ruffs, and sowing of black-work, I will of a mild, and loving
Tutor, become a Tyrant, Your Father has committed you to my charge, and I will
make a man, or a mouse on you


What would you have me do? this scurvy sword
So gals my thigh: I would it were burnt: pish, look
This cloak will never keep on: these boots too hide bound,
Make me walk stiff, as if my legs were frozen,
And my Spurs gingle, like a Morris-dancer:
Lord, how my head aches, with this roguish hat;
This masculine attire, i^ most uneasy,
I am bound up in it: I had rather walk
In folio, again, loose, like a woman.

In Foolio, had you not?
Thou mock to heaven, and nature, and thy Parents,
Thou tender Leg of Lamb; Oh, how he walks
As if he had be-pise'd himself, and fleares!
Is this a gate for the young Cavalier,
Don Lucio, Son and heir to Alvarez?
Has it a corn? or does it walk on conscience,
It treads so gingerly? Come on your ways,
Suppose me now your Fathers foe, Vitelli,
And spying you in the street, thus I advance,
I twist my Beard, and then I draw my sword.

Alas.

And thus accost thee: traitorous brat,
How dur'st thou thus confront me? impious twig
Of that old stock, dew'd with my kinsmans gore,
Draw, for i will quarter thee in pieces four.

Nay, Prithee Bobadilla, leave thy fooling,
Put up thy sword, I will not meddle with' ye;
I, justle me, I care not: I Will not draw,
Pray be a quiet man.

Do'ye hear: answer me, as you would do Don Vitelli, or i will be so bold as to
lay the pomell of my sword over the hilts of your head, my name's Vitelli, and
i will have the wall


Why then i will have the kennell: what a coil you keep?
Signior, what happened 'twixt my Sire and your
Kinsman, was long before I saw the world,
No fault of mine, nor will I justify
My Fathers crimes: forget sir, and forgive,
It Is Christianity: I pray put up your sword,
I Will give you any satisfaction
That may become a Gentleman; however
I hope you are bred to more humanity
Then to revenge my Fathers wrong on me
That crave your love, and peace: law you now Zancho
Would not this quiet him, were he ten Vitellies.

Oh craven-chicken of a Cock o'th'game: well, what remedy? did thy father see
this, OF my conscience, he would cut of thy Masculine gender, crop thine ears,
beat out thine eyes, and set thee in one of the Peare-trees for a scar-crow: As
I am Vitelli, I am satisfied but as I am Bobadilla Spindola Zancho, Steward of
the house, and thy fathers servant, I could find in my heart to lop of the
hinder part of thy face, or to beat all thy teeth into thy mouth: Oh thou
whay-blooded milk-sop, I Will wait upon thee no longer, thou shaltev'n wait upon
me: come your ways fir, I shall take a little pains with ye else.


Where art thou Brother Lucio? ran tan tan ta ran tan ran tan tan, ta ran tan
tan tan. Oh, I shall no more see those golden days, these clothes will never
fadge with me: a -- OF this filthy vardingale, this hip hape: brother why are
women's hanches only limited, confined, hoop'd in, as it were with these same
scurvy vardingales


Because women's hanches only are most subject to display and fly out.


Bobadilla, rogue, ten Ducats, I hit the propose of thy Cod-peicu.


Hold, if you love my life, Sister: I am not Zancho Bobadilla, I am your
brother Lucio: what a fright you have put me in


Brother? and wherefore thus?


Why, Master Steward here, Signior Zancho, made me change: he does nothing but
misuse me, and call me Cowheard, and swears I shall wait upon him


Well: I do no more then I have authority for: would I were away though: for
she is as much too mannish, as he too womanish: I dare not meddle with her, yet
I must set a good face on it (if I had it) I have like charge of you Maddam, I
am as well to mollify you, as to qualify him: what have you to do with
Armors, and Pistols, and Javelins, and swords, and such tools? remember
Mistress; nature has given you a sheath only, to signify women are to put
up men's weapons, not to draw them: look you now, it this a fit trot for a
Gentlewoman? You shall see the Court Ladies move like Goddesses, as if they
trodayre; they will swim you their measures, like whiting-mops as if their feet
were sins, and the hinges of their knees oyld: do they love to ride great
horses, as you do? no, they love to ride great asses sooner: faith, I know not
what to say to'ye both Custom has turned nature topsie-turvy in you


Nay but Master Steward.


You cannot trot so fast, but he ambles as slowly.


Signior Spindle, will you hear me,


He that shall come to bestride your virginity, had better be afoot over the
Dragon


Very well.


Did ever Spanish Lady pace so?


Hold these a little.


I Will not touch 'em, I.


First do I break your Office over your pate,
You Dog-skin-fac'd-rogue, pilcher, you poor John,
Which I will be at to Stock Fish.

Sister.


Maddam.


You Cittern-head, who have you talked to, ha^?
You nasty, stinking, and ill-counten^nc'd Cur.

By this hand, I Will bang your brother for this, when I get him a lone.


How? kick him Lucio, he shall kick you Bob,
Spite of the nose, that is flat: kick him, I say,
Or I will cut thy head off.

Softly you had best.


Now, thou lean, dride, and ominous visag'd kneve,
Thou false and peremptory Steward, pray,
For I will hang thee up in thine own Chain.

Good Sister, do not choke him.


Murder, murder.


Well: I shall meet with 'ye: Lucio, who bought this?
It Is a reasonable good one; but there hangs one
Spaines Champion never used truer: with this Stuff
Old Alvarez has led up men so close,
They could almost spit in the Canons mouth,
Whilst I with that, and this, well mounted, scurr'd
A Horse-troope through, and through, like swift desire;
And seen poor rogues retire, all gore, and gash'd
Like bleeding Shads.

'Blesse us, Sister Clara,
How desperately you talk: what do'ye call
This Gun a dag?

I Will give't thee: a French petronell:
You never saw my Barbary, the Infanta
Bestowed upon me, as yet Lucio?
Walk down, and see it

What into the Stable?
Not I, the Jades will kick: the poor Groom there
Was almost spoyld the other day.

Fie on thee,
Thou will scarce be a man before thy mother.

When will you be a woman?

Would I were none.
But natures privy Seal assures me one.

Thou angerst me: can strong habitual custom
Work with such Magic on the mind, and manners
In spite of sex and nature? find out sirrah,
Some skillful fighter.

Yes sir.

I will rectify,
And redeem eithers proper inclination,
Or bray 'em in a mortar, and new mold 'em.

Believe your eyes sir; I tell you, we wash an Ethiop.

I strike it for ten Ducats.

How now Clara,
Your breeches on still? and your petticote
Not yet off Lucio? art thou not guelt?
Or did the cold Muscovite beget thee,
That lay here Lieger in the last great frost?
Art not thou Clara, turned a man indeed
Beneath the girdle? and a woman thou?
I Will have you searched by --, I strongly doubt;
We must have these things mended: come go in.

With Lucio say you? there is for you.

And there is for thee.

I thank you: you have now bought a little advice
Of me; if you chance to have conference with that
Lady there, be very civil, or look to your head: she has
Ten nails, and you have but two eyes: If any foolish
Hot motions should chance to rise in the horizon
Under your equinoctial there, qualify it as well as
You can, for I fear the elevation of your pole will
Not agree with the Horoscope of her constitution:
She is Bell the Dragon I assure you.

Are you the Lucio, sir, that saved Vitelli?


Not I indeed sir, I did never brable;
There walks that Lucio, metamorphosed.

Do ye mock me?

No, he does not: I am that
Suposed Lucio, that was but Clara,
That is, and daughter unto Alvarez.

Amazement daunts me; would my life were riddles,
So you were still my fair Expositor:
Protected by a Lady from my death.
Oh I shall wear an everlasting blush
Upon my cheek from this discovery:
On you the fairest Soldier, I ere saw;
Each of whose eyes, like a bright beamy shield
Conquers, without blows, the contentious.

Sir, guard your self, you are in your enemies house,
And may be injured.

It Is impossible:
Foe, nor oppressing odds dares prove Vitelli,
If Clara side him, and will call him friend;
I would the difference of our bloods were such
As might with any shift be wiped away:
Or would to Heaven your self were all your name;
That having lost blood by you, I might hope
To raise blood from you. But my black-wing'd fate
Hovers aversely over that fond hope:
And he, whose tongue thus gratifies the daughter,
And sister of his enemy, wears a Sword
To rip the father and the brother up.
Thus you, that saved this wretched life of mine,
Have savd it to the ruin of your friends.
That my affections should promiscuously
Dart love and hate at once, both worthily?
Pray let me kiss your hand.

You are treacherous,
And come to do me mischief.

Speak on still:
Your words are falser (fair) then my intents,
And each sweet accent far more treacherous; for
Though you speak ill of me, you speak so well,
I do desire to hear you.

Pray be gone:
Or kill me, if you please.

Oh, neither can:
For to be pone, were to destroy my life;
And to kill you, were to destroy my soul:
I am in love, yet must not be in love:
I Will get away a pace: yet valiant Lady,
Such gratitude to honor I do owe,
And such obedience to your memory,
That if you will bestow something, that I
May wear about me, it shall bind all wrath,
My most inveterate wrath, from all attempts,
Till you and I meet next.

A favor fir?
Why I will 'give ye good council.

That already
You Have bestowd. a Ribbon, or a Glove.

Nay those are tokens for a waiting maid
To trim the Butler with.

Your feather.

Fie; the wenches give them to their Serving-men.

That little ring.

Twill hold you but by th'finger;
And I would have you faster.

Any thing
That I may wear, and but remember you.

This smile: my good opinion, or my self.
But that it seems you like not.

Yes, so well:
When any smiles, I will remember yours;
Your good opinion shall in weight poize me
Against a thousand ill: Lastly, your self,
My curious eye now figures in my heart,
Where I will wear you, till the Table break.
So, whitest Angels guard you.

Stay sir, I
Have fitly thought to give, what you as fitly
May not disdain to wear.

What Is that?

This Sword.
I never heard a man speak till this hour.
His words are golden chains, and now I fear
The Lioness has met a tamer here;
Fie, how his tongue chimes: what was I saying?
Oh: this favor I bequeath you, which I tie
In a love-knot, fast, nere to hurt my friends;
Yet be it fortunate against all your foes
(For I have neither friend, nor foe, but yours)
As ere it was to me: I have kepit it long,
And value it, next my Virginity:
But good, return it, for I now remember
I vowed, who purchased it, should have me too.

would that were possible: but alas it is not;
Yet this assure your self, most honored Clara,
I Will not infringe an Article of breath
My vow has offered to ye: nor from this part
Whilst it has edge, or point, or I a heart.

Oh leave me living: what new exercise
Is crept into my breast, that blauncheth clean
My former nature? I begin to find
I am a woman, and must learn to fight
A softer sweeter battle, then with Swords.
I am sick me thinks, but the disease I feel
Pleases, and punishes: I warrant love
Is very like this, that folks talk of so;
I skill not what it is, yet sure even here,
Even in my heart, I sensibly perceive
It glows, and rises like a glimmering flame,
But know not yet the essence on it nor name.

He must not? nor he shall not, who shall let him?
You? politic Diego, with your face of wisdom;
Don-blirt, the -- on your aphorisms,
Your grave, and sage Ale physiognomy:
Do not I know thee for the Alquazier
Whose dunghill all the Parish Scavengers
Could never rid? thou Comedy to men,
Whose serious folly is a but for all
To shoot their wits at; whilst thou have not wit,
Nor heart, to answer, or be angry.

Lady.

Peace, peace, you rotten rogue, supported by
A staff of rottener office: dare you check
Anys accesses, that I will allow?
Piorato is my friend, and visits me
In lawful sort to espouse me as his wife;
And who will cross, or shall our enter-viewes?
You know me sirrah, for no Chambermaid,
That cast her belly, and her wastcote lately;
Thou think thy Constableship is much: not so,
I am ten offices to thee: I, thy house,
Thy house, and Office is maintained by me.

My house of office is maintained in the garden:
Go too, I know you, and I have contrived;
You Are a delinquent, but I have contrived
A poison, though not in the third degree:
I can say, blacks your eye, though it be gray;
I have connivd at this. your friend, and you:
But what is got by this connivency?
I like his feather well: a proper man,
Of good discourse, fine conversation,
Valiant, and a great carrier of the business,
Sweet breasted, as the Nightingale, or Thrush:
Yet I must tell you; you forget your self,
My Lord Vitellies love, and maintenance
Deserves no other Jack in the box, but he:
What though he gathered first the golden fruit,
And blew your pigges-coat up into a blister,
When you did wait at Court upon his mother;
Has he not well provided for the barn?
Beside, what profit reap I by the other?
If you will have me serve your pleasure, Lady,
Your pleasure must accommodate my service;
As good be virtuous and poor, as not
Thrive by my knavery: all the world would be
Good, prosper'd goodness like to villainy.
I am the Kings vicegerent by my place;
His right Lieutenant in mine owe precinct.

Thou art a right rascal in all men's precincts;
Yet now my pair of twins, of fool, and knave,
Look we are friends; there is Gold for thee, admit
Whom I will have, and keep it from my Don;
And I will make thee richer then thou art wise:
Thou shall be my Bawd, and my Officer:
Thy children shall eat still my good night Owl,
And thy old wife sell Andyrons to the Court,
Be countenanced by the Dons, and wear a hood,
Nay keep my garden-house; I Will call her mother,
Thee father, my good poisonous red-har'd Dill,
And Gold shall daily be thy Sacrifice,
Wrought from a fertile Island of mine own,
Which I will offer, like an Indian Queen.

And I will be thy devil, thou my flesh,
With which I Will catch the world.

Fill some Tobacco,
And bring it in: if Piorato come
Before my Don, admit him; if my Don
Before my Love, conduct him, my dear devil.

I will my dear flesh: first come, first served. Well said.
O equal Heaven, how wisely thou disposest
Thy several gifts? one's born a great rich fool,
For the subordinate knave to work upon:
Another poor, with wits addition,
Which well or ill used, builds a living up;
And that too from the Sire often discends:
Only fair virtue, by traduction
Never succeeds, and seldom meets success;
What have I then to do with 't? My free will
Left me by Heaven, makes me or good, or ill:
Now since vice gets more in this vicious world
Then piety, and my stars confluence
Enforce my disposition to affect
Gain, and the name of rich, let who will practice
War, and grow that Way great: religious,
And that way good: my chief felicity
Is wealth the nurse of sensuality:
And he that mainly labors to be rich,
Must scratch great scabs, and claw a Strumpets itch.

To say sir, I will wait upon your Lord,
Were not to understand my self.

To say sir
You will do any thing but wait upon him,
Were not to understand my Lord.

I Will meet him
Some half hour hence, and doubt not but to render
His son a man again: the cure is easy,
I have done diverse.

Women do ye mean, sir?

Cures I do mean sir: be there but one spark
Of fire remaining in him unextinct,
With my discourse I Will blow it to a flame;
And with my practice, into action:
I have had one so full of childish fear,
And womanish hearted sent to my advice,
He durst not draw a Knife to cut his meat.

And how sir, did you help him?

Sir, I kept him
Seven days in a dark room by Candlelight,
A plenteous Table spread with all good meats,
Before his eyes, a case of keen broad Knives,
Upon the board, and he so watchd, he might not
Touch the least modicum, unless he cut it:
And thus I brought him first to draw a knife.

Good.

Then for ten days did I diet him
Only with burnt Porke sir, and gammons of Bacon;
A pill of Caveary now and then,
Which breeds choler adust you know.

It Is true.

And to purge phlegmatic humor, and cold crudities;
In all that time, he drank me Aqua fortis,
And nothing else but --

Aqua vite Signior,
For Aqua fortis poisons.

Aqua fortis
I say again: what is one man's poison Signior,
Is another meat or drink.

Your patience sir;
By your good patience, h'ad a huge cold stomach.

I fired it: and gave him then three sweats
In the Artillery-yard three drilling days:
And now he will shoot a Gun, and draw a Sword,
And fight with any man in Christendom.

A receipt for a coward: I Will be bold sir
To write your good prescription.

Sir, hereafter
You shall, and underneath it put probatum:
Is your chain right?

It Is both right and just sir;
For though I am a Steward, I did get it
With no man's wrong.

You are witty.

So, so.
Could you not cure one sir, of being too rash
And over-daring? there now is my disease:
Foolhardy as they say, for that in sooth
I am.

Most easily.

How?

To make you drunk sir,
With small Beer once a day; and beat you twice,
Till you be bruised all over: if that help not,
Knock out your brains.

This is strong Physic Signior,
And never will agree with my weak body:
I find the medcine worse then the malady,
And therefore will remain foolhardy still:
You Will come sir?

As I am a Gentleman.

A man oth' Sword should never break his word.

I Will overtake you: I have only sir
A complementall visitation
To offer to a Mistress lodgd here by.

A Gentlewoman?

Yes sir.

Fair, and comely?

Oh sir, the Paragon, the Non-parill
Of Civil, the most wealthy Mine of Spain,
For beauty, and perfection.

Say you so?
Might not a man entreat a courtesy,
To walk along with you Signior, to peruse
This dainty Mine, though not to dig in it Sgnior?
Hanh -- I hope you will not deny me, being a stranger;
Though I am Steward, I am flesh and blood,
And frail as other men.

Sir, blow your nose:
I dare not for the world: no, she is kept
By a great Don, Vitelli.

How?

It Is true.

See, things will veere about: this Don Vitelli
Am I to seek now, to deliver Letters
From my young Mistress Clara; and I tell you,
Under the Rose, because you are a stranger,
And my special friend, I doubt there is
A little foolish love betwixt the parties,
Unknown unto my Lord.

Happy discovery:
My fruit begins to ripen: hark you sir,
I would not wish you now, to give those Letters:
But home, and open this to Madona Clara,
Which when I come I Will justify, and relate
More amply, and particularly.

I approve
Your counsel, and will practice it: bazilos manos:
Here Is two chewres chewrd: when wisdom is imployd
It Is ever thus: your more acquaintance, Signior:
I say not better, least you think, I thought not
Yours good enough.

Your servant excellent Steward.
Would all the Dons in Spain had no more brains,
Here comes the Alguazier: dieu vous guard Mounsier.
Is my cuz stirring yet?

Your cuz (good cosen?)
A whore is like a fool, akin to all
The gallants in the Town: Your coz, good Signior,
Is gone abroad sir, with her other cosen,
My Lord Vitelli: since when there has been
Some dozen cosens here to enquire for her.

'he's greatly allied sir.

Marry is she sir,
Come of a lusty kindred: the truth is,
I must connive no more: no more admittance
Must I consent to; my good Lord has threatened me,
And you must pardon.

Out upon thee man,
Turn honest in thine age? one foot in the grave?
Thou shall not wrong thy self so, for a million:
Look, thou three-headed Cerberus (for wit
I mean) here is one sop, and two, and three,
For every chop a hit.

I marry sir:
Well, the poor heart loves you but too well.
We have been talking on you 'faith this hour:
Where, what I said, go too: she loves your valor;
Oh and your Music most abominably:
She is within sir, and alone: what mean you?

That is your Sergeants side, I take it sir;
Now I endure your Constables much better;
There is less danger in it: for one you know
Is a tame harmless monster in the light,
The Sergeant salvage both by day, and night.

I Will call her to you for that.

No, I will charm her.

She Is come.

My Spirit.

Oh my Sweet,
Leap hearts to lips, and in our kisses meet.

Turn, turn thy beauteous face away,
How pale and sickly looked the day,
In emulation of thy brighter beams?
Oh envious light, flv, fly, he gove,
Come night, and piece two breasts at one;
When what love does, we will repeat in dreams.
Yet (thy eyes open) who can day hence fright,
Let but their lids fall, and it will be night.

Well, I will leave you to your fortitude;
And you to temperance: ah, ye pretty pair,
Twere sin to sunder you. Lovers being alone
Make one of two, and day and night all one.
But fall not out, I charge you, keep the peace;
You know my place else.

No, you will not marry:
You are a Courtier, and can sing (my Love)
And want no Mistrisses: but yet I care not,
I Will love you still; and when I am dead for you,
Then you will believe my truth.

You kill me (fair)
It is my lesson that you speak: have I
In any circumstance deserved this doubt?
I am not like your false and perjured Don
That here maintains you, and has vowed his faith,
And yet attempts in way of marriage
A Lady not far off.

How Is that?

It Is so:
And therefore Mistress, now the time is come
You may demand his promise; and I swear
To marry you with speed.

And with that Gold
Which Don Vitelli gives, you will walk some voyage
And leave me to my trade; and laugh, and brag,
How you ore-reach'd a whore, and guld a Lord.

You anger me extremely: fare you well.
What should I say to be believd? expose me
To any hazard; or like jealous Juno
(The incensed stepmother of Hercules)
Design me labors most impossible,
I Will do 'em, or die in 'em; so at last
You will believe me.

Come, we are friends: I do.
I am thine, walk in: my Lord has sent me outsides,
But thou shall have 'em, the colors are too sad:

'Faith Mistress, I want clothes indeed.

I have
Some Gold too, for my servant.

And I have
A better mettle for my Mistress.

Undone -- wit now or never help me: my Master
He will cut my throat, I am a dead Constable;
And he will not be hanged neither, there is the grief:
The party sir is here.

What?

He was here;
I cry your Lordship mercy: but I rattled him;
I told him here was no companions
For such deboshd, and poor-condition'd fellows;
Ibid him venture not so desperately
The cropping of his ears, slitting his nose,
Or being gelt.

It Was well done.

Please your honor,
I told him there were Stews, and then at last
Swore three or four great oaths she was removed,
Which I did thihke I might in conscience,
Being for your Lordship.

What became of him?

Faith sir, he went away with a flea in's ear,
Like a poor cur, clapping his trindle tail
Betwixt his legs. -- A chi ha, a chi ha, chi ha -- now luck.

It Is he, do as I told thee: 'Blesse thee Signior.
Oh, my dear Lord.

Malroda, what alone?

She never is alone, that is accompanied
With noble thoughts, my Lords and mine are such,
Being only of your Lordship.

Pretty Less.

Oh my good Lord, my picture's done: but 'faith
It is not like; nay this way sir, the light
Strikes best upon it here.

Excellent wench.

I am glad the danger's over.

It Is wondrous like,
But that Art cannot counterfeit what Nature
Could make but once.

All Is clear; another tune
You must hear from me now: Vitelli, you are
A most perfidious and a perjured man,
As ever did usurp Nobility.

What meanst thou Mal.?

Leave your betraying smiles,
And change the tunes of your enticing tongues
To penitential prayers; for I am great
In labor even with anger, big with child
Of woman's rage, bigger then when my womb
Was pregnant by thee: go seducer, fly
Out of the world, let me the last wretch be
Dishonored by thee: touch me not, I loath
My very heart, because thou layst there long;
A woman's well helped up, that is confident
In ere a glittering outside on you all:
Would I had honestly been matchd to some
Poor Countrey-swaine, ere known the vanity
Of Court: peace then had been my portion,
Nor had been cozend by an hours pomp
To be a whore unto my dying day.

Oh the uncomfortable ways such women have,
Their different speech and meaning, no assurance
In what they say or do: Dissemblers
Even in their prayers, as if the weeping Greek
That flattered Troy afire had been their Adam;
Liars, as if their mother had been made
Only of all the falsehood of the man,
Disposed into that rib: Do I know this,
And more: nay, all that can concern this Sex,
With the true end of my creation?
Can I with rational discourse sometimes
Advance my spirit into Heaven, before
'T has shook hands with my body, and yet blindly
Suffer my filthy flesh to master it,
With sight of such fair frail beguiling objects?
When I am absent, easily I resolve
Nere more to entertain those strong desires
That triumph ore me, even to actual sin;
Yet when I meet again those sorserers eyes,
Their beams my hardest resolutions thaw,
As if that cakes of Ice and July met,
And her sighs powerful as the violent North,
Like a light feather twirle me round about
And leave me in mine own low state again.
What aylst thou? prithee weep not: Oh, those tears
If they were true, and righly spent, would raise
A flowery spring in the midst of January:
Celestial Ministers with Crystal cups
Would stoop to save 'em for immortal drink:
But from this passion; why all this?

Do'ye ask?
You are marrying: having made me unfit
For any man, you leave me fit for all:
Porters must be my burdens now, to live
And fitting me your self for Carts, and Beadles
You leave me to 'em: And who of all the world
But the virago, your great Arch-foes daughter?
But on: I care not, this poor rush: 'twill breed
An excellent comedy: ha, ha: 't'makes me laugh:
I cannot choose: the best is, some report
It is a match for fear, not love of your side.

Why how the devil knows she, that I saw
This Lady? are all whores, peec'd with some witch?
I will be merry, 'faith it is true, sweet heart,
I am to marry?

Are you? you base Lord.
By -- i will Pistol thee.

A roaring whore?
Take heed, there is a correction house hard by:
You have learned this of your swordman, that I warned you of,
Your fencers, and your drunkards: but whereas
You upb aid me with oaths, why I must tell you
I nc're promised you marriage, nor have vowed,
But said I loved you, long as you remained
The woman I expected, or you swore,
And how you have failed of that (sweet heart) you know.
You feign would show your power, but fare you well,
I Will keep no more faith with an infidel.

Nor I my bosom for a Turk: do'ye hear?
Go, and the devil take me, if ever
I see you more: I was too true.

Come, pish:
That devil take the falsest of us two.

Amen.

You are an ill Clerk; and curse your self:
Madness transports you: I confess, I drew you
Unto my will: but you must know that must not
Make me dote on the habit of my sin.
I will, to settle you to your content,
Be master of my word: and yet he li'd
That told you I was marrying, but in thought:
But will you slave me to your tyranny
So cruelly I shall not dare to look
Or speak to other women? make me not
Your smocks Monopoly: come, let us be friends:
Look, here is a Jewel for thee: I will come
At night, and --

What 'yfaith: you shall not sir.

'Faith, and troth, and verily, but I will

Half drunck, to make a noise, and rail?

No, no,
Sober, and dieted for the nonce: I am thine,
I have won the day.

The night (though) shall be mine.

What said he sirrah?

Little, or nothing: faith I saw him not,
Nor will not: he does love a strumpet, Mistress,
Nay, keeps her spitefully, under the Constables nose,
It shall be justified by the Gentleman
Your brothers Matter, that is now within
A'practicing: there are your Letters: come
You shall not cast your self away, while I live,
Nor will I venture my right worshipful place
In such a business -- here is your Mother: down:
And he that loves you: another' gates fellow, I wish
If you had any grace.

Well rogue.

I Will in, to see Don Lucio manage: he will make
A pretty piece of flesh; I promise you,
He does already handle his weapon finely.

She knows your love sir, and the full allowance
Her Father and my self approve it with,
And I must tell you, I much hope it has
Wrought some impression, by her alteration;
She sighs, and says forsooth, and cries heigh ho,
She Will take ill words oth' Steward, and the Servants,
Yet answer affably, and modestly:
Things sir, not usual with her: there she is,
Change some few words.

Maddam, I am bound to 'ye;
How now, fair Mistress, working?

Yes forsooth,
Learning to live another day.

That needs not.

No forsooth: by my truly but it does,
We know not what we may come too.

It Is strange.

Come, I ha begged leave for you to play.

Forsooth
It Is ill for a fair Lady to be idle.

She had better be well- busied, I know that.
Turtle: me thinks you mourn, shall I sit by you?

If you be weary sir, you had best be gone
(I work not a true stitch) now you are my mate.

If I be so, I must do more then side you.

Even what you will, but tread me.

Shall we bill?

Oh no, forsooth.

Being so fair, my Clara,
Why do'ye delight in black-worke?

Oh white sir,
The fairest Ladies like the blackest men:
I ever loved the color: all black things
Are least subject to change.

Why, I do love
A black thing too: and the most beauteous faces
Have oftnest of them: as the blackest eyes,
Jet-arched brows, such hair: i will kiss your hand.

'Twill hinder me work my sir: and my Mother
Will chide me, if I do not do my task.

Your Mother, nor your Father shall chide: you
Might have a prettier task, would you be ruled,
And look with open eyes.

I stare upon you:
And broadly see you: a wondrous proper man,
Yet 'twere a greater task for me to love you
Then I shall ever work sir, in seven year,
-- of this stitching, I had rather feel
Two, then sow one: -- this rogue h'as given me a stitch
Clean cross my heart: good faith sir: I shall prick you.

In goodder faith, I would prick you again.

Now you grow troublesome: pish; the man is, foolish

Pray wear these trifles.

Neither you, nor trifles,
You are a trifle, wear your self, sir, out,
And here no more trifle the time away.

Come; you're deceived in me, I will not wake,
Nor fast, nor dye for you.

Goose, be not you deceived,
I can not like, nor love, nor live with you,
Nor fast, nor watch, nor pray for you.

Her old fit.

Sure, this is not the way: nay, I will break
Your melancholy.

I shall break your pate then,
Away, you sanguine scabbard.

Out upon thee
Thou Wilt break my heart, I am sure.

She Is not yet tame.

On sir; put home: or I shall goad you here
With this old Fox of mine, that will bite better:
Oh, the brave age is gone; in my young days
A Chevalier would stock a needles point
Three times together: strait in the hams?
Or shall I gi'v'ye new Garters?

Faith old Master.
There Is little hope: the linen sure was danck
He was begot in, he is so faint, and cold:
Even send him to Toledo, there to study,
For he will never fadge with these Toledos;
Bear ye up your point there; pick his teeth: Oh' base.

Fie: you are the most untoward Scholar: bear
Your body gracefully: what a posture's there?
You lie too open breasted.

Oh!

You Would never
Make a good Statesman:

Pray no more.
I hope to breath in peace, and therefore need not
The practice of these dangerous qualities,
I do not mean to live by it; for I trust
You Will leave me better able.

Not a Button:

Let Us go get us a new heir.

I by my troth: your daughter's as untoward.

I will break thee bone by bone, and bake thee,
Ere i will have such a wooden Son, to inherit:
Take him a good knock; see how that will work.

Now, for your life Signior:

Oh: alas, I am killed
My eye is out: look Father: Zancho: --
I Will play the fool no more thus, that I will not.

'Heart: nere a rogue in Spain shall wrong my brother
Whilst I can hold a sword.

Hold, Maddam, Maddam.

Clara.

Daughter.

Mistress:

Bradamante.
Hold, hold I pray.

The devil's in her, of the other side: sure,
There Is Gold for you: they have changed what ye calt's:
Will no cure help? well, I have one experiment,
And if that fail, I Will hang him, then here is an end on it.
Come you along with me: and you sir:

Now are you going to drowning.


I Will even along with ye: she is too great a Lady
For me, and would prove more then my match.

You Are he spoke of Vitelli to the Steward?

Yes: and I thank you, you have beat me for it.

But are you sure you do not wrong him?

Sure?
So sure, that if you please venture your self
I Will show you him, and his Cockatrice together,
And you shall hear 'em talk.

Will you? by -- sir
You shall endeere me ever: and I ask
You mercy.

You were somewhat boystrous.

There Is Gold to make you amends: and for this pains,
I Will gratify you further: i will but masque me
And walk along with ye: faith let us make a night on it.

Come on my brave water-Spanlels: you that hunt Ducks in the night: and hide
more knavery under your gowns then your betters: observe my precepts, and
edify by my doctrine: at yond corner will I set you; if drunkards molest the
street, and fall to brabling, knock you down the malefactors, and take you up
their cloaks and hats, and bring them to me: they are lawful prisoners, and
must be ransomed ere they receive liberty: what else you are to execute upon
occasion, you sufficiently know: and therefore I abbreviat my Lecture


We are wise enough, and warm enough.


Vice this night shall be apprehended.


The terror of rug-gownes shall be known: and our bills
Discharge us of after recknings.

I will do any thing, so I may eat.


Lazarillo, We will spend no more; now we are grown worse, we will live
better: let us follow our calling faithfully


Away, then the Commonwealth is our Mistress: and who
Would serve a common Mistress, but to gain by her?

I pray you see the Masque, my Lord,

It Is early night yet.

O if it be so late, take me along:
I would not give advantage to ill tongues
To tax my being here, without your presence
To be my warrant.

You might spare this, Sister,
Knowing with whom I leave you; one that is
By your allowance, and his choice, your Servant,
And may my council and persuasion work it,
Your husband speedily: For your entertainment
My thanks; I will not rob you of the means
To do your Mistress some acceptable service
In waiting on her to my house.

My Lord,

As you respect me, without further trouble
Retire, and taste those pleasures prepared for you,
And leave me to my own ways.

When you please sir.

You Will leave my Chamber?

Let us but bill once,
My Dove, my Sparrow, and I, with my office
Will be thy slaves for ever.

Are you so hot?

But taste the difference of a man in place,
You Will find that when authority pricks him forward,
Your Don, nor yet your Diego comes not near him
To do a Lady right: no men pay deerer
For their stolen sweetes, then we: three minutes trading
Affords to any sinner a protection
For three years after: think on that, I burn;
But one drop of your bounty.

Hence you rogue,
Am I fit for you? is it not grace sufficient
To have your staff, a bolt to bar the door
Where a Don enters, but that you will presume
To be his taster?

Is no more respect
Due to this rod of justice?

Do you dispute?
Good Doctor of the Dungeon, not a word more,
-- If you do, my Lord Vitelli knows it.

Why I am big enough to answer him,
Or any man.

It Is well.

Malroda.

How?

You know the voice, and now crowch like a Cur
Taken worrying sheep: I now could have you guelded
For a Bawd rampani: but on this submission
For once I spare you

I Will be revenged
My honorable Lord.

There Is for thy care

I am mad, starck mad: proud Pagan scorn her host
I would I were but valiant enough to kick her,
Il'd wish no manhood else.

What Is that?

I am gone.

You see, I have kept my word.

But in this object
Hardly deserved my thanks.

Is there ought else
You will command me?

Only your sword
Which I must have: nay willingly I yet know
To force it, and to use it.

It Is yours Lady.

I ask no other guard.

If so I leave you:
And now, if that the Constable keep his word,
A poorer man may chance to gull a Lord.

By this good -- you shall not.

By this --
I mu^^, and will, Malroda; What do you make
A stranger of me?

I Will be so to you,
And you shall find it.

These are your old arts
T'endeere the game you know I come to hunt for,
Which I have borne too coldly.

Do so still,
For if I h at you, hang me.

If you do not
I know who will starve for it: why, thou shame of women,
Whose folly, or whose impudence is greater
Is doubtful to det^rmine; this to me
That know thee for a whore.

And made me one,
Remember that.

Why should I but grow wise
And tie that bounty up, which nor discretion
Nor honor can give way too; thou would be
A Bawd e're twenty, and within a month
A barefoot, lowzie, and diseased whore,
And shift thy lodgings oftener then a rogue
That Is whipped from post to post.

Pish: all our College
Know you can rail well in this kind.

For me
He never spoke so well.

I have maintained thee
The envy of great fortunes, made thee shine
As if thy name were glorious: stuck thee full
Of jewels, as the firmament of Stars,
And in it made thee so remarkable
That it grew questionable, whether virtue poor,
Or vice so set forth as it is in thee,
Were even by modesties self to be preferred,
And am I thus repaid?
You are still my debtor;
Can this (though true) be weighed with my lost honor,
Much less my faith? I have lived private to you,
And but for you, had never known what lust was,
Nor what the sorrow for it.

It Is false.

It Is true,
But how returned by you, thy whole life being
But one continued act of lust, and Shipwreck
Of women's chastities.

But that I know
That she that dares be damned dares any thing,
I should admire thy tempting me: but presume not
On the power you think you hold over my affections,
It will deceive you: yield, and presently
Or by the inflamed blood, which thou must quench
I Will make a forcible entry.

Touch me not:
You know I have a throat, -- if you do
I will cry out a rape, or sheath this here,
Ere i will be kept, and used for Julip-water
T'allay the heat which lushious meats and wine
And not desire has raised.

A desperate devil,
My blood commands my reason: I must take
Some milder way.

I hope (dear Don) I fit you.
The night is mine, although the day was yours
You are not fasting now: this speeding trick
Which I would as a principle leave to all,
That make their maintenance out of their own Indies
As I do now; my good old mother taught me,
Daughter, quoth she, contest not with your lover
His stomach being empty; let wine heat him,
And then you may command him: it is a sure one:
His looks show he is coming.

Come this needs not,
Especially to me: you know how dear
I ever have esteemed you.

Lost again.

That any sight of yours, has power to change
My strongest resolution, and one tear
Sufficient to command a pardon from me,
For any wrong from you, which all mankind
Should kneel in vain for.

Pray you pardon those
That need your favor, or desire it

Prithee.
Be better tempered: I Will pay as a forfeit
For my rash anger, this purse filled with Gold.
Thou shall have servants, gowns, attires, what not?
Only continue mine.

'Twas this I fished for

Look on me, and receive it.

Well, you know
My gentle nature, and take pride to abuse it:
You see a trifle pleases me, we are friends;
This kiss, and this confirms it.

With my ruin.

I Will have this dyamond; and this pearl.

They are yours.

But will you not, when you have what you came for,
Take them from me to morrow? it is a fashion
Your Lords of late have used.

But I Will not follow.

That any man at such a rate as this
Should pay for his repentance.

Shall we to bed now?

Instantly, Sweet: yet now I think on it better
There Is something first that in a word or two
I must acquaint you with.

Can I cry aim,
To this against my self? I Will break this match,
Or make it stronger with my blood.

I am yours,
A Don's not priviledgd here more then yourself,
Win her, and wear her.

Have you a Priest ready?

I have him for thee, Lad; and when I have
Married this scornful whore to this poor gallant.
She will make suit to me; there is a trick
To bring a high-priz'd wench upon her knees:
For you my fine neat Harpyes stretch your tallons
And prove your selves true night-Birds.

Take my word
For me and all the rest.

If there be meat
Or any banquet stirring, you shall see
How i will bestow my self.

When they are drawn,
Rush in upon 'em: all is fair prize you light on:
I must away: your officer may give way
To the Knavery of his watch, but must not see it.
You all know where to find me.

There look for us.

Who Is that?

My Piorato, welcome, welcome:
Faith had you not come when you did, my Lord
Had done I know not what to me.

I am gul'd,
First cheated of my Jewels, and then laughed at:
Sirrah, what make you here?

A business brings me,
More lawful then your own,

How Is that, you slave?

He Is such, that would continue his a whore
Whom he would make a wife of.

I Will trea'd upon
The face you dote on, strumpet.

Keep the peace there.

A plot upon my life too?

Down with him.

Show your old valor, and learn from a woman,
One Eagle has a world of odds against
A flight of Dawes, as these are.

Get you off,
I Will follow instantly.

Run for more help there.


Loss of my gold, and jewels, and the wench too
Afflicts me not so much, as th'having Clara
The witness of my weakness.

He turns from me,
And yet I may urge merit, since his life
Is made my second gift.

May I never prosper
If I know how to thank her.

Sir, your pa don
For pressing thus beyond a Virgins bounds
Upon your privacies: and let my being
Like to a man, as you are, be th'excuse
Of my soliciting that from you, which shall not
Be granted on my part, although desired
By any other: sir, you understand me,
And 'twould show nobly in you, to prevent
From me a farther boldness, which I must
Proceed in, if you prove not mercifuil,
Though with my loss of blushes, and good name.

Madam, I know your will, and would be thankful
If it were possible I could affect
The Daughter of an enemy.

That fair false one
Whom with fond dotage you have long pursued
Had such a father: she to whom you pay
Deerer for your dishonor, then all titles
Ambitious men hunt for are worth.

It Is truth.

Yet, with her, as a friend you still exchange
Health for diseases, and to your disgrace
Nourish the rivals to your present pleasures,
At your own charge, used as a property
To give a safe protection to her lust,
Yet share in nothing but the shame of it.

Grant all this so, to take you for a wife
Were greater hazard, for should I offend you
(As it is not easy still to please a woman)
You are of so great a spirit, that I must learn
To wear your petticoat, for you will have
My breeches from me.

Rather from this hour
I here abjure all actions of a man,
And will esteem it happiness from you
To suffer like a woman: love, true love
Has made a search within me, and expelled
All but my natural softness, and made perfect
That which my parents care could not begin.
I will show strength in nothing, but my duty,
And glad desire to please you, and in that
Grow every day more able.

Could this be,
What a brave race might I beget? I find
A kind of yielding; and no reason why
I should hold longer out: she is young, and fair,
And chaste for sure, but with her leave the Devil
Durst not attempt her: Madam, though you have
A Soldiers arm, your lips appear as if
They were a Ladies.

They dare sir from you
Endure the trial.

Ha: once more I pray you:
The best I ever tasted; and it is said
I have proved many, it is not safe I fear
To ask the rest now: well, I will leave whoring
And luck herein send me with her: worthiest Lady,
I Will wait upon you home, and by the way
(If ere I many, as i will not forswear it)
Tell you, you are my wife.

Which if you do,
From me all mankind women, learn to woe.

A cloak? good purchase, and rich hangers? well,
We Will share ten Pistolets a man

Yet still
I am monstrous hungry: could you not diduct
So much out of the gross some, as would purchase
Eight loins of Veale, and some two dozen of Capons?

O strange proportion for five.

For five? I have
A legion in my stomach that have kept
Perpetual fast these ten years: for the Capons,
They are to me but as so many black Birds:
May I but eat once, and be satisfied,
Let the fates call me, when my ship is fraught,
And I shall hang in peace.

Steal well to night,
And thou shall feed to morrow; so now you are
Your selves again, i will raise another watch
To free you from suspicion: set on any
You meet with boldly: I Will not be far off,
T'assist you, and protect you.

O brave officer.

Would every ward had one but so well given,
And we would watch for rug, in gowns of velvet.

Stand close: a prize.

Satin, and gold Lace, Lads.

Why do thou hang upon me?

It Is so dark
I dare not see my way: for heaven sake father
Let us go home.

No, even here we will leave you:
Let Us run away from him, my Lord.

Oh alas.

Thou have made me mad: and I will beat thee dead
Then bray the in a mortar, and now mold thee
But I will alter thee.

'Twill never be:
He has bin three days practicing to drink,
Yet still he sips, like to a waiting woman,
And looks as he were murdring of a fart
Among wild Irish swaggerers.

I have still
Your good word, Zancho, father.

Milk-sop coward;
No house of mine receives thee: I disclam thee,
Thy mother; on her knees shall not entreat me
Hereafter to acknowledge thee.

Pray you speak for me.

I would; but now I cannot with mine honor.

There Is only one course left, that may redeem thee,
Which is, to strike the next man that you meet,
And if we chance to light upon a woman,
Take her away, and use her like a man,
Or I will cut thy hamstrings.

This makes for us

What do thou do now?

Sir, I am saying my prayers;
For being to undertake what you would have me,
I know I cannot live.

Madam, I fear
You Will wish you had usd your coach: your brothers house
Is yet far off.

The better sir: this walk
Will help digestion after your great supper,
Of which I have fed largely.

To your task,
Or else you know what follows:

I am dying:
Now Lord have mercy on me: by your favor,
Sir I must strike you.

For what cause?

I know not:
And I must likewise talk with that young Lady,
An hour in private.

What you must, is doubtful,
But I am certain sir, I must beat you.

Help, help.

Not strik again?

How, Alvarez?

This for my Lord Vitell's love.

Break out,
And like true thieves, make pray on either side,
But seem to help the stranger.

Oh my Lord,
They have beat him on his knees.

Though I want courage:
I yet have a sons duty in me, and
Compassion of a fathers danger; that,
That wholly now possesses me.

Lucio.
This is beyond my hope.

So Lazarillo,
Take up all boy: well done.

And now steal off
Closely, and cunningly.

How? have I found you?
Why Gentlemen, are you mad, to make your selves
A prey to Rogues?

Would we were off.

Thieves, thieves.

Defer our own contention: and down with them.

I Will make you sure.

Now he plays the Devil.

This place is not for me.

I Will follow her
Half of my penance is past ore.

What noise?
What tumult's there? keep the Kings peace I charge you.

I am glad he is come yet.

O, you keep good Guard
Upon the City, when men of our rank
Are set upon in the streets.

The assistance
Shall hear os't be assured.

And if he be
That careful Governor he is reported,
You will smart for it.

Patience, good Signiours:
Let me survey the Rascals: O, I know them,
And thank you for them: they are pillfring rogues
Of Andaluzia, that have perused
All Prisons in Castile: I dare not trust
The dungeon with them: no, i will have them home
To my own house.

We had rather go to prison.

Had you so dog-holts? yes, I know you had:
You there would use your cunning fingers on
The simple locks; you would: but i will prevent you.

My Mistress lost? good night.

Your Son's gone to,
What should become of him?

Come of him, what will:
Now he dares fight, I care not: i will to bed:
Look to your prisoners Alguazier.

All Is cleared:
Droop not for one disaster: let us hug,
And triumph in our knaveries.

This confirms
What was reported of him.

'Twas done bravely.

I must a little glory in the means
We officers have, to play the Knaves, and safely:
How we break through the toils, pitched by the Law,
Yet hang up them that are far less delinquents:
A simple shopkeeper's carted for a baud
For lodging (though unwittingly) a smock-Gamster:
Where, with rewards, and credit I have kept
Malroda in my house, as in a cloister,
Without taint, or suspicion.

But suppose
The Governor should know it?

He? good Gentleman,
Let him perplex himself with prying into
The measures in the market, and th'abuses
The day stands guilty of: the pillage of the night
Is only mine, mine own feesimple;
Which you shall hold from me, tennants at will,
And pay no rent for it.

Admirable Landlord.

Now we will go search the taverns, commit such
As we find drinking: and be drunk our selves
With what we take from them: these silly wretches
Whom I for form sake only have brought hither
Shall watch without, and guard us.

And we will.
See you sase lodged, most worthy Alguazier,
With all of you his comrads.

It Is the Governor.

We are betrayed?

My guard there: bind them fast:
How men in high place, and authority
Are in their lives and estimation wronged
By their subordinate Ministers? yet such
They cannot but employ: wronged justice finding
Scarce one true servant in ten officers.
'T'xpostulate with you, were but to delay
Your crimes due punishment, which shall fall upon you
So speedily, and severely, that it shall
Fright others by the example: and confirm
How ever corrupt officers may disgrace
Themselves, it is not in them to wrong their place.
Bring them away.

We Will suffer nobly yet,
And like to Spanish Gallants.

And we will hang so.

I have no stomach to it: but i will endeavor.

Nay you are rude; pray you forbear; your offer now
More then the breeding of a Gentleman
Can give you warrant for.

It Is but to kiss you,
And think not i will receive that for a favor
Which was enjoined me for a penance, Lady.

You have met a gentle confessor, and for once
(So men you will rest satisfied) I vouchsafe it.

Rest satisfide with a kiss? why can a man
Desire more from a woman? is there any
Pleasure beyond it? may I never live
If I know what it is.

Sweet Innocence.

What strange new motions do I feel? my veins
Burn with an unknown fire: in every part
I suffer alteration: I am poysond,
Yet languish with desire again to taste it,
So sweetly it works on me.

I never saw
A lovely man, till now.

How can this be?
She is a wom^n, as my mother is,
And her I have kissed often, and brought off
My lips unscortch'd; yours are more lovelie, Lady,
And so should be less hurtful: pray you vouchsafe
Your hand, to quench the heat taken from your Lip,
Perhaps that may restore me.

Willingly.

The flame increases: if to touch you, burn thus,
What would more strict embraces do? I know not,
And yet methinks to die so; were to ascend
To Heaven, through Paradise.

I am wounded too,
Though modesty forbids that I should speak
What ignorance makes him bold in: why do you fix
Your eyes so strongly on me?

Pray you stand still,
There is nothing else, that is worth the looking on:
I could adore you, Lady.

Can you love me?

To wait on you, in your chamber, and but touch
What you, by wearing it, have made divine,
Were such a happiness. I am resov'd,
I Will sell my liberty to you for this glove,
And write my self your slave.

On easier terms,
Receive it as a friend.

How! giving favor!
I Will have it with his heart.

What will you do?

As you are merciful, take my life rather.

Will you depart with it so?

Does that grieve you?

I know not: but even now you appear valiant.

It Was to preserve my father: in his cause
I could be so again.

Not in your own? Kneel to thy rival and thine enemy?
Away unworthy creature, I begin
To hate my self, for giving entrance to
A good opinion of thee: For thy torment,
If my poor beauty be of any power,
May thou dote on it desperately: but never
Presume to hope for grace, till thou recover
And wear the favor that was ravished from thee.

He wears my head to then.

Poor fool, farewell.

My womanish soul, which hitherto has governd
This coward flesh, I feel departing from me;
And in me by her beauty is inspired
A new, and masculine one: instructing me
What Is fit to do or suffer; powerful love
That have with loud, and yet a pleasing thunder
Roused sleeping manhood in me, thy new creature,
Perfect thy work so that I may make known
Nature (though long kept back) will have her own.

Can it be possible, that in six short hours
The subject still the same, so many habits
Should be removed? or this new Lucio, he
That yesternight was baffeld and disgraced,
And thankt the man that did it, that then kneeld
And blubberd like a woman, should now dare
One term of honor seek reparation
For what he then appeared not capable of?

Such miracles, men that dare do injuries
Live to their shames to see, and for punishment
And scourge to their proud follies.

Prithee leave me:
Had I my Page, or footman here to flesh thee,
I durst the better hear thee.

This scorn needs not:
And offer such no more.

Why say I should,
You Will not be angry?

Indeed I think I shall,
Would you vouchsafe to show your self a Captain,
And lead a little further, to some place
That Is less frequented.

He looks pale.

If not,
Make use of this.

There Is anger in his eyes too:
His gesture, voice, behavior, all new fashioned;
Well, if it does endure in act the trial
Of what in show it promises to make good,
Ulysses Cyclops, Io's transformation,
Eurydice fetched from Hell, with all the rest
Of Ovids Fables, i will put in your Creed;
And for proof, all incredible things may be
Writ down that Lucio, the coward Lucio,
The womanish Lucio fought.

and Lamorall,
The still imployd great duellist Lamorall.
Took his life from him.

Twill not come to that sure:
Methinks the only drawing of my Sword
Should fright that confidence.

It confirms it rather.
To make which good, know you stand now opposed
By one that is your Rival, one that wishes
Your name and title greater, to raise his;
The wrong you did, less pardonable then it is,
But your strength to defend it, more then ever
It was when justice friended it. The Lady
For whom we now contend, Genevora
Of more desert, (if such incomparable beauty
Could suffer an addition) your love
To Don Vitelli multiplied, and your hate
Aagainst my father and his house increased;
And lastly, that the Glove which you there wear,
To my dishonor, (which I must force from you)
Were deerer to you then your life.

You Will find
It is, and so i will guard it:

All these meet then
With the black infamy, to be foyld by one
That Is not allowd a man: to help your valor,
That falling by your hand, I may, or die,
Or win in this one single opposition
My Mistress, and such honor as I may
Enrich my fathers Arms with.

It Is said Nobly;
My life with them are at the stake.

At all then.

She Is yours: this, and my life, to follow your fortune;
And give not only back that part the looser
Scorns to accept of --

What Is that?

My poor life,
Which do not leave me as a further torment,
Having dispoild me of my Sword, mine honor,
Hope of my Ladies grace, fame, and all else
That made it worth the keeping.

I take back
No more from you, then what you forced from me;
And with a worser title: yet think not
That I Will dispute this, as made insolent
By my success, but as one equal with you,
If so you will accept me; that new courage,
Or call it fortune if you please, that is
Conferred upon me by the only sight
Of fair Genevora, was not bestowed on me
To bloody purposes: nor did her command
Deprive me of the happiness to see her
But till I did redeem her favor from you;
Which only I rejoice in, and share with you
In all you suffer else.

This courtesy
Wounds deeper then your Sword can, or mine own;
Pray you make use of either, and dispatch me.

The barbarous Turk is satisfied with spoil;
And shall I, being possessed of what I came for,
Prove the more Infidel?

You were better be so,
Then publish my disgrace, as it is the custom,
And which I must expect.

Judge better on me:
I have no tongue to trumpet mine own praise
To your dishonor: it is a bastard courage
That seeks a name out that way, no true born one;
Pray you be comforted, for by all goodness
But to her virtuous self, the best part of it,
I never will discover on what terms
I came by these: which yet I take not from you,
But leave you in exchange of them, mine own,
With the desire of being a friend; which if
You will not grant me, but on further trial
Of manhood in me, seek me when you please,
(And though I might refuse it with mine honor)
Win them again, and wear them: so good morrow.

I nere knew what true valor was till now;
And have gained more by this disgrace, then all
The honors I have won: they made me proud,
Presumptuous of my fortune; a mere beast,
Fashioned by them, only to dare and do:
Yielding no reasons for my wilful actions
But what I stuck on my Swords point, presuming
It was the best Revenew. How unequal
Wrongs well maintained makes us to others, which
Ending with shame teach as to know our selves,
I will think more on it.

Lamorall.

My Lord?

I came to seek you.

And unwillingly;
You nere found me till now: your pleasure sir?

That which will please thee friend: thy vowed love to me
Shall now be put in action: means is offered
To use thy good Sword for me; that which still
Thou wearst, as if it were a part of thee.
Where is it?

It Is changd for one more fortunate:
Pray you enquire not how.

Why, I nere thought
That there was music int, but ascribe
The fortune of it to the arm.

Which is grown weaker too. I am not (in a word)
Worthy your friendship: I am one new vanquished,
Yet shame to tell by whom.

But I Will tell thee
Against whom thou art to fight, and there redeem
Thy honor lost, if there be any such:
The King, by my long suit, at length is pleased
That Alvarez and my self, with eithers Second,
Shall end the difference between our houses,
Which he accepts of I make choice of thee;
And where you speak of a disgrace, the means
To blot it out, by such a public trial
Of thy approved valor, will revive
Thy ancient courage. If you embrace it, do;
If not, I Will seek some other.

As I am
You may command me.

Spoke like that true friend
That loves not only for his private end.

This from Madona Clara?

Yes, and 't please you.

Alvarez daughter?

The same, Lady.

She,
That saved my brothers life?

You are still in the right,
She wil'd me wait your walking forth: and knowing
How necessary a discreet wise man
Was in a business of such weight, she pleased
To think on me: it may be in my face
Your Ladyship not acquainted with my wisdom
Finds no such matter: what I am, I am;
Thought's free: and think you what you please.

It Is strange,

That I should be wise, Madam?

No, thou art so;
There Is for thy pains: and prithee tell thy Lady
I will not fail to meet her: I Will receive
Thy thanks and duty in thy present absence:
Farewell, farewell, I say, now thou art wise.
She writes here, she has something to impart
That may concern my brothers life; I know not,
But general fame does give her out so worthy,
That I dare not suspect her: yet wish Lucio
Were Master of her mind: but fie upon it;
Why do I think on him? see, I am punished for it,
In his unlookd for presence: Now I must
Endure another tedious piece of Courtship,
Would make one forswear courtesy.

Gracious Madam,
The sorrow paid for your just anger toward me
Arising from my weakness, I presume
To press into your presence, and despair not
An easy pardon.

He speaks send: oh strange.

And yet believe, that no desire of mine,
Though all are too strong in me, had the power
For their delight, to force me to iufringe
What you commanded, it being in your part
To lessen your great rigor when you please,
And mine to suffer wirh an humble patience
What you will impose upon it.

Courtly too.

Yet has the poor, and contemned Lucio, Madam,
(Made able only by his hope to serve you)
Recovered what with violence, not justice,
Was taken from him: and here at your feet
With these, he could have laid the conquered head
Of Lamorall (it is all I say of him)
For rudely touching that, which as a relic
I ever would have worshipped, since it was yours.

Valiant, and every thing a Lady could
Wish in her servant.

All that is good in me,
That heavenly love, the opposite to base lust,
Which would have all men worthy, has created;
Which being by your beams of beauty formed,
Cherish as your own creature.

I am gone
Too far now to dissemble: rise, or sure
I must kneel with you too: let this one kiss
Speak the rest for me: it is too much I do,
And yet, if chastity would, I could wish more.

In overjoying me, you are grown sad;
What is it Madam? by --
There Is nothing that is within my nerves (and yet
Favored by you, I should as much as man)
But when you please, now or on all occasions
You can think of hereafter, but you may
Dispose of at your pleasure.

If you break
That oath again, you lost me. Yet so well
I love you, I shall never put you to it;
And yet forget it not: rest satisfied
With that you have received now: there are eyes
May be upon us, till the difference
Between our friends are ended: I would not
Be seen so private with you.

I obey you.

But let me hear often from you, and remember
I am Vitellies sister.

What Is that Madam?

Nay nothing, fare you well: who feels loves fire,
Would ever ask to have means to desire.

Are they come in?

Yes.

Read the Proclamation,
That all the people here assembled may
Have satisfaction, what the Kings dear love,
In care of the Republique, has ordained;
Attend with silence: read aloud.

FOrasmuch as our high and mighty Master, Philip, the potent and most
Catholic King of Spain, has not only in his own Royal person, been long,
and often solicited, and grieved, with the deadly and uncurable hatred, sprung
up betwixt the two ancient and most honorably descended Houses of these his
two dearly and equally beloved Subjects, Don Ferdinando de Alrarez, and Don
Pedro de Vitelli: (all which in vain his Majesty has often endeavored to
reconcile and qualify:) But that also through the debates, quarrels, and
outrages daily arising, falling, and flowing from these great heads, his
public civil Government is seditiously and barbarously molested and wounded,
and many of his chief Gentry (no less tender to his Royal Majesty then the
very branches of his own sacred blood) spoyld, lost, and submerged, in the
impious inundation and torrent of their still-growing malice: It has therefore
pleased His sacred Majesty, out of His infinite affection to preserve his
Commonwealth, and general peace, from farther violation, (as a sweet and
heartily loving father of his people) and on the earnest petitions of these
Arch-enemies, to Order, and Ordain, That they be ready, each with his
wel-chosen and beloved friend, armed at all points like Gentlemen, in the
Castle of St. Jago, on this present Monday morning betwixt eight and nine of
the clock; where (before the combatants be allowed to commence this granted
Duel) This to be read aloud for the public satisfaction of his Majesty's
welbeloved Subjects


Hark how their Drums speak their insatiate thirst
Of blood, and stop their ears against pious peace,
Who gently whispering, implores their friendship?

Kings, nor authority can master fate;
Admit 'em then, and blood extinguish hate.

Stay, yet be pleased to think, and let not daring
Wherein men nowadaies exceed even beasts,
And think themselves not men else, so transport you
Beyond the bounds of Christianity:
Lord Alvarez, Vitelli, Gentlemen,
No Town in Spain, from our Metropolis
Unto the rudest hovell, but is great
With your assured valors daily proofs:
Oh will you then, for a superfluous fame,
A sound of honor, which in these times, all
Like heretics profess (with obstinacy)
But most erroneously, venture your souls,
It Is a hard tasque, thorough a Sea of blood
To sail, and land at Heaven?

I hope not
If justice be my Pilot: but my Lord,
You know, if argument, or time, or love,
Could reconcile, long since we had shook hands;
I dare protest, your breath cooles not a vein
In any one of us, but blows the fire
Which naught but blood reciprocal can quench.

Vitelli, thou say bravely, and say right,
And I will kill thee for it, I love thee so.

Ha, ha, old man: upon thy death I Will build
A story (with this arm) for thy old wife
To tell thy daughter Clara seven years hence
As she sits weeping by a wintet fire,
How such a time Vitelli slew her husband
With the same Sword his daughter favored him,
And lives, and wears it yet: Come Lamorall,
Redeem thy self.

Lucio, Genevora
Shall on this Sword receive thy bleeding heart,
For my presented hat, laid at her feet.

Thou talkst well Lamorall, but it is thy head
That I will carry to her to thy hat:
Fie father, I do cool too much.

Oh boy:
Thy fathers true son:
Beat Drums, -- and so good morrow to your Lordship.

Brave resolutions.

Brave, and Spanish right.

Lucio.

Vitelli.

Alvarez.

How the devil
Got these Cats into the gutter? my pusse too?

Hear us.

We must be heard.

We will be heard
Vitelli; look, see Clara on her knees
Imploring thy compassion: Heaven, how sternly
They dart their emulous eyes, as if each scorned
To be behind the other in a look!
Mother, death needs no Sword here: oh my sister
(Fate feign would have it so) persuade, entreat,
A Ladies tears are silent Orators
(Or should be so at least) to move beyond
The honest tongu'd-Rethoritian:
Why will you fight? why does an uncles death
Twenty year old, exceed your love to me
But twenty days? whose forced cause, and fair manner
You could not understand, only have heard.
Custom, that wrought so cunningly on nature
In me, that I forgot my sex, and knew not
Whether my body femall were, or male,
You did unweave, and had the power to charm
A new creation in me, made me fear
To think on those deeds I did perpetrate,
How little power though you allow to me
That cannot with my sighs, my tears, my prayers
Move you from your own loss, if you shoule gain.

I must forget you Clara, 'till I have
Redeemed my uncles blood, that brands my face
Like a pestiferous Carbuncle: I am blind
To what you do: deaf to your cries: and Marble
To all impulsive exorations.
When on this point, I have pearch'd thy fathers soul,
I Will tender thee this bloody reeking hand
Drawn forth the bowels of that murderer:
If thou can love me then, i will marry thee,
And for thy father lost, get thee a Son;
On no condition else.

Most barbarous.

Savage.

Irreligious.

Oh Lucio!
Be thou more merciful: thou bear fewer years,
Art lately weaned from soft effeminacy,
A maidens manners, and a maidens heart
Are neighbors still to thee: be then more mild,
Proceed not to this combat; be thou desperate
Of thine own life? yet (dearest) pity mine
Thy valor's not thine own, I gave it thee,
These eyes begot it, this tongue bred it up,
This breast would lodge it: do not use my gifts
To mine own ruin: I have made thee rich,
Be not so thanklesse, to undo me for it.

Mistress, you know I do not wear a vain.
I would not rip for you, to do you service:
Life's but a word, a shadow, a melting dream,
Compared to essential, and eternal honor.
Why, would you have me value it beyond
Your brother: if I first cast down my sword
May all my body here, be made one wound,
And yet my soul not find heaven thorough it.

You would be catter-walling too, but peace,
Go, get you home, and provide dinner for
Your Son, and me: we will be exceeding merry:
Oh Lucio, I will have thee cock of all
The proud Vitellies that do live in Sprine:
Fie, we shall take cold: hunch: -- I am hoarse
Already.

How your Sister whets my spleen!
I could eat Lucio now:

Lamorall: you have often sworn
You Would be commanded by me.

Vitelli, Brother,
Even for your Fathers soul, your uncles blood,
As you do love my life: but last, and most
As you respect your own Honor, and Fame,
Throw down your sword; he is most valiant
That herein yields first.

Peace, you fool.

Why Lucio,
Do thou begin; it is no disparagement:
He Is elder, and thy better, and thy valor
Is in his infancy.

Or pay it me,
To whom thou ow'st it: Oh, that constant time
Would but go back a week, then Lucio
Thou would not dare to fight.

Lucio, thy Mother,
Thy Mother beggs it: throw thy sword down first.

I Will throw his head down after then.

Lamorall.
You have often swore you would be commanded by me.

Never to this: your spite, and scorn Genevora,
H'as lost all power in me:

Your hearing for six words.

Say. An. Strange obstinacy!

We Will stay no longer.

Then by thy oath Vitelli,
Thy dreadful oath, thou would return that sword
When I should ask it, give it to me, now,
This instant I require it.

By thy vow,
As dreadful, Lucio, to obey my will
In any one thing I would watch to challenge,
I charge thee not to strike a stroke: now he
Of our two brothers that loves perjurie
Best, and dares first be damned, infringe his vow.

Excellent Ladies.

Pish you tyrannize.

We did equivocate.

On.

Then Lucio,
So well I love my husband, for he is so,
(wanting but ceremony) that I pray
His vengefull sword may fall upon thy head
succesfully for false-hood to his Sister.

I likewise pray (Vitelli) Lucio's sword
(who equally is my husband, as thou hers)
May find thy false heart, that durst gage thy faith,
And durst not keep it.

Are you men, or stone.

Men, and we will prove it with our swords:

Your hearing for six words, and we have done,
Zancho come forth -- we will fight our challenge too:
Now speak your resolutions.

These they are,
The first blow given betwixt you, sheathes these swords
In one another bosoms.

And rogue, look
You at that instant do discharge that Pistol
Into my breast: if you start back, or quake,
I Will stick you like a Pigge.

-- hold: you are mad.

This we said: and by our hope of bliffe
This we will do: speak your intents.

Strike.

Shoot.

Vit. Lu. La. Hold, hold: all friends.

Come down.

These devilish women
Can make men friends and enemies when they list.

A gallant undertaking and a happy;
Why this is noble in you: and will be
A well comer present to our Master Philip
Then the return from his Indies.

Father your blessing.

Take her: if he bring not
Betwixt you, boys that will find out new worlds,
And win 'em too I Am a false Prophet.

Brother.
There is a Sister: long divided streams
Mix now at length, by fate.

I am not regarded: I was the careful Steward that provided these Instruments
of peace, I put the longest weapon in your Sisters hand, (my Lord) because she
was the shortest Lady: For likely the shortest Ladies, love the longest -- men:
And for mine own part, I could have discharged it: my Pistol is no ordinary
Pistol, it has two ramming Bullets; but thought I, why should I shoot my two
bullets into my old Lady? if they had gone, I would not have staid long after: I
would even have died too, bravely in faith, like a Roman-Steward: hung my self
in mine own Chain; and there had been a story of Bobadilla, Spindola, Zancho,
for after ages to lament: hum: I perceive I am not only not regarded, but also
not rewarded


Prithee peace: 'shalt have a new chain, next
Saint Jacques day, or this new gilt:

I am satisfied: let virtue have her due: And yet i am melancholy upon this
atonement: pray heaven the State rue it not: I would my Lord Vitellies Steward,
and I could meet: they should find it should cost 'em a little more to make us
friends: well, I will forswear wine, and women for a year: and then I will be
drunk to morrow, and run a whoring like a dog with a broken bottle at's
tail; then will I repent next day, and forswear 'em again more vehemently:
be for-sworne next day again, and repent my repentance: for thus a melancholy
Gentleman does, and ought to live


Nay, you shall dine with me: and afterward
I Will with 'ye to the King: But first, I will
Dispatch the Castles business, that this day
May be complete. Bring forth the malefactors.
You Alguazier, the Ringleader of these
Poor fellows, are degraded from your office,
You must restore all stolen goods you received,
And watch a twelve month without any pay:
This, if you fail of, (all your goods confiscate)
You are to be whipped, and sent into the Galleys.

I like all, but restoring that Catholic doctrine
I do dislike: Learn all ye officers
By this to live uprightly (if you can)

You Cobbler, to translate your manners new,
Are doomed to the Cloister of the Mendicants,
With this your brother; botcher there, for nothing
To cobble, and heel hose for the poor Friars,
Till they allow your penance for sufficient,
And your amendment; then you shall be freed,
And may set up again,

Mendoza, come.
Our souls have trod awry, in all men's sight,
We Will underlay 'em, till they go upright.

Smith, in those shackles you for your hard heart
Must lie by th'heeles a year.

I have shod your horse, my Lord.

Away: for you, my hungry white-loaf'd face,
You must to the Galleys, where you shall be sure
To have no more bits, then you shall have blows.

Well, though herrings want, I shall have rows.

Signior, you have prevented us, and punished
Your self severeller then we would have done.
You have married a whore: may she prove honest.

It Is better my Lord, then to marry an honest woman
That may prove a whore.

It Is a hansome wench: and thou can keep her tame:
I Will send you what I promised.

Joy to your Lordships.

Here may all Ladies learn, to make of foes
The perfect'st friends: and not the perfect'st foes
Of dearest friends, as some do now a days.

Behold the power of love, to nature lost
By custom irrecoverably, past the hope
Of friends restoring, love has here retriv'd
To her own habit, made her blush to see
Her so long monstrous metamorphoses,
May strange affairs never have worse success.


