Heaven save ye Gallants: and this hopeful Age,
Y' are welcome to the downfall of the Stage:
The Fools have labored long in their Vocation;
And Vice, (the Manufacture of the Nation)
O're-stocks the Town so much, and thrives so well,
That Fopps and Knaves grow Druggs and will not sell*
In vain our Wares on Theaters are shown,
When each has a Plantation of his own.
His Cause never fails; for whatsoever he spends,
There Is still Gods plenty for himself and Friends.
Should Men be rated by Poetic Rules,
Lord what a Pole would there be raised from Fools!
Mean time poor Wit prohibited must lie,
As if'twere made some French Commodity.
Fools you will have, and raised at vast expense,
And yet as soon as seen, they give offense.
Time was, when none would cry that Oaf was m^,
But now you strive about your Pedigree:
Bawble and Cap no sooner are thrown down,
But there is a Muss of more then half the Town.
Each one will challenge a Child's part at least,
A sign ^e Family is well increased
Of Foreign Cattle! there is no longer need,
When we are supplied so fast with English Breed.
W^ll! Flourish, Countrymen: drink swear and roar,
Let every freeborn Subject keep his Whore;
And wandering in the Wilderness about,
At end of 40 years not wear her out.
But when you see these Pictures let none dare
To own beyond a Limb or single share:
F^ ^here the Punk is common! he is a Sot,
(...) needs will Father what the Parish go^.

WHat Town's this Boy?


James-Town, Master,


Take care my Trunk be brought ashore to Night, and there is for your Pains.


God bless you Master.


What do you call this House?


Mrs Flirts, Master, the best House for Commendation in all Virginia.


That Is well, has she any handsome Lady's Sirrah?


Oh! She Is woundly handsome her self Master, and the Kindest Gentlewoman --
look here she comes Master -- God bless you Mistress, I have brought you a
young Gentleman here


That Is well, honest Jack -- Sir, you are most heartily Welcome.


Madam, your Servant;


Please you to walk into a Chamber Sir.


By and by, Madam, but I Will repose here a while for the coolness of the Air.


This is a Public Room, Sir, but it is at your Service.


Madam, you oblige me.


A Fine-spoken Person -- A Gentleman I Will warrant him, come Jack, I Will give
thee a Cogue of Brandy for old acquaintance


Here Nell, a Tankard of Cool drink quickly.


You shall have it, Sr.


Hah! who is that Stranger? he seems to be a Gentleman.


If I should give Credit to mine Eyes, that should be Friendly.


Sr, you seem a stranger, may I take the Liberty to present my Service to you?


If I am not mistaken Sr, you are the only Man in the world whom I would
soonest Pledge, you will Credit me if three years Absence has not made you forget
Hazard


Hazard, my Friend! come to my Arms and Heart.


This Unexpected Happiness O're-Joys me. Who could have Imagined to have found
thee in Virginia? I thought thou had been in Spain with thy Brother


I was so till Ten Months since, when my Uncle Colonel Friendly dying here,
left me a Considerable Plantation; And faith I find Diversions not altogether
to be despised; the God of Love Reigns here, with as much Power, as in Courts
or Popular Cities: but prithee what Chance, (Fortunate for me) drove thee to
this part of the New World


Why (faith) Ill Company, and that Common Vice of the Town, Gaming, soon run
out my Younger Brothers Fortune, for Imagining like some of the Luckier
Gamesters to Improve my Stock at the Groom-Porters; Ventured on and lost all --
My Elder Brother an Errant Jew, had neither Friendship, nor Honor enough to
Support me, but at last was mollified by persuasions and the hopes of being for
ever rid of me, sent me hither with a small Cargo to seek my fortune, --


And begin the world withal.


I thought this a better Venture then to turn Sharping Bully, Cully in
Prentices and Country Squires, with my Pocket full of false dice, your high and
low Flats and Bars, or turn broker to young Heirs; take up goods, to pay ten
fold at the Death of their Fathers, and take Fees on both sides; or set up all
night at the Groom Porters begging his Honor to go a Guinney the better of the
lay. No. Friendly, I had rather starve abroad then live Pitty'd and despised at
home


Thou art in the Right, and art come just in the Nick of time to make thy
Fortune -- Will thou follow my advice


Thou art too honest to Command any thing any thing that I shall Refuse.


You must know then, there is about a Mil^ from James Town a Young Gentlewoman
-- No matter for her Birth, her Breeding's the best this world affords, she is
Married to one of the Richest Merchants here, he is Old and Sick, and now gone
into England for the Recovery of his Health, where he will e'e^ give up the Ghost,
he has writ her word he finds no Amendment, and Resolves to stay another Year,
the Letter I accidently took up and have about me; it is easily Counterfeited
and will be of great use to us


Now do I fancy I conceive thee.


Well, hear me first, you shall get another Letter writ like this Character,
which shall say, you are his Kinsman, that is come to Trafick in this Country,
and it is his will you should be received into his House as such


Well, and what will come of this?


Why thou ar^ Young and Handsome; She Young and De^ring; (...) were easy to
make her Love thee, and if the Old Gentleman chance to dye, you Guess the rest,
you are no Fool


Ay, but if he should return --


If -- Why if she Love you, that Other will be but a slender Bar to thy
happiness; For if thou can not Marry her, thou may lie with her, (and Gad)
a Younger Brother may pick out a Pretty Livelihood here that way, as well as in
England -- Or if this ^ail, there thou will find a perpetual Visiter the Widow
Ranter, a Woman bought from the Ship by Old Coll. Ranter; she served him half a
year, and then he Married her, and dying in a year more, left her worth Fifty
thousand Pounds Sterling, besides Plate and Jewels: She Is a great Gallant, But
assuming the Humor of the Country Gentry, her Extravagancy is very Pleasant,
she retains something of her Primitive Quallity still, but is good natured and
Generous


I like all this well.


But I have a further End in this matter, you must know there is in the same
House a Young Heiress, one Coll. Downrights Daughter, whom I Love, I think not
in Vain, her Father indeed has an Implacable hatred to me, for which Reason I
can but seldom Visit her, and in this Affair I have need of a Friend in that
House


Me you're sure of.


And thus you will have an Opportunity to Manage both our Amors: here you will
find Occasion to show your Courage as well as Express your Love; For at this
time the Indians by our ill Management of Trade, whom we have Armed against Our
selves, Very frequently make War upon us with our own Weapons, Though often
coming by the Worst are forced to make Peace with us again, but so, as upon
every turn they fall to Massacring us wherever we ly exposed to them


I heard the news of this in England, which hastens the new Governors arrival
here, who brings you fresh Supplys


Would he were landed, we hear he is a Noble Gentleman.


He has all the Qualities of a Gallant Man, besides he is Nobly Born.


This Country wants nothing but to be People'd with a wellborn Race to make it
one of the best Collonies in the World, but for want of a Governor we are
Ruled by a Council, some of which have been perhaps transported Criminals, who
having Acquired great Estates are now become your Honor, and Right
Worshipful, and Possess all Places of Authority; there are amongst 'em some
honest Gentlemen who now begin to take upon 'em, and Manage Affairs as they
ought to be


Bacon I think was one of the Council.


Now you have named a Man indeed above the Common Rank, by Nature Generous;
Brave Resolved, and Daring; who studying the Lives of the Romans and great Men,
that have raised themselves to the most Elevated fortunes, fancies it easy for
Ambitious men, to aim at any Pitch of Glory, I Have heard him often say, Why
cannot I Conquer the Universe as well as Alexander? or like another Romulus
form a new Rome, and make my self Adored


Why might he not? great Souls are born in common men, sometimes as well as
Princes


This Thirst of Glory cherisht by Sullen Melancholy, I believe was the first
Motive that made him in Love with the young Indian-Queen, fancying no Hero
ought to be without his Princess. And this was the Reason why he so earnestly
pressed for a Commission, to be made General against the Indians, which long was
promised him, but they fearing his Ambition, still put him off, till the
Grievances grew so high, that the whole Country flockt to him, and begged he
would redress them, -- he took the opportunity, and Led them forth to fight,
and vanquishing brought the Enemy to fair terms, but now instead of receiving
him as a Conqueror, we treat him as a Traitor


Then it seems all the Crime this brave Fellow has committed, is serving his
Country without Authority


It Is so, and however I admire the Man, I am resolved to be of the Contrary
Party, that I may make an Interest in our new Governor; Thus stands-affairs,
so that after you have seen Madam Sure-Love, I Will present you to the Council
for a Commission


But my Kinsmans Character --


He was a Lester-shire younger Brother, came over hither with a small fortune,
which his Industry has increased to a thousand pound a year, and he is now
Coll. John Sure-love, and one of the Council


Enough.


About it then, Madam Flirt to direct you.


You are full of your Madams here.


Oh! it is the greatest affront imaginable, to all a woman Mistress, though but a
retale Brandy-munger. -- Adieu^ -- one thing more, tomorrow is our
Country-Court, pray do not fa^l to be there, for the rarity of the
Entertainment: but I shall see you anon at Sure-lo^ where I Will Salute thee as
my first meeting, and as an old acquaintance in England -- here is company,
farewell


Here Nell -- Well Lieutenant Boozer, what are you for?


I am for Cooling Nants, Major:


Here Nell, a quart of Nants, and some Pipes and smoke.


And do ye hear Nell, bid your Mistress come in to Joke a little with (...),
for adzoors I was damnable drunk last night, and am better at the petticoat
than the bottle to day


Drunk last night, and sick to day, how comes that about Mr. Justice? you use
to bear your Brandy well enough


Ay your shier-Brandy I Will grant you, but I was Drunk at Coll. Downrights with
your high Burgundy Claret


A Pox of that Paulter Liquor, your English French wine, I wonder how the
Gentlemen do to drink it


Ay so do I, it is for want of a little Virginia Breeding: how much more like a
Gentleman it is, to drink as we do, brave Edifying Punch and Brandy, -- but they
say the young Noblemen now and Sparks in England begin to reform, and take it
for their mornings Draught, get Drunk by noon, and despise the Lowsey Juce of
the Grape


Come Landlady, come, you are so taken up with Parson Dunce, that your old
friends cannot Drink a Dram with you, -- what no smutty Catch now, no Gibe or
Joke to make the Punch go down Merrily, and advance Trading? Nay, they say, Gad
forgive ye, you never miss going to Church when Mr. Dunce Preaches -- but
here is to you


Lords, your Honors are pleased to be merry -- but my service to your Honor.


Honors, who the Devil have we here? some of the wise Council at least, I Would
sooner took 'em for Hoggerds


Say what you please of the Doctor, but I Will swear he is a fine Gentleman, he
makes the Prettiest Sounets, nay, and Sings 'em himself to the rarest Tunes


Nay the man will serve for both Soul and Body, for they say he was a Farrier
in England, but breaking turned Lifeguard man, and his Horse dying -- he
Counterfeited a Deputation from the Bishop, and came over here a Substantial
Orthodox: but come, where stands the Cup? -- here, my Service to you Major


Your Honors are pleased -- but methinks Doctor Dunce is a very Edifying
Person, and a Gentleman, and I pretend to know a Gentleman, -- For I my self am
a Gentlewoman; my Father was a Barronet, but undone in the late Rebellion --
and I am fain to keep on Ordinary now, Heaven help me


Good lack, why see how Virtue may be belied -- we heard your Father was a
Tailor, but trusting for old Olivers Funeral, Broke, and so came hither to
hide his head, -- but my Service to you; what, you are never the worse


Your Honors knows this is a Scandalous place, for they say your Honor was
but a broken Excise-ma^, who spent the Kings money to buy your Wife ^ne
Petticoats, and at last ^ot worth a Groat, you came over a poor Servant, though
now a Justice of Peace, and of the Honorable Council


Adz zoors if I knew who 'twas said so, I Would sue him for Scandalum Magnatum.


Hang 'em Scoundrells, hang 'em, they live upon Scandal, and we are
Scandall-Proof, -- They say too, that I was a Tinker and running the Country,
robbed a Gentleman's House there, was put into Newgate, got a reprieve after
Condemnation, and was Transported hither -- And that you Boozer was a Common
Pick-pocket, and being often flogg'd at the Carts-tale, afterward turned
Evidence, and when the times grew Honest was fain to fly


Ay, Ay, Major, if Scandal would have broke our hearts, we had not arrived to
the Honor of being Pri^y-Councellors -- but come Mrs. Flirt, what never a Song
to Entertain us


Yes, and a Singer too newly come ashore:


Adz zoors, let us have it then:


Here Maid, a Tankard of your Drink;


Quickly Nell, wait upon the Gentleman;


Please you Sir to taste of our Liquor -- My service to you (...) see you are a
Stranger and alone, please you to come to our Table


Come Sir, pray sit down here, these are very Honorable Persons I assure you,
-- This is Major Dullman, Major of his Excellencies own Regiment, when he
Arrives, this Mr. Timorous, Justice a Peace in (...) T^s Capt. (...), all of
the Honorable Council


With your leave, Gentlemen;


My service to you Sir;
What have you brought over any Cargo Sir, I Will be your Customer.

Ay, and cheat him too, I Will warrant him.


I was not bred to Merchandising Sir, nor do intend to follow the Drudgery of
Trading


Men of Fortune seldom travel hither Sir to see fashions.


Why Brother, it may be the Gentleman has a mind to be a Planter, will you hire
your self to make a Crop of Tobacco this year


I was not born to work Sir.


Not work Sir, zoors your betters have workt Sir, I have work^ my self Sir*
both set and stripped Tobacco, for all I am of the Honorable Council not work
quoth a -- I suppose Sir you wear your fortune upon your Pack Sir


Is ityour Custom here Sir to affront Strangers? I shall expect satisfaction.


Why does any body here owe you any thing?


No, unless he means to be paid for drinking with us -- ha, ha, ha.


No Sir, I have money to pay for what I drink: here is my Club -- my Guinia,

I scorn to be obliged to such Scoundrells;


Hum -- Call Men of Honor Scoundrells;


Let him alone, let him alone Brother, how should he learn manners, he never
was in Virginia before


He Is some Covent Garden Bully;


Or some broken Citizen turned Factor,


Sir you lie, and you're a Rascal,


Adz zoors he has spilled all the Brandy.


I understand no Cudgel Play, but wear a sword to right my self.


Good heavens, what quarelling in my House?


Do the Persons of Quallity in this Country treat strangers thus?


Alas Sir, it is a familiar way they have, Sir.


I Am glad I known it, -- Pray Madam can you inform one how I may be furnished
with a Horse and a guide to Madam Sure Loves


A most Accomplished Lady, and my very good friend you shall be Immediately --


Come Mr. Dunce, though you are no Counselor, yet your Council may be good in
time of necessity, as now


If I may be worthy advice, I do not look upon our danger to be so great from
the Indians, as from young Bacon, whom the People have nick named Fright-all


Ay, Ay that same Bacon, I would he were well hanged, I am afraid that under
pretense of killing all the Indians he means to Murder us, Ly with our Wives,
and hang up our little Children, and make himself Lord and King


Brother Whimsey, not so hot, with leave of the Honorable Board, My Wife is of
Opinion, that Bacon came seasonably to our Aid, and what he has done was for
our defense, the Indians came down upon us, and Ravished us all, Men, Women, and
Children


If these Grievances were not redres^ we had our reasons for it, it was not
that we were insensible Capt. Whiff of what we suffered from the Insolence of
the Indians: But all knew what we must expect from Bacon if that by Lawful
Authority he had Arrived to so great a Command as General, nor would we be
huft out of our Commissions


It Is most certain that Bacon did not demand a Commission out of a design of
serving us, but to satisfy his Ambition and his Love, it being no secret that
he passionately Admires the Indian Queen, and under the pretext of a War,
intends to kill the King her Husband, Establish himself in her heart, and on
all occasions have himself a more formidable Enemy, than the Indians are


Nay, nay, I ever foresaw he would prove a Villain.


Nay, and he be thereabout, my Nancy shall have no more to do with him.


But Gentlemen the People daily flock to him, so that his Army is too
Considerable for us to oppose by any thing but Policy


We are sensible Gentlemen that our Fortunes, our Honors, and our Lives are at
Stake, and therefore you are called together to consult what is to be done in
this Grand Affair, till our Governout and Forces arrive from England; The Truce
he made with the Indians will be out to Morrow


Ay, and then he intends to have another bout with the Indians. Let Us have
Patience I say till he has thrum'd their Jackets, and then to work with your
Politics as soon as you please


Colonel Wellman has answered that point good Captain Whiff, it is the Event of
this Battle we ought to dread, and if won or lost will be equally fatal for
us, either from the Indians or from Bacon


With the Permission of the Honorable Board I think I have hit upon an
Expedient that may prevent this Battle, your Honors shall write a Letter to
Bacon, where you shall acknowledge his Services, invite him kindly home, and
offer him a Commission for General --


Just my Nancys Counsel -- Doctor Dunce has spoken like a Cherubin, he shall
have my voice for General, what say you Brother Whimsey


I say, he is a Noble fellow, and fit for a General.


But conceive me right Gentlemen, as soon as he shall have rendered himself,
seize him and strike off his Head at the Fort


Hum! his head -- Brother


Ay, ay, Doctor Dunce speaks like a Cherubin:


Mr Dunce, your Counsel in extremity I confess is not amiss, but I should be
loath to deal dishonourably with any man


His Crimes deserve death, his life is forfeited by Law, but shall never be
taken by my consent by Treachery: If by any Stratagem we could take him a-live,
and either send him for England to receive there his Punishment, or keep him
Prisoner here till the Governor arrive, I should agree to it, but I question
his coming in upon our Invitation


Leave that to me*


Come, I Will warrant him, the Rogue's as stont as Hector, he fears neither
Heaven nor Hell


He Is too Brave and Bold to refuse our summons, and I am for sending him for
England and leaving him to the Kings Mercy


In that you will find more difficulty Sir, to take him off here will be more
quick and sudden: for the people worship him


I Will never yield to so ungenerous an expedient. The seizing him I am content
in the Extremity wherein we are, to follow. What say you Collonell Downright?
shall we send him a Letter now while this two days truce lasts, between him and
the Indians


I approve i^.


And I, and I, and I.


If your Honors please to make me the Messenger, I Will use some arguments of my
own to prevail with him


You say well Mr. Dunce, and we will dispatch you presently.


Ah Doctor, if you could but have persuaded Collonell Wellman and Colonel
Downright to have hanged him --


Why Brother Whiff you were for making him a General but now.


The Councills of wise Statesmen Brother Whimsey must change as causes do,
do you see


Your Honors are in the right, and whatever those two leading Counselors say,
they would be glad if Bacon were dispatched, but the punctillio of Honor is
such a thing


Honor, a Pox on it, what is that Honor that keeps such a Bustle in the world,
yet never did good as I heard of


Why it is a Foolish word only, taken up by great men, but rarely practiced, --
but if you would be great men indeed --


If we would Doctor, name, name the way.


Why, you command each of you a company -- when Bacon comes from the Camp, as I
am sure he will, (and full of this silly thing called Honor will come
unguarded too,) lay some of your men in Ambush along those Ditches by the
Sevana about a Mile from the Town, and as he comes by, seize him, and hang him
upon the next Tree


Hum -- hang him! a rare Plot.


Hang him -- we will do it, we will do it Sir, and I doubt not but to be made General
for the Action -- I Will take it all upon my self


If you resolve upon this, you must about it instantly -- Thus I shall at once
serve my Country, and revenge my self on the Rascal for affronting my Dignity
once at the Councell-Table, by calling me Farrie


Do you know Brother what we are to do?


To do, yes, to hang a General, Brother, that is all.


All, but is it Lawful to hang any General?


Lawful, yes, that ^is Lawful to hang any G^nerall that sights against Law.


But in what he has done, he has sorv'd the King and our Country, and preserved
all our Lives and Fortunes


That Is all one, Brother, if there be but a Quirk in the Law offended in this
Case, though he fought like Alexander, and preserved the whole world from
perdition, yet if he did it against Law, it is Lawful to hang him; why what
Brother, is it fit that every impudent fellow that pretends to a little Honor,
Loyalty and Courage, should serve his King and Country against the Law? no, no,
Brother, these things are not to b^ suffered in a Civil Government by Law
Established, -- wherefore let us about it --


Here Jesiry, ye D^unken Dog, set your Coach and Horses up, 'le not go till the
Cool of the Evening, I love to ride in Fresc


Yes after hard drinking --


how now Boy, is Madam Surelove at home?


Yes Madam.


Go tell her I am here, Sirrah.


Who are you pray, forsooth?


Why you Son of Baboone don't you know me?


No Madam, I came over but in the last Ship.


What from Newgate or Bridewell? from shovi^g the Fu^ler, Sirrah, Lifting or
^ing the Cly


I don't understand this Country-Language for sooth, yet.


You Rogue, it is what we transport from England ^ost -- go ye D^g, go tell your
Lady, the Widow Ranter is come to dine with her -- I hope I shall not find that
Rogue Dareing here. S^ling after Mrs. Chrisame: if I (...), by the Lord, 'e Lay
him thick, Pox on him why should I love the Dog, unless it be a Judgment upon
me

-- My dear I w^ll how do do? -- as for you Gentlewoman you are my Rival,
and I am in rancouragai^st you till you have renounced my Dareing


All the Interest I have in him Madam, I resign to you.


Ay -- ^ut your house lying so near the Camp, gives me Mortal sears -- but
^thee how thrives thy Amor with honest Friendly


As well as a^ Amor can, that is absolutely forbid by a Father on one side,
and pursued by a good resolution on the other


Hay Gad, I Will warrant for Friendlys resolution, what, though his Fortune be not
answerable to yours, we are bound to help one another* -- here Boy -- some
Pipes and a Bowl of Punch, you know my humor Madam, I must Smoke and Drink in
a Morning, or I am Mauki^h all day


But will you drink Punch in a Morning*


Punch, it is my Mornings draught, my Table-drink, my Treat, my Regalio, my
every thing, ah my dear Surelove, if thou would but refresh and Cheer thy
heart with Punch in a morning, thou would not look thus Clowdy all the Day


I have reason Madam to be Melancholy, I have received a Letter from my
Husband, who gives the an account that he is worse in England than when he was
here, so that I fear I shall see him no more, the Doctors can do no good on him


A yery good hearing. I wonder what the Devil thou have done with him so long?
an old fusty weather-beaten Skelleton, as dried as Stock Fish, and much of the
Hue. -- come, come, here is to the next, may he be young, Heaven, I beseech thee


You have reason to praise an old man, who died and left you worth fifty
thousand Pound


Ay Gad -- and what is better Sweetheart, died in good time too, and left me
young enough to spend this fifty thousand pound in better Company -- rest his
Soul for that too


I doubt 'twill be all laid out in Bacons Mad Lieutenant General Darling.


Faith I think I could lend it the Rogue on good Security.


What Is that, to be bound Body for Body?


Rather that he should love no bodies Body besides my own, but my Fortune is
too good to trust the Rogue, my money makes me an Infidel


You think they all love you for that:


For that, Ay what else? if it were not for that, I might sit still and sigh,
and cry out, a Miracle! a Miracle! at sight of a Man within my doors


Madam here is a young Gentleman without would speak with you.


With me, sure you are mistaken, is it not Friendly?


No Madam it is a Stranger;


It Is not Dareing that Rogue, is it?


No Madam.


Is he handsome? does he look like a Gentleman?


He Is handsome and seems a Gentleman.


Bring him in then, I hate a conversation without a Fellow, -- hah -- a good
handsome Lad indeed


With me Sir would you speak?


If you are Madam Surelove:


So I am called;


Madam I am newly arrived from England, and from your Husband my kinsman bring
you this --


Please you to sit Sir;


She Is extremely handsome --


Come Sir will you Smoke a Pipe?


I never do Madam --


Oh fie upon it you must learn then, we all smoke here, it is a part of good
breeding, -- well, well, what Cargo, what goods have ye? any Points, Lace, rich
Stuffs, Jewels; if you have I Will be your Chafferer, I live hard by, any body
will direct you to the widow Ranters


I have already heard of you, Madam.


What you are like all the young Fellows, the first thing they do when they
come to a strange place, is to enquire what Fortunes there are


Madam I had no such Ambition:


Gad, then you're a fool, Sir, but come, my service to you; we rich Widows are
the best Commodity this Country affords, I Will tell you that


Sir, my Husband has recommended you here in a most particular manner, by which
I do not only find the esteem he has for you, but the desire he has of gaining
you mine, which on a double score I render you, first for his sake, next for
those Merits that appear in your self


Madam, the endeavors of my life shall be to express my Gratitude for this
great Bounty


Madam Mr. Friendly's here:


Bring him in;


Friendly, -- I had a dear Friend of that name, who I hear is in these Parts --
Pray Heaven it may be he


How now Charles.


Madam your Servant -- Hah! should not I know you for my dear friend Hazard.


Or you'rs too blame my Friendly:


Prithee what calm brought thee ashore?


Fortune de la gar^, but prithee ask me no questions in so good Company; where
a minute lost from this Conversation is a misfortune not to be retrieved


Do like her Rogue --


Like her! have I sight, or sense -- Why I adore her.


My Chrisante, I heard your Father would not be here to day, which made me
snatch this opportunity of seeing you


Come, Come, a Pox of this whining Love. It spoils good company:


You know my dear friend, these opportunities comes but serd^m, and therefore I
must make (...) of '^m


Come, come, I Will give you a better opportunity at my House to morrow, we are
to eat a Buffilo there, and I Will secure the old Gentleman from coming


Then I shall see Chrisanto once more before I go:


Go -- Heavens -- whether my Friendly?


I have received a Commission to go against the Indians, Bacon being sent for
home


But will he come when sent for?


If he refuse we are to Endeavor to force him.


I do not think he will be sorc'd, not even by Friendly.


And faith it goes against my Conscience to lift my Sword against him, for he
is truly brave, and what he has done, a Service to the Country, had it but been
by Authority


What pity it is there should be such false Maxims in the World, that Noble
Actions how ever great, must be Criminal for want of a Law to Authorize 'em


Indeed it is pity that when Laws are faulty they should not be mended or
abolish^


Hark'ye Charles, by Heaven if you kill my Dareing I Will Pistol you


No, widow I Will spare him for your sake,


Oh she is all Divine, and all the Breath she utters serves but to blow my
Flame


Madam dinner's on the Table -- --


Please you Sir, to walk in -- come Mr. Friendly.


Prithee good wench bring in the Punch-Bowle:


I Am sorry Sir, we meet upon these terms, we who so often have embraced as
friends


How charming is the Queen?


For your part, Sir, you have been so Noble, that I repent the fatal difference
that makes us meet in Arms. Yet though I Am young I Am sensible of Injuries; And
often have heard my Grandsire say -- That we were Monarchs once of all this
spacious World; Till you an unknown People landing here, Distressed and ruined
by destructive storms, Abusing all our Charitable Hospitality, Usurped our
Right, and made your friends your slaves


I will not justify the Ingratitude of my forefathers, but finding here my
Inheritance, I am resolved still to maintain it so, And by my sword which first
cut out my Portion, Defend each inch of Land with my last drop of Blood


Even his threats have charms that please the heart:


Come Sir, let this ungrateful Theme alone, which is better disputed in the
Field


Is it impossible there might be wrought an understanding betwixt my Lord and
you? 'Twas to that end I first desired this truce, My self proposing to be
Mediator, To which my Lord Cavarnio shall agree, Could you but Condescend -- -I
know you're Noble: And I have heard you say our tender Sex could never plead in
vain


Alas! I dare not trust your pleading Madam? A few soft words from such a
Charming mouth would make me lay the Conqueror at your feet as a Sacrifice for
all the ills he has done you


How strangely am I pleased to hear him talk


Se^ernia see -- the Dancers do appear;

Sir will you take your seat?


Curse on his sports that interrupted me, My very soul was hovering at my Lip,
ready to have discovered all its secrets. But oh! I dread to tell her of my
pain, And when I would, an Awful trembling seizes me, And she can only (...)
my dying eyes, read all the Sentiments of my Captive heart


The more I gaze upon this English Stranger, the more Confusion struggles in my
Soul, Often I have heard of Love, and often this Gallant Man (When Peace had made
him pay his idle Visits) (...) told a thousand tales of dying Maids. And ever
when he spoke, my panting heart, with a Prophetic fear in sighs replied, I
shall fall such a Victim to his Eyes


Sir here is a Messenger from the English Council

Desires admittance to the General.


With your Permission Sir, he may advance.


All health and Happyness attend your honor, This from the Honorable Council:


I Will leave you till you have dispatched the M^ger, and then expect your
precense in the Royal Tent


(...), read the Letter


SIR, the necessity of what you (...) (...) makes it pardona^, and we could
wish we had done the Country, and our selves so much Justice (...) to have
given you that Commission you desired -- We now find it reason^ble (...) raise
(...) forces, to appose these Insolences, which possible yours may be (...)
weak to accomplish, to which end the Council is ordered to meet this Evening,
and destring you will come and take your place there, and be pleased to accept
from us a Commission to Command in Chief in this War -- Therefore send those
Soldiers under your Command to their respective houses, and have, Sir, to your
affectionate Friends --


Sir, I fear the hearts and Pen did not agree when this was writ


A plague upon their shallow Politics! Do they think to play the old game
twice with us


Away, you wrong the Council, who of themselves are Honorable Gentlemen, but
the base Coward fear of some of them, puts the rest on tricks that suit not
with their nature


Sir, it is For noble ends you're sent for, and for your safety I Will engage my
life


By Heaven and so you shall -- and pay it too with all the rest of your
wise-headed Council


Your zeal is too Officious now: I see no Treachery, and can fear no danger.


Treachery! now Heavens forbid, are we not Christians Sir, All Friends and
Countrymen! believe me Sir, it is Honor calls you to increase your fame, and he
who would dissuade you is your Enemy


Go Cant, Sir to the Rabble -- for us -- we know you.


You wrong me when you but suspect for me, let him that acts dishonourably
fear. My Innocence, and my good sword's my guard


If you resolve to go, we will attend you.


What go like an Invader? No Daring, the Invitation's friendly, and as a
friend, attended only by my menial Servants, I Will wait upon the Council, that
they may see that when I could Command it I came an humble Suppliant for their
favor -- You may return, and tell 'em I Will attend


I kiss your Honor's hand* --


'Sdeath will you trust the saithless Council Sir, who have so long h^ld you in
hand with promises, That curse of Statesmen, that unlucky vice that renders
even Nobility despised


Perhaps the Council thought me too aspiring, and would not add Wings to my
Ambitious flight


A pox of their considering caps, and now they find that you can ^ar alone,
they send for you to knip your spreading wings

Now by my soul you shall not go alone.


Forbear, lest I suspect you for a mutineer; I am resolved to go.


What, and send your Army home? a pretty fetch:


By Heaven we will not disband -- not till we see how fairly you are dealt with:
if you have a Commission to be General, here we are ready to receive new
orders: If no -- We Will ring 'em such a Thundering Peal shall beat the Town about
their Treacherous Ears


I do Command you not to stir a man, Till you're informed how I am treated by
'em: -- leave me all --


Now while my Lord's asleep in his Pavi^ion I Will try my power with the General,
for an Accommodation of a Peace: the very dreams of war fright my soft slumbers
that used to be employed in kinder Business


Ha! -- The Queen -- What happyness is this presents it self which all my
Industry could never gain


Sir --


Pressed with the great Extremes of Joy and Fear I trembling stand, unable to
approach her


I hope you will not think it fear in me, though timorous as a Dove, by nature
framed: Nor that my Lord, whose youth's unskilled in War can either doubt his
Courage, or his forces, t^ makes me seek a Reconcilation on any honorable
terms of Peace


Ah Madam! if you knew how absolutely you command my Fate I fear but little
honor wonld be left me, since what so e're you ask me I should grant


Indeed I would not ask your Honor, Sir, That renders you too Brave in my
esteem. Nor can I think that you would part with that. No not to save your Life


I would do more to serve your least Commands than part with trivial Life.


Bless me! Sir, how came I by such a Power?


The Gods, and Nature gave it you in your Creation, formed with all the Charms
that ever graced your Sex


Is It possible? am I so Beautiful?


As Heaven, or Angels there:


Supposing this, how can my Beauty make you so obliging?


Beauty has still a power over great Souls, And from the moment I beheld your
eyes, my stubborn heart melted to compliance, and from a nature rough and
turbulent, grew Soft and Gentle as the God of Love


The God of Love! what is the God of Love?


It Is a resistless Fire, that is kinddl'd thus --


Alas, for me if this should be Love!


It makes us tremble, when we touch the fair one, And all the blood runs
shivering through the veins, The heart's surrounded with a feeble Languishment,
The eyes are dying, and the Cheeks are pale, The tongue is faltring, and the
body sainting


Then I Am undone, and all I feel is Love,

If Love be Catching Sir, by looks and touches, Let us at distance parley -- or
rather let me fly, For within veiw, is too near --


Ah! she retires -- displeased I fear with my presumptious Love, -- Oh pardon,
fairest creature


I Will talk no more, our words exchange our Souls, and every look ^ades all my
blooming honor, like Sun beams, on unguarded Roses -- take all our Kingdoms --
make our People Slaves, and let me fall beneath your Conquering Sword. But
never let me hear you talk again or gaze upon your Eyes --


She Loves! by Heaven she Loves! And has not art enough to hide her Flame. though
she have Cruel honor to suppress it. However I Will pursue her to the Banquet


This Madam Ranter is so prodigious a Treater -- oh! I hate a room that smells
of a great Dinner, and what is worse a desert of Punch and Tobacco -- what! are
you taking leave so soon Cousin


Yes Madam, but it is not fit I should let you know with what regret I go, --
but business will be obeyed


Some Letters to dispatch to English Ladies you have left behind -- come Cousin
Confess


I own I much admire the English Beauties, but never yet have put their Fetters
on --


Never in Love -- oh then you have pleasure to Come.


Rather a Pain when there is no hope atrends it,


Oh such diseases quickly cure themselves,


I do not wish to find it so; For even in Pain I find a pleasure too.


You are infected then, and came abroad for cure.


Rather to receive my wounds Madam;


Already Sir. -- who e're sne be, she made good have to Conquer, we have few
here, boast that Dexterity


What think you of Chrisante, Madam?


I must confess your Love and your Despair are there plac^d right, of which I
am not fond of being made a Consident, since I Am assured she can Love none but
Friendly


Let her Love on, as long as life shall last, let Friendly take her, and the
Universe, so I had my next wish, --

Madam it is your self that I adore, -- I should not be so vain to tell you
this, bu^ that I know you have found the secret out already from my sighs


Forbear Sir, and know me for your kinsmans wife, and no more:


Be Scornful as you please, rail at my passion, and refuse to hear it; yet
I Will Love on, and hope in spite of you, my Flame shall be so constant and
Submissive, it shall compel your heart to some return


You're very Confident of your power I perceive, but if you chance to find
your self mistaken, say your opinion and your affectation were misapplied, and
not that I was Cruel


Whatever denyalls dwell upon your Tongue, your eyes assure me that your heart
is tender


This is like the Noble Widow all over In Faith,


Ay, Ay, the widows Health in a full Ladle, Major, -- but a Pox on it what made
that young Fellow here, that affronted us yesterday Major


Some damned Sharper that would lay his Knife aboard your Widow Cornet.


Zoors if I thought so, I Would Arrest him for Salt and Battery, Lay him in Prison
for a Swinging fine and take no Bail


Nay, had it not been before my Mrs here, Mrs Chrisante, I had swing'd him for
his yesterdays affront, -- ah my sweet Mistress Chrisante -- if you did but know
what a power you have over me --


Oh you're a great Courtier Major:


Would I were any thing for your sake Madam.


Thou art any thing, but what thou should be, prithee Major leave off being
an old Buffoon, that is a Lover turned to ridicule by Age, consider thy self a
Mere rouling Tun of Nants, -- a walking Chimney, ever Smoking with Nasty
Mundungus, -- and then thou have a Countenance like an old worm-eaten Cheese


Well widow, you will Joake, ha, ha, ha --


Gad', Zoors She Is pure Company, ha, ha --


No matter for my Countenance -- Coll. Downright likes my Estate and is
resolved to have it a Match


Dear Widow, take off your Damned Major, for if he speak another word to
Chrisante, I shall be put past all my patience, and fall foul upon him


S'life not for the world -- Major I bar Love-making within my Territories,
it is inconsistent with the Punch-Bowle, if you will drink, do, if not be gone


Nay Gad's Zooks if you enter me at the Punch-Boule, you enter me in Politics
-- well it is the best Drink in Christendom for a Statesman


Come, now you shall see what my high Land-Vallet can do --


So -- I see let the world go which way it will, widow, you are resolved for
Mirth, -- but come -- to the conversation of the times


The times, why what a Devil ailes the times, I see nothing in the times but a
company of Coxcombs that fear without a Cause


But if these fears were laid and Bacon were hanged, I look upon Virginia to be
the happiest part of the world, gads Zoors, -- why there is England -- it is
nothing to it -- I was in England about 6. years ago, and was showed the Court
of Aldermen, some were nodding, some saying nothing, and others very little to
purpose, but how could it be otherwise, for they had neither Bowl of Punch,
Bottles of wine or Tobacco before 'em to put Life and Soul into 'em as we have
here: then for the young Gentlemen -- Their farthest Travels is to France or
Italy, they never come hither


The more's the Pity by my troth,


Where they learn to Swear Mor-blew, Mor-Dee:


And tell you how much bigger the Louvre is then White Hall; buy a suit
A-la-mode, get a swinging Cap of some French Marquis, spend all their money and
return just as they went


For the old fellows, their business is Usury, Extortion, and undermining young
Heirs


Then for young Merchants, their Exchange the is Tavern, their Warehouse the
Playhouse, and their Bills of Exchange Billet-Deaxs, where to sup with their
wenches at the other end of the Town, -- now Judge you what a Condition poor
England is in: for my part I look upon it as a lost Nation gads zoors


I have considered it, and have found a way to save all yet:


As how I pray,


As thus, we have men here of great Experience and Ability -- now I would have
as many sent into England as would supply all places, and Offices, both Civil
and Military, de see, their young Gentry should all Travel hither for
breeding, and to learn the mysteries of State


As for the old Covetous Fellows, I would have the Tradesmen get in their
debts, break and turn Troupers


And they would be soon weary of Extortion gadz zoors;


Then for the young Merchants, there should be a Law made, none should go
beyond Ludgate


You have sound out the only way to preserve that great Kingdom,


Well, Gad zoors it is a fine thing to be a good Statesman,


Ay Cornet, which you had never been had you staid in old England.


Why Sir we were somebody in England,


So I heard Major,


You heard Sir, what have you heard, he is a kid-Naper that says he heard any
thing of me -- and so my service to you -- I Will sue you Sir for spoiling my
Marriage here, by your Scandalls with Mrs. Chrisante, but that shall not do Sir,
I Will marry her for all that, and he is a Rascal that denies it


God's Death you Lie Sir -- I do.


Gad zoors Sir Lie to a Privy-Councellour, a Major of Horse, Brother, this is
an affront to our Dignities, draw and I Will side with you


If I disdain to draw, it is not that I fear your base and Cowardly force, but
for the respect I bear you as Magistrates, and so I leave you --


An Arrant Coward Gad zoors.


A mere paultroon, and I scorn to drink in's Company.


Stand -- stand -- and hear the word of Command -- do ye see you Cops, and that
Ditch that runs along Major Dullmans Plantation


We do.


Place your Men there, and lie Flat on your Bellies, and when Bacon comes (if
alone) seize him dy' see


Observe the Command now, (if alone) for we are not for bloud-^ned.


I Will warrant you for our Parts.


Now we have Ambusht our men, let us light our Pipes and sit down and take an
Encouraging dram of the Bottle


Thou art a Knave and have Emptyed half the Bottle in thy Leathern Pockets, but
come here is young Fright-all's health


What, wilt drink a man's health you are going to hang?


It Is all one for that, we will drink his health first, and hang him afterward,
and thou shall pledge me de see, and though 'twere under the Gallows


You Are a Traitor for saying so, and I defy thee.


Nay, since we are come out like Loving Brothers to hang the General, let us
not fall out among our selves, and so here is to you


Prithee Brother Whiff, do not be so Villainous a Coward, for I hate a Coward.


Nay it is not that -- But my Whiff, my Nancy dreamt to night she saw me hanged.


'Twas a Cowardly Dream, think no more on it, but as dreams are Expounded by
Contraries, thou shall hang the General


Ay -- but he was my friend, and I owe him at this time a hundred Pounds of
Tobacco


Nay, then I m sure thoud'st hang him if he were thy brother.


But hark -- I think I hear the Neighing of horses, where shall we hide our
selves, for if we stay here, we shall be Mawl'd damnably


Let the Groom lead the Horses over the Sevana we will walk it on Foot, it is not
a quarter of a Mile to the Town; and here the Air is cool


The Breazes about this time of the day begin to take Wing and fan refreshment
to the Trees and Flowers


And at these hours how fragrant are the Groves:


The Country's well, were but the People so,


But come let us on --


There Boys --


Hah! Ambush --


So, so, he is taken

Now we may venture out.


But are you sure he is taken?


Sure cannot you believe your Eyes, come forth, I hate a Coward -- Oh Sir, have
we caught your Mightiness


Are you the Authors of this Valliant Act? None but such Villainous Cowards
dare have attempted it


Stop his railing tongue.


No, no, let him rail, let him rail now his hands are tied, ha, ha, Why good
General Fright-all, what was no body able do you think to tame the Roaring Lion


You Will be hanged for this?


Come, come, away with him to the next Tree.


What mean you Villains?


Only to hang your Honor a little, that is all. We Will teach you Sir, to serve
your Country against Law


Hah -- My General betrayed -- this I suspected.


Did not the General tell you Rogues, you would be all hanged?


Oh Nancy, Nancy, how Prophetic are thy Dreams?


Come let us on --


God's Death what mean you Sir?


As I designed -- to present my self to the Council:


By Heavens we will follow then to save you from their Treachery 'twas this that
has befallen you that I feared, which made me at a distance follow you


Follow me still, but still at such a distance as your Aids may be assisting on
all occasion -- Fearless go back and bring your Regiment down, and Daring let
your Sergeant with his Party Guard these Villains to the Council


A Pox on your Worships Plot;


A Pox on your forwardness to come out of the hedge.


You heard Mr. Dunce's opinion Gentlemen, concerning Bacon's coming upon our
Invitation. He believes he will come, but I rather think, though he be himself
undaunted, yet the persuasions of his two Lieutenant-Generalls, Daring and
Fearless may prevent him, -- Colonel, have you ordered our Men to be in Arms


I have, and they will attend further order on the Sevana:


May it please your Honors, Bacon is on his way, he comes unattended by any
but his Footmen, and Coll. Fearless


Who is this Fellow?


A spy I sent to watch Bacon's Motions.


But there is a Company of Soldiers in Ambush on this side of the Sevana to
seize him as he passes by


That Is by no order of the Council.


No, no, no order;


Nay, 'twere a good design if true,


Gad zoors would I had thought on it for my Troup,


I am for no unfair dealing in any Extremity.


An't please your Honors, the saddest news -- An Ambush being laid for Bacon,
they rusht out upon him, on the Sevana, and after some fighting took him and
Fearless --


Is this your sad News -- zoors would I had had a hand in it.


When on a sudden, Daring and his Party fell in upon us, turned the tide --
killed our men and took Capt. Whimsey, and Capt. Whiff Prisoners, the rest run
away, but Bacon fought like a fury


A bloody Fellow;


Whim. and Whiff? they deserve death for Acting without order


I Am of the Colonels opinion, they deserve to hang for it.


Why Brother, I thought you had wished the Plot had been yours but now?


Ay, but the Case is altered since that, good Brother,


Now he is Exasperared past all hopes of a Reconciliation.


You must make use of the Statesman's refuge, wise dissimulation.


For all this Sir, he will not believe but that you mean Honorably, and no
persuasions could hinder him from Coming, so he has dismissed all his Soldiers,
and is Entering the Town on foot


What pity it is a brave Man should be Guilty of an ill Action.


But the noise of his danger has so won the hearts of the Mobile, that they
increase his Train as he goes, and follow him in the Town like a Victor


Go wait his coming


I was ever of your mind Colonel.


Ay right or Wrong -- but what is your Counsel now?


Even as it used to be, I leave it to wiser heads.


Bacon Sir is Entering.


Gad zoors would I were safe in Bed,


Colonel keep in your heat and treat Calmly with him,


I rather wish you would all follow me, I Would meet him at the head of all his
noisy Rabble, and seize him from the rout


What Men of Authority dispute with Rake-Hells? it is below us Sir.


To Stake our Lives and Fortunes against their nothing.


What means this Insolence -- What Mr. Bacon do you come in Arms?


I Would need Sir come in Arms, when men that should be Honorable can have so
poor designs to take my life


Thrust out his following Rabble.


We Will not Stir till we have the General safe back again.


Let not your Loves be too Officious -- but retire --


At your Command we vanish --


I hope you will pardon me, if in my own defense I seized on these two Murderers.


You did well Sir, 'twas by no Order they Acted, -- stand forth and here your
Sentence -- in time of war we need no Formal Trials to hang Knaves that Act
without order


Oh Mercy Mercy Collonell -- 'twas Parson Dunce's Plot.


Issue out a warrant to Seize Dunce Immediately -- you shall he carried -- to
the Fort to Pray --


Oh Good your Honor I never Prayed in all my Life,


From thence Drawn upon a Sledg to the Place of ^xecution, -- where you shall
hang till you are dead -- and then be ^ut down and --


Oh hold -- hold -- we shall never be able to endure ^lf this:


I think the offense needs not so great Punishment, their Crime Sir is but
equal to your own, acting without Commission


It Is very well Explained Sir, -- had I been Murdered by Commission then, the
Deed had been approved, and now perhaps, I am beholding to the Rabble for my
Life: --


A fine pretense to hide a Popular fault, but for this once we Pardon them and
you


Pardon, for what? by Heaven I Scorn your Pardon, I Have not offended Honor nor
Religion


You have offended both in taking Arms,


Should I stand by and see my Country ruined, my King dishonored, and his
Subjects Murdered hear the sad Cries of widows and of Orphans, You heard it
Loud, but gave no pitying care to it* And till the war and Massacre was brought
to my own door, my Flocks, and Herds surpised, I bore it all with Patience,
Is it unlawful to defend my self against a Thief that breaks into my doors


And call you this defending of your self?


I call it doing of my self that right, which upon Just demand the Council did
refuse me, If my Ambition as you're pleased to call it, made me demand too
Much, I left my self to you


Perhaps we thought it did,


Sir you affront my Birth, -- I am a Gentleman, And yet my thoughts were humble
-- I would have fought under the meanest of your Parasites --


There Is a Bob for us Brother;


But still you put me off with promises -- And when compelled to stir in my
defense I called none to my aid, and those that came, 'twas their own wrongs
that urged 'em


It Is feared Sir, under this pretense you aim at Government:


I scorn to answer to so base an accusation, the height of my Ambition is, to
be an honest Subject


An honest Rebel, Sir --


You know you wrong me, and it is basely urged -- but this is trifling -- here
are my Commissions


-- To be General of the Forces against the Indians, and Blank Commissions for
his Friends


Tear them in pieces -- are we to be imposed upon? De ye come in Hostile manner
to compel us


Be not to rough Sir, let us argue with him --


I am resolved I will not.


Then we are all Dead Men, Gudzoors! he will not give us time to say our
Prayers


We every day expect fresh Force from England, till then, we of our selves
shall be sufficient to make Defense, against a sturdy Traitor


Traitor, 'Sdeath Traitor -- I defy ye, but that my Honor's yet above my
Anger; I Would make you answer me that Traitor dearly


Hah -- am I threatened -- Guards secure the Rebel.


Is this your Honorable Invitation? Go -- Triumph in your short Lived Victory,
the next turn shall be mine


What means this Insolence!


We Will have our General, and knock that fellows brains out, and hang up Colonel
Wellman


Ay ay, Hang up Wlelman.


Hold, hold Gentleman, I was always for the General.


Let Us Barbicu this Fat Rogue.


Begone, and know your distance to theCouncel.


I Would rather perish by the meanest hand, than owe my safety poorly thus to Bacon


If you persist still in that mind I Will leave you, and Conquering, make you
happy against your will


Oh Villainous Cowards, who will trust his Honor with Sycophants so base? Let
us to Arms -- by Heaven I will not give my Body rest, till I Have Chastised the
boldness of this Rebel


What is the Roystering Hector gone Brother?


Ay, ay, and the Devil go with him.


Was there ever such a Bull of Bash^n? Why what if he should come down upon us
and kill us all for Traitors


I rather think the Council will Hang us all for Cowards -- ah -- oh -- a Drum
-- a Drum -- oh --


This is the misery of being Great,

We Are Sacrificed to every turn of State.


HOw now Major; what, they say Bacon scared you all out of the Council
yesterday: What say the People


Say? they Curse us all, and Drink young Frightall's Health, and swear they will
fight through Fire and Brimstone for him


And to morrow will hallow him to the Gallows, if it were his chance to come
there


It Is very likely: Why I am forced to be guarded to the Court now, the Rabble
swore they would De Wit me, but I shall hamper some of 'em. Would the Governor
were here to bear the brunt on it, for they call us the Evil Counselors

Here Is the young Rogue that drew upon us too, we have Rods in piss for him
in faith


Gadzoors that is he, do your Office.


We arrest you Sir, in the Kings name, at the suit of the Honorable Justice
Timorous


Justice Timorous, who the Devil's he?


I am the man Sir, de see, for want of a better; you shall repent Gud^ zoors
your putting of tricks upon persons of my Rank and Quality


Your Rank and Quality!


Ay Sir, my Rank and Quality; first I am one of the Honorable Council, next a
Justice of Peace in Quorum, Cornet of a Troop of Horse de see, and
Churchwarden


From whence proceeds this Mr. Justice, you said nothing of this at Madam
Ranters Yesterday; you saw him there, then you were good Friends


Ay, however I have carried my Body swimmingly before my Mistress, de see, I
had rancour in my Heart, Gads zoors


Why, this Gentleman's a stranger, and but lately come a shore.


At my first Landing I was in company with this Fellow and two or three of his
cruel Brethren, where I was affronted by them, some words past and I drew --


Ay ay Sir, you shall pay for it, -- why -- what Sir, cannot a Civil Magistrate
affront a Man, but he must be drawn upon presently


Well Sir, the Gentleman shall answer your Suit, and I hope you will take my Bail
for him


It Is enough -- I know you to be a Civil Person.


Brothers it has been often moved at the Bench, that a new Punch Bowl should be
provided, and one of a larger Circumference, when the Bench sits late about
weighty affairs, oftentimes the Bowl is emptyed before we end


A good Motion, Clark set it down.


Mr. Justice Boozer the Council has ordered you a writ of Ease, and dismiss
your Worship from the Bench


Me from the Bench, for what?


The Complaint is Brother Boozer, for Drinking too much Punch in the time of
hearing Trials


And that you can neither write nor read, nor say the Lords Prayer.


That your Warrants are like a Brewers Tally a Notch on a Stick; if a special
Warrant, then a Couple. Gods Zoors, when his Excellency comes he will have no
such Justices


Why Brother, tho I cannot read my self; I have had Dol^ns Country-Justice read
over to me two or three times, and understand the Law; this is your Malice
Brother Whiff, because my Wife does not come to your Warehouse to buy her
Commodities, -- but no matter, to show I have no Malice in my heart, I drink
your Health -- I care not this, I can turn Lawyer and plead at the Board


Mr. Clark, come, to the Trials on the Docket.


The first is between his Worship Justice Whiff, and one Grubb.


Ay, that Grubb's a Common Disturber, Brother your Cause, is a good Cause if
well managed, here is to it


I thank you Brother Dullman, -- read my Petition.


The Petition of Captain Thomas Whiff Shows, whereas Gilbert. Grubb, calls
his Worships Wife Ann Grabb Whore, and said he would prove it; your Petitioner
desires the Worshipful Bench to take it into Consideration, and your Petitioner
shall pray, etc. -- Here Is two witnesses have made Affidavit Vive voce, an't
like your Worships


Call Grubb.


Gilbert Grubb, come into the Court.


Here.


Well, what can you say for your self Mr. Grub.


Why an't like your Worship, my wife invited some Neighbors wives to drink a
Cagg of Syder, now your worships wife Madam Whiff being there fuddl'd, would
have thrust me out of doors, and bid me go to my old Whore Madam Whimscy,
meaning your Worships wife


Hah! My wife called Whore, she is a Jude, and I Will arrest her Husband here --
in an Action of debts


Gads zoures she is no better than she should be I Will warrant her,


Look ye Brother Whimsey, be patient, you know the Humor of my Nancy when
she is drunk, but when she is sober, she is a civil Person, and shall ask your
pardon


Let this be done and I am satisfied. And so here is to you


Go on to the Trial.


I being very angry said indeed, I would prove her a greater Whore than Madam
Whimsey


An't like your Whrships, he confesses the words in open Court.


Why, an't like your Worships, she has had two Bastards I Will prove it.


Sirrah, Sirrah, that was when she was a Maid, not since I married her, my
marrying her made her Honest


Let there be an order of Court to Sue him, for Scandalum Magnatum.


Mr. Clark, let my Cause come next.


The Defendant's ready Sir.


Brothers of the Bench take notice, that this Hector here coming into Mrs.
Flirts Ordinary where I was, with my Brother Dullman and Lieutenant Boozer; we
gave him good Council to fall to Work, now my Gentleman here was affronted at
this Forsooth, and makes no more to do but calls us Scoundrels, and drew his
Sword on us, and had not I defended my self by running away, he had Murdered
me, and Assassinated my two Brothers


What witness have you Brother?


Here Is Mrs. Flirt and her Maid Nell, -- besides we may be witness for one
another I hope; our words may taken


Mrs. Flirt and Nell are Sworn.


By the Oaths that you have taken, speak nothing but the Truth.


An't please your Worships, your Honors came to my House, where you found this
Young Gentleman; and your Honors invited him to Drink with your Honors: Where
after some opprobrious words given him, Justice Dullman, and Justice Boozer
struck him over the head; and after that indeed the Gentleman drew


Mark that Brother he drew.


If I did, it was se defendendo.


Do you hear that Brothers, he did in defiance.


Sir, you ought not to sit Judge and Accuser too.


The Gentleman's in the right Brother, you cannot do it according to Law.


Gads Zoors, what new tricks, new querks?


Gentlemen take notice, he swears in Court.


Gads Zoors what is that to you Sir.


This is the second time of his swearing.


What do you think we are Deaf Sir? Come, come proceed.


I desire he may be bound to his Good behavior, Fined and deliver up his
Sword, what say you Brot her


He Is asleep, drink to him and waken him, -- you have have mist the Cause by
sleeping Brother


Justice may nod, but never sleeps Brother -- you were at -- Deliver his Sword
-- a good Motion, let it be done


No Gentlemen, I wear a Sword to right my self.


That Is fine in faith, Gads Zoors, I have worn a Sword this Duzen year and never
could right my self


Ay, 'twou'd be a fine World if Men should wear Swords to right themselves, he
that is bound to the Peace shall wear no Sword


I say he that is bound to the Peace ought to wear no Peruke, they may change
'em for black or white, and then who can know them


I hope Gentlemen I may be allowed to speak for my self.


Ay, what can you say for your self, did you not draw your Sword Sirrah?


I did.


It Is sufficient he confesses the Fact, and we will hear no more.


You will not hear the Provocation given.


It Is enough Sir, you drew --


Ay, Ay, it is enough he drew -- let him be Fined.


The Gentleman should be heard, he is a Kinsman too, to Colonel John Surelove.


Hum -- Colonel Sureloves Kinsman.


Is he so, nay, then all the reason in the World he should be heard, Brothers.


Come, come Cornet, you shall be Friends with the Gentleman, this was some
Drunken bout I Will warrant you


Ha, ha, ha -- so it was Gads Zoors.


Come drink to the Gentleman, and put it up.


Sir, my Service to you, I am heartily sorry for what is past, but it was in my
Drink


You hear his acknowledgements Sir, and when he is sober he never quarrels,
come Sir sit down, my Service to you


I beg your Excuse Gentlemen -- I have earnest business.


Let us adjourn the Court, and prepare to meet the Regiments on the Sevana.


Is this the best Court of Judicature your Country affords?


To give it its due it is not. But how does thy Armor thrive?


As well as I can wish, in so short a time.


I see she regards thee with kind Eyes, Sighs and Blushes.


Yes, and tells me I am so like a Brother she had -- to Excuse her kind
concern, -- then blush so prettily, that Gad I could not forbear making a
discovery of my Heart


Have a care of that, come upon her by slow degrees, for I know she is Virtuous;
-- but come let us to the Sevana, where I Will present you to the two Colonels,
Wellman and Downright, the Men that manage all till the Carrival of the
Governor


Have you dispatched the Scouts, to watch the Motions of the Enemies? I know
that Bacon's Violent and Haughty, and will resent our vain attempts upon him;
therefore we must be speedy in prevention


What forces have you raised since our last order.


Here Is a list of em, they came but slowly in, till we promised every one a
Bottle of Brandy


We have brought Mr. Dunce here, as your Honor commanded us after strict
search we found him this morning in Bed with Madam Flirt


No matter he will exclaim no less against the vices of the Flesh, the next Sunday.


I hope Sir, you will not credit the Malice of my Enemies.


No more, you are free, and what you counseled about the Ambush was both
prudent and seasonable, and perhaps I now wish it had taken effect


I have brought an English Gentleman to kiss your hands, Sir, and offer you his
service, he is young and brave, and Kinsman to Col. Surelove


Sir, you are welcome and to let you see you are so, we will give you your
Kinsmans command, Captain of a Troop of Horse-Guards, and which I am sure will
be continued to you when the Governor arrives


I shall endeavor to deserve the Honor, Sir.


So Gentlemen, I see you're in a readiness.


Readiness! What means he, I hope we are not to be drawn out to go against the
Enemy, Major


If we are, they shall look a new Major for me.


We were debating, Gentlemen, what course were best to pursue against this
Powerful Rebel


Why, Sir, we have Forces enough, let us charge him instantly, delays are
dangerous


Why, what a damned fiery Fellow's this?


But if we drive him to Extremities, we fear his siding with the Indians.


Colonel Downright has hit it; why should we endanger our Men against a
desperate Termagant? If he love Wounds and Scars so well, let him exercise on
our Enemies -- -- but if he will needs fall upon us, it is then time for us
enough to venture our lives and fortunes


How, we go to Bacon, under favor I think it is his Duty to come to us, an you
go to that Gads Zoores


If he do, 'twill cost you dear, I doubt Cornet. -- I find by our List, Sir, we
are four thousand men


Gads Zoores, not enough for a Breakfast for that insatiate Bacon, and his two
Lientenant Generals Fearless and Daring


A Morsel, a Morsel.


I am for an attack, what say you Gentlemen to an attack? -- What, silent all?
-- What say you Major


I say, Sir, I hope my courage was never in dispute. But, Sir, I am going to
Marry Colonel Downright's Daughter here -- and should I be slain in this
Battle 'twou'd break her heart; -- -- besides, Sir, I should lose her Fortune


I Am sure here is a Captain will never Flinch.


Who I, an't like your Honor?


Ay, you.


Who I? ha, ha, ha,: Why did your Honor think that I would fight?


Fight, yes? Why else do you take Commissions?


Commissions! O Lord, O Lord, take Commissions to fight? ha ha ha; that is a
jest, if all that take Commissions should fight --


Why do you bear Arms then?


Why sor the Pay; to be called Captain, noble Captain, to show, to cock and
look big and bluff as I do; to be bowed to thus as we pass, to domineer, and
beat our Soldiers: Fight quoth a, ha ha ha


But what makes you look so simply Cornet?


Why a thing that I have quite forgot, all my accounts for England are to be
made up, and I Am undone if they be neglected -- else I would not flinch for the
stoutest he that wears a Sword --


What say you Captain Whiff?


I am trying Colonel what Mettle I Am made on; I think I am Valiant, I suppose
I have Courage, but I confess it is a little of the D -- breed, but a little
inspiration from the bottle, and the leave of my Nancy, may do wonders


An't please your Honors, Frightall's Officers have seized all the Ships in
the River, and rid now round the Shore, and had by this time secured the Sandy
Beach, and Landed men to Fire the Town, but that they are high in Drink aboard
the Ship called the Good Subject; the Master of her sent me to let your Honors
know, that a few men sent to his assistance will surprise them, and retake the
Ships


Now, Gentlemen, here is a brave occasion for Emulation -- why writ not the
Master


Ay, had he writ, I had soon been amongst them in faith; but this is some Plot
to betray us


Keep me here, and kill me if it be not true.


He says well -- there is a Brigan^ine and a Shallop ready, I Will Embark
immediately


No Sir, your presence is here more necessary, let me have the Honor of this
Expedition


I Will go your Volentier Charles.


Who else offers to go.


A mere trick to Kidnap us, by Bacon, -- if the Captain had writ --


Av, ay, if he had writ --


I see you're all base Cowards, and here Cashier ye from all Commands and
Offices


Look ye Colonel, you may do what you please, but you lose one of the best
dressed Officers in your whole Camp, Sir --


and in me, such a Head Piece.


I Will say nothing, but let the State want me.


For my part I am weary of weighty Affairs.


Command what Men you please, but Expedition makes you half a Conqueror.


Look ye now Gentlemen the Master has writ.


Has he -- he might have writ sooner, while I was in Command, -- if he had --


Ay Major -- if he had -- but let them miss us --


Colonel have with your Men and Reinforce the Beach, while I follow with the
Horse; -- Mr. Dunce pray let that Proclamation be Read concerning Bacon, to the
Soldiers


It shall be done Sir,

Gentlemen how simply you look now.


-- Why Mr. Parson I have a scruple of Conscience upon me* I am considering
whether it be Lawful to Kill, tho it be in War; I have a great aversion to it,
and hope it proceeds from Religion


I remember the Fit took you just so, when the Dutch Besieged us, for you could
not then be persuaded to strike a stroke


Ay, that was because they were Protestants as we are, but Gads Zoors had they
been Dutch Papists I had mauled them? but Conscience --


I have been a Justice of Peace this six years and never had a conscience in my
Life


Nor I neither, but in this damned thing of Fighting.


Gentlemen I am Commanded to read the Declaration of the Honorable Council to
you


Hum hum hum --


Silence -- silence --


By an order of Council Dated May the 10 th 1670: To all Gentlemen Soldiers,
Merchants, Planters, and whom else it may concern. Whereas Bacon, contrary to
Law and Equity, has to satisfy his own Ambition taken up Arms, with a pretense
to fight the Indians, but indeed to molest and enslave the whole Colony, and to
take away their Liberties and Properties; this is to declare, that whoever
shall bring this Traitor Dead or alive to the Council shall have three hundred
Pounds reward. And so God save the King


A Council, a Council! Hah --


Stand to your Arms Gentlemen, stand to your Arms, Bacon is Marching this way.


Hah -- what numbers has he?


About a hundred Horse, in his March he has surpised Colonel Downright, and
taken him Prisoner


Let Us fall on Bacon -- let us fall on Bacon hay --


We Will hear him speak first -- and see what he can say for himself.


Ay, ay, we will hear Bacon speak --


Well Major I have found a Stratagem shall make us four the Greatest Men in
the Colony, we'll surrender our selves to Bacon, and say we Disbanded on
purpose


Good --


Why, I had no other design in the World in refusing to ^ight.


Nor I, do you think I would have excused it with the fear of disordering my
Cravat String else --


Why Gentlemen, he designs to Fire James Town; Murder you all, and then lie
with your Wives, and will you slip this opportunity of seizing him


Here Is a Tarmagant Rogue Neighbors -- we'll Hang the Dog. All, Ay, Ay, hang
Bacon, hang Bacon


Well Gentlemen -- in order to your fine Declaration you see I come to render
my self --


How came he to know of our Declaration?


Rogues, Rogues among our selves -- that inform.


What are ye silent all, -- not a Man lift his Hand in Obedience to the
Council to Murder this Traitor, that has exposed his Life so often for vou? Hah
what not for three hundred Pound, -- you see I Have left my Troops behind, and
come all wearied with the Toils of War, worn out by Summers heats and
VVinters colds, Marched tedious Days and Nights through ^ogs and Fens as dangerous
as your Clamors, and as Faithless, -- what tho 'twas to preserve you all in
safety, no matter, you should obey the Grateful Council, and Kill this honest
Man that has defended you


Hum, hum hum.


The General speaks like a Gorgon.


Like a Cherubin, Man.


All silent yet -- where is that mighty Courage that cried so loud but now? A
Council a Council, where is your Resolution, cannot three hundred Pound Excite
your Valor, to seize that Traitor Bacon who has bled for you? --


A Bacon, a Bacon, a Bacon. --


Oh Villainous Cowards -- Oh the Faithless Multitude!


What say you Parson -- you have a forward Zeal?


I wish my Coat Sir did not hinder me, from acting as becomes my Zeal and Duty.


A Plaguey Rugid Dog -- that Parson --


Fearless seize me that canting Knave from out the Herd, and next those
Honorable Officers


Seize us, Sir, you shall not need, we laid down our Commissions on purpose to
come over to your Honor


We ever loved and honored your Honor.


So entirely, Sir -- that I wish I were safe in James Town for your sake, and
your Honor were hanged


This fine Piece is of your Penning Parson -- though it be countenanced by the
Councils Names -- Oh in gratitude -- Burn -- Burn the Treacherous Town -- Fire
it immediately --


We'll obey you, Sir --


Ay, ay, we'll make a Bonfire on it, and Drink your Honors Health round about
it


Yet hold, my Revenge shall be more Merciful, I ordered that all the Women of
Rank shall be seized and brought to my Camp. I Will make their Husbands pay their
Ransoms dearly; they would rather have their Hearts bleed than their Purses


Dear General, let me have the seizing of Colonel Downright's Daughter; I
would fain be Plundering for a Trifle called a Maidenhead


On pain of Death treat them with all respect; assure them of the safety of
their Honor. Now, all that will follow me, shall find a welcome, and those that
will not may depart in Peace


Hay, a General, a General, a General.


Successful Dareing welcome, what Prizes have ye?


The Fairest in the World Sir, I Am not for common Plunder.


Hah, my Daughter and my Kinswoman! --


It Is not with Women Sir, nor honest Men like you that I intend to Combat; not
their own Parents shall not be more indulgent, nor better safeguard to their
Honors Sir: But it is to save the Expense of Blood, I seize on their most
valued Prize


But Sir, I know your wild Lieutenant General has long loved my Chrisante, and
perhaps, will take this time to force her to consent


I own I have a Passion for Chrisante, yet by my Generals Life -- or her fair
self -- what now I Act is on the score of War, I scorn to force the Maid I do
adore


Believe me Ladies, you shall have Hon ourable Treatment here.


We do not doubt it Sir, either from you or Dareing, If he Love me -- -- that
will secure my Honor, or if he do not, he is to brave to injure me


I thank you for your just opinion of me, Madam.


But Sir, it is for my Father I must plead; to see his Reverend Hands in Serval
Chains -- and then perhaps if stubborn to your will, his Head must fall a
Victim to your Anger


No my good Pious Girl, I cannot fear Ignoble usage from the General -- And if
thy Beauty can preserve thy Fam^, I shall not mourn in my Captivity


I Will never deceive your kind opinion of me -- Ladies I hope you're all of that
opinion to


If seizing us Sir can advance your Honor, or be of any use considerable to
you, I shall be proud of such a slavery


I hope Sir we shall not be Ravished in your Camp.


Fie Mrs. Whimsey, do Soldiers use to Ravish?


Ravish -- marry I fear 'em not, I Would have em know I scorn to be Ravished by
any Man


Ay a my Conscience Mrs Whiff, you are too good natured


Madam, I hope: you will give me leave to name Love to you, and try by all sub
misive ways to win your heart


Do your worst Sir, I give you leave, if you assail me only with your Tongue.


That Is generous and brave, and Ple requite it.


The Truce being ended, Sir, the Indians grow so insolent as to attack us even
in our Camp, and have killed several of our Men


It Is time to check their boldness, Dareing haste draw up our Men in order, to
give 'em Battle, I rather had expected their submission

The Country now may see what they are to fear,

Since we that are in Arms are not secure.


Invoke the God, of our Quiocto to declare, what the Event shall be of this our
last War against the English General

The English General shall be,
A Captive to his Enemy;
And you from all your Toyls be freed,
When by your hand the Foe shall bleed
And ere the Sun's swift course be run,
This mighty Conquest, shall be won.

I thank the Gods for taking care of us, prepare new Sacrifice against the
Evening, when I return a Conqueror, I will my self perform the Office of a
Priest


Oh Sir, I fear you will fall a Victim first.


What means Semernia, why are thy looks so Pale?


Alas the Oracles have double meanings, their sense is doubtful, and their
words Inigma's, I fear Sir I could make a truer interpritation --


How Semernia! by all thy Love I charge thee as you respect my Life, to let me
know your thoughts


Last Night I Dreamed a Lion fell with Hunger, spite of your Guards slew you,
and bore you hence


This is thy Sexes fear, and no interpretation of the Oracle.


I could convince you farther.


Have thou a secret thou can keep from me? Thy Soul a thought that I must be
stranger too? This is not like the Justice of Semernia, come unriddle me the
Oracle


The English General shall be, a captive to his Enemy; he is so Sir already to
my Beauty, he says he languishes for Love of me


Hah -- the General my Rival -- but go on --


And you from all your War be freed: Oh let me not explain that fatal line, for
fear it mean, you shall be freed by Death


What, when by my hand the Foe shall bleed? -- away -- -- it cannot be --


No doubt my Lord, you will bravely sell your Life, and deal some wounds where
you will receive so many


It Is Love Semernia makes thee Dream, while waking I Will trust the Gods, and am
resolved for Battle


Have, Have Great Sir to Arms, Bacon with all his Forces is prepared, and both
the Armies ready to engage


Have to my General bid him charge em instantly, I Will bring up the supplys of
stout Teroomians, those so well skilled in the Envenomed Arrow, Semernia --
words but poorly do express the griefs of parting Lovers -- it is with dying
Eyes, and a Heart trembling -- -- thus --


Alas! What pity it is I saw the General, before my Fate had given me to the
King -- but now -- like those that change their Gods, my faithless mind 'twixt
two opinions wavers; while to the Gods my Monarch I commend; my wandering
thoughts in pity of the General makes that zeal cold, declined -- ineffectual;
-- If for the General I, implore the Deieties, methinks my Prayers should not
ascend the Skies since Honor tells me it is an impious zeal

Which way so ever my Devotions move,

I am too wretched to be heard above.


Have, have Sir to the Entrance of the Wood, Dareings Engaged past hope of a
retreat, ventring too far, persuing of the Foe; the King in Ambush with his
Poisoned Archers, fell on and now we are dangerously distressed


Dareing is Brave, but, he is withal, too rash, come on and sollow me to his
Assistance --


Turn, turn ye fugitive Slaves, and face the Enemy; Oh Villains, Cowards, Deaf
to all Command, by Heaven I had my Rival my in view and Aimed at nothing but my
Conquering him -- now like a Coward I must fly with Cowards, or like a
desperate Madman fall, thus singly midst the numbers


-- Where is the King, Oh ye perfidious Slaves, how have you hid from my just
Revenge -- search all the Brakes, the Fuzes and the Trees; and let him not
escape on Pain of Death


We cannot do wonders Sir.


But you can run away --


Yes, when we see occasion -- yet -- should any but my General tell me so -- --
by Heaven he should find I were no starter


Forgive me, I Am Mad -- the Kings escaped, hid like a trembling slave in some
close Ditch, where he will sooner starve than Fight it out


All Is lost -- the day is lost -- and I Am betrayed -- Oh Slaves, that even
Wounds cannot Animate


The King!


The General here, by all the Powers betrayed by my own Men.


Abandoned as thou art I scorn to take thee basely, you shall have Soldiers
chance Sir for your Life, since chance so luckily has brought us hither;
without more aids we will dispute the day: this spot of Earth bears both our
Armies Fates, I Will give you back the Victory I have won, and thus begin a new,
on equal terms


That Is Nobly said -- the Powers have heard my wish! You Sir first taught me
how to use a Sword, which heretofore has served me with success, but now --
it is for Semernia that it draws, a prize more valued than my Kingdom, Sir --


Hah Semernia!


Your Blushes do betray your Passion for her.


'Sdeath have we Fought for this, to expose the Victor to the Conquered Foe?


What Fight a single Man -- our Prize already.


Not so young Man while I command a Dart.


Fight him, by Heaven no reason shall dissuade me, and he that interrupts me is
a Coward, whatever be my Fate, I do command ye to let the King pass freely to
his Tents


The Devils in the General.


'Sdeath his Romantic humor will undo us.


You Fight as if you meant to outdo me this way, as you have done in Generosity.


You're not behind hand with me Sir in courtesy, come here is to set us even --


You bleed apace.


You Have only Breathed a Vein, and given me new Health and Vigor by it.

How do you Sir?


Like one -- that is hovering between Heaven and Earth, I Am -- mounting --
somewhere -- upwards -- but giddy with my flight, -- I know not where


Command my Surgions, -- instantly -- make haste Honor returns and Love all
Bleeding's fled


Oh Semernia, how much more truth had thy Divinity than the Predictions of the
flattering Oracles. Commend me to her -- I know you will -- visit -- your Fair
Captive Sir, and tell her -- oh -- but Death prevents the rest


He Is gone -- and now like Caesar I could weep over the Hero I my self
destroyed


I Am glad for your repose I see him there -- 'twas a Mad hot Brained Youth and
so he died


Come bear him on your Shoulders to my Tent, from whence with all the solemn
state we can, we will convey him to his own Pavillion


Some of our Troops pursuing of the Enemy even to their Temples, which they
made their Sanctuary, finding the Queen at her Devotion there with all her
Indian Ladies, I Would much ado to stop their violent rage from setting fire to the
Holy Pile


Hang em immediately that durst attempt it, while I my self will fly to rescue
her


Nay I Am resolved to keep thee here till his Honor the General comes, -- what
to call him Traitor, and run away after he had so generously given us our
freedom, and Listed us Cadees for the next command that fell in his Army; --
I Am resolved to Hang thee --


Will thou betray and Peach thy Friend: Thy Friend that kept thee Company all
the while thou were a Prisoner -- Drinking at my own charge. --


No matter for that, I scorn Ingratitude and therefore will Hang thee -- but as
for thy drinking with me -- I scorn to be hehind hand with thee in Civility and
therefore here is to thee


I cannot drink.


A certain sign thou wo't be Hanged.


You used to be a my side when a Justice, set the cause be how it would.


Ay -- when I was a Justice I never minded Honesty, but now I Will be true to my
General, and Hang thee to be a great man. --


If I might but have a fair Trial for my Life --


A fair Trial -- come I Will be thy Judge -- and if thou can clear thy self by
Law I Will acquit thee, Sirrah, Sirrah, what can thou say for thy self for
calling his Honor Rebel


'Twas when I was Drunk an't like yourHonour.


That Is no Plea, for if you kill a Man when you are Sober you must be Hanged
when you are Drunk, have thou any thing else to say for thy self, why Sentence
may not pass upon thee


I desire the Benefit of the Clergy.


The Clergy, I never knew any body that ever did benefit by em, why thou can
not read a word


Transportation then --


It shall be to England then -- but hold -- who is this?


So the dangers over, I may venture out, -- Pox on it I would not be in this
fear again, to be Lord Chief Justice of our Court. Why how now Cornet -- what
in dreadful


I Am in the posture of the times Major -- I could not be Idle where so much
Action was, I Am going to present my self to the General with these Trophies of
my Victory here --


Victory -- what Victory -- did not see thee creeping out of yonder Bush, where
thou weret hid all the Fight -- stumble on a Dead Indian, and take away his
Arms


Why, did thou see me?


See thee Ay -- and what a fright thou were in, till thou were sure he was Dead.


Well, well, that is all one -- Gads zoors if every Man that pass for Valiant in
a Battle, were to give an account how he gained his Reputation, the World would
be but thinly stocked with Heroes, I Will say he was a great War Captain, and
that I killed him hand to hand, and who can disprove me


Disprove thee -- why that Pale face of thine, that has so much of the Coward
in it


Shaw that is with loss of Blood -- Hah I am overheard I doubt -- who is yonder
-- Whiff in a Hempen Cravat-String


He called the General Traitor and was running away, and-I'm resolved to Peach.


Hum -- and one witness will stand good in Law, in case of Treason --


Gads zoors in case of Treason he will beHang'd if it be proved against him, were
there never a witness at all, but he must tried by a Council of War Man --
come, come let us disarm him --


What, I hope you will not take away my Brandy Gentlemen, my last comfort.


Gads zoors it is come in good time -- we will Drink it off, here Major --


Hark ye Cornet -- you are my good Friend, get this matter made up before it
come to the General


But this is Treason Neighbor.


If I Hang -- I Will declare upon the Ladder, how you killed your War Captain


Come Brother Whimsey -- we have been all Friends and loving Magistrates
together, let us Drink about, and think no more of this business


Ay, ay, if every sober man in the Nation, should be called to account of the
Treason he speaks in's Drink the Lord have mercy upon us all -- put it up --
and let us like loving Brothers take an honest resolution to run away together;
for this same Frightal minds nothing but Fighting


I Am content, provided we go all to the Council and tell them (to make our
Peace) we went in obedience to the Proclamation to kill Bacon, but the Traitor
was so strongly guarded we could not effect it, but Mum -- who is here --


Hah, our four Reverend Justices -- I hope the Blockheads will not know me --
Gentlemen, can you direct me to Lieutenant General Dareings Tents


Hum, who the Devil's this -- that is he that you see coming this way, 'Sdeath
yonder is Dareing -- Let Us slip away before he advances


I am scared with those dead Bodies we have past over, for God's sake Madam,
let me know your design in coming


Why? now I Will tell thee -- my damned mad Fellow Dareing who has my heart and
soul -- Loves Chrisante, has stolen her, and carried her away to his Tents, she
hates him, while I am dying for him


Dying Madam! I never saw you melancholy.


Pox on it no, why should I sigh and whine, and make my self an Ass. and him
conceited, no, instead of snevelling I Am resolved --


What Madam?


Gad to beat the Rascal, and bring of Crisante.


Beat him Madam? What a woman beat a Lieutenant General.


Hang 'em, they get a name in War, from command, not courage; how know I but I
may fight, Gad I have known a Fellow kicked from one end of the Town to the other,
believing himself a Coward, at last forced to fight, found he could, got a
Reputation and bullyed all he met with, and got a name, and a great Commission


But if he should kill you Madam?


I Will take care to make it as Comical a Duel as the best of 'em, as much in
Love as I am, I do not intend to die it is Martyr


Have you seen Crysante since the fight?


Yes, but she is still the same, as nice and coy as Fortune, when she is courted
by the wretched, yet she denis me, so obligingly she keeps my Love still in its
humble Calm


Can you direct me Sir, to one Dareings Tent:


One Dareing -- he has another Epithet to his name?


What Is that, Rascal, or Coward?


Hah, which of thy Stars young man has sent thee hither, to find that certain
Fate they have decreed


I know not what my Stars have decreed, but I shall be glad if they have
ordained me to Fight with Dareing, -- by thy concern thou should be he


I am, prithee who art thou?


Thy Rival, tho newly arrived from England, and came to Marry fair Chrisante,
whom thou have Ravished, for whom I hear another Lady Dies


Dies for me?


Therefore resign her fairly -- or fight me fairly --


Come on Sir -- but hold -- before I kill thee, prithee inform me who this
Dying Lady is


Sir I owe ye no Courtesy, and therefore will do you none by telling you --
come Sir for Chrisante -- draws


Hold -- what mad Frolicks this? -- Sir you Fight for one you never saw


Perhaps she will Love him as little.


Gad put it to the Trial, if you dare -- if thou be'st Generous bring me to
her, and whom she does neglect shall give the other Place


That Is fair put up thy Sword -- I Will bring thee to her Instantly.


I Am not so much afflicted for my confinement as I am, that I cannot hear of
Friendly


Art not persecuted with Dareing?


Not at all, tho he tells me daily of his Passion I rally him, and give him
neither hope nor despair, -- he is here


Madam, the Complaisance I show in bringing you my Rival, will let you see how
glad I am to oblige you every way


I hope the danger I have exposed my self too for the Honor of kissing your
hand Madam, will render me something acceptable -- here are my Credentials --


Dear Creature, I have taken this habit to free you from an impertinent Lover,
and to secure the Damned Rogue Dareing to my self, receive me as sent by
Colonel Surelove from England to Marry you -- favor me -- no more -- your
Ranter -- Hah Ranter? Surelove, not to receive my welcome


Stand by General --


'Sdeath Sir there is room -- enough -- at first sight so kind? Oh Youth --
Youth and Impudence, what Temptations are you -- to Villainous Woman


I confess Sir we Women do not Love these rough Fighting Fellows, they are
always scaring us with one Broil or other


Much good may do you with your tame Coxcomb.


Well Sir, then you yield the Prize?


Ay Gad, were she an Angel, that can prefer such a callow Fop as thou before a
man -- take her and domineer

-- 'Sdeath am I grown Ridiculous.


Why have thou not found the Jest? by Heaven it is Ranter, it is she that loves
you, carry on the humor. Ranter


Ay, she is the fittest Wife for you, she will fit your Humor.


-- Gad I Would sooner marry a She Bear, unless for a Penance for some horrid Sin,
we should be eternally challenging one another to the Field, and ten to one she
beats me there; or if I should escape there, she would kill me with Drinking


Here Is a Rogue -- does your Country abound with such Ladies?


The Lord forbid, half a dozen would ruin the Land, debauch all the men, and
scandalize all the women


No matter, she is rich.


Ay that will make her Insolent.


Nay she is generous too.


Yes when she is Drunk, and then she will lavish all.


A Pox on him -- how he vexes me.


Then such a Tongue -- she will rail and smoke till she choke again then six
Gallons of Punch hardly recovers her, and never but then is she' good Natured


I must lay him on --


There Is not a Blockhead in the Country that has not --


-- What --


-- Been Drunk with her.


I thought you had meant something else Sir.


Nay -- as for that -- I suppose there is no great difficulty.


'Sdeath Sir you lie -- and you're a Son of a Whore.


Hold -- hold Virago -- dear Widow hold, and give me thy hand.


Widow!


'Sdeath I knew thee by instinct Widow tho I seemed not to do so, in revenge
for the trick you put on me in telling me a Lady died for me


Why, such an one there is, perhaps she may dwindle forty or fifty years -- or
so -- but will never be her own Woman again that is certain


This we are all ready to testify, we know her.


Upon my Life it is true.


Widow I have a shrewd suspicion, that you your self may be this dying Lady.


Why so Coxcomb?


Because you took such pains to put your self into my hands.


Gad if your heart were but half so true as your guess, we should conclude a
Peace before Bacon and the Council will -- besides this thing whines for
Friendly and there is no hopes


Give me thy hand Widow, I am thine -- and so entirely, I will never -- be
drunk out of thy Company -- Dunce is in my Tent -- prithee let us in and bind
the bargain


Nay, faith, let us see the Wars at an end first.


Nay, prithee, take me in the humor, while thy Breeches are on -- for I never
liked thee half so well in Petticoats


Lead on General, you give me good encouragement to wear them.


WE we are now in the sight of the Tents.


Is not this a rash attempt, Gentlemen, with so small Force to set upon Bacons
whole Army


Oh, they are drunk with Victory and Wine; there will be naught but Revelling
to Night


Would we could learn in wha Quarter the Ladies are lodged, for we have no
other business but to release them -- but hark -- who comes here


Some Scouts, I fear, from the Enemy.


Let Us shelter our selves behind yonder Trees -- lest we be surpised.


Would I were well at home -- Gad Zoors -- if e're you catch me a Cadeeing
again, I Will be content to be set in the fore front of the Battle for Hawks Meat


You Are afraid of every Bush.


Ay, and good Reason too: Gad Zoors, there may be Rogues hid -- prithee Major,
do thou advance


No, no, go on -- no matter of ceremony in these cases of running away.


They approach directly to us, we cannot escape them -- their numbers are not
great -- let us advance


Oh, I am annihilated.


Some of Frightall's Scouts; we are lost men.


Who goes there?


Oh, they will give us no Quarter; 'twas long of you Cornet, that we ran away
from our Colors


Me -- 'twas the Majors Ambition here -- to make himself a great Man with the
Council again


Poxo' this Ambition, it has been the ruin of many a Gallant Fellow.


If I get home again, the height of mine shall be to top Tobacco; would l'd
some Brandy


Gads Zoors, would we had, it is the best Armor against fear -- hum -- I hear
no body now -- prithee advance a little


What, before a Horse Officer?


Stand on your Lives --


Oh, it is impossible -- I am dead already.


What are ve -- speak -- or I Will shoot?


Friends to thee -- who the Devil are we friends too?


E'ne who you please, Gad Zoors.


Hah -- Gad Zoors -- who is there, Timorous?


Hum -- I know no such Scoundrel --


Hah -- that is Friendly's Voice.


Right -- thine's that of Dullman -- who is with you?


Only Timorous, Whimsey and Whiff, all Valiantly running away from the Arch
Rebel that took us Prisoners


Can you inform us where the Ladies are lodged?


In the hither Quarter in Dareings Tents; you will know them by Lanthorns on
every corner -- there was never better time to surprise them -- for this day
Dareing's Married, and there is nothing but Dancing and Drinking


Married! To whom?


That I never inquired.


It Is to Crisante, Friend -- and the reward of my attempt is lost. Oh, I am
mad, I Will fight away my life, and my despair shall yet do greater wonders, than
even my Love could animate me too. Let Us part our Men, and beset his Tents on
both sides


Come, Gentlemen, let us on --


On Sir -- we on Sir? --


Ay, you on, Sir -- to redeem the Ladies


Oh, Sir, I am going home for money to redeem my Nancy.


So am I, Sir.


I thank my Stars I am a Batchellor -- Why, what a plague is a Wife?


Will you March forward?


We have achieved Honor enough already, in having made our Campaign-here --


'Sdeath, but you shall go -- put them in the front, and prick them on -- if
they offer to turn back run them through


Oh, horrid --


Oh, Nancy, thy Dream will yet come to pass.


Will you advance, Sir?


Why, so we do, Sir; the Devil's in these fighting Fellows.


To Arms, to Arms, the Enemy's upon us.


Now, Sir -- what injury have I ever done you, that you should use this
Treachery against me


To take advantage any way in War, was never counted Treachery -- and had I
Murdered thee, I had not paid thee half the Debt I owe thee


You bleed too much to hold too long a Parley -- come to my Tent, I Will take a
charitable care of thee


I scorn thy Courtesy, who against all the Laws of Honor and of Justice, have
ravished innocent Ladies


Sir, your upbraiding of my Honor shall never make me forfeit it, or esteem
you less -- Is there a Lady here you have a Passion for


Yes, on a Nobler score than thou dare own.


To let you see how you're mistaken, Sir, who e're that Lady be whom you
affect, I will resign, and give you both your Freedoms


Why, for this Courtesy, which shows thee brave, in the next Fight I Will save
thy Life, to quit the obligation


I thank you, Sir -- come to my Tent -- and when we have dressed your Wounds, and
yielded up the Ladies, I Will give you my Passport for your safe conduct back,
and tell your Friends in the Town we'll Visit them in the Morning


They Will meet you on your way, Sir --


Come, my young Soldier, now thou'st won my Soul.


Return, Sir, where your Sword will be more useful -- a Party of Indians,
taking advantage of the Night, have set Fire on your Tents, and born away the
Queen


Hah, the Queen! By Heaven this Victory shall cost them dear; come, let us fly
to rescue her


I cannot sleep my Impatience is so great, to engage this haughty Enemy, before
they have reposed their weary Limbs -- Is not you Ruddy Light the Mornings Dawn


It Is, and please your Honor.


Is there no News of Friendly yet, and Hazard?


Not yet -- it is thought they left the Camp to Night, with some design against
the Enemy


What Men have they?


Only Boozers Party, Sir.


I know they are brave, and mean to surprise me with some handsome Action.


I ask a thousand Pardons, Sir, for quitting the Camp without your leave.


Your Conduct and your Courage cannot Err; I see thou'st been in action by thy
Blood


Sir I Am ashamed to own these slender wounds, since without more my luck was to
be taken, while Hazard did alone effect the business; the rescuing of the
Ladies


How got ye Liberty?


By Dareings generosity, who sends you word he will visit you this Morning.


We are prepared to meet him.


My worthy Friend how am I joyed to see you?


We owe our Liberties to these brave Youths, who can do wonders when they Fight
for Ladies


With our assistance Ladies.


For my part I Will not take it as I have done, Gad I find when I am Damnable
Angry I can beat both Friend and Foe


When I fight for my Nancy here -- adsfish I Am a Dragon.


Lord you need not have been so hasty:


Do not upbraid me with your Eyes Chrisante, but let these wounds assure you I
endeavored to serve you, tho Hazard had the Honor on it


But Ladies we will not expose you in the Camp, -- a Party of our Men shall see
you safely conducted to Madam Sureloves; it is but a little Mile from our Camp


Let me have that Honor Sir.


No, I conjure you let your wounds be dressed, obey me if you Love me, and Hazard
shall conduct us home


He had the Toil, it is fit he have the recompense.


He the Toil Sir, what did we stand for Ciphers?


The very appearance I made in the front of the Battle, awed the Enemy.


Ay, Ay, Let the Enemy say how I mauled 'em -- but Gads zoors I scorn to brag.


Since you have regained your Honor so Gloriously -- I restore you to your
Commands, you lost by your seeming Cowardice


Valor is not always in Humor Sir.


Come Gentlemen since they are resolved to engage us, let us set our Men in order
to receive 'em


Our Commissions again -- you must be bragging, and see what comes on it; I was
modest ye see and said nothing of my Prowess


What a Devil, does the Colonel think we are made of Iron, continually to be
beat on the Anvil


Look Gentlemen here is two Evils -- if we go we are dead Men if we stay we are
hanged -- and that will disorder my Cravat-string -- therefore the least Evil
is to go -- and set a good Face on the matter as I do --


I tremble yet, do think we are safe Cavaro.


Madam these Woods are intricate and vast; and 'twill be difficult to find us
out -- or if they do, this habit will secure you from the fear of being taken


Do think if Bacon find us he will not know me? Alas my fears and blushes
will betray me


It Is certain Madam if we stay we Perish; for all the Wood's surrounded by the
Conqueror


Alas it is better we should Perish here, than stay to expect the violence of
his Passion; Towhich my heart's too sensibly inclined


Why do you not obey it is dictates then, why do you fly the Conqueror?


Not fly -- not fly the Murderer of my Lord?


What world, what resolution can preserve you, and what he cannot gain by soft
submission, force will at last overcome


I wish there were in Nature one excuse either by force or Reason to compel me:
-- For oh Anaria -- I adore this General, -- take from my Soul a Truth -- till
now concealed -- at twelve years Old -- at the Pauwmungian Court I saw this
Conqueror. I saw him young and Gay as new born Spring, Glorious and Charming as
the Mid-days Sun, I watch't his looks, and listened when he spoke, and thought
him more than Mortal


He has a graceful Form.


At last a Fatal Match concluded was, between my Lord and me I gave my Hand,
but oh how far my heart was from consenting, the angry Gods are witness


'Twas pity.


Twelve teadious Moons I past in silent languishment; Honor endeavoring to
destroy my Love, but all in vain, for still my pain returned when ever I beheld
my Conqueror, but now when I consider him as Murderer of my Lord -- [Feircely]
I sigh and wish -- some other fatal hand had given him his Death -- but now
there is a necessity I must be brave and overcome my Heart: What if I do? ah
whether shall I fly, I have no Amazonian fire about me, all my Artillery is
sighs and Tears, the Earth my Bed, and Heaven my Canopy

Hah, we are surprised, oh whether shall I fly? And yet methinks a certain
trembling joy, spite of my Soul, spite of my boasted Honor, runs shivering
round my heart.


Madam your out guards are surpised by Bacon, who hews down all before him,
and demands the Queen with such a voice and Eyes so Feirce and Angry, he kills
us with his looks


Draw up your Poisoned Arrows to the head, and aim them at his Heart, sure some
will hit


Cruel Cavaro, -- would 'twere fit for me to contradict thy Justice.


The Queen ye slaves, give me the Queen and live!


Hold, hold, I do Command ye


Hah -- a Woman's Voice, -- what art thou? Oh my fears!


Thy hand has been too cruel to a Heart -- whose Crime was only tender thoughts
for thee


The Queen! What is it my Sacreligious hand has done?


The noblest office of a Gallant Friend, thou'st saved my Honor and have given
me Death


Is It possible! ye unregarding Gods is it possible?


Now I may Love you without Infamy, and please my Dying Heart by gazing on you.


Oh I am lost -- for ever lost -- I find my Brain turn with the wild confusion.


I faint -- oh lay me gently on the Earth.


Who waits --


Hah on the Earth -- how do you Sir?


What would thou?


Wellman with all the Forces he can gather attacks us even in our very Camp,
assist us Sir or all is lost


Why prithee let him make the World his Prize, I have no business with the
Trifle now; it now contains nothing that is worth my case, since my fair Queen
-- is Dead, -- and by my Hand


So charming and obliging is thy moan, that I could wish for Life to recompense
it; but oh, Death falls -- all cold -- upon my Heart like Mildews on the
Blossoms


By Heaven Sir, this Love will ruin all -- rise, rise and save us yet.


Leave me, what e're becomes of me -- loose not thy share of Glory -- prithee
leave me


Alas, I fear, thy Fate is drawing on, and I shall shortly meet thee in the
Clouds; till then -- farewell -- even Death is pleasing to me, while thus -- I
find it in thy Arms --


There ends my Race of Glory and of Life:


Hah -- Why should I idly whine away my life, since there are Nobler ways to
meet with Death? -- Up, up, and face him then -- Hark -- there is the Soldiers
knell -- and all the Joys of Life -- with thee I bid farewell --


They fight like men possessed -- I did not think to have found them so prepared.


They'ye good intelligence -- but where is the Rebel?


Sure he is not in the fight, oh that it were my happy chance to meet him, that
while our men look on, we might dispatch the business of the War. -- Come,
let us fall in again now we have taken breath


How now, whether away?


Hah, Dareing here -- we are pursuing of the Enemy, Sir, stop us not in the
pursuit of Glory


Stay -- I have not seen you in my ranks to day.


Lord, does your Honor take us for Starters?


Yes, Sirrah, and believe you are now rubbing off -- confess, or I Will run you
through


Oh Mercy, Sir, Mercy, we'll confese.


What will you confess -- we were only going behind you Hedge to untruss a
point; that is all


Ay, your Honors will smell out the truth if you keep us here long.


Here, carry themPrisoners to my Tent, [Ex Sold with Wh. and Whiff.


A Pox of all ill luck, how came ^to ^ese Dareing in the fight? Ha -- who is
here? -- Dullman and Timorous Dead -- the Rogues are Counterfeits -- I Will see
what Movables they have about them, all is Lawful Prize in War


What, Rob the Dead? -- Why, what will this Villainous World come to.


Thou could expect no other Fate Young man, thy hands are yet too tender for
a Sword


Thou look like a good natured Fellow, use me civilly, and Dareing shall
Ransom me


Doubt not a Generous Treatment.


So, the Coast is clear, I desire to remove my Quarters to some place of more
safety -- --


'Twas this way Bacon fled.


It Is Just, ye Gods! That when you took the Prize for which I fought, Fortune
and you should all abandon me


Oh fly Sir to some place of safe retreat, for there is no mercy to be hoped if
taken. What will you do, I know we are pursued, by Heaven I will not dye a
shameful Death


Oh they will have pity on thy Youth and Bravery, but I Am above their Pardon.

This way -- this way -- hay -- hallow.


Alas Sir we are undone -- I Will see which way they they take.


So near! Nay then to my last shift. Undoes the Pomel of his Sword. Come my
good Poison, like that of Hannibal, long I have born a noble Remedy for all the
ills of Life. Takes Poison. I have too long survived my Queen and Glory, those
two bright Stars that influenced my Life are set to all Eternity


-- Hah -- what have ye done?


Secured my self from being a public Spectacle upon the common Theater of
Death


Victory, victory, they fly, they fly, where is the Victorious General?


Here -- taking his last Adieu.


Dying? Then wither all the Laurels on my Brows, for I shall never Triumph more
in War, where is the wounds


From his own hand by what he carried here, believing we had lost the Victory.


And is the Enemy put to flight my Hero?


All routed Horse and Foot, I placed an Ambush, and while they were pursuing
you, my Men fell on behind and won the day


Thou almost makes me wish to Live again, If I could live now Fair Semernia's
Dead, -- But oh -- the baneful Drug is just and kind and hastens me away -- now
while you are Victors make a Peace -- with the English Council -- and never let
Ambition -- Love -- or Interest make you forget as I have done -- your Duty --
and Allegiance -- farewell -- a long farewell --


So fell the Roman Cassius -- by mistake --


An't please your Honor we took these Men running away.


Let 'em loose -- the Wars are at an end, see where the General lies -- that
great Soul'd Man, no private Body e're contained a Nobler, and he that could
have conquered all America, finds only here his scanty length of Earth, -- go
bear the Body to his own Pavillion -- Dunce shall bear our Articles to the
Council --


With joy I will obey you.


Good General let us be put in the agreement.


You shall be obliged --


What does your Honor intend to do with Whim and Whiff, who are Condemned by
a Council of War


You come too late Gentlemen to be put into the Articles, nor am I satisfied
you're worthy of it


Why did not you Sir see us ly Dead in the Field.


Yes, but I see no wound about you.


We were stunned with being knocked down, Gads zoors a Man may be killed with
the But end of a Musket, as soon as with the point of a Sword


The Council Sir wishes you Health and Happiness, and ^sends you these Signed
by their Hands --


That you shall have a general Pardon for your self and Friends, that you shall
have all new Commissions, and Dareing to Command as General; that you shall
have free leave to Inter^ your Dead General, in James Town, and to ratify this
-- we will meet you at Madam Sureloves House which stands between the Armies,
attended by only by our Officers. The Councels noble and I Will wait upon them


How long Madam have you heard the news of Colonel Su^ve's Death?


By a Vessel last Night arrived.


You should not grieve when men so old pay their debt to Nature, you are too
Fair not to have been reserved for some young Loves Arms


I dare not speak -- but give me leave to hope.


The way to oblige me to it, is never more to speak to me of Love till I shall
think it fit --


Come you shall not grant it -- it is a hopeful Youth.


You are too much my Friend to be denied -- Crisante do you Love Friendly? nay
do not blush -- till you have done a fault, your Loving him is none -- here
take her young Man and with her all my Fortune -- when I am Dead Sirrah -- not
a Groat before -- unless to buy ye Baby Clouts


He merits not this Treasure Sir, can wish for more.


Can you forgive us Sir our disobedience.


Your offering peace while yet you might command it, has made such kind
impressions on us, that now you may command your Propositions; your Pardons are
all Sealed and new Commissions


I Am not Ambitious of that Honor Sir, but in obedience will accept your
goodness, but Sir I hear I have a young Friend taken Prisoner by Captain Hazard
whom I entreat you will render me


Sir -- here I resign him to you.


Faith General you left me but scurvily in Battle.


That was to see how well you could shift for your self, now I find you can
bear the brunt of a Campaign you are a fit Wife for a Soldier


A Woman -- Ranter --


Faith Madam I should have given you kinder. Quarter if I had known my
Happiness


I have an humble Petition to you Sir.


In which we all join.


An't please you Sir, Mr. Dunce has long made Love to me and on promise of
Marriage has --


What has he Mrs. Flirt.


Only been a little familiar with my Person Sir --


Do you hear Parson -- you must Marry Mrs. Flirt.


How Sir, a Man of my Coat Sir, Marry a Brandy-munger.


Of your calling you mean a Farrier and no Parson --


Bless me, what have we here?


Why, an't like your Honors, we were taken by the Enemy. -- hah Dareing here
and Fearless


How now -- Gentlemen were not you two Condemned to be Shot for running from
your Colors


From your Colors.


Yes Sir, they were both listed in my Regiment.


Then we must hang them for deserting us.


So out of the Frying Pan -- you know where Brother --


Ay -- he that is Born to be Hanged -- you know the rest, a Pox of these
Proverbs


I know ye well -- you're all rank Cowards, but once more we forgive ye, your
Places in the Council shall be supplied by these Gentlemen of Sense and Honor.
The Governor when he comes shall find the Country in better hands than he
expects to find it


A very fair discharge,


I Am glad it is no worse, I Will home to my Nancy.


Have we exposed our Lives and Fortunes for this?


Gads zoors I never thrived since I was a Statesman, left Planting, and fell
to promising and Lying, I Will to my old Trade again, bask under the shade of my
own Tobacco, and Drink my Punch in Peace


Come my brave Youths let all our Forces meet,
To make this Country Happy, Rich, and great;
Let scanted Europe see that we enjoy
Safer Repose, and larger Worlds than they.


