AS Rivals of each other jealous prove,
And both strive which shall gain the Lady's Love,
So we for your Affections daily Use,
Not the intrigues in the Galery;
(Who squeezes hand of Phillis masked, that stood
O^ling for sale in V^lvet Scarf, and Hood)
Can with more passion his dear Nymph pursue,
Than we to make Diversion s^t for you.
Grant we may please, and we have our outmost Aim,
It Is to your favor only we lay Claim,
In what can we oblige? Could we present you
With Mistress Young, and safe, it would content you;
Then husbands wearied out with Spouse alone,
And hen-peck'd Keepers that drudge on with one,
I fancy hither would in crewds resort,
As thick as Men for Offices to Court:
Who'd s^ay behind, the Beau above three score,
Would hobble on and gape for one bit more;
Men of all Stations, from the Nobles down,
To grave Sir Roger in his Cap and Gown,
Would hither come; but we some time must take,
E're we a project of such moment make;
Since that is laid by, for your diversion then,
We do invite the Brothers of the pen,
The Courtier, Lawyer, Soldier, Player too,
Wit never had more Encouragement than now,
Tho free, or Aliens to our stage we take 'em,
Not kick 'em out, but native subjects make 'em:
The Ladys too are always welcome here,
Let 'em in writing or in Box appear.
To that fair Sex we are obliged to day,
Oh! then be kind to a poor Orphan play,
Whose Parent while she lived obliged you all,
You praised her living, and you mourned her fall.
Who could like her, our softer Passions ^^ve,
The Life of humor, and the Soul of Lo^^,
Wits Eldest Sister, throughout every line,
You might perceive some Female Graces shine;
For poor Astrea's infant we implore,
Let it then live, tho she is now no more.

WEre you with Mrs. Manage, Britton?


Yes Sir; And she cries as much for her wanting Room for you in her House, as
she would have done some Forty Years ago for a Disapointment of her Lover. But
she assures me, the Lodging she has taken for you, is the best in all
Lincolns-Inn-Fields


And did you charge her to send Mirtilla's Page to me?


I did Sir; and he will be with you instantly.


It Is well -- Then shall I hear some News of my Mirtilla. Britton, have thee,
and get my Equipage in order; a handsome Coach, rich Liveries, and more
Footmen; for it is Appearance only passes in the World. -- And de you hear, take
care none know me by any other Name than that of Lejere


I shall Sir.


I came not from Paris into England, as my Old Father thinks to reform into a
Dull wretched Life in Wales. No, I Will rather trust my kind Mistress Fortune,
that has still kept me like her Darling, than purchase a Younger Brother's
narrow Stipend, at the Expense of my Pleasure and Happiness


My ever charming Brother!


My best, my dear Olivia!


The same lovely man still!

Thy Gallantry and Beauty's are all thy own, Paris could add no Graces to thy
Air; nor yet pervert it into Affectation


Spare me, and tell me how Mirtilla fares.


I think, Brother, I writ you word to Paris, of a Marriage ^^ncluded betwixt
me, and VVelborn


That Letter I received, but from the Dear Mirtilla, not one soft word; not one
tender Line has blessed my Eyes, has Eased my panting Heart this tedious three
Months space; and thou with whom I left the weighty Charge of her dear Heart,
to watch her lovely Eyes, to give me notice when my Rivals pressed, and when
she waver'd in her Faith to me, even thou were silent to me, cruel Sister


Thou will be like a Lover presently, and tire the Hearer with a Book of words,
of heavy Sighs, Dying Languishments, and all that huddie of Nonsense; and not
tell me how you like my Marriage


Welborn's my Friend, and worthy of thy Heart.


I never saw him yet, and to be sold unseen, and unsigh'd for in the Flower of
my Youth and Beauty, gives me a strange aversion to the Match


Oh! you will like him when you see him -- But my Mirtilla.


Like him -- no, no, I never shall -- what, come a stranger to my Hu^bands Bed?
It Is Prostitution in the lewdest manner, without the ^^^^ction; the Pleasure of
Variety, and the Bait of Profit, may make ^ame E^^^sse for Whores, who change
their Cullies, and quit their Nau^^^ ^oo^^ -- No, no, my Brother, when Parents
grow Arbitrary, it is ^^ne we lo^^ into our Rights and Privileges; therefore,
my dear George, (...) thou hope for Happiness in Love, Assist my Disobedience


In any worthy Choi^e be sure of me, but can thou wish happiness (...) Lov^
and not inform me something of Mirtilla


I Will tell you better ^ews -- Our hopeful Elder Brother, Sir Mer^^ (...) to be
disinherited, for he is, Heaven bethanked --


M^^^^d to some Town Jilt, the common fate of Coxcombs.


N^, so, my dear George, but sets up for a Celebrated Rake-hell, (...) we^l as
G^me^^er; ^e could not have found out a more dextrous way to ^^ve made thee
H^^^ to four Thousand Pounds a Year


What Is th^^ without Martilla?


Prithee no more of her -- Love spoils a fine Gentleman: Gaming, Whoring and
Fighting, may qualify a man for Conversation; but Love perverts all ones
thoughts, and makes us fit Company for none but ones self, for even a Mistress
can scarce dispense with a sighing, whining Lovers Company long, though all he
says flatters her Pride


Why do thou trifle with me, when thou know the Violence of my Love?


I wish I could any way divert your Thoughts from her I would not have your Joy
depend on such a fickle Creature


Mirtilla False? What my Mirtilla False?


Even your Mirtilla's False, and Married to another.


Married! Mirtilla Married? It Is impossible.


Nay Married to that Bawling, Drinking Fool, Sir Morgan Blunde^.


Married, and Married to Sir Morgan Blunder, a sot, an ill-bred senceless Fool;
almost too great a Fool to make a Country Justice


No doubt, she had her Aims in it, he is a very Convenient Husband I Will assure
you, and that suits her Temper: he has Estate and Folly enough, and she has
Youth, and wantonness enough to match 'em


Her choice gives me some Comfort and some Hopes; for I Will pursue her, but for
Revenge, not Love


Forget her rather, for she is not worth Revenge, and that way 'twill be none;
Prostitute in Soul as Body, she doats even on me in Breeches


On thee, her Page; dote on thee, a Youth; she knew thee not as Woman.


No that Secret I have kept to do you Service. -- At first she said she loved
me for your sake, because you recommended me, and when I Sung, or played upon my
Flute, would kiss my Cheek, and Sigh, and often, Endimi^n, thy Namesake, was
t^^s C^ressd by Cynthia. A Goddess did not scorn the humble Sw^in whom by her
Love she equaled to her Deity; she found that I had Sense to understand her,
and paid her Advances back with equal Ardour


Oh! Curse, where learnt she all this wickedness?


But she being obliged to go for Ilande^s, to see her Sister ^ak^ the Holy
Habit, I feigned a Sickness to be l^^^ behind, hoping that Absence might abate
her Flame; yet she returned more Amorous, and fearing the Thefts of Love might
wound her Honor, she thought (...) Husband would secure that shame; and
luckily my Aunt arrived s^om W^^^^, and brought Sir Morgan with her, who
Lodging where w^ did at Mr^. Manages; My Aunt (that doats on Quality in either
S^^ made up this hasty Match, unknown to me, though for my sake


What will not Faithless Woman do when she is raging.


And now having so well prepared the way, she grows impatient for an
Opportunity, and thou art Arrived most happily to succor me


No, for some Days keep this Habit on, it may be useful to us, but I must see
this Faithless Perjured Woman, which I must contrive with Mrs. Manage


Yet pray resolve to see my Father first; for now is the Critical Time to make
thy Fortune; he came to Town last Night, and lodges here at Mrs. Manages, with
my Aunt Blunder


What in the House with thee, and not know thee?


No more than a Priest Compassion; he thinks me at Hackney, making wax Babies,
where he intends to visit me within these three days. -- But I forgot to tell
you, our Brother, Sir Merlin Lodges in this House with you, and should he know
you --


It Is impossible -- I Have not seen him, or my Father, these five Years. Absence,
my Growth, and this unexpected Equipage, will not be penetrated by his Capacity


True, he will never look for his Brother George, in the Galantry and Person of
Monsieur Lejere -- My good Father Expects you Home, like the Prodigal Son, all
Torn and Tattered, and as Penitent too


To Plod on here in a Laborious Cheating all my Youth and Vigor, in hopes of
drunken Pleasures when I Am old: Or else go with him into Wales, and there lead
a thoughtless Life, Hunt, and Drink, and make Love to none but Chambermaids.
No, my Olivia, I Will Use the Sprightly Runnings of my Life, and not hope distant
Pleasures from its dregs


For that, use your Discretion; now Equip your self to your present business,
the more simply you are clad and look, the better. I Will home, and Expect you.


Do so, my good Sister, a little formal Hipocrisy may do, 'twill relish after
Liberty; for a Pleasure is never so well Tasted, as when it is seasoned with
some opposition


Sir, I Have News to tell you, will surprise you, Prince ^redrick is Arrived.


Is It Possible? I left him going for Flanders.


Passing by our Door, and seeing your Livery, inquired for you, and finding you
here, alighted just now. But see, Sir, he is here


My Life's preserver, welcome to my Arms, as health to sick men.


And thou to mine, as the kind Mistress to the longing Lover; My Soul's
Delight, and Darling of the Fair


Ah! Prince, you touch my bleeding Wound.


Ha! Lejere, leave to unhappy Lovers, those sighs, those folded Arms, and down
cast Eyes


Then they are fit for me: my Mistress, Sir, that Treasure of my Life, for whom
you have heard me sigh, is perjured, false, and married to an other. Yet what is
worse, I find my Prince, my Friend, here in my Native Country, and am not able
to pay him what his Greatness merits


You pain me when you compliment my Friendship.


Perhaps you will not think me worth this Honor when you shall hear my Story.


Thou can say nothing I can value less.


Perhaps too my way of Living has deceived you, being still received by
Princes, as Companions in all their Riots, Loves, and Divertisements, where
even you, did me the Honor to Esteem, and call me Friend


What e're thou art, I Am sure thy Mind's illustrious.


My Family, I must confess, is Honorable; but, Sir, my Father was the Younger
House, of which my unhappy self was destined to be last: I Am a Cadet, that
outcast of my Family, and born to that Curse of our Old English Custom:
Whereas in other Countries, Younger Brothers are trained up to the Exercise of
Arms, where Honor and Renown attend the Brave: we basely bind our Youngest out
to Slavery, to Lazy Trades, idly confined to Shops or Merchants Books, debasing
of the Spirit to the mean Cunning, how to Cheat and Chasser


A Custom insupportable. --


To this, to this low wretchedness of Life, your Servant Sir -- was destined by
his Parents, and am yet this Bound Indentur'd Slave


Thou have no cause to quarrel with thy Stars, since Virtue is most Vallu'd
when Oppressed -- Are all your Merchants Apprentices, thus Gay


Not all -- But, Sir, I could not bow my mind to this so necessary Drudgery,
and yet however, I assumed my Native Temper, when out of the Trading City; in
it, I forced my Nature to a dull s^o^enly Gravity, which well enough deceived
the busy Block-heads; my Clothes and Equipage I ledg'd at this End of the Town,
where I still pa^^'d for something better than I was, when e're I Pleased to
change the Trader for the Gentleman


And lived thus undiscovered --


With Ease, still Loved and Courted by the Great, ever Played high with those
durst venture most; and durst make Love where're my fancy liked, but sometimes
running out my Masters Cash, (which was supplied still by my Father) they sent
me, to Reform my Expensive Life, a Factor, into ^rance -- still I Essayed to be
a Plodding Thriver, but found my Parts not formed for Dirty business


There Is not a Thought, an Action of thy Soul, that does not tend to something
far more Glorious


If yet you think me worthy of your Favor, command that Life, you have so often
preserved


No more; -- Thou have encreast my Value for thee. -- Oh! take my Heart, and
see how't has been used by a Fair Charmer, since I saw thee last -- that sullen
day we Parted, you for England, you may remember, I designed for Flanders


I do with Malancholly, Sir, remember it,


Arrived at Ghent, I went to see an English Nun Initiated, where I beheld the
pretty Innocent, delivered up a Victim to Foolish Chastity; but among the
Relation; then attending the Sacrifice, was a Fair Sister of the Young Votress,
but so surpassing all I Would seen before, that I neglecting the Dull Holy
Business, Paid my Devotion to that Kneeling Saint


That was the nearest way to Heaven, my Lord.


Her Face, that had a thousand Charms of Youth, was height'n'd with an Air of
Languishment; a lovely Sorrow, dwelt upon her Eyes, that Taught my New
born-Passion Awe and Reverence


This Description of her, Fires me. --


Her Dimpl'd Mouth, her Neck, her Hand, her Hair, a Majesty, and Grace in every
Motion, completed my Undoing; I raved, I burnt, I languish'd with desire, the
Holy Place could scarce contain my madness, with Pain, with Torture, I
restrained my Passion when she retired, ^ed sadly from the Alter; I, mixing
with the Crowd, inquired her Name, and Count^y; her Servant told me, that she
was of Quality, and lived in England, nay, in this very Town, this gave me
Anguish not to be con^^^d, till I resolved to follow her, which is the cause
you find me here so soon^ thy Aid, thy Aid, Lejere, or I am lost


I wish to live no longer, then to serve your Highness, if she be Sir (...)
Maid of Quality, I shall soon find her out, and then you will easily Conquer

You Have all the Youth, and Beauty, that can Charm, and what gains most upon a
woman's heart, you have powerful Title Sir, a sort of Philter, that ^r sails to
win. But you have not told me yet the Ladies name


I had forgot that; -- It Is in these Tablets write: I Am now in have, going to
receive same Bills: I Wilborns, who came over with me, being sent for to be
Married


I know the House, it is in Southampton-S^^tare. I Will wait upon your ^^^^se --


Let me see -- Daughter to a Dece^^'d Lord, a Maid, L^^^lns-Inn-Fields, -- Ha^
-- her Name Mirtilla! Mirtilla.


thou have paid thy self, for all the Favors done me. Mirtilla! --

Why yes, Mirtilla! He takes but what she has given away already. --

Oh! Damn her, she has broke her Faith, her Vows, and is no longer mine -- And
you are my Friend.

Mirtilla's but my Mistress, and has taken all the Repose of my poor Life away
-- Yes, let him take her, I Will reisign her to him; and therefore shut my Eyes
against her Charms; Fix her inconstancy about my Heart, and scorn whatever she
can give me.


Your Lady mother has sent you a Candle, Sir.


Good Mrs. Manage, remember my kind Love to my Lady mother, and tell her, I
thank her for her Posset, but never eat in a morning after hard drinking over
night


Ah, Sir, but now you're married to a fine Lady, you ought to make much of your
self


Good Madam, as little of your Matrimony as of your Candle, my stomach is
plaguey squemish, and a hair of the Old Dog's worth both of 'em. Oh! sick! sick


WHat Life can compare with the Jolly Town-Rake's,
When in Youth his full Swing of all pleasure he takes!
At Noon be get up, for a Whet, and to dine,
And wings the d^ll hours with Mirth, Music and Wine,
Then Jogs to the Playhouse, and chats with the Masks,
And thence to The Rose, where he takes his Three Flasks
There, great as a Caesar, he revels, when drunk,
And scours all he meets, as he reels to his Punk;
Then finds the dear Girl in his Arms when he wakes.
What Life can compare with tue folly Town-Rake's!
He, like the Great Turk, has his Favorite She;
But the Town's his Seraglio, and still he lives free.
Sometimes she is a Lady; but as he must range,
Black Betty, or Oyster-Doll, serves for a Change.
As he varies his Sports, his whole Life is a Feast;
He thinks him that is soberest the most like a Beast.
At Houses of Pleasure breaks Windows and Doors;
Kicks Bullies and Cullies, then lies with their Whores.
Rare work for the Surgeon, and Midwife he makes.
What Life can compare with the Jolly Town-Rake's!
Thus in Covent Garden he makes his Campaign,
And no Coffee-house haunts, but to settle his Brain.
He laughs at dry Morals, and never does think,
Unless it is to get the best Wenches and Drink.
He dwells in a Tavern, and lies every where,
And improving his hours, lives an Age in a Year:
For as Life is uncertain, he loves to make haste;
And thus he lives longest, because he lives fast.
Then a Leap in the Dark to the Devil he takes.
What Death can compare with the Jolly Town-Rake's!
Why, how now, Sir Morgan, I see you will make a Husband of the Right Town Mode:
What, married but four days, and at your separate Appartment already


A Plague of your what de call ums.


Rakhells you would say, Cousin, an honorable Appellation for men of Bravery.


Ay, ay, your Rakehells -- I was never so mudl'd with Treason. Tierce Claret,
Oaths and Dice all the Days of my Life -- Was I in case to do Family duty;
S'life you drank down all my Love, all my Prudence too; Gad forgive me for it


Why, how the Devil came thou to bear thy Liquor so ill? Ods my Life, you
Drunk like a French man new come to the University


Pox, I can bear their Drinking as well as any Man, but your London way of
Boming and Politics does not agree with my Constitution; look ye, Cosen, set
quietly to it, and I Will stand my Ground, but to have Screaming Whores, Noisy
Bullies, Rattling Dice, Swearing and Cursing Gamsters, Cous. turns the Head of
a Country Drinker, more than the Wine


Oh! Use Cosen, will make an able Man.


Use, Cosen, Use me no Uses, for if ever you catch me at your Damned Clubs
again, I Will give you my Mother for a Maid; why you talk down right Treason


Treason, ay --


Ah Cosen, why we talked enough to --, Hang us all.


My Honest Country Couz. when will thou understand the Cuelphs, and the
Gibelins; and learn to talk Treason of this side the Law? Bilk a Whore, without
Remorse, break Windows, and not pay for 'em; Drink your Bottle without asking
Questions; Kill your Man without letting him Draw; Play away your Money, without
fear of your Spouse, and stop her Mouth by Undermining her Nose


Come, come, look you Cousin, one word of Advice now I Am sober; what the Devil
should provoke thee and me to put our selves, on our Twelve Godfathers for a
Frolic? We who have Estates, I should be loath to leave the World with a scurvy
Song, composed by the Poet Sternold

Or why, de see, should I expose my Noddle to the Billmen in Flannel, and lie
in the Roundhouse, when I may go to bed in a whole skin with my Lady Wife


Gad, Sir Morgan, thou have sometimes pretty smart Satirical Touches with thee;
Use but Will's Coffee a little, and with thy Estate, and that Talent, thou
may set up for a Wit


Mercy upon me, Sir Merlin, thou art stark mad: What, I a Wit! I had rather be
one of your Rakehells; for, look ye a man may sweat and stare, or so, break
Windows, and Drawers Heads, or so; un^^g a Needy Whore, and yet keep ones
Estate; but should I turn Wit, 'twere impossible; for a Wit with an Estate, is
like a Prisoner among the Canibal^


How so, good Sir Morgan?


Why, the Needy Rogues only feed him with praise, to fatten him for their
Palates, and then devour him


I applaud your Choice, Cousin; for what man of (...) would not prefer a Rake
to a Wit? The one enioys the pleasures, the other can only Rail at; and that
not out of Conscience, but Impotence; for alas! a Wit has no quarrel to Vice in
perfection, but what the Fox had to the Grapes; He cannot play away his Hundred
Pound at sight; his Third Day will not afford it; and therefore he Rails at
Ca^^e^^e^s, Whores si^^^ him, as much as Noblemen, and for the same cause,
money; These care not to sell their Carcasses for a Sonnet, nor these to scatter
their (...) be told an Old Tale of a Tub, they were so well acquainted with
before


What Is that, Sir Merlin?


Why, their Praise; -- For the Poets Flattery seldom reaches the Patron's
Vanity; And what is too strong seasoned for the rest of the World, is too weak
for their Palate


Why, look ye, Cousin, you're a shrewd (...) Whence learned you this Satyr; for
I Am sure it is none of thy own; (...) should as soon suspect thee guilty of Good
Nature, as Wit


I scorn it; and therefore I confess I stole the Observation from a Poet; but
the Devil pick his Bones for diverting me from the Noble Theme of Rakehells


Noble Theme, Sir Merlin! look ye, de see: Don't mistake me; I think it is a
very scurvy one; and I would not have your Father know that you set up for such
a Reprobate; for Sir Rowland would certainly disinherit thee


O keep your musty morals to your self, good Country Couz; They Will do you
service to your Welsh Criminals, for stealing an Hen, or breaking up a Wenches
enclosure, or so, Sir Morgan; but for me, I despise 'em: I have not been
admitted into the Family of the Rakehellorums for this, Sir: Let my Father
drink Old Adam, read the Pilgrim's Progress, The Country Justices Calling, or
for a Regale, drink the dull manufacture or Malt and Water; I des^e him; he
cannot cut off the Entail, of what is settled on me; and for the rest, I Will trust
Dame ^ortune; and pray to the Three Fatal Sisters to cut his Rotten Th^^d in
Two, before he thinks of any such Wickedness


Will you so, Sir? Why how now Sirrah! get you out of my House, Rogue; get out
of my Doors, Rascal.


Upon my Honor now, Brother, what is the matter? Whence this Ungenerous
Disturbance


What Is the matter? the Disturbance! Why, sister, this Rogue here -- this
unintelligible graceless Rascal, here, will needs (...) up for a Rakehell, when
there is scarce such a thing in the Nation, above an Ale-draper's Son, and
chooses to be awkerdly out of Fashion, merely for the sake of Tricking and
Poverty; and keeps company with the senseless, profane, lazy, idle, Noisie,
Grovelling Rascals, purely for the sake of spending his Estate like a Notorious
Blockhead: But I Will take care he shall not have what I can dispose of: You Will be
a Rake-hell, will you


How Cousin! Sure you will not be such a filthy beastly thing, will you?


Lord, Aunt, I only go to the Club sometimes, to improve my ^^lf in the Art of
Living, and the Accomplishments of a five Gentleman


A fine Gentleman, Sot, a fine Coxcomb.


Hold, hold, good Uncle, my Cousin has been only drawn in, a ^^^ie, or s^, do
see, be^^, Heir to a good Estate; and that is what his Club (...) to (...) off
Old Tavern Scores, and buy Utensils for Whores in Fa^^^^


My Estate sold to pay Tavern Scores, and keep Nasty Whores?


Whores ^ay filthy creatures; do they deal in Whores? Pray (...) what is a
R^^e-hell


A Rake-hell is a man that de^ies Law and good manners, nay and good ^e^^e too;
ha^^ both Morality and Religion, and that not for any Reason (for he never
thinks), but merely because he don't understand 'em, ^^^'s the Whore's
pro^e^tion and punishment, the Bawds Tool, the Sharpers Bubble, the Vi^^^r^
Property, the Drawers Terror, the Glasiers Bene^^tor: in short, a ^ea^ing
thoughtless, heedless, ridiculous, universal Cox^^o


O Lord, Aunt, no more like him than an Attorney's like an honest man. Why a
Rake-hell is --


What siraah! what you rebel?


Nay, Good Brother, permit my Nephew to tell us his Notion.


Why, Aunt, I say a Rake-hell is your only Man of Beavery; he slights all the
Force of Fortune, and sticks at no Hazard -- Plays away his hundred pounds at
sight, pays a Ladies Bill at sight, drinks his Bottle without Equivocation, and
sights his Man without any provocation


Nay then Mr. Rogue, I Will be sworn thou art none: Come, Sir, will you fight,
Sir? will you fight, Sir? Ha!


Fight, Sir! fight Sir?


Yes, fight, Sir: Come, spare your Prayers to the Three Fata! sisters, and cut
my Thread thy self, thou Graceless, Reprobate Rascal -- Come, come on, you Man
of Bravery.


Oh, good Sir, hold; I recant, Sir, I recant.


I will, Villain.


What, disinherit your Eldest Son, Brother?


Ay, Aunt, his very Heir Apparent? Aunt to show you h^^ the Old Gentleman has
misrepresented us. Give me leave to present y^^ a Dance. -- I provided to
Entertain your Son with, in which is represent^^ all the Beauties of our Lives


Oh! by all means, Cosen, by all means.


What hoa? Roger bring in the Dancers.


Sir, who does your Worship think is a^ri^'d.


My Son George, I hope, come in the Nick.


Even so, Sir, from Paris --


The Prodigal Returned, then Kill the ^^tt^d Calf?

-- My own dear Boy, thou art welcome to my


Pox take him that he should come just in the Nick, as the Old Fellow says --


Yes, you had a Mother.

Whom in my Youth I was compelled to Marry; and Gad, I think, I got thee with as
ill a will, but George and my Olivia? In heart of Love, when my desire was Now.
But hark ye Boy George, you have cost me a damned deal of Money, Surrah; but you
shall Marry, and Redeem all George


What you please, Sir, to study Virtue, Duty, and Allegience, shall be my
future business


Well said George! Here Is a Boy now.


Virtue and Allegiance, Lord, Lord, how came so sneaking I follow to spend Five
Thousand Pounds of his Masters Cash


She Is Rich, George, but something homely.


She Will not be Proud then, Sir.


Not much of her Beauty -- she is of a good staid Age too, about same fourscore.


Better still, Sir, I shall not fear Cuckoldom.


For that I cannot Answer; but she has two Thousand a year. (...) to settle my
Family, and then -- Marry my self George


What to this old Ladies Granddaughter? Methinks she is (...) ^it for your Son,
Sir Merlin, and the Old Lady for you


No, no, the Young Rogues can help themselves with Mistresses; but it is well if
an old man can keep his Wife to himself -- I Have invited 'em to Dinner to day,
and see, they are come


Where Is Sir Rowland Marteen? Oh, your Servant, Sir, I am come.


Your Ladyship is mistaken, this is not Sir Rowland, but a Handsome proper
Young Man


A young man! I cry you mercy heartily -- young man, I a lighted in the Sun,
and am almost Blind


With wondrous Old Age.


Good lack, Sir Rowland, that I should mistaken young man so!


Ay, Madam, and such a young man too.


Ay, ay, I see him now.


S^d^^th, what a Sepulcher is here, to bury a Husband in? How came she to
escape the Hood? for sure she was not born since.


This is the lusty lad, my Son George, I told your Ladyship of.


Got so, cot so, is it so Sir, I ask your Pardon, Sir. Mr. Twang, take a survey
of him, and give me your Opinion of his Person, and his Parts


Truly Madam, the young Man is of a comely Personage and Lineaments.


Of what Sir -- Lord, I have such a Cold.


Which she got when the ^ick^s went Naked.


Madam, you have a Power over Sir Rowland; Pray entreat him ^o take his Son,
Sir Merlin, into Grace again.


That, Sir, you must grant me, pray let me know the Quarrel.


By Heaven she is Fair as the first Ruddy Streakes of Opening Day. Cupid, but
never felt his Dart, she is so full of Life and Gayity. Pray, Madam, who is
that Lady.


The Grand Child of your Mistress, and your Mother that must be.


Then I shall Cuckhold my Father, that is certain.


For your sake, Madam, once again I re-establish him in my Family, but the
first fault Cashier's him -- Come let us in -- here my Lady Youthly, take George
by the Hand, but have a care of the young Rogue, if he comes once to touch so
Brisk a Widow, he sets her Heart on Fire


Which will burn like a snuff of a Candle. No Body will be able to endure it.

-- So Fortune, I see, provides for me.

On this Hand Wealth, on that young Pleasures Lie.
He never wants these, who has that Kind Supply.

W^ll, Sir Rowland, if I should be inclined to cast away my self on your Son
George, what would you settle --


Settle, not a souse Madam, he carries the best Younger Brothers Fortune in
Christendom about him


Why, the Young Man's deserving, I confess. But he is your Sun, Sir Rowland, and
something ought to be settled upon the Heirs of our Bodies, Lawfully begotten


Hercules his Labors, were a Jigg to his that shall beget 'em.


If you like him upon these terms, to make him Master of your Fortune --


For that, let him trust to me, and his own deservings.


No trusting in these Fickle Times, Madam -- Why, I Will let the young sturdy
Rogue out to Hire; he will make a pretty Livelihood at Journey work; and shall a
Master-Workman, a Husband deserve nothing


Ay, these Husbands that know their own Strength, as they say, set so high a
Value on their Conjugal Virtues -- And if he be Disloyal again a the other side
he gives a Wife so ill an Example -- for we are all Liable to Temptations


Well said, if thou be so, it must be the Old Tempter himself.

Teresia, I Will consent that you shall Marry George.


How, my Granddaughter? Why, I designed her for your Eldest Son, Sir Merlin;
and she has a good a fortune of Five Hundred a year that I cannot hinder her
of; and is too young for you


So is George for your Ladyship; and as for his Fortune, it is more than likely,
I shall make him my Eldest Son


Say you so, Sir; well, I Will ^^^^der, and take Advice of my Friends.


Consider, alas, Madam, my House will be Besieged by all the Widows in Town; I
shall get more by showing him, than the Rhinoceros. Ga^ I Will sell the young
Rogue by Inch of Candle, before he is Debauched and Spoiled in this lewd Town


Well, suppose --


Nothing under Teresia -- Gad, I think some old Dog Star Reigns to Day, that so
many old Heats are burning in their Sockets -- I Am in Love with this young
Tittymouse here, most damnably -- Well what say you Widow? Speak now, or you
know the Proverb


Well, Sir Rowland you are too hard for me.


It Is as you said, Olivia, I am destined to your Father.


What, the Sentence is past then?


Ay, but the Devil is in us, if we stay till Execution Day. Why this is worse
than being mewed up at Hackney-School -- My Fortune's my own, without my
Grandmother, and with that Stock, I Will set up for my self, and see what
Traffic this wide World affords a young beginner


That Is well resolved; I am of the same mind, rather than Marry Mr. Wellb^^n,
whom I never saw. -- But prithee let us see what we have in Stock, besides Ready
Money -- What Toys and Knick-nacks to invite


Faith my Inventory is but small -- Let me see -- First, one Pre^^y well made
Machin, called a Body, of a very good Motion, fit for several uses -- one
Pretty Conceited Head-Peice, that will fit any bodies Coxcomb, -- when it is
Grave and Dull, will sit an Alderman, when Politic and busy, a Statesman;
turn it to intreigne, will fit a City Wife, and to Invention, it will set up an
Evidence


Very well!


Item, one Tongue that will prattle Love, if you put the Heart in time (for
they are Commodities I resolve shall go together) I have Youth enough to Please
a Lover, and Wit enough to please my self


Most Excellent Trifles all! As for my outside, I leave to the Discretion of
the Chasserer; but I have a rare Devise, called an Invention, that can do many
Feats; a Courage that would stock a Coward; and a pretty Impl^ment, called a
Heart, that will strike Fire with any convenient force; I have ^^^ght thousand
Pounds to let out on any able Security, but not a Gr^^^ (...) I like the Man


Thus (...) shall rui^ all the l^ws, and ^^do the Indian Houses -- but where
(...) we show! W^^^ meet with the Love Merchants


What things you of the Gallery at (...) Esaias in Masks?


S^^, a state (...) taken up b^ women of Quality, and now run into Ridicule, by
all (...) Devils of the Town, and is only a Trap for a Te^^^, a small new (...)
^^sider, or a City Cul^^ where they Baul out their Eighteen Pence in B^^dy, and
Filthy Nonsense, to the Disturbance of the whole House, and the King's Peace,
the Man of Quality have forsaken


What think you of the Mall


As too Public to end an Intreague; our Affairs require a Conquest as sudden
as that of Caesar, who came, saw and overcame


It Is true, besides there is so many Cruisers, we shall never Board a Prize.
What think you of the Church


An Hippocritical shift, of all masks I hate that of Religion; and it should be
the last place I Would wish to meet a Lover in, unless to Marry him


And Faith that is the last thing a Lover should do, but we are compelled to
have, it is our last Refuge if we could but see; and like our men, the business
were soon dispatched. -- Let me see -- Faith e'n put on Breeches too, and thus
disguised, seek our Fortune -- I am within these three days to be fetched from
Hackney School, where my Father believes me still to be, and thou in that time
to be Married to the old Gentleman; Faith resolve -- and let us in and Dress
thee -- away, here is my Lady --


Ah, let me have that Song again.


NO, Delia, no! What man can range
From such Seraphic Pleasure
It Is want of Charms that make us change,
To grasp the Fury Treasure.
What man of sense would quit a certain Bliss,
For hopes and empty Possibilities!
Vain Fools their sure Possessions spend,
In hopes of Chymic Treasure,
But for their fancied Riches find
Both want of Gold and Pleasure.
Rich in my Delia, I can wish no more;
The Wanderer, like the Chemist, must be poor.
Not see him, Madam -- I protest he is Handsomer, and Handsomer, Paris has given
him such an Air: -- Lord, he is all over Monsieur -- Not see him, Madam, -- Why?
I hope you do not, like the Foolish sort of Wives, design a strict Obedience to
your Husband


Away, a Husband! -- when absence, that sure Remedy of Love, had healed the
Bleeding Wound Lejere had made, by Heaven I thought I never should Love again
-- but since -- Endimion has Inspired my Soul, and for that Youth I burn, I
pine, I languish


See, Madam -- there is an Object may put out that Flame, and may revive the Old
one --


Shame, and confusion, -- L^jere.


Yonder she is, That Mien and Shape I know, the the False Face be turned with
shame away.

-- God's Death, -- I tremble!

Yet came well fortified with Pride and Anger! I see thou'st in thy Eyes a
little Modesty.

That would conceal the Treasons of thy Heart.


Perhaps it is their scorn that you mistake.


It may be so, she that sets up for Jilting, should go on, 'Twere mean to find
remorse, so young, and soon; Oh, this gay Town has Gloriously improved you
amongst the rest; that taught you Perjury


Alas! When was it Sworn? --


In the Blessed Age of Love.

When every Power looked down, and heard thy Vows.


I was a Lover then, should Heaven concern its self with Lover's Perjuries,
'twou'd find no leisure to preserve the Universe


And was the Woman so strong in thee, thou could not wait a little? Were you
so raving mad for Fool and Husband, you must take up with the next ready
Coxcomb? Death, and the Devil, a dull Clumsey Boar! -- What was it charmed you?
The Beastly Quantity of Man about him


Faith a much better thing, five thousand Pounds a Year, his Coach and Six, it
shows well in the Park


Did I want Coach, or Equipage, and show?


But still there wanted Fool, and Fortune to it; He does not Play at the Groom
Porters for it; Nor do the Drudgery of some worn out Lady


If I did this, thou had the spoils of all my Nation's Conquests, while all
the whole World was wondering whence it came, for Heaven had left thee Nothing
but thy Beauty, that dear Reward of my Indust'rious Love


I do confess --


Till time had made me Certain of a Fortune, which now was hasting on. --

And is that store of Love and wondrous Joys I had been hoarding up so many
tender Hours, all lavish't on a Brute, who never Lusted 'bove my Lady's Woman;
for Love he understands no more than sense


Prithee Reproach me on --


'S Death, I con'd rave! Is this soft tender Bosom to be pressed by such a Load
of Fool? Damnation on thee -- Where got'st thou this Course Appetite? Take back
the Powers, those Charms she is sworn Adorned me, since a dull, Fat-Fac'd,
noisy, Taudry Block-head, can serve her turn as well.


You shall not go away with that Opinion of me. --


Oh, that false Tongue can now no more deceive -- Art thou not Married? Tell me
that false Charmer


Yes. --


Curse on that word; would thou had never learnt it -- it gave thy Heart,
and my Repose away


Do think I Married with that dull design? Can thou believe I gave my Heart
away, because I gave my Hand? -- Fond Ceremony that -- A necessary trick,
devised by wary Age, to Traffic 'twixt a Portion, and a Jointure; him whom I
Loved is Married to my Soul


Art thou then mine? And will thou make Atonement, by such a Charming way? --
Come to my Clasping Arms


Oh, Heavens! How rude am I? -- Cry Mercy, Madam, I protest I thought you would
been alone


'S Death! my Aunt Blunder!


Only this Gentleman, Madam. --


Sir, I beg your Pardon -- and am really sorry --


That you find me with your Daughter, Madam.


I hope you take me to be better Breed, Sir: Nor had I interrupted you, but for
an Accident that has happened to Sir Morgan, coming out of the City in a
Beastly Hackney, he was turned over in Cheap Side, and Striking the filthy
Coachman, the nasty Mobb came out, and had almost Killed him, but for a young
Gentleman, a stranger, that came to his Rescue, and whom he has Brought to Kiss
your Ladyship's Hands -- But I Will Instruct him in his Duty, he shall wait till
your Ladyship is more at Leisure -- alas! He Is already on the Stairs.


Let him wait there -- Lejere, It Is necessary you dapart, sure of my Heart, you
cannot fear the rest; the Night is hast'ing on; Trust me but some few Hours,
and then Lejere I Will pay you back with interest


All blessings light on thee.

But will your Lady Mother make no Discovery of my being here.


She Would sooner Pump for me, and believe it a part of good Breeding (...) away, I
hear 'em coming


He Is gone -- Sir Morgan, you may approach.


Nay, as Gat shall save me, Sir, you shall see my Lady, or so, do you see, and
receive the Thanks of the House


As Gat shall save me, Sir, I am sorry for it -- another time, Sir, I have
earnest business. Now, I am sure nothing worth seeing can belong to this litter
of Fools


My Daughter is a Person of Quality, I assure you, Sir.


I doubt it not Madam -- if she be of the same piece -- Send me a fair
deliverance

-- Ha! What bright Vision's that?


Heaven! It Is the lovely Prince I saw in ^landers.


Look how he stares -- why, what the Devil ails he?


To her, Sir, or so d' ye see, what a Pox are you afraid of her?


He Is in Admiration of her Beauty, Child.


By Heaven the very Woman I Adore!


How d' ye, see Sir, how de ye, ha, ha, ha?


I cannot be mistaken; For Heaven made nothing but Young Angels like her!


Lookee Page, is your Master in his right Wits.


Sure he is in Love, and Lov's a devilish thing.


Sa, ho, ho, ho, where are you Sir, where are you?


In Heaven!

Oh! do not rouse me from this Charming Slumber, lest I should wake, and find
it but a Dream


A plaguey dull follow this, that can sleep in so good Company as we are.


Dream -- A Fiddle-stick; to her, man, to her, and Kiss her soundly, or so, d'
ye see


I, I, Kiss her, Sir, Kis^ her -- i^, (...), i^, he is very simple.


Kiss her, -- there is universal R^in in her Lips.


I never knew 'em guilty of such mischiefs.


No, I Will be sworn, I have Kis^ 'em twenty times, and never did me harm.


Thou Kiss those lips? impossible, and they false; they never were pressed but by
soft Southern Winds


Southern Winds -- ha, ha, lookee d' ye see boy thy Master's mad, on so, d' ye
see -- why, what a Pox, d' ye think I never Kiss my Wife, or so d' see


Thy Wife! --


He will betray his Passion to these fools: Alas, he is mad -- and will undo my
Hopes.


Thou may as well claim Kindred to the Gods; she is mine, a Kingdom shall not
buy her from me


Hay day, my Wife yours! lookee, as do you see, what is it Midsammer-moon with
you, Sir, or so, do you see


In pity give him way, he is madder than a Storm.


Thou know thou art, and thy dear Eyes confess it -- a numerous Train
attended our Nuptials, Witness the Priest, witness the Sacred Altar where we
kneeled -- when the blessed silent Ceremony was perform'


Alas! he is mad, past all recovery mad.


Mad, say, poor Soul -- Friend, how long has your Master been thus Intoxicated?


He Is mad indeed to make this Discovery. Handers to whom he was Contracted.


Good lack -- ay, ay, he is distracted, it seems.


See how he Kneels to her, stand off, and do but mind him.


Rise, Sir, -- you will ruin me -- dissemble if you Love -- or you can never be
happy.


My Transport is too high for a disguise -- give me some hope, promise me some
Relief, or at your Feet I Will pierce a Wounded Heart


Rise, and hope for all you wish: Alas, he Faints --


Hold him fast, Madam, between your Arms, and he will recover presently. Stand
all away. --


Oh! tell me, will thou bless my Youth and Love? Oh! Swear, (...) thou
should break -- for Women would be Gods, but for inconstancy


See, he begins to come to himself again -- keep off --


You have a thousand Charms that may secure you -- The Ceremony of my Nuptials
is every evening Celebrated, the noise of which, draws all the Town together, be
here in Masquerade, and I Will tontrive it so, that you shall speak with me this
Night alone


So, now let my Soul take Air --


What pity it is so fine a Gentleman should be thus.


You must be bringing home your Fops to me, and see what comes of it.


Fops, I thought him no more a Fop, than I do my own Natural Cosen here


Where am I?


Why, here, Sir, here, at Sir M. Blun. Lodging in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.


That Is well, he has told me -- Where have I been this long half hour, and more?


Nay, the Lord Knows?


I fancied I saw a lovely Woman.


Fancied -- why so you did man, my Lady Mirti^a Blunder.


methought, I slept upon her snowy Bosom, and dreamed I was in Heaven, where I
claimed her


Good lack aday -- why, so you did, Sir, ha, ha, ha.


And raved on Love; and talked abundance of Nonsense.


Ha, ha, ha, by my Troth, and so you did, Sir.


I ask your Pardon, Sir, it is an infirmity I have that ever takes me at the
Approach of a Fine Woman, which made me so unwilling to see your Lady


Lookee, I ask your Pardon heartily, or so, d' ye see -- and am sorry you are
not in a Condition to Visit her often


I shall be better when-I'm used to her; it is the first time only affects me.


Pray, Sir, be Pleased to use your self to her, or so, d' ye see -- she is a
civil person, and a Person of Quality before I married her, d' ye see


My Son tells you Truth, Sir.


Madam, I doubt it not, pray beg her Pardon, and do you give me yours.


A most Accomplished Person --


WEll, the Ball does not begin these three Hours, and we'll divert our selves
at my Aunt's Bassett-Table, which you see is Preparing, her Natural Propensity
to oblige both Sexes makes her keep a Bank on purpose to bring 'em together.
There we shall see the Old and the Young, the Ugly, and the Handsome, Fools
that have Money, and Wits that have none; and if the Table afford us nothing to
please the Appetite, we'll abroad for Forage


Nay, Sir, I am resolved you shall Honor my Aunt's Basset-Table --


My Aunt's Basset-Table; There may be money Stirring among these Fools, and
Fortune may befriend me.


Sir Morgan, Pray know this worthy Gentleman, I have the Honor to lodge in the
House with him.

Sir, This is Sir Morgan Blunder, a Person of Quality in Wales, I assure you.


I question it not, Sir, and am proud of the Honor of Kissing your Hands.


Yonder Is a handsome Gentleman.


My Brother George, as I live, it is as I could wish.


Lejere.


Welborn! Welcome from Paris, I heard of your Arrival from Prince Fredrick.


Yes, I am come to my Destruction, Friend.


Ay, thour't to be Married, I hear to a Welsh Fortune.


Tho Matrimony be a sufficient Curse, yet that is not the worst -- I am fallen
most damnably in Love, since I arrived, with a young Creature I saw in the Mall
the other Night, of Quality she was, I dare swear, by all that was about her, but
such a Shape! a Face! a Wit! a Mind, as in a moment quite subdued my Heart; she
had another Lady with her, whom (dogging her Coach) I found to be a Neighbor
of mine, and Granddaughter to the Lady Youthly, but who my Conqueror was I
never since could learn


'Slife, Teresia, yonder is the Handsome Fellow that entertained us with so much
Wit, on Thursday last in the Mall


What, when you Changed your Breeches for Petticoats at my Lodgings.


That Night, and ever since, I have felt a sort of a Tender for him.


As I do for his Friend -- Pray Heaven he be not Married! I fear he has laid
an Imbargo on my Heart, before it puts out of the Port


Are you not for the Basset?


No, I Have business at the Ball to Night, besides my Lady Blunder has a Quarrel
to me for last Night's Debauch; I Will wait on you in the Morning.


Well, you to your Business, and I to mine. --

Let the Dull Trading Fool by Business Live,
Statesmen by Plots, the Courtier cringe to thrive;
The Fop of Noise and Wealth be Cullied on,
And purchase no one Joy by being undone,
Whilst I by Nobler careless ways advance,
Since Love and Fortune are acquired by Chance.

THO the young prize Cupid's Fire
It Is more val'd by the Old;
The Sun's warmth we now admire,
More than when the Season's cold.
TIme and Place you see conspire,
With tender Wishes fierce desire:
See the willing Victim stands
To be offered by your hands:
Ah! Let me on Lov's Altars lying,
Clasp my Goddess whilst I Am dying.

Oh Lord! what hard words, and strange things do you say;
Your Eyes to seem closing, and just dying away:
Ah! Pray what do you want? Explain but your mind,
Which did I but know, perhaps I Would be kind.

My pretty soft maid, full of innocent Charms,
I languish to sigh out my Soul in thy Arms;
Oh! then, if I Am loved, deny not the Bliss,
But tell me I Am happy, with a ravishing Kiss.

Oh! Fie, Sir, I vow I cannot endure you,
Be civil, or else I Will cry out I assure you;
I will not be Kissed so, nor tumbled, not I,
I Will tell all your tricks, that I will, if I dye.

Nay, never dissemble, nor smother that Fire;
Your Blushes, and Eyes betray your desire.
The pratic'd not Innocent, dally with bliss,
Then prithee be kind, and taste what it is.

Let me dye now, you are grown a strange sort of a man
To force a young Maid, let her do what she can;
I fear now I blush to think what we are doing.
And is this the End of all you Men's wooing?

At this pleasure all Aim, both Godly and Sinners,
And none of 'em blush for it but poor young beginners.
In pleasure both Sexes, all Ages agree,
And those that take most, most happy will be.

In pleasure both Sexes, etc.

OH, my dear Teresia, I Am lost in Love! I Have seen a Man, -- or rather it is
Angel! so gay, so soft, so charming, and so witty; so dressed! so shaped! and
Danced with such an Air


Hey day! Prithee where is this Wonder to be seen?


Why do thou ask? Have thou not seen a man of Dress, and Movement of uncommon
Fashion


A great many, very odd, and Fantastic, I Am sure my dear Man is none of 'em.


Thy Heart when fired burns easily, and soft, but I am all impatient, darts,
and flames, all the effects of Love are panting in my Heart, yet never saw his
Face; but see, he comes, and I must find a way to let him know the mischiefs he
has done


Endimion, where is Sir Morgan?


At his usual Diversion, Madam, Drinking.


Do you wait near me to Night, I may perhaps have kinder business for you ever
the morning


You heap too many Blessings on me, Madam.


Oh, turn thy lovely Eyes upon thy Slave, that waits and watches for a tender
look


Oh, Sir, why do you press a yielding heart too much, undone by what you have
said already


Those soft Addresses must be those of Love.


My Honor was in danger when I promised -- and yet I blush to tell you I was
pleased, and blessed the dear necessity that forced me


Ha! it is the man I love -- and Courts Mirtilla, and she receives him with
inviting looks. 'Sdeath, she is a common Lover! already I Am arrived to Jealousy


What gilded thing is that? -- I must disturb 'em --

It Is I, Mirtilla, languishing for the appointed Happiness, while you, perhaps,
are taken up with different thoughts --


Frederick; it is great to enslave a Prince.

-- Lejere -- wait till I give the word -- perhaps it may be late -- go mix
your self in the Crowd, you may be else suspected --


I have a shrewd guess that this should be my man by his shape, and mein.


Who Is there?


Love and Fortune.


Two very good Friends of mine, prithee who art thou that bring'st 'em?


A wandering Nymph, that has had a swinging Character of your Person and Parts
-- if thou be'st the man, prithee dear Stranger, let me see thy Face, and if
I Am not mistaken, it is ten to one, but we may go near to strike up some odd
Bargain or other


And I am as likely a Fellow, for some odd Bargain or other, as ever you met
with -- Look ye, am I the man


Let me see -- A very handsome Face, inclining to round, fine wanton Eyes, with
a Plaguey Roguish Lear, plump, round, red Lips, not tall, nor low, and extremely
well fashioned.


I am glad on it, and prithee dear Creature, let me see if thou art not the
Woman --


Heaven! what Woman, Sir?


Why, any Woman that is Pretty, Witty, Young, and Good-natured.


I had rather show any thing almost than my Face.


Faith, and that is kind; but every thing in its due time: I love to arrive at
Happiness by degrees, there is as much Pleasure in the Journey of Love, as in
the Arrival to it, and the first Stage is a handsome Face


Where you Bait a while, take a short Survey, and away.


To wit, and good Humor; where a man finds Pleasure enough to engage him a
long while


Then to all the small Villages, called little Freedoms, Kissing, Playing,
Fooling, Sighing, Dying -- and so on to the last Stage, where Whip and Spur
laid by, all tired and dull, you lazily lie down and sleep


No, I Am a more vigorous Lover: And since in the Country of True Love, there
remains a Terra Inc^gnita, I shall always be making new Discoveries


True Love! Is there such a thing in the whole Map of Nature?


Yes, I once discovered it in my Voyage round the World.


Sure it is some Enchanted place, and vanishes as soon as it is approached.


Faith, let us set out for it, and try; if we lose our Labor, we shall, like
Searchers for the Philosophers Stone, find something that will recompense our
pains. --

Ha, gone -- I must not part so with you -- I Will have you in my Eye.


This Night gives you an Assignation -- I tremble at the thought -- Ah, why
will you pursue me thus to Ruin? Why with resistless Charms invade my Heart,
that cannot stand their Force -- alone -- without my Woman -- the Enterprise
with you would be too dangerous


Dangerous to be adored! and at your Feet behold your Slave making Eternal Vows?


If I were sure that you would pass no further. --


Let the fond God of Love be my Security -- will you not trust a Deity?


Whom should she trust, that dares not trust her self?


That is some Lover, whom I must observe.


Alas, the Foe's within that will betray me, Ambition, and our Sexes Vanity --
Sir, you must prevail --


And in return, for ever take my Soul.


Anon I Will feign an illness, and retire to my Apartment, whither this Faithful
Friend shall bring you, Sir.


Hum! -- that looks like some Love Bargain, and Manage called to Witness. By
Heaven, gay Sir, I Will watch you


But hark ye, my Fellow-Adventurer, are you not married?


Married -- that is a Bug word -- prithee if thou have any such Design, keep on
thy Mask, lest I be tempted to Wickedness


Nay, truth is, it is a thousand pity's to spoil a handsome man, to make a dull
Husband of: I have known an Old Battered Bully of Seventy, unmarry'd, more
agreeable for a Gallant, than any scurvy, out-of-Humour'd Husband at Eight and
Twenty


Gad, a thousand times.


Know. I have Five Hundred Pounds a Year.


Good.


And the Devil and all of Expectations from an Old Woman.


Very good.


And this Youth, and little Beauty to lay out in love.


Teresia! the lovely Maid designed for my Mother, now, what a Dog am I? that
gives me the greater Gust to her, and would fain Cuckold my Father.


My Lady faints -- help, help.


Only the beat Oppresses me -- but let it not disturb the Company. I Will take
the Air a little, and return


Is this designed, or real -- perhaps she is retired for me -- M^s. Manage --


Ha! Monsieur Lejere! what shall I feign to put him off withal.


Why do thou start? How does my dear Mirtilla?


Reposing, Sir, a while, but anon I Will wait on her for your admittance.


Ha, she spoke in passing by that gay thing -- What means it, but I Will trace
the Mystery


The young People are Lazy, and here is nothing but gaping and peeping in one
another Vizards; come, Madam, let you and I shame 'em into Action.


Ha! what is this, Sir, a Challenge?


A Soft One, Sir.


A Billet -- whoever the Lady be.


I know not, Sir, how great a Jest you may make of it; but I assure you the
Lady is in earnest, and if you be at leisure to hear Reason from her. --


Fair and softly, my Dear Love Messenger, I am for no hasty Bargains; not but I
should be glad to hear Reason from any of the Sex -- But I have been so
damnably Jilted -- Is she of Quality


Yes.


Then I Will not hear any thing from her; they are troublesome, and insolent; and
if she have a Husband, to hide her Intriegues she has recourse to all the
little Arts and Cunnings of her Sex; and she that jilts her Husband, will her
Lover


She is not troubled with a Husband, Sir.


What, she is parted from the Fool; then she is Expensive, and for want of
Alimony, jilts all the believing Block-heads that she meets with


But this is a Maid, Sir.


Worse still! At every turn she is raving on her Honor; then if she have a
Kinsman, or a Brother, I must be Challenged


Sir, you mistake, my Lady is for Matrimony.


How!


You have not forsworn it, I hope.


Not so -- but --


If a Lady, Young and Handsome, and Ten Thousand Pounds --


Nay, I am not positive --


Wise Coxcombs be damned, here is a Health to the Man,
That since Life is but short, lives as long as he can.
Where is my Lady Mirtilla, Rogues?


And my Mistress, Rascals? For we are resolved to show our selves in Triumph to
our Wives and Mistresses


Your Mistress, Sir Merlin? mistake not your Mark,


Ha! Art thou there, old Cathedral? Why thou look as magnificently as Old
Queen Bess in the Westminster-Cupboard


Lookee as de see, when Adam wore a Beard, she was in her Prime, or so, de see.


Sir, you are a saucy Jack, and your Father shall correct you.


My Father! my Father's an old Tossed, de see; and I hope to see him hanged.


Here Is a Heathen-Christian! see his Father hanged!


Ay hanged, and all the old Fathers in Christendom. Why, what-a-Pox should
Fathers trouble the World for? When I come to Reign in Parliament, I will enact
it Felony, for any Father to have so little Grace to live, that has a Son at
Years of Discretion


A damned Rogue, I Will disinherit him immediately.


Is it so great a Crime, Brother, for a Gentleman to be Drunk?


You Lie like a Son of a Whore -- I have been drinking Confusion to all the
Fathers and Husbands in England


How, Sir, Confusion to Husbands! Lookee de see, Sir, swallow me that Word, or
I Will make you deposite all the conjugal Wine you have drunk


I deposite all your Wine! Sirrah, you're a Blunderbuss.


Sirrah! you are a diminitive Bully.


Sirrah! you're the Whore of Babylon, and I defy you.


Lookee de see, I scorn to draw upon a drunken Man, or so, I being sober; but I
boldly challenge you into the Cellar, where thou shall drink till thou renounce
thy Character, or talk Treason enough to hang thee, and that is fair and civil


Agreed; and when I Am drunk enough to ravish, I Will Cuckold my old Dad, and
fight him for his Mistress


I have no Patience; I Will kill the Dog, because I Will have the Law on my side --
Come on, Sir.


Villain! Rascal! What, draw upon thy Father!


Pray, Sir, who are you? that I may thank you for my Life.


One, Sir, whose Duty 'twas.


What, my dear George! -- I Will go and cut off the Inta^ of my Estate presently,
and thou shall have it all, Boy, thou shall --


Fortune is still my Friend! Had but Mirtilla been so! I wonder that she sends
not to me! My Love's impatient, and I cannot wait -- while the dull Sot is
boozing with his Brother-Fools in the Cellar. I Will softly to the Chamber of my
Love -- Perhaps she waits me there --


Oh! I am ravished with excess of Joy.


Enough, my charming Prince! Oh, you have said enough!


Never, my Mirtilla!

The Sun that views the World, nor the bright Moon, that favors Lover^
Stealths, shall ever see that Hour. Vast, as thy Beauties, are my young
Desires; and every new Possession kindles new Flames, soft as thy Eyes, soft as
thy render Touches, and, ever the Pantings of my Heart are laid, new
Transports, from new Wishes, dance about it, and still remains in Love's
Harmonious Order.


This House I know, and this should be her Bedchamber, because the Best; and
yet methought I heard another Voice -- but I may be mistaken


I faint with Pleasure of each tender Clasp: I sigh, and languish, gazing on
thy Lies; and dye upon thy Lips, with every Kiss


Surely I know that Voice! Torments, and Hell! -- but it is impossible?


Oh! satisfy my Doubt, my trembling Doubt! Am I beloved? Have I about me ought
engaging to Thee, Charmer of my Soul


It is the Prince.


Ah, Prince! Can you such needless Questions ask, after the Sacrifice which I
have made


Hell take thee for that Falsehood.


Think not the mighty Present of your Jewels, enough to purchase Provinces, has
bought one single Sigh, or Wish: No, my dear Prince, you owe 'em all to Love,
and your own Charms


Oh damned, dissembling Jilt!


No more, no more, my Soul's oppressed with Joy: let me unload it in thy tender
Arms, and sigh it out into thy ravishing Bosom


Death, and Damnation! --

I shall forget his Quality, and Virtue, forget he was my Friend or saved this
Life; and like a River, swelled with angry Tides, overflow those Banks that
made the Stre^m so gay


Who Is there? -- I heard a Voice -- Manage?


Yes.


Approach thou Confident of all my Joys; approach, and be Rewarded --


Yes, for my excellent Bawding -- By Heaven I dar not touch his Princely Person.


Where art thou? take this Jewel, and retire.


Even my Misfortunes have a sort of Luck; but I Will withdraw, for fear this
Devil about me, should raise my too rash Hand against his Life


Come, my eternal Pleasure -- each Moment of the happy Lover's Hour, is worth
an Age of dull, and common Life


Why do I vainly call for Vengeance down, and have it in my Hand? -- By ^eav'n,
I Will back -- Whether? To kill a Woman, a young perjured Woman! -- Oh, ye false
Fair Ones! should we do you Justice, A universal Ruin would ensue; Not One
would live to stock the World anew. Who is it among ye All, ye Fair Deceivers,
ye Charming Mischiefs to the Noble Race, can swear she is Innocent, without
Damnation? No, no, go on -- be false -- be fickle still: You act but Nature --
but my faithless Friend -- where I repose the Secrets of my Soul -- except this
one -- Alas! he knew not this: -- Why do I blame him then


Fire! Fire! Fire!


Olivia's Voice! -- Ha! what art thou? Thy Voice should be Olivia's, but thy
Shape -- And yet a Woman is all over Disguise


Fire! Fire! Fire! My Son, my dear Sir Morgan.


A Pox on your Son, and mine to boot; they have set all the Sack-Butts a
Flaming in the Cellar, thence the Mischief began. Timothy, Roger, Jeffrey, my
Money-Trunks, ye Rogues! my Money-Trunks


My Son, good Roger! my own Sir Moggy!


The Ten thousand Pounds, ye Rascal, in the Iron Trunk, that was to be paid Mr.
Welborn for Olivia's Portion.


Oh my Son! my Son! -- Run to the Parson, Sam, and let him send the
Church-Buckets. Oh, some help! some help


Oh, Heavens! my Lady Mirtilla's Chamber's all on Flame.


Ha, -- the Prince! I had forgot his Danger.


Ah! look up, and see how it burns!


Britton, a Million for a Ladder!


Blessing on you, Sir, if you dare venture through the House, there lies one in
the Fore Garden


The Passage is on fire, Sir, you cannot go.


Revenge is vanished, and Love takes its place: Soft Love, and mightier
Friendship seizes all. I Will save him, though I perish in the Attempt.


A Thousand Pound for him that saves Sir Morgan.


And, de ye hear, let my Rogue lie; I Would rather he should be burnt, than hanged
on Tyburn Road, for murdering his Father. -- But where is Boy George


Safe, Sir, I hope; he was not in the House.


So, so, away with these Trunks to my Lady Youthly's in Southampton-Square, and
tell her we must trouble her to Night. Come, Sister, let us away.


Frederick, and Mirtilla, appear at the Window, the Flame behind 'em.


Help, help, and save Mirtilla! Ask any Price, my Life, my Fortune! All!


Oh, Heavens! the Flame pursues us as we fly.


No help! Oh Gods, I shall prevent the Flame, and perish by my Fears to see you
dye


Alas! Sir, you with ease may save your Life! This Window you may leap, but I
want Courage


No, my Mirtilla, if it be thy Fate, I Will grasp thee, even in Flames, and dye
with thee


We dye! we dye! the Flame takes hold of us!


Ha! some pitying God takes Care of us. Have, have, my Charmer; Heaven has sent
us Aid.


Lejere! dear Man of Luck -- Some happy Star reigned at thy glorious Birth;
every thing is prosperous thou espousest. -- How fares my Love, the Treasure of
my Soul


Only fainting with the Fright, but she recovers.


My Chair there, quickly, that waits for me. --

Carry 'em to Mr. Welborn's, to my Lodgings there, and then return to me; for I
am wondrous faint, and cannot walk


Ha! by my Life, my Man!


But if I might impose so much Lejere upon thy Friendship, I beg thou would
see her safely carried to my Lodgings at Welborn's


You shall Command me, Sir.


You seem not well, Sir; pray repose upon my Arm a while.


I thank you, Sir, indeed I am not well.


Methinks I find a Pleasure but in touching him -- Would I ^ou'd see his Face
by all this fatal Light


So, so, the Fire abates, the Engines played rarely; and we have Ten Guinea's
here, Neighbors, to watch about the House; for where there is Fire, there is
Rogues -- Hum, who have we here? -- How now, Mr. -- Hum, what have you got
under your Arm there, ha? Take away this Box of Jewels

Ha, who have we here creeping out of the Cellar-Window? more Rogues!


Sirrah! you're a Bawd, Sirrah! and for a Tester will wink at the Vices of the
Nation, Sirrah! Call Men of the best Quality, Rogues! that have stood for
Knights of the Shire, and made the Mobile drunk Sirrah


We cry you Mercy, Sir, we did not know your Worships.


Lookee de see, here is a Crown for you; carry us to the next Tavern, and we'll
make thee, and all thy Mirmidons, as drunk as a Boat in a Storm


Sir, I find you have Interest with these Arbitrary Tyrants of the Parish; Pray
will you bail me, and this Gentleman


What, Endimion! my Lady Mirtilla's Page? He lent me Money to Night at the
Basset-Table; I Will be bound Hand and Foot for him, Mr. Constable, and gad we'll
all to the Tavern, and drink up the Sun, Boys


Yonder Gentleman too has received some Hurt by the Fire, and must go Home,
Sir; but you must restore him the Box, Mr. Constable


Ay, ay, lookee de see, return the Gentleman all; they are Gentlemen, and our
intimate Friends, de see.


Stand: Who goes there?


Philip -- Lookee de see, he shall along with us to the Tavern.


Sir Morgan, I came to seek you: Your Lady Mother sent me back on purpose; she
has spoiled her Beauty with crying for you


And washed off all her Paint? -- Or so de see! Gad sa' me, Philip, this is ill
Luck. Come let us go drink down Sorrow


Being sent of such an Errand, as your Safety, Sir, I dare not stay and drink
now, before I Have satisfied your Mother


Not drink! I charge you, in the King's Name, Mr. Constable, bring him along.

Wise Coxcombs be damned, here is a Health to the Man,
That since Life is but short, lives as long as he can.

HA! where am I, Manage?


Heaven be thanked, Madam, at the Prince's Lodgings.


What happy Star conducted us, and saved us from the Fury of the Flames?


Those whose Influence are always Gracious to your Ladyship.


But where is the Prince? Where Is my Illustrious Lover?


Waiting the Return of the Chair, Madam.


But my Endimion! -- Is Endimion safe?


Madam, he is: I saw him in the Garden.


Then perish all the rest -- Go send to search him out, and let him instantly
be brought to me. -- Ha -- Lejere


Bawd stand aside -- and do your Office yonder -- [ Puts away Manage. Why are
you frighted, Madam, because I Am not the Lover you expected


What Lover! be witness Heaven --


That thou art false, false as the insatiate Seas, that smiling tempt the vain
Adventurer, whom flattering, far from any saving there, swell their false Waves
to a destructive Storm


Why all this mighty Rage? -- Because I disappointed you to Night?


No, by Heaven, I dully could have waited for the Hour; have hoped, and wished,
and languish'd out an Age. But, oh Mirtilla! Oh thou perjured Fair! -- But
vanish all the softness of my Soul, I will be satyrial

A Plague, a Torment, to your fickle Sex,
Those smiling, sighing, weeping Hypocrites.

And can you think my Flight is Criminal? because I saved this worthless Life
-- for you --


What Innocence adorns her Tongue, and Eyes! While Hell and Furies gives her
Heart its motion, you know not where you are


Perhaps I do not.


Swear, for you are damned already, and by what black Degrees I will unsold:
When first I saw this gay, this glorious Mischief, tho Nobly born, 'twas hid in
mean Obscurity; the shining Viper lay half dead with Poverty, I took it up, and
laid it next my Heart, fed it, and called its faded Beauties back


Confessed: And what of this?


Confirmed you mine, by all the Obligations Profuseness could invent, or Love
inspire


And yet at your Return you found me married to another.


Death and Hell! that was not yet the worst: You flattered me with some
Pretense of Penitence; but on the Night, the dear destructive Night, you raised
my Hopes to all distracting Love could wish -- that very Night -- Oh let me
rave and dye, and never think that Disappointment over


What, you saw me Courted at the Ball, perhaps?


Perhaps I saw it in your Chamber too. Breathless, and panting with new-acted
Joy, the happy Lover lay -- Oh Mirtilla


Nay, if he knows it, I Will deny't no more.


There is no Honesty in all thy kind.


Or if there be, those that deal in it are weary of their Trade. But where is the
mighty Crime


No, I expect thou should outface my Eyes, out-swear my H^aring, and out-lye
my Senses -- The Prince! the Prince! thou faithless dear Destruction


The Prince! good Heaven! Is all this Heat for him?


Thou own'st the Conquest then?


With as much Vanity as thou would do, if thou had won his Sword: Have thou
took care wisely to teach me all the Arts of Life, and do thou now upbraid my
Industry? Look round the World, and thou shall see, Lejere, Ambition still
supplies the Place of Love The wornout Lady, that can serve your Interest, you
swear has Beauties that out-charms Fifteen; and for the Vanity of Quality, you
feign and languish, lie, protest, and flatter -- All Things in Nature Cheat, or
else are Cheated


Well said; take off thy Veil, and show the Jilt.


You never knew a Woman thrive so well by real Love, as by Dissimulation: This
has a Thousand Arts and Tricks to conquer; appears in any Shape, in any Humor;
can laugh or weep, be coy or play, by turns, as suits the Lover best, while
simple Love has only one Road of Sighs and Softness; these to Lejere are due:
But all my Charms, and Arts of gay Dissembling, are for the credulous Prince.
-- Ha -- he is here! -- and with him the dear Youth that has enslaved me, who
triumph's over the rest.


Ha! Mirtilla, and my Brother here! Oh how I long to see that Stranger's Face.


Mirtilla, thou Charmer of Life's dull and redious Hours, how fares thy Heart?
Dwells any Pantings there, but those that Love, and his dear Joys create


Or if there do, you should excuse it now.


How many Devils reign in beauteous Woman*


My dear Lejere congratulate my Joys; take all my Friendship thou -- but thou
my Soul. Come, come, my Friend, (...) retire together; I Will give thee leave to
gaze upon my Heaven, and feed on all the Sweets that Friendship may: But all
the rest of the v^s^ ^^o^e is ^rine


Madam Endimion is already here.


Thou have revived me -- Let him w^it my (...).


Spite! Spite, and dire Revenge, seize my fo^^l ^oul! -- Oh that I were a
Man, a loose lewd Man, how easily wou^d I rob him of her Heart, and leave him
but the shadow of Enjoyment


Now, my dear Sister, if thou ever lovedst me, revenge thy Brother on this
perjured Woman, and snatch her from this gallant Rival's Arms. She loves thee
-- Dissemble thou to love again; meet her Advances with an equal Ardour, and
when thou have wound her up to dalliance, I Will bring the Prince a witness of
her Shame


But what if he should kill me --


I Will take care of that.


Then ever the morning dawns, you shall behold it: She languishes to see me,
and I wait on purpose for her Commands


As I could wish: Be sure to Act the Lover well.


As well as I can Act it.

That all Mankind are Damned, I Am positive; at least all Lovers are.


What have we here? the Spark that rallied me about a Woman at the Ball to
Night? Who is it, Sir, you Curse so heartily


Ha, how Beautiful he is -- how many Charms dwell in that lovely Face --


Gad, I thank you for that, you were kinder to Night, when you told me of a
fine Woman that was in Love with me


Why, what have you to do with Womankind?


A pretty civil Question; has the Lady that sent you, a mind to be informed?


Or if she had, you're not at leisure now you are taken up, Sir, with another
Beauty. Did not you swear, never to speak to Womankind, till I had brought
her, I told you, sighed for you


Right, and I have kept my word Religiously.


The Devil you have, witness the Joy Mirtilla gave your Soul: Eve^ now you were
all Transport, all Ecstasy of Love; by Heaven you had forgot you brought me in,
and past Triumphant in Mirtilla's Arms, Love in your Heart, and Pleasure in
your Eyes


Ay, sure he mistakes me for the Amorous Prince, and thus, perhaps, has mistook
me all the Night: I must not undeceive him.

What e're you saw, I have a heart unwounded, a heart that never sound^^ loved,
a little scratch it got the other day by a Young Beauty in the Ma^^, (...) Name
I know not, but I wished to know it, and dogged her Coach, (...) ^^gh'd a
little after her but since never saw the lovely Vision


Sure this was I.


That I took notice of, 'twas Green and Gold -- Since that, I tri^^ now and
then with Love to chase away this Image, and that is all


Ha, now I view him well, it is the same handsome Fellow that Entertained us in
the Mall last Thursday


C^^e, Sir, it is late, please you to take a Bed with me to Night, where we'll
beget a better Understanding


A better than you imagine -- 'Sdeath, to Bed with him, I tremble at the
thought -- Sir, I do not love a Bedfellow


Sir, I have lent my Lodgings to a Stranger of Quality. (...) I would offer you
a single Bed -- but for once you may dispense with a Bedfellow


I will not put you to that trouble, Sir.


Do you design to make me your Friend, and use me with Ceremony? Who waits
there?


'Slife, what shall I do? I could even consent, to prevent his going to
Mirtilla -- besides, I have no home to go to --


Come, no more Scruples -- here -- a Nightgown and a Cap for the Gentleman.


What shall I do -- I have a little urgent Business, Sir.


If there be absolute necessity, I Will see you to your Lodgings.


Oh, by no means, Sir. 'Sdeath, whither can I go?


Why do you pause? Deal freely with me, Sir, I hope you do not take me for a
Lover of my own Sex -- Come, come, to Bed


Go you, Sir, I Will sit and Read by you till Day.


'Sdeath, Sir, de think my Bed's Infectious?


I shall betray my Sex in my denial, and that at last I can but do if Necessity
compel me to it.

Go on, Sir, you have shamed me.


And thus thou have my whole Adventure out, short was the Conquest, but the
Joys are lasting


I am glad on it, Sir.


Why do wear a Cloud upon thy brows, when Love's gay Sunshine dances in my
Eyes? If you are her Lover too, I pity thee; her Solemn Vows breathed in the
height of love, disarm me thy hopes, if Friendship would permit thee


I do not think it, Sir --


Not think it, not think that she has sworn!


Yes, doubtless, Sir -- she is Prodigal of Vows, and I dare swear, by all she is
sworn by, she will break 'em all: She has less Faith than all the fickle Sex,
uncertain and more wanton than the Winds, that spares no Births of Nature in
their wild course, from the tall Cedar, to the flowers beneath, but Ruffles,
Ravishes, and Ruins all


I speak of my Mirtilla.


Why, so do I -- of yours, of mine, or any man's Mirtilla.


Away, she that with force of Love can sigh and weep --


This very she, has all the while dissembled: Such Love she deals to every
gaudy Coxcomb, how will she practice then upon a Hero


Away, it cannot be.


By all your Friendship to me, Sir, it is truth.


Wrecks and Torture, -- let her have made of me a meet Example, by whom the
cozened World might have grown wise: No matter, then I had been pleased, though
Cullyed -- Why have thou ruined my Repose with Truths that carry more Damnation
than a Lie? But Oh -- thou at my Friend, and I forgive thee


Sir, I have done, and humbly ask your Pardon.


Stay, stay, Lejere, -- if she be false, you are all the World has left me; and
I believe -- but can thou prove this to me


Perhaps I may before the Morning's dawn.


Ha, prove it here -- here, in this very House!


Ay, here, Sir


What, in my Lodgings will she receive her Spark -- by Heaven, were he the
Darling Son of a Monarch, an Empire's Hope, and Joy of all the Fair, he should
not live to rifle me of Peace, -- Come, show me this destined Victim to my Rage


No, my Revenge is only Comical -- If you would see how Woman can dissemble,
come on, and follow me


What, disturb her Rest! Did thou not see her fainting with the Fatigues this
Night had given her, and begged me I would leave her to Repose


Yes, and wondered at her Art; and when you begged to watch by her Bedside,
with what dear Promises she put you off; while every word fell feebly from her
Tongue, as if 't had been her last, so very sick she was -- till you were gone
-- hark -- a Door opens -- I will obscure the Lights


Was ever Maid so near to being undone? Oh, Heavens! in Bed with the dear Man I
love, ready to be betrayed by every sigh.


It Is Olivia.


I left him here -- what, by dark? Endimion, young, ha^dsom Sir, where are you?


Do you hear that, Sir?


Oh, are you here? --


Slife, it is Manage -- how shall I escape --


Come, Sir, my Lady Mirtilla has dismissed her troublesome Lovers, for your more
agreeable Company


Do hear that, Sir?


Come softly on, Sir, and follow me.


I Am all Obedience --

She cannot Ravish me, and that is a Comfort.


Oh, Lejere -- can this be possible? Can there be such a Woman?


Follow him, Sir, and see --


See what! -- Be witness of her Infamy! Hell! Hell, and all the Fires of Lust
possess her, when she is so old and lewd, all Mankind shun her, -- I ll be a
Coward in my own di^e Revenge, and use no manly Mercy. -- But oh, I faint, I
faint with Rage and Love, which like two meeting Tides, swell into Storms. --
Bear me a minute to my Couch within


What have I done, now I repent my Rashness.


Rise, -- When Lovers are alone they pardon Ceremony -- I sent for you to end
the Night with me; say -- how shall we employ it


I Will sigh, and gaze upon your lovely Face.


Nothing but sigh, and gaze; we shall grow dull.


I Will tell you Tales of Love, and sing you Songs


Thy Voice, it is true, can charm a thousand ways; but Lovers time their Joys,
these for the Day, those for the lovely Night And when they would be silently
in love, have Music of soft Sighs and gentler Whispers


Oh, Love inspires all this -- What shall I do?


Nay, think not because I sent for you alone, while Night and Silence favor
Lovers Stealths, to take advantage of my yielding Heart


I would to Heaven she were in earnest now.


Oh, hide your Favorite, Madam -- do you hear.


A jealous Lover only, comes in such a Storm -- Dear, to my Heart, whose safety
is my Life. Submit to be concealed -- but where -- Oh heavens, he comes -- It Is
for you I fear --


He comes --


Here, let my Train secure you -- Till now I never found the right Use of long
Trains and Farthingals


'Sdeath, you have made these Pauses and Alarms to give her time to Jilt you.


Pray heaven she do -- I Would not be undeceived for all the Sun surveys.


My Lord the Prince! now you are kind indeed.


I thoug^t (...) left you sick, extremely sick.


And are young loved to find my Health return?


No, wondrous glad of it. You're mighty Gay, Mirtilla, much in Glory.


Can he who lays his Fortune at my Feet, think me too glorious for his Arms and
Eyes


Fifty to one, the Gyps^ ji^s him yet.


Pray heaven she lies but handsomely --

-- for mine Mirtilla. Ha -- ha --


Am I not yours? You cannot doubt my Vows.


She Will do it, and make me love her anew for her rare dexterity at dissembling.


I left you wearied, going to your Bed, but find you at your Toylet gayly
drest^ is if some Conquest you designed ever morning


Ma^^^^, Sir, from the Fire, secured these Trifles: and I was trying several
Dresse^on; that this slight Beauty that you say has charmed you, might, when
yo^ s^^ it next, complete the Conquest


And that thou will, if Flattery can do it.


Now, were she guilty, as I am sure she is not, this softness would undo me,
and appease me


You seem as if you doubted what I say.


H^^d, I scorn to need an Oath to six my Faith: Oh! thou art all Divine and
can not err

Cursed be the Tongue that da^es profane thy Virtue, and cursed the listening
Fool that dares believe it


What a poor, wretched, baflled thing is Man, by feebler Woman awed and made a
Coxcomb


Durst any one traduce my Virtue, Sir? and is it possible that you could hear
it -- Then perish all the Beauties you have flattered


Come to my Arms, thou Charmer of my Soul! and if one spark of Jealousy
remain, one of those precious Tears shall quench the C^ime -- Oh, come and let
me lead thee to thy Bed, and breathe new Vows into thy panting Bosom.


Now all the Plagues of injured Lovers wreck thee; 'Sdeath, where has she hid
Olivia? or how am I deceived? -- It Is Day, and with it new Invention rise to
damn this Woman to the sin of Shame: Break all the Chains that hold the
Princely Youth, and sink her with her fancied Power and Vanity.


Morrow my Lady Youthly, and thank you for my Nights Lodging -- You are as
early up as if it had been your Wedding Day


Truly, Sir Rowland, that I intend.


But where is the Bridegroom, Madam?

how now, Roger, what, no news yet of George?


Alas! none Sir, none, till the Rubbish be removed.


Rubbish -- What -- what is George become the Rubbish of the World then?


Why, Man is but dust, as a man may say, Sir.


But are you sure, Roger, my Jewel, my Sir Moggy escaped.


The Watch drew him out of the Cellar-window, Madam.


How Mr. Twang, the Young Gentleman burnt -- Oh --


Alas! my Grandmother faints with your ill News -- Good Sir Rowland comfort
her, and dry your Eyes


Burnt, Madam! No, no, only the House fell on him, or so --


How! the House fell on him -- Oh!


Ah, Madam, that is all; why, the young Rogue has a Back like an Elephant --
'twill bear a Castle, Madam


Alas, good Man: What a Mercy it is, Mr. Twang, to have a Back like an Elephant!


Of what wonderful Use it is upon Occasion --


Ay -- but -- but I shall never see him more, Back nor Breast.


Good Sir, discomfort not my Lady -- Consider man's a flower --


Ay, but George was such a Flower! He was, Mr. Twang, he was the very Pink of
Prentices. Ah! what a rare Rampant Lord Mayor he would have made? And what a
Swinging Sheriff --


What, cry, so near your Wedding Day, Sir Rowland?


Well, if he be gone -- Peace be with him; and 'Ifaks, Sweetheart, we'll Marry,
and beget new Sons and Daughters -- but -- but -- I shall never beget another
George.


This is but a scurvy Tune for your Hymenical Song, Sir.


Alas! Mrs. Teresia, my Instrument is untuned, and good for nothing now but to
be hung upon the Willows




What Is here, my Rogue?


What Is the matter, Gentlemen, that ye enter the House in this Hostile manner?


What, Mr. Twang, de see!


Ay, ay -- stand by Divinity -- and know, that we, the Pillars of the Nation,
are come, de see -- to Ravish


Oh, my dear Sir Morgan.


I do not intend to Ravish, like a Jew, in my own Tribe --


What say they, Mr. Twang, Ravish? Oh, save my Honor -- lead me to my
Bedchamber, where if they dare venture to come, they come upon their Peril.


Old Fellow, do hear? Sir Pandarus of Troy, deliver me my Cresida, de see,
peaceably, or I am resolved to be^r her off Vi and Armis


Sweet Nephew, retire, we are just upon making your Peace.


Ha -- Old Queen Gwiniver, without her Ruff on? --


Is there a man in Nature's Race so vile, dares lift a guilty Hand against his
Father


Father me no Fathers; I fight for Teresia, my Lawfully begotten Spouse.


That I once called you Brother, saves your Life; therefore resign your Sword
here at his Reverend Feet


Sirrah; you lie, Sirrah --


There, drag away this Brute.


Rogues, Dogs, bring Mrs. Teresia along with you.


Sure this is my fine Fellow -- and yet the very same that is to be married to
my Grandmother; nor can that City Habit hide the Gentleman


Burnt, say you, Mrs. Teresia de see -- my Lady Mirtilla burnt! Nay then, it is
time to go sleep, get sober, and Marry again.


Enough, my Boy, enough; thou deserve my whole Estate, and thou shall have
it, Boy -- This day thou shall Marry the Widow, and I her Grandchild. I Will to
my Lawyers, and settle all upon thee instantly --


How! Marry to day -- Old Gentleman, you must be cozened, and Faith, that goes
against my Conscience -- Ha, the Fair, the Young Teresia there -- When a man's
bent upon Wickedness, the Devil never wants an Opportunity to present him with,
that she should be in my way now -- Fair Creature, are you resolved to be my
Mother-in-law


As sure as you to be my Grandfather, Sir -- And see -- the News of your being
come, has raised my Grandmother


A Pox upon her, her Ghost had been less frightful.


I could have spared her now too; but see she advances as swift as Time.


And as old: What shall I do? I dye to speak with you --


Where -- where is this Young Welcome Gentleman -- Oh, are you here, Sir --

Lettice, take Teresia, and get you to your Chamber, she has her Trinkets to
get ready against the Wedding anon, for we'll make but one work of both


Ay, 'twill save Charges, Madam --


Ay, ay, get you gone, Lovers sometimes would be private.


Hark ye -- leave me not to her mercy, by Love, if you do, I Will follow you to
your Chamber


Leave you! no, hang me if I'do, till I have told you a piece of my mind, for I
find there is no dallying


Well, Sir, I have finished the Great Work.


I wish you had -- Teresia, once you made me hope you did not hate me.


What says he, Teresia?


He says, he hopes you do not hate him, Madam.


No, by my Troth, Sir; I feel something for you, I have not felt before.


Not these Threescore Years, I dare swear -- You have too much Wit, Teresia, to
have been only pleased with the Embroidered Coat, and Gaudy Plume, where still
the man's the same


What says he, Embroidered Coat and Plume?


He hopes your Ladyship likes him never the worse, for being without those
Fopperies


Marry do I not, I love not this over-finery in a Husband; those Fellows that
Dress, think so well of themselves, they never mind their Wives


Are you so dull, Teresia, not to see, this Habit was put on, only to get an
Opportunity to tell you my Passion


Tell me of his Passion! was it so, alas, good Young Man -- Well, well, I Will
defer your Joys no longer, this Night shall make you happy. Mr. Twang shall
join us, Sir


A blessed hearing -- You see, Charming Maid, how very shore a space there is
between this and the hastening hour; stand not on Virgin Niceties, but answer
me, our time admits of no Consideration


I have not been this Four and Twenty hours a Lover, to need Considering; as
soon as you had my Heart, you had my Consent, and that was the first moment I
saw you at the Basset-Table


Ha! at the Basset-Table?


Yes, I was the frank Youth that lent you Money -- but no more -- your Time and
Place


What are you prating to him there?


He doubts your Love, Madam, and I Am confirming it.


Alas, good Gentleman! -- anon I Will convince him -- for in the Evening, Sir,
the Priest shall make us one


Ah, Madam, I could wish 'twere not so long deferred, for sure I love you like a
sighing Swain, and as a Proof of it, I have here prepared an Emblem of my Love
in a Dance of Country Lovers, where Passion is sincere


Good-lack-a-day, indeed you're so obliging: But pray let us have the Dance.


Very pretty indeed. Come, good Gentleman, don't droop, don't droop; come, hold
up your Head -- you may be allowed one Kiss beforehand





Come, come, Teresia, come with me.


I Will send a Chair to your Back-Gate anon, that shall wait you on the
Field-side, and bring you whither I shall appoint. Get Ready instantly


And if I fail, may I be eternally damned to the Embraces of Old Age.


Mirtilla, thus thy Scorn I will out-brave,
And let my Father the kind Cheat forgive,
If I with dexterous Charitable care
Ease him of Burdens he wants strength to bear.

Prithee what became of the Spark that lay with me last night?


I know not, Sir, he 'rose before day -- What Letter's this, Sir? It lay upon
your Toylet.


To the dear Man whose Name I would be glad to

The Lady you saw last Thursday in the Mall, you had in Bed with you last
Night. Adieu

Oh! dull Divinity of Love! that by no Instinct, no sympathizing Pains or
Pleasure, could instruct my Sense, how near I was to Happiness

-- Lejere, behold me here the most unlucky Fellow breathing. Thou know I
told thee how I was in love with a young Woman in the Mall: And this very
Night, I had this very Woman in my Arms


Is this your ill Luck, Sir?


'Sdeath, all the while I took her for a Man: But, finding me asleep, she
softly 'rose; and, by a Light yet burning in my Chamber, she writ this Billet,
and left it on my Table.


By all that Good, Olivia! -- And were you very Honest, Sir?


To my eternal Shame, as chaste as Ice.


What will you say now, Charles, if I bring this Woman to you again?


Can thou? Oh, let me kiss thy Lips away.


For all her Frollick, Charles, she is very honest, a Fortune, and of Quality --
and were it not for Olivia, thou should marry her


Olivia I never saw, and now 'twill be too late.


Nay then, Sir, I must fight in her Defense.


You fight in her defense! Why, do thou love her? -- By all that is Good, I
will resign her to thee


You shall not, Sir; and know she is my Sister.


Olivia thy Sister! --


Ask no more Questions, but defend your self, if you refuse to marry her; for
her Honor's mine


Were she an Angel, I must love this Woman.


Then thou shall have her -- Have, and get a License -- no more -- trust my
Friendship -- Go.

Olivia, where did you lie last Night? -- Nay do not blush, for you may yet be
Virtuous


Virtuous! Not the young Roses in the bud secured, nor breaking Morn, ungaz'd
at by the Sun; nor falling Snow, has more of Purity


I do believe you; but your dangerous Frolicks will make the World talk
shamefully


Let him talk on, I will not humor Fools.


No more -- here is Manage -- Contrive an Assignation with Mirtilla; but do not
hide again where none may find you. This done, I Will tell you more, and make you
happy. How now, Manage, is the Prince stirring


He Is in his dressing Room, Sir, -- This from my Lady, Sir.


What have you there, Olivia?


An Assignation from your perjured Mistress, Sir.


It Is well -- You must obey the Summons. And wind her up to all the height of
Love; then let her loose to Shame. I Will bring her Lover in the height of
Dalliance, who, when he sees her Persidy, will hate her


And then the lovely Man stands fair for me.


Go write an Answer back -- and wait her hour.


AH, Charmion! shroud those killing Eyes,
That dart the Extremes of Pleasure,
Else Celadon, though favored, dies
As well as him that you despise,
Though with this different measure:
While lingering Pains drag on his Fate,
Dispatch is all the Advantage of my State;
For, ah! you kill with Love, as well as Hate.
Abate thy Luxury of Charms,
And only Part discover;
Your Tongue, as well as Eyes, had Arms
To give a Thousand fatal Harms
To the poor listening Lover:
Thy Beams, Glory's Veiled should be,
And like the Front of Heaven, unseen, pass by;
For to behold 'em, in full force, we dye.
Lydia, Oh! I faint, I dye with thy Beauty's Luxury! By heaven, I Am all
Rapture, Love, and Joy: Such a dear Night, Lejere! -- Poets may fancy pressing
Goddesses, on downy Beds of Clouds -- But oh, Lejere! -- Those Gods were never
half so blessed as I


What pity 'twere to wake you from this Dream.


It is not in the Power of Time nor Age: For even then Mirtilla will have
Charms! Oh, how she speaks! how well she will grace a Stor


How gay her Wit! how movingly she writes!


I do believe she does.


Would it displease you, should you see a Billet from her?


That Is as it were directed.


You would not credit what you saw last night.


Nor would have lost that Night for all the Treasure the vast Ocean hid^^.


I would not have a Man so good, and great, be made a Woman's P^operty --
There, Sir.


I Will not believe it here is; there are a thousand ways to ruin Innocence; if she
be false -- she is damned. Confirm me, and of course I shall despise her. You
cure me, when you show her worth my Scorn


Will you be ruled then, and believe it Friendship in me?


I will.


Give her, by Absence, but an Opportunity; feign some Excuse to leave the Town
to day


See where she comes --

Adorned with all the beauteous Wonders of her Sex. The Gods of Love are
playing in her Eyes, and give us Wounds from every graceful Motion? Ah, my
Mirtilla! how shall I support the Absence of a many coming Hours, that
languish, being from thee but a moment


I hope, my Lord, Fate is not so unkind, to let me live without you many Hours.


Can all this be dissembled?


How much more have I heard? yet all was false.


I must this Day -- this tedious live-long Day, be absent from thy sight -- but
shall be back i'th'Evening: I Will leave Lejere to wait on your Commands


Lejere shall ever, Sir, be dear to me --

But I Will retire, and sigh till your Return -- That World affords no Pleasure
where you are not


Do you hear that, Sir?

Till Night, thou dearest Blessing of my Life -- Adieu.


Thou little, mischievous, informing Thing, how vainly have thou lavished out
Invention!


By Heaven, methinks 'twere Sin but to suspect her.


Think so; I Will trouble your Repose no more: I Have done my Duty, and I would not
see you made a --


Property -- Ha -- A loathed convenient Tool -- A Woman's Implement -- God's Death!
she that off -- Loose to the nasty Love of every Tool, that will be Flattered,
Cozened, Jilted, Cuckolded -- No more -- I will, unseen, convey my self into
the Closet in my Dressing Room; it is near her Bed -- And if I find her Wanton


If you find her -- The Youth is waiting now that shall convince you.


Where? -- Oh set the happy Slave but in my View, and --


No faith, Sir, be convinced before you strike, for fear she jilt you out of
Sense and Reason --


Come to my Closet, from thence we may observe all that passes in her Chamber;
from whence I Will break upon the perjured Fair, like Thunder from a Cloud, and
more destructive.


Is the Prince gone?


Yes, Madam.


Then bring Endimion to me.


Madam, I wish you would think no more of him; for I foresee, that this Amor must
Ruin you. Remember you have left a Husband for the Prince


A Husband, my Drudge, to toil for me, and save me the Expense of careful
Thoughts: My Cloak, my Led-Horse, for Necessity to fill my Train -- no more --
but Endimion waits.

-- There is a native Generosity in me, that checks my Inconstancy to this
great Man; yet I have so much Woman in my Soul, cannot pain my self to do him
Justice -- A new desire of humouring my Wish, sways all my Interest, and
controuls all my Honor. Why should I lose a Pleasure for a Promise, since
Time, that gives our Youth so short a Date, may well excuse our needful
Perjury.

Let withered Age who fondly dreams of Virtue, lose the dear Opportunities of
Life

The coming Hours present themselves to us; and are too nice, not to be
snatched when offered


So hasty this disarms me of Excuse.


Why are thy Eyes bent down? Why do thou pause?


So hot! -- I must prepare to show my Sex's Evidence, if nothing else will do.


What not a Word!

Advance thou bashful Youth -- Love in thy Eyes, and Coward in thy Heart! The
one all Fire, the other too much Ice


Yet stay me, my Lejere, from my hasty Vengeance.


Ah, Madam, how are you mistaken! It Is not Coldness in me -- but --


What? Bashfulness!

Oh Love will lend thee Courage.

This Trembling is the soft Effects of it.


Oh how vilely she is mistaken!


Come to my Bed, and press the Roses down; and lend more sweetness to 'em than
they bring


Love -- thus I fling thy gaudy Fetters off, and am no more a Slave to
faithless Beauty


Ha! what do I see? -- Two Female rising Breasts. By Heaven a Woman. -- Oh
fortunate Mischance


No I will not hurt thee, cease thy trembling.


Oh, Sir, 'twere Sin to hurt the lovely Youth.


No, Madam, since I have taken back my Heart, I can present you with another
Lover.


Ha! another Lover! -- What means my Prince?


Eternally to leave you to your Frailty.


Can you so easily cancel all your Vows?

Then kill me at your Feet I do implore it.


Away, I do forgive Thee, wretched Woman -- But yet be gone -- least Love and
Rage return, and I should kill you yet with your young Darling


Whom mean you, Sir, this lovely Maid?


Maid! -- What means she? Sure she cannot know me.


Talk on, false Woman! till thou have persuaded my Eyes and Ears out of their
native Faculties, I scorn to credit other Evidences


Try 'em once more, and then repent, and dye.


Ha -- by Heaven a Woman!


You that would smile at my supposed undoing, present your self no more before
my Eyes 'Twas to perplex you that I feigned this Passion

I saw you had your Spies to watch for Mischief,

And poison all my Happiness with the Prince. --

And since I Am thought so Criminal, I Will take an everlasting Leave of you


Hold, thou most valued Treasure of the World, or turn the pointed Weapon to my
heart


No, I Am false; unworthy of your Love.


Yes, by Heaven. But thou have Jilted him so handsomely, thou'st vanquished all
my Rage


Yes. I am false; false to this Gallant Man.

False to my Husband, to my Sexes Fame; for you more Charming, I alas, am
perjured


Lejere! have I then injured thee?


This is the Fatal Beauty, Sir, for whom so often you have seen me languish.


Ah! would thou see me on a Precipice, and not prevent my Danger?


To mightier Friendship I could all surrender, and silently have born her
Perjuries; but those to you, awakened all my Rage; but she has out-trick'd me,
and I beg her Pardon -- And to secure her yours, have loved anew, and beg
Protection in your Lodgings, Sir, for a young Maid whom I design to marry


Command my Life, my Fortune, and my Sword, for the unwilling Injury I have
done thee -- And is this the charming perjured Fair, Mirtilla


It is, Sir.


Since it is possible that you could cease to love this Gallant Man, whom I
have heard with so much tender Passion tell your Loves, what sacred Vows had
past, and what Endearments, how can I hope from thee a lasting Faith? -- Yet on
the Oaths that thou have sworn to me -- by all thy Hopes of Pardon for thy
Perjuries, to ease my panting Heart -- once speak the Truth -- Did thou not
take this Woman for a Man


I did -- and were she so, I would with Pride own all the Vows I Have broke.


Why this is fair -- and though I buy this Knowledge at the vast Price of all my
Repose; yet I must own, it is a better Bargain then chaff'ring of a Heart for
feigned Embraces -- Thou have undone me -- yet must have my Friendship; and
'twill be still some Ease in this Extreme, to see thee yet repent, and love
Lejere


No, Sir, this Beauty must be first declining, to make me take up with a former
Lover


No, Sir, I have disposed my Heart another way; and the first knowledge of her
Falsehood cured me: Her Marriage I forgave -- that thing of form -- But never
could her Fondness to this Youth


Who Is this Lady, Sir, whose Pardon I must beg?


My Sister, Sir, who I disguised on purpose to be a Guard to this suspected
Fair One


Ha! she is there!

Now every Feature points me out my Conqueress. -- Nay start not -- I have
found Thee, thou malicious Charmer, to bring me so near to Bliss, and not
afford me one kind hint


And are not you a very dull Fellow, that loved and longed, and had the Maid so
near you, and yet needed a Hint


Nay, if you concealed your precious Talent, how should it profit any Body?


Concealed it? -- No, Faith, I made a very fair Tender; but you refused it, as
not being Current Coin


But if you most feloniously, and unlawfully deface our Sovereign's Image, so
as it may be as soon taken for the Grand Signior's, I may suspect the Metal too


What say you if I tender it before these lawful Witnesses?


I Will take it for good Payment -- I Charles Wellborn --


Ha, Welborn!


Take thee -- whom? -- Gad if the Parson of the Parish knew your Name no better
than I -- 'twill be but a blind Bargain


Olivia, Marteen --


My destined Wife?


The very same: Have you the Parson ready?


He waits in my Chamber.


Madam, I beg you will lend me something more becoming my Sex.


Manage will furnish you from my Wardrobe.


And see my good Genius appears too.


See, Sir, I am resolved to be welcome to your Arms; look here are the Writings
of the Estate my Grandfather left me, and here is Three thousand Pound my
Grandmother has settled on me, upon her Marriage with you


And here is my Father's Estate settled on me -- Come let us put them together --
and go in, and let the Parson do as much for us


But have you very well considered this Matter?


Teresia, we'll do like most Couples, marry first, and consider afterward --


Sir, Here Is Sir Merlin, with a Lady masked, would speak with you.


Carry 'em into the Dining Room, I Will wait on 'em anon.


Hold the Glass higher, Lettice; Is not this Tour too brown? -- Methinks it
does not give a youthful Air to my Face


That Is not in Nature.


Like Nature! Ay, but Nature's self wants Art, nor does this Fontange suit with
my Complexion -- Put on a little more Red, Lettice, on my Cheeks, and Lips.


Ay, for they are but a little too much upon the Coventry Blue -- This Tour
must come more forward, Madam, to hide the Wrinkles at the corners of your Eyes
--


Ay, Lettice, but there are others, that neither Tours, nor Paint, nor Patches
will hide, I fe^r -- Yet altogether, Lettice --


What, no Bride yet, nor Bridegroom!


Ay, what can be the Meaning of this?


But Teresia, Madam, where can she be gadding?


Why Lettice tells me, She went to buy some Trifles to adorn her this. Night --
Her Governante is with her, and my Steward

Twang, Alas, what pity it is; the Supper is quite spoiled, and no Bridegroom
come


Bless us! Here Is a whole Regiment of Liveries, Coaches, and Flambeau's, at the
Door! The Fops of the Town have heard of a Wedding, and are come in Masquerade


Hearing of a high Wedding, Sir, we made bold (as the Saying is) to give you
Joy. Sir, Are not you the Bridegroom


Where Is your Bride, Sir? Ha! ha! ha!


Ay, ay, where is your Bride?


What Is that to you, Sir, Coxcomb?


Hum -- How the Devil came he to know me now? -- Is this Reverend Gentlewoman
your Lady, Sir


Ounds, they come to mock us! -- Hark ye, hark ye Tawdrums, if you are Men,
show your Faces; if Apes, play over your Monkey-Tricks, and be gone, do you hear?
-- We are not at leisure for Fooling


Be but at leisure, Sir, to pardon


What the Devil's that to me, Sir.


Do not you know me, Sir?


No, Sir, nor don't care to know any such slaunting Coxcombs.


Look on me, Sir.


Hum, hum, hum! --


It is your Son, Sir, your darling Son, who has saved your Life from Insolence?


Hum -- Teresia!


How, Teresia! what robbed me of my intended Husband? Oh undone! undone!


And have thou after all, served me such a Rogne's Trick, thou ungracious
Varlet? What Cuckold thine own Father


Oh do not frown, I cannon bear your Anger! Here will I hang for ever till you
Pardon me.


Look -- look -- now cannot I be angry with the good-natured young Rogue

Well George -- But hark ye, Sirrah, this is a damned Trick of yours.


Sir, I found my Youth was fitter for her than your Age, and you will be as fond
of a Grandchild of my begetting, as you would of a Son of another Man's,
perhaps


Thour't in the Right on it.


Ha! Is Monsieur Lejere then my Brother George?


Sir, Here Is another Couple wants your Pardon; my Brother Merlin, and my Lady
Diana


Diana! what Sir Harry Modish's Mistress?


Yes, he pawned me at the Basset-Table; and, in Revenge, I resolved to marry
the next Man of Fortune I met with


The Fool had more Wit then I thought he had; for which I Will give him a
Thousand Pound a Year


I humbly thank you, Sir.


Pray, Melancholy Sir, who are you in Mourning for?


Alas! Madam, for a Person of Quality that was my Wife; but rest her Soul,
she is burnt

And I shall never see any thing again like her.


No! What think you of this Face, Sir.


As Gad shall sa' me, as like as if the same.


In troth, and so she is.


It Is true, she was once your Wife; but I have preserved her from the Flames,
and I have most Right to her


That Is a hard Case, Sir, that a Man must lose his Wife, because another has
more Right to her than himself; Is that Law, Sir


Lover's Law, Sir.


Ay, ay, Son, it is the Fashion to marry one Week, and separate the next: I Will
set you a President for it my self


Nay, if it be the Fashion, I Will even into the Country, and be merry with my
Tenants, and Hawk, and Hunt, and Horse-match


But now, Sir, I Will resign my Right to you, and content my self with the Honor
to have preserved her from the Fire


As gad shall sa'me, Sir, you're a civil Person; and now I find you can endure
a Woman, Sir, I Will give you leave to visit her


Well, since we are all agreed, and that the Fiddles are here, adsnigs we'll
have a Dance, Sweetheart, though thou have outwitted me


What, weeping yet? Here, Mr. Twang, take the Lady to your Care; in these
Cases, there is nothing like the Consolation of your young Chaplain

The Widow, with young Jointure, and old Face,
Affected Mien, and Amorous Grimace,
Uses to fall to the younger Brother's share;
But I by Fortune, and Industrious Care,
Have get one that is Rich, Witty, Young, and Fair.


