YE who will judge, and ye that can indeed,
(And Right, rather than long Prescription plead,)
To both we equally do bow this night,
Owning the Power of one and th'other's right.
Our Poet says, h'as brought you a new Play,
Or if no new dish -- dressed another way,
And better too, he thinks -- Plot, Humor, Wit,
(The Devil's in it if it do not hit)
Leading you not through horrid rugged ways;
Knows better how to please, than to amaze.
Of Lines of Wonder you have had enough,
That pose your Intellect, and the Authors too;
And to this Ages spite will live perplex't,
To dare the Understanding of the next.
His easier Scene no big-swoln rumbling speaks,
That while you look on it, like a Bubble breaks,
Tumbling along with an amazing noise;
But his accoast is gentle Nature's voice.
In this conceit he brisks, begins to swell,
And swears he shall come off at least as well
As some applauded Freemen of the Trade,
Whom neither Art nor Nature Poets made.
'Twere brave if 't would go thus, and you should be
Persuaded to believe't as well as he.
But he will go less; for all this little Huff,
At other intervals he is tame enough,
And wisely then considers what is due*
From his bold weakness, to such Powers as you;
You whose Prerogative is understood
To give the stamp, and make the Mettle good,
With Privilege as great and unconfined
As his, who Leather into Money coined.

ONce more I tell thee, Boy, thou shall have Gold:
Will thou not take my word? By these two Relics.

Prithee hold fast; thou have but little hold.

Why, there is the thing, that is it whets my revenge;
The little flesh I lost on either side,
Through the severity of old Sir Amorous
The Justice that lives in that Corner-house,
Has swollen my spleen to that excess of rage,
That nothing but the greatest of Revenge
I can invent, is able to allay it.

It was sharp dealing, I must needs confess.

Most certain. Hear, what I Have already done
In order to this business.

Out with it, man.

I am of late possessed with the affections
Of a young Lady at a Boarding-school,
Who, notwithstanding her severe restraint,
Has made a shift to give me her consent
To Marry me.

To Marry thee, say thou?
In The name of Fortune, for what do thou pass?

For nothing less than a Lords younger Brother,
What with my Tongue, my Person, and Gay Clothes:
My stories have so tickled her young heart,
She wishes hard this day be at an end,
That in the darkness of the succeeding night
I might (as I have promised) steal her hence.

But what is all this to Sir Amorous Frost?
Let Us hear what thy revenge prompts thee to do.

Why thus: in this servile sort of disguise
Thou see, I have oftentime met our Justice;
As often pre-possest him with the love
Of my new Miss unto his Worship's person;
Insomuch, that what with Letters and Bills,
Together with some other circumstances
Too long to tell, I have so filled his head
With fingle-fangles, that he is resolved
This night (through her desires, as he thinks)
To get her off, by a Ladder of ropes,
And then to marry her. Now comes the sport:
Get you in readiness, 'twixt two and three
This very night, half a dozen stout Lads
Fitly disguised to act the Watch-mens parts;
Your rendezvous shall be at the street-end.
Fail not in this, and leave me to the rest.
I had almost forgot to let thee know,
That French man whom I cunningly got off
The last Sessions but two*

An excellent Rogue!

I have disposed of to our Amorous Knight,
As a present from his Miss.

Look, look, yonder he comes; step you aside:
We'll both in here, and mark what he will do.
Come, come, turn out I say.

Jerny me voul
Et den your Madmoisel turn de you out:
Begar me go tell de her you no propre
To make de Gentleman; you no most have
De French Vallet, dat is geanty, galland,
No fit for de you dat: Jerny most have
De doll, de Diable, de simple English man
To serve de you, dat can no tesh de you
De Gallantry; no so mosh as de spoke.
Fee, fee, begar, no me shame for de you
Jerny, me voul go, no.

Should he in spite
Go tell my Mistress this, it might spoil all,
When I consider that she put him to me,
By the means of her confident, that man
Who interchangeably conveys our Letters,
The sole Correspondencie we ever had,
Through her severe restraint: I must submit.
Champagne, do but reflect on what you have done.
You Have stolen my Linen, lost your Hat and Clothes,
Spent all that Money I Would given you to lay out,
Which was five or six pounds.

Me lay it ote, Jerny.

On your own self, and give me no account.
Home you come naked, hundred Boys at your heels;
Then fit your self afresh from my best store,
All without License.

Begar, it is no de fasson
De Franshe serviteur de ask de permission;
Look de your Papier, and you voul see
It is de me devoir to sheet de you.
Begar, you no understand de Civilite
Francoise; you call de sheet, dat is simplement
De gaillardise, de tour d'addresse, Jerny.
It is meskin, begar.

I must be quiet,
And for the present wink at all his faults;
But time will come, I shall alter the Scene.
Well, well, Champagne, upon condition
That for the future you will live orderly,
All shall be now forgot. I will allow you
A Crown a day, and you shall promise me
That you will be honest, and cheat me no more.

Vell, tosh de la? do me lose be de bargain,
Me vould oblige de you. Come, give l'argent.

Well, well, let us in, and I Will give it thee there.

Another Letter?

Lest the former should fail,
In speaking not clear enough her intentions.

How does she do? Does she look briskly on it?
Thou see I do: speak; Is she cheerful, man?

As her Impatiencie, Sir, will permit.

Take this for thy reward.

I thank your Worship.

It Is a very small hand: where are my Spectacles?
Now let me see.
My dearest Knight; Since you have been so punctual to observe all my
Injunctions, I can no more doubt of your real Affections; I shall think the
time long till I am clasped within the loving Circle of your arms. This night
if you will come to receive me as yours, 'twixt one and two, I shall
impatiently expect your presence at the second window next the Garden, where
you will find

Yours wholly, Kath. Noble.


Let me see that again?
Yours wholly, Kath. Noble? it is just so.
I must not doubt your secrecy in this?

I Will be as secret to you as your thoughts.

It Is very well; that Virtue is a Jewel
Which must be set in Gold. Here, take the rest.
Only an earnest of my future love.
Thou must assist me in this my design,
In this Amorous Theft.

Sir, I am yours.
I Will not be wanting: be you but disguised,
And I Will secure you all.

Trust me for that
I can do it naturally, as it were.
What odd disguise do thou think would do best?

A woman's dress, nothing were better, Sir.

Thou Art in the right: but how should I come by it
Without suspicion?

Leave that, Sir, to my care.

I prithee do, and be sure not to fail
Precisely at the appointed time and place.

I Would as soon disappoint a Rich young wife,
As fail your Worship, Sir. This night at two
I shall be punctual, Sir -- to plague your heart.

Champagne, come here.
How do thou like me now?

O! ver vell --
Begar you look de no, Justement,
Comme de young Gallant: you have de odre day*
De bougre de hair all vitt, et no you have
De Peruque frisee; you vant
No more, Jerny, que de feat, vensh et drink.

Fight, wench, and drink? I Am old-dog at that.
This Love is a strange thing: I Am young again.
Henceforth to Justice I must bid adieu;;
That becomes not my Youth. Judge thou Champagne
Whether this Wig and Suit would fit the Bench.

No par ma foy, es bettre too sand tim
For de la Commedy*

How do I walk?

O ho! me tosh you dat.

And sing? fa-la-la-la-

Me tesh you dat.

And fence? ha ha!

Me tesh you dat.

Oddsniggs* I had forgot
My French, Champagne.

Oh! me no tesh* you dat.
Odnigg, odnigg, dat pitiful, Jerny,
Dat justement come de poor diable.
Alon donc? Qu'on prenne sa lecon
Par la Mort, par la Test.

Par la Mort, par la Test.

Bon, Jerny.

Bon Jerny.

Aye? no say bon Jerny.

Aye? no say bon Jerny.

Diable soit de la best.

Diable soit de la best.

Ah! Jerny, holl, holl: no say after me,
Je done au diable Mademoiselle.

Je done, etc.

Si je ne suis le plus humble serviteur.

Si je ne suis, etc.

De tous les serviteurs de vos Valets.

De tous les serviteurs, etc.

Very goot! alon, encore!

Very goot, alon, encore.

Non! Mademoiselle je suis rany d'avoir done
Jusques dans la Contre escarpe de vos bonnes graces.

Mademoiselle, etc.

Fort bien? no for de dance, Alerte Jerny.
Stand de you very strait, just come de me.
So, very goot.

Now let me see whether I have observed
Exactly her Commands: this is her Note,
Written with her own hand. In the first place,
You are to be apparelled in the French Mode,
To have this French Vallet, Companion rather,
Who is to teach you to Dance, Sing, and Fight,
To speak a Norman, or a Gascon French;
To Swear and Curse, in the same Dialect;
And cheat you of your Linen, Clothes, and Cash,
Before your face; at which you must but laugh.

Oh! O! do you see no? pray observe dat.

And swear by Jove, it is a witty Knave.

Un Crown de day? me loose be de bargain.

Then I must have you court some Gaysome Lady,
To accustom your self against you have me.
Jerny, Champagne, je had forgot this last.
Have vous incontinent to Monsieur Coggin,
Et know quand je can wait upon the Madmoisell.
Madmoisell Phill. Airy, pour kiss her bais les mains.

Ha! ha! ha! me go presentement.

Champagne, did thou not laugh at me, just now?

Ma foy un little.

There Is for thy pains. Be gone.
At thy return thou't find me in the Hall.

I Had intelligence a fortnight since
Of his coming to Town to woo the Widow.

The Widow Lovewealth, say?

The very same
Which put me on the business you shall hear.

Out with it; I long to hear't.

Thus in short.
You are to know my adversion toward Crosby
Being grown up unto a hatred of him,
By the sad narrative which Madam Phanny
Had made me of his base treachery toward her,
Caused on the other hand a sudden growth
To those well-wishings I had for Sir Coggin
Into affections --

Otherwise called Love.

It shall be what you please. This made me seek
All handsome means to break off those concerns
Which my Knight had, with th'interest Lady Lovewealth.
I soon made with his Sister a firm league,
And did so order things, it is now a week
That I lie in their Lodgings, where I have had
More opportunity to work my ends.
Last night I did contrive so, that a Letter
Was delivered into Sir Coggins's hands
In presence of me, with this Message to it*
That it was sent from an unknown Lady*
In which was mentioned, that he should meet this day
In the Piazza at four a clock a person
That likely would inform him of some things
Of his nearest concerns. He read the Note,
And presently assured the Messenger
He should not fail the assignation.
I had just parted with him, when I met
Timothy Clay, with his Man and his Dog,
Inquiring earnestly of each he met
Concerning me, who was but just gone by*
When I met you.

Well, but what said Sir Cogging?
Did he not know thee, think?

Not in the least.
I told him in a counterfeited voice,
The Lady Lovewealth did despise him so,
That a Rival was entertained by this
In his own room: if therefore he would desist
His pursuit in that place, a worthy Lady
Would entertain his Love, who surely had
Such an esteem for's person, as would amount
To the making him her Husband.

What said he?

I did not give him time, but added strait,
That if he would meet me in that place again
'Twixt five and six, I should inform him further.
To which he answered, that he would not fail.

How durst thou venture thy self all-a-lone
Without company with thee? Where is Siss?

Those two persons you see there --

Who be they? Do thou know them?

Yes, I do.
The one is Madam Phanny, the other Siss.
Thus all-along they have kept me company,
At such a distance as you see they observe.
Here Is Tim. Clay, Brother, we must not be known.

Let me alone for that: art sure it is he?

My life on it, man. It Is best I should retire,
And leave him to your handling: if he bite,
Bring him in the back-way, there I Will confirm
Whatever you have said.

Say no more, wench.

Do you know our Neighbor?

Where she lives?

Perhaps I might, did I but know her name.

Why her name is pretty Mistress Phill. Airy.
What say you now?

That I do know the person;
And if you please, I shall conduct you to her.
I am her servant, Sir,

Say thou me so, friend?
A-gad-a-mercie fecks; give him a groate,
Clunch; come, dispatch, a shall have a gray groate.

Oye, oye, soft there, pray let him earn it first.

But hark you now, what kind of servant pray?

My Profession, Sir --

Oye, oye, let us hear, what is that?

Is to instruct both Gentlemen and Ladies
In The art of Compliments; besides, I show
To such strangers as you, the Town and Court,
The Gallantry thereof, and the Intrigue --

Intrigue? what place is that?

By that I mean
Th'ingenious conversation 'twixt the Wits
Of either Sex, both in the Court and City.

You say that you teach Compliments?

I do so, Sir.

Why then I Will tell you friend, 'twixt you and I,
I Am come to town to court a certain Lady,
Who is already courted to my hands;
But that for fashion-sake (a murrain on it!)
I must bestow some few upon her Chaps.
Therefore, if you can help me to a brase
Of The newest of them at reasonable Rate,
I Will be your Chapman: I have money enough;
Have I not, Clunch?

Why, who dares question that?

I do not in the least.

You were not best.

But so few Complements, I am afraid
Will scarce serve turn.

Then keep them to your self,
For I could never yet learn how to write,
Scarce how to read; and do you think that I
Will burden my membry with Complements?

What if I teach you the new Mode of Courtship,
In which you will need but one single Complement,
And all the rest is voluntary Wit?

I marry, now you say something indeed;
But what do you mean by voluntary Wit?

It Is high Hyperboles, Anglice Nonsense.
No matter, Sir, how wide it is from the matter,
So you but keep your Countenance, go on,
And scarce take time to breathe.

Those what you call --
Hyper-bullies, and Anglice Nonsense,
I shall never learn without book, I Am afraid.

Well, Sir, suppose I have a way for that?
What can you then object?

I am not, Sir,
For your objects, I Am for one Complement:
And if so, why then so. Fecks you and I
Will be better acquainted.

Well, in short,
Because we are strangers to one another,
For further satisfaction, if you please
To let me wait on you to the Lady Airy,
She will inform you of my Capacity
In my Profession.

Gad-a-mercie fecks;
A dad a speaks, Clunch, like an honest man:
Come, we'll along.

I Hope your Ladyship will none of him.

Of whom talk thou?

Mr. Timothy Clay.

Thou silly thing! is he not wondrous Rich?

Yes, Madam, and that is all.

It Is all indeed:
For in that word is comprehended all
That I aspire at. Suppose he be
The ill-bred Chip of a rough-hewn block;
Impertinent, absurd, given to drink,
And to all sottishness; what is that to me?
I Will endeavor somewhat to polish him:
If I cannot succeed, he take that course,
And I will even take this --

Which, Madam, pray?

I Will give my self all the freedom I can
In modesty enjoy; take th'advantages
Of all his beastly extravagancies.
I Will insinuate my self i the management
Of the Estate; lull him asleep with ease;
Yield a full scope to all his appetites,
While I will work my ends, hoord up his Gold,
And spend on it at my list, on this, or that;
Eat, drink, wear what I please; as often change:
Go out, come in again, early or late,
Without control; have servants for my turn:
All this, and all things else, as I think fit.
What more can I desire? would he were come:
I long to see the man.

Sir Coggin, Madam,
Th'obliging Knight, what must become of him?

Faith, Prew, even as he pleases; here 'twon't
I Am for the Richest still.

The Tailor, Madam
Has brought some Patterns for your Ladyship.

SIr, in a word, he is the only man
On all accounts of Gallantry, you could
Have pitched upon.

Avads I think a be?

And for your sake, I Will dismiss him my service;
He shall be wholly yours.

Neighbor, good thanks.
You hear, Sir? henceforth you are to be mine;
Our Neighbor says the word.

Sir, I am yours.

Why very well. Now, because I Am in haste,
I Would have you dogmentise me instantly.
Was not that a hard word?

Most excellent!

Nay, sometimes I hit on um, do you see?
Come, give me some distructions.

Very well.
Now, Sir, observe, since I Am fully informed
You do not care for troubling of your self
With Compliments, I Will teach you the new Mode
A la Soldate.

Hy-day! what is that, I pray?

That is to say, Soldierlike Courtship, Sir;
A kind of rough-hewn way newly come up,
Which takes wondrous well in Court and City:
It Is generally used.

I long to know it.

Why thus in short: suppose that Lady there
Were your Maitress

That Is Latin for my Lady?

No, Sir, it is French: thus I make my approach.
It Is very well.

Nay fecks let me alone
To speak all the dumb Courtship, do you see?

Thus having kissed her hand, you must begin
Your Compliment.

Cannot I do it without speaking?

Not without speaking, Sir: but do you mark,
That you may have no use of memory,
I Will write you down a Compliment.

Nay, nay,
That will not do: for to tell you the truth,
I could never yet read a written hand,
Except it were in print.

It shall be so.
This done, and handsomely conveyed within your hat,
Which holding thus you shall read to you Lady,
She knowing not but you deliver it

That Is French again; oye oye.
Efecks it will be brave.

Your Compliment
Delivered as is said, you must begin
Either to whistle, sing, hop up and down --

Or else play with my dog. But tell me though,
Suppose my Lady speaks some Complements
To me again, what then?

Why, if she do,
She will not greatly mind what you will say,
Neither must you mind her.

It Is very true.
For why should I mind her, and she not me?
Let me alone for that. That is, you say --
A la -- what do you call it?

A la Soldat.

I Will defy any single man in town
To do it better than I. Me thinks I Am at it.
Hie Tray! alas poor rogue!

That Is very well.
It is done to the life. After a while,
If you do find the Lady to be silent --

So let her be! so I would have her fecks.

You must begin --

No Complements, I hope?

No, Sir.

Nay, then it will do well enough.

Only make use of some familiar talk:
As for example, What is most in fashion,
What News abroad, or else of some new Play.

Or of my dog Tray; or else, do you see,
Tell her how many Beasts, Sheep, Hogs; and Geese
My Father left me, besides, Money and Lands
In ready Cash.

There Is nothing better, Sir.

But yet, suppose she has an itching mind
To Complement?

Then you must let her know
That being of opinion that Complements
Are of too soft a nature for a man
(Especially of metal) for to use,
You Have hired me to supply in that part.

Effecks it will be rare.

Then will I court --

The Lady, as for me.

It Is very right.

Oddsniggs, I had forgot where we are to go.

Where shall I meet you 'bout an hour hence?
Sir, where you please.

Let it be in yond place --

The Piazza, Sir.

Oye there an hour hence.
Neighbor Airy go to: you have won my heart,
With leaving me your man.

Your servant, Sir.

Nay, nay, no Complements; and so farewell.

Brother, what think you on it?

Nothing but good.

In my opinion, if I ben't mistaken,
Here is a fortune flung into your arms:
You cannot avoid it man, it must be so;
You are the man designed to have the Lady
When all is done.

I hope no less, e'faith,
As I shall carry it on: for I intend,
As you may well perceive by this beginning,
That under the pretense of good instructions,
I Will make this credulous shallow-pated fool
Appear to be such an impertinent Sot,
As will oblige the widow without doubt
To see her folly in it if she once moves.
Then will I take fair opportunity
By the fore-top, and speak to her for my self.
That, Girl, must be the way.

A good one too.
Where Is our brother Dick? would he were here:
Have you not heard of him?

By the last Post.
This is the day he is to be in town.
The fatal pass, which so infortunately
He was compelled to make in's own defense
Upon his enemy, is no more thought on:
For underhand he has of late composed,
And (though with great expense) is gotten clear.

I fear of's money as well as his troubles.

It cannot be helped.

He deserves better things.

His Ingenuity will never let him want.

I hope 'twill not.

Madam, Mr. Crosby
Demands admittance to your Ladyship.

Why let him come; I shall soon dispatch him.

Mean time I Will go about the Compliment
Of such a nature --

Into my Closet there.

Your humble Servant, Madam.

Your Servant, Sir.

Madam, I come to ease my poor sick heart.

If you are serious, you will be best alone.
I have, Sir, other business now in hand.

Let me beg you will be pleased but to consider,
You can have none that may with greater Justice
Be taken to your thoughts, than such a passion
As I have always manifested to you,
By the saddest protests --

Those you call such
I must suppose are of your making so,
Perhaps it is your custom: I not the first
To whom you have made those sad protests you call.

Let me but only vent --

At leisure, Sir.

There Is something more than ordinary in the wind.
Should she have had intelligence of late
Of my former Amors with Madam Phanny?
But how should she come by it? I need not fear't.
I must confess she ever did receive
All my addresses with reluctancie;
Would often twit me with her friends consent
Which I had got: but now of later days
She Has not so much as common complaisance.
Well, I Am resolved once more to see this Miss,
And pump out, if I can, the cause of this.

Dear is de hoose, me most knoke de dor:

Begar is be un very pretty de ting.
Me voul make de her un grand Compliment.
Mademoiselle, je suis vostre esclave d'un grand coeur.
Bless us! what have we here?

Vat have you de here? Jerny, you have de Geante,
Jolly, polly, accomply, galland Gentilhome, Monsieur
De Brisefer; une person dat vill tesh de you de
Play de Trumpet marine, de Flageolet, de
Feedle, de Tambour, de Basque, de Sign, come ca
Fa-la-la-la, de Compliments, de Dance, come ca ha --
De Fence, come sa, a, ha! -- A Jerny me voul feet,
A kill all de Diables for de love de you.

Sure this same thing has skipt out of its wits
Into this Morris-dress before the season?
Hear you, pray, is not your name Champagne,
Sir Amorous Frost his servant?

Ha, a, a, Champagne?
Me Modre bring de me in de Champagne, et --

Upon her back?

No, begar, no open de her belee --
Aye, so me come in de varl in Champagne.

You were born there?

Very just, par ma foy, me born, me born der.
But me name be Monsieur de Brisefer admirateur
De vos perfections.

Goodnow, no more conjuring.

For de love de you me voul brake de neck presentement
Si'l vous plaist.

Good Sir, I thank you for your hanging love.

A ha! vostre tres humble Valet.

Well, but Champagne?

Aye! --

Or Monsieur Brisefer, what is your Arrand?

Harrang, begar, Jerny, me have no de Harrang, look
Der else;
Me come to baise les mains de Madmoiselle
Diana, pour de service de me Maistre.

What stuff is this? you baise les mains, Sot?
You kiss her --

Tout beau, tout beau, ma Genty de moiselle, ventre,
Test, Gozoon, if de Rogue de Englishman speak de
Me de Harrang, me kill de him come ca, ha!
Ho! com come Mademoiselle, sur mon honneur
Me voul no kill de you, harrang,
Jerny --

You say me sell de Harrang?
Arrand, yes, Sir, I Am going of one,
And should be glad you would inform me in it:
Pray where lives one whose name's Sir Hopewell Coggin?

Coquin? par la sang, par la mort, par la test, Gozoon,
Harrang? Coquin? if no respect de Madmoiselle
Me voul -- hum? Jerny -- behange --

This is excellent sport!

Jerny, your self:sure this fellow is mad.
What do you say to me, pretty one? ha?
Can you inform me?

Jerny, he live in de house.

Pray leave off your Jerny: it may be so.

Sot? Mademoiselle pray you hold de me fast,
Autrement me kill de him presentement.

In what place is this house?

In London, Jerny.

Jerny in your teeth:
I Am a mere stanger, and --

Et me be un person voul make de you mad.

where might I see him?

Ver you look o-top de him, Jerny?

Again? you are pleasant, Sir?

Begar me var mor plaisant if you go to de divle
Si Josois, Jerny --

Flesh and blood cannot hold out;
H'as gin me the Jerny a dozen times.
Pray change me this?

Peste? -- is it de jest ou bien de tout de bon?

Even as you please; what do you think on it, pray?

De jest, de jest, your humble serviteur.

Much good may do you, Sir: I Will go with you.

La peste? come il touch? --
Ha test non? ou est I'honneur? Champagne, ou est I'honneur?
Begar, me voul have de revange; first me vill kill
De Rogue, and den me cogel im sounlgle. Hah! Rogue,
Tosh me de face? Premierement, call de me de harrang,
Test non? en second lieu, call de me de Coquin? Par
La mort? Item, call de me Sot? ha! ventre blew?
Conclusion, zap, give en grand box de Ear? ha! Jerny?
Es Justment come ca? dat is de ting. Mon honneur?
Verbee you? allon viste speak de me.
Me say most have de respect for de Estranger --
Autrement me kill de him, van, too, tree tim. O! forbon,
Very goot, you see no, me honneur ave de respect et
De consideration for de Estranger? -- but me honneur
Be un ting, et me un odre; me say nothing, but
Jerny --

leading Phill. Noble, Diana, Lysse, Siss.

ON my word, Madam, there was no such thing.

But what then may it be?

Love, Madam, may,
And with such fierceness drive on these designs
As will compass his ends --

Not always, Sir --
Brother, say what you please, but let me think:
Go out so suddenly, come home in dumps,
Have not a word to say; nay scarce afford
Common respect to your most worthy guests,
Is somewhat strange.

He knows I am not his,
But your poor tenant, Madam.

I must confess,
That an odd business coming unexpected,
Has somewhat discomposed me for the present,
For which I humbly beg your pardon, Madam.

You have it;
But under favor, Sir, may we not know
What sort of business 'twas you had in hand?

I hope it was no quarrel?

Not at all.

Was it not some gay Lady's assignation?
That Note that was delivered you last night,
In my mind, spoke so much.

To tell the truth,
It was that very thing: I had intelligence
Of an amor.

What now, Sirrah?

Moving already, Ladies?

To th'next room.

Once more, Sir, you are welcome to this house,
And wish you quick success in your addresses
Unto my Sister, who already's informed
Of your own worth; and do believe that she
Will not be o're-severe in the reception
Of your love beyond what is to be allowed
To the modesty of her Sex.

Your Generosity
Is so surprising, that I Am to seek for words
To return you those thanks that might proportion
With your civilities.

You Are still beforehand: my Sisters Portion, Sir,
Is yet entire, though I Have had the misfortune
To loose my share of what we had inherited
From our Parents.

Had I any thoughts
That in the least should reflect upon interest,
'Twould render me unworthy the possessing
So rich a Jewel as that Lady, Sir.

You Are too obliging, Sir, -- who have we here?

Falla-la-la; Jerny Madmoisell vostre tres humble serviteur.
Niece! how is it, Girl? Monsieur je suis a vous.
Nephew! how do thou like this Peruque? ha!
This Trimming, Cravat, these Gloves, Sword and Belt?
The whole Apparel? hum? falla-la-la.

What the devil's the matter?
What your judicious Gravity approves,
I am not to contest --

Sure he is mad?

I Have always told you, Nephew, that delays
Were ever of a dangerous consequence;
And now you are like to know it by experience.
You know how often I Have advised you to marry,
That I might see some likelihood of Heirs
To be successors to that fair Estate
I have acquired, by my assidual pains.
You have had time enough, yet nothing done: --
It Is those neglects of yours, have put me on
This great necessity of marrying
In these more riper years.

The wench guest well --
I suppose, Sir, this is to try me with?

Mistake not; I Am in earnest, and in haste.

Why, Sir, the Gentleman is young enough;
And his lost time may easily be repaired
(I Am of opinion) if it pleases him.
It Is in his choice yet, to outstrip you there.

Where, prithy? where?

I mean in Marriage, Sir,
My Knight takes me not yet; I dare no more --

I thought you knew the person, I protest.
I shall scarce marry these three or four days,
And you may get a dozen wives by then;
But he must make good haste, or come too short.

You say three or four days?

Yes, thereabouts.

Well, Sir, will you but yield that if I marry --

The widow Lovewealth? I Will put a spoke there.

A Lady young and brisk, 'twixt this and when
You have appointed for your marriage-day,
You will --

I Will tell thee, nephew, what I Will do:
He that is first married of us two,
Shall bar the other from procuring Heirs
To my Estate.

A match, a match, e'faith.

And if Sir Cogging, Sir, does get the day,
You Will declare him your Heir immediately?

What say you, Sir, to that?

A match, a match;
I Will not deny you sweet: you must run post?

It Is very well.

We'll all be witness to it.

And to my wedding also morrow-morn.
To which you are all invited.

How? so soon, Sir?
Y'allow'd a longer time.

Three or four days?

Nay, Sir, it is so; now make what haste you can;
Whip, whip, and spur, you had need, or lie behind.
I Will stick to the Contract; so Gentles, adieu.

What a mad Scene is this?

It Is unexpected --

And sudden too, I think.

These the first news;
But now, what is to be done?

Even cross his Match.

But how is it to be done?

We Are left in the dark:
Did we but know where he makes his address,
There would be some hopes yet.

Sir, as for that,
I think I have a way which may succeed.

Prithy what is it?

You know, he has of late
Entertained a French servant.

What of that?

The fool, who pretends kindnesses to me,
Is doubtless privy to his Masters love;
And if so, Sir, I make no question then,
But to get knowledge of this secrecy.

No better way.

Lysse, if thou do this,
Thou will deserve our further care of thee.

Let me alone to worm out this French fellow;
Sir, fear it not.

Come, cheer up, Sir.

Madam, you may do so,
Who have assurances of your amors
By a Contract --

A Contract say you, Sir?
(Curse be the cause of this suspicion in him.)
It Is with my Parents then, never with me.
And likely enough that bargain's yet to make
Between the Gentleman you mean, and me.

Brother, let me advise you strait to go
To the Lady Lovewealth; learn if 'twere the hopes
Of your Uncles Estate made her accept
The tender of your services, or whether it be
A real affection does cause her to have
An esteem for your person. If the last,
Inform her how you are driven --

Not amiss.
So now it works as I would have it, just.

Sir, if you please to honor me so far
As to lend me your company t'her house --

It must be then with these two Ladies leave.

I Will but call by the way at the Rose-tavern.

In the mean time, according to my promise,
I Will speak two words at the School in next street.

Very well, Sir, we'll meet at the Piazza
An hour hence.

Till then, your servant, Sir.

NOw I Am a Prince again, in show at least.
Hem! hem!

Hist, hist.

It Is I; is the coast clear?

I Will look about -- I see none we may fear.
Why did you stay so long?

How does my Love?

As well as hopes can make me,
And yet my thinks this day is cruel long.

It draws toward its end.

Does the time hold?

'Twixt two and three: be sure the ^^ght be out;
Our work requires none.

How shall we do
To get off in the dark? the Moon by twelve
Will yield us no more light.

So I would hav't.

It will be very dark: how shall I know
When you are come, or whether it be you?

Here, here; secure these half a dozen Keys:
When I am got up to the Ladder-top,
I Will in the Room, and seek you in the dark,
Where when you find you are taken by the hand,
Conclude it is I. By the help of these Keys
I Will open every door to the Garden-side,
And that way we'll get off. Speak not a word,
Nor whisper then.

And where must we go then?
Not far, I hope.

Only to the Church Porch,
Where a Parson shall wait to tie the Knot,
And then --

Away, away, the Beldam comes.

Farewell till night.

Farewell.

FOr these same reasons, Sir, a stricter Eye
I Have kept upon her actions than before;
And till some two months since, or thereabouts,
I could not find she had any commerce
Beyond these walls; which made me grant to her
A little more liberty than before.
But it could not last long: for one bright night,
About the hour of two, I heard a noise
On the backside; I stole gently down stairs,
And there, you will scarce believe't --

Yes, I Will believe that she has not her like.

I found the Gentlewoman
Letting down of a bucket full of stones
Into a Well.

How Is that, pray? full of stones?

Yes, Sir.

For what?

I stood still close behind,
And she was so attentive at her work,
That she perceived me not: now mark, I pray!
Anon at the other end of the Well-rope,
Up comes, what do you think, Sir? pray you guess.

The Devil sure.

No, Sir, but one of's friends,
Dressed in a humane shape; a fine young man,
Who, as I thought, none but the Devil himself
Could have brought there. The Gallant spying me
Standing behind, twitches the rope she held,
And gently poises himself down again.
At this she turns, and so espies me out.
You must needs think she was much discomposed
At the sight of me?

I know not what to think.

Wounderfully! she in a laughing tone
Cries out, E'faith, you came in the nick of time,
Or else by this, I Would gin you the go-by.
With that, in a great laughter up she runs,
Where having locked her self, she 'gan to sing,
Oh! Love is a dilicate thing. In The morning
I visited the Well, and in it found
Toward the middle, a window that did answer
Into a neighboring Vault. I had a pump
Set in the place, to prevent for the future
Such like attempts. Seeing no remedy
But close confinement of her in a Room
Under good locks and keys, I Have mewed her up,
Where she does still remain.

Cannot be helped.
I pray let her not know of my return
Till I see you again. Till then, farewell.
I see it is easier the Ocean to span,
Than keep by force a young maid from a man.

NOw for to know my doom. Your Lady, Siss?

She Is gone to take the Air.

Come, let me in.
I shall grow angry else.

Here comes some Rescue?

Your obedient Servant, your Woman, Madam,
Denied you to me.

She did nothing, Sir,
But what she had in charge.

Madam, it is like
(My fate's the harder) that I am ariv'd
Upon some newer interest.

Your own
Was not so considerable, Sir, before,
Nor had it so much name you need to fear
That any should succeed it.

If there be any one dares own a favor
That Is to my prejudice, let him look, Madam,
You hide him in your bosom, if he would not
Have this sword through him.

Sir, you must prescribe
No Laws to me: that person I shall choose
To throw my favors on, shall know to answer
Whatever heats you bring.

Why be it so.

This care is over.

A fair riddance, doubtless.

This is not all, I have another plot,
To bring about my ends 'twixt Madam Phanny,
And this unworthy man, that I must do,
Or I Have done nothing yet.

Seriously, Madam,
I pity that poor Lady at my heart,
She is so melancholy --

Where is she now?

At her old trade of weeping.

I Will cheer her up
E're long; if things do hit.

Pray Heavens they may.

Let Us in, and there consult with her about it,
Lest we be troubled with this impertinent.

CHampagne? dis de honneur es un Jewel
De grand estimation: it is de so precious de ting
Dat mos no be loss; no, mos no be loss:
Den mon revenge: Oh! very goot, very sweet,
Par ma foy de honey is no so sweet
As de revange to de Frensh Vallet.
Derefor, par consequent you de Estranger
Dat give de me de pas open de face,
You moss prepare for de die, no remedee,
But Monsieur Champagne, me mande pardon,
Me ask quarter, de grace me no give:
Comment give box de Ear to me person?
Ah! Jerny, ventre test, come nee I done,
Dat me cope de test, et present de it
To me Maistresse Mademoiselle Lysse.
Alon; me no longre stay: point de quartier.

How now? who is that you will kill?

Ha! Monsieur mon amy, begar me be
Your very de humble Serviteur -- me very glad
De see de you ver vell, me voul present de you
Vit de pint de vin.

But my thinks you were grumbling
In an other dialect?

Es nothing, par ma foy:
Me only repete de verse de la Comedy.

Perhaps you are angry?

No, no, sur mon honneur.
Me know you de jest, me no angry, Mafoy:
You strick de me again if you de plaise,
Me never tink de arm vit de amiss.

Then fare you well, I Have nothing more to say.

Humble Valet; Jerny, mort test non:
Me no do vell, me shoull have kill de him:
A ventre blew, me voul call de him back.
Dis fool pittee always take de me
A contre temps: begar for de futur
Me voul be cruel, batre, kill, cojel,
Massecre all to me revange. Jerny,
Me voul presentement go send de him
Un shalange, but first me vill visit
Me Maistresse Madmoiselle Lysse, Jerny,
To give de me de la valleur -- Ah! pox de him.

I had forgot that while you are here, you should
Present my humble service to that Lass
I met with you in the morning, and let her know
I Will visit here e're long: do not you fail.

Jerny?

What Is that you say?

Ouy, ouy, dat is de say, iss, iss, presentement,
Oll, oll, a little, me do you de service.
Dear no is vell.

Oh! thank you, Sir.

Hum, um, um, Jerny; it is vell you go,
You make de escape, but me cash you agin
Un odre tim -- me voul extermin de you.
Oh! Madmoisell, for de grand love de you,
Me almost kill van, to, tree Rogue, just no.

For love of me?

Is par la mort. Jerny.
Me love de you tresfurieusement.

I, but how shall I know if this be true?

Sur mon honneur; me engage me honneur.

Were I but sure --

O! me voul tell de you?
Command no, de me de un ting,
Et me voul do de ting: you ondrestand?

That you will do any thing I shall command?
Well, I Will try you for once.

Come donc, allon.

With whom is it that your Master is to marry?

Dat be begar de very grand secret;
Me Mastre vill no have de know, Jerny.

I thought as much: I see your love in this:
You love? you hang.

Madmoiselle Lysse,pray come to me, me voul tell de you
De all; but you most be de very secret den?
Autrement -- hum, um, um --

Fear it not, man:
I Will be in this as secret as thy self.

De Mrs. de me Mr. is un little Gentilhoman
In de School, vish me Mr. take de away in de neet.

Who? Sir Amorous?

No, no, Jerny, un odre:
Me tell de you de all; me have too Mr;
Premierement, de un dat is un Rogue;
Secondement, that Rogue pote de me
To de odre dat is un fool --

Sir Amorous you mean?

Just so, Jerny: no, me Mr. de Rogue,
Voul all de sheet, d'odre Mr. de fool,
Et take de vensh for him: begar, just so.

Is it this night?

Is, is, but moss silance.

Here Is cheat on cheat: hark, hark! somebody comes.

Me voul come de see you after un hour.

Do so, be sure you come: you will find me here.

Adieu, begar, de nexe tim me see de you
Me vill see if you be de goot flesh; Jerny me
Can no stay de longre for un homan.

PRew? go to my Closet, and fetch me the Letter
I now received from Sir Amorous Frost.
It is both short and sweet. While I took care
How to dismiss Sir Coggin of his suit,
There is provision made; I need no more,
When he is come in, but to show him this Note:
Sure that will do it. How now?

Sir Coggin, Madam,
Is new set down at door, desires admittance
To your Ladyship.

Why, bring him in -- that is well:
I am prepared.

Madam, I have made bold --

You have so, Sir.

Yet I hope the offense
Is not so great but that I may find pardon?

It Is of that nature, Sir, as must not hope
To find excuse, much less a pardon for it.

Madam, I hope, it is not on my account
My friend is thus neglected by your Ladyship?

No such thing, Sir; if you are rich you are welcome:
But for that Gentleman, (your friend you call)
That knows himself to be wretchedly poor,
Beyond all hopes, and yet pretend to me,
Is such a thing as I must not forgive.

It Is likely, Madam, that some Rival here
Is hapyer than I?

He is so, if more Rich:
That is the only thing, Sir, that sways me.

Madam, in the opinion of the general,
There are other things to be considered
In the choice of a Husband.

The Vulgar, say you?
That commonly runs false; and I Will be singular,
Sir, thus in short: were you in full possession
Of as fair an Estate as is your Rival,
Your person, Sir, might pass muster with me;
I like that well enough.

Come, come away;
For shame, Sir, do not spend one single thought
Upon so interest a thing as this,
Who is a scandal to her gentler Sex.

Indeed! are you of that Religion too?
Here, Sir, read this, and then tell me your mind?

Madam, I hope you will attribute these few lines of advice to my diligent care
of your Welfare, since they tend to no other end, than the giving you notice
that I am in mind to have Heirs of my own getting, and leave my Nephew to his
Ingenuity. I make no question but you know my meaning: So conclude

Madam, yours, Amorous Frost

Your Uncle has been too quick for you here.

Madam, since it is so, yet give me leave
To congratulate my Rival e're I go.

Sir, To speak the truth, I had intelligence
He would be here this day; but yet, not come.
In The evening, Sir, if you please to be here,
You Will witness our Contract.

And Marriage too?

If he has a mind to it.

Madam, I Will come.

Your Friend too, Sir.

Your thrifty Servant, Madam.

So much for that: now shall I think it long
Till my new Lover comes. I wonder what
His Compliment will be?

By relation, Madam,
He cannot say, as a body should say,
As one should say, boh! to a Goose.

Go to:
How goes the day?

Madam, on its decline.

And not come yet?

A strange Gentleman, in as strange a dress,
Madam, demands access unto your Ladyship,
Both for himself, his mouth, his man, and dog.

What Is this thou say?
Admit him here.
Sure this is he, by the Message he sent.
I dread his coming in, who just before
Wished he were here: I must receive him now.
It is too late to think.

Come here, poor Rogue.

Now mind your business, Sir.

Madam, super Excellent, and the sole supreme Mistress of my sober Passions, (
hem, pat the Dog) paron -- hum -- pardon, that my peregrine self entreats the
Mixifick effects of the sweet Influentials of your, of your, -- your --
Loxogonos -- phe -- ri-cal Intuition. You sublime Lady alone, are able to nurce
up this -- ( hem again.) ( a pox of these hard words) ex -- exta -- extatickal
embryo of your more than thrice supedaneous Admirer. ( hem again. Give me leave
super Mundaine Lady, to supplicate at the (nownow again) sub-t-e-r-ter-sel of
your feet; and pardon him who subscribes himself your slave, as far beneath
your pity, as a Myrmidonial Insect to highest of Stairs; no, Stars I mean


So much for the Compliment Clunch, want it well done? efecks, 't has made me
sweat. This thing called wooing, is a most pest'lant thing. Lady, if you would have
more, I Have brought my mouth with me, do you see, to speak for me


Sir, in few words, you are welcome to my house.

It is not quite so big as our new Barn:
What thinks thou, Clunch?

Yea, thereabouts.

There Is nothing can be more ridiculous:
It Is the mere abstract of impertinencie;
Worse cannot be.

I am glad to hear that.

What have I done?

How do you like my Dog?
Do you see, Madam, en't it a fine thing?

Oh! very fine indeed, and nothing finer.

Come hither, Tray? what do you think's his name?

Why Tray I think.

Efecks you are in the right;
That you should guess, do you see, so well at first!
Did she not, Clunch?

Yea, yea, what was it you said?

Effecks, I Am glad to see you well: sit down.
Ho! fetch a stool for my Lady to sit.
Mouth, do you talk to my Lady a little,
While I play with my Dog.

I am commanded
Madam --

Heavens deliver me from this Impertinent!

Oye, oye, let him alone for Compliments.
I stoo-her, mouth: he will give you your belly full
Of Compliments, and Courtship, and what not?
I Will play him against any in Town or Country
At either of those Weapons for a great.
Oye, stick closs to her man, oye, oye, look on.
I know it is all for me he speaks to you:
For why? he is my mouth, are you not, mouth?
How do you like him, Lady?

Very well.

It Is all the better for me still, I cry.
I pray sit down. This London, Lady mine,
Is a chargeable place. Nay, look on me;
He is only to speak, not to look on.
What do you think 't has cost me, do you see,
Since I Am in Town, on me, on Clunch, and Tray?

What is it you said?

Well, Lady, for this bout
I will not pose you in it; but in a lump
'T has cost me just seven Nobles, do you see.

What person, Sir, is this you have brought with you?

It is my Mouth; I told you so before,

A Gentleman?

Gentleman, do you see, that will speak you --

And are you sure he is a Gentleman?

Our Neighbor Airy told me so, I Am sure;
And this I know, she would not lie for th'matter.
I tell you once more, he is a Gentleman
Every inch on him: do but try him else;
He Will give you, do you see, your belly full.

This works for me beyond imagination.

Nay, but pray hear me out: I brought him here,
That in case you loved Compliments, do you see,
A should sit your turn, Lady, t'a Cow's thumb,
As one should say: for, for my part,
I naturally hate these Compliments.
Look on him, Lady, pray.

A good presence.

Effecks I Am woundy dry: Clunch fetch two Pots
To make my Lady drink.

Sir, use my Cellar:
It is the fittest place for such a beast.

Efecks a match, a match; come hither Tray.
Nay, well all go: I Will lead in Tray, do you see?
And you, Clunch hand my Lady: As for Mouth,
He is only to talk.

Hands off.

Choose chub.

Now I begin t'abhor that foolishness
Which possessed me so late. I am justly punished
For my covetousness; plainly foresee
I shall become a laughing stock to all.

Madam, if that --

Pray, Sir, answer me first:
Are you a Gentleman?

I am so, Lady.
But Madam, give me leave to let you know
My miseries, the crossness of my Stars,
Those fatal Influences did preside
At th'hour of my Birth --

What, Sir, can make you
So unhappy a man, as you endeavor
To represent your self?

Madam, it is this:
That being extracted of a Gentile stock
Honorably derived, have been imbued
With a proportioned breeding to my Birth,
I should want that great Idol of the world,
A futable Estate to all those things
I have but newly mentioned.

A comely man;
Me thinks I am concerned at his relation:
Pray, Sir, how long have you known Mr. Clay?

Only since morning, Madam, have I seen
This man possessed with that great lump of treasure
Which renders him ridiculous to the world;
While the hundred part of that vast Estate
Might entitle some worthy gentleman
To your consideration.

Would I were certain
This person were of a Gentile extraction.
When're I cast my Eye upon his preson,
Me thinks I do him wrong to question it.
I feel somewhat within me takes his part,
That will not let me rest, but whisperes still
Unto my heart, This man's to be preferred
With his bare virtue, before that other thing
With all its wealth. Come, Sir, we'll in an see
What is become of Mr. Timothy Clay
And his followers.

Madam, I Will wait upon you.

CHampagne, this is the night which is designed
For my Amorous Theft: you must assist
With secrecy, be sure?

Secret, Jerny, no feere for dat:
Me be all de secret, me have de secret
To kill the Ratts, de Fleese, de Mooss, de Tick;
De secret to make de Money, to make de Charm,
To cash de prity Vensh; de secret de make de loose
De grate Belee, de botte secret, de Jerny --
De secret -- to runn avay vit your monee and close.

How Is that?

Noting, noting, me only repette all de me secret.

Against the time, provide your self for action
With useful arms, such as you handle best.
It Is like we may employ them -- do you see,
It Is a dangerous attempt?

Oh! let me come.
Begar, if dare be de bougre, de Rogue dat vill
Make de resistance, me voul come ca give
De him un grand posh -- den vit come ca kill de him.
Presentement, ha --

Hold, sure thou art mad?

Is begar, ven you speak de feet, me be mad, de Kill de all.

Besides, you must provide you a disguise.

Disquise: ho! very goot, no fere for dat,
Me voul disquise as mosh redicul as de you.

Come, let us hear how?

Me voul go in de estable, take de little horse,
Me voul kill de him, den me voul take de his
Skinn et pote upon de me, den me voul keek, and
Beet et Cree whin hin: humrfl. is no excellant?
Disquise?

Yes, but I loose my horse by the bargain, man.

Den me do autrement, me take de his skinn,
And no kill de him; den ven me don vitt de
Skin, me put de it open de horse again:
Is no dat good, no?

Still I should loose my horse.

Pox de horse: you get de Madmoisell? is no better.

We'll think on it, man: This night's to prove
To me a night of Pleasures, and of Love.

DIck Airy, thou art in London once again;
And now, what is to be done? I know not faith:
I Will examine my Pockets, see what is left
Of Lands, Chattels, and Goods, Money and all;
All I have in the world is in this place.
Let Us see, what have we here? just seven Guinies;
I Will to the Ordinary, there I Will try
Whether these seven pieces I have left
Are good breeders or not; if not, why then
I shall but lose what would do me no good
To keep, except 'twere more: however, then
I shall be thoroughly cleared of that small stock
Which never did me good since the first hour
My Father left it me. How he came by it
I know not; let that pass: then will I try
What I can do of my own self to live:
What know I but Fortune would prove more kind
Were this gone also?
Unwilling peradventure I should owe
My happiness to any thing but she.
I Will try her once; Fortune, an't be thy will
To have me loose this Gold, yet help me then,
Merely out of stark kindeness and pure love.
QUe dis honneur es un foolish de ting!
Et que un box de Ear cause mosh trouble!
Ho mosh un vaillant man, most have de business?
For un box de Ear me most now kill de him
Dat give it de me; it is que de forced time
He strick de me, for all dat he most dee.
But me is de opinion dat is very de simple
To go de feet vit simplement de shart,
Because der be veree great many places
To kill de man, and so de send de him
To de Antipodes. Der is de Heart,
De Livre, de Kiddeneis, de Longs, de Gots,
De Artere, de Vains, de Nerfs, et d'Estomach;
Derfor, as un prudant et vaillant home,
Me have prepared de arms cap espee.
Me have de very good parade, contre de Tierce,
De Cart, de Coup four; et contre de Back-sword:
As par example, me see me enemy
Just before de me, me draw, ha! ders for you.
Begar me stick de him just in de pansse:
Jerny, me parre vell? a ha! do you go back?
Alon, ventre Jerny, der to you head:
Ha! if me no go back, me have de hol
Justement in de heart, you pay for dat!
Ha! very goot, par ma foy: me kill de Eye!
Bon, Jerny, me kill de odre: O! blind man?
You most, Jerny, have de dog et de bell.
Hellas! Monsieur Champagne, me ask pardon:
No Jerny, no most dee: He! pardon -- no pardon.

Begar Mademoiselle you come de very goot tim.
Autrement me have kill de Rogue.
What? who? where? why?

Par ma foy is just go.

I am glad on it.

Me voul go fesh de him,
And kill de him for your service.

No, good Champagne --

Maistre Champagne, Jerny.

Then good Mr. Champagne,
Let him live for my sake.

Vell, live den, car Madmoiselle
Vill have de it so.

Well, have you got the name?

Begar, me know de all me voul tell de you,
But you love de me very vell den,
And let me do de little ting --

How Is that?

Nothing, nothing begar, me only say
You have de me for your Osban, is no?

I promise here, Champagne, to Marry you.

Aye! Monsieur Champagne?

Monsieur Champagne, I mean.
At the same hour your Rogue-Master shall wed
That Mistress he is about.

Toshe de hand:
Me tell de you in secret --

I suppose, Sir, that you are now returned
From th'assignation?
What did the Lady say?

Madam, I will inform you punctually
Of all that past between us. The Lady come
At the appointed place, caused the Chair
She was in to be stopped, and thus began.
There is a Lady not far from this place,
Of Beauty, Youth, Birth, and Estate to boot,
Not inferior to the rich Lady Lovewealth,
Has such Esteem, Affection, if not Passion,
Or rather Love for your personal worth,
As cannot be expressed in lesser terms
Than making you her Husband.
Sir, you must know,
This night she does intend in a disguise,
To Mascarade it at the Lady Lovewealth --
Where I Will be sure to accompany her.
Madam, here is all
That has past 'twixt the Lady and my self.

I find I am not in the least suspected.

Well Lysse, what news now?

None, Sir, but good.
These were his words, as well as he could speak,
Or I them understand. Me Mastre's Mistress is a
Young Lady whose name is Mrs. Kitty Noble.

How, Kitty Noble, say thou?

Just so, Sir.

This night, at three, my Master de Rogue and I steel her away, and cheat me
Master the fool of his fine Miss by a Ladder of Ropes, out of a window next to
the Garden-wall at the Boardingschool in our own street. He added, that this
Master was to be disquis'd like a Woman, and he he knew not yet. This did he
jabber in his Gibberish tone


Come, come, fear nothing, Sir, all will do well;
This works as I could wish: your assignation
At the Lady Lovewealth once at an end,
If you do not succeed, we'll watch the old Knight,
And seize upon that most villainous Rogue
That sets him on merely for his own ends,
As we may clearly see beyond dispute
By Lysse's late intelligence: we know the hour --
And there is no fear but to compass our ends.

Madam, if that --

Sir, I hope you will excuse
My absence this night from the Lady Love wealths?

And do you leave me, Madam?

She is not well.

I shall wish you good sport, and good success.

Come Sister, you will along?

Yes, she shall go,
And Lysse too.

Come, come, let us loose no time.
Madam, your humble Servant.

Servant, Lady.

Have thou got all things ready?

Madam, I have.

Cupid prosper and crown this last nights work!

watch their goings forth, and in what dress
Sir Coggin is accoutred; and when they are gone,
Advertise me, that we may after them
With diligence. Surely it is impossible
I should be known in a Torch-bearer's habit,
With such a Mask as will hide all my face?
Thou being the Lady too?

I must confess,
That this change put upon them, will help much
To your concealment.

It will: be gone; make haste.

Who Is this that knocks? I would not be seen now:
I Will hide the light, and then let them in.
Who Is there?
A Friend.

It Is more than I know yet.

I cannot help that. Sir Coggin? is it you?

The very same.

I Am glad I Have met you, Sir, though in the dark:
I have but some few words --

Your business, pray?

My business is but short: Mr. Crosby,
From whom I came, has desired me to say
You had not, Sir, that Title in Phill. Airy,
Or any of that worthy Ladies Virtues,
As he himself has, and does hold by right;
And on the same account, desires to see you
In the Piazza with your sword in hand,
At six this morning.

I Will wait upon him, Sir.

It will be requisite you take a friend;
Your Rival honors me.

That shall be done.

I am your Servant, Sir.

Sir, I am yours.

Now am I challenged: O! here comes my Second.
I come to tell you that the coast is clear.

Come, let us to the Coach, and as we go
I Will tell thee the best Jest that ever was.

Lady Lovewealth, Per. Clay, Clunch, Tray, Prew.
A Vadds, now, do you see, my head does ache
Like any wildfire? hark you, my Lady?
Now, do you keep of all these sorts of Liquors
In your own Cellar, all the year about?

Yes, yes, why not?

Why then you are woundy rich.
What Is your name, Prew?

My name is Prudence, Sir.

I prithy look my head.

No flesh and blood
Can bear this insolence.

It Is very cold;
Fecks we will to Blind-man's-bluff: 'twill heat us all.
Clunch shall be hid.

Not I; I know your tricks.

I am waggish sometime, Lady, do you see,
And he is wary of me: come, I Will hide.

I Will blind you then.

No, my Lady shall do it.

No, no, do you mark me, I Will have no such cheating.

So, o-brave Clunch, that calls my Lady cheat!
Thou Art so mistrustful -- come along simpleton:
Hold, hold, Clunch, not so hard.

Is it well now?

Oye, oye, do you see, I Will have no goings out.

No, no, come on.

Heavens! what will this be?

A cure I hope to your brains and my fortune.

Have at you Clunch; you do not clap your hands.
I warrant you this was Clunch. I taught him that.
I Will fit him for it.

Ods wowks, what have we here?

I Will tell you what, if I do catch you, Clunch.
Oh! have I caught you now, Clunch? Devil, Oh!

What Is this insolency for?

But Mascarades.
How his anger ^^comes him? all he does
Has so much grace --

I would I were a whom.

I would to Heaven thou had never been here.

Had I know, Lady, that your house was haunted,
I Would never a come so far to marry you.
What do I know, do you see, but when we two
Were in one bed minding of somewhat else,
We should have these Hobgobblings come to us,
And so mar all our sport? Pray now how long
Has your house been haunted? what say you Mouth?
Will Not they hurt Tray? nor Clunch? nor you? nor me?

Observe, they dance.

They Are merry Devils fecks.

Hy-day; more Devils yet?

Whow! Hell's broke loose.

Sir, if you dare put confidence in me,
Here I protest that in every respect
She is to Madam Phill. Airy equal,
If not to be preferred.

Well, Madam, since
I must not hope to see the Lady's face
Before I Have given my hand, and must confess
You have been just in all you have hitherto
Declared to me; my life and fortunes both,
I put into your hands, to dispose of
As you shall best think fit.

Then give me leave
To speak you at this time a happy man:
Some minutes, Sir, will make you say the same.

Madam, I am all faith.

Give me your hand,
To dispose with your heart, as I think fit.

What, wedded to a boy? Madam, what is this?
Sure I am not so tame as you imagine,
To have this put upon me thus?

Now, Madam,
It is time to discover.

How, Madam, say you?

But show your face, then you clear all suspicion
In this Gentleman.

Will this, Sir, serve the turn?.

Heavens!
But once more let me gaze; my happiness
Is so wonderful great, I cannot believe it.

What think you now?

What think I Madam?
I cannot think, nor speak, nor see, nor hear.

Peace, not a word: hold up the humor still,
That we may not disturb my Brother in his Amor.
Your Sister and I, Sir, will borrow your Coach
While you two catch the Old Knight in's own trap:
Then we'll expect you home. Run in no danger.
Remember you are mine.

Be pleased, Madam,
In The interim, to partake of our Banquet?

It Is likely, Sir, you know not your own mind?

I Will give it you under what Oath you please.

That, Sir, perhaps is too serious a thing
For any thing you mean. And then, besides,
Do but consider our young acquaintance, Sir,
Which is not a month old.

An Age in Love!
Who with industrious wings should leave behind
The formal hours, nor is our meeting, Madam,
To be assigned to any portion of them,
Since it was meant as soon as we took breath;
And is but reconciled to accidents
That make it up.

A new Philosophy?
Well, Sir, go on.

A mumble, Clunch?
Hye Tray, there; mumble boys.

And should we add to it (I mean that time)
A cheap account of years, they cannot give
The more authority to my Vows, nor wrong
The honorable Favors you may shower
Upon your Servant. These things well considered,
You must conclude, Madam, it is with a form,
An idle custom, you would now comply
Against my happiness.

Well, Sir, in short,
Since by my Brother I Am informed you are
A person much deserving, and that besides
I Am wholly guided by him in this choice,
You promising so fair, henceforth you will have
More than a Mistress in title of me;
And for the future, it is like I'it command:
Think how you can obey.

Obsequiously;
Nothing within the circle of my power
To be exempted, Madam.

On these conditions,
I may be bold, Sir, to give you my hand.

And I to seal them, Madam,
On the white authors of my happiness.

Sure, Sir, that is done already, is it not?
Or I have lost by the bargain.

It Is so, Madam;
And this is merely Emblematical.

Now for some Hyppochras!

White or red, Madam?

Either, Sir, both.

How do you like your Liquors?

They are good.
I Will try your skill once more; some Jelly now:
What are his brains turned to that substance too?

They are the kindest Devils that e're I saw;
Are they not, Clunch?

my Brother plies it close;
I hope he will carry the Widow.

Whoever you are accept my hearty thanks
For your most pleasant and seasonable pastimes.
No longer between interest and love
Shall my heart wavering be, but choose
The latter for his god, and with disdain
Renouncing Pluto, Cupid's slave remain.

WHy this is well: when things are at the worst,
They commonly do mend; so may my fortune.
But first let me be sure there is none o'th'dregs
Of the late stock behind, lest that a little
Of the old leaven should ferment that Mass
Which is to come; send it after the rest
To the Devil headlong: what have I got here?
Another Devil in a golden dress?

No, Sir, Heavens defend, I am the Parson
You have appointed to marry you this night.

What Is this you say?

That five hundred a year,
And a young handsome Wife in the bargain, Sir,
Should make you diligent, and loose no time.

Hold Fortune; not so fast, lest I should surfeit.
How, fawning of a sudden? Here, take this.

I thank you, Sir; there needs not so much haste;
I could a stayed till the business were done.
Sir, I Will be gone, and wait at the Church Porch,
Where first you did appoint me for to be:
There I Will expect you both to tie the Knot.

Hist! hist! -- the Devil I gave him but now
Has carried him away, and with him all
The budding hopes I had -- How now? what is this?
A Rope? it is so: ready fastened for use?
I thank thee Fortune however for this,
But beg your pardon if I slight your favor.
A Ladder of Ropes? there is something in the wind,
Some Lover's assignation, or some thieves;
It may be either. Should it be the last,
It were but charity to warn the house.
If It proves the first, as probably it may,
As far as I can guess, by the late discourse
I had with him my Devil took away;
Why may not I expect from a Ropes end,
What was denied me by all other means,
An end of all my miseries at once,
As many find? I Will up and try The Event,
Whatsoever it be.

We must grope for this Ladder in the dark.

Go you one way, and I Will another take.
And he that finds the Ladder first, gets up.

I Am glad you are come;
I thought you very long: is the Minister
At the Church Porch?

Peace, peace.

Come, let me lead,
I know the way of the house better than you.
Once more remember what a wise you get,
Young, Rich, and, though I say it, handsome to boot:
I hope, Sir, you will deserve this happiness,
By your tender love to me.

Jerny, me save me Modres shild; adieu.

Madam, we are undone if you come not.
I beg it on my knees, make haste away,
Or say you will not go: what, not a word?

Why, Madam, Madam? Oh! Heavens, she is gone;
And I Am so frighted, that I cannot move.
They come, and I Am undone --

Break down the door, it must be there.
Sieze on her there: what is this? a man apparelled
In a woman's dress? a pure Rogue this!

But where is Madam Kitty all this while?

Not to be found.

What a confusion's here?
Come along, Sir.

Stand: Who goes there?

Here, here, seize on these Thieves, and hold them fast.
I took them in the act, robbing the School-house.

Impudent Rogue!

Come, come, bring forth the Thief:
Which is the Watch?

Here, here; What, more Rogues yet?

Stand: Who goes there?
Call the Constable ho.

We are the Watch.

Come, away with them there, to the Justice, Sirs.

To Justice Frost we'll go.

Yes, there I Will go.

No, Sirs, you shall go to some other Justice.

To Justice Frost.

Yes, yes, they shall go there.

But I say no.

What Ward are you of, friends?

Of Covent Garden Watch.

Seize on the Rogues,
We Are Covent Garden Watch: how, counterfeits?
We'll teach you t'faleyfie the King's Majesty
In The person of his constable and Watchmen.
Along, along, to Sir Amorous Frost with them.

This works well now.

As well as heart could wish.

WEll, well, since it is so, I Will e'ne march off;
So Lady fare you well: com^ Tray, come Clunch,
Come mouth, we'll home.

Sir, I must beg your pardon,
If I make bold to detain this Gentleman.

To teach you Compliments.

For that same purpose,
And frequently to practice Courtship with him,
That I may be expert.

Practice, expert.
She begins well already -- e'ne stay with her.
For as well, in our Town, we have no need
Of Complimenters, nor of Courtiers neither.
There will I in all haste, so fare you well.

There will I in all haste, so fare you well.
Come, Tray, bid them farewell.

I must return you, Sir, thanks for those pains
Which you have taken to render me sensible
Of my late folly, my covetous mind:
Therefore in gratitude to your civilities,
I give you this assurance to be yours.

And I, Madam, with a most servent Love,
And most obsequious Services? will pay
My offerings to this Altar every day.

BRing in the Prisoners there, make room before.

Come, where is his worship? let him know we are here.
No, no, we know your tricks.

Gentlemen, look all to your Prisoners there.

Let Us count them over.

1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
They Are right, the are right.

Gentlemen, you mistake, I Am none o'th number;
Merely Curiosity did bring me here.

I think he came in since.

Then let him go.

Vish is de Constable?

Here, here, I am.

Me Mr. bidd me ask de you for de grate Teef
In de humans clos, he vill anser for de him.

Here, here a is; I warrant an old Thief:

By your leave, friends, you know me, I suppose?

My honest Landlord?

The very same.

I Am glad to see you well, Sir.

This Gentlewoman, Mrs. of the School,
Says, that through a mistake was all this stir:
She finds nothing amiss in all her house,
And therefore is come hither to treat
For the liberty of these Gentlemen:
It is not so?

It Is as the Gentleman says.

Mr. Constable, a word with you in private.

The Justice is very long.

He was asleep;
It Is like they could not wake him of the sudden.

Come, Gentlemen, let us go; I Am certifi'd.

I hope they will give us something though to drink?

There, honest friends; good night.
Good Mrs. Crostitch, where found you my Sister?

Passing by our house, as from that street
That leads to Covent Garden, a Gentleman
Leading her by the hand, by chance a glimpse
Of a neighboring light discovered her to me.

What did she say?

Why, Sir, that she was married
To that Gentleman; which he owned to be true.

She is undone for ever! quite undone!
Where is she now?

Sir, she is at my house,
Where she said she would stay till you came to her.

Go and be with her, pray, until I come.
This business managed well, Sir, may be worth
A thousand pounds a year.

That I must do.

I Will to my Sister go, examine her;
While you will do well to go to the old man
And try what you can do, while he is yet
In's pannick fears.

Be sure I Will do my best.

I Will take my Sister with me to your house.

My house is yours, you know; Now must I go
To the old Knight with a most griveous story,
No less than Burglary and rape in the Gase,
And those with aggravations --

Nephew, undone!
Undone for ever in my Reputation.

I hope not so, dear Sir, though had enough.

What Is become of the rest? Oh! fatal hour!

Sir, by my means conveyed out of the way,
Not far from hence.

Now Child, what is to be done?

Sir, for the present I have stopped all proceedings,
Though 'twill break out again.

Too soon, I fear.
Well Nephew, though it is late, I see my fault,
And most deservedly am punished for it:
I put my self, and Reputation both,
Into your hands; preserve them both as yours.
I shall requite you, and in consideration
Of The wrong I would of late have done you, Nephew,
I will allow you, during my whole life,
A thousand pounds a year; and at my death,
The whole reversion of all my Estate.
Let Us in, and there I Will confirm the Deed to you
Before sufficient witnesses, till I can
Get the Writings drawn up.

Honored Sir,
My life and honor shall for evermore
Stand between you and any sort of danger.
That no time may be lost, I Will instantly
To th'company, and take upon my self
The whole adventure. I hope I shall find friends
To get me off for some small sum of money.
It will be said of me, it was my youth.
Thus, Sir, your Reputation will be safe,
Your Person out of danger, and --

I instantly
Will send to have the Writings drawn up,
With all the haste that may be.

Sir, good night.

PRethy, dear heart, content thy self a while;
The appointed hour was between five and six,
And 't has but just struck five.

My dearest friend,
Pardon my Jealousies --

Be cheerful then;
I Will lay my life 'twill do.

Should your plot fail,
I were undone past all hopes of repair.
Is the Parson come yet?

Yes, long ago;
Waits in the Chamber next my Ladies closet,
Has but cold comfort on it.

He Is in the dark.

H'as neither fire, nor light,
And is locked up.

Come Siss, along with me to the Piazza.

Madam, I cannot fight.

No matter, Wench,
I Am stout enough for both.

Without a sword?

I Will leave you, Madam; you must have no light:
Let me alone to put the Change upon him.
Here comes some company, retire quick.

Well, Madam Sister, have you done your do?

Faith, dear Sister, not yet; but one plot more,
And then no more: Where Is your Brother, Madam,
And Mr. Noble?

Not yet returned, you see;
But sure they will not be long.

Well, I must go,
I shall not stay 'bove half an hour, at most.
I hope at my return to find all here.

Madam, how dare you venture all alone
At this unseasonable hour?

I fear no Colors!

This new Sister of mine is a mad thing.
What strange things she has acted here of late!
And still with good success.

She has her ends.
Siss has told me, her Mrs. made no question
But that she would procure her self a Husband,
And her Brother a wife, in two days space;
And had her other Brother been in Town,
'Twould have gone hard but she would a fitted him
With a wife also.

She has done pretty well,
Having made sure for her self of my Brother,
Has put hers also in so fair a way
To th'Lady Lovewealth, it is ten to one
But he will carry her: but here he is,
And by his cheerful looks I hope all is well.

The night being far spent, and knowing, Madam,
There was such work in hand as would detain you
From your accustomed rest, we have made bold,
This fair Lady and I, to wait upon you.

Madam, I had no sooner given this Gentleman
A power over me, but he has made use of it
In commanding me hither.

By your advice.

I am o'rejoy'd, Sir, to see your success,
And wish your Ladyship all happyness
In this your choice.

As I do you in yours.

I humbly thank your Ladyship, dear Madam.

Nay, for my part, I Am fully persuaded
That all the Stars are in a close conjunction
This very night: but, Madam, where is the rest?
My Sister, Madam --

Gone about some new plot.

Madam, here comes your Brother and his Mate.

Brother, speak, have thou sped?

I Will answer for him.
Madam, he may thank your politic head
For having me.

And my well acting in it.

I hope by this I Have made an other match
Since I went hence.

As how? pray let us hear.

Mr. Crosby being highly incensed
Against you, Sir, whom he knew was his Rival,
Was pleased this night to send a Challenge to you.
I in your absence, by the help of the dark,
Received that Message, which he thought he had given
To your own self. I was but just returned
From the Rendezvous, where finding the mistake
His Second had made, with some fair words,
And a promise of Marriage, I Have brought him home.

How! a promise of Marriage, do you say?

Yes, yes, which by this time I have made good
I hope, and yet no prejudice to you,
As you shall hear. The abused Lady Phanny
Through his wildness, as you know I had above,
And a Parson in readiness in the dark,
Under pretense of not being discovered,
He gave consent it should be without light:
There having brought Mr. Crosby, just now
l've slipped my hand from his, and in exchange
Have given him the Lady Phanny's hand:
I left them in this posture, the Minister
Doing his office readily without book.
So giving them the slip, I am come hither.
By this, I hope they are fast.

I wish it so.

Why here is plot enough to make a Play!

Oh! here they come, and by their countenance
I hope all is well.

Where Is my Trappanner, ho!

I hope, Sir, you have pardoned my deceit.

I thank your goodness for it, and do confess
You are that happy Star has guided me
To this shunned haven which will prove my Bliss,
Since I have paid that debt which through my Vows
I had contracted here. Your pardon, Sir,
For those thoughts I once harbored against you
My Rival then, but now I hope my friend,
What say you, Sir?

That here you may command
Your Lady too.

How now? who have we here?
My Brother sure, or I am in a dream?

Our Brother, Madam.

It Is impossible, sure.

Nay, it is even so: I am a married man,
And this my Lady, Brother.

Thank your fortune!

Sister, and so may you, that he is yours.
For your sake, Sir, I Will forget her late folly,
And thank the Heavens for designing her yours
At the same time she sought her own destruction.

You are all goodness, Sir, to pardon thus
My late presumption.

All shall be now forgot:
This is a night of Jubilee; from hence
We must banish all sorrow.

Pray let me come,
I Am Mrs. of the house, am I not, Sir?

And of me too.

I thought so much at least;
Therefore, dear Brother, I must bid you welcome,
And to your Lady.

Dear Sister, humble thanks.

Madam, for your sake, I Will praise him the more.

My very good friends all, I am come here
To make my recantation, own my fault,
And willingly set a fine on my head
For my late folly: I therefore in presence
Of all are here, declare this Gentleman, my Nephew,
Sole Heir to my Estate, after my death:
During my life, allow him every year
One thousand pound. To this pray witness all,
Till I have made it good in lawful form
Under my Hand and Seal.

We thank you, Sir.

All these joynings of hands, and no dance to it?

Come, come, I Am for a dance, in which you will see,
Though distinct Couples, we can all agree.

O! have I caught you, Sir? Now sirrah, either fight
With me presently, or prepare to die.

Ha! ha! ha! Begar me tink de fellow is made;
Vat pox do you no see dat de la Commedy is finish? look de
Your part, you will find no sush ting: go, go, and let de me
To de la Compagnie.

Gentliman, do in de la Comedye me most no fit, but me most swear, me
naturellement love de fit: et Jerny me voul no swear; derefor par consequent
me come to tell de you, dat me be de Poet Champion. If dear be man, homan, or
little shild dat vill no clape de hand, and swear Jerny de Comedye is very
good, begar, me swear is no de understand de vit, nor de raison, et me
presentement turn de la Comedye in de la Tragedy. Alon Jerny --

So, very good; now because you be all de civility, me promiss sur mon
honneur, me voul no kill de you, and me give de you de permission to come
here to morrow agin (for your argent Jerny) et so Mesieurs adieu; me go tell
de Poet de your courtoisie


