BUT do'e resolve, say you, never to visit the University again?


-- Not till Idleness and Hypocrisy be as much out of fashion as Learning; --
I Will sooner herd with Savages in a Desert, where hungry Nature's the sole
Tutoress


-- This is just such a quarrel, as a Presbyter has against Episcopacy; -- I am
confident some Preferment there, would reconcile you


-- Prithee don't mistake me; -- I never had the vanity to think I deserved it;
but though I had engrossed all the Morals, that ever the learned Ancients taught,
they would not ha'been proof against Exceptions


-- No! --


-- No of my Conscience, -- I have known a worthy Fellow that has been learned
as the Sybils, but modest religiously observant as the Vestals; -- Still and
reserved as the Night, yet cheerful as the Morning; -- temperate and strict as
an Anchorite, and complying as unpracticed Youth


-- Sure none could object against so fair a Character.


-- Yes, -- a tedious Blockhead, scare capable of an Ordinary's Office at the
Reading of a Neck-Verse, shall cavil against his Schollarship; -- then comes a
second spitting pimpl'd Sot, and shall first hyccup in his Face, then tell him,
he is a Company-keeper, when at the same time the dizzie Ape can scarce faulter
out his unjust Exception; -- thus all of 'em after a successive discovery of
Ignorance, and ill Principles, shall prefer a desertless Dunce to an
accomplished Candidate


-- Prithee what kind of Complexion'd People do your Sages approve on, as best
qualified for their preferment


-- Such easy suffering Sots as have lived in due observance of their Insolent
Grandeur, and Ridiculous Stateliness, that have no sense to discover the want
on it in them, and will suffer themselves to be solemnly cheated, and never take
notice on it


Noble Gentlemen, I am your Creature.


-- It must be an affair of grand concern that brings you hither, Sir Cred.


-- Without Ceremony Gentlemen, I have no other business at present, than to
invite you to the chase of a crippl'd Worm hunted by a couple of lame Snails


-- We Will attend your noble diversion. --


-- Well, but don't let his impertinence divert your discourse; pray continue
it, and acquaint me with the order of their Discipline


-- Order! ha, ha -- you will find no more there, than in Darius's Army against
Alexander; -- Arts and Sciences are promiscuous with Tricks and Debaucheries


Ay! --


-- It Is an imperfect Emblem of the Chaos, where Bodies of strange form and
figure were hudl'd up together in a disagreeing concord


An Universal Medly indeed! --


You shall have a serious old Homilist making his unfashionable Chamber-love to
a tractable Laundress, -- a young breeding Heir penning Madrigals on his
Bed-maker, or Phillising the Skull's Daughter; -- and a leading Tutor turning
off an old Tradesman, because some Upstart has got a handsome Wife


-- But as to the business of Learning; -- is not that promoted nowadays?


-- Yes, as thus -- you shall hear a couple of old Casuists, splutter their
moldy Notions, and intricate Terms in one another's Faces, The one laboring
with remote Fetches, to salve the opinion of a contradicting Dogmatist, whilst
the other bladders him with broken Latin, transgressing form, and confounding
Axioms; then like two battered Game-Cocks, the last word gets the Victory


-- They are very laborious upon it it seems.


-- No, no, -- They are too great to take pains; -- I have known a Reverend
poring Doctor, that has swouned half an Age over a St. Austin; and if he
chanced to mount the Pulpit but once in seven years, would after a Praeludium
of Hems, slyly draw his Memory out of his Pocket, and repeat the Opinions of
the Voluminous Fathers, then conclude with an Harangue against Court Vanities,
because some promising Lord has failed to make him a Bishop


You are resolved to spare none from the Scarlet Doctor to the draggl'd Soph.


Some few good well principl'd men there is in their Society, but like a
Loyallist in a Faction, they must either comply or be abhorred. -- But Pry --
the let us go, we shall be too late else in good sadness


You may if you please, but I must wait here for a Gentleman; if some thing
should detain me, do so much as excuse me


I shall.


Was this Flush I met upon the Stairs?


Ay; He has been Railing at his University like a suspended Parson.


He Is one of those lewd profligate Wretches that dishonor all places of civil
Education, because their own loose behavior is discountenane'd and upbraided
there


He Is above that vain thing called Learning, he may thank his Genisu.


Which way is he gone?


To the Palsgrave's-Head; the truth on it is, I engaged my Word to be there too,
But now I think on it, I Will dispose of my self otherwise


You have some rich beardless Foo! or other to manage; -- hanged, it is time to
give it over now


Your Servant good generous Sir; * I think it is more prudence to Thrive and
Rook whilst I Am Young, and so prevent it in my Old Age, then be forced to it in
these Days, and so have reason to condemn the negligence of my Youth


Truly, a Cheat at Threescore, is as Odious as a Usurer at Twenty.


And a Knave without necessity is as unpardonable as a Mercenary Matron that is
Rich and Ugly


I Will assure you Shuffle, I always believed your Principle to be so far
honorable, as that nothing but the severe impulse of necessity could shake
'em: I have observed with what an honest Calmness, and even tranquillity of
Mind, you have born disappointments, and have pitty'd you several times when I
could not help you


Certainly my needs are so violent they cannot continue long; however, whilst I
am concerned with Sir Credulous Trinket, and Sir Populer, I must not think of a
Reformation


Sir Credulous Trincket, That Is my Rival; Pry-thee what sort of a Gentleman is
he? I have not the honor of his acquaintance


You are very unhappy in it, I Will promise you; He Is a most facetious Person in
his way; -- first he read himself into Melancholy, then was advised to Travel
as an expedient, which he undertook, and is now returned Freakish and
Superstitious; he knows nothing of the World, and is imposed upon by every one


I have had such an account of him -- Well but I have wondered often how you
contracted this intimacy with Sir Populer


First I got repute amongst his Creatures, and so had the opportunity of
hearing him, and being in his Company long I discovered him; which he
perceived, and thereupon declared himself to me; since we have unanimously
Whedl'd our Blewapron Men -- the design on it you may Interpret easily


Ay, I can apprehend it; -- It seems now you have taught your Spirit to Truckle
to your Interest


Yes, yes, I can out cant a Tubster, out fawn a Rook, out promise a Courtier,
and out swear an Evidence


Well, Sir, I know your Business, here is a Gentleman with me now, but I shall
be glad to see you to Morrow Morning

A Pox o'these Dunns, they are as constant in a Morning as the Milk-woman; -- I
have warned the House I know not how often to deny me to all Visitants without
Swords


Poor Shuffle! -- Faith I never resented my own Condition more sensibly than
now; -- I am only sorry my fortunes are so Scant, because I cannot supply thee;
-- Come along with me, I Will try the extent of my Credit


Your Approbation Captain, your Approbation; did you ever hear a Mag-pye
discourse more Ingeniously, or greater Reason since you were a Gentleman? Did
ye


I must confess not usually.


Usually; did you ever? Speak.


To be plain with you, Sir Cred. once I did, but it was at Paris; -- I heard
one there that had more French then several of your Gentry that had resided
there some Years; it got my Name and Quality presently, I had a Familiar
acquaintance with it


And learned all his French from it, I Will warrant him.


Well, but consider Captain, my Mag has not had the advantage of such a
Gentleman's Conversation as your self; it was bred a plain Country Bird, and
had no other Tutor till I came to Town, than the Curate


A very promising Mag!


There was an Illiterate Cox-comb, the other day, told me he would not give me 5
Guineas for it


Some rude undervaluing Rustic that understood not its excellencies.


But was your shattering acquaintance so accomplished in good earnest?


It deserves a Panegyric as well as some of our modern Heroes; It would tell
you in the Nightime what a Clock, as exactly as the Bell-man; would talk as
quaintly upon occasion as an affected Citizen; would repartee as smartly as a
Mask in the Gallery: -- several of our traveling Fops derived from it their
scraps of Complaisance, and little civil Impertinencies, they are daily
troublesome with in Park and Playhouse


If it was not for these French Mag-pyes, I gess we should not have so many
English Owls


But Captain, I Will presume to tell you, I can show you as great Rarities as all
your Travels could entertain you with


My Curiosity will be obliged to you.


Jeffry! Here, take the Key of my Closet, and bring me Lisp and Quaker.


What are these Sir Cred?


A Brace of Animals, which the Vulgar take for Dogs; seriously, they resemble
'em so much, you will scarce distinguish till you hear 'em discourse


Sir you had left your Closet door unlockt, and Lisp's got out; one of the
Grooms told me he is gone to wait upon Sir Populer's Bitch home


Very probable, he was always an obliging courteous Creature; -- But where is
Quaker


Sir, he presents his service to you, and desires you to excuse him, he is
engaged


Engaged! Where, and upon what account?


With a Bone Sir, under the Dresser-board.


No, no, his absence cannot be dispensed with; -- go and conduct him in
immediately; -- be as quick as a Juggler's hand


Pish, -- I have as many Fools Errands to run upon, as a well-meaning
April-Bird


Pray resolve me, Sir Cred. what these two Prodigies are designed for.


Seriously Sir, I have made it my business to observe their humors severally;
the one I find to be of a tractable Genius, he will make a --


Good Guide for the Blind.


The other's of a more acid, choleric temper; I design him for a --


Yard or an Orchard.


Wuh you clumsie Block-head you, could not you make your entry with more
decency than this? -- Is that all the respect you give to your betters


Respect! Ay, and too much for a worthless Tyke that deserves not a Crust.


You know Sirrah your Ignorance excuses you; -- a Tyke!


Ay, and as contemptible an one as ever died of a crooked Pin.


Well, have but a little patience, and I Will convince you presently, -- Jeffry
provoke him


Now Captain, what think you on it, did not you perceive a choice accent in his
exclamation


Ha, ha, nothing but the yelp of a pinched Cur.


Sir, I am sorry for you, -- you hear still I perceive with a gross unrefind
sense, -- I Will assure you, I thought he was something Articulate; -- but he is
out a' humor now; -- Jefry attend him in


I wonder Sir Cred. a man of your contrivance, should so much debase your noble
Faculties; -- Why don't you attempt some glorious Enterprise, and die a Hero


Seriously I am at present upon a Project which will be of greater use to the
City than the Ditch; but most of all to the Insurers; -- And that is this -- I
have devised an Engine to blow up the Thames, and so prevent all Popish
Conspiracies by Water, for you know they have done their worst already by Fire


the Watermen will abuse you then.


No, no, I Will prevent that, -- I can convey it back in an instant by the
Penny-Post


Shaw that is an ignoble design; contrive rather the good of the whole Republic.


Think you so?


Ay, ay, -- Erect some Gymnasium where Youth may be taught the Art of
Addressing and Decoying young Virgins at twelve without being beholding to the
Instiuctions of a good natured Mother, to Swear genteely, without frequenting
Gaming Houses; to profane daringly without keeping the Wits Company; -- and to
be experienced in all the modish sins of the Age without going to Court


You propound Impossibilities Captain.


Not so Impossible as your project upon the Thames.


Make me but Iniquity Master General and I Will undertake it; and as the Age goes
with success I Will warrant you


Say you so?


Nay more; -- I Will encourage it so far as to give 2 or 3 Manors toward its
endowment: But we'll discourse farther on it at Dinner; I don't much care if I
Dine with you*to Day


Sir you will do me Honor.


Marry Gad a Mercy -- That was the Gymnasium he was con^^^ all this time.


Well honest Jeffry; how does Sir Credulous do?


What store of Visitants he has against Dinner time.

Why he is in a sit of Melancholy, and has ordered that no body shall have
access to him


I am a particular Friend man; -- I Will go and divert him, he has not Dined I
suppose


But if that will not prevent you, this will --

From you Sir it is possible he may admit of a Visit, since there is only two
Gentlemen with him; one of'em's a Draper, the same that sent his Man to you
Yesterday with a Note


That Soliciting Rogue! -- A Pox of his importunity -- But why may not this
same Youth smell my business

I Will urge it farther --

Go tell the Gentleman I desire a word with him.


Ha! -- He Is at Dinner Sir, I must not disturb him.


At Dinner before Eleven! Ho Sir, you are a fine Fellow indeed; -- Are you so
quick at turning away Business? -- It Is a piece of frugality your Master will not
thank you for


In good earnest Mr. Shuffle, there is so many, and such clearing Stomachs at
his Table every Day, that tho there was as much variety as in Heliagabalus's
Feast, it is piece meal't into as many reversions as an Alms-basket, -- Pray
Sir, help me for your own sake, as well as mine, only to repel some constant
Intruders, and then much good may do you

1. Y'gad Jack here lives the Hospitable Knight.

2. Sweetheart, how does my worthy Friend your Generous Master; -- He Is
within, is not he


Gentlemen, if your business be urgent, you may find him at the Swan on
Fish-street-hill; -- he waits upon a Country Lady there, that longs for a
Codshead

1. 'Sbud what does he mean? -- He invited us this Morning.

2. Ay, and made us swear not to fail him.


He ne need not have put that constraint upon you.


Gentlemen, if it be any business that I can do, I am ready to serve you.

1. No, no, we'll wait upon him at another convenience.

2. 'Slife Tom, it cost me two pence (all the stock I had) at the Coffee-house
in the Morning, -- I went to read the News, a purpose to provide my self of lies
and hard words for him

1. And I took a whetting turn in the Walks about ten for a preparative; -- a
plague o'their disappointments

2. S'hart, we had better have accepted Harry's Invitation; -- but who would
have imagined this

1. Come, let us to the Change, we'll pick up some body.


Gentlemen, will not you be pleased to leave your Names?


I Will engage they have as many as the Grand Seignior has Titles.


Or as an address of a whole County.


I desire to speak with Sir Credulous Tinklett if he be at leisure.


What nature, Pray Sir, is your business of?


I have some Stones of value for him; -- but I must deliver 'em to his own
person


I remember Sir, he was telling he expected you, and commanded me to take these
trifling concerns (as he called 'em from you; -- and to desire you to wait his
approbation


Here Sir, I Am sure they will please him.


Sir, he desires you to walk in, he will dispatch you presently; -- he has sent
to a Lapidary to have 'em tried


I left a Customers in my Shop; -- but I Will attend his honor in a Trice.


A very fortunate riddance; ha, ha, ha,


What Is the matter Sir?


Only some transparent Glass-bobs, that the Counterfeit Rascal has left in my
possession; -- he will as soon peep through a Pillory, as come here again


He would have put these Toys upon Sir Credulous for real ones, I Will warrant, if
you had not prevented him


No doubt on it, -- Come Jeffry we have made our Post good long enough.


In vain I strive to call past Nature back,
The Youthful Dye that glowed in either Cheek.
And forced so many melting Sighs and Vows,
Is gone beyond the reach of Female Arts:
My Glass, that kind Indulgence of my fears,
Now does forbear to sooth my willing faith,
And lays its pleasing flattery aside;
Fool that I was to credit Lovers Oaths,
And put my choicest sweets into their hands
Without consideration for the exchange;
But still I Have one reserve, providing time
Has for the loss of beauty, ge'en me wit,
And sure it is time to use it. --
I hope you have had success by your stay.


-- Such success Madam, as you foretold before I went.


-- Truly I doubted it; -- was he in a sullen humor?


-- Ay, as peevish as if his Wife had stayed out late last Night; -- There Is a
Broker, it seems, he has some concerns with, is run away


-- But did you whisper him as I ordered you?


-- Yes, I told him you were just upon Marriage with Sir Populer, and if he did
not give you credit for the Silks; things would look a little suspiciously


-- And did you offer him such advantages as I directed you?


-- Yes Madam, I urged every thing I thought might be effectual; I told him the
safest way to secure his arrears, would be to venture once more upon you


And what answered he?


-- Upon that, he examined his Shop-book, and showed me your Accounts, the
Total Sum I did not much observe, nor the Particulars; only the File of Items,
which was as deep as a Flight of Wild-Geese


-- That base unreasonable Creature; has the Conscience then to put me down for
the Necessaries I had from his Shop? -- Thou know Wench, how unusually civil
I was always to him, when I kept a convenient House


I am sure Madam, he had 'em always fresh out of the Country* without paying
for a Maidenhead; -- he was so nice always, I am sure a Lord has been glad of
his refuse ever now: -- But you may see --


It Is even true, a past kindness now-a days is as little regarded, as a future
promise; but what could the ungrateful Wretch say to you


After he had closed the Book, he broke out into passion, and swore he could
not wonder at your impudence, because you were so and so: But before the damned
Bawd was any more Tawdry at his charge, he won'd see her Ca^ted; -- nay, he
swagger'd worse then when he mist his Ring at our House


At his charge base man! -- It seems he looks upon the debt as desperate; -- as
I am a sinner, I fear he will noise it abroad and betray me


Never fear it, -- though he has little good-meaning for you, yet the hopes he
has of a change of your condition, will prevent him


How must we do in this case Wench? -- Let me die in a Ditch, if I be not as
much at my wit's end, as I have been ever now to direct a young unmanag'd
sinner


Never despair Madam, I have some comfort for you; -- Don't you remember his
eldest Prentice? -- The same that rallied so at our door one Sunday Night for
entrance, when all our Beds and Couches were in use


-- Yes, and swore he would have the House pulled down the Shrove-Tuesday
after; -- But what of him


I perceived as I was in the Shop, how diligently he watched the cast of mine
eye; and now and then I seemed accidentally to throw half a look at him, which
he would so far improve, as to return me a familiar smile, -- as who should say
--


Well.


-- I observed this, and willingly forgot my Fan, which he very officiously
followed me out with; -- then after a cast of his Counter-courtesie, he
promised me, such a trivial thing as my Errand expressed, should not be wanting
for my own sake


And there was the cause of your stay.


-- He had nothing as earnest toward the bargain.


When do you expect him?


Exactly at nine -- He Will be as punctual as a Tertian Ague.


-- You Will know how to pay him.


-- Ay Madam, I thank your Conversation.


-- Well, if this should unfortunately fail, I must even betake my self to the
poor Whore's last refuge, grave honest Crape


Truly Madam, it is a very modest agreeable dress, and especially for one of
your design; since you profess as much Religion as a Lady Abbess, you must be
as reserved in your habit too; Sir Populer will mistake your Necessity for your
Zeal


Then I must remonstrate against abominable Gauds; as he calls 'em.


-- And rail against Point, as tedious Vanity.


-- Against Neck lases and Pendants, as undercent costly Trumperies.


-- Rich Gowns, you must call, Popish Seducers,


-- And imbroider'd Petticoats, Man-catchers.


Hist! Sir Popular.


-- Take comfort Girl, the good man was very full upon that point the last day;
you took notice of his Doctrine


Sister spotless you are well employed, I conceive; there are not many of your
Sex that imitate you now adays; -- they will rather exhort their Women to read a
wanton Pamphlet, than a Paragraph of a good Sermon


Plainly Brother, I was even reminding her of her great concern in this World,
-- we are all Flesh


Ay Sister, but that consideration is but little laid to heart in these days.


-- Especially amongst the Worldlings that are set above us.


-- Never trust me, I am weary of this vexatious world, I wish I were well
disposed out of it


-- Offenses are given daily, and by those that should heal 'em; -- The
parti-colour'd Priests put on their Masquerading Robes, and tread a French
Dance to the sound of an Organ


Whilst the Judges give false measure, in the Whore of Babylon's Scarlet
Petticoat


-- A Parchment Cloak of blank Deeds would be a more seemly Wear for 'em a
great deal: -- Well, who knows, what they have to answer for


Then what a pack of debaucht Reprobates are they about court; -- They haunt
their Neighbors Board, and defile their Beds; and here amongst the number, if
a teaching Brother carries but some crumbs of Consolation, to a Sister in
anguish; how uncharitably will they interpret the duty


What gaudy Kicshaws are their Women? In good truth, they are as common, as if
the Land were unpeopl'd; and how hideous is their dress! -- I have even
resolved to put my self into a plain Primitive Grab; and defy the scornful: --
Come, Faith my private duty calls upon me


-- It Is about your Prayer time, forsooth.


This is the way I have chalkt out to compass my design; the Widow is Rich and
Religious; -- Well, my Addresses must be consonant with her Severity: I must
Nose, Cant, and turn up my Whites, Squint, and counterfeit the reserved Purity
of an Hermit, to diguise me whilst I sue for such a Blessing: -- In the mean
time I must play the Patriot with Artifice, and Resolution; foment Fears and
Jealousies, disperce Sedition, blind and baffle my unthinking Followers, and be
concerned only for the Religion of my Interest; -- This is the taking sure way
of repairing decayed Reputations

Say what you will; a thriving Zeal is best
To serve the City God of Interest.

I Think we have got fairly by our Passive Obedience, forsooth! And yet for all
this Court Doctrine we should find but few of the Sticklers but upon Trial
would hang an Arse to die Martyrs for it


Alas, it is too sure, to our irreparable damage I fear; -- We are undermined my
Friends and Neighbors; -- Popery and Slavery lurk under ground to blow up our
Lives and Liberties, -- Our great Senate, that like a firm Bank, braved the
Impetuous Flood, and confined it to its Channels, is removed; and now England,
distressed England, is at the mercy of a threatening Deluge; -- How soon it may
break in upon us, we cannot tell; -- The great Ministers, are Mercenary
Pensioners; and Creatures to the French Interest; The Favorites are the
high-flown Torys, a swarm of Insects bred of the malignancy of a corrupting
Nation, and the few just men are stigmatized with aspersions; Witnesses are
managed, Courts of Justice are influenced, and though Imposts are but few for
the present, I Will warrant they will play us an after-Game with a witness, and
Trade and Commerce is decayed: -- In brief, there is such traducing, shaming,
tampering, and conspiring, that I never go to Bed, but I expect to rise with my
Throat cut


And too great reason you have for it, -- whilst I was at the Nine-penny
Ordinary the other day, there came a person up to us, in the habit of an
Oyster-wench, with Oyster-knives as sharp as Razors


-- Some Jesuit sure enough.


Ay doubtless, he looked suspiciously.


I had notice on it, and ordered the Watch to be doubled; -- besides, the
Constables was upon their Rounds all Night


-- Yet there was a Shoemaker had the Skin of his Throat ripl'd as he slept
upon a Bulk


The Watch saved his life.


-- Bloody Villains.


It was buz'd about at Richard's this Morning, that the Papists had a private
Meeting yesterdy, at One upon the Exchange, about pulling down the Monument the
first dark Night, to put the City to the charge of building two other


One for the Memorial of the others ruin; -- but how was it discovered?


-- They were fortunately overheard, but slunk away in the Crowd.


Cursed Devils! -- I had a Letter from a Friend in the Country, that advised me
to forbear French Wine; it seems the Grapes were poisoned upon the Vines; --
They have got a trick of intoxicating the Air, several have been before the
Chamber of poisoning for it


Indeed, I have observed since this last Vintage, several pimpl'd Faces; -- But
our English Men --


Are a people of a robust Constitution, else we had seen alterations before
this: -- You have heard of the miraculous massacring Engine, that was found in
Devonshire, by a Justice of Peace that was a searching for Armor, have not you


Only a blind imperfect account on it.


'Twil hurl out above five Miles such a sort of Wildfire, as is nourisht by
water, and not to be extinguished but by Fasting and Prayer


Matchless wickedness!


-- Then 'twill sling for the same distance, an instrument infallibly mortal,
without either piercing or discoloring the Skin; so that a Crowner knows not
how to return the Inquest


Barbarous Villainy!


But the worst is, it assassinates the Soul as well as the Body, unless one be
Spiritually Cap-a-pee'd


-- It Is more terrible then Totchy Old Time with a sharp Sith in his Hand.


It Is charged upon occasion with a large measure full of Dispensation Powder,
and laden with the Case -- Shot of Equivocation, which the Popish Engineer so
artificially Discharges, that the carnally naked infallibly Perish


Horrid Butchery!


I remember now I have heard on it; -- But you mistake the manner of its
discovery, Sir Popular


Very probable, the confusion of the times disorder my Memory.


It came from beyond Seas in a Letter which expressed the use on it; and was
directed to a great Roman Catholic in the West, but through scarcity of Paper
it broak the vale and appeared


Wonderful providence.


But how little do these Conspiracies awake us? What miraculous signs of a
Sickly State appear daily? It Is not long since whole Armies appeared in the
Air, near Durham, and the French Standard displayed


Not long since Antichrist was seen Riding upon the Beast with the Whore of
Babylon behind him


It Is not long since Hailstones fell in the Fashion of Crucifix's and Agnus
Dei's


Nor since one of the Heads upon Westminster Hall cried fire.


Not long, since the Horse in the Poultry-Market nicker'd for Provinder.


But the City would give him none.


Not past a Month since, the Watch saw a Dreadful Comet that hovered above the
Banqueting House, and streamed out it is Scarlet Tail toward the City


Ay; and one of the Life-Guards lighted his Pipe at it. All. -- Daring Brute.


-- But that which dismays me the most, my Friends, is an Apparition my own
Eyes were witness of; It was in the likness of an Aged man, Riding upon a Jaded
Rainbow; and out of his mouth there proceeded a Label with this Inscription --
O England, prepare, for dessolation is at hand


Good Heavens!


Sure the Harbinger had made a long Journey, by the faultring of his Steed.


Yet all these preter-natural Omens cannot Alarm a self-secure Generation; --
How many Suns of late have appeared in the Heavens? How many Moons of differing
Figures and Magnitude have been seen at once, to the Distraction of Astrology


How many tall Men and mixed Monsters have been shown of late at
Bartholomew-Fair; even to the admiration of Men, Women and Children


Brutus was never more concerned for the sinking Liberties of his Fellow
Sublects then I am; the Sword of Tyranny like that of Damocles hangs by a
single Hair over our Heads, and if we only gaze at the threatening Spectre,
without providing against the Portent; we may expect the violation of our Lives
and Liberties, Rights and Religion; -- But now my Friends we'll adjourn, and at
our next Convention, we'll propound such measures as are most consistent with
our present Calamities


Hist! Mr. Zeal, Mr. Zeal.


You must send me a Bever, I am so much out upon the Cause, I must be endebted
to you at present


It Is the same thing Sir, you shall have the choice in my Shop.


And he shall have more of my Custom. --

For I, with Citts, as with false Dice, will play,
First sweep enough, then throw the Cheats away.

Past Three! The long expected Minute's past,
Which I with Love's Impatience waited for;
I cursed Time's aged pace, and blamed my Watch,
Because the Hand so faintly stole about;
But now the hour that flattered my false hopes
Is come, and gone; but still my Lover stays:
Even thus the thirsty Traveller, that knew
Once of a cooling Spring, near such a Hill,
Impatient of the Days tormenting heat,
Thinks every step a journey, till he comes
To that refreshing place he used of old,
Then eagerly preparing to lie down,
He spies the bottom parcht, the Pebbles dry,
Then mutters his complaints, and budgeth on;
Grant he be safe -- He Is here --
How soon the gaudy Bubble disappears.


-- Alone Cousin! -- You'v been rapt up in Lovers Paradise.


-- I was discanting a little, upon a passage I have read in a French Novel.


-- And you the Heroin; -- You are glorying in your Conquests over your
vanquished Admirers. --


You are in your pleasant vein Cousin.


-- I am always in it; -- I have no Murdered Servants to answer for, I thank my
Complexion; no languishing Lover has caught cold with syrenading under my
Windows; I was never accused in the Mystical Name of Cloris by the Dying
Sonneteer, nor blamed as an Accessory in his Swan-like Dirge; -- Nay, I never
caused the Death of a young Tree, by an Anagramming Penknife, I never --


Received a present of Value from a Servant, and then declared you hate him; --
you never gave a Rhithming Lover a Subject to allude upon, and then exposed his
endeavor


If a young generous Fop prevents me, and swears his Life depends upon my
Acceptance; I cannot be so barbarously scornful as to see a towardly Fool cut
off; -- or if an unfortunate pretender must needs discover his Dullness, I am
forced to comply with him, and use him accordingly, to be rid of farther
importunities


Now, I am much of another Humor, -- I could not receive a Gift from one I
disrespected; nor laugh at his Poetical Imperfections; -- I should rather pity
him, though not many deserve it


Come Cousin, that Sigh betrays you; be free with me; -- Has not that Gentleman
that makes visits to you, and you believe to be the only brave Man upon Earth;
given you Reason to retract your Opinion? Ay, a Conscious blush too, -- Well, I
perceive your disorder, -- We'll have a Song to divert you, -- Here -- Lyddy,
Sing your new Song

See how regardless she surveys
Whole Crowds of fettered Swains,
That boast themselves her Sacrifice,
And Triumph in her Chains.
See while their trembling Hearts expect
Some blessing from her Eyes,
She frowns, and with a cold neglect,
Kills all their blooming Joys.
Fair, Mighty Nymph! if you thus have
To show your endless power;
The number of your Slaves, alas,
Will lessen every hour;
And while you please your boundless Will,
Your Empire will decay,
You Will not have lover left to kill,
Nor Subject to obey.

Well Cousin, how do you relish the Air?


I suppose the Words were the love-task of some of your obsequious Admirers.


Ay, and the Composure too; -- He excused himself with the Poets Apology for
their dullness, haste; pretending they were his extemporary Thoughts over a
Glass of Wine, tho one would scarce perceive it by the Spirit


Madam, Yonder Is a Gentleman desires to kiss your Hand; I showed him into the
Dining Room, and left him rubbing his Sword


It Is that Fierce, Vapouring, Coward, Bravado, I fancy; and I had as soon
receive a Visitant in the Smallpox, only 'twill be no disposing of him before
my Unkle's return, unless I go and contrive some way


My Joy! [ salutes her] It Is true, I have lived since I saw you last, but no
otherways than dying Parents, that for the hopes of seeing an only Child, and
feeling Death come stealing on, will set their Teeth, contract their Fist,
recall their palling Spirits, and struggle with appointed time; I have lived to
see you once again, now let me die, I cannot choose a dearer place than this


And would you die without me? -- How could I survive you?


Thou Miracle of Women! -- You have all the Perfections of your Species,
without the Frailties, you have Wit and Discretion without Design; you are
Humble and Easy without making your self Familiar, and Modest without being
Coy; you are constant in spite of Importunities, and Beautiful though a
Fortune; you are --


-- Since I have some Qualities that please you, I shall value my self the
more; But Dearest, why did you stay


My Heart; -- I came as directly at the hour, as Death, before, I was loath, --
least Sir Populer should be within, and my Visit renew his Suspicion


My Watch then was like my Wishes, too forward, I expected you this live-long
half-hour, and with as much impatience, as Chemists do, for the result of some
Experiment; a Thousand Fears as great as Love could frame, distracted me


But how long Madam may we believe, the time will be our own? When returns Sir
Popular


O presently, within this half hour.


We must husband it with such caution, as a besieged Town does, their failing
Provision


-- Madam, Sir Populer is newly come in, and has sent to speak with you.


The news of Peace never came more unseasonably to the Soldier of Fortune.


-- With what reluctance I obey, let my sighs demonstrate; -- My Dearest, you
may be safe here from the busy eye of jealousy; if possible, I Will steal a
visit to you


The kindest power that ever favored love, attend thee.


The rarest piece, the whole Creation has produced, is gone; -- What -- cannot
I bear one hours absence? How shall I compose this unruly Passion? When she is
for ever doomed to a Rival's Arms? -- The raging Storm of Love heaves in my
breast, and like the weather-forc'd Mariner that labors to avoid the Shore he
wishes for. I must refuse, what I esteem so dear; I love her too well to Marry
her, my unkind Fortune forbids the Banes; I could not see her condition below
her worth and quality, and therefore must be cruel out of kindness


Dear Captain Roman, I am thine abundantly.


-- You expect I should return you the same Title back? but how came you here?


What an impertinent question is that to one of my correspondence amongst the
Ladies; -- Why, pretty Mrs. Charlietta could not be well, till she saw me


-- She wanted a Vomit, I suppose, and thought that the sight of you might
provoke it


-- I protest Roman, if I thought you designed it as an Abuse, I would not take
it. --


-- If I should tell thee thou were handsome, I should abuse thee indeed.


By the Life of Hercules, there is scarce a Lady of Quality about White Hall,
but has my Picture


-- To hang up among their Caesar's of the French Draught.


-- -- What a Devil! your so witty -- But what de'e think if it be for their
Cabinet Contemplations; -- I am in Watercolors I assure you


-- It Is true, thou art well enough for a Foyl, -- But what brought thee hither
to me


-- My little Genius Charlietta directed me; -- Sir Popular surpised us -- a
plague of his interruption


You were a bouncing of your lofty Heroic Lies I Will warrant.


I protest to tell you truly I was promising pretty largely, there was --


-- Some Matrimonial Affair in hand?


Will you not disclose.


-- Prithee don't enjoin me to secrecy; I don't desire you should communicate
any thing that requires it


You have more Honor than to betray a Love Parol I am sure, -- know then I had
got her consent


To marry?


No, but to enjoy the Freedom on it without the Form.


-- It cannot be sure.


'Slife there is no holding out where I Besiege, she Surrendered upon the first
Summons, our Parley was very short


I am surprised, though, I confess, I had but little Knowledge of her; -- Well,
-- There Is not above one Virtuous Woman


One! That Is too many by 'th Exception; -- Why who would have thought her Cousin
Juliana had been common


-- Juliana common!


-- Ay as a Bench in a public Walk; -- We Coacht it out a Town together
Yesterday


Rascal Dog, you Lie, you abuse her; -- but here is her Vindication.


Why, -- What Is the Matter? I meant like a Friend, I knew you loved her, and
therefore took this Occasion to undeceive you


Sirrah, I have scarce Patience to wait for a farther Information; yet the
Respect I have to the quiet of the House, shall prevail with me at present, but
be satisfied, thou shall speak it to her Face, and as I find occasion, I Will
proceed


If she denies it, I have Circumstances will silence her.


Sir, My Cousin sent me to desire your Patience, I fear her concerns will force
her to be uncivil a little longer


-- That Is happy.


-- Madam, Your Presence will teach us to Dispense with your Cousin's Absence.


-- Captain Bravado, this was a Courtesy to entertain this Gentleman with your
Company all this time


Faith Madam, I was never disobliging, especially when commanded by so fair a
Lady as your self


I fear Sir, your Complaisance may be Injurious to you.


No Madam, my Business is not very extreme; though there is an assignation waits
me; then I have Two or Three Challenges to write and send away


Challenges!


Ay Madam, one is to a Courtier that pretends to Love where I do; another is to
a Poet that reflected upon me under one of his Characters; the Third is to an
Officer that jostl'd me in a Crowd, and never begged my Pardon


Sensible affronts indeed; -- but I hope you will stay and Caress Madam Towers,
the Beauty of Hatton-Garden, before you go, -- list -- she is coming up I think
--


You, Roman, How came you thus acquainted with this same Madam Towers? By Jove
a pretty Woman


What would he mean?


-- Why the Lady that whispered you; -- I thought I had Lampoon'd all the
handsome Women in Town; -- I never see this before


Never see her, say you?


-- No, as I Am a Man of Honor.


-- It was my Cousin Juliana.


-- No!


-- Yes Sirrah, this was the very Lady you made so Infamous; this was your
Wench at will; -- Draw Dog -- Draw, thou something less than Coward


No Courage, Dastard.


Prithee, don't take this Advantage, my Sword's not in Case.


-- No Excuse shall give thee Refuge Slave, I Will fetch thee one that is.


Confound his Civility; -- I Will go and choose one for my self, I thank him.


-- Was ever Coward thus bafl'd before?


Ha! -- Is he gone? -- Has he abused me again this way?


-- He was resolved not to be guilty of a second rashness.


-- Well, he knows the greeting he must have, when we meet.


-- He was in have to send away his Challenges.


-- If the fixed opinion I have of Juliana's Virtues could have been shaken, I
had resigned it upon this Rascal's aspersion; But Madam, I must beg of you not
to take notice on it to her, it may trouble her; -- my hopes of seeing her now,
will not invite me to stay; her business I fear is in dispensable. -- Lady your
Servant


God's Death, is not the Coward returned yet?


Yes, but Mr. Roman's newly gone.


By the Martial Deity it was his safest course, else I would have had no more
mercy on him, than a tedious Poet has of an Actor's memory


O brave! -- I wonder you that are so bloodily inclined should have so much
mercy of your self as to avoid him


Why de'e think I would trust him to choose a Blade for me; -- The very Sword
he drew against me, was mine in point of Honor; I gave it him thrice upon
terms


-- Mr. Bravado, I must needs tell you, I question your Courage; and nothing
but some bold piece of Chivalry, can redeem your Reputation


Command me Madam an Impossibility, and I Will effect it; Shall I fetch you the
Sultan's Head out of the midst of his Janizares? Or the Pope in Effigy from the
strength of the Rabble? Shall I bring you --


Nothing but that Sword of yours that Roman wears.


That Madam, is so mean an attempt, 'twill fully my honor; but since you
command it, to morrow you shall see it laid at your feet


Well, remember it; -- but I have out-stay'd my time I must go --


That Is the only trial I cannot stand; But is -- there no contrivance, Madam,
can continue you another Lovers minute


Not now, Sir; -- Then you know Sir Popular's conclusions when he sees a
Stranger here


Can you bestow me in no place conveniently, till opportunity present?


Let me see -- Ho, I have it, -- There stands a low Table there sometimes; now
if you will couch upon your hands and knees, if any should chance to come in,
they will mistake you for it; I Will disguise the design with a Carpet; -- I know
no other way of securing you, till I can wait upon you


The posture will be a little uneasy, but the consideration of such a blessing
after it, will teach me to endure it


You must kneel here.


Here -- Boy -- Persian Carpet out of the Dining Room.


He becomes a Carpet better than a Sword, -- I Will be merry with him, if he be
not pre-discover'd; such a triumphing Coward cannot be abused enough


How do I look, Wench, since I reformed my Dress?


-- Indeed Madam, as taking, as one of five and fifty can be.


Five and fifty Huzzy; it is only five and thirty, I have been no more this
twenty years; -- -'It Is not so long since I was in a Lampoon; but Youth would be
as inconvenient to one of my design, as it is to a Beardless Candidate for a
Bishopric


By all that is good, that nauscious old sinner Mother Gullman; -- Is she then
Sir Popular's Rich Widow? -- Well, this Wind may blow me some profit; -- I Will
pretend I do not know her


A Stranger here Forsooth!


-- Lady I come in the behalf of Sir Popular Jealous, and do assure you, an
important occasion detains him at present from kissing your fair hands


I am sorry Sir Popular should make choice of such an unwelcome Mediator; --
Go, go, and repeat your branching Vanities to your fine tawdry Gugaws; you are
mistaken here


Mistaken, Madam, that cannot be, you are a Fortune, I want one, and Sir
Popular needs none


-- What would this troublesome young Fellow say?


Faith nothing Madam, but I Bachelor take you Widow; Come, come, reclaim a
young Extravagant by the surest way, Marriage -- There it is in short


You scandalous, vain, paultry Scoundrel, that never bless your self but when
you snees; a shilling of your own, I Will warrant, is as rare to be seen with you
as an Eclipse, and you could have the impudence to talk at this rate to me; I
would as soon marry a Criminal under the Gallows; -- so take that for your
final answer


Now Madam, to return you my sense of your Denial in your own Dialect, you are
a mercenary, loathsome, superannuated, ugly Sinner; you have Bawded almost ever
since you left Bulking; one of your Names is Gullman, I remember your House by
a lasting Token; you have more Diseases about you then a whole Campaign in a
hot Summer; you are worse plastered and patcht up than an old leaky calkt
Vessel; -- It Is high time indeed you set up for a Fortune; -- I Will draw the
Curtain and expose you, and will have you sent to Bridewell immediately


Dear Worthy Sir, for goodness sake, consider, you will utterly ruin me; if you
do this, I am undone for ever


There Is no way to relieve you but one,


-- Any way, dear Sir, rather than that.


-- Well, the tender regard I have to the extremity of any one's condition, has
so far wrought upon me, that I am willing to come to a Capitulation with you


Your Terms, sweet Sir?


You shall give me a Bond for 500 l. to be, due precisely upon your marriage
with Sir Pop. -- if he fails you, the Contract shall be void


-- But you will endeavor to promote the Match then for your own private
Interest, as well as mine


-- That I will; -- You shall be represented to all advantages I Will promise you.


-- Provide but the Writings, and I am satisfied.


-- Sister Spotless, I bid you welcome to this earthly Mansion.


Brother Jealous you have my thanks sincerely.


-- I conceive, our beloved friend Shuffle, would acquaint you with my
business; -- in earnest, he is a good man


-- Plainly, I have great hopes in him; I was recollecting his memory with some
wholesome Passages out of a Manual I have at home


I have a small piece in this Room, that was writ by a worthy Elder of
Tower-street, that fled afterward into New England; -- I Will recommend it to
you Sister


-- It Is removed -- I know not where to look it.


-- It may be fali'n down about that Seat Brother.


Good Sister speak to it, -- I am unfit, -- I had no Devotion in my Family this
Morning


-- Alas Brother, I have a mortal aversion to all Spirits but my own.


In the Name of Goodness, what art thou?


Nothing but your humble Servant Lady, -- My Name's Bravado.


How Is this! -- Some Popish Priest, that designed to fire the House -- Hoa,
hoa, within there


-- Secure this Suspicious Person in the Garret, till I be at leisure to take
his Examination and commit him


-- What Providence was here! We might have been all blown up.


-- All their Villainies are detected; -- Come Sister, I Will order him to be
brought before the face of Justice, and then give him over to condign
Punishment


Was ever honest man thus tormented with a confounded abusive Wife; -- S'bud,
-- here is one of her Badges grieves me so, I am scarce able to lift a Glass to
my head

but here is my Comforter for all that.

This I was forced to secure with as much caution, as a Sailor does a
prohibited Truck

Ha! -- marry if 'twas not for this refocillation, I should look as forlorn, as
a Bottle half out

Ah, ah -- this Brandy's a friendly creature.

Alac, alac, I am a dying man, my Hourglass is almost run out, and she is so
watchful, 'twill be difficult to replenish it


-- My dear old Pitcher, art thou whole yet?


-- No, I have almost lost one of my ears; -- She checkered my Corpse like a
Chess-board for my last Bout with you; -- A drought choke her for an
unreasonable creature, I have not slept over a Pot, nor set a Glass* upon its head
this two days, Mun


Profound abstinence! There Is a mortifying penance indeed: -- By Bacchus I
have been at the death of a Sea-Captain, and two Dutch Merchants, since you and
I breathed one another at Isaac's last


What did you drink?


-- True Nants; -- I challenged 'em at their own Weapons, by Stingo we had a
smart Engagement on it; we poured it down like Cataracts, till we were so
inflamed, you might have made Slap-dragons in our Mouths


O Man, for such a Risk now!


By Jove, I came to promote it. -- Here will be that solid trifle Sir
Credulous, -- the Reckoning will be his


-- Alac, alac, I doubt I must not go along with you.


-- Illustrious Knight, give me leave to lick your feet.


-- I am sorry Sir, I have never a Cask of Brandy to bid you welcome with.


-- Seriously Gentlemen, I left a Scene of pleasant diversion to wait upon you.


Then Sir we must acknowledge our Obligation to be the greater.


Was it some Bowl of Punch Sir?


No, no, a more delicious entertainment; -- it was a Combat betwixt a Flesh-fly
and a Spider; but after some dispute, the vanquished Fly begged Quarter with
what voice she had; but I left her to the fury of the mercy-less Insect


-- 'Twas unkind not to relieve her.


-- Here, Sir Credulous have at ye.


-- I should like an Encounter with that, better than the Spider's skirmish
with the Fly


-- I must crave your pardon Sir, I am not disposed to pledge you, I drink
nothing at present but the simplest Spring Water that flows


-- What Is this? -- Did not you give me your honor that we should carouse it
with whole Cisterns in a hand, and Volleys of Huzzahs at every health


-- But, since; I have consulted the Configurations of the Heavens, and I find
that Mercury my little influencing Planet forbids it; he is Retrograde, and
till his motion be direct, I must forbear


Prithee Knight don't be superstitious, or if you must, let Bacchus be your
Tutelar Power; he deserves to be a Constellation the best of all the Pack; --
He Is the jolliest Hero amongst 'em


Seriously Gentlemen, if I had apprehended, you would have desired me to drink;
I should scarce have come


Sirrah, thou drunken, drousie Sot, how often have I charged you to forbid this
thirsty spunging hollow Shurk the house

Let me see him within these Walls again, and I Will batter thee worse than I
would do an Alehouse Windows


Hey! -- but why so netl'd good Madam? If I keep him company, I pay my Club
with him; and as for the Civilities I receive from him here, he cannot say they
are unreturn'd, when I have an opportunity at my Lodgings


Thou Lodgings! Ay, may be such as the Constable provides for thee, when he
finds thee drunk; -- Thou art like some Fatherless Libel* condemned and
disowned; and no body dare entertain thee for fear of scandal; Thou art so
notorious a Bilker, that White-Fryars refuses thee


If you were any thing but a --


But a what, Rascal?


A passionate Woman, you would not use this Language to a Gentleman.


A Gentleman, you pitiful insignificant Scoundrel; It Is a clear Gentleman then
I Am sure, What Lands have you, or ever had, but what you carry upon your Shoes
in dirty Weather? What other Tenement, but that crasie Cottage, that Kennel for
your Soul? It had dilapidated before this, if that steep't Punch-Bowl there,
had not repaired it


She Is more abusive than a Bill in Chancery; -- Observe how I Will bob her.


Sirrah, how came the Parlour Hangings cut, the Chinay broke, the Carpet
stained? Tell me, or Ill use you worse, than the Posts do, as you reel along


What, what is the matter Lady? -- I meant you no harm by my troth.


Do ye sport with me, you babbling Buffoon, get you gone amongst your
Play-fellow, and be waggish there. -- I Will scower the House of you all -- Out
with ye --


Though the stupid Block-head, has not sense himself to that degree as to be
jealous; yet his Companions by their too frequent residence here, may be
injurious to my unsuspected pleasures; but now these trifling fears are
removed, and my kind youthful Gallant may come secure from the turn of
Interruption: -- Though such a Husband may be a Woman's grief upon one account,
yet the good ill Quality may be useful upon another; -- When my Lover is not
expected, I confine the Sot to his hated Abstinence; but when his presence
would be troublesome, I indulge his weakness, and the easy Fool thankfully
withdraws


1. NO, no, we shall not have a Parliament this half year, I have a great
suspicion of some Court practices, let me tell you that

2. -- Ay, there was a Council not long since, where 'twas debated about the
establishing of a standing Army; but the result on it I shall not know till to
morrow

1. For certain Neighbor?

2. Ay, ay, but too sure, I had it from the mouth of one of my Lord President's
Grooms

3. There was a Stranger at my Shop very lately, that told me, the French
Ambassador had a private Audience about some Affairs that nerely concerned the
Liberty of the Subject

1. -- But Providence, I hope, will defeat all their Machinations.

2. Here Boy, bring me the Impartial Protestant Mercury.

What News Mr. Fickle?

2. Here Is some that is material.

From Colchester we are informed, That on the 22d* Instant, a certain poor
Journey-man Tailor lay intranc'd for some days, and could not be reduced to the
least sense by all the Extremities could be applied; -- at last after several
painful groans, the Organs of his Body begun to be disposed, and he returned to
himself; after which, he sent away for a learned Divine* and tendered him this
following account, viz. That something appeared to him in the likeness of an
Eagle, with Magna Charta under its Talons; then presently he heard a voice in
these words, This is England' s Emblem, unless it use means. -- Which Relation
was not a little surprising to all True Protestants there present


'Twas only some Surfeit of Cucombers.


And Magna Charta under its Talons! -- How exactly did the Vision represent
Tyranny cowering over Liberty


-- How desolate with thou be, to see the Honorable Court of Aldermen
slavishly whipped with their own Fasces

^^^^^hen our Chests will be rifl'd, our Goods and Chattels distrain'd, (...),
and so be hanged at our own expense

(...) Conventicles must be turned into Quires, our grave formal (...) fly
Copes, whilst Hopkins and Sternhold blow the Bellows (...) the Organs


Our Matrons will be Ravished, our Daughters Deflowered, our Children brought up
in profane Toryism


The face of the times seem to threaten all this, and still we put the danger
far from us


I wish the Divination of a Strowling Gypsy prove not too fatally consequent.


Do ye mean the Prophecy in Seventy Eight?


No, another since, but altogether to the same purpose; only in different Words
and Postures; -- This last, star'd and raved and foamed, and then howled out in
a dreadful Tone, the Dragon of Bow, will devour the Grasshopper of the Exchange


Trade you see must truckle to Superstition.


The signs on the Change, to the sign of the Cross.


-- Lawful Gain, to Peter Pence.


-- The Frock, to the Sirplice.


-- The Shop-Book, to the Mass Book.


And a good bargain of Wares to --


-- An ill one of Errors.


-- But since there is means, my Friends and Neighbors, let us be resolute;
shall we be trampled upon like Worms, when we may resist like Lions? Let us
Petition, Protest, Remonstrate, Covenant, and Associate against the Common
Enemy; let us set apart a day of Humiliation for a Blessing upon our
undertakings; let none of us grudge our Christian Contribution to relieve our
distressed Religion; it lies bleeding, and her gaping Wounds cry loud for Oil,
whilst we only look on and pity; let us make a Public Bank, and list our
selves under St. Michael, to go out against the Dragon and his Angels


Agreed, agreed, agreed.


Come, my Friends, our present Concerns desire more privacy.


Kindly-Welcome Gentlemen.


Dam these dull drousie Coffee-Houses; I hate 'em; -- None but your dosing
Dunces of business come in 'em; -- I had as soon be seen in a Church as here


O Sir, these are of great convenience to a Republic, I Will assure you; for
beside the incomparable virtue of the Berry, you may know ^here daily how the
Pulse of the State beats


Pray don't tell me of your State Symptoms, if it be discomposed* I cannot
retrieve it, unless a healing Draught, my own prescription, will do it


Ay, that is the only Restorative when all is done.


And we shall have work for it presently: we are so nigh your house, we shall
have all the Mum-Glasses, and Coffee-pots about our ears quickly


What do you mean by that Mr. Flush?


Why, I fear the Inquisition of Toper's Hellish Wife, that piece of eager Wine
upon the Fret


I frequent Coffee-Houses so seldom, she will never suspect I am here man.


Mr. Toper, I can secure you three days to your own disposal, without
interruption from her


Marry, Heavens bless you Worthy Sir, but how?


I Will administer a certain thing of the nature of an Opiate, but made up of the
choicest Ingredients the four Elements could afford. -- It Is compounded of the
Animal Spirits of a Dormouse, and several invaluable Simples refined by
extraction; one Scruple provokes a dead sleep without intermission for three
days


For pity sake, give her one Thousand, I Will pay for 'um with all my heart.


Alas Sir, the Treasures of the East would not do it, yet however out of
revenge to her, and good will to you, I Will prepare a Semi-scruple more


And I Will drink your Health as long as I can stand.


What a parcel of Improbabilities lie scattered about here? -- What Is this? --
The Domestic Intelligence


O let us hear that by all means; it insists upon the Revolutions of our own
Country -- Let Us hear if --


The English Genius be as pregnant at invention, as the Foreign; -- Well --.

Yarmouth, Nov. the 6th. This day a Vessel laden with Clare^s, was forced upon
the Sands, and was slav'd, before she could be got off; but all her Crew came
safe a-shoar


Marry, I should have liked the News better if the men had been lost, and the
Wine saved. -- A Murrin take the Storm


-- By the next ^umper, if I had been aboard, I would have embraced a sinking
Hogshead, and gone to the bottom merrily


O mun, the Tritons had a blessed time on it.


-- Ay, there was roaring doings amongst 'um; -- Sure 'twas a Jovial sight, to
see old Neptune pierce a Vessel with his Trident, and all the watery Court
drinking round in full Shells


-- Then reeling along and breaking their Heads against the Rocks.


-- Seriou^ly, 'twou'd be ravishing to hear the frolic Sirens sing, Down the
Red Lane


-- And to see the sociable Souls knock upon a wrackt Hull for more Liquor. --
Oh


And the Green Sickness Nymphs simpering at full ones, -- Puny Sluts.


-- 'Twas always my Hypothesis, that the Reflux was caused by their drinking,
and the Flux by their disemboagning


-- And a very reasonable supposition too.


-- Indeed Gentlemen, I have spent some years study in searching into the
Economy of that Element, but not with the satisfaction my curiosity requires;
I am now thinking to descend in a Vehicle of Glass, and so p^y into that
Constitution, I shall be taken for some Chrystalline Rock


Poo -- this only loses time. Boy -- A Glass of Mum.


Jackanapes -- why no fuller? Here Is not above two Gulps.


-- It Is right Brumswick, indeed Sir.


-- Pray Sir show me that Intelligence you had in your hand.


-- No, no, we shall be too late.


It Is no matter then; -- I had only a little occasion to look amongst the
Advertisements


Have you found some Spaniel, or strayed Horse?


-- No, but I have lost an elaborate Thought; if any of the Poets find it, I
shall never have it again


Never fear it Sir Credulous, they commonly publish all they have, and more too
a great many times


Mine are remarkable, I shall distinguish it, -- But are you not for a Dish of
Coffee


No, no, I hate to have a puddle of your Outlandish Nuisance cloging my Stomach.


Puh. -- a scouring Bottle of Pontack will scour it again, Mun.


Nuisance! Take it from me, its Virtues are unknown; -- But what say you to a
Glass of Mum


Loathsome, ropy stuff; the tired Citizen's recruit: I need none of their
Artificial Provocations


Sweetheart, qualify a Dish of Coffee with an allay of Tea.


Faith let us be for Harry's now, I am for honest Trinkelo, I have not had my
stowage this two days


-- Come Sir Credulous, now for a sprightly Cup.


Welcome Gentlemen.


But would not Sir Popular be very severe with you if he was informed who you
were


Ay, as the Prentices are upon a Pillory'd Papist; there was a pious Baggage
with him, did help to exasperate him the more


I am sorry for your misfortune.


Let me be hanged, if I was not baited by a rack o'Slaves, worse than a
Pick-pocket; they lug'd me about, and stripped me; and accused me of a design to
fire the House, and that my Snush box was a Granado


But could not the Boy that admitted you, resolve the doubt?


When I alleged, I had several honorable Visits to your Ladyship the little
heedless Lace-coat said, he had never seen me here


That forgetful Jack!


-- But when the Constables came with their painted Authority in their hands,
one of 'em knew me, and confirmed what I had said before in relation to my
self; then Sir Popular begged my pardon, and promised me his assistance in the
promotion of the Match; which, Madam, I hope you will please to bless with your
consent


As soon as you present me with Roman's Sword.


Alas Madam, it is too degenerous a Trophy, only your Commands will gloss it.


-- Well Sir, I hope the next time I see you, to see the Sword in your hand.


I Protest Madam, to tell you truth, I do a little despair of disarming the
Coward to day; my Engagements are so obliging, I fear I can scarce neglect 'em
to correct his late insolence. -- But --


These Men of Honor are always so taken up; -- It Is some dwelling business I
fancy


Ay, by your fair self, and with both Sexes, let me perish.


-- You are a Man of business, Mr. Bravado.


-- My Lady Love-all

sent to me to be at my Lodgings about three; her Coach, it seems, must stop
there; I had no sooner read her Billet, but I had another to unknot from my
Lord Scruple, a ticklish resenting Puppy; -- I must second him in the Morning


I never thought my Lord had been quarrelsom.


No more he is; he has ill nature enough, but he wants Courage, hang him, I
have been very smart on his Livery, have banter'd his Coach and Horses,
ridiculed the conceit of his Dress, checked the rudeness of his Caresses,
corrected the harshness of his French, the darkness of his Stanzas; and from me
all this seemed like privilege


It Is like Sir, you might claim a particular freedom, as his Familiar.


No Faith, I past all ths upon him at Longs's the first time I saw him; though
if one, he suspected would not fight, had but misplac't the least Tittle, he
would have improved it to a breach of Civility, and then have grown Captious


So much for my Lord; now for my Lady Love-all; if I mistake her not, she is
none of the most correct Pieces


As disorderly a Maukin as ever was beholden to art; -- She has a cast of an
eye, which I persuade her is a wanton, delicious Ogling; then her Lips are
bloated, which she calls full and pouting; and her Chin is reflext, but she
complements the deformity as a dimple; then her complexion is a kind of a Hue
made up of all colors, and changeable according to the position of the eye


So, -- your description is copious enough a'ready; yet it seems you can
dispense with all these Errata's


I protest her Passion is so unmanageable, she will admit of no repulse. Nay,
she will betray it in public; She Is now working me a Suit of Lace which she
expects I Will wear


'Twere pity Sir to disappoint so kind a Creature, which I am afraid you must
do, if your stay here be any longer; -- I would not detain you another Minute
for all the Joys you carry along with you; -- Therefore, pray, if you must be
formal, take your leave


If the Queen of Love should come to court me, to the full possession of her
store, I would refuse the sueing Charmer for one Kiss of that inviting Hand:
Ay, though my Principle was in the Field, and stripping to encounter; I am sure I
should struggle with my honor, before I could leave you


Fie Sir, this is too soft, this Spirit will never disarm Roman.


I could as soon be kick't, and --


Mr. Bravado, What are you gone?


-- How! Was that sparkish thing here, and gone?


-- Ay, and in all the haste that a Coward can make from the pursuit of danger;
-- I Am beholden to you Sir, else it would have been as difficult to have removed
him, as it is to separate an old Statesman and his Opinion


-- I am sorry Madam, I was not instrumental to your delivery a little sooner.


Truly his Company was as insupportable, as a noise of Beggars is to a Miser;
first he tortured me with an endless display of Prowess; then made a Digression
to the Women, how passionate some person of Honor was for him; and --


I fear he will scarce make me a Consident to his Amorous Achievements any more.


No, -- you did not acquit your Trust with that Fidelity was requisite; but he
resolves to correct you for it -- I have appointed him proportionably a harder
Task than ever Hercules undertook


Is it to discharge a Pot-gun without winking.


No, it is only to make me a Present; I conceit I could weild a Sword well, and
should fancy yours in particular; but I have made a Vow to receive it from no
hand but his


He Will sooner venture to snatch one out of the hand of Justice. -- But where is
your Cousin Madam


Gone to the New-Exchange Sir, -- Did not her Boy give you a Letter?


Yes, but it did not take notice where she was; only, that her return would be
within less than an hour


In the mean time Sir, if you please to divert your self with a History, I Will
fetch you Sir Walter Rawleigh; I have a little trifling concern that calls me
away


No, -- I Will go and dispatch half an hours business, and be here again, --
Madam your Servant


-- How agreeable this Gentleman's behavior is in comparison of Bravado's; his
modest and equal Deportment steals on insensibly, and wins upon our Sex; whilst
the other thinks his modish lewdness is most prevailing; and thus provokes hate
with that very Quality he thinks incites Love


Has Mr. Roman been here yet Cousin?


Yes, and newly gone.


-- Gone! -- It is not Three; I am sure the Chair-men pac't away at a
considerable rate, but did not he excuse his haste


Only with a Promise he would be here again about half an hour hence; -- But
I Will leave you Cousin to be passionately elegant upon your Lover's absence


-- And sure our thoughts tower with the noblest flights,
When pinioned with the softest Plumes of Love;
What Pageantrys of fond Immortal Joys,
And what vain senceless fears we apprehend1
Tyrannick Passion blindly curbs our Souls,
And subjects all our reason to its Laws;
Whilst slavishly we own its Sovereign right
Esteeming such bright Chains as Ornaments.

Madam, a Footman in a Blue Livery seam'd with red, gave me this Letter.


It Is from Mr. Roman, Pray Heavens the Enclosure prove as welcome; I open it
with as much awful dread, as a modest Penitent does his heart to his Confessor

-- Nor was my fears, thin shallow Phantoms; -- Alas some ill natured business
has detained him; and we must be divorc't a whole day more; -- A Day! -- It
must not be -- I cannot be rackt with the Convulsions of hope and fear so long;
-- I Will write with all the feeling Thought, Pathetick Love candictate. -- But
sure he will come, it was only some design to heighten my surprise. -- But if he
should not -- Yes he will -- my confusion of thought distracts me; -- I make
needless Objections, and return as wild Answers; -- Well -- my restless passion
has almost wrought it self into a calm; -- my Spirits grow dull, my Eyelids
heavy, and all my Faculties indisposed; -- I Will endeavor to settle my
disorders with a Slumber


Ha! Seriously the Lady's Organs are untuned; -- but don't disturb her.


Pray let me conceive your reason for it.


You shall know it presently -- Jeffry here take this Key, -- go into my
Repository, and fetch me the Paper with the black Seal upon it


I hope you intend no harm here, Sir Credulous,


-- No, no, -- I have only sent for a certain Philter, which was found out
after many years travel, and long experience, by that Aesculapius of his* Age,
Don Arnando Curioso the Spanish Physician


The Virtues of it?


-- They are innumerable Sir, -- if you be Frenchify'd, it cures you beyond
Mercury, without Salivation or Bagneo, if you be scorbutic, it carries off the
malignity by its operation Diuretic, -- if* you be Hypocondriacal, it --


-- Here Is a hippo-conjuring with you; -- Do you make my House an Hospital?
This was not the business of your visit, I conceive, Sir


But its greatest virtue is --


-- Pray no more of its Vices, Sir.


I tell you Sir, it is of so subtle and insinuating a nature, that by its
Incorporation with the air, it smites upon the Olfatick Organ, and produces
the effect of Love; 'twill be requisite to my design with your Niece


Most requisite indeed.


Sir Popular take care to hold your Nose upon the opening of this Paper, or
your Passion may be greater for me then becomes your Sex; Jeffrey, do you make
use of the same precaution


Not I Sir, none can love a good Master too well.


An honest Servant.


In earnest, it is like your ordinary Damask Powder.


It resembles it indeed.


It Is no such subtle Body, Sir Credulous


-- You must know Sir, there are certain minut^ Volatile Particles afloat
amongst the grosser; and from these proceeds this Philo-poietick quality


His Trumperies are like the French flim-flams, valuable only because of their
hard Names


Here Jeffry, -- carry it safely back. -- But hark you Sirrah, has no odd
Commotions solicited you


In Faith Sir, Methinks you look exceeding lovely; ah that Eye, that Chin, that
Forehead; in faith Lady Master if you were but a Woman, I know what I know -- ah


Get you gone, get you gone, you Knave you; -- did not I give you warning of
this


Now, Sir Popular, you may enlarge your imprisoned sense.


What a wonderful effect it has wrought upon the poor Creature, I perceive
there is no resistance


You may as soon unravel your Destiny.


Now Sir, since your Marriage with my Niece is unquestionable, I conceive,
you will consider how active and industrious I have been; her Fortunes are
exactly as I acquainted you; and thereupon I must presume to tell you, I have a
Suit to yo


I will not part with an Atom of my Powder before hand.


Under favor Sir, d^ believe my request to be so unreasonable; -- It Is only to
lend the Good Old Cause one Thousand Pound before the Consummation of your
Conjugal (...), and another Thousand after


What, then is your Brotherhood's Treasury exhausted?


-- It Is only lent for the better confirmation of our Laws and Liberties; and
must be to be expended in the maintenance of the Cause aforesaid; I am
commissioned Receiver, and will take care your Talent shall be improved; in
earnest I will


Soft; -- She awakes. --


Why did the dear delusion fleet away,
And so abruptly close its flat'ring Scene?
How pleasingly transported have I been
With short and kind abusing Ecstasies?
I thought I tumbled on a Mossy Pallet,
Close by a Stream that gently stole away,
And hum'd with soft confusion as it run
Amongst the rustling Pebbles, and along
The verdant Banks, grew Rows of stouping Vines:
Up starts a Sylvan from a Covert bush,
Untwines the circling Branches till they bled,
And brought the swelling Clusters to my hand,
Then after some Grimaces, trip't away.
One Grape far more transparent than the rest
I culled, and sporting with it, dropped it in,
Then catching at it suddenly, methought
I slip't, and so awak't with the affright.
Still, still --

Neice, Neice, I must not suffer you to choose a Grape for your self, I have
provided one here for you


Lady, I was the Grape you were so concerned for, and am safe; -- through this
transparency you may read my passion


Pray Sir don't insult over an innocent surprise.


'Twill be convenient Sir Popular* that you moralize the Sylvan and withdraw; I
perceive the Operation already; therefore your Presence and the Lady's Modesty
may be a little disonant


In earnest, you provide discreetly.


Now fair Angel, let not an Abstemious Bashfulness restrain your Desires; Come
and pour out your Lovesick Soul into my Breast, -- I Will cherish it, and
restore it whole again


-- Infect not me with your Pestilent Breath; I loath your Embraces.


Shaw, this is the strangest humor: Come, I Am confident you love me.


Enjoy your belief then.


Well. -- She shall never taste the Joys she has refused, I Will punish this
coyness with disdain, till her Tears petrifie her; then she shall stand as a
Monument for bashful Maids


I cry you mercy Sir, if I have intruded upon your Secrecy; I expected my
Cousin had been here


Don't retreat my Pretty Creature, bless me only till I have given you an
account of that unhappy Creature


Unhappy! No sure.


She might have been otherwise, only she neglected it; -- in Fine, Madam, she
loves me


In troth* as great an unhappiness as could befall her.

But I hope Sir, you are not so cruel as to see her Virgin Blossoms snatched by
Death; since you can prevent the Tyrant's long reach


But if I do; I Will be hanged in her Zone; -- She has already disowned her Title
to my Heart, and never shall be admitted to a second Claim


Truly some of these Women are so humerous -- Now, I never could refuse in
public, something I longed for, and then condemn my self for it in private


Most excellent Form, you alone have reconciled me to your Sex; There is a
secret Harmony betwixt our Complexions, and I do here proclaim you Mistress of
my Heart


What -- Sir Credulous here? -- You have made use of my Name Knight for your
Introduction


You mistake Sir; my own challenges a greater Interest.


And you have a pretense to that Lady.


I have seriously; and her goodness has encouraged it.


-- Madam will you throw your self away, upon an undiscerning Idiot, that dotes
more upon Tinsel Toys than real perfections? He Will barter your whole Fortunes
for a Painted Rattle


Lady, he is a stupid Illiterate Animal; in nothing humane, but only that he
laughs and looks up; -- You must pardon him, he knows not how to value a Rarity


Why, you Incorrigible Fool, will you miscal your Trangam Rarities?


I Will appeal to you Lady if these be Trangams; -- First for Antiquities -- I
can produce one of the Trojan Horse's Shoes; a Black-Jack of a Grecian
Officer's Boot-Top; a Pocket-Glass of Janus's Spectacles, and several others.
Now for my Novelties --


Your Antiquities are Cheats, and your Novelties, Trash.


-- Thou art a Moving Clod, and acts only by the Dictates of Heat and Moisture.


You are an Hospital of lame Arts, and sickly Sciences.


Thou art a Liar with a bad Invention.


-- Thou art a Title Page to a Treatise of Elves and Goblins.


Thou art an Aesop Fables, without the Morals:


Gentlemen, you talk of Elves and Goblins, would they don't hear you; I Will
assure you this Room's haunted


By Jupiter, if a leering Shadow should come in hither, I would make bold to
kick its lean Worship out again


I scarce think thou have bravery enough to encounter Air.


I never heard he durst draw a Sword.

Come Sir Draw, you shall have a fatal proof on it presently.


Now Sir, I Am for ye.


-- Ha; -- Would I were well off it again.

It Is your Armor perhaps that makes you resolute; we'll strip and fight it
fairly


Indeed Gentlemen, there shall be no blood shed here; -- I Will call in the House.


Now Caitif, I Will mince thee worse than a City Sempstress does her words.


-- And this shall maul you more, than a dull Author does his Original.


Have at your Soul. --


Bless me, what a frightful Gambol was this, am I alive, tro.


Are they gone -- I am all in a Sweat, -- Doubtless they were a couple of
Devils, that were waiting for us, if we had killed one another


But they were disappointed for all their cunning; -- My hair stood so erect, I
could perceive it move my Wig


Why, where is it?


Good now! It Is gone and yours too.


-- Mine too! A Plague of their Pilfering Frolic; -- And our Clothes too, as I
live --


You are like Gladiators indeed now, Gentlemen.


I Protest Madam, Sir Cred. ows his Life to an Accident, or let me perish


-- Was not your Sword sharp enough?


Ha, ha, the Lady was arch upon him there; ha, ha, seriously the Fancy makes me
amends for the loss of my Clothes


-- How! -- Your Clothes gone, say you?


Ay, faith Madam, -- just as I directed the dead-doing point to his Heart, his
guardian Devil interrupted the Pass, sweep't away our Clothes, and vanished in
a Flash of Fire


Fair Creature, the odds were mine when the Demons came; -- but the truth on it
is, they took their leave a little rudely


Gentlemen, Sir Popular will be here presently; therefore if you will walk into
my Chamber you may be unseen there, till you can Careen your selves again


HOw ill my Practice and my Principles agree! -- My Maiden honor at first
resolved and strugl'd with unwilling Conflicts, before it yielded; but Poverty
importuned, and Proffers prevailed; -- Now I can cheat a Citizen with a City
Conscience; -- Yet still methinks I have some remorse; -- But why have I? --
These People I deal with, deserve no better; -- They Will lift one hand up to
Heaven, and pick Pockets with the other: -- A fair Correspondence with them,
loses its gloss; and is but Honesty misplac't; But --

'Tees strange Sir, yoo should no remember me, meetheenks yoo have no reeson
too complain of me usage, -- Dee Cure was both speedy an perfect: -- But yoo
dou foorgeet me


No, no, my Shins and Shoulders put me in mind of you: I feel the Symptoms on it
still; I fear the Lues frets in my Veins still; then, I have Gleetings
frequently


Dese be oonly some Seminal Wastings, de which do proceed from your Weekness;
bot me vill send you a Dose of my Pilulae Retentrices, de which vill obstruct
'em


None of your sipper-sawses for me any more, good Mr. Doctor, you have tampered
with me too much already; but my comfortis, No Cure, no Money


Vell, Vell, bot Begar me vill no abused by yoo, -- Me vill eder have my Money
or yoor Boody


A Pox of your damned mincing; why do you clip at this rate to me you
Counterfeit Rascal; do not I know you? Was not I the first that advised you to
melt your words; and pass for a Forreigner? If it had not been for me, you had
only been a Zany still; Did not I witness you went out Doctor at Padua, and
taught you to counterfeit your Testimonial from thence


Well, Well, this shall not bring you off, I Will tell you so much.


Do your worst you drudging Clyster-pipe, I Will make you fly the Town, I Will
assure you; I Will acquaint the College who you are; and how you are in Fee with
an Apothecary, to prescribe costly Drugs, and rich Compositions; which he only
observes in the making up of his Bill, but never in his Administrations


You shall lose your self, as you walk along, before I repair you again.


You repair me! -- You Suppositor; thou art not Physician enough to prescribe a
Drench; -- Get you gone and rake in distressed Fundaments; hide your Ignorance
with hard words; and maul your Latin beyond cure


Sir, your humble Servant; -- Faith I am glad you are come, I was just going to
send for you


Honest Mr. Shuffle give me your hand; -- I was going upon a little business
this way, and thought you would take it ill if I did not call to see you; -- My
Wife gives her service to you


-- It seems then this Visit was designed; -- You told her you were coming
hither


No really not I; she surmis'd so, but I did not design it at that time.


Then the Obligation is less of my side: -- Come, come, you Gentle Rogue you,
you came a' Dunning, did not you? Hanged Man, modesty and the business of your
Errand are inconsistent


Really Mr. Shuffle you mistake me, I had no occasion for Money.


And that is well; the truth on it is, I have money ready, because I am unwilling
to transgress my promise; but since your Occasions are indifferent, 'twill do
me a kindness; I must dispose of it elsewhere


But a --

Well -- dee see -- I am now going.


-- -- Nevertalk of going yet Man; here will be my Lord Change presently; he
has turned off his old Milliner; I Will recommend you to him; he shall go home
with you and furnish himself


Your Servant good Sir, I fear I shall be too late for an occasion; besides, I
don't go directly home, I have Concerns by the way. -- Here Is one at Door Sir
--


Mr. Shuffle the Money has been due above a Fortnight, and I could hear nothing
from you


How could you expect it, unless it were to contract another Debt with you;
doubtless you are not so unreasonable as to demand Payment


-- You know Sir, I am only an Agent, it is another's business; I am obliged to
the Duty of my Office


Prithee don't sham me with your Duty and your Office; de'e think I am a
stranger to your specious plausible Cheats, don't I know how you shift and
contract in one another's Names


I profess to you, the Money was not my own.


May be so; nor is that your own by right, which you hook in by your barbarous
advantages; how many raw Cullys have I decoyed e're now into your ravirous
Nooses


And I think Sir, you used to have a considerable share.


Did not my Treachery deserve it? -- That I should be such a Villain as to sell
my Friends! Well, since you have past this upon me, I Will do the young Gentleman
some justice upon you


-- You cannot injure me, the Law will justify me.


Will It justify your contracting with Minors? and taking advantage o their
Nonage, by some of your legal Quirks


-- There Is no such thing, I never exacted so.


Have you the Forhead to deny it? Have not I provided you of such Squires as
would subscribe to any terms for the relievance of their present wants? I Will
unravel all, I Will promise you; -- We'll plague you, if a Bill in Chancery will
do it


-- See what that Court will decree for you; -- but you are so passionate, I
had rather pay the Money, than be concerned with you; -- So your Servant


His Door's open, he must be within.

Here, here, I want nothing of you; I am none of your Misers Ghosts that haunt
you for Treasure


I Will promise you, I thought, by the authority of your Rap, that you would been
some person of a worse design; I have been tormented with these sort of
Creatures unmercifully


Not so ill as I have been with another sort.


Where Prithee?


-- In Gray's Inn Walks.


-- There Is variety of humor;


-- If Apery may be called humor.


It passes for it there; -- But who did you see?


-- I saw that splendid, Orthodox Fop, Jack Rigle, and was troubled with him.


How?


Why first, after he had run out his Chain of Thoughts, by way of Greeting, he
broke out, Dam-me, he was glad to see me, and especially at that Juncture; for
he had expressed his sense of the Times, Allegorically, in a Letter from Leghorn;
and must have my judgment on it, which I vouchsaf't very freely, and told him
his Style was tedious and obscure; he had so tag'd it with misapplied Figures,
that like his Pantaloons, it made a noise and was troublesome


And would not he Glout upon it?


No, but would reconcile me with some of his Rhapsodys which he produced; I
read, but he thought I did not give 'em grace enough, and thereupon snach't
'em, then thundered 'em off in a fancied Heroic greatness; -- but the
wofullest stuff that ever Aquafortis writ on Knife, or Tobaco-Box


He affects that way of tinkling, but with ill success commonly. -- Well, how
was you rid of him


Another seasonable Fop came singing up to us, and took him aside; then begging
my pardon, which I easily granted, he turned out his Toes, and gracefully moved
away


How did you bestow your self then?


-- I kept my seat still, and presently, two trim, loud Gentlemen seated
themselves by me, and made remarks upon all that past by; then would babble
Gibberish to one another, thinking to have it mistaken for French: Now would be
passionate and talk of love, making Allusions to the Trees, and walks; after a
while two Ladies came, and took up the Bench below me; which they no sooner
saw, but left me and run upon them


-- Was not Harry Smirk there?


Yes, yes, and shouldered a tawdry Chambermaid along, and bare all the time;
he had up all his revised motions of head and hand; nor could a female pass
without a distorted bow, and an obliging smile from him


He has a pretty impudent familiar way with him; -- But was not Madam Burly to
be seen


O, She Is as constant as the Usurer; she was trouling about very painfully, and
all mufl'd up in Lace; then, her Knots, her Towers, her Gloves, her Gown, were
so exact, and suiting, they represented her a most uniform deformity


You had variety of entertainment indeed.


Ay; -- there was a poor discarded Poet sitting very pensively under the Covert
of an Elm; I pitty'd his solitude, and walked up to him; and after an Epitome
of his observations, he begun to complain of the humor of these times; that
preferred silly apish Farce, to true solid wit


May be he had been damned lately. -- Now let me have your company to the
Coffee-house; and you shall see as luxurious a Medly of Manners there, though of
another nature


I cannot hear a sordid Slave saucily arraign the Proceedings of his Superiors,
besides, Sir Popular and I are at odds


He will not be at the Cabal this time, he is treating about Marriage with that old
harra'st Whore, I told you off


'Twill be very merry if she can but bubble him at long run.


Never doubt it; I have whetted him, and am in Fee for my Interest of both
sides; I Will serve my self of him, and then expose him


-- I must go steal into his House, which I should hate like a Pesthouse, but
only that the Divine Juliana's there


Gentlemen, if you had been seen in my Chamber, perhaps the occasion might
ha'been censured too severely; but here is a Closet in this Room will secure you


This Whoreson Boy of mine! He might have been here before this; I shall be too
late, I have 2 or 3 Cowards to Post before 6 a-Clock


Jeffry stays long too; -- What an unadvised Mortal was I to undertake any
thing this particular day; Hesiod reckons it inauspicious in his Emeralogia;
yesternight the Candle burnt blue, and this Morning I saw a Tom-Tit perching
upon a Bough with his Tail toward me: I divined --


Hang your Divinations.


Methinks I feel some chilling Particles tacitly creeping through my Pores.


Come but into the Closet, and I Will fetch either of you a Nightgown.


I fancy this Knight is the most humerous Whim that ever made antic Love; I
have provided a pleasanter Masque than the last was, if it have but the good
fortune to take -- Here are some Implements in order to it


Did observe Wench what a languishing kind of a Leer Sir Popular squinted at
me


Yes, I believe your Canting Fop is a little carnal; he is just such another
Arch Wag, as our Brown Betty picked up in the Rounds one Night


-- Ho; I remember him; -- He used to bring a Sword and Riding coat under his
black Cloak, to appear sparkish; he thought his own Habit was too notorious; He
was a good friend to the House though


But he took so much Flogging up to it, before one could stir his Inclinations.


Betty would complain, she used bodily austerity upon him, till her Arms ach'd;
he was a little dull of Discipline, only he paid well


-- A shame take her for a Slut, she incroacht upon me that night; he was made
prize in my Province; -- marry was he


He dispatched business three times a Week in the Blue Chamber constantly; --
But I hope I shall have no need to return to these poor shifts again


If the Scriv'ner prove but faithful.


-- He Is well enough; the pretext of a mistake will indemnify him; he really
has that Widow's Fortunes in his hand that I personate; -- Then Mr* Shuffle
will endeavor to promote it for his own sake


Now Madam if advice from me would not seem a little untimely to one of your
experience; I should look upon it as the safest way to secure him; to let him
command the freedom of your person, when you perceive a rising desire
fermenting in his Veins, he would then certainly Marry you, least the discovery
of his fall, should bring scandal to the Fraternity


May be Wench he will take us unawares; therefore leave the Prayer Book upon the
Table, and go down


Sister Spotless, I had come sooner, but that I was obliged to do justice upon
a wicked Apostatizing Brother, nay more, he was taken with a false Worshiper in
the very Act of Filthiness, Foh! Foh! I am sick with the Repetition


Oh! abominable, well plainly I am armed against all the Insults of lend men,
there lies my Sword of Defiance


In earnest a good Woman, I Will warrant it, some of our thorough reformed
Authors: Well, the Wicked may talk of their Ability and Learning, but I could
as soon edify on the Seven Champions, as the best of their Writings; no, no,
writing of Divinity to any purpose is a sort of Hereditary Patrimony, which
none but our Sanctified Brethren can justly lay claim to: What! the Title Page
is lost? What may you call this Sister


I have even forgot the Name, I fall commonly directly to the Matter, it is very
edifying


No doubt on it, a body may know a good Book by Simpathy, my Bowels commonly
Simpathize with an Holy Author, before I know one word of his meaning; but let
me see

I Will find you out a place presently that suits my Imperfections. Ha! How!
What Is here? Sure I don't see right


Oh! I am ruined, it is it, but too sure, that cursed careless Jade.


How! What means this? -- Avoid, avoid, O wicked!


Abominable, Oh Brother she is lost, she is lost, utterly lost, this was that
wicked lost Wretches doing, my sinful Maid: Oh! Horrid, and defile my Chamber
too with it! I must even take a new Lodging, I shall be as fraid to stay
hereafter, as if the Room was haunted with Spirits


Turn her away Sister, she would corrupt a Convert.


She Is a Harlot, an unclean Harlot, and shall be no longer under my Roof.


What will you say now if this Pious piece have some itching Inclinations this
way her self? I can guess shrewdly by my own Hypocrisy, and believe me, an
affected Cant, and a lift or two of the Whites, are the easiest parts of
Devotion, I Will attempt her at a distance, and if her Inclinations are right,
she will quickly make the most of a double meaning Saying

Well Sister, I cannot but think of this lost Creature, but indeed we are all
frail; but when we find our selves weak, we should apply wholesome Remedies to
prevent the growth of our Distemper; letus, Dear Sister, beware of our own
steps, we know not how soon the Minute of Sin may come upon us, we'll arm
against it; let us be joined together to morrow in Pious Wedlock


Ah Brother the memory of my late Husband forbids it, though I must confess, I
wish to be secure from Temptation as well as may be: But Brother let us burn
that filthy obscene Book, verily I shall be sick whilst it stays in the Room:
Oh, I am extreme queasie, the other day I eat but a little piece of a Pullet that
was singed with a Leaf of an old Common Prayer Book, and it has lain in my
Stomach ever since


Well Sister, we will however see the Inventions of the Wicked, and detest
them: Good lack! Sincerely it is pretty to the eye, though it be Lewd and
Abominable


Ay, They have the Pleasures of this vain World.


They have so, you little Rogue you; you Pigs-ny's, you little Creature, ye
Pugs-face you

In earnest, I am I know not how -- As it might be -- Strangely, I say it
Backsliding. -- Well, let me be far enough, Is the Canonical hour past

I profess, Matrimony shall be ratified to morrow, you pretty little Fubs you.


Indeed Brother! Oh no, it will be Friday an unluckly day,


Oh foh! Dear Sister, that is really Antichristian, and Superstitious; What! An
Observer of Times and Seasons? Oh! It Is Popery altogether, beside we must not
trust our selves too long in the hands of the Tempter: No, no, to Morrow, to
Morrow


Sure you mistake Brother, it must not be by any means.


Why Sister, why art thou refractory? I tell thee, while our thoughts are
upright, we may do what is pleasing to us: Well, well, my little Spouse, you
are my Spouse, you Wag you, my Heart is wedded to thee, and I must fulfill my
just desires with thee; Oh the Comfortable Condition of Wedlock! I say Sister
hearken unto me


But Brother, the Wicked may see us, let us not be a stumbling block before
them


Sister, here is an Apartment in this Room convenient for us, but least some
wandering eye should be about the Keyhole, I Will fetch these Whirligigs I
observed upon the Table; in earnest, these Vanities may be useful though uot
lawful


Well Brother, you are even the most Powerful Man!


Sister, Sister, make haste down; -- These Roysters have set the House in an
Uproar; -- I Will only set things in order, than come to your Lodgings and
comfort you


-- I hope if you come 'twill be for an honest end Brother.


How strangly this Creature is infatuated betwixt Lust and Zeal; This Religion
is a pretty sort of deluding Perspective, it represents all Objects of its own
color; -- I have used it like a Jac-call, it hunts down the Prey, but never
goes to share; -- Well, this Surprise had like to have been fatal; -- How the
Devil came Sir Credulous in this Closet, and in that posture? -- A Ourse upon
the Disappointment: But she will continue perhaps in her Sacred Rapture; -- I Will
go to her before her Transport be settled, and renew my Court; This Religious
Twang, I perceive, is the most prevailing way of Caress; if I carry her but at
last, I have played the Hypocrite to some purpose; -- It Is lucre that licenseth
all things, I hate a Conscience must be humored. --

Mine is a Complaisant, Good Natured Toy,
Demure as City Dames, but never Coy.

It Is strange, this dear expected man should stay, I am all Convulsion till he
comes; -- My dead, dried up Sot is now belching out his noisome fumes, and
weltring upon his Elbows amongst wet Tobaco on a slatter'd Table; whilst I am
preparing for a Luscious Brimmer of Love, with all the restless Drought Desire
can cause


My dear Creature, if this Transgression beyond the Period, can be atton'd with
the Sacrifice of my Heart; you have kindled it with your Eyes, and here I Will
offer it


Indeed I wished and fretted till I saw you, -- But why these Flourishes? I Will
excuse you without this Eloquence; this is not the Language of Love and
Familiarity; -- But where were you


Let me die, if I did not come almost directly from Sir Popular's; Madam
Charliett

detained me.


I perceive then I am neglected; -- These Men dote on new Mistresses like new
Fashions, though the old ones be both more easy and graceful. -- Well, false
man, Well


Prithee my Dear don't pout.


I am sure she is as ill shaped a Jone as ever was modeled by Rectifier; then
her Smile is the oddest simp'ring air; her Teeth are rusty in spite of all the
Operator's art, and fit only to be scoured with a Shooe-Brush; then she
flourishes her Fan so awkerdly; and shadows with her Patches so irregularly;
Fough -- I admire you can think on her


Hang her a fond young Slut; she forced her Maidenhead upon me; and is grown
the most Insatiate Creature; -- I was forced to heap Sin upon Sin, and Lie upon
Lie, before I could get, and was excused from her; at last, with much ado: --
Indeed she presented me with a Pendulum of a most ingenious fancy


You base, unconstant Wretch, get you gone, and replenish your feeble drained
Chine with Broths and Jellys, and away to her again


My Dearest! I have plentiful Reserves still; -- Let me stifle you with the
Sweets of Love


Well, false Man, I Will trust my Honor in your hands once more, but if you come
near her again, may all the Curses that an injured incensed Rival and a Woman
can invent, fall upon you


But let us not delay our mutual happiness, my Dear, all things conspire to
heighten our blessing


Ay, -- the Cuckold snores by this time; and the next Room waits us with all
its Conveniences; -- Here take my hand --


Ha! -- What noise is this? -- Yonder Is some bustle below.


Sir, Sir, here are a Company of rude Gentlemen that swear they will have this
Room, -- One of 'em they call Mr. Flush -- They Are coming up. --


Oh dear -- Alas! I am undone; -- He Is my Husband's Companion, -- Run, run
behind the Hangings there, whilst I go behind the Curtain, that skreens the
fire place


Gentlemen, we are now in great Nature's Storehouse, here is both Wine and
Women; -- Let every man follow the dictates of his Inclination. -- I declare
for bowzing; let all such as are Proselytes for the great Genius of
Goodfellowship, hold up their hands


What is the Knight a Heretic?


-- Marry he deserves to 'be stak't to a Tobaco-pipe, and burnt in Brandy for it.


His Spurs shall be^^l'd off, his Arms revers't, and his Posterity attainted.


Seriously Gentlemen, my temperament will not allow it; you see I am sanguine, hot
and moist; but heat is the predominant quality


'Sbud, is that a Carcass to be indulged, -- Come, come, disoblige it for
compliance and be drunk


O Sir, you never think of an Inflammation.


Shaw, -- What signifies it to be lukewarm a little; I would not shirk a Glass
for a general Conflagration


Wough, this is a stingy humor Sir Credulous; -- fill up your thirsty Veins
with consoling Bub, Mun; then fall down dead


And when you are translated to Purgatory, disgorge your o'recharg'd Stomach, and
so put out the flame


A Glass or so, Gentlemen, is very inspiring, therefore rather than reta^'d
your Jollity, I Will neglect my self, and take one round


O rare Sir Credulous.


Now for the Quantity and Quality.


Quantity! Fie, fie, no Limitations, Mun; -- We are resolved to have a Bout
on it, and agreed upon this place as the most out of my Wife's Road; -- The
Devil's in her if she finds us out here. -- What think you? --


Has she taken my Drops?


Ay marry, I stole 'em into her Glass at Dinner; I saw her begin to stretch and
gape presently after


They Will do her business.


-- I am as dry as Touch-wood; What shall we drink?


-- No sophisticated French Wine; It Is full of Tartar.


-- What say you to a spacious Bowl of Punch, Genteels.


-- A Bowl of Punch, a Bowl of Punch.


-- Hoa -- the House -- here. --


-- Go and compound a Bowl of Punch quickly; you have my Receipt, let it direct
you; -- only remember to throw in five Quarts of Whitewine to make up a Body


You shall have it Sir.


How we shall dust it about! Oh --


-- My Receipt is mightily in request now; They observe it altogether at the
Tower; I was the other day amongst 'em there


You would find hot service.


-- Ay, we drunk in Discipline, by the Word of Command; -- It Is the Camp way,
and a'mode now. -- But how dee like my Panegyric upon Punch, Sir Credulous


Most ravishing, I profess.


-- 'Twas a hotheaded Flash; -- if you did but observe, the words are a
designed Bombast, which is the most natural and expressive way to describe the
lumbring confusion of a Frolic


-- Very adapt indeed, -- then the disparity of your numbers.


-- Alludes to the distraction of the Company; -- One Capers, another Cringeth,
this tumbles down, another over him, and all are jumbling about in a various
Heterocliton of humor


Yonder comes the Lovely Vessel -- Now ha'for it old Lads.


Run the proud Argo with all her liquit Freight aground.


Now my Souls of Brass, let us seat our selves, and bounce it off; marry if I
mind Degree, or Quality, let me never drink more


-- Here Is a Thimble indeed! Wuh this will never douse us.


That! It Is like attempting to scoup drowned Zealand clear with an
Oyster-Shell; Let Us drink full ones with a Levit of Trumpets at every Health


No, no, That Is too extravagant; we'll sip out of the Bell of an opening
Cowslip to the buzzing Accents of an Humble Be


Ha ha ha, Siping! That Is very fine; -- I am mistaken if we came hither to Sip;
-- Go and fetch us a good thumping hollow Beaker, go -- Siping Qouth a', --


Prithee, it is Porterly to drink Punch out of a Beaker.


-- Tell not me of your Genteel Conrtly way of Quaffing, I am for true honest,
downright drinking


There, there, this is the Measure.

Let that be the Standard then; I Will sound it, though 'twere as deep as Doomsday.


Seriously Gentlemen, it is too Hyperbolical; but I Will venture to evacuate it
once or twice


By Styx, I scorn to refuse it.


And I, by Lucifer.


A Health to our Royal Master.


Hah my brave Boys! Is not this better than Plotting, and Leaguing, and
Clanning and Shamming? A Pox of these unquiet Curs, that must be yelping
against Heavens Luminary, and only because it is bright


A troublesome Crowd of Insects, that are Pestilential to the heat that
preserves 'em


That Buz like Bottl'd-Ale, and only make a noise because they are froathy; --
Foh -- the very naming 'em furrs my Mouth; -- I must even rence it with a
Bumper or two


-- Ah rare Toper! Thou art the Prince of a Man.


Y' Good Faith you Rogues, you see the worst of me; I only Plot how to avoid
the Slavery my Wife would Plunge me in, and to enjoy my Liberty in a Chimney
Corner, with a Pot and a Pipe before me


-- By Lucifer that is reasonable enough.


I tell you truth, or let this be my last.


You have none of this at the University, Mr. Flush.


Yes, yes, Drinking is looked upon as a perfection there; if a young Blade
after four years Residence, has but learned to make a Supernaculum; and as much
Logic as will prove a Countryman to he a Horse, he is a good Proficient


Indeed! -- Sleepy Jack Seaton, or honest old Hereboord's will teach 'um the
latter presently


Let Us about with it, and be sprightly my Men o'Mirth, ten Goe-down's to you
Sir Credulous


Generous Mr. Flush I am yours to Intoxication.


Dear Sir, your Devoted.


Dear Tom, I am thine.


Don't limit me, Mun, I am heavy, and must fall to the bottom, marry must I.


Gallant Toper, thou shall be Canonized y' faith.


-- A Saint Man!


Ay, and of as good Authority as any in the Calender's -- Shrove. Tuesday shall
be your Anniversary


By Stix, his Face is like a Holiday already.


Nay, but if you will honor me, make me the Prince of Drunkards.


We will; -- and your Inauguration shall be to morrow; It Is too late now for
the Solemnity


We'll all be his Peers.


Ay, his Mightiness shall confer Dignities upon us all; it is usual now adays
for a private Club to frame a new Constitution


And why may not we, as well as the sober Party; -- but how far man shall my
Dominions extend


Throughout all the Taverns, Brandy-Shops, and Alehouses, betwixt
White-Chappel and St. Giles's


Ah -- I shall be a happy Prince -- Duke Trinkelo shall be my Allie.


Myriads of Mirmidons shall defend your Reeling Mightiness from Constable and
Watch, Pillars and Posts, from Chamber-pots above, and Channels below, and all
such Hostilities


Ha ha, What, no Laws?


-- Yes, yes, but Lex bibendi, shall be Lex suprema, the rest shall be digested
into a Code


Marry, I shall be a Prince presently at this rate, I am as Drunk as a Lord
a'ready


The other Stoup old Toast.

Ho, hoa, -- It Is down by Stingo.


Ay, if 'twill but stay,

This Punch is plaguey cucutting Liquor.


Ha ha ha -- run behind the Curtain there, into the Fireplace, and disburthen.


Udsbodikins; how came this Incarnate Devil here;


O thou lumpish, weltring Swine, thou stupid Log, -- Here Is a pickle with all
my heart -- Sirrah, Beast, how came you amongst these roaring Rake-hells, these
tearing debaucht Ruffians? -- I could find to pull those big, rouling eyes out,
that stare and glow in your Fool's Noddle -- I thought I should find out your
Haunts at last


I believe Madam we have rather found out yours, how could you slink in hither
unseen? I guess you expected somebody, you would have been civiler too. --

Touch me, and I Will have you stripped, and turned down Stairs; -- Don't presume
the Privilege of your Sex shall excuse you


Thou pitiful, profligate Shirk; -- He that gives thee but a Pot of Brandy's
thy Darling; ay, for one poor Pipe of Smoke, Thou Wilt call a dull drousie
Pluralist, a diligent sound man; a poor poatching Pettyfogger, an able Council;
a Penny Pamphleteer, an Authentic Author; or a Tooth-pick-maker a Virtuoso;
thou offscouring of the Town, how durst thou pronounce so impudently upon me?
Sirrah, I Will make you know there is never a House of Entertainment, within the
Sound of Bow bell, which I have not a Spy in -- I Will --


-- A Cord here quickly --

Now Gentlemen, if we think to continue Company, we must resolve to tie her
down to a Chair, and Gag her -- Here Is a Gag --


Agreed.


Tie me! Brutes, -- Rascals. --


But are you sure she is fast? -- Come -- lets even take of our Liquor peaceably
and lovingly, -- A Po-Pox take her for a --


Ay, Gape on till your Jaws crack.

Sirrah, how came this Fury here.


I know not, Sir.


Get you gone you Pimping Rogue, and let her down into the next Room through
the Trap-door, that Devise to escape Constable; -- if you untie her Sirrah,
I Will confound you worse than the Pox has done


Sure there has been some default, else my Guttae Soporiferae had charmed her
as fast as an Incantation


Now Gentlemen, since the Bawd of the house has informed of the Company, let us
batter the Windows, flash the Hangings, break the Chairs, and fight our selves
out in the Uproar


We'll rout 'em by Jove.


Hey for a scouring Frolic.


Now for the Onset; -- Come my Squires, follow your Knight,


Here let us demolish all before us, and rip the Hangings up in order.


I protest I Will make one with you my honest old rending Rogues; -- let us pull
down the house, and crush the Sinful Crew


Bravado! So so -- the Mistery's explained now; Toper, I give you Joy of your
stately branching head


-- Wuh, What Is the matter man?


Oh nothing, nothing; -- You are only Cuckolded, and by this same honest
Gentleman here


Marry, but I Am mistaken if he escape so; -- make him drink half a dozen
Bumpers for his pains


Ha ha, Seriously Mr. Toper bears it with the indifference of a Stoic.


Gentlemen, you are well disposed; but let me die, I don't understand you; -- I
had an Assignation here, with a Person of Quality, and expected her every
Minute; a Devil on your unseasonable Invasion, It Is at least a hundred Broads
out of my way


But why did you abscond, we are all known to you?


-- You came poud'ring up Stairs with such Authority, I was afraid you had been
a Legion of Bailiffs


But why did you not appear upon acquaintance with our Voices?


Why' Pox I thought you would oblige me to Drink, and my Palate is so
Debauched, since my last Randezvous with my Lord, that any liquid thing's a
Potion to me


All these Wheadles will not take; -- But to show you how tender I am of these
Amorous Miscarriages, I Will prevail upon the Cuckold and Company to leave you to
the Complement of your Intrigue. -- Come, Gentlemen, let us Troop


Wuh, the Bo-bowl is not out yet Man.


Do but you get rolled down Stairs, and you shall have as much as you can
swill. -- Come, it is late


Now must I go and enlarge my unfortunate Herion that suffers in Limbo; then
our twisted Souls shall relish all the boundless Joys, that Passion endeared by
Disappointment can contribute

The Drunkard is the kind contented Ass,
He never Resents, but when you take his Glass.

WHat a shame's the matter with me trow? -- I am as Sick as a Horse, and I Am
sure I had not above six Quarts 'i my Guts -- Foh -- here is the strangest taste
'i my Mouth methinks Flush find me not out and unkennel me: -- Marry, I Will 'een
take a comfortable Nap; then rise up Fresh, and slay 'em every Soul


Are you sure Sweetheart we may be secure here.


-- Ay Madam; -- He, they call Toper, is lying dead Drunk under the Parlor
Table, I have newly bolted him in; the rest tumble together in the same
condition above in the Garret


Here -- be you Sentinel below?


-- But did you tell the Company that some Body had released me; and that I was
gone, say you


Ay, and they believed it.


But did not they suspect us, think you?


-- No, no, -- I made every thing clear.


-- Now let me tell you such a Transaction, as will heighten our Appetites to
the delicious Banquet


-- Mine, my lovely Angel is so eager already, that Artifice cannot improve it;
-- I am all Heat and Youth; my Eyes tremble, my Breast pants and throws; my
Nerves frisk, my Breath quivers, and a kindly generous Fire thrills in my Veins


-- Whilst I am ready to receive your kindest Tenders with an equal warmth.


Let Us hasten therefore, to let loose our bounding Passions to their absolute
Range and Forage


I am all Compliance.


Now my Angel, let me lead thee to the Stage of love, to act the softest part
that ever was uttered in broken sighs


Ha! my Husband! --


-- Pish Man -- the Cup does not stand at me -- What -- are you here
Sweetheart


Thou Eternal Sot! -- I Will smother-thee in the Bed-Cloaths*


Are you here! -- Come, you shall back with us.


Good honest dear Rogue excuse me; I am sleepy, I must to Bed.


What, you are afraid to disoblige your Complexion: Come prithee, we want a
fourth man till Toper be cast up


Heavens! -- I am discovered -- What shall I do?


-- Ay! -- The Lady Amazonia! -- Your Servant Madam, you will find out your
Husbands Haunts, I perceive


My Husband! I scorn it, I disown him; my Vow, in the Church was extorted from
me, and therefore it cannot oblige; I always hated him, and had rather throw my
self into the Embraces of a Leper, crusted all over with an uncurable Scurf,
than into his feeble Paralitick Arms


Marry Sweetheart, an you before that, I am as indifferent as your self; I had
rather lay my Lips to the Bung-hole of a Beer-Barrel, than Salute the finest of
your Sex, and there is for you again


No wonder she opposed your keeping Company with this rigor; it seems, that
too great plenty of Liquor, by a common kind of an Antiperistasis has dried
you; -- You are no farther useful then only to supply her with Money and
Opportunities; this is the Spark that relieves her with all other satisfactions


O Sir, much good may do you; you are happy, you have done more than ever I
could do; -- I could never please her, by my Faith


Thou! no truly I think not; I never loved to have you come yawning in my face,
and infesting me with your undecocted Lees of Ale, a Hogo strong enough to
fetch one out of a Fit of the Epilepsie; -- out upon it -- A Dray-horse were as
good a Bedfellow


Since your Ladyship's so very nice and delicate, I would advise you to avoid
these gross Hogo's, and devote your self altogether to this rare, calcined
Piece


O happy Opportunity! Gentlemen, you are Witnesses of her Infamy; Now let us go
and drink a dozen and consult over it about a Divorce


Ay, do, do, the Law will force you to allow me Alimony, but if it should not;
I have provided against all Extremities, and will never see you more; -- so a
fig for you -- Adieu Cuckold -- Come, my Dear. --


-- Prodigious Impudence!


Now my Ranting Rogues, let us go and Carous for Joy; now I may tipple
undisturbed, and be accountable to no body, ye Rascals; -- I Will never sleep
without a Roundlet of Brandy under my head, and when I die let overflowing Cups
drop tears of my Tomb -- Hah Boys --


Whilst my finger draws out a liquid Epitaph.


-- I shall love thee my old Trojan whilst I live, for trapaning my fierce Mrs.
Damnable thus; -- I shall faith. Flush We were forced to corrupt the Scout


-- But hark you mun -- Who is this same young Fellow that Sparks her thus?


The most White-liver'd Coward that ever took advantage; and a modish sort of a
Fop that is proud to be reckoned a Debauchee; -- He Will boast of his Venereal
Misfortunes, as so many Badges of Immortal Honor; and is as proud of a
Surgeon's Bill, as a Noble-man's Chaplain is of his Scarf; -- There Is not a
Great Person about Court, but is his Familiar, he pretends; Nor a taking
Nameless Pamphlet, which he does not adopt; -- He Is a --


So mun so, we have had enough of him here, let us discourse the rest of his
Qualities over a Glass; -- we'll go to Harry's, he is an honest Fellow, he will
broach a fresh run for us. -- Come, my Three Merry Boys, I shall be a Prince
indeed now. -- Hey Boys. --


Ay, and as absolute as your Draught; you shall be no more Homager to your
quondam Imperial Confort; we all swear Fealty to your Diadem; and Brimmers
shall be tendered as the Test; -- he that knocks under board shall be looked
upon as a Dissenter, and amerc't a Penal Groat the next Morning. -- Come. --


No wonder, Madam, your so soon this Morning, since this is almost the last
hour you can call your self your own; sure your Barbarous Uncle will revoke the
too severe Doom


No, -- he will urge it with all the rigor that lucre can provoke him to; -- he
knows my aversion forfeits half my Portion; but rather than contract a holy Vow
with any other than your dear self, I Will resign my life too, as a burden
without ye


Alas, my wondrous Creature, I am each way unworthy of so divine a Blessing; my
Fortunes are as mean as my Deserts; -- I have never a gaudy Coach graced with a
Rank of Lacquies to attend you; no supple French Valet calls me Master; I have
no swelling Titles, no fawning Parasites, no --


But Nature has enrich't you with Treasures more valuable, and though the Remains
of my divided Portion will not be an equivalent to your Merits, I am sure my
Passion will


How could I see the loveliest thing my heart ever knew, in a station beneath
her too great Worth and Beauty! No, my sole delight, rather than throw away
your Excellencies upon one would undo you, surrender your self up to your
Uncles Pleasure, and Marry the Party he designs* he is rich, and can support you
in an Equipage sultable to your Fortunes


And can you be so unkind as to leave me now after all your large Professions?
Pray don't; -- I cannot suffer whilst you are near me; we'll enjoy more Wealth
in one another's Love, than all the World can give; and when my slender
Competency fails, I can Limn, Embroyder, work Lace, and do a thousand such
pretty trifling Knacks


Thou Mirror of Perfections! Thy goodness has amazed me; -- When Love goes to
draw Seraphick Sweetness with a Cherub's Face, Thou shall sit to the little
Genius


-- Then since you think I deserve you, Why de'e grudge me the Present of your
self


Madam, I am no more my own; though I fear the gift may be fatal; if the visible
Universe were mine to give you, I should think it too mean a Jointure


Indeed Cousin, the Knight will be here presently; it is time now to settle your
looks into a Marriage Figure


-- Is Sir Popular resolved upon it still?


-- Ay, ay, -- he is unalterable in such a case as this; he expects you will
rather be nick't of your 5000 l. than consent to the Match


Some of these Aldermen have Consciences as large as their Charter.


I have not seen this Sir Credulous above thrice; the last time was yesterday,
and then I used him so, I thought he would have made no more Advances


Truly he resented your Carriage, after his way; I found him in a moderate Foam.


And did not you tell me he resolved I should die for him, rather than he would
prevent it with one kind word


-- I did so, and more then that, he was so sweet upon me I was half afraid he
would have Ladyfi'd me


-- Why such a change then?


Sir Popular was with him before five this Morning, and tampered with his
Fool-ship then, I fancy


They Are both very quick.


Ay, Matrimony now adays, requires as little warning as in the Playhouse;
where the Parties shall make the first Interview in the Fourth Act, and Marry
in the Fifth


Ladies, your humble Servant: this, I understand is like to be a jovial day.


Ay, Sir Popular intends to have a band of Fiddles toward the Evening.


No, no, he is for none of your Cat-gut Minstrelsie; but prithee Roman, What
pretenses can you have here now


Why truly Shuffle as many as ever I had.


Well, but this is no time for fooling; -- in short, the business is this --


Marries this very day, and is now at Sir Credulous Trinket's.


Very good.


He stays to bring Sir Credulous along with him, in order to Marry Madam
Juliana at the same time


But he shall find he cannot dispose of me.


But he can dispose of part of your Portion then, and that consideration will
satisfy him as well. -- Pray Madam, let me understand your Circumstances in
this case, it is possible I may relieve you


-- Prodigious Impudence!


Now my Ranting Rogues, let us go and Carous for Joy; now I may tipple
undisturbed, and be accountable to no body, ye Rascals; -- I Will never sleep
without a Roundlet of Brandy under my head, and when I die let overflowing Cups
drop tears of my Tomb -- Hah Boys --


Whilst my finger draws out a liquid Epitaph.


-- I shall love thee my old Trojan whilst I live, for trapaning my fierce Mrs.
Damnable thus; -- I shall faith


We were forced to corrupt the Scout.


-- But hark you mun -- Who is this same young Fellow that Sparks her thus?


The most White-liver'd Coward that ever took advantage; and a modish sort of a
Fop that is proud to be reckoned a Debauchee; -- He Will boast of his Venereal
Misfortunes, as so many Badges of Immortal Honor; and is as proud of a
Surgeon's Bill, as a Noble-man's Chaplain is of his Scarf; -- There Is not a
Great Person about Court, but is his Familiar, he pretends; Nor a taking
Nameless Pamphlet, which he does not adopt; -- He Is a --


So mun so, we have had enough of him here, let us discourse the rest of his
Qualities over a Glass; -- we'll go to Harry's, he is an honest Fellow, he will
broach a fresh run for us. -- Come, my Three Merry Boys, I shall be a Prince
indeed now. -- Hey Boys. --


Ay, and as absolute as your Draught; you shall be no more Homager to your
quondam Imperial Consort; we all swear Fealty to your Diadem; and Brimmers
shall be tendered as the Test; -- he that knocks under board shall be looked
upon as a Dissenter, and amerc't a Penal Groat the next Morning. -- Come. --


No wonder, Madam, your so soon this Morning, since this is almost the last
hour you can call your self your own; sure your Barbarous Uncle will revoke the
too severe Doom


No, -- he will urge it with all the rigor that lucre can provoke him to; -- he
knows my aversion forfeits half my Portion; but rather than contract a holy Vow
with any other than your dear self, I Will resign my life too, as a burden
without ye


Alas, my wondrous Creature, I am each way unworthy of so divine a Blessing; my
Fortunes are as mean as my Deserts; -- I have never a gaudy Coach graced with a
Rank of Lacquies to attend you; no supple French Valet calls me Master; I have
no swelling Titles, no fawning Parasites, no --


But Nature has enrich't you with Treasures more valuable, and though the Remains
of my divided Portion will not be an equivalent to your Merits, I am sure my
Passion will


How could I see the loveliest thing my heart ever knew, in a station beneath
her too great Worth and Beauty! No, my sole delight, rather than throw away
your Excellencies upon one would undo you, surrender your self up to your
Uncles Pleasure, and Marry the Party he designs; he is rich, and can support you
in an Equipage suitable to your Fortunes


And can you be so unkind as to leave me now after all your large Professions?
Pray don't; -- I cannot suffer whilst you are near me; we'll enjoy more Wealth
in one another's Love, than all the World can give; and when my slender
Competency fails, I can Limn, Embroyder, work Lace, and do a thousand such
pretty trifling Knacks


Thou Mirror of Perfections! Thy goodness has amazed me; -- When Love goes to
draw Seraphick Sweetness with a Cherub's Face, Thou shall sit to the little
Genius


-- Then since you think I deserve you, Why de'e grudge me the Present of your
self


Madam, I am no more my own; though I fear the gift may be fatal; if the visible
Universe were mine to give you, I should think it too mean a Jointure


Indeed Cousin, the Knight will be here presently; it is time now to settle your
looks into a Marriage Figure


-- Is Sir Popular resolved upon it still?


-- Ay, ay, -- he is unalterable in such a case as this; he expects you will
rather be nick't of your 5000 l. than consent to the Match


Some of these Aldermen have Consciences as large as their Charter.


I have not seen this Sir Credulous above thrice; the last time was yesterday,
and then I used him so, I thought he would have made no more Advances


Truly he resented your Carriage, after his way; I found him in a moderate Foam.


And did not you tell me he resolved I should die for him, rather than he would
prevent it with one kind word


-- I did so, and more then that, he was so sweet upon me I was half afraid he
would have Ladyfi'd me


-- Why such a change then?


Sir Popular was with him before five this Morning, and tampered with his
Fool-ship then, I fancy


They Are both very quick.


Ay, Matrimony now adays, requires as little warning as in the Playhouse;
where the Parties shall make the first Interview in the Fourth Act, and Marry
in the Fifth


Ladies, your humble Servant: this, I understand is like to be a jovial day.


Ay, Sir Popular intends to have a band of Fiddles toward the Evening.


No, no, he is for none of your Cat-gut Minstrelsie; but prithee Roman, What
pretenses can you have here now


Why truly Shuffle as many as ever I had.


Well, but this is no time for fooling; -- in short, the business is this --


Marries this very day, and is now at Sir Credulous Trinket's.


Very good.


He stays to bring Sir Credulous along with him, in order to Marry Madam
Juliana at the same time


But he shall find he cannot dispose of me.


But he can dispose of part of your Portion then, and that consideration will
satisfy him as well. -- Pray Madam, let me understand your Circumstances in
this case, it is possible I may relieve you


Thus Sir; -- 5000 l. was left me by an Uncle his Elder Brother, upon condition
I should consent to Marry the first Match that Sir Popular offered me;
otherwise, the Legacy was to fall to him, provided it could appear, that he had
only propounded my Fortune, and no indirect means to himself


It Is exactly as I represented it to you yesterday.


-- Ay, and observe what use I have made on it already; -- you must know, he has
shamed Sir Credulous out of a 1000 l. this Morning; and by my procurement, has
quitted all his future Claims to Madam Juliana's Legacy by a General Release,
which is now in Sir Credulous's Custody


-- Well, -- but Sir Credulous will re-deliver it, I suppose, upon the breach
of the Match


-- You shall hear -- I have persuaded him to present it to the Lady, after her
consent; as a means to work upon her Ingenuity, by making her Mistress of her
own Fortunes


So she must seem to give her assent.


Ay, Madam, be sure you sweeten him up as if you were his own; I Will contrive to
Spirit him out of the way, till Sir Popular be Married, I Will warrant you


There will be no need on it; she may absent her self, after it is in her
Possession


But de'e see; -- I am interested in Sir Popular's Marriage, and must endeavor
to maintain a plausible understanding betwixt Sir Credulous and him, till the
Ceremony in the Church be consummated; -- in short, I have some Money due from
Sir Popular for a secret service


I partly apprehend you; -- so that, you would secure Sir Credulous, till you
had received your Sum, least his disturbance might be of ill consequence to you


Ay, ay, -- Now, Sir Popular having a 1000 l. by him, he will discharge me
without any farther trouble, rather than have me expose him


Besides, -- his contracting with Sir Credulous upon such an account, though
indirectly, will invalidate his Title, by the Condition of the Will


But prithee don't you be seen here, till you receive a Summons from me; --
I Will to the Bridge, and order her to detain Sir Popular, till the other Knight
be disposed off


This Mr. Shuffle is such another; he will overreach my Uncle if it be possible
to do it


Ay, indeed, there is a hopeful prospect of circumventing him now; but it will
be convenient for the better circulation of the business, that I absent my self


My heart, you will remember the faith that is betwixt us.


How unseasonably you remind me; -- Can the Tenant forget the Service he holds
all his Lands by? Or a Beggar the needy moving Cant that sustains him? But you
could not doubt me sure; your Idea Sollicits for you, and never leaves me; it
distracts my thoughts, and breaks my slumbers; I must rove about like a
restless Ghost till I see you again


-- And when must I expect you, my Thoughts?


-- About an hour hence I hope; -- till then the whole Hierarchy protect you.


I fancy Cousin this love is a pretty pleasant Babble; there is such dying Leers,
such unaccountable Gestures, such soft confusion amongst you. -- Methinks I
could wish for a little experience of that antic Foolery, only for an
opportunity to laugh at my self


Could not Mr. Bravado bring you acquainted with it?


No, -- He has a Quarrel against me.


-- Some Love Skirmish.


-- He Swears, he will never see me again, which Oath I hope he will observe.


Does he suspect the Humor you past upon him Yesterday?


I almost fancy so; -- some had been fooling with the Visards, and so
Bug-bear'd both of 'em out of the Closet, else I had trick't 'em neatly


But you must leave these Merriments now; -- our new Aunt's severity will not
dispense with 'em


-- We shall be worse pestered now with a Religious Din, than ever; there'll be
such screwing of Faces, and drawing of Sentences through the Nose, amongst the
Assembly. -- Well, if she don't prove a right one in the conclusion, I am
mistaken


Kins-woman, I have brought you the Gentleman I design for your Husband, and I
conceive he may be a proportionable Match for you; -- Therefore prepare for
Marriage this very day


-- The notice is very short, Sir.


Let this be the day Lady by all means; the Asterisms are in a very amicable
aspect, and seem to be our Genial Torches; -- if we should decline this
Invitation, perhaps their future position might continue malevolent out of
revenge


Kinswoman, I charge you be advised by me, and be joined forthwith; He Is a good
man, and has a comfortable Fortune, I conceive


Sir, I never knew how to disobey you.


In earnest, very meekly answered; -- Well, I have some Negotiations to look
after; after I have attended these, we'll all go together, and dispatch the
pious Affair. -- Hem --


Then Sir, you have forgot your Asseverations to me?


-- Seriously, Sweet Madam, I was assailed with such violence, in this fair
Ladies behalf, by my worthy Friend Sir Popular that I am not empowered to
disoblige him


So rather then be uncivil to him, you will do injustice to her; -- -- O good
Sir, let not me in the least be the cause of such an Immortality


Fie Cousin; -- here is a coldness indeed, and such approaching Joys in
prospect! -- Believe me, there is no other engagement betwixt us, than the
obligation of common Civility


Indeed, Fair Lady, I must confess, your Cousin was not thought unworthy of
those respectful Tenders you neglected yesterday; but upon second thoughts, I
did believe your ill-advis'd Behavior to be the effects of your Modesty, and
do therefore remit your miscarriage


'Twere pity Sir, to trespass on so good a Nature.


Seriously, most excellent Being, Choler never predominates with me, I can
allow for Sublunary Failures


-- Or else you would Massacr'd Bravado yesterday.


He Is an abusive Gentleman, and did impose a little too much upon my Mediocrity.


-- Have you seen him since, Sir?


Seriously, fine Lady, no; -- I was Arrested by a Gang of good Fellows; they
would have me make one with 'em; -- 'Twas past Ten of the Clock when I left
'em, I could not endure it any longer; there was such Drinking, and storming,
and scuffling; -- Here lay a Hat, there a Wig, here one lay supine, there
another; -- I profess you might have seen as various a Horchpotch as in a Giblet
Pie


But don't you find your self indisposed this Morning, Sir?


The Emulsion has cooled me a little, but I am cloudy still; else I had
invented some uncommon curiosity, for the Illustration of our Nuptial Solemnity


-- Some Mask, or Fireworks?


No, no, these are dull -- A pair of Turtles supporting a Pageant that
represents the Solitary Phoenix, first warbling out an Epithalamium, and then
expiring in a Spicy Flame, would be a high Conceit


You have Traveled, Sir, I fancy.


O very far, and altogether in search of Nature, which I found at last in
spite of all her Mazes, and am now improving her into an Art


Is it possible, Sir?


Questionless; -- I am now teaching a Magpy to discourse in form, a Snail to
walk erect, a Sammon to become Amphibious, and graze in Medows; -- In short, I
am teaching Nature to be unnatural


And has wrought the Experiment upon himself.


-- You Will out-doe the Greshamites.


O, they are a Phegmatick Society.


-- Sure your Education has been costly, Sir Credulous?


Costly! -- Ay, I think it has: -- So much at Amsterdam for learning to eat a
Lobster; so much at Paris for mounting a Kite, so much at Madrid for scourging
a Top --


-- Your own Country might have accomplished you with these Perfections.


O you are much mistaken, fair Madam; -- your Foreigners are more polite a
great deal; there is not a Curiosity Master in England, let me tell you so much


Why, Sir, is the breaking up of a Lobster a Curiosity?


A choice one believe me -- But now for my more solid and substantial Sciences;
-- There Is first --


May I give you Joy, Sir Credulous?


You may antidate your Salutation, if you please.


-- Now there is some appearance of a Delivery from him, and all his Odious
Impertinence


We'll leave you with this Gentleman, Sir; -- your Brides Dress must be refined
a little


Have you presented your Lady with Sir Popular's discharge yet?


Seriously I had forgot.


-- O fie, -- run after her with it -- quick --


-- I forced it into her hand; -- she expects it is some Song, I Will warrant you;
-- She loves me extremely, I knew the vertueo' the Philter was irresistible


Udds me! Now you talk of Philters; -- Who de'e think did me the honor to take
notice of me this Morning


Who, pray?


-- The famed Astrologer, Rabbie Nathan, born a Jew, but bred a Chaldean for
some time; -- you must be acquainted with his Fame certainly


O Sir, who can be a Stranger to it? Would our Personal Acquaintance were as
great


He Is at present hard by; I Will send the Footboy to him to desire his Company
here


We should have sent in more formality to such a Personage as he is.


-- He Is a most obliging Man in his way; -- I am confident he will come, if he be
not gone to the Synagogue; -- it seems there is some Jewish Rite performed
there to day


Has he any English?


-- Yes, but almost as broken as his Nation.


-- I have tome little smattering of Hebrew, but none of Chaldy.


No! why the Radix is altogether the same; Chaldy was only the more Courtly
Dialect


-- But is his English intelligible?


-- Yes, only a little harsh and broad. -- He Is here --


Hail Rabbie Shoffle.


All Hail most Honorable Prophet.


-- I am hoonly a Magus haan dee Divine by Causes naatouraal.


Mr. Rabby, I shall think my self highly honored, if your Reverence will
condescend to Dine with me


Nay, I neever eat with the hun-circumcis'd; I smell no Christian Pork.


-- If this Rogue don't forget his Lesson, we shall have success.


I Swear, thou haast ha mole hin the hollow of thy haam.


Seriously I have so; is it his skill in Palmistry that directs him, think we?


Thou do purpose to take to thy self a Wife before the sixth hour.


I profess, a most Incomparable Man.


Nay, nay, -- The Plaanets, aan the Fowls of the Aar, aan the Flaame, aan the
Smook, aan the Entrails, aan the Shears, aan the Ompha do forbid thee


Ay! -- Then my Calculation was not exact.


-- Rabbie's Infallible; -- there has been some mistake in your Scheme.


Louk even this Glass, aan thou shaalt behold the Revolution of thy days; It
waas the South-sayer Uzzi's, whou waas ouf the Tribe ouf Lettle Benjamin


I profess Rabby, I can scarce discern any thing.


-- That ees because thou waants my Vestments; cloth thy saalf even them, aan
thy Fortune shaall appear; they were Consecrated when I sojourned in the Saandy
Desert, aand have a Proognosticating Quality


I beseech you most Reverend Rabbie, let me try 'em. -- A Profound Man!


puts off his Coat and Breeches gives'em to Quack, puts on his Breeches and
Gown


Come, Sir Credulous I Will help you to hold it steady.


I profess, I can discern nothing, but a kind of a glimmering Confusion, --
Most Excellent Rabby


Ha! -- What now! -- He Is Vanished, as I live.


-- Heavens shield us! -- Indeed I thought the House shook. -- Strange! --


Your Clothes are Vanished with him too; -- Are not they?


Ha. -- No, -- I see 'em there --


Ay! -- My Breeches are light, methinks -- Heavens! -- He Is gone with a Hundred
Pieces, besides Medals and other Movables


It cannot be sure; -- marry he is a Jew indeed.


-- A Pox Rabby him, would there were a Hogs-pudding in his Belly.


-- See what he has left you in Exchange. in his Prognosticating Pockets.


-- What Is here --

-- At the Ignoramus-Head in Cabal-Corner, near Treason-street, -- Lodges the
much noted Astrologer, Rabbie Nathan the Chaldean, he Resolves Questions,
Calculates Nativities, and performs other Secrets, and is to be spoke with at
his own Lodgings, from Nine till Eleaven, by all such as will make trial of his
Art


Here Is a Cheat! -- We'll have it Recorded at Filchers-Hall amongst the Memoirs
of the Pick-pockets


Is there no way think you to countermine this Typical Rogue?


Your best way will be to go directly to Mr. Zeal's the Constables, you
remember where I went in, when we parted the other day


Ay, Very well.


Charge him along with you to Rabby's Lodgings, and if you find him there, take
him up


But I shall be too late for my other concern.


-- No, no, Rabby does not lodge far off; -- It Is true, the place is Obscure,
but Mr. Zeal's acquainted there, he will find it out -- Make haste, never stay to
alter your Habit


I approve of your advice, and will about it with -- all Expedition.


I must help him to his Movables again, else the Humor would look a little
pilfering, and base


We conveyed your Conjurer out a*doors* -- What is he, pray Sir?


A Quacking Bill-poster by profession; I was a little indebted to him, and Sir
Credulous, I thank him has discharged the trifle


How have you disposed of the poor Innocent Knight Sir?


I have furbisht him out in the Garb of a Grecian (though he believes it is the
Habit of an Hebrew, and have directed him to a Constable that will secure him,
I Am sure


Without any pretense?


You must know, I prepossest him this Morning, that there was a Jesuit, one
Father Wildfire, about Town, and that I was to be in Company with him about
ten of the Clock, and would endeavor some occasion to betray him into his
power


So the Constable will have him before Authority?


No, I advised him to secure him till I came; -- The design on it was, to get
Sir Popular Married in the mean time


You need not have given your self so much trouble, -- It seems, my Uncle was
impatient, he is gone to Church already, and the Ceremony almost over by this
time


Happy News! -- I Will away and rescue Sir Credulous, and be here again
presently. -- Your Servant Ladies


Truly I am very much obliged to this Gentleman for his Activity upon my
account


I Will swear he is an Ingenious, good Natured Man; have you not observed how he
would rail against the times with Sir Popular, and be so serious and concerned
all the time; then turn his back, and fashion a Treacherous Smile; -- Well,
methinks I could fancy his Humor


So Cousin, you are coming on I find; this Approbation of his Humor, is
preliminary to a Passion for his Person


Indeed, a bold conclusion from such slender premises; -- Is that your
Love-Sophistry


'Twill be convenient, Madam, that you withdraw; Sir Credulous is coming up.


You have made a quick return, Sir Credulous.


-- My Entertainment did not Invite me to stay, I Will promise you.


-- What was the matter pray?


-- Why, I was almost Murdered amongst 'em; -- The Constable was not within,
and when I desired one of his Prentices to direct me to Rabby's Lodgings, he
said there was no such place in the City, but houted at me, and exposed me to
the fury of the Rabble, that scowr'd after me with Bones and broken Bricks, and
if I had not most nimbly approach't this Asylum, they had certainly demolisht
me


-- Indeed their behavior was a little rude to a person of your Quality.


-- Seriously I think it is my fortune to fall into the hands of Jews to day;
they tell me below, that Sir Popular is gone to perform his Conjugal Rite


Ay, and Madam Juliana too.


And I here? -- It cannot be. -- Pray, explain your meaning.


-- Why then, she is most certainly another Man's Wife.


-- My Lady another Man's Wife say you?


-- Ay, indeed; -- and therefore I persuade my self, that this practice was
agreed upon betwixt Rabby and Sir Popular, to hurry you into a confusion, and
so present him with an opportunity of stealing away to Church without ye


Ay, ay, there lay the Intrigue, -- I find then Sir Popular has abused me.


If I deal ingeniously with you Sir Credulous, believe it to be the effects of
my good Wishes; therefore to be plain; you have exposed your self so
notoriously by doting upon every worthless trifle, and busying your Brain
about such odd Fantastic Queries, that every needy Sharping Rook discovers
your blind side, and serves his ends upon you


I hope you will not condemn my Emulation for knowledge.


-- First, recompose your Mind, and endeavor to know more of the World; leave
your nice Contemplations, and observe the Public; you will soon discover that my
advice was seasonable, take my word


I profess to you, I do a little fear, I have been imposed upon of late; I Will
therefore scrutinize into the Manners of Men, frequent Gaming Houses,
Bowling-Greens, and all such places of Concourse


Continue your Resolution.


But how shall I proceed with Sir Popular, I would have him notify'd?


Come, I Will direct you.


How do I become my Honor Wench?


-- Wench! I must now be Mistress Faith, and your Ladiship's Woman.


But did you observe with what solemnity Mr. Shuffle gave me Joy?


Ay; -- I Will swear it happened well of his side, he has got 500 l. in Gold of
Sir Popular


-- I was afraid, I should have been discovered upon it, only he helped me well
out with it, by saying I could not call in any of my own, and therefore he
procured such a Sum for me


Madam, I give your Ladyship Joy.


-- Wah they say yea'r dubbed a Lady to day, Good Gullman, by my Saul Ise glad
to hear't, maury mickle Glee may you have on it, that is the warst that I wad ye


Upon my Honor good people, I don't know you.


-- Ah well-a-day, what have you forgotten Honest Robbin your and Yorkshire
Carrier, that brought ye up all your Deft Lasses


-- Faith, give the Poor Man 6 d. and set him away.


-- Maury but I mun have mare than 6 d. or 6 l. outhor; yea owe me for Nell
Bounce, and Bessy Nessle still, I reet weel rememmer; an like your Worship


How! -- My Lady entertaining two Distressed French Protestants! -- These are
not people of fit Quality to be seen with her I conceive; -- but I Will over-hear
the occasion on it


-- Upon my honor poor Wretch, I cannot understand thee.


-- Lac-a-day, Wah dinnot yea know Robbin that used to furnish you with fresh
Ware? -- I have even the Bonniest Lass at my Inn now, for your Worship's
purpose, that ever went Rigledy, Rigledy


What Is this! -- Lass, and fresh Ware? -- Would all things be right.


-- Sure good people you are mistaken someway; I am not the person you should
address to; -- therefore pray walk down, your Company is a disparagement to my
Quality


I commend her, she will not make her self little.


-- Pray Madam don't think to put us off so; we have forborne you long enough;
therefore pray pay me the 5 l. that is due to me


For what Sir?


-- For my diligence in the execution of love business; you know, at first I
was only employed to fetch and carry; but after, upon experience of my Agility
of Body, and satisfactory Dimensions, you were pleased to advance me to your
highest station; -- and I think I behaved my self like a faithful Pains-taker
till you left off Bawding


Ha! -- What Is that you say Sir? -- My Lady a Bawd? -- Speak -- I command you
speak


-- I Will speak for him; and can assure you, you are Married to as great a Bawd as
ever graced Cart, with no other Portion than Disease and Scandal


I die, I faint, -- Thou Devil, -- Thou Damned Whore, -- I Will murder thee
presently; -- Where Is my Gutlace, -- My Dagger, -- My Pocket-Flail. -- Oh, oh.
--


Maary honest Friend, if she be your Wife, I mun luke of ye for my Silver; she
had good sound ware of me, weel I wate, and sea good Morn to you


It Is pity Sir, to let the poor honest Carrier suffer; if you should chance to
live together, and keep a Public House; he will import another Argosie, and
restock your Lady with Merchandise


O thou base, insulting, Treacherous Rogue; this was thy contrivance, I have
Treason against thee, and will impeach, and hang thee, thou Dog


Now you remind me on it, I have something against your Good Worship too, Most
Noble Patriot. -- Here -- Sergeants --


-- Sergeants do your Office.


We Arrest you in the King's Name, at the Suit of Sir Credulous Trinkett in an
Action of a Thousand Pound


-- S'heart, has this Devil here served me with an Action;

O my Life, my Name! -- Thou Barbarous Rascal, I will tear these Eyes from that
Perfidious Skull


-- Officers, away with your Prisoner, and take care he don't do Justice on
himself, and hang himself up in his own Chain


Ha, ha, -- His Nuptials are Solemnized with a Boon Grace methinks.


Good Lord, Mr. Shuffle, Sir Popular's in a wonderful great Agony yonder, it
seems he is Married to some lewd Woman and is Arrested


Ay, indeed, your old Patroon is under great Affliction, a grosser Villain
never headed Faction to my knowledge, he only startled you with groundless
fears, to gloze and gull you out of Plentiful Contributions; then lavish 'em
out upon Strumpets


-- Bless us! -- Truly it appears so now.


-- Plainly, he has a 100 l. of mine in his hand, for maintenance of the
Liberty of the Subject, -- -- Ah wo'es me! --


-- And 200 of mine, by fair Yea and Nay; -- I have no other Security, than a
Promise of re-payment in Lands. -- Ah --


Indeed Gentlemen, you have a hopeful Bargain on it: This was your Darling
Demagogue that you revered


-- I must confess, I have been a Rascal amongst you, and have concorded with
Sir Popular, to baffle, poison, and seduce you* but now my needs are a little
mollify'd, and I do therefore recant, and am resolved never to have recourse to
these Consecrated Frauds again


-- Good Heavens! -- How strangely we have been deluded Neighbors -- Let Us
even leave Conventickling, take the Oaths, and go to Church


Now my Friend, go and make your self Master of Madam Juliana and Fortunes; I
think Sir Popular's Pretenses to 'em are disabl'd


-- I have reason to esteem thee a Friend indeed* That has neglected thy own
Interest to serve me


I hope we have contracted such a Tie, as Jealousy can never violate, or
necessity betray


And now let us confirm it by Alliance; -- Madam, you have not vowed Celibacy I
am confident. -- She will consider the Appurtinances of Wit and Good Humor


Truly such a Fortune would clear my Debts, redeem my Credit, and help me to
some Honorable Employment

Of late, like some Fat Meteor I Have blazed,
And with false flagrant Zeal, the Crowd have 'maz'd;
But now these Rays shall center in a Star,
Which for the future shall be regular.


