DOctor, Good Morrow, What News do you hear about the Plot? who are taken up?
who are Evidences? are there any Persons of Quality concerned in it, do you hear


I mind no Plots not I, but a Plot to get good store of Patients, if I can, but
I think they never were so Healthy


So, what? you seem to speak a little concerned, and look as if something had
vexed you, what is the Matter Doctor


Let me tell you, Mr. Trueman, I have been a Physician in London almost Forty
Years, and I never knew so little Business to do in all my Lifetime. It Is a
Damnable Healthy Town grown since I knew it first. I have known the Time when I
could go out and pick up 10 or 12 l. in a Morning, come Home to Dinner and
emptied, so out again after to Replenish. But I am sure the Times now are so
hard that if my good Father had not conveniently stepped aside, I could no more
have bragged of living by my Wit, as some Men do, than the D -- s of N -- can of
her Chastity


Pray Doctor, not too severe. Why Damnable Healthy? Do you wish the Nation a
Plague, or an Epidemick Sickness, purely to promote your own private Interest?
Such Expressions, methinks, become not Men of your Education, nor indeed savor
much of Religion


What do you talk of that to a Physician? I thought you had known the World
better than so. Is not every Body for their own Interest, be Religion what it
will? Does not the greatest Pretenders to Holiness cheat with Yea, and Nay, as
often (if not oftener) as he that says Dam me it cost me so much, when he knows
that he Lies at the same time he Swears? and all this to promote a Trade. All
the Excuse being, a Man must live, Customers always expect some Abatement of
what we ask. Nay I have known an Apothecary set down 4 s. 6 d. for a Specific
Bolus, when it has been about a Farthing-worth of Crab's-eyes in a little
London-Treacle


Ay, Doctor, that may be. That Is 4 s. for the Word Specific, and 6 d. for the
Bolus. Pretty cheap on my Word. But this is not to the purpose to explain what
you mean by Damnable Healthy


Why, Sir, are you always teazing me to explain my meaning? Then if you will
have it, I Will tell you. You know that every Body wishes well to themselves; now
Health is the greatest Enemy to our Interest and Profit that can be


But ye take care sometimes to subdue that Enemy of yours, I believe.


Good Mr. Trueman don't make Reflections upon our Profession, when the
Apothecaries after a long Siege have battered down the Walls, then the World
says we destroyed the Town; what reason is there in this


Troth very little, I confess, if it be so; but however I hope, Doctor, you
will not be angry at a Jest


No, no. But to go on. I call that Damnable Health (tho I know it bears another
Sense) when the Sickness is not great enough to require the skill of a
Physician, but every ignorant Apothecary assumes the Cure, and pretends to know
more than the learned Physician of us all


What then, you would not have the Apothecaries recover Peoples Health? Would
you


Yes, but I would, by all means, only let 'um do their part in their own
Sphere, and within their own Limits or Bounds. For when Men have no lawful
Authority to Act, that Action may be called Damnable, that is, such an Action
as may justly be condemned by all Wisemen. Now it is plain that the
Apothecaries have no lawful Commission to do what they do often, and
consequently they may be justly condemned for doing such an Action. So that if
the Patient dies under such an one's Hands, the Law judges him a bold Empyrick;
and all Men of Reason, the Patient a Fool, especially if he were able to pay


Nay, Doctor, now you are grown Grave. We will let this Nicety of examining
Words alone; I see you are angry with the Apothecaries for invading your
Province. However, you have one Comfort left that your Good Father Broke, and
left you an Estate


Broke, Sir? how do you mean?


How; why did not you say just now, had not your Good Father stepped aside.
What Is that but broke? And so compounded his Debts to support you with the
Cheat


Truly Mr. Trueman you run a little too fast now. When I said my Father stepped
Aside, I meant, into his Grave, and left me some Estate


O, Sir, I beg your Pardon, I thought you had meant otherwise, because I hear
all your whole Estate is mortgaged to pay the old Knights Heir some Thousand's
of Pounds


What he has on my Estate, I Will not tell you; but I can tell you that he has no
more on it than what I am able to pay, tho perhaps more than I am willing at
the rate of such unreasonable Demands. Come let us talk no more of that, we had
Rogues and Knaves for our Ancestors, who brought us in Debt, that is all can be
said. You know the old Proverb, Happy is that Family that has no Whores or
Rogues belonging to it


Come in, Come in, we were no sooner talking of Rogues but enters an
Apothecary: Prithee, Tom, where have been that thou come with the
Accoutrements of thy Profession thus


Truly, Sir, I have been at your House; your Lady was not very well to Day, and
she sent for me to -- to -- to -- Canonade her Posteriors: You know by my
Instrument what I have been doing. And now I have done that, I have prescribed
a Specific Bolus for her to take after it


A Pox of your Specific Bolus, and You. My Wife is never well but when she is
taking Physic, I think. Prithee, Mr. Gallypot, what will be the Charges of
this Morning's work


O, Sir, but little, you never stand upon that I am sure for your Ladies good;
she must also have a Pearl Julep, and an Anodyne Draught: and then I hope
she will be very speedily well again


A Pox had you with your cramp Names. Tell me what all this will cost? I am
sure I left her well not above an Hour ago


[ Starts back.] Good Sir, be not so unreasonably Passionate, and I Will tell
you. Sir, The Pearl Julep will be Six Shillings Eight Pence; Pearls being dear
since our Clipped Money was current. The Specific Bolus 4 s. and 6 d. I never
reckon less; my Master in Leadenhall-street never set down less, be it what it
would. The Antihysterick Glyster, 3 s. and 6 d. (a Common One is but 2 s. 6 d.)
and the Anodyne Draught 3 s. 4 d. That Is all, Sir, a small matter and please
you, Sir, for your Lady. My Fee is what you please Sir. All the Bill is but
Eighteen Shillings


Very fine, In Faith, do you make a But at it? I do suppose to be Genteel, I must
give you a Crown


If your Worship please; I take it to be a fair, and an honest Bill.


Do you so indeed? But I wish you had called a Doctor, perhaps he would have
advised her to have forbore taking any thing, as yet at least, so I had saved
13 s. in my Pocket


O Sir, call a Doctor; we never do that, at least very, rarely till we have
done all we can with the Patients: And when we cannot tell what to do with 'um,
then we oblige a Doctor and call him in


Very fairly confessed, Mr. Gallypot, I believe you never spoke a truer Thing
in your Life. I am glad to hear your Confession to Mr. Trueman; and am very
sorry the State does not think fit to handle you a little for your unreasonable
Practices. I see you have Impudence enough to demand a Fee too, but do wonder
you should do it before my Face


Truly, Doctor, I did not mind you. However, I hope, I may take what Gentlemen
please to give me


Pleased to give you? Faith, I am ashamed to see Gentlemen so imposed upon by
ye Mrs. Doctors


Troth, Doctor, that was a Lucky Thought of yours, we are but Mrs. tho they
commonly call us Doctors. And now you put me in mind of it, ha'nt you seen my
Paper, set out March 2, 1695? wherein I make above half the College of
Physicians Masters, tho they are called Doctors among themselves


How! Mr. Gallypot; How do you do that? That Is a Trick and an half, pray let us
know it


O Lord, Mr. Trueman, cannot you guess how? If the Doctor pleases, I Will tell you
immediately


With all my Heart, if you make it out, I believe you will be a Man of
admirable Sagacity


Faith so you will, for I cannot readily guess, tho I am sometime as good at
guessing as another, if you can prove that they are no Doctors, who have taken
Degrees in the Universities, then you will certainly be in the right


Prove? I can infallibly prove more than that if I once undertake it. You must
know that I own none to be Doctors but those who have regularly done their
Exercises for Physic in one of our Universities; that is plain. But hold a
little, here is my Brother Pestle of King Street coming in, he can be a Witness
of the whole. I Gad, I have so ferreted and humbled 'um, that I Will spoil their
Association against the Apothecaries; for they have Associated by the Names of
Doctors, and I Will prove above half of 'um to be but Masters at best

Brother Pestle, I am glad you are come in, in this nick of time; I was just a
telling Mr. Trueman how I have humbled the College of Physicians, has'nt thee
read my Paper of Queries I put out March 2, 1695? Do not see how smartly and
finely I jerk 'um? Hey


Ay Brother, I must needs say you have done your part very handsomely, tho I
don't hear any Body took much Notice of what you said


True, that may be. And do'sn't that show their want of Understanding the more?
None but a Block-head would slight such smart Reflections. O that I could think
of a short Saying in the Classicks relating to this Matter. I vow 'twas a smart
one, I remember it in English


What was it Mr. Gallypot? cannot I help you out? what did it relate too?


It Is a Saying in Latin, all which I have now almost forgot, except
Physick-Latin; I remember 'twas a piece of a Verse out of Tacitus, or
Suetonius, I cannot tell which


Come, come, Mr. Gallypot, let your two Poets alone, perhaps you may think of
Ovid, or Horace


Ay really so 'twas, but it is a long while ago, so I had forgot their Names on
a sudden


What! perhaps it was. Pudet haec opprobria nobis, and dici potuisse, and non
potuisse refelli


I troth that is the very Saying. I thank you that you have helped me out. Now
is that not plain to the purpose? Horace was a fine Fellow, I vow he was Mr.
Trueman. Tho I don't well know whether Ovid, or he said it; yet they were both
fine Fellows


Ay so they were, I believe, Brother. But I am in haste, and must go to blood
an Eminent Citizen in Towerstreet. So, I am in haste


Hold a little, Mr. Pestle, one Word with you before you go. Blood, Mr. Pestle!
I thought you had been an Apprentice to an Apothecary


So I was, Sir, but I thank God, and my own Industry, I have by my Diligence
perfectly acquired the whole Knowledge of Surgery. I Phlebotomize as well as the
best Surgeon in London, tho I say it that should not say it. I Will tell you how
I came to be so dextrous in performing that Operation in particular


Well now am I fairly hope up, between two of ye, one endeavoring to prove all
his Doctors to be Masters, and the other showing his dexterity in Phlebotomizing,
as he calls it. What a Pox, were not both of ye bred Apothecaries


Sir, pray be not so passionate. Yes we were both of us bred Apothecaries. But
Knowledge --


Is Dr. Pestle here?


Yes he is. What do you come from Sir Thomas in Tower-street? What does he want
to be let blood immediately


Yes, Sir, he does, and stays for you.


Good Lad, Well, I Will come presently. [ Exit. Messeng.] Now I know he will be
blooded by no Body else; I have persuaded him that all the Surgeons are
Blunderers, as to Bleeding. Sir Thomas is a Good-natured Gentleman. He believes
that no Body understands the curing a Disease, or an Ulcer, or indeed any
Thing, but an Apothecary. Faith he is one of the honestest Gentlemen in England


You make him a fine Gentleman indeed. Honest! For no other reason as I see but
because he suffers himself to be made a Fool of by such as you


But, Mr. Trueman, assure your self, he is a Man of very good Sense: All the
Apothecaries in Town say so, and then I am sure it must be true. He pays well,
and takes Physic freely; besides I particularly know his Constitution: after
Bleeding he must take a Purge or two, then some Cordial Powders, Dulcifiers of
the Blood, and two or three odd Things more, But as I was saying, this Sir
Thomas has a Vein as fine, and as small as the finest Silk you can imagine:
I Will tell you what I did to learn to let him Blood, I took a fine, nay
super-fine Cobweb, and picked out of it one of the smallest Filaments, or
Threads I could find: This Filament or Thread of the Cobweb, as I told you, I
lay upon a convenient place, as I remember upon a piece of white Paper, then I
took my Lancet, and without the least Hesitation, divided it soquickly, all the
whole length, to the great Admiration of the Standers by, that --


This was very admirable indeed, and almost like the Virtuoso's learning first
to swim on a Table in order to swim in the Water. But suppose this true, does
this make you a complete Surgeon, so as to undertake the Cure of any Ulcer, or
Wound


Puh! Mr. Trueman, I tell you it is an easy thing for a Man of Parts to be a
Surgeon; do but buy a Lancet, Forceps, Saw; talk a little of Contusions,
Fractures, Compress and Bandage: You Will presently, by most people, be thought
an Excellent Surgeon. Especially -- do you mind me -- Lord, you Nod, methinks, as
if you were Sleepy


O, Sir, I hear you: But I sat up late last Night, and am a little Drowsy. But
I heard you say you were a Man of Parts, I think, and that you had two Familiar
Acquaintance Compress and Bandage: I grant it, Sir, ( rubbing his Eyes) but
still how does this make you a Surgeon? You may as well say my keeping Company
with a Bishop may make me a good Divine


Alas! poor Gentleman, I find you did not sleep well last Night. Hah! Hah! I
cannot but laugh at your Mistake. My two Acquaintance! Hah! Hah! Hah! a pretty
Mistake! -- but true enough: For a Man must be acquainted with his Business
indeed; now Compress and Bandage being a part of it, you may term them my
Familiar Acquaintance, if you please, Mr. Trueman. -- Lord, I think the Devil's
in you for Drowsiness, and Gaping


Pray, Mr. Pestle, pray say something then that may divert me and keep me
awake, for I protest to hear you talk of skill in Surgery will never do; for my
part I am for employing every Man in his own way, the Doctor for Advice, the
Apothecary for Medicines, and the Surgeon for Wounds, etc


Now, how you are mistaken again, don't you think that one Man, being an
Apothecary, may understand perfectly and thoroughly all three parts


O, Sir, being an Apothecary indeed he may understand very much, as you say,
especially if he be a Man of great Learning


Learning? That signifies but little in this Age, nor (I thank our kind Stars)
had ever less Encouragement; if you but profess your self an Apothecary, and
then undertake any thing whatever, (as we dare do) no body questions but that
you are an Able Doctor, and a Good Surgeon, at any time


Very fine, on my Word; and do you think the World so blind as to believe it?


Faith, Mr. Trueman, they generally are. I my self have turned out several
Doctors out of Families, because they would not prescribe Physic plentifully,
and in large Quantities. I have persuaded my Patients, that they did not well
understand their Distemper; so have brought in another who has swingingly dos'd
'um. I could tell you of a Sir Harry that paid an 100 l. for Physic in six
Weeks, and I accepted it, being a Friend, without requiring one Penny for my
own Fees. -- You don't know the Mystery of Trade


In plain English, I know not what you call Mystery, but I now know the Roguery
of that Doctor and you too. What an 100 l. in 6 Weeks? Bless me, what did she
take? I believe she swallowed Guinea's made into Bullets for the Gripes, so
discharged 'um again for the Gold-finders. For I hear Guineas are grown so
cheap that Ladies begin to think that they can take them cheaper than
Apothecaries Doses


O Abominable! Do hear Brother Gallypot? I protest, Mr. Trueman, you scan
Peoples Actions too narrowly. Would Not you have us live


The same Question may be as well asked by an Highway-man, or a Pick-pocket.
Live upon honest Gains, come do, and then it will wear well


Well, Sir, I go to Sir Thomas, and wait on you again presently.


Nay, if you must be gone, even let us all go for the present, and discourse the
rest over to Morrow


MR. Trueman, methinks 'twas a pretty Diversion yesterday, to hear the
Apothecary brag of his Skill in Surgery and Physic; I could not imagine what
he had to set up with, but a large stock of Impudence: I know all his Medicines
in his Shop did not cost above Fifty Pound, and in Six Weeks Time has he made
an hundred Pound of one part of it? Such Reflections as these would make a Man
burn his Books, and curse the Gentility of his Education. It seems indeed
wonder to me, that so many Gentlemen who serve in Parliament, and have
oft-times many Younger Sons to provide for, do not find out a way to suppress
these griping Empyricks, and Quacks, that their Children may be the better able
to support themselves in a Genteel Profession, answerable to the Expense they
have been at in their Education. In troth it is a thing worthy Consideration


Truly, Doctor, I am of your Opinion, but in such Points our English Gentlemen
of what Sect soever are generally of the same Temper with those they call
Church of England-Men, that is, lazy and slow in prosecuting a Public
Interest, but active enough to promote their own private Advantage. And this,
to give you but one Instance, is evident enough in the Choice of a
Parliament Man, where the active Dissenter generally gets the Day, because the
lazy Churchman will not stir to manage a Public Cause and choose honest
Representatives, though his own private Interest may be often promoted by the
assistance of such a Public Friend


We have an English Saying that does a great deal of Mischief, which is this,
That which is every Bodies Business is no Bodies Business. Therefore I wonder
that the College of Physicians don't petition the Parliament for a Remedy in
this Case, and make it their particular Business


College of Physicians! What of them? by your leave, Doctor, I think the
Company of Apothecaries very Substantial Men, and are able to buy twice your
College. They are Monyed-Men; and have an Interest almost every where. College
of Physicians! they are Learned Men they say, but what is that to Money? Hah!
Hah! Hah!


Look you, Mr. Trueman, I suppose you know this Gentleman is an Apothecary by
his Carriage, and rude Behavior


Know him, Doctor? Ay very well, but I suppose he has been taking a large Whet
this Morning


No, Sir, but I have not, I understand the regulating my Health better than so; I
that have practiced Physic now near 30 Years know better things than Whets, as
you call 'um


Nay, Tom, if thee wou'lt have no Excuse made for thy Uncivility, I have done.
Then for ought I know Impudence is as necessary an Ingredient to an Apothecary,
as Sugar of Pearl for your Pearl Cordials, with a Pox


Sir, you are my Patient, so you may say what you please. But saving the
Doctor's Presence, I hope you remember what I said yesterday about my Paper
that I put out March 2, 1695. wherein I cut out half the College from being
Doctors


I have no Patience to hear this Fellow's prating.


Nay, but prithee Doctor, stay a little longer.


I beg your Excuse, I Will wait on you to Morrow.


Ho! I know he wou'd'nt stay to hear my Reasons against their worthy Society.


Nor indeed do I desire it. But if I must of necessity hear them, prithee put
me out of Pain as soon as you can


Why I Will tell you now. Some of them took their Degrees at Leyden, some at
Padua, some at Vtrecht, some in Scotland, others incorporated at Cambridg, or
Commenced Doctors, as an Honor conferred on them, being in the Retinue of some
Great Person, as Ambassador, etc. Now all these in reality are no Doctors; and
consequently every Member of the College that is such cannot rightly be called
Doctor


Why not, good Mr. Gallypot, is not a Doctor of Physic bred in Foreign
Universities as much a Doctor as one bred at our Universities? As to their
Titles I see no Difference


But I hope you will allow it to be more Honorable to be educated regularly in
one of our own Universities, and so Commence Doctor in One's Turn


Suppose that were so, yet I hope they are Doctors still?


But, Sir, I say they are not properly Doctors. For then an Apothecary, or
Farrier may go to Leyden a Year or two, come afterward to that free and
unquestioning University of Cambridg to be dubbed Doctor, and straightway be
admitted into the College of Physicians


I suppose you mean by properly Doctors, such Qualifications as you require,
they want. Else I should (as in other Cases) think they were properly so. For a
Church is properly a Church, so and so Built, and Consecrated. And a
Logger-head arguing very silly is properly a Logger-head. Besides I doubt such
Remarks come Home upon your Self


Well, Sir, then let us bar Reflections, even let it be so as you say. Come, I
hate arguing. But let me tell you under the Rose, I can write a Prescription as
well as any of 'um all, I learned that the first thing I did, by reading
Doctors Bills in my Shop


So, I am glad I have brought you to a good Temper: And I do believe you had
better been an Apothecary still. For to speak properly, as you call it, you are
a Mr. Doctor, or Dr, Master, which you please. But enough, hold, who is that
coming hither so gravely? what is his Name


I cannot call him readily to my mind, but I know him very well by Sight. I use
to meet him at Apothecaries-Hall


Sir, your Humble Servant. Pray, don't you belong to the Spanish Ambassador?


[ Stroaking his Whiskers] No, Sir, but I am an Italian born, my Name is
Retorto Spatula d' Vlceroso; I was bred in Italy what you call an Apothecary,
by which I attained to the Knowledge of Physic, both the Theoretick and
Practick part: I also exercise the Art of Chyrurgery, as Scarrifying, Cupping,
Stupes, Rollers, and Bandage, etc. Besides, I can by Chemistry extract the
Quintessence of the Four Elements, and tame the Red Dragon: and in fine, I can
make up a Cordial, Bolus, or Pills, according to the best mode in Foreign
Countries, as you may see in my Shop in -- lane


Hold, Sir, not too fast; after all with your hard Names, I believe you are
bred an Outlandish Apothecary; and they, forsooth, make up things far better
than our English Apothecaries do theirs


O, Sir, infinitely better, in my Shop I should be ashamed if my Pills looked
not like true Gold; though but gilt, my Bolus's are put up all in gilt Paper, cut
in fine Shapes and Figures: a Quire costs me 5 s. the cutting; besides the
Paper is pure Venice-Paper: My Cordials are all put into Venice-Vials, etc. and
all this Alamodo d' Italiano, to make the Physic taste the better, work the
better, and look the better. O fine Italians


Now you say something, look the better; but to taste the better, or work the
better, I don't well understand. Will a Vomit work the better for being in a
fine Venice-Glass? I think a little Nastiness for a Vomit makes it work the
better. I knew a Doctor that used to stir it with his Finger, before he gave
it, to make it nauseate the more


O, Sir, that be very unhandsome. No Englishman can do so finely as I can.


Then I must beg your Pardon, I believe they can all do as well as you pretend;
but I should look on it as a needless piece of Foppery if they all should do as
you do. And I am sure the Patient must pay more Sauce for his Medicines


O, Sir, that is very true; a good Cook will be well paid for his Sauce, you
know Sir


A Pox, but this is paying Sauce for the use of Dishes, like a young
Oxford-Scholar's Treat, if he spends Five Pound in Meat, it is odds but he pays
3 or 4 l. for the use of Dishes and Linen


Sir, notwithstanding all this, I never reckon for a little Bolus above 11 or
12 s. made of very good Diascordium, very good Gascoin-Powder, and a little
Pearl


No, on my Word that is mighty kind, to take not above 12 s. for all your fine
Dressing, and a Groats-worth of Medicines. And do you take any Apprentices


Yes, Sir, I do, for about 100 l. a Lad.


Faith, and very well worth it too, and a great deal of Money saved, if you
teach him all your Trades; for the Devils in it if one don't hit. For the
Education of a Son to be a regular Doctor is reputed 1000 l. Charge at long
run. Any Surgeon of Note will have 120 l. or more, an Apothecary 50 l. or more;
a Chemist perhaps as mnch. Now if you will teach my Son all these Arts and
Sciences, I think I have a very good Bargain


I Will certainly do it Sir, never doubt it.


Well, agreed: I Will send my Eldest Son to you, and when he is out of his Time,
I Will bind all his Younger Brothers to him, so each will have 4 Trades or
Callings, will not they Mr. Retorto


Do You doubt it? I thought you had known an Apothecary better than to disbelieve
him in his own Calling. Nay, Sir, to be free with you, I Will teach you how to
multiply Medicines so fast upon a Patient, that in a Weeks time he shall get
ten Pound in some Cases, when the Doctor shall not get above 20 s


That Is a rare Art indeed, then I suppose you must attack your Patient with a
Quadripartite Army of Medicines drawn from all Quarters of your four Sciences


I can do it, and will; and if you don't think this enough, here is my Brother
Comprehensive a coming

He can besides this teach him to make all sorts of Sweetmeats, buy and sell
Drugs, distill all sorts of Strong Water; nay cut Corns for a need to Persons
of Quality


O, Sir, then he is a Corn-cutter only to Persons of Quality.


No, not unless he pleases.


Nor any thing else, unless he pleases. However, I am content my Son shall only
learn your four Arts, or Sciences, as you call them. I think that is enough for
One, especially if he learn thoroughly the last, that is, to multiply Medicines
so as to get Ten Pounds to the Doctor's Twenty Shillings


That, assure your Self, I Will teach him perfectly: For all the Apothecaries in
Town now understand it pretty well; and, I think, I understand it exceeding
well


Well, Sir, I thank you for your Kindness; but I Will see ye all at the Devil
first, to learn how to swallow Assafoetida, before ye shall have the Education
of my Son. I think, if it be possible, ye have less Honesty than a Lawyer that
has but one Cause in a Year to keep him, and his Family, out of --


Sir, by your leave, this is not fit Language for a Gentleman Apothecary to
bear: He Is a Brother of the Quill, and an honest Man, I Will justify it. He was
Master of the Company not long ago


That may be, and never the honester Man, if he teaches his Apprentices that
Cheat. But, by your leave, I suppose you are an Apothecary too by your Talk.
Pray, what may I call your Name


My Name, Sir, is Jack Comprehensive, originally a North Countryman, and
Brother Apothecary to this Worthy Gentleman, Mr. Retorto Spatula d' Vlceroso,
Apothecary, Surgeon, Chemist and Doctor


Ay, Sir, his Titles I knew before; and pray, Sir, how many have you?


Sir, I am, in short, generally called Doctor only, but I also profess my self
a Surgeon: An Apothecary, I should have said first, then Surgeon, Chemist,
Druggist, Confectioner, Distiller, etc. And, to Persons of Quality,
Corn-Cutter. And --


Hold, Sir, pray a little, 'till -- I Will take out my Table Book, lest I should
miscal you, and not give you your right Title


O, Sir, no matter, Sir, to give your Self that Trouble; I answer to any one of
them


Sir, I am glad you do, for fear of giving Offense. Then pray, Mr. Corn Cutter
of Quality (that was the last Title I heard) tell me, since you have so many
Trades, which of all these were you bound to first? Or were you bound to 'um
all at once


Corn-Cutter of Quality! What, could you pick out none but that? I told you I
was usually called Doctor, and nothing else. I will not tell you what Trade I was
bound to. One would think you had Sense enough to guess I was an Apothecary


Good Sir, pray don't be so angry. How should I guess so many Trades to center
in one Man


Then I see you don't know the Town. I thought you had told me you had been in
Town above 30 Years


Truly so I have, and have known Apothecaries called Doctors, which is but two
Names; but you are Apothecary, Doctor, Chemist, Distiller. -- Hold, Call my Man
to give me my Pocketbook out of -- O! I have it by me in my Pocket. Faith, you
must excuse me, I cannot remember all your Titles


It Is no matter, Sir, remember but Doctor, that is enough, I Will answer to that,
if you please


Mr. Comprehensive the Apothecary's a better Name, in my mind; it does not
please me to call you Doctor


Then call me what you please; I am sure some of the Greatest Men of the Nation
honor us with that Title, and value our Skill above a Physician's often


I am sorry they do; and do think it a great Fault in our Government that Men
of Liberal and Ingenious Education --


Hold, let me go on. I heard what you were upon: -- I think you were saying the
Government would do well to suppress such Cheats, Quacks, and Empyricks


No, Doctor, they were not my Words. But I was saying that I thought it a Fault
in a Government that Men of Liberal and Ingenious Education should not have the
Countenance of that Government under which they live, so far as to have a Power
granted them to punish Men who act out of their Sphere, and Invade the Rights
and Privileges of their Neighbors: This is what I was about to say, but you
interrupted me


I beg your Pardon. When I hear these Apothecaries talk of their Practice,
their Skill in Diseases, and Medicines, their taking of Fees, and Pretension to
even the most difficult Diseases, it puts me into a Passion, then I am apt to
call 'um Cheats, and Quacks


Hold a little, Doctor, yonder are the other two a coming; if you talk at this
Rate, they will bait you to Death: I advise you to retire


Now, Doctor, you highly value your self for your Title; Brethren come hither,
come in


What Is the matter ye look so angry?


Angry! why the Doctor has most abominably abused all Apothecaries; he calls us
Quacks, and Cheats: as if an Apothecary could be a Cheat, or Knave


Did he so? would we had come time enough; we would a rounded his Doctorship.


Now, Gentlemen, I see ye are all four together, I Will leave ye a little, and go
see if I can reduce this Doctor to a better Temper. -- Your Servant


Come, Gentlemen, now we are got by our Selves, let us talk a little about
Trade: How stand Affairs? Is there any Business stirring? We ought to have a
meeting every now and then, to settle what ought to be the Prizes of our
Medicines. Pray how do ye at your end of the Town prize a Dose of Common
Purging Pills


Why, Brother, about Eighteen Pence, sometime Two Shillings, with an Haustus
after them of Three and Six Pence


And can you live so? I believe all the Things cost you at least a Shilling out
of Pocket


No, God forbid! How could I live then? indeed they cost me about Six Pence,
and I take but Five Shillings and Six Pence, sometime less, and I think that is
honest Gains. Hey Brother


O very honest! very fair! There Is nothing can be fairer in the World! Shall I
tell ye Gentlemen? I not long ago had a Patient, who accidentally had a Robust
heavy Fellow tread on a Corn that grew on his left Toe, which put him into some
pain. I persuaded him he was a little Feverish, so blooded him, and applied a
Caustic to his Toe (as I told him) to eat out the Corn: But unluckily eat to
the very Bone, and made a pretty handsome Ulcer. Then I Blister'd him, and
distilled some Antifebrifuge Drops, Specificks for him only, and good for no
body else besides. In short, he lay Ill of this but Eleven Weeks, and what
do think he would have paid me for the Cure


Faith, I cannot tell, perhaps 40 l. But why did not call in a Surgeon at
last for a dead Lift


O Pox Man! I saw I could do it my self, though but slowly. But Faith, I thank my
Stars, I have learned now to use them like the Doctors, never call in either,
but when I cannot tell what to do my self


Right, so have I, but what had at last?


What do talk of Forty Pound! Indeed as an Apothecary not above Thirty Pound
a Month, or so, was enough; but as Doctor (and saving thereby many Fees) and
Surgeon also, I asked him but 132 l. 12 s. 8 d. And he scrupled to give it me


[ Peeps in from behind the Hangings.] And, Faith, if he had paid you the odd
12 s. and 8 d. I think he had paid you too much: A Parcel of Canary-Birds, now
your Rogueries and Cheats come out


Prithee who was that peeped in and talked so, was it not Mr. Trueman? Well, I
like that Man's Company very well, were he not too Censorious upon a Man for
getting an honest Livelihood


Ay, He is well enough but he has that disobliging Humor in him.


What a Pox, if I tell ye that ye are Knaves and Cheats, when ye are so, this
ye call a disobliging Humor: Leave of Cheating then, and practice fair in your
own Sphere


Cheats, and Rogues, and Knaves! That will bear an Action I am sure. Let Us at
him at Law, and maull him: Have none of ye a Lawyer Clapped, or (to speak more
modestly) has the High Scurvy; let us employ him: As we take his Money, let him
take ours: I warrant ye we'll outdo him in making a Bill of Costs


That, Brother, I don't question: Besides you know if a Man be a Knave it is an
hard Matter to prove him so. Let Us put him upon the proof of any one Apothecary
in Town. If he should at last prove it, why it is but one Maungy-Hound in a
whole Pack


Soft and fair Brother. For suppose he should prove you, or me, Brother, to be
that very Knave ye talked of. Don't venture Proofs. Come let us threaten him
with it, and he will hold his Tongue a course


Gad, I will not venture it, not I.


Nor I neither. Come let us talk of something else.


Ay; Prithee, Brother Comprehensive, tell me, did abate him any thing of the
Bill


Yes, Faith, I did; being an old Customer, I abated the odd 32 l. 8 s. and 4 d.
and took a Goldsmith's Note for the other


On my Word pretty well paid too. I suppose he had a good Estate, and was a
Knight at least. But prithee deal ingeniously with me, What did it cost thee
out of Pocket


Some body will hear me, or else I would: I cast it up to a Penny to satisfy
my self what really I gained by my Medicines


No, No, Here are none but Friends, prithee tell us, I know you deal with
Lords, Ladies, and Knights; who sometimes pay, and sometimes not: But when they
do pay, besure you mount'um


To tell you the Truth they cost -- Hold look if no Body be near us --


No; I Will look my self ( Looks) there is no Body.


Then, to be plain, the prime Cost was Six Pound 17s. 6d. Farthing, or near
that: So I got in the 11 Weeks clear Gains not above 93 l. of one Patient.
That Is all


Would I had half a Score such: I cannot for the Life of me make above Sixteen
Pound in Twenty clear Gains; I mean not reckoning in my By-Fees of Ten
Shillings, and Five Shillings, or so


No! Come that is pretty well too, considering you are only Doctor, and
Apothecary. But I am Surgeon, and Chemist, etc. you know


Is the Doctor here?


Yes, Yes, and all run to him to know what is the matter.


Hey! I find ye are all Doctors. O, Tom Gallypot, go call Dr. Galen, and bid
him go to my Wife, she is fallen Ill again


Sir, He'ant at Home; Cannot I do it? Sir, 'twill save you Fees.


How do you know he'ant at Home? Go I say, I send for him because I would save
Money. I know last time how I saved Money by you indeed


Well, if you will have the Doctor, I Will wait on him to your Lady.


Stay a little; now ye are all here together I must tell you, with the rest,
before you go, that there was some body behind the Curtain, when the Medicines
cost but Six Pound Seventeen Shillings and Six Pence; and an Hundred Pound was
paid for them


O the Devil! What are we Betrayed?


Betrayed, do you call it? No; but ye have told your Rogueries, and Cheats, in
Private, and I Will publish 'um to the World, with my own Sentiments about the
Practice of Physic


Ay pray do, so you don't reflect on us; you use to do things very fair
sometimes


Well, Tom, my Advice to a Patient is as soon as he is Ill, to send for some
Doctor of the Lower Rank, of whose Learning and Skill in Physic he has an
Opinion; and in case he grow worse, to send for one of greater Fame,
Reputation, and Vogue in the World to join in Consult: For the Diligence of the
one, who has less Fame, and Vogue in the World (though perhaps equal in Learning
and Skill really, though not thought so in the Eye of the World) may, and often
does make amends for the supposed greater Skill of the other Physician, by
which means the Patient may more reasonably, and upon juster grounds expect a
Cure. Besides the Hurry, and Multitude of Business that distracts the Heads of
Men in great Practice, and makes 'um either forget what they did formerly in
the like Cases, or at least write but cursorily, and as they say, just for
their Fee, would by this means be a little tempered; and by the constant
Attendance and Observation of the Diligent Physician, the supposed Great Man
may be put in mind of using some more proper Medicines for the Patient, which
perhaps he would otherwise forget. These, Gentlemen, are my real Sentiments


Now, Master, I like your Discourse very well, seeing you make no Remarks on
Apothecaries. Besides perhaps it may open Peoples Eyes to employ me the sooner,
for though I am an Old Apothecary, I am but a Young Doctor. For I visit in either
Capacity, either as an Old Apothecary, which is as good as a Young Doctor, or
as a Young Doctor, and that is as good as the other again


But I thought you had left off Shop, and stuck only to your Doctorship.


So I do openly, but privately I keep a Shop, and side in all Things with the
Apothecaries against the Doctors; I am, and will be to such Families, as yours,
an Apothecary still, that pay well


Ay, Tom, 16 l. in 20 l. is good Gains. Your Apothecaryship, I believe, out
does your Doctorship


What. Sir, I believe you heard me jest a little among the rest. But pray no
more Reflections, I beseech you


Well, I Will say nothing to you about your Degree, for to me you are an
Apothecary still, and no other; to you as such, and to ye all I direct my
Speech, it is my Opinion that ye all ought to be forced to take moderate Prizes,
and be content with honest Gains


So we are: What would you propose?


In Troth, Mr. Pestle, my Proposal will signify but little I know; but were I
to advise the Lawmakers, they should make a Law that no Apothecaries Bills
should be paid till first Taxed by Two or more Doctors, appointed in every
District, or Division, in and about the City of London


That Is very fine indeed: How is that Practicable?


Why not? as well as the Attorney's Bills by the Prothonotories.


That Is only when the Client thinks himself overrated.


So should this be, when the Patient thinks himself over-rated in Medicines.
This would prevent the extravagant Cheats put upon the Patient often, and be
decided without the unnecessary Suits of Law. I am well assured that very often
it is cheaper to see a Doctor and pay you for Medicines, than employ one of ye
as Doctor and Apothecary too


Very fine again: You, and your Politics, You would make the Doctors our
Governors, would you? Good Mr. Trueman, we beg you Excuse, we are His
Majesty's Freeborn Subjects. And after all, pray, Mr. Trueman, How do the
Doctors understand to make Medicines? How do they understand the Prices of
Drugs? Puh! you talk you know not what. Come, let us leave him


Mr. Pestle, by your leave a little. How did all the Apothecaries learn to make
Medicines at first? It Is very probable that Men of Learning, Study and Industry
(such which the World has called Physicians) first found out the use of Herbs,
Minerals, etc. Out of these, proportionably mixed, formed Compound Medicines;
and their Prescriptions taught the Apothecaries the general use of these
Medicines: Which made the Apothecaries use these Weapons first formed against
all Diseases (as I beg leave to call 'um) peculiarly against the First
Inventor, to destroy him Root and Branch if possible. Like the Spaniards in the
West Indies, who thought it good Policy (tho 'twas neither Honesty nor
Christianity) to destroy the Natives wholly; to make the Possession of their
Country more quiet and secure. The Gentility of their Profession, I confess,
has been a great hindrance to them in reaping those Advantages as they might
(and with more Honesty than any of ye) otherwise have done


Even let 'um be Genteel still. I don't think 'um indeed such Fools, as that
they cannot make Medicines if they will; but why cannot they keep their Learning
and Gentility to themselves, and let us alone


O, Sir, I am glad you allow 'um to be capable of learning to make Medicines if
they please. Now, Mr. Pestle, to tell you the plain Truth, I hear they have
actually made several good Medicines at the College, and continue so to do;
neither do I think it so very difficult to understand making Compound
Medicines, and prizing of them: For if I know the Price of every Simple, sure
it is very easy for me to guess what the whole Mass cost, and so consequently by
a farther Calculation tell you what an Ounce, half an Ounce, or a Dram of that
Mass may be sold for: Thus I have made it plain that they can make Medicines,
and prize 'um too


How can they tell though when a Medicine is good?


Very easy, Mr. Pestle, they have taste, and sight to judge by as well as ye,
by which they discern the Goodness of Simples that make every Compound, and the
Goodness also of that Compound. Besides, if ever they have bought good out of
your Shops, (and yours is always right prime good, ye know) or have made good,
they may, and I believe can make the like again


Suppose all this true, though I am resolved I will not believe it true; who after
all shall give Attendance to observe the Operations of Medicines


Who should but the Doctors themselves? They are paid for attending their
Patients


Hah! Hah! Hah! Attending? I mean adminitring Physic; how I should laugh to
see a Doctor giving a Glyster, and the Bladder break and bespatter all his
Velvet Jacket: Hah! Hah! Hah


I find you would be merry at such a Mischance as that; but that is but Idle to
object, because every Nurse does that Office acourse, and all that ye pretend
to about sick Persons, or else are but sorrowful Nurses. As for Bleeding, the
Surgeon ought to be employed. As for Chemical Medicines, the Chemist is at
hand; and so for all others


Methinks your Head is full of Projects, cannot you find out one to serve them
in


I don't pretend to be a Projector; but I think the College would do very well
to make all sorts of Medicines themselves, and sell them out at easy Rates.
What they design by forming a Fund by Subscription, I profess I at present know
not, but one of 'um told me the other day that they design to make that a Fund
for buying in Drugs, etc. and making of all sorts of Compound Medicines
necessary for the Sick, selling them out again for small profit, sufficient
only to pay about a dozen Servants, and the Prime Cost of the Medicines, with a
Penny in the Shilling Overplus to the College. By which means the Doctors will
be sure to have such good Medicines, and so well prepared as to rely on them,
not to be sophisticated; or, for want of any one prescribed, to be supplied by
another in the room of it, as you Apothecaries often do: If you have not one Thing,
you in your mighty Wisdom will put in another in the room of it; so that the
Physician may prescribe till Doomsday, and the Patient will be never the
better, if ye substitute what Medicines ye please, and after that put what
Prices ye please


Prices Sir? I sell as cheap as any Apothecary in Town; I never have above 6 s.
and 8 d. for a Pint of Pearl Cordial in my Life, an you go to that


Not so passionate, Good Mr. Pestle, I believe you sell as cheap as your
Brethren, but all damned dear, and much to the Oppression of the Poor. To
remedy which they propose to sell a Pint of good Pearl Cordial for Eighteen
Pence, or thereabouts. A Cordial Bolus for a Groat, which ye reckon sometimes 1
s. 6 d. and sometimes 2 s. A Quart of Bitter Drink for 1 s. for which I my self
have paid 5 s. and 8 d. And so proportionable for all other Medicines


Puh! What if they do? our Old Customers will not leave us.


What if they do? Why then the Poorer sort of People will buy of them, because
they are sure of good and cheap Medicines. The better sort will think it
Prudence to save 5 s. in 6 s. and 8 d. if they can, to help pay Taxes, and not
have a Bill after a great Sickness brought in, enough to renew their Sickness
again. Even the Richest of all will be apt to be influenced by their
Physicians, when they tell 'um that there are the only Medicines prepared which
they can rely on. In short, every Body will be willing in their Illness to go
to such a Place, where they can with great probability be assured of Good and
Cheap Medicines


Good Mr. Trueman, you may even prate about ^^^ling the Practice of Physic
till you are weary, I warrant ye, let 'um do what they can, we'll easily
persuade People that we are all very Honest Men. -- We always said you were
always a prying, busy, Inquisitive Man, pretending to understand things, I am
sure you don't understand; you have a mighty Opinion of your Self. Come let us
leave him


Ay come, come let us leave him.


It Is an Old Saying, Si Populus vult decipi, decipiatur, if People will be
cheated even let 'um be so. -- I have done what lies in my Power to open their
Eyes; and by telling the Truth have gained other Men's Hatred, bu

I never to Flattery was, or will b' a Slave,
He that loves Truth is Generous and Brave,
And scorns the Wealthy and the Thriving Knave.


