CUSTOM, which every where bears mighty Sway,
Brings me to act the Orator to Day:
But Women, you will say, are ill at Speeches,
It Is true, and therefore I appear in Breeches:
Not for Example to you City-Wives;
That by Prescription's settled for your Lives.
Was it for gain the Husband first consented?
O yes, their Gains are mightily augmented:
And yet, methinks, it must havecost some Strife:
A Passive Husband, and an Active Wife!
It Is awkward, very awkward, by my Life.
But to my Speech, Assemblies of all Nations
Still are supposed to open with Orations:
Mine shall begin, to show our Obligations.
To you, our Benefactors, lowly Bowing,
Whose Favors have prevented our undoing;
A long Egyptian Bondage we endured,
Till Freedom, by your Justice we procured:
Our Taskmasters were grown such very Jews,
We must at length have Played in Wooden Shoes,
Had not your Bounty taught us to refuse.
Freedom's of English growth, I think, alone;
What for lost English Freedom can atone?
A Freeborn Player loathes to be compelled;
Our Rulers Tyraniz'd, and We Rebelled.
Freedom! the Wise Man's Wish, the Poor Man's Wealth;
Which you, and I, and most of us enjoy by Stealth;
The Soul of Pleasure, and the Sweet of Life,
The Woman's Charter, Widow, Maid or Wife,
This they would have cancelled, and thence grew the Strife.
But you perhaps, would have me here confess
How we obtained the Favor; -- Cannot you guess?
Why then I Will tell you, (for I hate a Lie)
By Brib'ry, errant Brib'ry, let me dye:
I was their Agent, but by Jove I swear
No honorable Member had a share
Though young and able Members bid me Fair:
I chose a wiser way to make you willing,
Which has not cost the House a single Shilling;
Now you suspect at least I ^ent a Billing.
You see I Am Young, and to that Air of Youth,
Some will add Beauty, and a little Truth;
These Powerful Charms, improved by Powerful Arts,
Prevailed to captivate your opening Hearts.
Thus furnished, I preferred my poor Petition,
And bribed ye to commiserate our Condition:
I Laughed, and Sighed, and Sung, and Leer'd upon ye;
With Roguish Loving Looks, and that way won ye:
The Young Men kissed me, and the Old I kissed,
And luringly, I led them as I list.
The Ladies in mere Pity took our Parts,
Pity's the darling Passion of their Hearts.
Thus Bribing, or thus Bribed, fear no Disgraces;
For thus you may take Bribes, and keep your Places.

THE Husbandman in vain renews his Toil,
To cultivate each Year a hungry Soil;
And fondly hopes for rich and generous Fruit,
When what should feed the Tree, devours the Root:
Th* unladen Boughs, he sees, bode certain Dearth,
Unless transplanted to more kindly Earth.
So, the poor Husbands of the Stage, who found
Their Labors lost upon the ungrateful Ground,
This last and only Remedy have proved;
And hope new Fruit from ancient Stocks removed.
Well may they hope, when you so kindly aid,
And plant a Soil which you so rich have made.
As Nature gave the World to Man's first Age,
So* from your Bounty, we receive this Stage;
The Freedom Man was born to, you have restored,
And to our World, such Plenty you afford,
It seems like Eden, fruitful of its own accord.
But since in Paradise frail Flesh gave way,
And when but two were made, both went astray;
Forbear your Wonder, and the Fault forgive,
If in our larger Family we grieve
One falling Adam, and one tempted Eve.
We who remain, would gratefully repay
What our Endeavors can, and bring this day,
The First-fruit. Offering, of a Virgin Play.
We hope there is something that may please each Taste,
And though of Homely Fare we make the Feast,
Yet you will find variety at least.
There Is Humor, which for cheerful Friends we got,
And for the thinking Party there is a Plot.
We Have something too, to gratify ill Nature,
(If there be any here) and that is Satire.
Tho Satire scarce dares grin, it is grown so mild;
Or only shows its Teeth, as if it smiled.
As Asses Thistles, Poets mumble Wit,
And dare not bite, for fear of being bit.
They hold their Pens, as Swords are held by Fools,
And are afraid to use their own* Edge-Tools.
Since the Plain-Dealers Scenes of Manly Rage,
Not one has dared to lash this Crying Age.
This time, the Poet owns the bold Essay,
Yet hopes there is no ill-manners in his Play:
And he declares by me, he has designed
Affront to none, but frankly speaks his mind.
And should the ensuing Scenes not chance to hit,
He offers but this one Excuse, 'twas writ
Before your late Encouragement of Wit.

JEremy.


Sir.


Here, take away; I Will walk a turn, and digest what I have read --


You Will grow Devilish fat upon this Paper-Diet.


And do you hear, go you to Breakfast -- There Is a Page doubled down in
Epictetus, that is a Feast for an Emperor


Was Epictetus a real Cook, or did he only write Receipts?


Read, read, Sirrah, and refine your Appetite; learn to live upon Instruction;
feast your Mind, and mortify your Flesh; Read, and take your Nourishment in at
your Eyes; shut up your Mouth, and chew the Cud of Understanding. So Epictetus
advises


O Lord! I have heard much of him, when I waited upon a Gentleman at Cambridge:
Pray what was that Epictetus


A very rich Man. -- Not worth a Groat.


Humph, and so he has made a very fine Feast, where there is nothing to be
eaten


Yes.


Sir, you're a Gentleman, and probably understand this fine Feeding: But if you
please, I had rather be at Board-Wages. Does your Epictetus, or your Seneca
here, or any of these poor, rich Rogues, teach you how to pay your Debts
without Money? Will they shut up the Mouths of your Creditors? Will Plato be
Bail for you? Or Diogenes, because he understands Confinement, and lived in a
Tub, go to Prison for you? 'Slife, Sir, what do you mean, to mew your self up
here with Three or Four musty Books, in commendation of Starving and Poverty


Why, Sirrah, I have no Money, you know it; and therefore resolve to rail at
all that have: And in that I but follow the Examples of the wisest and wittiest
Men in all Ages; these Poets and Philosophers whom you naturally hate, for just
such another Reason; because they abound in Sense, and you are a Fool


Aye, Sir, I am a Fool, I know it: And yet, Heaven help me, I Am poor enough to
be a Wit -- But I was always a Fool, when I told you what your Expenses would
bring you to; your Coaches and your Liveries; your Treats and your Balls; your
being in Love with a Lady, that did not care a Farthing for you in your
Prosperity; and keeping Company with Wits, that cared for nothing but your
Prosperity; and now when you are poor, hate you as much as they do one another


Well; and now I am poor, I have an opportunity to be revenged on 'em all; I Will
pursue Angelica with more Love than ever, and appear more notoriously her
Admirer in this Restraint, than when I openly rivaled the rich Fops, that made
Court to her; so shall my Poverty be a Mortification to her Pride, and perhaps,
make her compassionate that Love, which has principally reduced me to this
Lowness of Fortune. And for the Wits, I Am sure I Am in a Condition to be even
with them --


Nay, your Condition is pretty even with theirs, that is the truth on it.


I Will take some of their Trade out of their Hands.


Now Heaven of Mercy continue the Tax upon Paper; you don't mean to write!


Yes, I do; I Will write a Play.


Hem! -- Sir, if you please to give me a small Certificate of Three Lines --
only to certify those whom it may concern; That the Bearer hereof, Jeremy
Fetch by Name, has for the space of Sev'n Years truly and faithfully served
Valentine Legend Esquire and that he is not now turned away for any Misdemeanour;
but does voluntarily dismiss his Master from any future Authority over him --


No, Sirrah, you shall live with me still.


Sir, it is impossible -- I may die with you, starve with you, or be damned with
your Works: But to live even Three days, the Life of a Play, I no more expect
it, than to be Canonized for a Muse after my Decease


You are witty, you Rogue, I shall want your Help; -- I Will have you learn to
make Couplets, to tag the ends of Acts: do you hear, get the Maids to Crambo in
an Evening, and learn the knack of Rhiming; you may arrive at the height of a
Song, sent by an unknown Hand, or a Chocolate-House Lampoon


But Sir, Is this the way to recover your Father's Favor? Why Sir Sampson will
be irreconcilable. If your Younger Brother should come from Sea, he would never
look upon you again. You're undone, Sir; you're ruined; you will not have a Friend
left in the World, if you turn Poet -- Ah Pox confound that Will's
Coffee-House, it has ruined more Young Men than the Royal-Oak Lottery --
Nothing thrives that belongs to it. The Man of the House would have been an
Alderman by this time with half the Trade, if he had set up in the City -- For
my part, I never sit at the Door, that I don't get double the Stomach that I do
at a Horse-Race. The Air upon Banstead-Downs is nothing to it for a Whetter;
yet I never see it, but the Spirit of Famine appears to me; sometimes like a
decayed Porter, worn out with pimping, and carrying Billet-doux and Songs; not
like other Porters for Hire, but for the Jests sake. Now like a thin Chairman,
melted down to half his Proportion, with carrying a Poet upon Tick, to visit
some great Fortune; and his Fare to be paid him like the Wages of Sin, either
at the Day of Marriage, or the Day of Death


Very well, Sir; can you proceed?


Sometimes like a bilk'd Bookseller, with a meagre terrified Countenance, that
looks as if he had written for himself, or were resolved to turn Author, and
bring the rest of his Brethren into the same Condition. And Lastly, In the Form
of a wornout Punk, with Verses in her Hand, which her Vanity had preferred to
Settlements, without a whole Tatter to her Tail, but as ragged as one of the
Muses; or as if she were carrying her Linen to the Paper-Mill, to be converted
into Folio Books, of Warning to all Young Maids, not to prefer Poetry to good
Sense; or lying in the Arms of a needy Wit, before the Embraces of a wealthy
Fool


What, Jeremy holding forth?


The Rogue has (with all the Wit he could muster up) been declaiming against
Wit


Aye? Why then I Am afraid Jeremy has Wit: For wherever it is, it is always
contriving it is own Ruin


Why so I have been telling my Master, Sir: Mr. Scandal, for Heaven's sake,
Sir, try if you can dissuade him from turning Poet


Poet! He shall turn Soldier first, and rather depend upon the outside of his
Head, than the Lining. Why, what the Devil has not your Poverty made you
Enemies enough? Must you needs show your Wit to get more


Ay, more indeed; for who cares for any Body that has more Wit than himself?


Jeremy speaks like an Oracle. Don't you see how worthless great Men, and dull
rich Rogues, avoid a witty Man of small Fortune? Why, he looks like a Writ of
Enquiry into their Titles and Estates; and seems Commissioned by Heaven to
seize the better half


Therefore I would rail in my Writings, and be revenged.


Rail? At whom? the whole World? Impotent and vain! Who would die a Martyr to
Sense in a Country where the Religion is Folly? You may stand at Bay for a
while; but when the full Cry is against you, you will not have fair Play for your
Life. If you cannot be fairly run down by the Hounds, you will be treacherously
shot by the Huntsmen. -- No, turn Pimp, Fl^tterer, Quack, Lawyer, Parson, be
Chaplain to an Atheist, or Stallion to an Old Woman, any thing but Poet; a
Modern Poet is worse, more servile, timorous, and fawning, than any I have
named: Without you could retrieve the Ancient Honors of the Name, recall the
Stage of Athens, and be allowed the force of open honest Satire


You are as inveterate against our Poets, as if your Character had been lately
exposed upon the Stage. -- Nay, I am not violently bent upon the Trade. --
Jeremy, see who is there. what you would have me do? -- What do the World say of
me, and my forced Confinement


The World behaves it self, as it used to do on such Occasions; some pity you,
and condemn your Father: Others excuse him, and blame you; only the Ladies are
merciful, and wish you well, since Love and Pleasurable Expense, have been your
greatest faults


How now?


Nothing new, Sir; I have dispatched some half a Dozen Duns with as much
Dexterity, as a hungry Judge does Causes at Dinnertime


What answer have you given 'em?


Patience, I suppose, the old Receipt.


No, faith Sir; I have put 'em off so long with patience and forbearance, and
other fair words; that I was forced now to tell 'em in plain downright English
--


What?


That they should be paid.


When?


To morrow.


And how the Devil do you mean to keep your word?


Keep it? Not at all; it has been so very much stretched, that I reckon it will
break of course by to morrow, and no body be surpised at the Matter --


See who they are. Scandal, you may see what it is to be great; Secretaries of
State, Presidents of the Council, and Generals of an Army lead just such a life
as I do; have just such Crowds of Visitants in a morning, all soliciting of
past promises; which are but a civiller sort of Duns, that lay claim to
voluntary Debts


And you, like a true great Man, having engaged their Attendance, and promised
more than ever you intend to perform; are more perplexed to find Evasions, than
you would be to invent the honest means of keeping your word, and gratifying
your Creditors


Scandal, learn to spare your Friends, and do not provoke your Enemies; this
liberty of your Tongue, will one day bring a Confinement on your Body, my
Friend


O Sir, there is Trapland the Scrivener, with two suspicious Fellows like lawful
Pads, that would knock a Man down with Pocket-Tipstaves, -- And there is your
Father's Steward, and the Nurse with one of your Children from Twitnam


Pox on her, could she find no other time to fling my Sins in my Face: Here,
give her this,


What is it Bouncing Margery, and my Godson?


Yes, Sir.


My Blessing to the Boy, with this Token Margery put more Flocks in her Bed,
shift twice a Week, and not work so hard, that she may not smell so vigorously.
-- I shall take the Air shortly


Scandal, don't spoil my Boy's Milk: -- Bid Trapland come in. If I can give
that Cerberus a Sop, I shall be at rest for one day

O Mr. Trapland! my old Friend! Welcome. Jeremy, a Chair quickly: A Bottle of
Sack and a Toast -- a Chair first


A good Morning to you Mr. Valentine, and to you Mr. Scandal.


The Morning's a very good Morning, if you don't spoil it.


Come sit you down, you know his way.


Valentine, of 1500 l. of pretty long standing --


I cannot talk about Business with a Thirsty Palate. -- Sirrah the Sack. --


And I desire to know what Course you have taken for the Payment?


Faith and Troth, I am heartily glad to see you, -- my Service to you, -- fill,
fill, to honest Mr. Trapland, fuller


Hold, Sweetheart. -- This is not to our Business; -- my Service to you Mr.
Scandal --


The Other Glass, and then we'll talk. Fill, Jeremy.


No more, in truth. -- I have forborne, I say --


Sirrah, fill when I bid you. -- And how does your handsome Daughter. -- Come a
good Husband to her


Thank you -- I have been out of this Money --


Drink first. Scandal, why do you not Drink?


And in short, I can be put off no longer.


I was much obliged to you for your Supply: It did me Signal Service in my
necessity. But you delight in doing good. -- Scandal, Drink to me, my Friend
Trapland's Health. An honester Man lives not, nor one more ready to serve his
Friend in Distress, though I say it to his face. Come, fill each Man his Glass


What, I know Trapland has been a Whoremaster, and loves a Wench still. You
never knew a Whoremaster, that was not an honest Fellow


Fie, Mr. Scandal, you never knew --


What don't I know? -- I know the Buxom black Widow in the Poultry -- 800 l. a
Year Jointure, and 20000 l. in Money. A hah! Old Trap


Say you so, In Faith: Come, we'll remember the Widow: I know where abouts you
are: Come, to the Widow --


No more indeed.


What, the Widows Health; give it him -- off with it:

A Lovely Girl, In Faith, black sparkling Eyes, soft pouting Ruby-Lips! better
sealing there, than a Bond for a Million, hah


No, no, there is no such thing, we'd better mind our business. -- You're a Wag.


No faith, we'll mind the Widow's business, fill again. -- Pretty round heaving
Breasts, -- a Barbary shape, and a Jut with her Bum, would stir an Anchoret:
And the prettiest Foot! Oh if a Man could but fasten his Eyes to her Feet, as
they steal in and out, and play at Bo-peep under her Petticoats, ah! Mr.
Trapland


Verily, give me a Glass, -- you're a Wag, -- and here is to the Widow.


He begins to Chuckle; -- ply him close, or he will relapse into a Dun.


By your leave, Gentlemen, -- Mr. Trapland, if we must do our Office, tell us.
-- We have half a dozen Gentlemen to Arrest in Pall Mall and Covent Garden; and
if we don't make haste, the Chairmen will be abroad, and block up the
Chocolate-Houses, and then our labor's lost


'Udso that is true, Mr. Valentine I love Mirth, but business must be done, are
you ready to --


Sir, your Father's Steward says he comes to make Proposals concerning your
Debts


Bid him come in: Mr. Trapland, send away your Officer, You shall have an
answer presently


Mr. Snap stay within Call.


Here Is a Dog now, a Traitor in his Wine, Sirrah refund the Sack: Jeremy fetch
him some warm water, or I Will rip up his Stomach, and go the shortest way to his
Conscience


Mr. Scandal, you are Uncivil; I did not value your Sack; but you cannot expect
it again, when I have drank it


And how do you expect to have your Money again, when a Gentleman has spent it?


You need say no more, I understand the Conditions; they are very hard, but my
Necessity is very pressing, I agree to 'em, take Mr. Trapland with you, and let
him draw the Writing -- Mr. Trapland, you know this Man, he shall satisfy you


Sincerely, I am loath to be thus pressing, but my necessity.


No Apology, good Mr. Scrivener, you shall be paid.


I hope you forgive me, my business requires --


He begs Pardon like a Hangman at an Execution.


But I have got a Reprieve.


I am surpised; what does your Father relent?


No; He has sent me the hardest Conditions in the World: You have heard of a
Booby-Brother of mine, that was sent to Sea three Years ago? This Brother, my
Father hears is Landed; whereupon he very affectionately sends me word; If I
will make a Deed of Conveyance of my Right to his Estate after his Death, to my
younger Brother, he will immediately furnish me with Four thousand Pound to pay
my Debts, and make my Fortune. This was once proposed before, and I refused it;
but the present impatience of my Creditors for their Money, and my own
impatience of Confinement, and absence from Angelica, force me to consent


A very desperate Demonstration of your love to Angelica: And I think she has
never given you any assurance of hers


You know her temper; she never gave me any great reason either for hope or
despair


Women of her airy temper, as they seldom think before they act, so they rarely
give us any light to guess at what they mean: But you have little reason to
believe that a Woman of this Age, who has had an indifference for you in your
Prosperity, will fall in love with your ill Fortune; besides, Angelica has a
great Fortune of her own; and great Fortunes either expect another great
Fortune, or a Fool


More Misfortunes, Sir.


What, another Dun?


No Sir, but Mr. Tattle is come to wait upon you.


Well, I cannot help it, -- you must bring him up; He knows I don't go abroad.


Pox on him, I Will be gone.


No, prithee stay: Tattle and you should never be asunder; you are light and
shadow, and show one another; he is perfectly thy reverse both in humor and
understanding; and as you set up for Defamation, he is a mender of Reputations


A mender of Reputations! aye, just as he is a keeper of secrets, another
Virtue that he sets up for in the same manner. For the Rogue will speak aloud
in the posture of a Whisper; and deny a Woman's name, while he gives you the
marks of her Person: He will forswear receiving a Letter from her, and at the
same time, show you her Hand upon the Superscription: And yet perhaps he has
Counterfeited the Hand too; and sworn to a truth; but he hopes not to be
believed; and refuses the reputation of a Ladies favor, as a Doctor says, No,
to a Bishopric, only that it may be granted him. -- In short, he is a public
Professor of Secrecy, and makes Proclamation that he holds private
Intelligence. -- He Is here


Valentine good Morrow, Scandal I am Yours, -- That is, when you speak well of
me


That is, when I am yours; for while I am my own, or any body's else, that will
never happen


How Inhumane!


Why Tattle, you need not be much concerned at any thing that he says: For to
converse with Scandal, is to play at Losing Loadum; you must lose a good Name
to him, before you can win it for your self


But how Barbarous that is, and how unfortunate for him, that the World shall
think the berter of any Person for his Calumniation! -- I thank Heaven, it has
always been a part of my Character, to handle the Reputation of others very
tenderly


Aye, such rotten Reputations as you have to deal with, are to be handled
tenderly indeed


Nay, but why rotten? Why should you say rotten, when you know not the persons
of whom you speak? How cruel that is


Not know 'em? Why, thou never had to do with any body that did not stink to
all the Town


Ha, ha, ha; nay, now you make a Jest of it indeed. For there is nothing more
known, than that no body knows any thing of that nature of me: As I hope to be
saved, Valentine, I never exposed a Woman, since I knew what Woman was


And yet you have conversed with several.


To be free with you, I have -- I don't care if I own that -- Nay more (I Am
going to say a bold Word now) I never could meddle with a Woman, that had to do
with any body else


How!


Nay faith, I Am apt to believe him -- Except her Husband, Tattle.


Oh that --


What think you of that Noble Commoner, Mrs. Drab?


Pooh, I know Madam Drab has made her Brags in three or four places, that I
said this and that, and writ to her. and did I know not what -- But, upon my
Reputation, she did me wrong -- Well, well, that was Malice -- But I know the
bottom of it. She was bribed to that by one that we all know -- A Man too. Only
to bring me into Disgrace with a certain Woman of Quality --


Whom we all know.


No matter for that -- Yes, yes, every body knows -- No doubt on it, every body
knows my Secrets -- But I soon satisfied the Lady of my Innocence; for I told
her -- Madam, says I, there are some Persons who make it their Business to tell
Stories, and say this and that of one and the other, and every thing in the
World; and, says I, if your Grace --


Grace!


O Lord, what have I said? my Unlucky Tongue!


Ha, ha, ha.


Why, Tattle, thou have more Impudence than one can in reason expect: I shall
have an esteem for thee, well, and ha, ha, ha, well, go on, and what did you
say to her Grace


I confess this is something extraordinary.


Not a Word, as I hope to be saved; an errant Lapsus Linguoe -- Come, let us
talk of something else


Well, but how did you acquit your self?


Pooh, pooh, nothing at all, I only rallied with you -- a Woman of ordinary
Rank was a little jealous of me, and I told her something or other, faith -- I
know not what -- Come, let us talk of something else


Hang him, let him alone, he has a mind we should enquire.


Valentine, I Supped last Night with your Mistress, and her Uncle Old
Foresight: I think your Father lies at Foresight's


Yes.


Upon my Soul Angelica's a fine Woman -- And so is Mrs. Foresight, and her
Sister Mrs. Frail


Yes, Mrs. Frail is a very fine Woman, we all know her.


Oh that is not fair.


What?


To tell.


To tell what? Why, what do you know of Mrs. Frail?


Who I? Upon Honor I don't know whether she be Man or Woman; but by the
smoothness of her Chin, and roundness of her Lips


No!


No.


She says otherwise.


Impossible!


Yes Faith. Ask Valentine else.


Why then, as I hope to be saved, I believe a Woman only obliges a Man to
Secrecy, that she may have the pleasure of telling her self


No doubt on it. Well, but has she done you wrong, or no? You have had her? Ha?


Though I have more Honor than to tell first; I have more Manners than to
contradict what a Lady has declared


Well, you own it?


I am strangely surpised! Yes, yes, I cannot deny't, if she taxes me with it.


She Will be here by and by, she sees Valentine every Morning.


How!


She does me the favor -- I mean of a Visit sometimes. I did not think she had
granted more to any body


Nor I faith -- But Tattle does not use to belly a Lady; it is contrary to his
Character -- How one may be deceived in a Woman, Valentine


Nay, what do you mean, Gentlemen?


I Am resolved I Will ask her.


O Barbarous! why did you not tell me --


No, you told us.


And bid me ask Valentine.


What did I say? I hope you will not bring me to confess an Answer, when you never
asked me the Question


But, Gentlemen, this is the most inhumane Proceeding --


Nay, if you have known Scandal thus long, and cannot avoid such a palpable
Decoy as this was; the Ladies have a fine time, whose Reputations are in your
keeping


Sir, Mrs. Frail has sent to know if you are stirring.


Show her up, when she comes.


I Will be gone.


You Will meet her.


Have you not a back way?


If there were, you have more Discretion, than to give Scandal such an
Advantage; why, your running away will prove all that he can tell her


Scandal, you will not be so ungenerous -- O, I shall lose my Reputation of
Secrecy for ever -- I shall never be received but upon Public Days; and my
Visits will never be admitted beyond a Drawing Room: I shall never see a
Bedchamber again, never be locked in a Closet, nor run behind a Screen, or
under a Table; never be distinguished among the Waiting-Women by the Name of
Trusty Mr. Tattle more -- You will not be so cruel


Scandal, have pity on him; he will yield to any Conditions.


Any, any Terms.


Come then, sacrifice half a Dozen Women of good Reputation to me presently --
Come, where are your familiar -- And see that they are Women of Quality too,
the first Quality --


It Is very hard -- Will Not a Baronet's Lady pass?


No, nothing under a Right Honorable.


O inhumane! You don't expect their Names.


No, their Titles shall serve.


Alas, that is the same thing: Pray spare me their Titles; I Will describe their
Persons


Well, begin then: But take notice, if you are so ill a Painter, that I cannot
know the Person by your Picture of her, you must be condemned, like other bad
Painters, to write the Name at the bottom


Well, first then --

O unfortunate! she is come already; will you have Patience till another time --
I Will double the number


Well, on that Condition -- Take heed you don't fail me.


Hey day! I shall get a fine Reputation, by coming to see Fellows in a Morning.
Scandal, you Devil, are you here too? Oh Mr. Tattle, every thing is safe with
you, we know


Tattle.


Mum -- O Madam, you do me too much Honor.


Well Lady Galloper, how does Angelica?


Angelica? Manners!


What you will allow an absent Lover --


No, I Will allow a Lover present with his Mistress to be particular -- But
otherwise I think his Passion ought to give place to his Manners


But what if he have more Passion than Manners?


Then let him Marry and reform.


Marriage indeed may qualify the Fury of his Passion, but it very rarely mends
a Man's Manners


You are the most mistaken in the World; there is no Creature perfectly Civil,
but a Husband. For in a little time he grows only rude to his Wife, and that is
the highest good Breeding, for it begets his Civility to other People. Well,
I Will tell you News; but I suppose you hear your Brother Benjamin is landed. And
my Brother Foresight's Daughter is come out of the Country -- I assure you,
there is a Match talked of by the Old People -- Well, if he be but as great a
Sea-Beast, as she is a Land-Monster, we shall have a most Amphibious Breed --
The Progeny will be all Otters: he has been bred at Sea, and she has never been
out of the Country


Pox take 'em, their Conjunction bodes no good, I Am sure.


Now you talk of Conjunction, my Brother Foresight has cast both their
Nativities, and prognosticates an Admiral and an eminent Justice of the Peace
to be the Issue-Male of their two Bodies; it is the most superstitious Old Fool!
He would have persuaded me, that this was an Unlucky Day, and would not let me
come abroad: But I invented a Dream, and sent him to Artimodorus for
Interpretation, and so stole out to see you. Well, and what will you give me
now? Come, I must have something


Step into the next Room -- and I Will give you something.


Ay, we'll all give you something.


Well, what will you all give me?


Mine Is a Secret.


I thought you would give me something, that would be a trouble to you to keep.


And Scandal shall give you a good Name.


That Is more than he has for himself. And what will you give me, Mr. Tattle?


I? My Soul, Madam.


Pooh, No I thank you, I have enough to do to take care of my own. Well; but
I Will come and see you one of these Mornings: I hear you have a great many
Pictures


I have a pretty good Collection at your Service, some Originals.


Hang him, he has nothing but the Seasons and the Twelve Coesars, paultry
Copies; and the Five Senses, as ill represented as they are in himself: And he
himself is the only Original you will see there


Ay, but I hear he has a Closet of Beauties.


Yes, all that have done him Favors, if you will believe him.


Ay, let me see those, Mr. Tattle.


Oh Madam, those are Sacred to Love and Contemplation. No Man but the Painter
and my self was ever blessed with the Sight


Well, but a Woman --


Nor Woman, till she consented to have her Picture there too -- for then she is
obliged to keep the Secret


No, no; come to me if you would see Pictures.


You*


Yes Faith, I can show you your own Picture, and most of your Acquaintance to
the Life, and as like as at Knellers


O lying Creature -- Valentine, does not he lie? -- I cannot believe a word he
says


No indeed, he speaks truth now: For as Tattle has Pictures of all that have
granted him favors, he has the Pictures of all that have refused him; If
Satyrs, Descriptions, Characters and Lampoons are Pictures


Yes, mine are most in black and white. -- And yet there are some set out in
their true Colors, both Men and Women. I can show you Pride, Folly,
Affectation, Wantonness, Inconstancy, Covetousness, Dissimulation, Malice, and
Ignorance, all in one Piece. Then I can show you Lying, Foppery, Vanity,
Cowardice, Bragging, Lechery, Impotence and Ugliness in another Piece; and yet
one of these is a celebrated Beauty, and the other a professed Beau. I have
Paintings too, some pleasant enough


Come, let us hear 'em.


Why, I have a Beau in a Bagnio, Cupping for a Complexion, and Sweating for a
Shape


So.


Then I have a Lady burning of Brandy in a Cellar with a Hackney-Coachman.


O Devil! Well, but that Story is not true.


I have some Hieroglyphics too; I have a Lawyer with a hundred Hands, two
Heads, and but one Face; a Divine with two Faces, and one Head; and I have a
Soldier with his Brains in his Belly, and his Heart where his Head should be


And no Head?


No Head.


Pooh, this is all Invention. Have you never a Poet?


Yes, I have a Poet weighing Words, and selling Praise for Praise, and a
Critic picking his Pocket. I have another large Piece too, representing a
School; where there are huge Proportioned Critics, with long Wigs, Laced
Coats, Steinkirk Cravats, and terrible Faces; with Cat-calls in their Hands,
and Horn-books about their Necks. I have many more of this kind, very well
Painted, as you shall see


Well, I Will come, if it be only to disprove you.


Sir, here is the Steward again from your Father.


I Will come to him -- will you give me leave, I Will wait on you again presently.


No, I Will be gone. Come, who Squires me to the Exchange, I must call my Sister
Foresight there


I will; I have a mind to your Sister.


Civil!


I will; because I have a tender for your Ladyship.


That Is somewhat the better reason, to my Opinion.


Well, if Tattle entertains you, I have the better opportunity to engage your
Sister


Tell Angelica, I am about making hard Conditions to come abroad, and be at
liberty to see her


I Will give an account of you, and your Proceedings. If Indiscretion be a sign
of Love, you are the most a Lover of any Body that I know: You fancy that
parting with your Estate, will help you to your Mistress. -- In my mind he is a
thoughtless Adventurer, Who hopes to purchase Wealth, by selling Land
Or win a Mistress, with a losing hand.



HEy day! What are all the Women of my Family abroad? Is not my Wife come
home? Nor my Sister, nor my Daughter


No, Sir.


Mercy on us, what can be the meaning of it? Sure the Moon is in all her
Fortitudes; Is my Neice Angelica at home


Yes, Sir.


I believe you lie, Sir.


S^r?


I say you lie, Sir. It is impossible that any thing should be as I would have
it; for I was born, Sir, when the Crab was ascending, and all my Affairs go
backward


I cannot tell indeed, Sir.


No, I know you cannot, Sir: But I can tell, Sir, and foretell, Sir.

Nurse* Where Is your young Mistress?


Wee'st heart, I know not, they are none of 'em come home yet: Poor Child, I
warrant she is fond o'seeing the Town, -- Marry, pray Heaven they have given her
any Dinner, -- good lack-aday, ha, ha, ha, O strange; I Will vow and swear now,
ha, ha, ha, Marry and did you ever see the like


Why how now, what is the matter?


Pray Heaven send your Worship good Luck, Marry and Amen with all my heart, for
you have put on one Stocking with the wrong side outward


Ha, How? Faith and troth I Am glad of it, and so I have, that may be good Luck
in troth, in troth it may, very good Luck: Nay I have had some Omens; I got out
of Bed backwards too this morning, without *Premeditation; pretty good that
too; but then I stumbl'd coming down Stairs, and met a Weasel; bad Omens those:
some bad, some good, our lives are checkered, Mirth and Sorrow, Want and
Plenty, Night and Day, make up our time, -- But in troth I am pleased at my
Stocking. Very well pleased at my Stocking -- Oh here is my Neice! --

Sirrah, go tell Sir Sampson Legend, I Will wait on him, if he is at leisure, --
it is now Three a Clock, a very good hour for Business, Mercury Governs this
hour


Is not it a good hour for Pleasure too? Uncle, pray lend me your Coach, mine is
out of Order


What, would you be gadding too? Sure all Females are mad to day -- It is of
evil portent, and bodes Mischief* to the Master of a Family -- I remember an
old Prophecy written by Messehalah the Arabian, and thus translated by a
Reverend Buckinghamshire Bard. When Housewifes all the House forsake
And leave good Man to Brew and Bake,
Withouten Guile, then be it said,
That House does stond upon its Head;
And when the Head is set in Grond,
Ne marl, if it be fruitful fond.


Fruitful, the Head fruitful, that bodes Horns; the Fruit of the Head is Horns
-- Dear Neice, stay at home -- For by the Head of the House is meant the
Husband; the Prophecy needs no Explanation


Well, but I can neither make you a Cuckold, Uncle, by going abroad; nor secure
you from being one, by staying at home


Yes, yes; while there is one Woman left, the Prophecy is not in full Force.


But my Inclinations are in force, I have a mind to go abroad; and if you will not
lend me your Coach, I Will take a Hackney, or a Chair, and leave you to erect a
Scheme, and find who is in Conjunction with your Wife. Why don't you keep her at
Home, if you're Jealous when she is abroad? You know my Aunt is a little
Retrograde (as you call it) in her Nature. Uncle, I Am afraid you are not Lord
of the Ascendant, ha, ha, ha


Well, Jill-flirt, you are very pert -- and always ridiculing that Celestial
Science


Nay Uncle, don't be angry -- If you are, I Will reap up all your false
Prophecies, ridiculous Dreams, and idle Divinations. I Will swear you are a
Nuisance to the Neighborhood -- What a Bustle did you keep against the last
Invisible Eclipse, laying in Provision as 'twere for a Siege? What a World of
Fire and Candle, Matches and Tinderboxes did you purchase! One would have
thought we were ever after to live under Ground, or at least making a Voyage to
Greenland, to inhabit there all the dark Season


Why, you malapert Slut --


Will you lend me your Coach, or I Will go on -- Nay, I Will declare how you
prophesied Popery was coming, only because the Butler had mislaid some of the
Apostle's Spoons, and thought they were lost. Away went Religion and Spoon-meat
together -- Indeed, Uncle, I Will indite you for a Wizard


How Hussie! was there ever such a provoking Minx?


O merciful Father, how she talks!


Yes, I can make Oath of your unlawful Midnight Practices; you and the old
Nurse there --


Marry Heaven defend -- I at Midnight Practices -- O Lord, what is here to do?
-- I in unlawful Doings with my Masters Worship -- Why, did you ever hear the
like now -- Sir, did ever I do any thing of your Midnight Concerns -- but warm
your Bed, and tuck you up, and set the Candle, and your Tobacco-Box, and your
Urinal by you, and now and then rub the Soles of your Feet? -- O Lord, I! --


Yes, I saw you together, through the Keyhole of the Closet, one Night, like
Saul and the Witch of Endor, turning the Sieve and Sheers, and pricking your
Thumbs, to write poor innocent Servants Names in Blood, about a little
Nutmeg-Grater, which she had forgot in the Caudle-Cup -- Nay, I know something
worse, if I would speak of it --


I defy you, Hussie; but I Will remember this, I Will be revenged on you,
Cockatrice; I Will hamper you -- You have your Fortune in your own Hands -- But
I Will find a way to make your Lover, your Prodigal Spendthrift Gallant,
Valentine, pay for all, I will


Will you? I care not, but all shall out then -- Look to it, Nurse; I can bring
Witness that you have a great unnatural Teat under your Left Arm, and he
another; and that you Suckle a Young Devil in the Shape of a Tabby-Cat, by
turns, I can


A Teat, a Teat, I an unnatural Teat! O the false slanderous thing; feel, feel
here, if I have any thing but like another Christian,


I will have Patience, since it is the Will of the Stars I should be thus
tormented -- This is the effect of the malicious Conjunctions and Oppositions
in the Third House of my Nativity; there the Curse of Kindred was foretold --
But I will have my Doors locked up -- I Will punish you, not a Man shall enter my
House


Do Uncle, lock 'em up quickly before my Aunt come home -- You Will have a Letter
for Alimony to morrow morning -- But let me be gone first, and then let no
Mankind come near the House, but Converse with Spirits and the Celestial Signs,
the Bull, and the Ram, and the Goat. Bless me! there are a great many Horned
Beasts among the Twelve Signs, Uncle. But Cuckolds go to Heaven


But there is but one Virgin among the Twelve Signs, Spitfire, but one Virgin.


Nor there had not been that one, if she had had to do with any thing but
Astrologers, Uncle. That makes my Aunt go abroad


How? how? is that the reason? Come, you know something; tell me, and I Will
forgive you; do, good Neice -- Come, you shall have my Coach and Horses --
Faith and Troth you shall -- Does my Wife complain? Come, I know Women tell one
another -- She is young and sanguine, has a wanton Hazle Eye, and was born
under Gemini, which may incline her to Society; she has a Mole upon her Lip,
with a moist Palm, and an open Liberality on the Mount of Venus


Ha, ha, ha.


Do you laugh? -- Well Gentlewoman, I Will -- But come, be a good Girl, don't
perplex your poor Uncle, tell me -- will not you speak? Odd I Will --


Sir Sampson is coming down to wait upon you --


Good bu'y Uncle -- Call me a Chair -- I Will find out my Aunt, and tell her, she
must not come home


I Am so perplexed and vexed, I am not fit to receive him; I shall scarce
recover my self before the Hour be past: Go Nurse, tell Sir Sampson I Am ready
to wait on him


Yes, Sir.


Well -- Why, if I was born to be a Cuckold, there is no more to be said --


Nor no more to be done, Old Boy; that is plain -- here it is, I have it in my
Hand, Old Ptolomee; I Will make the ungracious Prodigal know who begat him; I
will, old Nostrodamus. What, I warrant my Son thought nothing belonged to a
Father, but Forgiveness and Affection; no Authority, no Correction, no
Arbitrary Power; nothing to be done, but for him to offend, and me to pardon. I
warrant you, if he danced till Doomsday, he thought I was to pay the Piper.
Well, but here it is under Black and White, Signatum, Sigillatum, and
Deliberatum; that as soon as my Son Benjamin is arrived, he is to make over to
him his Right of Inheritance. Where Is my Daughter that is to be -- hah! old
Merlin! body of me, I Am so glad I Am revenged on this undutiful Rogue


Odso, let me see; Let me see the Paper -- Ay, faith and troth, here it is, if
it will but hold -- I wish things were done, and the Conveyance made -- When
was this Signed, what Hour? Ods so, you should nave consulted me for the time.
Well, but we'll make haste --


Haste, ay, ay; haste enough, my Son Ben will be in Town to night -- I have
ordered my Lawyer to draw up Writings of Settlement and Jointure -- All shall
be done to Night -- No matter for the time; prithee, Brother Foresight, leave
Superstition -- Pox of the time; there is no time but the time present, there is
no more to be said of what is past, and all that is to come will happen. If the
Sun shine by Day, and the Stars by Night, why, we shall know one another's
Faces without the help of a Candle, and that is all the Stars are good for


How, how? Sir Sampson, that all? Give me leave to contradict you, and tell
you, you are ignorant


I tell you I am wise; and sapiens dominabitur astris; there is Latin for you to
prove it, and an Argument to confound your Ephemeris -- Ignorant! -- I tell
you, I have traveled old Fircu, and know the Globe. I have seen the Antipodes,
where the Sun rises at Midnight, and sets at Noonday


But I tell you, I have traveled, and traveled in the Coelestias Spheres,
know the Signs and the Planets, and their Houses. Can judge of Motions Direct
and Retrograde, of Sextiles, Quadrates, Trines and Oppositions, Fiery Trigons
and Aquatical Trigons. Know whether life shall be long or short, Happy, or
Unhappy, Whether Diseases are Cureable or Incureable. If Journeys shall be
prosperous, Undertakings successful; or Goods stoll'n recovered, I know --


I know the length of the Emperor of China's Foot; have kissed the Great
Mogull's Slipper, and rid a Hunting upon an Elephant with the Cham of Tartary,
-- Body of me, I have made a Cuckold of a King, and the present Majesty of
Bantam is the Issue of these Loins


I know when Travelers lie or speak Truth, when they don't know it themselves.


I have known an Astrologer made a Cuckold in the twinkling of a Star; and
seen a Conjurer, that could not keep the Devil out of his Wives Circle


What does he twit me with my Wife too, I must be better Informed of this, --

-- Do you mean my Wife, Sir Sampson? Though you made a Cuckold of the King of
Bantam, yet by the Body of the Sun --


By the Horns of the Moon, you would say, Brother Capricorn.


Capricorn in your Teeth, thou Modern Mandevil; Ferdinand Mendez Pinto was but
a Type of thee, thou Liar of the first Magnitude. Take back your Paper of
Inheritance; send your Son to Sea again. I Will wed my Daughter to an Egyptian
Mummy, e're she shall Incorporate with a Contemner of Sciences, and a defamer
of Virtue


Body of me, I have gone too far; -- I must not provoke honest Albumazar, -- an
Egyptian Mummy is an Illustrious Creature, my trusty Hieroglyphick; and may
have significations of futurity about him; Odsbuds, I would my Son were an
Egyptian Mummy for thy sake. What, thou art not angry for a Jest, my good Haly
-- I Reverence the Sun, Moon and Stars with all my heart. -- What, I Will make
thee a Present of a Mummy: Now I think on it, Body of me, I have a Shoulder of
an Egyptian King, that I purloyn'd from one of the Pyramids, powdered with
Hieroglyphics, thou shall have it sent home to thy House, and make an
Entertainment for all the Philomaths, and Students in Physic and Astrology in
and about London


But what do you know of my Wife, Sir Sampson?


Thy Wife is a Constellation of Virtues; she is the Moon, and thou art the Man
in the Moon: Nay, she is more Illustrious than the Moon; for she has her
Chastity without her Inconstancy, 'S'bud I was but in Jest

How now, who sent for you? Ha! what would you have?


Nay, if you were but in Jest. -- Who Is that Fellow? I don't like his
Physiognomy


My Son, Sir; what Son, Sir? My Son Benjamin, hoh?


No, Sir, Mr. Valentine, my Master, -- it is the first time he has been abroad
since his Consinement, and he comes to pay his Duty to you


Well, Sir.


He is here, Sir.


Your Blessing, Sir.


You Have had it already, Sir, I think I sent it you to day in a Bill of Four
thousand Pound: A great deal of Money, Brother Foresight


Aye indeed, Sir Sampson, a great deal of Money for a young Man, I wonder what
he can do with it


Body of me, so do I. -- Hark ye, Valentine, if there is too much, refund the
Superfluity; Do hear Boy


Superfluity, Sir, it will scarce pay my Debts, -- I hope you will have more
Indulgence, than to oblige me to those hard Conditions, which my necessity
Signed to


Sir, how I beseech you, what were you pleased to intimate, concerning
Indulgence


Why, Sir, that you would not go to the extremity of the Conditions, but
release me at least from some part. --


Oh Sir, I understand you, -- that is all, ha?


Yes, Sir, all that I presume to ask. -- But what you, out of Fatherly
fondness, will be pleased to add, shall be doubly welcome


No doubt of it, sweet Sir, but your filial Piety, and my Fatherly fondness
would fit like two Tallies. -- Here Is a Rogue, Brother Foresight, makes a
Bargain under Hand and Seal in the Morning, and would be released from it in
the Afternoon; here is a Rogue, Dog, here is Conscience and Honesty; this is your
Wit now, this is the Morality of your Wits! You are a Wit, and have been a
Beau, and may be a -- Why Sirrah, is it not here under Hand and Seal -- Can you
deny it


Sir, I don't deny it. --


Sirrah, you will be hanged; I shall live to see you go up Holborn-hill, -- Has
he not a Rogues face? -- Speak, Brother, you understand Physiognomy, a
Hanging-look to me; -- of all my Boys the most unlike me; a has a damned Tyburn
face, without the benefit of the Clergy


Hum -- truly I don't care to discourage a young Man, -- he has a violent death
in his face; but I hope no danger of Hanging


Sir, is this Usage for your Son? -- for that old, Weatherheaded fool, I know
how to laugh at him; but you, Sir --


You Sir; and you Sir: -- Why, who are you Sir?


Your Son, Sir.


That Is more than I know, Sir, and I believe not.


Faith, I hope not.


What, would you have your Mother a Whore! Did you ever hear the like! Did you
ever hear the like! Body of me --


I would have an Excuse for your Barbarity and Unnatural Usage.


Excuse! Impudence! why Sirrah, may not I do what I please? Are not you my
Slave? Did not I beget you? And might not I have chosen whether I would have
begot you or no? Ouns who are you? Whence came you? What brought you into the
World? How came you here, Sir? Here, to stand here, upon those two Legs, and
look erect with that audacious face, hah? Answer me that? Did you come a
Voluntier into the World? Or did I beat up for you with the lawful Authority of
a Parent, and press you to the service


I know no more why I came, than you do why you called me. But here I am, and
if you don't mean to provide for me, I desire you would leave me as you found
me


With all my heart: Come, Uncase, Strip, and go naked out of the World as you
came into it


My Clothes are soon put off: -- But you must also deprive me of Reason,
Thought, Passions, Inclinations, Affections, Appetites, Senses, and the huge
Train of Attendants that you begot along with me


Body of me, what a many headed Monster have I propagated?


I am of my self, a plain easy simple Creature; and to be kept at small
expense; but the Retinue that you gave me are craving and invincible; they are
so many Devils that you have raised, and will have employment


'Oons, what had I to do to get Children, -- cannot a private man be born
without all these followers: -- Why nothing under an Emperor should be born
with Appetites, -- Why at this rate a fellow that has but a Groat in his
Pocket, may have a Stomach capable of a Ten Shilling Ordinary


Nay, that is as clear as the Sun; I Will make Oath of it before any Justice in
Middlesex


Here Is a Cormorant too, -- 'S'heart this Fellow was not born with you? -- I
did not beget him, did I? --


By the Provision that is made for me, you might have begot me too: -- Nay, and
to tell your Worship another truth, I believe you did, for I find I was born
with those same Whoreson Appetites too; that my Master speaks of


Why look you there now, -- I Will maintain it, that by the rule of right Reason,
this fellow ought to have been born without a Palate -- 'S'heart, what should
he do with a distinguishing taste? -- I warrant now he would rather eat a Pheasant,
than a piece of poor John; and smell, now, why I warrant he can smell, and
loves Persumes above a stink. -- Why there is it; and Music, don't you love
Music Scoundrell


Yes, I have a reasonable good Ear, Sir, as to Jiggs and Country Dances; and
the like; I don't much matter your Sola's or Sonata's, they give me the Spleen


The Spleen, ha, ha, ha, a Pox confound you -- Sola's and Sonata's? 'Oons whose
Son are you? how were you engendered, Muckworm


I am by my Father, the Son of a Chairman, my Mother sold Oysters in Winter,
and Cucumbers in Summer; and I came up Stairs into the World; for I was born in
a Cellar


By your Looks, you should go up Stairs out of the World too, Friend.


And if this Rogue were Anatomized now, and dissected, he has his Vessels of
Digestion and Concoction, and so forth, large enough for the inside of a
Cardinal, this Son of a Cucumber. -- These things are unaccountable and
unreasonable, -- Body of me, why was not I a Bear? that my Cubs might have
lived upon sucking their Paws; Nature has been provident only to Bears and
Spiders; the one has its Nutriment in his own hands; and the other spins his
Habitation out of his Entrails


Fortune was provident enough to supply all the Necessities of my Nature; if I
had my right of Inheritance


Again! 'Ouns have not you four thousand Pound -- If I had it again, I would not
give thee a Groat, -- What would thou have me turn Pelican, and feed thee
out of my own Vitals? -- 'S'heart, live by your Wits, -- You were always fond
of the Wits, -- Now let us see, if you have Wit enough to keep your self? --
Your Brother will be in Town to Night, or to morrow morning, and then look you
perform Covenants, and so your Friend and Servant. -- Come Brother Foresight


I told you what your Visit would come to.


It Is as much as I expected -- I did not come to see him: I came to Angelica;
but since she was gone abroad, it was easily turned another way; and at least
looked well on my side: What Is here? Mrs. Foresight and Mrs. Frail, they are
earnest, -- I Will avoid 'em, -- Come this way, and go and enquire when Angelica
will return


What have you to do to watch me? -- 'S'life I Will do what I please.


You will?


Yes marry will I -- A great piece of business to go to Covent Garden Square in
a Hackney-Coach, and take a turn with one's Friend


Nay, two or three Turns, I Will take my Oath.


Well, what if I took twenty -- I warrant if you had been there, it had been
only innocent Recreation. -- Lord, where is the comfort of this Life, if we
cannot have the happiness of conversing where we like


But cannot you converse at home? -- I own it, I think there is no happiness like
conversing with an agreeable man; I don't quarrel at that, nor I don't think
but your Conversation was very innocent; but the place is public, and to be
seen with a man in a Hackney-Coach is scandalous: What if any Body else should
have seen you alight as I did? -- How can any Body be happy, while they are in
perpetual fear of being seen and censured? -- Besides it would not only reflect
upon you, Sister, but me


Pooh, here is a Clutter -- why should it reflect upon you? -- I don't doubt but
you have thought your self happy in a Hackney-Coach before now. -- If I had
gone to Knights-bridge, or to Chelsey, or to Spring-Garden, or Barn-Elms with*
a man alone -- something might have been said


Why, was I ever in any of these places? What do you mean Sister?


Was I? what do you mean?


You have been at a worse place.


I at a worse place, and with a man!


I suppose you would not go alone to the World's-End.


The World's end! What do you mean to Banter me?


Poor innocent! you don't know that there is a place called the World's-End?
I Will swear you can keep your Countenance purely, you would make an Admirable Player


I Will swear you have a great deal of Impudence, and in my mind too much for the
Stage


Very well, that will appear who has most, You never were at the World's End?


No.


You deny it positively to my Face.


Your Face, what is Your Face?


No matter for that, it is as good a Face as Yours.


Not by a Dozen Years wearing. -- But I do deny it positively to Your Face then.


I Will allow You now to find fault with my Face; -- for I Will swear your
impudence has put me out of Countenance: -- But look you here now, -- where did
you lose this Gold Bodkin? -- Oh Sister, Sister


My Bodkin!


Nay, it is Yours, look at it.


Well, if you go to that, where did you find this Bodkin? -- Oh Sister, Sister!
-- Sister every way


O Devil on it, that I could not discover her, without betraying my self.


I have heard Gentlemen say, Sister; that one should take great care, when one
makes a thrust in Fencing, not to lie open ones self


It Is very true, Sister: Well since all is out, and as you say, since we are
both Wounded, let us do that is often done in Duels, take care of one another,
and grow better Friends than before


With all my heart, ours are but slight Flesh-wounds, and if we keep 'em from
Air, not at all dangerous: Well, give me Your Hand in token of sisterly
secrecy and affection


Here it is with all my heart.


Well, as an earnest of Friendship and Confidence: I Will acquaint You with a
design that I have: To tell Truth, and speak openly one to another; I Am afraid
the World have observed us more than we have observed one another. You have a
Rich Husband, and are provided for, I am at a loss, and have no great Stock
either of Fortune or Reputation; and therefore must look sharply about me. Sir
Sampson has a Son that is expected to Night; and by the Account I have heard of
his Education, can be no Conjurer: The Estate You know is to be made over to
him: -- Now if I could wheedle him, Sister, ha? You understand me


I do; and will help you to the utmost of my power -- And I can tell you one
thing that falls out luckily enough; my awkard Daughter-in-Law, who you know is
designed for his Wife, is grown fond of Mr. Tattle; now if we can improve that,
and make her have an Aversion for the Booby, it may go a great way toward his
liking of you. Here they come together; and let us contrive some way or other
to leave 'em together


Mother, Mother, Mother, look you here.


Fie, fie, Miss, how you bawl -- besides, I have told you, you must not call me
Mother


What must I call you then, are not you my Father's Wife?


Madam; you must say Madam -- By my Soul, I shall fancy my self Old indeed, to
have this great Girl call me Mother -- Well, but Miss, what are you so
overjoyed at


Look you here, Madam then, what Mr. Tattle has given me -- Look you here
Cousin, here is a Snuff Box; nay, there is Snuff in it; -- here, will you have any
-- Oh good! how sweet it is -- Mr. Tattle is all over sweet, his Perruke is
sweet, and his Gloves are sweet, -- and his Handkerchief is sweet, pure sweet,
sweeter than Roses -- Smell him Mother, Madam, I mean -- He gave me this Ring
for a kiss


O fie Miss, you must not kiss and tell.


Yes; I may tell my Mother -- And he says he will give me something to make me
smell so -- Oh pray lend me your Handkerchief -- Smell Cousin; he says, he will
give me something that will make my Smocks smell this way -- Is not it pure? --
It Is better than Lavender mun -- I Am resolved I will not let Nurse put any more
Lavender among my Smocks -- ha, Cousin


Fie, Miss; amongst your Linen, you must say -- You must never say Smock.


Why, It is not bawdy, is it Cousin?


Oh Madam; you are too severe upon Miss; you must not find fault with her
pretty simplicity, it becomes her strangely -- pretty Miss, don't let 'em
persuade you out of your Innocence


Oh, Demm you Toad -- I wish you don't persuade her out of her Innocence.


Who I, Madam? -- Oh Lord, how can your Ladyship have such a thought -- sure
you don't know me


Ah Devil, sly Devil -- He Is as close, Sister, as a Confessor -- He thinks we
don't observe him


A cunning Cur; how soon he could find out a fresh harmless Creature; and left
us, Sister, presently


Upon Reputation. --


They Are all so, Sister, these Men -- they love to have the spoiling of a Young
Thing, they are as fond of it, as of being first in the Fashion, or of seeing a
new Play the first day, -- I warrant it would break Mr. Tattle's Heart, to
think that any body else should be beforehand with him


Oh Lord, I swear I would not for the World --


O hang you; who will believe you? -- You Would be hanged before you would confess -- we
know you -- she is very pretty! -- Lord, what pure red and white! -- she looks
so wholesome; -- never stir, I don't know, but I fancy, if I were a Man --


How you love to jear one, Cousin.


Heark'ee, Sister -- by my Soul the Girl is spoiled already -- do you think
she will ever endure a great lubberly Tarpawlin -- Gad I warrant you, she will not
let him come near her, after Mr. Tattle


OF my Soul, I Am afraid not -- eh! -- filthy Creature, that smells all of Pitch
and Tarr -- Devil take you, you confounded Toad -- why did you see her, before
she was Married


Nay, why did we let him -- my Husband will hang us -- He Will think we brought
'em acquainted


Come, Faith let us be gone -- If my Brother Foresight should find us with
them; -- He Would think so, sure enough


So he would -- but then leaving 'em together is as bad -- And he is such a sly
Devil, he will never miss an opportunity


I don't care; I will not be seen in it.


Well, If you should, Mr. Tattle, you will have a world to answer for, remember I
wash my hands of it, I Am thoroughly Innocent


What makes 'em go away, Mr. Tattle? What do they mean, do you know?


Yes, my Dear -- I think I can guess -- But hang me if I know the reason of it.


Come, must not we go too?


No, no, they don't mean that.


No! what then? what shall you and I do together?


I must make Love to you, pretty Miss; will you let me make Love to you?


Yes, if you please.


Frank, I Gad at least. What a Pox does Mrs. Foresight mean by this Civility?
Is it to make a Fool of me? Or does she leave us together out of good Morality,
and do as she would be done by -- Gad I Will understand it so


Well; And how will you make Love to me -- Come, I long to have you begin; --
must I make Love too? You must tell me how


You must let me speak Miss, you must not speak first; I must ask you
Questions, and you must answer


What, is it like the Catechism? -- Come then ask me.


De'e you think you can Love me?


Yes.


Pooh, Pox, you must not say yes already; I shall not care a Farthing for you then
in a twinkling


What must I say then?


Why you must say no, or you believe not, or you cannot tell --


Why, must I tell a Lie then?


Yes, if you would be well bred. All well-bred Persons Lie -- Besides, you are
a Woman, You must never speak what you think: Your words must contradict your
thoughts; but your actions may contradict your words. So, when I ask you, if
you can Love me, you must say no, but you must Love me too -- If I tell you you
are Handsome, you must deny it, and say I flatter you -- But you must think
your self more Charming than I speak you: -- And like me, for the Beauty which
I say you have, as much as if I had it my self -- If I ask you to Kiss me, you
must be angry, but you must not refuse me. If I ask you for more, you must be
more angry, -- but more complying; and as soon as ever I make you say you will cry
out, you must be sure to hold your Tongue


O Lord, I swear this is pure, -- I like it better than our old fashioned
Country way of speaking ones mind; -- and must not you lie too


Hum -- Yes -- But you must believe I speak Truth.


O Gemini! well, I always had a great mind to tell Lies -- but they frighted
me, and said it was a sin


Well, my pretty Creature; will you make me happy by giving me a Kiss?


No, indeed; I Am angry at you. --


Hold, hold, that is pretty well, -- but you should not have given it me, but
have suffered me to take it


Well, we'll do it again.


With all my heart, -- Now then my little Angel.


Pish.


That Is right, -- again my Charmer.


O fie, nay, now I cannot abide you.


Admirable! That was as well as if you had been born and bred in Covent Garden,
all the days of your Life; -- And will not you show me, pretty Miss, where your
Bedchamber is


No, indeed will not I: But I Will run there, and hide my self from you behind the
Curtains


I Will follow you.


Ah, but I Will hold the Door with both Hands, and be angry; -- and you shall
push me down before you come in


No, I Will come in first, and push you down afterward.


Will you? then I Will be more angry, and more complying.


Then I Will make you cry out.


Oh but you shall not, for I Will hold my Tongue. --


Oh my Dear, apt Scholar.


Well, now I Will run and make more haste than you.


You shall not fly so fast, as I Will pursue.


MIss, Miss, Miss Prue -- Mercy on me, marry and Amen: Why, what is become of
the Child? -- Why Miss, Miss Foresight -- Sure she has not locked her self up
in her Chamber, and gone to sleep, or to Prayers; Miss, Miss, I hear her --
Come to your Father, Child: Open the Door -- Open the Door Miss -- I hear you
cry hushed -- O Lord, who is there

What Is here to do? -- O the Father! a Man with her! -- Why, Miss I say, God's
my Life, here is fine doings toward -- O Lord, We Are all undone -- O you young
Harlotr

Ods my Life, will not you open the Door? I Will come in the back way.


O Lord, she is coming -- and she will tell my Father, what shall I do now?


Pox take her; if she had staid two Minutes longer, I should have wished for
her coming


O Dear, what shall I say? Tell me, Mr. Tattle, tell me a Lie.


There Is no occasion for a Lie; I could never tell a Lie to no purpose -- But
since we have done nothing, we must say nothing, I think. I hear her -- I Will
leave you together, and come off as you can


You cannot accuse me of Inconstancy; I never told you, that I loved you.


But I can accuse you of Uncertainty, for not telling me whether you did or no.


You mistake Indifference for Uncertainty; I never had Concern enough to ask my
self the Question


Nor good Nature enough to answer him that did ask you: I Will say that for you,
Madam


What, are you setting up for good Nature?


Only for the affectation of it, as the Women do for ill Nature.


Persuade your Friend, that it is all Affectation.


I shall receive no Benefit from the Opinion: For I know no effectual
Difference between continued Affectation and Reality


Scandal, are you in private Discourse, any thing of Secrecy?


Yes, but I dare trust you; We were talking of Angelica's Love for Valentine;
you will not speak of it


No, no, not a Syllable -- I know that is a Secret, for it is whispered every
where


Ha, ha, ha.


What is, Mr. Tattle? I heard you say something was whispered every where.


Your Love of Valentine.


How!


No, Madam, his Love for your Ladyship -- Gad take me, I beg your Pardon -- for
I never heard a Word of your Ladyships Passion, till this instant


My Passion! And who told you of my Passion, pray Sir?


Why, is the Devil in you? Did not I tell it you for a Secret?


Gadso; but I thought she might have been trusted with her own Affairs.


Is that your Discretion? trust a Woman with her self?


You say true, I beg your Pardon; -- I Will bring all off -- It was impossible,
Madam, for me to imagine, that a Person of your Ladyship's Wit and Gallantry,
could have so long received the passionate Adddresses of the accomplished
Valentine, and yet remain insensible; therefore you will pardon me, if from a
just weight of his Merit, with your Ladyshpis good Judgment, I formed the
Balance of a reciprocal Affection


O the Devil, what damned Costive Poet has given thee this Lesson of Fustian to
get by Rote


I dare swear you wrong him, it is his own -- And Mr. Tattle only judges of the
Success of others, from the Effects of his own Merit. For certainly Mr. Tattle
was never denied any thing in his Life


O Lord! yes indeed, Madam, several times.


I swear I don't think it is possible.


Yes, I vow and swear I have: Lord, Madam, I Am the most unfortunate Man in the
World, and the most cruelly used by the Ladies


Nay, now you're ungrateful.


No, I hope not -- it is as much Ingratitude to own some Favors, as to conceal
others


There, now it is out.


I don't understand you now. I thought you had never asked any thing, but what
a Lady might modestly grant, and you confess


So faith, your Business is done here; now you may go brag somewhere else.


Brag! O Heavens! Why, did I name any body?


No; I suppose that is not in your Power; but you would if you could, no doubt
on it


Not in my Power, Madam! What does your Ladyship mean, that I have no Woman's
Reputation in my Power


Ouns, why you will not own it, will you?


Faith, Madam, you're in the right; no more I have, as I hope to be saved; I
never had it in my Power to say any thing to a Lady's Prejudice in my Life --
For as I was telling you Madam, I have been the most unsuccessful Creature
living, in things of that nature; and never had the good Fortune to be trusted
once with a Lady's Secret, not once


No.


Not once, I dare answer for him.


And I Will answer for him; for I Am sure if he had, he would have told me; I
find, Madam, you don't know Mr. Tattle


No indeed, Madam, you don't know me at all, I find: For sure my intimate
Friends would have known --


Then it seems you would have told, if you had been trusted.


O pox, Scandal, that was too far put -- Never have told Particulars, Madam.
Perhaps I might have talked as of a Third Person -- or have introduced an Amor
of my own, in Conversation, by way of Novel: but never have explained
Particulars


But whence comes the Reputation of Mr. Tattle's Secrecy, if he was never
trusted


Why thence it arises -- The thing is proverbially spoken; but may be applied
to him -- As if we should say in general Terms, He only is Secret who never was
trusted; a Satirical Proverb upon our Sex -- There Is another upon yours -- As
she is chaste, who was never asked the Question. That Is all


A couple of very civil Proverbs, truly: It Is hard to tell whether the Lady or
Mr. Tattle be the more obliged to you. For you found her Virtue, upon the
Backwardness of the Men; and his Secrecy, upon the mistrust of the Women


Gad, it is very true, Madam, I think we are obliged to acquit our selves -- And
for my part -- But your Ladyship is to speak first --


Am I? Well, I freely confess I have resisted a great deal of Temptation.


And I Gad, I have given some Temptation that has not been resisted.


Good.


I cite Valentine here, to declare to the Court, how fruitless he has found his
Endeavors, and to confess all his Solicitations and my Denials


I am ready to plead, Not guilty for you; and Guilty, for my self.


So, why this is fair, here is Demonstration with a Witness.


Well, my Witnesses are not present -- But I confess I have had Favors from
Persons -- But as the Favors are numberless, so the Persons are nameless


Pooh, pox, this proves nothing.


No? I can show Letters, Locketts, Pictures, and Rings; and if there be
occasion for Witnesses, I can summon the Maids at the Chocolate-Houses, all the
Porters of Pall Mall and Covent Garden, the Door-keepers at the Playhouse, the
Drawers at Locket's, Pontack's, the Rummer, Spring-Garden; my own Landlady and
Valet de Chamber; all who shall make Oath, that I receive more Letters than the
Secretary's Office; and that I have more Vizor-Masks to enquire for me, than
ever went to see the Hermaphrodite, or the Naked Prince. And it is notorious,
that in a Country Church, once, an Enquiry being made, who I was, it was
answered, I was the famous Tattle, who had ruined so many Women


It was there, I suppose, you got the Nickname of the Great Turk.


True; I was called Turk-Tattle all over the Parish -- The next Sunday all the
Old Women kept their Daughters at home, and the Parson had not half his
Congregation. He would have brought me into the Spiritual Court, but I was
revenged upon him, for he had a handsome Daughter whom I initiated into the
Science. But I repented it afterward, for it was talked of in Town -- And a
Lady of Quality that shall be nameless, in a raging Fit of Jealousy, came down
in her Coach and Six Horses, and exposed her self upon my Account; Gad, I was
sorry for it with all my Heart -- You know whom I mean -- You know where we
raffl'd --


Mum, Tattle.


'Sdeath, are not you ashamed?


O barbarous! I never heard so insolent a piece of Vanity -- Fie, Mr. Tattle --
I Will swear I could not have believed it -- Is this your Secrecy


Gad so, the Heat of my Story carried me beyond my Discretion, as the Heat of
the Lady's Passion hurried her beyond her Reputation -- But I hope you don't
know whom I mean; for there were a great many Ladies raffled -- Pox on it, now
could I bite off my Tongue


No doubt on it; for then you will tell us no more -- Come, I Will recommend a Song
to you upon the Hint of my two Proverbs, and I see one in the next Room that
will sing it


For Heaven's sake, if you do guess, say nothing; Gad, I Am very unfortunate.


Pray sing the first Song in the last New Play.


ANymph and a Swain to Apollo once prayed,
The Swain had been Iilred, the Nymph been Be tray'd
Their Intent was to try if his Oracle knew
E're a Nymph that was Chaste, or a Swain that was True.
Apollo was mute, and had like to have been posed,
But sagely at length he this Secret disclosed:
He alone will not Betray in whom none will Confide,
And the Nymph may be Chaste that has never been Tried.
Is Ben come? Odso, my Son Ben come? Odd, I Am glad on it: Where is he? I long to
see him. Now, Mrs. Frail, you shall see my Son Ben -- Body of me, he is the Hopes
of my Family -- I have not seen him these Three Years -- I warrant he is grown --
Call him in, bid him make haste -- I Am ready to cry for Joy


Now Miss, you shall see your Husband.


Pish, he shall be none of my Husband.


Hush: Well he shall not, leave that to me -- I Will beckon Mr. Tattle to us.


Will Not you stay and see your Brother?


We are the Twin-Stars, and cannot shine in one Sphere; when he Rises I must
Set -- Besides, if I should stay, I don't know but my Father in good Nature may
press one to the immediate Signing the Deed of Conveyance of my Estate, and
I Will deferr it as long as I can -- Well, you will come to a Resolution


I cannot. Resolution must come to me, or I shall never have one.


Come, Valentine, I Will go with you; I Have something in my Head to communicate to
you


What, is my Son Valentine gone? What, is he sneaked off, and would not see his
Brother? There Is an Unnatural Whelp! There Is an ill natured Dog! What, were you
here too, Madam, and could not keep him! Could neither Love, nor Duty, nor
Natural Affection oblige him. Odsbud, Madam, have no more to say to him; he is
not worth your Consideration. The Rogue has not a Dram of Generous Love about
him: All Interest, all Interest; he is an undone Scoundrel, and courts your
Estate: Body of me, he does not care a Doit for your Person


I Am pretty even with him, Sir Sampson; for if ever I could have liked any
thing in him, it should have been his Estate too: But since that is gone, the
Bait's off, and the naked Hook appears


Odsbud, well spoken; and you are a Wiser Woman than I thought you were: For
most young Women nowadays are to be tempted with a naked Hook


If I marry, Sir Sampson, I Am for a good Estate with any Man, and for any Man
with a good Estate: Therefore if I were obliged to make a Choice, I declare I Would
rather have you than your Son


Faith and Troth you're a wise Woman, and I Am glad to hear you say so; I was
afraid you were in Love with the Reprobate; Odd, I was sorry for you with all
my Heart: Hang him, Mungrel; cast him off; you shall see the Rogue show
himself, and make Love to some desponding Cadua of Fourscore for Sustenance.
Odd, I love to see a young Spend thrist forced to cling to an Old Woman for
Support, like Ivy round a dead Oak: Faith I do; I love to see 'em hug and
cotton together, like Down upon a Thistle


Where Is Father?


There, Sir, his back's toward you.


My Son Ben! bless thee my dear Boy; body of me, thou art heartily welcome.


Thank you Father, and I Am glad to see you.


Odsbud, and I Am glad to see thee, kiss me Boy, kiss me again and again, dear
Ben


So, so, enough Father -- Mess, I Would rather kiss these Gentlewomen.


And so thou shall, -- Mrs. Angelica, my Son Ben.


Forsooth an you please --

Nay Mistress, I Am not for dropping Anchor here; About Ship I faith --

Nay, and you too, my little Cock-boat -- so --


Sir, you're welcome ashore.


Thank you, thank you Friend.


Thou have been many a weary League Ben, since I saw thee.


Ey, ey, been! Been far enough, an that be all -- well Father, and how do all
at home? How does Brother Dick, and Brother Val


Dick, body of me, Dick has been dead these two Years; I writ you word, when
you were at Legorne


Mess, and that is true: marry I had forgot. Dick's dead as you say -- well, and
how? I have a many Questions to ask you; well, you be'nt Married again, Father,
be you


No, I intend you shall Marry, Ben; I would not Marry for thy sake.


Nay, what does that signify? -- an you Marry again -- Why then, I Will go to
Sea again, so there is one for the other, an that be all -- Pray don't let me be
your hindrance; even Marry a God's Name an the wind sit that way. As for my
part, may-hap I have no mind to Marry


That would be pity, such a Handsome Young Gentleman.


Handsome! he, he, he, nay forsooth, an you be for Joking, I Will Joke with you,
for I love my jest, an the Ship were sinking, as we sayn at Sea. But I Will tell
you why I don't much stand toward Matrimony. I love to roam about from Port
to Port, and from Land to Land: I could never abide to be Portbound as we call
it: Now a man that is married, has as it were, do you see, his seet in the
Bilboes, and may hap may not get 'em out again when he would


Ben's a Wagg.


A man that is married, do you see, is no more like another man, than a
Galley-slave is like one of us free Sailors, he is chained to an Oar all his
life; and may-hap forced to tug a leaky Vessel into the Bargain


A very Wag, Ben's a very Wag; only a little rough, he wants a little Polishing.


Not at all; I like his humor mightily, it is plain and honest, I should like
such a humor in a Husband extremely


Say'n you so forsooth? Marry and I should like such a handsome Gentlewoman for
a Bedfellow hugely, how say you Mistress, would you like going to Sea? Mess
you're a tight Vessel, and well rigged, an you were but as well Manned


I should not doubt that, if you were Master of me.


But I Will tell you one thing, an you come to Sea in a high Wind, or that Lady.
-- You may not carry so much Sail o'your Head -- Top and Top-gallant by the Mess


No, why so?


Why an you do, You may run the risk to be overset, and then you will carry your
Keels above Water, he, he, he


I swear, Mr. Benjamin is the verriest Wag in nature; an absolute Sea-wit.


Nay, Ben has Parts, but as I told you before, they want a little Polishing:
You must not take any thing ill, Madam


No, I hope the Gentlewoman is not angry; I mean all in good part: For if I
give a Jest, I Will take a Jest: And so forsooth you may be as free with me


I thank you, Sir, I am not at all offended; -- but methinks Sir Sampson, You
should leave him alone with his Mistress. Mr. Tattle, we must not hinder Lovers


Well Miss, I have your promise.


Body of me, Madam, you say true: -- Look you Ben; this is your Mistress, --
Come Miss, you must not be shamefaced, we'll leave you together


I cannot abide to be left alone, may not my Cousin stay with me?


No, no. Come, let us away.


Look you Father, may-hap the young Woman may not take a liking to me. --


I warrant thee Boy, Come, come, we'll be gone; I Will venture that.


Come Mistress, will you please to sit down, for an you stand a stern a that'n,
we shall never grapple together, -- Come, I Will haule a Chair; there, an you
please to sit, I Will sit by you


You need not sit so near one, if you have any thing to say, I can hear you
farther off, I an't deaf


Why that is true as you say, nor I an't dumb, I can be heard as far as another,
-- I Will heave off to please you

An we were a League asunder, I Would undertake to hold Discourse with you, an
'twere not a main high Wind indeed, and full in my Teeth. Look you forsooth, I
am as it were, bound for the Land of Matrimony; it is a Voyage do you see that was
none of my seeking, I was commanded by Father, and if you like of it, may-hap I
may steer into your Harbor. How say you Mistress? the short of the thing is
this, that if you like me, and I like you, we may chance to swing in a Hammock
together


I don't know what to say to you, nor I don't care to speak with you at all.


No, I Am sorry for that. -- But pray why are you so scornful?


As long as one must not speak one's mind, one had better not speak at all, I
think, and truly I will not tell a lie for the matter


Nay, You say true in that, it is but a folly to lie: For to speak one thing,
and to think just the contrary way; is as it were, to look one way, and to row
another. Now, for my part do you see, I Am for carrying things above Board, I Am
not for keeping any thing under Hatches, -- so that if you ben't as willing as
I, say so a God's name, there is no harm done; may-hap you may be shame-fac'd,
some Maidens thof' they love a man well enough, yet they don't care to tell'n
so to's face: If that is the Case, why silence gives consent


But I Am sure it is not so, for I Will speak sooner than you should believe that;
and I Will speak truth, though one should always tell a lie to a man; and I don't
care, let my Father do what he will; I Am too big to be whipped, so I Will tell you
plainly, I don't like you, nor love you at all, nor never will, that is more:
So, there is your answer for you; and don't trouble me no more, you ugly thing


Look you Young Woman, You may learn to give good words however. I spoke you
fair do you see, and civil. -- As for your Love or your liking, I don't value it
of a Rope's end; -- And may-hap I like you as little as you do me: -- What I
said was in Obedience to Father; Gad I fear a Whipping no more than you do. But
I tell you one thing, if you should give such Language at Sea, you would have a Cat
of Nine-tails laid cross your Shoulders. Flesh who are you? You heard the other
handsome Young Woman speak civilly to me, of her own accord: Whatever you think
of your self, Gad I don't think you are any more to compare to her, than a Cann
of Small-beer to a Bowl of Punch


Well, and there is a handsome Gentleman, and a fine Gentleman, and a sweet
Gentleman, that was here that loves me, and I love him; and if he sees you
speak to me any more, he will thrash your Jacket for you, he will, you great
Sea-calf


What, do you mean that fair-Weather Spark that was here just now? Will he
thrash my Jacket? -- Let'n, -- let'n, -- But an he comes near me, may-hap I may
given a Salt Eel for's Supper, for all that. What does Father mean to leave me
alone as soon as I come home, with such a dirty dowdy. -- Sea-calf? I an't Calf
enough to lick your Chalked face, You Cheese-curd you, -- Marry thee! Oons I Will
Marry a Lapland-Witch as soon, and live upon selling of contrary Winds, and
Wracked Vessels


I will not be called Names, nor I will not be abused thus, so I will not. -- If I were
a man, --

-- You durst not talk at this rate -- No you durst nor, you stinking
Tar-barrel


They have quarreled just as we could wish.


Tar-barrel? Let your Sweetheart there call me so, if he will take your part,
Your Tom Essence, and I Will say something to him; Gad I Will lace his Musk-Doublet
for him, I Will make him stink; he shall smell more like a Weasel than a
Civet-Cat, before I have done with 'en


Bless me, what is the matter? Miss, what does she cry? -- Mr. Benjamin, what
have you done to her


Let her cry: The more she cries, the less she will -- she has been gathering
foul weather in her Mouth, and now it rains out at her Eyes


Come, Miss, come along with me, and tell me, poor Child.


Lord, what shall we do, there is my Brother Foresight, and Sir Sampson coming.
Sister, do you take Miss down into the Parlour, and I Will carry Mr. Benjamin
into my Chamber, for they must not know that they are fallen out. -- Come, Sir,
will you venture your self with me


Venture, Mess, and that I will, though 'twere to Sea in a Storm.


I left 'em together here; What are they gone? Ben's a brisk Boy: He has got
her into a Corner, Father's own Son faith, he will touzle her, and mouzle her: The
Rogue's sharp set, coming from Sea, if he should not stay for saying Grace, old
Foresight, but fall too without the help of a Parson, ha? Odd if he should I
could not be angry with him; twould be but like me, A Chip of the Old Block.
Ha! you are melancholy old Prognostication; As melancholy as if thou had
spilt the Salt, or pared thy Nails of a Sunday: -- Come, Cheer up, look about
thee: Look up old StarGazer. Now is he poring upon the Ground for a crooked
Pin, or an old Horse-nail, with the head toward him


Sir Sampson, we'll have the Wedding to morrow morning.


With all my Heart.


At Ten a Clock, punctually at Ten.


To a Minute, to a Second; thou shall set thy Watch, and the Bridegroom shall
observe it is Motions; they shall be married to a Minute, go to Bed to a Minute;
and when the Alarm strikes, they shall keep time like the Figures of St.
Dunstan's Clock, and Consummatum est shall ring all over the Parish


Sir Sampson, sad News.


Bless us!


Why, what is the matter?


Cannot you guess at what ought to afflict you and him, and all of us, more than
any thing else


Body of me, I don't know any universal Grievance, but a new Tax, and the loss
of the Canary Fleet. Without Popery should be landed in the West, or the French
Fleet were at Anchor at Blackwall


No. Undoubtedly Mr. Foresight knew all this, and might have prevented it.


It Is no Earthquake!


No, not yet; nor Whirlwind. But we don't know what it may come to -- But it
has had a Consequence already that touches us all


Why, body of me, out with it.


Something has appeared to your Son Valentine -- He Is gone to Bed upon it, and
very ill -- He speaks little, yet says he has a World to say. Asks for his
Father and the Wise Foresight; talks of Raymond Lully, and the Ghost of Lilly.
He has Secrets to impart I suppose to you two. I can get nothing out of him but
Sighs. He desires he may see you in the Morning, but would not be disturbed to
Night, because he has some Business to do in a Dream


Hoity toity, What have I to do with his Dreams or his Divination -- Body of
me, this is a Trick to defer Signing the Conveyance. I warrant the Devil will
tell him in a Dream, that he must not part with his Estate: But I Will bring him
a Parson to tell him, that the Devil's a Liar -- Or if that will not do, I Will
bring a Lawyer that shall out-lie the Devil. And so I Will try whether my
Black-Guard or his shall get the better of the Day


Alas, Mr. Foresight, I Am afraid all is not right -- You are a Wise Man, and a
Conscientious Man; a Searcher into Obscurity and Futurity; and if you commit an
Error, it is with a great deal of Consideration, and Discretion, and Caution --


Ah, good Mr. Scandal --


Nay, nay, it is manifest; I do not flatter you -- But Sir Sampson is hasty,
very hasty; -- I Am afraid he is not scrupulous enough, Mr. Foresight -- He has
been wicked, and Heaven grant he may mean well in his Assair with you -- But my
Mind gives me, these things cannot be wholly insignificant. You are wise, and
should not be over-reached, methinks you should not --


Alas, Mr. Scandal -- Humanum est errare.


You say true, Man will err; mere Man will err -- but you are something more --
There have been wise Men; but they were such as you -- Men who consulted the
Stars, and were Observers of Omens -- Solomon was wise, but how? -- by his
Judgment in Astrology -- So says Pineda in his Third Book and Eighth Chapter --


You are learned, Mr. Scandal --


A Trifler -- but a Lover of Art -- And the Wise Men of the East owed their
Instruction to a Star, which is rightly observed by Gregory the Great in favor
of Astrology! And Albertus Magnus makes it the most valuable Science, Because,
says he, it teaches us to consider the Causation of Causes, in the Causes of
things


I protest I honor you, Mr. Scandal -- I did not think you had been read in
these matters -- Few Young Men are inclined --


I thank my Stars that have inclined me -- But I fear this Marriage and making
over this Estate, this transferring of a rightful Inheritance, will bring
Judgments upon us. I prophecy it, and I would not have the Fate of Cassandra,
not to be believed. Valentine is disturbed, what can be the Cause of that? And
Sir Sampson is hurried on by an unusual Violence -- I fear he does not act
wholly from himself; methinks he does not look as he used to do


He was always of an impetuous Nature -- But as to this marriage I have
consulted the Science; and all Appearances are prosperous --


Come, come, Mr. Foresight, let not the Prospect of Worldly Lucre carry you
beyond your Judgment, nor against your Conscience -- You are not satisfied that
you act justly


How!


You are not satisfied, I say -- I am loath to discourage you -- But it is
palpable that you are not satisfied


How does it appear, Mr. Scandal, I think I am very well satisfied.


Either you suffer your self to deceive your self; or you do not know your self.


Pray explain your self.


Do you sleep well o'nights?


Very well.


Are you certain? You do not look so.


I am in Health, I think.


So was Valentine this Morning; and looked just so.


How! Am I altered any way? I don't perceive it.


That may be, but your Beard is longer than it was two Hours ago.


Indeed! bless me.


Husband, will you go to Bed? It Is Ten a Clock. Mr. Scandal, your Servant --


Pox on her, she has interrupted my Design -- But I must work her into the
Project. You keep early Hours, Madam


Mr. Foresight is punctual, we sit up after him.


My Dear, pray lend me your Glass, your little Lookingglass.


Pray lend it him, Madam -- I Will tell you the reason.

My Passion for you is grown so violent -- that I am no longer Master of my
self -- I was interrupted in the morning, when you had Charity enough to give
me your Attention, and I had Hopes of finding another opportunity of explaining
my self to you -- but was disappointed all this day; and the Uneasiness that
has attended me ever since, brings me now hither at this unseasonable hour --


Was there ever such Impudence, to make Love to me before my Husband's Face?
I Will Swear I Will tell him


Do, I Will dye a Martyr, rather than disclaim my Passion. But come a little
farther this way, and I Will tell you what Project I had to get him out of the
way; that I might have an opportunity of waiting upon you


I do not see any Revolution here; -- Methinks I look with a serene and benign
aspect -- pale, a little pale -- but the Roses of these Cheeks have been
gathered many Years; -- ha! I do not like that sudden flushing -- gone
already! -- hem, hem, hem! faintish. My Heart is pretty good; yet it beats; and
my Pulses ha! -- I have none -- Mercy on me -- hum -- Yes, here they are --
Gallop, gallop, gallop, gallop, gallop, gallop, hey! Whither will they hurry
me? -- Now they are gone again -- And now I Am faint again; and pale again, and
hem! and my hem! -- breath, hem! -- grows short; hem! hem! he, he, hem


It takes, pursue it in the name of Love and Pleasure.


How do you do, Mr. Foresight?


Hum, not so well as I thought I was. Lend me your Hand.


Look you there now -- Your Lady says your Sleep has been unquiet of late.


Very likely.


OF mighty restless, but I was afraid to tell him so -- He has been subject to
Talking and Starting


And did not use to be so.


Never, never; till within these three Nights; I cannot say that he has once
broken my Rest, since we have been Married


I will go to Bed.


Do so, Mr. Foresight, and say your Prayers; -- He looks better than he did.


Nurse, Nurse!


Do you think so, Mr. Scandal?


Yes, yes, I hope this will be gone by Morning, taking it in time. --


I hope so.


Nurse; your Master is not well; put him to Bed.


I hope you will be able to see Valentine in the Morning, -- you had best take
a little Diacodion and Cowslip water, and lie upon your back, may be you may
dream


I thank you Mr. Scandal, I will -- Nurse, let me have a Watch-light, and lay
the Crumbs of Comfort by me. --


Yes, Sir.


And -- hem, hem! I am very faint. --


No, no, you look much better.


Do I? And do you hear -- bring me, let me see -- within a quarter of Twelve --
hem -- he, hem! -- just upon the turning of the Tide, bring me the Urinal; --
And I hope, neither the Lord of my Ascendant, nor the Moon will be combust; and
then I may do well


I hope so -- Leave that to me; I will erect a Scheme; and I hope I shall find
both Sol and Venus in the sixth House


I thank you, Mr. Scandal, indeed that would be a great Comfort to me. Hem,
hem! good Night


Good Night, good Mr. Foresight; -- and I hope Mars and Venus will be in
Conjunction; -- while your Wife and I are together


Well; and what use do you hope to make of this Project? You don't think, that
you are ever-like to succeed in your design upon me


Yes, Faith I do; I have a better Opinion both of you and my self, than to
despair


Did you ever hear such a Toad -- heark'ee Devil; do you think any Woman Honest?


Yes, several, very honest; -- they will cheat a little at Cards, sometimes, but
that is nothing


Pshaw! but Virtuous, I mean.


Yes, Faith, I believe some Women are Virtuous too; but it is as I believe some
Men are Valiant, through fear -- For why should a Man court Danger, or a Woman
shun Pleasure


O Monstrous! What are Conscience and Honor?


Why, Honor is a public Enemy; and Conscience a Domestic Thief; and he that
would secure his Pleasure, must pay a Tribute to one, and go halves with the
the other. As for Honor, that you have secured, for you have purchased a
perpetual opportunity for Pleasure


An Opportunity for Pleasure!


Aye, your Husband, a Husband is an opportunity for Pleasure, so you have taken
care of Honor, and it is the least I can do to take care of Conscience


And so you think we are free for one another?


Yes Faith, I think so; I love to speak my mind.


Why then I Will speak my mind. Now as to this Affair between you and me. Here
you make love to me; why, I Will confess it does not displease me. Your Person is
well enough, and your Understanding is not a-miss


I have no great Opinion of my self; yet I think, I Am neither Deformed, nor a
Fool


But you have a Villainous Character; you are a Libertine in Speech, as well as
Practice


Come, I know what you would say, -- you think it more dangerous to be seen in
Conversation with me, than to allow some other Men the last Favor; you
mistake, the liberty I take in Talking, is purely affected, for the Service of
your Sex. He that first cries out stop Thief, is often he that has stolen the
Treasure. I am a Jugler, that act by Confederacy; and if you please, we'll put
a Trick upon the world


Aye; but you are such an universal Jugler, -- that I Am afraid you have a great
many Confederates


Faith, I Am sound.


O, fie -- I Will Swear you're Impudent.


I Will Swear your Handsome.


Pish, you would tell me so, though you did not think so.


And you would think so, though I should not tell you so: And now I think we know one
another pretty well


O Lord, who is here?


Mess, I love to speak my mind -- Father has nothing to do with me -- Nay, I
cannot say that neither; he has something to do with me. But what does that
signify? If so be, that I ben't minded to be steered by him; it is as tho'f he
should strive against Wind and Tide


Aye, but my Dear, we must keep it secret, till the Estate be settled; for you
know, Marrying without an Estate, is like Sailing in a Ship without Ballast


He, he, he; why that is true; just so for all the World it is indeed, as like
as two Cable Ropes


And though I have a good Portion; you know one would not venture all in one
bottom


Why that is true again; for may-hap one bottom may spring a Leak. You have hit
it indeed, Mess you have nicked the Channel


Well, but if you should forsake me after all, you would break my Heart.


Break your Heart? I Would rather the Mary-gold should break her Cable in a storm,
as well as I love her. Flesh, you don't think I Am false-hearted, like a
Land-man. A Sailer will be honest, tho'f may-hap he has never a Penny of Money
in his Pocket -- May-hap I may not have so fair a Face, as a Citizen or a
Courtier; but for all that, I Have as good Blood in my Veins, and a Heart as
sound as a Biscuit


And will you love me always?


Nay, an I love once, I Will stick like pitch; I Will tell you that. Come, I Will
sing you a Song of a Sailor


Hold, there is my Sister, I Will call her to hear it.


Well; I will not go to Bed to my Husband to Night; because I Will retire to my own
Chamber, and think of what you have said


Well; You Will give me leave to wait upon you to your Chamber Door; and leave
you my last Instructions


Hold, here is my Sister coming toward us.


If it will not interrupt you, I Will entertain you with a Song.


The Song was made upon one of our Ships-Crew's Wife; our Boat-swain made the
Song, may-hap you may know her, Sir. Before she was Married, she was called
buxom* Joan of Deptford


I have heard of her.


A Soldier and a Sailor,
A Tinker, and a Tailor,
Had once a doubtful strife, Sir,
To make a Maid a Wife, Sir,
Whose Name was Buxom Joan.
For now the time was ended,
When she no more intended,
To lick her Lips at Men, Sir,
And gnaw the Sheets in vain, Sir,
And lie of Nights alone.
The Soldier Swore like Thunder,
He loved her more than Plunder;
And showed her many a Scar, Sir,
That he had brought from far, Sir.
With Fighting for her sake.
The Tailor thought to please her,
With offering her his Measure.
The Tinker too with Mettle,
Said he could mend her Kettle,
And stop up every leak.
But while these three were prating,
The Sailor slily waiting,
Thought if it came about, Sir,
That they should all fall out, Sir:
He then might play his part.
And just even as he meant, Sir,
To Loggerheads they went, Sir,
And then he let fly at her,
A shot 'twixt wind and water,
That won this Fair Maids Heart.
If some of our Crew that came to see me, are not gone; you shall see, that we
Sailors can Dance sometimes, as well as other Folks

I warrant that brings 'em, an' they be within hearing.

Oh here they be -- And Fiddles along with 'em; come, my Lads, let us have a
round, and I Will make one


We Are merry Folk, we Sailors, we have not much to care for. Thus we live at Sea;
eat Biscuit, and drink Flip; put on a clean Shirt once a Quarter -- Come home
and lie with our Landladies once a Year, get rid of a little Money; and then put
off with the next fair wind. How de'e like us


OF you are the happiest, merriest Men alive.


We Are beholding to Mr. Benjamin for this Entertainment.

I believe it is late.


Why, forsooth, an you think so, you had best go to Bed. For my part, I mean to
toss a Can, and remember my Sweetheart, a-fore I turn in; may-hap I may dream
of her


Mr. Scandal, you had best go to Bed and Dream too.


Why Faith, I have a good lively Imagination; and can Dream as much to the
purpose as another, if I set about it: But Dreaming is the poor retreat of a
lazy, hopeless, and imperfect Lover; it is the last glimpse of Love to wornout
Sinners, and the faint dawning of a Bliss to wishing Girls, and growing Boys.
There Is naught but willing, waking Love, that ca
Make Blessed the Ripened Maid, and Finished Man.



WELL, Is your Master ready; does he look madly, and talk madly?


Yes, Sir; you need make no great doubt of that; he that was so near turning
Poet yesterday morning, cannot be much to seek in playing the Madman to day


Would he have Angelica acquainted with the Reason of his design?


No, Sir, not yet; -- He has a mind to try, whether his playing the Madman,
will not make her play the Fool, and fall in Love with him; or at least own that
she has loved him all this while, and concealed it


I saw her take Coach just now with her Maid; and think I heard her bid the
Coachman drive hither


Like enough, Sir, for I told her Maid this morning, my Master was run stark
mad only for Love of her Mistress; I hear a Coach stop; if it should be she,
Sir, I believe he would not see her, till he hears how she takes it


Well, I Will try her -- it is she, here she comes.


Mr. Scandal, I suppose you don't think it a Novelty, to see a Woman visit a
Man at his own Lodgings in a morning


Not upon a kind occasion, Madam. But when a Lady comes Tyrannically to insult
a ruined Lover, and make manifest the cruel Triumphs of her Beauty; the
barbarity of it, something surprises me


I don't like Raillery from a serious Face -- pray tell me what is the matter.


No strange matter, Madam; my Master's mad, that is all: I suppose your Ladyship
has thought him so a great while


How do you mean, mad?


Why faith, Madam, he is mad for want of his Wits, just as he was for want of
Money; his Head is even as light as his Pockets; and any body that has a mind
to a bad Bargain, cannot do better than to beg him for his Estate


If you speak Truth, your endeavoring at Wit is very unseasonable --


She Is concerned, and loves him.


Mr. Scandal, you cannot think me guilty of so much Inhumanity, as not to be
concerned for a Man I must own my self obliged to -- pray tell me truth


Faith, Madam, I wish telling a Lie would mend the matter. But this is no new
effect of an unsuccessful Passion


I know not what to think -- Yet I should be vexed to have a trick put upon me
-- May I not see him


I Am afraid the Physician is not willing you should see him yet -- Jeremy, go
in and enquire


Ha! I saw him wink and smile -- I fancy it is a trick -- I Will try -- I would
disguise to all the World a Failing, which I must own to you -- I fear my
Happiness depends upon the recovery of Valentine. Therefore I conjure you, as
you are his Friend, and as you have Compassion upon one fearful of Affliction,
to tell me what I am to hope for -- I cannot speak -- But you may tell me, tell
me, for you know what I would ask


So, this is pretty plain -- Be not too much concerned, Madam; I hope his
Condition is not desperate: An Acknowledgment of Love from you, perhaps, may
work a Cure; as the fear of your Aversion occasioned his Distemper


Say you so; nay, then I Am convinced: And if I don't play Trick for Trick, may
I never taste the Pleasure of Revenge -- Acknowledgment of Love! I find you
have mistaken my Compassion, and think me guilty of a Weakness I am a Stranger
to. But I have too much Sincerity to deceive you, and too much Charity to
suffer him to be deluded with vain Hopes. Good Nature and Humanity oblige me to
be concerned for him; but to Love is neither in my Power nor Inclination; and
if he cannot be cured without I suck the Poison from his Wounds, I Am afraid he
will not recover his Senses till I lose mine


Hey, brave Woman, I faith -- Will Not you see him then, if he desire it?


What signify a Madman's Desires? Besides, 'twou'd make me uneasy -- If I
don't see him, perhaps my Concern for him may lessen -- If I forget him, it is
no more than he has done by himself: and now the Surprise is over, methinks I
am not half so sorry for him as I was --


So, faith good Nature works a-pace; you were confessing just now an Obligation
to his Love


But I have considered that Passions are unreasonable and involuntary; if he
loves, he cannot help it; and if I don't love, I cannot help it; no more than he
can help his being a Man, or I my being a Woman; or no more than I can help my
want of Inclination to stay longer here -- Come, Ienny


Humh! -- An admirable Composition, faith, this same Womankind.


What, is she gone, Sir?


Gone; why she was never here, nor any where else; nor I don't know her if I
see her; nor you neither


Good lack! What Is the matter now? Are any more of us to be mad? Why, Sir, my
Master longs to see her; and is almost mad in good earnest, with the Joyful
News of her being here


We are all under a mistake -- Ask no Questions, for I cannot resolve you; but
I Will inform your Master. In the mean time, if our Project succeed no better
with his Father, than it does with his Mistress, he may descend from his
Exaltation of madness into the road of common Sense, and be content only to be
made a Fool with other reasonable People. I hear Sir Sampson, you know your
Cue; I Will to your Master


Do You see, Mr. Buckruin, here is the Paper signed with his own Hand.


Good, Sir. And the Conveyance is ready drawn in this Box, if he be ready to
sign and seal


Ready, body of me, he must be ready; his Shamsickness shall not excuse him -- O,
here is his Scoundrel. Sirrah, where is your Master


Ah, Sir, he is quite gone.


Gone! What, he is not dead?


No, Sir, not dead.


What, is he gone out of Town, run away, ha! has he trick't me? speak, Varlet.


No, no, Sir; he is safe enough, Sir, an he were but as sound, poor Gentleman.
He is indeed here, Sir, and not here, Sir


Hey day, Rascal, do you banter me? Sirrah, do you banter me -- Speak Sirrah,
where is he, for I will find him


Would you could, Sir; for he has lost himself. Indeed, Sir, I have a most
broke my Heart about him -- I cannot refrain Tears when I think of him, Sir; I Am
as melancholy for him as a Passing Bell, Sir; or a Horse in a Pound


A Pox confound your Similitudes, Sir -- Speak to be understood, and tell me in
plain Terms what the matter is with him, or I Will crack your Fools Skull


Ah, you have hit it, Sir; that is the matter with him, Sir; his Skull's cracked,
poor Gentleman; he is stark mad, Sir


Mad!


What, is he Non Compos?


Quite Non Compos, Sir.


Why then all is obliterated, Sir Sampson, if he be Non Compos mentis, his Act
and Deed will be of no effect, it is not good in Law


Oo'ns, I will not believe it; let me see him, Sir -- Mad, I Will make him find his
Senses


Mr. Scandal is with him, Sir; I Will knock at the Door.


How now, what is here to do? --


Ha! who is that?


For Heavens sake softly, Sir, and gently; don't provoke him.


Answer me; Who is that? and that?


Gads bobs, does he not know me? Is he mischievous? I Will speak gently -- --
Val, Val, do thou not know me. Boy? Not know thy own Father, Val! I am thy
own Father, and this is honest Brief Buckram the Lawyer


It may be so -- I did not know you -- the World is full -- There are People
that we do know, and People that we do not know; and yet the Sun shines upon
all alike -- There are Fathers that have many Children; and there are Children
that have many Fathers -- it is strange! But I am Truth, and corn to give the
World the Lie


Body of me, I know not what to say to him.


Why, does that Lawyer wear black? -- Does he carry his Conscience without
side? -- Lawyer, what art thou? Do thou know me


O Lord, what must I say? -- Yes, Sir.


Thou lie, for I am Truth. It Is hard I cannot get a Livelihood amongst you. I
have been sworn out of Westminster Hall the first Day of every Term -- Let me
see -- No matter how long -- But I Will tell you one thing; it is a Question that
would puzzle an Arithmetician, if you should ask him, whether the Bible saves
more Souls in Westminster-Abby, or damns more in Westminster Hall: For my part,
I am Truth, and cannot tell; I have very few Acquaintance


Body of me, he talks sensibly in his madness -- Has he no Intervals?


Very short, Sir.


Sir, I can do you no Service while he is in this Condition: Here Is your Paper,
Sir -- He may do me a mischief if I stay -- The Conveyance is ready, Sir. If he
recover his Senses


Hold, hold, don't you go yet.


You Would better let him go, Sir; and send for him if there be occasion; for I
fancy his Presence provokes him more


Is the Lawyer gone? it is well, then we may drink about without going together
by the Ears -- heigh ho! What a Clock is it? My Father here! Your Blessing, Sir


He recovers -- bless thee, Val -- How do thou do, Boy?


Thank you, Sir, pretty well -- I have been a little out of Order; will not you
please to sit, Sir


Ay, boy -- Come, thou shall sit down by me.


Sir, it is my Duty to wait.


No, no, come, come, sit you down, honest Val: How do thou do? let me feel
thy Pulse -- Oh, pretty well now, Val: Body of me, I was sorry to see thee
indisposed: But I Am glad you are better, honest Val


I thank you, Sir.


Miracle! the Monster grows loving.


Let me feel thy Hand again, Val: it does not shake -- I believe thou can
write, Val: Ha, boy? Thou can write thy Name, Val? -- Jeremy, step and
overtake Mr. Buckram, bid him make haste back with the Conveyance -- quick --
quic


That ever I should suspect such a Heathen of any Remorse!


Do thou know this Paper, Val: I know you are honest, and will it perform
Articles


Pray let me see it, Sir. You hold it so far off, that I cannot tell whether I
know it or no


See it, boy? Aye, aye, why thou do see it -- it is thy own Hand, Val. Why,
let me see, I can read it as plain as can be: Look you here The Condition of
this Obligation -- Look you, as plain as can be, so it begins -- And then at
the bottom -- As witness my Hand, Ualentine Legend, in great Letters. Why, it is
as plain as the Nose in one's Face: What, are my Eyes better than thine? I
believe I can read it farther off yet -- let me see


Will you please to let me hold it, Sir?


Let thee hold it, say thou -- Aye, with all my Heart -- What matter is it
who holds it? What need any body hold it? -- I Will put it up in my Pocket, Val:
And then no body need hold i

There Val: it is safe enough, Boy -- But thou shall have it as soon as thou
have set thy Hand to another Paper, little Val


What, is my bad Genius here again! Oh no, it is the Lawyer with an itching
Palm; and he is come to be scratched -- My Nails are not long enough -- Let me
have a Pair of Red hot Tongues quickly, quickly, and you shall see me act St.
Dunstan, and lead the Devil by the Nose


O Lord, let me be gone; I Will not venture my self with a Madman.


Ha, ha, ha; you need not run so fast, Honesty will not overtake you -- Ha, ha,
ha, the Rogue found me out to be in Forma Pauperis presently


Oo'ns! What a Vexation is here! I know not what to do, or say, nor which way
to go


Who Is that, that is out of his Way? -- I am Truth, and can set him right --
Hearkee, Friend, the straight Road is the worst way you can go -- He that
follows his Nose always, will very often be led into a Stink. Probatum est. But
what are you for? Religion or Politics? There Is a couple of Topics for you,
no more like one another than Oil and Vinegar; and yet those two beaten
together by a State-Cook, make Sauce for the whole Nation


What the Devil had I to do, ever to beget Sons? Why did I ever marry?


Because thou were a Monster; old Boy? -- The two greatest Monsters in the
World are a Man and a Woman? what is thy Opinion


Why, my Opinion is, that those two Monsters joined together, make yet a
greater, that is a Man and his Wife


A ha! Old Truepenny, say thou so? thou have nicked it -- But its wonderful
strange, Jeremy


What is, Sir?


That Gray Hairs should cover a Green Head -- and I make a Fool of my Father.


What Is here! Erra Pater? or a bearded Sybil? If Prophecy comes, Truth must
give place


What says he? What, did he prophecy? Ha, Sir Sampson, bless us! How are we?


Are we? Ah Pox o'your Prognostication -- Why, we are Fools as we use to be --
Oo'ns, that you could not foresee that the Moon would predominate, and my Son
be mad -- Where Is your Oppositions, your Trines, and your Quadrates? -- What
did your Cardan and your Ptolomee tell you? Your Messahalah and your
Longomontanus, your Harmony of Chiromancy with Astrology. Ah! pox on it, that I
that know the World, and Men and Manners, that don't believe a Syllable in the
Sky and Stars, and Sun and Almanacks, and Trash, should be directed by a
Dreamer, an Omen-hunter, and defer Business in Expectation of a lucky Hour.
When, body of me, there never was a lucky Hour after the first opportunity


Ah, Sir Sampson, Heaven help your Head -- This is none of your lucky Hour;
Nemo omnibus horis sapit. What, is he gone, and in contempt of Science! Ill
Stars and unconverted Ignorance attend him


You must excuse his Passion, Mr. Foresight; for he has been heartily vexed --
His Son is Non compos mentis, and thereby incapable of making any Conveyance in
Law; so that all his measures are disappointed


Ha! say you so?


What, has my Sea-Lover lost his Anchor of Hope then?


Oh Sister, what will you do with him?


Do with him, send him to Sea again in the next foul Weather -- He Is used to an
inconstant Element, and will not be surpised to see the Tide turned


Wherein was I mistaken, not to foresee this?


Madam, you and I can tell him something else, that he did not foresee, and
more particularly relating to his own Fortune


What do you mean? I don't understand you.


Hush, softly -- the Pleasures of last Night, my Dear, too considerable to he
forgot so soon


Last Night! and what would your Impudence infer from last night? last Night
was like the Night before, I think


'S'death do you make no difference between me and your Husband?


Not much, -- he is superstitious; and you are mad in my opinion.


You make me mad -- You are not serious -- Pray recollect your self.


O yes, now I remember, you were very impertinent and impudent, -- and would
have come to Bed to me


And did not?


Did not! with that face can you ask the Question?


This I have heard of before, but never believed. I have been told she had that
admirable quality of forgetting to a man's face in the morning, that she had
layn with him all night, and denying favors with more impudence, than she
could grant 'em. -- Madam, I Am your humble Servant, and honor you. -- You look
pretty well, Mr. Foresight; -- How did you rest last night


Truly Mr. Scandal, I was so taken up with broken Dreams and distracted
Visions, that I remember little


'Twas a very forgetting Night. -- But would you not talk with Valentine,
perhaps you may understand him; I Am apt to believe there is something
mysterious in his Discourses, and sometimes rather think him inspired than mad


You speak with singular good Judgment, Mr. Scandal, truly, -- I am inclining
to your Turkish opinion in this matter, and do reverence a man whom the vulgar
think mad. Let us go in to him


Sister, do you stay with them; I Will find out my Lover, and give him his
discharge, and come to you. OF my Conscience here he comes


All mad, I think -- Flesh, I believe all the Calentures of the Sea are come
ashore, for my part


Mr. Benjamin in Choler!


No, I Am pleased well enough, now I have found you, -- Mess, I Have had such a
Hurricane upon your account yonder. --


My account, pray what is the matter?


Why, Father came and found me squabling with you chitty faced thing, as he
would have me marry, -- so he asked what was the matter. -- He asked in a surly
sort of a way -- (It seems Brother Val is gone mad, and so that put'n into a
passion; but what did I know that, what is that to me?) -- So he asked in a
surly sort of manner, -- and Gad I answered 'n as surlily, -- What thof' he be
my Father, I an't bound Prentice to 'en: -- so faith I told'n in plain terms,
if I were minded to marry, I Would marry to please my self, not him; and for the
Young Woman that he provided for me, I thought it more fitting for her to learn
her Sampler, and make Dirt-pies, than to look after a Husband; for my part I
was none of her man. -- I had another Voyage to make, let him take it as he
will


So then you intend to go to Sea again?


Nay, nay, my mind run upon you, -- but I would not tell him so much. -- So he
said he would make my heart ache; and if so be that he could get a Woman to his
mind, he would marry himself. Gad, says I, an you play the fool and marry at these
years, there is more danger of your head's aching than my heart. -- He was woundy
angry when I gav'n that wipe. -- He had 'nt a word to say, and so I left'n, and
the Green Girl together; -- May hap the Be may bite, and he will marry her
himself, with all my heart


And were you this undutiful and graceless Wretch to your Father?


Then why was he graceless first, -- if I am undutiful and Graceless, why did
he beget me so? I did not get my self


O Impiety! how have I been mistaken! what an inhumane merciless Creature have
I set my heart upon? O I am happy to have discovered the Shelves and Quicksands
that lurk beneath that faithless smiling face


Hey toss! what is the matter now? why you ben't angry, be you?


O see me no more, -- for thou were born amongst Rocks, suckl'd by Whales,
Cradled in a Tempest, and whistled to by Winds; and thou art come forth with
Finns and Scales, and three rows of Teeth, a most outrageous Fish of prey


O Lord, O Lord, she is mad, poor Young Woman, Love has turned her senses, her
Brain is quite overset. Well-a-day, how shall I do to set her to rights


No, no, I am not mad Monster, I am wise enough to find you out. -- Had thou
the Impudence to aspire at being a Husband with that stubborn and disobedient
temper? -- You that know not how to submit to a Father, presume to have a
sufficient stock of Duty to undergo a Wife? I should have been finely fobb'd
indeed, very finely fobb'd


Hearkee forsooth; If so be that you are in your right senses, do you see; for
ought as I perceive I Am like to be finely fobb'd, -- if I have got anger here
upon your account, and you are tacked about already. -- What do you mean, after
all your fair speeches, and stroaking my Cheeks, and Kissing and Hugging, what
would you sheer off so? would you, and leave me aground


No, I Will leave you a-drift, and go which way you will.


What, are you false hearted then?


Only the Wind's changed.


More shame for you, -- the Wind's changed? -- it is an ill Wind blows no body
good, -- may-hap I have good riddance on you, if these be your Tricks, -- What
do you mean all this while, to make a fool of me


Any fool, but a Husband.


Husband! Gad I would not be your Husband, if you would have me; now I know
your mind, thof' you had your weight in Gold and Jewels, and thof' I loved you
never so well


Why can thou love, Porpoise?


No matter what I can do? don't call Names, -- I don't love You so well as to
bear that, whatever I did, -- I Am glad you show your self, Mistress: -- Let
them marry you, as don't know you: -- Gad I know you too well, by sad
experience; -- I believe he that marries you will go to Sea in a Hen-peck'd
Frigate. -- I believe that, Young Woman -- and may-hap may come to an Anchor at
Cuckolds-point; so there is a dash for you, take it as you will, may-hap you may
holla after me when I will not come too


Ha, ha, ha, no doubt on it. -- My true Love is gone to Sea. --

O Sister, had you come a minute sooner, you would have seen the Resolution of
a Lover, -- Honest Tarr and I are parted; -- and with the same indifference
that we met: -- OF my life I am half vexed at the insensibility of a Brute that
I despised


What then, he bore it most Heroically?


Most Tyrannically, -- for you see he has got the start of me; and I the poor
forsaken Maid am left complaining on the Shore. But I Will tell you a hint that
he has given me; Sir Sampson is enraged, and talks desperately of committing
Matrimony himself. -- If he has a mind to throw himself away, he cannot do it
more effectually than upon me, if we could bring it about


Oh hang him old Fox, he is too cunning, besides he hates both you and me. --
But I have a project in my head for you, and I have gone a good way toward it.
I have almost made a Bargain with Jeremy, Valentine's man, to sell his Master
to us


Sell him, how?


Valentine raves upon Angelica, and took me for her, and Jeremy says will take
any body for her that he imposes on him. -- Now I have promised him Mountains;
if in one of his mad fits he will bring you to him in her stead, and get you
married together, and put to Bed together; and after Consummation, Girl,
there is no revoking. And if he should recover his Senses, he will be glad at
least to make you a good Settlement. -- Here they come, stand aside a little,
and tell me how you like the design


And have you given your Master a hint of their Plot upon him?


Yes, Sir; he says he will favor it, and mistake her for Angelica.


It may make sport.


Mercy on us!


Hushed -- Interrupt me not -- I Will whisper Prediction to thee, and thou shall
Prophecy; -- I am Truth, and can teach thy Tongue a new Trick, -- I have told
thee what is past, -- Now I tell what is to come; -- Do thou know what will
happen to morrow? -- Answer me not -- for I will tell thee. To morrow, Knaves
will thrive through craft, and Fools through Fortune; and Honesty will go as it
did, Frost-nip't in a Summer suit. Ask me Questions concerning to morrow


Ask him, Mr. Foresight.


Pray what will be done at Court?


Scandal will tell you; -- I am Truth, I never come there.


In the City?


Oh, Prayers will be said in empty Churches, at the usual Hours. Yet you will
see such Zealous Faces behind Counters, as if Religion were to be sold in every
Shop. Oh things will go methodically in the City, the Clocks will strike Twelve
at Noon, and the Horned Herd Buz in the Exchange at Two. Wives and Husbands
will drive distinct Trades, and Care and Pleasure separately Occupy the Family.
Coffee-Houses will be full of Smoke and Stratagem. And the cropped Prentice, that
sweeps his Master's Shop in the morning, may ten to one, dirty his Sheets
before Night. But there are two things that you will see very strange; which
are Wanton Wives, with their Legs at liberty, and Tame Cuckolds, with Chains
about their Necks. But hold, I must examine you before I go further; You look
suspiciously. Are you a Husband


I am Married.


Poor Creature! Is your Wife of Covent Garden Parish?


No; St. Martins in the Fields.


Alas, poor Man; his Eyes are sunk, and his Hands shrivelled; his Legs
dwindl'd, and his back bowed, Pray, pray, for a Metamorphosis -- Change thy
Shape, and shake off Age; get thee Medea's Kettle, and be boiled anew, come
forth with laboring Callous Hands, a Chine of Steel, and Atlas Shoulders. Let
Taliacotius trim the Calves of Twenty Chairmen, and make thee Pedestals to
stand erect upon, and look Matrimony in the face. Ha, ha, ha! That a Man should
have a Stomach to a Wedding Supper, when the Pigeons ought rather to be laid
to his feet, ha, ha, ha


His Frenzy is very high now, Mr. Scandal.


I believe it is a Spring Tide.


Very likely truly; You understand these Matters -- Mr. Scandal, I shall be
very glad to confer with you about these things which he has uttered. -- His
Sayings are very Mysterious and Hieroglyphical


Oh, why would Angelica be absent from my Eyes so long?


She Is here, Sir.


Now, Sister.


O Lord, what must I say?


Humor him, Madam, by all means.


Where is she? Oh I see her -- she comes, like Riches, Health, and Liberty at
once, to a despairing, starving, and abandoned Wretch

Oh welcome, welcome.


How de'e you, Sir? Can I serve you?


Heark'ee; -- I have a Secret to tell you -- Endymion and the Moon shall meet
us upon Mount Latmos, and we'll be Married in the dead of Night. -- But say not
a word. Hymen shall put his Torch into a dark Lanthorn, that it may be secret;
and Juno shall give her Peacock Poppy-water, that he may fold his Ogling Tail,
and Argos's hundred Eyes be shut, ha? No body shall know, but Jeremy


No, no, we'll keep it secret, it shall be done presently.


The sooner the better -- Jeremy, come hither -- closer -- that none may
over-hear us; -- Jeremy, I can tell you News; -- Angelica is turned Nun; and I
am turning Friar, and yet we'll Marry one another in spite of the Pope -- Get
me a Coul and Beads, that I may play my part, -- For she will meet me Two Hours
hence in black and white, and a long Veil to cover the Project, and we will not
see one another Faces, till we have done something to be ashamed of; and then
we'll blush once for all


I Will take care, and --


Whisper.


Nay, Mr. Tattle, If you make Love to me, you spoil my design, for I intended
to make you my Confident


But, Madam, to throw away your Person, such a Person! and such a Fortune, on a
Madman


I never loved him till he was Mad; but don't tell any body so.


How Is this! Tattle making Love to Angelica!


Tell, Madam! alas you don't know me -- I have much ado to tell your Ladyship,
how long I have been in Love with you -- but encouraged by the impossibility of
Valentine's making any more Addresses to you, I have ventured to declare the
very inmost Passion of my Heart. Oh, Madam, look upon us both. There you see
the ruins of a poor decayed Creature -- Here, a complete and lively Figure,
with Youth and Health, and all his five Senses in perfection, Madam, and to all
this, the most passionate Lover --


O fie for shame, hold your Tongue, A passionate Lover, and five Senses in
perfection! when you are as Mad as Valentine, I Will believe you love me, and the
maddest shall take me


It is enough. Ha! Who Is here?


O Lord, her coming will spoil all.


No, no, Madam, he will not know her, if he should, I can persuade him.


Scandal, who are all these? Foreigners? If they are, I Will tell you what I
think -- get away all the Company but Angelica, that I may discover my design
to her


I will, -- I have discovered something of Tattle, that is of a piece with Mrs.
Frail. He Courts Angelica, if we could contrive to couple 'em together --
Heark'ee --


He will not know you, Cousin, he knows no body.


But he knows more than any body, -- Oh Neice, he knows things past and to
come, and all the profound Secrets of Time


Look you, Mr. Foresight, It is not my way to make many words of Matters, and
so I shall not say much, -- But in short, de'e see, I will hold you a Hundred
Pound now, that I know more Secrets than he


How! I cannot Read that knowledge in your Face, Mr. Tattle -- Pray, what do
you know


Why de'e think I Will tell you, Sir! Read it in my Face? No, Sir, it is written
in my Heart. And safer there, Sir, than Letters writ in Juice of Lemon, for no
Fire can fetch it out. I am no blab, Sir


Acquaint Jeremy with it, he may easily bring it about, -- They are welcome,
and I Will tell 'em so my self

What do you look strange upon me? -- Then I must be plain.

I am Truth, and hate an Old Acquaintance with a new Face.


Do you know me, Valentine?


You* Who are you? No, I hope not.


I am Jack Tattle, your Friend.


My Friend, what to do? I am no Married Man, and thou can not lie with my
Wife? I am very poor, and thou can not borrow Money of me; Then what
Employment have I for a Friend


Hah! A good open Speaker, and not to be trusted with a Secret.


Do you know me, Valentine?


Oh very well.


Who am I?


You're a Woman -- One to whom Heaven gave Beauty, when it grafted Roses on a
Briar. You are the reflection of Heaven in a Pond, and he that leaps at you is
sunk. You are all white, a sheet of lovely spotless Paper, when you first are
Born; but you are to be scrawl'd and blotted by every Goose's Quill. I know
you; for I loved a Woman, and loved her so long, that I found out a strange
thing: I found out what a Woman was good for


Aye, prithee, what is that?


Why to keep a Secret.


O Lord!


O exceeding good to keep a Secret: For though she should tell, yet she is not to
be believed


Hah! good again, faith.


I would have Music -- Sing me the Song that I like --


I Tell thee, Charmion, could I Time retrieve,
And could again begin to Love and Live,
To you I should my earliest Offering give;
I know my Eyes would lead my Heart to you,
And I should all my Vows and Oaths renew,
But to be plain, I never would be true.
For by our weak and weary Truth, I find,
Love hates to center in a Point assigned,
But runs with Joy the Circle of the Mind.
Then never let us chain what should be free,
But for relief of either Sex agree,
Since Women love to change, and so do we.
No more, for I am melancholy.


I Will do it, Sir.


Mr. Foresight, we had best leave him. He may grow outrageous, and do mischief.


I will be directed by you.


You Will meet, Madam; -- I Will take care every thing shall be ready.


Thou shall do what thou will, have what thou will, in short, I will deny thee
nothing


Madam, shall I wait upon you?


No, I Will stay with him -- Mr. Scandal will protect me. Aunt, Mr. Tattle
desires you would give him leave to wait on you


Pox on it, there is no coming off, now she has said that -- Madam, will you do
me the Honor


Mr. Tattle might have used less Ceremony.


Jeremy, follow Tattle.


Mr. Scandal, I only stay till my Maid comes, and because I had a Mind to be
rid of Mr. Tattle


Madam, I am very glad that I overheard a better Reason, which you gave to Mr.
Tattle; for his impertinence forced you to acknowledge a Kindness for
Valentine, which you denied to all his Sufferings and my Solicitations. So
I Will leave him to make use of the Discovery; and your Ladyship to the free
Confession of your Inclinations


Oli Heavens! You wont leave me alone with a Madman?


No, Madam; I only leave a Madman to his Remedy.


Madam, you need not be very much afraid, for I fancy I begin to come to my
self


Aye, but if I don't fit you, I Will be hanged.


You see what disguises Love makes us put on; Gods have been in counterfeited
Shapes for the same Reason; and the Divine Part of me, my Mind, has worn this
Masque of Madness, and this motly Livery, only as the Slave of Love, and Menial
Creature of your Beauty


Mercy on me, how he talks! poor Valentine!


Nay faith, now let us understand one another, Hypocrisy apart, -- The Comedy
draws toward an end, and let us think of leaving acting, and be our selves; and
since you have loved me, you must own I have at length deserved you should
confess it


I would I had loved you -- for Heaven knows I pity you; and could I have
foreseen the sad Effects, I would have striven; but that is too late


What sad Effects? -- What Is too late? my seeming Madness has deceived my
Father, and procured me time to think of means to reconcile me to him; and
preserve the right of my Inheritance to his Estate; which otherwise by
Articles, I must this Morning have resigned: And this I had informed you of to
Day, but you were gone, before I knew you had been here


How! I thought your love of me had caused this Transport in your Soul; which,
it seems, you only counterfeited; for by, mercinary Ends and sordid Interest


Nay, now you do me Wrong; for if any Interest was considered, it was yours;
since I thought I wanted more than Love, to make me worthy of you


Then you thought me mercenary -- But how am I deluded by this Interval of
Sense, to reason with a Madman


Oh, it is barbarous to misunderstand me longer.


Oh here is a reasonable Creature -- sure he will not have the Impudence to
persevere -- Come, Jeremy, acknowledge your Trick, and confess your Master's
Madness counterfeit


Counterfeit, Madam! I Will maintain him to be as absolutely and substantially
Mad, as any Freeholder in Bethlehem; Nay, he is as Mad as any Projector,
Fanatic, Chemist, Lover, or Poet in Europe


Sirrah, you lie; I am not Mad.


Ha, ha, ha, you see he denies it.


O Lord, Madam, did you ever know any Madman Mad enough to own it?


Sot, cannot you apprehend?


Why he talked very sensibly just now.


Yes, Madam; He has Intervals: But you see he begins to look wild again now.


Why you Thick-Skull'd Rascal, I tell you the Farce is done, and I will be Mad
no longer


Ha, ha, ha, is he mad, or no, Jeremy?


Partly I think -- for he does not know his Mind Two Hours -- I Am sure I left
him just now, in a Humor to be mad: And I think I have not found him very
quiet at this present. Who Is there


Go see, you Sot. I Am very glad that I can move your Mirth, tho'not your
Compassion


I did not think you had Apprehension enough to be exceptious: But Madmen show
themselves most, by over pretending to a sound Understanding; as Drunken men do
by over acting Sobriety; I was half inclining to believe you, till I
accidentally touched upon your tender Part: But now you have restored me to my
former Opinion and Compassion


Sir, your Father has sent to know if you are any better yet -- Will you please
to be Mad, Sir, or how


Stupidity! You know the Penalty of all I Am worth must pay for the Confession
of my Senses; I Am Mad, and will be Mad to every Body but this Lady


So -- Just the very backside of Truth, -- But lying is a Figure in Speech,
that interlards the greatest part of my Conversation -- Madam, your Ladyships
Woman


Well, have you been there? -- Come hither.


Yes, Madam, Sir Sampson will wait upon you presently.


You are not leaving me in this Uncertainty?


Would any thing, but a Madman complain of Uncertainty? Uncertainty and
Expectation are the Joys of Life. Security is an insipid thing, and the
overtaking and possessing of a Wish, discovers the Folly of the Chase. Never
let us know one another better; for the Pleasure of a Masquerade is done, when
we come to show Faces; But I Will tell you two things before I leave you; I am
not the Fool you take me for; and you are Mad and don't know it


From a Riddle, you can expect nothing but a Riddle. There Is my Instruction,
and the Moral of my Lesson


What, is the Lady gone again, Sir? I hope you understood one another before
she went


Understood! She is harder to be understood than a Piece of Egyptian
Antiquity, or an Irish Manuscript; you may pore till you spoil your Eyes, and
not improve your Knowledge


I have heard 'em say, Sir, they read hard Hebrew Books backwards; may be you
begin to read at the wrong End


they say so of a Witches Prayer, and Dreams and Dutch Almanacks are to be
understood by contraries. But there is Regularity and Method in that; she is a
Medal without a Reverse or Inscription; for Indifference has both sides alike.
Yet while she does not seem to hate me, I will pursue her, and know her if it
be possible, in spite of the Opinion of my Satirical Friend, Scandal, who
says, That Women are like Tricks by slight of Hand
Which, to admire, we should not understand.



WHERE is Sir Sampson? Did you not tell me, he would be here before me?


He Is at the great Glass in the Dining Room, Madam, setting his Cravat and Wig.


How! I Am glad on it -- If he has a mind I should like him, It Is a sign he likes
me; and that is more than half my Design


I hear him, Madam.


Leave me, and do you hear, if Valentine should come, or send, I am not to be
spoken with


I have not been honored with the Commands of a fair Lady, a great while --
Odd, Madam, you have revived me -- Not since I was Five and Thirty


Why you have no great reason to complain, Sir Sampson, that is not long ago.


Zooks, but it is, Madam, a very great while; to a Man that admires a fine
Woman, as much as I do


You're an absolute Courtier, Sir Sampson.


Not at all, Madam: Odsbud you wrong me; I am not so old neither, to be a bare
Courtier, only a Man of Words. Odd, I have warm Blood about me yet, I can serve
a Lady any way -- Come, come, let me tell you, you Women think a Man old too
soon, faith and troth you do -- Come, don't despise Fifty; odd Fifty, in a hale
Constitution, is no such contemptible Age


Fifty a contemptible Age! Not at all, a very fashionable Age I think -- I
assure you I know very considerable Beaus, that set a good Face upon Fifty,
Fifty! I have seen Fifty in a side Box by Candlelight, out-blossom Five and
Twenty


O Pox, outsides, outsides; a pize take 'em, mere outsides. Hang your side-Box
Beaus; no, I Am none of those, none of your forced Trees, that pretend to
Blossom in the Fall; and Bud when they should bring forth Fruit. I am of a long
lived Race, and inherit Vigor, none of my Family married till Fifty; yet they
begot Sons and Daughters till Fourscore. I am of your Patriarchs, I, a Branch
of one of your Antideluvian Families, Fellows, that the Flood could not wash
away. Well, Madam, what are your Commands? Has any young Rogue affronted you,
and shall I cut his Throat? or --


No, Sir* Sampson, I have no Quarrel upon my Hands -- I have more Occasion for
your Conduct than your Courage at this time. To tell you the Truth, I Am weary
of living single, and want a Husband


Odsbud, and it is pity you should -- Odd, would she would like me, then I
should hamper my young Rogues: Odd, would she would; faith and troth she is
devilish Handsome

Madam, you deserve a good Husband, and 'twere pity you should be thrown away
upon any of these young idle Rogues about the Town. Odd, there is never a young
Fellow worth hanging -- that is a very young Fellow -- Pize on 'em, they never
think beforehand of any thing; -- And if they commit Matrimony, it is as they
commit Murder; out of a Frolic: And are ready to hang themselves, or to be
hanged by the Law, the next Morning. -- Odso, have a care, Madam


Therefore I ask your Advice, Sir Sampson: I have Fortune enough to make any
Man easy that I can like; If there were such a thing as a young agreeable Man,
with a reasonable Stock of good Nature and Sense -- For I would neither have an
absolute Wit, nor a Fool


Odd, you are hard to please, Madam; to find a young Fellow that is neither a
Wit in his own Eye, nor a Fool in the Eye of the World, is a very hard Task.
But, faith and troth you speak very discreetly; For I hate both a Wit and a
Fool


She that marries a Fool, Sir Sampson, commits the Reputation of her Honesty or
Understanding to the Censure of the World: And she that marries a very Witty
Man, submits both to the Severity and insolent Conduct of her Husband. I should
like a Man of Wit for a Lover, because I would have such an one in my Power;
but I would no more be his Wife, than his Enemy. For his Malice is not a more
terrible Consequence of his Aversion, than his Jealousy is of his Love


None of old Foresight's Sybills ever uttered such a Truth. Odsbud, you have
wone my Heart: I hate a Wit; I had a Son that was spoiled among 'em; a good
hopeful Lad, till he learned to be a Wit -- And might have risen in the State
-- But, a pox on it, his Wit run him out of his Money, and now his Poverty has
run him out of his Wits


Sir Sampson, as your Friend, I must tell you, you are very much abused in that
Matter; He Is no more Mad than you are


How, Madam! Would I could prove it.


I can tell you how that may be done -- But it is a thing that would make me
appear to be too much concerned in your Affairs


Odsbud I believe she likes me. --

-- Ah, Madam, all my Affairs are scarce worthy to be laid at your Feet; And I
wish, Madam, they stood in a better Posture, that I might make a more becoming
Offer to a Lady of your incomparable Beauty and Merit. -- If I had Peru in one
Hand, and Mexico in the other, and the Eastern Empire under my Feet; it would
make me only a more glorious Victim to be offered at the Shrine of your Beauty


Bless me, Sir Sampson, what is the matter?


Odd, Madam, I love you -- And if you would take my Advice in a Husband --


Hold, hold, Sir Sampson. I asked your Advice for a Husband, and you are giving
me your Consent -- I was indeed thinking to propose something like it in a
Jest, to satisfy you about Valentine: For if a Match were seemingly carried
on, between you and me, it would oblige him to throw off his Disguise of
Madness, in Apprehension of losing me: For you know he has long pretended a
Passion for me


Gadzooks, a most ingenuous Contrivance -- If we were to go throw with it. But
why must the Match only be seemingly carried on? -- Odd, let it be a real
Contract


O fie, Sir Sampson, what would the World say?


Say, they would say, you were a wise Woman, and I a happy Man. Odd, Madam,
I Will love you as long as I live; and leave you a good Jointure when I die


Aye; But that is not in your Power, Sir Sampson; for when Valentine confesses
himself in his Senses; he must make over his Inheritance to his younger Brother


Odd, you're cunning, a wary Baggage! Faith and Troth I like you the better --
But, I warrant you, I have a Proviso in the Obligation in favor of my self --
Body of me, I have a Trick to turn the Settlement upon the Issue Male of our Two
Bodies begotten. Odsbud, let us find Children, and I Will find an Estate


Will you? well, do you find the Estate, and leave the the other to me --


O Rogue! But I Will trust you. And will you consent? Is it a Match then?


Let me consult my Lawyer concerning this Obligation; and if I find what you
propose practicable; I Will give you my Answer


With all my Heart; -- Come in with me, and I Will lend you the Bond, -- You
shall consult your Lawyer, and I Will consult a Parson; Odzooks I Am a Young Man:
Odzooks I Am a young Man, and I Will make it appear -- Odd, you're devilish
Handsome; Faith and Troth, you're very Handsome, and I Am very Young, and very
Lusty -- Odsbud, Hussy, you know how to choose, and so do I; -- Odd, I think we
are very well met; -- Give me your Hand, Odd let me kiss it; it is as warm and
as soft -- as what? -- Odd, as the other Hand -- give me the other Hand, and I Will
mumble 'em, and kiss 'em till they melt in my Mouth


Hold, Sir Sampson -- You're profuse of your Vigor before your time: You Will
spend your Estate before you come to it


No, no, only give you a Rent-roll of my Possessions -- Ah! Baggage -- I
warrant you; for little Sampson: Odd, Sampson's a very good Name for an able
Fellow: Your Sampsons were strong Dogs from the Beginning


Have a care, and don't over-act your Part -- If you remember, the strongest
Sampson of your Name, pulled an old House over his Head at last


Say you so, Hussy? -- Come lets go then; Odd, I long to be pulling down too,
come away -- Odso, here is some body coming


Is not that she, gone out just now?


Aye, Sir, she is just going to the Place of appointment. Ah Sir, if you are not
very faithful and close in this Business, you will certainly be the Death of a
Person that has a most extraordinary Passion for your Honor's Service


Aye, who is that?


Even my unworthy self, Sir -- Sir, I have had an Appetite to be fed with your
Commands a great while; -- And now, Sir, my former Master, having much troubled
the Fountain of his Understanding; it is a very plausible Occasion for me to
quench my Thirst at the Spring of your Bounty -- I thought I could not
recommend my self better to you, Sir, than by the delivery of a great Beauty
and Fortune into your Arms, whom I have heard you Sigh for


I Will make thy Fortune; say no more -- Thou art a pretty Fellow, and can
carry a Message to a Lady, in a pretty soft kind of Phrase, and with a good
persuading Accent


Sir, I have the Seeds of Rhetoric and Oratory in my Head -- I have been at
Cambridge


Ay; it is well enough for a Servant to be bred at an University: But the
Education is a little too pedantick for a Gentleman. I hope you are secret in
your Nature, private, close, ha


O Sir, for that Sir, it is my chief Talent; I Am as secret as the Head of Nilus.


Aye? Who Is he, tho? A Privy Counselor?


O Ignorance!

A cunning Egyptian, Sir, that with his Arms would overrun the Country, yet
no body could ever find out his Headquarters


Close Dog! A good Whoremaster, I warrant him -- the time draws nigh, Jeremy.
Angelica will be veiled like a Nun; and I must be hooded like a Friar; ha,
Jeremy


Aye, Sir, hooded like a Hawk, to seize at first sight upon the Quarry. It is
the Whim of my Master's Madness to be so dressed; and she is so in Love with
him, she will comply with any thing to please him. Poor Lady, I Am sure she will
have reason to pray for me, when she finds what a happy Exchange she has made,
between a Madman and so Accomplished a Gentleman


Ay faith, so she will, Jeremy: You're a good Friend to her, poor Creature -- I
swear I do it hardly so much in consideration of my self, as Compassion to her


It Is an Act of Charity, Sir, to save a fine Woman with Thirty Thousand Pound,
from throwing her self away


So it is, faith -- I might have saved several others in my time; but I Gad I
could never find in my Heart to Marry any body before


Well, Sir, I Will go and tell her my Master's coming; and meet you in half a
quarter of an hour, with your Disguise, at your own Lodgings. You must talk a
little madly, she will not distinguish the Tone of your Voice


No, no, let me alone for a Counterfeit; -- I Will be ready for you.


O Mr. Tattle, are you here! I Am glad I have found you; I have been looking up
and down for you like any thing, till I Am as tired as any thing in the World


O Pox, how shall I get rid of this foolish Girl?


O I have pure News, I can tell you pure News -- I must not marry the Seaman
now -- my Father says so. Why will not you be my Husband? You say you love me, and
you will not be my Husband. And I know you may be my Husband now if you please


O fie, Miss: Who told you so, Child?


Why, my Father -- I told him that you loved me.


O fie, Miss, why did you do so? and who told you so, Child?


Who? Why you did; did not you?


O Pox, that was Yesterday, Miss, that was a great while ago, Child. I have
been a sleep since; slept a whole Night, and did not so much as dream of the
matter


Pshaw, O but I dreamed that it was so tho.


Ay, but your Father will tell you that Dreams come by Contraries, Child -- O
fie; what, we must not love one another now -- Pshaw, that would be a foolish
thing indeed -- -- Fie, fie, you're a Woman now, and must think of a new Man
every Morning, and forget him every Night -- -- No, no, to marry, is to be a
Child again, and play with the same Rattle always: O fie, marrying is a paw
thing


Well, but don't you love me as well as you did last Night then?


No, no, Child, you would not have me.


No? Yes but I would tho.


Pshaw, but I tell you, you would not -- You forget you're a Woman, and don't
know your own mind


But here is my Father, and he knows my Mind.


O, Mr. Tattle, your Servant, you are a close Man; but methinks your Love to my
Daughter was a Secret I might have been trusted with, -- Or had you a mind to
try if I could discover it by my Art -- hum, ha! I think there is something in
your Physiognomy, that has a resemblance of her; and the Girl is like me


And so you would infer, that you and I are alike -- what does the Old Prig
mean? I Will banter him, and laugh at him, and leave hi

I fancy you have a wrong Notion of Faces.


How? What? A wrong Notion! How so?


In the way of Art: I have some taking Features, not obvious to Vulgar Eyes;
that are Indications of a sudden turn of good Fortune, in the Lottery of Wives;
and promise a great* Beauty and great Fortune reserved alone for me, by a
private Intriegue of Destiny, kept secret from the piercing Eye of Perspicuity;
from all Astologers, and the Stars themselves


How! I will make it appear that what you say is impossible.


Sir, I beg your Pardon, I Am in haste --


For what?


To be married, Sir, married.


Aye, but pray take me along with you, Sir --


No, Sir; it is to be done Privately -- I never make Confidents.


Well; but my Consent I mean -- You will not marry my Daughter without my Consent?


Who I, Sir? I Am an absolute Stranger to you and your Daughter, Sir.


Hey day! What time of the Moon is this?


Very true, Sir, and desire to continue so. I have no more love for your
Daughter, than I have likeness of you; and I have a Secret in my Heart, which
you would be glad to know, and shall not know; and yet you shall know it too, and
be sorry for it afterward. I Would have you to know, Sir, that I am as knowing as
the Stars, and as secret as the Night. -- And I Am going to be Married just now,
yet did not know of it half an Hour ago; and the Lady stays for me, and does
not know of it yet -- There Is a Mystery for you, -- I know you love to untie
Difficulties -- Or if you cannot solve this; stay here a Quarter of an Hour, and
I Will come and explain it to you


O Father, why will you let him go? Will Not you make him be my Husband?


Mercy on us, what do these Lunacies portend? Alas! he is Mad, Child, stark Wild.


What, and must not I have e're a Husband then? What, must I go to Bed to Nurse
again, and be a Child as long as she is an Old Woman? Indeed but I will not: For
now my Mind is set upon a Man, I will have a Man some way or other. Oh!
methinks I Am sick when I think of a Man*; and if I cannot have one, I would go
to sleep all my Life: For when I Am awake, it makes me wish and long, and I
don't know for what -- And I Would rather be always a sleeping, than sick with
thinking


O fearful! I think the Girl's influenced too, -- Hussy you shall have a Rod.


A Fiddle of a Rod, I Will have a Husband; and if you will not get me one, I Will get
one for my self: I Will marry our Robbin the Butler, he says he loves me, and
he is a Handsome Man, and shall be my Husband: I warrant he will be my Husband and
thank me too, for he told me so


Did he so -- I Will dispatch him for it presently; Rogue! Oh, Nurse, come hither.


What is your Worship's Pleasure?


Here, take your young Mistress, and lock her up presently, till farther Orders
from me -- not a Word Hussy -- Do what I bid you, no Reply, away. And bid Robin
make ready to give an Account of his Plate and Linen, do you hear, be gone when
I bid you


What Is the Matter, Husband?


It Is not convenient to tell you now -- Mr. Scandal, Heaven keep us all in our
Senses -- I fear there is a contagious Frenzy abroad. How does Valentine


O I hope he will do well again -- I have a Message from him to your Niece
Angelica


I think she has not returned, since she went abroad with Sir Sampson.


Here Is Mr. Benjamin, he can tell us if his Father become Home.


Who, Father? ay, he is come home with a Vengeance.


Why, What Is the Matter?


Matter! Why he is Mad.


Mercy on us, I was afraid of this.


And there is the handsome young Woman, she, as they say, Brother Val. went mad
for, she is mad too, I think


O my poor Niece, my poor Niece, is she gone too? Well, I shall run mad next.


Well, but how mad? how do you mean?


Nay, I Will give you leave to guess -- I Will undertake to make a Voyage to
Antegoa -- No, hold, I may not say so neither -- But I Will sail as far as Ligorn,
and back again, before you shall guess at the matter, and do nothing else; Mess
you may take in all the Points of the Compass, and not hit Right


Your Experiment will take up a little too much time.


Why then I Will tell you, There Is a new wedding upon the Stocks; and they two
are a going to be married to rights


Who?


Why Father and -- the Young Woman. I cannot hit of her Name.


Angelica?


Aye, the same.


Sir Sampson and Angelica, impossible!


That may be -- but I Am sure it is as I tell you.


'S'death it is a Jest. I cannot believe it.


Look you, Friend, it is nothing to me, whether you believe it or no. What I say
is true; do you see, they are married, or just going to be married, I know not
which


Well, but they are not Mad, that is, not Lunatic?


I don't know what you may call Madness -- But she is mad for a Husband, and
he is Horn-mad, I think, or they would never make a Match together -- Here they come


Where is this old Soothsayer? This Uncle of mine elect? a ha, Old Foresight,
Uncle Foresight, wish me Joy Uncle Foresight, double Joy, both as Uncle and
Astrologer; here is a Conjunction that was not foretold in all your Ephemeris --
The brightest Star in the blew Firmament -- is shot from above, in a Jelly of
Love, and so forth; and I Am Lord of the Ascendant. Odd, you're an old Fellow,
Foresight; Uncle I mean, a very old Fellow, Uncle Foresight; and yet you shall
live to dance at my Wedding; faith and troth you shall. Odd we'll have the
Music of the Spheres for thee, old Lilly, that we will, and thou shall lead up
a Dance in via Lactea


I Am Thunder-strook! You are not married to my Niece?


Not absolutely married, Uncle; but very near it, within a Kiss of the matter,
as you see


It Is very true indeed, Uncle; I hope you will be my Father, and give me.


That he shall, or I Will burn his Globes -- Body of me, he shall be thy Father,
I Will make him thy Father, and thou shall make me a Father, and I Will make thee a
Mother, and we'll beget Sons and Daughters enough to put the Weekly Bills out
of Countenance


Death and Hell! Where Is Valentine?


This is so surprising --


How! What does my Aunt say? Surprising, Aunt? Not at all, for a young Couple
to make a Match in Winter? Not at all -- It Is a Plot to undermine Cold Weather;
and destroy that Usurper of a Bed called a Warming-Pan


I Am glad to hear you have so much Fire in you, Sir Sampson.


Mess, I fear his Fire's little better than Tinder; may hap it will only serve
to light up a Match for some body else. The Young Woman's a Handsome Young
Woman, I cannot deny it: But, Father, if I might be your Pilot in this Case, you
should not marry her. It Is just the same thing, as if so be you should sail so
far as the Streights without Provision


Who gave you Authority to speak, Sirrah? To your Element, Fish, be mute, Fish,
and to Sea, rule your Helm, Sirrah, don't direct me


Well, well, take you care of your own Helm, or you may not keep your own Vessel
steady


Why you impudent Tarpaulin! Sirrah, do you bring your Fore-castle Jests upon
your Father? But I shall be even with you, I will not give you a Groat. Mr.
Buckram is the Conveyance so worded, that nothing can possibly descend to this
Scoundrel? I would not so much as have him have the Prospect of an Estate; though
there were no way to come to it, but by the North-East Passage


Sir, it is drawn according to your Directions; there is not the least Cranny
of the Law unstopt


Lawyer, I believe there is many a Cranny and Leak unstopt in your Conscience --
If so be that one had a Pump to your Bosom, I believe we should discover a foul
Hold. They say a Witch will sail in a Sieve -- But I believe the Devil would
not venture aboard of your Conscience. And that is for you


Hold your Tongue, Sirrah. How now, who is there?


O, Sister, the most unlucky Accident!


What Is the Matter?


O, the Two most unforunate poor Creatures in the World we are.


Bless us! How so?


Ah Mr. Tattle and I, poor Mr. Tattle and I are -- I cannot speak it out.


Nor I -- But poor Mrs. Frail and I are --


Married.


Married! How?


Suddenly -- before we knew where we were -- that Villain Jeremy, by the help
of Disguises, trickt us into one another


Why, you told me just now, you went hence in haste to be married.


But I believe Mr. Tattle meant the Favor to me, I thank him.


I did, as I hope to be saved, Madam, my Intentions were good -- But this is
the most cruel thing, to marry one does not know how, nor why, nor wherefore --
The Devil take me if ever I was so much concerned at any thing in my Life


It Is very unhappy, if you don't care for one another.


The least in the World -- That is for my Part, I speak for my self. Gad, I
never had the least thought of serious Kindness -- I never liked any body less
in my Life. Poor Woman! Gad I Am sorry for her too; for I have no reason to hate
her neither; but I believe I shall lead her a damned sort of a Life


He Is better than no Husband at all -- tho he is a Coxcomb.


Aye, aye, it is well it is no worse -- Nay, for my part I always despised Mr.
Tattle of all things; nothing but his being my Husband could have made me like
him less


Look you there, I thought as much -- pox on it, I wish we could keep it secret,
why I don't believe any of this Company would speak of it


But, my Dear, that is impossible; the Parson and that Rogue Jeremy will publish
it


Aye, my Dear, so they will as you say.


O you will agree very well in a little time; Custom will make it easy to you.


Easy! Pox on it, I don't believe I shall sleep to Night.


Sleep Quotha! No, why you would not sleep of your Wedding Night? I Am an older
Fellow than you, and don't mean to sleep


Why there is another Match now, as thof a couple of Privateers were looking for
a Prize, and should fall foul of one another. I Am sorry for the Young Man with
all my Heart. Look you, Friend, if I may advise you, when she is going, for that
you must expect, I have Experience of her, when she is going, let her go. For no
Matrimony is tough enough to hold her, and if she cannot drag her Anchor along
with her, she will break her Cable, I can tell you that. Who Is here? the Madman


No; here is the Fool; and if occasion be, I Will give it under my hand.


How now?


Sir, I Am come to acknowledge my Errors, and ask your Pardon.


What, have you found your Senses at last then? In good time, Sir.


You were abused, Sir, I never was Distracted.


How! Not Mad! Mr. Scandal.


No really, Sir; I Am his Witness, it was all Counterfeit.


I thought I had Reasons -- But it was a poor Contrivance, the Effect has shown
it such


Contrivance, what to cheat me? to cheat your Father! Sirrah, could you hope to
prosper


Indeed, I thought, Sir, when the Father endeavored to undo the Son, it was a
reasonable return of Nature


Very good, Sir -- Mr. Buckram, are you ready? -- Come, Sir, will you sign and
seal


If you please, Sir; but first I would ask this Lady one Question.


Sir, you must ask my leave first; that Lady, No, Sir; you shall ask that Lady
no Questions, till you have asked her Blessing, Sir; that Lady is to be my Wife


I have heard as much, Sir; but I would have it from her own Mouth.


That Is as much as to say, I lie, Sir, and you don't believe what I say.


Pardon me, Sir. But I reflect that I very lately counterfeited Madness; I
don't know but the Frolic may go round


Come, Chuck, satisfy him, answer him; -- Come, come, Mr. Buckram, the Pen and
Ink


Here it is, Sir, with the Deed, all is ready.


It Is true, you have a great while pretended Love to me; nay, what if you were
sincere? still you must pardon me, if I think my own Inclinations have a better
Right to dispose of my Person, than yours


Are you answered now, Sir?


Yes, Sir.


Where Is your Plot, Sir? and your Contrivance now, Sir? Will you sign, Sir?
Come, will you sign and seal


With all my Heart, Sir.


'S'death, you are not mad indeed, to ruin your self?


I have been disappointed of my only Hope; and he that loses hope may part with
any thing. I never valued Fortune, but as it was subservient to my Pleasure;
and my only Pleasure was to please this Lady: I have made many vain Attempts,
and find at last, that nothing but my Ruin can effect it: Which, for that
Reason, I will sign to -- Give me the Paper


Generous Valentine!


Here is the Deed, Sir.


But where is the Bond, by which I am obliged to sign this?


Sir Sampson you have it.


No, I have it; and I Will use it, as I would every thing that is an Enemy to
Valentine


How now!


Ha!


Had I the World to give you, it could not make me worthy of so generous and
faithful a Passion: Here Is my Hand, my Heart was always yours, and struggled
very hard to make this utmost Trial of your Virtue


Between Pleasure and Amazement, I am lost -- But on my Knees I take the
Blessing


Oons, what is the meaning of this?


Mess, here is the Wind changed again. Father, you and I may make a Voyage
together now


Well, Sir Sampson, since I have played you a Trick, I Will advise you, how you
may avoid such another. Learn to be a good Father, or you will never get a second
Wife. I always loved your Son, and hated your unforgiving Nature. I was
resolved to try him to the utmost; I have tried you too, and know you both. You
have not more Faults than he has Virtues; and it is hardly more Pleasure to me,
that I can make him and my self happy, than that I can punish you


If my happiness could receive Addition, this Kind surprise would make it
double


Oons you're a Crocodile.


Really, Sir Sampson, this is a sudden Eclipse --


You're an illiterate Fool, and I Am another, and the Stars are Liars; and if I
had Breath enough, I Would curse them and you, my self and every Body -- Oons,
Cully'd, Bubbl'd, Jilted Woman-bobb'd at last -- I have not Patience


If the Gentleman is in this disorder for want of a Wife, I can spare him mine.
Oh are you there, Sir? I Am indebted to you for my Happiness


Sir, I ask you Ten Thousand Pardons, 'twas an errant mistake -- You see, Sir,
my Master was never mad, nor any thing like it -- Then how could it be
otherwise


Tattle, I thank you, you would have interposed between me and Heaven; but
Providence laid Purgatory in your way -- You have but Justice


I hear the Fiddles that Sir Sampson provided for his own Wedding; methinks
it is pity they should not be employed when the Match is so much mended.
Valentine, though it be Morning, we may have a Dance


Any thing, my Friend, every thing that looks like Joy and Transport.


Call 'em, Jeremy.


I have done dissembling now, Valentine; and if that Coldness which I have
always worn before you, should turn to an extreme Fondness, you must not
suspect it


I Will prevent that suspicion -- For I intend to dote on at that immoderate
rate, that your Fondness shall never distinguish it self enough, to be taken
notice of. If ever you seem to love too much, it must be only when I cannot love
enough


Have a care of large Promises; You know you are apt to run more in Debt than
you are able pay


Therefore I yield my Body as your Prisoner, and make your best on it.


The Music stays for you.


Well, Madam, You have done Exemplary Justice, in punishing an inhumane Father,
and rewarding a Faithful Lover: But there is a Third good Work, which I, in
particular, must thank you for; I was an Infidel to your Sex; and you have
converted me -- For now I am convinced that all Women are not like Fortune,
blind in bestowing Favors, either on those who do not merit, or who do not
want 'em


It Is an unreasonable Accusation, that you lay upon our Sex: You tax us with
Injustice, only to cover your own want of Merit. You would all have the Reward
of Love; but few have the Constancy to stay till it becomes your due. Men are
generally. Hypocrites and Infidels, they pretend to Worship, but have neither
Zeal nor Faith: How few, like Valentine, would persevere even unto Martyrdom,
and sacrifice their Interest to their Constancy! In admiring me, you misplace
the Novelty. The Miracle to Day is, that we fin
A Lover true: Not that a Woman's Kind.




