AS Cowards would the Name of Cowards shun,
With Blustering Words, all said, and nothing done,
So Bully Poet I have known to escape
Such a hard Censure, would a Hero Ape,
And Paint Almanzor in a Monsters Shape.
Our Poet too, by such a Trick drawn in,
Too late repents the Self-deceiving sin:
For he forsooth,
In this ripe Age, where every Man's a Wit:
Lest he should be the only Blot was hit,
To save his Credit, as he thought, has writ,
Supposing that malicious Men might say,
Pox on it, he is Dull -- he Dull -- and writ a Play;
Why, I writ one, you know, but the other day.
But, since the Folly did so far deceive him,
Faith, he is ashamed to ask you to forgive him:
For here he swears, if you look out for Wit,
You may as reasonably expect to meet
Wit or good Manners in a dull Lampoon,
Or Christian Quarter from a French Dragoon.
Humility in Prelates, Truth in Priests,
Or in an Irish Coffee-house good Jests.
(Where, with our fancied Ruins, they make merry,
And from Mouths charged with smoke, Bomb Londonderry.)
No, Faith, our Author Imitates Ragoo,
For as without a shirt he was a Beau;
So without Wit he sets up for a Poet,
And thinks himself no more obliged to show it.
For if like Bays, all Poets should take pains
In letting Blood, and Physicking their Brains,
The Doctors Bill would sweep the third days gains.
Sure then, 'twas more Judicious Bays designed,
Than Purging of his Body; ay, 'twas his mind,
To temper it to bear with every Wind.
Thus to the change of Times, he changes Rhimes,
Whilst to the face of things his fancy Chimes,
And moulds his Soul and Body with the Times.

WHat Frank alive! mad Frank alive!


Even so, sober Tom, and glad to see you here in Town, which cannot have been
long: Pray when


Not yet a full week: But Frank, I should chide thee; for tho you are a
Rakehelly Non-resident fellow to any particular place, our Father old Sir
William's House stands where it did; and a slight direction would have secured
a Letter to your Loving Brother. Tho the old man has forsaken thee, I never did
Frank


Brother, I never write, it is my aversion: A man that writes must think and be
serious, which I never was, nor never will be. Talk as much as you will, but
Writing's my Abomination


Why Frank, it is the only way of Conversation with absent Friends.


Ay, but there is great charge in Paper, and one Letter begets another; besides
the expense of saying fine things. And then end with a damned Hypocritical
Conclusion, of your Faithful Friend and Servant, to a Rogue it may be you wish
hanged


Well, I find thou keep'st thy humor still, never to constrain thy self to
please thy friends. But why have you not asked how my Father does? What brought
us to Town, or where you might see us


Why first, I supposed he was well, or dead or alive, there is nothing to be got
by him. Next, I suppose you came to Town for the same reason I stay in Town, to
Whore and Drink. Lastly, I thought I might meet you in a Bawdy House


Well judged, dear Frank, but I Will inform you better; my Father is well, and we
came to Town upon the Condition of a match between the Beautiful Daughter of my
Lord Lovewit deceased, and your then happy Brother Tom Wealthy


Joy, Sir.


Abate a little, Sir; for tho the Lady's Consent and Inclination entitle me the
man, even since we came to Town, in that short time, a brace of Fops at
Covent Garden Church, have so far insinuated themselves, upon a slight
acquaintance with my Father, that every hour almost in every day they are
paying their Devoirs. I Will not disturb my Soul so far to think I am wronged,
but one, and to my face, she so far favors, as would provoke a man of a less
Jealous temper than my self: If this be the effects of going to Church, they
Church it by themselves for her or Tom


Nay, nay, Tom, rail not against the Church, but down on thy knees, and thank
Heaven thou brought her safe off: Why man, they are the very Heart-hunters
in Christendom: if thy Lady be not proof against Eye-shot and Ear-shot, you are
undone: Such nice surprises, at so sweet a Face, such amorous glances of half
Zeal half Love, such cocking of Cravat-strings and of Noses, with Perriwiggs so
exquisitely set, that happy is the Woman looks and lives


This is terrible News for a poor Country Gentleman: but I Will dispatch my
Marriage instantly, or cut the Throat of him that hinders it. And Frank, she
has a Cousin worth 10000 l. And faith, you are a young fellow Worthy, would
thou but leave these Courses --


Thus speaks the Elder Brother. Leave these Courses! Pox Course you; what
would thou have me do? You have the Estate, and yet I wear as good Clothes as
you do; Eat and Drink as well as you do; keep as good Company as you do; and
you will allow I Am the better Gentleman, by being the Younger Brother. Well,
prithee tell me where you lodge, for I Am resolved to make a visit to my Father,
not forgetting this 10000 l. you speak of


Why, at this very House.


What, the Widow Sly's?


The same.


'Sdeath, my Widow! I had a Note from her but just now, which was not
unwelcome; for I had damned ill luck at the Groom-Porters last night. Well, my
Duty to my Father, and tell him I must pay him a visit; I have some small
acquaintance with the Widow, and I shall gain Admittance


By the way, Frank, I doubt you have a Rival of the old Gentleman: But more of
that when I see you next; I Will find that out. You are in haste, and I a truant
to my Mistress. Adieu: Don't fail Frank, for she is so much of thy temper, I
dare almost promise thee success.


Well Cousin, this London's a delicate place; oh foh upon Sir William's old
nasty House in the Country: If e're you catch me there again! I did penance
enough in my Dads days: I Will no more of your Baing, Cackling and Crowing in a
morning; if I must be waked out of my sleep, it shall be with the dear Rattling
of Coaches, that, if I look out, I may see some gay thing fit to divert my
eyes; without that eternal prospect of Beasts, and bare Fields


Thou art a mad Girl, and this mad fancy will soon be cloyed; but if you are
resolved to stay after our return to the Country, with what Reputation will you
live here, a single young Woman exposed to the malice of this Rascally Town


Not so fast good Cousin: A single young Woman may be otherwise if she please;
and I am under no Vows that I know, unless this now; That the first young
Gentleman that I like, (if he has good manners enough to like me) shall have
the spending of this ten thousand pounds of mine, rather than I Will dye of the
Pip, to leave it to you and your Heirs


Well then, if you are upon choice, what think you of the two fine dressed
Gentlemen we came acquainted with at Church. There Is danger indeed in looking
on them


Oh foh! filthy old Effeminate Fools. Danger in them? none on my Conscience, I
dare swear it, if they were to be tried; though indeed, my dear Cosen, I
observed you a little over civil to Mr. Shamtown, who received it with all the
good manners in the World


Well Girl, since you are resolved to Marry, I Will give you some advice; this
Gentleman, this Mr. Wealthy, is the man on Earth, bait but his sin of Jealousy
I Would choose, which I am resolved to cure (if possible) e're I resign my self to
what I wish: For after that Maria, the Salique Law's in force against us all,
and then adieu to Government for ever: Our frowns no more can kill, nor smiles
revive: The humblest Lover makes a Lordlike Husband


I apprehend you, then you mean to write the folly of his Jealousy so plain,
in the two faces of these Amorous fools, that he may Read it there


Right Girl, but you must join in this great Plot; for sure you must discern
what Love and Languishment my Lovers friend expressed to you


To me! upon my life he hardly ever spoke, and then so softly, I could hardly
hear; he looked indeed and sight, and set his Cravat-string, and sight again, and
Combed his Perriwig: sight a third time, and then took snuff, I guess to show
the whiteness of his Hand. And all the speech he made to all this Action, was,
Renounce me, Madam, but you are very handsome; expecting, I suppose, the same
return


Well, this is making Love, the very newest way of making Love, and yet that
Wealthy can so slightly weigh my Judgment, or my Love; to think me fond of such
a nauseous Fop; but I Will Revenge my self this very way; I Will point my whole
discourse to him, like every thing he does, praise him to Wealthy's face, and
ask his Judgment of him; and as I find the ill-natured Fit work in him, I Will
treat my new acquaintance


And I must sigh, I judge too with my Lover: Well, I do hate a sneaking,
whining, crying, lying, dying Fellow, of all things in Nature: Give me the
airy, sprightly free Gallant, such a one as they report young Wealthy to be. I
long to see him, but this old Sir William will not suffer him, they say, to
come into the House; yet as ill-natured as he is to his own flesh, he has a
great inclination for mine, for he can hardly ever keep his hands from my
bosom. And what way should he take to make love to me, but by railing at
youth, especially his Son Frank, who shall starve he says, e're he get a Groat
from him


And you may believe him, for he is the gripingst old Jew living: Frank too made
bold with five hundred pounds of his, which he can never forgive. But see here
comes my Lord and Master. Ah Tom, would thou but quit that Jealous humor,
tho it is bred of Love, it is nursed by Folly; Love, Honor and Obey, should be
my Song for ever


Ladies, good day to you; what, not for Church this morning, Ladies? Methinks,
tho your Zeal may be somewhat allayed, so much good Company as meet there might
invite you to Prayers


O, goes it there? teaze him Cosen.


Well, Mr. Wealthy, I Will swear you are in the Right, there is the finest
Company, the finest Ladies, and the finest Gentlemen! 'twou'd do a bodies heart
good to look upon them. Upon my life they spoiled all my Devotion; 'twas well
for you, my Cosen made her choice before she saw these fine things, had you
been in Love with me you had been undone


You speak but your own Opinion on that Maria, though truly Mr. Shamtown, and
Mr. Littlegad, are the civilest, best bred men I ever saw; especially Mr.
Shamtown, he is the pleasantest Creature, so good humored, and so Witty, he is
three in Company at any time


Nay, Madam, I will allow him a fine Person, and a pleasant Creature, and three
in Company; but for Wit, indeed Madam, it is much more your goodness than his
desert


Well, I will not answer for Mr. Shamtown, but I Will swear Mr. Littlegad has Wit,
and more than that he is in Love with me


I doubt not that Madam; but has he told you so?


No, but he has sigh't, and that is all one; besides he set his Perriwig and
Cravat-string, for fear I should not like them. Pho, I know he is in Love with
me, and for ought I know, I am in Love with him too


Very fortunate fellows these, a poor Country Lover shall ride you twenty miles
a day, only to play a Game at Lantrelew, and go every Night home in the dirt
and the dark, and shall hardly be believed to be in Love, though he break a
Limb by the way; whilst one of these pleasant Creatures, by a new fancied
Dress, or nice tied Knot, shall conquer a young Lady in a trice


But then you must consider Invention is the labor of the brain, and exceeds
that of the body


And what signifies your Country Fools twenty mile a day to please his
Mistress, when one of these shall sit you twenty hours together, almost
distracting his dear Head, to find new fashions out, to delight us Ladies


And should not we be grateful, Mr. Wealthy, to these, who as if they were of a
Religious Order, abandoning and renouncing all your lewd Debaucheries of Wine,
wholly devote themselves to us, and our diversion


Present his Duty to me, wait upon me, he is a Bastard, no Son of mine, and if
he comes here I Will send him to Newgate, a Rogue


Nay, good Sir William, who has offended you?


What makes you so angry, good Sir William?


Pray be pacified, Sir.


No, Sir, I Will not be pacified, Sir, with you, nor your Brother Rogue neither;
he will visit me to rob me again, ha! What have you seen him, and advised him to
it, ha? The other five hundred pounds. I Will lay him close an I catch him, a
Thief


Nay, good Sir, consider, he is my Brother, and your Son.


Sirrah, you lie.


I have done, e're long you will say the same by me.


No, no, Tom, never; thou art my Son, my eldest Son, my best Son, I have no Son
but thee, Tom


Nay, Sir, you must pardon me, my Mother was Virtuous. You must forgive poor
Frank, he is your Son


Sirrah.


Your own flesh and blood, Sir William.


My flesh and blood, no Madam, but he robbed me of my flesh and blood, my money.


Egad, and I am glad on it with all my heart.


Fie, fie, you little Thief you, glad that a Son should rob his Father. But
I Will tell you that you may judge the grief of a Parent, against you have
Children, Tom or you, you little Rogue, for you will have Children; I'gad, I
could get you with Child my self. But as I was saying, I bred him at School,
and it was a forward dirty Boy; from thence I sent him to the University; from
the University to the Inns of Court, where in two years time, from a sober,
grave, discreet youth, he grew the Debauch of the Town; roaring, drinking,
whoring, fighting, were his daily Diversions: and because I would not supply
the Rogue with Moneys to maintain his Villainies, he comes down with a formal
Recantation to me in the Country, where like a Rogue, a Cutthroat Thief in the
Night, he robbed me of five hundred pounds, and now he sends me word, he will
make such an other Visit


Why, Sir William, methinks he has not wronged you in the least, you have saved
Money by him, for sure 500 l. is but a small portion for a young Gentleman, and
your Son


And would still deserve the name, would my Father but forgive him as a Son.


Sirrah, Son me no Sons, he was my Son, but is not, nor any that plead for him.


Come, come, Sir William, you were young once, and no doubt had your frollicks,
and your share of that whoring, roaring and fighting you speak of, I warrant
you


Fie, fie, or if I had, I never robbed my Father of five hundred pounds at a
time, Girl, Girl: Consider the sum of five hundred pounds, before you plead
for such a Rogue


Good Cosen leave off, for the thoughts of five hundred pounds will put him so
out of humor, we shall have no peace with him


Sir, Mr. Puzlecause the Lawyer is without, and desires to speak with you.


Cods so, I, Tom, Tom, you must go with me, it is about drawing them Writings,
about your Ladies Jointure. Well, God bless you both, and give you happiness


The man she likes needs not mistrust the blessing.


The man she likes must not mistrust at all.


I cannot imagine what I have to do among all these sober, busy people; would
I could find this mad young Wealthy, I fancy he and I should be better Company
than all these. Well, if this Town of London will not afford me one young
Fellow, after my own heart, it is very hard.

Sir William, when must the Wedding be, you keep me in expectation, I long to
see the manner, though my Cosen by her gravity, I see, does not wish for it at
all


O very suddenly, you little wagg you; what think you now of your own Wedding;
what think you of an old fellow of sixty now; hold, hold, I mean fifty: a good
hearty old fellow with abundance of Love and Money


What think I of him! I had rather Marry your roaring, whoring Son with never
a farthing, tho I never saw him yet


O fie, fie Child; why there is no safety with such lewd young fellows, you must
think better; but come Tom, come Tom, Mr. Puzlecause will think it long. Good
morrow Children, good morrow


Adieu, dear Madam.


Come Cousin, shall we visit the Widow this morning? and engage her to the
Exchange this afternoon. We'll have all our Fancies in your dress. Bless us,
you deserve a Husband indeed, to be married within these two days, and not a
Ribbond bought


Upon my life Maria, I begin to be afraid: The beginning, and your Courtship
indeed is diverting enough, but this Marriage i will swear when it draws so nigh
is a terrible thing. I pretend not to that ridiculous over-affected Modesty of
being afraid of a man-bedfellow I like, but seriously it shocks me, when I
consider I stake upon one cast, my good or my ill fortune for my life


Well Cousin, there is a hazard you know in all Games, and since we must be
playing, faith I had as lieve lose at this as any Game


But to the Widow, she will instruct you how
To steer your course under your Marriage Vow.
Tell you how far it must your Conscience bind,
And how far not, if Spouse should prove unkind.
And as you pay your duty, how to know
When he fails in some matters due to you.
With these Instructions, never talk of fear,
The Widow will make all things plain and clear.
And Faith Sophia, I dare swear for each,
We are as fit to learn, as she to teach.

I just received a message by Mr. Wealthy's man, Madam, that he will answer the
Contents of your Letter, for he has earnest business with your Ladyship, and
begs you not to fail at three exactly, at Mr. Spruce's Shop in the Exchange


I don't approve of his so often being there, though certainly had he any
Intrigue with her, he would not have the Impudence to appoint to meet me there.
Well, it is a barbarous case that a Lady cannot secure one man to her self,
though she pay a very good price for him, and maintain him as her own Goods and
Chattels; which is a great misfortune to us Widows. For upon my life, your
young fellows now a days, are scare-crow'd with the name of a Widow, that we
must either marry old musty Batchelours, or secure some younger Brother by the
magnetic Virtue of our Money. Betty, are the young Ladies up, think you


Yes Madam, and I believe I hear 'em coming to visit you this morning.


Run, run, and wait 'em up stairs: Upon my life I had forgot my Complexion this
morning; but they are Country Ladies, and may not miss it.

O dear, Ladies, I designed this kindness to you, as soon as I could possibly
have dressed my self


Madam, your humble Servant; we made bold to wait on you; I hope we have not
hindered your Devotions


O good Madam, I have been up these five hours. Betty, some Chairs; Ladies,
pray sit down


Madam, we came to desire your good Company to the Exchange this afternoon, to
buy two or three suits of Ribbond for my Cousins Wedding. Your good Fancy will
much improve her dress. Alas, we Country Ladies that so seldom come to Town,
are the awkward'st Creatures: Dear Madam, you must assist us


Alas Madam, since my unfortunate Widdowhood, dress has been the least of my
thoughts: Nor could I indeed ever boast of more than being clean, in the height
of my prosperity; for the gaudy part of Dressing was still my Aversion: And I
hope Ladies you will pardon me, if I must deny my self the satisfaction of
waiting on you to a place that will so ill become my Condition to appear in, as
the Exchange. Where I must meet my Wealthy, and with them 'twill be impossible.





Madam, you are Mistress of your self and time; but I thought the Exchange had
been one of the innocent diversions of the Town, and might as well help out an
afternoon, as the Playhouse, or the Park, without incurring the danger of
Censure in the least


Ah Madam! it is a base malicious Town, and whoever will live with Reputation in
it, must as nigh as possible avoid all those places


If all these are to be avoided, what difference is there between the Town and
a Nunnery? Or what diversion does your Ladyship propose in Living


In Visits, Madam. It Is the grand affair of all Ladies of Quality, to be exact
in their days of giving and receiving Visits; high days of State; your Ladies
Collar days as 'twere. -- Betty, bring my Table Book, where you shall see how
exact we are in our method, Madam, which is a mighty satisfaction to know every
Ladies particular day of giving or receiving; so that consulting your Tables,
you can never err. Let me see, Thursday last was my day of State; I think I had
a great Court, Betty


Twenty at least, Madam.


O Ridiculous! But certainly, Madam, so much Company should rather be uneasy
than diverting


O Madam, the Grandeur of the thing takes off all sort of uneasiness, tho you
hated every one in the Company; nor are you obliged to talk to every one, no
more than your rising acknowledgments at first. Now Madam, as thus,
Alphabetically: Madam Attall on Monday; Madam Bareman on Tuesday; and so in the
round, Madam Willdrink, Madam Wilful, Madam Wouldhaveit, Madam Wellenough,
and my Lady Worstofall


Your method, Madam, is extraordinary fine, but for my part, I Would sooner choose
to walk by my self in the Fields, than be troubled with all this Company in
their finest Apartments


Is your Ladyship for one in the Garden this morning?


We'll wait upon you, Madam.


No, pray Madam, indeed the Morning is inviting.


Ah, Mr. Wealthy!


Well met, my dear Cuckold, and particular Friend.


Good Mr. Wealthy, if I may be so bold, whether intend you?


Why, faith, to the Ordinary to Dinner.


Shall I prevent you, and perhaps to your satisfaction. If you will Dine with
me and my Wife at home, I will entertain you with the Oddest and Idlest
Resentment of a Brother Shopkeeper of mine, about his Wise, that can be


With all my heart.



Well, I am contented to Dine with you, Mr. Spruce, but if you design not to
take off the edge of my Appetite by suspense, let me know the business
immediately


You know, Mr. Topknot, in the same row with me, you must know the blockhead,
ha, ha, ha. When Mr. Horner was the other day at his Shop, he heard him talk of
a Journey he designed on Sunday to Epsom, upon this Mr. Horner, as you or any
man might do in my absence to my Wife, appointed a Visit to his Wife; as you, I
say, might do to mine, a Gentleman and Customer to the Shop, to comfort her. I
cannot tell you the occasion well, but this Blockhead coming home late a Sunday
night, goes up directly to his Wives Chamber, where finding Mr. Horner laughing
and playing with his Wife, no matter how, takes a ridiculous freak of Jealousy
in his Noddle, falls into the violentest passion that could be, calling his
Wife Whore; and Heaven knows what. The Gentleman seeing this, thought the
fellow mad, and putting out the Candle, made his escape down Stairs, leaving
the Blockhead railing and cursing, ha, ha, ha


But pray, Mr. Spruce, how has he dealt by his Wife?


How! By my Conscience and Soul, Sir, he has turned her out of doors, like a
Jealous Coxcomb as he is


O Barbarous!


Now, Mr. Wealthy, this is amazement to me, I cannot but believe these fellows
have some Imperfection they are sensible of in themselves; Lord, if I were such
a Coxcomb, how often must you and I have fallen out; though really, when I met
my Wife and you, the other day, in a Coach alone, it did at first surprise me


Faith, and so did you us; but I satisfied you that was an accident.


No more words, dear Mr. VVealthy, I don't mistrust my Wives Virtue, or my own
Merit; but we are just at the door: Nan, is my Wife come home from the Change


Yes, Sir, she expects you at Dinner, but not so good Company with you.


Pretty Mrs. Nanny.


Sir, shall I lead you in?


Your Servant Spruce. I have waited for you this half Hour: Mr. Wealthy, your
humble Servant; you are a Stranger indeed


Child, entertain Mr. Wealthy, till I go wash my Hands, and send up Dinner.


Must we attribute this Visit to Chance, or good Nature? I doubt, if to good
Nature, it is my Husbands


Faith, my Dear, you are in the right; but I designed to have pleased my self
at least with seeing you at three a Clock this Afternoon in the Change


If Mr. Spruce were as jealous as Mr. Topknot, indeed you might avoid seeing me
any where, but there; But Heaven be praised he is of another Mould, and much
more fit for my use


O he told me that Story. Shall I see you then to Night at home?


With all my heart; but you will fail, this is his Club Night, and ten to one but
he is fuddl'd, but how open soever his Eyes are, I cast a Mist before 'em as
easily as his understanding. At Nine the Garden gate shall be open, but don't
fail; let me believe you think on me sometimes, by your not forgetting this


By this, and this, I will not.


Ha, ha, ha, My Friend Topknot would have been at the Top of the House with
half this. Jealous Coxcomb. Come, my Dear, will you come to Dinner. Another
Fool would have been Jealous of this now, I warrant; a civil Salute, ha, ha, ha


Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha.


But what makes you laugh so, Prithee tell me?


Why, this was your Wife's own Contrivance to try to make you Jealous; you
railed so at Mr. Topknot: We have been Kissing ever since you went out, for
fear we should not be Kissing as you came in


Have you so? ha, ha, ha.


It Is true Spouse, faith.


Well, do if you can; but the Dinner cools: Mr. Wealthy --


Lead on, Sir.
May all thy Follies on thy Tribe attend,
And every VVhoremaster have such a Friend.

It Is vain, I fear, to urge you further for your good Compapany to the
Exchange, Madam, since your Reasons as well as Inclinations seem so averse to
it


Alas, Madam, I hope you will excuse my incivility in not waiting on you; since
really, Madam, I am so terrified at any thing may touch my Reputation, and the
gravity of my Habit, I dare not appear there, tho in so very good Company


Well, Heaven forgive me, I cannot think Charitably of thee. Cousin, since we
must venture by our selves into this bugbear place among Men, Monsters, and
Scandals: If we must suffer, Heaven have Mercy on our better part, I hope we
shall have your Ladyship's Prayers; and for Mr. Wealthy, I declare, if we are
Ravished he deserves no better: a Lover, and go about Business with an old
doting fellow of a Father, rather than wait upon his Mistress. Were he to be
mine, I would not Marry him this Fortnight, though I gnawed my Sheets to pieces


Indeed, Madam, I doubt you would relent, for Mr. Wealthy is really a very fine
Gentleman, and the better he settles his Affairs now, though he robs himself of
the Satisfaction of his Ladies Conversation, the more Enjoyment he proposes to
himself afterward; as all wise men do in so grand an Affair as Marriage


Indeed Madam, I am not come to those years of Discretion to like a wise man;
for on the contrary, he is naturally my Aversion: and I dare avow for young Mr.
VVealthy, whom I never yet saw, has more Wit in one of his Mad Frollicks, than
his Brother's Spanish Gravity can be capable of


Heaven send you may meet, for if what be true I have heard of him, by what I
know of you, you might be excellent Company, and very fit for each others
humors. Pray have you never heard of him, Madam


Yes, Madam, and seen him at a distance; a handsome young Gentleman indeed he
is, but very Debauched, or very much wronged


Madam, the Coach is at the Door.


Madam, your humble Servant, we'll try our Fancies by your Judgment, when we
come back


Ladies, your Servant.


Your Ladyships humble Servant; no farther, adieu Madam.


Betty, make haste, and lay me out the Mantua and Petticoat I wore the other
day, and take care to get a Hackney Coach to the Door when the Ladies are gone


Yes, Madam.


Certainly if I should meet them in the Change; they can never know me, my
greatest fear is lest young Wealthy, who is fond of every new face, should meet
them, and then I am undone, for 'twill be hard to lure him from so tempting a
quarry, to a game I fear he is already cloyed with: yet he knows the sign, and
in good manners must obey it, tho against his Inclination


I doubt I have over-stay'd my time; it is past Three, and the Widow is not
here, or else gone, which would be a cursed misfortune at this time: For to
morrow I must make a visit to the old Gentleman, whatever comes of it: And his
house of late has always been to me like a Tavern or a Baudy-house, bring but
Ready Money, and you shall be well looked after: Besides, the 10000 l. runs
strangely in my head. There sits this nights diversion; a Cordial of the
Widows will make it much more agreeable. Ha! she is here. I think, by this
light a brace of handsome Women.


Ribbonds or Gloves, Madam; Gloves or Ribbonds.


Ha! they go to Mrs. Spruce's? have among you I faith Ladies: If the Widow
catch me, these are Cousins, nigh Relations


Show us some of your newest fashion Ribbonds.


Mrs. Spruce your Servant; are the things I bespoke done Madam.


What things does he mean? O the Devil fetch him!


Cousin what say you? you don't mind 'em.


Cousin, what is the matter with my heart? Certainly the Devil's in that young
fellow, or in me


Ha, ha, ha, have you met with your man think you?


I have a strange Romantic thought in my head; what if I should fall in love
with this young Creature at first sight, a pretty account I should give of my
self to my Friends: I must find some opportunity to speak to her


O fie, these are too grave for our occasion, they must be for a young Ladies
Wedding favors, the gayest thing you have


If a stranger may so far presume, not for your own I hope, Madam.


Why Sir, would you forbid the Banes?


Had I the same Interest as Inclination to it, Madam, you would be in danger of
it indeed


O Lord, Sir, why are you in Love with me already?


Quick as her eyes I'gad: Why look you, Madam, plain Dealing's a Jewel: Let me
first know what hopes my heart may have to build upon; whether you are a
Predestined Wife or not; and accordingly expect an answer from your humble
Servant


No, no, no; Demonstration's no direct answer to any thing. I am resolved to be
a Riddle to all my Lovers. They that can find the meaning of me take me. I must
talk with this young fellow: Cousin take your own Fancy, as you have done
already: I like none of 'em


As you have done already, O then she is the Bride, your Servant for that; it is
kind and cunningly told, ha! I'gad these may be the two Ladies my Brother spoke
of; I Will try. Well, Madam, to show you that I have an art that goes beyond
unriddling any thing, I do positively know by the Stars, those Propitious Stars
to me, that you are not Married nor engaged: That you have not been in Town
above six days: That the Gentleman's Name, your Cousin is to Marry, begins with
a W. and that you lodge now --


Tell me that, and you're a Conjurer.


That you lodge now -- Let me fee -- At the Lady Sly's in Covent Garden; ha! do
you start, I'gad I am right


And pray Sir, how came you to know this?


Art, Black Art, Madam, therefore at your own Proposals I claim you; or at
least, the honor of being further acquainted


Why Sir, if you are Master of your Art, 'twill be in vain to deny you that,
after having seen me, when you were so well acquainted with me, before I saw
you


That Is true, indeed Madam, but granted favors are much sweeter than stolen
Fruits. Besides, Madam, there is really a necessity I should see you again, for
should I at the first sight tell you a Romantic Tale of Flames and Darts, (tho
you may well suspect your eyes,) yet you would not be apt to believe me


You are in the right, indeed Sir; ha, ha, ha.


Therefore Madam, since you are prejudiced against my first Essay, you ought in
honor to allow a second, unless you mistrust the Justice of my Cause may
prevail upon you


Nay, if you grow serious upon business, adieu.


And dare you venture to leave me thus, after avowing this passion, then I
declare open War against you, and all those little dancing Cupids in your eyes.
Assisted by the Spirits I command, those that informed me where you live, when
you came, shall dance eternally Attendance; and wheresoever among the numerous
train of Fops your fancy settles, him they shall Plague. By one of these the
nice shaped youth that dances with you at Balls, shall have his Legs broke. The
Sonniteer that chants his Amorous Notes, shall have his pretty mouth drawn to
his Ears, whilst every Fop that levels dressing at you, shall certainly be
tumbled in the Mire


Till at the last, for want of better choice, I must take up with you. Bless
us! a Conjurer! certainly I am a most unfortunate Creature, tho London I was
told was a lewd place, to light upon the Devil at the first dash


Therefore keep friends with him whilst you may.

'Sdeath the Widow. I know the sign, that cursed Handkerchief; a plague on the
Flag of Truce. When I was just giving Battle to the dear little Creature. Ay,
ay, shake on; I cannot see it yet


Cousin will you go? I have bought what I design.


I wait you. Sir, your Servant.


The honor, Madam, to wait you to your Coach.

Madam, your Handkerchief.


Not to trouble you Sir.


Jack, here take these things, and put 'em in the Coach.


Upon my life this is an Appointment; she is jealous by her answer: O that I
were alone with her, I might disappoint her. Sir, the Lady's going


Not whilst you are here Madam, or till I see you in the Coach.


'Twill be a trouble Sir, and our Coach is just at the Door.


You shall be obeyed; when I see you next, I may challenge the honor of your
acquaintance on other terms. Till then, fair one, Cross your self every Night,
or my Spirits will play tricks with you


None that can fright me, I Will watrant you.


Now for my Widow, by that time I have appeased her, it will be time to meet
Mrs. Spruce, and by that time I have appeared Mrs. Spruce, it will be time to
take a Bottle, and by that time I have that in my head, I shall think I have
managed my time very well. For tho on my Conscience I could forsake Whoring to
gain that dear little Creature, it is not like a wise man to leave off one
Trade, without a certainty of living better on another. Your Servant Mrs.
Spruce.


Jack, has it Rung at Convent-Garden yet?


Sir, it is past five.


Pox on this Drinking! it is no matter tho, for I look so filthily puddled, I
durst not have gone out. Lord, I am extravagantly hot; Jack, step where you
know, tell 'em I keep my Chamber this afternoon, and should be glad to see 'em


This is one of my masters high Intreagues; if Don Quixot's Dulcinea did not
come of a better Family, I Will be hanged


I should be very loath the Town should know half what I am forced to trust this
Rascal with: I have been now these 25 years (a damned long time to own) the
chief Intreaguer of the Town, made such a figure, raised such emulation, I have
been still the peak of every Poet, down from Sir Foplin to Sir Nice the Beau:
There Is not one Beauty famed in all the Town, to whom I have not paid some
Gallantry; and thus much I must own, I never made address in all my life, where
I was yet refused, to make the address indeed, but that was all. The
speculative part has still been mine, and my misfortunes have been gaily dressed;
Celia indeed no sooner broke her Vow, but Cloe entertained me as her own, and
married with my Rival in a month. Yet still I kept my Reputation up, and
wheresoever I came, fresh Billett Deux on Billet Deux received; sent by my
self, Heaven knows, unto my self, on my own Charges: yet now my Fate gives me a
fairer prospect, and beautiful Sophia will be kind. I have been well received,
and will go on: And tho I fight for once, once and no more, I Will venture Mr.
Wealthy's surly temper. But would my man would come, for this is all but
Speculative too, and I must Practice.


Sir, Mr. Littlegad's below, and bid me tell you he is come to wait on your
Coushee


'Sdeath, my Brother Beau, and in the Intrigue with me, I must speak with him,
tho he must not stay to see my Paramour. Wait on him up, I must maintain my
Character with him


Sir, your Servant; good Night to you, were now the properest. What, reading of
a Secret


No, a Trifle; you may read it if you please, I just received it from a teazing
poor Romantic Girl I promised Marriage to. I pity her, she writes a pretty
style


Poor fool! For still you must be dear, dear to my Eyes, dear to my longing
Heart; ah, why would you betray me into Love? Why would you promise me a Heaven
in you, and take that Heaven away? Curse of her Eyes who have estranged your
Heart! but O in vain, in vain I Curse the happiest Woman living. Pardon this
trouble, Sir, it is the last. Boast you have broke a fond young Woman's heart,
that loved too well to live, and live without you. Adieu. A very sad story.
What no Superscription, no Direction


'Sdeath, I had forgot to write it.

Wills, and order all. I Am much ashamed of this, but --


O Sir, the reason's Irresistible, no Complement, at Will's.


At eight.


Sir, she --


Rascal --


Sir, she says it is Washing day, and she cannot come.


Damn her, go down.


What, disappointed?


She begs my pardon, it is her day of receiving Visits. A Pox of all Quality,
'sdeath I Will Marry and oblige no more, Sophia shall engross my heart for ever;
and now we have time, Mr. Littlegad, tell me your mind, our time is short, our
Reception has been extraordinary. Will you resolve at this Ball to slip Notes
into their hands, that shall declare our honorable intentions


I would do much for beautiful Maria, but Love has so much awe upon my Soul;
besides, if they refuse we are undone, if they betray us worse, a Quarrel
follows


Sir, you're my friend, I Will trust you with my temper. By others want of
manners in the Town, I have suffered in my Reputation, and therefore would
prevail upon my self to venture once: The Cause I Am sure deserves it, and Mr.
Wealthy, I have often discerned, forces his temper to be Civil to me


Well Sir, you have been open with your friend: show me the Note you write, I Will
show you mine

For why should she ashamed or angry be,
To be beloved by me.

My matters go swimmingly faith, I have appeased my Widow, made my self half
drunk, and filled my Pockets with money. To morrow will I rise with the Sun,
and outshine the Sun, wait on my Father like a Son; and if I can but set like
the Sun in that dear little Thetis's lap, I should make a very good day on it.
However, since I am resolved to make honorable Love, I Will take my leave of
Whoring to Night. This is Mrs. Spruce's backdoor, and the fatal hour draws on,
in which I must graft a fresh Branch on my friends Forehead. Ha! the Door shut!
It used always to be open upon such occasions: I Will venture three gentle taps
however, there may be a Scout nigh


Who Is that, Mr. Wealthy?


Dear Mrs. Nanny: A Maidenhead I'gad; a pox of her mistress.


My mistress has expected you this half hour; she is alone in the Parlour.


With all my heart: But have you waited all this while in the Cold.


Indeed I thought it long before you came.


But you would have thought it longer, had you staid for one you Love.


Yes, if they came on purpose to see me.


Pretty little Rogue. The Child comes rarely on.


O fie Sir, what do you mean? Nay, pray Sir.


What do I mean? To kiss those pretty little lips.


O dear Sir, my mistress.


O Madam, now I hope you will own I am as good as my word.


Somewhat better methinks. Nanny go in. So Termagant, Mr. Wealthy, that you
could not have patience to walk in; I suppose my Maid told you I expected you
in the Parlour


Yes, yes, you will cool my Courage: Fie, Madam, I was only Coaxing her for fear
when you vexed her at any time, she should tell your Husband


You know, Mr. Wealthy, my Husband is not so easily persuaded; but however, you
boast of being as good as your word, I find, without a Bottle, you durst not
have ventured


Durst not; that word was never spoke to Spaniard yet, but forfeited a kiss
that gave him it. Now Madam, since our time is short, and consequently very
precious, pray let me have the honor to lead you into your own House


No, I Will swear you will be Rude.


No, I Will Swear I wont, but I Will be very Civil; when do you expect your Husband?


Not these two hours. O Lord, indeed I am afraid I shall catch cold, the
Night's very raw


I'gad you're in the right. Come along my dear.


Whereabouts are we Tom? it is somewhat dark.


Very nigh Covent Garden, Sir; we shall be at home presently.


This Lawyer is a smart fellow, Tom, he has drawn up these Writings concisely,
and full. Ah, that Rogue Frank, he might have done this, if he had followed his
Studies, an idle Rogue, and saved me this Charge: But he must be fine, he must
be a Wit, a Beau, Pox on him


Sir, I believe it is yet in your power to reclaim him; he has seen the Vices
of the Town, and no doubt is sick of them: Could he but get a Competence to
live


Well Sir, and you will have me settle an Estate upon him; I Will settle him in
Newgate first, a Vagabond


Nay, pray Sir, hear me.


No, Sir, thank God I Have taken care of you. I Have settled you, I Will part with no
more money


Sir, you shall not part with a Groat.


How Is that?


Upon my word you shant, and yet make him happy.


He has been a Rebellious Boy, but the tenderness of a Father -- Well, tell me
how, for I would do him all the kindness I could without Charges


Sir, give him the liberty of your House, Countenance him as your Son, and let
him address himself to young Maria


Here Is a Snake in my bosom; what, throw away my little pretty Maria with 10000
l. too. No, thank you Sir, I Will find a better match; what, betray my trust:
Marry her to a Ranting, Roaring Bully. What, give her the Pox? Ah, Sirrah! What
if I have a mind to marry her my self


Sir, you will pardon me if I say, methinks you are too old to think of marriage.


No, Sirrah, not so old as the young debauched Rascals of the Town, rotten
before they are ripe. Sirrah, provoke me any more, speak of this match any
more, I Will Marry, get a Child, and disinherit you both; and so come along


Sir, I Will follow you, and shall watch you too, for should he marry, a Child
may be got without his help


What Sirrah, do you mutter?


Mutter, no Sir.


No Sir, come along.


Adieu, dear Mrs. Spruce, you will send that Linen I bespoke, to morrow early.


Yes, but not by my Maid.

My Husband, if ever he is Jealous it is in his Drink. Dear Mr. Wealthy adieu,
how will you escape him


How the Devil do I know: 'Sdeath, I Will stand against this Pump.


Whereabouts am I? Is not this my back door? I am somewhat Drunk; it is a
beastly thing above once a month, and that is my stint; but I Will please her with
the Song I learnt: Tell me no more of Glory or Story. She loves a soft Song.
Tell me no more of Glory. No Canary, pox of that slip; I have all dirted my
face


'Sdeath I think I had best run for it now. Pox of his Agility, he is up
already: if he comes to the Pump, i am undone


Let me see, here is a Pump hereabouts.


Would it were in your Guts.


I must clean my self, that I may not disgust my Wife, and make her think
indifferently of my Person. Pox on it, they have taken away the handle: O here
it is


If he discovers me i will knock him down, and then I shall pass for a Thief. The
Dog will pull my Arm off


Zounds the Pump's dry.


'Sdeath I have a Bottle of Orange Flower Water his Wife presented me.


O does it come; delicate Water faith: So now for my Wife: Let me see, where is
the Key. Tell me no more of Glory, too to Court --


A senseless drunken Dog, not know a man from a Pump; this was a good escape, I
should have been loath to have Convinced him that he was a Cuckold. Let him dote
on, it is late; shall I go home so sober, I shall Dream of the Devil all Night?
no, the other Bottle

Good Wine does all our Satisfaction bring.
But the other Bottle is a Glorious thing.

WHat would I give to know whether I am really in Love with that young fellow
or not; let me examine my self. I am very angry with that Woman that came to
meet him; methinks I could beat her, yet I could not beat him. I long to see
him again too; and I am afraid I should be loath to part with him. Mercy upon
me, these are very ill Signs


What Musing Maria? Good morning to your serious Meditations: Pray your Thought?


If you will promise not to laugh at me.


What, the pretty young fellow reigns still in your fancy: What, four and
twenty hours together? On my Conscience you are constant; ha! ha


Laugh on, laugh on! Who was caught first?


But fie upon you, I thought you would have reserved your heart for young Mr.
Wealthy; and this Gentleman you saw was engaged


Would I knew where, I Would plague her however; but if he should be in Love with
her I Am undone


To clear that doubt Girl, I Will tell thee News shall make thee bless me for it:
That Lady your Rival, Madam, is our Individual, Grave, Formal, Hippocritical
Widow


Impossible, or how should you know it?


Walking last Night in the Balcony-room, somewhat impatient of Mr. Wealthys
return, I heard a Hackney-Coach stop, whence bolted out the very Figure we saw
in the Change, and my Curiosity found afterward to be the Widow


O this Ephesian Dame, shall she devour my Soldier; no, I Will vex every vein of
her Heart. I Will Dog her every day, that when she meets him next, I Will meet him
too, and turn her to her proper use, Procuring; I Will trace the old Fox till I
find out her Young ones


Poor Girl, she is sar gone.


A Witch: Pardon me Ladies, if I dare not go to a place that so ill becomes the
Gravity of my Habit.

What Serenading Fools are these?


You're strangely out of humor, what if it should be a morning Serenade from
our two Churchmen, in order to the Ball we are to have this Evening? You
remember the Part you are to Act


Iudeed you must pardon me, I shall be out.


I grow sick of mine too; but hark, a Song.


Mr. Wealthy do we owe our thanks to you.


This Madam, as the gentlest way I could, I chose to let you know my bold
request; Music and Beauty seem so nigh a kin; such equal charmers sure what
one desires, the other cannot deny; to morrow be the day; join to that natural
goodness of your Soul; your kind endearing Promises and Vows, put on the Deity
you are to me, descend and perfect all my hopes to morrow


Sir, I confess it is a fault to blush, in answering what I have so often
promised; but you must pardon both, since I must confess, so soon you have
surpised me, I own you Conqueror over all my heart, but beg as yet you would
not use your power; allow my Virgin fears some time to fly, I shall in honor
yield without surprise


Allow for all my Wracks of Passion; for all my broken hours and nights of
rest. Allow for the Impatience of my Love, that counts all hours Ages till to
morrow, and put this in the balance with your fears: If it be yet too light,
I Will kneel to beg a blessing great as this


Sir --


What a Pox, is the fellow going to Prayers, or to say Grace to to morrows
Feast? Child, Child, time is short, all things settled, and London's a Wicked
Place, therefore prepare to look the Parson boldly in the face, and in grace of
peace, i will see you married, and then --


But Sir William.


Stop her mouth Boy, she will cry it is too soon, or some mischief or other:
Where Is my little Maggot this morning? she would put off such a business I warrant
you; uh it is a parlous Queen


Well, I will plague the Widow and this old fellow. Good morning to you Sir
William, you see they are got together with a villainous design to make you a
Grandfather, and then you will look so old, Sir William, it is a pity; for now you
look brisk enough for the youngest Maid in Town; methinks I could fall in Love
with you my self


Think you so, my little Maggot, not so old but I can play at creep Mouse yet;
creep Mouse, creep, catch her, catch her


Nay, nay, nay, Sir William.


Why, you little Eyes, you little Nose, you little Mouth, you little -- No, no,
you're for young Rogues; we old wholesome fellows, with good Hearts, sound
Lungs, hum, hum: no, no, we cannot pass now a days. Tom, I heard Music here
just now, was it yours Tom? Prithee, let us have a Song there; gad, I Am very
merry this morning. Adsbodkins, I Will sing thee a Song my self, Girl. Now you
shall hear, now Huswife, an old fellow; adslid, hum, hum


O brave, Sir William.


Ah, you little Rogue! Creep Mouse creep, catch her.


Fie, fie, Sir William, you will make me angry.


Why then be pleased again, you little baggage, ah.


Come, Sir William, let us see if you're as good at Dancing as you are at
Singing; come Sir, I Will Dance with you


Art thou for a Hoy tite Rogue? Come, strike up then.


Margery Crey.


Oh, fie, fie.


Come, come.


O this unmerciful Jade.


No matter, Madam, he likes it.


About, about, Sir William.


Hold, hold, Merry and Wise; Wise Child, Merry and Wise Puh.


Sir William, you grow young again; you trip it like any Fairy.


Oh fie upon him, he has put me so out of breath, I shant be able to Dance this
Evening


And yet I am old, I warrant you, ha? You had rather marry my Wicked Debauched
Son Frank, you little Eyes, you little Nose, creep Mouse creep


No, I yield Sir William now, but I Will try your Courage at the Ball.


But what the Devils the meaning of these Balls? What a Pox do these fellows do
here? Here they tell me a Story of the Honor of my former acquaintance, when I
never saw them but once, when I was last in Town, at a Coffee-house, and now at
Church


And think you not that enough, Sir, to take hold of, when it will introduce
them into so good Company as these fair Ladies


Still there Tom? -- Cousin.


Good Sir William, and you Mr. Wealthy, do not quarrel at our good Fortune what
e're you think; if I were sure of meeting such good Company, I Would go to Church
every hour in the day; besides they are the Widows acquaintance; we are obliged
to her as well as you for their Company and the Ball we are to have; where, for
all this, you must Dance to night


Dance! you little Eyes you; ay, and Dance forty such Limberhamm'd fellows as
these dead still: What, because this great fellow here makes me look a little
old, and the Cares of the World makes me look somewhat gray before my time, do
you think I Will be laid aside; adsbodikins if you will Dance, Dance me a good
round Country frisk: Pox o your Minutes and Bore's (what do you call'em) Dances
only invented for your smooth paced pocky French fellows: Ounds, a good round
Country Jigg would shake em all to pieces


True Sir; but as brittle ware as they are, they crack many a Ladies
reputation, without ever hazzarding their own; and ought no more to be suffered
in Families than Eunuchs, who, however unmann'd, can both divert and disgrace
their Ladies if they please


Nay, sure Mr. Wealthy now you're too severe.


Not a bit, faith Tom, I hate these young old fellows mortally.


On my Conscience it is Scandalum Magnatum, were I a man so wronged, I Would Cuckold
you to disprove you; but here comes the Widow, I Will swear I Will tell

Oh Madam, would you believe it? This Mr. VVealthy is the vilest man, he says
he believes Mr. Shamtown and Mr. Littlegad are Eunuchs, as if that your
Ladyship, that has known what a real man is, would keep such Company, or suffer
them to come into your House


Ha, ha, why you little eyes you, what spare no body? She Is a Wag Madam, she is
a Wag


I like her humor the better; but Mr. VVealthy, indeed you must give me leave
to take the part of this young Lady, in behalf of the young Gentlemen who are
men of extraordinary Parts, upon my word


I doubt it not Madam, since your Ladyship is so well acquainted with them and
their Parts


Nay, nay, the men may pass; but what a Pox is that young old fellow, that
peeps out of his Perriwig like an Owl out of a Bush


O Damn him, an Antiquated Beau, aiming to be, but never in the fashion; saucy
enough to Ape the Noblest man, but wrongs him as much as a damned Country sign
did King Charles the Second; would make you believe he is a Linguist, but
really picked up the bits of Languages, by begging his way home when he was
abroad. In short, to be Pawn Broker to a Basset Table, is the Top of his
Pretensions


Upon my word, Mr. VVealthy, it is malice, for I received just now a very pretty
Epistle from them, and am in Love with the design of changing our Ball, among
our selves, into a harmless Masquerade, where every one may please their fancy
in expressing either their humors or desires, by their dress; and so, though
we know our full Company, be puzzled to find out each other


Troth, that is pretty indeed.


'Twill help the merriment, no doubt; I like the humor.


This is a Trick by Heaven! I beg your Pardon, Madam; I confess, since we are
so few, and we know all the Company, I cant find out the Jest of Masquerading;
to drive on an Intrigue or so, I grant you


Or to express our humors, by our dress, is full as well.


Nay, Madam, I have done.


Sir William, what say you?


With all my heart, in faith, I Will Masquerade you; and if I find you out, you
little eyes you, I will so creep mouse you. But what a Pox, we an't enough, we
shall want Company


If you are all agreed, I Will send them word; and by the way, desire Mr. Spruce
and his fair Lady's Company, and so please you


Agreed, agreed; come, be brisk Tom, let us be merry to Night, and please
Heaven, to morrow I Will settle the best part of my Estate upon thee, and thee
upon her, in faith Tom; and the rest my little eyes shall have if she will, and
there is my care over


Indeed Sir William, I must --


I know it my dear Child, I know it, all Women must; take her aside Tom, and
walk with her in the Garden, and tell her some fine things. Tell her she must,
and where she must, and when she must, and how she must; go, go Tom, tell her
all. What are you running away, you little eyes you? What, you must too, ha


So must you too, Sir William, when you can; I must go to my Chamber and study
my dress for the Masquerade, and some mischief against that black Devil, for I
hate the sight of her.


Get you gone you little Maggot, you little; um I could. The Devil's in her I
think, I never come nigh her but I fancy, my self twenty again


I have observed this old fellow is in Love with her; I Will try him, and help
too if I can, for if young Wealthy should as he has threatened, their humors
will so hit, I shall certainly lose him. Sir William, if you will pardon me, I Will
tell you something I have observed; and I believe I may serve you in it with
that young Lady


What says my Widow, with that young Lady, ha?


What think you Sir? would she not be a comfort to your Age? would not a
Bedfellow so sweet, so free, so gay, so witty, lovely, and so young, renew your
life, and give you a fresh Lease? What think you Sir, be ye open


Think Widow? Gad, I know not what to think, what her little Eyes mine, her
little Nose mine, her little Mouth mine, nay, her little all mine. Ah, Widow,
I Will give thee five hundred pound let me live to see that day, I Will Article
immediately Widow; there, there is my hand on it; by the Lord Harry -- but the
Money's returnable if not


Agreed, and I accept your Generosity. But then, unless you follow my advice,
you ruin all my measures. In the first place, you must resolve to stay in Town;
in the next, your youngest Son, whom every body Loves, they say that sees him,
must be banished, if e're he pays his Duty as he threatened. --


Banished! Ounds, I Will hang him Widow, a Rogue. I have enough to hang him when
e're I please: Why, he robbed me of five hundred pounds, Widow


What then, you would not hang your Son.


Let him keep off then, let him keep off then, a Dog; but my dear Widow, at
her, my dear Widow, tell her fine things, my dear Widow. What a fine thing
it is to have a great Estate, my dear Widow, and to reign Mistress of a House
and Family, my dear Widow: Tickle her my dear Widow, and I Will tickle her,
my dear Widow; hum. Methinks I have got her already; but Widow, Widow,
rail damnably at all young fellows


I Will warrant you Sir; how his old bones dance. Well, Sir William, I Will sound
her presently, she is gone to her Chamber, and I Will to her instantly, and after
Dinner I Will tell you more


Go, go, go, five hundred pound Widow go; go Widow, rail at all young Rogues.

Pox on them rotten Rogues, that can neither Drink nor Whore, and yet set up
for both, with weak Hams, slackned Nerves, shaking Hands, and flannel Shirts,
before they are five and twenty. I Will show them what an old fellow can do.


So, this Letter will I show or drop before the Widow: No, I Will show it her,
make her my Confident, as if it came from the Gentleman I met in the Exchange.
There needs no Name; and though she knows his Hand, if she be Jealous, she will
believe that Counterseit for fear of her. It begs I Would meet him there: I Will ask
her Counsel, and observe her looks; if she be moved, my Cousin's in the right.
Then if she goes to meet him in my stead, I Will Masque my self, and dog her to
the place, and let him Judge whatever he thinks fit. I Will tell him that I came
to vex them both


Madam, the Widow.


Wait upon her up, she leaps into my Net; I Will plague her very Heart.


Your Servant, Madam, still thinking on your Dress? I see you will surprise us
all with your fancy


No Madam, I was otherwise employed; for being a perfect stranger to this Town,
I was something troubled in my self to know whether I have met with a Civility
or an Affront


Explain your self, good Madam; not from me I hope, nor any of my Servants.


Not in the least; so far from that, dear Madam, you are the only person in the
World I Will trust, or ask advice of


You make me wonder.


You know how earnestly my Cousin and I entreated your good Company last night,
till you convinced us how unfit it was for one so much afflicted, to be seen in
naughty places, like the New Exchange


What means she?

Well Madam.


However after begging of your Prayers, and saying of our own, with aching
hearts, you know we went; nay, and are come off alive


Good Madam on.


Indeed there was much Company and fine, and had your Ladyship been there, I Am
sure you would say the same


I doubt it not Madam. The Devil, what does she mean?


But grief you know Madam, however it may lull it self at home with Balls, or
harmless Music to divert, ought not to appear in public, but in tears; that
robbed us of your company, dear Madam


And is it that disturbs her? -- It Is that I fear's the incivility which you
suspect


No, on my Life; swear to be secret and I Will tell you all.


I vow: I would she would begin.


There was a young and really handsome Gentleman.


Ha, goes it there?


What says your Ladyship?


Nothing Madam, a handsome Gentleman you said.


Nay, Madam, you would have said so had you seen him.


Very likely; but what of him?


Waiting, as afterward, I found too plain, for better company, to pass the
time, began to talk with me


Not rudely, I hope -- This Devil could not know me.


She Is stirred -- so far from that, even at first sight, nay, the first words
he spoke, were Raptures, Flames and Darts; I know not what, but mixed with much
Civility and Wit


These are the common Gallantries you meet; the young and beautiful must bear
with this


More Madam, he told me where I lodged, when I came hither, my Cousins
Marriage, and the first letter of her Husbands Name


And not his own.


No, but he would wait on me he said, and I believe him, for I just received this
Letter by his Servant to my Maid, which I can construe nothing but affront; for
sure he thinks me such another Prize as the Lewd Minx he met


Impossible; pray let me see it. By Heavens, this is none of his Hand! But that
was Jealousy of me, a trick I scorn him for


She srets: Nay, Madam, let not your Zeal for me disorder you so much, it is
not worth your Anger, nor my Notice


But Madam, such a Villain, at the first sight, without the least acquaintance,
to offer to request a second meeting of a young Lady in that open place, is so
much impudence, such an affront, it shocks a modest Woman but to think it


And then so basely too, to rail at her; I know he came tomeet, and curse her
too. If you read on Madam, you will find he curses; curses her, the occasion of
our parting, and rails at her impertinence and love


Oh base, base, Madam, monstrous base. This they are all, but he the basest
living


Nay, dear Madam.


Indeed I am too blame to wonder at it; I Will curb the just resentments of my
heart, and strike at this to speak for old Sir William


Hang her, I Am vexed to see her fret so much, for I shall love him more now out
of spite; but if I never should see him -- oh that is sad, would he would write
indeed


Madam, you asked advice, if you will accept it, judge but of this; you are
young, and in a place so pestered with Intrigues, may unawares your
inclination, fix on one may seem deserving in your eye: But, believe me Madam,
among the vain young flatterers of the Ag

The Monsters, we fond Women Lovers call,
There Is not one grain of truth.

Among them all.


She mocks me certainly, but I Will observe her. No, for their Folly, Vanity and
Pride, exceed the most ridioulous of us; and for their Vows, their Conscience,
or their Honor, a man on this side forty, is marked a fool, that ever meant a
true word to a Woman


Indeed.


By Sympathy the young affect the young, and she is the happy Woman whose kind
Lot directs her where those Vanities are past, and Marries with the Anoient and
Discreet. Were I to choose, I beg your Cousins pardon, I should prefer Sir
William before the Son


Madam, I sent your Letters, and had answer they will be here.


I come, Madam, you will be ready immediately.


I Will wait on you, you have the Letter.


Yes, Madam, at your Service.


No, pray, keep it Madam; I fear I shall be troubled still with more; if it be
so, i will beg your Ladyship so far as in a Mask, to venture with me, and find
out who it is, you cannot deny me


You shall command me Madam, to my wish. I Will ruin this and him. Your Servant
Madam


So, 'twas her he met, her folly and her jealousy betrayed it; by her grave
counsel and railing at young men surely Sir William taught her, I Will find that
out: Would I as easily could find a way to meet with him; he talked of visiting,
which with a formal show as to the Widow, if he has good nature, may be meant
to me; I Would thank him for it: However, since I am resolved to see him, I Will trace
and haunt the Widow every hour, bribe every Maid she has, know all she does,
read all her Notes, if Gold will break the Seals

Not slip the least of any likely hint,
And then if all should fail, the Devil's in it.

How, Mr. Shamtown not yet equipt? Impossible your fancy should be palled: I
never yet in my whole half years travel, met an Italian could for humor match
you. What can it mean, the Product must be wonderful


A trifle Sir to yours, Judge when you see it; it is odd indeed, but strikes
upon a string, that will declare my Love and Sufferings. You're for the Camp,
methinks it is very fine, and I believe will take Maria's humor


Do you sincerely think 'twill please the Ladies? Sir, it is the composition of
my Travels, more than three Kingdoms claim a right to it: My Perriwig I bought
in Paris, my Cravat at Venice, my other Linen in Flanders, my Gloves at Rome,
my Wastcoat at Naples, and my Sword is a Milanese


You give a good account, Sir, of your Travels.


If you will believe me Sir, I went on purpose, that being at each place, what
was their Pride, I might compare with the most nicely dressed


Sir, the Tailor is come with your Habit.


Bid him wait without.


What, shant I see you dressed; how shall I know you at the Ball?


O never fear, by the description I gave you will know me. We must not go
together; pray for our Success; I Will meet you there immediately


Adieu.


Upon my life I go with an aching heart, for should I be embarass'd with a
confounded accident as I was at the last Ball, concerning that damned China
Jar, I do not believe I should be able to sustain it. Pox on it, I Have renounced
back Capers ever since.


So, now for my Mistress and my Father, methinks I am a very pretty fellow;
certainly this old fellow wont have the heart to turn me out of doors, and
disgrace a Gentleman in his new Clothes. But plague of his Country breeding,
he will swear I stole them, or at least come to steal money of him to pay for
them, and then sans ceremony out goes the Reprobate Son, if not tossed in a
Blanket; and egad if he does, I have often promised the Widow, I Will marry her,
make the House my own, and turn him out in the dead of a damned thundering Rainy
Night, and nothing but Lightning to guide him to another Lodging; or deliver
him to the Watch for a House-breaker; and there is trick for tricks. What a Pox
is it to him. Ha, what is here Fiddles?

Gad, I believe they are married to day; that is well, the Devils in him if he
be'nt civil at such a time. Well, since I must have a pluck at the Golden
Fruit, I must venture waking the Old Dragon.

Is Sir William Wealthy within Sir?


Yes Sir, but there is a great deal of Company, I believe he is not to be spoke
with


What means the Music I heard, is his Son married?


No, Sir, it is a Ball.


Well Sir, I know them all, if you please to show me up --


Sir, they are all in Masquerade.


So much the better; can thou lend me a Masque, here is a Crown for thee good
Lad


Yes Sir, please to walk in, I believe I can.


Methinks faith, this is a pretty Frollick, my Wise came in one Coach and I in
another, and egad, among all this good Company, I know not which is she. Ah,
there is many a Jealous fool in our Change, would be hanged before he would trust
his Wife thus, for fear of being a Cuckold, forsooth: However, I Will look out
for her, sure this is she, pray Madam, What is your inclination by your Dress


This must be my Husband, by that ingenious fancy; he would be an Alderman I
find; if he were Knighted 'twould be well enough, for I would be a Lady, ride
in an Aldermans great Iron-workt rattling guilt Coach, and laugh at every body
on foot


Which of these three's Sophia? I cannot guess but that in the Nuns Habit, by
her Stature, must be Maria; on and prosper, my dress may plead for me. Oh my
sad heart


Which of the Coxcombs is this? a pretty way to tell his Passion, and I must
witness to it. Pox of all their Masking to this dumb piece of Courtship, and may
be to my Mistress. I shall make that heart bleed afresh, if it aim there; and
he goes right, for that I Am sure is she


Was ever so ridiculous a sight? this must be my Lover, and sure that Jealous
Spaniard must be Tom. Good Sir, how many hearts have you left whole, if a young
Country Virgin should unfortunately Love you? Or is your Mistress Cruel, you
look so pale on it


Ah! Fair one! Let this Emblem of grief speak what I dare but think.


Madam, the man's in Love, can you not guess.


Good, churlish Sir, who are you? And why in this Spanish Habit.


It suits my temper best, Madam; I hate ridiculous Fops that change their
fashions, to Court their Mistress, in variety: I am still the same, constant
and ever loving; but if provoked, as Jealous as Usurpers. I Would stab more hearts
than Cupid has of his, and lay them bleeding at my Mistress Feet. Nor is it
unjust, to think the man that Loves like me beyond a man, should, if once
wronged, do things beyond his reason. This Madam, whosoever you are's my
Character, and yet there lives not such a Slave as I am


It Is a good one, less Jealousy though were better, for I would choose a life
wholly retired from all the World, but that dear man I loved, where there were
left no room for Jealousy, or groundless fears to interrupt our Love, but live
long and happy days, and dye together


Ah, Fair one! Would the Goddess I adore
Speak but such words, my Wounds would bleed no more.

Good bloody Bones keep off.


Fie, Spaniard, do not over Act your Part.


This must be VVealthy, i will take a fitter time.


Cruel Devotress, will you rob the World of the but one sweet Angel they have
left, to add to those vast Millions are above? Let me prevail, throw off this
Garb of sorrow; shine out the Glorious Princess of the Earth; in every Princes
Court i will sing your Praise, and with my Sword immortalize your Name: The
stubborn'st Knight alive shall own your Beauty, Transcendent over the Mistress
of his heart


Oh Vanity! Be gone, you Court that Honor which your Sword must win, more than
the Mistress you pretend to fight for; and I have bid adieu to all the World


That Nun must be Maria, and she, i will swear, belys her inclinations; that
Villain VVealthy knows it. That Fantastic thing must be Mr. Shamtown, but
which of them is VVealthy, which Mr. Littlegad, I cannot guess; that must be
Spruce, but where is Old Sir William


Ye, la, ho, ho, hey, Jouler, oux there, oux hey, Ranter hey.


Sir William, Sir William.


Ha ha ha.


Who are you? what my little eyes, little Nose, little mouth. What a Pox a Nun,
is that thy Choice then, i will build Churches


How came it your Dogs are not in Masquerade too?


What a Pox is here with all these bloody hearts? Oux, oux, there, ye la ho.


I wonder a man of your years should Hunt in Ladies Chambers.


Ye la ho oux, there oux too.


He may follow the scent, but can never keep up with his Game.


What, all upon me, nay then, take off your Dogs.


What the Devil's the meaning of this, are they all mad, Nuns, Aldermen,
Huntsmen, Heroes, Milk-maids, Ladies? And what a Pox, the man in the Almanac?
I Will mix in the Crowd, and look out for my little one


Ladies, if you will be pleased to seat your selves, here is one will entertain
you with a Song


With all our Hearts.


Nay, Sir, Sir, you spoil the Song.


Pox of the Song, there is more Music in this; let us Dance.


Agreed, agreed; but what Dance?


Why, the Friar upon the Nun: Where Is my little Nun? Who are you Sir?


Your Servant Sir.


My Servant, Sir?


Bless me, who is it? -- I never saw him before. Let us reckon our number, how
many should we be


Mind.


One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. -- The Devil, the Devil;
this fellow will run away with half the House. Ounds, Sir, who are you? If you
are the Devil tell us so, that we may open the Doors and Windows, and give you
free passage; it must needs be the Devil, I have heard of such a business. Ay,
ay, it is the Devil


No Sir, I am no Devil, but your Son.


You lie you Dog, you're worse than the Devil. Thieves, Murder, Rogues, I am
undone, Lock up my Doors, call a Constable, I am undone


Nay, nay, Father, for shame; before all this Company.


Sir William, fie, consider.


A Rogue, he is come to rob me; what the Devil does he here else?


With your leave you do me wrong, I am neither come to beg, borrow, nor steal,
as you may see; for your five hundred pounds I Am able to pay you, and then I
owe you nothing but your begetting me, and may be I repent that as much as you;
and so Sir good b'y. I came to have asked your blessing had you pleased. -- Now
will he call me back


Who Is that, my Son Frank?


Yes, yes, this is your Son Frank.


Frank, why come hither you Rascal you.


O the blessing of a kind Father. -- Your blessing Sir.


Ah, thou have been a Rogue Frank, but I forgive thee.


Then the Debt's paid.


What say you?


I thank you Sir.


But where did thou get this money Frank, is it all Current? Let Us see Frank.


Brother, I am heartily glad to see you, I hear you are to be married. Pray
which of all these fair Ladies will honor me with the Name of Brother


This; and she does indeed.


Joy to you both.


This is her Cousin Brother.


All lovely kindred, faith, with your leave, sweet one.


Cousin.


Nay, I pity you.


Madam, I hope you will pardon this Intrusion.


On any account but this.


Your Servant Mrs. Spruce.


Ah smack her Mr. VVealthy.


Ay, ay, smack; he will smack her; ah it is a Dog, a handsome Dog, and a strong
Dog. But he is a Rogue, a damned Rogue, I must look to him, he will rob me again
else when his money's gone


An extraordinary fancy this of yours Sir.


To Divert the Ladies Sir.


A Hero too. Mr. Littlegad you have wondrous fancy; Ladies, you were talking of a
Dance, let me not hinder you. -- By your leave Mr. Hero, if I beg this Lady as
a Relation for my Partner


Damn him, I shall miss my opportunity.


Why Sirrah, Sirrah, robbing me already, ha.


No, no, Sir William, I danced with you in the morning.


Gad a mercy Nuns flesh, i will creep mouse you for this; and for that i will send
my Rogue Frank packing, well I Will sit by and see you. Tom, Tom, to the Widow:
Strike up there, who leads


Mr. Spruce, sure none but Mr. Spruce.


Your Servant Ladies.


This must be the time.


What Insolence is this.


Death and Hell.


Treason Tom, Treason! Ounds, a Plot upon your Mistress; a Plague of these
bleeding Hearts


Do you own this?


What if I did Sir?


I Would pay the Postage.


God a mercy Tom: Sir, you are a Son of a Whore; well said Tom.


For Heavens sake, Gentlemen, consider where you are; you have frighted all the
Ladies


Monsieur.


Damn you, speak English.


Monsieur.


What said he Frank,

Very well. Madam, I beg your pardon if I have gone beyond the Rules of
Civility, impute it to the ill manners of your friends


Yes faith, Widow, I beg your Pardon, but that fellow is a Son of a Whore,
that is certain. But where is my little Nun? 'sbud, they have not run away with her
too


They are within Sir William, but half dead with the fright.


I Will go comfort her, but that fellow, Widow, is a Son of a Whore. Let us in,
let us in, a damned Son of a Whore.


Behind Southampton-house you say, at six exactly.


So their fury tells us if it hold.


Brother, you must not be engaged in this, but of that more anon. I Will not stay
here to Night, we shall be prevented. Boy, call a Coach to the back door; make
haste and fetch my Cloak and other Clothes immediately. This business gives me
double satisfaction. Pardon me, dear Sophia, for the mean mistrust I had of
thee, and if this insolence go unrewarded, debar me of the blessing of thy
Love; come Frank


Gad a mercy Tom; now if this surly Country fellow should give this Beau a
cursed uncouth thrust in the Guts, 'twill disgrace his Shape most damnably.


Gads me, Tom, Tom, your Mistress is in a swound there. Tom, Tom, what a Pox is
he gone? the Devil, where is he gone? Horse, Horse there, Ounds, Murder, where
is he gone?


What Is the matter Sir William, the matter?


Nothing at all Child; but where are they all gone?


Sir, they took Coach, and drove away as fast as the Horses could lay Legs to
ground


So!


Look to the Lady, carry her in.


Ah me; and poor Mr. Spruce too gone?


No, my dear, I am safe enough, but damnably frighted.


What, under the Table? The Devil haunt you; come out here, and run along with
me to the Constable, and to my Lord Chief Justices, and the Kings Guards. Oh
Lord, I shall have my Son Tom killed; kill my Son Frank no great matter, but my
Son Tom killed would break my heart. Come along, you Cowardly, Sneaking. -- Oh
my Son Tom.


BRother, your extraordinary Generosity has drawn you into a business, in
which, of all Mankind you ought to have been the last I should have chosen; if
I would have followed the barbarous custom of our Country, in making use of a
Second, and under that abused phrase bring in a Friend, as if that were sit
business to employ a real friend in: Therefore, Frank, however high your blood
may work you, unless I am unequally opposed, draw not your Sword, but let me
right my self


Faith Tom, I shall not much uphold that custom, but as you are a Brother and
a Friend, a Stranger too, in all these Noble Feats, I must exchange a Thrust or
two to back you: besides, I sancy I am a Principal; for when these nice-chap't
Greyhounds hunt in couples, it is no single Booty that they aim at: My pretty
one was marked for Slaughter too. And Faith Sir, he shall win her e're he wear
her, with your good leave


Make that appear, curse him that bars your hand: A Mistress is a glorious
Cause to fight for. Pray Heavens the Villain be but brave enough to meet, and
Rival me with equal fury, and not disgrace the beauty of my Cause


Faith if he does he is strangely altered Sir: For I have heard of him in
several Quarrels, where he would trust his Honor with a man that never yet
gave him a good account often: But such a Cause may work a Miracle. And mine I
judge just such a noble person


I Am sorry for it: But certainly they will come. And Brother, since you will be
your own Master, I beg you be not rash, think what you do


Faith Tom, and that is well thought on; so I will. Let me consider, I am going
now to sight for my Mistress: That is, She must be my Mistress: Poor Soul, she
knows nothing of the matter yet. And I am to Fight with a Gentleman, that for
ought I know, knows nothing of the matter neither. Now I know I love her with
all my heart, and perhaps against her will. And I Would fight for her with all my
heart, but should she love me, that is against her will too: Then I Would marry her
with all my Soul too. But pox on it, if she don't love me, that is against her
will again; so the Lords will be done. I venture my Carcass upon an ill lay,
there is an end on it. Brother, I have settled my Conscience; would they would
come


However Fate designs you Frank, your Treasure must not be exhausted upon this
account; there is Fifty Guineas, put them up safely, they will prove good Friends,
however the matter goes


What, Smart-money, Tom! Well, if I light upon a Surgeon that has any grace, a
man may get a small Clap cured into the bargain


You Will find if I should fall a hundred more in this Right Fob. Don't let those
Rascals plunder me: For should they lay my Money out in Perriwigs and
Cravat-strings 'twould grieve my Ghost worse than my Death. I have ordered
Horses for us not far off. Damn 'um, the morning wastes, what mean these
Loyterers; prithee look out


Stand to your Arms Tom, your Enemy draws on.


Sir, you're something late in doing your self Justice; unless you're sensible
you deserved the blow I gave you. But this is no place for Parley. Draw


By your leave, but it is Dear Tom; a moments Temper. Sir, since these Gentlemen
know what they fight for, 'twere something fit that you and I did too; for I
suppose, if you dare own it, Sir, that you were charged with a damned
white-powder'd Bullet-Deux, to have shot the other Lady, without any Report


I scorn to disavow a passion, Sir, for beautiful Maria: But --


But your Servant Sir. Draw: Draw, both Traitors: Tom, fall on.

Thrust lower Tom, my Gentleman Dances.
St. George In Faith Tom. Your Sword, Sir.

Your Life.


I own it.


Your Sword Sir.


Take it.


Then take it as my gift. Whene're I see you where this Quarrel arose, I Will
take the forfeiture


Art thou hurt Tom.


No Frank, nor in danger of it.


There Sir, your Sword again. The Lady's mine. Your Servant Gentlemen. You know
on what conditions you live. Farewell.


Come let us be dressed. Pox on the Ladies: We have done enough to talk of in the
Coffee-house this month, and there is some comfort still. I Am glad it is over


Ha, who is here! it is they: One of them bleed.


Bloody too: Son Toms blood: Zounds Son Toms blood: Draw Dog, draw; where is my
Son Tom, you Son of a Whore. Fall on, fall on


For Heavens sake, Gentlemen, he is just there; just yonder unhurt: just gave us
both our lives


Say you so: Hold them fast tho. Runs to the side of the Stage. So ho Tomme,
Son Tomme.

My Dear Tomme. There Is Frank: Was Frank hurt at all.


No Sir.


No, Pox on him, he fights every day.

Ah, my dear Son Tom:

Here they come, here they come: Oh my dear Son Tommy. Ah my poor Tommy.


Good Sir, how came you hither with all this Rabble and Guards about you.


'Sdeath Brother, the Old fellow has seized upon the Gentlemen.


Gentlemen, you may go, we are sorry for this mistake.


Ay, ay, you may go, and the Devil go with you.


But good Sir, how came you hither?


O Pox Tom, I could not sleep a wink -- I have been at all the Slaughtering
Fields I could name about the Town, at Barn-Elms, and at Putney-Common, and
Chelsey-Fields, and Red-Lyon-Fields; at all the Golgatha's about the Town. And
Mr. Spruce, I thank him, went along with me before it was quite Day; he is a
damned Coward, but he is a very Honest Man


Indeed, Mr. Wealthy, my heart ak'd for you. And if my young Mr. Wealthy had
been killed, 'twou'd have broke my Molly's Heart, she has such a tenderness for
him


Faith, he speaks true, I dare swear his heart ak'd, for he started at every
Bush he came nigh; but I am glad to see thee my dear Tom and Frank; Frank's a
good Boy too


Sir, I thank you for your Tenderness, but would not for a thousand Worlds you
had prevented us. Frank! Sir, this is your Son, my Brother and my Friend. I beg
you would entertain him in your Heart


Who, Frank? Frank's one' I always loved till he played the Rogue and Robbed
me. Frank, Frank, that was a filthy business: But no matter, I Am so o're-joy'd,
I will give thee -- let me see, what shall I give thee


Ay, would I could see it.


I will give thee now, I will give thee. I will forgive thee now Frank; and
there is a Gift for thee


That all: I thank you Sir, I thought to have paid you now.


What say thou Boy?


I thank you Sir.


O Tom, my joy to see thee has been so great, I forget to tell thee sad News;
your Mistress Tom


What of her Sir?


O she is blind by this time.


What mean you Sir?


She has cried her Eyes out Man. The little naughty Girl too, that never cried
but just when she was born, has been shuffling ever since


Now if that were for me, agad I Would cry too. No, no, it must be for me.


I Will fly to comfort her, my dear Sophia.


Fly? Yes Tom you may fly; fly your Country if you please. Ounds, she swears
she will never see you more: You have betrayed her Honor, lost her Reputation,
undone her quite, and fixed her in the Rank of loose-tail'd Ladies, whose good
Name must be fought for, or be lost


Could she say this?


More, more man; she will go into the Country too night, but if you were killed,
she swore she would not outlive you


There Is love and life in that: Curse on my Temper, what wrong could such a Dog
have done to me? What Honor too to fight so poor a Creature? Did she not
slight and scorn him to my face? O my Sophia, Pardon this last ill-natured
Tempest here: Receive me with the Arms of Tenderness, and there becalm my Soul
and thine for ever. Come, Sir Brother


I wait on you.


There, there is Money for you; thank you Friends, thank you. My dear Tomme.


Thank you Sir.


Well, I Will tell her what a kindness you have for her: And I Will assure you, Mr.
Wealthy, there is no Love lost; I have heard her speak as kind things of you as
of any body except me, and me you know --


O it is impossible she should love, that is love so far as to lie with any body
but you


Indeed Mr. Wealthy, I must say I believe I have been no small satisfaction to
her since I married her: she knows when she is well: I warrant you she would not
change me for any man. I will not keep you, Sir, I Will tell her how you love her


So do, Mr. Spruce: You need not fear Rivals.


Adieu.


Now for my Prize, I think I won her fairly.


Rival! ha, ha. No faith, I have not sold Perfumes, Ribbonds, Gloves,
White-washes, and other sorts so long, but I know how to make my self agreeable
as well as any of my Customers: Nor have I followed Tunbridge and Epsom, and
sometimes Islington Wells so long, but that I know how to gain more hearts, as
well as secure a perfect inclination, even I believe to the loathing of any
other person. Therefore, when I am persuaded, like my Friend Topknot, into that
ridiculous Opinion of being a Cuckold; the Lord have mercy upon my Head, my
Wits are far gone indeed.


We have a sad distracted House: All our Servants are run after Sir William;
all the Maids are crying over their Mistress. -- I pity poor Sophia, but that
young Devil, however she seems moved with her Cousins grief, mourns her feared
loss of my perfidious Wretch. They must be gone to fight, would he were killed.
-- I had rather see him dead than see him hers. She knows I love him, I Am sure
she must; and by that Letter tried me unprovided; knows that I met him there,
but I Will watch her, and try her to the quick: Betty


Madam.


I charge you when Sir William returns, call me immediately; let me first see
him on your life; take heed be not from the way. I know the Old fool loves her,
he told me so himself, and asked my judgment, as being a Grave Person fit to
advise. I Will tell him how she dotes upon his Son, and if he is suffered here he
must not hope. And to convince him more, however the business goes, he shall
report him dead, to try her, and if she stands that test, she does out-wit me.
At least, Sir William's Jealousy I know will soon forbid the Rebrobate his
House. And it is some pleasure to remove the Scene, and not be Nosed by a Girl
in my own House


O Madam, Madam, Sir William.


What ails my Woman's Heart, sure I cannot pity him. Well, what News?


Sir William and his two Sons are below: I am sure by Sir VVilliam's talk, they
have been fighting, but neither of them seem hurt


Away, I Will meet with him.


No Answer yet? No News?


None Madam.


Is not Sir William come neither, 'sure it is almost Noon. They must have
fought, and the dear rash Man's killed. O Grief, O Insupportable Misfortune.
Is It not enough my Reputation's stained, my Honor questioned, my Fame, that
stood as fair as Day disputed, but must my Love dye in so ill a Cause? Was It
not enough I swore to quit him ever, punish his Faults with everlasting
absence, but must he dye, dye, upon my Account? Dye in my Quarrel


Patience, dear Cousin, Patience, we shall hear better News than Death; I hope
they are both together wheresoever they are; Brothers, and Valiant both, never
doubt their safety, those fellows dare not look them in the Face


Is It not still worse, engage a Family at once? Nay, I Have wronged thee Maria,
for though his Brother has been counted loose, he looks a Noble Gentleman; and
now perhaps I have robbed thee of thy choice


Indeed, I should be loath to hear his Death, though he is a perfect Stranger
yet to me; but would I had never seen him, I know not what I feel; fear of the
Widow, fear of losing him, has made me love too soon, before I know whether he
has the least good thought of me


Madam, I hear some body:


Run to the Door immediately; see who it is.


Sir William Madam, and the Widow.


She weeps; oh speak, Sir William speak, where is your Sons?


Sons? Son Tom's very well, but there has been the Devil to do; I have been
forty mile about to find them, though Tom, he will be with you presently


But where is that other Son, Sir William? My heart aches.


Who, Frank?


Yes, Sir.


Who Pop he was always Disobedient; there never comes better of Disobedience.


He Is Dead, and I could tear her Eyes out for crying; I Will weep it all my self.


What mean you Sir, he is not killed?


So Sir William told me; Mark, Mark, Sir William, a fresh Flood.


Then as I hope ever to dye in Peace, I Will never see or Wed to Mr. Wealthy.


So, so, Widow, there is fine work -- How shall we get off this business?


Have Patience, time enough.


Not see him Child, he is just at the Door almost, how could he help it, he
loves thee Child, and is sorry he has angered you.


Whether is she going? Zounds, here will be more mischief. But how now little
Eyes, what makes you cry? Look up


Look up and Curse such a remorsless Father.


Now Sir be judge, is it fit that he stay here? if he goes, you yet might hope
to win upon her


No, no, stay, Pox on him, I Will send him packing: But here comes Tom.


What News Sir? How does my angry Love? Have you informed her all? Will she
forgive


Yes: I told her thou were well. But on her Knees, she vowed she would never see
you; have but a little patience she will forget it


Which way went she?


She Is locked her self into that Room within; but where is your Brother?


I left him in the Garden; he is a coming.


'Sdeath, he will meet Maria; I Will go watch them.


Run, run, he follows you.


Take Heart Tom, take Heart, I warrant we bring matters about again, have but
patience. Pox on this young Dog, he is met her and spoiled all the Plot. To her
Tom, to her; beg her Pardon, and all will be well.


Yes, on my knees. Nay, and she must forgive me.
For though the humblest way my Love will choose,
And all the Arts to tempt good Nature use,
Should she at last my Penitence refuse.
I know my stubborn Temper will return,
And then too late she will her anger Mourn;
When I have seized the Rascal Author of my Pain,
Killed, Stabbed, Destroyed, and ruined all again.

A Pretty Garden this; ha, whose that, the purchase of my Sword? My Love in
Tears? Mistrust of my Sickness! I Will Court her in Heroicks. So, when the God of
War sets out for Fights and Ranges through the Fields in Blood and Dust, the
sweet-ey'd Venus takes a lonely flight, and in some soft Retirement of Heaven,
bemoans the vast Fatigues the Hero bears. So, so, this will do in Tears. My
Goddess


Bless me!


'Sdeath, I have not washed my face to Day, and she takes me for Vulcan. Mars, by
the Gods, come flusht with Honor from the Bloody Field, ready to lay them all
beneath your seet


Alive!


Yes, live to tell you how I fought; to tell you how I Would dye for my Delight, so
that you would let me taste this lovely Fruit, and make live again.


By Heaven no Ghost; true solid Flesh and Blood.


Such as it is Madam; it is blood that flutters now about my Heart, and Dances
to the Music of your Eyes. Oh, Fair one, since I saw you Fate has been abroad,
and angry Rivals threatened in the Fields, yet naught could take that Object
from my mind

I kept your lovely form still in my view,
And as I fought, I looked, and fought for you.

'Twas frankly fought; and Sir, I give welcome from your Wars, but grieve I
cannot recompense your Valor

A Heart's a trifle to so great a Hero,
And that is all we Virgins can bestow.

That and a little more is all I ask, and Virgins have them both.


But sure you would not rob me of my All, my most Uncourteous Knight?


No, I Would be thy All, thy All in All; thy All in every part. And you shall have
all me with all my heart. And know now I Have begun, I Will fight Mankind to keep
thee to my self


Whether I give encouragement or no?


I Will win you as a Hero should his Mistress, kill Monsters, Dragons, do
Herculean Labors; I hate a snivling, tedious, seven years Courtship, losing
our Youth and time: Put me to Action, let me convince you early of my Love,
that I may neither lose my time nor you


For a small Trial; answer me quick; tell me. Know I the Lady which you went to
meet in the Exchange. Do you boggle? Good b'y Sir


It Is a Rascally Trick; but in short, it was my Lady Sly, and there is quirk for
your quirk. Now, Madam, will you stand me a question


With all my heart.


What made your Ladyship in Tears just now?


I Will give you leave to guess it was for you.


And give me leave thus then to pay my thanks, since I have owned this early
kindness for you; you must expect i will be convinced of yours

Therefore prepare, and as I find
You constant, I Will be kind.

Rogue, Dog, Traitor; I Will fight with him my self.


I shall be turned out of Doors, and lose my opportunities with my dear one;
gad, I Have a Trick left for that still


Draw Rival draw, I --


Good Dad put up, O Se Defendendo's a Damned business.


Why look you now! The Rogue would murder me; I Will swear the Peace against him.


Are you mad Sir William? Nay then fight it out.


Sir William, hear me.


Hear you? No you Dog, but I Will hang you.


Then Sir I resign my self to you, will you yet hear me?


What Is the matter, Madam?


Only Sir William is bewitched. I Will watch him if he turns him out of Doors, I
have a Game to play, for I must plague him; and if I find he loves me, let him
take me.


Good Sir, what is it that disorders you?


What Is that to you Sir; and now I think on it, you advised me to it; you were
the Match-maker


Sir you mistake, why wont you hear me?


'Sdeath, you undo my Brother; he has no thoughts of Maria.


What made him with her then?


Mere accident; he is promised to the Widow, Sir, to my knowledge, though she
will not own it


How! she is Rich; she is a Miserable Woman then: The Dog will undo her. Come
hither Sirrah, do you make love to the Widow here


Sir, here are Letters under her Hand, that would have convinced you as much,
would you have been patient; yet should she ever know I owned it Sir, 'twou'd
break the Match, and ruin my Designs


This may be true, the Widdow's Jealous of him with Maria; so much the better,
'twill make her earnester in my Affair. Well Sir, if she be fool enough, go on,
I Will keep your Counsel.


Faith Tom, thou came in a lucky hour, we were just a going to take a fair
Tilt, the old Gentleman's Jealousy was up; how fairs your Mistress? When is
your happy day


She utterly at first denied me seeing her, and so Resents the Rashness of my
Quarrel, such an Affront done to her Reputation, by Heaven, I feared she would
never pardon it. But so far I have prosper'd, only pardoned


That Is all the effect of love; a day or two will soften her again, write to
her first; Maria will attend and plead thy cause


How goes the Cause with her?


It thrives; she gives me a free Stage, and if I can convince her of my Love,
which must be done, she gives me reasonable hopes of hers, but swears she will
try me first


Success to you in all: My task is hard, but I Will about it.


Never fear Tom; she is born to be thy Wife: And as sure

As after Marriage they must all be Ruled,
So Tom, before it they may all be Fooled.

A Comfortable Being this! Snapp'd last Night like a Dog by a parcel of
Rascally Bailiffs, and Mewed up here for 500 l. Lost my Mistress, lost my
Liberty, lost my Widow too, I fear, for I can get no answer of my Letter. The
Devil! This must be malice: I owe 500 l. but to no one, and how the Devil they
should all agree to confound me, I cannot tell.

Tom, this is kind indeed, to visit a Brother in affliction.


Dear Frank, I come to beg thou wilt let me know which is the best and readiest
way to serve you? What Is the Action


Five hundred Pound. I owe the Town indeed 500 l. and I believe the whole Town
is the Plaintiff: Therefore the readiest way, dear Tom, will be to search the
Offices, that I may know at whose suit I am here; my Father knows of it, I
guess he is strangely troubled


Strangely indeed, for he would let thee starve; but I Will away and search the
Offices. -- Be not dejected Frank, for shortly I shall have command of Money,
and if no way but paying of the Debt will give you freedom, I Will lay down the
Money, and thou shall laugh at the Old Man's ill Nature


Does Maria know it?


Yes, and pitties you extremely, rails at my Father for his Cruelty, and speaks
most tenderly of your Misfortune


There Is some comfort still; if I can get out no other way, tell her I Will break
through the Stone Walls to thank her


Never fear, I Will bring you News immediately.


I wonder how this Old Rogue my Father, could get two such honest fellows for
his Sons; this is a Brother. But would my Widow would come, she is Rich, and
I Am engaged to her already, an't 'twou'd be even a pain to be obliged so much
by one who is to me a stranger, though my Brother. How like a Counter-Rat I
look. -- I Will lay me down to sleep, and dream of Liberty

My dear Widow! This is kind indeed.


Good Sir, why did you send for me?


For the same Reason which I hope you came. Why all this Coldness? What have
you learnt this lesson of my Father, and come to preach, or practice it upon
me? My Constancy and Love's but ill repaid, if this must be the time you choose
for parting


Constancy! Thou Devil!


In Hell, Madam, you might have said, but no Devil.


Yes Devil, to wrong the woman, that never yet wronged you, but sacrificed my
Fortunes and my Honor to make you easy, and maintain your Pride


Did I e're yet disown it, Madam?


Most basely in your Actions, though your Words (that natural deceit in all
your Sex) flattered me still to keep me still your Fool; but I Am convinced; and
now it is all the pleasure I have left, that I came here in scorn, to let you
know I Have seen your baseness punished. So farewell.


Madam, though I can meet your scorn with scorn, and Perish as indifferently as
you wish it, you shall in Justice let me know what grounds for this; or is it a
Pretense? Own it true Woman, own it, find out a Lustier Fellow for your use,
you have nicked your time; laugh at your Quondam Servant, and be Damned


This wo'not do, your Pride will not carry't off, or make me think of you in any
terms, but as the most ungrateful of Mankind


For what? 'Sdeath, how? Be plain.


You cannot guess: O Impudence!


You Scold well, indeed Madam; but I remember a bit of a Song very proper; I Will
Sing it if you please, Madam


Sing! The Devil choke him.


Good Mr. True Merit; thou Monster, look upon this Letter, you don't know it,
though the hand be Counterfeit; a shallow Cheat


Then Witness for me all you Powers Divine,
If this be any Word, or Hand of mine.

O Impudence!


Perdition seize me if I ever saw it.


Monstrous!


If I did Madam, may I never be blessed with the Light of the Sun.


Cursed Lie.


But be shut up in Eternal Darkness in this Dungeon.


Unparellell'd Villainy!


May I be Rooted here a Spectacle to your Ladyship.


Would thou go to the Devil directly?


Nor be ever more in your good Grace.


Be Hanged.


If I know one word of the matter; therefore, good Madam, tell me how you came
by this


You did not write this to Mrs. Maria?


Why, did she give it you?


What Is that to you: By Heaven! I never thought of this: Upon my Soul it was a
Trick; but by his haste to know I find his Thoughts, yet he is better than I
thought of him, and I must use him better


'Twas my pretty little Rogues Letter; dull Dog, she is Jealous of me. Ah, would
I were out


Shall I believe you did not write this Letter?


Shall I curse any more?


No.


How came you by it?


'Twas sent me as a Copy stole from you of one you, writ.


A likely Story; and you soon believed it, to shake me off, just now starving
in Goal; I thank you Madam


No, my dear VVealthy, never, would you love me.


Could I have spoke such barbarous things to you?


No, but you would do worse should you ever leave me.


Leave you, Child! I can neither leave you, nor be with you while I am here.


What is your Debt?


Only five hundred Pound.


A good round Sum! By times he will certainly have all I have; I Will break a
right Widows Rule for once, and Marry him, he has osten proffered at it. Mr.
Wealthy, the Summ's no Trifle to the best Estate; you have often proposed, take
me and all I have, i will give you Liberty to Night


I must lie to get out; agreed -- but in the mean time, my dear, it is no
Novelty to you and I, we'll Seal this business in the other Room


Fie, Mr. Wealthy, not till I Am all your own.


She Is been all my own these two years. Nay, Childish, why so unwilling?


Lord! What do you mean? Fie, in a Prison?


In a Palace Child, with good Company; the place indeed is homely, but the
Entertainment shall be the heartier. Nay, come


Lord, I Will swear there is no dealing with you.


How bears the Gentleman his Confinement Jailer?


Very well.


You know by the Bailiffs on what account he is here, they told you, I suppose;
there is Money for you, when I release him ask him for no Fees, he must go with
me. There Is no Company with him, is there


Yes, a Lady.


What, in the inner Room? Run, run, run in immediately, tell him a Gentleman
would speak with him: No, stay, here he comes -- how like a Rogue he looks


Madam, your Servant, you will not forget; adieu.

I have seen this Youth somewhere; Sir, would you speak with me?


Yes Sir, I come from the Gentleman my Brother, you fought with the other day,
upon a Ladies account


Well, Sir.


I am to tell you it is in his Power, and only his, to take this Action off, and
give you Enlargement


In his?


Wonder not Sir; you are Rivals, and he took this way, this surer than his
Sword, to Ruin you. He had a Catalogue of all your Debts, and from each
Creditor, whom he has paid, full force to lay his Action, which he will take off
upon no other Terms than a perfect Resignation of your Mistress


Child, you may go, I Will bring my Answers back my self, and tell him next time
I have his Sword, I Will spoil his neat Proposals. Go, Lad, go


But Sir, she loves him.


Therefore I Will cut his Throat.


She Will hate and curse you for it.


Not when he is dead Child, she may like me then.


But how will you get out Sir?


What Is that to thee Impertinence; prithee go tell thy Brother, I Would Perish if I
were within his Power, rather than yield him up a thought of her


But why are you so stubborn, when to my Face I see you were engaged to cross
his just desires


Why, how now Child, though that pretty face does plead for thee, be gone, or I
shall use the scurvily


You Will not Resign her then?


I Will rip his heart, thine and my own too, up first: therefore be gone.


Then Sir, to show he does as much deserve her as your self, I have Orders here
to give you Liberty; if you dare meet him behind Southampton-House, within this
half hour alone, where he declares no Quarter must be given, but one of you
must dye upon the Spot


Sir, this obligation's great, and i will return it to your Brothers heart.


Guard your own Sir -- If you please --


Sans Ceremony, faith Sir; from a Prison.


Mr. Littlegad, my Friend and Champion, how do you?


Wholly Devoted still to Mr. Shamtown, and if there be no dangerous Deaths
Wound lies beneath that Noble Escutheon of your Honor, I wish you Joy of such
a Manly mark; and by my faith, I could have wished the like to have signalized
my self. You are for the Coffee-house no doubt, I Am sorry I am engaged: The
first surprises, the many questions, how, when, and with whom, where; at
Southampton-house


With this short Sword.


And how bravely the other fought you too; be sure mark that, that adds to you,
you know; then you disarmed him


Accident in fight, where the brave draw their Swords, the Combat's doubtful.


If they ask who were Seconds?


Fester my Wound Sir, if I do you wrong; will you go with me?


Damn it, how Love and Honor wrack my mind: Why for a Woman should I rob my
self of all I fought for? Pox of Visiting, and yet I must. Said each, there is
no danger now to second you, and yet there is real Honor to be got. But early
in the morning I Will be there; farewell Sir

I envy you the Honor you must meet,
But go to lay mine at my Coelia's feet.

Not come yet? this is the place; surely this Villain does design to Murder me,
or else fought booty with me the last time. No Seconds to so furious a
Challenge; I shall have my Throat Cut here in the Woods, and be Buried, like
the Children in the Ballad, by the Robin Red-breasts


Sir, your Servant, you're as good as your word.


That Is more than your Brother dare; why is he not here? And why are you, Sir?


Sir, the hurt he received in his Arm, has unexpectedly disabled him, but he
has sent his Sword by me


Give it me Child; indeed I should have took it had he come.


What mean you Sir? I came to do him Justice, maintain his Merit, is to be
preferred to yours


'Sdeath, does he take my Mistress for a Prize for Boys to Box for?


Boys Sir? Draw.


Ha, ha.


Flout not Sir, we'll try who is the strongest.


Ay, this is something, you young White-liver'd Dog.


Will you resign your Mistress, or dye upon the Spot?


Not till I Have ripped thy little Guts up. Fight me but one by one.


No, thank you Sir, we can Murder you a better way.


Speak, or we strike.


Hold.


Stand this, and take me quick.


Smooth-face stand off, though you are the very'st Rascal I e're saw, methinks
I Would save thy Life to tell my Story. Thou'st such a lying, wheedling face, thou
can not fail to work upon a Woman, when at this time methinks I could forgive
thee


I speak for you.


Yes, tell her how I fought, or if I perish, tell her how I fell; tell her how
much beyond my life I loved her, without the least security of hers. The Name,
the Pride, the Honor of my Love, thou shall in softning Eloquence relate; and
though thou art a very Villain, look as thou do speak as thou would for
him, and win her to my Bed, or to my Grave


I must try him further yet, though my heart aches with love and tenderness. Am
I so much obliged to Nature, Sir? Look then, despair and dye: 'Twas my own
Jealousy that drew me here, the other was a mere Pretension. I love Maria too
above my life, and therefore dare not, at an equal hazard, expose my life. I
followed her to Town, abandoning my Family and Friends: Mad with my Love, and
Resolute to win her. Though for your Generosity, which thus far in a Rival I can
pity, since you believe I could prevail for you, with looking, speaking,
flattering, any thing. You cannot doubt the Conqnest, for my self, yet still
Renounce her and I Will spare thy life


I Will not return that Complement to you, there is no safety if I let you live;
therefore prepare, and if thou have one grain of Honor left, venture me one
fair thrust among the Crowd, and I Will forgive thee yet


Hold, for i will Rival you in Honor too. Be gone, there is your Reward. You Will
bate the Murder. I Will thrust my single Arm in such a Cause, and dye or else
deserve her.


Dye or deserve her; 'Sdeath, thou wilt win her from me. Prithee contrive some
way we may be friends, I would not nip such Honor in the bud; thou art too
young to think of Marrying -- Gad thou shall be her Page: I Will give thee leave
to own thy Passion, Ogle thy Heart out, tell her pretty Tales, she will listen to
the Music of thy Voice, and give thee sigh for sigh. Put up thy Sword, 'Sdeath
thou holds it like a Girl


Ha! ha!


By Heaven! and look like one -- Where were my Eyes?


Pox on your Eyes Sir: Damme, will you fight?


Yes, Damme, thus, thus, and thus.


Now where is that cruel Creature upon Earth, that could deny so Generous a
Lover


If there be such, she lives among the Bears, and never came in Christian
Company. She never said her Prayers, sighed, shed a Tear, or played with Boys,
or Babys, in her Life


Then I am won.


By Heaven, and fairly too.


What will you do with me now?


E'ne Marry thee, my Dear.


And beat me?


No, live and dye with thee, by Jove. Put up thy Sword, and trust thy Eyes
alone

To those bright Planets, I my Trophies yield;
By them you are always Mistress of the Field.

Nay, but you shall my dear, or I Will swear I wont let you go.


Indeed Molly but I wont; I must go Child, there is no body at the Shop this
Morning


Nay, but consider he is your Friend, a fine young Gentleman, and one you love:


Very well; Madam, and what am I?


Oh, thou art the sweetest Creature Living, but you don't love me.


Yes, Molly, but I do, and my self too; and therefore, though I love Mr. VVealthy
as well as you do, I Will be bound for no body


Then I Am sure you don't love him half so well as I do, for I Would be bound Body
for Body for him. Poor Gentleman, so I would; but you don't love him because I
do


Not if you love him better than me, Molly.


Yes, yes, very likely, as if I did not know when I was well; but you know how
handsome you are, and that makes you as Proud as the Devil. This is like all the
rest, your running to Epsom and Tunbridge; so it is


Poor Rogue, now I have vexed her. Why, my dear, I always take you with me.


Yes, yes, to show me I don't deserve you, to see a hundred Women Dancing after
you, and pulling you as if they would eat you from me


Poor Fool, nay, I must confess they do reaze me: But how can I help all this,
Molly


You might stay at home, like an honest man: Would I had married the ugliest
fellow in England, then I might have had him to my self; or at least I might
have rhelish'd another after him; but to be Married as I am; I shall be
poisoned one of these days, and then you will be rid of me


Nay, prithee Molly.


Don't I see it; have not we a hundred Ladies for one Gentleman, that comes to our
Shop


Gad, and that is true, and I never minded it.


Lord Mistress you're the happiest Woman, says one; you must certainly have
delicate Children, says another; pray how long have you been Married, says a
third


Women's talk Child: prithee Molly, I love thee, let 'em say what they will.


Yes, I know it is Women's talk: Lord, says another, that can never be his own
Hair: Bless me, he has delicate Teeth; how strangely that French's Beard
becomes some sort of Faces: Nay more, I Will swear, I Have heard them say they
believed you were Painted, you had such a delicate Complexion


Nay, prithee Molly, you make me smile; for the Devil take me, if I have not been
told the same a thousand times


Have you so? Very well, who should I love better than you then? And but that
you have a mind to be cross, I have heard you say a thousand times, you would
do any thing to serve Mr. Wealthy, and yet refuse me to bail him out of Prison
only for five hundred pounds


I tell thee Moll, I forswore it when I was Apprentice, or I vow thou would
tempt me to Ruin my self; his Father and Brother will take care of him


But they must not know it; and I Am sure if they do, we shall so oblige that
Family, we shall get thrice as much by it


Gad Molly do not tempt me; I love you so, I shall play the Fool, i will run away
from you


I Will swear i will follow you to the Change.


Wife keep the House, remember your Lord commands you; I must be gone.


And i will be with you, for my dear VVealthy must be freed to Night; it is a
great blessing to know a Husbands blind side; what a good humor he is run away
with for my praising his Beauty. Bless me! how unreasonably we are accused for
Cuckolding our Husbands, when certainly, either by Vanity, Folly, Pride, or ill
Nature, they draw it upon themselves, and yet they have the impudence to
believe we must love all these faults, honor all these faults, and obey all
these faults, that obeys the Devil, and yet without this, we are the Vipers
that defile your Beds, Plant Hieroglyphick Figures on their Heads, when alas

No Woman does her Lawful Prince dethrone,
But you're so Proud you will so Rule alone;
We must be Slaves, or Cuckold every one.
If therefore you will not this Crime repent,
And we must still obey your Government,
Exalted be your Horns, by my Consent.

Nay, Madam, stay and hear me first; why so unjust? Will you not let me plead
in such a Cause, where Love and Life, my Heaven to come, and here, which all is
at stake


What would you Plead for, Sir? Have I not pardoned you at the first word? Even
in the midst of Tears, believing your offense the effect of Love? And yet you
will not grant me one Request


Not grant it: What Madam?


Me to my self; you grudge me sure my Grief, or else have very little of your
own, that can at this time covet Company


Why, Madam, am I your aversion grown?
So altered in a day! What have I done?
That Tears and Prayers, Pity and Love in you, (which once I did expect) cannot
wipe off


Bless me! that you can ask what you have done: Are you as Merciless as your
Father, Sir? Pray give me way, you would make me hate you, to see you Master of no
more Compassion; pray give me way


Not till you're torn from me. Dear Madam, do but hear me speak.


No, you have already made me break my Oath, which was so strict, never to have
seen you more; I must be gone


Dear Tom; what, flying of him, Madam?


Alive! Blessed be my Eyes, blessed be the day, and be for ever blessed thou best of
Men


What means this Ecstasy?


Thy Father told me he was killed.; killed in thy Quarrel, upon my account. Or
think you I could e're have parted with you, but Tears of Joy flow on so fast
upon me, I cannot speak the fullness of my Soul


By Heaven, nor I, but thus.


My dear Cousin, let me but recover the fright you put me in. Dear Cousin and
Sir, I beg your Pardons, for indeed I might have prevented this mistake, but
that my head ran too much upon this Gentleman; for in short, the Report of it
at first, was a Plot of the Old Fool your Father, Sir, and that Exquisite
Hypocrite my Lady Sly: For as I went down into the Garden, as he has the
Impudence since to believe, to lament his loss, I met this living thing there,
who has since, upon some small trials of his Faith, owned his Intrigue with the
Widow, confessed himself a Rogue, and I have forgiven him


Surely, your Ladyship would sum up an Evidence well: But Madam, should I
begin the Story, which shortly you will hear, how like a Rogue she has used me,
how like a Gaol-Bird she has treated me, and all, as she terms it, for a small
trial of my Faith. You would wonder how I could ever forgive her, yet, like a
good natured fool, I have done it, and she has the Grace to thank me for it


And must we wish you Joy, Frank? You play sure.


Faith, Tom, I Am in a Whimsical Dilemma, for I have often forswore the
Marriage-knot, and yet it is some way we must be joined, for we have made an
Oath we'll never part


It Is a sad Truth; but yet Mr. Wealthy, who knows, a good Example may prevail
upon the Churl


Say you so? Then Tom, I Challenge you; first, to join with us in a Plot we
have laid, for the two Fools, my Father and the Widow; next, you must meet no
Denials. Now, Madam, with your fair Lady in your hand to morrow, at the dread
hour which we call Canonical. Whereas you came into the World before me, so
quit it, Sir; dye to your Lady first, and though my heart aches even to think
upon it, since this young Niggard will be paid her price before she parts with
any of her Goods, let the black fellow thunder in my Ears

For thee such wounding Words I will endure,
No Surgeon (Child) on Earth can ever cure.

I take your silence for consent, my dear; and Frank i will meet you; as to your
Plot, we leave it wholly to you, act as you please, and we'll obey your Orders;
here comes the Widow, Frank


Be gone every one.


What, must I trust you with her?


Go, go, you Fool, I must make love a little to help the Plot; mind yours too
with my Father


I Will to Sir William for my part, and be with you in a minute.


My dear VVealthy at Liberty, and here; what can this mean?


Two Miracles, my dear.


As how, my Love?


My Delivery and my Constancy; i will swear I was delivered by Miracle; and for
my Constancy, you may judge of that, who railed against me so lately without
Reason. But Widow, thy Generosity has so prevailed upon me, and so much I
esteem you my Deliverer

I come my newborn Freedom to resign,
And make you Matrimonially mine.

No, Mr. Wealthy, though I own your kindnesses, on second thoughts I dare not
be so rash


Why, how now Widow, what repent your bargain?


Only for fear you should.


Ridiculous!


Ah Wealthy, you are too much a Libertine to use a Woman well thou have
enjoyed; Maria, that untainted fruit, may please. A Marriage Bed requires a
Maidenhead


Why Widow, do thou think i will be a Cuckold, at least, to any Man but to my
self? Marry a Girl! No, faith Madam, I leave her to Sir William, and but that
thou art an Infidel, I could tell thee such a Story of my Constancy, such a
Trial of my Faith, such a Miraculous Preservation of thy Honor, that would I
were choked if I thought I had been half so honest; you saw that young
Gentleman that came to speak with me just as we parted


Yes, what then?


Only he dogged you thither.


Me, by whose Orders?


He said he was the Brother of my Rival; and that unless I would resign Maria,
I should lie there and rot, but if I would, he had orders to release me


On this I begged he would show me to the door, Maria might be his Wife with all my
heart; the Lady that he saw was my first choice, and for her sake, no
threatening of his Brother, I did accept my freedom at his hands


I own 'twas more than I can e're deserve. But why dog me, did he take me for
her


No Child, but I took her for him.


Her sor him! Bless me, Sir, what mean you?


Maria, by the Gods, that Devil her self, was sole contriver of that hellish
Plot; in that disguise discovered our intrigues, owned some small kindness
formerly for me, bid me repent my folly, and my loss, swore that to morrow
morning she would be Married, and ruin me for ever with my Father; then with a
Curse she wished me Joy with you, and bid me hug my Monumental Widow


A Curse for her again. But my Dear Wealthy:


My dear Widow.


How can I requite you?


We'll be married to Night.


Impossible!


Then with my Brother Tom, in your private little Chapel, at the end of the
Hall, by six in the Morning; by Heaven I Will stay no longer. Here comes my
Father and she with him, i am sure this Match must please him, and i will scorn
her: Besides, I have already laid a Scene of mirth, which you must join in;
Shamtown and Littlegad shall pay the Fiddlers; the Old Fool hates them, and
will join in it. Be gone, i will meet you presently in the Garden, and then inform
you all


Adieu, my dear.


She smiles and winks, it thrives; Gads so, the Old fellow Dances as he goes:
Yes, yes, you shall be married


Who Is that? Why, Sirrah, who are you? Why, how now Frank, and my Boy Frank:
And a Franky, Franky, Franky, Frank; Sirrah, down on your knees


Sir.


Down on your knees, Sirrah.


Yes, Sir.


And a Franky, Franky, etc.


What the Devil ails the Old Fellow?


Sirrah, you are to be Married, I hear.


Yes, Sir.


To whom, Sir.


To the discreet Lady of the House.


To the discreet Lady of the House; i am glad on it you Dog.


Yes Sir, and beg your blessing in it.


Yes, Sirrah, I have blessed you Sirrah; rise up and say i have set you upon your
Legs, Sirrah. I have, given you three hundred a year, Sirrah. Franky, you Dog,
and a Franky, Franky, etc


Sir, I thank you, and am doubly obliged that you are so over joy'd at my good
Fortune


No, Sirrah, not altogether so neither, I have Joy of my own too, and Joy for
other people, as time shall try, as old as I am: Sirrah, there is your
Mother-in-law


Possible!


Ay, you Dog, it e'nt impossible, is it?


No, Sir.


No, Sir? What then, Sir?


Nay, Sir, I wish you Joy, I was just going to ask the Lady Blessing.


No, Sir, you shant ask her Blessing, she shall have enough of her own to ask her
Blessing, Sirrah; I will get upon her Body such a parcel of Gray Headed Cupids,
it shall be the Worlds Wonder


Nay, faith, Sir William, we'll do our best, for since Mr. Wealthy is engaged
to the Widow, and his Brother to my Cousin, I swear I will not be out of the
Family; and let me alone to make you young again


Why, Sirrah, why do'nt you rejoice to see your Old Dad so happy.


Sir, I do so much rejoice, that if the Lady will be ruled by me, we'll make
this the Merriest pair Royal of Weddings, as e're were heard of


As how, dear Mr. VVealthy; if there be any mischief in it, I am for you.


I must own, Madam, I have an implacable malice to the two Fools, that
occasioned the mistake between Tom and his Mistress. I have prevailed with my
Sister that shall be, who has writ a Note inviting them hither in a disguise;
Mr. Shamtown, who expects to carry off the Prize, to morrow morning, no less
than to be Married here, even in this House: And Madam, if you would join, and
write to Mr. Littlegad as I told you. --


We'll toss 'em in a Blanket, Fops, Fools.


Agreed, I write this minute.


Go, go, you Rogue: I shall so tickle you: Sirrah, am not I a lucky old Toad:
But you don't rejoice, Pox on you don't rejoice at your Fathers fortune. Pish
you an't overjoyed, for my own part Frank, it comes upon me so of a sudden, I
have such a preturbation of Spirit, and such a consternation of joy, on my
conscience, I can hardly tell where I am


Upon my life, if the surprise be so great, you had best let blood.


No, thank you Sirrah, an old fellow to be Married to a a young Woman and let
blood, would I had as much as when I got your Brother Tom, then I would so
rumble her, and so tumble her, and so jumble her, and so fumble her Frank; and
a Frank, etc. But Sirrah, I Will to my Daughter-in-law, and manage her to the
last penny for you: She Is a parlous Slut, and Franky, Frank, etc.


Not so very close, but now our Plot is sure, I Am satisfied our Letters took
the effect

The Fools bit at it rarely as I hear,
And early shall be welcome to the snare.

Are they come, are the Fools come?


'Sdeath out with the Lights, they are just got into the little Chapel, their
Ladies wait 'em impatiently; be sure Sir, you do not speak till you see 'em
fast bound, and then --


Ay, and then my little Eyes.


Hist.


Your hand, your hand, I hear the Widow; that is just where I appointed her.


So, I see the Unfortunate Lovers are come, my dear.


Hist, they are at it: This is the Hall: This happy darkness doubles my
Disguise. Friend, did you see any of the Family to day


No, Sir, but I saw a Chair go in about half an hour ago.


Punctual Creature; for fear I should not bring one. In the Passage, from the
surther corner of the Hall, we shall find that Chair, and in it the Treasure of
my Soul, which we must carry off; such are my kind directions; and then I think
I have conquered you Mr. Wealthy. Follow me close, and now the coast is clear,
be sure you mind the charge. This is the only secret I ever kept from
Littlegad: ah would he were as happy.


Ha, ha, ha; wish you joy, Gentlemen, wish you joy; you are met with In Faith;
Lights there Lights: Now for me, my Dear, Pox of their hugger mugger work:
we'll be married in state


The Devil, is this Sir William! that was just where Wealthy appointed me. You
mistake Sir William


Widow, where is my little Devil? What ho?


Coming, coming Sir William


Gad they have it, Fops, Fools, Cuckolds, Rogues, did thou see 'em?


See 'em! I think I provided well for my Maids.


Come, come, I Will Maid you: Where Is Frank? why Sirrah.


Here Sir.


Sirrah, to your Wife, you ill-natured Dog, this was your contrivance. Where Is
Tom


Just coming Sir, our turn's next: Where Is this Parson; if he be not out of
breath, he may do our work too


Pox on him, and his sneaking bit of Wax Candle; I could hardly discern a Man
from a Post; and the two Sluts stood with their backs to us


I swear Mr. Wealthy, you're an unmerciful man; I am sorry to see you have so
much ill nature; what have you done with the poor Gentleman


When they have served our mirth a little further, we'll dispatch em with their
Ladies. Pox where is this Parson, we'll fetch him by the Ears.


I suppose, Madam, I need not wish your Ladyship Joy, since you have made
choice of a young man so able to give it as Mr. Wealthy; for my part, I confess
you may wonder at this Match, but upon my word, Madam, I am altogether
satisfied with these poor Remains of Sir William, since he will put me in a way
to return your many obligations upon your dear Mr. Wealthy


I understand her, but since Wealthy is mine, can laugh at her.

Your Ladyship is highly obliging, and though indeed, Madam, I may seem to have
the better of you in this business, yet I cannot tell how wild Mr: Wealthy may
prove; and at least, you may live at quiet with Sir William, an old Gentleman
that is tamed to your hands


Now could I fall out with her in earnest, for her impudence, though I am sure
of my Man.

If I may be so bold, pray Madam, how long was handsome Mr. Wealthy an admirer
of you, before he gained the mighty Conquest over you


If Madam, without blushing I might tell you, I think too long. However, since
to Night he must be mine, i will reap that lost years Harvest in this Night; sure
of my bliss, i will seize my Vigorous Swain, free from the Curse of disappointing
Age: Blind with my Love, give loose to my desires, and in continued Trances
cheat the Night


Oh, Impudence: By Heaven, she is lying with him to my face, I can hold no
longer.

And is your Gravity come to this? Sure, Madam, you will not ravish Mr. Wealthy.


Sure, Madam, but I may, before Sir William can your Ladyship.


Poor cheated Fool.


Poor angry Girl.


Yes, Madam, value your self upon your Age, Wealthy admires it, Madam; an Old
Lady, and a Cast Widow, must be Honorable


Ha, ha, ha, have you lost your longing, Madam?


Nay then, take the Reverse of all thy promised Joys, which in malicious
eagerness you dressed. On Wealthy's breast you will find but poor support; upon thy
buried Honor lean thy head; Bath in the tears shed for that satal loss; Curse
my dear VVealthy's Eyes; cry out thy own. Blind with thy miseries, renounce the
Day, and in eternal howlings waste the Night. By Heaven, thou art betrayed,
VVealthy's my Husband; Married just now, before thy cheated Eyes. Poor fool,
thou art a witness to the Match, and hall Contriver of thy own Destruction


So, so, the Rival Queens have been at it, in faith.


Speak VVealthy, e're my heart breaks with my wrongs: Have you betrayed me? Are
you such a Villain


Faith, Widow, not to keep you in suspense, on second thoughts I could not be
so rash; therefore to save your Reputation still, own you were in the design,
and laugh with us. Here comes the old Man and the Parson; now the Plot
thick'ns, or the Devils in it


Come my Girl, answer before this man of God. Will thou be my Lawful Wife?


As Lawsul as that Gentleman can make me.


God a mercy: Come, Sir, to work, to work.


Indeed, and that is not very Lawful, Madam.


What a Pox ails the Fellow? Why, what Sir, it is not against the Law, for an
Old Man to marry a young Woman, is it


No, Sir, but sure it is to Marry your Daughter.


He Is mad: My Daughter, Sir.


Yes, if that Gentleman's your Son.


Good faith, Sir, even so.


I Will hang you, i will drown you, i will murder you, i will poison you, i will blow you
up, i will bury you alive; i will Cuckold you, you Dog


I Will hold you a Guinea on it.


Ah, you Devil.


I should have Cuckolded you, Sir William; it is better as it is, I shall love
now my none dear Daddy


Come, come, be patient, Sir William, you're happy in your Sons match, though
I am cursed; and though I burst must bear it


My Son, he is a Son of a Whore, i will prove it, and i will fight him.


Hark you Sir, if I am not your Son, it follows naturally you're not my Father:
And gad, Sir, if you abuse my Mother, I shall --


Murder me: Very well, i will have you hanged.


Think better, Sir William: How could you think that I, with that disparity of
years, could ever love you? I do love your Son, and in your Son love you


Come, you're a baggage.


I Am your Daughter, Sir William; i will be tender of you.


I Am your Son, and Dutiful: i will renounce the follies of the Town; i have tasted
them, and weigh them all at this. We will forsake this hole of Sin and
Sea-coal, and make you merry in a better Air. Come Spouse. Your blessing, Sir


Pox take him, he talks as if he had some Grace; he made a long Speech too
without swearing, but I cannot say Amen to it


Indeed Sir William, I think you're Happy, if you knew when.


Zoons, but I Have lost a Wife.


No, no, Sir William, if we had been married, you would have made no more on it.


There Is your Obligation of five hundred pound to me, and truly, I think,
Wisely saved


Five hundred pound on second thoughts is a round sum: Hum! you're a Rogue;
but rise, rise, and take my blessing, since I cannot help it. But pox on it,
where is Tom? Has no body stole his Wife? And where are these fellows, that I
may see if any thing can make me laugh


O Sir, I warrant you.


What a Pox, it was not you and your Brother Tom I saw Married, was it?


Even so, faith Sir; but here comes our Fortune-Hunters:


Hey day, what is here? Who Is in this Chair? Another damned Plot.


Set down the Chair, friends; who would you speak with, ha?


We were called Sir, to carry this Lady; she lives in this house.


Ha! Should not I know that Face: Mr. Shamtown. Indeed, I always mistrusted
your Shapes, but never yet really knew you were a Chairman. This, I suppose,
is a Plot for my Brothers Lady; pray Heaven it be not her, Sir


So, so, more Plots here; Tom shall deal with you.


Gentlemen, I beg you would not Murder me; and Madam, I hope you will stand to
your Note, and own me, and my love


Ay, me, i am undone, and shall be laughed to Death.


'Sdeath, who is this? Betrayed, oh Hell and the Devil; where shall I run?


Hey day; what, here and there too? Tom, you're obliged to this Gentleman, he
only came to steal your Lady


I shall not be backward in my thanks.


I shall be kicked to Death.


But, who are you? Come, unmask Lady; nay, by Heaven you must, pretty Mrs.
Littlegad


Mr. Littlegad.


Two Fools well met, in faith.


Upon my Faith, I meant it purely for your diversion; pray Pardon me. I would
give a hundred Pound for a Whirlwind to remove me


Sir, this is a base return for giving you your life; but here, call up my
Footmen


Gentlemen, do not mistake, I am a Gentleman, and since I am betrayed into your
House defenseless, which was cruel of the Ladies, I beg I may be safe, when
next I am in my Primitive Equipments


What, Sir, without a Shirt?


No, Sir, I Will give your Brother satisfaction.


Shut up the Doors: Poor Fool, he Pardons any thing he scorns, and you shall
share the Graces. And Gentlemen, if you loved these Ladies, you cannot but stay
Dinner, and after Dance at their Weddings, I am sure, Mr. Spruce

Name but a Dance, and up starts Mr. Spruce.


Mr. VVealthy, I am glad you are enlarged; and faith; Sir, I came only to have
served you


I must thank your Lady for that, I presume.


Gad, she loves you dearly.


I cannot deny't, indeed, Mr. VVealthy, though before my Husbands face.


I thank you, Madam.


Frank, I begin to love you already. Sirrah, you are a lucky Dog, make much of
her and I forgive you: and God bless you all four


Fairly spoken, Sir William.


We'll deserve it; but come, I have provided an Entertainment.

Come Gentlemen, you are the only dejected here, but bear up:
And don't too much the Accident Regret,
For two, by two, we are all but Fools well met.

WHat would our Author give, you would go away
Half so well pleased as you came here to day.
That he meant well is all he has to plead;
Faith then be kind, and let his Play succeed,
And take for once the good Will for the Deed.
He don't presume to justify his Play,
Vouch it for good, or if you liked you may.
A humbler way for your good word he takes;
You're welcome, would 'twere better for your sakes,
Therefore to damn him were very hard;
Two Fools well met's the Play, and in a word,
Forgive him, for he owns himself the third.
HOw shall I my Rivals meet?
They are too Mighty, Rich and Great:
How can I my Celia win,
A Shepherd I, and she Divine?
Or how can such a World of Charms
Be Circled in these humble Arms?
Ah Celia, If the Man that Loves thee most
Cannot deserve thee by it, I am lost.
I am lost, I am lost, Ah Celia, etc.
Propose me Wonders for my Task,
To be thy Slave is all I ask, is all I ask, etc.
The Rich may afterward Ropine,
They would have thee; I would be thine:
Nor scorn me that I am not great,
Since then can with a Smile create.
Let not, Oh let not then the Man be lost,
For what a Smile can give, who loves thee most.
Let not, Oh let not then the Man be lost; etc.
MY Amarillis scorns the Man
That does her Eyes adore;
Though I immortalized her Name,
And Sainted her with Power:
But now the Goddess to that height is grown,
She Has quite forgot 'twas I that made her One.
She Has quite forgot, etc.
A Congratulatory Poem on His Highness the Prince of Orange's coming into
England. By Tho. Shadwell

A Congratulatory Poem to the Most Illustrious Queen Mary, upon Her Arrival
into England. By Tho. Shadwell

The Squire of Alsatia. A Comedy Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by
Tho. Shadwell

The True Widow. A Comedy Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho.
Shadwell

Bury-Fair. A Comedy, Acted by Their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho.
Shadwell

The Forced Marriage, or, The Jealous Bridegroom; As it is Acted by His
Majesty's Servants. Written by A. Behn

The Female Prelate: Being a History of the Life, and Death of Pope Joan, A
Tragedy; As it is Acted at the Theater Royal

The Wanton Friar, or, The Irish Amor: A Novel in Twelves.

The History of the Inquisition, as it is Exercised at Goa; Written in French
by the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored five years under those
Severities, with an Account of his Deliverance; Translated into English.
Quarto. Price 1 s

Some Observations concerning the Regulating of Elections for Parliament, found
among the Earl of Shaftsbury's Papers after his Death, and now recommended to
the Consideration of this Present Parliament. In Quarto, price 3 d

Quadriennium Jacobi, or the History of the Reign of King James II. from his
first coming to the Crown to his Desertion


