WE had rather have you Auditors to day,
Than only bare spectators of our Play,
And exercise your Wits as well as Eyes,
The properest entertainment of the wise.
Mean time our Prologue to our Play to fit,
We'll say, it is dull, insipid, void of wit;
Lame, and deficient much, in every part,
Writ without judgment, plotted without art;
In fine, stark naught: but stay I lie, and they,
Must do so to, who discommend the Play.

IN fine, I Am turned Gallant, and according to my desire my Father is content I
should throw off the gown and leave the Law with al^ its Quirks and Quillits:
and now we are in the Thuilleries here, the Land o'th better World and
Gallantry; tell me Clyton, how do thou like this Metamorphosis, have I not
quite put off the Scholar? who come from the Kingdom of the Codes like me have
seldom the Mien and Air of Gallantry


That General Rule Sir was not made for you, you have nothing of the Scholar in
you, nor was Bartolus ever painted a this fashion; you look as you would make a
Thousand jealous, and I forsee a grand misfortune hanging over the heads of
many a married Man; and how do you like Paris


The Air is pleasant and agreeable; and now methinks that Law was too severe,
under pretense of study, banished me so long from hence. But tell me thou who
have had the happiness to have lived here all this while, and know all their
Divertisments, How should one gain the Ladies favors


I marry Sir! I like you, That, as the Poet sings, is the Gentle Care of every
Noble breast. But leaving Poets and Poetry, your stomach's up betimes I see,
and your humor cannot away with idleness, you long to be doing, you came to
Town but yester night and to day you are seeking a Mistress; but I Am in a good
posture and fine Reputation with ye am I not? that you should ask instructions
of me, as if I were superintendant of the Ladies quarters, and professed Master
of the Faculty


Mistake not Clyton I mean honesty and would only be acquainted with some of
them to talk and be merry for my divertisement, and pleasantly pass away an
hour or two sometimes


I understand, and know you are no ways given to Debosherie,

And would scorn those VVho'd follow you,
At sound or tinkling of a Crown or two;
nor do you much care; for those sage Cocquetts confine their secret favors
all to Talk, and all your pleasure to the eyes, the pastime's not worth the
Candle -- it is not to pass, but cast on's Time away for Gallants to converse
with such as they -- no, no -- y're of another Complexion I know; and would be
glad with all your heart to meet with some of those Good virtuous Ladies; whose
virtues, upon a good occasion, are not Incompatible with a little Vice, and you
shall find of all sorts here -- mean Time what need you ask instructions of me!
If I be'nt deceived in Physognomy, you are no Novice, nor did the Law regulate
your time so wholly to be always found with a Law-Book in your hand


To confess the Truth Clyton I lived at Poictiers as other young Students do
and had my share of all their pleasure too, but Paris and Poictiers are quite
different, and as their Climate, so their manner of living is quite different
too, I have known some there counted great Wits for admiring things, which here
they would be laughed at for, and counted men o'th other World for their
admiring them. In The Country on's glad of any thing and Fools pass muster for
want of wiser men: but here, where their eyes are not dazzled with those false
lights, it is requisite they have other qualities; and 'midst the number of so
many eminent men on's ill looked on, if he don't resemble them


You don't know Paris yet I see, that is a great Mart or Fair, where you shall
find installed all sorts of Ware, and there is such deceit in them, as one may
be as easily cozened here, as in any part of France: it is a great World where
'midst the confusion of all sorts who come from all parts hither, amongst your
choice, as you have every where so you have at Paris here, your Refuse Ware,
which, being hard to be distinguished, most commonly every on's esteemed
according to the rate he sets on himself, and so no doubt but they will esteem
you too. But touching your Demand are you Liberal


I Am no ways avaritious.


I ask because it is a great secret in Love, to know how to bestow on's gifts
with discretion, otherwise you shall loose rather than gain; by it and oblige
none by your liberality: the manner of giving's more than the Gift it self,
here one in Gaming cunningly* disguises his presents under the name of loss,
another there forgets a Jewel behind him, he knows would never have been
accepted had it been presented; a liberal Fool gives presents to his Mistress
as he were giving Alms; and so in doing every thing out of time he disobliges
instead of obliging them


Leaving those Fools thou declaim'st against, who are these Ladies can tell?


Alas Sir Ideal in no such costly ware, they are too high game for such as I to
fly at; but I shall easily learn of their Coachmen


Do think he will tell thee?


I, all he knows. And more than you desire to know to, if he be a right
Coachman


Ah,


Lady this mischance of yours has been a happy chance for me in affording me
the occasion of rendering you this little service


Sir the happiness this occasion has afforded you is so small, you have just
reason to count it none at all


True Lady, I owe it wholly unto chance, nor has your desires nor my deserts
any part in it, which make me esteem my self not much more happier than I was
before, since all the Favor you have granted me (in fine) had been denied to any
desert of mine


I Am of opinion one should esteem a benefit the more, the less th've deserved
it, since a gift is more than a recompense, and consequently our obligation

Favor that is merited is in a manner bought,,
Whilst that we never deserved does cost us naught:
And the greatest happiness merit can pretend unto,
Is just like Hirelings to be paid for what they do,
besides this way we obtain with ease, what we cannot without much labor and
difficulty, the other


Think me not Lady so presumptuous to imagine by any merit or desert of mine to
deserve your least of Favors; I better know to set the right value and esteem
on them than so, and the less I deserve them count my happiness the more I know
too, how without injury you might have denied them me; if then my heart repine
it is only for being so unhappy in my happiness you should oblige me without
design -- it is the intention, sets value on the Act and a kind of undervaluing
thing

To do them without it, the favor then is but small,
To give me y'r hand, 'less you give me your Heart withal;
and judge how little nourishment that fire receives,

That Amorous fire inkindled in my breast,
By giving me your hand and denying me the rest.

That fire you speak off sir's so new to me as now I only see the firesparks of
it; and though your heart perhaps may burn so soon, yet know Sir mine requires
a longer Time: but now I see your flame, mine perhaps may burn hereafter too by
simpathy; mean time you cannot in justice blame me not to know what I was wholly
ignorant off till now


That Is the eflect of the misfortune every where persecutes me, that I should
be here ever since I left the German Wars almost a year, Night and Day seeking
the occasion to make my Love known to ye now in promenades, and now in Balls,
and giving ye serenades, and never find that happiness till now


And have you been in the German Wars then?


I have Lady, nor was lightning more impetuous, nor Thunder there more
formidable than I


What Is all this?


In all which time no Battle ever was fought, nor Siege ever laid to any place,
but all the Glory of the Victory was principally attributed to me, witness the
Gazzette --


Why Mr. what mean you? are you mad?


Hold your peace, or --


You came but yesterday from Poictiers, the Devil take me else.


Go to, I say -- Yes Lady, for that short time I followed the Wars I well may
glory without vanity, none ere acquired a greater name than I


And how came you to relinquish so Noble, so Gallant an exercise?


That Is the effect only of your fair Eyes, when returning the last Winter from
the Campania to make my Court at Paris here, seeing you Lady, you soon made me
(in fine) your Prisoner, who had mad many mine, since when abanddoning all
those noble cares, I formerly employed in the Wars, Commanding Armies,
Conquering Enemies

With Thousand famous exploits, the Wars now done
I employed them all in serving you alone.

Madame yonder is Alcippe, he will be jealous.


Well Sir, another time we shall have leisure to hear more, now I must take my
leave


And will you so soon deprive me of all my happiness?


Excuse me Sir, notwithstanding the pleasure I take to hear my self flattered;
I must needs be gone and make a turn or two in the Walks alone


Grant me permission at least before you go to be your servant and always to
love you


Who are resolved to Love and know
What belongs to loving too,
need ask leave of no body else for that beside themselves.


Do you follow 'em Clyton?


That needs not Sir; for the Coachman has told me all, the handsomer of the two
is his Mistress, she is called Lucretia, she lodges in the place


What place?


The place Royal.


Oh!


The other whose name he does not know is lodged there too; I shall easily find
her out


No matter, suffices I know the fair Lucretia, the handsomer of the two, she
whom I had the happiness to entertain


By Your favor Sir I rather think the other's she.


What she who stood mute all the while and never spoke a word?


Oh Sir, that is so rare a quality and perfection in a Woman to hold her peace,
such a miracle in nature* such a prodgy in Earth, and such a particular grace
in Heaven, especially in this Age we live in, as for me who was never married,
nor ever am like to be, I should prefer one with that quality only, though as
ugly and deformed as an old Baboon, to all the perfections of Women-kind;
wherefore Master seek another name for your Mistress if you please; for
infallibility to others Lucretia, and the handsomer of the two, or I Am an arrant
Dunce and blockhead


That I easily believe for all thy boutades and flashes; but see Alcippe my old
acquaintance here, by their looks and Actions they seem to wonder at somewhat


How! Music and Collation upon the Water?


Collation and Music.


Yester night*


Yester night!


And how?


Magnificent enough.


And who should give it?


Nay that I do not know.


Dear Friend! how happy am I in this encounter?


And my happiness is no less to encounter you.


But I Have been unmannerly to interupt your Discourse: pardon my joy in seeing
you


You have all power over your Friends Sir.


And of what were you discoursing I pray? may I not partake of it?


Only of a certain Gallantry.


Some Love matter I warrant!


I presume so.


What was it? the name of Love and Gallantry has awaked my longing and curiosity
to know it


Why we were talking of a Collation and Music given to a Lady on the Water.


Good -- often times the Water makes the Fire burn more.


Sometimes it does.


And when was this?


Yester night.


Proper -- fires always shine brightest in the Night; they knew well how to
choose their time it seems: and was the Lady handsome


Many think her so*


And the Music!


None of the worst.


And Collation!


Excellent well ordered*


And don't you know all this while who gave it? Ha, ha, ha.


Why do you laugh?


To see you so admire a sorry divertisment of mine.


Of yours? Why did you give it?


Even I my self.


And have you got a Mistress already then?


I had but small address else having been a month or more in Town, though for
certain reasons I seldom stirred abroad by Day, and only made my visits
Incognito by night, not to have got a Mistress all this time


Why Master do you know what you say?


Hold your peace, and if ever I catch you interupting me again --


It makes me mad to hold my peace and hear him lie a this manner.


What luck have You. To have your Rival himself, discover himself unto you.


As to my dear Friends, now I Will tell you all, of five Barges expressly I had
prepared, I disposed four Consorts of Music, in four of them; Violins in the
first, Lutes and Voices in the second, Flutes in the third, and Hoboy's in the
last

Who playing by turns so Ravished our Ears,
It seemed the very Harmony of the Spheres:
The first, and most capacious of all,
Served us for our Banqueting House, or Hall.
Contrived so with interlaced Boughs,
For freshness sake it seemed a Summer House:
At each corner were Festons of Jessamine,
With other verdurs, Orange-flowers and Granadine:
Thither I led the Lady I adore;
Attended on, by some five Beauties more,
and presently in all pompeous manner the Collation was served in -- it were
long to tell you the several Services, Number of the Dishes, and order of every
Mess: suffices it, In this delicious Room, there were six services, twelve
Dishes at every one

While the Air, the Water, and adjoining shore,
Echoed the Music which the Barges bore;
Risen from Table suddenly did appear
Fireworks o'th Bank-side darted in the Air,
And Thousand Thousands flying now upright,
And now across did make a day of Night*
In which Deluge of flames you would admire*
To see the Element of water turned to fire;
This past, and done we danced the rest of the Night,
Passing the time with infinite delight
Till Day, when I waited on the Ladies home,
And so we finished our Collation.

I must needs say Sir, you have an admirable faculty in recounting wonders; And
Paris as great as it is has seldom seen a Banquet like (...) this


Alas, I was surpised, and had only an hour or two's warning to prepare it,
else that had been far more splendious and magnificent


The order was rare and exquisit, and the expense must needs have been
Excessive and Immense


A slight Toy not worth the speaking off.


Well, fare ye well sir, we shall meet another time at more liesure.


I am your Servan^ sir, and I beseech you count me so.


I even die with jelousie Philist.


Faith and you have small reason; for the particulars of this Collation agree but
ill with the particulars of the Page


The hour and place agree at least, the rest is nothing.


Now Sir, may I freely speak to you, without offense?


Thou may, and thou may choose too whether thou will or no: but look,
before company you be less saucy hereafter


Is it your Custom to Reve thus when you talk?


How Reve?


Nay Sir I speak with respect unto you; in any other but your self I should
call it plain lying


Fool thou have no wit.


Faith Sir, for that little I have you would make me lose it to hear you talk a
this manner, of Wars and Banquets, and consorts of Music, and I know not what:
I like you, you fight without any danger yet, and make Feasts without any Cost;
but why I wonder should you fain y'ad been in Town so long


Why but the more to endear my affection?


And what had the Wars to do with that?


Simple! it would have been a fine Complement would it not? to say Ladies I am
latly come from the University, and if you have any need of the Laws, or of the
Rubriques, I know the whole Codex, and Authenticks too; the Old and New digest,
the infortiat Baldus Jason, Accursius and Aleiat; this brave discourse now
would render one very considerable in Ladies company and mollify the Hearts of
the most inexorable, would it not? and a Paragraph-man would make a fine
Gallant for Ladies! no the Title of the Valiant is that introduces us into
their favor, strait, and makes them admire us too; they love Soldiers, and
love to hear them talk of Angles, Lines, Fortifications, strange names of Men,
Cities and Nations; which the less they understand more it amazes 'em: All the
Art is in setting a good Face upon it, Lying handsomely and Swearing with a good
Grace


But when they know all this is but a Lie?


When once I Have gained access by it, what care I; and for any other misfortune,
if any importunatly come to trouble me, it is but saying we speak by
Intelligence, this it is to make Love a la Mode now


These are Mysteries too high for me, I understand them not; but touching your
Feast, you would prove an excellent maker of Romances (without doubt) and never
Vrganda nor Melusin with all their enchantments could furnish a Kitchen half so
soon, nor half so well as you have done: I perceive these lofty Fictions are
natural unto you


I profess I take delight when your great Talkers and Tellers of Wonders think
to amaze me with Stories they Tell, to make them presently more wonder at
Stories I Tell 'em again thou can not imagine the pleasure I tak

To turn their own Wonders home
Unto themselves and strike these Talkers dumb.

I doubt not but that ye take great pleasure in it; but will not this engage you in
quarrels sometime or other


If It do I must disengage my self as well as I can again, but this idle
discourse, has retarded me from seeking the Lady

Come Clyton follow me and I Will teach thee more
Art how to live, than e're thou knew'st before.

I doubt not of his worth Sir, nor needs there farther commendation; it is
sufficient he is your Son; but yet I should appear too greedy and avidous of
marriage, (however worthy he were) to take a Husband on credit whom I never had
seen before: On the other side, to admit his Visits and Courtship in quality of
a Suitor; suppose the marriage went not on it would but expose me to affronts
and derision

Wherefore I desire to see him first, and see him so,
As whether the marriage go on or no,
It may be no prejudice to my Fame and me.


It is but just and reasonable, and you declare
your self Clarina, as discreet as fair,
In your demand, I Will go fetch Dorant then,
And within this hour return with him again,
and take occasion to make a stand just under your window, that you may
thoroughly survey him; mark but his Person, Port and Presence, and you shall
see, though he came but yesterday a Scholar from the University few Courtiers
have better Air and Mien than he; but of this your self be judge (after common
Fame) for me his Father I may be partial in his Commendations, for the desire I
have

To see him wedded, being my only Son,
And wish him Married unto you alone.

You much honor me Sir, in making so worthy a choice for so unworthy a person,
and I in confidence of your commendations; have a longing desire to see him


So, without engageing your self you are resolved to see him then.


I am Isabella; but alas! what can I judge of him by seeing of him so?

I shall see his outward form it is true,
But that is nothing lest I see his interior too.
our eyes are but flattering glasses, to make things appear far fairer than
they are; but pleasing impostures that show them without, far contrary to what
they are within; and oftentimes we find a noble Presence with an ignoble mind:
Our eyes then are to have the first choice still, but not the last; and we are
not to displease them, on pain of our disquiet, nor to please them so again to
be wholly ruled by 'em; finally it is more saf

To believe them when they refuse,
Then ofTimes when they choose;
especially in choice of this marriage chain,

(May bind us all our lives perhaps to one,
From whom we may have horror and aversion)
(which well considered Isabella should make us more fear, than desire it,) we
had need of more faithful Counselors than our Eyes; as for me, being to choose
a Master, I Am resolved to see him before I make choice of him; and see him so
that I may behold both his exterior and interior


Best speak with him than.


But Alcippe would be jealous.


What matter, so you have Dorant, whether he be or no?


No, I have not yet so great an indifferency for him to set so light by his
jealosie, it is now a year since we were contracted, and's Father's presence
only expected here for final conclusion of our marriage; who makes so many
delays, pretending now business, now danger of the Ways, from Tours hither;
now indisposition, and now unseasonableness of the time: as I begin, in fine to
suspect the delays, and take them for neglect, mean while I Am not in humor to
die for constancy

Virginity is a commodity will hardly off, if it be kept too long, each hour it
abates and diminishes of its price; Time will not be dallyed with, Maids are
contemned when they grow old; and though

Nothing's more glorious than a Virgins name,
(Grown stale yet) nothing's more a Virgins shame.

And would you forsake Alcippe for another then?


Yes if I liked that other better than him; but e're I forsook him I Would be sure
of one, That should supply his plaec when he were gone; and one who'd instantly
marry me

Else Alcippe (what ever may befall)
Would make a better husband than none at all.

I Will tell you how you shall do then, Lucretia's your friend, and will do any
thing for you, get her to send a Letter to Dorant to come and speak with her to
night, at her window, so you may speak with him, under her name, and none be
jealous, nor he ever suspect it is any one but she


I like the Invention well, and Lucretia I Am sure at the first word will do it,
so by this stratagem I may see Dorant and freely converse with him


Now I think on it, you freely enough to day convers't with that strange
Gentleman; and if I ben't deceived, liked his Conversation* too well enough


And if Dorant's do like me but as well, I should have but small difficulty to
leave Alcippe for him


Peace don't name him, he comes here.


His coming troubles me -- but go you to Lucretia's and as you have advised;
I Will leave the manngement of all to you


Ah Clarina, Clarina!


What Is the matter?


False, inconstant Clarina!


Has he over heard me? or heard of this intended marriage? what ayl you? you
sigh so


You make as if you did not know! ask of your own Conscience and that will
inform you


Speak softly, my Father comes.


Your Father comes! false-hearted dissembling Woman, you fear your Father now I
am here; but all Night on the River you had no fear at all of him


What all night on the River? I understand you not.


Can you ask me withont blushing?


What should I blush for?


Methinks you should even die for shame to hear me name these two words to ye.


What deadly Charm have these two words I pray? that I should die with hearing
them


Can you hear them and desire to hear more, or cannot you blush unless I tell
you all


What all?


Why all your Revels last Night.


What Revels? hang me if I know what you mean.


When I Am with ye, your Father comes, an excellent excuse! but you can be with
others all night and he never thought upon


Why Alcippe are you mad?


Knowing what I know you were enough (I confess) to make me so; yes all night,
until Morning, I speak of no longer agon, than Yester night


Do You Reve? or Rail? or what is the Mystery?


The mystery is somewhat new and strange, (I grant you) but not so secret as
you imagine it; for in fine your Gallant has told me all; you see what discreet
Gallants you make choice of


What Gallant?


Dorant.


Dorant!


It Is very good! fain your self ignorant still, do.


If ever I saw him --


And was not his Father here just now with you? it is well, go on and pass the
Day with the Father, and the Night with the Son, it is very well


His Father and mine are Old Acquaintance.


And was it for that I pray, that he was here? I, now you blush, when you know
not what to say; needs there any more yet to convince you


As for his Son, protest I never saw his Face.


Very likely, but yet however it was night you could not but see him by the
Fireworks light; or had you no liesure perchance to look on him for admiring
his sumptuous Feast, of six Services, and twelve Dishes at least at every one?
Or did the Dancing and Music so wholly take up your Attention? you could not
mind him! yet you might have seen him by day at least; for* 'twas bright day
ere you broke up your Feast: have I told you enough yet? to make you understand
my meaning, and blush, and die for shame


What at a feigned Story?


Belike I am a Liar then! a humorous Coxs-comb! a jealous Ass?


Somebody infallibly has abused you -- Alcippe credit me,


Come, come never seek excuses, I know your tricks well enough, but 'twill not
serve your turn; farewell, enjoy Dorant, Love him, Adore him, let me alone, and
never think of Alcippe more


But ^ar me a word or two before you go.


No, no, your Father comes.


He does not, I did but jest, but stay till I Have disabus'd you at least.


Well on condition you instantly marry me and give me your hand, and faith, and
two Kisses to boot, I care not if I do


And will no less do it?


Two kisses, no less, and those of your kindest ones; nay quickly dispatch.


I cannot, My Father comes.


Go then, and mock my Anger, do,

Make sport at my rage and me, till with indignity
Thou break my bands and chains, and set'st me free;
turn my deluded fires to Ice; and in their stead, let my just Anger burn; mean
whil

I Will seek your Gallant out, and make him feel
The dire effects of my revengful steel;
short shall be your joy of him, his blood and mine both in one stream shall
run; ever he shall glory in possession of any thing was mine -- but see he comes
here, and's Father with him; my gall rises at sight of him, and all my
friendship turns to hate, but this is not a time nor place


Stay Dorant, and let us rest a while, I Am weary and out of breath with walking;
and what think you o

these buildings? are they not fair?
and the Architecture excellent and rare?

Paris appears to me

A City of some Romance, or Enchanted I Will
I left a Desert and find so built the while,
As if some Amphion without Masons Aid,
Had all its Palaces out o'th quarries made.

Paris every day beholds as strange Metamorphoses as these, to see whose
Temples and Palaces you would swear that Kings and Gods, did only inhabit here: but
leaving this Discourse -- you know Dorant how much I love you


I do, and am most happy in the knowledge of it.


In a word then -- Considering the danger that youth and honor may daily
expose you to, in the perilous course you have taken having no other Son but you
to give some allay unto your youthful heat, and to prevent that honorable
danger I am resolved to marry you


Oh dear Lucretia.


And have chosen a Wife for you, both Noble, Rich and Handsome.


I beseech you Sir take some longer Time to consider on it.


There needs no further consideration; all Paris affords not a better nor
fitter choice than the fair and virtuous Clarissa; whose Father (my Ancient
friend) and I have already concluded the marriage -- why do you look so strangely


Alas Sir you make me tremble to think o'th heavy weight I Am to under-go, ^'re
my youthful years have force and strength enough to support the burden


Go to, leave these excuses for I Will have it so.


No ways to prevent it --


I marry will I Sir, e're by your Warlike deeds you come fairly to be knocked
o'th head, I Would have you marry and get an Heir to inherit in your stead when
you are gone and be a comfort unto me, and support unto our House and Name,
do you see? come never dispute often, for I Will have it so


But what if it be impossible Sir?


How impossible!


I humbly at your feet Sir demand your pardon, for I Am --


What?


Being at Poictiers --


What?


Since you will needs have it Sir, I Am -- married already!


How! without my consent?


You may do what you please Sir -- but I could not help it, I was forced unto't
by the strangest accident, the fa^ chance -- oh did you but know Sir! --


Tell me and conceal nothing from me.


This I can assure you Sir, the Gentlewoman is very well descended, though not
altogether so rich as you may desire perhaps


For that we shall talk more hereafter; what is her Name?


Orphisia Sir, and her Father's Armedon.


Orphisia and Armedon! they are names I never heard of -- well, on.


At my first arrival Sir I chanced to see this conquering Beauty, who had soon
reduced me to that sweet Thraldom and amiable Servitude, from which I neither
would, nor could be free

Having then no other thought or care
But only of serving her,
Six months were scarcely gone and past,
But by my assidual services at last,
I gained her affection, and was so happy to be,
As much beloved by her as she by me:
in which happy state I long continued, till one Night late ('it was the second
day of September, I shall never forget the day

Harmlesly discoursing with her in her Chamber all alone,
Her Father having Supped that night abroad came home.
And knocked at her chamber door; when she
All surpised at his coming, having first hidden me
Behind the Bed, ran and opened him the door,
Who sitting down began to discourse with her
of Marriage, and said he had provided a husband for her; (imagine what ill
News this was for me?) In fine, she answered him so discreetly as for that Time
he was satisfied, and just bidding her good night, when my Watch struck; at
which starting, What Watch is that (quoth he,) or who gave it you? quoth she,
my Cozen Acaste has sent it me out of the Country to get it mended; quoth he
again Let Us see it, when strait she ran to me behind the Bed to fetch it; when
behold the string of it being entangled in the Cock of my Pistol (I carried
ready bent,) off went the Pistol: when imagine the amazement and astonishment
of all: she all a^righted (...) a sound, he no less frighted ran out, crying
Thieves, and Murder, and presently returned again and three or four with him,
all withdrawn Swords, when instantly drawing mine, I soon had made my way
through the midst of them, had not my Sword unfortunatly broke in three pieces;
after which seeing no other way, I retired back again into her Chamber, when
she (recovered by this time) out of her care of me, just as I entered, clapped to
the Door, and shut them out; when they more furious grown, strait went about to
break the door open, and we as fast within to Barricado it, with Tables, Chairs
and Chests, and all we could heap against it: In fine, this Seige we held out
long to gain Time, and respit Danger, till at (...) breaking down the Wall upon
us, I was ta'n all unarmed and defenseless, and fain to come to composition
with them for my life


Which was, in plain English, to marry her.


True ^ir -- and how could I do less taken as I was alone with her by night?
The scandal great, the danger of her honor and my life most evident, and they
the stronger; but above all, her beauty made more lovely by her Tears

And Love chiefly in that occasion shown
More caref^ of my safety than her own,
was that which chiefly conquered me, and made me yield, willingly to do that
I Would else bee^ forced unto and ma^ry her strait

So 'voiding danger, and rend'ring all parts content,
To which I humbly here beg your consent,
My Love and Affection being to her so great,
And she so every ways deserving it,
You must resolve to see me married
Unto (...) or else to see me dead*

Heaven forbid I should be so hard-hearted and unnatural, especially thou
having done nothing but what I should have done my self in thy Estate^ -- all
that I blame in thee is only to have so long concealed from me your Marriage


Alas, I durst not tell you Sir, by reason she was no richer.


Suffices she loves you, and you love her; and if she be so well born, discreet
and fair, as you report her, and have such store of other perfections, she is
rich enough and I desire no more, Farewell* I Will to Clarissa's Father strait
and disengage my promise of marrying you unto his Daughter


Now Clyton, have I not finely gulled and cozened the Old man, with astory of
mine own Invention? -- some fools now, in my Case would not have known what to
have done, but whyn'd and cried and suffered themselves to be married against
their wills; thou see now how necessary it is to lie sometimes to purpose


And was all this but a Lie then?


Not a word of it true, but all invented purposely to prevent my Marriage with
Clarissa


The Watch! the Sword! and Pistol!


All, feigned and only a Masterpiece of mine own invention.


For Heavens Love Mr. Then, if ever you would oblige your poor servant, give me
some sign hereafter when you go about to lie and play any of these
Masterpieces any more; for though, I know you pretty well, protest yet I was
deceived


Well never fear, thou shall be so no more, I Will make thee hereafter, the
Secretary of all my Thoughts, and Cabinet of all my Secrets


And with all these qualities I fear I shall hardly keep my self from being
deceived by you again; but touching your Amors Master -- this Lady


With me fair Maid?


Please you read that Sir.


From whom?


From Lucretia.


Ha! -- Kiss her fair Hand


I shall.


Now Clyton! what think you! you had best say, the Lady I spoke withal to day
was not Lucretia; behold her Letter here, inviting me this Night to come to
speak with her, at her Window, and what has the other to do to write to me, to
whom I never spoke word


I know not what to say, but without more dispute, have patience only till
Night, and you will know by her voice (at least) whether't be she or no


Mean time* go thou as secretly as thou can and inform thy self of her Birth
and Parentage, and what fortune she has


I will.


Sir.


What more Letters?

Sir, Having received an Injury from you I should desire to meet you in the
Mail with Sword in Hand.

Alcippe.

Tell him I shall not fail; why this is pretty! I arrived here but yester
Night, and to day's the first sight of me, yet I Have got a Mistress, a Marriage,
and a Quarrel already; I want but a Process to make an end of me: Om! I Would
forbid any in so short a Time, to have more business on their backs at once, or
more difficult and dangerous on's; send me good luck with them -- but let us go
see what my old Friend Alcippe would have with me


You Have both done as befits valiant men, and I Am most glad it was my happy
chance to arrive here in time to part you, and make you friends, whilst you
were on equal terms, and no advantage on either side -- somewhat a rare
Adventure


To me I Am sure it was, who fought with as much Phlegm, as he with Choler all
this while, not knowing the reason why, which pray Alcippe now declare, that if
you have conceived any causeless jealousy, or any by false reports has injured
me, I, before him may clear my innocence


You know it well enough --


May I perish if I do, or ever (as I know of) said, or did any thing that might
offend you


Since you will needs have it, do you think it was no offense, to have given Ball,
Music, and Collation, to Night, to a Lady I long had loved, and now was just
on terms to make my wife? --

And more to increase the injury and disgrace,
To have boasted of it too before my face;
and how you had lain privately in Town this month, upon design only to do me
this sensible affront: do you think all this (now) was no offense


See how you are deceived? and how little reason you have for your jealousy? She
I gave a Treat to, is married, and one I Am sure you never saw, lately come to
Town on some affairs. -- Does this satisfy you


How was I deceived?


And if I had not given you sufficient proof of my valor already, and how I
fear you not, I should not give you this satisfaction now


If this be so I am most glad, our quarel's ended, and the atonement made.


And so am I. But let me entreat you Alcippe, hereafter to give less credit to
your jealousy, and consider better what you do before you challenge any one,
lest you begin there where you ought to end; and so I leave you, and am your
Friend and servant


What, sad still?


Alas, I Am but recovered from one trouble, to fall into a greater; for who
should have given this Music and Collation to Clarissa, if he did not? or who
should I call to account for it


Whosoever gave it, assure your self, Clarissa was not she 'twas given unto,
(as I Am credibly informed) but Daphne and Hippolita; and 'twas only your Pages
Error, who seeing Clarissa enter Lucretia's, and strait two Ladys masked come
out again, take Coach, drive to the River side, light and take Barge there, a
Collation brought and Music too, imagined it was she and Lucretia; which being
so, no wonder your Page, being first deceived himself, should afterward (as he
did) deceive you too


Do You think it was no otherwise?


I Am certain often; nay more, am sure all night she never stirred out of door.


This more and more troubles me. What a wretch was I then, to quarrel and
wrangle with her, as I did, for nothing


For that I Will make your peace; as for Dorant the Author of all this trouble,
who told us so many stories of his being in Town this month, and visiting
incognito, an incognita, with all the particulars of his sumptuous feast, know
he only yesterday came to Town, and all night too never stirred from home


And what the Collation?


All a mere fiction; Or if he gave any 'twas only in a dream.


It cannot be -- Dorant is valiant, as by his brisk answer of my challenge in
this last Encounter, I Have experienced, and in the School of Valor men do not
learn to lie; of the contrary a valiant man had rather dye* than suffer so foul
aspersion and stain to be fixed upon his Name -- wherefore I cannot believe it


Dorant it seems is Valiant by Nature, and only a Liar by Custom; however pray
hereafter cast this jealousy away, and let us admire our own simplicity, could
believe a story so incredible, that a Collation of six Services, twelve Dishes
at every one, four consorts of Music, with Fireworks, and I know not what,
could all be provided in an hour or two's time, as if the Collation had been
given in some of our Theaters, and with machins let down from Heaven. Those who
could credit it, had far more faith than wit. I saw this Fiction agreed but ill
with the Relation of the Page, how the Music was but so so, and the Collation
only a Dish or two: wherefore think no more on it


This was my blind jealousy now, that only sees with the Eyes of false
imagination, and believes all true that it imagines: but leaving Dorant with
his bold Fictions, I Will to Clarissa's and ask her pardon


Better stay till to morrow, when I may have made your way, by telling her all
this story, and making her laugh again to see how finely we were deceived by
him. The first heat of Choller's always most vehement, and it is not fit you
incur her full anger, till I beforehand have dissipated it


And if the uncertain light of the Evening deceive me not, I perceive her
coming with Isabella there. I Will follow your advice then and avoid her sight
till she may have laughed at my jealousy, and pardon it and me


Come Isabella let us go to Lucretia's.


There Is time enough, it is not yet so late, -- You Are much obliged to her; for
no sooner I had told her what you desired, but instantly she dispatched Sabina
with the Letter


And I shall be as ready to serve her another time. But did observe how this
Dorant Geronte's Son, whom he commended so much, is the self-same Gentleman we
saw in the Garden to day


I did, and was much surpised at it, and so was Lucretia, who marked it as
well as I* And do you continue your resolution still of speaking with him


I know not -- he does so lie.


And is that so strange? Dorant is not the first young Scholar, who boasts
himself a Soldier, and tells you of Battails h'as fought, Sieges h'as been at,
though never heard of 'em, but in the Gazzette

And foreign Countries he had traveled in,
Which (but in the Map too) he had never seen*
to ingratiate himself with Ladies; knowing they love men o'th Sword, and love
to hear them talk of wars and dangers they had past, and like them, when they
see 'em, make themselves not what they are, but what they would have 'em be


I know not what others are, but I Am sure he is a Master in the art of lying, and
has made Alcippe quite mad with stories h'as told him, of music and collation
given me yesternight upon the water; judge you what likelihood, or where a word
of it is true


By this you may perceive how Dorant loves you, and how cunning a Lover he is,
who knowing you loved Alcippe, first did set you two at variance, then
presently did get his father, to speak to yours for you; so at once gaining the
father, and in jealousing for the nonce your other Lover, to gain you, which he
has done in fine, and your marriage is concluded on


I, as much as ever it is like to be.


Will Not you obey your father then?


Alas thou art quite wide, and understand'st nothing I see, of what is lately
done; he is married unknown unto his father, who poor man came to mine with
tears in his eyes, to break off the match betwixt us: now what say you of him


If this be so, I Will say in my turn too, Dorant is an arrant Liar, and needs
must take delight in lying, who'd make such a lie as this without design? For
more I think on it less I comprehend what should be his end in it; -- but if
this be so why will you go and speak with him? is it to chide him, or else to
laugh at him


It Is to tell him soundly of it, an't does me good to think how 'sham'd I shall
make him


Faith 'twould do me more good to make him starve i'th'cold, and never go.


No, -- I Will go only for curiosity -- but soft I hear some coming, perhaps it is
he, and through the obscurity of the Evening he may chance to know me

I Will to Lucretia's then, and there I may freely speak with him, without all
fear of being known, whilst he will take me for her, -- Alcippe I perceive is
like to be the man must marry me at last, (do what I can) when once he is well
cured of his jealousy, which he will so on be when he knows as much as I


This is the time and place mentioned in the Letter.


Well, I have told you how her Father's one of the long Robe, and she his only
Daughter, as also what fortune she has, an ancient Servant of the house has
told me all; and now Master, if Lucretia had but a Talent of Lying as wellas
you, I should of have excellent sport, to hear you two strive to deceive one
another, tell story for story, and pay you in your own Coin, and give you as
good as you brought again, how I should laugh


No Clyton, I Would have thee know
Heaven grants that favor but to few
to lie as I do; they must have good memories,
good wits, great care and industry;
And finally when they are put unto the push
Indeed, come readily off, and never blush --
but soft the window opens -- let us draw nigh.


Isabella stand you centinal whilst I speak with Dorant.


I shall, and advertise you when any comes.


Yes, he recounted all your story to my Father -- but speak with him under my
Name, and I Will be silent the while


Who Is there Dorant?


Yes, Lady, it is I, your humble servant, and so I Will live and dye.


He goes on in making love to ye.


He goes on, with dissembling I Am sure on it -- I fear he will know me by my voice.


Well, Master, I confess you are in the right this once, it is she I Am certain now.


It Is I Lady who willingly would efface out of my lives account, all other days
I might have lived, without loving you

Who find living, without seeing you, such a pain,
As it is not life but rather death again,
And such a lingering torment finally,

As whosoever suffers, needs must say,
There Is no life but in loving fair Lucretia.

Hey day! now h'as about with you too; he makes love by turns it seems to every
one


He loves to lie to every one by turns I Am sure.


In obedience then to your Commandment,

I Am come to offer my life here at your feet,
And should dye most content so you would accept of it.
Tell me Lady what you please to command me now?


I thought to speak with you about a certain business, but now I find it
impossible -- it is to no purpose


How impossible? nothing Lady that you command, can be impossible for me to do.


Excepting only to marry, for that you cannot being married already.


How, I married? Ha, ha, ha! they only jeasted w'ye that told you so.


Was ever greater impostor?


He can do nothing else but lie.


No, far be it from me, and if any --


You think I believe you now?


May Thunder strike me dead, if ever I was --


Nay, I know all liars are prodigal of their oaths.


No Lady, if you have any thought of me that may be balanced by this false report,
let it no longer hold you in suspense, of what I can easily justify to be true


To hear how seriously, and with what asseveration he advances a lie, you would
think 'twere true


To rid you of your doubt Lady, so you be pleased Ill marry you instantly.


And so you would a Thousand more if they would believe you.


Make but your words good and I should be in such reputation here I should have
thousands to envy me


In such reputation (no doubt of it) as he deserved should boast himself such a
thunderbolt of War yet never was there, should tell us he had been in Paris
almost a year a courting Ladies, yet came but yesterday from Poictiers, who
gives Music, Collation, and Ball a nights to Ladies onth' water, yet all night
at home sleeps quietly in his bed; and who finally says he is married, and
presently unsayes it again: this is a fine way now to get you credit and
reputation! and tell me what is lying I pray, if this be none


Now Master, I Will say you are your crafts-master indeed if you come well off here.


Fear not Clyton, every thing in its time. -- Touching all these particulars,
Lady I shall give you such reasons hereafter as I doubt not but will fully
satisfy you. Now to come to the most important, -- I feigned this marriage,
(for why should I make difficulty to confess that to you, you must needs
commend in me) I feigned it I say, and you blame me for it; but what if you were
the only occasion often


I!


Pray hear me out; the love I bear to you --


Pray master tell me if you are going about to lie or no?


Hold your peace, Sirrah, or Ill pluck that saucy tongue of yours out of your
head -- The love I bear to you, I say, not permitting my father should marry me
to any one but you alone --


Now he begins to tell a new lie, -- hark.


I feigned this marriage purposely to keep my self free from marrying any one
but you: now go -- and call me Liar, and Impostor, and what you will, so you
call me your faithful Lover too; and blame me if you please for this feigned
marriage, so by this Fiction I may conserve me constant to you alone


I have reason to suspect this love Sir, it is so hot and vehement at first; for
how could my eyes inkindle in you so great a flame? you have seen but once and do
not know me yet


How, not know you! Is not your Mother dead? Is not your Father's Name
Pariander, a grave and sober Counselor? was not your Brother slain in the Wars
of Italy? Had you not a Sister called Julia? Now go, and doubt I pray whether I
know you yet or no


Now Cousen I see plainly it is you he means, and you he makes love to.


I would it were.


But I Will know all before I Have done. -- Well, Sir, at importunity of some
Friends I thought to speak with you concerning Clarissa, and pray tell me, is it
true you intend to marry her


How, I to marry her? beseech you no more of this; I Have discovered to ye the
very bottom of my heart, where you must needs see I feigned this marriage only
for love of you, for whom I Have nothing but affection, as I Have nothing but
aversion for Clarissa


Yet let me tell you, Sir, she is not so contemptible as you make her, and there
are others don't despise her, though Lucretia seems the fairer in your eyes


I, she has one main fault though --


What Is that?


Why, I cannot abide her, that is enough, -- and for my part I swear, I Will be
married in Turkey rather than marry her


And yet they say you gave her your hand, and courted her very amorously to day.


Who I? no such matter I protest.


Do You hear the impostor? it is a wonder he does not swear.


May Heaven --


Did I not tell you?


May Heaven I say, never prosper me, if I spoke to any one but you to day.


I can no longer endure his impudence --

How dare you deny that and forswear it too,
Which I my self to day did see you do?
Hence avoid my sight, and pray know, I sent for you only to make sport with
you; who love to laugh and make me sport sometimes with better wits than yours,
I Would have you know


Well, you see now all is discovered.


I, and I Am almost at my wits end with it too.


Mean time you may glory in your good success, and how you have gained a
notable acces

Unto your Mistress by it; and if I be ^e
importunately with my presence troubles ye,
and makes you say all this by intelligence now. --


Perhaps it is only so -- what think thou?


I think it is a pretty perhaps.


Well, don't think for all this I Will quit my part of her.


Faith Master, if your part of her were to be sold, and ye chanced to meet with
a good Chapman for it, I Would counsel you to let him have a good pennyvvorth of
this hidden treasure by any means, hovvever your hopes flatter you to the
contrary


Wonder! she should give no more credit to my Words yet?


Why, you Lie so abominably, who can believe you?


But I told her nothing but the very truth.


I, but when a Liar says it, only passing through his mouth, it loses all its
credit


I Will try then if from another mouth she will believe it better, and treat me
with less rigor hereafter. -- Their humors are as variable as the moon, and
sometimes they follow who fly 'em; sometimes again. fly those who follow 'em. --
Well, I Will to Bed, and take counsel of my Pillow

To morrow 'twill be day.
And nights the best counselor, -- let us away.

WHy Master, what mean you to rise so soon? they are not up at Lucretia's, it
is too early day


No matter, I Have chose this place as most proper to reve in, where beholding
her window, I may entertain my amorous thoughts, and wholly possess my mind
with her dear Idea


Now you talk of reving Master, have you bethought you of a remedy for your
last disgrace yet


I have, and it is the same thou taughtest me yesterday for so sovereign and
approved one, to be liberal enough --


Right, provided you rightly apply your liberality to some Coquett or other. --


I understand, and know Lucretia is too noble and generous to take, or to be
taken with gifts and presents: but her Maids have hands and tongues too, that
may be untied with Bribes. And howsoever she diaspprove it, she has Ears too,
to hear 'em when they speak; and it shall go hard, but I Will gain some of 'em,
and she who brought me the Letter yesterday I think the fittest; whom I do not
doubt to gain if I pay her well for her pains, as I intend


I Will warrant ye master, for it is my own humor right, to be always most kind
and complacent to those who give most, and count them my chiefest friends


There are enough of thy humor.


But master, in attending Sabina and the operation of our remedy, have you
heard the Rumor of Alcippe's Duel


No, with whom?


Some say with you; and but I can be answerable for you all this day, I should
believe it else


And did not I send thee to Lucretia's?


Umh -- and wast for that you sent me? I begin to smell somewhat.


Yes faith 'twas I that fought with him, though I resolved to keep it secret;
but from thee, the only Secretary of my thoughts, and Cabinet of all my
secrets, I can conceal nothing. Know then, about some five or six months since
we had a quarrel at Poictiers, where though we were seemingly reconciled, there
past a secret Engagement 'twixt us two to fight next time we met; and feigning
to embrace we whispered a Challenge into each others ears; when sending thee
away, away we went without any Seconds; and in a pass or two I quickly
dispatched my Gentleman, running him twice through the body and leaving him out
of all danger of ever being sick again, and welt'ring in's gore


And did you kill him then?


Dead, dead, and so I left him.


In Troth I Am sorry for it, he was a very honest Gentleman. Alack! alack!


Dear friend! happily met, I come to make thee partaker of my joy; my father --


What of him?


Is newly arrived.


I thought he had been dead I, thou were so glad; this is a new and
extraordinary kind of joy in a son like thee, for a Fathers arrival


I should have told thee (but that a mind wholly preoccupied with joy, imagines
every one knows it as well as they) that my marriage with Clarissa only
attended his arrival for its final accomplishment, and now at last he is happily
arrived


How could I imagine this? but I Am most glad, and congratulate your happiness.


This place is proper for you to Reve in, Sir.


And you are going thither now?


I am. and could not but make you participate of the good news by the way.


You Have much obliged me in it.


All those you killed, Sir, are alive and well you see.


So then you fear no farther impediments in your Amors?


How can I? All parties being so well agreed. --.Dear friend, pardon the
impatience of a Lover; I Have left my father reposing himself after his Voyage,
and have taken the occasion to visit my Mistress the while: farewell


Farewell and may your marriage prove as happy and fortunate as you desire.


And is this he that is dead? well, Master, I did not think you would have used me
thus, the only Secretary of your thoughts, and Cabinet of all your secrets: but
I perceive with all these qualities, one should have much ado not to be
deceive'd by you


Do think this combat then was nothing? and only a story of mine own
invention


I cannot tell, I should be glad to believe any thing rather than displease you,
Sir, but you invent so many every day, and every where, as it is a particular
grace of heaven if any escape being deceived by you: You spare none, Turk, Jew,
nor Christian, all is one to you


Why should thou think it so strange Alcippe should be recovered so soon o'th
dangerous wounds I gave him? Did never hear of that source of life called by
us Warriors the Sympathetique Powder, that every day works such strange and
miraculous effects


But none so strange and miraculous as this, that a man twice run through the
body, and left in the field for dead, should next day appear abroad, all whole,
and sound


I grant you, your ordinary Sympathetique Powder works none of these strange
effects? but Clyton, I have the Receipt of making one with Promethian fire,
shall recall a man from death to life again, in the twinkling of an Eye


Teach me the Receipt Sir, and I Will promise you to serve you gratis hereafter.


Why, I will, and make thee rich for ever; but now I think on it the secret
consists in certain Hebrew Words so hard, and difficult to pronounce, as
'twould be a treasure wholly cast away upon thee


And can you speak Hebrew then?


That I can, and nine or ten other languages besides.


Faith, and so y'ad need, and good sound ones too, to tell so many Lies: You
mince them as small as Herbs to the Pot, and must needs be full of verity
within, for I never saw any yet come out of you


Pity thy ignorance, but see my Father here.


O Dorant, I have been looking for you!


But I looked not for you, what mischievous luck had I to meet with him


Considering the strait union of marriage, methinks I have not consented at all
to thine, to suffer thee to live so long from thy wife, and be the occasion of
seperating those Heaven has conjoined; I m thinking then to write to your
Father-in-Law, how glad I am to understand you are married to so fair and
virtuous a Gentlewoman as his Daughter; and how I count our Family highly
honored, with the alliance it has with his


Your Civilities sir, will much surprise him.


And signify withal the longing desire I have to see her here; and how I
intend to send you for her; for to send a servant would have no grace, and show
a want of respect and esteem of her


You may do your pleasure, sir, and I Am ready to undertake the Voyage; but
'twill be to no purpose, for I Am sure he wont let her come


How so?


Why -- she is with Child sir,


How? with Child!


Yes, sir, and at least six months gone.


This is news rejoices my very heart.


And I Am sure you would not hazard her miscarrying, sir.


By no means, my patience rather shall contend with my joy which should be
greatest, ha! with child! Heaven then I see has heard my prayer, and I Am most
happy in it, I Will instantly go change my Letter then, and after a few
complements, desire her father to have a special care of her delivery, as that
on which all my happiness depends


Poor Man! how glad he is?


Hist*


And do you write too, do you hear? to the same effect.


I shall Sir. -- Good simple soul.


S'lid peace, he comes again.


I have forgot your Father in Law's Name now, how do you call him?


No matter, Sir, without giving your self that trouble, when you have writ your
Letter give it me, and I will write the Superscription


'Twere better 'twere all of a hand though.


Your hand or mine, all is one.


But these Country Gentlemen will easily take exceptions,


As for him he has been bred in Court.


Come, come what need all these excuses and delays tell me his name


I have forgot now.


When I say?


Pyrander, Sir.


Pyrander! you told me another name yesterday, and 'twas Armedon now I remember
me


Right, Sir, that is his proper name, the other only of a Signorie he has, by
which he was called when he followed the Wars, but now, they call him by one
and the other, promiscuously, now Pyrander, now Armedon


Very likely, it is a common abuse* warranted by custom that, and I did so my
self in my younger days: but I Will about my Letter


Well, now, am I not come handsomely off?


I, but you see, a Liar had need of a good memory.


Tush, when that fails a good wit supplies the want of it.


But the truth of this cannot be long kept hid, and having taken you tripping
once, they will suspect you at every turn, and Lucretia and Clarissa know already
how you have served them, who offended at so sensible an affront, in just
resentment of the injury, will cover you all over with shame and confusion in
time assure, your self


Thou Have reason for thy fears, and time putting me to my straits, I Will seek
presently to engage my self with Lucretia, and see, in good time, her Woman
here


Dear Sabina, I was so transported yesternight with joy of the good news thou
brought me, I had no leisure to reward thee for it; but thou shall lose
nothing, by my deferring it: hold thee


O Lord Sir,


Hold I say.


Indeed, you do me wrong, Sir, I am none of those. --


Come.


Beseech you, Sir.


I say you must, and don't think me ungrateful unto those who do me courtesies:
there


What ado's here with her? out of mere pity I must give her some few
instructions --

Hark ye, Sweetheart, 'twixt you and I,
One of your occupation should fly
This impertinent mincing, mumping, and simpering,
These cringes, reverences, and curtesing.
Take what they give you without more ado,
And if one hand suffice not stretch out two.
For me, when any o'these golden showrs do fall,
I use to stretch out hands, and heart and all;
They take on all hands in this age we are in,
And only to refuse is counted sin.
Care not for foolish honor then a rush,
One Bird in the hand's more worth than two in the bush. --
Remember this do you hear, and to conclude,

To make a friendship betwixt thee and me,
If thou art content now I Will go halves with thee.

Soft, Sir, that bargain's yet to make.


Look here Sabina, assure thy self what I do for thee at present is nothing in
comparison of what I will do hereafter, if (as t'hast done me the courtesy to
bring this letter) thou wilt but return me this answer back again


That I shall Sir, most willingly; but whether she will deign to receive it and
read it or no, I cannot promise you, but I Will do my best


See! she is souple as a glove now, and as kind as a young simple country Bride.


No matter, give it her, and I Will stand to my venture for the rest; the Ice is
broke, and I hope she has no such great aversion from me, -- within this hour I
shall return to know what success t'hast had


And by that time, I shall be able to resolve you.


Thou see now my Master is a Man, whose deeds out-go his promises; and who
makes no more of Gold, then Horses of Litter which they trample under foot: and
I Would have thee know, I can do any thing with him


Why, then, make it rain but more of these golden showers, and I Would have you
know, I can do any thing with my Mistress too


Ah Sirrah! thou beginst to have a feeling of these things I see.


Would you should well know, for all my mincing, mumping, and simpering, my
cringing reverences, and curtesying, I am not so simple as you imagine me; but
understand my office, and with my Mumpsimus know to play my Game as well as you
with your Sumpsimus, I Will warrant you


And if thou understandst thy office so well, tell me prithee what hope for my
Master to obtain his Suit? is thy Mistress so insensible of his love as she
makes show of


Since your Master is so honest a Gentleman, and so liberal withal, I Will tell
you, whatever show she makes, she is no ways insensible of his affection; and
could hardly sleep to night for thinking on him, and is half in love with him
already, if I be not deceived


What the Devil then made her use him so scurvily as she did to Night? or what
privilege has she to use her Lovers so, more than other women? I like not this
love by halves, and would have you know, my Master's worth your Mistress at any
time; and if he would follow my Counsel, rather than be used a this manner, he
should even fairly leave her


Let him not be too hasty though, for I tell ye assuredly she loves him.


She has but a harsh way of expressing it, though; and for my part, I
understand not the method of it


You must know, she holds a Woolf by the Ears of him (as they say) and would
fain love him, but dares not for her life, he is such a horrible Liar; and but
yesterday in the Garden, he told her so many Lies, and to two or three others
since, as it is a shame again


But your greatest Liars tell truth sometimes.


But she is reason to suspect him, knowing him as she does.


Let her believe him but this once, and believe me, he has nothing but sighed
for her all this Night


But don't you lie now as well as your Master?


Fie, that you should think so?

I Am none of those I would have you to know.


Tell me true then, does he not love Clarissa?


I tell thee he never did.


Art sure on it?


Most certain.


Well then, let him not fear to sigh for her in vain: for no sooner Lucrctia
saw him, but she sent me presently to try what I could screw out of him; and if
he love her indeed, all will go well enough. -- Go then and let me alone, I
need no farther instruction how to handle the business


Farewell then, and take but pains in the business, and I assure thee another
golden shower shall rain again


I shall make my Mistress a glad Woman with the news I bring; and see her here
already, she is impatient to know it, and what this Letter says here


Well, and what says the Man and Master?


Why, they both say like honest men, Madam, and agree in a Tale. As for the
Master, you may see what he says by this Letter


Let Us see it, --

Dorant plays the passionate Lover here, but he is so great a Liar, I Am not so
simple to believe a word he says


I believe him forsooth, no more than you, but I believe his Pistols though.


Why, has he given thee any?


Ecce signum.


And how durst you take 'em?


I took 'em Madam, to free you from your solicitude, and let you see he truly
loves you; for without loving the Mistress, you may be sure he would not have
been so liberal to the maid; and so great a liberality besides does show, he is
a Gentleman of a noble spirit too


Well, I Will be no hind'rance to your good fortune; but hereafter when you
exceed your duty, look you let not me know of it.


But what return to him for his liberality?


Why, tell him I tore his Letter without vouchsafing to read it; nothing else.


Ay me! there is an end of my good fortune then.


Only (of your*self) you may add a word or two of comfort, and tell him, it is
the nature of us Women to be soon offended, and soon pleased again: and above
all advertise him, when and where he may meet with me; for more assurance it is
necessary I see him often


If you did but know forsooth, how much he suffers for you, you would never doubt
of his affection; all this live-long Night he did nothing but sigh for you


To qualify his sighing, give him a little hope mingled with much fear; and
moderate it so I may not be engaged, nor he despair


Well, now I can assure you Dorant is wholly yours, and I have lost him quite:
but that which comforts me in the loss of him is, Alcippe's Father's arrived,
and the match concluded betwixt him and I


You Are rid of a great solicitude and trouble then.


I am so, and you like to under go it -- mean time you will have a fine catch of
him* for do you know what he said


Whatsoever he said, I dare be bound for him, body for body now he only says
the truth


Perchance he may, but it is a great perchance.


Dorant is a Liar, I know that well enough, but one may continue telling a Lie
so long, to make one doubt of the truth of it, at last


Well, if you love him, look well unto him, be sure, and make your bargain
wisely, or he will deceive you else


Nay I may believe him without loving him.


But they are so near a kin, as who makes us believe they love us makes us
believe them worthy of our love, and believing we are loved, and loving is so
nigh, one passes from the one to the other presently


But curiosity of*times produces the same effect as love.


I Will believe you this once to do you a courtesy.


Come, come, you make me mad to hear you talk so, leave your fiddle faddles and
fall roundly to work, or you will get Husbands as fast as old wives crack Nuts


Mind her not, the wench is foolish, -- but pray tell me when you encount'red
him in the Garden yesterday, and gave such willing ear to his complements, was
it love in you, or curiosity


Curiosity: mere curiosity, with intent to laugh afterward, and make me sport
at all he said


Why, and I did the like by this Letter here. which I received and read on
Curiosity, mere Curiosity; with intent to laugh afterward, and make me sport
at all he writes


I, but there is great difference though betwixt reading ones Letter, and giving
ear to 'em; for the one's favor, the other but a civility: but I shall be glad
if you find your count in him, who in the state I am, have no cause to envy you


Besides know, I Have given Sabina order to tell him I tore it* without ever
reading it


And what needed that? if you read it only out of curiosity?


I, but such a curiosity as yours was, you must add that too.


Well, be it so; but it is time to go to the Temple.


Let Us go then. -- And do you hear? do you as I command you.


Never fear, this is not the first time I Have been employed in these affairs: I
know both your Ma ladies, and't shall go hard but I Will apply to either a
convenient remedy; but know he is not a man to be delayed and dally'd with


I Am instructed.


For you my Friends, come you along with me,
I hope shortly to get you more company.

THis following the Law is a troublesome business.


And why then did you not write to me to dispatch it for you? I know, besides
the trouble, one of your years must needs expose his health, as well as ease,
to much inconveniency, in so long a voyage as from Poictiers hither

But since you are here, I hope to let you see, I want not friends, nor power to
serve you; mean time, tell me I pray of what Fortune and Condition is Pyrander
there


Pyrander, who is that?


One of the principall'st quality in Poictiers (they say) though none of the
wealthiest


I know none such in all the Town.


You may know him better perhaps by his other name of Armedon.


I know neither the one, nor the other.


Perchance you may know him better yet by being Father to Orphisia, so
celebrated for her rare perfections, and the only admired Beauty in all those
parts


Believe me, Pyrander, Armedon, and Orphisia too, are Names unheard of, and
wholly unknown to us; and if you will not believe me, I Will bring hundreds more
besides my self, to witness it


Come, come, I know you dissemble with me now, and feign your self ignorant,
thinking to do my son a courtesy: but I know all, how he loved Orphisia, how
he wooed her long, and at last by occasion of's Pistols going off, was taken in
the Chamber with her, and forced to marry her; I know all this, and have
forgiven him, and given my consent to his marriage too, wherefore you need not
make it a Secret to me any longer


I Will lay my life now, some body, to do ill offices betwixt you, has invented
this Chymerical story, names and all: I know Dorant more valiant and more
advised than to be taken so tamely in such a Trap as this; wherefore I pray,
believe not these false Reports


I can hardly yet believe 'em false, being told often by one assured me it was
true, and knew it was indifferent unto me. But pray in what Reputation was
Dorant whilst he lived with you


Why, he had always the repute of one who had both courage and wit enough; and
both ingenious, bold, and resolute; and one (in fine) could easily be Artificer
of his own Fame, and make it what he would only one fault he had. --


Pray what was that?


Why, 'twas a little unsafe to believe him on his word, he took such delight to
deceive the world, but 'twas a fault imputed to his youth, and custom of such
young Scholars as himself, but I hope he would leave that vicious craft, and
unhandsome divertisement, by your example and advice, when he came to riper
years, which lest he does, I can assure you 'twill much blemish his Fame and
Reputation

But I must take my leave, my business calls me.


And may you find that success in it which you desire.


Was there ever a more unfortunate Father than I? who now plainly see my Son's
a ^ourbe and Liar: And with his Lies has not only deceived me, but made me his
instrument of deceiving others

O shame of my too easy credulity, and my gray hairs! as if 'twere not enough
for me to live with my own shame, but I must dye guilty of his infamy? he
abuses my goodness with a seign'd story of his Adventures, and Marriage with
not a word of truth in it

Could I but meet with him, I Would make him know,
What it is to abuse his aged Father so.
O Sir, are you here!


What ill luck had I to meet him?


Come hither, and pray tell me, are you a Gentleman?


I hope, Sir, none doubts it, being born of you.


And do you think that sufficient?


I do sir, and so does all France too.


And don't you know with all France, from whence this Title of Honor takes its
origin? And that it is Virtue only enables us with that Nobility is afterward
derived unto our Blood


I am not ignorant of that which all the world knows, that it is Virtue first
acquires it


And if it be so, and contraries always work contrary effects, it clearly
follows that as Virtue gives Nobility, so Vice does take it away

Which being so, howe'r thou art my son,
yet doing as thou do, thou art no Gentleman.

How?


Peace, and hear me. Whosoe'r does any dishonorable Action, and after calls
himseif a Gentleman, lies when he says it, and is no longer one; especially
lying as thou do. Can therebe any Vice more dishonorable for a Gentleman,
born unto Honor, than to tell a Lie? The very name and mention of which sets
such a lasting blot and ignominious stain upon his Honor, as but in's
lifeblood can never be washed out again, and thou be imputed abase infamous
Liar


I! who told you so?


Who told me? tell me if thou can thy wives name now, with the whole story of
your marriage, you told me yesterday


Tell him you have forgot it in your sleep.


Or else your Father-in-Laws name, and's Signorie, and add to your impudence
and Effronterie some other stories else to cousen me


Now Master or never make use of your memory and invention.


Mean time I (old as I am) was so foolish to believe you (I speak it to my
shame) and am become the fable and mockery of every one, for my credulity. But
tell me now, thou impudent Liar, did I use any violence or force thee to it? did
I set a Dagger to thy Heart to make thee wed Clarissa? If thou had no mind to
her, why did not tell me so

Con'dst think I would deny thee my consent
To marry any might be to thy content?
I denied thee not (thou see) to marry a mere stranger? when truth (then)
each might have prevailed with me, what necessity was there to abuse me with a
Lie

Methinks this excessive goodness of mine at least
Should have a little touch, and move thy Breast,
Ungrateful as thou art? but now I see
Thou have no reverence, love, nor fear of me;
Hence, avoid my sight -- I here disclaim thee.


Good Father hear me.


What! more Lies and new deceits?


No, but perfect truth.


Was ever any in thy mouth?


Beshrew me, there he touches you home Master, how you will defend your self I
know not


Hap'ning to see the fair Lucretia, (I Am sure you know her) at first sight of
her

I was so taken, 'twas impossible for me
Ever to get loose from that sweet Captivity.

On -- I know her well, and her Father is my Friend, -- but look you do not lie.


And that will be very hard for him to do.


After which the very name of Clarissa, and all women too besides becoming
odious to me, I feigned this marriage only to avoid the marrying her; (not
knowing that feigning in Love was any Crime) nor durst I tell you of it, till I
might know whether Lucretra's Birth and Fortunes were answerable to your
desire: which now finding both noble and competent I dare, with more confidence
beseech you, Sir, by all the ties of Love and Consanguinity may bind a Father
and a Son, you would second my desire, and give your consent that I may marry her


You Will deceive me once again?


If you will not believe me, believe Clyton here, who knows all my secrets.


Methinks thou should even die for shame,

That I thy Father should more credit one
That Is but his servant, than thee his son.
But that thou may see my paternal love to thee, and how good I am, once more
(spite of my anger) I Will try thee, and hazard again the being once more
deceived. I know Lucretia well, and will demand her of her Father; but if
afterward I find the least impediment on thy part --


For more assurance I Will go along with yon.


No, do not; do not follow me; once more I Will try thee, though I misdoubt thee
still: and if thou do deceive me, look thou fly my presence, for by this
heavenly light

(Remember my Oath) and yon bright sun that shines,
Thou never shall dye by other hands than mine.
Remember.


Ha, ha, ha! these threat'nings fright me not.


Faith Master, you yielded too soon then, and should have stood out a little
longer, if you had any courage in you, and deceived him the third time; there is
good luck in odd numbers, they say


Peace and leave your fooling or you will anger me. I Am not in the humor now, but
am troubled in mind


Perhaps it is for having told Truth this once. If this of your love to Lucretia
ben't a Lie too; for I begin now to suspect every thing you say, and know you
so well, I understand you by contraries


No, no, thy suspicions are vain, for I love Lucretia; love her heartily; but
that which troubles me, is to think of the hazard I run by declaring my love so
soon? for if her father should deny her I Am utterly lost, and shipwrackt in the
port; beside, who knows where she will continue constant.? But that which chiefly
troubles me (to tell thee true) is to have seen one with her so charming fair,
as now I better consider her, it grieves me to have given my heart away before;
and if 'twere to do again, I should not know whether of the two yet I should
give it to


Why then were you so earnest to have your Father demand Lucretia for you?


Pho, he would not have believed me else.


So, upon the matter you told him a Lie, even when you thought you told him
true


There was no other way to appease his anger. But mischief on him for me that
disabus'd him, I might have had time and leisure enough to have considered who
to have chosen of the two


And you know that other ( Lucretia's bosom friend and inseparable companion)
is no other than Clarissa


Why then I have done my self a good office, though it troubles me, and I envy
Alcippe's happiness; but my comfort is he has but my leavings, and so I Will
leave the thought of her


As easily it seems as you did Orphisia's.


Let Us go then and restore Lucretia the same inviolable faith she had before,
and in good time behold Sabina


What have done with my Letter? have thou delivered it to her fair hands?


I have Sir, but --


What but?


She tore it all to pieces.


What, without reading it?


I Sir,


And vvou'dst thou let her?


Alas, Sir, I could not help it; she has so rated me for it, 'tvvould have
pi^ied ye to hear it: and has turned me away upon it; I Am quite undone


She Will take thee again never fear it, mean time there is somvvhat to comfort
thee


O Lord, Sir --


See! she is at her Reverences again, and hovy soon she is comforted?


Thou shall to her again, go, I Have not lost all my hopes yet, and did she tear
my Letter say thou


Indeed Sir, she bid me tell you so; but to deal ingenuously with you --


This is no cunning Queen!


She did not, but read it all over, why should I hold so brave a Gentleman
longer in suspense


If there be a Cunninger betwixt this and Rome, I Will go thither barefoot.


Why then by this account she does not hate me?


O Lord, Sir, no!


But does she love me?


Neither.


That Is strange? does she love any other;


Much less.


What then may I hope for from her?


Nay, I know not.


Come prithee tell me.


What should I tell you?


Why, the truth.


I have told it you already.


Dos't think she will ever love me?


Perhaps.


But when?


When she believes you, not before.


Thou make me happy; for by this time, she loves me then, and can no longer
doubt of my affection; for my Father --


Peace. Here she comes, and Clarissa with her.


Well, perchance he may have told you true; but he is not often guilty of that
fault; wherefore knowing him as you do, precipitate nothing; let me advise you


Admirable Beauty, who only can dispose of all my happiness and unhappiness.


One would think he spoke to me, his Eyes are fixed upon me.


He glanced them on you by chance (perhaps) or so, but his words were directed
unto me: let us observe him farther


Alas! in your absence, in what a mighty pain was I, and how by dear experience
now I find to be but a moment absent from those we love, is an age of torment
to a lovers mind


Still he continues!


But see what he writes.


But hark what he says.


You take what he says to me, as said unto your self.


We shall see that. -- Do you love me then Dorant?


Alas, is my love become then so indifferent a thing to ye, since I was wholly
yours, you should question that now


Do You mark? What think you now? Is this discourse directed unto you or me?


I know not what to think.


But let us hear out the whole imposture.


Indeed it is a little gross, considering what we know.


I do not like this whispering, -- beseech you Lady, whatever she says unto you
believe her not; consulting of my Life and Happiness, admit more favorable
Counselors than she, who has some reason I grant to have a pique against me


I have but too much indeed, and if I don't revenge me --


It Is somewhat strange indeed, what she has told me.


Believe her not I beseech you, it is only some invention of her jealous
thoughts


I believe so, -- but in fine, are you sure you know me?


Know you! pray no more of this Railerie. Are not you she, I had the Honor
yesterday to entertain in the T^uilleries, and who since I Have made the absolute
Mistress of my Heart


Which you have since given away to another, if I may believe her.


I given it away unto another! rather let me die here at your feet, your angers
sacrifice


Nay more, she says you are married to another too.


Ha, ha, ha! nay, now I see, you say all this (indeed) in Railerie to make you
sport, and here me often repeat again, and again, that I am only yours


And that you said, before you would be married to me, you would be married in Turkey.


I, and if they please in Argier's too, before I Will marry any one but you.


And that y'ad nothing but Aversion for Clarissa.


Come, come, what need this? you, know the whole Mystery of it? and that I do
all I can to marry you


I cannot tell what to think of 't now my self. -- Hark ye Lucretia?


How! she Lucretia?


Oh! are you advised of that now? did I not tell you so? and you would not believe
me


It cannot be, I Am sure I knew her by her voice to Night.


You were deceived; 'twas Clarissa spoke to ye under Lucretia's Name, Sabina has
told me all


I! was it so, well, say no more, keep my Counsel, and thou shall see how
handsomely I Will come off; and without changing discourse, only change battery,
and in a quick turn make all good again. I began to find her handsome before,
and had a secret inclination to love her, which now I Am fully resolved to do;
and so that was my Error, shall be my Judgment too


Now put him to his last Test of his impudence, and see how confounded, and
ashamed he will be


Well, Sir, in a word, she, as my Friend, has told me, how you courted her to
Night, and how you slighted me. Pray who is it of us two that is deceived? for
one it needs must be; and you spoke to her so lovingly and amorously to Night
it makes me think it is I


Who I! protest I never spoke to any one but you.


And did you not speak to Lucretia then to Night?


Ha, ha, ha! as if I did not know you by your voice*


I think at last he will begin to tell truth indeed.


You would fain put a trick upon me, and I let you go on to be revenged of you,
and feigned I did not know you. But alas, alas, do you think I was so simple? the
deceit was too gross, and pray learn against another time to choose better by
their Physiognomies, those you would put tricks on, for I am none of them. -- You
thought to deceive me, and I deceived you; only my ^lightings of you were
feigned to be revenged on you. For in fine I love you, and should hate my life
if any moment of it were spent in any thing, but only in serving you


And if this be true, why did you feign yourself married when you should have
married me? I do not see what end you could have in that


Or why would you w^ite me this Letter if 'twere not for love of me?


How I love the hidden cause of this anger now? that needs must be the love of
me, since you are displeased at my loving her; wherefore having enough
dissembled, I here declare, fairest Lucretia, it is you I love, not her


Was there ever a greater Impostor? how can you endure to hear him?


Stay, and when you have heard me out, you can no ways doubt of the truth of that
I say. Understanding of Clarissa's intent to Night, under your Name to deceive
me; and how you were consenting to it too: to revenge me gently on you, I said
something I grant that might have offended you


But what said you yesterday in the Thuilleries?


My Complements it is true, were to Clarissa, but my heart to you.


Out upon him! can you have any patience to endure him longer?


And there 'twas your fair eyes kindled that fire in me; I durst not let
appear, till I might see whether my Father would approve my flame or no: And as
all the rest of my discourse to her was only feigned, so that I told her of my
being so long in Town, and coming from the Wars, was a mere Fiction too


Do You mark how he goes heaping Lies upon Lies, and does nothing but juggle with
us


In fine, dear, dear Lucretia, you are she alone to whom I have dedicated all
my affection


Your actions so little confirm your words as I ca^ ^carce believe 'em.


But if my Father be gone to demand you of your Father, will you believe me
then


After so clear a Testimony as that, I should consult my seriouser thoughts
perhaps whether I should or no


I doubt not then, but shortly you-will see these clouds of doubt all dispersed
and dissipated by the light of the verity. Mean time Clarissa, betwixt you and
I, love your Alcippe, who had had no part in ye, but for my feigned marriage.
But this he shall never know for me; and see where he comes here


Our Parents are agreed, and Clarissa you are mine.


And as for yours fair Lucretia he has consented Dorant should marry you.


Least sign of your hands then, the business is done.


And as for you, least words of your mouth, will do the business too.


Sweetest, deny me not that happiness.


What are they both dumb? that they hold their peace.


My Father, in fine, may absolutely dispose of me.


And I am all obedience unto mine.


Come then and prove the sweet effects of his Commandments.


And you, that of yours,


Now you are married, farewell my golden days. You have no need of my office any
more


Fear not, I Will be more liberal then ever I was before.


To Lie is nothing, but do it so dexterously,
As not to be entangled in a lie,
There Is the Art of it; and I Will forbid any ^ne,
To do it so dexterously as Dorant has done.
And those who will not fail in the dexterity,
Let them come often here, and learn to lie.

