FRancisco, well met; whither in such have?


I am going to a feast; where, if you please, you shall be welcome too.


I am willing to believe you, and will wait on you.


I Will promise you a dish of mirth, that is all, and if my hopes delude me not,
well dressed too, so quaintly relisht, that it will provoke a laughter far
above thy spleen to suffer


How can these times afford such entertainment?


Why, I Will inform you: 'Twas yesterday my luck to be incountred by a rustic
Seaman, (or one at leastwise of as course condition.) This fellow, like a
perfect son of folly, began to rail extremely at his fortune, and needs would
make me Judge of his abuse. -- I have (says he) about some two years since,
married a wife, (woe worth the time I saw her) and in my absence she has got a
trick to make me Cuckold whether I will or no; a barbarous Barber makes a beast
of me, Cutbeard his name, whom I do vow to be the cutthroat of


I know the fellow well, he lives close by; but on I pray.


I finding that his humor might produce something worth laughing at, encouraged
him; he like a bladder that is sweld with blowing, was straight puffed up into a
desperate humor, so that he vowed this day for a revenge: And hereabout I am to
meet this Hercules


It cannot choose but produce excellent mirth, which I Will assist with all my best
endeavors


See, he is come laden with several instruments of death; he means to play a
prize with him, I think, -- Well John, I see you are prepared for murder; have
mercy on the Barber, I say


No, I scorn it, I will have no mercy, he has made a whore of a wondrous honest
woman, and a Cuckold of one, that for ought I know, might have been a Courtier.
For which abominable deed I scorn to show my self a Christian; for I do mean to
use him worse then a Jew would


Nay, but consider, he is a man how-ere, and you can boast your self to be no
more, although you have the spirit of a Giant; you have brought weapons here as
if you meant to kill him twenty times. Troth it is too much


If I bate him an Ace of forty, call me Coxcomb, I will draw his teeth one by
one, with an instrument called a pair of Tongs, then let him blood in the right
vein, and bid the Devil take him at his own peril


Let me prevail with thee to calm thy rage, and take acquaintance of this
Gentleman a worthy friend of mine


Do you long to be acquainted with me, Sir?


By any means, Sir.


It Is granted then; I Will toss a Can or a Pot with you, as soon as I have
dispatched this bawdy Barber; would he were dead that my business might be over


What Is your profession Sir? and how may I call you?


I am a Seaman, Sir, my name's John Swabber -- an Officer of the ship, sir.


I cry you mercy, sir.


Nay, never cry for the matter, -- But I had forgot this Barber all this while:
Barber come forth, or by the beard of my great Grandfather, I swear, I will so
shashado, mashado, pashado, and carbinado thee, that thou shall look like a
gallimafry all the days of thy life. Come forth I say


Why neighbor Swabber, who provokes you thus? what do you mean? who has
offended you


Oh slave of all slaves, who has offended me? why thou base, beastly,
boisterous, Babylonian, bawdyfac'd Barber, thou have, thou have made me fit to
chew the cud with oxen, climb the mountains with wild goats, and keep company
with none but Ram-headed people, for which I will tie thee up on the next
sign-post, and there thou shall hang a twelve month and a day alive, for an
example to all such notable shavers; but if thou come and submitst to my
mercy, I will do thee the favor to let thee hang till thou be dead


Fransisco hark -- I Will pawn my life this fellow's a rank coward, keep you his
fury up, and I Will persuade the Barber to a greater vein of roaring then ere was
practiced by a suburb blade, I Will make him at the least seem valiant, fear not


Do if it be possible, I Will hold him in discourse. -- But, Mr Swabber, what
think you if he does compound with you, will you be won to take an arm or two,
or both his legs, and save his other members


Pish, tell not me, it is neither his arms nor his legs that I stand upon, he has
caused me to go in danger of my life: for the other day I had an occasion to pass
by a worshipful Gentleman's pack of hounds, they no sooner looked upon my
forehead, but they came at me in full cry; and I for fear left such a sent
behind me, that they came after me as perfectly by it, as if I had been a
Stagg; and if I had not got shelter of a house, without doubt I had been
presented to some great man for Venison, and my hanches had been baked by this
time


You were in danger there I must confess.


And the Butchers Dogs still take me for a Bull, and fetch such courses at me;
and all this the Barber is the cause of


I would revenge it, were I as you he should not have a tool left him to work
with


No nor to play with neither, I Will have an inch of every tool he has. -- Barber
come forth, and let me kill thee upon fair terms, or else I will enter thy
house by force, pitch thee down the stairs, and send thee of an errand
headlong. And if thou do submit to my mercy, I will shave thee to death with
thy own razor, therefore take heed. -- So, now let him come if he dare


Well, now I see there is no hope to appease him, blood must ensue, and death
will take its course


With whom? what is the matter?


The Barber is preparing for the combat, he has took his pole to serve him for
a lance, and one of his basins for a buckler, and vows to make you the
windmill, whilst he plays Don Quixot against you furiously


A windmil! -- I Will begone.


You will not offer that sure. Who afraid?


Would it not make any one tremble with the thought on it, first to be made a
Cuckold, then a windmill? No, I Will begone, and come again to kill him when I can
find him in a better humor


Consider what you do; he will call you coward, proclaim you Cuckold still in
every Alehouse, and what disgrace will that be


I care not, it is better be a Cuckold then a windmil; if he had meant to make a
fool, a puppie, or an ass of me, or any such Christian like creature, 'twere
another matter: but to be made a windmill of, and never to be respected but
when the wind blows, is not to be endured, therefore let him make windmils of
my weapons, if he will, for my own part I Will defend my self with my heels


Come, I have brought him to a better temper, he will come armed with nothing
but a Razor, with which if he does slit your wezand-pipe, it will not be amiss
to take it patiently


Let him not spoil my drinking, and I care not; but hark you, if you should let
him hurt me, I should be as angry as a Tiger


Where is this slave that has provoked my rage to his destruction, I will swinge
this Boore, then hang him up for Bacon in my chimney, and send him to be
broyled for Pluto's breakfast


Why This is wors then to be made a wind mil. Do you hear sir, if ever you had
the fit of an ague upon you, or ever knew the trembling of a man troubled in
conscience, that would be loath to die till he had made even with all the world,
consider me; alas, sir I have my rent to pay yet, and if I should be sent to
hell of an errand, they will like my company so well, I should never come back
again; pray persuade him to send me to Jerusalem, or Ierico, or any those places
nearer hand


Why can not thou excuse thy self? where is thy brains?


Alas, my brains are fallen intomy breeches; but if you will stand between me and
harm, I Will venture to reconcile my self to him, -- Cut -- honest Cutbeard, did
not thou think I was in earnest all this while


What ere thou were, thou shall be nothing presently, death waits for thee,
come quickly I command thee


Sir, pray persuade Mr Death to have patience for a matter of 40 or 50 years
more; for I have a great deal of business to do in this world yet


Shall I be dallied with, let me approach him, for all the entreaties of the
world shall not preserve him past six minutes


One minut's past already, -- and there is two.


Nay, prithee Cutbeard, be more merciful.


Three -- four -- five.


Will no entreaty serve? Then take your course.


Six, O now I am gone.


If he submit he may live, let him know it -- do thou acknowledge thy own
cowardice and my heroic valor


O mighty Hercules, I confess my self a Pigmy, and I will never think otherwise
while I live; these Gentlemen be my witnesses


Why then all is well again. -- Remember Cutbeard,


I Will spice him fear not -- give me thy hand Jack, Thus do I grasp thy
friendship


He grasps my hand divelish hard tho.


I hear pronounce thy wife to be a Venus.


O rare! Is my wife a Venus? That Is more then ever I knew before; why then I
will be her husband Cupid


No, Cupid was her son.


It Is no matter for that, he shall be her husband for once, and we two will get
such abundance of young Cupids, that we will make all the world in love with one
another


Since we are reconciled, know, honest Swabber, that I will make the whole world
dote on thee, I Will wash thy face, and powder thee to the purpose, and shave thee
if thou will too


No, by no means, I dare not venture my throat under thy fingers; but for
washing and powdring, that all the world may be in love with me, I am content


Sit down then in this chair, look on this powder, the snow is nothing to it,
'twill create such a complexion on thee, that no Art did ever set upon the
proudest Lady


But hark you Cutbeard, how shall I do to satisfy all the women that will
follow me for kisses, if you make me too beautiful, my lips will be worn
threedbare before I can get home; and then Parnell my own dear wife, will have
the least share of her own sweet husband


For that we will take a course, -- wink, wink, good Jack, my Ball will search
your eyes else


My eyes are honest, and fear no searching


Now I begin to sprucifie thy phisnomie, -- This powder was extracted from the
Phoenix, when she last burnt her self, and is indeed the quintescence of odors


Nay, it is as odious as ever I smelt, that is certain, good Cutbeard let me have
enough I prithee


Nay, I Will spare no cost, -- Judge Gentlemen, is he not strangely alterd?


Past belief; I would not that my Mistress saw him now, my hopes would soon be
cooled then


I think so, but I would have you to take notice, I will have nothing to do but
with great personages, for I must not make my self common


What this fellow will com to no man knows yet, his fame no doubt will travel ore
all countries, and I am full resolved in my opinion, the Queen of Mauritania
will run mad for him


If she run as mad as a March Hare, she gets not a bit; no, Parnell and my
neighbors shall have all


Now if the Painters will draw Adonis out, let them come here for copies. So I
have done


Prithee Cutbeard lend me a Looking-glass.


By no means; what did you never hear of one Narcissus how he pined away for
love of his own shadow: No, go home, your house is hard by, let Parnell see
you, and bless her self with wonder


Honest Cutbeard, this Gentleman is a worthy friend of mine, prithee bestow
some of the same powder upon his face


No, no, you shall be beautiful alone, it is best.


Parnell I come, and if thou be not stupid, Thou Wilt say Jack Swabber is a
kin to Cupid


Well Cutbeard, thou have dressed him handsomely, I Would give a Crown that I were by
when first he finds what beauty he is adorned withal


This day I am to meet with pretty Parnell, pray Heaven the Fool be absent when
I come, some two hours hence if you will meet me, Gentlemen, I Will tell you how he
takes his transmigration


We will not fail. Farewell.


I wonder that my Barber stays thus long, can he neglect me thus? Well, I will
fit him; for if he use me once again thus basely, I will cashiere him, and bestow
my love upon some one more constant: forty to one but Swabber comes before him,
and spoils all

Who Is this in the name of blackness? the clothes and walk of my dear husband,
and I Will lay my life he has got a vizard on. -- Nay pray now, indeed you will
fright me presently, take heed


She does not know me that is excellent, -- Parnell believe it, I am flesh and
blood, I would not have thee take me for a Goddess


A Goddess quotha, a black one if you be one; what have thou got upon thy face
I prithee


Do not look too wistly upon me, Parnell, my beauty will put your eyes out if
you do, and then I must be at the charge of a Dog and a Bell for you


A Dog and a fools head; pull off your vizard.


Do not touch me unless you make forty curtsies first. Come kiss me, and thou will be out out of thy wits presently


Nay, then I see it is a trick put upon him; I Will fetch you a glass, you shall
behold your beauty


Do, and I will venture to be in love with my self for once. How shall I requite
honest Cutbeard? By this hand he shall have the honor to be Barber to all my
wenches


Are you not wondrous fair? Look and admire your self.


O Parnell, Parnell, I am gul'd most basely, I have not half so much beauty as
a Chimney-sweeper: I Will kill the Barber the first thing I do


Was it the Barber used thee thus?


I Parnell, 'twas he: I Will go fetch a company of my Fellow-Saylors, drag him
out, and hang him up at the main Yard presently. Parnell farewell: if I be
apprehended for the death of Cutbeard, what ever thou do, send me a clean
shirt; for I shall have need on it


Well Cutbeard, I commend thee for this project, thou have dressed him
handsomely; would thou were here, I would kiss thee for the jests sake.


I watched the time my Parnell, and have found it; How does the gul become his
feathers? Ha


As I would have him: Oh Cutbeard, this kiss, and this, for the device.


Where is he, Parnell?


Why gone abroad in his new-fashion'd face, to fetch a gang of Saylors, who he
vows shall hang thee up at the main Yard, and shall use thee worse then the
Prentices a Suburb-Bawd on a Shrove-tuesday


And those same water-rats are Divellish things; what a slave was I to use him
so


What can thou fear when I am in thy presence? Away you milksop, hence from
me, avaunt


Nay, gentle Parnel, by this hand I Will fight with a whole Army, if thou say
the word: prithee be reconciled


Why Parnell, Parnell, here is thy own sweet husband; open the door dear wife.


O me, my husband's come, what shall I do?


Let me into the well* if thou think good, or hang me in the chimney stead of
Bacon


Alas, that is full of hazard. -- No device!


Why huswife, huswise, must I wait half a day?


My peticotes fallen off, but I come presently -- Oh I have thought, come hither,
put on this biggin, I made it for my child that is at Nurse, and cram thy self
into this cradle here: there is no other way, therefore dispatch


O me, thou never think upon my beard, that will betray all presently.


Take you no care, I Will make him to believe you were born with it; be quick, I
say


Necessity compels me, send me off of this brunt once, I Will hunt the smock no
more -- Cover me close good Parnell


So, keep you close, and when he prattles to you, sneere in his face, and call
him Dad; do you hear


Why you proud, peevish, petty, paltry Parnell, why did you make me stay so
long


I made what have I could, but the child cried so.


The child! what child? have you got bastards here?


Bastards? they are your own then: Simon's come home, the boy I had a
twelvemonth since by you, he was born when you were at sea


Is he brought home? As I Am an honest man I Am glad on it. Let me see him Parnell.


Look here he is, the goodliest boy, and even as like thee John, as if thou
had begot him all thy self


Whoop, here is a boy of a twelvemonth old: if he grow but thus much this next
year, he will be able to fight with a Giant presentl. But Parnely, he has got a
great beard too, how comes that


Why he was born with it; many children are so, and it is a sign he will be a man
betimes, a wise discreet one too


Dad dad, dad.


Nay, it is a wise child, I perceive that; for he calls me dad at first sight.
Good Parnel fetch me some milk for him, I Will see him eat


He had milk but just now; prithee John be patient.


You are a fool, he has been starved at Nurse, and we must make him fat. Fetch
some, I say


I will not truly John, you will spoil the child.


I saw some stand in the next room, I Will fetch it my self so I will.


What will you do? You must endure with patience; I mingled batter but just now
for pancakes and that he will bring, as certain as I live


I shall be crammed to death; mercy upon me.


He comes, lie close again.


Dad, dad, dad.


I mine own boy, here is milk for thee, Simon. Parnel look, how greedily he eats
it


Now fie upon you John, you will choke the child.


I mean to make him grow as high as Paul's, and show him for a wonder in
Bartholmew fair. Fetch me some more milk, this is all gone


What, do you think I Will murder the poor infant?


By this hand I Will go to the Milk-woman and fetch him a whole gallon.


Up quickly and be gone; for when he comes he will choke you without fail.


A pox upon him, never was child fed thus. But what will you do now?


Do not you fear; I Will fetch my own child; it is at a neighbors house, and say
the Fairies have exchanged it


Send thee good luck; farewell sweet Parnel.


So, if this child will serve him for a Simon, all will be well again. John.


Come, give me Simon on my lap, I Will feed him til his guts crack again.


Alas, I went but in the next room, and in the mean time the Fairies have
exchanged him; look what a little thing they have left in's place


I Will have none on it; go fetch me Simon, and tell the Fairies I Will indite them at
the Sessions for this. Oh Simon, Simon, what is become of thee


Nay, prithee take not on so.


The goodliest boy of his age, that ever man saw. Pshaw, this has ner 'a beard,
I Will have none on it


Why how no Jack, what in a passion? ha! it was that blackt thy face to day for
mirth sake, and thou did think 'twas Cutbeard


I care not for my face, Simon is gone, that had a beard as big as Cutbeards
here, the Fairies have exchanged him; and look what a chitty-face they have
left in's room, a thing of nothing for him


Come, you must use this they have left with courtesy; for they will whip Simon
every day in the week else. I know the nature of them


Will they so? Nay then I must make much on it.


And now you must be friends with Cutbeard too.


With all my heart, for I am angry with none but the Fairies now.


We have brought music, and some neighbors with us, and mean to have a dance.
Come John


I can dance nothing but a melancholy dance. For I am in a grievous dump for
Simon still


I warrant thee. Strike up there.


Why that is well done; no time is counted lost,
Where civil mirth is gained with such small cost?


