ACTAEON AND DIANA* WITH A Pastoral Story of the Nymph OENONE; Followed By the
several conceited humors Of

Printed at London by T. Newcomb, for the use of the Author ROBERT COX.

Gentlemen, and Ladies, IF your serious occasions will permit me so much
honor, that this slight Book may be accepted and perused, I shall justly
acknowledge the favor to be far above either my hopes or merit. And if you
ever vouchsafed your Presence when it was presented on the Stage, I am
confident, your (no way erring) judgments will now allow it as it then was
intended, which was, rather to provoke a laughter, then occasion a
contemplation. It will likewise engage my grateful service if I be not (in
your worthy opinions) taxt of Arrogance to present my unpolished lines, when
daily those of excellence are offered to your Eyes and Ears: But in the
confidence of your clemency, I submit to the verdict of my grand Jury. And
howsoever you are pleased to censure, will remain (as I ought) the humblest of
your servants

ROBERT COX*
BUt tell me fellow Bumpkin, what is the matter?
Thou that have formerly been heard to sing
As merrily and sweetly as the Cuckowe,
But by the posture thou do now appear in,
Strangers will sooner take thee for an Ass,
Then for a man of mettle.

It may be so.
And for my own part, I am not such a fool, to think the contrary; nay, I
would change condition with an Ass, and thank him too: never was any man (of
parts) so tumbled, Jumbled and Rumbled, as poor Bumpkin is


Why what is the matter?


Nay, I know not, but every day my great guts and my small guts makes such a
combustion in my belly as passes, and my puddings (like Lances) runs a tilt at
my heart, and makes me as queasie stomackt as a young Green Sickness girl newly
come to a big belly


Can thou not guess the reason of this trouble.


Yes, I think I can, and I Will be judged by thee, if my case be not desperate: I
have a horrible mind to be in Love


With whom.


With any body, but I cannot find out the way how to be in Love.


Why? I Will instruct thee: can thou be Melancholy?


Yes, as a dog, or a hoglouse, I could even find in my heart, to cry presently.


Can thou sleep well?


I cannot tell, I never saw my self sleep.


Is It possible, that thou who have so long
Been an attendant on my Lord Acteon.
Should be to learn the way to be in Love.

I would it were not possible, on the condition thou were hanged and quartered.


I thank you Sir, but Bumpkin list to me,
This day thou know the maids and youngmen meet
To sport, and revell it about the May Pole;
Present thy self there, tell thy cause of grief,
And I dare warrant thee a sweetheart presently.

If thou can do that, I Will marry her first, and learn to love her afterward.


Have thither Bumpkin, I Will go on before.


And I will follow there a dog trot.
Is it not pity, that a man of Authority as I am, having been chief dog-keeper
to my Lord Acteon this five years, being a man so comely of person, and having
such a pure complexion, that all fair Ladies may be ashamed to look on me, and
that I should be distressed for a sweetheart

Maypole I com, and if the wenches there increas my pains
And scorn to Love, I Will beat out all their brains.

COme you youngmen, come along.
With your Music, dance and song;
Bring your Lasses in your hands,
For it is that which Love commands:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.
It is the choice time of the year,
For the Vi'lets now appear;
Now the Rose receives its birth,
And pretty Primrose decks the earth:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.
Here each Bachelor may choose
One that will not says abuse,
Nor repay with coy disdain,
Love, that should be loved again:
Then to the Maypole, etc.
And when you well reckoned have,
What kisses you your sweethearts gave,
Take them all again, and more,
It will never make them poor:
Then to the Maypole, etc.
When you thus have spent the time,
Till the day be past its prime,
To your beds repair at night,
And dream there of your days delight:
Then to the Maypole come away,
For it is now a Holiday.

It is possible, would Bumpkin be in Love?


Yes, if he knew but how, and for that sickness
I have undertaken to become his doctor;
For, at the Maypole meeting it is decreed
A sweet heart must be purchased, come what will on it.

Nay, if he be distressed, twenty to one he may find charitable persons there.


What Less to such a writhled faced companion;
One that by's looks, shows that his fathers orchard
Could yield no fruit, but Crabs or Apple-Johns:
Should he be granted a prevailing suitor,
I should not think it requisite or fitting
Women hereafter should enjoy their eyes;
Their very tongues too should be put to silence,
Only allowed to rail at that vile person,
Who by her choice of him, shamed the whole sex.

Nay, I would lay a heavier curse upon her,
She should not sleep without a wanton dream,
And waking find no hopes of what she dreamed.

That was a heavy curse and well considered,
But could you find our fellow Bumpkins parts.

He can loose none, and who can find them then.


Do you believe him foolish.


It is a faith that needs no confirmation.


Laugh at him then, and we will assist you in it; but do it with Consideration.


So we will, -- hark Lasses.


Now if they be not hatching Eggs of mischief, let me be counted addle, what
think you sirs


And if he have not love enough, good Cupid,
Let me want Love when looked for.

In the mean time
Let us not starve our pastimes, pray sirs,
Being the Maypole revels.

So we will;
Come strike up a farewell to misfortune.

That's a dance that I could never hit off, Pray desist a while and hear my
doleful tale


He Will make us cry sure.


Be it known unto all men by these presents


An obligation; we will be no witnesses.


Why then i will hang my self?


We will be witness then.


What to my hanging? O my conscience! If I should woo my heart out, I should
never be the fatter, for it. -- where is your promise now


You have not yet expressed your self, be plain, Tell them your grief, a remedy
will follow


If that be all, it is but an easy matter, pray take notice that I am in Love
-- with somebody


Would I were she!


Why? so you are, if you have a mind to it


Why then you are my own?


Pardon me, sister, I


Yes marry did she.


But I was she that won him at the Maypole.


Was that the cause you strove so for the Garland.


What Is that to you?
Would I had any one of them in quietness.

But yet I must have share.


So must I too.


I will not part without the better half.


Then who shall have me whole, what are you mad?


There Is reason for a madness in this case.


I will not lose my right. Let go I say.


He shall be mine, or else he shall be nothing.

Away you Burrs, why do you stick thus on me?
Now by this hand, if nothing can persuade you
I Will drown my self for spite that you may perish.

Hark, hark, my Lord Acteons warning piece,
That Horn gives us intelligence he does intend
To spend this day in hunting, Bumpkin, why stay you?
The hounds will quarrel with you, we will come after.

Will you not stay my Love.


I Will see you hanged first, and by this hand ere I will be in love again, I Will
feed my hounds with my own proper carcass


Now he is gone, our dancing may go forward.


My Lord Acteon stays, be quick, I pray.


Quick as you will, the doing of it quick makes it show better.


ARe all the hounds uncoupled, let the woods,
Valleys, and hills, be filled with their sweet music:
Till the thick Air pierced by their harmony,
Return a willing Ecchoe; Let your cunning
And care in this days hunting be expressed,
To make the world know that Acteons pleasure,
Is honored and obeyed, be nimble sirrah.

Nimble? yes, as a Bear that has been lug'd to purpose: if Love be such a
troublesome Companion, I will entreat him to keep out of my company


Where are your fellows? we consume the day
That should be spent in sport, with idleness.
Go find them out, and tell them of my purpose.

They have saved me a labor.

Fie! what mean you?
The glory of this day calls us to action:
The wild inhabitans of these fair woods,
Are to be instructed, they must fear our Javelins,
Our sloth will make them careless.

Sir, you may please to know, that yesternight
I lodged a Boar within the neighboring Forest.

Yes Sir, and I lodged a Fox at a house hard by.

His foamy tushes did proclaim defiance
To all that would oppose him, his vast length
And breadth of wonder, caused me to believe
These woods nere bred his equal.

He Is then a worthy subject for my javelin,
Whose glittering head I Will bath so long within him,
Till I have died it Crimson with his blood;
Nor shall Diana's self, who every day
Honors these woods with her fair train of Nymphs,
Have power to ravish from my resolute arm,
The glory of this conquest: in the mean time,
Let musicks sweet tunes in our breasts create
Desire of Acteon, whilst our active Feet,
Nimbly beguiles our duller thoughts of power
To contradict our pleasures: in the fall
Of this wild Boar, lies honor for us all.

This boldness ruins thee.

I Will follow though my ruin do attend me,

The unbridled boldness of Acteons youth,
Merits a punishment to equalize
The nature of his crime; saucy young man,
Too much presuming of thy known deserts,
Be witness you that have vowed chastity,
How much he has endeavored to eclipse
The glory of our purity; for to me
And those that are my Votaries, honors precepts
Must strictly be observed; no Balm can cure
The wound of Reputation when it is made
Upon those bosoms that are vowed to virtue.
Shall she resolve his ruin?

Gracious Madam,
Mercy with chastity and beauty joined,
Are both with Gods and Men in estimation,
And though his fault beyond expression great,
Cries lowdly on your wrath to execute,
Yet let his youth find pardon.

It will prove your charity unequalled.

Your goodness shall
Become example to my willing pity:
Therefore if young Acteon from this time,
Consider his own safety and my honor,
My vengeance shall be silent; but if again
He shall presume to tempt his most sad fate,
Ruin as quick as lightning shall demolish
What Nature did erect in him for wonder,
That so from men this truth may not be hid,
No one must covet what the Gods forbid:
Undress you now, for by this fountain side.
Our garments from our bodies we will divide.

What wonders do I gaze on? Might I thus
Be feasted at my eyes till time grow old,
I would not wish a satisfaction
Of any other sense: -- Unkind Diana,
To be so much a miser of thy beauties.
Loves laws can not be perfect, till they part
Rebellion from the confines of thy heart.

We are betrayed! Oh Chastity defend us.

It Was but a flattring bliss that did me cherish.
Fly, fly, Acteon, lest thy life do perish.

Fool! think thou to escape? Know that my will
Has power to reach, though thou bestrid'st a wind,
And as by hunting thy offense grew high,
So by the hands of Hunters thou shall die.
My will prevails, his head is circled round,
The largest Heart ere beat the Forest ground.
And now forbear this fountain from henceforth,
Let my dishonor dwell upon the Spring,
The waters be corrupted, choakt with mud,
Foul and infectious, like to Lethes flood.

Where Acteon comes transformed into the shape of a Heart, his Huntsmen pursue
him, and in the conclusion kill him, and bear him away


