AS when the Midland Sea is no where clear
From dreadful Fleets of Tunis and Argier,
Which coast about, to all they meet with Foes,
And upon which naught can be got but Blows,
The Merchand Ships so much their passage doubt,
That, though full-freighted, none dares venture out,
And Trade dacayes, and Scarcity ensues;
Just so the timorous Wits of late refuse,
Though laded, to put forth upon the Stage,
Affrighted by the Critiques of this age.
It is a Party numerous, watchful, bold;
They can from naught, which sails in sight, withold.
Nor do their cheap, though mortal, Thunder spare;
They shoot, alas, with Wind-gunns, charged with Air.
But yet, Gentlemen Critiques of Argier,
For your own interest I Would advise ye here
To let this little Forlorn Hope go by
Safe and untoucht; That must not be (you will cry)
If ye be wise, it must; I Will tell ye why.
There are Seven, Eight, Nine, -- stay -- there are behind
Ten Plays at least, which wait but for a Wind,
And the glad News that we the Enemy miss,
And those are all your own, if you spare This.
Some are but new trimmed up, others quite New,
Some by known Shipwrights built, and others too
By that great Author made, who ere he be,
That styles himself Person of Quality.
All these, if we miscarry here to day.
Will rather till they Rot in the Harbor stay,
Nay they will back again, though they were come,
Even to their last safe Rode, to Tyring room.
Therefore again I say, if you be wise,
Let this for once pass free; let it suffice
That we your Soveraing power here to avow,
Thus humbly ere we pass, strike sail to You.

STay Gentlemen; what I have said, was all
But forced submission, which I now recall.
You Are all but Pirates now again; for here
Does the true Sovereign of the Seas appear.
The Sovereign of these Narrow Seas of wit;
It Is his own Thames; He knows and Governs it.
It Is his Dominion, and Domain; as He
Pleases, it is either Shut to us or Free.
Not only, if his Pasport we obtain,
We fear no little Rovers of the Main,
But if our Neptune his calm visage show,
No Wave shall dare to Rise or VVind to Blow.

HOW hard, alas, is that young Lover's fate,
Who has a father Covetous and Cholerique!
What has he made me swear? --
I dare not think upon the Oath, lest I should keep it --
Never to see my Mistress more, or hear her speak
Without his leave; And farewell then the use
Of Eyes and Ears; --
And all this Wickedness I submitted to,
For fear of being Disinherited;
For fear of losing Dirt and Dross, I lose
My Mistress -- There Is a Lover! Fitter much
For Hell than thousand perjuries could make him,
Fit to be made The Example which all Women
Should reproach Men with, when themselves grow false;
Yet she, the good and charitable Lucia,
With such a bounty as has only been
Practiced by Heaven, and Kings inspired from thence,
Forgives still, and still loves her perjured Rebel,
I Will to my father strait, and swear to him
Ten thousand Oaths never to observe that wicked one
Which he' has extorted from me -- Here he comes;
And my weak heart, already used to falsehood,
Begins to waver.

Well, Dick, you know what you swore to me yesterday,
And solemnly.
I have been considering, and considering all Night, Dick, for your good, and
methinks, supposing I were a young man again, and the case my own (for I love
to be just in all things) methinks it is hard for a young man, I say, who has
been a Lover so long as you have been, to break off on a sudden. Am I in the
right or no, Dick? Do you mark me


Hard, Sir, it is harder much than any death
Prolonged by Tortures.

Why so I thought; and therefore out of my care for your ease, I have hit upon
an Expedient that I think will salve the matter


And I will thank you for it more, Sir,
Than for the life you gave me.

Why! well said, Dick, and I Am glad with all my Heart, I thought upon it; in
brief, it is this, Dick; I have found out another Mistress for you


Another? Heaven forbid, Sir!

I; Another, Good Man Jack Sauce; marry come up;
Will Not one of my choosing serve your turn, as well
As one of your own; sure I Am the older man,
Jack Sauce, and should be the Wiser!

But Nature, Sir, that is wiser than all Mankind,
Is Mistress in the choice of our affections,
Affections are not raised from outward Reasons,
But inward Sympathies.

Very well, Dick, if you be a dutiful son to me, you shall have a good Estate,
and so has she

There Is Sympathy for you now; but I perceive
You Are hankring still after Mrs. Lucy,
Do, do! forswear your self; do, damn your self, and be a beggar too; sure I
would never undo my self, by perjury; if I had a mind to go to hell, Cromwell
should make me a Lord for it! I, and one of his Council too, I Would never be
damned for nothing, for a Whimwham in a Coif. But to be short, The person I
design for you is Mrs. Tabith Baarebottle, our neighbor the Widow's daughter.
What do you start at, Sir? I, Sir, Jack an-apes, if you start when your
father speaks to you


You did not think her father once I Am sure A person fit for your Alliance,
when he plundered your House in Hartfordshire, and took away the very Hop-poles,
pretending they were Arms too


He was a very Rogue, that is the Truth on it, as to the business between man and
man, but as to Godward he was always counted an Upright man, and very devout.
But that is all one, I Am sure h'as raised a fine Estate out of nothing by his
Industry in these Times: An' I had not been a Beast too -- but Heaven's will be
done, I could not have don't with a good conscience. Well, Dick, I Will go talk
with her mother about this matter, and examine fully what her Estate is, for
unless it prove a good one, I tell you true, Dick, I Am of your Opinion, not to
marry such a Rogues daughter


I beseech you, Sir --
It is in vain to speak to him --
Though I to save this Dunghill an Estate
Have done a Crime like theirs,
Who have abjured their King for the same cause,
I will not yet, like them, pursue the guilt,
And in thy place, Lucia my lawful Soverain,
Set up a low and scandalous Usurper!

It Is well the old man's just gone. There Is a Gentlewoman without, Sir, desires
to speak one word with you


With me? who is it?


It should be Mrs. Lucia by her voice, Sir, but she is veiled all over. Will you
please to see her, Sir


Will I see her, Blockhead? yes; go out and kneel to her And pray her to come
in.


This is a favor, Madam!
That I as little hoped, as I am able
To thank you for it -- But why all this muffling?
Why a disguise, my Dearest, between us?
Unless to increase, my desire first, and then my joy to see thee
Thou cast this subtle night before thy beauty.
And now like one scorched with some raging Fever,
Upon whose flames no dew of sleep has fallen,
I do begin to quarrel with the Darkness,
And blame the sloathful rising of the Morn,
And with more joy shall welcome it, than they
Whose Icy dwellings the cold Bear o're-looks,
When after half the years Winter and Night,
Day and the Spring at once salutes their sight!
Thus it appears, thus like thy matchless beauty,
When this black Clowd is vanished.
Why do you you shrink back, my Dearest?
I prithee let me look a little on thee:
It Is all the pleasure Love has yet allowed me,
And more than Nature does in all things else.
At least speak to me; well may I call it Night
When Silence too thus joins it self with Darkness.
Ha! I had quite forgot the cursed Oath I made --
Pish! what is an Oath forced from a Lovers Tongue?
It Is not recorded in Heaven's dreadful book,
But scattered loosely by the breath that made it,
Away with it; to make it was but a Rashness,
To keep it were a Sin -- Dear Madam --
Ha! let us see this then first!
You know I have forgiven your unkind Oath to your
Father, and shall never suffer you to be perjured.
I come only to let you know, that the Physician and the 'Pothecary will do
this morning what we proposed, be ready at hand, if there should be occasion
for your presence, I dare not stay one minute. Farewell

Now thousand Angels wait upon thee, Lucia,
And thousand Blessings upon all thou do.
Let me but kiss your hand, And I Will dismiss you.
Ah cruel father, when thou made the Oath,
Thou little thought that thou had left
Such blessings for me out of it.

Give me the Pills; what said the Doctor, Will?


He said a great deal, Sir, but I was not Doctor enough to understand half of
it


A man may drink, he says, for all these Bawbles?


He Is ill advised if he give your Worship drinking Pills, for when you were
drinking last together, a Fit took you to beat the Doctor, which your Worship
told him was a new Disease


He was drunk then himself first, and spoke False Latin, which becomes a Doctor
worse than a beating. But he does not remember that, I hope, now


I think he does, Sir, for he says the Pills
Are to purge Black Choler!

I, Melancholy; I shall have need of them then, for my old Purger of Melancholy,
Canary, will grow too dear for me shortly; my own Estate was sold for being
with the King at Oxford. A Curse upon an old Dunce that needs must be going to
Oxford at my years! My good Neighbor, I thank him, Colonel Fear-the
Lord-Barebottle, a Saint and a Sope-boyler, bought it; But he is dead, and
boiling now himself, that is the best often; There Is a Cavalier's comfort! If his
damnable Wife now would marry me, it would return again, as I hope all things
will at last; and even that too were as hard a Composition for ones own, as
ever was made at Habber-dashers-Hall; but hang her, she will have none of me,
unless I were True Rich and Counterfeit Godly; let her go to her husband; (so
much for that -- It does not go down

Will, did you send for Colonel Cutter and Captain Worm, to come and keep me
company this morning that I take Physic? They Will be loath to come to day,
there is so little hope of drinking here


They said they would be here, Sir, before this time;
Some Morning's draught, I believe, has intercepted 'em.

I could Repent now heartily, but that 'twould look as if I were compelled
to it, and besides if it should draw me to Amendment, 'twould undo me now, till
I have gotten something. It Is a hard case to wrong my pretty Niece; but unless I
get this wicked Widow, I and my daughter must starve else; and that is harder
yet; Necessity is, as I take it, Fatality, and that will excuse all things, O!
Here they are


Welcome! Men of war, what news abroad in Town?


Brave news I faith, it arrived but yesterday by an Irish Priest, that came
over in the habit of a Fish-wife, a cunning fellow, and a man of business, he is
to lie Leiger here for a whole Irish College Beyond Sea, and do all their
Affairs of State. The Captain spoke with him last night at the Blew Anchor


Well, and what is it?


Why, Business is afloat again; the King has mustered five and twenty thousand
men in Flanders, as tall Fellows as any are in Christendom


A pox upon you for a couple of gross Cheats!

I wonder from what fools in what blind corners you get a dinner for this stuff.


Nay, there is another News that is stranger ye, but for that let the Captain
Answer


I confess I should have thought it very ridiculous, but that I saw it from a
good hand beyond Sea, under Black and White, and all in Cipher


Oh it cannot miss then; what may it be, pray?


Why, that the Emperor of Muscovy has promised
To land ten thousand Bears in England to
Overrun the Country.

Oh! that is in revenge of the late barbarous Murder of their brethren here I
warrant you


Why, Colonel, things will come about again!
We shall have another 'bout for it!

Why all this to a friend that knows you? where were thy former Bouts, I
prithee Cutter? where did thou ever serve the King, or when


Why every where; and the last time at Worcester

If I never served him since, the faults not mine; an there had been any Action
--


At Worcester, Cutter? prithee how got's thou thither?


Why as you and all other Gentlemen should have done; I carried him in a Troop
of Reformado Officers; most of them had been under my command before


I Will be sworn they were Reformado Tapsters then; but prithee how gots thou off?


Why as the King himself, and all the rest of the great ones; in a disguise; if
you will needs know it


He Is very cautious, Colonel, h'as kept it ever since.


That Is too long 'ifaith, Cutter, prithee take one disguise now more at last,
and put thy self into the habit of a Gentleman


I Will answer no more Prethees; Is this the Mornings-draught you sent for me to?


No, I have better news for ye both, than ever ye had from a good Irish hand;
the truth is I have a Plot for ye, which if it take, ye Shall no more make
monstrous Tales from Bruges to revive your sinking Credits in Loyal Alehouses,
nor inveigle into Taverns young Foremen of the Shop, or little beardless Blades
of the Inns of Court, to drink to the Royal Family Parabolically, and with
bouncing Oaths like Cannon at every Health; nor upon unlucky failing
afternoons take melancholy turns in the Temple Walks, and when you meet
acquaintance, cry, You wonder why your Lawyer stays so long with a pox to him


This Physic has stirred ill humors in the Colonel, would they were once well
purged, and we a Drinking again lovingly together as we were wont to do


Nor make headless quarrels about the Reckoning time, and leave the house in
confusion; nor when you go to bed produce ten several snuffs to make up one
poor Pipe of Tobacco


Would I had one here now; I have n't had my morning Smoke yet, by this day!


Nor change your names and lodgings as often as a Whore: for as yet if ye lived
like Tartars in a Cart (as I fear ye must die in one) your home could not be
more uncertain. To day at Wapping, and to morrow you appear again upon
Mill-bank (like a Duck that Dives at this end of the Pond, and rises
unexpectedly at the other) I do not think Pythagoras his Soul e're changed so
many dwellings as you have done within these two years


Why, what then, Colonel? Soldiers must remove their Tents sometimes, Alexander
the Great did it a thousand times


Nine hundred, Cutter, you are but a Dunce in Story;
But what is all this to the matter, Noble Colonel?
You run a Wool-gathering like a zealous Teacher;
Where Is the use of Consolation that you promised us?

Why thou shall have it, little Worm, for these Damned Pills begin to make me
horrible sick, and are not like to allow of long Digressions; Thus briefly
then, as befits a man in my case

When my brother the Merchant went into Afrique, to follow his great Trade
there --


How of Devil could he follow it? why he had quite lost his memory; I knew him
when he was fain to carry his own Name in Writing about him for fear lest he
should forget it


Oh his man John, you know, did all, yet still he would go about with old John,
and thought if he did Go, he did his business himself; well, when he went he
left his Daughter with a Portion of five thousand pounds to my Tuition, and if
she married without my consent, she was to have but a thousand of it. When he
was gone two years he died --


He did a little forget himself methinks, when he left the Estate in your
hands, Colonel


Hold your tongue, Captain Coxcomb; now the case is this; ye shall give me a
thousand pounds for my interest and favor in this business, settle the rest
upon her, and her children, or me and mine, if she have none (do you mark me? for
I will not have one penny of the Principal pass through such glewy Fingers)
upon these terms I Will marry her to one of you; Always provided though, that he
whom she shall choose (for she shall have as fair a choice as can be between
two such fellows) shall give me good assurances of living afterward like a
Gentleman, as befits her husband, and cast off the to others company


The Conditions may be admitted of, though if I have her, she will have no ill
bargain on it when the King comes home; but how, Colonel, if she should prove a
foolish fantastical Wench, and refuse to marry either of us


Why! then she shall never have my consent to marry any body; and she will be
hanged, I think, first in the Friar's Rope, ere she turn Nun


I Will be a Carthusian an she do!


If It were not for Chastity and Obedience thou might be so; their the other
Vow of never carrying any money about them, thou have kept from thy youth
upwards


I Will have her; I Am the better Scholar; and we are both equal Soldiers, I Am
sure


Thou, Captain Bobadil? what with that Ember-week face of thine? that Rasor of
thy Nose? thou look as if thou had never been fed since thou suck'st thy
mothers milk. Thy cheeks begin to fall into thy mouth, that thou might eat
them. Why thou very Lath, with a thing cut like a face at Top, and a slit at
bottom. I am a man have served my King and Country, a person of Honor, Dogbolt,
and a Colonel


Yes, as Priests are made now a days, a Colonel made by thine own self. I must
confess thus much of thy good parts, thou 'rt beholding to no body but thy self
for what thou art. Thou a Soldier? Did not I see thee once in a quarrel at
Nine-pins behind Sodom-lane disarmed with one of the pins? Alas, good Cutter!
there is difference, as I take it, betwixt the clattering of Swords and
Quart-pots, the effusion of Blood and Claret Wine --


(What a Barking little Curr's this?)


The smoke of Guns and Tobacco -- nor can you, Cutter, fight the better,
because you have beat an old Bawd or a Drawer; besides, what parts have thou?
Have thou Scholarship enough to make a Brewers Clark? Can thou read the
Bible? I Am sure thou have not; can thou write more than thine own name, and
that in such vile Characters, that most men take 'em for Arabian Pot-hooks!
Do thou not live, Cutter, in the Chymaerian darkness of Ignorance


Cymmerian, Captain, prithee let it be Cymmerian!


I; I know some will have it so; but by this light I always called Chymaerian!


O brave Scholar! has the Colonel caught you in false Latin, you dunce you?
you would even as good stick to your Captainship; and that you may thank me for,
you ungrateful Pimp you, was not I the first that ever called you so? and said
you had served stoutly in my Regiment at Newberry


Thy Regiment? -- well! leave your quarrelling, Baboons, and try your fortunes
fairly; I begin to be very very sick, I Will leave you, and send in my Niece to
intertain you, upon my life, if you quarrel any more, As great Soldiers as you
are, I Will have you Cashiered for ever out of this Garrison o'mine, look to it.


Come Cutter, we would even better play fair play with one another, than lose all
to a third. Let Us draw Cuts who shall accost her first when she comes in, and
the the other void the room for a little while


Agreed! you may thank the Colonel for coming off so easily; you know well
enough I dare not offend him at such a time as this


The longest first --


Mine! Od's my life! here she is already!


Not choose amiss? indeed I must do, Uncle,
If I should choose again; especially,
If I should do it out of your drinking company;
Though I have seen these fellows here, I think
A hundred times, yet I so much despise 'em,
I never asked their names: But I must speak to 'em now. My Uncle, Gentlemen,
will wait upon you presently again, and sent me hither to desire your patience


Patience, Madam, will be no Virtue requisite for us, whilst you are pleased to
stay here; Ha, ha! Cutter! that lit pretty pat 'ifaith for a beginning,


Is your friend going, Sir?


Friend, Madam? -- (I hope I shall be even with him presently) he is a merry
fellow that your Uncle and I divert our selves withal


What is he? pray Sir.


That Is something difficult to tell you, Madam; But he has been all things. He
was a Scholar once, and since a Merchant, but broke the first half year; after
that he served a Justice of Peace, and from thence turned a kind of Solicitor
at Goldsmithshall; h'as a pretty Smattering too in Poetry, and would have been
my Lady Protectres's Poet; He writ once a Copy in praise of her Beauty, but her
Highness gave him for it but an old Half-crown piece in Gold, which she had
hoorded up before these troubles, and that discouraged him from any further
Applications to the Court. Since that, h'as been a little Agitator for the
Cavalier party, and drew in one of the 'Prentices that were hanged lately; He Is
a good ingenious fellow, that is the truth on it, and a pleasant Droll when h'as
got a cup of Wine in his pate, which your Uncle and I supply him with; but for
matters that concern the King neither of us trust him. Not that I can say h'as
betrayed any body, but he is so indigent a Varlet, that I Am afraid he would sell
his Soul to Oliver for a Noble. But Madam, what a pox should we talk any more
of that Mole-catcher? (Now I Am out again -- I am so used only to ranting
Whores, that an honest Gentlewoman puts me to a Nonplus!


Why, my Uncle recommended him to me, Sir, as a Person of Quality, and of the
same Condition with your self, only that you had been a Colonel of Foot, and
he a Captain of Horse in his Majesty's Service


You know your Uncle's Drolling humor, Madam; he thought there was no danger in
the Raillerie, and that you would quickly find out what he was; Here he comes
again,


Madam, my Noble friend your Uncle has been pleased to honor me so far with his
good Opinion, as to allow me the liberty to kiss your hands


You Are welcome, Sir, but pray, Sir, give me leave
Before you enter into farther Complement
To ask one question of you.

I shall resolve you, Madam, with that truth
Which may, I hope, invite you to believe me
In what I Am to say afterward.

It Is to tell me your friends Name, Sir, and his Quality, which, though I Have
seen him often, I am yet ignorant of: I suppose him to be some honorable person,
who has eminently served the King in the late Wars


It Is a shrewd discerning Wench, she has hit me


They call him Colonel Cutter, but to deal faithfully with you, Madam, he is no
more a Colonel than you are a Major General


Ha! sure I mistake the Rogue!


He never served his King, not he, no more than he does his Maker; It Is true,
h'as drunk his Health as often as any man, upon other men's charges, and he was
for a little while, I think, a kind of Hector, 'till he was soundly beaten one
day, and dragged about the room, like old Hector of Troy about the Town


What does this Dog mean, trow?


Once indeed he was very low for almost a twelvemonth, and had neither money
enough to hire a Barber, nor buy Sizars, and then he wore a Beard (he said) for
King Charles; he is now in pretty good clothes, but would you saw the furniture
of his Chamber! marry half a Chair, an Earthen Chamberpot without an Ear, and
the bottom of an Ink-horn for a Candle-stick, the rest is broken foul
Tobacco-pipes, and a dozen of Gally-pots with Sawfe in 'em


Was there ever such a cursed Villain!


H'as been a known Cheat about the Town these twenty years.


What does my Uncle mean to keep him company, if he be such a one?


Why he is infatuated, I think! I have warned him on it a thousand times; he has
some wit (to give the devil his due) and that it is makes us endure him, but
however I Would advise your Uncle to be a a little more cautious how he talks
before him of State matters, for he is shrewdly wronged if he be n't Cromwell's
Agent for all the Taverns between Kings-street and the Devil at Temple Bar,
indeed he is a kind of Resident in 'em


Flesh and blood can bear no longer -- Worm, you are a stinking, lying,
perjured, damned Villain; and if I do not bring you, Madam, his Nose and both
his Ears, and lay 'em at your feet here before night, may the Pillory and the
Pox take mine* till then, suspend your judgment.


Nay, you are both even; just such an excellent Character did he bestow on you;
Why, thou vile Wretch

Go to the Stews, the Gaol, and there make love,
Thou Wilt find none there but such as will scorn thee!

Why here is brave work in faith! I have carried it swimmingly, I Will even go steal
away and drink a dozen before I venture to think one thought of the business.


Go cursed race, which stick your loathsome crimes
Upon the Honorable Cause and Patty;
And to the Noble Loyal Sufferers,
A worser suffering add of Hate and Infamy.
Go to the Robbers and the Parricides,
And fix your Spots upon their Painted Vizards,
Not on the Native face of Innocence,
It Is you retard that Industry by which
Our Country would recover from this sickness;
Which, whilst it fears the eruption of such Ulcers,
Keeps a Disease tormenting it within,
But if kind Heaven please to restore our Health,
When once the great Physician shall return,
He quickly will I hope restore our Beauty.

I See it is no small part of policy
To keep some little Spies in an Enemies quarters:
The Parliament had reason --
I would not for five hundred pounds but have corrupted my Cousin Lucia's Maid;
and yet it costs me nothing but Sack-possets, and Wine, and Sugar when her
Mistress is a bed, and tawd'ry Ribbonds, or fine Trimmed Gloves sometimes, and
once I think a pair of Counterfeit Rubie Pendants That cost me half a Crown.
The poor Wench loves Died Glass like any Indian, for a Diamond Bob I Would have her
Madenhead if I were a Man and she a Maid. If her Mistress did but talk in her
sleep sometimes of my conscience she would sit up all night and watch her, only to
tell me in the morning what she said; It Is the prettiest diligent Wretch in her
Calling, now she has undertaken't

Her intelligence just now was very good, and
May be of consequence; That young Truman is
Stolen up the back way into my Cousin's Chamber.
These are your grave Maids that study Romances, and will be all Mandanas and
Cassandras, and never spit but by the Rules of Honor; Oh, here she comes, I
hope, with fresh intelligence from the Foes Rendevouz


Ha, ha, ha! for the love of goodness hold me, or I shall fall down with
laughing, ha, ha, ha! It Is the best humor -- no -- I cannot tell it you for
laughing -- ha, ha, ha! the prettiest sport, ha, ha, ha


Why, thou have not seen him lie with her, have thou?
The Wench is mad; prithee what is it?

Why (he, hei, ha!) My Mistress sits by her Servant in a long Veil that covers
her from Top to Toe, and says not one word to him, because of the Oath you know
that the old man forced his son to take after your Father had forbid him the
house, and he talks half an hour, like an Ass as he is, all alone, and looks
upon her hand all the while, and kisses it, But that which makes me die with
laughing at the conceit (ha, ha, ha!) is, that when he asks her any thing, she
goes to the Table, and writes her answer, you never saw such an innocent
Puppet-play


Dear Jane (kiss me, Jane,) how shall I do to see 'em?


Why, Madam, I Will go look the key of my Mistress Closet above, that looks into
her Chamber, where you may see all, and not be seen


Why that is as good as the trick of the Veil; do, dear Jane, quickly, 'twill
make us excellent sport at night, and we will fuddle our Noses together, shall we,
dear Jane


I, dear Madam! I Will go seek out the key.


It Is strange, if this trick of my Cousins should beget no trick of mine, That
would be pitiful dull doings


Here comes another of her Servants; a young, rich, fantastical Fop, that would
be a Wit, and has got a new way of being so; he scorns to speak any thing
that is common, and finds out some impertinent similitude for every thing, The
Devil I think cannot find out one for him. This Coxcomb has so little Brains
too, as to make me the Confident of his Amors, I Will thank him for his
Confidence ere I have done with him


Whofe here? O Madam! is your father out of his Metaphorical Grave yet? you
understand my meaning, my dear Confident? you are a Wit


Like what, Mr. Puny?


Why -- like -- me!


That Is right your way, Mr. Puny, its an odd similitude.


But where is your father little Queen of Diamonds? is he extant? I long like a
Woman big with Twins to speak with him


You cannot now possibly, There was never any Creature so sick with a disease as
he is with Physic, to day, the Doctor and the 'Pothecarie's with him; and will
let no body come in. But, Mr. Puny, I have words of comfort for you


What, my dear Quenn of Sheba! and I have Ophir for thee if thou have.


Why your Rival is forbid our house, and has sworn to his father never to see
or hear your Mistress more


I knew that yesterday as well as I knew my Credo, but I Am the very Jew of
Malta if she did not use me since that, worse than I Would use a rotten Apple


Why that cannot be, Brother Wit, why that were uncivilly done of her!


O hang her, Queen of Fairies, (I Am all for Queens to day I think) she cares
much for that; No, that Assyrian Crocodile Truman is still swimming in her
praecordiums, but I Will so ferret him out, I Will beat him as a Bloomsbury Whore
beats Hemp; I Will spoil his Grave Dominical Postures; I Will make him sneak, and
look like a door off the hinges


That Is hard! but he deserves it truly, if he strive to Annihilate.


Why well said, Sister Wit, now thou speak oddly too!


Well, without wit or foolery, Mr. Puny, what will you give me, if this night,
this very improbable night, I make you Marry my Cousin Lucia


Thou talk like Medusa's head, thou astonishest me.


Well, in plain language as befits a Bargain; there is Pen and Inck in the next
Chamber, give but a Bill under your hand to pay me five hundred pounds in Gold
(upon forfeiture of a thousand if you fail) within an hour after the business
is done, and I Will be bound Body for Body my Cousin Lucia shall be your Wife this
night; if I deceive you, your Bond will do you no hurt, if, I do not, consider
a little beforehand, whether the Work deserves the Reward, and do as you think
fit


There shall be no more considering than in a Hasty Pudding; I Will write it an'
you will, in Shorthand, to dispatch immediately, and presently go put five
hundred Mari-golds in a purse for you, Come away like an Arrow out of a
Scythian Bow


I Will do your business for you, I Will warrant you; Allons Mon-Cher.


Now I have thee at the place, where thou affronted'st me, here will I cut thy
throat


You Will be hanged first.


No by this light.


You Will be hanged after then.


Not so neither; for I Will hew thee into so many morsels, that the Crowner shall
not be able to give his Verdict whether 'twas the Body of a Man or of a Beast,
as thou art. Thou shall be mince-meat, Worm, within this hour


He was a Coward once, nor have I ever heard one syllable since of his
Reformation, he shall not daunt me


Come on; I Will send thee presently to Erebus


Have at you, Cutter, an' thou had as many lives as are in Plutarch, I Would make
an end of them all


Come on, Miscreant.


Do, do! strike an' thou dare.


Coward, I Will give thee the advantage of the first push, Coward.


I scorn to take any thing of thee, Jew.


If thou dare not strike first, thou submitt'ft, and I give thee thy life.


Remember, Cutter, you were treacherous first to me, and therefore must begin.
Come, pox upon it, this quarrel will cost us quarts of Wine a piece before the
Treaty of Peace be ended


Here Is company coming in; I Will hear of no Treaties, Worm, we will fight it out.


Five hundred neat Gentlemen-like twenty-shilling


Why how now Panims? fighting like two Seafish in the Map? Why how now my
little Gallimaufry, my Oleopodrido of Arts and Arms; Hold the feirce Gudgings


'Ods my life, Puny, let us go in again; that is the only way to part 'em.


Do, do! kill one another and be hanged like Ropes of Onyons.


At your command? no, Puny! I Will be forced by no man; put up, Worm; we will fight
for no man's pleasure but our own


Agreed! I will not make sport with murdering any man, an' he were a Turk.


Why now ye speak like the Pacifique Sea; we will to the King's Poleanon, and
drink all into Pylados again; we will drink up a whole Vessel there to
Redintegration, and that so big, that the Tun of Heidelberg shall seem but a
Barel of Pickled Oisters to it; mean time, thou pretty little Smith of my good
fortune, beat hard upon the Anvil of your Plot, I Will go and provide the
Spankers.


Your Cousin, Mrs. Aurelia, has abused us most irreverently.


Why what is the matter?


Your father recommended us two as Suitors to her.


And she would have none of you? What a foolish Girl it is, to stand in her own light
so


Nay, that is not all, but she used us worse than if we'd been the veriest
Rogues upon the face of the whole Earth


That Is a little thought too much, but 'twas safer erring of that hand.


I, we are like to get much, I see, by complaining to you.


Ha, ha, ha! Here Is the key of the Closet, go up softly, Madam, ha, ha, ha! and
make no noise, dear Madam, I must be gone


Why does this little Foppitee laugh always? it is such a Ninny that she betrays
her Mistress, and thinks she does no hurt at all, no, not she; well, wretched
Lovers, come along with me now, (but softly upon your lives, as you would steal
to a Mistress through her Mothers Chamber) and I Will show you this severe
Penelope, locked up alone in a Chamber with your Rival


As softly as Snow falls.


Or Vapors rise.


What are you Punish too with your Similitudes? Mum -- not a word -- pull off
your shoes at bottom of the stairs, and follovv me


Why should her cruel Uncle seek to oppose
A Love in all respects so good and equal?
He has some wicked end in it, and deserves
To be deceived!

Deceived? pray mark that Madam.

She is gone in to see if things be ripe yet
To make our last attempt upon her Uncle;
If our Plot fail --

A Plot 'ifaith, and I shall Counter-plot ye.

In spite of our vvorst Enemies, our kindred,
And a rash Oath that is cancelled in the making,
We will pursue our Loves to the last point,
And buy that Paradise though 't be with Martyrdom!

She Is come, methinks I see her through her Veil;
She Is naked in my heart with all her Beauties.

Thou have a Bawdy heart I Will warrant thee.


Hold your peace, Coxcomb.


That has, I think, taken an Oath
Quite contrary to mine, never to see
Any thing else!
He Is extreme sick, and thinks he shall die,


What can this mean? and


Ah, Lord! my poor Master! Mrs. Aurelia, Mrs. Aurelia.


Here, what is the business?


Oh Lord! the saddest accident.


For the love of Heaven speak quickly.


I cannot speak for weeping; my poor Master's poisoned.


Poisoned? how prithee, and by whom?


Why by the strangest Accident, Mistress.

The Doctor prescribed one what dee' call it with a hard name, and that
careless Rogue the 'Pothecaries man (mistaking one Glass for another that stood
by it) put in another what dee' call it, that is a mortal poison


Oh then it is plain, this was the Plot they talked of; ye heard, Gentlemen,
what they said; pray follow me and bear witness.


Undoubtedly they had a hand in it; we shall be brought to swear against them,
Worm


I Will swear what I heard, and what I heard not but I Will hang 'em. I see I shall
be revenged of that proud Tit; but it grieves me for the Colonel


Oh! I have vomited out all my guts, and all my entrails --


Oh my dear Father!


I Am going, daughter -- have ye sent the pocky Doctor and the plaguey 'Pothecary
to a Justice of Peace to be examined


Yes, Sir, your Worship's Steward and the Constable are gone with 'em; does
your Worship think they did it out of malice, and not by a mistake? if I had
thought they did, I Would a hanged 'em presently, that you might have seen it done
before you died


Huh, huh, huh! I think that Rogue the Doctor did it, because I beat him
the other day in our drinking! huh, huh, huh


No, Sir, (O my dear father) no, Sir, you little think who were the Contrivers
of your murder, even my Cousin Luce and her Gallant -- Oh Lord -- it is
discovered by a miraculous providence -- they are both together in her Chamber
now, and there we overheard 'em as it pleased -- these two Gentlemen heard 'em
as well as I --


Can they be such Monsters? Oh! I Am as hot as Lucifer -- Oh -- Oh --! what did
you hear them say? -- Oh my stomach


Why that they had a Plot --


And that the Doctor and 'Pothecary had done it very well.


I and your Niece asked if he thought the Poison were strong enough.


There never was such an Impudence!


How murder will out! I always thought, fellow Ralph, your Mistress Lucia was
naught with that young smooth-faced Varlet; do you remember, Ralph, what I told
you in the Butteries once


Here she comes! O Impudence!


Oh! Oh! Oh! -- go all aside a little, and let me speak with her alone. Come
hither, Niece -- Oh! Oh --! you see by what accident 'thas pleased -- huh --
huh -- huh -- to take away your loving Uncle, Niece! huh: --


I see it, Sir, with that grief which your misfortune and mine in the loss of
you does require


There Is a devil for you; but, Captain,


No, but I love to strike home when, I do a business, I Am for through-stich;
I Am through paced, what a pox should a man stand mincing


I hope, Sir, and have faith, that you will recover!
But, Sir, because the danger's too apparent,
And who (alas) knows how `Heaven may dispose of you? before it grow too late
(after your blessing) I humbly beg one Boon upon my knees


What is it (rise up Niece) Oh -- I can deny you nothing at this time sure!


It is (I wo' not rise, Sir, till you grant it)
That since the love 'twixt Truman and my self
Has been so sixth, and like our fortunes equal,
Ye would be pleased to sign before your death,
The confirmation of that Love, our Contract,
And when your Soul shall meet above, my fathers,
As soon as he has bid you welcome thither,
He Will thank you for this goodness to his daughter;
I do conjure you, Sir, by his memory!
By all your hopes of happiness hereafter!
In a better world! and all your dearest wishes of happiness for those whom ye
love most, and leave behind you here


You have deserved so well of me Niece, that it is impossible to deny you any
thing; where is gentle Mr. Truman


In the next room, Sir, waiting on your will
As on the Sentence of his life and death too.

Oh -- I Am very sick -- pray bring him in.


A thousand Angels guard your life, Sir!
Or if you die, carry you up to heaven.

Was there ever such a young dissembling Witch?


Here Is Woman in perfection!
The Devil's in their tails and in their tongues!
Their possessed both ways!

Will* Ralph, is Jeremy there too? be ready when I speak to you.


Our prayers are heard, it is as we wished, dear Lucia, Oh this blessed hour!


Take him and carry him up to the Green Chamber -- Oh my belly -- lock him in
sure there, till you see what becomes of me; if I do die, he and his Mistress
shall have but an ill Match of it at Tyburn. Oh my Guts -- lock up Luce too in
her Chamber


What do ye mean, Gentlemen? are ye mad?


We mean to lock you up safe, Sir, for a great Jewel as you are!


Pray hear me all.


Away with 'em.


How do you, Sir? I hope you may o're-come it, your Natures strong, Sir.


No, it is impossible; and yet I find a little ease, but it is but a flash --
Aurelia -- Oh there it wrings me again -- fetch me the Cordial-glass in the
Cabinet window, and the little Prayer Book; I would fain repent, but it comes
so hardly -- I am very unfit to die, if it would please Heaven -- so, set down
the Glass -- there -- give me --


The Prayer Book, Sir, 's all moldy, I must wipe it first.


Lay it down too -- so -- it begins t'asswage a little -- there lay down the
Book; 'twill but trouble my Brains now I Am a dying


Here Is the Widow, Sir, without, and Mrs. Tabitha her daughter, they have heard
of your misfortune, and have brought Mr. Knock-down to comfort you


How? everlasting Knock-down! will they trouble a Man thus when he is a dying?
Sirrah! Blockhead! let in Joseph Knock-down, and I Will send thee to Heaven before
me; I have but an hour or two to live perhaps, and that is not enough for him
I Am sure to preach in


Shall Mrs. Barebottle come in, Sir?


That Is a She Knock-down too; well, let her come in -- huh! huh! huh! I must
bear all things patiently now; but Sirrah, Rogue! take heed of Joseph
Knock-down, thou shall not live with ears if Joseph Knock-down enter


How de' you Neighbor Colonel? how is it? take comfort.


Cut off in the flower of my age, Widow.


Why, Man's life is but a Flower, Mr. Jolly, and the Flower withers, and Man
withers, as Mr. Knock-down observed last Sabbath Day at Evening Exercise; But,
Neighbor, you are past the Flower, you are grown old as well as I --


In The very flower; that damned Quack-salver --


Me-thoughts he was the ugliest fellow, Mother,
And they say he is a Papish too, forsooth.

I never liked a Doctor with a Red Nose; my Husband was wont to say -- how do
you, Mrs. Aurelia? comfort your self, we must all die sooner or later; to day
here, to morrow gone


Oh the torture of such a tongue! would I were dead already, and this my
Funeral Sermon


Alas poor man! his tongue I warrant ye is hot as passes; you have a better
memory than I, Tabitha, tell him what Mr. Knock-down said was a Saints duty in
tormenting sicknesses, now Poison's a great tormentor


Oh! Oh! -- this additional Poison will certainly make an end of me!


Why seek for spiritual Incomes, Mr. Colonel; I Will tell you what my Husband
Barebottle was wont to observe (and he was a Colonel too) he never sought for
Incomes but he had some Blessing followed immediately; once he sought for em in
Hartfordshire, and the next day he took as many Horses and Arms in the Country
as served to raise three Troops; another time he sought for 'em in
Bucklersbury, and three days after a friend of his, that he owed five hundred
pounds too, was hanged for a Malignant, and the Debt forgiven him by the
Parliament; a third time he sought for 'em in Hartfordshire --


No, Mother, 'twas in VVorcester-shire, forsooth.


I, Child, it was indeed in VVorcester-shire; and within two months after the
Dean of VVorcester's Estate fell to him


He sought for 'em once out of my Estate too, I thank him; Oh my head!


Why truly, Neighbor Colonel, he had that but for his Penny, and would have
had but a hard Bargain of it, if he had not by a friends means of the Council
hooked in two thousand pounds of his Arrears


For shame let us relieve him; Colonel, you said you had a mind to settle some
affairs of your Estate with me, and Captain Worm here


I Will leave you then for a while, pray send for me, Neighbor, when you have a
mind to it Heaven strengthen you; come, Tabitha


Aurelia, go out with them, and leave us three together for half an hour. Will,
and reach me the Cordial; I begin to hope that my extreme violent fit of
Vomiting and Purging has wrought out all the Poison, and saved my life -- my
Pain's almost quite gone, but I Am so sore and faint -- give me the Glass


What d' you mean, Colonel? you will not dote, I hope, now you are dying? drink I
know not what there, made by a Doctor and a 'Pothecary? Drink a cup of Sack,
Man; healing Sack; you will find your old Antidote best


H'as reason, Colonel, it agrees best with your nature; it is good to recover
your strength -- as for the danger, that is past, I Am confident, already


Do thou think so, honest Cutter? fetch him a Bottle of Sack, Will, for that
news; I Will drink a little my self, one little Beerglass


Poor creature! he would try all ways to live!


Why if I do die, Cutter, a Glass of Sack will do me no hurt I hope; I do not
intend to die the Whining way, like a Girl that is afraid to lead Apes in Hell
-- So,


Let Us drink, let us drink, whilst breath we have;
You Will find but cold, but cold drinking in the Grave.

A Catch 'ifaith! Boy, go down, Boy, go down,
And fill us the other quart,
That we may drink the Colonel's health

That we may drink the Colonel's health

Before that we do part.

Why do thou frown, thou arrant Clown?
Hey boys -- Tope --

Why this is very cheerly! pray let us have the Catch that we made to other night
against the Doctor


Away with it, Cutter; hum --
Come fill us the Glass of Sack.

What Health do we lack?

Confusion to the Quack.

Confound him, Confound him,
Diseases all around him.

And fill again the Sack,

That no man may Lack,

Confusion to the Quack,

Confusion to the Quack,
Confound him, Confound him,
Diseases all Around him.

He Is a kind of Grave-maker,

A Urinal Shaker,

A wretched Groat-taker,

A stinking close-Stool raker,

He Is a Quack that is worse than a Quaker.

He Is a Quack, etc.

Hey, Boys -- Gingo --

Give me the Glass,

I Will venture once more what e're come on it, here is a Health to the Royal
Travailer, and so Finis Coronat


Come on Boys, Vivat; have at you again then.
Now a Pox on the Poll, of old Politic Noll.

We Will drink till we bring,
In Triumph back the King.

May he Live till he see,
Old Noll upon a Tree.

And many such as he.

May he Live till, etc.

I Am very Sick again;

help me into my Bed; rest you merry, Gentlemen.


Nay, we will go in with him, Captain, he shall not die this bout.


It Is pity but he should, he dos't so bravely; come along then, kiss me,
Cutter; is not this better than quarrelling


May he live till he see, etc.
Hey for Fiddlers now!

It Is true, Aurelia, the Story they all agree in; 'twas nothing but a simple
Plot of the two Lovers to put me in fear of death, in hope to work then upon my
good Nature, or my Conscience, and Quack conspired with them out of revenge;
'Twas a cursed Rogue though to give me such an unmerciful Dose of Scammony! It
might have proved but an ill jest; but however, I will not be a loser by the
business, ere I have done with it


Methinks there might be something extracted out of it.


Why so there shall; I Will pretend, Aurelia, to be still desperately sick, and
that I was really poisoned, no man will blame me after that, for whatsoever I
do with my Niece. But that is not all, I will be mightily troubled in
Conscience, send for the Widow, and be converted by her, that will win her
heart, joined with the hopes of my swallowing Lucia's portion


For that point I Will assist you, Sir, Assure her that my Cousin Lucia is married
privately this afternoon to Mr. Puny


I would she were, Wench, (for thine and my sake) her Portion would be
forfeited then indeed, and she would have no great need often, for that Fop's
very rich


Well, Sir, I Will bring sufficient proofs of that, to satisfy the Widow, and
that is all you require; be pleased to let the secret of the business rest with
me yet a while, to morrow you shall know it. But for my own part, Sir, if I were
in your place, I Would rather patiently lose my Estate for ever, than take it again
with her


Oh! hold your self contented, good frank-hearted Aurelia; would I were to
marry such a one every week these two years: see how we differ now


Bless us! what humming and hawing will be in this house! what preaching, and
houling, and fasting, and eating among the Saints! Their first pious work will
be to banish Fletcher and Ben Johnson out of the Parlour, and bring in their
rooms Martin Mar-Prelate, and Posies of Holy Hony-suckles, and a Sawf-box for a
Wounded Conscience, and a Bundle of Grapes from Canaan. I cannot abide 'em; but
I Will break my sister Tabitha's heart within a month one way or other. But, Sir,
suppose the King should come in again, (as I hope he will for all these
Villains) and you have your own again of course, you would be very proud of a
Soap-boylers Widow then in Hide-park, Sir


Oh! then the Bishops will come in too, and she will away to New England; well,
this does not do my business; I Will about it, and send for her.


And I Will about mine; Ralph, did you speak to Mr. Puny to meet me an hour hence
at the back-dore in the Garden? he must not know the estate the house is in yet


Yes, forsooth, he bad me tell you, he would no more fail you than the Sun fails
Barnaby-day, I know not what he means by it, but he charged me to tell you so,
and he would bring (forsooth) his Regiment of five hundred. He Is a mad man, I
think


Well, did you speak to Mr. Soaker to stay within too, the little Deacon that
uses to drink with Will and you


Yes, forsooth, he is in the Buttery.


Pray Heaven he don't forget my Instructions there! But first I have a little
trick for my Lovers to begin withal, they shall have twenty more before I have
done with 'em.


The Veil of this mistake will soon be cast away, I would I could remove
Lucia's as easily, and see her face again, as fair, as shortly our Innocence
will appear

But if my angry father come to know our late Intelligence in this unlucky
business, though we have fulfilled the Letter of his Will, that which can
satisfy a Lover's Conscience, will hardly do so to an old man's Passion; Ye
Heavenly Powers, or take away my life, or give me quickly that for which I
only am content to keep it


Ha! I did but speak just now of Heavenly powers,
And my blessed Angel enters, sure they have
Heard me, and promise what I prayed for.
My dear Lucia, I thought you would been a kind of prisoner too.
She Is kinder too than she was wont to be;
My prayers are heard and granted, I Am confirmed in it.
By my Maid's means I have gotten Keys both of my

Yours, Lucia.

Thou do not know me, Lucia,
And have forgot thy self: I am amazed.
Stay, here is a Postscript.
(Burn this Paper as soon as you have read it.)
Burn it? yes, would I had don't before,
May all remembrance of thee perish with thee,
Unhappy paper!
Thy very ashes sure will not be innocent,
But fly about and hurt some chaste man's eyes,
As they do mine.
Oh, Lucia, this I thought of all misfortunes
Would never have befaln me, to see thee
Forget the ways of Virtue and of Honor.
I little thought to see upon our love,
That flourished with so sweet and fresh a Beauty,
The slimy traces of that Serpent, Lust.
What Devil has poisoned her? I know not what to say to her.
Go, Lucia, retire, prithee, to thy Chamber,
And call thy wandering Virtue home again,
It is not yet far gone, but call it quickly,
It Is in a dangerous way; I will forget thy error,
And spend this night in prayers that Heaven may do so.
Would she have had me been mine own Adulterer?
Before my Marriage? -- Oh lust -- Oh frailty --
Where in all human nature shall we miss
The ulcerous fermentations of thy heat,
When thus (alas) we find thee breaking out
Upon the comli'st Visage of perfection?

Pray Heaven, I ha'nt made my foolish Wit stay for me; if he talk with others
of the house before me, I Am undone. Stay, have I my Paper ready? Oh! that is A's
and her G's I Will swear -- Oh! are you come? that is well


It Is almost four of clock and that is the precious hour.

My little Heliogabalus, here I am, Praesto!


You Are always calling me names, Mr. Puny, that is unkindly done to one that is
laboring for you, as I am


I have made more haste hither than a Parson does to a Living of three hundred
and fifty pounds a year


Puny, you are not a man of business I see, that is not the style of business;
Well, I have done, I think, the work for you, it is as odd a Plot as ever you
heard


I like it better, I love odd things.


Why thus then, you know Mr. Truman took an Oath to his father never to see my
Cousin more without his leave


Pish, do I know that a Lawyer loves to take money in Michaelmas Term?


A pies upon you: well, my father has made Lucy swear too never to see Truman
without his consent


Good, there will be a good Bo-peep love.


For all this, thy'r resolved to marry this afternoon, (nay don't interrupt me
with your Fopperies, or I Will be gone) and to save their Oaths (like cunning
Caluists, as all Lovers are) they will be married in a dark room (do you mark me?)
the Minister, Mr. Soaker, is to marry them without Book; and because thei'r
bound not to speak to one another (for that I forgot to tell you) they are to
signify their consent, when he asks 'em, Will you such a one -- by reverences,
and giving their hands; you never heard of such a humor, but their both mad --


Ha! ha! ha! Rare, as Fantastical as a Whirl-gig -- but how come you to know
all this, my little pretty Witch of Lancashire


Why that I Am coming to; her Maid you must know is my Pensioner, and betrays
all Counsels; And to confirm all this to you, here is her last Letter to Truman
about the business, which my Intelligencer has Delivered to me instead of him,
you know her hand, Read it all over to your self


I Will swear by her Foot, this is her Hand, -- hum -- my Uncles sick, and no Body
will be at this Soaker with you -- just at four -- you must not stay long with
me -- (ha, ha, ha!) when it is done and past recovery they will release us of our
Oaths -- hum -- I shall not fail -- yours L. (ha, ha, ha.


Now he knows nothing of the time, for that he should have known by this Letter;
and you conceive my design, I hope? you are not a Wit for nothing


My dear Pythagorean, that I should go in and Marry her instead of him?


Right! thou'st a shrewd reach.


But where is old Soaker all this while?


Why, I have told all this to him, only naming you in all things instead of
Truman; and that 'twas my Contrivance all for my Cosens and your Sake; he is
within at a Call, I Will send for him; whose there? Mary? call hither Mr. Soaker;
I have given him five Pounds, and for so much more he will Marry you to another to
morrow, if you will


I adore thee Queen Solomon; I had rather be Married by such a Plot as this,
than be Nephew to Prester John -- I Will mak't a thousand Spankers


Oh come it is time Mr. Soaker; as soon as you have done leave the Married couple
together, I Will lock this Door upon you, go out at the to'ther, where she will come
in to you


It Is as dark as the Devil's conscience; but the best is, the Parson has a
good Fieri Facies, like a Holiday, that will give some Light


No! there is Light enough to keep you from Stumbling within. Oh! I forgot to
tell you, break a piece of Gold, and give her half, for a proof of the -- do
you understand me


It Is well thought on; but Domine Doctoribus, can you say the Service without
Book are you sure


I warrant you Sir; can you Lie with her without Book afterward?


He Is a Wit too by Juno; all are Wits that have a finger in this Venison pasty.


She Will come, immediately, go in; do not stay above half an hour, Mr. Puny, my
Cozen will be mist else, and all spoiled


I Will warrant you, let us in; dear Learning lead the way.


So, all is sure this way; I Will be with you straight.


So, now the Widdow's gone, I may breathe a little; I believe really that true
Devotion is a great Pleasure, but it is a damned constraint and drudgery
methinks, this Dissimulation of it. I wonder how the new Saints can endure it,
to be always at the work, Day and Night Acting; But great Gain makes every
thing seem easy; And they have, I suppose, good Lusty Recreations in private.
She Is gone, the Little Holy thing, as proud as Lucifer, with the Imagination of
having been the Chosen Instrument of my Conversion from Popery, Prelacy, and
Cavalerism, she is gone to bragg often to Joseph Knock-down, and bring him to
Confirm me. But Cutter, thine was the best Humor that ever was begot in a
Rogues Noddle, to be Converted in an instant, the Inspiration way, by my
example! It may hap to get thee Tabitha


Nay, and I hit just pat upon her way, for though the Mother be a kind of
Brownist, (I know not what the Devil she is indeed) yet Tabitha is of the Fifth
Monarchy Faith, and was wont to go every Sunday a-foot over the Bridge to hear
Mr. Feak, when he was Prisoner in Lambeth house, she has had a Vision too her
self of Horns, and strange things


Pish! Cutter, for the way that is not material, so there be but enough of
Nonsense and Hypocrisy; But Cutter, you must reform your Habit too, a little;
Off with that Sword and Buff and greasy Plume of Ribbons in your Hat. They Will
be back here presently, do it quickly


I Will be changed in an instant, like a Scene, and then I Will fetch 'em to you.


I, there goes one of his Swaggerers; I could have Swagger'd with him once --
Oh! Colonel, you are finely Poisoned, are you not? would I had the Poisoning of
you -- where is my Son Dick? what have you done with him


Mr. Truman. --


True me no more than I true you -- come -- Colonel you are but a Swaggering --
I Will have the Law to Swagger with you, that I will


First leave your Raging; though you should rage like Tamerlain at the Bull,
'twould do no good here


Do you call me names too? I Will have an Action of Scandalum. Well Colonel, since
you provoke me, the Protector shall know what you are, and what you would have
had me done for the King in the time of the last rising


Mr. Truman, I took you for a Person of Honor, and a Friend to his Majesty; I
little thought to hear you speak of betraying a Gentleman to the Protector


Betraying? no Sir, I scorn it as much as you, but I Will let him know what you
are, and so forth, an' you keep my Son from me


Mr. Truman, if you will but hear me patiently, I shall propose a thing that will,
I hope, be good and acceptable both to your Son and you


Say you so Sir? well; but I will not be called Tamerlain.


My Niece, not only by her wicked design to Poison me, but by Marrying her self
without my consent this day to Puny, has (as you know very well, for you were a
witness Sir to my Brother's will) lost all the right she had to a plentiful
Portion. Aurelia shall have that and my Estate, (which now within few days I
shall recover) after my Death; she is not I think Unhandsome, and all that know
her will confess she wants no Wit; with these Qualities, and this Fortune, if
your Son like her, (for though h'as injured me, Sir, I forget that, and
attribute it only to the Enchantments of my Niece) I do so well approve both of
his Birth and Parts, and of that Fortune, which you I think will please to make
him, that I should be extremely glad of the Alliance


Good Colonel, you were always a kind Neighbor and loving Friend to our
Family, and so were we to you, and had respects for you; you know I would have
had Dick marry your Niece, till you declared he should have no Portion with her


For that I had a particular reason, Sir; your Son's above in my House, shall I
call him, Sir, that we may know his mind? I would not have him forced


Pray send for him good Colonel; forced? no, I Will make him do it, I Will warrant
you. Boys must not be their own choosers, Colonel, they must not 'ifaith, they
have their Sympathies and Fiddle-come-saddles in their Brain, and know not what
they would have themselves


Why how now Lucia? how come you from your Chamber?


I hope you did not mean me a Prisoner, Sir, since now you are satisfied
sufficiently that you are not Poisoned


I am not Dead, that is true. But I may thank Heaven, and a strong Constitution
for it; you did your weak endeavors; however, for the honor of our Family, and
for your Father's sake, I Will speak no more of that, but I could wish, for the
security of my Life hereafter, that you would go home to your Husband, for they
say you are married Niece this day without my knowledge -- Nay, -- I Am content,
-- go home to him when you please, you shall have your thousand Pounds


Hark you, Colonel, she should not have a groat of e'em, not a groat; she
cannot recover't by Law, I know the Will


I married Sir? it is the first news I Have heard often.


Nay, leave your pretty Jesuitical Love-tricks to salve an Oath; Mr. Truman,
you may let your Son see her now


I Dick you may see her as much as you please; she is married.


Married?


I married, so I say, Married this afternoon to Mr. Puny.


What do they mean?


And Dick I have got a Wife too for you, you shall have pretty Mrs. Aurelia.


Lucia married?


Her Father and I are agreed of all things; Hark you Dick, she has a brave
Fortune now


Married to Puny?


You shall have her presently.


This afternoon?


Come Dick; there is a Wife for you Dick.


I will not marry, Sir.


What do you say Sir?


I wo' not marry Sir.


Get you out of my sight you Rebel.


Nay, good Mr. Truman.


I Will never acknowledge him for my Son again; I tell you Colonel, he is always
thus with his wo'nots and his Cannots


We have made short work on it; it was a brave quick Parsonides; The little
Skittish Philly got away from me I know not how, like an Eele out of a Basket


Give him a little time Mr. Truman, he is troubled yet at my Nieces marriage,
it will over quickly


Give my Son time, Mr. Jolly? marry come up --


What have you done already? you are a sweet Husband indeed.


Oh! my little Pimp of honor! here, here is the five hundred Marigolds; hold
thy hand Dido -- yonder is my Wife, by Satan; how a Devil did that little
Mephistophilus get hither before me


To her Puny; never conceal the mystery any longer, it is too good a Jest to be
kept close


For your sake I will then, Colonel; Come prithee, Dick, be cheerful. --


I beseech you, -- Sir --


Look you there Colonel, now he should do what I would have him, now he is a
beseeching -- it is the proudest stubborn'st Coxcomb --


And now my noble Uncle -- nay, never Antony.


What would this rude fellow have?


I am drowned in wonder!


'Twas I, my dear Philoclea, that married thee even row in the dark room, like
an amorous Cat; you may remember the Damask Bed by a better Token of Two than a
bowed Philip and Mary


I call Heaven to witness,
Which will protect and justify the Innocent,
I understand not the least word he utters,
But as I took him always for a Fool,
I now do for a Madman.

She Is angry yet to have mistook her Man. It Is true, Sir, all that Mr. Puny
says, I mean for


True, Cousin, then I see it is some conspiracy t'ensnare my Honor and my
Innocence


The Parson, Mr. Soaker, that married 'em is still within.


He Is in the Buttery, shall I call him, Sir?


I, quickly.


It Is the sight of me, no doubt, confounds her with a shame to confess any
thing; It seems that sudden fit of raging lust, that brought her to my Chamber,
could not rest till it was satisfied, it seems I know not what


Mr. Soaker, did you marry my Niece this afternoon to Mr. Puny in the Matted
Chamber


Yes, Sir, I hope your Worship will not be angry, Marriage, your Worship knows, is
honorable


Have thou no conscience neither?


Niece, go in a little, I Will come to you presently and examine this matter
further; Mr. Puny, lead in your wife for shame


Villain, come not near me,
I Will sooner touch a Scorpion or a Viper.

She Is as humerous as a Bel-rope; she need not be so cholerique, I Am sure I
behaved my self like Propria quae maribus


Come in with me, Mr. Puny, I Will teach you how you shall handle her.


Mr. Truman, pray take your son home, and see how you can work upon him there;
speak fairly to him


Speak fairly to my son? I Will see him buried first.


I mean persuade him --


Oh! that is another matter; I will persuade him, Colonel, but if ever I speak
fair to him till he mends his manners -- Come along with me, Jack-sawce, come
home.


I Sir, any whither.


What Is the matter, brother Colonel, are there any broils here?


Why, Sister, my Niece has married without my consent, and so it pleases, it
even pleases Heaven to bestow her Estate upon me


Why, brother, there is a Blessing now already; If you had been a wicked
Cavalier still she would have done her duty, I warrant you, and defrauded you of the
whole Estate; my brother Cutter here is grown the Heavenliest man of the sudden,
it is his work


Sister Barebottle, I must not be called Cutter any more, that is a name of
Cavalero darkness, the Devil was a Cutter from the beginning, my name is now
Abednego, I had a Vision which whispered to me through a Keyhole, Go call thy
self Abednego


The wonderful Vocation of some Vessels!


It is a name that signifies Fiery Furnaces, and Tribulation, and Martyrdom, I
know I am to suffer for the Truth


Not as to death, Brother, if it be his will.


As to death, Sister, but I shall gloriously return.


What, Brother, after death? that were miraculous.


Why the wonder of it is, that it is to be miraculous.


But Miracles are ceased, Brother, in this wicked Age of Cavalerism.


They are not ceased, Brother, nor shall they cease till the Monarchy be
established

I say again I am to return, and to return upon a Purple Dromadary, which
signifies Magistracy, with an Ax in my hand that is called Reformation, and I
am to strike with that Ax upon the Gate of Westminster Hall, and cry, Down
Babylon, and the Building called Westminster Hall is to run away and cast it
self into the River, and then Major General Harrison is to come in Green
sleeves from the North upon a Sky-colour'd Mule, which signifies heavenly
Instruction


Oh the Father! he is as full of Mysteries as an Egg is full of meat.


And he is to have a Trumpet in his mouth as big as a Steeple, and at the
sounding of that Trumpet all the Churches in London are to fall down


O strange, what times shall we see here in poor England!


And then Venner shall march up to us from the West in the figure of a Wave of
the Sea, holding in his hand a Ship that shall be called the Ark of the
Reformed


But when must this be, Brother Abednego?


Why all these things are to be when the Cat of the North has o're-come the
Lion of the South, and when the Mouse of the West has slain the Elephant of the
East. I do hear a silent Voice within me, that bids me rise up presently and
declare these things to the Congregation of the Lovely in Coleman-street.
Tabitha, Tabitha, Tabitha, I call thee thrice, come along with me, Tabitha


There was something of this, as I remember, in my last Vision of Horns the
other day. Holy man! I follow thee; farewell, forsooth, Mother, till anon


Come, let us go in too, Sister.


WHat shall I think henceforth of Womankind?
When I know Lucia was the best of it,
And see her what she is? What are they made of?
Their Love, their Faith, their Souls enslaved to passion!
Nothing at their Command beside their Tears,
And we, vain men, whom such Heat-drops deceive!
Hereafter I will set my self at Liberty,
And if I sigh or grieve, it shall not be
For Love of One, but Pity of all the Sex.

Ha! she will not let me see her sure;
If ever, Lucia, a Veil befitted thee,
It Is now, that thou may hide thy guilty blushes.
If all their malice yet
Have not prevailed on Truman's Constancy,
They Will miss their wicked end, and I shall live still.
I Will go and speak to him.

Forbear, Lucia, for I have made a second Oath, which I shall keep, I hope,
with lesser trouble, never to see thy face more


You were wont, Sir,
To say, you could not live without the sight often.

I; 'twas a good one then.


Has one day spoiled it?


O yes, more than a hundred years of time, made as much more by sorrow, and by
sickness, could e're have done


Pray hear me, Truman:
For never innocent Maid was wronged as I am;
Believe what I shall say to you, and confirm
By all the holiest Vows that can bind Souls.

I have believed those Female tricks too long;
I know thou can speak winningly, but thy Words
Are not what Nature meant them, thy Minds Picture;
I Will believe now what represents it better,
Thine own Hand, and the proof of mine own Eyes.

I know not what you mean; believe my Tears.

They Are idle empty Bubbles.
Raised by the Agitation of thy Passions,
And hollow as thy heart; there is no weight in 'em.
Go thou once, Lucia; Farewell,
Thou that were dearer to me once, than all
The outward things of all the World beside,
Or my own Soul within me, farewell for ever;
Go to thine Husband, and love him better than
Thou did thy Lover.
I never will see the more, nor shall, I fear,
Ere see my self again.

Here me but once.

No, it is enough; Heaven hear thee when thou kneel'st to it.

Will he? he is gone; now all the world has left me,
And I am desolately miserable;
It Is done unkindly, most unkindly, Truman.
Had a blessed Angel come to me and said
That thou were false, I should have sworn it li'd,
And thought that rather fallen than thee.
Go, dear, false man, go seek out a new Mistress;
But when you have talked, and loved, and vowed, and sworn
A little while, take heed of using her
As you do me; no, may your love to her
Be such as mine to you, which all thy injuries
Shall never change, nor death it self abolish.
May she be worthier of your bed than I,
And when the happy course of many years
Shall make you appear old to all but her,
May you in the fair Glass of your fresh Issue
See your own youth again; but I would have 'em
True in their Loves, and kill no innocent Maids;
For me it is no matter; when I Am dead,
My busy soul shall flutter still about him,
'Twill not be else in Heaven; it shall watch
Over his sleeps, and drive away all dreams
That come not with a soft and downy wing;
If any dangers threaten, it shall becken
And call his spirit away, till they be past,
And be more diligent than his Guardian Angel;
And when just Heaven, as I Am assured it will,
Shall clear my Honor and my Innocence,
He Will sigh, I know, and pity my misfortunes,
And blame himself, and curse my false Accusers,
And weep upon my Grave
For my wronged Virtue, and mistaken Truth,
And unjust Death, I ask no more.

'Twas barbarously done to leave her so;
Kneeling and weeping to me; 'twas inhuman;
I Will back and take my leave more civilly,
So as befits one who was once her Worshipper.
She Is gone; why let her go; I feel her still;
I feel the root of her, laboring within
To sprout afresh, but I will pluck it up,
Or tear my heart with 't.
He Is there, Sir, pray let him now resolve you positively what he means to do.


What he means to do, Colonel? that were fine
'Ifaith; if he be my son he shall mean nothing;
Boys must not have their meanings, Colonel:
Let him mean what I mean with a Wennion.

I shall be pressed, I see, by 'em, upon the hateful Subject of a Marriage;
And to fill up the measure of Affliction,
Now I have lost that which I loved, compelled
To take that which I hate.

I will not be troubled, Colonel, with his meanings, if he do not marry her this
very evening (for I Will have none of his Flim-flams and his May-be's) I Will send
for my son Tom from St. John's College (he is a pretty Scholar I can tell you,
Colonel, I have heard him syllogize it with Mr. Soaker in Mood and Figure) and
settle my Estate upon him with her; if he have his Meanings too* and his
Sympathies, I Will disinherit 'em both, and marry the Maid my self, if she can
like me, I have one Tooth yet left, Colonel, and that is a Colt's one


Did I submit to lose the sight of Lucia
Only to save my unfortunate Inheritance,
And can there be imposed a harder Article
For me to boggle at?
Would I had been born some wretched Peasants son,
And never known what Love or Riches were.
Ha -- I Will marry her -- why should I not? if I
Must marry some body,
And hold my Estate by such a slavish Tenure,
Why not her as well as any else?
All Women are alike I see by Lucia,
It Is but resolving to be miserable,
And that is resolved for me by my Destiny.

Well, try him pray, but do it kindly, Sir,
And artificially.

I warrant you; Dick, I Will have you marry Mrs. Aurelia to night.


To night? the warning's short, Sir, and it may be --


Why look you, Colonel, he is at's old look, he is at's May-bees again.


I know not, Sir --


I, and his Know-nots, you shall have him at his Wo' nots presently; Sir -- I
will have you know, Sir --


Nay, good Mr. Truman -- you know not yet what answer he intends to make you.


Be pleased, Sir, to consider --


Look you, Sir, I must consider now, he upbraids his father with the want of
consideration, like a Varlet as he is


What shall I do? why should not I do any thing,
Since all things are indifferent?

I beseech you, Mr. Truman, have but a little patience -- Your father, Sir,
desires to know --


I do not desire him, Colonel, nor never will desire him, I command him upon
the duty of a Child --


Whether you can dispose your self to love and marry my daughter Aurelia, and
if you can, for several reasons we desire it may be presently consummated


Out with it, stubborn Tongue;
I shall obey my father, Sir, in all things.

Ha! what dee' you say, Sir?


This old testy Fool is angry, I think, to have no more occasion given him of
being so


I shall obey you, Sir.


You speak, Sir, like a virtuous Gentleman, the same obedience and resignation,
to a father's will, I found in my Aurelia, and where two such persons meet, the
issue cannot choose but be successful


Ah Dick, my son Dick, he was always the best natured Boy -- he was like his
father in that -- he makes me weep with tenderness, like an old fool as I am --
Thou shall have all my Estate, Dick, I Will put my self to a pension rather than
thou shall want -- go spruse up thy self a little presently, thou art not merry
'Ifaith, Dick, prithee be merry, Dick, and fetch fine Mrs. Aurelia presently to
the little Church behind the Colonel's Garden, Mr. Soaker shall be there
immediately and wait for you at the Porch (we will have it instantly, Colonel,
done, lest the young fool should relapse) come, dear Dick, let us go cheerily on
with the business


What have I said? what am I doing? the best is, it is no matter what I say or
do


I Will see Aurelia shall be ready, and all things on my part within this half
hour


Good, honest, noble Colonel, let me shake you by the hand. Come, dear Dick, we
lose time.


And the Vision told me, sister Tabitha, that this same day, the first of the
seventh month, in the year of Grace 1658. and of Revelation, and Confusion of
Carnal Monarchies the tenth, that we two, who are both holy Vessels, should by
an holy Man be joined together in the holy Bond of sanctified Matrimony


I brother Abednego, but our friends consents --


Heaven is our friend, and, Sister, Heaven puts this into our thoughts; it is,
no doubt, for propagation of the great Mystery; there shall arise from our two
bodies, a great Confounder of Gogmagog, who shall be called the Pestle of
Antichrist, and his children shall inherit the Grapes of Canaan


My mother will be angry, I Am afraid.


Your Mother will rejoice, the Vision says so, sister, the Vision says your
Mother will rejoice; how will it rejoice her righteous heart to see you,
Tabitha, riding behind me upon the Purple Dromedary? I would not for the world
that you should do it, but that we are commanded from above; for to do things
without the aforesaid Command is like unto the building of a Fire without the
Bottom-cake


I I, that it is, he knows.


Now to confirm to you the truth of this Vision, there is to meet us at a
zealous Shoomaker's habitation hard by here, by the command of a Vision too,
our Brother Zephaniah Fats, an Opener of Revelations to the Worthy in Mary
White-chapel, and he is the chosen Vessel to join our hands


I would my Mother knew't; but if that holy man come too by a Vision, I shall
have grace, I hope, not to resist


Sister, let me speak one word of Instruction to yonder Babe.


Oh how my bowels yern!


Sir, is my little Doctor already staying for me at Tom Underleather my
Shoomaker's house


Yes, Sir, but he is in so strange a Habit, that Mr. Underleather's Boy Franck
and I were ready to die with laughing at him


Oh so much the better; go you little piece of a Rogue and get every thing
ready against I come back. Gad --


Oh the Wondrous -- but, Brother Abednego, will you not pronounce this Evening
tide before the Congregation of the Spotless in Coleman-street


The will of the latter Vision is to be fulfilled first, as a Preparatory
Vision; let us not make the Messenger of Mystery, who is sent by a Vision so
far as from Mary White-chapel for our sakes, to stay too long from his lawful
Vocation of Basket-making. Come, Sister Tabitha


Hei, ho! but I will not resist.


Mr. Puny, since you threaten me, I tell you plainly I think my Niece has
undone her self by marrying thee, for though thou have a fair Estate at
present, I Am hainously mistaken if thou be not cheated of it all within
these three years by such Rabbit-suckers as these, that keep thee company, and
like lying sons of the Devil as they are, cry thee up for a Wit, when there is
nothing so unlike, no not any of thy own Similitudes, thy odious Comparisons


The Colonel's raging mad, like a Baker in the Subburbs, when his Oven's
overheated


Good, very good in faith.


I, that was one of 'em; as for her Portion, I thought to have given her a
thousand pounds, but --


O magnanimous Colonel! what a Portion for a Toothpick-maker's daughter!


Good, shoot him thick with similies like Hail-shot.


But now thou shall not have a groat with her.


What not a poor old Harry-Groat that looks as thin as a Poet's Cloak? But
however, my noble Mountain hearted Uncle, I have made her Maidenhead a Cracked
Groat already, and if I have nothing more from her, she shall have nothing more
from me; no, she shall foot Stokins in a Stall for me, or make Childrens Caps
in a Garret fifteen stories high


For that matter (for though thou speak no sense I guess thy brutish
meaning) the Law will allow her honorable Alimony out of your Foolship's
Fortune


And the Law will allow me her Portion too, good Colonel Uncle, you are not too
big to be brought into Westminster Hall; nay, Captain, his Niece uses me worse
too, she will not let me touch the Nail of her little finger, and rails at me
like a Flounder-mouth'd Fish-woman with a face like Billingsgate


What flesh can support such an affected Widgen, who has not a design to cheat
him of something as that Vermin has? well, I shall be able to Live now I hope
as befits a Gentleman, and therefore I Will endure the company of Fopps and
Knaves no longer


Come Colonel, let us go in, and dispute the difference conscienciously over a
Bottle of Sack


I keep no Tavern, Worm; or if I did, thy whole Estate would hardly reach to a
Gill


Colonel, thou art grown Unkind, and art Drunk this afternoon without me.


Without thee, Buffoon? why I tell thee, thou shall never show that Odd,
Pimping, Cheating face of thine within my Doors again, I Will turn away any man of
mine that shall disparage himself to drink with such a fellow as thou art


As I? why what am I? pray? Mighty Colonel!


Thou art or have been every thing that is ill, there is no Scandalous way of
Living, no Vocation of the Devil, that thou have not set up in at one time or
other; Fortune has Whipped thee about through all her streets; Thou 'rt one
that Lives like a Raven, by Providence and Rapin; now thou 'rt feeding upon
that raw young fellow, and do Devour and Kaw him; thou 'rt one that if thou
should by chance go to Bed sober, would write it down in thy Almanac,
for an Unlucky day; sleep is not the Image of Death to thee, unless thou be
Dead drunk; Thou art -- I know not what -- you are any thing, and shall be to
me herafter nothing


This Colonel pisses Vinegar to day.


This is uncivil Language Colonel to an old Camerade, and one of your own party.


My Comrade? of my party thou? or any but the party of the Pick-purses!


This bouncing Bear of a Colonel will break the back of my little Whelp of a
Captain, unless I take him off; come away Captain, I Will firk his back with two
Bum-baylies, till he spew up every Stiver of her Portion


Fare-ye-well, Gentlemen, come not near these Doors if you love your own
Leather, I Will have my Scullions batter you with Bones and Turnips, and the Maids
drown you with Piss-pots, if you do but approach the Windows; these are saucy
Knaves indeed, to come to me for Pounds and Portions.


Poverty, the Pox, an ill Wife, and the Devil go with thee, Colonel.


I vexed him to the Gills, Worm, when I put that bitter Bob of the Baker upon
him


I? is it e'n so? not come to your House? by Jove I Will turn him out of it himself
by a trick that I have


Pish! thou talk as Ravingly as a Costermonger in a Fever.


I Will do it by Jove.


How, prithee, Captain? what does thy Pericranium mean?


Why here I have it, by Jove; I Am ravished with the fancy of it; let me see -- let
me see -- his Brother went seven years ago to Guiny. --


I, but the Merchants say he is Dead long since, and gone to the Blackamores
below


The more Knaves they; he Lives, and I Am the man.


Ha! ha! ha! thou talk like a Sowc'd Hoggs-face.


I knew him very well, and am pretty like him, liker than any of your
Similitudes, Puny; by long Conversation with him, and the Colonel, I know all
passages betwixt 'em; and what his Humor and his Estate was, much better than
he himself, when he was Alive; he was a Stranger thing than any Monster in
Afrique where he Traded


How! prithee Captain? I love these Odd fantastical things as an Alderman loves
Lobsters


Why, you must know, he had quite lost his memory, totally, and yet thought
himself an able man for business, and that he did himself all that was done by
his man John, who went always along with him; like a Dog with a Blind man


Ha! ha! ha! Sublimely fantastical


He carried a Scrowl about him of Memorandums, even of his Daughters and his
Brothers names, and where his House stood; for as I told you, he remembered
nothing; and where his Scrowl failed, John was his remembrancer, we were wont
to call him Remembrancer John


Ha, ha, ha! Rarely exotique! I Will Act that apple John, never was such a John as
I; not John of Gant, or John of Nokes, I will turn Remembrancer John, as round
as a Wedding Ring, ha, ha, ha


Well said! but you must lay aside conceits for a while, and remote fancies.
I Will teach you his humor instantly; now will I and my man John swarthy our faces
over as if that Country's heat had made 'em so, (which will Disguise us
sufficiently) and attire our selves in some strange Habits of those Parts, (I
know not how yet, but we shall see it in Speed's Mapps) and come and take
Possession of our House and Estate


Dear Ovid, let us about thy Metamorphosis.


'Twill be discovered perhaps at last, but however, for the present 'twill
break off his match with the Widow, (which makes him so Proud now) and
therefore it must be done in the twinkling of an Eye, for they say he is to
marry her this Night; if all fail, 'twill be at least a merry 'bout for an
hour, and a mask to the Wedding


Quick, dear Rogue! quick as Precipitation.


I know where we can have Clothes, hard by here; give me ten Pounds to hire 'em,
and come away, but of all things, man John, take heed of being witty


I, that is the Devil on it; well, go; I Will follow you behind like a long Rapier.


If they would allow me but a little time, I could play such a trick with Mr.
Truman, as should smart sorely for the rest of his Life, and be revenged
abundantly on my Cozen, for getting of him from me, when I was such a foolish
Girl three year ago as to be in Love with him

But they would have us married instantly, The Parson stays for us at Church. I
know not what to do -- all must out -- Odds my life he is coming to fetch me
here to Church already


I must go through with it now; I Will marry her,
And live with her according to the forms,
But I will never touch her as a Woman.
She stays for me -- Madam --

Sir.

I cannot out with it -- Madam.

Sir --

Must we go marry, Madam?

Our friends will have it so, it seems.

Why will you marry me? what is there in me
That can deserve your liking? I shall be
The most untoward and ill-favored Husband
That ever took a melting Maid to his Bed;
The faculties of my Soul are all untuned,
And every Glory of my Springing youth
Is fallen into a strange and sudden Winter,
You cannot Love me sure.

Not to Distraction, Sir.

No, nor I you; why should we marry then?
It were a folly, were it not, Aurelia?

Why they say, it is the best marriage, when like is Joined to like; now we
shall make a very even match, for neither you Love me, nor I Love you, and it is
to be hoped we may get Children that will Love neither of us


Nay, by my soul I love you, but alas,
Not in that way that Husbands should their Wives;
I cannot Toy, nor Kiss, nor do I know not what,
And yet I was a Lover, as true a Lover --

Alack a day!

'Twas then, (me-thoughts) the only happiness
To sit and talk, and look upon my Mistress,
Or if she was not by, to think upon her;
Then every Morning, next to my Devotion,
Nay often too (forgive me Heaven) before it,
She slipped into my fancy, and I took it
As a good Omen for the following day;
It was a pretty foolish kind of Life,
An honest, harmless Vanity; but now
The fairest Face moves me no more, than Snow
Or Lillies when I see 'em, and pass by;
And I as soon should deeply fall in Love
With the fresh Scarlet of an Eastern Cloud,
As the Red Lips and Cheeks of any Woman;
I do confess, Aurelia, thou art Fair,
And very Witty, and (I think) Well-natur'd,
But you are a Woman still.

The sight of you Sir,
Makes me not repent at all my being so.

And prithee now, Aurelia, tell me truly,
Are any Women constant in their Vows?
Can they continue a whole Month, a Week,
And never change their faith? Oh! if they could,
They would be excellent things; nay never dissemble;
Are not their Lusts unruly, and to them
Such Tyrants as their Beauties are to us?
Are their tears true, and solid when they weep?

Sure Mr. Truman you ha'nt slept of late,
If we should be married to Night, what would you do for Sleep?

Why? do not married people sleep of Nights?

Yes! yes! alas good innocence.

They have a scurvy Life on it if they don't;
But we will not Live as other people do,
We Will find out some new handsome way of Love,
Some way of Love that few shall imitate,
Yet all admire; for it is a sordid thing,
That Lust should dare to insinuate it self
Into the Marriage Bed; we will get no Children,
The worst of Men and Women can do that;
Besides too, if our Issue should be Female,
They would all Learn to flatter and dissemble,
They would deceive with Promises and Vows
Some simple men, and then prove False and Kill 'em,
Would they not do it, Aurelia?

I, any thing Mr. Truman; but what shall we do Sir, when we are married, pray?


Why! we will live very Lovingly together,
Sometimes we will sit and talk of excellent things,
And laugh at all the Nonsense of the world;
Sometimes we will walk together,
Sometimes we will read, and sometimes eat, and sometimes sleep;
And sometimes pray, and then at last, we will dye,
And go to Heaven together; 'twill be rare!

We may do all this (methinks) and never marry for the matter.


It Is true, we may so!
But since our Parents are resolved upon it,
In such a Circumstance let 'em have their humor.
My father sent me in to Complement,
And keep a Prating here, and play the Fool;
I cannot do it, what should I say, Aurelia?
What do they use to say?

I believe you knew Sir, when you Wooed my Cozen.

I, but those Days are past; they are go for ever,
And nothing else, but Nights are to succeed 'em;
Gone like the faith and truth of Women kind,
And never to be seen again! O Lucia!
Thou wast a woundrous Angel in those days of thy blessed state of Innocence.
There was a Cheek! a Forehead! and an Eye! --
Did you observe her Eye, Aurelia?

O yes Sir! there were very pretty Babies in it.

It was as glorious as the Eye of Heaven;
Like the souls Eye it pierced through every thing;
And then her Hands -- her Hands of Liquid Ivory!
Did she but touch her Lute (the pleasing'st Harmony then upon Earth when she
her self was silent
The subtle motion of her Flying fingers
Taught Music a New art, to take the Sight, as well as Ear.

I, Sir, I! you would best go look her out, and marry her, she has but one Husband
yet


Nay, prithee, good Aurelia be not angry,
For I will never Love or See her more.
I do not say she was more Fair than thou art,
Yet if I did? No, but I wo'not say so!
Only allow me this one short last remembrance of one I loved so long. And now
I think on it, I Will beg a favor of you, you will Laugh at me I know, when you
have heard it, but prithee grant it; it is that you would be Veiled, as Lucia
was of late, for this one day; I would fain marry thee so; It Is an odd foolish
fancy, I confess, But Love and Grief may be allowed sometimes A little Innocent
folly


Good! this Fool will help me I see to cheat himself;
At a dead lift, a little hint will serve me.
I Will do it for him to the Life.

Will you Aurelia?

That Is but a small Compliance; you will have power anon to Command me greater
things


We shall be married very privately;
None but our selves; and that is even best, Aurelia.
Why do I stick here at a Fatal step
That must be made? Aurelia, are you ready?
The Minister stays for us.

I Will but go in and take my Veil, as you Command me Sir; Walk but a few turns in
the Garden, in less than half an hour I Will come to you, ha, ha, ha!


I go, I am Condemned, and must Obey;
The Executioner stays for me at Church.

So, I have her at last, and honest Joseph Knock-down married us, methinks,
with convenient brevity; I have some hold now upon my Estate again (though she,
I confess, be a clog upon it worse than a Mort-gage) that, my good Neighbor
Barebottle left wholly to his wife; almost all the rest of the Incomes upon his
seeking, go to his daughter Tabitha, whom Cutter has got by this time, and
promises me to live like an honest Gentleman hereafter; now he may do so
comfortably and merrily. She married me thus suddenly, like a good Houswife,
purely to save charges; however though, we will have a good Supper for her, and
her eating Tribe; Will, is the Cook a doing according to my directions


Yes, Sir, he is very hard at his business; he is swearing and cursing in the
Kitchen, that your Worship may hear him hither, he will fright my new old Mistress
out of the house


It Is such an over-roasted coxcomb -- bid him be sure to season well the
Venison that came in luckily to day


Troth, Sir, I dare not speak to him now, unless I should put on your Worship's
Armor that lies hid in the Barel below; he would like to have spitted me just now,
like a Goose as I was, for telling him he looked like the Ox that is roasted
whole in St. James's Fair. Who Is there


See who is at door. I shall have some plundered Plate, I hope, to entertain my
friends with, when we come to visit the Truncks with Iron hoops; who is it


Nay, Heaven knows, Sir; two Fiends, I think, to take away the Cook for
swearing. They have thrust in after me


They Will hardly know us at first in these foreign habits.


I Sir, and as the Sun has used us in those hot Countries.


Why, this is my old house here, John; ha, ha! little thought I to see my old
house upon Tower Hill again. Where Is my brother Jolly


They call me Colonel Jolly.


Ha! let me see, A burly man of a


Nay, it is my Master's Worship, Sir, would we were no more altered since our
Travels


It agrees very well -- Save you good brother, you little thought to see me
here again, though I dare say you wished it; stay, let me see, how many years,
John, is it since we went from hence


It Is now seven years, Sir.


Seven? methinks I was here but yesterday, how the what deye-call-it-runs? how
do you call it


The Time, Sir.


I, I, the time, John; what was I saying? I was telling you, brother, that I
had quite forgot you; was I not telling him so, John


Faith we are both quits then; I Will swear I have forgot you; why you were dead five
years ago


Was I? I have quite forgot it; John, was I dead five years ago? my memory fails
me very much of late


We were worse than dead, Sir, we were taken by a barbarous Nation, and there
made slaves; John, quoth he? I was poor John I Am sure; they kept us three whole
years with nothing but Water and Acorns, till we looked like Wicker bottles


What, Sirrah, did your Master look like? I Will teach you to say your Master
looked like what de-ye-call 'ums


Where did they take you prisoners?


Nay, ask John, he can tell you I warrant you; 'twas in -- tell him, John,
where it was


In Guiny.


By what Countrymen were you taken?


Why they were called -- I have forgot what they call'em, 'twas an odd kind of
name, but John can tell you


Who I, Sir? do you think I can remember all things?


It Is in my Book here I remember well. Name any Nation under the Sun.


I know the name, Sir, well enough; but I only tried my Master's memory, 'Twas
the Tartarians


I, I, those were the men.


How, John? why all the world man lies betwixt 'em, they live up in the North.


The North?


I the very North, John.


That Is true indeed, but these were another Nation of Tartarians that lived in
the South, they came anciently from the others


How got you from 'em, John, at last?


Why faith, Sir, by a Ladies means, who, to tell you the truth, fell in love
with me; my Master has it all in his Book, it is a brave story


In what Ship came you back?


A plague often, that question will be our ruin.


What Ship? 'twas called a thing that swims, what dee you called?


The Mermaid?


No, no, let me see.


The Triton?


No, no, a thing that in the water does -- it swims in the water --


What is it? the Dolphin?


No, no, I have quite forgot the name on it, but it is no matter, it swims --


What say you, John?


I, Sir, my Master knows well enough; you cannot conceive the misery we
endured, Sir


Well, Brother, I Will but ask you one question more, where did you leave your
Will


'Life, now he is posed again -- we shall never carry't through.


I Will tell you presently, Brother -- let me see,


In what place you left your Will?


I that was it indeed --, that was the very thing you asked me; what a
treacherous memory have I? my memory is so short --


This is no Answer to my Question yet.


It Is true indeed; what was your Question, brother?


Where you left your Will?


Good Lord, that I should forget you asked me that! I had forgot it, in faith
law that I had, you will pardon, I hope, my Infirmity, for I alas -- alas -- I have
forgot what I was going to say to you, but I was saying something, that I was


Well, Gentlemen, I Am now in haste, walk but a while into the Parlour there,
I Will come to you presently


But where is my daughter --


Lucia, Sir?


I, Lucia -- put me in mind to ask for her (a plague of your Tartarians.)


And o'your What dee-ye-call-'ems.


'Life, Tartarians!


If these be Rogues, (as Rogues they seem to be) I will so exercise my Rogues,
the tyranny of a new Beadle over a Beggar shall be nothing to it; what think
thou of 'em, Will


Faith, Sir, I know not -- h'as just my Masters Nose and Upper-lip; but if you
think it be not he, Sir, I Will beat 'em worse than the Tartarians did


No, let us try 'em first -- trick for trick -- Thou were wont to be a precious
Knave, and a great Actor too, a very Roscius; did not thou play once the
Clown in Musidorus


No, but I played the Bear, Sir.


The Bear! why that is as good a Part; thou 'rt an Actor then I Will warrant thee,
the Bears a well-penn'd Part, and you remember my Brother's humor, don't you?
They have almost hit it


I, Sir, I knew the shortness of his memory, he would always forget to pay me
my Wages, till he was put in mind often


Well said, I Will dress thee within, and all the Servants shall acknowledge thee,
you conceive the Design -- be confident, and thou cast not miss; but who shall
do trusty John


Oh, Ralph the Butler, Sir, 's an excellent tried Actor, he played a King once;
I have heard him speak a Play ex tempore in the Butteries


O excellent Ralph! incomparable Ralph against the world! Come away, William,
I Will give you instructions within, it must be done in a moment.


Ha, ha, ha! this is the best Plot of yours, dear Madam, to marry me to Mr.
Truman in a Veil instead of your self; I cannot choose but laugh at the very
conceit often; 'twill make excellent sport: My Mistress will be so mad when she
knows that I have got her Servant from her, ha, ha, ha


Well, are you ready? Veil your self all over, and never speak one word to him,
what ever he says, (he will have no mind to talk much) but give him your hand, and
go along with him to Church; and when you come to, I take thee -- mumble it
over that he may n't distinguish the voice


Ha, ha, ha! I cannot speak for laughing -- dear honey Madam, let me but go in
and put on a couple of Patches; you cannot imagine how much prettier I look
with a Lozenge under the Left Eye, and a Half Moon of this cheek; and then I Will
but slip on the Silver-lac'd Shoes that you gave me, and be with him in a trice


Don't stay, he is a fantastical fellow, if the whimsey take him he will be gone.


They say he is to pass instantly this way
To lead his Bride to Church; ungrateful Man!
I Will stand here to upbraid his guilty Conscience,
And in that black attire in which he saw me
When he spoke the last kind words to me;
'Twill now befit my sorrows, and the Widow-hood of my Love;
He comes alone, what can that mean?

Come, Madam, the Priest stays for us too long;
I ask your pardon for my dull delay,
And am ashamed of 't.

What does he mean? I Will go with him what ever it mean.

Come to my bed, my dear, my dear,
My dear come to my bed,
For the pleasant pain, and the loss with gain
Is the loss of a Maidenhead.
For the pleasant, etc.

Is that a Psalm, Brother Husband, which you sing?

No, Sister Wife, a short Ejaculation only.
Well said, Boy, bring in the things, --

What do you mean, Brother Abednego? you will not turn Cavalier, I hope, again,
you will not open before Sion in the dressings of Babylon


What do these clothes befit Queen Tabitha's husband upon her day of Nuptials?
this Hat with a high black chimney for a crown, and a brim no broader than a
Hatband? Shall I, who am to ride the Purple Dromedary, go dressed like Revelation
Fats the Basket-maker? Give me the Peruique, Boy; shall Empress Tabitha's
husband go as if his head were scalded? or wear the Seam of a shirt here for a
a Band? Shall I who am zealous even to slaying, walk in the streets without a
Sword, and not dare to thrust men from the wall, if any shall presume to take it
of Empress Tabitha? Are the Fiddlers coming, Boy


Pish, I cannot abide these doings; are you mad? there come no profane Fiddlers
here


Be peaceable gentle Tabitha; they will not bring the Organs with them hither;
I say be peaceable, and conform to Revelations; It was the Vision bad me do
this; Will It thou resist the Vision


An' these be your Visions? little did I think I wusse -- O what shall I do? is
this your Conversion? which of all the Prophets wore such a Map about their
Ears, or such a Sheet about their Necks? Oh! my Mother! what shall I do? I Am
undone


What shall thou do? why, thou shall Dance, and Sing, and Drink, and be Merry;
thou shall go with thy Hair Curled, and thy Breasts Open; thou shall wear fine
black Stars upon thy Face, and Bobs in thy Ears bigger than bouncing Pears;
Nay, if thou do begin but to look rustily -- I Will have thee Paint thy self,
like the Whore of Babylon


Oh! that ever I was Born to see this day --


What, do thou weep, Queen Dido? thou shall have Sack to drive away thy
Sorrows; bring in the Bottle, Boy, I Will be a Loving Husband, the Vision must be
Obeyed; Sing Tabitha; Weep o'thy Wedding day? it is ominous; Come to my Bed my
Dear, etc. Oh, art thou come Boy? fill a Brimmer, nay, fuller yet, yet a little
fuller! Here Lady Spouse, here is to our sport at Night


Drink it your self, an you will; I Will not touch it, not I.


By this hand thou shal't pledge me, seeing the Vision said so; Drink, or I Will
take a Coach, and carry thee to the Opera immediately


Oh Lord, I cannot abide it --


Why, this will cheer thy Heart; Sack, and a Husband? both comfortable things;
have at you again


I Will pledge you no more, not I.


Here take the Glass, and take it off -- off every drop, or I Will swear a hundred
Oaths in a breathing time


Well! you are the strangest man --


Why, this is right; nay, off with it; so -- but the Vision said, that if we
left our Drink behind us we should be Hanged, as many other Honest men na'been,
only by a little negligence in the like case; Here Is to you Tabitha once again,
we must fulfill the Vision to a Tittle


What must I drink again? well! you are such another Brother -- Husband.


Bravely done, Tabitha! now thou Obey'st the Vision, thou will it have Revelations
presently


Oh! Lord! my Head's giddy -- nay, Brother, Husband, the Boy's taking away the
Bottle, and there is another Glass or two in it still


O Villainous Boy! fill out you Bastard, and squeeze out the last drop.


I Will drink to you now, my Dear; it is not handsome for you to begin always --
Come to my Bed my


O Divine Tabitha! here come the Fiddlers too, strike up ye Rogues.


What must we Dance too? is that the Fashion? I could have Danced the Curranto
when I was a Girl, the Curranto's a curious Dance


We Will out-dance the Dancing disease; but Tabitha, there is one poor Health left
still to be drunk with Music


Let me begin't; here Duck, here is to all that


A Health, ye Eternal Scrapers, sound a Health; rarely done Tabitha, what
think thou now of thy Mother


A fig for my Mother; I Will be a Mother my self shortly; Come Duckling, shall we
go home


Go home? the Bridegroom and his Spouse go home? no, we will Dance home; before us
Squeakers, that way, and be Hanged you Sempiternal Rakers. O brave! Queen
Tabitha! Excellent Empress Tabitha, on ye Rogues.


But where is my what dee ye call her, Brother?


What Sir?


My Daughter -- Lucia, a pretty fair Complexioned little Dimpled, and a Mole
upon -- I would fain see my Daughter -- Brother


Why, you shall Sir presently, she is very well; what Noise is that? how now?
what is the matter


Ho! my old Master! my old Masters come, he is Lighted just now at the door with
his man John; he is asking for you, he longs to see you; my Master, my old
Master


This fellows Mad.


If you will not believe me, go but in and see Sir; he is not so much altered, but
you will quickly know him, I knew him before he was Lighted, pray, go in Sir


Why, this is strange -- there was indeed some weeks since a report at the
Exchange that he was Alive still, which was brought by a Ship that came from
Barbary; but that he should be Split in two after his Death, and Live again in
both, is wonderful to me. I Will go see what is the matter


I begin to shake like a Plum-tree Leaf.


It Is a mere Plot of the Devils to have us beaten, if he send him in just at
this Nick


Ah Rogue, art thou come at last?


Why, you will not look upon your Old friends! give me your Golls, John.


Thank ye all heartily for your Love; thank you with all my Heart; my old
Bedfellow, Robin, and how does little Ginny do


A murren take you, you will never leave your Waggery.


A murren take ye all, I shall be paid the Portion here with a witness.


And how does Ralph? good honest Ralph; there is not an honester Fellow in
Christendom, though I say it my self, that should not say it


Ha, ha, ha! Why Ralph the Rogue's well still; Come let us go to him into the
Buttery, he will be Overjoyed to see thee, and give us a Cup of the best Stingo
there


Well said; Steel to the back still Robin; that was your word you know; my
Masters coming in! go, go, I Will follow you


Make haste, good John.


Here Is a Company of as honest Fellow Servants; I Am glad, I Am come among 'em
again


And would I were got out from 'em, as honest as they are; that Robin has a
thrashing hand


John with a Pox to him! would I were hid like a Maggot in a Pescod.


Methinks you are not returned, but born to us anew.


Thank you good Brother; truly we have past through many dangers; my man John
shall tell you all, I Am Old and Crazie


Sir, the Widow (my Mistress I should say) is coming in here with Mr.
Knock-down, and four or five more


O'ds my Life! this farce is neither of Doctrine nor Use to them! keep 'em
here, John, till I come back


I Am glad the Colonel's gone; now will I sneak away, as if I had stolen a Silver
spoon


Who are those, John? by your leave Sir, would you speak with any body here?


The Colonel, Sir? but I Will take some other time to wait upon him, my occasions
call me now


Pray stay, Sir, who did you say you would have spoken with?


The Colonel, Sir; but another time will serve; he has business now.


Whom would he speak with, John? I forget still.


The Colonel, Sir.


Colonel! what Colonel?


Your brother, I suppose he is Sir, but another time --


It Is true indeed; I had forgot, I faith, my Brother was a Colonel; I cry you
mercy Sir, he will be here presently. Ye seem to be Foreiners by your habits
Gentlemen


No Sir, we are Englishmen.


Englishmen? law you there now! would you have spoke with me, Sir?


No Sir, your Brother; but my business requires no haste, and therefore --


You Are not in haste, you say; pray Sir, sit down then, may I crave your name,
Sir


My name's not worth the knowing Sir --


This Gentleman?


It Is my man, Sir, his name's John.


I Will be John no more, not I, I Will be Iackanapes first; No, my name's Timothy Sir.


Mr. John Timothy, very well, Sir; ye seem to be Travelers.


We are just now as you see, arrived out of Afrique, Sir, and therefore have
some business that requires --


Of Afrique? law ye there now; what Country, pray?


Prester-Iohn's Country; fare you well, Sir, for the present, I must be excused.


Marry God forbid; what come from Prester-Iohn, and we not Drink a Cup of Sack
together


What shall I do? Friend, shall I trouble you to show me a private place? I Will
wait upon you presently again, Sir


You Will stay here Master? --


I Will only make a little Maids water Sir, and come back to you immediately.


The door's locked Sir, the Colonel has locked us in here -- why do you shake
Sir


Nothing -- only I have extreme list to make water.
Here Is the Colonel, I Will sneak behind the Hangings.

We Will leave those Gentlemen within a while upon the point of Reprobation; but
Sweet heart, I have two Brothers here, newly arrived, which you must be
acquainted with


Marry, Heaven fore-shield! not the Merchant I hope?


No, brethren in Love, only -- How dee you Brother?


I your Brother; what de'e mean?


Why, are not you my brother Jolly, that was taken Prisoner by the Southern
Tartars


I Brother, I by Tartars?


What an impudent Slave is this? Sir, Monster, did thou not come with thy
man John


I my man John? here is no such person here; you see you are mistaken.


Sir, I Will strike thee Dead.


Hold, hold, Sir, I do remember now I was the Merchant Jolly, but when you
asked me I had quite forgot it; alas, I Am very Crasie


That Is not amiss; but since thou art not he, I must know who thou art.


Why, do'nt you know me? I Am Captain Worm, and Puny was my man John.


Where Is the fool, Puny? is he slipped away?


Yes, and no fool for it neither for ought I know yet.


Why, we hit upon this frolique, Colonel, only for a kind of Mask (de' ye
conceive me, Colonel?) to celebrate your Nuptials; Mr. Puny had a mind to
reconcile himself with you in a merry way of Drollery, and so had I too, though
I hope you were not in earnest with me


Oh! is that all? well said Will, bravely done Will, I faith; I told thee,
Will, what 'twas to have Acted a Bear; and Ralph was an excellent John too


How Is this? then I Am an Ass again; this damned Punies fearfulness spoiled all.


This cursed Coward Worm! I thought they were not the right ones.


Here Is something for you to drink; go look to Supper, this is your Cue or
Exit.


What need you, Love, have given 'em any thing? in truth, Love, (...)' too
lavish


'Twas wittily put off of me however.


Here are more Maskers too, I think; this Masking is a Heavenly entertainment
for the Widow, who never saw any Show yet but the Puppet-play of Ninive


Stay without, Scrapers.


Oh Lord, I Am as weary with Dancing as passes; Husband, husband, yonder is my
Mother; O mother what do you think I have been doing to day


Why what, Child? no hurt, I hope.


Nay nothing, I have only been married a little, and my husband Abednego and I
have so danced it since


Brave Tabitha still; never be angry Mother, you know where Marriages are made,
your Daughters and your own were made in the same place, I warrant you, they are
so like


Well, his will be done -- there is -- no resisting Providence -- but how, son
Abednego, come you into that roaring habit of Perdition


Mother, I was commanded by the Vision, there is some great end for it of
Edification, which you shall know by the sequel


Come, Dick, bring in your wife to your the other father, and ask him blessing
handsomely

Welcome, dear daughter; off with your Veil;
Heaven bless ye both.

Ha! what is this? more masking? why how now, Mr. Truman? you have not married my
Niece, I hope, instead of my daughter


I only did, Sir, as I was appointed,
And am amazed as much as you.

Villain, Rebel, Traitor, out of my sight you son of a --

Nay, hold him; patience, good Mr. Truman, let us understand the matter a little
--


I wo'not understand, no that I wo'not, I wo'not understand a word, whilst he
and his Whore are in my fight


Nay, good Sir -- Why, what Niece? two husbands in one afternoon? that is too
much of conscience


Two, Sir? I know of none but this,
And how I came by him too, that I know not.

This is Ridle me ridle me -- where is my Daughter? ho! Aurelia.

Here, Sir, I was just coming in.


Have not you married young Mr. Truman?


No, Sir.


Why, who then has he married?


Nay that, Sir, he may answer for himself,
If he be of age to marry.

But did not you promise me you would marry him this afternoon, and go to Church
with him presently to do it


But, Sir, my Husband forbad the Banes.


They Are all mad; your Husband?


I Sir, the truth of the matter, Sir, is this, (for it must out I see) 'twas I
that was married this afternoon in the Matted Chamber to Mr. Puny, instead of
my Cousin Lucia


Stranger and stranger! what, and he not know it?


No, nor the Parson, Sir, himself.


Hey day!


'Twas done in the dark, Sir, and I veiled like my Cousin; 'twas a very
clandestine marriage, I confess, but there are sufficient proofs of it; and for
one, here is half the Piece of Gold he broke with me, which he will know when he
sees


O rare, by Hymen I Am glad of the change; it is a pretty Sorceress by my troath;
Wit to Wit quoth the Devil to the Lawyer; I Will out amongst 'em presently, 't has
saved me a beating too, which perhaps is all her Portion


You turn my Head, you dizzie me; but would thou marry him without either
knowing my mind, or so much as his


His, Sir? he gave me five hundred pieces in Gold to make the Match; look, they
are here still, Sir


Thou have lost thy senses, VVench, and wilt make me do so too.


Briefly the truth is this, Sir, he gave me these five hundred Pieces to marry
him by a Trick to my Cousin Lucia, and by another Trick I took the money and
married him my self; the manner, Sir, you shall know anon at leisure, only
your pardon, Sir, for the omission of my duty to you, I beg upon my knees


Nay, Wench, there is no hurt done, fifteen hundred pounds a year is no ill
match for the daughter of a Sequestered Cavalier --


I thought so, Sir.


If we could but cure him of some sottish affectations, but that must be thy
task


My life on it, Sir.


I Will out; Uncle Father your Blessing -- my little Matchivil, I knew well enough
'twas you; what did you think I knew not Cross from Pile


Did you in faith?


I by this kiss of Amber-grees, or I Am a Cabbage.


Why then you outwitted me, and I Am content.


A pox upon you Merchant Jolly, are you there?


But stay, how come you, Niece, to be married to Mr. Truman?


I know not, Sir, as I was walking in the Garden.


I thought 'thad been -- but blessed be the mistake,
What ever prove the Consequence to all
The less important fortunes of my life.

Nay, there is no hurt done here neither --


No hurt, Colonel? I Will see him hanged at my door before he shall have a
beggarly --


Hark you, Mr. Truman, one word aside


This foolish Jane (as I perceive by the story) has lost a Husband by staying
for a Black patch


Though I in rigor by my brothers Will might claim the forfeiture of her
Estate, yet I assure you she shall have it all to the utmost farthing; in a day
like this, when Heaven bestows on me and on my daughter so unexpected and so
fair a fortune, it were an ill return to rob an Orphan committed to my Charge


My father's in the right.
And as he clears her Fortune, so will I
Her Honor. Hark you, Sir.

Why you speak, Sir, like a Virtuous Noble Gentleman, and do just as I should
do my self in the same case; it is --


'Twas I upon my credit in a Veil; Truman, do not you believe now that I had a
design to lie with you (if you had consented to my coming at midnight) for
upon my faith I had not, bud did it purely to try upon what terms your two
Romantique Loves stood


Ha, ha, ha! but your Farce was not right methinks at the end.


Why how, pray?


Why there should have been a Beating, a lusty Cudgeling to make it come off
smartly with a twang at the tail


Say you so? h'as got a set of damnable brawny Servingmen.


At least John Pudding here should have been basted.


A curse upon him, he saved himself like a Rat behind the Hangings.


O Lucia, how shall I beg thy pardon
For my unjust suspicions of thy Virtue?
Can you forgive a very Repentant sinner?
Will a whole life of Penitence absolve me?

It Is enough, good noble Colonel, I Am satisfied; Come, Dick, I see 'twas
Heavens will, and she is a very worthy virtuous Gentlewoman; I Am old and testy,
but it is quickly over; my blessing upon you both


Why so, all is well of all sides then; let me see, here is a brave Coupling
day, only poor Worm must lead a Monkish life of 't


I Will have a Wife for him too, if you will, fine Mrs. Jane within; I Will
undertake for her, I have set her a gog


I, but what Portion has she, Mrs. Puny? for we Captains of the King's side have
no need of Wives with nothing


Why Lozenges, and Half-moons, and a pair of Silverlac'd Shoes; but that
Tropes lost to you; well, we will see among us what may be done for her


Come, let us go in to Supper; there never was such a day of Intrigues as this
in one Family. If my true Brother had come in at last too after his being five
years dead, 'twould have been a very Play


Methinks a Vision bids me silence break,
And some words to this Congregation speak,
So great and gay a one I never did meet
At the Fifth Monarch's Court in Coleman-street.
But yet I wonder much not to espy a
Brother in all this Court called Zephaniah.
Bless me! where are we? What may this place be?
For I begin by Vision now to see
That this is a mere Theater; well then,
If It be even so, I Will Cutter be again.
Not Cutter the pretended Cavaleer,
For to confess ingenuously here
To you who always of that Party were,
I never was of any; up and down
I rowld, a very Rakehell of this Town.
But now my Follies and my Faults are ended,
My Fortune and my Mind are both amended,
And if we may believe one who has failed before,
Our Author says He Will mend, that is, He Will write no more.
THe Madness of your People, and the Rage,
You Have seen too long upon the Public Stage,
It Is time at last (great Sir) it is time to see
Their Tragique Follies brought to Comedy.
If any blame the Lowness of our Scene,
We humbly think some Persons there have been
On the Worlds Theater not long ago,
Much more too High, than here they are too Low.
And well we know that Comedy of old,
Did her Plebeian rank with so much Honor hold,
That it appeared not then too Base or Light,
For the Great Scipio's Conquering hand to Write.
How e're, if such mean Persons seem too rude,
When into Royal presence they intrude,
Yet we shall hope a pardon to receive
From you, a Prince so practiced to forgive;
A Prince, who with the applause of Earth and Heaven,
The rudeness of the Vulgar has Forgiven.

