MY noble Lord Minutianus,
I Am glad to see so good a Man alive,
And wonder at it; for as the times are,
When any good great Man has a new day,
He has new life, at least a new reprieve;
For by the Emperor he is decreed to die.

Indeed, my Lord, every new day to me
Seems a new pleasing shining Prodigy:
I lift my eyes with wonder at the Sun,
Nor look to see him more when day is done;
And when night comes, I am awhile afraid
I Am not alive, but in the Infernal shade.

Caesar has broke the Fortunes, and the Hearts
Of half the World; Men are but half alive.

Sometimes your Lordship gives our hearts some hope,
But then your League with Caesar frightens us.

Oh! two proud Men to Friendship never incline;
You may as well two lofty Mountains join.
If close in League Caesar and I appear,
It is because you do not see us near.
So when imperfectly remotely seen,
Two Mountains on each other seem to lean;
Approach 'em near, you will find 'em wondrous wide,
Interest and Nature do the great divide:
Pride is a friendless Vice, and foe to Pride.
I Have had success in War, and got renown;
And Caesar hates all glory but his own.
Why, how now Cassius?

My most noble Lord!

Examining thy Figure in a Glass?
That Glass is a dissembler, Cassius.
Thou would not love it if it told thee truth,
For then the shadow on that Dial shown,
Would let thee know thy Sun is going down:
Thou Art in thy fall, witness thy falling hair,
Yet thou would pass for young with all the fair.
Oh! Cassius! thou have wandered far from Youth,
And thy young dress tells scandalous untruth.
That the art in heart a Hector, who would guess,
Whilst the art a wanton Paris in thy dress?
Paris was not accoutred with such Art,
Thy habit is a Libel on thy Heart.

Oh! but a Manly daring Soul lurks deep,
Under this gentle Lady, like outside;
Which Caesar takes a pleasure to deride.

Nay, Caesar ought to spare him allow,
Caesar's grave only in his frowning brow:
He folds his brow in frowns; had he his will,
Basilisk like he would with his aspect kill.
But this sierce Monarch, in unmanly dress,
Is often extravagant to mad excess.
His Robes, like Crystal waves, around him flow,
At once his Limbs and Lusts they lewdly show.
His only coverings, in his wild attire,
Are blazing Gems, which make him seem of fire.
His wrists in Bracelets far outshine the Stars;
You Would think 'em Comets, and fear Plagues and Wars.

Ay, and his Sandals powdered o'r with Gems,
Exceed in splendour Regal Diadems.

They are so wondrous soft, and easy too,
He feels the ground no more than if he flew.

Dresses are Politics of Love; he is wise,
And steals to hearts of Ladies, through their Eyes.

Were Cassius led to die, he would die well dressed,
To leave a Dart in every Ladies breast;
And to his death he would gracefully advance,
As if he only lead a solemn Dance.
And loss of life would grieve him less, he will own,
Than loss of love; the dead are loved by none.

No, from dead Lovers living beauties fly,
And soon let all remembrance of 'em die.
Our Images for years in Marble stay;
Our Images in Hearts scarce last a day.

Well Cassius, though you soft and frail appear,
Cassius is hardy, valiant, and sincere.
Calm to a Friend, a tempest to a Foe,
With his hand active, though in speech he is slow.
He fights as if he had a thousand Lives,
But for preferment modestly he strives.
In Court he yields, in danger leads the way;
Wins, yet can scarce be said to gain the day.
Of speech he is sparing, liberal of his blood;
To all, but to himself, he is just and good.

This from your Lordship? I am over-paid
For all I Have done.

No, there are great Arrears
Due to thy Fortune, and thy Honor both,
Injured by Caesar.

I am wounded by him,
In a more tender part, my Conscience;
He often forces me, to ruin those
Whom I am bound in conscience to defend.
The fortunes, nay, the flesh I Am forced to rend
Of those, who have no faults, but Wealth or Power;
And thus my self I torture every hour.
For all the miseries I impose, I feel;
And my heart bleeds when guiltless blood I spill.
Because I faintly act this cruel part,
Caesar is pleased to say I want a Heart,
And has my tenderness in great disdain;
He thinks I Am not a Man, because Humane.

Nay, Caesar counts humanity a crime:
Well Cassius, you may have redress in time.
Behold a foolish ostentatious show,
Of Robes and Crowns, won in the German War;
Not by the Valor of the Emperor,
He never stoops in Person to subdue,
He fights by Proxy, as great Princes woo.
He dares not look on War; a while ago,
He marched to'ards War, and made a noise and show,
Which through the German Woods a horror spread;
The hasty Rhine to Sea more swiftly fled.
He had two Armies.

No, my Lord, but one.

Yes, Cassius, I lead gallant Men, and Caesar
A flying Camp of ranting Concubines,
Who flamed, and gave a luster to the day;
No Meteors were so bright, or hot as they.

Ay, but my Lord, these falling Stars, it is known,
Though bright aloft, are Jellies when they are down.

That you have often found; now what became
Of this Bravado, and attempt on Fame?
It dwindled to a Farce, and foolish Scene;
For his Light Horse, light Concubines I mean,
With Caesar in their head began to fly,
On the first News the enemy drew nigh:
To look on a brave Foe they durst not stay,
The German Trumpets blew 'em all away.

They have some wounds I Am told.

In Fame they have,
And scratches which the Quick-set Hedges gave.
Caesar is often prancing, on the Road.
To War, but long ever danger is abroad.
Like a hot early Spring he often sets forth,
Not to enrich, adorn, but blast the Earth;
Whilst sweet young Beauties, in their lovely May,
Like blossoms round him blow, but far more gay:
And when approaching dangers rudely threat
The splendid Prince, he and his buds retreat;
He wisely keeps in War a Regal State,
Makes danger from himself at distance wait,
But with stiff pride enters an empty Town,
His Troops have won, and assumes their renown.

Second-hand Glory appears somewhat bear.

Second-hand Clothes he may as proudly wear.
With all their Laurels then a Prince is crowned,
Who never saw fight, nor felt a noble wound.
Wounds he has had, but they were all behind,
For yet his face danger could never find;
But he will triumph in Person, o'r the bold,
For Victories he never durst behold.
Now in triumphal pomp he enters Rome,
Leading those chained he durst not overcome.
And now who dares but in a look betray,
The least contempt of this illustrious day,
Sacred to the honor of the Imperial Sword,
And the vast pride of our vainglorious Lord?

You of his pride and vanity complain;
Oh! would to heaven he were only vain.
But he has Vices I abhor to name;
They cover me with everlasting shame.
His Sisters were all wonderfully fair;
Part of that beauty I desired to share.
The youngest then seemed to have every grace;
Her beauty gave a luster to her race.
I humbly begged his leave for an address,
And angry Heaven cursed me with success.
I got his Sister, and let that suffice
To express all the plagues Hell can devise.
By Heavens, he whor'd her on the Bridal Night;
Nay, which is more, he whor'd her in my sight.

She was his Sister I may safely swear;
No race besides affords so lewd a pair.
I pity this great Man, in War he is brave,
In Court he is a cautious fawning slave.

He views the ground with a dejected eye.

And with good reason he expects to die.

For what offense? He has ruled Syria well,
And humbled haughty Kings who durst rebel;
As Fame reports.

Court deeps but few can sound;
Tyrants and Priests in mysteries abound.
Perhaps their Arts will not the light endure,
They strike most awe, like Temples, when obscure.
This sad and thoughtful Hero lets approach,
Try if his painful wounds will bear the touch.
My Lord Vitellius, you seem full of care,
And out of Asia bring a cloudy air,
Which weighs your Eyelids down; what should it mean?
You fortunes has been smiling and serene,
And yet you sigh as if your heart would break.

My Lord, I Am bruised, I have scarce strength to speak;
I Have had a fall, which makes my Vitals bleed.
I fell from Heaven.

That Is a high fall indeed.

From Caesar's favor.

Why de'ye bend so low?

To Caesar's Image in my thoughts I bow.
I honor my own thoughts when Caesar's there,
And when he is named, I reverence the air,
And lowly toward the awful sound incline;
The air is then, methinks, a holy shrine.

Your prudent, courtly temper, I commend,
But I had rather make proud Monarchs bend,
And with crowned Victims my devotions pay;
So I would worship Caesar every day,
And now bring Princes to adore his Throne.
Caesar's my Prince --

And God. --

Well, that I own.
To Caesar I Will not grudge a pompous word;
And how he pleases he shall be adored.

These shouts tell joyful news, that Caesar's nigh;
Oh! I Have his glorious person in my eye.
His glittering Chariot is of beaten Gold;
But in himself I Nature's pomp behold.
The bounteous Monarch, as he rides along,
Rains silver showers on the admiring throng.

Bribes to the Rabble; that a Prince so proud,
Should stoop to purchase flattery from the crowd;
From all bold Foes, but flatterers, he flies;
Flattery is a part of his high Luxuries,
And none can be too fulsome for his taste;
Thus Wit, and Gold, and Blood, we vainly waste.

Rome pours into the Court a dazzling Crowd,
With an illustrious stream it is overflowed.
I dare not show my self in Caesar's sight;
My Lords farewell, may Fortune do you right.

Welcome to Rome once more, my Mars, my Jove;
Welcome from War, to Luxury and Love.
Well, I am pleased to find they have taken care
To fill the Palace with a fragrant air.

I have bestowed more odours, on these Rooms,
Than would, I think, perfume a thousand Tombs.

Sir, why do you name Tombs?

Does it become
A Heroin, to startle at a Tomb?

Nay, I could dwell with pleasure, on the Graves
Of Caesar's Foes, or his rebellious Slaves.
I Have a nice Nostril, with rich perfumes fed,
The least offensive vapor strikes me dead.
I can endure no sweets but what excel;
Yet of dead enemies I like the smell.

Well, if dead enemies can entertain,
Thou have been gratified this last Campaign.
What would you have Valerius?

What you please;
I am attending, Sir, on your decrees.

Caesar, Victorious, Gracious, Pious, Wife,
The noblest pleasure of our thoughts and eyes;
Scourge of the proud, relief of all the oppressed;
Caesar, of Gods, the greatest and the best.
At Caesar's feet, I humbly prostrate lie,
To live his Vassal, or his Victim die.
But I would live (if that might be allowed)
To pay those Offerings I Have to Caesar vowed;
Those Divine Honors are to Caesar due,
The only God that stoops to humane view.

Sir, in no Mortal all perfections dwell,
They Have both been faulty, but they have both done well.
That Lord in Germany has Battles won;
This made the Parthian King leave Babylon,
Cross his Euphrates, and his swelling pride,
To pay those Honors he till then denied,
Caesar's Divine protection to implore,
His Eagles, and his Images adore.

Madam, the glory wholly I disclaim,
To Caesar's Divine Genius be the fame.

Let 'em once more in Caesar's favor rise,
For all that honor him I highly prize.

Thy Will is irresistible, like Fate;
What makes me love thee at so mad a rate?
Live both in the Commands you had before;
Now is there any thing you would have more?

To kiss your sacred feet we beg your leave.
With humble thanks the bounty we receive.

We must give thanks for such affronts as these;
And proudly humbling us below our knees.

Oh! how the World is with an Emp'ror blessed;
May I presume to make one more request?

What is it? speak.

The honor, Sir, to kiss
The Empresses Sandal; -- but it is too much bliss.
Alas! I am afraid, I Have been too bold.

Lucius, your Lips are common, I am told;
Often to the Sandals of the fair you bend,
And to your joys from those low Stairs ascend.

Light, Sir, is common, so is vital air,
And often kiss the Sandals of the fair.

Well Lucius, I am in good humor now,
And the great honor you have begged bestow.
Let 'em adore you, Madam, at your feet.

Oh! bounteous Prince!
Oh! Empress! heavenly sweet.

Come, you would try my bounty once again;
Speak boldly, Man, I Am in the giving vein.

I Would beg the shell of that delicious fruit,
A Sandal sweetened by that beauteous foot.

Go fetch him one with speed.

Transporting joy!
For such a gracious God, who would not die?
Oh! 'twill recall my youth, perfume my breath,
Restore my health when I am sick to death.
Nay, when I Am dead, make life in me return;
I shall, to kiss it, leap out of my Urn.

I once looked round me as I passed along,
And near me I observed a mutt'ring throng,
And in their looks saw discontent appear,
Which grudged my pomp, as if it cost too dear.
Do not they know, that Caesar cannot brook
The least offense, but in a word or look?
They who will live, must not with Caesar strive,
Or dare to let me know they are alive,
Till my commands enliven, and inspire,
And warm their bosoms, like Promethian fire.
Rome to amazing Insolence is grown;
No doubt, one spirit runs through all the Town.
Since Rome has but one proud rebellious Soul,
Which dares presume my pleasures to control,
And in my pomp give me a secret check,
Would to the Gods all Rome had but one Neck,
That I might cut of millions at a blow;
Chaerea, fling 'em to my Lions, go.

Whom shall I fling?

The Rogues I named of late;
I Will silence Villains who presume to prate.

Sir, on my knees --

I know thou art afraid;
Fear not the stubborn Rogues, thou shall have aid.
Besides they are in Fetters.

So am I.
Sir, from armed enemies I would not fly;
But from obeying such severe commands,
Humanity and pity bind my hands.

Have thou humanity, thou fearful slave?
No, thou art not a Man, because not brave.

Sir, I have found him brave.

So have not I,
The Coward dares not see another die;
When I have forced him to strike off a Head,
The executed wretch looked not so dead.
Begone.

Forgive me, Sir, if I am bold,
And the dark thoughts of mutt'ring Rome unfold.
Si^* you engage in Wars, which cost you dear;
But, Sir, no reasons for those Wars appear.

Must I give reasons, Sir, for my Decrees?
I may do what I please, with whom I please.
Perhaps I burn proud Towns, and slaughter Men,
Only to please my humor, Sir -- what then?
When wild Convulsions divide streams from Springs,
Roll Hills o'r Hills, the Rabble o'r their King;
Lift Commonwealths to Realms, sink Realms to States;
What are all these, but Gambols of the Fates?
But to eternal Glory I address
In all my Wars, with infinite success.
I, for my Glory, seize on Regal Crowns;
To make my Glory blaze, burn wealthy Towns.
The Gods, for Glory, Worlds from Chaos won;
The Gods, for Glory, kindled up the Sun,
And set that noble part of Heaven of fire;
I Am hourly urged by such Divine desire.

Inglorious Princes are but half alive,
And want a sense worth all the other five.

The Prisoners, Sir, whom you have doomed to bleed,
Have begged of me that I would interceed,
Sir, with appeals to Heaven, they all declare
They muttered nothing, but a Loyal Prayer
For blessings, on your Person, and your Crown,
And admiration of your great renown.

Am I delighted with a Fool's applause?
No more, by Jove, than were I praised by Daws.

Sir, these Men's lives are below your regard,
They Have sent Petitions; Sir, shall they be heard?

Ay -- Sing 'em.

Sing 'em? I Have no skill in Song;
I never so idly, Sir, employ my Tongue.

Then were I Caesar, I would have no ear;
I would no troublesome Petitions hear,
Unless sung to me with harmonious Airs.

Priests sing, and make an Opera of their Prayers.

Sir, one thing more: I'told by common
From empty Bowels many murmurs came.
The last Campaign trod all our Harvests down;
And all the Horses, in or near the Town,
You pressed, to bring the Imperial Treasures home:
Therefore the Farmers cannot furnish Rome,
With what supplies they are able to afford;
And here our Granaries are all devoured.
And thus, Sir, by your Wars, you grind Mankind;
But you will let 'em have no Corn to grind.

Damn 'em, they are over-fed; the mutt'ring sounds
Came from full Bowels; Luxury abounds.
War destroys Men, but Luxury Mankind;
At once corrupts the Body, and the Mind.
And thus, a just revenge poor Brutes receive,
Who die for Rogues that deserve not to live.
Rich Knaves will engross Corn, to raise the price;
And starve Mankind, to feed their avarice.
For harmless injured Beasts I Have some remorse;
But my chief care is for my favorite Horse.
That Animal is full of noble fire;
Go visit him, and how he fares enquire.

Heaven! how we spoil the pleasure of the day.

It Is true, my Love; but we will soon be gay.
The falls of Nations, which fill Cowards with fears,
Shall but like Water-falls delight our Ears;
And murmuring Subjects shall, like purling streams,
But lull us deeper in our pleasing dreams.

We Are deep in Winter, yet methinks the air
Has an unnat'ral heat, I cannot bear.

Caesar's swift marches have inflamed his veins;
He drives with all the spirit that he reigns.
I wonder not you left me far behind,
Methoughts your fiery Steeds outran the Wind;
Winds lost their breath in giving Caesar Chase,
His speed seemed more a Rapture than a Race.
When a high Mountain showed him to my Eye,
I feared some Goddess snatched him to the Sky;
Then from my seat I often fell cold and pale,
Till I beheld him flaming in a Vale,
Saw his bright Chariot, and his glittering Train,
Flying like blazing meteors o'r a Plain:
His dazzling Chariot, though a ponderous mass
Of solid Gold, scarce bent the tender Grass.
I Am apt to think there can no prints be found
Where Caesar drove, his Steeds scarce touched the ground:
No, Sir, provoked by their own fire and you,
They ran, raged, foamed; I thought in Clouds you flew.

I love intemperance in all I do.
All speed to me but drowsy sloth appears,
I thought I lingered on the Road for years,
And my dull Horses did not run, but creep;
I Would have sprung hither at one lofty leap.
Had I my will, I would range Lands and Seas
As swift as thought; think and be where I please.
The very minute I begin my flight,
I Would pierce all Regions, at a start, like light.

You Would range all Lands, new beauties to subdue;
For your desires the World has not enough:
And without toil, you would give a beauty chase,
You would but think, think in her embrace.

We call Men constant, when they are dull and tame;
Thus imperfection gets a noble name.
I have a heat which never can be cooled;
A spirit in me which can never be ruled;
It rages whilst it is in my bosom pent,
Nor can a thousand Beauties give it vent.
When I am deluging your Arms with bliss,
You never think me guilty of excess.
Egypt is not more pleased with flowing Nile;
But if I rove to others Arms awhile,
Of my intemp'rance you complain aloud;
Though it be but a momentany flood,
You think you have a dreadful dearth in view;
Madam, was Caesar only made for you?

Jove had, no doubt, intentions more divine,
But Caesar will not be a moment mine.
My heart in Caesar lives, to Caesar grows;
Therefore I never have an hours repose.
Repose? His many wanderings tear my veins,
And give me wounds which have tormenting pains.

You love an Emperor, that I ll not deny;
Who, but a Caesar, can your heart supply
With all the pleasure, wealth, and power it craves?
Now you have Queens for your Domestic slaves,
And all delights that nature yields in call;
Were there more Emp'rors you would love 'em all.

No, Sir, of all Men, Emp'rors would I shun,
They are mysterious, understood by none.
But this I know, what are so much above
All Kings on Earth, it is arrogance to love;
And, to my sorrow, I have found it vain,
For having all things, all things they disdain.
Caesar is pleased with beauty, whilst it is new,
And the next hour thinks it not worth his view.
A while I Am graceful in the Emp'rors thoughts,
And the next moment seem all over faults.
Now I Have all beauties, then I Have all decays;
Now sudden starts of joy, then sharp always.
Now I Am in luxury, and then in tears,
And always shaken with confounding fears.

Oh! my Cesonia, prithee have a care,
Impose not on me more than I can bear.
This Neck is soft, so is not Caesar's Heart;
This Head and Neck how easily can I part?
But though in Caesar thou have no delight,
To thy fair self thou art a pleasing sight;
And by all Eyes thou art with wonder seen:
Oh! I am loath to stain so white a skin.
It Is pity so much beauty should be lost,
Thou will not be so lovely when a Ghost.

I find I Am pleasing still in Caesar's Eye,
And therefore now I Am very loath to die;
No joys in the most sweet Elizian Grove,
Can equal the Remains of Caesar's love.
With pomp and power I am pleased, I own;
But Caesar far outshines his glorious Throne.
Were Caesar but my equal, were he lower,
Had but that graceful person, and no more,
From all Mankind to Caesar's arms I Would fly,
And think no Goddess is so blessed as I.

Oh! thou art made exactly to my mind,
Fair to perfection, fond though l'm unkind.
Faithful thou art as the severely chaste,
And yet as Venus wanton, when embraced.
I have a thousand Venusses in thee;
Once more I love thee to a mad degree.
New beauties for a moment snatch my Eyes,
And entertain me, whilst they are novelties.

Caesar will often abandon me I know,
But one hours love will rich amends bestow.
I am luxurious, freely I confess,
But Caesar, Caesar is my Sovereign bliss.
From Caesar's Lips divine Ambrosia flows,
His breath in sweets excels the Syrian Rose;
And when I have his Arms I think I Am dressed,
The Queen of Heaven has not so rich a Vest.
In Caesar's Arms in extafies I lie,
Like a mad Prophetess, entranced with joy;
Whilst a God fills me all my spirits fly.

No, my Cesonia, I must do thee right,
Thy spirit gives a life to my delight;
A livelier Beauty Caesar never enjoyed,
Thou have more life than all thy Sex enjoyed.

Now I Am composed, and fit for great Affairs,
Your Glory must a while employ my Cares.
Oh! come my Lord, though in this last Compagne
You gave us too much reason to complain,
Your service, for your faults, make great amends;
And I rank you among the Emp'rors friends.

Thou Art proud, and therefore I think Caesar's friend,
Thy haughty heart can to an Emp'ror bend;
My powers by Jove and Nature were bestowed,
By serving me thou serv'st an Earthly God.
Senators often are of ignoble blood,
And all their powers the Offspring of the Crowd;
Can thy proud heart endure those Men should reign,
Whom thou would scarce admit into thy Train?
Will one so brave, by Cowards be controlled?
And one so rich, let Bankrupts rule his Gold?
So Wise to Blockheads for Advice repair,
In all the great Affairs of Peace and War;
Depend on the result of empty prate,
And account Fools the Oracles of State.

I would not be a slave, to slaves, it is true;
Our Senators are solemn slaves to you.
If I must serve, on Caesar I Would depend;
For as the Ladies, who on Queens attend,
Are by the World Ladies of Honor styled,
Though of their Honor they have been beguiled.
So, Sir, if Honor can to slaves be due,
They Are slaves of Honor, who are slaves to you.

Spoke like a Nobleman, and Man of sense;
It Is an illustrious thing, to serve a Prince
So great, so glorious, so renowned, so wise,
What Vassal would not such a glory prize?

When he has Caesar's favor in pursuit,
He Will lick the dust beneath the Tyrant's feet.
Caesar's a God, and Caesar says I Am proud;
A God knows all the secrets of our blood.
Therefore, no doubt, I Am ostentatious vain,
The Characters he gives me I Will maintain;
I will be proudly faithful to my trust,
To all Mankind I will be proudly just:
All danger, Sir, I Will haughtily despise,
To serve you boldly fight, as boldly advise.
Your service to your pleasure I Will prefer,
And boldly stop you, if I think you err.

Stop me?

By Council, though it cost my Head;
Even by your self I will not be misled.

Will I be judged, and governed by my slaves?

I Will judge, and if I can I Will rule your Knaves.
I Will offer, and I Will suffer no abuse,
Because I Am proud; pride is of mighty use.
The affectation of a pompous name,
Has often set Wits and Heroes in a flame;
Volumes, and Buildings, and Dominions wide,
Are often the noble Monuments of pride.

Then I Am your lofty Building? Have a care,
This from no other Man on earth I Would bear.
Thou rul'st thy Emperor, I know not how;
More than thou dare demand, I dare bestow,
Have all a Vassal can from power derive,
Tho'th'art the boldest proudest Man alive.

All this I durst not have presumed to crave;
My thanks I Will on your foes in wounds engrave.

In serving Caesar, rich rewards proceed
From the mere conscience of the noble deed;
But yet is Caesar so Divinely good,
He over-pays his Warriors for their blood.
I Am sure, my Lord, your recompense is great,
You Have Rubies for your blood, and Pearls for sweat;
You Have Provinces for all the Fields you have won,
And Realms for all the Kings you have undone.

Higher rewards than these my service meets,
This Province, Madam,
It Is all over sweets.
Here dwelt a foot, a Wonder of its kind,
And left a thousand fragrancies behind.

How false are Men, both in their Heads and Hearts;
And there is falsehood in all Trades and Arts.
Lawyers deceive their Clients by false Law;
Priests, by false Gods, keep all the World in awe.
By their false Tongues such flattering Knaves are raised;
For their false wit, Scriblers by fools are praised.
Whores, by false beauty, Venusses appear;
Hect'ring Faux -- braves o'r Cowards, domineer:
Look round the World, what shall we find sincere?

The Senate, Sir, attend.

Well, let 'em wait.
How dare you, in my Ear, name what I hate?
I Will have no Guardians, I Am at Age to reign;
What my Birth gave, my Courage shall maintain.
I will endure no Partners in my Throne,
I ll govern as I please, and rule alone.
Do not I trample Kings beneath my feet?
Will Caesar then let his own slaves be great?
Caesar shall be the only Sovereign Lord,
And Senate be a vain and useless word;
And therefore wholly laid aside, ere long,
Amongst the Rubbish of the Roman Tongue.

Then will the name of Emp'ror be low;
Sir, your Throne stands on golden Columns now,
On Men who are by Birth and Fortune great;
Would you be King of Beggars, six you seat
On a vile Dunghill, on the dirty Crowd?
This by your friends can never be allowed.
Sir, your mistakes are your most dangerous foes,
And for your service I Will your self oppose,
And in the face of any danger fly;
You have not a more faithful friend than I:
Compared with Caesar's service, how I slight
Danger and Death, I Have often showed in fight.

Cherish him, Caesar.

Well, let quarrels cease;
Thou Have a great Genius, both in War and Peace.
But love not, if thou art one of Caesar's friends,
A Senate; for the very name offends.
But call 'em in, for they shall quickly know
I have a farther quarrel with 'em now.
When Caesar by a Triumph honored Rome,
How durst you tarry sullenly at home,
As if my Victories you proudly scorned,
Or thought 'em curses, and in darkness mourned?

Who dares reply? for to this raving Prince
What can be said, that will not give offense?

The honor, Sir, we humbly did implore
To fill your Triumphs, to be triumphed o'r,
To be led Captives; but we beg in vain,
Our great devotion met your high disdain.

It Is true, I scorn all honors you bestow,
And you resent the affront; ha! is it so?

That were presumptuous arrogance indeed;
Sir, with united hearts, we have all decreed
The highest honors --

How? Dare you pretend
To grant me Honors? Honor must descend.

We humbly beg --

You Would beg me for a Fool;
Beg me to own you have the Sovereign rule:
By this Decree, you sawcily invade
Imperial Power, Imperial Glory shade.
Affronts from his own slaves, will Caesar bear;
Refuse, or grant me Honors, if you dare

My errors wrong the Senate I perceive;
To show our love we humbly beg your leave.

Your love? Mankind is envious vain and proud,
Love nothing that is above 'em, bad or good.
You hate a Prince, unless he will tamely bear
Partners in power; let Senates have a share.
Where Laws, and domineering Senates reign,
Princes are slaves in purple, slaves in grain;
Sword bearers to a many-headed Lord,
I mean the Crowd, and weak upon Record;
For every Law made by the State, implies,
That Princes are defective, Senates wise.
Such Demi-Kings have half your hearts, no more,
While they have any share of Sovereign power;
But if a Prince entirely quits his Throne,
He Is loved by all, because he is feared by none.
The Votes of Senators, though never so great,
Shall but like Echoes my commands repeat;
So Forests may advise, and utter Law.

The wisest Monarch the Sun ever saw.

Fear me, I care not how I am abhorred,
Your hearts I Will have; with my Imperial Sword,
I Will rip 'em from your Breasts, when I think good:
In short, I Will have your Duty, or your Blood.
This you all know, and therefore you will obey;
Fear is the Parent of all Sovereign sway.

Sir, with triumphant pomp, to Court they have brought
Your Image wrought in gold; is that a fault?

My Image may have faults, the Gold has none;
It Is the only faultless thing below the Sun.

No, Caesar, no; if Art has done you right,
The Image is faultless; bring it in my sight.
If Caesar's graces in the Image shine,
There is no gold on Earth, so rich, so fine.
This shining shadow, I would feign behold;
This constant shadow fixed in solid gold.

HAIL! Mighty Prince, whose loud renown
O'r every Region flies;
On whom with wonder Gods look down,
And gaze with envious eyes.
Whom, more than Hell, all Nations fear,
And more than Heaven obey;
Who o'r-runs Kingdoms every year,
With Jove has equal sway:
Who ruins Realms, enriches Graves,
Makes mighty Kings of humble Slaves,
And Slaves of mighty Kings;
His praise, this great Assembly here,
With all devotion sings.
Our bloody Wars are ended;
The Sword is now
But worn for show;
And the stubborn bow unbended.
Our hours of ease, and leisure,
We'll give to pomp and pleasure,
And Songs in praise of Caesar,
Who War with glory ended.
The Sword is now
But worn for show;
And the stubborn Bow unbended.
Now Peace begins to heal our wounds,
And all our wants repair;
We'll Plough the Seas, and Plough our Grounds,
And Plough the tempting fair:
Our lofty Towers shall scale the Sky,
Our Wealth unbounded, like our joy,
Shall fly more free than air:
Our Wars are done,
And the World is won,
So now farewell to care.
CAESAR triumphs, and is by Rome adored,
For Battles won by your victorious Sword.

It Is true, to triumphs he has small pretense;
Put would you have me proudly out brave my Prince,
And boast I won those Fields he durst not see?
This would be fatal saw ciness in me.
Soldiers in fight their courage should display;
They have a triumph when they win the day.
Let them be brave against the bold and great,
But humble to all those beneath their feet.

A generous thought.

In most triumphal shows,
A conquering Coxcomb o'r a beaten crows.
The fopp'ry in the Hero then appears,
The Lyon's couched, the Ass pricks up his Ears.
Vain ostentation does too often enslave,
The learned, the wise, the mighty, and the brave.
The Man of Learning, no content can reap
From all his knowledge, till he spreads the heap,
And great applause, and admiration gains;
For that poor chaff, how he will thrash his brains?
He is-in throws before, but then he is eased;
When he is a public fool he is highly pleased.
For Fame vain Wits take all their soaring flights;
For Fame the ostentatious Hero fights;
For show, with wounds will be embroidered o'r,
And deeply died in his own purple gore.

Vain ostentation deforms every grace;
It Is like a blister in a beauteous face.

It Is hard to know, whose brains have wider flaws,
They who sit rattling chains, and pleating straws;
Or they who toil, only for vain renown,
To wear in History a paper Crown.
Whilst Caesar now, for a design so vain,
Takes Poets and Historians in his Train;
How like a Lunatic this Prince appears,
Pleased because Bells hang jingling at his ears?
^^us he resolves oblivion to subdue;
(...) and the graces of his person too,
In strong and lively coloring displayed,
And in bold Images, shall time invade.
For this are famous Artists kept in pay,
And Art brings forth dead Caesar's every day;
You will see all our Gardens and Abodes,
And Temples crowded with those silent Gods
And for his likeness, he will sit brooding long,
With all the pains that Birds do, to hatch their Young.

Well, this Campaign the Emperor ventured far;
I think, he marched to the frontier of War.

Yes, and he bore some little Princes down,
Whose fall will give no sound to his Renown:
Their Provinces he might with ease o'rerun:
On my War-Horse I could have leaped over one.

Your Lordship is the Pillar of his Throne;
But, that is a truth Caesar disdains to own.

I support Caesar? Be not so profane;
Caesar's a God, to him all aid is vain.

Who can that impious Flattery endure?
His Father was a mortal Man, I Am sure.

His Godhead both from Chance and Nature came;
It Is a Convention in his Sacred Frame
Of Divine Atoms; it was not begot,
'Twas an original and glorious lot.
Thus his Atheistick flatterers blaspheme,
Hum'ring their hot-brained Emperor's waking dream.
Vast fortunes bred the frenzy, I confess;
Feeble mankind can suffer no excess:
Fortunes too high, or low, wrack humane thought,
But fortune only has not been in fault;
The Empress too, did her assis^^nce join,
And often gave him Philters in his Wine;
Then this proud folly first began to Reign,
Successes turned, and drugs Diseased his Brain.

I Would raised thy fortunes by commands,
But thou have Enemies, which hold my hands:
However I Will raise thy Honor, if I can,
I do not know a more deserving Man.

In the esteem of such a noble Friend,
My Lord, I to an envied height ascend;
The Emperor's pleased to call me Coward, and Fool,
Because he always finds me soft and cool;
And always slow in shedding guiltless blood,
Caesar may give what titles he thinks good.
I Have many faults, but boasting is not one;
If any thing deserving praise I Have done,
I Am not much pleased to hear it often proclaimed;
But yet, methinks, I Am loath to be defamed.

Oh! my good Lord, I Have in this Vessel found
Excellent Metal, though it yields no sound.
He who seems here, only an Image dressed,
A piece of fine Court-furniture, at best;
In War is more then Man.

So I Have been told.

I Have seen Barbarians numerous, and bold,
Fly from this Man, like Locusts from a storm;
Wonders in War, I Have seen him often perform:
But of rough Cassius, after a Campaign,
No marks but in his scars and wounds remain.
Here all his time on pleasure he bestows;
He rises late, and rises to repose
On a soft Couch, where Wine drowns all his care;
Or on the softer Bosoms of the fair.
Where Amorous dalliance, and wanton Play,
Is all the toil in which he wastes the day.

My Lord, I love all pleasure nature yields;
The joys of wanton Beds, and bloody Fields.
Perhaps your tast'e and mine may not agree;
Whilst I have Life, I would shake all the Tree:
I Would have Wine and Women, Music and Renown,
And thus have all my days go sweetly down:
I would not let one moment run to wast,
No, nor go off, with an unpleasant taste.
Fearful and melancholy minds prepare
For their last hours by Sacrifice a^^ Prayer,
Contemplate bones and sculls: But I design
To part with life, over a Glass o'Wine:
I Will fill my Eyes with beauty, e're they close,
And Songs shall lull me to my long repose.

But whilst your time you eagerly bestow
On the warm side of life, where pleasures grow:
Men think you not the gallant Man you are,
That all your Manhood lies among the fair.

So, Caesar thinks, and tramples on his brow,
But Cassius does not seem to feel the blow;
But he is to admiration calm and tame;
And all his anger is a lambent flame.

Oh! no, my Lord, I feel the heavy blows,
Nor have I all the patience you suppose;
It Is true, I keep my painful Wounds unseen;
But wounds, when inwardly they bleed gangreen.
Reasons there are, why I seem patient now;
But I, one day, may let the Emperor know.
I love not to oppress, or be oppressed;
But every thing is in its season best.
Man has his hours of sleep, when he is embalmed
With that soft unguent, and lies all be calmed;
Trees have their seasons, when you would think 'em dead,
But Nature finds a time to lift her head.
And shortly Cassius may his vigor show,
And make the World ring, with a dreadful blow,
Shall settle Regal Diadems; which now
Totter, on many a trembling Prince's brow;
But all our bonds write in Imperial gore.
That I Am a Man, and Caesar is no more.

This sudden lofty flame has made me sweat;
Oh! Cassius, worthy of a name so great:
May thou in fame and fortune, far exceed
The Renowned Cassius, who made Julius bleed.

Have I not told the Emperor, I Am his Friend,
That Caesar, against Caesar, I Will defend?
That, to increase his Empire and Renown,
By Wars, which I may honorably own:
I Will in the face of my danger fly?
And do thou hope I Will give my self the lie.
Let Caesar's Life be stolen by base surprise,
And own my self a Villain in disguise?
On Faith and Honor I have fixed my foot;
And for that ground with Caesar I Will dispute.
Perhaps his favor, nothing can retain,
In my own favor I Will to death remain.

Does not your Lordship every moment shed
Blood, guiltless blood; by guarding Caesar's head.

He Is young and fiery; and has a Brain
Deseas'd by drugs, and Knaves the dregs of Men.
All the corruptions of a Land repair
To Courts, and fill 'em with unwholesome air:
A Monarch with great virtue is endu'd,
If he appears but moderately good?
Cassius your wrongs are not to me unknown,
Nor that all Nations under Caesar grown.
But I Will to him, and all mankin*d be just,
Prote^^ his Person and oppose his Lust.
I Will (...) by Counsel first to stop his course;
Th^^ ^^^^^ng, I Will to fair and open force.
In Caesar's faults, or yours, I Will have no share;
Secure this Tribune, Sir, with utmost care.

My Lord, a noble spirit you display;
But yet, my Lord; this I must boldly say:
You feel not Caesar's faults, as thousands do;
A decent distance they have kept from you.
They have not yet approached your heart or head;
Nor seized your fortune, or de^^'d your Bed.

My Bed!

Your Bed, as mine he often has done;
His brutal Lust, has often my Bed over run.
On remote sires, with small concern we gaze,
But we all rise when our own dwellings blaze
Had Caesar and your Wife been kind --

Been kind.
No more, I sweat when ever their names are joined.

You wisely keep her out of Caesar's sight,
And in safe privacies engross delight:
You never suffer her to see the Town,
And thus secure her honor and your own.

My Lord, I Would stab her, if she should presume
But to look toward, or own she dreamt of Rome?
Damnation! She Is in Court, in this Lewd Court:
I pray, my Lord, for your own sake retire,
Of my Domestic troubles take no share,
You have enough, and more than you can bare
Why, how now, Madam, am I disobeyed?
What has allured you, from your Sacred shade
To Rome, where every Vice has open sway;
Revells and Rages, in sight of day?

My Lord, I Am overjoyed with your Renown;
Spoil not my pleasure with an angry frown.
Why do you look with such a threatening brow?
My Lord, you are not in a battle now.

I Am in worse danger, as I Have cause to fear;
For you expose my life, and honor here.
If e're you come in ravenous Caesar's eye,
Your beauty Il be devoured, and I shall die.

I Will guard my self.

I Will not trust your defense;
I Will hurry you a hundred Leagues from hence.
Your Beauty shall not flourish in report;
I Will furle that banner up, remote from Court.
Shell I display your tempting white and red,
And challenge Caesar to invade my Bed;
Provoke the proud Adulterer to my Couch,
And be Procurer to my own Reproach?

You have confined me, till I wished to die;
The unborn have as much joy in life, as I.

Caesar and you I labored to divide;
But, shame and ruin, what have I denied?
I out of love, confined you to a seat,
I do not think Elezium is so sweet.
I kept you a Luxurious Court at home;
You had the pomp, without the crimes of Rome.
Had Reason Ruled you, I had pleased your mind,
But Reason is no part of womankind.
Your Lusts and Vanities no bounds admit,
You're moderate in nothing but your Wit.

This picture of our Sex, not much allures;
Now I Will endeavor to delineate yours,
Our Follies are akin, but yours are gross,
And ours from beauty have a pleasing gloss:
Your Fop is but our Ape, he paints the face,
And acts our fool without her Charming Grace:
Both Sexes vex the World with noise, and prate;
But we confound a street, and you a state,
Our fools but seldom write; your Sex is stored
With fools, who will be Coxcombs on Record,
And their impertinence through ages spread;
Your scolds in Books wrangle alive, and dead.
Fighting all Women, and most Men, abhor;
But Women Cowards have wit to keep from War.
Your mighty Tyrant Lords our beauty rules;
Your greatest Wits are gulled by Female Fools.
I Have youth, I Have youth, and pleasure I Will enjoy,
But fear me not, my birth and spirit are high,
Rather than taint my Family I Would die.

Of Caesar's wickedness I Am most in fear,
Madam, begone, you're in a mad house here;
Not where a Lunitick is held in Chains,
But where a great Imperial Madman Reigns.
Who tares the World and lays all Nations bare,
And when he has enjoyed he strips the Fair:
Of his Lewd love those are Triumphal shows,
In jovial moodes on Favorites he bestows.
The beauteous Empress I have often by night
Beheld all naked, like unclouded light,
Have often seen in wanton postures spread,
That brazen beauty on a Golden bed.

Whatever you suppose, e're I Would be food
To brutal Lust, Lions should drink my blood.

Oh! Madam, you have virtues that he slights,
And Rapes and Rapines, are his high delights.
He loves to make all Nature feel his force;
Rivers he Ravishes, and turns their course?
He levels Mountains, Elevates the Vales,
Over waves he rides, and over Lands he sails.
Nay, he builds lofty Palaces on Seas;
He scorns the Pleasure he can gain with ease:
I have been hot; but no one should admire
In a watch Tower to see a bla^ing fire.
It Is kindled up, to lend a needful light
To Mariners, in dangerous dead of night:
To tell 'em Land is near, they are cast away,
Unless they keep aloof to Sea, 'till day:
For such kind ends my passion flamed aloft,
But though my words were harsh, my heart is soft.
Now I Will no more be troublesomely wise;
Dwell where thou will, with thy own heart advise,
Study thy pleasures and regard not mine;
To my own bosom, I Will my fears confine.
But of my fortunes carve thy self thy share,
I will lock nothing from thee, but my care.

This generous Love I never can requite;
In pleasing you, I Will place my chief delight?
Rome from this moment I renounce, abjure,
I Will not the memory of Rome endure.
Nay, in my presence, no one shall presume
To mention infamous and vicious Rome.

Oh! if this Town should rightly be portrayed,
Hell must lend colors, for a dismal shade.
Climates there are, which burn the natives black,
And scorching day appears a fiery Lake.
In a more horrid Climate here we dwell,
For they are burnt by Heaven, but we by Hell.
Here bosoms often flame with incestuous fires,
And many Sons are Brethren to their Sires,
Our Emp'ror has with high-sprung Bastards stored
A thousand beds, and all his Sisters Whor'd.

Oh! Monster!

Stay: He drags thee to his bed,
And then his fear and envy take my head;
None whom he fears, will he with life entrust,
And nothing that he likes escapes his Lust.

My Chariot; -- I abhor a Court so Lewd:
Methinks it has a scent of Lust and Blood,
And I shall sicken, If I longer stay;
Therefore this very minute I Will away.

Can thou not breath in the same air with Vice?
Then thou must quit the World; thou art over nice.
Well, I Will release thee from this dire abode,
When I Have an hour on some affairs bestowed.
Then I Will along; I hurry thee from hence,
Only to save thee from lewd violence;
Not part with beauty I so highly prize,
But to secure thee to my Arms and Eyes.

I have been building, Madam, since we went.

A palace lofty as the firmament.
The Rooms with wondrous pleasure I behold.

And mark the doors; the hinges are of gold.

If Artists, Sir, can for the work be found,
I Would have the doors yield an harmonious sound,
As all the Heavens do, when ever they move;
And make this palace like the seat of Jove.
Would this were possible to human skill.

What is impossible to Caesar's Will.

No, Caesar's genius exalts every mind,
Gives a great Soul to Arts of every kind.

How do those Gardens in thy eye appear?

The face of Winter now frowns every where.

Oh! Madam! you're the favorite of a God,
And charmed all nature, when you came abroad;
The rugged Winter civilly withdrew,
And the sweet Spring looked out to gaze on you.
The Zephyrs played, and threw the clouds away,
As dancers strip, to be more light and gay.

I would enrich these Gardens, were they mine,
With Rocks of Diamonds, and Seas of Wine.
Here tides of Wine should daily ebb and flow;
The Walks with golden dust, and pearls, I Would strew,
And then I might suppose, on Stars I trod,
As it becomes the consort of a God.

Thou shall have all the Wealth that Nature yields;
These Gardens shall excel the Elizian Fields,
Or the Hesperiaen Groves, so famed of Old,
Where all the Trees bore fruit of solid Gold.
And will that please thee? Oh! how sits the Wind?
This golden Grove brings Africa to my mind.
With much impatience, I expect from thence
An Obelisk of great magnificence.
A Wonder both for stature and extent;
I Have for this Wonder, a Sea Wonder sent,
A Ship, which covers half the Sea, and more,
And with its burden makes the billows roar.

Sir, if the Ocean can the burden bear,
'Twill very soon be here, the Winds are fair.

They say, that Pyramids are Regal Tombs
Of mighty Kings, the last Retiring-Rooms.
This spacious Universe, in War overcome,
And laid in Ruins, shall be Caesar's Tomb.

Be Caesar's Tomb? Let me not see the hour
When he is entombed.

We will name Tombs no more.

Their powers to me, would Destinies resign,
Eternal should be Caesar's Life, and mine,
And all our days be smiling, and serene;
We would not know what cares, or troubles mean.

Well may we love, I Am sure our souls agree;
Then may thy life be all serenity.
And that of pleasure thou may have thy fill,
Command all Caesar's power, all humane skill.
Now, Love, prepare for Caesar's golden Couch;
The Images smile, with hopes of thy approach.
They blaze with gold, we burn with hot desire;
There we shall all appear, nay be of fire.

Is the Bed new? For I, when I Have my choice,
Let nothng, but my Caesar, touch me twice.

It is all new, and so I think art thou;
Thou never did appear so fair as now.

Perhaps from joy, some color I derive;
But I have drooping beauties I Would revive.
By this days trouble, I Have contracted soil;
Therefore, with Caesar's leave, I Would bath awhile.
From water then, I Will like a Venus rise,
And in my Caesar's arms dissolve in joys.

Water a Bath for beauty so Divine?

Water ennobl'd with the richest Wine,
Perfumes, and pearls dissolved.

Go bath an hour;
In pleasure then dissolve an Emperor.
How now, old splendid Knight? thy days decline,
But thou resolv'st to make thy evening shine;
But all the luster of thy Youth, and Age,
Has been from Buildings, Train, and Equipage.
How dare thou have the ill manners, to abstain
From War, and Honor, in a Warlike reign?

In Youth I served in War; Sir, now I Am old,
The relick of a Man.

But wrapped in gold.
Well, what is your business here?

With Caesar's leave,
From Caesar's glory pleasure to receive.
Also to let my gracious Emp'ror know
News, which perhaps some pleasure may bestow;
The Egyptian Wonder is arrived at last.

The Obelisk? Where?

It Is of a size so vast,
That, Sir, it will let nothing else appear;
And, I may say, it is almost ev'rywhere.
Sir, I believe, no Province is so large
As the great Ship that brought this monstrous charge.
I was of late forced, on a small design,
To send to Egypt a young Son of mine;
And in this Ship he found a passage home.
Sir, a great Nation might have there found room.

I Will see this Vessel, and its monstrous freight;
I Will go by Sea, prepare my Galleys straight.
Where is your Son?

Without, Sir.

Call him in.
Thou venture to the Sea? no, rather sure,
Thou have been polishing thy self awhile,
In a sweet Bath of Milk, and Wine, and Oil.
The Sea would frighten one so soft as thou,
Unless 'twas smoother than a Ladies brow.
Where blew the Wind?

In the East, where now it blows.

You mean through Flutes and Trumpets, I suppose.
The Ocean was in peace with every cloud;
The Winds were only in Wind-Musick loud.
Thou Have found at Sea a serene milky way,
And to those Waters went to dance and play,
As Ladies do to Wells, when weather's gay.
Oh! thou had rather Rome, and all the World,
Should be confounded, than thy hair uncurl'd.
Thou never would expose to rugged air,
Rings which allure, and Nets which catch the Fair.

Nature, Sir, gave me what I value more,
A great devotion for my Emperor.
Sir, in that Ornament lies all my Pride,
When Caesar pleases, any thing beside:
I can with infinite delight resign,
In duty, only I desire to shine.

Well said?

A nobler Youth I have not seen,
I love you, Sir, our tempers are akin.

The Egyptians highly flamed with zeal of late,
For Caesar's Glory, does their heat abate.

Caesar --

When Caesar's mentioned by your own,
Or any Tongue, pray, Sir, bow humbly down.

Egypt with Gods is plentifully stored,
But, Divine Caesar there is most adored.

Yes, Caesar makes a glorious Figure there,
Therefore that Kingdom greatly I revere;
And often toward that point of Heaven I bend,
Which Canopys that happy holy Land.

The Alexandrian Jews each moment feel
Dreadful effects, Sir, of Egyptian zeal.

And they shall quickly feel my fury too;
And so shall every disobedient Jew.
Their old dead Priests and Prophets they prefer
Above a living, new, young Jupiter;
Caesar I mean.

The Egyptian Jews have sent,
A noble Agent Learned and Eloquent.
His Life is Pious, and his Conduct Sage,
He Is called, by some, the Plato of the Age.

Let Us see this second Plato --
Welcome, Sir?
You are a Learned Philosopher, I Am told.
Caesar may well admit of your adress,
You have to nature intimate access,
And are her Minister; you shall be heard,
For that is a Character deserves regard.
She is my Benefactress, I must own;
I had from nature my Imperial Crown.
Nay, more a Godhead on me she bestows,
Or so it is my pleasure to suppose.
And who will plunder me of what I love;
Thunder may easier be snatched from Jove.
Your Nation spoils my Images, will you,
Assault my high Imaginations too?

To such high arrogance who dares ascend?
Sir, with the Egyptians we only contend:
We'll not thrust Caesar down, among the low
Rabble of Gods, to which the Egyptians bow.
A Leek in Egypt is a Heavenly Lord;
Cart loads of Gods their Gardens can afford.
We'll not mix Caesar with their Herds and Flocks,
Their Rams and Goats; nor yoke him with an Ox:
Nor join him with the Monsters of their Nile;
Nor link him with an Ape, a thing most vile.
All these are Gods in the Egyptian Creeds;
And for refusing this our Nation bleeds.
No Age, no Sex, the Alexandrian spare:
Our Men they murder, and they force the Fair.

Jove is a Caesar in the World above;
Caesar is in this lower World a Jove.
He Thunders often indeed, and so do I,
But he keeps always safe within his Sky;
And, in my Reign, quits not his lofty ground:
He Thunders now; I do not love that sound --
Why should I shake when I hear Thunder roar,
For I Have no fear.

Antipathy, no more.
Lions are in disorder, when they hear
A poor Cock crow; yet Lions have no fear.

These foolish qualities in Men and Beasts,
Are tricks of Nature, and her trifling jeasts.
Now will this writing Knave his Prince defame,
And with unmanly Cowardice blast my name.
Hew him to pieces Lictors; -- hold -- not yet.
How ready blockheads are to ruin Wit?
Swine shall not root in such a noble Bed,
Whence fame may spring to me when I Am dead.

What Divine Clemency does Caesar show?
What say you now? Is he a God or no?

My Galleys I will hasten to the Port,
And see the wonders that must grace the Court.

A throng of noble Youths the honor craves
To Row you, Sir, and be your Galley-slaves.

Well, let 'em Row; they will Row against the stream,
Men must tug hard if they get my esteem.

Attendants, Guards. Enter Lepidus and Salome

My Father lives, my devout prayers are heard,
Good Angels left their Heaven, to be his Guard.
The Tidings of your danger reached my ear;
Ah! what have I endeavored from tot'ring fear?

So much it would be cruelty to tell;
A thousand times she in deep swoonings fell.
When sense returned, grief failed not to revive:
Ah! how she mourned because she was alive?
And blamed us all, who forced her to retain
A miserable Life, when you were slain?
That to deprive her, we unkindly strove,
Of happy Martyrdom for filial love?

Why were thou so amazed at this Report?
Is danger any News in Caesar's Court?
Thou knewst we to a fiery furnance came,
This raging Prince is always in a flame.
Sleep cools not him, disturbed by dreams he burns,
And when he wakes, his waking dream returns,
That he is a God: We pity this Disease,
And worship not for Gods, his Images,
If the Images be Gods, we should adore
The Men that made 'em, they are something more.
It Is base born Godhead, which from Man descends,
If Caesar be a God, as he pretends,
His Godhead in Creation was displayed,
He needs no Image but the World he made.
Well, in the shameful Alexandrian Rape,
Daughter, you had the happiness to escape;
But, in this Court thou art in a dan'grous place,
And therefore, always vail thy thoughts and face.

Ay, Madam, here you are in the seat of sin;
Caesar will force the Fair he cannot win.

Oh! you have filled my heart with chilling fears,
To fly from him, I Would rush over Swords and Spears:
The Croaks of Ravens, and the Shreikes of Owls,
All boding sounds threatening departing Souls,
And to the sick approaching death proclaim;
Are not so dreadful as this Tyrants name.

OH! Madam! I was in a dreadful fright;
Had you appeared in our young Emperors fight.

Sir, I have no temptations to allure
So great a Prince, and therefore I Am secure.

Oh! you have all qualities, can be desired;
You are by all, but by your self admired.
You Are to a wonder fair, and yet not vain,
Your innocence and fame have not a stain.
You Are humble though of high extraction sprung;
Devout, and Grave, and Prudent, though young.
Like all your Fathers works, your worth is high,
With great delight perused by every eye.
Oh! if kind Heaven would grant my hearts request,
This work should be immortal like the rest.

This Charity I thankfully receive;
But affairs call me hence, I take my leave.

Affairs? no, Madam, you are too severe;
Why should not you Angels sometimes appear:
But, Angel like, you with the Heavens converse,
And with poor mortals will have no commerce.

Sir, you often talk to me of Love,

I do;
And show Religion in admiring you.
If over my heart your Virtue had no sway,
Ah! what Celestial Law should I obey?
What Revelation should not I disdain;
What miracle to me not showed in vain.

Till joined in faith, our hearts, Sir, must not join;
Our Laws, which many wonders prove Divine,
From Foreign Love strictly enclose our race:
Should I climb over those Walls to your embrace,
And boldly lay all piety aside,
You would not, Sir, accept me for your Bride,
For to Religion should I prove untrue,
You could not hope I would keep faith with you.
I sin if to your Love I lend an ear,
Therefore, in generous Charity forbear.

Oh! it is the nature of a flame to rove,
My eyes will in your presence talk of Love.
My heavy sighs will silently complain,
And own my secret languishings and pain.

Oh! I Am afraid you own your love elsewhere,
And it will reach your angry Emperors ear.
Have you confessed your Love to none.

I have;
I talk so much of Love, Men think I rave.
I mention not your name; but fair and young.
Lovely, and Love, dwell always on my Tongue;
And these serve me for every reply.
Some ask where Caesar is -- in Love -- say I.
Some ask what new raised Forces we prepare,
Against the spring; -- I answer, young and fair.
Some, if the Towns, that Caesar took, were strong;
I answer, wondrous beautiful and young.

Oh! Sir! avoid me, least I should be won,
And then you share our fate, and be undone.
To Caesar's Image we'll not humbly fall;
And now his fury flames around us all.
A horror sits on every Jewish brow;
Our Nation has a frightful aspect now.
Sir, for my peace, give your Addresses o'r,
And for your safety never see me more.

Ah! cruel doom! and not to be obeyed;
Who can live always in a mournful shade?
Well, though your Laws, and you, all hope deny,
Sweet Maid! I must love on.

Ah! so must I.
Sir, pray retire, I see my Father near;
He Will be displeased if he should find you here.

Since you command, I must, and will withdraw;
But I hope yet, in your dividing Law,
To find a passage, where our hearts may meet,
And have delights, as innocent, as sweet.

I went for a dead miracle of Art,
And a fair living Wonder charmed my heart;
A Divine beauty! she exceeds all praise:
I sent Vitellius for her, and he stays.
How dares he let my pleasure be delayed?
He knows I Am not of patient metal made.
It Is dangerous my appetites to pall,
Or make 'em await a minute, when they call.
What would you have?

Caesar was pleased to send
His Orders to us, that we should attend.

My Lords, you are all deep in Caesar's debt,
For Caesar's Wars; and crimes you often commit.

Into Court-mysteries we dare not pry;
Caesar's Commands are writ (we know not why)
In Characters, which can be read by none;
So into faults we fall, to us unknown.

You say my characters cannot be read;
Our Roman Priests, and Lawyers, earn their Bread
By turning Laws, and Jupiter's Commands,
To mystic stuff, no mortal understands.
Thus they deceive you, yet never repine;
You are their fools, why should you not b^

Sir, when your Will you legibly express,
We to our duty readily address

No; for my Wars, when I exact my due,
No streams are louder murmurers than you.
The World is all my own, it is all Crown-Land:
I reign from Heaven to Hell; -- perhaps beyond.
You live on the Estates I Am pleased to lend,
Yet you would have me upon your Alms depend.
You are the Consuls.

Yes, great Sir, we are.

Those Offices you shall no longer bear
I Will choose a Consul, that has Youth and Force,
Spirit and Fire; I Will choose my favorite Horse.
You Are rul^d by Brutes, who are not half so wise;
How often Fools to Magistracy rise?
Elephants carry Castles in the East;
Here Towers and Towns often support a Beast.
You Will honor, only for his noble breed,
A Blockhead, and why not a noble Steed?
Our Roman Priests rule every Soul and Purse,
Yet they have no more Religion than my Horse.
Begone! begone! the charming beauty's won;
Through all my veins enlivening pleasures run.
The news! the news!

Sir, ere she was aware,
We snatched her up, and forced her to a Chair;
And then she shrieked, and tore her beauteous hair.

I would lose nothing of her, it is confessed,
Except her hair; thou have brought all the rest.

Yes, Sir.

Go, bring her.

I Am in Caesar's power;
I came to Rome in a dark fatal hour.
Oh! Caesar!

Goddess! -- so no doubt you are;
No mortal can be so divinely fair.
Nay, nay, at my request, sweet Madam, rise;
Let all your Graces entertain my eyes:
To Caesar grant the infinite delight
To touch, and see a hand so soft and white.
Were all thy other beauties cheats of Art,
This hand might palm a passion on my heart.
Where have you lived?

In Woods remote from hence;
And, till this hour, in peaceful innocence.

In Woods? there were no shades, whilst you shone there:
Why would you not at Caesar's Court appear,
But hide, in a remote and lonely Grove,
The only perfect Workmanship of Jove?
I saw you walk by Tibur, all alone,
In a fair Garden, bord'ring on my own;
And in amazing rapture, and transport,
I sent this Lord to bring you to my Court.

Sir, I am married to a valiant Lord,
Who has served Caesar nobly with his Sword.

He loves thee not; else he would love to show
The happiness in thee his Stars bestow:
For all Mankind are ostentatious, vain;
And pleasures, when exposed, most entertain.
Men think their fortunes droop, when they are concealed,
And pleasure sweetest, when it is air'd revealed.
And of my Empire too, he has possessed
A part, I value above all the rest;
By Venus, I would rather quit my Throne.
Madam, I may and will assume my own.

A thousand painful deaths I Will rather choose.

I die a painful death if you refuse.
Madam, my Time, nay more, my Life you waste;
Yes, Madam, now it is Treason to be chaste.

Sir, for the World I Would not my Honor lose.

Oh! I Am the Fountain whence all Honor flows.
Yes, Madam; sure you are not to be told,
Men honor nothing more than Power, and Gold.
I can make Virtue scorned, and Vice esteemed;
I can make Hell adored, and Heaven blasphemed.
Success, Dominion, and the longest Sword,
Make any Creeds believed, or Gods adored.

Oh! save me! save me! all you Powers above!

I will hear nothing, from that voice, but love.

Assist me, gracious Gods! without delay!

Does she love noise? then let my music play.

This Bath has cleans'd my blood, and made it thin;
Has revived all the Lillies in my skin,
The Roses in my cheeks, with such a red
The blushing morning leaves her watery Bed.
This way my Caesar went, as I Am informed --
The door is shut the Castle must be stormed.

Who Is there? --

Your Empress.
I look wondrous well.
Now all my Sex, nay, I my self excel:
Fresh Roses in my Cheeks now sweetly blow.
Your Emp'ror went this way not long ago.

Over that Beauty? Yes, I must confess,
That has been long his only Paradise.
There his heart lived, there his Lips often strayed;
But Caesar now is by new Beauty swayed.
Madam, your pleasure with your humble slave?

I Have business --

With your Glass; -- I see you have.
Well, we have now three Empresses in Town;
This beauteous Empress here, whose falling Crown,
Unknown to her, sits loosely on her head;
One Empress in a Glass, and one in Bed.

I think I never look so clear and fair;
I Will steal on Caesar, like a shape of air.

Most Sacred Madam, Caesar now retires
For great affairs, and privacy desires.

From me?

From all the World, for half an hour.

Dare you oppose me? then I Have lost my power;
And some new beauty over Caesar Reigns:
My blood will start out of my swelling Veins.

Caesar indeed, too often to his cost,
Injures himself and you; himself the most:
And your misfortune you have rightly guest.

My heart can never have a moments rest.
Why do I loyter whilst my interests bleed?
Ha! stop me: You are a bold bawd indeed
Were thou a flaming Mountain I Would not stay,
But through thy burning bowels force my way.

How now? from whence is this presumptious noise
Who dares break in on Caesar's Privacies?

Love is the offender, Sir; Love urged me on
To stay your heart, e're it is for ever gone.
For I am told, my Interests decline;
You have found Beauty that charms more than mine.

Come, Madam, you are Luxurious, Haughty, Vain;
Caesar you love, because you love to Reign.

Caesar I love more than his Glorious Crown;
And I love Caesar let him smile or frown.
Aetna did never with more fury burn:
I love to madness, and as madly mourn.

Oh! you are mad no doubt, for who is not?
Cowards are mad, they fear they know not what.
What death is to the living never was shown:
Life is not more to the unborn unknown.
The brave are mad, for fame they will madly die,
Which after death they hope not to enjoy.
The Learned are mad, and madly tear their brains
For knowledge; which no mortal e're attains.
And what confusion from Learned madness springs,
Among Religions, Laws, States, Realms, and Kings?
And yet in Schools, where thoughtfull madness Reigns
The mad are free, and Books are bound in Chains:
The vicious are all mad, by Laws confined:
The Virtuous are more mad, themselves they bind:
And Jove was mad, when he made mad Mankind.
There Is one great flaw runs through the Earth and Sky;
And every God and Man is mad, but I.

Would I were mad; I should be more at ease,
And have no sense of all my Miseries.
New Beauties vanquish Caesar every hour;
Then how does raging grief my heart devour?
My heart to Caesar fixed, more torment feels,
Than if he dragged me at his Chariot wheels.

I love, and hunt variety, it is true:
And does not Mother nature love it too?
Good Gods! how does she vary humane mold?
She often makes new faces of the Old.
If any have in Life continued long,
We always say they are Old we do 'em wrong;
And if we called 'em Young, it is but their due,
Their Shapes and Features are entirely new.
How often does nature change us e're we die?
She loves new faces, then why should not I?
In chase of change my Nature loves to run,
Yet to amazement I have doted on.
Two years and more, I have thy will obeyed;
Others enjoyed seem in a night decayed.
They Have sprung to Caesar's Bed, young, lovely, gay;
And I have thought 'em old by break of day,
Have thought 'em dead with age: and I Have decreed
To burn 'em or embowel 'em with speed.
But to thy arms I Have been two years confined;
Thou Art an Enchantress and can fix the wind,
Back to its spring can make a torrent run,
And stop the fiery Chariot of the Sun.
The Beauty only could not have the Power
To fix my heart: never see Caesar more.

Oh! these eternal Tempests who can bear?
I Will rather sink into profound despair.
I Am hourly broken on a golden shore,
A barren beach could not afflict me more.
I never in your presence will appear;
I ll Labor to forget you ever were.
No Image of you shall my griefs renew:
And so a long farewell to Love and you.

Come back?

Only to love, and mourn in vain,
And be a follower, id my Rivals train?

I Will have thee wracked, to make thee own the art,
Which thus eternally enslaves my heart.
When any one but thee I Have often embraced,
Corrupted Water has a sweeter taste.
But thee I never can abandon long:
Thy tempting Beauty, and Enchanting Tongue,
Soon make the wandering Gods of Love return;
And now once more with violence I burn.

Oh! Caesar, Caesar! tempt my heart no more:
For can I moderately Love, Adore,
A Prince so Great, so Graceful, so Divine?
Ah! what do I enjoy whilst Caesar's mine?
And when I loose his heart, does he believe
That I can calmly, moderately grieve?

I know in Love my Godhead I exert,
Therefore I Am loved by thy voluptuous heart.
Cast from thy mind all jealousy and fear;
I ll never forsake thee, by my Life I swear.

Your heart no beauty scarce an hour endures
I could dwell years upon a kiss of yours.

Thou art a Golden Harp Divinely tuned,
What Statue would not dance to such a sound?
Raze from thy memory my sinful hours,
And all my little vagabond amors;
They Are meteors, and like other vagrants poor,
Soon wast their fires, and then appear no more.
Others no more the riots can supply
Of such an Epicure in Love as I;
Than a Plebeian fortune can support
My Guards, my Fleets, my Armies, and my Court.
But my excursions from thy arms improve
Thy joys and mine, and make new springs in Love.
So an Arabian gains by his retreats,
The livelier sense of his o'recoming sweets.

Cost what it will, to Caesar's arms I Will fly,
I cannot pay too dear for so much joy.

Oh! Welcome to my arms my Charming Love?

Welcome to mine: my young Illustrious Jove.
Oh! my excess of Love gluts Caesar's heart.
If I were wise I Would temperate Love with art;
But I am too immoderately kind

Have I a temperate and a moderate mind?
Is Caesar to thy heart no better known?
Give me extravagant delights or none.
Moderate delight is but a waking dream:
And of all pleasures, Love is the supreme.
And therefore Love immoderate Love deserves:
Excess o'recomes, but moderation starves.
Fear not my wanderings; for go where I will,
I Am in my Empresses dominion still.

And though he wonders, I love Caesar still.
Caesar! methinks the name of Caesar charms.
Caesar I love, though in a Rivals arms.
More in my own embraces, I confess:
And I will Love to infinite excess.

Love to excess, thou art infinitely fair,
In my delights I can no limits bear.
But (for what reason never could he known)
Our joys have bounds, and our desires have none.

Oh! I have met with News, which makes me flame;
And every eye upbraids me with my shame.
My services have met a kind reward:
The hour I quitted my Domestic Guard,
The Emperors Bawds ravished my Wife away;
And he is devouring now the Luscious prey.
She comes --
Oh! Julia! what has Caesar done?

Oh! my Lord! leave me to my griefs alone.
Do not look on me, I Am a hateful sight,
And long to hide in everlasting night.
As in my Garden I walked all alone,
Securely, as I thought, unseen, unknown,
The Emperor, from an Apartment nigh,
Often beheld me with a greedy eye,
And forced me thence. -- Let me not tell the rest;
Oh! thou most wronged of Men, and yet the best.

New Giants have bound Jove, so he lies still,
And lets this filthy Tyrant take his fill
Of Whoredom, Blood, Rapes, Incest, what he will.
Had Caesar ravished from me all my Lands,
Bottomless treasures, numberless commands,
But to thy beauty never had approached,
Had left me thee unblemished, and untouched;
My heart is so devoted to thy love,
I would not have changed happiness with Jove.

Oh! my dear Lord, your wrongs with patience bear,
Trust not your dangerous passions to the air.

Revenge, revenge, my love I must pursue,
The Tyrant with more ease I can subdue.
And fear him not; for as the lofty Sky,
And bright full Moon, attract a mad man's eye,
This gaudy Tyrant's meditations gaze
On the bright splendors that around him blaze,
And so to others no regard he pays.
Like a fierce Panther I will hunt my prey,
And with his blood wash all my spots away.
Come, let me lead thee home.

Can you endure
To touch, or to approach one so impure?
I hate to touch my self; to draw my breath
It makes me sick; and I am sick to death.
For Love I prize, for Love I lose my life;
I lived your chaste, and die your martyred Wife.

Oh! Caesar! Caesar! thou shall feel my Sword;
Shall is too sluggish, and too faint a word.
The Tyrant's fallen, on his Neck I tread;
He Is dying by my Sword; nay more, he is dead.
But can one death for all his crimes atone?
He breaks thy Laws: Oh! Nature! break thy own
Let him have many Lives, be often born,
That he may often be in pieces torn.

RUN to my Lord, desire his swift return,
For I Have drunk Poison, and I burn, I burn.
Oh! my dear Lord! I Have done my honor right,
And Death will soon transport me out of sight;
For I am all in a consuming flame,
I burn with poison, and I burn with shame.

With poison?

Poison; but I Have never been
With a worse poison tainted, shameful sin.
Oh! I abhor the thought.

I Have no distrust.

I Have been inviolably true, and just.
No one can have a Soul more clear than I
From foul desires; -- for Caesar's sin I die.

I do believe thou art as chaste as fair;
Wound not thy wound^d heart, thy griefs I share.
How much I value thee thou have not known,
Because I love thee more than can be shown.
I, out of love, concealed thee in a shade.

And your Commands I boldly disobeyed,
And came to Rome. --
The fatal fault forgive;
And, at the least, oh! love me, whilst I live.

Ay, and for ever; rise, sweet Julia, rise,
Rise to my arms, thou life of all my joys,
But a departing life my Julia dies.

Oh! would to Heaven I had died, before
This shameful violation. -- Oh! no more.
My blushing cheeks glow with a fiery red;
In thy dear bosom, let me hide my head.

How blessed was he, before this heavy wrong,
In a soft beauty, constant, chaste, and young.
In this sweet Lady all perfections join;
I never had a pleasing hour with mine.

When I am dead, strew me all over, I pray,
With flowers, to show that I was chaste as they.

As sweet, and lovely too.

They fade, and die,
When they are rudely touched; and so do I.
Oh! my blood rises, my cheeks glow again;
Why should I blush for wicked Caesar's sin?

The least undecent thought thou can not bear;
Thy Virtue, to its self, is too severe.

Oh! see! the Souls of Vestal Virgins come,
To welcome me, and grace my martyrdom;
They Are all in Robes, whiter than mountain Snow.

Alas! she raves.

Do you not see 'em?

No.

Then I perceive, the modest beauties shun
The sight of men; therefore begone, -- begone.
I shall in triumph to Elysium go;
It Is a great honor, Ladies, you bestow.
Oh! they retire. -- Ladies, return again,
Admit me into your sacred spotless Train.
I Am chaste as you, though not so fair in fame;
For wicked Tongues, I know, will wrong my Name,
Throw on my memory undeserved disgrace;
But your sweet Groves will hide my blushing face.
Oh! they are going, stay sweet Virgins, stay;
They Are gone! they are gone! you have frightened 'em away.
And I Am with strangers left I know not where.

Thou Art in his arms, to whom thou art wondrous dear.

Ha! you are Caesar.

No, sweet Julia, no;
I Am Caesar's mortal, and eternal foe.

Well, you are a man, and every man I dread.
-- Who Is this? my Lord? I knew not what I said.
In my few moments, that my thoughts should rove
From him, whom I so dearly, dearly love.

Lean, lean, my Julia, on my panting breast,
My love and sorrow cannot be expressed.

I Am going where no wicked Tyrant reigns;
Preserve my memory

All thy dear Remains.

Heaven knows how I Have been faithful to your Bed?
I Have loved you to my death, shall love when dead.
Elysium can to me no bliss afford,
Till in those happy shades I meet my Lord:
Till then -- farewell. --

She Is going -- she is gone.
Ah! see, what beastial tyranny has done.
Her beauty's gone; Death has deflowered her too,
What I so loved I Have not the heart to view.
Cover her face; forbear a while-those pale
Departing beauties, Death too long will veil.
I will have one cold kiss before we part.
Revenge! Revenge! Oh, how it swells my heart?

Be well prepared; Rome loves a vicious Prince,
All the corrupt will rise in his defense.

Well, if Rome rises, I will raise it higher,
For I Will exalt it to the Clouds in fire.
But it is dispirited; and dares not rise;
And Caesar's scorned by all the brave and wise.

Proud Tyrants who no bounds of law endure
Are common foes; and never are secure;
Their lofty Thrones they seldom long enjoy:
Streif Lions all men labor to destroy.

Oh, tremble Caesar; prodigies appear,
Which say, if there be Gods, thy fall is near.
Prodigious Virtue in this Beauty shone;
Her Cause and Justice live, though she is gone.
Thy own prodigious Crimes thou have cause to dread;
Vengeance they will hurl at thy devoted head.
Eclipses are thought frightfull omens too:
This sad Eclipse thou may with terror view,
It threats thy life -- View it, ye Gods forbid;
His frantic Lust would violate the dead.
Methinks I talk too much in words abound,
And my Revenge evaporates in sound.

Will you not set the gallant Cassius free?

And steal by stabs, revenge, and liberty?
My honor in full splendour I Will maintain,
I Will by fair War end this inhuman Reign.
This night, for mine, and universal good,
The Sun shall set in blood, Imperial blood.

Beauty I love, but I hate toilsome Rapes;
I love good Wine, but would not tread the Grapes.
The Chaste are cold, therefore I hate the Chaste;
Fruits in cold climes have an insipid taste.
I Am told by Oracles my death is nigh.

Your death!

my death; all I suspect shall die.
Valerius first shall perish by my Sword;
He can in battle face his Sovereign Lord.

Nay, he is provoked, and therefore dangerous grown.

Provoked by pride to mount the Imperial Throne.
And by Revenge provoked to take my life,
Because I forced his fair, young virtuous Wife.
Cassius Cheraea's honest, though not bold:
Valerius has confined him, I am told.
In the mad Revels of his Rage, no doubt,
Valerius let some dangerous secrets out,
Which now he would lock up in the dark from me:
But I Will unravel all the Villainy.

The Jews informed, that if they dare deny
To worship Caesar's Image, they shall die;
Bey Audience.

Villains -- They would not presume
To slight my Will, had they not found in Rome
Rebellious spirits: and when they appear,
A Prince's fall and death are often too near.
Nay, a young Roman, I reproved of late,
For being Wanton, Soft, Effeminate,
Useless to Caesar and to all mankind
Except the Fair -- has sawcily designed
To wed a Jewess, now in Caesar's Court:
With Caesar's anger none shall dare to sport.
I Will reform Rome, and all shall feel my Sword,
Whose names are written in this black Record,
Then I Will to Egypt, where I Am most adored.
Bring in the Jews.

What would you have? --
Those carvings there look well --

Permission, Sir --

Permission to Rebel? --

We Sacrifice for Caesar every day.

You Sacrifice for Caesar often, you say,
But not to Caesar. How dare you presume
To give my honor to I don't know whom?

Leave to enjoy those rights we humbly crave,
Your glorious Ancestor Augustus gave.

What are those rights?

They Are by long custom known;
And all derived by the Imperial Throne.
The Alexandrians slight our lofty claim;
And hourly put our dwellings in a flame,
Plunder our Treasures, seize on all our Lands,
And often in our blood embrue their hands.
The lives of thousands --

Ha! the lives you say?
Oh! now my Waterworks begin to play.

Audience from Caesar Water works can gain;
A bleeding Nation humbly begs in vain.

These streams are sweeter murmurers than you:
Now these apartments let us a moment view.
See there Gods ride on Clouds.

Can painting give
A life to shadows, one would think they live.

You Have rights derived from the Imperial Throne?
There I Will have Windows of transparent Stone.
Which shall the fury of the Sun allay
The fiery River of a flaming day,
Will through those channels coolly, mildly pass:
Glass windows in hot climes are burning-Glass
Have you a Patent? -- come let it be seen --

Under the Imperial Seal --

Of Heaven you mean;
For you are the Almighty' darling choice:
Your prayers have in Heaven a casting voice.
And all your Rams which at your Altars dye,
Prove batt'ring Rams, it seems and force the Sky.
Go; you are cheated fools or saucy cheats:
And above Caesar raise your vain conceits:
Throw down the Statues of the World's great Lord,
Whilst your Imaginations are adored,
I will put all your Nation to the Sword.

A Glorious Prince!

We patiently resign
Our selves to Heavens Will.

And shall to mine.
You have a Daughter now in Rome, it is said,
Whom a young Roman dares presume to Wed.
Oh! Pastor, you have a Son, who dares design
To wed a fair young enemy of mine.

I never heard this dreadful News before;
If Thunder-stricken could I tremble more?

Sir, our unhappy Children I perceive,
Have wickedly without their Parents leave
Or knowledge, stolen into a Marriage vow,
I never knew they Leagued or Loved 'till now.

On this offense, I Will lay a dreadful fine;
Which shall be paid, by thy Sons blood or mine.
Secure the old Knight; and then with speed and care,
Search for his Son: Conceal him they that dare.
Philosopher, you would have your Tribes submit,
Not to my Will, but to your aspiring Wit.
Say my pretenses to Celestial power,
Are lofty frolicks of my mind, no more;
Will you presume to give my pleasure Law?
I Will be adored to keep the World in awe;
Ay, and by you; if you dare disobey,
Your death shall be among my sports to day.

We must adore him; if he is disobeyed,
We dye, for Caesar's sport were Nations made
By power Celestial, infinitely good,
For Caesar's Lust to glory, power, and blood?
Oh! Sir! you have wronged me; cruelly beguiled
Your Friend of his beloved and only Child.

Indeed I have not, Sir; I will confess,
I fought to gain her, but with no success.
Sir, my addresses she would not receive,
Or lend an ear to 'em, without your leave;
And that I sought not, for I feared 'twas vain,
I know your zeal: But, Sir, did she complain?

I heard the News in Court, and not till now:
It has reached Caesar's ears, I know not how.
The Emperor no contempt with ease endures;
'Till you appear, your Father he secures.
And if from Caesar's fierce Revenge you fly,
Your aged Father for your fault will die.

Oh! Lovely Maid! for death I must prepare,
My sweet commerce with one so wondrous fair,
Has fallen, it seems, under the envious Eye
Of some Court-whisperer, and I must die.

This dire event, I always did forebode,
And lost the pleasure which thy Love bestowed.
I Have loved thee though my Love I have not shown,
More than 'twas fit a modest Maid should own.

Oh! what delightful harmony I hear?
But I must meet the death, which is too near*
For angry Caesar now in Court secures
My tender Father, and he threatens yours.
If I abscond they both will die, I fear;
Therefore, to save 'em both I must appear.

Ah! dreadful News! then thou art ensnared indeed,
Almighty Father of the World with speed
To this brave pious Youth send succor down;
For the Religion to his Father shown.
Let not the World so great a treasure loose;
But let some other Angel interpose.

Some other Angel? then thou think me one,
What happiness I loose? I must be gone,
Methinks I hear my suffering Father groan.
Farewell, sweet Love --

Farewell? ah! killing word.
He parts from me to rush on Caesar's Sword
From loving me my genrous Lover dies.

And yet that Love above my life I prize.
Ah! Caesar comes? trust me to Heavens defense,
But not thy Beauty to this Lustful Prince.

Oh! I had rather be in pieces torn
By raging Lions, or in Aetna burn.

Sir, to redeem my Father, I appear
Unforced, unfound, and come a Voluntier.

You love a Jewess.

Sir, I do indeed.
I love her Beauty, Virtue, not her Creed.
We may accept good Foreign Coin, though there
The Images of Caesar's Foes appear.

Were she worth Love, she would thy Love despise;
And rather choose a Lover, brave and wise:
Whose Cheeks are drained of all their blood by wounds,
But his good Sword with noble blood abounds;
His locks are gone, old time has cut that Comb,
But Fame and Wisdom sprout up in the room;
Then a young fool, whose brains flow all in hair,
But has no heart, and a wit bald and bare.

This from the most Effeminate Prince alive:
With thy own Lusts and Vices, Caesar strive.

Too many worthless Youths now cumber Room,
Who derive all their honors from the Womb.
They bask in luster, which their birth bestows,
And in the lap of Fortune dully dose.
To leave their sloth, and take a noble course,
The Trumpets seem with frequent summons hoarse.
The grumbling Drums urge 'em to War in vain;
The Drones have Warlick glory in disdain.
And from their wealth and ease no more can rise,
Then from their amber tombs poor lifeless flies.
Begone; thou art an offense to Caesar's eye:
Go to thy Father and prepare to die.

My self to death with pleasure I resign,
Hoping I shall redeem his life with mine.

Go, let Cher^ea speedily be brought.

He Is come.

A Prisoner, Cassius? What Is thy fault?

My Lord, Valerius, who has been my Friend,
Sir, 'twas my great misfortune to offend.

Confess the truth, save thy own life and mine:
From his proud heart some dangerous design
Broke in thy hearing, e're he was aware,
And then he locked it up from taking air.

He Is close and dark, I believe loyal too;
I love a Virgin in the dark, it is true,
Not Treason, Sir, with the most lovely face:
But I Have not seen him since his last disgrace.

His nature's visible enough, he is proud;
He Courts the Senate, purchases the crowd,
By their assistance to ascend the Throne:
Power is the Idol of his heart, it is known.
This night the memory of Augustus claims:
With all Magnificence, and public games,
I fail not to adorn it, every year:
And I shall have a great assembly here.
This Evening my Tragedians represent
Some of those Fables, Priests of Hell invent.
Then Rome shall be a Hell and flow in blood,
A noble Fable for an interlude.
Cassius, I Will try the metal of thy Sword,
Thou shall have the honor to obey thy Lord.

Caesar makes bloody hangmen of his Guard --
We to a noble Office are preferred.
When his mind changes (which will be soon,
For it has more new faces than the Moon,
And influences more this lower World)
We, by new hangmen, shall to Hell be hurled.
My resolutions I have let you know,
And you embraced 'em; now let us give the blow,
For which sick trembling Rome in secret longs:
Let Us give her freedom and Revenge her wrongs.
The Tyrant by our aid, Robs, Burns, Devours:
Let Us put an end to all her guilt and ours.

Rome has inborn aversions to a Prince:
And I am warned to stand on my defense
By Oracles and Dreams -- Sleep shuns my eyes;
I Am angry that I need such poor supplies.
Time by immortal natures may be spared;
But from short life to take a third seems hard.

Thanks to the Gods in yonder beauteous Bower.
You slept of late.

How long?

Almost an hour,
Ten minutes short: for, Sir, I proudly own,
I numbered 'em, and then I penned 'em down.
Whatever Caesar does (a Prince adored
By half mankind) is worthy of Record.

Then did I dream from Heaven (where I was Crowned)
Jove spurned me to the Earth; nay, under the ground.
The Earth then yawn'd, and with a frightfull roar
Closed over my head, and I was seen no more.
Dark Treason lurks in Rome, I know not where.
I Am in disorder -- Rogues will call it fear,
And so will impudent Historians too;
How do they blacken Kings, they never knew?
Of their own vain imaginations proud
Into their stories sawcily they crowd.
Their own Reflections, Dreams, and false Conceits;
So lie with Kings, in the same fine wrought sheets,
All Rome but I, now with delight abounds:
Let Music try, with sweet enchanting sounds
To calm my stormy thoughts, to lull my care.
Music charmed Hell and all the furies there
My Guards! my Guards.
How now? does Rome Rebel?

One of your Statues shook and groaned, then fell;
The assembly frightened then, in tumults rose;
And with blood rained from Heaven the pavement flows.

For Caesar's danger nature is in pain:
There is more truth in Marble than in Men.
The fall of Rome, or Caesar's death is near:
I Will have the blood of all I Have cause to fear.
Go and prepare for this design to night,
And we'll to morrow forage in delight.

Now our great work no longer let us retard.
Strike when I strike.
Sir, I am on the Guard:
Be pleased to give the Word.

Stay! let me see! --
Priapus; -- that is a fit word for thee.

Ha! I am murdered! murdered! by my Guard!

No, no; a murderer meets his just reward.

I Am yet alive

How many lives have thou?
Thou have a thousand if thou art living now.
Had we not killed thee, thousands must have died
By us; as victims to thy bloody pride,
They could no way, but by thy fall escape:
'Twas on my innocence a cruel rape.
Death I expect, and I Will prepare to die:
Not by the Councels of Philosophy,
I will converse with beauty more Divine,
And be inspired by Love, and Songs, and Wine.
My self for death with pleasure I Will compose,
And give my life an entertaining close.
What should this mean? No matter what, away;
Lest you be cut in pieces if you stay.

I am yet living, and the Villains fly;
I shall revenge my death before I die.

Where is this Ravisher of beauteous Wives,
Of Virgins, Realms, Religions, Laws, and Lives?

Valerius? then my death was thy design;
I Am butcher^d here, by Cowardly Rogues of thine.

Cowards I hate, and Cowardly treason scorn,
I Will keep unstained the Laurels I have worn.
A brave Revenge I fairly sought and won:
I Have beat thy Guards, and thou art left alone.
I Have given thy dreadful power a dangerous blow:
Thou and thy lofty Throne both struggle now.

I Am going! -- going! -- whither -- who can tell.

Whither all Tyrants go; to burning Hell.

I Would rather sink into the Hell I dread,
Than at a Rascals foot -- thus -- lay my head.

So, he is fallen, he who lately trod
On all mankind, and called himself a God,
That he was mortal to his cost he found,
And in his blood now wallows on the ground.

He wished all Rome had but one neck, it is said,
That at one blow he might all Rome behead.

Ay, but he found too many hands in Town,
And hands, it seems, as bloody as his own.
A debauched vicious Prince does often find
It Is very dangerous to corrupt mankind.
It Is odds, he by his own corruption dies,
And crimes by crimes justly the Gods chastize.
For Cassius speedily search all the Town,
For he has wronged my honor and his own.
He wrought, no doubt, the Villainy I feared;
But by his death my honor shall be cleared.

My Caesar murdered! stand away -- forbear;
Now I Have lost Caesar, what have I to fear.
Oh! here is my Caesar, I so Loved, Adored;
Lord of the World, I Am sure Gesonia's Lord,
Mangled by Villains, here in blood he lies,
In his own blood -- Caesar, who gave my eyes,
Ay, and my heart, such infinite delight,
Is now a mournful, and a dreadful Sight.
The World to me is all a desert now;
For a lost Caesar, Gods, revenge bestow.
Revenge all Princes, by this horrid deed
All thrones are shaken, and all Princes bleed.
Revenge two Lovers, here by Villains torn;
One murdered, and I only live to mourn
Revenge my Princely Babe, from Caesar sprung,
It cannot sin, why should it suffer wrong?
Now the Tree's fallen, the little branch will soon
Decay and wither -- Oh! I faint! -- I swoun --

Help her!

Stand off; I Have pleasure in my grief
Except revenge, I desire no relief.
Take up the precious relics of your Prince:
Oh! take 'em up, whilst I Have remains of sense.
Oh! gently! gently! if you be humane,
His wounds pain me, and he feels all my pain
For his Cesonia he more dearly Loves,
Than all the beauties in the Elizian Groves.
Come, my dead Lord, with thy Cesonia dwell:
In Love at least, I all my Sex excel.
Now in the dead, and death are all my joys:
I Will weep till tears and death have quenched my eyes.

Unhappy Princess! the worst fault she had.
Was an excess of Love, for one so bad
Now bring the sentenced Prisoners in, with speed,
Whose unjust deaths, the Tyrant had decreed.
Your fortunes and freedoms I restore.
The tyrants dead, he will plague the World no more.

The dreadful Emp'ror dead! good news indeed.
Oh! to his Vices may no Prince succeed.

Oh! my dear Love!

My Love! art thou so near?
Oh! how durst thou expose thy beauty here?

Ask me no Questions, I am mad with Joy,
And have not sense to make thee a reply.
I in distraction came to die with thee,
Die in thy arms, and find thee safe and free.

Go, marry; of each other take your fill;
And now you Jews, go, believe what you will.

Yes, marry, Son; thou have nobly earned my leave.

Oh! with what joy this favor I receive.

Most Gallant Youth, not many minutes since,
When the keen weapon of a dreadful Prince
Was on your Father drawn, you stepped between;
Such an Example we have rarely seen.
Now shall we turn the edge of Law on you?
More favor to your piety is due.
My Daughter, Sir, I to your arms resign.

Oh! my dear Love, thou art mine.

And thou art mine.

The Imperial Throne I can with ease ascend,
I know no power which can with mine contend:
But should I reign, the World which thinks me proud
Will charge me with the Guilt of Caesar's blood,
And say, the horrid Villainy was done
By my command; that I might mount the throne.
I Would rather be an honest slave, I swear,
Than buy the Empire of the world so dear.
I never yet in crimes employed my Sword:
When I Have the Senate to their right restored,
And revenged Caesar, as our Laws require;
I Will to some quiet privacy retire,
And there disarmed, and all my powers laid down,
I will be great in nothing but renown,
And in my solitude till death I^ll mourn
Over my Martyred Julia's sacred Urn.

SO mad a Tyrants part I act to day,
That you will think him mad who wrote the Play.
In Comic humors he takes most delight,
And yet he rants in Tragedy to night;
And strives to give diversion for an hour,
With a young Prince, mad with excess of power.
He had that mighty power you all desire;
Power you all love, and labor to acquire,
Some have desired a French Invasion here
For under them, they hoped to domineer:
But, Oh! should France this nobler Realm subdue,
Every Dragoon would be a Caesar too.
Poor Rogues, who for three-half-pence sell their Lives,
Would lord it over your Lands, your Selves, your Wives.
What wretched slavery is, we show to day,
It Is well you only see it in a Play:
Thanks to the Brave, who well deserve their pay.
Some gentle pity we have hopes to move
By the misfortunes of sweet virtuous Love.
The nicest Lady need not blush today,
At least, at what the Women do or say.
Chaste all the beauties are they represent,
Their loves are Conjugal or Innocent.
We are young actors; yet we hope to please
By Acting Love, for love with youth agrees.
You love the Actors, who have pleased you long;
But the Images of Love should all be young.
SInging in Plays is grown so much in vogue,
I had some thoughts to sing the Epilogue.
Since singing such delight to you affords,
To please you, we'll all turn Canary Birds.
When I Am a Woman, which will be e'ne long,
No Man, I swear, shall have me for a Song,
If you will tempt me, do it with glittering Gold,
And those enchanting words, To have and hold.
I^ll on those Terms yield to some worthy Man,
Have me he may, and hold me if he can.
Well, let me be an Actress I Am content,
Provided, Gallants, you will give your consent;
I mean your generous Encouragement.
But to the famous Actors you resort,
Who fled from us to an old Tennis-Court.
Thither let all the old Gallants repair,
And toss and racket the fine Beauties there,
Applaud, admire 'em, and do what they will:
If you young Sparks, will please sometimes to fill
And grace our House, with an alluring throng:
Methinks you should, for most of us are young.
Tender young plants, most of our Women are;
Some, it is said, are ripe enough to bear.
Here Is a Spring-Garden which deserves your care.


The SCENE, the Imperial Palace of Rome, the Time, the last ho^^ of the
Emperor's Life

A Mathematical Compendium, or the Description and Use of a new sliding Rule,
by which many Useful and Necessary Questions in Arithmetic, Military Orders,
Interests, Trigonometry, Planometry, Sterenometry, Geography, Astronomy,
Navigation, Fortification, Gunnery, Dyalling, may be speedily resolved without
the help of Pen or Compasses. By William Hunt, Philomath

A Discourse upon the Nature and Faculties of Man, in several Essays: With some
considerations on the Occurrences of Human Life. By Tim. Nourse Gent

Familliar Letters, written by John late Earl of Rochester, to the Honorable
Henry Savile Esquire and other Persons of Quality, with Love Letters, written by
the late Ingenious Mr. Ottway, and several Letters written by Sir George
Ethridge, the late Duke of Buckingham, etc. in two Volumes, each Vol. may be
had singly

Ovid Travestie: or a Burlesque on Ovid's Epistles, by Captain Alaxander
Radcliff

The Novels, etc. of the late Ingenious Mrs. Behn, Collected into one Vol. viz.
Oroonoko, or the Royal Slave. Fair Jilt, or Prince Tarquin. Agnes de Castro, or
the force of Generous Love. The Lovers Watch, or the Art of Love. The Ladies
Looking-Glass. The Lucky Mistake: And the History of the Nun, or fair
Vow-breaker

Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning. By William Wotton, B. D.
Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham. The Second Edition,
with Large Additions. With a Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris,
Themislocles, Socrates, Euripides, etc. and Aesop's Fables, by Dr. Bentley

The Family Physician; being a choice Collection of Approved and Experienced
Remedies, to cure all Diseases incident to Human Bodies, useful in Families,
and serviceable to Country People, by George Hartman Chemist, Servant to Sir
Kelemn Digby, till he died

A General Treatise of the Diseases of In^ants and Children, Collected from the
most Eminent Practical Authors, by John Pechey, of the College of Physicians

Contemplations Moral and Divine, in three parts, Written by the late Lord
Chief Justice Hales, to which i^ added the Life of the Author, by Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum. The third part may be had singly

Cocker's Decimal Arithmetic, the Second Edition, very much enlarged, by John
Hawkins Schoolmaster at St. George's Church in Southwark

Vade Mecum, or the necessary Companion, containing Sir Sam. Moreland's
Perpetual Almanac, showing the days of the Month ^or any year, Past, Present,
or to come; a Table of the Kings Reigns since the Conquest, compared with the
years of Christ. A Table of the Reign, wherein any numbers of Farthings,
Halfpence, F^nce and S^il^ings are ready cast up, of great use to all Traders.
6. The Interest and Rebate of Money, the Forbearance, Discount and purchase of
Annuities. 7. The Rates o^ Post-Letters, Inland and Outland, 8. Account of the
Penny-Post. 9. The Principal Roads in England, showing the distance of each
Town from London, also the Market Towns on each Road, with the days of the week
the Markets are kept on; also the Hundred and County each Town stands in. 10.
The names of the Counties, Cities and Burrough-Towns in England and Wales, with
the number of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses chosen therein, to serve in
Parliament. 11. The usual Rates and Fares of Coachmen, Carmen and Watermen. The
Sixth Edition, much Enlarged


