NEW Plays as well as Guineas fall of late,
Like Addle Plotters hurried to their Fate,
And yet our Ben would needs be Plotting too,
But only Plotted for himself and you;
But yet I fear he will not please to day,
Alas! it is a mere out-of-fashion Play;
No Bawdy in it to make the Ladies Glow,
Nay, what is worse, the Play's without a Beau;
No Chit-Chat Repartee, nor Raillery,
Such as Masks sell Sins within the Gallery;
Stuff learnt by Rote, pass with you for Sense,
Brought here by Wits, and by Fools carried hence,
Nay, he has to day, spared min' honest Citt,
Who Is Holiday Half Crown seats him in the Pit,
And Laughs when he is abused, because it is Wit;
Thus all he does but Politickly spare,
He fears to Bite, yet hardly can forbear,
The Poet would be at you, if he might,
Did not the Player deter him from the Fight;
He Draws on your side, Swears you shall not frown,
The Comic Vein shall keep the Cynick down,
'Twixt you and him no Quarrel yet has been
If now he eres, he will freely own his Sin;
Nay, what is more strange, he will repent on it too,
But not as other wretched Scriblers do:
Attempt to mend, yet trouble still the Age,
Confirm them Blockheads, and Confound the Stage.

SIR, Here Is a Letter for you.


A Letter, Let me see it.

Dear Frank, I arrived this Day at London, and to Morrow, purpose for
Gloucester: where, if after Three Years Travel, I can find my Friend what I
left him; I cannot think my Self Unhappy, how unfortunate soever I may seem to
the World

Woodvill.

I wish Ned, it were in my Power to make thee as happy, as it was in thy
Father's to make thee miserable; thou should find a better Welcome here from
thy Friend, then thou will from a Dead Sire, and departed Acres, Sirrah, go to
Sir Thomas Testies, and see if ^e's at home, and at leisure to receive an Hours
Conversation


Yes Sir.


Franck Friendly.


Ned Woodvill.


What Acknowledgments shall I make my Stars for letting me live to see once
more, the Man that is nearest to my Heart


There let me grow; till want of Friendship makes me unworthy, of the Place --
I was just now Reading your Letter, and by that, did not expect to see you
these two Days; How came you so soon


I designed to come in the Stage-Coach, but finding no other Company but an old
talkative Woman, and two overgrown Boys, I chose rather than be cooped up with
Old Age and Ignorance, to ride Post, and run the hazard of breaking my Neck
upon Hackney Jades: that have, I think, disjointed every Limb of me


I wish Ned after the fatigue of thy Journey, I could Entertain thee with
something would divert thy present pain, and prove a Cordial for the future;
for the News I have to tell thee, I fear will disorder thy whole Frame, and
make thy Mind as distempered as thy Body


Say thee so, prithee out with it at once; for I am Armed against the worst
that can befall me; my Life, which is the last and only thing Fate can now take
from me; I see in no Danger, as for any other misfortune, there can come none
so great as what is past


I know not what you have met with abroad; but the greatest you are to expect
here, is the News of your Father's Death, who departed a Fortnight since; but
before he left the World, took care to make you a younger Brother to his
Extravagancy, which has left you never a Groat, for he played the last Game with
the last stake, and Died, leaving hardly enough to Bury him


This I heard at London, and expected it long before: for when he sent me
abroad, it was only that I might not be a Curb to his Will, which was as
unbounded as his Lusts, that t would be obeyed in all those Vices his younger
Years ough to have been ashamed of; but the Age we live in is so perverted,
that Old Men pursue the Vanities of Youth (taking up the Cudgels they lay down)
and fumble with those Debauches, young Men grow weary of


Thou say true, Ned; but I wish thou had not experienced it so much at thy
own Cost


So do I Frank; but since it was in my Power to prevent it, it shall not now be
my fault to repine at it; the Old Gentleman could not 'a chosen a better time
to put me to my Shifts, since the War gives me so Glorious an opportunity to
try what Fortune has in store for me


Fortune! Prithee what can thou hope from Fortune, with Bullets flying about
thy Ears, that could Buffet thee so unmercifully in the time of Peace; Had
thou a Friend indeed who had Interest to get thee a Commission, that had
Authority in it to keep thee out of Harms way, thou might hope as much as
another Man; But as thou have nothing to prefer thee, but a comely Figure of
Six Foot high, thou oughtst to look for nothing more, then after the first
Volley, to chance on a clean place to measure thy Length on, without spoiling
thy Clothes


Prithee Frank, What Commands are those that have Power to awe a Bullet, for
till now, I never heard a Cannon made any distinction


True Ned, if we come in their way; but I Have known some Men, whose Actions were
above being questioned, step aside when Danger faced 'em, but if their Enemies
(meeting with the worst of it) have been forced to turn their Backs, have
fallen in like Lions, to scramble for Honor, and come home laden with as much
as he that deserved most


I must confess we have too frequent Examples of this kind; however it shall
not keep me from doing my best to serve my Country, nor make medespair of
Success


You do well to hope the best; it doubles our misfortunes to afflict our Selves
with the Apprehension of 'em; which sometimes make 'em look more dreadful than
they are in themselves


That will never be my fault, for disappointments are so frequent with me, that
I should look for nothing else, did I not believe all things must have an end,
one time or other

How now, Did not I send you to Sir Thomas Testies?


Sir, I was going as you commanded me; and met his Man by the way, coming with
a Message to you, and he is now without, waiting to speak with you


This Old Knight (Ned) was a Citizen of London, but being weary of his
Vocation, and willing to keep a young Wife to himself, is come to inhabit here,
upon an Estate which he has lately purchased; part of it was your Fathers: he
has one only Daughter by a former Wife, whom Nature has been very bountiful to,
she wants no Charm to make her Self Adored, and has found that way to my
Heart, which none of her Sex could ever do before. There is a Niece (Ned) is
equally deserving, and would be equally desirable, did not Love to show his
Power, bias my Affections: Come, thou shall go with me and see them, if thy
Journey has not fatigued thee too much


Never to hinder me from the Company of a pretty Woman Frank; that Temptation
is more prevalent with me than any other, Nature can be liable to: But at
present I must deny my self that satisfaction; I hear the Post goes hence
within these Two Hours, and I have Business obliges me to write by the first
opportunity; but let my Man go with you to acquaint my himself with the way;
and I will come to you, as soon as I have dispatched Jack, wait of Mr.
Friendly, and come back quickly


*It Is very well, Your Servant; Come back.


Niece, come hither, -- Come hither, I say, and shut the Door.


Bless us! What Is amiss in the State, that I must be Closeted. -- The Door is
locked, Sir


Very well; Come hither then: -- Hark'ye, who am I?


Who are you, Sir!


Ay; whom am I?


You are my Uncle, Sir, I think.


Am I no more than your Uncle? your Father thought me worthy of a better Title,
when he made me your Trustee, and by that means empowered me to make you a
Beggar, had I not been your very good Friend as well


Sir, you have been more than I could hope for -- Nor shall you ever find me
wanting in those Acknowledgments your Goodness has obliged me to pay you, for
your extraordinary Care of me, when I was left young and unable to take any for
my self


It Is very well; Why then, since occasion now presents, wherein you may in some
measure requite my Love, and discharge your Duty, I expect you shall be sincere
with me, and Answer me directly; -- When was Mr. Friendly last with my Daughter


Sir.


I say, When was Mr. Friendly last with my Daughter?


To the best of my Remembrance -- Sir -- I will not -- be positive -- but --


But -- No, no hold -- hold -- lookd'ye see, If I catch you stumbling, or
endeavoring by your Female Devil's Wit at a pinch, to cast a blind upon my
Understanding, I shall conclude you as bad as she, and both alike shall share
^y Resentment. Therefore come, I say, and Answer directly to the Question, for
I will know it, and from you Huswife -- You that are her Confident, as you call
it, -- Her Help-Mate to Iniquity: What, because I am Old, and cannot go withour
a Staff, you think I Am Blind and cannot See your Roguery without a pair of
Spectacles, -- but I have found you out Mistress, I have so. --


Found us out; I hope, Sir, you don't think that she would Act, or I Assist
her, in any thing, that might blame her Conduct to Mr. Friendly, who you know
to be a worthy Gentleman, and one, I Am sure, I have heard you say, you had
rather dispose of her to, then any Gentleman in the Country; and if so, I don't
know why I should conceal their being together, since their designs are
Honorable


How -- What -- Designs, and Honorable -- What -- without my Knowledge --
without first consulting me -- that am her Father -- whose sole Right it is to
dispose of her Person; and dares he, without my Leave, my Consent to Authorize
his Pretensions, make Love to her, under my roof? Were he a Prince, and would
Endow her like a Queen, and should but think of such a thing, without my
License; I would Lock her up till the Green Sickness had made her Eat her
passage to him through the Wall, tell her so, do you hear --


Indeed old Gentleman, you would a found neither Locks nor Bolts could have
held her, -- Had she not been disobliged by his making you acquainted with his
Love, for she is such a Friend to Disobedience, that she thought your being
privy to the matter, a sufficient Reason to discard him her Favor, so that now
I hope you may have a very Dutiful Child of her


Was not that my Father that parted from you?


It was.


Was he in Humor?


Yes, a very ill one, at the news of your proceedngs with Mr. Friendly; If you
think you shall dye for Love Floria, you may prepare your self a Halter, and
swing to Elysium as soon as you please, for your Father has forbid the Banes;
had he been first acquainted with your Lovers Inclinations, you might have
eaten a Sack-Posset after a Matrimonial Grace together, according to Custom;
But you are now to be Locked up, and feed upon Chaulk and Lime, he says, till
you have eaten a Passage to your Spark through the Wall


I Am glad to find him so resolved, I shall now dispose of my self to my own
liking; for had he been inclined to the Match, I was resolved never to ^ee
Friendly more, for affronting my Love, by seeking me at my Father's Hands, when
that had assured me to him before


Why, Would you not have your Father have a Power in disposing you where he
likes best


Yes, if he could Command my Love; But since that is decreed by a higher Power,
I must go with my Heart whether he will or no; nor shall he have any Vote where
he has no right to give it


An excellent Piece of Sophistry to encourage Disobedience.


You may call it what you please. But in following the dictate of my Passion, I
obey the Power that made it; and my Duty toward Heaven is to be considered
before that to my Father I take it; I shall therefore Marry without his Leave
or Knowledge


Why without his Knowledge?


For the pleasure of what thou call'st Disobedience. Why thou forget'st sure
that I am a Woman as thou art; the Sex that first taught it to the World,
would have me degenerate


O, by no means, Madam; pray go on, have a care of being unjust to your Self;
whatever you do; and for the better encouragement to proceed, Know, your Father
has sent this day to Mr. Friendly to forbid him the House, or approach it at
his peril


I know it, and by the same Messenger, I bid him me et me to night at the
Garden Door; I scorn the Old Gentleman should have the start of me


And pray what is the business of your meeting? To contrive how you may run away
with him


That Is as he shall deserve, if he is as fond of the Vagabond Trick as my self,
and will be contented to take me for my own sake, without any other
Consideration


You Will be contented to pack up your Awls; that is a clean Smock, with a Suit
of Night Clothes thrust into a Band-box, and bid Good-buoy Daddy; -- Well speed
thee well, since thou art resolved upon a mad Trick, I think indeed, thou
could not have chosen an honester Fellow to play it with


You may call it a mad Trick, but any other had been a foolish one, witness my
Mother-in-law, had she been Governed by her own Will, my Father had wanted a
Comforter in his old Age; and she had been better supplied with one in her
Youth


Go, you're naught, I Will talk no more with you.


Nay, take me with you, for if you leave me here alone, I shall think worse
than I talk


Come along then, Mad-Cap.


Good dear Madam, don't afflict your self, since you are bound to your
Misfortune, resolve to endure it, and make your self as easy under it, as you
can; your Grief will make you sick in earnest else


I wish it could, that I might not be troubled to dissemble it; to keep my self
from the loathed Bed of that old nauseous Wretch, my Husband; who not contented
to Wed me to his withered Carcass, has also forced me from London from my
Friends, from every thing that might give me Comfort in my Misery, to dwell
here in a Country Town, where nothing is to be seen but such as himself


Yes, Madam, here is something better to be seen then himself; -- What think you
of the Gentleman you saw alight yesterday at the Inn Door, when you stood at
the Window


O don't name him, unless thou could give me another sight of him; and yet I
fear if I had my Desires, 'twou'd serve me only to beget another, and another;
still succeeding, till I had asked my Ruin. Did you enquire who he is


I did, Madam, but cannot learn; he came from London, and it is thought by the
People of the House, he stays for Horses, to convey him farther


Could not ye have contrived to have spoke to him?


I could, Madam, had you so commanded me; but 'to what end?


Nay, I know not, tho I wish he knew my Heart, and were inclined to take me
from my Plague my Husband, who, I Am resolved never shall enjoy me, tho I Am sure
to be the unhappiest of my Sex


It Is impossible, Madam, I think, for you to hold out much longer; you have kept
him this Month (ever since you were Married) from your Bed, with the pretense
of Sickness, he now grows impatient, and begins to believe it is designed through
the want of Love


I care not what he believes -- ha! -- Who Is that yonder?


Where, Madam?


Yonder, coming down the Walk.


'Slife, Madam, it is the stranger we was talking of.


Put on your Mask.


Did not you say, you had a mind to see him, Madam.


I have, and speak to him; but he must not see my Face; but see, he makes this
way


Boy, which is the House?


Sir, they go in at one of these Garden Doors to it; but they are so much
alike, I cannot go directly to it; I Will knock, if you please, at one of them,
and enquire


What Is here? Women, and Masked, I thought Vizards had been of no use at night,
out of London, where they did not serve to invite us to a Face that had a mind
to be seen; Jack, when you have found Sir Thomas Testies, wait for me at the
end of the Walk


Yes Sir --


Ladies, is not the pleasure of the Walk lost, without company?

Not to us, Sir; we think Two enough, and are best pleased when we are by our
selves


If one of you has hid a different Sex under her Petticoat, I could believe
you; but Two Women can only talk themselves into an Imagination of a Pleasure;
they can never produce without the help of one of us


Ay; -- What Is that, Sir, which we of our selves are not able to possess,
without your assistance


Lookyee Child, if you have an inclination to be informed, leave your Friend
and come with me to the other end of the Walk, and I Will show you presently


I do nothing without her, Sir; If you cannot instruct us both together, we'll
not Edify alone


Both together; -- I Will give you leave to seem as ignorant as you please, if
you have a mind not to understand me; but don't put me upon impossibilities; --
If you will retire with me one at a time, I Will promise you shall be both
satisfied, before I leave you


But how shall we be sore you will keep your Promise? Have a care you don't put
your self upon impossibilities


'Egad that is true too; I think I have been a little too forward; but come my
Dear, what I want in Power, you shall find I have in Will, therefore don't lose
time


Who do ye speak to?


Aye; suppose we had a mind to take you at your word, which of us would you
choose first? for I don't see yet to which you are inclined


Nay Gad, that I cannot tell; unless you agree to pull off your Masks, you keep
my Fancy in the dark


And it is too light I think to show our Faces, after the liberty we have taken
-- How, or which way shall I contrive to keep him? If he leaves me now, perhaps
I may never see him more; and he has staid too long already, to part with him
for ever; think quickly, what shall I do


I cannot tell how to advise you, Madam, unless you take him this back way into
the House with you; when we have him there, we shall have more time to consider
what is best to be done


Ha! What are they doing, drawing Cuts who shall be first served; Ladies, pray
let no Dispute arise between you upon my Account; I Am resolved to go with her
that is nearest my own temper; let the coldest Constitution withdraw, till the
other and I have been a little better acquainted, and then --


Hold -- Hold, Sir -- Don't raise you Expectation too high, tho the freedom we
have given our selves, may cause a suspicion of our Conduct, you will not find
us to be what you imagine


I Am sorry for that; Are you what you seem to be, Women?


Yes, but not fit for your Conversation, for we are Honest, yet were we willing
to be otherwise, our Age would want a Charm to provide for us


Honest, -- and Old -- What, do ye study al^ays to my Courage, before I come to
engage -- Ha! -- Here Is a plump smooth Arm; and your Speech does not betray any
want of Teeth; and so far I Am sure, you are Young enough


You Are Ear has deceived you then; for I want all my Teeth but three.


If you had two less than you have, I Am sure you have a Colt's-tooth, as long
as there is a Stump left; therefore that shall be no hindrance


Hold, I say, where would you have me?


Have thee, Child, why to the next Green Bank we come at: It Is true, the Place
is not so well, as I could wish it; but Love will make hard shifts. -- See your
Friend knows your Mind, she keeps her distance


Forbear; and if it is in your Power to behave your self like a Gentleman,
follow me, and as you shall deserve expect a Return; But first, for your
Instruction, know you must put a Constraint upon your temper, and seem
Virtuous, which I believe will cost you some pain to do


Seem Virtuous What a Pox does she mean by Cramping of me? -- Hark'ye Child,
does your Friend use to task her Lovers, as Conjurers do the Devil, with things
Impossible


Whatever task she designs for you; it is such, I believe you would very willingly
go through, if you knew the Reward would follow


Say thou so; I'gad I Will endeavor to guess, to Encourage me.

Whatever it is; it cannot but easy prove,
Enjoined by Beauty, and repaid with Love.

HOwe'en you are pleased to reproach me, Madam, I beg you will think better of my
Love; than to believe it has a Thought beyond your self: It Is true, I asked you
of your Father; But I ask't nothing else but you, that he might witness for me
to the World how much beyond it I preferred you


Well; I Will not enquire any farther what your Reasons were; but whoever has me
must receive me from my own Gift, and consequently without a Portion; for Sir
Thomas parts with nothing that he can keep to himself; therefore, think before
it is too late, how Love and Marriage may agree with you, where there is a
Fortune wanting to support it


I beseech you, Madam, If I am not wholly lost in your Esteem, name it not; I
have Estate enough to make us both happy, if Fifteen hundred Pounds a Year, and
an Unexhausted stock of Love can do it


Well; for once I Will try to believe you; and in the mean time, take this
Confession, which I did not design so soon should a spoke my Inclinations, if I
am not yours on those Conditions, I here promise never to be another


O say that again; that the Sound may dwell in my Ears, and the business of my
Life shall become my study to repay it


O Madam, Madam, Sir Thomas has been enquiring for you all over the House, and
has sent me and the rest of the Servants to look for you


Then I must leave you.


Unhappy Chance! Speak, my Soul, when shall I see you again?


I know not; -- When next I hear from you, If I can, I Will send you, word, till
then --


Ten thousand Angels dwell with my Love.

Boy, where is your Master?


I left him here, Sir, when I came to you; and he ordered me to come to him to
the end of the Walk, but I cannot find him


Our staying so long, I believe, has tired his Expectation. Come, let us go home.


Patience! What do thou preach Patience to me for, when thou know I have
not so much left, as will stay the Roasting of an Egg


Had you as much as would go to the building of Paul's, I Am afraid you would
have occasion for it

It Is very true, indeed, Sir, I must needs say, but where there is no Remedy, we
must bear it: Alas! my poor Lady has a double Portion of Sorrow; First from her
Sickness, and next to be kept from your Embraces, for sure, Sir, whatever you
are pleased to think, I Am confident she loves you


Do thou think so; I wish she would give me a Reason to think so, for to me her
sickness seems Apocryphal; she will take nothing, though the Doctors and
Apothecaries every Day send in as many Pots and Glasses, as would Kill or Cure
a whole Parish


Alas, Sir, Her weak Stomach loathes every thing that is offered her, if it has
but the Name of Physsick


Why, what is to be done then?


Sir, She has to day, through my persuasion taken a Cordial to strengthen her
Stomach; and if to Night I can but get her to use something that is prepared for
her, it will put her kindly to rest, and make her clear another Woman by the
Morning


Say a so, my Girl; How thou reviv'st me What is it? Prithee tell me, what it
is


That your Worship shall know time enough; for if it agrees with her, it must
be your Care hereafter to see that she has it often, or it will endanger a
Relapse; In the mean time, Sir, your best care will be to Command the Family
early to Bed; for if she be disturbed in its Operation, it may prove of
dangerous Consequence


I Will warrant thee, my Girl, not a Dog in the House shall dare to wag his Tail
after she is in her Chamber; but pri^hee see that she has enough of it; and if
she shows any disgust in the taking of it, bid her think of me, and that for my
sake she must be prevailed upon


Nay, If she has the Pleasure (I should have) in using an Old Man as he
deserves, she will not forget ye; Though she will have a stronger Motive to think
of something else, when she is in the Arms of a Young Fellow that she likes. --
Pray leave every thing to my management, and good Sir, be going early to Bed,
and pray our Endeavors may prosper


Pray -- Ay, Ay; Thou needs not fear but I Will pray, and I hope my Prayers will
be heard, for I am not often troublesome


So -- I hope I Have secured my Ladies pleasure, without the Fear of being
disturbed; Now to prepare the matter


Oh, Oh, -- lead me to a Chair; Oh, Oh, -- Betty, come hither.


Will your Ladyship be pleased to have any thing.


No, no; Nothing but a little more Air, if you please. Oh, -- Oh, -- where is
Sir Thomas, I thought I heard him with you, when my Fit took me


No, Madam; If you please we'll send for him.


No, it is no matter; -- My Distemper is such, it makes me fancy I see him
oftener than I do


I believe you see him oftener then you wish.


You may be sure of it; Can any Woman look upon a Husband of his Years, without
fancying she is taking leave of the World; were I in (...) Condition, 'twou'd
make me set the Sexton to Work without the help of a Physician


Oh -- Oh --.


I Have disposed him, Madam, as you bid me; but I fear it will be Impossible to
conceal him there till bed time, from every body's knowledge


I know it. Sir Thomas therefore I design shall see him, and bid him Welcome.


'Slife, here comes my Father, Lucia! How shall I avoid him?


The best way as I know, is to take your Hoels, Floria.


How now! What are you scared at the sight of me? Come back here Gentlewoman,
come back I say, thou Pimple of the Primitive Itch; that like thy Grandmother
Eve, will eat of no Fruit but what is forbidden thee; Pray, when is it forsooth,
that we are to dance at your Wedding, hah? -- Have you got the Man in the Mind
yet, you are ready I know, let him come when he dares


I Am never ready to do any thing I ought not to do; If I have received the
Addresses of Mr. Friendly, 'twas because I thought I saw nothing in him, that
you could disapprove, and his Love and Fortune claimed that return I but justly
made him


God so, Madam; I beg your Pardon, get you to him then, if you think so; Go,
get you gone to him then as fast as you can go; and let the Parson mumble ye
together, that you may dance your Matrimonial Jigg without loss of time. Do you
long to be Moulding of Cockeldebread, hah; get you out of my sight, Hussy, go;
Hold, now I think again, you shall not go, you shall stay here and hang at my
Girdle like a Horn-Book, till I have learnt ye through


You Would sooner crack your Brains with her, Old Gentleman; that I can tell you.


But here, -- here is my greatest Grief, all my other Afflictions are doubled
and trebl'd in this one; and this will sink me to the Grave; How do thou my
Love? Is there no hopes of Comfort? Must I for ever live without the use of my
self; or, like Tantalus, have the Meat at my Nose, and yet be forbid to Eat


We must endeavor to be satisfied, my Dear a little time will, I hope, restore
me to my Health; you must needs think it is an equal trouble to us both, though
my Sex forbids me to express so much of it as you do


Say'st-a so; then I will be satisfied, if thou do love me, I Will wait with
more Patience than a Patriarch for thee


You shall not need, Sir, I hope, if my Lady will be but ruled.


O my Dear, this importunate Wench would not let me alone, till I had promised
to take something to night, that she had provided for me; tho I fear the very
sight of it will disorder me


The sight of it; why, what need you look upon it, take it in the dark; and if
you can but get it into your Mouth, consider the good it will do you, and I Will
warrant you will get it down, therefore pray take it


Why then I will my Dear, since you will have it so, pray come hither and lead
me in; but hold, I have something to say to you first; Betty has been a very
good Girl, and for that reason I will forbear to chide her, for her fault in
admitting a Man to my House, with any design, without my Knowledge


A Man! What do thou mean, hah? What Man, hah? What Man?


What Man, Sir -- Why -- a.


Hold your Tongue, and don't go about to excuse it.


With all my Heart; for I Am sure I Am at a loss to justify it.


'Twas a fault, knowing how much Sir Thomas and I are your Friends; and would
rather promote a a good Husband for you; than he your hindrance


Say you say -- Lies the Game there --


This Gentleman, my Dear (for so it seems he is, and the only Son of a very
good Family) has for tuned to fall in Love with this foolish Girl, and comes
unknown to them to Court her for a Wife; therefore pray Sir Thomas, if you can
be any ways assistant in forwarding the matter, do it in consideration of her
faithful Service to me


With all my Heart -- Betty -- Let me see him, and his Love shall not want
encouragement, and if, my Life, thou do recover thy Health, I Will make her a
Fortune that shall deserve a Gentleman


Go Betty, bring him hither --


I will, Madam. --


What a dear Friend Dissimulation is to a Woman, how many moldy Kisses has it
saved my Mother-in-law, from my Fathers old brush Beard


Why, do you think she dissembles?


Aye, as sure as thou do, when you cry you will never Marry, and had rather
have me for a Bedfellow, than a Man


It Is well they have taken pity of me, and suffered me to breath in a larger
Room; I wish they may have Charity to reward my Sufferings, for I have been
thrust into such a hole, that no body but a Beau, who feared being drub'd for
Cuckoldom could a hid himself in it


How! Not speak to him, say you?


I could not, 'twas impossible, Madam.


Odds so, a very handsome young Fellow; Sir, your Servant, you are welcome, very
welcome; and had I seen you before, and known your intent of coming hither,
your Reception ssiou'd not a been concealed, what ever your Love was


Reception and Love, What a Pox does the Old Fellow mean, my Fairy Mistress, I
picked up by Moonshine, has not brought me here, sure, to make a Jest of me:


I perceive by the Lovers Silence, my Uncle has put him out of Countenance.


He looks like a likely Fellow; if he does not want a Tongue, Betty has made a
good choice


Come, Sir, you seem surpised that I Am privy to this matter; don't fear, I Am a
Friend to her you love, and for her sake will assist you in this Business,
farther than you imagine


Egad, may be so, and perhaps farther than I desire; I Thank you, Sir, But
however you came by your Knowledge, if she that brought me here, had been as
wise as she ought to be, she had known you were no more fit to be acquainted
with my Business, than you are to do it


Say you so, Sir; perhaps I mistake your Business, I thought 'twas Honorable,
'twas so represented to me; Sir, if it is otherwise, there is the Door, it is as
wide as 'twas when you came in, you shall have no Coupling here, if you come
not I God's name


What does the old Blade mean, and who a Plague does he take me for?


Sir, as you hope to have a happy end of this Adventure, Humor my Master's
mistake, and seem to be what he would have you


What he would have me -- What Is that -- I -- I --

ask your pardon -- Sir, -- if l've been unmannerly -- I thought my Design had
been concealed, but since it has come to your Knowledge, I hope you will be my
Friend as you have promised, for there is but few I care to trust with a Secret
of this Nature


The fewer the better; what need any body know of it, but we that are present;
but to prevent what may happen if they should let us come to a conclusion, What
say you, will you to Bed together presently


With all my Heart, Sir, this Minute if you please.


Hold your Tongue, Huzzy, and say no more; it shall be as I Would have it --


Indeed my Dear I think she is in the right; so sudden, and at this time of
Night; it will not be decent


Decent; Fiddle Faddle; strick while the Iron's hot; many accidents fall
between the Cup and the Lip; if she don't know what is good for her self, I do;
she will make me a Curt'sie for it to Morrow Morning, and Than] me; go go,
presently to Amen the Clerk, and bid him bring Mr. Small Tithes, the Vicar


The Vicar, Sir. --


Aye? Why? -- He Will do it as well as the Parson.


I-Gad, but he shall not, Thank you.


Go, Go Girl, make haste, when it is done, it is done, you know.


Aye, and I know any thing the Parson does, is not to be undone by any body but
the Hangman, and I Am not ready yet for eigher of their Noozes


So, my Spark has made a fine hand on it; he has spoiled his Part by over acting
it. -- Betty, think of some way as you go along to bring himoff again


If I should, I fear he would be gravelled again, for it is Impossible he should
find his way thus in the Dark


Now I think again, Sir -- a -- a -- a -- I must entreat you defer this matter
till a Canonical hour; for I Am under an Obligation to a Deceased Grandmother,
not to marry out of one; and tho Dead I durst not disobey her Commands


Why, that is well said; I love thee the better for it: But prithee let it be
suddenly


The sooner the better, Sir.


What say you, to morrow Morning then.


With all my Heart. -- By that timesure I may hope to be able to expound this
Riddle


Very well. Niece and Daughter, entertain the Gentleman, while I wait on my
Wife to her Chamber, and I Will be with you again presently, Sir, your Servant


Sir, I Am yours.


Betty, hearken to their Discourse; and if any should happen to our prejudice,
be ready to step in, and break it off


I will, Madam.


I wish that Old Fellow had not taken his Wife away with him; for my Temper at
this time has inclined my Heart more to the making of Cuckolds, than the
Destruction of Maiden-heads


Now for a formal Bow, and a set Speech; these Country Sparks approach all
Women as they do their Godmothers, when they ask 'em blessing


I believe you are mistaken, Floria; I fancy that Air will produce something more
than you imagine


I should a fancied so too, if he had not made Love to my Mother's Maid.


Now the Enemy is drawn off, Ladies, I hope we come to a Close Parley again;
for since I have seen your Faces, it has cost me more Pain to hold my Tongue,
than 'twou'd a Maid of Forty, when she was bid say after a Parson for a Husband


Say you so; Well, and now it is at Liberty, what have you to say?


Nay, Gad, I think not much, for we were agreed in a manner before we came
hither; and what remains now, is to be done, Child, and not said. -- Come, set
aside that Improper Face upon the Matter, and show me the way to your Chamber;
I know you like me, or you would not a taken so much pains to a brought me her


Ha, ha, ha.


What a Pox do they laugh at?


Prithee Cousin, what does he mean?


Nay, I must ask you that, who brought him here.


I bring him here!


Poch; You brought me here between you, and you shall share me between you as
far as I can go; therefore prithee let us Understand one another without more a
d


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


You may laugh, Ladies; but if you force me away with your Jest, I'gad you
shall cry for me, before you have me again


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Good, Sir, have a Modester Opinion of your self, than to believe the loss of
you would cost either of us one Tear, though we were those very kind Fools you
say we are


No indeed, Sir; We are not so enamored of your sweet Sex, (tho we must own
here is a Scarcity in this Place) to weep for any Man, tho he promised more to
recommend himself, than any of your Mothers making


Pray Madam, don't disparage my Mother's Huswifery; I think this Leg with the
true proportion of my Body, shows she made as good Instruments to raise
Succession to the Family, as any Dutiful Wife in the Parish; and let me tell
you, if you were not worse than an errant Widow, you would say so too, but it is no
matter; such as I am, I shall find somebody will know what it is to be thankful
for me, and for them only will I keep my self, and so Ladies your Servant


Ha, ha, ha, ha


Perhaps you think I will not go.


Sure he is Mad.


I believe so too; Good, Sir, let me ask y^ one Question. You seem to be very
well acquainted with us; Pray how long is it since, and where did our
acquanitance first begin


Come along with me, and I Will show thee the Place presently; and as forgetful
as you seem to be now, if I don't give thee Reason to Remember it these Nine
Months, I Am a Capon


I Am afraid I Have staid a little of the longest. Sir, perhaps you are weary with
riding, and had rather be a-bed; if you please I Will light you to your Chamber


He does talk indeed as if he wanted sleep.


Madam, I believe my Lady will want you and Madam Lucia's help, for she is grown
exceeding ill


I rather believe, Gentlewoman, you want our absence; which should we afford
you, I fear will give you occasion to be worse than you ought to b


Pray, what do you mean, Madam?


Your pretended Lover here wears too thin a Disguise to pass upon us, tho he
has upon my Father; a Gentleman of his Sense is seldom so fond of Marriage, to
have such an honorable design upon a Chambermaid


Ha; what is the Meaning of this? I honorable designs upon any body!


I hope, Madam, you don't think I Would admit of any Thoughts but what are so, I Am
sure, Sir, if you have any you never owned them to me, therefore pray


The Devil's at Work for me, I find, by this Wenches winking, but what I must
do or say to help the matter forward, I Am a Dog if I can tell


Sir, my Wife continues very ill, and I cannot wait on you, but I hope you will
be so kind to Command my House however; Betty, see the Gentleman has every
thing that is fit to make him welcome: Come Girls, come here is no business for
you, therefore leave the Lovers to themselves, come


Sir, be pleased to leave us here; and we'll wait upon you in a moment.


To what end forsooth?


Sir, we have some reasons to suspect this Gentleman's pretensions to Betty;
and before, we leave him alone with her, my Cousin and I will enquire, if you
please, a little more into the Truth


Humph -- You enquire -- What -- What would you enquire? ha! -- What would you
enquire? -- What a mighty concern you have for every Morsel that goes by your
own Mouth; You enquire -- You have such an Itch to know how matters stand
toward Matrimony; you are for examining every body how it is with them -- Pray
walk in, Pray do, -- You enquire


Harkee Damsel, you that can tell, now the Coast is clear -- Pray let me know
what is my business here; and and how am I to be employed to Night


What your Business will be, Sir, I can only guess; but mine is to light you to
a good Bed, and clean Lumen; a Bedfellow I cannot promise you, but should you
happen to find one you like, I hope you will remember your Benefactor


Well hinted that I will, and to assure thee I Will keep my word, there is earnest
for thee; -- But may not I guess who this may be


That you may, Sir, and be deceived; -- But if you hit the Nail on the Head, I
must not tell you


Come, thou shall tell me; and tell me against thy Will; I Will ^orce thee to it
--


I must not indeed, Sir, but if you will follow me, I will endeavor to carry
you, where you shall inform your self


Will thou, that is better still;

Sure at the last we shall this Clew unwind,
At least the Ball if not the Bottom find.

I Wish I could guess where my Friend is: If we were in London, I should
believe some Petticoat Companion had picked him up; but here is no Traders; and
for any other Woman, he has not had time to fit her for his use: -- Robin, bid
that Country-fellow without come to me


Yes, Sir.


Hob, Can thou carry this Letter to Sir Thomas Testies House for me?


Yes, Sir.


Do so; and give it to Madam Flora; but take care no Body sees you deliver it.


Yes, Sir, -- But must I car it to Night, it is very dark?


You must go immediately.


I hope Sir, there is no difference between you and Sir Thomas?


Why do thou hope so?


Why truly, Sir, I do hear there is; and if so, I shall not greatly care to meddle
or make between Friends, that I must tell you, for it is but an unthankful
Office; besides, you know Sir Thomas is a Man that is very cursed; and if he does
but respect I concern my self between you, may hap he may take the Law of me


Pish, the Law of thee, no, no, I Will secure thee from any harm.


Very well, Sir, very well, that is as much as I can desire; but pray don't take
unkindly what I say; for you know no Man is willing to bring himself into a
primunire if he can help it


No, no, prithee be gone.


I will, Sir, I will -- for*for -- Pray, Sir, be pleased to read the
Subscription for me


'Sdeath, how I Am tortured with this foolish Fellow? and I can send no Body
else, without being suspected; don't trouble thy self with the Superscription,
but deliver it as I bid thee


Very good, Sir, very good; -- it is main dark; Would it not do as well, Sir, if
I should car it in the Morning? -- I had rather carry it in the Morning


Why so?


Why truly, Sir, I Will tell you; -- At the lower end of Sir Thomas's Orchard,
one of our poor Neighbors, being in a dispariging condition, has gone and
Hanged himself: -- Now there is some does say who have seen him, how that he
walks by Night in several shapes


What, and so you're afraid, are you?


No indeed, Sir, I Am not afraid, I thank Providence, I defy the Devil, and all
his Works


A Pox upon thee then, get thee gone.


Though I must tell you, I have a great conceit that he will appear to me; for
you must know, to Morrow the Crowner's Quest does sit upon him, whereof, de'e
see, I am to be one; and who knows but he may have something upon ^is Spirits
that may make him break his Mind to me; and if so -- Let me tell you, I Am
afraid it will make a bad Day for some Body: For if Sir Thomas had kept his
Fences whole, may hap this Man had never been tempted to 'a gone into his
Ground to 'a Hanged himself: But be it as it will, I Will do your Business for
you; therefore pray take you no care, Sir


Prithee about it then.


Aye, aye, I Will warrant you, I Will warrant you, don't trouble your self no
further


Adventures of this kind, that look with the face of a Reward, make Expectation
great and uneasy; but mine has been so often jilted, since I Have been here, I
begin to wish it Morning, that I might go home and laugh at my self for my
damned impertinent Curiosity -- Yet methinks this Business should not end so,
if this Virgin, Wife, or Widow, or what the Devil she is I know not, (that
does trick me) should suffer me to sleep to Night, with a bare Pillow in my
Arms; may she have the Curse of always lying alone, and never know the use of a
Bedfellow. -- The Crumbs of Comfort -- A Plague of your Diet; -- Is that feeding
for a Gentleman? -- Now have I a good mind to read and be Converted; fall a
singing of Psalms, and disturb the whole Family; -- But that is to mortify my
self now I think on it; I Will even go to Bed, and try to forget 'em


So, now the Candles out, I may with safety venture: -- Sir, -- Sir, --


Ha! Who Is there?


A Friend.


What would you have?


I Am come for Satisfaction for a Wrong you have done in coming hither to seduce
my Mistress from me


Your Mistress; Who are you?


A Gentleman.


Then good Gentleman, go and fetch a Light, and you shall have what you come
for presently; though the Devil take me, if I Am acquainted with either thee or
thy Mistress that I know of


Sir, there needs no Light, the Dark is fitter for my Revenge, therefore guard
your self as well as you can, for I have more Swords than my own to assist me


Ha! Then I fear I Am fallen into the hands of a Villain, not of a Gentleman;
but come, I Am bound to try it, come on


Hold, Sir, hold a little, 'Slise if he should make me smart for my fooling,
'twou'd make but an ill Jest

Pray, Sir, suspend your Fury a while, here will happen no danger, unless you
apprehend any from a Woman


A Woman! -- I thought indeed the Voice did not found very much like a Hero's,
-- But how shall I know you're a Woman? You Have accosted me but odly


Cannot you tell how to find that out?


I don't know faith, I could a done; I Will try.


Pray put up your Weapon first.


Aye, that I will; I think this is too sharp for a Woman's use, But why came you
in the Dark


For fear you should not like me in the Light.


It must be a very ill Face that cannot recommend it self to one Nights Lodging
-- Prithee let me take a Kiss to sweeten my Imagination however:


Where are you pulling me?


Pulling thee, why to Bed.


Hold, not so fast; -- I Am come resolved to give my self wholly to you, but
e're I do so, you must promise me something to deserve it


That I will; my Dear, any thing.


But will you perform what you promise?


Don't doubt it; What is it?


To esteem this Favor, as it is the first I ever granted to any, and in return
swear, to love me as long as you live


Humph -- That Is a little hard, before I see your Face.


When I think sit to show it you, and it prove not a Tolerable one, you shall
be dissolved from your Oath


That Is fair, as a Man can desire.


Swear then.


I do; By the dear Pleasure I Am going to possess; upon that Condition, I swear
to love thee, and only thee, to the end of my Life. --


What a lightness do I wear to seem the thing I am not? Love is too powerful in
me to be this Airy thing he takes me for, and before I leave him, I fear I
shall betray it, which yet I would not do


What means this Pause Child? I hope no foolish Qualms to check your Reason.


No, Sir, Only a few Ejaculations before I go to Execution; and now dispose of
me as you please


Then Heaven have mercy upon thy Soul, for I shall have little on thy Body.


Are you sure no Body has been here, to speak with my Daughter from Mr.
Friendly


Not that I know of, Sir.


No; nor no Messenger sent from my Daughter to him?


I cannot tell, Sir; I did not see any.


Sirrah, stand you here and watch, till toward Morning, and see if you can
observe any Body walking about the House, whistling at the Windows, or crying
Hist! Ten to one I shall have my Blade a Evesdropping by and by, or some Body
from him; but it shall go hard but I Will spoil their business


Sir, Sir, -- Yonder Is some Body with a Light coming down the Field.


Stand still then, and observe.


So; -- This is the House; -- Now let me see, how shall I go about to do this
same business? if this Old Fox Sir Thomas, should chance to spy me, he will maul
me for certain: But let me alone, I Will be cunning enough for him, I Will warrant
me; if he sees me, he must have more Eyes then two -- Hold, -- hold, -- Now let
me see for this same Letter; -- Oh, here it is; -- For Madam Flo -- Flo --
Madam Flora


Where are you carrying this Letter Friend?


Letter, Sir.


Letter, Sir, -- aye Letter, Who did you bring it from?


Bring it from, Sir; I brought it from no Body, not I.


How came you by it?


By it, Sir? -- Why I found it in my Pocket.


Found it in your Pocket; -- What did it grow there? -- Ha? -- Where are you
going with it


Going with it, Sir; -- I don't know where I was going with it, not I.


What do you here at this time of Night?


I cannot tell what I do here, Sir, not I; -- I Will go home, Sir, if you please:
-- God buy to you, Sir; -- I wish you a good Night


Hold, -- hold a little, Friend; let me reward you first for bringing of it
however


Not a Farthing, Sir, indeed, I must not take one Farthing; for Mr. Friendly
charged me to the contrary, therefore pray don't offer it


O ho -- Did he so? But something I will give you however; pray take that, and
that, and that Sirrah


O Lord -- O Lord -- What do you strike me for? What do you strike me for? A fore
God I Will take the Law of ye, see an I don't; What do you go to Murder me


I Will Law ye, -- you Rogue; -- Are you their Letter Carrier? There Is more for
you, Sirrah


Bare Witness -- bare Witness; -- see an you don't pay for this; O Lord! O Lord!


Sirrah, see him out of my Ground.


O Night, thou darling Friend to active Love, keep still thy Mantle spread, and
hide us from the World. Beauty needs no light but its own, to see the way to
Joy; -- Why? -- Oh! -- Why my Love, will you be gone so soon? The few short
hours we have loved, has given us but a taste of what we might possess


Do not ask me more than I Am willing to give; what I have already done, might
sure convince you that I had rather stay had I not more weighty Reasons so soon
to leave you


Go not till the Day is broke.


That you may see my Face; -- Go, I should chide your Ungrateful Curiosity;
Will you contribute nothing to spare my Blushes? Think what I Have done, the
Jewel I have parted with; and no security for your faith, but a promise of a
moment's growth, what should 'a been dearest to me, like a Toy, I Have thrown
away; and to complete me wretched, you may desire my Ruin


Can it be your Ruin to make my Happiness complete?


Whilst I Am Concealed, should you prove unkind, 'twould rob me but of Life; but
if Exposed; take from me, Life and Reputation


You allay my satisfaction, when you doubt my Love, and both that and Honor
tie me to secure your Reputation


If you have either, I conjure you do not ask it any more; when it is fit you
should know me better, Love of it self will betray me to you; -- for 'twill not
be in my power to conceal my self


Tell me then, when I shall be so blessed?


I cannot; but if in the mean time, it will stay your Curiosity to be admitted
here another Night, perhaps I may be persuaded to Morrow or next Day to write
to you, till then farewell; I know your Lodging


O do not stay till the next day, let it be to Morrow, and to Morrow, and every
Morrow; let every day be fed with Expectation of the approaching Night, and
every Night like this; but with a more lasting Ecstasie


How unwillingly my Legs convey me hence; and yet they trembled when they
brought me here; my Virgin fears hang heavy on my Limbs, and feebl'd all my
Joints! O Love how strange are all thy ways! With dread thou leadst us where we
long to be, and when possessed of what we come for, with double pain conveys us
back again


Prithee don't rail at him any more; thou have done enough already to convince
me you love him


I could almost be angry with you for saying so; though I know you don't think so.


Indeed I do; and should he Marry Betty to Day, (as I Am sure that is but a
pretense to farther some other design, he has in coming here) it would break
thy Heart


You think me very amorous sure to be so smitten with a Man at first sight?


You cannot help it if you are.


But why do you think I am?


I Will answer you with another Question: Why would you not let me sleep last
Night for Talking of him


Who began it?


I did; because I thought the Discourse would please you.


For what reason?


Because all the Evening you did as you do now, Blush when any Body spoke of
him


Who can forbear it, to hear you Talk so?


No Body indeed in thy Condition; -- Come prithee Lucia don't vail thy Heart
from me; for if thou do, I Will certainly make thy Case known, and tell Betty
what a Rival she has


I find it is but a folly to say any thing to you; but do you really think he can
be so in Love with that foolish Girl? -- A Man, to all appearance, so much
above a Thought so low, methinks it is an Injustice to him to believe it, such a
Mien and Air in all he says and does, so free and unaffected his Discourse, it
creates a Delight in all that hear him


His Wit indeed is very engaging.


Ay, is it not? And when he addresses -- Though it is not in a style so awful as
the nicest Virtue would expect; yet it Charms beyond the Oratory of a God


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Why do you Laugh?


Only at your not being in Lucia, for if thy Malady increase, the Cordial of a
Friends advice will soon fetch thee to me again


Come Neighbors, bring him along, and set 'en down here, for he must be
examined, before we part with 'en


How now Friends; What Body's that you have got?


Body, -- This no Body forsooth; this is a Carcass, one that was a wicked Body.


What has he done?


Why he has Hanged himself.


Alas poor Wretch! What was the Cause?


The Cause; -- Why he is Married, and has a Wife and six Children.


Is that a Cause for a Man to Hang himself? What is he?


What is he? Why he is a Jacobite, and he Hanged himself, because he would not
pay double Taxes


Pish; --


Come Neighbor Hob, you that can tell, pray let us know what we are to do.


Why we that are the Crowner's Quest, the Law says, must enquire how he came by
his Death


But of whom must we enquire?


Why, of they that can tell, and no Body knows that so well as himself.


Well, but he is Dead.


Why ay, so it seems; and he must be Buried if we say he must; and if we say
not, it may be not neither


I suppose that is as we shall find him guilty; therefore pray tell me,
Neighbor Hob, whether you think a Man that Hangs himself, is guilty of his own
Death, or no


Why truly that is a hard case to judge, Neighbor Clumsey.


I think now, that he is guilty.


Hold, hold, take heed, don't be too rash; -- for your Conscience must be Umper
in this Case: -- Look'ee -- I put this Point to you now, Whether every one that
Hangs himself, is willing to die


I, -- I, -- Sure he is willing.


Now I say no, for may-hap he might he Non Complementus, and if a Man be Non
Complementus, he don't know his own Mind


That Is true indeed; but now being Dead, pray who must answer the King for the
loss of his Subject


Marry he that Hanged his Subject: That was himself.


Nay, nay, 'twas the Halter that hanged him.


Aye, in some sort it did; but that was in se Offendendo, for it may be he went
to break the Rope, and the Rope held out in his own defense


But is not this same Rope-maker now that made the Rope, in some danger?


No, no, the Rope-maker can be in no fault; -- for do you see, when he makes the
Rope, he goes backwards, and how can he see before, what shall follow after? --
Nor indeed is the Rope in fault, for may be he might urge the Rope Solus
Volence, as the Law says, neither is he himself in fault, for may be his Time
was come, and he was born to be Hanged: -- Therefore I do conclude that he was
Conscious and guiltless of his own Death


Why then Neighbor, he may be buried.


O, of great reason, always he that is alive must die, and he that is dead must
be buried


Yet truly I think in my Conscience, he does not deserve to be Buried.


O you speak partiously Neighbor Puzzle-pace, -- not deserve to be Buried, I
say he deserves to be Buried alive, that shall Hang himself; therefore don't
Take of that


Well, but what must we do with his Clothes?


His Clothes, why they are the Hangman's.


Why then he must have 'em himself.


Hold, hold, -- This is a shrewd point of Law, and must be well handled; Did he
make a Will


No, he died detestable.


Why then they fall to the right Heir Male; for look'ee do you see, the Female
can inherit no Breeches, unless she can prove she wore them in her Husband's
Days


But suppose he has no Heirs at all?


Why then they go to the chief Mourner, -- and look'ee do you see, that will be
I, I will take his Clothes; here now I begin with his Cloak, -- there now*let
every one take a quarter of him, and I Will follow with doleful Lamentation


Why then, we have done Neighbor, have we?


Ay, ay.


How dolefully you look Neighbor?


Why, aye; it is the fashion so to do; I Am chief Mourner, I must be sad.


Art thou sure he is Drunk?


I Am sure I left him Dead-drunk.


Then I believe they take him for the Man you gave out hanged himself in Sir
Thomas's Orchard to fright the Boys from stealing the Fruit


I believe so too, therefore prithee let us make haste for fear they bury him
alive


IT IS strange you should not see her Face, but when you tell me you love her, I
must laugh at you; what if you have enjoyed her, 'twas in the dark, and in the
same minute your fancy painted her a Venus, you might has supposed her a Dowdy,
and yet have been more just to her


Aye, but I Am never such an Enemy to my pleasure, to suppose her the last, when
I Would more reason to believe her the first; but ^^unck you mistake me, if you
think it is her I love; no, that is impracticable after Enjoyment; dear Rogue,
it is the Married Woman I told thee of, that has charmed my heart; and I have
some reason to believe hers is not impenotrable


Why, d'eo believe it? You durst not sure tell her so?


Why not, her Complexion promised me a hearing, and having an opportunity as I
was coming away this Morning, through the Garden where she was walking, I spoke
to her, and told her, the seign'd Love I owned last Night for her Servant, was
a Plot I had bribed her Maid to assist me in, to get an opportunity to confess
the real one I had for her


Very good; -- and no doubt but she beliv'd you.


She seemed at first a little surpised, but before I left her, I prevailed so
for, to gain a promise to see her again; and how much that may conduce to a
good conclusion, you may imagine


How do you know, but this may be the same Woman you lay with last Night.


Prithee don't call my Judgment in question; can thou believe me so raw a
Gamester not to know a Maid from a Married Woman


I know not what you may do; but I Am sure it is a Secret I Am yet to learn; but
come you must go along with me, Flora has sent me word to day will be kept a
Wake before their house, and if in the Crowd she can get loose from her Father,
we may chance make work for the Parson


I Am sorry for it, I had rather help you to make work for the Midwife, I don't
care to meddle where the Church is concerned


Is not that he, see.


It is Madam.


Follow him, and give him this.


To what end, Madam; you have found him false already.


Dispute not my Commands, but fly.

How now! Did you give it him?


I did, Madam; and he will see you he says.


Do not think he suspects me to he her that was with him last Night?


No, Madam; but believing me to be confident to both her and you, he has bribed
me to keep you ignorant of each others Loves, and assist him in your several
In^rigues


Perjured base Villain! Why am I fated to Love, and not the Infection on my
Lips, that when his flattery would feal my ruin, he there might meet his own


Come, Husband, good now make haste; the Town will be full of People, before we
shall get fitted


Don't trouble thy self Wife, every thing within Doors is ready; and there is
nothing wanting without but the Sign to be put up, and look'ee, that shall be
done present; Hob -- Hob --


What say you Father?


Go and Tap th'Ale, quick, quick.


Aye, aye Father.


There -- Now he that will drink good Ale, let e'n come to th'Sign oth'Potlid.
Come, Wife, let us to our business within


If these Disguises will let us stand unsuspected, we may be able to attempt
something to gain my Flora's freedom


Ay, and lose thy own.


Yonder she is with her pretty friend; and old Argus that sticks to 'em, like
Murder to a troubled Conscience


Ha! Are these the Jewels of such virtue? One of them I Am sure has none to
boast of; nor will the other, I believe, be a Martyr for her Honor


Now Ned, tell me, How do like my Mistress?


Like her?


Ay, like her?


Very well for a Mistress.


A Mistress!


Ay, why do think I can like her for any thing else?


I do, Sir, and think my self happy in my Choice.


I Am glad you are so pleased, Sir, I can have her at a clieaper rate.


Ha! What dice mean?


What do you mean?


Not to hear any thing dishonourably spoken of her I Love, though by my Friend.


Hum -- Franck, thou know I have but a loose Opinion of all Women, which but
seldom will let me speak well of any, though they deserve it


Good Manners should correct that ill Custom in a Gentleman, and for your own
sake, pray be persuaded to forget it


Grave Sir, I shall Edify -- Blindman's-Buff, or she shall keep my Head in the
Bag


Come Gentlewomen, if you must see the Pastime, you may have as fair a Prospect
of 'em here, as you can in the Crowd, and with less danger to your Reputations


Our Reputations! In what can they suffer, amongst such people as resort here?


Why these are Men, and fitter for Women's use than Finical Fops, that have only
the appearance of Men; mere outsides, the signs of Men; and such I have known a
Woman fond of


It Is very hard Sir, we cannot be where we like best, I think we are at Age to
look after our selves


Aye, if you had but Grace to take care of your selves too.


Women at our years, know how to make their choice; or if we did not we are
seldom instructed by ill usage


Eh -- eh -- What, -- what are you a chattering Magpye, he -- do you want to
have your Legs at liberty


If I do, I can have patience; for I shall not want it long, unless you could
confine my inclinations too


Let me come at her, -- let me come at her, -- what does she prate again to me?
You are one to be entrusted with your self indeed, look'e here else, witness
this Letter, I got scouting from your Lover to ye; de'e see here I cannot read
it now for want of my Spectacles, but here he says how that she has given him a
new life, from the last favor she was pleased to grant him; -- Hark'ee Hussy,
what favor was that you were so pleased to grant him, tell me, for I will know
what that favor was


I don't know what you mean Sir?


What, not by the last favor? -- Before God i will have her searched; -- i will
know how far the honor of my Family was concerned in that last favor of hers;
-- I will Gentlewomen. -- And sure I shall find an Expedient too, to keep you
asunder, if Locks, and Bolts, and Bars can do it: -- Odso well remembered, let
me see if my Doors are all fast, and then if you can shufle Love through the
Keyhole, withal my heart


Prithee see Flor, if I Am not mistaken, on of those men yonder looks like your
lover Friendly in disguise


And the other the very sperk that lay here last night, I now begin to think
Friendly employed him about that piece of Knight Errantry; to get news from our
enchanted Castle, or to try if thou had Chrams enough to engage him to yoke
with his friend


Why do you think so?


Because there are few men that marry in this Age; but are ashamed of their
fortune; and would therefore draw in as many of their friends as they can to
Countenance their folly as they call it


I have a better opinion of your Lover, Flora.


He Is obliged to ye Madam.


Ch'm coming, Ch'm coming; your Servant Mr. Friendly, I Am glad to see you;
you are welcome to the Fair


I thank the Honest Hob.


I should know that Gentleman, -- Master Woodvill I think.


Aye Hob, how do do?


O Lord Master, how de'e do? Faith I Am glad to see you with all my heart; Lord
a mercy upon us; how strangly you be grown since you have been over-Seas; --
Come, pray sit you down -- Master Freindly, -- Come pray stay, and drink one
Pott before you go


Prithee let us sit down, or this fellows impertinence will make us observed.


What do thou do with an Apron Hob?


A Dod, I put un on but just now; Father will do as Meighbours do, and every
one in the Town a most sells Ale on Fair day, but now we sell several other sorts
of liquor; and Wine too an occasion be


Wine?


Aye, all sorts of Wine.


Say a so, bring us some Claret then.


Claret Sir, we have no Claret, we must not sell Claret; it is against the Law,
now you may have some of your Port, your red Port now, or your white Port, or
such sort of Stuff


Such stuff as thou have then, Prithee bring us.


Yes Sir, --


Pirthee bring, what thou like best thy self -- For I Am sure 'twill please no
palate but thy own


I fear Frank, your project will not answer your end, for I see no way of
getting at the Ladies


There is but little hopes indeed Ned, since I see the doors shut, and the old
Knight in their Company; fortune may do something unexpectedly to befriend us


Ch'm coming, ch'm coming, here Sir.


Where is the Sack?


Sack Sir, -- Od I don't know, I thought you said you had rather have Ale --
Ale is indeed much wholsomer now, for your English Stomaches; -- for my Part,
i would rather have Ale now; Master Woodvill, bite a bit before you drink: -- Come
and mean time i will put a little Sugar in the Ale; and make it as good as I can
for you: -- Come Sir, against your dispose'd --


Thank ye Hob, this fellows kindness will poison me before I go hence.


Not whilst you have such a Taster; for I don't see that he intends to leave
you any


A Dod it is main good Sir; -- will you have the other Pott Sir?


No, prithee drink this too, and then fetch us a Couple.


Yes Sir, -- I will, I will.





Yes, an't like your Worships, we are all ready, come Scratch strike up. --
Dance


Aye marry Sir, well done Ralph; set to u'n Joane, set toe'n.


Mother within. Hob, Hob.


Ch'm coming, ch'm coming Mary, Sides all now, sides all.


Hob, Hob.


Ch'm coming, ch'm coming Master, toll, loll, etc.


Hob, Hob.


Ch'm coming, ch'm coming, what a Plague ails my Father trow? and old Fool!
Udsbled he makes more a noise, -- set to now, William, ah rarely done; in Mary,
O dainty Mary, turn her about now John, now, now, a murrain, you're quite out:
Hold, hold, ye are all out, look Ralph should a cast off, and while John had
turned Mary about, Thomas should a led up Nan, and Joan met Ralph at Bottom
again, mean while John should a sided with Mary; and then Mary should back to
back with Ralph, and then Thomas had come in again in his own place, and so all
had been right. -- Come begin again, strike up scratch, Toll, loll, doll, loll,
etc


Hob, Hob, Where be ye?


Ch'm coming, ch'm coming, what the Devil cannot you be quiet a bit, toll, loll,
etc


Hey day, hey day, this is rare sport, I God, i will strap you, ye base Rogue
you; must you be danceing here, and your Mother and I at work


Hey day! what is the matter now? what, must I be beat all the days of my life?


Ye Graceless Rogue, mind your business then, do ye, yonder is your poor Mother
within a scoreing and a scoring till she sweats again, and no body to draw one
drop of Beer


I don't care a farthing, I will not draw a drop more if you go to that, do your
worst, and take your Course


Sirrah, come ye in, and don't ye stand dancing here, don't ye.


I will not go in, so I will not, if that trouble yo, I will Dance, and Dance again
-- Angerly, toll, loll, etc


Aye you are an untoward Boy as e're was born; Mercy forgive me for begetting
the


Marry come up, what is here to do I trow?


Here Is the Cudgells an't like you, will your Worship please to have us begin.


Aye, Aye, by all means make have Roger, and bring forth the Hatt and the
Favor


Here it is, an't please ye.


Hang it up there, and he that wiens it, let him wear it. The first
Sommersetshireman that breaks a Head, here is half a Crown for him to drink; and
he that breaks that Rogue Hobs head, shall have another


Shall he -- look'e, he that breaks my Head, shall have somewhat to do, i will
tell you that, let 'en be who he will, he shall earn his Money, Ecod ill rib
'en -- And look'e, to begin here i will take up the Cudgel, -- And now let the
best man here, take up the other, an he dare, if he be a Sommersetshireman, let
'en be a Sommersetshireman, -- I sight for Glostershire; I don't care who knows
it


At him, at him there -- What, is there no body dare venture upon him?
Neighbor Puzlepate, take up the to 'ther Cudgel


Not I (...)'t please you, I have enough of 'en already, he broke my Head but
last week


Roger, -- Sirrah, do you take up the Cudgel, and thrash him, do'e hear --
thrash him soundly Sirrah


I cannot promise that Sir, I Will do my best, I Will break his head if I can in
Love; and if he breaks mine, much good may do him


This is as I could wish; If Hob does but get the better of the Combat, the
Testy Knight will certainly be provoked to come down, and then we shall have
sport


Prithee let us encourage him then; O brave Hob, now for Glostershire Hob.


I warrant ye Master, let me alone.


Here Hob, there is an Angel for thee.


And break his head Hob; and I Will give the another.


Don'te fear Master, I God I Will anoint 'en.


Do if thou can; I don't fear thee Hob.


S'bleed, I Will dress thy Jacket; I Will dowse thy Somersetshire Coat for thee.


Come on then.


Obrave Hob.


Obrave Roger.


Obrave Hob.


Obrave Roger.

All the Clowns Hollow!


I God I Have don't; I Have don't Faith.


Foul, foul, foul.


Fair, fair, fair.


Here take the Hat Hob.


You lie, you Dogs, 'twas foul.

All Clowns Hollow!


Stand upon thy Guard Hob, the Kinght's coming down to thee.


Is a, let 'en come and welcome; here I Will stand, I Will take no other than St.
George's Guard; if he let us drive at me, Fore-god I Will hit 'en over the Sconce,
if he was a Knight of Gold


Where are these Bumpkins? -- Now who dars say it is fair.

I say it is foul.


I say it is fair.


So is that too


O brave Knight!

He has bestirred himself I says, with as much courage, as if he fought for
distressed Damsels


So he has I thank him: Here Is liberty for you Madam unexpected, if you will
embrace it come down quickly


Your Jaylor's gone Ladies, and the doors open, come down and we'ell knock off
your Fetters


To put on stronger of your own


Not I faith, I Would have every Woman use her legs as she pleases.


So shall thou thy tongue hereafter; But prithee let me Confine it now, for we
have no time to talk


What is it, you would have of me Friendly?


Remember your promise Madam; and spare that question.


I don't know what his design is Madam; but here is a Parson planted hard by I
can till you, I believe a purpose to do mischief


I own my promise to marry you, but do not remember I ever obliged my self to
time


Be it still unlimited, I Will never press it against your will: All I ask now
is, to deliver your self from Bondage


What say thou Lucia, shall I go?


If I thought you would take my advice, I Would give it you, but I Am sure you will adhere
to none but that of running away, therefore prithee make haste and begone


Farewell then.


But have thou the Conscience to leave me behind, to be punished for thy sins?


Aye, if you can have the heart to let me go without ye.


Make haste Madam, your Fathers returning.


We come, we come, fly good Lucia.


It Is pity that Marriage should be the end of this Adventure, it looks so like
Whoring; I wish the old Fellows Wife had been in their company, to a got me a
Stomach to the Business


Upon my Knees I should receive you Madam; but the place --


Will not let us lose time in talking -- where is my Cousin? Where Is my Cousin?


Leave her to my Friends charge -- He Is an honest Gentleman, and will take care
of her


A Pox of your honest Commendations, let me speak for my self, Madam, here is
your Man


What to do? Not to follow our Friends example I hope.


No faith Child, I Am better principl'd; thou shall have me upon easier Terms.


There -- there you Rustich Rogues, -- you hard headed Dogs, I think I Have at
last met with your Sculls; I believe I have notch't some of your Noddles for
you; I have made you pay for shedding my Blood


Oh Sir, Sir, We Are undone, Madam Flora and Madam Lucia.


What of them?


They are gone Sir.


Gone where?


With a Couple of Gentlemen Sir, No body knows where.


The Devil go with 'em -- which way are they gone?


They have taken toward the Road Sir, but they cannot be got far.


Bid every one of your fellows take Horse immediately, and ride several ways;
-- Have they slipped through my fingers at last. -- Make haste you Dogs --
(beats 'em) make haste fly, fly


If reason had a power in Love, I should not fann this fire within me, to make
a Ruin of my Peace, -- But oh I strive in vain, my ungoverned passion drives me
on, though sure Destruction follows me: What is it a Clock


Four Madam.


Look if you can see him coming.


He Is just here Madam.


O could he bring a heart like that he will find here; how happy would this
meeting be? -- But that is impossible


So much for my honest obligation; we have housed they Lads; my friends
business is done: -- Now let me look after my own --; it is something past the
time, -- ha


You see Sir, how much you have prevailed upon me, am I not punctual?


Pardon me Madam, if I seem not so, in suffering you here before me; a fault
nothing but a businss of no less concern than Life and Death, should a made me
guilty of


So, there is one lie already. -- Thomas's Neice and Daughter.


How the Devil came she to know that?


Come, since I know you were engaged in that pi^ce of Chivalry, you may spare
the expense of an invenion to hide it


It Is true Madam; I did give some little assistance in that affair to the
service of my friend, but --


But the extent of your desire is only to engage my heart i will warrant.


It Is the last of all my wishes, from the first moment I saw you at Church --


At Church?


Aye, at Church Madam; -- pray Heaven she goes to Church (aside). 'Twas there I
first beheld you; and there promised never to think of any other Women


My pretended flekness has kept me from Church, ever since I Have been here; but
I believe if he could have thought I had been to be found at Rome, he had said
he had seen me there; -- Well Sir, I will not question the truth of what you
say: But if I should be inclinable to believe you, what would you do to deserve
it


All things that is possible my Unartful Passion will Compel me to.


All things but Constancy; and that I fear is not in your Passion.


It is the only sin of my Affection, if it be one to love forever.


O Heaven! that truth dwelt in his words.


I do by all --


Hold, -- hold -- I know there is nothing but he will Swear: And break it when
he has done; and yet he must swear it; -- for there is such a Charm in the
Cheat; that again I must hear him, and be again deceived


How then, I must leave you, when next I see you.


You Will perhaps again be taken from me; let me not part with you now.


I must be gone.


Then take me with you.


What to do?


That we will talk of by and by.


But the time will be so short.


That we shall have no time to talk; -- Well hinted I Gad --


A Pox upon you, for a company of uncultivated Clods; where de'e hall me?


Sir, what we do we are bound to; it is our Office, therefore pray forgive us


You are not going to Execution with me, you ask pardon so like a Hangman;


No Sir, Our Warrant is only to carry you before a Justice, and from thence I
believe to Prison: but where afterward I dare not say; but I am afraid your
Worships time is but short


Not so short as you would make it, you dund-headed Dogs, to be tried, Condemned
and Hanged in a Breath


No Sir, I hope not; Tho your Worship made but quick work with poor Hob.


Aye, aye poor man; his head has done aching by this time:


I Am glad of it; and had I my Sword, and my hands at liberty none of your
should trouble you long


O bloody, bloody, away with him; this is bloody Neighbors.

All, Away, away with him.


So Mr. Probe, how de'e find your Patient?


Alas his Wound is nothing; his Scull is not so much as touched tho he fancies
it impossible for a cut with a Sword to be less than Mortal


Poor Hob, you must still keep him ignorant of his Condition, and make him
believe it is dangerous; it may be of use to me


I need not do that, his fears will not let him believe otherwise; let me say what
I can


Robin, come let us go see if we can find Mr. Woodvill, for without his help we
shall hardly bring our Plot to perfection


Not Jove in all his transformations, when he Ungodded himself for Mortal
Pleasures, had one hour of Love like me. O for a Night to Revel in; that the
Taste might be turned into a Feast; And my longing Soul be filled with delight


Is not this Ecstasy feigned: And shall not the easy access you have found to
my heart, make me one day slighted for another


Wrong not thy self with such a thought, -- there can be no other but thee:
Thou Charmer tell me when shall I see thee again


I cannot tell, this Evening i will endeavor it; and if it is possible I will
meet you here; -- tell then -- Farewell


Farewell my Dear, Dear Creature.


Have you my things Betty?


Here they be Madam.


Give 'em to me; i will put 'em on as I go; if he takes not the nearest way I may
meet him at the lower end of the Walk


O well met; I find I might have looked long enough for you, had not chance
brought me to a sight of you: -- Come Robin the things, quick, qu^ck


Here Sir, here.


How now, what are these for?


Nay, prithee ask no questions; But if you will do me a piece of service, come on
with this Holy outside, you must suffer a Transformation Ned; from a Town Bull
to Parish Priest


That Is the same thing still Frank; But to what end must I wear this Mantle,
for Iniquity


Cannot you guess?


Not I faith, unless it be to mock Matrimony; And if that is the business come
on, as fast as you will, I Am for you


How! I did not think thou had been so well acquainted with Religion, to be
able to act any thing of it


Yes, yes, to serve a friend upon occasion Franck; I have studied it a little.


And a very little, nor that for any affection thou had to it, i will be sworn,
Come, come along


A word with you Sir, -- If the care of some departing Soul does not make you
too much in haste


Thou dear Creature, have I met thee here again? And art thou come to perform
they last promise; and let me see that beauteous Face of thine


Why should you be so curious? for if it prove handsome you know the engagement
you lie under


What, to love thee? -- It Is impossible my dear for me ever to love any body
else


So, -- What de'e do with this habit then? -- I fear there is something to be
managed in this disguise, not of a piece with your vows


This habit Child; why I procured it a purpose to try if by it is assistance I
could find some way to get access to thee


Thou lie thou Devil; and the Curse of broken promises pursue thee for it.


Hey day! what is the meaning of this Divinity, if you bring me no better
fortune, you must go home and Cloak for the good Wives of your own Parish again

To Levies Tribe they will part with any thing.
And thank the Saint that takes the Offering.

COme easy Neighbors, easy, set 'en down easy.


O my poor Child, how do thou do?


Worser and worser, I find I Am not for this Life.


Then I hope you will take warning, how often have I said. Hob says I don't thee
concern thy self; what business is it of thine? Let every Tub stand upon its
own bottom; but thou thought because --


Pray now don't ye talk to me, pray now don't; Don't ye vex me so: It Is a
strange thing you cannot let me depart in peace


How de'e Neighbor? how does your Son?


Ah Sir, the poor boy I Am afraid will dye.


Who is that Neighbor?


It is the Parson come to Pray with thee Hob.


Ha! What do say, the Parson? -- O Lord, I hope it is not come to that is
it? -- O my heart, O my poor heart will break; O -- O Lord


Come Patience, Patience Neighbor, have a little Patience -- And I hope as you
have lived a good Christian, you will take care to dye so


Aye sure Sir, that I will, under Mercy; for if I live I will dye a good
Protestant


That Is well said, then the first thing you must do, is to forget and forgive.


Forgive? -- What must I forgive him that has knocked out my brains? Why then
may hap he will do so again


If he does, you must forgive him.


Aye, -- why then if I must, I do forgive him.


Hob, Child here is Mary come to see thee.


How do find thy self Hob.


Ah Mary, I cannot speak to thee.


Poor heart; -- do try to speak to her child, for she is thy Wife and no other.


I know I Am sure to her, -- and I do own it before you all, I ask't her the
Question, last Lammas; and at Allhollows-tide we broke a piece of Money; and if
I had lived till last Sunday, we had been asked in the Church


Ha poor wretch I always thought 'en to pretty to live -- Mary, go and kiss 'en
Mary


I do desire you all present, to take notice of my last Will and Testimony. --
I have forty Shillings in a leatherpurse under my Beds-head, which I do
bequeath unto Mary; And the ball'd-fac'd Heifer that I bought at Tukesbury*
Fair, I do bequeath unto Mary; -- And my new leather Breeches, which I bought
against Whitsontide: I do bequeath unto Mary; And my Bible, and new Pitchfork,
and Tobacco-box, I do bequeath unto Mary: Mary, come and kiss me once more,
Mary you may never kiss me again


How now, what is the matter; -- how do do Friend?


Dead Sir, -- I Am a Dead Man.


How Dead! Thou art the first Dead Man that ever told me so; let me feel thy
Pulse


O Sir, they do beat, beat, like any Durm.


O your Pulse beats very temperate.


Do they Sir?


Aye, aye, you're better than you was a great deal.


Am I indeed Sir?


What have you given him to eat?


Nothing Sir, I have eat no kind of thing: Sir Thomas sent a Doctor here, and I
believe he had a mind tof amish me, he gave me a sort of stuff here made of
Barley; -- Barley Porridge I think they call it; 'twas no sooner in but out
again; it runs through a man and does no manner of good


You must have some thing to strengthen him; what have you a mind to?


I don't know Sir; I could eat something fit for a man in my Condition; -- a
little somewhat Roast; -- what de'e think of a little Roast-beef now; -- and a
little Pepper and Vinigar to make it Savory, may hap I could get a bit of that
down


O a very good thing for a sick man; let him have it, and give him some Sack
now and then; there is half a Dozen Bottles within, which Mr. Friendly sent to
comfort him with


Has a, -- God bless 'en -- *Ha! he is a good man -- Mother give me a little
Sack, will ye pray now do


Well, how de'e find your self now?


Ha, -- ha -- add I don't know Sir, -- methinks I Am pretty hoddy now as 'twere.


That Is well, why then let him drink another Cup.


Shall I? -- Why so, I will then -- Mother give me a sup or two more -- He --
he -- he


Ah much good do thy precious heart; how do do now Child.


Ha -- add I Am fine and spract now.


Pough, -- you will do very well again; I Would have you try to get up, and i will come
and see you again anon


Thank you Sir, heartily; -- Sir, Sir, pray take the Parson a long with you, I
don't care to see 'en here, a looks unlucky methinks


Aye, aye, I will.


Mother I Will try if I can walk a bit.


Do then stand up.


Pray lend me my Breeches Father.


O don't be too bold good Hob.


Give me a little more Sack


Get on thy Cloths first, good Child.


I Am, I Am, very fainty, -- I wont venture too soon Mother.


Don't then, sit down, and let them carr thee in again.


Aye, so I will.


Come help Neighbors.


I have misfortunes enough to send me into the other world, without a Halter; I
need not swing thither for a Rogue not worth the Money the Rope will cost; --
but if I be hanged, it shall be a day of mourning for somebody


Save you Sir.


And you too Sir, have you any thing to say to me?


Yes Sir, I hear you are to be tried for Murder, and as the Fact appears to me,
you will suffer for it


Well, and what then?


I would know in what state, you are in, and if you are prepared for Death as
you ought to be


You know; -- What with that Face, -- prithee get some hair on thy Chin first
-- boy -- thy outside will beget no veneration in me


My inside will not I Am sure --


Why, what is my Condition Cobble Conscience?


Do ye know where you are a going?


No nor you neither Sir, for all you get your living by it.


This way Sir, will not convey you to Heaven.


Why then I Will go to to'ther place along with you.


And is this all the Preparation you intend to make for your Journey.


Aye Sir, I shall go just as I am, without Boots or Spurs; you may therefore
spare your pains, if you please


What an old Reprobat have I to work upon.


Your Servant Sir, I Am glad to see you in such good Company.


It Is the Company Neighbor Saywell, that will bring me to the Gallows; -- The
Parson and the Hangman are the two last that take leave of us there. Have you
brought my Writings


I have Sir, and here is a Gentleman recommended to me for an able Lawyer, that
will settle your Estate as you shall think fit


Sir, here is a young Lady without, desires to see you.


O it is my Wife, let her come to me.


I Am afraid the help I can give you, will do but little service, for he is as
much averse to a black Gown, as a Non-Con is to a Surplice: What have you done
with the Ladies


They Are safe at my Aunt Friendlies.


Does Flora know of your Plott.


No, nor of her Fathers being here; nor durst I tell her, till I have effected
my design; for tho it is only for her sake, if I do get her Fortune, yet
t'wou'd displease her if she knew I but attempted it. -- Ha


O, show me, show me, where on my knees I may fix, till my Tears have washed
away my Offenses; O Sir, forgive my Disobedience, that has I fear been too much
the cause of this most fatal accident


Hum, -- get out of my sight, -- get out of my sight -- Go get you gone to your
Rogue, that will have mehang'd, go and I Will provide for ye; -- I Will give you a
Portion, Twelve-pence and thy Fathers Curse, be thine Inheritance


What a Pox is the meaning of all this?


O do not Curse me Sir, I have not deserved that, leave me a Beggar if you
please, but with your Blessing and I will be contented


What, bless thee for contriving to have me hanged? be gone* -- begone from me
quickly, or I will fist thee from me


Do any thing Sir, so you will heat me; -- Let me clear my Innocence, and
banish me your sight forever turning to Wood. O Sir, I beseech you plead for
me, it is your Duty to Reconcile us, and yours, and yours turning


I Am so amazed I cannot think what to do, if I discover my self to her in this
humor, she will not have patience to let me undeceive her


So, I find our Plot is growing to an end already; How like two Fools we shall
look by and by, if they find us out in our borrowed shapes


Come, pray let me persuade you to hear her however, you are never the farther
from your Resolution


What can she say for her self, am I not brought here for Murder, provoked to
it by their invention, she and her Rogue Friendly, that she ran away with; did
you not run away with him Huzzey


I did Sir.


Very good; Come, I Will reason the matter calmly with you; and have you not
married him too, against my express Command to the Contrary


No, Sir nor never will.


Swear, swear that, and damn thy self.


By all my hopes of future Blessings, he is not my Husband; nor till within
this half hour, did I know of your imprisonment, or the fatal cause


If this be true.


If it be not let misery p^rsue me.


Will you promise me not to marry him when I Am dead, for hang me I suppose they
will


O do not name him, Death would be a thousand times more welcome to me, than
such a Husband


So now I may go hang my self.


Well, on condition that all you have said is true, I do forgive thee, rise up
and Heaven bless thee


Dear Ned, what shall I do.


Why, as thou said just now, hang thy self; for since thou can not marry to
cure thy passion, I know no other way


You will do well, Sir Thomas, for she has expressed her self a very dutiful
Child


She has so, and I will reward her for it, here is a Deed of Gift of half my
Estate, which I did once before design for her, but happening to fall in Love
at that Juncture, and marrying I altered my Resolution, here Sir, --


Mr. Nonsuit;


Come and witness this, the rest of my Estate I will settle upon my Wife, and
let the Writings be drawn as soon as you can


Sir, they shall be ordered immediately.


Sir, your hand too.


Withal my heart; and heav^n give a blessing to it:


Amen.


There I deliver this as my Act and Deed.


So, I Am glad however I Have seen this done for her! tho she has renounced me for
ever


I wish I could have lived to a seen thee married; my death had been more
supportable to me


I wish so to Sir, for I Am young and know not how the subtilties of men may
prevail, when you are gone that should advise me: But for fear this Friendly
should attempt me again, to make me break the promise I have made you; I will
this minute put it out of my power, and give my self to this Gentleman Mr.
Nonsuit, if he will please to accept of me


Ha, accept of thee.


Nay, -- you don't deserve me, for not letting me know your designs upon my
Father, am I not fit to be trusted with my own welfare think ye


Oons!


Forgive me Madam, and had I --


Nay, no Apology, I Am satisfied that I Am not obliged to your Plot for what I
have, but my own


By all that is sacred I will deserve thee, if it be in Love to reward this
unexpected blessing, tell me you Powers, if there be any that knows a happiness
like mine; how shall I express my Joy


Woons, what is all this?


O good Sir, forbear swearing; it is an hollowed sound, and my ears cannot bear
it


Rot you and your ears, you Canonical Pimp, Confussion I Am cheated out of my
Estate too, as well as my life


No Sir I will take care your Estate shall be disposed of according to your Act
and Deed; and you may live to now if you please, and enjoy your liberty


Which you had never wanted


Patience give me Patience.


In troth, Neighbor, -- it is the best Remedy you can have; even make use of
it, and let that seem your choice which is not now in your power to help


What would you have me do? Would you have me give her to him?


Aye, and your Blessing too, or they will be happy without it; an Estate is a
good step to it, and that you have given 'em already; and there few Children in
this Age, that think their Parents can add any thing more


Come hither, -- Take her, and make her --


Any thing but a Wife, or I forbid


You forbid the Banes.


What Is the meaning of this?


Look'ee Frank, while the Jest would bare, I was willing to carry it on; -- But
the Business grows now too much in earnest; and the Welfare of my Friend
obliges me to make bold with my Mistress


What say ye, your Mistress?


Aye your Lady, and her Companion, were the two Masks that I told you I picked
up, and one of 'em, I thank her, did me the Favor to afford me her Company
that Night, if it was Flora she has something very particular in her behavior
that makes her a very agreeable Bedfellow


Thou durst not sure say this to me in earnest?


But I dare, Sir, if it be truth, as I Am sure it is; though, perhaps, you may not
care to hear it


By Heaven thou lie, and did not her presence make this place sacred, thou
shoud'st pay dear for this Blasphemy


Are you so hot? Follow me, and I Will find you a place to allay your fury in.


Follow thee --


Hold, you shall not go; What Is the meaning of this?


What Is the matter? -- [As Wood. is going out,


With your leave, Sir.


Ha!


What are you surpised to see me here?


Ay, I'gad, am I, more than ever I was in my Life.


Sir, it is hard to conceal wrongs, from a Jealous Mistress.


And it is harder for me to do you right, whilst you conceal your self.


Why did you not meet me, as you promised?


Meet you; S'bud I thought I had you here; but since I find I Am mastaken, pray,
Madam, satisfy me, who you are? For if you remember, when you and I Bargained
for a little Familiarity, I was to be under no obligation, till I had seen and
liked you


That you have done already, if you spoke truth; but since you are so apt to
forget, refresh your Memory and look again; What are you Dumb? [Pulls off her
Mask


I should be dumb, Madam, if --


If thou had nothing to say, but thou have a Tongue can never want words to
excuse thy Perjury, should I stay to hear it; farewell, ungrateful Man


So, very well, what trick next; Fortune is pleased to be very merry with me to
day, I find I have made a very pretty hand of this matter; -- Lost both my
Mistresses, wronged a virtuous Lady, abused my Friend, and brought a Quarrel
upon me, all in one quarter of an hour, -- Hark'ee, Friendly, --


Well, Sir.


It Is as thou say, I do lie; and prithee forgive me for it.


It Is very well, Sir; -- But do you think this will satisfy me?


At present I hope it will; to Morrow thou shall know more.


In the mean time then pray make some amends to the Lady.


I can only ask her pardon, what else is requisite do thou do for me, anon when
the Curtains are drawn


Fear not, Sir; you shall not be troubled with any Night-work of mine.


That I should have both my Eyes, and yet not see these pair of Counterfeit
Knaves; well, it is not the first time that Whoremongers and Adulters have been
cloak't with the Law and the Gospel

My Dear, art thou ventured hither too?


Ay, my Dear, to fetch thee home, hearing Hob was well and abroad, I could no
longer bear to have you here, since I have recovered health enough to be happy
with you at home


What say thou? -- Health, -- and be happy? -- What do thou mean, ha! --
Shall I have thee in my Arms? And will it thou be my Bride to Night


I shall be what you please to have me.


Why then let sorrow vanish, and a Fig for my Daughter, Friendly, take her, and
do what thou will it with her


I thank you, Sir; and to deserve this Kindness; if you get an Heir to Inherit
your Estate, you shall have it again


Hum! Do you jeer an Old Man? Well, if I cannot get an Heir, do you, I Am
contented now, it should be for my Grandson


How now Ned, engaging afresh? If you purchase there, it must be for Life.


With all my heart; -- Madam, shall I have Possession upon that Condition?


I don't know what may be, after seven Years Acquaintance.


He Will be worn out in half that time, Madam, if you don't reclaim him.


Do you think it is possible, Sir, to reclaim him?


I hope so, Madam.


So do I, though I doubt it; Neice have a care of him.


Let her take care of her self; her Father left her at my disposal, and if she
Marries him, I will not give her a Groat


Then, Sir, I suppose your Courtships at an end; for without that Charm, my
Beauty, I fear, will have but little force


Enough, Madam, to make me a Convert, if you dare put me to a Trial --
Friendly's Example, or any concealed Mischief in this holy Covering, but I find
my self of a sudden strangely inclined to do something to repent of, as well as
the foolish part of Mankind


I know she loves him, and if I thought he loved her, --


You need not doubt it, if he Marries her, for nothing but Love can make him do
such a Violence to himself. Ned, pursue your purpose, if it is honorable for
such a Beauty, and eight thousand Pound, -- (if we can work the old fellow to
consent) will be a better Fortune then any thou can hope for in Flanders


If Love goes on as it begins, I shall be of thy Opinion Frank.


Ask what thou will, my Dear, I will deny thee nothing; for thou art every
thing to me; What wou^d I give now, that it were Bed time, Neighbor, h


Not so much as your Lady would give to have it Morning again; for we old
Fellows, Sir Thomas, are but troublesome Companions between a pair of Sheets


Say you so, Sir; you may be mistaken; what say thou my dear?


I hope so too, Sir.


Ha! My little Rogue.


Why should I be angry that he cannot love me? I would not love him if I could
help it: Shall I then think that a Crime in another, I would my self be guilty
of; Alas, it is neither of our faults; for fate has decreed me wretched to make
him happy, and this way it must be done; -- Neice to Day I am Sir Thomas, and
your Fortune now you shall receive from my Gift, -- take it, and dispose of it
with yourself, as you please


Madam, I should blush so to receive it, if I did not hope you would command
both it and me


If I do, it shall be to bestow you here; -- I know your Inclinations.


Madam, this generous Act has --


Deserved better usage than you have treated me with; but I forgive you, and
hope I shall forget you too


Never, Madam; for though I cannot as a Lover, as a Friend I Will hope to deserve a
place in your Memory


A Friend! A cold distinction for a heart like mine, unless it could
degenerate, and be as yours has been to me; however be happy, and if I have
contributed any thing to make you so, 'twill please me that I had it in my
Power


That both these young Jades should get the better of me!


Aye, and you may thank Heaven for it, or we had hanged you; for Hob's Life
depended upon your good Behavior; and had you been still refractory, we had
knocked out his Brains and you should a Swung for it


A very Christian-like Contrivance.


'Twas such as would a served our turns, Sir.


There Is Master Friendly.


God bless you, Sir.


O, honest Hob!


What, durst that Rogue venture hither? Give me my Sword, I Will have a Collop of
him I Am resolved


Will you? -- As I hope to be saved -- Master Friendly -- For the Lord sake
do'nt let e'n draw his Sword upon me again, pray now don't


No, no, prithee don't fright thy self; -- Good Sir, let me entreat for him.


Don't ye thirst after Blood so, don't ye; -- You have enough of mine to answer
for already


What brought him here?


Brought me here? -- Why look'ee, Sir, I am through Providence here a going to
be Married to Mary; and I don't know how it may please God to deal with me;
therefore I desire before I go to Church, that I may be at Peace with all the
World; forgive me, and I Will forgive you


Poor fellow, he is the first I ever knew in his Condition that seemed to have a
sense of it


Well, since you will have it so, let him give us a Dance, and I will be
Friends with him


And the Farm next his Father's, for his Life shall be his, if he makes a good
Husband; -- It Is in my Gift yet, Sir


And shall be ever so, Madam; and to show I Am pleased with your Bounty, I will
stock it for him


O Lord, Scratch, strike up Scratch --


And I Will make one.


Nay then we'll all join.

Hey-day! What Is here the Country come in upon us?


So much for Dancing, now, my Dear, let us Home; for since this proves not a
Tenement for Life, I don't care how soon I get hence


And where shall we go?


To Church, Madam, and then --


Even where you please;

Marriage makes us yours, but remember still
To keep us so, Women must have their Will;
For by restraining us, you will only prove
There Is no Obedience, where the Tye's not Love.






