FOols, which each man meets in his Dish each day,
Are yet the great Regalio's of a Play;
In which to Poets you but just appear,
To prize that highest which cost them so dear:
Fops in the Town more easily will pass;
One story makes a statutable Ass,
But such in Plays must be much thicker sown,
Like yolks of Eggs, a dozen beat to one.
Observing Poets all their walks invade,
As men watch Woodcocks gliding through a Glade:
And when they have enough for Comedy,
They stow their several Bodies in a Pie:
The Poet's but the Cook to fashion it,
For, Gallants, you your selves have found the wit.
To bid you welcome would your bounty wrong,
None welcome those who bring their Cheer along.


WHere the Devil is this Master of mine? he is ever out of the way when he
should do himself good. This it is to serve a Coxcomb, one that has no more
brains than just those I carry for him. Well! of all Fopps commend me to him
for the greatest; he is so opinion'd of his own Abilities, that he is ever
designing somewhat, and yet he sows his Stratagems so shallow, that every Daw
can pick'em up: from a plotting Fool the Lord deliver me. Here he comes, O! it
seems his Cousin's with him, then it is not so bad as I imagined


I think 'twas well contrived for your access to lodge her in the same house
with you


It Is pretty well I must confess.


Had he plotted it himself, it had been admirable


For when her Father Moody writ to me to take him Lodgings, I so ordered it,
the choice seemed his, not mine


I have hit of a thing my self sometimes, when wiser Heads have missed it --
But that might be mere luck


Fortune does more than Wisdom.


Nay, for that you shall excuse me;
I will not value any man's Fortune at a rush,
Except he have Wit and Parts to bear him out.
But when do you expect 'em?

This Tide will bring them from Gravesend.
You had best let your man go as from me,
And wait them at the Stairs in Durham-yard.

Lord, Cousin, what a do is here with your Counsel!
As though I could not have thought of that my self.
I could find in my heart not to send him now -- stay a little
-- I could soon find out some other way.

A minute's stay may lose your business.


Well, go then, -- but you must grant, if he had stayed, I could have found a
better way, -- you grant it


For once I will not stand with you. --
It Is a sweet Gentlewoman this Mrs. Millisent, if you can get her.

Let me alone for plotting.


But by your favor, Sir, it is not so easy,
Her Father has already promised her:
And the young Gentleman comes up with 'em:
I partly know the man, -- but the old Squire is humoursome,
He Is stout, and plain in speech and in behavior;
He loves none of the fine Town-tricks of breeding,
But stands up for the old Elizabeth way in all things.
This we must work upon.

Sure! you think you have to deal with a Fool, Cousin?


O my dear Neice, I have some business with you.


Well, Madam, I Will take one turn here in the Piazza's;
A thousand things are hammering in this head;
It Is a fruitful Noddle, though I say it.

Go thy ways for a most conceited Fool. -- But to our business, Cousin: you
are young, but I am old, and have had all the Love-experience that a discreet
Lady ought to have; and therefore let me instruct you about the Love this rich
Lord makes to you


You know, Madam, he is Married, so that we cannot work upon that ground of
Matrimony


But there are advantages enough for you, if you will be wise and follow my
advice


Madam, my Friends left me to your care, therefore I will wholly follow your
Counsel with secrecy and obedience


Sweet-heare, it shall be the better for you another day: well then, this Lord
that pretends to you is crafty and false, as most men are, especially in Love;
-- therefore we must be subtle to meet with all his Plots, and have
Countermines against his Works to blow him up


As how, Madam?


Why, Girl, he will make fierce Love to you, but you must not suffer him to
ruffle you, or steal a kiss: but you must weep and sigh, and say you will tell me
on it, and that you will not be used so; and play the innocent just like a
Child, and seem ignorant of all


I warrant you 'Ile be very ignorant, Madam.


And be sure when he has tows'd you, not to appear at Supper that night, that
you may fright him


No, Madam.


That he may think you have told me.


I Madam.


And keep your Chamber, and say your head aches:


O, most extremely, Madam.


And lock the door, and admit of no night-visits: at Supper I Will ask where is my
Cousin, and being told you are not well, I Will start from the Table to visit you,
desiring his Lordship not to incommode himself; for I will presently wait on
him again


But how, when you are returned, Madam?


Then somewhat discomposed, I Will say, I doubt the Meazles or Smallpox will
seize on you, and then the Girl is spoiled; saying, Poor thing, her Portion is
her Beauty and her Virtue; and often send to see how you do, by whispers in my
Servants ears, and have those whispers of your health returned to mine: if his
Lordship thereupon asks how you do, I will pretend it was some other thing


Right, Madam, for that will bring him further in suspense.


A hopeful Girl! Then will I eat nothing that night, feigning my grief for
you; but keep his Lordship Company at Meal, and seem to strive to put my
passion off, yet show it still by small mistakes


And broken Sentences.


A dainty Girl! and after Supper visit you again, with promise to return strait
to his Lordship: but after I am gone send an Excuse, that I have given you a
Cordial, and mean to watch that night in person with you


His Lordship then will find the Prologue of his trouble, doubting I have told
you of his ruffling


And more than that, fearing his Father should know of it, and his Wife, who is
a Termagant Lady: but when he finds the Coast is clear, and his late ruffling
known to none but you, he will be drunk with joy


Finding my simple Innocence, which will inflame him more.


Then what the Lyon's skin has failed him in, the Foxes subtlety must next
supply, and that is just, Sweetheart, as I would have it; for crafty Folks
treaties are their advantage: especially when his passion must be satisfied at
any rate, and you keep shop to set the price of Love: so now you see the Market
is your own


Truly, Madam, this is very rational; and by the blessing of Heaven upon my
poor endeavors, I do not doubt to play my part


My blessing and my prayers go along with thee.


I believe, Madam, here is the young Heiress you expect, and with her he who is
to marry her


However I am Sir Martins Friend, I must not seem his Enemy.


Madam, this fair young Lady begs the honor to be known to you.


My Father made me hope it, Madam.


Sweet Lady, I believe you have brought all the Freshness of the Country up to
Town with you


I came up, Madam, as we Country-Gentlewomen use, at an Easter-Term, to the
destruction of Tarts and Cheese-cakes, to see a New Play, buy a new Gown, take
a Turn in the Park, and so down again to sleep with my Forefathers


Rather, Madam, you are come up to the breaking of many a poor Heart, that like
mine will languish for you


I doubt, Madam, you are indisposed with your Voyage; will you please to see
the Lodgings your Father has provided for you


To wait upon you, Madam.


This is the door, -- there is a Gentleman will wait you immediately in your
Lodging, if he might presume on your Commands


You mean Sir Martin Marrall: I am glad he has entrusted his passion with so
discreet a person


Sir John, let me entreat you to stay here, that my Father may have
intelligence where to find us


I shall obey you, Madam.


Sir Martin Marrall! most happily encountered! how long have you been come to
Town


Some three days since, or thereabouts: but I thank God I am very weary on it
already


Why, what is the matter, man?


My villainous old luck still follows me in gaming, I never throw the Dice out
of my hand, but my Gold goes after 'em: if I go to Picquet, though it be but
with a Novice in it, he will picque and repicque, and Capot me twenty times
together: and which most mads me, I lose all my Sets when I want but one of up


The pleasure of play is lost, when one loses at that unreasonable rate.


But I have sworn not to touch either Cards or Dice this half year.


The Oaths of losing Gamesters are most minded; they foreswear play as an angry
Servant does his Mistress, because he loves her but too well


But I am now taken up with thoughts of another nature; I am in love, Sir.


That Is the worst Game you could have played at, scarce one Woman in an hundred
will play with you upon the Square: you venture at more uncertainty than at a
Lottery: for you set your heart to a whole Sex of Blanks. But is your Mistress
Widow, Wife, or Maid


I can assure you, Sir, mine is a Maid;
The Heiress of a wealthy Family,
Fair to a Miracle.

Does she accept your service?


I am the only person in her favor.


Is she of Town or Country?


How Is this?


She is of Kent, near Canterbury.


What does he mean? this is his Rival --


Near Canterbury say you? I have a small Estate lies thereabouts, and more
concernments than one besides


I Will tell you then, being at Canterbury;
It was my Fortune once in the Cathedral Church --

What do you mean, Sir, to entrust this man with your Affair thus? --


Trust him? why, he is a friend of mine.


No matter for that; hark you a Word Sir. --


Prithee leave fooling: -- and as I was saying -- I was in the Church when I
first saw this fair one


Her Name, Sir, I beseech you.


For Heaven's sake, Sir, have a care?


Thou art such a Coxcomb. -- Her name's Millisent.


Now, the Pox take you Sir, what do you mean?


Millisent say you? that is the name of my Mistress.


Lord! what luck is that now! well Sir, it happened, one of her Gloves fell
down, I stooped to take it up; And in the stooping made her a Complement. --


The Devil cannot hold him, now will this thick-skull'd Master of mine tell the
whole story to his Rival --


You Will say, 'twas strange Sir; but at the first glance we cast on one another,
both our hearts leaped within us, our Souls met at our Eyes, and with a
tickling kind of pain slid to each others breast, and in one moment settled as
close and warm, as if they long had been acquainted with their lodging. I
followed her somewhat at a distance, because her Father was with her


Yet hold Sir -- --


Saucy Rascal, avoid my sight; Must you tutor me? So Sir, not to trouble you, I
inquired out her Father's House, without whose knowledge I did Court the
Daughter, and both then and often since coming to Canterbury, I received many
proofs of her kindness to me


You had best tell him too, that I am acquainted with her Maid, and manage your
love underhand with her


Well remembered in faith, I thank thee for that, I had forgot it I protest! my
Valet de Chamber, whom you see here with me, grows me acquainted with her Woman
--


O the Devil. --


In fine Sir, this Maid being much in her Mistresses favor, so well solicited
my Cause, that in fine I gained from fair Mistress Millisent an assurance of
her kindness, and an engagement to marry none but me


It Is very well! you have made a fair discovery! --


A most pleasant Relation I assure you: you are a happy man Sir! but, What
occasion brought you now to London


That was in expectation to meet my Mistress here; she writ me word from
Canterbury, she and her Father shortly would be here


She and her Father, said you Sir?


Tell him Sir, for Heavens sake tell him all --


So I will Sir, without your bidding: her Father and she are come up already,
that is the truth on it, and are to lodge by my Contrivance in you House; the
Master of which is a cunning Rascal as any in Town -- him I have made my own,
for I lodge there


You do ill, Sir, to speak so scandalously of my Landlord.


Peace, or I Will break your Fool's head, -- So that by his means I shall have
free egress and regress when I please Sir -- without her Fathers knowledge


I am out of patience to hear this. --


Methinks you might do well, Sir, to speak openly to her Father.


Thank you for that in faith, in speaking to old Moody I may soon spoil all.


So now he has told her Father's name, it is past recovery.


Is her Fathers name Moody say you?


Is he of your acquaintance?


Yes Sir, I know him for a man
Who is too wise for you to overreach;
I am certain he will never marry his Daughter
To you.

Why, there is the jest on it:
He shall never know it: it is but your
Keeping of my Counsel; I Will do as much for you mun --

No Sir, I Will give you better; trouble not your self about this Lady; her
affections are otherwise engaged to my knowledge -- hark in your Ear -- her
Father hates a Gamester like a Devil: I Will keep your Counsel for that too


Nay but this is not all dear Sir John.


This is all I assure you: only I will make bold
To seek your Mistress out another Lodging --

Your Affairs are now put into an excellent posture, Thank your incomparable
discretion -- this was a Stratagem my shallow wit could never have reached, to
make a Confident of my Rival


I hope thou art not in earnest man! is he my Rival?


'Slife he has not found it out all this while! well
Sir for a quick apprehension let you alone.

How the Devil came thou to know ont? and
Why the Devil did thou not tell me ont?

To the first of your Devil's I answer, her Maid Rose told me on it: to the
second I wish a thousand Devils take him that would not hear me


O unparalleled Misfortune!


O unparrellell'd ignorance! why he left her Father at the waterside, while he
lead the Daughter to her Lodging, whither I directed him; so that if you had
not labored to the contrary, Fortune had placed you in the same House with
your Mistress, without the least suspicion of your Rival or of her Father: but,
it is well, you have satisfied your talkative humor: I hope you have some new
project of your own to set all right again: for my part I confess all my
designs, for you are wholly ruined; the very foundations of 'em are blown up


Prithee insult not over the Destiny of a poor undone Lover, I am punished
enough for my indiscretion in my despair, and have nothing to hope for now but
death


Death is a Bug-word, things are not brought to that extremity, I^l cast about
to save all yet


O, Sir Martin! yonder has been such a stir within, Sir John, I fear, smoaks
your design, and by all means would have the old man remove his Lodging; pray
God your man has not played false


Like enough I have: I am Coxcomb sufficient to do it, my Master knows that
none but such a great Calf as I could have done it, such an overgrown Ass, a
self-conceited Idiot as I. --


Nay, Warner, --


Pray, Sir, let me alone: -- what is it to you if I rail upon my self? now
could I break my own Loggar-head


Nay, sweet Warner.


What a good Master have I, and I to ruin him: O Beast! --


Not to discourage you wholly, Sir Martin, this storm is partly over.


As how, dear Cousin.


When I heard Sir John complain of the Landlord, I took the first hint of it,
and joined with him, saying, if she were such an one, I would have nothing to
do with him: in short I ratled him so well, that Sir John was the first who did
desire they might be lodged with me, not knowing that I was your Kinswoman


Pox on it, now I think on it, I could have found out this my self. --


Are you there again, Sir? -- now as I have a Soul --


Mum, good Warner, I did but forget my self a little, I leave my self wholly to
you, and my Cousin; get but my Mistress for me and claim what ever reward you
can desire


Hope of reward will diligence beget,
Find you the Money, and I Will find the wit.


IT happened Madam, just as you said it would,
But was he so concerned for my feigned sickness?

So much that Moody and his Daughter, our new Guests, took notice of the
trouble, but the Cause was kept too close for Strangers to divine


Heaven grant he be but deep enough in love, and then --

And then thou shall distill him into Gold my Girl.
Yonder he comes, I Will not be seen: -- you know
Your Lesson, Child.

I warrant you.

Pretty Mistress Christian,
How glad am I to meet you thus alone!

O the Father! what will become of me now?

No harm I warrant you, but why are you so fraid?

A poor weak innocent Creature as I am, Heaven of his mercy, how I quake and
tremble! I have not yet clawed off your last ill usage, and now I feel my old
fit come again, my Ears tingle already, and my back shuts and opens; I, just so
it began before


Nay, my sweet Mistress, be not so unjust
To suspect any new attempt:
I am too penitent for my last fault,
So soon to sin again. --
I hope you did not tell it to your Aunt.

The more Fool I, I did not.

You never shall repent your goodness to me,
But may not I presume there was some little
Kindness in it, which moved you to conceal my
Crime?

Methought I would not have mine Aunt angry with you for all this earthly good;

But yet I Will never be alone with you again.


Pretty Innocence! let me sit nearer to you:
You do not understand what love I bear you.
I vow it is so pure -- --
My Soul's not sullied with one spot of sin:
Were you a Sister or a Daughter to me,
With a more holy Flame I could not burn.

Nay, now you speak high words -- I cannot understand you.


The business of my life shall be but how to make your Fortune, and my care and
study to advance and see you settled in the World


I humbly thank your Lordship.

Thus I would sacrifice my Life and Fortunes,
And in return you cruelly destroy me.

I never meant you any harm, not I.

Then what does this white Enemy so near me?
Sure it is your Champion, and you arm it thus to bid defiance to me.

Nay, fie my Lord, in faith you are to blame.

But I am for fair Wars, an Enemy must first be searched for privy Armor ever
we do engage


What does your Lordship mean?

I fear you bear some Spells and Charms about you,
And, Madam, that is against the Laws of Arms.

My Aunt charged me not to pull off my Glove for fear of Sun-burning my hand.


She did well to keep it from your eyes, but I will thus preserve it.


Why do you crush it so? nay, now you hurt me, nay -- if you squeeze it never so
hard -- there is nothing to come out on it -- fie -- is this loving one -- What
makes you take your breath so short


The Devil take me if I can answer her a word,
All my Senses are quite employed another way.

Never stir, my Lord, I must cry out --

Then I must stop your mouth -- this Ruby for a Kiss -- that is but one Ruby
for another


This is worse and worse.

Why Niece, where are you Niece?

Pox of her old moldy Chops.

Do you hear, my Aunt calls? I shall be hanged for staying with you -- let me
go my Lord


D. My Lord, Heaven bless me, what makes your Lordship here?

I was just wishing for you Madam, your Niece and I have been so laughing at
the blunt humor of your Country-Gentleman, -- I must go pass an hour with him


You made a little too much haste;
I was just exchanging a Kiss for a Ruby.

No harm done; it will make him come on the faster:
Never sull-gorge an Hawk you mean to fly:
The next will be a Neck-lace of Pearl I warrant you.

But what must I do next?

Tell him I grew suspicious, and examined you
Whether he made not Love; which you denied.
Then tell him how my Maids and Daughters watch you;
So that you tremble when you see his Lordship.

And that your Daughters are so envious, that they would raise a false report
to ruin me


Therefore you desire his Lordship,
As he loves you, of which you are confident,
Hence-forward to forbear his Visits to you.

But how if he should take me at my Word?

Why, if the worst come to the worst, he leaves you an honest woman, and
there is an end on it: but fear not that, hold out his messages, and then he will
write, and that is it my Bird which you must drive it to: then all his Letters
will be such Extacies, such Vows and Promises, which you must answer short and
simply, yet still ply out of 'em your advantages


But, Madam! he is in the house, he will not write.

You Fool -- he will write from the next Chamber to you. And rather than fail,
send his Page-Post with it upon a Hobbyhorse: -- then grant a Meeting, but tell
me of it, and I Will I revent him by my being there, he will curse me, but I care
not

When you are alone, he will urge his lust, which answer you with sorn and anger.
-- --


As thus an't please you, Madam?
What? Does he think I will be damned for him?
Defame my Family, ruin my Name,
To satisfy his pleasure?

Then he will be profane in's Arguments,
Urge Natures Laws to you.

By'r Lady, and those are shrewd Arguments;
But I am resolved I Will stop my Ears.

Then when he sees no other thing will move you,
He Will sign a portion to you before hand:
Take hold of that, and then of what you will.

Now fair Mrs. Millisent, you see your Chamber, Your Father will be busy a few
minutes, and in the mean time permits me the happiness to wait on you. --


Methinks you might have chose us better Lodgings,
This house is full; the other we saw first, was more convenient.

For you perhaps, but not for me:
You might have met a Lover there, but I a Rival.

What Rival?

You know, Sir Martin, I need not name it to you.

I know more men besides him.

But you love none besides him: Can you deny your affection to him?


You have vexed me so, I will not satisfy you.

Then I perceive I am not likely to be so much obliged to you as I was to him.


This is Romance, -- -- I Will not believe a word on it. --

That Is as you please: however it is believed,
His wit will not much credit your choice.
Madam, do justice to us both; pay his ingratitude and folly with your scorn;
my service with your Love
By this time your Father stays for me: I shall be discreet enough to keep
this fault of yours from him
The Lawyers wait for us to draw your Jointure:
And I would beg your pardon for my absence,
But that my Crime is punished in it self.

Could I suspect this usage from a favored Servant!

First hear Sir Martin e're you quite condemn him;
Consider it is a Rival who accused him.

Speak not a word in his behalf: --
Methought too, Sir John called him Fool.

Indeed he has a rare way of acting a Fool, and does it so naturally, it can be
scarce distinguished


Nay, he has wit enough, that is certain.

How blind Love is!

How now, what is his business?
I wonder after such a Crime,
If his Master has the face to send him to me.

How durst you venture hither?
If either Sir John or my old Master see you.

Pish! they are both gone out.

They went but to the next street; ten to one but they return and catch you
here


Twenty to one I am gone before, and save'um a labor.

What says that Fellow to you? what business can he have here?


Lord, that your Ladyship should ask that question, Knowing whom I serve!


I Will hear nothing from your Master.

Never breathe, but this anger becomes your Ladyship most admirably; but though
you will hear nothing from him, I hope I may speak a word or two to you from my
self, Madam


'T was a sweet Prank your Master played us: a Lady's well helped up that trusts
her Honor in such a persons hands: to tell all so, -- and to his Rival too

Excuse him if thou can.


How the Devil should I excuse him? thou know he is the greatest Fop in
Nature --


But my Lady does not know it; if she did --

I Will have no whispering.

Alas, Madam, I have not the confidence to speak out,
Unless you can take mercy on me.

For what?

For telling Sir John you loved my Master, Madam.
But sure I little thought he was his Rival.

The witty Rogue has taken't on himself.

Your Master then is innocent.

Why, could your Ladyship suspect him guilty?
Pray tell me, do you think him
Ungrateful, or a fool?

I think him neither.

Take it from me, you see not the depth of him.
But when he knows what thoughts you harbor of him,
As I am faithful, and must tell him, --
I wish he does not take some pet, and leave you.

Thou art not mad I hope, to tell him on it;
If thou do, I Will be sworn, I Will forswear it to him.

Upon condition then you will pardon me,
I Will see what I can do to hold my tongue.

This Evening in S. James' Park I Will meet him.

He shall not fail you, Madam.

Some body knocks -- Oh Madam, what shall we do!
It Is Sir John, I hear his voice.

What will become of me?

Step quickly behind that Door,
To them Sir John.

You Have made a quick dispatch, Sir.

We have done nothing, Madam, our Man of Law was not within, -- -- but I must
look some Writings


Where are they laid?

In the Portmanteau in the Drawing Room.

Pray stay a little, Sir. --

He must pass just by me; and if he sees me, I am but a dead man.


Why are you thus concerned? why do you hold me?

Only a word or two I have to tell you.
It Is of importance to you. --

Give me leave. -- --

I must not before I discover the Plot to you.

What Plot?

Sir Martins Servant, like a Rogue, comes hither
To tempt me from his Master, to have met him.

Now would I had a good Bag of Gunpowder at my Breech to ram me into some hole.


for my part I was so startled at the Message,
That I shall scarcely be my self these two days.

Oh that I had the Rascal! I would teach him
To come upon such Errands.

Oh for a gentle Composition now!
An Arm or Leg I would give willingly.

What Answer did you make the Villain?

I over-reached him clearly, by a Promise
Of an appointment of a place I named,
Where I never meant to come: but would have had
The pleasure first to tell you how I served him.

And then to chide your mean suspicion of me,
Indeed I wondered you should love a Fool.
But where did you appoint to meet him?

In Grayes-Inn Walks.

By this Light, she has put the change upon him!
O sweet Womankind, how I love thee for that heavenly gift of lying!

For this evening I will be his Mistress;
He shall meet another Penelope then he suspects.

But stay not long away.

You over-joy me, Madam.

Is he gone, Madam?

As far as Grayes-Inn Walks: now I have time
To walk the other way, and see thy Master.

Rather let him come hither: I have laid
A Plot shall send his Rival far enough from watching him ever long.

Art thou in earnest?

It Is so designed, Fate cannot hinder it.

Our Landlord where we lie, vexed that his Lodgings should be so left by Sir
John, is resolved to be revenged, and I have found the way

You Will see the effect on it presently.


O Heavens! the door opens again, and Sir John is returned once more.


Half my business was forgot; you did not tell me when you were to meet him.
Ho! What makes this Rascal here


It Is well you're come, Sir, else I must have left untold a Message I have for
you


Well, What Is your business, Sirrah?

We must be private first; It Is only for your ear.

I shall admire his wit, if in this plunge he can get off.

I came hither, Sir, by my Masters order. --

I Will reward you for it, Sirrah, immediately.

When you know all, I shall deserve it, Sir;

I came to sound the Virtue of your Mistress; which I have done so cunningly, I
have at last obtained the promise of a meeting. But my good Master, whom I must
confess more generous than wise, knowing you had a passion for her, is resolved
to quit: And, Sir, that you may see how much he loves you, sent me in private
to advise you still to have an eye upon her actions


Take this Diamond for thy good news;
And give thy Master my acknowledgments:

Thus the World goes, my Masters, he that will cozen you, commonly gets your
good will into the bargain


Madam, I am now satisfied of all sides; first of your truth, then of Sir
Martins friendship

In short, I find you two cheated each other,

Both to be true to me.


Warner is got off as I would wish, and the Knight overreach'd.

How now! What would this Carrier have?

This is our Landlord whom I told you of; but keep your Countenance. --


I was looking here-away for one Sir John Swallow; they told me I might hear
news of him in this House


Friend, I am the man: What have you to say to me?


Nay, 'Faith Sir, I am not so good a Schollard to say much,
But I have a Letter for you in my Pouch:
There Is plaguey news in it, I can tell you that.

From whom is your Letter?

From your old Uncle Anthony.

Give me your Letter quickly.

Nay, soft and fair goes far. -- Hold you, hold you.
It is not in this Pocket.

Search in the other then; I stand on Thorns.

I think I feel it now, this should be who.

Pluck it out then.

I Will puck out my Spectacles and see first.

To Mr. Paul Grimbard -- Apprentice to --

No, that is not for you, Sir, -- that is for the Son of the Brother of the
Nephew of the Cousin of my Gossip Dobson


Prithee dispatch; do thou not know the Contents on it?


Yes, as well as I do my Pater Noster.

Well, What Is the business on it?

Nay, no great business; it is but only that your Worships Father's dead.


My loss is beyond expression! how died he?

He went to bed as well to see to as any man in England,
And when he awakened the next morning. --

What then?

He found himself stark dead.

Well, I must of necessity take orders for my Father's Funeral, and my estate;
Heaven knows with what regret I leave you, Madam


But are you in such haste, Sir? I see you take all occasions to be from me.


Dear Madam, say not so, a few days will, I hope, re^^^n me to you.

Noble Sir Martin, the welcomest man alive!

Let me embrace my Friend.


How untowardly he returns the salute! Warner will be found out.


Well friend! you have obliged me to you eternally.

How have I obliged you, Sir? I would have you to know I scorn your words; and
I would I were hanged, if it be not the farthest of my thoughts


O cunning Youth, he acts the Fool most naturally.
Were we alone, how would we laugh together?

This is a double generosity,
To do me favors and conceal 'um from me;
But honest Warner here has told me all.

What has the Rascal told you?

Your plot to try my Mistress for me -- you understand me, concerning your
appointment


Sir, I desire to speak in private with you.

This impertinent Rascal, when I am most busy, I am ever troubled with him.


But it concerns you I should speak with you, good Sir.

That Is a good one in faith, thou know breeding well, that I should whisper
with a Serving-man before company


Remember, Sir, last time it had been better --

Peace, or I Will make you feel my double Fists; If I don't fright him, the saucy
Rogue will call me fool before the Company


That was acted most naturally again.

But what needs this dissembling, since you are
Resolved to quit my Mistress to me?

I quit my Mistress! that is a good one in faith.

Tell him you have forsaken me.

I understand you, Madam, you would save
A quarrel; but in faith I Am not so base:
I Will see him hanged first.

Madam, my Master is convinced, in prudence
He should say so: but Love o'remasters him;
When you are gone perhaps he may.

I Will go then: Gentlemen, your Servant;
I see my presence brings constraint to the Company.

I Am glad she is gone; now we may talk more freely;
For if you have not quitted her, you must.

Pray, Sir, remember your self; did not you send me of a message to Sir John,
that for his friendship you had left Mistress Millisent


Why, what an impudent lying Rogue art thou!

How Is this! has Warner cheated me?

Do not suspect it in the least: you know, Sir,
It was not generous before a Lady,
To say he quitted her.

O! was that it?

That was all: say, Yes good Sir John -- or I Will swinge you.


Yes, good Sir John.

That Is well, once in his life he has heard good counsel.

Heigh, Heigh, what makes my Landlord here? he has put on a Fools Coat I think
to make us laugh


The Devil's in him; he is at it again; his folly's like a sore in a surfeited
Horse; cure it in one place, and it breaks out in another


Honest Landlord in faith, and what make you here?

Are you acquainted with this honest man?

Take heed what you say, Sir.

Take heed what I say, Sir, why? who should I be afraid of? of you, Sir? I say,
Sir, I know him, Sir; and I have reason to know him, Sir, for I am sure I lodge
in his House, Sir, -- nay never think to terrify me, Sir; it is my Landlord
here in Charles Street, Sir


Now I expect to be paid for the News I brought him.

Sirrah, did not you tell me that my Father --

Is in very good health, for ought I know, Sir; I beseech you to trouble your
self no farther concerning him


Who set you on to tell this lie?

I, who set you on Sirrah? this was a Rogue that would cozen us both; he
thought I did not know him: down on your marribones and confess the truth: have
you no tongue you Rascal


Sure it is some silenced Minister: he is grown so sat he cannot speak.


Why, Sir, if you would know, 'twas for your sake I did it.


For my Masters sake! why you impudent Varlet, do you think to 'scape us with
alye


How was it for his sake?

'Twas for his own, Sir; he heard you were the occasion the Lady lodged not at
his House, and so he invented this lie; partly ^o revenge himself of you; and
partly, I believe, in hope to get her once again when you were gone


Fetch me a Cudgel prithee.

O good Sir! if you beat me I shall run into oil immediately,


Hang him Rogue; he is below your anger: I Will maul him for you -- the Rogue's so
big, I think 'twill ask two days to beat him all over


O Rogue, O Villain Warner! bid him hold
And I Will confess, Sir.

Get you gone without replying: must such as you be prating?


Friend will you go along, and take part of a bad Repast?


Thank you; but I am just risen from Table.

Now he might fit with his Mistress, and has not the wit to find it out.


You shall be very welcome.

I have no stomach, Sir.

Get you in with a vengeance: you have a better stomach than you think you have.


This hungry Diego Rogue would shame me;
He thinks a Gentleman can eat like a Servingman.

If you will not, adieu dear Sir;
In any thing command me.

Now we are alone; have NOT I carried matters bravely, Srrah.


O yes, yes, you deserve Sugar Plums; first for Your quarrelling with Sir John;
then for discovering your Landlord, and lastly for refusing to dine with your
Mistress: All this is since the last reckoning was wiped out


Then why did my Landlord disguise himself, to make a Fool of us?


You have so little Brains, that a Penn'orth of Butter melted under 'um, would
set 'um afloat: he put on that disguise to rid you of your Rival


Why, Was not I worthy to keep your counsel then?

It had been much at one: you would but have drunk the secret down; and pissed
it out to the next company


Well, I find I am a miserable man: I have lost my Mistress, and may thank my
self for it


You Will not confess you are a fool, I warrant.

Well I am a fool, if that will satisfy you: but
What am I the nearer for being one?

O yes, much the nearer; for now Fortune's bound to provide for you; As
Hospita's are built for lame people, because they cannot help themselves

Well; I have yet a project in my pate.


Dear Rogue, What is it?

Excuse me for that: but while it is set a working
You would do well to scrue your self into her
Fathers good opinion.

If you will not tell me, my mind gives me I shall discover it again.


I Will lay it as far out of your reach as I can possible.
-- For secrets are edged Tools;
And must be kept from Children and from Fools.


YOur Worship's most happily encountered.

Your Ladiship's most fortunately met.

I was going to your Lodging.

My business was to yours.

I have something to say to you that --

I have that to tell you --

Understand then --

If you will hear me --

I believe that --

I am of opinion that --

Prithee hold thy peace a little till I have done.

Cry you mercy, Mistress Rose, I Will not dispute your ancient privileges of
talking


My Mistress, knowing Sir John was to be abroad upon business this Afternoon,
has asked leave to see a Play: and Sir John has so great a confidence of your
Master, that he will trust nobody with her, but him


If my Master gets her out, I warrant her, he shall show her a better Play than
any is at either of the Houses -- here they are: I Will run and prepare him to
wait upon her


My Hoods and Scarfs there, quickly.

Send to call a Coach there.

But what kind of man is this Sir Martin, with whom you are to go?


A plain downright Country Gentleman, I assure you.

I like him much the better for it.
For I hate one of those you call a man of the Town,
One of those empty fellows of mere outside:
They Have nothing of the true old English manliness.

I confess, Sir, a Woman's in a sad condition, that has nothing to trust to,
but a Perriwig above, and a well-trim'd shoe below


This, Sir, is Sir John's friend, he is for your humor, Sir, He is no man o'th
'Town, but bred up in the old Elizabeth way of plainness


I, Madam, your Ladyship may say your pleasure of me.


How the Devil got he here before me! It Is very unlucky I could not see him
first --


But, as for Painting, Music, Poetry, and the like, I Will say this of my self --


I Will say that for him, my Master understands none of 'um, I assure you, Sir.


You impudent Rascal, hold your Tongue: I must rid my hands of this fellow; the
Rogue is ever discrediting me before Company


Never trouble yourself about it, Sir, for I like a man that --


I know you do, Sir, and therefore I hope you will think never the worse of me
for his prating: for, though I do not boast of my own good parts --


He has none to boast of, upon my faith, Sir.

Give him not the hearing, Sir; for, if I may believe my friends, they have
flattered me with an opinion of more --


Of more than their flattery can make good, Sir; -- it is true he tells you,
they have flattered him; but, in my Conscience he is the most downright simple
natured creature in the world


I shall consider you here after Sirrah; but I am sure in all Companies I pass
for a Vertuoso


Vertuoso! What Is that too? is not Virtue enough without O so?


You have Reason, Sir!

There he is again too; the Town Phrase, a great Compliment I wiss; you have
Reason, Sir; that is, you are no beast, Sir


A word in private: Sir; you mistake this old man; he loves neither Painting,
Music, nor Poetry; yet recover your self, if you have any brains


Say you so? I Will bring all about again I warrant you -- I beg your pardon a
thousand times Sir; I vow to Gad I am not Master of any of those perfections;
for in fine. Sir, I am wholly ignorant of Painting, Music, and Poetry; Only
some rude escapes -- -- but, in fine, they are such, that, In fine, Sir --


This is worse than all the rest.

By Coxbones one word more of all this Gibberish, and old Madge shall fly about
your ears: What is this in fine he keeps such a coil with too


It Is a Phrase a-la-mode, Sir, and is used in conversation now, as a whiff of
Tobacco was formerly, in the midst of a discourse, for a thinking while


In plain English, in fine, is in the end, Sir.

But by Coxbones there is no end on it me thinks: If thou will have a foolish
word to lard thy lean discourse with, take an English one when thou speak
English; as So Sir, and Then Sir, and so forth; it is a more manly kind of
nonsense: and a Pox of In fine, for I Will hear no more on it


He Is gravelled, and I must help him out.
Madam, there is a Coach at Door to carry you to the Play.

Which House do you mean to go to?

The Dukes, I think.

It is a damned Play, and has nothing in it.

Then let us to the Kings.

That Is e'ne as bad.

This is past enduring.
There was an ill Play set up, Sir, on the Posts, but I can assure you the
Bills are altered since you saw 'um, and now there are two admirable Comedies
at both Houses


But my Daughter loves serious Plays.

They are Tragi-Comedies, Sir, for both.

I have heard her say she loves none but Tragedies.

Where have you heard her say so, Sir?

Sir you forget your self, you never saw her in your life before.

What not at Canterbury, in the Cathedral Church there? this is the impudentest
Rascal --


Mum, Sir --

Ah Lord, what have I done! as I hope to be saved, Sir, it was before I was
aware; for if ever I set eyes on her before this day -- I wish --


This fellow is not so much fool, as he makes one believe he is.


I thought he would be discovered for a wit: this it is to over act ones part!


Come away Daughter I will not trust you in his hands; there is more in it than I
imagined


Why do you frown upon me so, when you know your looks go to the heart of me;
what have I done besides a little lapsus linguae


Why, who says you have done any thing? you, a mere Innocent.


As the Child's that be born in my intentions, If I know how I have offended my
self any more than in one word. --


But don't follow me however -- I have nothing to say to you.


I Will follow you to the worlds end, till you forgive me.

I am resolved to lead you a Dance then.

The Rogue has no mercy in him, but I must mollify him with money.

Truly my little Cousin's the aptest Scholar, and takes our loves lessons so
exactly that I joy to see it: she has got already the Bond of two thousand
pounds sealed for her Portion, which I keep for her; a pretty good beginning:
it is true, I believe he has enjoyed her, and so let him; Mark Anthony wooed not
at so dear a price

O Madam, I fear I am breeding!


A taking Wench! but it is no matter; have you told any body?

I have been venturing upon your foundations, a little to dissemble.


That Is a good Child, I hope it will thrive with thee, as it has with me:
Heaven has a blessing in store upon our endeavors


I feigned my self sick, and kept my bed; my Lord, he came to visit me, and in
the end I disclosed it to him in the saddest passion


This frighted him, I hope, into a study how to cloak your disgrace, lest it
should have vent to his Lady


It Is true; but all the while I subt'ly drove it, that he should name you to me
as the fittest instrument of the concealment; but how to break it to you,
strangely does perplex him: he has been seeking you all o'r the house;
therefore I Will leave your Ladyship, for fear we should be seen together


Now I must play my part.
Nature, in Women, teaches more than Art.

Madam, I have a Secret to impart.
A sad one too, and have no friend to trust but only you.

Your Lady or your Children sick?

Not that I know.

You seem to be in health,

In body, not in mind.

Some scruple of Conscience, I warrrant; my Chaplain shall resolve you.


Madam, my Soul's tormented.

O take heed of despair, my Lord!

Madam, there is no Medicine for this siekness, but only you; your friendship's
my safe Haven, else I am lost and shipwrack'd


Pray tell me what it is.

Could I express it by sad sighs and groans,
Or drown it with my self in Seas of Tears,
I should be happy, would, and would not tell.

Command whatever I can serve you in,
I will be faithful still to all your ends, provided they be just and virtuous.

That word has stopped me.

Speak out, my Lord, and boldly tell what it is.

Then in obedience to your Commands; your Cousin is with Child.


Which Cousin?

Your Cousin Christian's here in the house.

Alas then she has stolen a Marriage, and undone her self: Some young Fellow,
on my Conscience, that is a Beggar; Youth will not be advised; well, I Will never
meddle more with Girls; One is no more assured of 'um than Grooms of Mules,
they will strike when least one thinks on it: but pray your Lordship, what is her
choice then for an Husband


She is not married that I know of, Madam.

Not married! it is impossible, the Girl does sure abuse you. I know her
Education has been such, the flesh could not prevail; therefore she does abuse
you, it must be so


Madam, not to abuse you longer, she is with Child, and I the unfortunate man
who did this most unlucky act


You! I Will never believe it.

Madam, it is too true; believe it, and be serious how to hide her shame; I beg
it here upon my knees


Oh, oh, oh. --

Who Is there? Whose there? help, help, help.

O merciful God, my Lady's gone!

Whither?

To Heaven, God knows, to Heaven.

Rub her, rub her; fetch warm Clothes.

I say, run to the Cabinet of Quintessence; Gilberts Water, Gilberts Water.


Now all the good Folks of heaven look down upon her.

Set her in the Chair.

Open her mouth with a Dagger or a Key; pour, pour,
Where Is the Spoon?

She stirs, she revives, merciful to us all, what a thing was this! speak,
Lady, speak


So, so, so.

Alas, my Lord, How came this fit?

With Sorrow, Madam.

Now I am better: Bess, you have not seen me thus.

Heaven forefend that I should live to see you so again.

Go, go, I Am pretty well; withdraw into the next Room but be near I pray, for
fear of the worst

-- My Lord, sit down near me I pray, I Will strive to speak a few words to you,
and then to Bed, -- nearer, my voice is faint. -- My Lord, Heaven knows how I
have ever loved you; and, Is this my reward? Had you none to abuse but me in
that unfortunate fond Girl that you know was dearer to me than my life? this
was not love to her, but an inveterate malice to poor me. Oh, oh. --


Help, help, help.

This fit will carry her: alas it is a Lechery!

The Balsom, the Balsom!

No no, the Chemistry Oil of Rosemary: hold her up, and give her Air.


Feel whether she breathes, with your hand before her Mouth.


No, Madam, it is Key-cold.

Look up, dear Madam, if you have any hope of Salvation!


Hold up your finger, Madam, if you have any hope of Fraternity. O the blessed
Saints that hear me not, take her Mortality to them


Enough, so, it is well, -- withdraw, and let me rest a while; only my dear Lord
remain


Pray your Lordship keep her from swebbing.

Here humbly once again, I beg your pardon and your help.


Heaven forgive you, and I do: stand up, my Lord, and sit close by me: O this
naughty Girl! but did your Lordship win her soon


No, Madam, but with much difficulty.

I Am glad on it; it showed the Girl had some Religion in her, all my Precepts
were not in vain: but you men are strange tempters; good my Lord, where was
this wicked act then first committed


In an out-room upon a Trunk.

Poor Heart, what shift Love makes! Oh she does love you dearly, though to her
ruin! and then what place, my Lord


An old waste Room, with a decayed Bed in it.

Out upon that dark Room for deeds of darkness! and that rotten Bed! I wonder
it did hold your Lordships vigor: but you dealt gently with the Girl. Well,
you shall see I love you: for I will manage this business to both your
advantages, by the assistance of Heaven I will; good my Lord help, lead me out


A mischief upon all Fools! do you think your Master has not done wisely? first
to mistake our old man's humor, then to dispraise the Plays; and lastly, to
discover his Acquaintance with my Mistress: my old Master has taken such a
Jealousy of him, that he will never admit him into his sight again


Thou make thy self a greater Fool than he by being angry at what he cannot
help -- I have been angry with him too; but these friends have taken up the
quarrel. --

Look you he has sent these Mediators to mitigate your wrath: here are twenty
of 'um have made a long Voyage from Guinny to kiss your hands: and when the
Match is made, there are an hundred more in readiness to be your humble
Servants


Rather then fall out with you, I Will take u'm; but I confess it troubles me to
see so loyal a Lover have the heart of an Emperor, and yet scarce the brains
of a Cobbler


Well, what device can we two beget betwixt us, to separate Sir John Swallow
and thy Mistress


I cannot on the sudden tell; but I hate him worse than foul weather without a
Coach


Then I Will see if my project will be luckier than thine. Where are the Papers
concerning the Jointure I have heard you speak of


They lie within in three great Bags, some twenty Reams of Paper in each
Bundle, with six lines in a sheet: but there is a little Paper where all the
business lies


Where is it? Can thou help me to it?

By good chance he gave it to my custody before he set out for London. You came
in good time, here it is, I was carrying it to him; just now he sent for it


So, this I will secure in my Pocket: when thou art asked for it, make two or
three bad faces, and say, 'twas left behind: by this means he must of necessity
leave the Town, to see for it in Kent


It Is no matter, though the old man be suspicious; I knew the story all
beforehand; and since then you have fully satisfied me of your true friendship
to me -- Where are the Writings


I beg your pardon; I thought I had put 'um up amongst my Ladies things, and it
seems in my haste I quite forgot 'um, and left 'um at Canterbury


This is horribly unlucky! Where do you think you left 'um?


Upon the great Box in my Ladies Chamber; they are safe enough I Am sure.


It must be so -- I must take Post immediately:
Madam, for some few days I must be absent;
And to confirm you, friend, how much I trust you,
I leave the dearest Pledge I have on Earth,
My Mistress, to your care.

If you loved me, you would not take all occasions to leave me thus!


Do, go to Kent, and when you come again, Here they are ready for you.


What Is that you have in your hand there.
Sirrah?

Pox, What ill luck was this! What shall I say?

Sometimes you have tongue enough, what, are you silent?


It Is an Account, Sir, of what Money you have lost since you came to Town.


I Am very glad on it: now I Will make you all see the severity of my Fortune, --
give me the Paper


Heaven! What does he mean to do? it is not fair writ out, Sir;


Besides, I am in haste, another time, Sir. --

Pray, oblige me, Sir, -- -- it is but one minute: all people love to be pitty'd
in their Misfortunes, and so do I: will you produce it, Sirrah


Dear Master!

Dear Rascal! am I Master or you? you Rogue!

Hold yet, Sir, and let me read it: -- you cannot read my hand.


This is ever his way to be disparaging me, -- but I Will let you see, Sirrah,
that I can read your hand better than you your self can


You Will repent it, there is a trick in it, Sir. --

Is there so, Sirrah? but I Will bring you out of all your Tricks with a
Vengeance to you. --

How now! What Is this? A true particular of the Estate of Sir John Swallow
Knight, lying and situate in, etc


This is the very Paper I had lost: I Am very I will not thank you for the
Courtesy, which now I find you never did intend me -- this is Confederacy, I
smoke it now -- Come, Madam, let me wait on you to your Father


Well, of a witty man, this was the foolishest part that ever I beheld.


I am a Fool, I must confess it, and I am the most miserable one without thy
help, -- but yet it was such a mistake as any man might have made


No doubt on it.

Prithee chide me! this indifference of thine wounds me to the heart.


I care not.

Will thou not help me for this once?

Sir, I kiss your hands, I have other business.

Dear Warner!

I am inflexible.

Then I am resolved I Will kill my self.

You are Master of your own Body.

Will you let me damn my Soul?

At your pleasure, as the Devil and you can agree about it.


Do You see the points ready? Will you do nothing to save my life?


Not in the least.

Farewell, hard-harted Warner.

Adieu soft-headed Sir Martin.

Is it possible?

Why don't you dispatch, Sir? Why all these Preambles?


I Will see thee hanged first: I know thou won'dst have me killed, to get my
Clothes


I knew it was but a Copy of your Countenance; people in this Age are not so
apt to kill themselves


Here are yet ten Pieces in my Pocket, take 'em, and let us be friends.


You know the Eas'ness of my Nature, and that makes you work upon it so. Well,
Sir, -- for this once I cast an Eye of pity on you, -- but I must have ten more
in hand, before I can stir a foot


As I am a true Gamester, I have lost all but these, -- but if thou wilt lend me
them, I Will give 'em thee again


I Will rather trust you till to morrow;
Once more look up, I bid you hope the best.
Why should your folly make your Love miscarry,
Since men first play the Fools, and then they marry?


BUT are they to be married this day in private, say you?


It Is so concluded, Sir, I dare assure you.

But why so soon, and in private?

So soon to prevent the designs upon her; and in private, to save the effusion
of Christian Money


It strikes to my heart already; in fine, I am a dead man. -- Warner.


Well, go your ways, I Will try what may be done. Look if he will stir now; your
Rival and the Old man will see us together, we are just below the Window


Thou can not do it.

On the peril of my twenty pieces be it.

But I have found a way to help thee out, trust to my wit but once.


Name your wit, or think you have the least grain of wit once more, and I Will
lay it down for ever


You are a saucy masterly Companion, and so I leave you.


Help, help, good People, Murder, Murder!

How now, what is the matter?

I am abused, I am beaten, I am lamed for ever.

Who has used thee so?

The Rogue my Master.

What was the Offense?

A trifle, just nothing.

That Is very strange.

It was for telling him he lost too much at Play; I meant him nothing but well,
Heaven knows, and he in a cursed damned humor would needs revenge his losses
upon me: A' kicked me, took away my money, and turned me off; but if I take it
at his hands --


By Cox nowns it was an ill-natured part, nay, I thought no better could come
on it, when I heard him at his Vow to Gads, and in fines


But if I live I Will cry quittance with him: he had engaged me to get Mrs.
Millisent your Daughter for him; but if I do not all that ever I can to make
her hate him, a great Booby, an overgrown Oafe, a conceited Bartlemew. --


Prithee leave off thy Choler, and hear me a little: I have had a great mind to
thee a long time, if thou think my Service better than his, from this minute
I entertain thee


With all my heart, Sir, and so much the rather, that I may spite him with it.
-- This was the most propitious Fate. --


Propitious! and Fate! what a damned Scander-bag-Rogue art thou to talk at this
rate! hark you, Sirrah, one word more of this Gibberish, and I Will set you
packing from your new Service; I Will have neither Propitious nor Fate come
within my doors. -- --


Nay, pray Father. --

Good old Sir be pacified I was pouring out a little of the dregs that I had
left in me of my former Service, and now they are gone, my stomachs clear of
'em


This Fellow is come in a happy hour; for now, Sir, you and I may go to prepare
the License, and in the mean time he may have an Eye upon your Daughter


If you please I Will wait upon her till she is ready, and then bring her to what
Church you shall appoint


But, Friend, you will find she will hang an Arse, and be very loath to come along
with you, and therefore I had best stay behind, and bring her my self


I warrant you I have a trick for that, Sir, she knows nothing of my being
turned away: So I Will come to her as from Sir Martin, and under pretense of
carrying her to him, conduct her to you


My better Angel --

By the mess 'twas well thought on; well Son, go you before, I Will speak but one
word for a Dish or two at Dinner, and follow you to the Licence-Office. Sirrah
-- stay you here -- till my return


solus. Was there ever such a lucky Rogue as I! I had always a good opinion of
my wit, but could never think I had so much as now I find. I have now gained an
opportunity to carry away Mistress Millisent for my Master, to get his Mistress
by means of his Rival, to receive all his happiness, where he could expect
nothing but misery: after this exploit I will have Lilly draw me in the Habit
of a Hero, with a Laurel on my Temples, and an Inscription below it, This is
Warner the flower of Servingmen


Pray do me the favor to help me to the speech of Mr. Moody.


What Is your business?

I have a Letter to deliver to him.

Here he comes, you may deliver it your self to him.

Sir, a Gentleman met me at the Corner of the next Street, and bid me give this
into your own hands


Stay friend, till I have read it.

He told me, Sir, it required no Answer.

Sir, permit me, though a stranger, to give you counsel; some young Gallants
have had intelligence, that this day you intend privately to Marry your
Daughter, the rich Heiress; and in fine, above twenty of them have dispersed
themselves to watch her going out: therefore put it off, if you will avoid
mischief, and be advised by

Your unknown Servant.


By the Mackings, I thought there was no good in it, when I saw in fine there;
there are some Papishes, I Will warrant, that lie in wait for my Daughter, or else
they are no Englishmen, but some of your French Outalion-Rogues; I owe him
Thanks however, this unknown Friend of mine, that ^old me on it. Warner, no
Wedding to day, Warner


Why, What Is the matter. Sir?

I say no more, but some wiser than some, I Will keep my Daughter at home this
Afternoon, and a fig for all these Outalians


So, here is another Trick of Fortune as unexpected for bad, as the other was
for good. Nothing vexes me, but that I had made my Game Cock-sure, and then to
be back-gammon'd: it must needs be the Devil that writ this Letter, he owed my
Master a spite, and has paid him to the purpose: and here he comes as merry
too, he little thinks what misfortune has befal'n him, and for my part I am
ashamed to tell him


Warner, such a Jest, Warner.

What a Murrain is the matter, Sir?
Where lies this Jest that tickles you?

Let me laugh out my langh, and I Will tell thee.


I wish you may have cause for all this mirth.

Hereafter, Warner, be it known unto thee, I will endure no more to be thy May
game: thou shal't no more dare to tell me, I spoil thy projects, and discover
thy designs; for I have played such a Prize, without thy help, of my own
Motherwit ('it is true I am hasty sometimes, and so do harm; but when I have a
mind to show my self, there is no man in England, though I say it, comes near me
as to point of imagination) I Will make thee acknowledge I have laid a Plot that
has a Soul in it


Pray, Sir, keep me no longer in ignorance of this rare Invention.


Know then, Warner, that when I left thee, I was possessed with a terrible fear,
that my Mistress should be married: well, thought I to my self, and must'ring
up all the Forces of my Wit, I did produce such a stratagem


But what was it?

I feigned a Letter as from an unknown Friend to Moody, wherein I gave him to
understand, that if his Daughter went out this Afternoon, she would infallibly
be snapt by some young Fellows that lay in wait for her


Very good.


That which follows is yet better; for he I fent assures me, that in that very
nick of time my Letter came, her Father was just sending her abroad with a very
foolish rascally fellow that was with him


And did you perform all this a'gods name? could you do this wonderful miracle
without your soul to the Devil for his help


I tell thee man I did it, and it was done by the help of no Devil, but this
familiar of my own brain; how long would it have been e're thou could have
thought of such a project? Martin said to his man, Who Is the Fool now


Who Is the fool? why who use to be the fool? he that ever was since I knew him,
and ever will be so


What a Pox? I think thou art grown envious, not one word in my commendations?


Faith Sir, my skill is too little to praise you as you deserve; but if you
would have it according to my poor ability, you are one that had a knock in
your Cradle, a conceited lackwit, a designing Ass, a hair-brained Fop, a
confounded busi^ brain, with an eternal Wind mill in it; this in short, Sir, is
the Contents of your Panegyric


But what the Devil have I done, to set you thus against me?


Only this, Sir, I was the foolish rascally fellow that was with Moody, and
your Worship was he to whom I was to bring his Daughter


But how could I know this? I am no Witch.


No, I Will be sworn for you, you are no Conjurer.
Will you go Sir?

Will you hear my justifications?


Shall I see the back of you? speak not a word in your defense.


This is the strangest luck now --


I Am resolved this Devil of his shall never weary me, I will overcome him, I
will invent something that shall stand good in spite of his folly. Let me see
--


Here he is -- I must venture on him, for the tyranny of this old Lady is
unsupportable, since I have made her my confident, there passes not an hour but
she passes a pull at my Pursestrings; I sha'l be ruined if I do not quit my
self of her suddenly: I find now, by sad experience, that a Mistress is much
more chargeable than a Wife, and after a little time too, grows full as dull
and insignificant. Mr. Warner! have you a mind to do your self a courtesy,
and me another


I think, my Lord, the Question need not be much dissputed, for I have always
had a great service for your Lordship, and some little kindness for my self


What, if you should propose Mistress Christian as a Wife to your Master? you
know he is never like to compass the other


I cannot tell that my Lord --


500 l. are yours at the day of marriage.


500 l. it is true, the temptation is very sweet, and powerful; the Devil I
confess has done his parr, and many a good Murder and Treason have been
committed at a cheaper rate; but yet --


What yet --


To confess the truth, I am resolved to bestow my Master upon that other Lady
(as difficult as your Lordship thinks it) for the honor of my wit is engaged
in it: will it not be the same to your Lordship were she marred to any other


The very same.


Come my Lord, not to dissemble with you any longer, I know where it is that
your Shoe wrings you: I have observed something in the House, betwixt some
parties that shall be nameless: and know that you have been taking up Linen at
a much dearer rate, than you might have had it at any Drapers in Town


I see I have not danced in a Net before you.


As for that old Lady, whom Hell confound, she is the greatest Jill in Nature,
cheat is her study, all her joy to cosen, she loves nothing but her self, and
draws all lines to that corrupted center


I have found her out, though late: first, I Will undertake I never enjoyed her
Neice under the rate of 500 l. a time; never was Woman's flesh held up so high:
every night I find out for a new Maidenhead, and she has sold it me as often
as ever Mother Temple, Bennet, or Gifford, have put off boiled Capons for
Quails and Partridges


This is nothing to what Bills you will have when she is brought to Bed, after her
hard bargain, as they call it; then crammed Capons, Pea-hens, Chickens in the
grease, Pottages, and Frigacies, Wine from Shatling, and La-fronds, with
New-River, clearer by six pence the pound than ever God Almighty made it; then
Midwife -- Dry-Nurse -- Wet-Nurse -- and all the rest of their Accomplices,
with Cradle, Baby-Clouts, and Bearing-Cloaths -- Possets, Cawdels, Broth,
Jellies, and Gravies; and behind all these, Glisters, Suppositers, and a
barbarous Pothecaries Bi^l, more inhumane than a Tailors


I sweat to think on it.


Well, my Lord! cheer up! I have found a way to rid you of it all, within a
short time you shall know more; yonder appears a young Lady whom I must needs
speak with, please you go in and prepare the old Lady and your Mistress


Good luck, and 500 l. attend thee.


I am resolved I Will never marry him!


So far you are right, Madam.


But, how to hinder it, I cannot possibly tell? for my Father presses me to it,
and will take no denial: would I knew some way --


Madam, I Will teach you the very nearest, for I have just now found it out,


Are you there, Mr. Littleplot?


Studying to deserve thee, Rose, by my diligence for thy Lady; I stand here,
methinks, just like a wooden Mercury, to point her out the way to Matrimony


Or, Serving-man-like, ready to carry up the hot meat for your Master, and then
to fall upon the cold your self


I know not what you call the cold, but I believe I shall find warm work on it:
in the first place then I must acquaint you, that I have seemingly put off my
Master, and entered my self into Sir John's service


Most excellent!


And thereupon, but base --


Something he would tell us, but see what luck's here!


How now, Sirrah? are you so great there already?


I find my Father's jealous of him still!


Sir, I was only teaching my young Lady a new Song, and if you please you shall
hear it

Make ready fair Lady to night,
And stand at the Door below,
For I will be there
To receive you with care,
And to your true Love you shall go.

Ods bobs this is very pretty.


I, so is the Lady's Answer too, if I could but hit on it.

And when the Stars twinckle so bright,
Then down to the Door will I creep,
To my Love will I fly,
E're the jealous can spy,
And leave my old daddy asleep.

Bodikins I like not that so well, to cosen her old Father; it may be my own
case another time


Oh Madam! yonder is your Persecutor returned.


I Will into my Chamber to avoid the sight of him as long as I can; Lord! that my
old doting Father should throw me away upon such an Ignoramus, and deny me to
such a Wit as Sir Martin


O Son! here has been the most villainous Tragedy against you.


What Tragedy? has there been any blood shed since I went?


No blood shed, but, as I told you, a most damnable Tragedy.


A Tragedy! I Will be hanged if he does not mean a Stratagem.


Jack Sauce! if I say it is a Tragedy, it shall be a Tragedy in spite of you,
teach your Grandam how to piss -- what -- I hope I am old enough how to spout
English with you Sir


But what was the reason you came not after me?


'T was well I did not, I Will promise you, there were those would have made bold
with Mistress Bride; an' if she had stirred out of doors, there were Whipsters
abroad in faith, Padders of Maiden-heads, that would have trussed her up, and
picked the lock of her affections, ever a man could have said, what is this: but
by good luck I had warning of it by a friends Letter


The remedy for all such dangers is easy, you may send for a Parson, and have
the business dispatched at home


A match, in faith, do you provide a Domine, and I Will go tell her our
resolutions, and hearten her up against the day of battle


Now I think on it, this Letter must needs come from Sir Martin; a Plot of his,
upon my life, to hinder our marriage


I see, Sir, you will still mistake him for a Wit; but I am much deceived, if that
Letter came not from another hand


From whom I prithee?


Nay, for that you shall excuse me, Sir, I do not love to make a breach betwixt
persons that are to be so near related


Thou seem to imply that my Mistress was in the Plot,


Can you make a doubt on it? do you not know she ever loved him, and can you
hope she has so soon forsaken him? you may make your self miserable, if you
please, by such a marriage


When she is once mine, her Virtue will secure me.


Her Virtue!


What, do you make a mock on it?


Not I, I assure you, Sir, I think it no such jesting matter.


Why, is she not honest?


Yes in my conscience is she, for Sir Martin's Tongue's no slander.


But does she say to the contrary?


If one would believe him, which for my part I do not, he has in a manner
confessed it to me


Hell and Damnation!


Courage, Sir, never vex your self, I Will warrant you it is all a Lie.


But how shall I be 'sut'd it is so?


When you are married you will soon make trial, whether she be a Maid or no?


I do not love to make that Experiment at my own cost.


Then you must never marry.


I, but they have so many tricks to cheat a man, which are entay'ld from Mother
to Daughter through all Generations, there is no keeping a Lock for that Door
for which every one has a Key


As for Example, their drawing up their breaths with Oh! you hurt me, can you
be so cruel? then the next day she steals a Visit to her Lover, that did you
the Courtesy beforehand, and in private tells him how she cozened you; twenty
to one but she takes out another Lesson with him to practice the next night


All this while miserable I must be their May Game.


It Is well if you escape so; for commonly he strikes in with you, and becomes
your friend


Deliver me from such a friend that stays behind with my Wife, When I gird on
my Sword to go abroad


I, there is your man, Sir; besides he will be sure to watch your haunts, and
tell her of them, that if occasion be, she may have wherewithal to
recriminate: at least she will seem to be jealous of you, and who would suspect
a jealous Wife


All manner of ways I am most miserable.


But if she be not a Maid when you marry her, she may make a good Wife
afterward, it is but imagining you have taken such a man's Widow


If there were all; but the Man will come and claim her again.


Examples have been frequent of those that have been wanton, and yet afterward
take up


I, the same thing they took up before.


The truth is, an honest simple Girl that is ignorant of all things, makes the
best Matrimony: There is such pleasure in instructing her, the best is, there is
not one Dunce in all the Sex; such a one with a good Fortune --


I, but where is she, Warner?


Near enough, but that you are too far engaged.


Engaged to one that has given me the earnest of Cuckoldom beforehand?


What think you then of Mrs Christian here in the house? There Is 5000 l. and a
better penny


I, but is she Fool enough?


She Is none of the wise Virgins, I can assure you.


Dear Warner, step into the next Room, and inveigle her out this way, that I
may speak to her


Remember above all things, you keep this Wooing secret; if he takes the least
wind, old Moody will be sure to hinder it


Do thou think I shall get her Aunts Consent?


Leave that to me.


How happy a man shall I be, if I can but compass this! and what a Precipice
have I avoided! then the revenge too is so sweet to steal a Wife under her
Fathers nose, and leave 'um in the lurch who has abused me; well, such a
Servant as this, Warner, is a Jewel


There she is, Sir, now I Will go to prepare her Aunt.


Sweet Mistress, I am come to wait upon you.


Truly you are too good to wait on me.


And in the Condition of a Suitor.


As how, forsooth?


To be so happy as to marry you.


O Lord, I would not marry for any thing!


Why? it is the honest end of Womankind.


Twenty years hence, forsooth: I would not lie in bed with a man for a world,
their beards it will so prickle one


Pah, -- What an innocent Girl it is, and very child! I like a Colt that never
yet was backed; for so I shall make her what I list, and mould her as I will;
Lord! her innocence makes me laugh my Cheeks all wet. -- Sweet Lady --


I Am but a Gentlew man, forsooth.


Well then, sweet Mistress, if I get your Friends consent sha'l I have yours?


My old Lady may do what she will, forsooth, but by my truly, I hope she will
have more care of me, then to marry me yet; Lord bless me, what should I do
with a Husband


Well, Sweetheart, then instead of wooing you, I must woo my old Lady.


Indeed, Gentleman, my old Lady is married already: cry you mercy forsooth, I
think you are a Knight


Happy in that Title only to make you Lady.


Believe me, Mr. Knight, I would not be a Lady, it makes Folks proud, and so
humerous, and so ill Huswifes, forsooth


Pah, -- she is a Baby, the simplest thing that ever yet I knew; the happiest
man I shall be in the world; for should I have my wish, it should be to keep
School, and teach the bigger Girls, and here in one my wish it is absolved


By your leave, Sir: I hope this noble Knight will make you happy, and you make
him


What should I make him?


Marry, you shall make him happy in a good Wife.


I will not marry, Madam.


You Fool!


Pray, Madam, let me speak with you, on my Soul it is the pretti'st innocent'st
thing in the world


Indeed, Sir, she knows little besides her work and her Prayers; but I Will talk
with the Fool


Deal gently with her, dear Madam.


Come, Christian, will not you marry this noble Knight?


Yes, yes, yes. --


Sir, it shall be to night.


This Innocence is a Dowry beyond all price.


You are very melancholy methinks, Sir.


You are mistaken, Sir.


You may dissemble as you please, but Mrs. Millisent lies at the bottom of your
Heart


My Heart, I assure you, has no room for so poor a Trifle.


Sure you think to wheedle me, would you have me imagine you do not love her?


Love her! why should you think me such a Sot? love a Prostitute, and infamous
person


Fair and soft, good Sir John.


You see I am no very obstinate Rival, I leave the field free to you: go on,
Sir, and pursue your good Fortune, and be as happy as such a common Creature
can make thee


This is Hebrew-Greek to me; but I must tell you, Sir, I will not suffer my
Divinity to be profaned by such a Tongue as yours


Believe it; what'er I say I can quote my Author for.


Then, Sir, whoever told it you, ly'd in his Throat, do you see, and deeper than
that do you see, in his stomach, and his guts do you see: tell me she is a common
person! he is a Son of a Whore that said it, and make him eat his words, though
he spoke 'em in a pr^vy-house


What if Warner told me so? I hope you will grant him to be a competent Judge in
such a business


Did that precious Rascal say it? -- Now I think on it I Will not believe you: in
fine, Sir, I Will hold you an even Wager he denies it


I Will lay you ten to one, he justifies it to your face.


I Will make him give up the Ghost under my fist, if he does not deny it.


I Will cut off his Ears upon the Spot, if he does not stand to it.

Enter Warner.


Here he comes in Pudding-time to resolve the question: come hither, you lying
Varlet, hold up your hand at the Bar of Justice, and answer me to what I shall
demand


What a Goodier is the matter, Sir?


Thou Spawn of the old Serpent, fruitful in nothing but in lies!


A very fair beginning this.


Did thou dare to cast thy Venom upon such a Saint as Mrs. Millisent, to
traduce her Virtue, and say it was adulterate


Not guilty my Lord.


I told you so.


How, Mr. Rascal! have you forgot what you said but now concerning Sir Martin
and Mrs. Millisent? I Will stop the Lie down your Throat, if you dare deny't


Say you so! are you there again in faith?


Pray pacify your self, Sir, 'twas a Plot of my own devising.


Leave off your winking and your pinking, with a Horse-pox to ye, I Will
understand none of it; tell me in plain English the truth of the business: for
an'you were my own Brother, you should pay for it: belie my Mistress! what a
Pox do you think I have no sense of Honor


What the Devil's the matter w'ye? either be at quiet, or I Will resolve to take
my heels, and be gone


Stop Thief there! what did you think to escape the hand of Justice?

The best on it is, Sirrah, your heels are not altogether so nimble as your
tongue


He p! Murder! Murder!


Confess, you Rogue, then.


Hold your hands, I think the Devil's in you, -- I tell you it is a device of
mine


And have you no body to devise it on but my Mistress, the very Map of
Innocence


Moderate your anger, good Sir Martin.


By your patience, Sir, I Will chastise him abundantly.


That Is a little too much, Sir, by your favor, to beat him in my presence.


That Is a good one in faith, your presence shall hinder me from beating my own
Servant


O Traitor to all sense and reason! he is going to discover that too.


An'I had a mind to beat him to Mummy, he is my own, I hope.


At present I must tell you he is mine, Sir.


Hey-day! here is fine juggling!


Stop yet, Sir, you are just upon the brink of a Precipice.


What is it thou meanest now? -- -- a Lord! my mind mis-gives me I have done
some fault, but would I were hanged if I can find it out


There Is no making him understand me.


Pox on it, come what will, I Will not be faced down with a Lie; I say he is my
man


Pray remember your self better; did not you turn him away for some fault
lately, and laid a Livery of black and blue on his back before he went


The Devil of any fault, or any black and blue that I remember: either the
Rascal put some Trick upon you, or you would upon me


O, ho, then it seems the cudgelling and turning away were pure invention; I am
glad I undestand it


In fine, it is all so damned a Lie. -- --


Alas! he has forgot it, Sir, good Wits, you know, have bad Memories.


No, no, Sir, that shall not serve your turn, you may return when you please to
your old Master, I give you a fair discharge, and a glad man I am to be so rid
of you: were you thereabouts in faith? what a Snake I had enterta^n'd into my
bosom? fare you well, Sir, and lay your next Plot better between you, I advise
you


Lord, Sir, how you stand! as you were nip'd i'th'head: have you done any new
piece of Folly, that makes you look so like an Ass


Here Is three pices of Gold yet, if I had the heart to offer it thee.


Noble Sir, what have I done to deserve so great a Liberality; I confess if you
had beaten me for my own fault, if you had utterly destroyed all my projects,
then it might ha'bin expected that ten or twenty pieces should have been
offered by way of recompense or satisfaction. -- --


Nay, on'you be so full o'your Flowts, your Friend and Servant; who the Devil
could tell the meaning of your signs and tokens, an'you go to that


You are no Ass then?


Well, Sir, to do you service, do you see, I am an Ass in a fair way; will that
satisfy you


For this once produce those three pieces, I am contented to receive that
inconsiderable tribute, or make'em six and I Will take the fault upon my self


Are we Friends then? if we are, let me advise you. --


Yet advising. --


For no harm, good Warner: but pray next time make me of your Council, let me
enter into the business, instruct me in every point, and then if I discover
all, I am resolved to give over affairs, and retire from the world


Agreed, it shall be so; but let us now take breath a while, then on again.
For though we had the worst, those heats were past,
We Will whip and spur, and fetch him up at last.


YOur promise is admirably made good to me, that Sir John Swallow should be
this night married to Mrs. Christian; instead of that, he is more deeply
engaged than ever with old Moody


I cannot help these ebbs and flows of fortune.


I am sure my Niece suffers most in it, he is come off to her with a cold
Complement of a mistake in his Mistress's Virtue, which he has now found out,
by your Masters folly, to be a Plot of yours to separate them


To be forsaken when a woman has given her consent!


It Is the same scorn, as to have a Town rendered up, and afterward slighted.


You are a sweet youth, Sir, to use my Lady so, when she depended on you; is
this the faith of Valet de Chamber? I would be ashamed to be such a dishonor
to my pro^ession; it will reflect upon us in time, we shall be ruined by your
good example


As how my dear Lady Embassadress?


Why, they say the Women govern their Ladies, and you govern us: so if you play
fast and loose, not a Gallant will bribe us for our good wills; the gentle
Guiny will now go to the Ordinary, which used as duly to steal into our hands
at the stair-foot as into Mr. Docto^s at parting


Night's come, and I expect your promise.


Fail with me if you think good, Sir.


I give no more time.


And if my Mistress go to bed a Maid to night.


Hey dey! you are dealing with me, as they do with the Banquers, c^ll in all
your debts together; there is no possibility of payment at this rate, but I Will
coin for you all as fast as I can, I assure you


But you must not think to pay us with false Money, as you have done hitherto.


Leave off your Mountebank tricks with us, and fall to your business in good
earnest


Faith, and I will Rose; for to confess the truth, I am a kind of a Mountebank,
I have but one Cure for all your Diseases, that is, that my Master may marry
Mrs. Millisent, for then Sir John Swallow will of himself return to Mrs.
Christian


He says true, and therefore we must all be helping to that design.


I Will put you upon something, give me but a thinking time. In the first place,
get a Warrant and Bailifs to arrest Sir John Swallow upon a promise of marriage
to Mrs. Christian


Very good.


We'll all swear it.


I never doubted your Ladyship in the least, Madam -- for the rest we will
consider hereafter


Leave this to us


Rose where is thy Lady?


What have you to say to her?


Only to tell you, Madam, I am going forward in the great work of projection.


I know not whether you will deserve my thanks when the work's done.


Madam, I hope you are not become indifferent to my Master.


If he should prove a fool after all your crying up his wit, I shall be a
miserable woman


A fool! that were a good jest in faith: but how comes your Ladyship to suspect
it


I have heard, Madam, your greatest Wits have ever a touch of madness and
extravagance in them, so perhaps has he


There Is nothing more distant than wit and folly, yet like East and West, they
may meet in a point, and produce actions that are but a hairs breadth from one
another


I Will undertake he has wit enough to make one laugh at him a whole day
together: He Is a most Comical person


For all this I will not swear he is no fool, he has still discovered all your
plots


O Madam, that is the common fate of your Machivilians, they draw their Designs
so subtle, that their very fineness breaks them


However I Am resolved to be on the sure side, I will have certain proof of his
wit before I marry him


Madam, I Will give you one, he wears his clothes like a great Sloven, and that is
a sure sign of wit, he neglects his outward parts; besides, he speaks French,
sings, dances, plays upon the Lute


Does he do all this, say you?


Most divinely, Madam.


I ask no more, then let him give me a Serenade immediately; but let him stand
in the view, I Will not be cheated


He shall do it Madam: but how, the Devil knows -- for he sings like a
Scritch-Owle, and never touched the Lute


You Will see it performed?


Now I think on it, Madam, this will but retard our enterprise.


Either let him do it, or see me no more.


Well, it shall be done, Madam; but where is your Father? will not he over hear
it


As good hap is, he is below stairs, talking with a Seaman, that has brought him
news from the East Indies


What concernment can he have there?


He had a Bastard-Son there, whom he loved extremely: but not having any news
from him these many year's concluded him dead; this Son he expects within these
three days


When did he see him last?


Not since he was seven years old.


A sudden thought comes into my head to make him appear before his time; let my
Master pass for him, and by that means he may come into the House unsuspected
by her Father, or his Rival


According as he performs his Serenade, I Will talk with you -- make haste -- I
must retire a little


I Will instruct him most rarely, he shall never be found out; but in the mean
time, what will thou do with a Serenade


Faith, I am little non-plus'd on the sudden, but a warm consolation from thy
lips, Rose, would set my wits a working again


Adieu, Warner.


Inhumane Rose, adieu. Blockhead Warner, into what a Praemunire have thou
brought thy self; this it is to be so forward to promise for another -- but to
be Godfather to a Fool, to promise and vow he should do any thing like a
Christian. --


Why, how now Bu^ly, in a Brown Study? for my good I warrant it; there is five
shillings for thee, what, we must encourage good wits sometimes


Hang your white pelf: sure, Sir, by your largess you mistake me for Martin
Parker, the Ballad-Maker; your covetousness has offended my Muse, and quite
dulled her


How angry the poor Devil is? in fine thou art as chollerick as a Cook by a
Fireside


I am overheated, like a Gun, with continual discharging my wit: 'slife, Sir,
I have rarifi'd my brains for you, till they are evaporated; but come, Sir, do
something for your self like a man, I have engaged you shall give to your
Mistress a Serenade in your proper person: I Will borrow a Lute for you


I Will warrant thee I Will do it man.


You never learned, I do not think you know one stop.


It Is no matter for that, Sir, I Will play as fast as I can, and never stop at
all


Go to, you are an invincible Fool I see; get up into your Window, and set two
Candles by you, take my Landlords Lute in your hand, and fumble on it, and make
grimmaces with your mouth, as if you sung; in the mean time. I Will play in the
next Room in the dark, and consequently your Mistress, who will come to her
Balcone over against you, will think it to be you; and at the end of every
Tune, I Will ring the Bell that hangs between your Chamber and mine, that you may
know when to have done


Why, this is fair Play now, to tell a man beforehand what he must do; Gramercy
in faith, Boy, now if I fail thee --


About your business then, your Mistress and her M^id appear already: I Will give
you the sign with the Bell when I am prepared, for my Lute is at hand in the
Barbers Shop


We shall have rare Music.


I wish it prove so; for I suspect the Knight can neither p'ay nor sing.


But if he does, you're bound to pay the Music, Madam.


I Will not believe it, except both my Ears and Eyes are Witnesses.


But it is night, Madam, and you cannot see'em; yet he may play admirably in the
dark


Where Is my Father?


You need not fear him, he is still employed with that same Seaman, and I have
set Mrs. Christian to watch their discourse, that betwixt her and me Warner may
have wherewithal to instruct his Master


But yet there is fear my Father will find out the Plot.


Not in the least, for my old Lady has provided two rare disguises for the
Master and the Man


Peace, I hear them beginning to tune the Lute.


And see, Madam, where your true Knight Sir Martin is placed yonder like
Apollo, with his Lute in his hand and his Rays about his head

Did he not play most excellently, Madam?


He played well, and yet methinks he held his Lute but untowardly.


Dear Madam, peace; now for the Song. BLind Love to this hour
Had never like me, a Slave under his power.
Then blessed be the Dart
That he threw at my heart,
For nothing can prove
A joy so great as to be wounded with love.
My Days and my Nights
Are filled to the purpose with sorrows and frights;
From my heart still I sigh
And my Eyes are never dry,
So that Cupid be praised,
I am to the top of Love's happiness raised.
My Soul's all on fire.
So that I have the pleasure to dote and desire,
Such a pretty soft pain
That it tickles each vein,
It Is the dream of a smart,
Which makes me breathe short when it beats at my heart:
Sometimes in a Pet,
When I am despised, I my freedom would get;
But straight a sweet smile
Does my anger beguile,
And my heart does recall,
Then the more I do struggle, the lower I fall.
Heaven does not impart
Such a grace as to love unto every ones heart;
For many may wish
To be wounded and miss:
Then blessed be loves Fire,
And more blessed her Eyes that first taught me desire.



A pretty humored Song -- but stay, methinks he plays and sings still, and yet
we cannot hear him. -- Play louder. Sir Martin, that we may have the fruits
on it


D ath! this abominable Fool will spoil all again. Dam him, he stands making his
Grimaces yonder, and he looks so earnestly upon his Mistress, that he hears me
not


Ah, ah! have I found you out, Sir? now as I live and breathe, this is
pleasant, Rose, -- his man played and sung for him, and he, it seems, did not
know when he should give over


They have found him out, and laugh yonder as if they would split their sides.
Why Mr. Fool, Oaf, Coxcomb, will you hear none of your names


Sir Martin, Sir Martin, take your Man's counsel, and keep time with your Music.


Hah! what do you say. Madam? how does your Ladyship like my Music?


O most heavenly! just like the Harmony of the Spheres that is to be admired,
and never heard


You have ruined all by your not leaving off in time.


What the Devil wou^d you have a man do when my hand is in! well of my
conscience I think there is a fate upon me


Look, Rose, what is the matter.


It Is Sir John Swallow pursued by the Bailiffs, Madam, according to our Plot;
it seems they have dogged him thus late to his Lodging


That Is well! for though I begin not to love this Fool; yet I am glad I shall
be rid on him


Now I Will redeem all again, my Mistress shall see my Va our, I m resolved on it,
Villains, Rogues, Poultroons! what? three upon one? in fine, I Will be with you
immediately


Why, Sir, are you stark mad? have you no grain of sense left? he is gone! now
is he as earnest in the quarrel as Cokes among the Puppets; it is to no purpose
whatever I do for him


Victoria! Victoria! what heart, Sir John, you have received no harm, I hope?


Not the least, I thank you Sir for your timely assistance, which I will
requite with any thing but the resigning of my Mrs -- Dear Sir Martin, a good
night


Pray let me wait upon you in Sir John.


I can find my way to Mrs. Millcsent without you, Sir, I thank you.


But pray, what were you to be arrested for?


I know no more than you; some little debts perhaps I left unpaid by my
negligence: once more good night, Sir


He Is an ungrateful Fellow; and so in fine, I shall tell him when I see him
next -- Monsieur --

Warner, A propos! I hope you will applaud me now, I have defeated the Enemy, and
that in sight of my Mistress; Boy, I have charmed her in faith with my Valor


I, just as much as you did e'n now with your Music; go, you are so beastly a
fool, that a Chiding is thrown away upon you


Fool in your face, Sir; call a man of Honor, Fool, when I have just achieved
such an Enterprise -- Gad now my blood's up, I am a dangerous person, I can
tell you that, Warner


Poor Animal, I pity thee.


I grant I am no Musician, but you must allow me for a Sword-man, I have beat
'em bravely; and in fine, I am come off unhurt, save only a little scratch
i'th'head


That Is impossible, thou have a Scull so thick, no Sword can pierce it; but
much good may 't do you, Sir, with the fruits of your Valor: you rescued your
Rival when he was to be arrested on purpose to take him off from your Mistress


Why, this is ever the Fate of ingenuous men; nothing thrives they take in hand.


Sir Martin, you have done your business with my Lady, she will never look upon
you more; she says, she is so well satisfied of your Wit and Courage, that she
will not put you to any further trial


Warner, is there no hopes, Warner?


None that I know.


Let Us have but one civil Plot more before we part.


It Is to no purpose.


Yet if he had some golden Friends that would engage for him the next time --


Here Is a Jacobus and a Carolus will enter into Bonds for me.


I Will take their Royal words for once.


The meaning of this, Dear Rose.


It Is in pursuance of thy own invention, Warner; a child which thy wit has
begot upon me: but let us lose no time, Help! help! dress thy Master, that he
may be Anthony, old Moody's Bastard, and thou his, come from the East Indies


Hey-tarock it -- now we shall have Roses device too, I long to be at it, pray
let us hear more on it


Old Moody you must know in his younger years, when he was a Cambridge-Scholar,
made bold with a Towns-mans Daughter there, by whom he had a Bastard whose name
was Anthony, whom you Sir Martin, are to represent


I warrant you, let me alone for Tony: but pray go on, Rose.


This Child in his Fathers time he durst not own, but bred him privately in the
Isle of Ely, till he was seven years old, and from thence sent him with one
Bonaventure a Merchant for the East Indies


But will not this over-burden your memory, Sir?


There Is no answering thee any thing, thou think I am good for nothing.


Bonaventure died at Surat within two years, and this Anthony has lived up and
down in the Moguls Country unheard of by his Father till this night, and is
expected within these three days: now if you can pass for him, you may have
admittance into the house, and make an end of all the business before the other
Anthony arrives


But hold, Rose, there is one considerable point omitted; what was his Mother's
name


That indeed I had forgot; her name was Dorothy, Daughter to one Draw-water a
Vintner at the Rose


Come, Sir, are you perfect in your Lesson? Anthony Moody born in Cambridge,
bred in the Isle of Ely, sent into the Moguls Country at seven years old with
one Bonaventure a Merchant, who dyed within two years; your Mothers name
Dorothy Draw-water, the Vintners Daughter at the Rose


I have it all ad unguem -- what do think I Am a Sot? but stay a little, how
have I lived all this while in that same Country


What Country? -- Pox, he has forgot already --


The Moguls Country.


I, I, the Moguls Country! what the Devil, any man may mistake a little; but
now I have it perfect: but what have I been doing all this while in the Moguls
Country? He Is a Heathen Rogue, I am afraid I shall never hit upon his name


Why, you have been passing your time there, no matter how.


Well, if this passes upon the Old man, I Will bring your business about again
with my Mistress, never fear it; stay you here at the door, I Will go tell the
Old man of your arrival


Well, Sir, now play your part exactly, and I Will forgive all your former
errors. --


Hang'em, they were only slips of Youth -- how peremptory and domineering this
Rogue is! now he see's I have need of his service: would I were out of his
power again, I would make him lie at my feet like any Spaniel


Is he here already, say thou? which is he?


That Sun-burn'd Gentleman.


My dear Boy Anthony, do I see thee again before I dye? welcome, welcome.


My dear Father, I know it is you by instinct; for methinks I am as like you as
if I were spit out of your mouth


Keep it up I beseech your Lordship.


He Is wondrous like indeed.


The very image of him.


Anthony, you must salute all this Company: this is my Lord Dartmouth, this my
Lady Dupe, this her Niece Mrs. Christian


And that is my Sister, methinks I have a good resemblance of her too: honest
Sister, I must need kiss you Sister


This fool will discover himself, I foresee it already by his carriage to her.


And now Anthony, pray tell's a little of your Travels.


Time enough for that, forsooth Father, but I have such a natural affection for
my Sister, that methinks I could live and dye with her: give me thy hand sweet
Sister


She Is beholding to you, Sir.


What if she be Sir, what is that to you Sir?


I hope, Sir, I have not offended you?


It may be you have, and it may be you have not, Sir; you see I have no mind to
satisfy you, Sir: what a Devil! a man cannot talk a little to his own flesh
and blood, but you must be interposing with a murrain to you


Enough of this, good Anthony, this Gentleman is to marry your Sister.


He marry my Sister: ods foot, Sir, there are some Bastards, that shall be
nameless, that are as well worthy to marry her, as any man; and have as good
blood in their veins


I do not question it in the least, Sir.


It Is not your best course, Sir; you marry my Sister! what have you seen of the
world, Sir? I have seen your Hurricanos, and your Calentures, and your
Eclipticks, and your Tropic Lines, Sir, an'you go to that, Sir


You must excuse my Master, the Sea's a little working in his brain, Sir.


And your Prester John's of the East Indies, and your Great Turk of Rome and
Persia


Lord, what a thing it is to be Learned, and a Traveller! Bodikins it makes me
weep for joy; but, Anthony, you must not bear your self too much upon your
Learning, Child


Pray Brother be civil to this Gentleman for my sake.


For your sake, Sister Millisent, much may be done, and here I kiss your hand
on it


Yet again stupidity?


Nay, pray Brother hands off, now you are too rude.


Dear Sister, as I am a true East India Gentleman --


But pray Son Anthony, let us talk of other matters and tell me truly, had you
not quite forgot me? and yet I made woundy much of you when you were young


I remember you as well as if I saw you but yesterday: A fine grey-headed --
grey-bearded old Gentleman as ever I saw in all my life


Grey-bearded old Gentleman! when he was a Scholar at Cambridge.


But do you remember where you were bred up?


O yes, Sir, most perfectly, in the Isle -- stay -- let me see, oh -- now I
have it -- in the Isle of Silly


In the Isle of Ely, sure you mean?


Without doubt he did, Sir, but this damned Isle of Silly runs in's head ever
since his Sea-Voyage


And your Mothers name was -- come pray let me examine you -- for that I Am sure
you cannot forget


Warner! what was it Warner?


Poor Mrs. Dorothy Draw water, if she were now alive, what a joyful day would
this be to her


Who the Devil bid you speak, Sirrah?


Her name, Sir, was Mrs. Dorothy Draw-water.


I Will be hanged if this be not some Cheat.


He makes so many stumbles, he must needs fall at last.


But you remember I hope where you were born?


Well, they may talk what they will of Oxford for an University, but Cambridge
for my money


Hold your tongue you Scanderbag Rogue you, this is the second time you have
been talking when you should not


I was born at Cambridge, I remember it as perfectly as if it were but
yesterday


How I sweat for him! he is remembering ever since he was born.


And who did you go over with to the East Indies?


Warner!


'T was a happy thing, Sir, you lighted upon so honest a Merchant as Mr.
Bonaventure, to take care of him


Saucy Rascal! this is past all sufferance.


We are undone Warner, if this discourse go on any further.


Pray, Sir, take pity of the poor Gentleman, he has more need of a good Supper,
than to be asked so many Questions


These are Rogues, Sir, I plainly perceive it; pray let me ask him one question
-- which way did you come home, Sir


We came home by Land, Sir.


That is, from India to Persia, from Persia to Turkey, from Turkey to Germany,
from Germany to France


And from thence, over the narrow Seas on Horseback.


It Is so, I discern it now, but some shall smoke for it. Stay a little Anthony,
I Will be with you presently


That wicked old man is gone for no good, I Am afraid, would I were fairly quit
of him


Tell me no more of Sir Martin, Rose, he wants natural sense, to talk after
this rate; but for this Warner, I am strangely taken with him, how handsomely
he brought him off


Among half a score tough Cudgels I had in my Chamber, I have made choice of
these two as best able to hold out


Alas! poor Warner must be beaten now for all his wit, would I could bear it
for him


But to what end is all this preparation, Sir?


In the first place, for your Worship, and in the next, for this East India
Apostle, that will needs be my Son Anthony


Why do you think he is not?


No, thou wicked Accomplice in his designs, I know he is not


Who, I his Accomplice? I beseech you, Sir, what is it to me, if he should
prove a Counterfeit; I assure you he has cozened me in the first place


That Is likely, in faith, cozen his own Servant?


As I hope for mercy, Sir, I am an utter stranger to him, he took me up but
yesterday, and told me the story word for word as he told it you


What will become of us two now? I trust to the Rogues wit to bring me off.


If thou would have me believe thee, take one of these two Cudgels, and help
me to lay it on soundly


With all my heart.


Out you Cheat, you Hypocrite, you Imposter! do you come hither to cozen an
honest man


Hold, hold, Sir.


Do you come hither with a lie to get a Father, Mr. Anthony of East India?


Hold you inhumane Butcher.


I Will teach you to counterfeit again, Sir.


The Rogue will murder me.


A fair riddance of 'em both: let us in and laugh at 'em


Was there ever such an affront put upon a man, to be beaten by his Servant?


After my hearty salutations upon your backside, Sir, may a man have leave to
ask you, what news from the Moguls Country


I wonder where thou had the impudence to move such a question to me, knowing
how thou have used me


Now, Sir, you may see what comes of your indiscretion and stupidity: I always
gave you warning of it, but for this time I am content to pass it by without
more words, partly, because I have already corrected you, though not so much as
you deserve


Do thou think to carry it off at this rate, after such an injury?


You may thank your self for it; nay 'twas very well I found out that way,
otherwise I had been suspected as your Accomplice


But you laid it on with such a vengeance, as if you were bearing of a
Stock Fish


To confess the truth on it, you had angered me, and I was willing to evaporate
my choler; if you will pass it by so, I may chance to help you to your
Mistress: no more words of this business, I advise you, but go home and grease
your back


In fine, I must suffer it at his hands; for if my shoulders had not paid for
this fault, my purse must have sweat blood for it: the Rogue has got such a hank
upon me --


So, so, here is another of our Vessels come Rose, no Harbor near?


My Lady, as you may well imagine, is most extremely incensed against Sir
Martin; but she applauds your ingenuity to the Skies. I Will say no more, but
thereby hangs a Tale


I am considering with my self about a Plot, to bring all about again.


Yet again plotting! if you have such a mind to it, I know no way so proper for
you as to turn Poet to Pugenello


Hark! is not that Music in your house?


Yes Sir John has given my Mistress the Fiddles, and our Old Man is as jocund
yonder, and does so hug himself to think how he has been revenged upon you


Why, he does not know 'twas we, I hope?


It Is all one for that.


I have such a Plot; I care not, I will speak an'I were to be hanged for it --
shall I speak, dear Warner? let me now, it does so wamble within me, just like
a Clyster, in faith law, and I can keep it no longer for my heart


Well, I am indulgent to you; out with it boldly in the name of Nonsense.


We two will put on Vizards, and with the help of my Lordland, who shall be of
the party, go a Mumming there, and by some device of dancing, get my Mistress
away unsuspected by 'em all


What if this should hit now, when all your projects have failed, Warner?


Would I were hanged if it be not somewhat probable: nay, now I consider better
on it -- exceeding probable, it must take, it is not in Nature to be avoided


O must it so, Sir! and who may you thank for it?


Now am I so mad he should be the Author of this device. How the Devil, Sir,
came you to stumble on it


Why should not my brains be as fruitful as yours or any man's?


This is so good, it shall not be your Plot, Sir, either disown it, or I will
proceed no further


I would not lose the credit of my Plot to gain my Mistress: the Plot's a good
one, and I Will justify it upon any ground of England; an'you will not work
upon it, it shall be done without you


I think the Knight has reason.


Well, I Will order it however to the best advantage: hark you, Rose.


If it miscarry by your ordering, take notice it is your fault, it is well
invented I Will take my Oath on it


I must in to 'em, for fear I should be suspected; but I Will acquaint my Lord,
my old Lady, and all the rest who ought to know it, with your design


We'll be with you in a twinkling: you and I, Rose, are to follow our Leaders,
and be paired to night --


To have, and to hold, are dreadful words, Warner; but for your sake I Will
venture on 'em


Nay! good my Lord be patient.


Does he think to give Fiddles and Treatments in a house where he has wronged a
Lady? I Will never suffer it


But upon what ground will you raise your quarrel?


A very just one, as I am her Kinsman.


He does not know yet why he was to be arrested; try that way again.


I Will hear of nothing but revenge.


Yes, pray hear me one word, my Lord, Sir Martin himself has made a Plot.


That Is like to be a good one.


A Fool's Plot may be as lucky as a Fools's Handsel; it is a very likely one,
and requires nothing for your part, but to get a Parson in the next room, we'll
find work for him


That shall be done immediately; Christian, make haste, and send for Mr. Ball
the Nonconformist, tell him here are two or three Angels to be earned


And two or three Possets to be eaten: may I not put in that, Madam?


Surely you may.


Then for the rest -- it is only this -- Oh! they are here! pray take it in a
whisper: my Lady knows of it already


Strike up again, Fiddle, I Will have a French Dance.


Let Us have the Brawls.


No, good Sir John, no quarrelling among Friends.


Your Company is like to be increased, Sir; some Neighbors that heard your
Fiddles are come a mumming to you


Let 'em come in, and we will be Jovy; an' I had but my Hobbyhorse at home -- --


What, are they Men or Women?


I believe some Prentices broke loose.


Rose! go and fetch me down two Indian gowns and Vizard-masks -- you and I will
disguise too, and be as good a Mummery to them as they to us


That will be most rare.


O here they come! Gentlemen Maskers you are welcome -- He signs for a Dance I
believe; you are welcome, Mr. Music, strike up, I Will make one as old as I am


And I Will not be out.


Gentlemen Maskers, you have had the Frolic, the next turn is mine; bring two
Flute-glasses and some stools, Ho, we'll have the Ladies health


But why stools, my Lord?


That you shall see: the humor is, that two men at a time are hoysted up; when
they are above, they name their Ladies, and the rest of the Company dance about
them while they drink: this they call the Frolic of the Altitudes


Some High-lander's invention, I Will warrant it.


Gentlemen-maskers, you shall begin.


Name the Ladies.


They point to Mrs. Millisent and Mrs. Christian, A Lou's Touch! Touch!


A rare toping health this: come Sir John, now you and I will be in our
altitudes


What new device is this tro?


I know not what to make on it.


Pray, Mr. Fool, where is the rest o'your Company? I would fain see 'em again.


Come down and tell 'em so, Cudden:


I Will be hanged if there be not some Plot in it, and this Fool is set here to
spin out the time


Like enough! undone! undone! my Daughters's gone, let me down, Sirrah.


Yes, Cudden.


My Mistress is gone, let me down first.


This is the quickest way, Cudden.


Hold! hold! or thou will break my neck.


And you will not come down, you may stay there, Cudden.


O Scanderbag Villains!


Is there no getting down?


All this was long of you Sir Jack.


'Twas long of your self to invite them hither.


O you young Coxcombs, to be drawn in thus!


You old Sot you, to be caught so sillily!


Come but an inch nearer, and I Will so claw thee.


I hope I shall reach to thee.


And 'twere not for thy wooden breast-work there.


I hope to push thee down from Babylon.


How, Gentlemen! what quarrelling among your selves!


Coxnowns! help me down, and let me have fair play, he shall never marry my
Daughter


No I Will be sworn that he shall not, therefore never repine, Sir, for Marriages
you know are made in Heaven: in fine, Sir, we are joined together in spig't of
Fortune


That we are indeed, Sir Martin, and these are Witnesses; therefore in fine
never repine, Sir, for Marriages you know are made in Heaven


Rose!


What, is Rose split in two? sure I have got one Rose!


I, the best Rose you ever got in all your life.


This amazeth me so much, I know not what to say or think.


My Daughter married to Warner!


Well, I thought it impossible any man in England should have over reached me:
sure Warner there was some mistake in this: prithee Billy let us go to the
Parson to set all right again, that every man may have his own before the
matter go 100 far


Well, Sir! for my part I will have nothing farther to do with these Women, for
I find they will be too hard for us, but e'n sit down by the loss, and content
my self with my hard fortune: But, Madam, do you ever think I will forgive you
this, to cheat me into an Estate of 2000 l. a year


And I were as thee, I would not be so served Warner!


I have served him but right for the cheat he put upon me, when he persuaded me
you were a Wit -- now there is a trick for your trick, Sir


Nay, I confess you have outwitted me.


Let me down, and I Will forgive all freely.


What am I kept here for?


I might in policy keep you there, till your Daughter and I had been in
private, for a little consummation: But for once, Sir, I Will trust your good
nature


And thou were a Gentleman it would not grieve me!


That I was assured of before I married him, by my Lord here.


I cannot refuse to own him for my Kinsman, though his Father's sufferings in
the late times has ruined his Fortunes


But yet he has been a Serving-man.


You are mistaken, Sir, I have been a Master, and besides there is an Estate of
800 l. a year, only it is mortgaged for 6000 l


Well, we'll bring it off, and for my part, I am glad my Daughter has missed in
fine, there


I will not be the only man that must sleep without a Bedfellow to night, if
this Lady will once again receive me


She Is yours, Sir.


And the sam Parson, that did the former execution, is still in the next
Chamber; what with Cawdels Wine, and Quidding, which he has taken in abundance,
I think he will be able to wheedle two more of you into matrimony


Poor Sir Martin looks melancholy! I am half afraid he is in love.


Not with the Lady that took him for a Wit, I hope.


At least, Sir Martin can do more than you Mr. Warner, for he can make me a
Lady, which you cannot my Mistress


I have lost nothing but my Man, and in fine, I shall get another.


You Will do very well, Sir Martin, for you will never be your own Man, I assure
you


For my part I had loved you before if I had followed my inclination.


But now I am afraid you begin of the latest, except your love can grow up like
a Mushrome at a nights warning


For that matter never trouble your self, I can love as fast as any man, when I
am nigh possession; my love falls heavy, and never moves quick till it comes
near the Center; he is an ill Falconer that will unhood before the quarry be in
sight

Love's an high mettal'd Hawk that beats the Air,

But soon grows weary when the Game's not near.


AS Country Vicars, when the Sermon's done,
Run hudling to the Benediction;
Well knowing, though the better sort may stay,
The Vulgar Rout will run unblest away:
So we, when once our Play is done, make haste
With a short Epilogue to close your taste.
In thus withdrawing we seem mannerly,
But when the Curtain's, down we peep and see
A Jury of the Wits who still stay late,
And in their Club decree the poor Plays fate;
Their Verdict back is to the Boxes brought,
Thence all the Town pronounces it their thought.
Thus, Gallants, we like Lilly can foresee,
But if you ask us what our doom will be,
We by to morrow will our Fortune cast,
As he tells all things when the Year is past.

