AS when some dogrel-monger raises
Up Muse, to flatter Doxies praises,
He talks of Gems and Paradises,
Perfumes and Arabian Spices:
Making up Fantastic Posies
Of Eyelids, Foreheads, Cheeks and Noses,
Calling them Lillies, Pinks and Roses.
Teeth Orient Pearl, and Coral Lips are,
Neck's Alablaster and Marble Hips are;
Prating of Diamonds, Saphyrs, Rubies,
What a Pudder's with these Boobies?
Dim Eyes are Stars, and Red hairs Guinnies:
And thus described by these Ninnies,
As they sit scribbling on Ale-Benches,
Are homely dowdy Country Wenches.
So when this Plot quite purged of Ale is,
In naked truth but a plain Tale is;
And in such dress we mean to show it,
In spite of our damned Fustian Poet,
Who has disguised it with dull Hist'ri's,
Worse than his Brethren e're did Mistress,
The Ghost of Labas the Corn-cutter ascends and does not sing (lest it should
be thought that the rare Fancy, was stolen from that singing Ghost of Pompey)
but speaks

FRom Tuttle Fields full speed I came
To tell you all you are much to blame,
Great P -- y's injured Ghost I am.
Sister Morocco pine no more,
Behold the man they loved before,
Though slighted now like common Whore.
When to Elyzium they shall come
Where all submit to Poets doom,
We Will be revenged on all and some.
Hectors shall take their Oaths away,
Poets their Wit they steal from Play,
Wenches their Claps -- then what are they?
When thus the swelling thing's brought low,
How will poor naked Critic show;
Think Ladies, for you best do know.
As dull and cold you will find his zeal,
As heart of Mob that home does steal,
Forced to leave Clothes in pawn for Ale.
Then hungry Iilt that rails at Play,
'Cause Cully will not bite to day,
And's eager grown for want of prey,
Shall still in sight have Jolly Robin,
But all her tricks shall not make him bob in.
When passion's up, to allay the flame o't,
We Will tickle her to death with straw moat.
But I must go --
When Pullen swell and rustle so,
And Critic Cock prepares to Crow,
All Ghosts but his unwelcome grow.
Is not my P -- y here? then sure he is gone,
How long his speech was and how soon'twas done!

OH Morena I am took napping
And must lay my head thy blew Lap in,
And my poor fist upon my Rump lay
That every one of these there thump may.

Is my Lap then such ill abiding
That you should need make all this chiding?

Great Sir, your Hector Hamet's coming
From Car-men and stout Butchers thrumming
At the Bear-garden, he is crossing
From Bank-side on billows tossing:
River bright does change complexion
With his tattered Flags reflection:
Boat does move as man does pull her,
In greater State you never saw Sculler:
Drum does rattle and Boys do bellow
Hamet up, for a pretty Fellow.
He all the way Tobacco puffing,
And in the smoke your praises huffing;
As School Boys use with little trouble
From Walnut-shell to blow up bubble;
Or as Nurse pleases Child in Cradle
With the dim smoke of an old Ladle.

This matter that you are relating
Does not merit half this prating.

Come about the business roundly
And be sure you strike him soundly.

Who was that?

It was some Brangler
That struck with Slipper, like a Wrangler:
By Jove if I knew who is the author
I in his porridg would pour Water.

Labas though you be in such dudgeon
Yet you must swallow me this Gudgeon.
These are new Shoes, as I was saying
I came just now from Cudgel playing
Where from all the mad rout I won them,
So you may take them there, and don them.

Think thou with Shoes to beg thy pardon,
Those Shoes with which thou layd'st so hard on?

-- Who I?

-- I thou.

-- O errant Liar!

Stand all away, let me come nigher
That I may scratch his copper Nose off.

Peace Beldame, or I Will shake your Shoes off.

Good Mother peace, you make a squabble
In very truth abominable,
And with your bawling put the Youth out,
So I shall never find the truth out.

Sir I came in but very newly,
Old Mother Bunch does not say truly.

Peace sawse-box, know it is Queen Mother.

'Twas Crimalhaz made all this pother.

It was not I, no in good sooth Sir.

He tells you not one word of truth Sir;
When Bum was turned up I did watch it;
And I do say, 'twas Crimalhatchet.

But you may spare him though Morena
You know well enough what I mean a.

Fie, Fie, Fustilugs, be not yellow
For he is but a dungy Fellow.

Marry come up, my durty Cozen,
He may have such as you by the Dozen,
And therefore make not such a bustle
For you are but an errant pussle.

Mot^er Shipton been't so testy,
You may perhaps find me as resty;
My Labas struck by Muly Hamet!
You may all be ashamed to name it.

Eunuch tell truth, for you stood by it;
Since they so shamefully deny it.

Tut all this scolding is but Nonsense,
'Twas Crimalhaz upon my conscience.

Out from my sight thou base misshapen
Ugly Dastard, Craven, Capon.

How Crimalhaz! upon my credit
'Twas Muly Hamet there that did it.

Now, I will haste me to our Village
And there look after Sheep and Tillage.

Is Crimalhaz so good at sneaking
To steal away thus without speaking?
Hamet since thou have caused this brabble
Converse hereafter with the rabble:
From Court and City I thee banish
Presto be gone, why do not vanish?

In troth Sir I am verry sorry
So soon to quit your territory;
Though in it I must make no figure,
With all my heart I wish it bigger.

-- How bigger!

-- Yes indeed and longer.

I find my Choler waxing stronger.

Labas were you ten times my Brother,
My love I can no longer smother:
Your anger now grows too unruly,
For my part I Will go with my Muly.

Mariamne I don't think it proper
That you so soon should turn Hedg-hopper;
But since you are in such a taking,
As you do brew you may be baking.

Oh Son you have now quite undone us
If Crimalhaz does thus outrun us,
For we the Parson must be feasting
And with him there will be no jesting,
He Will be so cross, who can abide him
If we a Sheeps-head don't provide him?
He Is such an errant Mutton-monger:
Wherefore let us stay here no longer,
But after Crimalhaz be creeping:
Who has got all the Sheep in's keeping:
And when we are all there together,
Be sure with him you make fair weather.

But Laula you who are his doxie
Had best bespeak him by your proxy;
For he will be vapouring and bragging
If I go after him a begging.

No Labas, there you are mistaken,
We shall have Coleworts, Beans and Bacon,
Fat Mutton boiled and Chestnuts roasted,
Parcht Pease, Potatoes, and Cheese toasted:
And fully to end all the quarrel,
Of humming Ale a lustly barrel.

If this be more than merely Cogging,
Let Us talk no more but straight be jogging.

It Is very true, you need not doubt it.

Then Come away, let us go about it.

SWeet Gentiles all, I am that Parson
They lay the fault of all this Farce on,
And thus most basely do belie me
Having no Friend here to stand by me,
Saying this Journey they were put on
Only to feast my Chops with Mutton.
Although the scandal on our Coat lies,
Who ever says it in his throat lies;
As though I Would keep a Jewish pascal.
But I may thank Hamet that Rascal,
For he, and that same Jackadandy
Emperor, came here for Ale and Brandy;
Laula, Morena, and to other Gipsy
Came hither only to be tipsy:
And when spent Crimalhaz his store is
They will come out, and dance the Moris:
And I my self the Hobbyhorse am;
Thus treated I without remorse am.

Hamet they have drunk all the fuddle
And straight will come here on a huddle.

Then till they come I Will tell a story,
The strangest too, e're came before ye.
To day as I the wheat-Field stood in
The sky was altered on a sudden,
And looked as thick as hasty pudding:
For lo, behold the Aerie Region
Had water in it to drown a Legion
Of Flies, had they been buzzing in it,
If you will credit one has seen it:
Then presently our goodly Sun shine,
Was grown almost as dusk as Moon shine:
And which did more increase our wonder,
It did both lighten, rain, and thunder;
And wet to the skin poor I, and Hamet,
But now it is too late to blame it:
Quoth I, let us find some place to sleep in,
This is no weather to keep Sheep in.
See what it is to be no Scholar,
This made the Woodcock grow in choler,
And at the gods to huff and spatter,
Swearing they were all drunk with water;
When I that stood but just behind him,
Besought their worships not to mind him:
Parson quoth he l'me not so silly,
Though you do strut in Piccadilly
And are a greater cheat than --
E're to be frighted with your canting.
More than you are at all my ranting:
Then he began to stare and goggle
Like skittish Jade about to boggle.
Then straight cried I, Hamet I Will leave ye,
Still praise the Gods though they deceive ye;
Yet I no Parson with starch't face am,
But in good sooth Hamet Alhaz am.

YOur North-down Ale is muddy,
French Wine quite spoils your studdy,
'Twill make your Brains so addle,
As any jog in the Cradle.
'Twill make your etc. Chorus.
All strong Beer makes you duller,
Than Porter, Groom, or Sculler:
Excess of Sack does dull some,
And Chocolate is fulsome,
And Coffee now does gull some.
Excess of Sack, etc. Chorus.
It elevates the Reason,
No higher than damned Treason;
Which makes the Saints to love it,
And all new lights approve it.
Which makes the etc. Chorus.
Brumsick Mum's mere puddle,
And Rhenish Wine base fuddle,
But Brandy is the Liquor,
Makes all your veins flow quicker:
Brandy the best of Nectars,
Makes us bolder than Hectors,
Fearing no Ghosts nor Specters.
Brandy the best etc. Chorus.
Woe and alas, help, help some Brandy;
Oh help me some body that is handy.

Pernicious Woman thou have killed him,
And with base tipple over filled him.

Mother it makes me more astonished
To be by you now thus admonisht.
Did you not cry, Ply him with liquor,
Yawling out fill, fill, Daughter quicker.

Was I of drink so very craving?
I pity her, this is mere raving,
She rages worse than huffing Players;
Go try if you can say your Prayers.

I Will winged by love for you be groping,
Nor can I miss where you lie moping.

What Is the cause of all this rumble?
What was it ho, did make him tumble?

You need not ask me what he aileth,
Do not you see his memory fails?
Then thus in short, the all and sum is
My poor Labas, so drunk, as drum is:
Though he thus sweetly seems to slumber,
His Breeches are bedight with scumber:
Oh drunken Sister, Maudlin Mother,
Thus to disguise your Son and Brother.

When Gods are in Olympus fluster'd,
And for a while half hufft and bluster'd:
Breeches for Petticoats they are chopping
In Masquerade to come hedg-hopping
Amongst us here to bellow.
Jove in disguise has been a Sculker
On Earth, to find him out a Bulker:
You know he once came down a trulling,
The shape of beastly great Town Bull in;
And so in twenty other dresses,
In Villages to find out Misses;
Which shows no Game in the upper Region,
Can be compared to the sweet Pidgeon,
Who e're disputes this is a widgeon.

Sweet blouz you make us all look sadly,
To see you still take on thus madly;
But should you blubber till to morrow,
There Is no drink left to ease your sorrow.

Oh Crimalhatchet, you are cruel
To use him thus, loves you but too well.

Fresh as the Honey-suckles flower,
Say will thou be my Paramour.

Stand off, bold impudent Invador,
Think thou I am of Copper made, or
Brass, that I my Labas should wrong thus,
Now he but sleeps Dog-sleep among us.

Just so the blushing Morn appears,
When from behind black Cloud it leareth:
So falling rain does look on Cherries,
When baskets full come here in VVherries.
Thus Orange looks new rubbed with piss-clout,
Or scullions face besmeared with Dish-clout;
Such looks the VVelkin puts on even
When Cuckolds are going to Heaven.

Though on my shoulders you are leaning,
Yet I don't understand your meaning.

So when Aurora's Dew does scatter,
Rose-buds do smile quite through her water;
And whilst your Roses are distilling
Of their sweet Liquor, I Will be swilling.

Fie, get you gone you nasty swabber,
For I do hate your ugly slabber.

I gave you wherewithal to paint ye,
Therefore you need not be so dainty.
Against all these I Will fight your battle,
And give each of them a sound rattle;
One Brandy bottle is behind yet
And hid, where none but I can find it.

Indeed?

And you shall have your share on it,
Before your company is 'ware on it;
Come tell me now, will you not love me?

I Will do in that as shall behove me.

Then stay not here, but let us together.

I will do both -- I can do neither.
Revenge says go, honor does no say,
Truly I do not know what to say.

Out fornicator are you billing,
And is your Franion too so willing?

Come thou with me thou pretty Harlot,
And I will be thy loving Varlot.

That I my baggage now should lose so,
Does make me wilder than Furioso:
I should have killed all that came near me,
Nay even those that did but hear me,
Made all the Furies stand affrighted,
Like trembling Children when benighted.
But they most basely have outrun me,
Alas, alas, they have quite undone me;
And left so many woes to grieve me,
That Divine Brandy cannot relieve me;
If you would describe grim Pluto's dwelling,
It Is done by my sad Story telling.

Kind Taffilet hearing your praises,
H'as turned his army to pick Daysies;
And gives to you our great Metropolis
With all Excises and Monopolies;
Swearing I pray you Sir observe it,
That your stout drinking does deserve it;
And soon he will privately come hither,
That you two may be drunk together.

All this alas, to me 's no blessing,
Now my kind Bona-Roba's missing;
For neither conquest, thrones, nor treasure,
Without a Wench, yield any pleasure.
Thus stripped of thy black gowns protection,
I order thee Gentle correction;
Tied up to post, instead of Gaunches,
Thou shall be drubb'd on both thy haunches.

Princox, I scorn thee, and thy malice;
And in thy Guts, wish all thy Tallyes.

I found your Trull behind you Bushes,
Sleeping upon a Tust of Rushes;
Stretched out at length on her back lying,
Some warm thoughts thereby signifying:
Louder, than any Porpus snoring;
Oh, what man could forbear adoring?

Thanks brave Heroic Chimney-sweeper;
Hold, thou shall be my Tally keeper.

How? I keep your Tallyes! no such matter,
She in my chops makes too much water,
I Will fly from her for all this pother,
Yet I scarce know, where is such another.

Oh stay and drink some Ale that is nappy,
And make me just as thou have made he happy.

I Will not stay, though you had the Town full,
But will suppose I have my Crown full;
And my self banish from her presence,
Of all my joys the verry Essence;
And to what place so e're I blunder,
I Will think I see this Cole-yard wonder.

I do not value all their talking,
Now I have got again my Maulkin;
Then since thou art my only dowdy,
Fie, do not wear thy face so cloudy.

Abdrahaman, I must not forget yet,
For I am sure y' are in his debt yet.

My justice on you scounded ended,
I with a Crown shall be befriended;
Pish, what are Crowns to a fine Woman,
Though most of them are very common;
All blessings not compared with drinking,
Aretine shows, (to my thinking,)
Drink in the first place I adore thee,
Next Woman, I fall down before thee;
Therefore I Will take thee my sweet Trallop
Behind me, and so homeward gallop:
Empire's but toil, though Commons would leave grumbling;
And age in that is not worth an hour in tumbling.

Turn scoundrel turn thee and thy Trull resign,
Know I will have her, if she will be mine.

Labas --
Come from my Punk, why do thou tempt thy fate,
She Is my concern --

-- this shall the brawl debate
Who can the toughest Fox and longest show,
Will find all doxies his, or make them so.

Are you not ashamed -- de'e come here to brawl?
Begone -- I Will tear thee from my Natural.

Unhand me Caitiffs for I hate you both.

Both -- Both -- did you say
O murrain luck!
Can Jove hear this? I Will to prevent this wrong,
Scold with my Eyes, and blubber with my tongue.

Do thou come here to whine --
What will thou dare to do for her, wou't weep,
Wou't drink, wou't swear; wou't rant, wou't sleep,
Wou't toss a Bottle, eat a Custard, or Mince-pye,
VVou't go to bed with her, why so will I.

Ha, ha, he. --
Do thou know what thou have said now? If I do
Not do all this, and a thousand things more --
Nay if I do not eat, drink, sleep, go to bed with her,
Play at Scotch-hoppers, chuck-farthing, or any thing
And all that, I am the verry'st Son of a Whore breathing.

O Villain do thou grin, dare thou believe
After my Drab is gone, that thou shall live?

What -- am I slighted, then I will not die,
Till I from you obtain what you deny.

What Murrain luck, did urge me to contend
Against this honest Fellow, my old Friend?
And yet the baggage I must still pursue,
Let Queen which made the brawl, excuse it too.

Doxie! Doxie!
O thou have a tender thing!
I Would rather lose a bit of both my Ears,
Did I her warlike Pimp full fourteen years,
Outswear her Hectors, and outface her Dun,
While the vile Girl to Coverlet did run;
Out-cheat the Alehouse when we run of tick,
Out-last the Headles Penitential whip;
Out-eat old Mariot -- out-huff Bottle Beer,
Out-cant the Gypsy and the Maunderer;
And there where last Night's reckoning was unpay'd,
When Watchmen furred like Bears made all afraid:
I did with hands in Pocket door maintain,
Against show'res of marrow bones and Piss pot Rain,
Have I made Wive's secured by Husbands yield,
Sent snotty Rascals cursing from loves Field;
Must I for fop Labas all this forgo,
For which I did so impudently throw?
He steals my Doxie e're my job is done,
Who can but dream of Claps that I have won.

An Epilogue spoken by Witches, after the mode of Macbeth.

What, you have been at Hot-Cockles I see,
Beldames! how dare you traffic thus, and not call me?
It Is I must bear the Brunt --
Where Is VV --?

Here.

Where Is W --?

Here.

Where Is Mack'rel back and Jilting-Sue.


You Lazy Hags! what mischief have you done?

I was with Templer locked from Night till Noon,
My case he opened thrice and once
Actions he entered three and one,
But grown with study dull as dunce
His deeds I burnt, his Fees I spent;
And till next Term or quarters Rent
I left him poor, and Malcontent.

Thou shall have a Spirit -- What have thou done?

I picked Shopkeeper up, and went to the Sun*
He Houncht -- and Houncht -- and Houncht;
And when h' had done,
Pay me quoth I,
Be damned you Whore! did fierce Mechanic cry,
And most unlike a true bred Gentleman,
Drunk as a Bitch he left me there in Pawn.

His Shop is in Fleetstreet --

In Hackney Coach, I Will thither sail,
Like wanton Wife with sweeping Tail;
I Will do! I Will do! and I Will do!

A running Nag I Will thee lend;

Thou art my Friend*

I Will give thee Shancker and Buboe.

I can have all the rest of Friends below.
To sweating Tub I Will youth confine,
Where he shall dwind'le flux and pine,
Though white VVitch Surgeon drench and anoint.
I Will have at least a Joint.

And what have thou done?

With Cock of Game I fought a Match,
While his -- my -- did catch,
I stole his money and Gold Watch.

Thou shall have an Incubus;
Come to our Friends to make their charms more quicker,
Here Is six go-downs of humming Stygian Liquor.

A health, a health to Mother C --
From Moor-fields fled to Mill-bank Castle,
She puts off rotten new rig'd Vessel.

A health, a health to G -- that Witch,
She needs must be in spite of fate Rich,
Who sells tough Hen for Quail and Partridg.

A health, a health to Sister T --
Her Trade's chief beauty and example,
She Will serve the Gallant, or the Pimp, well.

A health, a health to Betty B --
Though she began the Trade but newly,
Of Country Squires there is not a few lie.
But of all the brisk Bawdes it is M -- for me,
It Is M -- the best in her degree;
She can serve from the Lord, to the Squire and Clown,
From a Guinny she will fit ye to half a Crown.

Fei! Fah! Fum!
By the itching of my Bum,
Some wicked Luck should that way come.

Stand still -- by yonder dropping Nose I know,
That we shall please them all before we go.

Hail! hail! hail! you less than wits and greater!
Hail Fop in Corner! and the rest now met here,
Though you will never be wits -- from your loins shall spread,
Diseases that shall Reign when you are dead.
Deed is done!
VVar's begun!
Bank-side Maulkin thrice has mewed, no matter:
If puss of to other house will scratch, have at her.
TO appease your Spirits and keep our Farce from harm,
Of strong Ingredients we have powerful charm,
To catch Bully Critic whose wit but thin is:
Yonder sits empty Cully stuffed with Guinnies,
Then for the wary squeamish Critic Lover,
A Dainty Virgin Pullet sits above there,
And those two Vizards hide a brace of Jinnyes,
Enough to hamper all the Critic Nynnyes:
Besides all this, our charm is stronger made yet,
With Dock of Harlot hasht and grylliaded,
Carcass of Country Girl that is fresh and wholesome,
Haunch of whetstone Do, but that is fulsome.
Moreover Friends! in every place to fit ye,
Goose Giblets, Rumps, and Kidneys for the City.


He that would damn this Farce does strive in vain
This charm can never be overcome by man,
'Till Whetstones Park remove to Distaff Lane.

Heccate! Heccate! Come away.
Hark I am called --

I come; I come; Alack and well a day.
Alack and well a day.
The Pot boyls over while you stay --

Vanish --
It Is time I know it by my count.
The Goose and the Gander went over the Green,
They flew in the Corn that they could not be seen.
They flew, etc.

Rose-mary's green, Rose-mary's green,
derry, derry, down.
When I am King, thou shall be Queen,
derry, derry, down.
If I have Gold, thou shall have part,
derry, derry, down.
If I have none thou have my heart.
derry, derry, down.
THis Farce --
Not like your Country Girl made proud at Court,
Because she there first learned the naughty sport,
She Would now take place of all and's grown so haughty,
Those that debauched her, dare not say she is faulty,
Ashamed to own she jilted them with low dress,
As stroling Punk did once in Summers progress:
No, this like Sutlers Doxie, came from Black Heath,
Longed but to be as fine as Witch in Mackbeth.
High though it looks 'twill stoop to all good fellows,
As most proud Women will for Story's tell us,
They now will do from Room of State to Alehouse.
Like blithe Scotch Maggy Clothes in River bucking,
T'has showed you all the flowers it had worth plucking,
It thinks you Gentle-folks, are all for -- looking.
Farce and Heroic tale use but one fashion,
Love and affection Lays the first foundation
Then Giant noise and show set cheating Glass on.
So little cruising punk and first rate Harlot,
Though one Don's stuff to others clad in Scarlet,
Use but one Mouse-trap to catch trading Varlet.
Those that adore the Ghosts and Devils yonder,
The Powder Lightning and the Mustard Thunder;
Who though they cannot of Plot and Language prattle,
Can mew like Cats, and roar like Drum in battle.
When scourged Vermin from the Stage do Crall
Whipped off --
As some are from Estates with Lusty Tail,
Those we shall hardly please --
When Heccate calls, they thither swarm till full it is,
Like humors drawn to boil by old Wife's Poultice,
Because at you Show-house you liked such doings,
We thought to purchase Cake-bread and stewed Pruines;
But you look all like Lovers cloyed sie on ye,
When deed is done you should not grudg your money.
Have we not seen, O whoreson Rogue John Dory?
You that Damn most, you know not wherefore nor why,
Caught ten times over with one old new dressed Story.
Be to this joy thus kind you will rouse up yet,
Much better Farce, one more Heroic Puppet;
When little Worm is praised it will so brag o't,
That 'twil set Tail on end of bigger Maggot;
Since with success great Bard's grow proud and resty,
To get good Plays be kind to bad Travesty.

