POets in Prologues (to cajole the Age)
Have spent such stocks of Wit upon the Stage,
That it is become the hardest par to'th' Play,
They Have said so much, there is little left to say.
Yet Critics, you new Miracles attend,
As if Wits Treasury could know no end.
Like cruel Landlords, who do never weigh
Hard times, or damage, when it is Quarter day;
With eager expectation you destrain
For Wits Excise upon our Poets brain,
And for a Prologue, you old custom cite:
They writ with ease who first began to write;
All fancies then were fresh, all ^heams were new;
Wit's ransacked now from China, to Peru.
Nay, here at home, all fancies are as stale,
Some flatter, some entreat, and others rail:
And this last Method we must needs confess,
Has of all others met the most success:
But our new Poet dares not take this Course,
He would entreat, but not your likings force;
For if your Charity don't help him out,
He does protest he then must turn Bankrupt:
Not with design as knavish Bankers do)
For he will not break and then compound with you;
But fairly to you, his whole interest quit,
And give you up the forfeit of his it^.

HE who comes hither, with design to hiss,
And with a bum reversed to whisper Miss,
To kemb a Peruke, or to show gay Clothes,
Or to vent antique Nonsense with new Oaths;
Our Poet welcomes as the Muses Friend,
For he will by Irony each Play commend.
Next him, we welcome ^^ch who briskly dine
At Lockets, at Giraus, or Shattiline;
Swelled with Pottage, and the Burgundian Grape,
They hither come to take a kindly Nap;
In these our Poet don't conceive much harm,
For they pay well, and keep our Benches warm;
And though (scarce half awake) some Plays they damn;
They do it by wholesale, not by Ounce, and Dram.
But when fierce Critics get them in their Clutch,
They Are crueller than the Tyrannick Dutch;
And with more Art do dislocate each Scene,
Than in Amboyna they the limbs of Men;
They rack each line, and every word unknit,
As if they would find a way to cramp all Wit.
They Are the Terror of all adventures here,
The very objects of their hate, and fear;
And like rude Commonwealths they stillare knit,
Against English Plays, the Monarchies of Wit.
The invade Poetic license, and still rail
At Plays, to which in duty they should vail,
Yet still the infest this Coast to F^^h for Jests,
To suppliment their Wits at City Feasts,
Thus much for Critics: To the more generous Wit
Our Poet frankly does cach Scene submit,
And begs your kind Alliance to engage
Those Hogen Interlopers of the Stage.

SIgnior Honorio!

Signior Amante! You are the Man
I wished to meet.

Then we are both pleased.
I Have worn out my Feet with seeking you.

And I my Patience.

I thought you better stored.

You have most reason to believe so Signior.

I cannot apprehend you.

I shall explain my self. I understand
You have been a liberal detractor Sir,
Both of my honor, and my Sisters fame*
And as a Gentleman expect fair satisfaction.

Ha, ha, ha, you are disposed to droll.
Italians seldom understand that Language.

You speak French. Teach your Sword the Dialect.
And don't mistake my injuries for jests.

Though I have always made it my chief care*
Neither to offer, nor receive a wrong,
And am as far from injuries to you.
As English Subjects from oppressive Laws:
Yet custom does so cruelly impose
Upon the Laws of Honor, the must give
Satisfaction, to the Capricio of each jealous brain.

I am no common Duellist, nor make a living*
From the price of blood. My temper
In your refusal of my Sisters Love*
(After such long address) was too much shown;
But* then her tears did conquer my resentments,
Which fresher injuries have inflamed anew.
And if not false to Honor, as to Love,
You will this Night those injuries repair,
Or take his Life, whose fame you did not spare.

'Twere not amiss I knew particulars,
The why and wherefore I must draw my Sword,
For I Am not so in love with the French garb,
TO expose my skin to pinking for the Mode.

You shall --
Setting a part your late inconstancy, (which I am*
Bound to pardon by^ an Oath) receive in short
My other injuries: y' have given out (thereby
To justify your levity) my Sister was unchaste,
And that the reason you forsook her Love;
That I (being conscious of my Sisters guilt)
Durst not confirm 't to the world by my revenge,

Let me but know the inventor of these lies,
These Hell-bred lies, that I may punish him,
For I am more than equally concerned.

You must excuse me Si^, I swore concealment.

Then give me leave to say you are unjust:
Though love, which all want Power to resist,
Compelled my stubborn heart to feel a second flame;
^et ^ was never so little generous, so destitute
Of Honor, or of Manhood, as to asperse a Lady,
I once loved.

Words are no balsom for the wounds of Honor:
I hope you will meet me in Pantalonies Grove.

To vindicate her Fame I will; but never
To justify so black a Calumny.

Y' are a Coward then, that wants a Soul
To own the injuries your malice vents.

A Coward! Lend me your patience Gods!
It Is all too little to allay the flame
That word has kindled here; Oh how it rages!
Now y' have given my anger a just Theme;
You shall soon know to whom the Coward's due:
Expect me about Six.

I shall attend you with a second.

Though he pretends fresh wrongs, it is evident
He seeks to punish my inconstancy,
A cause my Sword would have defended weakly,
Had not his fury given 't an argument,
Too warrantable to admit dispute,
As to the justice often, a Coward!
It is a Title of such Infamy;
Methinks his life is slender satisfaction!
And yet when I consider him my Friend,
Methinks that Title should all quarrels end.

But is she so deformed?

As ugly as heart can wish, but rich
Beyond the numbers of Arithmetic.

She Is a Woman?

Her Progeny assures it, for she has seen
Her great Grand-childs Daughter;
But still remember she is rich.

There Is my Elyzium.

But will you marry her?

Why did I crave thy aid else? for riches
I will marry any thing. Were she so old
That the single hairs upon her Chin
Were hardened by time, to the consistence
Of Knitting-needles, and grown as long; if
She had money, yet I Would marry her, and
Kiss her upon occasion, notwithstanding
That Porcupin defense.

And much good may it do thee.

Nay, if she be but rich enough, I care not*
Though she were a Witch the Devil had sucked
Nine lives; but thou art sure that I shall*
Meet no Rival?

Except Don Satan should in mere spite
Animate an hanged Carcass to court her,
Never fear one.

How happy's Riccamare! since glorious Gold
Gives form to Youth deformed, Beauty to the old.

How he is exalted! like a Beggar that had*
Drunk himself into a Prince, and keeps
State in a dream.

Dear Garbato let us instantly to this India.

Weigh the adventure: There Is more pleasure*
To sleep in a Trench, though in a deep Snow,
When Bullets dance about your ears, and
Less danger, than in kissing her, she
Has a breath more noisome than a Jakes,
Able to belch a Pestilence, but Gold is a
Rich Restorative, and she is as mellow as
An Angelot Ch^ese, that has been mortified
Fifteen Months in Horse-dung: But still
To your great comfort, she is exceeding rich.

That Is my Paradise, has she many Heirs?

None but an overgrown Gib-cat, she has
Outlived her kindred by nine Generations,
And they say remembers ever since Eve
Gave suck; and for her Religion she is a
Pre-adamite.

Then are my fortunes made for ever.

And you shall make mine before we part.

How am I bound to fortune! Rich and Old,
Two blessings I would hardly change for Heaven
Might it succeed.

The refusal must be on your part Signior.

What, and be worth ten thousand Ducats yearly?

Yes, and ten times that in money.

If I wed her not, may I marry a poor
Beauty, and undo my Parish with getting
Beggars. Why should thou scruple it?
Prithee let us lose no time.

A word first about my own concerns.

Delay me not, I Will reward thee to thy wish.

I am no Slave to coin Sir.

How shall I otherwise deserve thy Love?

As we walk I shall inform you.

Well, you shall govern me: now to my Mine;
Nought's so deformed, but Gold can make divine.

Dispute no more, you may as well compare
An Atome to a Mountain, as balance
Your miseries with mine.

Let each impart her grief, and then the Scale
Will not perhaps appear so much unequal.

Let me begin happily, hearing mine
You Will blush, and think your own not worth
Relating.
The man I love is banished from my sight,
And him I hate, usurps a Lovers right.
Such Magic is there in a Parents will,
As does destroy my Love, my Lover kill.
If I obey, I must espouse my hate,
And disobedience is a harder fate.
For so I lose my love, who does pursue
Me with such Virtue, he would then shun me too,
As lost to duty, judging I might prove,
As to my Father, falser to his love.

Your fate's severe, yet Madam you possess
In's Virtue still a kind of happiness,
Whilst I have lost in mine, (being so untrue,)
Not only a Lover, but his virtue too.

Yet both your fates my happiness outgo:
You were beloved, but I was never so.

My having been beloved my griefs increase:
War racks them most that have been used to peace.

And those true vows my Lover does impart,
Serve but as Torches to inflame my heart.
Which otherwise by silence might abate
In Love, and reconcile me to my hate.

All these are trifles to poor Clara's grief,
Whose Love never had, nor e're can hope relief.

What e're they seem, sure those griefs deepest grow,
Which feel the effects of love, and hatred too.

If to discern, you would contraries compare,
(For great hope lost, begets the worst despair.)
You Would find my grief all others far excel.
So joys privation is the worst of Hell:
And darkness seems more horrid to the sight,
When Bodies intervene 'twixt us and light,
And rob us of the glory of the Day,
Than when by course, Night drives the Sun away.
So does my Fathers will to our Love appear,
Much more prodigious, than were Love severe,
Or either of us false: that grief destroys,
Which cruelly separates uniting joys.

Disputes are vain; we never shall decide,
Which should precede, amongst griefs so near allied.

You Are in the right, for mine must never yield.

Nor mine -- adieu.
I must retire to the Cypress Grove.

So dark a shade will best become my Love,
I Will bear thee company, where we will feed,
Sorrow with silence: As wounds inward bleed,
When least apparent, yet then best surprise
The fort of life; so griefs which dwell on Eyes,
Cannot so dexterously life overcome,
As silent sorrows, which live nearer home.

If Love alone be difficult to bear,
And that Loves torments are increased by fear,
Though fear denote some hope, Love paid with scorn,
Being void of hope's much harder to be born.
How have I fined! that I Am compelled to prove
The utmost rigours both of scorn, and love:
Great Deity forgive! and next abate
My love like his; as one teach both to hate.
Or if I still must dote by your decree,
Yet mitigate my cruel destiny.
And make Amante feel a scornful hate,
May equalize the rigor of my fate.
That so,
Wearied with scorns, his penitence may prove,
More advantageous than his feigned Love.

Where do think I met thy Mistress?

My Mistress!

Make it not so strange, the Lady of your
Public address, the Lady Arabella.

The Lady Arabella! Where?

See* if your countenance speaks not truth for you:
Be Master of a better temper,
Or hang me if I tell you a Syllable.

I Will tell you more without a Covenant;
Amante does with solemn Oaths deny
Those base aspersions which you swore he laid
Upon my Sisters Fame: And tho'he be
A Vagabond in Love, yet I believe him
A Man of Honor, that would not eat his words;
Besides the Oath of silence you imposed,
Begets suspicion.

This comes by telling lies, damnable lies;
To please my fancy I expose my throat,
And with a Pox must be Romantic still.

Signior, I expect your answer.

Sir, since my zeal and over-fond affection,
Has rendered me a sufferer in your thoughts;
I shall become more careful for the future
Of busy friendship, and a pur-blind zeal,
And find at present ways to vindicate
The truth.

That will oblige me to implore your pardon,
For my unjust suspicion.

It Is confidence I see, must bear me out.
Time will make all things plain.

The time is riper Sir, than you suppose,
For by appointment, I Am to meet Amante
This Night in single Combat.

Then I have made fine work, and shall no doubt
Have my dear Guts carved in Italian Cut-works,
Or my poor Carcass pounded to a Sawsage.

If now you please to honor me so far
As to appear my Second, you will thereby approve
Your truth, and friendship.

Second! -- A Pox of all lying, it will lie
Heavy on my blood one day, or other; and
Yet if I should be hanged for it, my very body
Could not choose but lie, after 'twere dead.

Furfante, When we meet Company, whisper me.

Yonder Is Signior Honorio Sir, my young
Mistresses Servant.

Good day Signior Honorio.

How the Devil does he to see me at this
Distance, that gropes from one Room to another;
And knows not the way to his Mouth
But by custom -- I joy to see you Sir,
That I may enquire of my souls chief
Happiness, my Arabella, how fares my life?

In perfect health, like sad Penelope she
Moanes the absence of her Love, you make
Your self too much a Stranger.

She makes m'indeed a Stranger to her heart,
Where I could wish to be more intimate
Than Friends appeared before the World knew fraud.
But since she is pleased to have it otherwise,
My duty's to submit.

Talk not to me of duty, or submission; your flames
And flatteries make them proud; your terming
Them Deities make them forget there frailty,
Calling them Mistresses, you teach them disobedience, Signior Honorio:
You have my voice, if she is mine, she is mine
To dispose.

Doubt not her just obedience, she will comply
In every thing she can; but Tyrant love
Does so our reason and our will surmount,
It makes all ties besides of no account.

Allow Girls reason, and will! that were fine in faith.

I see you are busy Sir, I Will take my leave.

Who's that, Furfante?

Stay but a Minute, and I Will wait upon you,
In the mean time, consider of the business.

Should I refuse, he would fight with me himself,
Though I perform nothing I Will promise fair.

Does he turn this way yet?

He does, speak aloud, for he is at some distance.

Signior Buggio, my old acquaintance!
I protest I saw you not.

He may believe him, for he has been
Blind these five years.

Your Age excuses you.

I am not wont to make such gross mistakes.

Thanks to my Eyes, and your Ears.

Old as I am, these Eyes will serve me without spectacles.

As well as with them.

I Have heard, you have that sense so perfect,
That you can see the point of a Needle
At twelve score.

Then Signior Buggio, you have heard a truth.

He neither cares to hear, nor speak one.

Son Honorio.

That Title honors me, and revives my hopes.

Hopes! I Will have 'em certainties, the day
Appointed, and that quickly too.

You speak the Language of the Gods, prepare
My Arabella for a free consent,
And Hymen shall soon make us one.

Say no more, I Will have't dispatched
To morrow, the privater, the better.

For his Purse.

Fursante!

This suddenness surprises me,
But old men do all by fits.
And I will sooner lose my life
Than this blessed opportunity.

I hope you will wait upon your friend to morrow.

I sooner may neglect my self than him.

You have considered my proposal?

I have, and with a double joy receive
The honor, as vindicator both of my same,
And truth.

You Will approve your self a worthy Gentleman.
The Place is Pantalonies Grove, the hour Six.

I understand you Sir. -- If I observe
Either time or place, I Will be fley'd, and
Have Vellum made of my Hide for Historians
T^ write authentic History -- your Servant Sir.

A word, you seemed at first to intimate
Somewhat concerning my Arabella.

True, I did -- But --

Mince not the matter, this old man's suddenness
Does justly give me cause of jealousy,
Which we esteem high wisdoms sentinel,
Cause it alar'ms fear, and straight awakes
Suspending doubt, which actions wisely stay
'Till discreet reason can prepare their way.

I shall so claw your wisdom.

Dear Buggio, be particular in what
Your have did make appear of some concern.

Yes, and have my Throat cut for my labor,
Sure, I shall learn more wit.

Nay, how you play the Tyrant! that Friendship's
Poor, which danger can affright,
And he loves little cannot forgive his Friend
When 'twas not he, but's Passion did offend.

The danger, which I fear's to incur your hate;
Yet that I Will wave, with all the interest
Of divine Friendship, rather than conceal
Ought that may affront your love or honor.

Thou will oblige me to Eternity.

In short, I saw your Arabella, Signior,
With young Amante on the Grand Canale
In a Felucca rowing toward Leghorn,
Adorned with all the Gallantries of Art,
Harmonious Music entertained her Ear,
Perfumes her smell, which much enriched the Air,
A Banquet and delicious Wines her taste,
Whilst he appeared the object of her Eye,
And pleased her more than that variety.

Hell, and Devils! Art thou sure 'twas he?

As sure -- What? Do thou take me for an Atheist?
Have I any Faith? have I any Eyes?

Enough -- you will not fail at Six.

I Will sooner fail my Grannam on her Deathbed,
When she is bestowing Legacies.

Were not Constantius injuries sufficient
But thou must wound more near, and having struck
My Honor, must destroy my Love, and wound
A Chasti^y my Soul did glory in?
Thy injuries confound my patience
And revenge, and make me think Heaven unjust,
That gave thee so much power to offend,
And but one life to make me satisfaction;
But I Will denounce a War against thy blood,
And thence proceed to thy affinities.
Nor shall my vengeance slacken, much less end,
Whilst thou have left, a Kinsman or a Friend.

Our agreement's this, if this Damsel of sixscore
And odd, be worth the sums you talk off,
And will marry me, I am to procure my
Niece Arabella's Company at my house, and
Make you a Collation; if it do not sccceed
you forfeit two hundred Crowns.

You have an exact memory. View now
The Fabric.

It looks like an old ruin of Egypt.

Or rather like a relic of the Flood;
Sure it was built in the In^ancy of time,
Before the World was acquainted with proportion,
Or Architectu^e.

Knock, I long to survey the Inhabitants
Of this Monument, if she be rich enough
'Twill make amends.

Nay, you must expect nothing but antiquity:
Her Parlour will appear like a Brokers shop,
Every Stool of a several Parish.
But here comes her general Officer -- I must
Dispatch him Ambassador to his Lady,
Before I can proceed with my description.

This is some Egyptian Mummy preserved
By a petrifying Vapor, he moves as if he
Had no Soul.
What strange African Monster's that?

A moveable suitable to her other appurtenances.
But to my description; The Cushions in her
Windows look by the Anti que Embroidery
Like Relics saved at the Sack of Jerusalem,
And the Velvet of the Couch like an High
Priests Cope, that had lay'n buried nine Ages.

If she be parallel to these, I shall be VViv'd.

I fear she will prove the greater antiquity.

Good Gold, fortify my Stomach strongly.

But she is rich, that is all thou car'st for.

True, in being so, she is all, All I can wish.

And here returns our Sanco-panco, Porter,
Usher, Steward, Butler, Coachman, or what
You please, to conduct you to your Indies.

After my Mistresses hearty commendations
Presented unto you.

'Slife, he is her Secretary too, and is directing
A Letter of thanks for a Country Cake.

My Mistress bid me notify her intentions
Are to see you.

She can see yet, that is some comfort.
Good Sir Lancelot, do your Office, and Marshal us.

I shall show you up to my Mistresses Chamber.

Now if I can but obtain her.

Fear nothing, pray for a good Stomach,
Say Grace, and fall too.

Unless you call upon your Apron-strings
For some device, that may confine him home,
You Will loose a Brother, and a Servant, Lady.

Are you to be his Second?

Madam I ever used to appear first
In these Encounters, but my respect to you --

I shall ever own the Obligation.

You Are most obliging, it is a pious work;
You will prevent the direst Massacre

I doubt not but I shall persuade my Brother*

I wish you may, for your fair sake I wish it,
Else never expect to see a Brother more:
For my own part, I think that I can die
As decently as another;
And sell my life too, at as dear a rate
As any flesh alive, for all their Guns,
Petars, Grenades, and Demi culverings,

Heaven bless us.

Madam, you are fore-warned, I must prepare,
I mean for mischief, and to bro^ch new lies.

His words are terrible, should this be true;
I lose at once a Lover, and a Brother.
It Is safe to fear the worst, some way ^'le prove
To save their lives, 'altho I lose their Love.

TEll me thy Name, and Parentage.

My name is Infortunio, for my Birth,
I claim an honest, but no high descent,
A Shepherds Son in Sicily.

Infortunio!

A Name which answers my misfortunes, Madam.

Alas thy face does show the petty griefs
Thy Age has undergone, the Sun did broil
Or the cold Air did sometimes make thee quake,
Or hunger tyrannized for want of break* fast
Upon thy empty Stomach: can thou sing?

According to our Rural way I can.

Pretty Boy! Prithee be not so bashful,
But begin.

If love enjoy'd's the greatest bli^e
A mortal ^an sustain,
The greatest pain
Must be the contrary to this,
Cruel disdain.
No Passion's harder to be born,
Than Love, when it is repaid with scorn.
I Would rather have my Love untrue
And given to flattery,
Then should I be
So happy as to have him sue
For Love to me.
And if his fal^hood prove too great,
At pleasure sound the first retreat.
But when men the advantage have
To show the first disdain
They thereby gain
The Privilege to kill, or save,
Increase our pain,
And make us Perish by their scorn,
Or live by smiles, like ^assals born.
How happy is this Boy, who sings his Aires,
And makes his pastime out of others cares!
Ah that I were as ignorant as he,
He knows no love, therefore no misery,
But Women are too apt (heaven knows) to learn,
To wish, to blush, and next to have concern.

Yonder Is my young Mistress, Sir.

Lead me to her, what Company?

Only a Page, a little Youth.

A very pretty Youth.

Of a black, as e're you saw.

Yes, yes, I see that, a pretty Moor.

Is he mad, or blind, or both?

He Is blind, and mad, and both.

These are but shifts, Apron-string policies,
No more, it is my command, show your obedience.
You have not seen Garbato lately?

You did command the contrary, and I obeyed.

It well became your duty --
He Will be so wise I hope t'absent himself,
His entertainment shall not incite him hither,
Let Beggars marry in their Tribe, and so
Maintain their race, I must have you prepare
To be the rich Honorio's Bride.

Dear Sir --

Nay no reply, your warning's short, I Will see
You married my self to morrow Morning.

He talks of seeing still, where are his Eyes?

Can not perceive, they are always in his Mouth.

You mistake, his sight's there, his eyes
Are in his head.

Here, take this Purse, and see you fit your self.

What for a Sepulcher?

A Bridal Bed, dear Madam.

'T were less injurious to wish a Tomb.

I Am glad she hates him yet, there is some hope le^t,
If my poor stars prove kind, however I Will
Aid them.
Madam, so strange a sadness clouds your Soul
As would move pity in a senseless Statue,
Therefore impute it not to impudence,
If in compassion of your miseries,
I proffer my poor service to persuade
Honorio to forsake your Love, and leave you
To your choice.

Thou speak a blessing rather to be wished,
Than hoped for, or obtained.

Be not distrustful.
You know not how my innocence can plead,
Armed with your cause; if he has any pity,
I Will use such soft and tender language to him
As shall dissolve his soul into compassion.

Thou have indeed a moving language Boy,
And thy looks, with me, have power to persuade
Beyond the Charms and Tropes of Rhetoric.
May they with him find equal grace, and Power.
Tell him my heart, and love, was pre-dispos'd;
That it is not Pride, but Love, refuses him;
Bid him not take it ill, that I am constant,
For Death to me is welcomer than change:
That if he ceases to prosecute my fate
He will deserve my pity, and such Love
As gratitude, and honor can dispense.
But if he will persist my dreadful'st hate,
That from my Love he will at such distance be
He scarcely will be worth my Charity.

When he knows this, he will surely blame his Love,
And straight endeavor to suppress his flame.
But I wrong your service by deserring it.

Whilst he employes his richest eloquence
In mitigation of Honorio's Love,
I must make use of my own diligence
To find Garbato and discover to him
The hasty rigor of my Fathers Will*
I am informed he often does frequent
My Uncles House, but upon what design
I cannot surmise, unless he hope from thence
To reap advantage to our love:
However boldly, I Will adventure there,
She should fear naught, 'has every thing to fear.

As she is set together, she appears
Reasonably handsome.

Like the grave Governess of a Roman Bawdy House,
But when she is disjoynted, like a new dissected
Anatomy, then tell me thy opinion.

I warrant you, a gilded Pill will down.
But did observe her Conscience, how 'twas spiced?

Like a Wassal bowl, or a pepper posset, it bit again.
She Is not like our Shopkeepers, that vent their
Wares by a false light, she will have you survey
The Commodity well, that you may not repent
The bargain.

Blame her not, she is honest and kind.

As Cats when they first grow proud, all her
Caresses will consist in scratching, and like
The Russian Lasses, she must be basted, to be
Made sensible of thy kindness.

The Woman's well, considering her Wealth.

I fear thou wilt scarce like her when thou
Have seen her imperfections.

Why, are they so horrid?

Faith I know not, but the Ceremony gives
Much of Terror -- she is made of several
Loose Parcells, that is certain; and to have an
Arm taken off, turn into a Cats paw; her
Nose convert to a Swines Snout, her Periwig
To Hares, and her Legs to Greyhounds to course
Them, would it not startle thee?

Thou art as whimsical as a Court Lady
Studying of new fashions, I cannot imagine.
Half these deformities.

May she prove the Figure of Helen! or rather
May her wealth make her appear so!
My dear Amante, it is above an Age,
Since I had last the happiness to see you.

Perhaps you will wish you had not seen me now.

You wrong our Friendship much; your reason Sir?

Dismiss that Gentleman, and I Will inform you.

I shall see you at my lodging.

In time to wait upon you to the party.

Be sure you don't forget.

You know my forfeit. Now Friend I am yours.

You knew my Love once to Constantia.

And have lamented often, the change.

That Crime must be imputed Sir to Love,
Or beauty which commands it; however now
I am summoned to answer it with my Sword.

I thought Constantia had prevailed upon
Her Brothers rage, to let it sleep.

'T was so believed, and that she had consigned
His fury by an Oath; I must avow
Her pity therein did affect me much,
For I was loath to justify a Crime
Love made me so unwillingly commit.

What Is the occasion then of this new quarrel?

I know not well, but he seems to charge me
With fresh injuries, which I averring false,
He called me Coward, thy Friend Amante Coward.

Just Gods! and when do you Combat him?

Immediately, if you but honor me so far,
As to appear my second*

You know you may command me.

It Is time we did attend him.

Away, this Arm unto my Sword shall lend
A double vigor to revenge my Friend.

Now that my Brother's safe, my next design
Must be, how to secure his same, for honor
To a Cavaleer of his Complexion
Is of more dear concern by far than life:
It Is an hard Task, yet what I want in Art
My Courage shall supply, for I Am all heart:
I heard some tread, I will obscure a while.

The Coast is clear, and I Have time to invent
Some delicate Romance, a fine-spun lie
To please my fancy, and to save my bones,
Should fair Constantia miss of her design
To stay Honorio.

He speaks of me, I Will listen nearer.

If he come first Amante's very sick*
And sent a Messenger to make excuse.
But if Amante on Honorio's behalf,
I Will make submission.

Base* Slave!

And beg a pardon for the injuries
He did him: oh delicate, dainty lies!
How you tickle, and delate my Genius!
There is no Paradise, but in Romance.

What a strange Fellow's this? yet to me
I fear his Story was too true, for see
Amante comes.

Now for a dainty fancy to make Fools --

We are in time I see, here is only Buggio,
And without a Sword.

Oh he is a Man of peace.

He should be a Conjurer by his Guess.

It Is time I show my self.

Noble Gallants, Signior Honorio --

Honorio! If any here have ought
To say against him, I appear his Champion,
And in the just defense of his true Honor
Oppose my Innocence to your rude Swords.

She has spoiled the rarest Fable brain e're
Gave being to -- Cursed Woman --

Is not this Constantia?

The same.

Yes it is ^he same, the same Constantia;
I would you were the same Amante too!
But wherefore should I wish you so much ill?
No, prosper in your Love, and set in me
A period to your hate.

How much I prize your life, the Gods bear witness.

How little you esteem my love, this heart
Can witness; yet tell me, false, and cruel,
How many new vexations you design me?
You Have robbed my heart of Love, my life of peace,
And now pursue my sole surviving comfort,
My Brothers life.

Alas I pity your misfortunes Madam,
And own my self unworthy of your Love,
Vil'd and inconstant;
But for your Brother as he made the strife,
It Is justice he should answer't with his life.

His life! can nothing else obtain his peace?

Balance my injuries, and be you Judge*
He has reproached me with a Cowards name,
And with much baseness urged me to the Field,
Himself not daring as a Gentleman to meet
Me here, or give me satisfaction.

Suspend your sentence till you understand*
By what necessity he is detained,
I Have locked him up, and am come here my self
To make you Friends, or else supply his Room,
If we must fight, come on,
Yet sure you will gain
But small repute, to kill a Maid (...) slain
By Love before, whose valor will appear,
More in her tongue than hand, most in a Tear.

My heart dissolves, I shall forget my wrong^.

Friend, let me intercede, who can deny
A Lady pleading with a weeping Eye?
'T was for her sake Honorio did forgive
Your change in Love, for her sake let him live.

I am content, we are on an even score*
Besides it is as little as I can do
In satisfaction for my wrongs to you.

This is a relic of some kindness yet,
But once your love, and vows did promise more,
I now must study to forget both them, and you,
Farewell for ever.

She Is passionate.

She Has reason for it, her injuries would vex
The strongest Patience of that Noble Sex.

Sister! Constantia, Sister! sure she is deaf,
Or some infectious Vapor makes her mad
To lock me up thus; Curse of her design!
My honor's wounded to Eternity,
But how the Devil she should come to hear
Of our appointment is beyond my brains
Or reason to conceive. Hell take her care!
She kills my honor to preserve my life;
And who can say she has not destroyed her own,
And made me fast to play at loose her self?
Unto its Center I will sift her heart,
Level a Prospect to her very soul,
But I will know her thoughts, her hidden thoughts,
I Have made a passage through three locks already,
This is beyond my skill, or strength to force.
It Is almost Night, I Will call on yonder Boy.

This certainly must be Honorio's House.

Youth, kind Youth.

It Is he! Pray what is your pleasure?

Good Youth step to the adjacent street
And fetch a Smith; my Family are gone,
To the festival, and locked me in.

'Twill be a kindness to my self,
For I have business with you.

Prithee dear Boy dispatch, I long to hear it.

I Will bring you straight your freedom.

Arabella not come home, and night!

When is it other with him? the Sun
Is half an hour high Sir.

Yes, yes, I think it be.

He peakes into the Element
Like an Astrologer, that picks out
Good Stars for others, and unlucky ones
For himself.

No, no, the Sun is not so high.

You might swear it, could you see the Candles.

It Is just a quarter high, or there about.

You are more than three quarters blind.

But that is Night in a manner.

Blindness is always Night in a manner,

What Is that you say Sirrah of good Manners?

Not I Sir, I had never any to talk of.

Nay, you're a saucy Knave, did Arabella
Take any body with her?

No, Sir, ^he was loath to promote the Cook-maid,
And my Livery was sick of a Rupture.

Did she say nothing?

She were not a Woman then; she told me all
Her Wedding Intrigues, but her tongue went
So merrily, and my memory was such a Jade
We could not keep pace.

If she be gone about her marriage necessaries
She will not be long, come let us about her
Preparations here at home.

We are like to have wonderful doings, and much
Sobriety; our Wine will come up in Physical
Viols, and we shall drink it out of Acorns.

Are the provisions come?

Yes Sir, Coleworts in abundance, Lettice, Anchovies,
And Mushroomes, the Feast will make a rare
Grand Salade.

No flesh Varlet?

A pair of Pigeons, half a dozen of La^^s, a
Monstrous Quail, and as much Butchers meat
As a pair of Mice yoked to a Peascod can
Conveniently draw.

You think you are in England to clog your stomach
With Buttock Beef.

Would mine were a Porter, upon condition
It bore no worse a burden.

Be content Rascal, thou sha^^ swefeit on
Macharoni, and Vermicelli.

A Pox of your Minestras, give me Beef.

Just like a Felon by his guilt pursued
I Have traced the Streets; for every little noise
Begets new terrors, and my erring fancy
Frames out of nothing, objects to affright me.
But soft, I hear some footing.

It Is very late, for every one's a Bed
Except some Lovers, who do serenade
Their Mistresses, no Smith can I prevail with;
They tell me that ^tis time to rest* but I
Can meet with no such season.

This Youth is as timorous, as I.

That' voice should be Constantias.

He named, me, I am ^ost.

Madam Constantia.

Protect me sacred Innocence! I know you not,
What are you?

A Friend, and yet unknown.

I do not cove^ new acquaintances.

Fear not, I was desired by Honorio,
(Locked up through some mistake of his Domestics)
'To fetch a Smith.

I hope you have sent none, I have the Keys.

I have not, for surfeited with this days Feast,
They went, I think, all drunk to bed, sooner
At least than usually.

I shall perform their Office.

Nay I must attend you.

Excuse ^our self the trouble, and my modesty
The Guilt of being seen with you so late.

I am too young for such a jealousy.
Besides I have a message to your Brother.

D^^e^ it till the Morning; now it is late.

It does require a more quick dispatch.

I cannot shift him off, what shall I do?
'T were madness to return, to stay here worse
I Will then rely upon my Virtues force.

SIster, Ple ^anvafs your affair at leisure,
And as you ^atisfie my doubts,
Conclude your guilt, or innocence.

My Virtue Sir dare suffer any Test.

I do both wish, and hope it, now thy message.

Y' are to resolve me a short question first.

Willingly, proceed.

Do you entirely love fair Arabella?

Do I love honor, life, or health? she is more,
Commands my soul, governs my heart.

She that has all the power you confess,
Has sent you a Command.

Which I Will obey more joyfully, than Slaves
Receive their liberties, speak thy command.

It Is to leave loving her.

Cease to Jove her! I tell thee cruel youth
I must first cease to live.

Behold the truth of men! did you not say
She swayed your heart, yet see if you will obey.

You must distinguish Boy, if she by love
(As that is her only Title) sway my heart*
I am no longer bound to an obedience,
Than whilst her high commands suit with that love:
But when she waves that right, and bids it cease,
I justly disobey, her hate, not her.
For if a Monarch should command me kill him*
VVere't not in me a Treason to obey?
Surely it were, nor can my Inconstancy,
'Cause she commands it, a Iess Treason be.

He argues cunningly -- But you will appear
A double Traitor, both to her, and love,
If you obey not, for on this command
Depends her love, and life.

I understand you not, explain your self.

Sir, I shall both explain my self, and her.
Love gives her to Garbato, she would have you
Cease your false claim, and let him have his due.

My answer Boy, shall be as home, and brief.
Her duty makes he^ mine, and I Would have her
Banish my Rival, and my Love prefer.

It rests in you to mitigate her Crime,
Her Father too with duty may dispense,
But there are none, when mutual vows are knit
Can cancel Love, till death determine it.
Is she contracted then?

Less could not disingage her from her duty.

Tell her I shall not discompose her peace,
Nor long I fear survive her cruelty.

Oh that he had but this concern for me!

Having delivered this short message to her,
Obtain her leave to visit me again:
Methinks your Faces have such sweet resemblance
I could delude my Passion, and adore
In thee my Arabella.

I will not fail to visit you.

Do my kind Boy, and then we'll weep together,
And sigh, and sing grief to a Lethargy,
Shall we not Boy?

You shall command me any thing.

So, thanks to my happy fate, he is fast again,
And thinks it wants three hours yet of day,
What a Rogue was I to abuse a poor blind Man
Thus? by making him believe 't Night, and that
His Daug^ter's returned, when she is as far from
Being visible as the Motion of time on a Dial.

Where Is thy Master?

Measuring his length, upon a Feather-bed, a sleep,

This Fellow has got my faculty, and lies extempore*
The Sun is mounted in the Meridian.

But I persuaded my Master it was not full East.

Delicate Varlet, I could kiss thee, did he lend faith?

Like a young Mercer, who had never been deceived
By a Court Customer; he believed most religiously.

As many do by an implicit faith.
But how goes the Wedding forward?

As honest Men thrive, and Crabs crawl, backwards,
Backwards -- the Bride's fled Sir.

Escaped!

Like a Canary Bird, fled to her Country.

What Province is that?

A Place most Virgins delight in, their
Lovers bosom.

You Are a rare Rogue, does the old Man
Know it?

He dreams as little of it as a Thief of the
Gallows, whilst he is committing Burglary.

Does he not miss her?

Yesternight he did, but now thinks her safe
At home between flaxen.

Thou mean a Bed, did tell him so?

I did a little impose upon his faith.

Sweet Rascal, let me hug thee, thou
May in time grow up a Mr.

In the Art of lying.

The Noble Science Varler.

But now to make this good when he wakes
Would be a Masterpiece.

Trust to these brains and I Will secure thee,
We'll persuade him he slept two days,
And dreamed a third.

And I have such a quickening Mornings draught.

Will it exalt the Genius?

To the fifth Region.

Let Us in, and taste it Boy; may it inspire
Our Sculls with fancy, and our Noses fire.

I Will neither meddle, nor make with you that is flat;
I cannot answer't to my Brother.

Prithee change humors; As he pretends to see,
And sees not, seem you blind though you see.

I Have been blind too long, when she came, she
Would but speak a Word* and straight return.

But having weighed my Fathers temper since,
(Which as you know is highly passiona^e)
I dare not tempt his fury by my presence
Till by some Friend I mediate my peace.

Nor can I think it safe; she ought to be
Of some concern to you; you are her Uncle.

I cannot go with her now, were she my Mother.
You know my concern.

Let her (...) here till our return.

Not I, carry her where you please, I will not be
Known I ever saw her.

Then I must wait her home, all places else
Will be injurious to her ^ame.

You promised to attend me to the VVidow.

And you to me a Treat, of which your
Niece was to partake.

And will perform it.

Very like, and grutch your Niece a poor
Days habitation.

Well Signior, you shall ^ee the contrary
^'le hazard for your sakes, my Brothers love,
Niece you shall stay a week and welcome.

This favor will oblige me still to serve you.

But since I hazard for your sakes a Brother's
Love, I hope you will spare my Purse
In the entertainment.

Most willingly, and if our stay be long*
Pay for our Diets too, at your own rate.

We shall not disagree, so, here is profit,
My Widow, and my Niece are at distance
With her Father, all makes for me, our time
Draws near.

I Will wait upon you.
Though we have gained a breathing time
For love.
And fortune seems to applaud our enterview,
Yet still my timorous concerns for thee
Grow strong upon me, and allay my Joys.

Let Us not destroy our present happiness
With fears of what may happen, leav't
To time.
Let Fathers rage, and fate denounce our ruin.
Yet-whil'st we Love, and can thus breath
Our Vows,
Into each others breasts, what can impair
Our real happiness?

Whilst you continue thus, fortune may show
Her teeth, but never bite us -- But I forget.
Your Uncle -- like of my soul! farewell.

So dying Bodies with their Spirits part,
So Virgins to their Ravishers do yield
Their honors up, with such a dying smart
Does wounded honor often forsake the Field,
As I Garbato's sight, till whose return,
My heart seems dead, my body as its urn.

And how do I become the Petticoat?

As a Thief the Gallows, admirably well.

If I can but counterfeit a Voice, between
Laughing and crying, a right Woman's voice;
I am past discovery to a blind Man.

Study Pythagoras, and transform thy self to
A Parsons Pig, that squeak will do it.

No I will speak like a Bakers Widow
Kneading of Cake-bread for her Husbands Funeral.

Either will serve with the help of my faculty.
But what Dandiprat's this?

A Pillow Querister, that sings my Lady a sleep.

And after plays with her Lips to make
Her Dream of kisses.

Kisses are loves earnest before they seal
The bargain, but if we don't feal his Lips,
Our design will be reduced to its first principle,
Nothing.

Fear not, we'll make him as silent as a Chamber
Maid in her Lords bed, when her Lady lies over her.

Or she under him, the Simile will hold both ways.

Where Is my Lady? ha, ha, ha, I cannot forbear
Laughing whilst I look on him.

You might show better manners Sirrah.

What, to a Fool?

To your Lady, 'sdeath are you blind?

I were blind indeed to mistake a Baboon
For a Phoenix.

I wonder Madam, you will keep such a Jack-sawce

I must have him corrected,

This is rare fooling.

He Is beyond drunk, mad, or bewitched.

These impudent Fellows are able to outface
Truth, and make her fly the Dukedom.

Nay you must not enter there.

What do they mean? I begin to fear them,
For certainly they are extremely drunk;
Furfante, without fooling, where is my Lady?

Thou saucy impudence.

I wonder Madam that you don't discharge him.

Though Furfante plays the Rogue, the other
Seems a sober Gentleman.

That Is not your way Sirrah, get y'out of my Doors.

How the Boy stares! do you not hear your Lady?

I hear a saucy Coxcomb.

Furfante, Arabella, Furfante.

My Master comes, what shall we do?
This Boy will ruin us.

Let me alone to charm him, I Will make
Him believe the Devil walks above ground.

Are none of my Knaves within?
Or is my Daughter deaf -- Furfante!

Your pleasure Sir.

Did you not hear me call?

I was so taken up with grief for my young Mistress.

Why what of her?

Alas poor Gentlewoman, she has wept her Eyes out.

Wept! for what?

Her Lover Signior Honorio who should have made
Her a Woman, with her own consent Sir.

'Sdeath, what of him?

Why Sir, he has disappointed her expectation;
He is not come according to promise, and
She poor Bride, sits yon^^^ blubbering*
Her Eyes out.

Foolish Girl! it is early, he will come, fear not.

It Is rather growing late Sir.

It Is breakfast time with thee.

That Is a season I never was acquainted with
Since I knew your Worship, but if you please
It Is dinner time.

How Rogue! are we not newly up?

You may take your ease, but we under -- Officers
Of the Family, rose six hours ago.
Signior Buggio has been here these three hours.

How! Signior Buggio, here?

Your Servant Signior.

You Are welcome Sir, it is late it seems.
I wonder the Bridegroom comes not.

It Is past twelve half an hour.

He Is mad too, damnably mad, or drunk.
Why, I am but newly up.

That Is no nows to me Sir, we have
Plied you these four hours with hot Clothes,
Till at last you began to groan, and we
Believed it but a deep sleep.

Did I appear so insensible?

As if you had been an Alabaster
Figure, for your own Tomb.

It Is strange, I feel my self well, and lusty.

I Am sure we pinched you till our Fingers
Ak'd, and pulled you by the Nose till the
Gristle cracked, and made us fear the
Bridg-fall, yet all this while we saw
No sign of life.

No sign of life! how my heart fails me?

He looks as if he would faint with imagination.

Nay I find I was very ill.

I never saw a Man nearer's grave, and live.

I believe it, for my heart aches yet, I feel
A' strange pricking. Hem, a hem -- But
Where Is my Daughter?

There Is a second affiction too -- the poor
Soul's undone.

Undone! the Gods forbid!

In her honor Sir, Honorio's gone to travel.

My Wit shall teach me silence.

Base Villain, to forsake my Daughter thus!
And cheat my good opinion of his worth;
But it is not Germany, nor all the World*
Can hide his shame, though it secures him.

It may prove false, all are not truths we hear.

However Sir he cannot be true to me,
Nor to my Child, the hour's long since past
He promised to be here, and make her his.

He Is rarely wrought, there is no Policy
Comparable to lying, and therefore I Will lie,
And tell lies in this corner abundantly;
That is, counterfeit a Passion for my dear Honorio.

Poor Girl! thy Passion made a better choice,
Than my too avaricious care; Gaxbato's love
Might have made thee more happy.

This makes for Arabella.

But Poverty's no Virtue doubting Fool.

And blind Coxcomb to boot.

It Is good.
Since Manners are uncertain, we make sure*
Of Gold, a Mineral that will endure.

How small a time can age be generous!
But it is not strange; old Men are near the Grave,
And therefore care not how much earth they have.

Your Daughter's full of grief, you would do well
To comfort her.

If I could find her, this Rogue Furfante's
Still out oth' way, and I dare not call, for fear
Of discovering my imperfections.

Sir you forget, your Daughter sits younder
The most forlorn.

I see her well enough, but she is a counterfeit.

The liker her Father.

And though she seigns a grief, loves secretly Garbato.

I may cry my Eyes out for him, a loving
Father I have.

Arabella.

Sir.

So I Will follow the voice, it came from
Yonder Corner, she is not here.

How the blind Man's puzzled?

Why Arabella.

Your pleasure Sir.

My Ears ^have failed, she is at the other end,
I Will call her to me, and save my credit yet,
Must I call twenty times? why come you not?

Sure this Man has suffered a mutation of
Sense, his Eyes feel, and his fingers see.

These Rogues make sport able to kill the
Weeping Philosopher with laughter.

Poor Arabella, come forget him Child.

No sooner forced my heart to obedience Sir,
Begin to love him, but I must lose him, oh ho.

This is not altogether counterfeit,
For she has altered much her voice with grieving.
As your obedience did first force your love
To this inconstant Man, so my commands
Do now require a change, forget him Girl.

This will be happy news to Arabella
Could I but find her out, I shall go near it.

My Arabella, what still blubbering?

Good sweet honey Mistress, you will so grieve my Mr.

That Villain was here all this while.
I shall requite him. Fu^fante.

Sir.

Where stands my Daughter now?

Alas she is gone weeping to her Chamber.

There let her t^ars, discharge her grief,
But Rogue I shall make you more diligent.
Come lead me in.

Oh pray sweet, good Sir.

These lies were carr^ed off with Gallantry,
The Management dilates my spleen, but
I Will not leave him thus, he is so excellent
A Subject for my brains to work on.

My Clara's gone, and I must never more
Expect to see those beauteous Eyes age^,
Nor from the rays of her Divinity,
Receive one comfortable beam.

It Is Amante, I Will listen nearer.

She Is gone for ever, and I Have nothing left
But her poor Aerie name to do^e upon;
Could Heaven be so mercil^ss as to punish
With such severity one ship of Love?
Yet sure it is just since I did falsify
My Vows to the first, I for the second dye.

I cannot apprehend this second love;
Constantia was his first.

But wheresore she, she who was so guiltless
Of all my Crimes should want a Monument,
Be lost to all Posterity, I apprehend not.

All this discourse, is still beyond my reach.

Yet blessed Clara, wherefoe're thou art,
Thou have a Noble shrine within this breast.

The ridle's now explained, it is me he loves.
For when I took this shape, 'twas given out
(By my command) that I was dead, but how,
Or where concealed; yet it seems strange
That I should prove the cause of his Revolt
Who never was yet beloved, perhaps his Vow's
Directed to some other of my name,
I wish it were, I Will satisfy how e're my
Curiosity: ho! Signior Amante, ho!
He Is in an Ecstasy, or else asleep.
Signior Amante.

Ha! Thou blessed Idea, and divinest form
Of that fair Maid my soul adored,
Instruct me where to find her Sepulcher.

He takes me sure for Deaths Ambassador.
I understand you not, no^ know I her.

Do not disguise your message, for I know
Y' are sent by Clara, on some blessed errand.

I Will humor him, it may have good effect.
Sir it is most true I am by Clara sent,
Whose restless soul wanders without content,
Because your Passion does disturb her peace,
If that you love her, you your flame will cease.
Else she as cause must suffer in her urn
For your inconstancy, therefore return
To your first love.

Do I deprive my Clara of her bliss?
Wretch, let thy Crimes accumulate thy torments
Rather than injure her, but both's impossible.
How can she be concerned in my Revolt,
That never knew my change? Heaven's too just:
She can but be an accidental cause,
And if to cause such bad effects were sin,
The Gods themselves are scarcely innocent.

Sanco-panco.

What would your worship forsooth?

Set the Gentlemen some stools Sanco.

Does not thy Stomach begin to wamble?
And Roll like a Ship in a storm?

Thou art too curious, she is rich, and I can
Digest a few imperfections.

As the chattering of her chops like a new beaten
Ape, which, together with the salivation
Of her Nose, makes her kiss as moist, as a
Young Girl, that licks her Lips after stewed Prunes.

Thou art a sworn enemy to old Women.

Mark that Cough; she has had it ever since
The cold she got in Nebuchadnezzars days,
Doing homage to the Golden ^mage.

Gentlemen be pleased to seat your selves.

She strains a complement, as if she were
Costive upon a close stool.

Peace Infidel, Thy whineling Courtship
To Arabella, is ten times more ridiculous.

Gentlemen, the observation of my younger
Days has instructed me from time to time
In the politic secrets of nuptial conjunction,
And of seven Husbands (heaven be praised)
I Have buried in my days, I found but one
That loved me for my self, Gallants, I
Mean for my well-favouredness, and this Man
Was my first, the other Six pretended Love,
But doted on my wealth: Now as my first
Did love for youth, and favor, my last must
Love for age, and comeliness of mind, I mean
Wisdom, and Experience.

I am the Man that would so love, and from
Each antique part of venerable age,
Make youthful pleasures spring joys of mind.
The older the Body, and the more decayed,
The soul's more youthful still and vigorous.
For as a Tenement that is held by time
Whose Walls and Roofes are half con^um'd by age
Enjoyes a freer influence of the Sun
Than Towers newly built, or modern Caves,
So you participate the knowledge of --

Making May Butter.

So you participate the knowledge of --

The wonderful use of a dry dogs-turd.

Pox on thee, peace, the knowledge of --

Stewing Prunes, and Munching Marmalade.

A Pox confound thee, the knowledge of --
The superior Powers.

A rare speech in commendation of --
Arabian Mummy.

Sir I perceive your affection, and how directed
The right way to knowledge and experience.
Your discretion therein, I must tell you, takes
Me much -- uh uh hu -- very much uh hu hu --
Give me a stick of liquorish uh hu uh hu
When you have seen my five imperfections --

I believe one may see the Devil, with less horror.

And like me then, I sha'n't be hard hearted.

I long for trial like a teeming Wench
In an Orchard. Your imperfections will at
Worst appear like foyles to set off
The luster of your soul.

You speak bravely, and I hope will like me,
I Will give you this encouragement, above my
Other Suitors, I like you.

Better than Heaven, by the haste you make there.

And as a secret in your ear, I am better
Worth than twenty thousand Crowns per annum,
Besides some Bags in a Corner.

I value your self only, and hope --

She Will dye, and make you her sole Executor.

Sanco, fetch my dressing Table, and Boxes.

Sure she means to lay her Carcass out in
Parcels, and dispose her Limbs in Legacies;
Or having boxed them severally, indorse
Them to her loving Kinsmen thrice
Removed -- But her implyments are come.

Prithee leave fooling and observe.

How she is set together, as if she moved
By Wires, or Clockworks.

How do you like me now?

How should I like you less, for want of
Such an idle excrement?

Put them in their right Box Sanco.

I Will case them most exactly.

And send them to France for a Pattern
That the Mode may pass into England.

Giv me your opinion now.

Where the soul has such a subtle knowledge
To discern, there needs no corporal light.

Now would she look like the figure of
Homer scanning of Verses, if her Beard
Were but half so venerable.

Where Is my Eye-Box Sanco?

It Is but a blind Eye that cannot
Hit its own Box: how do like her?

As I would like a Treasure on a Dunghill,
I endure the stench of the one, for the lucre
Of the other.

Now view my third imperfection.

She Will be sure to kiss soft, and thou
May venture thy Fingers in her Mouth
Safely.

This is my fourth, consider't well.

This will never be seen in a Night-gear.
Besides it is a charitable age, we frequently
Borrow hair of one another.

But art in earnest? ha?

She Is sufficiently ugly, but still I pray with
The Man, that was carried away by the
Devil, God bless us from worse.

On my Conscience he will go through stitch
And learn by her face to Picture deformity.

Now for her last.

Which he expects with as much curiosity
As a Court Lady the arrival of a new Gown
From Paris.

Sanco, help to untye.

In the name of ugliness, what will she draw
From those parts?

It Is beyond the Wit of Man to imagine.
Look Garbato, -- Look.

Remember she is rich.

The Devil take her and her riches too Marry
A Stump, a Wooden Leg? I Will have flesh
Though never so ugly -- Come away.

Thou will not leave her thus.

Do think I Will engender with Bedstaves,
And beget a generation of Scourg-sticks?
I Will see her whipped first, it is penance enough
To look on her, Don Beelzebub shall
Marry her for me.

Are all my pains come to this? The time may
Come, a rich Widow may be in more reverence,
I warrant he is an Elder Brother, by his ill
Breeding, and less Wit.

No he is a younger Brother forsooth.

A younger Brother! then am I at my last
Prayers, and may dye without my eighth Husband,
And what a lamentable misfortune that will be,
Let all venerable Damsels consider --
Come Sanco, lead me in, and as we go
Let Us both together sing fortune's my foe.

I Hope you will applaud my diligence.

You Are fit to be great Loves Ambassador
So well thou have managed this affair,
First to persuade Honorio cease his claim,
And then to bring me such a just account
How things succeed at home --
What more could I expect, or thou perform?

My duty Madam did oblige this service.
She little guesses at my interest,
Which add the Wings to diligence her self.

Garbato will be ravished with this news,
Dear Boy, how shall I recompense this service?

Your acknowledgments are prodigal rewards;
But Madam if you will enlarge your bounty,
By giving me leave to attend Honorio,
I shall have cause to bless your service.

Why Boy? will that so much advantage thee?

Make me for ever Lady -- for he fancies
Some kind of small resemblance in this face
To your bright beauty; weeds resemble flowers,
And have their use, and virtues too, so I
May palliate this Lovers misery.

Had thou a Sex more suiting to thy face,
Thou might effect a perfect cure. Methinks
(If I forget not my own form,) there is
Enough resemblance for a Lovers flame
To feed upon.

Madam I wish there were --

Another Sex.

No Madam, more resemblance.

That wish alone were foolish, and must end
In a cold friendship, which soon brings disgust.
Thou cou'd'st not marry him.

It should be much against my will then.
Yet I could live with him, and please his fancy
In all the pleasures of true Love.

That Is not done in a song Boy; thou would come short.

I mean I Would serve him with more fidelity
Than any Woman could (except my self)
For I would make it my happiness to please him,
And share a double part of all his griefs.

Thou wou'd'st be wondrous kind.

As your fair self to Signior Garbato.

It Is pity to divide such love, yet for both
Your sakes, I wish thou were a female.

I hope these breeches han't transformed me.
Here comes my Lord, Madam I Will take my leave.

Dear Infortunio I am loath to lose thee,
Yet since Honorio proved so kind to me
As to leave me to my choice, I Will let thee go,
But take this Ring, and wear it for my sake.
My dear Garbato I have news
Will raise thy soul to such a happiness,
Thou Wilt think thy self in Heaven.

Being in thy Company I am so.
Yet I could wish your Uncles absence,
That I migh participate your joys.

His presence is less welcome than storms
Of rain in Harvest.

Speak softly, lest he hear you.

Oh, I could curse him!

Do It like a Politician then, and smile in's face.

Niece Arabella.

You must seem attentive, for he longs
To tell you his adventure.

Were you at leisure I could give you a
Description of the strangest piece of deformity.

I am ever at leisure to hear you.

How soon Women learn to dissemble?

You have seen Mother Shiptons Picture.

Before her Prophecies I think I have.

Just such a prognosticating Nose had this
Sucking Damsel I went to woee, she was
So young that she had not a natural
Tooth in her head.

He Will be as tedious now --

They Are all Ivory, and those died Saffron by
The contagion of her breath, the putrefaction
Whereof might breed a Plague (if the Wind
Sat right) as far as Piemont.

Thou have as little kindness for an Old Woman
As a Hangman for a Thie^, for like him thou
Would Murder the race thou desir'st to advance
Thy fortunes, and live by.

I Would as soon live in my Grandsirs valut, and
Keep Company with the Worms of my dead Ancestors.

I thought Riches would have digested any imperfection.

Except hers, had it been a common ugliness --

As the Battery of the Nose in the French War.

Gold might have excused it.

Or say sh'ad been as wry-mouthed as a Plase.

I would have digested that too, and kissed her less
But to have a surfled Mouth, with too much Nose,
Neither Eyes, nor Hair on her brows,
A Toothless chops, with brisled Chin,
A Pate as bald, as e're was seen,
With parchment hide, and timber Legs,
Would make a Man forswear such Megs,

Will he never have done?

I fear he has but begun yet.

Such accumulated imperfections did I never
Behold, they were beyond the Power of Gold
To qualify.

Then you're quite out of conceit with Gold
And Old Women.

Not whilst the beauty of the Gold will balance
The ugliness of the Woman.

Ha, ha, ha, we'll find you out a handsomer,
Come Arabella, I long to hear thy news.

So they are got together, and think themselves
More happy than the Gods; but soft young Friend,
Since the wealthy hopes of this old VVidow
Were Parents to my kindness, they being vanished
It Is just my love expire into some new advantage
To my self, which ^'le extract from their
Loves; The Plot begins to ripen.

Stay thou blessed shape, Amante bids thee stop;
With what a flying Speed she makes away,
As if displeased I should detain my Clara
So long in Torment by my fruitless passion.
Dear soul of my deceased love, but stay!
Some hold that Saints cannot hear us when we pray.
Then how should she poor Soul, who is in pain
For thy inconstancy? thy prayers are vain.
Yet since I cannot love her less, I Will try
To bear her punishment my self, and dye.

But is she so beautiful withal?

Fresh as Aurora, before the rising Sun.

Cleopatra was a Gypsy to her, and Helen a
Black Dowdy. I Will outlie him if possible.

So fair, and rich?

Richer than Croesus, she spends more in a year
Than his Catholic Majesty has been cozened of
Since the first discovery of America.

This is nothing Sir, they say that Gold is more
Plentiful with her than Mackarel in their
Season, or Cherryes at a Crania a pound.

He Will outdo me in my own Art.

Why knew I not this sooner?

I thought your Worships capering days
Were done, and that you would not have committed
Your grave head to the Matrimonial Noose
At these years.

At these years Knave! do I look so old?

Young as a stripling of eighteen.

Or a Cherry in May, you are green again.

I think I am as fresh, and vigorous as
When I went to School.

Y' are like the year Sir, and every spring renew your youth.

As Girls in Rome, their Maiden^heads.
But you have a Daughter Sir.

What then? because she will pine away with the
Sorrel sickness, and die for Love, must I not marry?

'Twere pity on your life else.

She grieves poor Lady, and sees no body.

She Will be less subject to temptation, I must
Mind my own affairs first.

Save you, good Brother.

Is he come to interrupt us -- dear Buggio
Let Us to the Window.

What have you found your Daughter yet?

Now are we lost, without a double brazen impudence.

Is he mad? found my Daughter! when was
She lost?

Not lost!

He has certainly a design upon your VVidow,
And would keep you off with a Tale
Of your Daughter.

A Tale of a Tub, I Will hear none often, I must
Beg your pardon, I Am engaged about a business
Which concerns me nearly.

You Will hear of your Daughter first?

I hear of her too much, she is above weeping, but I am in haste.

What speedy wings does avarice bestow
On creeping age! he flies that scarce could go.

Weeping in her Chamber! it is strange, nay
It Is impossible, I left her but even now
With Garbato plighting amorous Vows,
His strange behavior much amazes me,
I know not what to think, less what to do,
My whole design to supplant Arabella
And make my self as next a Kin, his heir, is lost.
He Is damned in his belief that she is above,
I Am in a mist, yet sometimes things appear
At a great distance, when they are near at hand.
So painted Prospects do deceive the Eye
And seems remote when on a flat they lie.
So may my fortune, I Will have the other pluck;
If then I fail, a plague of all ill luck.

It was a little piece of charity
To send thee back to be my Comforter.

I wish 'twere in my power; but for me
Who am the very abstract of misfortune
To undertake another grief would prove
Too great a madness, and too little love.

Thou art deceived, sorrows find most relief
In stories like themselves.

Therefore dear Boy
Impart this History, if it be sad
'Twill better suit our thoughts.

I am so young, you cannot well expect
Various adventures from my Childish Love,
Yet old enough for Loves severity,
Who quickly found a passage to my heart,
Which soon adored an object much too fair
Not to be predispos'd of; things of value
Are coveted by all, and I soon found love
Had preingag'd that heart t'another,
Which my soul languish'd for.

Alas poor Boy!

Yet to this grief there did succeed a joy,
For that heart being refused, I thence derived
A fresh, and lingering hope.

Why, that was well.

That seeming heaven did increase my torment.
For I by Nature bashful, had not then the courage
To speak my Love, of which they are ignorant.
And I by consequence must always pine,
Unable to assist my own design.

Thy fate's severe; but it is thy folly Boy
Which makes it so.
But cruel Love so crosses my design,
My Mistress cannot (if she would) be mine.

And it is as much impossible for me
TO express my flame, as it is for her to love:
But if you would please to undertake my cause
I know it would succeed.

I cannot Boy, I Have bound my self by Oath
Never to speak of Love to Woman more.

As from your self, you still may speak for me.

Dear Brother do, I pity his misfortune.

My vow was general concerning Love;
But you are free Constantia.

It Is not a thing for me to undertake,
That always have in love been so succesless.

May we not know her name?

It Is not a Woman that I love,
Yet we a Man and Wise might prove,
If that our hearts could but agree
As well as Sexes sympathy.

This is a kind of a riddle.

But easily unfolded.

Trust mo the unriddling will require some time,
What says Constantia?

My thoughts have been so taken up of late
'Twixt love and grief, that I have lost that art.

It is unworthy either of your thoughts.

The kindness of this Boy does puzle me
For either I mistake him or he loves me,
In an extreme that misbecomes his Sex.
It must be sure some Virgin in disguise.

I must confess you have discovered me,
But you who know so much of love your self
Know best to pity the extremities love has compelled me to.

It Is evident, the riddle does import it.
She loves no Woman, therefore loves a Man,
And if a Man who cannot divine her Sex?
I Will set Constantia to discover all.

In all I can, I will assist your love*
But lest my Brother should unfold too soon
Your Oracle, divert him with a Song.

I never shall henceforth approve
The Deity of Love
Since he could be
So far unjust as to wound me,
And leave my Mistress free.
As if my flame could leave a Print
Upon a heart of flent.
Can flesh and stone
Be ere converted into one,
By my poor flame alone?
Were be a God, he would neither be
Partial to her, nor me,
But by a Dart
Directed into eithers heart
Make both so feel the smart,
That being heated with his subtitle fire
Our loves might make us feel but one desire.
How cravingly he looked upon me now,
As if he had a boon he shamed to ask*
There Is somewhat hid beneath that borrowed shape
I must know more of.

So, let him chew upon the riddle
Till we have ripened our design,
But art thou sure Amante dotes on thee?

Am I sure when the Sun shines it is day?

Then I Will renew my hopes, since his revolt
Is to an object cannot return him love.

Let Us then assist each other in our loves,
I Will use my art to make Amante thine.

The readiest way's to wed thee to Honorio.
For when in thee his amorous hopes are dead,
He Will soon return to the Love from whence he fled.

It should be Clara; yet she is too discreet
To trust her modesty to that disguise,
Yet she is a Woman, and moreover loves,
And few are known Lovers, and wise at once,
It must be she, and I the easy fool
That gave her credir, she might feign the message,
And make false use of Arabella's Name,
If so I Am lost to her, and to her Father,
My honor and my love destroyed at once,
One I may yet reprieve.
But see, Amante! that wound of fame gives
No Precedence to lesser quarrels: then whilst
I prefer my honor, Love, take thou a Sepulcher.

Sure he intends some mischief to himself.
Though I would dye, I Will lend a helping Arm
To save his life, hold, brave Honorio, hold,
Let that reason which I want vanquish
Thy Passion -- kill not thy self.

I do not find an inclination to it*
Though life before was irksom, since I discern
A fitter subject for my Enmity.

I scarcely understand you.

I shall explain my self --
I drew to make your yield me satisfaction
For that dear honor which my Sisters fears
Compelled me lose, when I failed meeting you,
To justify the injurious words I gave you.

Those Injuries Honorio are forgot.

I cannot forgive my Honor such a blot,
In you it is noble to forgive, in me
Should I accept, as great an Infamy.
Honor takes nothing when she is in arrear
Lest what is meant kindness be miscalled a fear.
Therefore Amante if you can afford
Me any favor, let it be your Sword.

As a Present take it; I dare rely
Your honor's too great security
For me to doubt; or should you take this life
'Twou'd ease my grief, and finish all my strife.

My hand is furnished Sir, but if you will part
More nobly with it, present it to my heart.

I Would rather wound my own, and by one blow
Destroy that Friend, whom you would make your foe.

If Friend unto my same, you must confess
What I affirmed was true, and ask my pardon.

If nothing less Sir, can appease your rage,
Than owning my self Coward, Honorio
Must excuse me, though I promised Constantia
To bear an injury beyond man's patience.
Fame never shall report a VVomans tears
Destroyed Amante's honor.
I Would give my life, if live would satisfy;
But dare not Friendship with dishonor buy.

Then draw --

I do, and in as just a cause
As Power when she Executes by Laws.

Stay, to show I don't delight in blood
I Will only urge my Sister might
Return her love, and make but good her claim,
I Will own you by a Friends and Brothers name.

I cannot alas consent, in Clara's grave
(Where e're it is) I have entombed my heart.

But what if she be still alive?

I Will love her till she be disposed of to another.

It must be Clara wandering for my sake
In that disguise, if so, it lies in me
To marrry her, and that may set him free.
But then my Arabella! she may prove
Still undispos'd, my first and dearest Love,
I Will never hazard thee, I am resolved --

To fight --

Or basely be denied.

You shall not find a Coward.

I believe It -- Come on.

So you have drawn the first blood.

I see I have, shall we put up?

No Sir I can as little put up this
As you your Sisters injury; the Coward
Sticks here still.
So, we are on even terms, what say you now?

My Sister's unrevenged.

I do renounce that quarrel as unjust
And will at any time implore her pardon,
As I have often done. Sir you shall see
I can be noble in inconstancy. As for
The other slanders, I pronounce them*
And their Author false.

These are but words*

You shall have deeds to testify I am no Coward,
Nor asperser of a Ladies fame.

Hold, oh hold your hands.

Employ your Swords on us, for that would be
A greater kindness than severitie.
It would destroy our grief, as well as lives
Which in your dangers cruelly survives.

Good Sister give us way --

Madam be resolute, we'll rather fall
As Martyrs to prevent their Funeral.

They shall not constrain us to a misery,
If they will fight, let us agree to dye.

I am content.

Prepare thy Poniard then,
And in our courage let us vie with them.

Hold! you have unarmed me quite.

And conquered me.

Then we may triumph in our Victory.

Triumph! alas what comfort can we find?
Preserving Lovers to be still unkind.

Preserved them! no Constantia they bleed, and faint away.

It Is too true, what is to be done?
Each drop Amante sheds, draws from my heart
A flood, nor is my soul much less concerned
For my dear Brother, oh my misery!
Nature, and Love, do equally contend,
Whom shall I save my Brother, or my Friend?

Madam be comforted; this sacred stone
Has a choice Virtue to stop bleeding wounds,
And send the blood back to the distressed heart.
I Will try it on Honorio.

Oh, ho.

See he revives

But poor Amante labors still beneath the
Pangs of death; oh lend it here.

Then will your Brother faint.

Why let him perish rather than Amante.

Honorio perish! ah, how can you be
So cruel in your foolish charity?
To save a Man so false, and let a Brother
Dye, so good as my Honorio?

Not thine, but Arabella's, Clara.

That sound was most Divine -- Dear Arabella!

What Angels voice pronounced fair Clara's name?

A Wretch you once did love --
Open your Eyes and you at once may see
Your cruel Clara, and kind Constancy.

That beauteous form, is she then in disguise?

Believe her not; she only used this art,
To make your blood return into your heart.
I Am but her Brother Sir.

Then tell me, where
She lives; if dead, show me her Sepulc're.

Within a day, I Will show her you ailve.

I Will strive to live upon that hope.

They begin both to give good signs of a Recovery.

This wound seems almost closed;
Apply the Stone to him, there cannot be found
In Art, or Natures Treasury so good
A stenching Medicine for a stream of blood.

It seems to me miraculous, I find
It strengthens both the body and the mind.
How fares Amante?

Better to see my Friend so near his health.

I am now in Amity with all the World, and find
(I praise the Gods) a sweet recess from love.

My thanks kind Youth, thou do not only give
Me life, but likewise a desire to live,
By assuring me of Clara's recovery.

Wretched Constantia, thou art never thought on.

You Had best retire Sir, the air is cold,
And may offend your wounds.

I thank your care.
Signior Amante come, we'll now be Friends,
Since eithers blood has made too large amends
For all past injuries.

Here take my hand,
And with it a heart devoted to your service:
If you in any thing be disobeyed
Impute the fault to love, and not to Amante.

In every Truce of love I still must be
Like one exempt! we are not to agree.

MAy we give credit to this happiness,
Or do you only tempt us with a bliss,
To try how soon we'll credit what we wish?

It seems unlikely, yet ^'de (...) believe.

What do you take me for* a Fabler* Niece?
I did expect another kind of thanks.

Good Uncle be not angry, we thank you*

Our thanks but shame us Sir; there is none but you
Could have obliged so much.

I did in troth compassionate your loves,
And that compassion urged me to assist you.
What pains I took, and how I pressed my Brother
By prayers, entreaties, and some slender reasons.
Before I could prevail, is not material:
It is enough I compassed my design.
He Will seem for the present enraged at the Match.
And afterward receive you into Grace,
Which in effect's as good as a consent.

Y' have done a charity, becomes a Saint.
Now Arabella you have no excuse,
Your duty being safe.

My blushes do consent, yet I would fain
Be blessed before the Nuptial Rights.

By the Priest you may; but Niece it is in vain*
TO expect your Father's yet.

Be satisfied; I hope we shall not long
Be barred that happiness.

Not six hours I dare pass my word.

If I transgress, it is upon your soore.

Make haste to Church, and here make all things sure.

Never went Lovers to that sacred place
With a more innocent, and pure flame.

My Plot succeeds thus far, to my own wish,
This Match must disinherit her for certain.
And then stand I our houses Candidate.
I Will ^eek my Brother, and so aggravate
His Daughters Crime, that his misgovern'd rage
May hear no reason, nor admit excuse;
But like a Bedlam, furiously before
She makes defense, may turn her out of door.

From Signior Cicco, say thou honest Friend*

Yes forsooth, he is my Master, and a very proper Gentleman,
Though I say it.

Very likely, and he would have leave to visit me, is it not so?

To kiss your hand, and vow himself your adorer.

O fine, he will make a Saint of me.

He may -- for she has preserved her Carcass
Ninety years beyond the course of Nature, and
Kept it by a Miracle from stinking

Of what profession is thy Master Friend?

A Courtier forsooth, he has a good estate of
His own, which he daily improves by a kind of
Facility he has to beg any thing that comes
In his way.

Belike then he is a very thriving Gentleman.

A most resistless Courtier, for he never designs
Any thing, but he obtains it by his importunity.

Have courage Mistress, there is life in a Muscle, if this
Be not another sweetheart, never trust a livery Prophet.

A sweetheart! the word warms at heart
Like a Cup of Muskad ne, commend me to thy Master
Heartily, and tell him tha^ he shall be heartily, heartily
Welcome, with all my heart heartily.

A very hearty commendation.

What do thou think Sanco?

That your capering days are not done yet, you talk
Of your decays, and deformities, but if you have the grace
To keep them to your self, you will pass well enough
In a crowd I warrant you.

Be like I had best change my Method, and make
No more discoveries of my imperfections.

They Will discover themselves fast enough never fear it.
Alas forsooth you were born in a plain dealing Age,
When Men meant honestly, and Virgins were proud
To show a handsome Leg; but now, no dissimulation,
No life. Every deformity is concealed, and every
Perfection set off to advantage.

As how good honest Sanco?

Marry thus, a good Eye sparkles through a Vizard
Mask, whilst the bad features, and worse complexion
Lies concealed, good features are illustrated with
Counterfeit complexions, and good complexions heightened
With black Patches.

Thou art much improved Sanco?

I have not altogether lost my time in your Worships service.

Nay thou art a shrewd clung pated Fellow,
I Will say that for thee

I do pick, and glean now and then some small
Crumbs, and fragments of knowledge out of my continual
Observation.

Marry, and it is very discreetly done Sanco, when
I am married thou shall instruct me in the
Customs and fashions of the present Age, for belike
A Wife is quite another thing than what 'twas in my days.

Marry is it Mistress, for then they stayed at home
To entertain their honest Neighbors, now they
Gad abroad to be entertained by their Wild Gallants.
Then they took a Pride to be thought modest, now,
It Is their^ glory to be thought Modish, the World's
Turned upside down.

Do think I shall ever learn to endure this fashion?

A little use will make it as familiar to you as
Taking of Fees to an old covetous Lawyer, or
Killing to an unskilful Physician.

Then belike I may be brought to a Modish Lady again?

As modish as if you had travailed to Paris for
Your Clothes, or to London for a confident behavior.

And they say your London Ladies are courtly indeed,

But here comes the Gentleman.

Observe him warily Mistress, and seem the whilst
To speak to me; my observa^ion learned that
Trick of a Country Parson, who spoke to the
Congregation, and fixed his Eyes the whilst on a
Handsome VVench.

Is she not a Miracle of Nature, what an Eye's there?

Brighter than the Ottoman Diamond, it fills the Room with luster.

And him with darkness.

Then for a Lip.

I observe that too; the Ruby thence receive its tincture.
Oh but the pretty Mole!

Where Sir? I see none.

A pox on it, I must be prating still before
My time, and shame my self.

I cannot find that Mole, though I have surveyed
Her face most critically.

I mean the form of her face, Nature formed
Hers, and Venus's in one Mould.

How he extols me Sanco? by my holy dame
I have not been so complemented these forty years.

I Am pers^aded that your ^ace, like fashions laid by
Twenty years, begins to grow a la mode.

A very pretty observation.

Old folks they say are twice Children, and you have
Been old enough for that Proverb these twenty
Years, so that by observation you should be much about your prime.

And that may very well be.

I believe your Sciatica is nothing but the Rickets;
And your ach in the Jaws, breeding of teeth, which your
Artificial ones hinder from cutting.

Then belike I may renew my youth again,
I am resolved to fling away these rotten Teeth
And cut my Gums with munching loaf Sugar.

You would do well to buy a Corral.

That is not so good, but I Will eat store of Rabbits
Brains to make me tooth more easily.

I can observe no longer, for I discern such
Excellence, I cannot contain my self,
I must speak to her.

If he could find her out, but I Will assist him.

Fair Strega, and therefore the more fair because

do not disdain the humble flame which spouts --

Which blazes --

Which blazes from a young Lovers heart.

I never was addicted much to scorn.

Now is the rest of his penned speech lost* and
Our Lover in a brown study how to proceed.

If not to scorn, I hope to love.

Well urged old Man how e'^e extempore.

Belike Love is a very comfortable thing,
But it will require debate, if you please
We'll walk in, and confer notes.

You cannot more oblige me.

His speech had like to have ruined all.

He would not be persuaded otherwise,
Come lets in and share the mirth.

My old Ma^ter, cannot move without me.

With what a strange, and yet mysterious art,
Love has entangled, and engaged each heart
Yours to Amante, to fair Clara his,
Hers unto me, what a strange Maze is this?
Mine was entangled too, but since got free
By a rash vow, dislikes that liberty,
Because it cruelly prevents thy peace,
And renders me unable to release
Amante from his flame, by wedding Clara.

Ah that you would but so befriend my love^

I dare not think you wish a happiness,
That I must purchase with so great a Crime.

I would not have you sin, yet I Would fain be
Eased of this load of Love, and misery.
But is there no expedient, no just art
To break a Vow, which else must break my heart?
Not only mine, but loving Clara's too,
And that I Am confident will not much please you.

Not in the least; for I at present find
Such an indifferency to Arabella,
That I had rather oblige Clara's love,
And make Amante capable of thine,
Would my rash vow permit it.

It is not better to dispense one Oath,
Than kill a Mistress and a Sister both?
When by two Sins you equally are pressed,
It is a Virtue sure to choose the least.

But I perceive no such Dil^mma here.
I may preserve my Vow, and you your lives.
But Clara comes I date not trust my self
Lest my Compassion should destroy my Virtue.

I fear your Rhetoric prevails but little
To persuade his lover, since he avoids my presence.

It Is altogether hopeless, he is so constant
To that cursed vow, there is no removing him.

We must find some evasion, some reservation.

But where my Clara? you still cherish hope.
Thoug^ you have naught in Prospect but despair.

That Is the last passion love should entertain.
Weigh but discreetly this perplexive vow,
And the evasion will not seem difficult.
It was if I remember it but rightly,
Never to speak of love to Woman more.

It was, what shadow of hope can you derive from thence?

A certain joy, if nothing else obstruct my happiness.

Find an evasion for that cursed resolve,
And I Will assure your marriage.

Why let him keep his Vow religiously,
And never speak of love to me, or any,
I Will understand his signs, if he will consent
The Priest shall make us one. Besides Constantia
He may write his love, that is not within his Oath.

How dull was I, not to discern it sooner!
It Is evident, plain as the light that shines,
I Will straight convince him of it.

Though y' are still so cruel, and deaf to all my vows,
Yet lend an ear to my sad sufferings.

The Lady that went hence suffers much more
For you, than you can do for me.

Alas, I pity her!

I pity you;
But pity more your base inconstancy.

Impute that crime to love, and beauty Madam:
Since they conspired to betray my heart.
To one far more deserving, now it is fixed.

Like to an exhalation, for a moment.

For ever Madam.

What hope of constancy can there be found
In love, of which inconstancy's the ground?
What truth, when both alike must be untrue?
You in your change, and I in loving you?

She has struck me dumb, yet will not give me time
To answer, or extenuate my Crime,
Or if she had, I could make small defense,
Guilt can but ill dispose with innocence.
But I Will reform, and though I cannot gain
Her love, her good opinion I Will obtain.
Then let her know though once I went astray,
Her brave reproofs has set me in the way.

'^is a strange, solitary house this; None
But an Old Woman to bid us welcome!

I do'nt like my Uncles absence neither

That seems suspicious too: But I applaud
However the design, since it obtained me such a happiness.

I must applaud it too, since it is my fate,
Repentance after Marriage comes too late.
But here my Father comes? I fear too soon.

Your Uncle with him too, nay th^n we 're safe.

What, are you sencel^ss Sir? she has married a Beggar.

And I a Mine; 'twere a hard case if I could not
Afford one Portion; set your heart at rest,
^'me resolved to make this Day a Jubilee.
And I Will begin with my Daughter first, call her,
Furfante, that I may forgive her.

Forgive her! is he possessed?

W^y Sir she is by you.

How strangely I forget my self! oh love,
Love, how thou distractest youth! Arabella.

To him in this humor, and get a blessing.

I hope you are as ready to forgive as you were wont.
That I disobeyed you in my choice
I must confess, but 'twas not till the choice
You made abandoned me, that very Minute
You designed me his Wife.

Thou had more Wit I see than thy old Father,
I do forgive thee Girl, and hope thy Husband
Will make that out in love, he wants in fortune.

How riches alters some Men's tempers!
Oh! I could curse!

My love I hope has been unquestionable,
And by so many Acts confirmed, it needs
No farther proof, let it suffice I married
(On a bare promise of your favor Sir) for her
Own Merits, without least assurance of
Any Portion, which the fair Estate newly
^aln to me by an Uncles death might
Justly challenge

He Is rich too! a Curse on my design, they are
Both ways crossed, in advantage, and revenge.

How the old Man c^urts him now! before
Forgiveness was a savor. Signior Buggio
Your Cake's Dough.

I find I ing a very unprofitable calling.

It may be one day paid Sir with a basting.

Then will I make you my Receiver.

May the Heavens pour down blessing on you.
She shall not want a Portion.

Uncle I thank you for your kind design,
My Father will no doubt declare you his Heir.

Oh, they may laugh, that win.

You Have lost your fortunes both ways, in a
Wife, and an Inheritance.

Yet I Will not cry for the matter, except
It be my Nieces pardon.

Alas, you never injured me.

In thought I did, for I designed thy ruin,
And cannot find an apter recompense,
For having sought to disinherit thee,
Than by the addition for my poor fortune.
I here adopt you mine, and when I dye,
What I possess, is yours.

You are too Noble.

If she be yours, Sir, I must salute her.

Do so good Wife, whilst I give directions
For the invitation of our Wedding Guests.

My duty should have thrown me at your feet
For your dear blessing Madam, had I known,
Y'^ad been my Fathers choice.

How prettily she prattles Sanco!

She called you Madam too in the Court dialect.

Dialect! prithee Sanco make me understand
These fine words.

I Will buy you a Dictionary forsooth, and that
Shall teach you.

A very pretty Word, prithee let me have it.

Be sure none be forgotten.

I Will table them exactly.

Prithee Buggio, do thou assist him.

I shall Sir* Pray one Word --

You mean my Daughter, but she is
Disposed you see, but I Have a Niece, a rich
One for you.

Ha, ha, ha -- he has paid him in his own coin,
Lie, for lie.

Now let us in to entertain our Guests.
This ought to be a double marriage feast.

I must avow, it is highly generous,
But now such actions are not in request,
I know your love to Clara, and suspect it
A cunning Stratagem to sift my heart.

Your thoughts of me Honorio are too mean:
It Is true I have been faulty in my Love,
And made by beauty a too easy Conquest,
But I have fortified my heart with Virtue,
Both against Clara's, and all other Charms,
Except these first, which in Constantia
Surprised, and made a Conquest of my Love.

Let me adore thee, Friend. This noble Act
Will canonize inconstancy, and make it a Virtue.

I wish Constantia receive it so.

She '^ be but too much joy'd, and so will Clara,
For the kind resolve I Have made on her behalf.
See they appear to share the happiness.

Turn not aside your face, for I Am become,
Loves penitent, y' have wrought a perfect cure,
And by your reproof my inconstancy taught*
My Love steady Virtue.

I rejoice in it.
And shall be proud to perfect the good work,
By joining you to fair Constantia.

Your Virtue shall dispose me.

Here Constantia, receive a convert to your Love. Nay
Neither blush nor doubt, he is proof I warrant you.

Against the World.

No beauty now, but yours has power to charm me.

May the Gods still increase your happiness.

I dare believe you. My Joys now are perfect,
And so shall thine be Clara, lend's thy hand,
I here Dispose thee to Honorio;
Love him, he is a Gentleman deserves it.

You Are my Noblest Parent, and have given me
A fresh life of happiness.

Now all is as it should be, but methinks,
Constantia, you presumed too much to dispose
Clara without her own consent.

She knew my heart had done it long before.

Then naught remains, but that we lead to Church,
And there confirm our joys by sacred Rites,
Love Joins our hearts, but it is the Church Unites.

I must implore Constantia's pardon first,
For my so long revolt.

You Are to me in your return more welcome,
Than Reprieves to Malefactors that despair of life.

Say no more, I dare assure your pardon, Love still
Prepares our Joys with bitterness, to make us
Relish them with more delight:
By inconstancy, deluded hopes, and fears,
The wished fruition he at length endears.

You Are strangely merciful.

But who are these?

Sure one is Buggio.

That fatal cause of all our difference?

He is not worth this heat -- let us observe him.

Thou art so whimsical, I tell thee I Will abuse
My Master no longer. Tho^ he be blind, my Mistress has one eye.

Do me this kindness then, say I have lost my memory.

Do you think I Will tell a lie?

It Is not the first.

Not by a thousand. But to tell a lie without
Design, or profit, goes against my conscience.

I must bribe the Rascal, for now Honorio, and
Amante are friends, I perceive a basting coming
Toward me^ unless I can maintain a loss
Of memory, come Furfante* prithee be honest,

Yes and tell a lie gratis, I thank you heartily.

Come here is a Crown.

Well, it is for love of thee, and this.

We heat nothing, prithee let us advance,
I must be upon that Rascals bones.

Stay, his Companion makes toward us.

Signior Cicco lately married to the rich VVidow:
Strega, desires all your Companies at his Wedding supper.

Married! sure this is coupling time why we
Are going to perform that Ceremony, and then
We'll wait upon him.

It falls out happily since we are so unprovided
For the solemnity.

They Will be a rare Comedy of Mirth.

Rather a Masquerade by their odd antique dress.

O^ a French Farce for the extravagancy of
Their humors, the old man conceales his
Infirmities, and ^he takes a Pride in
Manifesting hers.

This is a strange Fellow, he will neither know me,
Nor you, nor ^^ny injury he did us.

I shall revive his memory.

Be patient dear Honorio, your anger here
Is thrown away.

I can assure you Sir he has lost his
Memory above these ten years.

How Slave will you help to outface us too?
Did not I ^ee him within these too days?
And speak with him? this is an impudence
Beyond Imagination.

If y' had seen him within this hour, he can no
More remember you, than the moment he was born.

Nay, prithee Honorio.

Pray be not angry Gentlemen, I have traveled
Far, it may be I had the honor of your
Acquaintance in Peru, Cattai, Mascar, or Mexico,
Or some Clime more remote, I have a brief head
And a short memory.

A very short head Sir, he cannot remember that
He told a truth in all his life.

Why Rogue, Furfante?

This Fellow would be killed.

Or rather kicked, but he is a punishment
Sufficient to himself.

You must forgive him, it is a day of Joy.

Upon Condition he will never tell lie more,
I am content.

That Is the next way to make him
He Will never keep Covenant.

I Will make him tell a truth then, did not
You tell me, like a Rascal, that Amante
Had divulged my Sister was unchaste?

Que dicte vous Mounsieur.

That trick shall not serve you Sirrah, answer
Me directly, and in your own language, or --

It Is very true Sir.

What Is true Rascal, did ever I divulge that scandal?

Not as ^ remember.

Then it is very false Rogue.

However h'as shamed the Devil once.

The injury concerned me most, I pray forgive him.

A Noble Lady, I Will never lie again,
But in thy commendations.

May he deserve your mercy. Now to Church:
Bu^ stay what Musick's this?

As I live, the old couple revelling upon the Piana.

What a mischief it is we are not married now,
That we might Dance.

A frisk or too before, will do no harm.

I thank you Gentlemen,
And hope e're long to wish like joy to you.

'Twill not be much unseasonable now,
For we ate marching to find out the Priest.

I Have one at home shall save you all that labor,
And a slight Supper you shall be welcome to.

We had not best refuse the old Man's kindness,
We shall fare worse at home.

Oh by no means; since fortune made us meet
Thus happily, we'll celebrate this Night to
Gaudy Hymen in a leash of Marriages.

Pray let us fill the Mess.

I beg your pardon Friend, I believed yours
Past the celebration.

But not the consummation.

Every thing in its proper season Sir. Love once
Proposed me Madam for your Bridegroom,
But your commands dismissed my happiness.

I must acknowledge mine your generous gift.

Fortune has made some reparation here.

May you be happier in this Ladies love,
Than possibly you could have been in mine.

So kind a wish deserves my best acknowledgment.

We Truant it too long, let us now make have
To complete all our joys.
You're now my lot, though not at first designed,
Fortune, and Love, dispose of all mankind.

AS in Religion much less time is spent
I^th' practice, than debate, and argument:
So fares it now with Wit, for that is grown
The troublesome dispute of half the Town;
All have it in their Mouths, though few or none
Produce a Piece of true Wit all their own:
Some steal, some buy, and others borrow it,
And when all is done, 'twill hardly pass for Wit,
Unless they form a faction, and engage
(As Bessus did) the Brothers of the Stage,
To give it under hand and seal, that they
Approve the Plot and Language of the Play;
How then should our unknown have any hopes
His Play should pass, who wanted all these props?
He neither had add^^^^ nor Critic Friend
To show him where^ he ai^'ed, or how to mend;
Nor did he use t^^ Poets common Art,
To repeat Scenes at the Coffee-house by heart;
Nor half a year before the Play came forth,
By lending it anticipate its worth;
And by that juggling trust oblige each Wit
To justify his Compliment i't^' ^ it.
No, this came quite a stranger to your view,
And he that writ it means to be so too,
Till your applause have made him freeo'th' Trade,
And then perhaps he will quit his Masquerade.

