WHen Critics come resolved to damn a Muse,
What Wit can please, what Prologue can excuse?
It Is vain endeavor to unblind their eyes;
Of such inveterate force is prejudice,
Poor harmless Plays can draw a party's hate
As if 'twere Revolution of a State:
And with such force your Batteries are engaged,
As if you took the Stage for Mons, besieged.
If in a character a Fool we show,
It Is ten to one it angers some Town Beau;
Or if some boyst 'rous Females Rampant Tricks
That Cuckolds Husbands, and talks Politics,
As Lees part now -- that straight must needs abuse
Some Stickler in the Ladies Coffee House,
Though no Reflection is intended here,
And I dare swear the Poet never was there.
Or if we show the humors of a School
Offending none, Still some will play the Fool;
Some dancing Critic, in despite of Wit,
Shall swear, we do it to offend his Kitt,
And rashly his dull City friend possess,
That our Romps here -- are meant his Babes of Grace;
Though all true Judges no Reflection find,
And nothing but diversion is designed.
The Poet thinks then, finding that this is true,
Implores the assistance of the generous few,
Assuring them they shall diverted be
If the Malcontents will let 'em hear and see:
You all can judge of Plays as well as they
Party as wise, and sure pretend we may
To be as strong too at this time of day.
Thus low then he addresses to you all,
Your favor can his doom proscribed recall
And it is by you that he must stand or fall.
He has done nothing h^re to make 'em foes,
No Worth nor no Opinion does expose,
But only harmless Comic humor shows.
As to the Ladies.
He says, he would not, nor he dares not wrong 'em
There are no Romps nor rampant Wives among 'em,
Nor Jilts; -- yet in some hole should there be one
That will make Lee's or Iiltall's part her own,
Her Hiss beyond applause he must prefer,
A Clap would now more pernicious be from her.

HA, ha, ha, ha, thou art the pleasant'st Fellow --


Nay, prithee suspend thy damned critical Censure till I have told thee the
Plot, and then if thou laugh'st at me


I shall have cause, has --


No gad not unless strength of Judgment, exquisite Wit, admirable Contrivance,
and the rest of the noble Ingredients that qualify a brain for things
extraordinary, can give cause


Very well Sir, we shall judge of that presently; proceed.


Art thou solid then? is thy face set?


Not a line out of order, as grave as a Country Vicar expounding at Catechize:
When do you begin


Thus then, I need not tell thee, to prolong the story, the Extravagancies of
my ungovernable Minority, thy self always being a spectator of 'em, 'tho' no
friend to 'em, nor need I expose my own passionate Inclinations for that
delicious Creature Woman, whose sweet dear bewitching Sex I still cannot repent
adoring, though it has been the utter ruin of my Fortunes, my dear Betty whom I
now live withal, charming me as much in this my worst and lowest Ebb, as when I
was a Flutterer at the Court with Coach and Six and gaudy Equipage


Prithee take my counsel Friend, and do not doze and slumber over thy ruin: I
lately came thou know from the University, and* for self satisfaction must
confess, a great part of my study there was Woman, that dear damned tempting
Sex as thou have called 'em; I made Remarks from Rules of Physiognomy, studied
Complections, knew whether Black or fair were true or false, all Female
Pinaccs, and how much Love would freight 'em; even blinded my own with poring
on black Eyes, to find their subtle motions; and for Noses, I knew all
Natures from the high Roman Arch, to the sharp little turn-up Nose that stands
as if 'twere set in the face to hang one's Hat on


Very well Sir, and what does your learned Worship infer from this?


Now I come to thee; this skill, amongst the rest of that Soul-gaining tribe,
has taught me to observe thy Betty, thy dearest Charmer as thou fondly call'st
her, and though fond love mustle her faults from thee, I can perceive, and
plainly, her jiltish Actions, and must take the freedom of a friend to tell
thee, she is false and does abuse thy Love


Impossible! her gratitude would secure me from such a baseness, if I had no
merit to deserve her; which begging excuse of your severity, I shall not
altogether believe Sir; besides, her beauty and agreeable behavior make such a
large impression on my heart, all other joy is pal'd and unpalla^able, like
Wine uncovered to the Summer Air. She Is all that Luxury could wish to please it

I look abroad, and see the young, soft, fair,
Then turn me round, and find 'em all in her.

Nay, if you are upon your Raptures I have done with you.


Besides, I have given her frequently lusty sums of gold the more to endear her
to me, and that I Am sure is the Lovers best proof of his Affection


Yes faith, and the worst of his discretion.


Discretion! why thou talk like a Shopkeeper weighing of s^ap; a manager of
sense by drams and ounces; Discretion is a spurious Brat begot between solid
Dullness and sophisticated Reason; a staple Commodity for cheating in Trade,
upon the Royal Exchange; a virtue in Country Graziers that would fell Horses
or buy Sheep; the dull Companion of bob-tail'd Chaplains newly come from the
College, for whom Discretion is as good an Epethite, as Circumspection is for
one that squints; but amongst the Beaux Esprits and men of sense, is, was, and
ever will be, the jest of Conversation, and the scandal of good Company


Handsomely troll'd off in faith; and this you steadfastly believe?


Most conscientiously; I have known your discreet person wear his Cravat three
inches from his neck, wipe his nose on his sleeve, act the Mute in witty
Company three hours together, cram himself with other Peoples Jests to vent'em
dully as his own at home* get his Cookmaid with Child in the Kitchen, and every
night in the Parlour expound against Whoring, with a Pox to him


But did thou ever hear he settled three hundred pounds a year upon her, as
thou have on Betty? hah. Prithee was not that want of discretion? were thou not
a Cully for that


Not at all; no damn him, a Cully is a dull senseless Rogue bubled and tricked
out of his Estate by subtlety. I can own my self an Extravagant, but no Cully;
what she has I gave her as a quantum meruit for her Love, and not through
imposition on her part; she did endear my generous Faculty, but cheated me of
nothing; and there is as much difference between Timon of Athens Generosity,
and Sir Timothy Bashsops lavish Folly, as between the Courage of a brave
Officer bred in a Camp and a sneaking Captain of a Country Militia


Well, well, but thou forget'st the Plot all this while.


I beg thy pardon: To gain then another Estate to make amends for what I have^
squandered away, Betty and I, being newly returned from Flanders where we made
shift to melt the last 2000 l. are involved in a Design, and such a one, that
were Nick Machiavel alive he would be ashamed of his Insufficiency, and thou only,
as my dearest friend, I have thought fit to trust in it


Come on then, let us hear.


Thou shall and what will make thee wonder, know then, that though I have lately
bragged of my own Abilities, it is to thy Father that I am principally obliged


My Father! prithee how?


Thou have heard no doubt, of old Sir Rowland Rakehell a rich Uncle I have here
in Chelsey


Pox, every body has heard of him, there is not such another drunken, r^aring,
wicked, debauched old Dog in the whole Parish: I hear he was tried for his life
once for for making away a young Orphan Helress to whom he was Guardian, whose
Estate he now enjoys of three thousand pounds a year


He was so, and but for subornation of witnesses, and money, had mounted for it:
well, he is to do my business however, and in this manner; thy Father, to whom
I am faith most infinitely obliged, had it seems, such a near acquaintance with
that young Orphan's deceased Parents, that he can give account of every passage
between 'em, the very particulars of the Will, the most remarkable Jewels left,
and each other thing of moment committed before their death to the charge of my
confounded Uncle


Very well Sir, and what of this?


Why this will produce the best Plot in the world; for instructed by him who
knows all their concerns, it is contrived to dress up my Betty as if she came
from the Indies, to which place it is said the other was kidnap'd, and top her
upon my Uncle instead of the true Orphan


But can my Father give any noted demonstration?


To every point, and so substantially (for else 'twere an empty Undertaking)
that it will put the old Hell-hound into such a fright, that he will be glad to
part with a good round Settlement to me, to secure the rest: what think thou


Faith it looks with a good face I confess.


I therefore have agreed to place her at a Boarding School that the (...) look
the more grave


I shall be the better able to assist thee, having an admirable (...) there.


Have thou? gad that is rare, what is it a pretty Whore?


A Whore! the Devil's in thee thou think all Women are of that sort.


That sort, ay, and the best sort too; that is an Article of my Creed faith.


Thou art a lewd Fellow, and can not relish an Intrigue of honor.


Not well faith, though I had lately like to have engaged in such a business with
a pretty young Tit since I came over, and in that very School thou talk of
too, had not thy wise Father, who gad I believe has studied my Constitution,
diverted me to pursue this Plot upon my Uncle; and faith I confess I was
willing enough to leave it off, for an Intrigne of honor is in my sense just
like a tedious Fox chase, a man is forced to ride a long dirty race out of the
way for a purchase neither worth his time nor his trouble; however, I Will be thy
good Genius for once, and prophecy thou shall prosper: for if Wit, Poetry,
Music, and all the noble Qualities that build up true perfection in a man are
capable of winning her, she is thine


Oh Sir, no flattery to your friend; yet I must own, tho Poetry be a drug to
the dull part of the unthinking World, it is to her a Jewel worth her prizing;
she is skilled in Books friend, a rarity in Women, especially bred in a Boarding
School; she has all her Sexes graces without their frailty, Modesty without
their Affectation, wit without their Mischief, and Love without their Levity;
then for Beauty, she has enough to make a Man an Atheist, believing there could
be no greater Heaven


Now who is in Rapture?


Oh it is impossible I should avoid it when she is the Subject.


How now, who have we here?


A pox on him, I know him already by his damned tone; it is one Monsieur le
Prate, a singing, dancing, talking fluttering Nothing, a Fellow whose chief
discourse is always in bragging of the mighty Actions of the French King, for
which he is loudly cried up by all that party: he is a great Intrigner too, but
then it is the French way, that is, he never brings it to any effect; but above
all, such an eternal Tongue pad, that the clack on it never ceases, no not in
his sleep; in short, he is right Frenchman in his nicest qulaity; and now am I
wishing for Morose's Nightcaps only to defend my Ears against him, for I see he
has us in the Wind


Gad have but patience, and thou shall hear me gabble with him; I have as good
a knack at bauling as he


So, I am likely to be well entertained.


Tholl, loll, loll -- Ah Messires come vous portezvous, Well let me never be
appee in de possession of de fair Angel dat I adore, if I have not a bin sick
for the sight of my dear Monsieur Merriton, he is de life de soul of
Conversation, a bon Companee, all de rest dat I meet are dull efford, flat,
Scoundrels, not fit for a man of parts to sprinkle the dew of Wit upon. I tell
you vat, I just now came from London from de, how you call it, de house of de
Parliament, de place vere de greata people make a deLaw, and de Gospel too begar
I tink, just by de great Shursh yonder, and dear de first ting I hear vas a dam
Rascal Sloven out at de Elbow talk politic and settling de Nation vid anoder
Blockhead who swear so loud dat de ver wind of de oath blew off a reverend
Bishops hat begar dat vas going to serve his Country in de oder house, den
after when I came into de great Hall below, dear one confounded Lawyer teize me
two whole hour vid simple story lessening de vast and immortal glory of de
great and renowned Monarch of France begar. -- A plague wat Conversation is
dis? what son of whore dear be in de world, hah deer Merriton? hah Monsieur,
vat you tink, hah


Why gad for my part I think the Lawyer was in the right, and that your great
and monstrous Monarch that you talk of, will be pared less, and brought into
shape very shortly


Zoon, vat you say le grand Roy de France pared less? how you mean Monsieur?
vat is pare less? Zoon I no understand you


So, the Wind rises, now for the storm.


Shid mauld, Monsieur, some of the brood of old English Harry the Fifth are yet
alive, who unable to bear Insolences so disgraceful to their ancient glory,
shall unite together, and fight, baffle, rout and confound --


The great Monarch of France?


Lop off his fluttering pride and ill got grandeur, and pare him for their use
like a Cork for a bottle


Who, the great Monarch of France?


I see him tumbling already, he is going with a Vengeance, lost, irrecoverably
gone


Zoon who, the great Monarch of France?


The great Monarch of France? Ay the great Monarch of France. What a poxd'ye
take him for a Devil, and think that no body can cope with him


Yes begar, you will find him too grand a Devil for you to conjure, ha, ha, ha.
Le grand Roy de France going down, it make a me smile; but you English have
such sine faculty of bragging, dear is no Nation under the Sun, dat compare
wi^h your true Englishmen, for dat the French sneer, and make grimace, the
Dutch belch, the Spaniard strut, the German huff, the Danes tope, and the
Englishmen only brag, brag, brag, and do noting begar, ha, ha, ha, my dear
Monsieur Merriton, vat say you


I beg your pardon, faith nothing not I Sir: I think you have said enough for
us both


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


You laugh, ver good, you have ver good diversion; you tinke this grand Diable
as you call him is going down too; but vat if I tell you he is rather coming
up, up here into your Country, and vat if he bring one hundred towsand little
Devil with huge long horn to butt at you, vat den, vat den


Why then we'll cull an Army of Cuckolds out of the City to butt at him again,
we have as many horns as he or else the Devil's in it


Very well, do, do, abuse the City, do, anger 'em, and make 'em keep up their
Wives, and call in the money they have lent, make them refuse to raise the
Regiments they promised, do


No faith, I Am resolved to speak well of 'em, in certain hope that those very
Regiments shall be the first to rouse your great French Dragon out of his den;
they are all swinging Warriors, I tell you that besides


Besides? but hark ye, but hark ye.


Nay nay, hark you, I say there is another stratagem.


Zoon hear a me speak, morblea^ hear a me speak, I say dat --


I say that the Common Council of London have within this two days made an
order. --


I say that de policy of France have thought fit


So, so, hallooe, hallooe, ten Crowns to one on the French Tarrier.


Politically, judiciously, wisely for the safety of the people.


Zoon will you not give me leave? I tell you dat de best --


Tell me nothing, the best at a stratagem in the whole World is --


Is the French King, begar, there I got before you.


The French King, a pox, we shall starve him in one six months longer, the loss
of his Wine Trade has almost broke his heart already, that one Law has undone
him


Yes begar, just as much as de other Law for selling Wine at sixpence de quart
did the Vintners, morblea^ he know ver well how much you English care for de
Law, or de Gospel either: on my Consiense I was particularly designed by
Providence to confront and rally the Vices of your Country: I perceive every
day so many filthy Crime, fulsome follies, damd Extravagance, and ungenerous
Action, that dear Merriton I cannot forbear telling thee as my bosome-Friend,
that I cannot help being extremely fatigued and disturbed and am begar
eternally --


Eternally prating, a pox take thee, and I am the unlucky Dog doomed to be
worried, -- buz -- in short, Amorous and I have some business together,
therefore prithee let me beg thee to be so civil as to leave us


Leave us, dat is very fine, dear be a touch now of right English breeding,
they never distinguish a man of parts from the nasty Vulgar; foh I hate ill
manners like a Toad, but times will turn, the French are coming do you hear,
that is my comfort: five hundred Sail, and a thousand Fireships, they are coming
ma foy


Well, get thee gone and let 'em come and be damned.


A thousand Fireships, Zoon there will be a blaze.


Prithee oblige us and go -- Dear Le Prate be so civil.


The Rogue has made me sweat like a Hos^es in the dog days.


Why then all Raillery apart morbleau I cannot be civil if I would, not stir
one foot from dis place, for I Have appointed Music this instant to meet me here
to serenade a Lady that lodges just there at the corner of that house, ah, and
see here they come Messires sortbein venu


This Lady he speaks of is my Betty, that window there belongs to her
Apartment, she has told me indeed of a fiding Fool that often addressed himself
this way, and now I find it is this Coxcomb


Art thou not jealous?


What of such a thing? prithee have a better opinion of me and her too; I Am
satisfied she knows him for a Fool


And perhaps likes him the better; Women have stranged Appetites, a man of
sense, as a good standing dish, may go down a little a (...), but a Fool is
generally their beloved second course and desert, Trash and (...) suits their
longing


To convince thee of the contrary in her, (...) is instructing aside here and
thou shall see how she will use him


With all my heart, for I confess I am yet an Insidel.


As soon as day began to peep
And little twinkling stars withdrew,
Begar me could no longer sleep,
Dear charming Devil for you;
But from my weary tumbled Bed
Must early rouse my pensive head,
My passion to pursue,
To come with Fiddle, Song, and Voice,
To bid good morr, to your bright Eyes
Me love so much morbleau.
With sitting up late at your Window or Gate,
With howling and squawling I Am grown a mere Cat,
And all that your grace I may win:
I scratch and I purr at your cruel heart's door,
And mew, mew, mew, to come in.
Sometime that ugly Witch despair
Make me believe you frown
And tempt me which is ver severe,
To hang my self or drown.
But though me dare with Rival sight,
And watch your door whole Winter night,
Yet me no care to swing.
De Voice, de Fiddle, and de Song
To say I love, and say how strong,
Begar is must de better Ting.
With sitting, etc.
Oh, I see she has sent for me: Tres humble serviture sweet Mistress Oyley.


Sir, my Lady wonders you are not ashamed to make this noise to disturb the
neighbors: she bid me tell you too, that she admires you should think that
pitiful fidling and piping should win a Lady of her Beauty and Quality; so
first desiring a Cessation of Cat-guts, she implores your absence. -- The Fool
has been here twice a piping without a penny of money in's Pocket, which I can
assure him will not take with us


Not fidling and piping win a Lady? A plague of your damned English Brutality:
Zoon there is no other way in France to win de Lady, but dat; a Lady there,
shall as soon take a Gentleman with a good Pipe as a good Patrimony; but here,
noting will do but money, money, a plague take her. Gazoone I must get some and
present her, for I love her damnably, and I see dear is no oder way; along
Messires


Now, did not I tell thee how she would use him; I know she hates all mankind but
me


Still I say be wary, for according to the Poet
Show me a man of sense in all the Roll
That some one Woman has not made a Fool.
Here she comes, my Company will be of no use now; besides, I Have a Billet to
write to my own dear Angel. Adieu


My dearest Comfort!


My Jewel -- My dear Iackey, why did you rise so early this morning Sirrah, hah?


I had business Child; but I have been laughing this half hour at Mrs. Oyley's
message to that serenading French Puppy: ah my sweet life, every hour brings me
more and more into my Debt


And so ye dear Rogue you have been Eves-dropping, have you? Indeed Iackey I
will not allow that: what cannot your Mistress have a spare Gallant to her self a
little, but you must be peeping, you little pretty honey dear dog you


Now is there something to be got out of him I Am sure, by this fondness; -- ah
wit of Man, where art thou


Would I had never seen it, for I am grown so jealous o'th sudden, and my heart
does so swell; go, go, get ye gone, I don't love ye, you shant kiss me no more,
you have got a French Flapdraggon now


I Will sit you as well anon at night, for I Will tie your hands to the Bed-posts;
when you are asleep I Am resolved you shall play no more tricks with me


Nor you shant wake me no more if you go to that, with sprawling over me,
pretending to put out the Candle


Do you hear Oyley, did you ever hear such a confident little dear honey lying
Rogue, there is for you Sirrah


And there is for you Hussy, and that, and that, Oyley, pray stand' by a little
and see fair Play, and you shall see how I Will maul her, I Will smother her
immediately


Oh, a Truce, a Truce, I Will play no more, but I Will pummell you at Night Sirrah,
you shall not think to carry't off thus, you shant, you dear, dear, dear, sweet
damned Dog you


Ah sweet damned Cunning, how I Love thee, this must be upon some mighty
Matter, for this is better acted then ordinary


But leaving off fooling, for I Am so fond of this Puppy, that I can scarce mind
any other Business; how goes our Plot, Iacky, when is this nasty Uncle of thine
to be fleeced, when am I to act the Indian Heiress, and take my Voyage from
Bantam, ah you dear little Pimp you


What, you expect a new Addition to your Settlement, do you Hussy, but I Will
prevent those vain Hopes, I will Black Eyes, for I wont tell a Word


Choose Churl, you shant Kiss the Honny-Mole upon my Duddy this Month then I Am
resolved


Ah dear, Dear Mole, come I will, I will tell rather then be punished so, I Will
discover any thing


Quickly then, for if once I swear, begin and seriously.


Why then, in good earnest you are to go to your new Lodgings to night.


At the Boarding School.


The same I have agreed with the Governess, and have also found out a Roguish
Lawyer of my Acquaintance with a Conscience and Confidence suitable to the
Business, who is to be ready to begin the Process; we have got a Sunburned
Sailer or two likewise to swear he was hired to carry her over and put the
better face upon the Matter


And I Will warrant you for acting my part, give me but my Cue and you shall see
me do it like any Player


If I should get a thousand Pounds a Year by this Trick now would not you want
a Croshet of Diamonds, a Neck-lace of Pearl, nor no such Triffle, hah, for I
find you will take pains and act your part very dilligently


Indeed my dear sweet pretty Puppy-face, not for that, but only because Child I
know a thousand Guinnys would do thee good, thou knows my dear dog, I was never
fond of Money, besides Iacky I have Croshet and Neck-lace already, I confess
Love if I had a pair of Pendants as my Lord Keepwells Mistress has


Oh, now it is out.


I Think they would become me as well, but my Sweet Honey Sugar Candy Rogue, I
can be contented without, I Will ask nothing Dearest


Finely acted I swear, ah, where is the wit of a Man now; I say still, there is
not a s^roke of that soft hand but will cost him fifty Guinnys


Thou needst not ask, that may command so absolutely, I Will tell thee more
when I possess it, in the mean time be sure to get ready against Seven in the
Evening to take Coach, I le go put on my Disguise and find out my Uncle, who
is either damning himself at the Magpy-Tavern, or at my Lady Addleplots just by
it, there I Will break the matter to him, and dear Fortune stand but propitious
now, and then my sweet pretty charming Black Eyes, and I will Live and Laugh,
and Love to perpetuity


And if thou failst in it, thou shall be served just as the Mony-less Mounsieur
was before thee: Oyley, how do thou like my managing of this fond Puppv


Troth Madam I have been admiring you, and think you have played a better Scene
than is to be seen upon the Stage, but pray give me leave to ask you a
question, do you not love Mr. Amorous at all


No Faith not I, but I love his Money which I find this Plot is likely to
bring -- he has already settled three hundred pounds a year upon me, I love
that well enough


And yet you call him Dear, and Sweet and Honey.


Words, words only -- mere Springs to catch Woodcocks; I never call a Fellow
Dear and Sweet, and Honey, but I think him a Dog, a Cully, and a Rascal


If you think so ill of him who is a witty man, and whose only fault is too
much fondness, how will you entertain the impertinent Frenchman that I know
intends you another visit


Why if he comes with money you shall admit him; Love for money ever while you
live wench


What, that nauseous chattering Fool?


Ay, ay, any Fool in Europe that has money, learn this of me, as they that
first debauch us, do it for their own pleasure without any consideration of our
Ruin; so we that are debauched ought to value to Merit equal to our Interest:
If a Fool comes larded with Guinnys, and a Wit empty, the Fool is like to be
preferred for all the tothers Tropes and Figures, besides a Wit plays
cautiously, and upon the square, when a Fool sets deep without consideration,
and therefore to me is the more meritorious by half

For what is the worth of any thing,
But so much money as 'twill bring.
As a famous Author has it.

Now you talk of Money here comes Mr* Deputy Nicompoop, the sneaking rich
Goldsmiths that married the famous stickler against the Government, the Lady
Addlepot


I have heard of her, her House is the very Common-Shoar into which all the
Malcontents oth' Town drain themselves, she pretends to rail at the Times for
Conscience sake; but it is really on no other score but her own Vanity, for the
glory of being thought a notable Woman, out-weighs all her other reasons
whatever: that fluttering Fellow there goes for her Kinsman, but is really her
Gallant, and kept by her under her Husbands nose; so she finishes her Character
at her Cuckolds cost, and by her management of him, teaches the true Doctrine
of Passive Obedience


Bless me, how fine is he; I see these grumbling Ladies keep high, however they
mislike the Government


Nay, but seriously, Captain, and Son in Law that must be, I was strangely
ashamed to have an impudent Fellow, a ragged red-coat Rogue to talk at that
rate


By the Sun and Moon, and all the Planets had I heard him, his Soul had paid
for his Sawciness, the Sun should have shon through him ere he had spoke five
words; but prithee honest Father in Law that must be what did the Rascal say?
hah


Say, why seriously I think the Fellow was mad, he had the impudence to say
that he was your Father, and that your right name was Bragg, and that you were
the wickedest Rake-hell in Town seriously, and then he called you a hundred
Pimps one after another


Intolerable Rascal.


He said he would kick you seriously.


Dog. --


And when you went into the Coach with my Lady my Wife, if I had not stopped him,
on my Conscience he would have come in after you


I Will have the Rogue whipped from Charing Cross to Chatham for this.


Nay seriously the Fellow ought to be punished, that is the truth on it, he was
as saucy as if he had been your Father, indeed -- well god-buy, I must wait
upon my Lady my Wife, to beg leave of her to let me meet some Friends at a
Bowl of Punch this Afternoon


Do so, and do you hear Cousin, tell her that I Will be with her Ladyship
presently


Ay, but you wont make have; prithee dear Captain make have now, seriously she
likes your Company mightily, she says you are the finest Man, and the fittest
Husband for my Daughter Moll in the world, well, will you make have


I will, I will, I Will but take the other turn and be with her.


Seriously you will oblige me extremely then, for I long to be at the Punch Bowl.


How rarely do my Lady and I manage this Fellow, she has kept me this two
Years, and I think one of the Princes of Italy scarce appears in better
Equipage. I am naturally impudent, and though I was formerly of the Black-Guard,
yet now being kept well, and assisted by good Rigging, dare thrust my self
daily amongst People of Quality, and pass for a Captain amongst 'em; the
misfortune is, that I have a peevish ragged damned old Father, a poor Granadier
who is eternally disgracing me before Company, 'twas he I know b^ the Style
that gave the late Character of me to my Cuckold, and see as the Devil will
have it, here he comes, the old Rogue has been dogging me I ^ay my Life


Your Servant Sir.


Yours Sir.


Do you know me Sir.


Yes, yes, I know you well enough.


Cons what a deal of Gold-lace the Son of a Whore has got on's Coat; do you
hear, a word with you Friend, am not I your Father Sir


You had best ask my Mother, she knows better then I, but what if you are Sir.


Where Is your Hat then you Dog, Rascal where is your Reverence Sirrah, what are
you too good


My Hat's too good to be speil'd Sir, and the Feather in^^ (...) a Guinny.


Did it so Sir, and must you wear a (...) in your H^t cost a Guinny, and let
your Father be reduced to a single (...), come, come, disb^rse, disburse, if
you would save your bones disburse, and (...), Money, Money, Money, come


What a plague you wont Rob me, (...) you, sure you know the Law.


The Law, here is a Rogue for you, he is for hanging his Father, he; but I'il Law
you presently, here is Law for you you Dog, -- Sirrah di^^urse and quickly -- o


This old heathen will make no more of spitting now, than if I were a Rat, and
the Devil a penny have I in my Pocket to give him, what a plague shall I do


You have a Rampant Lady I hear you Rogue to uphold your Prodigality; you can
feast upon Wine and Venison, when I was fain to dine yesterday with an honest
Dutch Trooper a Friend of mine upon a pickled Herring you dog; but come Sirrah,
since you are kept with a Pox to ye, let us see what Wages her Ladyship affords,
lets see the Cod come


I Have nere a Sowse upon my faith Sir.


How, nere a Sowse, what then you do my Ladys Drudgery for nothing, do you
Sirrah, a fine Trade indeed, a hopeful Employ, had not you better have staid
with the blacksmith where I put you to Prentice, you prodigal Villain


No I thank you, faith I Have an easier Forge to work at, and better Company.


Come I Will try what Company you keep presently, I Will give you the Test Faith,
I Will part with the best part of my Dinner to treat you for once: come Sirrah,
here is King William's Health


O Lord, indeed Sir I never dare drink any Brandy.


Sirrah drink, and quickly, or by this bottle I Will cut your throat.


D'sheart Sir you will undo me, my Lady will smell me, an^ she hates the smell of
Brandy as she hates the Devil


You lie you dog, there is nere a Lady of her party but has a Bottle by her
bedside every night: what a plague, do you think I ha'nt heard of their cold Tea


'Dsheart how should he hear of the Ladies cold Tea? it is the greatest (...)
Court, by this Light


Come, come, the Health, the Health.


Why then here is the Kings Health, I Will top upon him as our Party use, with a
mental Reservation, -- Come the Kings Health Sir


What King? What King, Sirrah? speak the words.


Sir, I drank to the King, and I took it off clean,
And he is but a Fop that asks what King I mean.

A Fop, very well Sir; in troth you are in the right, and to quip me better to be
one, I think this Hat and Feather would not be amiss, this Peruke likewise is
proper, this Coat and Sword likewise


'Dsdeath what do you mean Sir?


To make money of 'em, and drink the Kings Health you Rogue.


Nay, Father.


Sirrah, stir a foot after me and I Will run my Sword in your Guts Zooks I Have a
great mind to the Breeches too; I could flea a Rebel methinks as I would an
Eel: but come, this shall serve at present; but do you hear Sirrah, get money is
your pocket against the next time to relieve your old Father, or I Will have no
more mercy on thee than a she Tiger has of a Traveller when her Cubs have had
nothing foo dinner


So, a very pretty business this; thus am I served by this old Rascal whenever
I refuse him money; nay nor is this all, for the disgraces I suffer by him vex
me more by half, -- Meeting me talking with a great Lord in the street the other
day, Sirrah says he, lend me eighteen pence, for my Stockings want footing and
my Shoos have lost both their heels; my Lord star'd at him like a stuck Pig,
and he as much at my Lord, till having dispatched him I was fain to recover all
by swearing he was a crazed old Edgehill Officer, that I kept upon Charity.
Well this will not do, I must study some redress, though I want Courage to beat the
old Scoundrel; but first to my Lady, to whom I must tell some damned lie or
other for a new Hat and Peruke; one hour's soft Indearment I know will quip me
again

Tho to the Royal Aid she will naught disburse,
To me she never fails to draw her purse.

OH Will, well met; when were you last at the Boarding School?


Yesterday, Sir.


Then you must give me leave to guess your business there; nay I Will not
question you, but only let you see a Fathers Eye guided by his indulgence still
most observes when it seems least to do so: what think you of Mirtilla? come
speak freely


Sir, to dissemble is a Courtiers Vice, that never intends to do the thing he
promised: I Will speak my thought as free as Air, I think her the brightest
Jewel of her Sex, her Virtues set in her Beauty are unparalleled; and like the
Jewel of great Tuscany, too rich for all the neighboring Kings to buy


Thou speak my thoughts; do love her, prithee tell me.


Alas Sir, be not pleased to hear my Follies; my Will you know is bounded in
your Pleasure, on your Commands depends my love or liking; besides, tho dressed
in Beauty, Wit, and Innocence, I hear she is an Orphan, and unknown, not fit
for me to love that cannot raise her to what her worth deserves


She may be known hereafter; and not to baulk your fancy Sir, I give you leave
to exercise your liking, and if you think fit license you to love her


Which I could do, and faithfully, but must grieve that my small fortune --


Do not upbraid me Son; if my distresses have like clouds hung over me, and so
involved thee in my sad Misfortunes, believe me it is no fault of mine but
fates; that thou deserve more I must needs confess; for tho my Son thou art
to Virtue nearer, Arts still have been thy aim, Wit, Honor, Justice,
Philosophy, soft Music, with all the train of noble Sciences


Good Sir no more, you need not show too nearly how much I am indebted to your
goodness


Thou art not in my debt, but rather I in thine; the trust I had in the last
Reign deceiving me, beggering my hopes, makes me but half a Father: I deserved
well, and loyal Faith expressed, but Ruin was the word, and I amongst the rest


Divert the Subject, I beseech you Sir.


To the purpose then -- When did thou see young Amorous?


Today Sir, who told me he was much beholden t'you for a late Plot upon his
sordid Uncle


It Is true, for I must own I hate that vicious Fellow more than Cowardice, tho
for some private reasons I seem to indulge his Humor; more of that hereafter;
I know you are for the Boarding School this Afternoon, to see the Fair forlorn;
well, give her my Love, she will make thee not less welcome for it I Am sure. --
Adieu

I have maintained her there this many years unknown to any, and will proceed
till fate make ripe my project; young Amorous was framing an Intrigue till I
discovered, and diverted him with a specious Plot upon his Uncle to amend his
Fortunes; she is not of that mean desert she seems, nor my Son's Love so weak
as he pretends it is, Time must ripen all. Here comes Sir Rowland as merry as
Wealth and Wickedness can make him, -- my first game is with him, I shall go
near to dash his jollity


Hoh, Devotion, art thou there with a pox to thee, and without a Prayer Book in
thy hand too, that is a wonder faith, for thou art as rarely seen out of a
Church as I am out of a Tavern; pox on thee, what a dull scandalous life do
thou lead? thou art swilling thy belly full of Small-beer Devotion every
morning, whilst I am sanctifying mine with Sherry, Sugar, and Nutmeg, you old
Church Puppy you


Oh rare Sir Rowland.


Right old Vrim and Thummim, and oh rare Sir Rowland it shall be; I intend to
have it for an Epitaph upon my Tomb as well as Ben. Johnson, for I shall have a
Name for the best of his qualities. I can drink Sack as well as he, tho I
cannot write so well in the praise on it


To have a name for drinking Sack only, is a wretched Trophy at our years Sr
Rowland, methinks you and I should study to be dignified by our Virtues


Virtue! here is a hypocritical old Dog; Gadzookes name a word more of Vertuo to
me, and I Will draw upon thee; speak a syllable to me of Religion, Morality,
Godliness, or any of your canting stuff and I^ll run my Sword in your guts, you
old orthodox Thief you


Nay, if you are so hot Sir --


Talk of Virtue to me the blood of the Rakehells, you old Pew Pimp; a starving
notion that all the World laughs at, and which the wiser part of it always
abhorred: prithee ask the young Cocking Athiest how he got his rich Widow with
6000l. a year, and see whether he answers Virtue, or the illiterate Dunce that
can scarce spell his own name, whether he got his Place at Court by Virtue; the
sweaty splayfoot City Putt, whether he came to be Lord Mayor by Virtue; ask
how the Laundress came to be a Lady, or the lawless Pettifogger a Judge, and
see if Virtue be the cause on it, ye old Church Weesel, ha, ha, ha


I think in Reason we ought to believe it the cause, whatever you may imagine.


Reason! the Devil take him, he is got next door to Virtue again already: why I
tell thee, like an incorrigible Sot as thou art, that Reason has nothing to do
in the business, neither the course of all humane Affairs depend on Destiny.
Reason and Virtue are as useless drugs as Learning and Poetry; the first is
disgraced by Knaves, the last ruined by Fools, and there is Morality for thee,
thou old Hassock


Though this be a profligate Rascal, yet he is in the right in that.


Ha, ha, ha, besides, I cannot forbear laughing faith, to think, for all thy
praying and mumbling, what a damned Hypocrite thou art; Here do I enjoy an
Estate of three thousand a year by having a young Orphan that was my Ward,
kidnab'd to the Indies; and thou, for the sake of two hundred a year, got'st it
done for me; there was Virtue, ha, ha, there was Virtue


Well Sir you need not upbraid me however: You have small Reason if you knew
all


Well, well, I will not upbraid thee, ha, ha; I will not upbraid thee; for to tell
thee the truth, I think thy Virtue and mine have much the same weight, that is
in short we are Rogues both, and so let us like Politicians keep one another
Counsel


You may guess, that for my own part I have no great mind to be hanged for any
Discovery of my own; but i have a secret to tell you that somewhat troubles me


A secret! prithee what is it old Bellarmine, come let us hear it.


Why it is credibly reported, that your Nephew Mr. Amorous, that went to travel
lately, after having mortgaged the rest of his Estate to you, has unluckily in
the Indies met with this very Orphan, made a discovery from one of the Ships
Crew that is since dead, and has now brought her (...) with him to claim her
Right


'Dsheart thou art not in earnest old Psalm Book a^?


It Is most certa^nly so, Sir, I saw one of his (...) half an hour ago in the
Street


'Oons we must be Impudent, and swear bloudily, we must (...)-mouthed: hah old
Avy Mary, we have possession, they shall Law and Claw too before they get it:
-- how now;


Ko zowl mon dingos Bashterosh vin draggozeen Ilander gin flounce van dander
Scopen


Scopen, ay you may Scopen and Slopen long enough with a pox t'you, before I
understand ye, this Rogue has got the language of the Devil, and on my
Conscience is come to teach it us instead of our Dutch, do understand him,
old Surplice, I know thou have been a Traveller


'Dslife, very well, Sir, he tells ye in the Morisque tongue that your Nephew
is in the garden, and desires to speak with you


Gadzooks I shall murder the Dog, I shall never have patience.


Oh Sir, hear what he says whatever you do: I Will stand behind that hedge
there, and make remarks -- Collimosh Zwingle gowse Scopen awlin --


You Will, you will --


You Will, you will, the Devil you will ye -- Belzebubs own darling dialect, by this light.


He comes Sir; I Will retire --


Now must I set my face and fleer upon him just like a Court depender upon a
great Lord that has newly worm'd him out of his Office, and is too powerful
for him to beat, that is Salute him Civilly, and all the while heartily wish
him damned


Dear Uncle I am heartily Sorry that my occasions could let me no sooner wait
on ye since I came to England, but assure your self my Duty has often made me
heartily wish to see ye -- hanged I mea


Oh it is very well, it is very well good Nephew; why faith I did not Expect ye
so soon, I did not think you could have made your Tour of India and the Mogulls
Country in twice the time, in my opinion you have made too much have home --
with a pox t'e


I had stayed longer indeed, had I not returned to do you a small piece of
service, which Sir you shall presently know, and what an honor and tenderness
dear Uncle I have for you -- I mean for your money, ye old Dogbolt --


To do me service, Nephew, prithee let us hear how the Son of a Whore looks in
that habit, as (...) he were engendered by a Succubus upon an Indian Witch. --


Then in short, Sir, I came home thus suddenly to clear your Reputation.


My Reputation, ha, ha, ha! -- what in'th Indies, prithee Cousen don't make me
think you are mad, 'oons I never cared for it here man, and do think I value
it in the Mogulls Country -- besides I know my reputation here is as secure as
any man's


Ah Sir, would you could make it out.


So I will Sir. I have three thousand pounds a year fool; -- that is reputation.
Set that upon the Exchange against any man's honesty, and see which will buy
most Cuthinelo


Sir, you have not a groat a year.


Hey-day, the fellow's possessed, some Indian Devil has bewitched him.


Oh you will find it otherwise Sir, in short then to keep ye no longer in
suspense, the Orphan Heiress daughter to Sr. William Wealthy committed to your
charge, and so strangely lost about 9. years since, was lately discovered in
the Indies by a Sea-Captain upon his deathbed, to whom she was sold, and is
now returned with me, with intention to Claim her Estate in your possession


Pshaw pshaw, what witnesses Nephew, what witnesses?


Oh the Devil and all, Sir, the Captains kinsman, several of the Ships Crew
that carried her over, besides a Convincing sign, a Ruby that hung about her
Neck with her Fathers Coat of Arms upon it


So now the old Rascal sweats, work on, work on my Plot, thus far it goes
rarely --


Would she had been Choked with the string on it before she had come hither to
discover her pedigree, d'^heart I shall be hanged for Kidnapping --


Come Sir, I see you a little disturbed, therefore as I said before, to let you
see what a kindness I have for your Credit, perhaps upon some reasonable
Considerations, I may put you in a way Sir --


Hold, hold, let me see her first, and then talk of Considerations, I must be
Cunning with the Rogue, there may be a trick in it


That you shall Sir to morrow, without fail, and be thoroughly Convinced of all,
and what further service I can do ye


Very well, and with secresy good Nephew do you here, you know your Uncles Honor
is as your own, and so farewell for this time, but proof must clear all: for my
part I own nothing, if it be thy fortune to oblige me, I Will be as ready to
prefer thee, --


Ha, ha, ha, ha, who is here my Genius, my best friend --


'Twas acted rarely.


Did ye hear us.


Most distinctly, and doubt not but the Consequence will be as pleasant: away,
away, I know he is upon the hunt for me, and he must not see us together; Is not
this better now then hankering after a silly moneyless Orphan with a white
face, and nothing in her purse, hah


That Is well, but hark I hear him coming, away, away.
Thus your great Wit that long renoun'd does pass,
Is often by a greater made an Ass.
Well Sir what news?


Why all the news that I know is, that thou art to be hanged like an Ignorant
praying Kid-napping Rascal as thou art


Hanged Sir.


Yes hanged Sir, and a pox on thee, nothing vexes me but I am to keep that
Apoeriphall face of thine Company; all is out, we are discovered with a
vengeance, this is your trusting your Sea-Captain with a murrain to you, you may
remember dog-fish, that I advised ye to knock her in the head like a discreet
person as I was


Faith I could not in Conscience kill the pretty Creature, that is the truth
on it


A Plague of your Conscience, must I be hanged for your confounded Conscience
must I? you had conscience enough to swallow two hundred pound a year for
Kid-napping, never keckt at that you old pew-pimping Rascal


Nay then, since you provoke me, know, the Rascal is in the inside of your own
hide, and ye lie, I never received a groat on such a damned attempt


What art mad, where is it then? a pox where is it.


Managed till the deceiver I deceive
And thou art hanged by a strong Rope, I weave.

What a Devil does he mean? gad I believe the grave fools brain's cracked
through mere fear, as it generally happens to these sober praying Coxcombs with
Clodded brains and no Genius, the Rogue has a hang upon me, I must not fall out
with him; however I Will send for him presently to the Tavern, and if I can make
him Drunk, there leave all fates transactions for to morro

And with full Bumpers Tope away all sorrow.

Oh Mrs. Tearshift your humble servant, pray where may I find my Lady my Wife?
I have been looking all about the Garden and han't the honor to meet her
seriously


Oh rare Mr. Deputy there is Rods in piss for you in faith.


Nay prithee dear Mrs. Terashift don't fright me now, seriously I stayed but
half an hour longer then I promis't, I hope my Lady my wife is not angry, for I
could not help it seriously


Oh fie, your Gills look as red as a Turkey-Cocks, you are as fluster'd as a
Non-Con-Preacher at a Sisters wedding. She Will be in a violent passion when she
sees ye, and you know (like a silly man as you are) you are nothing in her
hands when she is in a passion


That Is true seriously, but have I no friend with her, that can hold her tack,
and rail against the Government whilst I go and Cool a little


Yes there is the Captain with her as it happens, well, take it from me you are
extremely obliged to that man, he has held her tack upon your account more then
once to my knowledge


Ah the Captain's a very honest Gentleman.


See yonder they are coming down the walk together: Come, come in, and wash
your face and hands, and Comb your head, and smug up your self a little


With all my heart dear Mrs. Tearshift, for if she should fall into a passion I
were a lost man seriously


Captain -- Y. Bragg: -- Madam.


Did you visit all our Loyal friends in Newgate this morning according to my
order


Yes Madam, I was there a great while, I sat at the Treason-table there above
an hour, they are all pretty hearty, they eat and drink well Madam, onl^ a little
lousy, some of them


Ay that is nothing, Loyallty and Lice are Concomitant; and did you take care to
present my humble service to that worthy person that bid the Government kiss
his britch -- and tell him that I would do my self the honor to sup with him
to night


Yes Madam, and for which he humbly thanked your Ladyship, but sends ye word
that he is to be Engaged


What, he is crowded by our party I warrant.


No faith Madam, he was Crowded another way, for he was just going into the
Cart to be hanged


Codsoe, that was engaging him indeed -- and did they hang that brave fellow?
well there will a time come I hope -- when we shall hang in our turn too.
Tearshift who is that within there


Mr. Deputy Madam, who being rashly coming before with a dirty face and hands,
I repremanded and turned back to mundyfy


Let him be locked into the Garret, de^e hear as formerly, and allowed no meat
till my order: what? the Brute is fluster'd I warrant


He has drank a little too much indeed Madam.


He shall not eat these three days; fogh the very thought of him gives me the
vapors; prithee give me my Spirit of Hartshorne; Captain your Arm a little,
stand up strongly ye fribling fool; of my Conscience the fellow begins to bend
in the hams already


Who I Madam, gad you are mistaken, I Am as strong as a horse.


Ye lie yefool, a horse, ye lie ye Jackanapes, you showed your strength finely
last night when you were Robbed and lost your Hat and Peruke


What man could do I did, but to have eight Rogues upon me at once, Madam, was
a little hard


Indeed Madam the Captain got well off as he did, for had they stripped him, Lord
bless us, they might have damaged his outworks Extremely


Well Sir you see I have quip'd ye again, and pray let me find your Services
answerable; all Ladies of my humor require to be served well


I am thy Adonis my bright Citheraea, always ready and perpetually devoted to
thy command


And well said Captain in troth.


Well Sir, there is something t'encourage ye, and I give you leave to frequent
the Coffee-house


Madam, that is every day my whole business, you are thought the very heart of
the grumbling faction, and the greatest Pollitician in the Town; The famous
Lady Addleplots name is in every ones mouth from the Secretary of State down to
the Seller of Pippins


Your Ladyship is thought a most admirable States-woman I must needs say.


Nay I thank my Stars the Ladies stick close to me, the good women are most of
'em of my side, I thank 'em, especially the merry griggs that will drink a
Bottle, all those are most Conscienciously Loyal, and do great good, besides I
expect a swinging Rising in Kent suddenly, and then we shall fegue these
Rebels: -- my Lady Stroddle and I intend to go and head 'em, we have bought
our Fuzees and Jack-boots already


Oh Madam, here is the fine French Gentleman coming, that is such rare Company,
that sings and dances and will let no one talk but himself


And with him, Mr. ^eputy new-wash'd and Tallow'd; Lord, how Matrimony looks,
Madam


Madam, I vas Impatient till I vas come to kiss your Ladyships fair hand.


Your Servant good Monsieur.


Your Servant Sire, and your most humble, pret Metresse Tear the sheet, Madam,
I must beg your Ladyships pardon, dat I have oblige a my self to make
reconsiliation between your Ladyship and Monsient Nicompoop here, who is very
sorry for disappointing your Ladyship and desire me to Intercede for him


He Is a pitiful fumbling fellow, it is impossible for him to do otherwise then
disappoint a Lady


Nay, Madam I beseech your Lady ship.


Alas Monsieur you are Ignorant of his Crime, I had at least Six hundred
Letters to finish, and should have sent him to as many places with 'em, and to
have a Sot to dare to baulk me in State Affairs, Sir I Will make him know that
I Will have the blood of him that shall baulk me --


Lord, she is bloody angry, what shall I do?


Dat is very great fault, but dear Madam hear a me speak.


A little fribbling Cit that I have married, and affronted my own Quality to do
him honor, to dare to be absent when I had business for him


I beseesh your Ladyship, look he is dear upon his knee.


A frigid fop, that I have taken as much pains withal to make a man, as ever
my first husband Sr. Arthur Addleplot did to make me a woman --


Ah dear Captain, you have an Interest in her, here is an Oriential Pearl, pray
try if that will qualify


Madam, the penitent offender offers Tribute, a Mediator from the Indies kisses
your fare hand


Ay, the fool Imagines this will do now, and truly I think pearls are good
against the Spleen, -- but a careless fellow -- d'slife to neglect my
Negotiation, I can hardly pass it over; but for your sake Cousen for once I
deign to accept his Trifle, but if ever he boulk me again, if there be a
Cuckold in the Nation, you understand me Friend


I do, I do, and am overjoyed that we are friends seriously.


This was managed rarely well; I vow my Lady's a woman of admirable parts.


So dis is ver well, all friends, all friends, and Mousieur let me tell you
enter nous it will be ver reasonable for you hereafter to watch her Ladyships
(...) better, you have de ver great honor in her Conversation I tell you dat


I have so seriously, and could even weep for Joy that we are reconciled.


She Is the grand wit of all our Party, and so admired in France, dat I believe
our great Monarch will in a little time make her President of his Council
(...)


Oh deer Monsieur, indeed you honor me too much, but I know you have all the
Secret from the Party, and pray what news last night Mon^sieur? when shall we
have some sport? when will the French fleet come to an Anchor? ha


Ah garzoon, I forgot to tell your Ladyship, dey are come already.


Are they come. Cods^oe that is rare; I Will have a Bonefire as big as a Steeple,
have they Landed? hah


Morbleau twenty towsand at least, brave valiant fellows, with resolution like
Lions. Dey have scare all de Country round, they have burn two ^refown of de
Ancient Lofty Noble Thatch Cottage Morbleau dat ever was seen


Rare news; Tearshift get ready my Jack-boots.


Dey have attaque de Enimys Intrenchement, and have taken two or three hundred
of the boldest fattest bravest --


Prisoners, humh, prisoners.


Sheep, Madam, sheep, my Countrymen allways take more sheep den Prisoner, dey
are of better use, by mush


Madam, here is a Messenger come from the Boarding-School, to Invite your
Ladyship to the Ball, and to see your Ladyships Daughter dance her new Chacoone


Oh with all my heart, come Gentlemen w^'l all go; this news has made me so
pleasant, codsoe I could dance my self


And there we shall see my Daughter Moll dance too, who though she does not dance
so well Cousen, as her Ladyships Daughter, yet though I say it


Who? that is my wife that must be.


As my Lady my Wife pleases Cousen. Moll has 6000l.


Ay that is well enough.


Come Madam, allons;


Will your Ladyship please to walk?


Pox on your damned English breeding.


Two hundred sheep: well I swear this French Monarch is a prodigious Conqueror.


Take heed your Actions don't discover ye --


I Will warrant ye, and if thou can but bring me into the dear Creatures
Apartment all my remaining time of life shall study to requite the obligation


Not a word more, let me alone, follow me:


The Song I Will teach in the afternoon, in the mean time Miss practice the
Trill: come -- au ha au ha ah au au ah --


Aw aw aw aw aw --


A plague; what with your mouth full of bread and butter? -- for shame empty
your Chops Miss there is a Trill for the Devil, see me here au ha au ha au --


Aw aw aw aw -- hum! --


So, she has got her mouth full again, well Miss Molly, but that I love ye very
well, I assure ye I would not endure this: pray lay by the bread and butter and
practice the Trill, I Will step into the next room and teach a little, and be
here again presently: --


Aw aw aw aw aw aw hum hum --


Make your Honors Miss, tholl loll loll,
Now to me Child, tholl loll loll.
Aerie and easy now, tholl loll loll
Very well done Miss, tholl loll loll
Raise up your Body Child, tholl loll
Then you in time will rise: hoh, tholl, la.
Hold up your head Miss, tholl loll loll
Wipe your Nose Child, tholl loll
When I press on ye, tholl loll loll
Fall back easy Miss, tholl loll loll
Keep out your toes too, tholl loll loll
Then you will learn presently, hoh, th^ll la.
Bear your hips Swimmingly, tholl loll loll
Keep your Eyes languishing, tholl loll loll
Zoons where is your Ears now? tholl loll loll
Leave off your Ierking, tholl loll loll
Keep your knees open, tholl loll loll
Else you will never do: hoh tholl la.
If you will love me Miss, tholl loll loll loll
You shall dance rarely Child, tholl loll loll,
You are a Fortun^ Miss, tholl loll loll
And must be Married Child, tholl loll loll
Give me your Money Miss, tholl loll loll
Then I will give you my, hoh tholl la.
Oh dear Mr. Coopee indeed I love you very well, and will do any thing you would
have, but pray let me go now, for I Am so hungry --


The Poor little Tit's as coming as heart can wish, I Am resolved to snap her,
for I hear she is a fortune and worth while


Jane, let the Buck-basket be got ready for the foul-cloaths, de'e hear, and
bid the Landress take care to mend all the shifts; these great Ramping-girles
do so tear their Linen, it almost makes me wild


Your Servant Mrs Crowstich.


How de'e Mr. Coopee, and de'e hear bid the Cook-maid Cut a hundred and fifty
pieces of bread and butter round the Loaf; these Hoyden tits have plague'e
Stomachs


What is it breakfast time with 'em already then?


Always at nine a Clock, and they watch the hour as warily -- as a Parson does
his Glass-when he is tired with preaching; this is their bread and butter-days,
and each of 'em has a full half yard by measure, of which if there were but an
Inch wanting, the greedy things will cry they are starved, and complain to
their parents


Aw aw aw aw aw aw aw hum --


There Is one now, I vow and swear Mr. Coopee I am quite tired with that Romp
there. Coming down Stairs this morning, what do you think I saw, I protest that
great Bear there getting a stride upon John the Gardeners back as he was
sto^pping down to gather a Sallet


Ha ha ha ha --


What if I did? what ^^en? what need you care? pray -- aw aw^.


But in faith gentlewoman, you shall be well slashed for it, the Governess has a
Clawing Rod a making: --


Aw aw aw aw aw aw --


Oh Sister, what did John Gardner do to you pray? oh law, oh law --


What Is that to you long Nose, oh law oh law.


My Governess will order ye she vows, and I Will tell my Mother on ye I Am
resolved, she will be here this afternoon


And I Will tell my Father then how you peeped upon Mr. Coopee the other day when
he was going a Swimming


Ay tell tell Snotty-nose, what care I, my mother can order you, and my father
both pray; besides [pushes her] hussy you peeped as well as I that you did, so
you did


Go, go baby, and make dirt-pyes again, my father says I shall have a husband
shortly pray


You, -- my mother will bring me a tall huge husband home next week and
methinks I long for a tall huge husband, and I am to leave off my Bib and Apron
too


The Maids will not lie with you, you do I know what a bed.


Oh law, that is a great l^e, and I Will tear your Eyes out.


Hussy I Will pull your head off


You shall not think to tell such Lies on me to make Mr. Semibrief hate me, I Will
tear ye alive first


Rare work indeed, come Gentlewoman the Governess would speak with ye.


Oh oh oh --


So, I Am glad on it i'vads, she will be lashed Swingingly.


I Will go and act a Centry without, and if any body comes this way, shoot off my
piece and give ye warning


Ah dear Rogue I Am obliged to thee for ever.


The reverence I have to the very Name of my worthy Foster-Father Mr. Merriton,
to whom you say you are related, and to whose virtue I stand Indebted, for all
the Comforts of this life makes me submit my self with more willingness to this
your Importunity, else Sir believe me, I should think this lonely Visit very
improper, and not at all Concurring with my honor


Your honor is a thing, I would defend against a World of Enemies, then think
not Sweet that I would willingly do any thing to blast it, I know this private
Visit may be censured, but not whilst it is a Secret, as it is now, I had no
other way to express my Love, and not to have done it would have made me
Miserable


You Imagine Sir that my Soul is Musical, and therefore treat me with that
tunefull word; but build not Sir, too much upon my weakness, for though my heart
is tender and unartfull, and Love a bait most proper to deceive me, yet Virtue
is a guard


There needs no guard Sweet Angel against a Love so honorable as mine, the
World is full of Treachery, and our Sex are brooding mischiefs daily against
yours, but I alas am of another Mould, my Soul by fate was designed for your
Slave, my heart still moves the narrow constant Road, in hopes in yours to
find at last it is heaven


Oh that bewitching tongue would charm a Saint. you are not of the humor of
the Town then


I hate the Town and the vain Crowd are in it, the Biased Court and Mercenary
City where gorged with Ignorance and Luxury, Wit is disgraced, the Sciences
despised, and modest Merit mourns in Rag's it is fortune, it is the Epitome of
the nauseous world whose Vices I with such fell-hate pursue, that I love
nothing near the Town but you


In loving me you doubly wrong your self, I have Sir not power to make return.


Your heart is sure your own.


Most certainly: but where I give a heart I Will give a Fortune, and that alas my
Niggard Stars deny me, yet think not that I neglect an honest Love; for to
slight Merit were a baseness in me; no, you shall find worth has a Friend of
me, and shares my best acknowledgements and praise: you are a Man complete by
Heaven and Nature, most qualified with Wit and rarest Arts, which from my Soul
I always loved and honored, and therefore she that gains ye must be happy, but
I whilst s^inted by Injurious fate, can bring no equal value, therefore m^st
think ye a Jewel much too Rich for me to wear


How near to Heaven is my present Joy, from that sweet mouth to hear my self
thus praised; Oh thou dear source of all my worldly blessings, Eternal Rapture
charms me from thy tongue, and whilst I hear thee I am deify'd, to loose thee
were Damnation so Infallible, I question whether there could be a greater


^ay Rise Sir, or you will make me dye with blushing.


Ah make me happy then, and give consent.


To what?


To Marriage, to perform, sweet Angel that blessed work thou were Created for.


Ah, Poverty and Marriage never suit.


Thou have all Craesus Treasure in thy Virtues, and I in gaining thee shall be
far Rich


You think (...) now, but when wants make me troublesome then you will upbraid and
Chide me


Ah never, never, can I chide my Genius for making my days happy.


I can be Constant Sir, therefore have patience, fortune may change and give to
one or the other the Power to oblige


A cursed Fortune, still to Justice blind,
Averse to Merit, but to Idiots kind:
Thou Misers Darling, and trifle of the Brave,
Niggard to the Poor, but to the Rich a Slave:
How nicely happy all Mankind would be,
Thou Nauseous Common-Whore, were not for thee.
How now --

Come, come, give him your hand quickly, here is Crowstich the Teacher coming,
you must dance for your Liberty now Sir


Madam, pray does this Implement belong to you or to Miss Scatterwater, yonder
Laundry Wench will face me dow^, that -- Bless me, who is here [ sees Mer.] how
now Mr. Semibrief-wh^'s that there in the Ladys quarters


A Brother Hop-Merchant of mine Mrs^ (...) that I brought here to help to teach
a little, having a lame leg


Come, come, you will be wanted now in the Dancing-Room, there is my Lady Addleplot
come already, and a great deal of good Company


Odsoe we must make have then, for there is to be singing besides the
Entertainment of a young Indian Lady: A new Boarder that is to Danc


Sir, you will remember to teach me the new Chacune.


Any thing that is mine Madam.


Ah Iernie vat a filthy place is this when compare vid our School in France, no
Decorum, no Ornament, no Fresco, begar metink it stink a like a de Kitchen of
de Lord Mawor -- or the hold of a Ship begar


Ah Sir, our Noses are not so Nice here in England.


Dat is as much as say you are all Sloven in England, gazoon your Jantee French
Dancing Master, all we^r persume and cover them all over vid rare Pulvile to
take away de nauscous ill Air. Ugh -- ugh, -- oh fogh it is Intolerable


Bless ye, Bless my good Child, and make her a good woman, and the mother of
many Children: I think she is grown since I saw her last Mrs Crowstich


Mightily Madam, mightily, would she would grow in grace as much.


Lord save her pretty Moppet, hold up your head Ienny, and go and make a
Courtesy to my Lady Stroddle: --


Your servant pretty Miss: -- Indeed Madam, Miss, you are almost fit for a
husband already; hah Child


Hoh hoh hoh hoh --


Fie Miss Ienny where are your hands now? have I not told ye, you must remember
to put 'em thus always; when you make a Courtesy


That Is my good Girl, Mounsieur Le Prat and Cozen Bounter you don't see Miss
and her fine work here


Madam, I beg your Ladyships pardon, and I am your most Obedient Slave pret
Miss. --


Dear Sweet Pretty Creature yours: --


Well I vow Madam these Nudities are very Ingenious; the Child is Extravagantly
well bred


Monsieur Coopee a word with you.


Here comes the the other Romp that I told ye was so fond of me, I have hopes of
getting her, for they say she is a swinging fortune


Which on my Conscience will be no hard matter for thee to Compass.


I hope so, I Will try: --


Come Molly wipe thy eyes Child, I Will take thee away from 'em to morrow, they
shall whip thee no more seriously --


Ugh ugh ugh ugh --


Go and ask my Lady my Wife blessing, and then come to me again, de'e hear
Molly: -- that is a good girl


This is my wife that is to be, if my Lady can bubble the old Cuckold to give
consent: d'sheart


Fogh, my Lady Stroddle, did your Ladyship ever see such a Nauseous thing? it is
so like the Father


Her face has Mr. Deputys Clumsie Cut indeed Madam:


All dis, Monsieur Coopee I can show you in less time den one half hour -- tah
tah -- I have two tree hundre of de most admirable French step -- hark you me I
will tell a you in four words


Four words Sir, you hove spoke above four thousand in less than a minute. I
can hear no more, I must beg your pardon, I must go teach


Monsieur Merriton, did you ever see such a dam English Puppy? I tell you vat
Sir


And briefly too, Sir or else --


And did the Governess whip her, say ye Sir? Why this is barbarous, but yet I
see she is pretty brisk for all her Jerking


Brisk, nay, the Girl is mettle to the back seriously, but I Will take her away
to Morrow I Am resolved, they shall jerk no Child of mine, if it must be done,
I Will have the jerking her my self


Well said Mr. Deputy, 'ds' heart what a thing of a Spouse shall I have?


Oh here is dear Mr. Coopee, -- Sir your most humble Servant.


Yours dear Miss, I have brought your Guittarr here, and harkee you will be sure
to be ready to morrow to get out as we have contriv'


Yes I warrant ye, and you shall see I Will do it so Cunningly.


Oh Ienny has got her Guittarr, pray look upon her, Madam, there is an Air,
there is a shape, there is an Ingenious look, fogh the other awker'd Romp makes me
sick


De deevil take a me if in the space of half an hour Monsieur Merriton, I would
not have tell a dat Ignorant English Puppy all dis, and hark you I will tell
you one ting more --


No more Monsieur, not a word upon my faith, I am almost deaf already, besides
I must see the Dance


Dis is ver strange dey vill no hear me speak begar.


Very fine, upon my honor, those Guittarrs agree with the dance admirably --
hold up your head Ienny


And gives 'em a delicate Air, Madam, oh it is extreme fine.


The Divil it is, gad a half-tub Strung with Packthread is better Music by
half


Zoon who is dis I see my dear Sweet pret Metresse Betty in disguise, I must
know vat dis mea


Oh yonder is the Sham-Indian Heiress the Rogue Amorous I see has dressed her
rarely


Iernie Metresse Oyley you ravish me to tell me dat your Lady came in disguise
to entertain me


It Is most Certainly so Sir, you are most extremely in her favor, this was a
fit of Jealousy in her to find what Lady you hanker'd after: -- I find the
Fool has money now


Jealousy begar is as true a sign of Love as huffing is of Cowardice, ah
garzoon I languish, I dye, for her, dear Metresse Oyley can you tink I may
Enter de fort of her favor for one hundred Guinny


A 100. Guinnys, ay, any fort in Christendom Monsieur assure your self.


Begar here dey are den but where, how shall I kiss her fair hand Dear Sweet
Charming Metresse Oyley


The Frenchmans as hot as if he were Bombing a fort in good Earnest -- well,
have patience a little Monsieur, and by and by -- I Will bring you a Note --


Aw I understand a you -- mum --


The Captain has a great many taking Qualities I perceive Madam; Pray Sir what
Countryman are ye


If I should speak truth now, and tell her my Mother was a Sinderwench, and
that I was whelp'd in the Mews Dunghill, how my Lady will be surpised Arabia
Foelix, my Father was a very near Relation to Prester John, The Bouncers of
Africa are the Ancient'st Family in the World, Madam, for my own part
thirsting after Glory, I left my Country to assist at the late memorable Seige
of Buda, where I stood upon the Breach just by the Governor at the Storming of
the Town, I saw him fall, and narrowly Escaped my self; after which action
acquainting my self with a famous English Officer, one Colonel Bragg, I came
over hither, where I soon learnt the Language, and had the honor to Ingratiate
my self with her most noble Ladyship


Oh dat is certain de Bounsers be ver great Family in France too.


The Liars indeed are a great Family all the World over, now rather then not
prate at all with that French Fool, join with 'tother in his monstrous vanity


If he is neither Singing, Dancing, nor Prating, you may conclude a French Man
dead at any time


Oh Cozen, as I was standing at the door, just now, who should come by but that
old saucy Granadeer who had the Impudence to affront ye so yesterday, I told
him you are within here, and that you would have him whipped, and seriously,
what does the old Rascal do but gave me a huge Box o'th Ear, called you a
Thousand Sons of Whores, kicked Molly; beat two of my Lady's Footmen that took
my part, and is just now forcing his way in hither seriously, o Lord


D'shert what shall I do, this is my old dog of a Father, now shall I be
disgraced for ever


Jernie -- vat is de meaning of dis sa, sa, vat a Plague do you do.


Let me go and I Will beat the Rogues into Paste.


What Is the matter Friend?


Oh are you there Sirrah?


The Devil, I think, I Am sure you are as great a plague to me,


Mad old fellow, here is an Impudent Rascal, what you have forgot me Rogue, have
ye? but I Will rub up your Memory presently: --


Why how now old Armor of proof de'e know to whom you give this Language, the
Gentleman's a Captain


Why let him be a Colonel, he is my Son, and I Will call him as many Rogues and
Rascals as I please


Would I had been the Son of a Coach-horse.


Thy Son, ha ha ha, this is pleasant in faith; art thou the stock of the Ancient
family of the Bouncers of Africa ha ha ha ha ha. --


De fellow has not bin bred in France dat I Am sure.


Hark'e Sir, I Am Courting a young Lady here that has six thousand pound
Fortune, follow my directions, and recover my Credit, and you shall have half


Six Thousand Pounds --


Every Farthing Sir; it is she yonder that stands by the old Gentleman.


And shall I have half, Neddey?


You shall; therefore own your self to be Colonel Brag, an Acquaintance of mine
at the Siege of Buda, and let me alone for the rest


Why, this is fair now Neddy? now you don't abuse and slight your old Father,
you are a good Boy -- Three Thousand Pounds! Gad Zooks! it is enough to make me
a Colonel indeed


Mind your Cue; Ha, ha, ha, ha: Come dear Colonel, it is enough now, prithee
leave off thy Joking, I see my Lady is surprised at it. Why, Madam, and
Gentlemen, this was nothing but a Jest all this while, this is my dear Friend
Colonel Brag that I met withal at Buda --


Yes, Madam, I am Colonel Brag, and as the Captain says, we me together at Buda.


Methinks your Habit is not very like a Colonel, Sir.


Jernie de ver, resemblance of de English nasty foot Granadeer.


Oh, a Jest, a Jest, the Colonel has often these Frolicks to come a broad in a
Disguise; he has some Design in this now I warrant


I warrant he is a Colonel o'th wrong side, by his beating my Footmen; the
Rebels all know my Livery, and have a spi^e at it; and therefore pray tell him,
Cozen, I care not for such Roysters Company


Sir, you would do well to humor my Lady a little in her way, she is a great
Stickler against the Government


What, you would have me speak Treason, would you ye Rogue, and so hoist my self to
the Gallows before I Am aware


Would thou were hoisted there fifty Cubits high: Dsheart, this old Scoundrel
will discover all yet, I see by his awkward Carriage


A Filthy Beast! Come, Madam, let us leave him, and go and give order for our
Bonfire. Madam, are your Ladyship's Jack-Boots ready


They were liquor'd this Morning, Madam; I Am ready in a Minute.


Mr. Alderman, Come, let us go; Cozen Bouncer, come you away too from the Old
Rebel, I have occasion to use ye


I Will wait on ye, Madam. Meet me at the Magpy-Tavern at Nine.


Enough, I Will come -- Gentlemen, Good buy.


Oh, your Servant good Colonel Musket, ha, ha, ha, I will know the bottom of
this Cheat I Am resolved, and to effect it thou shall go and invite 'em to a
Glass of Wine with me to morrow


That old fellow is certainly a Counterfeit; but what is the other? Is he really
a Captain


No more than thou art a General: It Is the Common Title nowadays for all the
Bullies, Shop-lifts, Robbers, Pimps, Panders and Rakehels about the Town; any
tall Fellow that can but get a red Coat on's Back is dubbed a Captain
presently: But prithee let us go, whilst the Monsieur is busy yonder, for fear
he should thrust himself upon us; and dear Rogue, procure me but another
Meeting to Morrow with Mirtilla, and then I Am thine for ever


I Will do what I can, but you may thank your Dancing Faculty.


Jernie, here be de very pret Fancy, a Sheny Orange vid de Billet Doux wrap in
it; ha, ha, ha, let a me see now vat it say? Ha! -- It Is from my deer sweet
Mrs. Betty, Begar -- I Will go into the Garden and read it, for I see here comes
more Company


Patience! Talk not to me of Patience, Mr. Amorous, I will have Justice.


You shall, Madam, you shall.


I Will have him hanged, I Will make a Parliament business of it, I Will make him an
Example to all Villainous cheating Guardians; I Will mount him, tho it cost me
half the Estate


This is a very Indian Devil.


It Is well she is ignorant who you are, Sir; for she has such a Devilish
Spirit, that, G^d, if she knew, she would go near to tare ye to pieces


The very Issue of a Dragon; Gadzooks, I Am afraid to come near her.


Would I had the Villain here' I Would tare his Throat out with these Fingers, I Would
chop him into more pieces than ever Medaea did her Brother Absirtus in Story:
What say you, Sir? would not you help me to murder the Villain, hah --


O yes, Madam,; I Would have a Leg or an Arm of the Rascal if he were here


A Treacherous bloody kidnabbing Villain, hah, Sir!


Oh, a Rogue, a Rogue, a very Rogue!


O^ that this Dagger were in his Hearts Blood.


He were right served if it were, Madam.


But the Gallows shall perform the Work more decently; therefore Mr. Amorous,
if you have any Love for me, as you profess, lose not a minut's time in the
Prose^ution; you know the Witnesses are all ready, and want nothing but a
Summons; I think the Law cannot fail to do me right in so notorious an Abuse;
but if it should, I swear by Mars, Apollo, Venus, Mercury, and all the Powers
of Fire, Air, Earth and Water, rather than let my Cause be left in the Lurch,
I Will st^b him, tho I do it in the Church


Ay, there I would give thee leave, for I never come into one; but that is all
one on my Conscience, this Fury will be the Death of me one way or other


Certainly, Sir; For to say Truth, she has often a mad Fit takes her, and then
she fears neither God, Man, nor the Devil; she got it with drinking Brandies
and Hot Waters in the Indies, Sir


Well Cozen, I see I must depend upon thee -- What relief, hah?


Why, Sir, to show what a Value I have for ye, and what Care for your
Reputation, make up the Estate of Seven hundred a Year that I sold ye, a
Thousand, and settle it upon me, and I Will instantly marry her, and give you a
Discharge for all the rest


Well, well, I Will do it Nephew, I Will do it, for I find, if I should carry it
against her by Law, I shall never carry my own Guts in quiet an hour after;
she will have her Dagger amongst 'em before I Am aware


Ay Sir, besides the Disgrace of Kidnapping you know.


Ay, it is time; but Mum for that, good Nephew; thou know all Flesh is frail,
and 'twas a shrewd Temptation: Go, go, and get the Writings ready, and I Will
Seal to Morrow: But prithee when thou have Married her, keep her within doors,
for Gadzooks, I had rather eat a Fricassy of Souls with Beelzebub, than meet her
in my Dish again


Ha, ha, ha, ha -- Is he gone?


And most damnably frighted, what betwixt the shame of being taken for a
Kidnapper, and his own Cowardly Apprehensions of being Murdered, he is even out
of his Wits; the business is done, ye little Devil, the Writings are going to
be drawn for a Thousand a Year, and he is to Seal to Morrow


Ah, dear Dog, I am glad on it for thy sake, I vads Iacky; and I think I acted
to the Life


Rarely, Rarely, and thy Settlement shall fare never the worse for it; it may
chance to swell to Five Hundred a year now, ye dear Devil you


No indeed sweet Blood, that is too much I Am afraid, you will think I Am mercenary,
Iacky; Mrs. Strikeup, Sir Thomas Rental's Mistress, it is true, has Five Hundred
a year; but for my part, my dear Honey, sweet Puppy-face, thou art so Charming
I can love thee without e're a Groat


Ah! dear Betty, I love thee so entirely, that I think I can never do enough
for thee: Prithee let us go and be private a little, shall we


Not now, dear Iacky, there is the Governess and some other Boarders in my
Chamber, who expect me at supper, but to morrow my Honny-suckle Rogue I Will be
thine all day -- till when my little dear sweet Apes Face, adien -- Ah Sirrah,
I Am too fond of thee


Well, go thy ways, if all thy Charming Sex had Souls like thee despising base
Confinement and wore thy constant kind endearing humor, in what a forlorn
state were Matrimony! A Wife! why is not she the best of Wives, that loves me,
that pleases and indulges my desires, and all still upon honor, without force,
and this, dear Betty, is thy Character

Marriage the product of Convenience is,
It Is Love with freedom brings the truest Bliss.

Ha, ha, ha, ha --


How now, what makes this French Puppy here grinning? so Monsieur, you are very
merry, I see


Merry! ay begar, I have de ver good reason too if you knew all -- dis Lettra
dat you see here make me de most happy person in de whole World, begar


A Letter! what from some young thing here I warrant, that is smitten with thy
airy parts; come prithee -- discover thou know I am thy Friend, art stealing
a Fortune here? hah --


Dam Fortune, she is a blind Bawd dat obliges none, but Fool begar; dis
Intreague is beyond all de Fortune in de World, which because you are de Man of
Honor I will communicate; you must know den dat here is great Beauty in
dis-Town dat goes by the name of Madam Iiltal


Ha, Iiltal! --


A rare Creature, both for de Shape, de Wit, de Beauty, and every ting dat is
incomparable


So, Sir.


Now you must know dat at intreaguing is de very soul of the French, and my
self being always great Admirer of dat Gallantry, I have endear my merit so
much in her Favor, by de Song, de Fiddle, de Present, and oder ting shall be
nameless, dat she came yesterday hither in an Indian habit to meet me


To meet you --


Yes, begar, ha, ha, ha, vas not ver pretty frolic, hah, for you must know dat
we have sometime met together in order place before now


Damnation! What does this Rascal mean [Aside.] This must be my Betty, it can
be no other -- So, Sir, and that Letter is from her, is it


Just now sent to invite me to her private Chamber, where dear is de Bed, and
Couch, and Chair, and all oder convenience; ah, it is full of de most tender
obliging expression dat ever vas writ; dear, read, you shall find she has great
deal of Wit -- she is ver fine person, ma foy


Hell take me if it be not her own Character! Oh patience!

Your Merits, dear Sir, have so won upon my heart that I can no longer defer
your desire; therefore you may come, if you please, by the Back Garden up
Stairs into my Apartment; for I Am obliged to stay here to night upon some
urgent occasion; now is your time, and to endear ye more, know that I intend to
feign my self sick to a young passionate Fool that loves me and waits for
admittance, to possess the greater Pleasure of enjoying your sweet Company


Ay, dat Fool, dat Fool, de turning away of dat fool dat wait, please me most
of all -- ha, ha, ha, vat tink you? Hah, is not she an Angel


A down right Devil.


Deevle! who, who, Jernie, vat are you tinking on? Oh you are surprised at her
Wit are you? ha, ha, ha, vel begar, I believe she has the richest brain in all
England, ma foy, and is assurement the greatest


Jilt in Europe, by Heaven! Oh -- Confound her, is all [ Stamps the Vows and
fondness come to this -- Ah dear Merriton now I confess my Blindness and thy
Judgment


Hey! Vat a Diable is de matra? nay, nay, if you be mad, come give me de
Lettra, and let me go, for I long to be embracing de dear, dear ravishing
Creature dat stay for me


Why then let me tell you, Monsieur Rantipol tanto, you shall not have her
Letter, nor shall you go to her neither


Hey morbleau, vat time of the Moon is dis, -- vat you mean Monsieur!


Why I mean to signify to ye Monsieur, that this Charming Angel of yours has
been my Whore this seven years; I settled an Estate upon her in 87, carried her
to Flanders in 88, and spent two thousand pounds upon her in 89, brought her
over with me in 90, and now this present year find my self jilted and resolve a
Revenge, therefore consent to qui^ all pretensions to her instantly or draw


Draw, dis is very fine begar, I come heeder to make Love, and you will force
me to make War, but it never shall be say dat a Frenchman desert his Mistress,
or his Intreague -- Come on Monsieur, sa, sa


A Plague, what you are dancing a Galliard, are ye -- Come, I Will show ye an
English step, Sir


Gazoon, vat dam Fortune is dis? I have shame my Country -- begar dis is de
first time dat ever de French were foiled


Oh, Sir, you are ill read in History I find; come, there is your Sword again,
you see I scorn to make you beg your Life; therefore in return of Honor, fail
not to meet me here to morrow at this time; I have business with ye --


Begar, you are ver brave Fellow, therefore I Will come; and dee hear Monsieur,
when ever our great Monarch come and conquer your Country, de Devil take a me,
but I will do as much for you


Oh, I thank ye Sir.


Dis is ver brave Fellow, ma foy, but a Plague of his dam English step for all
dat


And now to ruminate on my Revenge,
And right my self in this strange turn of Fortune;
For oh, I loved this Jilt beyond my Reason,
Wounded my heart afresh, and every night
Fancied I had the first sweet budding Nosegay,
When every Flower was common in the Market.
Suppose I poison, or I strangle her,
Why, I send her to the Devil, my self to the Gallows.
What satisfaction! Suppose I trade with some of her Aunts the Bawds, and get
the Pox, and give it her, why then the Venom of her own Nature will relieve it,
and I alone am wretched, or should I cut her into little Morsels, like a true
Serpent, every part would live, and every part would join again to sting me. No,
I have it, the Purse is the Whores mortal part, I Will stab her there

Learn this by me, you that desert kind Wives,
And with this cursed Tribe debauch your Lives;
For Gold you gain a thousand Sweets and Dears,
But cease to pay, and then the Punk appears.

TO laugh at thee is not like a Friend, and to rail at her would be to no
purpose: I only hope thou will value my Judgment another time, and in the
present Juncture make a good use of this lucky discovery


I warrant thee, thou shall as much value me for my discretion now, as thou
did formerly wonder at me for my strange stupidity, but yet by Heaven it
shocks my very Nature to think such barbarous ingratitude could injure such
true Love


That Love was rather a Disease in thee than otherwise; thou had a
Callenture, and thy strange madness muffled her jilting mischiefs from thy Eyes


Damned Mercenary Whore.


Oh fie! How can thou rail at a poor Creature for acting of her kind. A Whore
and Jilt are Boot and Spur, the one depends on the other, and it is unreasonable
to expect a separation; and if thou think thy Wit or Love could make her
constant, thou art weaker still; for a Whore has no Love but what depends on
Appetite; the coursest Food often goes down the best, and is just like one
invited to an excellent Treat, yet is not satisfied, nor thinks himself well
entertained, unless after all you let him take a nasty Pipe of Tobacco


Half a Flask in the King's Arms, Score.


How near the cursed Nature of the Devil is such a nauseous Creature?
Yet such there are I find.
Sir, there is a Gentleman below desires to speak with ye.

Oh, it is Coopee; go and send him up, Sirrah.
I employed him, Jack, about a pleasant Discovery of the Colonel and Captain
I told thee of -- Well, what now Tom?

They are coming, Sir; and 'twill make you laugh to see in what a strange
Romantic Dress the old sham-Colonel's in now; he looks just like the old
Picture of Giddeon in the Hangings, and struts as if he were newly come from
lapping at the River


I Am resolved to find out the Trick now; and if thou can get the Romp and
the Six Thousand Pounds, thou do thy self a Profit, me a Pleasure


What, the Rogue is stealing one of the Kitlins from the Boarding-School, is he?


Faith, Sir, I think you have nicked it, for all she can do yet is to Purr and
Mew a little, she is not come to her Scratching. But there has a plaguey
Accident happened since I saw you last


What, Prithee? a discovery of any thing?


All, all, Faith; and the business is this moment in Agitation; that damned
Witch Crowstich has told the Governess that I used to cram the Girl with
Almonds and Reasons, and when I taught her to Dance, kiss her between every
Step, upon which Mr. Deputy and my Lady are sent for this Afternoon; for my
part, I was discarded presently: but to show ye that I have played my Game very
well, just as I was going out of Door, the poor young Fool followed, and
pretending to give me a Song-Book, pinned this Note to the first leaf, ha, ha,
ha -- Here, you may read it if you can, for she does but just scrawl, and
spells worse than a Town-Whore in a Billet-doux


If you lofe me as you portend, and will marro me, and let me go abroad to eat
Cowsturd and Chesscock as often as I please, I will lofe you butter than my
Father, and will come to you out at the Balcondey in the Iurdain at Eight a
Clock just after we have Soopt. I am, sweet Mr. Coopee, your true Friend, Jenny
Addleplot. Ha, ha, ha, ha


Ha, ha, ha, ha. One that never knew it, might Swear that Letter came from a
Boarding-School by the Lofe and Butter that is in it


So, why this goes very well, hah, and thou intendest to be at the Balconey at
the time appointed, do not


Most punctually: For I hear my Lady intends to match her to this Coxcombly
Captain that is coming hither, but I Will prevent her Faith, I Will about it
instantly


Oh, here comes the Colonel -- Now for the Discovery.


Now, Sir, besure you don't discredit your self, but remember you are a Colonel
still


Sirrah, hold your Tongue, and leave off your saucy Instructions or as I am a
true Grauadeer --


Or Lord, O Lord, a Granadeer already!


A true Colonel I mean, Sirrah, I will swinge you incessantly.


Oh Colonel, your most humble Servant, and Captain yours; -- Pray know my
Friend here


Gentlemen, I am your Worm to tread upon, the Lappet of your Shoe, your Slave
of Slaves, and shall be proud to serve you, whether in the Celler, the Kitchen,
or the Stable


So now he talks like a Groom, a Tapster, and Scullion -- I shall be undone.


Oh, you debase your self too much, Colonel, for so great an Officer,
performing such an Action as yours at the Siege of Buda qualifies ye to be a
General to some great Monarch


Pray, Colonel how is their Method of Fortification at Buda?


Buda, Sir?


Ah, he is foundred already: Dsheart; Sir, own you have an ill Memory presently,
or you will spoil all


I Have a very ill Memory Gentlemen, I hope you will excuse me.


Tell 'em you hurt your Brain by catching a great Cold with lying in the
Winter-Trenches in Hungary


Why, when was I in Hungary, Sirrah? This Rogue crams so many Lies into my
Mouth together, that Gadzooks, it is a pain to me to know which I shall get out
first


You must needs be able to give a good Account of the famous Transaction at
Buda, Sir: Come, pray let us hear


Say yes, yes Sir, and I Will help ye out.


Yes, yes Sir, at least the Captain here can, if I cannot. Go and manage your
Lie your self, ye Dog, I Am almost choked


We were both drawn out, Gentlemen, in the Detatchment that received the
Assault; the Colonel here, I must needs say, behaved himself more like a Lion
than a Man. And for my own part, I escaped by Miracle; I fought on Foot three
Hours by the Clock, when above twelve Great Fieldpieces played at me all the
while as thick as Ha^l; I had the Honor to Horse the King of Poland twice,
lent my own Sword to the Duke of Bavaria when he was in Distress; and at last,
with a Clapper of a Bell, which a swinging Turk that I had just before killed,
had used instead of a Battle-Ax, fought through their Vantguard, and came off
safe in spite of 'em


A Clapper of a Bell! Why Captain, there are no Bells in Turkey.


No, Captain, no -- The Turks never use any Bells or Clappers neither.


Ah plague of my heedless Nonsense, what shall I say now.


Hold ye, Gentlemen, hold ye, I can make it out plain: Now will I help the
Rogue off at a dead list


What, that the Turks use Bells, Colonel Coddlebrain.


The Turks, No, no: But you must know that the Captain there was formerly
Prentice to a Blacksmith, and brought the Clapper to the Wars along with him


Oh, that may be indeed -- Your Servant, Noble Captain.


Much Good may'^ do ye with your Clapper, worthy Captain.


Ah, Pox of your Plain-dealing -- I Am disgraced for ever now: What do you mean
by this Colonel, when was I Prentice to a Blacksmith, hah


When? Why, what a damned shallow Brain have thou: Why, were not thou Prentice
to Old George Grimble when I sold Brandy and Tobacco by the Church-wall at
Antwerp, just the Winter before I listed my self a Granadeer


A Granadeer!


Ah the Devil! now all is out, and nothing can retrieve it.


No, no, a Granadeer: He listed himself a Colonel, I warrant; hah -- what
say thou


Ay.


Ay, a very fine Story you have made of this indeed, and I shall inform my Lady
presently of your great Merit and Extraction; and so my most Noble Blacksmith
Adien


Your Servant, honest Granadeer.


Hold, Sir, though the Captain here be a kind of a Coward, or so, yet you shall
know that I have a Sword


And Dagger, I know it; all Granadeers have. Come, come, it is in vain to be
testy with us; there is Money for the Wine, you can'^ do less than drink together
when we are gone -- H^sh, not a word more


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Ah! plague of your Antwerp Occupation, here is 6000 l. lost now, and the best
Maintenance that ever Man had: Oh, I Am lost, ruined for ever! I shall never be
kept again, that touches the very Soul of me: Oh! What shall I do


Why, take your Turkish Battle-Ax, and go to the Wars, Captain, you will get
Immortal Honor I know presently; and so here is my Service to ye, good Captain
Clapper


Nay, let it be some of the Brandy then that you sold by the Church wall, good
Colonel Granadeer: D'sheart, was the Devil in ye to talk at that Rate


What, Sirrah, I warrant you thought I had crammed a dozen or two of Lies in
the hinder part of my Jaw, as a Monkey does the overplus of his Dinner. But,
Sirrah, I Would have you know I was of too honest a Principle


Honest! Ay, that is it has made ye dine so often on pickled Herrings and hard
Cheese; Oh, what will become of me


Come, come, Sirrah, take the Gentleman's Advice, and strip from that
fluttering Coat, and sell it, 'twill serve to make us merry a considerable
while; and since these Titular Captains are most of 'em Rogues, I Will provide
you a new Title, you shall serve the King and Queen, Sirrah, and be as I am, an
honest Granadeer


Lord, Sir, what do you mean? If my Lady should but hear I was in Company where
they but named the King and Queen, she would discard me for ever -- And I have
yet some small Hopes


Sirrah, I Will have you hope no more hopes; but let my Lady be pox'd by her
whole Party, cramped with her Jack-boots, and choked with her cold Tea. Come,
come, strip, strip, I Will have the Coat off presently; that Lace will keep us
two Months at least, in Tobacco, Brandy, and Red Herrings


Oh the Devil, he is at his old Play again.


Come, come; quick, quick; off with Hat, Peruke, and Coat; quick, I say.


Quick! Ay, as quick as my Legs can carry me, [runs out] if you are at that
sport


Say you so, Rascal? I Will be with ye presently Faith.


Embarked at last, and sculk'd into the Hold;
My Flight was to my jealous Parents told;
As much too timorous they, as I too bold.
Ah dear, dear Ovid, how thy precious Wit,
Dressed in the glittering Robe of Charming Poetry,
Moves my soft Soul? -- When e're thou writest of Love,
Methinks my Heart melts with the Sacred Flame,
And even makes Virgin Innocence grow wanton:
For then dear Merriton I think on thee,
And every Thought begets an Ecstasy,
Almost too fierce for Virtue to endure:
Yet though I love thee, my Resolves are constant,
I Will sigh and mourn for thee my dearest Friend,
But can no more, till our hard Fortunes mend.

You amaze me, Mrs. Crowstich, with this Discovery: I thought it impossible the
Girl should be so wild


It Is strange indeed, Madam, for one of her years; but your Ladyship shall have
the proof on it presently


She here! To disturb my Contemplation: Horrid Creature! How shall I avoid her?


The the other Dowdy indeed I always imagined indocible; but that Sir Arthur's
Offspring, a Child born of my own Body, Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh,
Vitals of my Vitals, that she should degenerate, I am amazed at it


To look so much below her self, as to fancy a little Dancing Master; it is not
adequate your Ladyships Blood that runs in her, I confess


Whither were you going you great Romp? ha!


Oh Pray Mam forgive me this time, and I Will never do so again.


Only to Mr. Coopee, Madam; this has been hatching a good while; the the other
too is as mad for Semibrief our Singing-Master; they were both found Romping in
the Garden with 'em last Night, but the Governess has turned them away for it.
Here she comes with her Father, I Have told him her* Tricks already


Ah Madam, the Girls are both undone seriously!


The Girls! I hope you don't couple your Tarrier there with Sir Arthur's Breed,
Jack Sauce! -- Ah Tearshift, it is evident now that filthy thing there has quite
spoiled Miss by Keeping her Company


It Is certainly so, Madam, there is no comparison between the Childrens Parts.


I'lle examine her my self. Hussy, speak the Truth, and escape the Rod: What
did you and that awkward Creature do with Coopee and Semibrief in the Garden
last Night


No hurt, truly, truly now.


What business had ye there? What was your Design? Come, don't ye lie.


Why, we Eat, ugh, ugh; we eat a dozen of Custards there.


A dozen of Custards, very well.


And about Fourteen Cheescakes.


There wan't Fourteen then, there was but Thirteen in all, and I have one of
them in my Pocket here


My Lady Stroddle, did ye ever hear such a filthy Romp?


She has a little too much of the vulgar, I confess, Madam.


Madam, I beseech your Ladyship to hear Molly tell what Word* passed between
'em, and what that Impudent Singing-master said to her


Prithee hold thy Tongue.


Pray Madam, let me beg your Ladyship. Come Molly, leave chawing your
Cheescake, and tell my Lady, Child


Why, he asked me --


But pray Mother don't be angry with Mr. Coopee, for he is a mighty pretty Man,
and the best Caperer in all the Town


And pray Father don't fall out with Mr Semibrief, for he is a fine Man every
inch of him, and the best Triller, aw, aw, au, au


The poor Fool wins upon me so with her pretty Carriage, that seriously I can
deny her nothing: Come and kiss me, Molly


Fogh, how the Brute licks the Calf yonder. Well, Mrs. Crowstich, though the
Fellow has been saucy with her; it is not so far gone I see, but the Girl may be
reclaimed


Ah Madam, this is not half her Fault; if this had been all I had born it with
some Patience; but, Madam, he has taught her to be a Rebel too


Hah!


And made 'em drink Confusion to the French three times one after another in
Sillabub


Degenerate Bastard? Is It possible! I had rather she had been choked.


Nay, and what is worst of all, the Villan made her sit on's Knee and sing an
impudent Ballad twice over in praise of King William


A young Whore, gad I Will whip her presently before ye all.


Nay, dear Lady, seriously, you will put your self into such an heat. -- Hussy
get ye gone


I Have a trick for it yet, for I Will go and hide my self till night, and then get
out to Mr. Coopee at the Belcony


And I Will get out at the Cellar-Window to Mr. Semibrief and be gone from 'em
all I Am resolved on it


Away ye Coxcomb, or I Will give you as much; 'dslife a young Jade to drink
Confusion to the French; I shall hate Sillabub as long as I live for it; but
I Will claw her, I Will teach her to turn Rebel


Pray Mrs. Crowstich go and strive to pacify her, for she is in a devilish
humor seriously


But to pass upon 'em thus for a dancing Master and undiscovered, is a strange
Riddle to me


It pleased Mrs. Crowstich to introduce me, who it seems, has some friendly
opinion of my qualification for my performance Yesterday; beside, what can be
strange to Love, who'd not change Shapes like Jove for such a Danae


Who would not talk like you that had your Wit?


Or who would live confined here, that had yours? once more think on my Suit
then dear Angel


Nay, now you are unjust; did you not promise, provided I would suffer ye to
see me, to touch no more upon that jarring string


If that be jarring, there is then no Music; but Discord is the Soul of
Harmony. I own I promised ye, alas! but how? as men in Fevers promise not to
drink, yet have no Ease or Comfort till they break it; or as to modest Virgins
newly wedded and beg a Weeks Reprieve, we seem to promise, but how can that
e're bind the amorous Bridegroom, when there is necessity it should be broke


Little should I depend upon your promise, when you had power, that can
infringe it now


All things of sense unanimously excuse me; I cannot look upon thee without
loving, nor love thee but I must renew my suit


A Suit bent to the ruin of us both.


No, rather to our Souls Eternal Comfort.


Oh Heaven! What Comfort can there be in Love, curbed and confined by Poverty?


We have no Poverty, whilst we love enough; the Dross of gilded Luxury never
can equal the Glittering Ore of our sublime Contentment. Thou have a Soul I
know disputes Fortune as much as vile unchastity or folly; a Soul that sits in
the middle of her Wheel with Wings still poyz'd, not mounting up, nor falling,
but in a constant Station fixed, can smile at those that climb, and those that
hurry down


I have so, and I own I think as little of the vain noisy fluttering World as
you, the gaudy Fop or haughty thing of Title, the strutting Prelate, or the
Knave in Furs can laugh at too; nay I could be contented with the least gift of
Fate, if that were all


If that were all! What is there else, sweet Life?


It Is not for my own sake that I deny, but, Sir, for yours; if we were married,
perhaps I should love ye, nay love ye dearly; perhaps have Children too, some
half a dozen pretty smiling Blessings to cling around and help Life's tedious
Journey with the dear nonscence of their prattling Stories. But should the
freezing hand of Want afflict us, what should we do, but sit by our small fire,
Tears in our Eyes and throbing Griefs at Heart, to see our little Flock of
unfledged Cupids, shivering with Cold as wanting necessaries, who looking
wishly on us seemed to say, why would you marry thus to make us miserable


Thou talkst of Children, and I think of Heaven, when I conceit thou art to be
their Mother; oh I would learn to out-dig my Grandsire Adam, e're thou should
want the profits of the Earth, or my dear Children born of thy sweet Body,
their due or proper sustenance


And what must I do then when you should dig? I know in Marriage we must share
the Troubles as well as Joys of him we are confined to; can I see him that lies
within my Arms so full of cares he has scarce time for Love, rise early to
provide for me and mine, and I not knit, or sow, or spin or something? The
laboring Husband that has a lazy Wife may not only suspect her Love, but
Virtue -- No, I Would never part from you in your ill Fortune, but will not be the
Cause to bring it on ye


You cannot be the Cause I have enough, though not what you deserve.


But I alas! have not enough for you.


No matter, Heaven will prosper.


That I hope, and then my Tongue shall tell another story, till when adieu; and
yet I believe I value ye, and it is value keeps me from consenting


Come, come, it is plain you hate me; for if you did not, Fortune and Wealth
were Trifles


Be ungrateful and think so still.


I must and will by Heaven!


How now Son? Why in such have? Come back again.


My Foster Father here, and in this unhappy Juncture! Oh Heaven! What shall I
say to excuse my self


Sir, I beseech ye give me leave, I Am ill of the sudden, and want a little Air
-- What makes he here? She said indeed she was beholding to him, but how,
Heaven knows: I Will observe more hereafter, this may be a Riddle worth finding
out


Sir, I am afraid I have offended you, finding me thus discoursing with your
Kinsman in this suspicious manner


To fear implies a Guilt; I know your Virtue, and you might have spared that
word; beside, he is my Son


Your Son! Nay, then a Sisters Amity may well excuse this Freedom; 'twas Sir,
your Interest first that introduced him; for any Blood of yours mere Gratitude
would prompt my throbing Heart to love and honor


'Twas warm discourse you had, the purple Signal that yet remains displayed
within your Cheeks, confirmed me that your Tongues have had a Battle, and Love
or War has fiercely been denounced. -- Pray let me know, and if I Have interest
in ye, as for past Cares I cannot doubt I have, give me a share in the
discovery


Sir, I dare trust you with my secret Sins, much more then with my little
worldly Business: Know then, your Son has often been pleased to honor me with
passionate Expressions of his Love


I thought so, pray proceed


Ah! then take all; I own I love him too, and now you have a secret out, which
nothing but your Commands could ever have forced from me; I love him, Sir, yet
knowing my Condition, modest regard of wronging him hereafter by my ill Stars,
made my poor famished Heart hold out, though within one short hour of starvin


This is as I could ^ wish -- Come be not sad, the Stars have better aspects
than you think, and Fortunes giddy Wheel will soon turn round to sea^ thee on
the utmost Spoke with Honors


Ah, do not mock my Wretchedness, dear Father!


Not for the World; come in with me and listen, for I will tell thee wonders;
the Minute is near and the blessed Hand of Providence to pass thee from thy
Labyrinth of Misfortunes holds out a Clue and guides thee on to Happiness

In every Life, the Doom of Fate secures
One Hour to make it blessed, and this is yours.

Now Monsieur, you see what a Precipice I freed ye from, and what Reasons I
had for my late passionate resentment


Monsieur, you have made it out dat you have de good reason, and I perceive dat
she be de ver dam Jilt, ma foy; and tho I have lost de little Honor in de
quarrel, I have save one hundred Guinea morbleau, vish make me ver much amends:
But Monsieur, pray observe, I will show you the finest French Song here dat I
learnt dis Morning, -- thol loll, loll


'Dslife, no Song now, dear Le Prat, this is our very Minute of Projection;
I Have just sent for her, go, go, prithee step into that Closet, and when I call,
come and confront her


Vid all my Heart, and I will practice dis Song all de while dear for fear I
should fall asleep


And if there be a subtiler Devil than ordinary,
Used by grave Statesmen, or by jilting Whores,
Him I invoke t'assist me; here she comes.

Why that French Fop should fail to come to my Assignation is a Riddle to me,
Oyley


And to me too, Madam. I Am sure I wound him upright, I wonder he did not strike.


Hush, here is the other Woodcock just fallen into the Plash; one at a Shoot must
serve, when there is but little Game: my dear, dear Iackey


Oh my sweet, sweet, sweet -- Devil!


But why is my dear Honey, little Puppy-dog come before the hour? hah --


My dear Life might assure her self, 'twas to do her good; to be short then,
you must know that my Uncle just now sent for me


So, dear Monkey, so, so.


And sent me word: that upon condition, that I would marry thee to morrow
morning, he would feal my Settlement to Night, ha, ha, ha, ha


Ha, ha, ha, ha, an old Fool, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, ha -- I must laugh too, but it is at him; Lord, who would be a Man,
to let a Woman abuse him thus


So dear Betty, thou know I had no reason to defer it, Child there is a
thousand pound a year coming, ye dear, sweet, pretty, melting, charming --
confounded --


I shall bite ye, Sirrah, I cannot forbear, I shall bite your Nose off If you
come near me: ah Iackey, Iackey, if ever you should leave me I should dye, I
should dye. --


Ah! how the Devil has turned her to do mischief; her trebble Violin is just
now strung, and every Fop that plays upon it is damned


How now? What Is that?


The Devil sure, it can be nothing else.


A Plague on him! Now is that French Fool's Head so full of that new Song, he
has forgot where he is, and is singing our aloud. You need not go Mrs. Oyley,
it is one without that came with me to be Witness to the Marriage upon occasion,
or so


I vow, I was terribly frighted at the sound; I don't use to hear any Man's
Voice, but thine Iackey, so near my Bedchamber


Kind Betty, -- No, a Pox take ye, I find they all used to come in.


There Is an Oagle now, there is an Oagle, as well worth two Guineas between Turk
and Jew, as one shilling's worth another


And will you marry me to morrow morning then Iackey?


Will I! ah thou shall find, I Will do more for thee than that; come give Mrs.
Oyley the Key, and bid her fetch the Settlement out of the Cabinet quickly, I
suppose a Jointure of five hundred a year may do as well


I cannot give it her, I vow I cannot, I Am ashamed, -- I vow I am.


Oh fie! you must not trifle now, the Time wastes; Mrs. Oyley take it from her.


Pray, Madam, since the noble Squire will have it so --


That Bitch takes me for a Cully too, I find by her Squiring me. --


Indeed Iacky, I shall dye for thee.


I vow I shall.


I shall never live to be brought to Bed, I Am afraid I shall have two this time
-- I swear, I believe I shall


So! here is Generation for ye! One Jointure has begot two Bastards in half a
quarter of an Hour


Here it is Sir, and Heavens bless ye for your Love to her.


Umph -- I think indeed this is my erring Scrawl.


Yes indeed is it, I was witness to'r, it is your very hand, Sir.


You are also Witness to this then,


Zoons, what does he mean?


Oh, Madam! be not afrighted I beseech ye, it may chance to make ye miscarry of
your two Babes; there is what I know will please ye -- it is your Jointure,
Madam, your Ladyship understands the shorthand


My Letter to the Frenchman -- Oh Confusion! I Am undone.


There is no Witness yet, but I Will call one; Allons Monsieur approach!


Sharming, and fair, and most extraordinary your very most humble and obliged
Serviture; Tholl, loll --


D'slife, if this be true, I must into woollen stockins again.


Madam, the Deevel take me, if I am not ver sorry -- ^at --


Hell take thee, burn the World, and perish Nature!


Faith, Madam, I confess I Have been your hindrance, the Monsieur had a Hundred
Guineas for ye, but that I told him my Whore took no money. As for your Babes
of Grace, if they chance to be born naked, and have not back and breast on like
Troop, I Will give ye something to buy Blankets, and so adieu, thou Wretched --


Impudent.


Pockey.


Common.


Senceless, and what is yet worse, Ungrateful Where, And Curse me Heaven, if
e're I love thee more


Nay, you are right enough served, could you think to have an intrigue with a
Frenchman, but that all the Town should know it


Oh! That I were a Witch now for a minute, or knew the means to be so; I Have
heard of Bonds written with Blood and Charms, that have by that made mischief
prosperous, would some revengeful Power would tempt me once, hah

I Am wishing for the Devil, and here he comes as pat, as he were sure to have
my Soul beforehand; oh -- for a Female Plot now to o'rereach this subtle
Amorous, and make his Wit outwitted, the Omen appears fair, let me Consider


I Am sure I saw my Nephew come this way, but where to find him amongst this
Warren of Conney Burrows, is a Work past my Skill; I bolted into one of their
holes just now, and there were two or three young bouncing Girls stark naked,
going to wash themselves in a Tub; 'gad I thought I should have lost my
Eyesight, or at least been used like Acteon, but that as it happened there were
no Hounds about me. A plague on it, I cannot find the way down neither, and I am
damnably afraid of falling into that Indian Tigers Quarters again


I have it, go Oyley and tell him I Would speak with him, and thou dear Devil of
Female subtilty, if e're thou were our Sexes Benefactor, assist me now


Sir, my Lady would speak with ye.


Oh! Gad's bud, I Am fallen into the Devil's paws, with seeking to avoid 'em;
Oh pray young Gentlewoman inform your Lady that the Writings are ready, I Will
Seal to night, and it is no matter for speaking with her; alas, you know she is
mad


Mad, pray Sir, come nearer, and be undeceived. Mad, did you say?


Sir Rowland, I could never have thought a man of your Sense could be so grossly
imposed upon, without perceiving it


How Is this --


Lord, Sir, you shun me as I were a Ghost, but I find this is your Nephews
Trick, and I cannot blame ye, he would have Tricked me too, Sir, had I not
watched him


She talks well now, but if this should be a calm fit of the Devil in her, only
to get time to put the Dagger into my guts, 'gad I Will keep my distance yet for
all her Coaksing


Now work but thy part Devil, we are made again:


I had designed to send to ye this morning, Sir, to tell ye how this base
ungrateful Fellow, this Prodigal your Nephew has abused ye; nay, not only you
but me, by making me affront one of your merit; but, Sir, I ask you now ten
thousand Pardons


This must be madness, for I can find no sense in it.


I had at first, it is true, as it was reasonable, some ill thoughts of ye, but
now have much the better; his Plots are all unravelled, and by substantial
information now, I find 'twas he that fold me to the Indies


It Was so, Madam, oh he is a damned Kidnabbing wicked Fellow, 'gad I Will take
heart and close in with her while the Fit lasts


'Twas by his Plot I acted that mad part when last I saw ye, much against my
own good nature, but I have found his Villainies out since, how he designed to
gull me to a Marriage, and you out of a Settlement; it is plain now, and I was
sending too this very morning, to beg ye not to Seal


Gadzooks, what is this I hear? Why hark ye, Madam, are not you really mad then?


Mad, indeed such injuries were enough to make me so; but, Sir, I hope my Eyes
will resolve that doubt; besides, if you doubt my sense, you shall hear me sing
a Song of my own making


ROyal and Fair, Great Willy's dear Blessing,
the Charging Regent of the Swains;
Heavy with Care, thus sadly Expressing
Her grief, sat weeping on the Plains:
Why did my Fate Exalt me so high,
If fading State must deprive me of Joy?
Since Willy is gone,
Ah! how vainly shines the Sun,
'Till Fates decree, the Winds and Sea
Waft, waft him to me.
Large are my Flocks, and flowery my Pastures,
Worth Treasures vast of Silver and Gold;
Where Ravenous Wolves too, fain would be Masters,
Devour all my Lambs, and break down my Fold:
Willy whilst here, secured me from fear,
All the wild Herd stood in awe of my Dear;
But poor helpless I*
Mourning Sigh, and hourly Cry
Let Fates decree, the Winds and Sea
Waft Willy to me.
A most admirable Creature, and if I may be so bold, Madam, have you never a
Dagger under your Petticoats, nor nothing


Nothing that will hurt you, Sir: alas! that Dagger was given me by him to Act
my part with; Oh he has abused us both inhumanly, but we'll be even with him
now, Sir, shall we not


Shall we not? 'gad, Madam, say but a word more, and I Will have him hanged at
your door before to morrow night; here is luck, I thought I had got a Devil,
'wons it is a Cherubin of Cherubins


There Is time enough to punish him, but he shall see us laugh at him first;
give me your hand, will you be true to me, and revenge me on that wicked fellow


Most vigorously --


And take me, and my whole Fortune for your pains.


Most thankfully --


There Is Bargain made, then go and get a black Coat, I Will marry ye immediately.


My Genius, my Soul, my Spirits, I have not breath enough to speak my joy, Oh
that I could fly now, my Legs cannot carry me half fast enough, now would some
honest Toping Priest would come fluttering like a Swallow down the Chimney, I
must try and get one presently, for fear she cool again

See in the World how strangely things are carried, I thought I should be
hanged, and now am to be Married

So now let the History my Annals grace,
Mine is the Wreath, and Matchivil's an Ass.

Three thousand Pounds a year, in three short minutes your Wit has gained; hah!
hah! hah! 'd'slife I could leap out of my skin methinks


Besides that poor dull wretched fellow Amorous stripped out of all, in spite of
all his Cunning; this now is prosperous mischief, and I am proud to see my
Conquering Brain overcome Mankind

Let each Miss-Keeper take this for a Rule,
to get one Young, and if he can, a Fool:
Whilst her Sense yields to his, the day^s his own,
But if he is once Outwitted, he is undone.

WHere did you leave Sir Rowland, Boy?


At an Alehouse, Sir, just by the Church, waiting for Mr. Stiffrump our
Parson, and he desires ye to go presently to his House, and order his Servants
to trick it up nearly, and provide a good Supper against Twelve a Clock, and
then he will come and impart to ye an Extraordinary Affair that has happened to
him


Well, go, Sirrah, and tell him it shall be done, but there


Alas! Whither must I go? you have so surprised me with this strange News, that
did I not know you to be a Man of Honor, I should believe you spoke it to
abuse me


Do You doubt my honesty? have I deserved this from ye?


Oh! no, Sir. And pray be not angry for my diffidence; to fear is natural to
our Sex; besides, Sir, fifty Thousand Pounds is such a Sum methinks


As great a Sum as it is, you still outweigh it -- And what I Have said I Will
justify. Give me your hand; you must now change your Lodging, as we go on I Will
tell ye more -- Come, Will


'SDeath, Fifty Thousand Pounds; why, it is worse than Witchcraft to her; half
that Sum shall convert any Woman in England into a Peacock, and make her so
proud of her own Tail, there would be no enduring her: I warrant she thinks now
that I Will crawl on my Hands and Feet to purchase her; but she shall find she is
deceived; -- Love may oblige me to a slavish Duty, but Fortune never shall


Come, Brother Fortune-Stealer, help along with the Ladder: I hope this will
prove more lucky than our last Plot; for methinks the Moon favors us very
well. How goes the Night


The School-Bell has just rung Nine, the Chickens within are all going to
Roost, and as full I warrant of Bread and Butter, Milk, Posset, and Cawdle, as
a Woman in Childbed, that has but just three days lain in


Oh, here is the Balcony, now for the Sign.


Whose there? Coop. It Is I, dear Miss, it is I.


Who, Mr. Cooppe?


The same, the same, my dear, sweet, little, pretty --


Oh, Law, oh, Law; but how shall I g^t down to ye though?


Oh, easily, easily, my dear: Look here, I Have brought a Ladder for thee.


So, so, I see you are in a pretty posture; I Will go now and see how Affairs
stand at the Cellar Window


A Ladder! Oh good! What, and must I act Love with a Ladder then?


A Ladder! you must do any thing for your poor Hubby that is to be; have you
got the Packthread


Yes, I warrant ye; what do you think I would forget any thing? But will you be
sure to marry me to night then


To night! presently, Child, as soon as ever thou get'st off the Ladder; why,
the Parson stays for thee


There it is then; I'vads he shall not stay for me; I Am better bred than so, I
warrant ye


So, now put it round the Bar of the Window, and then let me alone to hoist it
up


There, Oh, Gemini, what a pretty trick is this -- But; dear Mr. Coopee, when
we are married, what must we do afterward, I wonder


Afterward; why then we must go to Bed, my Dear,


Go to bed! well, and I'vads that will be very pretty; but what must we do
after that pray, dear Mr. Coopee


After that, why? --


Ay, there is the thing now, Mr. Coopee; what must we do after that?


Why, do but get upon the Ladder, and come down my Dear, I Will tell thee
presently


Will ye? well, and so I will I'vads; I Will be with ye in a twinkling.


Will ye so Gentlewoman.

Pray let me have an account of your Journey first.


Oh law, what shall I do now?


Here are rare doings; what, you are going to be married, are ye? but I Will help
yet to a Husband in the Morning. A good Rod, Hussie, that shall act Love with
ye, better than the Fool below there


Well, well, I will have a Husband, I Am resolved on it, do what you can: And if
you offer to whip me, I Will tear your Eyes out, so I will


Go, get ye in, ye great Ramp. I Will lock her into her Sister's Room below
Stairs, for to night, there is no Balcony there. 'D'slife, was there ever such a
contrivance? We shall have all our Girls st^le out of the School by Baskets
full, if this trade hold; but I Will prevent it to Morrow Get ye in Hussie


Ah, plague of my damned luck: If this Devil had slaid but a minute longer, I
had got my Fortune upon my back, a lamping penniworth, by this time: But now,
as the Devil will have it, must leave my Dow, that I have so long molded for
my own Cake, to be mumbled by the Chops of another: Pox on it, we used to be
more prosperous in these Intreagues; and if any of these raw Tits can bolt out
of their Warren at any time, it is (...) to one but your Greyhound,
Dancing Master, or your Lurching Songster has the first snap at 'em. It Is a
poor loving Fool, this; and of my Conscience will be very constant to me; and if
we can but contrive another Assignation, then if I lose her --


Hist, hist, Coopee, come along with me presently.


Phoo, prithee let me alone, I am very unfit for another I^treague now. A Pox
on it, I have lost my own


Ye lie, ye lie, ye Rogue; she is su^er than ever; Crowshik has just now locked
her up into a low Room, where my little Butterprint was watching for me, who as
soon as ever she was gone, puts back the Lock, gets out, and they are now both
together yonder at teh Cellar Window


Ha! what do thou say, both, what, my little Cakebread too!


Ay, ay, ye Dog, come quickly, and let us help 'em out.


'Dsheart, this was beyond expectation. Run, run, run, run.


If I had not run away from this old Dog Father of mine just now when he was
drunk and fell asleep, I had been detached in the Morning amongst the
Granadeers, and shipped for the Expedition in Ireland; my fine Rigging's all
gone, he has damned, that is burnt, the very Soul of my Coat, the Lace; and my
Embroidered Breeches hang out at a Broker's in Drury Lane; by this time, he
has taken up with the Money they yielded, a whole Firkin of Brandy, a Hogshead
of Red Herrings, two dozen of Tobacco, and half a hundred of Cheshire Cheese:
For my part, I believe he is turned Conjurer, and lays up Provision for some
Famine or other that is to come. If I should appear before my Lady in this Cap,
with this Cipher upon it, I were no more a Man of this world; she would fly upon
me like a Cat in a Closet, and the tokens of my Manhood would be in a very
desperate Condition


Come along, along, my dear, dear little Chicken.


Ha, That Is Semibreif's voice; who are those with him?


Well, you tell me you will make me a Woman too night. But i'vads my heart goes a
pit a patt about it; for I Have been told a Maid goes through a great deal of
trouble before she comes to be a Woman; and if you should chance to kill me --


Kill thee; ha, ha, ha, never fear it, my Dear.


By Heaven, my little Boarding-School-Spouse that should have been.


Oh law, my Baby, my Baby -- I Have lost my Baby.


Ah, It Is no matter if thou had lost it, I Will get thee a better Baby my Dear.


It Is so, the Romps are both stole from the School to night; and I am luckily
the first discoverer. I Will dog 'em, and then run and inform my Lady; this, with
some swinging lie or other may chance to re-instate me in her favor, and get
me other Rigging. For to say truth, I Am damnably ashamed of this; well, Fortune
prosper, I have but small hopes


SO, so, the Rising's up, and I think we are all fitted: and since you have
done me the honor to choose me for your Colonel, you shall find me ready to
push forward, I warrant ye


Madam, mine Horse is ready, let us go to night, begar.


Methinks Mr. Deputy looks very like an Officer too.


Oh lack, no seriously, I make but an indifferent Figure: I profess I never
wore a Sword in my life before, but once at a Training: 'Od so, I Have forgot my
Scaberd


An Officer! I vow, my Lady Stroddle, I Am ashamed of him; he will never be fit
for any thing but to carry the Match


But, Madam, I don't see the Captain here all this while.


Ah, there is another: I beseech ye, Madam, don't name him; he is found to be the
greatest Rascal in Town, a poor beggarly Fellow; they say he was formerly a
Blacksmith; but what has made me utterly discard him, is, the Villain has had
the impudence to brag of Favors; and you know, Madam, if once they do that --


Ah, that is insufferable; but really he was a lusty Fellow.


Oh, Madam, here is your Ladyships Rigging, and the account of the Kentish
Rising: The Captain of the Party has sent ye the particulars


Oh, that is good; I thought I should hear to night. Come let us peruse it, and
drink their healths, hum, hum

An Impartial Account of the Mutineers that have risen since Friday last. Very
good. Imprimis. Of Officers and others, that deserted through scruple in the
last Reign, and have now deserted through another scruple in this, Two Hundred
and Threescore. Here Is a Pint Glass, their Healths, my Lady Stroddle. Of Monks,
Dominicans, Franciscan Friars, and Jesuits, that herd amongst Quakers,
Fanatics, Independents, and Fifth Monarchy Men, Fifty Nine

Oh, fie, that is but few. L. Strod. Alas! Good Men, they have made hard shift,


Pray observe, Madam, of Loyal Tory Rory Whores in and about London -- Ten
Thousand -- 'Dslife, give me the Bottle


Ah, blessing on their Hearts. Gad it is pity they should have that scandalous
name given 'em; the Creatures have always been very serviceable to our Part


Ah, it is certain, de Whore do ver mush good in de turn of Government: dey
haunt dey haunt de Playhouse, and shatt, and make a de noyce, ah, begar, they
are ver serviceable


Serviceable; ay, you would say so if you knew all: Why, they are the chief Tools
we work with; why, these Ten Thousand Whores now shall draw as many Fools to
'em in a Months time, and that will make a considerable Army. We'll be gone by
break of day, Madam


With all my heart, Madam. I Am ready at a minute. I hope we shall have Mass
open again some time or oath


A Son of a Whore to run away from his Colors, almost before he was well
Listed, 'oons I Will hang him my self, I Will make him ride the Wooden-Horse twelve
hours together, with a dozen of Muskets tied to each Leg -- Let me see, this
is the House I Am sure -- I Will make bold to beat up her Ladyships Quarters for
once, I know the Rogue is crept in here


See the careless Baggage, this is your leaving the door open.


And when we are Caballing too, Oh fie Mrs. Tear-shift, this is a great fault
indeed, d'slife we shall be discovered


Let me go my Lady Stroddle -- you shall see me lay the Rascal's Soul at my
foot the first push


Ah! Madam, it must not be, I will demand de Combat my self, I will Challenge
him to morrow morning, I will bring you his heart for your Dinner, instead of
de French Capon, and his guts shall serve instead of de Sawsage about it


That must be the French Admiral by his bragging, ugh; and the Rogue carries
the Bastile about him; you take out my guts for Sawsages, Sirrah? Sirrah you are
the Son of a Whore, and I Will make a National Quarrel out


Vell, Vell, I remember, Rascal, I remember.


Where is this Rascal got now? I Will ferret him out of your holes in faith, I Will
find out your Ladyships ugh by places, I Will have him if he be above ground


Go, Tear-shift after him, and let my Footmen use him at their discretion.


Oh! Madam, here is the saddest-News you ever heard. Your Ladyships fine
Daughter Ienny, and my ungracious Molly are both stole out to night from the
Boarding-School, with Coopee and Semibrief


Hah! what says the fellow?


Ha, ha, ha -- dis is de Captain, de Blacksmith, and now turned Granadeer,
begar


Madam, I hope your Ladyship will excuse my disguise, but what Mr. Deputy says
is very true, I dogged 'emmy self, and have told him wherethey are


This ever comes of these plaguey Boarding-Schools, the Girls are always snap'd
up by some Piping or Capring Fellow or other, if they are worth any thing --
Come my Lady Stroddle, my Bowels yearn for the Jade, however I must go see
whether she is undone or no


Ah! dear Madam, what must I expect from your Ladyships favor --


Who Is there? bid some body give the Blacksmith here a Tester, and let him have
my Custom for shooing my Coach-Horses -- Come Monsieur, come let us go


And pray let us make haste Colonel, for you know the Rising is of greater
concern to us than Children or Parents either


Ah Morbleau, is it dear be de ver much difference?


Give the Blacksmith a Tester, it is so, she is in the right, faith, for I have
worked at the Forge many a time, 'till I have earned it very dearly

Ah dear Mrs. Tearshift I Am undone, my Lady has quite thrown me off, this old
Scoundrel Father of mine has utterly ruined me


Why then ye have the means now to be revenged on him, for yonder he lies
Drunk, and a sleep upon the Cellar stairs, and my Ladies Footmen are going to
dress him up like a Dominican Friar, and as soon as he wakes intend to expose
him to the Mob, I Am sorry I cannot stay to see the sport -- for I must after my
Lady


Gad. I Am glad of this however, for now will I be revenged of the Old Dogbolt
-- I Will go and enter my self amongst the Mob immediately, I Will be the Foreman
of his Jury 'faith --


NOw, Madam, I hope you are satisfied, I Will therefore leave ye in Possession,
and go and get a Guard for our further Assistance. Gentlemen stand to your
Post, you know your own Ladies are at stake


Doubt not, Sir, we are very happy to meet you, to give us this Protection.


We'll defend our Fortunes now we have got 'em, I Will, warrant ye Sir -- Come
Domine, you are one of our Party


It Is well, and I Will be with ye presently.


I hope, Sir, you will defend your Fortune too?


My Fortune is not worth defending, Madam.


How, Sir, not worth defending -- is my price fallen then?


Your price, ah no, I spoke of my own Fortune; your value, Madam, is
inestimable, young, fair, and witty, Fifty Thousand Pounds too, and much good
may it do you, I am not envious


All which I freely give to your dispose, Sir.


By no means, Madam, I am no Usurer; your wisdom will do better to signify this
to your Goldsmith, he will manage your full Baggs to an advantage, for my own
part I deal in Hearts, not Money


My heart, Sir is yours, for now I can give it nobly, I Have wealth enough.


But I, alas, have not enough for you: I think 'twas once your saying.


And do you then refuse me for a Saying?


The Rich require no love, they expect reverence, and you see I keep my
distance: When we were equal, then I loved ye dearly, I durst be bold then, now
you are above me


I am not proud, Sir.


Not to your own thinking, a Woman's pride is just like one that squints, she
seldom thinks she has the imperfection, because she never sees it


Are not you proud now, to refuse a Blessing so strangely thrown upon ye? pray
consider, Sir, are you not damnably proud


I have a noble fullenness of Soul, not proud, I never was a Slave to the Bawd
Fortune, noy am I to be pufft up with her Benefits


Must then your bravery of mind be shown to all the World but me, ah! where is
now the Love you once protested


Here in my breast, my heart is full of it; but, Madam, you would never
entertain it, you set my heart still on the score of Fortune, 'twas not to be
obliged to you but her; it is true, you argued prettily upon it, but too wise
reasoning, shows too little Love


All Love without is madness.


Rapture you mean, and in that Rapture, Heaven, it is the Soul's general good
enjoyed in common, as well by the naked Beggar, as the Monarch; Fortune's a
gift particular to Fools, to make amends for the Soul's gross defects, the
blind work of Predestination, what must be, must be


I never yet did wish the Gifts of Fortune only to give 'em you.


You should have given your self, in you was fortune, each precious minute you
deferred my happiness, was greater loss than Fortune could repay me, now it is
your Charity -- I take it basely, it is Fifty Thousand Pounds given as an Alms


You are shrewdly hurt, to take the Alms of Love thus warmly heaped in Gold --
Come, come, you jest with me, you cannot leave me so


Not so, I Have yet some generous services to pay ye, when you are settled, then
I Will tell ye more


And more I hope to the purpose.


It may be so, mean time please to retire, here is Company coming* I should be a
fool indeed, if I should lose thee for all my seeming

Here comes Amorous, whose merry tone will be turned too very suddenly.

Ha! Jack, well met; thour't very merry, I see, by which I guess the World goes
well -- hah --


Beyond my expectation, faith. Dear Rogue, I have stripped Iiltall, taken away
her Settlemement, and torn it; and have now brought this honest Fellow with
Deeds here that give me a thousand a year, which my Uncle has this night
promised to Seal. Ha, ha, ha


So; why, thou wett wrapped in thy Mother's Smock, sure, for thy luck: But
prithee what is become of the Jilt now


Why, thou will find her selling of Walnuts by the Fleet Ditch within these two
days; footing of Stockings is above her level; she has not left a Ninepence to
buy Materials


'Dslife, prithee look, is not that she yonder?


No, that must be the Devil who has taken her likeness, and comes I believe
with a design upon my Person


Methinks Oyley, the Coach is not easy enough, I Will have the Cushions altered,
and the Velvet finer; I Will have Six Horses too, I find every tawdry Gentlewoman
has a couple


It Is true, Madam; and methinks your Ladyships Liveries are not fine enough
neither


No, they have too much of the dull City Air; I Will make Sir Rowland change 'em.
I Will have my Pages Coat covered with Gold Lace, and lined with Tissue


Is this she that was selling Walnuts by the Fleet Ditch?


Damn her, this can be nothing but bouncing; you shall see me go and teize her
about the Settlement


What makes Sir Rowland stay so long, Oyley?


He Is only talking with Mr. Dogsears the Parson a little, Madam, he will be with
ye presently


Hoh, old Acquaintance; what, I see thou keep'st up still, I see thou will not
want Rigging whilst there is a Cully in the Town


What means the Fellow? Who is this Rascal, Oyley?


Some pitiful Shaggrag or other, Madam, of Aisatia, that wants to be kicked by
your Ladyships Footmen


Do I so, eternal Common-shoar? No, they will better serve for your Bitchships
Recreation in the Larder at night. But, Betty, prithee why so resty? Lord, you
Whores with Settlements are so Proud, ha, ha, ha


If I did know thee to be a Fool, and not worth a Groat, I would ruin thee for
that word. Hark ye, do you pretend to know me, Sirrah


Cry ye Mercy, faith, may be I am bewitched and mistaken: but the Devil take
me, if you do not look as like to a confounded Jilt of my acquaintance as one
Thumb looks like another. Do hear, prithee, honest Fellow, who is that Lady?
ha


Who is it? why, it is my Lady Rakehell: Sir Rowland will fleece your Coat, I
can tell ye that, if he comes and sees ye saucy with her


Lady Rakehell, and Sir Rowland, what a Devil does this mean!


This cunning Jilt has counterplotted him, by Heaven; I find it.


Why, hark ye, Fubbs, prithee how came thy Name to be altered? ha.


It Is a disgrace to me to tell thee; but since it is the only honor I ever
intend to do thee, know, Sirrah, I Am your Aunt, I am married to your Uncle,
Sirrah


'Oons, married to my Uncle!


Ay, ay, married to your Uncle, Sirrah; what a Pox, will not the Fellow be
answered


'Dsheart, ye Jade, deny it again, and quickly, or I will have no more mercy on
thee than --


Help, help, Murder, Murder.


What Is this I see, my Rascally Nephew abusing Mistress Oyley? Sirrah, hands
off, or I Will run my Sword in your Guts. What is your meaning for this Rogue? ha


Meaning, why, Sir, the impudent Queen would face me down that you were married
to Iiltall my quondam Whore there


How, Sirrah, your Whore? Stand off, let me come to him, he shall never speak
again, by this Blade


Now for my last Game cunningly.

No, dear Sir Rowland, for my sake spare him now, because it is our Wedding day;
it is true, he has been saucy, and wicked, ungracious, and impudent, but let him
escape for once, do dear, sweet, honey Sir Rowland, Alas! you know the poor
Fellow is crack-brain'd


Or shall be presently, 'faith, if this hold.

Well, Sir, to the discovery of that another time: Here the Scrivener has
brought the Deed you ordered; will you please to go in and Seal


Seal, 'oons ye Blockhead, I Have married

The Heiress, what a Devil should I Seal?


Why to the Thousand Pounds a Year you promised me, what a plague have ye
forgot


I Will not give thee a Groat, get the Pox, take the Highway, Rob, come to the
Gallows, and be damned, a fair riddance --


Alas, if my dear-Husband here should Seal to the Settlement, in one of your
mad fits, Cousin, you would tear it some time or other


A Pox Cousin ye, -- I Am resolved this Devil shall never carry it off so,
however; why then, Sir, I must tell ye, that you are cheated too, for she is no
more the right Heiress than I am, but, as I told ye before, my Cast off Wench,
and her Name is Iiltall --


Ay, make him believe that if thou can, Fool


Ay, ay -- A Pox on him, but I Will not endure this; I Will send the Dog to Bedlam
to morrow -- but come, my Dear -- Supper stays for us -- thou'^t welcome now to
thine own House -- Sirrah, go and get open the door


Who would you speak with, Friend?

Have you any business here --


Business here, Sir, yes that I have.


To me then.


To you! I Have nothing to say to you, my Business is with the Porter.


I am the Porter.


How, now, Sir, you the Porter, pray since when, I never entertained ye that I
remember


The Lady of the House has, that is enough, Sir.


Who, I? what does he mean, I never entertained him, not I.


You never did, indeed; alas, how should ye? you are not the Lady of the House
--


No, Sir, then I hope you will give me leave to be Lord on it, I hope I may come in?


Not a Foot further, Sir, my Lady has given orders to the contrary.


A pox on your Lady, what have I to do with her; 'oons must not I bring my Wife
into my own House for her


You may if you please, Sir, but this is none of it, this my Ladies House.


I believe Merriton has contrived this trick for my sake; come dear Will, shall
I come in then, dear Rogue


Nor you neither, Sir, I must beg your pardon.


Pardon, prithee what do thou mean, is the Devil in thee?


Hey day! here is another madd Puppy -- the Town swarms with 'em now as thick as
Wasps in Summer; what hoa -- whose within there, Old Merriton -- Orthodox,
Pew-pimp, where are ye in the Devil's Name


To one of my Names I answer, what is your pleasure, Sir?


'Oons, to go in, Sir -- and to carry in this sweet Lady, Sir, quick, quick, ye
old Homily, I Have wonders to tell thee, Rogue


I have wonders to tell you, Sir Rowland.


A pox of thy wonders, thou have 'em all out of the Apo^rypha, I Will not hear
one of 'em before Supper; 'sbud, open the Door there


What can be the meaning of this?


You will not force, Sir, into a Ladies House without her leave?


A Ladies House -- ha, ha, ha, old Deutrinomy's mad too, or has the old
Hipocrite got a Whore into my House, and lovingly given her the Possession


No, Sir, the Lady within is the right Owner of the House, Sir William
Wealthy's Daughter; she, you and I kidnab'd to the Indies, Sir, who has, to
tell you the truth, with my Assistance, now made hard shift to get back to
seize her own


Ha, ha, ha -- it is so, he is Crazed, poor Religion is stark mad by this light,
the Owner within, ye lie, here she stands; speak, my Dear, art not thou the
true Heiress -- hah, prithee speak and confound the silly Fellow


Why then, if I must speak, not I, Faith, Sir, therefore look to your self.


Not the Heiress, 'oons, what a Devil art thou then?


A very good Gentlewoman, I assure ye, Sir Rowland --


I told ye once before, she is an old Acquaintance of mine, an admirable
Backsword-player; it is true, she is not worth a Groat, but she can knit well, or
make Buttons: will you Seal yet, Sir


Oh the Devil, I am choused, abused, undone!


A mistake only in the Woman, Sir, here comes a Lady will clear all.

Your Guardian, Madam -- but perhaps you have forgot him.


I have, but not his Vices, which I Will not reprove, because I Will leave the Law
to do it for me; in the mean time it is satisfaction for me that I dare seize my
own


My little pretty Tit of the Boarding-School, by all that is good, this subtle
old Fellow, I find, has fooled me damnably


Her own Furies and Hell, am I then gulled at last?


'Sbud draw, I Will make a forcible entry; I Will not be ^ool'd thus* Draw, Nephew,
and I will Seal


Not I; draw to Newgate, to Tyburn, be Condemned, Carted, Halter'd, Hoisted and
Hanged, if you please, I Will not draw an inch, not I


Oh, we are ready for ye, Sir; seize on him there, and secure him till the Law
determine further

And now you are hampered, Sir, know that our former Agreement of Spiritting away
to the Indies this young Lady, the right Heiress to Sir William Wealthy, was
always odious to me, which I had then discovered and secured her, had I not
known your Crowded Coffers would have out-talk'd my honesty, I therefore took
this way, and seeming readily to pack her off, conveyed her privately to a
Boarding-School, where the two hundred pounds a Year allowed me for that
honorable Action, I have faithfully laid out on her in Breeding, thus saved
her from your mischievous Intentions, and well rewarded in the grateful Action


I have made a fine days work of this! not so much for losing three thousand a
year, as for marrying a three pil'd Whore, for an Heiress -- but there is one
comfort still, she is not like to get a Groat by me


If I had known that, I Would as soon have married the Hangman.


What does your Ladyship think of a Page now, covered with Gold-Lace, and lined
with Tissue


I Would poison him, as I would thee, and all the World.


If I did not dream of Woollen Stockens last night, I Am no Christian.


The House I stand possessed of, and the Writings, which give me Title as my
Father's Heir, all which, Sir,


And has he his Wits left?


Whoever, Madam, that stupid Creature is, you shall find me more tractable, and
if you please, you may remember, Madam --


Oh, Sir! this is a Jem too Rich to lose; and, as you say, he must be very
stupid, that, kindly proffered can deny to wear it -- I hope, I may succeed,
Madam


I need not speak, my heart too much pleads for ye.


Pox, fopp'd again, the Devil's in my Fortune, hark'e, Sir, you have choused me
finely here


Only Wit outwitted, Jack, no chouce, I only diverted thee a little, for my
Son's sake; thou know Natural affection is unblameable


Diverted me! a pretty Epithete, he has diverted me from fifty thousand pounds,
with a Pox to him; a fine diversion indeed -- A plague of my shallow Pate


Mr. Constable, there is your Warrant, go and secure Sir Rowland till further
order; Crimes of this Nature must not be winked at, nor can I refuse my
Evidence, and be honest


Honest! a F^llow with a Face of thy Levitical Cut, honest! and a Rogue that
knows too, there is no such thing in Nature


No.


No! does not the Forreigner cheat the Country, the Country cheat the City, the
City cheat the Courtier, the Courtier cheat the King, the Robber cheat the
Fur-Coat, the Fur-Coat cheat the Red-Coat, the Red-Coat cheat the Petty-Coat,
the Petty-Coat cheat the Black-Coat, and the Black-Coat cheat us all! and yet
thou pratest of Honesty, Honesty; prithee Cant, pray on, and be damned, for
that thou will come too for all thy Honesty; and so farewell


Godbuye, Uncle, here is my Settlement in a fine Condition.


Well Jack, thou shall be no loser by my Fortune, I know thy Ravenous Uncle has
sucked up a great part of thy Estate by means unjust, which we'll return, and
set thee up anew; see, B^tty smiles at that


And shall we sawn, and stroke, and kiss, and spett at one another again? Hah,
my dear, dear, damned Crockadile, hah


Plague on 'em, they laugh at us; come away, Madam.


I come; but I Am resolved I Will leave one swinging Curse behind me first.

May Whores lose, thee, and all thy Race, Salvation;
Breed want, the Pox, Murder, and Desolation;
And damn ye to the twentieth Generation.

Hah, hah, ha; Adieu Buttock; and Gad little did I think that ever I should
have had the Heart to have said so; but come, there is an end on it. How now, who
have we here, more House-warmers


Where is this Wretch, this degenerate Creature, that is so eager for Man
before she is capable, this Cub of thirteen, with the Devil in her already?
Where must I find her? hah


This is the House, an't please your Ladyship.


Dis is de House begar of Sir Rowland Rakehell


Begar you lie; and therefore stand further off: Hey, what a Plague, do you come
to besiege my House


Your House, Morbleau? but dat is ver strange.


Oh, Sir, strange and true! Therefore dance your distance.


I hope your are not accessory to the Childrens Rape, Sir?


Not I, Faith; all your Ladyships Children have a better faculty themselves
than to want Accessaries


Very well, Sir; you may chance to swing for this; for my Daughter is an
Heiress


Oh, I Will venture that; they are within there with two honest ingenious young
Fellows, who I think are Married to 'em; and for my part I could not civilly
deny 'em the protection of my House. See, I suppose they have heard your voice,
and are come of their own accord


Ay, ay, there has been some mischief done, I Am sure, for yonder is a Parson
with 'em


Do You know your Mother, Hussie? Come hither.


Oh, but I will not tho, you will whip me.


And have thou ungraciously taken Man without my leave, Molly?


Yes indeed have I, therefore hold your self contented.


Ay, ay, well said, my Dear.


However, whereof I am married, pray, the Man asked Mr. Coopee a Question, and
he said ay; and then he asked me a Question, and I said ay; and then we both
joined hands together, and so we were married as fast as any thing


You have not consummated the Jade, and therefore I Will unmarry you again.


Verily they have done as became them Both, I was an eye witness.


An eye witness! there is a pimping fanatical Rogue for you now.


Ivads I like it very well, I wish I had been married sooner for my part, for I
begin to love Mr. Semibrief since we bedded, better than my bread and butter by
half


This comes of putting Girls to a Boarding-School.


Ay, they hop, and dance till they set their blood on fire, and then they
quench it with the next puddle they come at seriously

A Rogue, a Friar, down with him, down with him.


Help, help, Murder, Murder, I Am pursued, I Am taken, I Am killed, help, help.


Oh we'll bring you to life again presently, you old Scoundrel.


There Is Money for ye, I Will purchase his Liberty for once; and do you hear,
yonder is a better subject for you by half, my Lady there; now you have a rare
time to revenge your self, and seize on her and her Party; I know they are
hatching something against the Government


I Will do it, fall on friends -- By your leave, Madam, I must secure you, you
have done as much for me you know many a time: it is true, yours was a fairer
way, but we Politicians must not value Niceties of honor, we have an
Advantage, therefore I, the Blacksmith and Captain confine you Prisoner to the
State


And I the Chimney-sweeper a Lieutenant, justify him in it.


Nay I know the Government's afraid of me, I have been told as much; but for
thy own part, look to it that I don't meet thee hereafter, for if I do, if there
be a Capon in Christendom I Will make thee one; I Will teach you to disarm the
Colonel of the Ladies, you Limberham's Rascal you


If ever we live to see good days again, look to your selves, Rebels.


Or twenty towsand French upon London Bridge, as Notredame assure us -- den you
shall see vat de French can do; den Mortbleau you shall se de great Monarch --


Ah, stop his mouth there, down with him, a French Rascal.


Well, I hope we shall have peace for all this, for I am weary of my Buff,
seriously


And so am I of my Sables, here I Am sure 'dsdeath could they find no other way
to disgrace me, but to stink me with an old Fox Hide, and choke me up in the
fur of a Friar, now shall I stink of Popery for this Month at least, which is a
worse smell to me, then an Old Jew that is telling a Story, and has just
rellish'd his Mouth with a Clove of Garlic


Come, Madam, your Supper is ready within, where you shall give me leave to
drink Prosperity to the King and Government, not forgetting some new
Consummations


And if I do haphen to be drunk with toping thine and thy blessings Health,
there thou wilt be so kind, Friend, as to remember the mortgage in the morning,
hah --


Oh never doubt me, I Will not break my Word -- and now sweet Angel, my Joys
crowd thick about my heart, and long for vent, the approaching happiness looks
so like Heaven, that I methinks am ex^asied already


Nor is my share of vast Content less Charming.

In Fortune's brightest Sphere of Bliss I move,
Enjoying Wealth enough, and him I Love.


