I AM come with tears, and sobbs, with sigh and groan,
To tell the saddest tale that e're was known;
The Stage, the darling Stage is going down.
For since your favor, we no more can trust,
Dear Bays farewell, let Honor lie ^th dust.
Let the Wreath, that as the badge of best renown
So long has Courted been by all the Town,
By noblest Peers bear witness all their works,
By Knights, Squires, Courtiers, Templers, Trading Sparks,
Pert London Prentices, and Lawyers Clerks,
Degraded, from W^ts Temples lowly ^all,
To Crown some Coxcomb, in some ^ity Hall.
I know, to part with ^^me thu^, is great pity,
But we all grow too good now, to be Witty.
And therefore I submit, as there is occasion,
To wear this Sackcloath of pure Reformation.
Thus far I^ve like a Poet howl d my share,
Now you shall hear me bellow like a Play'r.
Hard-hearted Critics -- harder than the Stone;
Must to other House have all, and we have none:
Ah, can you see poor Penkethman undone!
As ^ightning Trees so your Neglect has rent us,
You are more dreadful Foe^ than those Present us.
^or Mirth not long ago you made good use on's:
Have I displeased ye, is this Face ^ Nuisance!
Must we, in spite of Labor, shut up Door?
And must -- by way of Punn -- I had like to ha swore,
And must our stanch Friend Mr Rich grow Poor?
Then farewell Playhouse, and all Comic Jest,
And farewell Trojan true, as ever P --
Is no way left to get this humor off?
For if we must not Ioke, you must not Laugh?
No, there is none; a zealous fit controlls,
To starve our Bodies here to save our Souls.
Well then, since it is a blessing to the Nation,
Pray let us see a thorough Reformation.
We Are not the only Guilty, I dare say,
There Is more of the wicked -- every one in's way.
First, for example is a glorious thing,
Let those reform -- be Loyal to the King.
Next; let the Elder-learn'd in our Affairs,
No more upon a Sunday sneak up Stairs,
To take a humming Bottle after Prayers.
With Phiz demure -- let not grave Cassock hide
Rebellion, Spite, Hypocrisy -- nor Pride
Let this be done, we'll choose him for our Guide.
We Will then -- talk Smut no more nor swear odsnigs,
Nor ever after grutch him his Tithe Pigs.
Let such as guide the Laws sincerely speak,
Nor those they put in force against us break.
Let all Professions set up Virtues Schools
And we'll soon bring the Stage to sober Rules.
Correct our Libertines, and gag our Fools.
Let the dull Mizer's Purse relieve the poor,
Let him never cheat, nor go to Church to snore,
And we will sing -- of Rashers broyl'd no more.

DEar Brother in Iniquity, here is to thee. Paris -- Well, and how do like my
Country, hah -- I see by thy Rosy Gills and these Collops here -- matters have
gone very well with thy Belly -- the Ambassador will not spare the Kings Purse, he
will have good meat and drink, I Will say that for him


Yes faith, the meat and drink was nourishing enough in itself, it is true, if
it were not always condemned to be spoiled by the damnable Cooks and Butlers.
But your true Frenchman will sit playing with his Plate, talk out the whole
time of dinner, and fast at your Table, if he has not his own favorite
Kickshaw, and the Meat is not dressed his way


And when a Dish does come up our way, it is metamorphos'd so, you cannot know it
I warrant, hah


Know it; no nor taste it neither, when I have expected to have been Regaled
with a good slice from a thing that looked like a Rump of Beef, I have found my
mouth full of Eggs and Herbs, Suet and Onions, Hogo'd with Garlic, and burnt
with Pepper -- oh would the Cook were hanged, then thought I; when strait to
quench my Choler, and make amends, I call for a Brimmer, and then they give me
a Glass of Water, just colored with three or four spoonfuls of Claret, a
little of which is no sooner down, but up comes a curse after it, a pox take
the Dog the Butler


To give a right Dutchman Water with his Wine is an absurdity, that faith
Brother I must needs say deserves a Curse; our Blockheads ought to consider the
constitution of your Country, and remember they always live up to the mouth in
water, where, like Ducks, they no sooner come out of their houses, but they
may, if they please, swim to any place of business; and when the affair is
ended, if they are thrifty, and would save Shooe-leather, they may Dive home
again


Why, how now Scoundrel, what, at your quirks and jee^s, hah? Well, as much
Water as we have, we make it turn to better account, that you do all that
barren land of yours in Gascoigne, and Picardy; how goes the best Wheat a
bushel, hah? but that I think few of you poor Rascals know; you forget your
Brown-Georges, ye Rogue, ye do


No, not now in time of Peace, when we can get some of your Dutch Butter to
'em, Sirrah -- but hang ye, lest my Satirical Wit should provoke a Combat of
Snick or Snee, here is the Embassador's health -- I begin thy Masters first,
because you shall follow with my Monsieurs in its turn. Come, tope away.


Ay, with all my heart, tho gad, methinks I Am so fine, it goes against the
grain to call any one Master now. Prithee how do like me: here is a dress,
here is a shape, Paris Tuilleries the other day, ah how sweetly the sound came to
my ears of the poor Rogues crying, bless the noble Captain, make way there for
the Colonel, for by my garb, all thought me one of these at least


Especially when separated from the Ambassadors Retinue.


And that I took care to be as often as possible, to follow the intrigue I had
with a rich Merchant's Daughter there. You may see by this the value of good
Clothes, Brother. This Coat of mine got me into the Company of the prettiest
Rogue, and so into her Fathers house, from thence into her Chamber; and had not
the plagay Ambassador dispatched me away instantly with Letters to his Sister
here, I had got into her Bed, the night following e'gad, under the Title of Min
Here Flounder Belchman, B^^mce Dender Van Scopen, Colonel of Horse, and one of
the intimates of the Ambasaddor


Odso, 'twas a great disappointment to your Excellency I confess, Sir, and for
my part, ^tho I don't glitter so much as you do, yet the Marquis my Master
being in mourning for his Mother, gives me as genteel a garb, as I think any
man of Quality need have, which I industriously strive to improve you may be
sure


How, pray, an't like your Honor?


By intriguing with the Washer-woman without doors to wear his Shirts, and
within doors to filch his Cravats, and transform the rest of his Linen


Very well, noble Sir, my service to ye again,


He must be duller than any thing belonging to the Devil, that does it,
Brother, I Am sure of that. But come, we used to be open hearted, and tell one
another employments. Prithee what can be thy hasty expedition hither from the
Ambassador, what he is jealous of his Sisters Marrying in his absence, I Will lay
my life


He is so, and since we were always Brother Sterlings in managing and
discovering secrets to one another, thou shall know all. His Nose is bored, the
young Lady has surrendered to some body. We have in Brussels here, a certain
finical spruce Fop, a kind of a Flanderkin Beau, who is President of the
Council of Trade here. His name is Bondevelt, and who, I believe, has entered
the Citadel already, for there is certainly a Kid born, and I am to wait to
night, upon some new Employment of hers, the Louis d'ors will come in fresh, ye
Rogue, and ^ace is the word. Come now, what news on your side


Why you must know, I have for some months last past been entrusted by my
Master, as a Spy over my Lady, he having noted some loose carriages of late in
her, and to day an occasion was offered to confirm his suspicion, she sending
me with a Letter to an English Colonel lately come over, and about an intrigue
I Am sure. What the event will be, I shall know hereafter, and then, Brother,
we'll find further leisure to consult


In the mean time let us conclude, that whilst men are fatigued with too much
Employment, and women lie idle with too little, Horns must infallibly happen on
one side, and brawlings and heart-burnings on the other: And so your Excellency's
most humble. For I think I hear a voice you are acquainted with, it is your
Friend and Companion the Marquis, and some others.


And I the Glass, an't like your Honor, and we'll retire into the next Room.


What, have we dropped the Maquis?


Only, whilst he dispatches Orders to his Lacquey; drop him, no, he is of too
nice a Punctillio for that; to part from his Company without the Decorum and
Ceremony proper, would be to him an rudeness unpardonable


I never saw him till last night with thee, but he seems to me a fellow of good
sense, and humor, I like him better than any Frenchman I have met with a great
while


Why, faith, I think he has less affectation than most of 'em, and tho he talks
a little more perhaps than comes to his share, yet it is commonly good matter,
which makes some amends


And so civilly addressed too, that a man is not so weary as one used to be,
with some of the rest of his eternally tattling, Countrymen


I intend to oil his Tongue if I can with a good Bottle, Powerful Champaign
will discover what imperfections he has infallibly, as well as what wit


Nay, I don't look upon him as a Solon neither, for I hear* he is married but
odly


To old Lafroon's Daughter, a sordid rich Hunks of Blois, I have seen her, but
have no acquaintance


Is she pretty?


Yes, faith, and I Am told witty, airy, and musical, but coquettish as a little
Devil, a great Bassett-player, and like the Jew her Father, the most insatiable
Lover of Money. And you know, friend, when ever a woman too well loves that,
she will soon be brought to do another thing that we love, for that


Ay, that is most certain: And yet I could wish a pretty Charming Creature that
I had a Letter from this morning, had that covetous quality, tho I were a
hundred Pistoles the worse for it to morrow. Come, Frank, you are my friend, and
shall give me thy judgment of it, I Will tell thee a pretty adventure


Come on, all yours used to be pleasant, especially that of the Merchants Neice
you enjoyed at London, and in search of whom you now come hither Colonel, but
pray take care, do you hear, the Plot of it be'nt too knotty, for if you are for
Riddling you may search an O Edipus for me, faith


Oh, this is plain 'enough for the Meridian of thy understanding I warrant it;
know then Frank, that standing this morning at the Shop door of a certain
Goldsmith, where I sometimes have exchange of Money for my Expenses, as I was
putting up a hundred Pistoles into my Purse, which I had received there, just
over against me stopped a Coach in mourning, with a Lacqueys behind it, in
which was a Lady of a most incomparable Beauty and Feature, she stood talking
to a Shopkeeper about some of her affairs, and at the same instant, tho she
turned away her Face, yet so pretty a hand lay upon the Glass on the other
side, that it discovered the most delicate sample of the whitest Skin that ever
cased a Beauty of Fifteen


Rhyme i'gad, and Rapture, -- very well, Colonel, go on.


Charmed with the sight, and in an ecstasy, I could not cease from crying out
aloud, and in a Tone she miget be sure to hear me. I Would give these hundred
Pistoles in my hand to enjoy her but one night


A hundred Pistoles -- enough for a hundred Princesses i'gad -- well well,
when is the Assignation, where is to be the Bower of Bliss? there was a Coronet
behind the Coach, I know Colonel it must be quality at least, a hundred
Pistoles -- she took ye at your word I Am sure


Quite contrary for that time faith, for presently away rolled the Coach, and
my poor panting heart trundled after it as fast, till distance kept my Eyes
from guiding it farther. Ah Frank, it is a pain to me even to tell thee what
pangs of disquies I felt for two long hours after: but then, as if the God of
Love had seen and pitied the posture I was in, of down-cast Eyes and Arms
across -- walking alone on the Parrade, I saw on the sudden standing just
before me, and offering this Letter, one of the Footmen of my adored Goddess


So, then I hope you had justice done, however -- And dear Colonel, I beg thy
pardon for lessning the Merit of thy office. What a plague did I talk of
Quality for, when I might know, like a sot as I was, a hundred Pistoles is a
price sit for none but a Goddess. Jove himself, who was the first Whoremaster
we read of, that ever gave money, for all his shower of Gold so talked of, gave
his Mistress Danaae not a farthing more


Well, prithee hear the Letter, which is penned so cunningly, between
threatening and encouragement, that gad I think I want an O Edipus indeed to
salve it. Prithee observe* Sir, Be assured, that I think my self very much
affronted at the word. I heard you speak this morning. How dare you insolently
set price upon a person of my Rank: Render your self to the justice of my
Resentments therefore, and come to morrow night at nine, to the House with the
little Gate, next to the Ch^quer'd Posts in the High Street, to answer your
accusation, or expect all that can be feared from a Woman wronged and Angry.
(...) -- What think thou, is she in earnest or in jest





In earnest by Heaven, Colonel, but it is the right way the hundred Pistoles
have made a breach in her heart, wider than a Cannon Ball at a hundred yards
distance would in a plank of three inches


Hugh -- I think she means fairly, and will not take the Money sure; for all her
jesting -- However, gad I Am resolved to venture, but not without being well
armed tho. I Will carry a pair of pocket Friends with me, and a good Sword, and
then Love be my guide. I defy treachery


Here comes Monsieur, don't trust his Tongue however with the secret, for all
your good opinion of him. Oh -- Marqui, the warmth, the soul of good Company,
ye are welcome, you have been too long from us, we freeze without ye


The Campaign, tho never so good, would seem palled to us, Sir, unless your
pleasant conversation gives it a relish


Sir, I am your most ver humble serviture.


I dare not vie with ye in Compliment of Courtly Expressions, Sir, therefore
only can say, that my heart and inclinations are faithfully at your service


Sir, both the Colonel and my self set a greater value upon the blessings the
Peace brings us, having by it been obliged with the knowledge of you.


Hey Waiter! Fill Glasses, and give me a brimmer. Come to the great Monarch of
France, Vivat


Along Messires, I will do ye de reason wid all min heart, and tanke you vor
your great goodness, brave, brave Colonel ^ Morbleau, Sir, vat wonder have I
hear of this Shentleman, how^ beyond expression Valliant he behaved himself at
Stenikirk, after vish the next Campaign in de most fameux Battle of Landen, he
had his Arse shot, beside have receave two tree wound at the grand Siege of
Namur. Ah, I have no breath enough to speak


Oh no more, no more, let me beg ye, Sir.


Nay, Colonel, the Marquis does ye but justice.


Most veritablemen dear vas no oder fame but of de brave Colonel Dorange and
his prodigious Action ma foy Sire. I tell you noting but de grand trute -- Ay,
'twas ver well for us de Peace vas made in de good time, Morbleau, it is one
miracle dat we have held out so long


Faith not to flatter our selves, I must think Sir, 'twas a double Miracle that
we did as we did


Oh it is without dispute, that we had the worst of it at Steenkirk by much,
though our Men fought bravely it is true


Like de fiery Draggon, besides vat you call de worse, it vas your Complisance,
your grand civility dat give us de betra


A very pretty Complaisance truly, but then Sir what think ye of Landen, were
not we --


Aw, we were beaten dear by dis light -- confoundedly.


Nay then Monsieur I must needs think your courtesy does your Country wrong,
did not we retire over the River


Yes Morbleau to rally ten time more strong de oder side.


We lost our Cannon.


For It negligent to show you could beat us wid only de Sword.


Come, come, pardon me, indeed we were worsted.


Pardonne moy ausi indeed you vere not


Fie, fie, you know we were a little.


No no, Sir, not one jot.


We were, we were.


No no, no no.


Oh you forget, you forget.


I remember very well da't we were ver mush mawle and dat --


Pray Sir hear me a word or two.


Not on 'dis pray Sir, for it is we were beaten, it is we were beaten, and
derefore I beseech you Sire


But Sir give me leave a little, did not we --


Iernie you did all de brave ting in de warle Sir, and you are no beaten, nor
you ver no beaten, nor you no can be beaten.


Nay, if it must and shall be so, the French Complement shall carry it.


Ay, besides all things considered, he is not so much out of the way neither.


Come then, faith, Sir, we'll e'n make a drawn battle on it and own we had
knocks on both sides


Wid all mine heart, but to speak of to beat de brave Officer Englise, it must
never be say. Come here is one Bumper, a health Deliciae Humani generis, to the
Immortal Monarch of Great Britain, along Vivat


Come let us sit down -- would we had some Music to it.


And that we will have presently, for here is a waiter in the House, sings
well, and a new thing fit for the purpose, call him up there, sing the Song of
the new Reformation.


Very well Sir -- de'e hear, score a Dollar into the reckoning.


Two, two, score two ye, merry scoundrel, in honor of de grand Roy de
Angleterre.


How now, who have we here?


Oh I know him it is one of the retinue of the Spanish Ambassador in France,
sent back hither I suppose on some affair


Hum, I should have taken him for my Counterpart, if the Man had been like his
dress


Gentlemen there is Min Here the Burgo-master below, who made his Request to me
to tell ye, he would speak with the Marqui Bertran -- tholl, loll, loll.


Oh dat is ver true, he is my Neighbor shentlemen, he live next door to me,
and I appoint him to meet me here, hark you Sir,


Well Sir I see you're very fine.


Indifferent Sir, -- but I suppose I am well dressed, I Am so like ye, tholl,
loll, loll, loll.


Ha, ha, ha, saucy puppy --


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Oh I Will speak to him -- de'e hear Colonel the Marqui says, the Burgo master's
a rare humourist, and hates the Company of all Officers, and the Soldiery, he
was lately the chief Voter for disbanding the Army, now if we could any way
disguise ye he should come up and divert us a little -- Waiter, has your Master
never a Cloak, thy Hat will serve


Yes, Sir, here is one hangs up in the next Room. I Will fetch it.


Quickly and I Will be an English Merchant of your Acquaintance.


Dat will be ver Pretty -- go Sire fesh him up.


Fesh him up, tholl, loll, loll.


Yes, fetch him up -- vat a Diable


Tholl, loll, loll, loll.


Monsieur le Marqui you must receive him, here he comes.


Yes, yes, let me alone I warrant you, aw Monsieur Neighbor dis is ver kind,
I am glad to see you Sire, and now I beseech you give me leave to present you
to des two ver wordy Gentlemen both de Natiff of England, dis de Man of quality
at de Cour, and dis de fort considerable Marchand upon de Exchange Royal


I am so little used to speak French gibberish, and this Kickshaw sputters it
out so fast, that snick me, I can scarce understand him. England de'e say, well
as long as there near a Soldierly Locust, amongst 'em I think I may venture to
drink a bottle, and so without Complement I Will set me down.


Aw dis be de bon Company assure you Sir, and so here be Monsieur le Marchands
good health.


Well Tope away, he may be a good man for ought I know, but do hear Monsieur,
he mustles himself up so queerly in his Cloak, that he looks as if he were
broke, snick me, ha, ha, ha, ha, I cannot forbear joking, come Sir here is a
Brimmer to you.


With all my heart, and pray now Sir if you are a little at leisure, what news to
day, you are a great man in business, you know all


Ay praylet's hear Sir, what are your Grandees about to day.


Why snick me, I have been at it amongst 'em till I Am hoarse a voting down the
rascally Soldiery, we have had enough of an Army in conscience, now Peace is
come, down with 'em therefore I say, is it fit that Rogues with long chines and
full Calves, should huff and strutt with our Money, in time of Peace, no no,
disband 'em, pinch 'em, keep 'em low, and we have 'em under: Cocker 'em, and
they will do the same by our Wives, what say you Sir, with the Cloak is it not so


Aw Varlets, Poltroons Cuckold making Rascals, when the Wars are done in my
opinion there should be an order, they should be all hanged


Why well said, I have a rich Neice at home you must know, ha, ha, ha, the
Sister to my Nephew the Ambassador, a swinging fat lass I can tell ye, she is
worth two Tun of Gold, worst Penny, and would you believe it, ha, ha, ha, may
the next Poll of Ling choke me, if one of those Poltroons, a Redcoat
Ragg-Carrier of a Regiment, as lousy as fowl Linen could make 'em, had not
like to have snapp'd her away the other day, but we found out the Plot and he
scow^'d, if we could have caught the Lobster we had broyl'd him, snick me


And he deserved it richly, an impudent Rascal to pretend to dare to aspire to
any fortune, but what the War allows


Which he may very well Improve if he be a Thrifty Rogue: What, half a Dollar a
days pay, snick me, it is a considerable thing


Aw too much in conscience faith, Sir, only the Government is so wise, to let
it fall into Arrears now and then; besides the Rogues have got a trick now of
eating Beef too, an utter Enemy to valor


They have so, egregiously, egregiously, and I have read in some History or
other, the Army of Hannibal eat nothing but Potatoes


With an Egg or two now and then Sir, as they marched by a Barn and found a
Henroost; an Egg, come come an Egg and a good Heart's enough in conscience, if
they cannot live on that, even down with 'em, I Am against a standing Army that
eats Beef, snick and snee me


Gadzooks, this is a plaguey close fellow, why he is harder than I am against
'em, I Will warrant him a true Englishman by that, come hearts of Gold, begin
another Brimmer, come prosperity to Trade; harkee Monsieur, I find this
Merchant a notable fellow, prithee to what part of the World does he deal


Ma foy, Sire, I have not ask him dat question, but speaka speaka your mind, he
will tele you presantlee himself


Prepare your self Colonel, here is a question coming will try your invention.


Why e're I Will be balk'd, I Will answer him in Greek and confound at once, his
Dutch understanding


You are a great dealer, I suppose, Sir. Pray, if I may be so bold, in what
part of the world is your Factory, in what Commodity do you deal


Oh, in several, several, Sir, I have dealt in all sorts and sizes.


Indico, Cutchin^^^ Logwood, or Pepper, pray Sir?


Rot his Pepper, how he Devil shall I banter him. dealings to one so eminent,
till I know you better, till when -- pray, Sir, give me leave in my turn to ask
you what you Merchand'ze in


In Herrings, Sir.


Herrings, Sir, and does the profit arising, allow you Salt and Bread to 'em?


Ha, ha, ha, That was the simplest question from a Trading Headpiece, that ever
I heard in my life, snick me, sure this is not a fool of a Merchant after all.
Come, Sir, pray now your way of dealing


Why, Sir, I deal in Sprats.


Sprats, Sir?


Yes, Sir, Sprats, but not such as yours are here. I Would have you know, mine a^e
a sort of rare Oleaginous Sprats, Sprats that will melt in your mouth like an
Anchovy, I have 'em out of the South Sea, and the River of Amazons, and from
Peru, Coquimbo, Gapiago, and Salta. I have also the pleasure to have the
Factory only to my self, for few Merchants else have any


Faith, Sir, and you have the pleasure to eat 'em all your self too, for never
were my guts stuffed with any of 'em, what say you Gentlemen


Ah, I Have regaled with 'em a thousand times, we eat 'em with Sugar and Pepper
like a Mellon


Aw dey have de flaveur delliceuz ^de grand Monarch of Peru, drink 'em alive in
Plantain Wine like de Losh


Sprats of Peru, I never heard of 'em before, snick me.


Aw, they turn to another sort of account than your Herrings, Sir, let me tell
you that


Another word of a Herring, would make him as Choleric as a Cook half roasted.


Ay, and as snappish as a Dog in a Coach-box, as our old friend Fitty used to
say.


How, my Wife in a rage, say thou, and would speak with me?


Yes, Sir, there is something happened concerning your Niece, Madam Angellica,
that makes her 'roar like a Tempest: for Heaven's sake make haste home, Sir, to
appease her, or we all split


Well, well, I come. Waiter, bring to pay.


I find that fellow has called away the Burgo-master. What are yo^ going
already, Sir


Something very notable has happened at home, Gentlemen.


Since our diversion then is at an end, I must beg leave to say, I have a
little business too


Dear Sir, wat please you always make me happy, do de loss of your Company make
me miserable


Well, friend, what is it?


Two pound, four Shillings, and four Stivers.


How, two pound ye Rogue, it is impossible. It may be you reckon ten Shillings a
Flask, but we are no Fools, Sirrah, we understand business; and there^s an
honest Fellow at the sign of the Holland Cheese and Pickled Herring, that sells
as good for five, ye Rogue, so that the Club comes to -- let me see -- just to
five skellings, a half, and one Stiver a man, and a kick in the guts, Sirrah,
for imposing on us


Oh damn the five skelling, de half, and de one Stiver, dear Sirrah, dear is
your whole reckoning, and de rest for your self.


Oh Monsieur, what do you mean?


Faith, Sir, it must not be --


If you love me Gentlemen, not one word more, I will Court you to take de same
always, -- Allon, allon, Mon Cher. Messires de ting is not wort dis Morbleau.


Amongst French Prodigals, but I have found One Stiver saved thus every day, in
one year makes one pound.


OH Heaven! she has made me quite deaf, my Ears will not be able to perform their
office for this week, I Am sure


Her noise is shriller than if a whole Stye of Hogs were sticking; and you may
hear her further than a dozen of Powder Mills in a still evening: but what was
all this storm for, Madam, only the Presidents being here to night


For nothing else, she having my Brothers private order to admit no Suitor to
me; and in hopes her nasty Cubs, if ever she has any, shall inherit my Estate,
which was entailed on me, for life, and after upon^ the first born of either of
us, by my dead Unkles Will


And now she has found out it seems her Husbands furtherance of the Presidents
Courtship to ye


I suppose so, tho neither of 'em imagine the true reason of my consent to his
admittance, which is, thou know only to blind the world, and cover the
misfortune that happened to me, if the Child I lately had should be discovered,
I know my Estate will make the tame President father what he never got, when
ev^r there is occasion. Have you packed up all its things that were left here
into a bundle, ready to be car^ied to the Nurse


Yes; and for fear your Aunt should, by prying about, find 'em out, I have hid
'em in a hole under the Garret-stairs, ready when the Footman comes, who is
ordered at ten to night, to be thrown to him out of the Balcony


That Is well, and so then we can slip out easily after him unsuspected, for I Am
resolved to go to night, I have not seen the dear, dear Creature, this three
long days and nights. Hark, what noise is that, there is some body coming
'dslife it is my Uncle, away, away


And by the clapping of her Closet door, your Aunt has seen him come in and is
following, here will be a foul house presently.


This perpetual Nuisance, my Wife, I find has discovered my furtherance of the
Presidents love to my Niece, whose Heirs, if a Match should succeed, would
frustrate the hopes of her Estate's descending to mine begotten on her body.
Now my reason not to flatter my self is, because in troth I find I Am not so
capable as her inclinations would prompt, and therefore resolve to be for the
easiest way of profit. Here on one side the President is obliged by Bond, to
give me three thousand pounds for my assistance, and this I keep her ignorant
of. On the other side she is for having an Heir, forsooth, and hooking it in that
way; nay, is so ravenously greedy of it, that she plagues me almost to death.
Tomas, she cries every night, remember the Estate Tomas, think on two thousand
pound a year Tomas, tho she be so fat, and so incapable of Childing, that an
Irish man may as soon get a Bantling out of a Bog; and all the Doctors in Town
have declared nothing can swell her bigger than she is, but a Tympany. Ecce
signum, here she comes.


So, are you come, Sir Assinego? you use me very well, don't ye? you are a kind
Husband


As far as there is reason, Anky; I have heard too much ^indness once killed a
Good Wife, and therefore I think I Am civil ^hou have no more on it, snick me


To contrive at another marrying my Niece, and so to get heirs to inherit her
Estate, when 'twas designed for the fruit of my own proper body; it is a
baseness like thee; baseness, it is frigidity, I Will be sworn, mere frigidity, as
the Scholards have it; but, if I live a month longer, I Will have one to connive
with me too, I will as I Am a Calvinist


Why Lookee Anky, as thou know, we have all from the Government, Toleration
of conscience for our Souls, so will I give thee toleration of conscience for
thy Body: Ply, Ply abroad Anky, with all my Heart, do faith, thy Fat with
another Man's Lean, perhaps may make a tolerable dish, but thou and I have a
Relish so common to one another, that I despair of ever making a good Meal,
for my part, gadsbores I fancy we lie always like two Udders in a Dish without
e're a Tongue


Queazy Fellows that have no Appetites, cannot Relish the finest Haunch of
Venizon, when a strong healthy Stomach would feed heartily and be glad of it


Ay, but if he were to feed upon ten or twenty years together, as it is the case
of us miserable Husbands, he would be glad to change it for the Hanch of a
Horse, snick me


Miserable Husbands, miserable Coxcombs, what wretches would ye be without us,
if we should be fullen and hold out a little, what a c^inging and sighing and
whining, would all the proud pert powdered Puppys make then; but gadslidikins,
would 'twere in my power to dispose of our Sex. I Would plague all the flashy Town
Fellows faith, I Would teach ye to find fault; this is too ^at, or that is too lean,
I Would make ye know, that an Angel Woman is your chiefest blessing as she is a
woman, and like a piece of Gold is of true value, whatever coin she is of, or
whatever impression she bears


Say ye so Anniky, what think ye of an Angel Woman that has had the Impression
of a Bastard or two upon her, humh


Why you will find her for her Wit and Qualities, always too good for the fool
that got those Bastards, she has the better of her Cully ten to one, she made
him a right Ninny before she left him I warrant her. But why do I throw away
wit upon thee, -- my Conce^pts are always out of thy reach, poor Doodle


Ay that may very well be snick me, considering that profundity of yours, but
harkee now you shall hear what you (...), you are. Anky, you are a Heteroclite


A Tro^ke^^ite what is that Sot?


Why it is Anniky to be explained two ways, figuratively (...) ^^^^^ially, first
figuratively, it is a foul Storm in the shape of a scolding Woman, an ill wind
that blows no body no good, but roars and blusters, without ever ceasing


Well, when there is nothing aboard but a Ship of fools, however there will be
no loss if any thing be cast away


Hump -- the Jade's as sharp as a Razor, but I Will at her again, snick me; why
then secondly to come to the matter, it is a gross Barren Hen, that is so rank
fed, she is incapable of breed, and yet so greedy on it, that she is eternally
Cackling


Because she roosts among Cravens that have got the Pip, if Cocks were good,
Hens would have Chickens, Clodp^te


Humh to be plainer, since you provoke me, a Heteroclite in the best sense is a
Noun whose way of declension is different from all others, I mean an overgrown
dowdy Wife, who is just like a Dining Room joined to a great hot Kitchen, when
ye expect to have a good Meal in one, the Nauseousness of the other turns your
Stomach, there is a Heteroclite for ye


And there is another Trokellite for you.


How now Bradamant, how now, is it so indeed -- dare you sawcilly attack your
Governor, I Will pinnion ye, ye Harpy, presently


Seellum Hundsfoot, help, murder, murder.


I Will lock ye up over the Stable, faith, heirs, you shall have heirs, and the
great Gib Cat there shall Father 'em, -- how now Goody Stove, what strike a
Burgomaster, I Will make ye an example faith, you shall eat nothing but Horse
Beans this week for it, snick me


Help, help, there, Murder, Murder.


The Clock has not yet struck ten, and I find I am come a little too soon for
my dispatch, there is no stirring above yet, no light in the Window, nor no
appearance in the Balcony, I Will therefore step to the next Tavern to my Brother
Mascarillo, and take one Bumper or two, in the mean time, to warm my Stomach,
it is a cold raw night, and such a Cordial is very necessary.


That I may the readier find the place at my hour of appointment to morrow, I
have resolved, tho it be dark, to stumble this way to night; this is I Am sure
the Street, and I suppose yonder is the House with the Checkered Posts; but
where this little Gate of the Enchanted Castle is, that, wanting Madam
Cinthia's aid, is now invisible: Well, I Will content my self with thus much to
night, and leave the rest for my dark Lanthorn to discover to morrow.


Hist, hist, are you there?


Hah -- what is that a woman's voice?


Are ye there, I ask ye?


Ay, ay.


Come underneath then and catch, and stay below till we come down.


So, I have got it, but what I have catch^d, or who the Devil they take me for,
I cannot so much as guess -- hum -- it is a bundle, and if I feel right -- Silk
and Laced -- oh -- for a rich Purchase of shining Pearl, or glittering
Diamonds, now which some young pretty wanton has packed together to run away to
her Lover, from some damnable cross old Aunt, or confounded Mother-in-Law,
whilst I, guided by my Propitious Stars, in spite of darkness am ordained to be
the lucky supplanter, gad it is a pretty kind of an Adventure this, and I hope
the coming Lady, will answer my vigorous expectation: the door opens -- now
dear Goddess Fortune


Van Scopen, Van Scopen, -- where are ye?


Scopen, Scopen, -- confound it, what a Names that, here, here.


Have ye the bundle?


Yes, yes.


Follow us then and make no noise, -- softly, softly,


Gad she is a delicate Creature for ought I know, but the very hash of her voice
has such allurement in it, that I Will follow her, tho into the Dominions of
Prester John, but I Will have a sight of my little Night-walker.


So now give me the Bundle.


The Bundle, -- humh -- but harkee, am not I to, to,


To, to, -- 'dslife give it me, what is the fellow mad.


Quickly, quickly, and de'e hear do you Seal this Letter and carry it as it is
directed presently, do it carefully be sure, and there is for your pains.


Oh mighty well Madam, I have just now been suckling it I assure your Ladyships
my Milk agrees with the Pretty Creature strangely, it thrives mainly Madam


Oh the dear little Angel, I long to see it, there Nurse I have bought it some
necessaries -- give 'em her Gusset.


A Plague take that Jade for standing in my light, I could not see her face,
but she has a rare shape, -- harkee, harkee, Mistress, pray a little of your
Light, that I may know how to dispatch away a Letter here, which is in great
haste.


Ay, with all my heart Sir, and bless your good worship, this is a great honor
to see you here, intruly this must be the Gentleman Do^^. Doll, bring up the
Child's Barrow and Belly-band,


So, here is another comical mistake going forwards; but who she takes me for I
may go read in the Stars. Your Servant Mistress, IN moblig'd to ye


Your Worship, I may truly say in truly, are Father to the sweetest Babe --


Humh -- humh --


That ever came into the world of its kind, I think in Conscience. Good lack,
that your Worship cannot stay, and give it your fatherly kiss, and your
blessing, poor heart


A fatherly kiss; very good: Instead of a bundle of Jewels, I have got a Child
I find; but methinks by the Mothers dress it should be no very ill bargain


Pray, if I may be so bold, when will your Worship come and have your bellyfull
of kisses


Oh, shortly, shortly -- but if this should prove some Harridan, some Lady of
the Game, that wants a Providore for her Bantling, I should be finely fobb'd
after all.


I Will warrant the Mother kisses it forty times in an hour -- Well -- in truly
it is as like your Worship as if you had carved it with a Chizzel; there your
Nose, and your Eyes, and your Mouth so like; good lack, to see the wonders of
Nature


Now, to get a piece of me will this plaguey Cloutwasher lie like a well feed
Lawyer, or a young Shopkeeper new set up. But the Lady has given me two pieces
here, and these to carry on the jest shall serve for her.


And then its Limbs are, as if they were made of Wax, I Will be sworn. Well,
Heaven bless your worship, you got it with a good will, I dare say for ye, for
the pretty Creature is most notably marked, in truly


That Is well, and to improve its good gifts, there is something to encourage
your care, Nurse


Oh dear, in truly, your Worship is too liberal, and I Will indulge my self with
Eringo Roots, and Clary and Potatoes, to make my Milk more nourishing. Besides,
my particular care of his Body, it shall not want for stretching nor stroking, I
assure your good honor -- Doll, why Doll, I say -- Ay, this a lazy Carrion.


Hang her, she has half ^attled me into a belief it is mine indeed, but now for
the Letter -- That I Am to play the Laquey withal, this will, I doubt not,
discover the true Parents. Let me see, first for the Subscription, To the
President Bondevelt, near the great Cathedral. Good! this is enough to find out
the Father in the first place, and and if the Mother have subscribed her name,
the discovery will be perfect. Sir, The great respect my Uncle has for you,
strengthened with his Commands, and your Merit, obliges me to set Pen to Paper,
to let you know, that it is not by my means, your access to me is hindered, but
by my Aunts Tyranny, who, for her own selfish reasons, debars me from having
converse with any body. However, my Uncle and she having fallen out, you may
have the better opportunity to see me with him this afternoon, if you value so
much as you have often proteste

Angellica Mendezo.

Mendezo, and Angellica, -- By fate it must be she, the pretty Creature I one
night enjoyed by a trick at her Unkles house in London, who since died, and
left her his Estate, and after whom, since the Campaign was ended, and the
Peace made, hearing she was come to meet a Brother, I came hither in search --
Ay, but if this should prove her Child now, and she should be married since. I
went to one of that name -- What a damned unfortunate Rogue am I, -- but hold,
this Letter is only a permission of Courtship, that gives me some hopes
however, and I Will go and find the Lover instantly, and in this my mistaken
quality of Laquey. With subtilty his dearest secret sound
And like a cunning Mole work under ground.



Good lack, what is the Gentleman gone? I was so fearful this sleepy Queen,
should burn the Child's Bed and Blankets, I gave her to air, that I was forced
to run away from him abruptly, well he is much a man of honor I protest, and
I Will collect a dozen or two of the finest words I have in my budget, against he
comes next, that I will intruly


Come Nurse where are ye? here is your little charge expects ye.


Ah Doddy besse it pity face, Doddy besse it, Doddy bless it, was its naughty
Nurse gone from it, and make it cry a Bawl for bubbies, did she so, did she so,
aw 'twas a paw Nurse to leave the sweet Sylds so basely, so she was, and
catchee, catchee, catchee, catchee, catchee, catchee, and catchee, catchee,
catchee, catchee, catchee, catchee, tum a me, tum a me, leta me do a my Nurse


Could one believe the Child would ever speak English, that hears her jabbering
to it at this rate


Indeed Madam, I have always thought it little less than a wonder.

MY dear Cockadoodle, my Jewel, my Joy,
My Darling, my Honey, my pretty sweet Boy;
Before I do rock thee with soft lullaby,
Give me thy dear Lips to be kiss, kiss, kiss.
Thy charming high Forehead, thy Eyes black as Sloes,
Thy round dimpled Chin, and thy right Roman Nose,
With some pretty marks that lie under thy Clothes,
Show thou wilt be a rare one, to kiss, kiss, kiss.
To make thee grow quickly, I Will do what I can,
I Will feed thee, I Will stroke thee, I Will make thee a man;
Ah then how the Lasses, Moll, Betty, and Nan,
By thee will run mad to be kiss, kiss, kiss.
And when in due season, my Billy shall Wed,
And lead a young Lady from Church to her Bed,
Ah, welfare the losing of her Maidenhead,
When Billy comes near her to kiss, kiss, kiss.
The welfare high Forehead, and Eyes black as Sloes,
And welfare the Dimple, and welfare the Nose,
And welfare the marks that lie under thy Clothes,
For none are more hopeful to kiss, kiss, kiss.

Well; da, da, Mamma say, I must go a peep, pay Mamma, pay a Doddy besse me,
and make me a dood Man, ah, egh.


Heaven bless my Heart and Soul.


Your Ladyships humble Servant, this is the Child's hour to go to Sleep, and I
always use them to an hour, there must be method used, Madam, in ^ll things;
good night to your good Ladyship, leave little master to me, you shall hear him
say twenty year hence, he had a good Nurse I Will warrant ye.


Good night Nurse.


Good fortune attend thee pretty Angel from henceforth, tho hitherto thou have
had very little


You never told me out his History yet Madam, tho often have begun it, and as
much as I remember, was that, whilst you were living at London, in your Unkles
house, a Spanish Merchant, who was our Burgo-masters Elder Brother, to whom
being an Orphan, you were sent from Spain, by your Brother in your infancy, and
who afterward dying left you his Estate; that you came acquainted there, with
a young Lady your Neighbor, with whom you grew so intimate, that you were
often Bed-fellows, she frequently coming to you, and you to her, you began to
tell me too of a young Captain, that was her Brother; but at that part of the
Story, some business intervening you still broke off, and left me to guess the
rest imperfectly, of what now I hope to hear


Thou shall, tho the recital is ushered with a sigh, when e^re I tell it; know
then, this Gentleman her Brother, was so like her in face, in shape, in voice,
height, age, and gesture, that when they dressed in one another Clothes, their
Parents and Relations often mistook them; he as ill Stars ordained it, fancied
me, and being young, wild and extravagant, and finding me averse to all loose
Courtship resolved upon the greatest piece of Treachery, that ever Maid was
wronged by


By all that is good Madam, I begin to tremble at my own apprehensions.


Thy fears are certainly too true, for having stolen out his Sisters Clothes one
night he came to me, admitted to our house, taken for her, I was in bed, and
innocently heaven knows n^^staking him as the rest, prayed him make haste,
which too too soon he did, for before Morning, with struggling wooing kisses
and vows of Marriage, backed with the treacherous opportunity, he broke my
first resolves and gained his purpose, took from my finger too a favorite Ring,
with solemn Oaths, within 2 days at farthest to bring another, and a Priest to
join us; but oh, the perjured wretch, instead of this, the next News I had, I
heard he was commanded to his Post in the Army, since when I have never seen
nor heard of him


And this little one was the product of that only meeting?


By all that is good it was, soon after this my Uncle dies, and left me luckily
e're my fault was known, his fortune, but afterwerds finding my self grow big,
and fearing scandal I resolved to go to Madrid, and discover all to my Brother;
I did so, he knew him, and after having generously forgiven, and desired me to
stay here at Bruxells, promised to seek the wronger of my honor, and force him
to do Justice, as soon as he had finished his Embassy into France, for which
employment he was about that time chosen, and by his Letter now sent he tells
me my false friend is come this way toward England, but that he himself will
be here to morrow; then, if we can find the right Father, his Penitence
restores him, but if not, a jolly Widow passes on the formal President,
seeming at my Unkles suit, tho my own cunning, in spite of my Aunts
Machiavilian plotting; and now thou have heard all, let us home and consult, I
know their heads are at it


To do you Justice honor would prevail With every man of sense that only heard
your tale.


You have now Sir brought me to the door of my house, I will therefore only
discourse ye with a word or two more, and then good night. You are Sir a young
Gentleman, and I perceive of singular good parts, prosper me it is very much,
you have not applied your self more to business


Troth Sir, all that I can say ^o your worthyness on this matter is, that my
Father bred me of his own opinion, which was, that pleasure is the only
business a Gentleman should apply himself to


Oh vile, you must give me leave then, hearing this, to tell ye, Sir, your
Father was an Epicure, but your Country England is noted by all considerative
Nations, for breeding their Progeny in that manner; oh vile notion, a
Gentleman's business pleasures, why it should be quite contrary, a right
Gentleman's pleasure should be business


Why faith Sir, I must needs own our Countrymen would hardly take such a one
for a right Gentleman


I believe so, the reason is, because, prosper me, you let your Souls rust with
idleness, now my sharp-sighted Father, I thank him, seasoned me from the
beginning


Season him, what did he Pickle and Salt him?


I mean he wisely let me know, some of the rough and untoward part of Life in
my infancy, my seasoning was the early preparing my body for travel and
business; to which purpose, he sent me at seven years old, a Voyage into
Greenland for Whalebone


Now my Father sent me at seventeen to the University.


To do what, study silly Theories, to lose the solid Practick, learn Bawdy,
under the nickname of Philosophy, or bandy Religion about so hard, to be all
the rest of your Life an Atheist, -- hah, oh vile Management, there is a whole
age lost, misspent and neglected; seventeen, why I had almost finished my Travels
by that time


There Is the hint; now will I set his Tongue agog to tell 'em merely to save my
self, the plague of Repartee, what Travels pray Sir


Sir, every where, I have Traveled every where, to the East and West Indies,
from thence to the South America, Panama, G^^n^avellica, Lima, and Porto Bello,
I have rolled in Silver from the Mines of Potosi, and in Gold from the River de
la Plata, and the rich banks of the lake of Parima


What Merchandises I beseech ye, Sir, what Commodities did you vend there?


Ah things Sir, that in their nature you would laugh to hear of, trifles in our
parts here, tho there of prodigious value, to wit, Thread, Points, Horns,
Catcals, Penny Looking Glasses, Wooden Trumpets, Tin Nutmeg*grater, Brass,
Candles, Saveals, and the like; and then the rare Mechanical invention of
Combs, Knifes, Scizzars, Tooth-picks, Thimbles, Buckles, Buttons, Bodkins, with
the most ingenious Cork*screw and incomparable Nut cracker, bring in a Mint, a
Mint of Money, there is pleasure for ye, Sir. Prosper me, what greater can there
be, than the ingenious overreaching ones fellow creature in the way of Trade


That is, he means cheating ones fellow creature in the way of Trade.


To do which there are occasions innumerable, would you believe it, Sir, Riches
and Treasure flow there so plentifully that I have had my self a Bushel of
Silver for a pack of Cards, and a large Ingot of Gold for a little diminutive
unmusical Instrument, vulgarly called a Jewstrump


Ay, and if that be'nt a lie, th^n I Am a Dromedary.


And so, Sir, I with yo^ well home. Sirrah, wait on the Gentleman.


The President Bondeveli's house, Gent* pray which is it?


That there, Sir; but here is the President himself -- Hah who is here -- what,
my dear Colonel


Mum, Kinglove, not a word more, I Am no body.


For me, Sir -- But hold, there is no need of Ceremony, I know the hand, and
find now he is but a Footman for all his gaudiness.


No questions, Frank, till to morrow, only this, as a doughty Hero once said
before, I am going where Love and Honor call, return if alive to morrow by
twelve


Speed the Plough, Sir, fare ye well.


It Is very well, friend, and on my word you are a very lucky fellow; for I had
just writ a Letter, which I would have early in the morning sent to the party,
in reference to this very affair -- here it is, be careful, and there is for thy
diligence


Good again -- What Sot is he now, that disparrages the function of a Lacquey,
additionally graced with the praise worthy industry of a well-bred Pimp, and so
forth -- here is four Pistoles got in three quarters of an hour, and gad some
two years ago in Flanders I should have thought my Collonelship very lucky in
possession of but half as much.


It may be so, Sir, it may be not, Sir, tho^l, loll, loll.


Come, come, for all thy surliness, I Will prove my self thy f^iend -- I know
thee -- know all thy business too -- thou stayst for a Letter to carry to Madam
Angellica. Why lookee here it is for thee -- here is the Gentleman too thou art
to guide thither, and here is two Pistoles by way of encouragement to diligence
-- hah -- what think thou


Think, Sir, gad, Sir, I think ye are much in the right, and my diligence shall
second your liberality, Sir, immediately. Follow me, Sir


Why well said. Thus spite of Locks and Bars when Jove did woo,
Almighty Gold never failed to shower him through.



COme prithee my dear, let me have this money, it is but a hundred Pistoles, and
I may chance to win five hundred


Ma Chere, in van word den, I will let no mor money go upon shance, shance is
de Teefe, de Sheat, de Pickpocket, shance, morbleau, vill empty min purse, if I
give you any mor money for Play, min Dear


Because I had a little ill luck last night, which was looked upon as a Miracle
too by all the Bassett-Table, the most skilful of all the Punts blessed himself
to see it; for during the time of play, I had once from an Alpiew or Paroli,
Sept et la va, Quinze et le va, Trent en le va: Nay, once Soissant et le va,
and yet lost all at last, but 'twas a thousand to one, my Dear


It Is one towsan to one but min Purse get de dam Consumption wid your Trent and
Soissant, if I give you mor money


What for an Accident, Child? No, no, I shall have luck to night I Am sure, for
Mr Shuffle-tallies and I Am to be Croupiere; Ill follow the winning Knaves, and
get Sept and Quince et le*va, before another shall make an Alpeiw; but I
confess this last time I had the Devil of ill fortune, such indeed that it is
almost incredible, I lost a Sept et le va upon an Eighth King


Morbleau, and voud lose de Kings Revenue, if you play play on, dat is most
veritable, dis game is fit for none but de King and Queen to play at, derefore
I speak once more ver true, I have no more Money ver de Bassett


But I Am engaged in honor to meet my Lady Fatly and take my revenge, for 'twas
that hideous Punt that won most of my Money -- I Will tell thee how 'twas, Child,
she fass'd me every Card I set, or when I drew a lucky one it did not go: she would
make Paroli and Sept e le va upon the same Card, and when ^ lost my King four
times in one deal, she upon an odious filthy Knave, every time wone* Sonica:
Did you ever hear the like. Sonica? Oh prodigious! Every time Sonica


De divla tak my Lady and Sonica too, vat care I vor -- hear dis: come, come,
be advise and play no more


What not have my revenge, shall such a huge Tun-belly'd nasty Thump-cushion,
as my Lady Fatly, make her brags she has stripped me. No, I Will sell my Skin but
I Will have my revenge. Besides, does this consist with your French Honor, Sir,
to have me stripped and made a jest to the Lords, Gentlemen, and the rest of
the Company; 'twould be a very pretty sight, would it not, for them to see me
stripped


Yes, Morbleau, dat would be de ver pretty sight, indeed.


I mean, made incapable of another night's play.


Gazoon, I mean so too, I should be ver loath to find dat.


Pish. Pray, Sir, no more of your jests, if you will grant my request, and save
my credit, I shall think my self obliged, but pray spare your wantton conceits,
my virtuous inclinations don't admire 'em


Nay, nay, Madam, I hope I may jest without affronting of your virtue; and I
hope I may love you ver well, widout more squeezing min Purse vor de Bassett


Will you deny me then?


You set your heart too much upon dis ting, Madam Your love of de Play, make you
covetous, and love Money too well. And dat Wife dat love Money too well,
assurement ver often love her Virtue too little


It Is basely said, if you reflect on me, Sir, whose virtue has been of so pure
a nature, it never was tainted yet with one bad thought. Virtue as white as
Down of Swans or Ermin


I don't know dat, but to be sure, I have tak de care to wash you a little.


You will deny me then?


No, no, no, deny, I will only keep a my Money, dat is all.


I shall be horribly out of humor, I shall scold confoundedly.


I shall sing and laugh den ver mush.


Indeed you had better save my credit, Sir.


Indeed I had betra save my Money, Madam.


Phoo, you shall do it for your little Dear this once; what, hang a hundred
Pistoles, I Will oblige you, my dear dear precious, a hundred times as much:
Come, you shall hear a pretty new Scotch Song I made --


Ay, with all my heart. JOckey was a dowdy Lad;
And Jemmy swarth and tawny
They, my heart no Captive made,
For that was prize to Sawny.
Jockey wooes, and sighs and sues,
And Jemmy offers Money;
Weel, I see, they both love me,
But I love only Sawny.
Jockey high his voice can raise,
And Jemmy Tunes the Vyol;
But when Sawny Pipes sweet Lays
My heart kens no denial,
Yen he sings, and to other strings,
Tho sweet, yet only teize me;
Sawny's Flute can only do it,
And Pipe a Tune to please me.



There Is for ye, my Life, my Heart, my Vitals; and now you shall do it for me;
I Will do any thing to divert my dear Honey


Aw you are de dam cunning Gipsey -- Here is de Honey, and de Honey, but Gazoon
is only for my Money -- Aw but dis shall no do for all dat.


And this now my own heart shall command every day if he pleases, and every
night I Will sing my own dear asleep


Aw, pure wheedle, morbleau dis is plain, dis is de mere sheate; ve good den, I will try now vor put de sheate upon her


Come Sweet, shall I be obliged to thee? p^ithee say Ay.


Vell, vell, put off your meeting vor one two day, you know I go to morr to
receive Money, and sall stay out de whole night; ven I come home I will tell
you more; but no more to dat purpose, Morbleau: -- Aside. So, go go and make
your Visit, and present my service to de Lady.


Pish, this is only a sham, this niggardly wretch will not do it I see by his
sleering. Well Monsieur, since you dare deny your Wife necessaries, for Money
is the chief of necessaries, she shall try what her Merit can do without ye;
and whether her Beauty will pawn for a hundred Pistoles; for the truth is, I do
love Money so well, and Play for the sake of Money, that I Am resolved to keep
up my Credit abroad with the Gamesters of Qualtiy, tho his Cuckoldom purchase
the means of doing it; and I think I have a Chapman ready too, which I made
sure of, for fear he should prove thus hide-bound. Mascarillo, what news of the
Colonel


Why, Madam, I hear there is a Letter left at home for ye, and I suppose from
him; but if you would know more particularly, step into the next room and you
may inform your self, for he is just gone in to visit Madam Angellica


Who the Colonel -- ar't sure it is he?


Very sure, Madam, for I saw Van Scopen my Brother Crony bring him in the back
way about a quarter of an hour ago


What can this mean? I am sure she has no acquaintance with him. Ha, ten to one
it is after me he comes, having had information of my being here; go and pump
the the other fellow, dear Mascarillo, and bring me what Intelligence thou can^t


Very good, I am to Pump for her, and I am to Pimp for her, and yet not a penny
of Money; humh -- Gad this shall not do? but hold, she is not fit for the Trap
yet, let the Mouse play a little longer.


My Lady heard you were here Madam, and having this instant some company with
her, she commanded me to wait on you into her Bedchamber, where she will
attend you presently


I am her humble Servant: This shows ^he does not care I should see what
company is with her; hum -- is it so? Well, I Will watch her I Am resolved, and if
they proceed to an Intrigue, prevent it, tho I ruin he^ I Am of a nature that
can endure no Competitor.


Sir, as the Presidents friend you are welcome to me, and I thank you for the
care of his Le^^er; tho you have ventured into a place so inhospitable to
strangers, that I dare not assure your good usage long


Madam, the Courtesy I receive from you has obliged sufficiently one that has
had a character of the nature of this family.


What makes him look on me and mutter to himself? Sure he knows something of
the Child! Lord help me, how every look or trifle frights me, since that
unlucky accident first happened.


Oh Madam, if you don't intend to have all the things in the Room thrown at
your Head, your Eyes pulled out, and your Clothestorn to pieces, look about you
presently, and clear your Lodgings; here is Scopen has run himself out of
breath, to bring news from the Stable, that your Aunt is broke out, and is
coming like a Fury, her eyes flaming with rage, and her Tongue thundering out
dissolution to her Husband, and all that withstand her


Oh Heaven, what shall we do with the Gentleman?


I know not; she is such a Fiend now she is in her fit, she will tear him all to
pieces


The Devil she will; I Will warrant ye, Madam, fear nothing, I Will tame her
quickly


Tame her! O Lord, Sir, it is impossible, she has got Firearms and the Devil and
all with her; she will have a brace of Slugs in your guts before you can ask
what is the matter


Humph* Gad I Am like to be finely paid for my postage, if this be true, I Will
get out at the back door


The plaguee Footman has taken away the Key -- No, hold. (Studies.) I Have
thought of something at a pinch -- Your Tailor, Madam, that brought home your
Stays to day, left a Coat here of some bodies, to call for as he came back,
and an old Perriwig the Butler can lend him; then, Sir, if you can act a Tailor
a little, you may pass securely


A Tailor, ay, ay, I can act the Devil, any thing, come, ^I warrant thee.


Follow me then quickly, for she will be here in a moment.


Come, Neice, without mincing the matter any longer, if as your Uncle, I have
any interest in ye, I desire ye to look on this worthy friend of mine, the
Honorable President, in a particular way, I mean as a Suitor, his place in the
State ^^ eminent, his parts not to be questioned, and to sum up all virtues in
one, the greatest promoter of Trade in Europe


Sir, I shall always honor your Merits, and in how particular a manner your
admission extends, I hope I satisfied you in my Letter


Madam, you did, which, prosper me has given me a universe of joy. When I was
at Qui^o, after coming from the River of Amaz^^s, I saw a Wedding, and the
Bridegrooms method of expressing his joy for his Bride was, by slitting his
Nose, cutting off one Ear, a joint of the Ring finger from each hand, and so
forth. Ah Madam, I could wish it were the custom here to assure ye, I would not
spare the sacrificing any part about me, to show the grand satisfaction I
possess for the honor of your Ladyship's favor


His discourse is always so pleasantly larded with his Travels, Niece -- oh --
the President's an admirable speaker, snick me


I believe no less, Sir, but pray where is my Aunt, did not she come with ye?
why we have been frighted here with the alarm of her coming? We have almost
been scared out of our Wits


Aw never fear her, I have laid her fast enough -- I shall rest in my Bed now,
and lay my Legs across as I please; and I think it is but reason, for I have not
slept soundly this twenty years


How now? How came you to fright us so, and tell my Woman my Aunt was coming?


Dsheart, so she is coming, and by this time at the bottom of the stairs.


How, Sirrah, what the Devil is she broke out?


Broke out, I gad, Sir, and will break your head within this two Minutes -- She
has armed herself like the figure of St. George in the Sign, with a Headpiece
on, and a great Iron-headed Pike in her hand instead of a Lance, a huge Sword,
with a Basket-hilt, after the fashion of Scanderbeg; besides, a Fusee, and the
Devil and all of Firearms


Gad forgive me, Fire arms -- Good Sir be pleased to abscond for a moment, I
know it is you the seeks. Here Is a Press used to hang Clothes up in; in, in
quickly, I beseech ye, Sir, whilst I submit my self and calm her fury


How, Uncle, is this you that used to say you would show your Masculine power,
and make her tremble


Ah, but the Fusee, Niece, the Firearms, if she had come reasonably, that a
man might have box'd with her fairly, I Would have given her a squelch, and kept
her under me till she asked me pardon, but that confounded Fusee, Engine ^f the
Devil, or wo^se than the Devil to me; a Soldier, I quake at the thought ^n't.
Skellum? where are ye? I shall ferret ye presently


Ah, it is her dreadful voice, snick me. In, in, pray Sir, she is coming up the
stairs


An odd turn of affairs this, I that have been sixteen thousand leagues off in
the wide world, from East to West, to be now confin^d to a Box not above
sixteen inches Diagonical, hugh -- It Is a strange turn of affairs, prosper me.


I Will get out of hearing I am resolved, let them fight their Battle by
themselves.


Lord, Goodman Assinego, how you ^ook now? How does your stomach stand
affected, hoh; I have brought ye a relish here of the Diet you designed me;
there, eat.


I will eat, I will eat any thing, dear Wife, any thing


Wife! 'Dslife such another word, and the Sun shines through thee immediately
-- Wife! familiar fool, my name shall be Tame^lana, as being the first
Conqueress and Tamer of a useless insignificant Animal called a Husband. Do You
eat, Sir


I do, I do, most invincible Tamerlana, I do.


The best repa^t in the world for fellows that are troubled with frigidity.
Well, now to Confession; what, you are a Doodle, I suppose


I am so.


Very well. Come, now muster up your offenses with an audible voice, and
explain your self; begin with your notorious misdemeanour in Wedlock -- Come,
own first, that whatever you are, you ought to be -- a Cuckold


I do so.


Leave off that sneaking Dog-look you had best, and speak out, or here is what
shall open your pipes


Oh good Wife. Tamerlana I mean*


Go on to the rest then; own, own.


Why, I do own, I do own, that when I married the^ first 'twas for thy Money.


So.


And tho I was indifferently civil the first night, much against my will; and
yet I made a horrible resolution in the morning never to be so again.


Like a sordid Rascal as I was.


Like a sordid Rascal as I was.


Good, proceed.


That I always hated that goodly plump person of thine, and being instigated by
the Devil, used to call thee a fulsome Dowdy


For which I deserve to be hanged.


For which I deserve to be hanged.


In thy Garters at my own door.


In thy Gar^ers at my own door.


Right. Now to your contrivance with Bondevelt about marrying my Niece -- Own
quickly, come


Why, I own I have contrived.


With that Coxcomb the President -- Out with the truth, and loudly -- as you
would keep your Guts whole


With that Coxcomb the President -- Oh Lord, he hears me now I Am sure,


That Is well; now come give me that Bond: Come, come, and set your hand here to
assign it to me, and I Will condescend to be friends


Ah, sweet Wife, gracious Wife, gracious Tamerlana, don't exact so hardly upon
the Husband of thy bosom, don't Chick


Nay, no delays or evasion^; do that or take this; I have Money and Friends
enough to get my Pardon for killing a thousand such drones as thou art, and do
the State good service into the bargain -- Or else come I Will go another way,
give me Bond and Judgment to get me an heir by Christmas Day next, and I Will be
satisfied


Oons, that is a task ten times harder than the other Snick me, that is a thing the
Devil would not undertake -- Come, give me the Paper -- There --


Ay Friends -- what else, come kiss me.


Ah Anky, Tamarlana, ah Anky -- Away with your Arms then, away with that
Murder-maker now


Well Husband, and do you truly


Wormwood, Gall.


I see thou have a frown or two left upon thy forehead still. Come, we'll have
some Wine to our reconcilement: Would thou drink my health in a Bumper of
Sherry now, and sweeten it with --


Ratsb^ne -- Come Cockatice, ye are caught at last, ye are disb^nded in faith --
Have you laid down your Arms, good Powder-Monkey -- Come, deliver -- 'Sbud give
me the Papers back again, or --


How, Sir!


Instantly, or snick me my double fist shall so mawl thee -- Oh, I lie, I lie,
I lie; oh gracious Tamerlana:


Ah ye treacherous Skellum, is this your reconcilement. 'dlife, why should not
I rid my self of such a Scoundrel


Oh Tamerlana, Tamerlana, I am at thy feet, I am at thy feet.


But hang^t, let the fool live, I know always how to keep him in awe. Go, get
ye out of my sight and study a repentant Speech, you had best. If I find any
more Rebellion, it is but thus: Phiz, bounce, your Puddings shall pay for it
instantly


Tarmagant Jade, what a life must I lead now -- Oh, I must go and get drunk to
cure me of my fright. Oh I am a miserable Burgo-master, snick me.


So, here is the Bond, three thousand pounds worth of Paper. However, here is
the effect of Wit 'now, this comes of managing Matrimony, as I am a Calvinist:
And now I Will to my Niece, I Am sure she is in some of these Rooms, and perhaps
the President with her, I care not if he is now, the Fish is caught, I Will go
and see. -- If Husbands still are pleased when Wives they fool
Wives must be so, that can their Husbands rule.



A strange unaccountable Creature this! And I have found since my enclosure in
my Hutch here, that this Burgomaster too is a very timorous rascally Fellow:
First, to let a saucy Woman affront me behind my back; and, secondly, to be
baffled out of my Bond; but it is all one to me who has it, great Benefits are
seldom got without good Bribes: And if by either of 'em I get but the Lady and
the Fortune, I shall be repaid well enough, therefore I Will venture to go, and
show my self amongst 'em.


So this disguise was very lucky


And very ugly, the Devil take me, as ever I saw.


Come, come, Sir, it is well for you we had it, the Dragons Claws in her fury,
would have spoiled your Roman Nose else Sir. -- hush -- to your Trade -- here
she comes, and Madam la Marquise with her, whom she has met in the Dining Room:
come Sir, look sneakingly and mind your business.


How now, what fellow's that?


My Ladies Tailor, Mr. Stichwell Madam.


How, how, Madam, not like your Stays?


No not like them, they pinch me here upon the breast, pucker here on the
Shoulde^, and the whalebone hurts me


And are not you a foo^ Neice, to employ him then; the fellow looks like a
Blockhead


Thankee


Ay, it is true Aunt, but he makes some amends by his honesty tho he be a dull
Rogue


Very pretty on the other side.


It Is the Colonel, I^m sure it is he, tho disguised


Here take a Needle and Silk, and gather in this skirt a little straighter --


Well, you will never come into our fashion Neice, you will always wear Armor,
and Coats with long Tails that sweep the Rooms cleane^ than the w^^ch does; if
you would have had my Tailor you had not been so clumsi^y served; 'dliflikins
this awkward fellow ^ooks as if he ne re hand^ed a Needle in's life


Pox on her she might have swore it, my Fingers are a little numbed and please
ye Madam, it is cold weather


Well Neice, where have ye hid the President, for I Am sure he was here, -- come
you may tell me, I am not now so angry at the matter, as I was, so you
entertain none but he, tell me the truth where is he


Then to be ^lain with ye Madam, you frighted him hence, tho he would fain have
spoken with you, and I believe he waits for ye now, at your own apartment


Well I Will go to him, and be moderate, lookee Neice, you know your Brothers
order and my power, let me be concerned in your affairs, and then all will go
well, but otherwise not so, as I Am a Calvinist.


So, thank fortune, she is dispatched at last. Come, now what think ye of a Game
at Cards


Pray let the sham Tailor get into his true shape again first, Madam.


Ay, gad, for I Am plaguee weary of my Trade -- You Devil, you puzzled me
soundly, about gathering the Skirt there.


Madam, I have a business that calls me home, or else I should be very glad to
make one at Ombre, but the Colonel no doubt will march ye at Picket


The Colonel! What, then I perceive she is acquainted with him; who can this
Colonel be?


Why, Madam, don't you know?


Not I: He Is an acquaintance of the Presidents, but an utter stranger to me,
and this disguise was to keep him from my Aunts knowledge


I am glad to hear that.


I believe I shall laugh at this Adventure very often when I have not the
happiness of seeing your Ladyship


The occasion will require it, Sir.


It Is always so, when we are to be governed by Relations. Gusset get the Cards
ready.


And till they come, I beg the favor of a word with you Madam.


Madam, I beg your leave a minute.


Madam, having been engaged lately to hear a little tumultuous discourse just
now between your Aunt and the Burgomaster, and perceiving at last the main
hinge on which the whole matter moved was relating to me, I resolved to conceal
my self no longer, but to discourse her. Is she gone, I beseech ye


Just gone Sir, a minute since; I Am sure you may overtake her easily; and
'twill be proper, Sir, because now she has a mind to see ye


Madam, I understand ye perfectly.


Sir, your most humble Servant.


Madam, I have longed for a Regalia of pleasant Conversation with your Ladyship
too -- But business, unfortunate business, Madam --


Diligent fellow! what does he mean? he talks of him as if he were my Footman.
Gusset.


The Presidents great business sure makes him forget his manners; he uses ye
very familiarly, Colonel


Oh, I know it is his way, and am used to it -- I understand what he means by a
nod, as well as a dumb man the language of the fingers: but to the purpose of
what I whispered, do you believe me, Madam


What, that you came here purposely to see me?


That, or you undo me.


O fie; try if you can persuade me to it; however, as I find you behave yourself
like a man of honor, I shall be induced to give ye credit; but no more now,
the Lady expects ye at Cards


By Heaven I Will not fail -- Oh damned Rogue, now cannot I forbear pursuing this
Intreague, tho I lose this other Angel by it, and a flourishing fortune -- Oh
woman, woman, tempting flesh and blood, how wicked do thou make us.


I forgot to ask her before I went whether I should have any farther private
correspondence with her Uncle, the Aunt being, I perceive, Lady of the
Ascendant, and sole Governess of the Family's affairs; but I hope it is not too
late to be resolved -- How now! what is this I see! At Cards -- and so familiar
with a Footman -- Prosper me, can this be real!


For the Point Madam -- fifty seven.


I Am your equal, Sir.


Are ye so? I have spent my time fairly then.


Your Ladyship has a Qui^t, I suppos^.


No, indeed Sir I am not so lucky.


Not a Quint? what think ye then Ma^^^ of Terse Major?


Very good.


Oh Abominable, it is plain now there^^ ^n Intreague between 'em, a rank
Intreague by Heaven, and I accidentally coming back have surpised 'em, when
they thought themselves secure, -- oh the P^odigious Appetite of Women, that
when the Blood ferments make no distinction, the high born Princely Peer, and
the poor Peasant, are equal in their fancies. However I Am glad I saw this, that
I may sort a season to inform her how I despise her Amity.


I hope your worthyness is not going so soon.


I have staid too long unless in better Company.


How Sir, what is it you say, better Company!


Yes 'twas I said it -- besides perhaps I might disturb your Lady and the
Footman at their Game


The Footman, Sir,


The Footman, Mistress: it is not his fine Coat can make him otherwise, he^s too
well known


Bless me Sir, he passes here for a Colonel.


That Is a likely matter, I say once more, he is a Footman; and she knows it, to
whom within this few hours, I gave Gold to pay him for an Errand, and so I
leave her, tell her to her Pastime, and much good do her with her running
Gamester


How is this a Footman^; who the Devil would have thought it, I wondered indeed
he was so over civil, how many raw young Creatures has that Coat now put a
cheat-upon


Seven. --


And how many Guinea's will she give me for discovering this now.


Five, --


'Twould be worth some I warrant from this Scoundrel too to conceal it.


Eight.


To intreague with a Footman, Lord how many Lovers of Quality has she had.


Five.


And some Rampart Damsels this Cheat has had I warrant too.


Nine.


It will deserve ten Guinea's from her.


Six Seven.


And from him to play false.


Nine.


Hah, sure the Impostor does not answer me, but if he did I Will be honest, I
know I shall have ten of her


Eight.


Well Eight with honesty, and for his part. --


Nine.


Bragging Puppy, sure he has overheard me, but I Will cross-purpose him
presently. Madam, I beg your pardon for interrupting ye, but I must needs speak
with you on earnest business


What, sure you can stay till the Game's up.


Not a minute Madam, excuse me, it is what concerns your honor.


Oh by all means Madam, I must not be guilty of detaining ye when matters of
moment engage -- your most humble Servant, I Will wait on ye another time, --
your Servant pretty Creature.


Impudence, prithee get thee gone.


Hey day, what has she left her manners amongst her Ladies foul Linen, what a
pox ails her.


How now, what you did not affront the Gentleman I hope.


Gentleman, hang him trotting Horse. Madam, you have been the most damnably
imposed on that ever woman was. In short, this gay Fellow that you have made
your Companion, is another Van Scopen, nothing but a Footman


A Footman! Why, Madam la Marquise told me he was a Colonel, and a man of a
very good Family; I know too they generally dress in that manner


Pugh, what signifies that, or what she says: Here was the President just now
looking over your Play, and in such a passion to see your familiarity, that I
could not pacify him; he knows him, it seems, no otherwise but as a Footman,
and doubtless was angry, believing some intreague between ye. Tell her, says
he, I Will leave her to her pastime, and much good do her with her running
Gamester


Was there ever such a mischievous ^ccident? What could be the Fellow's design?
he never hinted any thing* of Love to me? and I swear did not look unlike a
Gentleman


No, a pox take him, the fellow set a good face upon the matter.


Well, be sure the Porter locks him out for the future; in the mean time go you
and find out the truth, and give the President our account of him, but
especially let us contrive to keep it from my Aunts knowledge. With Art and
Care, success we now must get
And since good fortune fails, supply with Wit.



HA, ha, ha, ha, ha.


You have very good reason, ^aith Sir; when a Wife once comes to be tarmagant
and saucy, she ought to be reprimanded. This is the most comical fellow that
ever I met with.


Oh your Highness will have more of him presently; but remember I Am a Merchant.
Brussels, to be as it were imasculated by a Woman; faith it is egregious; no,
no, take thy Revenge, old Butter-gullet


Revenge -- egh -- Zooks I Would give half I Am worth to be revenged of her, and
the other full Glass or two will set me purely in for it, Odsbeares: For you must
know I an't such a sneaking Pea goose then, as when I Am sober: Odsbeares, I can
talk to her then and swear; I am a mettled fellow when I Am drunk, snick me


Why well said, who gives the Burgo-master a Bumper there? Monsieur Marquis,
you are his next man, pray see the Glass come to him -- Come, here is Confusion
to all domineering Wives: Wives that set a greater Tax upon a Husbands virility
than his Constitution is ever able to pay. Here, Confusion to 'em


Hem; come, away with it; gad I shall be pure and bowzy presently.


Along Monsieur, here is one Bumper to you; and hark you, de healt is, may your
Wife break her neck down staire to mor morning.


Amen: I Will drink a pint to that, snick me.


As fairly drank as the occasion is honorable. And now, Sir, as you are a
Merchant, and a Lover of Trade, you are obliged to help a Brother in distress;
you were beginning to tell him a pleasant way of Revenge; come, pray let us hear
it


Ay, come Brother Sprat, prithee out with it.


If it wants more heads than one we'll all help: I Will give thee some drops to
mix with her mornings draught shall make her so hoarse for a twelvemonth, that
she shall whiz like a Monster shewer in the Fair, and not be heard the distance
of two foot, let her endeavor to scold never so violently


Thankee good Sir, snick me, that would do very well.


And harkee you Mister Burgomastree, I will give you one rare Powder, dat shall
draw her Tongue out of de Mout, de Teet out of de Head, and de Nail of de
Finger, and ven she can neider scold, bite, nor scrash, she vill be ver good
Wife, Morbleau


Humph -- odd that is an admirable Powder too, that is Powder would do mighty
well, Sir my service tee.


Why Sir I remember you said some time since, that above all things your Wife
hates a Monkey


She does so; nay, and with that Mortal aversion that she will swoon if it comes
too near her, goggle with her eyes, foam at mouth, and play such tricks as if
ten thousand Devils had possessed her


There Is your way, Sir, whenever you would gain your point, carry one under
your Cloak you may fright her to any thing


Zooks he has nicked it; it is a rare way faith, to get my Bond again; for the
very Devil is not so frightful to her as a Monkey, and I Will carry one always
about me, I Am sure 'twill make her do any thing. Odsears, this is a notable
man, he carries a great deal of Docity, egh -- under that Cloak there.


So, his joy for his Monkey and the last Bumper together, have almost foxt him;
'twou'd be pleasant to see him and his Wife when they meet now


Pleasant, 'twou'd be an admirable Scene for a Comedy.


See, he is going to tak^ the other Bumper upon it.


He will be more dru^k for joy of his Monkey, den he vas when Peace vas
proclaim


Ay, or at the safe ^^urn of the Smirna Fleet, tho he had never so great a
share i^'^. So, Sir, by your smiling I see you like my project


Like it! I could kiss th^e, faith and troth; but stay, where shall get I this
Monkey? hum -- Oh, Odsears, well remembered, my Niece has a rare one, which she
keeps up always privately for her own diversion, that shall be ^t faith, and
I Will go get it instantly, for I Am resolv^d to have my Bond again. Dear Brother,
I thank thee once ^ore heartily for thy project, and your good Lordship for my
^r^at. And so, egh -- but hold, my Lord, my Lord, one G^^^s more faith, here is
-- egh -- my Neices Monkey's health, my Lord.


Oh, with all my heart Sir, and to the rest of your Relatio^s, if you please,
Mr Bu^go master


And so sit ye merry; I am egh -- almost drunk faith. Odseares if I light on
Aniky now she is a miserable Jade, snick me.


Ha, ha, ha, ha -- now he is gone vee sall lose de ver fine humeur, sneeka me.


And snick me, now he is gone too, there lies my Merchandise.


My Lord, the Music your Lordship ordered wait below to know your pleasure.


Let 'em come up. Come Gentlemen we'll have a Song. NEw Reformation begins
through the Natio
And our grumbling Sages, in hopes of good wages, Direct us the way.
Sons of the Muses* then ^loak your Abuse^;
And lest you s^^uld tr^mple on ^ious Example, Observe, and Obey.
Time-frenzy Cu^^rs,
And stubborn Non-Iurors,
F^r want of Employment, now s^ urge the l^wd times:
They Have hinted, they have Printed,
Our vein is, Profaneness,
The worst of all Crimes;
Dull Clod-pated Ralliers,
Smiths, Cobblers and Colliers,
Have damned all our Rhimes.
Under the notion of zeal for Devotion,
The humor has fired em, or rather inspired 'em
To Tutor the Age:
But if in season, you would know the true reason,
The hopes of Preferment is what makes some Vermin
Now Rail at the Stage.
Cuckolds and Canters,
With Scruples and Banters,
The Old Forty One peal against Poetry ring.
But let State revolvers,
And Treason-Absolvers,
Excuse if I sing
The Sconndrel that chooses
To cry down the Muses,
Would cry down the King.



Do You hear Music, flourish all when I drink this health, To the Great Umpire
of Christendom, Genius of the War, and all our brave Confederate Princes;
Savior of our Lives, Honors, Liberties and Estates; and eternally renowned
Procurer, Finisher, and Protector of our glorious Peace, his Sacred Majesty of
Great Britain.


May he be dam dat refuse I say, Morbleau.


Nay Marqui this is not all yet, the next must be your Masters health, the Most
Christian King, then our Mistresses, and then --


To reel into a Chair, Colonel, that is the next then I Am sure. But now ye talk
of Mistresses, harkee, does the Intreague I know of hold to night, are the
hundred Goldfinches to fly


Love will oblige me to fly thither, but I hope her generosity will spare the
rest, for all my jesting; however, I Am resolved to offer the hundred


Nay Gad if you offer the hundred, it is a hundred to one but she will resolve to
take 'em


Pardeu she be dam Jilt dat take de hunder Pistole from de Colonel, be who she
vill; do I know her


Faith I cannot tell; but if you do, I Am sure I don't; for I never so much as
asked her name; but she is pretty as an Angel, and witty as it is possible; and
if she has an ingredient of old Sa^an mixed with these, and is mercenary, she
only runs the risque of my hate after the business is over; but for the present
I have no forecast


Ah, she vill be shenerous no doubt, and so I vish de bon pastime wid all min
heart, ha, ha, ha, dear Colonel


Stay friend, I think it most proper to send my Complement to the Prince before
I enter, having been so fatigued with business, that I could not wait on him
here at dinner, in compliance to his generous invitation -- Ay, do so friend,
prithee go to him, and present my most humble --


Sir, you should have told me before; you are in the very Room now, and yonder
the Prince sits amongst the rest of the company


Od^o, he is in the right -- Well, say nothing then. Angellica? It is, it must
be he, and laughing and prating like a Companion


Prithee, my Lord, reach the Glass; I Will begin another health.


Impudent Dog! he will begin another health! Why, what a shame is this, when
Noblemen debase themselves to mix with Grooms and Vassals: Bless me, what will
this world come to -- I Will introduce my self -- My good Lord


Oh Mr President your humble Servant. I wanted ye extremely at Dinner, but your
perpetual business debars your friends still of their expectations


My Lord, your Lordships command to me is always business. Ah Sir --


What, is he drunk?


I canno tell; I wondra de Colonel noe give him one grand kick, morbleau.


And harkee, if occasion will permit --


He takes me for a Footman.


Enough, it shall be done.


I have it.


Ha, ha, ha, -- oh it is ver well.


Now my good Lord, when goes your Lordship for Holland.


Not till Winter, Sir; I intend f^rst to wait upon King William in England, Sir
-- you may vail you^ Bonnet now if you please, you will be taken for my
Bedfellow a^on else


Prosper me, my Lord, I had taken him for such indeed, but that I know him.


Ah, it is a Gentleman that gives us sometimes the favor of his Company -- he
pays his Club here -- ha, ha, ha


Ha, ha, ha, ha. --


Oh your Lordship's merry -- I see now this was only allowance, a frollicksome
humor to make mirth, and yet had I just now a message from Angellica, full of
seeming wonder, that I should mistake his quality so, he coming there as such a
one, and by my interest; I know not what she means, but am resolved I Will carry
him to her, and there his quality will be proved.


I hear amongst the rest of the news, that fame is proud of, that your
worthiness has a design to marry


Ay gad, and I hear it is to a particular acquaintance and intimate friend of
mine


Scoundrel -- prosper me, but now this fellow begins to be too saucy, I fear he
will put me into a passion.


Faith, Sir, he is thus free with us all, he makes no distinctions, it is his
humor


It Is an undecent humor, and were I to converse much with the Prince, I would
argue him out of it. There is one of your Country Proverbs, which I remember,
very pertinent to this purpose, which is, Play with a fool at home, and he will
play with you in the Market place. I think it wants no application: Not but I
can wink at his folly my self now, having some present business with him --
Do hear, fellow?


Very well, fellow.


Audacious Rogue.


Ay, he is a very strange fellow, that is the truth on it.


Well, I know thee, and answer as thou please, so thou will do me one piece
of service. It Is this, that thou will go with me instantly to visit the Lady I
found thee at Cards with yesterday, for a private reason known only to my self,
and I will give thee something to pay thy club hereafter with men of quality


I Will do it, and will it spend afterward upon thee in what liquor thou like,
Bully Rock.


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, ha -- This is as I could wish, for I have been denied entrance
lately, and long to know the reason.


My Lord and Gentlemen, I hope you will honor me with your presence, I know ye
are all admirers of fine Ladies, and I Will beg your opinions of this


With all our hearts, Sir.


I Will shame her before all the world.


Come pug -- egh, come along, by thy notable assistance, and my -- egh, potable
endeavors, I make no doubt but to make a fool of my Wife, therefore thus I
embrace thee -- I find now it is true as the old saying is, that it is good to
have a friend in a corner, and in the Chimney-corner I found thee, the best
friend I ever had in my life, snick me, for thou can cunjure out the Devil
that possesses Wedlock, and let the poor Vermin feed at ease that is enclosed --
egh -- in the Conjugal Mouse-trap. Why how now, Pug -- thou laugh'st to hear me
called a Mouse-trap -- Very well, Monkey-face, thou would not be so merry if
thou were married, for I tell thee, for all thy grinning, it is a Mouse-trap, a
very Mouse-trap, and not only so, but often baited with damned moldy Cheese,
that choaks a man into the bargain


Lord, Uncle, the privilege you give the President will bring us into a
strange praemunire presently, if my Aunt knows it* for he is coming yonder with a
whole Train of Gentlemen a^^er him. What he intends, I know not, but I Am sure
my Aunt watches perpetually to see who comes in, and if she finds 'em here we
shall have a horrible House


Oh, I warrant thee, Niece, I warrant thee, here are some that shall be
nameless -- as egh -- horrible as herself, that shall make their Party good
with her, I warrant ye; but in the first place, prithee lend me thy Keys, to
lock my reliever here into the Closet, that I may have him forthcoming upon
occasion, and then I defy thy Aunt, egh -- and all her Imps, snick me


Madam, you sent me an account to day by your Chamber-diligence there of this
most renowned person, of his Quality, to shade no doubt from my shallow
understanding, the intimacy I saw between ye yesterday. My visit to your
Ladyship therefore now is, to confirm before your Uncle, and the Company here,
your honorable proceedings, and admirable choice of a Play fellow


Sir, you will do very well to confirm it, for my own part I shall not repent
of my proceedings, till I have a worse account of my Play fellow


Sir, tho you wear no Sword, I shall borrow one for ye* if your busy head vent
any thing reflecting on my honor


The old impudence -- his honor -- my Lord did your Highness hear him, -- ha,
ha, ha, -- his honor


Ha, ha, ha -- ay, Sir, he holds it up still.


A strange odd fellow, Sir, he will disgrace ye before your Mistress, if you have not a care


Oh, that is impossible -- if my word were invalid, you can give her knowledge
enough of him


Yes, yes, if she would know his merit or qualities -- we can do him ver good
justice


Mr Burgo-master, you once thought me worthy of a favor from your Niece, but
she has since thought better of that laced Coat there, than my civil Robe. Pray
look on your Nephew that is to be, dee know him.


Odsears, who have we here, egh -- why what my Brother Sprat Merchant of Peru,
what are ye come to put off your Oleaginous Ware to my Niece, dressed like a
confounded Soldade, humh


A plague of his memory, I thought he had been too drunk to distinguish now; no
faith, Sir, I only come to know if you remembered the Monkey


Ay, ay, ye cunning thief, egh -- I do remember it, and do you remember too,
that your project for me then has brought ye off the danger of your project
upon my Niece now. We have Horse ponds and Blankets for Fortune-stealers, ye
cunning Dog


What, the Coat is known then, it is reasonable the Ambassadors Livery should be
familiar here


The Ambassadors Livery, ^oons it is the Devils Livery, a Soldiers. Pox on thee,
put it off, egh -- gad I cannot abide to look on^t, and prithee be as thou art,
a Merchant of true blue Protestant Sprats, monopoliz'd to thy self from
Coquimbo, Copiago, Porto Bello, and the Devil knows where


What in the ^ame of Mystery does he mean? he must needs know his Nephews
Footman


A Merchant in that dress, what Riddles this, my Lord you can inform us I Am
sure, he is your acquaintance


He is so, Madam, and when he thinks it convenient, we are ready to expound his
Mystery


There are some people above the vulgar, that may own him without scandal.


Yes, tru^y, I have seen him sit wid his Hat on among ver good Shentlemen.


Enigma's still more riddling -- sure this is not the Czar of Musc^vy
disguised, that they make such caution of discovering him -- oh here comes one
I Am sure will unravel all


So, Niece, is this your compliance to your Brother's Authority and my Commands
-- hah, but I know this is not so much your doings, as Sir Assinego's there --
What is your Article with me out of date already, friend -- Have you forgot
Tamarlana's power, and your horrid Oaths to encourage no man's coming here
without my knowledge -- it is very well I Will, have a Bone for you to pick
presently, you shall gnaw for this as I Am a Calvinist


The Jade has a Pistol in her pocket now I know, but I Will keep the wind of her
till the Company's gone, and I can get Pug out, and then I defy her, snick me.


Gentlemen, pray what business have you here with my Neice, for I must tell ye,
till I know it, and you make an interest with me you are not welcome, this
Gentleman indeed has my suffrage by virtue of his merit, and this Bond here,
but you, if you come by another authority, may walk out, she shall hear nothing
from ye


Madam, my Lord and these Gentlemen came at my request to discover a new Suitor
of your Niece's: Here Monsieur Enigma, but since I find them shy of it, I
desire the favor from you; pray what is this doubty person, Madam


Hey day, why who is here, the High and Mighty Signior Stitchwell, Viscount
Bodkin, and Baron Thimble. Why how now, Sirrah, what Roguery are you designing
in this dress? hah


So, she thinks she has stitched me too.


The Lady there affirms he is a person of quality, pray let his qualities be
made public. Come, pray declare, Madam -- What is he


What is he, why he is a Tailor.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha


A whimsical, unthrifty, Maggot-pated Rascal, that has put on some Of^^^ers
Clothes, that is his Customer, only that he might brag that once in his life
time he looked like a Gentleman. What say you, Sir Christopher Cros^leg, are not
you a Tailor


No.


Why ye ^itty, spindle shank'd, white liver'd, oyly-fisted, bot^herly Cuckold,
did not I see you with my Niece's Stays in her Chamber to day


Yes.


And have you the impudence then, Sirrah, to say you are no Tailor; if not,
what Trade are ye, and be hanged


A Cuckold maker.


Oh rare Tom Thimble, here is an impudent Rascal for ye.


This is more intricate still, I cannot understand either of 'em. Harkee, come
hither, did not you bring me a Letter lately for which I gave you Money, Sir


Yes, Sir.


Very well, Sir, and are not you one of the Ambassadors Retinue, a Footman, Sir?


No, Sir.


What a Devil art thou then?


Misanthropos -- I hate impertinent Mankind -- This Madam may satisfy you, pray


Why then, Sir, in a word, he'is a Colonel of Horse, his Name is Dorange, a
Gentleman of a very ancient Family, Sir William Dorange's Son of Norfolk


What do I see, by Heaven, the very Ring I gave the Author of my once forfeited
honor, -- oh I faint.


The rest you shall know hereafter: and then perhaps the Gentleman, Lacquey,
Sprat-Merchant and Tailor, may be qualified, if affronted to pull you by the
Nose, Sir,


You know where I lodge Colonel, if any thing happens, Command my Sword and
service


And mine -- Come Monsieur Marqui, shall we set you down?


(...) Sire, I tank you I am oblige anoder way upon one grand affair.


I am amazed, and I fear fooled into the bargain, but I must have the rest
on it, for to know this, and no more sets me on the Rack


I Will after and piece up the matter, for I find here has been pl^guy tricks and
contrivances, but I Will have no private doings with my Niece without me, I Will
not give up that authority however


But you shall.


Oh the Devil the Devil -- oh, oh, --


Why lookee, the Truth is -- here is the Devil -- and egh, there is his Dam,
and when I Have locked the door I intend to m^ke ye better acquainted


Oh dear Husband, dear Husband, put it out of the Room, or I s^an't live three
minutes


I don't care three Stivers, if thou do not live, egh -- one.


Dear Husband.


Husband, snick me, such another word as that, and I Will whisper in's Ear, to go
and give thee a Buss -- Husband, egh -- ye saucy Gil-flirt -- no, my name shall
be Don Dominario, from my subjecting and making truckle under me a Devil of a
Wife, and so to take state accordingly. Rise, and give your Betters place,
Hussy.


Ay withal my heart most noble Husband -- Dominario I mean, is there no way to
get out, oh how I tremble.


Now lookee, tho my Friend Pug here asks ye no questions, it is not egh for want
of copious capacity, but to egh ease himself, and therefore leaves ye wholly to
my examination, upon which he will c^a^er his judgment, -- come, what have you
to say for your self, -- what you are a Heteroclite I suppose now


I am so.


Good, come then, now in your own words muster up your offenses with an audible
voice; egh -- come explain your self, and begin your most notorious misdemeanor
in Wedlock, to which purpose own first, that several times on several occasions
you have properly deserved egh -- to have your bones broke


I do so


Good again, well now go on to the rest, and leave blubbering and screwing your
face, you had best, for if Pug should see that, he would think you were making
faces at him, and fly at ye like a Devil -- snick me, therefore own, own
quickly


Oh -- gad, what shall I do, this is intolerable, why I do own, I do own, that
when we first married, I was in Love with another man, and that upon the
wedding Night I would have made ye a Cuckold but I could not.


Like a notorious Jilt as I was.


Like a notorious Jilt as I was.


So proceed, Odsears I have her at a rare advantage.


That my not trying other men since, to get me an heir was not for want of my
inclination but theirs, and the less grift was brought to the Mill, the more
still I put you to hard Labor


For which I deserve to be hanged.


For which I deserve to be hanged.


In my Garters at my own door.


In my Garters at my own door.


Right, and that I did insolently plunder my Lord and Master Dominario
aforesaid, of a Bond and Assignment of three thousand Pounds, which I now
beseech him upon my knees to receive again, -- and pardon me, -- Come out
with it, and instantly, or here is one shall fetch 'em out of your Pocket, snick
me


Oh, which here upon my knees, I give him again,


Oh, you Servant good Anniky, and now you may go if you please, about your
business, and brag what a


Only this which I was going to throw away indeed Husband.


A Pistol, away with it ye Devil instantly, or I Will bring. Pug to bed to thee
to Night -- Ah ye Cockatrice,


Curse on him, if he had not found out this Monster to plague me, I had kept
him always under, but now he has me at his ^eck, and may do what he will, which
to a Wife, that has before been always uppermost, is in-supportable of that
odious Devil above here, than I could of the the other below, as I am a
Calvinist.


So, here they are once more, ha, ha, ha, this makes me merry, and now thanks
to my dear releiver, come Buss Buss.


Sir there is great News since you were below Stairs, my Master the Ambassador
is newly returned, and just gone up into his Sisters Chamber


Odfears, he must not know of my Agreement with the President till I have made
sure of the Money -- egh -- well I Will go to him, come dear Friend let us along,
Buss, Buss.


How now Brother in iniquity, what in haste?


Yes faith, like a Pot that is boiling over, is my Master here.


No, gone some time since, and I think he said out of Town, why what is the
matter


Matter? why the great matter of the world, ye Rascal, matter of Hornifying ye
Scoundrel


What, the Colonel resolves then to answer her Challenge; and will thou betray
'em, Rogue? -- Will thou spoil sport


Why, ye unconscionable Rogue, would you have me Pimp for nothing; 'Sdeath
she is as niggardly as a Usuring Jew, her Soul lives in an Alley, and gad if she
were a Cherubim I Would betray her if she has no sense to reward Diligence --
Yonder they are faith -- close as Pigeons, and I am going to bring my Master to
breakfast on 'em


There will be some blustering in our family too now the Ambassador's come home;
I believe the President will be routed when the Father of the Kid's known


Angellica deserves to be befriended because she is generous; but my covetous
Devil at home lets Money stick to her fingers like Bird lime; there is no
getting it from 'em; she thinks she^s secure of him till to morrow noon, but I
know where he is gone, and will ferret him away faith -- he will reward me with a
Piece or two I Am sure


What cursed unhappy hours does he behold,
Who to be proved a Cuckold pays his Gold?

On the other side how wisely Gold is paid
To one well gifted in the Pimping Trade:
It Is Art sublime -- for as a learned Poet said,
Pimping the Mind inures, and does prepare
For Politics, as Hunting does for War.

YOu are then assured 'twas he.


I cannot mistake, Sir, this Ring he gave me, which I know was mine, and by him
taken from me that fatal Night, besides his Stature and his Tone of Voice, tho
the Smallpox have altered much his features, and his hair then wore uncut
changed for a Peruke, confirm him for the Man


And Sister did he make such haste out do you say, when he had shown this Ring?


Vanished immediately, e're I had time to rally my lost Spirits, sunk in a
swoon at such unlooked surprise, he disappeared, leaving only these few words
softly with the Ring, this Madam may satisfy you, pray give it to your little
one to play with


How should he know of that?


I cannot guess what way, unless the Nurse be false.


Furies and Fire, give it your little one, that looks all insolence, neglect
and scorn, as if he braved ye with his lucky Treachery, or as ye since were
served so by some other


I could not understand him, I confess and had no time to Argue.


I Will find time, and force his best occasions to wait on it, to make him clear
the blot that stains my Honor, or in his lustful heart imprint my wrongs, so
deep that all our Family shall read 'em, and own I have revenged an injured
Sister


Oh, if you ever loved me, dearest Brother, add not to my misfortune by a
greater, endangering your self in any quarrel, there are much milder ways


I Will warrant thee I Will use 'em, -- I Will find out Bertran, by him send a Letter
to Dorange, then as he answers nobly I Will proceed. If reason justly can delay
the Fight
It Is well, if not my Sword shall do me right.



I wonder where this lazy fellow is, some body has been knocking at the Gate
this good while; stay here, dear Sir, a little till I go and see, Il'l be with
ye instantly, I know my Husband is secure till noon, and you shall not go yet I am
resolved. Indeed it is too early*


Too early did she say, to go -- rather too late that I repent my coming, now
things are weighed in just consideration -- What a vile Creature is ungoverned
man, when merely his own natural heat can change him into a fulsome Idiot. I
have left now the fair Angellica, half dead with doubts; nay, and two thousand
pound a year in Posse, to give a hundred Pistoles to a Jilt for one nights
Lodging, for whieu -- it is gone -- you are paid, and shake your empty Pockets. Am
not I then an Idiot? Faith Colonel Coddle, I am afraid you are. Besides,
Angellica was beautiful as an Angel -- but then the Child, that is indeed a
Thorn which pricks with jealousy; but why should I suspect it is not mine, it is
likely and reasonable, and consequently her Estate mine too by owning it-and
yet I Have am left her; Idiot, Idiot still. As for this Creature, now my
judgment's cool, my Tongue cannot express how much I hate her. And yet the Jilt
is pretty too, but mercenary to such degree, she would kiss for Gold a Negro, and
get a Brat to make the Devil a Page of. When I first gave my Purse, foolishly
thinking she would refund two thirds back, if not all, no juggler ever played
his Cups and Balls with such a slight pass, presto -- it was gone, at which my
heart gave m^ so strange a thump, as if 'twere coming to my head to break it,
or rail at me for my egregious folly -- humh -- let me think, with what was in
that Purse, and little more, a Man might buy a House, with Acres and a pretty
Orchard to it, to live in Fresco, at -- A hundred Pistoles, 'twould buy a Horse
to charge against the Turks, break through their Ranks, and trample down a
Bassa. 'Twould do a hundred things -- indeed any thing -- And what have you
done with it, Colonel -- Nothing. You have played a game at Hide and Seek with
it, and now can neither find that nor yourself. A hundred Pistoles -- well,
here, here, they lie. This Box (takes up the Dressing Box.) contains the
treasure of my folly -- hah -- if e're you could dispense with plunder,
Colonel, what think ye now -- But see, that very word, like some great charm,
has drawn her Carcass up to look ou't for her Soul


Oh dear Colonel, I am at my wits end, this idle fellow is gone out, no one
knows where, and my Husband, unlooked for, coming back, has been knocking at
the Gate this half hour, the Maid's just gone to let him in


A hundred pound in Gold, a lusty Purse indeed.


Oh for Heaven's sake, dear Sir, get into that Closet immediately, and I Will
contrive to get him away as soon as I can -- Bless me, how you stand -- 'Dslife
if ye don't go in quickly he will come and catch ye


A lusty Purse indeed. Did e're so much in so short time, from one poor Cully
bleed


Lord, Sir, what dee mean? is this a time for tuning, why my Husband's just
coming up stairs.


Gad I Have a great mind to stay and see who this Cuckold is, then stand buff to
him, and try to take my Money again, but it may be she will get him off quickly,
and give me new occasion to make her compound. I Will try her once more.


Good morr, Madam, you rise ver early dis morning.


Ah my dear, you know I can never sleep soundly when you are out of the way,
but I confess I did not expect ye home quite so soon


That I dare swear you did not, nor desire it neither.


Has any extraordinary business happened my dear?


Yes, yes, ver extraordinary business.


Come, I know ye have brought me the money now, I Am sure you have.


Yes, yes, widout doubt, you will be paid for your great kindness.


Prithee what business Child, I am one half of ye, ye know, and I cannot rest
till I know what accidents happened to the other.


Ah, very pretty wheedle, coakes him there -- Now would I swear by this she had
certainly made him a Cuckold, tho I had known nothing of the matter.


What is it you look for, my dear.


Vor de Birds-nest, but gazoon, I perveave dey be all fledge and flown away.


Into the Closet there, Sir, no further; search there and you may find one with
his Feathers on, I warrant ye


That Villain has undone me, what shall I do.


Come, Madam, let me see de Key, dear is one Papier dat I must have presantlee,
dat concern me ver much


The Key indeed, Sir, the Key, the Key, the Key is lost; Sir, I am just sending
to have another made, you may have it at night, Sir


At Night, oh ver good, you are vor de Night work still Madam, but I have now
occasion vor de day, de Sun fall shine upon your grand grand virtue, virtue,
dat is you say of such pure Nature, it never was tainted yet wid one bad
Tought, virtue as white as down of Swan or Ermine fall glitter in de day light,
hey Sirrah, go take de Fork from de Shimmine and breaka open de door


Yes Sir, gad I Will desire my Master to let me be at board wages for the time to
come, I shall have my Meat sawe'd with Ratsbane else, I see by her looks --
come let us see,


Dee hear there, who dares to touch the door once more to open it is a Dead Man
that minute


Hah vat is dat.


Oh Lord dee hear Sir, -- there is one within says, he that touches the Door to
open it, is a dead Man


Ver good, dear is some body den, who is it in de name of virtue, I beseech you
Madam


Indeed Sir some Thief I Am afraid, that has had some private notice of my
Jewels that are there


I have a Pistol charged in one hand, and a good Sword in the other, therefore
keep off.


Hugh, wat do he say?


He says he has a Pistol charged in one hand, and a good Sword in the other.


Vell, vell, dat is not matra Morbleau, so have I, go Sirrah and bid him come
out, and if he can show de reason how he deserve it I will give him de
Shentleman satisfaction fairly, tell him dat Sirrah


Oh but I am sensible Sir, the man has a spite against me, and will aim at my
Guts through the Keyhole, besides you know Sir, your Worship is much better
armed. Good Sir, walk a little nearer your self, you may hear what he says
plainly, Sir


Dog, Coward, look you to her den.


With all my heart, Sir. Gadzooks I shall (...) what a look was there again.


Infamous slave! have I honored thee with (...) given thee so many kind words
for this


What a pox was I the better for your smiles or (...) you never gave me a
f^rthing of Money; and pray what is (...) place of a Pimp g^od for, without the
perquisites, therefore in short, Madam, for what has happened thank your self.


Sordid Rascal, I shall find a time --.


So ho, without there, will you give me leave to speak to the matter fairly.


Ay, ay, you sall have leave, speak on.


Let the Husband of the Lady approach then to hear me.


Vell, vell, he does approach.


First then, as I am a Gentleman, which let him assure himself I am, I am
utterly ignorant of his Name or Quality, nor had I ever been familiar with the
Lady, but by her consent and invitation


Horrid detraction, Sir, I hope you will not give credit to what an impudent Thief
says, that has broke into your house


Patience, Madam, Patience, your Virtue vill clear all dis I make no doubt.


Now will this Traitor, because I took his Money a little, ungenerously tell
all, this is an Englishman right


But accidentally seeing her, and being charmed with her Beauty, I could not
help saying aloud, I Would give a hundred Pistoles for a nights Lodging; she
over-hearing me liked the Proposal, and sent me a Letter of Challenge by a
trusty Footman of yours, who might, if he pleased, have informed you before,
and hindered all


Haw Rascal, is dis true?


O Lord, Sir, I was resolved to be sure, Sir: why I could not swear 'twas true,
Sir, till I was sure


Oh dam Rogue, he let me be make de Cuckold dat he might be sure.


Gad I begin to wish I had not meddled in the matter, that little Witch there
has given me a Spell, I shall hedge my self into beating on my Conscience


Vell, Sir, proceed.


Why, Sir, I received the Letter, answered the contents, and came to the
appointment, where I had the pleasure of her Company, and she the benefit of my
Money


Oh rare virtue, oh fine virtue, virtue more white den Down of Swan or Ermine.


^h^y thou most impudent of Creatures, can thou, wilt tho^, dare thou affirm
this, have thou no remembrance of what I am -- Oh Wretch, do thou ever expect
--


Expect, no, no, Madam, I expect nothing again, says I give it over for lost
-- Sir, Sir, to prove every tittle of what I say is true, you will ^ind the
hundred Pistoles locked up in her Dressing Box upon the Table there


So* then, all is out. Oh that I had him but under the mischief of my Revenge
for one hour, Well, if ever I trust an English man again


A hundred Pistoles, there is high feeding, there is costly Mutton for ye, and
not one to spare me, there is a niggardly Devil too.


In de Dressing box, vet good again, -- come de Key, Madam de Key, I must see de
inside of dis box -- nay no struggle


You Are like to have no Key of me, I Have none on it.


It Is under ^he Bol^^er.


Rare still, do you know nothing Madam, he widin know ver well your private
place, I perceive, ^ete me see.


Confusion, I shall love the money too, and cons^quently my dear appointment at
Ba^^et, curse on him, this is the worst vexation of all


Here is de Purse morbleau, here


Vat de Colonel -- oh Morbleau.


Hah my Friend the Marqui -- Hell and Damnation was s^e his Wife; what a damned
chance is t^is, -- I am so confounded with shame, I cannot speak to him.


Sire, I am ver well satisfied in your case, and believe I should have done de
some my self; and to show you I design noting but honor and amity, dear is
your Purse again, one hunder Pistole vill serve ver well for your self, your
Arse and your Equipage, to appear v^r de honor of your King -- only one
leetel piece, if you please, I will beg here.


Oh Dear Sir, any thing -- take what you please.


No, no, no more, no more, dear Madam.


Then pray give it her now, if you please; I shall endeavor to make my self
easy without troubling your generosity. But for you, niggardly Sir, that think
you can give too much for a Lady's favor, and for a petty sum can blast her
honor,


Let her make noice Colonel, let her make noice, her time is but ver short
he^^, ^or gazo^^: I ^ill send her to one Convent to morr morning -- I have tak
care of (...) ^^odee to de small purpose, I will try now vat I can do for her
Soul -- For your part, Colonel, as you are a man of honor, take care of mine
-- dat is all I ask


Believe, dear Sir, I^ll study to make satisfaction.


How^ now, vat is dat knock? hah. Paris: Run Ra^e^^, an^ open de Gate.


A^ g^d, and glad I Am got off so; but I must hide my self from my Mi^^ress; for
whi^^ she is in the house I Have never a member safe about me, that is c^^tain*


So, here is the Ambassador coming up, the Brother to Angellica, whom I ^afely
wronged; and instead of rig^ting her, have been spending my time here in
another lewd frolic, without any honor, justice, or consideration, humh --
what can be the end of this? Why we must fight; he knows me, and I am sure is
brave enough to right his Sister: and for my own part, I am so angry now at my
own mischiefs, I Will give him all the means I can ^o punish em, and so revenge
my self upon my self.


Monsieur, beside my cordial tank vor dis grand honeur of your visit, I am ver
glad de S^entelman is here dat you voud have speak wid -- Dear Sire, de^e is de
wordy Colonel himself


You extremely oblige me -- Sir, I have spent some time in seeking ye, and have
a business for your private ear.


I^m ready to attend ye Sir.


Shall I desire, my good friend -- your Garden for us to discourse in a little,
the affair shall not be long


Wid ^ll min heart Sir, I beseech you command any ting.


I hope my intre^g^ing Colonel has got no mischie^ by his ^old un^erta^ing, I
h^ve b^^n watching about the house all this morning, to a^s^^t if 'twere
^ece^sary, but I ^ind all still as if twere midnight: However I Will take another
turn or two by Angellica's Lodging, and then if he does not b^^^, he^s gone
another way, and we shall meet at our old Rendezvous.


Since then you own, Sir, you have wronged my Sister, w^a^ way do you propose
to do her Justice


Sir, as I fear the case now stands with her, the question p^zzles me.


Does it so, Sir? what reason can you give?


Faith Sir, no great one, and yet I think sufficient to stop proceedings in the
affair you drive at


Sir, that affair as much exceeds your hopes, nay, or your merit, when compar^d
with hers, that it would leave you friendless in the world if you durst put it
to Comparison


You have not yet, Sir, tried how much I dare; but for your Sister, I have
value for her, and therefore shall make no Comparison


Furies! A value for her! Sir, you talk as if you had only heard her touch her
Lute, or known her mistress of some trivial quality; but I must tell ye, Sir,
your value for her should be Adoration, and for her sake neglect all the world


Sir, for her sake I might do much indeed, but there is another since I went
that shares her; the Riddle is, I know, obscure to many, but it is to me
expounded; there has been a Child I hear


Shame to my honor, dare thou urge my Blood, from my warm Heart to paint my
face with blushes, by hearing thee sp^ak this, and not fear vengeance, and
severe chastisement from a wronged Brother; by day and night I Have heard her
hourly vow, when first she hid the secret in my bosom, that of that Child thou
were the cursed Father; and as I know her full of truth and honor, therefore
thy vice is still more black and odious, to soil a second time her Reputation
-- Draw then, I had some thought at first to bless thee with happy means of
Reconcilement to her, and given thee by Marriage title to a Fortune, exceeding
even the bounds of thy Ambition; but this last baseness has revoked it all, and
nothing but thy blood shall calm my fury. Give me thy heart


Much freer than my Sword, Sir.


That Is something; yet I see you are not Case-harden'd.


No Sir, you have found me penetrable. Come on.


I Will try if I can hit the place again.


You see the advantage fortune throws upon me.


Make use of it, for I shall scorn a life that e're was in thy power.


Spoke too hastily, yet by my lewd life past, I must confess I have deserved
w^rse words, -- there, noble Sir, there is your Sword again -- And once more
use it in your just revenge, you have not yet, Sir, drawn out the wild blood
that wronged your Sister, try your skill again


No, were she dear as my Soul, as she is my Sister, I would not fight again,
thou brave young man; this honor has regained her honor lost, and fixed me
for thy Brother.


Thus, thus for ever I ^^al to that: And now, dear Sir, assure ye, my late
neglectful words of your fair Sister, were not intended basely, as I spoke 'em,
but from a conscious sense of my own mischiefs, and to provoke you to a severe
Justice, which you have done too slightly for a fault of such uncommon nature


You bleed, pray take this Scarf, which my dear Sister gave me, as a
kind-present, when I went to Travel; and as it binds the wound up in your Arm,
may mine, yours and my Sisters heart, be ty^d in lasting union.


I long to see her, to throw at her feet a true repentant heart, and beg to be
received without advantage, for her Estate shall still be settled on her, and
on her pardon rest my whole contentment


Here she comes, fear of our meeting I know has led her to find us out.


Oh heaven! it is as I feared; here has been mischief.


A little, Sister, but none that long shall keep the paleness on your Cheek; to
prove it, look on the Man whom I embrace, and then receive him as your long
secret Love has given ye cause: I have proved him, found him brave, kind and
repentant -- the secret is locked closely up with us, and so your honor clear
to all the world.


Thus low, I first thank heaven for my blessing --


My heart^s too full to let me speak my Joy; let then my eyes and blushes do
that office


Well, my intentions were good to share with ye, though I chanced to be out of
the business


Faith, Colonel, we have been watching for ye all this morning; right or
wrong, I came to make one of your side


My good Lord, and my dear Kinglove, I ever was your Debtor.


Morbleau, I tought it had bin some State Affair you went about, you carry de
ting so gravely


The clashing Swords has raised the neighborhood, you may be assured of that by
my Uncle and Aunts coming


How do you Nephew? I hope you have not been assaulted.


No, no, Aunt, a Trial of Skill only -- nothing else.


Do hear Brother Sprat-Merchant, in the first place a Plague on thee, will thou never leave off this Rakehelly Soldierly Coat again? And in the second
place, what a pox make you cling so close to my Niece, hah


Why then, Sir, first to give you a reason, and then to satisfy all that are
here, know, that I am married to your Niece, and have been so this two years;
and more than that, have a Child by her: And so, as I hear, by my Unkles Will,
your Claim is void, Aunt; you may ease your Husband now about an Heir, I have
got one for the Estate already


Brave and honorable, this was spoke to clear your reputation, if any malicious
Tongue should slander ye.


Well, Niece, art thou married then? And have thou really had a big-belly
before me


Not so big a belly as yours, good Aunt; but however, I cannot contradict the
Colonel: You watched very narrowly it is true, but I made shift to dazzle your
eyes now and then, Aunt -- I am only sorry for this Gentleman, that I hear has
been out of his Money about me; but, Sir, I Will wish ye to a good Wife, though I
can be none


I think, Sir, I Am indebted to ye two Pieces; there they are, Sir. And now I
hope you will believe, 'twas on my own Errant, and not yours, I went when I
carried -- the Letters -- ha, ha, ha


D^e hear Mr. Burgo-master, give me my Bond of 3000 l. again, and prosper me I
shall be as easy as she, 'twill turn to better account in Trade three thousand
times over. I have been in the South-part of the Globe already, and now will
visit the North, the Ports of Russia and Muscovy will be open; and some
Commodities to warm the Stomach, and qualify the coldness of the Climate, must
be very beneficial, which principally I design shall be French Brandy, Irish
Usquebaugh, and English Ginger-bread.


Well, since our hopes are frustrated, there is your Bond again; if she had not
married a Rakehelly Soldier, after all, I had not so much cared, for now I find
he is one: But why the Devil could not I find him ^ut all this while, I believe
he has bewitched me, for I used to smell 'em out; my Nose would formerly wind
out any one that dealt in Powder and Bullet three quarters of a Mile, snick me


What will vex me worst is, that when my Niece keeps House, that Devil the
Monkey will be always frisking about there; and then I shall never be able to
give her a visit. She has stood in awe of me all this while, and kept it close
in a corner, but now she is married and cares for no body, I shall have the
Devil upon my back as I sit at dinner.


Oh, I warrant ye, Aunt, I shall take care to keep it out of your way, when you
come; you may be sure, the respect I bear ye will make me do that


And, Sir, since you were bred with such antipathy against our Trade, a
Soldier, I will dress my self always when you come in a Cloak -- ha ha ha- like
one of your Trade, a Merchant, whether of Sprats or Herrings, no matter ^ow ye
know


No, a Pox on ye, you know ye have caught the right Fish, snick me.


And now, dear Brother, my heart is so merry that I wish we had Music, that
since our first (...) was so priva^e, this second might look somewhat more like
a W^dding, which shall be to morrow, with more joy than ever I saw the ^ig^^.


Sir, Music shall be my task to procure, for but half an hour ago, I saw a
whole Band of them P^acti^ing at a Tavern over the way, from this Window here I
can becken 'e


Knowing, Madam, this little Gentleman would add to your Mirth, I have brought
it to finish the Entertainment


But pray take Nurse off from me, Madam, for she has worshipped me, I believe,
a hundred times, as we came along; my fine Shew-Coat h^re, has made the simple
Jade take me for in betters


Pri^^^e look how the President is gravelled.


Ha ha ha -- the Comical mistake of the Lacquey is plain now.


Well, I see now a traveled head may be erroneous -- I have been too positive,
and will be gone, left undecent laughter offend me.


Ods my life, what is here to do, what Riddles are these? Gad, I Will not have
little Master affronted


Well, Nurse, you may venture upon me for the Father now then -- and there^ for
thy diligence honest likeness, ^he re^t to morrow, dearest, when we'll try
With mu^^al Wills, to get another Boy.



DIscourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England* In Two Parts,
viz. I. Of the Use of Political Arithmetic, in all Considerations about the
Revenues and Trade. II. On Credit, and the Means and Methods by which it may be
restored. III. On the Management of the King's Revenues. IV. Whether to Farm
the Revenues, may not, in this Juncture, be most for the Public Service? V. On
the Public Debts and Engagements. Part. I. To which is added a Discourse upon
Improving the Revenue of the State of Athens. Written Originally in Greek; and
now made English from the Original, with some Historical Notes

Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England; which more
immediately Treat of the Foreign Traffic of this Kingdom. Viz. I. That Foreign
Trade is beneficial to England. II. On the Protection and Care of Trade. III.
On the Plantation Trade. IV. On the East India Trade. Part. II. To which is
added the late Essay on the East India Trade

An Essay upon the probable Methods of making a People Gainers, in the Balance
of Trade: Treating of these Heads; viz. Of the People of England, or the Land
of England, and its Product. Of our Payments to the Public, and in what manner
the Balance of Trade may be thereby effected. That a Country cannot increase in
Wealth and Power but by private Men doing their Duty to the Public, and but by
a steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom, in such as are trusted with the
Administration of Affairs

A Discourse upon Grants and Resumptions. Showing how our Ancestors have
proceeded with such Ministers as have procured to themselves Grants of the
Crown-Revenue; and that the forfeited Estates ought to be applied toward the
Payment of the Public Debts

Essays upon, I. The Balance of Power. II. The Right of making War, Peace, and
Alliances. III. Universal Monarchy. To which is added, an Appendix containing
the Records referred to in the Second Essay. These five by the Author of The
Essay on Ways and Means

A New Voyage round the World. Describing particularly, the Isthmus of America,
several Coast and Islands in the West Indies, the Isles of Cap^ Verd, the
Passage of Terra del Fuego, the South Sea Coasts of Chili, Peru, and Mexico;
the Isle of Guam one of the Ladrones, Mindanao, and other Philippine and
East India Islands near Cambodia, China, Formosa, Luconia, Celebes, etc. New
Holland, Sumatra, Nicobar Isles; the Cape of Good Hope, and Santa Helena. Their
Soil, Rivers, Harbors, Plants, Fruits. Animals, and Inhabitants. Customs,
Religion, Government, Trade, etc. By Capt. William Dampier Vol. the First.
Illustrated with particular Maps and Draughts. The fourth Edition, Corrected

Voyages and Descriptions. Vol. II. In Three Parts, viz. 1. A Supplement of the
Voyage round the World, describing the Countries of Tonquin, Achin, Malacca,
etc. their Product, Inhabitants, Manners, Trade, Policy, etc. 2. Two Voyages to
Campeachy; with a Description of the Coasts, Product, Inhabitants,
Logwood-cutting, Trade, etc. of Iucatan, Campeachy, New-Spain, etc. 3. A
Discourse of Trade-Winds, Breezes, Storms, Seasons of the Year, Tides and
Currents of the Torrid Zone throughout the World; with an Account of Natal in
Africa, its Product, Negro's, etc. By Capt. William Dampier. Illustrated with
particular Maps and Draughts. To which is added a General Index to both
Volumes. The second Edition

A Collection of Original Voyages: Containing, 1. Capt. Cowley's Voyages round
the Globe. 2. Capt. Sharp's Journal over the Isthmus of Darien, and Expedition
into the South Seas. Written by himself. 3. Capt. Wood's Voyages through the
Streights of Magellan. 4. Mr. Robert's Adventures among the Corsairs of the
Levant, his Account of their way of Living, Description of the Archipelago
Islands, taking of Scio, etc. Illustrated with several Maps and Draughts.
Published by Capt. William Hack

Three Practical Essays, viz. On Baptism, Confirmation, and Repentance.
Containing Instructions for a Holy Life: With earnest Exhortations, especially
to young Persons, drawn from the Considerations of the Severity of the
Discipline of the Primitive Church

A Paraphrase on the Gospel of St. Matthew. 8 o.

A Paraphrase on the Gospel of St. Mark, and St. Luke. All Three Writ by Samuel
Clark. M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God John Lord Bishop of
Norwich, and Fellow of Caius College in Cambridge

Jocobi Rohaulti Physica. Latin reddidit, and Annocatis majoribus ex Clariss.
Newtoni, etc. principiis illustravit S. Clark, A. M. admodum Reverendo in
Christo Patri Joanni Episcopo Norvicensi a Sacris Domesticis. Editio secunda,
correcta and multum aucta. Accessit Index Rerum and Phaenomenorum. Item tres
novae tabulae aeri incisae

Several Discourses; concerning the Shortness of Humane Charity. The Perfection
of the Mercy of God. The Difference of Times with respect to Religion. The Joy
which the Righteous have in God. The secret Blasting of Men. The Instructive
Discipline of God. The Danger of Unfaithfulness to God. The Malignity of
Popery. The Conversion of a Sinner. Also, the Prayer used before Sermon. Vol. I

Several Discourses; concerning the true Valuation of Man. The Necessary
Repentance of a Sinner. The Exercise, and Progress of a Christian. The Frailty
of Humane Nature. The Justice of one toward another. The Nature of Salvation
by Christ, etc. Being Twenty Sermons. Vol. II. Both by the Reverend and Learned
Benjamin Witchcot, D. D. sometime Minister of St. Lawrence Jury, London.
Examined and Corrected by his own Notes; and Published by John Ieffery, D. D.
Archdeacon of Norwich

The God-Father's Advice to his Son. Showing the Necessity of performing the
Baptismal Vow, and the Danger of neglecting it. With general Instructions to
young Persons to lead a Religious Life, and prepare them for their
Confirmation, and worthy Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament. Very necessary for
Parents, etc. to give their Children, or others committed to their Care. By
John Birket, Vicar of Milford and Hordle in Hampshire. The Second Edition, with
a Preface. Price 3 d. 100 for 20 s

The Government of the Passions, according to the Rules of Reason and Religion.
Viz. Love, Hatred, Desire, Eschewing, Hope, Despair, Fear, Anger, Delight, and
Sorrow. Twelves

Some Reflections on that part of a Book called Amyntor: Or, The Defense of
Milton's Life, which relates to the Writings of the Primitive Fathers and the
Canon of the New Testament. In a Letter to a Friend. 30

A Treatise of Morality. In Two Parts. Written in French by F. Malbranch,
Author of the Search after Truth. And Translated into English by James Shipton,
M. A

The Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the French Armies 56 Years.
Translated by Charles Cotton, Esquire Folio

Processus integri in Morbis fere omnibus Curandis, a Dno. Tho. Sydenham
conscripti. 12 o

Dr. Sydenham's Practice of Physic, faithfully Translated into English, with
large Ann^tations, Animadversions, and Practical Observations on the same. By
W. Salmon, M. D. 12 o

The Penitent or Entertainments for Lent: Written in French by R. F. N.
Caussin, and translated into English by Sir B. B. Tenth Edition. To which are
added several Sculptures

A New Method of Curing all Sorts of Fevers, without taking any thing by the
Mouth. Being a New Prescription for giving the Bark in Clyster. Whereby all the
Inconveniences of administering it in any other Form are avoided; and a more
speedy and certain Cure is obtained. Writ by A. Helvet, M. D. The Second
Edition

Mr. Wingate's Arithmetic: Containing a plain and familiar Method for
attaining the Knowledge and Practice of Common Arithmetic. The Tenth Edition,
very much enlarged. By John Kersey; late Teacher of the Mathematics

The Hist^ry of the Inquisition, as it is exercised at God. Written in French,
by the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored five Years under those
Severities. With an Account of his Deliverance. Done into English, by the
Learned Henry Wharton, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace the late Archbishop of
Canterbury

The Artificial Clock-Maker. A Treatise of Watch and Clock-work. Wherein the
Art of Calculating Numbers for most sorts of Movements is explained, to the
Capacity of the Unlearned. Also, the History of Watch and Clock-work, both
Ancient and Modern. With other useful Matters never before Published. The
Second Edition, enlarged. To which is added a Supplement, containing, 1. The
Anatomy of a Watch and Clock. 2. Monsieur Romer's Satellite-Instrument, with
Observations concerning the Calculation of the Eclipses of Jupiter's
Satellites, and to find the Longitude by them. 3. A nice way to correct
Pendulum Watches. 4. M. Flamsteed's Equation Tables. 5. To find a
Meridian-Line, for the Governing of Watches, and other Uses. 6. To make a
Telescope to keep a Watch by the Fixed Stars. By W. D. M. A

A short View of the Principal Duties of the Christian Religion: With Plain
Arguments to persuade to the sincere and speedy Practice of them. To which is
added a Prayer suited to the whole, to be used Morning and Evening. By a Divine
of the Church of England, for the Use of his Parishioners. Price 3 d. or 20 s.
per Hundred

Arcana Imperii Detecta: or, Diverse select Cases in Government; more
particularly, Of the Obeying the unjust C^mmands of a Prince. Of the
Renunciation of a Right to a Crown. Of the Proscription of a limited Prince and
his Heirs. Of the Trying, Condemning and Execution of a Crowned Head. Of the
Marriage of a Prince and Princess. Of the Detecting of Conspiracies against a
Government. Of Subjects Revolting from a Tyrannical Prince. Of Excluding
Foreigners from Public Employments. Constituting Extraordinary Magistrates
upon Extraordinary Occasions. Of Subjects Anticipating the Execution of Laws.
Of Tolerati^n of Religion. Of Peace and War, etc. With the Debates, Arguments
and Resolutions of the greatest Stasemen in several Ages and Governments there
upon

A View of the Posture of Affairs in Europe both in Church and State. I. The
Ancient Pretensions of the two Families of Austria and Bourbon to the Spanish
Monarchy Historically stated. II. The Balance of the Power of Europe, settled
by Charles V. and how it came to be broke. III. A View of the Courts of Europe,
and their present Disposition and State relating to War. IV. Of the State of
the Church of Rome, and the Decay of the Protestant Interest in Europe. Written
by a Gentleman by way of Letter

Devotions: Viz. Confessions, Petitions, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings for
every Day of the Week; and also Before, At, and After the Sacrament: With
occasional Prayers for all Persons whatsover. By Thomas Bennet, M. A. Rector of
St. James's in Colchester, and Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge

Confesso, five Declaratio, Sententiae Pastorum, qui in Foederato Belgio
remonstrantes vocantur, super praecipuis Articulis Religionis Christianae. 12 o

There is in the Press, and will be speedily published, Somatopolitia, or the
City of the Human Body, artificially defended from the Tyranny of Cancers and
Gangrens. In the first is shown how the Human Body may be called a City in
respect of its Parts and Fabric; how it may be compared to a political City,
in Relation to the various Offices of its Parts, and their natural dependence
upon, and subserviency to each other; the state thereof analogically
considered, whether aristocratic or oligartic; together with the proper
Remedies both for reducing it to, and preserving it in a due State. In the
second is explained the various Processes of the Blood, how it nourishes the
Parts, how infected, and what Diseases are contagious. As also, a complete
Treatise of Cancers and Gangrens, and an Inquiry whether they have any Relation
to contagious Diseases; with the Nature, Causes and Signs of the different
Species of Cancers and Gangrens, with the Methods of Cure by the most approved
Medicines. By John Brown Surgeon in Ordinary to his Majesty, and late Senior
Surgeon of Saint Tho. Hospital in Southwark


