IF Plot and Business Comical and New,
Could please the Critics that sit here to view,
The Poet might have thought this Play would do.
But in this Age Design no praise can get:
You cry it Conversation wants, and Wit;
As if the Obvious Rules of Comedy,
Were only dull Grimace and Repartee.
Such, Sirs, have been your Darlings proved of late:
The Author therefore careless of his Fate, --
And knowing Wit a Chattle hardly got,
Has ventured his whole Stock upon a Plot:
He says a Mock-Song, or a Smutty Tale, --
Can please the Town; and why not this prevail? --
I friendly told him, all that I could say,
Was, that your Fancies leaned the other way;
And you loved Wenching better than his Play.
For the Body still you Luxury prepare;
But let the Mind be desolate and bare:
Thus lose your selves in the Worlds prudent thought, --
Then strive to get Reprieve by finding fault.
A Critic is a Monster that can sway
Only over Ignorance, and yet dares prey
Upon that Power that formed him out of Clay. --
Adulterate Age, where Prudence is a Vice, --
And Wit's as scandalous as Avarice: --
Yet in despite of this, -- you are Poets too;
And what two Fops rail at, a third shall do.
Upon our Privileges you incroach,
And with dull Rhimes the Noble Art debauch.
For Writing Plays you scorn a Poets Name;
A Bawdy Song's enough to get you fame:
Where midst the Reputation that is due,
You will be sure no man shall censure you.
Yet though your Faction does infest the Town,
There is a wise Cabal dares judge and own
Desert and Wit, and our Endeavors Crown:
To these we humbly Dedicate our Plays,
Whilst at their Feet our Poets throw their Bays.

IN vain, Cruel Nymph, you my Passion despise,
And slight a Poor Lover that languishing dies:
Though Fortune my Name with no Titles endowed;
Yet fierce is my Passion, and warm is my Blood.
Delay in Affection exalts an Amor;
For he that loves often will soonest give over.
But Vigorous and Young I Will flee to thy Arms,
Infusing my Soul in Elysium of Charms.
A Monarch I Will be when I lie by thy side,
And thy pretty Hand my Scepter shall guide;
Till cloyed with delight you confess with a Joy,
No Monarch so happy, so pleasant as I.
BY Heaven, There Is nothing so dear to a free and generous Spirit, as this
roving and uncontrolled way of Love: Me thinks we live like Angels, and every
Kiss brings a new life of pleasure


You have reason to believe I think so, for suffering this early Visit from you
in my Husbands absence; who, poor Man, went from me by break of day to see a
Horse-Race a Mile beyond High-Gate


Nay, I confess, it is a sign of your kind resentment of my passion: Oh Heaven!
that happy thought has made me all rapture: I Will cherish it, Madam, as I would
my Youth, or the best of all my Senses, the Sense of Feeling


Cherish it rather as the means of keeping our love from my Husbands knowledge.
Well! I swear the thought of my indirect plot sometimes makes me very
melancholy


Melancholy? -- Fie, Madam, banish such thoughts for ever from your breast: If
you are melancholy now, what would you have done, if I had not known you, when
the Clog of your Conscience (I mean your Husband) would have been your
perpetual plague, and given you cause for more melancholy than the contrivance
of the plots you speak of? --


Ay; but to break a Vow, Sir, a Vow: Little do you think what it is to break a
Vow


Little do I think? Madam, I thought you had known me so much a Gentleman, to
imagine I know what belongs to the breaking a Vow as well as another man. To
undeceive you, I have broke twenty Vows, that is, unnecessary Vows, (such as
yours are!) nay, and without a scruple of Conscience: I thank my Stars, I Am of
a tougher Constitution


Besides, you consider not the other inconveniences; you know my Husband's
Sister Maria loves you, and is of that untamed, malicious nature, that she will
revenge my invading her propriety in your heart by discovering our love to my
Husband: I know she plots it hourly; and though her pretense is the Honor of our
Family, her real design is through her love to you


Never doubt your Husband, Madam, he has so strange a confidence in my
fidelity, that to possess him otherwise, were utterly to take away the little
sense is left him. You know he brought me to lodge in his house, which
prudently I refused at first, and seemingly fled from the Heaven I desired, to
make him more importunate: Since I came here, you know how he has carrest me;
and to color my design, and divert you, have feigned a Mistress in this
quarter of the Town; and then, as if I spoke of her, have told him all that has
past betwixt my self and you, at which the good-natured Creature has laughed
extremely, and wished me good luck a thousand times; and can we now doubt
further success? By Heaven, we cannot Madam


Then you know there is another great obstacle; Ned Ranger has long professed a
passion for me, and doubtless is not ignorant that my love for you is the cause
of his no better success: A jealous man sees more than twenty others; and
'twill be very necessary for us to be careful of so dangerous an Enemy


Dangerous? -- not at all, Madam, -- never think him so; success, which
animates the Hero, and leads him on to greater enterprises than before he durst
attempt, has cherisht hopes in me: Let me alone with him; and for thy part,
Igad I Will turn thee loose to any Female-Devil on this side Lapland, either for
plot or repartee


Yet still I fear the worst.


Fear nothing, Madam: Fear is the worst of passions, and incident to base, not
noble Hearts; besides, our love, considered rightly, is a second-rate
Innocence, where affection, not duty, bears prerogative; it is the great and
primitive business of our Souls, suspicion and fear came in by the by


Madam, Mr. Ranger, in spite of my resistance, has rudely pressed into the House,
and is just coming hither


Call up the Footmen: Lock the door. --


Stand still, Mrs. Jilt, or I shall spoil your door-keeping hereafter. Jack
Rashley, here -- Hell and the Devil --


What insolence is this? pray, Sir, your business?


Only my zeal, Madam, to give you notice of an approaching danger: Your Husband
has so intangl'd his Horns yonder in a Hawthorn-Bush, that it is to be feared
without immediate help he will lose the decent and commodious ornament of his
Forehead


Most impudent of men! how dare you talk thus?


Most infamous of women! how dare you do thus?


Do what, Sir?


Hold, and as you love me, move no farther. Basest of men! have you the folly
to believe this way can prove beneficial to your love? No, I hate thee
mortally, nor shall thy malice from henceforth be successful; I Will disarm it;
and when thou think thy plots are surest laid, be sure of a surprise. --


O infamy! -- 'Sdeath, is your Forehead Steel? and is your Skin of that
obdurate temper you cannot force a Blush into your Cheeks at the confession of
your obscene Crime? -- How great a Friend to Hell is Impudence


Pray, Sir, -- forgive him, it is an insipid Fellow that I am often troubled
with, and believe his insolence for the future shall be prevented: in the mean
time to express my gratitude, give me leave to present you with this Necklace;
this Ring too will fit your Finger; -- nay, and swear you shall not refuse 'em, my
Husband gives me often such as these, it is all the good I get by him


Very well; -- the blessing of a wife let all men judge. What envious Fiend to
plague me makes me love this Creature


I will preserve your favors as my life; your memory shall possess my Soul,
and all your charms live ever in my sight. -- My kindest, sweetest -- dearest
--


Death and Damnation, must I stay and see this? Madam, -- this modest carriage
before a jealous Lover makes --


Little for your contentment I doubt not, Sir. -- But it is a fate proper enough
for such busy and inquisitive persons. --


Fa, la, la, la, la. -- Sings.


Go -- you are a Devil; so far from being a Woman, that I begin to doubt
whether Nature had any hand in your Creation. Is It not enough, Vile Creature,
that I know you abuse your Husband, but that you dare give me an ocular proof?
Dispense your favors to the man that horns him before my face? Oh
unparalleled impudence! --


Incorrigible Fool, think thou to daunt my will? the little ill I do can
raise no infamy, nor will I ever doubt it


Fa, la, la, la.

The joys of a Lover in passion remains,
In passion that is fervent and free, etc.

Oh Madam, my Master's just come home and coming up.


Blessed minute! now I hope his eyes will be unsealed, and through the right end
of the Perspective see you: Madam, assure your self there shall want nothing in
me


I know, Sir, and am prepared for the worst of thy malice. Here, take this
Battle-dor, and let us play


Out, out, Madam -- you are out.


Ha, ha, ha. -- Chicken; Good morrow, Chicken. -- Morrow Tom. -- Chick, prithee
let me kiss thee: What, in the mumps? -- This morning, pop -- no more of that
-- hoh -- What my old Friend Ranger too! Morrow Ned. Faith! would you had been
with me this morning, I have had the rarest sport yonder at High-Gate with two
or three Country-fellows -- Harkee, Chick, I have invited 'em all to Dinner one
day this week, good blunt course Fellows Faith, but damnable rich: -- as Gad
jidge me, I past for a brave Fellow amongst 'em. --


You need boast of applause from such Clowns.


Clowns? What, honest, tough, hard-fisted, plain-dealing Farmers, Clowns? --
Pop -- I say, you are an inconsiderable Varlet, Chicken, -- and know not what
belongs to such good company


She is so well diverted at home, Sir, that all Rural society is distastful to
her. --


I guess 'em to be much of your humor, Sir, Owners of a great deal of dull,
insipid noise, and very little or no sense. --


Well said, Chicken. -- Ned. To her. -- To her again, Ned; It Is a raging Turk at
Repartee. -- Invent, invent; strike her home; prithee try her wit. -- Thou art
a Scholar, -- for my part I dare not: (As Gad jidge me!) she is always too hard
for me. --


And me too, I assure you, Sir. -- But there is a Gentleman that has the good
fortune to be more intimate: -- his address is far more pleasing than mine. --


Who, Tom! Come, I Will hold a Guiney she is too hard for him too; why, it is the
readi'st, witti'st, jeering'st, flearing'st Queen -- 'Sbud she is one of the
pearls of Eloquence. -- And Pop, -- by the way let me tell you, there is never
an Orator in Christendom has more Tropes and Figures, take her when her hands
in --


Nor knows the Art of Wheadling better, I Will say that for her. --


Gad, thou art in the right, she is a Non Parelio at it: but now you talk of
Wheadling, prithee, Tom, how goes thy Love-affairs? Thou look but ill
upon it? -- Any plots? adventures of late? Hah


None that can make me frown, Sir: -- My Stars have allotted me so mild a
destiny, that I can caress my Friend with my wonted Air, without being
discouraged by my success in Love-affairs


I Am glad on it, Faith: Come, prithee let me be partaker of thy good fortune; --
when were thou with her


Tell him, tell him, Sir: Lord, you never used to be so cautious in these
matters: -- pray tell him and tremble: -- Now observe


Why, Sir, -- I was with her this morning.


So! and what success prithee?


Why at my first coming she entertained me with a Song, softly expressing the
delights of Love in an excellent Air, and added to it a thousand kind words and
kisses: I had all the privilege imaginable, and 'twas my good luck to come at
a very happy hour, for her Husband went out early in the morning a Fowling as
far as Holloway


Holloway? -- a Pox on it, -- what damned luck had I? if it had been High-Gate I
should have met the Fool; for I have been there all this morning


Ah! it is no matter, Sir his company can add little to anyones credit; for he
is but a kind of a soft-headed, a half-witted Fellow. --


A Ninny, a Fool. -- Ha, ha, ha.


Ay, and the most credulous of all the Cuckolds I ever met with.


Poor Animal! Faith I pity him, but there is a number of 'em about Town in faith,
-- we men of wit should want diversion else


We men of wit, quoth a! Dam him, he is duller than a Justices Clark. -- To be
made a property all this while, and not discern it, Oh insufferable stupidity


Observe, Sir, observe.


Yes, Devil, I do observe; I doubt not but my observation shall add little to
your quiet. Oh curse of --


Why how now, Ned? what, grinning like a Monkey eating of Chestnuts? -- prithee
what art thou thinking on? As Gad jidge me, I think thou art grown insipid, as
my Wife says; How do like Tom's Intrigue? Ha, -- is it not pleasant


Very pleasant, Sir, and faith in my judgment represents as nearly as any
character I ever saw. --


Represents? -- whoo pox you're at your Quirks and Quiddits, your
Cambridge-Puns and Westminster-Quibbles are you


Pray forward, Sir, me thinks it is very divertive.


Very divertive! Dam her, she was sure the Offspring of Beelzebub.


After a thousand other caresses intermixed with kisses and smiles, and a world
of happy thoughts and fancies extravagantly rendered upon so happy an occasion,
she obliged me in a new and most sensible way, presenting me, with a sweet and
incomparable grace, this Gold-Watch, and this Diamond Ring


Prithee observe Ned there, he is grown a strange whimsical Fellow; -- Ha, ha,
ha, look how he stares


Was ever such an Impudence? sure I dream! and this is all delusion. -- Harkee,
Sir, are you irrecoverably blind


Blind? what I blind?


Methinks that Watch looks very like one I have seen your Wife wear often.


Ha! as Gad jidge me, and so it does; but much good do thy heart, Tom, I Will
warrant it right


Me thinks that Ring too much resembles yours.


The square is right, -- but I think my Stones were a little bigger.


Now the Devil take thee for a dull Rogue.


But the best jest was, before she gave me these, there happened to come rudely
into the Room a wild, young Fellow, that I found afterward to be my Rival, and
one she hated for his ill nature and impertinence; but to see how pitiful he
looked to see me so presented before his face, would have made you die with
laughing. -- Ha, ha, ha


Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha.


Hell and Furies, what is this I hear? am I made a property too? If I bear this,
may I be posted for a Coward, and my infamy known to all Nations. -- Harkee,
Sir


Well, Sir.


By your ridiculous fleering behavior, I guess I was concerned in your last
description, an affront that requires instant satisfaction; and believe, Sir,
you shall not carry it off so clearly as you imagined: Though he is such a fool
to be bubbl'd out of his reason, -- I am not --; follow me, Sir, if you dare


Dare! Lead on, Sir, -- you shall see how much I dare.


Hold, Sir, you shall not go.


Dare follow you?


Ay, Sir, 'twould be a doubtful question if your protection there were out of
the way


What Is that? protection?


How now? -- what Jokes? hard words? what is the matter, Tom? -- I must have no
quarrels here


It Is Mr. Ranger's ill humor; prithee, Love, speak to him, he is always
disturbing good company; tell him, he is Impertinent


Gad, and so I will. -- What a pox, a man cannot be a little jocose in his own
house but he must disturb him; you shall see me go and huff him


His Horns I am sure are large enough; -- Horns of sufficient growth,
substantial Horns; Horns visible, large, craggy-brancht, rough Horns, and yet
he may not believe it


Believe what, Ned? Ha, ha, ha, -- He Is mad. -- Downright out of his Wits: It Is
a thick scull'd Fellow, God knows, -- but we were not all born to be Wits. --
What do believe, Ned


Why, Sir, I believe you are mad.


I mad? -- Damme Ned, you're an impertinent Fellow. Now observe, Chicken.


How, Sir?


I say, Sir, an impertinent Fellow, Sir, and deserve to be cramb'd into a
Powdering-Tub. --


Dam this Fool, how he tortures me! but my revenge lies another way; I Will
instantly go to his Sister Maria, who I know loves Rashley, and will willingly
join with me in my revenge. This must do, and I Will about it instantly


Ah -- he is gone; I thought when I began to roar once he would quickly vanish:
I warrant I have frighted him into an Ague. -- Poor Fool, he will hardly trouble
us again this good while


An uncivil person, first to intrude into our company, and then to hinder our
discourse, especially of so pleasant a Narration: Gad! 'twas too much. --


Too much? -- Why 'twas the Devil and all; and as Gad jidge me, -- he is the Son
of a Whore, and I Will make him an example


Sir Roger Petulant with his Nephew, and old Mr. Fumble are come to visit you.


Gads so! -- Sirrah! wait on 'em up, and call my Niece down. This is the man,
Chicken, I told thee that I intend for Cordelia's Husband: He Is very Rich, I am
told, and his Father's a Knight, and Sheriff of the County


But who is the other, Sir?


Why, do not know him? It Is old Alderman Fumble: He Is a little deaf, but
in faith very good company, and will so fumble about the Women. -- You shall see
he is a very jolly Fellow, and repartees, and talks, and chats at all rates; --
but the Devil a word he hears, for he always answers quite contrary: -- He*ll
make us all laugh in faith. --


I Have heard he dotes on all the Women he sees, and is as passionate and
inconstant at his age of Seventy Three, as the brisk Sparks of our times are at
Five and Twenty


He says (the Devil take him that believes him) nothing fails him but his Eyes,
which defect he has lately amended by a pair of Venetian Spectacles


Ha, ha; it is a pleasant old Fellow. -- But here they come.


Cob! come, Cob, come! along, I say, and hold up thy head. -- Fie, fie, -- be
not so bashful, Child. -- Nay, Cob, -- what do think I Will forsake Thee? --
Pish, in verity I will not: Wipe thy Eyes, I say


He Is a little moody-hearted, that is the worst on it: -- But the young man will
show his parts by and by, I warrant ye. -- Come hither, Niece: Sir Roger, Your
most humble Servant


Yours, good Mr. Peregrine. You see, Sir, I am as good as my word: I have
brought my Nephew, Cob, here is your Mrs. Cob. -- Look, look up, -- and go and
salute her. I Will show thee the way. Nay, Cob, still in thy dumps? -- Look upon
me, Man! I Will do it first


Well, well! I Will follow you, Uncle: I am a little bashful at present, but I
shall come to it anon


Well said, Madam! I am your humble Servant. --


And I likewise, Madam!


Ifack, ifack! a pretty well-favour'd Woman that there* A good Eye, good Hair,
and ifack I think every thing good -- ha -- Hem, Mr. Peregrine, prithee who is
that there? that Woman there


Who, she yonder?


Hah!


Why, she is a near Friend of mine, Sir. --

What an ignorant old Fellow it is, not to know my Niece?


A Friend? Well I could have heard you, I could have heard you without this
exclamation: What ifack, I am not deaf, I could have heard you: but if she be a
Friend, I hope an old Friend may salute her; it is a civility well paid. By your
leave, sweet Lady


What the Devil does this old Fellow mean? Uncle! did you ever see the like?


Ha, ha, ha! a pleasant mistake in faith.


Ha! ifack I think I was mistaken, was I not, Gentlemen? was I not? I doubt my
false light guided me to the wrong person; -- Hah! But come, no matter, I meant
it right, Madam, I meant it right: Never the older for a mistake Ifack! I meant
it right


I am glad I mist it for all that.


Mr. Rashley, you are not merry; in troth I fear I have disturbed you, -- Hah!


Not at all, Sir; it is impossible your free humor can be troublesome to any one.


You know my old way, Sir, jovial and inoffensive. -- Pray let me commend my
Nephew to you. Cob, come hither: --. He Is a little too modest, Sir; -- but else
I think I may say, -- a youth of notable parts: Come hither, Cob


I can believe no less: Sir, your humble Servant.


With all my heart, Sir; and I am your Servant in like manner.


Bless me! what a Figure of a Husband shall I have?


You know, Sir, when I was a Bachelor I delighted much in merry Songs and
Catches. -- 'Ah! Sawny Broom rare Fellow; and when a dozen of us Royalists
were met at the Miter under the Rose there, the Leveller went round, round,
in faith. -- I hold out still, Sir, as well as I can; and though I cannot sing my
self, I keep those that can. --


Ay, and so do I. -- My Wives Maid shall sing you a Scotch Song: -- Come, sing
it Betty. --


IN January last on Munnonday at Morn,
As along the Fields I past to view the Winter Corn,
I leaked me behind, and saw come ore the Knough,
Yen glenting in an Apron with a bonny brent brow.
I bid Good Morrow, Fair Maid, and she right courteously,
Bekt lew and Sine kind Sir, she said, Good Day again to ye.
I speard o her, Fair Maid quo I, how far intend you now?
Quo she, I mean a Mile or two to yonder bonny brough.
Fair Maid, I Am weel contented to ha sike Company;
For I am ganging out the Gate that you intend to be.
When we had walked a Mile or two, I said to her, My Dow,
May I not light your Apron sine kiss your bonny brow?
Nea, Good Sir, you are far mistean, for I am nean o those,
I hope you ha more breeding than to light a Woman's Cloths;
For Ive a better chosen than any sike as you,
Who boldly may my Apron light, and kiss your bonny brow.
Nay, gif you are contracted, I have no more to say;
Rather than be rejected, I will give ore the Play:
And I will choose yen o my own that shall not on me rue,
Will boldly let me light her Apron, kiss her bonny brow.
Sir, I see you are proud-hearted, and leath to be said Nay;
You need not tall ha started for eaght that I did say:
You know Wemun for modesty no at the first time Boo;
But gif we like your Company we are as kind as you.
How dee like it?


Oh! I have hundred such as this, Sir.


A pretty matter ifack, a very pretty matter.


I doubt, Sir, you heard it not.


Ay, is it not, Mr. Rashley, is it not? Ifack I like it well.


With all my heart, Sir.


Right ifack, it was sung well indeed.


Ha, ha, ha!


Well said, Grandfire Fumble. -- Come, Sir Roger, now let us in, and toss a
Bumper about


I wait upon you, Sir. Cob, lead in your Mistress. --


So! thus far all is well. -- But what is next to be done? for I know Ranger and
Maria are plotting mischief


To prevent 'em we must counterfeit a falling out by railing at you to my
Husband. I Will soon confirm it in his opinion; but be sure you are melancholy
enough; and by this means their designs are frustrated, and we still safe in
our Intrigue


Excellent! -- And I Will warrant you, Sweet, I Will play my part well.


The better will be the success: but let us go in for fear we are seen.


Thus whilst we are equally involved in thought,
That side fares best that lays the wisest plot. --

NEver was an Intrigue carried with so much confidence; every word they spoke
retained a double meaning; but so evident, that any Animal, but a dull Husband,
could not fail to understand it: for they were so far from hiding their Amor,
that they openly confessed all; only speaking in a third person for a slender
security. He stood and heard it, and often would laugh heartily to hear himself
notoriously abused


An insipid Fool! Oh that I had been there to have changed the Scene a little!
But, Sir, could you be idle on such an occasion? Why did not you play your part
cunningly, and discover 'em? --


Faith, I did what I could: but the cunning Devil your Sister, still as I was
speaking something toward the discovery, would interrupt me, and in a minute
dash all my hopes by turning what was said into raillery


Is she so politic? it is very well: I once imagined I could best design, and
thought my Talent of Wit equal with any. But are they so intimate, say ye, Sir


As Man and Wife.


Impudent Fellow! dares he insult over my Love? Baffle my passion with a sly
pretense? I am not fair enough; but he shall find my Brain has Wit enough to
ruin his design, Fool as I am


Now the Devil in her is working hard for me; we shall have it anon. --


Fooled by a Brothers Wife! A Creature that the Law makes kin to me! No, 'twas
tamely thought, and I as tamely now should suffer wrongs had I a Dastard
Spirit. But in me Nature has shown her Masterpiece, and to a Masculine person
Providence has bestowed an Active Soul so sensible of wrongs, that to forgive
would argue me as base as is their treachery


Now she thunders; the Devil has been priming her all this while, and now she
scatters like a Hand-Granado


My love refused! It Is Death to the dull Fool; Death, double Death; Damnation
too it is likely. -- But why did I name it Love? there is no such word; for with
this breath I banish it for ever, and in my ^^east receive obscure revenge, my
Hearts delightful Darling! Oh the pleasure in that slender word Revenge! --
I Will plague the Fool her Husband with a story shall make his Gall flow upwards


Plague him with doubts, and make his jealousy break into violent fits of rage
and passion: I Will further all, Madam; by Heaven I will not fail you


Enough; and doubt not we'll soon turn the Current.


We'll catch 'em in his Lodging.


Entrap 'em there, and bring him in to see it.


Right: What else? We'll shame 'em. --


Slight 'em. --


Laugh at 'em. --


Vex 'em. --


Ruin 'em. --


Dam 'em. --


Hey! By Heaven it is excellent; and now I see the sense of wrongs can arm a
Female Spirit, and make it vigorous. -- Oh I adore thy temper


I Will instantly go to her, and first charge her with the fact, then upbraid
her: for I am resolved never to let her rest till she deserts his passion. --

And whilst she suffers that base Wretch to woo her,
I Will plot, and counterplot, but I Will undo her.

I am glad I met with her; for of all the persons I am acquainted with, she
only has enough of the Divil to follow such a business closely: for she will
never rest till she has betrayed 'm, which still will further my revenge; and I
am resolved to enjoy her Sister, if it be but only for the dear pleasure of
boasting it hereafter. I Will strait to Bubble, and once more infect him with my
poison: Maria is my Pilot* and her being thus slighted by Rashley, will still
augment her desire of revenge; it is natural to the Sex

For baulk a Woman once, and love rebate,
Not all the Devils shall reclaim her hate.

MAnage it but carefully, you need not doubt the consequence: I have already
possessed my Husband with a belief of our variance, and I know he is coming up
with an intent to reconcile us. I Will not be seen; the rest is your part, carry
it but handsomely, and Ranger's plots are fruitless. Maria has sent also to
speak with him; I guess the business, and I am accordingly provided. -- But
remember you are not tardy


Never doubt me, Madam; I am more a Lover than to be idle in a business that so
nearly concerns us: besides, it is so well contrived, and so easy to be
followed, that to fail now would demonstrate me as defective in sense as your
Husband is. But what business can your Sister have with you? The Devil and She
have been plotting together about this Intrigue


Let 'em plot: -- I am so much her Sister, that my part shall never be wanting
to furnish the Comedy. I Will go to her strait: in the mean time be you sure to
play your part with him. -- Hark! I hear him coming


Well! I never thought a Woman till now so necessary a Creature: Intrigues are
their Masterpieces, and as readily they undertake 'em as a Country-Lawyer a
bad Cause from a half-witted Client: 'twould be excellent sport to hear the two
She-Wolves bark one at another: but since I cannot be there, I Will divert my
self with entertaining the Fool her Husband. -- Here he comes! Now to my
studied posture


Why how now, Tom? What, all-a-mort? In verity this is Foppery, as Sir Roger
says. Come, cheer up, cheer up, Man, and hold up thy head; in troth thou make
me sad to see the look so like -- so like a -- Gammon of Bacon. There I was
sharp upon him: -- Ha, ha! a good jest afaith


Dam him, what a simile the Fool has found out!

Sir, it lies not in any man's power to banish serious thoughts at all times: --
Besides, I have some cause for my present melancholy


The cause? -- Come, come, Tom, -- I know the cause, ha, ha. -- You thought I
warrant to have carried matters so privately; but if I once go about such a
business, there is never a man in Christendom (though I say it) can find out a
cause sooner than I


You may be mistaken in mine, Sir, for all that.


Mistaken? ha, ha! -- I see, Tom, thou know not what it is to be ingenious: I
tell thee once more, I do know the cause, the very cause; I, and more then
that, the cause of that cause; -- 'Sbud there is never an Attorney in the Inns
of Court knows more causes than I do


I doubt not but in the end you will be brought to confess your self too positive
in this particular: but since you have such an excellent faculty, and imagine
your self so well skilled in finding out secrets, -- come, what is it? what is it


What is it? Why, ha, ha, ha! -- My Wife -- my Wife, Tom, and you're fallen out,
ha, ha, ha! -- have I mumpt you now in faith? --


I must confess you are in the right, Sir.


O must you so, Sir? What a pox I warrant you thought we Husbands had no wit
but what our Wives lend us? But I would have you to know, Tom, that I am a
Leviathan at these matters: to be plain, that is as much as to say, a Whale. --


I am sufficiently convinced of your excellent judgment, Sir; and as I have
confessed to you freely the cause of my sadness, to be your Wives ill usage of
me, so I am continually tortured to guess the reason: for I am confident, Sir,
you know I always honored her, and loved her


Faith! so thou did! I Will say that for thee; and by the Lord Harry she shall
love and honor thee too, or I Will be very sharp upon her; I Will pinch her
severely faith, for all she is my Chicken: nay, if she*ll be still refractory,
rather then fail thou shall pinch her too, Tom. I am not like your
surly-burly-waspish-cross-grain'd Fellows, that fall out and fight about their
Wives: 'Sbud I Will give my friend leave at any time to chastise my Wife if she
don't behave her self civilly


You ever load me with your kind expressions, Dear Friend! --


Dear Dom, Faith you are an honest Fellow.


This ever is the fate of Cuckolds. --


Never doubt; -- I Will bring you together again with a vengeance: nay, I can tell
you the reason of her anger too, if I thought 'twere convenient


Convenient! Why, Sir, it is the only thing that conduces to my contentment; for
I have long studied in vain, and could never yet so much as guess at it: Let me
beg it of you, Sir; come, I Am sure you cannot deny so near a Friend


In Faith I cannot, -- that is the truth on it, and thou shall have it. -- Why, you
must know, Tom, one night (when I was examining her about you) she told me very
seriously that the cause of her anger was, that you promised to give her a
Squirril that night, and never kept your word; and she loves Squirrils
passionately


It Is true, I confess I did promise her; -- but as the Devil would have it, I
was disappointed utterly of my Squirril that night my self; for I got very
drunk, and from thence sprung this fatal consequenc


Pugh! -- no matter; I Will warrant thee I Will bring all about again. --


Oh it is impossible; -- I am sure she will near be brought to it,


Not brought to it? Yes, I Will lay my commands upon her, and I Will have you know
she shall be brought to it: I Will lay a Wager I Will reconcile you both before
night. --


Done: any Wager. --


What shall it be?


Why, Five Guinneys to be spent in a Treat of Ven'son and Champaine.


Agreed in faith; and we'll drink and sing Tory-Rory. Not reconcile you! You
shall be all one before to morrow-morning. -- I have a spell for that; I Will
do it, I say; come along, Boy. --


A petty Friend for pimping we applaud:
But of all Men a Husband's the best Bawd. --

MAdam, You, as being the Niece to Mr. Peregrine, truly deserve the favor I
intend you by this Alliance: You are a handsome Woman, and in verity were I a
young Man, none should be more forward than I for a place in your affection. I
like your Air well; and upon my Faith you have the right way on it. Ah! --
Madam, I once saw the days when such an Eye as yours -- Well, I say no more
on it, -- it is for my Nephew now I make addresses; -- you see what he is, Madam;
-- His Face is none of the worst, nor his Person I think any way defective. --
In brief, Madam, I present him to you, nor shall he want an Estate to make him
worthy


It Is well he named an Estate to Candy over his bitter Pill, my squeamish
Stomach would else have hardly digested it. -- Lord! how he looks? --


Cob! go; -- prithee go and make your address to the Lady. He Is newly come from
the College, Madam, and is as the rest of 'em are, a little bashful at first;
but by that time h'as seen a Play or two --


Me thinks this silence becomes him very well, Sir: A Student should always be
contemplative; it is a great sign of Learning. --


It Is a sign he thinks the more: But, Madam, Ladies of this Age are not to be
won with Imaginary Courtship, it is the practick part they love; and he that can
sing well, dance well, talk well, rhyme modishly, swear decently, and lie
confoundedly, -- is certainly the happy man, whilst others pass unregarded. --


I see, Sir, you are well skilled in Modish Address; but give me leave to tell
ye, perhaps few other Ladies are of my humor: -- I love words considerately
spoken. --


And I too, Faith Madam. Cob, Dee hear that, Cob? --


Ay, ay! it is a fine Woman, by Ierico, and now I begin to be a little in heart:
I shall put up well enough anon, Uncle. --


Well said! Why now I love thee: And, Madam, as to his Interior Virtues, I
dare speak for 'em; His Wit is hereditary; Ah! his Father, old Sir Jeremy
Sneak, had a notable Headpiece, and troth Cob comes very near him; you will find
it, Madam, when he talks with you


Your Character of him, Sir, gives me the satisfaction I should receive in his
discourse: I imagine him to be one of those that hoord up Wit for Plato's great
Year, and are very shie of using their Talent for fear of diminishing the value
in making it too common. --


In verity, Madam, I always held him so. -- Cob! --


Ay, Madam, you may say of me what you please; I am your Slave, -- your Vassal,
-- your Pigg, Madam: But as for Wit, as my Nuncle says, I think I may compare
with another, take the Court-Cabal away. -- It Is a blessing thrown upon me:
Besides, mine is none of your Wheadling Wits, that cheat for a Livelihood: I am
no Parasite, Madam; -- I am a Scholar, I


In troth he is in the right: -- Did not I tell you, Madam, he would speak
notably? -- Ah, it is a Wag


His Disputes in the College have added extremely to his Rhetoric; he speaks
with good Emphasis, and gives a delightful period to every Jest, of which I see
he has many. But I would fain have the Gentleman speak himself, a little talk I
am sure would become him


He shall do it, Madam. -- Cob, now is your time; -- she is wrought finely. --
Madam, -- I Will take my leave for a minute; -- I know his temper, Madam; --
he will speak the better for my absence. --


Pray, Sir, what University was blessed with your presence?


Cambridge, Madam. --


Will you not be angry if I ask you one Question more?


O Lord, Angry, Madam? You do not know me. Angry! You mistake me clearly: We of
the Round Cap are not given to*t; it is your Graduates are the angry people


Pray, what have you learnt at Cambridge?


Learnt! what a Plaguey Question's that? -- where is my Uncle now? -- Learnt,
Madam


Yes, Sir, Learnt!


Why, Madam, -- I learnt Nothing.


Nothing, Sir!


No, -- but to wear a Daggled Gown, as the rest do, and eat dry Chops of Rotten
Mutton: We Fellow-Commoners don't go thither to learn; -- Madam, we go for
Diversion, we. --


I thought you had gone to learn the Sciences. --


Right, Madam; -- but not Gentlemen: Your green halfwitted Pupils, I confess,
come thither for some such business; that is, Madam, your Priggs that would be
Parsons. But the Sciences of your Persons of Quality; -- I ll give you a
description; -- Hum? -- It Is to Wench immoderately; -- To be Drunk hourly; --
To wear their Clothes slovenly; -- To abuse the Proctor damnably; -- And so be
expelled the College triumphantly: -- There are sev'n, -- but I contented my
self with these


This is ever found, -- Your sly Fool is in his nature more impudent than the
greatest Professors of Debauchery. -- I must shift him off. --


Oh! -- here she is; -- and ifack I Will put up to her now I have found her. How
do thou do, Girl? -- Hah! how do thou do? Give me thy hand. Ah, little
Rogue! -- Well, I have been with my Goldsmith about the Ring I promised thee;
Thou shall have it, Bird, thou shall have it. -- How now, who is that there? --


O the Devil! -- Now will the old doting Fellow disturb us before I have told
her half my mind. Who am I, Sir? Why, Sir, I am one that cares as little --


Thank you heartily, Sir, Ifack; -- I am very well; only cold weather, cold
weather. -- It Is Sir Roger's Nephew! A pretty Fellow, -- a very pretty Fellow


Very well, Sir; would you were very sick, Sir. 'Ounds, I must beat this
Fellow. --


Here Is like to be rare sport.


Pray, Old Philosopher* depart in silence for fear of further damage; this Lady
and I have business


Ifack, and so she is, Sir, very pretty, very pretty, bona fide. Ah that black
of the top there! Well, I Will say no more. But, ifack, Black Hair, Black Eyes,
and a Black -- (Gad forgive me, what was I going to say?) -- Patch or two
further Generation more than Tissues and Embroideries


Generation? O Lord! was ever such an Impudence? An old doting impotent Fellow,
one that was rotten in his Minority, and now has lost three of his five Senses,
to talk of Generation! I am impatient: Will you begone, Sir? 'Sbud I will so
swinge you else


Held, Sir, and pray forbear this rudeness; I like his Company very well. --


How! like him? Why, he has Nothing, Madam: A Lady can like no Hearing, no
Smelling, no Tasting, no Teeth, no Strength, no -- nothing I say that a man
should have? Besides, he*s above fourscore; and by being a Stallion in his
Youth, has acquired to be a Baboon in his Age, by Ierico. -- 'Sbud, like him,
quoth a


What does the Wag say? Hah! What does he fay? He Is a pretty spruce Fellow,
Madam, and ifack knows a Hawk from a Handsaw, as the saying is. -- But here are
those not far off that ifack know as much as he, if that were all; what
think thou, Bird? do they not? do they not, Rogue? Well, still I say that
Hair of thine. Ah, Rascal


I am glad it pleases you, Sir.


But, Madam, when shall I begin? 'Sbud me thinks we lose time.


Begin! what, Sir?


Why, my Courtship. Pox of this old chatt'ring Fellow; if he had not come, I had
been out of my pain before now: -- Hark ye, Reverend Sir, 'Bud! what do you do
prating here? why don't you go and chat to your Granddaughter at home, if you
love Women so well? --


Hah! -- what does the Wag say, Madam?


He says, Sir, he is extremely in love with your Granddaughter.


My Grand -- daughter? and ifack she deserves it, Madam: She Is a juicy,
spritely Girl; she will make a Pottle of Water of a Pint of Ale; a Chip of the
Old Block, bona fide, and shall turn her Back to never a one in Christendom of
her Inches, I Will say that for her


Sir, there is one Mrs. Snare below desires to speak with you.


Snare! O Lord, what shall I do? how the Devil came she to know I was here?
Hark, -- prithee, Sweetheart, tell her I am gone: Oh! I would not see her for
the World


Sir, she says she dogged you hither, and swears and rants yonder strangely.


O damned Queen! what shall I do?


And vows if you come not instantly, she will go into the Parlor to Sir Roger,
and discover something to him, I know not what; but I saw she was a Big-bellied
Woman, and I was loath to discourage her


Well, well, -- tell her I Will come; why how the Devil could she get from
Cambridge already


What Is the matter, Sir? Not well?


Yes, I thank you, Madam, very well, only thinking of a little business I have;
I must about it presently: Madam, Your Servant, I Will wait on you some other
time. I must go and pacify this Queen* This comes of Learning the Sciences
with a Pox* --


Come, Sir, shall we go in?


Ifack, -- and so he is, Madam: but the Fellow has some pretty parts, and will
grow better in time: But come, let us go in and see Sir Roger


'Twas that I asked you.


Hah! do like me, say thou, ifack? I Am glad on it. Shall we not have a word
or two in private, my little Queen of Fairies? We must, I say, we must. -- Ah
Rogue! -- I Will warrant thou art a Swinger: -- But come, let us go. --


NOw for my Talent of Women! I see by her looks I shall have occasion for it.


Sister!


Sister!


The natural love I bear you, and my desire to prevent your growing Infamy, has
brought me hither to give you counsel


The sense I have of your ill nature, and my knowledge of the little good it
will do you, has brought me hither to give you advice


Your Reputation is lowdly branded by all tongues, and I only as a Sister have
power to speak indifferently of your Life in hopes of your Reformation


Your Malice and unexampled Envy is mortally hated by all people; I only as a
Sister retaining so much pity as to desire its utter Dissolution. --


Why do you echo me?


Why do you question me? What have I done deserves it?


Done! Recollect your thoughts, and then confess; for my part, shame ties up my
tongue I dare not speak it


Dare not! Nay, that I am sure is false, you dare speak any thing: Come,
prithee don't fright me, what is it you mean


Excellent cunning! she has fitted me. --

Why would you seem ignorant? I confess to a stranger you might be cautious of
a nice Confession: But this artifioe to your Sister, fie, Emilia


Now I Will lay my life your design is to wheedle something out of me to make
your self merry withal


Rare still! -- No, Madam, this is no such merry matter; the Infamy of a Family
is not so to be jested with


Infamy! Nay, then I see it is time to be serious: Come, express it; I suppose
it is the Invention of your Envy, some new stratagem to affront me with; I am no
stranger to your temper


This is an impudence beyond a prostitute: Do I not know you are false?


False! How?


False to your Husband; False with Rashley: I need not tell you how, you best
know that


I know you love him! and am sensible of the Intrigues and Assignations which
you have had, which makes your meaning visible. But me thinks this is so
strange a design


Design! What is it she means? I hope you can tax me with no such crime with him.


Not I; it is not my business; I have only liberty to guess: yet indeed your
often private meetings were a little suspicious, and I suppose your late
raillery was only a design; but you might have took a better way with your
Sister: -- I am not so talkative


Exquisite Devil! -- Death, I am incensed beyond all bounds of reason: I
private with him! An Intrigue with me! Fury! thou know --


I do; -- and to exasperate thy rage, will now confess all* I do love Rashley
more than I love Fame: Nay, more than you could do, could you die for him. --
But why should that offend you


Oh Confusion! I am all over Fire: Dare you be such a Devil? dare you love him?


Yes; and to vex you more, dare make you of my counsel*


Can I endure this? Oh for a look now of a Basilisk that I might kill thee.


Thou art worse. --


Expect to find me so; for if there be a stratagem of Malice in all Hell, I Will
have it thence: Ah, I Will be a tender Sister to thee


As ever Woman yet was blessed withal.


Not all the Infernals clad in the secret darkest Robes of Malice, did ever
watch a Soul they meant to ruin, as I will thee: Thy very sleeps shall be
discovered to me, and every dream I Will trace with so much care, that if thou
scapest thou art the wiser Sister, and I a poor unthinking Creature good for
nothing


I slight thy threats, and dare thee to persevere: Manage thy hate with such
dexterity, the World may wonder at thee, and confess thou had the practick
part of Policy: Design thy plots so subt'ly, that the Devil should own himself
out done in his own Mystery; yet in the Arms of him I love, I Would laugh to see my
Wit outdo 'em


Thy Wit! thy Wit compare with mine, insipid Fool?


Yes; and my prosperous Fate shall mount me far above thy shallow Stratagems.


I Will pull thee down from that ambitious height, and trample thee in Ashes. --


Do.


Expect it.


And from that low recess I Will forge a plot shall blow thee into Air. --


I Will make that Devil in thy Envy tame.
And if I fail thee may I sink and dam.

NAy! prithee, Pegg, have patience.


Tell not me of patience, Sir, for my part I can stay no longer; you see my
condition; if you will consider, so; if not, Sir Roger shall know that the
abuse of so innocent a person as I was, deserves better satisfaction


Innocent! -- 'Sbud, she was a Strumpet to the whole College before I knew
her: Innocent, with a pox


Sir, do not grumble, nor say your Devils Pater Noster to me, but give me
money; Fifty Pounds I demand, which I think is reasonable enough considering
the charge of my journey


You might have staid till I came back again, I was not running away.


But I was, Sir* and so might you for any thing I know: Come, come, Sir, I am
to be baffled no more; I am grown older now, make me thankful


Ay, in impudence, by Ierico: she has been snapt it seems formerly, -- but has
now learnt cunning. Ah, plague of these Sciences, I say still! -- Come will thou be civil? will thou take Twenty Pounds? Pox, use a little Conscience in
thy dealings; thou will thrive the better for it


I Will abate not a Farthing, Sir; Don't tell me of Conscience.


'Sbud, would she were in the Sea, and a Millstone about her neck: I must give
it; for if my Uncle comes and sees her, I am undone


O Sir, what shall we do? Sir Roger and my Master are just coming.


Oh unhappy minute! if he sees me I am lost for ever: No hole nor corner to
hide us in, my little Rogue? 'Sbud here is a Guiney for thee do but contrive
handsomely


Well, Sir, -- I see you are a Gentleman; therefore I Will help you: this door
opens to my Ladies* hamber; there you may hide your selves; -- and at night
when it begins to grow dark, I Will come and let you out


With all my heart! Oh I Have an Ague on me. --


Are you still resolved?


Assure your self I am and shall be ever.


Give me but hopes, and I Will forget all injuries, and ask your pardon.


Fie, this from a Man of Wit, one that can plot so well? it is impossible: what
would you have me do


Desert young Rashley: Come, I beg thee do it.


Not for the World! Oh Heaven! desert him! I love him, Sir.


Go on then, Devil, and if I don't plague thee! --


Now for the Venison, Tom! you will stand to your Bargain?


Firmly, Sir, win it, and it is yours. -- Ha! -- what a Devil makes Ranger here?


Madam, I hope you will excuse my last abrupt departure: my nature, Madam, is
merry, and in verity careless sometimes. I have not since I came to England
achieved the Polite Method of Courtship and Address; but if blunt Actions,
kind Behavior, and merry Songs can do it, I think I have shown an example,
have I not, old Signior


Ifack, Sir, and it is right, let who will say the contrary; what does he say
now? Madam, you may believe him


Any thing, Sir, rather than put you to the trouble of an Apology*


What think you now, Sir? do you observe her angry Look? do but see what an Eye
of indignation she casts upon me


Ay, ay, -- I Will put out her Eye of indignation presently; I Will fetch her down
with her haughty looks in a moment; I Will make her look as I Would have her, or I Will
put her head into a Pudding Bag


Sdeath, how she looks! here is another plot a hatching.


Wife! I have brought honest Tom here to be reconciled to thee; and to take
away all manner of distastes, he says he will give thee a Squirril at any time,
woult thou not, Tom


Sir, and my heart into the bargain, if she please to pardon me.


Why, look ye now; -- he is as honest a Fellow as lives, I Will say that for him.


Sir, the affront he offered me was so contrary to my nature, and his behavior
so opposite to his Duty and Character, that to forgive him, would argue my
Spirit as mean as by his late deportment one might guess his breeding


What! dare you be refractory? -- Hoh! -- do it, or by the Lord Harry I shall
be very sharp upon you, that is in short. --


Now all the Fiends that dwell beneath the Center,
And hourly study deeds subtle and horrid,
To sooth and snare the Souls ye mean to dam,
In favor of your Commonwealth appear,
And to be still more Devilish, copy her.

Still refrectory? Then thus, I break the Truce, and fally out with my full
power


Sir, do you not see her artifice? This is nothing what she intends; it is all
feigned, and you are abused, by Heaven: Sir, there is nothing of this real


Ah! would it were not. But Ned, thou can talk well, prithee go and try if
thou can reconcile 'em; Faith I Will do as much for thee; prithee try. --


Insufferable ignorance! No Brains! No sense of feeling! Sir, this is all
dissimulation, and to carry on their design of abusing you


Why, peace, I say, not a word of this; 'sbud I shall lose my Venison by this
Fools prating, if I let him alone a little longer. Wife, I command you once
more; and instantly obey upon this Summons, or I Will turn you away like a
Vagabond for contempt of my Government. Sir Roger! try you to persuade her;
'sbud this Ned here had liked to have spoiled all; but what says Scoggen


It Is hard to force lost friendship to the blood when once it is banished.


Had she been bred a Witch she had lost half her Character.


Come, Madam! forget and forgive; it is necessary your Husband should be obeyed.
Mr. Rashley, I am sorry to see you so deserted by the Ladies you used to be
most in favor withal


Not I: but you weigh my Merits in your own Scale, Sir Roger.


No faith; I am old now; but about some thirty years ago I could have said
something; I could have fetched 'em about with a Horse-pox in faith; I never
flincht, I was a true Knight Errant, I


What is the meaning of all this? Ifack I cannot guess the matter: but mum, I
must not discover my failing


Well, Sir, rather than be thought disobedient I will submit; but Heaven knows
with what an ill will --


Why so, now all is well, and the Venison's mine, -- ha, ha, ha* -- I thought I
should have it: Faith, Tom, be civil, and kiss her, it is no confirmation else


Oh dam him, dam him! was ever such a Coxcomb?


It Is now about Five; at Seven I will not fail ye: Madam, -- you have given me
new life with this favor


At Seven? (Good!) Thanks to my Ear for that discovery: I shall go near to
spoil your assignation


Go now, get you in, and begin a Set at Ombre, and I Will come and make one
presently. By the Lord Harry I am glad they are friends with all my heart


So Paris stole the Wife of Menelaus, and Troy grew bright with Fire. --


Hey day! -- Troy! why what have thou to do with Troy? Ned, prithee let us talk
of our own affairs


And wisely too; for your Reputation suspended one hour will grow nauseous; the
Rabble will shout at ye, and point their fingers, and by your Name you will
grow infamous


My Name, Sister! what do mean? what name?


A Cuckold: Can you bear it, Sir? A Cuckold-Buz.


By the Lord Harry it is but a scurvy Name for a Man of Honor, that is the truth
on it; but what is it to me


Nothing, Sir, nothing; only you are the Man, that is all.


That Is all, quoth-a? what a pox does he mean?


Dull Man! I blush to call ye Brother, that kind name, your want of sense taken
from you: Can you see the guilty Love 'twixt Rashley and your Wife, the melting
Touches, and the glancing Eyes? the often Pressings, Sighs, and kind Caresses,
and all the signs of shame and burning Lust, and yet be patient? Oh the insipid
dullness of a Husband! A Husband


Rashley and my Wife! Pish, -- why, I reconciled 'em but just now; she has been
angry with him this week for not giving her a Squirril he promised her


A Squirril? -- Hah! a very fine present that, if you understood all.


Happy discovery! this shall to my Lady immediately.


That anger was designed: You are abused, and I that have a share in all your
ignominy, have now resolved prevention. Oh that ever I should live to be a
Witness of this shame

Heaven knows how I have loved her, instructed her, and told her the Duty of a
Wife was to obey and be constant; yet all would not do: therefore I am resolved
to right my self and you in the discovery; nor shall our race in future times
be branded with any Spurious Offspring


I could not be believed, I was impertinent; but if you knew what I have seen,
Sir


Seen! why prithee what have thou seen, Ned?


Faith, 'twill be no secret long, therefore I Will tell you: I have seen her lie
in Rashley's Arms and kiss him; play with his Nose, and clap his Cheeks, and
laugh till her whole Frame was shook with Titulation; I guess, Sir, 'twas at
you, but will not swear it. -- She Would sing, and breathe upon him, and with her
Hand locked fast in his, and Eyes with rapture gazing on his Face, she would tell
him wanton Stories of her love, and of her easy Husband. He, to requite her,
would display her Charms, and betwixt every word imprint a Kiss to prove his
amorous Argument


And you have seen this?


More than this, Sir, I have seen (but to tell you is to be called
Impertinent!) such things, such monstrous things


My Head begins to ache; -- all is not well; prithee, Ned, out with 'em; come, I
am thy Friend; and 'sbud, if I thought any thing were done in Hugger Mugger


What would you do then?


Do! -- Why, I Would ask him civilly whether his meaning were good or no.


His meaning? --


Ay: -- you know it is best to begin mildly, that afterward, if occasion be, a
man may cut his Throat with greater assurance


Stare on your Infamy with Eagle-aspect! Behold the evidence of Shame writ in
her Eyes and Actions! See every Glance, each Touch, each kind Embrace; and when
you have seen 'em in the very fact, stand coldly unconcerned, and ask the
meaning. Ah! Curse upon all dullness. --


Let Rashley smile and point his Fingers at ye, tell you a Story of a Quondam
Mistress, (which is indeed your Wife) how often he has lain with her, and
pleasantly deceived the easy Cuckold; -- yet as a President of excellent
Nature, I could advise you still to ask his meaning, -- his meaning. --


Watch all his Actions; and when some kind Genius has, to undeceive you, made
you a Spectator of Rashley, full of hopes, and all undrest, entering your Bed
with a glad Lovers haste, step in, and pull him back; and ask his meaning, his
meaning


My Bed! my Bed is my Castle; and, by the Lord Harry, he that violates it but
with a look, my First shall crush him into Mummy


So! now he begins to take fire. --


He Is a Son of a Whore, a Dog, a Bitch, a Succubus; and if I find this true,
I Will cut him piecemeal though he were Sword-proof, and had a Witch to his
Mother


Ay, this is meaning now! Go on and prosper.


These words display a revived sense of Honor, nor shall you want
encouragement to forward it; and since I see your Eyes and Understanding are
opened, I, as your Friend, will give this secret to you: 'Twas my good fortune
to hear an Assignation appointed between 'em this night at seven a Clock; I
guess it is now very near the hour; you have a Key to the Chamber, go thither at
the time appointed, and then never trust your Friend if you find her not the
falsest of Women


If I do, I Will make her the ugliest in Christendom: for I Will cut off her Nose,
and send her to the Devil for a New-Years-Gift


Here she comes, we must not be seen, 'twill spoil all: talk of going abroad,
and carry it handsomely, for fear she mistrusts


But where shall we meet?


At my lodging in the Strand, about half an hour hence.


What, studying, my Dear? Come, come, indeed you must not be so thoughtful: Did
you not promise to come and make one at Ombre


Now if I might be hanged, cannot I speak an angry word, no: -- I wont play, I
am busy, I am going abroad for two or three hours. -- Farewell


It Is so; our Intrigue to night is discovered to him, I find by his actions;
the Infernal Colleagues, Ranger and Maria, have been possessing him with some
strange resolutions: But since it is but what I expected, it gives me the less
trouble, and it is ten to one but I have a Counterplot left that shall undo
their policies, (...) the Devil made one in the Invention. Did you meet my
Husband


Yes, but in a strange humor: He looked with so dull an aspect, and returned my
salute so coldly, and so far from his usual manner, that I more than half fear
-- our Intrigue is discovered


Without doubt it is: -- They have played their parts to discover, and it now
belongs to us to study to repel. Come, summon your Wits together, and advise
what is to be done in so Critical a Conjuncture; you had a contriving Genius
once


Ay, it is true, Madam, I had once: but this damned Champaigne has so dulled it,
that Igad it is now worth little or nothing: Madam, you know my Talent in plot
is insignificant; but if a Rancounter, or cutting Ranger's Throat may do the
business, I Will thrust my hand as far as any man. I Will spoil his plotting by
Heaven, say you but the word


No! fighting will do in any other business better than this: for in stead of
defending, it blasts my reputation


The Devil take me, if I had not like to have forgot that too: well, I am a
dull Rogue, Madam, that is the truth on it


Oh Madam, you are betrayed! Mr. Ranger, by what means Heaven knows, has been
informed of your Assignation, I accidentally overheard him telling it to my
Master, and Madam Maria coming in, seconded his Story with an extravagant fury;
and in conclusion 'twas designed that he should pretend business abroad, but
privately return home and surprise ye


It Is as I imagined, and I am glad of this caution: Now we may take breath again.


Gad and so am I. -- But is there no way to keep on the plot, and deceive 'em
still? --


It Is in my head, and will have birth presently. -- Betty, you have Sneak still
fast in my Chamber


Yes, Madam, he is securely locked in, and here is the Key.


Follow me then, and do as I directed you: In the mean time, Sir, go you to
your Chamber, and put on your Gown and Nightcap as if you had been in Bed; and
when you hear me stamp come out, and wonder: Let me alone for the rest, -- I Will
plague 'em with an after-plot. Away, the minute's near. --


What she intends I know not, but am certain of the success by the assurance
she does it with. -- Hah! It Is a rare Creature, and by Heaven is Mistress of
^he sweetest Nature, and noblest Trust, and most substantial good English
Principles of any Woman in Europe. Well, -- if Cuckolding be a Crime, it is the
sweetest Crime in Christendom, and has certainly the most Practisers. But let
that pass; now to my Gown and Nightcap


'Sdeath! I have had confounded luck to night; -- not a good chance since I
begun; nor no Mirth neither, there is the plague on it. -- Had I had the liberty
to have sung two or three merry Catches, and have lost my Money with a Trolly
Lolly -- Lo, -- it had been nothing. -- Here; -- Hey; -- where is Cob, call him
hither quickly, and let us go


Sir! I have not seen him these two hours; I believe he is gone home.


How! what without taking leave of his Mistress? it is impossible.


Sir Roger, you are disturbed me thinks; what is the matter? Hah! your
behavior seems to publish that --


No great matter, Sir: Pox of this old Fool.


Sir, it ill becomes a person of your gravity to be angry on so small an
occasion. --


Small! By Heaven, Madam, -- it is a matter of moment: What, run away without
taking leave? In verity it is barbarous, and derogates from his Birth and
Breeding; nor can I, though his Kinsman, excuse --


What does Sir Roger say, Madam? does he rally. Ha! he is a merry Man, and a
good Fellow, and ifack I love mirth: for my part I hate your drowsy, insipid,
phlegmatic Fellows, that sleep over a Glass, and talk of nothing but
State-Politicks: -- But Sir Roger is a man for the purpose, a merry jolly-man,
He


Sir, you may spare your Commendations for them that delight in 'em. What an
impertinent old Fellow it is? -- Pray, Sir, no more of this, I am not pleased
with it. --


Your Song of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the rest of the brave old Fellows, was
very fine, Sir Roger. -- Well! I Will not be positive, but there was certainly a
great deal of Judgment and sheer Wit in some of those Rump-Songs


'Sdeath! this is the most insufferable old Fellows: Pox, tell not me of Rump
Songs* Sir in Verity, would you had been hanged up in stead of the Rump, --
that I might have been free from the noise. -- But, Madam, as I was saying* --
upon my Honor I never knew Cob* in such an error


Then, Sir Roger, Chevy-Chace, and the Hunting of the Hare, is finely penned!
finely penned! Ifack it was --


Oh the Devil, is there no riddance of this Clack? because he can hear nothing,
he would speak all


Ay, so it was, Sir, so it was. -- But Ifack that Hunting was most excellently
contriy'd* Ah! he makes the Dogs speak notably. Ieod and the Hare repartees
again very well for an Animal of her Magnitude. --


'Sbud. I shall grow as deaf as he if I stay longer: I must go seek my Nephew:
Come, Madam, lets go away and leave him; I am sure his Eyes are so defective he
cannot miss us presently. --


And though some petulant, insignificant, and disaffected persons have raised
Calumnies by calling it Doggrel and fustian, and such like; yet Ifack the thing
is really a witty, sacetious, (nay, and as some think) a Moral Satyr: for mark
me, Sir Roger, and Madam pray give your attention, for the Dogs were
Hieroglyphick-Characters of Fanatics, as the Hare was of the Quakers, and
ifack I have often heard the Sisters sing it in stead of an Hymn or an Anthem,
for the Conversion of Unbelievers; and nay, and as a greater rarity I have
heard it acted to the life betwixt a Dog-Phanatick and a Conny* Quaker. -- But
ifack, -- I think you mind me not. -- Ha, Sir Roger, -- Madam, -- Sir Roger,
Madam, -- what, a vacuity? -- Gone? well. --

I Will after, and redeem all; but Ieod, this was a little uncivil.


Come, Sir, and with as little noise as you can for fear of discovery. I swear
were you not a man, to whom I am sensibly obliged, I should not be drawn to
this Infidelity


I will reward thy care; are they together?


Yes, Sir, in that Room there.


Take this, and begone, I have no further service for thee, and I would have
her ignorant that this is thy discovery: Away. --


The discovery will add little to your content: but since I have the profit, I
care not


Ned! what says she? are they met?


Securely, and with a great deal of content, they are in that Room in the dark;
(met!) Ah, Sir! they are both better practiced than ever to be tardy in a
Love-Intrigue


Now I think I have trapt her finely. -- Oh my Joy! -- I shall not be able to
contain my self. --


A Man of Wit and Honor thus abused! It Is horrible! A Cuckold! 'Sbud, it is a
worse Name than a Conjurer, -- and has more of the Devil in it: -- but I Will be
so revenged, the World shall tremble at it: I Will first cut off her Hair, to
affront her Family; then the want of a Nose shall proclaim her Bawd, and the
Penny-Pot-Poets shall make Ballads on her. --


So! this thrives as I would have it, and we have snapt 'em finely in the nick!
just when the Intrigue was at its best perfection! Oh Revenge! --


Ha, ha, ha! Nay, and at such a time when all help is denied 'em; when her
Blushes, Sighs and Entreaties are all fruitless; when her exasperated Husband's
rage flows high, and best of all when Rashley is defenseless. O Wit! I love
thee for this Stratagem


She dared us to persevere; slighted our plots, and had the confidence to make
descriptions of her kind Intrigue before her Husbands face, then laughed at us


It Is now our time; Ha, ha, ha! I thought I could not fail.


No; and this happy Minute brings me more perfect pleasure, and more true
delight, than pristine Ages: For she is one whom Hell designed for its chief
Instrument; She will out-lye a Siren, cheat the Devil, and dam more Souls to
further her Intrigue than Charon's Boat has room for; yet I own a kind of
Mungrel love, and must enjoy her though Legions were her guard


Hark! --

He Is as good as his word: Now I hope she will own her Sisters Wit above her. --
Well! -- this was rarely plotted. --


By Heaven it was, -- and fit to be Chronicled, Madam: -- Your Wit surpasses
humane thought, and should be spoken of with wonder: You plot with such
assurance, that --

Hell! Death! and Confusion! Can I believe* my Eyes? She here!


I am confounded, and have lost my senses. Sure, Sir, we dream: Are we awake,
think you


No! nor shall never wake when I design to raise my Wit above the poor weak
Creatures. I could laugh now, but I swear I pity ye. Wear out your tedious
Nights in dull design, and then in the Morning hatch the Abortive Brood which
ere Night turns to nothing; slender Encouragement, Heaven knows, for Wit: And
you, Sir, plot and sweat, and plot again for Moonshine in the Water: Poor
reward, Sir, for one so well skilled in Intrigue as you are! --


Oh that I had thy heart here in my hand! How pleasant were the Diet? -- Fate
and Death! was ever such a Devil


No! never! Therefore since thou art a Devil, as I now am sure thou art, have
mercy on me, and do not take my Soul for my first Crime, -- and I will plot no
more. my Conqueror; I Will honor thee; -- Good Devil, do not hurt me


Strumpet! Whore! Witch! I Will spoil your Curls by the Lord* Harry. O Lord! my
Wife; -- and she that I have beaten a stranger. --


Oh Heaven! was ever poor sinner so abused? --


Madam, I beg your pardon, and am ashamed of my fault; but I Will make you amends
presently. --


Well, nothing but the greatest Devil could have brought this Woman hither for
this Intrigue, and therefore once more I acknowledge thy power. --


Ay! you had need ask her pardon; it is you have betrayed us. Chicken! dear
Chicken, -- don't srown so: -- I confess I was a Fool; -- but forgive me but
this once, and if ever I offend again, I Will give thee leave to Cuckold me indeed


Indeed, Sir, your jealousy is a little severe, I wonder what I have done to
deserve it


Nothing, I know thou have not; prithee forgive me.


But to be disturbed thus when I was at my Devotion.


Prithee forget it: Come, Tom, you may come out now, here is none but Friends.


Who do you mean, Sir?


Tom Rashley: -- Poor Fellow, I warrant now he will be so bashful.


So, that is something yet, and I Will fetch him out or bleed for it. --


Look, yonder he is!


I find it now, -- and this is all designed: O Devil! Devil!


What Is the matter, Mr. Rashley? what is the matter.


Rashley here? Hey day! who the Devil is that yonder then?


Come, Sir, appear; I find you are now no Hercules. Hah! -- Death more
Miracles, Sneak


'Sdeath, my Gob! -- and taken with a Wench: Why how now, Sirrah?


Now it works to my wish: prithee observe how they look.


Hush, -- I do.


O Lord, Uncle, your mercy; -- I was betrayed, seduced, as a man may say. --
Go, go, -- begone, I Will speak with you to morrow. --

I say, Uncle, I was seduced, chowsed, cheated.


Caught with a Wench? -- Come, Sir, I Will talk with you. -- Oh disgrace to the
Family. -- With a Wench? a lewd Wench? Come along, Sir; -- I Will watch you
henceforth. --


Ha, ha! Why, here has been a great deal of Intrigue to night I see, Ha, Sir?
-- I am sorry now I went to Bed so soon: -- But I have been in the sweetest
Dream yonder. --


Here has in troth been a great deal of Intrigue, as thou say, Tom: But no
matter; now all is well: And since it has happened so well, a Day of Jubilee
shall Crown it. To morrow is my Wedding Day, and in memory of that happy hour
that conjoined me and my sweet Chicken there together, we'll have a Feast; --
and I Will sing, and roar, and drink cum privilegio. Go, wait on her in, Tom: --
Chicken, remember we are Friends; Go, -- I Will be with you presently. --


Never was such a day, nor such a deed.


Ned! let me have no more of your doubts nor counsels. Do You hear! 'Sbud, I say
once more my Wife is the honestest Woman in Christendom, and you shall hear
from me


Was ever the like known?


Never since Adam; but she was a Devil before the Creation.


I Will not give over thus. --


Nor I. --


Your hand on it --


Here! and may all the Demons that have power
In subtle plots help now, though never more.

I Will die but I Will perform it. --

My Slights shall with Immortal Wit be wrought:
And all my Senses shall convert to Thought.

SIrrah! haunt me no more, I know thee not.


Nay, Uncle.


Go to your Wench, and let her entertain you; then stock Sir Ieremy's
Mannor-house at home with Bastards, -- Birds of night, and teach 'em all to
know their Father when you have done. --


Good Uncle, let me speak. --


No place to bring your Cattle to but thither, under your Mistrisses Nose, thou
most notorious Ass? Mercy of me, what will this World come to? who could imagine
that Sheeps Face of thine; that Mouth, whence never came any thing that had
sense; that Person that has as often been thought a Puritan as thou have been a
Fool? Then that hanging Dog-look. I Will say no more, but the Devil is subtle


Uncle, you know it is an old saying, We cannot appoint our own Destinies; nor
did I foresee this: besides, Sir, if you knew her as well as I do, you would find
the Woman has some parts that are not contemptible. -- 'Sbud, I know what is
what; I am not such a Fool


Not such a Fool! In verity if thou were but a grain nearer to a Natural, I Would
beg thee of the King, and adopt another to inherit thy Estate. Not such a Fool


No, so I say, Sir, since you go to that: Whoop! what a Pox you have forgot
since you were young your self


I young! why, Sir, I hope I got no Bastards.


No: -- But you kept Whores that you did, and that is all one, bona fide.


This Rogue has heard all; I must stop his mouth. How, Sirrah, I kept Whores?


It has been thought so, Sir, since you go to that: Nay, it is no such Miracle
now adays; there is many an old Badger about Town does the like; it is grown a
custom now


But it is not so customary with your Uncle, Sir: but come, pray express your
self; what Women do the infamous World lay to my charge


What Women! 'Bud are you ignorant? Hum, Nan, Pegg, Joan of the Dairy, Sara,
Ienny, Dorothy, Mary, Bridget


Hold! hold, I say; 'Sdeath he will reckon the whole Country presently: I must
quiet him, the Rogue has me upon the hip; Harkee, Cob


Then the Parsons Wife, Sir, and the old Hostess at the Townsend: You see the
Fool has a good memory


A waggish one I see thou have: Ha, if thou could remember Law-Cases as
well, thou would be a brave Fellow. Why, Cob, thou think thou have paid me
off now, do not


I know not, if my Wit flow too fast, Sir, I cannot help it* it is a good that is
thrown upon me, it is not my seeking: it is true, I have an unhappy way with me
sometimes, but it is over presently, it never lasts long, that is one comfort


In verity I see thou have Wit, and now I Will cherish it. Why, Cob, my
instruction is for thy good, Child, what will thy Mistress think when she hears
of it? -- Come, come, in verity, Cob, 'twas ill done, 'twas in faith. -- But mum,
no more words on it, I Will make all well again


So, so, I have brought him about finely; 'Sbud I did not think I had so much
Wit, but I see a man may be mistaken in his own parts


But do you hear, Cob, not a word more of these Wenches, let the foolish World
say what it will. -- Thou art a good Boy in verity, I like thy Wit well: Thou
know I have no *Heir, and when I die, Cob, I will not say I Will give thee any
thing, lest I should make thee proud; but expect, expect wonders may fall, who
knows? --


By Ierico I would not have spoke on it now, but that I had nothing else to say,
and you know it is a disgrace to a Scholar to be silent in company


It Is no matter, it is no matter: prithee how came thou to know that Pegg and
I were so intimate


Ah, you will be angry if I should tell you.


In verity not I: -- Angry? -- Come, come, out with it, Cob, out with it.


Why, the truth is, I lay with her one night, and the Queen told me all.


Did thou! God a mercy. (Dam him! what a Snake have I fostered?) Done like a
Cock of the Game in verity. Ah, when I was of thy years I could have done as
much my self


Yes, she told me you had done as much: but mum, Sir, not a word more, I know
my Kew


'Sdeath, I shall be a byword to the Town. -- How now?


Sir Roger, I was just coming to your House for you; my Master desires yours
and Mr. Sneak's company immediately


What, the Solemnity holds? this is his Wedding Day?


Yes, Sir.


Tell him I am coming. --

Come, Cob, let us go; and mum, do you hear? you understand me?


I warrant you, Sir. --


COme, come, another Bumper about; my Chickens Health: Here, I am not wet
through yet; Tom, what say thou


With all my heart, Sir! Oh here comes Sir Roger and his Nephew.


Mr. Bubble and Gentlemen, your most humble Servant.


Yours, good Sir Roger; I am glad to see you in faith; and you, sweet Mr. Sneak.
Well, Faith, Sir Roger, we have been Bumping it about here, we have been dipped,
as the saying is: Tom Rashley, send it round; come, Sir Roger's a Freshman,
he will drink an Ocean


Fill every Man's Glass there: Mr. Ranger, you want it, it is Madam Emilia's
health


I Will do you reason, Sir; --

And ten to one but I have a stratagem shall dash this mirth.

Are they ready?


Hush! we are observed; they are --


So, so! Come, now the Song, and then the Dance. Look ye, Gentlemen, you must
know


Come, come, Mr. Bubble, let us have the other Soop, I say; ifack we loose time.
Ah Sirrah, are you there? Gad I Will be with you presently; dust it about once
more, I say; the Wine has a pretty smack with it; -- it cherishes, I like it
well: come, another Soop, and then do what you will


Fill Wine there! -- Gentlemen, (as I was saying) I got this Song made
purposely, it is in praise of Marriage, and there was not one ready made of 'em
in Town; I searched it all over


Were you at the Poets Lodging?


Yes, but they had none; for they told me 'twas a Song would not take: besides,
they were so busy getting Plays up for the next Term, that I could hardly get
one made


Sir, you needed not have troubled 'em; you once had a very good Vein that way
your self. --


Yes, I was mightily given to rapture and flame once: I writ Tom Farthing: -- I
had a hand too in Colly my Cow, a Song that took well I can assure you: but
this is of another kind in praise of marriage, Sir; and they told me the Town
loved nothing but Satyrs against Marriage, and the reason was because they were
afraid of being Cuckolded: -- When, alas, poor silly Rogues, there is no such
thing in Nature


Well, of all stupid Animals a drowsy Husband is the most notorious: -- -- but
I shall change your note presently I doubt not, Sir. -- --


You shall hear, Gentlemen: Hey, the Song there and the Dance?


UNder the Branches of a spreading Tree,
Silvander sat, from care and danger free,
And his inconstant roving humor shows
To his dear Nymph, that sung of Marriage-Vows:
But she with flowing Graces charming Air,
Cried, Fie, fie, my Dear, give over,
Ah, tempt the gods no more!
But thy offense with penitence repair:
For though Vice in a Beauty seem sweet in thy Arms,
An Innocent Virtue has always more Charms.
Ah Phillida! the angry Swain replied,
Is not a Mistress better than a Bride?
What Man that Universal Yoke retains,
But meets an hour to sigh and curse his chains?
She smiling cried, Change, change that impious Mind;
Without it we could prove not half the Ioys of Love.
It Is Marriage makes the feeling Ioys Divine:
For all our Life long we from scandal remove,
And at last fall the Trophies of Honor and Love.
Well sung in faith: Look'ee, Gentlemen, is it not as I told you?


In verity very well, very well, Sir.


Come, now the Dance. --


Sir, here is a Letter for you; it was left by a Porter, who said it required no
answer, and is gone


So, now for a change of Countenance. -- I think this will do.


If not, I Have writ a Letter that will: but let us observe. --


What the Devil has this Fellow given me here? A Letter? Pray Heaven it be no
challenge. -- How? -- What Is here

Sir, That you are blind, I have heard; that you are a Fool, I know; and that
you are a Cuckold, I believe. -- However, as a Friend, though unknown, I am bound
in Conscience to give you this Information; Your Wife is false; You are abused;
The Author of your wrong you know as well as your self, if you know your self
as well as you know Rashley

Oh Heaven! was ever such fate? -- But hush, I Will smother my resentment till
they are gone. -- Come, Sir Roger and Gentlemen, there is a Tongue in the next
Room, pray go and eat; -- I Will be with you presently. --


So, I see by this behavior it takes, and I Will away, lest he should suspect
me. -- Now for my the other plot


O Sister, here is a new discovery; the Devil is come abroad again.


How? the Devil?


Ay, in the likeness of a Letter: Here, prithee read it; it is his Character; I
am sure it looks as if 'twere writ with a Cloven Hoof. -- Hah! -- what think
thou


Sir, he calls you Fool here.


Ay, he is a little uncivil, that is the truth on it: but what is to be done,
Sister


A Cuckold too.


Ay; -- was ever such an impudence?


I never heard of any: but it is no more, Sir, than I expected: Alas! it is
nothing to be a Cuckold now


Oh unfortunate estate of Marriage! by the Lord Harry, if this be true, I have
praised it to fine purpose. But, Sister, thou were wont to be kind; prithee
advise me


It Is to no purpose, Sir, you know I am envious, my words have double meaning:
I did my Sister wrong in my last Story, pray let me offend no more


Well, I confess I was to blame; but who the Devil could have mistrusted her
when the plot was carried so hansomly


Oh you will find, Sir, she has still more plots, and I find you so credulous
and so wedded to your infamy, that for my part I am afraid to have any thing to
do with it


Help me but this once, and if I fail thee again, may I be proved a Cuckold to
the whole County, and my Case tried in Westminster Hall


Well! once more then I Will assist you, and to confirm what that Letter has
informed, -- know, Sir, she is false; and though she frustrated our last plot by
her Waiting-Womans means, she certainly met Rashley that night. -- I am glad
you credit a Strangers Letter; for my part I love her so well, I should have
hardly caused a second breach between ye else: but since it is out, and you
desire my assistance, follow me, and ere night I doubt not but to give you
sufficient proof of your misfortun


With all my heart, dear Sister. -- 'Sbud, a Cuckold? -- It Is impossible, I have
no Cuckolds face; -- but I Will be resolved immediately. --


Do this, thou shall command me.


In truth, Sir, I am afraid 'twill be discovered, and I would not have my Lady
know it for the World


I swear she never shall. What, do thou doubt me? Besides, I Will be so
grateful to thee, thou shall never have cause to repent this Courtesy. --


Sir, you know you always might command me in any reasonable thing: pray speak
it again, Sir, what would you have me do


Why only plant me in or near her Chamber for a design I have, she shall be
ignorant why, -- or by what means I got thither; I Will still be careful of thy
reputation: Come, take this Purse, and prithee do it willingly


Well, Sir, what you mean I know not; but Heaven direct all for the best: I can
deny you nothing, Sir; I lie in a Closset that joins to her Chamber, where you
may both over-hear and speak to her. --


That above all things! prithee let us go.


But for Heavens sake take care she knows not that I brought ye thither; I
would not be seen in such a business for the World. --


Never doubt, I warrant thee I Will be careful.


Follow me then, Sir. --


SPat. Sirrah!


Here, Sir, here.


Whither is this Rascal gone? Well, ifack, I am too full of clemency; I must
swinge this Rogue, or he will never be good for any thing; he is at Nine-holes
now, I Will lay my life: A damned Villain, that spends me Threepence a day I
know not how


O Lord, who I, Sir?


Who Is within there? what, will no body hear me? Am I left desolate? I have not
the plague I think. -- Ha


Why, here am I, Sir; I have been here all this while. --


Oh Sirrah, are you come? where have you been, ha? I say, where have you been,
Rogue


No where, Sir, not I.


Sirrah! I must be left alone! must I! and when I have a message to send, go my
self. -- Hah! -- Sirrah, Mr. Little-Pox has a Boy, that though he was stinted at
Nurse, and is not above pockethigh, can run, and frisk, and jump upon occasion,
Sirrah, know a Bailey by his Nose, and a Wench by her Buttocks, ye Rogue, and a
good Linguist, and a pretty Pimp, Sirrah, and can hold the Door with a steady
hand, ye Rogue: but thou, a Rascal, a Drone, art good for nothing


Any thing, Sir, I warrant you: try me, and you shall find I can hold a Door as
well as he


Why, how now, Sirrah? what, make mouths at me? is your Master grown your
mirth? Ha, this will teach you better; this will new-mold you; I Will fetch you
out of your damned looks ifack: French Grimaces, Rogue, French Grimaces


O Lord, what shall I do? Because he is deaf, and cannot hear me, he thinks I
mock him. -- Hold, Sir, -- for Heavens sake; upon my Faith I don't mock you

It Is all a mistake; and, Sir, you have beaten me for nothing.


What a noise the Rogue makes! Why, Sirrah, cannot you speak temperately, but
you must roar thus? I am not so deaf, but I can hear without this Thunderclap.
But you do it in contempt, do you, Sirrah? Bless us, to what an impudence this
Age is grown! But I Will fetch the Devil out, lest he should grow in ye, -- thus.
--

I should be loath to see thee hanged till you come to years of discretion.


Mercy of me, what a Master have I? If I stay long here I shall be beaten into
Mummy


Come, Sir, now I have performed the part of a Master and a Friend in your
Castigation, I have now a word or two by way of Instruction. Mark me, Sirrah,
-- nothing exasperates more than scorn, nor nothing pleases more than
observance; a Master should be strict in finding occasion to beat his Servant,
and a Servant should be careful in avoiding the beatings of his Master


So, he has taught me, now I shall be careful of avoiding it hereafter if my
legs will carry me


What, mouths again, Sirrah, mouths again?


Umph. --


Oh this submission pacifies: Come hither, I have a message for ye, and let me
see how you can behave your self; it is a matter of moment


I Will do my best to please ye, Sir.


What do thou say now? -- Look, look! -- was ever such a Rascal as this? This
Rogue knows well enough that I cannot hear him. Sirrah, come and lay your mouth
to my ear, and then speak, if you would have me understand ye


Yes, Sir, I shall be very careful to remember it hereafter.


Rafters? -- what Rafters, Rogue?


Sir, I shall be careful to remember it hereafter. --


O shall you so, Sir? and 'twill become you ifack: for look'ee, Sirrah, it is my
humor as long as I am healthy and jovial, to cover failings and imperfections
in Nature as well as I can; it is a Wise-mans virtue, and I have paterns for it
every day. Ah! here are a sort of jolly, brisk, ingenious, old Signiors about
Town, that with false Calves, false Bellies, false Teeth, false Noses, and a
false fleering Face, upon the matter fill up Society as well as ere a
Masquerading Fop of 'em all. -- But to the matter: Sirrah, you must carry this
Ring to Cordelia, and possess her with my love in an elegant manner: Stand
there, and let me see how you can carry your self in such a business


Thus, Sir: I had my Honors from the Dancing-School. --


O damned Rogue! what a Bow's there? it is worse than a Country Counselors to a
Client that has no money. Sirrah, -- pull me your Hat off thus, -- with a
Grace: -- Ah! I could have done it rarely twenty years ago; -- but ifack Time
and Gravity defaces all things. -- Come, Sirrah. --


Madam! my Master too well knowing the Charms of your Wit and Beauty are too
sharp at all times to be opposed, has by me sent this Ring, and humbly desires
--


Well, that last Honor was pretty well: -- but come now, let us hear what you
can say


'Sdeath! he has not heard me all this while; -- what shall I do?

Oh somebody knocks; this was happy: Sir, there is somebody at door to speak
with you. --


Go see who it is, I Will follow. -- This is a plaguey dull Rogue, but I must have
patience, and take pains with him. -- Nor should he do any thing in this
business had I not a design in it; and ifack I like the Woman well; -- she is
young, and plump, free in her Nature, and of a Sanguine Complexion, and bona
fide, I never see her but some secret motions in my blood seem to imply that
she is the cause. -- What? I am not Bedrid; -- I can dance yet, ay, and run and
jump too if occasion be, and why not the the other thing? -- Come, come, -- it
must, it must; -- mine was ever a stirring Family: -- it must, I say, and she
shall know it suddenly. --


COme softly, Sir, and plant your self here at this backdoor, I have already
made a discovery


Are they together?


I believe so; they seldom miss such an opportunity, especially when they think
you absent


No; they are politic with a Pox to 'em: Sister, what revenge, ha? I am
resolved to be a Tyrant: 'Sbud I Will pinch her to death with a pair of Tongs


O fie, that will be too cruel. --


Cruel! by the Lord Harry it is Justice, -- palpable Justice! Why, should she
live, she would Cuckold the whole Nation


Consider better on it, it is but a venial Crime, and deserves not such rigor.
-- But come, -- meditate of no revenge till you are certain of the fault: --
keep close at that door, be sure you discover not your self till I come to you;
I Will go and observe


I Will try my patience; -- but it is a damned Cause. --


Our Intrigue as yet goes well.


I swear to admiration; and had I not seen each passage, I should have thought
't had been impossible. Oh my Dearest! how shall I gratify thee? My love's too
poor, and my desert too mean ever to equal it. --


I am glad I Have got air again; this damned old Gib-Cat has mewed me this half
hour into such a hole, that had I staid a minute longer I had certainly been
smothered: it stinks worse than a Pothecaries Shop, and is furnished with
nothing but Gally-pots full of nasty Oil, into which groping about I often
thrust my Fingers: -- Fough! -- Assafoetida, as I live! -- a most intolerable
stink! -- -- Ah! the Devil grind her old Chops. -- Stay; -- this is sure
Emilia's Chamber, and if I am not mistaken, I heard a whispering here; -- it
may be they are together; -- I Will be still and listen


Our love shall last whole Ages, and each Kiss add new and fierce desires:
Death shall want power to separate us, and Envy droop and pine it self away to
see its ^^^^agem succeed no better


By Heaven it is so; -- They are here: -- Blessed minute! now I shall make a rare
discovery


I am confirmed, and will proceed in loving. A Husband is a dull insipid thing,
palled and grown stale within a week: But a Lover appears still new and gay,
and is to perpetuity the same he was at first, -- all mirth, -- all pleasure


A most excellent Theme: -- Oh that that Property, that Fool her Husband, stood
now to hear this Devil of a Wife make out this free Confession! --


He, dull Creature, Heaven knows, is blind to all your Charms. Marriage acts
only the Decrees of Duty, Love has the least share in 't. In this Age a Husband
with a Wife is like a Bully in a Church; -- the only pleasure he takes is to
sleep away the hours should be employed in Conjugal Duty


Well! I am very glad our plots succeed so well: I swear I was half frighted
the other day when my Sister-in-Law Maria discovered us. Was it not done subt'ly?
Did I not fetch all off again with an excellent Invention


Good! rarely good! This Devil cannot sure have so much impudence to deny this
again


Ha, ha, ha! By Heaven I Am ready to die with laughing when I think what Asses
we made of 'em. -- Ranger too, that busy Coxcomb, -- what a fretting, and
plotting, and sweating did he make for nothing! -- Alas, poor Fool! -- Ha, ha,
ha


Ha, ha, ha!


O the Devil fleer you. -- 'Sdeath, am I still their Property? I shall have a
slice at your Nose ere long: I doubt not, my young Gallant, -- I shall dash
your Mummery. --


Come, we lose time: -- Let talk be our diversion when we are old and can reap
nothing else; our minutes now should all be spent in rapture. -- -- Thus, thus,
my Sweet! -- Oh that we could live thus ever! -- How now, what noise is that


Bawds! Strumpets! Whores! Witches! Break open the door there, break open the
door. --


Fetch a Leaver, or call the Smith over the way presently.


Oh Heaven, my Husband and Maria! we are undone.


It Is Bubble's voice sure! this compleats my joy. Now let Beelzebub, if he owes
her any kindness, fetch her from hence, I Will guard this passage


What! what shall I do, Madam?


Here quickly, run into this Closset, Sir, and jump out of the Window into the
Garden; if you were gone, let me alone for the rest


Who steps a foot this way, steps on his death; his Soul shall not be his a
minute


Ha! Ranger here? I am lost in my amazement.


Death! and Hell and I defenseless too! O cursed Minute!


No, Madam, I Will secure you from this stratagem: This Window shall be no Bawd
to the Intrigue now, that I Will be sure on. --


Quickly, quickly! a Leaver, a Leaver!


No way to escape? Can I not climb the Chimney? Any thing to get free this
once. -- Oh fate, taken in the midst of our security, when we least thought of
it! what shall we do


I have it: Come hither, get ye under this Table, and diligently listen to what
I say: It Is ten to one he never searches here. Come, in, in, quickly, and pray
the rest may prosper


I never had more need of prayers: -- I Will try. --


So! that conveyance is fast enough. Now, Madam, what think'ee of a fleering
Jest upon the Fool Ranger, the Coxcomb, the Ass Ranger, and your jolly spleen
to laugh, Ha, ha? I think the Dice are mine now: Now, Devil, I have trapt ye.
--


This Key may add to my design. --


Down, down with it, break it open there.


What think you of that, Madam? Does your Husbands voice refresh you extremely?
--


Now help me, Wit, or I am lost.

Help, help there, for Heavens sake, I am undone, ruined for ever: A Rape, a
Rape! -- Help, help! --


Hell and the Devil, what does she mean?


Ah, cruel Man, cannot these Tears prevail? will nothing stop Barbarity? what
have I done that could deserve this usage? O most unfortunate of Women


Dam her, I shall be finely caught if this hold; I must get away. --


A Rape, a Rape! Help there, for Heavens sake, help. --


By Heaven, I am snapt again, caught in my own snare.


Has my Husband been so much thy Friend, and would abuse him thus, (thou base
man?) but Heaven forgive thee


'Sbud, what is this I see? Ranger?


Ranger here, and Rashley absent: I have plotted finely. It Is plain now that
Traitor loves her, and has only made me an Engine to work his design with more
facility


Rashly gone too? Now has the Devil to spite me conveyed him away in a Mist:
Here Is like to be fine work toward; but I must stand the brunt now I am
entered. --


Now, Sir, what a Pox make you here with my Wife? Hah? --


So, it begins rarely! O this subtle Devil! Why, Sir, as I am a Gentleman, and
upon my Honor


O my Dear, a thousand thanks for this deliverance; and by all our love I
charge thee, by our Marriage-Vows, by all our Pleasures since, and Joys to
come, I charge you revenge me upon that Traitor there: -- He would have Ravished
me! -- Oh Heaven, that ever I should live to be so put to it! --


'Sbud! Ravish my Chicken? Ranger, you are the Son of a Whore, and I shall
presume to cut your Throat


Sir, do but hear me, upon my Honor all this is false. --


It must be true! what should he come hither for, but upon some ill intent? I
am resolved I Will be revenged on him however. --


'Sdeath! she against me too? this is worse and worse.


Discover the matter, that I may do Justice on both sides.


Sir, know then, -- Ranger long has loved me; often solicited me unlawfully:
-- but finding something in my Virtue that shook his designs, his recourse was
to make you jealous of me and Rashley; - who, poor man, has often told me with
sighs how deeply he has resented your unkind suspicions. --


Alas, poor Fellow!


O confusion! he begins to believe her again. --


At last, Sir, finding his suit to be too troublesome for me to bear, and being
loath to vex you with such fooleries, -- I told Rashley, who promised all
assistance imaginable: -- I desired him also to be careful, and watch lest I
should be surpised; as to night (Heaven knows) I was


Dam her, what a Lie is this! Pray, Sir, let me speak.


Not in my House, Sir, you have talked too much already; and by the Lord Harry
I Will talk with you anon: but let that pass, go on, Chicken. --


At last, Sir, this unhappy night coming hither as I used to do to my
Devotions, -- He it seems having corrupted some of my Servants, got into the
Closset, and thence came and surpised me; -- first locking the door, and
putting the Key into his Pocket


I a Key? Sir, as I live I saw none: This is the most notorious Lie --


Oh wretched man! was it not Crime enough to make such an attempt, but you must
persist in falsehood? Sir, he has it now about him there in that Pocket, I saw
him put it in


This Pocket? -- Why, thou Devil! hah! --

'Sdeath, how came it here? Magic, Witchcraft, -- the Devil and all, --
combine against me! would I were well out, -- if ever I plot again, --


It Is evident now he would have Ravished her! Locked her in for the purpose. --
Perfidious Traitor, see me no more


A very fine business this!


Is it so, Sir? I Will do your business for you. --


Discovered? I am lost again.


'Sbud, Rashley!


'Sdeath and Hell, what will become of me now?


How! Rashley under the Table? Then Fate is mine again. Now, Sir, do you
perceive any thing yet


Stranger and stranger! what can this mean? or what could they both do here?


'Sdeath! how came he here? -- Hoh! --


Ay, -- examine that point closely; sure this will make for me.


As Gad jidge me, and so I will: speak, I say, how came he here?


Nay, Heaven knows, not I; I believe for the same design with Ranger.


'Sdeath, she will betray me too.


Tell him, tell him, Sir: -- speak for your self; -- say any thing.


Speak? why, -- 'Sbud, Madam, have I not done as you commanded me? Have I not
watched here this two hours to frustrate Ranger's design? What, do you think to
make an Ass of me


How, Sir, -- my design? Dam me this must not pass upon me, Sir.


Nor you shall not pass upon my Friend here neither, Sir; I heard you this
evening when you corrupted one of the Women to get you into that Closset, that
you might accomplish with more ease, Sir. But, Madam, this is a little
unnatural, to make me suspected as his Colleague, when my design was so far
different


'Sbud I cannot find the meaning of this.


The meaning! Why, Sir, -- she hid me under the Table as a defense against
Ranger's insolence: but when she heard you at the door, and knew you were
coming in, she conjured me by all the love I bore her to sit still, and not
discover my self; -- and all her excuse was your jealousy; (Jealousy with a
Pox!) a very fine slight for the abuse she intended to me: -- 'Sdeath, Madam,
my service deserved a better reward if you consider it. -- (Pray Heaven this
Lie prosper.


Ha, ha, ha! -- I knew I should vex him; but I confess it is all true: -- For
(my poor dear Rogue!) I am so hourly tormented with fear of thy naughty
jealousy, that I dare not tell thee any thing. -- Prithee desert it, do, my
dear Sweet; -- Ifads thou would be the best Husband in the World if thou
would but leave it. --


Well! it must be so; this cannot be feigned: -- Come hither to me, -- I will
forsake it: -- By the Lord Harry thou art the best Wife in Christendom, -- and
I the most ungrateful Husband; but forgive, my Dear, forgive. --

We have all failings thou know, prithee forgive me.


So! now may I hang my self. 'Sdeath! all the Fiends are Asses to her. -- I Will
begone for shame, lest worse befall me

-- -- Succubus, Farewell; --
There is not such a Sorceress in Hell. --

Come! have thou sealed my pardon?


You know the softness of my temper; but your unkind jealousy will kill me one
day. --


Igad I Will kill my self first. Come, prithee no more. Tom, thy hand too; --
come, I know thou can bear with my frailty. --


I Sir, I can bear well enough! but me thought 'twas a little strange to tax me.


Come, come, all shall be well; -- Faith, we'll go in and frolic. Oh my Dear,
suspect thee; -- Well, I am a Fool, that is the truth on it. --


The Devil helps her sure; for this was certainly an Assignation: I Will after
Ranger and know the truth on it


Ha, ha, ha! -- Was ever plot carried thus? Sure never! Her Wit has more
supplies than I have thoughts, and happily they end still; and Gad for my own
part I shall love lying the better as long as I live for the success of this --
Once more all is well, and he the Cuckold still, Ha, ha, ha! I must go in and
laugh with her

Intrigue's her Masterpiece; and all may see,
A Woman's Wit's best in extremity. --

Well, of all Creatures that vex Mortality, a superannuated Lover is certainly
the most troublesome, especially to one of my years: our inequality is so
preposterous, and his address so unnatural, that I always entertain rather hate
for his person, than compliance for his love: From Fourscore and five, Heaven
deliver me; it is an Age of doting. -- Here he comes, I knew I could not be
quiet one hour


Sirrah, Sirrah! Rogue, Rogue! and how and how! Hah! art thou jolly, blithe,
like a Bird in a Tree? Ifack I was impatient till I came to see thee: well, and
how sits the Ring? does it shine? does it glitter? Hah, little black Rogue! --
Ifack I bought it of the best Goldsmith in Cheapside, a Man of good Reputation;
A Cuckold too, and they are always the honestest Fellows. --


From henceforth let me desire you, Sir, to bestow your presents on some body
else: -- I sent your Ring back by your Man, he can best give you an account of
it. --


Hah! -- what say thou? Counterfeit? Ifack thou art mistaken, Bird; -- thou
art, bona fide, they are as well cut as any in Christendom, and of the right
Black-water: What, do thou think I Will put any false Stones upon thee ifack?
-- I am more civil, Ieod, there I was waggish; -- But she is a witty Rogue,
she will apprehend the jest


Was ever such an insipid piece of Antiquity? Pray, Sir, forbear these
impertinences, and assure your self I hate an old Fellow for a Husband, as much
as an old Gown, or an old piece of Wit, that after forty years Oblivion, with a
new name, is published for a new Lenten Play. --


What does she say now? But no matter, I Will go on. Well said, Bird, well said:
Bona fide, thou have Wit in abundance; that Color, and such a sort of Nose,
never fail. But come, we lose time, I know it is ordained I must marry thee: I
am the Man that must gather the Rosebuds. -- Ah Rogue! -- I Will warrant you are
a swinger, and Ifack that black a top there fires me strangely, I am all flame,
and bona fide, me thinks as youthful and Mercurial as any Spark of 'em all. ANd
he took her by the middle small
And laid her on the Plain;
With a hey down derry down, come diddle,
With a ho down derry, etc.


What think you, Madam? am I old?


So old, that your presence is more terrible than a Deaths-Head at Supper: for
my part I tremble all over. There Is a kind of horror in all your antic
gestures; 'specially those that you think become you, -- that fright worse than
the Devil; than the Devil, Sir. --


The Devil! what of him, Bird? Pish, the Devil's an Ass, I have seen't in a
Play; -- and ifack we lose time in talking about so worthless a matter. Lovers
should never be slow in their affairs: -- For, as my good Friend Randolph tells
me, Nothing is like opportunity taken in the nick; in the nick, Sweetheart! --
Icod, I was waggish again, I was waggish again ifack. -- Come, Bird, come


What will you do, Sir? Heaven, how he tortures me!


Come along then; -- I have got a Priest ready, and paid for the License and
all: -- Prithee let me kiss thee; I long to practice something that might
please thee: Never was man so altered! never! Come, prithee Bird, -- come,
ifack I have not patience


Here Is Sir Roger Petulant! my dear Mouse desires to speak a word or two with
you


Oh here is some hope of deliverance! Sir Roger, your humble Servant. Come
hither, Lettice, and stand just in my place: I am so tortured with this old
Fellow, -- prithee be kind to him, and follow him whither he would have thee; it
may be a Husband in thy way, and a good Estate


A Husband! marry that is fine! I warrant you, sweet Mouse, I*ll be very
punctual


So, now let us slip aside and observe; 'twould be an excellent revenge if he
should marry her. -- He Is coming to her already, and his eyes are so old and
dim that he perceives not his mistake


Delays, Sweetheart, are dangerous ifack; I have considered it: The time I
have lived in the World has given me the benefit of knowing more than another
of fewer minutes. -- Along, along, -- I say, thou shall be my Queen, my
Paramour, my Cleopatra, -- and I will live another Age in Love, and then
farewell old Simon ifack. Come, come along


Oh sadness! what happy fortune's this? Well, I Will go with him, pray Heaven he
be blind enough, that is all I fear


She seems kinder than usual; -- ifack I have wrought her finely. Come, poor
Rogue, come. --


I am ready, Sir; -- this was a happy hour;
And if it hit but right, I Am made for ever. --

Ha, ha, I am glad I am rid of him any way: but now, Sir Roger, to your
business. -- I hear your Nephew is sick


In verity, Madam, most dangerously sick, and the cause of my giving you this
trouble was in verity to give you information of it; for by his melancholy I
find love is the cause. Ah, Madam, your last indifference was very prejudicial
to him: It Is true, he denies it; -- but I am old enough to judge of the
contrary, and therefore have found out it is Passion, nay Passion for you has
laid him thus low, and nothing but your smiles can raise him, it is gone so far
in verity. --


I am sorry, Sir, I have the misfortune to be the occasion of such a disaster:
-- but is there any remedy? what would you have me do


Madam, my suit to you is, that you would be pleased to go with me and give him
a visit; the surprise of your presence I am confident will dissipate his
melancholy, and perhaps totally banish his distemper

But I see we are interrupted; let us retire, Madam, and if you please now will
be a very good time to visit him


Softly, Sir, I would not have my Cozen Maria know any thing of it; but if that
can do him any good, I Will not be so cruel to deny it, -- it is an act of
charity. -- Come, Sir, I Will go with you


Madam, you oblige us both --


Still baffled! sure this cannot last long; the Devil will be weary of obliging
her in a little time. I have been yonder sifting Ranger about the last plot,
and by all circumstances find what he said was true, and shall I leave off thus
poorly? Pish, I cannot for shame: -- I have Truth and Honesty on my side; --
she is only cunning, and it is impossible that should last ever. -- Once more
then have at 'em: -- I have by several false messages buz'd it again into my
Brothers ears; he believes, and will once more follow my counsel: besides, I
have here a false Key to her Chamber, and can surprise 'em when they least
suspect: this, if Ranger be at all diligent, must needs effect it; -- for I am
resolved not to rest till it is done, for the satisfaction of my revenge on that
false man. --


Uh! Uh!


Nay, Sir, if you would have the effects answer your expectation, you must
suffer, Sir, and be patient


'Ounds! I cannot have patience: -- Sure a civil Clap might be cured without
all this stir. It Is not a Miracle in this age. -- Oh Lord


O horrible! what is this I see?


My Uncle! Oh I am undone, lost for ever.


But, Sir, your civil Clap might have been an uncivil Pox in time.


How, Sir Roger? was it fit to make me Spectator of this object?


The Pox? In verity I have brought his Mistress to fine purpose: Ah damned
Rascal! The Pox? what shall I do? I am disgraced for ever. --


Hark ye, Sir, pray what is that there?


What shall I say? (Death, she has found out his Sweating-Chair!) Why, Madam,
it is -- umph -- it is a Mathematical Engine they use at Cambridge. -- Cob was
always addicted to study


'Twere a fault to hinder him then, Sir, being so well employed. -- Farewell. --


She has found it out. -- Sirrah, see my face no more: from this hour I abhor
thee, a damned Rascal


Good Uncle! --


The Pox! A sneaking, sniveling Rogue! Heavens, was ever the like seen? -- But
it is now a general Maxim, and your Sandy, Sheeps-face, unthinking Villain, is
always the greatest Whoremaster


Why, by Ierico, it was by chance, Uncle; Hab-nab as a man may say: As I hope
to be saved 'twas against my will


Sir, your anger makes an addition to his distemper.


What, you are his Pandar, Sir, are you? but I think you may be the Devil for
your honesty; -- so may ye all; -- such as you sooth 'em in Vices; -- I warrant
you are tired with such Customers, -- Ha, Sir, -- are you not


In troth, Sir, my rotten Patients are so loath to die, and my sound ones,
which for my Arts improvement I would make rotten, -- so hasty to recover, that
I confess I am often weary, but not tired, Sir


So, Sir, in verity you are all a company of Rascals; -- and as for his part,
I Will instantly write to his Father to disinherit him, that I may revenge my
disgrace, and punish his folly. -- The Pox! a Son of a Whore! the Pox


A mad old Fellow, but your penitence will recover all.


Would you were hanged, by Ierico, for leaving the door open. -- Oh what shall
I do? This comes of learning the Sciences in the Devils name. --


Patience, Sir, have patience. --


A Trap-door, say you, Madam?


Yes, we happily discovered it yesterday looking for a Ring accidentally dropped;
-- it opens upon the Stairs the backside of the Kitchen; -- I am sure 'twill be
very necessary in our Intrigue: -- Here, take the Candle you, and go and watch;
-- and when I give the sign, be sure be ready


I Will not fail, Madam.


It Is good to be secure, for I know Maria has still an eye over us, and my
Husbands new jealousy gives me fresh cause of doubt. --


Igad, it is unnecessary: -- This Trap-door must needs be very useful; -- I see
Fortune is ours still, and will not leave us. -- Let us doubt when we see
danger; there is none now, nor can be whilst our love continues. --


Which I fear will be but a short time: for what is indirect is seldom
permanent; therefore let us consider on it


Dam Consideration; It Is a worse Enemy to Mankind than Malice: Let impotent Age
consider, that is fit for nothing but dull tame thoughts of what he has been
formerly: Let the Lawyer and Physician consider, what Quibbles, and what
Potions are most necessary: And let the fly Phanatick think his time out, and
consider how to be securely factious: But let the Lover love on, still
transported, whilst all his thoughts and senses are employed in the dear Joys
of rapture, endless passion, without a grain of dull Consideration


I swear the softness of our Tempers abuses half our Sex, we should not else be
won so easily: -- But we are such kind Fools


Ay, we are all Fools, Madam, that is the truth on it; but how shall we help it?


Resolve upon a remedy; -- Love no more. --


Resolve upon the contrary; Love for ever: Gad the World would be at a fine
pass if all were of your mind. How now


Stand there till I fetch you in; I Am sure they are here.


My Sister as I live! Malicious accident!


Hah, -- with a Light too! How the Devil got she in?


Heaven knows, unless with a false Key.


Nay, You Are caught, and finely too, I Am cozened else. What plot now, Madam, to
convey you hence? -- Now show your mighty skill; and if there is a Devil at
your service employ him now, you never had more cause. -- Me thinks you are
melancholy, why do you not laugh? smile at your Wit and great security? You, I
know, have a thousand ways to get off still; or if you want, that Gentleman can
supply you


I supply! A plague of your damned jest!


Hush, -- and leave me to her. -- Nay, Sister, this is barbarous to triumph
over our misfortunes; You know your self what Love is, and what inconveniences
it brings poor Women too


You can confess now; -- and here is a Gentleman not far off, -- your Husband,
Madam; I know this cannot choose but be grateful to him, I Will call him to hear
it


Ah, be not so cruel to undo me quite! -- I Will confess all to thee, and from
this minute be converted. -- Ah, had I taken thy counsel before I had been
happy


Ay; -- but you would persist, and now see what comes on it.


Oh! I am miserable! Forgive me, dear Maria!


Nay, Heaven forgive you: -- but come, will you confess? I have her at a rare
advantage. --


Most faithfully; -- but let me do it in the dark; -- let no light see my guilty
blushes; -- it is enough my tongue dares utter it: -- Dear Sister, let me not
be too much ashamed: -- Oh misery! misery! --


Well, here is a Light not far off, and thus much I Will comply with you. -- Now
begin. --


By Heaven I grow cheerful; -- we shall 'scape, I am sure, we shall. -- Oh this
dear Devil! --


My grief ties up my tongue. --


It Is time to grieve: But come, when do you begin?


This cruel man seduced me: Cruel Rashley. -- Where are you, Sir?


Here, Sweet, here! --


First won upon me with his comely presence, hansom demeanor: -- every several
Grace my Soul admired -- Give me your hand. --

But when he came to speak, his Tongue, his Charming Tongue, Oh Heaven, that I
shall live to utter it! so ensnared me, that I no longer knew my liberty, --
but as his Victim gloried in my passion. --


With shame you live to speak it.


'Twas my misfortune too: -- but Heaven forgive me, I shall laugh out, -- I am
not able to hold. --


Down, quickly down. --


Now could I laugh till my heart ak'd again to think how I have caught 'em. -- I
knew 'twas impossible she should 'scape always, -- and I will tyrannize more
than a Turk over his Slave: -- For my part I am sorry for your infamy, and were
it not that by the Laws of Nature I have a great concern in any of my Brothers
injuries, you might love on for me; but since my Blood runs in his Veins, I
dare not see his infamy and let it pass unquestioned: Therefore either swear
from this hour to desert Rashley, and never see him more; or your disgrace I
will this instant publish, or call your Husband to be Spectator of his shame
and yours. -- What, are ye dumb? Not answer me! It seems you dislike this
Proposal; but do not provoke me. -- Not yet? Nay then -- within there? --
Brother, -- here they are, a light, a light, -- quickly


Where? where is this Traitor? this Strumpet? by Scanderbeg, -- I am ready for
a Charge: I Will push him with a Vengeance; -- Where is he


Here, here! How now? What, are you got under the Table again? or into a corner?
-- Give me the Candle, Brother, -- I am sure have em fast. --


Here Is nothing; another mistake, as Gad jidge me.


She is a Devil, and I lose my labor. Gone! what both gone? Oh I could tear my
self: Which way? -- How! by what means could they escape


'Scape? -- 'Sbud! it is impossible they should escape if they were here. --
Pish, -- this is only one of your Maggots, Sister, you do but fancy you saw
'em. --


Fancy? -- Eternal Light forsake me, if I did not both see and speak to 'em two
minutes since; heard her confess the Crime, and vow repentance; here, in this
very place: but by what means they 'scapt, I only can admire, not imagine. --


Prithee hold thy peace; I say once more it is only a Maggot: -- Sleep, Fool,
and purge thy head from fancies. How now, Ned


Sir, I know not whether the News I bring may please you; but I have made a
strange discovery yonder


Discovery! of what prithee? --


Sir, I saw Rashley and your Wife -- going laughing Arm in Arm through the
Entry -- the Backside of the Kitchen into the Parlour, -- where, if you please
to give your self the trouble, you may find 'em. --


This is as my Mistress suspected, and I Will inform her immediately.


Hey day! My Wife and Rashley? Art sure on it, Ned?


As sure, Sir, as I live, I saw 'em there: -- nay, what is more, my curiosity
inducing me to peep through the Keyhole, I saw his Head lie in her Lap, --
whilst she with a fond passion strok'd his Cheeks, and dalli'd with his Hair:
Faith, Sir, I could not see this and be silent; but you I fear will think the
worse of me for it. --


In the Parlour, say thou? 'Sbud, was ever such a confusion? Why, my Sister
says that within these two minutes she saw and spoke to 'em here in this
Chamber. They are here, and there, and every where, and yet I can find 'em no
where; what a Pox should a man think of this


They are there this instant, Sir, upon my Honor.


Sure, I have not dreamt all this while! Did I not see here ^^ by Heaven I saw
the Devil in her likeness then


Why, peace, I say, -- if you are mad, offend no one but your self with it. --
What a Pox shall I not believe my eyes? The House is not haunted that I know
of, unless it be with Fools: -- There Is a Bob for you by way of Conclusion


Yes, Cuckolds too! There Is a Bob for you by way of Repartee.


Cuckold? -- I Would have you to know I scorn your words; -- and were you not my
Sister, I Would fetch you out with your Repartees. What, because you are a Fool,
you guess all persons are alike? -- Do you but conceive me, Mrs. Juniper? I am
a Turk at matter of fact when I see occasion. --


Good Sir, -- no more of this, -- but go down and satisfy your self in the
truth of my Story: -- if I tell you a Lie, call me Fool, -- Horse, -- any
thing, -- do but go and see


'Sbud, I know not what to do: One brings me up, another carries me down; one
jilts me, another abuses me; a third laughs at me; -- and yet I find nothing,
nor see nothing, -- nor know nothing, -- and you are nothing but Fools to make
all this stir about nothing. But come, I Will go with thee, Ned


And I, that I may say once in my life I saw a Miracle.


I have her once more in the Noose of the slip; now the Devil hold her fast in
the other World: -- It Is above mortal power! Come, Sir. --


HEre, here, quickly take my Nightgown, and put it on, you are sure they are
coming


Very sure, Madam; -- I stood at the door and heard all.


What must I do, Sweet? -- Prithee do not let us be surpised again.


Uncase, uncase, Sir; -- and let your Man represent you as Betty does me:
Jeremy, be sure you play your part well, and Court her to the life. --


Do You hear, Sirrah!


I Will warrant you, Sir. Come, Mrs. Betty.


Stay, a word more in thy ear: -- I see this Fellow is but a Blockhead, and
therefore am afraid of trusting him too far: -- Keep him as ignorant of our
Intrigue as thou can; and if my Husband ask where I am, tell him I am gone to
visit my Lady Courtly: -- I Will be in my Chamber; -- and when they are all gone,
bring me word what Ranger and Maria are doing


Yes, Madam, I Will be very careful.


I will reward thy care, my pretty little --


Hark! I hear 'em coming; -- now to your postures. --


Now, Mrs. Betty, we having so fit an occasion, let us make Love in some
Heroic Vein


No, I am for the plain-dealing way. --


Pish! to others a great deal better, as thus:

Your Eyes with so bright Charms are decked about,
That I could kiss 'em till I kissed 'em out.

Oh I hate that; -- I vow it is very silly.


There, there, Sir; -- Do You see 'em now? will you believe next time?


O dismal Object! -- I am a Cuckold then.


This is miraculous; how was it possible they could get hither? But I am glad
they are here however


Now for a good full blow at his head before he sees me: it is a Cuckolds way of
revenge I Am sure; Have at him! --


Oh Lord, what mean you, Sir, what mean you?


Traitor! Rogue! Rascal! I Will -- Hah, Jeremy?


Ay, Sir, it is I, poor Jeremy, Sir.


And Betty in her Mistrisses Nightgown. --


Their old Friend the Devil has fetched 'em away again.


What make you here in their Night-Gowns?


Only, Sir, through an ambition to make Love as Gentilely as we could.


Go, go, and find your Mistress out, and tell her, Her humble Servant and
Husband desires to speak with her. -- Look ye, Ned, you are a Fool, I see


I am so, Sir, I acknowledge it.


And you, Madam, are a little leaning that way, are ye not?


I can say nothing for my self, Sir.


Then I can say you are a Couple of Fools: Did I not tell you what all this would
come to? Ha, ha, ha! It makes me laugh to think how busy you two Asses have
been about nothing; and I am no better than a third Fool for believing you: But
from henceforth, he that speaks against my Chickens Virtue, is the Son of a
Whore; for 'Uds Bood she is the honestest Woman in Christendom, and he that
denies it, I will immediately invade him with Battle-Ax, Poinard and Pistol


She is a very Saint, Sir.


A very Devil, Sir! O Death, is there no remedy?


I Will go instantly and reconcile my self to her, with a strict Vow never to
doubt her more. -- Oh Sir Roger! welcome

Faith! I was wishing for some good Company to be Witness of my Reconcilement
to my dear Chicken. You are melancholy, Sir, -- I heard your Nephew was sick, I
suppose that is the cause


If he has heard of what, I am disgraced for ever.


Come, Sir, cheer up, cheer up, he will be well again, doubt not.


I hope so, Sir. Madam, this Generous Act of concealing the infamy of our
Family, has so wrought upon me, that if I could requite --


No more, Sir: -- Your Nephews forbearance is all I desire: You are sensible
now that I have some reason to request that


I am, Madam, and am extremely bound to your Generosity; and Gad I have another
Nephew whom I Will make better by 200 l. a year to make you amends. -- Well, Mr.
Bubble, I am glad to come at so good a time, when mirth is going forward: you
are a merry man, Sir, -- and in verity I like your company


And I yours, Sir Roger; -- for I am very merry for some private reason best
known to my self: -- We'll toss a Bumper about by and by, Faith


An old Cronee, a Sorceress; -- What ifack, and in the Devils Name, am I to be
popt in the mouth with Fourscore and Twelve? A Beldame, a Witch, that expects
next Winter to be turned into a Gib-Cat, -- thought fit to be yoked with me!
No, no, some wiser than some; and I Will have her know within this week that I am
as fit for Two and Twenty, as Two and Twenty is for me: -- In the mean time
avaunt Iezabel, -- I like thee not, Icod; thou have no black of Top, ifack,
thou art not for my turn


What, old Signior Fumble? what is the matter, Man?


Yes marry am I, Sir, and chows'd damnably too, and some shall know it when I
can find 'em


He Is groping for his Spectacles; now I expect to be rated.


Ah, -- are you there, Rogue, are you there! Why, you very Wag, would you offer
to serve me so? But hang thee, you are a Rogue, and come ifack though 'twas a
Knavish Trick, I am pleased with the Wit on it: -- Give me thy hand, and come
and kiss me, and all shall be well again. --


Upon condition you never trouble me more, -- there it is. --


Icod, she has a pretty Touch with her, she has ifack; I forgive thee with all
my heart. -- Well, old Woman, depart in peace; old Woman, I say, depart, and
trouble me no more: -- I am busy, and cannot dispense with the Fopperies of
Age now


Well, this comes of eating Sweet-meets when I was young: He had never found
out the trick, if my want of Teeth had not discovered me


Ha, ha! -- Here had like to have been fine sport in faith: -- but would I knew
where my Wife is, that we might all go and address, now I am in this good
humor


Sir, just as I came in, I saw her go up into her Chamber.


Did thou? I am glad on it in faith: Come, let us all go.


Sir, I cannot find her; but I heard her say about an hour since, she intended
to go and visit my Lady Courtly


No, no; -- I know where she is now: -- Poor Creature! I warrant she sits so
melancholy above now. -- Well, -- I dare proudly say I have the best Wife in
Christendom: for in faith I have been very jealous of her, but I was wrought
upon, -- when of my Conscience the innocent Wretch would not hurt a Worm: -- *
But come, we'll all go to her, and be sure, Sir Roger, you plead for me; -- in
troth my heart aches to think how I have used her


I must prevent their going up, or we are undone.


Whither are you running? I have some business with you.


Good Madam* I Will wait on you immediately.


Ye shall not stir till I have spoke to you: -- Here must be something in this
I find by her eagerness to be gone


Well, Mr. Bubble, -- in verity I Will do my best in your behalf; my Tongue is at
your service at any time


Sir Roger, you will oblige me in it. -- She is the most innocent, sweetest, and
most virtuous Person in the whole World, and I shall never be able to make her
amends. -- Come, let us go


Now will I see how she behaves her self, and wonder at the prosperous
Impudence Hell has endowed her with, though it lies not in my power to repel it


Now I think better on it, I Will defer my business till another time: -- You may
go where you please


This cunning Devil has undone 'em; -- nor lies it now in my power to hinder
it. -- Oh I could Curse --


THe Plague of living with such a Husband you must imagine is very disagreeable
to my Temper; -- and were it not for the happy hours I have the good fortune to
enjoy in thy society, my Life would be wholly uncomfortable: -- But, my Dear,
thou will forget me, one day I shall grow cheap to thee, shall I not


No, never, -- never, my Sweet! -- Thou have more Charms each hour added to
thee, rather than one diminisht. -- Forget thee! I sooner shall forget to feed
my self, or that the Sun ere shone in midst of Summer, than thy more precious
Favors. Thou bring'st each hour new Sweets, and every minute a thousand
thousand Graces throng about thee, my Dear, -- Dear, Charming, Sweet, --
Precious! --


Softly, softly, Sir Roger: Poor Soul, -- I warrant she is at Prayers. -- Hah!
what is this I see? -- Gad jidge me --


By Heaven, they are here a Kissing! -- Oh happy minute!


Ah, who could have the heart to leave thy Blisses for such a Fool, such a
Beast, such a dull, sordid, filthy, insipid Creature as my Husband


How Is that? Oh Devil!


I am smothered with thy Charms; Oh for some Air! Hah! -- Oh horror, cursed
minute! taken thus


My Husband! Nay then I am lost for ever. --


Ah cursed Creature! is this thy Virtue? -- But I Will --


Hold, Sir, in verity that must not be; No Swords against Women in my Company.


Then here let my Vengeance light. Traitor! have I obliged thee so often for
this? -- Have at thee


Your pardon, Sir, I must hinder dishonorable proceedings; in the Field you
may do what you please


Speak, Witch, speak! what reason had thou to use me thus? Thou Limb of the
Devil, -- speak, I say


Use you thus? -- Why, -- Sir, your Rage makes you suggest strange thoughts
without cause. My kindness to Mr. Rashley was only because -- he promised to be
my Friend in urging my Reconcilement with you; -- and because I knew he was
your Friend, I therefore -- I say, because I knew you loved him, I desired him
to -- to -- I was very urgent with him -- about -- about -- No I mistake! 'twas
he was urgent with me to entreat you to do me the favor -- no -- to do him the
favor: I mean, hum -- to -- to --


Pox! what a Story's here? Oh Strumpet! Witch! --


To Cuckold him, was that it, Sister?


Madam, me thinks your speech fails you exceedingly.


All will not do; O spiteful minute! Taken thus at last? Shame ties my Tongue,
and absence is most necessary


Oh farewell in the Devil Name! Oh Horns! Horns! found a Cuckold at last! I have
spun a fair Thread, by the Lord Harry; A Cuckold at last! --


A Cuckold! Why, Sir, -- have I done any thing but by your directions? -- Why
do you suggest such things to your self? -- Well, Sir, if I have injured you* I
wear a Sword, Sir, -- and so -- Farewell. --


In verity his was a strange discovery; -- but such things* will happen --
sometimes. --


So it seems; yet this me thinks is wonderful.


Oh unfortunate Husband! Well, -- I Will go instantly and get a Divorce, and
spend the remainder of my Life in penning a Satyr against Women; -- I Will call
it, A CAUTION FOR CUCKOLDS; where I will deplorably set down my own Case, and
as a Warning-piece for rash young men, and for the benefit of my Country

Felix quem faciunt aliena Cornua Cautum.


Something is the matter now, if I could guess: But mum! I must not yet
discover my failing


Now the mighty Sophistress is overthrown!


Thank Chance for that; -- but no Wit of our own. --


Right, Madam; and by this a Man may see how unnecessary a thing it is, -- to
strive to turn the current of a Woman's fancy, when it is bent to another. It Is
a damned thing this Wenching* if a Man considers seriously on it; and yet it is
such a damnable Age we live in, that, Gad, he that does not follow it is either
accounted sordidly unnatural, or ridiculously impotent. -- Well, for my part
henceforward this shall be my Resolution

I Will Love for Interest, Court for Recreation;
Change still a Mistress to be still in fashion:
I Will aid all Women* in an Amorous League;
But from this hour never baulk a Love-Intrigue.

WEll, Gentlemen, how do you? -- Icod you sit,
As if you had no Souls, no Brains, no Wit.
What, not a word now in the Poets praise?
Hah! -- Faith, I was a Spark in my young days. --
I Clapped, and Clapped; -- nay, sometimes to my cost:
I Clapped so long, -- Gad, I (was) Clapped at last.
There I was waggish; -- You know what I mean; --
The Devil was in it, a Plaguey Yorkshire Queen. --
But it is no matter, -- 'twas but thought a Jest,
And, Gad, I was as brisk then as the best.
So I am now; for Ifack I Would have you know,
Your Old Man, though he only serve for show,
Yet give him a Young Wench with Black of Top, --
And you shall see him Frisk, and Iump, and Hop; --
Icod, and Wriggle! -- Hah! -- the old Bell will sound,
Though there is never a Clapper to be found.
But let that pass: Now your Applause disburse;
Why, -- what the Devil makes you silent thus? --
What say ye, -- The Play does not deserve it? -- Hah! --
Icod, you are mistaken: -- for I Will tell ye,
I once could Write and Judge, -- and 'Fack did do
Very strange things; -- but I Have forgot 'um now: --
But I remember what a Wag -- I was: --
I had so many Smutty Jests those days,
I could get none but Women to my Plays.
But that is all one; -- Icod, the Youth that Writ,
Does well; -- and who knows, -- may do better yet:
Therefore you should encourage him, Do You hear?
And he that fails, I wish this Curse may bear,
That he be really my Character, --
Lascivious, Deaf, and Impotent as I;
And Gad that is Plague enough, -- and so God bu'y.

