SInce there is a Dearth of Wit, and that to Play,
Is hardly worth one poor Brown George a Day;
I from the Poet, and our Friends within,
Am sent t'intreat, and your last Favors win,
E're we go hence and shall no more be seen.
For my part, --
I Will to the French Campaigne, where one may get
A certain Wholesome though a Homely Treat;
Good Oil and Cooling Sallads, though no meat:
Good Campany, good honest Lowste Currs.
There Is Honor to be got too -- Honor, Sirs;
Honor that makes the General's Voice sound loud,
And serves instead of Brandy to the Crowd.
My Spirits are revived; Methinks I hear
A Crew of Fire-fac'd Rogues embattled there,
Whose Motly Noses carry Hope and Fear:
Cry out, Fall on, we shall be Kings, Great Men,
Nay Emperors, the Devil knows how, and when.
Then Shouting all, advance they to the Siege,
And to the Plunder fall with Privilege.
Pray tell me then, is it not better far,
To live abroad when other Nations Iarr,
Then amongst our selves to make a Civil War?
Are not these Bandaliers, this Sword, this Coat,
Better than Tipstaves, or a Baily's Note?
To day we Play Great Kings, strutt, bounce and fly,
But e're next Morn the Shop's shut up -- God buy.
This by your great Unkindness is our Lot,
We share and share, it is true -- but nothing's got.
Like laboring Bees we toil for Wit, though poor,
Which you like Drones suck up, and hum for more,
But bring in nothing to the Winter-Store.
Wit is forgot; for with you Men of Miss,
Sense is unnatural as Marriage is --
Knowledge of this has made me what you see,
And if your tempers change not instantly,
Comedian Haines a man of Sword shall be.
It Is true, my Loyalty is not preserved,
But that in many has for Profit swerved;
Besides, it is better to be hanged than starved.

COme prithee leave this Melancholic humor, Franck; Don't disguise thy
temper: For if it be Love that causes it, as I shrewdly guess it is -- thou
do so richly deserve to be laughed at


I am not of your mind, Sir, but I wish you would tell me why.


Why, suppose it be for a Beautiful Woman -- a smiling Rosy Charming melting
Woman; one that kisses with Art, but uses none -- that often sighs to add more
grace to her speech; and speaks never, but to show the perfection of her Mind;
that Sings with Skill, and Prays with Zeal; And never Jilts a Man but to prove
her own Innocence. In fine, One that is indeed the Jewel among Women. Do
thou not know, O Man, O Mortal, do thou not perceive that she has all this
only for Men -- shows all her Beauties only to please Men -- ha! do thou
not know this


Not I 'faith; but I find my self very willing to be Instructed.


Well said, and 'faith thou shall be instructed to some purpose before I leave
thee


But prithee how shall I know when a Woman loves me, that does, and will not tell
it me? my greatest Ignorance lies in that


Oh -- well remembered 'faith -- why Franck -- if she loves thee, when thou art
in company with her, thou shall see her leer upon thee -- like a crafty
Shopkeeper after a fellow that has bid him money


Sir, Mr. Hylas is below, and come to visit ye.


Hylas? Is he returned to England so soon? Well, desire him to walk up.


Hylas! I believe I know him -- if it be he I mean, he is a shallow fellow, much
pleased with his own Inconstancy


You have hit him, Sir -- he now were a fitter Person to give thee a Lecture
about Women than I; he has been the most Inconstant, and the most adventurous
Fool in the Town, been abused by all sorts of Women -- and yet dares love a
fresh


A very modish Character.


I believe Mad Tom's come back with him, Monsieur Thomas as we call him here,
for they two have ever yet been Inseparable; but here he comes


Ah Jack! welcome home 'faith -- I am glad to see thee with all my heart; how
do thou, ha

'Faith, very well, the better to see my dear Val in so good a humor -- well,
and prithee how fare all our Friends, and among the rest, all the Bona Roba's
of the Age, ha? Any new faces of late worth a man's observance? Come, I know
thou art generally acquainted, and thou art sure thou can not oblige me
more, than by such a relation, what say thou


Why only this, That to thy boundless comfort, the Town's full of them; But, for
my part, thou know I want the faculty of Address -- I am no Woman's Man, Jack


How? no Woman's Man -- ye lie Val. do you hear? (and give me thy hand) I cannot
oblige thee more than to tell thee so: But hark ye, is not that Frank
Wellbred, there


The same; one that I can assure you, will be proud to be listed among your
Friends


Will he? and 'faith -- I Will do him that honor instantly. Franck, thy humble
Servant, -- 'faith -- I hardly knew thee at first -- why sure, thou art
plaguily altered, or else I am: Thou look quite another Man, than thou were
formerly


Sir -- Time blots the nearest Friends out of our Memories, And that is the
reason that makes you think I am altered: But, though I am so, I see you hold
your old humor still, You are the same. That is, as much a fool as ever.


'Faith thou art in the right, I am so, I am as mad an Inconstant Debauched Son
of a Whore as ever I was. Why what a Pox should a man do poreing, and dreaming
out his time for, when he can spend it to better advantage, I am for a short
life, and a merry, I


'Faith, I believe thee, thou art a Latitudinarian in Debauchery; and for
Hectring, Bilking, Drinking, and for Wenching, let thee alone


Ah Rogue, for Wenching let me alone, as thou say; For, if any Female scapes
me, she must be a copy of my Grandame Eve; for from Fifteen to Five and fifty,
I have tried already


Why, well said -- what an impudent damned lying Rogue is this?


But now we are talking of Debauchees -- Prithee Val, Who do thou think is
come over with me


Why, it may be, he that went with thee, the Bully of Covent Garden, Mad Tom of
Covent Garden


Why, what a Plaguey guess have thou? -- 'faith, thou art in the right, Mad Tom,
Mounsieur Thomas is returned, 'gad I believe thou art a Conjurer


No, no, I have only a small Familiar -- well -- I hope he has brought the same
Virtues home with him, that he carried out


Ah, more, Val, more -- he was but a Puny before he went, But now he is grown
Arts Master -- it is strange he has not been here; told me the first thing he
did, should be to Visit thee


I have not seen him yet, but I hear he has a Father in Town, I suppose, duty
carries him thither first


He has so; why do thou not know him? Sir Wilding Frollick his own Father to
a hair; did thou never hear his Character


No; prithee, what is it?


'Faith, a pleasant one -- why Sir, the Old Knight is three times more
debauched than he, encourages him in it, and provides him Tutors, to teach him
the Arts of Playing, Drinking, and Wenching, sent him to Travel, to learn
Experience, he had like to have dis inherited him the other day, for breaking his
assignation with -- an Old Whore, that was rotten seven years before, and was
then under the Surgeon's hands; ha, ha


A very hopeful Family.


By St. Christopher, rare Creatures! ah! ye little fleering Queen you -- Pox on
her, what an Eye she has


Brother, pray let me desire you to receive my Cousin, Sir Peregrine Goodall's
Daughter, a worthy person, and one that is pleased to give me the honor of her
Love, and Acquaintance


She shall command here as my self -- Madam, your humble Servant.


I must have a touch too -- fair Saint your most -- devoted -- ah, how it hangs
about my Lips


I hope your Father's well, Madam.


He was three days since -- I have his Letter for ye, will give you full
satisfaction


This Favor makes me much his Debtor. Peregreene mean by all these Ceremonies,
he desires you may lodge here with my Sister, till he comes to Town; and does
it here with so many reiterated expressions of Obligations received, that it
far exceeds the poorness of the courtesy -- I thought he had known, Madam,
that his Commands, rather than Entreaties, had been honors to me -- Sister,
pray see all things provided for my Cousin, and once more welcome to my house


You Will find me a bold Guest, Sir -- but I am no stranger to your generous
temper


For my part, I am glad for my own sake, for now I shall have some Company to
go and see a Play now and then


Your Friend Val. is struck dumb, prithee speak to him, he is in a fit sure.


Hark ye Jack -- Prithee what think thou of this Lady, Is she not tight,
cleanly shaped, and well rigged, ha


Ay, ay, -- would I had her in a Sack at my Lodging, I desire no better Company.


But which of them do like best? deal faithfully.


Why 'faith, to be free with thee, I like them both best; I tell ye, I Am a right
Rover, I never bestow all my passion upon one: Woman, if there be another in
the Company; I don't hold it for good manners


Why merry be thy heart -- what now, Sirrah?


Sir, Monsieur Thomas is below, and desires to kiss your hands.


Wait on him up; so, now for the Entertainment.


Hark there, Madam, does not that Sound rejoice your heart? Monsieur Thomas,
your old Gallant -- that used to Court ye with Songs; Serenades, Masks,
Fiddles, Fa-la's, and the Devil and all, is returned from Travel, full of the
same Virtues he carried with him, and has found you out already


I know it -- for I unluckily met him, just as I was coming out of the Coach,
and he would not let me go till I told him where I was to lodge; I know I shall
be troubled with his former Impertinencies; but if I do not fit him --


Hark! he is coming up -- if you have not a mind to see him, It Is but stepping
here to this Closet, and you may, unknown to him, hear what he says


With all my heart.


Madam, will my company breed your diversion, 'faith I Am in Earnest, desire to
appear serviceable to your Ladyship


Your Wit, Sir, will be better employed another way; Come Cousin, let us go
listen to the Gentleman, no doubt, we shall find a great reformation


Why, look ye Gentlemen, this is always my damned luck, Pox on it, they will not
allow me so much as a Leere; but hush -- here comes the Monsieur


Dear Val, let me have thee in my arms, and there give me leave to tell thee,
thou art my best of Friends -- What Jack, my Noble Friend, and
fellow-Traveller, art thou here too? and my dear Franck? nay then, let us
incorporate and make one body, our hearts I know are united already -- and let
me boldly now confess I Am proud to mingle with such worth and honor


Here Is your Courtier, Gentlemen -- but prithee Friend, let us have no more of
this; Ceremony among Friends, betrays as little Love, as Jesting among 'em --
thou know I love thee


'Faith, I believe thou do -- Well Gentlemen, what news then, You that live
here in this free thriving Climate, I Am sure you can never want that


I hear, the King of Poland has received a considerable loss in a Pitched
Battle -- but new Succors lately coming in, it is thought he will adventure
once more


The Grand Signior, they say, is sick too.


Is he? why, let him be damned too -- prithee, what a Devil have thou and I to
do with the Grand Signior, or with the King of Poland's fighting. Why
Gentlemen, you mistake me; when I spoke of News, I did not mean what Accidents,
or what Battles have been fought; but what Wine, what merry Songs, what good
Company, what Women are abroad? there lies my Province; The Other is fitter for a
Grocer, and stinks so of a Coffee-house I hate it


Mad Tom still I see -- hark ye, Jack Hylas there can help thee to Twenty
Women, he is one of their Counsel


I saw two not long ago that --


Hush -- Pox on thee thou will discover all -- but my dear mad Rogue, prithee,
what exploits have thou performed since thou have been absent -- I Am sure that
story must needs be divertive -- come, impart


Not In Faith, I have more modesty than to speak things so much in my own
praise, I thank ye-but if thou knew'st all Val -- Could I but infuse into thee,
the Intrigues, the Rambles, the Serenades, the Quarrels -- and the punishment
attending 'em, which most valiantly -- and 'faith I think much like a
Gentleman, I have undergone, and attempted, 'twere enough to put thee into a
Fever; therefore, in pity to thee I Will desist


Nay, prithee, if thou do not care to speak it thy self, Let thy Man relate
it for thee


My Man -- why he is the dullest Rogue in the World; We shall have it from him,
in a Gallamafry of Languages; prithee observe him, See, how he looks, he is the
most Impudent, and withal, the most Ignorant Son of a Whore, that ever I met
with. A pox on him, he sticks on me like a Burr, not to be shaken off


Vat is dis -- Vat is de Matra dat they stare upon me, Begar, he be telling
some dam Lie now


Come, prithee, let us hear it from him however, It must needs be very divertive.


Well, for your sake, I Will try him -- You shall hear one of my last Frollicks
at Paris. -- Come Sirrah, you sneaking Dog, advance before me, put your face in
a Posture, And then tell it


Yes, -- with all my heart -- Serviteur Gentlemen.


Come, Sirrah, begin.


Vell, Vell -- presantly, presantly -- hum -- but what must me tell -- it is
requisite I should know dat


Sirrah, Declare, and with rhetoric, tropes, figures, and such like; for if
you pronounce it in your every days language, I will make your face plainer by
a Nose, Rascal -- I say, Declare to my Friends here my last Frollick at Paris


Oh -- de Frollick at Par^^ -- well -- now I know what to tell, Let me alone --
hum -- Gentlemen, the Noble Monsieur my Matra here, going out of his Lodging
one Moonshine Night, with intent to diverta himself, with the various Object,
he very fortunately met in the Street -- Who was it you met in the Street --
Jernie I have forgot that


A Whore, ye Dog; who should a man meet at that time of Night; I told ye what a
dull Rogue he was


A Whore; right, a Whore -- my Membra be a little short, but that is all one --
Vel, dis Whore give him the Jogg -- as the damned Bitch did to me here in
Covent Garden -- the other Night. He, as a well-bred Gentleman should -- follows
her, and to say truth, the Woman had a great many divertive, Inscrutable,
unintelligable, abominable, Intrinsickable postures with her


What, what is that, Sirrah -- Inscrutable, Intrinsickable; bless me, what
stuff's this ye Dog


Vat is it -- why do you not know -- why, it is Rhetoric as you bid me speak;
Jernie -- you do not know tropes, and figure, when you hear 'em


What think you now -- was there ever such an Insipid Rogue-? you will speak
more to the purpose, Rascal, will you not


Prithee speak it in another language, or in English, if thou can, that we
may understand the better


Speak it in an odra Language?


Ay, Plainer, in English.


Why, so I can Sir, as plain as you if you go to that. Whoo, what a Pox, dee
think I cannot speak English


Why, ye Impertinent Dog, must I be played with all this while, speak quickly,
or I will so --


Well, well, Lord you are very Choleric; so as I was saying Gentlemen, my
Master going along with this Gentlewoman --


This Gentlewoman -- what Gentlewoman --? this Whore -- Rogue, this Whore --
Sirrah, let me have no corruption of Notions -- But speak every thing in its
Nature -- by this Light, Gentlemen, a scurvy Suburb Whore, that smelt of
nothing but Tobacco, and Brandy


Well, to be short, going farther, we met a Company of fellows attended by a
blind Harper, and a Taber and Pipe, they were bringing along 3 or 4 Bears that
were the next day to be baited, my Master presently bargains with 'em for a
Pistol to carry this Gentlewoman -- this Whore I mean, in triumph home to her
Lodging upon one of the Bears, ha, ha -- she was easily persuaded; for the
truth is, she was a little too Maudlin to be refractory; my Office was to be
Marshal, to keep the Boys from throwing Eggs, and Tirnups, and he was the
Orator to declare her quality -- and Virtues -- but had you seen the Rabble
shouting, the noise that the blind Harper, and Taber and Pipe made, my Master
bawling, the Whore singing, and I quarelling among the Boys, you would have
blessed your self. Hark ye Sir, shall I tell now how you were beaten, and thrown
into a Ditch coming home too


Ha! what is that, thrown into a Ditch?


Ay, ay -- a saucy fellow. I threw him into a Ditch, for taking the Wall of me
-- Sirrah, not a word more of that, as you expect to eat again --


Mum, I have done -- O Lord, not eat again?


Dee hear this Cousin? here is your reformed Gentleman.


He has Traveled to fine purpose, if this be all he has learnt; I Am glad I Have
heard this, I might have been mistaken else


Sirrah, go you instantly to my Father, and tell him I Am returned, And sift his
Inclination handsomely, that I may know whether his old humor hold, or no;
away, by that time you have prepared him a little, I ll come, and prosecute; I
must have a trick upon him, or I shall get no money


I am gone Sir -- his Father if he be not changed since I saw him last, is ten
times madder than he; it is a strange World this! in a Young Man it is Natural,
but that an Old Fellow should be so debauched -- mercy on us, how can he hope
to be saved?


Well Gentlemen, what think you of my Frollick?


'Faith, 'twas very extravagant, yet gave occasion for Mirth enough.


Ah, I have a thousand of 'em, and as many Mistresses to play upon; but now I
talk of Mistresses, I thought I should have seen one of 'em here before now, my
Old Love, Val. Madam Cellide, I met her yesterday, and she told me, she was to
lodge here


She will not be long from hence, Sir.


They have my name in question, and I Will hear what he says of me a little
nearer


I have the honor to have some little knowledge of her; But prithee Tom, how
has she entertained thee since thy return? for I remember you were always
quarrelling together formerly


Ay, that is true, but let me tell you Friend, the case is altered now; Why,
though we were fallen out, and I have not seen her these six Months, yet I
prevailed with her yesterday to go to the Tavern with me


How, to the Tavern?


Heaven! what a ly's this! was ever such Impudence!


Hush, hear more.


To the Tavern? Ay, to the Tavern -- and 'faith, between you and I, took off
her Bumper as roundly and heartily as one of us could; And believe me, I had a
great deal of Joy to see it


Ha, ha, ha -- why then I see she could dispense with her Modesty, to give
compliance to your Love


Modesty, what is that, prithee?


Why a Virtue that is as necessary for young Ladies as their Beauty.


Is it, well, I thank Fortune, and her Education, she understands nothing of it
-- No, no, she is all free and charming -- ah! had thou but seen her Eyes
sparkling, her Breast panting, her Sighs flowing, her Body trembling, and her
Arms twining about me -- Ah Rogue -- what a Pox, that is not she I hope!


By my faith it is, now I think on it, the very she, the same Obliging, Loving,
Flexible Creature you spoke of


Umph -- I am in a fine Condition.


Impudent Detractor! how dare you blast a Ladies Reputation thus! I at the
Tavern? I Kiss ye, and Clasp ye in my Arms? No, I Would sooner do it to my Footman;
and were I not certain that these Gentlemen know me better, than to believe a
word thou have said, I would not sleep, till I were revenged


So, -- will the Devil never leave these tricks?


It seems, it is now your custom to abuse Ladies, but let me tell ye Sir, and
with an anger just, and warranted, I am none of those easy Creatures that will
suffer such affronts, My Education and Modesty are both proofs against that, I
assure ye


She carries it well -- but if he knew how well she loved him, We should have
better sport


Why, Hang me, Madam, if I meant any hurt, It Is only a damned way of expressing
my self, which I have got


Curse on your debauched Phrases -- must my defamation be your way to express
your self, you Impudent, base fellow


Why faith, the truth is, I am a very Impudent fellow, This debauched World
leads us all astray


This was certainly a very new way of Courtship, or could you Imagine I would
be taken with the Wit on it, when I should happen to hear your Character of me?
whatever you think, I know my own mind, and it is a question, whether any of
your future services will ever be strong enough to blot this affront out of my
memory.


Bounce -- there goes the Cannon -- ha, ha -- She was in a plaguey heat
Gentlemen, ha, was she not


It seems so -- but what a damned lying Rogue art thou, To say thou had her
at a Tavern


Ay, and that she kissed him -- and claspt him in her Arms, and drank a Bumper
to his health at her first coming in


'Twas well she came in, and hindered ye before you could go further, Certainly
you must needs have been foundered, else your lie would have been discovered


No 'faith, all on it was no lie -- but I must confess to you, under the Rose
here, I did stretch a little, as a good teller of a Story should; -- for a man
can no more tell a good Story; without enlarging upon his Jest -- than a Poet
can make a good Play, without enlarging upon his Plot


Nay, let thee alone to bring it off, be it what it will; But come, if thou will go in with me, I Will give thee thy Welcome to Town


No, I have business elsewhere; Nor must this angry Beauty sleep in her
displeasure -- but first to my Father -- and whatever you hear of my Actions,
Gentlemen, Not a word of my Humor; for though to you I appear a Mad, Wild,
Monsieur; To him I must be Ananias -- Walk thus -- Look thus -- Spit thus -- I
have a Plot in it, and you will find it your diversion, if you think it worth your
patience; for the present, Adieu


Farewell Wild Oats.


Now to my Sober Look; thus often we see, The Plodding Fool's the greatest
Debauchee.


SIrrah, no more of your French shruggs, I advise you. If you are Lousy, shift
your self


Loosie -- Vat a diable -- me Loosie -- why Monsieur -- do you understand who
you speak too -- me Loosie? Jernie, that is fine indeed


Let me have no more of your French Grimaces, Rogue, But fetch your Master,
your Master, and my Son, body of me Sir, No money, No more money, Monsieur
Lance, not a deneer Sweet, Signior, but bring me instantly my Boy, my mad Tom,
Monsieur Thomas, or get you gone again; Du gat a Whee Sir, Basa mi cu, good
Lancelot, Valetote, my Boy, or Nothing


Why so you shall, Sir -- but you won'not hear me, because you speak all your
self -- what a damned dull Old fellow this is


Why then Sirrah be facetious, and speak quickly, and do not mop, nor mow, nor
draw your mouth into a damned Posture; Sirrah, I hate all postures; I say be
facetious, and quick


Jernie, why so I will be facetious and quick, if you would holda your Tongue;
begar Monsieur, you have the most Eternal Clack -- You will let no body speaka
but your self


Be brief Rogue, be brief.


Why then -- because your Worships Vulgar Judgment shall meeta me at the
nearest -- Your Son, my Matra, or Mounsieur Thomas, is at last arrived to ask
your (as the worthy French man call it) Benediction de jour en jour


Sirrah, do not conjure me with your French Furies.


Che dit a vou, Monsieur.


Che doga vou rascal, leave your damned rotten language, and tell me plainly
where your Master is, and why he does not come -- or -- shall I crack your
French Crown? Sirrah -- I have maintained you and your Monsieur these two years
at your Ditty vous, your Iours, Jour me no more; for not another penny shall
pass my purse till Thomas comes himself; then, if I find him profited, the
Wild, the Wanton, the Mad Tom I wish him -- he shall not want the means, whilst
I have any; do not answer me, unless in English, Sirrah


English -- Well, and so I will, and let me tell ye, that 'faith he will fit you
to a hair -- Sir, he was the most debauched Fellow in Paris when he was there
such Rearing, such Revelling, such Serenading, and such Whoring; Oh he is a fine
man


Why this is comfort now -- there is for thy News; why now I like thee -- but
Sirrah, is he such a mad Rogue still? Is he my blood, and bones, ha


I and other Peoples blood and bones too Sir, let me tell you, that -- hark ye
Sir -- give me a Crown to make my self drunk With drinking your health to
Night, and I Will tell you -- something of him shall make you merry at heart


Will thou? by Bacchus I Will do it then -- there -- Come, I stand on thorns to
hear it, what is it, what is it


Why Sir -- he has had since we left England by Citizens Wives, and their
Daughters, private Ladies, and Night Adventurers -- Another half Crown Sir --
or I cannot in conscience tell it else


Nay, prithee Lance -- 'faith, now you are too hard --


Too hard -- why, it is worth a Pound Sir; 'Faith you should not have it so
cheap, but that ye are my Friend


Pox on thee for a Rogue -- there it is -- come be brief now, What new Prank has
the Rogue played, ha


Why Sir -- by these Women, which I have already mentioned to you, he has had
since you saw him last -- 4 Bastards, ha, ha


Four? has he 'faith? ha, ha, ha; by Bacchus, a brave Boy. Four? ha, ha -- I am
overjoyed to hear this; But how Lance, how


Why Sir, one of 'em was begot in a Cobler's Stall, Which he broke open for the
purpose


Ha, ha, ha -- So --


Another Sir, upon the Back-Stairs at the Louvre, And the other two in a Church.


Ha, ha, ha -- better and better -- I am grown young again at this News -- four?
-- Cock of four -- ha, ha, -- a Rascal in faith.


Hush Sir, here he comes -- Mum, not a word of this I have told ye.


What, my Boy -- mad Tom -- Monsieur Thomas, I am glad in faith to see thee, I
have wished for thee, Tom, for you wild Thomas -- Tom, I thank thee heartily for
coming home


Be pleased to give me your Blessing Sir --


Thou have it, Tom, may thou live, and multiply till thou art a hundred and
ten; and as thou art now Cock of four, may thou be Cock of Fifty, and sound
ones

I have prayed for thee, and hope thou art the better for it.


Sir, I do find your Prayers have much prevailed above my Sins.


How Is this, Sins! -- what Sins, Tom?


Else surely I had perished with my rudeness.


Ha. --


E're I had won my self to that discretion, I hope you shall hereafter find --


What -- discretion, oons is it come to that, Sirrah? Lance -- Dog -- is this
the reformation, is this your Cock of four


Lord Sir, what dee mean, why you mistake your Father clearly; Why, he is as
debauched as you Sir, he likes it in ye, and will cherish it, good Sir, unmask,
unmask


Sirrah you Rogue -- look for it, for I will make thee ten times more miserable
than thou thought thy self before thy Travel; Thou have told my Father, I
know it, and I find it, all my Rogueries by mere way of prevention, to undo me


Sir, as I speak Eight Languages, I only told him you came to ask his
Benediction -- de jour en jour


But that it is my duty to be civil now -- I would beat thee like a Dog.


The Devil's in him -- this is another Whim now, but I Will be gone, for I Am sure
the Old Man's Fingers itch at me, and I think, it is not fit that Learning
should be beaten.


However, Sir, the time I have misspent, may make you doubtful, Nay harden
your belief against my Conversion


Forgive me! -- Conversion! -- this is worst of all -- O Pox on Travel, I say.


Yet, dear Father, your own experience in my after-courses, and observation of
my Life and Carriage, may yield some satisfaction; for I Will reform my self in
every thing: I won'not be drunk, nor swear, nor Wench, Pray forgive me Sir,
Indeed I will no more be so forgetful, hah.


Ha -- the Devil ha ye, and the Pox too -- spoiled, quite spoiled, for ever
lost; a Plague of Travel, If this be the fruits on it


Let not your Ears be open to my Enemies, he leads an ill life Sir, that never
mends -- there are a sort of sober Men in the Town, which the Rabble call
Phanaticks; these I will follow to instruct my self -- and you shall see me
mount the losty Hogshead, and teach, and preach, and sing, and say, and pray,
--


And ha, and Yea, and Nay, and Fool, and Ass, and Coxcomb.


Ay, ay Sir -- you have reason to be angry, but let Religion tell ye I am your
Son, Sir


Ye lie Sir, and get you out of my doors -- I disclaim ye; Undone, without
redemption! hang him, he will drink by Thimbles full -- like a sneaking Rascal --
how the Devil have I sinned, that this affliction should light so heavy on me?
Well, I Will go seek an Heir -- I am resolved on it, for my Inheritance must not
turn Secretary; my Name and Quality has kept my Land three hundred years in
Madness -- and if it slip now, may it sink for ever -- But first, I Will find out
this lying Rogue, this Dog, this Lance, that took my money, and then fooled me
-- I Will find him, and I Will cudgel him to Mummy.


Ha ha ha, this verifies the Old Proverb, No Impudence like that hid under the
Vizor of Zeal. A sudden compliance will now make him part from his Estate more
willingly, but the time is not come yet -- I must amuse him a little longer --
my dear Sister -- I am glad to to see thee, did thou meet my Father


Yes, but very angry to my thinking.


'Faith, he does ill in it, for I was uttering a handsome speech or two -- I
have been studying e're since I come from Paris; but how do thou, ha


Very well, and gladder to see you, and with more Love, I dare affirm it, than
my Father's sorry, to see, as he supposes, your Conversion; I am sure he is
vexed to'th' Heart


Pish.


Nay, I know it, He has prayed against it strongly.


I warrant thee, let me alone -- I can bring all off when I list, and yet be
mad too; ah Doll, ever take a Traveller for a Plot -- but hark ye, I have a
little business for thee


Yours, is my business, speak, and be obeyed; You know I can deny you nothing.


Ah poor Soul! 'Faith, thou art a dear Rogue to me; Well, you partly may guess
this; it is concerning my Old Mistress, Madam Cellide


Oh Sir, are you there already -- what, some small affront to her I Will lay my
life -- and I Am to be Arbitrator


'Faith thou art in the right -- and it is but a small matter -- but you know
she is so pettish --


Some lie -- or defamation of her, I Will lay my life.


No, faith, no, a petty business, a flight matter; but however, to make all
well again -- I have writ her a Letter here, and my Suit to thee, is to be
Emissary -- thou can hit her humor right, and I Am sure will put in a Word or
two (by the by) for me, for old acquaintance sake


Well Sir, I Will do what I can, but I assure ye, she has heard of all your mad
Tricks, the Gambols you have played since your departure, in every Town you
came, your several Mischiefs, your Rowses, and your Wenches; all your Quarrels
too, and the no causes of 'em -- Your fame came over before ye


Whoo Pox -- lies, damned lies -- prithee tell her I am converted now; Not like
the man I was: Thou had a pretty faculty of swearing once, Prithee try --
Pox, what is an Oath or two to oblige a Brother -- Pshaw, pshaw, it is nothing --
I Will swear an hour together for thee at any time


A very friendly offer; Well Sir, though I will not promise ye to swear as you
request -- yet perhaps I may do your business as well


Will thou? -- why a blessing on thy heart, and 'faith to requite thee, if
there be e're a tall, handsome, Well set brisk Fellow -- better than ordinary
about Town, I Will get him for thee, that thy business may be done too


How now Sirrah, what News?

Madam, there is two Ladies below come to Visit ye.


Ten to one it is they, and my trouble of going is saved; Tell her I Will come.


I Will not be seen -- 'twill look like modesty in me, and play but thy part now
dear Rogue, and command me for ever.


What, still this mopeing alone my dear -- why sure you have forgot what
diversion or good Company means, or do ye intend to turn Nun, and exclude your
self from the World, and now practicing Austerity


Neither of these assure your self; for first, I love Company too well, to take
my self from 'em, that am or desire to be a Considerable Subject; and secondly,
I love my self too well to exclude it from pleasing Society, through any
aversion I have for the World, or any passion for the Nunnery you speak of


I am very glad I am mistaken; but hearkee, do thou want e're a Trick, a
Design, a Plott, to bubble thy Servant, or so


Not I indeed -- but how dee mean to Bubble him?


Why, cause him to stand in the Snow at thy Chamber Window all Night long, to
make him temperate -- or make him Jump over thy Turkey Chairs in the Parlour,
and break his Shins, to try his Activity -- or tie his hands behind him, and
then break his head with the Hilt of his own Sword, to try his Valor, and
Patience; -- or have thou occasion for a Lie -- a Woman's Lie? that is, a loud,
malicious -- swinging lie -- a lie that has stuff enough, and is not spoiled in
the making -- if thou have, speak, and if I do not fit thee


Well, when I want, I Will not fail to make use of your offer. But I am now
employed upon a business -- and though you think me so retired a Person, to say
truth, I was just going out before you came, and coming to you, I have a Letter
for ye


A Letter?


A Billet Doux -- from some unknown Gallant I warrant that was surpised in the
Country


No, he was surpised in Town, I can assure you that, and he is a Relation of
mine


Oh, are ye thereabouts -- nay then I begin to smell the Jest, There is a Wild
Monsieur, a Brother of yours -- that is newly returned from Travel, one that I
confess has a better faculty at lying, than I have; and for defaming Ladies,
debauching their Women, beating Constables, breaking Glass Windows -- the most
accomplished that ever came from Paris


For what he has done, I have nothing to say, but only for what he is now; and
though I am his Sister, I dare assure you, never was man so much altered in so
short a time; he is grown the most sober, civil, well behaved, courteous Man
you ever saw -- Prithee read the Letter, there you will find more of him


It Is a riddle to me he should be so, he was yesterday quite another thing to
my knowledge; and to leap in an instant from an excess of Wildness, to the
extreme of Temperance, is to me a Miracle


Ha, ha, ha, I thought as much -- his Letter speaks a very civil, reformed
Creature indeed; read it, ha, ha


What, Complement, I warrant, some Wretched piece of Poetry.


Oh, an Excellent piece -- ha, ha, ha.


Dammee Madam -- If I were a Poet, I would be more Elegant; But confound me,
you know I am not; Was ever such a thing writ? -- is this his modesly in the
devils name


Well, what think ye now, is not the Gentleman a great Convert? -- ha, ha, ha,
-- there is an Old Proverb, What is bred in the Bone, will never -- you
understand me, and therefore prithee trouble thy self with no more Embassies,
but next time, let him make his Address himself -- Come, put on thy Scarf, and
let us take a pair of Oars to Fox-Hall, It Is a fine Evening, and I know we
shall be merry


Well, what you please -- but in my opinion the Park is the better place of the
two: What think thou, my Dear? -- hey day, why thou art not grown
Melancholic about this simple Letter, art? -- Come, prithee sing us a Scotch
Song, I know thou art good at it


ABroad as I was walking upon a Summer Day,
There I met with a Beggar-woman clothed all in gray;
Her Clothes they were so torn, you might have seen her skin.
She was the first that taught me to see the Golin.
Ah see the Golin, my Io, see the Golin.
You Youngsters of delight, pray take it not in scorn,
She came of Adam's Seed, though she was basely born:
And though her Clothes were torn, yet she had a Milk-white skin,
She was the first, etc.
She had a pretty little Foot, and a moist Hand,
With which she might compare to any Lady in the Land;
Ruby Lips, Cherry Cheeks, and a Dimpled Chin,
She was the, etc.
When that ay had wooed her, and wad her two my will,
Ay could not then devise the way to keep her Baby still.
She bid me be at quiet, for she valued it not a Pin,
She was, etc.
Then she takes her Bearn up, and wraps it weel in Clothes,
And then she takes a Golin and stuck between her Toes;
And ever as the Lurden cried, or made any Din,
She shook her Foot and cried my Jo, see the Golin.
Ah see the Golin my Jo, see the Golin.
Hark! what is the matter?


Rogue -- Dog, Lying Rascal.


It Is my Father's voice, he is angry with some body, Come, let us be gone; for if
he sees me, I shall not get out these two hours.


Sirrah, am I to be baffled? -- must I give Money to give your Dogship occasion
to laugh at me in a Corner: What, I am a Fool, am I? fit to be bubbled? -- no
Rogue, Instead of tutoring your Master, I find you have spoiled him


Ay, spoila him -- make a dat out -- Jernie, I can bring sufficient Evidence,
he did spoila me the first week I came to him -- You don't remember when he
made the Ten Whores in Whetstones Park stand every one on their heads upon
Quart-Pots, you are Ignorant of that, but I Am sure I remember it; for I got a
damned clap dat time, which I could never claw off since: besides, how could I
spoila him


Oh, I Will tell you how, Sirrah -- first, thou have taught him, like an Insipid
Rascal, to read perfectly, which, on my blessing I warned him from; for I knew,
if he came to read once, he was a lost Man. Secondly, Sir Lancelot, Sir Lousy
Lancelot -- You have suffered him against my power, first then -- against my
Precept -- to keep that sort of People company, which sober Men call civil,
mark ye that Sir


Why then, the Divla fetch me, if to my knowledge he does not hate all Civil
Company; he never was civil in his life, nor never will be -- Oons I saw him
break a Parson's head the other day but for praying him to be Civil to his Wife,
whom he was going to be uncivil to before his face


Nay, nay, I know you have your come offs and your lies, But it shant do, this
is like your Cock of Four, Sirrah, I remember that your Cock -- but I Will make
you Cock of Five before we part; I Will teach you to play your Tricks with me


Vat trick? -- me play no trick -- begar it is he dat do play all the trick --
is dear no hole, or Corner


Thirdly, and lastly Sirrah -- which if the Law were here I Would hang thee for --
(however I will lame thee) Like a Rascal thou have wrought him -- clean to
forget what it is to do a mischief -- a handsome mischief, and such as thou
know I love well; my Servants are all sound now, my Drink sower'd, not a
Horse pawned, or played away; no Warrants come for the breach of Peace; Men
Travel with their Money, Nothing meets 'em: I was accursed to send thee with
him, thou were ever leaning to Laziness, and loss of spirits, and sleep'st
still like a Cork upon the Water


O Lord, O Lord, I sleep -- why Sir, all the Town knows that next to him --
there is not such a debauched -- Lewd Fellow in Christendom as I am -- I may
thank him for it, if I am damned. Why Sir, did you never hear of my Astrology


Thy Astrology? -- dull Rogue, thou would make a rare Astrologer!


Vat -- you mock me then -- a cursed simple old fellow this, Yes Sir, I tell ye
I am famed for Astrology -- I can tell any Woman her fortune, and her
constitution too, whether hot, or dry; or cold, or moist; or whether she is
honest, or dishonest -- Jernie, if I can get her alone with me, I Will quickly
tell her, whether she is a Whore, or no


I tell ye, I know you can prate well enough, but that she-shan't save ye -- ha
-- is that Tom -- No, that -- Thomas, sure: Turn you yonder, Sirrah -- and see
who is there; there is your Reformer -- does he look like a Cock of four, ye Dog


What sweet content dwells here?


Oons, put up your Book Sir! What, what is this Baxters Call? Baxter's Coxcomb
-- here, here -- give't me, and here is Aratine's Book of Postures for ye --
take it, We are all Undone else


Oh profane Rogue -- there Sirrah, for ye.


Oh! what shall I do, I shall be murdered at this rate.


Tom, When is the Horse-Race?


I know not, Sir.


No -- why, you will be there I hope?


Not I -- I have forgot those Journeys, thank my Fortune:


Undone, without redemption -- the Cocking holds at Derby too, Tom, and there
will be Jack Hylas, and Will. Purser


Hah -- I am sorry, Sir, They should employ their precious time so vainly,
Their Understandings will bear better courses


Yes, I will marry again, I am resolved on it; but Son Thomas, what say ye to the
Gentleman that challenged ye before ye went about your Mistress


Oh good Sir -- remember not those Follies where I have done wrong -- so much I
now have learned to discern my Self, my Means, and my Repentance shall make
even Sir; Nor do I think it any Imputation to let the Law persuade me


Very well, Sir, the Law? the Law's an Ass as thou art; Did ever such
affliction light on Man? Well, any Woman, I care not of what color or
constitution, if she can but bear Children, 'faith I Will have her.


Oh I am glad he is gone -- I have had such an Ague upon me -- but good Sir,
what dee mean by this? You have utterly undone me, I shall be for the Ragged
Regiment within these two days


Ha, ha, ha, he fiets to some purpose; but art thou such an Insipid Rascal to
mind it? What, Eight Languages, and tremble at an Old Man's Threats


Not at his Threats, but his Blows, Sir, I know them too well to be mistaken;
it is not Eight, nor Eightscore can keep me from beating, if not killing; I Will
give him leave to break a Leg, and thank him, pull off my Hatt, and cry, God
bless his Worship. You might have saved all this, and but sworn a little --
What a Pox had an Oath or two been to you when your hand was in, or a head
broke -- though it had been mine, to have satisfied the Old Gent. a little


Come, faith, to do thee a kindness, I Will break it yet.


Phoo, Pox now it is too late -- but Sir, will you do me one favor, will you be
drunk to night? -- a less entreaty has served your turn to my knowledge -- do
it, and save all yet: Yet do not be maddrunk, for then you are the Devil; Yet
the Drunker, the better for your Father still. Your State is desperate Sir, and
with a desperate Cure we must recover it -- good Sir, do something, some
debauched drunken thing, some mad thing, or some any thing to help us


Well, go, for a Fiddler then -- the blind Old Fiddler, under the Church Wall --
he that saves his Songs -- and dee hear, get me a Whore or two -- a good, full,
fat Whore, One that is fleshy; let her be an Old Bawd, so she be fat enough --
I care not


Why I -- this is well sed now, Sir I thank ye heartily, and I Will about it
presently.


Ha! Somebody knocks -- go, let 'em in, who ere it be, and then make haste.
I Will put him to plunge once more, and by that time my Design will be full ripe
-- how now, how do thou Jack


Why 'faith, at the same pitch still -- I neither wane not thrive.


O Sir, I have been with the Physicians, and they are all ready below here.


Go, direct 'em to my house, and desire 'em to take all possible Care in the
Recovery of the Gentleman


Physicians! for what prithee -- whose Dog lies sick of the Mulligrubs?


Whoo, prithee, leave thy vile Phrases, -- it is a Friend of yours, I assure
you, Franck Welbred -- he was taken extremely ill of a Fever yesterday, and
lies very weak at my house


Who young Franck? the only tempered, Spirit, Scholar, Soldier, Courtier, and
all in one piece, it is impossible


You Will find it true -- but who is this?


Hark ye, Sir, a word wee'.


Oh, Dear Rogue, art thou come already -- well, of all Women, thou for dispatch
shall be most famed; and what success, prithee? -- how did she like my Letter


Like it, infamous Man! -- do you not blush at your Ingratitude? had you no one
to abuse with the carriage of your debauched Epistle, but your Sister? must I
be your Property? because you found my easy Nature, willing to oblige -- would
you affront me so? this baseness is hardly to be paralleled


By her vehemence in action, this should be something of Moment, Jack.


I know not what her action is -- but she has a fine Buttock I Am sure, I have
been looking at that


Hey-day, I affront thee? prithee what do thou mean, Sister?


You would be told, would you? You have forgot, I warrant. But come, to refresh
your memory, I Will read your worthy piece to you, Your Letter of Address to a
Lady, whom you have abused -- Your sweet Ticket of Repentance, and
Reconciliation -- Pray observe, Sir


Ay, with all my heart,

Zoux Madam, if I were a Poet, the Devil take me if I would not be more
Elegant. A very fine beginning, Is it not


'Faith I think so -- without I should have begun with -- After my hearty
Commendations; or, Surely; and, By my truly Mrs. -- but go on --


But, Confound me, You know I am none; and by the Beard of Jupiter, I am the
less able to pen my excuse. 'S' Death, Madam, You know like a Devil as you are,
I love you dearly. There, there, what occasion for that Oath, that Culverin
there


Why, to tell thee the truth* I swore in that place, because I would have her
su^e to believe me


Very well; and by the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, the Stars, the Meteors --
and such like, I am sorry for my last fault -- And sinck me, am thy Devoted
Servant both in this World -- and in the other. Oh horrible, is not that now
monstrous lewd and wicked


No 'faith -- Methinks it is very pretty -- I have given her occasion there to
see my Wit, and Learning

Therefore, by the Eternal Blazing-Starr, that is to Convert the whole World
into a Snuff Box, either instantly pardon me, or expect to be hourly molested,
by the most passionate, and most resolute of his Sex; and so I leave ye to
enter into consideration, and retire my self to my place of residence, the
Devil-Tavern


What think you now? speak, In your Conscience, Is not this a Rare Piece?


Ay, the Devil take me if it be not the fairest, noblest and most lofty style
that ever was writ -- Well -- Doll -- I will pardon thy Ignorance, and hers
too; but in troth you are both very silly Creatures


What you please Sir, let me have no more such Messages, and then you will favor
me -- I Will instantly to my Father, and tell him to his great Joy of heart --
You are his true Son still -- the same for lying, Swearing, Drinking, Wenching,
you ever was: And now I talk of Wenching -- give me leave to inform ye -- Your
Young Rear-Admiral -- I mean your last Bastard, Don John, ye had by Lady
Blanch, the Dairy-Maid -- is by an Academy of Learned Gypsies stolen from the
Nurse, and wanders with these Prophets. This in conclusion, I thought good to
tell ye, and so your humble Servant, Sir.


A Plaguey smart Jilt -- but this is her Minute, the next is mine, and I have a
design in my head, if followed well, shall bring all about yet. Come Jack


Where, where is the Lady? -- what, thou have not let her go, have?


Let her go? why 'twas my Sister.


Ah, is she thy Sister? nay then even let her go.


Well, Gentlemen -- I must beg your pardon -- I must go see Franck.


Stay Val, a word first; hark ye -- I Will go with thee; To Visit him, will be
an excellent pretense of Introducing me into my Mistresses sight -- and if I
can but once more see her. --


Nay 'faith, I am so much thy Friend, I Will hinder thee nothing -- Come then
we will all go


With all my heart.


You shall see me cut upon her Heart, like a Diamond on Glass -- I know her
humor to a thought

With brisk behavior, loud Impertinence
I Will Court her, her own way, much noise, small sense;
For I Have observed it is not the Man of Parts,
But your fine Talker, gets the Ladies hearts.

A Pleurisy, I see it.


I rather hold it for Tremor Cordis.


Dee' mark the Foeces? it is a most pestilent Contagious Fever -- a Surfeit, a
Plaguey Surfeit, he must bleed


By no means --


I say Bleed.


I say it is dangerous, the person being so much spent beforehand,
Hypocondriaque humors being now in full Power, and Nature drawn so low -- No,
I rather think Clysters, cool Clysters


Now, with your favors -- I should think a Vomit; for, take away the Cause,
the Effect will follow; his Stomach's foul, and the Intellect inflamed


No, no, we will rectify that part by milder means.


Come Sir, you must have patience; Brother, I think we had best first clap on
the Cataplasme


Good Gentlemen, good Learned Gentlemen.


And see those Broaths made ready within this hour; Come Sir, pray be ruled.


Pray Sir will you leave me; I beseech you leave me: Convey your Cataplasmes to
those that need 'em, your Vomits, and your Clysters


Bring in the Lettuce Caps -- You must be shaved Sir, and then we will make you
sleep


Ay, till Doomsday -- What unnecessary Nothings are these?


How do ye Sir?


What Questions they propound too -- how do you Sir, I Am glad to see you well.


Open your Mouth, I pray Sir.


Aw -- well, can you tell me now how old I am? -- There Is my hand, pray show
how many broken shins I shall have within these two year -- 'S'Death, who would
be thus in Fetters, good Mr. Doctor, and you Dear Doctor, and the third sweet
Doctor, and precious Master Pothecary, I beseech ye to give me leave to live a
little longer -- You stand before me like my Mourners


A great Distemper, his fancy now begins to turn too.


Oh, -- a fair riddance, my learned Horse-leeches.


Be not uncivil, Tom, -- and use your pleasure -- I know she will be here to
visit him within this half hour: Do what you can to win her, but use no
violence


I will not 'faith.


Where, where is this Sick Man?


Where are the Women, Man? there is my Province. Methinks these Women --


Thou think nothing else. --


See Franck -- here is two of thy Friends come to visit thee; Prithee look up --
and bid 'em welcome -- I Will go and see if they have got any thing for thee to
eat -- Come, sit up, and be merry, Man


How do thou, Franck, ha?

Come, give me thy hand, and bear up boldly -- what, shrinck in the Sinews for a
little Sickness? a petty, puny, paultry Fever -- Pox upon it, sing it away, Man


I am on the mending hand, I thank ye.


How like a Flute thou speak, on the mending hand? Gogs boars I Am well --
Speak like a Man of honor


Thou art a Mad Fellow; what, never staid. Tom?


Let Rogues be stayed that have no habitation, a Gentleman may wander -- turn
thee round, Franck -- and see what I have brought thee -- Sirrah, open the
Scene and let the Work appear -- Francis, a Friend at need is worth a Million.


What have thou there, a Julip?


He must not touch it, it is present Death.


Ye are an Ass --

Thou minister? thou mend a Pack-Saddle-You must pardon him -- my Friend Franck
-- but a plaguey simple Fellow

Do thou see this Bottle? -- Prithee view it well; Again observe it.


Well, I do, Tom.


There are as many Lives in it as a Cat carries; It refines the Spirit, revives
the Person, removes the Disease, Restores the blood; heats, nourishes, fills
the Veins, Cures, comforts, warms, purges -- hey -- in fine, it is everlasting
Liquor -- and should be spoken of with reverence


Prithee what is it?


Why 'faith -- Old Sack.

Old Spirit stirring Oily, reverend Sack -- which, maugre any thing I can read
yet, was the Philosopher's Stone The Wife King Ptolomy did all his Wonders by


Nay, I see no harm Sir -- if drunk with moderation.


Moderation! -- Drink with Walnuts, Man, which I have ready here, and a Glass
too; take me


Pray, Sir, use temperance, You know your own state best.


Temperance! -- ugh, ugh -- Pox on him, I had like to bin choked with a
Wall-nut-shell -- by giving ear to his damned temperance


I thank thee, Jack -- I shall be careful -- Yet a Glass or two can do no harm,
your Friend Tom is grown very sober


A fool, a fool, he minds nothing now


Where the Devil are these Women all this while?


No, no, take my Counsel, Franck,
Hang up your Julips, and your Portugal Possets, Your Barley Broths -- and
Sorrel Sops; I hate 'em -- they are mangy and breed the scratches only -- I
wonder she does not come all this while -- Come Franck, here is to thee


With all my heart -- and methinks I feel a strange alteration on the sudden --
my pulse beats quick, and lively


So long, and yet no bolting.


Ay, I knew 'twou'd come to that -- my presence is a Never-failing Cordial to
both Sexes; here, take this off thrice, and then cry Heigh, like a Huntsman,
with a clear heart, and no more fits I warrant thee


Are the things ready? and is the Barber come?


An hour ago, Sir?


Bring out the Oils, then.


God's Death -- here again! -- Now, or never, Tom, do me a kindness, and deliver me.


Deliver thee, -- from whom?


From these things that talk there, Physicians, Tom, Scouring-sticks, they mean
to read upon me


I Will do it, -- Come hither, Jack.


We desire all to depart the Room, and no longer disturb the Patient.


Strike in with me for your part, and let us play upon these Rogues a little --
for Look ye Doctor, suppose the Devil were sick now -- his horns sawed off, and
his head bound with a Biggen -- sick of a Calenture taken by a Surfeit of
stinking Souls at his Nephews, and St. Dunstans, what would you minister upon
the sudden? Your Judgment short, and sound


A Fool's head.


No, Sir, -- it must be a Physician, for three causes; the first, because it is
a ball'd head likely -- which will down easily without Apple pap


A main cause.


So it is, and well considered,

The second Cause, it is filled with broken Greek, Sir,

Which will so tumble in his stomach, Doctor, and Jumble and work upon the
Crudities, the Faeces, and the Fiddle-strings, conceive me Doctor, that of mere
reason they must dis-imbogue


Or meeting with the Stygian humor.


Right, Sir.


Forced with a Cataplasme of Crackers.


Ever.


Scour all before him, like a Scavenger.


Satis fecisti Domine -- my last Cause.

My last, and not my least, most Learned Doctors,

Because in most Physicians heads -- I mean those that are most excellent --
and Old withal -- and angry; I say, because in most Doctors heads, there is a
kind of Toadstone Bread and Crust, Sir, -- whose virtue -- the Doctor being
stripped and laid upon a Grid-iro


What Is that, Sir! -- a Grid-iron?


A Grid-iron, Sir! the Learned hold it necessary, then by an Instrument of his
own Barber, his Nose being slit, incis'd, his Mouth gagged open, and his most
bawdy excremental Tongue -- brayed in a Mortar -- to Powder -- the Cure's
infallible, Not to be questioned


Bless me! what stuff's here? Mad Sir! what mean you?


Only a Question -- Nothing else -- for say the belly ache caused by an
Inundation of Pease Porridge


This is not civil.


I think not -- that is all one: Or grant the Diaphragma by a Rupture --


The Sign being then in the head of Capricorn.


Meet with the Passion Hypocondriaca, and so cause a Carnosity in the Kidneys,
must not the Brains being buttered with this humor cause a Cathartique Motion?
answer me that


What shall we answer ye? what shall I say? Ye are an Ass, will that satisfy
ye


Out still -- for the Ass is yours by your long Ears, your Nose too which I
will pull thus into form, and take possession of a Satin Cap to give your
thick Skull, and your Brains more air


Come, come, let us be gone Sirs, we are abused.


No 'faith, not yet, but shall be in good time -- then if my Ladies Dog be
laxative, troubled with qualms, grumblings, Windy Cholicks, Doctor; are ye
therefore to open the Port Vein, or the Port Esquiline? your answer quickly


I Will answer no more -- farewell, Sir, the next Fit you have, Bedlam shall find
a Salve for; we came to do you good, But these young Roarers it seems have
bored our Noses


Drink hard, and get unwholesome Wenches, it is ten to one then we shall hear
further from your note altered.


And will thou be gone, says one?


And will thou be gone, says the other?


Then take the odd Crown, to mend thy old Gown, And we will be all gone together.


Ha, ha, ha, -- most excellent Rogue, I love thee heartily for this.


Sir, the Young Lady -- sent me to see what Company ye had with ye -- and
whether they may make a Visit


Pray tell 'em, with all my heart -- they will much honor me in it -- You see my
Company


Come hither Crab -- is not my Mistress one of 'em?


Yes Sir.


And who else?


Madam Sabina*


Oh -- hark Sirrah, not a word of my being here; Take that, and Mum.


You have tied my Tongue up, Sir.


Ah -- nay if you look so brisk, farewell the Fever, Friend.


Nay, I am much better, thank my Dear Tom here.


The Game is ready to begin, your Mistress is coming.


I know it, therefore sit still good Franck, and not a word of me till you hear
from me -- then as you find my humor, follow it. You two come with me, and let
us stand close, unseen -- I warrant thee I catch her.


How dee' Sir?


The favor of this Visit from you, Madam, gives me strength to tell ye, That
my Enemy has done his worst; I am growing well again


I am glad to hear it -- Were you ever sick before, Sir?


Of Love, Madam, not else.


Of Love? Alas! for ye -- but you had good hopes of your side* You know 'twas
no Epidemick distemper; for it is as impossible, a man should dye by Love, as
that he should live by it -- and either of these are Miracles this Climate
never produces


No, no -- I have no hope, nor is it fit Friend -- my life has been so lewd, my
loose condition, which I repent too late, so abominable, That nothing but
despair stands now before me


Who Is that, Sir -- another Sick Man?


In all my Courses shameless -- disobedience.


Sure, I should know his voice -- Pray, Sir, who is it?


One that you little thought to have seen in such a condition; It Is the Wild
Monsieur


Who my Monsieur? -- Monsieur Thomas? ha, ha, ha, this is some trick.


You Will think better, when you see him -- he was seized yesterday with a strange
distraction -- a perfect madness


That Is like enough -- he has been seized with that, ever since I knew him.


Not in this Nature, Madam; he is now, since he came to himself, much afflicted
in's mind -- he came hither to ask pardon of me for some things done long
since, which his distemper made to appear like wrongs; but 'twas not so


Sure that is not possible.


Here he comes -- Pray observe him.


Come, Sir, be comforted.


To what end, Gentlemen -- when all is perish't upon a wrack. Is there a hope
remaining, the Sea, that never knew sorrow should be pitiful -- my Comfort's
gone, my Life has made me Wretched -- Nor is it possible, were I to live Ten
Ages, Ever to recall the least part of my Follies


Oh you despair too much. Madam, you see his condition, One word from you may
yet recover him


I know not what to do, nor what to think -- I am amazed 'twixt pity and
admiration


If it be real, it is no Jesting matter; a Man is not so soon made, Cousin.


What are these Ladies? -- I had a Sister once, a Virtuous Sister, But I abused
her -- poor Soul, I wronged her -- a Mistress too, a Kind sweet Beauteous
Mistress


Now, Madam, now is your time; now he is talking of ye.


I Will do any thing, rather than see him thus.


I wronged her too -- I sent her a damned Letter full of Oaths, Wrack't her
poor Innocent Ears with Damms and Devils, Woe worth the time I did so


Now, Madam, speak, or never.


By Heaven, I will; ah little do you know how my heart bleeds for him.


Ha, ha, ha -- she comes apace -- the Rogue counterfeits rarely.


Oh my fortune. But it is but Just I be despised and hated.


Despair not, it is not Manly -- Now Madam.


How dee' Sir? pray be comforted -- give me your hand -- you used to meet this
kindness with more haste; I swear I pity ye


By Heaven it is she -- oh goodness! not to be equaled -- let me thus low
implore thy pardon; I have been wild and wicked, I confess it, but ah dear
Saint, consider on our frailties; Youth often wanders from the way, and --


Indeed Sir, you shan' not kneel.


Not kneel? oh name it not, my Crimes are many, and nothing but repentance, low
repentance -- Jack


I, I mind ye -- proceed and she is thy own, Boy.


Nay then I Will kneel too -- for I have faults too many, I should beg your
pardon too, all things considered


Precious -- Dearest, Lovely -- Charming -- Ah,


Where, where is my Master? -- oh Sir -- the Fiddler, Sir, is not at leisure yet,
but he will be about half an hour hence. But I have got Sir, according to your
order, a couple of the finest Black fat Whores yonder -- 'gad the Jades do so
tumble about -- ha, ha --


Damned Dog --


How Is this?


'S'death -- this damned dull Rogue will spoil all -- what, what is that you
say, Sirrah? who would you speak with, ha


Ay, an Impudent Dog, who would he speak with? -- here is no body here knows
him -- Kick him out of doors there


What, not know Lance? -- I am Lance, Sir, and a Pox take me, if I have not
two of as fine fat Whores as a man would desire to lay his Leg over


Oh Heaven! I Am betrayed! and this was only a design upon me. I find it now
it is so, Cousin -- oh I could curse my self now for being so credulous -- this
was a Plot betwixt 'em, and now by chance discovered; stand off, and touch me
not, Base Fellow -- Come, let us away -- Farewell Sir, and when you are mad next
-- let your fat Whores administer


Ha, ha, ha -- this was a pleasant Jest.


Come ye hither, Sirrah, and lay your head down on this Chair, I Will be merciful
to ye -- I Will only cut your Ears and Nose off; Your head shall escape -- do it
quickly, Rogue, or I will hew thee into Mammocks


Oh for Heavens sake, Sir, what mean ye? You know I did nothing but what you
bid me


Ah -- Insipid Whelp.


Hang him, let him wear his Nose a little longer -- 'Twill spoil the fashion of
his face else


Though 'twas unluckily, 'twas Ignorantly done, and let him live to make amends.


Pox on it -- when I had bent her like a twigg -- brought her to my hand -- made
her quite sure, my own, with art and Industry, and to be bubbled of her in the
very last moment, by the negligence of a Dog, a Hound, a Son of a Whore, a
plague -- Prithee Val, let me have but one pass through his Guts, and I Will
forgive him


Oh Gentlemen, for heavens sake hold him -- for my guts are so empty, that he
may easily rip 'em open


Come forgive him -- the Rogue I dare swear did it out of mere Kindness.


By my Eight Languages, and so I did -- I was so overjoyed to bring him the
good News, that I never minded who was with him


A Devil on it -- this is always my damned fortune, and I have still observed
if a Fool be in a Family -- where any Person has a design -- if his Ignorance
does not discover it, his ill fortune will -- and that is as bad -- Well, I am
resolved she shan'not escape thus -- I will have one more bout with her. You
will not leave me, Gentlemen


Not I 'faith; I will not miss the sport.


Nor I -- but when shall it be?


To Night at her Window in a Serenade.


With all our hearts -- Franck, would thou were well to go too.


I know not, it is as I feel my self -- but it may be I may venture, For I can
walk I find


Go Dog, get you to my Father, and tell him my last Nights Ramble, I Will come
and second ye; away -- I shall get the Rogue this way a beating at the second
hand


Yes, Sir. I am glad I Am got off so well; for I was damnably afraid of losing
my Ears, and Nose. Well Sir, I Will go and carry the Whores to the same Bulk,
where I found 'em, and then let 'em seek their fortune.


Sirrah, that shall be my task.

Come Friends, let us prepare for the business; till Night I am employed -- but
then I am for ye.


Now to the business of Matrimony -- I think I have got one here will fit me --
I picked her up in the Piazza's, what she is I know not, nor do I care -- so she
be fruitful and sound -- Set down the Candle, Sirrah, and get you gone -- Come
hither Mistress -- Let me see your Face -- those Eyebrows are your own, I
hope


Yes, I assure you, Sir -- I counterfeit nothing.


Very well -- now walk before me -- let me see you pace a little. ah -- trip --
trip -- thus, thus -- I would have my Woman do so


Sir, I shall quickly learn to please ye, there shall be nothing wanting in my
duty, to act, or to observe


Prettily said -- as to your age, Madam, I guess you to be about Five and
twenty -- something over -- a good ripe age, I like that well enough -- Pray
open your Mouth; I think you have all your teeth


I hope so, Sir -- they have had easy service.


And will thou sing?


Pleasantly, Sir.


And drink?


Profoundly.


And swear -- and tell a Story after Supper?


As you think fit, Sir -- by the way of relish, or so.


Give me thy hand then, she is honest, I know by that; for she that simpers, and
talks of Religion always, proves to be the greatest Jilt -- who waits there


Your pleasure, Sir?


Bid my Daughter come hither -- now I think I shall be even with my Monsieur --
my sneaking Ananias: For I will get upon her Body* Demi-Gyant that shall play
the Hector at his Nurses Breast, and beat a Constable in his swaddling Clothes.


How Sir!


Now you shall find me so then -- what a pox, do you think I Will leave my
Inheritance to Pins, and Bodkins, to Towers, Jesamine Gloves, and Trimmings --
to a leaky Vessel -- that cannot keep my name up when I dye to thee


You have a Son, Sir.


Who? -- where is he? who is he like?


Your self.


Thou lie -- thou have spoiled him, Thou, and thy Prayer-Books; -- he my Son?
No, I disclaim him, And all that speaks of him. Why, did not I catch him
singing yesterday a godly Ballad, to a godly tune too, and in one of his
Pockets a Catachisme with the Creed in great Letters at the beginning? -- No,
Damsel of the dark -- I know he is one of your Disciples, he would be ruled else


Mine? -- it is a sign then you know little of his humor, That can believe I
have power to turn him any way


Huswife I know it, and expect to be rewarded, what Tavern has he used since he
came over? what things done, that shows a Man and Mettle? when was my house at
such a shame before, to creep to bed at ten and twelve for want of Company? No
singing, nor no dancing, nor no drinking? -- thou think not of these
scandals -- thou can snore, and sleep, and Chatter bawdy in thy Dreams, --
and the next morning wake and go to breakfast, and nothing else -- but his life
should be otherwise


So it is, Sir -- believe me, for I speak it to my knowledge, he is as mad as
heart can wish; as debauched a Fellow as any in the Suburbs


Women, Sir, will talk, but you know we must bear with that sometimes.


Well, now I think on it, I will try the Boy once more, it may be he does but
counterfeit, and then I Am happy -- go, get you in, I Will keep you close enough,
lest you break loose, and do more mischief to him -- Within there.


Dee' call, Sir?


Go presently, and seek the Boy, and bid him wait my pleasure in the morning --
do you hear, Mark what house he is in, and what he does -- and tell me truth


I will not fail, Sir.


If ye do, I Will hang ye. Come, Madam -- I must desire you to stay here, till he
comes, and then we will settle all -- there is your apartment, there you will find
all necessaries -- Now if he prove but right, he has all yet; If not, this
other way shall make an end on it

Youth may delight to boast of Act or Skill,
But the pleasure of an Old Man -- is his Will.

AT Valentine's house so merry?


As a Lark, Sir.


So frollicksome, do say?


I Am sure I heard it.


Ballads, and Fiddles too?


No, but one Fiddle, but twenty noises.


Did he do Tricks?


Ah, the rarest Tricks, Sir -- here is my Fellow Lance, he can Inform ye all,
he was among 'em, and as mad as any there; I stood up in a Corner


Come, Sir -- what can you say? -- Is there any hope yet your Master may return?


Put your hand into your Purse -- and give me an Angel, Then perhaps I may tell
you more


How, how? an Angel?


An Angel, Sir -- 'Faith not a Farthing under, such things, such roaring things
-- an Angel, Sir, quickly, come


There it is, damned Rogue, thou have found my blind side.


Ay, ay, Sir, that is all one -- so -- well now Sir, by the Virtue of 8:
Languages, by the Faith of a Traveller and a Gentleman, Your Son is found again,
the Son -- the Tom


Is he the Old Tom?


The Old Tom.


Proceed then.


Next to consider how he is the Old Tom.


Ay, handle me that.


I would you had seen it handled last night, as we handled it -- Cap-a-pe,
in faith -- oh the noise, the noise we made


Good, good, in faith, ha, ha, ha.


The house beset around -- the Windows Clatt'ring, and all the Chamber-Maids
in such a hurrey, one with her Smock half off, Another in haste with a Hose
upon her head


Ha, ha, ha.


A Fellow railing there out of a Loupe-hole, and his Mouth stopped with dirt.


Ha, hah, ye Rogue.


Another peeping out with his greasy Nightcap on, and a Torch popt in's face
to clear his eyesight


Ha, ha, ha -- Dog.


The Gentleman himself, young Monsieur Thomas, environed with his furious
Mermydons, the fiery Fiddler and my self, Now singing, now beating at the Door,
there parlying -- Courting at the Window, at the other, scaling


Ha, ha, ha.


And all these several Noises to two Trenchers strung with a Clew of Brown
Thread -- which showed rarely


Ha, ha, ha, -- rarely well -- rarely well.


Well, well -- what do you mean, Sir -- Your blows are not well I Am sure, nor
will my shoulders long, if you hold on at this rate


In Faith I beg thy pardon -- I was so transported, I did not know what I did --
there is money for thee to make thee amends -- eat, and grow fat again


Nor here, Sir, gave we the Frollick over.


What, more yet? why this is admirable.


More, ay, and the best too, Sir -- for at last we quit the Ladies house on
composition -- and to the silent Street turned all our furies. A sleeping
Watchman here we stole the shoes from; there make a noise, at which he wakes
and follows -- then cries out Thieves, and throws his Bilboe at us -- and
Wades the Kennel in no footed stockings


Oons -- this is the rarest Boy, ha, ha --


Windows and Signs we sent to Erebus -- a cry of Butchers Currs we entertained
last, and having let the Pigs loose in out-Parishes, made every Street look
like a Bear-Garden


Instead of Bears, and Bulls, a Rogue, a Rogue.


Down -- comes a Constable -- and the Sow his Sister, most villainously
tramples upon authority -- there a whole Stand of Rug Gowns routed Manly, and
the King's Peace put to flight -- the Constable rallyes again -- when, Sir, a
Purblind Pigg -- runs me his dirty Snout into his Lanthorn -- out goes the
light, and all turns to confusion


Ha, ha, ha.


But, Sir, the best Jest was, a foolish Potter needs would know the matter --
opens his door, when, mark the Fate of Cuckolds, a Boar imbost takes sanctuary
in his Shop, and Twenty Dogs rush after -- We still cheering, down goes the
Pots, and Pipkins -- down the Pudding-Paus -- the Cream-Bowles cry revenge
here; There the Candlesticks; oh such a noise


Ha, ha, ha, --
If this be true, thou little Tyny Page,
This tale thou tell to me,
Then on thy Back will i presently hang.
A handsome new Livery.

How now, where is my Son?


He Is here, Sir.


Now Sir -- you shall hear all -- and laugh abundantly, he has such a grace in
telling it, Sir


Son Thomas -- I am glad to see ye, and to hear of ye; You may be now my Son
again, if you please, and enjoy the blessings attending it -- but come, because
I feel a scruple in my Conscience, concerning your late carriage -- and
therefore like Father would be satisfied; To clear all, Thomas, get you upon
this Table


This Table, Sir? Lord, how you are misled! -- what strange fancies are these?
fitter for Fools and Madmen


What, what? -- come, come, I say, get you on this Table. and Instantly, I Will
have it so


Well, Sir, you must be obeyed.


So -- now Thomas, like a most complete Gentleman come from Tripoly -- relate
your last Night's Frollicks, mince at nothing -- but let me have it freely as
'twas acted -- 'twill please me best


Verily, Sir -- though Age and Youth, and Youth and Age are different,
different I mean divided 'twixt themselves in point of reason; Nay, though our
eyes are blinded, that is, though we cannot see. I say -- yet I say again -- or
it is no matter whether I say it again or no, That Reason, and Religion, should
Instruct Age to better courses than Blindness guides them to. Reason, and
Religion are two worthy persons, and should Instruct a wandering Mortal -- Ah,
Sir, remember -- remember, I say, Take notice, place it in your Bosom -- in
your Heart, in your -- I say, remember -- that is, do not forget -- but
remember


Hey day, he is preaching -- you Rogue Lance, You lying Rascal.


Gad forgive me, will ye spoil all again, Sir? -- What a Devil do you mean?


Away, Sirrah, and summon the rest of the Family hither, that I may edify them
all. Sir, you keep a Company of saucy Fellows, debauched, and daily Drunkards,
that devour ye. Things, whose Souls tend to the Cellar only


Sirrah, give me my Money again, or --


Why Sir, let me never eat again -- or feel the Blessing of another new Livery,
if he be not the very Devil in Debauchery, Sir: And what I have told you of him
is all true; ask Robin here


Nay Sir, the truth is, I did see my Young Master pick up two Whores, and put
'em into Pudding-Lane


It Is strange these Rascals -- but Sir, when Folly and Idleness take the upper
hand of Reason, and permit when they meet and Inhabit the Heart, the Mind, the
Soul, the Faculties, the -- It Is a hard matter -- it is, I say, a -- matter of
difficulty, of difficulty -- a matter of moment -- and all that, Sir, to reform
or conform, or direct, or dispute, or dissuade -- or divine, or dispose, or --


Or the Devil and all; come down, I say. Bless me! what stuffs here?


Sir, are ye mad? stark mad? did not I see ye beat a Constable last Night?


I touch authority, ye Rascal? I violate the Law?


No, no, he had rather preach to him -- Lancelot du Lake, Get ye upon
adventures -- cast your Coat, and make your Exit


Pur l'amour de Dieu.


Pur me no purs -- but get you out at that Door there; Out ye Eight Languages.


My blood upon your head Sir -- Did not I tell you 'twou'd come to this? What
shall I do to live now? if I beg, I shall be Whip't; and if I steal, I shall be
hanged. What shall I do


Hark ye, Sirrah; I Will provide for ye -- go instantly and get the Fiddler I
ordered ye -- let him be sure to be ready -- and then go and tell Vall and Jack
I Will meet 'em within this half hour in the Rounds


Now, now, Sir, dee hear him now?


Sirrah, a word, and I Will cut your Throat -- away.


Out of my doors, Sirrah.


Ay, ay, purge 'em all Sir.


I shall Sir -- and you too presently. Go Sirrah, bid my Maids that stand
without -- come in -- I will have one shall please me


It Is most fit Sir.


Bring in the Money there -- here Mr. Thomas.


What you please Sir.


This money I give you, because heretofore you have been thought my Son -- and
by my self too -- and some things done like me; Ye are now another -- here is
two hundred pounds, a civil sum Sir, for a young Civil Man: Much Land and
Money would (I suppose) now only prove temptations, to take you from your
settled and sweet carriage


How Is this? but Sir, I hope --


Nay, I beseech ye, cover Sir; ye owe me no respect -- I have nothing to do
with ye; nor have you with my Estate Sir; Nor with this money neither, now I
think on it -- you can preach well Sir -- Pray get a Tub -- and deal about your
Hums and Has with reverence; some of the Rabble perhaps may have farthings


'S'death, I shall be finely bubbled if this hold -- lose all my Fortune for a
Frollick -- I must wheel about again, there is no remedy


I have one thing more to say before we part Sir. Behold those females there,
pray view 'em well: I want a right Heir to Inherit me, not my Estate alone, but
my conditions, from which you are revolted -- therefore dead -- And I will
break my back, but I will get one


Will you choose there, Sir?


There, among those Damsels -- in my own Tribe, I know their qualities -- which
cannot fail to please me, for their Beauties -- a matter of three farthings
makes all perfect. A little Beer, and Beef-broth -- they are sound too -- stand
all abreast -- Now Mr. Thomas, before I choose -- You having lived long with
me, and happily, sometimes with some of these too, which fault I never frowned
on -- Pray show me (for fear we confound our Genealogies) which you have laid
abroad: Speak your mind freely, Have you had Copulation with that Damsel


I have.


Say ye so? Pray how?


How, is not seemly here to say, Sir.


Stand you aside then -- What say you to'th' second, Thomas?


With her too, Sir.


With her too? ha, ha -- the Rogue wins upon me strangely.


So, so, he is coming again.


Retire you two -- speak forward Mr. Thomas.


I will, and to the purpose -- even with all Sir.


How? with all? that is somewhat large, with all Thomas?


All, surely Sir.


A sign thou art my own yet -- in again all, and to your several Functions --
Mrs. I pray come hither -- Tom, here is a Lady -- that I found my self,


Mercy upon me, He here! nay then, I shall be murdered.


What, what is that? do know her Tom?


Know her? Why Sir, every Bulk about Town knows her; I met her drunk in the
Strand the other Night, with twenty Boys about her -- I have thrown her into the
Fleet Ditch -- three several times for my share


Go, get you gone too -- and to your Bulk again, my Marriage fit is over.


And thank ye too, rather than stay where He is.


Well, but what say ye to Luce, the Merchant's Daughter? she was too young -- I
think, when you traveled some twelve years old


Her will was Fifteen, Sir.


Ha, ha, ha -- 'Faith well answered to cut off long discourse, Thomas, for I
have many yet to ask ye of, Where I may choose, and nobly -- hold up one finger;
-- where I may not, two -- or more; What think ye of Valeria? whose husband
lies a dying now -- why two and in that form.


Her husband is recovered, Sir.


A Witty Moral -- have at ye once more, Thomas -- the Sisters of St. Albans --
what all five? -- ha, ha, that Boy, that is my own Boy --


Still hoping for your pardon.


Pshaw, there needs none -- a pox on pardon -- I am pleased with thy
confession, Nor will I think of Marriage any longer; for of my Conscience I
shall be thy Cuckold -- there, there is Twenty Guinneys for ye, Sir. Go, and be
merry -- I see some sparkles which may flame again; and if they do, you are mine
yet -- farewell Monsieur.


So -- it is better thus, than the other way however -- but now to my Serenade --
I have such a kind of a Mungril Love for this Woman -- that I must, and will
enjoy her, come what will on it -- Oh Sirrah -- well, have got him


I Sir, I have been here -- a rare Rogue -- he will Fiddle and make a noise, but
the Devil a stop he knows, or when he fiddles in Tune. Good Sir -- do
something now -- some roaring thing, that we may live and eat again -- By my 8.
Languages I have had but one poor moldy Crust this two days


A Pox on thee for an eating Rogue, Nothing but Famine frights thee -- Come
hither, Sirrah, what Ballads are you seen in best? -- ha? let us hear


Under your Masterships Correction, I can sing the Merry Ballad of Diverus and
Lazarus. The Rose of England. In Creete when Dedimus first began. Jonas his
Crying out against Coventry -- and a merry Song, how Blind Toby and his Dog
fell in Love with a Fair Lady, by seeing her play upon a Cymbal


Very well. What else?


Maudlin the Merchant's Daughter. The Devil, and the Dainty Dames.


Rare still!


The Landing of the Spaniards at Bow; With the Bloody Battle at Mile-End.


Excellent! Well Sirrah, go, and put him to his Stand, and let my Friends be
ready -- I Will follow ye.

All you that would your good Old Fathers Cheat,
And e're his Death, do Covet his Estate;
To all his humors strict Compliance give,
For Age that doates once, has not long to live.

Whatever your Nice humor, Madam, seems to declare now, I am sure you must
needs sometimes be of a contrary temper -- he is my Friend I acknowledge; and
the least thing I can do in his absence, is to speak well of him


Sir, that freedom is of necessity allowed, and whatever his Merit is, your
Generosity could not do less -- but my knowledge of him and his temper, is proof
against all your assertions; I will allow him for a general Man, and good
Company; but let me tell ye -- such a one though he makes the best Servant --
certainly makes the worst Husband in the World


Ay, that is, Madam, according as you order him. If you give him liberty, it is
true, Men are apt to follow the Dictates of their own humors -- but when you
have the Bridle in your hand, methinks it is easy stopping the course


That, Madam, does not so much depend on your own power, as on your husband's
temper; for if he be rough and passionate, you have so much Judgment to know
your bounds. But, if mild, and soft natured -- Your Province is the larger. And
there are two things which ruin such a man -- Fondness and Folly; for a man
that is too fond of his Wife, is as certain to be made a Cuckold by her -- as
that she would if she could do it -- were he never so ugly, or Jealous


If good Phrases, and Reason might pass for Jests, I swear you are the merriest
man I know


I should be glad, Madam, I could breed your Diversion any way; though to the
rest of the World, it is my ambition they should relish me more in the
Philosopher, than the Buffoon


Fie, fie, a better word than that, Sir, -- Call a Witty brisk Fellow, that
breaks a Jest only for the sake of good Company, or so, a Buffoon? -- Fie, I
swear 'twas ill said


Ay, it is a sign he has been sick lately.


I do but think how you would look, if Monsieur Thomas should hear of this -- you
had best call Him Buffoon too


No, He Is the General of 'em, -- and the only Person that I know can be
allowed of in that nature; for he has Wit in his Buffoonry -- and a graceful
action, gives an excellence to his Jest. -- If he tells a Lie, he will be sure
it shall be a pleasant one: And he never tells a bawdy story for its own sake,
but the Companies, and the Mirth that follows after


What think ye of this, Cousin?


Pish -- Prithee what should I think of it? -- hark! what noise is this?


But I have seen some dull Rogues Mangle a good Story so barbarously -- how
now? what is that


Was ever the like known? -- there is such a rout at your Window yonder -- such
shouting, such singing, and such a dismal noise --


Noise? what noise? who is it?


The mad Gentleman that used to ask for Madam Cellide, and twenty more,
fidling, singing like Madmen


It Is he -- shall I never be at rest? who can endure this?


He Is as good as his word I see.


Hark ye, Cousin -- now if you love me, let us put a trick upon him -- I have a
rare device in my head


I know this is against the grain, but come, I Will second ye.


It Is a mad Rogue -- but I know she loves him; I Will go up to my Closet-Window
and see the sport.


Stand close now, and every one mind his business, Jack keep you that door
there -- and be sure none of her Servants enter, or go out -- if any Woman
pass, she is lawful Prize -- Cut off all Convoyes


It Is not fit I am seen -- I Will therefore stand at distance and observe ye.


Ay, but hark ye Tom -- who shall answer this?


Why, I shall answer it, Sir; -- You fearful Puppy I shall appear to the Action.


Well, well, I have done -- we may talk too, may we not?


With any Woman freely.


And sing too, ha? -- for there is my Masterpiece.


No, Sir, by no means. I am the Man reserved for Air -- it is my talent, and
the Devil's in it if my voice don't charm her; hark ye, You may Record a little
-- Whistle, or so -- to show you are good at something -- but for main singing
-- let me alone; away, be careful


But there is another thing; we may be beaten.


'Faith, so thou may -- and well too -- for thou deserve it richly -- Why,
what Bug-bears are in thy Brains? Beaten? -- why who should beat thee


Why she may have men enough.


Ay, art not thou man enough too?


I warrant thee -- there is a low Window -- I Will peep in and see what they are
doing


Come Sirrah, let us hear some of your Art now -- Nay, nay, No tuneing as ye
love me -- let thy Fiddle speak Welsh, or any thing that is out of all tune --
the Viler, still the better -- like thy self -- for I presume thy voice will
make no Trees dance


Nay, truly you shall have it even as homely.


With all my heart, keep it to that Key still -- I think they are all abed.


I think so too, Sir -- I can hear no stirring any where, No light in any
Window, it is a Night for the purpose, Sir


Come, strike up a flourish -- and Sirrah, do you sing the Serenading Song I
taught ye the other Night; We Will bear the Chorus


Who Is there? what noise is this? -- what Rogue at these hours -- dares disturb
us thus


Oh what is that to you ye Fool?
Oh what is that to you?
Pluck in your face -- ye bawling Ass,
Or I will break your Nose.
With a hey down, down, down, downa.

Tom -- here is rare sport -- here is one of the Women washing her Legs -- Ah
Rogue! -- 'Faith she has a fine plump Calf -- ha, ha, -- now she is come to her
Knee -- oh -- murder, murder -- I Am killed


Hah! -- his face all bloody? Jack, let me see, Where Is the Wound? this is no
jesting matter


I know not, I feel none -- cannot you see it?


Ha, ha -- I find it now -- this was only a trick, a squirt of blood and a
Pistol fired off -- are they so frollicksome? have at 'em once more


'Troth I Am glad I Am alive for all that -- I Will go and get my face washed, and
come again.


Come Sirrah, now sing the English Ballad.


There was a Noble Merchant
That lived in a Town,
He had an only Daughter,
That was both fair and brown;
Sing hey trangdillo, dillo down.
A Noble Knight likewise,
On whom Fortune did frown,
He got her Maidenhead once in thrice,
Sing hey trangdillo down, down, derry down.

No stirring yet? -- I believe the Devil has charmed 'em asleep. Come, flourish
again, and the the other Song --


The Twelfth of April on May Day,
My House, and Goods were stolen away.

Hold, hold -- she comes -- Sirrah, give me the Address I gave you in writing
the other day


O Lord, Sir, the Mice eat it in my Pocket one Night, but I have the Complement
here that you took out of the Book of Common Places


That then, Sirrah, quickly -- holdup the light -- Madam. Were there no other
light but your eyes -- the World would need no Sun -- And -- Conf -- conserve
me, Madam, if, like a Fly, I can forbear buzzing about that light -- though I
have burnt my Wings -- ha? what think ye of that, Sirrah?


Who would forbear loving a Man that has such several ways of Gallantry?


Hush -- you shall hear a Dialogue between us.
My Man Thomas did me promise
He would Visit me this Night.

What? Musical? -- nay, let me alone for answering that.
I am here Love, tell me dear Love,
How I may obtain thy sight.

Come up to the Window my Love,
Come up to the Window my Dear;
Here Is a Ladder of Rope,
That will help to guide thee up,
And thou shall be lodged here.

And 'Faith, I Will be with thee strait, she is very kind of the sudden, ha Sirrah?
-- go, all be gone, there is money


Ay Sir, so she is; you will have good sport anon, ha?


Now Cousin -- the Scuttle quickly.


Sir Eglamore that Valiant Knight,
Hey down, down a down;
So bruised was with grievous frights,
Hey down, down, downa down.
For he had been Cuffing so long with the Dragon,
That nothing could quench his thirst but a whole flaggon,
With a hey down, down, downa, etc.

How now? what a Devil -- is this? Lance? -- what is the matter I Am Enchanted,
I cannot stir -- bound hand and foot


Nay, my Dear -- why are you so slow? Prithee make haste.


A pox on ye -- Lance -- what a Devil is this?


Come down, Sir, come down -- they have played some trick or other with ye --
ha, ha -- I thought so.


Fie, fie, so slow Sir; is this like a Mercurian?


'Faith I Will be even w'you presently -- 'S'death, a Basket! What Witches are
these? -- but I Will storm once more, and it is not Baskets, nor Chamber-pots,
shall hinder me now; Sirrah, now sing


Lucilla.


I Am ready, Madam.


The Duke, he was a Noble Man, as any in the Town,

Phoo, phoo -- what is this? oh!


But climbing to promotion, he suddenly fell down.


Ha, ha, ha.


Death! this was another Trick upon me, I find by the Queans Mirth.


What have thou done? -- not thrown him down I hope.


Only a little way, Madam.


A little way? -- Oh heaven I Am undone! she has broke his Neck.


Ha! is she so pitiful? -- I may have a Trick then to recover all yet -- oh my
leg, my leg -- I am spoiled for ever; both my Legs.


Hark, hark, do you not hear him?


Shattered in twenty pieces, I Am undone! oh barbarous Woman! howl Sirrah, howl.


Oh, his back too! his back! -- the bone is out of Joint.


Do You hear ye Devil? run to the Surgeon quickly, fly: Or see my face no more. O
horrid mischance! I come, I come


Take heed of Women, Friends, take heed of Women; They Will put ye out of Joint --
they will shake your Souls out. Oh, ha, my Leg! my Leg


Your head, your head too, Sir -- for your Skull being cracked, Your Brains may
happen to catch cold. Ha, ha, ha! The Light's taken away, I believe she is
coming


And cry out still -- Men believe falsely that think Age makes 'em decrepid --
No, it is Women, it is Women, oh --


She comes -- she comes, Sir.


Sirrah, squeeze out a tear, or two -- Now for a swouning fit -- ah! --


Where, where are ye, Sir?


He Is gone -- he is gone. Master -- sweet Master, here is Lance that calls --
oh! -- what shall I do


Oh I am miserable! Sir, Sir -- Dear Sir -- Oh cursed Accident! help! help to
hold up his head


Ah it is stiff, Madam -- every part of him is stiff; rub him, rub him.


Here, hold this Bottle of Amber to his Nose -- Sir, Dear Sir, Open your eyes,
and see my sorrow for ye; it is I that speak Sir. For Heavens sake open your
Eyes -- I am here.


Ay -- and -- I am here too -- and well -- thank my Activity; Your Bottle of
Amber will be unnecessary, And if thou scap'st me now --


What, caught again! oh this subtle Devil!


However, I am bound in Conscience to thank you for your kindness -- and since
it is only Trick for Trick, Madam, we have the more reason to be friends -- I
must needs own my self obliged to you; for the Devil take me if I have been
kissed so heartily this great while


Ha, ha, ha -- it is strange your Legs should be cured already Sir; But, Madam
-- he is such a Wagg -- ha, ha --


Well -- I have no other way, but seeming to comply.


Come 'faith be kind now -- I have a convenient Lodging here hard by -- and one
reconciling here now, will be worth Ages


Fie! What baseness is this?


Ay, that is all one -- If I leave my self to a doubt again -- May I be Jilted as
I have been -- Come Sirrah, and help --


Hold Sir -- well, now I see you love me; and believe Sir, this Impatiency has
taken me far more than all your Addresses: Violence, will now be unnecessary


Ah, no Tricks, Madam -- to be plain with ye, if you will marry me -- so -- if
not, I am resolved to enjoy ye before I part, and then marry who you please


Nay, that shall not need, I swear, if you have a Priest ready -- I have tried
thee long enough; and though you are a little Wild -- I know you can love truly
-- ah my Dear Sweet!


Why Ay. this is like something now, -- Sirrah, have I not wrought her rarely?


Ay, ay, but to her, to her Sir, don't let her cool.


Come my Dear, shall we go in here, or to my Lodging?


Your Lodging, no indeed -- I Will have the confirmation made here, follow me;
but hold, it is convenient the Candle be out, for if my Cousin sees me, she will
so laugh at me


'Faith, well considered; besides, light in such a case is a little unnecessary
-- Sirrah, turn the Lantern -- so


And will you always love me?


This kiss shall confirm it.


What ye Clown -- with your Hat on? and to your Mistress too? You could do no
more if I were your Wife.


Who the Devil would have thought, you should expect Ceremony in the dark? --
Where, where is it Sirrah? -- Oh here, Come, now let us go -- I Am impatient till
-- God's Death what is that?


Ha! She Is gone Sir.


How! gone!


I have only leisure now to bid you good night Sir, and wish your leg well
cured -- to morrow perhaps, you may hear more.


A Pox fetch thee -- that is but the preamble. Still thus bubbled? -- Sirrah
help me to curse her. May she fall in love with an old man that is bedridden,
Afterward, consider of it, despair, and then poison her self with her own
Mercury


May she be proud to that degree to scorn all her Sex, Then get the small Pox,
and look like a Witch, that all her Sex may scorn her


Well sed; or may --.


May she get a great Belly by imagination -- and when she hopes to see the
precious Offspring -- may it prove Fire and Brimstone


Well sed again -- Gad thou have a pretty gift at it -- but come, now let us be
gone -- and plot how to plague her to morrow, for if I leave her thus, may I
lose all my Fame and turn Civilian

Men rail at Whores for Luxury and cost,
But believe me, all you that Judgment boast,
It Is your damned honest Women Iilt ye most.

NOble Sir Peregreene, this unexpected favor of honoring my house with your
Company is so far above my hopes -- that I want words to express my sentiments
of it


Sir, your complements put me in mind of the Debt of gratitude I owe ye -- for
my Daughters kind Entertainment: -- I fear I have too much trespassed upon your
patience


Fie Sir Peregreene, I thought you had known me better than to Imagine so
poorly of me -- your Daughter I assure ye has been a grace to my Family


Any one Sir that has the good fortune to be in her Company will rather think
it a blessing, then a trouble, especially if he be of my opinion


Sir I thank ye, and 'twas a business of Moment that brought me hither; for
yesterday in the afternoon I had a Letter from Sir Wilding Frollick --
proposing a Marriage between his Son and my Daughter


What, with Monsieur Thomas?


The same -- I am so vexed I forgot to bring it with me, 'twou'd have made you
laugh heartily -- for in my life I never saw so extravagant a style; -- now
Cousin my business in Town is, to put a stop to this Match, for I hear he comes
often to her, and against her Will too, -- does he so Cousin


Sometimes Sir -- by way of visit, or so -- but not against her consent, that
ever I heard of, and you know Sir, 'twou'd not be civil in me to deny her
visitants


Cousin, you say well -- but we Fathers perhaps have better eyes to pry into
these matters -- then your Youngsters have; she is a good Girl Sir, and I think
a Fathers Indulgence should be carefully employed in bestowing a good Girl upon
a good Man


Oh all the reason in the World Sir.


Why very well -- then to be plain, his fame is none of the cleerest -- for in
troth we hear in the Country, he is ten times more mad, and debauched since he
came from Paris, then he was before -- they say, he never says his Prayers


Not publicly I think Sir -- but he may be the better for that.


Oh no -- and between you and I, I don't relish him -- not like him I mean, and
my Judgment* and good liking have gone hand in hand these 50 years -- and think
I am not crazy now Sir; there is an Imposition laid upon us Fathers -- by the
Law of Nature -- to be Elaborate, and Zealous in our care for our Children; and
though I profess to you Cousin, I entertain no ill sentiments as to matter of
his estate, I do as to the matter of his manners; mark me, I say his manners,
for, believe me, however corrupt affections -- put a false gloss upon a Fathers
charge, yet it is certainly required of him to be very circumspect in his
consideration, when it tends to the disposal of his Children; -- but come, pray
let me see her


Sir, Im afraid she is hardly stirring yet -- but she will soon be ready -- I Will
wait on ye Sir


Cousin, your very Servant.


This Knight is as much affected with his formal Oratory as a Judge at the
Sessions House, and if his humor hold, I fear may lose* his Mistress in spite
of all his Intrigues


how do thou?


'Faith, better to see thee so well again Franck, but prithee have thou seen Tom
today


No -- what mad Rogues you were last night to make such a noise.


Did thou hear us? we were very frollicksome, that is the truth on it -- for
my part I thought he was mad


Ay, but here is one come to Town, that will spoil his mad frollicks (her
Father, Jack) he came early this Morning -- and with intent to stop all
proceedings


Her Father! God's Death what luck's this -- where is he?


Gone in with Val. to see her -- come, go with me, I Will help thee to the sight
of him


With all my heart, it may be I may do him a kindness by it -- Pox on him, has
he smelt the business out already?


Sirrah, stay you there and watch --


Yes Sir, he came this morning; and since your bounty Sir has made me your
Creature -- I cannot but inform you that he is much incensed against you -- and
if he sees you -- he may perhaps fly into more Passion


I Will be gone then. Damned Rogue, that he did not give me warning!


Sir, There Is no going out there, if you do you will meet him, You must have a
little patience -- come hither -- here is a standing Press -- that my Master
uses to hang Clothes in, Get in here and you are safe, I Am sure they will not
stay long


Pox, mewed like a Cat in a Cupboard -- what damned luck's this!


Cousin, it has been longer my study -- therefore I should know more of Men and
Manners than you -- Mum, mum -- I say to you once more she shall not have him


Sir, I am sorry he has the ill fortune to be no better known to ye; but it is
fit your Judgment should have precedence, especially, as to this affair


Ha, ha, ha -- there in that Press say thou?


Yes, Madam, and I warrant in an Ague by this time.


Hush, not a word on it -- I Will plague him for his last nights work; Sir I hope
you know my Obedience is so settled, to believe my Youth shall never make me
throw my self away upon a Man -- you dislike -- and one that I confess is the
General of all mischief -- and the lewdest, and most debauched person in Town


So -- she has hit me to a hair --


Her mind is very suddenly altered, or else this must be Cunning.


Child, remember my Caution, my blessing shall follow; and observe this as a
Maxim, (which though not in Epithetus, yet is in Aratine -- or some such merry
Book, which in troth I have forgot) That the Marriage Bed is never happy,
except the Father eats part of the Posset -- it is somewhat familiar, but the
sense is strong


Very strong Sir, and in my Judgment extends to many things.


It does so. Do ye know this Man we speak of Sir?


Some small acquaintance, Sir -- his Person, not his humor.


Your name good Sir.


Hylas -- at your Service -- Sir Robert Hylas Son of Essex.


Indeed? let me embrace ye -- your Father was my Intimate and good Friend; are
you Sir Robert Hylas Son, say ye? By my faith, I am glad to see you. Your
Father was the best Man of Land we had in Essex, when I knew him


I think he had enough to keep him warm Sir.


And you I think are his Heir -- let me embrace ye once more -- 'faith, I
should think my Daughter better bestowed, if -- but I Will not begin


Hum! -- his Daughter -- Sir I have 15 hundred or so; this would be rare -- and
she is a delicate Girl -- Well -- sit fast Monsieur Thomas -- I never refuse
blessings, I


A man of no Principles; no, I will not have you think of him.


I will not Sir -- but as of a Madman.


A Whirligigg.


A Monster -- that on my Conscience -- has more Wenches -- that take pay of
him, than the Grand Signior has


That Is a lie, for I never paid a Whore in my life.


What think ye Sir? -- I Am sure you cannot but be more my Friend than his --
Pray speak


'Faith she seems willing too -- well, I begin to be damnably in Love -- this
must be the Twentieth, I find it


Will you be so unkind to be silent, Sir? -- I Am sure this


In Town? nay in Christendom -- I think he is the greatest Corrupter of Youth,
and Debaucher of Women in the whole World


A Rare Rogue!


I marry him? what, a Fellow that makes it his business to be wicked?


That never considers on his latter end, but Wenches on to perpetuity.


Ay, and that never is out of a course of Physic, but to gain time to get in
again


Right, Madam -- that never will be found -- nor I think hardly ever was.


Very well, the Rascall's witty now he thinks me absent, But I shall make you
smart for this my damned Friend, I shall


Is this done like a Friend, Jack?


No 'faith; but it is like a man in Love, and that hopes to bubble his Friend
tho


Be not too confident of your success -- there will be some danger in it; for
you know he dares fight


Ay, but he is absent now -- why when I see him Man, I Will forswear all again.


The Rogue has a tender Conscience however.


Mr. Hylas -- in troth I like your humor, and Company so well, That I desire to
have you acquainted with my Daughter; she is a good Girl Sir -- Pray be
familiar with her


Prithee, look on this Gentleman -- 'faith he pleases me well.


Sir, I cannot doubt but in a little time his Merit, and Witty conversation --
will give me the content you receive in him -- Now he frets rarely.


Still more strange! -- sure it is not possible she can be thus flexible.


Prithee go, and address -- I believe she has a mind to thee.


Your humble Servant, Sir -- it is a happiness too great; 'S'death, this is the
Civill'st Old Fellow -- I ever met with -- Madam, be pleased to enroll me among
your Vassals


My Father's pleasure prefers ye Sir -- you may command me.


Very fine -- Faith I have been debauched to fine purpose if this last; -- but
the worst is, that this dull Rogue should bubble me -- 'S'death I shan'not have
patience


The Devil take me Val. if I can help this, it is a Fortune thrown upon me --
and you know if it were your own case --


I Will not be concerned in it Sir -- if you will venture a Beating, You may do what
you please


Sir, here is a suspicious Fellow, has been prying up and down the house for
above this hour; I believe h'has stole something


Jernie, stole something! -- I Will be Judged by all dis Company, who look most
like a the Thief, you or I


O Rascal, are you here? examine him Sir, here is one Plot or other contriving.


Sir -- this is his Rascal, his Procurer -- one that he employes to set his
Whores for him


Oh -- is he so -- I thought there was more in it than ordinary, Bring him
before me


Sirrah, bear up boldly, and fear nothing, I Will stand thy Friend.


Well, well -- and what have you to say to me you Son of a -- I say Sir -- what
have you to say to me


I say, you are his Pimp, Sir -- and by the leave of this Company shall be
whipped, and tossed in a Blanket


Ah no! -- a Jirk or so, if you please -- but no Blanket, That is a little too
ungentile -- Jernie, when did you ever see a Frenchman tossed in a Blanket? --
Where the Devil is my Master gone now


Stand by, Let me examine him; Friend, it agrees not with the reserv'dness, and
solidity of your Countenance, to be so far forgetful of your self, as to
embroile, Or rather Incumber your Wit, about this Criminal Affair


Your Servant, Sir.


Come, be genuine with me -- here is a Protector's half Crown for thee -- two
shillings five pence sterling -- and let it be a Key to unlock thy heart --
Do thou come upon any Sinister Design


Sir, upon my faith -- I stood there only to watch, that was all.


To watch us -- oh --


Placed as a Spy Sir -- come deal freely, and I Will entertain thee; What new
Pranck is your Master about


Tell that, I Have another Protector for thee.


Why then Sir, to say the truth, my Master is a plaguey -- Debauched Fellow --
he never goes to Church -- he says there is no good Company there; and my
business here was to give him warning -- if any came to disturb him when he was
with this Lady


It Is plain now he would have ravished her -- go fetch me a Cudgel, I Will make
you an Example


O Lord, Sir, what do you mean?


There Is for your Commendations, Dog.


How! -- in the Press?


Ay, it is evident -- he came to rob the house.


Nothing but confidence can bring me off, therefore have at 'em -- well,
Gentlemen -- have you looked your fill? -- pray observe me once again; it is I, I
assure ye


How! -- has he heard all then? -- what will become of me?


This is a little uncivil, by your favor, to hide your self in my house
without my knowledge


Hold Cousin -- let me speak -- Sir -- to lay the Law to you, would perhaps be
insignificant, you not understanding it; Reason too is lost upon ye, because
you are a Madman -- Yet, though these two fail -- anger -- has its full power;
Nor shall my Daughter want a Champion -- whilst she has a Father -- You
conceive me Sir -- Prepare your self


Take him at his word -- I Will be thy Second.


What, in a Game at Tennis? -- but now I think on it, thou art too dull for that
too -- for thy Wit and Courage have been much of a stamp ever since I knew
thee. Hush, not a word more -- I Will talk with you anon, Sir


I shall be swing'd -- I see there is no remedy.


Now for my faculty, I Am resolved this Jilt shall not carry it off so -- Sir,
since I see you are a Man of Honor, and Jealous, and mindful of Injuries, and
for some reason best known to my self, being now resolved that all shall out --
know, 'twas by your Daughters contrivance -- that I was shut up here


My Daughters?


Very well, he is fetching it off with a lie, but that shall not do; -- heark'ee,
Sir, what do you mean by that


Nay, Madam -- what did you mean by it. Sir, for me to say she is honest


Is a lie?


Oh Heavens!


Would not be, I confess, so like a Gentleman, but that she is given to
subtlety, and wantonness -- give me leave to confirm it; For to be faithful
with you, this was the day appointed for a certain business 'twixt she and I.
You understand me, to which purpose I was shut up there -- 'faith I must needs
say much against my own good humor and Inclinations


Umph -- I begin to discern it now, this was a Plot -- Huswife -- see my face
no more


Oh horrid Impudence! Pray hear me speak, Sir.


Sir, this must not pass, upon this Lady without better grounds.


Sir, you shall have what ground you please, and Where. What Madam, I warrant
you are amazed at this


I do confess I am.


Hark ye, Sir -- do you hear that? -- she confesses it -- after this -- sure
there is nothing remains to prove the truth of my Story: Madam, I am heartily
sorry, it should be my ill fortune to relate this -- but you must pardon me --
I do it for the discharge of my Conscience, and so your most devoted -- hark
ye, shall I lie with ye to night? -- Be kind -- I Will recover all yet -- I Will
stay half an hour for your answer at the next Tavern; consider on it --
Gentlemen your Servant -- and You Sir --


Pox on him -- what a plaguey twitch he gave me.


I hope he has forgot me, but I must follow him, and if he will be contented
with a Limb -- I Am happy.


My rage has almost suffocated me -- but I Will instantly go and cut off the
Intail of my Estate, and leave her as despicable as she has left her honor


Sir, let reason mitigate your passion, this may be all false.


May be, upon my life it is -- Pray Sir, let me speak a word with ye in
private.


Infamous Creature!


Was ever such an Impudent lie carried so prosperously? By Heaven I was so
confounded, I had no power to speak a word: I must have this recovered, and
suddenly, I Am undone else. -- He told me when he went -- he would stay for my
answer at the next Tavern -- go you instantly, and tell him I have considered,
and desire to speak with him privately in my Chamber


Yes, Madam, and I Will warrant I Will bring him back.


I have one Trick more in my head, that if it prospers, is certain to recover
all yet; for the Love I had for him is so turned in a desire of Revenge -- that
I cannot rest till it be done.


What, always in Contemplation? shall I never find thee otherwise? -- Why,
thou have quite deserted thy merry humor; Prithee Cellide, what ayl'st thou


Now I think on it, her Company may be advantageous to me, If made use of
rightly -- Come -- thou shall know all, and I must therefore confess the
subject of my thoughts was thy mad Brother


What, are ye reconciled? I am glad of that.


In a fair way to it -- he will be here within this hour, to confirm the bargain
-- and if I could, I would have his Father be by, and overhear it


I Am sure he will come willingly, for he is very much pleased with the Match, though
our Father be against it


Do, and I Will Order my Woman to place him conveniently.


Ha, ha, ha, we shall have rare sport.


Rare sport indeed -- as I will order it -- for his Father, and Sister to be by
-- when I put the Trick upon, will be a rare venture -- hark, I think he is
coming, I Will to my Chamber, and prepare for him


What, Sir, do you think I tell ye a lie? -- I hope you see more grace in my
Physiognomy -- than to believe that


Ay gad, if Deformity be a grace in a Woman -- thou I confess have a
considerable share on it


Come, good Sir, spare your Expressions till ye come to my Lady.


Away then -- Sirrah, for the last business I forgive ye. But if you fail in
your charge again


No Sir, Ill be doubly careful now -- I understand my Trade. What a Devil, I
have not been a Pimp so long for nothing


You shall find me bountiful -- but be sure to do as I bid ye, and be all ready
when I give the Sign, then leave the rest to me


Madam, we will not fail.


Away then, and watch your time.


Madam, he is come.


So. Is he alone?


No Madam, his Man is with him.


Then it is as I would have it; for I am resolved that Rascal shall partake in
my revenge -- be sure you are ready with a Rope when I give the word


Yes, Madam, I warrant ye.


But first, go to my Father, and tell him my Design to prove my Innocence --
and when his Father comes, place both the Old Men in that Window there, where
they may see all; Away, I hear him coming.


Ha, ha, ha -- have you considered then, Madam? Will you allow me a Man of Wit
now? ha, ha, ha


Nay, I confess I deserve you should laugh at me for sending to ye -- but I
swear I was not able to let you go, till you had ask't my pardon for the
affront you put upon me


An affront? not in the least 'faith -- a little harmless rallery, that was all
-- why thou art not such a Fool to think my Father believed me, Do? No, no,
he knew I was in Jest


Now is he going about another Swinger -- well, I believe I have the lying'st
Son of a Whore to my Master that ever was born-fifty an hour is nothing to him.
--


A Jest? -- what your swearing that I shut ye into the Press with Intent to
have you lie with me? a Jest


Nothing else upon my Faith. -- Come, let all be forgot; and since we have
given proof of one another's Wit -- let us now come to the trial of our Persons
-- Come my Dear -- your promise -- Pox, must


Promise, or not Sir -- you are like to stay till we are married, I Will assure
ye -- Well, are they come? and have you placed 'em as I ordered ye


Yes, Madam, there in that Window -- look up, you may see 'em.


Ha, ha, ha, -- the Rogue has her there. -- Now I shall see if he behaves
himself like a Cock of Four, or no


And I shall see how she behaves her self -- but Mum --


Come, prithee leave whispering; These Young Bawds are never good for any thing
but mischief


She shall be gone immediately -- but first for the safety of my Honor,
confess before her -- that what you sed in the Hall before my Father, was a lie


Well, I confess it was -- now begone Mistress, be gone I say; and do you,
Sirrah, hide your self below till I come, and be sure you are not seen


Hold, I must have a word with him first -- be gone, and get the Rope ready.


With Him? -- Pox, prithee lose none of thy breath with Him, let Him go.


It Is for your safety, Sir.


So, now the Old Woman's gone -- now Cock of Four.


Friend, there is a weighty business imposed upon you, for your Master's good;
for Sir Ferdinand had never pulled him by the Ears -- if Pomgranats had been in
season. Now you being a Scholar, and Homer you know loving Paremains -- sent
all the Lobsters in the Levant to Massinello the Fisherman -- You understand
me


Yes, yes -- gads noons not a word -- not I -- You say, Madam, that I being a
Scholar, proceed -- pray


You, I say, having read Aristotle -- and knowing Mice to be very destructive
to the Commonwealth, cannot but consider what your Master may suffer; for
there is as much difference in Perrukes, as in Bucklers, and the Cardinal
Bobinello loosing one of his Teeth with a Skirmish 'twixt him, and the Pigmies
-- Your Master's Interest will be left in the hand of Sir Ieoffry, or the Here
Hander van Dander Scopen; Do You conceive me


Yes, yes, I think I do. Madam, I speak 8. Languages; I assure ye therefore, I
think I understand ye


Come, come, Madam -- what business can she have with this dull Rogue?


Oh she is ready I see -- Now Sir, I come to ye.


Nay Sir, no struggling,


Damned, Cowardly Dogs -- and damned dull Rogue as I was to venture my self
here, knowing her so well


What, you are running away, Sirrah, are ye? come, the Rope, the Rope quickly.


O mercy, mercy! Why you will not be guilty of such barbarity, will you? to
hang up 8 Languages


How, how, Tom? beset, and bound -- then it is time to discover my self --
Courage, Tom -- Courage, I am here -- I Am here


Ay, and I am here too, Sir -- nay, sit still -- for here is no getting out.


How Sir Peregreene -- 'S'bud, this was a Plot,


So, this Service has obliged me -- but now begone all, and leave him to me.


My Father here too! Pox, this is worst of all -- Oh I could curse now! well,
he that loves a Woman, loves his Torment -- and he that Courts her --


Ha, ha, ha, have you considered yet, Sir? -- will ye allow me a Woman of Wit
now? Ha, ha, ha


Ha, ha, ha -- a Rare Girl I profess.


Ha, ha, ha; well, I was a damned Insipid Rogue, that is the truth on it -- but
Madam, little did I think you could have been thus ungrateful


Ungrateful! why thou shallow inconsiderate unthinking fool, Could thou
Imagine I could sleep -- and leave thy last affront unpunish't? No, all my
Faculties were turned to Thought and Revenge. Nor get ye your Liberty, till I
have it thoroughly


But what harm did I do, Madam? You know I took your part -- oh --


What, Sirrah, are you prating? I Will stop your noise.


Well, I shall get loose again -- and then if you persist in this usage, I shall
then be implacable -- You know, Madam, I have Wit


What, do you threaten me? -- I know you have Wit; Where, where is it? for my
part, I am blind to it; but I can give ye some, Sir -- thus -- and thus --


Who' Pox -- Prithee forbear -- 'S'death, this is barbarous.


O, it is a blessing you want, Sir -- and pray let me infuse it into ye -- You
cheated me, I remember, with your broken Leg, last Night Sir, and roared, and
howled, and laugh't and fooled me Sir


Oh Devil, this is past sufferance.


Told a swinging lie this morning to prove me a Whore, Sir, to my Father; for
which there is a swinging cuff, Sir


Umph -- nay enough, enough -- come -- I Will reform.


And so will I too -- I Will never Pimp for him, no -- oh --


Still prating, Rascal?


Oh that plaguey Queen -- that brought me hither.


You must have patience, Sir -- a sweet Girl I profess.


What, is the Monsieur caught? -- the plotting Monsieur? Ha, ha, ha -- this is
strange I swear Sir -- where was all your Wit


Dam her, Is she come too?


Ay, where indeed -- ah Cousin, he is so cruel to me, here have I lain
languishing this hour,


Ah Devil!


Ha, ha, ha -- what, and his Spaniel here too? What, Sirrah, Cannot your 8
Languages free ye from that Rope


Ah, would they could.


Now I think on it -- I should bestow a little Wit on you, Sirrah -- my Lying --
Pimping -- Ugly Impudent Varlet -- There Is for ye Sir


Oh! would my Master had been hanged seven years ago, rather than I had come to
this -- oh --


Again Rogue, again; ah it is gone.


Oones I am delivered by Miracle; Look up, Sir, look up -- I am free -- Nay,
'faith Madam, I beg your pardon, I must be Porter now.


How? free? nay then, Fate is mine again, Sirrah, lock the Door, and take out
the Key


It Is done, Sir.


Come then, unbind me quickly.


Cur'st Accident -- Caught again? -- help, help.


Help, help.


Ay, Faith -- I Will help ye presently, Your humble Servant, and Devoted Lover,
Madam, is making what haste he can


How! at Liberty? -- Nay then it is time to help indeed.


By Bacchus, Sir, but you shall not -- now it is my turn to be Porter; Now Son
Thomas -- now Cock of Four -- now Rogue, now


Sirrah, for this piece of Service -- there is a Lady for ye;


Ha, ha -- with all my heart 'faith -- come Madam, 'gad I have not had a touch
a great while


Ha, ha, ha, -- ha, ha, ha, what think ye now, Madam? Where Is your Wit now? --
Did I not tell you what a stubborn denial must come to? 'gad if thou scap'st me
now -- let me be recorded an Ass, and my Story put into a Ballad.


Nay, do not dishonor me good Sir; if you love me -- I Am sure you will not --
I confess I have wronged ye


Dam Confessions, Madam -- do that when the business is done, and then I Will
confess with ye


And I must confess too.


Kind, Dear Sweet Sir, help, help!


Well sed Tom, Well sed Tom, to her again Son Thomas, to her again Boy -- ha, ha,
ha


Rascal, Villain, Debauched Villain, thou will not ravish her, will thou?


No, no, Sir, upon my Faith not I; I*ll only lie with her, that is all.


Why, thou will not lie with her before my face?


Yes but I will though -- and before my own Father's face too; But for your sake,
Sir, I ll use her as kindly as I can


'Gads noones, this is sport.


Savage, Barbarous Villain -- oh Heaven! what sin have I committed, to undergo
this punishment? help, help; help --


Rather kill me Sir, than do it. Help, help.


Apox on 'em -- they have taken the Alarm -- I see -- 'gad I must dispatch -- I
find I shall be hindered else.


Help, help, -- I Am undone else -- help, help.


'S'death! What Barbarity is this? -- what were you going to do with the Lady,
Sir? ha


Why, I was going to teach her a new Dance, Val.


Ay, I believe 'twas a Dance indeed.


Kill him, kill him -- let him be murdered -- let me come to him.


Hold, hold Sir -- this must not be in my house.


I ll lay the Statute of Ravishment against him, I Will have him hanged, I Will
take the Law on him


You take a Coxcomb, will you? -- Tom, give me thy hand, Fifteen hundred a year
is thy own for this days work; And now talk of the Law, Sir, if you dare --
Tom and I will swinge ye


Now, Madam, could not you have saved all this, and been willing?


Impudent Man! could no entreaty prevail with ye? Well, from this instant I Will
shun thee as I would the Plague; and if I do speak of thee, it shall be with
Scorn, and Derision -- to curse thy ill Nature -- and Ingratitude -- to which
purpose I this Moment banish all sparks of Love -- and do here solemnly vow --
Never to see thee more


Nor I, unless it be to revenge this baseness.


A Pox on it, this comes of Interruption, if they had but stayed a little
longer, that I might have had earnest of her, all had been sure; -- but one
Weeks humble Address shall make all well again, shall it not, Sir


No Sir, Not believe I Will put up this affront so tamely: You shall hear from
me, assure your self.


Ah, let him go, Tom -- the Old Fool frets -- ha, ha.


A Pox on it, I have had the greatest Loss -- for methought my Nymph began to be
willing


Thou will?


I warrant ye, Sir, And now to you my Friends -- first Val. I beg thy pardon
for offering this in thy house -- Prithee forget all -- and from this Minute --
assure thy self -- I am thy Friend indeed


Well Sir -- having some Interest in the rest of your Frollicks, I have the
more reason to bear with this -- especially since 'twas only a Design -- But
had you gone through with your Dance -- You and I should have made but a kind
of a scurvy Salutation


For thy sake only, I am glad it happened otherwise -- Dear Franck, give me thy
hand too


With all my heart -- and believe I share a great deal of content in seeing you
two friends; for when I came in first -- I guest it would be otherwise --


I believe thou did. -- What Jack art thou behind? here come forth, and give
me thy hand too -- Come, all is forgot; Thou art a damned Inconstant Rogue, I
believe thou will confess it: but let that pass. We have all our failings


We have so -- but this Kindness in thee has so obliged me -- that I am
resolved to desert my Roaring Humor, and turn all into Friendship for thee


Well sed Cock of Four -- 'gad I like it well -- Come Gentlemen -- Pray let me
Invite ye to my house -- I Will provide a Collation, and we will be heartily merry


Come, you shall go 'faith -- for I am resolved to give my farewell to
Intrigues, with a free and merry heart; and it is fit that you that are my
Friends, should be now my Witnesses, as you shall be when I go through the
the other Gate, Marriage. And though this kind of life is least troublesome;
the other is certainly most safe: especially, if a Man can change his Temper,
else it is a Plague to him. For Marriage to a Debauchee, is a second Purgatory;
It gives him only a Prospect of Joy, or Torment, without knowing which he
shall arrive to. But I hope I know my self better, than to venture without
great Consideration to such Uncertainties

Loose Love like a thin Garment serves us ill,
And though wee'r pleased with it, we shiver still;
But I Am confirmed, let the Age be what it will,
What ever Nature in a Miss designed,
Wives only are the Blessing of Mankind.

THat I have been a Mad Old Fool to Night,
I need not tell you; but to set all right,
The Poet now makes me a Parasite.
Sends me to flatter ye, and beg Excuse,
For the Insipid Errors of his Muse:
He bids me say, the less to show his Guilt,
On the Foundation Fletcher laid, he built;
New dressed his Modish Spark fit to be shown,
And made him more Debauched, to oblige the Town.
Drink, Rant and Sing, he now takes pains to be
A perf^^t and accomplished Debauchee.
But Critics, you that never yet were known
To think there could be Sense above your own;
You that do surfeit on the Spoils of Wit,
And still have less to show, the more you get.
Like barren Ground that swallows up the Rain,
Yet is by the Industrious Hand Manured in vain,
Will in your Censures your Ill Natures show,
And with your Weeds choke up the Grain we sow.
I know you will cry, Confound this tedious Stuff,
He has not made the Spark half mad enough;
He should have been all Air, and the Mode pursue,
That is, keep Miss, kick Wise, and Run Men through:
Ashore you give good proofs of this each day;
Pray Heaven you hold and prove as mad at Sea.
But that I think there is none can doubt or fear;
No, -- Witt's a greater Plague to you than War.
Wit that is now used like a Common slave,
Both by those have none, as well as those that have.
Therefore against such to procure defense,
Not doubting the Aid of all the Men of Sense,
The Poet now the Ladies help does Crave,
That with a frown or smile can damn or save.
And as the Mighty God of Wit shines clear,
And shines upon his Favorites once a Year;
From them that Sacred Influence let him find,
That he may say he Once found Beauty kind.

