THough Modish Wit is now as public grown
As Common Women in this damned lewd Town,
Yet it is my Fate, however the World goes,
I Am sure I Am still a Fool in Verse and Prose:
Nay, Poets now ( fore George) are at that pass,
They raise their Wits by making me an Ass.
Our Scribler makes me act one of threescore,
A dull, unnatural Fop that keeps a Whore:
Poor silly Rogue -- an old Man waggish, fie,
It Is fitter for an Alderman than I:
However, to oblige and save the Play,
I Have undertook this Character to day.
I cannot choose but laugh though cause there is none, ha, ha, ha.
To see the Reverend habit I Have on:
And faith I fancy that in being thus fine,
I Am very like too sneaking Friends of mine.
One, Sirs -- you would laugh if you but heard his name,
Is one o'th Burly States at Amsterdam;
Just of my size, such hait and plodding look,
Such Doublet, such slasht Sleeves, and Knavish Cloak.
T'other's a Velvet blade of Watling-street,
Bred from his infancy to thrive and cheat;
So like me, that for him I Have often been took;
But only mines the more ingenious look.
But as vain Fop gives Gold to silken Whore,
Yet kicks the Threadbare student from his Door,
Just of that humor is this factious Fool,
And though for Sneaky he would disburse his Soul,
He Will grutch a poor clipped Shilling for his Pole.

WHat! Harry.


Dear Jack, thy humble Servant.


This was unexpected, in faith, Prithee when came thou to Town?


This Morning; and hearing at your Lodgings you were come hither, I had hardly
patience to stay and dine, for fear I should miss you, not coming time enough


'Twas a happy fear, and argues friendly love. Well, and how fare all our
Friends at Bath? hah! are thy Tenants still thrifty? Does the Old Wood stand
where it did: But I think I need not question thee; for I heard of late thou
were grown a great Husband


Why faith I am so much a Husband, as you call it, to understand that the
better the Care, the better the Purse; but my Steward can satisfy you in this
particular better than I; for I confess I am of the same temper with other
Young Gentlemen, newly come to their Estates, and do not so much consider what
I may spend, as what I can spend, still deserting the thrifty for the gentile
quality


This was thy humor I know; but if I may credit Report; thou art now quite
altered: Besides, my words carry a double sense with 'em; and by calling thee
Husband, I not only meant as to thy Estate, but the other weighty matter,
Marriage: Hal. is it so? come, confess


Why 'faith, I will; and therefore must ingeniously tell thee, one of that soft
delicious Sex has been too hard for me; for getting damnably drunk one Night, I
got damnably in love too; and was never sober till I was married


Ha, ha, ha --


Nay! I expect now you will laugh at me, knowing my former humor of
mistrusting all Women's Virtue. But know Friend, this is such a Jewel of a
Woman, so witty, so modest, so charming, so observant, so --


Hold! hold! and prithee waste thy Breath in no more of these lavish praises,
till thou have strengthened my Faith, in what thou have said already. Thou
talk of Miracles, Hal. either of these qualities thou have mentioned is more
than ever any Lady yet had to boast of. But I see thou have got the blindness
of a Husband with his condition. Go home and say thy Prayers. Thou art no Man
of this World. Hal


Yes! and of the next too Sir, let me tell you that, I have gone a good step
toward it already. Come prithee desert this roving humor of thine, take a
Friends counsel, grow solid, do -- grow solid, and marry, 'faith it is the sober
part of Man's Life -- I have considered it: you know I have rambled my self ere
now, and know what belongs to Mistresses, Garnitures and Fiddles; but by the
way, let me tell you, a Mistress breaks a Bone, but a good Wife sets it again.
There Is a Proverb for ye


Well, so much for Marriage, Hal. that necessary Ill as many call it. But to
requite your Proverb, let me tell ye; a Mistress only cracks a Man's
Purse-strings; but a Wife his Heart Strings: Give me thy Hand, I have
considered that too


Sir, I grant this may be true in some Cases, your jilting, wanton, costly,
squeamish mallapert London Wife, that will be seven years wooing, and use her
several Lovers according to her several Humors, I allow may deserve this
Character: but mine, although she was bred at Court, and is a Person of Eminent
Quality, yet as I have molded her, is now a pretty, humble, good-natured,
innocent Country Wife, one that will --


One that will lie with a Man at first sight, and never put him to a seven
years Court-ship


Phoo! Prithee no more of this; thou art too severe: What a Pox do think I
have married a Messalina! a Dol Common -- This is as I feared -- but I Am
resolved he shall be ignorant of her being now in Town; I see he cannot leave
his old humor


Well! to confirm the contrary, prithee let me see her; come, I know thou have
brought her to Town with thee


To Town! That Is a good one in faith: Bring a young breeding Lady to Town, that is
the way to have her long for every thing she sees: no, no! I understand things
better than so -- Poor Soul, she is at home spinning. She --


Spinning! an excellent Employment; and as wholesome and necessary a Debauch
for a Woman, as Whoreing and drinking is for a Man. The Wheel is a kind of an
implicit Pimp; and while she is whirling it about to spin a fine Thread for
her Sheets, it gives her thoughts the liberty of imagining how she shall wear
'em out: Then adding the blunt Stories of the Country Wenches her Companions,
and the relish of a Bawdy Song now and then; Oh! it is as necessary an exercise
as I would wish a Woman


Hey! why thou art mad sure. Death, is there no difference in Women?


No faith! that ever I could find; blow but out the Candle --


Then let me inform you the contrary; for mine is the only happy Creature that
had power to make me forbear affronting the Sex. But hold --

You were lately talking of pimping; I ha no skill in Phisiognomy; but here is a
Fellow making up to us; methinks has an admirable Face for such a Business


Hush -- He Is one of my Creatures, an Utensil I have now and then occasion for
-- Now Sirrah! what News


News, quoth a! sincerely I am ashamed to tell you; and my Heart bleeds within
me, to think you should have no more Consciscience in you. The my Mistress be a
weaker -- O, frail Woman! yet you should, methinks, temper your Concupiscence
-- Sincerely you should, Sir -- Fie, fie: I Am ashamed on it; and I begin to
think too, that mine is but a scandalous Employment, sincerely


Sirrah, it is a noble one. A Pimp is both an Ancient and Honorable Employ.
What, Rascal, do you murmur at your Vocation? Come -- the business -- is the
Frollick done to night


Lord, Sir, -- have you no Religion! no spice of it in ye: Why if not for my
sake, take care of your own Soul, Sir -- Take care of your Soul


Leave your howling, Dog; and tell your message quickly. Sirrah -- you could
speak softly the other night, when you took my Guinny. Rogue you could


Ay! you know my blind side, sincerely: You know I am a mortal Man.


You talk of Religion, Rascal, Sirrah, don't I know you got a Wench with Child
when you lived with my Lord Acrelesse -- and afterward contrived to have it
brought upon the Parish


I, Sir! 'Twas my Lords Scullion got it: 'Twas none of me, sincerely: I Would have
you to know I scorn the scandal. I get her with Child! no: Thank my Education,
I am a Maid -- I --


A Maid! a precious one. Well, whether you did or no, tell me the message
quickly, or this shall search for it


Hold, hold, Sir, what you will not murder me, sincerely! will ye?


I know not! do not trust me. Come, Dog, there is half a Crown for ye; say
quickly now. --


Well! adsniggs Mr. Welford, you are such a confounded Whipster, there is no
denying you any thing when you have a mind to know it. Lend me your Ear --


In the Grove behind my Lord Richlands --


Ay, Sir; but you must make haste, for it is near the time.


You are sure the Old Fellow will not fail --


Very sure, Sir; his discourse for above this week has been nothing but hard
Words, Charms and Conjurations, and has such a mind to be young again, that he
misses not a tittle, sincerely. -- You are wag to use him so, you are, you are: but
gad mend ye, gad mend ye


Go, Sirrah; prepare every thing, and tell her I Will be there immediately. Go,
Rascal -- Ha, ha, ha


What, an Intrigue, Jack! I told you I knew that Fellows Business by his Face.


Prithee, do not abuse the Poor Fellow; for he is as necessary in this affair to
me, as he that gave thy Wife at Church was to thee. But see, yonder is Will.
Lovel, and the rest of the Bowlers; there is some humors amongst them, that
will divert thee, Hall -- Prithee excuse me now, because I have a little
business -- But thou know my Old Lodging: to morrow I Am thine all day


No; it is resolved he must not see, nor know my Wife, while she is in Town.


Hal; I am all wonder to find thee here. I heard thou were married, and had
resolved to desert all thy old Friends in Town


No such matter, Sir, a Wife will hardly get such power over me -- I am my
Friends all day, though I am hers at night, Will


Colonel, you were talking of Toledo's, here is one for you, look upon it; look
upon it again, Colonel; you have looked, you have surveyed it well


I have, Sir Fredrick.


Well, now take it and run me through with it; pshaw, what a Man of Blood, and
sflinch -- Do it, I say. Run me through, I Have a trick in it --


By the Life of St. Gregory, Sir Fredrick; what mean ye, are you compos Mentis?


Look now: He has spoiled my trick, quite ruined my device, by King Ieffery.
Why Colonel, if you had run me through, gad I would have shown you the most
cunning trick, the most intricate sophistick matter, that ever Eyes beheld: I
would have caused Sack, Rhenish, and Claret to have gusht from the Wound; I
would have made you drunk by transpiration, with a box on the Ear made you
sober again, healed up the Orrifice in a trice, and then gone to Supper with
the Pox -- Not run a Man through, when he desires you


Hey day! Here Is a pleasant humor in faith; prithee what is he?


Why the only Buffoon of Town and Country, Sir Fredrick Banter; one that has
spent the best part of his youth in observing and practicing the ridiculous
humors of the age, and the more mimicry he has in his Actions, the more he
thinks himself accomplished: a great bowler: but amongst all his humors this
of bantring people he most delights in


Bantering, prithee what is that?


I Will tell you, Bantring in his sense is divided two ways; one is a manner of
gabling, by doubling the Tongue; which makes you think they tell a story, when
they say nothing: And the other, is telling ye a prolix, ridiculous, incredible
story, with the face of truth, answering your question with a tedious lie; and
the jest is in amuzing you half an hour, in hearing an impertinent, prodigious
narration of wonderful matters, full of nonsense, and far from the purpose --
See, he is at it, prithee observe him --


Colonel, I know you are a Man in favor, and if you would but --
bublinshrundish -- the same again, the oblishbrutiglish would advantage the --
whishmstolshed in the greatest manner imaginable


What would you have me do, Sir Fredrick?


Why look you, I say you are a Man much beloved at Court: Now, what were it for
you to wshilbeminishiemdlidge the King, about infedgingldgninry upon
apprehension to usludingell grindidliddintolwish -- in kindness to your friend


I beg a Pention of the King, do you say?


No, no: I don't talk of Pention, I say; pray observe me, I say were it my case
as it is yours; I would subberlinledge ningldruidge to any Friend, and then,
mergnmurgnledg and the worth prilugillux coming in! Gad I would


What, Sir?


What, Sir! why, what a Devil don't you understand me?


By the Blade, not a word, not I.


Ha, ha, ha, do not! give me thy hand then, I have a little imperfection! ha,
ha. Will. did hear me


Ay, ay, Sir. Now, is it not as I told thee?


Yes, and I find he is much taken with it! but, by Sir Fredricks leave though, I
should sooner break his head than stay so long to let him break his jest, were
I the Person. But prithee are there any. such people


O many Sir, I assure you -- It Is a very Modish humor now adays -- That other
there is a Colonel of the last age, an honest merry blunt Fellow, a little
vain, if you get into his Element of fighting, but else a very good companion
-- But the best of our company is wanting, one 'Squire Oldsap, a credulous
merry old debaucht fool, one that though he be too crazy himself for Women, yet
he keeps a Wench for the credit on it. The pleasant'st threescore and three thou
ever saw -- Pla -- Faith this was good luck, yonder he comes, prithee
observe him, Hal


Lovel, merry be thy heart Lad, my Son, Son of the Ooldsaps, I Will call thee so,
shall I? For a Man that keeps his word with me shall not only be my Son, but
my Sons Son, nay my Sons Sons Grandson! if affinity will do it -- hah, Sir
Fredrick, by the Marry Maskins I Will kiss thee too. Prince. -- Prince of the
Jokers, prithee let me kiss thy hoof, do -- let me, my Merry wagg --


By King Iesfery, by no means, Squire. Well, but a pox on thee, how do thou
do, Old Jewstrump


Very well, Sir Fredrick! Very well! better and better! by the Marry Maskins,
-- whoop, -- why who is here -- what my noble old Friend Col. Buff too, let me
kiss thee, old stump of honor: Before George I could jump for joy to see thee:
hah! old Lad


Whirr! why this is Whirligigg.


The mock of Regeneration? but hush, we shall have more yet.


Gramercy Squire in faith! I see thou art a merry shaver still, by the Blade,
thou hold'st out bravely. But prithee, my merry spawn of the Oldsapp's what
do thou mean by this, this Cap here? Thou art not going a Morrice-dancing,
art thou


A Morice-Dancing! why merry be thy heart Colonel, what Jokes upon me, -- hah,
-- before George it is well I am in have I should pound you else, by the marry
maskins I should -- This Cap, Sir, let me tell you, was --


I Will tell you what 'twas Colonel. I was acquainted with it before him. This
Cap, Colonel, was the Cap of Fortunatus, the wishing-Cap. You have heard of the
wishing-Cap, have not you


Sir, I have heard of some such thing.


Yes, yes, it is very well known abroad. It Is in the Chronicle. This Cap Colonel;
(Mercy upon us who would imagine it?) This Cap has been the death of many a
Bishop


A Bishop! Sir Fredrick! Marry Heaven forbid, how?


Why they died Sir, no one knows how -- but they died -- The very lining on it
had like to broke the Heart of two or three Queens


It Is impossible! why, good Sir Fredrick? what virtue can there be in the
Lining of this Cap? --


O wonderful, wonderful: 'Twill draw Teeth, that is one thing.


Teeth!


Ay, or cure the Gout; the New Spring is nothing to it.


Ha, ha, ha.


Pish, ye jest, ye jest, I Will never believe it.


Well, said Sir Fredrick, you are full of your merry humors I see; but take it
from me, this is no jesting matter: for let me tell you, how slightly soever
you think of it, this same Cap here is worth Two Millions in Money


What the Devil does he banter how?


Two Millions! how, prithee Squire, how?


How! why there is Magic in it. It Is full of Magic; 'twas the Cap of Michael de
Scoto: The Florentine Necromancer, and with the rest of his Robes, which I have
here in this Bundle, together with some Ceremonies which shall be nameless, has
power to convert Age into Youth -- You shall see me to morrow a Spark of one
and twenty


Ay, you may fancy what you will, Mr. Oldsapp, but by the Blade I can find no
reason in what you say


Reason! before George, the Colonel is a little soft too. Why, it is Magic:
it is Magic, Man: it is above Reason: Lord, how dull he is


Confound 'um, these are the most insufferable Coxcombs: I shall never have
patience --


I have told my Sneaky on it already, and poor Rogue she is so overjoyed -- she
has such hopes of me, poor Queen. Well I Will about it instantly. And pray
believe that nothing but so pressing an affair could take me from my merry
Bowlers. But to morrow, like Jupiter, and Mars, and Mercury: Venus, Diana, and
the rest of the Gods, I will appear and frollick and frollick my merry wags; --
to try, to try, -- ah Rogues! well adieu


Ah, go thy ways old Baboon. Well, by King Ieffry, it is a strange thing men
should be such Fools


Come Sir Fredrick, let us go in and drink a Bottle before we bowl, in faith my
Westwhaphlia, at Dinner, has made me as dry as dust


With all my heart, Col. Will. Lovel, will thou go?


I Will follow you, Sir. Come Hal, will thou make one? I Am sure thou can not
meet with better diversion


No: a pox on it, I am weary of 'em already: for I am as much tired with the
extravagance of a Fool, as with riding of a jaded Hackney. Besides I am weary,
and will go presently to Bed; but to morrow I Will see thee again


Farewell, Hal.


WELL, confess now; art not you a wicked, lewd, debauched wretch, to hire a
Fellow to put such a trick upon the poor Old Man, and now to stay here thus
with me, for any thing I know upon some ill design


And are not you a cunning, vile, deceitful Damsel, not to tell the Old Dotard
of the Cheat, when you knew of it, and could have betrayed me: but now to dare
to send for me; in faith I fear, intending some outrage upon my Person: Hah, are
not you a Wicked Wretch


Sincerely: The truth is you are both wicked Wretches: and I Am afraid the Devil
will have ye, that is in short. First, for cozening my old Master. Secondly, for
polluting your self. And thirdly, and principally, for abusing a Man of such
eminent parts as I am. But such whipsters as you, are too hot to have any
consideration, sincerely. --


Why, Dog! are you murmuring again? I have not had ashillings worth yet of your
moldy conscience for my half-Crown, and are you at your reproofs already? --
but I Will --


A treacherous grumbling Rogue! Cut's throat, cut's throat.


Ay, ay! his throat. Carve him, Carbonado him. His throat, quoth a -- hold,
hold, Sir -- what mean ye


Sirrah! Swear! swear desperately too, to be true to the intrigue, and do what
you are commanded, or I will rip ye up from the Navel to the Nose


Hold, hold: I will, I will --


Swear then, not one of your sneaking equivocating Phanatick Oaths, such as
oddsniggs! by the Mass! odsniggers, and the like. But a good Heroic, Romantic
Oath. Sirrah, let me see, swear by the Sun, and Moon, and seven Stars


O Profane, Monstrous, Irreligious; is not the seven Stars enough, but you must
bring the Sun and Moon upon the Stage too? sincerely it smites my Conscience:
and I had rather swear Muggleton's Oath -- by Sodom and Gomorrah, than swear by
the Sun and Moon -- I had sincerely --


Do It, Sirrah; or expect what follows. Come say, by the Sun, and Moon, and
seven Stars


By the Sun, and Moon, and seven Stars --


I Will do it --


Well, I Will do it; but odsniggars, Mr. Welford, if ever I take you at an
advantage --


How, Rascal, odsniggers after such an Oath? What an offense is this?


Ay, a horrid offense indeed -- why, Sir, -- will you give a Man no liberty of
Conscience! sincerely, I did it to give a relish to my Mouth, after the other
lewd Execration


A Pox OF your Chilblain Conscience. But hark, I think I hear one coming.


It Is my old Master.


So, I see he keeps touch; you have placed the Fellows ready, Madam.


All ready; I instructed them this Morning --


Come, let us be gone then: Sirrah, you know your Business.


Ay, I do know my Business, and will follow it: I Will go home and read a Chapter
-- Sincerely you shall find Pimpo another manner of Man than you take him for


Why, Dog, Sun of a Whore, you will not forswear your self, will ye?


Not I, Sir; I only spoke of the Sun and Moon in Cheapside; I did not swear --
and sincerely, Mr. Welford, I do not understand your hide and seek, not I: nor
shall you impose upon my Judgment, Sir


Your Judgment, Baboon! This damned Rogue knows he has me on the hip: Well,
Sirrah, there is another half Crown for you, see if you can afford me a better
Pennyworth now -- Come, let us go -- We shall be seen anon, and spoil all --


So; this is something yet; it is a strange thing! now my Conscience that was
within this Minute as narrow as the Muzzle of a Trumpet, is as wide as from
hence to Aldgate: Certainly this mettle has Witchcraft in it -- for a Key of
Gold shall open an Iron-Lock, though the Devil thrust his horn into the Keyhole.
Well -- I must do it -- here he comes, now for the conjuration --


O, Pimpo!


O, Sir, I am glad you are come, sincerely; the hour is almost past.


Oh! I would not have it past for the World.


Nor I neither, Sir; come unstrip, unstrip, have you got all your things ready?
--


Ay, ay, -- here in this Bundle: Oh, if the Charm be but strong enough, Pimpo,
I shall be made for ever


Ay, Sir, my Mistress will be overjoyed to find such alteration.


Ha, ha, ha; -- ay, so she will poor Rogue, I warrant she will be transported.


Ay, Sir.


Look, I have got all my things ready; first, here is my Circle, in this I am to
conjure up Concupisence in the likeness of a Water-Rat


Very well, Sir.


Then here is my dead Mouse, and my couple of Snails, to invoke the Queen of
Fairies. And this is my Sirrup of Cacademons, to anoint my Face with


So.


Then here is my Charm, and the Magician told me 'twould be more powerful, and
much the better, if I sung it to a Godly Tune; ha, what think'ft thou


Oh, Sir, have a care of that: sincerely 'twill spoil all; besides, Sir, under
favor, you have but a scurvy voice, and from you any thing will be like a
Godly Tune, 'twill be all one


I think so too; for, the truth is, as thou say, Pimpo, my Voice is not
extraordinary. But come then, bind my Head and Hands, and anoint my Face, that
we may begin. --


With all my heart, Sir -- so now kneel down, Sir, and wink -- nh nh --


Keep it from my Mouth as much as thou can, for though the Virtue on it be
extraordinary, it has but an ill taste


There -- let me look on ye now: ha! odsniggs, what do I see? what Miracles are
these


Hah, what say thou, Miracles?


Why Sir -- you are grown monstrous fair.


Ha, ha, ha, am I?


Sincerely, I am amazed at it; how! how do you feel your self, Sir?


Why, before George, very brisk; and methinks four or five of the hairs of my
Beard are fallen away of the sudden


Well, Sir; There Is your Wand, and I Will go aside and pray for you.


Oh prithee do not talk of Prayer, Man; the Devil will be angry then, and make
me older than I am


Well, Sir, I Will be careful. Odsnigs I shall laugh out.

Draw near ye Spirits, that dispense
Your Powers over Concupiscence;
Bring all your Spells, and come along,
To make an amorous Old Man young!
Whose frozen Ioints, long since have cooled his passion,
But now he sighs, and blows, and puffs, for generation;
Come, come away; your assistance confer,
And then I shall be tho happ^est Old Cur,
The happiest Old Cur in the Nation.

Hark, now the great Devil is whistling the young Cubbs together -- Ohhow I
tremble

How frail is old age to believe
Their, Sinnews can even be strong.
or think that a heap
of Diseases can reap
The Pleasures of him that is young.

He plunges in care let him do what he can,
So wretched a thing is a doting Old Man.
His Life has been spent in Debauch,
Till he comes to be sixty or more,
And so wenches on
Till his vigor is gone,
And then the Old Letcher gives over.

A passion that is sickly can never be strong;
And an old doting Fool is far worse than a young.

Ha, ha, ha.


What Is this I hear? do they mock me?


Ha, ha, ha.


Oh, what shall I do? I have mist something now, and the Devils laugh at me for
it


Oh, oh, murder, murder.


That was Pimpo's Voice -- Oh I am in an Ague.


Whiz, buz, bough.


Oh, good Devil, avoid Satan; sweet Devil, do not hurt; avoid Satan, avoid; Oh,
oh, --


Oh, I Am murdered, I Am murdered, they have me by the Nose: oh, oh -- So,
there is Love tied to a Tree

And now to my young Whipster, that lies yonder in the Bed of Honor; there is
half a Guinney more at least, Well, it is a pretty employment this, in faith -- if
a Man carries policy with it, and sincerely is more in use, than People
imagine. But they want my skill to wheedle and sooth iniquity -- ah, Signior
Pimpo is a brave Fellow at it

For to connive at Crimes and vile Transgression,
Is the best rule for one of my Profession.

IF you would give me no cause to doubt your love or obedience, be careful of
this particular, and let no one know of our Marriage, or that you are in Town,
till I give you further notice. I have some reasons, which I may not discover,
which force me to be thus strict with you: But, my Dear, 'tie for thy good,
assure thy self


I confess, I am wholly ignorant of your design, and therefore can say little
to the Business: But what will my Friends think, when they know I am in Town,
and have not so much kindness as to come and see 'em; did not you promise me I
should have the privilege to see all my Relations -- and do what I would? --


I acknowledge I did; but there has something fell out since, which has made me
alter my resolution: Prithee have but a little patience, and thou shall see 'em
all


But hark ye, Sir, to come nearer to the matter, are not you infected with the
Epidemick Disease of Mankind, Jealousy


Jealousy! prithee Cozen; what, I jealous?


This prohibition seems to imply as much; but, if you are, it is no Crime as the
World goes now: For, a Man of this Age can no more forbear being jealous, (if
his Wife be handsome) than one of the last could forbear living from her, if
she were old or ugly --


Faith a good observation; why, now I see thou have loved Songs and Play-Books
thus long for something: But, my pretty pert Kinswoman, give me leave to tell
you, I am no such jealous Coxcomb; I have too good a knowledge of my person and
sufficiency to be jealous, I thank ye --


I must confess that is an excellent rule for prevention; but, here is another
weighty question to be resolved: for, suppose now that she should not be so
well satisfied in your person and sufficiency; what then, Sir? what then


Faith that is enough to make a Man jealous indeed: But, what say thou to
that, my dear


I never doubted any thing; nor can any Disease (accident or misfortune)
whatsoever, abate any of my affection: I love ye so well, that it is impossible
I should ever think ill of ye, were ye never so wicked


Ah -- poor Soul -- ay -- here is a Wise now -- well -- when thou art dead, I Will
have thee canonized for a Saint


Hah -- when she is dead -- perform the part of a loving Husband; and to
convince her that you are not jealous -- constrain not your Wife to keep within
doors -- for, a Woman that is forced to keep her Beauties unseen, will spend ye
200 l. a year in getting Pictures drawn, in little, to send abroad to her
Friends


Very well -- you have a great deal of Judgment, I see.


Ay, a little -- I have not read Songs, Romances, and Play-Books so long for
nothing, you know. Then, first, buy her a Glass-Coach that she may be seen in;
do; a Glass-Coach -- do, I say


Bless me; this prating Jilt, will persuade me out of my Reason. Prithee,
impertinence, leave me: a Glass-Coach, in the Devils name! Come, come, my dear,
let us go


Sir, here is Mr. Lovel coming down the walk, and another with him.


Death, he will see us presently; come, come away.


Don't go, Cozen; what, does he think to make Nuns of us? I say we will see the
Man


But I say you shall not; do not provoke me -- but go --


Come -- prithee do not vex him --


Vex him! well I Will go; but if I be not revenged --


Sirrah, go you home with 'em, and excuse my absence at Dinner; and take a
particular notice, who has access to 'em; and about nine a Clock at Night, bid
the Fellows bring the Sedan up to the Cock in Bow-street


Yes, Sir --


I think she is virtuous, and I have reason to think so. However, I am resolved
to keep her concealed, till my business is done, and then, watch her, as I see
occasion; but here comes Lovel, and the Devil I think with him; no matter, I am
for no drinking match these two hours. I have business


Ha, ha, ha; By Heaven, Squire, this is the strangest adventure; all this Night
tied to a Tree, say you


Ay, before George, have I; and been almost drowned with the Rain; besides the
fright the dancing Devils put me to, when they tied me up


Faith, by your Face, a Man would guess you had been in the Devils Company,
that is the truth on it


My Face! well, that makes me some amends however. -- And prithee how is it, am
I taking, hah -- how do like my countenance


Oh, pray guess, Sir, guess; for my part, I have not wit enough to speak my
admiration


Why, this is a Devil!


A Copy of him, Sir.


And I am the same Old Fellow, I used to be, am I?


The very same, only a little altered in complexion.


Complexion in the Devils name --


Or else I see no difference.


Why then the Conjurer's a Dog -- and I Am resolved I Will go instantly and take
the Law of him


Oh, have a care of that, Sir, the Law's chargeable.


I care not: I Will do it: for I Am as implacable as an angry Fish-Wife that has
caught the Fellow that picked her Pocket. For, first I Will have his Ears nayl'd
to the Pillory, for perjury: Then I Will bring him within the Statute of
Witchcraft; and have him hanged without benefit of Clergy


'Faith -- I must needs say 'twas a great affront, and a grand imposition upon
a Man of your quality; besides, I think, Sir, you are never the younger neither


Why no; would I were hanged if I find any alteration at all.


Why, what ill luck is that? but certainly, Sir, there must be more in this
business than you imagine: Nor does the affront only lie upon the Fellow. Pray,
Sir, who brought you to this Conjurer


Jack Welford; thou know him, one of our Brother Bowlers.


There, there lies the plot -- it is plain, Sir; why, to my knowledge he has
been in love with your Mistress this half year and more, and who knows but this
may be a trick upon you, by his means


What he in love with my Sneaky!


Ay, Sir, that I can assure you; why did you never take notice on it -- Did you
never see 'em together --


Yes, often, but I never doubted any thing: for before George, I always took
him for a very honest Fellow


Why, Sir, who doubts it -- he is so -- a very honest Fellow; and though he lies
with your Wife, your Sister, your Aunt, your Kinswoman, your Mistress -- your
--


The Devil and all -- my Mistress, before George: that word enraged me beyond
all patience: and he shall know, that invading a Man's Propriety in his
Mistress is Death by Wenching Law -- and he deserves the stab -- I Will murder
him instantly


Sir, know me so much your Friend that if my Sword and Arm can do you any
service to revenge your wrongs you shall command me


Sir, I thank ye; but I Have another way to work with him, which shall be done
suddenly -- and so farewell. But hark ye, if you will do me the favor to let me
see you at my House this Evening -- I have a secret to deliver to you, in which
you may sensibly oblige me: Till then I Will take my leave


Sir, I will not fail ye. Happy minute!

Fortune in this is more my Friend than ever; for I have long loved this
Woman, but he keeps her so close, that I could never get access to her, and
that he should introduce me: it is a pleasant one in faith, my disclosing Welfords
Intrigue furthers my own design; for when he is removed, I have more freedom:
It Is not so like a Friend, but it is like a Man of pleasure, and that is the rule
I must walk by --


WHY, Sir, I tell you once more: I found him gone, untied and gone --


How was it possible, Rascal, he could get loose if you had played the faithful
Servant, and tied him last enough


I know not what you mean by that; but if a new Rope, strong enough to hang us
all, could tie him fast enough, I am sure I did it -- ah would it were to do
again, I would think better on it sincerely --


And so would I; you should not get such power over me if it were to do again.


What has this notorious, dissembling Rascal, taught you a fit of the
Conscience too? Faith, I am more in love with the humor than ever; it shows
thee a discreet ingenious Woman; and such a one, if she has a scruple arises in
her Conscience, which is very seldom, it shall be sure to be after the business
is done, for then she is at leisure


Well, I swear Mr. Welford, this insulting temper of yours will lessen my love
to you; what Woman could bear this, especially from a Man that has had so many
evident proofs of my kindness, as you have


rather than put you to the trouble of squeezing out a tear, I will confess my
self ungrateful: but here is a Rascal, that though he looks like a
Fifth-Monarchy-Man, and talks like a Quaker, has a Conscience tougher than a
Buck-Skin; is a greater Atheist than a Bully that owns it his profession; and
for mischief --


What mischief, Sir, what mischief, sincerely I am ashamed to hear you talk
thus; and wonder how you can have the face to abuse an honest, worthy person
thus: For, as great a Rascal, as you make of him; there are some Gentlemen,
that shall be nameless, are glad to keep him company, and thank him too, when
they have occasion to make use of his parts


Ay, Sirrah; a Rascal, like a Bullet, is then only necessary when we intend to
do mischief: but what excuse can thou have for thy last pranck: did not
thou tie thee poor old Gentleman to a Tree? was not that a great Crime


And did not you in the mean time lie with his Mistress? was not that a greater
Crime


How, Sirrah, with me, why thou impudent, ugly, impertinent, sneaking,
dissembling, cheating, lying, Son of a Whore -- ud's life, lend me your Sword,
that I may cut his Nose off --


Nay, nay, if she be provoked, it is time to run; sincerely I had rather lie at
the mercy of a Thunderbolt -- and less harm 'twou'd do me


Ha, ha, ha -- it is such an old Rascal: but I think it is best for me to
consider of my safety; for if the old Fellow is got loose, there is no staying
for me here; thou know it is now almost Night -- and he cannot be long absent
-- besides I want Linen


Madam, Sir Fredrick Banter, and Colonel Buff, came into the House unknown to
me, and are just coming up


Pox take Sir Fredrick, run and tell him I am not within.


Madam, I did tell him so -- but he told me I ly'd; he heard your Voice.


A Devil of your diligence.


Sir Fredrick! Oh for Heavens sake, Madam, let me go; I would not have him see
me here for the World --


Death and Confusion! what makes him here to disturb me?


Madam, sweet Madam, your humble and devoted Servant. Colonel -- come, now your
Honor


Your Servant, Lady --


Well said, the Colonel is a Soldier, Madam, you must pardon his behavior.


Any thing, Sir, rather than give you the trouble of repeating it. You, Rogue,
are the cause of this --


Ah! I see by her looks she is vexed at their being here; but it is all one, she
shall find I can resent an affront: She shall, sincerely


Sirrah, do you think that I Will ever put up this injury?


And do you think that I Will exercise my learned faculty for nothing?


Nothing, Rascal, do all mine and Mr. Welford's Gifts amount to nothing?
bedsies the Sallary I give; which, since you can forget, Sirrah -- I Will give
you some cause for it, and from this moment will pay it no longer


Well, if you will pay no longer, sincerely -- I Will pimp no longer; and so your
Friend and Servant: But, hold, now I think on it, I Will stay till Mr. Welford
comes, because he owes me an Angel


An Angel! for what?


Why for some service done Yesterday; Lord, you are mighty forgetful: Come,
come, Madam -- places are not so scarce, that a Min of my industry should want;
here is a Person of Quality not far off, that to my knowledge will be glad of
me, and give my Function due recompense; there is Madam


Madam -- my carnest desire to see you, with a little other Business, which the
Colonel in due time shall deliver to you, made me guilty of this rudeness


I am in such a confusion, and so tortured in my thoughts for Welford -- I hear
not one word they say -- what were you saying, Sir Fredrick


Why, did you not hear me, Madam, did not you hear me? Faith I Will banter her --
why I was saying, Madam, that if Mr. Welford had made his address to the Mogul,
before the Cattamountains of Padua had taken their degree, the Alarm had been
given to the Swedes, from the Swedes to the Switzers, and then the Pomegranates
had straight been taken out of the mouth of the Turks, and given to the
Germans, a plain case; and then Champaign had been twelve-pence a Bottle by
this time


No Minute; but just at such a time: Well, Sir, and what then?


What then? hey day -- if she should banter me all this while, 'twere a good
jest --


Pray, Sir Fredrick, that again; I confess my thoughts were a little busy.


You are melancholy, Madam; I see you are out of humor, I can guess the cause
too; but fear nothing, Madam, all shall be well again: Pray be merry -- Come
the Colonel shall give you a Song, do old Pot-gun; sing the Battle of Mardike


Oh no more of that, good Sir Fredrick; for my part I am no Songster -- that is
a good one indeed -- why, when did you know a Soldier sing well, unless it
were to a Trumpet, or a Drum


Was ever Creature so tortured? Pray then, Sir, since you cannot sing, and that
I know the business of you Men of War with Visitants, is only to divert 'em
with a Story; let me desire the favor to hear from your own mouth, your own
actions in the War, I know it is the best thing you can talk of, and the
strangeness of it I doubt not will divert me too --


Now, Colonel, charge her, she is in thy Province, charge her I say, old Pollux;
hark ye; show her the Shot in thy Groin


Pish, Madam; leaving the story of my life for some fitter opportunity, give me
leave first to inform you of something that concerns you


Concern me! sure this old Mortar-piece knows nothing of my Intrigue, does he?
Concern me


Nearly, Madam; Mr. Oldsap is this night engaged in a Rencounter; Sir Fredrick
and I heard of it at the Tavern just now from Will. Lovel -- who I believe is
concerned


A Rencounter! if my Welford should be there now; oh how my heart aches --


But the main person aimed at, is Mr. Welford --


Oh, Gods! what do I hear?


For my part, they are both my Friends; and therefore I would have a prevention
-- Pray, Madam, view this Sword --


Hell and Death, I am distracted; who is within there? who is there? are you all
deaf


Madam -- by your leave a little, pray handle this Sword --


Burn the Sword, would it were rusty to the Hilt: Oh this Witch too; whither is
she gone


What Is that, rusty -- ha, ha, ha -- but I must bear with her, she is a little
simple: rusty quoth a -- 'Sbud, the Nation would be in a fine condition if this
Sword were suffered to be rusty


From the Moon say you, Sir?


From the World in the Moon.


A Whale as big as all Garnsey.


Bigger, bigger.


Ha, ha, ha -- he is bantring the poor Fellow.


Mercy upon us; what prodigies are these? and yet I warrant, maugre all this,
our wilful Nation will keep on in their sinful courses still


Ay, the more's the pity; but it is well he is taken -- for he has done a world of
mischief


Has he so?


Oh, ay, he had like to have swallowed the Isle of Wight.


The Isle of Wight, sure never was the like known -- I never heard a word on it
till now -- it is not in Muddiman's Letter


Oh no, he is lazy, the Gazet out-does him; but you shall have some
Figure-flinger or other cast the Nativity on it; when new Almanacks come in
season


Very strange! but pray, an't like your worship, How comes this Whale hither?


Why, in a Hand-Bakset.


Sir --


A Hand-Basket! look, look, thou starest now! Spinola's Hand-Basket -- Fool
Made purposely in the Moon for this occasion. And some Astrologers hold, that
this is Spinola's Whale too -- and designed by the Mogul of the Moon, a present
to the French King, that his Army might have Oil to their Sallets --


Ha, ha, ha, -- by the Blade -- a pleasant humor.


Well, this must portend something; for I never heard of a Whale in my Life,
but that some body or other died presently after


Come hither, and give me thy hand; Colonel, your company too -- hum do thou
see this here --


Yes, Sir.


Within this little Vessel is contained Steruntatorium Mivaculosum, or, The
Powder of Sciences -- have a mind to be learned, will thou speak Greek


Not I, Sir, it is not for my profit to be a Scholar.


No! Well then, do thou love singing?


Oh extremely, Sir.


Do thou? here, take then, take, thou shall do it to a Miracle: Tarlton shall
be nothing to thee. Come, snuff up -- there -- come now, begin, try, try -- oh
-- weak, weak; the other touch --

There now, sing, ha, ha, ha, go thy ways I Will warrant thee for a Songster.


Sincerely, methinks -- it is but a scurvy -- tune -- though -- of my Nose -- my
Nose --


Oh, for Heaven's sake go and part 'em; yonder is my Master and Mr. Welford
fighting in the Street, and my Mistress is run out like one distracted


It Is so; come Sir Fredrick, I am resolved there shall be no foul play --


NO Sense of Honor, Dogs?


Down with the Traitor, down with him; kill him, kill him.


Hold, set me down -- hah, fighting at this time of Night; it may be one of my
Friends is beset -- stand ye here till I come, I am resolved to go and see --


Yonder, they are; go quickly, and do your office --

Though Welford is my Rival, he is a Gentleman, and it is baseness to suffer him to
be beset: But I must keep this from the Old Fellow's knowledge -- lest it spoil
my design --


'Twas well the Watch came and dispersed 'em, I had certainly been mauld else:
This Old Fellow has discovered my Intrigue with his Mistress; and, if I should
consider seriouly of the matter, this affair of his is neither contrary to
Reason nor Justice. Would I were at home -- I am very dry, and very drowsy;
and it is so dark, that I hardly know the way to my Lodging -- how now, what is
there a Chair! ay, it is so, and by those Fellows standing there, it should be
empty too -- I Will make use of this opportunity -- It may be by this means I may
light on some pleasant adventure, to recompense my Nights trouble -- I am
resolved to venture


Iak, Jack, Master's come back again.


Is he come! then let us make haste.


So, they take me for their Master; thus far I am right: now Fortune be
propitious --


The Bullies are surpised by the Watch, and the Gentleman has made his escape;
who it was I know not, but by his demeanor, he should be of quality. Dogs!
Night Rogues! is this a time for Rencounters -- Here -- Hey! where are ye?
bring the Chair hither -- Hey -- what gone? What damned Rascals are these?
afraid I believe the Watch should seize on 'em -- what shall I do? I shall
never find the way home, it is so dark: How now, who is this


Who Is there?


Ha!


It Is he! it is he. Oh my dear, how glad am I to find thee! ye naughty Rogue to
leave me so; but see what comes on it: yet for all that, I am glad with all my
heart I have thee again. My dear, dear --


Ah, it is a loving poor Rogue, who ere it is; and I hope young.


Come, come away with me, for the Old Fellow and a Company of Bullies are
watching for thee; and I love thee too well, to have thee killed


Who it is I know not, but such a tempting occasion I must follow --


Come, come in with me, and I Will hide you in my Chamber, till the search be
over


Dear Matrimony, thou must pardon me; for this is such a pleasant adventure,
that I cannot choose but be in love with --

But tho I to the Banquet hungry go,
'Twould spoil my Stomach, if my Spouse should know.

I swear I tremble to think on it.


Expect never to be happy then: Prithee Cozen, take my Council, and believe
that a jealous Husband, that takes all the liberty imaginable, and allows his
Wife none, will at last pretend a suspicion of your Intrigue, only to keep you
from the knowledge of his


I have considered it, and am resolved to let him know, I have enough of the
Woman to resent such an injury


For my part I Will assist you in all your proceedings, and if we two han't
enough of the old Serpents subtilty to confound the Intrigues of one weak
unthinking man; it is pity but our Sex was changed, and we made the dullest of
Creatures --


It distracts me to think on his behavior: what business can he have out thus
late --

How now! is he come?


Yes, Madam, the Sedan is just coming in at the Gate.


Go then, prithee Cozen, be not seen to Night, it may be he is in drink, and a
reproof now will signify nothing


True: for a drunken man is as perverse a Creature, as an opinionated old man
-- whatever he is advised, he is sure to do quite contrary: Therefore, it is best
to leave him till the morning qualm -- for then a little impertinence will
teaze him more than ordinary --


Now to prepare my self with a little policy -- I must pout and seem angry, as,
if considered rightly, the cause requires; for, to live as singly after we have
ventured upon Marriage as we did before -- in truth is unreasonable. Here he
comes


Madam.


H^! a stranger! Heaven! what means this?


I have now reason to bless my adverse fortune, since it has requited me with
so beautiful an Object; and I see there are some happy Stars that --


Pray, Sir, no more of this; but tell me where my Husband is, and by what means
you got possession of his Chair


Her Husband! that is well --

Faith, Madam, y' have done me an injury in interrupting my thanks to Fortune
-- I was horribly afraid I should have rambled all Night -- and truly such a
Lodging deserves a little acknowledgment


A Lodging! truth, Sir, you are deceived: you are like to get no Lodging here --
But where have you left my Husband -- you look not like a Murderer -- or else I
should think you had killed him, to put some horrid design in execution --


Not I faith -- I found the Chair empty, and went into it; and being mistaken
by the good, honest, purblind, Sons of Whores the Chair-men for another -- I
suppose, am brought hither instead of your Husband -- and I am resolved I Will
not baulk my Fortune -- I --


Then, Sir, let me desire you to be gone before he comes, for his being left
so, must needs make him very angry; and then his finding you here, will be
enough to make an everlasting breach betwixt us -- good Sir, go --


Not I -- faith Madam -- I must beg your pardon -- I will not stir -- come what
will on it -- it is a pretty place -- this -- and yonder is a good Bed, I see --
your Servant Madam; to morrow morning command me any thing --


A strange blunt Fellow this.

Pray, Sir, no more trifling, but go; my reputation is more dear to me, than
your inconvenience; therefore be gone, or I am resolved to cry out. --


Nay, now I am sure you will not; for I Will no more believe a Woman intends to cry
out, that says she will, than I Will believe a Man has courage to duel me, that
draws upon me in the Playhouse --


A strange confidence this; what do you intend, Sir?


'Faith, to go to Bed; I want no waiters in these cases: I am a true
adventurer, Madam, and like a Knight Errant am contented with my Quarters,
wherever I find 'em


Why, sure you will not go to the Bed that is prepared for my Husband?


Yes, but I will -- and be thankful too, I like the place very well.


Nay, this is rudeness unheard of; good Sir, consider my condition, and what
danger I am in, if my Husband comes, as I Am certain he will to night -- kind,
sweet Sir --


Pox on her, she has mollify'd me: Well, Madam, two conditions observed,
perhaps I may depart. The first is, to tell me who you are? and secondly, to
permit me to wait on you to morrow


Sir, the latter of these I will consent too; but to discover my name, for some
private reasons, I am bound not to do


Then here I pitch my Tent -- pugh -- you cannot be so cruel, to turn me out of
Doors at this unreasonable time of night, when nothing is abroad but Owls and
Weezles


What shall I do?
If he is found here, I am ruined --

I Will love you dearly, my life's service shall be devoted yours, prithee be
kinder -- How now! Who Is that


My Husband! my Husband! for Heavens sake away, Sir, I Will wait you here to
morrow


Will ye, in faith? will you not fail?


Upon my life I will not.


I Will trust ye then; adieu; a pox of this Husband --


Come, Madam, it is in vain for you to wait longer: My Master I am certain will not
come home to Night


Go, get my Night-Clothes ready, I Will follow you --


THus, Sir, depending upon your care and secrecy, I have told you my concerns.


Sir, you shall never have any cause to doubt my fidelity.


I believe thee, in troth -- before George, thou have an honest Face of thy
own, that confirms it: Therefore, prithee give thy attention -- I confess I am
old --


O, Sir, not old.


Yes, faith, the Women think me so; and to deal faithfully with thee, I am
somewhat above threescore --


Oh, a small Age, that, Sir -- for a healthy Man --


But, I confess to thee, though I am old, I cannot choose but love a Wench, as
well as a younger Fellow. Well, before George, I know not what is the matter --
but methinks I am never well without one


It Is a sign you came of a good Family, Sir. I shall laugh at this old Fellow
--


Yes, the truth is, I came of a notable Generation; my Father and Mother were
swingers -- but let that pass -- you know my Sneakie is about twenty one


Much about that Age, in my Opinion, Sir.


Yes, yes: nay I can tell to a Day her Age -- but would you believe me Friend
-- I dare tell you, though to another I should be ashamed, when I am with her,
sometimes, the arch Jade will play upon me strangely -- she will call me Fool
almost at every Word. Ah, it is a witty Queen


Ha, ha, ha. Then it seems, Sir, she is angry with you sometimes; and how do you
do to pacify her


Why, you must know, Sir, I allow her a Hundred Pound a Year, and that makes up
the business very well


Oh --


No faith we never quarrel -- now, Sir for this reason I attempted the Charm
you know of, thinking that would make me young and fit for her --


And yet to be never the better! faith 'twas ill luck.


The better! nay, before George, I think I am the worse for it.


Why, that is worst of all, Sir. But pray come a little nearer to my business.
What would you have me do


I Will tell you; the Story you told me to day of Welford has so tortured me --
that I am grown damnably jealous; and I fear, I may have some cause if the
truth were known; For I had certainly mauld him to night, if by some device or
other she had not conveyed him away


Very well. Sir.


And though I cannot possitively say she did, I fear the worst -- Now it is in
your power to do me a signal favor


Command it then, Sir -- you know I am your Friend.


You can counterfeit Welfords Voice -- I have heard you do it; you therefore
shall go to her instantly, and personate him, she is in the dark, which makes me
suspect she waits for some body, believing me absent -- and to prove all, you
shall court her as if you were him -- and so find her inclination, then you
discovering the truth to me -- I shall know the better how to use her hereafter


Faith, Sir, you must pardon me, if I refuse to serve you in this -- I am
sensible of the inconvenience, Sir. I shall not be able to contain my self --


Inconvenience! how, prithee?


Oh, Sir, you that are so jealous of every one, I have just reason to fear will
be so of me, should I do this: I am resolved not to hazard the loss of so good
a Friend about so trivial a matter


Jealous of thee! what, of a Brother! a dear Friend that I have picked out
amongst Men to trust a secret with -- jealous of thee! Why, thou do not take
me for a Fool, do thou? Come come, no excuse, thou shall do it --


It cannot be, Sir, what will she think? 'Sdeath this is the simplest Fellow --


She think! why, she shall not know it, Man; there lies the jest, she shall be
ignorant of it -- and think it is he still; for you are to come in the dark --
Now, here is my plot -- by this means she taking you for him, will discover her
Intrigue, and I shall know whether she is a Jilt or no


Nay, Sir -- If I can do you any service, you know I want power to deny -- Was
ever such a Coxcomb --


Thank ye heartily, dear Friend, before George thou art an honest Fellow --
well, I Will go instantly, and see if she is there -- and then conduct you to her,
and an hour hence --


Ay, Sir, sooner if you please --


No, no, not sooner: Well, have a little patience, I Will be with you instantly
--


Ha, ha, ha, -- This is the pleasantest adventure that ever Man had: and thanks
to my Stars, my pains shall now be rewarded; for above these six Months have I
laid plots, and studied daily how to obtain this Woman's Company, and could
never prosper; and now in a moment, when I least thought on it, to be brought to
her Chamber; and by her Keeping-Fool, that has been jealous of every body: Oh,
my Joys -- methinks every Hour's an Age -- till he comes -- and then to bob
Welford of his Mistress too, ha, ha, ha, -- it is a happy chance -- Well, I see
some Men are born to strange Fortune


Where the Devil am I? this is the first door I found open, and I am resolved
to enter, be it where it will. Hah -- this Garden should belong to my dear
Tricklove's Lodgings, by that Belcony there -- ay, it is so -- Now, if I could
but contrive to make her hear me -- I am certain she would overcome all
difficulties to let me in -- but how shall I do it? Knock, I dare not, lest the
old Fox should hear? Well I was a Fool to forsake my other Lodging -- but when
they cry how can you be so cruel, rather kill me then proceed, and the like, I
have not the heart to touch 'em. But see, the door opens, and a Man is coming
out. I hope she has heard me, and sent one of the Servants --


Hist, hist, Come Sir -- she is in her Chamber; and in the dark, as I told you:
Therefore there must be some close business in hand -- good Sir, make haste --


Oldsapp, as I live! Death, if he discovers me, I shall be murdered -- but I Will
withdraw in time -- I hope the darkness will obscure me --


Nay, Will. what do mean? what do go backward for? fie, flinch from thy
Friend in such an affair. Come back, for shame; come back, I say


What shall I do -- he does certainly mistake me for another, and I shall at
last be discovered -- whither, Sir, would you have me go


Whither! what a forgetful Fool it is -- why, have I not told thee already to my
Sneakey -- to my Sneakey Man; pugh, it is the modestest Fool this -- go; prithee
go; she will do thee no harm, I warrant --


No, I dare swear she will not.


Well, this is so quaint an Intrigue, that though I may be betrayed to infinite
danger, I have not power to resist it

Before George, I Will thrust you forward -- if you will not go: why, thou art
the dullest Fellow I ever met with -- if Welford were here, he would not have
been thus backward; a pox on him, he is ready at all times, would I had him here
-- 'Sbud I Would give twenty pieces I had him in this Garden: But come away -- thou
art such a Ninny --


What will become of me, I know not -- but, let it be hanging, stabbing,
drowning, or what 'twill, it is so happy an Intrigue, that I am resolved to
venture, come what will on it --


WHat ever merit, Sir, you can propound to your self, had I known at first you
were not my Love, you had not purchased my company so easily


Madam, though I am not the happy Person you mean, yet I am one extremely
sensible of your kindness, and would willingly gratify -- but, what shall I
do? you say the old Gentleman is just coming up; I hope you have more sense of
Honor, than to betray me


I confess your behavior has won so much upon my heart, that I should be loath
to see you wronged here; but you will forget me, when you are gone, I warrant


Never, Madam; don't doubt me -- faith a Courtesy was never lost upon me yet;
and that it should now is impossible: but hark, he is coming -- for Heavens
sake, let me not be surpriz'


Well, get you in there, at the end of that Gallery; there is a Door that opens
into the Garden: but be sure you keep touch with the assignation


If I fail, wish me impotent, and that is plague enough for one Man.


Welford, cloyed with my love, has of late slighted me; but, now the happy
means of revenge is come, and I am resolved to right my self this way; since
he is so dull and neglectful --


Here, this is the Door; go boldly in, boldly, as I used to do; hum -- what,
still hanging an Arse -- I think the Devil's in thee -- go, I say


Was ever such a Night as this -- if I come off but well, I Will have this Nights
Adventure put into the Chronicle


So, he is gone at last; it is such a bashful young Fool, that faith, once I
thought I should never have brought him to it -- Well -- I Will wait her --


I have been groping up and down this half hour, to find the Back-Stairs she
talked of; but the Devil a Place, or Stairs, or any thing can I find to get out
by -- Ah, Plague 'o these Night-Rambles; the trouble a Man gets in finding his
way home after 'em, is more by half than the pleasure he gets by 'em


'Slife, he is come back again already, and ten to one will spoil all -- why,
Will, Will, is the Devil in thee, what do mean to come away so soon -- gad
forgive me, you will not ruin my design, will you? get ye gone, get you gone,
I say


Death, what shall I do? this is the old Squire; he certainly takes me for some
other; therefore I Will bear all patiently, and say nothing


She wonders I warrant, why he stays so long; away, away -- I never saw such a
lump -- no Life in thee


What a Devil he means, I know not; but I must go, to avoid further danger.


It may be, thou can not find the right Door again; come, I Will show thee --
ah thou art a Novice


How durst you come back so soon, after I had shown you the way out, are you
not afraid of the old Fellow


So -- she mistakes me for another too -- well -- this has been a Night of
Wonders -- Why, Madam, do you not know me, sure the intimacy betwixt you and
me, deserves not this forgetfulness


Oh Heavens! are you Welford! are you indeed! and have I then been mistaken? [
aside] But why would you use me so -- why would you speak in that same tone to
fright me


Ay, here has been another adventure: but this is no time for questioning --
Hark, prithee my dear, let us have no disputes now, but go and see what the old
Fellow is doing; for though he has been very kind to me to night, yet to say
truth, I am not much in love with his company


Kind! yes, great kindness indeed: his kindness was shown in besetting you --
where, had not my care conveyed you hither, you had been murdered by this time


Thy care! why, prithee art thou mad? I tell thee he brought me hither himself
-- just now, within this two minutes; who he takes me for, Heaven knows, not I


Ha, then I was not mistake -- that was not Welford that was with me first --
I Will seem ignorant, and recover all again -- why, then you did not see my Woman
that I sent to seek you


Not I -- but prithee waste the time no longer in talking; but go see what the
old Man is doing -- for I am in an Ague still for fear of him


Stay there then, till I come back --


Now am I very certain some adventrous traveller has been with her to night --
and to finish his design made use of my name and quality -- Well, for a night
of Intrigues let this be put in the Calender -- I have been exquisite at
night-walking this seven years, and never met the like, What a pox the old
Baboon should mean by his proceedings to me, I cannot imagine; suppose he does
take me for another; why should he bring me to his Mistress! Well, let the
Devil that knows all discover all -- it is beyond my apprehension --


Oh, what a quaking fit has he put me into! shall I never find the way out -- I
have gone I believe through twenty Rooms, and never the better -- I got into a
Closet just now, and groping about thrust my Hand into a Mouse-trap, and was
pincht severely -- and the worst is, the Devil of any one there is up in the
House to direct me -- I must even go and awake her, and get her to assist me.
This, by his directions, is her Chamber -- hist, hist my dear; my dear --


Here, here; sweet, well -- what say thou? where is he? hah.


How now! what is this here? a Man's Voice, pox o'nt I am mistaken again --
Damned Fate! what shall I do


If he be coming up, prithee convey me out; for I know he will never have
patience. Prithee what is he doing of


What a Devil does he mean? hark, prithee honest friend show me to the
necessary house --


Death, have I been talking to a Man all this while? ten to one, one of the
Servants -- who has discovered me, and stands here to watch --


He Is gone again; they are all Fairies sure in this House: Oh fortune! fortune!
some deliverance I beseech thee


No way to escape! well, this comes of rambling. 'Sdeath, would I had been
sighing at home, rather than sweating here


Where are ye? oh! ha, ha!

I have been to see for the old Gentleman, and coming softly through the Hall
-- found him sitting alone in the Porch: and I believe he has been there all
this Night; but for what reason I cannot imagine


So, I am glad I found her at last -- there let him stay if he pleases -- But
dear sweet Creature, show me the way -- for I have been rambling about ever
since, and cannot find the way down -- besides, here is some body in the Room
too, prithee who is it


What cursed luck is this? he come back again! -- ha, I swear you frighted me
-- but speak softly -- (who is it) why it is, it is -- the Chaplain -- don't
disturb him -- he always studies in the dark, it is his custom


Sure I heard a whispering; now are they plotting together to cut my Throat, it
must be so


Come, prithee let me be gone instantly; for if he discover me I shall
certainly be murdered


Hah! -- what is that, murder? oh these cursed Women; what dangers they bring
us to


Follow me, Sir, and tread softly --


What, are they gone? nay then I grow cheerful: a pox on it, what a Fever have
I been in

If I can find the way out now, all is well: if not, it is but staying till she
comes back, and then, I Am at liberty


DAM this old Rascal: what does he mean by making me stay thus long? sure he
dares not do it to abuse me -- and yet it may be so, for the cause of his
bringing me hither is so ridiculous, that the truth is, I had not faith to
believe it at first -- my patience is quite tired: And besides, the Air is so
cold and piercing, that if I stay a little longer, I shall be mortified for any
Woman these three Days. 'Sdeath, am I thus baffled -- I Will carbonado this old
Rogue; a Dog, a Son of a Whore, no one to affront but me -- besides all my
hopes of seeing that sweet Creature is disappointed -- 'Sdeath, I Will murder him
in the next Tavern I meet him

This is the Garden, Sir; and yonder at the end of the walk, is the back door
that leads into the Street. I dare go no further, least I am seen -- farewell,
Sir, -- fail not to meet me to morrow


I will not, sweet: so now there is some hopes.


Oh, yonder, I think he comes -- I thought the old Fool durst not affront me so
-- harkee! Sir, Sir


What now? 'Slight! have I met him again?


Is it time to go yet, Sir, I thought you had forgot me, you staid so long.


What the Devil shall I say? how long have you staid, Sir?


How long! why by Heaven above this hour and half; come, come, Sir: dispatch,
dispatch: if you stay a little longer I shall be very unfit for the service you
intend me


This is not he, this is another; and a new adventure I Will lay my life.


Why dee not answer, Sir?


It Is so: I Will banter him a little -- Sir, the cold Air will season your
complexion


How, Sir? complexion!


Ay, Sir, I have heard, the Switzers lie naked in the Snow to make their Skins
the tougher: a politic Nation, Sir, and by my faith, 'I think hardly to be
conquered -- for take it from me, Sir, they are --


What a pox care I, Sir, what they are; art thou mad old Fellow? what do
prate to me of Snows and Switzers


Ay, but, Sir, the Nation deserves --


Damn the Nation, Sir; is this a time for a description of it: prithee speak to
me of the Present Affair: Shall I go to the Woman yet? what a Devil did thou
bring me hither for


For Air, Sir, for Air; it is now very delightful and cool --


I shall cool your Coxcomb, Sir* 'Sdeath shall I be baffled thus by an old
Badger


Not so old as you imagine; and since you are for that sport, have at you --


Ha! I Am mistaken, this is not he all this while -- but no matter -- I Will take
such an affront from no Man --


How now! what Noise is this? hah, fighting in my Garden at this time of the
Night -- hey, within there -- murder, murder; Thieves, Thieves; Rogues! Lights
here; bring Lights --


You are still so tardy; why did you not come sooner? for now he is below in the
Garden, it is impossible to convey you out, but he will see you -- the best way is
to cry out Thieves with me -- and make as if you came to our aid, hearing the
outcry --


No, I dare not do that, he knows my voice; I Will try if I can steal by him --


How now! who is there?


Oh -- a friend, Sir, a friend -- Oh how I shake!


Oh, Will. art thou come off undiscovered? that is well -- before George this
was carried handsomely now. Come, I Will show thee the way out before the lights
come; and to morrow thank thee as the cause requires --


My dear, my dear; Thieves, Thieves; call the Watch, there is Thieves in the
Garden --


Where dove, where? There Will. there; that is the Door: Where are they, dove,
where are they -- go, go out -- at that Door there -- Lights -- Lights --
there, away, away --


We have searched all the Garden, and can find no body.


No! why then they have killed one another, and the Devil has fetched 'em away
-- To prevent further trouble -- for I Am sure I found 'em fighting --


Well, let 'em go. Come, prithee, my dear, let us go in --


With all my heart -- I Will smother my resentments all to morrow, and then I
shall know all --


SO; I am got off at last -- and thanks to an unexpected chance with all my
Limbs too -- which, as my case stood, be little less than a Miracle. But for
that he should conduct me out, that two hours before would have murdered me, is
a wonder past my apprehension: I confess I have been frighted, damnably
frighted, that is the truth on it; but a pox it is nothing, when it is over: and I
begin to think now, that there is no Fate that keeps an honest, drunken,
Whore-master up the Wall -- when the judicious, reserved, sober Fool, is thrown
into the Kennel -- Well, I am resolved -- I Will pursue the Intrigue to morrow
with my new Mistress; gad she is a rare Creature -- and I hope her Husband is
not so kind as he should be

In Modish Love, the allowance may be small;
But Marriage, like a Miser, covets all.

DID I not tell you, he would not come to night: I know a Man of his humor can
no more forsake company he likes, to come to his Wife, than an Usurer could
forsake a Purchase of Land when he has it for half the value


I confess it vexes me; but had I been of the same humor, you know I could
last night have been even with him


Madam, here is a Gentleman below, that enquires for his Cozen; I desired to
know her name, which he says he is ignorant of; and says, she is a Relation
a-far off; but by his description of her, he doe^ certainly mean you


It Is he; I knew he would not fail: go, bring him up; and prithee Cozen, let us
put a trick upon him. Do you step into the next Room -- when you hear us entered
into discourse, and that he leaves you as a spy over me --


I Will personate it to the life; but the jest will be to hear what a company of
lies he will tell when I question him about his Visit --


Ha, ha, ha -- away, away -- he comes.


Madam, though the Night to me has been as dark and comfortless, wanting the
light of your Eyes; yet this joyful Minute dissipates those horrors -- and
makes me happy to excess; ah Madam, I have been --


Where? or what have you been, Sir?


Where? why in my Lodging ever since I left you -- and what could I be but the
most melancholy, despairing, restless, uncoath Creature in the World -- I
breath not as I did formerly, my Heart pants, my Eyes roll -- all my Faculties
are disturbed: In a word, Madam -- I am desperately in Love, and with you; have
mercy upon me, I beseech you


But, what help, Sir, can a Woman in my condition bring you: You know, I told
you last Night I was married


Ay, Madam, and the memory of it brings me all the joy imaginable -- for it is
only a married Lady that has the ability of helping me. My Disease is of that
singular Nature, that all other are helpless and unnecessary --


A strange Distemper indeed -- but hush; here comes my Sister --


A Sister! a pox, shift her off, Madam -- she is not for our company.


O! I dare not for my life, Sir; she is my Husbands Sister, and one set to watch
me


A fine Woman in faith, the Devils in it if I miss both --


A handsome Fellow, I swear -- who is this Gentleman, Sister, a Kinsman of yours?


Yes, Madam; a Cozen removed: speak for your self, Sir --


A little out of the way, Madam; and hearing she was in Town* I could not pass
by without giving her a Visit; I had ever a dear love for my Relation --


A very good quality, Sir; and if I am not mistaken, a thing very little in use
amongst young Gallants; for they rather visit their Mistresses than Relations
-- nay the Wives; it is a strange World, Heaven mend it; pray are you married,
Sir


Yes, Madam, and have seven Children; a pox on her --


So, that is a sound one -- now he begins --


Seven! as I live a jolly company -- indeed, Sister, I am angry with ye, for
not bringing me acquainted with your Relations; you know my Sisters Father I
presume, Sir


Very well, Madam; the old Gentleman and I are very intimate -- What a Devil
shall I do


And pray how does he?


In health; in health, Madam -- he is a lusty Man of his Age, Heaven bless him
--


How, in health, Sir! he was dangerously wounded in a Rencounter, not above
three days ago; it is impossible he can be well so soon


So, I am snapt* 'twas given out, a dangerous Wound, Madam, but 'twas only a
scratch; a very slight business, believe me --


And his Son at Oxford, how does he, Sir, Mr. -- what do you call him?


Ay, what indeed?


Mr. -- Sir, you can tell his name: Mr --


What, Gregory?


Fie, fie, Gregory! no: Mr. -- Lord, it is strange you should not know his name!


Know him! alas, I know him, Madam, as well as I know my self; but I have such
a confounded memory -- his name quickly; I am foundered


She means my Brother Alexander.


Alexander! I was sure I was near it -- why, he is the same brisk Fellow, Madam,
he used to be -- all Spirit -- (pox on him, would he had been hanged seven year
a go, so I had escaped the trouble of finding out his damned name.


It Is strange he should be so altered, he used to be of a very sober, morose
temper -- Then, I suppose, Sir, you know his Sister, Mrs Phebe


Ay, I have some reason to know her, Madam, if you knew all -- why she has been
my Mistress a great while --


How, Sir, your Mistress!


Ay, the business was almost concluded on -- I had like to have married her
about a Month a go


Married! why, Sir, you say you have a Wife already, and seven Children.


Death and the Devil -- I had forgot that -- I see a Liar had need have a good
memory


Ha, ha, ha, my Cozen, Madam, is a little involved in a mistake, ha, ha, ha.


I believe he will prove a salse Kinsman at last --


I find it now, this is a plot upon me -- well I shall have a time -- why then,
the truth is, Madam, I am a damned lying Rascal, and have not spoke a word of
truth -- since I came in --


Ha, ha, ha, ha --


Madam, my Master is just come home, and I believe coming up.


Here, quickly take this Kinsman of mine then, and convey him down the back way
-- a word in your Ear, Sir -- write me word when you will come next, that I may
be better provided -- and so your Servant good Cozen


So, that is something however; to night about twelve, I Will not fail you -- your
Servant Ladies, your Servant -- I Will see if I can have better luck in my
Evenings Ramble --


How does my dear, sweet, precious Wife, hah? Nay, I know thou art angry now at
my staying out last Night; but prithee consider, my dear, I had business --
business must be done you know -- come prithee let us kiss and be Friends


This kindness adds to my suspicion; for, he is never kind to me, but when he
has been rambling --


An Infallible Sign -- for, to you he gives only false Fire --


Come, what is the meaning of this whispering; prithee my dear don't mind her;
she is as envious as a Nonconformist Parson, that has lost his Benefice


And you are as false as an Accomptant at the Custom House -- nay, if you out
do me at a simile --


'Twas wonderful business sure, that could make you out all Night, pray let us
here -- what business


Ay, come, the business, the business.


You know my dear, when I left you I went to visit Counselor Fee-Simple -- to
know how my suit goes in Chancery -- and to have his advice

My dear, I must beg thy pardon for a little while, I must to my
Lords again; the Case is to be determined to Night.

You Will stay till to Morrow again, I warrant.


No, no, I will not; I fear it will be somewhat late, but I am resolved not to
stay all Night: adieu, my dear Rogue. So -- Now to my assignation --


There must be something in this: Lucinda, go and dog him.

Still I must doubt; for he that weds betimes,
Makes Marriage often a Cloak to hide his Crimes.

COme, the Kings health, Colonel: There it goes.


Come round with it: Sir Fredrick, to you.


Faith, I did not think you had past through so many dangers, Colonel, as you
say you have


Ah* little does the World think, what I have suffered, Sir --


Ah, the Devil and all; why, the Colonel has been killed three times, have not
old stump


That I have, Sir Fredrick, above forty times, I assure you.


What, killed!


Not downright killed -- but very near it, as near as you can thrust a Knife.
Oh, I have escaped by Miracle


I think thou told'st me too, that thou have a demi-cannon Bullet in thy Belly,
did not


Oh no, no, it is a mistake, several Ounces of Pistol-shot, I may tell you, but
no Bullet, Sir Fredrick; no Cannon Bullet, I remember an accident once at
Plymouth fight; I was then one of the Dragoons in the Brigade that lay before
the Town: The Battery being raised, Sir, I mounted -- I had not been there two
Minutes, but I received six several shots upon me; two went quite through me --
and one sticks here in my Throat, pray put your hand here -- feel


Before George, here is something, that is the truth out.


Ah, this is nothing -- why, the Colonel was one of the six that made a Dish of
Tripe, of a pair of old Boots; and a handful of Gunpowder served for Mustard
to it


Gunpowder! it is impossible; why, 'twould blow him up Man, 'twould blow him up
--


What, a Colonel blown up! a Colonel! I grant it might blow up a stingy
Corporal; or such a Fellow: but a fat Colonel! ah, there is no danger on it


Nay, by the Blade we have been put to our shifts, that is certain; but no
matter, at the long run, we did our business well enough


Ay, I think your Consciences were asleep, that is the truth on it; the Devil had
a kindness for you, that is certain; or else you could never have proceeded so;
for you know, Colonel, yours was the wrong Cause


Cause! why prithee, we had no Cause, we had Money; that is the Cause of a true
Soldier -- Money! Money -- I served beyond Sea too in the low Countries -- I
have traveled in most parts of the World, and observed the Customs


Oh, that was my delight too. Did thou ever observe the Customs in Catalonia
Colonel


Oh curiously, Sir. I sojourned there some Months.


And pray what Customs do they use, Sir Fredrick?


Oh wonderful! wonderful!

Why, it is the Custom in Catalonia, for the Women to bear Children at seven --
and to dye decently at eleven -- and for the Men to marry at fourteen, and hang
themselves at twenty one -- a barbarous Custom -- but it is for prevention of
Diseases --


Ha, ha, ha, nay, nay, Sir Fredrick.


Hush, thou shall see me balder him --


Before George, that is the way to prevent Generation, as well as Diseases.


No, no, it is a hot Country, and they breed accordingly; -- the poor people
that eat nothing but Thistles and Barks of Trees -- it is true produce but one
at a time: But, your better fort that feed on March-pane, and Yolks of Eggs --
will bring ye five -- six at a Birth, more or less, according as they are in
humor


Good lack! well, this traveling is a rare thing: why, who the Devil could
have believed this now, but you that have seen't


Then near the Bosphorus, the back part of Thrace, live a sort of Hogs that are
skilled in Philosophy


Hogs!


Ay; they are good Scholars, and understand the Sciences very well; but that
immoderate Crime of Wenching undoes 'em


Indeed!


Ah rots their Memories; spoils 'em; undoes 'em quite.


Why what a strange thing is this; but why don't they marry then, Sir, why
don't they marry


Why it is thought they would; but it is against the Law, and your Hogland-Law is
very strict; very strict --


Before George, it is very strange -- but prithee Sir Fredrick be plain, are
they really Hogs -- or a sort of Hoggish-Men like Hogs


Really Hogs -- prithee ask the Colonel; Colonel, what say thou?


Ha, ha, ha, -- a Banter, a Banter; ha, ha, ha.


There I was with thee, faith Boy, ha, ha, ha. There Is news for thee; tell it
thy Mistress, do, put the banter upon her; give her a balderno, do I say --


Phoo -- before George, it is a very silly humor this, Sir Fredrick, a Man
knows not where to find you now adays with your shams and tricks -- gad forgive
me, I hope you do not take me for a Fool, do you


Oh no Anger, Squire; thou know it is his humor; he will sooner loose his
Friend than his Jest; and 'twere to his Father 'twere all one --


Nay, pox, not that I care a Pin; but I speak only that we might have a right
understanding betwixt us. Here, Boy, the the other Glass, Sirrah


By the blade, I wonder where the Lady is all this while, Sir Fredrick.


And so do I too; for the truth is, Colonel, the main design of my coming
hither, was to see her


Sir Fredrick, a Bumper -- Prithee lets be merry and cast away care Man, come
I Have a little Utensil within shall give thee a Song. Within there, Ienny

Close in a hollow silent Cave
Young Damon sleeping lay,
Himself one hour from grief to save,
And from the scortching day --
He Celia loved, whose Fate and wit
Did every Shepherds sense control,
Whose every hair was Loves soft Net,
Whose every glance a Heart did get,
And every smile a Soul.
But see the Balm Loves Monarch keeps
To ease a Lovers pain,
As he in that dark Mansion sleeps
It fiercely began to rain.
Fair Celia wandering through her Farm,
A straying Lamb from hurt to save,
Which got she folds in her white Arm,
And glad to save it from the storm,
Straight slips into the Cave.
The drowzy Swain begins to smile,
To see his Heaven so nigh,
She doubts and fears; and all this while
The Lamb stands bleating by.
No Breath is left her to complain,
She now a Captive to surprise,
And fears approaching Ioys or Pain,
Thus at the mercy of the Swain,
The charming Virgin lies.

What think you now, was it not well sung?


By the Blade, 'twas a pretty matter, and has some relish in it; in faith I like
it well


Hah, Will, dear Son, thy humble Servant.


A word with you, Sir! Sir Fredrick, pray give me leave; I have some business
with him


With all our hearts, Sir -- we were just going. Come Colonel, let us go; here is
nothing to be done to Night -- Hark in thy Ear

We'll go seek out the Fellow that waits on her, and make him a little drunk,
and the business is done


Agreed, with all my heart; Squire your humble Servant.


Prithee, Will, what do thou mean by this? before George I am an arrant Ass,
if I can guess at it


Not Know my meaning: Come, Sir, I Will refresh your memory, since you are so
forgetful. Did not you bring me hither last Night, to go to your Mistress


Yes marry did I.


Very well, Sir: And why was it not done then? why did you not come and conduct
me as you promised? hah --


Ha, ha, ha, you wag, you wag, will you flout; will you jeer your Friend --
fie, fie -- before George this is unkind: What you did, you did -- I know well
enough how things were carried -- and I am contented -- but in faith it is ill
done to upbraid me with it


What, what is all this? But, Sir, I am not contented till I have further
satisfaction -- I tell you I did not see your Mistress all Night


No: Cause you were in the dark -- Ah -- you are a wag.


Sir, I mean I was not in your House at all, but stayed expecting you at least
two hours -- and at last fought my way out with a Bully that I found in the
Garden


Then in my Conscience I put him in, instead of you: for one I Am sure was with
my Sneaky at least two hours


It must be so -- For I saw him come out of the House --


Was ever such a mistake! 'Sbud, that I should be so blind too; not to know
another Man from him? yet though I could not distinguish, ten to one she might --
she has her haunts I find. Who Is within there

Sirrah, is your Mistress come home yet?


No, Sir.


Ah, Sir, here is rare doings; but I am resolved I Will be revenged on her
however. Sirrah, go you to the Constable here at the Corner of the Street, and
bid him keep diligent watch about my Door; and if any Persons attempt coming
in, bid him seize 'em; go -- begone -- Now shall she be taken by the Constable
like a Harlot as she is, and punished, till she comes upon her Knees to
acknowledge her fault, and me her superior --


NAY, dear Madam, let me wait on you home.


That Is his Voice: he is here, and a Woman with him: This is as my Lady
suspected -- I Will stand aside and watch --


By no means, Sir; pray take my advice and be gone, least we are seen -- but be
not far off -- and I Will not fail you


But how shall I know the happy Minute, Madam?


Thus, Sir, it is requisite I go to him -- but lest Sleep should overcome my
Senses too -- I Will tie a String with a Bell to it -- which shall lead from the
Balcony into the Street -- and when you hear all still, come and ring that
Bell, and your kind Conductress shall be ready to wait on you


Ah dear, sweet -- how shall I gratify thee? Well, I Will be watchful -- your
Servant


They are all very still methinks, pray Heaven he has heard no Stories on me to
Night, and is gone to Bed: Sirrah, go and open the Door, you have the false Key


Not I, sincerely, I was afraid to bring it -- Oh Lord, will you never leave
these tricks -- never leave buzzing and whizzing about the World like a
Flesh-Flie; by gadsniggs, let me tell you roundly, Madam, you are a greater
Jilt than the Whore of Babylon, and have more tricks, sincerely --


What tricks, Sirrah, what tricks?


Why is not two enough; but that you must jilt them to make room for a third;
sincerely, you are more unreasonable than a Country Parson -- that thinks he
never has Tithe enough, and yet deserves none --


Rascal, is this a time for your moldy reproofs: Sirrah, let me have no more
lies; but go and open it, and softly too, you know the danger else -- go I say
--


It Is well the Watch are coming -- and that I am afraid my person may be in
some damage, for being in such lewd company, Pimpo should be refractory else,
I assure you

Oh! now does my Hand shake so with the sense of the Crimes you have made me
commit to Night, that I am not able to find the Keyhole --


Give me the Key: Cowardice is a greater Crime than any, and that I am sure you
have enough of. Cornet, what excuse shall I make? he is grown of late so
jealous, that I Am afraid he will never believe me --


Ay, and all your Kinsmen have been sick so often too, that if you go to bring
it off that way, it is ten to one but he finds you out


Oh, don't speak of that: if he finds me out I am undone --


This comes of caterwawling.


So, it is open; Sirrah tread softly -- I Will make him believe I have been within
all this Night -- and lay in another Room, being not well -- and afraid to
disturb him


So, he is gone in with her -- here is your constant Husband: But I am resolved,
for my Ladies sake, to spoil his Intrigue to night; it may be I may get ten
Guinneys of him to hold my Tongue too; I Will try my Fortune


Oh, she is come, it is she, her Bully* has turned her off at last -- 'Sbud, have
I nourish't this Viper in my Bosom so long for this -- Where the Devil is the
Constable and Watch now -- Oh, I think I hear 'em coming, now for my revenge


He cannot for shame deny it; and to excuse his coming will be to no purpose,
because she is a Woman of the Town

Hah, and as good fortune would have it, here comes the Watch too -- This makes
well I am sure for me, for they know him -- and he will be willing to give any
thing rather than be so disgraced -- Oh, the Door opens


Ah, Mistress! have I caught you in faith! this is your visiting, with a pox to
you -- Hoa -- the Watch there -- hoa -- I Will order you now, Madam -- I Will teach
you to abuse your Patron -- I will ye Jilt, I will --


Seize on 'em; seize on 'em; if they resist knock 'em down.


Thank ye, Mr. Constable -- do so, take her away; Carry her to the Round-house;
away with her --


I shall, Sir, and you too, I assure you; you shall even house together to
Night --


How Is that? I too; what do you mean? why do you not know me?


Know you! no; nor desire to know you; not I --


This was a design upon me, I find -- but I Will fit him: Sirrah, when they are
all gone, tie the Bell here, and then go to Bed


Why, what a Devil do you mean; it is a mistake, I am not the Person, it is she
here, this Jilt: Death, what is here, a stranger -- what will become of me now


Sir, you may well be ashamed of this rudeness: Heaven knows, I came hither
only upon a message


Come, come, away with 'em, away with 'em.


Hold I say; what are you mad? I tell you we are not the Persons.


Ah, Sir -- that shall not do: I was charged to seize on all Persons that
attempted to come in at this House; if you are not the right, you may clear
your selves to morrow, for my part I must do my duty


Your duty! poxo' your duty -- I think the Devils in the Fellow: I tell thee
once more, it is all a mistake: This is my House, and 'twas I that sent that
message to you, with design to seize upon a Jilt -- that I have some concern
with; but this is not she


And pray, who is that Jilt that you have such concern with, Sir, hah --


Hey day! what more Miracles? How the Devil got you in?


In! what do you mean, Sir? is it not enough, base Man, to bring your Wenches
home to the very Door here, and make the whole Town witness of your lewdness,
but you must be jealous of me too? she knows here I have been sick a-Bed all
this Night


I can assure you that, Sir, and in a very violent Fever this hour.


This is strange! but where was she, I am sure she was not in my Chamber.


No, I left that empty for you, and your Wench there.


My Wench! before George I never saw her before.


Pray let me speak with her a little; Had you any business here, Madam -- I
suppose 'twas you knocked at the Door


Yes, Madam; there came a Gentleman home with you that I am concerned with, and
my business was to speak with him


How, a Gentleman! what a Devil then you were abroad it seems.


A Gentleman with me! thou monstrous Impudence: with me, that have been in Bed
sick to death, all this Night! but this is your plot, Sir, to let her slander
me, base Man as you are -- I see it now


As I hope to be saved, not I -- I am so confounded, that I know not what to
think of neither side


Nay, if I am not mistaken; and if you are not the Lady --


Oh, if she is not; do you mark, Sir, is it come to that?


Ay, this is rare Impudence; pray Mr. Constable, take her away; of my
Conscience, this is some Jilt that owes us a spite, and designs to make a
separation; but it shall not do, Mistress -- away with her I say --


Sir, I beg your pardon for my mistake: Come, Madam, you must go -- but for
your Masters sake, whom I have the Honor to know, you shall have a Watchman
home with ye -- but pray no more of these Night-walks


This is very strange; but I must be patient --


Come, my dear, let us go in again; before George I am afraid thou will catch
cold --


Sir, this shall not serve your turn; and, though I am too weak now to express
my Anger, never think I Will put it up so; I will have satisfaction I assure you,
Sir: this was well-carry'd --


Satisfaction; now ten to one but I shall be duell'd about this business -- I
must put a stop to that; for my capacity of fighting, like that of loving, is I
think, past the best now. But I Will watch her a little more. This may be a trick
--


They are all gone at last -- and now to my Employment: This Bell is to give
the Alarm to the Damsel when the Giant sleeps, and the adventrous Knight
approaches; so, this will be a Guinney in my way at least to morrow

Hark -- I think he is come already -- it is a little too soon; but, no matter, I
think all is well, for the old Man is gone into his Chamber --


I am afraid I Have overstay'd my time, and made her wait for me; but the damned
Constable and Watch, yonder, stood so directly in my way, I could not get by
'em. It Is a witty Rogue, what a pleasant contrivance she had -- ha, ha, ha.
Well, little does my poor Matrimony at home think that I am a Batfowling -- but
she is ignorant, poor Soul, that is one comfort --


Never Man had such damned luck as I; The Devil sent but two prizes in my way
all this Night, and neither of 'em worth hanging -- Well, however, I have one
plot holds; it is now neat the time I promised Christina, and I Will thither --
How now? What Is this


Where the Devil is this String? a pox of these dark, envious Nights; there is
never any Stars out, when a Man has occasion for 'em


What Is here? a Man! and an Intrigue toward. This I think is Oldsapps Window;
ay -- it is so: Here Is another Adventurer, driving into my Harbor -- but, this
shall prevent him --


Hah -- are you at that sport; my Sword's as good as thine, I Am sure, and I
think the darkness is equal --


Past twelve a Clock.


It Is best for me to retreat, till the Watch be past -- I shall know this Bully
another time --


'Twas well you run faith, gad I had spoiled your Intrigue else; but the Watch
are coming, I Will stand close behind here, till they are gone


What is the meaning of this, sincerely if he should be killed now, and I lose
my Guinny, 'twould be fine work


What Noise was that? I thought I heard one whisper; the clashing of Swords --
but 't may be, 'twas only the Watch passing by. Well, I Will make haste to Bed,
and to morrow reconcile my self to my Dove -- it may be I am misinformed -- and
have done her wrong, I must know the truth on it. How now! what a Devil have we
here, a String tied to a Bell

That hangs from the Window into the Street? I Will see what this means I am
resolved, here may be another discovery; before George it is so: Here Is another
plot going forward, I Am certain on it -- But I Will be even with her, for I Will
watch -- I Will see what this New Project means


So, they are gone at last; and now to find this Bell that my young Gallant was
speaking of; I am resolved to defer my Intrigue with Christina so long. This by
the quaintness of it should be a plot of Trickloves; and I Will see what welcome
I shall have, that come unexpected -- oh here it is -- now Fortune --


Some body pulled the string, and the Bell rung -- list -- ha, again -- ay it is
some Rascal -- and I Will be his Porter immediately --


Oh how I shake! oh, oh -- Madam, Madam, we are undone, discovered, oh, oh --


The Bell is taken in -- a sign I suppose of her coming, so fall, all is well.


Death and Hell; discovered again! cursed fortune: Sir, Sir, sweet Sir, begone
-- begone, our Intrigue's discovered, the old man's coming, away, you are lost
else -- Cornet, do you run out and stop him at a distance, till I have made up
the business within, and then privately convey him hither, for I Am resolved not
to lose him so


The old Man! a good caution; and I Will follow it, though, I see 'twas meant to
another --


The Coast is clear once more -- I think the Devil and his Imps are abroad to
Night, with an intent to hinder honest Night-walkers -- I Will try once more --

Oh Heaven! what the Door open, and my dear Creature ready to receive me? a
thousand thanks to Fate for this blessing. Ah my dearest


Ah Rascal -- now I think I have snapt you finely. Within, Lights, Lights,
Lights, bring the Musket and two-handed Sword hither quickly, Lights, Lights


Surpised! oh I am in an Ague, what shall I do? will my damned Fortune never
leave me


Oh Heaven! he has not heard me -- but is come in! This is the most spiteful of
all Minutes: However I Have a trick left --


'Sbud, are you all dead? what hoa, Lights here, Lights.


Never a Chimney, nor Window, nor nothing to make my escape? God's Death! caught
like a Mouse in a Trap


Why, when you lazy Dogs; when I say?


Do it well; counterfeit your self drunk, and feign as if you mistook him for
Cornet, and five Guinnies are thine


I Will warrant you: Five Guinnies! odsniggers, I Will venture hard for it; there,
there is the Closset-Door; away, Sir, away --


Why Rascals, Sons of Whores, will you never come? before George I Will make a
Bonefire of ye: Drowzy slaves -- come, Sir,


By Fortune, sincerely, mere Fortune: Prithee let me kiss thee, sweeting;
odsnigs I Will lie with thee for this kindness


Away ye drunken Rascal -- but where, where is this Night-Walker -- I Am sure the
Door's locked, he cannot be gone


Prithee, dear Rogue, lend me thy Candle to go to Bed.


Away, ye saucy drunken Rogue; why Sirrah, are you blind, don't you know your
Master


How, my Master! I hope not so -- Well, if you are my Master, thank you for
letting me in, sincerely -- I Will see if I can find the way to Bed in the Dark,
and so good-boy to you


What a pox can this mean?


So; I Will second this, it begins well: What still more disturbances! will you
never be quiet? I wonder what the Devil you untied the Bell for -- Oh my side
--


What the Devil did you tie it there for?


What! old jealous Brains! I Will tell you for what: The poor Fellow asked me
leave to go and be merry with some of his Friends; and because he should not
disturb you, nor none of the House with his knocking to come in, I contrived
that Bell, and ordered Cornet to let him in; and you must take it away, and
make a bustle here for nothing: Ah you are a muddy-pate


Why did not the Rascal speak to me then? before George, I took him for
another; go get you to Bed again


No; 'twas your jealousy, your jealousy, ungrateful man; Oh my side! my side
-- Welford has long courted me without any return: but to be revenged on his
importunity, I made an assignation with him this Night to meet him in the
Garden


Very well.


You see what haste I make to him; and I had told you of this before, had you
not vexed me so to Night -- Now do you put on my Night-Cloaths, and go thither
instead of me; in my shape you may easily have opportunity of snatching his
Sword -- and then be sure to beat him soundly. And when you have revenged your
self sufficiently -- Consider, ungrateful Man, what reason you have to be
jealous? Oh my side


Well, before George, thou art mine again; and this discovery has made amends
for all, and thou stands as clear in my thoughts as ever -- My dear, dear
Rogue, prithee forgive what is past -- Come the Night-Cloaths -- for I Will
thither instantly, I Will swinge him -- faith --


To be jealous without cause, is the worst of Ingratitudes, but you know my
good nature -- Oh sick! sick


Alas, poor Rogue -- so, so I do in troth -- well have but patience till I come
back, I Will let thee see how much I think my self obliged -- ah, a watching
Rascal -- I Will be even with ye presently --


Ha, ha, ha; so, farewell threescore and three; and now to my frighted Friend
yonder in the Closet -- I am sure not to be interrupted these two hours -- and
when he comes back again, I Will tell him Welford's coming might be hindered by
some accident -- I Will wheedle him into a belief of any thing -- but I am tardy:
Now to my new Lover -- I am sure he expects me --


Madam, I have brought the Gentleman.


What Gentleman? Death and Confusion, Welford! Oh Distraction! what cursed
Fortune is this

He Is the only Man I would have avoided; for he is as dull to me now as a
Husband. What shall I do, I am at my wits end now


Mr. Welford, what a mistake is this? by Heaven I thought it had been the other
Gentleman


Madam, you sent for me.


Well the Devil has played his part, I have it once more -- I did, Sir, and if
ever you will oblige your self or me, do what I shall direct you -- I have told
the old Gentleman, intending to put a trick upon him, that I was to meet you in
the Garden to Night; and he in my Gown and Night-Cloaths is gone thither and
expects you: Now if you love me, go into the Garden, and as if you spoke to me,
call him a hundred Whores and Jilts -- for abusing so good a Man as Mr.
Oldsapp, and at last beat him soundly. This will make him ever have a good
Opinion of you, and our Intrigues hereafter shall be less suspected


Ha, this will defer my other Intrigue with Mrs. Christina: But come, it is but
half an hour lost -- I Will do it.


Heaven! how came he to know that! Oh I Will tell you more o'that hereafter: Go,
go, you lose time -- There is a Lover provided, and Marriage is going forward
-- I Will tell thee all another time -- but prithee go and swinge him soundly
first -- do my dear, dear, sweet, honey Rogue, do --


On your Commands I dare do any thing; but this methinks is a little strange.
Where Is your Dragon


Ah, gone, gone, Sir! blown into Air? Fie, fie; a young Gentleman and ask
questions --


I will no more: Come, let us go in, and laugh at him --


To drowzy Souls Love shoots his Darts in vain,
But happy Joys that Woman does obtain,
That gets her Lover by her working Brain.

WELL, if ever a beating did a Man a kindness; my old Gallant is obliged to me
for mine; it has quite changed his Nature, and from a rough, waspish -- rude
unmanner'd Fellow, made him as mild, a well-humour'd, sweet-condition'd person,
as a Man would desire to keep company with -- Ha, ha, ha -- He thinks I meant
her the blows, though he felt 'em -- and from that belief, calls me Dear Friend,
and swears he shall never make me amends for his wrong Opinion of me; so that
Intrigue is secure: Now, for my 'tother Mistress, this is the House, and I Will
hide my Lanthorn, lest I am seen by some prying Puppy at a VVindow -- Now good
luck toward me


Hist, hist, come, Sir, come --


I had discovered more, but the Constable and Watch hindered me. But hark,
Madam, I believe Mr. Welford's come


I know it; and therefore am resolved to be prepared for him: Whatever my
Husband is, I am sure my Virtue was grounded on a better Foundation, than to be
so easily o're-thrown -- I Will cure his rambling humor -- he shall find there
are some virtuous Women. Is the Moor a-Bed


Yes, Madam, and looks more horrid than ever, for her Age and Ugliness are now
plainly discovered -- she seems very well pleased -- and says, though the World
is grown ill-natured now; she has known the time when she has been called a
Foil to set a Jewel in -- and been kissed with appetite


Ha, ha, ha -- she will fit him rarely -- how now Cozen?


Yonder he is -- I Have let him into the Parlour. I suppose he took me for one of
the Maids, for he began to be very Rhetorical; but I swear methinks it is pity
to use him so


Pish -- prithee spare thy pity for a Subject: Now Lucy -- be sure you carry
the plot politickly -- and tell him at first I am not well, and will have no
company -- and so by degrees consent to let him know I am in Bed -- and telling
him that is my Chamber, send him to the old Moor


The Jest will be to see how reformed he will look in the Morning when he
awakes, and finds the Devil a-Bed with him --


Nay, we shall have sport enough -- but come, let us begone -- I Will instantly to
Bed and leave my Door open -- that when my Husband comes, he may make the less
Noise. Sure this will appear a proof of my constancy to him


If he has faith, it will -- but I am afraid he is an Infidel.


Come, away, away. Now Lucy, mind your business.


O Sir, I was just coming to you.


I am glad I have prevented that trouble: Well, where is thy Lady, my pretty
Emissary, hah --


Sir, she desired you, by me, to excuse her to Night -- for she is very ill, and
is gone to Bed


Not well -- gad my Company shall make her well. Come, there is Money for thee,
prithee let me see her


Well, you will never be able to make me amends, when you know how I Have
employed my wits to serve you --


Have thou -- and igad I Will not be ungrateful, for I Will serve thee too: I love
not to sleep always in a Palace: A thatch't Cottage, and a Straw Bed, is
sometimes more pleasant to me, than Embost Roofs, or downy Couches -- but to
the purpose -- how goes my affair


Why, Sir, my Mistress loves you --


There Is more Money for thee.


Extremely, Sir, beyond all others.


More still.


And fills her Husbands empty Head with Scoffs and Fancies, hers being full of
you


There Is all I have -- and gad were not my Pocket now empty, more yet were at
thy service for that conceit; but come, which is her Chamber, tell me that, and
I am thine for ever --


Oh Lord, Sir, I dare not -- her Chamber! marry Heaven forbid: I hope you do
not take me for a Bawd, do you


A Bawd! fie, no; a little harmless Emissary, that goes on Loves Messages for
Charities sake -- Come -- I have another Purse for thee at home, prithee
discover --


In good truth I dare not, Sir.


Nay, still a denial. Come, no more on it, I Will stand between thee and whatever
danger happens


But I am so afraid you will do some mischief or other to her --


Pugh, what mischief? it is impossible.


Well, that is her Chamber Door, Sir -- but I Will be gone, I Will be no accessory
-- I Will have no hand in it --


No, thou shall not -- come give me thy Light.


A Light -- gad forgive me -- what do you mean, Sir; is it manners think ye to go
into a Ladies Chamber at this time o'Night, and disturb her with a Light


Well, I Will have none then; pox on her she will awake her presently with her
chattering --


Is he gone?


Just gone, and as eager as a Student at his Commons: he gave me all this --
and I swear had he given the other half Crown, I believe I should have relented
-- for I began to feel some Motions of pity


Nay, I swear I believe thee; but in the mean time you are a fit Jewel to be
trusted -- a Mercinary Waiting Woman is a worse sort of Creature than a common
Strumpet; for she only forfeits her own reputation, but the other first sells her
Ladies honor, and afterward her own, that she may be sure not to go to the
Devil without Company


But I hope, Madam, you see I am a Woman of better Principles --


I do -- and for thy own sake am glad on it: But come, let us to Bed --


Sure I am haunted by Fairies, that lead me into Dens and Caverns, where none
but Witches inhabit; gad I know not what to think on it -- For going to begin
the first Complement of Love to my Mistress as she slept -- the first thing I
laid my Hand on, on the Bolster, was this -- which by the feeling and smell --
I guess to be my Grandams Implement, a Strong-Water-Bottle: And in faith a Man
would guess by her look to Day, she had little need of Restoratives. But here is
another that is worse -- for steping back -- I stumbled upon this -- a Shoe I
think; but if she owns it, though she is an Angel by her Face -- she is a Devil by
her Hoof -- I am resolved to inform my self -- come what will on it -- I very
happily left my Lanthorn in a Corner without -- and now 'twill do me excellent
Service

So, now I shall see what manner of Female I ha got.

By all that is good, a Moor, as black as the Devil's Grandmother; and I find it
now, this is a plot put upon me -- this Woman is damned honest -- but I am glad
I mist my Witch of a Bedfellow however -- stay, now for a Project to be even
with 'em -- Here Is another Chamber, the Door's open too -- and I think that is
her Gown upon the Table -- it is so -- Fortune I thank thee -- now I am sure I
am right --


I cannot rest and let this trick pass upon Welford; methinks there is something
within me, that taxes me with great Ingratitude: For, I am afraid, I love him
more than consists with my quiet, which induces me to imagine him worthy of a
far better Bedfellow. Why did I then consent to it? my Cozen's a married Woman,
and it is but Reason in her, but I swear it is Barbarity in me! the height of
incivility; and I Am resolved I will not suffer it. I Will instantly discover the
plot to him, it may be so good an Office may commence a passion in his heart
for me too, and that I am sure would be very agreeable: Hark, what Noise is
that


Nay, Madam, since you can act Daphne so well, you shall see that I can act
Apollo too. I shall be too swift for you --


Help, help there; I am undone else. Help, help --


All that shall not do -- I must be so unmerciful to stint this Noise -- and
since I Have ventured so hard for it, am resolved to try the difference between
the old, the Devil yonder my intended Bedfellow -- and Lady Venus, my now
happy purchase -- smile Madam -- and bless your Fortune: Oh my full Heart,
Come, come, I Have not a Minute more to spare, nor have you to consider, nay no
struggling, it must be so --


Hold, hold, Sir, a word or two with you first.


'Sdeath, she here! a plague, and double plague on opportunity, she always
jilts us most, when most we need her --


This is a wonder to me, prithee how came the plot discovered?


I know not, the Devil I think owed me a shame, and sought to pay it this way:
But, I am glad thy care prevented it --


Nay, nay, Madam; there is no going out -- I am resolved to make better use of
my good fortune, than by such a neglect. It Is true, I have no occasion for a
Witness at this time, but since it happens so, I must fortify my self as well
as I can -- come, come, Madam -- Hey -- what do I see Raymond here


Jack Welford here, and at this time of Night? Death and Confusion! what means
this? How now, Sir, what business have you here with my Wife


His Wife -- gad I am in a fine condition?


Sir, answer me, and quickly -- lest I force it from you another way; what, you
designed an Intrigue with her to Night I warrant, and mistook my House for your
Ordinary in Durham-Yard


I Will venture, this must do or nothing. How, Sir, an Intrigue with her -- pray
be no longer guilty of such a mistake, I assure you, Mr. Welford's business
here is with me


With you?


With me, Sir; and a business of weight too; I can assure you; for he has this
Night given me a promise of Marriage


Death! what is this -- Madam, what do you mean, I know nothing of the business?


Next week say you, Sir -- fie, I swear 'twill be indiscreetly to marry so soon
-- (a word more and you're undone!) No, no -- I think it is fit we consider a
little -- a Month hence will be time enough; indeed, Sir, next week is too soon


Faith and so it is, what a Devil shall I do in this case?


Nay, if he comes to my Neice all is well again -- he has a good Estate, and
will be a fit match for her -- but gad I thought his business had been with my
Wife when I came in -- but see how Men may be mistaken --


Pray Uncle salute him kindly, do it as to one that is shortly to be my Husband
--


What Husband, Madam! gad I must not let this pass --


What Husband, Sir? do you begin to recant already, nay then I suspect something.
Come, Sir, repeat your Promises to her instantly before me -- or my jealousy
will give me cause to believe my wife was concerned here -- it will, Sir -- if
otherwise, you need not study I am sure, for she has six thousand Pound, and
merits you every way


Six thousand Pound! gad this is better than I expected, a pretty Lady too! hah
-- I think I need not stand out indeed -- six thousand Pound


Come, what say you, Sir?


Say! why I say, Sir, if she has six thousand pound, I will confirm my promises
to her, I Will marry her at a minutes warning


That was spoke like a Friend -- let me embrace thee, and give thee thanks for
making our knot of Friendship stronger by this Alliance -- Come, my dear, let us
leave 'em together; they have a thousand things to say, I know -- and it is
rudeness to hinder 'em; farewell -- I believe it is near break of day -- I Will --
take an hours rest, and then Neice -- I Will go to the Alderman, and speak to him
to get your Money ready -- (So, this gives an opportunity of visiting my new
Mistress again, according to my promise;) Come, my dear, this plaguey business
does always so disturb thee -- but --


I swear, Madam, this was a cunning cruelty, I have not heard of -- to
challenge me un-arm'd, and take my Heart by surprise; methinks in Conscience
you should have given me an hours warning


If you think me cruel, Sir, I can release your promise: nay, would choose to
do it, rather than give you occasion to boast of my kindness -- I know you, Sir,
and am acquainted with your humor


I am glad on it faith -- for, when I was as well acquainted with your person --
who can imagine the blessing that will follow -- In brief, Madam, I am resolved
to pursue what is so well begun, and will marry ye indeed -- for the present
I Will leave you to consider, and go to settle some affairs of my own -- but
believe I would not loose the hopes I have in thee, nor the possession of the
joys that are in prospect -- for all the wealth of the World --


Nor I -- I swear --


I WILL lay any Man five Guinneys upon my Bowls to day;


Lovel, what say thou? will thou take me?


Not I, Sir -- but is she at leisure now, think thou? Come, thou art an
honest Fellow, I may trust thee


Sincerely I know not, Sir -- I hope you take me for a more conscientious
Person, than to have any thing to do in Women's Affairs. There Is no Money
stirring with him, he shall know nothing


Come, Lovel, take your Glass; hark you, Pimpo, I am your Friend -- keep her
Affairs from these, and let me know all -- 'twas I that sent for thee -- when
is the best time to wait on her, ha? softly, when, I say -- come, I am thy
Friend I tell thee


Ay, ay; your Servant, Sir; a Friend quoth a -- (he has no Money neither.) Well
-- there is a number of Consumptive Knights now adays; good, Sir -- do not
tempt me: Sincerely, I am a Man of better Principles I tell you -- and if this
be the thing you sent to me for --


Dam him; this is a zealous Rogue -- I Will banter him -- hark'ee, Elubu
bizeldoclaman -- bila, shaw


Sir --


Carlid donzal. pulin tack lillikaw -- do prithee.


Do what, Sir; I do not understand one word you say.


Ha, ha, ha, he plays the wag -- he does in faith -- Well, Sir Fredrick -- you
will never leave this humor -- but honest, worthy Gentleman, pray a word with
you


Honest, worthy Gentleman; mark the Colonel's Complement: I warrant he has been
studying all this morning for it


Do not trust a secret in these slight Bottoms; they leak presently: mine is
the same business -- the Lady, the Lady -- thou understand'st me -- by the
Blade she is a dainty one -- and I think I am the fittest for her -- hah --
come -- when is the time? serve me but in this -- and if ever thou have a mind
to be a Soldier -- I Will stand thy Friend -- I Will do thy business for the


So -- here is another Friend -- and consequently no Money, for it is a Maxim --
that he that professes most Friendship to you, will be sure not to lend you
Money -- a pox I Will have nothing to do with such sneaking Fellows -- not I --
for like my honest Brethren the Quakers, though I am a Rascal when there is
Money to be got sincerely, I Will be a Saint when there is none


Hah, Squire! what brought you hither this Morning? hah --


Oh! no more of that, Sir; before George I am very sore about the Back and
Shoulders -- I Will tell thee what, Will. I was beaten last Night Man, swing'd
confoundedly -- ha, ha, Jack Welford did it -- well say you what you will, I am
confirmed he is the honestest Fellow in Christendom --


It Is much to hear a Man say so of one that has beaten him --


Ah -- I Will say it again, and again -- his honest beating has much obliged me
-- and I am his humble Servant in black and blue for it -- things are cleared
Man -- all doubts and suspicions vanished -- hah -- I could jump -- I am so
merry --


Hark'ee, Squire -- prithee come hither a little.

I have in Essex a Manor of Land, and I would know whether,
Elblizzelmontablementa blisigonable -- now you can tell --


What say you, Sir Fredrick?


Why look you, Sir -- my Land is -- deelishable, etc. now you can give me
information --


Of what? what a Devil is it you say? before George I cannot understand you.


Hah, ha, ha --


Well, you play the Wag with me, I warrant -- but no matter, I am in so good a
humor now, that I Will take any thing; and if we meet at the Bowling-Green anon
-- the Glass shall go round merrily, in faith -- till when, your Servant, I have
now a little business --


Come, Colonel; shall we go and dine?


Not I, Sir, I have some business must be done, pray excuse me.


Now to make amends, for once I Will condescend to strain my Conscience for ye,
therefore go and stand all ready at the Back-Garden-Gate, and I Will see if the
Old Man be safe, and come and convey ye into the House, and bestow ye
conveniently -- and then he she likes best is sure to have her company --


Rare Rogue! do this, and I am bound to thee for ever.


And so am I.


And I -- by the Blade I believe he is a very honest Fellow --


Oh is it come to that? a rare Wheel -- go then, and be sure you miss not the
hour -- for I Will be ready for ye


I Will warrant thee -- a very honest Fellow in faith.


Ay, ay, a very honest Fellow -- ha, ha, ha: Am not I a cunning Rascal now, by
gadsniggs I am -- For I will make all these that think to serve themselves in
this business and fool me, fool themselves and serve me -- By abusing them, I
shall get my self into my Mistresses favor again, who I know hates 'em -- They
must be Ferreting -- well -- sure this is the most immoderate whoring Age that
e're was kown: No matter Signior you fleece your self indifferently amongst
them -- Ha, ha, ha -- of my Conscience I have made up more wanton matches, than
ever Mosely did -- And what then? why it is my Trade, and the frozen Zealots
will allow a Man to labor in his Vocation -- Besides I employ but my Deputy

For since all Crimes with profit come off clearly,
It Is Profit is the Pimp, not I sincerely --

NEver argue to the contrary, for you shall stay and dine here. The old
Gentleman is now in so good a humor, that I can pretend you are my Kinsman, or
any thing -- I am sure he will not suspect


Do not think my dear, it is possible for me to be weary of thy Company; but I
fear some Inconveniences may happen which we think not of; besides I promised
faithfully to come home to Dinner, and I have a Friend or two that will stay
for me


You may if you please satisfy that with a Letter; make no more excuses, for I
command you stay, and if you had rather serve a little insignificant business
before obeying my commands, you may do what you please


No, thou have Charms enough to make a Hermit obey, one that never knew what Love
or Beauty meant; but prithee did the old Fox suspect nothing -- if he had come
into the Closet where I was locked up last night, what should I have done then


He! poor sneaking old Fool, he never mistrusts when there is an occasion, but
when there is none: For, observe this, your old, doting, impotent, keeping Fool
-- if ever he be jealous of his Mistress, it is so much to his loss; for she will
still augment it, and by that means get one of his Bags, or a snip of his
Estate for her plot at last, the cause shall always fall on her side, and then
he is sure to pay soundly for his jealousy, though he has never so much cause
for it


Why, well said; and in faith, if I could bring my reason to dispense with any
rules for Love and Intrigue but my own, I Would sooner take thine, than any Woman's
in Christendom --


There Is a Book within in the Closet will teach you more, prithee go fetch it.


That I will, if it be only for the curiosity of knowing the Author --


Madam, though your last plot has reconciled me to Oldsapp, I am not yet
satisfied in point of Love -- I must know more of this new Rascal -- and I
think this a very fit opportunity


Again interrupted, and by him too? why what a madness is this of you, Sir, to
come hither to me at so unseasonable a Minute -- though the old Man has retained
a good Opinion of you, do you think 'twill not make him suspect afresh, if he
sees you here alone with me -- go -- for Heaven's sake go, go


The old Man! why where is he?


Hush! where is he -- why there, in that Closet there -- go, go: nay go I say
-- hark, don't you hear him


Nay, now I am sure I Have found you out -- for I saw him not a quarter of an
hour agon, go into the Devil Tavern -- and I am resolved to see who inhabits
that Closet before I go


Oh Devil chance, taken thus! hah, you are so jealous! let me go, and I Will open
the Closet Door --


No, no, Madam, I Will have patience --


Oh dam him, Madam, this is an insipid Fellow: he writes -- Death, Welford here?


why could the Devil find none to affront me in this nature, but one of my own
Tribe, a Kinsman --


How, his Friend! what a mischievous plot is this!


Gad, I begin to understand the plot now: So, Sir, I see you are the Man of
Intrigue still: You were the person the Bell was let down for last Night -- but
you may thank Fortune you are to be my Kinsman, and that the value I have for
this trifle makes me think her not worth my Sword, or else this should not pass
so --


Ha, ha, ha, I am glad of this, was it his Mistress all this while? pass as it
will, Sir, all I can say, is, that I was ignorant you were concerned with her,
and if that is not enough to satisfy you, Sir -- I wear a Sword as well as
another --


Well, the Devil did take his progress last Night, that is certain: but you may
take her, Sir.


With all my Heart, Sir, I have known her too -- when perhaps you have been
locked out -- since you go to that --


Oh, the Devil! what is this I hear? What, both known her!


Death -- I am undone! here is the old Man: Nay, Gentlemen, be not so cruel to
ruin me -- do but second me, and I Will bring all about yet


I Will do any thing, what is it?


And I, for thou art a damned Jilt, I Will be charitable to thee, thou shall have
one Cully left


Mind what I say then: You known to her -- fie, I wonder you are not ashamed to
talk so; but this it is, when poor innocent Gentlewomen venture their
reputation in such Hands. Now answer --


Why, Madam, why should you speak for her, you know her not --


Ha! what is this?


You are not concerned with her, I hope?


I dare swear you were hardly ever three times in her Company, and yet like
impudent Creatures you dare say you are known of her -- Ah it is a wicked Age
this


Oh, they mean some body else; but before George, at first, I was afraid they
spoke of her; and gad my heart was at my mouth -- Dear Welford, your humble
Servant; welcome in faith -- who is this Gentleman, a Friend of thine


Yes, Sir, and one that will be very proud of your acquaintance.


Before George, I shall be proud of his too: Sir, your most obedient Servant --
Here, hey, Boy -- bring half a dozen Bottles of Claret


See, Madam; there they are, and with her, I told you I could not miss the
House


It Is so, Oh Heaven! is this the Fate of Marriage?


Welford here too -- if he keeps this custom, I find I shall buy his Loaf at a
dear rate


A Lady speak with me, say thou?

Tell her, I am at her service -- I hope some new adventure --


Sir, I desire a word in private with you?


In private! with all my Heart, Madam: this Room, I confess, is too public for
any business -- if you please, Madam, I Will wait on you to your Lodging


No, Sir, mine is a public business -- you will guess it so when you see my
Face. Now, what think you, Sir


My Wife!


Nay, Madam, since my Friend is entertaining your Companion, be pleased to give
me the Liberty of making my address to you -- faith I must kiss your hand --
Death my Mistress


What are these Women, my Dear, do know 'em?


Not I, do you think I am acquainted with Town Women? Rare Gallants! they have
their haunts I see


Is this your Alderman that was to pay the Money, Sir?


Nay, prithee sweet, I Will give thee a reason for my being here.


And is this your preparative for Marriage, Sir?


Preparative! prithee, what do thou mean? why that Lady there is my Aunt -- I
hope you will give a Man leave to visit his Relations


Your Aunt! yes; so that Lady was your Cozen once, do you remember that?


Well; then in brief, we'll give you full satisfaction at home, but no more
words of it here -- you see we are observed; and 'twill be for neither of your
Honors to make discovery: In the mean time, believe your Jealousy always
gives you the wrong end of the prospect -- but hush, more of that anon --


Sir, now I Will give you cause to say, I am a Man of Wit and Design; ha, ha, ha
-- sincerely I have played such a pranck, such an exploit --


What, Sirrah! you are upon some new sham, are you?


Sham, O Lord! when I talk of Wit -- he talks of shaming: Madam, pray do you be
more credulous -- and hear me. Sir Fredrick, Mr. Lovel, and Colonel Buff -- you
know have long loved you


How Is this?


You, I know hate them; and though I have been often solicited by 'em severally
to bring 'em into your Company, I never did; but sincerely, to show my duty to
ye, I have now put a pleasant trick upon 'em


Have thou! well said; prithee what is it?


Oh no, Sir, you need not know; I am upon the sham, am I?


Well, well, I was mistaken; but prithee, dear Rogue, let us hear it.


Why, I have brought 'em all into the House, and placed 'em very conveniently.
One of 'em stands there in the Pantry tied up in a Meal-Sack -- and another
sits sneaking in a Corner of the Wash-house -- hid between two stinking
Half-Tubs clapped together -- and the other is in the 'Cellar, all waiting for the
Watchword. Now stand all close and be silent, and you shall see rare sport
betwixt 'em


Ha, ha, ha -- faith so 'twill -- Gentlemen and Ladies, pray stand close.


First, for my adventrous Lover in the Cellar here -- hem, peugh --


Is he gone, Pimpo -- ha -- is the old Foel gone?


Ay, ay, Sir -- Come, come up quickly --


This was a cunning contrivance, I swear; but pox on it I have lost my Perriwig
here; and it is so damnable dark I cannot find it; prithee get a Candle, for you
know to be seen by her without a Perriwig --


Will be a great hindrance to your Intrigue; hah --


How! betrayed! Oh this damned Rascal --


Ha, ha, ha -- But sincerely, Sir, it is none of my fault; for you know I often
told you, what a Cause without Money must of necessity come to


You are a precious Friend indeed; but I shall take care of ye hereafter.

How now! what is that makes a Noise in the Pantry. Let Us see -- Sir Fredrick!


Oh! I Am almost smothered: Oh that Rogue! by King Ieffery, I am almost choakt
with Meal --


within. Oh, oh, oh.


Hark! there is another voice -- I think.


Hey! what my old Boy of the Bilbo, Colonel Buff too; before George, this is
strange; nay, nay, no flinching now; why what have thou been a swimming old
stump -- hah --


Where is this Rogue? this Dog? I Will cut him into Morsels --


Colonel, you know you are my Friend, Colonel -- ha, ha, ha -- and are to help
me to a place -- ha, ha, ha --


Let him alone, it is a wag -- but prithee how came this mischance?


Why, Sir, the Rascal hid me in the Wash-house, between two Tubs -- and I
suppose you know upon what design; and hearing the whistle, making haste to get
out, I stumbled headlong into another Tub full of Water, which I believe the
Rogue had set there for that purpose; but I shall find a time --


Ha, ha, ha -- a Tub of Water -- 'faith 'twould have been hard, that you that
have been in the Army where so many Bullets have whiz'd about your Ears, should
have died like a Rat in a Tub of Water -- But Colonel --


Pray, Sir, no more, I am not in a condition now to answer questions; only this
I Will say, I can resent such an injury, and so farewell --


This was a pleasant discovery, faith Squire; but see what Love is.


Sirrah, did my kindness to you, and all my promises, merit no better reward
than this


Why, sincerely you did not carry it well, Sir; for had you had but patience
till the case and quiddits of the proposals determined, or to be made plain
betwixt Sir Anthony and Sir Rowland, had been first fetched over with a
whim-wham for the better contriving of the business, the Intrigue had been
settled, fixed, ratified and confirmed, to order or declare a nonsuit as to
matter of moment, significant with all propositions that should concern and
persuade you, touching the great Cham of Tartary, or the Grand Signior; do you
conceive me


Impudent Rascal! what, a Banter too! nay, then it is time to hide my self --


Ha, ha, ha -- the bantring Fool is gone off in a rage: Well, Sirrah, for this
piece of service, Sneakey and I here forgive your past faults -- Come,
Gentlemen, lets go in and be merry. Lovel, thou shall go too; thou have been
treacherous it is true, but Love makes many a Man so: Come, I forgive thee --


Will thou never leave this mad humor of intriguing, Will. sure Age will wean
thee from it


Prithee, do not tell me of Age; there is no such thing in Nature; for he that
is old as thou call'st it, never thinks himself so; at least I shall not as long
as I can drink a Bumper, what say thou, Bully -- hah


No, before George I Am of your Opinion; it is impossible for a man of Spirit to
be old, especially if he has such a Cordial as this by his side; hah, little
Pigs-nies? gad I can hardly forbear kissing her before company: Here Is a Jewel
Gentlemen -- here she stands that is not only the most constant Woman in
Christendom, but there is never a Wife in all Europe has such honest principles
-- and so give me thy Hand, I Am thine for ever


Put a right value on her then, Sir; for give me leave to tell you, Sir, such
Jewels are very scarce now adays --


Well, if ever the Devil sat brooding to do Mankind an ill turn, 'twas
certainly in a Woman; They are made up of nothing but mischief: If they are
Wives they Cuckold ye; if Maids they beggar ye; if Whores they jilt ye: Every
way you are sure to loose if a Woman be concerned in your business: Well, did
not Interest tie my Tongue, I could say something, but mum, let it rest, all
will out one day


Come, come, we waste the time, pray let us go in; and to divert ye an hour or
two -- I Will relate to you the Intrigues that past between Sneakey and I, at our
first acquaintance; 'twill make ye laugh 'faith; and I think I have a pretty
way of telling a story too; besides, I can teach you a secure way to keep your
Misses constant; can I not, Sue


Oh, without doubt, Sir, they see you have given proof of it.

But to forge plots in an extremity,
Let every Mistress henceforth learn of me.

LIKE some true Friend that makes a willing Feast,
And him he loves does still invite his Guest;
Although his Treat prove course, is sure to use
A hearty welcome, and a kind excuse:
So the Poet fearing this his Case may be,
TO excuse the Play's Defects has chose out me:
But I, swear, am loath to venture it,
You deal as ill with Women now as Wit:
And like true Gallants of this wicked Town,
Debauch 'um first, and after cry 'um down --
Ah, happy were the former Antique Days,
When Love and Wit, were taught in Schools, not Plays:
When Formal Grandees priviledg'd the Creature,
Allowed Intrigues, and called 'um Scapes of Nature --
When Plays would do, without Sing, Show or Dance,
And Critics slept in Native-Ignorance:
But now, about the World they spread amain --
Like Numerous Weeds that choke the Prosperous Grain:
However, though I know it is against the mind,
Yet, Gallants if you please* you may be kind,
Prove so -- or may this Curse your Torture be;
May you all live, till you are as dull as he;
And all your darling Misses prove like me.
But if you change your damning tempers, then,
As Heaven knows I love kind natured Men,
May there inconstant prove not one in ten.
Not peevish -- proud -- bit mild and silent all*
If our Sex has faults blame the Orignal,
For all our frailties came by Adam's fall.
TArtuff: or, The French Puritan. A Comody acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants. Written in French by the Famed Wit of France, Mounsieur
Moliner, and made English by Mr. M. Medburn

The forced Marriage: or, The Jealous Bridegroom. A Comedy acted at the Dukes
Theater

Abdelazzar: or, The Moor's Revenge. A Tragedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Town-Fop: or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. A Comedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

All mistaken: or, The Mad Couple. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants

The English Monsieur. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants

Calisto: or, The Chaste Nymph. A Masque, acted at Court by the Lady Mary, the
Lady Anne, and many other Persons of the greatest Quality in England

The Country-VVit. A Comedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, in two Parts, acted at the
Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants. Price 2 s

The Tragedy of Nero. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.

S^phonisba: or, Hannibal overthrown. Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants

The Court of Augustus Caesar, or Gloriana. A Tragedy acted at the Theater
Royal

The Princess of Cleve a famous Romance, in the Press.


