LOng live Elizabeth of England, France and Ireland, Queen; sole Protector of
our Lives, Fortunes, and Religion, under whose Sacred Rule may it shine
brighter than unclouded Stars


May Foreign Nations fly to do you Homage, and Kings find Succor under the
Shelter of your Wings; Princes and Potentates bow down before you, as the
Universal Goodness of the World: Never was England so happy in a Monarch, nor we
in such a Royal Mistress


May the Aethropians forget the Sun and fall down and worship you, whose Sacred
Influence governs thus Mankind


My thanks to all, But I must refuse that Worship which the Immortal Powers
have only bidden to themselves, yet must own you, next to the Powers above, who
have given me Essence, and preserved my Life from Dangers great; placing me
upon this Throne to Rule a Tottering State, driven by fierce Storms of Malice,
o'r the deep Billows of devouring Envy; encompassed on every side with Foes,
yet fearless will I act. First then, To settle Religion, the dearest part of
Government, and surest Rock for Princes to build upon, shall be my speedy care
to begin: I Will reform my own House, and after that the Nation. Therefore all
you who pay Obedience to the Sea of Rome, or think Supremacy due to the Pope,
we here discharge you and banish you our Court. You my Lord Cardinals, as
chief, must show the way, and in your rooms such faithful Ministers I Will place,
as shall be worthy of so great a Charge

Bloodshed and Rapine shall to Rome retire,
Murder and Luxury which feed the fire,
Shall to the Scarlet Beast for Succor fly,
And unimploy'd within his Bosom die.

Is it come to this?


Now Heresy begins to peep abroad, that in Maryes days was laid as low as
Earth


Oh I could curse her Heart out, nay, my own, for not preventing it before it
had took root


Horrors and Death, why were our hands so tame, when one brave stroke had done
it at the Altar


Where was this Devil, Rome's, great Counselor; where was he, I say, that he
foresaw not this Monster, to have pashed it in the Mould of Nature, or have
strangled it in its Infancy, ever it grew to such a Gyantick Stature, now enough
to shake the very Throne of Rome


It is not yet too late, the Seeds are newly sown, and ever they root too deep,
we may pluck them up; or by lopping off the Cedar, make the Shrubs bend pliant
as we please


Let us about it then, and lose no time; methinks I could as freely strike the
Heretic, as one assured Salvation


It Is that must crown our Wishes; the Queen once Murdered, the rest are easily
reduced unto the Sea of Rome; let us on then, no opportunity must be omitted, to
get her speedily dispatched. It Is meritorious no doubt: Blood and Murders are
Rome's chiefest Glories


O Pius Quartu^, assist us with thy Prayers, and Hell, if thou hop'st a
glutting Harvest, protect the best Religion


Elizabeth is Crowned King of England, and therefore we ought to keep it Holy.


We ought, we ought.


How Neighbor, Holy! Pray Neighbor have a care what you say, for methinks
talking of keeping a day Holy, sounds as if we intended to keep a day for his
Holiness


Who Is that talk's of his Holiness? His Holiness is a Pimp, and so is he that
speaks of him; I say no more, I say no more


Indeed Neighbor Brush, my Neighbor Honeysuckle is in the right on it; for
since King Elizabeth has Banished Popery out of England, I say he is a Son of a
Whore that names any thing like it


Ay but Neighbor, this had been Treason a year ago --


But now we have got a King Elizabeth, it is no Treason Neighbors; Agad I think
my son as good a Christian now, as any man of no Religion whatsoever


A year ago, I had like to have been burnt for a Heretic, because the Watch
took me with a Bible in my Pocket, which I had had there at least a quarter of
a year, and never thought on it


Nay, I had like to have gone to pot too, for saying that I was as great a
Whoremaster as the Pope: But those times are gone, they are I thank my Stars,
or else we should all have smoked for speaking against the Pope. Well, I am
but a Tinker, but if I would have turned Papist, I never needed to have mended
Kettle more


How Is that, never mended Kettle more, that had been brave.


No, for you must know I am a great Politician, and a great Statesman; that is,
a man of the State: and a man of the State is a Statesman, mark ye me
Neighbors


Why then we are all Statesmen.


All, all Statesmen.


Yes, every Man and Mother's Child that don't go to Church too often; for if ye
go to Church too often, People takes ye to be Religious, and then ye are looked
upon as all Plotters, Traitors, Conspirators, and the like; for under Religion
the Pope acts all his Villainies: and every one knows that he is the greatest
Churchman in the World


He is, he is, he is --


But come Neighbors, to make right use of this Holyday, let us go to the
Alehouse, and there drink till we are drunk, come home and beat our Wives, and
so to Sleep: Come, come, come Neighbors, come


Ha, What ha we got here, two young Popes?


No, no, They are Cardinals.


How Canibals! Neighbors Ud'slud, they look as if they were a hungry, I had
best have a care they don't eat me. But now I think on it Gentlemen, Pray how
dare you stay in London, since King Elizabeth has Banished Popery out of
England


Why, you know we ought to have Preached to you but --


But what, But what --


Why, ye are a company of Incorrigible, Impenitent, and Exorbitant Wretches --


How Is that Neighbors, Exorbitant!


Ay, that is a hard word Neighbors; let me see, Exorbitant is -- is -- is as
much as to say Exorbitant


As much as to say, we are all Whores Birds.


All Sons of Whores, every Man and Mother's Child; for now I think on it, an
Exorbitant fellow is the Son of a Whore, and the Son of a Whore is an
Exorbitant fellow; Therefore I think Neighbors, these He Popes ought to be
chastised


They ought, they ought --


Pray Gentlemen, pray Gentlemen be civil.


Down on your Knees then, down on your Knees, we say, and beg our Pardons, and
that quickly


O cursed Fate! But better this than worse, we do, we do Gentlemen, and are
sorry for what we have said


Well, now I know 'um, that is he that burnt my Neighbor Mole the Sexton for a
Heretic, who was of no Religion


And that sly Scarlet Rogue, because I would not let him Ravish my Wife, and
Debauch my Daughter, burnt them both for Heretics. --


And that is the Fellow that lay with my Wife behind the Buttery door, and made
me a Cuckold to my face; but it is no matter, we'll Plague 'um for it now we
have got 'um in our clutches; they had better have been at Rome In Faith


Come, come, Away with 'um, away with 'um.


Thus like two Roman Hero's handy dandy,
We'll go to the Alehouse to be Drunk with Brandy.

Now let the Joy of Rome be great, and let every individual Father cry, Long
live Religious Soul, and Scourge of Heresy, Mary of England, Eldest Daughter
to this Holy See, read here


How Is this, 300 burnt alive in a Church as they were Preaching Heresy and
close Rebellion against this Holy Catholic and Apostolic See: Ten more such
Sacred Murders would have made the haughty Turk and stubborn Flemming to have
owned you the Supreme Head of the Universal Church --


It Is great and Meritorious, let him be Canonized for a Saint, that first
invented this Religious way of sending Troops of Heretic to Hell together


Let it e done, it is my Command it be so; for the Propagators of Religion ought
to be cherished, though in Blood: and let our speedy thanks be sent to our best
Daughter, for taking such effectual care to blast the growing Heresy, and keep
it under foot


She ought to be Sainted whilst on Earth, and when wrapped up into the brighter
Mansions, far above this lower world, be Enthroned a Goddess, and adored, who
found her self uneasy in her Thoughts and restless, till opportunity gave
leave to throw her Self and Crown at your Sacred feet, desiring to be received
into your bosom --


And by so doing has fenced her self within a Wall of Addamant, too secure for
Envy, or the prying Fates to reach; and her Ambassadors shall still have the
preheminency in all our Courts


Who dares dispute it, if it pleases you, when all the Glories of the Earth
depend upon your Will? Monarch's but a Name you lend to pleasure haughty Man
withal, and when you please to call it back, Kings are as soon divested of
their Honors, as are your meanest Slaves


Ha! Your Eyes speak wonders, and forebodes some dismal Message to the Sea of
Rome


Dismal indeed, the Flower of Rome is gone, the Star that lately shone so
bright in your great Firmament, is set; The Sacred Empress of the Northern
Isles, the angry Power have snatched away, Mary of England's Dead


How!


Cold as the face of Ice, and in her stead the haughty Magnanimous Sister's
Crowned -- But Crowned to make Religion and her Ancient Seat stagger and fall
before her


Cursed disafter.


All of the Church of Rome she has Disgraced, and the greatest Places of Trust
about her Person, are given to Heretics; no Roman is to be seen in London now,
but such as sculk in Corners, or those of such puny Souls that swallow all the
Execrable Oaths they lay before them


Let them swallow all they can Impose, we make it Lawful, we'll grant them
Dispensations for so doing; no matter if the whole outside taste of Heretic,
so within they remain firm to us --


Something must be done to change the Scene, least other Nations taking Example
from her, should fall from their Obedience, and throw off your yoke


There shall; Nor must we linger in a Cause of such a vast Importance: for
Heresy, like Weeds, grow fast, and if timely care be not taken to prevent it,
the World ever we can root them out will be Infected.


She must be Murdered, and that without delay.


Spoke like a Saint that would fain be in Hell before his time.


Murther's too gross a name, and sounds too harsh in Peoples Ears; let her be
made away secretly: Sign a speedy Warrant for her Death


Here take this, and with our ample Pardon, though it be for the blackest
Murders Hell ever knew, the Burning of Cities, or Deflowring of Virgins

For to promote Religion naught's withstood,
Empires must fall, and Kingdoms set in Blood.
Blood must Cement the tottering State of Rome,
And Heaven shall warrant all the Ills we doom.
To fix Religion in its blessed abode,
Should be the mighty Business of a God:
Murther's the end, the Trait'ress shall not live,
Who kills for Rome, Rome's Vicar will forgive.

I can but laugh now, to think how these old Fools are cheated: This is the
Warrant that Signs the Pope's Destruction. That must needs be a hopeful
Religion, that has the Devil to it for a Tutor. It Is Murder and Poison that
brings them to the Popedom, where for a while, they enjoy all earthly
Pleasures; but then by dire Mischance, or their own Luxury, Death snatches them
hence, and then they are hurried Headlong down to my great Master

For he which in Pleasure gives his Soul to dwell
A Pope on Earth, must be a Devil in Hell.

THis is the time the friendly Fates to Rome have set to cut the root of
Heresy, and Crown Religion Monarch in the Throne: Ever to Morrow's dawn the
haughty Usurpress shall be no more


Who are the Assassines? Are they qualified for such a Work? That their bold
Hands at once may strike, and Tongues forswear 'twas they


Doubt it not; They are two Fellows bred up in Villainy; Rascals that have sucked
Murder from the very Intrals of a Prison: I have agreed with them for so many
Masses to Kill the Queen, and if they bring them off short Heaven, there is no
Truth in our Religion


You may as well misdoubt Eternity, as Holy Unction, Mass and Prayer.


Should they fail, I would strike the blow my self; methinks I could as easily
do it, as I can merit my Salvation. --


Lost, lost, and undone for ever. Fly, -- Fly, -- the Treacherous Secretaries
of the Ambassador, just as the blow was going to be given, have unravelled all
the Secrets of the Plot, and laid them open for each Vulgar Eye to pry into


O Dam 'um for Fools and Cowards, to boggle at a thing called Conscience, when
Religion bids them Act


Why if the Plot be Discovered, we shall all be hanged if we are taken.


But what say the Assassines? How stand they affected?


Some glimmerings they have, but as yet no certainty of what has passed; which
makes them still Lurk about the Court, resolving this Night to kill the Queen


Haste then, and give them all the Encouragement and Assistance that thou can
devise, slip no Opportunity to perfect such a glorious Work; in the Name of
Rome's universal Lord, I charge thee haste; let not a moments stay retard thy
steps


I go, Imperious Cardinals, but it is my Master's Interest I consult, not yours;
though you are they that reap our Harvest of dire Sin, it is we that have the
Profit of the Scarlet Grain to fill our Stores. I Will leave ye to your Fates, it
will not be longe'r


Well, we must be swift in all we do, this opportunity let slip will ruin us,
and put disgrace upon the Cause for ever


Death and Confusion seize the Heretics ever that be done, Horror and the
darkest deeds of Night shall be their Portions


It Is in vain to linger, we must hence or shall be discovered by some prying
Eyes; let us in obscurity await the blessed event


If the Assassines fail, Rome's ancient Glory shall not fall, for this bold
Hand shall strike the busy Heretic, and push her headlong down from her
Usurped Throne

What Is done for Rome must needs, if great, be good,
He merits Heaven, whose Soul is bathed in Blood.

This is the Night designed to wash our hands in Blood of Heretics, to cut
down that high Cedar that has made her self Rome's Envy; nor shall we want Gold
for perfecting so brave a Work; the Enterprise must be with Resolution
undertook, and as fearless we must on, as did that brave Burgundian who killed
the Prince of Orange


Remember Raviliac, and let us boldly undertake an Act so meritorious; nor let
our hands be slack to strike our fatal Daggers home into her Breast; plunge
them to the Hilt, and when we have drawn 'um out, laugh loud, as being pleased to
see the streaming gore be-crimson the pale Surface of the Earth


See where the Queen comes, attended only by one Gentleman. Now Is the time to
cut the Root of Heresy, and if she *escape us, may we be accursed for ever.
Methinks the blow's already struck, and Death has hushed her silent in his
frozen Arms


Let us abscond a while, the better to surprise her.






Are all things done according to my Order.


They are, in all things I have been obedient to fulfill your Royal Pleasure.


What said the French Ambassador to his Accusation?


Haughty and bold, like any Guiltless man he did behave himself before the
Council, denying that he knew ought against your Sacred Life, or was not
obliged to tell it if he did; he only alleged, That it was not in the Power of
any Council to tax the King's Representative, much more to demand such
Questions of him, as none but his Master ought to know


It Is close and dark, as all their other Actions are, but we'll not meddle with
Lemaspin more; only tell him our just resentments, that we Banish him our
Court, and speedy care shall be taken to send him quickly to his own Land

What Powers Divine Protect, Rome cannot harm,
Nor can the Scarlet Beast our Senses charm;
Pistol nor Poison never can make her start,
Who has Heavens Sacred Armor for her Heart.





Now, now is the time, strike home -- Now for cutting the very root of Heresy,
that it shall never sprout in England more; let us on, let us on, I say


My heart fails me, I cannot touch her.


Cowardly Slave, art thou not paid for Murder?


Not as you are assured Salvation; therefore strike you, and that quickly, or
I Will kill you, and so end the Dispute


Villain, thou dare not.


You shall see I dare.


Why how now, what is to do here? what two Fellows a Fighting in the Queen's
Garden


I Will be hanged if these Fellows have not a hand in the Plot, and come hither
to Kill the Queen


It may be it may be so, therefore I think it fit that we seize 'um, and carry
'um before a Justice of Peace to have 'um Examined


Pray Gentlemen of what Trade or what Calling are ye, for know Gentlemen, I
have Power to apprehend ye, and make ye give a better account of your selves,
and what business you had here. Ha, What are these! Truly Gentlemen, these are
suspections Weapons


Ud'slud see ye here, as I take it Neighbors, if I am not mistaken, they
should be Butchers by their Knives


Well, come Gentlemen, I must carry you and these before a Magistrate, and have
you both Examined; and I Will promise you Gentlemen, I Will be so kind to you, that
I will not leave you till I see you both fairly Hanged: Come away with 'um, away
with 'um; bring 'um along, bring 'um along


Along with 'um, along with 'um.


Come thou best Partner of my silent Joys, let me Embrace thee thus, and in
Slumbers soft repose on thy fair Breasts, lulled between thy Arms, whose Ivory
bends can only make the circle of a lasting Pleasure, in which to charm the
Universal Prelate, Rome's awful Head, and Ruler of the World


Alas, what would you have me do? I am ignorant of what you mean.


Only to Solace in Delight and Dalliance, as did thy Father in thy Mothers
Arms, when their Loves mixed to give thee Being


All Society of Men in that Nature are by your strictest Laws forbid to Nuns;
or would you have me break my Vows of Chastity, and all the Ties Religion does
impose, to my dishonor and disgrace


All Vows so made, I freely here dispense; and as for Religion, it is but a
Trade lately found out, for to maintain such as would live at ease, as cannot
frame themselves to labor. A mere Cheat, that has been lately put upon the
Word, to delude easy people, and keep them up to strict Obedience: None but
Women and Fools do believe that we can Save or Damn for Moneys whom we please;
or that Salvation can be bought or sold


Why then are silly Virgins enticed by specious pretenses of Meriting Heaven,
to these close Confinements, to undergo such Penances as Midnight Mattins,
Shifts of Hair, and Discipline? If all is but a Fable, why are we not
undeceived


Few Artificers declare the Knack by which they live, unless for Money or long
Servitude; it is that by which we do deceive the prying Eyes of those that we
would keep under subjection


Then all your Piety's but feigned, a mere Fiction all.


Nothing more, for how can you imagine that the Clergy could consist or live
without such soft dear things as are your Sex in general; for was it not for
Procreation, Nature would stand still, and the whole Creation being out of
frame run backward --






Why this is as it should be; why should not you, who have the World all at
Command, and Heaven in store, always ^ull in Pleasures. -- For what were those
glittering Angels made, if not to be enjoyed? To your Bed of Pleasure Sir, and
in the Morning I Will attend you; and in the mean time take care to manage your
Affairs against the Heretics --


Thanks my dearest best of Friends (thou have been always kind to me) I Will take
thy Counsel, and expect thee when to Morrow dawns


To cut his thread of Life just now, is the ready way to Damn him; but then I
break the Promise of a Devil -- No, he shall live till Fate or dire Mischance
push him upon me, and I Am sure he wants not much of that by Nature's Course,
were not his Luxuries enough, Damnation is his Bargain, and the Price of my
dear purchased Service; so the fat crammed Clergy, and the sordid Laity, with
willing feet come crowding to my great Master, who leads the Pope by the Nose,
and sits as Partner with him in the Popedom: But it shall be my future Business
to supplant them both, and so at once to rid the Chair of a Lustful Pope, and
an Imperious Devil

Pope thou art ready, and we all agree.
When thou come to Hell to keep a Jubilee.




No, nor hear them confess neither.


Confess, why Neighbor Brush, are you such a Fool to think that they will
confess, now the Pope has Pardoned them; no I Will warrant ye, they will confess
no more than a Post, nor so much neither


Why, what would you have men confess that are Innocent.


How Innocent! -- How dare you, being but a Cook, say they are Innocent!
Sirrah, How dare you say they are Innocent


Why Sir, I do say so, and will maintain it upon any ground in England --


How do thou mean, fighting ways?


With all my heart.


Why then as I Am a Tinker, upon my Honor I Will fight thee.


The time.


After Execution, and if I beat you, you shall turn Protestant; but if you beat
me, I Will be dragged to Rome in Chains, and there turn Pope


Agreed, Agreed.


Look to it you Son of a -- for I shall so maul thee; I say no more, but look
to it --


Whither, whither so fast; they are all Dead already, all Hanged.


How all Dead! All Hanged! why then A Pox Choke 'um I say; it is true I thought
to have seen 'um shake their heels, but it is no matter, since they are Dead
they are past Plotting, and now may King Elizabeth Live and Reign in Safety --
O that she had but forty such Subjects as I am, she would be the happiest Queen
in England, a-gad she would. Cook, look to it -- But now I think on it Sirrah,
Pray what Religion are you on --


Why of your Religion.


How can that be, I am of King Elizabeth's Religion -- Ha, ha, Sirrah, methinks
you smell somewhat stinking, like a Papist


Why I am a Papist, what then?


How a Papist, in the company of a Tinker and a Statesman? knock him down,
knock him down


I, I, do, and the Law shall --


Nay, now he talks of the Law let him alone, for we are not to knock any Man
down that understands the Law

But look to it, Sirrah, about an hour hence, for I shall so maul thee, Vds-bud
I shall, thou Son of a Papist thou

Even till I make thee swear, this Bum
Is Holier Flesh than all the Pope is of Rome.
Come, come, Neighbor, for one cherriping Cup, and then to the Fight.


NOw thou look more lovely Fair than Venus ever could boast her self to be,
and on thy Cheeks more rosy Blushes sit, than Sol could ever spare to deck the
early Morn; and now my Dulcementa, Rome


I must confess you have taught me to forget the thorny way, which I poor fool
once wandered in, being misled; but now by your Advice, return to taste of
Pleasures and Delights, I had not else been capable to understand. They cannot
sure be ill, that you the Universal God on Earth vouchsafe to try -- But alas,
What will my Father Cardinal Moricena say, when he comes to know of this, and
when our midnight Meetings are discovered to the World, as ever long they must,
I find by something that forbodes within me --


Alas! Thy Father dares not blab, for if he do, I have a Sleeping Pill, that
shall seal his Mouth for ever: And as for the World, who dares grumble at the
Pope, the Universal Bishop of the Church, or question ought he does


Fly, fly, or all will be discovered, Cardinal Moricena's at the Gate, railing
against your Holiness; calling you Monster, Beast, Leacher, and the vilest
terms that Envy can invent


Oh where shall I fly, to hide me from his angry Face? Now gilt comes fast upon
me, and I tremble at the thoughts of what I have committed


It Is too late, for see he enters.


Where is this Leacherous Pope, this He decripid Goat, the scandal to the Holy
Chair for ever? And where is this Irreligious Nun, the shame of her Sex and my
Honor? -- Oh have I found you after your glutting in all unlawful Pleasures:
Take that for a reward.


Oh Father forgive me, in your Arms I do desire to die; and as with your Aid I
did receive this mortal Shape, into your Bosom let me breath my last: It was
that Monster that betrayed my Innocence, by telling me Religion was but a
trick, invented to delude easy Women withal, or as a trade found out for to
maintain such as were incapable of labor; a mere cheat or shadow, without
substance: and with strong Allurements wone me to his Lust, which now I
heartily repent me of, with my last breath, whilst fainting in your Arms I
die.


Damned Incarnate Devil, what have thou done, thou have slain that Angel in thy
Daughters Shape, that shall deny thee thy Salvation: I as grand Prelate to the
Church, will send my Mandate to my Patron Peter, that when thy Soul shall
mount, to strike it headlong down from Heavens Crystal Gates, into the deep
Abiss


Talk on, talk on, Lascivious Pope, thou Head of Hell, not Rome: How can
thou look upon an Angry Father, whose Daughter thou have so basely defloured,
and caused him to kill


Kill the old Cox-comb, Sir, he will be babbling else, kill him, I say, or else
you cannot be safe


Moricena, let me Embrace thee thus.


Ah, I Am slain.


Take that for railing at the Pope, and that for prying into his secret Love.


Evil Counsel is a sure way to push a Man upon Damnation, and I am sure he
wants not much of that


Well what is next to be done?


Fly Rome, Sir, without loss of Life or Honor; this Cardinal reviled much the
Peoples Hearts, and when the Murther's known, they will feek Revenge: Take all
your Jewels, and Things of greatest value, easiest portable; and in some far
Country spend the residue of your days in pleasure


It will grieve me much to be deposed, but more to suffer a shameful and
ignominious Death; by the hands of those that were my Slaves: -- I was a fool
to kill him --

For Men though great, yet are not always good,
Who like to Rome, delight to deal in Blood.

Well, like his shadow I must follow him wheresoever he goes, his thread of
Life is almost spun, and then he falls to my great Masters share --

I Will haste, an in destruction push him on,
And then I Will leave him in confusion.

Victoria, Victoria, Victoria.


Well, I must confess you have beaten me, and now I Will turn Protestant, and
cry, God bless King Elizabeth, Queen of England, and a pox on the Pope --


Well Sirrah, and for the sake of Queen Elizabeth give us one Dance now, and
here is my hand, we'll be friends for ever


Agreed, agreed.


So, well done Cook, now I like thee In Faith.


Arm, Arm Neighbors, Arm, or we shall be all burnt, burnt for Heretics.


How Is that Neighbor, all burnt for Heretics?


Ay, all for Heretics; for the Pope with the whole Spanish Armado, is come
into the Hope, laden with Faggots, Iron, Whips, Racks, and Gibbets, to torture,
hang and burn us all for being Protestants


How the Pope come into the Hope, Uds-lud then let us go hope to catch the
Pope; and if we do catch the Old Gentleman, we'll so singe his Tail, that he
shall never forsake the Country. Now will I go muster up all my Kent-street
Regiment, and if I pull him not by the Beard, say Tim's a Coward. Come along,
come along, along, along






Where have thou brought me, through these gloomy shades of Night?


Ask thy self -- know thou this Figure, once thy Servant, and now thy
Master: I counseled thee in all, raised thee at first, and gave thee Popedom;
bore thy Messages o'r Sea, and laid and managed all thy Plots against the
Heretics; but thou have bought my Service dear, at the price of thy poor Soul.
I had thee too in Bonds, and all to make thee one to Lucifer my Master: The
time's expired, thy Glass is run, and long thou can not stay; therefore I Will
leave thee to that fate thou meritest, and the Heriticks shall give thee


What ghastly Visions? this my Eye Balls start, my Blood runs backward, and
chill Horror freezes up the Spring of Life






WHere, where is the Pope:
Answer. Come to die in a Rope:
Or his Breath expire, by the flames of hot fire.
To meet the just Plagues that his sins do require.

Pray what is his Crime?
For coming to Popedom before 'twas his time;
For Murder and Whoredom, for Poison and Rape,
For killing the Father and making escape,
From the Chair of St. Peter to a Heretic City;
Midst the Rabble, to suffer without any pity.
A round, a round, round, enclose the Pope round;
Push him and ross him on Prongs; all yet quicker,
Till he cries there is no hope, for bloody, bloody Pope,
And a cheating old fool of a Vicar.

Cursed dismal fate, must all my Glories and incumbent Honors sink into the
dust! O Popedom, thou gilded Pill, whose outside seems enticing fair, but being
took, thou hurriest Mankind upon his sure destruction

Oh, I could curse thee, but it is now too late,
And I with patience must endure my fate.



Ha, what have we got here a Mamamouche?


I Will be hanged if this fellow han't run away from his Colors: Vds-foot look
here, he has brought the Key of the Cupboard away with him for haste


Pray Sir, if a Man may be so bold to ask, what are you Sir?


He Is a Pope --


Ha, -- hark ye there Neighbors, there is something says he is a Pope.


O law!


Pray, Sir, are you a Pope?


No.


Why then you might have told a body so at first.


He lies.


Ha, there is something says he lies, but I don't know what it is, yet it is no
matter, let it be what it will, we are bound to believe it; for it cannot lie so
long as it speaks against the Pope.


He Is the Pope of Rome.


Ha, -- hark you there Neighbors; -- nay, if he be the Pope of Rome, he shall
quickly know his doom


He shall, he shall.


For now I think on it Neighbors, we are to have Bonfires to night, for the
Victory over the Spanish Armado, and this Pope having been the cause of the
burning of many a Heretic; what say ye if we should return him like for like,
and burn him? -- Hold stop the Pope there


Ay, ay, that would be brave, that would be brave.


Then take him up, and let us march along with him from hence

To Temple Bar, where being come,
We'll sacrifice this mighty Pope of Rome.

O Gentlemen, Gentlemen, for Gods sake Gentlemen, Oh.


Ay, ay, up with him, up with him.


For know, if you your self to us do commit, You soon shall find, we love
neither Pope, Priest, nor Jesuit


Gentlemen, Gentlemen, nay, Gentlemen.






Long live the most Victorious Queen on Earth,
The far famed Great Renowned Elizabeth.
Whose Arms may now be termed Invincible, since Spain and France with their
United Powers, could not resist your Force: May the World tremble at your Name;
and may afflicted Kings and Princes fly to you for Succor, who, next, to
Heaven, are only able for to give it, and the Neatherlands still owe their
Peace to you; nay, may the Nations far remote, hear of the Terror of your Arm,
and shrink into the caverns of the Earth for fear of your dire Thunder


And as the Moon draws after her the watery World, may you attract Mankind to
gaze on you with wonder, and so spread your Sacred Luster beyond the utmost
limits of this Globe


Never was Prince blessed with such Loyal Subjects, the Honor of this day was
yours, not mine; I was but a Spectator at a distance, saw the Fight, and saw
such great Courage that the World must blush to hear: Therefore you great
sharers of my joy, who did partake the danger, shall receive such Favors from
our Royal Bounty, as are fit for a Princess to give, and Subjects to receive


Our Lives and Fortunes still attend our Royal Mistress.


Here Is King Elizabeth, Down on your Marrow-Bones, ye Dogs, Down on your
Marrow-Bones, I say


What would these Supplicants?


Ha, what does she Invite us all to Supper.


Ay, ay; O law!


What is it you request?


We the Tatterdy-Mallion head of the Body Politic, an't shall please your
Majesty -- We are your True-born Subjects, as Arrant Heretics as ever pissed;
and it shall please your Majesty, we have been a fighting against the Pope,
An't please your Majesty, and have beaten the Pope, and taken the Pope; and now
we are come to get your Majesty's leave to let us burn the Pope


And where will you get one?


O, we have a Pope, a lusty Pope, a strapping Pope, a Rumping Thumping Pope, a
Pope that will fry like Bacon, an't please you


Use your freedom, you have our leave; but do it with discretion, without Riot
or Tumult; lest Grace once given and then abused, should turn the Sword of
Justice against my friends


Hark you there, she calls us all Friends.


O law --


O It Is brave King Elizabeth; I Will warrant your Worship we'll use him as we
ought. Come, come, to burn the Pope, to burn the Pope; Away, away


Thus Heaven showers Blessings on the head of Kings,
And does Protect them with Immortal Wings.
Rome may Conspire, and Hell with her Combine;
Yet cannot harm, though Pope and Devil join.





GAllants, I must confess your dealing's fair,
You paid your Moneys, ever you saw our Ware:
And should you now dislike since you have seen,
Pray tell me how you would get your Coin again?
For never at Law there yet an Action lay
For Money's gi'n to see a Wanton Play.
Let me entreat you then dislike it not,
But like to those who late a Clap have got,
Commend the Wench, that more may to her go;
So if they Jeer you, you may Jeer them too:
Yet Plays, like Wives, are subject to a Curse,
Because they are took for Better or for Worse.
Ladies, If you would but Smile, I Am sure that then
It would be pleasing to the Gentlemen;
Yet pleased or displeased, we cannot Command;
But you that a'r well pleased, Pray Clap your hands.

