YOu Peers of England that with awful dread
Have paced on the green Garments of fair France,
Here cease a while, and give the Frenchmen rest,
That they may know whose Sovereignty is best,
Either the Dolphin^, or our Royal Lords.
But what avails our Conquests far from home,
When civil Discords stir uncivil arms
In the Kings Chamber, London, nay, his Court?
See Lords, read what is written there.
By blessed St. Peter, Gloucester is to blame,
And W^nchester has neither grace nor shame.

Yes my Lord, he is Lord Cardinals grace.

Lord Cardinal! marry fie, he was proud before,
But now his Hat exalts his proud heart more:
But when I come among them, I Will make them know
The benefit of Peace; fall out for women,
Wrangle at a word? the one's Protector
Of a sacred Prince, the other made a Prince
Amongst the Prelates; though Bewford basely born
I Will write to them: if with regardless eyes our lines they read,
We Will over and cut off their factious head

About old Playnseys son what says your Excellency?

Sir Walters son, marry Sir Rob. Westford;
This Drum I think marches from Amiens,
Is should be he, I sent him for the Prisoners.

Health to your Excellence most gracious Regent,
Playnsey long Prisoner in Amiens,
Releast by Momfords bounty and your care,
Requests before these Prisoners be dismissed
This Switzar may be searched, for last night late
I heard a Gentleman tell him in Dutch,
If he would bear a Letter to a Lord,
With whom Veleires had intelligence,
He should receive in hand ten Crowns in gold,
And 30 more when 'twas delivered him.

Who was it promised you so large reward?

On frolic yonker,
Dat is de Scryven Ick Doeniit for-stow
De secretary to Van Here Velieres

He was the Secretary to the Governor?

Yaw, yaw, mine Here.

Who were they sent unto?

To van Heren Montford dat is de grave van Callis ant van Guynes,
Dar is deen script deen Letters watt you see then.

To Momford! what should Veleires write to Momford.

Playnsey is this the plot for Momfords fall?

It is, and be assured that down he shall.

Oh let me hugg thee! thou have won my heart!

Forbear, lest the sharp eye of Jealousy,
See by this sudden Joy our Injury.

When it breaks forth we will seem to weep for grief.

Lords take your places, and Mr. Playnsey take your seat,
For in this business your desert is great.
See here is a Letter sent from Amiens unto Momford.

How, unto Momford!

Yes, and if this speak right,
Momford betrayed Guynes on Friday night,
And means to morrow ere the Sun be set
To yield up Callis to the enemy.

High Heaven for-send it, gracious General.
I think there breaths not a more noble Spirit
In any Soldiers breast, than noble Momfords.

I Will gage my life Lord Momford will be loyal.

We would be loath to find him otherwise:
But here he comes himself, his eyes bewray
Sorrow, as clouds fore-shew a stormy day.

Better success betide my Noble Lords,
Than has befaln the miserable Momford.

What has befaln thee?

Guynes, Guynes, is betrayed.

And when must Callis be surrendered?

Never while Momford has the charge of it.

Yes, if thou have the charge of it this night
It must be yielded unto false Veleires.
Here Is a large promise of ten thousand Marks,
Your praise for Fridays work in yielding Guynes.
Know you this hand? Oh that on silver hairs.
After much honor won in flowring Youth,
Should sit so huge a shame as on thine does.

My Lord! Lords all! this is conspiracy.

True, conspiracy in thee, for there he stands
That should have brought that Letter to thy hands.

This fellow fled from Hance Beamart the Traitor,
The Walloon Captain that betrayed the Lanthorn,
And so by consequence the Fort of Guynes.

Momford no more, his free confession
Has purchased his pardon, fellow stay
Amongst our English, and expect good pay.

Thank had mine Here, lets Jacob gilt habben,
And Ick sall fight wid ten hunderd towsand Devils.

Shall such a one touch Momfords reputation?

These Letters and the accidents succeeding
Condemn thee, and thou know by Law of Arms
Thou merit'st death with more than common torture:
But thy exceeding valor often tried,
Sets open Mercies gate, whose gentle hand
Leads thee from death, but leaves thee banished
From England, and the Realms and Provinces
Under protection of the English King,
Only thy Lands and Goods thou shall enjoy,
And wheresoere from them be still maintained.

My gracious Lord!

Thou find'st but too much grace.

Here me but speak.

No more; we must away,
To win by force the Town thou did betray.

Oh miserable! miserable man!

Why do you faint? why fall you on the ground?

Cosen arise.
Manet Momford Sir Rob. Y. Playnsey, and Cap. Westford.

Father, you are my Father!
The Lady Elizabeth your noble Daughter
Is my affied wife, for her sake rise,
And stop this tide of woe that drowns your eyes.

Oh miserable, miserable Man!
Dishonours-abject, base reproaches scorn,
Why was mine age to this disaster born?

Comfort your self, let not condemned despair
Add to your sorrow, more than common care.
If you be just, as I suppose you be,
Know Innocence ends not in misery;
Kings have had falls, great Soldiers overthrown,
No riches in this earth is a man's own,
He strives, he toyls, with many pains he takes it,
In an age gets it, in one hour forsakes it.

He Is yonder yet, he is digrac'd, and can do us no more good,
Therefore let every man ask his own. Follow me Sirs,
I Will speak to the purpose and stand to it.

Nay Sutler by your leave I Will stand to the best man in the Army,
And have my due before the proudest of ye, if I do not,
Say Luce the Landress is your Shee-asse to bear for others,
I Will venture upon him, let him take it as he will.

Do Luce, we will be ruled by thee.

My Lord, my Noble Lord, I am sorry for your weak estate, I hope for all this
to see you up again, here is 4 poor Creatures of us; amongst the rest I am Luce
your poor Landress, that have washed you, and trimmed you, and starch't you, and
as I have done for you, I have done my part with all your company, here is my
Bill, I pray see me crossed


What do I owe thee woman?

Nine pound, nine shillings, and nine pence my Lord.

There Is 10 pound for thee.

Oh good Noble man! that ever, that ever I should see thee thus down, adown!


Your poor Vitler Sir, where your Lordships men went of the ticket.


Your Armorer an't please your Honor.

Your Carter Sir for carriages.

What owe I thee?

Some (7 marks) an't like ye.

What thee?

Twelve pound.

What thee?

About some 20 Nobles.

There Is 30 pound amongst ye, all Thave,
The Treasurer owes me some two thousand Marks.

God bless ye Sir, and send it ye.

Wherefore stayest thou my Friend? Oh I know thee now!
Thou art not impudent, thou can not beg,
Thou art a Soldier, and thy wound-plow'd face
Has every furrow filled with falling tears,
That arms and honor should be thus disdained.
I have no gold to give thee, but this chain,
I pray thee take it friend, thou griev'st at me,
And I am grieved thy want and wounds to see.

My silent prayer my hearts love shall express.
Heaven succor you, as you help my distress.

Brother Sir Robert, if you do not scorn
Momfords disgraced name, and Mr. Playnsey,
Son I should call ye if all vows be kept,
Will you vouchsafe to tarry here a while
Till I go down unto the Treasurers tent?
It may be he will pay me all my due.

Father I Will wait for you, and weep for woe,
That I have lived to see your overthrow.

Well, I Will stay too, or bear ye company,
For your distress does make my woes abound.

Come Cosen Captain Westford walk with me.

To do you good I Would go though it be to death.

Ha, ha, ha, gill, gill, gill, I have been teady to burst.
Son pray thee tell me how thou laid'st this plot?

Marry Sir Robert thus, when I perceived
Your great desire for Momfords overthrow,
I got intelligence at Amiens,
How one Beaumart a Captain in Guynes Fort
Offered to sell it to the Governor,
Having this light, about a two months since,
I wilfully was taken Prisoner,
Born into Amiens, where I was confirmed
And knew the very time of taking Guynes,
On Thursday evening I attired my self
Like Veleires Secretary Lanclot,
Came to the Prison where the Switzer lay,
For I had liberty to walk the Town,
Had all my Ramsome ready sent by Momford,
And only tarryed for our English Drum,
That should exchange French Prisoners for the English,
The Switzar being one that stayed with us.

So, I understand ye; but in the end
How dealt ye with the Switzar for the Letter?

I brought it home in secret, gave him charge
To give it Momford with all able speed,
Promising 30 Crowns, besides those ten
I gave him first, of noble Momfords bounty:
He took me for Veleires Secretary;
But now you see the end, Momford's disgraced,
And I am unsuspected in this case.

Excellent good! I hugg thee gentle Playnsey.

But tell me pray, How goes all in England?

Marry I Will tell thee Gill, thy Fathers Ward
The Lady Ellenor, shall be his Wife.

The Duke of Gloucester will not suffer that.

Tut, tut, it is all but talk, it is all but lies;
So does the Cardinal make show of Love,
But tittle tittle tattle, all is but talk,
He shall have Lady Ellenor no ^,
Say she die childless, there is land for you,
You marry with my daughter, she is my heir,
Still Mr. Playnsey there is land for you;
I Will turn out Momfords daughter forth of doors,
Seize all her goods and lands by a device;
Still Mr. Playnsey there is Land for you.

But how I pray? What color have you for it?

Marry Son thus, About a twelve month since
Momford in trust made me a Deed of Gift
Of all he had, excepting certain land
Morgag'd unto a Norfolk man, one Strowd of Harling,
Now Sir I am acquainted with an odd Consort,
One Ca^bee, that does serve the Cardinal.

Oh he can cheat, take purses, forge men's hands.

The same, the same, he rac'd out that Exception,
And put in other matter to my liking:
So I Will defeat old Strowd, turn out Besse Momford,
All shall be mine, and after mine all thine.

No more, Momford returns.

Captain, Ye see
That men dejected bust bear injury.
He knows I am exiled, and cannot stay,
And yet he drives me to a longer day.

There is a hundred pound, ye shall not choose.

I faith my Noble Cozen, I and Playnsey
Are without money, but send into England,
Ye shall not want for 20 thousand pound.

Brother Sir Robert I put trust in you,
This Ring shall come within a day or two.

I cannot speak for grief!

No more can I,
This wind ere the Sun set will let you see
London, that nere must be beheld of me.
Commend me to my Daughter, love her Playnsey;
Part silent, let your sighs serve for reply.
Captain think on Strowds morgage, and farewell.
They shall see London, they shall see my Child,
But Momford must not, for he is exiled.
I am exiled, Yet I will England see,
And live in England 'spight of infamy.
In some disguise I Will live, perhaps I Will turn
A Beggar, for a Beggars life is best,
His Diet is in each man's Kitchen dressed,
But first I Will like an aged Soldier
Carry mine own Ring to Sir Robert Westford,
They say it is good to try Friends, him I Will try.
Though I believe he love me steadfastly.

Sir Walter Playnsey.

Lady Ellenor,
You are too strong in this opinion,
I yield you are my wardship, and that desire
To your Revenews, more than true hearts love,
Enforced me beg your wardship of the King.

I do believe you Sir, for did you look
Into my State with an indifferent eye,
Or love me half so well as you make show,
You would --

Come, come, I know what you would say,
You think I am your Foe, because I keep you
From private conference with the Duke of Gloucester,
And his proud Uncle the Lord Cardinal,
That diverse times have practiced sundry plots
To steal you from my house.

Your love's but feigned,
Because you say you love me for my living.

I say my first love took first life from thence,
But since more dear familiarity
Has brought forth perfect and true shapen love.
I love you Lady, and you are mine own,
Mine in possession, and I do intend
To make you mine by lawful marriage,
Then blame me not if being all my joy,
And the high-prized Jewel of my heart,
I overlook you with a wary eye,
Lest Gloucester, or the Bastard Cardinal
Should with their swelling Protestations,
Cheat my fair meaning of thy hopeful love.

Sir here is a Servant from the Duke of Gloucester
Has brought you Letters.

How! Letters to me!
No thou mistak'st, they come to Ellenor,

My Lord and Master greets Sir Walter Playnsey,

I do accept his honorable love
With more than mean or ordinary care.
He does entreat me to come and speak with him
About some certain Letters come from France,
Touching the present fortunes of my Son
Lately taken Prisoner by the bloody French.
He shall command far more than he entreats.
How now? whose that which knocks?

One of the Cardinals men.

Bid him to come in.

Sir Walter Playnsey,
From my Lord Cardinals grace of Winchester
I greet thee well, and charge thee without stay
To come, and answer such objections
As may by him be laid unto thy charge

Oh you should be his Sumner by your message.

And if I do not take my marks amiss
Thou should be Glosters Skullion.

How ye Groom?
I am as good a man, and better born
Than up-start Bewford the base Cardinal.

Sirrah! were not thou in presence of this Lady
Whose love my Lord does prize above his life,
I Would scorn to take these braves at Glosters hands,
Much less at thine. Madam know I am Bewford,
And for your love do undergo this scorn.

Then for my love let all these quarrels cease,
For fear Sir Walter do discover you.

Had thou been Servant to the meanest man
That breaths in England, being legitimate,
I would have born with thee: but thou to brave me,
Whose Master I esteem as basely on,
As on thy words, I cannot put it up,
For Madam know, that howsoere diguis'd
My name is Gloucester, who holds scorn --

No more,
If ever I had interest in your love,
Show it in silence, that's the Cardinal
Who comes diguis'd, armed with some base resolve
To get me hence by foreign violence.

Is It possible that this disguise should mere,
So just with mine?

It Is true, he told me all.

Would we were well rid of his company.

Do you but send away Sir Walter Playnsey,
Let me alone to pack the Cardinal.

What do you say Sir Walter?

There is some hidden secret in this message
Which Playnsey sounds not, but I Will go to them both.

But Sir I hope you will go to Gloucester first.

And why to Gloucester first?

'Cause he is the betcer man.

He lies that says it.

Were the Cardinal
Bewford himself apparelled in thy clothes,
I Would cross his pare for giving me the lie.

Keep the Kings peace Sir.

Sir Walter, so I will,
Yet the worst boy that feeds on Glosters beef,
Holds it high scorn to pocket up the lie
At ere a Sumners hand that follows Bewford.

Thou durst not speak this in another place?

Yes here, or any where to Bewfords face,
Even to his teeth, and I would thou were he.

Shall I be braved! oh I could tear my flesh,
And eat his heart for this disparagement,
I fear he knows me, and to work my shame
He braves me thus before my Mrs. face,
But Bewford with a shower of patience,
Lay the rough wind of thy distempered thoughts
For my vexed Soul has taken a solemn oath
Nere to kiss comfort till I be revenged.

Nay Gentlemen, howsoever private brawls
Have set your Lords and Masters at debate,
Let my entreats so much prevail with you,
As in my house to use no violence,
And so I pray rest pleased, for ere I sleep
I do intend to visit both my Lords.
Will It please you to walk along for company?

I would, but I must stay an hour or two
About some other business in the Town.

About my Love you mean, but Cardinal
Here Is one will do that business to your hand.

Why then farewell to you both.

A due Sir Walter Playnsey.

A word with you my good Lord Cardinal,
Your Brothers man seems very quarrelsome,
And should you both stay, there might grow some jars,
Which to prevent, I would entreat your grace
To walk before into the Spittle fields.
Whilst with good words I send away this Fellow,
Which done, I Will choose my opportunity,
And in the absence of Sir Walter Playnsey
Get out, and meet you at the Orchard-gate,
And there conclude about some stratage me
To make you Master of your own desires.

Enough sweet Lady: Sirrah Horse-courser,
I Will course you one day for your Jadish tricks.

Jades a fit Title for an Ass like thee,
That can not kick, but bear all injury.
Come Madam now let us go, the Cardinals mad
To lose thee thus, then banish hence all fear,
Gloucester is on thy side.

Sirrah Jack.


What say thou Franck.


How you base Rogue, nere an ( M.) under your Gidle, have I preferred thee to
my good Lord Cardinal here, and am I no better than your homesome Franck


Canbee, let me nere take purse again, and I think not, but thou and this Tom
Tawny coat here gull me, make me your cheat, your gull, your strowd, your
Norfolk Dumpling, whom when you cheated him of his sattin-suite, left naked bed
to the mercy of his hostess


And I damb thee not for thy unbelief. Call Canbee Coward think thou) I would
have lost this evenings work, but for my Noble, my Princely Lord Cardinal? no


That Is some reason indeed, but Prince and Cardinal if thou be, Iack-Hadland
swears by the bawled Crown of King Carnifax the meeting thy greatness this
evening has dampnified our receipts at least six purses


Be what you will be both, only be resolute
In any quarrel against Glosters men,
And on mine honor I Will reward ye well.

My Lord, and ye were able to give him as much Land as would lie between
Winchester and Walsingham, he would be your prigger, your prancer, your
high-lawyer, your --


Your nipper, your foyst, your rogue, your cheat, your pander, your any vild
thing that may be, sblud the worst that any man can say of me is, that I am a
tall Thief, and the best that any man can say of thee is, that thou art a base
Rogue and a Cheater


I Will jerk ye for this ye slave.


Nay Sirs be Friends, hold ye, here is gold,
Do but assist me against Glosters life
And I Will reward you better.

Cardinal, were thou Cardinal King of the Infernals, were thou Prince of
Grim-tarter-tarmagant and Erebus, I would not shed one drop of the worst Dogs
blood my Duke of Gloucester keeps, for thy miter, thy million, thy metropolis,
shall I betray his life that saved me from the death of a Dog? no. Yet for my
honest friend Franck Canbees sake, I am content to stand by, and give aim at
this time

See where he comes two of ye are enough to deal with one, I Will not meddle with
him


Let Us set upon him all, and kill the slave.

Have thou betrayed me Coward? Bewford know
Though I am over-matcht I am not killed.

Keep the Kings peace for shame my Lords.

Come Canbee follow me, Playnsey be sure
I Will sit upon your skirts for parting us.

Bewford Thou may befriend him with thy power,
Had not he been, thou had not breathed this air.

Gloucester thou wrongst me, with-hold'st St. Iohnses,
Look to it, for fear when I get enterie
I pull not down the Castle ore thine ears:

Cardinal to spite thee I Will keep Ellenor,
And wed her in St. Iohnses make her my Duchess.

Thou will abuse her with lascivious lust,
As once thou did the Earl of Flanders wife,
And make her wretched, hoping in thy love.

Oh! your holiness would have her turn a Nun,
Your cloyster-lemmon but she minds thee not;
Fellow what ere thou art that take my part
There Is 20 Crowns, go prove an honest man

There Is 40 for thee, Canbee, kill that slave
A^ ever thou intend'st my Love to have.

I will take my time my Lord.

Canbee come not near me, thou know my ancient order* They die that dare me:
but if thou dare meet me, hark in thine ear, disturb not these honorable
personages


Be brief, appoint the place of meeting, subito, subito.

At our Old Hostises mad rogue to make merry, lay a fresh plot to meet the
Norfolk gull, and be blithe


Agreed, and I meet thee not, bafle my good name, and chronicle Canbee for a
Coward, my Lord I will have a limb of that Rogue


I shall be mindful of thee Canbee: if thou kill him
Base slave, had not he been Gloucester had dyed?

I am sorry Gentlemen for Momfords fall,
And for our Brother the Lord Regents anger,
Let him pull down the pride of Winchester,
And Gloucester easily will be appeased.

Humphry nor Bedford, nor thy self has power
To make Lord Bewford stoop; do thou forget,
I am a Prince, and a Plantaginet?

Bastards were never Princes in their state.

I am a Prince elected by the Pope.

I Will make ye gladly fly to your Elector.

First will I see thy death Witless Protector.

Keep the Kings peace my Lords.

Look to it, I Will rowse you and your minions,
Out of St. Iohnses ere a week be spent.

Sir we'll rowse ye, we --

Would never greater care came near my heart;
Could I have had my will in my Loves sight.
This evening had been Bewfords latest night.
But to the purpose, now Sir Walter Playnsey
Take no exceptions as you love our favor,
That Lady Ellenor's escaped away.

Is she escaped away my Lord?

She is, nay storm not,
For if you do your anger is in vain,
I Will answer any Duty for her wardship.
So rest your self content; if ye rest quiet
And will confirm your ward to be my wife,
I Will send ye within six days six thousand pound,
Being more than you can get by course of Law.

I but my Lord her sudden taking hence --

Nay, nay, stand not on terms, take this or choose*
Send word ye love us, or our Loves refuse.
Come Captain Westford bring us to St. Iohnses.

Here Is a good world when every Duke is King;
Thus I see power can master any thing.

I son, else durst not you and old Sir Robert
Being but new come from the dejected Father,
Offer such open wrong to Momfords Daughter.

Father I Will answer that upon the way
Please ye to walk but to Sir Robert Westfords.

Save ye Gentlemen, pray can ye tell me
Whether Sir Robert Westford ly in London.
Or at his Summer House?

He lies at Stepny fellow.
Follow us we'll bring thee thither presently.

That Is Playnsey and his son, I Will follow hem,
And try my Brother Westford ere I need,
Already have I took a little Cottage
On Bednall-Green, pretending my self blind,
Thither perhaps my gentle Child will come,
For she is full of charitable alms.
But howsoere now I shall surely see her
Bringing my own seal as a Messenger,
I Will follow after kind Sir Walter Playnsey,
And his Heroic son my Daughters Joy.

FAther you wrong me, and my Cosen Momford,
I marry Playnsey, troth plight unto her;
Oh it is an impious match! I Will rather have
Than such a mariage-bed, a dismal grave.

Use no more words, no title tattle talk,
The Priest is sent for, Playnsey is a coming,
He shall have you, and you shall have his Land.

But for my Cosen Bess --

Your Cosen-Beggar, Child unto a Traitor;
Go to no more, come hark a word with me.

Ha this is excellent, stripped of his clothes,
His shirt stolen from his back, why this exceeds,
This is a toy to mock an Ape withal.

Nay barlady Sir this toy has mocked as well-favour'd a Youth, as your own Son.


Hold ye, there is ten pound, go fetch him new clothes.


Nay Sir he wants no clothes, for he has a Cloak laid on with gold lace, and
an imbroidred Ierkin, and thus he is marching hither like the foreman of a
Morris


Not for 20 l. gold lace embroiderd,
I Will see how he is suited by and by.

I Will tell him so, but pray Mr. let me be at the wedding feast.


And there you will be hoyting and kissing the Wenches you.


Not I indeed Master, I never use to kiss any, not I.


You know what complaints was made of you the last wedding you were at.


I thank ye Master ye made me stand in a white sheet for ye-


How for me Knave? go to thou lie, thou shall not be there for that lie.


Pray let me go, there will be all the Youth of our Parish there, good Master?


Well Sir, go your way, but let me hear no ill of ye you were best.


I warrant ye Master, thank ye Sir, hey for our Town.
Green now in faith!

Go, get you gone, I fear we shall fall out,
I wonder what Sir Robert does intend?

Look to it, pine, pule, weep, sob, it shall be so,
Thou shall be Playnseys wife who ere says no.

Sir Robert since your Cosen is refused
By Mr. Gilbert Playnsey, if she please, and you agree
Your Cosen Elizabeth shall have Tom Strowd;
You know he is my Heir, no Clown, no Swad,
But held in Norfolk for a Lusty Lad.

Let her take whom she will, all is one to me.

How say you Lady?

For Playnsey's sake
The name of marriage I have sworn to hate.

Good morrow good Sir Walter and Son Playnsey,
I trust Sir Walter gill has let you know
My purpose, for this marriage with my Daughter?

He tells me he is so resolved Sir Robert,
And in his own power now consists his choice,
But be assured, the searching eye of Heaven
Sees every thought of man, take heed you two
Answer not for each ill deed, and wrong ye do.

Tut tut Sir Walter, God and we for that;
Speak Mr. Playnsey, let Bess Momford hear
How you resolve unto my Daughter Katherine.

I come to mary her.

Think upon your Vow,
See this sad Lady, when you went to France,
You swore at your return to mary her.

Fair be content, my mind therein is changed,
Her Father is disgraced and exiled
And therefore Playnseys Son does scorn his Child,

Do scorn me, leave me, every way abuse me,
Death will receive me, though you all refuse me.

Nay good Sir Walter be not discontent,
Son Playnsey, Daughter Katherine, let us confer.

How say you Madam, will Sir Robert Westford
Defeat me of the Land I have at morgage,
Take away all your Jewels, and your plate?

He says he will.

Well let him and he dare.
And if he wrong you Lady come to me.
Momf. Wondrous amazement! what does Momford see?
Where he most trusted, most impiety.

The Chaplain stays in Heavens name let us in,
They shall be married in Bess Momfords sight.

Father your malice to my Cosen Momford,
This deed of Playnsey whom you call my Husband,
Whom I shall never love, never abide,
Makes me to Death and Shame become a Bride:
But Shame will quickly from my red cheeks fly,
And Death will paint them with his ashy dye.

Come, come, leave prattling, Playnsey comfort Kate.

Fair Love be frolic talk no more of death and care
We'll sport, for I am young, and thou artfair.
Farewell forsaken Turtle, take thy flight
To some more abject mate whilst Kate and I, joys adore.

High Heaven forgive me, Father have remorce,
Let me not thus be haled to death perforce.

Sir Robert Westford I mislike this match.

It Is more than Injury, but Lady grieve not you.

No Sir I am patient.

I pray you go in Sir Walter.

Yes I Will go in,
But Heaven can tell, I hate this forced sin.

What will you do Mr. Strowd?

I scarcely know
Your moods, and these affairs do ^^ll out so.

Well at your pleasure, go Huswife get you in.

I will do what you will, yet ere I go
Somewhat on this old man I will bestow,
Thou seem a maimed Soldier, woe is me!
I have a little Gold, good Father take it,
And here is a Diamond do not forsake it;
My Father was a Soldier maym'd like thee,
Thou in thy limbs, he by vil'd infamy.

Bith mass I like her, she is a Momford right
Of noble blood and the true Norfolk breed;
Hold the good fellow there is one 40 pence
From a poor Yeomans purse, old Strowd of Harling.

I thank you Sir, I have more than I deserve.

I Sir, and more than you shall bear from hence
Come Minx what Jewel did you give this Rogue.

I am a Soldier Sir, the name of Rogue
Ill fits a man of your respect to give
To a poor Gentleman, though in distress.

A Gentleman! and why a Gentleman
Because a Soldier? Come you desper-view.
Deliver me the Jewel or I Will hang thee,
To morrow is the Sessions, I Will make short,
And shave your Gentry shorter by the neck,
A Gentleman! come, come, give me the Jewel,
What makes your Gentry sneaking at my Gate?

I came from Momford banished in Britany,
He prays ye by this token you would send
A thousand Marks to help him in his need.

Where do you lie Sir?

I lay last night with a Blind-Beggar
That has a little House on Bednall-Green.

He came but yesterday, I heard of him
Beggars keep lodging, well I Will hamper him,
I know this token, and will keep the same:
But have no 1000 Marks to maintain Rebels.

Base upstart Knight deliver Momfords Seal,
Or by the honor of a Soldiers name
I Will slice thy heart out.

Help me Mr. Strowd.

What help ye to do wrong?
Nay by the rood, though Momford was exiled,
'Twas told me he should have his Lands and Goods.

There, take them, but do you hear me Sirrah
Take heed I catch you not at the Blind-Beggars.

If I should lie there, though you be a Justice,
I trust to find Friends in my just defense.

Hold thee good fellow, there is the the other noble,
Bith mass I like thee, thou art a tough old Lad

I thank you Sir, Lady I Will take my leave.

Commend me to my Father good old man.

I will, and tell him of Sir Roberts wrong.

Do fellow, say, I scorn his treachery,
And hope his end will be in misery.

I Will tell him what you say.

Father farewell.

Nay 'twere best ye packt,
Beggar with Beggar, for ye shall away:
Ha Huswife! are you giving Diamonds,
Do you forget your Jewels are all mine,
Did not old Westford pay for this attire?
But off with it, go in, or either drudge
Amongst my Servants to maintain your State,
Or pack, stay not an hour.

You shall not need
To bid me pack, for I Will begone indeed.

To steal and hang, or starve and beg, choose which

Sir Robert by the -- you do her wrong.

What Is that to you look to your own affairs,
Strowd, Strowd, you think to have the Land at Farnam,
I and shall, and shall --

And will, do you your worst.

You Are too saucy Strowd.

Too saucy moody Knight,
Thou durst not thus in scorn to old Strowd prate,
But cock on thine own hill, thus near thy Gate.

I Will meet thee where thou dare, and when thou dare*

I Will say thou art a tall man and thou do.

Appoint the place.

Theee is a new mown field
Lying by Eastward of a little shed
That stands on Bednall-Green.

I know it, that is the shed the Soldier lay in,
The Close is compas'd with a quick-set, is it not?

The same.

I like it, what is the hour?

'Twixt one and two*

Hold the Strowd, there is my hand
I Will meet thee, and I Will make thee know me too.

No more, I Will meet thee, else call me Jew.

London lick penny can ye it, -- t'as licked me with a witness, I was set ore
for a reckoning of 40 shillings, and as fair a Satin suite the other night, as a
man shall lightly see in a Summers day; but if ere it be my fortune to meet
with that ill faced Gypsy that stole it, I Will teach him his teripoop for
stealing, whilst he has a day to live again, so woll I: Nay nothing grieved me
Swash, but that the slave persuaded me to lie naked for fear of the Fleas;
which when I had done he stole me away as fair a shirt of my Mothers own
spinning, as a man shall need to pull over his ears: and Sirrah in the morning
when mine Hostis came up to call me, I was as naked as your Norfolk-Dumplin, as
I am a christen man I blushed out of all --


Nay Master I told you at first you should find a sower fellow of that Gypsy,
I liked him not he had such a crabtree-fac'd countenance of his own: but come
my old Master sent me for you, you must along to the wedding to --


Why so I say now, -- it would make a Horse break his Bridle to see the humors
of these fellows, I know no more how to please him than I know how to build up
Pauls-steeple, so do not I, but come Swash follow me, I Will to him, the --


Tush man it is be, I know him as well as the Beggar knows his dish, it is he
that I fetched over for the satin suite, and left him in pawn for the
reckoning, he has a fair Cloak on's back, and we could get that we were made
men


Be ruled by me it is our own, do thou take the wall of him, if he take
exceptions I Will draw; if he draws his Cloak falls down


And all fallings are mine Sir, let me alone, I know my cue Strowd, thou had
as good have met the Hangman; for thy upper Garment's mine


-- What is the matter with you? so feather-ey'd ye cannot let us pass in the
Kings high way


You must learn to know your Duty, and give your betters the wall.


My Betters the wall, on what acquaintance? ye shall be set up and ye say the
word, I Will wash mine hands and wait on you


What do you prate, nay then have at you Sir.


-- And have at you too then e'faith.


Hold, as you are a Gentleman hold.


Hold me no holds, I Will have another bout with ye, or I Will make your sconce and
the post ring noon together, and sirrah Gypsy you shall fare the worse for one
of your Coats sake, that robbed me of a satin suite the other night, -- and well
remembered where is my Cloak Swash


Your Cloaks a good Cloak, take the wall of my Master ye slave you.


I think the fellow be mad, -- where is my Cloak man.


Your Cloak's good Cloak and a fair Cloak, quarrel with my Mr. ye scabs you.


I think the fellow's frompall, I ask thee where my Cloak is.


Let not a man pass unsearch'd, the Gentleman shall not lose the worth of a
mite in my company


I hope Sir you will not suspect my Boy nor me?


Suspect me no suspects, I am sure my Cloak cannot go without hands, and I Will
have it again, or I Will bang it out of the coxcombs of some of them


-- Sir you mishape lies as near my heart as it had been mine own, and cause I
see'you a resolute tall Gentleman, and in respect that I was the occasion of
this falling out, my Cloak (simpl though it be) cost me 40 French Crowns, take
it, it is at your service


Forty French Crowns, forty French Pins, what do thou tell me of thy Cloak? I
scorn to wear ere a man's Cloak under the Element but mine own: but I Will tell
thee what, and it were not for thy sake, whom I think an honest kind fellow and
so forth, I Would bang this Bacon fan'd slave orethwart his shaoks, he should
remember stealing a Cloak to Dooms day, so should he


Why Sir I hope you know no harm by me were it in place, where I Would say, he
lied in his Throat that but touched the very hem of my reputation with reproach


Wol't say I lie? thou had as good eat a load of logs were thou, I ^ay no
harm by thee, and yet I say I have seen an honester face than thine hanged,
what say thou to it now? and thou be agrieved mend thy self how thou
can, or how thou dare, dost't see now. Nay Swah yonder is my father, say
nothing of my Cloak Swash


Well, if I live I Will meet Sir Robert Westford,
But first I Will see if I can find my Son,
And here he is, is it possible my Lands
Should maintain this Attire, you Podigal
Where have you got this trash, unto whose Books
Are you indebted for it, pardon me Gentlemen
For being so sawey in your company;
It Is not for a poor Country Yeomans son
To flant it out thus.

Sir you may say your pleasure, is your Son, but thus much I Will assure you,
though if he be your on the chiefest Gallants in the Land are enamored with
his good parts and valor


Nay Gentlemen thus much I Will say for him,
He Is a right Norfolk-man mettle, all steel:
But I Will not have him use his bravery.
The time has been when as a Norfolk yeoman
That might dispend 500 marks a year
Would* wear such cloth as this sheeps russets gray,
And for my Son shall be no President
To break those orders, come off with this trash
Your bought Gentility, that sits on thee
Like Peacock's feathers cock't upon a Raven.
Let true born Gentlemen were Gentries robes,
And Yeoman Country seeming Liveries.

-- You Would have the Calf with the white face I think, I am sure yonder is old
Simsons son of Showdam Thorp, that wears his great gall gaskins of the
Swash-fashion, with 8 or 10 gold laces of a side, and yet, without boast be it
spoken, you are more in the Kings Books than he. and pay more scot and lot a
fair deal, so ye do


He is a desperate Castaway like thee,
And wrongs his fathers credit and his own;
The Sons discent's no better than her fathers.
Why should their clothes be richer? I am as proud,
And think my self as gallant in this gray,
Having my Table furnished with good Beef.
Norfolk temes-bread, and Country homebred drink,
As he that goes in rattling Taffity.
Let Gentlemen go gallant what care I,
I was a Yeoman born, and so I Will dye;
Then if thou be my Son be of my mind,
Wast less in rags and spend more in thine House,
Or if thou have no House to spend it in

Go to a Bawdy House Mr.

How Knave to a Bawdy House, no sirrah no
give it maimed Soldiers, and poor helpless Widows.
Off with this trash, on with this seemly weed,
Be not Strowds shadow but be Strowd indeed.

Come hither Swash there is no remedy, I must give the old man good words and
speak him fair, for and if he should die to morrow next (as God forbid but he
should) he might defeat me of all his Land


You say true Master, come on with this Jerkin, so now young Master you look
like your self, and like my Masters son


Son what are these that keep you company?


A couple of honest proper Gentlemen they seem to be, but alls one to you, I
must keep company with none but a sort of Momes and Hoydons that know not chalk
from cheese, and can talk of nothing but how they sell a score of Cow-hides at
Lynmarte, and what price Pease and Barley bears at Thetford market


Then still consort thee with these Gentlemen, I like the carriage of them
passing well


I a murren on em they they have carried away my Cloak amongst 'em.


But let that pass.


I Sir it is past and gone too.


And come along with me to Mile end to my Lodging.
I must talk a couple of cold words with Sir Robert Westford.
Go Swash before, and saddle my bay Nag,
Perhaps I Will ride a mile or two to night:
Kind Gentlemen, I am somewhat troublesome
To press thus rudely into your company;
Come Gentlemen, I Will gratulate your Loves
And your kind favors used unto my Son.

And we live we will make him spend your living, come Jack lets go, where is Snip.

Oh Sir at my sweet Boss the Broakers, near fear it there is a sure Dandeno, she
cuts it out in Hose and Jerkins, she is an honest dealer, your privy taker, and
your sure concealer


Let Us to it and turn again to meet this Gull,
We Will fleece him and his Bags we they nere so full.

Oh hapless, hapless, miserable wretch!
To loose my wealth and all my fathers Lands
Did never move me; but to see my Uncle
Cheat me of all my Jewels, and in spite
Even to my face mary my troth-plight Husband
To his own Daughter, and to see young Playnsey
Embrace another in my promised bed,
And I thrust out upon the wedding day;
Oh this is it that drives me full of woe
Into this sad and sollitary Green!
Here to do violence unto my self.

My Daughter in despair, then play thy part,
Prevent her ills that did procure her smart,
Alas where am I? how shall I return
Unto my homely Cabin? where is my boy?
I prithee do not leave me gentle wag,
Take pity of my miserable state.

Who talks of pity? now alas good man,
What are you blind?

Yes blind, and like to die,
Not for my own, but for thy misery.

Father be comforted, I am but poor,
Yet time has been --

Oh do not sigh Girl,
Grief has so tyrannized upon my heart
That if you mourn my tears will bear a part.

You are the man I look for.

I am indeed,
And yet thou know me not, alas the while
That blind deceit, should clear eyed love beguile,
Whence spring thy sorrows from some private wrong.

Am I asleep, or do I know his tongue,
Art thou blind say thou, let me see thy face,
Oh let me kiss it too, and with my tears
Wash off these blemishes which cruel time
Have surrow'd in thy cheeks! Oh could thou see,
I Would show thine eyes whom thou do represent.
I called thee father, I thou shall be my father,
Nor scorn my proffer, were my father here,
He Would tell thee that his Daughter held him dear:
But in his absence Father, thou art he,
Shed but one tear for him, and I for thee
will weep, till from the moyster of mine eyes
A little font of crystal tears, shall rise
To bath thine eye lids in, yet do not weep;
Lay all thy griefs on me, for I am young,
And I have tears enough to weep much wrong.

Will thou remain with me; I dare not speak
For fear my tongue should my heart's counsel break.

I Will dwell, I Will tend thee, I Will do any thing
To do thee good, because within thy looks
I see the presence of my reverend Father.

Hast'^ lost thy Father then?

Father! I have,
List to my words and I will tell thee how.

First lead me to my Cottage, there relate
From the beginning all thy down-cast state.

I tell thee Captain Westford I have done
No more than I can answer, I and will.

Nay Cosen Westford mis-conceit me not,
Or if thou do all is one, I say again,
You showed a cruel part, and wod the Maid
Be rus'd by me your Betters should decide it.

Decide a pins end, do you take her part,
Each one you saw did seek to get their own,
Why should not I then? shall I undergo
Public displeasure for a pawltry Girl;
She comes not in mine ears.

The more unkind
And cruel you, but wherefore should you mary
Young Playnsey to your Child, considering
He was the troth-plight Husband to your Kins-woman,
The much wronged Daughter of the down-trod Momford.

Alas for her, does she complain to you,
Why and she want a Husband you are a Batcheler,
You may do well to take her.

You had done better,
Had not your avarice broke the contract,
Twixt her and Playnsey.

Well Sir, I will answer what I have done,

Not one word more Sir.

I marry Sir, why this is somewhat like,
Now art thou like thy self, but stand aside,
Whose that, Sir Robert? he is as good's his word,
The Captain with him, ah he promis't me
To meet me single

Pacify your self,
What I have done I Will stand to, pray forbear,
I Will talk a word or two with Master Strowd,
What Is here his son, how and his man too? ha
That Is more than promise.

Now Sir Robert Westford you are an early riser,

My last nights promise wakened me before my hour,
Send hence your Son.

It Is good, I like you well, send hence your Kinsman,
Yet it is no matter, I have a devise
Shall rid them all, God save you Captain Westford,
Thanks for your friendly company last night.

I take your greetings kindly Mr. Strowd,
And with the tongue of love return it back
With double intrest, pray is not this your Son.

I cannot tell, his Mother tells me so.

I shall desire your more acquaintance Sir.

I thank you Sir, I am easier to be acquainted with all, than to borrow money
on, I thank my father, but and it please you to drink a Cup of beer or ale, and
you will but walk 'ore the Green to the red lattice yonder, I Will bestow it on you


Thanks Mr. Strowd, pray walk to my Chamber,
I am desirons to impart my love
Unto your kind acceptance.

Sir I thank you for him.
Please you to walk to Mile end with my Son
And this good fellow, I Will but talk a word
In secret here with Sir Robert Westford,
About Lord Momfords Lands, and follow ye.

At your good pleasure wilt please you walk Mr. Strowd?

Pray lead the way, I Will follow you come hither Swash* and it had pleased my
Father, I might a had as gallant apparel as he, or another man, but all is one,
a dog has his day, and I shall have mine too, one day when the old man's dead;
-- I Will make all fly then e'faith.


So they are gone, and now Sir Robert Westford.
Think of your last nights quarrel.

Tut, tut, never prate,

Thus I revenge my wrong, Thus I defend
The truth, and reputation of my cause.

O I am slain.

Then Heaven receive thy Soul,
And pardon me, thy Conscience can tell
I never wished unto thy Soul but well.

What pitious groan calls Momford from his Cell,
Whose this my Brother Westford? what and slain!
Heaven thou art just; he that last day for Gold
Did sell my Daughter, is himself now sold
Into the hands of death. Momford dissemble,
Daughter come forth, and look about this Close,
I heard one groan.

And here is a bloody Coarse.

Look if thou know it.

Oh it is my Uncle Westford,
He that last day with his commanding breath
Chid me out of his doors, now breathless lies
Entreating me, to give his mingled body
A homely entertainment in our Cell.
Heaven thou art just, and dreadful is thy judgment.

Glory not in his Fall, but rather grieve
That in his end thou can him not relieve:
Let Us bear him in, and if we can by Art
Upon thy Foe, we'll work a friendly part:
For have he but the smallest sign of breath,
We'll recall life, and rescue him from Death.
But howsoever the Body stays with me,
Till Justice points him out that murdered thee.

Saddle my horse, there Swash run
Where Is my Son?

At hand quoth Pick-purse, -- what is the matter with you trow?

Good Son leave prating, Swash where is my horse?
I am undone, go post to Chenford, run to Mr. Glasscock,
Give him my Seal-ring, desire him send me.
Where Is my horse I say, the 100 pound he owes me, where is Captain Westford,
take heed he hear me not, Lord how my heart pants in my bosom, I have slain a
man

Slain a man! oh oh oh oh.

Peace Swash do not cry so.

No, I do not cry, I do but rore.

I had not the power to keep it longer,
Nor to take my horse till I confessed it.

Lay hold on him, and Mr. Strowd once more,
Confess thy guilt.

Why Sir? I not deny
Sir Robert Westford doing me much wrong,
Is by me slain.

And you for this offense,
Shall be conducted safely unto Prison,
Till matters may be better thought upon,
Mean time your own confession is my warrant.

My Father kill a man, -- here is a jest to mock an Ape withal, what shall
become of me now: Swash hie thee to Chenford for the 100 pound, and soon
toward Evening I Will meet thee at Ilford for fear of base Knaves; -- I know not
whom a man may trust when ones own Father does deceive 'em thus.


Well Gentlemen I do obey the Law,
And yield my body Prisoner to the King,
Soon work what means ye can for my repreeve
Till we may sue for pardon. So adue my Son,
Heaven give thee grace such desperate bralls to shun.

Get a reprieval call you it, -- I know no more how to go about it, than I know
how to build Pauls-steeple so I do not: but I Will go seek out a Gentleman, one
Franck Canby that served the Cardinal, and try what he can do in it; it is an
old saying in our Country, it is better to have a friend at Court than a penny in
the purse, it shall go hard but I Will save my father from hanging that's certain.


GOod Father! gentle Maiden set me down,
My wound I fear will freshly bleed again,
I prithee let thy Daughter make a bed,
I fear my Deathbed, good now send her in.

Daughter I pray go in and make the bed,
If we need help I Will call you, pray you begone.

It does torment him to behold my sight,
Well Heaven forgive him and restore his health,
He did me more than wrong, and if I see
He be at point of death, I Will let him know,
That I am Momford's Child he wronged so.

Father lend me thy hand now in Heaven's eye
Swear to be secret till thou see me dead,
Or of this wound by the recovered;
Know first I am a Knight, my Name is Westford,
My Wife was Sister to the Baron Momford,
That Momford left his Daughter to my trust,
Which Daughter I have this day turned forth
To seek her living, and from her have kept
Above ten thousand Marks, besides the Lands
Morgag'd unto one Strowd a Norfolk Yeoman,
That Strowd on my abuse done to the Lady
Challenged the field, we fought, and here I fell,
He escaped I hope, Heaven grant he may do well.

It Is well Sir that you are so penitent.

Oh Father I had need to rend my heart
In sunder, with true sorrows hourly sighs,
For I have done a deed more impious
Than ever entered in the heart of man,
If ever thou did hear of Momfords name,
His honor, bounty, and magnificence,
If ever thou did hear his late defame,
His accusation, exile, indigence,
Then know that I am he, Momford loved well,
Yet I am he by whom old Momford fell.

Alas Sir! how?

I coveted his Land,
And practiced with Sir Walter Playnsey's Son,
An irreligious careless Gentleman;
Yet one that will make show, swear and protest,
His course of life is equal with the best.
O there are many such old man there be,
Too many in this Land like him and me;
We laid this plot, he should go into France,
He did, and served on horse at Amiens,
Where he was wilfully ta'n Prisoner,
And by his Keepers Daughter understood,
The French should by a treacherous plot win Guynes,
Wherein Lord Momford held a Garrison.

Who were consenting with the French in this?

A Wallown-Captain called Haute Bewmart.

Did Momford know of it?

No (old man) never-
But Playnsey counterfeited certain Letters.
Subscribing them with Lord Villiers his name,
In gratulation for betraying Guynes,
These Letters were delivered to a Post,
The Post surpised, examined where he had them,
He answered from Villiers his Secretary:
For in his habit Playnsey was disguised*

Oh Heaven!

Good father wherefore do thou sigh?

For grief men's hearts should harbor such deceits.

I faint good father, if thou can relieve me,
Call for thy Daughter, stretch me on a bed:
Bear witness I repent now, help and ease me,
And till I dye conceal my treachery.

Be sure I will, and yet I hope you will live,
And reconcile the banished Lord your self,
For 'twas an unjust fact, indeed it was.
Come Daughter help to lead in this Gentleman,
We Will show him all the favor that we can.

Father he fownes.

Come quickly help him in,
I hope he will recover, but if not,
Heaven grant his sins may wholly be forgot.

This damb'd perpetual Rogue Swash, has kept me here in little ease of the bare
ground, hungry, cold, and comfortless, ever since two hours before day. I am
hungry for the hundred pound he brings, cold at my heart for fear he come
without it, and comfortless least if he have it, he comes with company, but
lupus in fabula here he comes, what and alone! excellent the 100 l. mine own
then.


I discover none, the danger is past, I think I may with safety put up an
honest weapon, thou terror to all Thieves, sleep there; my young Master
promised to meet me, he stays somewhat long, but he knows Swash is able to
stand under the strokes of a dozen false slaves, oh that I could meet with a
Thief now to try my valor


Stand sirrah and deliver.


Oh Lord, Thieves, thieves, oh, oh.


Peace Villain, or I Will cut out thy Tongue, and make a rasher of the coals
on it, deliver the money


Yes good Mr. Thief with all my heart, there it is I am glad I had it for you.


So am I too Sir, come hold up I must now bind you hand and foot for running
after me


I pray you do bind me hard, do good Mr. Thief, harder yet Sir.


So now farewell, your money goes with me Sir.


Farewell kind Mr. Thief. O pox choke him for a slave, Thieves, thieves,
thieves, help, help, help


Sirrah Snip be sure you run away with Strowd's sword


I warrant you Sir let me alone for running.


Thieves, thieves, help, help.


How thieves, I Will go, and raise the town Sir, thieves, thieves.


How Thieves, -- where is Snip run with my sword? who is that cries Thieves
Swash, how now man come stand to it


Yes Sir, I am bound to it.


Why what is the matter Swash, how came thou thus, ha.


I am robbed Master.


How robbed, I hope not so man!


Yes faith there was six Thieves set upon me, I very manfully killed seven of
the six, and the rest carried away the money, but I shall have it again that is
the best on it


How do thou know thou shall have it again Swash?


Why he has left me his bond here to bring it again.


There Is a bond with a Halters name, -- Swash is all the money gone?


Every penny Master.


What ill fortune is that Swash, what shall we do now trow.


Thieves, thieves, come good Mr. Canby make have, this way, this way.


Thieves, where Boy? I am almost out of breath with runring, what Mr. Strowd
and Swash how comes this


Why Swash is robbed man!


How robbed?


Yes faith, but I may thank Snip there that run away with my sword.


Alas Sir I was so amazed I knew not what I did,
Nor whither I ran, till I met Mr. Canbee here!

Robbed, I wod I had been with thee Swash.


I honest Mr. Canbee, and you had been with me I had escaped well enough then.


Well Mr. Strowd, as I was passing through Allgate this morning I saw the
Shreeves and Constables set toward to Newgate to fetch your father, the
Carpenter in a Cart carried the Jebbet to Bednall-Green, only love to meet you
made me neglect the principal business, here is the Protectors Reprieve, I have
done the part of a Gentleman, here is Humphry Gloucester good Noble man, he loved
your Father well, let not your delay dash all, I was two hours by the clock of
my bare Knees to the Protector, prayed the equity of the quarrel, and could
Westfords body a been found, the Pardon had been sealed: but haste away with
the Repreeve, take horse at Langton, and make speed, or your father will be
hanged


How take horse quoth ye, yes, the Cat would lick her ears and she had 'em,
why, I was robbed too last night my self at Langton


Were you robbed Mr. Strowd?


Yes faith, they make a matter of nothing to rob Swash and I now adays, I have
not a horse to cast at a dog man not I


Apox of all ill fortunes, hold Sir, there is five shillings left take it, and
go take my horse at the Bell at Stratford, and make have for fear you come too
late


Troth Mr. Canbee, and ye gave me all that ere ye had, I can but thank you, and
your horse were a horse of gold, he shall be forth-comming again. Come Swash
let us go.


Mr. Canbee no more but so for this kindness, farewell Mr. Hadland, farewell
Snip, pray let us see ye all at the Gallows, till when I bequeath this halter
amongst ye, in token of my love, and so adue


Farewell Swash and be hanged.


-- Canbee, art thou mad to give him thy horse, and five shillings to save his
father from hanging


No you Friday-fac't-frying pan it was to save us all from whipping, or a worse
shame; for let your Rogueship understand, that this reprieve is counterfeit and
made by me, your ordinary pasport maker, that should have lost an ear at
Salisbury, and another at Northampton; the truth is we must leave London, for
if the Protector get us under his protection, we shall all go Westward for this
warrant


-- Let Us turn Gypsies again then, and go about a fortune-telling, it is in good
request again now


That Is the smooth foot path up Holborn, no lack there is an odd fellow
snuffels in the nose, that shows a motion about Bishopsgate, we will wheel about
by Ratliff and get to his lodging, see shows for a fortnight, till Strowd's
nine days wonder of hanging be past, to let us use his motion, which done the
boy shall turn girl, thou as I have done already, wash off that Gypsie-colour,
and be doorkeeper with the boy, my self with a half vizzard will describe, and
thus we will live like young Emperors


^anbee I Will chronicle thee for this conceit. Snip thou shall have good
purchase of the Wenches in the throng


And if I snip not off their Purses then call me crack.


Strowd I am sorry for this heavy sight.
And by the dread command of my liege Lord,
I come to witness 'twixt the world and you
What state you dye in, how you will dispose
Your lands, your goods and debts now forfeited,
These he restores thee, yet whilst thou has life
To give unto your son, your friends, or wife.

I humbly thank his royal Majesty,
VVishing long happiness to him and you:
But with your favor my good Lord Protector
I still deny I am a Murderer,
I killed Sir Robert Westford in fair fight;
Our quarrel rising from open wrong,
He offered to his niece the Lady Momford.

All that was certified his Majesty,
But prithee hear me Strowd, Death's fleshless hand
Clapsing the wretched palms of endless woe,
Has made a circle, and thy soul's the Center,
From which by neither power, prayers, or tears,
If thou dye desperate she can be freed.

My Lord I do beseech ye pardon me,
The worl'd believes that I have murdered Westford,
Or since abused his body being dead,
And shaming at my savage guiltiness,
Have hurled it in some well not to be found;
Is this the matter that I should confess?

It is good Strowd in that make clear thy Soul.

He whose pure blood turns scarlet sins to snow.
Forgive me all my faults and Westford's death:
But if I ever wronged him being dead,
Or moved him from the place whereon he fell,
Not far off from this place where I must fall.
I ask Heavens anger on me, for his grace,
And I can say no more concerning that.

Enough what says thou about Momford's lands.

I say, seeing the King of his good grace
Has given me all my lands, my debts, and goods,
I give too marks, and all the deeds,
Unto the Lady Elizabeth his Daughter,
And Captain Westford, in whom I put all trust,
Be careful that the Lady be not wronged.

I warrant you Mr. Strowd.

How mean thou to di^pose of all thine own?

I have a will drawn at my house in Harling,
And I confirm that for my Testament.

Are you pleased that will shall be performed,

Heaven's will be done.
But I would fain have seen mine unkind Son.

Tarry a little Executioner.

Hold, hold, hold, let him alone you cross legg'd-hartichoak, touch him and
thou dare


Hold Hangman and thou be'st a man, hold for the Kings advantage.


What are these trow?


Two sir that come not without their cards I hope, Father you have a simple
fellow to your Son you see, come who is the shreeve here haw


I do supply his place.


Do ye so, then here is a Mittimus to repreeve my father back again to the Gaol,
or a repreeval what do you call it, it is my Lord Cardinal's, and my Lord
Protectors own hands, and seals; I assure you Sir


Proud Winchesters and mine, that is strange, let us see it.


It is not so strange as true Sir, there it is.


Is this your Son Strowd?


I my gracious Lord.


It Is the more shame for my Mother else.


Where had you this repreeve?


Of an honest Gentleman Sir, one that can do any reasonable matter with my Lord
Protector


I truly Sir he is one, as honest a Gentleman as Canbee.


It may be so, for I know one Franck Canbee,
He served sometimes Bewford the Cardinal,
The commonst cosening Knave in all this Land.

I, I that is he Sir, that is he.


As God mend me it is the very same man, but all is one for that, he has played
the kind Gentleman with me, and as God save me, and Swash had not been robbed
this morning of 100 pound, I had paid him well for his pains too Sir


Strowd turn your self to Heaven these hopes are vain,
And young Strowd as you hope to have our favor
After your Father's death, I charge you seek
That Canbee forth that forged you this repreeve.

How after my father's death, -- I hope it is not come to that now? after all
this charge


Sirrah you, ever choose you such sure Mates,
My Lord Protector pray be good to him.

Nay pray you my Lord be good to my father, and turn him 'ore the Ladder.


-- is this my Lord Erector?


How Is that my Lord Protector, and you be my Lord Protector, I pray do but set
your hand to this Bill, and as God save me, and ere ye come into Norfolk, I Will
do you twenty times as good a turn as the hanging of my father comes to, pray
you my Lord


Do my good Lord Erector, and Swash and his Buckler shall be at your service.


Peace, peace, your idle prate, Heaven's peace
Must be my comfort in adversity.

Swash what shall become of me now, I nere dare go down into Norfolk again,
every clown will brave me, and bid me go to London, and be hanged as my father
was


I, and they will bid Swash swing in an Halter as his old Master did.


Some good man bring me to an Officer.
It may be a blind wretch may save a subject.

Master, here is a blind man come to see your father hanged.


How a blind man see him hanged? that were strange indeed Swash.


What would that aged man, and that fair Maid?


I hope she comes to beg my old Master from the Gallows.


No Swash She should have come in her Smock* and then


It may be it is not clean Master.


I heard the people murmur near my house,
A little Cottage yonder on the Green,
That there was come an ancient man to die,
For killing of a Knight last afternoon,
If it be so, the Knight lives, and no doubt
Will be recovered of his dangerous wounds.

Where is he father?


Yonder in my Cottage.


O brave, Master he says the Knight's in his God-piece.


No in his Cottage man, thou mistakest.


He named himself but now, and sent us forth,
To know the truth, and he comes after us,
As well as his green wounds will give him leave.

I marry Swash, here is a good old man, and a goodly Mother, brings news for the
nonce, -- I would not for all the Bullocks in Norfolk, they had fallen out, that my
father had fallen off


Let Strowd come down, I hope Sir Robert lives,
And if he do, believe me I Will reprove
This over rash proceedings for Strowd's death.

May it please your grace, 'twas Sessions the last day,
Strowd granted he had killed him, Judgment past,
And my Sons wife the Daughter to Sir Robert,
Hastened (with tears) the execution.

Yonder he comes Master, come you had like to made a fine piece of work here,
are you a Knight and can fight no better


Health to my gracious Lord the Duke of Gloucester.


I am glad Sir Robert Westford of your health,
How do you feel your wounds?

May it please your grace, I hope they will do well,
This good old man, and this fair-comming Maid,
Next under Heaven preserved me from death.

Be thankful to them then, and hear ye young Strowd,
Consider this poor man, and that fair Maid.

Consider her, -- I consider well enough, sirrah Swash methinks it is the
prettiest Mother that ere man's eyes looked on


Sir Walter Playnsey take Strowd to your house,
His pardon shall be sent you ere you dine,
So upon Sureties let him be discharged,
But hear you young Strowd, see you find out Canbee,
Or at my hands never expect a favor.

Yes my Lord I Will find him or it shall go hard, vesdiness Swash I am mightily
smitten in love with yonder Mother, and I ha not a swelling burning feavour, in
every member would I might nere stir, -- yonder is Mr. Playnsey has all the talk
with her, and yet he is no Batchelar


Cannot you go and take her away from him, I co'd do it my self Master.


I Will go to 'em, I Will try,
Goddeen to your Sir.

Pish you are no body Master, let me alone I have a device to get him away, and
then do you sease upon the Wench: follow me Master


Oh brave Swash e'faith.


Now Sir your news?

The haughty Cardinal
Taking advantage of your being from home,
Has with a crew of his Confederates,
Beset St. Iohnses, and with all his force
Assayls to wrong the Lady Ellenor,
And steal her forth the Castle.

Is It possible, that this proud Priest dares offer violence
Unto my Troth-plight Ellenor?

It Is too true my Lord.

Where is he now?

Rid to the Court my Lord.

And thither Gloucester does intend to fly,
As swift as quickest speed will give him leave.

Come Sir you will seek those Cozeners*
No doubt those copes-mates had my 100 pound,
And do you hear, take your companion with you,
Go and seek them, or for your own part never see my face:
But as for you that trust to every slave,
Wasting my goods, nay jesting out my life.
By false repreeves, and such base practices,
Walk, pack, sink, swim, pine, perish, look not on me,
Till you have found those that have Cony-catch't you.

Hark hither Swash, and it had not been for a blemish to the name of the
Strowds, would we had made an end of this brawling at the Gallows, and then thou
should a seen whether I would a kept such a coyl for a little pawltry loss or
no, I warrant thee he ha not the honesty, to cast thee a Noble toward the
healing of thy cracked Crown, yet every one says he gave that ill-fac't knave
the Hangman five, or six pound


I that was to buy him a better face Mr. But give him good words, you know the
old man is kind enough


I as any Corssen creature, he is won with a Apple, and lost again with a nut,
but come Swash we'll go seek out those Cony-catchers, and ere I catch them, --
I Will make them pay soundly all for their roguery


Sir Robert will you shake hands with Mr. Strowd.

Well he may have my hand but not my heart,
Srowd thou did wound me, yet thou did it well,
No more, I Will think on it till my dying day,
I Will sit upon your skirts before, I will.

Oh Uncle have patience.

You are an Agent for the Child of Momford,
I pray you Sir Walter Playnsey make good Bonds,
That Strowd abuse me not, look to it I pray.

I warrant you Sir Robert I Will be sure
Of such security as you shall like.

Come Captain Westford, you shall have the Deeds
Concerning Momford's lands past unto you.

I had rather Sir you kept them in your hand.

Well as you please, yet walk with us I pray,
You brought me to the Gallows, bring me back:
Father farewell, farewell good gentle maid,
I Will rest your Debtor till some other time;
But 'twas Sir Robert's kindness to reveal his name,
Else Hangman you had had this homespun suit,
But Heaven be thank't I keep it for my Son,
I hope to drive him from his silken humor.

Come good Mr. Strowd will you go?

Gallows farewell, Strowd's heart is blithe and bold,
Having escaped thy danger being thus old.

A plague of this blind slave, and that base drab,
Else had thou hanged ere I had been discovered,
And on my tongue a mischief, that revealed
Our purpose in the plot of Momfords fall,
But I have it now, I am resolved, hear you Son Playnsey,
I pray you give that Maid a mark in gold,
And Father I must crave a word with thee.

Fair Maid besides his offer take this Gold,

I pray you pardon me, for all the world
I would not do my soul that injury.

Divine immortal, all my Souls delight.

Salute me not with such vain Epithet.
I am wretched, mortal, miserable, poor,
But howsoever base, I Will be no whore.

Will thou be then my wife, for she is dead.

It Is much unlike,
A Gentleman of your worth will vouchsafe,
A B^ggars Daughter to your Bridal bed.

By Heaven I will if thou w^lt grant me love.
I Will answer you another time kind Sir.
My father has no Nurse, no Wife, no child,
No servant but my self, and he is blind.

Hark in thine ear one word.

I, I, I, I do remember such a tale I told thee,
Come hither good son Playnsey thou shall hear it.
Last night at my first dressing I was Lunatic,
Mad that I was hurt, more than of the hurt,
And in my ravening fit told this old fool,
That thou and I did practice Momford's fall,
Now this old Asse-believing I said true,
Comes with my Conscience, bids me advise,
And goes about to make a matter on it,
Ha, ha, old fool go, go, go to thy prayers,
Thou had need of eyes to keep thy Daughter honest.
I guess thy cottage be a brothell house,
Talk thou of Momfords fall and of my madness

I do beseech ye hear me for Heaven's sake.

Tu^, tut, do not tell me of Heaven, or Hell,
Prate not, I Will send the now and then a penny,
But if thou tittle tattle tales of me,
I Will clap thee by the heels, and whip thy Daughter,
Turn thee to the wide world, and let thee starve.
Come come son Plainsey let the Knave alone,
Keep's tongue, and keep his friend, else he gets none.

My Father Sir had pity of your wounds.

Peace Huswife. I have paid him for his pains.
Come son away, and old man hold your tongue,
Remember this old saw, As men are friended,
So either right or wrong their suits are ended.

Oh miserable age!

Oh wretched youth!

Oh times corrupt by men for want of truth!

What ailes my father?

Why exclaims my Daughter?

Playnsey the perjured, he that did deride me,
He that did marry Westford's only Daughter,
Courts me again to be his Concubine.

Does he then know thee?

He makes show he does not.

Oh do not trust him Girl, Westford and he
Are all composed of guile and subtilty.
Alas that this fair world, by sin deformed,
Should bear upon her bosom such a shape
As Westford is; last night expecting death,
Terror dwelt on his heart, which forced him tell
With tears and lamentations his foul facts,
No sooner had he any hope of health,
But he conspired the faultless death of Strowd,
And would not have come forth, had not we been,
But till the man had died kept close within.
Now he denies a deed as clear as day,
Threatens poor want, and low-trod poverty
Must not resist men in authority;
Come lead me in, I would my days were done,
Since vice lays baits which virtue cannot shun.

How Is this, shall I see all Norwitch in the corner of a little Chamber? I had
as lieve thou had told me Charing cross stood in Cheapside, and all one


And you will not believe me you shall see it your self, it is in this house,
it is called a motion: there is first the Master of the motion, then the Master's
Mate, the Mate's Consort, the Consort's Cabin-fellow, the Cabin-fellows Hangby,
the Hangby's Man, the Man's Boy, the Boy's Page, the Page's Wench, and all
these live upon the motion


This is old excellent in faith; come, and I had but one cross in the world to
bless me with I Would see it; go you before Swash and show me thither


Do you see you Wench Master? she is Doorkeeper, I have given her earnest to
enter her soberly, and pass through her quarters at my pleasure


Is this she? how now pretty Mother? what Gamballs have ta? can thou describe
them? sen ye


Not I Sir, the Master of the Motion can Sir.


Go call him out then, -- What Is he? is he ashamed to show his face trow? or is
it the fashion trow ye? what Gamballs have ye here now? ha


Why This is Strowd that I fetc'd over with the counterfeit Repreeve, but it is
no matter, we will outface him. Gentlemen the first conceit you are to see is
Tumbling


Stumbling, What stumbling? I think the fellow be straught.


Sir he means Tumbling, and feats of Activity.


Why man that is as stale as Bancks curtal, there were a sort of Tumblers at
Windham fair last week, and they have made that so stale in Norfolk and
Suffolk, that every wench is turned Tumbler, and ye ha no better matters ye
lose my custom I can tell ye Sirs


You shall likewise see the famous City of Norwitch, and the stabbing of Julius
Caesar in the French Capitol by a sort of Dutch Mesapotamians


How the French Capitol! nay I remember Tully's Offices says the Capitol that
Caesar was stabbed in was at Rome


Impute the gross mistake to the fault of the Author; you shall likewise see
the amorous conceits and Love songs betwixt Captain Pod of Py-corner, and Mrs.
Rump of Ram-alley, never described before


Good Master let us see Mrs. Rump of Ram-alley.


How? Captain Pod and Mrs. Rump? -- I think this snufling slave flouts us; then
in faith let us see the sawing of the Devil with a wooden saw


Or if it please you shall see a stately combat betwixt Tamberlayn the Great,
and the Duke of Guyso the less, performed on the Olympic Hills in France


France? -- Thou speak all French to me; but off with this snuffling French
Mask, and speak in your English voice, or as God sa me I Will beat thy nostrils
as flat as a pancake, or a barley froyes


Alas Sir, the Gentleman has got a mischance lately, and broke his Brow, that
makes him wear a Visard


Do tell me on his Brow? what cared I and he had broke his Neck, I Will have it
off; what are you the Master of the Motion? -- I am glad I know it; Swash look
thee here is Canby that cosen'd me with the false Repreeve


And here is the slave Snip that ran away with your Sword in a Wenches
Petticoat; we'll spoil your motion now we have ye


I beseech you good Master Swash.


What Gypsy? are you turned Jugler? I Will tickle you.


Hark ye Mr. Strowd.


Mr. Swash as you ever came of a woman --


Let me never come off a woman while I live again if I do not terrify you,
I Will motion you, I Will murder your Tamberlayn and his Coatch-horses, I Will stab
your Caesar, I Will ravish your Rump, I Will peper your Pod, I Will powder your
Motion, your Norwitch shall down, I am fire, and I Will consume your Motion in a
twinkling.


Do Swash, and let me alone with these till thou come again.


Mr. Stro. For mine own part I protest unto you I love you as dear as the heart
in my bosom, and protest unto you it went to the very soul of me to hear how
that slave Canbee, like a Gypsy, cosen'd you of a satin suit


How? how is this, was he the Gypsy that cosen'd me of my suit?


Jack you are a Gypsy; believe him not Mr. Strowd he has been proved perjured,
the slave will fight with his own Father for a Jack of Beer, and kill a sucking
Infant for a pint of Wine, and where he says I cosen'd you of your suit, 'twas
his damned counsel that Swash was robbed yesterday of the 100 l


Mr. Strowd, by this hollow tooth that shall tear that slaves Nose like a piece
of Swines flesh, 'twas he that robbed him, and counterfeited the Repreeve;
indeed I must confess I had my share; some I have spent, the rest is here, take
it Mr. Strowd, and think of honest Jack Hadland as he deserves


I must give him some to; Mr. Strowd there is 20 l. toward your losses, because
I would not have my reputation come in question before the Protector, nor seem
to stain my Lord Cardinal's cloth; there should be an old Harry Angel amongst
it, lend it me to swear by a little


Not one of them and there were a hundred of 'em.


Let me be torn into mammocks with wild Bears if I make not a gallemaufry of
thy heart, and keep thy Skull for my quaffing bowl you base cheating Slave


-- Here Is the old Proverb right, When false Thieves fall out, true men come to
their own; but say I should take this 40 l. in part of payment, what security
shall I have to get the rest? for my Father has vowed nere to take me for his
Son, till I get his money again, or see you at the Gallows


Are you fallen out with your father? fall in with us helter shelter, you shall
fare no worse than we do


-- Man, what would thou have me to turn Conycatcher?


Oh Sir, your only bravest life that can be.


-- I think it were not amiss, for I ha seen Wheat and Barley grow amongst
cockell and darnell, and many an honest man keep Knaves company; How now Swash,
what have thou done


I have confounded their Motion, beleaguered their Castle, battered down the
Walls, and taken Tamberlayn the blood* Prisoner in a pursuit, to the utter
undoing of all Motion-Monger and Puppit-players


It Is well done Swash, but wotts thou what man? I am turned Cony-catcher since
thou wentst


Cony-catcher? the Devil you are?


Yes in faith Swash, and if thou wou't do one thing for me now, I Will teach thee
to conycatch too when I come into Norfolk


On that condition Master I Will do it what ere it be.


Do but go thy ways to Mile-end-Green to my fathers lodging at the 3 Colts,
and do but tell him I cannot find these fellows yet, but as soon as I do meet
with them, tell him he shall hear from me


Yes Sir, I Will go tell him you are with 'em, but you bid me say you could not
find 'em


-- By no means Swash, then thou marr'st all, tell him I cannot find 'em, make
a lie for me now, I Will make two for thee another time


Well on this condition you will teach me to cony, I am content to lie for you.


Do so; Now Sirs, what course will you take, that I may come by the rest of my
money


Tush we have 100 l. tricks when we want cash one amongst us undertakes the
name and habit of some swashing Italian or French Nobleman at least, the rest
in Liveries attending, then we come and sojourn at some honest Gentleman's
house, till we have eat him out of house and home in diet, and wore his credit
out at elbows with taking up commodities at his Merchants, in hope to have all
his money at a day, before which day we give him the slip, and to escape pursuit
attire our selves like Gypsies, Pedlars, Tinkers, or such like disguise; how
like you this


This is old excellent in faith; well I see I might a kept company with honest
men all the days a my life ere I should a learned half this Knavery: but hark
my Masters, yonder is the Blind-Beggar of Bednall-Green has the prettiest Mother
to his Daughter as a man need to lay his leg over, now if all the wit in your
heads can but get her to be my wife, I should think my money every penny better
bestowed than other


You shall have Sir her.


Shall, why well said; come then my mad Viragoes I have spent many a gray groat
of honest swaggerers, and tear-Plackets in my days that I never drunk for, and
now I Will turn swaggerer my self, I Will keep you company and't be but to keep you
honest, true men I cannot, for there is nere a finger on your hands but is as
bad as a lime twig, I Will do my good will, and I can bring ye to any goodness,
then say God a mercy honest Tom Strowd of Harling


Thou shall be our chief Captain amongst us.


How your Captain? -- I Will make all split then, come my hearts.


Father, dear father succor me from shame,
Young Mr. Playnsey is entered our house,
Has shut the fore-door up, detains the keys,
And swears to kill me, if I do not yield
To his abhorrid and intemperate lust,
Help me good father over the Garden pale,
That I may call for succor on the Green.

No Daughter, sit thee down, sit down by me,
I call you Daughter, being your own desire,
If you be nobly born as you report,
Why should you to escape your own distress
Leave me poor man alone, and comfortless?

He comes!

Let him, sit down, sit down I say.

O how shall I escape reproach this day?

Peace, heaven may give my byzon'd eyes their light,
Stretching these crooked limbs strait and upright.

Art thou fled hither? think thou his weak strength
Can free thee? come, why should this frosty ice
Clasp his cold arms about thy flowring spring?
Nay strive not Bayard, if ye do, by Heaven
I Will draw my Rapier, and with one thrust
Send thee to Charon as a Passenger:

Oh, I am feeble, pray ye hurt me nor,
If it be true, as I have heard it told
You married lately with Sir Robert's Daughter.

Father, I hate her, and she scorneth me,
She pules, she sighs, she pines, she leaves her meat,
She flies by Bridal-bed, she bans, she raves
That ere her father forced her to be mine.

Good Sir comfort her.

Comfott thou me, and I will comfort her.

I will not yield consent to such a sin,
I scorn to be a Princes Concubine.

Will thou be then my wife?

No, I have sworn
To dye as pure a Maid as I was born.

How can she be your Wife?

My wife will die.

Tarry that time.

All lingering I defy.
Old man I Will make thee happy by thy grant;
Fair Maid thou shall be blessed in thy consent;
Deny me and I Will turn a Tereus,
Murder thy Father, then cut out thy tongue,
Deform thy beauty with the hand of wrath,
Lastly make spoil of thy Virginity,
Then leave thee wretched; where if now thou yield,
Against all reproach and wrong I Will be thy shield.

Help me good Father.

Bid a sere dried Reed
Oppose his sapless strength against a green Oak.
See me, I am all youth, all love, all beauty,
Thou beauteous, lovely, youthful, it is thy duty
To love thy like, which duty if thou shun,
My hate thy beauteous youth shall overturn.

Good Sir stand but aside a little while;
I do remember since my self was young
The strong effects of lust; both she and I
Must yield to your desire.

I Will rather dye.

Nay say not so, listen to me my Child.

I marry father if thou can persuade her
I Will make thee rich, and one day mary her.

Fear nothing Child, but use him gently,
And I will fit his hot lust presently.

Come, what resolve you? either yield or dye.

Sir I commit my Daughter to your hands,
But I beseech you woo her with fair words,
She may without compulsion yield at last;
I Will in and we^p, for what can I do more?
You're rich and strong, and I am week and poor.

Hold Father, take that Gold to comfort thee.

For money few men now shun infamy.

Oh me, do you forsake me!

I a while I do,
But Playnsey I Will anon be even with you.

Now pretty Virgin how are you resolved?

I yield, yet though I yield I bend my knees,
And ere my spotless Virgin shape I leese
Let me delate the many miseries --

Come do not stain thy lilly cheeks with tears,
Nor fashion to thy self a form of dread,
Thou talk of loss of shape, a fair Lass bears
A shape as goodly in lost Maidenhead,
And far more lovely; then with smiling grace,
They boldly look upon a Lovers face,
Try once, then be assured thou wilt not refuse,
Had thou a hundred Maiden-heads to lose.

Impious temptation! I defy thee Playnsey,
Setting my weak strength to resist thy lust;
Off with thy poisonous hands, help, help me Heaven.

But a poor earthly man guided by Heaven
Will keep thee from this deed, hateful as Hell;
Playnsey forbear as thou respects-thy life.

Thou Autum-shaken leaf, thou bare Anatomy,
Thou withered Elder-pith, thou shape of death,
Sent by that blind exorcist to disturb
The pleasures that young Playnsey's heart affects,
Vanish, I know thou art but lither Air,
Thy hand fell lightly on me like thin smoke
That is disperc'st amongst the spreading clouds.

What make thou me a Ghost? come take thy weapons,
Thou shall soon try I am both flesh and bone.

Hold Villain hold!

No Boy, I am a Man,
Uncle to that wronged Maid, the Blind-mans brother,
Who quaking sits within mourning his Child;
Ar't not ashamed? no thou art impudent,
Westford and you are flesh't in villainies;
Think on your plot about the banished Momford,
If you will repent it I will use you well;
Make means that Momford may be proved clear,
As you know best his harmless innocence,
And on a Soldiers word I do protest
Momford shall make your peace, and sue your pardon.

What do thou mean? what is this thou talk to me?

I talk of Treason, rapine, slander, wrong;
Go get thee to Sir Robert, he is hard by,
I saw him walking up along the Green;
Stand not to talk, if thou accept my offer
I Will be a faithful servant in this business,
Preserve your credits, and confer with you;
If not, resolve on this, I Will to the King,
And there accuse you of this heinous wrong.

Will thou stay here until I fetch Sir Robert?

I will. Go Maid, h^lp the old man to bed,
He Is shrowdly frighted by this violence.

Wh^t reverend man art thou? or Angel rather,
That speak these wonders of my banished father?

Go honorable M^iden, Momford's Heir,
A little help the old weak blinded man,
That weeping si^s within, trembling for dread
Lest Playns^y had thy chaste youth injured,
Help him, and then I Will tell thee many wonders.

To hear but one word of my fathers weal,
I Will undergo a^l work, all pain, all toil.

Poor Girl, how glad she is to hear the voice
Of Momford's honor? with what nimble ^peed
She hyes to help a shadow, there^s no beggar,
No poor blind man, that wants her comforting;
I wonder what she'ill think, when she shall find
Only a staff, a scrip, a gown, a bonnet,
And nere a body to make use of them?
She comes, and is amazed a^ she comes.

Where is the blind man I beseech you Sir*
Alone I find his garments in his Chair,
Do not amaze me, tell me where he is?

He is within fair Maid.

Aged man,
I should give credit to your milk-white hairs;
Tell me, O tell me, why within a Chair
The case is left; are you a Conjuror,
Where is the blind man that I called my father?

I am no Conjuror, stay here but a while,
And I will bring the blind-man to thy fight,
Stay here, look on this clowdy Element,
And I Will produce him to your hearts content,

Alas where am I sure this Beggars Cell
Is a base Cottage to betray my honor;
I took him at the first to be a Comforter,
But now I see he is expert in shapes:
But why should I dispraise him? he did free
My body from vild Playnsey's luxury.
Methinks he has been all my Joy to me,
Why should there now arise this difference?

Daughter where are you?

Pray where is your brother?

I have no Brother, no kin but one Daughter.

He Is an Inchanter sure, his ways I Will shun.

Daughter where are you? I conjure you Child
By the true honor of old Momford's name,
By Momford's faith, that was by fraud exiled,
You would not let his honor die in shame*

Help me ye powers, that give all Mortals power,
To escape this heavy and too troublous hour.
Spirit avoid me, or if thou be no spirit
Surely it is a damned Magicion.
Fly me, thou alter'st shapes, I do not love thee.

Thou do; see here the Gold thou sent'st thy father,
When I, even I my self brought these fair Arms
To wicked Westford's Gate; poor Child be not amazed,
I am thy Father Momford, by traiterous practice banished.

Ah me, that I have lived so long unknown,
I still had such a hope.

Fair Child forbear,
I know Sir Robert Westford, and this Playnsey,
Or one of them at least, will come forthwith;
Say you the blind man is in his bed sick,
And call me Uncle; come, be comforted,
Our sum of honor in despite of guile
Shall brightly shine in England's Hemisphere,
We have been clowded long, but mauger hate,
Truth will advance desert to honor's state.

Dare you trust Strowd in this same stratagem?


Tush fear him not, since his father has given him over, he has given over
all honesty and lives upon the spoil; come ye mad Rogues here is three of us,
and here is 30 l. each man take his share, and with his share his charge; We are
all for this money to cut the throat of the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and his
Daughter


How? cut their Throats? -- I Will see ye hanged first.


Jack thou and I will keep quarter at this end of the Green, and Waylay the old
spruce Serving man, he shall be our share, and Tom Strowd thou shall ly at this
corner for the wench, for this way she comes unto the Conduit-head for water,
she falls to thee


And fall thou to her, and ye can but agree of price.


Nay let me alone for falling upon the Wench I warrant ye.


Mr. Playnsey and Sir Robert do you keep about the old Man's Cottage, and when
you see his Daughter gone knock out his Brains with his Crutches; thus have you
heard your several charges; every man to his Court of Guard, and keep fair
quarter


Plotted with good discretion; Son Playnsey
I like it well, that you and I go walk
Near to this Cottage, for it much concerns us
To see this Beggar dead, upon whose breath
Proud slander si^s to blemish our good names,
And blast our honest reputations;
Shake hands and part in hope when next we meet,
Their deaths shall lay all danger at our feet.

Pray heaven it may; a word good Mr. Strowd.
Although you had in charge to kill the Maid,
I do entreat you use some special care
In your attempt, and in the stead of death
Tell her I love her dearly, and that love
Enforced this shift: for though the Wench be poor,
Yet in the glass of my affection
She seems right wealthy, fair and virtuous;
Commend me to her Strowd, and since my wife
Has given her latest farewell to the world,
Tell her I do intend to mary her;
Mean time convey her to my farm at Rederiff,
And there is 10 Angels more for thy reward:
But be as trusty to me, as the thought
That sleeps within my bosom, so adue,
I trust the richest of my hopes with you.

Do so, and I do not deceive you let me dye like a Dog on a Pitch-fork; -- This
is excellent, hire me to steal away the Wench I am in love withal my self,
this comes just in the nick in faith, I desire no more, but to meet her. Whose
yonder Swash? how now? whither away so fast Swash ha?


What my young Master? why I am going to the three Colts to saddle your Fathers
Gelding; we both ride into Norfolk this afternoon


-- Better and better still, thou come as fit for the purpose as a Pudding
for a Friars mouth, so do thou: I do but stay here to talk 3 or 4 cold words
in hugger-mugger with the Blind-beggars Daughter, and I Will ride down into
Norfolk with you; and as God would have it, yonder comes the Mother


Oh what content attends this Country life?
Here proud Ambition's emulating eye
Plays not the find-fault; our thatch'd-shed is built
Without the reach of Treasons bloody Gripe.

To her Master; it is an old saying in our Country, Long Standers are but short
Doers, Wenches cannot away with them


Mass Swash I think thou say true; I Will to her, How now pretty Mother,
whither are you going so fast


Alas good Sir I am a poor man's Child,
My Father is the Beggar of this Green,
That ives upon good peoples charities,
I am agoing with this earthen Pitcher
To fetch clean water from the Conduit-head;
We eat the herbs that grow on the Springs brinck,
And count the Conduit-water wholesome drink.

Nay you drink water you are no hostess for me:

You are no hostess for me, fie, fie, I am ashamed of you.


Why? what should I say to her?

What? you should have praised her little foot,
Her hansome shoe belonging to it:
And then a come to her round knee,
And then Master to her belly.

I marry Swash, and I were there once I Would do well enough: but pray thee let me
alone, I Will talk to her well enough I warrant thee; this is to the purpose,
VVench you know young Mr. Playnsey


I do remember I have seen the man,
He loves my Father well; why names he Playnsey?
I hope he'ill do me no more injury?

Fie, fie, what have you to do with Playnsey? come to your own business; as
thus you must come upon her, Oh Lady bright, pity this Knight, that in this
plight is thus tormented, if you be willing, to be billing, I dare hold a
shilling you shall be contented


I marry Swash, this is excellent in faith; could not thou a taught me this?
but all is one Swash, I Will win her without these Ballads I warrant you; Well
wench, to come to the point, there is young Playnsey loves you well, and he has
hired me to watch for thee here, and carry thee to his Farm house at Rederiff,
where if he find thee, soon at night thou art like to lose thy Maidenhead
before morning


Unhappy wretch, that Playnsey sure was born
To make our House and Family a scorn.

She begins to yield Master, give her not over, to her again Master.


I warrant thee Swash now I am in let me alone. Well VVench, this is the plain
English on it, and thou love me no worse than I love thee, instead of carrying
thee to his Farm-house at Rederiff, I Will ha thee to the Church and mary thee,
and of a poor Beggar, Daughter, I Will make thee a wealthy Norfolk Yeomans wife;
what say thou to it now sen ye


Alas my Father is a poor Blind-man,
And I am all the comfort that he has,
I am his eyes to see, his feet to go,
And hands to dress him, I being gone he is left
Eyeless, handless, footless, comfortless,
Yet if you love me as you make a show,
Come to our Cottage: though our State be poor,
We live content and that is a good man's store,

Lay thee Swash, I must go into her Cot-house she says; Well VVench, and thou
wot not go with me, thou art never like to see thy Father, nor his Shed more,
for Mr. Playnsey and Sir Robert Westford has hired a couple of false Knaves to
cut thy fathers throat, therefore and thou can love me, say, and hold, go
thou with Swash and raise the Town, and I Will go back and save thy Father's life
I warrant thee


I Will go with ye, love ye, I Will do any thing so thou will save my aged Fathers
life


-- Let me be hanged like a Dog and I do not; Swash go you with her and raise
the Town, I Will but cross over the Summer lay by the Broom field over goodman
Dawson's Close and be with you presently; -- whither art thou going? thou do
not hear me


Yes, yes, I must go by the Broom-field, I hear you Sir, come VVench come.


Nay since you are so forward hold, take you the Pitcher, I Will go with her my
self, -- I wod not for any thing but I had turned Cony-catcher, here had been a
black day with some body else; come VVench, dry thine eyes, never cry for the
matter, the worst is past, thou shall see the case altered I warrant thee, I Will
save thy Father's life fear not


Oh, oh, oh, I carry the Pitcher I there let it lie, I Will after them.


-- I am hurt.


Hold, and thou come of the noble blood of the Trojans hold.


Nay do not think you desperate Cast-aways,
Though time has hid me with the rynd of Age,
And hung his snowy livery of my face,
Though I am old, that I want strength to fight;
If you be men whose fortune's has been shak'd
By the rough arm of want, or Servitors
That have consumed your living in the wars,
I have a poor blind Brother on this Green,
Who by the Alms of charitable men,
And with the wealth I brought him out of France,
Has store of Gold, and had you shown your wants
To him or me --

I scorn to make my state known to e're a prowling Beggar on ye all, we know
your Brother has Gold, and it is that we come for


And we'll have it or dye for it.


Murder, help, help.


What murder? where is the Murderers?

Sir Robert draw, it is my friend that is wronged.

Nay I beseech your worship hold your hands,
Though I be old, I am sufficient
To answer two far better men than these.

Sir Robert, as you are a Knight lay hold upon one, who was have con^ent to rob
us in the Kings high way, but would likewise ho^ taken away our lives


Upon my Soul you do the fellow wrong.

Nay, nay Son Playnsey, never take his part;
How should the B^ggar here of Bednall-Green
Get so much wealth, as the world thinks he has,
And keep his minion at the Beggars house,
But by such practices? yield up thy weapons,
Or set upon him all, I Will answer it.

Well, well, Sir Robert Westford, time has been
The Blind-man and his Daughter did deserve
More friendship at your hands: and Mr. Playnsey
I could repeat, but let old matters rest.

What do ye brave us? set upon the slave.


What is he gone? how did he escape our hands?


-- I know not, I had a full blow at his left leg, I had thought I had cut it
off.


Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, Canbee! I Pray Heaven keep the old man from killing
ere I come, and I care not


What Tom Strowd? well met, where is the Wench? is she safe?


Safe ^ Do thou make a question on it? I warrant she is safe enough for
telling any more tales, I am no Bunglar ab^ut a VVench: but where is the
Blind-beggar and his Brother


The Beggar is a Devil, and his Brother his familiar; here is old Madge has bit
off 100 and 50 Legs and Arms in her days, and yet she could not so much as
draw blood of him, he is Musket-proof, or he had dyed for it else


She is at Rederiff then, there I sent Strowd;
We Will end this task, and then I Will visit her:
But here is the Cottage, pull the Villain out,
He Is both a Fellon, and a Murderer.

What means this outrage at a Blind man's door?
Are Englishmen become so inhumane
That Beggars cannot escape their violence?

Leave this dissembling, and send forth thy Brother,
For he has robbed these honest Gentlemen,
We followed him, and saw him enter here,
Therefore dispatch, and either send him out,
Or else we will lock the Doors upon you both,
And fire the rotten Cottage 'ore your ears.

Indeed I must confess I have a Brother,
An Ancient Serving-man, maym'd in the wars
Under Lord Momfords colors.

For naming Momford run him through the heart.

-- Touch him he that dares; as God sa' me I Will be his Priest that touches but
a hair of him


Strowd, I hope you do but jest with us.


Jest me no jests shall never be said, Tom Strowd of Harling stood by and saw a
Blind-man murdered, therefore courage old Father, set thy back to mine, and
cover thy head with thy Crutches; I Will take up my lodging on Gods dear ground,
er'e thou shall take any harm, for the pretty Mother thy Daughters sake


How now? what quarrels have we here?
Sir Robert Westford, it ill be^eems a man of your estate
To have a hand in such unlawful riots;
Are you there Son? have you so soon forgo
The timeless death of your deceased wife,
To follow such unseemly practices?

Ha, sest me so? do take the blind man's part?
Thou Art a Strowd right, a Norfolk Yeoman right,
To take part with the weakest; Well done my Boy,
I do forgive all matters that are past,
For joy to see thy heart so well inclined.

Why I thank you Father, and I forgive you too withal my heart.


Sir Walter Playnsey you are mis-inform'd,
We come with no intent of injury,
These Gentlemen were Strangers unto us,
We found sore hurt and robbed by a false Thief,
And Brother to this Beggar, whom we saw
Enter into his house.

What say thou Father?
Know thou of such a practice by thy Brother?
Or to thy knowledge is he in the house?

Sir Walter Playnsey, that I take's your name,
So help me Heaven, as I am ignorant
From any such lewd practice of my Brothers:
But since your worships here, I Will call him forth
In person, to make answer for himself,
Desiring you to pardon me a while,
For what with sorrow and with cares down pressed,
My sightless eyes had need to take their rest.

Send us thy Brother and be thou discharged:^
But Mr. Strowd, what can you say to this?

Faith Sir, it is a common saying in our Country, You shall know by the
Market-folks how the Market goes; and none knows their Knavery better than I
that was one of their company. Father do you see those two fellows there


I son, what of them?


Why these were they that cosen'd me of my satin suit, and with the false
Repreeve that had like to a hanged you, and robbed Swash of the 100 l. too


What these Gentlemen?


Gentlemen! as God mend me, a couple of as arrant Cony-catchers as e're pist*


Is It possible Son?


Push, you are a Fool Father, you know nothing, I have paid for my learning;
and falling into their company in hope to get some satisfaction for all my
losses; it was my chance to be by when Sir Robert Westford and Mr. Playnsey
there gave them 30 l. to murder the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and his
Daughter: but by my means the Beggar and his Daughter are alive, but what is
become of his Brother I know not; this, as I am Tom Strowd of Harling, and a
true-hearted Norfolk-man, I Will justify against one, two, three, or the whole
pack of 'em, when, where, or how they dare, for the very ears and guts of 'em
all


Strowd, you are a Nit, a Slave, and a Pessant.


How a Fessant? -- I scorn to soil my hands about thee: but and I had thee
alone, with a tough Ashen Gibbet in my hand, and I did not dry bang ye all one
after another, I Would eat no meat but Mustard; sen ye


Strowd have a care you speak naught but truth.


And speak the truth Boy as thou art my Son.


And I do not I Will give you leave to call me Cut, sen ye?


Sir Robert Westford this concerns you near,
And Son it touches your reputation too?

But it shall touch his life that Authors it;
Strowd you are a villain, and for old grudge
Betwixt your Father and Sir Robert Westford,
Forged this surmise, as both these Gentlemen
Are ready on their oaths to justify.

No more, here comes the Slave that robbed us.

Robbed ye! of what I trow? of your good conditions?

This is he that hack't my Thygh like a leg of Beef.

Thou lie like a Thief.

Are you the Blind-mans Brother?

Sir, I am.

You are accused here of a Robbery,
What can you answer in your own defense?

Sir Walter Playnsey, and good Captain Westford,
First as I look for comfort from above,
I never nursed a thought to that intent:
Indeed these Gentlemen, Strangers to me,
Did draw upon me, and as I suppose,
By the provokement of Sir Robert Westford
And Mr. Playnsey, sought to take my life.

What reason should they have for that?

Your worship shall perceive; Sir Robert Westford
Wounded by Strowd, and desperate of life,
Confessed unto my Brother the Blind-man,
That by the means of him and Mr. Playnsey
They counterfeited these Letters that wrought
Momford's banishment; Besides all this,
My Sword shall justify, that first by bribes,
And then by forcive means he would have forced
My Niece unto his lust. All this is true,
And this I^ll justify upon their bodies in the open lists.

Thou dare not for thy life?

Playnsey I dare,
And would my Sovereign Liege give me but leave,
This Sun should see thy Treasons punished.

Were thou a Gentlemen as thou art a Slave,
I Would make thee eat thy words or dig thy Grave.

Eat a Pudding's end, the old man shall take no wrong Sir.

Sir Robert Westford, your Gentility
Shall not tread down the truth; long has my Soul
Thirsted for this occasion: for when I saw
You falsify your faith, wedding your Daughter
Unto Playnsey's Son, that was the Troth-plight Husband to Bess Momford,
I thought as much as this poor man now speaks,
And will in single combat prove as much;
He of you both that thinks himself most touched,
Take up my Gage.

Westford I Will answer thee.

And I Will maintain Sir Robert Westford's cause.

Take up my Glove then.

Give me it, I Will maintain it my self.

This shall justify that Strowd
And that base Villain were agreed to murder us.

I is the wind ei' that door, I Will take up thy Glove: but -- and I bang not thy
Coxcomb, hang me la


I hope this challenged combat will decide the truth.

Which Heaven assisting, and the King well pleased,
Shall be performed this present afternoon;
I Will to the King, and never raise my Knee from the cold earth,
Till I obtain, by privilege of f^ight
A black revenge for worthy Momford's fall.

And thither Westford will I follow thee,
Or born upon the wings of my just cause,
Arive before thee.

Each man take his way,
St. George and Conquest guide our swords this day.

Courage my Boy, if thou prevail in fight,
I Will swear Lord Momford has not had his right.

Courage sa' ye? as God mend me, I respect them no more than I do a flap with a
Fox tail, and I do not beat'em as ye should cuyle a side of dried Stock Fish,
I Will be bound to go to Rome with a Mortar a my head


Why well said my Son, let us away.


But hark ye Father; you know I am to go amongst the Court-nowles, you must
needs let me have good store of money with me, let not the name of STROWDS be
disgraced, I pray Father


Tush Boy, fear not, I Will carry 500 l. with me, and that shall fly ere thou
want


-- And I Will bring some of my own too, or it shall go hard.


Uncle of Gloucester, and Lord Cardinal,
Since all our Court has put on smooth-faced mirth,
Only to grace your Honored Marriage,
Embrace each other in the arms of Love,
And as you join your hands, so let your hearts
Knit your affections in a friendly league.

Gloucester speaks first, yet speaks he not in fear,
As begging Bewford's friendship, but in love
Both to his King, and to fair Englands good;
Yet ere I set my hand to this new League,
Bewford, if any undisgested wrong
Lies in thy swelling bosom, freely speak't,
And Gloucester will as freely answer it:
But if thy Conscience be as clear from soil
Of hateful treachery, as Glosters is,
Give me thy hand, and with thy hand thy heart,
Which Gloucester will as charily regard,
As the best blood that is chamber'd in his breast*

On that Condition Bewford gives his hand,
And from his heart wipes off all forepass'd wrongs.

Witness this League Lords, and now Ant Ellanor
Heaven give you joy, both of our Uncles love,
And of this new born peace. Now Uncle Gloucester I desire to know
The cause of Momford's treason, and his fall,
Which he has lately undergone in France?

His fall my Liege was great, but his offense
Little or none; for by Velleires his means,
Who as a Prisoner now attends your Grace,
I have found out since Momford's banishment,
That all his accusations were false.

Yet Guynes in which Lord Momford had a charge,
Was yielded up by Treason.

True my Liege,
I have known Momford in my Brothers days,
Put in great trust; yet never heard
That he was found disloyal in his charge.

And Uncle Gloucester, we have always had
His honored age in reverent esteem.
We hear he had a Daughter, where lives she?

Thrust out of all by one old Westford's means.

Methinks it is hard the Child should not enjoy
The riches that the painful Father left.
Good Uncle Gloucester let it be your care,
To see old Momferd's Daughter have her right.
But what grave man is that?

Sir Walter Playnsey,
The bosom friend unto exiled Momford.

Sir Walter Playnsey, by our Uncles leave
I pray stand up, methinks those reverent hairs
Deserve a softer pillar than the ground;
I pray stand up, and boldly speak your mind.

My Sovereign Liege, your Subject comes in love
To let you know, that diverse Gentlemen,
On what presumption they themselves best know,
Have underta'en to prove in open field,
That the Lord Momford who late fell in France,
Was treacherously accused.

Why? 'twas your Son
That first p^oduc'd his accusation.

Your Grace will give me leave to clear my self,
For I was neither privy to that fact,
Nor speak in his excuse; he is my Son,
But if in malice he has wronged Lord Momford,
Let him have Justice, and the Law take place.

Are they resolved to try it out in fight?

They are my Liege, and only wait your pleasure.

Even what our Uncle Gloucester will set down
We do assent to.

Herald fetch them in,
See them at all points armed.

Who is the Plaintiff?

I my gracious Lord.

Reach him the Book, and thereon take thine Oath,
That thou art neither drawn by bribes nor hate
To undertake this Comba^. -- It Is enough.
Speak truth, and naught but truth, so help thee Heaven.

Pleases your Grace, this in a word is all,
Sir Robert Westford and Mr. Playnsey there confessed
To a Blind-man, in hearing of that Maid,
That Playnsey and himself did counterfeit
The Letters that wrought Momfords banishment.

Give him the Book, now answer on thine oath
In thy defense.

Then first my Liege it is false,
Next he is a Felon, and by force of arms
Offered to rob these honest Gentlemen
In the high way.

-- Then I can hold my tongue no longer, it is an arrant lie my Lord, that is the
plain English on it: for I was by when Sir Robert Westford and Mr. Playnsey gave
them 30 l. to murder the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and his Daughter, and if I
had not been, they had been all killed too, so had they


Fellows what do you say to this?


My Liege I cannot talk, grant me the Combat, and my Sword shall prove Iam a
Soldier, and my tongue nere knew the art of scolding


Give him his will, alarm to the fight.


Stay, for me thinks there is some difference,
Both in their years, and their conditions,
And for we highly prize our Subject lives,
Good Uncle Gloucester let them choose their weapons*
It may be a means to save their lives.

And hearten others in pursuit of knowledge.
Herald bring forth all sorts of weapons,
It Is the King's pleasure that every man
Make choice of those weapons he has practiced most.
Sir Robert choose your weapon first.

Thanks to my Liege: the common fight of these same serving men is sword and
dagger, therefore I Will choose the sword and target they are unskilful in; I
take the sword and target for my defense


And my Liege, because Sir Rob. Westford shall not think I Will take any
advantage, I Will answer him at his own weapons


It Is well; on to the next.


Come Captain Westford, you have been in Spain,
And well are practiced in the desperate fight of single Rapier?

Playnsey I am pleased.

So are not we, the single Rapier is too desperate,
And therefore choose some other weapon,
Or we will have no Combat fought this day.

Backsword then and't please your Grace.


So, we are pleased.


Sirrah Jack, methinks Sword and Bucklet's a safe fight.


I Will choose no other, and I had a thousand lives.


I do, take your bars of Iron, and your Barn-doors, and I do not bang 'em
together like a couple of Cur-dogs, I Will nere be seen again


Sirrah thou fellow.


Anon.


What weapons will thou use?


Weapon me no weapons, I can play at wasters as well as another man; but all is
one for that, give me but an ashen Gibbet in my hand, and I do not dry-bang
them both, I Will be bound to eat hay with a horse, so will I


An ashen-gibbet? what do thou mean by that?


What do I mean by it quoth ye? -- I think you be sib to one of the
London-Cockneys, that ask't, whether Hay-cocks were better meat broyl'd or
roasted, an ashen Plant, a good Cudgel, what should I ca it


If there be such a weapon in the Court, let one go fetch it him.


Nay I Will make a page of my own age, and fet it my self. Swash bring out my
blessed Beggar there


Yes Sir, here is your blessed Beggar Master.


Look ye Sirs, this is en it, and I do not cudgell'em both with it, I Will give
you leave to stick me up at the Court-gate for a Pissing-post, so will I


But two to one is odds, rather fight single.


No, they know me well enough, I have cudgelled them both before now.


Well, if thou dare oppose them both, have thy desire.


Alarm to the flight.


Fellow, do hear?


Anon?


What should I call thy Country, and thy name?


Sen ye?


The King would know thy Country, and thy name?


My name? I am not ashamed of my name, I am one Tom Strowd of Harling, I Will
play a gole at Camp-ball, or wrassel a fall a the hip, or the hin turn with ere
a Courtnoll of ye all, for 20 quarters of Male, and march me height for height


A lusty fellow trust --

We have too few such Subjects in our Land; where is the Blind-beggar and his
brother


Where the Blind-beggar is I know not, but here is the pretty Mother his
Daughter; and thou be a kind spring all speak a good word for me to my
father that I may have her, and as God mend me and ere thou come into Norfolk
I Will give thee as good a Dish of Dumplings as e're thou layd'st thy lips too,
so will I, sen ye


How? mary with a Beggar? mix the blood of Strowds with a tatter? either cast
her off, or I will cast off thee


Now we shall have a coyl with ye; and ye were not my father I Would knock your
pate, so would I


How Is that? do and thou dare.


Strowd, though she be Daughter to a poor Bind-man that long has lived on good
men's charity, do not disdain her. Be her birth as it may, the portion I Will give
with her, deserves as good a Husband as your Son


Bate me an ace of that quoth. Bolton, yet I would I had her as naked as my nayl.


As good a portion as my Son? proud Beggar,
It Is not your Clapdish and your patched Gown can do it.

However poor, good Sir digrace me not.

It Is my disgrace to be out-worded by a Beggar?
But and thou be'st such a well-monied man
As thou do brag, dare drop old Angels with me?
And he that out-drops other, take up all?

That were ambition in a beggar Sir.

'Twere credit for thee, and thou could out-drop him.

So please my Liege to give me leave, I Will venture
That small Estate I have.

We are content,
Amongst cares it is fit to mix some meriment.

Come hither Daughter; are you ready Master?

-- To him Father, never lose a hog for a halfp'worth of tar; come old fellow
bring thy white Bears to the stake, and thy yellow gingle boys to the
Bull-ring; -- Father wherefore do you hang an arse so? they are all our own and
there were a comb seck full on 'em


I thus begin.

And thus I answer thee.

Thus I reply.

And thus do I join issue.

I had rather join issue with the Mother a great deal, had I.

Some more money Swash.

Here Master, we'll outdrop the Beggar, we'll make Gill sweat else.


Have thou any money about thee Tom?


An hundred angels, and a better penny, Pigs of your own Sow Father.


There Is 20 more.


More yet? the Rascal will disgrace me; more yet?


And yet too, -- you think beggars have no lice father.


Why how now Strowd, begins it to be low water with ye?


I am even run a ground, have dropped till I can drop no more.


You must even burn of the spit, for I have no more oil of Angels to bast you
father


Nor thou Swash?


Only a broken three farthings that I kept in a corner to buy my wench pins
with


All this is mine then.


I not deny't, it is true
That was our match, and so good Gold adue.

-- I have brought my hogs to a fair Market, must I lose the Mother and all my
Gold too


Yes says, all is gone Tom.


This is your foolery Father, and I had don't, we should have had such a
scolding with you


Then Strowd where thou before did scorn my Daughter,
Now I do scorn thy Son; not moved through hate,
For Strowd I hold thee a most honest man,
For right thou did unto Lord Momford's Daughter,
And since thy Son did save my poor Girls life,
And rescued mine with hazard of his own,
This Gold which by our bargain is all mine
I freely give him toward his marriage.

Trust me a gallant Beggar.

Beggar? -- He might be a King for his bounty, for he gives away all.


I know the reason of that, he can beg more, and Begging be so good an
occupation would I had been bound Apprentice to it seven years ago, there was
somewhat to be got by it then, it is out of request now


This is old excellent, here carry't to my Chamber Swash, and lock the door
fast I charge thee


And I meet no false Knaves by the way; Canbee and Hadland here had been a
simple boon for you now.


And now my Lord, since Momford is proved clear,
And his Accusers have confessed their guilt,
I freely give my Daughter to the man,
Who for the love of Momford (loved of all)
Will take her to his wife.

For Momford's sake, whose honored deeds
Are writ up with the blood of the proud French,
Were she the meanest and deformed'st Creature
That treads upon the bosom of the earth,
Westford would take, love, live and marry her.

Nay then I see that virtue shall find friends;
Take her good Captain, and for Momford's sake
Use the Maid kindly.

Why farewell 40 pence, I ha fisht fair and caught a frog; well Mother, though
I am no Gentleman, I co'd ha brought you to more Land than a score on 'em, thou
should have had 40 as fair milch kine to your payl, as a man should need to
see in a Summers day, 4 yoke of Oxen, and three team of Cart-horses; besides;
thou should have had thine ambling nag, and thy side-saddle to ha rid on, a
little easier than to be jaunted up and down London Streets in a lethern
wheel-barrow; and then of the other side there is the old woman my Mother, she
would have made thee a vild-good Huswife could have taught thee how to a made
butter, and flap-jacks, fritters, pancakes, I and the rarest fools, all the
Ladies in the Land know not how to turn their hands to 'em: But I Will take my
leave on thee with an oh good night Land lady the Moon is up


Gl. Card. Momford!


Bold Momford living, and proved Loyal,
Thy Love like a rich Jewel we will wear
Next to our hear^; upon those Gentlemen
That have maintained and proved faithful,
We do confer a 100 Crowns a piece.

Your Grace in this does Momford double right;
And noble Countrymen while we do live,
Your Love and Valor must not be forgotten.

How is it you will we deal with your Accusers?

That we refer unto our Uncle Gloucester,
Who better knows those passages than we.

Since it is your will my Liege, then thus't must be,
For you Y. Playnsey and Sir Robert Westford
Receive a legal Trial; Canbee and Hadland,
We for a President will have you sent
Out of the Land to dateless banishment.

Thanks your good Honor, and we'll do you more good by cheating your enemies
abroad, than ever we did hurt by cosening honest subjects at home


Good Uncle Gloucester, we commend your care
For throwing out such rank weeds forth our Land,
Whose weakened body has been sick too long,
Wanting those helps that should have made it strong.
Amongst whom Lord Momford you are not the least,
(Pray Heaven you be the last) whom this wild beast,
Ambitious treason sought to ruinate:
But in requital of your more than wrong
We make you here our Lord High-Treasurer;
And Captain Westford, make you General
Of all our forces mustered up against France.
Thus our disjointed Kingdom being made strong,
Each Member seated in his proper seat*
Let Us in to praise his name, whose powerful hand
Protects the safety of our peaceful Land,

JOHN DAY.

