WE with pure Conspersions thus,
Sacred rites, and hallowed Thus,
To render every Lover true,
Do Element Love's dominions new;
That no heart too strongly beat,
We give his Fires temperate heat;
We give his Waters virtuous force,
TO assuage 'um taken in their source;
^ogg of perjured Vows and Oaths,
Which fair Truth, and Candor loathes,
We purge the Air from, and the Earth
From every fowl and monstrous birth;
For, as some Lands their Monsters fear,
Unruly Lust's our Monster here;
As others poisonous Beasts molest,
So Avarice is our poisonous Beast,
From which, when once a Realm is freed,
Then Love's d^ominion it is indeed.

YOu wo'n't be mad?

I will be nothing but
For Love, and for Love I will be any thing.
Pray unhand me -- shall Bellinda, the
Divine Bellinda, who is to Beauty what
Beauty is to others, all Grace and Ornament,
Shall she be banished hence to day? and shall
Euphanes live to see it?

And shall Euphanes,
The gallant, and the brave Euphanes die
Only to prevent death? how low
And poorly would it show? -- and that is the worst
That can come on it, -- but I hope better still;
Venus, the Goddess of this Isle, has often
Done greater miracles than this, to make one young,
And fair, to love.

"Who has only miracles
"For Hopes, has Hopes but nigh Despair.

Yet Time's
A mighty Qualifier of Fortune's harms,
And he who headlong throws himself into
Despair, precipitates his life, whilst he
Circumvents death, who lets himself down into 't by
degrees; -- But pray consider, has she not promised
you, If any in Cypres she loves, it shall be you? and
Is this no hope?
No comfort?

Just as much
As among the numerous and unhappy throng
Of excluded Lovers, to stand next the door,
First exposed to affronts, and most concerned
In the disgrace.

Nay, if you give your self
Despair, there is none can give you Hope; at worst
If Euphanes loves Bellinda, as he says,
What hinders him following her whersoe'r she goes?
"Bootlesly and idly does he complain
"Of Winter, who but following of the Sun
"Might still enjoy the Spring.

But following an
Eclipsed Sun, what should he gain by it,
But only dark and dismal visions to
His Eyes, and to his Heart black
Melancholy thoughts?

Well Euphanes, as the Experient prove,
There are strange turns, strange mysteries in Love,
Who often (as by experience we find)
Changes the most obstinate, obdurate mind:
For know, the Temple of Love is not composed,
As by the gross ignorant vulgar it is supposed,
Of The dull materials, Of dead senseless stones,
But he has more sensible and living ones,
The hearts of every one which he does fit,
And apt at pleasure for composing it,
Of which some Nature makes so fit to love,
They with small difficulty Lovers prove:
Others so stuborn and unapt again,
They love not, but with mighty toil and pain;
And those who finally so useless prove
They Are wholly unfit for the fabrique of Love,
As in Bellinda, ('t may be) you will see to day,
Offended Love does cast'um quite away --
But far be the omen from my words, for though
't be more yet to be wished than hoped, it is
Impossible she should not feel Love who
Does make so many feel it, nor have no fire
In her herself, who kindles it in so many breasts --
But see Philena here makes me behold you as
A thing of pity.
Go hapless youth, and sacrifise to Love,
Whose Deity you must have highly offended sure
Inflicts on you so heavy punishment,
To love one who neglects you, and neglect
Her here so dearly loves you:

Stay, you will
Not go I hope?

Excuse me, in the quarrels of Lovers
it is dangerous interposing.

I Will warrant you.
Love shoots not his darts so fast and vehemently
From either of our encountering eyes
You need fear being shot.

How ever I Will not trust you,
For in these pretty skirmishes
None knows
When you are friends or foes:
For now there is falling out,
Now truce, Now war,
And then
Amity and peace again.
So if you be foes, I Will not hinder your making friends;
If friends, Love keep you so.

NOw shall i
(...) to madness with her importunity,
Lest (...) her, and with one importunity
Expel another -- Philena happily met,
For in you I meet my wishes.

Most happy I, if my hopes now don't delude
And flatter me into deceit.

Thou know my life
So much depends on the Fortune of this day,
As should Bellinda part hence, I of
Necessity must part with Life and all,
Whose Love the Fates have with so strong a Tie
Fastn'd to my very heart strings, they cannot snatch
Her hence, but they must rend and tear my heart
Out of my bosom too -- Go prithee, go then,
And in this last moment when the Fates are busiest
At work in finishing their design, Indear
Thy diligence, and redeem thy Tardiness.
"Time is a Treasure few or none do care
"To save till 't's almost lost --
Thou know those softer minutes when Nymphs minds
Are best disposed for the Impressions of Love:
Could thou but instamp me in her bosom then,
And glide a thought of me into her memory,
Just as she passes to the Temple, thou should infinitely
Oblige Euphanes, and make him ever happy.

And my self ever unhappy by it, ah me!
Was ever any more miserable than I
To be made confident of my Rivals Love
Against my self?

What should I say more? tell her
How much I love her, -- yet that is not enough,
How much I Reverence and Adore her, do thou hear?

I do; -- and will you hear me now?

If the have any thing new to say I will;
But of old businesses I pray no more.

That cannot be old that is every day renewed.

Rather that cannot be new, that every day
Needs renovation, -- but of this enough.
See how thou stand'st now ^ as if my life were not
Concerned in thy have; Go, prithee go;
And if perchance the art ought concerned in it, know
'Less thou do this to day, thou have seen the last
Of wretched Euphanes.

And if I do it to day,
The world has seen the last of more wretched
Philena, -- Oh me! I now do see
"Love is a burden two hearts equally
"Should bear, and then it is light and pleasant, but
"Grievous and intolerable when the one
"Does bear it all alone.
Mean time what shall I do? he well deserves
To find no pity, who affords me none:
But love never stands upon such nice respects,
Who there where unfeignedly 't does Love profess*
't does never sin, but in officiousness.
I am resolved to plead for him then against
My self; and though my heart do disavow
All my tongue says, spite of my heart, (in fine)
't shall say 't, or I Will not avow it to be mine.

HAy, -- whurr, -- there boults another wench;
The Warren's full of them; and I do but think
What dainty sport I shall have
In ferretting 'um;
The very name o't^' place had Attraction
Enough to draw me hither, where I expect
To find all Women as coming and tractable, as
Kids-leather gloves, one gentle pull or two
Will easily draw 'um on. I do not like
Your difficil ones, who come as hardly off
As a wet Summers boot; --
Hey! there is another; and
Alone too? this opportunity
Is the shell Love's hatched of, and the wenches here,
Like Lap-wings, run away with it on their heads.
I Will accost her; -- she is right I Will warrant ye.

FAir Nymph, might I be so bold (I pray)
To request the time o'th'day of you?

With all my heart Sir, take what time you will,
It shall be any thing of the clock you please, for me.

Le ye there now?
There Is never a Sextons wife in all Cypres
Could answer you more courteously -- Lets see,
What Is next now? pox on 't, we young practitioners
Of complement, and dabblers in Love,
When once w' ar out of our legs and fac^s, are presently out
Of our discourse, -- ^, it shall be so --
And how, and how have you done Faith since I saw you last?

Most methodical! how do you, and what is a clock?
I Will wager with any one now, next is, what News?
Or somewhat about the Weather; the ordinary
Discourse of those who can discourse of nothing:
And when (I pray) was it you saw me last?

Why in Plato's great year, don't you remember it?
When just after such an encounter as this, I took
You by the hand, and kissing it, offered
To lead you just into such another Grove as this.

Just no such matter, -- pray, pray Sir stay,
Sure you do n't remember well?

Most perfectly,
By the same token I offered to salute you too.

I knew you were quite wide,
And out Sir, I? -- not me I can assure you.

You cannot deny 't I Am sure;
Think, think, and you must needs remember it,
I do as perfectly as if 't were but to day --
And how I told you, having so fair an opportunity,
But lose it, and you would never have the like again.

Wider and wider still from my remembrance.

And that such kind offers, from such kind youths as I,
Came not every day; -- and I added too withal,
That I assured my self the Nymphs of this Country
Were so well learned, their Husbands on the marriage night
Could teach 'um nothing, but what they knew before

Bless me! I never heard
Man talk a this manner.

And for your particular,
I durst be sworn first time y' ad Liberty,
After fourteen to walk abroad alone,
Returning home, you found that you had left
Some such odd toys, as your Scarf, your Mask, and gloves,
And perhaps your Maidenhead, behind ye too.

Thanks Love, thou have redeemed me --
Oh! cry mercy Sir.
Now I remember it
Perfectly well: Lord what a Treacherous
Memory have ^!

Oh do you so? I knew you would at last --
Now she is mine own, I Am sure on it.

By the same token, just
As you talked thus wildly and licentiously
Philostrates, Love's sovereign Pontif, and
Governor of the Isle past by.

Mas, and I think
Yonder he comes indeed.

When I
Addressing me to him, and complaining of
Your unworthy rudeness, he presently
Invited you most honorably to dance
To a certain sprighly Instrument, called a Whip,
Worth a hundred of your Pochets and Violins
To make such Gallants as you to frisk and caper.

I remember nothing of all this now --
But beshrow me I begin to fear, next Plato's great year
I shall indeed, if I tarry longer here.

Hark ye, hark ye Sir,
Now I can tell you what time of the day it is too.

I know it now, I thank you, well enough,
it is time for me to be gone as I take it.

Farewell then my
Platonique Lover, and a fair riddance -- But to
My business. I wonder where all
The Nymphs are, that none of them appears. I must go seek 'um out.

ANd what dispatch to the Provincial governors,
Touching Platonique Love?

Tell 'um we are men, pure spirits, and had no other end
But only the propagating Ideas, this communicating
Of minds to minds might pass, which now has
So slippery a way to go:
It Is outre tendance most commonly falls fowl
Of The Body in its passage toward the Soul,
Yet in those colder climats have Phlegm enough
To quench their amorous flames, 'tmay be allowed,
But no ways to those hotter Nations,
Whose sulphurous Spirits presently take fire
At presence of their Mistresses; Nor Is It but with
Much caution to be permitted to different Sexes,
Unless of age more different: for distinction
Is the Art of Wisdom, and who imagins
One measure for all Bodies may suffice,
And one rule for all minds, are equally unwise.

The sacred Philostrates speaks divinest truth.

So amongst these Chymerical speculations,
Like the Alchymists great Elixar, rarely
Or never are reducible to Art,
And practice, it may pass -- An other abuse
They much complain of (and deservedly)
Is the confounding Love with Liking, and
Calling of every trivial passion Love;
Each Peasant now who likes but a dairy Maid,
Crying out, He is in Love, profaning so
The Divinity of Love, by making him companion
Of every vulgar breast.

As every Schoolboy too
Once past the School, and Schoolboys toys, next toy
He gets, is a Mistress, whom he straightways courts
In The canting language of Enamourists,
Of darts and flames, and dying and languishing,
Which he calls Love forsooth, so many degrees
Removed from't, it is scarce the coverture
Love is infolded in, (a dutious heart,
Obsequious services, and sincere respects.)

True Polydor, such affected triflings
Are as far from Love, as Valor is from Boast,
Or Wisdom from Levity; But who can hinder
The ignorant from being ignorant still?
So let us leave 'um, and pass to our other Affairs:
Let the Chorus advance singing in praise of Love,
Whilst the Mysti explicate its sacred mysteries,
To inform, and indoctrinate the tender minds
Of Youths and Virgins in its Religious rites;
For Music and Poetry,
Are the Language, and the Accent of the Gods,
Speaking unto us in a diviner strain,
And moving our minds with far more Energie;
Than plain dull Rhetorique* Religion
Still entering easilier, and penetrating more
Profoundly, those hearts the ave softened before.

Praised be the Deities above.

We Loved.

We Love.

And we shall Love.

Thus by succession we go,
Love to Love connecting so;
Whilst link of Age to Age we knit,
W' eternize, and perpetuate it.

Now our doctrine to begin,
From Love's diviner origin;
Know two different Loves there are
In hearts, incessantly do war,
The on a lustful brutish one,
The Other Venus Urania's Son,
With his Celestial darts and fires
In chaste hearts kindling pure desires,
Distance 'twixt whom as much there is,
As 'twixt high Heaven, and deep Abyss;
As by the effects you will easily find,
Since the one imbrutes and soils a mind,
Whilst the others purity never can
Admit of blemish, spot, nor stain.
As unconsistent too as night
And darkness is with cleerest light,
"For in the same place, on the same day,
"The Swine and Ermin never lay.
In a word then for to tell
What virtuous Love is, mark me well,
it is a just temper of our Souls,
All vicious extremes controuls,
it is the gust we have and sense
Of every noble Excellence,
It is that whereby we know
Whether our Souls have sense or know,
It is the main spring that our minds
To fair and virtuous things inclines,
And 't's that and only that in fine,
Which makes men next unto Divine*

I better can tell you what it is --
it is a mixture and compound of all
We happy and unhappy call,
it is a contradiction again
A bitter sweetness and a pleasant pain;
In one word what Love is to tell,
Look in Bellinda's Eyes it is a Heaven,
Look in Euphanes Heart it is a Hell.

So now march on before,
And as you have initiated so proceed,
And finish the solemnity of the day.

Praised be the Deitys above.

We loved.

We love.

And we shall love.

THus by succession we go,
Love to Love connecting so;
Whilst link of Age to Age we knit,
W' eternize, and perpetuate it.

Now to the rest
Of our affairs: Is the Nymph summoned to
The Temple yet?

It Is yet not time.

When it is,
Be it your care to see it done, and all
The rites and ceremonies in prepare
For the great solemnity:
This day peculiarly Love is thine
Work miracles on it, and show thy self divine.

YE aged Oaks, the semi-gods aboads,
And who your selves in ancient times were gods;
Ye silent walks, and solitary groves,
Places which melancholy passion loves,
You I make only Confident of
My secret thoughts; I love. O dissipate
My words some gentle wind, in such minute,
And aerie particles, none in soft Characters
May ever read, nor ever find impressed,
This most important secret of my breast;
But whe'r my loved Philander live, or no,
Heaven knows, I do not know
By other Argument than that I live my self,
Have so dear sympathy with him, infallibly,
Were he but dead, I instantly should die,
Our Loves and Lives having but one third, one knife,
And once but cut our Loves, and cut our Life:
Mean time my daily musings; which only ar
But waking dreams, and nightly Dreams, which are
But sleeping Actions, both testimony bears,
"Love's a solicitous thing, and full of Fears, --
But soft, I Have blab'd too much I fear,
See Philena coming here.

MY dear Bellinda! and where have you bin so long
Without Philena! to call me your life, and live
^o long without me! to call me your heart, and make
^e such a stranger to your breast! tr^st me it is most
^nkindly, most unnaturally don.

^weetest Philena, until my heart was all
^epleat with bitterness, I called you my heart indeed;
and till I was a weary of my li^e,
^esteem'd yon as my life; but now all the joy,
^elight, and Comfort lost, Bellinda has
^y heart and life, being all comfited
(...) bitterness and woe,
(...) is not fit I longer call you so.

^ sad Complement, this Bellinda, and such
^little should have attended from so dear a friend:
Complements in friendship being like Sinister ba^s
(...) Haraldry, but marks of Bastardice;
Why serve friends, but when cares and woes molest,
^o lighten the heavy burden of our breast?
But to be confident w'ye, I much suspect
You are not so with me, and that there is somewhat
Of Artifice in it, you decline my company
So much, and make me not partaker of
Your secret thoughts.

Of all I know, I will,
And do Philena; but the gods know there is
Somewhat in my breast I do not know my self;
You who are my heart, divine it if you can.

Nay if you know it not, how should your heart
That Is but a part of you? But give me leave
Bellinda to admire, that in so general a
Commotion and solicitude for you,
You should appear so little solicitous,
So little moved, and so unconcerned to day, whilst all
Are concerned so much for you; Trust me it is
A Temper, or above, or below humanity.

I Will tell thee Philena, I have considered,
That of all Creatures, Man's the most ingenious
In's own own affliction, and in's consolation the
Most dull; and that in the navigation of
This life, in this frail barque of ours, where the Gods
Are Pilots, and the World the Sea, our solicitude
For the future no more avails
Than that of every common Passenger, how
The ship is governed: Whence I conclude that best
Way for our quiets and rest,
Is to leave all our solicitude to the Gods,
To whom we are dearer than we are unto our selves,
They having a hundred times more tender care of us;
And this it is now makes me for the future no more
solicitous,

This Bellinda for our sex
Is high Philosophy, but the gods making
Every one Architect of their own fortunes; what
Should hinder you to day, to make a fair
And noble one of yours? and but declare
You love Euphanes, as already you have declared,
If any one in the Isle you love it shall be he.

And so I do again, let that suffice,
And seek not Philena, I prithy, to advance
An unprofitable knowledge, Time will, but too soon,
Accelarat, and bring to light.

Ay me! what says my friend?

To explicate
My meaning clearer, too soon, for you I mean,
Are intrest by your Goodness and Gentleness
So far in my Affairs, you necessarily must
Or lose a friend, or Lover by it.

NOw gentle Polydor,
What news from the Temple?

All there is in prepare
For the great solemnity, and only fair
Bellindas presence expected; Into whose breast
May the God of Love propitiously inspire
As many loving thoughts, as ever yet
Were crowded into any's breast,
Or amorous bosom had capacity to receive.

Come Philena, let us away then.

So sudden, and so unmoved!
I suspect her more and more; to doubtful things
We run not with such have and Resolution;
And if she be resolved, there is somewhat in it,
That she conceals it from me!

It Is happy Augury,
(No doubt) this have of hers: Love has invisible
Attractions, and chains, which who follows, visibly
Perceives at last, this gentle force of his
Does but conduct them to their greater bliss.

SUch a Wench
Would I give a Limb for now, although I begged
On Crutches ever after, and were confiscated to
The Hospital, -- I must needs have her; and this
Same fellow shall be my agent in the business,
Do You hear Sir? do you know
Any of these Nymphs, I pray?

That I do Sir, very well,
What then?

Why then I should desire
Your better acquaintance: For look ye Sir, suppose
A man should have a mind to one of them.

A mind! What mind d' ye mean?

Why a months mind or so.

Why then Sir after a month, for ought I know
You may be rid on it -- This is
Some foolish stranger, rather deserving my
Pity than Anger.

I hope you do not mock me Sir?

Indeed Sir but I do.

^tis well you confess it, otherwise
^ should be very angry -- But since I see
You Are a little dull; in plainer terms, I Would fain
Have a bout with one of them; do you apprehend me Sir?

I think I shall do -- But know you Sir where you are,
That you dare talk thus?

Why, in Love's Dominious,
Where should I be?

In Lust^ rather, for Loves is not for you, if you
Be such an one, and so as Loves Minister,
Less you better know to temper your Tongue, and mend
Your behavior, I command you sir
Straight to depart the Isle.

I hope you are not in earnest?

Indeed sir but I am.

It Is well you are so, for I
Don't love to be jested with I tell you plain.

It seems you love to jest Sir, but
Look to it, and so farewell.

Slud, this is the unreasonablest Fellow
I ever met withal in my life, a man
Cannot talk of a Wench but he is angry!
Temper your Ton^ue, and mend your behavior,
When can you tell? Loves Minister d' ye call him,
If he teach no better doctrine, he scarce deserves
To be Minister to the Family of Love.

What? my Enamourist again!
Sure then, being so well accompanied
I Will have some sport with him.

Gods so, she here!
I Will away then.

D'y hear d'y hear Sir? pray come forwards here,
And don't turn Sea-crab, -- do you behold that Gentleman?
He is one of the terriblest persecutors of young nymphs*
H'as no mercy with him; And's so in love with himself,
He imagins all women are in love with him too;
Nay, will swear it, if they but look upon him once, --
There is nothing so cold, as to hear him talk of flames;
And it were enough to make a body forswear love, but
To see how he makes it; -- nay, be n't ashamed
Of your own Commendations.

Commendations do you call it? what are your Reproaches pray?
^f these be your Commendations?

Then if he pretend
To Poetry (that is Riming with him) he wearies Phoebus
And all the Muses, to find him out similitudes
Of R^bies, Pearl, Gold, and Diamonds,
To compare with his Mistresses lips, teeth, eyes, and hair:
If not, he is yet a more solemn fool in Prose,
With His speech imbroder'd, just like your Masquing clothes,
With Oos and Aspirations, and never a word
Of sense in them, -- see now how he fleers and grins,
The common put-off of the Fool and Impudent.

To have an Anatomy Lecture
Read over me alive thus, there is no enduring it.

Nay, I Will promise ye
You shall endure it, and twenty times more to boot,
If I meet with you again.

You Have met with me
Already, I thank you, but if I meet with you
Alone, I Will make y' endure somewhat too for this.

Threatened too? nay then have at you with
Another trick; well Sir, having sufficiently tried
Your patience, and finding it invincible,
I Will let you see now all the Nymphs here are not
So cruel as you imagine the^, -- meet me but hereabouts
When Bellinda's gone to the temple, and I Will promise you
I Will bring you to the gentlest Nymph in Cypres,
So far from coy, you may do what you will with her,
She can deny you nothing nor say nay to any thing.

I marry Sir, and such an one would I meet withal,
I knew I could not be so grossly deceived
In the dispositions of the Nymphs minds here,
And Constitutions of their Bodies.

Look you fail not now.

Nay, if I fail at such Assignations,
Call me Eunuch.

And if I don't fit you, call me fool -- but hark,
The pomp draws nigh, and the procession
From the Temple, dilating of it self,
And swelling with numerous multitudes, fills up all
The spacious and ample Plain.

HOly Love that do command
In Fi^e, Water, Air, and Land,
Gently thy commands inspire
To all in Land, Air, Water, Fire,

Now is the Nymph come?

Behold great Sir she is here --
Know you the reason Philena why Euphanes
Is not present?

He misdoubts his temper,
And therefore wisely does absent himself.

I feared some other cause, and am glad he is so discreet --
Stand by there.

What are you there whiffling again?
Goodly, Goodly, here is more ado
With your under Officers

Draw nigh then Nymph, and t'understand
What Sacred mysteries in every Ceremony
Involved lie, Know first
By this sprinkling's signified
How minds ar to be purified
Er' they receive the Deity,
Who deigns in purified breasts alone
To make on earth its habitation:
Next for your Eyes and Ears by which two ports
There often issues forth, and enters in
Much pollution and sin
(And by one sluice bootlesly we should drain
Out Objects, if by another we let them in again)
Veiling your Eyes we are to conduct you to
The sacred Cell, where far from noise
Of Tumult and the public voice,
Only attending to holy orisons
An hour enclosed you are to remain:
No bosom (^in fine) but wholly abstracted and
Sequestered from humane consortship,
Being capable of Divine --
So before (for compliment of all)
We charm you silent, If you have ought to say
Now freely spoke

Unto the Gods
I need not speak seeing they know my mind,
And to men I will not, seeing it is not fit
They know it yet -- what should I say then, but
Behold the entirely resigned Bellinda here stands
Ready to obey your holy orders and
The Gods Divine commands.

Reach us the sacred wand then, whilst we thus
Invoke with due solemnity silence to come,
And in its softer chains bind up her Tongue.
Still born silence thou that art
Floodgate of the deeper heart
Offspring of a heavenly kind,
F^ost of the mouth, and Thaw of the mind,
(...) Confident, and he
That makes Religion mystery;
Admirations speakingst tongue,
Leave thy desert shades, among
Reverend Hermits hallowed cells,
Where retir'dst devotion dwells,
With thy Enthusiasms come
Seize this Nymph, and strike her dumb, --
Now give us the sacred veil
To veil her eyes, -- thus Nymph
We close your eyes toward Earth, and open 'um
Toward Heaven --
Now whilst the air you sweetly move,
Gently excite her mind to Love,
"For Music to Religion,
"'s just like those who temper and mold the wax
"For the seals impression
Whilst with her Lilly and Rosy hands
Nature molds beauteous forms, Love stands,
And ever as he does ^spy
A fair and gentle one,
This, this, is fit for me
To work upon, says he,
And lays it by.

What fools are those then who can miss,
So grossly to suppose
Bellinda, and mark how gentle sh' is
And fair: were none of those
Wh^m Love's own hands had chose?

Now let the pompous train move on, and let
The Music in sweet harmonious strains,
O'r all these spacious plains,
Resounding higher yet,
Invocate Loves sacred Deity
TO impose blessed end to this solemnity.

HOly Love, that do command
In Fire, Water, Air, and Land,
Gently thy commands inspire,
To all in Land, Air, Water, Fire.

Here Is a do indeed!
I could have dispatched her my way
In half this time, and with half these Ceremonies too;
But let her go, and^now if this Wench
Perform but her promise, she will redeem
Her self and this Isle from my ill opinion; --
And see just where she comes.

Oh! it is well you're here.
The Nymph I told you of --

I, where is she? where is she? I long
To see her.

You shall find
Sleeping in the wood there*

Excellent opportunity!
And is she so kind say you?

So kind (as I told you) and so far from coy,
You may do what you will with her -- she can
Deny you nothing, nor say no to any thing.

And I Will put her to it presently

Behold her there,
But look you don't disturb her.

Ah pretty Rogue?
Have I caught you napping?
She sleeps as snugg and soundly as
A sucking pigg -- you can scarce hear her breath, --
She Is handsome, exceeding handsome, I see that,
A very Goddess; -- the gods make me thankful,
Hey, hey, -- how jocund shall I be?

Softly, softly.

Oh! I Would forgot, -- soft
^ think she stirs,^^what a sloven was I
Not to put on a clean band to day?
No 'twas only the leaves, -- I Will jogg her softly, --
But first I Will steal a kiss of her whilst she sleeps, --
Ha! how is this?

Ha, ha, ha.

By this hand
A Maukin, a Mammet, a very Moppet with
No more life in it than a Scar-crow, or
The Puppet of a Tire woman's stall*

Ha ha ha,
Make much of your Mistress Sir.

D' you laugh too? shame on her how she has cozened me;
Is this your Gentle Nymph with a vengeance*
So far from coy you may do what you will with her,
She can deny you nothing, nor say no to any thing:
So me thinks indeed -- hey
This is the Log now
And the other the stork, it is 'question which would make
The better Mistress -- only this I may mock
While the other mocks me -- farewell to your Ladyship.

HAil happy land, where if the Oracle prove
But true, Philander again shall find his Love,
Whom six Moons now have just been in their wain,
And six with light replenished again,
Since in a storm I lost, whilst I detained,
A woeful Captive have ever since remaind;
Until at last releast, I suddenly
Addressed me to the sacred Oracle, to know
Whether my dear Bellinda lived, or no,
And consequently to know, whe'r I
Should either live or dye;
When this answer I received,
That as on Cyprian Seas I lost her, where
Venus, Loves Queen, floating did first appear,
So I should find her on Cyprian Land again,
Where Venus fixed perpetually does remain.

IMpatient of expectancy, I Am come
Hither to the Temple, to await my doom,
Fear of which made me absent my self before,
Until in lieu of one fear, a thousand more
Soliciting my breast, I did conclude,
Still more in absence, than presence, solicitude
Does urge our bosoms, as Terrors do more affright
In The dark, than in the light.

Strange! the houses should be all so desolate,
As some Plague had swept 'um, and the land depopulat,
As the Enemy had mowed it with his sword!
But see one here to inform my wonder,
And curiosity. Gentle Sir,
Might a stranger newly ariv'd here, desire to know,
Why all do flock unto the Temple so?
Is It any annual feast (perhaps) they celebrat?

No Sir, but one
Mere Accident has produced to day,
For understanding which, be pleased to know,
That by this ^lands Laws all Strangers, after
A six-months residence, are solemnly
To swear they love some one here, or else
Abjure the Isle: --
Now Sir, six months to day are just expired,
Since there ariv'd here one of the most admired
Nymphs, as ever in Cypres yet was known,
And most deserving Admiration,
By tempest cast on shore here, surprising so the while
With her excellent beauty the Inhabitants of this Isle,
With pious error they all adored her
As a second Venus, a second time
Ascending from the Sea. Nor was this Idolatry
By Venus punished as any crime at all,
Since Cupid's self did on the like error fall,
Imagining her his Mother, she was so fair,
And so at all parts most resembling her.

The Time and every Circumstance agree
It should be she, -- and her Name I pray Sir?

Bellinda --

Her name too, then
No farther evidence nor circumstance does need,
For to confirm me it is she indeed --
And where is this Nymph Sir now?

^'th sacred Cell
Straight to be produced to take the solelmn Oath.

And is it supposed she will take it?

That Is doubtful yet, but this I know,
That less she do, you behold in me here Sir
The wofullest Lover as ever yet for love
Sighing and groaning gaspt out his latest breath,
The Dreggs of life, and Harbingers of death.

Ha! I like not this --
And has she given you no hope Sir of her love?
For love without hope's but a dry morsel, and goes
But hardly down.

Only this Sir, that if any one she loves
Sh' as promised it should be me.

Nay then you have enough, for Nature gives not
Youth and beauty, but of the condition
Of loving, and their sex gives pledges unto love
Reciprocally again -- But why go I vainly thus
Hunting with mine own curiosity,
Mine own disquiet -- I Have ta'n in poison already at
Mine Ear,
And feel it working -- defend me Reason from
Thine Enemy Rage, and thou defend me Love
From thy more deadly Enemy Jealousy,
Thou bring'st forth just as the Viper does its brood,
When all its endeavor after all its strife,
Is to give death to thee who gav'st it life --
But see in happy time variety
Of other objects to divert my mind
From farther thought of it.

NOw you Virgins all draw near,
And most needful doctrine hear;
First be modest as you go,
For each looser glance you strew
Will be interpreted a snare
To catch those youths that present are,
And your rolling eyes betray
A heart that rowls as well as they.

O Fly then far,
Glances that are
But sparkles of a wanton fire,
And pledges of a loose desire,
Fly rolling eyes that but betray
A heart that rowls as well as they.

Here Is Doctrine' with a ^urren, able to infect all
The young Wenches in the Parish.

Then for kisses, Oh be sure
Never Virgins those endure,
Are but bellows blows the fire
Of Lascivious desire,
But seals of Lust, and poison, that
Infect the Mind and Body strait;
And your lips with kissing used,
Are but just like Cherries bruz'd.

O Fly then far
Kisses, that are
Incentives of foul Lust, which no
Virgins lips should ever know;
Whose lips once with kissing used,
Are but just like Cherries bruz'd.

Heyday! no kissing neither?
God help the poor Country wenches then,
For all their sport is marred.

But 'bove all Virgins again,
Look you fly the Touch of men,
For you are flowers, and every Touch,
Does your fresher beauty smutch:
And Youth's a thing so delicate,
But touch it, and it withers strait,
Which once fading in their hew,
Youth and Beauty then Adieu.

O Fly then far
Touches, that are
Things, Youth and Beauty chiefly blasts,
And on them foulest blemish casts,
Which once fading in their hew,
Youth and Beauty then Adieu.

Pity a their breeding! these wenches will be quit^ spoyl'^
With this Education, and good for nothing, but
To make Inckle and bone-lace.

Lastly, for enjoying, I
Need not warn you that to fly,
For flowers gathered there is no talk,
Ever to piece 'um to their stalk;
And it is only that the while,
Makes you so contemned, and vile,
Men, what ever they did before,
Never care for Women more.

O Fly then far
Your men that are
Only born for to destroy you,
Since if once they but enjoy you,
Whatsoever they did before,
They never care for Women more.

Were not Love's Inquisition here so severe,
I could teach 'um other doctrine, whose Liberty
Would please 'um a great deal better; but well,
Would I had my Moppet again,
At all adventures, for that is the likelyest thing
To a Wench I Am like to get here, for ought I see,
If they be taught a-this manner.

By Philostrates return
They should be coming; oh how my heart does burn,
And throb now, with doubtful expectation
Of the event!

SO now produce her.

Behold great Sir she is here.

If there be any Sympathy
In Lovers hearts, it is she.

Draw nigh then Nymph, and laying your hands
Upon this sacred Volume here,
Where on the skins of Doves and Swans
Love's 'holy Laws recorded are,
Swear; But swear truly, on penalty of no less
Than forfeiture of life if you transgress:
Unveil her there.

Ha, it is she! ye Gods it is she,
But Oh my jealousy, tell me some one
Skillful in decyphering Love's Character,
Whether that glance the superscription of
An amarous heart was directed to him or me.

What ails this stranger!

What means these sudden starts of hers,
And change of color.

Veil her presently again, since she so ill
Governs her eyes, they are straying still --
Fie Nymph be more Religious-wise
And restrain those wandering eyes,
Who in objects takes delight,
Brings distraction with the sight,
In their breasts do never find
A holy recollected mind --
Now approach her nearer.

Now I shall know my destiny,
And whether I Am to live or die.

Now Philander thou shall know
Whether she be true or no.

Now Philena thou shall soon
Prove her faith, and know thy doom,

Proceed and swear then, thus I uncharm thy Tongue.

Then by Love's sacred Deity I swear,
I love one here.

Enough.

O blessed voice which heavenly minds applaud
With their celestial wings;
Oh me most happy!

And most unhappy I.

Did I not tell you it was impossible
But she should Love. O day ever to be
Recorded in the Calendar of Love,
For holy and festival; Which never may
Oblivion, that like a torrent rouls
All things along with it to the L^thean Lake,
Abolish the happy memory of.

Oh the Dissembler, how she 'as deceived me!

Conduct her again now to the sacred cell,
Where yet an hour she is to remain,
Ever we dissolve our magic spell;
And then with indicible joy we are again to produce her,
And solemnly deliver her for ever to repose
^n's dear embraces she has for Lover chose.

Praised be Love, that does command
In Fire, Water, Air, and Land,
And so gently does inspire
All in Land, Air, Water, Fire.

^ should laugh now, if I were he she loved,
^s who knows but she may be enamoured
Of my person, as I of hers, there is nothing impossible.

^ell, for her sake I Will never trust Stranger more.

^air Nymph, I should desire
The honor of conducting you to your lodging, If
't might not be troublesome.

Troublesome? who doubts it? why
Thou Art nothing else but trouble.

Fie Flamette, this is discourteous,
And to a stranger too!

She tells you true, -- pray be gone,
And don't trouble us,-you see there are some will accept
Of my Courtesy now, though you will not

Neither would she, did she know thee as well as I,
But let her go, when the ast abused her curtesy,
As thou do others, to molestation, she will know thee better.
But this sudden turn of Bellinda's affection
Is wondrous strange!

BEllinda false! O ye Gods where then
Are Faith and Vows and Oaths; nay where are you
Your selves; for I shall doubt whe'r Love
Have any Divinity now at all, and think
All Is but Idolatry, and women that you are Angels
Till we make you Devils by our adoring ye.

There Is no joy like your unexpected one
^t comes so striking -- not falling upon
The expectation first, that deads and dulls
The blow. This intermixing difficulty
With Love, and leading you unto the very brink
Of despair* and then hoysting you up again,
There is the Art on it, and that she
Grand Artifex of it as she is
^ull well did understand.

The more I think on it, the more
^t puzzles my belief and imagination, I will
^uspend my faith and patience then until
^er farther Declaration may confirm me,
and give my passions their full carier.

Heavens! I am so overjoyed,
^o ravished with it, and in so high transport,
Me thinks like Metors I even walk in Air,
And have naught of Earth about me, nor other fear
But only presently to expire and die
^n Bellind^'s sweet embraces.

Nay then
Were my patience bound in Adamantine chains
^'d break 'um all -- know Sir you have
Another Victory to obtain before
You triumph thus -- and perhaps too the Fates
Have provided you another death to die
Than what you fear so much.

What Is that I pray?

Why, to die by Philanders hand, for know Sir Bellinda
^'s my espouss'd.

Yours?

Yes mine, for all your scorn Sir,
And be assured, long as I live, that man
Is not alive shall enjoy her besides my self.

How Is this? but this
Must be prevented

Wherefore or quit and relinquish your claim of her,
Or follow me strait to the shore, where she first
Set foot a land, that so that ground she then did tread
May receive one of us dead,
Who cannot be enjoyed by both of us alive.

Although bold stranger I might well decline
Thy challenge, not knowing whe'r thy quality
Be equal unto mine, and assured
Our conditions are not (by thine own confession)
I being as happy in Bellinda's love
As thou unhappy, which makes thee desperate of
Thy life perhaps: yet know I Will be so noble
For Bellinda's sake to kill thee this once my self,
Who else might leave
Thee to a hundred more ignoble deaths:
Nor is this Arrogance in me, but Confidence
That those who have honor of Bellinda's love
Cannot but come off victorious in fight.

^lated by good Fortune, you talk high Sir,
Pray Heaven you do so, -- but Love
Shall straight determine who has the better cause,
The injust possessor of Bellinda, or
The injuriously deprived of her, If thou dare but fight
^n so unjust a Quarrel.

Ha, ha, ha, if I dare? for that never fear,
^'ll but instantly arm my self, and meet thee there.

STay, --
By order from Philostrates I Am to
Secure your persons.

Mine?

Hold, --
In Love's Dominion, where no force is offered,
^n vain is all resistance. --
Now though bold stranger the disturbance of
The peace here, and sowing of
Enmity and Dissension in a happy soil
Produces naught but Gentle Peace and Amity,
Deserves a more exemplar Chastisement, yet here
Where favors are to the utmost extended, and punishment
The most contracted,
Confinement to your Chamber shall
Be all your punishment.

And is it a-this manner then
Lovers in Love's Dominion are treated, not only
To be deprived of their Liberties, but of
Their Spouses too?

What Spouse?

Bellinda.

And is she then your Spouse?

All Greece can witness it.

Too much of witness already you have here,
If this be true. But this must be examined
More narrowly by Philostrat^s; mean time
Indiscreetly have you done* in publishing a secret
Might better have bin concealed, which now it is known
May prove Bellinda's ruin, and your own, --
You Euphanes
Have your Chamber for prison -- you must along with me

I obey you Sir.

And I necessity.

SO now Sir my humble thanks
For the honor y'a pleased to do me.

Nay Lady, I Will
Wayt upon you in, that is certain, I Am not
So coursly bred, nor so ill mannerd.

I should be at least Sir, to trouble you farther -- and
Engage your courtesy so much*

No trouble in the world,
^tis pleasure to me rather.

Pray Sir excuse me, I am presently
To go forth again on visit.

Why I Will accompany you,
And wait upon you thither too.

By no means Sir, it is to a friend of mine
You Are not acquainted with, besides I have
Some business --

Nay an't be to a friend of yours
I must needs
Be acquainted with them, being so much your servant as I am,
And for your business, my presence
Shall no ways hinder its dispatch.

Now I think on it too, I must visit by the way
A friend of mine there lately brought abed, --
Will Not that shake him off?

I Will wait upon you thither too. I
Am the welcom'st man amongst the Gossips,
You will not think how they love my Company.

It Is a sign I Am none then, -- no getting rid of him!
Oh see in happy Time Flamette here.

PRithy Flamette, an' thou love me, get me rid
Of this Im^ortune here; is more tedious
Than a painful-sleepless night, and worser than
A Fever or Catharr, I am even sick of him.

Oh! have you found him then?
This comes of your complacency, I told ye so,
All courtesy is cast away on him, and discurtesie
Is no discurtesie to such as he,
Who either brag of favors they never received,
Or el^e abuse those they receive of us.

I, I shall be sure
Of your good word still, but no matter what
You say, she knows me well enough, and I
Know what I owe too, to such Nymphs as she.

Nothing but a blanquetting as I know of.

Come Lady shall we go?

What shall I do to rid me of this Importune?

Why an' take my counsel, a flat denyal's best,
And if that will not do, a good Cudgel; I know
No other way.

Come, come, let her talk
Till her tongue's a-weary, and let us go.

Still does this Burr
Stick on me?

Burr? he is Pitch rather, defiles all those
He touches; it is imputation enough of Curtezan
For any Nymph but to be seen in's Company:
But hear you not the News?

H^h! she must come
Tattling with her News now!

No, what is it?

The lamentablest and dolefullest.
As ever yet was heard in Cypres,
Will leave, I fear, no heart without a sorrow*
No eye without a tear.

For heavens Love what?

Why Bellinda,
The lovely Bellinda, and so beloved of all,
Who merited to live beyond the natural bounds
Of life, this day untimely is to die.

Ay me! how so?

Condemned to death
By our Islands Laws, for falsifying her faith
To Gods and men, in swearing she loved one here,
Whilst it is proved she was betroath'd before
Unto another.

And how is that known?

By a Stranger's arrival here
Just on the point she took the sacred Oath,
And proving her forsworn.

Strange! but on a strangers bare information
This may not be believed, there may be malice,
And consequently falsehood in it, -- and may't not be
That other to whom she was betrothed, she swears she (loves?

The Oath you know admits no such equivocation,
Being expressly limited to some one in the Isle.

and so may he be for ought we know,

that probability of that?
and you at her lodging never know of it! --
^o no, her guilt's but too apparent.

^gh, ugh, ugh.

that ails the Fool?

^h I Have lost the best Wife, the best Wife
^s ever poor Husband had -- what shall I do?
What shall I do?

Why prithee go hang thy self,
So we were rid of thee.

Oh, oh, such a Wife! such a wife!

^ see now
The man is vain and foolish, -- but this is wondrous strange;
The patient gods latter or sooner still
Follow ('it is true) all crimes with punishment,
But just in the Act to meet her punishment
Declares them mightily offended -- I cannot believe it yet,
Where there is gain in sin, there is excuse
For sinning, but he sins twice who commits
An unprofitable crime, as must be this of hers,
To lose her life for nothing, for an Oath,
A breath.

Unhappy breath the Whilst,
And most unhappy she*
That what is cause of others living should be
Her cause of death -- but see where Polydor comes,
We shall know all of him.

FOr the Prisoners now you may restore 'um to their liberties;
With prohibition only of wearing arms,
Death being their Rival* there is no fear now
Of their farther Rivalship.

O Polydor
Is this news true?

Too true alas, unfortunate she the while,
Unfortunate we, unfortunate all the Isle.

Never gave Fate then a greater document,
If the fair Bellinda be to die,
No beauty's proof against death and calamity --
But this comes of dissembling, and now I see
That Falsehood and Dissembling are but twins,
And where the one ends, the^ other but begins.

OWelcom, welcome, and in this general dismay,
Tell us, since Love so gentle was of old,
As w'ar by Ancient Sages told,
Whence is it, that to day
He so tyrannical and cruel proves?

That Is Fortunes fault, and none of Love's, -- for know,
Love and Death of the way once meeting,
Having passed a friendly greeting,
Sleep their weary ey-lids closing,
Lay them down themselves reposing;
When this Fortune did befall um,
Which after did so much apall 'um:
Love whom diverse cares molested,
Could not sleep, but whilst Death rested,
All in have away he posts him,
But his have full dearly costs him;
For it chanced that going to sleeping,
Both had given their darts in keeping
Unto Night, who, Errors mother,
Blindly knowing not the one from the other,
Gave Love Death's, and never perceived it,
Whilst as blindly Love received it;
Since which time, their darts confounding,
Love now kills, instead of wounding,
Death our hearts with sweetness filling,
Gently wounds, instead of killing.

Next, pray tell us with what fire
Our breasts are charged, that our desire
And hearts so vehemently should move
Toward the Object of our Love?

That speculation is more high,
And deeper the Philosophy;
Know, that from the Impulsion
Of self-divided things does come,
Which separated, are in pain
To reunite and join again,
As branches we asunder bend,
Forcibly again toward one another tend;
For Nature did both sexes knit*
At first in one Hermaphrodit,
Till finding by conjunction so near,
Both but more dull, and more unactive were
To edge their Appetite again
She severed and dis-joyned them,
Whence does proceed that gentle pain,
And longing appetite to conjoyn again.

BEllinda to dye!
O ye just gods, whom yet I will not blame,
Nor asperse with foul imputation and stain
Of such a horrid crime, till she be dead;
And then though you shower down all your punishments
And plauges upon my head,
I Will say 'twas cruelly and unjustly done.

O Heaven and Earth!
Why does not to one sink under me? and the other
Fall on my cursed head, am guilty of
Bellinda's death? but yet it is needless too,
For though they both
forbear to punish me, I do so loath
My ha^ed life for it, I Will die in spite of them,
If flames, or steel, or precipices have any force
To take away a life.

To be conducted by Love only to Hope,
And have only a glimpse of Hope to light
Me to despair! if this be to Love and Hope,
Happy who hate, and those who desperate are.

To have sought her only to find her false!
And found her, only to be the loss of her!

Cruel Fortune thus to have lifted me up,
Only to throw me more violently down again.

But I dally and trifle, a friendly Sword
Might do me a pleasure now; and see in happy time
Euphanes who for need could help me.

Art thou there murderer? complete thy wickedness then
And take my life too, Bellinda's but half dead yet;
When thou have slain me, thou shall find the other half
Here panting in my Bosom.

I prithee spare
Thy reproaches Euphanes, and do not add
Affliction to Affliction; have more humanity
Than to wound a dying man: know I am more
Miserable already than Miseries self
Can make me, or thou thy self could wish.
Bellinda's murderer?

Yet killing of me thou might add unto thy crime.

But it would take from thine
By killing me*

If thou know no better way
To die, than by my hand, I wish thee no
Greater punishment than still to live:
The Sword is Angers weapon, faint-hearted Coward,
Grief has a keener one, if thou can find it out.

Thou advisest well, a single death
Suffices not for Philanders crime indeed,
And I shall but redouble it, by seeing of her die.

THat a Nymph so fair and young
Should rush thus voluntarily upon
A sacrilegious Oath, and so incur
Her own destruction, 's a folly and rashness to
Be expiated equally with a prodigy. --
Go let a Sacrifice presently be prepared,
IN appease the angry Deity.

Too much of Blood
We have already, the water of mine Eyes
Shall furnish out the rest of sacrifice;
As who is so hard-hearted, so avaritious
Of sorrow and grief, he would not spare a tear
From all calamities, to spend it here?
But see Euphanes. Now still and still
Do You persever ill-advised Youth to love,
Where you are not loved, and prefer Bellinda's
Falsehood to Philena's Truth?

Thy heart then never by experience it seems did prove,
Only to love where we are beloved again
Is bargain, and not Love, --
And what, silly Nymph, avails it you
Toward the obtaining of Euphanes love, that Bellinda's false,
Who but collects from thence, no woman can be true?

Bring forth our sable robes, and let
The Executioner with the fatal Ax
Be ready against the hour expires.

Behold'um here.

Then whilst we vest us all in solemn black,
Let Music make a Funeral doleful moan,
For her, whose sad disaster moves the very Rocks
Unto compassion.

VVO to what we virtuous call,
Woe to fair and sweet withal,
Since she must dye who was 'um all.
Let 'um seek in all their story
They shall find she was their glory,
Oh! what heart then is not sorry?
Come Music with thy doleful tones,
Come Sorrow with thy sighs and groans,
And assist our grievous moans.
Since all love had of sweet and fair,
All the world of good and rare,
Is to perish now with her.

ROom, room before there.

She comes, she comes; now to declare
A Resolution great as its causes are,
Dare thou Philander, when her death we see,
Resolve to die with me?

For my resolve Euphanes, never fear,
I will not say to die with you, but her.

Now unveil her, whilst thus it is with pain,
O open the port of speech,
Shortly by deaths hand to be closed up again.

Ha! what means this deadly Tragic spectacle,
This Funeral Livery, and those bloody Ensigns of cruel
And abhorred death! is there any thing can be
In Philanders presence able to frighten me? --

How Is this?

Ha! he unkindly reject me,
Nay then away with all
These deadly preparations,
The shadows of death it self,
The Axe and the Executioner too,
For one unkind look of Philander's
Can kill me sooner than all the rest can do.

Thy Falsehood Nymph makes him behold thee so,
Occasioning all this affliction and woe,
To swear thou lov'dst one here, betrothed before
Unto another.

And what else should I swear,
Beholding my betrothed Philander here?
When passing along to take the sacred Oath
And hearing of his voice amid'st the Throng
I glanced mine eyes aside,
And instantly espied
My dear Philander, For Lovers are quick sighted,
Though Love be blind.

Error of Humane minds.
How were we all deceived then.

Strange, but so it is in Religious minds,
Still in high contemplation
Error of humane things is often found,
As those who most do contemplate the Stars
Do soonest fall to ground.

But that I of all men should be so deceived?
Knowing my Bellinda so well, is an Error I
Shall never pardon in my self, nor do I know
Dearest whe'r thou can ever pardon or no.

Well, well.

See how she sweetly nods, and smiling
Out the rest does seem to say,
Well, well Philander, I Will be jealous another day.

Away with these doleful preparations then,
And resume your former joyful ones again.

Ugh, ugh, ugh,
I have lost the best Wife, the best wife,
As ever poor Husband had -- But soft what this?
Alive again! and in another Arms!
How comes this about? this is fine geer I faith.

Why thou perpetual Doult,
Thou unconscionable Ass Thou; make People
Kill themselves with laughing at thee, If she'ave
^
Philander's, both before she arrived here,
And since, and now, when should she be thy Wife
I prithee?

Why even when she pleases,
I am ready for my part.

I dare swear thou art for any one.

See how hand in hand,
These happy Lovers stand,
So lost in joy for their escape from death,
As yet they do not know,
Whether they live, or no*
Mean time you may perceive
By their ey-beams twisted, their fixed regards,
Their unmovable posture, and their minds surprise,
There Is nothing glews so fast as Lovers eyes.

O happy pair!
Now safely to your Port arrived are;
Happy whose former suff'rance and annoy,
Does now but heighten more your present joy;
Happy, who after you have so long
On Fortunes rough tempestuous Seas been tossed,
May truly say, y'ad been lost indeed,
Unless you had been lost.

Oh my dearest, and don't my eyes deceive me?

My dearest, dearest heart,
Come, come, let us go, and take from Love,
And Fortune both, the power they had before,
Of making us ever miserable more;
For yet some farther proof there needs, and some
More true and real joy, to let us know,
Whe'r that w'enjoy be real, true, or no.

Lead on unto the Temple then,
There to conjoyn them by Hymen's sacred hands
In eternal, and unseparable bands,
And as unto the Temple they pass along,
Let the Chorus sing aloud their Nuptial Song,

ALL the joys that unto heart,
Heaven and Earth did ever impart,
All the pleasures that the Spring,
Or Love, to Youth did ever bring,
All contentments too, that ever
Yet in any's bosom were,
With a Ravishment to boat,
At all parts answerable to it;
May blessed Hymen all, and more
In these Lovers bosoms store,
Till satiat with it, they may cry,
To pitious heaven,'t would let 'um die,
And to a better life translate 'um,
Where joys, pleasures, contents ne' tiate 'um.

And will not you go along?

No Flamette, to a heart
And pallat so sad and so out of taste as mine,
No Music, no Feast can relish, and the sight
Of others wealth and happiness, would but make me
More sensible of mine own poverty and misery;
Let them abound with happiness then, and surfeit with
Deliciousness, I envy not their fortunes,
But pity and lament my own.

Excellent sweetness! Heaven's my witness I
Heartily pity her.

But see where Euphanes stands, turned musing Statua*
Who knows but now may be the fittest time
To move my Suit again? to love beyond
The possibility of enjoying, is Hope
Too far stretched beyond the end of Love;
I Will try then, now Bellinda's love
Is probably extinct in him, whether Philena's yet
Have any flame to enkindle it again, --
Euphanes --

Hence troublesome and importune, --
Out of how profound a slumber, and sweet
Reverie has she awaked me, whilst I imagined
With grateful Error, Philander's happiness
Might possibly have been mine own, had Love
And Fortune pleased, -- the more fool I the whilst,
Who with these fancied joys, and imaginary wealth,
But feed my Thoughts, whilst I am starved my self.

Cruel and pittyless! Is this then all the thanks,
And reward I have, for preferring thy Loves
Interest to my own? and betraying mine own
Love, in pleading for thee to Bellinda
Against my self?

And what is the effect of it?

The ungrateful only judge by the Event,
The Grateful by the Act and the Intent;
Thy face belies thy heart, for that is gentle,
And full of Love; but with my heart now what
Shall I do, since thou, whose it is, reject'st it?
Would I could gratify thee with it any ways,
Though I tore it out of my bosom.

Prithee
If thou't gratify me, let me never see thee more.

And so perhaps (cruel as thou art,)
Thou never shall't;
My mind condenses with multitude of thoughts
I feel transporting me to somewhat high and brave --
Let Us see; -- but for that which we approve our selves,
And cannot b' approved by others until 't be done,
There needs but small deliberation. --
Flamette, a word with thee.

FLamette,
Thou know the secrets of every herb and plant,
And nothing's in Nature so hidden and abstruse,
Thou penetrat'st not with thy skill; Amongst the rest,
I remember the other day,
Feeding thy Flocks in the pasture there below,
And spying suddenly one of thy tender Lambs
All-trembling, stretching out its fainting limbs,
And closing its dying eyes, thou straight cryedst out
A venumous herb had poisoned it, and bidst
Lycisca bear him to the River with all speed,
And drive thy Flocks from thence. --

It Is true; -- and what of this?

Nothing, but the seeing these wondrous effects,
Gives me a curiosity to learn of thee
A little of thy skill; and to know what herb it is
That works so by surprise, it steals away
A Life so insensibly, one scarce perceives it, --
A friendly office it might do to some,
Who weary of living* fear not so much to die,
As the pains devancing death --

Take heed Philena,
This is a Curiosity more dangerous
Than knowing the cheats of Gaming, by how much life
Is more precious than coin, -- and those
Who know these tricks, it is feared at need will use 'um.

Thou art deceived, they would rather know them to
Avoid them; therefore I prithee tell me
What herb 'twas.

If you desire, as you say, to learn my skill,
I Will teach you the natures of a hundred
More soveraignly virtuous.

Malicious wench!
That wilt not understand me.

I fear I understand you but too well.

Must I be put to it then,
To discover a secret to thee that concerns
My life so nearly?

I, that is it I fear.

Yet why should I dissemble?
Dissimulation is child of Fear,
And how fearless are those who are resolved to die,
Not only of those lesser Tyrants, Want,
And Misery, but of those greater, Love,
And Fortune, of whom now I q^it all my fears,
Being Deaths subject, and no longer theirs --
Know then since thou't needs know it, aweary of
Repulse upon repulse, aweary of
Euphanes scorns, and finally aweary of
^y wretched being, I am resolved to die.

^h! far from so gentle a bosom be
o cruel thought.

^hey are rather cruel would divert me from't;
^ruel as those would keep poor wretches still
upon the Torture, rather than dispatch their pain,

^ut do you know what it is to die?

I know what it is to sleep; the afflicted'st ease,
Repose of the weary, comfort of the distressed,
When all our troubles, all our cares do cease;
And sleep, and death; but in the length, and the
Continuance nothing differ, so as deferring
My death, thou but defer'st my happiness,
For know Flame^te when life is misery,
it is hapiness to die.

You talk the while
As if all were fabulous of the other world,
Furies there were none, nothing
Their Torments, and no
Gods to punish those Impiously leave
There stations here on Earth ever they command.

Troublesome ignorance; those who understand
Their Language, the Gods perpetually command:
So when we virtue eagerly pursue,
They bid go on, when we abstain from ill
By repentance or avoidance, it is they who still
Recall us, or prohibit us, and finally*
When we feel in us a desire to leave this life,
it is they infallibly command us for to die.

But consider --

Prithee no more consideration; Flamette I ask help,
Not counsel of thee, wo't do
What I desire?

I Will see.

Nay, who give us doubtful help,
Do but deny us in necessity;
Say It shall be done, yet that is too slow, prithee say
it is done.

Since bootless it is to deny you, I Will but run
To the mead, and instantly be here again.

Thou shall find me in the Cipress grove --
So now my minds at ease, and it rejoices me
To think how I shall triumph over Love
And Fortune, yet o'r Love for Euphanes sake
I Will do it more gently, and not insult too much; but o'r Fortune
I Will march in state, while she to her despite shall ^ee't
How I Am above her, now tramples me under feet. --
But stay, being to divest me of this life;
And strait to die, it is requisite I make
My latest Legacy; first then my sufferance I bequeath
To desperate Lovers, my constancy to death,
My sighs to the winds, to the ocean my tears,
To Bellinda my hop'd-for joys,
To Fuphanes my memory; and lastly, my hopes and fears
^o those would live in longer misery;
Philena will not; for the rest,
All other passions die with us, only Love
Accompanies us to the blessed Mansions above.

Just like a Dog with his mouth watering at
A Frumetty pot had scalded his chops before,
I look after these Wenches now, who ar all too hot for me;
Besides, that which keeps me most in aw,
Is the inkling I have of an odd punishment they have here,
To marry unruly Youngsters to old women, just
Like Dogs no^es, beyond all possibility
Of ever heating 'um, and this they call forsooth
Mortification, in the Devils name,
A good cooler for him, but too cool for me.
But see where my quondam wife comes here with her Gallant,
Who took her from me, my stomach rises at him, --
Scurvy fellow, -- none but my wife serve his turn? --
A little thing would make me bumbast him, --
If I thought he would not bumbast me again.

NAy I could tell you too
A hundred other stories, as how the Cabin,
Wherein y'ad enclosed me from seeing
The danger of the storm, by a violent wave
Being washed away, and driven here on shore,
I ever since have only sustained my life,
With expectation of your arrival here;
My dreams, the faint shadows of our waking thoughts,
And oftentimes obscure representations
Of future Events, being so favorable still,
To promise me that happiness, and your life,
Til at last, wearied out with long expectancy,
And my six months Residence here almost expired,
I took resolution to abjure the Isle,
And depart in search of you, just as you arived here, --
Mean time, I Will warrant ye, you never thought of me?

Alas! no sooner I saw
Your danger, and was of the point
(Had I not violently been withheld)
To cast my self after you into the Sea,
But Pirates making toward us
All resistless took us Captives, we paying so
At expense of our Liberties the Ransom of our Lives,
So straightly guarded the whilst, as till the other day
I was released, (I as soon could tell
To send to the other world, as well
As when you were) when repairing to
The Oracle, by its directions I found you out --
But tell me,
How have you past your time here ever since?
And pray, who is that Philena and that Euphanes
You Have contracted so straight an Amity withal?

O you are jealous ar ye? -- I could find in my heart I faith
To defer answering you, til I had informed my self
What Mistresses you have had since I saw you last --
But not to hold you longer in suspense,
Know that Philena is a noble Nymph
Of Cypres here who when I was cast on shore
First found me, and hospitably entertained me,
And Euphanes one would needs love me against my Will:
To avoid whose importunity,
I promised if any in the Isle I loved
It should be him; now are you satisfied?
Or shall I bring you all Cypres to testify
How like a Salamander midst of other flames,
To all their admirations, I have still lived here as cold as Ice,
And yet you are jealous?

Not jealous sweet, but so covetous of the dear
Treasure I Have in thy Love, as I confess
When thon prayest in the Temple to the Gods above,
I even do grudge 'um part of it.

Fie, to those who have given't you all?
That is too much Philander, -- but oh my dear
What would I have given a few days since for
The happiness I now enjoy, to which,
Through how many miseries have I past?

That, dearest, is it that gives our present joys
The sweeter taste and relish, none being more
Happy than those were miserable before;
But who are these come here?

Some neighbor Swains it seems,
Who in kind expressions of their loves, are come
To present us with some Pastoral show, or Rural masque.

WE, whose due Affections move
Us to congratulate your Love,
Are come in Dance, to personate
The Emblem of a Lovers state;
As how wavering 'twixt Hopes and Fears
He stands distracted, till appears
The Mistress of his soul and mind
To's love propitiously inclined,
When Hopes and Fears no more annoy,
But are converted all to Joy.

Can Joy be never sincere, but still some grief
Be intermixed, to bitter all its sweets?
And is there nothing permanent here below,
But all, like the Sea, perpetually must ebb and flow?
Away with all light jollity then, and lets
With heavy sorrow prepare to weep again.

Alas! for what?

For poor Philena, who yonder lies
A dying, or rather by this time dead,
The lamentablest spectacle was ever exhibited
On Fortun's Theater!

Alack! alack, the woeful day!

Nay, nay, draw nigh,
Know you that hand? read there,
Cruel as thou art, if thou can without a tear,
And when the ast read it, thou must have a heart of stone
Or rather none at all, if it be not mollified with it,
By Philena's own hand writ 'twixt tears and blood,
Who, after thrice she had cried out on Euphanes
Name, -- as if it were he, cruel he alone that killed her,
Poor Gentle soul she dyed.

Cruel, barbarous Euphanes,
Nursed sure with Tigers milk, if a Tigers self
Were not the Damm of thee.

What writes she here?
-- Hum!

Now triumph in your victory,
And glory in your triumph, to have slain
An innocent Nymph, with scorn and with disdain,
So great a glory to ye, as Euphanes name
Amongst Nymphs and Virgins shall ever be the mark
Of infamy and shame, to shoot their hatreds at.

But why defer we to seek her out, and see
If possibly there may be any remedy yet
To save her life?

I am awaked
By their reproaches, but much more
By somewhat here within, now lets me see
I was to blame to use her so cruelly,
And now I perceive, for all our corporal and
External sight, we nothing see, till Heaven
Do give our souls within Internal light --
And art thou dead for me, for me?
O extremity of love, beyond even life it self --
And shall I nothing do for thee again?
I, it shall be so, thou'st got the start
Of honor of me, but I may overtake thee yet.

NOt so fast I pray,
H'ad like to overthrown me,
And I Am little better than overthrown already -- for
No Wenches! no Wenches! for love nor money;
It Is a hard case, this you will say -- but I Am
Well enough served, I longed for change of^ Pasture,
And see what is come on it,
I shall return home again nothing
But skin and bones -- but no flesh at all to be got --
But soft, what is this? --
What another Moppet?
They shall catch me no more I Will warrant 'um,
They know what baits to lay for me it seems,
And would make a Gudgeon of me,
But I Will watch 'um well enough for that.

A Nymph slain in our woods!
Unheard of prodigy, there are no savage beasts
And much less men so savage and barbarous
To violate the lives and Honors of our Nymphs --
Stay, is not that she there? alas it is
Too true, behold Philena dead --

Hum Philena, it is a strange case this
One cannot know the Mopets from the Wenches here,
They are all so dead and spiritless.

Stay! who is that
Stands suspitiously there, is it not he has murdered her?

Ceaze on him, and till he can acquit himself
Of the crime, let him stand charged with it.

Ah! now I Am paid
For my following of Wenches,
No warning, no warning would serve my turn,
And see what comes on it*
Now if I be hanged, what a goodly exhortation
Shall I make, with an -- oh good people,
Let all young men take warning by me; for
This comes of following of Wenches,
I Have been a wicked liver in my days,
And one of the greatest Wenchers -- and
See what't has brought me to,
The Gallows, a wry-mouth, a neck as long
As a Cranes, and so with a thump on the breast,
There'll be an end of Pamphilus.

I, Here she is --
Rest gentle soul, and may naught heavy lie
Upon thee, to press thee to the shades beneath,
But ever in the Elizian fields, among
The blessed Quires o^ Lovers, may thou be honored, and
Adored as Love's Martyr, and in his Calendar
Be ever recorded as a Rubrique Saint;
Mean time, upon thy Anniversary day,
Each year, we'll pay our vows unto thy Tomb,
And to the King and Queen of Shades erect
Two grassie Altars, whereon we will offer our
Libations every year, so as all living Lovers
Envying thee, shall wish them dead to have the like
Obsequies; and lastly, we will
Inscribe an Epitaph on thy Sepulcher,
In reading which, all passing by shall know,
A gentler soul walks not in the shades below.

Room, room, for the most concerned
In this Catastrophe -- Fair sweetest f^ower,
By rigid Winter of Euphanes frowns and scorns
Untimely dead, what parentations
Shall wretched Euphanes use now, to appease
Thy angry Ghost?
And with what sad Libations shall I invoke
Thy blessed Manes? take here this hair of mine
I offer on thy Tomb; and fairest soul,
For ever wayl'd, for ever pitty'd, if
Thou't deign to look upon me from the Groves
Of fair Elysium, behold, behold
E^phanes so strangely metamorphosed
Who living loved thee not, he now loves thee dead,
Thus ready with his life to expiat the crime
Which he committed, in being the loss of thine.

Hold, hold, and know
Philena is not dead.

We trifle both, -- away.

I adjure the sacred deity
She is not, but only by my Art entranced,
So deceiving and deluding her despair;
In witness often, besprinkle but her face
With water, and you will see she will instantly return to (...) again

Nay, if water may revive her, no other than my tears
Shall have the honor often,
And if those will not do it,
I Will let out all my blood on her to boot.

Oh! happy we if this be so.

See, see, she begins to stir already.

Marry and I Am glad on it, for I began to stink
With the fright they put me in.

^a! where am I? in Hell I cannot be
^ince Euphanes who is my Heaven is here with me,
Nor can I be in Heaven, until I know
Whe'r Euphanes will be kind to me or no*

Alas, alas, it is I rather my dear Philena am
In Hell until I know
Whe'r thou can forgive my unkindnes to thee or no.

Nay, if it only does depends on that,
There is no fear, I can resolve thee strait,
W'ar both in Heaven Euphanes since for me,
I do desire no greate^ Heaven than thee.

^oy unto both, and joy then to us all
In the accession to our Festival,
Of The glad conjunction of his happy pair,
^'th' joy of which each has peculiar share;
Let us conduct 'um to their marriage then,
And whilst to the Temple they are going,
Tell 'um this most worth their knowing*
Love that tends but too enjoying
^s satiate soon and easily cloying,
Only that of the Soul still does
Wax perfecter, and more lasting grows*
So we compare those light desires,
Only unto blazing fires,
Whilst these like fire of the Element,
^ast always, and are never spent. --
Now what will Bellinda and Philander do?

For us here, where we have found our happiness,
We are resolved, better to conserve it, even to remain,
And exchange our native Country for this happy soil.

Beshrew me so wo'n't I,
For I Have enough on it, if there be no Wenches here to be had;
Perhaps I may come here again when I Am old,
And have a mind to be good.

Mean time who put off goodness to old age, are just like those
Who defer their Creditors till all their moneys spent.

For you,
What should we say then for Conclusion,
But you are most welcome to Lov^'s Dominion.

You Are most welcome to Love's Dominion.


