You Would have new Plays, and when you have them, you
Do by them, as Children by their Trifles do,
Slight and dislike them, and then cry for more,
And use them just as you did those before:
And this you think fine sport now, so do'nt they,
(I tell ye Gentlemen) who make the Play.
Notwithstanding, our Author gives you one
this once, and comes with resolution,
To try whether or no, to be a Disease
That reigns amongst you, no new Plays can please.
And if he find it so, he bid me say,
All the harm they will do him who condemn his Play;
They Will bring him off oth' Stage, into the Pit,
To judge with them, of others Plays and wit
To others this. But to Your Majesty,
Our Author here with all humility,
Offers his Labors: chiefly he' underwent,
Most Royal Sir, for Your Divertisement.
Counting it highest Happiness can be fall,
To delight Him, who is the Delight of all.

NOble Leontius, once more you are kindly welcome to Missena. The many
civilities and courtesies I received from you at Argos, obliges me to all the
fair offices and services I can do you here


Gentle Anthenor, all I cod do to oblige a person of your worth, was abundantly
rewarded in the doing it, and if you would oblige me speak no more of it: let us
talk of somewhat else. -- We hear Cleander your noble General in the Attique
War, with victory leading him, and fortune following him, goes on like
lightning consuming all before him, and it is much wondered that employment, was
not rather conferred upon the Prince, who wants nor years, nor experience in
the wars, to make him fit for action; but necessity of state (it seems)
required an older, and more experienced Soldier


Betwixt you and I I Will tell you, those who not only look upon the outside of
Princes actions, but boldly pry into their insides too, say, it was not so much
necessity of state that sent the brave Cleander to the wars, as more to
facilitate the Dukes access unto his Lady the admired Erminia --. But how does
your fair Princess Cyrena? that we may freely talk of; it was our hope the
Prince at's being at Argos should have married her, but the destinies of marriage
were not pleased it seems to make us so happy


It was our hopes too, and we indeed wondered as much as you he should so suddenly
leave her, but much more, she should so suddenly after leave her country, since
when none knows, nor can imagine, what is become of her


You amaze me with your news!


Mean time whilst others several ways address themselves in search of her, I Am
come to Missena here, well knowing their former loves and the attraction of
mutual hearts, when once they are touched with the adamant of lov


Alas, I fear you will hardly find so much as her memory with him now, who only
minds the fair Erminia, about whose palace restlesly day and night like some
pale ghost he wanders, carefully seeking opportunity of seeing her, whilst she
as carefully avoids his sight


This then made him it seems with so little difficulty quit his place abroad to
Cleander, in hope to enjoy his place at home. -- And now I see among the many
possibility of things, never were, nor are, nor e're are like to be; we well may
reckon Lovers constancy


But what Youth's this, so fair and lovely, as curious Nature doubtful which
sex to make, at last, in the framing him seems to have made one, who of either
all perfections had


Oh! it is Aurindo the Princes page, much loved and favored by him, but much
more by the Duchess, who to avoid the Dukes jealousy preferred him to the
Prince


He muses on somewhat, and there is a solemn sadness in his face, excellently
becomes him


He is always sad and musing, what ere's the matter: but I must leave you, and
beseech you whilst you make your residence here, I may have honor to serve
you.


You too much honor your servant, Sir.


Now I perceive it is not the change of place but change of mind, brings lovers
rest, else it is but just like sickmens turning them in their beds, who sinde
rest no where, 'cause they carry still their sicknesses and unrest along with
them


Sure I should know that face.


Leontius! I must hide me from him, and avoid his sight as I Would avoid my sears.


It Is she I know for certain now by her care not to be known: -- Hark you fair
Youth, a word with you I pray


With me Sir! pardon me, I know you not.


It rather besits me ask your pardon for knowing you. But fear not, I shall
call you Aurindo still, or whatsoever name in public you please to be known
by, so you will give me leave in private to know you for my Princess


Leontius though you might well perceive I desired not to be known, and
therefore it was a bold curiosity; yet since I Am well assured you did it with no
undutiful intent, I pardon you. But I command you let this secret pass no
further, neither enquire the reason of my disguise. Whilst I am here (which I
hope shall not be long) in private you may know me; but in public I charge you
take no notice of me, neither be seen with me lest you discover me; for your
court eyes are piercing ones, and there are many spies, -- and hark I hear some
coming, go, begone and leave me.


What is it only she! this is Althea Erminia's woman, who I know not for what
sins of mine, unless for loving too much, is fearfully in love with me; deliver
me from her, for love in aged veins, as fire in dry timber, burns always most
terribly. I Would fain avoid her, she persecutes me worse then frosts do flowers,
they blast, or Ivy, trees, they kill, with their embraces


Gentle Aurindo! happily met, it is so long since I saw you last I might well
expect the courtesy of a salute from you


Oh -- I were discourteous else: good Althea I Am glad to see you well.


What no more! and that so coldly too.


What wod you have? I know no other salutes.


You are not so ignorant as you would seem, I Am sure, to know no better what
salutes belongs to a Gentlewoman


You would not have me make you a curtsy wod you? that is your woman's salute,
for men's I know no other


Pity his ignorance; I Will teach you if you know not; sie, where have you been
bred I wonder! you are so bashful! I must imbolden you: this bashfulness in you,
shows worse then impudence in woman; how nice and coy he is? it will cost me
more pains and labor I fear to train him up to women's businesses, then to
break a wild unruly Colt unto the manage: come, come, pray sit down


Pardon me, I Am in haste and cannot stay.


Always in haste! but tarry a little and I Will tell you all my Ladies secrets.


I Am not curious.


Look you what is here -- nor liquorish neither? h'as nothing of the Page in him.


Pray let me go, you have not seen my Lord the Prince?


Yes but I have though.


And where I pray?


Where you are not like to see him, let that suffice.


Nay, if you can tell me no more news of him, I must go seek out those that
can, and so farewell.


Gone? well, I pity him he is such a backward thing, and pity the Prince who is
as forward on the other side; and one of these sighing lovers who sigh and sigh
like dry pumps, or broken-winded bellows, for their Mistresses; and to hear
them, you would never wonder at Lapland witches selling winds so cheap, and
imbrakt (as he is) in my Lady love; I Have sold him as much as comes to a little
hope, send him a good voyage of it -- but see my Lady, pray heaven my plot
take, I Have venter'd hard to give the Prince entrance, and opportunity to speak
with her


Althea are all the doors shut?


They are Madam.


And have you given order they let none enter?


I have.


It Is well. So should wives live, honorable wives, solitary and retired when
their husbands are away, always apprehending what will the people say; for it is
not now with women as it was in the days of Innocence, when none imagined harm,
'cause none did any; but now if we admit men's visits, they presently speak ill
of it; if women's ill too, ill of every thing: and though public rumor be but a
breath it is true, yet fame and honor is so pure a thing, as like crystal
mirrors it is blemished with every breath, and more pure, more subject to
blemishing


The more's the pity.


Then if they stir abroad, the world's so foul and durty, how nicely one must
go, and step by step pick out their way, not to defile their Ermine purity


Lo there? and I go dash, dash, through thick and thin. that is my way now.


Besides, how softly and warily must they tread, not to awaken rumor and
calumny, which once fastening on our fames and honors, oh how they tear them
with their poisonous teeth


What a terrible bandog does she make of it which other Ladies play with, as
familiarly as with their little Shocks or Bononi^ Dogs


In fine, this fame's a hard lesson, and one must study it well. --


Faith it is so hard as I despair


Is the wench mad?


No, but we should think that woman so should pine away, and starve her self in her
husbands absence; and this is just your case: uds bodykins before I Would torment
my self so for want of a husband, I Would have twenty so I would


Peace Althea, peace for shame, and cease thy idle talk.


Pardon me, Madam, I am left in charge of your health, and must speak.


Speak modestly then, for I am left in charge of my honor too, and must do
that, it obliges me to do: nor shall Cleander purchase more honor abroad, then
Erminia shall at home


That man never gets honor (nor woman that is never tried: what made Penelope
(neither) so famous (I pray) in her husbands absence, but her entertaining so
many Gallants as she did? there was a valiant woman now. Let them come as many
as they wod, she feared them not, she knew she cod deal with them all. And you
to lock up your self (a this manner) for fear of them! there is wise valor
indeed


As though there were not as much valor, in Passive Fortitude, and holding out
a siege, against the enemy, as in the Active one, of fighting them in the
field. The one is Cleander's honor, the other shall be mine. In either we will
declare our selves invincible


I grant you a man's honor chiefly consists in sighting, and a woman's in
defending her chastity; but there is discretion in all things; a man may fight
and fight, and yet be counted a quarrelsom Coxcomb for his pains: and a woman
proud and peevish, in defending her chastity: give me a fair conditioned man or
woman 'long as you live; and one, that understands reason. I cannot blame young
maids to have always for burden of their song, a husband, a husband, for they
never tried, and therefore may long perhaps; but for married wives to be
always in that tone, and crying out for their husbands, like fools and
children for their baubles, shows a kind of incontinence, and insatiate desire
in them


Cleander was my first love, and shall be the last and only one I Will ever have.


That shows your ignorance now; for as that man should never be a great scholar
who never red but in onebook, so should she never be a wise woman, who never knew
but one man. Variety is good in every thing; and use in that, as in all things
else makes perfectness


Well Althea, I know you say this by way of argument now, and only to try your
wit; but take heed, it is dangerous disputing against known verities; and
Atheism in Religion, Rebellion in States, and dissolution in life and manners,
had all their rise at first from knowing the best, and arguing for the worst


Well then, since you will needs be so far out of fashion of other wives, to
remember your husband in's absence; how can you better do it then by
recommending him in your Orasons to the Gods? and my Lord Cleander being now
exposed to the dangerous chance of war, towhom can you better recommend him,
then to the God of war


Now thou advisest well.


Great Mars, thou whose potent Arm does weild
The deadly pointed Lance, and mighty Shield,
Fight for my dear Cleander with the one,
And with the other, O defend him from
His enemies abroad, and grant that he
May safely but return with victory:
So shall I ever honor thee, ever pay
My vows unto thee; and on thy Altars lay
The purest offerings the world e're cod get,
Or e're were laid upon thy Altars yet.
Hear me great Mars.
I do.


Prodigious! the Statue speaks!


It Is you, fairest, have animated it.


A good beginning, if it hold on as well.


Cold horror seizes me! and I Am become by wondrous metamorphose, of living, a
dead statue, as that of dead's become a living one. -- And see it moves too!


It Is your beauty, fairest, has given me life and motion; and if in the cold
veins of frozen marble t'has the virtuous force to inspire and infuse such
spirit and vital heat, imagine in my bosom what it must needs beget.


Ha! my Lord the Prince!


The Prince your servant, dearest, for you metamorphos'd into statue thus, for
you, thus changed into my self again


Stay Madam, whither go you? he will not hurt you.


Gods and my better Angels defend me! how came you here?


Your powerful charms, sweetest, did bring me hither.


That Is well answered, I was afraid he would have said it was I


And what wod you here?


Only that you would please to hear me speak.


Though I might well deny you, coming as you do, yet on condition you speak
nothing but what is honorable, nothing but what besits both you to say, and me
to hear, I am content


Shame on this Honor, I Am afear'd he will hardly speed.


What can be more honorable? or how can I honor you more? then to come here
with no less devotion, then to the Temple of the Immortal Gods, to offer my
vows and orasons at your shrine


That Is an Idolatry I cannot admit without a crime, an honor too too great and
too divine for me


To com to that which is more humane then, I come to beg your help for one
that is sick, your pity for a miserable wretch, burns, languishes, and consumes
away, for love of you


Nay, if you talk of love once, I Am gone.


And if you go I dye: -- of what should I talk but of love to you? who are all
lovely? Cruel as you are, can ye behold my sufferings and never pity me! should
Heaven be so pittiless, always to look upon the Earth with cruel Canicular
eyes, we soon should see all burn, languish, and consume like me


You call me cruel, and you your self are far more cruel to your self then I;
for what remedy for one, will needs be sick? or what means to quench their
fires will needs Nero-like, be their own incendaries? But now, to let you see
I Am not so pittiless as you imagine me, If It be my sight occasions your malady,
and inflames you so, I Will instantly be gone and leave you


Ah do not, do not go; that were a remedy worse then the disease. Think not,
think not excellents of your sex to quench the fire you have kindled in my breast
by taking away the Torch that kindled it; that were to mock my flame and me.
No, no, your Eyes have double virtue, to wound and cure me too


It Is vice not virtue to kindle unlawful fires. Know Sir, I am another: and as
it were crime in me to give away what is none of mine, so it is no less in you to
covet what is none of yours


It Is crime in Cleander rather to appropriate to himself an universal good, and
injustice in you to consent unto the impoverishing the world to enrich
Cleander's bed


And you would steal me from him. Is this noble? this Prince-like? do you not
see one may as well bereave you of your principality


I may taste the fruit and yet not be proprietary of the Tree.


Without theft you cannot, unless the owner will; and I Am so absolutely
Cleanders, he cannot alienate me though he wod, nor relinquish his right of me.


O Madam, Madam!


Ha! what is the matter?


My Lord the Duke.


What shall we do then? My Lord, you see what dishonor you are like to bring
upon my house and me, if you be seen here


To your disguize my Lord; be a statue again, and all will be well: nay quickly,
quickly, so


What Is here? silence; where Fame's loudest tongue proclaims all Excellency?
and solitude, where she is, who with fames of her excellence fills all the
world? leave, leave this sadness Madam: I come to bring you joyful news.
Cleander your noble husband has finished the wars, and only attends dispatch
of a few affairs, to return and bring us peace, and you the joy and happiness
of seeing him


Your Highness too much honors your humblest servant, to be messenger of this
your self. Propitious heaven has heard my prayers for the public safety then
I see, if Cleander but return with victory


And I hope You Will have some care of my private safety too, fair cruel Mistress,
and not suffer me to perish here at home, whilst Cleander so nobly abroad,
preserves us all from perishing


Can you remember that my Lord, and be so unjust and ungrateful to him, to seek
to dishonor him, who honors you so much; and tempt me to so vilde ingratitude


Dishonor is but the blasting of public breath let us be private only in what
we do, and there is no fear of that


Whilst there is heaven and conscience, there' no privacy for sin.


there is no greater sin then uncharitablenes and want of love, and of that
you are highly guilty Erminia. Think on it, and though it be Empire to be
beautiful, yet Majesty and Beauty share Empire equally betwixt them, and
remember I Am your Prince


I do my Lord, and wod your Highness did but remember't too, and the mighty
obligation Princes have to be good and virtuous; who are to give example of
goodness, and virtue unto all. Princes are public fountains, from whose manners
all others are derived; and if they be infected once, a general infection
necessarily follows: -- and is this the example you give the Prince your Son


Pho! he sees it not, and hears not of it.


But statues, have ears, and eyes.


Will she discover me?


What will become of this? I must find out some means to send him hence, or
he will mar all.


Come, now we are alone, I must tell you, modesty's a habit Ladies wear in
public, and it becomes them well: but in private they always lay't aside, and
so should you. And if you would know the difference 'twixt the modest and immodest,
it is only this; the one puts off their modesties with their clothes, the other
before, that is all


I Will tell you my Lord another difference yet, the modest stop their ears
against such immodest purposes as these, and cannot endure to be where they are
spoke


Stay, you will not leave me, I hope.


I hope you will not force me? should you offer it, the very statues here (I Am
sure) wod stand up in my defense.


Ha!


And see the God of War, in just resentment of the injury you offer to the best
of Warriors, begins to stir in it.


Oh, Madam, Madam!


What news!


My Lords' returned.


Is It possible?


How! without my privity, and unknown it cannot be.


Beseech you my Lord be gone. to me Cleander loves me more then his life I know,
but his honor more then me. Imagine then what storms and tempests the clouds
of jealousy to see you here must raise in his noble mind


I Am so confounded I know not what to say, nor what to do.


So, let him go to's Duchess to cure his lovesick fever; she is young and
handsome and having so good remedy at home, what needs he seek abroad? But for
the Prince, the poor Prince, who is wholly unprovided, in truth it were charity
to help him


Well remembered help, help him away before my Lord comes, by any means.


There Is no fear of that: his coming was only a story feigned by me to send
the Duke away


Nothing else?


Excellent Wench, then I may be my self again.


Hark, what noise is this! clashing of weapons? louder and louder still? there
is some fighting. Althea shut the doors and call up all our servants.


What? hoa, Clinias, Cleobulo.


What should this be? the noise comes from the Garden door where I commanded my
followers to attend me, and let none enter, but make good that passage till my
return. I Will out and see what it is


O Clinias! run, run.


What to do?


No matter for that: run, run I say,


But whither?


More interrogations! no matter for that neither; run, run, as you will answer
it.


Hurry, hurry, hurry, these fellows think no business can be done without noise
and bustle; and I must make a noise and bustle too, They Will think I Am idle else.
Whoo, whoo, whoo


Come come what haste you make now? and all the house is in an uproar.


Therefore I make no more haste, I do not love these uproars and hurly-burlies,
I; but what is the matter can you tell


Nay hang me if I know, or much care either; only if it be any fighting matter,
fight who is list for me, I have no mind unto't


Faith nor I neither; wherefore and't say the word, let us to the cellar, for
that is a Sanctuary; and for reverence of god Bacchus I hope they will respect
it accordingly


Content, but let us make haste then, for I hear some coming.


That sure was the Duke who first went hence, but who those other were, denied
us passage; or he who last came out disguised, and so fiercely assaulted us, I
do not know


But I had known, or searched his heart for it, had they not rescued him. and is
this the so renowned Ermenia? for solitude, in my absence! she sat like
solitary Turtle in absence of its mate: no Anchoress more enclosed, no Recluse
more retired! to whom there is more resort, then ever was to Corinth in ancient
time, when Thais and Phrine were in their prime, those famous prostitutes;
prostituting her Fame and honor, if not her self. -- Thanks to my disguize for
this discovery, in which I thought to have ta'n her by surprise to our greater
joy; but now to my greater grief I Am more surpised my self


Indeed it is passing strange.


But from the witness of these eyes of mine I might not have believed it. Why
this is right Courtesan like: Bravo's disposed at door to let in Customers,
keep their pleasure free and undisturbed; the door's open to all, only debarred
to me, her Husband


Nay now you go too far with your suspicions.


I Will go farther yet, none knows of my arrival but only you; you shall conceal
me, and present me to her as a present sent from me in some disguise, may gain
me not only access into the house, but into her bosom too


Had you not better discover you presently, I do not like this seeking that we
should be loath to find, and hunting with our own curiosities, but our own
disquiets


Our quiets rather, for so knowing for certain what now I but suspect, my mind
will be at rest, imagine else how miserable I should be, to have the marriage bed
poisoned with jealousy, and all its sweets embittered with the thought that
she is false? no, I like not this gentle handling wounds, which till they are
thoroughly searched, can never be thoroughly cured: I am resolved to try. What
e're may chance, of all evils the worst is ignorance


Pray Heavens you find not jealousy a worser yet, for ignorance though it be a
dull disease, yet it is not painful; it is a Lethargy of mind, benums us so, as
though we are sick, we know not how sick we are: but jealousy like the Wolf, or
Vipers brood knaws and tears out their very bowels, who breed it, and give it
food


It Is not to be jealous, but free from jealousy I undertake this trial, and to
take my self off the painful rack of doubt


They make themselves more miserable then they were, who fall from what they
doubt to what they fea


Dispute it no more, I am resolved to try her; and as I find her faith and
Loyalty, away she goes, or else my Jealousy


FIe on these men, let never woman trust them more, for my sake, for they all
are false, as is this Prince, this most perfidious Prince, and all glory in
deceiving them, as he, false as he is, glories in deceiving me. What a lost
thing am I? without a name and being; neither what I was, nor what I am, Cyrena
nor Aurindo: my very thoughts are lost too in the Labyrinth of my self with
thinking on it. -- Here by this fountain side I Will lay me down and try whe'r I
can sleep. if wearied slaves whose bodies are oppressed with heavy burdens,
would be glad to rest; much more wod lovers, whose minds bear about a heavier
weight within, then they without


There there he sleeps, and there does take his rest, for whom I restlesly do
wake; Such was Narcissus, only this more wise, not to behold himself in
mirror of that liquid Crystal Fountain, shuts his eyes. Sleep, sleep fair
youth, for so, I do not see those murdering eyes, that kill me with their sight
yet wake, wake too, for whilst you sleep you take from me the delight I have in
seeing them, and your repose is my tormenting; but that which most of all
torments me, is the strife betwixt desire and shame to let him know my love,
like struggling twins tearing the womb that bears them: nor do I know yet
whether's the greater pain, either to lose my love, or lose my shame, -- I must
find out some way to secure both. Aurindo, Aurindo


Ha! who calls?


It Is I.


The Duchess! your pleasure Madam?


Look in that same Fountain, see if thou can find the portrait there of one
I dearly love


I see nothing Madam.


Thou can not be so blind; or as thou resemblest Cupid the god of Love in
all things else, thou art ambitious perhaps to resemble him in blindness too;
look look well, I see it hither to


I see nothing but my self.


And is that nothing Fool? I must come down my self I see, or thou will never
find it


Now I know what portrait, it is she means, but it is not fit she know it, to
save her shame; from which if you but take away restraint of modesty once, all
other restraints are vain: is there no end? no mean of thy persecution love?
but I must be thus persecuted both actively and passively, thy Quiver and
Arrows both


Now have you found it yet?


No Madam, yet I have sought and sought.


well, you may cease your search, no matter for the portrait, now the original
is so nigh


Where is it? I see it not.


No! run presently to my apartment, fetch my mirror here, and I Will convince
thee to thy face thou do


How crafty and cunning she is, to conceal her love, and to declare it too?


Yet you may stay too, I Will be that glass this once, Look in mine eyes, and
thou shall find it there; look in my face, see if I do not blush


Madam I see no other blushes there, but such as Aurora, such as the blushing
Rose, or Beauty's self would wear


It Is very good, I am glad you are so courtly yet. -- Ay me! what can be secret
in a Lover, when their own blushes, their own loves discover? learn learn
Aurindo, if yet thou do not know, when ever thou hear'st one sighing so, or
see them blush, it is only for Love


What Is that? nothing but affected ignorance can secure me.


Nay, if thou know not, thou can not imagine how delicious a thing it is to
love, and be beloved; nor yet how great a pain it is to love, and not be loved
again


I know it alas! but too too well unto my grief. How she goes driving me


Ha!


Madam my Lord the Duke.


He here!


Never was poor condemned wretch awaiting every hour his execution, more glad
of his reprieve, then I am now of mine


That he should come when I Would half past the shame, which now is wholly to begin
again? -- He looks as he were jealous too, to see us here together


I like not this privacy, but the liberty of reprehension's lost, when we our
selves are guilty once, of that we'd reprehend in others


My Lord I know not whether I should more wonder or rejoice, to see you returned
so soon; you said you went a hunting, and what sudden accident has made you
leave the Chase so soon


Nothing, nothing,


It Is true, and I Am glad you were frustrated as well as I.


I must dissemble O my dearest delight of my delight, joy of my joy, how do I
love your sight? how jealous? how fearful I am of every thing? the ground's too
hard (me thinks) you tread upon, the air not soft enough you breathe; and as
often as any one looks on you, me thinks they usurp a right and privilege
belongs to me alone, -- I mean thee Aurindo.


This is dissembling, and I must dissemble too;


He means Erminia I Am sure.


Hei day! here is brave courtship now; where shall you find a married couple,
and married so long too, so kind and complemental? this in a Gallant to his
Mistress, wod show handsomely now; but in a husband to his wife, looks as
ridiculously as to complement with ones self


I, but there is more in it then so; it is all dissembling, rank dissembling, not
only pieces it out with the Fox's tail, but is all Fox, and stinks; you may
see it plain, for dissimulation whilst it is solicitous to do enough, most
commonly over does; and through its care to conceal its self, but discovers it
self the more


Pray who was this Duchess before he married her?


Why, a Lady he married in second nuptials only for her beauty, the frailer
part of woman. and that which men are soonest cloyed with, which yet she
cunningly seasons so, she keeps him always in fresh appetite; and there is
nothing but my dearest, and my dearest with them


See, see, how the Ladies slock about the Page?


I, this young and handsome is a bait catches women as fast as nux vomica does
crows, and intoxicates them much alike too. The modester sort of them, use men
as they do Lions, play with them when they are young, but grown old once,
they are afeard of them: and if the Page be modest too, let him look to himself,
for they will try what mettle he is made of


Marry, heaven defend!


Fie, fie, you must learn more boldness, this modesty's virtue in the Country,
but vice in the Court; come to our Chambers we will read you a Lecture of it, it is
here, one of the Liberal Sciences


A my conscience he is a Maid still, you may see by's blushing.


Amynter! welcome, welcome brave Soldier, 'twas rumored Cleander was returned;
and now I see 'twas but half false, since you the one half, of him are here, and
where is your other half


Great Sir yet he is not come, but will be shortly here; mean time by these he
kisses your Highness hands, with full information oth' state of your affairs


We Are glad to hear from him, and should be much more glad to see him


I Am sure you would not, nor I neither.


And how does our valiant General


As he does always Sir in time of war, sowing you battles, and reaping you
victories, which now the war's past, and glorious harvest done, he is binding up
in sheaves to bring you home


Let Us see what he writes.


Amynter you are welcome home.


And take my welcome too.


Tyrannous honor! cruel greatness! as if we were great only to be miserable,
and put on state, but to put off our selves; they may converse freely with
Aurindo now, without all fear of this man's talk, and that man's jealousy, no
honor lost: whilst I with all my greatness dare to do that the least I wish
the most. -- Cleora, Olinda, come hither, you were courting Aurindo there, I
saw it well enough: go too, I must, have you more modest, do you se


She Is jealous, Aurindo's company, as severe Mrs. forbid their maids eating
those dainties they reserve for their own tooth and pallat


And how do you find him, ha!


A little bashful Madam, and nothing so bold as Pages are at Court.


You Will soon make him bold enough, if he frequent your company; he has some
secret outlet I fear for his affection, makes him no fuller of it, that
usually overflows in those of his age; for curiosity Cleora observe his haunts,
and let me know, do you hear


I shall Madam.


I as much suspect the Dukes over kindness as his want of it; nor is it so
strange in nature, that so different effects should from the same causes grow


Cleander like a valiant Soldier here recounting his noble actions, writes
modestly of himself, and shuns boast the Cowards valor


h'as learnt that lesson (sir) in the school of war, no language better becomes a
soldiers mouth, then silence of their own praises, who when they once are
their own trumpets, have never that of fames to found them forth; and when from
their high and glorious achievements once they fall so low as boast, the glory
of all their actions is lost


And have you visited Erminia yet?


My duty first performed unto yonr Highness, next is to visit her.


You Have Letters and commends from Cleander to her?


I have my Lord, and amongst the rest am to commend unto her more freedom and
courtship; Cleander dos not like her sad and sullen retirement and solitude


He Is wife in it, it shows him not jealous, which men would else suspect;
besides it more secures him of her: for women commonly most long for that
they are most debarred of, and take the restrain away, their longing ceases. Go,
remember me to her, and tell her we shall shortly visit her


I shall my Lord, -- that is it the train was laid for.


Still eyeing the boy? of such light sparks as those your fires are kindled,
unextinguishably inflame the marriage bed with jealousy. Hark you Anthenor, do
you observe our Duchess, not that we suspect her, but only to preserve her
from suspect; you are wise I know* and understand


So I Have got an office now; sure his Highness takes me to have more wit or less
honestly then I have, that he imployes me in spyery, but I must stretch both a
little now, to serve him


Come my dearest, thus by short intervals we rise from feasts, only to return
with greater appetite, let me glut mine eyes with pleasure once, gen and in
full draughts take down the sight of thee* whilst I can never accord satiety
and fruition together.


Again at his complements?


I and again at his dissembling, mean time they are either of them as jealous as
neighboring States, and jealousy of all vices in old men's is the greatest;
for it is not only jealousy, but envy too. -- And what difference in faith
betwixt a Bawd and Spy now


Why they are in the contrary extremes, the one hinders love matters, the other
furthers them; besides a, Spy is a State Bawd, and a Bawd a womanspy


Nay, if that be all, Cleora, she tarries for somewhat: and as women always
imagine there is some ill in all men say, so we to be quit with them always
imagine there is some ill in all they do. -- I Will to her, -- sweet Cleora if
there be any thing wherein I may serve you, know. --


What do I know? that you are more troublesome and importune, then Flies and
Wasps in summer: and for your service y'd best set up a Bill, or go to the
office of Address, to tell what a serviceable man you are, and amongst your
other good qualities be sure you put in your short neck like a roasted Pig,
your smirking and fleering, as much as to say, Who Will laugh at me? and your
stubble beard for kissing costs us more Pomatum. -- I Would as lief kiss through a
hair sive


I there it is now, your smooth faced boys carry it clearly away from us
bearded men; and it is with kissing as it is with bowling, they love not rough
grounds for fear of rubs, but in a smooth Alley they trundle it away, and so I
will too, for I Have enough of her


My Lady sets me to watch Aurindo now, and though this playing the spy in love
matters be no hard task, yet it is a ticklish one; and I imagine to find as
much pleasure and delight in it as they, who look upon the Game whilst others
play


See where he comes and the Prince with him, I Will stand here and stretch mine
ears upon the tenters this once to over-hear them


It grieves me to see him so sad and pensive, and I Would fain comfort him, and
try whether I can do that for him, I have more need another should do for me. --
If It may not appear too great a boldness to ask your Highness, I should desire to
know, why you are so sad and pensive; sure my Lord it can be nothing but love
that makes you so, the gentle companion of every gentle breast


Thou Art in the right boy, and since thou have seen so far into me; I Will make no
difficulty to declare unto thee all the rest, and tell thee who it is I love too


God of desire, now grant it may be I.


Thou know the fair Erminia I Am sure, she who as far outshines all other
beauties, as the Sun all other lights, it is she I love


Disloyal and persidious. can I hear this, and not hate him for it? -- and pray
my Lord did you never love before


Yes a little at Argos once for fashion sake, but that now is quite forgot, and
my heart by loves fire tempered to a delicate softness, has of late received
another impression has quite effaced that


Learn, learn all ye deceived, Virgins learn what temper false men's hearts are
made of, and how you are deceived by them. -- And does she give ear unto your
suit


Oh no! but is as deaf unto't, Ulysses to the Sirens cod be no more, against
whose charms he obstinately stopped his ear, and none hear worse then those who
will not hear


Heaven then is just I see, and punishes him for's falsehood unto me.


But methinks thou art sad and pensive too, now I consider it better, and by
thy own rule, I should guess thou were in love too. --


Who I? I can assure your Highness, if I have any love it is only love of you.


Thanks gentle Boy, I Have always experienced thee loving and trusty; and to
repay thy trust, I Will not only make thee confident of my love, but advocate
too to plead for it unto Erminia


Cruel office; and is it not enough to be undone, but I must be made instrument
my self of my own undoing? and if this be the reward of my faith and love, how
wod he reward my hate and disloyalty


Thou shall to Erminia then, Althea will introduce thee, give her but this
jewel from me, and hark thee. --


All I can o're-hear of their discourse, is, Aurindo is going to Erminia, and
Althea's to introduce him; it is enough of intelligence for once, this goes unto
the Duchess.


Go, and make me ever happy.


And my self ever unhappy by it, what shall I do? but what a question's that?
those who deliberate have some will of their own, but I have none; with
resolution great as is my love then, I Will go and plead for him against my self;
and though my heart disavow all my tongue says, yet it shall say it, or I Will
disavow it to be mine: no matter for the pain I suffer, who truly love do know

" no pleasure, no contentment is above
" the delightful pain we suffer for those we love.

You Are sure the Duke will visit her.


I Am sure, if he love her he will rather dye then fail; and if he fails, it is sign
he loves her not


It Is well, make haste to present me to her then, I wod be present at their
parley and interview; and what do you think? am I sufficiently disguised


Disguised! you are changed, and are no more Cleander; Proteus was never so
transformed: I, who know you even doubt whether it be you, and were your
thoughts but changed as all the rest, your self would doubt whether 'twere your
self or no


Then do you tell her I Am both deaf and dumb, that so having provided for all
without, that nothing from within may issue forth to betray me, I Will shut up
the port of speech, and my thoughts shall hold no intelligence with my tongue


Peace, here comes some of the house, you will see how they will wonder to see me
here


How Amynter! my Lords inseparable companion and bosom friend! O madam, madam,
who is here do you think?


Ha, Amynter! was it instinct or prophecy in thee, to say my Lord was come?


I know not, I Am sure I meant it for a lie; and if it should prove true now, what
should I say, but I Have good luck with lying


Amynter, to me who never joy'd since Cleander went, it is twylight of joy to
see you; and such a promise of seeing Cleander here, as is Aurora of seeing the
day: and where is he, I see him not


Madam, he sends you all health and happiness, with the assurance he will shortly
be here


Shortly! how shortly? all time seems too long, an hour a day, a day a year, a
week an age, until I see him; and there is no health nor happiness for me
without him


Dissembler.


Mean time by these he kisses your fair hands, and by me presents you with this
Ethiope here, Emblem of his affection, whose color can never change


And I Will keep him as emblem of mine, what qualities has he?


A more trusty servant no where lives then he, more valiant, nor more
intelligent, although both deaf and dumb


What means he now? you understand his signs.


With all humility he dedicates himself and service to ye, and vows perpetual
faith.


And now!


He solemnly protests he will fight and dye for you.


A goodly personage, -- but let me read my Letters,


Hum! deaf and dumb! pretty qualities to sit in the chimney corner: let us see
for's dumbness, I like that well enough, he will not tell tales; and for his
deafness too, it is no great matter, men naturally understand what women wod
have them do; were he blind too, he would make the better husband, only I like
not his color: But for that all men are black in the dark, and I may chance to
try him one of these nights


And art not thou glad now my Lord is coming home?


Why should we be glad fool? we shall be only Clinias and Cleobulo, a couple of
poor slaves still; but what a fellow servant has he sent us here? both deaf and
dumb! what shall we do with him


Why, we will be sure to put all the work of the house upon him, let him put it
off again as well as he can; best is we may use him as we lift, he cannot
complain of us


But is he not too gallant to work do think?


We Will make him do it, for all his Gallantry.


Do You think he will suffer it? he seems a sturdy piece.


We Will make him suffer it too, for all his sturdiness, I Will warrant you.


Content then


How Is this? he writes me here, he would have me quit my sadness and solitude, and
be more free and courtly. If this be his pleasure, he has strangely changed his
mind; but I am all obedience, and am not to dispute but to obey his will: and
how has he his health well


Passing well. all his malady is only want of you.


And why is he not his own Physician then? no wounds I hope?


None dangerous, all he had are now converted to honorable scars.


But that I fear to trouble you with my questions, I should never cease
questioning you


Madam the Duke.


Now, now.


I will observe them.


why now the clouds of sadness ar overblown y' appear like your self the bright
Erminia: So beauty should appear, cheerful and gay, nature's best ornament, only
the wise know how to wear, the foolish mar in the wearing. And now you have elevated
again your fair and long dejected eyes, with hope to see Cleander shortly here;
whilst you cast them every ways about to look for him, I hope a glance at
least may light on me


Your Highness is not to be looked upon so slightly.


Now, now it begins.


I look upon you as my Sovereign Lord and Prince.


That Is at too great a distance, look on me as one who admires and honors you,
and your lover rather


I, there it is.


That my Lord were too great presumption, and no less impudence, in one already
married


She cunningly holds off to draw him on.


Think not of that: marriage of its self is a tie strait enough, we need not
straiten it more with superfluous nicety; but let us talk no more of it, -- I Have
somewhat to say in private to ye, but send that Slave away


He Is both deaf and dumb my Lord, and's presence can be no hinderance to what
you have to say


But he can see though; and it is not fit what we do in private should be seen by
every one


It Is fit for those have care of their fames and honors; and for me, I will do
nothing but what I cared not, though all the world did see


I like that answer well, it is discreet and modest. -- If I should be deceived in
her, never was man more glad to find his hopes true, then I should be to find
my fears were false


You talk of honor, know Princes are the fountains of it; and there is none but
what does flow from them, all is honorable they do, so is my love


Nothing is honorable, that is not virtuous too; make your love so then; else
you might as well call Vice, Virtue; and Hell, Heaven; as Lust, Love; and
Dishonor, Honor; as you do. Know my Lord, the acts of marriage are such, as
matrimony it self (holy as it is) can scarcely make honorable and lawful; but
imagine how dishonorable and unlawful they must needs be without it then


What a wretch and villain I was ever to suspect her?


Come you think you do a high act of justice now, to be true unto Cleander; but
alas you are deceived, justice consists in equality, and equality there is none;
you should be true to him, that is false to you


Should any but your Highness tell me so, I Would say he lied, most basely lied:
Cleander false? the Gods, Truth it self' wod as soon be false as he


My own dear dear wife.


Ha, ha, ha, I pity you, to see you so abused, and to disabuse you; know
Cleander has another Mistress in Attica he warms with his embraces, whilst Erminia
in her cold bed freezes here: why should he tarry so long away else think you,
the wars now at an end


And is that all your argument? how ill you argue Sir, as if gold by the
touchstone should be rendered false, or men guilty by tiral of their innocence:
absence is the only touchstone and trial of our loves; in it we but repeat by
heart that lesson, which in presence we learned before. And as in presence of
those we love we are all eyes, so in absence we are all thought of them; as I
am of Cleander, and I Am sure he is of me


My dearest dearest wife still.


And was it for this you sent him to the wars. to overthrow your enemies
abroad, at price thus of my overthrow at home? he is much obliged to ye sure, and
now I see 'twas not to honor him, but dishonor me


This will not do, I must try some other way. --


You wod not? you cannot Sir; -- talk to me of force! should you but offer it,
I Would sooner kill my self then suffer it:


Ha! the villain looks terribly indeed, and I Am afeard of him: Gods and fiends
I think conspire to defend her from me, and hinder my pursuit, I Am resolved yet
to go on, spite of them. -- Farewell, your Bravo has saved you this once,
make much of him, but I shall find a time. --


Althea, where is this woman?


Here Madam.


And why not here? you must be always leaving me alone; either wait closer, or
I shall provide me of those who will


Pardon me Madam, when a Lord and Lady are together, it is good manners in the
waiting woman, and part of their breeding (I take it) to leave them alone


Is It so? go too, you are grown so impudent of late, (whatsoere's the matter)
you are quite marred again; or mend it, or you and I must part, -- look to it.


I, say you so? then it is time to look to it indeed.


O friend was ever man more happy in a wife then I am in Erminia? did observe
(for thou heardst all I know) how she answered the Duke? how she confounded
him? and made even impudence it self to blush, whilst chastity like a Phoenix
burnt in her eyes with anger and indignation at his unchaste purposes, and
darted lightning at him. Oh ye Gods! Erminia is as white I see as is her name
or innocence it self, and I Am o'rejoy'd with it


I joy you have found her so.


You wod not have had me jealous now, and see what is come on it, without my
jealousy I Would never known thus much


I am most glad you have so good issue of it, and that jealousy its parent's dead
that gave it life; and what will ye do now


What! but instantly cast off my disguize, and discover me unto her -- but
stay! who is this? more visitants


Althea, happily incountred, I was just seeking you.


And I Am glad of it, for I was just thinking on you; and see how ones thoughts
will come to pass! well what is your business? whatsoever it be, you are like to
speed, I can tell you that


Take heed Althea. that whatsoever has a large extent, and she who promises
that denies nothing, not so much as her self


Well concluded I promise you, you have studied Grammar and Logic too I see, and
want not Rhetoric neither for a need I Will warrant you


Indeed and I have need to use my Rhetoric; please you to help me but to
speech of your Lady


Marry come up here, no wonder indeed you are grown so dainty! will no body but
my Lady serve your turn? am not I good enough for you I pray? she is for your
Master, wod you should well know


And it is from him I desire to speak with her who recommends him to you by this
jewel


A noble Prince he is, I Will say that for him, and bounteous and liberal
withal, you have few such Princes now adays: he was in a great fright (so were
we all) when he was last with my Lady. -- Well, did my Lord but know how I
labor for him. --


He knows it, and thou shall know he does too.


Well hark then!


Hell and confusion! do you hear how she'as been visited? I Am just like a
mariner newly escaped one storm, and even arrived unto the port, when by
another, he is driven to sea again, in greater danger then ever he was before:
the Prince visit her, and handsome boys? to be rid of my jealousy, O th'Duke
is nothing; for what avails it one h'as many thorns prick him, for easing of
his pain to have one plucked out, and all the rest remain. -- I Am as jealous as
e're I was before.


Well, though my Lady be in ill humor now, and very stanch of her visits (as
they say) for the Princes sake yet, I Will try what I can do; and for your self,
though I Have partly made a vow never to marry, I know not yet how I should be
tempted, should you offer to marry me


But I Will never tempt you I Will promise you. yet for my Lords sake I must humor
her; Althea, for my part I promise you, if ever I marry any woman it shall be
you


That Is some comfort yet, I Would fain have somewhat in hand though, to be doing
with; but come I Will bring you to my Lady


And are you sure he went to Erminia's?


Sure Madam 'twas so appointed, and Althea was to have the introducing him.


Did I not tell you he had some secret haunt? I knew it I, there is no deceiving
me. -- See this dissembling boy, you shall sooner find Spring without flowers,
and Autumn without fruit, then without loving thoughts, a youthful mind, it is
the proper fruit, and flowers of the season


So I have brought him to my Lady, who was nothing nigh so much offended and
surpised with it as I imagined. -- Who Is here the Duchess


And Althea too must be their Bawd! that old Hag, that Witch, go seek her out,
and bring her hither strait; if she conceal their secret meetings, tortures
shall enforce it from her


Ha! she has heard it seems of the Dukes visiting my Lady, I Would best confess it
e're she put me to the torture; I Am melancholy enough to lie in bed alone, and
apprehend this lying on the rack a far more melancholy business; besides I
know not how my bones will hold out, beshrew me


She Is here Madam.


Indeed I must confess,


Oh does he so!


But I cannot help it, there is no keeping him out.


Is he so hot upon it?


But this I can assure your Highness, it is much against my will and against my
Ladies too


Worser and worser, I cod pardon him to prefer her love to mine; but to prefer
even her neglect unto my love, is such an indignity, such a neglect of me I
never shall forgive


Gone after him do you say?


I can assure your Highness,


Why this is fine, very fine, -- but see she is here.


I Am glad I Have found his haunts yet, now I see he goes to Erminia's still, when
he makes such haste from me


How comes she to know that? I Would best make no secret then of what she knows
already, lest she suspect some farther secret in it, more then she knows. --
Well, what if I visit Erminia sometimes? it is but to comfort her in her
solitude and sadness in her husbands absence


Ha! this is a discovery I looked not for; --


What have I done? betrayed my self? this is this foolish conscience makes us
do such poor ignoble things, a noble spirit wod be ashamed of; she is gone
enraged, and rage that in petty bosoms, as winds in narrow brooks, makes small
commotion; in mighty ones raises as fearful storms, as boisterous winds in the
vaste Ocean: no matter, let her go, if Erminia's name can raise a tempest, I
have an exorcisme of Aurindo's can allay it again; nor will I desist -- the
bold and resolute, when checked and reprehended for their faults, grow more
licentious, and devoid of shame, only the weak and timorous refrain.


I Am glad she is gone, and I safe here, I was in a terrible fright; -- for her
calling me Bawd it never angered me, it is no disgrace to a waiting woman; but to
call me old Hag! --


Prithy good boy no more, pity so much handsomeness, should be so unhandsomely
employed; and so much good language and eloquence cast away upon so bad a
cause; find out somewhat wherein I may do thee good, and I shall gladly do it;
but I should do thee harm, to make thee complice of another ill


She instructs me excellently, and her kindness invites me to discover my self
unto her; and somewhat here bids me accept the invitation: who knows? she may
be so nobly generous to help me in my love, hinder me I Am sure she cannot. I Will
try, it is but my blushes lost, and in a better cause I cannot lose my shame. --
Noblest of Ladies, whilst I discover to ye a secret you will sooner wonder at, then
believe, to take from your wonder, and add to your belief, be pleased to
behold this Portrait here.


What Is this?


How! taking presents? nay then she has sold her self, and is no longer mine; and
whispering! women's shames go always with their whispers: how close they are, as
he were pouring out himself into her ear, as she inclines her ear, as she were
careful nothing should be lost: -- now h'as told her somewhat that tickles her;
-- now she looks on's present, now on him again, as she were begetting babies in
his eyes, Preludiums, and images in little of procreation. It Is good, it is very
good, I see you, but you see not the revenge I Will take for it


Is It possible! comparing what I hear, with what I see, I can no ways doubt
the truth of what you say; I Have seen your Portrait formerly, and wonder,
comparing it with you now, I knew you not before


You see Madam how your sweet goodness has imboldned me to the discovery of a
secret to you I should have concealed even from mine own bosom, if it had been
possible


And I shall keep it as safe as your own bosom, sweet Cyrena assure your self.


See, she even embraces him by heaven!


Beseech you Madam call me Aurindo still, and show some kindness to the Prince,
when next he visits you; lest he suspect I have neglected his commands, and had
more care of mine own concern, then his


For your sake I Will do any thing, I may in honor do; and I hope sweet friend
e're long to let you see you not deceived your self, in trusting me


Dearest Madam, my ravishment is so great, my joy must needs burst forth in
some expression, or I shall burst my self: here then before I go I make a
solemn league of friendship with ye, and seal it with my breast


By heaven I Will kill them both.


Fie fie, be more advised and temperate.


Unparalled impudence! embrace in public! the very action of coupling! no
strumpet lost to shame and abandoned to infamy, wod e're have don't: I burn no
less with rage and jealousy, then they with lust; and the fire of my love is
quite extinguished by it, as greater fires extinguish lesser ones. I Will be
revenged on both, for her I now do loath her worse then a Toad or Snake; and
for him, ungrateful as he is, I Will let him see since he wod not have me for a
friend, what it is to have me for an enemy


AUrindo welcome, I have awaited thee just as the trembling prisoner at the bar
suspended 'twixt hope and fear, awaits his doom, and what is it ha? do bring
me life or death


Life, life, assure your self my Lord, or else I should not live to tell it you;
had rather dye my self a hundred times then bring you death


Thanks gentle Aurindo. I know thou love me.


You know nothing yet compared to what I hope you will know e're long.


Well hast' been there?


I have my Lord.


And how did find her, ha?


Beyond expectation kind, she hearkened to me, and that is half consent, and
the other half you are to expect e're long: well I say nothing but there are those
in Missena here, who love you, dearly love you; I can tell you that my Lord,
though I am sworn yet not to tell their names


Come prithy tell me.


Let it suffice it is one you would least imagine, one you will shortly know, and I
hope be happy in her knowledge too


Enough, enough, I know then it is she, for there is none else in nature can
make me happy, but Erminia. O my dear Aurindo how thou obligest me, with thy
joyful news


Happy conjuncture!


Never was Prince more happy in a Page, then I in thee.


I hope your Highness e're long will find it so indeed.


More, more I prithy, more of Erminia.


See here comes company.


Lets withdraw then to my apartment, and there I Will take the Ambrosrek food
into mine ear


Tell me Olinda, were thou ever in love.


Yes faith a little once for fashion sake, as much as came to jest, and
methought 'twas pretty sport; but never in earnest I, to make me whine and cry,
leave my meat, break my sleep, and be melancholy and mad as my Lady is


Thou were the wiser; for love indeed is but a sort of madness: and as you have
several sorts of mad folks, so you have of Lovers; some sad, some merry, some
mild and gentle, some raving and furious again; and for these, the Pazzarello
was well invented, whither shortly my Lady must be sent I think; for she is mad,
outrageous mad against Aurindo, and has accused him to the Duke, for offering
to ravish us


I wod he had faith.


And see she comes, and the Duke with her.


Beseech you my Lord, banish him the Court.


Well we shall think upon it.


It is a shame to suffer him here, is not content to deboish himself, but seeks
to deboish the Prince too


Well, well.


Nay what is more, h'as not only attempted the honor of my women here, but
even attempts the honor of Erminia too


Ha! does he so? nay then we will not only banish him the Court, but City and
Country too; let it be strait proclaimed


Do You mark how that heats him, he was cold before?


I do.


I will not tell you how insolent he was to tempt even me my self, not to
expose his life to danger, and my honor too; that he should dare to do it, and
hope to live


His life thirsted after too, nay then I see nothing's more insatiate then
women in their love, or in their hate


Though for's insolency I confess he deserves to die, yet in regard of's tender
years so thou my dearest be content, I am content to spare his life


Our sex is soft and gentle, as it becomes us to be merciful; but think my Lord
whe'r't becomes you or no, and't may not appear in you, too great neglect both
of my honor and your own


Then I see no Tigress, nor Lioness, nor Aspick trod on, is more fell and
cruel, then cruel women


Content thy self dearest with his banishment, we would not kill, where we
might safely spare


Mistaken clemency! misplaced goodness! who spare the guilty are cruel to the
innocent; best tarry till h'ave left nothing in the Court inviolate, even to
the Royal bed; nay till his lust like a violent spreading torrent overflows and
involves Erminia' honor too, gaining her the dishonorable repute of a foul
Strumpet, and base Prostitute


That Is a killing blow put home, guard thee well Aurindo, or thou art but dead.


Oh, how I love this zeal of justice in you, and you, for it? you have
prevailed it is resolved he dye: let him be apprehended strait


This must be prevented.


Now my dearest art thou satisfied? If thou be, appease thy anger, serenate
thy mind, and in thy cabinet expect thine own desires and wishes always to
attend thee. -- Attica, call him to us strait, we will take the scruple of
marriage out of Erminia's breast, that we are resolved come what will of the
rest


Fly, sly Madam, all the Court is up in search of you, and busy danger
threatens and surrounds you on every side, just like the hunted Dear when the
hounds are uncoupled, and the hunt is up: for heavens Love haste, I Have told you
what you stand accused of


And if I wod compound with danger, I easily cod clear my innocence, but I Will
keep that now for my last reserve; mean time I Will to Erminia's, and shelter
there, to whom can I better owe my life then her; to whom I hope shortly to owe
all my joy of living


Quickly, quickly then, and as secretly as you can.


Well Clinias, and how do you like the Moor our fellow servant?


Why, as thou wodst a rusty jade, wod not stir a foot for thee; and when thou
spur'st him, and puts him to it, capers, rears an end, throws thee, and breaks
thy neck. Uds so, we were deceived in him; we thought to put all the work of
the house on him, and we may do it our selves for ought I see, and thank you
too. You may command a poast as well as him, and he is so sturdy too, a poast
will stir as soon as he


He does not understand you perhaps.


I know not, but I Am sure I understand him but too well: I gave him a broom to
day, and pointed him where he should sweep, (this now was plain enough one
would imagine) and what did he, but 'stead of sweeping, lay me over the pate
with it, and so he served me with a fire shovel another time; he will carry no
coals I can tell you


Will he not? But I Will make him, and h'ad as good eat them too as refuse to do
what I command him; such as he like Nettles, handle them gently, and they sting
you; but you shall see how I Will handle him, like a good Water Spaniel I Will make
him obey my beck, and fetch and carry when I Would have him, and make him do tricks
like an Ape e're I have done with him: and see here he comes, like your baboons
and drills, he will not speak, because he will not work: but 't shall not serve
his turn. -- mark


Do You mark? there is all I can get of him; and do it your self for him.


But I Will make him do it, if he will not. -- How now Sir? -- O Clinias
Clinias,


What think you now? like a good Water Spaniel he obeys your beck, and does
tricks like an Ape for you, it is only you know how to handle him now. --


The Devil shall


How now, what is here to do?


Nothing, nothing my Lord.


You have been vexing the Moor I see by him.


No indeed forsooth, h'as rather been vexing us.


Go too, leave him, and about your business, or your Lady knows of it.


Oh worse and worse!


I hope you have discovered no other haunts?


No no, and of the Dukes I am secured too; but the Prince's, the Prince's still
depends, and that boy, that villain boy! -- Oh friend! the chafed sea baited by
all the winds, till it be all a tempest and a foam, was never in more trouble
and agitation, then is my breast; and that may return to its former calm again,
but never I unto my former rest


What will you do then?


Nay if I knew that, my mind wod be at ease, but this is your fault now, put
me off the resolution of killing them, who now am just like one has so long
differed cure of a desperate ill, till the danger grows greater, and cure more
desperate


Fear not Aurindo, here you are more safe, then in your innocence, for that I
see may be violated, but my cabinet shall never be I hope; there you may
securely rest your self, till the danger's over; and whilst you rest you there,
all my business shall be to think, how to remedy your Love as well as fear


Blessings, such as Saints, in their ecstasies do wish, and pray for, (Madam)
reward you for your excellent goodness


"Good deeds besides themselves need no reward." I will not trust my woman, but
for your more security will lock you up my self


You are my Angel-guardian, and as I fear no danger so long as I am here, so I
hope all good from your protection


So there is provision of lust now stored up for night; but I may chance mar
their banquet. --


There, there she is, do as I Have commanded you, and expect our favor and
reward: I must not be seen in it.


Who Is this, does any know?


Pardon Madam my bold intrusion, I Am a soldier lately returned from Attica;
have had the honor long to serve in the wars under Cleander, our noble General


Do you know him Amynter?


I have often seen him in the Army Madam.


Then you are welcome Sir, you can tell me news of my Lord perhaps.


Alas Madam 'twill be but unwelcome news that I can tell you. --


O my divining soul! what is it?


I cod wish I had a tongue in thousand infoldments of sugared speech cod wrap up
my bitter news; -- or whilst I wounded you with grief of it, with oily words
cod cure the wounds I made; or rather indeed I had no tongue at all to tell you
Cleander's dead


Dead!


Drowned in his return from Attica.


How Is this? this is pretty!


Cleander drowned! my Lord and husband drowned! tell me, Oh tell me quickly
how! and let thy fatal tongue finish the deadly work it has begun, and kill me
quite


The treacherous winds with flattering gales intic't him first from shore into
the midst of the vaste Egean Sea, e're they declared their treacherous intents
of drowning him; when first in soft whispers, then loud murmurs, they conspired
to raise a furious storm: the abyss, the seas and skies, all mixed in one dismal
Chaos, and horrid confusion, surrounded with all these horrors, the fear of
death, far worse then death it self; only Cleander fearlesly did stand,
beholding death with the same countenance at sea, he was wont to behold it on
the land; till long struggling against the storm in vain, at last loudly
invoking Erminia's name, he and the Bark perished together: wod I had done so
too, rather then to have been preserved alone, whilst all else perished, to
bring this news I do


Ay me! then I have lived too long.


Help, help.


Ha, ha, ha, leave her, and she will soon leave her swooning, no woman e're
swounded when she was alone


Why Madam, Madam, what mean you? to dye for a false report: Cleander lives,
upon my life he does


I, in the other world, whither I Will soon follow him.


Nay in this; and if I show you him not here alive before next sun, let my life
and honor or whatsoever else I hold most dear pay for my abusing you


Wod I had had no tongue rather then to have bin author of this false report


Do'nt you delude my grief now, and flatter me into hope?


As I hope for life my self, I tell you true. and this soldier shall confess
as much. -- I had some glimmering of the Duke, and suspect his hand in this. --
Hark ye Dimagoras, (for so as I remember you are called) I know this news is
false, and straitwayes cod disprove it if I wod; I know too you were hired to it
by the Duke, confess the truth, do like those better witches, who undo the
harms they have done; you see her life's in danger, which you by timely discovery
may save, and gain far more reward for it, then you have


But should the Duke know it. --


Which he shall never do.


Besides mine honor. --


The very thought of that should prompt you to it.


Then with your pardon Madam, I confess Cleander lives, and I was hired by the
Duke to report him dead, I know not for what intent


Neither becomes it you to examine it, only know it becomes a Soldier to do
nothing dishonourably, and nothing can be more, then basely lie; but you have
well repented, and there is for your confession of the truth, so honor ever
guide you


As it shall to speak all honor of you.


Oh me! my Lord, my Lord,


Why, prithy hold thy peace, and leave thy howling and caterwawling, thou
cryest only for fashion sake now I know, and wod thou had but a glass to see
how ill it becomes thee


Wod you should well know, I can cry as well as e're a woman in Missena, so I can.


Thou must hold thy water well beforehand then, but prithy do'nt change thy
crying into scolding now


Scold, who scolds? I scorn it so I do.


Will thou hold thy peace then?


Why may not one speak I pray?


Again? twenty Pies and Jayes taken in lime-twigs, keep not such a noise and
chattering, as one woman when she sets upon it once


The Duke put such tricks on me! I Am glad I know it yet.


And see he is here Madam.


I am prepared for him.


So now this punctillio of marriage taken away, I hope to find her no more so
scrupulous. -- Cleanders loss, and to assure you, you shall find in me all you
have lost in him; I Will be in place of husband to you. --


I believe you would.


Cease mourning then, and reckon your loss among those remediless misfortunes
can never be remedied with mourning


Your Highness highly honors me; but comfort (my Lord) 's a work of time:
first we must grieve, e're we be comforted; there are certain decencies of
widdow-hood, which for widows to neglect, is to neglect their fame: many a
shower of tears must fall first, and many a gust of sighs blow over, e're it
clear up again. In fine, comfort's the physic of grief and sorrow, and no
feverish body in Crisis of their Fever takes physic: that once over, all the
comfort becomes or me to take, or you to give, I willingly shall admit; mean
time I leave you, and humbly beseech your Highness to leave me to my grief


Peace to your thoughts Erminia, nor shall I ever take that peace away by any
act of mine; so recommending to you a moderation of your grief and sorrow, I
take my leave, -- this is some comfort yet.


He Is gone, and I but dally with my grief, fancying Cleander not dead, whilst
no other difference is 'twixt death and absence, but only this; t'one's a
short death, the other a long absence; so he whilst absent for the time is dead
to me; and absence for the time zanies death, and imitates it so, the one can do
nothing that the other does not do


The Prince here too? deluded by this news, he comes I know, only to bring me
fresh molestation; and to serve Cyrena's end, I Will let him go on in the
delusion


Here comes Cleander too, he knows not she knows he is alive, and I Will leave
him in his ignorance, and so perplex him, and strew his way with thorns; I Will
make him weary of it, and glad at last, when he cannot go forwards to return
back again


Dearest Madam, if at such a time, when other widows griefs are at the
height, I come to persuade you, let yours fall, and take comfort in the place
on it: I hope you will pardon me, when you shall see, I bring you a full comfort,
not an empty one of words only, whilst in lieu of your dead husband, I come to
offer you a living one; and such an one, 'tmay be no boast to say, (add but
your esteem to it) does every way equal Cleander. I mean my self


This falls out happily to my desire; --


The words and actions of dying men are not more real I swear.


There are those who love you, dearly love you (I can tell you that) though
their shames will not suffer them to declare so much


And why so?


To hide their shames then, come but in the dark to night unto my chamber. --


Enough.


And there after the holy vows of marriage. --


I understand.


You shall enjoy her for your wife. --


Oh me most happy! you overjoy me Madam.


Go then, and do not fail.


Which if I do, may I fail to live.


Now for Cyrena, she shall change habits, and veiled appear like me: pardon me
sacred truth, if in so good a cause I transgress a little, it is not to violate
thy laws, but preserve them from greater violation.


Why, she is married already.


Can you blame her? believing you dead, and you letting her go on in the belief.


No matter, let her go on her way, I Will go mine. --


And lose your self.


And trace her through all her ways.


And err in all, do'nt you see; you are just like one, who entering a
Labyrinth, farther he goes, the farther still he strayes; or one puzzled with
tying a Gordian knot, which he can never untie


How you are deceived! I do but as Hunters now, who following the Chase, mind
not so much their way, nor pains they take, as taking of the prey; and for the
Gordian knot you speak of, I know how to cut that which I cannot unty


Had you not better discover your self now, and do that with ease, you cannot do
else, without much toil and pain


Have patience a little. there are farther mysteries yet I must reveal, e're I
reveal my self, especially that of the boys concealment


Of that I Will say nothing, 'cause I know not what to say; but for the rest I
dare engage my life, and should dye martyr in so good a cause; she is all
honorable, and honor and she are twins, and so alike 'twere no mistake to say,
Erminia is honor, and honor Erminia


Well, to night we shall know all, mean time leaving you in your belief, leave
me in mine.


WHy, this Moor's a devil, and now I know the reason why they paint the devil
black of his color; he makes no more of beating us, then Squirrils do of
cracking nuts; it is his ordinary exercise before meals to get him an appetite,
and afterward to help digestion: we are never quiet for him, but when we
sleep, and shortly I fear he will fall upon us like a night mare in our sleeps too


I Would compound with him for a limb with all my heart, and let him choose any he
pleased except my neck


Wod I were certain to escape with that, but you are well enough served now,
why wod you offer to beat him


Why, because I thought he wod not beat me again, else I Would have seen him
hanged e're I Would have meddled with him: well, we must hold together, there is
no remedy, he is too hard for either of us alone; but Hercules himself (they
say) is not strong enough for two


I, but if he should prove stronger then Hercules, what then? that old saying wod
do us but little 'light here he coms, I Am as feared of him (good: -- as of a
bear broke loose, and running after me, and look every moment when he will catch
me by the breech


See see, he becons us away.

But let us not stir for him; -- yes I Will warrant you, when can you tell?


Look again.


No matter, let us but hold together.


He comes upon us fearfully, look h'as got a staff too; now for a dry beating,
I Am as sure of it. --


I Will warrant you, oh oh!


Oh, oh, a my conscience h'as broke my neck.


I think mine is broke too, and pray heaven it be no worse.


A vengeance on him, are these his tricks? he will make more work for Surgeons if
he hold on, then Brandee wine with Dutchmen in their Kirmesses; or Stum in
Taverns with quarrelsome Englishmen, he made me spin like a top


And I imagined my self a hand-mill grinding mustard seed.


If he cod speak yet, and give us but a reason for his misusing us, 'twod never
anger me


For my part I Am glad he is dumb, for if he cod speak, I Am sure 'twould be but a
word and a blow with him


Away, here comes my Lady.


The time draws nigh, and night approaches, I Will go unto the Princess, and see
if she be dressed yet, I joy to think how happy I should be to advance her
happiness;

" and there is a secret pleasure in doing good,
" by none but those who do it, understood.

She Is gone unto the boy, and I unknown to Amynter will follow her, and kill
them both together; he is of too mild and too relenting nature for me and my
stern purposes; and what w'ar once resolved to do, wise politics count it but
little wit, to confer with those may hinderth' doing it


So, this it is to be out of favor, I Am excluded now; and if I prove
unfaithful, she has absolved my faith: nor can she complain seeing she trusts
me not, that I betray her trust: all rivals jealousies help to revenge me on
her, and add to those mine own revenge to boot, for threatening to turn me out
of service, I Will serve her for it as she deserves, and tell the Duchess of
Aurindo's concealment here, and of the Princes marriage with her too, whilst he
researcht her only by my means, and by gifts and presents sought my mediation,
I loved him for it, but hate him now he seeks to marry her; my profit's lost
by it: and women of my quality, if they be wise, should count those only friends,
who bring them gain, and when the gain ceases, count them enemies


So now y'appear like your self the bright Cyrena unclouded in all your
glories, so appears the sun so glorious and so bright after a long Eclipse


Nay now you flatter me.


I wod to heaven men wod believe so, 'twod acquit our sex of envy, and I should
easily be acquit of flattery, for none can doubt but they must be rather
envious who praise you not, then flatterers who do


Nay if you hold on, you will give me a beauty I had not, and make me blush.


I ought rather to blush, you have so little help, but 'twas your desire for
greater secrecy, and secrets lose their virtue, just like precious perfumes
when once disclosed, and more they are hid the more they conserve their
pretiousness. Pray let me help you, this curse's a little too long


Pardon me Madam.


Beseech you it is but my duty, you are not used to these petty things, and it is
so long since you saw your self dressed, you and your mirror


How much am obliged unto you dear Erminia?


Dearest Madam, think I was only born to serve you; where was the Prince's
judgment (I wonder) where were his eyes? having seen this beauty once, he cod
ever look on any other


He might be well excused, having seen yours once, to have quite forgotten mine.


Mine! alas it is never to be seen on the same day with yours, nor ever so much
as to be mentioned with it; nor do I say this out of complement now, but merely
out of consciousness of mine own defects. Stay a little more, and I have done


Sweet Erminia, you make me even bankrupt with your courtesies.


Sweetest Madam, I shall think you tax me with want of it, if you speak any
more of it


What rudeness is this?


Now for my revenge, -- ha! what is here? the boy vanished! and a woman in the
place! what strange apparitions are these? what wondrous delusions of the
sight? there is witchcraft in it sure!


what means this Moor, he is grown strangely jealous of me of late, (whatsoere's
the matter) and I begin to fear him


I was afeard h'ad come to apprehend me.


Pardon me Madam, I Am ashamed you should find such rudeness here, but trust
to it, you shall be put no more to these affrights. -- Come pray be merry, if
the Prince should chance to sleep in your arms to night instead of mine, I hope
your Highness wod not be offended at the mistake


Imagine sweet Erminia by your self, whether you would be offended Cleander should do
the like by you


I fear my happiness is not yet so nigh, though I wish yours may, so now all
here is prepared, I Will go and put all in prepare without for the Prince's
reception, and leave you the while to the entertainment of your better
thoughts.


As those who walk over fearful precipices avert their eyes not to behold their
danger, so I avert my thoughts from thinking on mine, only this I find too
clear. "love's a solicitous thing, and full of fear.


Thanks Althea for thy intelligence, and the Duke shall thank thee too, go thou
before, and wait to give us entrance, I Will but go advertise the Duke, and
instantly follow thee


I shall Madam.


They shall not steal a marriage in the dark, I Will light their nuptial Tapers up,
and for Aurindo I Am glad I Have found him; I (...) feared h'ad fled my anger, and
escaped my revenge, which now he shall find after this little stop, like
violent torrents stopped, which grow but more violent after, then e're they were
before.


She Is gone enraged, and nothing's more impetuous then woman's rage, no
battering Ram demolishingston walls to dust, nor violent thunder riving whole
forests, and shivering mighty oaks like slender reeds; woe to poor Aurindo must
stand the shock of it, -- wod I Would some body to tell this news to now; no
cholick, no strangury, nor pangs of childbirth were e're half so painful, as
the retention of news, to a woman that longs to be delivered of it; and here
comes some body


O Olindo! hast' heard the news of Aurindo?


No, what is it?


He Is at Erminia's, and just now there is order given to apprehend him.


Alas!


But you must say nothing now.


Pho, no avaritious body holds money faster then I do secrets you know. O
Anthenor have you heard the news of Aurindo?


No, pray what?


Why he is apprehended at Erm^^^'s, and presently to dye; the Scaffold's already
set up for him, but you must say nothing


That Is understood, now am I bound to tell it the next I meet.


You keep secrets sweetly, I Will tell you news another time; and you make it
more then it is too


How wod you have newsmongers live else?


O Leontius! have you heard the news of Aurindo?


For heavens love, what?


I Will tell it.


No let me.


Will you over run me? why he is apprehended at Erminia's, and instantly to dye;
he is on the scaffold by this


See if he have not added more unto it yet?


Nay then, it is time to discover him, be the danger what it will, I Am sure
there can be no more, then there is in the concealing him


Stay, stay, and take the news of the Prince along with you.


I thank you, I have no leisure to hear it now.


I Will tell it you then.


Pardon me, I must be gone too.


And I Will to the Presence with my news.


She gone too! now am I in no less pain then I was before for some body to tell
the rest of my news to; thus does she serve me still when I trust her with any,
all women are leaking vessels, and can hold nothing, God help them. But of all
commend me to her.


Althea stay you here, and when the Prince comes, direct him into my Cabinet,
but without light be sure; I Will in and see all the lights extinguished there.


I, hide you, do, cast clouds of night upon your faults, and you fast as you
hide them, I Will bring them unto light; and what you seek to keep secret I Will
proclaim, till to all the world I Have published your shame. --


Oh my Lord, you are welcome, my Lady expects you there within, you need no light,
love can find the way best in the dark

With thy good directions Althea, there is somewhat for thy pains.


And there is her Cabinet.


Now to reap the long expected fruit of all my happiness.


Send you a good harvest of it, I Will send you sickles enough presently to help
you, and those will help too, to fetch it in for you. -- Aurindo! and the
Prince too! she might have left me one of them at least, but I Will fit her for
it


Wod I Would never imbarkt my self upon this perilous sea, where it is dishonor to
go back, and assured ruin to go on; to discover me now, every one wod laugh at
me; and to conceal me longer, I should run such desperate hazard, it is horror to
think upon -- To marry so soon a second husband, e're the funeral rites and
obsequies of the first are celebrate, no blacks, no mourning, my memory like a
shadow gone with my self; her grief for me not half so durable as other widows
watery colored ones, which only a tear or two can wash away; is this her love
of me? then farewell all my love of her; it is sign the Prince and she have lived
before in close adultery, and will do so again unless she dye; nor less h'ad
known it formerly, cod he find the way now so readily to her bed; since I am
dead to her then, she shall be so to me; and the hour of her marriage shall be
her hour of death; these hands shall kill her, these eyes shall see her dead,
though this heart of mine burst at the sight of it, mine honor's engaged, and
I Am resolved.


Now friend,


Pardon me, I have no leisure to tell you now.


There is some mystery in this haste of his, and's great thoughts labor with
some mighty birth. -- On what a turbulent sea has his jealousy embarkt him?
and so embroiled him as without miracle he can never disimbroil himself again;
and if this be the fate of marriage to be in hell, of loathing, if their wives
be foul; and if fair, in purgatory of jealousy; marry who is list for me


Where Is this great Commandress of all hearts? commands as absolutely as fate
it self; this tyrant beauty, that needs only say, render your hearts, and all
hearts must obey, I long to see her, let some seek out the boy, I Will seek out
her my self.


Where Is this curious Lady? in whose nice bosom no flowers must be worn, but
fresh and blooming buds; others as overblown and canker-eaten, she rejects and
scorns


Where is her chamber?


There.


What, hoa within there? open the door, or else we will break it op'.


Where is this newly married pair? let them appear, we come to wish them joy.


Who Is that that knocks so rudely? ha! the Duke and Duchess; no matter, fear
not, fear not my Erminia, for now thou art mine


Shame of thy honor, a Prince, and own a base ignoble strumpet for thy wife!


Now now, -- how is this?


I am nor base, nor strumpet, Argos.


Ha! Cyrena!


And Aurindo she! how was I deceived?


The Princess already discovered!


Now all of the boy is clear, but that the news of my death should strike her no
more. --


Thunder cod not have more struck her you saw, till I assured her 'twas false,
and only invented to deceive her, when she to assist the Princess in her love
turned the deceit on them


Enough, enough, 'now all have cast off their vizards, it is time to cast off
mine, I Will instantly go and discover my self unto her.


Whither goes the Moor in such haste I wonder? I Will after him and see.


Wonder and amazement seizes me!


Wonder not Prince, nor admire your Page should turn your handmaid now, this is
the least miracle that love can do; I am that Cyrena you promised marriage to
at Argos, who have hither to Misseua followed you to claim your promise which
now you have anew confirmed


Miracle of constancy! compared with your goodness, my ill appears so great,
methinks no penance can be great enough for expiating it


This shall be all your penance, and this.


And this is the only one that I desire.


Now Madam I hope you will pardon me, for putting you to the proof and declaration
of your sex, which I suspected through your disguise


There needs no pardon Madam; where the offense was to Aurindo, not to me.


But where is Erminia all this while, the great Architectress of all this plot?


For her you shall find her there within, in the Moors arms straightly embraced,
(my Lord) and by this time perhaps in bed together too


Was ever a more lascivious strumpet?


Where are our Guards? go fetch her hither strait with her fair Paramour; so
foul an act as this deserves a public shame and punishment, however in private
done


Erminia thus dishonor her self! or honor with justice is fled to heaven, and
there is none on earth, or else all this is false


Bring them away, is this the honorable Lady, nothing cod dishonor her above
temptation, above suspect? -- no body to serve her lust but a Moor, a slave!
and one fittest she thought to conceal her shame, 'cause mute and dumb! but
here are enough beside to publish it; away with her, and to the gallows with that
slave


Cleo. I, hang him, hang him.


Stay, rather then her fame shall suffer, the mute shall speak, and more to
evince the miracle and declare her innocence, the Ethiope shall turn white


Cleander!


My Lord, there is none rejoices more then my fellow andI, for this your
metamorphose, we had as lief see the devil, as see your black face


We had rather a great deal have you our master then our fellow servant, you
don't beat us half so much


Noble Cleander I must demand your pardon for trying Erminia's constancy in
your absence, assure your self 'twas done with good intent


I shall believe it, and considering the prosperous estate I Have left your
affairs in, I hope your Highness will easily pardon my return from Attica
without your license


I do, and with you all happiness with your fair and virtuous wife.


And I the like.


I humbly thank your Highness, and desire to be no longer happy then my friend
Amynter may be so with me


For you Althea (another time whent't may not appear revenge as it wod now) I
shall entreat you seek another service


With all my heart, and I hope your Highness then will entertain me.


Not I; you who wod be false to her, will never be true to me.


Well, my comfort is, though there are no services, yet there are trades enough.


Oh my dear Erminia! here let me ever rest.


And as I gladly receive you here as the long parcht up earth does longed for
showers of rain


Think not Cleander so wholly to possess your Erminia, I shall always claim a
friends part in her


She is all yours Madam.


Here then ends our jealousy, since Erminia's virtue renders me (I Am sure) as
free from suspect as Aurindo's sex does you; but why differ we longer to
celebrate these happy Nuptials that unite our States, by the Accession of Argos
to Missena, and of all Greece now makes it the happiest Land


Mean time my dear Erminia thy name shall be so celebrous in the mouth of Fame,
that as often as 'twod praise any one; for Beauty and Virtue it shall only
say, the are like the fair and virtuous Erminia


WE do confess your curiosities
Have purified the Stage, that otherwise
Had been all dross e're this; and nothing there
That might delight a curious Eye or Ear.
And we'ar so far from taking of it ill,
We thank you for it, pray be curious still:
So shall the Poet, and the Actors too,
In time become as curious as you.
For just as Judges by their rigidness,
Make men more careful, and offend the less:
So do you, us, in the Boxes and the Pit,
In whose verge chiefly it lies to judge of it.
Do then by this Play as you are wont to do
By others, if it be bad, condemn it too:
If good, we hope you will give some sign, that may
Declare your approbation of the Play.

