THE PILGRIM, A COMEDY: As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL, IN DRURY LANE.

Written Originally by Mr. Fletcher, and now very much Altered, with several
Additions

LIKEWISE A Prologue, Epilogue, Dialogue and Masque, Written by the late Great
Poet Mr. DRYDEN, just before his Death, being the last of his WORKS

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took, near the Middle-Temple-Gate, in
Fleet Street, 1700

HOW wretched is the Fate of those who write!
Brought muzled to the Stage, for fear they bite.
Where, like Tom Dove, they stand the Common Foe;
Lugg'd by the Critique, Baited by the Beau.
Yet worse, their Brother Poets Damn the Play,
And Roar the loudest, though they never Pay.
The Fops are proud of Scandal, for they cry,
At every lewd, low Character, -- That Is I.
He who writes Letters to himself, would Swear
The World forgot him, if he was not there.
What should a Poet do? It Is hard for One
To pleasure all the Fools that would be shown:
And yet not Two in Ten will pass the Town.
Most Coxcombs are not of the Laughing kind;
More goes to make a Fop, than Fops can find.
Quack Marus, though he never took Degrees
In either of our Universities;
Yet to be shown by some kind Wit he looks,
Because he played the fool and writ Three Books.
But if he would be worth a Poet's Pen,
He must be more a Fool, and write again:
For all the former Fustian stuff he wrote,
Was Dead-born Doggrel, or is quite forgot;
His Man of Uz, stripped of his Hebrew Robe,
Is just the Proverb, and As poor as Job.
One would have thought he could no longer Iog;
But Arthur was a Level, Job's a Bog.
There, though he crept, yet still he kept in sight;
But here, he founders in, and sinks down right.
Had he prepared us, and been dull by Rule,
Tobit had first been turned to Ridicule:
But our bold Britton, without Fear or Awe,
O're-leaps at once, the whole Apocrypha;
Invades the Psalms with Rhymes, and leaves no room
For any Vandal Hopkins yet to come.
But what if, after all, this Godly Geer,
Is not so Senceless as it would appear?
Our Mountebank has laid a deeper Train,
His Cant, like Merry Andrew's Noble Vein,
Cat-Call's the Sects, to draw 'em in again.
At leisure Hours, in Epique Song he deals,
Writes to the rumbling of his Coaches Wheels,
Prescribes in have, and seldom kills by Rule,
But rides Triumphant between Stool and Stool.
Well, let him go; it is yet too early day,
To get himself a Place in Farce or Play.
We know not by what Name we should Arraign him,
For no one Category can contain him;
A Pedant, Canting Preacher, and a Quack,
Are Load enough to break one Asses Back:
At last, grown wanton, he presumed to write,
Traduced Two Kings, their kindness to requite;
One made the Doctor, and one dubbed the Knight.
PErhaps the Parson stretched a point too far,
When with our Theaters he waged a War.
He tells you, That this very Moral Age
Received the first Infection from the Stage.
But sure, a banished Court, with Lewdness fraught,
The Seeds of open Vice returning brought.
Thus Lodged, (as Vice by great Example thrives)
It first debauched the Daughters and the Wives.
London, a fruitful Soil, yet never bore
So plentiful a Crop of Horns before.
The Poets, who must live by Courts or starve,
Were proud, so good a Government to serve;
And mixing with Buffoons and Pimps profain,
Tainted the Stage, for some small Snip of Gain.
For they, like Harlots under Bawds professed,
Took all the ungodly pains, and got the least.
Thus did the thriving Malady prevail,
The Court, it is Head, the Poets but the Tail.
The Sin was of our Native growth, it is true;
The Scandal of the Sin was wholly new.
Misses there were, but modestly concealed;
White Hall the naked Venus first revealed.
Who standing, as at Cyprus, in her Shrine,
The Strumpet was adored with Rites Divine.
E're this, if Saints had any Secret Motion,
'Twas Chamber Practice all, and Close Devotion.
I pass the Peccadillo's of their time;
Nothing but open Lewdness was a Crime.
A Monarch's Blood was venial to the Nation,
Compared with one foul Act of Fornication.
Now, they would Silence us, and shut the Door
That let in all the barefaced Vice before.
As for reforming us, which some pretend,
That work in England is without an end;
Well we may change, but we shall never mend.
Yet, if you can but bear the present Stage,
We hope much better of the coming Age.
What would you say, if we should first begin
To Stop the Trade of Love, behind the Scene:
Where Actresses make bold with married Men?
For while abroad so prodigal the Dolt is,
Poor Spouse at home as ragged as a Colt is.
In short, we'll grow as Moral as we can,
Save here and there a Woman or a Man:
But neither you, nor we, with all our pains,
Can make clean work; there will be some Remains,
While you have still your Oats, and we our Hains.
SEignior Alphonso, you are too rugged with her, too harsh; indeed you are.


Yes, it seems so.


A Father of so sweet a Child, so good, so beautiful; Fie, Sir, fie, so
excellent a Creature


She Is a Fool; away.


Can you be angry? Can any wind blow rough upon a blossom so fair and tender?
Can a Father's Nature, a Noble Father's too


All this is but prating: Let her be ruled; let her observe my Humor; with my
Eyes let her see, with my Ears let her hear; I am her Father; I begot her, I
bred her, and by Jupiter I will --


No doubt you may compel her, but think how wretched you by force may make her.


Wretched! wretched! Is It not a Man I force her to? A noble Man; A Rich Man; A
Handsome Man; A Young Man; A Strong Man; none of your piec'd Companions, none
of your washy Rogues, that fly to fitters upon every puff of Weather. I force
her to a strong Dog, don't I? What would the Flirt have


I grant you, Roderigo is all these, and a brave Gentleman: But does it
therefore follow, she must dote upon him? Will you allow no Liberty in choosing


Alas! she is tender yet.


Tough, Tough, Tough as the Devil; you see I cannot break her.


You put her to too hard a Trial: You know, though he has Merit, he is a banished
Man, an Outlaw; you know the Life he leads; That he is the head of a rough Band
of Robbers; Judge what Effect his bloody Rapines must needs e're this have
workt upon his nature. A rugged Mate, I doubt, for such a Dove


Rugged indeed; Such different Tempers, where can you ever hope to reconcile?


Abed, abed, Do You hear? abed, Sir. She will not find him so rugged there, I Will
warrant you: She Will find ways to soften him. And for the Pranks he plays in's
Banishment, it shows he is a mettled Fellow: He Will make them weary of their
Sentence; a small Composition will restore him. But I know the Secret of all
this: My Minx has some other in View; some flickering Slave or other, some
sweet-scented Coxcomb, that -- a -- Sings, I Will warrant you, and -- a -- Lutes
it, Languishes, and has no Beard; ha! Is It not so


So far from what you charge her with, I would engage my Life, she has not yet
a Glance to answer for


I never yet beheld more Modesty.


Nor I, in one so young; so much discretion.


-- Hum -- and yet there was a Fellow (Dead I hope) whom I have seen her glance
at, 'till I thought the Hussy would have stuck her Eyes into the Rascal


Pray, who was that?


Pedro, Sir, only Pedro, old Fernando's hopeful Heir; my Mortal Foe, who is
Family I wish consumed; that is all, Sir


If that be all, you have nothing le^t to fear; for Pedro, urged by secret
discontent, has left his Father, Friends, and all; and, as it is said, is gone
to range the World


With all my heart: He was a Beggar, so strolling is his Business.


He was a Beggar, but a noble Beggar; shame on the Court for suffering him to
be so


Shame on those who encourage Beggars, I say. Here Is this young Slut, in the
midst of her Rebellion, is so very Religious, she undoes me with her Charity.
Why, what a Crew of Vermin have I about my Door every day, to receive Meat,
Drink, and Money, from her fair hands. Not a Rogue that can say his Prayers,
groan, and turn his Pipe to Lamentation, but she thinks she is bound to dance to


O, are you there Mistress? Well, how goes Disobedience to day? -- That Is a
base down Look -- Ah you sturdy young Jade


Pray be more gentle to her.


Pray be quiet; I know best how to deal with her: and I will make her obey, or
I will make her --


Sir^ you may make me any thing; you know I Am all Obedience, there is nothing
but my Prayers and Tears oppose you


Then will I oppo^e nothing but your Prayers and Tears. Now I hope you cannot
complain of me


Poor Lady, how I pity her.


Pray, keep your Pity for a better occasion. Look you, Gentlewoman, you know my
Will; and, in that, you know all; So I leave you to digest it; and I desire
these Gentlemen will do so too


Seb. A better hour attend you, Madam.


I thank ye Gentlemen: Alas! I want such Comforts. Would I could thank you too,
Father; but your Cruelty will not give me leave. Grant, Heaven, I may not forget my
Duty to him


If you do, Madam, Heaven will forgive you for it, never fear it. A perverse old
Rogue.


What Poor attend my Charity to day, Iuletta?


Enough of all sorts, Madam; some that deserve your Pity, some that don't: But I
wish you would be merry with your Charity; a Cheerful Look becomes it


Alas! Iuletta, what is there for me to be merry at? What Joy have I in View?


Joy; why what Joy, in the name of Venus, would you have, but a Husband? A
handsome lusty young Fellow, that will make such a bustle about you, he will send
your Spleen to the Devil, Madam


Away, light Fool; I doubt there is poor Contentments to be found in Marriage.
Yet could I find a Man --


You may, a thousand.


Mere Men, I know I may. But such a Man, from whose Example (as from a Compass)
we may steer our Course, and safe arrive at such a Memory as shall become our
Ashes; such Men are rare indeed. But no more of this, it is not Discourse that is
suited to thy Giddy Temper: Let Us in, and see what poor afflicted Wretches want
my Charity.


Stand off, and keep your Ranks. Twenty foot farther. There, louse your selves
with Reason and Discretion -- The Sun shines warm. No nearer. The farther still
the better: Your Beasts will bolt anon, and then it is dangerous


Hey ho! Heaven bless our Mistress.


Does the Crack go that way, old Hunger, ha? 'Twill be of my side anon.


Pray, Friend, be kind to us.


Friend! your Friend; and why your Friend, Sirrah, Meager Chaps? What do you
see in me, Louse-trap, or without me, ha! that I should be your Friend? Have I
got the Itch, Scrub, or do I look like some of thy Acquaintance hung in
Gibbets? Have thou any Friends, Kindred, or Alliance, or any higher Ambition
than an Alms Basket? This young soft-hearted Mistress of mine does make these
Rogues so familiar


I Am sure I would be your Worship's Friend.


No doubt on it, Vermin; and so you shall, when I Quarter the same Louse with
you


I Am sure it is Twelve a Clock.


It Is ever so with thee; when thou have done scratching; For that provokes thy
stomach to ring Noon. O the infinite Seas of Porridge thou have swallowed! Alms
do you ^all it, to relieve these Rascals


Look you there! Did not I tell you how she would undo me! What Marts of
Rogues and Beggars


It Is Charity Methinks you are bound to love her for.


Yes, I Will warrant you. If Men could Sail to Heaven in Porridge-pots, with
Masts of Beef and Mutton, what a Voyage should I make? What are all these here


Poor People, an't like your Worship.


Wretched poor People.


Very hungry People.


And very Lousie. And what are you!


Strangers, that come to wonder at your Charity; yet People poor enough to beg
a Blessing


Use 'em gently, Sir, they have a reverend M^en. You are Holy Pilgrims, are you
not


We are, Sir, and bound far off; to offer our Devotions.


What do you do here then; We have no Relics, no Holy Shrines.


The Holiest we ever heard of: You keep a living Monument of Goodness; a
Daughter of that Pious Excellence, the very Shrines of Saints sink at her
Virtue. We come to see this Lady, not with Profane Eyes, or wanton Blood, to
dote upon her Beauty; but through our tedious way, to beg her Blessing


This is a new way of Begging; these Commendations cry Money for Reward, good
store too: Ah! the Sainting of this young Harlot will Cost me Dear




A handsome well looked Man.


What Country Craver are you? What! nothing but Motion? A Puppit Pilgrim.


He Is a stranger, Sir, these four days I have traveled in his Company; but
little of his Business or his Language yet I have understood


Both young and handsome; only the Sun has injured him.


Would you have Money, Sir, or Meat, or a Wench? What kind of Blessing does
your Devotion point at, Still more Ducking? Are there any Saints that
understand by sign only? Hah, more Motion yet? This is the prettyest Pilgrim;
the Pink of Pilgrims


Fie, Sir, Fie; rather bestow your Charity then Jest upon him.


Say you so? Why then, look ye, Pilgrim; here is a poor Viaticum, very good
Gold, Sir, I Am Sorry it is not heavier. But since the lightest Grain of earthly
Dross would be a Burden to a Heavenly mind -- I Will put it up again


O horrible! you are too Irreverent.


You are a -- Must I give my Money to every Rogue that carries a grave Look
in's Face? Must my good Angels wait upon him? I Will find 'em other business


But consider, Sir, the Wrongs you do those Men may light on you: Strangers are
entitled to a softer Usage


Oon's, half the Kingdom will be strangers shortly, if this young Slut's
suffered to go on with her Prodigalities. But I must be an Ass: Here, Sirrah,
see 'em relieved for once; do it effectually too; do you hear? Burst 'em, that I
may never see 'em more. Were I young again, I Would sooner get Bear-whelps than
She-Saints.


Such a Face as that, sure I have seen.


I thought so too; but we must be mistaken.


Come, will ye troop up, Porridge Regiment? Captain Poor-Quarter, will ye move?


Why are not these poor Wretches served yet?


Bless our good Mistress.


They are too high fed, Madam; their Stomachs are not awake yet.


Do you make sport with their Miseries? Sir, learn more Humanity, or I shall
find a way to teach it you


Kind Heaven preserve her, and for ever bless her.


Bless the good end I mean it for.


Would I knew what that were; if it be for a Man, I Would say Amen with all my
heart

You have a very pretty Band of Pensioners, Madam.

Vain Glory would seek more and handsomer;
But I appeal to Virtue what my end is.
What men are these?

Holy Pilgrims they seem to be. What Pity it is that handsome young Fellow
should undergo so much Penance: Would I were the Saint he makes his Vow to;
I Would soon grant his Request, let him ask what he would


You are Pilgrims, Sirs, Is It not so?


We are, fair Saint; may Heaven's Grace surround you;
May all good Thoughts and Prayers dwell about you;
Abundance be your Friend, and Holy Charity be ever at your hand to Crown you
Glorious


I thank you, Sir; Peace guide your Travels too;
And what you wish for most, end all your troubles.
Remember me by this; ( Giving him Money) and in
Your Prayers, when your strong Heart melts,
Meditate my poor Fortunes.

All my Devotions wait upon your Service.


Are you of this Country, Sir?


Yes, worthiest Lady, but far off bred: My Fortune's farther from me.


I am no Inquisitor, whatever Vow or Penance pulls you on, Sir, Conscience, or
Love, or stubborn Disobedience; That Saint you Kneel too, hear and ease your
Travels


Yours never begin; and thus I Seal my Prayers.


How steadfastly this Man looks upon me? How he Sighs? Some great Affliction
sure's the source of his Devotions




Would he would stir me a little; I like his shape well.


It may be he would speak to me alone;

Retire a little, Iuletta; but do you hear, don't be far off.


I shall not, Madam: Would I were nearer him: A young smug handsome Holiness has
no fellow


Why do you grieve? Do you find your Penance sharp?
Are the Vows you have made, too mighty for you?
Or does the World allure you to look back, and make you mourn the softer Hours
you have lost? You are young, and seem as you were formed for Manly Resolution;
Come, be Comforted


I am, fair Angel: And such a Comfort from your words I feel, that though
Calamities, like angry Waves, curl round, contending proudly, who shall first
devour me, yet I will stem their Danger


He speaks Nobly.


All that can make me happy: I want my self.


Your self! Who robbed you, Pilgrim?
Why does he look so earnestly upon me? I want my self.
Indeed you Holy wanderers are said to seek much,
But to seek your selves --

I seek my self, and am but my self's shadow, have lost my self, and now am not
so Noble


Self sake, Pilgrim, who so e're it be, take this.


Your hand I dare take; that be far from me: Your hand I hold, and thus I kiss
it; and thus I bless it too. Be constant still: Be good: And live to be a great
Example


One word more. He Is gone: Heaven! How I Tremble? Be Constant still; it is the
very Poesy here; and here without, Be Good. He wept too, as he left me. It
must be Pedro. Iuletta


Madam.


Take this Key, and quickly fetch me the Jewel that lies in my little Cabinet.
That will determine all, Pedro


Let me see it: It Is so; It Is he; it must be he. He spoke the words just as
they stand engraven here. I seek my self, and am but my self's shadow

Poor Pedro! But how shall I recover him?
Iuletta, the Pilgrim, where is he? which way did he go?

Alas, Madam, I don't know; it is in vain to seek him now.


I tell thee, I must see him; I gave him nothing.


That was ill done, indeed; for he is the handsomest Fellow I have seen this
many a Day. What makes her look so thoughtful? Sure here is something afoot more
than ordinary


aside. It Is enough. He has done much for me: I Will try what Recompense it is in
my power to make him.


CAn she slip through a Keyhole? Tell me that; resolve me; Can she fly in the
Air? Is she Invisible? Gone, and no body knew it


Pray, be more moderate.


Some Goatish Rogue has watched her hour of Itching, and has clawed her, clawed
her; the Dog has clawed her. 'Oons find her out, or I Will hang ye all; you,
Wagtail, you know her Designs, you were of her Council, ( to Iulet) her bawdy
Adviser; where is she, Strumpet


You would know of me, Sir.


Of you Sir? Yes of you Sir; why, what are you Sir?


Her Servant, Sir, her faithful Servant.


Servant? Her Bawd; her Fiddle-stick; her Lady Fairy, to oil the Doors
o'nights, that they may not creek. Where is she, Infamy


It Is very well.


You Lie, it is ill, Damnable ill; and either confess, or --


Indeed I will not.


Why?


Because I cannot; if I could, I Would give another Reason.


Well said; but I shall deal with you, you Slut you. What say you, Thick-skull,
which way did she get out? why were not my Doors ^hut


They were, a'nt Please you; nothing open but the Keyhole.


Where did she lie? Who lay with her?


Not I, an't please you; I lay with Frederick in the Flea-Chamber.


Once more, of thee I demand her; tell me News of her, or expect -- the Devil
and all


Come Iuletta, if you know any thing, tell him --


Look ye, Sir, if I knew all, and had been entrusted by her, not all the Devils
you could call upon, should scare one single Hint from me. But, since I know
nothing worth your knowing, I Will tell you what I do ^now. I know she is gone,
because we cannot find her. I know she is gone cunningly, because you cannot find
which way. I know she was weary of your Tyranny, because the Devil would have
been so too: And I know, if she is wise, she will never come again --


Out of my Doors.


That Is all my poor Petition. For were your house Gold, and she not in it, I
should think it but a Cage to whistle in


Whore; if she be above ground, I Will have her --


I Would live in a Colepit then, if I were she.


Indeed, Sir, I fancy she knows nothing of her Flight; you know her mad way of
talking


Hang her, hang her, she knows too much.

Well Rascal, have you any News of her?


N. -- N. -- Not a Drop Sir. The Butler gave me the Key of the Cellar, to
search the Cellar, Sir; so I have been searching the Cellar


Here Is a Dog for you.


I searched every Hogshead, Sir, and opened some Bottles, but could not find a
spoonful of her


You Rascal, get you out of my reach, or I Will be thy Murderer.


S, S, S, S, Sir.


Well, what News? Be quick:


My yo, yo, yo, yo, young La-Lady is gone --


I know she is gone, you Dog, but where?


Out at the P --


Out with it, you Son of a Whore --


The Po, ho, ho, ho, ho, hostern Gate of the Ga, ha, ha, ha, ha --


This Dog will make me mad; but one stammering Rogue in the Family, and it must
fall to his share to give me an account of her. The Wind's in the East too; The
Dog will not get it out this Hour. Where was it, Sirrah, where was it


The Gaarden Sir, the Ga-arden.


The Garden, Sir, the Garden; was it so?
And how do you know she got out at the Garden, ha?

Is -- s -- saw, an't p, p, p, p, p-lease you, the P -- Print of^ her fo, fo,
fo, fo, Foot


Right, a Foot, a little Foot, a young Where Is Foot?


Ye, Yes Sir.


And from thence scrambled over the Wall into the Park, and so to the Devil?


So I sup, -p, -pose, Sir.


It Is very well, ye Stars, it is very well: This comes of Indulgence, I must
needs allow her the Key of the Garden, to walk on Fast-days, and Contemplate
with a Pox: But I Will fetch her again, with a Firebrand at her Tail. My Horses
there --


You Will give us Leave to wait upon you?


You Will give us Leave to wait upon you?


That you may if you please. My Horse there; dispatch. Are you so Hot, I Faith?
I Will Cool you, Mistress; Must you be jumping Joan? If I catch you again, I Will
clap such a Clogg about your Neck, you shall leap no more Walls I Will warrant
you; I Will hang Roderigo there, In Faith. My Horses, quick; and do you hear, keep
me this young Lirry Poop within doors, fast; I shall discover Dame --


Indeed you will not Sir.


Well, Love, if thou be'st with her; or whatever Power else arms her
Resolution, conduct her carefully, and keep her from this Madman -- Direct her
to her Wishes; dwell about her; let no dishonorable End overtake her, Danger
or Want; and let me try my Fortune --


You are not merry Captain.


Why, we get nothing, we have no sport; Whoring and Drinking spoils us; we keep
no Guard


I Am sure there is neither Merchant nor Gentleman passes, but we have Tribute.


Yes, and while we spend that idly, we let those pass that carry the best
Booty: I Will have all searched and brought in. Rogues and Beggars have found the
Trick of late to become Bankers. In short, Gentlemen, I Will have none Escape but
my Friends and Neighbors, who may be useful in laying my Innocence before the
King: All others shall pay their Passport


You now speak like a Captain; if we spare any, flea us, and Coin our Cassocks.


You hear of no Preparations the King intends against us?


Not a Word; Don't we see his Garrisons?


Who have we out now?


Good fellows, that, if there be any Purchase stirring, will not flip it; Jacques
and Lopez, Lads that know their Business


Where Is the Boy you brought in e'n now? he is a pretty Lad, and of a quick
Capacity --


He Is within at Meat, Sir; the poor Knave's hungry; yet he seasons all he eats
or drinks, with Tears


He Is young; it is Fear and want of Company.


Don't use him roughly, and he will soon grow bolder. I intend to keep him to
wait upon me; I ^ike the Boy, there is something in this Face pleases me
strangely: Be sure you all use him gently


Here Is a little Box, Sir, we took about him, which almost broke his Heart to
part with; I fancy there is something of Value in it; ^ cannot open it


Alas! some little Money, I warrant you, the poor Knave carried to defray his
Charge: I Will give it him again

How now! Who Is this? What have you brought me here, So^diers?


Why Truly we don't well know; only he is a damned sullen fellow.


Where did you take him?


Upon the skirt of the Wood, sauntring and peeping about, as if he were looking
for the best Access to our Quarters: Money he had enough, and when we threatened
him, he smiled and yielded, but would not speak one word


Pilgrim, come hither; are you a Pilgrim, Sir? A Piece of pretty Holiness; do
you shrink, my Master? A smug young Saint this. What Country were you born in,
I pray? What, not a Word? had your Mother this excellent Virtue too? Sure, she
was a Matchless Woman: What a blessed Family is this Fellow sprung from! sure
he was begot in a Calm. Are your Lips Sealed, or do you scorn to Answer? Look
you, Sir, you are in my Hands, and I shall be too hard for you: Put off his
Bonnet, Soldiers. You have a speaking Face, Sir


A Handsome one, I Am sure; this Pilg^im cannot want She-Saints to pray to.


Stand nearer: Ha?


Come, do your worst; I am ready.


Have you found your Tongue then? Retire all, and let me ta^k with him alone;
and keep your Guards st^ict. ( Ex. all but Rod. and Ped. So, now, what art thou


What am I? My habit shows me what I am.


A Desperate Fool; and so thy fate shall tell thee. What Devil brought thee
hither? For I know thee


I know thou do; and since it is my Fortune to light into thy hands, I must
conclude, the most malicious of Devils brought me; yet some Men say thou art
Noble --


Not to thee; that were a benefit to mock the giver. Thy Father hates my
Friends and Family; and thou have been the Heir of all his Malice; can two such
Storms then meet, and part without Kissing


You have the mightier hand.


And so I Will use it.


I cannot hinder you; less can I beg submissive at his knees that knows no
Honor, that bears the stamp of Man, and not his Nature. You may do what you
please


I will do all.


I do expect thou will; for had thou been a Noble Enemy, thou would have
sought me whilst I carried Arms, whilst my good Sword was my Profession, and
then have cried out, Pedro, I defy thee; then stuck Alphanso's Quarrel on thy
point; the mercenary anger thou serv'st under, to get his Daughter. But now,
thou poorly, basely, set thy Toils to catch me, and like the trembling
Peasant, that dares not meet the Lion in the face, dig'st crafty Pitfalls. Thou
shame to Spanish Honor


Thy bravery is to thy Habit due: That Holy dress thou think will be thy
sanctuary; thou will not find it so


I Look not for it; The more unhallowed Wretch however art thou t'invade it.


When you were bravest, Sir, and your Sword sharpest, I durst affront you, you
know I durst; when the Court Sun gilded you, and every Cry was, The young
hopeful Pedro, Alonso's sprightly Son, then I durst meet you, when you were
Master of this mighty Fame, and all your Glories in the full Meridian. Had we
then come to Competition, which I often sought --


And I desired too.


You shoud have seen this Sword and felt it too, sharper than Sorrow felt it.
Then like a Gentleman I would have used thee, and given thee the fair Fortue of
thy cast: But since thou steal'st upon me like a Spy, and Theif-like think
that Holy Case shall save thee, base as thy Purposes thy end shall be.
Soldiers, appear, and bring a halter with ye. I Will forgive your Holy Habit,
Sir, but I Will hang you


Here Is a Halter, noble Captain, what service have you fort?


That Traitor has Service for it. Truss him up.


With all my heart; do you want a band, Sir? I Will fit it to your Collar
immediately


What Is his fault, Captain?


It Is my will, he perrish; that is his fault.


A Captain of good Government: Come, Soldiers, come, you are roughly bred, and
Bloody; show your Obedience, and the Joy you have, in executing Impious
Commands. You have a Captain Seals you liberal Pardons: Be no more Christians,
it is not in your way, put Religion by, 'twill make you Cowards. Feel no
Tenderness; nor let a thing called Conscience trouble you; alas! 'twill breed
delay. Bear no Respect to what I seem; were I a Saint indeed, why should that
stagger ye? You know no Holiness; to be excellent in Evil is your Goodness; and
be so, '^will become you; have no Hearts for fear you should repent, for
Repentance will be dangerous


Truss up the Preacher.


The Racks of Conscience are of dire Importance.
Be therefore steady in your Mischiefs; waver not.

Up with him, I say.


Why do you not obey your Chief? Come, this one daring stroke at Heaven, will
make ye hardened Soldiers of Iniquity


What do the Villains gaze at? Why am I not obeyed?


What would you have us do?


Dispatch the Babbler --


And have Religious Blood hang over our Heads?
We have sins enough already, to make our Graves loath us.

I shall not be obeyed then?


Obeyed? I don't know; though I am a Thief, I Am no Hangman^ They are two Trades;
I don't care to meddle with Holy Blood


Holy, or Unholy, I Will have it done.


If I do it, I Will be Damned.


Or I.


Or I. We'll do any thing that is reasonable; but the Devil would flinch at such
a Job


I have done as many Villainies as another; and though I say'^, with as few
Qualms: But I don't like this, it goes against my Stomach


Have ye then conspir'd^ ye Slaves?


Why art thou so disturbed at their Refusal; if it is my Life alone ^hou'
want, why with thy own cursed hand do thou not take it? Thine's ^he
Revenge; Be thine the Glory: Engross it to thy self, take the whole ^in upon
thee, and be Mighty in Evil, as thou art in Anger. And let not those poor
wretches howl for thy sake


It Is enough; I Will make ye all repent this stubborness; nor will I yet be
baffled, I Will find another means to have my Will obeyed. Let him not escape, I
charge ye, on your Lives.


What the Devil have you done Pilgrim, to make him rave and rage thus? Have you
killed his Father, or his Mother, or strangled any of his Kindred


Or has he no Sisters? Have not you been Bouncing about them?


OF my Conscience his Quarrel to thee is not for being Holier than he.


Nor for seeming an Honester Man; for we have no Trading here with such stuff.
To be excellent Thieves is all we aim at. Hark thee, Pilgrim; will thou take a
Spit and a Stride, and try if thou can outrun us


No, I scorn to shift his Fury.


Thou will be hanged then.


I cannot dye with fewer faults about me.


I fancy he will shoot him; for the Devil's in it if he hang him himself.


No, he is too proud for that; he will make some body do it: See, here he comes
again, and as full of Rage as ever


He has got the Boy with him; sure he will not make him do it.


As like as not.


Come, Sirrah, no wonders. Nay, don't Stare, nor hang back; do it, or I Will hang
you, you young Dog --


Alas, Sir, What would you have me do? Heaven's Goodness shield me.


Do? Why, hang a Rogue that would hang me.


I Am a Boy, and weak, Sir; pray excuse me.


Thou art strong enough to tie him to a Bough, and turn him off. Come, be quick.


For Heavens sake, Sir.


Do ye dispute, Sirrah?


O, no, Sir; I Will do the best I can. Which is the Man, Sir?


That in the Pilgrim's Coat there; that Devil in the Saint's Skin.


Guard me, ye Powers.


Come, Dispatch.


I wait thy worst.


Will the Boy do it? Is the Rogue so bold? So young, so deep in Blood!


He shakes and trembles.


Do thou seek more Coals still to sear thy Conscience? Work Sacred Innocence
to be a Devil? Do it thy self, for shame: Thou best becomest it


Thou art not worthy on it. No, this Child shall strangle thee. A Crying Girl,
if she were here, should Master thee


How shall I Save him? How my self from Violence? Are you prepared to dye, Sir?


Yes, Boy; Prithee to thy Bu^iness.


The young Dog begins to look as if he would do it in earnest.


If you are prepared, How can you be so angry, so perplext'd? Heaven's won by
Patience, not by Heat and Passion


The Bastard will make a good Priest.


I thank thee, gentle Child, thou teach rightly.


Methinks you seem to fear too.


Thou see more than I feel, Boy.


You tremble sure.


No, Boy, it is but thy tenderness; prithee make haste.


Are ye so willing then to go?


Most willing. I would not borrow from his Bounty, one poor hour of Life, to
gain an Age of Glory


And is your Reckoning stated right with Heaven?


As right as Truth, Boy; I could not go more joyful to a Wedding.


Then to your Prayers! I Will dispatch you presently.


A good Boy; I Will reward thee well.


I thank you, Sir; but pray allow me a short word in private. Now guide my
Tongue, ye blessed Saints above.


What would thou have, Child?


Must this Man Dye?


Why do thou ask that Question?


Pray be not angry; if he must, I Will do it: But must he now?


What else; Who dares reprieve him?


Pray think again; and as the Injuries are great this Man has done^ you, so
suit your Vengeance to 'em


I do; it is therefore he must dye --


A Trifle.


What is a Trifle?


Death, if he dye now.


Why, my best Boy?


I love you, Sir, I would not tell you else. Is it Revenge to Saint your Enemy;
Clap the Dove's, Wings of Downy Peace upon him, and let him soar to Heaven, is
this Revenge


Yet die he must.


Right. Let him die, but not prepared to die. That were the Blessing of a
Father on him; and all who know and love Revenge would laugh at you. You see,
thus fortified, he scorns your Threats, despises all your Tortures; smiles to
behold your Rage; so blind your View, that ^ while you aim his hated Soul to
Hell, you shoot it up to Heaven. Shall he die now


What has the Boy done to him?


How thoughtfully he looks?


Come, Sir, you are wise, and have the World's regard; you are valiant too, and
see your Valor honored. 'Twill be a Stain to both, indeed it will, to have it
said, you have given your Fury leave to prey on a poor passive wayward Pilgrim
--


The Boy has shaken me: What would thou have me do?


Alas Sir, do you ask a Child? But since you do, I Will say the best I know. I Would
have you then do bravely, scorn him, and let him go. You have made him tremble,
now seal his Pardon; and when he appears a Subject fit for Anger, fit for you,
his pious Armor off, his hopes no higher than your Sword may reach, then
strike the noble Blow.


Here; Let the Fool go. I scorn his Life too much to take it from him. But if
we meet again --


I thank ye, Sir.


No more: Be gone.


Why this was greatly done, most noble.


Come, Boy, thou shall retire with me; I love thy Company: Thou have a pleasing
Tongue; come with me, Child


I Will wait upon ye, Sir. Pedro.


The Boy has don't; he has saved the Pilgrim. A Cunning young Rogue, I shall
love him for it heartily


And so shall I. But the Knave's so good, I Am afraid he will ruin us, he will make
us all honest


Marry Heaven forbid.


He Will find that a harder Task, than to save the Pilgrim.


That I believe: But come, Gentlemen, let us to Supper; we'll Drink the Boy's
Health, and so about our business


It Is strange none of you shoud know her.


Alas! we never saw her, nor heard of her, but from you.


I don't think 'twas she; Methinks a Woman shoud not dare --


Thou speak thou know not what: What dares not Woman, when she is
provoked? Or what seems dangerous to Love and Fury? That it is she, These
Jewels here confirm me, for part of 'em I my self sent her, which (though against
her Will) her Father forced her to accept and wear


It Is very strange, a Wench and we not know it, I used to have a better Nose.


But what could be her business here?


That Is what distracts me. O! that canting Pilgrim, that Villain Pedro; there
lies my Torture. How cunningly she pleaded for him? How Artfully she saved him?
Death and Torments, had ye been true to me, I never had suffered this


Why, you might have hanged him if you would; and would he had been hanged,
that is all we care for it, so we had not don't --


But where is she now? What care have ye had of that? Why have ye let her go,
to despise and laugh at me


The Devil that brought her hither, has carried her back again, I think; for
none of us saw her go


No living thing came this Night through our Watches. You know she went with
you


And was by me, 'till I fell asleep. But when I waked and called was gone. Curse
on my Dullness, why did I not open this? This would have told me all


Prithee bring me to thy Captain, where is thy Captain, Fellow? Oh, I am
foundered, I am melted; some Fairy has led me about all Night; the Devil has
enticed me with the voice of a Whore. Where Is thy Captain, Fellow


Here Sir, there he stands.


O! Captain, how do thou, Captain? I have been fooled, bubbled, made an Ass
on: My Daughter's run away; I have been haunted too; have lost my Horse, am
starved for want of Meat, and out of my Wits


I Am sorry, Sir, to see you engaged in so many Misfortune's; But pray walk in,
refresh your self, and I Will inform you what has happened here; but I Will recover
your Daughter, or lose my Life: In the mean time all these shall wait upon you


My Daughter be damned. Order me Drink enough; I Am almost Choked.


You shall have any thing. What think you now Soldiers?


I think, a Woman's a Woman; that is all.


And I think the next Boy we take, we should search him a little nearer.


This is Roderigo's Quarter; my old Master's gone in here, and I Will be with him
soon; I Will startle him a little better than I have done. All this long Night
have I led him out of the way, to try his Patience. I have made him Swear and
Curse, and Pray, and Curse again: I have made him lose his Horse too, whistled
him through thick and thin. Down in a Ditch I had him; there he lay
blaspheming, till I called him out to guide his Nose pop into a Fuz bush. Ten
thousand Tricks I have p^ay'd him, and ten thousand will add to them before I
have done with him. I Will teach him to plague poor Women. But all this while, I
cannot meet with my dear Mistress. I Am cruelly afraid she should be in Distress;
would to kind Heaven I could come to comfort her: But, till I do, I Will haunt
thy Ghost^ Alphonso; I will, old Crab-Tree. He shall not sleep; I Will get a Drum
for him, I Will frighten him out of his wits; I have such a Hurricane in my head,
I have almost lost my own already; and I Am resolved I will not be mad alone. When
a Woman sets upon playing the Devil, 'twere ashame she should not do it to the
purpose.


It Is strange, in all the Tour we have made, we sh^u'd have no news at all of
her


I Cannot think she is got so far.


She Is certainly disguised; her Modesty would never venture in her own Shape.


Let her take any Shape, I Am sure I could distinguish her.


So could I, I think. Has not her Father found her?


Not he, he is so wild, he would not know her if he met her.


I hope he would not; for it is pity she should fall into his hands. B^t where
are we, Curio


In a Wood, I think; hang me if I know else: And yet I have ridden all these
Coasts, and at all hours


I wish we had a Guide.


If I am not much mistaken, Seberto, we are not far from Roderigo's Qu^rters. I
think it is in this Thicket he and his Outlaws harbor


Then we are where Alphanso appointed to meet us.


I believe we are, would we could meet some living thing to inform us.


What Is that there?


A Boy, I think; stay, Why may not he direct us?


I am hungry, and I am weary, almost quite spent, yet cannot find him; keep me
in my Wits, good Heaven! I feel 'em wavering. O my Head


Hey Boy, do hear, thou stripling!


O my fears, some of Roderigo's wicked Crew. If I am carried back to him, I
then indeed am wretched


Do know what place this is, Child?


No indeed, Sir, not I. O my Bones!


What do thou complain for, Boy? A very pretty Lad this.


What Is the matter with thee, Child?


Alas, Sir! I was going to Segovia, to see my sick Mother, and here I have been
taken, robbed, and beaten by d^unken Thieves. O my back


What Rogues are these to use a poor Boy thus! Look up Child, be of good cheer,
hold up thy head


O, I cannot, it hurts me if I do; they have given me a great blow on the Neck.


What Thieves are they, do know?


They call the Captain Roderigo. O Dear, O Dear.


Look you there; I knew we were thereabouts.


Do thou want any thing?


Nothing but ease, Sir.


There Is some Money for thee however, and get thee to thy Mother.


I thank ye Gentlemen, pray Heaven bless ye.


Come let us along, we cannot lose our way now.


I Am glad you are gone, Gentlemen; I know you are honest men, but I don't know
whether you are on my side upon this occasion; Lord how I tremble, send me but
once into Pedro's Arms, Dear Fortune, and then come what will -- Which way
shall I go, or what shall I do? it is almost Night again, and I know not where
to get either Meat or Lodging. These wild Woods, and the various fancies that
possess my Brain will run me Mad. Hey ho.


Boy, Boy.


More set to take me.


Do hear, Boy? a word with thee.


It Is a Boy too, and no bigger than I am, I can deal with him.


Hark ye young Man; Can you beat a Drum?


A Drum!


A Drum! Ay, a Drum; did never see a Drum, mun? Prithee try if thou can
make it grumble


Iuletta's Face and Tongue; is she run mad too? Or is theresome design in this?
I Am Jealous of every thing


I Will give thee a Royal, but to go along with me to Night, and hurry durry this
a little


I care not for your Royal nor you neither, I have other business, prithee Drum
to thy self and Dance to it


Why how now, you saucy young Dog you! I have a good mind to lay down my Drum,
and take ye a slap over the Face


Hark; here comes more company, I shall be taken at last. Heaven shield me!


Basto; who is there?


Do you need me any farther, Captain?


No, not a foot: Give me the Gown: so: the Sword.


This is the Devil Thief; and if he take me, woe be to my Gaskins.


Certainly Sir, she will take her Patches off, and change her Habit.


Let her do what she will, she cannot again deceive me. No, no, Alinda, it is not
the Habit of a Boy can twice delude me


A Boy, and Patches on, what a dull Jade have I been!


If she be found in the Woods, send me word presently, and I Will return; she
cannot be yet got far. If you don't find her, expect me -- when you see me. No
more, farewell.


I Am very glad thou art gone. This Boy in Patches was the Boy I talked to; the
very same, how hastily it shifted me! what a mop-ey'd Ass was I, I could not
know her. It must be she; it is she: now I remember her, how loath she was to
talk: how shy she was of me. I Will follow her, but who shall plague her Father
there? No, I must not quit him yet: I must have one flurt more at him, and then
for the Voyage. Come, Drum, make ready. Thou must do me Service.


Are they all set?


All, and each quarter's quiet.


Is old Alphonso a-sleep?


An hour ago.


We must be very careful in our Captain's absence.


It concerns us, he will not be long from us. Hark --


What!


A Drum.


The Devil.


It Is not the wind, sure.


No: that is Still and Calm. Ha^k again.


Tat, Tat.


It ^omes nearer: we are surpised; it is by the King's Command; we are all Dead
men


Hark, hark, a Charge now. Our Captain has betrayed us all.


This comes of Love: Poverty, a scolding Wife, and ten Daughters be his
recompense.


Do You hear the Drum?


Yes, we do hear it.


Hark, another on that side.


Fly, fly, fly, we are all taken, we are all taken.


A Thousand Horse and Foot, a Thousand Prisoners, and every Man a Halter by his
side


A dismal Night, Companions! what is to be done?


Every Man shift for himself.


Ay marry Sir, where is my Horse now? what a Plague did I do amongst these
Rogues? is there never a hole to creep into? I shall be taken for their
Captain, and out of respect to my Post, be hanged up first. A Pox of all
Ceremonies, cry I; what will become of me! I must be a Daughter-hunting, with a
Pox to me: Lord! Lord! that a foolish young Whore should lead a wise old Rogue
into so much mischief. But hark: hark, I say: ay; here they come. That I had
but the Strumpet here now, to find 'em a little Play while I made my escape. --


What do you fear? what do you run from? Here are no Soldiers, no Body from
the King to Attack you, are you all mad


Ay, but the Drum, the Drum Sir, did not you hear the Drum?


I never saw such Pidgeon-hearted Rogues: what Drum, you Fools? What Danger?
who is that stands shaking there behind, enough to infect a whole Army with
Cowardice. Mercy on me, Sir, is it you? what is it that frights you thus


Is there any hopes; do ye think I could buy my Pardon?


What is it that has frighted you thus out of your Senses? here is no danger near
you: A Drum I heard indeed, and saw it, a Boy was beating it; Hunting Squirrils
by Moonlight


Nothing else, upon my Word, Sir.


That Rogue, the very Boy, no doubt on it, that haunted me all last Night. I
wish I had him, he has plagued my heart out. But come, let us go in, and let me
get on my Clothes; if I stay here any longer to be Martyred thus, I Will beget
another Daughter. Where is that Jewel? Have you met her yet


No; we have no news of her.


Then I can tell you some, she has been here in Boys Clothes, she has trust up
her Modesty in a Pair of Breeches. There has been a Pilgrim at her Tail too. I
suppose the Game's almost up by this time


A young Boy we met, Sir.


In a Gray-Hat.


In a Gray-Hat.


Patches on.


Patches on.


The Strumpet.


Impossible.


True -- in the Litteral Sense.


It Is wonderful we should not know her.


Dam her, that is all. Come get me some Wine, a great deal: This Halter makes me
kekkle in the Throat still.


What a fright have I put 'em in! a brave hurly burly; IN faith, if this do but
bolt him, I Will be with him again, with a new part. I Will ferk him; as he hunts
her, I Will hunt him, no Fox with a kennel of Hounds at his Tail, ever had such a
time on it.

You need make no Apology Sir, I take a Pleasure in waiting upon Srangers, and
showing 'em what is worth their seeing in our City. Besides I observe you are
sad, I would divert your melancholy if I could. Will ye view our Castle


I thank ye, (...), but I Have already seen it; it is strong and well provided.


How do you like the Walks?


They are very pleasant; your Town stands cool and sweet.


But that I would not add to your sadness -- I could show you a place were
worth your view


Shows seldom alter me, Sir, pray what place is it?


It Is a House here, where People of all sorts, that have been visited with
Lunacies, and Follies, wait their Cures. There Is fancies of a thousand stamps
and fashions: Some of Pity, that it would make you melt to see their Passions:
And some again as light that would divert you. But I see your temper, Sir, too
much inclined to Contemplation to have a taste of such Diversions


You mistake me, Sir, I should be glad to see 'em; if you please, I'^l wait
upon you thither


Since you are willing Sir, I shall be proud to be your guide.


I never yet had so much mind to take a view of misery.


Carry mad Bess some Meat, she roars like Thunder. And tie the Parson short;
the Moon's in the full, he has a thousand Pigs in's Brain. Who looks to the
Prentice? Keep him from Women, he thinks he has lost his Mistress: And talk of
no Silk Stuffs; 'twill run him Horn mad


The Justice keeps such a stir yonder with his Charges, and such a coil with
his Warrants


Take away his Statutes; the Devil has possessed him in the likeness of Penal
Laws; keep him from Aqua-vitae, for if that Spirit creep into his Quorum, he will
commit us all. How is it with the Scholar


For any thing I see he is in's right Wits.


Thou art an Ass; his Head's too full of other Peoples Wits, to leave room for
his own.


Give me some Drink.


O ho, here is the English Man.


Fill me a thousand Pots, and froth 'em, froth 'em; down of your knees, you
Rogues, and pledge me roundly; one, two, three -- and four. To the great Turk,
I Am his Friend, and will prefer him, he shall quit his Crown -- and be a
Tapster


Peace, thou heathenish Drunkard, Peace for shame. These English are so
Malt-mad, there is no meddling with them; when they have a Fruitful Year of Barley
there, the whole Island's thus


Who talks of Barley? my Drink's small; down with the Malt-Tax. Huzza.


Hold your Tongue, you Bear you, or I shall so Chastise ye --


Who Is that? An Excise man? The Devil


God give you good Even, Gaffer.


Who has let the Fool loose here?


If any of the Madmen get her, they will Pepper her, they will Bounce her, l' Faith.


Will you walk into the Cole-house, Gaffer?


She Is as Leacherous as a she Ferret.


Who a Vengeance looks to her? Go in Kate, go in, and I Will give thee a fine
Apple


Will you buss me, and tickle me, and make me Laugh?


I Will whip you, Hussy.


Fool, fool, come up to me, fool.


Are ye peeping?


I Will get thee with five Fools.


O fine, O Dainty.


And thou shall lie in a Horse-cloath like a Lady.


And shall I have a Coach?


Drawn with four Turkeys, and they shall tread thee too.


We shall have Eggs then; and shall I sit upon 'em?


Ay, Ay, and they shall be all Addle, and make a Tanzey for the Devil. Come,
come away; I am taken with thy Love, Fool, and will mightily belabour thee


How the Slut Bridles! How she twitters at him! These English men would stagger
a wise Woman. If we should suffer her to have her will now, we should have all
the Women in Spain as mad as she here


They Would strive who should be most fool: Away with her.


Pray ye stay a little, let us hear him sing: He has a fine Breast.


Here comes my Master: to the Spit, you whore; and stir no more abroad, but
tend your business, you shall have no more sops in the pan else. Away with 'em
both.


I Will assure you Sir, the Cardinal's angry with you for keeping this young Man.


I Am heartily sorry, Sir; if you allow him sound, pray take him with you.


We can find nothing in him Light nor Tainted; no starts, no rubs in all his
Answers: His Letters too are full of Discretion, Learning, and in a handsome
style


Don't be deceived Sir, mark but his Look.


His grief and his Imprisonment may stamp that there.


Pray talk with him again then.


That will be needless, we have tried him long enough, and if he had a taint,
we should have met with it


A sober Youth: It Is Pity so heavy a misfortune should attend him.


You find no sickness?


None Sir, I thank Heaven; nor nothing that disturbs my understanding.


Do you sleep a Nights?


Perfectly sound and sweet.


Have you no fearful Dreams?


Sometimes, as all have, who go to Bed with raw and windy stomacsh.


Is there no unkindness you have received from any Friend, or Parent? or Scorn
from what you loved


No truly Sir, I have not yet s^^n Vill^ny enough, to make me doubt the truth
of Friend or Kindred -- and what Love is, unless it lie in Learning, I am
ignorant


This Man is perfect; I never met with on^ that t^lk'd more regularly.


You Will find it otherwise.


I must tell you plainly Sir, I think you keep him here to make him mad, but
here is his Discharge from my Lord Cardinal. Come Sir, you are now at Liberty to
go with us


I thank ye, Gentlemen; Master farewell.


Farewell Stephano. Alas! Poor Man.


What flaws and gusts of Weather we have had these three days? How dark and hot
it is? The Sky is full of mutiny


It has been stubborn Weather.


Strange work at Sea, I doubt there is old Tumbling.


Bless my old Uncle's Bark, I have a Venture in it.


And so have I, more than I Would wish to lose, I Am in some fear.


Do you fear?


Ha! How he looks?


Nay, mark him better, Gentlemen.


Mercy on me, how he stares?


Now tell me how ye like him? What think ye of him for a sober Man now?


Does the Sea stagger ye?


Now you have hit the Nick.


Do ye fear the Billows?


What Ails him, who has stirred him?


Be not shaken: Let the storm rise; let it blow on, blow on: Let the Clouds
wrestle, and let the Vapors of the Earth turn mutinous. The Sea in hideous
Mountains rise, and tumble upon a Dolphin's back, I Will make all shake, for I am
Neptune


Now, what think you of him?


Alas! poor Man.


Your Bark shall Plough through all, and not a surge so saucy to disturb her:
I Will see her safe, my Power shall sail before her -- Down ye angry Waters all
Ye loud whistling Whirlwinds fall.
Down ye proud Waves; ye Storms cease,
I command ye, be at Peace;
Fright not with your Churlish Notes,
Nor bruise the Keel of Bark that floats.
No devouring Fish come nigh,
Nor Monster in my Empery
Once show his Head, or terror bring,
But let the weary Sailor sing,
Amphitrite, with white Arms
Strike my Lute, I Will sing Charms.



Now he must have Music, his fit will grow worse else.


I pity him.


Now he will go in quietly of himself,
And clean forget all.

We are sorry, Sir, and we have seen a wonder.
Pray Excuse our unbelief.

This was a strange Fit.


Many have sworn him right, and I have thought so; yet on a sudden, from some
word or other, when no Man could expect a Fit, thus he has flown out.


Must I come in too?


No, my pretty Lad, keep in thy Chamber, thou shall have thy Supper.


Pray what is that, Sir?


A strange Boy that was found last Night wandering about the Town a little
distracted, so was sent hither


How the pretty Knave looks! and Plays, and Peeps upon me! Sure such Eyes I
have seen


Pray take care, Sir, if you seem to take notice of him, you will make him worse.


I Will warrant you, I Will not hurt him: How he smiles! Let me look once again;
but that the Clothes are different -- Sure it is not she -- How tenderly it
presses me


I must attend else where, pray take heed.


Fear not: How my Heart beats and trembles! He holds me hard; thou have a mind
to speak to me, he Weeps: What would thou say, my Child? Do know me


O Pedro, Pedro!


O my Soul.


Hey, what fit's this; I think the Pilgrim's off the Hooks too.


Let me hold thee, and now come all the World, I fear not.


Be wise my Angel, you will discover your self; oh, how I Love thee. How do
thou? tell me


I have been Miserable. But your Eyes have blessed me; pray think it not
immodesty I kiss ye. Oh, my Head's wild still


Be not so full of Passion, nor hang so eagerly upon me, 'twill be observed.


Are ye then weary of me! but you shall not leave me: No, I Will hang here for ever.
Kiss you eternally, O my dear Pilgrim


Look ye there now; I knew what you would do. The Boy's in's Fit again: Are ye not
ashamed to torment him thus? I told you, you would bring it upon him. Either be
gone, and presently, I Will force ye else: Who waits within!


Alas! good Sir, this is the way never to recover him.


Stay but one minute more, I Will complain to the Governor. Pull away the Boy;
look ye there, do you see how he pulls, and tears himself. Be gone you had best,
for if the Boy miscarry I Will make you rue it


O Misery.


Farewell, for ever.


YOU are now within a Mile oth' Town, Sir; if my business would give me leave,
I Would guide ye farther. But for such Gentlemen as you enquire for, I have seen
none. The Boy you d^sc^ibe, or one much like it, was sent in the other Night a
little maddish, and now is in the House appointed for such Cures


It Is very well, I thank ye Sir.








Here Is one belongs to the very House, Sir, it is a poor Idiot. But she will show
you the way as well as a wiser Body. So, Sir, I leave you.


Your Servant. Here Fool, a word with thee, Fool.


O I am lost, it is my Father in all his rage.


Hark thee, Fool.


He does not know me, Heaven grant I may deceive him still! will ye give me two
pence, Gaffer, and here is a Crow Flower, and a Dazie? I have some Pie in my
Pocket too


This is an errant Fool, a mere Changeling.


Think so, and I am happy.


Do thou dwell in Segovia, Fool?


No, no, I dwell in Heaven; and I have a fine little House made of Marmalad;
and I am a lone Woman, and I spin for St. Peter. I have a hundred little
Children, and they sing Psalms with me


A very pretty Conversation I am falling into here, especially for a Man in a
Passion. Can thou tell me if this be the way to the Town


Yes, yes, you must go over the top of that high Steeple, Gaffer.


A Plague of your Fools face.





And then you shall come to a River, Gaffer, twenty Miles over, and twenty
Miles and ten; and then you must pray, Gaffer, and pray, and pray, and pray,
and pray, and pray


Pray Heaven deliver me from such an Ass as thou art.


Amen, sweet Gaffer; and fling a Sop of Sugar-Cake into it, and then you must
leap in naked





And sink seven days together. Can ye sink, Gaffer?


Pox on thee, and a Pox of that Fool that left me to thee.


God be w'ye Nunkle.


How I rejoice in any thing that vexes him! I shall love this Fool as long as I
live, for putting her hand to the Plough. Could I but see my Mistress now, to
tell her how I have labored for her, how I have worn my self away in her
Service! -- Well, sure I shall find her a^ last


Iuletta. -- Sure she is honest; yet I dare not discover my self to her.


Here, fool, here is something for thee to buy Apples, for the sport thou have
made in crossing thy Nunkle


Thank ye, little Gentleman; Heaven bless ye. Pray keep this Nutmeg; 'twas sent
me from the Lady of the Mountain, a Golden Lady


How prettily it prattles!


It Is very good to rub your Understanding; and so good Night; the Moon's up.


Pretty Innocence!





I Will follow him to your Town; he shall not 'scape me. -- Let me see. -- I must
counterfeit a Letter, a Letter of Authority for him. -- Yes, 'twill do;
certainly do. -- How I shall make his old Blood boil! Rare sport in faith! --
But what in the Name of Innocence has this Fool given me! She said 'twas good to
rub my Understanding; is it Bread or Cheese? -- Hah! a Ring! a right one! a Ring
I know too! -- The very same -- A Ring my Mistress took from me, and wore it. I
know it by the Posie. None could deliver this but she her self. 'Twas she.
Curse of my Sand-blind Eyes. Twice deceived! Twice so near the Blessing I am
seeking! What shall I do? Here are so many cross-ways, it is in vain to follow
her. I hope however, for all her Dress, she is in her Senses still, for sure she
knew me. -- Well, to divert my melancholy ^ill I can meet with her again, I Will
go and have the other touch with her Father


She Is not to be recovered; and, which doubles my Torment, he is got beyond my
Vengeance. How they laugh at me! Death and Furies! But why should I still
wander thus, and be a Coxcomb, tire out my P^^ce and Pleasure for a Girl? a
Girl that scorns me too? a thing that hates me; and, consider at the best, is
but a short Breakfast for a hot Appetite? -- Well thought: That short Repast
I Will make on her, and so I Will rest. -- Look to it, my young deceiver; we shall
meet; which when we do, not all the Tears and Cries of trembling Chastity shall
save you. You have fired my Dwelling, and shall quench my Flame.


Is not that Pedro? It Is he; it is he. -- Oh my --


What art thou?


Hah! -- Oh! I Am miserable.


What the Devil art thou?





It dances! Hey-day! The Devil in a ^ool's Coat! Is he turned Changeling? What
mops and mows it m^ke^! How it frisks! Is It not a Fairy? It has a mortal F^ce,
and I Have a great mind to it. But if it should prove the Devil! --


Co^^ hi^her, Dear.


I t^ink '^will ravish me. I^'s a handsome thing, but basely Sunburnt. Wh^t's
that it points at


Do thou s^e that S^ar there? that just above the Sun? Prithee go thither and
light me ^^is Tob^cco, and stop it with the Horns of the Moon


The thing's mad, quite mad. Go sleep, fool, go sleep.


Thou can not sleep so quietly; for I can say my Prayers, and then slumber. I
am not proud, nor full of Wine
This little Flower will make me ^ine:
Cruel in heart, for I will cry
If I see a Sparrow dye.
I am not watchful to do ill,
Nor glorious to pursue it still;
Nor pitiless to those that weep.
Such as are, bid them go sleep.
Do, do, do; and see if they can.


It said true. Its words sink into me. Sure it is a kind of Sybil; some mad
Prophet. I feel my Fury bound and fettered in me


Give me your hand, and I Will tell you your Fortune.


Here, prithee do.


Fie! fie! fie! fie! fie! Wash your Hands and pare your Nails, and look finely,
you shall never kiss the King's Daughter else


I wash 'em daily.


But foul 'em faster.





You shall have two Wives.


Two Wives!


Yes; two fine Gentlewomen. Make much of 'em, for they will stick close ^o you,
Sir. And these two in two days, Sir


That Is a fine Riddle!


To day you shall wed Sorrow, and Repentance will come to morrow.


Sure she is inspired.


I Will tell you more, Sir. He called down his merry men all,
By One, by Two, by Three.
William would fain have been the First,
But now the Last is he.



The very Chronicle of my misfortunes.


I Will bid you Good-Ev'n; for my Boat stays for me, and I must sup with the Moon
to Night in the Mediterranean.


Can Fools and Mad-folks then be Tutors to me? Can they feel my Sores, yet I
insensible? Sure this was sent by Providence to steer me right. I Am wondrous
weary; my thoughts too, they are tired, which adds a weighty burden to me. I
have done ill; I have pursued it too; nay, still run on. I must think better;
be something else, or nothing. Still I grow heavier. A little rest would help
me; I Will try if I can take it; and Heaven's Goodness guard me.


We have escaped to day well. If the Outlaws had known we had been stirring, we
had paid for it, Neighbors


A murrain take 'em, they have robbed me thrice.


Me five times, my Daughter fifty; though to give 'em their due, they never take
any thing from her, but what she can very well spare


Ah! my poor Wife has been in their hands too: But, to say the truth, I don't
find she has lost much neither


For my part, I ought not to complain, for I have got three Children by 'em.
Poor Ione! they have peppered her Jacket


Would we had some of 'em here, to thank 'em for their kindnesses.


So we were strong enough to Circumcise'em, I don't care if we had.


What Is that lies there?


An old Woman that keeps Sheep hereabouts.


Drunk, I suppose.


And a Sword by her side to keep the Wolves off? -- Hah! Captain Roderigo, or
the Devil. -- Stand to your Arms, Gentlemen


It Is he.


Speak softly.


Now Is our time.


Stay, stay, let us be provident. Shall we wake him before we kill him, or after?


Let me kill my share of him before he wakes.


Let me have the first blow; he robbed me last.


No, I ought to have the first; he Cuckolded me last.


Hold, hold; no Civil Wars, do you hear? Beat his Brains out between ye, -- And
then I Will pick his Pockets.


Draw your Knives, and every Man seize a Limb.


Huzzah!


Slaves! Villains! will ye murder me?


No, no; we'll only tickle you a little. Do You remember Joan, Captain? I Will
spoil ye for a Cuckold-maker.


For Heavens sake! as you are Men; as you are Christians.


Neither Man nor Christian upon this occasion, but a Cuckold with a Knife in my
hand


Oh help! Some help there!


Ye Villains! are ye at Murder? Off, ye in human Slaves! -- Do ye not stir? Nay
then have among ye


Away, away, away.


Villains! use Violence to that Habit?


Pedro! Nay then I am more wretched than ever.


Hah! Roderigo! What makes him here thus clad? Is it Repentance, or a Disguise
for Mischief?


To owe my Life to him, makes me all Confusion.


Ye are not much hurt, Sir?


No. -- All I can call a Wound, is in my Conscience.


Have ye considered the Nature of these Men, and how they have used you? was it
well





Did it look noble to be o're-laid with odds? Did it seem manly in a multitude
to opp^ess you? If it be base in Wretches low like these, what must it be in
one that is born like you? Ah Roderigo! had I abando^'d Honesty, Religion, broke
through the Bonds of Honor and Humanity, I had set as small a price upon thy
Life, as thou did lately upon mine: But I reserve thee to a nobler Vengeance


I thank ye; you have ^he Nobler Soul, I must confess it; and of your Passions
are a greater Mas^er. T^' Example's glorious, and I wish to follow it. There is
a s^^^n of ^nf^my about me, and the Dye is deep; yet possibly occasion may
present, that I may wash it off


I Will give you one, a noble one, I think. We have a quar^el, we have a Mistress
too. We are single, and our ^^ms alike. In one fair risque of Life let all
determine, our Ran^our past, and Happiness to come


Pedro.


I do believe you dare: Or if you wanted Cour^ge, the beauteous Prize for which
we now contend would rouse you to it


Hah!


If you deserve her, draw.


I do not, nor such a noble Enemy: I therefore will ^ot draw.


I could compel you to it, but would not willingly.


You cannot, to increase my Guilt: The Load's already more than I can bear; I
wo'not add to it


Poor Evasio^n.


Thou wrong'st me, much thou wrong'st me; time will convince thee on it. I Will
satisfy ^hee any way but this. I have been wicked, but cannot be a Monster. My
Sword refuses to attempt the Man preserved me; its temper starts at thy Virtue.
If thou will have me sight, give me an Enemy, for thou art none


I Am more, for I Am thy Rival.


That is not in thy power, for I no more am thine. No, Pedro; the wrongs I Have
done my self and thee, let that fair Saint atone for: There Is nothing more I
or the World can give, and nothing less can expiate my Crimes, or recompense
thy Virtue


Is It possible thou can be such a Penitent!


I am most truly such; and left I should relapse again to Hell, forget the Debt
I owe to thee and Heaven, this sacred Habit I have so profaned, shall
henceforth be my faithful Monitor


Noble Roderigo, how glorious is this Change! Let me embrace thee.


Thou great Example of Humanity, do thou forgive me?


I do; with joy I do.


Then I am happy -- All I have more to ask, is, leave to attend you in your
present difficulties; that by such service as I have power to render, I may
confirm you I am what I seem


There needs no further proof. However, in hopes I doubly may return those
Services, I Will not refuse 'em.


Yes, Sir, here are such People: But how pleasing they may be to you, I cannot
tell


That Is not your concern; I desire to see 'em, to see 'em all.


All? Why, they will quite confound ye, Sir; like Bells rung backwards, they are
nothing but confusion, mere Noise


May be I love Noise? -- But hark ye, Sir; have ye no Boys? handsome young Boys?


One, Sir, we have, a very handsome Boy.


Long here?


But two Days. A little crazed, but may recover.


That Boy, I would see that Boy; perhaps I know him -- I beseech ye the Boy.


You shall see him, Sir, or any else: But pray don't be so violent.


I know what to do, I warrant ye; I Am for all fancies; I can talk to 'em, and
dispute if occasion be -- Who lies here


Pray don't disturb 'em, Sir; here lies such Youths will make you start, if
they begin to Dance their Frenchmores


Fetch out the Boy, Sirrah.


Hey-boys!


Bounce. Clap her of the Starboard. Bounce. Top the Can.


Dead, ye Dog, dead! Do You quarrel in my Kingdom? Give me my Trident.


Bounce! -- 'Twixt Wind and Water! Laden with Mackerel! -- Oh brave Meat!


My Sea-Horses. I Will charge the Northern Wind, and break his Bladder.


Brave sport, in faith!


I Will sell my Bells, before I Will be outbrav'd thus.


What Is he.


A Priest, Sir, that run mad for a Tythe-pig.


Curran-sawce cure him.


I Will curse ye all, I Will excommunicate ye. Thou English Heretic, give me the
tenth Pot


Sue me, I Will drink up all. Bounce I say once more -- O-ho! have I split your
Mizen? Blow, blow, thou West-wind; blow till thou rise, and make the Sea run
roaring; -- I Will hiss it down again, with a Bottle of Ale


Tryton! why, Tryton!


Tryton's drunk with Metheglin.


Strike, strike the Surges, strike.


I Will have my Pig.


Drink, drink; it is Daylight -- Drink, diddle, diddle, diddle, Drink.


I Will damn thee.


Priest, proud Priest, a Pig's Tail in thy Teeth.


My Pig -- or I Will marry thee.


Say no more. My Drink's out. Hush is the word -- and to sleep.


Their Fits are cool now; let 'em rest.


Mad Gallants, mad Gallants, in faith; I love their Faces; I never fell into
better Company in my Life.


Who Is that? -- The King of Spades?
I Will make him a new Mantle?

Hey Day: A mad Tailor too! What
The Pox made thee Mad?

Cabbage -- Snip goes the Sheers --
And the Coat's never the shorter.

You Are a brave Fellow, and shall make me
A new Doublet.

For thy Coronation -- I Will do it;
But Money down; do hear? Money down.
The King of Spades is a Courtier.

I Will have a new Gown.

So thou shall, made of Shreds -- and a
Tithe Louse -- to prevent Damnation --

Wo't be my Chaplain?

And say Grace to boild Meat? -- The Devil.

Can thou Preach?


Give me a Text.


Pudding.


Where is it? -- I Will handle it -- Divide it -- Subdivide it -- and give my
Parish -- never a bit on it


My Lady's Woman shall have a slice.


Mum.


I Will cut thee a pair of Britches, out of the tail of her Petticoat.


Warm ware -- Dog Days -- but Hush: Put out the Candle -- Maiden-head's the
Word. If the Cardinal hea^'s on it -- he will have a Pair too


You stinking Whore, who did this for you? Who looks to the Boy? Pox take him,
he was asleep when I left him


I suppose he made the Fool drunk.


What Is this noise about? Where Is the Boy?


Here Is all the Boys we have found^


These are his Clothes; but where is he?


Ay, that is all I want to know.


Where Is the Boy, ye Slut you? Where Is the Boy?


The Boy's gone a Maying; he will bring me home a Cuckow's Nest. Do you hear,
Master? I put my Clothes off, and I dizen'd him; I pinned a Plume in his
Forehead, and a Feather, and buss'd him twice, and bid him go seek his Fo^tune.
He gave me this fine Money, and he gave me fine Wine too, and bid me sop; and
gave me these trim Clothes too, and put 'em on, he did


Is this the Boy you would show me?


I Will give you Twopence, Master.


Am I Fooled on all sides? I met a Fool in the Woods in a long py'd Coat; they
said she dwelt here


That was the very Boy, Sir.


Ay, ay, ay; I gave him leave to play forsooth; he will come again morrow, and
bring Peascods


I Will Peascods your Bones, you Whore.


Pox of your Fools and Bedlams; Plague of your Owls and Apes.


Pray, Sir, be moderate; such Accidents will happen sometimes, take what care
we can


Damn Accidents: You're a Juggler, and I Am abused.


Indeed, Sir, you are not.


It Is false; I am abused, and I will be abused, whether you will or no, Sir.


Whaw, Mr. Keeper.


What a pox have we got here?


Give me some Cheese and Onyons; give me some W^sh-prew; I have hunger in my
pellies; give me apundance. Pendragon was a Shentleman, mark you, Sir? And the
Organs at Wrexham were made by Revelations; there is a Spirit plows and plows
the Pellows, and then they sing


Why, this Moon Calf's madder than all the rest. Who the Devil is he?


He Is a Welch-man, Sir: He ran mad, because a Rat eat up his Cheese.


The Devil he did.


I will peat thy Face as plack as a plue Clout.


He will not Hurt you, Sir, don't be afraid.


Give me a great deal of Cuns: Thou art the Devils, I know thee by thy Tails: I
will will peg thy Pums full of Pullets


This is the rarest Rascal! He speaks as if h' had Buttermilk in's Mouth.


Basilus Manus is for an old Codpice, mark ye. I will porrow thy Ursip's Whore
to Seal a Letter


Ha, ha, ha.


Now he begins to grow Villainous.


Methinks he is best know.


Take him away.


he shall not go.


He must, Sir.


I will Sing, and dance, and do any thing.


Will thou declaim in Greek?


Do, and I Will confound thee.


I will eat some Puddings.


Pudding! where is it? Baked or Boiled, Plums or Plain, it is mine by Magna
Charta. -- The King of Spain eats White-Pot


Oh brave English Man? Wilt have any Beef, Boy?


Nay, now, Sir, y' have made him stark mad. Lay hold of him there quickly.


Beef! ye Gods! Beef! -- I Will have that Ox for Supper -- Knock him down --
Chines, Surloins, Ribs, and Buttocks. -- Lead me to the French Camp -- They
fly! they fly! they fly! they fly! they fly! they fly! Huzzah


Away with him; he will be so mad now, the Devil cannot tame him. Take 'em all
away.


He shall not go. What a Pox makes ye spoil company?


Away with him, I say.


I gad I Will see him in's Lodging then; I have a mind to sup with him. If he is
such rare company now he is sober, what will he be over a Bottle


What the Devil would this old Spark be at? I think he is as mad as any of 'em.





Yes, What do you want?


I have a business from the Duke of Medina. Is there not an old Gentleman come
lately here


Yes; and a mad one too; but he is no Prisoner.


There Is a Letter, pray read it --


This Letter says the Gentleman is Lunatic: I half suspected it.


It Is but too true, Sir; And such pranks he has played --


He Is some Man of note, I suppose, the Duke Commands me with such care to look
to him. He Is in haste too, I find, for his Recovery; for he bids me spare no
Correction


He directed me to say the same thing to you. Pray, Sir, have no regard to his
Age or Quality: But since it is for his Good, strap him soundly


He shall have the sharpest Discipline, I promise you. -- Pray how did you get
him hither


By a Train I laid for him; he is in Love with a Boy you must know; there lies
his Crack


He came hither to seek one.


Yes, I sent him. We should never have got him here by force.


Here was a Boy last Night.


He did not see him, did he?


No; he was slipped away first.


So much the better. Pray, Sir, look well to your Charge; I must see him lodged
before I go; the Duke orde^'d me. I fancy you will find him very rough


Oh! that is nothing. We are used to that; we can be as rough as he, I Will
warrant him


See here he comes. --


What do talk to me of noises? I Will have more noise. I love noise: I Will have
'em all loose together. Your Master has let my Boy loose, and I Will do as much
by his


Will you go out, and not make disturbances here?


I will not go out, you Rascal; I Will have 'em all out with me. There Is no body mad
here, but thee and thy Master. -- brave Boys! Mad Boys! Mad Boys


Do you perceive him now?


It Is too apparent. -- Do You hear, Sir? Pray will ye make less stir, and see
your Chamber


Ha!


Nay, I thought he was mad. I gad our Master has found him out. I^ll have one
long lash at your back, in faith, old Spark


Come, Sir, will you retire quietly to your Chamber?


My Chamber! What do thou mean by my Chamber? Where Is the Boy, you Blockhead
you


Look ye, Sir, we are People of few words here; either go quietly to your
Chamber, or we shall carry you there with a Witness


A strange fellow this! -- And what Chamber is it thou would have me go
quietly to


A Chamber the Duke has ordered to be prepared for you within; you shall be
well lodged, don'^ fear


The Duke! What, what, what have thou got in thy Head? what D^^e, Monkey, ha?


Ha^k ye, Sir, let me advise you, don't expose your self; you are an old
Gentleman, and should be Wise; you are a little mad, which you don't perceive;
your Friends have found it out, and have delivered you over to me.





Hold, hold, hold, hold, hold. -- Hark ye, Gentlemen, Gentlemen, one word, but
one word. Pray do me the favor to show me my Chamber


O-ho! I Am glad to see you begin to come to your self, Sir. I don't doubt, by
the blessing of Heaven, and proper methods, to bring you to your senses again


Yes, Sir, I hope all will be well. Really I find my self at this time, as I
think, very sensible -- of some strokes of the back.


I can see your madness very much abated.


Yes, truly, I hope it is; though I cannot say but -- a -- I am still -- a --
little discomposed


There must be some time to restore a Man. ^ome was not built in a day. But
since the Duke has so much kindness for you to be in haste for your Cure, when
your next sit comes, we'^l double the Dose. -- Here, lead the Gentleman to his
Chamber. But he must have no Supper to night; take care of that


Pray, Sir, may I sleep?


A little you may. In the morning we'll take 30 or 40 Ounces of Blood away;
which with a Watergrewel-Dyet for a Week or ten days, may moderate things
mightily. -- Go carry him in, I Will follow p^esently


What a Wretch^d Dog am I!


You see, Sir, the Duke's Orde^s are obeyed.


I Will not fail to acquaint him with it. Pray let the old Gentleman want nothing
but his Wits


He shall be taken perfect care of. -- My humble Duty to his Grace.


So, now I think I have fixed thee. This has succeeded rarely! -- I could burst
with laughing now, lie down and roll about the Room, I Am so tickled with it:
But I have other business to do; now is my time to serve my Mistress. Good Stars
guide me where she is, and I have nothing more ^o ask you, but a Husba^^


OF My Conscience we have quite lost him: He Is not gone home, we heard from
thence this morning


Faith, let us even turn back; this is but a Wildgoose-Chace.


No, hanged, let us see the end of these Adventures now we are out: They must
end soon one way or other


Which way shall we go? We have scowr'd the Champion-Country, and all the
Villages, already


We'll beat these Woods; and if nothing start, we'll to Segovia.


I Am afraid he is sick, or fallen into some danger. He has no Guide nor Servant
with him


Hang him, he is tough and hardy; he will bear a great deal.


Shall we part, and go several ways?


No, that will be melancholy; let us even keep on together. Come, we'll crose
here first; and as we find the Paths, let them direct us.


Indeed, Madam, it is very cruel in you to show this strange Mistrust of me.
Have I not always served you faithfully? Why do you shun me thus? What have I
done to call my Truth in question? But I see you are still doubtful; it is
enough; I Will leave you; and may you light of one will serve you better. Farewell


Prithee forgive me. I know thou art faithful, and thou art welcome to me; a
welcome Partn^r to my Miseries. Thou know I love thee too


I have indeed thought so.


Alas! my Fears have so distracted me, I durst not trust my self.


Pray throw 'em by then, and let 'em distract you so no more; at least,
consider how to prevent 'em. Pray put off this Fool's Coat; though it has kept
you secret hitherto, it is known now, and will betray you. Your Arch-Enemy
Roderigo is abroad, and a thousand more are looking for you


I know it, and would gladly change my Dress if I knew how: But, alas! I have
no other


I Will equip you. I lay last night at a poor Widow's house here in the Thicket,
where I Will carry you, and disg^ise you anew; my self too to attend you


But have thou any Money? for mine is all gone.


Enough for this occasion; I did not come out empty.


Have thou seen Rod^^igo lately?


This very morning, in these Woods. Take heed, for he has got a new Shape.


A Pilgrim's Habit, I know it. Was he alone?


No, Madam. And, which made me wonder, he was in Company with that very
Pilgrim, that handsome Man you were concerned you gave nothing to


Is It possible?


The very same. -- See how one may be deceived! I should never have thought him
a Companion for such a Villain


Did they seem Friends?


The greatest that could be.


Intimate?


Walked with their Arms about one another's Waste.


What can this mean?


Lord! how she trembles!


Can thou show 'em me?


Not for the World in this Dress: But come with me to my Old Woman's; and when
we are new cased, I Will show you any thing


Let Us be speedy then, for I am full of Agitation. Come, as we go, I Will tell
thee all my Secrets


I Will keep 'em faithfully. -- This is the way, Madam.


Use all your Sports, good people, all your Solemnities; It Is the King's
Birthday, a Day we ought to honor


We will, Noble Governor, and make Segovia ring with Joy.


We should be a little more hearty in our Mirth though, if your Honor would take
into your Consideration the Miseries we suffer by these Outlaws here. Our
Trade's undone by 'em, Strangers dare not come near us; besides, our Wives and
Daughters make woeful Complaints of 'em


I Am sorry for it, and have Orders from the King to help ye; You shall not be long
perplexed with 'em


It Is time they were routed truly; for they grow fearful Confident. They Will
come to Church sometimes, and carry off our Altar-Plate. Father Dominic has
cursed 'em all till he is grown hoarse again; so he says they are damned, which
is some comfort


If your Honor were not here to awe 'em a little, they would come and make us a
Visit at this good time


Yes; they would eat all our Meat, drink up our Drink, ring our Bells backwards,
piss out our Bonefires; and when their Mettle was up, have at the Fairest
in faith


Nay, have at All: They are none of your nice ones. My poor Mother's Fourscore
and odd, and she made shift to get her self ravished amongst ^em


Are they so fierce? Do You hear, Verdugo? after this Solemnity is over, I Will
send you with a Party to attack 'em. We'll try if we can tame 'em


Their Captain Roderigo is to be piti'd; A Gentleman, and a brave Soldier too.


The Count has not rewarded him as his Services have deserved; their neglect of
him has urged him to this Course


They have a hungry Eye on his Estate; it is That, I doubt, keeps back his
Pardon


It had been passed e're this else: but he wants Temper to discern the Cause.


Have you never heard, Sir, of the Noble Pedro yet?


Never. I fear he is dead. The Court bewails his loss; the King himself laments
him


He has reason; 'twas in his Service he undid himself: And if he had rewarded
him as he deserved, he had had him still to merit more


If he be still alive, and e're returns, I know he is resolved to make him
happy. But come, let us to the Church, and there begin the Celebration of our
Royal Master's Birthday


How sweet these solitary Places are! how wantonly the Wind blows through the
Leaves, and Courts and Plays with 'em! Will ye sit down and sleep? It Is
wondrous Hot


I cannot sleep, my Friend: My Heart's too watchful to admit of Slumbers.


The Murmurs of this Stream perhaps may lull you into Rest: Hark! the Birds
join too to Ease you. Pray sit down




It is impossible: Have you seen no one yet?


No Creature.


What strange Music was that we heard far off?


I cannot guess; it was uncommon; sometimes it seemed hard by, at least I
thought so


It pleased me much: what could it be? here is no Inhabitants.


They talk of Fairies, and such airy Beings: If there are such, methinks they
could not choose a lovelier Dwelling


Those Rocks there look like enchanted Cells, formed for such Inhabitants.
Hark! more Music! Roderigo! O Love! what fuel's this to feed thy Flame? O
Alinda





What are these?


What!


Those there; those things that come upon us: Did not I say these Woods had
Wonder in 'em


Now you may view 'em: There are the Men you wished for. There they are both;
Now you may boldly talk with 'em, and never be guessed at. Don't be afraid:
See! they are surpised! they don't know what to make of us


I tremble! --


Then you spoil all: Take Courage and attack 'em, I Will bring you off I Will
warrant ye


It Is he and Roderigo; What Peace dwells in their Faces? What a friendly Calm?


They seem Mortal: They come upon us still.


Let Us meet 'em; Fear will not become us. Hail Reverend Dames!


What, do you seek, good Men?


We would seek happier Fortunes.


Seek 'em, and make 'em.
Lie not still, nor longer here;
Here inhabits naught but Fear:
Be Constant, Good, in Faith be clear,
Fortune will wait ye everywhere.

Whither should we go? For we believe thee, and will obey thee.


Go to Segovia; and there before the Altar pay thy Vows, thy Gifts and Prayers;
unload thy Heaviness

There shed thy mournful Tears, and gain thy Suit;
Such honest noble Showers never wanted Fruit.

And next for you.
See how he Quakes!
A secure Conscience never shakes.
Thou have been ill, be so no more;
A good Retreat, is a great Store:
Thou have Commanded Men of Might;
Command thy self, and then you are right.

Command thy Will, thy foul Desires;
Quench thy wild, unhallowed Fires.
Command thy Mind; let that be pure;
A Blessing then thou may procure.

Take sage Advice: Go say thy Prayers;
Thou have as many Sins as Hairs.
Of Lawless Men, a Lawless Chief;
A Rebel bloody, and a Thief.

Retire thou Trembling Guilt, retire;
And purge thee perfect in his Fire:
His Life observe; be that thy Guide,
And Heaven may then be on thy side.

At Segovia, both appear.

Be wise, and Happiness is near.

Be wise, and Happiness is near.

Astonishment! what can this mean? They know my very Soul.


Mine they have Inspired: -- Be wise, and Happiness is near. Those were their
parting words. They had the awful Sound of sacred Truth, and I have faith to
Comfort me. Come on my Friend. The Oracle enjoins an easy Pilgrimage. Let Us try
what Fate intends us.


We have told you what he is, what time we have sought him, his Nature and his
Name, The seeming Boy too. We have given you I think a fair Account of


That the Duke should send that Letter, is Impossible; He knows him not. And
for his madness, that we both can clear him of. A Humourist he is indeed a
great one, violent too on every small occasion -- but no more --


'Twas some Trick that brought him hither; The Letter and the Page, both
Counterfeits: If therefore you would be well advised, don't keep him longer here


Gentlemen you have satisfied me, and I Will release him: Though I must confess,
whether you will call it madness or not, I believe a little more of our Discipline
would do the old Gentleman a kindness. But I Will dispute no longer -- you shall
have him


Sir, we thank you.


Here, bring out the old Gentleman, I believe he may be something weak, for we
have Dieted him low, and taken a good deal of Blood from him


Poor Alphonso.


Poor Alphonso indeed! Was there ever such a Skeleton! Sir, I Am glad once more
to meet with you,


I Am overjoyed to find you.


Soft, no flights: Passions are all forbid here. Let your Tongue go like a
Pendulum, steady: or that Gentleman there will regulate your Motion, with fifty
Strokes of the back presently


There Is no Danger: You are safe too; we have satisfied the Master, who, and
what you are; And he has consented to release you


Yes, Sir, these Gentlemen have assured me you are a sober Person, so I ask
your excuse for what is past, and restore you to your Liberty


Very concise indeed: Sir, I am much beholding to you truly, and do confess
with great humility I have not deserved the Favors you have been pleased to
bestow upon me. But if I have the Honor to see you at my House, I shall not
forget to return your Bounty with some Strokes of Acknowledgement


Sir, your very humble Servant.


Sir, Entirely yours.


Farewell Gentlemen.


Come Friends, one under one Arm, and the other under the other. I must make a pair
of Crutches of ye --


You are very weak indeed.


You look wretchedly.


A little in Love only, that is all. Ah Seberto. Ah Curio -- such Discipline,
the Lord have mercy on me. Had I been here till to morrow morning, this Dog
would not have left me Six Ounces of Blood in my whole Body


Can you imagine who put this Trick upon you?


The Devil to be sure; but who gave him his Cue I cannot tell -- Come, Carry me
off: Lead me to Church, I Am in a very Religious fit at this time, and will give
some small Thanks for my Delivery: when that is over, I Will be revenged.


This -- To Devotion sacred be.
This -- To the Kings Prosperity.
This -- To the Queen, and Chastity.

Long live the King;
Prolong ye Powers, Prolong his Sway;
Repeat, repeat this Joyful Day,
Long live the King.

These Oblations first we bring
To Purge our selves: These to the King:
To Love and Beauty these: Accept our Offering,

Long live the King, etc.

For our selves first Thus we bend;

Forgive us Heaven, and be our Friend.
With Glory bless, and Long preserve
The Prince we do, or ought to serve;
Accept our Offerings we Implore;
The Peace which we have Lost restore.

Give me Alinda, and I ask no more.

Long Live the King, etc.

For my Lost Wits (Let me see)
First I pray; and Secondly,
To be at home again and Free;
And if I Travel more, -- hang me.
Next for the King, and for the Queen,
That they be wise, and never seen
Where I was, in the Madman's Inn.
For my Daughter I should pray;
But since the Strumpet's run away,
In Heaven's presence I forsake her
And give the Devil leave to take her.
Long live the King, etc.

Here they all are, Madam, but fear nothing: The Place protects you. My old
Bilboa Master, of my Conscience. How in the name of mischief got he out? but
they have peppered him I see. That Is some Comfort


Hail to this sacred Place.


It Is She, sure.


It Is, certainly.


Is it a Vision? or is it She?


It Is she, and what you were fortold is now at hand. Rejoice, my Friend, for
happiness attends you


What is it these Strangers seem so much surpised at?


I had a Daughter once with just such a young whorish Leer as that: A Filly
too, that waited on her; much such a Slut as the other. Are they come to keeping
of Goats: it is very well


Thus we kneel, and thus we pray,
Happiness attend this Day.
Our sacrifice we hither bring,
And sue for Blessings on the King.

These of Purple, Damask, Green,
Sacred to the Virtuous Queen,
Here we hang; As these are now,
May her Glories spring and flow.

These for our selves, our Hopes and Loves,
Full of Pinks and Ladies Gloves.
Of hearts-ease too, which we would fain,
As we labor for, Attain.
Hear me Heaven, and as I bend
With faith and hope, some comfort send;

Hear her, hear her, if there be
A spotless Sweetness, this is She.

Long live the King, etc.

Now Roderigo I may stand in need of your Assistance.


My Life is yours.


Then with a Joy that Lovers know, but none can else conceive,
Let me approach this beaut^ous Wanderer.

O Pedro.


My Life, my Heaven.


Pedro: the Devil it is?


Pedro, Noble Pedro, are we so happy to have you still among us!
This is an Unexpected Blessing.

A very Great Blessing indeed.


In spite of all my Griefs, Life still prevails: Fate seems to have some
farther business for me; if it is to wander on with fruitless Care, and buffet
still with Disappointments, let Manhood be my Aid. But if the sullen cloud that
long has lowering hung about my head, be destined to withdraw, it is the warm
Influence of your blessing Sir, that must disperse it.


I bless thee! -- ha, ha: -- Damn thee.


Sir, though I am a Stranger both to you, and the Request the Noble Pedro makes
you, his merit's so well known to me, that I must be his second in his suit,
and tell you nothing can er'e be in your Power to grant, but his desert may
claim. --


I don't know what his desert may claim, Governor: But if he claims any thing
but a Gallows, he is a very impudent Fellow


Perhaps I being a Mediator, Sir, may change your thoughts of him --


Roderigo?


Roderigo, Sir, becomes a supplicant for Pedro, that you would bless your self
in blessing him, and bless him with the Fair Alinda





Are you serious in this request, Sir?


Most serious, Sir,


I believe you may. Let me see: he has a mind to be rid of her, why should not
I? Pedro's a Dog, and if I could hang him, I would. But since I cannot, I Will be
revenged another way: He shall marry the Whore


Look ye Sir; and Madam,


Most Generous Alphonso. --


Most Courtly Pedro: you may spare your Compliment; for if you take my word for
it, the Present I have made you does not deserve it


But I that know her better than he that got her, say she deserves the world.
--


Hark you, Madam, you had a Gillian once; nimble Chaps I think we called her:
Pray is this the Lady


No, Sir, She Is at home as you ordered her; I Am a little Footboy that walk a
Nights, and Frighten old Gentlemen, make 'em lose Hats and Cloaks


And Horses too, ha?


Sometimes I do Sir, when the Case requires it. I teach 'em the way too through
Hedges and Ditches: And how to break their Shins against a Style


A very pretty Art truly.


Sometimes I Am a Drum, Sir; a Drum at midnight, Ran tan dan, dra dan tan, Sir;
a Page too upon occasion to carry Letters for the securing of old Strolers


Thou art the Devil.


I Am worse, Sir, I Am an old Woman sometimes that tells Fortunes.


Ha!


And fright Pilgrims, and send 'em to Segovia for their Fortunes. I am Music
too, any thing to do her good. And now she has got her Lover, I am Iuletta
again, and at your service Sir, if you please to forgive me


I dare do no otherwise, lest thou should follow me still: so I desire we may
be Friends with all my heart; and Gentlemen, if any of you have a mind to marry
her --


Sir, I am obliged to you; but I Am married to my Mistress; with her I hope to
p^s^ some three or fourscore Years; so when you have any more Pranks to Play,
Sir, you know where to have me --


It Is very well, I shall be sure to send to thee.


One reconciliation more lies on my hands: In which I must engage the genero^s
Governor. Rod^rigo, Sir, is not unknown to you; nor is he a Stranger to your
interest with the King. I hope you will employ it to restore him


The King indeed is much incensed; but when his merit shall be laid before him,
I hope he will find it easy to forget his Crimes. Be it my Care to set him right
at Court


And mine to get home to my house again; and if I leave it for such another
Expedition


May thou be my Fellow-Traveller.


I hope before you go, Sir, you will share with us, an Entertainment the late
great Po^t of our Age pr^par'd to Cel^brate this Day. Let the Masqu^ begi



