OF old, in England's Golden Age of Wit,
When Godlike Ben, and Lofty Shakespeare Writ;
Hard was the Poets Task, and great their Toil,
Who strove to Cultivate the Muses Soil.
Our Poesy not then exposed to Scorn,
In perfect Strength, and in Due Time was Born.
Nine Months, at least, the Teeming Parents went,
And labored hard, nor was their Time misspent;
Who in each Manly Page, without Controal
Could gall the inmost Thoughts, and pierce the Guilty Soul.
Now if Concern in any Face appears,
It Is at the Poet's Folly, not your Fears;
Nor does the Audience Blush through Conscious Shame,
But at the Sawey Author's Fulsom Flame.
Each Wretch, whose Drunken Days and Bawdy Nights
Have doomed deservedly to Starve or Write.
Complains he is Poor, and under that Pretense.
Trumps up his Inbred Impudence for Sense.
Once in a Month a Still-born Brat we see,
And the Crais'd Issue speaks its Pedigreee;
For Births of Poetry like Births of Men.
In their Diseases show their Parents Sin.
It Is thus the Muse becomes each Buffoon's Choice,
And Pegasus a Hobbyhorse for Boys;
Whilst Tavern Jests fill up each Smutty Line,
And Rakes belch out in Print the Fumes of Wine.
Then if you seem displeased at what they say,
They damn your Judgment, while you damn their Play.
But to your Censure, who as Judges sit,
Our Author does with Modesty submit,
Nay is the first to Arraign what he has Writ.
So far from Huffing, that he will not Plead,
And owns himself in the Law's strictness, Dead.
Swears not the drolling of a Mungril Fool,
Not Irish-English farce is half so dull.
Not Witlings troubled with Romantic Whims
Can tire you more, who to enhance their Crimes,
And not content to Write, must act their Rhimes.
Yet when he ought in Justice to Despair,
He flies for aid and refuge to the Fair;
To you a due Respect his Muse has paid,
And though she is Dull, she is still a Modest Jade.

MAY I believe my eyes, or is it illusion? I charge thee in the name of
pleasure, speak: art thou the natural substance of Jack Townley, or some evil
Spirit in his fleshly clothing


The very He -- true Flesh and Blood, but such another conjuring Speech would
strip me of my mortality. What do you stare at? Where is the wonder


To see you abroad at this unseasonable hour, when Hypocr^tes and Women walk
barefaced -- May I presume to guess


Yes, and be mistaken -- To deal fairly with you, I have business of concern,
business that implies no less than --


Your own dear self -- Business I know suits you as Religion does a Statesman,
it is always a cloak for something worse


Fie, fie, you talk wildly, I must reprove you; come, come, be wise, take up in
time, and live sober as I do


As you do! very good, that to me, who have known thee thus long a true Son of
Bacchus, a notorious Friend of the Bottle, and consequently no Enemy to the
Pettycoat


I own the Indictment; all this may have been, but times and resolutions are
altered. You shall see me shortly --


What, in the name of Whimsy?


A grave serious Lover. I am come already to Melancholy and Contemplation, and
it is hop d I may in time arrive at Rhyme


Then thou will be a public nuisance to all companies. A Lover or a Poet
separately are downright Lunaticks, but where they meet it is frenzy upon
frenzy, bu^ heark'ee Jack, art thou really in earnest


Last night this reformation began, I retired soberly at ^ine, went to bed
spent the night in meditation, and am come hither this moreing to play the foo^
very deliberately


Preth^e how! Certainly it is something entertaining, but be it what it will I
am prepared to believe all after what I have already heard, which I no more
thought than that a Lawyer would refuse a fee, or a Courtier keep his promise


The business is this, yesterday at the New-house, I talked to a Vizard, who
rallied me so gently, and put me so handsomely out of conceit with my own Wit,
that I shall have the better opinion of hers for it while I live -- She would
not let me see her face, but to my confusion assured me she was honest and a
Fortune, and to give me a sample, showed me such a hand, Harry, such a hand
that i'gad if she be all of a piece I am in for a silly out-of-fashi^n'd,
honorable Lover


Very good: Proceed.


When the Play was done, I handed her to her Coach, where she told me if I
thought it worth my while, I might this morning in this very place see all of
her that is to be seen


And so here your goodness took root.


It did, but the pert little baggage ran so in my head, that I could not sleep
for her. -- Nay I had not the poor pleasure of a Dream. -- I shall be revenged


You come upon reprisal it seems, and hope to make as easy a conquest of her,
as she has of you: I only wish that the end may be answerable to the beginning;
she have Beauty enough to subdue, you weakness enough to yield, then shall I
have the pleasure of turning your Passion into ridicule, as you have often done
mine


Hey-day, what gaudy butterfly have we before us there? it moves this way.


Some country Elder Brother I suppose, dressed up like a Merry Andrew, for the
public view of all his gaping relations


Oh! I know him now, it is a noted sharper, one Squeezum.


He that pressed in upon us at the Blue-Posts the other day?


The same. The Rogue has Wit, which I believe he has put to the stretch for
this gorgeous appearance


Gentlemen, your very humble Servant; you are surpised I see at this bravery
of mine. Is then this sudden change from my tatters of ancient memory to modish
accoutrements so wonderful


A little startled at first I confess we might be, but upon recollection are
well enough satisfied, that Fortune now adays provides liberally for men of
your Character, and takes care Knaves sha'n't fail, by being so kind to Fools
as she is. While the Bank is in their hands, you can never want Cash


Why should they, it would be too much for a man to build his own fortunes, if
he had no tools to work with. Levelling is no where to be found, nor are men
more equal in Sense than in Fortune: Fools are like a Plantation, all you can
make useful are your own


It would indeed be hard, Sir, if we who bear all the scandal of cheating,
should not share in its profits. It Is true the world begins to grow weary of
us, but it is because we are not as great Masters in the Art as themselves


How? will you own that? Such as you generally stickle for superiority more
than an Alderman's Wife, at a City Christening


O Lau, Sir, I always give place to my betters. I cannot deny that they whgull
the world with fair pretenses of Religion and Honor, and hide all their vices
in an hypocritical Ostentation of Virtue, go far beyond us, who cannot help
being sometimes caught in those tricks which they can conceal


He says right, vice is never discountenanced, till it grows public: Cheating
is in it self but a venial trespass, but to be taken, to be seen, as Father
Aldo says, is, before George, a point next the worst


Yet there are Chemists who can extract reputation even out of that Scandal.


As how? I should be glad to know how much Mercury performs the operation.


It Is done thus -- If a Tradesman be taken cheating, it is good husbandry, and
prudent caring for his Family. If a Statesman, the intention of serving his
King and Country, however he was mistaken in the means, brings him off. If a
Levite tampering for Plurality, it is a great desire he has to be saving Souls,
and laboring much in his Vocation


I stand corrected.


The Quack cheats for the publick-good; the Lawyer takes Money on both sides,
that he may serve both in order to a reconciliation. The Courtier will not refuse
a Bribe, because it gives him opportunity to be grateful, nor keep the promise
he made you for it, that he may not seem mercenary. Thus all Sharpers, but
those who are professedly so, can retreat to the Jesuits refuge, Second
intention


Yet you must confess that your gains come easier than theirs: You enjoy the
Treasure without the trouble of digging for the Ore


Quite contrary, we as well as other Projectors extract our Wealth from the
Fire, and our hopes as well as their's often vanish into Smoke: When most I
have named are at no pains to be rich, nay some of 'em have their markets
brought home to 'em


A Pleasant Fellow this. Well but Mr. Squeezum, how goes the world abroad? is
there no new stiring in Town


Faith, Sir, little. Reformation is the universal Topic talked of in all
places, and begun no where. We are Sheep at a Stand, and should make shift to
get over the Hedge, if our Leaders had the courage to make the leap first. It Is
true public Houses are shut up on Sundays, so people get drunk at home.
Honesty and Money are very scarce, and you will find as little of either
amongst the Bankers as ever. Thieves and Whores give off their Trades, because
nothing is to be got by them, and Tradesmen are grown such Infidels, that the
poor Beaus are forced to pay their Bills to get new Credit --


The discourse is edifying -- Look out, Jack, yonder comes the Enemy, put your
self upon the guard to prevent surprise


Ha! it is she.


Then it is time we withdrew -- I will but cross the Mall, and call upon Frank
Richley -- by that time I guess your parley will be over, and we may find you
here -- Adien -- be bold, the day is your own


Gentlemen, g' Morrow.


A^t thou then come at last, my dear Angel, I began to question your sincerity,
and feared I should not meet with you


Me Sir -- I believe you are under a mistake, I dare swear you don't know; may,
that you never saw me --


But I hope I shall -- ^y, Madam, this is not fair to conceal your self after
last night's promise --


Goodlack, I warrant you are the same importunate Gentleman I met at the
Playhouse; and you are so vain now to think, that design, not chance, has
thrown (...) upon you again


Whether design or chance, I am sure to meet you is a happiness, such a one too
as I have waited for with impatience


Well, to see how we ignorants that are bred up in the Country may be deceived.
I -- have been always trade believe that it was not possible you Men of the
Town should leave your Beds before twelve


You may now be convinced of your error: here am I attending your pleasure at
the early hour when midnight Rakes stagger home, and old Lechers steal out of
Brothels --


Yes, I see you can rise upon Assignation, which you all answer as punctually
as you do a challenge, with this difference only, that you are as much too hot
in your Amors as too cool in your Duels


Right, Child, and good reason for it too -- In a Duel Life is the stake and
the winner makes but a bad hand of it -- But in an Intrigue, if our
expectations be balked, the loss cannot be great, half a dozen Oaths, a few
Sighs or so -- when, if we succeed, and the fair surtenders, the pleasures of
the Victory over-pay the charges of the War -- Yet methinks this is not much to
our purpose -- If you remember, Madam, there were certain conditions agreed on
between us last night, and I don't doubt but you are so much a Woman of honor
as to stand to 'em this morning


I was terribly afraid he would not have thought 'em worth mentioning


Nay, no flinching I am not to be put off with a flam: The agreement was -- All
of you that is to be seen, and I don't doubt but it will prove a charming sight


It Is pity to undeceive you, you will not thank me for it -- If your fancy has
drawn a beautiful Image, how will you be startled to see the original come
short of it --


I should be vexed, that is certain


Then my age is --


Sixteen to a day.


What if I have none of all this, but am old, wrinkled, painted and toothless
--


Were thou more deformed than a Scotch hag, I would love thee for thy Wit --
therefore


Prepare to see.


By Heaven the loveliest Creature under the Sun, those very charms I described
--


Well, Spark, what think you? You will advise me now, I suppose, to keep my
mask on -- ha, ha, ha, what dumb, Man


And must be so for ever if I never speak till I am able to express what sudden
pleasure seizes all my Faculties -- with what admiration I see all those
beauties in your single face, which are scarce to be found i^ your whole Sex
besides --


Heigh-day, this is worse than I thought for -- I did not think to fright you
quite out of your Wits


Ah! cruel Charmer, why should you ridicule those truths which Love, Almighty
Love, extorted from my Soul -- Yet you were kind in this a while to dally with
my expectation, least a too sudden view had raised my transported spirits to
that height of ecstasy, which is insupportable


And thus you begin the attack, open your trenches with all your train of
Artillery in view to fright the besieged into Capitulation -- I receive your
Raptures as they were meant for a trial of skill, and truly I must own you
dissemble pretty naturally


Can you then doubt my passion? -- You are the dissembler now, or you won'd
confess that you believe I love you --


Since I cannot help it then to save you the trouble of a rehears^l, and my self
that of hearing it I do consent to think you somewhat smitten as you are with
all new faces and in token of Sovereignty command --


And shall be obeyed with all the ardour Love and Beauty can inspire in man


To tell me who the tallest of those Gentlemen was that left you just as I came
up -- Now for my Brother's Character --


His name is True Love, Heir to a good Estate in Norfolk, his Person is as you
see, agreeable, his Humor taking, his Wit poinant, and his Honor, unblemi^h'd
-- He knows how to be gentile without Foppery, Sociable without Debauchery, and
is every way a complete Gentleman


Truly, S^r, I am of your opinion, unless you, as most good Painters do, have
given him beauties he has not, instead of defects he has -- however, in
recompense of this service, if you continue in this mind a few hours, you may
hear farther from me till when I leave you to the pleasures of Imagination


Till that dear minute comes

My wandering thoughts over all your Charms shall rove,
And gather all the pleasing sweets of Love.

There he goes in his full career.


St^p him not: he is hunting upon scent; we shall meet him next double -- A
happy couple, you that can give a loose to your appetite, and follow your
pleasure in the full cry --


While thou, Frank, because thy Friends cannot be without thee in the day, art
resolved to prevent the Sun in rising, and run thy course of business before he
begins his --


It Is as you say, Harry, since you and some other honest fellows will make me
pursue the pleasing game of beauty, I am forced to deprive my self of some
hours sleep, to give 'em to that galling load of Life, that grave trifle which
old sots call business, as if that noble creature Man were endowed with all
those generous inclinations he enjoys only to plod on in one dull road --


To hate it more than I, you must turn Hermit, and fly all the laborious herd
of mankind -- But where have you dwelt these three days -- that I could not get
one sight of you, though I searched as diligently as a rich Usurer after a
Prodigal young Heir, or an old bawd for a fresh Country girl


Lighting by chance into Company with young Lord Frolicksome, we drank so long
till he grew freakish, and then there was no stirring from him --


I have heard much of him and his humor -- Your living in the same house gives
you opportunity to know both -- prithee oblige me with an account of 'em


To give him his due -- He has Honor, Wit, and Courage to recommend him to any
Man's Friendship and Esteem, were it not for some odd frolicks which make the
Town talk more freely of him, than it is for his reputation they should -- He is
now and then guilty of mad things, which because done by one of his figure,
seem the more extravagant


It Is with Men of quality, as with good Paintings, one fault is easily seen
amongst many Virtues, and casts a blemish on the whole piece


'Faith I am particularly obliged to his Lordship's favor; he was pleased to
single me out of the whole Company for his Friend, and has desired me to attend
him here, in order to greater Service --


He wants your experience to steer him through some difficulty.


But hark'e, Friend, how blows the wind at my Lady's, is it still in the point
of Matrimony. -- Ha, boy, what likelihood of to have and to hold? --


Not a little, I assure you -- she is none of the precise ones who call a
second Marriage a Crime -- She knows well enough what Nature and Education have
done for her, and all the Town knows her old Lord left her worth 3000 l. a year


What obstacle then can put a stop to your happiness -- You, I take it, have
more Wit than to slight the enjoyment of such a Woman and such a Fortune -- And
she should have more Youth about her than to forget how much time she has lost
in an old Man's arms --


I have nothing to dread from her aversion or nicety -- all my fears center in
her old Uncle Sir William Loveland, -- he is for Titles, and thinks that income
will make her Her Grace, at least


That Uncle may be useful


Damn him, a mere muck-worm, who has kept perpetual Lent these thirty years,
under pretense of mortification, when indeed it was only to save two dinners in
a Week. Would he were dead --


Dead! he is immortal, and can live by the air -- Death he slights in all
^hapes, since he has braved him in his worst of famine -- But what harm can he
do ^ou


My Lady in hopes to get by him, seems politickly to leave all to his
management -- This Authority he uses to declaim against Youth and Extravagance,
not forgetting a Friend of yours --


Old men will talk, we should take no more notice of them than of a cursed Cur,
who, though he cannot bite, will be still showing his Teeth


Let him rail on -- she, I think, likes me never a jot the worse for his rough
^raught -- therefore I am satisfied --


It Is such a satisfaction that were I so near enjoyment as you are -- I should
curse the lazy hours that retarded my bliss, and think all the time between ^he
and it one tedious Scene of night and horror -- She has charms would give life
to age and make impotence vigorous -- A Face --


You are transported, but I impute your Raptures to kindness for me, and
^orgive 'em


You hit the cause. I cannot see the man I love so nigh being int^^ely hap^y
without sharing in his joy -- It Is now the hour I should meet my Lord -- ^ake a
turn or two, and I Will be with you if I can --


G'morrow.





Frolicksome?


Your Servant, Mr. Richley -- I thought to have surpised you at home, but
understand now you are generally a very early stirrer


True, my Lord, it is a custom I always use: Business and Pleasure are to me
what Wife and Mistress are to modish Husbands --


One you endure out of necessity, because you are linkt to it, the other you
seek in hopes to find a real delight in it --


Even so -- and I manage 'em accordingly, taking care to weary my self with one
at home, that I may be more eager in pursuit of the other abroad


As good a Sportsman as you are, you love to stand upon the sile sometimes, I
perceive by your baulking your Glass, and observing your hour as precise^y as a
Hen-peck'd Cuckold, who dreads civil broils at home, when the Gallant has
failed his Wife's Assignation


Your Lordship was too hard upon us -- in my Conscience I believe you thought
we could out-drink the Quorum at a Quarter Sessions, or the to^ing Clergy at a
Visitation -- else you would not have plied us so


That was nothing, we took our half flask a Man standing, after you were gone,
and about morning bravely marched our rounds in the Neighborhood here -- fell
foul upon Overd^ne's Lodgings, entered, and found Squeezum hugging the whore,
while an awkard Country Booby called No-wit sat snoring by in the two armed
chair, and she was lightning his pockets --


You have seen the Monster then -- I knew his old Sire, a good hearty
substantial Clown he was who scraping together a little pelf, bred this Oaf at
School, gave him a smattering of the learned Languages, and sent him away
packing to the University --


Where no doubt he improved --


He picked up all the Debauchery of the place, broke his Father's heart, and
jampt into his Estate -- He is now come to London for accomplishments, and has
accordingly provided himself with such a Tutor as you saw -- but pray, my Lord,
who is this Overdone


A cast Mistress of mine -- whom, finding too familiar with my Footman, I
turned loose to the World -- She has been since kept by several -- but her
saucy pride soon made them weary of her, and her, I suppose, of getting her
living that way -- therefore she intends to provide her self with a Fool of her
own and will easily compass it if No-wit be what you describe him -- for she
neither wants beauty to bait her trap, nor cunning to keep the prey --


Leaving them to one another may I be so happy as to know your commands?


Why, 'Faith, I want your advice -- the young Lady I spoke of the other day
begins to encroach upon my heart, and I am in doubt whether I shall expel her
by dint of resolution, or let her take quiet possession --


Never resist a good motion -- I see nothing you can apprehend of ill
Consequence in the Intrigue if her birth be answerable to her person and humor


There Is the mischief on it -- I have been at the pains of enquiry, and find her
to be our near Neighbor, Sister to the Lady Generous, her name Eugenia, her
Fortune 6000 -- but am vi^hal informed, that she has often professed I should be
the last Man she would admit for a Lover


Therefore the first -- I thought you had been better read in the Sex, than to
be ignorant that it is a Stratagem used in Love as well as War, to give out they
intend to sit down before one Fort, and then bend their Arms against another --


That I cannot tell -- but I Am sure, if she thinks me worth conquering the will
meet with no difficulty in the enterprise -- One Summons, and I Surrender upon
discretion


Never doubt it -- she reserves you for her own, or she would never speak so
slightingly of you before Company -- Women are like sly Traders, who undervalue
the Commodity they design to buy, before others, that they may have it the
cheaper themselves --


You ^id me hope then.


Every thing -- To be assured of a man's own Courage is half way to a Victory --
How will you proceed


Improve the small acquaintance I have with the Sister, and make the Onset in
person -- for I long to be delivered of this burdensome secret, more tedious
to a Man of my Complexion than a Maidenhead to a Girl of Sixteen -- shall we
dine together --


If possible I will wait upon your Lordship, about one --


Adieu --


For a young Bully I huft it out pretty well, especially when I found what
kidney my man was of -- These breeches allow so much liberty, that I shall be
loath to part with 'em -- but to my Lady, to you I dare own that failing, though
to all the World beside I pretend he is my aversion --


But what do thou mean by this habit?


Mean: To do such things under a pretense of imitating his humor, as will make
him ashamed of it, and by letting him see how ridiculous the copy is, guess
what the Original must be


Who is this making toward us?


Townley by my life, the very Spark Sabina was so taken with at the play last
night -- He is her Brother's Companion and Confident -- ha! let me see -- it
shall be so -- Sister a word


Generous! that close whisper bodes no good to True^ove's amor --


Ha, ha, ha, Well -- I protest, Sir Francis, you are a pleasant, Gentleman and
rally so agreeably! I shall not forget your description of Mrs. Wouldhavemore a
good while, ha, ha, ha --


Worse and worse -- I am too good at guessing I see.


My only study is to please your Ladyship --


Say you so Friend -- g'ad then I must interrupt you -- G' morrow to your
Ladyship -- You would not lose the fine morning --


But did not expect so good Company as Mr. Townley.


Small want of that I believe, Madam, while this Gentleman is with you --


Truly we have passed an hour or two very divertingly -- The Mall afforded us a
large field of Satyr, and this Spark -- I thank him, has managed his province
much to my satisfaction -- He comes up just to your pitch of Malice and Wit --
I fancy your humors be very suitable -- I must have you acquainted --


I am always ready to be a Servant to merit -- Sir, I shall be proud to know
you better --


You are courtly -- My Language is as plain as my Meaning, I can only say I
thank you --


No matter for fine words -- You will be nevertheless grateful to me for the
want of 'em -- Since I find your other qualifications no way short of my
Uncle's Character --


It Is as I imagined -- poor Harry is to be cashiered to make room for that
smock^ac'd young rogue -- I Will try her however -- Mr. True Love would have been
glad my good luck had fallen to his share -- but Fortune does not always favor
the deserving --


Your Friendship speaks this -- You know constancy is a scandal to a man's
Judgment -- the Witty and gay make their court to Variety -- She is your
Mistress -- We only properties to serve your ends -- we shall be in a humor to
be even with you --


It Is not Wit but Affection which makes men such Weather-cocks -- particular
follies should not be charged upon the kind -- You may as well say all
Statesmen love bribes, and all Judges will be Knaves, because some of the first
have sold their country -- and not a few of the latter sleep away justice --


When his leisure serves he knows where to find me -- but I would not disturb
his more weighty concerns; so pray tell him --




So the rich City Spark, while yet unwed,
Sees the horns flourish on his Neighbors head,
And laughs: Yet takes not warning by their fate
Till his own forehead tells him it is too late --

HE is your own never fear -- Question not my management -- If you be not Madam
No-wit before to morrow night, may I become the scorn of my fraternity -- And
be all my life condemned to haunt three-penny Ordinaries, and Cully young
prentices --


Nay, I think you love your own interest better than to deceive me -- a
thousand pound is a great rate for a Fool -- they are a plenteous cheap
commodity -- The Town swarms with them, they are as common in the Side-boxes,
as Vizards in the Pit -- Yet the Sum is yours, complete it when you will --
Remember that, and think how much it concerns you to bring him to the lure


Here Is my hand -- it is done already -- You shall not only marry him, but --


Leave the ordering of him to me -- I shall deck his brows. If he does not
carry his horns as high as any Stag in his own Park, then say I don't know the
Town -- I wish last nights Accident does not give him a qualm --


If it should have a cure for him -- He will be here immediately to r^ceive
some instructions from me -- be you prepared within for his courtship


How goes it Bully Rock -- how now, alamort? -- what contrivance is hatching in
thy pericranium? -- What noble Exploit, old Charon, have thy designed for thy
Achilles? -- shall we roar it away, rantum tantum, helter skelter? hey-boy,
Speak --


Sir.


Now by the Immortal Glory of my great Forefathers, leave this Sullenness or I
will let thee know foul discontent dwells not in my presence -- Gadsbud, I am
Heroical --


Ah! well said, in faith, Squire -- those are reviving sounds fit to dispel
melancholy, and inspire courage -- is not this better than, Yes forsooth, and
No forsooth --


Perish the Clownish phrase, and they who use it -- Breeding and honor be my
province --


Good again -- You come on finely -- Now to Repetition -- D' you remember what
I told you of an Accomplished Gentleman's behavior


That he is to do all things with Affection, and a design of being singular --
to beat his Footmen that he may dismiss 'em for asking Wages -- and run in debt
where he never designs to pay, purely for the pleasure of disciplining his Duns
in a morning --


To be the first that begins a quarrel, but the last to engage in it -- To be
seldom Witty or honest, always noisie, and for the most part to be impertinent


To dress, eat, drink, and Whore modishly -- To do every thing in vogue, but
sight -- To damn good Poets, while he is repeating his own dull Lampoons -- and
act the Fool so naturally in the Pit, that the Audience shall not mind his
pourtraict on the Stage --


Right -- He should besides admire himself before his Mistress -- be always
praising his Shape, Air, and Mein to her -- Never come where there is a
Looking-Glass without acting all his postures before it -- or where there is
not one, without complaining of the want of it -- In short, he ought to be
particularly fond of what the ill-bred wiser part of the World count ridiculous
--


You promised me yesterday to put me forward with the Women -- Your
Instructions on that point --


The thing is easy -- If you have ill Nature enough, it is but railing at 'em
to one another, taking special care to find fault with the celebrated beauties
-- To set up for discretion and secrecy, and be liberal to the Chamber maid


Very well --


Be uneasy in Company -- 'twill look like a man of Intrigue -- Produce all
your Letters, though they be your own Writing -- Swear every scrawl came from a
sine Woman, when it is an ill-spelt dun from some needy punk that wants
subsistence


Excellent.


But nothing will stand you in so much stead as impudence and importunity. ^
have known a great many Physicians get into practice by going to see Patients,
whose only disease was their coming so often -- and a great many men sought too
by the ^adies, only because they believed them in favor with others -- Not but
to be fami^ar without encouragement may be very serviceable --


Gads me, now you mention Familiarity, it puts me in mind of my Lord what is his
name -- methinks he was somewhat too familiar with your Cousin last night -- I
did not like his talking to her after that free rate --


Sdeath, Sir -- I hope you do not question my Relation's honor -- if I thought
you entertained the least suspicion to her prejudice, by this light I would
make your Carcass worms meat instantly


O Lord, O Lord! her prejudice -- Not I, as I hope to be saved -- I have more
respect for her and you than that comes to -- You quite mistake me, I only say,
'twas not very civil in him, and so would have told him, Gadsbud -- If I durst
-- I wonder you would bear it --


Do you think I will -- If I had not known what a fright a naked Sword puts her
into -- by Jove this arm had laid him breathless at my feet -- And were it not
for the robbing you of the Glory of serving your Mistress, he should pay dearly
for the affront -- But you shall challenge him --


Thank you for that heartily -- You would have me hanged out of the way for
breaking the Law -- but I shall take care of one -- Challenge him! marry Heaven
forbid -- The Law, Sir, the Law, remember the Law --





So that I shall be pricked inevitably Squeezum --


Damn you --


He is obdurate I fee, and must be mollify'd -- I will even send him twenty or
thirty yellow Boys to melt him --





Poor man! how he considers for my good -- Come, come, it shall never be said,
that we parted about such a trifle as murder -- therefore --


Has the Devil possessed him -- he will not fight sure --


As you are my Friend, I must desire you to carry him this Glove, and ask his
in exchange --


That indeed is the Country fashion -- ha! it is heavy -- what have we here? a
score of Lewises by my life -- this is rhetoric, I understand -- since I see
you dare do so much for her honor, she shall thank you for it within -- as for
the Quarrel -- he was in drink when he gave the affront -- we will even let it
fall --


'Gad, and so we will -- for to say truth, I had rather conside in my heels
than my hands --


Allons -- my brave Pupil --


My Learned Tutor --


This is not another Pretender I hope -- if he be he is the maddest Lover that
ever I saw -- I Will stand off, and observe him a little


He has followed me as I wished --


What can he mean by a Serenade and Flambeaux at this time of day -- I Will be so
impertinent for once as to enquire, if it be but to be better acquainted with
his humor -- Pray, Sir, if a Stranger may be so bold, how long has this sort
of gallantry been in fashion? --


As long as I have thought fit to make it so -- I am sorry you are so little
acquainted with the Town as not to know I am an Original -- My appearing in any
thing makes it an authentic Fashion -- I am always for something Extravagant
and Novel, and would no more make Love than dress twice in the same way --


Your Genius to Vanity is particular -- for i'gad I am sure it cannot be
imitation --


To deal frankly with you, I cannot tell you what it is -- it is both and neither
-- for as I would owe nothing of singularity to another -- so I would not be
outdone in any thing that is humorous, and will make a noise in the World


In my opinion you have taken an effectual way to satisfy your self --


Yes truly, the success has answered my design pretty well -- but I am told
Lord Frollicksome still attempts to go beyond me -- which if he does I Will be
content to quit all claim to Eugenia's heart, and engage my Honor she makes
him happy, and that she is not much inclined to at this juncture --


By your intimacy with the Lady's Secrets, you should have a great interest in
her --


Who I -- O Gad by no means -- I never made any address of this sort before --
but that is not material -- I have learnt that French trick of State to keep
Pensioners in the Enemies Court, who inform me of the most secret transactions
-- from them I received this advice, with an additional assurance, that this
person of mine, which as you see is no despicable one, is as dear to her as her
own --


He is handsome and knows it


Ha, ha, ha! how easily the Fool was caught, he chopped so greedily at the hook,
that I had scarce time to bait it -- Now will he away to my Lord's with this
Story, who will no doubt be sufficiently vexed before he comes, at some other
Tricks I have played him -- If this attempt does but prosper I shall have
Monuments reared to me in after ages, and be immortalized in tuneful Dity by
the name of the Mad Reformer -- but I should dismiss my attendants


To me Child?


Yes, Sir, if your name be Townley, but I shall soon know whether you be the
man I am sent to, by a peculiar Virtue he is master of --


Paying those of her Profession well, She means


Their Evidence is sufficient -- I suppose you have your Directions there --


So, Jack, you have your Agents abroad --


I don't know what this means -- reads --

If you have any respect to your Safety and Honor, you will not fail to come
immediately into the Park, and receive advice that concerus both from --
Sylvia, Who this Sylvia is I cannot tell, but she is a Woman, and for ought I
know a handsome Woman, which is a sufficient charm to conjure me whither she
pleases. It Is a Citation, Harry, that calls me from you -- Woman's business,
and that you know must be minded --


Seeing Eugenia. By Townley's description that should be the young Knight --
who has poacht up the Game for which I have so long beat the Bush -- I will
even accost him


It may be so, Sir, -- but what is it to me, Sir, -- shall I get any thing more
by it than if it were Sr. Solomon Single, Sr. Nicholas Cully, or any other
Fool's name you are pleased to pitch upon --


Yes, I Will tell you what you are like to get, I shall perhaps take occasion to
cut your Beauship's Windpipe for daring to pretend to my Mistress the Lady
Generous --


I cry you mercy indeed -- You are the Lover it seems, upon whose ruins my
happiness is to be built -- Alas! Sir, I am sorry it should fall to your lot,
for I vow it is great pity a handsome proper Gentleman should be baulk't so --
But Destiny and the Stars decree our Fates, and we must submit to 'em --


'Sdeath, do you make sport of my misfortune? -- thou art too much a Boy to give
me that satisfaction my loss requires, or I should soon make you change your
note, young Ganymede, I should --


You were pleased to intimate something of a loss -- III luck will make a man
peevish -- But pray, Sir, of what nature may this loss be -- I would fain
condole with you --


Don't provoke me too far, Minion, don't, lest I forget my self so much as to
chastise thy Insolence -- Let it suffice that she prefers you, and be gone now
when Love and the thought of her checks my just Fury --


By what power, if I may be so inquisitive, do you command thus? --


My own -- I wear my Warrant here --


And is that all -- Why I have just such another for my stay


That Is soon tried -- it is but producing both, and we may easily know which is
be obeyed -- therefore, Sir, draw --


I have fooled too long -- if my invention does not relieve me quickly I am
un^^^e, and shall be forced to discover my self before my Plot is ripe -- Oh I
have be^^^ught my self --


Come, Sir, you are tedious.


I have weighed the matter, and though I may perhaps incur my Lady's displea^^^^e
by hazarding her reputation so publicly, I must not be braved


He says true, this will incense her more, but I have waded out of my depth,
(...) must through -- Come, Sir, prepare, I hope you are prepared to die


I have generofity enough to make the same wish for you -- have at you --


Hold, hold -- Sir Francis, I am very sorry you should by this miscarriage give
^^ just reason to lay aside those thoughts I had entertaind in your favor --
as for (...) Gentleman he has given me sufficient proof how real all his
protestations have (...) -- from you I take it extremely ill --


I doubt not but your Ladyship will acquit me of the guilt, when you know (...)
small my share was in the Crime --


I wish your defense may be plausible at least, that I may have some color to
^^^give you -- You shall have your hearing within --


I hope, Madam, you will not be partial -- Give me but leave to clear my self,
(...) you will find this rashness rather only an excess of Love than any thing
else --


As it comes from you, Sir, I don't so much as think of it -- therefore you
(...) not trouble your self for a set Apology -- All your rhetoric will never
make (...) more favorable in my Opinion of you than I am now -- and what that
is I leave (...) to judge --


Judge quoth -- a -- I judge I have made a fine hand of it, ruined my self with
(...) Mistress, and given my Rival just cause to triumph -- Thus it is in all
things; the ^^^er our hopes, the nearer still the disappointment -- It is in
Love as in all other ^^^eases, a short interval of strength preceeds death --


I have not recovered the fright yet.


Your Valor was hard put to it, that is the truth on it -- I fancy you would
(...) been glad of your Petticoats again when he drew upon you -- 'T was happy
I ^^^c'd to be within hearing --


It saved my Honor -- I was at the end of my Valor, just ready to turn
Recre^^^ and yield Arms and Mistress to the Conqueror's discretion -- Methinks
you deal ^^ hardly with a man whom you design for your Husband --


That cannot be, Child -- You can never use a man so ill while he is your
Ser^^^^, as he will you when he is your Master -- People may talk of our
Privileges and ^^^^ority over the other Sex -- but we all find sooner or later,
that our Mock-reign ^^ but a short prelude to their Tyranny --


Thank our selves --


Our selves! --


Yes our selves -- that is our Pride -- If we gave them better usage we migh
expect it in our turns -- but it is a mistake to think Lovers are like our Dog^
the fonder for beating -- Man is a sly Animal, that carries Peace in his Face
but if ever you fall into his Clutches you will be sure to be paid your own
wit^ interest --


But then there is that Darling Pleasure of our Souls, that Idol of Woman kind,
mischief in it -- Which --


Often falls heaviest upon us, the Authors -- too many Impositions from a
M^stress are as dangerous as from a Prince -- it is ten to one, but they make
the Subje^^ Rebel, and then nothing e're reclaims them to their Obedience --


You think, it seems, that the state of Love like all others, can admit (...)
no Female Regency -- 'T would please you to see all the Sovereignty in the Me^^
hands --


Don't mislake me -- I have as great an itch of Rule as any of my Sexbut I
would have our Laws contrived so easy, that so Love should be a happ^ness, and
the indisserent Railer looked upon as the most ridiculous of Mankind --


Very good -- You will allow us, I hope, when the trust is great, to try before
we conside --


Provided your Trials neither carry too much suspicion, nor be too oft^^
repeated --


Not suspect them said you?


Why not? -- A Generous Lover resents a suspicion from his Mistress, a Man of
Honor does from his Friend -- it cancels all Obligations, and leaves us li^^
Chemists to curse our own Curiosity for making unnecessary Experiments -- And
(...) try a Man too often looks more like Pride than Caution


You are a notable Advocate I swear -- it is pity but the Men knew what Friend
you are to the Cause


I would not willingly they should -- for look ye, Sister, I am as errant (...)
obstinate Woman as you can be, and own no Law but Inclination -- Yet whoe^^^
takes pains to study us, will sind us mere Gypsies -- We have our Cant as w^^^
as they to keep our selves from being understood by the World, and like the^
too, can lay it aside among our selves, and talk plain English --


You should be secured for the public good -- if you should revolt, you (...)
betray the Sex -- You know all our strengths --


Never fear me -- but how will you deal with poor Mr. Truclove -- I fancy would
be pleasant enough to hear him now cursing his Stars, and ripping up all (...)
Frailties of Womankind from Grannum Eve, of deceitful Memory, to your prese
self


Yes, yes -- No doubt but he will rail furiously till his Passion is over --
l^vers are like Froward Children, cry 'em selves to sleep, or fall a Laughing
in t^^ same Breath -- We shall have him here all Ecstasy -- I have an important
discov'ry make, that will pretty well recompense his disquiet --


What? you will sighing, blushing, dying own your Love.


No such matter -- it is something of a quite different Complexion -- it is only
to tell him that the Gentleman he brought the other day to see his Bargain, is
very willing to take it off his Hands, and has been chaffering with me about a
Lease for Life of this Tenement


Downright Treachery -- I suppose he bids high.


Extraordinary Conditions -- Abundance of Love, a swinging Jointure, and good
comely Bedfellow, somewhat turned of thirty --


Which you had the Grace to refuse?


Not absoluely -- fearing a flat Denial might exasperate him to contrive his
Friends Ruin; I faintly put him off with two or three trivial Objections,
which he thinking easily answered was very well satisfied. But if my Invention
does not fail me, he will have little reason to boast his success --


If there be any thing that has Mirth or Mischief in it going forward -- I
would not lose my share to be a Saint in the Calendar -- therefore impart


You shall know all within -- But how to get True-Love hither without sending
for him


Leave that to my management -- I have a decoy for him -- But I am impatient to
know your Contrivance -- Let us in and about it immediately -- though I doubt
not but we shall agree upon it, as readily as a packt Jury upon their Verdict
--


Here have I walked till I have tired my Self and Patience -- It would vex me
most horribly if this should be a Trick now -- But why the Devil should I
suspect it to be any thing else -- What did I see in my Glass this Morning,
that could flatter me into the Vanity of believing a Woman would send for me --
Yet the unknown Fair promised me I should hear from her -- it is her Writing
then, and her Name is Silvia -- Here comes a Damsel, but it is not she --


Punctual I see he is -- Now if he stands the Test, he is the Lover I wished
him.


And by your Question, Madam, I guess you sent it.


I must confess I did -- You seem to me to be a Gentleman, and a Man of Sense
-- therefore out of Respect I bear all such, I would rescue you from a Danger I
hear you are running into --


Faith, Madam, I shall be obliged to you for the Favor, which will be the more
grateful, because it come unexpected, and from you --


First then, I must desire you to believe no particular Affection for your Self
-- no Hatred of any body else -- nor any private Interest of my own, promoted
this Discovery --


That is easily granted.


Then I may safely tell you that the Woman you Entertained last night at the
Play, and this Morning here, has as little Reputation as Fortune, and subsists
only upon that small stock of Beauty you saw -- which is not so great but
others may have more --


This destroys your Credit with me, Madam -- I cannot but think this is a Design
-- tho perhaps I cannot fathom it


I am sorry you misconstrue me, and know her no better -- I dare affirm you are
the only Man in Town that is not intimately acquainted with her -- She knows,
and is known to all the Taverns in London; and has been Jaunted so much up and
down the Town, that the Hackney Coachmen know her as well as they do their Fare


This sounds too like Malice to be true.


This does not take -- but I have another Stratagem for him -- Stay Sir, and
take a Confession I should never make, did I not believe you have generosity to
pity, and secrecy to conceal a Woman's Failing --


You have me right -- now if you please proceed --


Then I must own, however I strove to dissemble it, 'twas Love to you made me
defame her -- You may spare a Woman's Blushes, and esteem their freedom as the
effect of no ordinary Passion -- I saw your Person and liked it -- Observed
your Actions and found 'em noble -- hence grew my esteem for you, which time
has ripened into Affection


This Banter I credit as little as the other -- Yet should I be so vain as to
hearken to it -- I love her too well to receive yours as I ought --


You have no reason to despise me -- My Fortunes are every way your Equals --
My Face, if the World flatters me not, no bad one, and my Reputation not
sullied by any Crime, but that of Loving a perverse obstinate Man -- You will
perhaps repent your Contempt when it is too late -- and wish you had been wiser
-- Farewell, but remember tha

Love turns to Hatred, when by Slight removed,
And we most Hate the Men, we most have loved.

TO outdo me, did he say? -- Are my Extravagances then grown so public as to
countenance an Imitation --


So it seems.


This will, no doubt, further my Designs upon Eugenia mightily, if once it
comes to her Ears -- I had not need have other Men's follies laid to my charge,
when I have so many of my own to answer for --


What is already done cannot be helped -- but you ought to prevent the progress
of it: He will stop at nothing; it is the maddest young Rogue that ever I met
with


Handsome?


To a miracle -- and by his Discourse seems to want no Wit --


'Slife who can this be -- No common Town-Rake sure -- they are too much tired
with their Midnight debauches to frollick at any other time -- They are a sort
of Bats -- never seen by daylight, and only come abroad in the dark to do
mischief


Men that can as soon be valiant when they are sober, as peaceable when drunk
-- and would no more baulk a Quarrel in their drink than their Glass --


Hang 'em, he can be none of them -- but the Town rings of his Exploits, and my
Fame suffers for 'em -- It must be remedied --


When do you intend for Eugenia --


I have sent my Man to know if a Visit this Afternoon wont be unseasonable --
Oh, here he comes -- Well, what Answer


She Will expect your Lordship -- Here is a Paper, my Lord, which a young
Gentleman forced upon me at the Door, with a strict charge to deliver it


Let me see.

My Lord,

UPon sight of this I advise you, as a friend, to quit your Pretensions to all
sort of Humor, and to Madam Eugenia; for I resolve to be unrivaled in both: If
you slight this Advice, I shall expect you to morrow Morning at Six, behind
Mountague-House, as your Enemy


So then, it is like to come to something -- Well, my young Squire, you shall be
met with -- The Superiority in Madness I shall not dispute with you -- The Lady I
must not lose, but with the last drop of my Blood --


'Twill never come to that, I warrant you -- You don't consider he is a Beaux
-- Fighting is too rough an Exercise for his nice Constitution --


However 'twill concern my Honor to go: But there is time enough to think of
this -- Come, here is Prosperity to all mortal Lovers


With all my heart -- Here, my Lord, to all kind Mistresses --


Who waits there --


Noise, my Lord? there is a whole Regiment without that talk of Injuries,
Reparation, and I don't know what -- I fat old Beldam leads 'em up, whose
Tongue never lies still -- She soolds, good Woman, till she sweats again, and
swears she will have Satisfaction --


Of whom? For what --


Of your Lordship, for throwing her Fruit about the Market this Morning.


You might have satisfied her, Rascal -- You know well enough that I have not
been nigh a Market since I rose --


I told her so, my Lord, but had like to have had my eyes scratcht out for it
-- One of your Men, she says, told her who you were, and she will not be Answered
so


More of the young Hector's pranks, I suppose; 'faith I can neither guess at
the Man, nor his meaning


Sirrah, Sirrah -- not see him; why sure a Cat may look upon a King, as the
Proverb says --


There Is no standing her -- I am not Tongue-proof -- Go, see 'em paid -- then
follow me to my Lady's -- We may steal off this way, and discharge the
Reckoning below --


A Man of the Town, and so constant -- to a Woman he does not know too? it is
incredible


Rather very probable -- it is ten to one but what you miscall Constancy, is
only an obstinate desire of knowing her -- Curiosity has often more share in
Passions than Love --


That I suspect -- I have one Plot more to try him, in which I much engage my
Brother -- If he resists that as firmly as he did the other -- Virginity Adieu
-- and Wedlock I embrace thee --


Does Mr. True Love know you are in Town?


I believe not -- Sure I should have seen him before now if he had --


No matter -- I am glad he does not, for Reasons you shall be hereafter
Acquainted with --


As you please -- You have my Consent.


Lose no time -- but send for him immediately -- My Sister, and I have Business
for him to manage, which may turn to his Advantage, and your Satisfaction --


I Will dispatch a Messenger, and wait on you in a Minute.


If I may disturb your serious Contemplation -- Pray Madam, what Sage
Contrivance lies brooding in your Matchiavilian Brain


I was considering how to receive my Lord when he comes -- whether with the
stately Port of a Court Lady, the easy freedom of a City Wife, or the affected
Toss of a Modish Cocquet


Thou art a mad Girl -- But how do your Plots succeed --


To my Wish -- Not a Trick I have played him, but is by my means come to his
knowledge


Well, and what use can your Wisdom make of that?


If he makes any Advances to me, as I suppose that is the Intent of his Visits
-- then will I produce the black Catalogue of my own Faults, and bring him to
Repentance for it --


It Is uuconscionable dealing to act Crimes in a Man 's Name, and then Arraign
him for them -- I wish you be not the Sufferer at last --


Let what will come, I resolve to make the Venture -- If I can but break him of
his mad Humor, I defy Fortune and all her Malice to make me repent it
hereafter --


No Passion now in my free Breast shall move,
None, but that soft and best of Passions Love,
Ha!


Nay, never blush for it, Love and Murder will out -- It Is in vain to think of
concealing your Passion now -- When once a Maid comes to Sigh in Rhyme, Cupid
bless her, and a good Husband take her --


Poetry in us then is as certain a sign of Love, as Poverty is of Wit in a good
Poet --


And it is not possible that a Woman when alone, should have the Word in her
Mouth, without harboring the God in her Heart


Spoken like Sybils -- Women hide their Passions with the same care Men do
their Villainies; and a voluntary Confession in secret does as certainly betray
Love in us, as a guilty Conscience in them -- To the World I grant you, we may
seem what we are not, but she that can disguise her Inclinations to her self is
more than Woman


No, no -- Dissimulation is true Vizard, which though worn constantly abroad,
is always put off at home


You know my Heart too well to be shamed off with a Denial, else you should not
want it -- I wish you would be contented with your Knowledge, and pry no
further


If the Theme be ungrateful, we may shift it for another.


Agreed -- My absence from the Town, has made me almost a Stranger to it -- An
account of it from you would be very welcome, if not necessary


It Is not so much altered as you Imagine -- Men of Sense are still searce, and
foolish Fops plentiful


Virtue is still undervalu'd, while Vice is hugged close and made much of --
Great Promises and little Performance go hand in hand at Court, and the City
sticks to the old Maxim of Cheating to posterity


These are Truths somewhat to grave for us -- I should rather have expected a
Discourse of Fashions, Diversions and Galantry -- Things that suit much better
with a Woman's Capacity, as well as her Inclinations


To speak of Fashions is endless -- 'twould pose a good Arithmetician to count
'em. People may talk of New Fashion, but a considerate Person, will rather
believe there is no such thing -- It Is like Time either past or future, for the
present is gone so quickly, you can scarce say it has been


Our Diversions are all abused -- The Stage! the very best of them is now
become a shelter for every needy Witling, that has but Sense enough to patch up
a Farce for three Days -- A mere Hospital, to which all that cannot maintain
their own Lame s^nd it to be kept at the Public Charge


It Is grown so Scandalous, that a certain wise Reformer has pronounced it of
worse Consequence to the Nation than the late Revolution, though he lost his
little All by it --


I am sorry to hear this -- the rest sure will make amends -- What say you to
Gallantry --


Nothing was ever more pretended to, and less practiced -- it is Foppery and
Impertinence in the Men -- Affection and Levity in the Women -- Conversation is
now kept up, not so much for the Advantages of it, as the Opportunity it gives
to vent particular Follies -- and will no more admit of sound sense than true
Breeding


How is the World Employed then?


Every one in their own Vanities.


Gaming is indeed the accomplishment all aim at -- To Cheat gentely is a mark
of quick Wit -- and to be skilled in all the little Tricks of Play, a sign of
profound Judgment


Who are the Men now in Vogue?


The greatest Fools -- either such as are of our own growth -- but have
infinitely improved under the French Air -- or your true Natural Frenchmen, and
abundance whom you may know by the following Marks -- Much foul Linen, a short
Wastcoat, red topt Shoes, much Impudence, and no English --


Nay, some are so fond of Poverty, that they dote upon the Cashiered Officers,
and choose their Lovers, as the Indians do their Generals for the multitude of
their Scars -- As for particulars it is tedious to name 'em -- The Box-keeper
will give you a List of their Names out of his Debt -- Book when you please --


Bless me! You have said enough to frighten a poor Country Gentlewoman from
coming within sight of London -- If it be thus, we must even be content with
our Solitude, Visit one another once a Quarter, take up with the Fag End of a
Fashion, and quietly suffer the awkard Passion of my Lady's overgrown Eldest
Son


No such danger -- There are those Men to be found, who bateing a little
wildness, are what you would wish 'em, Genteel, Generous and Witty -- Our Beaux
I must confess, are rather Puppets than Men -- Things that have no Life in 'em,
but as they are moved by others


Enough of them -- their Character is as Nauseous as their Company -- Next to
the trouble of conversing with them; I hate to hear them named


How now?


My Lord Frolicksom, and the Gent. who dined here the other day with Mr.
True Love, are below to wait upon your Ladyship


Go show 'em up -- did you hear Sister, -- my New Lover too, this is
unexpected, he has Surpised me -- Your Advice quickly how I shall use him --


Not Ill -- it would break our measures if you should -- I wish he does not
know me again


I Will withdraw, and expect my Brother. --


The near acquaintance I had with your Dead Lord, Madam, makes me bold to
assure you, as I share in your loss, so I am ready to do all that lies in my
power to make it easy


These generous offers surprise me, so that I can scarce thank you for 'em, yet
my gratitude shall always speak my acknowledgments --


In spite of your coldness I am come once more to lay my self at your Feet --
and beg you would not let an unfortunate Man perish for want of your pity --


My nature abhors cruelty -- I would not willingly be the cause of any
Gentleman's Misfortune -- Yet, Sir, when my Reputation and Faith are engaged --


Your Reputation is safe, while I wear a Sword -- And your Faith, Madam, as I
take it obliges no longer than the man, it is given to, values it as he ought


I am not of your Opinion there -- Yet a Slight from any Man would provoke me
to forgo him -- I would neither have my favors thought cheap -- nor my choice
unworthy -- therefore should I know my lover Guilty of the least Action, that
might call my virtue or prudence in question, I would this moment discard him
--


It will Work -- Mr. True Love is my Friend -- One whose welfare I prize beyond
my own -- Yet when he forgets his respect to you, I can sorget my Friendship to
him. Were it what concerned me, I should bury it in Silence -- But to dissemble
with a Lady of your Quality, and at the same time he pretends all the Honor in
the World, hazard his Health and Fame with a common prostitute, is insufferable
-- What I cannot bear. --


This may be a trick -- I will encourage him, and dive into the Mystery -- If
this were proved, I should not be ungrateful


Proved! Why Madam, I can give you occular demonstration.


How?


If I do not, may I become the scorn of Mankind -- a by word to all honest Men
-- a common jest to Fools -- or what is yet more intoierable, the object of
your ^ate -- But I desire to be heard in private


You shall -- A business of vast concern, which this Gentleman has unexpectedly
imparted to me, makes me less civil than I ought to be -- but I bope Your
Lordship will excuse my rudeness, and dispense with my absence a Minute or two
-- ^ister pray entertain my Lord --


Do but hear me.


I have heard you with a great deal of patience, not that I think your Heart
and tongue hold any correspondence at present


Scan my Actions if you distrust me, and see which of 'em points at Interest or
Vanity -- I loved your Person before I knew your Quality, without expecting
more than a return of my passion -- I do so still -- If you will try me --
command, and see how readily I can quit all things to gain your favor


All but your Humor -- You are too much wedded to that to think of a Wife --
Alas! Whenever I consent to think of Marriage -- The Man I choose shall be one
that will lay aside his own pleasures to further mine -- His Actions must wait
upon my Will, and all his Diversions center in Innocence -- He must forget to
be a Man of the Town -- Bid adieu to his darling Bottle, shake off the boon
Companion, and be a sober discreet Husband


All this I can do --


Think better on it, hang it, I am but a Woman, a Toy, a Triffle, not worth
troubling your head, much less changing your manner of Life for -- consider,
Sir, when once we are Married I must have no rambling at Midnight, nor
serenading in the Morning -- I shall not care to hear my Neighbor's Windows
rattle, nor my own Maids shriek


She knows me to a tittle I perceive.


Weigh the loss of all these dear delights, and then resolve --


I weigh 'em as I should, and acknowledge 'em to be the Folly and Madness --
the childish feats of half-witted Fops and Fools -- Actions which every Man in
his Senses is ashamed of


But then to be jeered by all your Acquaintance, your Reformation looked upon as
ridiculous -- and your Company shunned as infectious -- it is intolerable


All this does not stagger my Resolutions -- I should perhaps pity the
Scoffer's folly without being concerned at their Censure, any more than I
should be for a Madman's telling me I was out of my Wits


That you at present intend all this I believe -- but there are a thousand
pleasing Temptations to make you forget it -- A Lover's Vows to his Mistress
like Sickmen's repentance last but till the Fit is over, and then as they were
easily made they are soon broke


But when performance succeeds the promise, a Mistress will be unjust to
scruple a Lover's sincerity, or deny him his reward -- such proofs you shall
have --


There you meet my Wishes, let me see them -- and then --


Ay, Madam, what then


I will believe you -- in the mean time you must promise me to draw your Sword
upon no account whatever, though provokt beyond the sufferance of a Man --


No account! Except but your own and my Honor, and I am all obedience.


That were to take away the merit of your service -- to abstain from things
which the wisest part of Mankind esteem brutal and ridiculous, is what may be
expected from any Man that loves himself -- But tamely to sit down with an
Affront when all Men's Eyes are upon you -- When your patience must brand your
Name with Cowardice, and lose you in the Worlds opinion, only because I bid
you, is the mark of an extreme passion, and what I expect from you --


You think it fit then that I should hear your Virtues traduced, and your
Favors belied by a Saucy braggard, without telling him he is a Rascal, and
taking satisfaction for the injury --


To choose -- If I am detained, better let it rest there, than make a Quarre of
it -- You cannot make my disgrace more private, more open you may -- therefore
if you would have me think your professions other than the mere effects of
Gallantry, you must promise


Since I cannot help it -- I swear by this White Hand, to perform the Conditions.


I shall put you to it


To doubt your Sincerity now, would be rude -- Your Honor is engaged, and if
you value that, or my repose, you will not fail --


I shant't -- if my Invention don't fail me.


His Relation has disordered me strangely, I would not have him see it though


You need not -- Modesty like true Wit, is best seen in those that make the
least show of it --


You can allow then, that freedom and gaiety are not inconsistent with Virtue
-- that a Woman may give a loose to her humor, without forfeiting her
Reputation


This and more -- I can laugh at those who miscall Bashfulness, Modesty -- and
despise their formality, who shun the mention of those things abroad, they are
not ashamed to Act at home --


Such are the Hypocrites of our Sex, who rail at all Mankind in public, yet
Love all in Private -- Who make their Sanctity a Baw'd to their pleasures, as
cunning Lawyers rail against Bribery, to get Clients


Or the better sort of Quacks decline public Operations for Chamber Practice.


Not forgeting the Grave Reformers among us, who would Monopolize Lewdness --
and forbid others reading those wicked Plays they have got by heart


We will wave this Discourse, if you please, and retire to a dish of Tea, and
the Cards for an hour or two


Agreed --


Here Cousen, the Squires good Health -- he will make you an Admirable Husband.


I don't doubt the Gontleman's good Qualities --


You are pleased to jeer one now --


Well what want you.


Madam the Broker is come --


Softly hussy -- Whisper cannot you -- here this way


Nothing, but that he is come for your Furniture, he swears it shall not stand a
day longer -- you have had it long enough for nothing --


I must appease him -- You will pardon me for a Minute Gentlemen --


Here Is a do with you indeed


Nay, but prithee Dear Mr. Squeezum, have a little Patience.


Patience! you great Calf you -- Zounds I have none left -- you have quite worn
out mine -- Plague on you, take your own Courses for me, and be Damned --


Pshaw, pshaw -- you shall not be angry -- here is my hand, I Will do what you would
have me


Go to her then, and get her consent -- I know she Loves you -- I will not tell
you all I know neither --


Does she ifackins -- does the Rogue love me -- Nay, nay, you shall tell me --
Not be free with your Friends? Come let us hear what she says -- does she like
my person, ha? I gad has this Face taken, this Shape, this Leg, this Hair --
have they -- come confess --


You are but too happy, that is the truth on it -- First she says you have a
very pretty Wit


That shows her judgment.


Then she admires the Careless shake of your Head -- the neat Carriage of your
Body -- the gentile Shamble in your Gate --


Right thus --


Next -- but here she comes -- now strike up briskly to her -- she Loves the
Lad that is brisk and Gay --


But hates the formal Wooer -- ha! old Boy.


The impertinence of a City-Visitant would have detained me from you, Sir, --
but I thought every minute an age till she was gone


Do You hear that?


Ay, ay, she is smitten that is certain -- but how could she choose -- hum, hum,
--


Tell your mind then -- Couz. Mr. Nowit would confer with you about a Business
of moment





The fear of a Denial deters him from speaking -- He would be happy as soon as
possible -- What if the Wedding were to morrow


By no means -- what would the Town say of me, if I should be won so casily --


Say -- you were a wise Woman -- One that understand your own happyness better
than to lose so good an Offer, and so fine a Person, for a mere piece of
formality





But how am I sure his Love is sincere?


Sincere enough I warrant you for a Husband -- Methinks you have but small
reason to question it, since he is willing to give you the last proof of his
sincerity --





It Is too Sudden --


Look ye -- what I propose by this quick dispatch is to prevent rumor -- and
finish the intreigue before any body can know I have begun it --


A very nice Stratagem.


Your persuasion and that person would excuse a Woman's frailty -- But


Why there it is again now -- pshaw hang but -- Women ofiner spoil than make
their Fortunes, by being over Modestly Scrupulous -- We Men of Estates take a
refusal as an affront, and seldom are at the pains to ask twice -- Let Younger
Brothers Drudge at constancy, who must live by it, we are above it --


The Fool has reason, it is best making sure of him


I make over my Right to Mr. No-wit --


Then there is a bargain made -- I must provide a Parson and some other
necessaries -- I will leave you two together --


Fortune be praised success attends us -- He is yours as sure as --


The Thousand pound is yours -- I am thinking how to manage Affairs when we are
Married -- In the first place I do Solemnly Vow and Swear never to leave London
--


Nor any of its Vices -- Item, to bring his Acres hither, and him to a Prison
--


Then will I keep my Gallant in Ordinary, besides two or three hangers on in
reserve -- Game without measure; run in Debt without measure. And after the
Laudable Custom of most Wives, domineer over my Husband without measure -- Not
to mention many other Necessary Privileges as essential to a Woman's
Prerogative, as Chocolate and cold Tea, are to her Health --


Come leave cheating, and put the glass about -- alas he is departed --


He has a Brother or two in my Closet -- We will retire thither for Consolation
-- Let the World believe


However in public our Nice Sex pretend,
That Drinking does their Modesty offend,
All hold the Bottle a good private Friend.
WILL when looking well cannot move her, looking ill prevail --

Bear your Misfortunes like a Man, and scorn her Inconstancy -- If she be
false, it is well you mist her -- You cannot wish your Rival a worse Plague,
than such a Wife -- But to Whine and sneak after this rate, as if there were no
more Women in the World, is insufferable -- The only way to become matter of
ridicule to her, and of Triumph to him


No more of your grave Morals -- They are to me like Water to a Man in a Fever,
only serve to make my disease more violent -- all you can say shall never make
me forget she is a base perjured Woman


A deceitful Flattering Hypocrite -- One that has all the Pride, Malice and
Affection of her Sex -- The very Epitome of Falsehood and Dissimulation


Fickler than a Town Gilt.


Fonder than a City Wife.


Lewd as a Young Widow in her first Year.


Ugly and impertinent as an old Maid in her Fiftieth --


Hold, hold --


Nay, there is no stopping me when I am once set a going -- the Larum will run
'till it is down -- she is more Tawdry and ill-bred than a Country Silly -- More
imperious and Prodigal than a Termagant Court Lady -- And more Peevish than a
Cast Mistress --


Will you never have done?


Yes, yes presently -- She is --


Nay then


Stay, stay -- I thought you might have been for an Inventory of your
Mistresses good Qualities -- Prithee let me go on -- I am brimful of Scandal,
and if I don't find a vent for it here, shall run over where I should not


No -- Whatever my Rage made me Utter, she is still at my Heart -- I wear her
Image here, which is never to be effaced but by Death


Is not that a very pretty Speech for a Youth of thy Inches -- Never to be
effaced but by Death! ha, ha, ha -- Why every Clown Writes as much to his dear
Margery -- Thy Loving Friend till Death us do part, Roger -- ha, ha, ha, --


You are an excellent Friend to make sport with my Misfortunes, when you should
be studying a remedy for 'em -- Lay aside your unseasonable Mirth, and tell me
what I shall do --


Do? the best thing you ever did in your Life would be to despise her, as much
as she does you -- Fortune and Women always dote upon those that Slight their
power


No, No, I want Resolution for this -- I Love her to Madness -- Without her
there is no joy on Earth for me --


If you must have her then -- don't stand to parley, but in spite of her young
Champion's seeming Valor, and her own studied Aversion -- Sieze boldly on your
bliss, she will like you the better for it -- Force is never unpleasing to that
Sex, but when it makes an attempt without compassing it is end --


To those who want such a pretense to gratify their own inclinations, I grant
it is not -- she was always held nicely Virtuous --


And may be still -- That is no obstruction to you -- If there can be a way
found to secure both her pleasure and reputation, and she not appear as a party
in the design, is not she bound to thank you for it


But that way.


Is ready chalkt out to your hand -- You say she has hitherto given you all the
Prooss of Sincerity, could be expected from a Woman of her Quality -- That she
has in all other Actions betrayed nothing of this changeable humor -- but
managed all with that prudence, which is not Ordinary in Women of her Years --


This I acknowledge -- her Words were always so just to her thoughts, and her
behavior so agreeable to both, that I began to hug my self with the opinion of
a Miracle -- and thought I had met with a Woman destitute of her Sex's
Frailties --


Very good -- then may not this sudden Alteration be a reach in female Policy
-- to try your Temper, and see how you stood affected


Probable enough! but the Knight, the handsome Young Knight --


Is a Relation perhaps -- or suppose him a Rival -- nay, a favored Rival --


Favored?


I say suppose him such -- you have the more reason to bestir your self, and
set all your Wits on Work to get rid of him --


I Will cut his Throat.


Not so hasty -- it may be done at a much easier Rate than Murder -- Go to
her, and tell her, that in spite of her contempt, you are resolved to Love her,
Marry her, and Lie with her


And be Laughed at for a Madman --


If you have not Patience to hear me out, God b'wy.


I am Silent --


Take a Parson along with you -- Invite your Friends to the Wedding -- I will
prepare a Consort of Music to give you Joy -- Do this, and she must of
necessity commit Matrimony with you, or let the Town think she has done
something worse -- which I am sure will not suit her Temper --


It Is full of hazard, and may as well lose me as not -- therefore you must give
me leave to try other Methods, and leave this to the last pinch of Necessity --


As you please -- Business calls me from you now -- that done you may depend
upon my assictance --




Oh! Frank, such a Disaster --


Spare your Exclamation -- I know your Disease, and have brought you a Remedy
if you have but Courage to apply it -- I heard of your Rupture with my Lady --
and therefore took the opportunity of Visiting her, with my Lord Frolicksome,
who is in Love with her Sister, to see if there were any way left me to serve
you --


I am obliged to you, for your good Intentions -- the success I fear --


Was answerable to my wishes -- I was resolved to be assured whether she had
forgot you or no -- so made Love to her -- She indeed seemed to dislike my
Passion -- but still there was no mention of you -- When I saw that would not
take, I told her plainly you had quite laid aside all thoughts of her, and were
in Love with another --


What did you mean by that?


Mean? by making her Jealous to discover every corner of her Soul, and find
where the secret Spark lurked yet unextinguish'd -- The Mine sprung, and she
appeared to be what I thought her, a Lover disguised in Anger -- At first she
started and Raved at your infidelity, till recovering her self, remembering I
was by, she smoothed her brow into a Calm Sighed, and said she could forget you
too --


The end of all this? --


Was that she took it for a Trick, and as such began to Laugh at it, till I
promised to give her proofs -- She is how in the Park, fasten upon the first
Woman you meet -- you will know by her uneasiness how she resents it -- If as a
Woman loath to lose you, it is but making your Peace at the Price of a
discovery, and save all yet


Thou art my good Angel, and I could Worship thee for this Advice --


You have no time to lose in Words -- about it instantly --


I fly to follow your Directions and be happy --


And be gulled -- This was a Masterpiece of Contrivance, to make my Rival a
step to my own Happiness -- But if he should clear himself, where is my project
then -- To prevent that he must be secured -- here comes one shall do it --

So my trusty Agent art thou prepared -- are the Men and Habits ready as I
directed this Morning


All Sir --


And you can clap a Man on the Shoulder in the King's Name with a good Grace --


Never fear -- I have not fallen so often into the hands of his Bloodhounds
for nothing -- I can do it with the true Smile of a Sergeant, Laugh in a Man's
Face, and cut his Throat -- Or like Judas betray with a Kiss -- You have not
told me who it is that is thus to be shamed into Limbo --


You know Mr. Truolove.


Your intimate Friend!


That is not material, and might have been omitted -- yet I am ashamed to think
such a fellow should start at the name of Friendship, and I break through all its
ties unconcerned


Better than you imagine.


Take this as an earnest of your Reward -- A small Portion of what is behind --
The business once done, you may command me and my Fortunes


I am sorry our Plot was quasht by this unseasonable News -- I promised my self
a great deal of Mirth in it --


There is nothing in it -- My Brother Love another -- a common Thing of the
Town, one that Doats upon a Fool -- it is impossible -- false as Hell -- a
Malicious Report, forged by some envious Friend, and divulged by his Wicked
Instruments -- I am sorry he was not to be found when I sent -- then the
falsehood had been soon detected


I had it from one of his best Friends --


His Rival --


A Man of Integrity and Honor.


A Lover -- consider that, and think what he dares not do to become Master of
his Wishes -- Love you know is blind to all things but the beloved object -- to
which he makes his way through all obligations of Honor and Gratitude --


The proof of his Assertion is still to come -- if he gives me that, I hope I
may believe him --


I cannot think so -- Despair may force a Man to do what his reason when he is
composed may be ashamed of -- Therefore I would no more build my Faith upon
appearance than my honesty -- she that does either, will be sure one time or
other to suffer for her Credulity --


What would you have me do.


Hear what he can say for himself -- You are sensible that you gave the first
occasion for his Crime --


Too true


You ought then to make way for his Vindication --


I told you what your Trial would come to -- But I was not to be heard -- There
was that Darling passion of the Soul, that Idol of Womankind, mischief in it --
Pray who feels the effects of it now --


Add not the remembrance of my follies to my other afflictions -- their weight
is enough to sink me -- Oh! they gnaw my very Entrails, and rend my Heart into
a thousand pieces -- I could -- but Oh? Ha! see where he comes with the vile
Wretch that Robs me of his Heart -- I Will make her know


Fie, Madam, this Passion in a Public place, where there are so many eyes upon
you is unseemly, contain our self -- and observe --


There she is now to my cue


So I supposed -- You look indeed like some idle strouler that wanted
employment -- What think you of a Lady's Service -- can you play a fan -- comb
a Shock -- Read a play --


All, all from the dressing Room to the Bed Chamber -- there I am in my own
Sphere -- a very Hercules -- Nothing is too hard for me -- Difficulties and
dangers I despise -- Dare meet those Giant Monsters, Modesty and Honor, and
spite of them reap the Golden Fruit --


You promise much --


Ay, ay, and will perform much -- but before I enter into Articles, it is but
fair I should see my Mistress: Nay, nay, away with that cloud -- Alas Masks
are good for nothing in the World -- Of little use to a good Face, and less to
a bad one


I cannot comprehend that Mystery -- I always thought a bad Face was prudently
to be concealed


Never -- a Vizard is a sort of an invitation to a Feast, which raises the
Curiosity and gives an edese to the Appetite -- it makes us suspect some very
extraordinary thing is hid under it -- therefore to have all our eagerness
checked with a course appearance of homely fare, is an intolerable baulk --


Say you so -- then such as mine is, there it is for you --


Sickness blast her -- We may venture closer and hear what they say --


Perhaps you will get that by your listening, you will not be easily rid off -- If
you can be content to know what you are well, desist and leave them to
themselves -- Time will clear the Misunderstanding between you -- and what you
have now seen will then prove matter of Diversion --


I must be satisfied though it costs me my Repose --


So, so -- she is within hearing, now is my time -- well Madam, I am so well
pleased with what I see of you, That I would venture any thing to be Master of
the whole -- here is my hand, you shall have Chart Blank, and Write your own
Conditions --


A handsome Man -- They shall be few -- I hate to fetter a Man's Freedom with
formalities -- A Rover that runs at all, in my Mind, shows vigor and greatness
of Soul -- The Woman who would put a restraint upon her Lover, will soon find
an alteration in him; and what if left to his choice might have proved his
pleasure, when it becomes his duty, will prove his utter aversion --


Impudent Creature! I can hold no longer.


Stay, and see the issue of it.


For heaven's sake, name 'em quickly -- Your Humor is so agreeable, and your
Person so lovely, that I am impatient till I come to sign and seal --


To desire you should quit all other Women for me is unreasonable -- What I ask
is to share you equally with the rest -- Only if there be such a thing as
honorable Love -- a hankering after some virtuous thing of Quality breeding in
your heart -- I must advise you to cast it from you, as you would a Snake that
will certainly sting you to Death


Honorable Love -- Ha, ha, ha -- You cannot think me guilty of such a Folly --
What sigh at a Woman's Feet! to have my Service scorned, and my constancy
rewarded with contempt --


To bear the burden of her Expenses, and be the property of her Pleasures --
To spend your time and fortunes in gratifying her Vanity, and at last see the
Fairy Treasure you have so long been seeking after, dropped into some Fools lap
that scarce thinks it worth keeping --


This bites -- No, no, I love my self a little better than so -- I cannot deny
but I have seemingly engaged in some such thing -- but hanged, it was only for
the name of an Intrigue, and to trifle away a few spare Hours --





Madam --


With what Face can thou look upon my injuries, and not blush at thy own
Guilt -- View me well, and then, if thy frighted Conscience will permit thee,
call to mind the thousand Oaths and Protestations you made me to be true --
Witness that Heaven by which you so often swore, and which will surely punish
thy ingratitude


Yours rather -- It Is a strange thing that you Women must be as unconfined in
your Passions as you please, and we not allowed the Christian liberty of
following your Example -- You see, Madam, there are those can like this Person,
however despicable it is in your Eyes. I cannot blame you. Truly, Sir Francis is
a pretty Gentleman


Name that no more -- I confess it all a trick --


So may this be for ought I know -- It is as hard to know when a Woman speaks
truth, as when she wears her own Face


A design to sound you, and try whether you valued me enough to resent the loss
-- the Effects of it are visible, since you can leave me for a notoriou^ lewd
--


No incivility I beseech you -- This Lady is at present under my Protection --
I must not hear her affronted


Alas! Poor disconsolate Virtue -- give her leave to rail, Sir, it is the
losing Gamester's privilege -- Good Lady! She is Husband-ripe -- but to my
certain knowledge this Gentleman is disposed of


It Is even so, Madam, Here have I fixed my happiness unalterably, fixed it
beyond the power of capricious Fortune, and more capricious Woman --


And this is your Resolution?


It is -- I have suffered enough for being wiser than my Neighbors -- I must
needs make my Court to a Woman of Quality, Forsooth -- and a Fortune -- but
what have I got by it? -- Only the experience that whoever would raise himself
by Marriage, is condemned to a Slavery worse than theirs that dig in the Mines


Your Honor is engaged --


Your Quiet is at stake.


You have been well used, and may again.


How! My Sister here too! -- Nay then --


You have been ill used, and may again.


Youth, Beauty, Virtue, and all that is defirable in a Wife court you to be
happy --


Pleasure, Gaiety, Love, Freedom, and whatever else makes a Mistress amiable,
invite you to more substantial Joys




Come, my Dear,


He took her by the Apron-strings.

To pull her to his beck --

How! my Lady fair, my Bride that is to be, in communication with another Man
-- By the Lord Harry, I don't like that though -- I am afraid they are hatching
Mischief which will light upon my Head -- It may be I am a predestined
Cuckold --


What Fool have we here?





Why this demur -- prithee child let us be going --


What do you mean --


Ha! Here Is a sudden change -- Pray Heaven it prove lucky --


I go any where with a stranger -- sure you mistake me, I am more cautious of
my fame than that comes to -- Besides, I am now another's, as fine a Gentleman
though I say it --





O Law! Mr. No-wit -- I Will vow you startled me! here is a Man for you -- Do but
view this finished piece of Gentility --


Of Foppery --


This compound of Comeliness and Breeding.


Of Foolery and Clownishness.


Now judge if I would leave him for you, who are in my Opinion just his
reverse, and want all those good Qualities he is Master of -- I am and will be
his, inviolably his


Ay, ay -- Inviolably -- mind that Word Inviolably -- there must be no
fingering here, Sir -- none at all -- she tells you true -- she is another's,
as fine a Gentlemen as ever peeped between Scenes -- I could be large in his
commendations -- but they say, he who praises himself lives by bad Neighbors
-- Ha, ha, he -- Well we shall be Married to morrow, and a happy Couple we are
like to be --


Damned Puppy --


Phoo -- You are angry now -- To show you how far I am from resentment -- You
shall be welcome i'gad to a small Dinner -- you and your Friend -- But the Lady
I cannot spare you, Sir -- she is inviolable, remember inviolable -- So bonos
nocios Scignior, as the Spaniard says --


This was a happy turn of Fortune, prithee help me to teize him a little.


Stay, let us hear what he thinks on it first --


So -- I have at length recovered my surprise -- sure folly has some hidden
Charms in it, or Women would not be so fond of it as they are -- for my part, I
cannot help thinking it a Curse entailed on the whole Sex for their first
Parents Disobedience -- that as she ruined Mankind by hearkening to the
Serpents cunning -- her posterity might all ruin themselves by doting on
Mankind's fooleries --


And thus your Wisdom has determined it -- pray, Sir, for which of Adam's sins
was the curse of Perpetual Disappointment entailed upon his Sons


Believing a Woman --


Not that I would accuse your Prudence of a Disappointment -- I know you have
fixed your happiness, unalterably sixth it -- beyond the power of capricious
Fortune, or more capricious Woman --


That you are just now flying to meet Pleasure, Gaiety, Love and Freedom in the
Arms of a kind yielding Mistress --


Scoff on -- I can bear it all, it is what I have deserved -- yet --


Ay, ay, Brother -- poor disconsolate Virtue, give her leave to talk, she is a
losing Gamester -- You understand Physiognomy -- Is the Lady Husbandripe -- How
stands your Stomach -- Will a fine Woman and 3000 l. a Year down with you yet


Do you join to make me wretched too?


Don't tempt his virtue, Child -- The Gentleman is engaged -- you would not
have him inconstant to a Lady that loves him so tenderly as she does -- I
really believe it would break her Heart, if he should leave her --


It would kill her -- She is certainly a passionate Lover -- How readily she
gave her Hand to another, rather than embroil him in a Quarrel --


For Heaven's sake spare me, and forgive my weakness -- I can Love you still,
Love you honorably --


Honorably -- Ha, ha, ha -- What sigh at a Woman's Feet -- To have your
services Scorned, and your constancy rewarded with Contempt -- I cannot think
you guilty of such a Folly -- You may now be as free as Air -- No restraint
upon your Humor -- Nothing to check your Pleasures -- I would not for the
World disturb you in this happy State --


Ha, ha, ha.


What is the matter?


We have been taking the Gentleman's Dimensions, to know what employment he his
fit for -- I think he had best turn Poet --


Why so?


Because he bears a baulk in his hopes so heroically -- Upon second thoughts
the Man may come to preferment -- he has a good promising Look, and a smooth
Tongue -- What think you of daily Waiter to some decayed Beauty, who will pay
well for being flattered? --


Or Nightly retainer to a buxom City Wife, who Marries an old dull Alderman, in
order to maintain a spruce young Beaux --


Very well, Ladies -- And thus you have disposed of me -- You might have been
so Civil as to take me into service among your selves -- What if I were Butler
to one of you -- there are privileges belonging to that place -- You share my
Gains, and I your pleasures -- or a Page -- it is true I am something of the
Eldest -- yet I can Lie, Flatter, Manage an Intreague, or sing a brisk smart
Song, as you call it, with e're a young Rogue of 'em all -- Then for
performance, my abilities go far beyond theirs


Nay now he grows satirical -- we shall never stand him -- we had best
Capitulate -- give him Chart Blanc, and let him Write his own Conditions --


Ha, ha, ha --


There Is no opposing three of you -- Therefore I leave you all with this hearty
Curse --


What, your Sister too! --


Ay, ay, you are a Woman -- May you dote upon Fools, and be slighted -- Have
all the desires of Love about you, and be forced to live Honest, and in spite
of your own warm Wishes be Virtuous out of Necessity --


In return, may you never be free from Love, yet never meet with any Woman but
will leave you for a Fool, as the Lady did just now -- So Adieu


Now let us home, and thank your Stars for this opportunity of crying Quits
with him -- This looks like a design of his to retort your Stratagem upon you
again -- but see what comes of it -- Thus it always fadges, when Mankind set
their Wits against ours -- We have ever had the better of 'em in cunning since
the World began, and shall till it ends

In Politics themselves the Fools may Pride,
But Fortune still is on the Female side.

IT IS impossible -- He cannot be so great a Villain --


You are at your liberty to believe, Sir -- But that he intended this, is as
true, as that these Twenty Pieces were the earnest of a greater Reward for me
to do the Work


Forgive my incredulity -- I always took Frank Richley for an honest
wellmeaning Man -- One that would no more do an ill thing to his Friend, than
take it from him -- Therefore to be surpised with this sudden Change, must
needs confound me --


I was equally amazed when he proposed it, knowing the intimacy that had always
been between 'em -- and should have told him so, had I not seen a prospect of
serving Mr. True-love by undertaking it --


He is happy in your Honesty -- How many Men in the World would have gone
through with it, if it were only for the pleasure of doing an Injury --


I scorn such a temper -- The lowness of my Fortunes may make me stoop to cozen
Knaves and Fools -- because to cheat the one, is serving them in their own
kind; and to put upon the other, but making that use of 'em which Nature
intended them for -- I am still above every thing that is ungenerous -- and now
I have lost all, retain a veneration for Merit, which I am always ready to show
upon occasion --


I love your Principles -- and thus embrace your Friendship --


I shall study to deserve the Honor -- You are thoughtful.


I was considering how to make this discovery turn to account -- It was luckily
thought on -- Kind Invention, I thank thee -- It is decreed -- Treachery shall
undermine it self, and Policy unravel its own designs


Will Not you see him then?


Not 'till I have made his Happiness complete -- Something is working in this
Brain, which if it succeeds, will turn that to his advantage, which was meant
for his ruin -- If it does not, the disappointment lights here, and goes no
farther -- You have communicated this to no body else


No body at all --


Then be it still a Secret -- His trouble may work too much upon his Spirits,
if he be long alone -- Do you make haste to him, and divert his melancholy
Thoughts -- I Will follow you in less than half an Hour -- One word more -- Tell
him nothing of any Project in hand --


I shall not -- a good Morning, and success be with you --




No Mask like open Truth to cover Lies,
As to go naked is the best disguise.

You have indeed obliged me, and I were ungrateful not to thank you for it --
But to be thus importunate for a Reward, looks as if your Interest were more
concerned in this Discovery than mine


Shrew'dly guessed.


A Lover should make all his actions their own reward, and ask no more for the
trouble of serving a Mistress, than the Pleasure of having done it --


But when he is bid to hope, can you blame him for putting you in mind? --


Let him do it modestly -- Too much earnestness looks peremptory, and bears the
face of a demand, rather than a Petition -- It seems to distrust my Honor, and
retrench my Bounty, by making that a Debt which I designed a Favor


I have no such bold thoughts about me.


Why do you urge me thus?


Because I know Anger is now the predominant Passion of your Soul, and stifles
those small remains of Love, which if I should let you cool, might plead for my
Rival, and re-instate him in your good Graces --


The Answer is free and ingenious -- But suppose I should, in this heat,
consent to be yours -- Don't you dread the result of my calmer Hours? -- Are
you not afraid, that even when you are Master of my Person, he should possess
my Heart


Your Honor would secure those Fears.


Why not my breach of promise then?


There is a wide difference in the Obligation -- Virtue will not let a Woman of
your prudence dispense with the sacredness of your Marriage-Vows -- But such a
slight thing as a Promise never checks your Wishes --


You will force me to declare, then --


Not for the World -- I know whence my happiness must be derived, and should
receive the grant of it with more pleasure tha

Wretched Captives do their freedom gain,
Or Ship-wreck'd Saylors escape the stormy Main.

It Is hard to forget your Friend with the same ease he did me -- Yet a few days
will blot him from my Memory, to make room for a more worthy impression


I shall wait the alteration with impatience -- This rascally Boy will spoil
all with staying so long


Your Man, Sir, desired me to bring you this immediately -- It Is Business of
vast importance, and requires your present knowledge


By your Ladyship's leave.


He seems in great amazement --


My present knowledge indeed -- Leave the Town so suddenly, without giving me
longer notice -- It Is unkind, very unkind -- What I should scarce have done to
Harry True-love


Comes that from him --


It does, Madam -- He writes, that having abjured the whole Female Sex, and
with it all the pleasures of this Town, He resolves to bury himself in a silent
retreat -- His desire is to see me before he goes -- I cannot deny him; for
though I hate his beseness, I still love his Person -- Your Ladyship will
pardon me for leaving you so abruptly -- This or nothing will make her mine


How! go from hence upon so slight provocation -- Why, let him go -- But he may
never return -- What concern is that of mine? He has already forgot me, and I
would -- but cannot forget him -- Reason tells me, I ought to think no more of
him -- Love, stronger than Reason, says, I may and ought to think of him -- Not
only think of him, but see him, stay him, and make him my own --


Your own! What else -- Here Is a stir about a Husband indeed -- before I Would
trouble my self for a Man thus, I think I should --


What?


Marry him out of hand -- It Is the only Cure for your Disease --


It Is a Cure that genorally proves the greatest Disease.


That Is as you choose your Physician -- Take but an able Man, I Will engage for
the sufficiency of the Remedy --


You are a bold Disputant, to argue against Experience -- I have tried it, and
don't think it so Sovereign --


Your Lord was old, and past practice -- There Is the Reason.


You make me blush -- Yet I should take your Counsel, but it is now out of my
power


The Blessing is within reach, if you will be at the pains to lay hold of it --


There Is you mistake -- You don't know who I have had with me here --


Yes, yes, Mr. Richley -- I met him at the Door in great haste -- What of him?


He received Advice just now, That True-Love is leaving the Town in a pet, with
a full resolution never to see it again


And you believe he intends it?


He is gone by this time.


Pleasure has too great a hank upon his Affections, to be shook off so easily
-- At worst, if he should be so far transported, as to venture half a score
Miles out of Town -- He will soon turn back again


Why so?


Is that a Question to be asked of a Man who has lived thus long here in full
Enjoyment of all that is delightful? -- What should one of his Life and
Conversation do in the Country, where there is no Park, no Play, no Love, no
Raillery; and to sum up all, no good Wine


But in exchange, there are --


Innocent Diversions you would say -- Such as your honest Clod-pates use --
Noise and Nonsense will be very agreeable Entertainments to him! -- His Humor
will neither suit with the brisk dullness of the Young, nor the grave Wisdom of
the Old


He that will, may find Men of Sense every where.


That is not the thing -- A great many are Men of Sense in their own way, few
in his -- Youth must meet a gay resemblance of it self, or it will never be
pleased. Preciseness and Morosity, though accompanied with Knowledge, must be
tedious to him -- And he will never endure to hear the Delights of his past life
railed at -- After all -- Men of his temper, look upon the Country as a sort of
large Forest, in which the greatest Wild Beast is a Country Squire


This don't satisfy me, I am afraid my Lover is --


Very unfortunate in his Friends.


Whom would you point at, Sir?


Not you, Sir, though you are his Rival, you never were his Friend, his bosom
Friend -- the Consident of all his secrets; the Man whom before the whole World
he loved and trusted


Where will this end?


In the destruction of a Villain, if I could meet him; but Fate reserves him
for a more signal justice -- Poor unhappy Truc-love


What of him? he is well I hope. No ill accident has prevented his Journey --
If it has, speak -- Why thus silent? Pity my misfortunes, and do not rack me
thus with doubts --


His journey! For Heaven's sake what does your Ladyship mean, do you mock, or
are you serious


Serious enough, if you would be so: You know nothing of his going into the
Country this Morning


It Is all Mystery to me, where am I? what do I do? am I awake? perhaps he can
fly; if he cannot, I am sure he was just now in no capacity to travel


Ha! He is murdered then; give way to my just grief, I must, and will see him;
bind up his Wounds; make these Arms his Monument, and if it be possible, warm
him into life again


I am glad to see this concern however.


What should hinder him, if he be well and in Town? I am informed he is not.
Mr. Richley --


Dares not abuse your Belief after this rate. He is too well acquainted with
the cause of his absence, to tell you so. In short, he is at this very time
under an Arrest for a Sum of Money borrowed of him: The other is only a blind
to deceive you


Now I see through his disguise, and understand the meaning of his officiousness:
This was a Stratagem of his, to make my Revenge do what my Love would not.
Pitch upon him for a Husband: He shall find I can be sensible of an Affront: I
shall have your assistance, Sir


Very readily.


And yours, Sister?


Through Fire and Water to punish such ingratitude.


Mrs. Eugenia!


At your service. You see in opposition to a known Maxim; Sometimes Women can
be changed into that lordly Creature Man, at least in appearance! We can assume
masculine Habits, and masculine Souls too, to serve a turn, and do a little
mischief


I know one has paid for the Experiment.


He must thank my Sister for the harm I did him; she was the Contriver, I but
the Instrument: He knows where to demand satisfaction


I Will take care he shall not trouble you; what is the Debt?


Five Hundred Pounds --


It Is hard in this scarcity of Money to raise so much -- But he shall be bailed.


I have taken care of that; I can release him from durance: Would I could as
easily free him from the apprehensions of losing you


Be that my Business, yours to bring him hither; for since we are joint-sha^ers
in the Injury, we will be so in the revenge

At last, I am beyond the danger of a Shipwreck -- There are now no more Rocks
or Sands to perish by; the Harbor is within view, and I just going ashore to
enjoy that Wealth my eager hopes thus long have aimed at; all my care is for
you ^ow


My Voyage is as near an end as yours. One Wedding may chance to serve us ^oth;
I expect my Lord every minute


Why in this dress?


To teize him a little, I must have the other mad fling, though I ben't married
this Month for it. How is your business to be managed


As we ordered at first: The Gown and other things are not laid away yet; ^
have thought of some small addition to make it more entertaining, which you
shall ^now anon: It Is high time I were preparing for him


How simply will the poor Lover look, when he finds he is caught -- I ^hink I
hear some body upon the stairs


I Will leave you to your self.


What have we here, Narcissus admiring the reflection of his own Face? He is
(...) taken up with his dear self, he can mind nothing else


At first address I make my Honor thus -- No, that is something too stiff --
^^en -- Not quite low enough -- here I mend it -- ay, that is pretty well -- ^ow
for my Speech -- hum, hum

^ost divine Creature, the brightness of your perfections has so captivated my
dasled ^eason -- By Heaven! I have forgot my Chin-patch. Oh indecency


There Is a good harangue spoiled, for a rascally Valet's neglect.


Now all is right;


What the Devil is all this?


Since they give me opportunity to offer at your feet a Heart, many have in
vain sighed for


I wonder he forgot himself so long.


The Ladies court, the Men envy me -- but for your sake, Geddemmee, I despise
both, and here resolve to spend the remainder of my days, to let the World know
you have Charms to fix inconstancy it self! You may doubt my Truth: But
command, and by yon azure Sky I will do wonders


Sure he will not promise her to quarrel; that indeed would be a wonder. Eugenia,
I am here to wait upon her


I will, my Lord.





There Is no harm done, Sir, unless I disturbed your more profound cogitations.


No, Sir -- not disturbed; you raised me from a pretty amusement indeed: I
would not for the Universe, you should think me so vain as to make it my
Employment. It Is necessary to ajust before we visit, else I never trouble a
Glass -- Will you be pleased to use it, Sir; it is no Flatt'rer, I can assure
you


I can scarce believe him there, he would not be so intimate with it, if it
were not --


You understand fashion it may be; pray, what is your Opinion of this Suit?
view it, view it well; is there not something of Genius visible in it? It Is all
French, upon Honor, bought of a Frenchman, made by a Frenchman, and is now
--


Worn by a damned English Fop -- The Farce grows tedious.


The Pattern all the Beau monde dress by. Well, those French are an ingenious
contriving People; they send us over so many pretty Devices and Inventions, so
many unnecessary Fashions in a Year! those unnecessary Fashions are a great
help to a Kingdom


How so?


Oh Ged! they encourage Industry, and keep thousands in employment, that would
otherwise be idle; you shall have a Man, now a days, put one Suit to as many
uses as a Welsh Parson does his threadbare Cassock, yet pretend to be genteel.
Now it is my way to keep a particular Suit for every occasion


Insusserable Fop!


I have my dancing, visiting, gaming, and drinking Clothes; these are my
fighting Clothes


So I should have guessed by their freshness.


These I wear but seldom; I was to have met my Lord Frolicksome this Morning
upon a Challenge; but he was so wise as to prefer his safety to his Honor


Ha, my Rival! who has played me so many tricks -- Perhaps he had reason for it.


Yes, yes, his Fear is Reason sufficient.


He was never held a Coward, sure some more particular obligation hindered him.


A good Jest -- why, Sir, do you think any obligation particular enough to
sacrifice a Man's Honor to


The Commands of a Mistress would tie my Hands. Can any Man pretend to love,
and refuse to sacrifice his Honor to his Passion


There you pose me. But between you and I, his Mistress never thinks so much of
him, as to honor him with her Commands


But between you and I, she does think so much of him, and to my knowledge did
honor him with this --


Ha, ha, ha -- I cannot but laugh to think on it! She had a design to make him
ridiculous to the World, and consulting how to effect it, put him upon this.
He, poor Lover, it seems has been punctual to his own gulling; and I am here
according to assignation to laugh at him, and toy away an Hour with her


You are a favorite!


You seem to be an honest fellow, I don't care if I make you my Confident: I
have had her a hundred times, but enjoyment has palled my appetite -- This she
I believe perceives by my coldness, and has proposed such a thing as drawing my
Lord in for a Marriage -- He will serve well enough to father such Children as
she provides for him


You are mistaken in him, he will father no Children but of his own getting,
for you nor any Fool in England; and so he will tell you


Why you don't design to betray me? Gad's my life, I would not have you tell it
abroad; I designed it should be a Secret between us two


Did you so? I shall cut your Throat for an impudent young Dog.


Help, help --


I would not have you tell it abroad, I designed it should be a Secret between
us two


Put your Mistress to the Squeak already! you are a termagant Conqueror I see,
and give no quarter --


Let him do his worst, I defy him -- Here Is my Hand, my Lord, I Will meet you
Body for Body, in any place you dare name


St. James's Church.


I as little expected to hear that word out of your Mouth, as any Man's living;
it is a place you never frequent


Don't be too positive; there are as many Intrigues begun, continued, and ended
there as any where: Devotion has the least share in those that come thither;
they are all too much taken up with particular Saints, to join in the Prayers
of the Congregation; unless it be when they pray for the desolate and
afflicted, among whom are ranked all despairing Lovers, and superanuated
Virgins


And you dare venture upon a mad Reformer?


Dare I embrace the greatest blessing upon Earth; the only happiness all my
Desires are levelled at! I receive you, Madam, as my Preserver, my guardian
Angel, to whom I owe the greatest comforts of Life, Virtue, and Reputation


You Will repent your forwardness in a little time: Now I have begun to wear ^he
Breeches, it will be a hard task to make me lay 'em aside again --


That shall not save you; I have your Hand, and will keep it; it is not in your
power to draw it back


We had better stay the other Twelvemonth, and see how the World goes -- Marriage
is a ticklish Calling; and though we have a good stock of Love to begin the World
with, we may chance to break these hard times


It is but running the hazard.


You are obstinate; give me but half an Hour's time to serve my Sister in an
Affair depending, and I am for you; if you take a turn in the Gallery in the
mean while, you will find something to divert you; we will show you the way


Not a step farther --


You will not disappoint a Lady when she sends for you?


No, no, when she sends for me!

What a look there is? is that a Face to receive good News with? never did poor
disbanded Officer wear a more rueful Phiz when he was petitioning for Arrears.
Put on a better Countenance to entertain her, or, by Heaven, I will leave you


Phy, phy, Sir, your fullenness becomes you, just as gravity does a Mountebank.


So, that is pretty tolerable -- Then I tell thee once more, the Day is your
own; your Mistress is constant and kind, your Rival discarded, and you the
Favorite Lover


You would delude me; I know my Fate, and can sit down contented with it.


Sit down! do -- let another be happy in your stead.


With all my Heart, balk your Fortunes now I have made 'em for you; it is but my
labor lost


Are you in earnest?


If you will not believe me, believe your Senses, believe my Lady; here is one can
satisfy you better


No more strangeness, I beseech you; I beg your pardon for the disquiets I have
given you, and in recompense offer you all you wish for: Nay, no raptures, time
is precious, you will find my Sister in the next room, take your Friend with
you -- She will give you your Instructions

You, Mr. Townley, must stay with me; and however I change my Discourse, tune
your Answers to it


When do you expect him?


Immediately.

He is here already -- You must not see him -- it is in vain to excuse it, I am
well enough satisfied of his Conduct


Townley here! I don't like that --


But Madam --


Pray Sir desist -- I will hear nothing in his favor, who would make a Maygame
of me -- Am I a fit Subject for his pretended Passions -- I will not be
affronted so


He did not design you should.


Give me leave to trust my own Ears -- I heard him say all the pretensions he
made, were only for the name of an Intriegue, and to trifle away a few Hours


Nay then I acquiesce -- I dare defend him no farther --


I would not have you; he is now my Aversion of Aversions -- The only Man I
would shun and avoid -- To show you there is no dearth of Lovers -- I have
already made choice of another -- A Man of Estate and Understanding -- Who though
he wants Mr. Truelove's youth, has sincerity to recommend him to a Woman's
liking --


May I know the happy Man?


[Aside] Now I fear.


It Is his Friend Richley -- Modesty forbids me to tell him -- yet I could wish
he knew my sentiments


And I too --


How! turned Eve's dropper -- Is that like a Gentleman, to know more of your
Mistresses mind than she is willing you should -- I could find in my heart --
yet since you have heard my confession, it is but a folly to stand off longer
-- upon one condition I am yours --


Transporting Words -- I would do any thing to purchase you; be it what it
will, I am resolved to agree to it


I Will but step into the next Room, and you shall know your task.


I little expected to see this Day, Frank, thou were always such an Enemy to
the Clogs, of for better for worse, that I should as soon have expected
Liberality in an Usurer, as Love in thee --


It Is not in the fate of Man to avoid it -- He that had told me a Week since I
was so nigh Matrimony, had been to me as ridiculous as a Lecture of Sobriety to
(...) Drunkard -- Now I recant my Error, and am as you see just making a
Settlement for Life --


When my first Husband died, I made a Vow never to be any Man's, that would not
gratify my humor so far, as to set his Hand to whatever I brought him without
perusing the Contents -- If you dare make the venture, you know the price -- if
not --


I beseech you, Madam, don't suspect me in such a Trifle -- I am only sorry
it is not something of greater difficulty, that you might see I value nothing
comparable to you --


You say there can be no flaw found in it, Mr. Split-cause?


Give me leave to know my business, Madam -- Upon the honest word of a Lawyer,
there is no Hole for him to creep out at -- It Is fast and firm -- the
obligation to endure in Secula Seculorum, as we say -- if he does not satisfy
it -- are you ready, Sir -- do you want any thing? --


Pen and Ink.


I can furnish you -- I never go without my Instruments, a Lawyer with no
Ink-horn is as ridiculous as a Soldier with no Weapons -- How say you, he Sir
--


Even as you say -- pray dispatch [Writes] There Madam --


Francis Richley -- a good Hand, truly -- a very pretty Hand -- were you never
bred up to the Law, Sir -- it is a crabbed Studdy -- but Men of industry conquer
it -- The Witnesses -- Come, Sir, if you please, your hand --


[Writes] There it is.


John Townley -- Now for my own [Writes] and there it is.


Henry True Love.


How, True Love! Where were my Eyes -- then I find my disgrace -- I am Fooled
and Choused


No -- not Choused -- that is a hard word to give a Lady; only played upon, or so
--


Served in your own kind, my dear Friend, or so --


Pray forbear, Gentlemen -- Mr. Snap, do your Office.


I Arrest you, Sir, at the suit of my Lady Generous, in an Action of 1000 l.


Hah!


Never vex, you are but going to make a Settlement for Life --


It Is for my interest to have you out of the way -- they shall use you well --


Very well -- I am betrayed -- it will be my turn to do you the favor, Sir --
there is such a thing as a Debt of five hundred Pound --


Which you have here released to me, besides a Judgment given for 1000 l. more
-- How do you like the alteration? -- Are you for new discoveries? -- Your Head
lies much toward Politics -- it is pity you are not a Statesman


There Is no way to get loose, but confessing my self a Rogue [Aside] Spare my
guilt -- I own my self a Villain -- the greatest of Villains, a false Friend --
Yet forgive me this one slip, my future honesty shall make amends for it -- I
might plead the imperiousness of Love for my crime, but I had rather take it
upon my self -- To repair which, I confess the Deed -- and before all this
Company make Mr. True Love my Heir, for I resolve never to Marry --


Can this be?


I am ready to seal it -- if you dare not take my Word --


That I forbid, I must not be outdone in generosity -- I restore you the
Judgment -- Nay, take it -- and with it my Friendship --


Mine.


And mine.


[Discovering himself] And if you please mine.


Mr. Squeezum!


You must forgive what he did for my sake.


Forgive! Yes, and thank him too -- thus thank him [Embrace] His honesty has
prevented a Crime in me -- the remembrance of which must have eternally
disquieted me --


I knew your Nature, and made bold to do you this service against your will --
There are times when seeming Treachery is the truest Friendship -- and to
falsify a Man's trust, the only way to be just to it


Experience confirms it -- To prevent temptations of the like sort for the
future -- Be Master of me and mine


Let your Necessities know me for their Friend --


Me.


And me -- Come, Gentlemen, if you please now to do your Office, I suppose it
will not be displeasing --


Our thanks to your Ladyship.


[ Coming up to Townley] Why this sadness, to damp the universal joy -- You are
not pleased with my good Fortune --


Say rather displeased at my own bad -- I have seen you settled in the free
possession of all your desires -- it is time now to mind my own affairs --
[Going] Adieu --


You will not leave us so?


Better leave you, than stay to spoil your Mirth -- I am out of tune, and all
with every thing else so


Your Ladyship must use your Authority here, or we shall lose Mr. Townley, he
^unning in quest of he does not know whom


He cannot be such a Madman?


I must go -- My Quiet, my Life, my All depends upon finding her, which ^ill
do, if diligence can do it


Are you sure she is worth finding -- she is ten to one some Town Jilt or ^^dy
Errant that has been long in pursuit of a Husband, and has at last singled you
out


A needy Beauty perhaps, who for want of Fortune is fain to lie upon the ^^^ch
-- You shall not fling your self away


Think no more of her -- The Sister you have so often heard me speak of ^^ ^n
Town -- if a good Face and 5000 l. will please you, she is yours -- speak, ^^
it a Match


I would not have you misconstrue my refusal, for Pride or Stupidity -- but I
(...) resolved to have her -- and none but her -- who if she were here


As she is here,


Should be mine instantly -- you would retreat -- No Faith, Madam, you (...)
stand to it now -- Here are two or three Couples going to the same sport --
(...) will not spoil a Humor --


Not I -- though you were so hard-hearted, as to give me a flat denial in the
Park ^^^terday -- Do You remember Sylvia


So, Jack, we must be Brothers in spite of Fate -- A Sister of my giving will not
^^^se you, you must pick for your self --


To this face, wherever I find it, I swear Allegiance. Come, Sir, you are
slow, (...) the way to Church


Oh! save me, save me!


From what?


That Legion of Devils, my Wife.


What Is the matter?


My Shoulders, my Shoulders! She has been using the rod of Authority, (...)
bestowed plentiful Castigation upon 'em, the first day of our Marriage


How did you provoke her to it?


Not at all, as I hope to be saved -- I provoke her -- No such ma^ter truly --
I am not suffered nigh enough -- By the pleasures of generation, I (...) much
as k^st her since we were Married


There Is her quarrel to you -- stick close to her, she will soon be in a ^etter
humor


I cannot abide to stick close to her, so I cannot -- she does so hug an^ (...)
Monkey, that it would make any Christian ashamed of her; she nothing but (...)
him, and all forsooth because he is like a Man -- sure I may be thought as like
one as he --


With a great deal of Justice -- Phoo! you should never mind those (...) Women
will have their Play-fellows --


What Monkeys (...) Foh.


Monkeys or Bea^s -- there is not a Pin to choose between (...) come I Will see
you reconciled, I Will mediate for you


No need for that -- I can go to siner Women, those that will not use (...) One of
'em clap't my cheeks the other day, and said I had a good Country (...) ^^tray'd
my quality -- hang me if she did not protest any body might read (...) my Face


A common Strumpet -- a mercenary Jade of the Town.


Mercenary -- O Law -- and I Will swear then she proffered me (...) for half a
Crown -- She was some Gentlewoman without doubt, she had (...) Velvet-hood and
Scarf on


Little does he think that they are as true signs of a willing Tit as a (...)
Well, well, forget her, I Will satisfy your Wife


Will you indeed now -- but will you satisfy her -- You were (...) Friend,
that is the truth on it -- but to undertake such a task as satisfying a Wom^^ is
mighty kind -- Dear Rogue come along -- but be sure you (...) nough


Has not this coold you a little? -- are not you afraid of facin^ (...)
Neighbors


Not a jot; for though

The choice which interest makes soon tedious grows,
And hasty Passions do themselves destroy;
Yet when Desert, that kindled, feeds the Flame,
Love is for ever fresh, and still the same.


