WE are not safe Lamot; this bawdie peace
Begets a war within me; our swords worn
For Ornament, not use; the Drum and Trumpet
Sing drunken Carrols, and the Canon speaks
Health, not confusion; Helmets turned to Cups;
Our bruised Arms administer discourse
For Tables and for Taverns, where the Soldier
Often finds a pity, not relief: I Will tell thee,
Wee'r walking images, the signs of men,
And bear about us nothing but the form
Of man that is manly.

Wee'r cold indeed.


Yes, and th'ungratefull time
As coldly does rewards us, all our actions,
Attempts of valor, looked into with eyes
Filled with contempt, when ye Gods ye know
It is our gifts they see yet: oh I am mad!
The very bread that lends them life to scorn us,
Our blood has paid for, yet demand a bit,
Or ask of this old satin belli'd sir,
Or Madam toothless with her velvet sconce,
And you shall hear their rotten lungs pronounce
The Whip and Whip-stock.

Prithee contain thy self.


Thou know I can;
With what an equal temper did I breath
Under the frozen climate of the North,
Where in mine arms (the sheets of war) I slept,
My bed being feathered with the down of heaven?
I have lain down a man and rise a snow-ball.
There these have been my pastimes, which i have born
As willingly as I received them nobly.
The Queens black envy which does still remain,
And peeps through every limb she bears about her,
Fated to ruin us, does not swell my Gall,
No nor this willing beggary I wear
To cloud me from her malice; by the Gods
This bastard-betting peace unspirits me,
A greater corrasive to my active soul,
Than all past ills what ever.

As you are valiant be wise too, this is no time
To vent your passions like a woman in,
Your sword, not tongue, should speak.

You are an expert Tutor, and I thank you;
Our wrongs would add a spirit to the dead,
And make them sight our quarrels; -- but look here

The minion of our Queen, oh what a train
The painted Peacock bears! death, were I Jove
But only for this Giant.

Good your honor, our wives and Children,
Good your honor hear us.

Where are our slaves? keep off these dregs of men,
The scum and outcast of the world; bring round my charict
To the postern Gate; these bell-mouth'd Rascals
Split mine cares with noise, make have before
Lest my great Mistress wait my coming.

Good your honor.


The devil take your worship; we must follow.


These are the fruits of base upstarts and flatterers.
Tell me Lamot, can this same Merchpane man
Think, or commit a sin though never so horrid,
But it is candied o'r, and from his vice
Excessive praise and plaudites arise?
Were I the King, but he is wilful blind,
And by the horns she rocks him fast asleep,
Before the wanton and hot-blooded Queen
Should have the license but to be suspected
With such a Knight of Ginger-bread as this,
A gilded flesh-flie, I would lock her up,
Yea chain the evil Angel in a Box,
And house her like a silk-worme.

Pardon me sir, the good old King's unable.


And therefore must admit an upstart Page,
Now raised to honors by her lawless lust,
Mayor of the Palace, and the Duke of France,
The next stepped is the Crown; now by my life
'Twere good the King would execute them both.

Alas he dares not, for the no chaste Queen,
Is as her birth, as great in faction,
Followed and sainted by the multitude,
Whose judgment she has linck'd unto her Purse,
And rather bought a love than found it:
She has a working spirit, an active brain,
Apt to conceive, and wary in her wiles;
Besides, her Sons, the pillowes of the State,
Support her like an Atlas, where she sits,
And like the heavens commands our fates beneath her;
She is the greater light, the King a star
That only glares but through her influence.

Hark, the thunder of the world, now out of tune,
This peace corrupting all things makes them speak,
What means this most adulterate noise?

Why, are you ignorant?
This is a night of jubilee, and the King
Solemnly feasts for his wars happle success,
Besides his Sons and he are knit again;
We shall have Masks and Revelling to night.

Now the great Gods confound this pickthanck noise,
The Drums and Trumpets are turned flatterers,
And Mars himself a Bawd to grace their riot,
O I am mad, this grates my very Gall.

What man, bear up;
Although I wish all civil discord hence,
Yet I do hope a time wherein we Soldiers,
Shall like a moving wall of living steel,
Defend this City that offends us now.

My thoughts keep not your road, I think
The devilish spirit of the haughty Queen,
Will find employment for us yet, her brain
Is very active in exploits that breed
The Soldiers harvest, war and dissension.

What vision's this? it is Gold right and fair,
Sure I dream not.

I cannot tell, but he that takes this from me,
Shall soon perceive I do not sleep nor slumber.

It was the Eunuch.


That needs no deciding.


What speaks the Paper left behind?
If it be Chorus to this dum show, read it Dumaine.

As you are Soldiers truly valiant, I honor you, as poor, I pity you;
therefore have sent you that will render you as complete Courtiers, as undaunted
Soldiers: we know your present fortunes shame your parentage, which was not
only great in it self, but fortunate in so fair an offspring: Dumaine, Lamot,
let it suffice we know ye; for our eye is every where: whilst I remember your
worths, I shall forget your parents injuries; fear nothing, for your hitherto
concealment, i will get your pardons, and whilst I breath, breath your kind
Mistress: if you dare trust me, appear at Court to night so adorned, as shall
become your honors, our friends

Fredigond.

The Queen?


We are betrayed Lamot, what shall we do?


We Will take the gracious proffer of the Queen,
She Is princely vowed our friend; besides what ill
Can we expect from her, who might have sent
Her murdering ministers and slain us here,
If she intended foul play? but she is noble.

Noble, grant her so, yet --


What yet?


Her murdered Brothers memory. --


When he fell, we were too young for traitors.


But not for torments, had we been apprehended;
For in the high displeasure of the Queen,
All our posterity was doomed; some felt the wheel,
Some wracked, some hanged, others impaled on stakes,
With diverse strange and horrid forms of death,
That you would have thought, and fitly thought it too,
That all the torments which the Poets feign
The damned spirits exercise in Hell,
Had here been put in execution;
And had not we been then in Witenburge,
Beyond the fury of her mortal spleen,
We had added to the number of the dead;
Then think you still we shall not?

Now by my life it is murder to suspect her,
Our lives are all that we can lose, our fame,
Not time nor Art can murder, so we will venture.

What conference did they maintain with thee?


None farther than the language of their eyes,
They looked on me as if they meant me thanks,
Which their amazement robbed me off.

Spoke they not then at all?


No not a word,
They seemed to me as if they knew no language.

You know them not?


No dearest Lady, for th'appear'd to me
Like to the silent postures in the Arras,
Only the form of men with stranger faces.

Take u'm then, they are our enemies,
Whom I have angled with that golden bait;
Their parents waded in my Brothers blood,
For which i will be revenged of all their kin,
Could they increase as often as I would kill,
I Would ever kill that they might still increase:
This picture drawn by an Italian
(Which still I keep to whet mine anger)
Does represent the murder of my brother,
For ravishing this beauteous piece of ill;
A bloody and a terrible mistake,
To murder Clodimir for Clotarrs fact,
For which behold how Fredigond's revenged,
This old Dumaine and father to this maid,
With all his kindred, sociates and alies,
(These brace of wicked ones, and that ravished whore,
The fair and fatal cause of these events
Only excepted) are here, here ini this picture:
Is It not a brave sight, how does the object like thee?
How prettily that babie hangs by th'heels,
Sprawling his Arms about his mothers womb,
As if again he sought for shelter there?
Here Is one bereft of hands, and this of tongue,
Finger thy Lute Maria, sing out Isabel:
Hark, hark Castrato, the music of the Sphaeres,
O ravishing touch, hark how the others voice
Echoes the Lute, is it not a divine softness?
Ha ah ha, I do expect they now should rail extremely;
I prithee scold at me good Isabel,
A little of the woman; no Maria;
Within the clothed circle of mine eyes,
Anchor thy fingers, alas, thy nails are pared,
Nor has poor Isabel a tongue to scold with,
And here is the Granddam with her glares out;
Saddle her nose with spectacles, or else
She Will miss her way to the infernal pit.
Tow horie Gray-berds in this angle lies,
Will find their way to Hell without their eyes,
Villains that killed my Brother; how does this like thee?
To execute men in picture, is it not rare?

Were but Chrotilda here, and these two youngsters,
It were a pastime for the Gods to gaze on.
Oh were I but a man as others are,
As kind and open-handed nature made me,
With Organs apt and fit for woman's service.

What if thou were?


What if I were great Queen?
I Would search the Deserts, Mountains, Valleys, Plains,
Till I had met Chrotilda, whom by force
I Would make to mingle with these footie limbs,
Till I had got on her one like to me,
Whom I would nourish for the Dumaine line;
That time to come might story to the world,
They had the Devil to their Grandfather.

I find thee Eunuch apt for my employments,
Therefore I will unclaspe my soul to thee,
I Have always found thee trusty, and I love thee.

With thanks I ever must acknowledge it,
And lay my life at my great Mistress feet,
To spend it when she pleases.

We need it not
As yet Castrato, but we may hereafter.
See, their's the plat-forme of great Childricks death;
And they which must be thought his murderers,
Our Enemies, and now new Courtiers,
Whom hitherto I have reserved for policy;
First, that they take away the guilt from us;
Next, being apprehended, studying deaths,
The heads of all our Engineers shall sit
T'invent unheard of torments for the slaves;
I long to see them here, here in this frame,
Greeting their kindreds bones.

You are the Goddess of invention.


Then i will commend thee to my elder Son,
Where thou shall wind into his secret thoughts;
As for the younger Boy let me alone;
And when we have them on the hip, they shall
Follow their Fathers unto Hells-black-Hall

Still better.


Will not this be brave? ha, how like thou this?
Now by this light I Am taken strangely with thee,
Come kiss me, kiss me sir, tremble not.
Fie, what a January lip thou have,
A pair of Iscicles, sure thou have bought
A pair of cast lips of the chaste Diana's,
Thy blood's mere snow-broth, kiss me again:
Now see if you can find these gallants forth,
And bring them to our presence.
O sir you are welcome,
Your visits have been freer, but I grow old,
And you command the beauties of the time.

What means my noble Mistress? think you the blood
Runs so degenerate within these veins,
To stoop to an inferior embrace,
When I enjoy the best.

We are betrayed:
I Will tell thee a good jest Landrey, pray mark;
This morning dressing my head my husband came,
And with his switch (for he was then to hunt)
A gentle stroke he gave me on the back;
My fancy busied then to make me fine,
Supposing it was you that sported so,
(Not dreaming that the dotard was so near)
Cried, well my Landrey, in story we still find,
The best Knights strike before and not behind:
The King who always understood too fast,
Quits suddenly my Chambers, what he intends
I cannot guess, unless it be our deaths,
Which if he speedily perform not, then
Know he shall never, for this night concludes him.
His Sons I weigh like him, they have rebelled,
And taken spirit of late to oppose my will,
And contradict my pleasures in thy love,
For which it is not safe that they should live;
The Kingdoms Heir shall be a boy of thine,
And Kings and Queens shall follow in thy Line.

Madam, here are the Gentlemen.


You Are welcome to the Court, and us, brave spirits you are welcome.
Take a Queens word you are welcome.

Your highness is as full of grace as mercy.


Rise and follow us, we will be your Guardian and Protectres.


What are these?


Sheep for my shambles, whom I have fatted up
Only for slaughter; things are on foot decreed,
Shall make some smile to night, and others bleed.

My best Mistress,
What Angel brought you hither? for I know
Millions attend your goodness.

My Lord?


Why do you cast such stranger eyes upon me?
You were not wont to cloth your brows with scorn,
Nor dart such deadly looks; can my mistress
Be angry with her servant? my offense,
If slowness in my visits, i will hereafter
Grow to your threshold; why weep you now?
Trust me divinest fair thine eyes seed pearl,
Bracelets for Gods to wear about their arms.

I am too fond, and yet he swears he loves me,
I have believed him too, for I have found
A Godlike nature in him, and a truth
Hitherto constant.

Sweetest fair the cause?


If this should be dissembled, not your heart,
And having won my souls affection,
Should on a judgment more retired to state,
Smile at your perjuries, and leave me in love,
What ill-bred tales the world would make of me.

That jealousy i will strangle; take this Ring,
As I that Diamond dazel'd by thine eyes,
Whose beauty sickned' cause eclipsed by thine;
Be these the mutual pledges of our love,
Our Marriage before our Marriage,
And cursed be he that separates our love,
Though France be one, or what is greater Jove.
Are your fears over now?

My Lord, I dare no ill, and therefore doubt none.


Approach our person nearer, for methinks
You Have honest faces, if your hearts keep touch
T'your outward semblance, you are a pair
Nothing but death shall force from me.

Good, good, this Physic works.


Madam, is it done?


I my black Genius, such a fatal dram
I have administered, will wing his soul
With expedition to the other world,
His part essential like a wearied Ghost
This night forsakes her Inn, when sled and gone,
Who knows where it shall lodge: mark his looks,
See thou not death throned in his hollow eye,
Great tyrant over Nature?

With looks inquisite I have beheld him.
But see no alteration.

Thou art a fool, and wantst the optique nerves
To pry into my Arts; where I lay trains,
Death comes before the grief, the sulphurous match
Destroys the powder with a motion slow
To what I work with; as Antumn aged leaf,
In youth the prime and glory of the Grove,
Not to be graspt with hand, falls with a puff,
And what we could not touch but now, we tread on,
So Childrick --

Lend me thine arm Dumain, I now not what,
But on the sudden --

How the Nats play and buz about the fire.
Must consume them.

It Is rare, observant Cocks comes.


What Star's unshe'rd and walks upon the Earth,
Making our night a noon? methinks her sight
Does cure blindness, and lend darkness light,
Castrato --

No more, we are observed, my Lord.


What Ladies that?


That French India with a mine upon her back,
With whom your Brother holds discourse?

The same.


The chaste and beautiful Aphelia.


Indeed she is wondrous fair, nature has much
Befriended her, art sure she is honest?

Snow's not purer;
No vestal Virgin at the Altar bears
A soul so incorrupt, so void of flame
That Is loosly active.

Castrato, be as our self, get but that Lady for me;
Thou understand'st me.

She dotes upon your Brother, by which means
I Will think upon some plot.

The Masque ended we will talk further on it.


Defer our pastimes till another night,
I am not well at case.

Lights, lights for his Majesty.


How is it with your grace our Royal Father?


Your feet are in the snare,
Fredigond hunts, and when she hunts beware.

What says the slave?


No matter what, mind we his Majesty.


There is an Aetna in me,
The air I draw returns illuminate,
Philosophy thy Element of fire's here.

His Grace grows worse and worse, support him
Gently friends; O my dear Husband, O my gentle Lord.

I credit your report, and will obey,
His mind is honorable like his parentage;
His single name has armed me, pray lead on.

O woe, woe, woe.


Horror and death.


O dismal fatal hour.


with Childrick end
The World.

Have patience gentle Queen.


Stand from me,
Preach patience to the Sea when the rude winds
Swell her ambitious billowes'bove the clouds,
And if thou tutor'st them to peace and silence,
I Will be as calm as they.

The treason here, and not the Traitor,
Quite confounds me.

Doubt ye the Traitors?
I Have brougth a pair of Vipers to the Court,
Warmed and relieved them with a sting to kill us;
Who could be Authors of this dead but they?
His new bosom friends have slain him,
Lay hands upon the villains.

We are betrayed Lamot, basely beset with snares.


Justice fight thou my cause with thine own sword.


O villains, would ye let them escape?
Two men to pass the strength of all our guard?
This mads me.

Make after them and bring them back.
Or by my Fathers soul ye sleep your last.
Aphelia, oh Aphelia, she will not from my mind,
I may command her now.
Come Mother, Brother, Friends, come let us go,
King never received a Crown so full of woe.

I Left her midst the amazed multitude,
Where doubtless frighted with the sudden horror
Of the unlooked for murder of the Kings,
She has with other beauties of the Court,
Retired her self until the morning star.

It Is very likely so, yet do you hear --
I know not what to say, i will not to bed,
My thoughts are full of tempests, dismal thinkings;
Where is my Son, why went he not to Court?

Your Son sir Charles, sir, is not yet in bed,
But why he went not to the Court I know not.

Perhaps she is safe, then why returns she not?
Why sends she not glad messenges of health?
No, no, she is lost, and I undone forever.
Go to your bed, I will not trouble you,
Go take your rest, yet pray be up betimes,
Yet stay and watch with me, she may come home,
She may come home, it is good to wait for her;
Yet now I Have thought on it get you hence to bed,
And yet not so, run, run unto the Court,
O Villain how he moves; yet why so fast,
Let me deliberate, that were to give
The Courtiers notice I have lost my Daughter,
Whom they will then suspect, and call her fame
Into an ill construction; no no no:
O sir you are welcome, where is your sister?
I must have her sir, and I will; where is
She Charles, where is she?

My noble Father.


Tut tut tut, noble me nobles, nor Father me
No Fathers, where is your sister sir?

My sister?


Your sister; this cunning shall not carry it;
Where is she? speak.

Within fir, is she not? otherwise this Gentleman
Has lost his labor, he is come to visit her.

Hoyday, hoyday, hoyday, hoyday, to visit her?
Plots, plots, mere fetches to delude me: to visit her?
What at the dead of night, when the whole world
Is sunck in slumber, and our lusty youth
As quiet as the Grave? to visit her?
O most ridiculous, to visit her?
Pray Gentleman consider, does your sister keep
Times so preposterous for visiting?
Makes she day of night, or has been bred
As loose as Lais, to love night Courtings?
Do not distract me; to visit her?

Pray sir collect your self; this Gentleman
Even at that horrid point where the King fell --

I there is more mischief too; God for his mercy.
What a world is this!

Saw a Ring drop from off my sisters singes,
And at his best advantage took it up,
Which he had then delivered, but that fright
Which renders men forgetful made him so,
But knowing where she lived, (so he protests)
He could not sleep until it were delivered.

Pray let me see the Ring; yes it was hers.
And she would say she would never part with it
But when she meant to wed; if you have married her,
Or have her promise rivited to yours,
Tell me but where she is i will be content,
For I in losing her have lost my joy.

Is she not then within?


Yes too much; oh no
The house contains her not, she is not here,
Nor is for ought I know at all.

O my prophetique soul, then it is no idle fear.


How the Monsiure? what makes he here?


There Is something whispers me, go not to bed,
Go not to bed till thou have found her out,
Be'st thou my Genius or what power else
(Suggesting lawful things) I will obey thee.
Still it cries, sleep not to night; had I taken Opium,
The drowsy Poppie, cold Mandragora,
Or all the sleepie sirrops of the world,
With such a powerful spell thou work'st upon me,
That should I take an everlasting sleep
Thould'st wake my scattered bones, and make them rise
To watch the horror of this fatal night;
Sleep ever waking envy and mistrust,
Yes things which never knew what slumber meant;
Ghosts keep your beds, ye Sentinels of night,
Goblings and Specters do not walk your round;
A general Lethargy seize on this hour,
Whilst I alone the Watchman of the night
Will wake in spite of fate, Argus Thine eyes
To find Aphelia and her miseries.

Pretty in good sadness, wondrous pretty;
Is he in earnest?

Sure he dissembles not, I little thought [When I did
Let him in, what person graced [Our Threshold.

Ah sir, what a Girl is this to be out of the way,
He is in love that is certain; let me remember,
When I was first a lover as he is,
I Would just such wild vagaries in my brain,
Such midnight madness; this puling baggage
May lose her self for ever, and her fortunes,
For this hours absence; go, begone,
Follow his royal person, comfort him,
Tell him my daughter will again be found;
And so good Angels grant we meet with her.

Into what Labyrinth do you lead me sir?
What by perplexed ways? I should much fear
Had you not used his name, which is to me
A strength against terror, and himself so good,
Occasion cannot vary, nor the night,
Youth, nor his wild desire, otherwise
A silent sorrow from mine eyes would steal
And tell sad stories for me.

You are too tender of your honor Lady,
Too full of aguish trembling, the noble Prince
Is, as December, frosty in desire,
Save what is lawful, he not owns that heat,
Which were you snow would thaw a tear from you.

This is the place appointed, pray heavens all things go well.


I will go call him, please you rest your self;
Here lies a book will bear you company
Till I return, which will be presently.
Hither i will send the King, not that I mean
To give him leave to cool his burning lust,
For Clovis shall prevent him in the fact;
And thus I shall endear my self to both:
Clovis enraged perhaps will kill the King,
Or by the King will perish, if both fall,
Or either, both ways make for me;
The Queen as rootedly does hate her sons,
As I her Ladyship, to see this fraie
She must be brought by me, she will steel them on
To one another damage, for her sake
I Will say I set on foot this hopeful brawl.
Whilst she will hug and kiss me for the same;
Thus on all sides the Eunuch will play foul,
And as his face is black he will have his soul,

How witty sorrow has found out discourse
Fitting a midnight season! here I see
One bathed in Virgins tears, whose purity
Might blanch a Blackmore, turn natures stream
Back on it is self; words pure and of that strain
Might move the Parcae to bepittiful.

Methinks I stand like Tarquin in the night,
When he defiled the chastity of Rome,
Doubtful of what to do, and like a Thief
I take each noise to be an Officer.
She has a ravishing feature, and her mind
Is of a purer temper than her body:
Her virtues more than beauty ravished me,
And I commit even with her piety
A kind of incest with Religion;
Though I do know it is a deed of death
Condemned to torments in the other world,
Such tempting sweetness dwells in every limb,
That I must venture my essential parts
For the fruition of a moments lust,
A pleasure dearly bought.

Alack poor maid,
Poor ravished Philomel, thy lot was ill
To meet that violence in a Brother, which
I in a stranger doubt not; vet methinks
I am too confident, for I feel my heart
Burd'ned with something ominous; these men
Are things of subtle nature, and their oaths
Unconstant like themselves. Clovis may prove unkind,
Alack why not? say he should offer foul,
The evil counsel of a secret place,
And night his friend, might over-tempt his will;
I dare not stand the hazard; guide me light
To some untroden place, where poor I may
Wear out the night with sighs till it be day.

I am resolved, I will be bold and resolute.
Hail beauteous Damsel.

Ha, what man art thou
That have thy countenance clouded with thy cloak,
And hid'st thy face from darkness and the night?
If thy intents deserve a Mustler too,
Withdraw and act them not. What art thou, speak?
And wherefore came thou hither?

I came to find one beautiful as thou,
And am a man willing to please a woman.

I understand you not.


But I must you, yea and the right way too,
Or my strength shall fail me.

Help, help, help.


Peace, none of your loud music Lady,
If you raise a note, or beat the air with clamor,
You see your death.

What violence is this? inhuman sir,
Why do you threaten war, fright my soft peace
With most ungentle steel? what have I done
Dangerous, or am like to do? why do you wrack me thus?
Mine arms are guilty of no crimes, do not torment'um:
Mine heart and they have been heaved up together
For mankind that was holy, if in that act
They have not prayed for you, mend and be good,
The fault is none of their's.

Come, do not seem
More holy than you are, I know your heart.

Let your Dagger too; noble sir, strike home,
And sacrifice a soul to chastity,
As pure as is it self, or innocence.

This is not the way, -- know you me beauty?


The Majesty of France!


Be not afraid.


I dare not fear, it is treason to suspect
My King can harbor thoughts that tend to ill,
I know you are godlike good, and have but tried
How far weak women durst be virtuous.

Cunning simplicity, thou art deceived,
Thy wit as well as beauty wounds me, and thy tongue
In pleading for thee pleads against thy self;
It is thy virtue moves me, and thy good
Tempts me to acts of evil; were thou bad,
Or loose in thy desires, I could stand,
And only gaze, not surfeit on thy beauty;
But as thou art, there is witchcraft in thy face,
I must enjoy thee, or not thou thy life.

You are my King, and may command my life,
My will to sin you cannot; you may force
Unhallowed deeds upon me, spot my fame,
And make my body suffer, not my mind;
When you have done this unreligious deed,
Conquered a poor weak maid, a trembling maid,
What trophie or what triumph will it bring
More than a living scorn upon your name?
The ashes in your Urn shall suffer for it,
Virgins will sow their curses on your Grave,
Time blot your Kingly parentage, and call
Your birth in question; do not think
This deed will lie concealed, the faults Kings do
Shine like the fiery Beacons on a hill
For all to see, and seeing tremble at:
It Is not a single ill which you commit;
What in the subject is a petty fault,
Monsters your actions, and's a foul offense;
You give your subjects license to offend,
When you do teach them how.

I will endure no longer, come along,
Or by the curious spinstrie of thy head,
Which natures cunnin'st finger twisted out,
I Will drag thee to my couch; tempt not my fury.

Hold, hold my heart -- can I endure this --
Unhand me Charles and render me my self,
Lest I forget my self on thee.

Great sir;
Remember it is your brother, and the King.

O that I could forget it, and shake off
Duty at once and Consanguinitie,
That like a whirlwind I might rush upon him,
And bear him to destruction. Monster of men,
Thou King of darkness down unto thy Hell,
I have a Spel will lay thy honesty,
And this abused goodness: Is It not enough
That thou have wronged Crotilda, ravished a Maid,
A Virgin of that purity of life
Might saint her here on earth; but thou will add
Unto the first a second violence the Gods must not forgive:
Don't arm your face,
Nor wear acount'nance of horror, I cannot fear
Bearing a bosom innocent and pure:
Is It even so, then guard thy self Oh King,
For I am swift as thought that executes.

Hold, hold, my Lotd forbear.


Beat down their swords, what do the Princes mean?
Ring out the larum Bell, call up the Court,
The Princes here will murder one another.
For shame for shame forbear.

What means this sudden outcry? oh my Sons,
Hold, hold; part 'um good Gentlemen.

Braved by a subjects hand?


Though nature by precedencie of birth
Made thee his King, it therefore follows not
His Murderer: wherein is our Clotair
Greater than Clovis? the self same blood
That spirits thee, makes him as valiant,
The difference lies in Anno Domini.

Most acurat mischief, most rare Crocadile!


I grant thou art his elder, by which law
You Are born his subject, not his equal Clovis:
Know Clotair's thy King, and subjects hands
Without the deep and dangerous traitors name,
May not advance against their sovereignes head.

Neither shall his without Correction
Upon him slaves.

Hold, I command ye hold:
Oh Clotair thou art of a valiant soul,
And will thou basely thus beset thy Brother?
Fear argues spirits most degenerate,
And that thou fear, the advantage argues it;
O set not on thy slaves, if he must die,
Let thy sacrifice not butcher him.

That argument sounds harsh, does Clotair fear?


Sacrifice me? it is not in his power.


Exquisite Philter, how it operates!


We hope so Clovis; yet thy brother King
Is as an earthly God, his will his law,
His power uncircumscrib'd, unlimited,
Whose Majesty can look a subject dead.

How? look me dead? I do not fear his frowns.


I grant th'as great a Basiliske as he,
As thou art merely man; but as thy King
Divinity does prop him, he stands firm
That builds on that foundation; yet I know
Thy sword's as sharp as his, and where it lights
Imprints as much of fate; thine arm's as strong,
Thy spirit as daring, and thy will as prompt
To any action that may write man, Man.

He is your darling, you do well to praise him;
When I have slain him write his Epitaph.

My Epitaph? this Pen of steel shall first
Write on thy heart thine end.

Still, still better.
The venomed poison of a woman's tongue
Is more sublimed than Mercury.

Hold, hold.
O dearest Maddam, your maternal breath
Bears a Mandamus in it, and like heaven
Will lay this tempest.

As the wind the Sea,
Which makes it rage the louder,

Where Is our guard
That lets a tray tor pull me by the berd?
Upon him slaves.

O they have slain my Son;
Bloody villain, thy hands have made these holes,
Hell take thee for it.

Mother, rise and depart,
For I am bent on mischief.

Do thy worst
Thou murderous minded Prince, this blood is mine,
For in some sort I bleed; out Paricide.

How cunningly she spits her poison forth!
I know her soul is light, she is glad he is dead,
And joys in the opportuntie to curse the killer,
For which she gains the name of pious mother;
Here Is pretty woman-villany and dissimulation.

If they have slain him, wherefore do I live?
O my swollen heart.

Remove the Corpse, withal
Convey this Siren from our wandering eyes,
And house her in a Dungeon; let no light
Peep through a cranney on her; mask the day,
Put the all-searching eyes of Phoebus out;
Lest accidentally he gazing here,
Here fix eternally, and so we may
Despair of night as once we did of day:
Bear her to prison; reason not the cause,
A Kings prerogative's above his laws.

Be merciful and lead to earth, away,
Since he is gone it is to die to stay.

Now we begin to flourish, this black night
Is only lighted by our stars, which smile
Upon these actions, and rejoice to see
Thee our sole favorite so near a Crown.
But tell me Landrey, how did I play the mother;
Did not I seem a Niobe in passion,
A deluge of salt tear?

Most true, you wept.


As a good Actor in a play would do,
Whose fancy works (as if he waking dreamt)
Too strongly on the Object that it copes with,
Shaping realities from mockeries;
And so the Queen did weep: By this good night
I think I could become the Stage as well
As any she that sels her breath in public;
Come shall we Act Landrey?

Act Lady, what?


Nothing that is new, old Plays you know are best:
Eunuch is our bed ready?

Great Queen it is.


Come then my joy to bed, where we will Act
The truth which others doubt, and in that sport
We Will laugh at death which triumphs in the Court.

Go sleep your last; i will straight unto the King,
And he shall take them in the very act;
And then to cover my discovery
I Will set on fire the Queens Bedchamber,
That so I may disturb them more secure,
And yet the plot not mine, i will tell the King
Unless he present help, his mother burns:
About it then, this is a happy night,
The more it works their woe more's my delight.

LOok how it fiames, I fear some treachrie,
Beat at her Chamber door, cry it aloud,
And let your voice be thunder to this lightning;
Cry, fire, fire, fire, the Court is all a hot-house, fire, fire.

Great Queen, royal mother, open your door
Lest you do sleep for ever; mother awake.
The God of sleep lies heavy on her eyes;
Force up the door; fire, fire, fire.

It Is fortified against strength, you must call louder.


Mother, Queen, Mother, awake awake,
Your sleep was never more like death than now;
Lady, Great Princess; fire, fire, fire.

What saucie Groom
Beats our offendless doors thus daringly?
He Had better roused a sleeping Lyoness
Than thus to have broke our slumbers; what art thou?

Look,
The fire will give you light, it is I your Son,
Fly from your Chamber else you are but dead,
Your Court is all a Bonsire.

Let it burn, I have lost my credit everlastingly,
I will not move afoot.

You must be forced then.


Lady,
Where is your wit now in necessity?
When shall be taken, and you shamed for ever.
Bethink, bethink your self, what shall we do.

I have't, it shall be so; there, put on that,
And as the door flies open meet him full
Appearing in his Brothers warlike form,
Thou will amaze and so pass by him safely.
Do not appear to me, I did not wound thee,
Seek out the beds of those that caused thy death,
And howl to them thy pittious complaints;
O do not look on me, be gone, be gone.

Whom do you hold discourse with, with the air?
Bethink your self, this is no time to dally.

O my Son, such horrid apparitions full of dread
Have I beheld, have quite unwitted me;
Thy brothers Ghost, young Clovis Ghost in arms
Has thrice appeared to me this dismal night,
You heard me speak to it.

True, I heard you speak,
But what of that?

Calls for Aphelia
To bear him company i'th'other world,
Or else he will nightly haunt us in our sleep.

O see, it comes!


Fear it not, Son.


What art thou that usurp'st this dead of night,
In metal like the age? why art thou sent
To cast a horror on me? If thy soul
Walks unrevenged, and the grim Ferriman
Deny thy passage, i will perform thy rights.
O do not wound me with such piteous signs,
Lest I dissolve to air, and like thy self
Affright fool mortals: If that thou desir'st
Aphelia's death to appease thy troubled soul,
Make some consenting sign, and so depart.
Thy sight afflicts my soul.

How fares our Son?


It was my brothers spirit; nothing but Aphelia?


She must die, you see it is requisite.


Would he had asked my life first.


Why should you be so fond upon a woman?


Woman's the least part of her, she is all Goddess.


'Twas your offer;

Remember there is no jesting with the Gods.

What might this mean? ha, where are my brains?


I had forgot my self, your pardon Mother;
Bear her from me this Jewel, I esteem
Equal with life; it was my brothers picture;
And with it, this, that she prepare to die;
Pray her to take it; and in death, but kiss
This sad remembrance for the senders sake,
Although for his whose form it represents,
And I shall take it for the greatest grace
That she can give, or I ought to desire.
Tell her, and if you can be moved to sorrow
Express it in you tears, it is not I
Pronounce this fatal sentence against her life
Which needs must ruin mine, but the hid will
And providence of heaven, against which to rage
It were as impious as not obey.
My brothers funeral is her dying day.
Tell her, though reason and my will do jarr,
My soul'speaks peace, although my sentence war.
Say I love, and pray her to forgive me.
Go, all attend my Mother; my estate
Delights not in Court Ceremony; stay,
Castrato stay,
And with thy Counsel cure thy dying Prince;
Thou art my bosom, Eunuch, and to thee
I dare unclasp my soul; what is to be done?
This is a damned spirit I have seen,
And comes to work my ruin.

What spirit?


My Brothers spirit in Arms, I swear it came forth here
Out of my Mothers Chamber as I knocked.

Was it in Armor said you?

Yes, in that Armor he was used to wear
When we have run at Tilt, till our cleft Spaeres
Have with their splinters scared the Element.

That Armor as I well remember, I did leave
In the Queens Bedchamber as yesterday,
After the Trlumphs and the Tournaments,
Having unbrac'd the Prince; it is even so,
Ha, ha, ha.

Why this ridiculous passion?
My state requires thy tears, and not thy mirth.

The Devil came from your Mothers Chamber sir',
She has a circle that can raise a Spirit;
A Mars in armor too, she is a Venus,
And through your license Landrey is no Eunuch.

What killing sense thou utter'st?
There Is someting in it I would understand,
And yet I dare not; Landrey? How know thou this?

Since I have gone so far, i will tell you;
I looked in at th'Key-hole, and I saw
Him in your Mothers arms upon the bed,
As sportingly as ever I saw your Father.

Thou lie, take that; suspicion double sees,
Jealous informers no'r meet better fees.

King, thou had better far have struck thy Father,
Dig'd up his bones and played at logats with them.
Stricken?

I know not,
My Mother always had a seanted fame;
His thoughts too have been mine; I was to blame,
Prithee forgive me; my passions but like lightning,
Flash and away, dead ever we say it is;
I am not always angry, let that assure:
My Mother may befalse, she is a woman.
Prithee deliver, come I will believe thee
Even to the utmost syllable.

Then, she is false.


And did thou see him mount my Mother bed?


Else pull these out.


Thou have shot poison through me;
False with Landrey, her sometime Page?

Even with the same.


But wherefore would they have Aphelia die?
There lies the mystery.

They fear you will accept her as the Queen,
Of whom you may beget a hopeful issue
And frustrate their intents, who but expect
Your hop'd-for death, and perhaps plotted too,
That so they might become, what now you cross,
Lawfully man and wife, and govern in your seat.

This carries show of truth, or is it a lie
Well sahdowed by the slave? I cannot tell:
My mother certainly is not so bad,
It is a sin to think it; hence and avoid my sight
Thou sower of debate, thy seeds are strow'd
On steril groun; and therefore ill bestowed.

Is It even so, work and about my brain,
I Am lost for ever if not close again.

Are all your Troops well furnished against resistance?
Are your men bold and daring, resolute
To run your hazard, indifferent rich, not poor,
That only fight for bread? such often betray
The sinews of a well knit plot for gain,
When these as well fight to defend as win.

Noble Lanove,
Mine know, nor fear no death, souls of that fire,
They Will catch the bullet flying, scale a wall
Battled with Enemy, stand breaches, laugh
The thunder of a Canon, call it music
Fitter a Ladies Chamber than the field;
When o'r their heads the Element is seel'd,
Darkened with Darts, they will fight under the shade,
And ask no other roofs to hid their heads in;
They fear not Jove, and had the Giants been
But half so spirited, they had disthron'd him:
Kill, till they are killed with killing, and oftener die
Wearied than wounded, being more oppressed
With giving wounds than taking; when they fall,
They fall not vaquish'd, but by fate betrayed;
Such are the men I lead.

They Are Soldiers fit to sack a Kingdom then,
And share the spoil between them.

Were it come to that sport once.


Bourbon, it must, or some of us must fall.


Where shall we first attempt?


The Citadel.


I say no, it is dangerous.


It is the safest course.


Believe it not, it is full of hazard.


So is the general enterprise in hand.


But this of certain ruin.


Give me a reason, why you would invade
The Palace first, and I am satisfied?

Then understand, Lamot lives still at Court.
Disguised like a formal Surgion,
To whom the Prince being delivered
To be embalmed and boweld, finding life
Yet in his Corpse, which way he is very skilful,
H'as balsomed all his wounds and cured him.

And what of all this!


Have temperance, and hear the rest:
For this the Prince h'as promised him the place,
The grand Commander of the Citadel,
Whose aid can stead us infinitely.

Is it certain?


I did but even now receive this Letter,
Which constantly affirms it from himself;
He says it is not known in Court yet, that the Prince lives,
For diverse reasons best known to themselves;
And herein does require our secrecy,
Therefore dear friends be wary to divulge it.
Besides he says here,
That the great Monseiur's supposed funeral
This day's solemnized with greatest pomp;
And how Aphelia dies a sacrifice
That hour he is buried on his Hearse:
What if we made attempt to save the Virgin?

It may not be, better she fall alone,
Than all of us together. And now best friends
Let us behave us bravely, it is no base act
We undertake, but our whole Countries freedom
From slaverie and bondage; men of worth stand bare
To pages and gilt Butterflies? besides the Queen
Will grave us all rather than want sport
In spilling human blood; come, let us withdraw,
And lay the platform of this mighty work;
My soul sits smiling in me, I divine
Though now it lows, I shall see Sun will shine.

Strephon, for so thou nam'st thy self, thou'st made
Thy Prince thy subject by thy timely cure;
This is the hour I must be buried living;
And this the hour the fair Aphelia
Dies on my Hearse to appease my wandering Ghost;
Say Strephon, is it so?

Nay this the very minute: hark, I hear them Coming.


Stand close here, we will observe the Mourners.

Come blessed Virgins come and bring
To this Goddess offering,
Offer to her kisses, such
As make good better by the touch;
Where her eyes let fall a tear,
Another Paradise springs there;
It Is prepostrons cruelty
To saerifice a Deity;
If a true path should be trod,
To her sacrifice a God.

Set down, set down your honorable load,
Fitting an Atlas shoulder; burden of grace
And majesty immense, whose weight does load
Heavens stooping Porter, under which he groans
More than the Spaeres, and sweats thy weight not theirs;
Let me bedew thy Hearse with pious tears,
Balm to wounds, repenting ones; look down
From heaven empireall and behold me stand
All flood in sorrow, drowned in mine own tears;
Behold this spotless sacrifice, a Virgin
As pure in thought as Vesture, an Oblation
To ransom Jove and Heaven had he been taken,
And so we yield her up.

O my good Lord,
This is conspiracy against an old man's life;
Have you no other way to murder me,
But to begin wit her? are these your plots?
You Are weary of my counsel? and my place
May better be supplied by greener heads?
Pray cut off mine, do, do, a weak old man,
My absence were material, since your state
Requires Paricides about you,
Alas I may be spared; why must she die?
Because she is fair? or that a Prince
Once thought her so? the fault is none of hers,
Let nature suffer for it; if it prove Art,
Or that with plaistred cunning she did catch
Your Brothers love with an adulterate form,
I yield her up as not aly'd to me;
If not, why should she suffer?

Brissac, peace.


What pageant's this?


Be it no wonder Lords
To see a Prince an Executioner;
Far be it from the dignity of France
To let a soul forth so refined as here is
With mercinary hands.

Contain your self,
You may prevent the danger when you please.

Behold the conquest of thine eyes Aphelia,
France at thy foot, tread on his Royalty;
Or if thy nature knows not to forgive,
which to believe were impious, take this sword
And search my heart, send me a sacrifice
To Appease the troubled spirit of thy love.

O Eunuch, that she would take him at his word.


I find a speaking pity in thine eyes,
Which thence will drop upon thy gentle tongue,
And cry in peace, Long live my Sovereign.

Long live Clotair, long live my Sovereign.


The motions of the Sphaeres move in that tongue.
Turn all your sables to the Tyrian dye,
Your dirges into sprightful wedding airs.
Why looks our Court so sad? is this a time
To anckor your aspects unto the earth?
By my blessed self, he is traitor to the height,
That does not straight salute her as his Queen.

Long live Aphelia Queen of France and us.


Do you hear this? what are you planet-stroken?
Clovis, Prince, Monsiure?

What will Clotair do?


What heaven has pointed for him, Marry her.


Thy Grave, thy Grave first Clotair.


Cardinal.


What evil spirit's crept into my Son?
Venomed his noble nature, sickned all
His wholesome faculties, slain's divinity?
Are these your vows? or can thou cousen heaven?
Necessity of fate depends on it,
Your know she must to earth.

I, but not yet:
Since she has conquered me, that could do fate,
Had she joined with me, the awed destinies
Spin her decrees, and what she wills they act;
Since then what must be must be, join our hands.

Now, now, prevent them yet, O statue Prince
Thou art undone for ever.

Where am I?
Awake? for ever rather let me sleep.
Is this a funeral, O that I were a Hearse,
And not the mock of what is pagented.

Amazement quite confounds me, Clovis alive!


Yes sir, by my Art he lives, though his desire
Was not to have it known; this Chest contains
Nothing but spices sweetly oderiferous.

Into my soul I welcome thee dear brother;
This second birth of thine brings me more joy,
Than had Aphelia brought me forth an Heir,
Whom now you must remember as a Sister.

O that in nature there was left an Art,
Could teach me to forget I ever loved
This her great Masterplece; O well built frame,
Why do thou harbor such unhallowed guests
To house within thy bosom perjurie?
If that our vows are registered in heaven,
Why are they broke on earth --? Aphelia,
This was a hasty match, the subtle air
Has not yet cooled the breath, with which thou swor'st
Thy self into my soul; and on thy cheeks,
The print and pathway of those tears remain
That wooed me to believe so: fly me not,
I am no spirit; taste my active pulse,
And you shall find it make such harmony.
As youth and health enjoy.

The Queen she faints.


Is there a God left so propitious
To rid me of my fears; still let her sleep,
For if she wake (O King) she will appear
Too monstrous a spectre for frail eyes
To see and keep their senses.

Are you mad?


Nothing so happy Strephon, would I were;
In times first progress I despair the hour,
That brings such fortune with it; I should then
Forget that she was ever pleasing to me;
I should no more remember she would sit
And sing me into dreams of Paradise;
Never more hang about her Ivory neck
Believing such a one Diana's war,
Never more dote she breaths Arabia,
Or kiss her Corrall lip into a paleness.
Streph See, she is returned, an with majestique gaze,
In pity rather than contempt, beholds you.

Convey me hence some charitable man,
Lest this same Creature looking like a Saint,
Hurry my soul to Hell; she is a fiend
Apparel'd like a woman, sent on earth
For man's destruction.

Rule your disordea'd tongue;
Clovis, what is past we are content to think,
It was our brother spoke, and not our subject.

I had forgot my self, yet well remember.
Yon Gorgon has transfrom'd me into stone;
And since that time my language has been harsh,
My words too heavy for my tongue, to earthly;
I was not born so, trust me Apbelia:
Before I was possessed with these black thoughts,
I could sit by thy side, and rest my head
Upon the rising pillows of thy breast,
Whose natural sweetness would invite mine eyes
To sinck in pleasing slumbers, wake, and kiss
The Rose beds that afforded me such bliss;
But thou art now a general disease
That eat'st into my Marrow, turn'st my blood,
And make my veins run poison, that each sense
Groans at the alteration: am I Monsiure?
Does Clovis talk his sorrows. and not act?
O man bewomaniz'd; were thou not mine,
How comes it thou art his?

You have done ill,
And must be taught so; you Capitulate
Not with your equal Clovis, she is thy Queen.

Upon my knees I do acknowledge her,
Queen of my thoughts and my affections.
O pardon me, if my ill-tutor'd tongue
Has forfeited my head; if not, behold
Before the sacred altar of thy seet,
I lie a willing sacrifie.

Arise:
And henceforth Clovis thus instruct thy soul;
There lies a depth in fate, which earthly eyes
May faintly look into, but cannot fathom;
You had my vow till death to be your wise,
You being dead my vows were cancelled,
And I as thus you see bestowed.

Farewell;
I will no more offend you: would to God
Those cruel hands not enough barbarous,
That made these bleeding witnesses of love,
Had set an endless period to my life too.

Where there is no help it is boothless to complain;
Clovis she is mine; let not your spirit war
Or mutiny within you, because I say it;
Nor let thy tongue from henceforth dare presume,
To say she might, or ever should be thine;
What Is past once more I pardon, it is our wedding day.

A long farewell to love, thus do I break
Your broken pledge of faith; and with this kiss,
The last that ever Clovis must print here:
Unkiss the kiss that feal'd it on thy lips.
Ye powers ye are unjust, for her wild breath
That has the sacred tie of contract broken,
Is still the same Arabia that it was:
Nay I have done; beware of jealousy,
I would not have you nourish jealous thoughts;
Though she has broke her faith to me, to you
Against her reputation she will be true:
Farewell my first love lost, i will choose to have
No wife, till death shall wed me to my Grave.
Come Strephon, come and teach me how to die,
That gav'st me life so unadvisedly.

Let Clovis that way go, this way will we,
He Is great with grief, we with felicity,

Mischief grows lean Costrato, all our plots
Turn head upon themselves, my brains grow weak;
And in this Globe the policie's not left
To kill a worm unseen; I am undone,
And all my plots discovered.

This is strange,
Some comic Devil crosses our designs;
How else should he revive, or yea prepared,
Nay in the arms Landrey, when desire
Had made you all a Venus, meet events
So barren in their expectations?

Their lies the grief Costrate; Had the Court,
So I had quenched these burnings flames within,
Been buried her cinders, I had cared not.

But yet Landreis escape does qualify
The nonperformance.

That sits smiling here,
It set my brains upon the tentors Eunuch;
Was It not a rare device?

And was not I
As fortunate to leave that Armor there;
But now what is to be done?

My dull Aethlope,
I will instruct thy blackness; learn to know
My reputation's sichned, and my fame
Is looked into with narrow eyes at Court;
Therefore it is thus decreed, I will remove,
And sequester my self from company.

Good!


Thou know where Childrick keep his Concubine
To none discovered by thy self and me,
For which she is no more.

Right.


There will I
And my Landrey securely spend our time,
Revil, embrace, and what not my Eunuch:
The Cave that leads unto the postern Gate,
Which Childrick made, will give him entrance:
No ele acquainted, being thus retired.
What lust inflamed must be by lust unfir'd.

Excellent mistress, I applaud your brain.


I will away to night, I cannot brook
These loathed Nuptials, they have undone
My hopes on earth for ever, therefore my Eunuch,
Acquaint Landrey with these designs.

What else?


If by the engine of thy stronger brain,
Thou could remove --

Aphelia or the King,
Monsiure, or all; it is not so my Queen?

Thou have a brain which does engender thoughts
As regal as our own, which do beget
A race of rare events; what pity it is
Thy body should be sterril, since thy mind
Is of so pregnant and a fruitful kind;
Farewell, remember me.

Remember you?
Your Gibship shall be thought on fear it not;
And now bethink thee Eunuch, all thy plots
Find fruitless issues, only in the King,
His worship walked into the other world,
Like a tame suckling Pig that died o'th pipp;
The trouble is behind, my hate extends
To the whole family, I must root them up,
And beldam first with you: but how? but how?
If (in her proud desire) I do prevent
Her lust this second time, before the third
She may repent and save her loathed soul,
Which my revenge would damn; yet were she crossed,
Her lust being now at full flood in her,
And no way left to quench her burning flame,
Her dryer bones would make a bonfire,
Fit forth Devil to warm his hands by:
Stay, stay, Castrato; no, this must not be,
Nor Must the high and mighty Queen Aphelia
This night enjoy her Bridegroom, I must set
Some mischief instantly on foot to stop it;
If I miscarry in it story shall tell,
I did attempt it bravely though I fell.

Dissuade me not, Castrato I have sought thee
Through every angle of this spacious Court,
I Have business to impart.

And so have I.


Mine is of honorable consequence,
And does require thine aid.

So does mine yours.


Aphelia is --


Your Brother Wife. and you
Would fain enjoy her too: why sir you may,
But time must work her.

Eunuch, thou art wide;
Those vaneties of love are quite extinct,
Revenge does swell the Monsiure, and his thought
Which burn within him must be quenched with blood;
I have incenst the King with yellowness,
With doubtful phrases on Aphelia's fame;
See thou this Letter, it is a script I feigned,
For I can counterfeit Aphelia's hand;
The King has banished Landrey from the Court,
Because he wore the Jewel which he sent
To his Aphelia: light suspicions,
But this shall aggravte; find thou the King,
Show him his Note, it does express great love
To Landrey from Aphelia; and withal,
It mentions the Jewel as a Gift
To gratify her servant; this to the rest
Of poison he has sucked already in,
Will so inflame him, that the Court shall burn
Too hot for his Aphelia.

Think it done;
But now your aid, since that your mind is bent
On honorable ends, here is one will try you.

Thou Would have me join my self unto the Rebels,
And with my person grace their cause, perhaps
That is not now to plot.

I find you high,
Worthy the name of Monsieure; yet your thoughts
Hit not my purpose, it is such that made
Your Brother quake to hear.

What is it Eunuch?
If that if bear an honorable sound,
Though death stood gaping wide to swallow me,
I would not shrink nor fear.

Noble; hear it then,
Your Mother's loose, and this night renders up
Her body unto lust, if not prevented;
I can direct you where and when, with whom.

My soul finds the man, is it not Landrey?


The same


I Will tear him all to pieces then,
Whore my Mother; Eunuch lead the way,
In what thou shall prescribe we will obey.

WHat vulture gripes me here, ha, what art thou?
If thou be jealousy mount and be gone;
Fly to the vulgar bosom, whose cheap thoughts
Despair their own performance; in a Prince
Thou show a nature retrograde to honor.
Suppose she gave the Jewels, must it follow
She therefore is disloyal? poor consequence,
A Babble for a boy to play withal;
I am resolved, hark, I hear her coming;
O Juno, what a look and gate is there!

Mock me not Ladies with this Ceremony,
For I am fitter to attend on you;
I am become a servant and a slave
To every moodle passion of my Lord.
All that is behind I can perform my self,
Without this complement.

Sweet Lady,
You must not weigh these things so deeply,
Your Lord is of a noble spirit;
And you shall see how calm he will return,
Blessing your Bridal bed with fruitful issue.

No, no;
The Safforn-coated Hymen frowns upon us,
These Tapers here wre lighted at a pile,
As sit Attendance on the Grave, not Bed;
Juno denies her presence at this match,
And all the ill presaging birds of night
Sing fatal Requiems for a Bridal Song;
O Ladies, is not this ominous?

Yes my Aphelia, if that ragged fate
Lie in a kiss, then it is ominous.
Let me dwell here; I am ravished,
Am I on earth? no, heaven is here,
And all th'unimitable joys, that Poets feign,
Are bettered in thy goodness.

I hope your fears are satisfied now,
You bear a brow so sweetly pleasant.

What pretty foolery is this Aphelia?
I am not jealous, for by all that good
I cannot think thee evil; kiss me sweet,
There Is no deceit lies here; again, again:
Her kisses melt upon my lip, if sin
Have so much heaven in it, i will be a sinner;
Prithee forgive my folly that could be wrought
To such a senseless passion, come let us in
And shake this off as it never been.

We must a while my Lord entreat your absence,
We have some certain Notions to deliver,
Some pillow counsels; i will assure your highness
It shall be no ways prejudicial to you.

You see she is not prepared, till that is performed
She Is ours; that done, we yield her up
To the dark night, and mercy of your Lordship.

Go then unharnis your Lady for these wars,
For we are of the Camilli, and fight naked.
Ye powers that favor Lovers, infuse apt strength
Through every nerve and sinew of this frame;
Make me all pleasure; and unto the bride
Add every vein a Venus; guide me light,
Wherein on bed lies all the worlds delight.

Not yet in bed! O happy, happy minute,
Until this hour I never was fortunate;
I have preserved my King, my Prince, my Patron,
From the loose ardor of a Strumphts bed.

What Is this?


Be not this second time incredulous,
And scorn my honest heart; or grant you were,
Dishonests as the Suburbs, I am loath
To nominate her whore though it betrue.

True? ha!


Leave this Lethargiz'd passion which benumns
Your nobler nature; turn your eyes on this;
Whose Character is this?

It is Aphelia's hand, the very same
Which I have often seen Clovis peruse
In his loves amorous pursuit.

Read the Contents.


A Letter that she loves Landrey, with thanks
For his so freequent visits, which she repaies
With the rich Jewel sent her by the King,
Wishing a perpetuity of imbracements.
Ten thousand Ravens crook is this black paper.
How came you by it.

I saw it drop from Landrey, but never thought
Before I perused it what it did contain;
Which finding, in my duty I was bound
To save my Prince from ruin.

Hold my heart,
Oh what shall Clotair do? -- it cannot be;
Do but behold her face, and thou shall read
What we call virtue there, and modesty;
Here is a look would persuade cruelty
To sigh and shed a tear, bride Nemesis
To knot her steely scourge with Plume of Down,
And Jove himself to call her vice a virtue,

A book of Devils may have the Cover gilt;
Treason lies Cabin'd in the smoothest brow;
The Devil can assume an Angles form;
Your wife is fair, but fair to do you harm.

Oh say not so, she is the neatest cut
As ever was printed by the hand of heaven;
Here is a volum of Divinity,
Composed so rarely, that to add to this,
Or take away from hence, were such a sin
Repentance could not expiate; i will not touch
With hands unhallowrd such a purity,
Could it change all my thoughts to peace and silence.

My Lord --


Peace slave,
Thou that infects all peace.

Why are you thus distempered? let not truth
Make you so wild a tempest; were it false,
Or that I sought the ruin of your house,
Your youth and honor, then it were a time
To swell beyond all charming down, but being truth-

Truth! hence and avoid my sight, fly where the world
Promiscuously combines without distinction;
Where every man is every woman's husband,
Or where it is thought a courtesy to have
A fellow labourer in the marriage bed.
These were a people that might bear with thee,
And fit for thee to dwell with; hence away,
And if thou love thy life, acquaint thy feet
With such by paths that we may never meet.

This Prince is of a nature mild and genlte,
His mothers milk's too fluent in his eyes,
And much I fear his resolution:
Yet I will work him forward; she awakes
I Will after him and fetch him back; if then
She escape his hate, Hell has no power with men.

Oh, oh, oh, help, help my Lord and husband;
O my Father, my Lord and husband; help, help.
Bless me Divinity, is it but a Dream! ha the light
Gone; who waits there? Isabel, Julia.

It was my Ladies voice, does she call for help?
I cannot blame her; were I in her place I should
Do so too, the Prince looks like a bungler.

Who Is there? Isabel?


Did you call Maddam?


Saw thou nothing? where is my Lord?


Is he absent? I cannot blame her then to cry for help,
I should do it my self; a Prince, a Puppit would have
Been more manly: how do you Maddam?

All stands not well.


I believe that faithfully.


O Girl I Have past the dismal'st part of night,
As ever tortured fancy with extremes.

If all Brides should be so tortured, i would for swear Marriage.


Methoughts I saw my Father in a Vault,
His silver hair made crimson with his blood;
My brother at his Hearse upon his knees,
Taking a solemn oath for his revenge;
Yet all this while fancy so fooled my sense,
Methought that I was here; where on the instant,
My Lord in preparation for my bed,
Was by an uglyfiend ravished from hence
And hurried to destruction; here I awaked,
And they ready --

Landrey, blood does swell
The Monsiur's thoughts, to send thy soul to Hell.

Wisdom bids ui shun the Court,
What great ones do, fame will report;
Here we may enjoy each other,
And no eye our loves discover.
I will make thee choice of poset,
Beds of Castia mixed with Roses;
Where we will toy, and kiss, and vary
Pleasures till the mores disoloses
All our secrets, if thou's tarry.
If I will tarry, let me wither here,
Within these sacred walls let me expire,
And spend the remnant of my life that is left,
In service of the Deity lives here,
The air's perfumed each room thorugh which I walk,
Banquets the senses, courts the appetice
Of every faculty that makes up man,
To complement it into paradise.
If then Elysium's here; where are those shades,
Those blessed apparitions Poets feign?
Appear my Goddess and out sing the Poets:
Realty of fancy that excell'st
The faint expressions of a lazy tongue,
Whose house is roof'd with flesh; to tell thy worth,
Tongues tip'd with imortality would faint in it.

Excellent servant, what house do you write too?
Poet and Actor both? why, this sudden gaze,
Your cases are too narrow for your eyes?
Pray spare your Optiques sir for Venus service.

No,
I Will play the prodigal with my precious sight,
And spend it all on you; to view your second
Were such a happiness, after the which
It were a sin to see more.

bless me Rahlais,
And all ye foster phansies of the French;
What ails the man? my Landrey Laureat.

It is my Queen that is Laureat, whose blessed sight
Creates a Poet; this divine feature
Heaven only made to make man ingenious.

Is this Extempare, or have you hired
Some hackney Muse acquainted with the road
Of vulgar exoricsms to charm cheap beauties;
Take up, at this speed else your Muse will founder.

Founder, and have her founders by? with patience
Here but these poor expressions of your worth,
Which faintly paint forth your perfections,
And you shall bless my Muse.

We Will hear your jigg,
How is your Ballad titl'd? come pronounce.

From head to foot, Fredigond been
Far excelling beauties Queen;
Had Jason but beheld her hair,
The golden Fleece had never seemed fair;
Those stars which mortals suppose eyes,
Were ascendant in the skies,
When it fell to Venus lot
That little Cupid was begot.
Her tongue in which the Sphares do move,
Organ of divinest love,
Was by Apollo framed, that be
From hence might learn more harmonies;
Who neats her teeth, and lips discloses,
VValls of Pearl, and gates of Roses;
Two leaved doors that lead the way
Through her breath to Arabia,
To which would Cupid grant that bliss,
I Would go a pilgrimage to kiss:
Those bills of snow which on her breast.
Rise swelling with their double crest,
Mate Parnassus mountain, whence
The Muses suck their eloquence;
Whose parts which we will not discover
He Will imagine that is a lover.
Like Juno she does go,
Like Pallas talk and sow,
Like Venus in her bliss,
Each kiss a Cupid is,
And her hands as white as snow.
From head to foot my Mistress been
Far excelling beauties Queen.

Leave these ariall Viands, taste of that
Is here substantial; how like you the fruit?

Let me for ever dwell upon these lips.


You are too greedy of these rarities,
And must be dyeted, lest surfeiting
Your appetite should sicken and so die.

Die on yuur lips, O deathbed for a Jove,
Who Is buried here, his Grave's immortal love;
Here will I dwell, and know no age nor sorrow.

Yet Childrick knew them both.


A frosty Prince
Begot on January by a Dutch man.
And worthy of thse flames he now indures.

What noise is this? guard me divinity.


What has my harshnes done? she is my Mother;
My conscience tells me I was much to blame
Thus to delude her fancy; she returns.

O Childrick I confess 'twas I that killed thee,
These hands administered the fatal draught
That set thy soul on wing.

What do I hear?


Oh do not snatch my soul from out this world,
Till I have bathed it in repentant tears,
And made it fit for heaven.

She faints again;
Who waits within? come forth and lend your aid;
O welcome Strephon; use thy best of skill
That masters nature, and does life restore,
Beyond the Art of Aesculapius;
Apply thy gentlest medicines.

Let us withdraw;
My life sir answer hers if she miscarry.

What are ye?


Musicianes, whose obedience
Does here attend the Queen.

Bawds, arrant-bawds;
I Will talk with you anon; in, in.

Stand close, stand close, I heard a busling within here while.


Busling, and they come this way here is that shall buslle them.


Fly upon him, he is drunk, and will betray us all.


I am betrayed, tht Monsiure seeks my life,
All ways against m'escape are fortified;
O cruel fortune bawd to time and fate,
That sooth'st us up to make us ruinate:
For now thou know no tears, anon no glee,
But only constant in inconstancic.
Ha! what is here? great Goddess pardon me,
I have offended against thy Deity.
This shall delude the Watch; thrice blessed hap
That thus deliver'st whom they would entrap.

I will not stand, nor I cannot stand; do you think
I Am drunk, what is that?

Bless us, Oblesse us; Diabolo, Diabolo.


The Devil, what a Devil care I, keep off Devil,
I say keep off, I do not fear thee; are you
Sneaking back, you cowardly Rogue, do you budge;
I hate a cowardly rogue, as I hate, as I hate the
Devil; take that.

Oh, oh, oh.


Oh, oh, oh, i will make you cry oh;
What Devil made you in my way?
I Will now see what money he carries about him;
Men say the Prince of darkness is a Gentleman,
By'rladie he has good clothes; but yet for all that
He may have no money.

I know not were he is, or if I did,
Before i would yield him up to thy revenge,
I Will die the thousand deaths.

Thou glorious light, that in thy natural Orb
Did comfortably shine upon this Kingdom;
How is thy worth eclipsed, what a dull darkness
Hangs round about thy fame? in all this piece,
To every limb whereof I once owed duty,
I know not where now to find out my mother.

The Devil and disobedience blinds your eyes;


O that I had no eyes, so you no shame;
Murder your Husband to arrive at lust,
And then to lay the blame on innocents?
Blush, blush, thou worse than woman.

Ha, ha, ha.


Hold my heart,
You Are impudent in sin; has your proud page
Made you thus valiant? tell me, where he is;
For if you dally with me, know this hand
Shall rip him from thy heart, though Cabin'd there.

How dare thou cloth thy speech in such a phrase
To me thy natural Mother?

My Mother!
Adulterate woman, shame of Royal tie,
I blush to call thee mother; thy foul lusts
Have taught me words of that harsh consequence
That Stigmatize obedience, and do brand
With mis-becoming accents siliall duty:
Deliver quickly where this leacher is;
Here housed he must be, for he cannot escape,
Lest wildness conquering my foster sense,
Thrust forth my hand into an act of horror,
And leave you breathless here.

What French Neronian spirit have we here?
^nsolent boy, will thou turn Paricide?

The justness of my cause would excuse me
If I should execute; speak murtheress,
Where have you mewed your Monster?

Here lies the Monster, oh rare Monster; two Berds,
This is a comic Monster; a Periwick too, this is a Court Monister;
Do You gape, what in the Devils name would you beg now?

Behold my Lord, the Woodcock's in the Gin,
Here lies the great Landrey.

O horrid sin.


This habit might have ruined all Lamot.
But Goblin now you are caught; what is he dead?

Scarce hurt my Lord; how is it? look up.


Where is the Queen?


Here Eunuch, as thou fee'st, in misery.


O my heart, how came the Monsiur hither? Lamot too?


All that I know is that we are betrayed.


I Will set them packing, fear not, -- my good Lord.


Thou art a faithful servant.


Sir, the Rebels --


Give' hem a nobler Title, by my life
I do applaud their courage; come they on?

Yes, and Brissac is made their General.


A hopeful youth, fraught with Nobility,
And all the graceful qualities that write
Man truly honorable; my injuries
Have swelled me up to this.

His Father's dead.


Trust me i am sorry, grief has broke his heart,
And mine Castrato too; can thou imagine
Who was the Author of our Fathers death?

Am I betrayed? then lend me impudence,
I Am sure I cannot blush: Royal sir, whom?

Our Mother with Landrey, and this Lamot,
They meant should bear the blame; this was Strephon.

Indeed? -- would I were fairly off.


But what news with Aphelia and her Bridegroom?


As you could wish, he is lull of jealousy,
No Frenchman ever was more Italian;
I Have wrought him bravely on, your Physic works,
Hither i have brough Aphelia; to morrow
You shall hear further sport i will warrant you;
In the mean while, what will you do with these?

Castrato thus;
Nature forbids me spill my Mothers blood,
And Landrey is unfit for my revenge;
For I must study torments for the slave,
Therefore I give them up to your tuition,
Until I shall return victorious.

Observed you that? there is some comfort yet.


Then we will determine of them, if we fall
Let Clotair point them out a funeral:
Reward these with the whip, these with my purse,
His merit is two hundred Crowns, perform it

Drink, I adore thee drink; good fellows all,
Sometimes we rise by drink, but oftener fall.

A moral drunkard, go away with them;
And on your life let them not stir from hence.
Now my revenge grows to maturity,
We Will to Dumain (Lamot) and join with him;
Now France thou lie a bleeding, thou shall prove
What it is to cross the Monsiur in his love.

FOr certain then the Princes are at odds.


Yes, and the ground the marriage of my sister.


The Ulcerous state is ripe, and we must lance it.


The King does Whore my sister; she is not his,
But true and lawfully the Monsiur's wife.

Did not one Strephon wait upon the Monsiure?


What Is his condition?


A Surgion, and famous for the cure o'ch' Prince.


Yes, such there was; but little noised at Court.


That was Lamot our fast and noble friend.


There Is some design on foot that hinders him,
He would not else neglect us.

What noise is that Lanove, step forth and see.


O death we are suppris'd, the Monsiure, suddenly
Snared, let each man to his charge.

Hark, still the noise increases.


By the sound, this is a shout of joy and not of dread;
Lanove the news?

and you the rest,
Think not I come a Traitor to your Camp;
I cannot gild my speech with eloquence,
If this will serve you sir, I am a friend.

The Monsiur's welcome, and his worth will grace
The dignity of this days work in hand.

My almost Brother once, suffice I thank you,
And fairly greet this brave assembly,
Whose souls do look for stirring opposites,
When your resistance I fear will be slender;
But were they centupul'd, i will fight your cause,
Kings arm their subjects when they break their laws.

Long live the Monsiure.


Lead on, away.


Here sits our Beldam dieted for Venerie,
And by her, her Landrey not sur feited;
Her Ladyship's allou'd a mouldie crust,
He stinking water to piece out his life,
Between them both they banquet like one slave,
Condemned perpetually to the Burdello;
They think I know not that they thus are used,
When it is ouely I that use them thus.
How wickedly they look, oh I could laugh
To hear them rail at others misery;
He curses her, and she sooth curses him,
And both each other damn for their offenses.
Learn ye that pamper up your flesh for lust,
The Eunuch in his wickedness is just. Play louder, they sleep too long.

A mischief take thee keeper, hardened dog,
Whom no distress can melt or mollify;
The cruel King does not deny us sleep,
Although the Nursers of it, food and ease.

Peace, peace, ye villains cease that ruder noise
That breaks your softer slumbers; gentle Queen,
I am not guilty of these harsh-voic'd words
Your wilder sense hurls at me; you mistake,
I am your Eunuch, one that weeps for you.

Oh Castrato, wast not those tears in vain,
Come hither and i will catch those falling drops
Which prodigally overflow their banks;
There Is Nectar in thine eye, oh let me drink it;
These aged Cesterns are grown dry, and yield
Not one relenting drop to ease my thirst.
Castrato pity me, my veins are parcht,
And this same flesh which walls about my soul,
Chops with excessive heat; a little water
Castrato, but a little, though it has been
The birth of Toads, or what the leapers bathed in;
O show thy love but in a little water,
What can a Queen ask less, or subject grant her?

Though I be tortured, for it yet i will do it.


It has quenched half my thirst to find some pity.


I cannot bite mine arm, their tyranny
Denies me what is mine own to feed upon,
One mouthfull would suffice; I cannot get it,
Poor unfed sides that pass along the street,
I now am sensible of what ye want;
Did I ever think to die for want of food,
Whose Table was the world, from whence I culled
The rarities of nature to delight me,
And more to feed my lust than Appetite?
One bit of bread, though it were gray with age,
Hoary and crusted with a second bark,
Whose loathed outside would not court a Dog
Armed with the edge of appetite, would seem
A rare rich banquet to my empty gorge;
Oh I am worn to nothing with this want,
Such emptiness has hunger made of me
That you may draw me on another man.
Some bread, some bread.

Oh thou art welcome,
Quick, dear Eunuch quick; what needs this delay?
A way with form and ceremonious duty,
Respect in this is too respectless.

O give me leave, I will begin a heald;
It Is very good, exceeding pleasant Wine.

Do thou deride my sufferance?

No, no, not I.


Give me the drink then, i am all flame and fire.


Say you so, say you so? then you must pardon me,
I love your safety, and it is dangerous
To drink while you are hot, pray cool and tarry:
In the mean while I will begin to you;
How tart and pleasing this is to the Palate,
A sweeter Pheasant Christendom affords not.

I thank thee Eunuch prithee give it me.


You Will let me taste it for you, will you not?
Are you so sharply set? fie, this sauce is naught.

Prithee make have, hunger digest's no tasters.


Come sir, I must feed you, oh, oh, not so fast,
Be not so hasty; here, still you are too hasty;
Gentle sir it will digest the better.

More, more, oh it is excellent.


Madam, here is for you now.


May heaven reward thee for it, oh it is rare.


How do you like your banquet great Landrey?


Beyond compare.


And you your drink?


The Gods taste not the like.


Ha, ha, ha, you have both eat and drunk abominable poison.


Ha!


How!


It Is true, I tell your Oracle;
There Is not an hours life between ye both;
The poyson's sure, I did prepare it for ye,
And have my self taken an Antidote:
What say'now to the other bout with Landrey,
I can procure a second meeting for you,
Indeed I can; think you not whoredom sweet
Now you are a dying? is not you soul at ease,
The murder of your Husband but a toy,
A flea-biting? alack you feel it not.

Inhumane slave, treacherous Rascal.


Good words, Lady whore, good words: what are you loose?

Miraculous famine, has your empty guts
Persuaded you to valor? will it scratch or bite?
I Am sure't has no weapon, Monsiure disarm it.
Lan. He did so Rascal, yet your curious search
Never pri'd into this sheath; do you see this:
With mine own hands it had let forth mine own life,
Had the proud Monsiure trusted us to any,
Thy self excepted, whom I now perceive
The only Author of our misery.
You Are very nimble Hell-hound.

O Lord sir, you know the cause,
I Am lighter by a stone or two than you,
Yet I am weight enough to keep you down;
Stir and thou dy'st -- now sir, what say you to me?
How did you like your old Queen? was she gamesome?
Did she apply her self like an apt whore
Unto your loose embraces?

Dog, let me rest.


Good my Lord pardon me,
Under your Graces favor be it spoken,
You are our cushion, and i will sit on you.
I am not very heavy, and I sir?
I do not altogether weigh a man.

Villainous Traitor,
O let him rise, and wreck thy spite on me.

You cog now, you would rather I should kill.


O spare him, spare him; Eunuch save my servant,
And i will forgive thee all thy sins against me;
There Is not an injury thou do to him,
But wounds me to the soul.

Pray then look here,
How easily this Skean is sheathed in him;
An Engine of his own preparing Lady,
And pittie't were so brave a Gentleman,
Such a neat hopeful whore-master as he,
Should die by any weapon but his own.
So perish all that love Adultery.
There, sit you there again: once more to you,
Who if your poison do not work too fast,
Shall see more sights like these before you die;
But lest you should prevent us with your tongue,
I will be bold to gag your Ladyship;
I Will leave a peeping hole through which you shall
See sights, shall kill thee faster than thy poison;
I am prepared now for Aphelia's death.
All things are ready, and behold the King.
Now for my part.

I am too pitiful, a watrie flux,
Which soft and tender hearted men call tears,
Stand on mine eyes, and does express a nature
Too like my Bearer; it is now with me
Full tide in sorrow, my Cynthia governs strongly.

How fares the great Clotair?


What do the wise,

Castrato, call the moisture which presumes
To meditate betwixt my wrath and me?

Expressions of a weak and silly nature,
Passion of fools and women: are you a man
And bear so tame a soul, such a smock spirit?
The Distaff owns more spleen, more noble anger;
Pray let her live until the Pages write,
An hopping balladry verse rhyme upon you,
Great Clotair had a wife and she was fair,
Yea fairer than the flowerie meads in May;
Oh she was fair, yet foul; most ridling sense,
Oh it is horrid; then to conclude
In what a high streign you did take revenge,
How like your house and honor, hark, how she dies,
Strangled in tears fallen from the Cuckolds eyes;
You are her husband sir, and now must own
Her doubtful issue, and her lawless lust;
Although a Bull should leap her, you must father,
And have a drove of forked Animals,
Shall have their horns born with them to the sound,
'Twill save their prodigal wives the reacky labor.

Marry a Whore? father a bastard issue?


I tell you truth, there is no avoiding it.


Come bring her forth.


Use not such violence good Gentlemen,
I Will walk a lamb to slaughter, not repine
At any torments you shall put me too,
Only be modest: commend me to my Lord,
I doubt I never shall behold him more;
For by the calculation of your looks
I have not long to live.

True Aphelia, confess and turn thy fate; give me to know
With what foul Monster thou have wronged thy soul,
Seam-rent that holy weed, Virginity;
And case me of a load that bears more weight
Than what my youthful sins have heaped upon me.

If ever my Lord --


No more of that, it tends to madness;
I Will force it from thee; bring forth the tortures there;
I Will try if in these fiery instruments
There lie a tongue, which better can persuade
Confession from thee; these red hot applied
Unto thy breast adulterate, shall extract
All future hope to suckle lawless issue;
The poisonous springs which from these hills arise,
Shall have their fountain head damned up by these.

I Have heard you swear, that you were poor in words,
And knew not to express the happiness
Which you conceived was habitable here.
How much my Lord is altered from himself

It Is thou art altered; true Aphelia,
That whilst thy purer thoughts did awe thy will,
I loved like an Idolater: I was possessed
That these two twins, these Globes of flesh, contained
All that was happy both in earth and heaven;
In this I could descrie the Milkey way,
The maiden Zone that girds the waste of heaven;
In this the seat of Paradise, and how
The wanton Rivelets played about the Isle
Which puzzel yet Geographie: all this I could,
I could in thee my sometime chaste Aphelia
Find and rejoice in; but thou art now
An undrest wilderness wherein I walk,
Losing my self amongst multitude of beasts;
O savage actions! Come dispatch.

Sir --?


I'I hear no more.


Heaven will then;
And though it bear an ear far distant hence,
Both hear and pity me. O my loved Lord,
Should but a dream work on my fancy,
That you were thus to suffer as I am,
It would conspire to kill me with more speed
Than these your threatening Ministers; alas,
I Will force a gentler nature in the steel,
And with my rainy eyes weep out their heat;
Which as it dies should hiss it self to scorn,
For offering to contain but fire to hurt you;
And will you then a bold spectator stand,
Smiling at what I suffer? shed but one tear,
Or counterfeit a sorrow for my sake,
A little seeming woe, and I shall die
Sick of your kindness, not your cruelty.

O my soft temper, her sweet harmonic
Will melt me into fool; to hear these words,
The Mother is to busy in mine eyes;
What shall I do?

Make a new Hell,
And if thou can, create more Devils, do,
And they will find employment all on her;
For since the general Creation,
Time never did produce a fowler sinner,
Or one more beggered hell in punishing.

Thou have awaked me; Whore will you confess?
Do not enforce your death through wilfulness;
Speak stubborn silence, or i will break thy heart.

My Lord and Husband, oh my Lord and husband,
Regard my misery and pity me.

You Are cruel to thy self, I wrong thee not;
It is not I that tear this precious Fleece,
This glorious excrement, in validity,
Another Cholcos better seeming Jason.
I pull not off these curious sporting Tresses,
Fit braids to Captive Kings had thou been honest.
I wound thee not, confess, and live as free
As mountain air, I will not injure thee.

My gracious Prince, I dare not call you husband,
Your actions do forbid, which write me slave
And not your equal; if to be your wife
Has plucked this misery upon my head,
Or caused in you this frenzy, put me off,
I will endure it patiently; but if ever --

The old tune this, come, come, the Irons there.


Oh, oh, oh, cruel my Lord, unmanly;
I will not curse yet heaven, no nor blaspheme,
Although mine injuries would half persuade,
Gods are not, or are deaf to innocents.

Arm, arm, my Lord, the Castle's walled about
With living Clay, three times ten thousand men,
Approved Warrlers, souls of blood and fire,
That only known to do, and not to suffer,
Make head against you; believe me sir,
A braver Troop, and spirits more resolved,
Life never put in action: young Brissac
Now old enough to quit his Fathers death,
Together with the ruin of his Sister,
H'as vowed destruction to your name and ashes.

Let them come on, we will dare them do their worst;
This Castle will endure a fortnights siege,
Before the expiration of which time,
My Brother with his fellow Peers of France,
Shall whip these Rebels for their insolence.
Know thou ought else; why do thou shake thy head?

Fly, fly, my Lord.


Villain, it is no language for a Prince.


Then stand upon your guard; yet that is as bad,
The Castle's walled about with walking steel,
And you but tempt your death in your escape,
If you stay here, provoke it.
The Monsiur, like the God of war, bestrides
A bounding Courser, who is therefore proud
To be so backed, as knowing whom he bears:
So Centaur-like he is anckor'd to his seat,
As he had twind with the proud steed he rides on;
He grows unto his saddle all one piece,
And that unto his Horse; who thus unmoved,
Sits like a Persons on his Pegasus,
Stable and fleet. Who at head of all his Troops,
With words inflames 'em that did burn before,
But now appear much brighter; their glistering arms
Reflecting against the Sun, does lightning mock;
Unto which blaze, their Drums and Horses hoofs
Do not want much of Thunder: such is the show,
As if great Mars, angry with humane race,
Did lead the Gods to battle against the Earth.

How does your Grace? how fares your Majesty?


The Monsiur? did he not name the Monsiur?


I did my Lord.


Is he joined with them too?
Then Doomsday is at hand, I see my ruin.
Go to the Castle walls to summon them
To render an account of their intents.
Ask the proud Monsiur (though I know the cause)
Why his presumptious and ambitious feet,
Have on the bosom of his mother earth,
Made a broad road of treason; go, begone.
Castrato thou do love me, i am sure thou do;
I have such proofs of thy true hearted-love,
That I must put my life into thy hands.
Thou see how all things stand, my wife she is false,
Her brother seeks my life, the Monsiur's thoughts
(Backed with the ever factious souls of France)
Aim at the Gallick Crown and dignity,
Whilst I a catiff and neglected Prince
Must fall by traitors hands.

What mean you sir?


Look here is a Pistol in whose womb lies death,
A heavy leaden sleep.

Would you I should
Try the conclusion here? make her confess
By other instruments her horrid guilt,
In this there is too much mercy.

Hear me speak,
I Will trouble her no further; let her sin
Be punished from above, i will wait heavens leisure.
Here Eunuch take thou this, it was prepared
For the adulterate Landrey; here, receive it,
And if thou love me use it upon me:
Come shoot me through, I know I shall be slain,
(If not by thee, yet by the enemy)
And therefore to prevent the bitter scorn
Of the insulting foe (which is a death
So full of horror to the conquered,
No Tyranny is like it) use this handful,
The handsom'st weed that nature can produce
In the large Storehouse of her providence,
Can show no simple like it; for this cures
At once, the sickness of the mind and body.
Thou shall, I know thou will, I prithee take it;
It is not murder, tenderhearted fool
Which thou commits, rather a sacrifice,
For which heaven will reward thee.

I do not know the nature of your Gods,
Yet on your words i will try their kindness.

Nobly resoly'd, come shoot me quickly then.


I never was liker t'express my self
Than at this minute; do not betray me tears,
The Eunuchs nature must be harsh and cruel.

O spare him Eunuch, spare him, save my Lord,
And i will forgive thee all thy sins against me.

Peace foollsh woman, it is thou that kill'st thy Lord,
Were It not for thee he might live long and happy;
Pray let me kiss your hand, and take my leave
Of my best best Master.

Do It and be sudden then: ah what means this?


Marry sir this it means,
That if this fail, this shall perform the deed;
Think not but I will kill you, do not fear,
I am the excellent'st he alive at these same toys,
Look here my coufin'd fool I do not bungle.

Are these dead then?


As sure as you live, pray ask them else;

Unless this Ewes flesh too intense in heat
Be lingering yet behind; she is scarcely dead,
But in her dying ears i will howl this noise;
Look Queen, here is the top-branch of all thy Family,
Mark but how kindly for thy sake'i'l use him.

Then I perceive I have been much abused,
So has my chaster Queen; oh my cursed fate!

Oh, do you so, do you so.


Oh, oh, oh.


There broke a Strumpets heart; hear me King,
Thy Mother was a foul adulteress,
A cruel butcherer of innocents;
Witness thy brother, that thy Mother's false,
Witness thine own eyes that beheld the fall
And ruin of the Dumain! amily.
Thy Mother's deep in blood, for which she is damned:
You ravished fair Chrotilda; Clodimir
Your valiant Uncle, brother to this Queen,
Was for the foul fact slain; for which mistake,
Dumain, Lamot, Maria, Isabel,
And the abused Chrotilda, if by flight
She had not saved her life, had fallen with them.
I knowing this, and ever pitying
The wrongs that they endured,
Have found it time thus to revenge them.

What were their wrongs to thee?


I Will not Capitulate mine injuries,
I hear my time is short.

How fain would I preserve my life from death,

Since my Aphelia's chaste; to think her false,
(Not that I fear the foe) made me despair
Of future comfort. Eunuch, spare my life,
I will forgive thee, and reward thee too;
Remember who it is that sues to thee.

In that remembrance I have lost my self,
I cannot strike him, my relenting heart
Yerns on his Princely person: take your sword,
But on condition Clotair, thou shall swear
By thy descent, thy princely parentage,
By the wronged souls of all those innocents
To thy lust satisfied, by Aphelia's self,
Or any thing thy soul shall hold more dear,
Upon receipt, to guide the fatal point.
Directly to thy heart.

Why would thou so?


Pish, I Will teach thee to be speedy in the fact;
Remember how thy Royal Father fell;
Behold thy Mother murdered by this hand;
Into thy bosom cast thine inward eyes.
And view the sorrows I have heaped on thee:
Look on Aphelia, and let her wrongs
Prompt thy slow hand to this most timely flaughter;
I cannot brook delay, or do, or suffer.

A Heathen, and a Traitor die with thee.


A Christian Heathen Clotair if thou will,
Made so by thee; read that and break thy heart.

Force open the door, seiz on his Royal person:now Clotair
Thou are the Monsieur's prisoner; Tyrant say,
Where is Aphelia your Adulteres!

It makes no matter where.


O my dear Sister, O my dearest life.


See Noble Lords,
Here lies that Hel-hound Eunuch; villain up,
And tell us who has done these fatal deeds.

They Are never ali'd to thee that did these Acts,
Chrotilda and a woman.

Villain thou li'st, my sister's gone a weary pilgrimage,
And for this many years with grief I speak it,
Been traveled none knows where.

What am I?
What strange and uncouth thing?

A ravisher,
And better to instruct thee in thy self;
Had not Chrotilda been, incestuous.

Hold, hold your Royal hand; what will you do?


What else but follow her; shall Clotair live
A Captive to his Brother, slav'd to sin,
Inthral's in wedlock that is incestuous,
O ravisher and murderer of his friend,
There Is no way left to rid me but my sword,
Of all these ills at once, Oh wronged Chrotilda /

My sister


I Dumain, no Eunuch she;
No sunburned vagabond of Aethiope,
Though entertained for such by Fredigond.
I say here lies thy ravished sister slain
By me the ravisher.

Hold, hold, my heart.


Lend me thy hand Clotair, have I thy hand?


Thou most abused of womenkind, thou have.


I should have killed thee King, and had put on
A masculine spirit to perform the deed;
Alas how frail our resolutions are!
A woman's weakness conquered my revenge:
I Would spirit enough to quit my Fathers wrongs;
And they which should have seen me act that part,
Would not believe I should so soon prove haggard:
But there is something dwells upon thy brow
Which did perfwade me to humanity;
Thou injur'dst me, and yet I spared thy life;
Thou injurd'st me, yet I would fall by thee;
And like to my soft sex, I fall and perish.

Speak, for ever speak: Chrotilda, Chrotilda.


My Sister's in mine eyes, this brave revenge
Should have been mine, and not thy act Chrotilda;
Away salt rhume, Chrotilda laughs at thee,
Her spirit is more manly.

I must weep too,
Mine injuries and hers are so near kin,
That they must bear each other company
In tears of blood and death;
For my grieved heart too long with earth,
Would gladly seek a way to find out rest.

Art thou joined with her too against thy self?
Will my Aphelia leave me? pardon sweet,
My love is fatal, and too well thou know
The deadly proof in fair Chrotilda death;
Yet leave me not though I refrain thy bed,
And must abandon all those thoughts of love
Which married couples use; yet we may sit
And gaze upon each other, tell sad tales
Of ruined Princes, wronged Virginity;
And when our utterance is tired by speech,
We Will sit and sigh a sad parenthesis,
And then proceed again, then sigh again
A silent Chorus to our History;
Our tears shall keep our sorrows ever green,
Still springing, never ripe: shall we do thus
To lengthen out our grief?

For ever King,
The hand of heaven lies on me; for I feel
My in ward and external injuries
Wrestle with life, in which condition
My soul is woried by that Tyrant death.
I must forsake thee Clotair

Stay awhile, it is unkindly done to leave me thus:
O she is gone, for ever, ever gone;
And I stand prating here between them both,
The fatal cause of death unto them both.
Will thou not break proud heart, I prithee break,
Prove not a Rebel to thy Prince like these;
It Is well there is some loyalty in thee yet;
Thou art commanded by me --

Gracious my Liege.


Charles I have injured thee, and thee Dumain;
Can ye forgive me?

Good your Grace
Call back your spirits, think what is to be done.

I consider well, and the now King,
The quondam Mounsieur shall not deny me this;
Half of the honors of the deal Landrey
We do confer on thee, the other half
Be thine Dumain; Charles shall be Duke of France,
Thou of the Palace Major: this is our will.

Great King, you are not yet so near your end,
Forsend it heaven.

Look up my Gracious Lord.


My Royal Brother?


I begin to faint,
A darkness like to death hangs on mine eyes;
Lend me thine hand Brissac, and thine Dumain.
Good gentle souls when ye shall mention me,
And elder time shall rip these stories up,
Diffected and Anatomized by you;
Touch sparingly this story, do not read
Too harsh a comment on this loathed deed,
Left you enforce posterity to blast
My name and Memory with endless curses;
Call me an honouralbe murderer,
And finish there as I do.

O Noble Lord,
Whose fame was very essence to his souls.
That gone, the other fled, choosing to die,
Rather then live a King in infamy.

A heavy spectacle of grief and woe
Have beheld since our arivall here;
Take up the body of the King, and these
That for his love on either hand lie slain,
They shall lie buried in one Monument:
And take up these; this was Royal Queen
When virtue steered her thoughts; but we may see,
When we turn foes to good, to vice a friend,
We fall like these, and like these thus we end.


