HE that has served in the Office of a Footman so long as I have done, though
never so light at first, (ere the year go about) shall be a heavy man. Sure I
was born to run as long as I breath: but if the way had not been so dirty, I
would have showed my Master a fair pair of Heels; but if he send me again to
run such a way, I will run quite away. I have come to day further, than I hope
I shall go to morrow: for Mr. Boot will be sure to have his Liquor before he
goes out of Town. My Master has sent me before to provide his Inn, but I Will
meet with him anon for it; I Will go to the Sign of the Leg, there is my old
friend Slipper: The sign of the Leg is either in Shoemaker Row, or in Hosier
Lane


Shoemaker Row, or in Hosier Lane? I shall know by this it is a Leg in Print,
and see by good luck I have stumbled of the Leg; first in step: What, so hoe,
Chamberlain


Anon, anon, Sir


It is the trick of these Chamberlains never to do any thing at the first word:
What, Chamberlain, Come away


Anon, anon, Sir; What, my old Companion pump, with whom I dwelt, so long? Let
Slip. embrace thee


I am glad old Slip. to see thy heels at liberty, but I Will tell thee what, my
Master Boot is at the next Town by this time


He shall be welcome; in faith he is a good Guest, he will come off roundly, and
therefore Slip. will be always ready for him


Come, let us see a Chamber presently.


I, presently; I know Mr. Boot is a neat fellow, and therefore he shall have a
very neat Chamber.


Make have again: I never felt my self so weary in all my life; I perceive now
poor Pump, thou art past the best, such another Journey as this will quite wear
thee out.


I know Pump thou art dry, come follow me into the Room, and there Pump I Will
give thee a slash


Do thy worst: Pump will never refuse good Liquor.


I think our Trades are both alike one the other, for Chamberlains and Footmen
get their living by running up and down


Nay, soft, the Footman has the better, for he may go before his Master.


Why, are not Chamberlains men of great calling? every one that has to do with
them, shall find them men of good reckoning


Faith Slip. there you go over me, and besides this, Footmen are very
provident, for be their Master never so wise, they must rise betimes if they
will over reach them


Faith Chamberlains are as cunning, for they have always a trick to deceive
their Masters, for if they be above, they will under-mine them, if below, they
will be sure to come over them


Well, Slipper, P. will not fall out with thee; we will drown our quarrels in
this Glass of drink


What? Mother Geers Round? one to another?


Come Spur, where art thou?


Hard at your heels, Sir.


Faith but for thee I should not have got to my Journeys end to night.


Faith Master we were fain to prick on hard: Spur did his best to set you
forward


Well-said Spur, I see that thou art all mettle.


Yet as soon as you come to your Journeys end, you cast me off.


But yet thou have the wit to stick close to me.


I do it for your sake, for you will never ride without me.


This is one thing, I know thee trusty, for many times thou have fought up to
the ears in blood for mysake


Nay, I would have you know my Service on foot too; for unless. I attend you,
you can walk in no fashion


But Spur, One thing I like not in thee, thou spoilest all my Horses, thou art
a very sore Rider


Why I am as good as Provender to your Horses, I will stick close to his Ribs.


Let it be thy part to see my Horses well curried, while I go call for my
Lodging: What, Chamberlain?


O here is Mr. Boot, I know by his creeking Slipper: Now show a slippery trick,
and slip away the Jugg. Pump stoops as low as your feet to welcome you to the
sign of the Leg


Methinks you are somewhat fine, I doubt some body has trimmed you since you
came in


I must needs say your poor Vassal has been vesselling; I have been with
Slipper and have set foot to foot and drunk hard


These be your old tricks: as long as there is any strong Beer to be had, Pump
will drink no water. But what have you provided for my Supper


Faith I have clean forgotten, I spoke for something, but I know not what; Call
up the Chamberlain, he knows more of my mind


Just such a trick you served me at Flushing when you were drunk.


Master, if you will believe me, I was as sober as I am now.


It Is well you can be drunk and stand in it too. What, Chamberlain?

Anon, Anon, Sir, What Is your Worships pleasure.


What did my man bespeak for Supper.


Three Juggs of Beer, and half a dram of Tobacco.


St. St.


O, I cry you mercy, I mistook the Room.


Do you not know what is provided for my Supper.


Not very well, but whatsoever it is, it shall be ready for your Worship: But
you shall be sure of a mess of Sallet Oil, and a dish of fresh Butter


Very good.


Nay, it shall be very good.


In good time.


Nay, you shall have it in very good time.


Nay, good Sir, stand not so much upon your Pantoples, but answer me directly
to one question; Do you not know one Mr. Shoe


Yes, Sir, there be two of that name, the one a High-German, the other a
Low-Countryman


I mean him that dwells in the Town.


I know him well, he is a man of very good fashion, and a continual
Housekeeper


And I hear very good report of him, that Mr. Shoe is a very upright man.


And yet for all that he may go awry sometimes; and this is his fault, he loves
to be greased often: But as I take it, here comes the Gentleman.


String, Come tie my Shoe.


What little go by the ground is that?


A Hang-by of Mr. Shoe; they call him Shooe-tye, a fellow that I am not
beholding to: But Pump, farewell a while.


Slipper farewell. Pump will have a fling at you anon. Shoe, Sirrah, How does
my Cousin Stocking


Faith, Sir, He was lately a dying, but now they say, he is on the mending hand.


Why, what is the matter?


They say he took a grief, because he stretched himself for. Mr. Leg, and so
brake


Well, if that be all, we will have the matter taken up: But for my Neighbor
Foot, what says he


Marry Foot says, he scorneth to be kept in by your Vows, as he is a part of
the Body Politic, and a Member of the Commonwealth; he will do his best to
tread you under foot


Alas, poor wretch, I took him in, when he might have stood and cooled his
Toes: But let him go whither he will, he shall never come into my latch again.
But is not yonder Mr. Boot


Mr. Shoe.


Your poor friend: Shoe would do Mr. Boot any service, One that will spend life
and limb to do you service: But methinks Mr. Boot you look somewhat old, for you
are full of wrinkles


Age and Travel will alter a man.


I hope you have been no great Traveller.


as great as any goes upon earth; for travel, Coriate could never come near me.


I think so, for Coriate went always on foot, You travel on Horseback. But
what think you of Coriate's Book of his Travels


I suppose he took great pains, and traveled hard for it; but his Crudites I
could never digest them; he cannot so much as pass by a Walnut Tree, but he
must have a fling at it: He can as well be hanged as pass by a Gibbet, and
every pair of Gallows he removes, as if they were Hercules's Pillars: but
because he is my fellow-traveller, I Will let him pass


But what say you to Mr. Mandevill? they say he went to the Worlds end, and
then I am sure none of you can go beyond him


I think so for lying, for he will go to a hair; He loses his hair in some hot
skirmish, and then says, he was burnt in going too near the Sun


Faith it was a bold excuse, and yet it was well enough: Put off, let us leave
these Land-travellers for a company of dry fellows: Now for the Watermen, let
us have an Oar in their Bote; What say you to Drake and Candish


Faith Candish made a good Voyage at the first, but was clean over the ears ere
he was aware the second time, he had so engaged himself, and so in the end
proved a Castaway


It is an excellent thing for a Mariner to keep himself within Compass; but
how sped Drake


Drake was a wild fellow, but before he had done, he so trounced the
Spaniards, that he made them quake, quake


And these Seamen methinks should stand best to their Tackling. But what is the
reason these Puritans cannot abide them


I think it is because they hate the Sea of Rome.


Or it is because they use the Cardinals Winds.


Or perhaps because they hate the invention of Cards.


Or because they have a Pilot in their Company.


I am partly of their mind; I have gone as far as any of them, but by my good
will, Boot will never take water. But by this time, Mr. Shoe I think your
heels do ache with standing, therefore sit down here, and I will unfold unto you
the whole discourse of my Travels in Print


Now while my Master and Mr. Boot are set at talk, I Will enter Complement with
this finical Gentleman; Sir, your friend Shoestring had no sooner got to see
you, but he must needs salute you in the way of kindness


Sir, in reciprocal congratulation, I kiss the very shadow of your Shooestring.


I pray, Sir, let me crave your name.


Do then.


Then, Sir, with your good leave and liking, what is your name.


My name is Water Pump, Sir,


Very well: Water, I thought your name was Water, you look so thin on it; surely
he that made your Trunks was a very good Tailor, he went so roundly to work


Why, Sirrah, I hope, Jack-sawce, I may wear these Nocks in despite of your
Nose


Surely you were a fortunate young man, you were lapt in your Mothers Smock,
for she has given you one of her old Blankets


You harp too much upon one String, Shootye, though your Tongue be never so
busy about my Nocks; I do not think you can pull down my Breeches


Shite on your Breeches, I care not a fart for them.


Well I perceive shortly, if I should stay never so long, you will never leave
wagging: Well, I Will leave you to my fellow Spur.


Good Ostler, if ever you mean to curry favor with me, look well to my Horses,
and let them be well littered, or else I Will care not a straw for you; do not
play the fresh Serving-man with me: pour down their Provender before them, and
let them try it out by the Teeth


Mr. Bo. is a strange man, he has a pair of Serving-men look as if they were
not fellows; one in his Nocks, and another in his Cloakbag: Pray, Sir, before
-- give me leave to spur you one question


If you will give me leave to kick you an answer.


Pray, Sir, what Countryman are you?


Northamptonshire man, and I was born at Rowel.


I had thought you had been a German; you are something a kin to Kickerman.


I perceive you are a notable Slip-string: but, sirrah, is thy Master here?


What if he be, Spur has nothing to do with him.


O, He comes in good time, for all my Horses want shoes.


do not disparage my Master, for I will not change with you without Boot.


Nor I with you, for all the shoes in your Shop.


Go to, hold your peace, if Boot be so lusty, we will have him strapt.


Boy, hold your prating, if Shoe fly out, I Will clowt him my self: What is your
Master but a Zitizen, and then he is but a Prentice at the most; And thy Master
(says String) is but a Traveller, and then he is a Journeyman


Shooe-tye hold your peace, or I Will hang you up for the sign of the Rose.


I can tell you the Rose is the best flower in my Masters Garden. But I wonder
Spur why you are so sharp; for all your great Sword, if I once buckle with you,
I Will leather your Hide


I hope my Sword troubles not you; if you be so busy Shooe-tye, take heed,
this is the great Sword that cut the Gordian knots


I could never tell why such clownish Serving-men are tied to such great
Swords, unless it be when they fart they might touch cold iron


Sirrah, I Will tell you, wit^ the point I Will prick a hole in your coat, and with
the Hilt I Will panel you about the pate


But stay, Sirrah, here comes your Master to take you off.


Mr. Shoe, you and I come both from one house, for as Antiquaries say, we are
lineally descended from Th^ng-castle


Nay, there Mr. Boot I think you are wide, for I heard some say, that our
Ancestors were born at Bulver-hide, but it is no great matter, it is certain we
came both from one stock


But I forgot to tell you one thing as I passed by this Town side, I had much
ado to 'scape this Tree: so coming along Francefa deep, I fell up to the top in
a dirty hole, and was so bemired, that I was fain to get an Ostler to make me
clean


Bee-lady that was a foul mischance.


Nay, I can tell you Boot has many of those Voyages, for he has gone through
thick and thin


Well, now I see plainly before my face that you are a great Traveller, you
excel Ulysses for all he was so long abroad, that when he came home his wife
knew him not, no more then his Dog: and Aeneas though he was a true Trojan, yet
may come far behind you


As for Ulysses, Cirees made a very Hog-rubber of him; and for Aeneas, any Ape
may do as much as he did


Good, Sir, may I entreat but one thing, that you would bestow this Map on me.


Mr. Shoe, I would be loath to stick with you for any thing, but you must
pardon me, I should not part with this Map for a world: but I think I have held
you too long, therefore to wind up all in a word, after this rare discourse, I
will invite you to part of a bad Supper


No, faith I mean to go another way.


Nay, Mr. Sh. I will not be put off so.


Nay, then good Mr. Boot lead you the way, I Will follow at an inch.


I hope you are somewhat cooler, you are not a hot Spur still.


No, faith, my little wagg, 'twas but a flourish: but why went my fellow Pump
away


It seems he had been drinking somewhat stiffly, and your Pump could not hold
his water.


What? how now Slipper, never without a Jugg of Beer in thy hand?


I, here you may see as in a glass the life that we Chamberlains lead.


Come, it is in a good hand, pray begin to sombody.


Sirrah, you may be sure I Will not begin to you, for I was never beholding to
Shooe-tye


And that is that has made you such a loose fellow.


Go-to String, you are a very wag-halter; here is to thee Spur, thou art all
steel to the back


Come, I Will never refuse Chamberlain; but I am half out of love with those
Ostlers, one of them yester-night gave me such a rub


What, a whole one?


What else but a whole one:


was always a dry Whoreson.


And I have always marked this in him, when Slipper was sober he was in his
plain fashion, but when he is typsie he is always in his turn-overs


Well Shooe-tye if you use these tricks, you may chance come to be knit up: But
I pray you, Sir, take off your liquor


Here Shooe-tye (he drinks) Troth I wonder at these Tapsters how they bear so
much drink, such another glass as this would make Spur's head turn round


I thought where I should find you, you must stand nesting here, while poor
Pump must dance attendance; come away quickly, or my Master swears he will have
you all set in the Shoomakers stocks


Faith, for my Master Shoe, I have him in a string.


For Mr. Boot I have served him on and off a good while.


Faith, Pump thou stands as though thou had neither life nor soul: will you
drink


No, by no means, I had as liffe pour it into my shoes.


I hope Pump you may be drawn by little and little.


Nay, if you be thereabout, I must take me to my heels.


Though I care not for my Master, yet I love my Supper, therefore let us in, and
after Supper we? I have a Catch in the Chimney-corner


Content.


Pray you, Sir, while you sing the Song let me bear the burden: I, take the
Cloak-bag


Thank you heartily, it is for mine own case: I hope you have never (...) Cloak
for your Knavery, for if you have, you have given me the bag very sweetly.


IF Bungler-like my Work be brought to end,
I Will be a Cobbler, who ye know may mend.
Next time I hope my Work shall be more meet,
Now I have learnt the length of all your feet:
But if in Workmanship I do excel,
I know your bounty, ye will pay me well.
Or else I Will trust, and book't at your Commands,
So that ye will subscribe it with your Hands.

