Writ and Spoke by Mr. Horden.

AS idle Beggars, when they would Pity move,
With borrowed Bastard at their Backs do rove,
TO incite good Christians Charity and Love,
So I, that I might have a fair Pretense
To feed (what some Fools call Extravagance)
Have begged this spurious Play from Hands unknown.
I have engaged, the honest Rakes of the Town,
That they will all espouse it as their own.
But e*re it is tried, let me its Cudgels choose:
I first except all Writers for the other House,
All good Authors, and -- no, I Will trust the Beaux:
For it is so free from Wit they have no Pretension
To damn one Line for want of Apprehension.
Besides, each Beau's a Friend; for if it miss,
He Will not disturb his solemn Face to hiss.
And good or bad, the Ladies sure will spare
The generous Poet, for the laboring Player.
And now your Smiles a double Kindness hold,
The Poet shares the Praises, I the Gold.
Guineas, they say, in low condition be,
Pray Heaven they are low enough to fall to me.
Yet you who have kept 'em by you, don't repent ye,
My Guinea Box takes all at Nine and twenty.

INdeed, my Lord, you are too rugged to her.


Pray, Sir, hold your peace.


So sweet a Child as she is, such a Mirror of Beauty.


A Mirror of Folly, is she not?


How can you be angry with her? How can any Wind blow rough upon a Blossom so
fair and tender


Look ye, Cousin, all this is but prating; I Will make her see with my Eyes, hear
with my Ears, talk with my Tongue, and taste with my Palate: I begot her, bred
her, and I will make her


-- A Whore, if you marry her against her Inclination.


Why, is it not a Man I wish her too? a young Man? a handsome Man* a rich Man?


-- And a wise Man?


No, no; as for Wisdom, we'll let that alone: Besides, none but Fools and
Madmen marry now adays, unless here and there a younger Brother, or a broken
Gamester, that ties up with some old rich Widow, to prop up his falling
Fortunes


But, Sir, she is tender yet.


Prithee hold thy Peace -- She can endure the H^m^er, and why not the Workman
that strikes deepest? She Is fourteen, and if she is not ready now for rutting.
--


But will you allow no liberty for choosing?


Why, I believe the Devil's in the Fellow. Do thou think, I that have lived a
Courtier to the age of sixty and upward, don't know better how to choose than a
little piss-tal'd Girl, that has not yet washed her Mother's Milk off of her
Chaps. But I know the reason of her Coyness; there is another in the Wind that
hovers ov^r her, a young smock-fac'd Rogue, not worth a Shilling; and yet she is
too young. Cousin, let me tell you, Inclina^ion is a great ripener of a young
female Flower. Israel. So, good morrow to you; nay, th^t's as you deserve too:
You know my Mind, therefore let me see you study to deserve it


I shall endeavor to obey you. But, noble Sir --


Hold your Peace, you little Ferret you, let me have none of your set Phrases.


Ud'slife don't be Tongue-tide, Cousin. Hark'ee, you piece of dried Mummy.


Nay, give him good Language, Cousin.


give him Ratsbane. Hark'ee, old Sixty odd, do you with that Whey Beard think
your self at years of discretion to dispose of a young brisk Maidenhead, a
shrivelled piece of Patchment, fit for no use but to have his Skin flea'doff,
to engross his cheating Mortgages upon


Tell me, thou eternal Thunderclap, how dare thou talk thus?


Tell me, old Ne^tor, first, how dare thou do thus?


Hussy, get out of my House.


I will not; I Will stay to plague you: And if you don't take some milder Course
with your Daughter, I Will watch my opportunity, steal her out, and set fire to
your House; do you hear, I shall so singe your Muzzle, Grandsire Gray beard


By this Light, I Will have her hanged.


Do, and hang your Daughter too; it is ten times better than marrying her to a
piece of Logwood.


Well, Impudence, he has saved your Bones for this time. Noble Castilio, good
morrow to you


Good morrow my Lord: Good morrow Miss Wife, that must be.


Good morrow, noble Sir.


Thank you.


How proud am I to see our homely Roof blessed with the Rays of such
resplendent Beauty. Fortune is sure distributing her Favors, and sends the
greatest to adorn your Servant


Hark'ee, Father that must be, I really believe this young Gentlewoman's mad:
The last time I was here, Fool, Booby, Loggerhead, Puppy, and such like Nam^s,
she thought too good for me; and now she is all upon the Complement. What the
Devil's the meaning of all this


Sir, you must forgive; she is a little crazed by Fits. Hussy be gone, or I Will
cane you in


Ah! cruel Sir, will you then drive me from the sight of those dear Eyes, that
lovely Face: Open that precious Mouth, from whence there falls Wit faster than
the Rheum from Nunkles Eyes


Why, Father-in Law, been't you ashamed to stand still, and hear your Flesh and
Blood, that is to be, abused thus


Hark'ee, you Whore in imagination, you well-wisher to the Trade of Cuckoldom,
thou unlawful Destroyer of Maidenheads, get thee gone presently, or I Will use
the so scurvily, that the Punishment of a duck'd Scold, a pillory'd Cheat, or a
carted Bawd, shall be honorable Punishment to what I Will make thee go through


Well, well, Uncle, I will be gone; but one Word of Advice before I go. Come
hither Cousin, be ruled by me, marry the Man your Father bids you; cuckold him
with every Footboy in the Lobby; spend his Estate on Bullies; deal with all
sorts of Men, all Languages; make thy self a Mother of Nations

Use Husband, Father, both like stubborn Knaves;
Obtain thy Freedom, and make them the Slaves.

Why, what the Devil has possessed the Woman?


I am struck with astonishment! but it is no matter, I Will soon get rid of her.
-- Come, Nephew, we'll walk in, and leave the Lovers together. Worthy Castilio,
I wish you good Success with my Daughter; she is something too young, and that
makes her foolish, but you must bear with that. I Will to Court, and hear what
News is stirring, and whether these Medians design to block us up till we
become Food for one another.


Well, Miss, you see how Matters are like to go; your Father designs me for
your Mouse-trap of Matrimony. Why do not talk to me, Wench, ha? What, not a
Word? -- Well, it is no great matter, for if I marry, it is not for the sake of
the Tongue. A good Estate, with the Tail tagg'd to it, will do my Business well
enough. Well, but, Miss, when shall we marry


When you please, Sir.


Why that is well said; I love a Woman that speaks little, and to the purpose.
Look'ee, Miss, you are a Lord's Daughter, and I am a Lord's Son, you don't love
me, nor I don't much care for you; but what then, there are young Men and Women
enough about the Court, and if we cannot among 'em all find some to please us,
it is pity but we were condemned to feed on one Dish all our Life time


Will Not you be pleased to follow my Father, Sir?


Why, ay, an you will, Sweetheart: I think there is no great occasion for
talking more, since we are both agreed of the matter.


How now, Grease and Pov^^le, I thought you had been gone by this time.


No, Plaster of Paris, I Am here still.


Dear Amadine!


My dear Lycastes, welcome.


Hey day! What Is here to do? Heark'ee, Friend, will you be pleased to keep your
distance; this Philley is already provided of a Rider, I can assure you

Qui dil vox?


What the Devil does he say now? Do You see Sir, in my own Country Language, I
tell you once again, I Am to have the backing of this Colt; therefore pray go
about your business


Are not you, Sir, Son to the Lord Castilio?


Yes, Sir, I am his only Son, his firstborn Child, the Prop of his Family, the
Staff of his Age, and the Heir to his Estate


Why then, Sir, I have News to tell you: I came just now from Court, where I
left your Father in an Apoplectick Fit, given over by his Physicians


How! how! my Father given over! Nay then, Miss, you^ humble Servant: Your
Affections and mine are not so fast tied, bu^ an Estate will quickly unloose
'em


I thought there was no way but this to get rid of him. Well my dear Amadine,
how stands your Father affected


He continues his cruel Resolutions still, to marry to tha^ Coxcomb.


And we continue our Resolutions, to make Coxcombs of them both before it comes
to that


Nay, for my part, I Will sooner live in a Hovel upon Wate^ and wild Sallads,
than be forced to marry against my Inclinations


My dear, my Fortunes are not so despicable to throw you on so mean a Remedy.
Do you but find a means to deciev^ your watchful Guardians, and I Will find means
to secure us from wild Sallads and a Hovel, I Will warrant thee


Madam, your Father is returned.


Ud'slife, slip you out at the Garden Door.


Farewell, my Jewel, keep constant to thy Resolutions, and we may both be happy.


Never doubt me.


No, no; let us alone: If we two young Girls cannot cozen one old Fellow, it is
pity but we were nailed against a Wall with our Heels upward


Still, Memnon, we withstand their battering Rams,
Still our strong Walls defy the Median Fury,
Against all Dangers still my Breast stands firm.

There Is Winter, Sir, in all your Parthians Veins,
Nor will the Soldiers be induced to Flight,
But basely from your Royal Standard shrink.

Slaves! do they see the threatening Flood overwhelm
Their Country, and like senceless Brutes, gaze at
The near approaching Deluge till they are lost?

Your Citizens, whose Coward Souls never knew
What Valor was, without the Plumes of Fortune,
Seeing you drove within this last result,
Into the narrow Bounds of one poor City;
Disturb their Rest with Dreams of rifled Hoards:
Their own, their Wives, their Sons and Daughters Fates,
And like infected Caitiffs spread their Fears
By their contagious Murmurs through the Streets.

Already they have prized your Head, and plot
Who shall be first to seize the sacred Prey.
They Have told the Stores, the Lordships they shall gain;
And when the Great, the Royal Oak is struck,
There Is none but hopes a Branch, beneath whose Shade
Their Revels are designed; and with one Voice,
They cry, an Artaban, an Artaban,
Must these Rewards, and their Deliverance bring.

Is Artaban the Minion of their Hearts?
Was not that Traitor, Memnon, justly banished?
He by my Influence first to being rose,
And nurtured by my warmest Rays grew Great;
Yet all my best Rewards he did contemn,
And scorned a meaner Bounty than t'espouse
My only Daughter, and possess my Throne:
Fortune and Fate oppress me as they please,
I never can forgive such Insolence.

Sir, Sir, you may yet command what Terms you please,
The great Tigranes only fights for Love;
And would you grant Elinda to his Arms,
He Would quickly lay his conquering Weapons down,
And bend to pay his Homage at your Feet,
A double Vassal, Son and Subject both.

If Kings deserve, why may not he deserve her?
Fame loudly speaks the Largeness of his Soul,
How brave in Fields, in Courts how amorous!
Pleasant and Martial, Great, and yet not Proud;
As free from Passion as th'unkindled Fire:
Yet urged, can loose his Reins, and let the Beast
Course it awhile to show he is a Man.

Must it be said 'twas Arms made Phraates grant
Offers; in Peace, he almost scorned to hear,
Oh, this reclaims me, this disturbs that Rest,
Which liberal Nature by her Charter gives.
To every Peasant on his Bed of Straw.

Sir, Success proclaims Men Great.
Tigranes till he conquered was not so;
Now who is greater than Tygranes is?
What distant Nations do not dread his Strength?
Even Rome it self, the Empress of the World,
Glad of a Peace, embraced him as her Friend.
His Faults to you are meritorious grown,
And in my Judgment purchase this Alliance.

There Is no resisting of an adverse Fate,
When wayward Gods contend struggling against them,
^ntangles more, and weaves us in the Toil.
What mean these Shouts?

Hail, Gracious Prince, we are at length relieved.

Whence? or by whom? it is impossible!

The Shades of Night their lowest Ebb had made,
And flowing Light began to swell the Day,
When first our Scouts th'incamped Host descried.
All in Disorder, rowz'd from Sleep, -- to Arms;
To Arms the general Cry: The distant Parts
Of the wide Wings in Terrors waked, in haste
They rose, and trembled 'ere they knew for what,
Undrest, half-arm'd, around their Troops they gazed,
Saw dismal Fear, Distraction in each Eye;
Some Wonder-struck, like Statues stood, as if
Gorgonian Charms had petrified their Feet:
Others for Flight prepared, and all amazed,
Whilst still the unintelligible Noise increased.

From whence the Cause?

That, Sir, deserves your Ear.
Five hundred Horse led by a valiant Chief,
To their main Body did their Out-Guards press,
Surpised with Thought a greater Strength was near,
The nighest parts, did crowd, the next, in Hopes
By Numbers to withstand the Storm, yet this
Did but facilitate his Victory;
For still he forward drove, and still they fled,
Till in the Field the scattered Deaths were strewn
Thick as Autumnal Leaves before the Wind,
Until at last, that mighty Host, which but
Some Hours before our Terror was, in Flight,
Left us the Field, glad any ways to save
Their Lives, from the rapacious Victor's Sword,
Who now approaches to your joyful Gates.

Let Us haste to meet him;
And you, my Lords, witness to what I vow,
If our Deliverer be a Man, on whom
My Daughter can her kind Affection* place,
To morrow's Sun this Nuptial Rites shall see,
And mix our Joys in that Solemnity.

GOne! Why it is impossible, she could not creep out at the Keyhole, sure; Is
she a thing invisible; Gone, and not know it


You amaze your Servants.


Some Rogue or other has watched her Hour of Itching, and clawed her, clawed
her, do you mind me? Some Rascal, I Will warrant that I foster up


They are all her^, Sir.


Let 'em be where they will, they are all Rascals, Sir; and by this Hand, I Will
hang 'em all


Deal calmly; you will not give 'em time to answer.


I Will choke 'em, famish 'em; what say you, Wag-tail? you knew her Mind, you
were of Council with her; Let me know where she is


Ask with Discretion


Discretion! Hang Discretion: Pox you, confound you, damn you all. Hussy, let
me know where she is


Would you know of me, Sir?


Of you, Sir! Ay of you, Sir: Why, what are you, Sir?


Your Niece, an't like your Worship.


A Bawd, an't like your Worship; a Lady fairy, to oil the Doors a Nights, that
they may open without squeeking


It Is very well, Sir.


You lie, it is damnable ill, Sir: Hearky', will you confess yet?


If I were guilty, I Would be hanged first: Is this an Age to confess in?


Tell me the Truth, Ariene, and as I live I Will give thee a new Petticoat.


If you would give me ten, I would not tell you. A Petticoat! I Would have you know,
Sir, Truths are now adays at a higher Price, than I perceive you are aware of


Come, Cousin, deal modestly.


Why, I don't pluck my Clothes.


What say you, Sirrah, you, and you, are you all dumb?


I saw her last Night, an't shall like your Worship.


Did you so, an't shall like your Worship? Where lay she? who lay with her?


In truth, not I, Sir; I lay with my Fellow Frederick, in the Flea-Chamber.


I left her by her self in her own Closet; and there I thought she had slept.


Were all the Doors locked?


All mine.


And mine; she could not get out that way, unless she leaped the Wall; and I am
sure that is higher than any Woman's Courage dares venture at


Come, come, I say once more, Hussy, you must know.


Why then, Sir, I Will tell you what I know.


I, do, that is my Ari.


In the the first place, I believe she is gone, because you cannot find her. In
the second, I believe she is weary of your Tyranny, and therefore gone; and in
the third place, I believe she is in Love, where you have no good Liking; and in
the fourth place, If I were she, I Would see you hanged before I Would come again


Was there ever so much Impudence in Woman! Get you out my Doors.


Ay, with all my Heart; if your House was Gold, and she not in it, I should
count it nothing but a Cage to whistle in


If she be above ground I will have her.


I Would live in a Coal-pit then, if I were she.


Go search the House once more, all Corners where it is possible she may go out:
If I do find your Tricks --


I care not what you find, so you don't find her.


Why, how now, Father-in-law, what, I hope you have not got a sham Fit of the
Apoplexy too: Look, look, how he struts about, like a new-made Gentleman Usher.
My Lord, your Lordships most humble Servant; pray how does Miss Wife do


Oh, Son-in-law, she is quite undone.


Why, she is not married yet, is she?


Nay Heaven knows, she may be for ought I know; she is stolen out of the House,
and is gone, Heaven knows whither


Humph -- Now do I begin to smell out my Fathers Apoplectick Fit; I perceive I
was not shamm'd off so for nothing, ^^k ye, Father that should have been, if
your Daughter be gone, there is a Witch at your Elbow knows what Wind will fetch
her back again


Meaning me, Sweet Sir?


Yes, you, sweet Lady, pray when went the Gentleman away that was so kind to
bring me the News of my Fathers being given over by his Physicians. A Plague of
his Message, I Am sure he procur^d me a good drubbing


He went just after you, Forsooth.


How! A Man was there! a Man with her!


O, yes, Uncle, the prettiest, sweetest, good humoredst Gentleman I ever saw in
all my life


And how got he in? tell me.


I let him in, Forsooth.


And who was it? tell me, my dear Ariene, tell me, and I protest I Will give thee
new Clothes from top to bottom


I Will rather turn Adamite, and bring Fig Leaves into fashion again.


'Slife, I could find in my Heart to murder the Jade.


If I an't mistaken, my Lord, they call him, Ly, Ly, Ly, something.


Lycastes.


The same, by Jupiter.


Oh! Rogue, Dog, Oh! Villain, he has been hankering after herr above this half
year

How now, what news? is she in the House?


I Am sure she is not i't' Cellar; for look ye, Sir, if she had been (...) --


I Am sure thou have been there.


Yes truly, Sir; and I carried the matter very swimmingly; I searched every
piece of Wine, yes sure, Sir, every Terse that could but testify, and I drew
hard to bolt her out


Away with him, fling him into the Hay-loft. Go Rascals, careless Dogs, get me
my Sword, my Pistols, and arm your selves quickly; I Will to that Rascal's House,
I Am sure she is rousled there. Come, Castillio, will you accompany me


Ay, with all my Heart, Sir.


And do you hear, Hussy, get you to your Chamber, and let me find you at my
return, -- or --


Wipe your Beard, Uncle, the Effects of your Anger hangs upon it. Why what a
little ill-natured Titt was this to steal away without my Knowledge. Well, I Am
resolved I Will follow her, and be an eternal Plague to this old Devil of a
Father of hers: Sure Lycastes, will have Wit enough to conceal her; thither I Am
certain she is gone. We Will, I Will to my Chamber, and study how to make my escape
unknown. I Will teach his anger to dispute with Women


So Jove Imperial, from his Throne of Thunder,
Circled by all the lesser Train of Court,
Attending Gods speaks the big Voice of Fate.
Monarchs are Jove's on Earth, their Words are Laws,
And these are mine. In all our -- be
This Day for ever marked a Festival.
Let smoking Altars Loads of Incense waste,
Forests of perfumed Trees be rooted up;
Whence hallowed Herds in spicy Clouds, shall mount;
And with their victim'd Odours Feast the Gods.
Sound all our Trumpets, beat up all our Drums,
Music of War; Ring out the Bells of Peace;
Mankind be glad, whilst the rich Goblet crowned
With sparkling Gore, launched from the wounded Grape,
In Healths at every Table walk the round.
Nor be it here restrained, our Conduits fill,
Till from their Heads whole Rivers are poured down,
And their long Streams reach Neptune's large Bowl.
Behold my Lords, here our Deliverer comes.

The Gods, the Gods, great Sir, have used my Sword,
Weak in these Hands, but conquering in theirs,
To punish the proud Arms of that bold King,
Who dared aspire their Phraates to attempt.

By all the Gods, Artaban!

The same banished Artaban,
Led by the Genius that inspires his Soul,
Once more has taught his Passions to submit,
And, maugre all your former Threats, is come
To offer up his Service at your Feet.

Rise, Noble Man, and let me shroud my self
Within the generous Covert of thy Breast.
I Am all o'r shame to be outdone in Honor.
Can thou forget my fell Ingratitude?
(Oh cursed remembrance, how it racks my Soul!)
That drove thee, as a Criminal, from Court:
The Words, the Action, every part of that
Black Deed is in my Thoughts, and does advance
The brightness of thy Character the more.

Let that be blotted, buried, Sir, for ever,
In the dull Orb of dark Oblivion's Grave.

Oh, Let me hold thee in my Arms, thou Son
Of War, elder than Mars, What have I seen
Those Hands of thine perform. Not he who holds
Heaven's Shaffs of Vengeance could do more.
Had it not been for him, we had not been.
Our Kind, our Brave, our Valourous Restorer,
The Adamantine Locks that keeps, Fates Laws,
His Sword can break, and change their Sacred Rolls.
Is not this he, that in the Phrygian Fields,
When the eager Armies were drawn forth to fight,
Rod forth, and bid defiance to the Host;
Then, then the Battles joined, and then thy Sword,
All crimsoned with their Gore, flung Wounds and Death
Round all the scattered Troops, and gained the day.

My little share in that great Conquest, Sir,
If any, I derived it all from you.
'Twas your Example, Sir, that led me on:
I did but follow where you broke the way.

Thou art as modest, as you are truly valiant.
O, Artaban! What was it could make me hate thee?
'Twas madness, by the Gods, 'twas madness all,
To rob my self of my Right Hand, my Life,
My Battles, Sieges, Victories, and Fame;
I never could end thy Praises, it is a Theme
Years would want time to finish; but in part
Of what I owe thee for Reward, take this:
Alinda's thine, and Hymen bless your Loves.

The bounteous Gift's so vast, I blush to think
How far my humbler Merit it exceeds.
Oh! I Am all Ecstasy, through every Pore
The balmy Joy creeps to besiege my Heart,
And drowns the Expressions of my Gratitude.

Oh! I Am undone; it must not, shall not be.

Say, brightest Pattern of the Deities, speak,
And let me know what Dowries you expect.
Though to no Crowns my abject State was born,
No joyful Subjects at my Birth could sing
An Io Pean to their Infant King;
But brought into the World, have always lived
The Son of Fortune in the Broils of War:
Yet, thanks to Fate, the Kingdom's in my Sword.
Name in what fertile Soil you will have a Throne;
Be it beyond the Alps, or there where runs
Pactolus Streams oe'r Sands of shining Gold.
I Will lead my conquering Bands where the bold Foot
Of Warrior never trod, oe'r Hills of Snow,
Where Summer's Suns never made a cheerful Day.
Or changing Climates farther Eastward go;
Where Nature in her Fire, expiring lies,
And the parched Earth gapes for a blast of Air:
Nay search lost Paradise, and place ye there.

O, Artaban! thy Love's a Throne to me;
Enjoying that in some wild Rural Seat,
Which mimmick Art did never cultivate,
Close by the Mossy Head of some sweet Spring,
Whence gentle Streams their murmuring Cadence make
Through flowery Meads, Green Lanes and whispering Groves,
I Would rather live with thee than in gay Courts,
Those busy Markets of Revenge and Hate.

Oh, I have gained the prosperous point of Love;
Enjoyment scarce it is Measures can increase:
So well agreed, so well our Hearts are joined,
E're Marriage-bonds admit the nearer Ties.

Thy Virtues do deserve her best returns.
Nor can she love thee more than I admire.

It Is time that we retire, my Lord, the General,
By his late Action tired, may want Refreshment.

E're long we'll meet again; in the mean while,
United Joys through all the City smile.

O, my Eudora, faithful Confident,
To thee I dare disrobe my covered Soul,
And lay my naked Thoughts before thy view;
Which did I not believe, I Would never tell thee
That Artaban's the Object of my Flame.
Gods! I confess, that at the first sight I loved,
The poisonous Arrow* flew like Lightning through
My Veins, and left it is sulfurous Tincture there.

When such Resolves in Royal Breasts are sent,
Thy're Pledges of their own Accomplishment.

Oh, my Eudora, did thou mark the Lovers?
Did you behold their interchang'd Delights?
How their Lips moved? their swelling Veins boiled over?
Their throbbing Hearts Love's loud Allarums beat,
As if they would leave the Lodgings they had got;
And in the presence with each other join.

Where Is the bright, Lamp of Reason, Madam, now,
Which shone so clear within your Honors Breast?
If they too fiercely love, it cannot last.

By all the Sulphur of the flaming Deep,
It sha'n't, not an hour, a minute more.

Then Madam, know, I hate Alinda with
As great a force as you love Artaban.
This, amongst others, take a Reason for it:
My Heart burnt once with Fires, as fierce as yours,
It Is Object not unworthy, but unhappy:
Pressed with Alinda's Charms, told her his Griefs.
She scorned, and he, too great to bear it, died.
Revenge has since buoyd up my Life, and now
I Will strive to act it both for you and me.

The means to the way.

Leave that to me. But stay,
Here Is Memnon coming, he is your Lover, Madam,
And may be made a useful Engine here.
Screw up his towering Hopes, and put Ambition
Into the Scale to lift him to our Ends.

May I approach you, Madam?

Draw near, my Lord, how do the Lovers do?

They Are happy, sure.

They shall not long be so:
How know you that?

Despairing Memnon's only wretched are,
Where Love meets Love, there is an Elysium there.

You always had a Mast'ry over my Heart,
But yet, the Way's too rough to climb a Throne;
Till that be smoothed, you know my vowed Resolve.

If done, may I have leave to hope?

You may.

Then shall this Sword before the next Day's Light,
Give Death to Phraates, and Life to me.

Methinks, my Lord, 'twou'd be ill seasoned then,
The very time the Nuptials are performed:
And should the King be slain, the General
May in Alinda's name claim Sicily.

Could we contrive how to divert the Match,
Then Courage makes a Queen, and Crown your own.

The Cornerstone is laid, the Art's to raise
The Structure; let me think.

Is the High Priest to marry 'em?

Yes.

He is your Brother.

And with his Life would serve me.
I left him in the Temple now, preparing
All things in order to receive the King,
Who comes in private to consult the Oracle.

If you could now engage him how to work
The Jealous King in fear of the angry Aug'ries:
It Is for your sake and mine, Memnon, be quick;
I long to see thy Temples in a Crown.

You are my Queen, and I in all obey.

Choose they who will the smoother Ways to tread,
Where the dull beaten Paths of Virtue lead;
My Soul's above my Sex, the common Road
Befits not me, I Will travail like a God:
Where I find none, these Hands shall make my way,
And Pleasure only shall oblige my stay.
In flowing Ecstasies consume the Night,
My Life shall be the measure of Delight;
So may the Hours of all those Lovers be,
Who live, and love, and dare to act like me.

My dear Alinda, oh, my Life, my Soul,
My Happiness, my every Bliss to me;
What happy Influence ruled the Skies to day?
How comes your Father, once the cruel Phraates,
So kind, so gentle, and so bounteous now?

Is there amongst the Inhabitants above,
A God that bears a Domination there,
That can,
Knowing thy Virtues, which their Hands did make.
So near their own Original, neglect
A Care of thee, thou ow'st it all to them.

Thou art all Goodness, perfect Charity;
Nor does the Aetherial Maid that bears that Name,
With half thy Beams, and brightened Beauties shine;
Oh! I could look, and love, and gaze, and live,
And bask my self within these Rays for ever:
Thy Eye's my Sphere of Light, thy Breast my Globe;
My Garden's in thy Face, and in thy Heart my Love

These are your Infant Raptures, Gentle Strains,
An uncloy'd Fancy makes a Posie of,
For some short time the pleasant Flowers are Sweet,
Beauteous to the Eye, and Odorous to the Scent;
But when the Noon of Life is past, the Toy's
Withered, laid by, forgot, and seen no more.

Best of thy kindest Sex, restrain these Fears;
Our Hours too precious are for Thoughts like these.
They should be all Delight and Ecstasy,
No saucy Care intrude it is Ravenous Look,
No dread its paler Face, no Jealousy
Its yellow Locks to discompose us now.

Then banished let 'em be, it shall be so.
Thus in thy manly Breast I Will lay my Head,
And in a gentle Sigh thus kindly breath
Soft as a whispering Evenings Summers Glade,
The next approach unto thy Listening Ear.

Oh my Alinda! thy kind gentle Words
Set all my Veins on Fire; the Lambent Flames
Their liquid Streams through all my Arteries send:
Oh! I could chide the tardy Day, the tedious Night,
Which stand between me and my utmost Joys.
Fly, fly, you Minutes, lay your Crutches by,
Huddle to Hours, you Hours to Days, and bring
Life and Enjoyment to my longing Arms.

This Day has done its share, we owe it much,
And may be pleased to treat it whilst it is here;
These little Lets pay our Delights increase
In Expectation, there is its Pleasure found.

This is thinn Diet to the Hungry Soul.

It is spare Dyet's Meals that make us feed the better,
Whilst the palled Stomach nauseous Surfeits feel.

Oh! who could surfeit in enjoying thee?
Thou art a Counterpoison to all Ills:
Misfortunes stand avaunt when thou art near.

Enough, my Lord, the Evening is far spent:
Indeed it is time to part.

But till to Morrow;
Then we shall join to separate no more:
So have I seen two Sister-Streams that spread,
Their Silver Currents from one Fountain's Head,
Kiss, and take each their several way, through all
The fertile Soil where their soft Murmurs fall,
Till having run their Course, they kindly greet,
And in the Sea, their twined Embraces meet.

THAT Day the Valiant Stranger does Alinda Wed,
The Parthian Monarch's Blood shall be untimely shed
Away vain Oracles: shall Priests persuade me
To forfeit Honor, and betray my Friend?
No, I Am resolved, let Fate pursue its course,
I Will never break my Vow.
Ha! You shadowy Phantoms, Airy Nothings; where,
Oh whither are you fled, you spiteful Sons of Fear!
Nights dismal Haunters! Groans, and no more
Sad Dying Groans in lifeless Figures cast:
Here, Thermusa, Memnon, Guards
Come fling your selves about me,
And be my Shields, my Towers, my Bulwarks of Defense
Against the Legions of the Prince of Darkness.
Where Is the Queen? Come hither Memnon, Lycastes,
Oh! I Am one piece of Terror, cold as Ice;
My Veins all frozen, like a Northern Sea,
Their Spring, and Fall, forget.

You're frighted sure, my Lord.

Do thou not see
Yon horrid Skeleton, how its Gumless Jaws
Chatters; without his Eyes he stares, he shakes
His fleshless Fist, and Rattles as he walks?

You fancy, Sir; there is nothing there.

Ha! Nothing! nothing! why then it is gone:
Thas spied the Horses of the Sun bound over yon Mount,
Clapped on its Shroud, and dropped into the Grave.
By all my Fears the Gods have spoke the Truth,
And I must dye to morrow.

How, to morrow!

Yes, thou bright Partner of my Bed, to morrow.

Ye Gods forbid; your Majesty's in health.

It Is an immutable Decree, I must
To all my Glories, Honors, Crowns, Contents,
Friends, Loves, and dearest Happiness on Earth
For ever, oh for ever, bid a faint
A -- last, a parting sad Adieu to morrow.

Some Melancholy Priest, my Lord, has had
Too near Admittance to thy Royal Ear;
Spoke his false Dreams, and raised these causeless Fears.
Like Phraates, shake them from you; by Heavens
There Is something in my Woman's Breast which holds
More Courage than to bend to any Tale of theirs.

Oh how the Poison works.

When Heaven speaks we should regard its words;
Nor have they told me ought, but what from them
In Sacred Oracles they learnt, which still declare
Fortune's Reverst, Event preposterous,
Hurled into Being, ever their Cause is known:
Strange Truths ripped from the Womb of Time
Ever well Conceived.

Tell me, what is it they have said?

Oh horror! how I tremble to relate it!
That Day Alinda does the Valiant Stranger Wed,
Phraates Blood shall be untimely shed.
Is it not strange?

Most wonderful, indeed.

And to confirm the Truth, glad of my doom
My Uncle as I stood,
Whom I had long ago confined to Earth,
Left his cold Bed, and stole the form of Life.

Fate or his Fancy works with us.

But still the Gods are kind, thus to foretell,
When yet you may prevent the fatal Sentence.
Stay the intended Match. --

Oh Name it not.
Heaven never can wink at so much Perjury,
Such black Ingratitude, and cruel spite:
What when I Have trained them up to hope their hands
In Contract joined, and on the brink of Joy:
When their full Veins are swelled to all Loves heights:
It cannot be -- Sound all, sound all to Horse,
By all my Honors, I grow Resolute;
My Blood it s^irs, it is warm, it is hot, it burns;
Give me my Arms, I Will mount, and brave to's Face
This King of Terrors, in the Field of Mars.

Hold my Lord and be advised: If Phraates Life
Be so unvalu'd in His Eyes, shall not
Thermusa's Groans be heard, her Tears regarded?
Grant her at least your pity, Sir, who is resolved
When her Lord dies, not to survive the hour.

Oh how the Crocodile can weep.

Help me, ye Gods, to bear this last Assault.

Besides you may reward great Amanda.
Give him a frown t'inlarge his narrower Fate;
Load him with Honors, Offices, and Trusts;
Put in the Balance all your Friendship's Store;
Choose where he will amongst the Parthian Court,
A Mistress that may suite his haughty mind;
Sure this may satisfy his ambitious Thirst.

Oh spare me --

I cannot:
Gods, Kings, and every petty Mannor'd Lord
Will call you Fool and Coward thus to give,
In spite of their Advice, your Life and Crowns,
Your Daughter, Fame, and me, and all at once,
For an Alliance you should rather scorn.

Thou mov'st me Queen: by all the living Gods,
He Is dead that does advise the contrary.
Go raise the Court, draw all my Guards about me,
I Will stand this shock of Fortune ever I fall.
Have Memnon, and secure the Princess safe.
At her own Lodgings, whilst that you dispatch
A swift Express to the great King Tygranes;
Invite him to Alinda's Arms and Peace;
Here take my Royal Signet, and begone:
Thus will I close with what my Stars advised,
Laugh the old Ghost to scorn in years to come,
When tired with Age, I Am pleased to accept a Tomb.

Ha! Royal Phraates, can you think of Tombs,
Whilst your Artaban is your Guard? this Sword
Shall skreen your Person from advancing Ills;
Your Subjects Treasons, and your Foes designs:
Death if sees me shall start back for fear,
And seek some other Prey to gorge his Lust:
Speak, speak the danger you are in -- ha! mute,
What is the meaning of all this -- not yet --

The King is discomposed, 'twere well to leave him.

By all the Laurels, all the Kindnesses
I Have in his Service reaped, I will not stir
A foot, till first I know his Enemy.

Look round thee Artaban;
See what all Parthia can afford that is worth
Thy Favors, I will give the same, and more
To hold thee to my Breast, and keep thee there.

Already you have given me more than in
Th'expanded Arms of the wild Deeps lie hid,
More than the Entrails of the Earth can buy,
The opulent World is indigent to me,
Whilst I enjoy the blessed Alinda's Love.

Oh, that --

Yes, that is beyond them all, not Heaven
Could add a Grain the Treasure to increase.

It Is this alone cannot be thine --

Not mine?
Oh all ye Powers above! not mine, my Lord?
Rather say kindly that my Life's not so;
It Is easier Torture to endure the worst,
The complicated Strokes of every Ill:
Fires, Plagues, Diseases, Sores, and Sicknesses,
Wounds, Racks, Dishonor, Deaths and Hell,
Than hear the sound of such a killing Word;
Sure, Sir, you do it but to try me, your Brows
Thus clouded in Storms, cover the Shine
That warms the Generative Seeds of all
My future Bliss, and my increasing Hopes;
Put on the Daylight of your Eyes again.

For ever I could smile upon thee, see
Thee mounted in my Throne on my Right Hand,
Share all my Empire with me; nay, Content
Would fill my Soul to be thy Subject made;
And this without Alinda ask, and by
The Powers that guide the World it shall be thine.

And this without her I would never accept!

I am too poor to give thee more, yet must,
Though urged by all the Gods, deny thee her.

My Friend, why stand you hushed, silent as Night,
As Infant-Winds in secret Caverns locked,
And tell me not whence is this sudden change?

It Is brave to be Resolved, shake not your Mind,
His haughty Fierceness by degrees will cool,
And Prudence, Sir, to Temper bring him back.

Is that the Reason, it is plain Forgery,
Mere tampering with the Skies to bribe their Voice,
And speak my Ruin; -- hear Phraates, hear King,
If all the former Services I have done
Your Empire, with the weight of those I Am yet
To do, may ever Conjure you, hear me now.

I will be dragged no more: if you are Wise,
Accept my offers, for it is all I grant.

Can you so soon forget your Artaban,
Him, who but yesterday you loved so well?
Has he so little Interest in your Breast,
That a vile Sorcerer, Priest or Devil
By Charms or Inchantations thrust
His Image thence? oh my too rigid Fate!

Forbear, and be my Friend, thy Suit's unpleasant,
And never can change my Mind; so cease it now,
Or see my Face no more.

Ha! Ingrate!
Pardon my Love, I call thy Father so --
Look over my Breast, and see the Scars it wears;
These Seams torn to defend thy tottering Throne,
And tell me, tell me, deluded fearful King,
Have I deserved such Infamous Returns?

Provoke me not, I can be passionate.

Be as thou will, I shall regard it not,
Thou'st done thy worst, and I defy thee now;
Oh Heavens, it is something sacred in thy Face,
Some Features of my dear Alinda there,
Which holds my injured Hands more than the Guards.

Against my Person; seize the Traitor.

-- Stand off.
I know not how to yield, nor will learn now.

Oh Heavens! how he looks, a brave disdain --
Strikes like the Darts of Lightning through his Eyes,
And kindles in my Breast Increasing Flames.

Sure I have power to tame him; kill him:
What will he cut his way to reach my Head?

Hold, let him live to see his Punishment.

Well, now I hope you will beg your forfeit Life.

First thou shall hack me into Atoms.

Accept it as my Favor then.

Nor thus:
My conscious Breast would still Reproach this Arm
For all my ill-spent Youth, the Harvest of my Life;
My wreathed Laurels wither on this Brow,
Which I have gathered at so vast expense,
And often purchased at so dear a rate.

Then for Alinda's sake I grant it.

Alinda's Name can charm my utmost Rage,
And Death it self would be a Life for her.

But with Reserve you never see her more.

Must it be so, then know thy Interest King,
Keep this bold Lion whilst he is in thy toil,
For if he ranges once abroad aga^n,
By all the violent Sufferings which I feel,
Not all thy Huntsmen with their Warring Spears,
Thy Guards, thy Armies, shall e're withstand his force;
But in despite of thee will seize his Right,
And from thy Bosom, tear it to his own.

Gods! shall I bear this? thus to be braved,
Thus dared and threatened to my very Face,
In The midst of all my Court, by one disarmed,
Whom with a blast of Breath I could to Death,
To vilest Torments in my anger doom?
Go bear him off, and if he does presume
To tread on this forbidden Ground again
His Life shall pay the forfeit of his Crime.

And am I thus Rewarded? O Heavens!
Who would your Votaries be? Oh seeble Virtue,
How thin, how lean, how starved are thy Returns?
Farewell your Courts, I Will trouble you no more,
Let Cowards if you please your helps Implore.

MY Lord, I cannot help complaining at the injust manner of your Proceedings; I
do assure you, Sir, I am as much concerned for the loss of your Daughter as you
can be, and on my Honor will join with you in the search of her


Pish, pish, never mind him, my Lord, he is a cunning Warrener, and has more
Burrows than one I dare engage for him


I am resolved I will not leave a House unsearch'd in the whole City till I Have
found her


I will assist your Lordship, but for you, Sir, I Will call you to an account
some other time


Prithee what care I what thou do, what the Devil, when a Man's Mare's broke
out of his Ground, will not you allow him the liberty of looking after her


So, Heaven be thanked, I Am got safe hitherto, let me but come once to the
Arms of my dear Lycastes and I am happy; ha! bless me, what do I see! my Father
and his Myrmidons! what will become of me? If I offer to go 'twill show
suspicious, I must stand the brunt let what will come on it


How now, what Boy is that? come hither Sirrah.


Then what a most glorious Sight 'twill be, to see me riding upon one of the
Horns of the Moon; To have my Palace made of Amber, and a hundred little
twinkling Stars for my Attendance


What a Devil is the Boy mad?


I don't know that, but I am sure his Discourse is above my Understanding.


Harke'e Child, do thou dwell here in the City?


Yes an't please you Sir, but I am going to remove my Habitation: I have an
Authority from Jove to be a Cloud-maker, and Juno has promised me an Apartment
in her own Court


Alas, the poor Child's Lunatic; I think 'twere well to send him to the
Hospital of Madfolks till we can learn what Family he is of


Heaven grant you would, for I Am sure I shall be mad outright, unless I escape
these watchful Dragons


Nay, nay, look ye, my Passion is not so great as to lessen my Charity, and
indeed I think my self bound in duty, as I am in Authority, to succor the
Unfortunate

Hey day, what the Devil have we here?


Gad I don't know, it is half Fish half Flesh I believe.


I suppose it is one of the Amazonian Ladies lately arrived at Court.


Ha! I find the House is beset, Lycastes there, and my Cozen not among 'em?
then do I begin to fear every thing has not happened right


Well, I Will be going; pray Gentlemen, if Juno, Jove, or Mercury inquire for me,
tell 'em I am but just gone to Cupid's Palace, and will attend 'em in Counsel
immediately


Here, one of you take the Boy; let him be kept safe in the Hospital, till
further enquiry be made of him


Ay, ay, don't let us be troubled with other peoples Madness.


As I live it is she: now Brain assist me, and if I find not some way to fit
this Politician, may I dye a Maid when my Mind's brimfull of Matrimony. Your
Servant, Sir


Your Servant, Sir, or Madam; or Madam, and Sir; for by my t^oth you may be
both for ought I know: Pray, what would you have with me


You have lost a Mistress if I am not mistaken, Sir.


No faith Child, I Will answer for thee thou art not mistaken in that; but I Am
much mistaken if you can tell me how to get her again


Indeed Sir but I can.


How, how is that, Madam? Pray take pity on a poor fond Father, that has lost an
only Child


Your Daughter left you Sir this very moment.


If that be the best of 'your Intelligence pray do you leave us too; what the
Devil have we not been in search of her these 8 hours


Why that same little thing you thought a mad Boy was Amadine your Daughter.


What, you know her then?


Yes, 'twas I helped her to make her Escape; but I having since considered what
a great Grief so loving a Father must of necessity have for so sweet a
Daughter, thought it my Duty to acquaint you where she was, that you might
justly punish her Disobedience


How now Cozen, what News bring you? have you heard ought of my Daughter yet?


Only this, Sir; we took her Clothes with a young Youth, who said the Person
that left them had a Suit of his in the Room of 'em


Prithee peace, the lost Sheep's heard of, come, come, Father-in-law, let us
make haste after her, for who knows as mad as she pretends to be, but she may
have wit enough to give us the goe-by once age^


A^, ay, come Co en and Gent^emen, Mr. Lycastes, we discharge you, and for you,
Madam, for this singular Favor, I shall be very proud you would command my
House


And do me the Honor too Dame at my Wedding.


How now Lycastes, what is the occasion of your Melancholy?


You have undone me.


What in letting you know where to find your lost Mistress?


In letting me know I have for ever lost her.


Never trouble thy self for that, but take my word for it thou shall have her.


How!


Ariena says it, and it shall be so.


Ariena!


The very same; come, come, we have no time for Talking, we must be at the
Heels of 'em, and if I don't perform my Promise to thee, may I be sixty odd
before any Man makes his Address to me.


The Great Alcides, when of old surpised,
Amongst the Lydian Dames his Warlike Limbs,
Wrapped in soft Silks, and those unconquered Hands
Wielding the Distaffe, which that Sword had born,
Blushed less in his, than I in this Disguise.
Oh Phraates, I again will see thy Court,
Though my vowed Death should meet these forward sleps;
It Is better far to feel, than fear our Fate.
Oh Alinda!
For thee my Armor to these Weeds are changed,
For thee my Resolution's barred, for thee
My very Rage luxuriant grown, is stopped,
Like the great Thunderer, though his mounted Arms
Charged with Destruction, aiming at his Foes,
By a kind Goddess, whose prevailing Charms
Are far more powerful than his angry Bolts.

The Clouds, my Lord, mu^t be discharged, before
The joyful Sun can fairly guild the Sky;
Allow her leave to weep and tell me, Sir,
How she received your Person.

As I approacht,
Her careless Tresses half disheveled hung
Like Sheaves, with which the Wind had been too bold;
Her Head on her bent Arm its burden le'nt,
Whilst from her Eyes those Diamond quarries run,
The teary Streams that Dew'd her Rosal Cheeks,
Which as they fell bending to kiss her Lips,
Her Sighs drove back, to seek their Grave below.

The Part's too passionate you act, my Lord.

The Queen of Sorrow never was Dressed like her,
So Beautiful she seemed, so full of Grace
Amidst her Griefs, she might have charmed a God.
She dried her Eyes, and with a mournful Look
Beheld me fallen at her Princely Feet.

Could she be Cruel then?

My self, my Heart,
And Empire, were the Offerings which I made,
But these, alas! too mean for her Acceptance,
She with Scorn denied; begged me to desist
My tedious Suit, and give her leave to dye.

She Is unworthy of you, Sir, but must
With my Commands to so much Virtue yield.

Thus on my Knees I beg you, Sir, to use
Your utmost Kindness: All the Endearments, which
A Father's Breast can to his Child's convey,
To charm her Favors in behalf of me.

Pray doubt it not, nor do I question by degrees
To Effect your Ends. She must have time to wean
This Darling from her Bosom, her Mind will turn;
The Wind that veres to every point of the Sphere,
Is not more changeable than Woman's Will;
Yet when it is settled in some Corner Rests,
And plays the Sovereign there.

May that blessed Season,
Spring of my Hopes, and Summer of my Life,
On Time's sost Wings fly swiftly to my Aid.

What still a weeping? has thy Father's care
No other Influence than this? The Great
Tygranes, whom I have chose the Partner of thy Bed,
Waits with a Crown, to adorn thy Virgin Brows.

Oh Royal Sir! My King, my Father, hear me!
By all the Loves you ever bore my Mother,
By all the Virgins Angels Vows, by those
Their Images on Earth do chastely make,
Be not so strickt, so hard, so harsh, to use
Authority to bend my sixth Resolves,
Which like the Center of the Earth stands firm,
But loosened once will into pieces burst,
And in Eternal Ruins break to Dust.

These are but feeble Reasons t'avert my Ends,
Nor should they move with you; Methinks a Throne
Should overrule these little letts, whose Spots,
If such some Fools esteem them, by its Rays,
Like Tapers in the Sunshine, are not seen.

The boasted Grandeur of the Universe,
Were it together heaped upon one Man,
Were he a Person where all Beauties met,
All Virtues kept their Bank, Learning and Arts,
By Nature all his own, would never tempt
My Heart in prejudice of him, to whom already
All that is mine, is given away.

Oh Madam, be not so unkind, but bless me
(Thus on my Knees I beg it) with one Smile,
And dart a Cordial Balsom to my Wounds.

This Posture, Sir, becomes you not, pray rise,
And let me beg you hear me. Hear
A Harmless, Weeping, Mourning, Dying Wretch,
If ever you intend to enjoy your aims,
A Mistress that is Rind, Content, or Greatness,
Or what vou value most, think not of me,
For in Heavens Face, I Vow --

Hold -- hear my Vow first --
By the dread Majesty of Kings I swear;
If you consent not to Tygrane's Love,
I Will search thy Artaban throughout the World,
And all the Gods shall never save his Head.

O Unmercifull! Oh Cruel Phraates!
Can your hard Heart no more of Pity hold?
Is all your Kindness, all your Oaths forgot?
Good Gods! Tygranes hear,
By all the Honors, all the Virtues, which
You Are feigned the Master of, by these my Tears,
Which ever will disturb you, should I be forced,
Should I be drove, or ravished to your Bed,
Constrain me not by Importunities,
To forfeit all my Vows. --

Oh Madam! Words like these stab to the Soul,
Feed on my Entrails, Riot on my Heart,
And with a Vulture's Rage my Vitals tear.

If such their Influence be, why do you stay
Within their Reach? The Fire of Love
In narrow Limits pent, grows fierce in its Restraint;
Which did it rove at Large, 'twou'd wasle,
And by degrees, in Lambent Flames expire.
Would you but be advised, my Lord, in this,
Though to some dismal Cave, dark as the Night,
Where Horror, and dire Mischief keep their Cells,
Brooding on Midnight Tragedies to come,
I was confined, with patience I would bear
The happier Doom, and thank the giving Gods.

Oh Heavens! is there No pleasure in a Throne?
To Rule not only Subjects, but their King?
To see the bowing Heads, and bended Knees,
The Adoring Crowds that wait your Steps?

Alas! poor sounding Nothings: only fit to blind
The distant Gazers with an Awe of Power,
And keep the Knot of Duty fast; I should
Be tired to hear, and see its empty noise.

Choose then throughout my Realms, a Palace fit
To please, or entertain your Sight: I Will leave
My State, and all the Ornaments of Power
To be your Servant, or your Vassal there.

I would not rob the World of such a Prince,
Yet, if I should, you would soon repent the Change.

Oh! Never -- Never --

Yes, to hear me talk
Sad melancholy loving Tales of Artaban,
Which I could never help, would grieve you, Sir.

By Heavens you raise
A Fire, naught but his Blood shall ever quench;
If all my Empires, Crowns, may be a price
Sufficient for the Purchase, I will buy his Fate.

And mine They Are so intwin'd together,
Nor Life, nor Death can make a separation.

Will nothing move you? O, e're I Storm, display
The Glorious Banners of your peaceful Eyes;
Speak a sweet Parley from your Mouth, and bless
Me with the sounds of Peace --

I can no more --

By Artaban, I do Conjure you stay,
If all my Interest cannot Entreat, I Will use
My Rival's Name, to oblige a parting Look.
But to Enjoy her all my own; gather
The luscious Fruit ripe, from the Noble Stock;
For this y' Gods! give me Expressions, which
No Tongue e're spoke, or ever Heart conceived.

Hold Sir, you must not, dare not harbor such
A thought so Impious to another's Right.

Why, who art thou --

His Friend who thou so basely have disseiz'd,
Great Artaban commanded me to tell thee:
Alinda, mark me, never shall be thine.

I Would give a Kingdom for that Traytor's Head.

Thou'st tremble at his Sight, turn pale with fear,
Though Armies were before thee, Towers thy Shield,
Mountains and Seas your Separation made;
For well thou know, he would force, he would break, he would seal,
He Would leap them all, to reach at thee --

Base Miscreant --
Although thy forfeit Life is in my Power,
Yet will I spare it, that thou may go back,
And let him know to morrow is the Day,
I Will in Alinda's Arms, my Bliss complete.

By all the Gods, you never shall see its light;
It Is Artaban that speaks the Oracle.

Thanks to Almighty Powers you are in my view;

And to my Stars, I Have found thee, this blessed hour
So often as I have sought, so often thou'st fled:
Ignobly, basely hid thy Coward Face,
Amongst the common Rout, that makes thy Guard,
Or led them in their speed to avoid my rage.

Proud boasting Man, thou art almost too bad
To fall by any but a Villain's hand;
My Face would wear more Scarlet than my Sword,
Tho covered with thy Blood, to take thy Life.

That Life of mine is sacred, placed so high
In the large Throne of Fame; thy little Arm
Can never rise to touch it; as well thou may
Great Jove in yonder Starry Seat Attempt,
And from his Fellow-Gods, discard him thence,
Battle his Winds, and stand his Thunderbolts.

Draw then, thou proud, thou boasting Fool, and know,
Instead of Bulls, and common Offerings,
Which every poor Plebeian Marriage grace,
In thy hot Blood I Will treat the Deities.

There lie Revenge; next for my injured Love,
That in Alinda's presence, I will meet
And Sacrifice my Life beneath her Feet.

Oh! I am slain; Life's tottering burden sinks,
And I must die without Revenge --

By Heavens thou shall not --
Oh! he is gone: The Royal Soul is fled,
Loosed from its Cage, to flutter in the Air,
And mount the Noble Mansion of the Skies.
But thus in Tears I will not mourn thy loss;
Give order that the City shut the Gates,
Search every House, guard every Passage,
On pain of Death, to find the Murderer out,
Were he my first, my dear'st only Son,
Born to Inherit my Imperial Crown,
I would not spare him: No, the Wretch should die,
Tho all Mankind should to his Succor fly --
Entreating Gods to save him, I Would deny.

Go, carry mad Bess some Meat; she roars like Thunder; and do you hear, tie the
Parson up: The Moon's in the full, and he has a thousand Pigs in's Brains


Save you, Gentlemen; was there not a little Boy brought in here lately?


Yes, Sir, but for what reason Heaven knows; the Boy seems to me as much in his
Wits as I am


He is so, Sir, but the Child is under the Care of an Unhappy Father that is
stark mad; I have often endeavored by force, to bring him to the College of
Lunaticks, but could not; therefore I was forced to use this Stratagem; for he
loves the Boy entirely, and will follow him any whither


Well, Sir, what of this?


Why therefore I sent the Boy that we might have an opportunity of getting him
hither in order to secure him


Oh, Sir, let us alone for that.


There is the Child's Brother with him too, Sir, as mad as the Father;
therefore I desire you to take particular care of both, and there is your
Entrance-Money, I Will see the rest paid


I Will warrant you, Sir, we have those as mad as he.


One thing I had forgot, Sir, when he finds himself Trapan'd, he will almost
murder the Child; therefore I desire you would let me have him with me


With all my heart, Sir; here, bring the Boy that came in last.


Here Is the Boy, Sir.


Here Child, here is a Gentleman come to set you at liberty.


As I live Lycastes, O happy Deliverance!


Come my pretty Rogue, your Father's near us; therefore we had best make have
left we should be seen


No, no, Sir, never fear that; here Boy, show the Gentleman out at the
Backdoor


Your Servant, Sir.


Why how now? Who let this English Madman loose? A Pox on him for coming
hither; could he not have kept in his own Country


Give me some Drink.


Give you some Halter; there is a great many of your Countrymen I Am sure
deserve it


Give me a thousand Pots, come down on your Knees you Rogues and pledge me.
One, two, three and four, we shall be merry within this hour


Go, go lock him up: How now, who comes here?


Save you, save you, Sir.


And you, Sir; have you any business with me?


Yes, Sir, we come to look after a Boy and no Boy; a Wife of mine that should
have been; but as the Stars will have it, I Am like to find nothing of the
matter


Oh, these I find are the Gentleman told me of: Do You hear, go and secure their
Swords


Why how now, what the Devil do you entertain Thieves in a Mad-House.


Go fetch me a couple of strong Cords --


Cords! What a-Pox, I hope you don't design to Hang us for your Robbery?


Go, in the first place bind that old Gentleman.


How, how, bind me? Hark'e, Sirrah, leave prating and bring me the Boy that was
sent in just now


Poor Gentleman, what pity it is a Man of his Years should fall under such a
Misfortune; do you hear, Sir, pray make less stir, and get you to your Chamber


My Chamber! A Pox of my Chamber; Prithee where is the Boy?


Hark'e, Sir; either go in, and quietly, or we have Whips: Do you hear, Sir,
Whips


Whips?


Ay, Whips.


Oh Lord, O Lord, what a Mad Puppy was I to come into a Mad-House? It Is ten to
one but for their diversion they may whip me too


Go Lash him soundly.


Hold, hold, is the Devil in you? I will go in, Sir, I Will go in very civilly;
but good Sir, let none of your Tormenters come to me; you have a good-natured
Face, those Fellows look like Dragons


Well, Sir, be Civil, and you shall have any thing; but for these two Days you
must Eat nothing, 'twill ease your Fits, Sir


'Twill starve me, Sir, but I must bear it with a Christian Patience.


Come Sir, now for you; I Will warrant you will say you are not Mad neither; here
bring the Whips


Hold, hold, Sir, you are mightily mistaken in me; not Mad Sir, alack a day I Am
very Mad; I was Born Mad: Why you shall hardly find an English Man madder than
I; only there is this difference between us, I know when I Am well, and that I Am
sure they will never do


Your Servant, Sir, I must entreat you to unbind this Gentlewoman, and pardon
me for making you an Instrument to procure my Happiness. This Boy (as you
think) is that Old Gentleman's Daughter, whom I have long Loved, and by your
industrious Care in detaining him, have at last Married


How, Married!


Yes, Sir, and ask your Blessing.


Married! Well, well, I don't care; I Would rather be persuaded out of my Wife than
my Wits: I have been Mad only for a small time, he that Marries, perhaps may be
Mad all days of his Life: Much good may do you, I say


Nay, I dare not be angry; for it seems I Am bound to my Good Behavior: But,
Sir, since you are pleased to make bold with my Daughter against my Will, you
will not allow me to be Mad without my Knowledge: And though your bound your self,
pray, Sir, be pleased to free me


You have your freedom, Sir.


And you have my Daughter, Sir.


And that Gentleman has the liberty of choosing where he pleases: Ha, ha, ha.


What do Laugh at now, do know? Why as great a Fool as I am, I an't Married
yet, 'Igad I believe your Money can no more keep you from being a Cuckold, than
mine can me from being a Fool, as you think me


Ha, ha, ha.


Ay, ay, Laugh on, Laugh on, some rich Men wear Asses Ears, and some wear
Horns, and 'gad I don't know which is the more ugly sight of the two


Sir, I desire you to accept of this as part of my acknowledgement for the
Service you have done me


Faith, Sir, I Am very glad 'thas proved to your advantage.


'Igad I begin to have a little liking to the business my self too, for I Am rid
of a certain trouble that the Child and that Fool would have brought upon me


So, so, I had like to have been made a Madman just now, but since they failed
in that, they are resolved to make a Fool of me


Have you forgot your Niece, Sir, Ariena.


Amadine! What I warrant you had a hand in the Plot too.


Yes, by my troth.


No doubt on it, I always thought you would make me Mad at last: But come now let us
go, your Servant Landlord that had like to have been


And I will never think I have miscarried,
As long as I can say I am not Married.

The heartless King's Inexorable grown,
Nor will he alter his Decree: I saw
The dying Ceremonies fixed; the Axe,
The Scaffold, the Procession, Guards, and all
The Cursed Attendants of the Train of Death:
Oh my Eadora! Now Night thickens on us;
All its pitchy Clouds, gather apace,
Inveloping my sight, that I scarce see
The fatal Path, I tread, yet I must on,
And whilst Lysander Acts his Part, do ours.

I saw him with your Guards, march toward the Marketplace,
The Season suits with our Designs.

Let Us call the deadly Sisters to our Aid
Hell's rankest Monsters, Envy, and Hate
Be Death it self amongst our Train; Nay, Love,
The worst when angered, of the black Retinue,
And then advise who first must feel our rage.

Mercy and Pity banish from your Eyes.

Alas! They Are gone for want of room, my Breast
Is full of every Manly Virtue now,
And I can strike, where, when, or whom the Fates
Or my own Will, the guide of fate enjoins.

Then, Madam, it is the King must fall, and next
The Princess, by Memnon him, and her by me.

Oh thou my best, my Bosom Councellor!
I hold thee near my Heart -- And you my Lord
Must share it too; it is time the Stroke was made;
Why should we keep our Happiness aloof,
Stand shivering near the brink of flow'ring Joys,
When we may plunge into the Depths at once;
My Sword, my Heart, all that is Memnon's, Madam,
Dispose, and order as you please, I Will fly to obey.

This binds me to thy Interest, this alone,
The highest Token of thy Love, engages more
Than all the formal Oaths, the Tears, the Sighs,
Which Whining poor Romantic Lovers ^ake.

You add New Courage to my hands, my hopes
Thus winged, can mount me above the reach of fears,
Danger, or Death, or any faint Remorse,
Not an Avenging Angel should do more,
To serve Heaven's Pleasure, than I Will act for you,
The Goddess of my Life, and Heaven alone to me.

It Is then this hour, my Lord, may crown you both,
It Is time to act; occasion hates delay,
Stars may tell Tales, and our Designs betray.

Think on the Method, Madam, and it is done.

That we'll consult within, give me your hand;
Thus shall we shoot the mighty Gulf of Fate,
Escape the Shelves, and weather all the Storms,
The Oceon of our Ends so dangerous made,
In these secure, as on the Continent we stand,
And may behold the battling Billows war;
Their angry Waves in swelling pride arise,
As if our safety they would a mind to attack, --
Dash at our feet, and break their little spite.

Oh my dread Lord! could you but see my heart,
As you might hear its Cries, the mangled Piece
Bleeding, and torn, it would fright, if not affect
Your eyes, to some compassion -- Oh! relen --

Hold thy hands, trouble me no more,
By all the Gods, I will not hear thee -- What?
In my own Court, whence I Would Proscribed the Wretch
On Penalty of Life, not only to
Return, but with a Villain's Insolence
T'attempt to Fight, to Murder my best Friend;
Nay, more a Royal Head: By Heavens i will not
Bear this; the Dignity of Monarchs, and the Rules,
The Interest of State, will never admit it.
Leave me, I say --

O Sir, I cannot: --
About your Knees i will curle these Arms, my Tears
Shall wash their roots, and I will grow --
For ever here, you shall not stir, or move --
Without their burden. Oh be patient --
Think what you are doing, whilst your anger dooms
The best, the bravest of Mankind to Death;
Think of his Services, his Laurels, Sir,
His Courage, Fortune, Youth, and Virtues prise:
And can you yet be cruel? O no! I see
The Parent in your eyes; Love smiles beneath your Frown:
Send, and recall the fatal Orders.

Again -- A way -- I am resolved --

Oh let it be to think --
That if you thus persist, What will become --
Of your unhappy Daughter? You Have often said,
Nay, swore you loved her, Sir: And can you see
Her plunged in so much sorrow, welt'ring in pains
Worse then the flames of Sulpher can inflict?
Oh Gods! my Father cannot be such a Rock.

Unhand me, I grow unweildy with thy weight;
And shall with fury throw thee hence; can thou
Take part with any Enemy of mine?
By Heavens you would make a Woman of me,
Bring down my Purposes to obey your Will,
My Interest, turn and vere, as you shall sigh:
Nay, all my Reason in your Tears immerge;
By all my Power you shall not; I Will by Phraa es still,
Lord of myself, and your pity shall never
Stagger my mind, my soul's above its cry,
It Is Justice moves me, and the Slave shall die.

Oh, help me Gods!
I cry, yet it is in vain, your ears, your eyes
Are deaf, and blind, to poor Alinda's prayers:
Oh barbarous Father, cruel King; cursed Stars,
That influence thus my Fate. --
O passion! tame thy follies, bate thy tears,
Why are these needless Offerings made?
To woes like thine, thy Life can only be
Their proper Sacrifice - then die Alinda, die --
Oh Gods! what is it I hear? Death's dismal sound;
The fatal March that leads my Artaban away,
To take his last farewell of Earth, and me:
Oh! Horror and Distraction to my ears;
My Artaban, my Artaban, my Lord!
O mount not yet, --
That fiery Chariot, e're you seat me there,
Placed by your side, we'll travel over yon Roads,
Those azure Mountains touch, bate with the Stars,
Contemn the despicable World beneath,
And in the silver beams of chaste Latona's night,
We'll find a bed to crown our Nuptial-joys;
But oh! where am I? --
My Senses start; This Cordial-drop which my long jealous fears
Prepared for hopeless Love, this healing Balm
Shall be my sovereign Cure. T'out-live my Artaban,
Is more then all my Woman's strength can bear:
I must make haste, I dare no longer stay;
Love calls, and the great Summons I obey.

And must I still be bound, cruel Phraates?
Amidst thy Guards, do thou yet fear my Arms,
These naked Arms should pull thee from thy Throne?
No. -- Sit thee there, I envy not thy Place,
Nor would I choose to Live, alas! in Death
What is it makes Men tremble so? to me
It Is welcome as the Harbor to the Seamen,
When Beat and even drove a Wreck to the Shore;
I see no Horror in it, but a calm Recess
From the loud Clamorous Billows which disturb
The flow's and ebbs of Life, sure it is the Form,
The Manner makes them shake; to me it is nothing,
I Have seen it in as diffrent Shapes, as e're
The Eye of Man beheld, nay, this the worst
I fearl'sly can view, with the premised
Formalities, the Mockeries, the Pomp,
The pageant Infamy of my Fate,
And thus to fall is not my Grief; oh Gods!
You bear me Witness that I speak a truth;
Lead on! --
This is the Pedestal by which I mount
To yond'r Throne of Brightness, this the Car
In which as Conquer'rs, to Triumph ride --
I go to meet a Palace in the Stars --
I Am ready to obey your Warrant, Sir.

What sounds are these?

Who is it I see, Lysander?
What Is the Message?

It Is from the Queen, with which she bids you clear
Your passage to Alinda's arms. --

Ha! Alinda, said thou?
Yes, I will live to see her --

Hold your Orders, Sir.

I bear them in my hand --

Oh Heavens! what mean these Ghostly Fear
Why do I stiffen, as if my Destiny
Was drawing on! -- I beg for ease, and yet
Your loads oppress; nay, tho I strive to shake
You hence, your Darts still goad me;
My pains increase; But where is the hidden Wound?
Oh! that is within, a throbbing conscious Guilt
That spite of all Resolves upbraids me, with
A Life ill-spent, discovers to my veiw,
The History of past, and present Crimes;
Tells me of Death, of large Accounts to come,
And Punishments unknown: What makes you thus
Disturb me? Why at present, when i am well?
I have not leisure to contemplate now;
My veins are full of youth, my hands are vigorous,
The sounding voice of War delights my ears,
Bea'ties bright Charms, yet appetites my eyes,
Avaunt, and when the reverend Marks of Age
My Wintered Head shall snow, the Crutch support
My falling steps, I call you to my thoughts,
Sum up my Farwel-Exit to the World,
And sink into a Grave of Peace: Oh Gods!
Are you still here? Sure there is something else
Than barely Apprehension's force in this:
My Soul, by its eternal Beams, sees more,
Than to the Elements of Sense she speaks at large,
Pointing the Effects, but never marks the Cause.
If I must die, Oh all the Powers above!
Pronounce my Doom, 'twill be some ease to know
The utmost Malice of my boding Stars.

Why is my Lord disturbed? --

I Am feeling for the cause,
As Men at Midnight when they have lost their way.

It Is strange you should not know it, Sir, and yet
Let Rebel Fancy so usurp your sense.

It Is true, I don't
Only a mist of things sits hovering here,
Sad melancholy Thoughts, faint Chymera's,
Such as disturb our Careful Nights, and creep
In Slumbers to our Brains, flashes of Light,
Which soon in smoaky Shades evaporate,
And nothing leave but sulphurous shine behind.

It Is much beneath you, Sir, to give them head.

Thou do not know, Thermusa, what a weight
A tainted Conscience bears; you are Innocent,
Thy Hand unspotted; Nay, thy Heart is free,
Mine both are deeply plunged in Murtherous Gore.

Granting they have been so; Whence do they now
So terrible appear?

There I Am to seek --
But yet as Clouds before a Showers approach,
Ruffle, and Crowd thick in a Grove of dark,
These do so too, which makes my trembling Heart
Presage impending dangers near my Head.

Your vanquished Spirits like a Coward rout,
Fly, e're they know for what, till tired they will stand
And miss the cause, they rally then again.

Oh Empire! had I felt thy weight before,
Ambition to my Arms the burden bore;
Not all thy glittering Robes, Scepter, or Fame,
Thy boasted Grandeur, and Eternal Name,
Should e're my Soul in such a Scarlet died,
To glut the hunger of thy towering Pride.
Oh! What can wash it white? Rivers and Seas,
Are all too shallow for such Blots as these.
The Watery Element has not a Flood,
To cleanse the Stain of Paricidial Blood.
Oh, I faint --
Upon thy Bosom let me lean a while;
Oh my profetick fears!
Must all my Glories hence their period date?
Are there no bars to stop prevailing fate?
Then down vast Pile, sink to thy funeral Dust,
Your Ruin speaks, the Almighty Gods are Just.

My ready Hands have your Commands performed,
And thus I run to clasp my bliss --

Hold off --

How, Madam! Have not my Actions purchased yet
Your favors?

They have, and I Will reward them,
Guards, seize the Traitor.
Oh my dear Murdered Lord --

Am I betrayed? Then Love I blow thee hence;
Spirit of Hate drawn from the Lees of Nature,
Assist me now, whilst thus I act Revenge --

Cursed Villain!
But thus thou shall not brag thy Treachery,
Bear him away, and let the Murderer taste
The subtil'st Pains e're tortured Wretch yet felt,
Worse than the Damned partake, or Devils invent.

They Are Merciful to thee, nor shall I find,
In Hell a Fury worse than Womankind.

What is the meaning of this Scene of Horror.

Oh Artaban! E're to the Shades of everlasting Night
My Soul its Journey makes. Hear me,
^ must be short my Summons calls me hence;
love was the cause of this, and Love to thee,
Thou best, thou most deserving of Mankind;
For thee, Great Phraates fell by my Command;
For thee, I met my Fate by Memnon's hand;
Alinda was the next that must have fell;
Forgive me, and my Death will prove a Blessing.

Alinda! Was she meant a Sacrifice?
What barbarous hand would crop so sweet a Flower?
But Oh, her very Name has chilled my Blood:
Lysander, my kind dearest best of Friends,
If thou would have me Live, Conduct me to her.

Oh, Sir, this Scene of horror you behold,
Comes short of what must follow your poor Alinda.

Ha! my heart bodes horror.

Denied your Life by her remorseless Father,
In wild Despair she took a fatal Draught,
That will with racking Torments end her Life.

Oh Gods! my fears prove true.

I burn, I burn, I Am all one Funeral Pile;
A flaming Bolt shoots through my hissing Veins;
Not as young Phaeton's Wheels that drove the
Sun and set the World on Fire.

Why was I born
To see this Day! What will the Gods do with me.

Oh for a Rock of Ice, a Bed of Snow
To lull my pains, and hush my sleeping Fever:
Here, take me quick, throw me into the Sea,
Pour Oceans over me, Plunge me, Sink me, Drown me,
If all the Waters of the Deep can quench
My blazing Mines of Fire.

No pitying God!
No aiding Power to drop these lovely Ruins.

Stand off, and let me go, I Will mount the Pole,
Drive round the Northern Wain, and freeze to a Star.
Oh it is a Glorious Chariot, ha, ha, ha.
Sherumna, Phraates, Artaban, look there,
Yonder Is my Love, Oh it is a fine* old Gentleman.
See how the Grizly Frost, and Reverend Isicles
Hang on his hoary Beard a front of Snow,
Soft as the Down of Doves, and Cool as Charity.

Answer my aching Heart, speak Life my Fairest.

Nay, I have choice of Lovers, if that old dull
Winter Fool don't like me, he has a Rival
Will be more kind, kind Death: Yes, he will be
Kind indeed; no angry Kings will hinder me
From his Embracing Arms; he has a Nuptial-Bed
Prepared for poor Alinda.

Sweetest Innocence.
Yet speak to thy mourning Artaban.

Ha, my dear Artaban, and art thou come,
To hand thy poor Alinda to her Grave!
It Is kind, it is wondrous kind; but how more kindly
Had our Stars smiled, might I have Lived, my
Artaban! What a long thousand thousand Years of Love
Which those dear Arms had given me, have I lost!
But I am not so poor; what Earth has robbed me off,
The Gods will give me back: There we shall meet
No Rival Queens, nor Tyrant Fathers part us,
There I shall mount to everlasting Joys,
To Love Heaven and Artaban.

She Is Dead, she is Dead, that Sovereign of my Soul
Has left the World and me; and dares this Traitor,
This Rebel heart outlive the fatal Blow?
No; Love's fair Martyr, thou have reached Heaven before me;
But thus I Will post to follow th^^
The Eternal Gordi^n's tied; so now no Tyrant's Sword
Shall cut these (...) of Love: Ah my Alinda,
I Will find the out (...) the blessed Walk above:
In that last Pa^^, (...) Love can never stray,
Thy own ^^^ght Beams, fair Saint, shall light thy way.

Farewell, young Hero: Was ever Faithful Pair like this?
When these
Last Wounds the Seals of Truth and Love they give,
How have they Died, to show us how to Live.


