A Mask? at a minutes warning? the Scene undesign'd, the Speakers imperfect,
the Masquers unready, the Dancers disordered, the Songs unset, the Music
uncertain, the house full, the Poets head empty. Invention under-foot, and
Expectation on tiptoe? All these linkt together make up a chain of rare
impossibilities, or a large Bill of impossible Items, whose sum total amounts
to --

Gentlemen, you have all lost your labors, and I am sorry they could make
choice of no other emissary but my self to administer to you this empty
entertainment, especial since I see such a firmament of bright Ladies like to
lose their longings. But the grand occasion of this confusion issues from the
motley humors of the Masquers, and their dissenting in Fancy; one forsooth
would have a Masque of Satyrs, another a dance of Devils, a third something in
honor of Citizens, a fourth a Scene of Soldiers; this would have fools, (...)
would have madmen; one does purpose to have no speeches, another speeches to
no purpose; And in the middle of this Medley, after Invitation had made a
progress to all their acquaintance, and Honor would not admit of a retreit,
they expose the whole model of it to my design, and at such a barren season
when I am not furnished with Invention enough for the post of a Ring, or a
verse for the Bell-man: This impossibility premised, I must humbly desire you
to favor the fault; convert your expectation to patience and at your own
leisure depart, and devote your selves to some Recreations of more certainty

When all is fit, we will make you recompense,
Which will be (let me see) some six weeks hence.
Why how now Poetry? whither go you?

Your name is Verity I think?

It Is true.

The Queen of Truth, I wonder to see you
On Earth again, and in this City too:

Why came you from Parnassus?

To escape harms,
They say that Ignorance hat took up Arms
Against the Muses.

But what make you here.

I Am studying of a Mask.

Let me appear
In your design, I shall enrich your Rhimes,
It Is royal to speak truth.

Not at all times:
They say Truth seeks no corners, but be it known,
If I should speak it, I must find out one.

What do they speak of me?

They say your rules
Are only fit for Children and for fools.

Say you so too?

Not for the world; to me
You are the only precious Deity;
But in a Mask ('las) we shall but abuse ye,
'Twere fit some holier place would oftener use ye,
It Is shrewdly feared in many a sacred seat,
That your white hand is only counterfeit.

Then I Will desist, for I shall but disease you,
Here comes a Lady that will better please you.

It Is Madam Fancy, in a luckier time
Thou could never come, since Reason mixed with Rhyme;
Great with Invention as I live; let me
Dear Fancy but express my Midwifrie.

It Will be abortive.

Have thou pangs? that smile
Presages well, prithee sit down a while,
Thou can not want a help in such a case,
Since there is so many Ladies here in place;
Good Verity come hold her back.

I find
When Fancy's working, Truth must come behind.

Like a good moral Madam.

All you do
Will come to nothing.

Fancy! help me now,
Or I shall lose my Name, my Fame, my Honor,
She laughs our-right, her throws come thick upon her.
Let the Spheres sing some Dialogue-like Song,
That may fit Fancy, and do Truth no wrong.

Fancy tell me, can thy youth
Any way compare with Truth?

No, but I would have you know it,
Fancy best becomes the Poet.

Verity does brightest move,
In Religion, or in Love.

Can a Stage the Truth secure,
When the Pulpit is impure?

Is It not fit that Truth should spring,
And grow up in every thing?

Truth may move in every part,
But a Politians heart.

Ha, ha, ha.

Her very torments tickle her, this throw
Delivers her, it is done; what is it trow?
What has Fate sent us here, let me peruse?
Ribons, Bells, bawbles, Masks, and dancing shoes?
Here are two papers too, this is the Plot,
And this the language. it is but small God wot;
A hasty labor, and, I fear, will be
Only a tittle 'bove a Timpanie;
We Will take it as it is, and so must you, -- begin,

Stay, I Will have my Scoene first now I am in.

With all my heart.

Though pride and envy scoff,
I Will bring you on.

Agreed, I Will bring you off.

Thus I charm the Scoene, appear
Great and lovely, chaste and clear;
In this Cabinet there dwells,
That which all the world excells.
From this Royal Throne does come
The great Lights of Christendom;
Nations renowned in Peace, and famed in Wars,
Good Poetry give them their Characters:

What must I do it without premeditation?

Yes, yes, you know Extempore's in fashion.

The first of these that enters in the Van,
Should (by his posture) be an Englishman,
A noble Islander, and one whose parts
Are filled with Love and Honor, Arms and Arts;
Much blessed with plenty, if the peevish Elf,
Could but forbear to quarrel with himself.
What is the next that enters in my view,
The bonny Scot, whose Bonnet is true blew?
Good mawraw for auday, a hardy Nation,
Although it seems (by some men's approbation,
Whose judgments are much above mine advanced)
Of late, he had better have sat still then danced.
What have we here? the Frenchman? it is he sure,
He looks so brisk, Tres humble Serviture,
A witty Nation, that has gained applause,
Not only for delights, but wholesome Laws,
And bears so many pretty toys about him,
The English cannot dress themselves without him.
What Melancholy persons this, whose motion
Declares him dedicate to Loves devotion?
It Is the Italian, he that disputes
Abroad with Turks, at home with Love and Lutes;
Who though by Cupid in this posture hurled,
His Vocal Music vyes with all the World.
Oh hone! Oh hone! poor Shon lost all his houses,
Here Is Cork and Tallow in a pair of Trowses,
The Idle Irishman, who avoids harms,
Much better by his legs, then by his Arms;
For he does fly (as by his feet you will find)
Like Mountain Snow blown by the Northern wind.
What Goblin have we here, whose belly struts,
As if he had a Navy in his guts?
It Is not the Dutchman; yes, it is he I see,
That stagger clears the dubiosity;
Ha lust^ck! he is come too, to delight ye,
From Poor distressed unto High and Mighty.
Here comes the haughty Spaniard, now give way,
Room for the Infantry, he must display
His footing too, He is a Nation which,
Is Constant, Learned, Valiant, and Rich,
Who now the better to delight his friends,
Has brought his Fiddles at his singers ends.

How like you this?

Not much amiss.

What now?

I have a handsome fancy in my brow,
Which if it take effect, and all hit right,
Shall fit your Genius with a new delight.

Go on, and as your faculty affords
Projections, mine shall put them into words;
In the mean time I hope these persons will,
Connive at our deficiencies of skill,
And cast their bright indulgent eyes upon.
The errors of our Recreation.
Hark in your ear.

No, I know what you mean.

Advance your Music, and obscure the Scene.

Why how now Power? why art so discontent?

I am in study how to circumvent
Thee prattling Policy; you that only are
Valiant in Logic: Death! a man of War
Is nothing now; Our Swords ye say make Schisms,
It Is you must rule all with your Sillogismes,
And your dogmatick dog-tricks.

Prithee peace.

I will not, I hate the name on it.

Let Us increase
Our amity, the time will come when we,
May jointly use both Power and Policy.

But in the mean time where shall I get the gilt,
Or can I feed upon my Basket-hilt
Stewed in a Headpiece? Will a Musquet-bullet
(Swallowed) appease the fury of my gullet?
Will Match make Sausages? or (if burning hot)
At a Cooks shop, will it discharge my shot?
Can my kind Colors cover my cold back,
When the spruce Drapers man cries What do you lack,
And gives me nothing? Must my Martial Powers
Fight Cowards quarrels? or guard Suburb whores?

Why you are very witty.

Like enuff,
Would you had the same cause; what if my Buff
Were cut in double Tripes?

Prithee be quiet.

I would fain think upon some sort of diet,
Till the time come ye talk on, I would gnaw,
Hunger is fiercer far then Martial Law.

Prithee be patient.

Pish!

Give me thy hand,
Without us two the plentifullest Land
Is liable to loss; How can it be
Safe, if it have not Power and Policy?

It Is right; but when the Power shall only lie
Contracted in the breast of Policy;
When Sophistry breaks Swords, and Warlike projects
Shall be destroyed by Rhetoric and Logicks;
When Aristotle and his musty Tribe,
Shall cause the valiant Man of Mars subscribe,
To live on Turnip tops, and cloth his back
With Sackcloth, when his belly should have Sack,
When we have only power to help, not hurt ye,
Where is our strength? where is the Martial virtue?

You miss your mark, your passion runs too quick,
We are members of one body Politic;
Indulgent Nature our Mysterious Mother,
Has made us mutually to serve each other;
And as the members of one body be
Reciprocal, so Power and Policy;
My feet are fitted to march on, or fly,
Eyes guide my hand, my hands do guard my eye,
My judgment regulates.

I know all these,
And we must only sight when Scholars please,
Till you direct we must be standers by,
You are the eyes; A pox of Books cry I,
They do no good, nor those that do invent 'um,
I Will prove it.

Come, Negatur Argumentum.

It Is done, do you chop Logic, and I Will draw.

Good Man of war, consider we have Law.

I there is the Devil on it, I must submit.

Rule without Reason's like War without wit.

But why when all is in peace are we neglected?
Would you in time of war be so rejected?

Nor is it fit; our labors never cease,
We aid your war more then you help our peace.

We guard ye then.

Ye do, from foreign showers.
Within Power is with us, without it is yours.

I do remember once upon a wall,
I saw a poor, but witty Soldier, scrall
This Verse, which though it was in Charcole hue,
And wildly writ, I Am sure the sense is true.
God and the Soldier men alike adore,
Just at the brink of danger, not before;
Wars being done, both are alike requited,
God is forgotten, and the Soldier slighted.

We all are liable to the same harms,
Some sorts of peace slight Arts as well as Arms,
It Is happier sometimes with him that delves,
Scholars quote Authors that cannot cloak themselves:
But hark, what sound is this?

A Drum?

A Lute.

A Fiddle.

Come sit down and let us be mute.

Woeful War I do abhor thee.

Puling peace I care not for thoe,
When the bright Bellona thunders.
I do fill the world with wonders.

Yes, and all the Camp with plunders.

Wanton Peace then yield to me,
And resign the victory.

What does Peace produce but pride?
And a thousand sius beside.

Who but is in love with peace,
She does make all sorrow cease,
And sweet Amity increase.

I execute Joves Justice.

I his love.

Then let us both in our own channels move,
And quench the strife which now so fierely burns,
Since Fate will have us rule the world by turns.

Alas poor Gown-man, now coms on thy dolor!

I can turn Soldier, thou can never make Scholar.

Madam?

Sir, what are you?

Do you not know me?

Even so fair Mistress Friendly.

Fair and Friendly are two good Epithites.

Better then foul and froward; I am one of those that had rather embrace lovely
levity, then divine deformity; a tractable vice prevails with me more then a
tyrannical virtue; I do not much affect the grim goodness of honesty, when it
looks ugly


You want no words to express your wantonness.


Nor deeds to direct my devotion to so sweet a Saint as thou art.


You breath nothing but Musk and Amber, these are fine Civit sentences.


Such Altars as this (my dear) must not want Incense.


Especially when honor is the Sacrifice, but I must leave ye.


I Would rather you would love me.


So I do.


How shall I know that?


You must make it the object of your faith, for your reason will never reach it.


No matter if my sense can.


What sense?


Such a sense as cannot miss your apprehension.


I shall easier understand you, then answer you: Love you! that have as many
Mistresses as there be minutes in a month, that has vowed affection to all
gradations, from the lofty Lady to the limber Lawndress, from Cloth of Bodkin
to Lindsey-woolsey, from the Court Curtezan to the Sunburned Suburbian? and
from 16. to 60. as they press Soldiers in Scotland


Do you know what you say?


Some are of opinion, that the exact Catalogue of thy Mistresses, would
supernumerate the Commonplace Books of a Registers Office


You are invective.


It Is verily believed, that thou have undone three poor Parishes with Cradles,
Milk and Swadling-clouts


How many Servants have you had pray?


Some two or three whining fellows which were quickly mortified with my answers.


They speak modestly that say betwixt the ages of 15. and one and twenty you
have had ^now to people a Plantation; but others who would bring these lesser
I^ms to a sum total, believe you have had as many received Suitors as would
raise a Royal Army against the Grand Siegnior, and leave a close Siege about
Constantinople


That Is a lie beyond all limitation.


That Messalina the Roman Empress will be esteemed a Virgin, when you appear in
the balance of comparison


Fie, fie.


To conclude your commendations, they say the four quarters of the world are
but your Diocese, and all the Nations which divided at the fall of Babel, have
attempted to reunite themselves in you affection


How many Ladies have you inveigled with this kind of Courtship.


Not enough to vye numbers with the Commonplace Books of a Registers Office.


Nor to serve your Constantinople Leaguer with Lawndresses, my memory shall
record your expressions, when it may be you would be glad to sue for
composition, and give all the Coin in your Counting House for an Act of
oblivion. So fare ye well Sir


No, no, you are not gone yet, for although I cannot stop the volubility of
your tongue, I can stay the celerity of your heels


But not the activity of my hands, if you abuse me thus.


You will not sight.

I cannot promise you, it is not the rude Reputation you have amongst your
fellow Hectors, your Seas of Sink-mee's, nor Artillery of Dam-mee's can defend
you from my fury, when you provoke me thus in point of Honor


Prithee good Frank put thy patience in practice, and let me kiss thee into
composition* for all my expressions, I know thou art as virtuous as the Queen
of beauty, lovely as Lais, and as chaste as Phryue


Thank ye, one was a whore in Petty-france, and the other two Pick-pockets in
Bloomesbury


Oh fie on thee, they were all Princes, and died 1000. years ago.


The matter is not great, I shall rather accept of your single assertion, then
tire my head to turn over your lascivious library, to find the truth on it;
therefore pray release my hand, and give my feet their freedom


To do what?


To leave the vanity of your company, and pursue my occasion.


Whither?


You shall not be my Secretary in that.


But I will before you or your secrets go out of my handling.


You will not be rude.


Whither do you go?


I will not tell you.


Then you shall go with me to a place where welcome shall present it self to you
in comely company, diverse dishes, brisk wine, melodious Music, sprightly Songs,
dapper attendance, no Reckning, and where all your senses shall be feasted if
they could multiply from 5. to 50. where sensuality is sublimate, Liberty
dances a Lavalto, and Concupiscence cuts cross-capers


In what part of the world is this Pagan Paradise?


I Will tell thee the occasion, you know Jack Chowse?


He whom the Hectors fight Duels about?


The same; This is his birthday, this very minute he writes twenty one, and is
of age to challenge the valiant Inheritance of three thousand pounds per annum;
he begins his reign to night, therefore cancel all your occasions, and go with
me to the Coronation: Such a Tavern-Jubilee you shall not see again these 50.
years


Whose with you?


Only some of his Nobility Phil Frantic, Jack Rant, Tom Terrible, and I.


What women have you?


None, that I know, thou shall be Queen of the Festivals, and I Will be Lord of
Misrule


I cannot go, but hark you.


Will you be sure?


How often have I failed you.




No, no, I Will have a Song, I Will have a Song.

As I live they are at it.

By and by, by and by, anon, anon Sir.

A quart of Claret in the Coxcomb, score.

When Coxcombs come of Age the Taverns roar.

DRink your wine away,
It Is a joviall day,
let our Cups and Cash be free,
Beer and Ale are both
But the sons of sloth,
let us then in wine agree,
To taste a quart
Of every sort,
the thinner and the thicker,
That spite of chance
We may advance
the nobler and the quicker,
Who shall by vote
Of every throat,
be crowned the King of Liquor.

Muscadell, avaunt,
Bloody Aligant,
shall have no free vote of mine.
Claret is a Prince,
And he did long since,
In the royal order shine,
His face is spread
With sprightly red,
and so he loves to see men,
Where he bears sway,
His subjects they
shall be as good as Freemen.
But here is the blot,
Almost forgot,
He Is too much burned by women.

By the River Rhyne,
Is a valiant Vine,
that can all our veyns replenish,
Let us then consent,
To the Government,
and the Royal Rule of Rhenish,
The German Wine,
Will warm the Chine,
and frisk in every veyn,
'Twill make the Bride,
Forbear to chide,
and call him to it again;
But that is not all,
He Is much too small,
to be our Sovereign.

We shall never think
Of a nobler Drink
then with votes advanced high,
Let us all proclaim
Good Canary's name,
Heaven bless his Majesty,
He is a King
In every thing,
whose nature does renownce ill,
He Will make us skip,
And nimbly trip,
from the seeling to the Groundcill,
Especially
When Poets be
Lords of the Privy Council.

But a Vintner he
Will his Taster be,
there is no man that can him let,
And a Drawer that
Has a good Pallat,
shall be made Squire of the Gimlet.
The Barr-boyes shall,
Be Pages all,
a Tavern well prepared,
In joviall sort
Shall be his Court,
where nothing may be spared;
Wine-Porters shall,
With shoulders tall,
be Yeomen of the Guard.

If a Cooper we
With a Red-nose see,
but in any part oth' T ow
That same Cooper shall,
With his Adds Royal,
be the Keeper of the Crown,
Young wits that wash
Away their Cash
in wine and Recreation,
That bate dull Beer,
Are welcome here,
to give their approbation,

So shall all you,
That will allow
Canary's Coronation.

She Is come, she is come, now I love thee.


You will, when you know what I have done to advance your jollity.


Prithee what?


I Will tell you, Madam Fancy lay in lately, and I very abruptly came just now
from the Gossips feast, there is Mrs. Obscene the Midwife, Mrs. Luscious the
Confectioners wife, Mrs. Light the Feathermakers, and Mrs. Prattle the Lawyers,
not a man amongst them, they are now in the height of protesting, the Midwife
has almost got a rattle already, and talks at such a rate 'twould make thee
blush to hear her


And that is much you will say.


They are come from home to con^lude in the Tavern, there is but this wainscot
partition betwixt you, which being dexterously removed (by a pair of drawers)
the Scene will be discovered, and you may join companies


Agreed, agreed.


Here Is to you Gossip.


Thank ye good Gossip.


Mother my service to you.


Thank you good daughter.


Pray wind up your bottom.


A Diamond of that bigness: where is Mrs. Friendly*


Hark, de' ye hear 'um, I Will be gone, they call for me, remember my
instructions


I warrant ye.


COme let us be merry,
Till wine make us weary,
'Twill fright away Sullens and Chollicks,
Let Husbands rake Riches,
We Will reach at their Breeches,
And spend an odd remnant in frollicks.
While we bear chink about,
Lively let us drink about,
And be as jocund as may be,
Let men wast wealth about,
We Will drink this Health about,
To the good wife and her Baby.

Let Us drink our Sack away,
Some say 'twill take away
Every cold swelling and tumor,
If my feet fail,
And my Husband do rail,
I Will tell him Tom-fool it is my humor.
Let Us prittle and prattle,
We Will twittle and twattle,
This glass of Canary we will toss up,
Let none of us spill it,
But drink as we fill it,
For it is a good Health to my Gossip.

As I live pure company, Ladies shall we prevail with you to mix societies?


I have acquainted these Ladies with your desires, and they are well contented
to mingle in a Dance with you


Come Gentlemen, sit your selves, here am I.


Faith Mr. Frolic I see what you drive at.


Well, well, no more, we will talk the rest in private.


Why how now Sleep, what do thou mean to stretch?
Open thine eyes, it is I, my name is Watch.

Prithee disturb me not, thou know I am
As far from hurt, as truth is free from blame.

I think so too, prithee hold up thy eyes,
I Will tell thee of a thousand rarities.

Good Watch depart, keep company with those
Whose evil actions make all men their foes;
Fly to forlorn hopes, seek out the Cell
Of vigilant Revenge, or go and dwell
With Husbands jealousies, or Rebels fears;
Oh* for a nap of sixteen hundred years.

Thou shall not sleep a minute by this light,
The Prince of darkness and the Queen of Night,
Intend to revel, betwixt twelve and one,
This night they keep their Coronation,
And you must needs be there.

Did ever see
Sleep at a Masque, or tricks of jollity?
I shall spoil all; what spirits can I raise?
Sleep goes to Sermons oftener then to Plays.

The Queen will have it so.

So let it be.
I hope she will send her Coach to carry me,
For if I walk, I shall be out of breath;
Who will be there?

Your elder brother Death,
And his great opposite the Queen of Life.

Where ever they meet there must needs be strife,
And I abhor contention, I Will not go,
I must seek out a place where pleasures flow,
Where plenty strews the room with wine and diet,
Where cares are banished by the Queen of quiet,
Where health and wealth, prosperity and ease,
Are in contention only how to please;
Where Amity is thought the best defense,
And Conscience has no crime, or else no sense,
Where war and Law, and Faction are unknown,
Where Lovers sing, and Organs play alone,
Where all things are presented to the eyes,
Beyond what man can wish for, or devise.

Where will you find all this?

Far from your knowing,
Where I keep Court these joys are ever flowing;
The showers of April, and Apollo's beams,
Shall not produce such plenty as my Dreams;
Nor can the liquid lips of the South wind,
Send such sweet succor as in Sleep we find;
The Lover (though his Lady prove extreme)
Spite of her pride, enjoyes her in a Dream.
The Beggar when by Sleep stowed under hatches,
May tell more pieces then his coat has patches;
The Turkey-Captive in a slumber laid,
Is safe at home, and all his Ransom paid:
The hungry Lazar, in a Dream, is able
To sit in plenty at a Princes table.

How long shall they this Paradise partake?

For everlasting, if they never wake.

If this be all your drowzy power can do,
Beggars and slaves are only fit for you;
Give me the watchful eye, the active hand,
The copious Intellect that can command
Misterious designs, and all that are
Conservative in Peace, and used in War.

Prithee be quiet, what a noise you keep,

I Will tell thee what I am.

Do, and I Will sleep.

I am the prop of prayer, life of devotion,
By my assistance men command the Ocean,
I guide all Ships that every billow bears.

Pillow bears?

I teach them in a storm to work out fears,
Without my aid the Spaniards, Turks, nor Russians,
Could sail against the foaming repercussions.

Cushions, I can sleep without Cushione, if you would but leave your bawling.


I make the Student wake, I watch the Centry,
That does expect each minute the foes entry:
I keep the Camp in war, the Court in peace,
By me the Plowman sows and reaps increase;
No cunning consultation could be held
Without my help, in City or in Field;
If I do not assist, nothing can be
Secure, that tends to Power or Policy;
Where I am wanting all things must miscarry,
That are Divine, Moral, or Military;
I watch with them that laugh, and them that weep,
Indeed what is that I do not?

Sleep.

It Is true, that is thy dominion; where were thou,
When fruitful Albians Alabaster brow,
In the warm blood of Civil War was dyed?

I was amongst them too on the Kings side.

Your faculty and theirs did well agree.

Yes faith, I took a nap, and that took me.

Sleep is the sluggards joy, the Drunkards diet,
The Freemans fetters.

It Is the Plowmans quiet.

The Soldiers ruin.

But the poor man's wealth.

The Magistrates disease.

The sick man's health.

The dull man's bedfellow.

The Lovers balm.

The Statesmans Lethargy.

The Seamans calm.
Whilst watching either suits with him that grieves,
Or else with Ranters, Rebels, Whores and Thieves.

A very comely Character, but come,
Lift up your eyelids, or I Will beat a Drum
About your ears.

What would you have me do?

Attend the Festivals.

Come then let us go;
But I shall never hold out.

We two must lead
The King and Queen, when they their measures tread.

A match, a match, that Dance must needs be taking,
Which is performed between sleeping and waking.

WElcome you whose love and leisures,
do design you for delight,
Freely come and taste the pleasures,
which attend the Queen of Night;
Here you may securely prove.
All the liberty of Love.

Here no Spy does lurk in bushes,
to betray you to the light,
Virgins may secure their blushes,
underneath the vayl of Night.
In this Court such pleasures be,
As the Sun did never see.

You that rob and kill for treasure,
get ye hence and come not near,
It Is the Prince of Darkness pleasure,
no such person shall appear.
They do banish all from hence,
But true Love and Innocense.

Great Prince of Darkness welcome to my Court.

We thank you Princess for this Royal sport,
Which is so innocent, the eye of day,
Could she look on us, need not turn away;
All the transactions of this short nights story,
The Sun might see in his Meridian Glory.
Where Is Watch?

At hand my Liege.

Go still the Ocean,
And bid the Spheres make Music to our motion.

MAids that are well and young,
List to the Bell-mans Song,
Cupid has tidings to tell ye,
He will not spare his Darts,
Therefore prepare your hearts,
you shall have Love by the b^lly.
Do not retire in snuff,
There will be fire enuff,
when ye have quenched all in the household,
Though you have hinder locks,
Love and his Tinder-box,
will be let in a Moushole.
Men that have Ware enough,
And well may spare enough,
force not your wives to go borrow,
Mind what I speak I pray,
Always at break of day
bid your fair Ladies good morrow.
What noise is that.

An outcry in the City.

Go seek out Watch, I told ye I would fit ye,
I have given them their dose, how the fools snort,
If they should sleep till noon 'twould be rare sport;
But here comes Watch, there ly your wise Projectors.

How now what news?

A nest of whors and Hectors.

Un charm the watch.

Ho Sirs, what guard do you keep

Murder abroad, and all the watch asleep?

Come before the Constable, knock 'um down; take away their weapons.


The morning star appears.

Come let us to bed.

We vanish when Aurora's curtain's spread.

Hail fair Aurora.

Poetry good morrow.
Why art thou up so soon?

I come to borrow
Light from your luster Madam, your bright eyes
Discover Natures vast varieties;
You and Apollo have the keys of health,
Whose treasury discloseth wit and wealth;
You are the Students Queen, the wanderers guide,
The Springs Imperial Crown, the Summers pride;
Flora that drinks her mornings draught in dew,
Could never spread her mantle but for you.
Though Phebe shine refulgent in her sphere,
She shows but sickly when your beams appear,
You are fair Fancies Midwife, all the worth
She labors with all night, your hands bring forth;
To tell how bright, how sweet, how rich, how ruddy
Aurora is, would ask a twelve-months study.

Leave off, you will make me blush else I protest.

It Is my intent, a blushing morning's best.

When saw you Madam Fancy.

Never since
I did employ her to present the Prince
Of darkness with some Revels, which were done
To celebrate his Coronation.

That was but lately, they are newly gone,
The Queen and he went off as I came on.

You never move together.

Never since
We parted from the Chaos, when the Prince
Of all the world divided us.

Who Is here?

It Is Madam Fancy sure.

Well met my dear.

Your servant virtuous Madam.

welcome from
The Court of Darkness.

I am glad thou art come,
For without thy assistance there is no hope
Of a conclusion.

What must be the scope
Of this design?

Something that may appear
For a grand Masque.

A Dance? what if it were
Performed by the 9. Worthies.

That Is too common.

Or the 9. Muses?

There Is too much of woman
To express footing well.

Then ye shall have
The 7. Sciences.

They are too grave.

The 7. deadly sins.

They are too rude.

The 7. Champions.

They are too proud.

The 4. Complexions.

No, they are not new.

The 4. patts of the world.

They are too few.

Five Senses with a Devil and a Zany.

Preposterous.

12 Sibils.

They Are too many.

You Are hard to please.

I would have something come,
As from the bancks of blessed Elysium,
Where Immortality does lead the Spirits
Of Heroes, lately stellified for merits,
Where the white souls of those bright Lovers move,
Who made their lives a sacrifice to Love,
And in deep Melancholy dyed to please,
The cruel coyness of their Mistresses,
Where those triumphant Worthies are, whose blood
By war was wasted for their Countries good;
Where pious Priests and Princes reassume
The heads and Crowns they lost in Martyrdom,
Where Poetry is mounted above chance,
And the poor power of Pride and Ignorance;
Where the Fields bloom with everlasting Summers,
And Sufferers are only Overcommers.

Shall this be your device?

I think 'twill be
The best design for a Catastrophie.

Why then it shall be so, I like the story,
That which begins with Truth, should end with Glory.

It Is very proper.

Go about it then.

would Madam Verity were here again,
Where shall I look for her?

I know not where.

I Will search the City.

She is seldom there.

Look in the Camp, for they pretend to good.

'Twill be in vain, she never deals in blood.

I Will seek for her at Court.

That were mere dotage,
You Will sooner find her in some poor man's Cottage,
Whose low-pric'd labor hardly will sustain
His house with bread, and free his bed from rain.

Are those her Rendezvous?

See, she is come.

Whence came you Madam?

From Elysium.

And in a happy minute; it is from thence
At this time we attend Intelligence.

What is your wish?

That you would pleas to grace
Us with a glimpse of that eternal place.

It is a great request, no carnal eye
Can view the splendors of Eternity.

Not by reflection?

Yes, if you can get
An Optic from Fidelia's Cabinet,
The Queen of Faith, through that Glass I Will show,
What all the world without it cannot know.

It will not fit this place.

Why then go on.
By Fancy, and I Will give direction.

Content.

I must depart, I see the Sun
Begins to mount to the Meridian;
My Regency declines.

See us begin it,
We shall not much exceed the twentieth minute;
Advance your concord, let the Spheres proclaim,
Cromatick welcomes in Aurora's name.

COme ye happy Souls that be
Clad with Immortality,
Ascend your Thrones,
Though the World did use ye hard,
Here ye shall have full reward,
For all your groans.
Here the Lover never wears,
Willow-Garlands, sighs nor tears.

You that have by cruel War,
Been reduced to what you are,
with many a wound
For your conscience, here you may
Enter into Royal pay,
And all be crowned;
They that so are forced to yield.
Win an everlasting Field.

You who have without vain glories,
Been fair Truth's dispensatories,
And firmly stood,
In this place shall surely know,
Prophets may to Heaven flow,
In their own Blood.
Bare pretenders never come
Into our Elysium,
Therefore let each active spirit,
Show the joy he does inherit.

TRuth is departed, Fancy fled, and I
Am only left to the Artillery
Of all your censures; in your power it lies,
To make our hopes prove heaps of Batteries,
But that we are better confirmed you mean,
Rather to succor then besiege the Scene;
We have opinions that you do not come
To dam us in our own Elysium,
To rowt us from our Revels, and advance
Your valor against a Fiddle and a Dance;
Then you will destroy us, for (alas!) we are
But slenderly provided for a war,
A Brest-work of bright Ladies makes us bow,
One Eye will charge a Masquer through and through;
Do but consider this, as yet our trust is,
That your bright Mercy will outshine your Justice,
And that you will look through these Inventions,
To the civilities of our Intentions:
We could be careless, and (as some have done)
Forbear to court your Approbation,
Upon considerations that the tasks
Of our endeavors, live not upon Masks;
But we shall not with such rough tempers ceize ye,
Since our desires are every way to please ye.

