MArtino?

Signior Francisco? you are the luckiest Gentleman to meet
Or see first in a morning: I never saw you yet
But I was sure of money within less than half an hour.

I bring you the same luck still.

What you do not?
I hope Sir you are not come for an other Warrant?

Yes faith, for an other Warrant.

Why there is my dream come out then. I never dreamed of a buttock but I was sure
to have money for a Warrant. It is the luckiest part of all the body to me: let
every man speak as he finds. Now your Usurer is of opinion, that to dream of
the Devil is your wealthier dream; and I think if a man dream of that part
that brings many to the Devil, it is as good; and has all one smatch indeed;
for if one be the flesh, the others the broth: So it is in all his members and we
mark it; if Gluttony be the meat, Leachery is the Porredge, they are both boyld
together, and we Clerks will have our modicum too, though it conclude in the
two penny chop: Why Sir, Signior Francisco


'Twas her voice sure,
Or my soul takes delight to think it was,
And makes a sound like hers.

Sir, I beseech you.

It is the prettiest contrived building, this:
What Poesie's that I prithee?

Which Sir, that
Under the great brass Squirt?

I that Sir, that

From fire, from water, and all things amiss,
Deliver the house of an honest Justice?

There Is like to be a good house kept then, when fire and water's forbidden to
come into the Kitchen. Not yet a sight of her? this hour's unfortunate. And
what is that yonder prithee? O loves famine, There Is no affliction like thee. I,
I hear you Sir


You Are quicker eared than I then: you hear me
Before I heard my self.

A gift in friendship
Some call it an instinct.

It may be
The other's the sweeter phrase though; Look you Sir,
Mine own wit this, and it is as true as turtle;
A Goose-quill and a Clerk, a Constable and a Lanthorn,
Brings many a Baud from Coach to Cart, and many a Thief to one turn.

That one turn helped you well.

'Tas helped me to money indeed for many a Warrant. I am 40. dollars the better
for that one-turn; and 'twould come off quicker it were nere a whit the worse for
me. But indeed when Thieves are taken, and break away twice or thrice one after
an other, there is my gains; then goes out more Warrants to fetch'em again: one
fine nimble villain, may be worth a man ten dollars in and out a that fashion;
I love such a one with my heart, I, and will help him to escape to, and I can;
hear you me that: I Will have him in at all times at a months warning: nay, say I
let him run like a Summer Nag all the Vacation: See you these blancks, I Will send
him but one of these bridles, and bring him in at Michaelmas with a vengeance:
nothing kills my heart, but when one of 'em dies Sir; then there is no hope of
more money: I had rather lose at all times two of my best kindred, than an
excellent Thief: for he is a Gentleman I Am more beholding to


You betray your mystery too much Sir. Yet no comfort?
It Is but her sight that I waste precious time for,
For more I cannot hope for, she is so strict,
Yet that I cannot have.

I Am ready now Signior.

Here are blanck Warrants of all dispositions, give me but the name and nature
of your Malefactor, and I Will bestow him according to his merits

This only is the excuse that bears me out,
And keeps off impudence and suspicion
From my too frequent coming: what name now
Shall I think on, and not to wrong the house?
This Coxcomb will be prating. -- One Astilio,
His offense wilful murder.

Wilful murder? oh I love a life to have such a fellow come under my fingers;
like a beggar that is long a taking leave of a fat lowce, I Am loath to part with
him, I must look upon him over and over first; are you wilful? in faith, i will be
as wilful as you then


Martino?

Mistrisse?

Make haste, your Master's going.

I Am but about a wilful murder forsooth, I Will dispatch that presently.

Good morrow Sir: oh that I durst saymore.

It Is gone again, since; such are all life's pleasures,
No sooner known, but lost; he that enjoys 'em
The length of life, has but a longer dream,
He wakes to this in the end, and sees all nothing.

He cannot see me now; i will mark him better
Before I be too rash: sweetly composed he is;
Now as he stands, he is worth a woman's love,
That loves only for shape, as most on's do:
But I must have him wise, as well as proper,
He comes not in my Books else, and indeed
I have thought upon a course to try his wit: Violetta.

Mistrisse.

Yonder Is the Gentleman again.

Oh sweet Mistrisse
Pray give me leave to see him.

Nay take heed,
Open not the window and you love me.

No, I Have the view of whole body here, Mistrisse,
At this pore little slit, oh enough, enough,
In troth it is a fine outside.

I see that.

Has curld his hair most judiciously well.

I there is thy love, now, it begins in barbarism: she buys a Goose with
feathers, that loves a Gentleman for's hair; she may be cozend to her face
Wench. Away: he takes his leave. Reach me that letter hither, quick* quick
Wench


Nay look upon it, and spare not: every one cannot get that kind of Warrant from
me Signior. Do you see this prick in the bottom, it betokens power and speed, it
is a privy mark, that runs betwixt the Constables and my Mr. Those that cannot
read, when they see this, know it is for Leacherie or Murder, and this being
away, the Warrant comes gelded, and insufficient


I thank you Sir,

Look you; all these are Nihils,
They want the punction.

Yes, I see they do Sir,
There Is for thy pains, mine must go unrewarded.
The better love, the worse by fate regarded.

Well, go thy ways, for the sweetest Costomer that ever Penman was blessed
withal: now will he come for an other to morrow again; if he hold on this
course, he will leave never a knave in the town within this twelve month: no
matter, I shall be rich enough by that time


Martino?

Say you forsooth.

What paper's that the Gentleman let fall there?

Paper? It Is the Warrant I hope, if it be i will hide it, and make him pay for it
again. No Pox: it is not so happy

What is it Sirrah?

It Is nothing but a letter forsooth.

Is that nothing?

Nothing, in respect of a Warrant Mistress.

A letter? why 'tas been many a man's undoing Sir.

So has a Warrant, and you go to that Mistress.

Read but the superscription; and away with it:
Alas it may concern the Gentleman nearly.

Why Mistress, this letter is at home already.

At home, how mean your Sir?

You shall hear Mistress. To the deservingst of all her Sex, and most worthy
of his best respect and love, Mrs. Philippa Brandino


How Sir, to me?

To you Mistress.

Run, as thou love my honor, and thy life,
Call him again, I Will not endure this injury:
But stay, stay now I think on it, it is my credit,
I Will have your Masters Counsel: ah base fellow
To leave his loose lines thus; it is even as much
As a poor honest Gentlewomans undoing,
Had I not a grave wiseman to my Husband:
And thou a vigilant varlet to admit
Thou car'st not whom

Alas it is my office Mistress.
You know you have a Kirtle every year,
And it is within two months of the time now,
The velvets coming over: pray be milder; a man that has a place must take
money of any body: please you to throw me down but half a dollar, and I Will make
you a warrant for him now, that is all I care for him


Well, look you be clear now from this foul conspiracy
Against mine honor; or your Masters love to you
That makes you stout, shall not maintain you here;
It shall not: trust to 't. --

This is strange to me now:
Dare she do this, and but eight weeks to New Years tide?
A man that had his blood as hot as hers now, would fit her with
French Velvet: I Will go near it.

If this be a wrong to modest reputation
Be you the censurer Sir, that are the Master
Both of your fame and mine.

Signior Francisco?
I Will make him fly the land.

That will be hard Sir;
I think he be not so well feathered Master,
H'as spent the best part of his patrimony.

Hark of his bold confederate.

There thour't bitter;
And I must chide thee now.

What should I think Sir?
He comes to your man for Warrants.

There it goes then;
Come hither knave: Comes he to you for Warrants?

Why, what of that Sir?
You know I give no Warrants to make Cuckolds,
That comes by fortune, and by nature Sir.

True, that comes by fortune, and by nature; Wife
Why do thou wrong this man?

He needs no Warrant Master, that goes about such business, a Cuckold-maker
carrys always his warrant about him


La: has he answered well now? to the full?
What cause have thou to abuse him?

Hear me out I pray:
Through his admittance, h'as had opportunity
To come into the house, and court me bodly.

Sirrah, you are foul again me thinks.

Who I Sir?

You gave this man admittance intoth'house.

That Is true Sir, you never gave me any order yet
To write my Warrants in the street.

Why sure thou take delight to wrong this fellow, Wife:
Hah, cause I love him.

Pray see the fruits: see what has left behind here:
Be angry where you should be: there is few Wives
Would do as I do

Nay I Will say that for thee
I never found thee but honest.

She Is a beast
That ever was found otherwise.

Read Martino,
Mine eyes are sore already, and such business
Would put'em out quite

Fair, dear and incomparable Mistrisse, --

Oh! every letter draws a tooth me thinks.

And it leads mine to watring.

Here Is no villainy?

My love being so violent, and the opportunity so precious in your husbands
absence to night, who as I understand takes a journey this morning


Oh plot of villainy.

Am I honest think you Sir?

Exactly honest, perfectly improov'd: on, on Martino.

I will make bold dear Mistress, though your chastity has given me many a
repulse, to wait the sweet blessings of this long desired opportunity, at the
back gate, between nine and ten this night


I feel this Ins-a-Court man in my Temples.

Where if your affection be pleased to receive me, you receive the
faithfullest that ever vowed service to woman -- Francisco


I will make Francisco smart for it.

Show him the letter, let him know, you know him;
That will torment him: all your other courses
Are nothing Sir to that: that breaks his heart.

The strings shall not hold long then: Come Martino.

Now if Francisco have any wit at all,
He comes at night; if not, he never shall.

Nay mark, mark it Francisco: It was the naturalest courtesy that ever was
ordaind; A young Gentleman being spent, to have a rich Widow set him up again:
to see how fortune has provided for all mortalities ruins; your College for
your old standing Scholar, your Hospital for your lame creeping Soldier, your
Baud for your mangled Rorer, your open house for your Beggar, and your Widow
for your Gentleman: ha Francisco


I Sir, you may be merry: you are in hope of a rich Widow.

And why should not thou be in hope of an other, if there were any spirit in
thee, thou art as likely a fellow as any is in the company. I Will be hanged now
if I do not hit the true cause of thy sadness; and confess truly in faith; thou
have some land unsold yet, I hold my life


Mary I hope so Sir.

A Pox ont, have I found it? 'slight away with it with all speed man. I was
never merry at heart while I had a foot: why man, Fortune never minds us, till
we are left alone to our selves: for what need she take care for them, that do
nothing but take care for themselves? why, do think if I had kept my lands
still, I should ever have looked after a rich Widow? alas, I should have
married some poor young Maid, got five and twenty children, and undone my self


I protest Sir, I should not have the face though, to come to a rich Widow with
nothin


Why, art thou so simple, as thou make thy self? do think in faith I come
to a rich Widow with nothing


I mean with state not answerable to hers.

Why there is the fortune, man, that I talkd on;
She knows all this, and yet I am welcome to her.

I* that is strange Sir.

Nay more to pierce thy hard heart, and make thee sell thy land if thou'st any
grace: she has amongst others two substantial Suitors

One, in good time be it spoke, I owe much money to,
She knows this too, and yet I Am welcome to her,
Nor dares the unconscionable Rascal trouble me;
She Has told him thus, those that profess love to her
Shall have the liberty to come and go,
Or else get him gone first; she knows not yet
Where fortune may bestow her, she is her gift,
Therefore to all will show a kind respect.

Why this is like a woman: I have no luck in it.

And as at a Sheriffs table, O blessed custom,
A poor indebted Gentleman may dine,
Feed well, and without fear, and depart so,
So to her lips, fearless I come and go?

You may well boast, you are much the happier man Sir

So you would be, and you would sell your land Sir

I have heard the circumstance of your sweet fortunes:
Prithee give ear to my unlucky tale now.

That Is an ill hearing; but come on for once Sir.

I never yet loved but one Woman.

Right, I begun so too; but I have loved a thousand since.

Pray hear me Sir; but this is a man's wife.

So has five hundred of my thousand been.

Nay see and you will regard me.

No? you see I do,
I bring you an example in for every thing.

This man's wife

So you said.

Seems very strict

Ha, humh.

Do you laugh at that?

Seems very strict you said,
I hear you man, in faith you are so jealous still.

But why should that make you laugh?

Because she seems so: you are such an other --

Nay Sir, I think she is.

You cannot tell then.

I dare not ask the question I protest
For fear of a repulse, which yet not having.
My mind's the quieter, and I live in hope still.

Ha, hum: this it is to be a landed man. Come, I perceive
I must show you a little of my fortune, and instruct you:
Not ask the question?

Me thought still she fround Sir?

Why that is the cause fool, that she looked so scurvily.
Come, come, make me your woman, you will never do it else,
I Will show you her condition presently.
I perceive you must begin like a young Vaulter, and get up at horse-tail,
before you get into the saddle; have you the boldness to utter your mind to me
now, being but in hose and doublet? I think if I should put on a Farthingale,
thou would never have the heart to do it


Perhaps I should not then for laughing at you Sir.

In the mean time I fear I shall laugh at thee without one.

Nay you must think friend, I dare speak to a woman.

You shall pardon me for that friend; I will not think it,
till I see it.

Why you shall then: I shall be glad to learn too, Of one so deep as you are.


So you may Sir; Now it is my best course to look mildly, I shall put him out at
first else


A word, sweet Lady.

With me Sir? say your pleasure.

O Ricardo,
Thou art too good to be a woman long.

Do not find fault with this, for fear I prove
Too scornful, be content when you are well used.

You say well Sir. Lady I have loved you long.

It Is a good hearing Sir. If he be not out now i will be hanged.

You play a scornful woman? I perceive Ricardo, You have not been used to
'em: why i will come in at my pleasure with you: alas it is nothing for a man to
talk, when a woman gives way to it: one shall seldom meet with a Lady so kind,
as thou playdst her


Not altogether perhaps: he that draws their pictures must slatter 'em a
little, they will look he that plays 'em should do it a great deal then


Come, come i will play the woman, that I Am used too,
I see you never wore shoe that pincht you yet,
All your things comes on easy.

Say you so Sir?
I Will try your Ladyship 'faith: Lady well met.

I do not think so Sir.

A scornful Gom,
And at the first dash too: my Widow never gave me such an answer, i will to you
again Sir

Fairest of creatures, I do love thee infinitely.

There Is no body bids you Sir.

Pox on thee thou art the beastliest crossest Baggage that ever man met
withal; but i will see thee hanged sweet Lady ere I be daunted with this: why
you are too awkward Sirrah


Hang thee base fellow.

Now by this light, he thinks he do indeed,
Nay then have at your plumb-tree faith, i will not be foild,
Though you seem to be careless Madam, as you have enough wherewith all to be,
yet I do, must, and will love you


Sir, if you begin to be rude, i will call my woman.

What a pestilent Queans this? I shall have much ado with her I see that; tell
me as you are a woman Lady, what serve kisses for? but to stop all your mouths


Hold, hold Ricardo.

Disgrace me VVidow.

Ait mad, I Am Francisco?

Signior Ricardo, up, up.

Who is it Francisco?

Francisco quoth a? what are you mad Sit?

A bots on thee, thou do not know what injury thou have done me, I was in the
fairest dream, this is your way now, and you can follow it


It Is a strange way me thinks.

Learn you to play a woman not so scornfully then,
For I am like the Actor that you spoke on,
I must have the part that overcomes the Lady,
I never like the Play else. -- Now your friendship,
But to assist a subtle trick I have thought on,
And the rich Widows mine within these three hours.

We should be proud of that Sir.

List to me then.
I Will place you too, I can do it handsomely
I know the house so well, to hear the conference
'Twixt her and I, she is a most affable one,
Her words will give advantage, and i will urge 'em
To the kind proof, to catch her in a Contract,
Then shall you both step in as witnesses,
And take her in the snare.

But do you love her?
And then 'twill prosper.

By this hand I do,
Not for her wealth, but for her person too.

It shall be done then.

But stay, stay Francisco,
Where shall we meet with thee some two hours hence now?

Why hark you Sir.

Enough, command my life,
Get me the widow, i will get thee the wife.

Oh that is now with me past hope; yet I must love her,
I would I could not do it.

Yonder Is the villain Master.

Francisco; I am happy.

Let Us both draw Mr. for there is no body with him; Stay, stay Mr.

Do not you draw till I be ready too,
Let Us draw just both together, and keep even.

What and we killed him now, before he saw us?

No, then he will hardly see to read the letter.

That Is true: good counsel marry.

Marry thus much Sir, You may kill him lawfully, all the while he is a reading
on it, as an Anabaptist may lie with a Brothers wife, all the while he is a sleep


He turns; he looks: Come on Sir, you, Francisco,
I loved your father well, but you are a villain:
He loved me well too; but you love my wife Sir,
After whom take you that? I will not say
Your Mother played false.

No Sir, you were not best.

But I will say, in spite of thee, my wife's honest.

And I, my Mistress.

You may, i will give you leave.

Leave, or leave not, there, she defies you Sir;
Keep your adulterous sheet to wind you in,
Or cover your forbidden parts at least,
For fear you want one; many a leacher may
That sins in Cambrick now.

And in Lawn too Master.

Nay read, and tremble Sir.

Now shall I do it Mr? I see a piece of an open seam in his Shirt, shall I run
him in there, for my Sword has never a point


No, let him foam a while.

If your Sword be no better than mine, we shall not kill him by daylight, we
had need have a Lanthorn


Talk not of Lanthorns, he is a sturdy Lecher,
He would make the horns fly about my ears.

I apprehend thee: admirable woman,
Which to love best I know not; thy wit, or beauty.

Now Sir, have you well viewd your bastard there,
Got of your lustful brain? give you joy on it.

I thank you Sir, although you speak in jest,
I must confess, I sent your wife this letter,
And often courted her, tempted, and urged her.

Did you so Sir?
Then first before I kill thee, I for-warn thee my house*

And I before I kill thee, for-warn thee my office; dye to morrow next, thou
never getst Warrant of me more, for love, or money


Remember but again, from whence I came Sir,
And then I know you cannot think amiss of me.

How Is this?

Pray hear him: it may grow to a peace:
For Mr. though we have carried the business nobly, we are not altogether so
valiant as we should be


Peace, thou say true in that: what is it you would say Sir?

Was not my Father, (quietness be with him)
And you sworn Brothers?

Why Right: that is it urges me.

And could you have a thought that I could wrong you,
As far as the deed goes?

You took the course Sir.

To make you happy, and you rightly weighd it.

Troth i will put up at all adventures Mr.
It comes off very fair yet.

You in years
Married a young Maid: what does the world judge think you?

Birlady Mr. knavishly enough I warrant you,
I should do so my self.

Now to damp slander,
And all her envious and suspicious brood,
I made this friendly trial of her constancy,
Being Son to him you loved; that now confirmed
I might advance my Sword against the world
In her most fair defense, which joys my spirit.

Oh Mr. let me weep while you embrace him.

Francisco; is thy fathers soul in thee?
Lives he here still? what, will he show himself
In his male seed to me? give me thy hand,
Me thinks it feels now like thy fathers to me,
Prithee forgive me.

And me to, prithee.

Come to my house, thy father never missed it.

Fetch now as many Warrants as you please Sir,
And welcome too.

To see how soon man's goodness
May be abused.

But now I know thy intent
Welcome to all that I have.

Sir, I take it:
A gift so given, hang him that would forsake it.

Martino, I applaud my fortune, and thy Counsel.

You never have ill fortune when you follow it.
Here was things carried now, in the true nature of a quiet Duello;
A great strife ended, without the rough Soldier, or the --
And now you may take your journey.

Thou art my glee Martino.

SErvellio.

Mistress.

If that fellow come again,
Answer him without me: i will not speak with him.

He in the Nutmeg-colourd band forsooth.

I, that spic'd-Coxcomb Sir: Never may I marry again
If his right worshipful idolatrous face
Be not most fearfully painted, painted, so hope comfort me,
I might perceive it peel in many places,
And under's eye, lay a betraying fowlness,
As Maids sweep dust of the house, all to one corner,
It showed me enough there, prodigious pride
That cannot but fall scornfully. I Am a woman,
Yet I praise heaven, I never had the ambition
To go about to mend a better Workman,
She ever shames her selfi'th' end, that does it.
He that likes me not now, as heaven made me,
I will never hazard hell to do him a pleasure;
Nor lie every night like a Woodcock in past
To please some gaudy Goose in the morning:
A wise man likes that best, that is it self,
Not that which only seems, though it look fairer;
Heaven send me one that loves me, and I Am happy,
Of whom i will make great trial ere I have him,
Though I speak all men fair, and promise sweetly,
I learn that of my Suitors, it is their own,
Therefore injustice 'twere to keep it from 'em.

And so as I said sweet Widow.

Do you begin where you left Sir?

I always desire when I come to a Window, to begin in the middle of a sentence,
for I presume she has a bad memory of a woman that cannot remember what goes
before


Stay, stay Sir, let me look upon you well,
Are not you painted too?

How, painted, Widow?

Not painted Widow, I do not use it trust me Sir.

That makes me love thee.

I mean painted Gentleman,
Or if you please to give him a greater style Sir;
Blame me not Sir, its a dangerous age I tell you,
Poor simple dealing women had need look about 'em.

But is there such a fellow in the world, Widow,
As you are pleased to talk on?

Nay, here lately Sir.

Here? a Pox, I think I smell him, it is Vermillion sure, ha: oil of Ben, do
but show him me Widow, and let me never hope for comfort, if I do not
immediately gueld him, and grind his face upon one of the stones


Suffices you have expressed me your love and valor, and manly hate against that
unmanly pride: but Sir, i will save you that labor, he never comes within my door
again


I Will love your door the better while I know it Widow; a pair of such Brothers
were fitter for Posts without door indeed, to make a show at a new-chosen
Magistrates gate, than to be used in a Woman's Chamber: No, sweet Widow, having
me, you have the truth of a man, all that you see of me, is full mine own, and
what you see, or not see, shall be yours: I ever hated to be beholding to art,
or to borrow any thing but money


True, and that you never use to pay again.

What matter is it? if you be pleased to do it
For me, I hold it as good.

Oh, soft you Sir I pray.

Why 'yfaith you may and you will.

I know that Sir.

Troth, and I would have my will then if I were as you.
There Is few women else but has.

But since I cannot hav't in all Signior, I care not to have it in any thing.


Why you may hav't in all, and you will Widow.

Pish, I would have one that loves me for my self Sir,
Not for my wealth: and that I cannot have.

What say you to him that does the thing you wish for?

Why here is my hand, i will marry none but him then.

Your hand, and faith.

My hand, and faith.

It Is I then.

I shall be glad on it trust me: shrew my heart else.

A match.

Give you joy, sweet Widow.

Joy to you both.

How?

Nay, there is no starting now, I have you fast Widow,
You Are witness Gentlemen.

We Will be deposed on it.

Am I betrayed to this then? then I see
It Is for my wealth; a woman's wealth's her Traitor.

It Is for love chiefly, I protest sweet Widow,
I count wealth but a fiddle to make us merry.

Hence.

Why you are mine.

I do renonunce it utterly.

Have I not hand and faith?

Sir, take your course.

With all my heart; ten courses and you will Widow.

Sir, Sir, I Am not so gamesome as you think me,
I Will stand you out by law.

By Law? O cruel merciless woman,
To talk of law, and know I have no money.

I will consume my self to the last stamp,
Before thou gett'st me.

'Life, i will be as wilful then too: I Will rob all the Carriers in Christendom,
but i will have thee, and find my Lawyers money

I scorn to get thee under forma pauperis,
I have too proud a heart, and love thee better.

As for you Gentlemen, i will take course against you;
You came into my house without my leave;
Your practices are cunning, and deceitful;
I know you not, and I hope law will right me.

It is sufficient that your husband knows 'em,
It Is not your business to know every man,
An honest wife contents her self with one.

You know what you shall trust to, pray depart Sir,
And take your rude confederates along with you,
Or I will send for those shall force your absence:
I Am glad I found your purpose out so soon.
How quickly may poor women be undone.

Lose thee? by this hand i will fee fifteen Counselors first, though I undo a
hundred poor men for 'em, and i will make 'em yaul one an other deaf, but i will have
thee


Me?

Thee.

I, fret thy heart out.

Were I he now
Il'd see thee starve for man before I had thee.

Pray counsel him to that Sir, and i will pay you well.

Pay me? pay your next husband.

Do not scorn't gallant: a worse woman than I,
Has paid a better man than you.

1 Why how now sweet Widow?
Oh kind Gentlemen,
I am so abused here.

Abused?

What will you do Sirs? put up your weapons.

Nay, they are not so easily drawn, that I must tell you you, mine has not been
out this three ears; mary in your cause Widow, 'twould not be long a drawing.
Abused? by whom Widow


Nay, by a beggar.

A beggar? I Will have him whipped then, and sent to the house of Correction.


Ricardo? Sir.

Ricardo? nay by'th' mass, he is a Gentleman beggar, he will be hanged before he
be whipped. Why you will give me leave to clap him up I hope


It Is too good for him; that is the thing he would have,
He would be clapped up whether I would or no methinks;
Placed two of his companions privately,
Unknown to me, on purpose to entrap me
In my kind answers, and at last stole from me,
That which I fear will put me to some trouble,
A kind of verbal courtesy, which his witnesses
And he forsooth call by the name of contract.

O politic villain,

But I am resolved Gentlemen,
If the whole power of my estate can cast him,
He never shall obtain me.

Hold you there Widow,
Well fare your heart for that in faith.

Stay, stay, stay,
You broke no gold between you?

We broke nothing Sir.

Nor drunck to one an other?

Not a drop Sir.

You Are sure of this you speak?

Most certain Sir.

Be of good comfort wench, i will undertake then
At mine own charge to overthrow him for thee.

O do but that Sir, and you bind me to you,
Here shall I try your goodness. I Am but a woman,
And alas, ignorant in Law businesses,
I Will bear the charge most willingly.

Not a penny,
Thy love will reward me.

And where love must be,
It is all but one purse now I think on it.

All comes to one, sweet Widow.

Are you so forward?

I know his mates Attilio and Francisco,
I Will get out process and and attach 'em all,
We Will begin first with them.

I like that, strangely.

I have a daughter run away I thank her,
I Will be a scourge to all youth for her sake:
Some of 'em has got her up.

Your daughter? what Sir? Martia.

I a shake wed her,
I would have married her to a wealthy Gentleman,
No older than my self, she was like to be shrewdly hurt Widow.

It was too happy for her.

I Am of thy mind.
Farewell sweet Widow, i will about this strait,
I Will have 'em all three put into one Writ,
And so save charges.

How I love your providence.

Is my Nose board? I Will cross ye both for this,
Although it cost me as much o'th'other side,
I have enough, and I will have my humor.
I may get out of her, what may undo her too;
Hark you sweet Widow, you must now take heed,
You be of a sure ground, he will overthrow your else.

Marry fair hope forbid.

That will he: mary le' me see, le' me see: pray how far past it between you
and Ricardo


Farther Sir
Than I would now it had, but I hope well yet.

Pray let me hear't: I Have a shrewd guess of the Law.

Faith Sir, I rashly gave my hand and faith
To marry none but him.

Indeed?

I, trust me Sir.

I Am very glad on it, I Am an other witness,
And he shall have you now.

What said you Sir.

He shall not want money in an honest cause Widow,
I know I have enough, and I will have my humor.

Are all the world betrayers.

Pish, pish, Widow.
You Have borne me in hand this three months, and now fobd me
I Have known the time when I could please a woman,
I Will not be laughed at now; when I Am crossed, I Am a Tiger;
I have enough, and I will have my humor.

This only shows your malice to me Sir,
The world knows you have small reason to help him,
So much in your debt already.

Therefore I do it,
I have no way but that to help my self;
Though I lose you, I will not lose all Widow;
He marrying you, as I will follow't for him,
I Will make you pay his debts, or lie without him.

I lookd for this from you.

I have not deceived you then:
Fret, vex, and chafe, I Am obstinate where I take.
I Will seek him out, and cheer him up, against her,
I have no charge at all, no child of mine own,
But two I got once of a scowring woman,
And they are both well provided for, they are in the Hospital:
I have ten thousand pound to bury me, and I will have my humor.

A man must have a time to serve his pleasure,
As well as his dear Friend, I Am forced to steal from 'em,
To get this night of sport for mine own use*
What says her amiable witty letter here?
'Twixt nine and ten, now it is 'twixt six and seven,
As fit as can be; he that follows Lechery,
Leaves all at six and seven, and so do I me thinks:
Sun sets at eight, its 'bove an hour high yet,
Some fifteen mile have I before I reach her,
But I Have an excellent horse; and a good gallop,
Helps man as much as a provoking Banquet.

Here Is one of 'em, begin with him first Officers.

By virtue of this writ we attach your body Sir.

My body? 'life, for what?

Hold him fast Officers.

The least of us can do it, now his Sword's off Sir,
We have a trick of hanging upon Gentlemen,
We never lose a man.

O treacherous fortune,
Why what is the cause?

The Widow's business Sir,
I hope you know me?

For a busy Coxcomb,
This fifteen year, I take it.

Oh you are mad Sir,
Simple though you make me, I stand for the Widow.

She Is simply stood for then: what is this to me Sir,
Or she, or you, or any of these flesh-hooks?

You Are like to find good bayl before you leave us,
Or lie till the Suit's tried.

O my loves misery.

I Am put in trust to follow't, and I Will do it with all severitie;

Build upon that Sir.

How I would curss my self.

Look, here is Francisco,
Will you believe me, now you see his qualities?

It Is strange to me.

I tell you it is his fashion,
He never stole away in's life from me,
But still I found him in such scurvie Company;
A pox on thee Francisco wilt never leave thy old
Tricks, are these lowsy Companions for thee?

Pish, pish, pish.

Here they be all three now: 'prehend 'em Officers.

What Is this?

I gave you warning enough to make away,
I Am in for the Widows business, so are you now.

What, all three in a nooze? this is like a Widows business indeed.


She Has catchd you Gentlemen, as you catchd her,
The Widow means now, to begin with you Sir.

I thank her heartily, she has taught me wit: for had I been any but an ass, I
should have begun with her indeed: by this light, the Widows a notable
House-wife, she bestirs her self, I have a greater mind to her now thau ever I
had: I cannot go to prison for one I love better I protest, that is one good
comfort, And what are you I pray Sir, for a Coxcomb


It seems you know me by your anger Sir.

I Have a near ghess at you Sir.

Ghess what you please Sir,
I Am he ordaind to trounce you, and indeed
I am the man must carry her.

I, to me.
But I Will swear she is a beast, and she carry thee.

Come, where is your Bail Sir, quickly, or away.

Sir, I Am held wrongfully, my Bayls taken already.

Where is it Sir, where?

Here they be both: pox on you, they were taken before I Would need of 'em, and you
be honest Officers let us Bail one another, for by this hand, I do not know who
will else: -- 'odds' light is he come too? I Am in for midnight then, I shall
never find the way out again: my debts, my debts


I Am like to dye in the hole now.
We have him fast old Signior, and his Consorts,
Now you may lay action on action on him.

That may I Sir, in faith.

And I Would not spare him Sir.

Know you me Officers?

Your bounteous worship Sir.

I know the rascal so well, I dare not look upon him.

Upon my worth deliver me that Gentleman.

Which Gentleman?

Not you Sir, you are too hasty;
No, nor you neither Sir: pray stay your time.

There Is all but I now, and I dare not think he means me.

Deliver me Ricardo.

O sure he lies.
Or else I do not hear well.

Signior Ricardo.

Well, what is the matter? you may go, who let us you?

It is his worships pleasure Sir to Bayl you.

Bayl me?

I will, I Sir, look in my face man,
Thou'st a good cause, thou wilt pay me when thour't able?

I, every penny, as I am a Gentleman.

No matter if thou do not, then, I Will make thee,
And that is as good at all times.

But I pray Sir,
You go against the Hair there.

Against the Widow you mean Sir,
Why it is my purpose truly, and against you too,
I saw your politic Combination,
I was thrust out between you: here stands one
Shall do as much for you, and he stands rightest,
His cause is strong and fair, nor shall he want
Money, or means, or friends, but he shall have her,
I Have enough, and I will have my humor.

Hang thee; I have a purss as good as thine.

I think they are much alike, they are rich knaves both.
'Heart, and I take your railing at my Patron Sir,
I Will cramp your joints.

Let him alone sweet honey,
I thank thee for thy love though.

This is wonderful.

Oh Ricardo,
It Is seven, struck in my pocket: I lose time now.

What say Francisco?

I have mighty business,
That I never thought on: get me Baild, I Am spoild else.

Why you know, it is such a strange miraculous courtesy,
I dare not be too forward, to ask more of him,
For fear he repent this, and turn me in again.

Do somewhat and you love me.

I Will make trial 'faith
May't please you Sir: -- 'life if I should spoil all now?

What say Ricardo?

Only a thing by'th'way Sir,
Use your own pleasure.

That I like well from thee.

'Twere good, and those two Gentlemen were Bayld too,
They Are both my witnesses.

They Are well, they are well:
And they were Bayld, we know not where to find 'em,
Let 'em go to prison, they will be forth-comming the better,
I have enough, and I will have my humor.

I knew there was no more good to be done upon him,
It Is well I Have this, heaven knows I never looked for it.

What plaguey luck had I to be ensnared thus?

O, patience.

Pox O your comfortable ignorance.

Martino, we ride slow.

But we ride sure Sir,
Your hasty riders often come short home Mr.

'Bless this fair company.

Here he is again too,
I am both shamed, and crossed.

See thou who is yonder, Martino?

We ride slow, i will besworn now Mr.

How now Francisco, art thou got before me?

Yes, thank my fortune, I am got before you.

What no? in hold?

I, of my troth poor Gentleman,
Your worship Sir, may do a good deed to Bayl him.

Why do not you do it then?

La you Sir now, my Mr. h'as that honesty
He Is loath to take a good deed from you Sir.

I Will tell you why I cannot, else I would Sir.

Luck I beseech thee,
If he should be wrought to Bail me now, to go to
His wife, 'twere happiness beyond expression.

A matter but of controversy.

That Is all, trust me Sir.

Francisco shall never lie for it; he is my friend,
And I will Bayl him.

He Is your secret friend Mr.
Think upon that.

Give him his liberty Officers,
Upon my peril, he shall be forth coming.

How I am bound to you?

Know you whom you cross Sir?
It Is at your Sisters suit, be well advised Sir,

How, at my Sisters suit? take him again then.

Why Sir, do you refuse me?

I Will not hear thee.

This is unkindly done sir.

It Is wisely done sir.

Well shot, foul malice.

Flattery stinks worse sir.

You Will never leave till I make you stink as bad sir.

Oh Martino, have I this for my late kindness?

Alas poor Gentleman, do complain to me?
Thou shall not fare the worse for it: Hark you Master,
Your sisters suit said you?

I sir, my wifes sister.

And shall that dant you Master? think again,
Why were your mothers suit; your mothers suit,
Mark what I say, the dearest suit of all suits,
You Are bound in conscience sir to bayl this Gentleman.

Yea, am I so, how proov'st thou that Martino?

Have you forgot so soon, what he did lately?
Has he not tried your wife to your hand master?
To cut the throat of slander and suspicion;
And can you do too much for such a man?
Shall it be said, I serve an ingratfull master?

Never Martino; I will bayl him now,
And 'twere at my wives suit.

It Is like to be so.

And I his friend, to follow your example Mr.

Precious Martino.

You Have done wondrous well sir.
Your sister shall give you thanks.

This makes him mad sir.

We Will follow't now toth' proof.

Follow your humor out,
The widow shall find friends.

And so shall he sir,
Money and means.

Hear you me that old huddle.

Mind him not, follow me and i will supply thee,
Thou shall give all thy Lawyers double fees,
I Have burryed money enough to burry me,
And I will have my humor.

Fare thee well once again my dear Francisco,
I prithee use my house.

It is my purpose sir.

Nay you must do it then; though I am old, I Am free.

And when you want a warrant, come to me.

That will be shortly now, within this few hours.
This fell out strangely happy. Now to horse,
I shall be nighted; but an hour or two
Never breaks square in love; he comes in time
That comes at all; absence is all loves crime.

COme, come, let us watch the event on yonder hill,
If he need help, we can relieve him sudainly.

I, and with safety too, the hill being watched Sir.

Have you the Blew cotes and the Beards?

They Are here Sir.

Come, come away then, a fine Cock shoot evening.

Kuck before, and Kuck behind, and c.

Troth you are the merriest, and delightfulst company Sir,
That ever Traveller was blessed withal,
I praise my fortune that I overtook you Sir.

Pish, I Have a hundred of 'em.

And believe me Sir,
I Am infinitely taken with such things.

I see there is music in you, you kept time me thought
Pretty and handsomely with your little hand there.

It only shows desire, but troth, no skill Sir.

Well, while our horses walk down yonder hill Sir,
I Will have an other for you.

It rids way pleasantly.

Le' me see now: one confounds an other sir,
You Have heard this certainly: Come my dainty Doxes.

Oh, that is all the Country over sir,
There Is scarce a Gentlewoman, but has that pricked.

Well, here comes one I Am sure you never heard then.
I keep my Horse, I keep my Whore,
I take no Rents, yet am not poor;
I traverse all the Land about,
And yet was born to never a foot:
With Partridge plump, with Woodcock fine
I do at midnight often dine;
And if my Whore be not in case,
My Hostess daughter h'as her place;
The Maids sit up, and watch their turns,
If I stay long the Tapster mourns;
The Cook-maid has no mind to sin,
Though tempted by the Chamber lin;
But when I knock, oh how they bustle,
The Ostler yawns, the Geldings justle.
If Maid but sleep, oh how they curse her!
And all this comes of, Deliver your purse sir.

How Sir?

Few words: quickly come, deliver your purse sir.

You Are not that kind of Gentleman, I hope sir,
To sing me out of my money?

It Is most sit
Art should be rewarded: you must pay your Music sir
Where ere you come.

But not at your own carving.

Nor am I common in it: Come, come your purse sir.

Say it should prove the undoing of a Gentleman?

Why sir, do you look for more conscience in us, than
In Usurers? young gentleman, you have small reason for that in faith.

There it is, and all I have; and so truth comfort me,
All I know where to have.

Sir, that is not written
In my belief yet; search, it is a fine evening,
Your horse can take no harm: I must have more sir.

May my hopes perish, if you have not all sir,
And more I know than your compassionate charity
Would keep from me, if you but felt my wants.

Search, and that speedily: if I take you in hand,
You Will find me rough, me thinks men should be ruled,
When they are so kindly spoke too, fie upon it.

Good fortune, and my wit assist me then,
A thing I took in haste, and never thought on it:
Look sir, I Have searched, here is all that I can find,
And you are so covetous, you will have all you say,
And I Am content you shall, being kindly spoke too.

A pox of that young devil of a handful long.
That 'as fraid many a tall thief from a rich purchase.

This, and my money sir, keeps company;
Where one goes, the other must; assure your soul
They vowed never to part.

Hold, I beseech you sir.

You rob a prisoners box, and you rob me, sir.

There it is again.

I knew 't would never prosper with you;
Fie, rob a younger Brother, oh take heed sir,
It Is against nature that, perhaps your Father
Was one sir, or your Uncle, it should seem so
By the small means was left you, and less manners.
Go, keep you still before me, and do you hear me;
To pass away the time to the next Town,
I charge you sir, sing all your Songs for nothing --

Oh horrible punishment. -- A Song:

Honest Gentleman.

How now, what art thou?

Stand you in need of help?
I made all haste I could, my Master charged me.
A Knight of worship; he saw you first assaulted.
From top of yonder hill.

Thanks honest friend.

I taste this trick already. --

Look, he is gone sir,
Shall he be stopped; what is he?

Let him go sir;
He can rejoice in nothing, that is the comfort.

You have your purse still then?

I, thanks fair fortune,
And this grym handful.

We were all so fraid o'you,
How my good Lady cried Ohelp the gentleman,
It Is a good woman that: but you are too mild sir,
You should have marked him for a villain 'faith
Before h'ad gone, having so sound a means too.

Why there is the jest man; he had once my purse.

Oh* villain, would you let him escape unmasacred?

Nay, hear me sir, I made him yield it straight again,
And so hope bless me, with an uncharg'd Pistol.

'Troth I should laugh at that.

It was discharged Sir,
Before I meddled with it.

I Am glad to hear't.

Why how now, What Is your will?

Hoh, Latrocinio, Occulto, Silvio. --

What are you caught sir?

The Pistol cannot speak.

He was too young,
I ever thought he could not; yet I feared him.

You Have found out ways too merciless to betray
Under the veil of friendship, and of charity.

Away sirs, bear him in to the next Cops, and strip him.

Brandino's Copps, the Justice?

Best of all sit, a man of law?
A Spider lies unsuspected in the corner of a buckeram bag, man.

What seek you sirs? take all and use no cruelty,

You shall have Songs enough.
How round the world goes, and every thing that is in it,
The Tides of gold and silver, ebb and flow in a minute:
From the Usurer to his Sons, there a current swiftly runs,
From the Sons to Queans in chief, from the gallant to the Thief,
From the Thief unto his Host, from the Host to Husbandmen;
From the Country to the Court, and so it comes to us again.
How round the world goes, and every thing that is in it,
The Tides of gold and silver, ebb and flow in a minute.

What time of night is it?

Time of night do you called?
Its so late, it is almost early Mistress.

Fie on him, there is no looking for him then;
Why sure this Gentleman apprehends me not.

It Is happy then y'arrid of such a fool Mistress.

Nay sure Wench, if he find me not out in this
Which were a beaten path to any wiseman,
I Will never trust him with my reputation;
Therefore I made this trial of his wit,
If he cannot conceive what is good for himself,
He will worse understand what is good for me.

But suppose Mrs. as it may be likely,
He never saw your letter?

How thou plyest me,
With suppositions? why I tell thee wench,
It Is equally as impossible for my husband
To keep it from him, as to be young again,
Or as his first wife knew him, which he brags on
For bearing children by him.

There Is no remedy then,
I must conclude Francisco is an Ass.

I would my letter, wench, were here again,
I Would know him wiser ere I sent him one;
And travail some five year first.

So h'ad need methinks,
To understand the words, methinks the words
Themselves should make him do it, had he but the perseverance
Of a Cock sparrow, that will come at philip,
And can nor write, nor read poor fool, this Coxcomb
He can do both, and your names but Philippa,
And yet to see, if he can come when is called,

He never shall be called again for me sirrah.
Well, as hard as the world goes, we will have a Song we nch,
We Will not sit up for nothing.

That Is poor comfort though.

Better then any's brought, for ought I see yet? So set to your Lute.

1 If in this question I propound to thee
Be any, any choice,
Let me have thy voice.
2 You shall most free.
I Which had thou rather be
If thou might choose thy life,
A Fools, a fools Mistress,
Or an old man's wife?
2 The choice is hard, I know not which is best,
One ill you are bound too, and I think that is least.
1 But being not bound, my dearest sweet,
I could shake off the other.
2 Then as you lose your sport by one,
You lose your name by the other.
1 You counsel well, but love refuses,
What good counsel often chooses.

I have got my self unbound yet: merciless villains,
I never felt such hardness since life dwelt in me;
It Is for my sins: That light in yonder Window
That was my only comfort in the woods,
Which often the trembling of a leaf would lose me,
Has brought me thus far, yet I cannot hope
For succor in this plight, the world's so pittiless,
And every one will fear or doubt me now:
To knock will be to bold, i will to the gate,
And listen if I can hear any stirring.

Was ever man so crossed? no it is but sweat sure,
Or the dew dropping from the leaves above me,
I thought'thad bled again: these wenching businesses
Are strange unlucky things, and fatal fooleries,
No mar'l so many gallants die ere thirty,
It Is able to vex out a man's heart in five year,
The crosses that belong to it: first arrested,
That set me back two mangey hours at least,
Yet that is a thing my heat could have forgiven,
Because arresting, in what kind soever,
Is a most Gentleman-like affliction:
But here, within a mile of the town forsooth,
And two mile off this place, when a man's oath
Might ha'been taken for his own security,
And his thoughts brisk, and set upon the business,
To light upon a roguy flight of Thieves,
Pox on'em, here is the length of one of their whistles,
But one of my dear Rascals, I pursued so,
The Gaol has him, and he shall bring ou'ts fellows:
Had ever young man's love such crooked fortune?
I Am glad I Am so near yet; the Surgeon bad me too
Have a great care; I shall never think of that now.

One of the Thieves come back again? I Will stand close;
He dares not wrong me now, so near the house,
And call in vain it is, till I see him offer't.

'Life, what should that be? a prodigious thing
Stands just as I should enter, in that shape too,
Which always appears terrible.
What ere it be, it is made strong against me
By my ill purpose. For'tis man's own sin
That puts on armor upon all his evils,
And gives them strength to strike him: were it less
Then what it is, my guilt would make it serve;
A wicked man's own shadow has distracted him:
Were this a business now to save an honor,
As it is to spoil one, I would pass this then
Stuck all hels horrors i'thee: now I dare not.
Why may't not be the spirit of my Father
That loved this man so well, whom I make haste
Now to abuse? And I have been crossed about it
Most fearfully hitherto, if I well think on it;
Escaped death but lately too, nay most miraculously;
And what does fond man venture all these ills for,
That may so sweetly rest in honest peace?
For that which being obtaind, is as he was
To his own sense but removed nearer still
To death eternal: what delight has man
Now at this present, for his pleasant sin
Of yesterdaies committing? alas, it is vanished,
And nothing but the sting remains within him.
The kind man baild me too; I will not do it now
And 'twere but only that: how blessed were man,
Might he but have his end appear still to him,
That he might read his actions in the event?
'T would make him write true, though he never meant.
Whose Check so ere thou art, Fathers, or Friends,
Or Enemies, I thank thee, peace require thee;
Light, and the lighter Mistress both farewell.
He keeps his promise best that breaks with hell.

He Is gone to call the rest, and makes all speed,
I Will knock what ere befalls, to please my fears,
For no compassion can be less than theirs.

He Is come, he is come; oh are you come at last sir?
Make little noise, away, he will knock again else.

I should have bin at I stria by daybreak too,
Near to Valerias house the wealthy Widows,
There waits one purposely to do me good.
What will become of me?

Oh, you are a sweet Gallant, this your hour?
Give me your hand; come, come sir, follow me,
I Will bring you to light presently: softly, softly sir. Exeunt.

I should have given him up to all my thoughts
The dullest young man, if he had not found it;
So short of apprehension, and so worthless,
He were not fit for woman's fellowship;
I Have been at cost too for a Banquet for him;
Why't would have killed my heart, and most specially
To think that man should ha'no more conceit;
I should have thought the worse on's wit for ever,
And blamed mine own for too much forwardness.

Oh Mistress, Mistress.

How now, what is the news?

Oh, I was out of my wits for a minute and a half.

Hah?

They are scarce settled yet Mistress.

What Is the matter?

Do you ask that seriously?
Did you not hear me squeak?

How? sure you are out of thy wits indeed.

Oh, I Am well now,
To what I was Mistress.

Why where is the gentleman?

The gentleman's forth-comming, and a lovely one,
But not Francisco.

What sai'st, not Francisco?

Pish, he is a coxcomb, think not on him Mistress.

What Is all this?

I'ave often heard you say, ye'ad rather have
A wise man in his shirt than a Fool featherd,
And now fortune has sent you one, a sweet young gentleman,
Robbed even to nothing but what first he brought with him,
The slaves had stripped him to the very shirt Mistress,
I think it was a shirt, I know not well,
For Gallants wear both now adays.

This is strange.

But for a face, a hand, and as much skin
As I durst look upon, he is a most sweet one;
Francisco is a child of Egypt to him:
I could not but in pity to the poor gentleman,
Fetch him down one of my old Masters Suits.

'Twas charitably done,

You Would say Mistress, if you had seen him as I did.
Sweet youth, I Will be sworn Mistress he is the loveliest
Proper'st young gentleman, and so you will say your self,
If my Masters clothes do not spoil him, that is all the fear now,
I would't had been your luck to have seen him
Without'em, but for scarring on you.

Go, prithee fetch him in whom thou co^mend'st so,

Since fortune sends him surely we will make much on him;
And better he deserves our love, and welcome,
Than the respectless fellow 'twas prepared for;
Yet if he please mine ese never so happily,
I will have trial of his wit, and faith,
Before I make him partner with my honor,
'Twas just Francisco's case, and he deceived me;
I Will take more heed of the next sor't; perhaps now
To furnish his distress, he will appear
Full of fair promising Courtship; but I Will prove him then
For a next meeting, when he needs me not,
And see what he performs then when the storm
Of his so rude misfortunes is blown over,
And he himself again: A distressed man's flatteries
Are like vows made in drink, or bonds in prison,
There Is poor assurance in 'em: when he is from me,
And in's own power, then I shall see his love.
'Masse here he comes.
Never was star-cross'd gentleman
More happy in a courteous virgins love,
Than I in yours.

I Am sorry they are no better for you,
I wished 'em hansomer, and more in fashion,
But truly Sir, our house affords it not:
There is a Suit of our Clerks, hangs in the garret,
But that is far worse than this, if I may judge
With modesty of men's matters.

I deserve not
This, dear, and kind gentlewoman, is yond' your Mistress?

Why trust me, here is my Husband young again,
It is no sin to welcome you, Sweet gentleman.

I am so much indebted, courteous Lady,
To the unmatched charity of your house,
My thanks are such poor things they would but shame me.

Beshrew thy heart for bringing o'him: I fear me
I have found wit enough already in him,
If I could truly but resolve my self
My husband was thus handsome at nineteen,
'Troth I should think the better of him at fourscore now.

Nay Mistress, what would he be, were he in fashion,
A hempen curse on those that put him out on it,
That now appears so handsome, and so comely in clothes
Able to make a man an unbeleever,
And good for nothing but for shift, or so
If a man chance to fall in the ditch with better?
This is the best, that ever I marked in 'em,
A man may make him ready in such clothes
Without a candle.

I for shame of himself Wench.

My Master does it often in winter mornings,
And never sees himself till he be ready.

No, nor then neither, as he should do Wench.
I am sorry gentle Sir, we cannot show you
A courtesy, in all points answerable
To your undoubted worth: your name I crave sir.

Ansaldo, Lady.

It Is a noble name Sir.

The most unfortunate now.

So do I think truly
As long as that Suites on.

The most unfitting,
And unprovidest sir of all our courtesies,
I do presume is that you have past already,
Your pardon but for that, and wee'r encouraged.

My faithful service, Lady.

Please you Sir
To taste the next a poor slight Bancket, for sure I think you were*
Unluckily prevented of your supper sir.

My fortune makes me more than amends Lady,
In your sweet kindness, which so nobly shown to me,
It makes me bold to speak my occasions to you:
I am this morning, that with cleerness now
So cheerfully hastens me, to meet a Friend
Upon my states establishing, and the place
Ten mile from hence: oh, I am forced unwillingly
To crave your leave for it, which done I return
In service plentiful.

Is It so important?

If I should fail, as much as my undoing.

I think too well of you, to undo you sir,
Upon this small acquaintance.

My great happiness.

But when should I be sure of you here again sir?

As fast as speed can possibly return me.

You will not fail?

May never wish go well with me then.

There Is to bear charges sir.

Courtesy dwells in you.
I brought my horse up with me from the woods,
That Is all the good they left me, against their wills too,
May your kind breast never want comfort Lady,
But still supplied, as liberally as you give.

Farewell sir, and be faithful.

Time shall prove me.

In my opinion now, this young man's likeliest
To keep his word, he is modest, wise, and courteous;
He has the language of an honest soul in him:
A woman's reputation may lie safe there,
I Am much deceived else, h'as a faithful eye
If it be well observed.

Good speed be with thee sir;
He puts him to it in faith.

Violetta.

Mistress.

Alas, what have we done wench?

What Is the matter Mistress?

Run, run, call him again; he must stay tell him;
Though it be upon's undoing, wee'r undone else,
Your Masters clothes, their known the Country over.

Now by this light that is true, and well remembered,
But there is no calling of him, he is out of sight now.

Oh what will people think?

What can they think Mistress?
The Gentleman has the worst on it: were I he now
I Would make this ten mile, forty mile about
Before Il'd ride through any market town with 'em.

Will he be careful think?

My life for yours Mistress.

I shall long mightily to see him again.

And so shall I, I shall never laugh till then.

IT goes well hitherto, my sweet Protector.

I, and shall still to the end, to the end my honey,
Wherefore have I enough, but to hav't go well sir?

My whole State on it; thou overthrowst him Widow.

I hope well still sir.

Hope? be certain Wench:
I make no question now, but thou art mine,
As sure as if I had thee in thy night-geer.

By'r Lady, that I doubt Sir.

Oh it is clear wench
By one thing that I marked.

What Is that good sweet sir?

A thing that never faild me.

Good sir, what?

I heard our Counselor speak a word of comfort
Invita voluntate, hah, that is he wench,
The word of words, the precious chiefy's faith.

Invita voluntate, what is the meaning sir?

Nay there I leave you, but assure you thus much,
I never heard him speak that word in my life,
But the cause went on's side, that I market ever.

Do, do, and spare not: thou would talk with her.

Yes, with your leave, and liking.

Do, my adoption,
My chosen child, and thou holdst so obedient
Sure thou will live, and cozen all my kindred.

A Child's part in your love, that is my ambition sir.

Go, and deserve it then: please me well now;
I love wrangling a life Boy; there is my delight,
I have no other venery but vexation,
That Is all my honey now: smartly now to her,
I Have enough and I will have my humor.

This need not ha'been Widow.

You say right sir.
No, nor your treachery, your close conspiracy
Against me for my wealth, need not have been neither.

I had your fairly, I scorn treachery
To your woman that I never meant to marry,
Much more to you whom I reserved for wife.

How, wise?

I, Wife, Wife, Widow, be not ashamd on it,
It Is the best calling ever woman came to,
And all your grace indeed, brag as you list.

Ha, ha.

I grant you sir, But not to be your wife.

Oh, oh.

Not mine? I think it is the best bargain
That ere thou made i'thy life, or ever shall again,
When my heads laid: but that is not yet this threescore year,
Let Us talk of nearer matters.

You Are as near sir
As ere you are like to be, if Law can right me.

Now before conscience, you are a wilful housewife.

How?

I, and I fear you spend my goods lavishly.

Your goods?

I shall miss much I doubt me,
When I come to look over the Inventorie.

I Will give you my word you shall sir.

Look to it Widow,
A night may come will call you to account for it.

Oh if you had me now sir in this heat
I do but think how youl'd be revenged on me.

I, may I perish else; if I would not get
Three Children at a birth, and I could o'thee.

Take off your yongster there.

Take off your Widow first,
He shall have the last word, I pay for it dearly;
To her again sweet Boy, that sides the weaker.
I have enough, and I will have my humor.

O Brother see I Am up to the ears in law here;
Look, Copy upon Copy.

'Twere grief enough if a man did but hear on it
But I Am in pain to see it.

What sore eyes still Brother?

Worse, and worse Sister; the old woman's water
Does me no good.

Why, 't'as helped many sir.

It helps not me I Am sure -- Marti, Oh, oh.

What ayls Martino too?

Oh, oh, the toothache, the toothache.

Ah poor worm, this he endures for me now.
There beats not a more mutual pulse of passion,
In a kind husband when his wife breeds child,
Than in Martino; I have marked it ever,
He breeds all my pains in's teeth still: and to quit me,
It is his eye-tooth too.

I, I, I, I.

Where did I hear late of a skillful fellow,
Good for all kind of Malladies? true, true sir,
His flag hangs out in town here, in the Cross Inn,
With admirable cures of all conditions,
It shows him a great traveling, and learnd Emperick.

We Will both to him Martino.

Hark you Brother,
Perhaps you may prevail, as one indifferent.

I, about that sweet Widow.

True; speak low sir.

Well, what is the business, say, say.

Mary this Brother.
Call the young man aside, from the old Woolf there,
And whisper in his ear a thousand dollars
If he will vanish, and let fall the Suit,
And never put's to no more cost and trouble.

Say me those words good sir, I Will make 'em worth
A chain of gold to you, at your Sisters wedding.

I shall do much for that.

Welcome sweet heart,
Thou come most happily, I Am bold to send for thee
To make a purpose good.

I take delight forsooth
In any such employment.

'Good wench trust me

How Sir, let fall the Suit? 'life I Will go naked first.

A thousand Dollars sir, think upon them.

Why they are but a thousand Dollars, when they are thought on.

A good round sum.

A good round Widow's better,
There Is meat and money too. I have been bought
Out of my lands, and yielded, but (sir) scorn
To be bought out of my affection.

Why here is even just my Universitie spirit,
I prized a piece of red Deer, above gold then.

My Patron would be mad, and he should hear on it.

I pray what is good Sir, for a wicked tooth?

Hanged, drawn, and quartring; is it a hollow one?

I it is a hollow one.

Then take the powder
Of a burnt Warrant, mixed with oil of Felon.

Why sure you mock me.

'Troth I think I do sir.

Come hither honey; What Is the news in whispers?

He will not be bought out.

No? that is strange Brother.
Pray take a little pains about this project then,
And try what that effects.

I like this better;
Look you sweet Gentles, see what I produce here
For amities sake, and peace, to end all controversy;
This Gentlewoman my charge left by her friends,
Whom for her person, and her portion,
I could bestow most richly, but in pity
To her affection, which lies bent at you sir,
I am content to yield to her desire.

At me?

But for this jar, 't had never been offered.
I bring you flesh, and money, a rich heir,
And a Maid too, and that is a thing worth thanks, sir:
Nay, one that has rid fifteen mile this morning
For your love only.

Honey, hearken after her;
Being rich, I can have all my money there:
Ease my purse well, and never wage law further.
I have enough, yet I will have my humor.

Do you love me forsooth?

Oh infinitely.

I do not ask thee, that I meant to have thee,
But only to know what came in thy head to love me.

My time was come sir, that is all I can say.

Alas poor soul, where did thou love me first prithee?

In happy hour be it spoke, out at a window sir.

A window? prithee clap it too, and call it in again:
What was I doing then should make thee love me?

Twiriling your band-string, which me thought became you so generously well.

'Twas a good quality to choose a husband for: That love was likely to be tied
in Matrimony, that begun in a bandstring: yet I have known as much come to pass
ere now upon a tassell. Fare you well Sister; I may be cozend in a Maid, I
cannot in a Widow


Art thou come home again; stickst thou there still?
I will defend thee still then.

Sir you malice
Will have enough on it.

I will have my humor.

Beggary will prove the sponge.

Sponge in thy gascoyns,
Thy gally-gascoyns there.

Hah brave Protector.

I thought 'twould come to open Wars again,
Let 'em agree as they will; two testie Fopps,
I Will have a care of mine eyes.

I, of my chops.

Away, out with the Banner, send's good luck to day.

I warrant you; your name's spread Sir, for an Emperick.
There Is an old Mason troubled with the Stone,
Has sent to you this morning for your counsel,
He would have ease fain.

Mary I cannot blame him sir.
But how he will come by it, there lies the question,

You must do somewhat sir, for he is swollen most piteously,
Has urine in him now was brewed last March.

'Twill be rich geer for Dyers.

I would 'twere come to that sir.

Le' me see, i will send him a whole Musket-charge of Gunpowder.

Gunpowder? what sir, to break the stone?

I by my faith sir,
It is the likeliest thing I know to do it,
I Am sure it breaks stone-walls, and Castles down,
I see no reason, but't should break the stone.

Nay, use you pleasure sir.

'Troth, if that do not
I have nothing else that will.

I know that too.

Why then you are a Coxcomb to make question on it.
Go call in all the rest, I have employment for them.
When the highways grow thin with Travelers,
And few Portmantues stirring, as all trades
Have their dead time we see; Thee very, poor takings,
And Lechery cold doings, and so forwards still;
Then do I tak my Inn, and those Curmoogions,
Whose Purses I can never get abroad,
I take 'em at more ease here in my chamber,
And make 'em come to me, it is more state-like too:
Hang him that has but one way to his trade,
He Is like a mouth that eats but on one side,
And half cozens his belly, specially if he dine among Shavers,
And both-handed feeders: Stratio, Silvio, and Fiducio,
I will have none left out, there is parts for you.

For us? pray let us have 'em.

Change your selves
With all speed possible into several shapes
Far from your own, as you a Farmer sir,
A Grazier you, and you may be a Miller.

Oh no, a Miller comes too near a Thief,
That may spoil all again.

Some Country Tailor then.

That Is near enough by'r lady, yet I Will venture that;
The Miller's a white Devil, he wears his theft
Like Innocence in badges most apparently
Upon his nose, sometimes between his lips;
The Tailor modestly between his legs.

Why pray, do you present that modest thief then,
And hark you, for the purpose.

'Twill improve you sir.

'Twill get believers, believe that my Masters,
Repute and confidence, and make all things cleerer;
When you see any come, repair you to me
As samples of my skill; there are few arts
But have their shadows Sirs to set 'em off;
Then where the Art it self is but a shadow
What need is there my Friends? make have away sirs.

Where are you Sir?

Not far man; What Is the news?

The old Justice sir, whom we robbed once by Moonlight,
And bound his man and he in haycock-time
With a rope made of horse-meat, and in pity
Left their Mares by 'em, which I think ere midnight
Did eat their hay-bound Masters both at liberty, --

'Life, what of him man?

He Is enquiring earnestly
For the great man of art; indeed for you sir:
Therefore withdraw sweet sir; make your self dainty now,
And that is three parts of any profession.

I have enough on it.

How now, what thing's this?
Now by this light, the second part of the Justice
Newly revived with never a hair on's face,
It should be the first rather by his smoothness,
But I have known the first part written last:
It Is he, or let me perish, the young Gentleman
We robbed, and stripped, but I am far from knowledge now.

One word I pray Sir.

With me gentle Sir?

Was there not lately seen about these parts sir
A knot of fellows, whose conditions
Are privily suspected?

Why do you ask Sir?

There was a poor young gentleman robbed last night.

Robbed?

Script of all in faith.

Oh beastly Rascals.
Alas what was he?

Look of me, and know him sir.

Hard-hearted villains, strip? troth when I saw you
Methought those clothes were never made for you sir.

Want made me glad o'em.

'Send you better fortunes sir:
That we may have about with you once again.

I thank you for your wish of love, kind sir.

It Is with my heart in faith; now store of coin
And better clothes be with you.

There Is some honest yet
And charitably minded: how, wha'ts here to do?
Here within this place is cured
All the griefs that were ever endured.
Nay there thou lie, I endured one last night,
Thou can not cure this morning; a strange Promiser.
Palsy, Gout, Hydropick Humor,
Breath that sticks beyond persumer,
Fistula in ano, Ulcer, Megrum,
Or what disease so ere beleaguer 'em,
Stone, Rupture, Squinancie, Imposthuma,
Yet too dear it shall not cost 'em.
That Is conscionably said in faith.
In brief, you cannot I assure you
Be unsound so fast, as I can cure you.
By'r Lady, you shall pardon me, i will not try't sir.

Martino, is not yond my hinder parts?

Yes, and your fore parts too Sir.

I tro so,
I never saw my hind parts in my life else,
No, nor my fore ones neither: what are you sir?
Are you a Justice pray?

A Justice? no truly.

How came this Suit to you then?

How, this Suit?
Why must he needs be a Justice sir, that wears it?

You Will find it so: 'twas made for no body else.
I pai'd for it.

Oh strange fortune, I have undone
The charitable woman.

He Will be gone.
Martino, hold him fast, I Will call for aid.

Hold me? oh curss of fate!

Oh Mr, Mr.

What ayls Martino?

In my conscience
Has beat out the wrong tooth, I feel it now,
Three degrees of.

Oh slave, spoild a fine Penman.

He lackd good manners though: lay hands of me?
I scorn all the deserts, that belong to it.

Why how now? what is the broil?

The man of art
I take you sir to be.

I Am the professor
Of those slight cures you read of in the Banner.

Our business was to you most skillful sir,
But in the way to you, right worshipful
I met a thief.

A thief?

With my clothes on sir,
Let but the Hose be searched, i will pawn my life
There Is yet the Tailors bill in one of the pockets,
And a white thimble that I found in moon light,
Thou sawst me when I put it in Martino.

Oy, oy.

Oh, has spoild the worthiest Clark that ere drew Warrant here.


Sir, you are a stranger, but I must deal plain with you,
That Suit of clothes must needs come odly to you.

I dare not say which way, that is my affliction.

Is not your worships name Signior Brandino sir?

It has been so, these threescore year and upwards.

I heard there was a robbery done last night
Near to your house.

You heard a truth then sir,
And I the man was robbed.

Ah that is too gross
Send him away for fear of farther mischief,
I do not like him, he is a cunning knave.

I want but aid.

Within there.

Ceize upon that impudent thief.

Then here me speak.

Away;
I Will neither hear thee speak, nor wear those clothes again,
To prison with the varlet.

How am I punished?

I Will make thee bring out all, before I leave thee.

You Have took an excellent course with this bold villain sir.


I am sworn for service to the Commonwealth sir,

What are these, learned sir?

Oh they are my patients.
Good morrow, Gout, Rupture, and Palsy.

It Is farewell Gout almost, I thank your worship.

What no, you cannot part so soon, I hope?
You came but lately to me.

But most happily,
I can go near to leap sir.

What you cannot?
Away I say, take heed, be not to ventrous though,
I Have had you but three days, remember that.

Those three are better than three hundred sir.

Yet again?

Ease takes pleasure to be known sir.

You with the rupture there hernia in scrotum.
Pray let me see your space this morning, walk sir,
I Will take your distance strait: 'twas F. O. yesterday:
Ah sirrah, here is a simple alteration,
Secundo gradu, ye F. U. already,
Here Is a most happy change; be of good comfort sir,
Your knees are come, within three inches now
Of one an other; by to morrow noon
I Will make'em kiss, and justle.

'Bless your worship.

You have a hundred prayers in a morning sir.

'Faith we have a few to pass away the day with:
Tailor, you had a stitch.

Oh good your worship
I have had none since Easter: were I rid
But of this whoreson Palsy, I were happy;
I cannot thread my needle.

No, that is hard,
I never marked so much.

It comes by fits sir.

Alas poor man: what would your worship say now
To see me help this fellow at an instant?

And make him firm from shaking?

As a steeple,
From the disease on it.

It Is to me miraculous.

You, with your whoremaster disease, come hither;
Here, take me this round glass, and hold it steadfast,
Yet more sir, yet I say; so.

Admirable.

Go, live, and thread thy needle.

Here Martino:
Alas poor Fool, his mouth is full of praises
And cannot utter 'em.

No, what is the malady?

The fury of a tooth.

A tooth? ha, ha,
I though it had been some Gangrene, Fistula,
Canker, or Ramex.

No, 'its enough as it is sir.

My man shall ease that straight, sit you down there sir,
Take the tooth sirrah, daintily, insensibly:
But what is your worships malady, that is for me sir?

Marry pray look you sir: your worships Counsel
About mine eyes.

Sore eyes? that is nothing too sir.

By'r Lady I that fell it* think it somewhat.

Have you no Convulsions? pricking aches sir,
Ruptures, or Apostemates?

No by my faith sir,
Not do I desire to have 'em.

Those are ^^res,
There do I win my fame sir: quickly sirrah,
Reach me the eye-cup hither: do you make water well sir?

I Am all well there.

You feel no grief in the kidney.

Sound, sound, sound sir.

Oh here is a breath sir, I must talk withal
One of these mornings.

There I think in faith,
I am to blame indeed, and my Wises words
Are come to pass sir.

Oh, oh, it is not that, it is not that.
It is the next beyond it; there, there, there.

The best have their mistakings: now I Will fit you sir.

What Is that sweet Sir, that comforts with his coolness?

Oh soverign geer: wink hard, and keep it in sir.

Oh, oh, oh.

Nay, here he goes, one twitch more, and he comes sir.

Auh, ho.

Spit out* I told you he was gone sir.

How cheers Martino?

Oh, I can answer you now Master,
I feel great ease sir.

So do I Martino.

I Am rid of a sore burden, for my part Master,
Of a scaled little one.

Please but your worship now
To take three drops of the rich water with you,
I Will undertake your man shall cure you sir
At twice in your own Chamber.

Shall he so sir?

I will uphold him in it.

Then will I do it sir.

How lively your man's now?

Oh I Am so light me thinks
Over I was.

What i^'t contents your worship?

Even what your worship please, I am not mercenary.

My purse is gone Martino.

How, your purse sir?

It Is gone in faith: I'ave been among some Rascals.

And that is a thing
I ever gave you warning of Master, you care not
What company you run into.

Lend me some money: chide me anon I pre' thee.
A pox on 'em for vipers, they ha'suckt blood of me.

Oh Master.

How now man?

My purse is gone too.

How? I Will never take warning more of thee while I live then, thou art an
Hypocrite, and art not fit to give good counsel to thy Master, that can not
keep from ill company thy self


This is most strange sir: both your purses gone.

Sir, I Would my hand on mine, when I came in.

Are you but sure of that; oh would you were.

As I Am of ease.

Then, they are both gone one way, be that your comfort.

I but what way's that sir?

That close knave in your Clothes h'as got 'em both,
It Is well you have clapped him fast.

Why that is impossible.

Oh tell not me sir: I have known purses gone,
And the Thief stand, and look one full in the face,
As I may do your Worship, and your man now.

Nay, that is most certain Master.

I will make
That Rascal in my clothes answer all this then,
And all the robberies that have been don
Since the Moon changed; get you home first Martino,
And know if any of my wives things are missing,
Or any more of mine: tell her he is taken,
And by that token he has took both our purses.

That Is an ill token Master.

That Is all one sir,
She must have that or nothing, for I Am sure
The Rascal has left nothing else for a Token.
Begone, make have again; and meet me part of the way.

I Will hang the villain,
And 't were for nothing but the Sowce he gave me.

Sir, I depart ashamed of my requital,
And leave this seal ring with you as a pledge
Of further thankfulness.

No, I beseech you sir.

Indeed you shall sir.

Oh, your worships word sir.

You shall have my word too, for a rare gedtleman
As ere I met withal.

Clear sight be with you sir;
If Conduit-water, and my Hostess Milk
That comes with the ninth child now, may afford it.
'Life, I feared none but thee, my villainous toothdrawer,

There was no fear of me; I Have often told you
I was bound Prentice to a Barber once,
But ran away in the second year.

I marry,
That made thee give a pull at the wrong tooth.
And me afraid of thee: what have we there sirs?

Some threescore Dollars in the Masters purse,
And sixteen in the Clerks, a Silver seal,
Two or three Amber beads, and four blank Warrants.

Warrants? where be they? the best news came yet.
'Masse here is his hand, and here is his Seal I thank him,
This comes most luckily: one of our fellows
Was took last night, we will set him first at liberty,
And other good Boys after him: and if he
In the old Justices Suit, whom he robbed lately,
Will come off roundly, we will set him free too.

That were a good deed 'faith, we may in pity.

There Is nothing done merely for pity now adays,
Money or Ware must help too.

Give me fortune, give me health,
Give me freedom, I Will get wealth.
Who complains his fate's amiss,
When he has the wide world his?
He that has the Devil in fee,
Can have but all, and so have we.
Give us fortune, give us Health,
Give us freedom, we will get wealth.
In every Hamlet, Town and City,
He has lands, that was born witty.
HOw well this Gentleman keeps his promise too?
Sure there is no trust in man.

They Are all Francisco's,
That Is my opinion Mistress: Fools, or false ones.
He might have had the honesty yet in faith
To send my Masters clothes home.

I those clothes.

Collyers come by the door every day Mistress,
Nay, this is Market Day too, Powlterers, Butchers,
They would have lay'n most deintily in a Panyer,
And kept Veal from the wind.

Those clothes much trouble me.

'Faith, and he were a gentleman as he seemed to be,
They would trouble him too I think;
Me thinks he should have small desire to keep 'em.

'Faith and less pride to wear'em, I should think wench,
Unless he kept'em as a testimony
For aftertimes to show what misetie
He past in his young days, and then weep over 'em.

Weep Mistress? nay sure me thinks he should not weep for laughing.


Martino? oh we are spolld wench, are they come then?

Mistress, be of good cheer, I have excellent news for you, comfort your heart,
what have you to breakfast Mistress, you shall have all again, I warrant you


What says he Wench?

I Am loath to understand him.

Give me a note of all your things sweet Mistress,
You shall not lose a hair, take it of my word
We have him safe enough.

Olas, sweet wench
This man talks fearfully.

And I know not what yet
That Is the worst Mistress.

Can you tell me pray,
Whether the Rascal has broke open my desk or no,
There Is a fine little barrel of pom-citrons
Would have served me this seven year, oh, and my fig-cheese.
The fig of everlasting obloquy
Go with him if he have eat it, I Will make haste
He cannot eat it all yet, he was taken Mistress
Grossly, and beastly, how do you think in faith?

I know not sir.

Troth in my Masters clothes,
Would any thief but a beast been taken so?

Wench, wench.

I have grief enough of mine own to tend Mistress.

Did he confess the robbery?

O no, no Mistress
He Is a young cunning Rascal, he confessed nothing;
While we were examining on him, he took away
My Masters purss and mine, but confessed nothing still.

That Is but some slanderous injury raised against him.
Came not your Mr. with you?

No sweet Mistress.
I must make have and meet him pray dispatch me then.

I have lookd over all with special heedfulness,
There Is nothing missed, I can assure you sir
But that Suit of your Masters.

I Am right glad on it That Suit would hang him yet I would not have him hanged in
that Suit though, it will disgrace my Masters fashion for ever, and make it as
hateful as yellow bands


O what shall's do wench?

It Is no marvail Mistress
The poor young Gentleman could not keep his promise.

'Alas sweet man, h'as confessed nothing ye wench.

That shows his constancy, and love to you Mistress:
But you must do it of force, there is no help for it,
The truth can neither shame nor hurt you much,
Let 'em make what they can on it, 'twere sin and pity in faith
To cast away so sweet a Gentleman,
For such a pair of infidel hose and doublet,
I would not hang a Jew for a whole wardrobe on 'em.

Thou say true wench.

Oh, oh, they are come again Mistress.

Signior Ansaldo?

The same mightily crossed Lady,
But past hope freed again by a Doctors means,
A man of art, I know not justly what indeed,
But pity, and the fortunate gold you gave me,
Wrought my release between 'em.

Met you not
My husbands man?

I took such strange ways Lady
I hardly met a creature.

Oh most welcome

But how shall we bestow him now we have him Mris?

'Alas, that is true.

Martino may come back again.

Step you into that little Chamber speedily sir,
And dress him up in one of my Gowns and head-tyres
His youth will well endure it.

That will be admirable.

Nay do it, do it quickly then, and cut that Suit
Into a hundred pieces, that it may never be known again.

A hundredth? nay ten thousand at the least Mris.
For if there be a piece of that Suit left, as big as my nail,
The deed will come out, it is worse than a murder,
I fear 'twill never be hid.

Away, do your endeavor, and dispatch wench,
I Have thought upon a way of certain safety,
And I may keep him while I have him too,
Without suspicion now: I Have heard of the like:
A Gentleman, that for a Ladies love
Was thought six months her woman, tended on her
In her own garments, and she being a Widow,
Lay night by night with her in way of comfort,
Mary in conclusion match they did together,
Would I Would a copy of the same conclusion:
He Is come himself now, if thou be'st a happy wench
Be fortunate in thy speed, I Will delay time
With all the means I can: oh welcome sir.

I Will speak to you anon wife, and kiss you shortly,
I Am very busy yet: Cocksey-down, Mem-berrie,
Her Manner house at Well-dun.

What Is that good sir?

The widows your sweet Sisters deed of gift;
She Has made all her estate over to me wench:
She Will be too hard for 'em all: and now come buss me
Good luck after thieves hansell.

Oh it is happy Sir
You have him fast.

I have laid him safe enough wench.

I was so lost in joy at the report on it
I quight forgot one thing to tell Martino.

What Is that sweet blood?

He, and his villains sir
Robbed a sweet Gentlewoman last night.

A Gentlewoman?

Nay, most uncivilly and basely stripped her sir.

Oh barbarous slaves.

I was even fain for woman-hoods sake
(Alas) and charities, to receive her in,
And cloth her poor wants in a Suit of mine.

'Twas most religiously done: I long for her;
Who have I brought to see thee think thou woman?

Nay Sir, I know not.

Ghess, I prithee heartily:
An enemy of thine.

That I hope you have not sir.

But all was done in jest: he cries thee mercy,
Francisco sirrah.

Oh; I think not on him.

That Letter was but writ to try thy constancy,
He confessed all to me.

Joy on him sir,
So far am I from malice, look you sir;
Welcome sweet Signior; but I Will never trust you sir.

Faith I Am beholding to thee wife, for this.

Methinks, I enter now this house with joy,
Sweet peace, and quietness of conscience,
I wear no guilty blush upon my cheek
For a sin stamped last midnight: I can talk now
With that kind man, and not abuse him inwardly,
With any scornful thought made of his shame:
What a sweet being is an honest mind?
It speaks peace to itself, and all mankind.

Martino.

Master.

There Is an other robbery done sirrah,
By the same party.

What? your worship mocks,
Under correction.

I forgot to tell thee
He robbed a lovely Gentlewoman.

O Pagan,
This fellow will be stoned to death with Pipkins,
Your women in the Suburbs will so maule him
With broken crew^es, and pitchers without ears,
He will never dye alive, that is my opinion.

Look you your judgments Gentlemen, yours especially
Signior Francisco, whose mere object now
Is woman at these years, that is the eye Saint I know
Amongst young Gallants, Husband, you have a glimpse too;
You offer half an eye, as old as you are,

By'r Lady better wench: an eye, and a half I troa,
I should be sorry else.

What think you now sirs
Is It not a goodly manly Gentlewoman?

Beshew my heart else wife.
Pray soft a little Signior you are but my guest remember,
I Am Mr. of the house, I Will have the first buss.

But Husband, it is the courtesy of all places
To give a stranger ever the first bit.

In Woodcock or so, but there is no heed to be taken in Mutton;
We commonly fall so roundly to that we forget our selves:
I Am sorry for thy fortune, but thou'it welcome Lady

My Master kisses, as I Have heard a hackney man Cheer up his Mare, chap, chap.


I have him fast Lady, and he shall lie by it close,

You cannot do me a greater pleasure Sir,

I Am happily glad on it.

Me thinks there is somewhat whispers in my soul,
This is the hour, I must begin my acquaintance
With honest love, and banish all loose thoughts;
My fate speaks to me from the modest eye
Of yon sweet Gentlewoman.

Wench, Wench.

Pish, hold in your breath Mistress,
If you be seen to laugh, you spoil all presently,
I keep it in with all the might I have -- puh.

Pray what young gentleman's that sir?

An honest boy in faith,
And came of a good kind: do like him Lady,
I would thou had him, and thou be not promised,
He Is worth ten thousand Dollars.

By this light Mistress, my Master will go near to make a match anon, me thinks
I dream of admirable sport Mistress


Peace, thou art a drab.

Come hither now Francisco,
I Have know the time, I Have had a better stomach;
Now I can dine with looking upon meat.

That face deserved a better fortune Lady
Than last nights rudeness showed.

We cannot be
Our choosers sir in our own desteny.

I return better pleased, than when I went.

And could that beastly Impe rob you forsooth?

Most true forsooth,
I will not altogether sir, disgrace you,
Because you look half like a Gentleman.

And that is the Mothers half.

There Is my hand for you.

I swear you could not give me any thing
I love better, a hand gets me my living;
Oh sweet lymon-peel.

May I request a modest word or two Lady
In private with you?

With me sir?

To make it sure from all suspect of injury,
Or unbeseeming private, which heaven knows
Is not my aim now, I Will entreat this gentleman
For an ear witness unto all our conference.

Why so, I am content Sir,

So am I Lady..

Oh Master, here is a rare Bedfellow for my Mistress to night,
For you know we must both out of Town again.

That Is true Martino.

I do but think how they will lie telling of tales together
The pretiest.

The pretiliest indeed.

Their tongues will never lyn wagging Master.

Never Martino, never.

Take heed you be not heard.

I fear you most Mistress.

Me fool? ha, ha.

Why look you Mistress: faith you are faulty, ha, ha,

Well said in faith, where lies the fault now gossip.

Oh for a husband; I shall burst with laughing else,
This house is able to spoil any Maid.

I Will be revenged now soundly of Francisco
For failing me when time was.

Are you there Mistress? I thought you would not forget that
How ever, a good turn disappointed is ever the last thing
That a woman forgives, she will scarce do it when she is speechless,
Nay, though she hold up her whole hand for all other injuries,
She Will forgive that but with one finger.

I Will vex his heart as much as he mocked mine.

But that may mar your hopes too, if our gentlewoman be known to be a man.


Not as I Will work it;
I would not lose this sweet revenge me thinks
For a whole fortnight of the old man's absence,
Which is the sweetest benefit next to this:
Why how now sir, what course take you for laughing?
We are undone for one.

Faith with great pain,
Stifle it, and keep it in: I have no receipe for it.
But 'pray, in sadness say; What is the Gentleman,
I never knew his like for tedious urgings,
He will receive no answer.

Would he would not Sir.

Says I Am ordained for him: merely for him,
And that his wiving fate speaks in me to him;
Will force on me a jointure speedily
Of some seven thousand Dollars.

Would thou had'st'em sir: I know he can and he will.

For wonders pity; What is this Genleman?

'Faith shall I tell you sir,
One that would make an excellent honest husband
For her that is a just Maid at one and twenty;
For on my conscience he has his Maidenhead yet.

Fie, out upon him beast.

Sir, if you love me.
Give way but to one thing I shall request of you.

Your courtesies you know may lay commands on me.

Then at his next sollicitings, let a consent
Seem to come from you; 'Twill make noble sport sir,
We Will get joincture and all; but you must bear
Your self most affable to all his purposes.

I can do that.

I, and take head of laughing.

I Have bide the worst of that already Lady.

Peace, set your countenance then; for here he comes.

There is no middle continent in this passion,
I feel it since, it must be love, or death
It was ordained for one.

Seignior Francisco,
I Am sorry 'twas your fortune, in my house sir,
To have so violent a stroke come to you:
The gentlewoman's a stranger pray be counseled sir,
Till you hear further of her Friends and portion.

It Is only but her love that I desire,
She comes most rich in that.

But be advised though,
I think she is rich heir, but see the proof sir,
Before you make her such a generous Jointure.

It Is mine, and I will do it.

She shall be yours too,
If I may rule her then.

You speak all sweetness.

She likes your person well, I tell you so much,
But take no note I said so.

Not a word.

Come Lady, come, the gentleman desertfull,
And O my conscience honest.

Blame me not, I am a Maid, and fearful.

Never truth came perfecter from man.

Give her a lip-taste,
That she her self may praise it.

Yea, a match in faith: my house is luckly for 'em
Now Martino.

Master, the Widow has the day.

The day?

She Is overthrown my youngster.

Precious tidings,
Clap down four Woodcocks more.

They Are all at hand Sir.

What both her adversaries too.

They Are come sir.

God bid the Cook serve in two geese in a dish.

I like your conceit Master beyond utterance.

VVelcome sweet Sister; which is the man must have you.
I Would welcome no body else.

Come to me then sir.

Are yo' he' faith, my chain of gold? I Am glad on it.

I wonder you can have the face to follow me,
That have so prosecuted things against me,
But I have resolved my self it is done to spite me.

O dearth of truth.

Nay, do not spoil thy hair,
Hold, hold I say, I Will get thee a VVidow somewhere.

If hand and faith be nothing for a Contract,
What shall man hope?

'Twas wont to be enough, Honey.
When there was honest meaning amongst Widows,
But since your bribes came in, it is not allowed
A contract without gifts to bind it fast,
Every thing now must have a feeling first:
Do I come near you Widow?

No indeed sir,
Nor ever shall I hope: and for your comfort sir,
That sought all means t'entrap me for my wealth,
Had Law unfortunately put you upon me,
You had lost your labor, all your aim, and hopes sir:
Here stands the honest Gentleman my Brother
To whom I Have made a deed of gift of all.

I that sheh' as in faith, I thank her Gentlemen
Look you here sirs.

I must not look for pleasures
That give more grief if they prove false, or fail us
Then ever they gave joy.

Ha'you se've me so widow

I Am glad thou have her not, laugh at him honey; ha, ha.

I must take one that loves me for my self:
Here Is as old Gentleman looks not after wealth
But virtue, manners, and conditions.

Yes by my faith: I must have Lordships too Widow.

How sir?

Your manners, virtue, and conditions Widow.
Are pretty things within doors, I like well on 'em,
But I must have somewhat with out-lying or being
In the tenure or occupation of me such a one: ha?
Those are fine things indeed.

Why sir, you swore to me it was for love.

True; but there is two words to a bargain ever
All the world over, and if love be one
I Am sure mony's the other; it is no bargain else:
Pardon me, I must dine, as well as sup Widow.

Cry mercy, I mistook you all this while sir.
It was this ancient Gentleman indeed,
Whom I crave pardon on.

What of me Widow?

'Alas I have wronged you sir; 'twas you that swore
You loved me for my self?

By my troth but I did not.
Come, Father not your lies upon me Widow:
I love you for your self? spit at me Gentlemen
If ever I Would such a thought, fetch me in Widow:
You Will find your reach too short.

Why you have enough you say.

I, but I will have my humor too; you never think of that, they are Coach
horses, they go together still


Whom should a Widow trust: I Will swear 'twas one of you
That made me believe so: mass, think 'twas you sir
Now I remember me.

I swore too much
To be believed so little.

Was it you then?
Beshrew my heart for wronging of you.

Welcome blessing,
Are you nine faithfully now?

As love can make one.

Why this fills the Commonwealth so full of beggars,
Marrying for love, which none of mine shall do.

But now I think on it: we must part again sir.

Again?

You Are in debt, and I, in doubt of all,
Left my self nothing too; we must not hold,
Want on both sides makes all affection cold:
I shall not keep you from that Gentleman,
You Will be his more then mine and when he list
He Will make you lie from me in some sour prison,
Then let him take you now for altogether sir,
For he that is mine shall be all mine or nothing.

I never felt the evil of my debts
Till this afflicting minute.

I Will be mad once in my days: I have enough to cure me, and I will have my
humor, they are now but desperate debts again, I never look for 'em

And ever since I knew what malice was
I always held it sweeter to sow mischief.
Than to receive money; it is the finer pleasure.
I Will give him in his bonds as 'twere in pity
To make the match, and bring 'em both to beggary,
Then will they never agree; that is a sure point,
He Will give her a black eye within these three days,
Beat half her teeth out by Alhall outide,
And break the little household stuff they have
With throwing at one another: O sweet sport.
Come Widow, come, i will try your honesty
Here to my honey you have made many proffers,
I fear they are all but tricks: here are his debts Gentlemen:
How I came by 'em I know best my self.
Take him before us faithfully for your husband
And he shall tear 'em all before your face Widow.

Else may all faith refuse me:

Tear 'em honey
It Is firm in Law, a consideration given:
What with thy teeth? thou wilt shortly tear her so
That Is all my hope, thoud'st never had 'em else
I Have enough, and I will have my humor.

I Am now at liberty Widow.

I Will be so too
And then I come to thee: give me this from you Brother,

Hold Sister: Sister.

Look you, the deed of gift sir, I Am as free
He that has me, has all, and thou art he.
1. 2. How Is that?

You Are bob'd, 'twas but a deed in trust
And all to prove thee, whom I have found most just.

I Am bob'd among the rest too: I Would have sworn
T'had been a thing for me, and my heirs for ever;
If I Would but got it up to the black box above
I had been past redemption

How am I cheated?

I hope you will have the conscience now to pay me sir.

Oh wicked man, sower of strife and envy, open not thy lips.

How, how is this?

Thou have no charge at all, no child of thine own
But two thou got'st once of a scowring woman,
And they are both well provided for, thei'r in the hospital,
Thou have ten thousand pound to bury thee,
Hang thy self when thou will, a slave go with thee

I Am gone, my goodness comes all out together.
I have enough, but I have not my humor.

O Master, Gentlemen: and you sweet Widow
I think you are no forwarder yet, I know not,
If ever you be sure to laugh again,
Now is the time.

Why what is the matter wench?

Ha, ha, ha.

Speak, speak.

Ha, a marriage, a marriage, I cannot tel't for laughing: ha, ha.

A marriage do you make that a laughing matter?

Ha: I, and you will make it so when you know all,
Here they come, here they come, one man married to an other.

How? man to man?

I man to man in faith
Ther'l be good sport at night to bring 'em both to bed;
Do you see 'em now, ha, ha, ha.

My daughter Martia.

Oh my Father: your love, and pardon sir.

It Is she indeed Getlemen.

I have been disobedient I confess
Unto your mind, and Heaven has punished me
With much affliction since I fled your sight;
But finding reconcilement from above
In peace of heart; the next I hopes your love.

I cannot but forgive thee now I see thee,
Thou fledst a happy fortune of an old man,
But Francisco's of a noble family.
Though he be somewhat spent.

I loved her not sir
As she was yours, for I protest I knew't not,
But for her self sir, and her own deserving,
Which had you been as foul, as you have been spightfull
I should have loved in her.

Well, hold your prating sir,
You Are not like to loose by it.

Oh Violetta, who shall laugh at us now?

The child unborn Mistress.

Be good.

Be honest.

Heaven will not let you sin, and you would be careful.

What means it sends to help you, think and mend,
You Are as much bound as we, to praise that friend.

I am so, and I will so.

Marry you speedily,
Children tame you, you will die like a wild beast else.

I by my troth should I, I Have much ado to forbear
Laughing now, more's my hard fortune.

O Master, Mistress, and you gentles all;
To horse, to horse presently, if you mean to do your Country any service.

Art not ashamed Martino, to talk of horsing so openly
Before young married couples thus.

It does concern the Commonwealth and me,
And you Master, and all: the Thieves are taken.

What sai'st Martino,

Law, here is Common-wealths-men,
The man of art Master, that cupt your eyes
Is proved an arrant rascal: and his man
That drew my tooth, an excellent purse-drawer,
I felt no pain in that, it went insensibly:
Such notable villainies confessed.

Stop there sir:
We Will have time for them: Come gentle-folks,
Take a slight meal with us: but the best cheer
Is perfect joy, and that we wish all here. --

A Sport, only for Christmas, is the Play
This hour presents to you; to make you merry,
Is all the ambition 'thas; and fullest aim
Bent at your smiles, to win it self a name:
And if you edge be not quite taken off,
Wearied with sports, I hope 'twill make you laugh.
STay, stay, Sir, I Am as hungry of my Widow
As you can be upon your Maid believe it,
But we must come to our desires in order,
There Is duties to be paid, ever we go further;
He that without your likings, leaves this place,
Is like one falls to meat, and forgets grace.
And that is not hansome trust me, no,
Our rights being paid, and your loves understood,
My Widow, and my meat, then does me good;
I have no money Wench, I told thee true,
For my report, pray let her hear't from you,

