FIRE And Brimstone; OR, THE DESTRUCTION OF Sodom.

Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. IF any think my Buskin is too
much
Like to Satyr; know, it is not a touch:
If the Physician can a Gangrene kill,
He must use Corrosives as well as skill;
Else putrid matter will infest the part
That Is sound, till it has seized on the heart:
This is too often seen to be disapproved;
Let not the courteous Reader then be moved,
If I have laid the Axe to the Tree's root,
Thinking to fell it. O! that I could do it.
If Lot's Wife, who was led by Angel's hand,
Escaped not God's Judgment, but does Pillar stand
Of Salt. And seeing Justice does begin
With House of God, must we not all fear sin?
That Adam out of Paradise did cast;
And after him, drowned the old World at last;
That slaved Israel four hundred years;
And costs each Heaven-born Child much briny tears:
What say I, tears? for it the Son of God
Sweat drops of blood, and bore a heavy load
Of wood, for's Cross, and then resigned his breath,
That who believes might not taste second death.
For it is Sodom burnt, our present Theme;
We must beware of Sin, or bear the blame.
If we give way, this Circe will bewitch
The best. The fire's hot made of wood and pitch
But hotter far, that is kindled by the breath
Of Sin-revenging God, eternal death.
BEhold, how Sodom swaggers in its Pride,
And Lust, and Gluttony! none is espied,
That thoughts of Heaven have; or bow a knee:
But one poor Stranger, who adoreth me.
My Servant Lot: whose holy Soul they vex;
Because there is no distinction made of Sex
Nor age, But all promiscuously do go,
Like Goats and Leopards that all they may know
Each other. Come, we will go down and see,
Those horrid facts; whose cry has come to me.
I am the Holy One who sit above,
My purer Eye cannot such things approve.
The Soul that sins, it shall surely die.
Awake my Just revenge; I Will down and try:
If they my handy work who are but clay,
Dare quarrel with their Potter and say nay:
But we will do it. Who can us control?
What profits Religion, since the Soul
Is mortal as our flesh and cannot rise?
Let Us heap up sin on sin, and heaven despise.
Put on your walking habits: Let us go
And view the place, to see if it be so.
Yet there is a trusty Friend lives in our way
By Mamre Grove: there we must make some stay.
See, Yonder is the place where Sun does shine,
Gilding the Oaks whose tops seem to incline:
To bid us welcome --

Eternal Son, true Day Star from on high,
It is our honor that we may draw nigh
So great a Light, and be employed by thee;
To execute thy Will we ready be.

My Lord.

Do not see strangers come?

I do, I do, it is well you were at home.

Their gate bespeaks them great: I Will run and see,
Walking on foot perhaps they weary be.
Al-hail my Lord, if I have favor found
With thee: pass not from off thy servant's ground,
Until a little water fetched be
To wash your Feet, and you under this Tree
Rest for a while, it being almost noon;
You shall go on as soon as Dinner's done:
For therefore to your servant are ye come --

It Is true! go quickly, do as thou have said.

Up my dear Sarah now I lack thine aid,
Of Meal three measures thou shall dress: and knead,
Cakes on the hearth make of it, we want bread;
And I my self will bring a fatted Calf:
Out of the herd; young man dress you its half.
Bring Milk and Butter hither unto me:
With Veal both roast and boiled; my Lord you see
Your homely dinner, Let your Friends take place.
Where the Almighty eats, there needs no grace.
Accept such things as you are pleased to send
To your poor Servant who will you attend.

These Favors I will certainly requite
Upon thee and thy Wife who is out of sight.
Where is thy Sarah? Is she not at home?

Yes, in the Tent.

Then why did she not come?
For I intend, about this time next year
To come again, and she shall surely bear
A Son: though Abraham be old, and she
Have no forerunner of a pregnancie.

Ha, ha, Is not this likely to be true?
Have I been thus long Married to you,
Without Conception? shall my nutted Breast;
And barren Womb procure a cleansing Feast?
No, I shall sooner far expect my grave:
Than that such Pleasure you and I should have.

Hark; Sarah laughs, good Abra'm tell me why?
She cannot be thy Wife; if she deny
That the Almighty can all Natur's laws
Reverse, dilate, contract as he see's cause.
Or thinks she that any thing on Earth
Can be too hard for him; who gave all breath?
Once more I say I will return, and she,
This time next Year, shall Joyful Mother be.

Alas! What shall I do? he did me spy
Laughing, yet Woman-like I will deny,
I did not laugh.

Nay, but thou did, forbear:
He cannot be deceived who is Eye and Ear.
Arise, Let us go hence: a fearful stink
Comes to my nostrils, from that filthy sink,
Whose crying sins do hasten its decay.

Pray let your Servant bring you on your way.

Well Abraham, since thou have served me
So faithfully, nothing shall hidden be,
Of all that I am now about to do,
Here I will all relate before I go.
For thou shall surely a great Nation be:
And all the World shall blessed be in thee,
The Sin of Sodom's great, its dreadful Cry
Has long since sounded in my Ears, now I
Am come to see: armed an angry Judge,
Without repentance there is no refuge:
But Fire and Brimstone from the Lord shall fall;
And shall consume those cursed Cities all.

Will thou not then the righteous in it spare?

Thou know long since that great my Mercies are.

If there be Fifty righteous in the place,
Shall not thy Justice run a slower pace?
Art thou not of the World the holy Judge?
If thou do otherwise 'twill make men grudge:
We do confess you are infinite in Might:
Yet let the Judge of all the World do right.

It Fifty in it be I will return:
And for their sakes, I Will not at this time burn
The Cities --

Since thou a gracious Ear do to me lend,
Who am but dust and ashes, I Will yet spend
Some of the breath thou giv'st me, and desire,
That if there want five, yet that dreadful fire
May not be kindled.

If but five there lack
Of fifty, I Will not burn it for their sake.

What if but forty, Lord, what will thou do?

For fourtie's sake I Will spare the Cities too.

I plead for mercy, let not anger burn:
If thirty there be found, will thou return?

Yes.

But if twenty


For twentie's sake, I also will refrain.

Let not my Lord be angry, this once more
I Will speak, What if you find but half a score?
Speak Lord, a grac'ous answer let me hear.

Even for Ten's sake I also will forbear.
Now get thee home, I Will make no more delay,
The Angels at Lot's house do for me stay.

Mamre from henceforth let thy grove
Renowned be, because Jehove
Daigned to rest in thy cool shade,
And with our Master Dinner had.
Cake, Milk and Butter: sav'ry meat,
Two Angels with their Lord did eat.
Which done, Jehovah did requite
Old Abram 's kindness: whose delight
Is to refresh the weary Stranger,
And to relieve the weak from danger.
The fear of God he always keeps
Sure, when he either wakes or sleeps.
El-Shaddai in his faithful Eye,
Is all-sufficient Treasury.
He with the Lord a Covenant made,
And he with him, Jehovah said:
Walk me before and perfect be,
Then I no good will hold from thee.
Of Children thou complains, thy Wife,
According to the time of life:
At my return a Son shall bear,
To usher in the next new Year.
Our Mistress needs not doubt the thing,
That Is promised by Salem's King.
Let her laugh on, but not distrust,
What Heaven says fulfilled must
Be, see how on her Marble face,
A rich Vermilion takes place;
The Rose and Lilie are at strife,
Who shall have most in Abram's Wife:
Her shaking hands and feeble knees,
Put on their youthful Liveries.
And is not Abram altered,
Since the other day the Angels fed
At's Table? Does not every feature
In's Face, declare a God of Nature?
Quick eye, quick ears, and nimble feet,
Strong legs and arms, do not ye see it?
It Is said that Eggles only do
Renew their age^^^ Abra'm too.
Go happy Couple; let your new
Raised vigor unto the World show
A resurrection from the dead,
In both of you by promised seed.
Isma'l thou must give over to hope,
That thou shall be our Fam'lies prop:
Thy Mother Hagar must forbear,
Over Abra'ms Wife to domineer.
It is not fit that hand-maid-drudges,
Should be of Mistress actions Judges.
If she intends to live in ease,
She must her grieved Mistress please:
And thou thy unborn Brother serve,
Or be cast out of the house and starve;
For we are sure to have an Heir;
Of whose Flesh God will take a share:
And in it die that we may live,
To whom, Let Us ever praises give.

Father pray tell us what is this Town's name?

It Is sinful Sodom, too well known by fame,
That has already flown over earth to heaven.

Pray what a clock?

My Lords it is almost Even.

Can strangers any entertainment find?

Yes Sir with me (if you to stay have mind)

Is there no house in Town but yours that is civil?

None, none My Lords, all imitate the Devil.

Then what of this bad City will become?

If God be Just 'twil have a sudden doom.

What Judgment's fittest think thou for their Sin?

Brimstone and fire suits best those burned within:
With lust unnat'ral,

If it should be so,
What will thou do? think thou to perish too?

No Sir, I do not, he whom I do serve,
Will send his holy Angels to preserve
Me; as from sin, so from the punishment,
That from the Heavens on Sodom will be sent.
My Lords come in, we'll talk more in the house,
For when night comes our streets are very loose.
You shall this once take harbor here with me,
Nor shall you leave my Cottage till you see
Next morning Sun. Here Is water, wash your feet,
My Wife and Daughters shall take care for meat.

Sir your good nature merits well of us:
Yet will the Street be better than the house,
There we will stay.

My Lords that must not be:
You shall have welcome, pray turn in with me,
The ends I have upon you are but civil,
Then if I urge, you must not take it evil.
This is a cursed Town, and if you be
Wronged in the street, the blame will lie on me.
Wife try thy skill, see if thou can persuade
These men; we never yet such Lodgers had.
If God in likeness of a man may be,
The man that speaks most must needs be he.

Husband were I such as the Town affords,
I might invite them with such Sugared words,
As neither I nor they I think approve;
Flattery I hate, if they become in Love,
They will not pass our Door; come good my Lords,
My civil actions shall confirm my words.

Your courteous invitations take a place
With us.

My Lords I Am glad I have found grace,
To Lodge such persons as you seem to be,
And that you will eat such victuals as you see.

Our hearts are grieved to see
Those Men in Jeopardy:
Who Lodge with Father Lot,
On him will lie a blot,
Who does them entertain:
If they shall now sustain
Any harm in the night,
By the Sodomits might.
The Town already knows,
And have made bitter vows:
That before the Sun rise
They will secure the prize;
If Heaven come to their aid,
They will not be afraid.
Where Lust does rage and swell,
There is no thought of Hell.
No Monsters liker unto Devils be,
Than men given up to filthy Sodomie.

A prize, a prize! run, call the Town together,
The beauties of World are now come hither:
Come let us not lose this opportunity,
At Lot the stranger's House, the Gallants lie.
How can thou tell? I saw them enter in;

Such persons to defile 'twill be a Sin:
Besides the old man has persuaded them
To stay, if this be done; he will bear the blame,
Forbear.

You punies, you will be Godly too,
Is this the way you do his daughters woo?

And we would have you so, could we persuade.

Ha, see how like they grow to their old Dad;
Go get you hence, we'll make no more delay.
Give over to plead, or you shall dearly pay
For your sobriety; come out ye Rogue,
Bring forth these strangers, do not time prorogue:
We hear they are beauties, it is but what they owe,
Being within our Town, we must them know.
See how he shuckes, old Rascal do not dally
With us, nor time; see not the City rally
About thy House? it is but in vain to think,
That thou shall eat our Bread or drink our Drink,
And not submit thy self unto our Will.

All your requests (if just) I will fulfill.
I hope these boyst' rous words are all but Jests.

Confounded Dog, bring forth thy handsome Guests,
Or by our great God Priapus we swear,
That we thy Body will in pieces tear.

My Lords, this rudeness is not strange to me,
Be not dismayed, I will go out and see
It my grave presence can make them give over,
However after me I Will shut the Door.
Brethren I do not understand your humor,
What is the cause that ye make such a rumor
In The street at this time, and about my Door?
Neighbors be ruled, this wickedness give over.
And if your Beastly lust cannot refrain,
But that these strangers you with sin would stain;
See here two Maids of mine who Virgins be,
Use them at pleasure, and let these go free.

Rogue, runagate, slave, think not that thou must,
Make such exchanges to restrain our Lust.
Who made the'a Judge? If we be ruled by thee,
Then must we bid adieu to Buggary.
But hold, stand back, or we will break the Door.

Help, help, O help, these Villains press me sore.

Hark, this mad fellow thinks to have Rescue,
Whence must it be? from Heaven I warrant you
Heaven! help, indeed of that we are not afraid,
Though it and Hell combine; their feeble aid
Cannot reprieve the Prisoners within,
We are not scared with punishment of sin.
There Bald-pate God-adoring Rascal, take yo^ that;
How pretily he looks in's dimpl'd Hat?
Now open to us. --

Beloved of Heaven, we see thy willingness,
To curb these wretches, and our grief redress;
Come in to us, and we'll secure the Door;
Blindness shall make these Brands of Hell give over.

He is a Devil, he'th bewitched me,
And me, and me, and me, and me, and me.
I Am blind, I Am blind, and cannot find the Door,
By Heaven nor I, I fear we must give over.
We see their God can help them in a strait,
And cool our courage; let us leave his Gate,
Begging him pardon; for if we stand still,
He that has struck us blind can also kill.
Not I, for though I see not, I can fell;
And if I catch the old knave, I will deal
Worse with him than before: In spite of Heaven,
We may in time with him also be even;
For if he does not open our Eyes again,
He and all his to morrow shall be slain.

Besides thy Family, do any pity,
Daughters, or Sons-in-Law, within this City?
^f any; call them, those we'll not anoy:
But all the City else we will destroy,
Because the cry is wax'n great, we must
Reduce all Living in it into dust.

Sons now take warning, get you from this place
Quickly, the Sun shall not twice run his race
From East, to West, before destruction shall,
(Reward of lust) on wicked Sodom fall.
God says it, and I Am sure it will be done,
Sons if ye love your lives get ready soon,
To go with me --

Sir, this you told all of us long ago,
And yet nothing is come to pass you know;
You old and fearful are, your brain is dry,
Before that it be so, we shall espy,
Unusual signs from Heaven if any be,
Such things we may believe, but never thee.

God give thee good morrow, do not spy.
The Sun in this Horizon mounting high?
Have, get thee hence, with Daughters, Sons and Wife,
Nothing that stays behind shall keep in life.
You must out of the City speedily,
Lest for its sin you all consumed be.
Come there is no time to stay or look about,
He that would not be burnt must get him out.
Why do you linger? pray give me your hand.
Yours Madam, pray give me, we cannot stand;
Your God is merciful and full of pity,
And has sent us to bring you out of the City.

Escape for thy life, shake off all Worldly cares,
When God afflicts, all such things are but snares;
Trust not to humane help, it is I who fight,
And nothing's able to resist my might.
Go look straight forward, if thou turn thy back,
Or any that is thine, then I will make
Thee feel the smart of my afflicting Rod.
Fly to the Mountains, lest Almighty God
Consume thee with the City.

Not so Lord,
Since I believe according to thy word,
And have found grace in saving of my Life,
As likewise have these two poor Girls and Wife.
Into the Mountains Lord, I cannot fly,
^est there some evil take me, and I dye;
Add to thy former favors out of pity,
Leave for to fly unto the neighboring City;
It Is but a little one, my Lord it give
Into thy Servant, and his Soul shall Live.

Dear friend, to show thee what respect I bear,
^o thee and all thy Servants, this I hear,
and grant what thou desire; fly in have
^o thy entreated shelter: while you are past
^he City Wall, my powerful hands are bound
With cords of Love, while thou art on this ground
Although my Just revenge does burn and chafe
^can do nothing, till thou art come safe
^o Zoar. --

Cursed be the day when we,
This stranger first did see.
Cursed be the mouth that spoke
To us, that we should take
This wretch within our Walls,
Who Studieth our falls.
And has with Heav^n conspired,
That Sodom may be fired:
There is no remedy,
We must destroyed be.
Come, yet let us endeavor,
To get the Rogues favor.
If he will but once pray,
We Are sure Heaven will stay
His hand, and will revoke
This sad and fatal stroke.
Rise, let us to his Gate,
(Perhaps it is not too late)
And give his guests good words,
The best Sodom affords:
If these do not take place,
Then there will be no space
Between us and the fire:
Taugh! I must now retire,
Here Is such a loathsome smell,
That nothing (if not Hell)
Can the same parallel.

The Sun shines bright, and Lot almost at home
In Zoar, now must Sodom have its doom;
Gomorah also Admah and Zeboim,
The fifth, I will reserve as yet for him.
Awake my Justice, and let dreadful streams,
Of Fre and Brimstone darken the Sunbeams;
Once more let Heavens Windows opened be,
That Lot may fire (as Noah water) see.
Shut up those bowels full of mercy are,
And neither young nor old i'th'Cities spare.
Raise thickest Smoke, and make a sulfurous smell,
That living, they may know the pains of Hell.
Perhaps 't may warn all those that come behind,
To know, and walk according to my mind;
If not, while I am just they must be sure,
Those, or such dreadful torments to endure.
He that sheds blood, with blood must punished be,
For lust and anger fire's the destiny.
I Will stamp my curse on all things for their sake,
This fruitful plain shall be a stinking Lake.
If any fruit for ever after grow,
It shall not be for Food, but only show.

Oh Heavens! I Am choack'd with Smoke,
I Am burned with fire,
O Brimston, Brimston! Where shall we retire?
We dye, we dye, O may this be the last
Of Heavens dreadful Sentence on us past!
We Are burned and damned, there is no remedy;
We would not hear Lot, when he bid us fly
From wrath to come. O how our Limbs do crack
With fire! Our Conscience is upon the rack
For bypast Crimes; our beastly Lusts Torment
Us, as the precious time that we have spent.
O wretched Nature, whither have thou brought
Us Fools, and made us sell our Souls for naught?
Luxurious Eyes, why were ye so unkind,
To dote on objects, who have made you blind?
And you Tenacious hands, why did you grasp
The Poison of the Spider? Why from Wasp
Did you seek Honey? did not Heaven bestow,
As upon Lot, so also upon you,
The Lawful helps, and remedies for lust?
Was not all this enough? but that you must
In spite of Heaven, lay hold on all that came,
Although they man his members had or name.
Could not a lawful Wedlock satisfy
Thy burning flame, proud flesh? No, thou must cry
Bring out thy handsome Guests, them we must know,
Not knowing that they were not from below*
Whose Just revenge does make us miserable,
To bear these scorching flames we are not able.
And yet alas! our woe does but begin,
The vengeance is Eternal that is for sin.
O that Lots God would grant us a reprieve
But for one hour, that wretched we might live,
To wail our bypast sins; and beg his aid,
Who never yet to humble sinner said,
I scorn your plaints, but always graciously
Prepared a bottle for a melting Eye.
And piecemeal Prayers made whole with his own merit,
Sa'ing be comforted, it is you must inherit
My endless Joy; which sentence now does pierce
Our Souls so much, that we cannot rehearse
Our woes, though Oh! alas! it is too late,
We must expect naught but Almighties hate.
See how the Devils laugh, whom we have served:
O cursed Spirits it't this we have deserved
From you, for all those things that we have done
At your Command?

Give over, blame not me;
You know I did but only gratify
Your own desires, I never could command,
Or force your wills; this the Almighties hand
Was only able to effect, but ye
With your unbounded wishes wearied me.
You made the Tinder, then from me begged fire;
Half what ye did, was never my desire.
You sought the newest ways to damn your Souls,
For which we Devils do account you Fools.
Your state might have been happy when at worst,
If you had not me, and your Natures forced.
If we Apostates had such promises,
And helps as you; No sinful false surmises
Of feigned fruition (of I know not what)
Should e're have made us spirits forfeit that,
You were assured of by Heavens word;

Whosoever turned unto the Lord,
Should have their crimson sins made white as Snow;
Their Scarlet ones like Wool; and what they ow
Cancelled out of Gods omniscience Book,
Even all sins trumpery, that they ever took
On trust: and after death should all receive,
Glory in Heaven, as much as they could crave.
Did not your consciences many times
Speak, when you acted these unheard of Crimes?
Then why did ye not say Tempter forbear?
This, this ye did not, being voy'd of fear,
Of either Heavens anger, or of Hell,
Till scorching flames of a Sulphurous smell,
Forced you on former actions to reflect,
Which heretofore you ever did neglect.
This you will find a good Apology,
When you to Heavens Tribunal called be;
Then you shall hear what I already said,
That if you had implored The Almighty's aid,
He would at all points, so have armed you,
As all my fiery Darts should ever bow
And never pierce, But since your free election
Was sin, you must not grudge at your rejection.
You are my Prisoners, and Hell your place,
Where you shall never see the blessed Face
Of God in mercy, but for ever must,
Burn with his wrath, for your unnat'ral Lust.

Come Wife, why do thou tarry so behind?

I am a Woman, can I be unkind?
Have we not dwelt in Sodom several years?
Can I behold its flames, and not shed Tears?

When Heaven is angry, we must be so too,

Ah Husband! flesh and blood this cannot do.

But flesh and blood shall not inherit bliss,
This truth we fully see confirmed in this
Sad fire.

O Husband, Husband! see the smoke,
The Town is fired.

No, it will provoke
My God, who has his mercy magnified,
To grieve, that I'ave not with the City died.

I must look back, let come of it what will,
What God has promised he will fulfill.
I shall not dye.

Fond Woman say not so,
Thou must perform conditions, if thou go
Alive to Zoar.

O! I Am senseless struck.

Who break God's precepts never have better luck.

Help Husband e're I dye, I fixed stand,
My mouth is full of Salt.

It is God's hand
That strikes; his blessed will I Will not control,
However, Lord have mercy on her Soul.

Beware of Sin, for God abhors
Impenitents, and all their scores,
With pen of Iron graves in stone,
Which he will produce when time is done.
Of vengeance if you would be free,
Beware of Lust and Gluttony.
This drowns the Soul, that does it kill,
Though Christ for it his blood did spill.
The man that does attempt the Crown,
Deserv's not to have kindness shown.
Christ's honor is his Crown, yet we
From time to time attempters be;
Though he be patient and forbears,
As witness his Jerus'lem Tears;
Yet at the last, when he does come
With all his Angels; then our doom
(With Majesty) he shall repeat,
When we can neither Bribe nor Cheat
The Judge, nor Jury; but submit
To those that hurry to the Pit;
Where we must be deprived of bliss,
If we make Sin our business.
Then let us look on Sodom's flames, and say,
From Sodom's sins, deliver Lord we pray.


