DIVINE DIALOGUES.

VIZ.

CONTAINING The Histories of Dives and Lazarus, The Destruction of Sodom, And
Abraham's Sacrificing his Son

To which is Added Joseph Revived, OR, The History of his Life and Death.

By George Lesly, Minister of the Gospel.

A Verse may find him, who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
LONDON, ^^inted for Charles Smith, at the Angel near (...) the Inner Temple
gate, Fleet Street. 1678

Right Honorable, THough the Author's obscurity, and unworthiness of the
ensuing Poem, may in Justice forbid either your Lordships Patronage; yet the
swift-wing'd fame of your Honor's goodness, giving life to my harmless
ambition, has emboldened me (though with trembling Heart and Hand) to make
this poor address. Not that I have, or dare have, confidence to think it worth
your Lordship's acceptance, being the frozen conception of one born in a cold
Climate; but that the enlivening Beams of your Honor's Patronage, may screen
it from that contempt and obloquie it might otherwise meet with in a hotter
region: On this and no other score is poor Aeschine's gift presented to your
Lordship. Favor therefore noble Sir, my beggar with a Serene Aspect. And if
your Honor think him worthy, grant him the regard of being one of the meanest
of your Lordship's Closet inhabitants; and for his fidelity, take the word of a
Priest, he will neither steal nor flatter. His beginning is divine and so I hope
is his rise, though he be not adorned with so much Eloquent bravery as this
Golden-tongu'd age boasts of; yet I dare say, he will stammer out so much
truth as may inform the Reader, that the Kernel not Shel, the substance not
show of Christian Religion and Piety is to be minded. I might I confess have
drawn the Matter to a longer Thread, had I not feared that it would neither
please your Honors Eye, nor become the Hand of

Your Lordships, most Obedient. George Lesly.
HAving in a small essay declared my self a Lover of the Muses, I have now
ventured upon the Stage, not ignorant of the fate that attends pious Poems;
that of the Poet being ^o less true than common. Pro captu lectoris ha^ent sua
fata libelli. I discern a Cloud (I might say (...) crowd) of Carpers, for they
will be of all sorts. The Learned whom I honor, and would be glad ^o imitate,
may think my Style antic, Matter ^aw, Plots ill-laid and worse managed, and no
^arty well humoured: To them I grant all, because they could better have
answered wise men's expectations in such an enterprise. Yet I hope that the
expression is neither so rude, nor the mat^er so indigested, (though that be
not so tumid, ^or this so taking as the Genius of the present Age ^equires) but
that they may outlive the rigor ^f a sober censurer, and prove beneficial to
some. The Lady that wears a Ruff with a loose Gown; ^he Gentleman with the
high Crowned Hat, and Wooden heel'd Shoes, may call it plain old Eng^ish, and
good Morality at least

I know there are Courteous as well as Critical heads, these may let my
Pamphlet alone; it is intended for the other. If the Stage-Poet frown, all I
shall say to him is, Though my Muse be not tuned to his Key, yet my mind
transcends his Apollo

Majora Cano.

But if all men put a fair construction on what they find here, and read, with
the same intention I wrote it, not only to divert idle hours, but to deter them
from sin, who will not trouble themselves with an impartial Scrutinity of Holy
Wri^ for an Antidote; and to promote Divine Faith and Charity among Mortals in
this faithless and frozen Age. If this I say be done, my time (I hope) in
Writing, nor theirs in Reading, will be misspent

Farewell. THese humble Lines to all men cry aloud,
Bidding them shun Hells horror Styg'an flood
In Heavens Language, every Neophite,
Must learn to say, mercy Lord, I Am not meet
To tread thy Courts; nor cast a hoping Eye
Upon a promise, till I do espy,
My Sins transferred on a Savior.
And then, O then! begins that happy hour.
When dismal Clouds of wrath shall disappear,
And Sunshine mercy overspread the Sphere
Of thy poor weather-beaten Soul, and then,
Thy Tongue shall bless God; thank the trembling pen
Of him who raised thee out of deepest sleep,
E're death succeeded; wishing thee to keep,
The wholesome Laws of him who can destroy
Thy Soul, or give it everlasting Joy.
These are the ends I have proposed, and do
Wish they may prove effectual to you.
If sense, not swelling words have leave to speak,
Know, it is you, not yours that I do seek.
WHat Monster's this li'th at my noble Gate,
Bedawb'd with leprous spots? what cruel fate
Attends the caitife? What unhappy Star
Ruled at his birth: that such his mis'ries are?
While happy I, who scorn the Divine Powers
Am glorious, by Nature's help and yours.
Does not the World behold my heaps of Gold
With cov'tous eyes?

Yes, it was always bold.

This stately Fabric that is by me made,
Do not all men admire?

Yes, most have said:
You're he, and only he, dare boldly say,
The life of Man is constant holy day.
The earth with all its fullness smiles on you,
And we its dearest Minions, serve you too.
Rise from your rich, embroidered Bed, I see
This petty light would emulator be,
Of those resplendant Rubies that hang round
Your Couch: and those, wherewith your Head is crowned.
See! how the numerous Atoms dance and touch
Your lofty Brow, as if they did think much
That their own Brats should have so near approach
To your admired worth; they but encroach.
Rise up, and let your Purple Red, and White,
Exceed the Sun in beauty and delight:
Call, call your Waiting-men, that they may dress
And fit you, for your golden Business.

Who Is there?

What! Slaves, do not you hear my Lord?
Good Servants always answer at first word.

We come, what is your Honor's will?

That ye Perform your Offices, I Will dressed be.

What Clothes to day, Great Sir, the Heavens frown?

What! Purple and fine Linne, worse I scorn.

Good, good immortal Sir! why should you be
Served with the Emblems of Mortality?
With Russet, Flaxen, or the courser Stuff,
Since your rich Wardrobe can afford enough,
To speak you Non-such, bring the Crimson Suit,
(You may at pleasure have a new recruit.)
Finest Silk Stockings, Shoes of golden Cloth.
With best of Beavers (never touched by moth;)
The largest Chain of Gold, and Diamond Rings,
Never as yet put on; all other things
Are ready. Barber, are your Razors good?
Come, shave your Master, but beware of blood.
Powder, Perfume, Pomatum, and the Glass,
Bring. Let my Lord see his admired face.
Haste with the golden Basin, silver Ure,
In place of water, Wine put in that is pure;
This will not only wash, but strengthen all
The Members of my Lord both great and small:
The Scarlet Cloak forget not, Cuffs and Band
Of Lace, see! how the Fools amazed stand:
Groom of the Chambers call to make a fire,
Perfuming first the Room at my desire;
Thus is my business done. Now I retire.

Hail, glory of the world, and more than Man!
Since Brother Pride has served you what he can:
I think it is time for you to take advice
From me; Drink first your Mornings-draught with Spice.
Here Sir, accept the Quintessence of Blood,
Distilled from the Oppressed, taste, it is good;
And here the widows house, a greater Dose;
The next's a Cordial from the Church's Clothes:
These (I presume) may serve you till you dine,
Ever then what you expect, I will design.

Thanks dearest friend, O how this Spirit pleases!
Sure'tis Nepenthes, cure for all Diseases;
It is Ambrosia or Nectarian Juice,
The Gods (themselves) no better drink can wish:
I certainly enliv'ned am all over,
My Soul it self is greater than before.

I Am sure your eyes shine brighter than the Sun,
Now Thunder speaks, make Earthquakes, I have done
So all that is called Man, thy threatening voice
Shall fear, and we your Vassals must-rejoyce.

Sir, if your greater business permit:
I have one word to speak (if you think fit)
This Beauty-broker minds not that the Clock
Says, It is time, your Stomach to unlock.
His trimming without food can never please;
You know Dogs only hunger bear for ease.
Come Sir, your Table's richly furnished.
Pray give you over and let my Master feed.
Here Is Manna instead of Bread, here is sprightly Wine,
Here Is flesh of all sorts, delicate and fine;
With Sweetmeats store, and all may gratify
And please my Lord his Palate and his Eye.

Was ever Man so happy in his friends,
As I in mine? their kindness never ends;
For which on them my Substance I Will bestow,
(If that be not sufficient, Soul too.)
Open the Casement, pray let in the Air;
Hark, hark, what voice does to my Ears repair.

One crumb for God's sake to a hungry Soul.

Go, ask the Huntsman why the Dogs do houl.

One crumb for Heavens sake to the hunger-starved.

It Is not the Dogs, a Beggar would be served.

Prodigious boldness! dare that meazled whelp
Approach my Parlor-window to seek help;
Must he, a very mass of loathsomness
Name God or Heaven? (these do disturb my bless)
No, Huntsman, whip him while his life does last,
And say, the rich man sent that for's repast.

Come Leprous Rascal, here is a wyred cord
With which I Will scourge you, you have disturbed my Lord:
Thou know that Heaven and Earth can never agree,
How then should our great Dives suffer thee,
Who, what he ever expects enjoys here,
Though such as Fools are, think there is more elsewhere.
Come, I must whip thee dead, it is his command;

First, let me tell you on what ground you stand,
Though his great favors smile on you this day,
To morrow's frowns may call them all away:
And then the lash may be bestowed on you:
Which heard, the Huntsman (making humble bow)
Said, Sir, what are you?

Do not plainly se^
Me, one (to look on) fraught with misery,
View me all over, if any part be free,
I Will not desire compassion from thee.
If otherwise, take heed thou do not wrong
My Lord and Master, who will be too strong:
For thee, and thine. Though he may from me take
This painful life, he whom I serve, can make
It up, with interest a hundred fold.
(Yet pardon me, if I have been too bold)

Make but these words clear to my duller brain,
And then I will forbear; if I be slain
In place of thee? What do thou say to this?

My answer's short, thou art not far from bliss,
Could thou but see all unto me belongs,
Thou would conclude that all corporeal wrongs
Are Skin-deep only, while my better part
Rejoices always, when my wounds do smart,
Knowing that without tribulation
I never can possess that station
Bought with the blood of an eternal Son:
Ponder this well, and then God's will be done.

What mean'th the cursed Block-head to delay
His torture thus.

I Am charmed, and what to say
I know not, for he says, he has a Soul
Impassible: if so, I dare not foul
My hands with blood, for which I answer must
Before the Judgment seat of him that is Just.

Whip him, or die, Rogue, if that will not do,
My Dogs are keen, I Will make them eat him too.

Sir, I must do it, you must your shoulders bare
I will strike easy, though I dare not spare.

Will not Heaven woo thee? Is thy Masters word
Sharper then hellish Torments? Flaming Sword,
Mark them about me stand: who will defend
Thy worst of bloody blows, and then will send
Thee to the place prepared for cruelty,
Where Dives also shall a sharer be.

A Vision! I dare not touch this man,
Who has an Angel for his Guardian.

A Fool, an Angel, you flew high last night,
Your brain is dry, eyes dim, there no such sight;
Old Nurses only scare their Babes with such,
Believe nothing, but what ye see or touch.
Call out the Dogs, Rockwood, Old Lady, Ring,
And you shall see that they mind no such thing;
Baw, aw, aw.

Peace, gentle Hounds, forbear to do me harm.

My Lord, he can the Beagles also charm.
Sir, do but see, how they lie at his feet,

Then call them in; hang him, it is not meet
That Wizards (such as he) should have relief
From him, who never was sensible of grief.

Hang me, why so? you see I have no spell,
But that may keep such as your self from hell.

He makes me tremble, fill the other cup,
When Dinner's over, I Will see him hanged up.
Come eat and drink, if this must be my doom,
I Will lose no time (I swear) before it come.
Hell! I have that within me, there is no other
Which I resolve to drown. Come, fill another,
A third, a fourth, fifth, and then as many more,
I Am sure the Beggar's God has no such store
In his Elysium --

There pretty Dogs, lick on your healthful tongues,
Make satisfaction for your Master's wrongs;
But Good my Lord, one morsel to the poor,

Peace wretch, you shall be hanged at my door.

For God's sake, Sir, bestow the crumbs that fall
From your full Table on him, who does call
For Christ and Pitie's sake to be relieved,
My suit is honest, Pray Sir, be not grieved.

What tell thou me either of Christ, or Pity?
This is my House. I'xpect no other City.

But to relieve the Poor's the way to bliss,

Give over, you Rascal, there is no Heaven but this.
Here Is all that I can wish for, or desire.

No, Herer's no screen to keep thee from Hellfire;
Nor is here any fence against powerful Death,
Thou, thou, proud Dives, must resign thy breath.

Ha! ha! this canting Rogue would terrify
Me also with that Mormo, I must die.

I wonder, Sir, you have the patience
To speak, or look on such, bid drive him hence.

I wonder more that he should dote on thee,
A pinted Devil, Soul's great Enemy;
While the Almightie's Power upholds the house;
Thou fawn'st and flatter'st; but if he let loose
His Instruments, Want, Sickness, Pain or Age,
Thou fleest, then men must Act, or leave the Stage,
Without thy aid, Angel's and Adam's foe
Cease thy delusions, let great Dives go.

Sir, do not ye hear this malicious wretch,
It Is want of Bread that makes him use this fetch
To draw you in for this his wants supply.

No, you are mistaken, if he still deny
Or give to Lazar, either cannot hinder
The wholesome Precepts he shall to him tender;
For having learned content in all Estates,
He can endure cold Frosts, and Summers heats.
Let him be pinched with want, abound with wealth,
All Is welcome. Sickness is to him as health:
His needy Belly, and these noisome Sores,
Are called by him Harbingers to stores
Of endless Joy, the thoughts of which does raise
His Soul above the World's Envy or Praise.

True, true, dear friend, for when men are brought low
By me, they study only Heaven to know,
Although my various pains disrobe their faces
Of earthly glories, they augment their graces.
The true accountant of his days did say,
Before affliction, I went astray.
But being touched by my Morbifick hand,
His eyes were opened, and he saw a Land:
So full of glory (though a King before)
He Will there throw down his Crown, and keep the Door,
Where Sunbeam-Beauty sat upon his brow
So bright, so long, that Meshech, Kedar now
Are black and ugly, Heaven alone can please,
Such are the effects of this good man's disease.

Great Sir, this drift you easily may 'spie,
They would have Friendship broke 'twixt you and I;
Old friends are always sure, beware of new,
There are Religious Cheaters, not a few;
Is any one so mad to think that heaven,
When balanced with Gold, can carry even;
No Sir, leave these to such far-hoping fools,
They may be hurt, who meddle with edged tools.

Their words are vain, thou art to me most dear,
I hate their persons, and give over to hear
Their savourless discourse. Come, let me drink,
This babbling makes me melanchol' I think,

Cheer up, great Sir, shall your courageous Soul
Be daunted with the whooping of an Owl;
Shall croaking flesh-crow-sounds disturb your breast,

Here Is Lethe water will make you forget,
That eyer Lazarus was heard as yet.

O! but my head aches, and my spirit's dull.

In haste, of Cordial, bring a brimmer full.

Be of good cheer, this draught is for your good.

Oh! oh! oh! oh! Now, now I feel my blood
Returning to its Center; and my eye,
The greatest Object doubled does epsy.
Oh, hold me, all my limbs begin to shake;
Hold me, O hold, or else my poor heart will break.
Who Is there? O who is there! O what friends have I
To leave me thus in my extremity.
Who Is there? oh! who is there?

All your friends are gone.

Can thou not help?

Yes, but I^ll let alone,
To see if your beloved Fraternity,
Dare show their heads to promise certainty
Of a reprieve.

Dear Pride where art thou now?

At hand; but cannot help, I Have made a Vow,
Never to own, or speak to dying men.

Delitious Gluttony, where art thou then?

Here Sir, but all in vain, your passage stops.

May be for Meat, yet bring the gold'n drops,
My Essences of all sorts, now bring out.
A friend (be damned) he never stirs a foot.

Why should I, Sir, though I was sworn to be
Yours unto death; now you must pard'n me.

Ah wretches! who would trust you. Lazarus, where art thou?

who would be abused thus?
What think you now of your forenoons discourse?

Good Lazarus forbear, that makes me worse.

Then you must die, as once before I said,
Though you, and yours then nothing of it made.

Nothing so true. Oh! oh! what sight is here,
A Sceleton brings in an empty Beer.

Sir, I arrest you at the Almighties suit.

I know him not. What man on Earth dare do it?

Do not your outcries speak you prisoner.
Now better words become you, do not err.

I scorn to please a Bailiff What Is my charge?
That I will pay; and thee thy fees at large.
How'er it is strange that any should me sue.
I never borrower was, nor lender knew.

The last is true, the first a horrid Lie;
All that thou haft is borrowed; for which I
Do execute this Warrant without Bail.

-- Stay, first set my goods to sale.

Goods, thou have none, a judgment past long since.

Judgment, you Rogue, I never owed two pence.

But you're a Bankrupt and must defray
All now.

What are the Bills that I must pay.

I have a many, whose total's transgression.

Then bailed I may be by your own confession;
And I can have the best in all the Land.

No mortal dare your action take in hand.
To Goal you must.

I Will pay before I go.

You lived blindly, and you will die so.
Do not you hear? what?

your own Conscience
Cry, guilty, guilty.

Yes, I must go hence.
Treasur's farewell, Pride, Gluttony and Pleasure,
This is the last, Death giv's me no more leisure;
Else I would question you of treachery;
For crying, Hail, and yet to Crucify
Your Noble Master.

Such things said before
Might have done good, but now you must give over;
Time's Glass is almost out, Eternit' enters;
The worst of men sometimes are late repenters;
Which can in no case mitigate Hell's flame,

Hast'any more to say, I strike the stroke.

No, no, you need not, my heart-veins are broke:
Augh -- augh -- augh -- g-o-l-d-dead.

You smile, and yet you must my Captive be
Laz. Most joyful news (dear friend) then I shall see
An end to all my lingering days; in grief,
Is any thing more welcome than relief
To weather-beaten Seamen, when the Waves
Of boystrous Neptun clasps his open Jaws
About their Vessel, forced by Wind and Tide.
Or to the Sould'er when he has espied
The Enemy triumphing on his ground,
With flaming Steel and conquering Trumpet sound.
Unto the hungry Soul what gives more life,
Then sight of Butler's liberal hand, and knife,
Ready to cut that may his app'tite stay;
Or to the weary Pilgrim on his way,
What Is greater joy, than when he sees, and when
His friends receive him safe returned again.
Such straits had I in all my life, yet still
I sought to be submissive to the will
Of my good God, and shall I quest'on now
That Strength and Goodness, which I ever knew?
No, thou art welcome as the Harbinger,
To call me hence, where my affections were,
All this sad time that I have lived on earth;
No man's more willing to resign his breath.

You Are not afraid of death as Dives was?

No Sir, you see that I have no such cause.

You are a debtor too, and't must be paid.

Yes unto nature. What my sins have made
Me liable to th'Law when Christ did bleed,
He said, that from the same I should be freed;
Whose Cross my Crown, and Blood my Treasure is;
This being so, pardon I cannot miss.

Then thou art ready.

Yes, through Heavens Grace,
And hope e're long to see his blessed face.
^n Glory. Who is that behind you stands?

It is an Angel into whose blessed hands,
You must resign your Soul. Now I must see
The Rich Man's Funeral Solemnity.

This loathsome, pale-faced Death, made me retire
from my deceased Lord, whose last desire
Was, That you Sexton ring his passing Bell;
And you Embalmers dress his Body well;
And that you Masons out of Marble Rock,
^ig for his Statue a substantial Block,
(...) length sev'n foot, breadth four and somewhat more,
^or's just dimension (as he was before)
^ou'r wished likewise who Mallet use and Tool,
^o cut the Effigies while his wandering Soul
^oth miriads of years 'bout Lethe Streams
^ange, drink and sleep, until his newer Dreams
Remove him to the fair Elysium,
Where none but such as my dear Dives come.

Master, I went about your just Commands,
But flaming Spirits flood and held my hands,
Saying, That since you, you had damned his Soul,
He was no better if the Bell did towl:
Though then at Prayer, these unexpected words
With stranger Faces and prodigious Swords,
Repelled my spirits so, as I seemed to be,
As fit for my last Funeral Rite as he.

Well, it is no matter, I and Gluttony,
In spite of Heaven and Hell will Ringers be.
Chyrurg 'ons view the Corpse, and spare no cost;
We do too little when we do the most:
For our dead Father Dives, by whose breath,
All men received either life or death.
Though we 'bove all, as Trustees, must our skill
Use, till we have performed his last Will.
An't shall be done, Artists, what say you to it?

Sir, Art avails not, we cannot do it;
The sparkling Glowworm yesterday shined bright
Melts into Rottenness: A horrid sight!

Where is the leaden Coffin? put him in.

Nor this Sir, can we do, he has no skin.
His flesh and bones consume, nothing remains:
So save your Gold, good Sir, as we our pains.

Is It usual for dead men to do so.

No, no, it only speaks where he is to go.

Why? He Is already in the Elizian Groves.

Be not deceived, Heaven no corrupt'on love

And do you truly think his state is bad.

We do so truly, and think yours as sad
Without Repentance.

Now I know ye rave.

We knew what we should have, no more we crave.

Masons, where is the Stone that I bespoke
For's Statue?

Coming hither it was broke.

I think we shall be crossed in each design.

We never were so till now, it is a bad sign.

I never heard so much of these till now.

Such om 'nous things may make a proud man bow.

Bow! with a Pox! then what must the most do.

We answer soon, learn to be humble too.

Be gone, ye Rogues, about your business.

From such as you, we never expected less.

Carvers, have you no such already made?

Yes; but we must take pains about the head;
which we with artificial hairs must cover,
And in his hands put bags of Gold however.
Now Sir, it is done according to your mind.

Come take your Money, I Will have that is behind.

Thrice cursed be the day and Fate,
That did our bliss obliterate;
Our golden Mine is now shut up;
Its owner drinks of Styg'an Cup;
While we his Votaries do groan,
Being deprived of him, alone,
From whom we all our living had,
All but his Flatter'rs wanted bread:
His Friends (though few) he loved well;
Since for them he would go to Hell;
Where we must leave him, and repent,
E're our last glass of time be spent;
Or else we must expect that Doom,
To which he is too surely come,
For his neglect of Piety,
Of which he would no lover be:
Our Tears are vain; then let us give over,
And take possession of his store;
It is sufficient that his Glory,
Will live as long as Sacred Story;
And name of Dives will be sweet,
To every earthly Proselyte,
Who make their God of gilded clay,
Till Heaven, as him, sweep them away:
There needs no Tomb, most Rich Men's Purses,
Wrap him, as Children, by their Nurses.

Friend Lazarus, how like you my return^

Well, though your absence gave me cause to mourn.
Had not the glor'ous Light you left behind,
Made my past mis'ries vanish from my mind.

Does not the Doom of the Rich Man affright
Thy feeble flesh.

Never while I see this Light;
Which I am sure is earnest of that bliss
I shall receive when come where Jesus is.
Keep me no longer here, I am most willing;
Thou can not hurt me having lost thy Sting.

Hold fast, dark night, rough way, may make me slide.

Joy of thy Lord, I Am come for that same end,
To bring thee safe to Heaven, he did me send:
Whose will I always cheerfully obey:
Yet e're we take our wing, pray let us stay,
And talk of your Adventur's here below:
This I desire.

I Will tell you what I know.
What entertainment had you all this time
On earth?

As Cynthia* now Full, now Prime.
Or as bright Phoebus, whose resplendant Rays,
Give heat and light to the renewed days,
And yet are sometimes wrapped in Clouds and Mist,
That if he shine or not, it is not guest;
Or when pale Luna overshades his face,
So various was my state, while in this place.

Is there not then among Mortals difference?

Yes, that is one cause, for which I would go hence.
Some swim in pleasure, some are drowned in want,
Though this last happens where true Grace is scant.
The Rich oppress the Poor, the fat devour
The lean, and yet this lasts not an hour,
Being compared with Eternity.

Do not some say, that they shall never die?

Yes, so said the Rich Man but yesterday.
Now I am almost weary of my stay;
For though I Am glad to see your glorious light,
I long to see my God, who shines more bright;
Into whose presence I desire to be.

I have yet one word more to say to thee.
What were thy thoughts of Heaven when thy distress
And sores were grievous?

You may easily guess.
I never yet despaired of Shaddai's help,
Though men looked on me as a leprous whelp.

And think thou that such Misers come to bliss?

The Scripture says, To such God's Promise is.

Trust me thou dare then with thy happy Soul.

Why should I fear? Since you dare not control
Your Makers Mandat; who desires that ye
Ne^r leave my better part, till placed it be
In Abram's bosom, where I shall inherit
More than Elisha's or Elia's spirit.

This pleases well. What thy last words may be,
I Will hear of Mankinds treple Enemy.
And so go hence: The Flesh, the World, and Hell,
Are those I mean; b'ing such since Adam fell.

The Devil a Liar is, whom I defy,
And ever did, you are my witness, by
His black suggests, that did my Maker rob
Of's Glory; I despised, and shared with Job,
In's dunghill scabs, and rather than commit
A wilful trespass, I would to the pit
Have gone alive, he has a murdering mind,
Although he flatter, let him get behind.
As for the alluring world, the Almighty knows,
It never received ought of me, it owes
Me many common favors, fare it well;
'Twas better want them, then have gone to Hell.
Poor flesh, I am a debtor unto thee;
Wait but a while, my Lord will satisfy
With Interest, what ever I took on score,
Enough for all; thou shall revive: Nay more,
Thou shall be glorified with Christ thy Head,
At Day of Judgment, when he 'wakes the dead.

This true Confession, makes the glorious
Earth is not worthy of thee, come with us:
Death strike him gently, he is the adopted Son
Of Abram, where I leave him, and have done.

Welcome dear Child, now I am filld with joy,
To see thee trample all did thee annoy.
It Is Faith, and Hope, and Love that helped thee hither:
Two of which cease, the last shall never wither.
It Is Summer always here, here is no Hail-showers,
To stock the fruit once set, or blast the Flowers.
Of bliss eteanal. Pray look upon me,
My faithful Son, whom I have longed to see;
Here take this Crown, this Royal Diadem,
Adron that head, which formerly with shame
Lay on the Dunghill. Let thy spotted skin
Henceforth be glorious, as thy Soul within.
Prepare thine ears for the uncessant noise
Of Saints and Angels, who do all rejoice
At thy admission to this Sacred Quire,
Where all their Hymn's are fraught with Divine fire;
And none do sing of any thing but love.
That Is our eternal business now above.

All praise to the Almighty, through whose Grace,
I fought the good fight and have won the race.

Raise thy Immortal Voice another Key.
Thou must sing Halelujahs night and day
For ever -- La. Halelujah --

Did my dark chains and torments fierce permit,
I should rejoice to see Great Dives sit
Here pined with anguish thirst, and cold,
While my dear Friends consume his ill got Gold.
How fare you Sir? How like ye your remove?
The Scene is altered, since you were above.

Ah me! What ruful sights? what squalid shapes,
Of Bears, and Wolves, and Tigers, ugly Apes,
Devouring Vulturs; and that which is worse,
Damned Furies foaming under Heavens curse.
Fire, fire, O fire! dreadful, sulphurous.

Such entertainment you must have with us.

I freeze, I fry, and cannot get way.

Stay, first for Purple, and fine Linen pay.
You took on trust; your quintessence of blood
Must be exchanged for the Styg'an flood.
The pleasure you have had for some few years,
Is ended, after which eternal tears
Must have succession.

O! what glorious light
Do I see, shining through the gloomy night;
And place, with fairest Diamonds and Pearls
Beset and floored, fit for none but Earls,
Or such as I once was. What Sun-like Sage
Is that? his face bespeaks him of great age.
And who is that li'th in his glor'ous arms?
Sure, it is some Cupid, who fond nature charms.

Nothing but Nature yet, I thought this load
Of chains might have assured there was a God,
Whose habitation is the place you see.

Then cursed be they, who have deceived me.

That ancien's Abr'am, and that glorious youth
In's happy arms is Lazarus, whose mouth
You once forbid to show his wretched case,
Or give the least relief Div. Alas! alas!
Will neither of them help me, if I cry.

'Twill but augment your torment, you may try.

Father, dear Father Abram, ease your Son,
Who li'th in torment, else he is undon.
My misery's so great, I cannot tell:
But ah! too sure it is the fire of Hell,
Which heretofore none could make me believe;
Yet dearest Father (if you can) relieve
Me from this torment, reach thy helping hand;
If not, send Lazarus; who thy Command
is ready to obey, and let him dip
In cooling water, but his fingers tip,
Which he upon my scorched tongue may drain,
To quench this flame, which I cannot sustain.

Son be content, time was thou would not see,
(Without disdain) this poor man's misery.
Nor would give the crumbs fell from thy Table,
To satisfy his Soul; when thou wast able,
His fortunes to have raised, to such a pitch,
That none but Dives might have been more rich:
Then thou thy portion had while wretched he,
Lay in distress; unpitied by thee.
Do not remember these things?

Yes, O Yes!
Is this the cause I am deprived of bliss?

And good cause too, wherefore give over to grieve,
There Is none in Heaven or Earth can thee relieve.
A fixed Gulf, betwixt us ever shall
Unmoved stand; God's Justice, brazen wall;
So that no heir of Heaven can come to thee,
Nor thou to them, for ease of misery.

Then pray you send him to my Father's house,
I have five Brethren there, are very loose;
They Are also feeding fat for this sad slaughter.

Tush, News from Heaven, will only make their laughter.
For they who drowned are in earthly pleasure;
Have this hard fate, ne^re to repent at leisure;
Or mend that is amiss, but spend their day,
In eating, drinking, rising up to play,
Till they are fallen asleep: Their golden Dreams,
^re never well interpreted, till Streams
Of fire and brimstone from the higher powers,
Rain on their heads for ever.

O, these Showers
Would I were turned to some Marble Rock,
Or had at first been made a senseless Block.
Oh! that great hills and mountains might us swallow;
Or that (like Bruits) I might for ever wallow
On Earth, and have no other 'count to make.

Give over, give over, and these your torments take,
A^ from a just, and sin-revenging God,
Who willed you once to bear a lighter load.

O! but my Brethren, Sir, know not my Doom.

They Will know it (I doubt) too soon, when they are come
To that same place of torment where you are.

Then send, O send, Sir, e're they go too far.
Is not the gate of Heaven ope' while they live?
They may repent, and God their sins forgive.

It Is but in vain to send one from the dead,
Se'ing he can say no more, than may be read
In Moses, Isai'* weeping Jeremie,
And all the rest whose Inspirations be
Divine. Then cursed wretch, thou must give over
To cry, bidding Adieu for evermore
To Heaven, where Lazarus must now remain
With me, and thou in Hell's tormenting pain.

HEre li'th the Man, who never did
Good while he liv^d, nor Vice forbid:
Here li'th the Man, who to his Wealth,
Trusted his Souls and Bodies health:
Here li'th the Man, who out of measure,
Glutted himself with beastly pleasure;
For which his hungry Soul and dry,
Is doomed eternally to fry
In Hell. A warning unto those,
Who in base Earth their trust repose.
His Sentence past; let such give over,
God's just still, as he was before.
Avertat Deus hoc malum a nobis.


