Abraham's FAITH.

(...). FRet not to see a Tragi-Comedy,
Written by one, who thinks no shame to be
All things to all men, Pedant, Player, Fool,
Provided he may gain a Sin-sick Soul;
And bring him back to his first Love and Lord,
Using no other Spel than Heavens word.
The Atheist I do first Court and say,
Sir, you're invited to our homely Play;
Where, if you look with Abraham's faithful eye,
You mercy in a Mystery may spy.
The disobedient Child, I do invite
To come, and view with me this happy sight.
Young Isaac, who submits to the knife
Of Abraham, from whom he first had life.
The tender Mother may also draw near,
And hear or read these Lines and never fear,
Abra'm by God must only tried be,
The Boy by him, and then delivery
From Heaven will come, or if the World's worthies,
Will daign a look, or stoop to catch such flies
As I have brought; or can spare any time,
From greater matters to read humble Rhyme,
They Are welcome. Sick men also from their beds
May come, and have a Pillow for their heads.
He that is fit to hang himself may come,
Here is a Ram already in his Room.
In fine, of all sorts, comers welcome be,
To see Heavens Wisdom, Pow'er, Philanthropy.
ALas poor Boy, our comfort now is over!
I never knew what 'twas to grieve before.
How often have I solac'd in the Arms
Of thy dear Father? Oh! but now the charms,
Printed by Heaven upon my Mistress face
Are irresistible, alas! alas!

Why Mother, why? was it not always so?
Hag, No Child, you are ignorant, thou do not know;
It is not long since Old Age and despair
Of Issue, made her self account me fair,
And recommend me to my dearest Lord;
Though now her piercing looks, as sharpest Sword
Cut what they see. We, we are both undone,
She must enjoy old Abraham alone.

But Mother, Sarah has no Children yet.

I know she has not, but the time is set
For her deliv'ry; and 'twill be a Boy,
To dis-inherit thee, the only joy
Of me thy Mother.

Dis-inherit me
He cannot, unless Law perverted be:
The Primo-geniture I Am sure is mine,
Which no man shall persuade me to resign,

I Am but the Handmaid, Sarah is the wife;
These very words may breed an endless strife
In The Family: and Mistress without doubt,
Will study means whereby to cast us out.

My Lord can you the glories of my face
Behold and not admire? Can there be place
In your grave Breast, for any other flame
Beside that kindled from my Eyes? then tame
Your strange desires; and let your lawful Bed
Bound your caresses. Know that you are Wed
To Sarah now, who cease to be dead
And barren as before: View her from head
To foot, her features and her limbs mark well,
And if these please not, see her Belly swell.
One Child from Heaven may balanced be with two,
That come by Natures law, and mine is so.

Dearest of Wives, this new thought on discourse,
Seems to rise from some malicious source.
What is thy will? or what do thou desire?
Would you have fuel added to the fire
That Heaven has kindled? Dear what do require?

That you shake off your Handmaids, and Love me,
Is all I crave; I will not Rivall'd be.
Kind Husbands when their Wives in my condition
Be, (for the most part) do with full submission
Hearken to them, fearing untimely birth.

Well Sarah, well, you are disposed for mirth.

It Is mirth to you, but I must feel the sorrow,
I think I shall be brought to Bed to morrow.
Go, call the Midwife, I am very bad;
I never yet such Griping torture had,

Cheer up my dearest, when thou see the Boy,
'Twill banish grief, and ravish thee with joy.
When Males are born the trouble is forgot,
And thine will be a Boy I question not.

Pray for me Husband, this is a sharp bout.

He who has promised, he will help thee out.
Midwife what news?

You have a lovely Child,
Thank Heaven your expectation's not beguiled.

Take him my Lord, this Boy will make you glad.

It is the best that e're my dearest had,
Here, take ye him, it is time that he were fed.

Nay hold as yet my Lord, you have forfeited.

Forfeited, what?

Good Sir, a Midwives fee.

Here take the Child, and I will give it thee.
Here.

Sir I thank you, when I women lay
Of their first born, I see I'ave double pay;
The next my Lady has, my Lord will hold
His hand, and will not part with so much Gold.

I am no Niggard if that time do come,
I promise thee to give a bigger sum.

My Lord I Am but in Jest, yet may you have
A numerous issue, if you nothing gave.

Husband you know I laughed heretofore,
Have not I reason now, as many more;
Then from my laughter let him have his name.

I'ave called him Isaac, is not that the same?

My Lovely Babe, come let me suckle thee.
There is no Mortal can more joyful be.

Heavens mind's fulfilled,
And Sarah still^d.
O how she longed,
And said I Am wronged.
No Wife like me,
Who Abra'ms be:
All have their Joys,
Their Babies-toys.
I Am only she,
Who barren be.
New, now her Breasts
Are made two Nests,
For harboring
The loved Offspring,
Of her dear Lord,
At Heavens word.
And more she may
Have that same way.
Gods promises
To us are bliss.
No Art avails,
When Heaven fails.
His blessings he
Bestowed, then she
Got blown Saills.
If any after Children want, they may
For remedy, with her to Heaven pray.

Dear heart methinks this Boy has sucked too long.

What? and has neither Feet nor Tongue
E're he be weaned he must a Footman be,
To run and prattle up and down with thee.
Now do your pleasure.

Call our friends together,
He must not be a burden to his Mother.

Mam if I lose my pap the Child will cry.

Yes pretty thing thou must, or Mam will dye:
O! how it snugs and sleeps upon my Breast;
Poor rogue, I Am sure of all he loves me best.
Here, thou shall have thy bubby one month longer,
E're that be over my Chicken may be stronger:
And if that will not do, He give'm another,
No Love is like to that of a dear Mother.
Come dry Nurse, take the Child and use him well,
Thy care of him, shall make thee ever dwell
With me in plenty. Abram see the scorn
Of Hagar's Brat, that in my house was born;
If you deceive not Heaven which counts you just,
You must him and his Mother both, out thrust;
Because the Rog^e in years has got the start,
He strives with Isaac for an equal part
In thy estate, but it must not be so;
If me and mine you Love, pray let them go.

What change of humors all you Women have!
It is not long since you the handmaid gave,
And said, of her you shall raise seed to me;
I thought this was enough to make her free
In The house, but now I see it is otherways,
Favors of this kind, have sudden decays.
However your desire I will fulfill;
Hagar be gone, it is thy Mistress will.

Well said my friend, for I desire the same,
Thy Family must from Isaac have its name,
And blessing too. Ab. Thy will I shall obey;
Come Sirs, get up and make no more delay:
The Lord commands, whose laws are all to me
Just, though contrary they to nature be.
This Bread and Water take, and so go hence,
You have abused your Mistress patience;
Though I know nothing, I must not control,
This peevish humor grieves my very Soul.

Each day has its succeeding night,
Clouds sometimes darken the Suns light.
The Flowers that florid are to day,
Tomorrow Frost nips quite away.
Youth like a shadow flies, and age
Says, it is my turn to tread the Stage.
Life must give place to grim-fac'd Death,
There Is nothing fixed made of Earth.
But all dance round and Circle make,
While one another place does take.
The passions likewise have their turns,
One Breast with Love and Hatred burns.
One's sad, and merry, Melancholy,
And all sometimes, are counted folly.
Honors and pleasures are so brittle,
That most wise men esteem them little.
In fine there is naught but thoughts of Heaven,
That brings Wages home at Even.

Abra'm my faithful Servant, do thou hear?
I must give thee a visit once a year;
I^ave found thee perfect always hitherto,
And now I am come, to try if thou will do
What I command thee, without stay or grudge;
Remember, once thou called me righteous Judge.

I Am here, speak Lord, thy Servant hears and will
Count all thy precepts Just, and them fulfill.

What could thou freely part withal for me?

What could I not? since I have all from thee.

Then thou must take thy Son, thine only Son,
And sacrifice him; so my will is done.
The Mount Moriah's fittest for thy turn,
There thou shall lead young Isaac, and him burn;
This action, Abraham, will please me well.

My Lord if you command, I Will go to Hell.

Fond fool give over, Religion makes thee mad,
Heavens Minions never yet rejoicing had
Without a damp; their sweet is mixed with sour,
It is not possible for humane power,
To act what he commands, being as strict
As those, who bid men without straw make brick.

Give over thou murdering Sp'rit, do not delude,
The friend of God, all whose commands are good,
If he should fear or fret at his desire,
Thou can not keep him from a fiercer fire
Than he is bid to kindle for his Son,
That Is Brimston, and will last when this is done;
And yet will be no pleasing Sacrifice
To God nor him, do Abraham and be wise.

What Father ever yet so cruel was,
To Murder his own Child without a cause?
View but these Limbs and features of his face,
His sparkling Eyes, then there will be no space
Left in thy hardened heart, for cruelty;
A faithful man will never Butcher be
Of humane Bodies --

Faint flesh, those Eyes and Features are but toys,
That fade with time and age, there is greater Joys
Laid up for Isaac, immortality;
What needs thou care then if he burned be?
Besides, have thou not heard how Phaenix rare,
Burned to ashes, does her self repair
Out of the same, being first a little Worm?
If thou believe, thou need'st not fear this storm.

Thou can not be beloved of God, since he
Bids thee perform such monstrous cruelty:
They say he is merciful, if it be so,
Thou may lie still and never think to go
To Mount Moriah, whom he loves, he loves;
But this command, rather his hatred proves.

This is an old tone, and bespeaks thee fool;
Know, that he has given every man his Soul,
Which, if he back again from him requires,
By Famine, Sword, or Pestilence, or Fires;
It Is never to destroy that he does this,
But for removal to Eternal bliss.

Give over, give over, now it is almost day,
I will no more dispute. Believe and pray
I will, for success on my loved host,
I spend but time, my God is at the cost;
He gave me Isaac, and desires that he
In fire and flames should from the Altar be,
Sent whence he came --

My Lord I fear you have a troubled head,
For I could scarcely hold you in your Bed:
Tell me your Dream, it fearful is I Am sure,
For I have Dreamed too, and cannot endure
Now when awake, no not to think of it:
I saw a Bow from Heaven, bent and hit
My darling.

Sarah then our Dreams are one,
God bids me go and burn my little Son.

Burn him? alas! I see I laughed too soon,
Then must my hopes and comforts all be gone.

Peace Sarah, it is God requires the Lad,
And he shall have him, if I twenty had.
Can I bestow them better, than to give
My Maker all? in whom I move and live.

My Lord it is but a Dream, as yet forbear,
Such things require a double Messenger.

Dearest thou know my Dreams are always true,
Though such a Dream as this I never knew.
However, honey, let us with submission
Part with the Lad, obeying Heavens commission;
His pow'er is great, so is his mercy too,
Thou know not what he is about to do:
For I may safely with the Boy return;
And if I do not, there is no cause to mourn,
We are but as were, and he another
May give, whom thou may call Isaack's Brother.
The promiser is all-sufficient,
We can have no just cause then to repent
Our Piety, which always promise has,
Of grace and freedom from Eternal Death.

My Lord he is your own, and God your Friend,
Obey him, mean while I will Prayers send
For him to Heaven, as soon as you are gone,
And beg he may not give me cause to moan,
Who laughed before. --

Go Sadle me my Ass, and two of you
Must go with me, where yet I do not know.
Call my Boy softly, tell him he must rise,
To see his Father offer Sacrifice.
Go to the Log-pile, and choose out some wood,
Cleave none for use, but that is exceeding good.

Sir all is ready.

Sarah fare thee well,
Still hope in God, the Lad may live and dwell
Again with thee his Mother, till he come
To man's 'state: or another in his room.

My doubts are over, may the Lord direct
You in your Journey, for if he protect,
Or kill the Boy, I shall leave to complain;
Perhaps he does intend a greater gain,
Than either you or I as yet expect;
Kiss me dear Child, and thou my God effect
The present work, my Husband is but clay,
And may stretch out his hand another way
Than is thy will; again kiss me my Son,
Then go with courage, Heavens will be done.

Behold my Servants, do not you espy,
Above the rest, a hill stands very high?
I and my little man must yonder go,
Mean while abide ye here.

My Lord why so?
May we not bear our Master company?

No, If ye did perhaps ye'd hinder me,
From acting the highest piece of Piety,
That ever yet was heard, or seen with Eye.

Have we not seen the Sacrifice before?

It Is true, and yet in this will be much more
Faith, Resolution, needful, than when I
For smaller matters Sacrifice or pray.

Good my Lord, let us go to see the sight.

No, no, I cannot, it will you affright.

We must contented be and you obey,
Hoping you will not from us make long stay.

I will return as soon as I have done,
'Twill be no pleasure to stay there alone.

Alone you cannot be, this little Boy
Can make a Wilderness a place of joy.

But I must leave him there my God commands.

First dearest Master tie your Servants hands;
For we will sooner far resolve to dye,
Than see you actor of such cruelty.
This is in jest.

No, I must Sacrifice
The Boy, Heaven bids me, who I Am sure is wife;
If I do freely act what he commands,
He either will approve, or hold my hands.
Tnink you that I can any other thing
Value above my All-sufficient King?
No no, it is his mind and't shall be mine,
In spite of all who against it do combine.
I think his Mother has the greatest cause,
Who willingly submits to Heavens Laws;
Bidding me act what my good God has said,
For proof thereof, she him encouraged,
To suffer valiantly --

Sir, We are not to quest'on your intent,
Being our Master; but a good event
We will implore.

Come, come my pretty boy,
This cloudy day may end in Sunshine Joy.
Take up the Wood my Son, I'ave knife and fire,
We must fulfillers be of Heavens desire.

Eternal Wisdom, when he made
Sun, Moon and Stars, to each he said,
Take you your turns; you must the day
Govern, and you your Scepter sway
In The night, when men are gone to rest,
And think to sleep with quiet Breast.
This is Heavens Laws, and yet we see,
That men then most unquiet be.
Abram from Heaven hears a voice,
Which quickly marred his new made joys.
It bids him go and burn his Son,
Which is no sooner said than done,
And Sarah who in all men's thought,
Would have Abraham counted naught,
For harboring such cruelty
In's Breast, as he should Butcher be
To his own Child; contents and says,
Husband we may have happy days
When Isaac 's gone, then why should we,
Strive Abrams hinderers to be?
Go on Sir, let your high desire,
Be hallowed with Heavens fire.

O Father, Father, one thing yet we lack,
(...) Lamb for offering you'ave forgot to take.
shall I run back and make a quick return?

No, no, you need not, that which I must burn
God will provide; come let us go together,
^e find a Lamb, my Boy, when I come thither.

Does any clean Beast pasture on that hill?

That work which God begins he will fufill.
^ut hark my Child, do thou not fear my God;

Why doubt you that?

Then this thy load of Wood
Must thee consume. --

But Father, does your God such Sacrifice equire?

It seems so now.

Father be wise,
The Devilish can change into a Saint of light,
May be 'twas he that called you in the night.

No Child, God's promise goes far with me,
Who faith, that none shall ever tempted be
Above what they are able; I do not fear,
Nor need thou to shed a guiltless tear.

My tender limbs will never endure the heat.

He Will send his Angels to wipe off the sweat.

My dearest Father, is your heart so hard?
Can nothing this your enterprise retard?

Nothing my Child, though I be full of love,
And grieve to kill thee, yet since my Jehove
Commands; My faith does overcome my sense,
And makes me with humanity dispense.
Boy thou must dye.

I Am glad it is for God.

None other should have made me lay this load
On Isaacks tender shoulders. Now my Child
We Are at the place where I must Altar build.
Dig up the Turf, and let us raise the Earth.

Ah Father I Am already out of Breath.
The thoughts of Death, with the Sun's melting heat
O'recometh me, Oh see how I do sweat!
Is It done enough?

Not yet, it must b^ higher,
That all the ashes may fall from the fire.
Now it is enough, come Child, bring me the Woo^

It Is here my Father.

It is very good
All Is done so far, my Boy thou must be bound.

Your will be done: O that I may not swoun!
But with undaunted courage yield my breath,
To him who power has of life and death.
^t is my Maker's will and I submit,
^oping by him to be kept from the pit
^^fernal: He will raise me up again,
With Saints and Angels ever to remain.
^ehold my hands! I Will fold them for your ease.

Son, knew I any way my God to please,
(...) would not touch thee.

I am now grown strong,
and valiant too, I count this death no wrong.

Thou must get up before I bind thy feet.

Sir, that your will I should perform is meet.
^ow bind not hard, I will not struggle much,
^ut dearest Father, kill me at first touch,
^he knife is sharp enough and you are strong.

Dear Child I tremble, and may strike thee wrong.

Hold Father but a little, let me pray
(...) Heaven, and first Lord teach me what to say.
^y God look on me with a tender Eye,
and pardon all my sins of Infancy;
^^en my Eyes before the knife come down,
that while I live, I may leap at the Crown
^epar'd for Martyrs. Lord let me inherit,
^e blessings promised by thy holy Spirit.
^all, call thy Angels to receive that Soul,
^ho never as yet did willingly control
Thy will. Sir, now strike on, for I have done.

No, I must pray too, e're I can go on.
O All-sufficient whose purer Eye,
Look'th with abhorrence on all cruelty;
Accept this Sacrifice, make strong my arm,
Since thou best know that I intend no harm
To my dear Child, but that I may the name,
Receive (when done) of faithful Abraham.
Lord I believe, raise feeble hand and heart
To give the blow --
Now Child I strike. Here. O! who holds m^ Arm?

Stay Abram, stay, and do not any harm
Unto thy Son, I minded but to try,
If I could in thy faith a flaw espy.
Look but behind thee, there is the Sacrifice,
Lay hold of it, and let young Isaac rise;
I Am sure thou love me 'bove each Earthly thing
Since thou wast willing to make offering
Of thy own flesh: Touch not the hopeful Boy,
But let him to his Mother go with Joy.
This Ram thou shall instead of him up offer,
I never did intend that he should suffer.

The best of news that ever yet were hear
For though I did believe, I greatly feared.
But blessed be God, and let him ever be,
As Abraham's so also God to thee;
Let no distrust for ever Lodge within
Thy Breast, you are Type of him who must for
Be offered really; is it not best
To go unto the Servants?

There Is no haste.
Before approaching death I prayed, and now
Restored again, I Will at the Altar bow.
He that is freed from danger ought with speed,
To bless the hand that helped him in his need.

Do happy Child, and I will second thee;
^oynt Prayers welcome unto Heaven be.

Lord let me ever with all thankfulness
Adore thy name, since thou did not oppress,
With grief my Mother, but have saved me,
That I to her may greatest comfort be
^n old age, when my Fathers hoary head,
^hew's to the World that he is almost dead.
^id me thy will perform, I Will never grudge,
Being persuaded you are a righteous Judge.

Lord I can say no more than I have said,
Who thee implores shall never want timely aid.
Thy Arm is strong, Eyes quick and always ready,
^o ease his Burden, who does carry steady;
(...) have endeavored, and my weak intention,
Has met with mercy, Heavens condescension.

IF any thing in these few sheets be found,
May burn the thorn, or prick the stony ground.
If any thing the way-side-corn does gather,
To Sow't in good, then, then my Heavenly Father,
The Meat is right, if not spoiled by the Cook;
If so, the squeamish may forbear to look
Upon it. If any hunger starved be,
Eat heartily, it will not surfeit thee.
If any Gentleman or Lady find,
Ought in this Poem fitteth not their mind;
They may repair unto some fatter Soil,
Where they may have their lukewarm hearts mad boil
With love and valor, (Imps of flesh and blood)
I'ave no such ware, but here is that is as good.
And love, and valor too, yet such as will
Not hurt the lover, nor the valiant kill.
They love and fight, and yet both victors be.
Abra'm and God. This Tragi-Comedy,
Pleased my self, when I it undertook,
And pleased my friends, when they on it did look;
But if it please not others, let them cast
It out of Doors, perhaps 't may be the last,
That they shall see of mine in such a style,
For this I Will neither Plaudite, beg, nor smile.

