I Am quite weary of the Country Life; there is that Little thing the World
calls Quiet, but there is nothing else; Clowns live and die in it, whose Souls
lie hid here, and after Death their Names: My Kinder Stars, (I thank 'em) have
Winged my Spirit with an Active Fire, which makes me wish to know what Men are
Born for, to Diet a Running Horse, to give a Hawk casting, to know Dogs Names;
These make not Men; no, it is Philosophy, it is Learning, and Exercise of Reason
to know what is Good and Virtuous, and to break our Stubborn and Untemper'd
Wills, to Choose it; This makes us Imitate that Great Divinity that Framed us


I thought you had Learned Philosophy enough at Oxford, what betwixt Aristotle
on one side, and Bottle-Ale on the other, I am confident you have arrived at a
Pitch of Learning and Virtue sufficient for any Gentleman to set up with in the
Country, that is, to be the Prop of the Family


My Father's Fondness has kept me so long in the Country, I Have forgot all I Would
Learned at the University: Besides, take that at Best, it but Rough-casts us;
No, London is the Choicest Academy, it is that must Polish us, and put a Gloss
upon our Country-Studies; Hither I Am come at last, and do resolve to Glean many
Vices. Thou, Tranio, have been my Companion, still one Bed has held us, one
Table fed us; and though our Bloods give me Precedence (that I count Chance) My
Love has made us Equal, and I have found a frank return in thee


Such a Discourse commands a Serious Answer; Know then, your Kindness tells me,
I must Love you: The Good you have Taught me Commands me to Honor you; I have
Learnt, with you, to hate Ingratitude; But setting those aside, for thus I may
seem to do it: for my own sake, be assured, I must Love you, though you hate
me; I neither look at Vice nor Virtue in you, but as you are the Person I dote
on


No more; I do believe and know thou love me: I wonder Iamy stays so long
behind: You must look out to get me handsome Lodgings, sit to receive such
Friends the Town shall bring me; you must take care of all, for I Am resolved to
make my Study my sole Business; I Will live handsomely, not over high, nor yet
beneath my Quality


Gentlemen, Importune no farther, you know my firm Resolve, not to bestow my
Youngest Daughter, before I have a Husband for the Elder; if either of you both
Love Pegg, because I know you well, and love you well: You shall have freedom
to Court her at your Pleasure


That is to say, we shall have leave to have our Heads broken, a prime
Kindness, by'ur Lady, she is too rough for me; There, Geraldo, take her for me,
if you have any Mind to a Wife; to her, you are Young, and may clap Trammel's
on her, and strike her to a Pace in time; I dare not deal with her, I shall
never get her out of her high Trot


It Is strange, Sir, you should make a Stale of me among these Mates thus.


Mates, Madam, 'Faith, no Mates for you, unless you were a little Tamer; woe
worth him that has the Breaking of you


Take heed I don't bestow the Breaking of your Calves Head for you; You Mate,
Marry come up; go, get you a Sempstress, and run in Score with her for
Muckinders to dry your Nose with, and Marry her at last to pay the Debt: And
you there, Goodman Turnep-eater, with your Neats-Leather Phisnomy, I Will send
your Kitchen-wench to Liquor it this Wet-weather; Whose old Boots was it cut
out of


From all such Potticoate Devils deliver us I pray.


Did you ever see the like, Sir? that Wench is either stark Mad, or wonderful
Froward


I cannot tell, but I had as live take her Dowry with this condition, to be
whipped at Chairing-cross every morning


Faith as you say, there is small choice in rotten Apples, but since it is as
it is, let us be Friendly Rivals, and endeavor for a Husband for Margaret, that
Biancha may be free to have one, and then he that can win her, wear her


I would give the best Horse in Smith-field to him that would thoroughly Woe
her, Wed her, and Bed her, and rid the House of her, to carry her far enough
of, well come agreed


But pray Sir, is it possible that Love should of a sudden take such hold of you.


O Tranio, till I found it to be true, I never found it possible, but she has
such attractive Charms, he were a stone that did not Love her, I am all fire,
burn, pine, perish Tranio, unless I win her; Counsel me, and Assist me, Dear
Tranio


Are all your Resolutions for Study come to this? you have got a book will hold
you tack, you are like to be a fine Virtuoso, now must we to a Chemist to set
his Still a going for Philters -- Love Powders and Extracts of Sigh's and
Highoe's


Nay Tranio, do not make Sport with my Passion, it is a thing so deeply rooted
here, it cannot dye, but it must take me with it; help me, or hope not long to
see thy Master


Nay Sir, if you are so far gone there is no remedy, we must contrive some way,
but 'twill be difficult; for you know her Father has mewed her up, and till he
has rid his hands of her Sister there is no coming near her


Ah, Tranio, what a cruel Father's he, but don't you remember what care he took
to provide Masters for her


I Sir, and what of all that?


You Are a Fool, cannot I be perfer'd to her, to teach her French, I have a good
command of the Language, and it may be easily done


I don't apprehend the easiness of it; for who shall be Sir Lyonels Son here in
Town? To ply his Studyes, and welcome his Friends, visit his Kindred, and
entertain 'em


Be content, I have a Salve for that too; we have not yet been seen in any
House, nor can be distinguished by our Faces, for Man or Master. Then it
follows thus, you Tranio must be young Winlove in my stead, and bear your self
according to my rank; I Will be an ordinary French Master about the Town, the
time I stayed in France, in that will help me, it must be so. Come, come,
unease, and take my Clothes and when we are at our Lodgings, we'll make a full
change; when Iamy comes he waits on thee, but first I Will charm his Tongue


'Twill be needful, since this is your Pleasure I Am tied to be Obedient, for
so your Father charged me at your Parting, although I think 'twas in another
sense; In short I Am ready to serve you, and assist you in your Enterprise


Here comes the Rogue. Sirrah, Where have you been?


Where have I been? Pray how now Master, where are you Master, has Tranio Stolen
your Clothes, or you his, or both


Sirrah come hither, this is not time to Jest. Some weighty Reason makes me
take this Habit; enquire not; you shall know them time enough; mean while wait
you on Tranio in my stead I charge you as becomes you, you understand me


I, Sir, never a whit.


And not of Tranio; one word in your Mouth, he is turned to Winlove.


The better for him, would I were so too.


When I am alone with you, why then I am Tranio still, in all places else, your
Master VVinlove


Tranio, let us go, one thing yet remains, which you must by no means neglect,
that is, to make one amongst these Wars; Ask me not why, but be satisfied, my
Reasons are both good and weighty


I obey, Sir.


SIrrah, leave off your Scotch, and speak me English, or something like it.


Good will I Sir.


I think we have Ridden Twenty Miles in Three hours, Sawny are the Horses well
Rubbed down and Litter'd


Deel O my Saul, Sir, I never Scrub'd my sell better than I Scrub'd your Naggs.


And thou need'st Scrubbing, I Will say that for thee, thou Beastly Knave; Why do
ye not get your self Cured of the Mange


S'breed, Sir, I w'ud ne'a be cured for a Thousand Pund; there is nea a Lad in
aw Scotland but Loves it; Good Sawny might hang himsel an it were not for
Scratting and Scubbing


Why so Prithee?


When ye gea 'tull a Ladies House ye are Blithe and Bonny Sir, and gat good Meat,
but the Dee'l a bit gat's Sawndy, mere than Hunger and Cawd, Sir; Ba then,
Sir, when aw the Footmen stan still Sir, and ha nothing to dea, then gees
Saundy tul his Pastime, Scratten and Scrubben


Do call it Pastime?


A my Saul de I Sir; I take as Muckle Pleasure, Sir, in Scratten and Scrubben,
as ye de in Tiplin and Mowing


Nay, if it be so, keep it, and much good may it do you. This is my old Friend
Geraldo's Lodgings, for whose sake now I am come to Town, I hope he is at home;
there Sauny, Knock


Wuns, Sir, I see nean to Knock boe' yer ean sell, Sir.


Sirrah, I say Knock me soundly at this Gate.


Out, Out, in the Muccle Dee'ls Name to ye; you will gar me strike ye, and then
ye'l put me a-wau, Sir, with ye'r favor Ise never do it Sir: Good an ye ne ken
when ye an a gued Man, S'breed I wo't when I Have a gued Master, ye's bang yer
Sell for Saundy


Rogue, I Will make you understand me.


Good an yeed give Sawndy ea bang ar two mere e that place, for I can never
come at it to Scrat it my sell Sir


Yes thus, Sir.


The Dee'l faw yer Fingers, I may not beat yea of yee'r e'ne Dunghill, Sir, bot
gin I had yea in Scotland, Is'e ne give yea a Bawbee for your Luggs


How now Sauny, What Crying out? Dear Petruchio, most welcome; When came you
to Town? What Quarrel is this 'twixt you and Sauny? I pray let me Compose the
Difference, and tell me now what happy Gale droye you to Town, and why in this
Habbit? Why in Mourning


A common Calamity to us young Men, my Father has been Dead this four Mouths.


Trust me I am sorry, a good old Gentleman.


Gee yer gate Sir, ge yer gate, on ye be fow a grief ye'r nea Friend, Sir, we
are blyth and bonny, Sir, we nere woe for it


Sirrah, you long to be basted.


Gad do I not, Sir.


Hither I come to try my Fortunes, to see if good luck and my Friends will help
me to a Wife; Will you wish me to one


What Quallifications do you look for?


Why Money, a good Portion.


Is that all?


All Man? all other things are in my making.


I shall come roundly to you, and wish you to a Rich Wife, but her Face --


That shall break no Squares, a Mask will mend it, wealth is the burden of my
Wooing Song. If she be Rich, I care not if she want a Nose or an Eye, any thing
with Money


De ye nea gi him Creedit Sir, I wud a halp't him tul a Highland Lady with
Twanty thousand pund; Good he wud nea have her, Sir


Sirrah, your Twenty thousand Pounds Scotch will make but a Pitiful English
portion


Good Sir, Bo a Muckle deal of Scotch Punds is as gued as a Little deal of
English Punds


She has nothing like this, but a thing worse, she has a Tongue that keep's
more Noise then all that ever Moved at Billingsgate


Pish, a triffle; Where lives she? I long to be Wooing her, let me alone with
her Tongue, I Am in Love with the new's of it, who is it? who is it? I Am resolved
for her or Nobody


But look before you Leap, Sir, and say you were warned.


Out, out, he can nea break his Cragg upon her, Good an ye'd venture your bonny
Lass, Ise venture my bonna Lad at her, Sir


Her Father is the brave Noble Beaufoy, her Name Margaret, famed about Town for
a Vixen


The Town's an Ass, come prithee show me the House, I will not sleep 'till I
see her, I know her Father. Nay, I am resolved man, come prithee come


Wun's man an she be a Scawd, awaw with her, awaw with her, and Iohnee
Iohnstons Curse go with Her


Prithee what is that?


That is, the Deel creep into her weem t'ith very bottom on it that is to the
Croone gued faith of her head


Well Sir, if you are resolved, I Will wait on you; to say the truth, 'twill be
my great advantage, for if you win her, I shall have liberty to see her younger
Sister sweet Biancha, to whose fair Eyes I am a Votary, and you in order to my
Love Petruchio must help me, I Will tell you why, and how you must prefer me as a
Musick-Master to old Beaufoy


I understand you not.


He Would ha ye make him her Piper, Sir, gued at ye'd make Sanndy her Piper, wun's
I Would sea blea her Pipe


Sirrah be quiet, what I can I Will serve you in; But who comes here Geraldo?


It Is Mr. Woodall, a rich old Citizen, and my Rival: Hark.


Out, out, What sud an awd Carle do with a young bonny Lass, are ye not an And
theif, Sir


How!


Are ye not an And Man, Sir?


Yes marry am I, Sir.


And are not ye to Marry a young Maiden?


Yes, What then?


And are not ye troubled with a sear grief, Sir?


A sear grief, what sear grief?


Your troubled with a great weakness in the bottom of your Bally, what sid yea
dea with a young Maiden? Out, out, out


You understand me, your French Books treat most of Love; those use her too,
and now and then you may urge something of my Love and Merit? besides her
Fathers bounty, you shall find me Liberal


Mounsier, me will tell her the very fine ting of you, me vill make her Love
you whether she can or not


Enough, Peace, here is Geraldo, your servant Sir, I am just going to Sir
Nicholas Beaufoy to carry him this Gentleman, a Frenchman, most Eminent for
teaching his Country Language


I have a Master for Biancha too, but waving that, I have some news to tell
you, I have found out a Friend that will Woo Margaret, What will you
contribute, for he must be hired to it


Why I will give him forty Pieces in hand, and when he has don't, I Will double
the Sum


Done, Sir, I Will undertake it.


S'breed Sir, I'se gat it done muckle Cheaper, for twanty Punds I'se dea it my
Sell


Come, down with your Money, and the Bargain's made.


But if He should not do it, I don't care for throwing away so much Money.


If he don't I Will undertake he shall refund.


Why then here is ten Pieces, and that Ring I Will pawn to you for 'tother Forty,
it is worth a Hundred; But does the Gentleman know her Qualities


I Sir, and they are such as I am fond on; I woul'd not be hired for any thing,
to Woo a person of another Humor


Save you Gentlemen; Pray which is the way to Sir Nicholas Beaufoy's House?


Why Sir, what is your Business there? you pretend not to be a Servant to either
of his Daughters, d' ye


You are something blunt in your Questions, perhaps I do.


Not her that Chides, on any hand I pray.


I Love no Chiders; come Iamy.


Pray stay Sir, Is it the other?


May be it is, Is it any offense?


Yes it is Sir, she is my Mistress.


I must tell you Sir, she is my Mistress too.


And I must tell you both she is my Mistress; Will that content you? nay never
frown for the Matter


And I mun tell ye all, there is little hopes for Saundy then.


The Rogue does it rarely.


Nay, nay, Gentleman, no Quarrelling, unless it were to the purpose: Have you
seen this young Lady Sir


No Sir: but I Am in Love with her Character. They say she has a Sister moves
like a Whirlwind


Pray spare your Description Sir; that Furious Lady is my Mistress; and till I
have Married her, Biancha is Invisible; her Father has Sworn it, and, till
then, you must all move Forty foot off


I thank you for your Admonition; I should have lost my Labor else; and since
you are to do all of us the Favor, I shall be glad to be numbered among your
Servants Sir


You will honor me to accept of me for yours. But pray Sir let me know who
obliges me with this Civility


My Name is VVinlove, Sir, a VVorstershire Gentleman; where I have something,
an Old Man's Death will Entitle me to, not inconsiderable. Come, Gentlemen,
let us not fall out, at least till the Fair Biancha's at Liberty; Shall we go
sit out half an hour at the Tavern, and Drink her Health


Do my Bearns; and I'se Drink with ye to Countenance ye.


I, I, agreed; Come, and then I Will to my Mistress.


Good these Lades are of Saundyes Mind, they will lather take a Drink, nor Flight.


Marry come up Proud Slut, Must you be making your self Fine before your Elder
Sister? You are the Favorite you are, but I shall make you know your Distance;
Give me that Necklace, and those Pendants, I Will have that Whisk too, there is an
old Handkerchief good enough for you


Here, take 'em, Sister, I resign 'em freely, I would give you all I have to
Purchase your Kindness


You Flattering Gypsy, I could find in my Heart to Slit your Dissembling
Tongue; Come, tell me and without Lying, which of your Suitors you Love best?
Tell me, or I Will beat you to Clouts, and Pinch thee like a Fary


Believe me Sister, of all Men alive, I never saw that Particular Face which I
could Fancy more than another


Huswife you Lie; and I could find in my Heart to Dash thy Teeth down thy
Throat; I know thou Love Goraldo


If you Affect him Sister, I Vow to plead for you my self, but you shall have
him


O then belike you fancy Riches more, you Love Old VVoodall.


That Old Fool: Nay now I see you but Jested with me all this while; I know you
are not Angry with me


If this be Jest, then all the rest is so: I Will make ye tell me e're I have
done with you Gossip


Why now now Dame, Whence grows this Insolence? Biancha get thee in my Poor
Girl; She Weeps; Fie, Peg, put off this Devilish Humor; Why do thou Cross
thy Tender Innocent Sister? When did she Cross thee with a Bitter Word


Her Silence Flouts me, and I Will be Revenged.


What in my sight too? You scurvy Ill-natured Thing: Go, poor Biancha, get thee
out of her way


What will you not suffer me; nay, now I see she is your Treasure; She must
have a Husband; and I Dance Barefoot on her Wedding Day: And for your Love to
her, lead Apes in Hell. I see your care of me, I Will go and cry till I can find
a way to be quit with her


Was ever poor Man thus plagued?


How now who'se here?

Sir your Servant, I am bold to wait on you to present you this Gentleman, an
Acute teacher of the French Tongue, his Name's Mounsieur Mawgier, pray accept
his service


I am your debtor Sir, Mounsieur you are welcome.


Me give you humble thanks Sir.


But what Gentleman is that?


I don't love him so well to tell you his Errant, but he would come along with
me, you had best ask him


I beg you Pardon for my Intrusion, we heard your Fair and Virtuos Daughter
Biancha, praised to such a height of Wonder, Fame has already made me her
Servant; I Have heard your Resolution not to Match her till her Eldest Sister be
bestowed, mean while I beg Admittance like the rest to keep my hopes alive;
this Lute Sir, and these few French Romances I would Dedicate to her Service


Sir you oblige me, Pray your Name?


It Is VVinlove, Son and Heir to Sir Lyonell VVinlove.


My noble Friend, he has been my School-fellow; for his sake you are most
kindly welcome, you shall have all the freedom I can give you


Hand in hand, Sir, I'se go tell him my sell. Whare is this Lord?


Here, Sir, What would you have, what are you?


Marry I'se can a bonny Scot, Sir.


A Scotchman is that all?


Wun's wud ye have me a Cherub? I ha brought ye a small teaken Sir.


But do you hear you Scot, don't you use to put off your Cap to your betters?


Marry we say in Scotland Gead Mourn til ye for aw the day, and sea put on our
bonnets again, Sir; Bud Sir, I ha brought ye a Teaken


To me, where is it; from whence is your Teaken?


Marry from my good Master Petruchio, Sir; he has sen ye a Piper to teach your
Bonny Lasses to Pipe, but gin yet let Sauny teach 'em? I'se pipe 'em sea Whim
-- Whum, their Arses shall nere leave giging and joging while their's a Tooth
in their head


Petruchio! I remember him now, How does thy Master?


Marry Sir, he means to make one of your Lasses his Wanch, that is his Love and
his Ligby


You are a Saucy Rogue.


Good wull a Sir, he will tak you Lass with a Long Tang that the Deel and Saundy
wun a venture on, but he is here his aun sell, Sir


Your most humble Servant.


Noble Petruchio welcome, I thank you for your kindness to my Daughters. Within
there


Conduct these Gentlemen to my Daughters, tell 'em these are both to be their
Masters, bid 'em use 'em Civily; take in that Lute, and those Books there,
Petruchio I hear you have lost your Father lately

It Is true, but I hope to find another in you; in short I hear you have a fair
Daughter called Margaret, the World says she is a Shrew; But I think otherwise,
you know my Fortune, if you like my Person, with your Consent, I Will be your
Son-in-Law


I have such a Daughter, but I so much Love you, I would not put her into your
hands, she will make you mad


Good he is as mad as heart can wish, Sir, he need nea halp, Sir.


I Will venture it Father, so I Will presume to call ye; I Am as Peremptory, as
she is Proud-minded: and where two Rageing fires meet together they do consume
the thing that feed's their fury; my Fathers Estate I have bettered, not
Imbezell'd, then tell me, if I can get your Daughters Love, What Portion you
will give


After my Death the Moiety of my Estate, and on the Wedding day Three Thousand
Pounds


And I Will assure her Jointure answerable; get Writings drawn, I Will warrant you
I Will carry the Wench


Fair Luck betide you.


How now Man, What Is the matter? Will my Daughter be a good Lutanist?

She Will prove a better Cudgel Player, Lutes will not hold her.


Why then thou can not break her to thy Lute.


No, but she has broke the Lute to me; I did but tell her she mistook her
fretts, and bowed her head to teach her Fingrings, Fretts call you these,
(quoth she) and I Will frett with you, so fairly took me over the Pate with the
Lute, and set me in the Pillory; and followed it with loud Volly's of Rogue,
Rascal, Fiddler, Jack, Puppy, and such like


Now by the World I Love her ten times more than er'e I did.


Good, bo the De'll a bit ye's wad her Sir, Wun's I'se nea gi two Pence for my
Luggs gin you make her yer Bride


I Will warrant you Sauny, we'll deal with her well enough.


Well Sir, I Will make you Reperation, proceed still with my youngest Daughter,
she is apt to Learn; Petruchio will you go with us, or shall I send my Daughter
to you


Pray do Sir, and I Will attend her here.


Good at ge gi Saundy a little Siller to gea to Scotland again.


Why Sauny, I have not used thee so unkindly.


Good I'se nea tarry with a Scauding Queen Sir, yet the Dee'l faw my Luggs, if
Ise ken which is worse, to tarry and venture my Cragg, or gea heam to Scotland


Peace Sirrah, here she comes; now for a Rubbers at Cuffs. O Honey Pretty Peg,
how do thou do Wench


Marry come up Ragmanners, Plain Peg? Where were you bred? I am called Mrs.
Margaret


No, no, thou lie Peg, you are called plain Peg, and Bonny Peg, and sometimes
Peg the Cursed, take this from me; Hearing thy Wildness praised in every Town,
thy Virtues Sounded and thy Beauty spoke off: my self am moved to take thee for
my Wife


I knew at first you were a Moveable.


Why what is a Moveable.


A Joint Stool.


Thou have hit it Peg, come sit upon me.


Asses were made to bear, and so were you.


Why now I see the World has much abused thee, 'twas told me thou were rough
and Coy, and Sullen, but I do find thee pleasant, Mild and Courteous; Thou
can not frown, nor Pout, nor bite the Lip as angry wenches do. Thou art all
sweetness


Do not Provoke me, I will not stand still and here my self abused.


What a Rogue was that told me thou were Lame, thou art as straight as an
Osier! and as Pliable, O what a rare walk's there! why there is a gate puts down
the King of Frances best great Horse


And the King of Scotland's tea.


Where did thou Learn the grand Paw Peg? It becomes thee rarely.


Does it so sawcebox? how will a halter become you with a running knot under
one Ear


Nay, no knot Peg, but the knot of Matrimony 'twixt thee and me, we shall be an
Excellent Mad Couple well match'


I matched to thee? what to such a fellow with such a Gridiron face; with a
Nose set on like a Candels end stuck against a Mud wall; and a Mouth to eat
Milk Porridge with Ladles? Foh, it almost turns my Stomach to look on it


Good an your Stomach wamble to see his Face, What will ye dea when ye see his
Arse Madam


Marry come up Abberdeen, take that


S'breed the Deel tak a gripe O yer faw fingers and Driss your Doublat for ye.


Take heed Peg, Sauny's a Desperate Fellow.


You Are a couple of Logger heads Master and Man, that I can tell you.


Nay, nay, Stay Peg, for all this I do like thee, and I mean to have thee, in
truth I am thy Servant


Aye you, why then I Will give you a favor, and thus I Will tie it on, there is for
you


Out, out, I'se gea for Scotland, Good an she beat ye Saundy's a Dead Man.


I Will swear I Will cuff you, if you Strike again.


That Is the way to loose your Arms, if you strike a Woman, you are no
Gentleman


A Herald Peg? Prithee Blazon my Coat.


I know not your Coat, but your Crest is a Coxcombe.


Stop her Sirrah, stop her.


Let her gea her gate Sir, an e'n two Deels and a Scotch wutch, blaw her weeme
full of Wind


Stay her Sirrah, stay her, I say.


S'breed Sir, stay her yer sen, but hear ye Sir, an her tale gea as fast as her
tang, Good ye ha meet with a Whupster, Sir


Prithee Peg stay, and I Will talk to thee in Earnest.


You may pump long enough er'e you get out a wise word, get a Night Cap to keep
your brains warm


I mean thou shall keep me warm in thy Bed Peg, What think thou of that Peg?
in plain terms without more ado I have your Fathers Consent, your Portions
agreed upon, your Jointure settled, and for your own part, be willing or
unwilling all is one, you I will marry, I am resolved on it


Marry come up Jack a Lent, without my Leave?


A Rush for your Leave, here is a Clutter with a troublesome Woman, rest you
contented, I Will have it so


You shall be baked first, you shall; within there, ha!


Hold, get me a Stick there Sauny; by this hand, deny to Promise before your
Father, I Will not Leave you a whole rib, I Will make you do it and be glad on it


Why you will not Murder me Sirrah? you are a couple of Rascals, I don't
think, but you have picked my Pockets


I'se sooner pick your tang out OF your head, nor pick your Pocket.


Come leave your idle prating, have you I will or no man ever shall, whoever
else attempts it his throat will I Cut, before he lies one night with thee, it
may be thine too for company; I am the Man am born to tame thee Peg


Here comes your Father, never make denial, if you do, you know what follows.

The Devil's in this fellow, he has beat me at my own Weapon, I have a good
mind to marry him to try if he can Tame me


Now Petruchio, how speed you with my Daughter.


How but well, it were Impossible I should speed amiss, it is the best Naturd'st
Lady --


Why how now Daughter, in your Dumps?


You show a Fathers care indeed to Match me with this mad Hectoring Fellow.


She has been abused Father, most unworthily, she is not Cursed unless for
Policy; for Patience, a second Grizel; betwixt us we have so agreed, the
Wedding is to be on Thursday next


Good Saundy's gea for Scotland a Tuesday then.


Hark Petruchio, she says she will see you hanged first, is this your
speeding? I shall make you refund


Pish, that is but a way she has gotten, I have Wood her, Won her, and she is my
own; we have made a bargin that before Company she shall maintain a little of
her Extravagant Humor, for she must not seem to fall off from't too soon; when
we are alone, we are the kindest, Lovingst, tenderst Chickins to one another!
Pray Father provide the Feast, and bid the Guests, I must home to settle some
things, and fetch some Writings in order to her Jointure. -- Farewell Gallants,
give me thy hand Peg


I knot not what to say, but give me your hands, send you Joy; Petruchio, it is
a Match


Tran. Amen say we, we all are Witnesses.


Why Sir de'ye mean to Match me in spite of my Teeth?


Nay, peace Peg, Peace, thou needst not be pevish before these, it is only
before strangers according to our bargain; Come Peg, thou shall go see me take
horse, farewell Father


As I live I will not.


By this Light but you shall; nay, no testy tricks, away.


Good I'se be your Lieutenant and bring up your rear Madam.


Was ever match clapped up so suddingly?


Faith Gentlemen, I have ventured madly on a Desperate Mart.


But now Sir, as to your younger Daughter, you may remember my long Love and
Service


I hope I may (without Arrogance Sir,) beg you to look on me as a Person of
more Merit


Content ye Gentlemen, I Will compound this strife, it is Deeds not Words must win
the Prize: I love you both, but he that can assure my Daughter the Noblest
Jointure has her, What say you Sir


I Will make it out my Estate is worth De clara, full Twenty Thousand Pounds,
besides some ventures at Sea, and all I have, at my Discease I give her


Is that all Sir? Alas it is too Light Sir, I am my Fathers Heir, and only Son,
and his Estate is worth Three thousand pound per Annum; that will aford a
Jointure answerable to her Portion; no Debts, nor Encumbrances, No Portions to
be paid -- have I nip't you, Sir


I must confess your offer is the best, and let your Father make her this
assureance, she is your own, else you must pardon me, if you should dye before
him, where is her Power


That Is but a Cavel, he is old, I young.


And may not young men dye as well as old, have I nip't you there again?


Well, Gentlemen, I am thus resolved, on Thursday my Daughter Peg is to be
Married; the Thursday following Biancha's yours, if you make this Assurance; if
not, Mr. Woodall has her; and so I take my Leave, and thank you both


Sir, your Servant; Now I fear you not: Alas, Young Man, your Father is not
such a Fool, to give you all, and in his waining Age, set footing under your
Table; You may go Whistle for your Mistress* ha, ha, ha


A Vengance on your Crafty Withered Hide. Yet it is in my head to do my Master
good: I see no reason why this supposed young VVinlove should not get a
supposed Father, called, Sir Lyonell VVinlove, and that is a wonder, Fathers
commonly get their Children, but here the Case must be altered

Love Brings such Prodigies as these to Town,
For that, at Best, turns all things upside Down.

PRay Madam, will you take out this Lesson on the Gittar.


Here be de ver sine Story in de Varle of Mounsieur Appollo, And Madomoselle
Daphne; Me vill Read you dat Madam


Good Madam, mind not that Monsieur Shorthose; But Learn this Lesson first.


Begar Monsieur Fideler, you be de vera fine troublesome Fellow, me vil make de
great Hole in your Head wid de Gittar, as Margaret did


This is no Place to Quarrel in: But Remember --


Why Gentlemen, you do me double wrong, to strive for that which Rests in my
Bare Choice: To end the Quarrel, sit down and Tune your Instrument, and by that
time his Lecture will be done


You Will leave his Lecture, when I am in Tune.


Yes, yes; Pray be satisfied: Come, Monsieur, let us see your Ode.


I do suspect that Fellow, Sure he is no Lute-Master.


Here Is the Place, Come Read.


Do not Believe I am a Frenchman, my Name is VVinlove; He that bears my Name
about the Town, is my Man Tranio. I am your passionate Servant, and must live
by your Smiles. Therefore be so good, to give Life to my hopes

Madam, your Gittar is in Tune.


Let Us hear; fie, there is a String split.


Make de spit in the Whole Man, and Tune it again.


Now let me see. I know not how to believe you. But if it be true, Noble Mr.
VVinlove deserves to be beloved; and, in the mean time, keep your own Council;
and it is not impossible but your Hopes may be Converted into Certainties


Madam, now it is Perfectly in Tune.


Fie, fie, Begar no Tune at all.


Now, Sir, I am for you.


Mounsieur, Pray walk now, and give me leave a while, my Lesson will make no
Music in Three Parts


Me vil no trouble you Mounsieur Fiddeller. I am confident it is so, this must
be some Person that has taken a Disguise, like me, to Court Biancha; I Will watch
him


First, Madam, be pleased to Sing the Last Song that I Taught you, and then
we'll proceed


I Will try, but I Am afraid I shall be out.


Madam, before you proceed any farther, there be some few Rules set down in
this Paper, in order to your Fingering, will be worth your Perusal


Let Us see.


Though I appear a Lute-Master, yet know my fair Biancha, I have but taken this
disguise to get Access to you, and tell you I am your humble Servant, and
Passionate Admirer, Geraldo. Pish, take your Rules again, I like 'em not the
old way pleases me best, I do not care for changing old Rules, for these
Foolish new Inventions

Madam my Lord calls for you to help dress the Bride.


Farewell then Master, I must be gone.


I know not what to think of her, this fellow looks, as if he were in Love, and
she carresses him. These damned French men, have got all the trade in Town, if
they get up all the handsome Women, the English must even march into Wales for
Mistersses; well, if thy thoughts Biancha are grown so low, to cast thy
wandering Eyes on such a kikshaw, I Am resolved to ply my Widow


I am glad I Am rid of him, that I may speak my Mother Tongue again, Biancha has
given me hopes, I dare half believe she Loves me


But here is her Father.

Believe me Gentlemen, it is very strange! This day Petruchio appointed, yet he
comes not; methinks he should be more a Gentleman, then to put such a slur upon
my Family


Nay, you have used me sinely, and like a Father; I must be forced to give my
hand against my will, to a rude mad brained Fellow here; who Wooed in have, and
means to Wed at Leisure. this comes of obeying you, if I do it again, were you
ten thousand Fathers hang me


Be Patient Madam, on my life he will come; though he be blunt and merry, I Am
sure he is Noble; good Madam, go put on your Wedding Clothes, I know he will be
with you e're you be Dressed


Wedding Clothes, I Will see him hanged before I Will have him, unless it be to
scratch his Eyes out


Poor Girl! I cannot blame thee now to weep, for such an Injury would vex a
Saint; Tho I am old, I shall find some body will call him to a strict Account
for this


O Master, News! News! and such News as you never heard off.


Why what News have you, Sir?


Is It not News to hear of Petruchio's Coming?


Why, is he come?


Why, no my Lord.


What then Sirrah?


He Is coming Sir.


When will he be here?


When he stands where I am and sees you there.


Well sarrah, is this all the News?


Why Petruchio is coming in a new Hat, and an old Jerkin, a pair of Britches
thrice turned, a pair of Boots that have been Candle-cases; an old rusty Sword
with a broken hilt, and never a Chape, upon an old Lean, Lame, Spavin'd,
Glander'd, Broken-winded Jade, with a Woman's Crupper of Velvit, here and there
peec'd with packthreed


Who comes with him?


O Sir, his Man Sauny, and in an Equippage very suitable to his Master, he
looks no more like a Christian Footman, then I look like a Windmill


This is a most strange Extravagant Humor.


I Am glad he comes however he be!


Come, Where be these Gallants, who is at home?


You're Welcome Sir, I Am glad you're come at last.


I think I have seen you in better Clothes.


Never, never, Sir, this is my Wedding Suite; Why how now, how now Gentlemen,
What do you stare at, do you take me for a Monster


Faith in that Habit you might pass for one in the Fair.


O you talk merrily, my Tailor tells me it is the newest Fashion: But where is
my Peg? I stay too long from her, the Morning wear's, it is time we were at
Church


Why you will not Visit her thus.


Marry but I will.


And sea will Saundy tea Sir.


But you will not Marry her so will you?


A my Saul sal he Sir.


To me she is Married, not to my Clothes; Will ye along Father and Gentlemen?
I Will to Church imediately, not tarry a minute


Here ye Sir, ye sal Marry her after the Scotch Directory, then gin ye like her
not, ye maw put her awaw, How say ye now


He has some meaning in this mad Attire, but you must persuade him to put on a
better, e're he goes to Churc


Let Us after and see what will become of it.


Well Sir, you find there is no other way, it is too short warning to get your
Father up; should you Steal the Match, who knows but both the old Fools would
so deeply resent it to your Prejudice


Why Prithee this way it will be Stolen for it is but a Cheat, which will be in
a little time Discovered


That Is all one, it Carries a better face, and we shall have the more sport;
besides e're it comes out, your Father may be wrought to like it, and Confirm
my Promises; She is suitable to you every way, and she is rich enough to do it,
and Loves you well enough besides


Well if it must be so, let us contrive it handsomely.


Let me alone, Iamy shall do the business, he shall find out some Knight of the
Post, that shall be old Sir Lyonel VVinlove here, and make Assurance of a
greater Jointure then I proposed; never fear it Sir, I Will so Instruct him, it
shall be carried without the least Suspicion


Ay but you know old Beaufoy knows my Father.


That Is nothing, it is so many years since he saw him, he will never distinguish
him by his face


This may be done, but notwithstanding all did not my fellow Teacher, that
damned Lute-master so nearly watch us, 'twou'd not be amiss to steal a
Marriage, and that once performed, let all the World say no, I Will keep my own


That we may think on too; this same Lute-Master I more then half suspect.


And so do I.


I have mist a Gentleman out of the gang a good while, but let that pass, I
have already sent Iamy to find a Man


To our postures, here is Mr. VVoodall, he must be Choused too among the rest,
save you Sir, Came you from the Church

As willingly as e're I came from School.


And is the Bride and Bridegroom coming home.


A Bridegroom, why he is a Bridegroom for the Devil, a Devil, a very Fiend.


Why she is a Devil, an errant Devil; nay, the Devils Dam.


But she is a Lamb, a Dove, a Child to him: When the Priest asked if he would
take Margaret for his Wife, I by Gogs wound's quoth he, and Swore so loud! that
all amazed, the Priest lets fall the Book, and as the Sexton stooped to take it
up, this mad brained Bridegroom took him such a cuff, that down fell Sexton
Book and all again; now take it up quoth he if any list


What said the poor Bride to this?


Trembled and shook like an Aspen Leaf; after this just as the Parson joined
their hands, he called to his Roguy Scotchman, for a Glass of Muscadine, drank
his Wives Health, and threw the Toast in the Clarks face, because his Beard
grew thin and hungry, then took the Bride about the Neck and gave her such a
Smack the Church echoed again; the sight of this made me run away for shame, I
know they are following by this time; but hark, I hear the Minstrels. Music


Gentlemen and Friends I thank you for your Pains, I know you think to Dine
with me to day, and have prepared great store of Wedding Cheer, but so it is,
grand business calls me hence, and I take my leave


Is It Possible you will away to night?


I must immediately, if you knew my business you would not wonder; well honest
Gentlemen I thank you all, that have beheld me give away my self to this most
Patient, Sweet and virtuous Wife; Dine with my Father here, and drink my health
for I must hence, so farewell to you all


Wun's will ye nea eat your Wadden Dunner, Sir?


Let us Entreat you to stay till after Dinner.


It must not be.


Let me Entreat you.


That will do much, I am Content.


Are you content to stay?


I am content you should Entreat me, but yet I will not stay entreat me how you
can


Now if you Love me stay.


I cannot, Sauny the Horses.


They have nea ea't their Wadden Dunner yet.


Sirrah get the Horses.


Nay then do what thou can, I wont go to day, nor to morrow, nor till I
please my self. The door is open Sir, there lies your way, you may be jogging
while your boots be green


O Peg content thee, Prithee be not angry.


I will be angry, What have thou to do? Father he quiet, he shall stay my
Leisure


I marry Sir, now it begins to Work.


Gentlemen forward to the Bridal Dinner; I see a Woman may be made a fool off,
if she want Spirit to resist


They shall go forward Peg at thy Command; Obey the Bride you that attend on
her. Go to the Feast, Revel, Carouse, and Dance* be Mad or Merry, or go hang
your selves, but for my Bonny Peg she must with me; Nay look not big uppn't,
nor stamp, nor stair, nor fret; Come, come, gently, so so, so, that is my good
Peg, I will be master of my own; She is my proper goods and Chattells; my
House, my Ox, my Ass, my any thing: Look here she stands, touch her who dare,
I Will make him smoke that offers to stop me in my way. Sauny unsheath thy
Dudgeon Dagger, we are beset with Thieves, rescue thy Mistress if thou be a
Man; fear not sweet Wench I Will Buckler thee against a Million; nay, come


Will none of you help me?


The Deel a bit of Dunner ye gat, Good at ye would speak to your Cuke to gi
Saundy a little Mutton and Porridge to put in his Wallet


Nay let 'em go, a couple of quiet ones.


Never was so mad a Match.


Well Gentlemen let us in, we have a Dinner, although we want a Bride and
Bridegroom to it; Biancha you shall take your Sisters Room, and Mr. Winlove
you may Practice for a Bridegroom


Mounsieur how do ye find my Mistress inclined?


Me can no tell dat yet, but in time Mounsieur sal inform you.


Pray Ply her close, here is something for you.


Me tank you, Sir; Ha, ha, ha, I must go tell this to my Biancha.


Hark ye Sir, you may inform me, Pray what think you, does Madam Biancha fancy
any other but my self, she bears me fair in hand, pray discover Sir, I shall
not be ungrateful


Troth Sir, I think she is as all other Women are.


How is that pray?


Why Fickle and Foolish.


Why d' ye think so of her, she was always held Discreet?


No sober Man will think so, I tell you Sir, she cares neither for you, nor
any Man, that is worth careing for; she is fallen in Love with a Mounsier
Jack-daw, a fellow that teaches bad French, in worse English


That fellow, why it is impossible.


It Is true though.


Why I am confident he was employed by old Woodall as his Instrument to Court
her for him


If he were, he has spoken one word for him and two for himself.


See here they come hand in hand, stand close, perhaps your Eyes may convince
you

Madam, you need not doubt my Passion; by those fair Eyes I swear (an Oath
inviolable) you have made a Conquest over me so absolute, that I must dye your
Captive


What does he say, what does he say?


I cannot hear, Listen.


I must believe you Sir, there is some strange power attends your Words, your
Attractive Actions, and your Person, which is too strong for my weak
resistance; you have won, but do not boast your Victory


Nay then I see it is so, I cannot hold! Madam you must forgive my Interruption,
you have used me kindly, fooled me with fine hopes, your Mounsieur there has
read Excellent Lessons to you


Sir, I understand you not.


That is, you will not.


What be de matter Mounsieur Fiddeler?


No Fiddler, nor no Lutanist Mounsieur, No point, but one that scorns to live
in a Disguise; for such a one as leaves a Gentleman, to dote upon a Pardon a
moy Jack-pudding; know, I am a Gentleman, my name Geraldo


Alas, Sir, And have you been my Master all this while, and I never knew it?


Yes, Sweet Lady, you did know it; I see you have a Little Spice of Peg in you:
But I have done with you, Mr. Winlove; Pray tell me, Don't you hate this
Gentlewoman now


I cannot say I Hate her; but I Am sure I don't Love her for this days Work,
Would she Court me, I Swear I would not have her


Nor I, by Heavens: I have Sworn, and will keep my Oath.


Why Gentlemen, I hope you will not both give the Willow Garland.


Go, go, you are a Scurvy Woman; I have a Widow that has Loved me as Long as I
have Loved you. Sweet Lady, I am not Bankrupt for a Mistress: It Is true, she is
something of your Sisters Humor, a Little Way-ward: but one Three Days time
at the Taming-Schoole, will make her Vye with any Wife in England. And then I
can pass by you unconcerned


The Taming-School, for Heavens-sake where is that Sir?


Why your Brother Petruchio's House: I doubt you must there too, e're you will be
good for any thing; I Will to him immediately? Farewell thou Vile Woman


Ha, ha, ha, this is Excellent.


Madam, I beg your Pardon; but I hope my boldness with you, has done my Master
some Service


Believe me has it Tranio, and I must thank thee.


Now, Sirrah, Whither away in such have?

O Master, I have found him.


What? Who have thou found?


A rare old Sinner in the Temple Cloisters will do the Feat to a hair.


What feat? What Is to be done?


That which I told you of my Fairest:
Where is he?

Here, here, he Walks in the Court.


Well, I must in, or I shall be mist;
Carry the Matter handsomely, and let me not suffer.

Fear not Madam; Call him in, Tranio
You must Instruct him, I Will not be seen in it.

Now Friend, What are you?


Any thing that you please Sir.


Any thing; Why what can you do.


Any thing, for so much as Concerns Swearing and Lying to your Worships
Service, and to get an Honest Livelihood, So please you to Employ me


Why thou may serve turn I think;
But I Will put thee to no Swearing, Bare Lying and Impudence will serve for my
Occasion
You must bate of the Price for that.

Faith, Sir, they are both of a Price, take them or leave them.


But can thou Manage and Carry off a good Well-contriv'd Lie, to the best
advantage


I should be very sorry else; it has been my Trade these Seven and thirty
Years, never fear it Sir


Nay, I picked him out amongst half a Score;
I fancied he had the best Lying Face amongst them.

Well, come along with me, and I Will Instruct you; But if you fail, look to your
Ears, if you have any


I Will venture Neck and all to do it Sir.


Honest Sauny, Welcome, welcome.


Saundy's Hungry; Cannot you get a little Meat, Sir?


Yes, yes, Sawny.


Ye mun gat a good Fire, Sir; Mrs. Bride has gat a faw intull a Dike, She Is aw
wet Sir; Good she has not a dry thread to her Arse


Is Master and Mistress coming Sauny?


Good are they, gin they be nea frozen to the grund, bo whare's your Fire man?


It Is making, it is making, all things are ready; Prithee what News good Sauny,
what kind of Woman is our Mistress


Ken ye two twanty Deel's Sir.


Marry Heaven defend us.


Good she has ean two twanty Deel's I'se nea bate ye can of 'em.


They say she is a Cruel Shrew.


O my saul Sir, I'se hau'd a thousand pund, she is set up her Tang, and Scaud
fro Edingbrough to London, and nere draw bit for it


What shall we do then, there will be no living for us.


Good will there not, Wun's I think the Deel has flead off her Skin, and put his
Dam intul't; Bo where is Phillip and George and Gregory


They Are all ready, what ho, come forth here, Phillip, George, Joseph, Nick,
where are you


Honest Sawny, Welcome home.


Gat me some Meat, and I Will believe ye Sir.


I am glad to see thee Sawny.


Gat me a Drink, and Is'e believe ye tea.


What, Sawny come to Town again, Welcome?


Wun's, Walcome, walcome, gat me good Meat and Drink, that is Walcome, Sir.


Old Lusty Fellow Sawny, Welcome.


How do you Wully?


Do You hear the News, Sawny? Wally Watts is Dead.


S'breed, nea Man that geas on two Legs could slay Wully Watts, Sir.


True; for he was fairly Hanged.


I was sure nea Man that went on two Legs could slay him.


You are in the right Sawny, for 'twas one with Three Legs, 'twas Mr. Tyburne,
for he was fairly Hanged


S'breed ye Lie, Sir, the Gallows might kill him, and break his stout heart,
but it could nea hang him: It Is hang an English Man


Well, But what kind of Woman is our Mistress, Sawny.


You Will ken soon enough 'tea your Sorrow, and wea Sir; Ye've awe two Luggs
apeece o'your Head: A my Saul I'se nea gea ye two Pennys for them by the Morn:
How say ye now


Where be these Idle Rogues? What no more at Door to hold my Stirrip, or take
my Horses? Where Is Curtis, Phillip, Nick and Gregory


Here, Here, Here, Sir.


Here, here, here, you Loggerhead Currs; What, no Attendance, no Regard, no
Duty? Where Is that Foolish Knave I sent before


Wuns, Sir, Ise be sea hungry, snd sea empty, ye may travel quite through me,
and nere faw your fingers Sir


You Mangy Rogue, Did not I bid you meet me in the Park, and bring these
Rascals with you


Good did ye Sir; bo Ise sea hungry, Ise ha nea Memory, Deliver your Message
your sell Sir


Be gone you Slaves, and fetch my Supper in; Rogues do I speak, and don't you
fly to make have. Peg and Welcome. Why when I Pray, nay good sweet Peg be
Merry, These are Country Clownish Fellows; Prithee be Merry: Off with my
Boots, Sirrah, you Rogues, ye Villaius. When

It was the Orders of the Friar Gray,
As forth he walked on his Way.

Sure he will run himself out of Breath, and then it will be my turn.


Out you Rogue; You pluck my Boot awry; take that, and mend it in pulling off
the other. Be Merry Peg. Some Water here, ho; Where Is my Spanniel, Sarrah?
Make have and desire my Cousin Ferdinand to come hither, one Peg you must Kiss,
and be Acquainted with: Where are my Slippers? Shall I have some Water. Come,
Peg, wash and VVellcome Heartily


VVuns bo whare is the Meat to mack her Vvelcome.


We shall fall out if we wash together.


You VVhorson Villain will you let it fall?


Pray Sir be Patient, 'twas an unwilling Fault.


An Idle, Careless, Beetle-headed-Slave.
Come, Peg, sit down. I know you have a Stomach.
Will you give Thanks, Sweet Peg, or shall I?
Or each for our selves? Come, fall too,
What Is this, Mutton?

Good it is, Sir.


Who bought it?


I did Sir.


You Rascal you it is not Mutton, it is the Breast of a Dog; What Currs are
these? it is dried and burned to a Coal too, Where is this Rascal Cook? How dare
you bring such rotten Meat to my Table? Why d' ye mean to Poison me, ye
heedless Joltheads? ye ill manner'd Whelps, what d' ye grumble? I Will be with
you straight


Pray Husband be content, the Meat is good Meat; and I am very hungry, I must
and will eat some of it


Not for the World Peg, I Love thee better then so; It Is burnt and will
Engender Chollar, a Disease we are both to Subject too; I Love thee too well to
give thee any thing to hurt thee, we'll fast to night, to morrow we'll make it
up


Say what you will Sir, I Will eat some of it; Did you bring me hither to Starve
me


Why ye Rascals will ye stand Still and see your Mistress Poison her self? take
it away out of her sight, quickly


Good Saundy will venture, Poison and 'twill.


Well Peg, this night we'll fast for Company; Come I Will bring thee to the
Bridal Chamber


I must Eat something, I shall be Sick else; But an Egg.


No, no, Prithee don't talk on it; to Bed upon a full stomach.


But a Crust of Bread.


To morrow, to morrow; Come prithee away.


Did ever see the like?


He kills her in her own Humor.


Have you said Grace Sauny?


Good I was sea hungry, I forgot Grace. O thou that have filled our Boys, and
our blathers, keep us aw from Whoredom, and Secrisie


Secrecy, why Sauny?


Wuns Man, it is wutchcraft, peace, you put me out with the Deel's name to ye:
Keep us aw from Whoredom and Secrecy, fro the Dinger of the swatch to the
gallow Tree, keep us aw we Beseech thee; Tak a Drink man


Are ye full now Sauny?


As for as a Piper, ye may put can finger in at my Mouth, and another in mine
Arse, and feel beath ends of my Dinner


Where are you, you Rogues? Some lights there, come Peg undress to bed, to bed.


Pray send your Men away, and call for some of your Maids.


Maids, hang Maids, I have no such vermin about my house, any of these will do
as well; Here Sauny come hither Sirrah, and undress your Mistress


O my Saul Sir, I'se put on my head-peice; now, an ye'll bind her hands behind
her, I'se undress her


What do thou do?


In Scotland we aw ways begin at the nether end of a bonny Lass.


Who made this Bed? What Rascals are these? Foh these Sheets are Musty as the
Devil, and what Rags are here upon my Bed? Is this a Counterpain? it is a
Dishclout


Why the Counterpain is well enough, and Rich enough, and the Sheet's are as
Clean, and as Sweet as may be


Fie, fie Peg, thou have got a Cold, and lost thy Smelling, I tell thee they
are all Damp and Musty, I would not have thee to venture to Lie in 'em for the
world, it would be thy Death; here take 'em away, we must ce'n sit up, there is
no remedy


Pray Sir talk not of sitting up, I am so sleepy I cant hold my Eyes open, I
must to Bed


I Will keep thee waking, I warrant thee; Ho Curtis bring us a Flaggon of March
Beer, and some Tobacco, and clean Pipes, we'll be merry


Why what d' ye mean are you Mad?


Mad? I, what should we do? I mean thou and I hand to fist, will drink a Health
to my Father, and my Sister, and all our good Friends at London


Why you don't take me to be one of your fellow Tospots?


I mean to Teach thee to Drink; thou must Learn that, or you are no Wife for
me: Here, Peg, to thee with all my Heart, a whole one, and thou art Welcome;
My Father's good Health, Peg, you shall Pledge it


I cannot Drink without Eating; 'twill make me sick.


Pish, Pish, that is but a Fancy; Come, off with it, or thou shall neither eat
nor drink this Month


Shall I go to Bed when I have drank it?


Good at ye gi Sawndy a little Drink Madam.


Talk of that anon.
So, here Peg, here is a Pipe I have filled for thee my self,
Sit down, and Light it.

Do You mean to make a mere Hackny Horse of me? What d'offer me your nasty
Tobacco for


Nay, never make so shy, I know' thou Love it: Come, young Ladies are often
troubled with the Toothache, and take it in their Chambers, though they will not
appear Good Fellows amongst us: Take it, or no Sleep nor Meat, Peg, Do You hear


Yes, to my Grief; I will not be abused thus.


Nay, nay, Go where thou will, I Will make thee Smoke before I Sleep.


SIrrah, wait on your Mistress; Say what you will to her, and Vex her, but do
not touch her; and let her have no Meat I Charge ye


S'breed Sir, send her into the Highlands in Scotland, there is Hunger and Caud
enough, there she may starve her Bally foo


Well Sirrah, Do as I direct you.


OF my Saul wull I Sir, Yee'l let me take my Headpiece to defend me Sir.


What Gregory, Phillip! No Body near me? Sawny, Where are you?


Is'e even hard at your Arse Madam.


Where Is your Master?


He Is gone to the Market himself, and he will bring ye heam a Braw Bull's Puzzle
to Swaddle your Weam with


And in the mean time I am Famisht; Was ever Woman used so Damnably? I am
Starved for Meat, Giddy for want of Sleep; and that which Spites me more then
all the rest, is, he pretends it is out of Care and Love to me: Prithee good
Sawny give me some Meat


OF my Saul, Sawndy would be Hanged gin I sud bestow an awed Liquor'd Bute,
Sawny will cut it into Tripes to Stuff your Weam with


Good Sawny, here is Money for thee, but one little bit of any thing to stay my
fainting Spirits


What will ye eat a Bit of Beef?


I, good Sawny.


Will ye eat some Mustard to it?


I, good Sawny, quickly.


Mustard is nea gu'd for your Tang, 'twill make it tea keen, and ye can Scau'd
fast enough without


Why then the Beef without Mustard.


Good Beef is nee gued without Mustard: Sawny will fetch ye some Meal and Water,
ye'st make ye a Scotch Pudding, ye'st Eat of that tull your Weam crack


You Abusive Rogue take that,
Must I be Braved thus by my own Servant.

The Dee'l wash your Face with a Fou Clout.


Why how now, Sirrah, Will you strike your Mistress? You Cowardly Rogue strike
a Woman


S'breed Sir, Do You Caw a Scotchman a Coward? Gin Is'e had ye in Scotland, Is'e
put my Whinyard in your Weam, gin ye were as stout as Gilderoy


Why Gilderoy was as arrant a Coward as thou art.


VVuns yeed be lath to keep the Grund that Gilderoy quits; yet I must confess
he was a little Shame-fac'd before the Enemy


O Mr. Geraldo, never was Poor Woman so used. For Charity sake Convey me home
to my Father


Here Peg, here is Meat for thee, I have Dressed it my self, my Dear; Geraldo
VVellcome, this was kindly done to Visit Peg and Me; Come Peg, fall too, here is
an Excellent piece of Veal


Why it is a Pullet.


Why it is Veal, Art thou Mad?


You will not Persuade me out of my Senses,
It Is a Pullet.

A Good is it Sir.


What an unhappy Man am I, my poor Dear Peg's Distracted. I always feared
'twould come to this. Take the Meat away Curtis; Is the Room Ready as I
Ordered? Are the Lights Damned up


Yes Sir.


Why what do you mean to do with me?


Poor Peg, I Pity thee; but thou shall want no Help for thy Cure, you must be
kept from the Light, it troubles the Brain


I see I shall Learn, he is an Excellent Teacher.


Why Sir, Pray tell me, Have you a mind to make me Mad? this is the way
indeed: How have I injured you, that you use me thus inhumanely? Did you Marry
me to starve me


He means to bring down your VVeam for a Race; For we awways Cry a Nag with a
VVeam, but a Mare with Nean


No, no; Good Peg thou know I have a Care of thee; Here Is a Gown just
brought home for thee Peg. Now thou art empty, it will sit Handsomely; Where
is this Tailor? Call him in Sawny, if it fits you, you shall put it on, and
we will Gallop over to London, and see your Father; Your Sisters Wedding is at
hand, you must help her


If she be Matched as I am, Heaven help her! But there is some Comfort in going
Home; there is Meat and Sleeping-room


Come Tailor, lets see the Gown, How now what is here? Bless me, what Masquing
Suite is this! What Is this a Sleve? why it is like a Demmy Cannon, Why what a
Devil Tailor do thou mean? Is this a Gown


A gown Sir? yes Sir, and a handsome Gown as any Man in London can make, it is
the newest Fashon lately come out of France


What a lying knave art thou! my great Grand-mothers Picture in the Matted
Gallery is just such another


It is like the Picture of Queen Margaret in Edenbrough Castle, Sir.


I never saw a better Fashon'd Gown in my life; more quaint nor better shaped,
I like the Gown, and I Will have this Gown or I Will have none; say what you will I
like it, it is a handsome Gown


Why thou say true Peg, it is an ugly paltrey Gown, I am glad to hear thee of
my mind; it is a beastly Gown


Why I say it is a good Gown, a handsome fashionable Gown; What do you mean to
make a Puppet of me


Ay, this fellow would make a Puppet of thee?


She says your Worship means to make a Puppet of her.


Thou Impudent, lying, Thread, Bodkin and Thimble, Flea, thou nit, brave me in
my own house? Go take it, I Will ha none on it


Sir I made it according to your Directions, and I cannot take it again.


Tak it awaw, or the Deel O my Luggs, but yest tak my Whineyard.


He shall not take it again, what need you trouble your self about it, as long
as it pleases me; lay it down there


Sirrah take it away I say, we shall find more Tailors; I wont have my Wife so
Antickly dressed, that the Boys shoud hoot at her


Come, come, all this is but fooling, you don't understand what belongs to a
Gown, say what you will I Am resolved to have it, if it were an ugly one I would
wear it, and it were but to Cross you


Now the Deel's a cruppen untell her Mouth Sir, you may see a little of his
Tail hang out, it looks for aw the world an it were a Sting Sir


Why that is my good Peg, I know thou do not care for it; say no more prithee,
thou shall have another


I know not what you mean to do with me, but methinks I might have leave to
speak, and speak I will, I am no Child, no Baby; your Betters have endured me
to speak my mind, and if you cannot you had best stop your Ears; It Is better
set my Tongue at Liberty, then lee my Heart break


Speak Peg, by all means, say what thou will; Sirrah carry that tawdry thing
away, Ceraldo tell him you will see him paid, Peg


Leave the Gown in the next Room Tailor, and take no notice of what he says,
I Will see you paid for it


Why I say I will have that Gown, and every thing I have a mind (...) not bring
you such a Portion to be made a Fool of


Very true, you are in the right Peg; come lets to Horse, these Clothes will
serve turn at present till we can get better. Go Sirrah lead the Horses to the
Lands end, thither we'll walk a foot; lets see, I think it is about seven a
Clock, we shall reach to my Father in Laws by Dinner time with Ease


It Is almost Two, you cannot get thither by Supper time.


It shall be seven e're I go, why what a Mischief's this, what I say or do,
you are still crossing it; Let the Horses alone, I will not go to day, and e're
I do it shall be what a Clock I please


Nay Sir, that shant stop our Journey, it is seven, or two or nine, or what a
Clock you please, pray lets go


Ye's have it what hour you wull Sir.


Very well it is so, get ready quickly; Come Geraldo let us all go, we shall
help mend the Mirth at my Sisters Wedding


I Will wait on you.


Come Peg, get on your things.


Let me but once see Lincolns-Inn-Fields again, and Yet thou shall not Tame me.


Now Sirrah, be but Impudent enough and keep state like the old Knight, and
thou art made for ever


I warrant ye Sir, I know it to a hair, my Lord Beaufoy and I were School
fellows together at Worster; my Estate lies in the Vale of Evesham, Three
thousand Pound a year, and Fifteen hundred a year I settle upon you upon the
Marriage, let me alone I am Sir Lyonell himself


Right, right; Excellent brave, How now.


To your Postures old Sinner, be an exquesite Rascal, and then thou shall be a
Rogue Paramount; thou shall lay the Dragon asleep while my Master steals the
Pippins


Well Iamy, What have thou done?


I have been with my Lord Beaufoy, presented your Fathers, and your Service to
him, and told him the old Knight was happily come to Town, and hearing of your
Love to Biancha, was so overjoyed, he would Settle all upon you


Well, and what said he?


He gave me a Piece for my News, I told him Sir Lyonell desired his Company
just now to treat upon the Match; he is coming in all have, he longs to be
Couzend, and Snatchpenny if thou do not do it


Then hang me.


Mum look to it, he is here.


Mr. Winlove your Man tells me your Father is just happily come to Town* Where
is he


Here Sir, this is my Father; Time has been too Bold to wear ye out of each
others Memory


Is this my Lord Beaufoy, Sir?


Yes Sir.


My Lord your humble Servant; I Am happy at last to meet a Person I have
formerly so much Loved


Noble Sir Lyonell I joy to see you.


O the merry Days that you and I have seen my Lord; Well fare the good old
times I say


I Sir Lyonell, when you and I were acquainted first.


I marry, there were Golden Days, indeed, no Couzening, no Cheating, the World
is altered


But we will remember these times, and be honest still.


That Is even the best way, there is hopes we may have honest Grand Children too,
if all be true as I hear, my Son tells me, your Daughter has made a Captive of
him


I would she were better for his sake, she is a good Girl, and a handsome one,
though I say it; if she were not, I would give her somewhat should make her so


It takes Rarely.


I Am even overjoyed that you think my Son worthy your Alliance, I Will give
something they shall make a shift to Live on; in Plain and in brief, if you will
approve of it, I Will settle Fifteen hundred Pound a year upon him at Present,
which shall be her Jointure; after my Death, all I have with a good will, What
say you my Lord


Sir Lyonell, Your Freedom pleas's me; I see you are an honest meaning
Gentleman: The Young Folks (if I am not mistaken) like one another. Well, I
say no more, it is a Match


You bind me to you Ever: Now I may boldly say, I am truly happy: Where will
you please to have the business made up


Not in my House, Son; I would have it Private; Pitchers have Ears, and I have
many Servants; Besides, Old VVoodall will be hindering of us; He Is hearkening
still, and will be interrupting


Then at my Lodging; there my Father Lies, and there the Business may be all
Dispatched: Send for your Daughter by this Gentleman; my Boy shall fetch a
Scrivener presently. The worst on it is, it is too small a Warning. You are like
to have but slender Entertainment


No matter, no matter; I shall like it.


I would feign see your Daughter, my Lord; I have heard great Commendations of
her


That you shall presently; Mounsier, pray go to Biancha, and tell her from me,
She must come hither with you immediately; you may tell her too, if you will,
what has happened, and that she must prepare to be A^r. VVinlove's Bride


My Lord, me vil fetch her presant.


My Lord, Will your Lordship please to walk in with my Father, this is my
Lodging


I Sir; Come Sir Lyonell, I Will follow you.


Good my Lord, I will wait upon you.


Thus far it is well Carried on Iamy; But how shall we prosecute it?


Why there is but one way in the World, Sir.


And what is that?


Why thus, I have got a Parson ready for the Purpose; when you have got
Biancha abroad, whip her into Covent Garden Church, and there Marry her, and
your VVork's done


Troth thou say true; But is the Parson Orthodox and Canonical? I would not
have an Obadiah to make us enter into Covenant of Matrimony


Trust me Sir, he is as true as Steel; he says all Matrimony without Book; he
can Christen, Wed, and Bury Blindfold


Well, I Will take thy Counsel, if I can persuade her to it, as I hope I shall,
for I know she Loves me; fair Luck betides me; But who comes here


It Is the Olp Grub VVoodall; What shall we do with him?


We must contrive some way to get him off.


I don't like those shuffling matters; I doubt there is some false Play toward
me in hand: Here Is my Monsieur he may Inform me -- Mounsieur


Che Dict a vouz Mounsieur. Mounsieur, Your Servant.


Prithee tell me, if thou can, how Affairs go, things are carried very
closely; How stands my Mistress affected


Moy foy Mounsieur; Me tell you de bad News in the Varle, Madamoselle Biancha
no stand Affected to you at all. My Lord has sent me to fetch her just now to
be Marry to Mounsieur Vat you call? Mounsieur Le --


What not to VVinlove


Yes to Mounsieur VVinlove; Begar me be very sorry, but me canno help dat.


Is Old Beaufoy mad to Match her to him without his Father's Privity.


Here be de ver Fine Old Man new come to Town, me Lord be wid him now.


Upon my Life old Sir Lyonell, nay then she is lost quite; Hark you Mounsier,
yet it is in your Power to make me a happy Man


O Mounsier me be your humble Servant.


Why look you, you are to fetch her; here is forty Pound in Gold to buy you a
pair of Gloves, let me take her from you, as you are carrying her thither; I
will have two or three with me, and you may saftly say she was forced from you


Mounsier begarr, me do you all de Service in the Varle, but me sal be the
grand, Sheat Knave then


That Is nothing, here is more Money, I Will save you harmless; Come, you shall do
it


Mounsier me have no mind to be van Knave, but to do you Service, if you will
meet me upon de Street


Fear not I Will secure you, honest Mounsieur farewell; I will be your Friend for
Ever


Ha, ha, ha, this is rare; What an Ass this Fellow will make himself, do what
we can? Here Iamy, thou shall share with me


Thank you Sir; Would we had such a Windfall every day: But come, Sir, you must
make haste, this is the Critical Minute; if you miss it, you lose Biancha


Thy Counsel's good, away; I Will buy a Ring, and Pay the Priest with some of
Woodall's Money, Ha, ha, hah


Walk your Horses down the Hill before, we shall reach London time enough, it is
a fair Night; How bright and goodly the Moon shines


The Moon! the Sun, it is not the Moonlight now.


I say it is the Moon that Shines so Bright.


I say it is the Sun that shines so Bright.


Now by my Mothers Son, and that is my Self, it shall be the Moonlight, or what
I please, before you set Sight of your Father's House; Sirrah, go fetch the
Horses back; Evermore Crossed, and Crossed, and nothing but Crossed


Say, as he says, or we shall never go.


Forward, I Pray Sir, since we are come so far; And be it Sun or Moon, or what
you please; Nay, if you call it a Rush-Candle, henceforth it shall be so for me


I say it is the Moon.


S'breed, but I say nay, Sir, Out, out, a Lies.


I know it is the Moon.


Nay then you Lie, it is the Blessed Sun.


Why Heaven be Blessed for it, it is even what you have a mind to; Pray let us
forward


Petruchio, go thy ways, the Field is Won.


Well, forward, forward; Now the Bowl runs with a Right Byas, but soft, here is
Company


Boy, Bid the Coachman drive gently down the Hill; I wonder I meet nor overtake
no Passengers to day; stay, I think here be some


I will have one bout more with thee Peg; Good Morrow Gentle Lady; Which way
Travel you? Come hither Peg; Did thou ever behold so Exquisite a Beauty as
this Fair Virgin bears about. Go to her Peg, and Salute her


Are you Mad, it is an Old Man.


Beat back again then, still Cross? Will you do it?


Why in the Deel's Name, What mean ye? it is nea bonny Lass Sir; S'breed, it is an
aw faw Thief


He Will make this Old Man Mad.


You Budding Virgin, so fair, so sweet, so fresh, which way Travel you? How
happy should we be in the Enjoyment of so fair a Fellow Traveller


The Dee'l has built a Bird's Nest in your Head; Good ye'r as mad as he; and he
as Mad as gin he were the Son of a March Hare, Sir


Why what do ye mean Gentlewoman?


Why now now Peg, I hope thou art not Mad: A Virgin Quotha! it is an Old
Wrinckled Withered Man


Reverend Sir, Pardon my mistaking eyes, that have been so dazzled with the Moon
(Sun I mean.) I could not distinguish you; I now perceive you are a Grave Old
Man, pray excuse me


Indeed you are a Merry Lady; your encounter has amazed me. But I like such
Cheerful Company; I am for London to see a Son of mine, that went lately from
me thither


We shall be glad of your Company; you must pardon my Wifes Error, she has not
slept well to Night; and I could not persuade her, but she would come out
Fasting, which makes her Fancy a little extravagant


The Dee'l OF my Saul but you are a false Trundle Tail Tike, the Dee'l a bit
he would lat her eat these three days Sir


Curse upon your Excuse, and the Cause of it; I could have eaten my
Shooe-Soules, if I might have had 'em Fried


Your Name I beseech you Sir.


I am Called, Sir Lyonell Winlove in the Country.


Father to young Mr. Winlove?


The same Sir.


Then I am happy indeed to have met you; I can tell you some News, perhaps may
not be Unwelcome to you. Your Son is in a fair probability of Calling me
Brother within these Two days


How so, I pray Sir.


Why he is upon Marrying my Wifes Sister, my Lord Beaufoyes youngest Daughter. A
brave Match, I can assure you, and a Sweet Bedfellow


Good she is tea gued for any man but Saundy; Good Gin poor Saundy had her in
Scotland, Wun's I Would sea Swing her about


You Amaze me! Is this true? or have you a mind, like a pleasant Traveller, to
break a Jest on the Company you overtake


Upon my Word, Sir, it is very true; 'twas so designed; but I don't think he will
Marry her, he is Forsworn if he do


You make me Wonder more and more.


Mind him not, he is a Party Concerned, it is true.


Pray Gentlemen let us make haste, I must look after this Business, it soundes
strangely, he would not do it without my Consent; he is my only Son, my Heir, the
Prop of my Family, I must be careful


I see you are Jealous Sir; but you need not; he cannot have a better Match.


I doubt it not, if all be fair; I should be glad of my Lord Beaufoyes
Alliance, he was my School-fellow; but Time, I doubt, has worn out our Old
Acquaintance; Gentlemen, I must hasten to prevent the worst


What mean ye Sir? Yea will nea bawk the Bonna Lad, and tak fro his mattle Sir.


Well, Petruchio, thou have put me in a Heat, have at my Widow now.


How good you are my Fair one: Iamy, Ar't sure the Priest is ready for us?


I warrant you Sir; Pray make have, some Devil or other may come else and Cross
it. Don't stay Thrumming of Caps; Here, Body of me away, here is VVoodall, shift
for your selves, all will be spoiled else


Be sure you seize on her, and Clap her into a Chair, and one stop her mouth;
fear not, I Will save you harmless


I warrant you Sir.


What a Devil makes this Rogue Poaching here?


Tum, te Dum, te Dum; Sing Old Coal of London.


Now Iamy, What Walk you here for.


Why to look about me; Te Dum, te Dum, etc,


They say your Master is to be Married to Madam Biancha to day.


Why then we'll be merry at Night; Te Dum, te Dum, etc.


The Rogue will not be gone; What, Have no Business? Thou look as if thou had
not Drank to day, there is something for thee, go get thy Mornings Draught


I thank your Worship: Will you take part of a Pot of Ale and a Toast.


No Sirrah, I Drank Coffee this morning.
So, he is gone; I wonder Mounsieur appears not with Biancha.

Ha, Who comes there?


Now you are there Ill take my Leave; Your Servant.


Sir Lyonell, you are Welcome to Town; There Is your Sons Lodgings; my Father
Lives on the other side; thither we must, and therefore here I take my Leave


Pray stay a little, may be he is not within; if so, I Will wait upon you to the
Lord Beaufoy


OF my Saul, nea can could have Begged (Knocks.) Dunner better then this awd
Theife has done


They are all busy within Sir, you must Knock Louder if you mean to be heard.


Who is that Knocks, as if he would Beat down the Gate.


Is Mr. Winlove within?


He is within, but not to be spoken with.


What if a Man bring him a Hundred Pounds or Two, to make Merry withal.


Keep your Hundred Pounds for your self, he shall need none as long as I Live.


Nay, I told you, Sir, Your Son was well Beloved in London. Do You hear Sir,
leaving your Frivelous Circumstances, pray tell him, His Father's just now come
out of the Country to see him, and is here at the Door to speak with him


That is a Lie Sir; his Father came to Town yesterday, and is now here Looking
out at Window


The Devil he is; Are you his Father?


I Sir; so his Mother says, if I may believe her.


Can they Hang him for having two Fathers Sir? Good and 'twas sea, poor Sawndy
would be Hanged sure enough


Why, Have thou Two Fathers?


Good have I, and Two, and Two to that Sir.


Why how now Gentlemen, this is flat Knavery, to take another Man's Name upon
you


Lay hands upon this Villain, I believe he means to Cheat some body here, under
my Counter-Name


I have seen the Church on their Back, send them Good Speeding: Ha, how now, my
Old Master Sir Lyonell? S'foot, we are all lost, undone; I must Brazen it out


Come hither Crack Hemp.


You may save me that Labor, and come to me, if you have any thing to say to
me


Gome hither you Rogue, What have you forgot me?


Forgot you Sir? I could not forget you; for I never saw you in all my Life
before


You notorious Villain, Did thou never see thy Master's Father, Sir Lyonell
Winlove


What my Worshipful Old Master? Yes marry Sir: See where his Worship Looks out
of the Window


Does he so Sir? I Will make you find him below stayres.


Help, help, here is a Madman will Murder me.


Dea Caw your sell Iamy? And wull ye be Beten by an aw faw Thief? An yea Caw
your sell Iamy cance meare, l'se bang ye tea Clootes, breed a Good will I Sir


Help Son, help Brother Beaufoy, Iamy will be killed.


Prithee Peg stand by to see this Controversy.


'Sheart it is Sir Lyonell; but we must bear it a little time: Sir, What are you
that offer to Beat my Servant


What am I, Sir; Nay, What are you, Sir? O Heaven what do I see! O fine
Villains, I Am undone, while I play the Good Husband at home in the Country,
my Son, and my Servants spend my Estate Lavishly at London


Your Son sal allow you Siller to keep an Awd Wutch to rub your Shins; And what
to anger would ye ha mere Sir


How now, What Is the Matter?


Is the Man Frantic?


Sir, You seem a sober Ancient Gentleman by your Habit; but your Words show you
a Madman: Why Sir, What Concerns it you what Rich Clothes I wear? I thank my
good Father, I am able to maintain it


Thy Father! O Villain! he is a Hemp-dresser in Partha.


Mara the Deel stuff his Wem fow a Hemp, and his Dam Spin it out at his Arse.


You mistake, you mistake; What do you think his Name is?


His Name; as if I knew not his Name; I have Bred him up e're since he was
Three Years old, and his Name is Tranio


Away, away, mad Ass, his Name is Winlove; my only Son, and Heir to all my
Estate in the Vale of Evesham


Heavens! he has murdered his Master; lay hold on him, I charge you in the
King's Name, O my Son, tell me thou Villain, Where is my Son VVinlove


Run for an Officer to carry this mad Knave to the Jayle; Lay hold on him I
charge ye, and see him forthcoming


Awa, awa with the Hampdresser Sir.


Carry me to the Jayle ye Villains!


Hold Gentlemen; Your Blessing Father.


Son Petruchio VVellcome. You have it, and you Peg, how do you? Know ye any thing
of this matter


My Lord, take heed what you do; so much I know, I dare Swear this is Sir
Lyonell VVinlove, and that a Counterfeit


VVuns, I think sea tea, good an ye please I'se take the Covenant on it.


So durst I Swear too almost.


Swear if thou durst.


Sir I dare not Swear Point Blank.


You had best Swear, I am not VVinlove neither.


Yes, I know you to be Mr. VVinlove.


Away with the Doater'd, to the Jayle with him.


Are you all settled to do mischief to me? Why my Lord Beausoy methinks you
might know me


Away with him to my Lodgings for the present, 'till we can get a Constable to
charge him upon, we shall have a hubbub in the Streets, drag him I say


Rogues, Villains, Murderers! I shall have Justice.


These are strange Passages, I know not what to think, of 'em; but I am glad
Biancha came not when they were here, sure my Mounsier will not fail me


Now my Biancha I am truly Happy, our Loves shall like the Spring be ever
growing


But how shall we Escape my Fathers Anger.


Fear not, I Will warrant thee.


O here is Biancha, how now Mounsier brave, What fancy's this?


O Mounsieur te Vous la Menes, How do you do good Mr. Woodall, how do you like my
new Bride


How, how, how, Sir, your Bride? Seize on her quickly.


Hands off, she is my Wife, touch her who dares; Will you have your Teeth picked?
What do you think of giving 20 Pieces to teach your Mistress French


O Rogue, I Will have thee hanged.


Or 40 Pieces to buy a Pair of Gloves, to let you Steal Madam Biancha: this
Ring was bought with some of it, ha, ha, ha


Down with him, down with him, a damned Rascal.


I, do, Which of you has a mind to breath a Vein?


Nay if she be his Wife we dare not touch her.


I Will fetch some body that shall, O Devil.


Ay do, I am your poor Mounsieur, ha, ha, ha; Fear not Biancha, he will fetch 'em
all I know, I warrant thee we shall appease thy Father Easily


Trust me Sir, I fear the Storm.


That Rogue, that Damned Counterfit Frenchman has stolen your Daughter and
Married her, here they are


Bless me, What do I see yonder my Father, in earnest? Dear Sir your Blessing,
and your Pardon


My Dear Son, Art thou alive? then take it.


I must beg your Pardon too Sir.


And I most Honored Father.


Why what is the Matter? What have thou done? VVoodall tells me thou have
Married the Frenchman


Me she has Married, but no Frenchman. The right VVinlove, Son to the right
VVinlove is her Husband, and your Son in-Law


S'breed Sir, ye act two parts, ye were but a Hamp-dresser in the last Act, Sir.


It Is time for us to be going, I feel one Ear going off already.


You amaze me* Are not you the Frenchman, Mr. VVoodall preferred to teach my
Daughter


No my Lord, he put on that Disguise to Court me, he is the true VVinlove.


Marry is he my Son, Sir.


Those were but (...) of my making.


Here Is Patching with a Mistress, I Am sure I am Gulled.


But do you hear Sir? Have you Married my Daughter without my Consent.


Come my Lord, now you must know me; I will beg both their Pardons, and Secure
her a Jointure worthy her Birth and Fortune


You are a Father now Indeed.


Sir Lyonell excuse my rashness I accept your noble Proffer, you are forgiven.


S'breed Sir, we sal nere go to Dunner Sir, the Deel forgot and forgive you aw,
Sir


But where is that Rogue that would have sent me to Jayle? I Will slit his Nose
for him


I must beg his Pardon, for he did all for my Sake.


Well Sir, for your Sake I Pardon him.


Come Gentlemen all to my house, we shall there end all our Doubts, and drowned
our fears


Sir, I shall expect my Money back again, it is enough to loose my Mistress.


No Faith it is in better hands already, you will but fool it away, you will be
hireing Frenchmen again


Well mock on, I Will in and eat out part of it.


Come Gentlemen.


Husband will you not go with my Father?


First kiss me Peg, and I will.


What in the middle of the Street.


What art thou Ashamed of me?


Not so Sir, but ashamed to kiss so openly.


Why then let us home again, Sauny lead the way.


Good the Deel a bit will Saundy Budge before Dunner, Sir.


Nay I will give thee a kiss, nay pray now stay.


So is not this well? come my sweet Peg.


Sister I hope we shall be friends now.


I was never Foes with you.


Come fairest, all the Storms are overblown; Love has both Wit and Fortune of
her own


BUt is it Possible Sister, he should have used you thus?


Had I served him as bad as Eve did Adam, he coud not have used me worse; but I
am resolved now I Am got home again I Will be revenged, I Will muster up the Spite
of all the Cursed Women since Noah's Flood to do him Mischief, and add new
Vigor to my Tongue; I have not pared my Nails this fortnight, they are long
enough to do him some Execution, that is my Comfort


Bless me Sister, how you talk.


Thou art a Fool Biancha, come Learn of me; thou art Married to a Man too, thou
do not know but thou may need my Council, and make good use on it; Thy
Husband bares thee fair yet, but take heed of going home with him, for when
once he has thee within his verge, it is odds he will have his freaks too; there is
no trusting these Men: Thy temper is soft and easy, thou must Learn to break
him, or he will break thy Heart


I must Confess I should be Loath to be so used, but sure Mr. VVinlove is of a
better Disposition


Trust him and hang him, they are all alike; Come thou shall be my Scholar,
learn to Frown, and cry out for unkindness, but brave Anger, thou have a
Tongue, make use on it; Scould, Fight, Scratch, Bite, any thing, still take
Exceptions at all he does, if there be Cause or not, if there be reason for it
he will Laugh at thee. I Will make Petruchio glad to wipe my Shoes, or walk my
Horse, ere I have done with him


Peace Sister, our Husbands are both here.


Thou Child I am glad on it, I Will speak louder,


Well Brother VVinlove now we are truly happy, never were Men so blessed with two
such Wives


I am glad to hear you say so Sir, my own I Am sure Im blessed in.


Yours, why Biancha's a Lion, and Margaret a mere Lamb to her: I tell thee
Winlove, there is no Man living tho I say it, (but it is no matter since she does
not hear me) that has a Wife so gentle, and so active and affable, poor thing I
durst be sworn she would walk barefoot a hundred Miles to do me good


No but she would not, nor one Mile neither.


Now have at your Luggs, Sir.


O Peg, art thou there? How do thou do my Dear?


You may go look, What Is that to you?


Stand of yer guard Sir, Good Saundy will put on his head Piece.


I am glad to hear thee say you are well in troth.


Never the better for you, which you shall sind.


Nay I know thou love me, Prithee take up my Glove Peg.


I take up your Glove; Marry come up, command your Servants, look you there it
lies


I am glad to see thee merry, poor wanton Rogue.


It Is very well, you think you are in the Country but you are mistaken, the
case is altered, I am at home now, and my own disposer; Go swagger at your
greazy Lubber there, your Patient Wife will make you no more Sport, she has a
Father will allow her Meat and Lodging, and another gaits Chambermaid then a
Highlander


Good an ye were a top of Grantham Steple that aw the Toon may hear what a
Scanden Queen ye are, out, out


Why what is the matter Peg? I never saw thee in so jolly a Humor, sure thou
have been Drinking


Good has she, haud ye tang, ye faw dranken Swine, out, out, out, was ye tak a
Drink and nere tak Saundy to ye, out, out, out


It Is like I have, I am the sitter to talk to you, for no sober Woman is a
Companion for you


Troth thou say right, we are excellently Matched.


Well mark the end on it, Petruchio prithee come hither, I have something to say
to you


De ye nea budge a foot Sir, Deel a my saul bo she will Scratch your eyn out.


Well, your Pleasure Madam.


First thou art a Pitiful fellow, a thing beneath me, which I scorn and Laugh
at, ha, ha, ha


She holds her own yet I see.


I know not what to call thee, thou art no Man, thou coudst not have a Woman to
thy Mother, thou paltry, Scurvy, ill conditioned fellow, do thou not tremble
to think how thou have used me; What are you silent Sir? Biancha see, Looks he
not like a Disbanded Officer, with that hanging dog look there? I must eat
nothing because your Cook has Roasted the Mutton dry, as you used to have it
(...) your Worship was a Batchellor, I must not go to Bed neither, because
(...) are Damp


Mark you Peg; What a strange Woman are you to Discourse openly the Fault of
your Servants in your own Family


No, no, Sir, this wont serve your turn; your Old Stock of Impudence will not
carry you off so: I Will speak your Fame, and tell what a fine Gentleman you are*
how Valliantly you, and half a Douzen of your Men, got the better of a Single
Woman, and made her lose her Supper


Good she Lies Sir; I would a gin her an awd Boot tul^ a made Tripes on, and it
wod a hin bra Meat with Mustard, and she would nea have it


My Faults? No, good Squire of the Country, you thought to have Tamed me, I
warrant, in good time; why you see I am even with you; Your Quiet Patient Wife,
that will go no more in the Country with you, but will stay in Town, to Laugh
at your Wi^e Worship, and wish you more Wit


I should Laugh at that; why we are just now a going* Sauny go get the Horses
ready quickly


Good will I Sir; I'se Saddle a Highland-Wutch to Carry your Bride; Good she will
mount your Arse for you Madam


Sirrah, touch a Horse, and I Will Curry your Coxcomb for you: No Sir, I will not
say, Pray let me not go; but boldly, I will not go; you force me if you can or
dare: You see I am not Tongue-ty'd, as silent as you thought you made me


Prithee Peg, Peace a little, I know thou can Speak, leave now, or thou wilt
have nothing to say to morrow


Yes, I Will say this over again, and something more if I can think on it, to a
poor despised man of Clouts: Sister, how he smoakes now he is off his own
Dunghill


Prithee Peg leave making a Noise; In Faith thou wilt make my Head ach.


Noise? Why this is Silence to what I intend; I Will talk Louder than this, every
Night in my Sleep


The Dee'l shall be your Bed fellow for Sawndy then.


I will learn to Rail at thee in all Languages; Thunder shall be soft-musick to
my Tongue


The Dee'l a bit Scot's ye gat to brangle in, marry the Dee'l gi ye a Clap wi a
French Thunderbolt


Very pretty; Prithee go on.


I Will have a Collection of all the Ill Names that ever was Invented, and call
you over by 'em twice a day


And have the Catalogue published for the Education of young Scolds: Proceed
Peg


I Will have you Chained to a Stake at Billingsgate, and Baited by the
fish-wives, while I stand to Hiss 'em on


Ha, ha, ha; Witty Peg, forward.


You shall not dare to Blow your Nose, but when I bid you; you shall know me to be
the Master


Wuns gat her to the Stool of Repantance, Sir.


Nay, I believe, thou will go in Breeches shortly; On, on; What have you no
more on it? Ha, ha, ha


Do You Laugh and be Hanged? I Will spoil your Sport.


Nay, Peg, Hands off; I thought you would not have Disgraced your Good Parts,
to come to Blows so soon; Prithee Chide on, thou can not believe what
Delight I take to hear thee; It does become thee so well: What Pumpt dry
already? Prithee talk more and longer, and faster, and sharper, this is nothing


I Will see you in the Indies before I Will do any thing to please you; Do You like
it


Extremely! On Peg, you will cooll too fast.


Why then Mark me, if it were to save thee from Drowning, or Breaking thy Neck,
I will not speak one word more to thee these Two Months


Ah Good an ye do nea Ly, Madam.


Nay, Good Peg, be not so hard-harted. What Melancholy all ^'th' sudden? Come,
get up, we'll send for the Fiddlers, and have a Dance; Tho'lt break thy Elbow
with Leaning on that hard Table: Sawny, go get your Mistress a Cushion; Alas! I
doubt she is not well; Look to her Sister


Are you not well, Sister? What ail you? Pray speak Sister: Indeed, Brother,
you have so Vexed her, she will be Sick


Alas, alas! I know what is the matter with her, she has the Toothache. See how
she holds her Cheek; the Wind has gotten into her Teeth, by keeping her Mouth
open this Cold Weather


Indeed it may be so Brother, she uses to be troubled with that Pain sometimes.


Without all Question; Poor Peg, I pity thee; Which Tooth is it? Will thou
have it Drawn, Peg? The Toothache makes Fools of all the Physicians; there is
no Cure, but Drawing: What say thou? Will thou have it pulled out? Well,
thou shall. Sauny, Run, Sirrah, hard by, you know where my Barber Lives that
Drew me a Tooth last Week, fetch him quickly; What do you stand staring at? Run
and fetch him immediately, or I Will cut your Legs off


Good I'se fetch can to pull her head off an ye wull.


This will make her find her Tongue again, or else for certain she has lost it.


Her Tongue, Brother? Alas! You see her Face is so Swelled, she cannot speak.


You Jest Brother; her Face is not swelled. Pray let me see, Sister, I cannot
perceive it


Not Swelled? Why you are blind then; Prithee let her alone, you trouble her.


Here, Honest Barber, have you brought your Instruments?

Yes Sir; What must I do?


You must Draw that Gentlewoman a Tooth there; Prithee do it neatly, and as
gently as thou can; And, de hear me, take care you don't tear her Gums


I warrant you Sir.


Hear ye Sir, Could not ye Mistake? and pull her Tang out instead of her Teeth.


I Will be gone, I cannot endure to see her put to so much Pain.


Pray, Madam, open your Mouth, that I may see which Tooth it is.
Why Sir, Did you send for me to Abuse me.

Good be nea Angry, Ye ha ne aw yer Pay yet Sir. Cud ye not Mistake, and Draw
her Tang in stead of her Teeth Sir


No, no: But it seems now she wo' not have it Drawn: Go, there is something for
your Pains however


Ye sid ha taken my Counsel Sir.


This will not do, Sir. You cannot raise the Spirit you have laid, with all
your Arts


I Will try; Have at her once more. VVinlove, you must assist me; I Will make her
Stir, if I cannot make her Speak. Look, look! alas! How Pale she is! She Is gone
of the sudden; Body OF me, she is stiff too; undone, undone, What an unfortunate
Man am I? she is gone! she is gone! never had man so great a Loss as I; O
Winlove, pity me, my poor Peg is Dead, dear Winlove call in my Father and the
Company that they may share in this sad Spectacle, and help my Sorrows with
their joining Griefs. Sauny thou feast in how sad a condition thy poor Master
is in* thy good Mistress is Dead, have to the next Church and get the Bier and
the Bearers hither, I Will have her buried out of hand; Run Sauny


An you will mack her Dead, we'll bury her deep enough, we'll put her done intill
a Scotch Coalepit, and she shall rise at the Deel's arse of Peake


I will see that last Pious act Performed, and then betake my self to a willing
Exile; my own Country's Hell, now my dear Peg has left it. Not yet, upon my
Life I think thou have a mind to be buried quick; I hope thou have


Bless me Son Petruchio, Is my dear Daughter Dead?


Alas, alas, it is but too true, would I had taken her room.


Why methinks she looks brisk, fresh and lively.


So much Beauty as she had must needs leave some wanding remains to hover still
about her face


What could her Disease be?


Indeed I grieve to tell it, but truth must out, she Dyed for spite, she was
strangely Infected


Fie Sister, for shame speak, Will you let him abuse you thus?


Gentlemen you are my loving Friends and knew the Virtues of my matchless Wife,
I hope you will accompany her Body to its long home


We'll all wait on you.


Thou will break her heart indeed.


I warrant you Sir, it is tougher then so.


I bring you here vera gued Men, an she be nea Dead Sir, for a Croon more
they will bury her quick


O honest friends, you are Welcome, you must take up that Corpse, how!
hard-hearted, Why de ye not weep? the loss of so much Beauty and goodness, take
her up, and lay her upon the Beir


Why what do you mean Sir? She is not Dead.


Rogues, tell me such a Lie to my face? Take her up or I Will swinge ye.


Tak her up, tak her up, we'll make her Dead Billy, ye'st a two Croo^ mear, tak
her up Man


Dead or alive all is one to us, let us but have our fees.


There, nay she is stiff, however on with her, Will you not speak yet? So here
take these Strings and bind her on the Beir, she had an active stirring body
when she Lived, she may chance fall off the Hearse now she is Dead: So, now take
her up and away, come Gentlemen you will follow, I mean to carry her through the
Strand as far as St. Iame's, People shall see what respect I bore her -- She
shall have so much Ceremony to attend her now she is Dead. There my Coach shall
meet her and carry her into the Country, I Will have her laid in the Vault
belonging to my Family, she shall have a Monument; some of you inquire me out a
good Poet to write her Epitaph suitable to her Birth, Quallity and Conditions,
Pity the remembrance of so many Virtues should be lost; March on, I would say
more, but grief Checks my Tongue


Father, Sister, Husband, Are you all Mad? Will you expose me to open shame?
Rogues set me down you had best


A Miracle! a Miracle! she Lives! Heaven make me thankful for it, set her down,
Liv'st thou my Poor Peg


Yes that I do, and will to be your Tormentor.


Out, out, gea her nea Credit, good she is as Dead as mine Grannam, tak her, away
with her, Sir


Bless me my hopes are all vanished again, it is a Demon speaks within her Body;
Take her up again, we'll bury 'em together


Hold, hold, my dear Petruchio, you have overcome me, and I beg your Pardon,
henceforth I will not dare to think a thought shall Cross your Pleasure, set me
at Liberty, and on my knees I Will make my Recantation


Victoria, victoria, the field is won.


Art thou in earnest Peg? May I believe thee?


You ken very well she was awway's a lying Queen when she was Living, and wull
ye believe her now she is Dead


By all that is good not truth it self truer.


Then thus I free thee, and make thee Mistress both of my self and all I have.


S'breed bo ye`l nea gi Saundy tull her Sir?


Take heed of giving away your Power, Sir.


I Will venture it, nor do I fear I shall repent my bargain.


I Am sure I will not give you Cause, y've taught me now what it is to be a Wife,
and I Will still show my self your humble Handmaid


My best Peg, we will change kindness and be each others Servant; Gentlemen why
do you not Rejoice with me


I am so full of joy I cannot Speak, may you be happy, this is your Wedding day.


Shall Saundy get her a Bride-Cake, and Brake o'r her Head Sir? and wee's gatt
us a good Wadding Dunner


Save ye all Gentlemen; Have ye any Room for more Guess? I am come to make up
the Chorus


My Noble Friend, VVellcome; Where have you been so long?


I have been about a little trivial Business; I am just now come from a
Wedding


What Wedding I pray Sir?


Troth even my own; I have ventured upon it at last: Madam, I hope you will pardon
me


Yes Sir; and so will this Gentleman.


Are not you a Gentleman-Hampdresser?


It Is even so, this proves to be VVinlove in earnest.


Good Gentlemen undo this Riddle; I Am all in the Dark.


You shall know anon, in the mean time Believe it Gentlemen. We want another
Woman, or we might have a Dance


My Widow is within, she will supply you.


Good Peg go and wait on her, and you Biancha too.


I tell thee Geraldo, never had Man so Obedient and Loving a Wife as I have
now, I defy the World to equal her


Nay, Brother, you must except her Sister.


You must except mine too, or I shall have a hard Bargain of it; my Widow is
all Obedience


I Will tell you what I Will do with you, I Will hold you Ten Pieces to be spent in a
Collation on them, That mine has more Obedience than both them; to try which,
each send for his Wife, and if mine come not first I Will lose my Bett


Good yeel lose your Siller sure enough Sir.


A Match.


I Will be your halves Geraldo, and yours Mr. VVinlove too.


Iamy, Go tell your Mistress, I desire her to come hither to me presently.


A Piece more she does not come.


You Will lose Son, you will lose; I know she`ll come.


I know she won`t; I find by Instinct I shall VVin my Wager.


Sir, she says she is busy, and she can`t leave Mr. Geraldo's Lady.


Look ye there now, come your Money.


Prithee go again and tell my Wife I must needs speak with her immediately.


I shall win yours too as sure as in my Pocket.


I warrant you no such matter, What will you give to be off your Bett?


I will not take forty Shillings.


How now?

Sir, she says you have no Business with her, if you have you may come to her.


Come produce, I knew 'twould be so; Sauny go and tell Peg from me, I command
her to come to me instantly


I'se gar her gea wuth me Sir, or I'se put my Durke to the hilt in her Weam.


Yet you wont win, I Will hang for it if she will come.


Yes but she will, as sure as you gave forty pieces to Court Biancha, I Will
venture them to twenty more upon it with you


Nay I have lost enough already.


Look ye here Gentlemen.


O my Saul, she is can a daft gued Lass, she is at your Beck, steake her and kiss
her Man


I come to receive your Commands, Sir.


All I have to say to thee Peg, is to bid thee demand ten pound of these two
Gentlemen, thou have Won it


I, Sir, for what?


Only for being so good natured to come when I send for you.


It was my duty Sir.


Come pay, pay, give it her, I Will not bate ye two pence.


There Is mine.


And mine Sister, much good may it do ye.


Well Peg I Will find thee one Thousand Pound the more for this.


Bo what wull ye gi Saundy that halpt to make her gued and tame? VVuns she was
as VVild as a Galloway Coalt


Look here they come at last.


What did you send for me for?


Why to win me five Pound if you had been as obedient as you should a been.


You have not known me long enough to venture so much upon my Duty, I have been
my Sisters Scholar a little


Bo put her to Saundy to teach, Good I'se make her sea gentle ye may streake her
and handle her all over Sir


You might have got me five Pound if you had done as you should do.


Were it to do again you should be sure to loose.


Fie Ladys, for shame, How dare you infringe that Duty which you justly owe your
Husbands, they are our Lords and we must pay 'em Service


Well said Peg, you must be their Tutor, come Son if youll have a Dance
dispatch it quickly, the Musick's ready, and the Meat will be spoiled


Come then, play, play.

Now let us in, and Eat, the Work is done,
Which neither Time nor Age can wear from Memory;
I Have Tamed the Shrew, but will not be ashamed,
If next you see the very Tamer Tamed.


