ROderigo.


Art mad?


Yes, not so much with Wine; its as rare to see a Spaniard a drunkard, as a
Germane sober, an Italian no Whoremonger, an English man to pay his debts. I am
no Borachia, Sack, Maligo, nor Canary breeds the Calenture in my brains, mine
eye mads me, not my cups


What would have us do?


Do?


So far as it is fit for a Gentlemen we will venture.


I ask no more, I ha seen a thing has bewitched me, a delicate body, but this
in the waste, Foot and Leg tempting, the Face I had a glimpse of: but the Fruit
must needs be delicious, the Tree being so beautiful


Prithee to the point.


Here it is, an old Gentleman, (no matter who he is) an old Gentlewoman (I ha
nothing to do with her) but a young creature that follows them, Daughter or
Servant, or whatsoever she be her I must have, they are coming this way,
shall I have her? I must have her


How, how?


Thou speak impossibilities.


Easy, easy, easy, i will seize the young girl: stop you the old man, stay
you the old woman


How then?


I Will fly off with the young Bird, that is all, many of our Spanish Gallants act
these merry parts every night, they are weak and old, we young and sprightly,
will you assist me


Troath Roderigo any thing in the way of honor.


For a wench Man any course is honorable.


Nay not any, her Father, if he her Father may be noble.


I am as noble.


Would the adventure were so.


Stand close, they come.


It Is late would we were in Madrill.

Go faster my Lord.

Clara, keep close.

Help, help, help!

Are you crying out? I Will be your Midwife.

What mean you Gentlemen?

Villains, Thieves, Murderers.

Do you know me? Iam De Cortes, Pedro de Cortes!

De Cortes, Diego, come away.

Clara, where is my Daughter?

Clara I these Villains
Have robbed us of our comfort, and will, I fear,
Her of her honor.

This had not wont
To be our Spanish Fashion, but now our Gallants,
Our Gentry, our young Dons heated with Wine,
(A fire our Countrymen do seldom sit at)
Commit these outrages, Clara! -- Maria,
Let Us homeward, I will raise Madrill to find
These traitors to all goodness, Clara.

Oh Diego I am lost, I am mad!

So we are all.

It Is not with wine, i am drunk with too much horror,
Inflamed with rage, to see us two made Bawds
To Roderigo's lust, did not the old man
Name Decortes, Pedro de Cortes?

Sure he did.

Oh Diego, as thou love me, nay on the forfeit
Of thine own life or mine, seal up thy lips,
Let 'em not name De Cortes, stay, stay, stay,
Roderigo has into his Fathers house
A passage through a Garden.

Yes, my Lord.

Thither I must find Roderigo out,
And check him, ckeck him home, if he but dare
No more; Diego along my soul does fight
A thousand battles blacker then this night.

Tho the black veyle of night has over-clowded
The World in darkness, yet e're many hours
The Sun will rise again, and then this act
Of my dishonor will appear before you;
More black then is the Canopy that shrowds it,
What are you, pray what are you?

Hushed, a friend! a friend.

A friend, be then a gentle Ravisher,
An honorable villain, as you have
Disroab'd my youth of natures goodliest portion,
My Virgin purity, so with your Sword
Let out that blood which is infected now,
By your soule-stayning lust.

Pish.

Are you noble?
I know you then will marry me, say.

Umh.

Not speak to me! are want on Devils dumb?
How are so many harmless Virgins wrought
By falsehood of prevailing words to yield
To easy forfeits of their shames and liberty,
If every Orator of folly plead
In silence, like this untongu'd piece of violence?
You shall not from me.

Phew no more.

You shall not,
Who e're you are, Disease of natures sloth:
Birth of some monstrous sin, or scourge of virtue,
Heavens wrath and mankinds burden, I will hold you,
I will, be rough and therein merciful,
I will not loose my hold else.

There, it is gold.

Gold, why! alas for what? the hire of pleasure,
Perhaps is payment, mine is misery;
I need no wages for a ruined name,
More then a bleeding heart.

Nay then you are troublesome,
I Will lock you safe enough.

They cannot fear
Whom grief has armed with hate and scorn of life.
Revenge I kneel to thee, alas'gainst whom?
By what name shall I pull Confusion down
From Justice on his head that has betrayed me?
I know not where I am, up I beseech thee
Thou Lady regent of the air, the Moon,
And lead me by thy light to some brave vengeance,
It is a Chamber sure, the guilty Bed.
Sad evidence against my loss of honor
Assures so much, what is here, a window curtain?
Oh Heaven! the stars appear 'too, ha! a chamber,
A goodly one, dwells Rape in such a paradise!
Help me my quickened senses, it is a garden
To which this window guides the covetous prospect,
A large one and a fair one, in the midst
A curious Alablaster Fountain stands,
Framed like-like what? no matter, swift remembrance,
Rich furniture within too! and what is this?
A precious Crucifix? I have enough,
Assist me oh you powers that guard the innocent.

Now!

Welcome, if you come armed in destruction,
I am prepared to die.

Tell me your Name,
And what you are.

You urge me to a sin
As cruel as your lust, I dare not grant it,
Think on the violence of my defame,
And if you mean to write upon my Grave
An Epitaph of peace, forbear to question,
Or whence, or who I am; I know the heat
Of your desires are after the performance
Of such a hellish act, by this time drowned
In cooler streams of penance; and for my part
I have washed off the Leaprosie that cleaves
To my just shame, in true and honest tears;
I must not leave a mention of my wrongs,
The stain of my unspotted birth to memory,
Let it lie buried with me in the dust,
That never time hereafter may report
How such a one as you have made me live;
Be resolute, and do not stagger, do not,
For I am nothing.

Sweet let me enjoy thee
Now with a free allowance.

Ha, enjoy me!
Insufferable villain!

Peace: speak low,
I mean no second force, and since I find
Such goodness in an unknown frame of virtus:
Forgive my soul attempt, which I shall grieve for
So heartily, that could you be your self
Eyewitness to my constant vowed repentance,
Trust me you would pity me.

Sir, you can speak now.

So much I am the Executioner
Of mine own trespass, that I have no heart,
Nor reason to disclose my name or quality;
You must excuse me that, but trust me (fair one)
Were this ill deed undone, this deed of wickedness,
I would be proud to court your love like him,
Whom my first birth presented to the World: this for your satisfaction,
What remains, that you can challenge as a service from me?
I both expect and beg it.

First, that you swear neither
In riot of your Mirth, in Passion
Of Friendship, or in folly of Discourse,
To speak of wrongs done to a ravished Maid.

As I love truth I swear.

Next that you lead me
Near to the place you met me, and there leave me
To my last fortunes e're the morning rise.

Say more.

Lay a new man, if e're you marry
(Oh me! my heart's a breaking) but if e're
You marry in a constant love to her
That shall be then your Wife, redeem the fault
Of my undoing, I am lost for ever,
Pray use no more words.

You must give me leave
To veil you close.

Do what you will, no time
Can ransom me from sorrows or dishonors,
Shall we now go?

My shame may live without me,
But in my soul I bear my guilt about me,
Lend me your hand, now follow.

Not yet come in, not yet?

No i will assure your Lordship, I have seldom known
Him keep out so long, my Lord usually observes
More seasonable hours.

What time of night is it?

On the stroke of three.

The stroke of three! it is wondrous strange!
Do hear?

My Lord.

E're six I will be here again,
Tell thy Lord so: e're six, -- a must not sleep,
Or if a do, I shall be bold to wake him:
Be sure thou tell him -- do.

My Lord I shall.

Diego.
Walk thou the street that leads about the Perado,
I Will round the West part of the City, meet me
At the Inquisition Chapel; if we miss him
We Will both back to his Lodgings.

At the Chapel?

I there we will meet.

Agreed, I this way.

She is not noble, true, wise nature meant
Affection should enable her descent,
For love and beauty keeps as rich a seat
Of sweetness in the mean borne, as the great --
I am resolved.

It Is Roderigo certainly,
Yet his voice makes me doubt, but I Will o're-hear him

That if only I should be the Man
Made accessory, and a party both
To mine own torment, at a time so near
The birth of all those comforts I have traveled with,
So many, many hours of hopes and fears;
Now at the instant -- Ha, stand! thy name,
Truly and speedily.

Don Lewys!

The same; but who art thou -- speak?

Roderigo.

Tell me,
As you are a noble Gentleman, as ever
You hope to be enrowl'd amongst the virtuous,
As you love goodness, as you wish to inherit
The blessedness and fellowship of Angels,
As you are my friend, as you are Roderigo,
As you are any thing that would deserve
A worthy name, where have you been to night?
Oh! how have you disposed of that fair Creature
Whom you led captive from me, speak, oh speak,
Where, how, when, in what usage have you left her?
Truth I require all truth.

Tho I might question
The strangeness of your importunity;
Yet cause I note distraction in the height
Of curiosity, I will be plain, and brief.

I thank you sir.

Instead of feeding
Too wantonly upon so rich a Banquet,
I found even in that beauty that invited me
Such a commanding majesty of chaste
And humbly glorious virtue, that it did not
More check my rash attempt, then draw to ebb
The float of those desires, which in an instant
Were cooled in their own streams of shame and folly.

Now all increase of honors.
Fall in full showers on thee Roderigo,
The best man living.

You are much transported
With this discourse methinks.

Yes, I am.
She told ye her Name too.

I could not urge it
By any importunity.

Better still;
Where did you leave her?

Where I found her, farther
She would by no means grant me to wait on her,
Oh Luys I am lost.

This selfsame Lady
Was she to whom I have been long a Suitor,
And shortly hope to marry.

She your Mistress then? Luys, since friendship,
And noble honesty conjures our loves
To a continued league, here I unclaspe
The secrets of my heart. Oh I have had
A glimpse of such a Creature, that deserves
A Temple, if thou love her, (and I blame thee not)
For who can look on her, and not give up
His life unto her service? if thou love her,
For pitties sake conceal her; let me not
As much as know her Name, there is a temption in it,
Let me not know herDwelling, Birth or Quality,
Or any thing that she calls hers, but thee
In thee my friend, I Will see her, and to avoid
The surfeits and those rarities that tempt me,
So much I prize the happiness of friendship,
That I will leave the City.

Leave it.

Speed me!
For Salamanca, court my studies now
For Physic against infection of the mind.

You do amaze me!

Here to live, and live
Without her, is impossible and wretched.
For Heavens sake never tell her what I was,
Or that you know me, and when I find that absence
Has lost her to my, memory, I Will dare
To see ye againemeane time the cause that draws me
From hence, shall be to all the World untol'd;
No friend but thou alone, for whose sake only
I undertake this voluntary exile
Shall be partaker of my griefs; thy hand
Farewell: and all the pleasures, joys, contents
That bless a constant Lover, henceforth crown thee
A happy Bridegroom.

You have conquered friendship
Beyond example.

Ha, ha, ha! some one
That has slept well to night, should a but see me
Thus merry by my self, might justly think
I were not well in my wits.

Diego!

Yes it is I, and I have had a fine fegary,
The rarest, Wild-goose chase.

Thad made thee melancholy.

Don Roderigo here? it is well you met him;
For tho I mist him, yet I met an accident
Has almost made me burst with laughter.

How so?

I Will tell you, as we parted, I perceived
A walking thing before me strangely tickled
With rare conceited raptures, him I dogged,
Supposing 'thad been Roderigo landed
From his new Pinnace, deep in contemplation
Of the sweet voyage he stole to night.

You Are pleasant.

Prithee who was it?

Not I.

Y'ate in the right, not you indeed;
For 'twas that noble Gentleman Don John,
Son to the Count Francisco de Carcomo.

In love it seems.

Yes, pepperd on my life,
Much good may't do him, I Would not be so lind
For my Cap full of double Pistolets.

What should his Mistress be?

That Is yet a Riddle
Beyond my resolution, but of late
I have observed him often to frequent
The sports the Gypsies newly come to th'City present.

It Is said there is a Creature with them,
Tho young of years, yet of such absolute beauty,
Dexterity of wit, and general qualities,
That Spain reports her not without admiration.

Have you seen her?

Never.

Nor you my Lord?

I not remember.

Why then you never saw the prettiest toy
That ever Sung or Danced.

Is she a Gypsy?

In her condition, not in her complexion.
I tell you once more, it is a spark of beauty
Able to set a World at gaze, the sweetest,
The wittiest rogue, shalls see 'em? they have fine gambolls,
Are mightily frequented, Court and City
Flock to 'em, but the Country does 'em worship.
This little Ape gets money by the sack full,
It troules upon her.

Will ye with us friend?

You know my other projects, sights to me
Are but vexations.

Oh you must be merry,
Diego, we will toth' Gypsies.

Best take heed
You be not snap'd.

How snap'd?

By that little Fair,
'Thas a shrewd tempting Face, and a notable Tongue.

I fear not either.

Go then.

will you with us?

I Will come after.
Pleasure and youth like smiling evils woo us,
To taste new follies; tasted, they undo us.

Come my brave boys, the Tailors sheers has cut us into shapes fitting our
Trades


A trade free as a Masons.


A trade brave as a Courtiers, for some of them do but shark, and so do we.


Gypsies, but no tanned ones, no Red-oker rascals umberd with soot and bacon
as the English Gypsies are, that sally out upon Pullen, lie in ambuscado for a
rope of Onions, as if they were Welsh Free-booters; no, our style has higher
steps to climb over, Spanish Gypsies, noble Gypsies


I never knew nobility in baseness.


Baseness! the arts of Cocoquismo, and Germania used by our Spanish Pickeroes (I
mean Filching, Foysting, Niming, Iilting) we defy; none in our College shall
study 'em, such Graduates we degrade


I am glad Spain has an honest company.


We Will entertain no Mounty-bancking Stroule,
No Piper, Fiddler, Tumbler through small hoopes;
No Ape carrier, Baboon bearer,
We must have nothing stale, trivial or base:
Am I your Major domo, your Teniente,
Your Captain, your Commander?

Who but you?


So then, now being entered Madrill the enchanted Circle of Spain, have a care
to your new Lessons


We listen.


Plow deep furrows, to catch deep root in the opinion of the best, Grandos,
Dukes, Marquesses, Condes, and other Titulados, show your sports to none but
them, what can you do with 3. or 4. Fools in a dish, and a block-head cut
into sippets


Scurvy meat.


The Lacedaemonians threw their Beards over their shoulders, to observe what men
did behind them as well as before, you must do


We shall never do it, our muzzles are too short.


Be not English Gypsies, in whose company a man's not sure of the ears of his
head they so pilfer; no such angling; what you pull to Land catch fair; there
is no Iron so foul but may be gilded, and our Gypsy profession how base
soever in show, may acquire commendations


Gypsies, and yet pick no pockets?


Infamous and roguy, so handle your Webbs, that they never come to be woven in
the Loome of Justice, take any thing that is given you, Purses, Knives,
Handkerchers, Rosaries, Tweezes, any toy, any money, refuse not a Maruade, a
blanck, Feather by Feather birds build Nests, grain peckd up after grain,
makes Pullen fat


The best is we Spaniards are no great feeders.


If one City cannot maintain us, away to another, our horses must have wings;
does Madrill yield no money? Sivell shall; is Sivell close fisted? Vallidoly is
open; so Cordica, so Toledo: do not our Spanish Wines please us? Italian can
then, French can, preferments bow is hard to draw, set all your strengths to
it, what you get, keep, all the World is a second Rochill, make all sure, for
you must not look to have your Dinner served in with Trumpets


No, no, Sackbuts shall serve us.


When you have money, hide it; sell all our horses but one.


Why one?


It Is enough to carry our apparel and trinkets and the less our ambler eats,
our cheer is the better; none be fluttish, none theevish, none lazy, all Bees,
no Drones, and our hives shall yield us Honey


See Father, how I am fitted; how do you like This our new stock of clothes?


My sweet Girl excellent; see their old robes be safe.


That sir, I Will look to,
Whilst in my house you lie, what thief so ever
Lays hands upon your goods, call but to me
I Will make the satisfaction.

Thanks good Hostess.


People already throng into the Inn,
And call for you into their private rooms.

No Chamber Comedies, Hostess plie you your tide; flow let 'em to a full Sea,
but we will show no pastime till after dinner, and that in a full ring of good
people, the best, the noblest, no closset sweet meats, pray tell 'em so


I shall.


How old is Pretiosa?


Twelve and upwards.


I am in my teenes assure you Mother, as little as I am, I have been taken for
an Elephant, Castles and Lordships offered to be set upon me, if I would bear
'em; Why your smallest Clocks are the pretiest things to carry about Gentlemen


Nay Child thou will be tempted.


Tempted! tho I am no mark in respect of a huge But, yet I can tell you great
bubbers have shot at me, and shot golden Arrows, but I my self gave aim,
thus; wide, four Bows; short, three and a half; they that crack me shall
find me as hard as a Nut of Galisia, a Parrot I am, but my teeth too tender to
crack a wantons Almond


Thou art my noble Girl, amany Dons
Will not believe but that thou art a Boy
In Women's Clothes, and to try that conclusion
To see if thou be Alcumy, or no,
They Will throw down Gold in Musses, but Pretiesa
Let these proud Sakers and Jer-falcons fly,
Do not thou move a wing, be to thy self,
And not a changeling.

How! not a Changeling!
Yes Father, I will play the changeling,
I Will change my self into a thousand shapes
To court our brave Spectators; I Will change my postures
Into a thousand different variations,
To draw even Ladies eyes to follow mine;
I Will change my voice into a thousand tones
To chain attention; not a changeling Father,
None but my self shall play the changeling.

Do what thou will Pretiosa.
What noise is this?

Here Is Gentlemen swear all the oaths in Spain they have seen you, must see
you, and will see you


To drown this noise let 'em enter.


Is your Playhouse an Inn? a Gentleman cannot see you without crumpling his
Taffaty cloak


Nay more then a Gentleman, his man being a deminitive Don too.


Is this the little ape does the fine tricks?


Come aloft Jack little ape!


Would my Jack might come aloft, please you to set the water Mill, with the
Ivory cogs in it a grinding my handful of purging comfetts


My Master desires to have you loose from your company.


Am I a Pigeon think you to be caught with Cummin-seeds? a fly to glue my
wings to sweete-meates and so be taken


When do your gambolls begin?


Not till we ha dined.


Foot then your bellies will be so full you will be able to do nothing, Soto
prithee set a good face on it for I cannot, and give the little Monkey that
Letter


Walk off and hum to your self: I dedicate (sweet destiny, into whose hand
every Spaniard desires to put a Distaffe) these lines of Love


What Love, what is the matter?


Grave Mother Bumby the marks out a your mouth.


What Is the Paper, from whom comes it?


The comodity wrapd up in the Paper, are Verses, the warming Pan that puts heat
into 'em, you fire-braind bastard of Helicon


What Is your Masters Name?


His name is Don Tomazo Portacareco, Nunckle to young Don Hortado de Mendonza,
Cosen german to the Conde de Tindilla, and natural brother to Francisco de
Bavadilla, one of the Commendadors of Aleantaro, a Gentleman of long standing


Verses! I love good ones, let me see 'em.


Good ones! if they were not good ones, they should not come from me, at the
name of Verses I can stand on no ground


Here Is gold too, who is is this?


Whoe's but yours? if there been any fault in the Verses, I can mend it
extempore; for a stich in a man's stocken not taken up in time ravells out all
the rest


Botcherly Poetry, botcherly.


Verses and gold! these then are golden Verses.


Had every Verse a Pearl in the eye it should be thine.


A pearl in mine eye! I thank you for that, do you wish me blind?


I by this light do I, that you may look upon nobodies crime but mine.


I should be blind indeed!


Pray Sir read your Verses.


Shall I sing 'em or say 'em?


Which you can best.


Both scurvily.


I Will set out a throat then.
Oh that I were a Be to sing
Hum buz, buz, hum, I first would bring
Home Honey to your Hive, and there leave my sting.

He manders.


Oh that I were a Goose to feed
At your barne-dore, such Corn I need,
Nor would I bite, but Gozlings breed.

And Ganders.


Oh that I were your Need'les eye,
How through your Linen would I fly;
And never leave one stich awry!

He Will towze ye.


Oh would I were one of your hairs,
That you might comb out all my cares;
And kill the Nits of my dspaires,

Oh Lowzie.


How! Lowzie I can Rimes be Lowzie?


No, no, they are excellent.


But are these all your own?


Mine own! wud I might never see Inck drop out of the nose of any Goose quil
more, if velvet Cloaks have not clapped me for 'em, do you like 'em


Past all compare, they shall be writ out
When you have as good or better.
For these and those pray book me down your debtor.
Your Paper is long lived, having two souls,
Verses and Gold.

Would both those were in thee pretty little body, sweets Gypsy.


A Pistolet and this Paper, 'twould choke me.


No more then a bribe does a Constable; the Verses will easily into your head,
then buy what you like with the Gold, and put it into your belly, I hope I ha
chaw'd a good reason for you


Will you chaw my Jennet ready sir?


And eat him down if you say the word.


Now the coxcombe my man is gone, because you are but a Country company of
Strowles, I think your stock is threadbare, here mend it with this Cloak


What do you mean sir?


This Scarf, this Feather, and this Hat.


Dear Signior.


If they be never so dear, pox'o this hot Ruff; little Gypsy, wear thou that.


Your meaning sir.


My meaning is not to be an Ass, to carry a burden when I need not, if you
show your Gambols forty Leagues hence, I Will gallop to 'em; Farwell old
Gray-beard, adue Mother mumble-crust, morrow my little Wart of beauty.


So harvest will come in, such Sunshine days Will bring in golden sheafes, our
Markets raise, Away to your task.


Mother, Grandmother!


Two rows of Kindred in one mouth!


Be not uncivil sir, thus have you used her thrice.


Thrice! three thousand more: may I not use mine own?


Your own! by what tenure?


Cupid entailes this Land upon me, I have wooed thee, thou are coy, by this
air I am a Bull of Tarisa, wild, mad for thee: you told I was some copper
coin, I am a Knight of Spain, Don Francisco de Carcomo my Father, I Don John
his Son, this paper tells you more, grumble not old Granam, (heeres gold) for
I must by this white hand, marry this cherry-lip'd, sweet-mouth'd villain


There Is a thing called quando.


Instantly.


Art thou so willing?


Peace threescore and five.


Marry me! eat a Chicken e're it be out o'th shell! I Will wear no shackles,
liberty is sweet; that I have, that I Will hold, marry me! can Gold and Lead mix
together? a Dimond, and a button of Crystal fit one ring? you are too high for
me, I am too low; you too great, I too little


I pray leave her sir, and take your Gold again.


Or if you dote, as you say, let me try you do this.


Any thing, kill the great Turk, pluck out the Magul's Eyeteeth; in earnest
Pretiosa any thing


Your taste is soon set down, turn Gypsy for two years, be one of us, if in
that time you mislike not me, nor I you, here is my hand farewell


There Is enough for your Gold, witty Child.


Turn Gypsy I for two years! a capering Trade.
And I in the end may keep a dancing School,
Having served for it, Gypsy! I must turn,
Oh beauty! the Suns fires cannot so burn.

I have offended, yet oh Heaven! thou know
How much I have abhorred even from my birth,
A thought that tended to immodest folly;
Yet I have fallen, thoughts with disgraces strive,
And thus I live, and thus I die alive.

Fie Clara, thou do court calamity too much.


Yes Girl, thou do.


Why should we fret our eyes out with our tears?
Weary complaints, it is fruitless, childish,
Impatience, for when mischief has wound up
The full weight of the Ravishers foul Life,
To an equal height of ripe iniquity,
The poyse will by degrees, sink down his Soul
To a much lower, much more lasting ruin
Then our joint wrongs can challenge.

Darkness it self
Will change nights sable brow, into a Sun-beame
For a discovery, and be sure
When ever we can learn what monster 'twas
Has robbed thee of the Jewel held so precious,
Our vengeance shall be noble.

Royal, any thing;
Till then lets live securely: to proclaim
Our sadness were mere vanity.

A needs not,
I Will study to be merry.

We are punished
Maria justly, covetousness to match
Our Daughter to that matchless piece of ignorance,
Our foolish Ward, has drawn this curse upon us.

I fear it has!

Off with this face of grief.

Here comes Don Lewys; noble sir.

My Lord,
I trust I have you and your Ladies leave
To exchange a word with your fair Daughter.

Leave and welcome, hark Maria, your ear too.

Mine my Lord.

Dear Clara, I have often su'd for Love,
And now desire you would at last be pleased
To style me yours.

Mine eyes never saw that Gentleman
Whom I more nobly in my heart respected,
Then I have you, yet you must Sir excuse me,
If I resolve to use a while that freedom
My younger days allow.

But shall I hope?

You will do injury to better fortunes
To your own Merit, Greatness, and Advancement,
Which I beseech you not to slack.

Then hear me,
If ever I embrace another choice,
Until I know you elsewhere matched, may all
The chief of my Desires find scorn and ruin.

Oh me!

Why figh you Lady?

Deed my Lord I am not well.

Then all Discourse is tedious,
I Will choose some fitter time; till when fair Clara. --

You shall not be unwelcome hither sir;
That Is all that I dare promise.

Diego!

My Lord!

What says Don Pedro?

He Will go with you.

Leave us:
Shall I my Lord, entreat your privacy?

Withdraw Maria, we will follow presently,

The great Corigidor, whose politic stream
Of popularity, glides on the shore
Of every vulgar praise, has often urged me
To be a Suitor to his Catholic Majesty,
For a repeal from banishment for him
Who slew my Father, complements in vows,
And strange well studied promises of friendship,
But what is new to me, still as he Courts
Assistance for Alvarez my grand enemy,
Still he protests how ignorant he is,
Whether Alvarez be alive or dead?
To morrow is the day we have appointed
For meeting at the Lord Francisco's house,
The Earl of Carcomo; now my good Lord,
The sum of my request is, you will please
To lend your presence there, and witness wherein
Our joint accord consists.

You shall command it.

But first as you are noble, I beseech you
Help me with your advice, what you conceave
Of great Fernando's importunity,
Or whether you imagine that Alvarez
Survive or not?

It is a question sir
Beyond my resolution, I remember
The difference betwixt your noble Father,
And Conde de Alvarez, how it sprung
From a mere trifle first, a cast of Hawks,
Whose made the swifter flight, whose could mount highest,
Lie longest on the wing. From change of words
Their controversy grew to blows, from blows
To Parties, thence to Faction, and in short
I well remember how our streets were frighted
With brawles, whose end was blood, till when no friends
Could mediate their discords: by the King
A reconciliation was enforced,
Death threatened the first occasioner
Of breach, besides the confiscation
Of Lands and Honors, yet at last they met
Again; again they drew to sides, renewed
Their ancient quarrel, in which dismal uprore
Your Father hand to hand fell by Alvarez,
Alvarez fled, and after him the doom
Of exile was set out; He as Report
Was bold to voice, retired himself to Rhodes,
His Lands and Honors by the King bestowed
On you, but then an Infant.

Ha, an Infant!

His Wife the sister to the Corigidor,
With a young Daughter, and some few that followed her
By stealth were shipped for Rhodes, and by a storm
Ship-wrack'd at Sea, but for the banished Conde,
'Twas never yet known what became of him,
Here Is all I can inform you.

A repeal,
Yes, I will sue for it, beg for it, buy it, any thing
That may by possibility of friends,
Or Money, I Will attempt.

It Is a brave charity.

Alas poor Lady, I could mourn for her!
Her loss was Usury more then I covet;
But for the Man, I Would sell my patrimony
For his repeal, and run about the World
To find him out, there is no peace can dwell
About my Fathers Tomb, till I have sacrificed
Some portion of revenge to his wronged ashes.
You will along with me?

You need not question it.

I have strange thoughts about me, two such furies
Revell amidst my joys as well may move
Distraction in a Saint, Vengance and Love,
I Will follow sir.

Pray lead the way: you know it.

How now! from whence come you sir?

From fleaing my self sir.

From playing with Fencers sir, and they have beat him out of his Clothes sir.


Cloak, Band, Rapier, all lost at Dice!

Nor Cards neither.

This was one of my Masters dog-dayes, and he would not sweat too much.


It was mine own Goose, and I laid the Jiblets upon an other Coxcombs trencher,
you are my Guardian, best beg me for a fool now


He that begs one begs the other.

Does any Gentleman give away his things thus?

Yes, and Gentlewomen give away their things too.

To Gulls sometimes, and are Cony-catch'd for their labor.

Will thou ever play the Coxcombe?

If no other parts be given me, what would you have me do?

Thy Father was as brave a Spaniard
As ever spoke the haute Castilian Tongue.

Put me in Clothes, I Will be as brave as he.

This is the ninth time thou have played the Ass,
Flinging away thy trappings and thy cloth
To cover others, and go naked thy self.

I Will make 'em up ten, because I Will be even with you.

Once more your broken walls shall have new hangings.

To be well hung, is all our desire.

And what course take you next?

What course? why my man Soto and I will go make some maps.

What maps?

Not such Mapps as you wash houses with, but Mapps of Countries.


I have an Uncle in Sivell, I Will go see him, an Aunt in Siena in Italy, I go
see her


A Cosen of mine in Rome, I go to him with a Mortar.

There Is a Curtizan in Venice, I Will go tickle her.

Another in England; I Will go tackle her.

So, so, and where is the money to do all this?

If my wookes being cut down cannot fill this Pocket, cut 'em into Trapsticks.


And if his Acres being sold for a Maruedi, a Turffe for marks in Cages,
cannot fill this Pocket, give 'em to Gold-finders


You Will gallop both to the Gallows, so fareyou well.

And be hanged you, new clothes y'ad best.

Four cloaks, that you may give away three, and keep one.

We Will live as merrily as beggars, lets both turn Gypsies.

By any means, if they cog we will lie, if they toss we will tumble.

Both in a belly, rather then fail.

Come then, we will be Gipsified.

And tipsified too.

And we will show such tricks, and such rare gambolls.
As shall put down the Elephant and Camels.

A thousand stings are in me! oh what vild prisons
Make we our bodies, to our immortal souls!
Brave Tenants to bad houses! it is a dear rent
They pay for naughty Lodging: the soul, the Mistress,
The body, the Caroach that carries her,
Sins the swift wheels that hurry her away;
Our Will the Coachman rashly driving on,
Till Coach and Carriage both are quite over thrown;
My body yet scapes bruizes, that known thief
Is not yet called toth' bar, there is no true sense
Of pain, but what the Law of conscience
Condemns us to, I feel that, who would loose
A Kingdom for a Cottage? an Estate
Of perpetuity, for a man's Life?
For annuity of that Life (pleasure) a spark
To those Celestial fires that burn about us!
A painted Star to that bright Firmament
Of constellations, which each night are set
Lighting our way, yet thither how few get?
How many thousand in Madrill drink off
The cup of lust, (and laughing) in one month
Not whining as I do? should this sad Lady
Now meet me, do I know her? should this Temple
(By me profaned) lie in the ruins here,
The pieces would scarce show her me: -- would they did
She Is Mistress to Don Lewys -- by his steps,
And this disguise I Will find her; to Salamanca
Thy Father thinks thou art gone; no close here stay
Where e're thou travell'st, Scorpions stop thy way: these.

Soto, how do I show?

Like a rusty Armor new scoured, but Master how show I?

Like an Ass with a new pibal'd saddle on his back.

If the Devil were a Tailor, he would scarce know us in these gaberdines.


If a Tailor were the Devil, I Would not give a Lowse for him, if he should bring
up this fashion amongst Gentlemen, and make it common


The freshness of the Morning be upon you both.

The saltness of the Evening be upon you single.

Be not displeased, that I abruptly thus
Break in upon your favors, your strange habits
Invite me with desire, to understand
Both what you are, and whence, because no Country
(And I have measured some) show me your like.

Our like! no we should be sorry, we or our clothes should be like fish, new,
stale, and stinking in three days


If you ask whence we are, we are Egyptian Spaniards; if what, we are, ut, re,
mi, fa, sol. Juglers, Tumblers, any thing any where, every where


A good fate hither leads me by the hand,
Your quality I love, the scenicall School
Has been my Tutor long in Italy,
(For that is my Country,) there have I put on
Sometimes the shape of a Comedian,
And now and then some other.

A Player! a brother of the tyring house.

A Bird of the same feather.

Welcome, wut turn Gypsy?

I can nor Dance, nor Sing, but if my Pen
From my invention can strike Music tunes,
My head and brains are yours.

A Calves head and brains were better for my stomach.

A rib of Poetry.

A modicum of the Muses, a horse-shooe of Helicon.

A Mag-py of Parnassin, welcome again, I am a firebrand of Phoebus my self,
we will invoke together, so you will not steal my Plot


It Is not my fashion.

But now adays it is all the fashion.

What was the last thing you writ, a Comedy?

No 'twas a sad, too sad a Tragedy.
Under these eves I Will shelter me.

See here comes our company,
Do our tops spinne as you would have 'em?

If not whip us round.

I sent you a Letter to tell you we were upon a march.

And you are welcome -- yet these fools will trouble us.

Rich fools shall buy our trouble.

Hang Lands, it is nothing but Trees, Stones and Dirt, old Father I have Gold to
keep up our stock, precious Pretiosa, for whose sake I have thus transformed
my self out of a Gentleman into a Gypsy, thou shall not want sweet Rimes my
little Musk-cat, for besides my self here is an Italian Poet, on whom I pray
throw your welcomes


He Is welcome!

Sir, you are most welcome, I love a Poet,
So he writes chastely, if your Pen can sell me
Any smooth queint Romances, which I may sing,
You shall have Bays and Silver.

Pretty heart no selling:
What comes from me is free.

And me too.

We shall be glad to use you sir, our sports
Must be an Orchard bearing several Trees
And Fruits of several taste; one pleasure dulls.
A time may come, when we (besides these pastimes)
May from the Grandoes and the Dons of Spain
Have leave to try our skill even on the Stage,
And then your wits may help us.

And mine too.

They are your servants.

Trip softly through the streets, till we arrive
You know at whose house Father.

Trip it Gypsies, trip it fine,
Show tricks and lofty Capers;
At threading Needles we repine,
And leaping over Rapiers.
Pindy Pandy rascal toys,
We scorn cutting Purses,
Tho we live by making noise,
For cheating none can curse us.
Over Highways, over low,
And over Stones and Gravel,
Tho we trip it on the Toe,
And thus for Silver travel.
Tho our Dances waste our backs,
At night fat Capons mend them;
Eggs well brewed in Butterd'-sack,
Our Wenches say befriend them.
Oh that all the World were mad,
Then should we have fine Dancing,
Hobby horses would be had,
And brave Girls keep a prancing,
Beggars would on Cock-horse ride,
And Boobies fall a roaring,
And Cuckolds tho no Horns be spide,
Be one another goring.
Welcome Poet to our Ging,
Make Rimes we will give thee reason,
Canary Bees thy brains shall sting
Mull-sack did never speak Treason.
Peter-see-me shall wash thy nowle,
And Malligo Glasses fox thee,
If Poet thou toss not bowl for bowl
Thou shall not kiss a Doxie.

Lewys de Castro, since you circled are
In such a golden Ring of worthy friends,
Pray let me question you about that business
You and I last conferd on.

My Lord I wish it.

Then Gentlemen tho you all know this man,
Yet now look on him well, and you shall find
Such mines of Spanish honor in his bosom,
As but in few are treasured.

Oh my good Lord!

He Is Son to that de Castro, over whose Tomb
Fame stands writing a book which will take up
The age of time to fill it with the stories
Of his great acts, and that his honored Father
Fell in the quarrel of those Families
His own, and Don Alvarez de Castilla.

The volume of those Families is too large,
And too wide Printed in our memory.

Would it had never come forth.

So wish we all.

But here is a Son as matchless as the Father,
For he minds bravery: he lets blood his Spleen,
Tears out the Leaf in which the Picture stands
Of slain de Castro, casts a Hill of Sand
On all revenge, and stifles it.

It Is done nobly.

For I by him am courted to solicit
The King for the repeal of poor Alvarez,
Who lives a banished man some say in Naples,

Some say in Arragon.

No matter where,
That Paper foulds in it my hand and heart,
Petitioning the royalty of Spain
To free the good old man, and call him home;
But what hope has your Lordship that these beams
Of grace shall shine upon me?

The word Royal!

And that is enough.

Then since this sluice is drawn up to increase
The stream, with pardon of these honored friends
Let me set open another, and that is this,
That you my Lord Don Pedro, (and this Lady
Your noble Wife) would in this fair assembly
(If still you hold me Tenant to your favor)
Repeal the promise, you so often have made me,
Touching the beauteous Clara for my Wife.

What I possess in her before these Lords
I freely once more give you.

And what is mine?
To you (as right heir to it) I resign.

What would you more?

What would I more? the tree bows down his head
Gently to have me touch it, but when I offer
To pluck the fruit, the top branch grows so high
To mock my reaching hand, up it does fly;
I have the Mothers smile, the Daughters frown.

Oh you must woo hard!

Woo her well she is thine own.

That Law holds not amongst Gypsies, I shoot hard,
And am wide off from the Mark.

Is this my Lord your Music?

None of mine.

A crew of Gypsies with desire,
To show their sports are at your Gates afire.

How, how, my Gates afire Knave!

Art panting? I am a fire l'me sure!

What are the things they do?

They Friske, they Caper, Dance and Sing,
Tell fortunes too (which is a very fine thing)
They tumble -- how? not up and down
As Tumblers do, but from Town to Town.
Anticks they have, and Gipsie-masking,
And toys which you may have for asking;
They come to devour, nor Wine, nor good Cheer,
But to earne money, if any be here.
(But being asked, as I suppose,
Your answer will be in your the other hose)
For there is not a Gypsy amongst'em that begs,
But gets his living by his Tongue and Legs.
If therefore you please Dons they shall come in,
Now I have ended, let them begin.

I, I, by any means.

But fellow bring you Music along with you too.

Yes my Lord, both loud Music, and still Music, the loud is that which you
have heard, and the still is that which no man can hear.


A fine Knave.

There is report of a fair Gypsy,
A pretty little toy, whom all our Gallants
In Madrill flock to look on: this she trow?
Yes sure it is she -- I should be sorry else.

Come follow your Leader follow
Our Convoy be Mars and Apollo,
The Van comes brave up here,


Sa, sa, the Gypsies Army comes.
Horsemen we need not fear
There Is none but footmen here;
The Horse sure charge without;
Or if they wheel about,

Pit a pat rattling in the Sky.
If once the great Ordnance play
That Is laughing, yet run not away;
But stand the push of Pike
Scorn can but baesely strike.

And pit a pat make our Knackers ring.
Arm, Arm, what Bands are those?
They cannot be sure our foes;
We Will not draw up our force,
Nor muster any Horse,

Let Us this way, this way, give delight.
A Council of War lets call,
Look either to stand or fall;
If our weak Army stands
Thank all these noble hands;
Whose gates of Love being open thrown
We enter, and then the Town's our own.

A very dainty thing.

A handsome Creature.

Look what a pretty pit there is in her chin.

Pit' it is a Grave to bury Lovers in.

My Fathers disguise guard me.

Soto, there is de Cortez my guardian; but he smells not us.

Peace brother Gypsy, wud any one here know his fortune?

Good fortunes all of us.

It Is I sir needs a good one, come sir what is mine?

Mine and my husbands fortunes keep together,
Who is it tells mine?

I, I, hold up Madam, fear not your pocket, for I ha but two Hands.

You are sad, or mad, or glad
For a couple of Cocks that cannot be had,
Yet when abroad they have picked store of grains
Doodle do they will cry on your Dunghills again.

Indeed I miss an idle Gentleman,
And a thing of his a fool, but neither sad
Nor mad for them, would that were all the Lead
Lying at my heart.

What look thou on so long?

So long I do you think good fortunes are fresh Herrings, to come in sholes?
bad fortunes are like Mackerell at Midsummer, you have had a sore loss of late


I have indeed, what is it?

I wonder it makes you not mad; for
Through a gap in your Ground
Thence late has been stole
A very fine Ass, and a very fine Fool,
Take heed for I speak not by habs and by nabs,
E're long you will be horribly troubled with scabbs.

I am now so, go silly fool.

I ha gin't him.

Oh Soto, that Ass and Foale fattens me!

The Mother of the Gypsies, what can she do?
I Will have about with her.

I with the Gypsy Daughter.

To her Boy I

From you went a Dove away
Which e're this had been more white,
Then the silver Roabe of, Day,
Her Eyes the Moon has none so bright.
Sat she now upon your hand
Not the Crown of Spain could buy it;
But it is flowne to such a Land,
Never more shall you come nie it;
Ha! yes if Palmestrie tell true,
This Dove again may fly to you.

Thou art a lying Witch, I Will hear no more.

If you be so hot sit, we can cool you with a Song.

And when that Song's done, we will heat you again with a dance.

Stay dear sir, send for Clara, let her know her fortune:

It Is too well known.

'Twill make her merry to be in this brave Company.

Good Diego fetch her.

What Is that old man! has he cunning too?

More then all we.

Has he! I Will try his Spectacles.

Ha! Roderigo there! the Scholar
That went to Salamanca, takes he degrees
In The School of Gypsies? let the fish alone,
Give him Line, this is the Dove, the Dove: the Raven
That Beldam mocked me with.

What Worms pick you out there now?

This -- when this Line the other crosses
Art tells me it is a book of losses,
Bend your hand thus, Oh! here I find
You have lost a Ship in a great wind.

Lying Rogue I never had any.

Hark, as I gather,
That great Ship was de Castro called your Father.

And I must hew that Rock that split him.

Nay and you threaten.

And what is Don John thy fortune? thou art long fumbling at it?

She tells me tales of the Moon sir.

And now it is come to the Sun sir.
Your Sun wud ride, the youth wud run,
The youth wud sail, the youth wud fly;
He Is tying a knot will never be done,
He shoots, and yet has never an eye.
You have two, 'twere good you lent him one,
And a heart too, for he has none.

Hoyday, lend one of mine eyes!

They give us nothing, he would best put on a bold face and ask it.

Now that from the Hive
You gathered have the Honey,
Our Bees but poorly thrive,
Unless the Banks be sunny.
Then let your Sun and Moon
Your gold and silver shine,
My thanks shall huming fly to you.


See, see, your Gypsy toys,
You mad Girls, you merry Boys.
A boon voyage we have made
Loud Peales must then be had,
If I a Gypsy be
A crack rope I am for thee;
Oh here is a Golden Ring,
Such clappers please a King;
Such clapers please a King: you pleased may pass away
Then let your Bell-ropes stay,
Now chime it is Holy Day,
Now chime it is Holy Day.

No more of this pray Father, fall to your Dancing. Dance.

Clara will come too late now.

It Is great pity,
Besides your Songs, Dances and other Pastimes,
You do not as our Spanish Actors do, make trial of a Stage.

We are sir about it,
So please your high authority to sign us
Some warrant to confirm us.

My hand shall do it -- and bring the best in Spain to see your Sports.


Which to set off this Gentleman a Scholar

Pox on you.

Will write for us:

A Spaniard sir?

No my Lord an Italian.

Denies his Country too -- my Son sings Gypsy Ballads,
Keep as you are, we will see your Poets vain,
And yours for playing; time is not ill spent
That Is thus laid out in harmless merriment.

My Lord of Carcomo, for this entertainment,
You shall command our loves.

You Are nobly welcome.

The Evening grows upon us, Lords to all
A happy time of day.

The like to you Don Pedro.

To my hearts sole Lady,
Pray let my service humbly be remembered,
We only mist her presence.

I shall truly
Report your worthy love.

You shall no further,
Indeed my Lords you shall not.

With your favor
We will attend you home.

Where Is Don Pedro? oh sir!

Why what is the matter?

The Lady Clara,
Passing near to my Lord Corigidors house,
Met with a strange mischance.

How, what mischance?

The Jester that so late arrived at Court,
And there was welcome for his Countries sake,
By importunity of some friends, it seems
Had borrowed from the Gentleman of your Horse,
The backing of your mettl'd Barbary:
On which being mounted, whilst a number gazed
To hear what Jests he could perform on Horse back,
The head strong beast unused to such a Rider,
Bears the Press of People before him;
With which throng, the Lady Clara meeting,
Fainted, and there fell down; not bruised I hope;
But frighted and intranc'd.

Ill destined mischief!

Where have you left her?

At your house my Lord,
A servant coming forth, and knowing who
The Lady was, conveyed her to a Chamber,
A Surgeon too is sent for.

Had she been my Daughter,
My care could not be greater, then it shall be
For her recure.

But if she miscarry,
I am the most unhappy Man that lives.

Diego Coast about the Fields,
And over-take Don Pedro and his Wife,
They newly parted from us.

I Will run speedily.

A strange mischance, but what!
I have my Lord Francisco this day noted,
I may tell you, an accident of merriment and wonders

Indeed my Lord.

I have not thoughts enough
About me to imagine what the event
Can come to, it is indeed about my Son;
Hereafter you may counsel me.

Most gladly -- how fares the Lady?

Called back to Life, but full of sadness.

Talks she nothing?

Nothing, for when the women that attend on her
Demanded how she did, she turned about,
And answered with a sigh, when I came near,
And by the Love I bore her, begged a word
Of hope to comfort me in her well-doing;
Before she would reply, from her fair Eyes
She greetes me with a Bracelet of her tears;
Then wished me not to doubt, she was too well,
Entreates that she may sleep without disturbance,
Or company until her Father came.
And thus I left her.

For she is past the worst,
Young Maids are often so troubled.

Here come they
You talk of -- sir, your Daughter for your comfort
Is now upon amendment.

Oh my Lord!
You speak an Angels voice.

Pray in and visit her.
I Will follow instantly -- you shall not part
Without a cup of Wine my Lord.

It Is now too troublesome a time;
Which way take you Don Lewys?

No matter which, for till I hear
My Clara be recovered I am nothing,
My Lord Corigidor, I am your servant
For this free entertainment.

You have conquered me
In noble courtesy.

Oh! that no art
But Love it self can cure a Lovesick heart.

Clara, hope of mine age!

Soul of my comfort,
Kill us not both at once; why do thou speed
Thine Eye in such a progress 'bout these Walls?

Yon large Window
Yields some fair prospect, good my Lord look out,
And tell me what you see there.

Easy suite,
Clara it over-viewes a spacious Garden,
Amidst which stands an Alablaster Fountain,
A goodly one.

Indeed my Lord.

The griefs grow wide,
And will mislead thy judgment through thy weakness
If thou obey thy weakness.

Who ownes these glorious buildings?

Don Fernando
De Azeutda, the Corigidor
Of Mardrill, a true noble Gentleman.

May I not see him?

See him Clara, why?

A truly noble Gentleman you said sir.

I did: lo here he comes in person,
We are my Lord your servants.

Good no complement,
Young Lady there attends below a Surgeon
Of worthy fame and practice, is it your pleasure
To be his Patient?

With your favor sir,
May I impart some few, but needful words
Of secrecy to you, to you your self,
None but your self.

You may.

Must I not hear 'em?

Nor I.

Oh yes, pray sit my Lord.

Say on.

You have been Married.

To a Wife young Lady,
Who whiles the Heavens did lend her me was fruitful
In all those virtues which styles Woman good.

And you had Children by her.

Had it is true,
Now have but one, a Son, and he yet lives,
The Daughter, as if in her Birth, the Mother
Had perfected the errand she was sent for
Into the World, from that hour took her Life
In which the other that gave it her, lost hers;
Yet shortly she unhappily, but fatally
Perished at Sea.

Sad story!

Roderigo,
My Son.

How is he called sit?

Roderigo.
He lives at Salamanca, and I fear
That neither Time, Persuasions nor his Fortunes
Can draw him thence.

My Lord, do you know this Crucifig?

You drive me to amazement, 'twas my Sons,
A Legacy bequeathed him from his Mother
Upon her Deathbed, dear to him as Life;
On Earth there cannot be another treasure
He values at like rate as he does this.

Oh then I am a castaway!

How Is that?

Alas she will grow frantic.

In my bosom,
Next to my Heart my Lord I have laid up,
In bloody Characters a Tale of horror,
Pray read the Paper, and if there you find
Ought that concerns a Maid undone, and miserable
Made so by one of yours, call back the piety
Of nature, to the goodness of a Judge,
An upright Judge, not of a partial Father,
For do not wonder that I live to suffer
Such a full weight of wrongs, but wonder rather
That I have lived to speak them; thou great man
Yet read, read on, and as thou read'st consider
What I have suffered, what thou ought to do;
Thine own Name, Father-hood, and my dishonor
Be just as Heaven and fate are, that by miracle
Have in my weakness wrought a strange discovery;
Truth copied from my heart is texted there:
Let now my shame be thoroughly understood,
Sins are heard farthest, when they cry in blood.

True, true, they do not cry but hollow here,
This is the Trumpet of a Soul drowned deep
In the unfathomed Seas of matchless sorrows.
I must lock fast the door.

I have no words
To call for vengeance.

I am lost in marvel.

Sir, pray fit as you sat before: white paper
This should be innocence, these Letters Gules
Should be the honest Oracles of Revenge.
What Is Beauty but a perfect white and red?
Both here well mixed, limne truth so beautiful,
That to distrust it as I am a Father;
Speaks me as foul, as rape has spoken my Son,
It Is true.

It Is true.

Then mark me how I kneel
Before the high tribunal of your Injuries;
Thou too too much wronged Maid scorn not my tears,
For these are tears of Rage, not tears of Love.
Thou Father of this too too much wronged Maid,
Thou Mother of her counsels and her cares;
I do not plead for pity to a Villain,
Oh! let him die as he has lived dishonorably,
Basely and cursedly, I plead for pity,
To my till now untainted blood and honor,
Teach me how I may now be just and cruel;
For henceforth I am Childlesse.

Pray sir rise,
You wrong your place and age.

Point me my Grave
In some obscure by path, where never memory
Nor mention of my Name may be found out.

My Lord, I can weep with you, nay weep for ye
As you for me, your passions are instructions,
And prompt my faltering Tongue to beg at least
A noble satisfaction, tho not revenge.

Speak that again.

Can you procure no Balm
To heal a wounded Name?

Oh thou art as fair
In Mercy as in Beauty, will thou live,
And I Will be thy Physician?

I Will be yours.

Don Pedro, we will to counsel
This Daughter shall be ours, sleep, sleep, young Angel,
My care shall wake about thee.

Heaven is gracious,
And I am eased.

We will be yet more private,
Might curtains over the world, soft dreams rest with thee.
The best revenge is to reform our crimes,
Then time crowns sorrows, sorrows sweeten times.

Welcome, welcome, welcome.

More Sacks to the Mill.

More Thieves to the Sacks.

Peace.

I give you now my welcome without noise.

It Is Music to me.

Oh sir!

You must not be in your Mutton before we are out of our Veale.


Stay for Vinegar to your Oysters, no opening till then.

No kissing till you are sworn.

Swear me then quickly.
I have brought Gold for my Admission.

What you bring leave, and what you leave count lost.

I brought all my Teeth, two are struck out, them I count lost, so must you.


I brought all my wits, half I count lost, so must you.

To be as you are, I lose Father, Friends,
Birth, Fortunes, all the World; what will you do
With the beast I rode on hither?

A Beast is it a Mule? send him to Muly Crag a whee in Barbary.


Is It an Ass? give it to a Lawyer, for in Spain they ride upon none else.


Kill him by any means, lest being pursued
The beast betray me.

He Is a beast betrays any man.

Except a Bayliffe to be pumped.

Pray buy the Carcass and the furniture.

Do, do, bury the Asses House-hold-stuffe, and in his skin sow any Man that is
mad for a Woman


Do so then, bury it, now to your Oath.

All things are ready.

Thy best hand lay on this Turffe of Grass,
(There thy Heart lies) vow not to pass
From us two years for Sun nor Snow,
For hill nor dale (how e're Winds blow.)
Vow the hard Earth to be thy Bed,
With her green Cushions under thy Head;
Flower bancks or Moss to be thy bourd,
Water thy Wine,

And drink like a Lord.

Kings can have but Coronations,
We are as proud of Gypsy Fashions;
Dance, Sing, and in a well-mixt border,
Close this new Brother of our Order.

What we get, with us come share,
You to get must vow to care;
Nor strike Gypsy, nor stand by,
When strangers strike, but fight or die;
Our Gypsy Wenches are not common,
You must not kiss a fellows Leman;
Nor to your own (for one you must)
In Songs send, errands of base lust.

Dance, Sing, and in a well mixed border,
Close this new Brother of our Order.

On this Turffe of Grass I vow
Your Laws to keep, your Laws allow.

A Gypsy, a Gypsy, a Gypsy.

Now choose what Maid has yet no mate, she is yours.

Here then fix I my fate.

Again fall too before you ha washed!

Your Nose in the Manger, before the Oats are measured.
Jade so hungry!

Set foot to foot, those Garlands hold,
Teach him how, now mark what more is told;
By cross Arms the Lovers sign,
Vow as these flowers themselves entwine,
Of Aprills wealth building a throne
Round; so your love to one or none,
By those touches of your Feet,
You must each night embracing meet;
Chaste how e're disjoined by Day,
You the Sun with her must play;
She to you the Marigold
To none but you her Leaves unfold;
Wake she or sleep, your Eyes so charm,
Want, we, nor weather do her harm.

This is your Market now of kisses,
Buy and sell free each other Blisses.

Most, willingly.

Holy days, high days, Gypsy Faires,
When kisses are Fairings, and hearts meet in paires.

All Ceremonies end here; Welcome Brother, Gypsy.


And the better to instruct thee, mark what a brave Life it is all the year
long

Brave Don cast your eyes on our Gypsy Fashions,
In our antique hey de guize, we go beyond all Nations;
Plumpe Dutch at us grutch, so do English, so do French,
He that loapes on the Ropes, show me such an other wench.
We no Camells have to show, nor Elephant with growte head,
We can Dance, he cannot go, because the Beast is Corne-fed;
No blind Bears shedding tears, for a Colliers whipping,
Apes nor Dogs, quick as Frogs, over Cudgells skipping.
Jack in Boxes, nor Decoyes, Puppets nor such poor things,
Nor are we those roaring Boys, that cosen Fools with guilt Rings;
For an Ocean, not such a motion, as the City Ninivie,
Dancing, Singing, and fine Ringing, you these sports shall hear and see.
Come now what shall his Name be?

His Name shall now be Andrew, friend Andrew mark me:
Two years I am to try you, prove fine Gold,
The uncrack'd Diamond of my Faith shall hold.

My vows are Rocks of Adamant.

Two years you are to try me, black when I turn
May I meet youth and want, old age and scorn.

Kings Diadems shall not buy thee.

Do you think
You can endure the Life and love it?

As Usurers dote upon their treasure.

But when your Face shall be tand, like a Saylors workieday hand:

When your Feet shall be galled, and your Noddle be mall'd:

When the Woods you must forredge, and not meet with poor Pease-porridge:


Be all to be dabled, yet lie in no Sheet:

With Winters Frost, Hayle, Snow and Sleete;
What Life will you say it is then?

As now the sweetest.
Away, away, the Corigidor has sent for you.

Hence merrily fine to get Money,
Dry are the Fields, the Bancks are Sunny;
Silver is sweeter far then Honey.
Fly like Swallows,
We for our Coneys must get Mallows,
Who loves not his Dill, let him die at the Gallows;
Hence bonny Girls foot it trimly.
Smug up your beetle Brows, none look grimly,
To show a pretty foot, Oh! it is seemly.

Do you hear you Gypsy? Gypsy?

Me?

There Is a young Gypsy newly entertained,
Sweet Gypsy call him back for one two words,
And here is a Jewel for thee.

I Will send him.

What Is his Name?

Andrew.

A very handsome fellow, I ha seen Courtiers
Jet up and down in their full bravery,
Yet here is a Gypsy worth a drove of 'em.

With me sweet Heart?

Your Name is Andrew.

Yes.

You can tell Fortunes Andrew.

I could once,
But now I ha lost that knowledge, I am in haste,
And cannot stay to tell you yours.

I cannot tell yours then,
And cause you are in have, I am quick,
I am a Maid.

So, so, a maid quick.

Juanna Cardochia,
That Is mine own Name, I am my Mothers Heir
Here to this House, and two more.

I buy no Lands.

They shall be given you, with some Plate and Money,
And free possession (during life) of me,
So the match like you, for so well I love you
That I in pity of this Trade of Gipsying
(Being base, idle and slavish) offer you
A state to settle you, my youth and beauty,
(Desired by some brave Spaniards) so I may call you
My husband, shall I Andrew?

'Lass pretty Soul,
Better Stars guide you, may that hand of Cupid
Ache, ever shot this arrow at your heart,
Sticks there one such indeed?

I would there did not,
Since you will not pluck it out.

Good sweet I cannot;
For marriage it is a Law amongst us Gypsies
We match in our own tribes, for me to wear you
I should but wear you out.

I do not care
Wear what you can out, all my life, my wealth,
Ruin me, so you lend me but your love,
A little of your love.

Would I could give it,
For you are worth a World of better men,
For your free noble mind, all my best wishes
Stay with you, I must hence.

Wear for my sake
This Jewel.

I Will not rob you, I Will take nothing.

Wear it about your neck but one poor Moon;
If in that time your eye be as it is now,
Send my Jewel home again, and I protest
I Will never more think on you; deny not this,
Put it about your neck:

Well then it is done.

And vow to keep it there.

By all the Goodness
I wish attend your fortunes I do vow it.

Scornd! thou have tempered poison to kill me
Thy self shall drink; since I cannot enjoy thee
My revenge shall.

Where are the Gypsies?

Gone; -- Diego do you love me?

Love thee Juanna!
Is my life mine! it is but mine so long
As it shall do thee service.

There Is a younger Gypsy newly entertained.

A handsome rascal; what of him?

That slave in obsceane Language courted me.
Drew Rialls out, and would have bought my body
Diego from thee!

Is he so Itchy? I Will cure him.

Thou shall not touch the Villain, I Will spin his fate;
Woman strikes sure, fall the blow never so late.

Strike on sin, thou will be a striker.

See Don Lewys, an Army!
(The strongest Army in Spain) to the full length
Is stretched to pluck old Count Alvarez home
From his sad banishment.

With longing Eyes,
(My Lord) I expect the man, your Lordships pardon,
Some business cal's me from you.

Prithee Don Lewys,
Unless the occasion be too violent,
Stay and be merry with us, all the Gypsies
Will be here presently.

I will attend your Lordship,
Before their sports be done.

Be your own Carver,
Not yet shake off these fetters? I see a Son
Is heavy when a Father carries him
On his old heart.

Could I set up my rest,
That he were lost, or taken prisoner;
I could hold truce with sorrow; but to have him
Vanish I know not how, gone none knows whither,
It Is that mads me.

You said he sent a Letter.

A Letter! a mere Riddle; he is gone to see
His fortune in the Wars, what Wars have we?
Suppose we had, goes any man toth' Field
Naked, unfurnished, both Arms and Money?

Come, come, he is gone a Wenching; we in our youth
Ran the self same Byas.

The Gypsies my Lord are come.

Are they? let them enter:
My Lord De Cortez send for your Wife and Daughter,
Good company is good Physic, take the pains
To seat your selves in my great Chamber.

See they are here; what is your number?

The figure of nine casts us all up my Lord.

Nine! let me see -- you are ten sure.

That Is our Poet, he stands for a Cipher.

Ciphers make numbers; what Plays have you?

Five or six my Lord.

It Is well so many already.

We are promised a very merry Tragedy, if all hit right, of Cobby Nobby.


So, so, a merry Tragedy, there is a way which the Italians, and the Frenchmen
use; that is, on a word given, or some slight Plot

The Actors will extempore fashion out
Scenes neat and witty.

We can do that my Lord, please you bestow the Subject

Can you? come hither,
You Master Poet to save you a labor,
Look you, against your coming I projected
This Comic passage -- your Dramma; that is the Scene.

I, I, my Lord.

I lay in our own Country, Spain.

It Is best so.

Here Is a brave part for this old Gypsy -- look you
The Father: read the Plot -- this young she Gypsy,
This Lady -- now the son -- play him your self.

My Lord, I am no Player.

Pray at this time.
(The Plot being full) to please my noble Friends,
Because your brains must into theirs put Language,
Act thou the Sons part, -- I Will reward your pains.

Protest my Lord --


Nay, nay, shake off protesting,
When I was young sir, I have played my self.

Your self my Lord! you were but a poor Company then.


Yes, full enough honest fellow -- will you do it?

I Will venture.

I thank you, let this Father be a Don
Of a brave spirit, old Gypsy observe me.

Yes my Lord.

Play him up high, not like a Pantaloone,
But hotly, nobly, checking this his Son,
Whom make a very rake-hell, a debosh'd fellow, --
This point I think will show well.

This of the Picture,
It will indeed my Lord.

My Lord, what part play I?

What parts do use to play?

If your Lordship has ever a Coxcombe, I think I could fit you.


I thank your Coxcombe-ship.

Put a Coxcombe upon a Lord!

There are parts to serve you all, go, go, make ready,
And call for what you want.

Give me the Plot, our wits are put to trial.
What Is the Son's Name, Lorenzo? that is your part
Look only you to that, -- these I Will dispose;
Old Don Avero, mine; Hialdo, Lollio,
Two servants, you for them.

One of the foolish knaves give me, I Will be Hialdo.

And I Lollio.

Is there a Banquet in the Play? we may call for what we will.


Yes, here is a Banquet.

I Will go then and bespeake an ocean of Sweet meats, Marmalad and Custards.


Make have to know what you must do.

Do I call for enough, and when my Belly is full, fill my Pockets.


To a Banquet there must be Wine, Fortunes a scurvy Whore; if she makes not my
head sound like a Rattle; and my Heels dance the Canaries


So, so, dispatch, whilst me employ our brains
To set things off toth' Life.

I Will be straight with you,
Why does my Father put this trick on me?
Spies he me through my Vizard? if he does
He Is not the King of Spain, and it is no Treason;
If his invention, Jet upon a Stage
Why should not I use action? a debosh'd fellow!
A very rake-hell, this reflects on me,
And I Will retort it, grown a Poet Father?
No matter in what strain your Play must ruune,
But I shall fit you for a roaring Son.

Come Ladies take your places, this their Music,
It Is very handsome, oh! I wish this Room
Were frighted, but with noble friends
As are to you my welcomes, begin there masters.

Presently my Lord, we want but a cold Capon for a property.


Call, call for one -- now they begin.

Both short and sweet some say is best,
We will not only be sweet but short,
Take you Pepper in the Nose you mar our sport.

By no means Pepper.

Of your Love measure us forth but one span,
We do (tho not the best) the best we can.

A good honest Gypsy.

Slave! where is my Son Lorenzo?

I have sought him my Lord in all four Elements; in Earth, my Shoes are full
of Gravel; in Water, I drop at Nose with sweating; In Air, wheresoever I
heard noise of Fiddlers, or the wide mouths of Gallon-pots roaring; and in
Fire, what Chimney soever I saw smoking with good cheer, for my Masters
Dinner, as I was in hope


Not yet come home? before on this old Tree
Shall grow a branch so blasted, I Will hew it off,
And bury it at my foot, did thou enquire
At my Brothers?

At your Sisters.

At my Wives Fathers?

At your Uncles Mothers, no such sheep has broke through their hedge, no such
Calse as your Son sucks, or bleates in their ground


I am unblest to have but one Son only,
One staff to bear my age up -- one Taper left,
To light me to my Grave, and that burns dimly
That leaves me darkling hid in clouds of woe,
He that should prop me is mine overthrow.

Well done old fellow is it not?

Yes, yes, my Lord.

Here comes his man Hialdo.

Where Is the prodigal your Master sirrah?

Eating Acorns amongst Swine, draffe amongst Hoggs, and gnawing bones amongst
Dogs; has lost all his Money at Dice, his Wits with his Money, and his honesty
with both, for he bumfiddles me; makes the Drawers curvet, pitches the Plate
over the Bar, scores up the Vintners Name in the Ram-head; flirts his Wife
under the Nose, and bids you with a Pox send him more Money


Art thou one of his Currs to bite me too?
To nail thee to the Earth were to do Justice.

Here comes Bucephalus my prauncing Master, nail me now who dares.


I sit like an Owl in the Ivy bush of a Tavern! Hialdo I have drawn red
Wine from the Vintners own Hogshead


Here Is two more, pierce them too.

Old Don, whom I call Father; am I thy Son? if I be, flesh me with Gold, fat
me with Silver; had I Spain in this hand, and Portugal in this, puff it
should fly, where is the Money I sent for? -- I Will tickle you for a Rake-hell


Not a Marvedi.

Thou shall have none of me.

Hold his Nose to the Grinstone my Lord.

I shall have none!

Charge me a case of Pistolls.
What I have built I Will ruin, shall I suffer
A Slave to set his Foot upon my heart?
A Son! a barbarous Villain, or if Heaven save thee
Now from my Justice, yet my curse pursues thee.

Hialdo, carbonado thou the old Rogue my Father.

Whilst you slice into Collups the rusty Gamon his man there.


No Money! Can Tavernes stand without anon, anon? Fiddlers live without
scraping, Taffaty Girls look plumpe without pampering? if you will not Lard
me with Money, give me a Ship, furnish me to Sea


To have thee hanged for Piracy?

Trim, tram, hang Master hand Man.

Then send me to the West Indies, buy me some Office there.


To have thy throat cut for thy quarrelling.

Else send me and my ningle Hialdo to the Wars.

A match, we will fight Dog, fight Bear.

Oh dear Hernando! welcome, clap Wings to your heels,
And pray my worthy friends bestow upon me
Their present Visitation.

Lorenzo, see the anger of a Father,
Although it be as lowed and quick as thunder,
Yet'cis done instantly, cast off thy wildness,
Be mine, be mine, for I to call thee home
Have with my honored friend here, Don Hernando
Provided thee a Wife.

A Wife! Is she hansome? is she rich? Is she fair? Is she wity? Is she
honest? Hang honesty. Has she a sweet Face, Cherry-Cheeke, Strawberry-lip,
white-skin, dainty Eye, pretty Foot, delicate Legs? as there is a Girl now


It is a Creature both for Birth and fortunes,
And for most excellent graces of the mind,
Few like her are in Spain.

When shall I see her? -- now Father pray take your curse off.

I do, the Lady
Lives from Mardrill, very near fourteen Leagues,
But thou shall see her Picture.

That, that, most Ladies in these days are but very fine Pictures.

Ladies to you first welcome, my Lords (Alonzo,
And you worthy Marquess) thanks for these honors.
Away you: to th'cause now of this meeting, my Son Lorenzo,
Whose wildness you all know comes now to the Lure,
Sits gently; has called home his wandering thoughts,
And now will Marry.

A good Wife Fate send him.

One stayed may settle him.

Fly to the mark sir, show me the Wench, or her Face, or any thing I may know
it is a woman fit for me


She is not here her self, but here is her Picture.

My Lord De Carcamo, pray observe this.

I do attentively -- Don Pedro, mark it.

If you ha done your part, yonder is a Wench wud ha a bout with you,


Me!

A Wench!

Why stand you staring at it? how do you like her?

Are you in earnest?

Yes sir, in earnest.

I am not so hungry after flesh to make the Devil a Cuckold

Look not upon the Face, but on the goodness
That dwells within her.

Set fire on the Tenement.

She Is rich, nobly descended.

Did ever Nobility look so scurvilie?

I am sunk in fortuaes, she may raise us both.

Sink, let her to her Granam; marry a VVitch! have you fetched a Wife for me
out of Lapland? an old Midwife in a velvet Hat, were a goddess to this: that a
red Lip


There Is a red Nose.

That a yellow hair.

Why? her teeth may be yellow.

Where Is the full Eye?

She has full blabber Cheeks.

Set up thy rest, her marriest thou or none.

None then, were all the Water in the World one Sea, all Kingdoms one
Mountain. I would climb on all four, up to the top of that Hill, and
headlong hurl my self into that abisse of waves e're I would touch the skin
of such rough Haberdine, for the breath of her Picture stinkes hither


What tumult's this?

Murder, murder, murder, one of our Gypsies is in danger of hanging, hanging!


Who is hurt?

It Is I my Lord, stabbed by this Gypsy.

He struck me first, and I Will not take a blow
From any Spaniard breathing.

Are you so brave?

Break up your play: lock all the doors.

I faint my Lord.

Have him to a Surgeon, how fell they out?

Oh! my good Lord, these Gypsies when they lodged
At my house, I had a Jewel from my Pocket
Stolen by this Villain.

It Is most false my Lords,
Her own hands gave it me.

She that calls him Villain,
Or says he stole.

Hoyday, we hear your scoulding.

And the hurt Gentleman finding it in his bosom
For that he stabbed him.

Hence with all the Gypsies.

Ruffians and Thieves, to prison with 'em all.

My Lord we will leave engagements, in Plate and Money
For all our safe forth-commings; punish not all
For one's offense, we will prove our selves no Thieves.

Oh Soto! I make Buttons.

Would I could make some, and leave this Trade.

Iron him then, let the rest go free, but stir not one foot
Out of Madrill; bring you in your witness.

Prick him with a Pin, or pinch him by the Elbow; any thing.


My Lord Don Pedro, I am your Ward, we have spent a little Money to get a
horrible deal of Wit, and now I am weary of it


My runne-awayes turned Juglers! Fortune Tellers!

No great Fortunes.

To Prison with 'em both: a Genleman play the Ass!

If all Gentlemen that play the Ass should to Prison, you must widen your
Jayles. Come Soto, I scorn to beg, set thy foot to mine, and kick at shackles


So, so, away with 'em.

Send all our Company after, and we will play there, and be as merry as you here.


Our Comedy turned Tragical! please you Lords walk.
This Actor here and I must change a word,
And I come to you.

Well my Lord, your pleasure --

Why? could thou think in any base disguise
To blind my sight? Fathers have Eagles Eyes.
But pray sir why was this done? why when I thought you
Fast locked in Salamanca, at your Study,
Leaped you into a Gypsy?

Sir, with your pardon,
I shall at fit time, to you show cause for all:

Mean time sir, you have got a Trade to live by,
Best to turn Player, an excellent Ruffian! ha!
But know sir, when I had found you out, I gave you
This project of set purpose, it is all my self,
What the old Gypsy spoke must be my Language,
Nothing are left me but my Offices,
And thin-fac'd honors, and this very Creature
By you so scorned, must raise me by your Marrying her.

You would not build your glory on my ruins.

The Rascal has belied the Lady,
She is not half so bad, all is one, she is rich.

Oh! will you see the joys of my full youth?
To Dunghill muck, seek out some wretches Daughter;
Whose soul is lost for gold then? you are more noble
Then to have your Son, the top branch of your house
Grow in a heap of rubbish; I must marry a thing,
I shall be ashamed to own, ashamed to bring her
Before a Sun-beame.

I cannot help it sir, resolve upon it, and do it.

And do it and die.
Is there no face in Spain for you to pick out
But one to fright me? when you sat the Play here
There was a beauty, to be Lord of which
I would against an Army throw defiance.

She! Alas.

How! how! at every hair of here is
There hangs a very Angel, this! I am ready
To drop down looking at it: Sir I beseech you
Bury me in this Earth, on which I am humbled
To beg your blessing on me for a Gypsy,
Rather then -- oh! I know not what to term it.
Pray what is that young pensive piece of beauty?
Your voice for her, I eyed her all the scene.

I saw you did.

Me thought 'twas a sweet Creature.

Well tho my present state stands now on Ice,
I Will let it crack and fall, rather then bar thee
Of thy content, this Lady shall go by then.

Hang let her there, or any where.

That young Lannard,
Whom you have such a mind to, if you can whistle her
To come to Fist, make trial, play the young Falconer.
I will nor mar your marriage, nor yet make
Beauty no wealth, wealth ugliness, which you will take.

I thank you sir, put on your Mask good Madam,
The Sun will spoil your Face else.

THou have now the Wife of thy desires.

Sir, I have;
And in her every blessing that makes Life
Loath to be parted with.

Noble she is,
And fair, has to enrich her Blood and Beauty
Plenty of Wit, Discourse, Behavior, Carriage.

I ow you duty for a double birth,
Being in this happiness begot again,
Without which I had been a man of wretchedness.

Then henceforth, Boy, learn to obey thy fate,
It Is fallen upon thee, know it, and embrace it:
Thy Wife's a wanton.

A wanton!

Examine through the progress of thy youth,
What capital sins, what great one it is, for it is
A great one thou have committed.

I a great one!

Else Heaven is not so wrathful to pour on thee
A misery so full of bitterness;
I am thy Father, think on it, and be just;
Come do not dally.

Pray my Lord.

Fool 'twere
Impossible that Justice should rain down
In such a frightfull horror without cause.
Sir, I will know it, rather blush thou did
An act thou dare not name then that it has
A name to be known by.

Turn from me then,
And as my guilt sighs out this monster Rape,
Oh! do not lend an Ear.

Rape! fearful.

Hence, hence springs my due reward.

Thou Art none of mine.
Or if thou be, thou do belly the stamp
Of thy Nativity.

Forgive me.

Had she
Poor wronged Soul (who e're she was) no Friend,
Nor Father to revenge, had she no Tongue
To rore her injuries?

Alas I know her not.

Peace thou will blaze a sin beyond all president,
Young man thou should have married her, the Devil
Of lust that riots in thy Eye, should there
Have let full love and pity; not on this stranger
Whom thou have doted on.

Oh! had I married her,
I had been then the happiest man alive:

As I the happiest Woman being married,
Look on me sir.

You shall not find a change
So full of fears as your most noble Father,
In his wise Trial urged.

Indeed you shall not,
The forfeit of her shame shall be her pawn.

Why pray do you mock my sorrows? now oh now
My horrors flew about me!

No thy comforts,
Thy blessings Roderigo.

By this Crucifix
You may remember me.

Ha! art thou that Lady wronged?

I was, but now am
Righted in noble satisfaction.

How can I turn mine Eyes, and not behold
On every side my shame!

No more hereafter,
We shall have time to talk at large of all,
Love her that is now thine own, do Roderigo.
She Is far from what I charactred.

My care shall live about me to deserve your love.

Excellent Clara -- Fathers both, and Mother,
I will redeem my fault.

Our blessings dwell on ye.

Married to Roderigo!

Judge your self,
See where they are.

Is this your Husband Lady?

He is sir, Heavens great hand that on Record,
Fore-points the equal Union of all hearts,
Long since decreed, what this day has been perfected.

It Is well then, I am free it seems.

Make smooth
My Lord, those clouds which on your brow deliver
Emblems of storm; I will as far as honor
May privilege, deserve a noble friendship,
As you from me deserve a worthy memory.

Your Husband has proved himself a friend,
Trusty and tried, he is welcome I may say
From the University,

To a new School
Of happy knowledge Lewys.

Sir, I am not so poor to put this injury up,
The best blood flows within you is the price.

Lewys for this time calcalme your anger,
And if I do not give you noble satisfaction,
Call me to what account you please.

So, so, I come for Justice to you,
And you shall grant it.

Shall and will.

With speed too.
My poor friend bleeds the whiles.

You shall your self
Before we part, receive the satisfaction
You come for, who attends
My Lord?

The Prisoner.

He attends your Lordships pleasure.

What would this Girl? foh no tricks.
Get you to your Cabin Hus-wife, we have no ear for Ballads.

Take her away.

A wondrous lively Creature.

Noble Gentlemen,
If a poor Maids, a Gypsy Virgins tears
May soften the hard edge of angry Justice;
Then grant me gracious hearing (as you are merciful.)
I beg my Husbands Life.

Thy Husbands, little one!

Gentle sir, our plighted troaths are Chronicl'd
In that white Book above, which notes the secrets
Of every thought and heart, he is my Husband,
I am his Wife.

Rather his Whore.

Now trust me,
You Are no good man to say so, I am honest,
Deed la I am, a poor soul that deserves not
Such a bad word, were you a better man
Then you are, you do me wrong.

The Toy grows angry.

And it becomes her sweetly, troath my Lord,
I pity her.

I thank you sir.

Your Husband
You Will say is no Thief.

Upon my Conscience he is not.

Dares not strike a man.

Unworthily
He dares not, but if trod upon, a Worm
Will turn again.

That turning turns your Worm
Off from the Ladder, Minion.

Sir, I hope
You are not his Judge, you are too young, too chollerick,
Too passionate, the price of Life or Death
Requires a much more grave consideration
Then your years warrant, he sit they (like gods)
Upon whose head the reverend badge of Time
Has sealed the proof of Wisdom; to these Oracles
Of riper Judgment, lower in my heart,
Then on my knees, I offer up my suite,
My lawful suite, which begs they would be gentle
To their own fames, their own imortall stories,
Oh! do not think my Lords compassion thrown
On a base low estate, on humble People
Less meritorious, then if you had favored
The faults of great men; and indeed great men
Have often times great faults; he whom I plead for
Is free, the soul of Innocence it self
Is not more white, will you pity him?
I see it is in your Eyes, it is a sweet Sun-beame,
Let it shine out; and to adorn your praise
The prayers of the poor shall crown your days,
And theirs are something hard.

Beshrew the Girl,
She has almost melted me to tears.

Hence trifler -- call in my friends,
What hope of ease?

Good hope, but still I smart,
The worst is in my pain.

The price is high
Shall buy thy vengeance, to receive a wound
By a base Villains hand, it madds me.

Men subject to the extremity of Law,
Should carry peace about'em to their Graves,
Else were you nobler then the blood you boast of,
Could any way (my Lord) derive you know,
I would return sharp answer to your slanders;
But it suffices I am none of ought
Your rage mistermes me.

None of 'em, no Rascal?

No Rascal.

Nor no Thief.

Ask her, that is my Accuser, could your Eyes
Pierce through the secrets of her foul desires;
You might without a parciall Judgment, look into
A Woman's Lust and Malice.

My good Lords,
What I have Articled against this fellow,
I justify for truth.

On then, no more,
This being true she says; I have deserved
To die.

We sit not here to bandy Words,
But minister Law, and that condemns thee
For theft unto the Gallows.

Oh my misery!
Are you all Marble-brested? are your bosoms
Hoop'd round with Steel, to cast away a man?
More worthy Life and Honors then a thousand
Of such, as only pray unto the shadow
Of abused greatness.

It Is in vain to storm,
My Fate is here determined!

Lost Creature,
Art thou grown dull too; is my Love so cheap,
That thou court'st thy destruction, 'cause I love thee?
My Lords, my Lords; speak Andrew, prithee now,
Be not so cruel to thy self and me,
One word of thine will do it.

Away with him,
To morrow is his day of Execution.

Even when you will.

Stay man thou shall not go;
Here are more Women yet, sweet Madam speak:
You Lady, you methinks should have some feeling
Of tenderness, you may be touched as I am,
Troath were your cause, I Would weep with you, and join
In earnest suite for one you held so dear.

My Lord, pray speak in his behalf.

I would, but dare not,
It Is a fault so clear and manifest.

Back with him to his Dungeon.

Heaven can tell.
I sorrow not to die, but to leave her,
Who whiles I live is my Life's comforter.

Now shall I be revenged.

Oh me unhappy!

See the Girl falls,
Some one look to her!

Alas poor Maid.

Pretiosa!
She does recover, mine honorable Lord.

In vain, what is it?

Be pleased to give me private audience;
I will discover something shall advantage
The noblest of this Land.

Well I will hear thee,
Bring in the Girl.

Ought with me, what is it?
I care not for thy Company old Ruffin,
Rascal art impudent?

To beg your service.

Hang your self.

By your Fathers Soul sir, hear me.

Dispatch.

First, promise me you will get Repreeve
For the condemned Man, and by my Art,
I Will make you master of what your Heart on Earth
Can wish for, or desire.

Thou lie thou can not.

Try me.

Do that, and then as I am noble,
I will not only give thy friend his Life,
But royally reward thee, love thee ever.

I take your word, what would you?

If thou mock'st me,
'Twere better thou were damned.

Sir, I am resolute.

Resolve me then, whether the Count Alvarez,
Who slew my Father, be alive or dead?

Is this the mighty matter? the Count lives.

How!

The Count lives!

Oh fate I now tell me where?
And be, my better genius.

I can do it,
In Spain a lives: more, not far from Madrill,
But in disguise much altered.

Wonderful Scholar,
Miracle of Artists, Alvarez living!
And near Madrill too! now for Heavens sake where?
That Is all, and I am thine.

Walk off my Lord
To the next Field, you shall know all.

Apace then, I listen to thee
With a greedy Ear, the Miserable and the Fortunate
Are alike in this, they cannot change their Fate.

Good, good, you would feign kill him and revenge Your Fathers Death.


I would.

Bravely, or securely?

Not basely for the World.

We are secure.
Young Lewys, two more trusty blades then these,
Spain has not in her Army; with this
Alvarez slew thy Father, and this other,
Was that the King of France wore, when great Charles
In a set Battle took him Prisoner;
Both I resign to thee.

This is a new Mystery.

Now see this naked bosom, turns the points
Of either on this Bulwark, if thou covet'st
Out of a sprightly youth, and manly thirst
Of vengeance blood, if blood be thy ambition,
Then call to mind the fatal blow that struck
De Castor thy brave Father to his Grave;
Remember who it was that gave that blow,
His enemy Alvarez, hear, and be sudden,
Behold Alvarez!

Death, I am deluded.

Thou art incredulous, as Fate is certain
I am the man.

Thou that Butcher!

Tremble not young man, trust me I have wept
Religiously to wash off from my Conscience
The stain of my offense: twelve years and more,
Like to a restless Pilgrim I have run
From foraigne Lands to Lands, to find out Death.
I am weary of my Life, give me a Sword,
That thou may know with what a perfect zeal
I honor old De Castors memory;
I Will fight with thee, I would not have thy hand
Dipped in a wilful Murder, I could wish
For one hours space I could pluck back from Time,
But thirty of my years, that in my fall
Thou might deserve report: now if thou Conquerst
Thou can not triumph, I am half dead already,
Yet I Will not start a foot.

Breathes there a spirit
In such a heap of rage?

Oh! that I had
A Son of equal growth with thee, to tug
For Reputation: by thy Fathers ashes,
I would not kill thee for an other Spain,
Yet now I Will do my best, thou art amazed,
Come on.

Twelve tedious Winters banishment!
'Twas a long time.

Could they redeem thy Father?
Would every Age had been twelve Ages Lewys,
And I for Penance every Age a dying,
But it is too late to wish.

I am overcome,
Your nobleness has conquered me, here ends
All strife between our Families, and henceforth
Acknowledge me for yours.

Oh! thou reviv'st
Fresh horrors to my Fact, for in thy gentleness
I see my sin anew.

Our peace is made,
Your Life shall be my care, 'twill be glad news
To all our noble friends.

Since Heaven will have it so,
I thank thee glorious Majesty; my Son
For I will call thee, e're the next morrow:
Salute the World, thou shall know stranger mysteries.

I have enough to feed on; sir I Will follow ye.

Don John Son to the Count of Carcomo,
Woman take heed thou trifle not.

Is this
My Lord so strange?

Beauty in Youth, and Wit
To set it forth, I see transformes the best
Into what shape Love fancies.

Will you yet
Give me my Husbands Life?

Why little one he is not Married to thee.

In his Faith
He is; and faith and troath. I hope bind faster,
Then any other Ceremonies can,
Do they not pray my Lord?

Yes, where the Parties
Pledged, are not too unequal in degree,
As he and thou art.

This is new Divinity.

My Lord, behold this Child well: in her Face,
You may observe by curious insight, something
More then belongs to every common birth.

True, it is a pretty Child.

The Glass of misery
Is after many a change of desperate fortune,
At length run out, you had a Daughter
Called Constanza.

Ha!

A Sister Guyamara,
Wife to the Count Alvarez.

Peace, oh peace!

And to that Sisters charge you did commit
Your Infant Daughter, in whose birth your Wife
Her Mother died.

Woman thou art too cruel.

What do you mean Granam? Lass the noble man Grows angry.


Not I, indeed I do not,
But why do you use me thus?

Your Child and Sister,
As you supposed were drowned.

Drowned, talking Creature!
Supposed!

They live Fernando from my hand,
Thy Sisters hand receive thine own Constanza,
The sweetest best Child living.

Do you mock me?

Torment me on, yet more, more yet and spare not,
My heart is now a breaking: now!

Oh Brother!
Am I so far removed off from your Memory,
As that you will not know me? I expected
An other welcome home, look on this Casket,
The Legacy your Lady left her Daughter,
When to her Son, she gave her Crucifix.

Right, right, I know ye now.

In all my sorrows,
My comfort has been here; she should be,
Be yours, Constanza kneel sweet Child
To thy old Father.

How my Father?

Let not
Extremity of joys ravish Life from me
Too soon Heaven I beseech thee; thou art my Sister,
My Sister Guyamara; how have mine Eyes
Been darkened all this while: -- it is she!

It Is Brother,
And this Constanza, now no more a stranger,
No Pretiosa henceforth.

My souls treasure,
Live to an Age of goodness, and so thrive
In all thy ways, that thou may die to live.

But must I call you Father?

Thou will rob me else
Of that felicity; for whose sake only
I am ambitious of being young again;
Rise, rise, mine own Constanza.

It Is a new name,
But it is a pretty one, I may be bold
To make a suite to you.

Any thing.

Oh Father!
And if you be my Father think upon
Don John my Husband, without him alas
I can be nothing.

As I without thee,
Let me alone Constanza, tell me, tell me,
Lives yet Alvarez?

In your house.

Enough.
Cloy me not, let me by degrees, digest
My joys -- within, my Lords Francisco, Pedro.
Come all at once, I have a World within me,
I am not mortal sure, I am not mortal,
My honorable Lord, partake my blessings.
Count Alvarez lives here in my house;
Your Son my Lord, Francisco, Don John
Is the condemned man falsely accused of theft,
This my Lord Pedro, is my Sister Guyamare,
Madam, this Constanza mine own Child,
And I am a wondrous merry Man,
Without the Prisoner.

Here free and acquitted,
By her whose folly drew her to this error,
And she for satisfaction is assured
To my wronged friend.

I crave your pardons,
He whose I am, speaks for me.

We both beg it.

Excellent, Admirable; my dear Brother.

Never a happy man till now: young Lewys
And I are reconciled.

For ever faithfully, religiously.

My noble Lord most welcome.

To all my heart pays what it owes, due thanks
Most, most brave youth to thee.

I all this while,
Stand but a looker on, and tho my Father
May justly tax the violence of my Passions,
Yet if this Lady, Lady of my life
Must be denied, let me be as I was,
And die betimes.

You promised me.

I did,
My Lord of Carcomo, you see their hearts
Are joined already, so let our consents
To this wished Marriage.

I forgive thine errors,
Give me thy hand.

Me thine! but will thou love
My Daughter, my Constanza?

As my bliss.

I thee as Life, Youth, Beauty, any thing
That makes life comfortable.

Live together one, ever one.

And Heaven Crown your happiness.

Now sir, how like you a Prison?

As Gallants do a Tavern, being stopped for a Reckoning, scurvily.


Though you Cag'd us up never so close, we Sung like Cuckoes.


Well, well, you be your self now.

My self, am I out of my Wits Soto?

Here now are none but honorable Friends,
Will you to give a farewell to the life
You ha led as Gypsies, these being now found none,
But noble in their Births, alterd in Fortunes,
Give it a merry shaking by the hand;
And cry adue to folly?

We Will shake our Hands, and our Heels if you will give us leave.


On Brides, and Bride-Groomes to your Spanish Feasts,
Invite with bent Knees all these Noble Guests.


