MORE DISSEMBLERS BESIDES WOMEN.

A COMEDY, BY Tho. Middleton, Gent.



LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, 1657:

WHen these amongst others of Mr. Thomas Middleton's Excellent Poems, came to
my hands, I was not a little confident but that his name would prove as great
an Inducement for thee to Read, as me to Print them: Since those Issues of his
Brain that have already seen the Sun, have by their worth gained themselves a
free entertainment amongst all that are ingenious: And I am most certain, that
these will no way lessen his Reputation, nor hinder his Admission to any Noble
and Recreative Spirits. All that I require at thy hands, is to continue the
Author in his deserved Esteem, and to accept of my Endeavors which have ever
been to please thee

Farewell.
WOmen beware Women; it is a true Text
Never to be forgot: Drabs of State vexed,
Have Plots, Poisons, Mischeifs that seldom miss,
To murder Virtue with a venom kiss.
Witness this worthy Tragedy, expressed
By him that well deserved among the best
Of Poets in his time: He knew the rage,
Madness of Women crossed; and for the Stage
Fitted their humors, Hell-bred Malice, Strife
Acted in State, presented to the life.
I that have seen't, can say, having just cause,
Never came Tragedy off with more applause.
Nath. Richards.
Scaen Milan.

TO be chaste, is Woman's glory,
It Is her fame and honors story.
Here sits she in Funeral weeds*
Only bright in virtuous deeds.
Come and read her life and praise,
That singing weeps, and sighing plays.

WElcome Souls Music: I have
been listening here
To melancholy strains from
the Duchess lodgings.
That strange great Widow,
that has vowed so stiffly
Never to know loves heat in a second Husband:
And she has kept the Fort most valiantly
(To the wonder of her Sex) this seven years day;
And that is no sorry trial. A months constancy
Is held a virtue in a City-widow,
And are they excelled by so much more i'ch' Court?
'My faith a rare example for our Wives.
Heavens blessing of her heart for it poor Soul,
Sh'ad need have somewhat to comfort her.
What would thou do? Faith now
If I were dead, suppose I wear thy Husband,
(As shortly I will be, and that is as good)
Speak freely, and thou love me.

Alas Sir,
I should not have the leisure to make Vows,
For dying presently, I should be dead
Before you were laid out.

Now fie upon thee for a hasty dier,
Would thou not see me buried?

Talk not on it Sir,
These many years, unless you take delight
To see me swoun, or make a ghost of me.

Alas poor Soul, i will kiss thee into color,
Can thou paint pale so quickly, I perceive then
Thou Would go beyond the Duchess in her vow,
Thou Would die indeed: What Is he?

Be settled Sir,
Spend neither doubt, nor fear upon that fellow,
Health cannot be more trusty to man's life,
Then he to my necessities in love.

I take him of thy word, and praise his face,
Though he look scurvily, I will think hereafter
That honesty may walk with fire in's Nose,
As well as brave desert in broken clothes:
But for thy further safety, I Have provided
A shape, that at first sight will start thy modesty,
And make thee blush perhaps; but 'twill away
After a qualm or two. Virginity
Has been put often to those shifts before thee
Upon extremities; a little boldness
Cannot be called immodesty, especially
When there is no means without it, for our safeties;
Thou know my Uncle the Lord Cardinal
Wears so severe an eye, so strict and holy,
It not endures the sight of Woman-kinde
About his Lodgings;
Hardly a Matron of Four-score's admitted,
Though she be worn to gums, she comes not there,
To mumble Mattens, all his admiration
Is placed upon the Duchess; he likes her,
Because she keeps her vow, and likes not any;
So does he love that man, above his Book,
That loves no woman, for my Fortunes sake then,
For I am like to be his only Heir.
I must dissemble and appear as fair
To his opinion, as the brow of Piety;
As void of all impureness as an Altar,
Thine ear -- that, and we are safe.

You make me blush Sir.


It Is but a star shot from a beauteous cheek,
It blazes Beauties bounty, and hurts nothing.

The power of Love commands me.


I shall wither in comforts, till I see thee.


My Lords, I have work for you, when you have hours
Free from the cares of State, bestow your eyes
Upon those abstracts of the Duchess virtues,
My studies ornaments. I make her Constancy
The holy Mistress of my contemplation,
Whole volumes have I writ in zealous praise
Of her eternal vow: I have no power
To suffer Virtue to go thinly clad,
I that have ever been in youth, an old man
To pleasures and to women, and could never love, but pity 'em,
And all their momentary frantic follies.
Here I stand up in admiration,
And bow to the chaste health of our great Duchess,
Kissing her constant name, O my fair Lords,
When we find grace confirmed, especially
In a creature that is so doubtful as a woman,
We'are spirit ravished, men of our probation
Feel the Spears, Music playing in their Souls
So long, unto the eternizing of her sex.
She Has kept her vow so strictly, and as chaste
As everlasting life is kept for Virtue.
Even from the sight of men, to make her oath
As incorrupt as th'honor of a Virgin
That must be strict in thought, or else that title,
Like one of Frailties ruins, shrinks to dust.
No longer she is a Virgin, then she is just.

Chaste Sir, the Truth and Justice of her Vow
To her deceased Lord's able to make poor
Man's treasury of praises. But methinks
She that has no temptation set before her,
Her Virtue has no conquest; then would her constancy
Shine in the brightest goodness of her glory*
If she would give admittance, see, and be seen;
And yet resist, and conquer. There were argument
For Angels, 't would out-reach the life of praise,
Set in Mortalities shortness. I speak this
Not for Religion, but for love of her,
Whom I wish less religious, and more loving:
But I fear she is too constant, that is her fault,
But it is so rare, few of her sex are took with it,
And that makes some amends.

You have put my zeal into a way, my Lord.
I shall not be at peace, till I make perfect;
I Will make her victory harder, it is my crown
When I bring grace to great'st perfection;
And I dare trust that daughter with a world,
None but her vow and she. I know she wea^s
A constancy, will not deceive my praises,
A Faith so noble; she that once knows Heaven,
Need put in no security for her truth;
I dare believe her face, use all the art,
Temptation, witcheries, sleights, and subtleties,
You Temporal Lords, and all your means can practice.

My Lord, not any we*


Her resolute goodness
Shall as a Rock stand firm, and send the sin
That beat against it, into the bosom of the owners, weeping.

We with her virtues so.


O give me pardon,
I have lost my self in her, upon my friends.
Your charitable censures I beseech,
So dear her white fame is to my souls love*
It Is an affliction; but to hear it questioned,
She Is my religious triumph.
If you desire a belief rightly to her,
Think she can never waver then you are sure.
She has a fixed heart, it cannot err;
He kills my hopes of woman, that doubts her.

No more, my Lord, it is fixed.


Believe my Judgment,
I never praise in vain, nor ever spent
Opinion idly, or lost hopes of any,
Where I once placed it; welcome as my joys.
Now you all part believers of her Virtue.

We are the same most firmly*


Good opinion
In others reward you, and all your actions.
Who Is near us?

My Lord*


Call our Nephew: There Is a work too
That for bloods sake I labor to make perfect,
And it comes on with joy; he is but a youth
To speak of years, yet I dare venture him
To old men's goodnesses and gravities,
For his strict manners, and win glory by him;
And for the chastness of his continence
(Which is a rare grace in the spring of man)
He does excel the youth of all our time,
Which gift of his more then affinity,
Draws my affection in great plenty to him.
The company of a woman is as fearful to him,
As death to guilty men: I'have seen him blush,
When but a Maid was named; I Am proud of him,
Heaven be not angry for it: He Is near of kin
In disposition to me. I shall do much for him
In life time, but in death I shall do all;
There he will find my love. He Is yet too young
In years to rise in state, but his good parts
Will bring him in the sooner: Here he comes.
What at thy Meditation? half in Heaven.


The better half my Lord, my minde's there still.
And when the heart's above, the body walks here
But like an idle Serving-man below,
Gaping and waiting for his Masters coming.

What man in age, could bring forth graver thoughts?


He that lives Fourscore years, is but like one
That stays here for a Friend; when death comes, then
Away he goes, and is never seen again.
I wonder at the yongmen of our days,
That they can dote on pleasure, or what it is
They give that title too, unless in mockage.
There Is nothing I can find upon the Earth,
Worthy the name of pleasure, unless 't be
To laugh at folly; which indeed good Charity
Should rather pity: But of all the frenzies
That follow flesh and blood (O reverend Uncle)
The most ridiculous is to fawn on women;
There Is no excuse for that, it is such a madness,
There is no cure set down for it, no Physician
Ever spent hour about it, for they ghest
'Twas all in vain, when they first loved themselves,
And never since durst practice, cry Heu mihi,
That Is all the help they have for it. I had rather meet
A Witch far North, then a fine Fool in love,
The sight would less afflict me, but for modesty;
And your grave presence, that learns men respect,
I should fall foul in words upon fond man
That can forget his excellence and honor,
His serious Meditations being the end
Of his Creation, to learn well to die,
And live a prisoner to a woman's eye.
Can there be greater thraldom, greater folly?

In making him my heir, I make good works,
And they give wealth a blessing, where on the contrary,
What curses does he heap upon his soul
That leaves his riches to a riotous young man,
To be consumed on Surfeits, Pride, and Harlets,
Peace be upon that spirit, whose life provides
A quiet rest for mine.

How now, the news?


A Letter Sir, brought by a Gentleman
That lately came from Rome.

That Is she, she is come:
I fear not to admit her in his presence;
There is the like already. I Am writ chaste
In my grave Uncles thoughts, and honest meanings
Think all men's like their own -- Thou look so pale,
What ail'st thou here a' late.

I doubt I have cause Sir.


Why, what is the news?


I fear Sir I Am with child:


With child; peace, peace, speak low:


'Twill prove I fear so.


Beshrew my heart for that -- Desire the Gentleman
To walk a turn or two.

What Gentleman?


One lately come from Rome, my Lord, in credit,
With L. Vincentio; so the Letter speaks him.

Admit him, my kind Boy; the prettiest Servant
That ever man was blessed with; it is so meek,
So good and gentle, 'twas the best almsdeed
That ere you did, to keep him. I have often took him
Weeping alone (poor Boy) at the remembrance
Of his lost friends; which as he says, the Sea
Swallowed with all their substance.

It Is a truth Sir,
Has cost the poor Boy many a feeling tear,
And me some too, for company. In such pity,
I always spend my part: Here comes the Gentleman.

Welcome to Milan Sir, how is the health
Of L. Vincentio.

May it please your Grace,
I left it well and happy, and I hope
The same: Blessed Fortune keeps it:

I hear your near him.


One of his Chamber, my Lord.


I Would near wish one of her condition nearer,
Then to be one of mine.

Your news is pleasing;
Whilst you remain in Milan, I request you,
To know the welcome of no house but ours.

Thanks to your Grace.


I Will leave you to confer;
I Will to the Duchess, and labor her perfection.

Then thus begins our conference, I arrest thee
In Cupids name, deliver up your weapon,
It is not for your wearing, Venus knows it.
Here Is a fit thing indeed, nay, Hangers and all,
Away with 'em, out upon 'em, things of trouble,
And out of use with you: Now you are my prisoner,
And till you swear you love me, all, and only
You, part not from mine arms.

I swear it willingly.


And that you do renounce the Generals love
That heretofore laid claim to you.

My heart bids me
You need not teach me, that my eye never knew
A perfect choice, till it stood blessed with you.
There Is yet a rival, whom you little dream of,
Tax me with him, and I Will swear too, I hate him.
I Will thrust 'em both together in one Oath,
And send'em to some pair of waiting-women,
To solder up their credits.

Prithee what is he
Another yet, for laughter sake discover him.

The Governor of the Fort:


That old dried Neat's tongue.


A Gentleman after my Fathers relish.


By your kind favors Gentlemen:


O my Father,
We are both betrayed.

Peace, you may prove too fearful.
To whom your business Sir.

To the Lord Cardinal,
If it would please your self, or that young Gentleman,
To grace me with admittance.

I will see Sir,
The Gentleman's a stranger, new come over.
He understands you not -- Loff tro veen, Tantumbro, Hoff Tufftee
Locumber shaw.

Quisquimken, sapadlaman, Fool-urchin old Astrata.


Nay, and that be the Language, we can speak't too: Strumpettikin,
Bold Harlottum Queaninisma, Whoremongeria.
Shame to thy Sex, and sorrow to thy Father.
Is this a shape for reputation?
And modesty to mask in? Thou too cunning
For credulous goodness.
Did not a reverent respect and honor
That Is due unto the Sanctimonious peace
Of this Lords house, restrain my voice and anger,
And teach it soft Humility: I would lift
Both your disgraces to the height of grief
That you have raised in me; but to shame you
I will not cast a blemish upon Virtue.
Call that your happiness, and the dearest too.
That such a bold attempt could ever boast off.
We'll see if a strong Fort can hold you now,
Take her Sir to you.

How have I deserved
The strangeness of this hour?

Talk not so tamely,
For you Sir, thank the reverence of this place,
Or your Hypocrisy I had put out of grace,
I had 'ifaith, if ever I can fit you,
Expect to hear from me.

I thank you Sir,
The Cough of the Lungs requite you: I could curse him
Into diseases by whole dozens now.
But one's enough to beggar him, if he light
Upon a wise Physician. It Is a labor
To keep those little wits I have about me.
Still did I dream that Villain would betray her.
I Will never trust slave with a parboiled nose again.
I must devise some trick to excuse her absence
Now to my Uncle too; there is no mischief
But brings one Villain or other still
Even close at heels on it. I Am pained at heart:
If ever there were hope of me to die
For love, it is now, I never felt such gripings*
If I can escape this Climacterical year,
Women never trust me, though you hear me swear.
Kept with him in the Fort, why there is no hope
Of ever meeting now; my ways not thither,
Love bless us with some means to get together,
And I Will pay all the old rock'nings.

What a contented rest rewards my mind
For faithfulness; I give it Constancy,
And it returns me Peace: How happily
Might woman live, methinks, confined within
The knowledge of one Husband?
What comes of more, rather proclaims Desire
Prince of affections, then religious love;
Brings frailty and our weakness into question;
Amongst our Male enemies* makes Widows tears,
Rather the cup of laughter then of pity?
What credit can our sorrows have with men,
When in some months space, they turn light again;
Feast, dance, and go in colors? If my vow
Were yet to make, I would not sleep without it,
Or make a Faith as perfect to my self
In resolution, as a vow would come to;
And do as much right so to Constancy,
As strictness could require: For it is our goodness,
And not our strength that does it. I am armed now
Against all deserts in man, be it Valor, Wisdom,
Courtesy, Comeliness, nay, Truth it self,
Which seldom keeps him company. I commend
The Virtues highly, as I do an Instrument
When the Case hangs by th'Wall; but man himself
Never comes near my heart.

The blessing of Perfection to your thoughts, Lady,
For I Am resolved they are good ones,

Honor of greatness,
Friend to my vow, and Father to my fame,
Welcome, as Peace to Temples.

I bring War.


How Sir?


A harder fight: If now you conquer,
You crown my praises double.

What Is your aim Sir?


To astonish sin, and all her tempting evils,
And make your goodness shine more glorious,
When your fair noble vow showed you the way
To excellence in virtue, to keep back
The fears that might discourage you at first,
Pitying your strength, it showed you not the worst.
It Is not enough for Tapers to burn bright,
But to be seen, so to lend others light,
Yet not impair themselves, their flame as pure,
As when it shined in secret, so to abide
Temptations, is the Souls flame truly tried.
I have an ambition, but a virtuous one,
I would have nothing want to your Perfection.

Is there a doubt found yet, is it so hard
For woman to recover, with all diligence,
And a true fasting faith from sensual pleasure,
What many of her sex has so long lost:
Can you believe that any sight of man,
Held he the worth of Millions in one spirit,
Had power to alter me

No, there is my bope,
My credit, and my triumph.

I Will no more,
Keep strictly private, since the glory on it
Is but a virtue questioned; I Will come forth
And show my self to all, the world shall witness,
That like the Sun, my Constancy can look
On Earth's corruptions, and shine clear it self.

Hold conquest now, and I have all my wishes.


The meaning of that sudden shout, my Lord.


Seignior Andrugio, General of the Field;
Successful in his Fortunes, is ariv'd,
And met by all the gallant hopes of Milan.
Welcomed with Laurel wreaths, and Hymns of praises.
Vouchsafe but you, to give him the first grace Madam,
Of your so long hid presence, he has then
All honors that can bless victorious man.

You shall prevail grave Sir.


LAurel is a Victors due,
I give it you,
I give it you.
Thy name with praise,
Thy brow with bays;
We circle round.
All men rejoice
With cheerful voice,
To see thee like a Conqueror crowned.
A Cupid discending, sings this.
I am a little Conqueror too
For wreaths of bay^,
There Is Arms of cross,
And that is my due.
I give the flaming heart,
It is my crest.
And by the Mothers side,
The weeping eye,
The sighing breast.
It is not power in you, fair beauties,
If I command Love, it is your duties.

Welcome, Welcome, Son of Fame,
Honor triumphs in thy Name.

Alas poor Gentleman! I brought him news
That like a Cloud spread over all his glories,
When he mist her, whom his eye greedily sought for;
His welcome seemed so poor, he took no joy in it:
But when he found her, by her Father forced
To the old Governors love, and kept so strictly,
A coldness struck his heart; there is no State
So firmly happy, but feels Envies might.
I know Lactantio, Nephew to the Cardinal,
Hates him as deeply as a Richman death;
And yet his welcome showed as fair and friendly,
As his that wore the truest love to him.
When in his wishes he could drink his blood,
And make his heart the sweetness of his food.

Madam, Madam.


Beshrew thy heart, do thou not see me busy:
You show your manners.

In the name of Goodness,
What ails my Lady?

I confess I Am mortal,
There Is no defending on it, it is cruel flattery
To make a Lady believe otherways.
Is not this flesh? Can you drive heat from fire?
So may you love from this; for Love and Death
Are Brothers in this Kingdom, only Death
Comes by the Mothers side, and that is the surest.
That General is wondrous fortunate,
Has won another field since, and a victory
That credits all the rest: He may more boast on it,
Then of a thousand conquests. I am lost,
Utterly lost, where are my Women now,
Alas what help's in them, what strength have they?
I call to a weak guard, when I call them,
In rescuing me, they'ld be themselves o'er-come,
When I that professed war, am overthrown.
What hope's in them then, that never stirred from home?
My Faith is gone for ever, my Reputation with the Cardinal,
My Fame, my Praise, my Liberty, my Peace,
Changed for a restless Passion: Oh hard spite
To lose my seven years victory at one sight.

I prithee Dondolo, take this shirt, and air it a little against my Master
rises, I'had rather do any thing then do it in faith


O monstrous, horrible, terrible, intolerable! Are not you big enough to air a
shirt; were it a smock now, you liquorish Page, you would be hanged, ere you would
part from't. If thou do not prove as arrant a smell-smock, as any the Town
affords, in a Term time, I Will lose my judgment in Wenching


Pish; here Dondolo, prithee take it.


It Is no more but up and ride with you then? All my generation were Bedles and
Officers: and do you think I Am so easily entreated? you shall find a harder
piece of work (Boy) then you imagine, to get any thing from my hands; I will
not disgenerate so much from the nature of my kindred; you must bribe me one way
or other, if you look to have any thing done, or else you may do it your self.
'Twas just my Fathers humor when he bore office: you know my mind Page, The
Song, the Song; I must either have the Song, you sung to my Master last night,
when he went to Bed, or I Will not do a stitch of service for you, from one weeks
end to the other. As I am a Gentleman, you shall brush Cloaks, make clean
Spurs, nay, pull of strait Boots, although in the tugging, you chance to fall
and hazard the breaking of your little Buttocks: I Will take no more pity of your
Maribones, then a Butchers Dog of a Rump of Beef; nay, ka me, ka thee, If you
will ease the Melancholy of my mind with singing, I will deliver you from the
calamity of Bootshaling


Alas you know I cannot sing.


Take heed, you may speak at such an hour, that your voice may be clean taken
away from you: I have known many a good Gentlewoman say so much as you say now,
and have presently gone to Bed, and lay speechless: It Is not good to jest, as
old Chaucer was wont to say, that broad famous English Poet. Cannot you sing
say you? Oh that a Boy should so keep cut with his Mother, and be given to
dissembling


Faith to your knowledge in it, ill may seem well;
But as I hope in comforts, I Have no skill.

A pox of skill, give me plain simple cunning: Why should not singing be as
well got without skill, as the getting of children; you shall have the
arrant'st Fool do as much there, as the wisest Coxcomb of 'em all, let 'em have
all the help of Doctors put to 'em; both the directions of Physicians, and the
erections of Pothecaries; you shall have a plain Hobnail'd Countrey-Fellow,
marrying some Dairy-wench, tumble out two of a year, and sometimes three,
By'rlady, as the crop falls out; and your nice paling Physicking-Gentlefolks,
some one in nine years, and hardly then a whole one, as it should be; the
wanting of so me Apricock, or something, looses a member on him, or quite
spoils it. Come will you sing, that I may warm the shirt; by this light, he
shall put it on cold for me else


A Song or two I learnt, with hearing Gentlewomen practice themselves.


Come, you are so modest now, it is pity that thou was it ever bred to be thrust
through a pair of Canions; thou would have made a pretty foolish
Waiting Woman, but for one thing. Wil't' sing


As well as I can Dondolo.


Give me the shirt then, I Will warm't as well I can too.
Why look you Whoreson Cockscomb, this is a smock.

No it is my Masters shirt.


Why that is true too,
Who knows not that; why it is the fashion Fool,
All your young Gallants here of late wear smocks;
Those without Beards especially.

Why what is the reason Sir.


Marry very great reason in it: A young gallant lying a Bed with his Wench, if
the Constable should chance to come up and search, being both in smocks, they would
be taken for Sisters; and I hope a Constable dare go no further: And as for the
knowing of their Heads, that is well enough too; for I know many young Gentlemen,
wear longer hair then their Mistresses


It Is a hot world the whilst:


Nay, that is most certain,

And a most witty age of a bald one; for all Languages you have many daughters so
well brought up, they speak French naturally at fifteen, and they are turned to
the Spanish and Italian half a year after


That Is like learning the Grammar first, and the Accidence after;
They go backward so.

The fitter for the Italian; thou'st no wit Boy,
Had had a Tutor, he would have taught thee that.
Come, come, that I may be gone Boy?

CUpid is Venus only joy,
But he is a wanton Boy:
A very, very wanton Boy.
He shoots at Ladies naked Breasts;
He is the cause of most men's Crests;
I mean upon the Forehead,
Invisible, but horrid.
Of the short Velvet Mask, he was deviser,
That wives may kiss, the husband's never the wiser.
'Twas he first thought upon the way,
To keep a Ladies Lips in play.

Oh rich, ravishing, rare, and enticing: Well, go thy ways, for as sweet a
Brested Page, as ever lay at his Masters feet in a Truckle-bed


You Will hie you in straight Dondolo?


I Will not miss you.
This smockified shirt, or shirted smock,
I will go toste; let me see what is a clock,
I must to th'Castle straight to see his love,
Either by hook or crook: My Master storming
Sent me last night, but I Will be gone this morning.

SEek out the lightest colors can be got;
The youthful'st dressings; Tauny is too sad.
I am not thirty yet, I have wronged my time,
To go so long in black, like a Petitioner.
See that the Powder that I use about me,
Be rich in Cassia.

Here Is a sudden change.


Oh I Am undone in Faith: Stay, art thou certain
Lactantio, Nephew to the Cardinal,
Was present in the late entertainment of the General?

Upon my reputation with your Excellence,
These eyes beheld him: He came foremost, Madam,
'Twas he in black and yellow.

Nay, it is no matter, either for himself
Or for the affectation of his colors,
So you be sure he was there.

As sure as sight
Can discern man from man, Madam.

It suffices.
Oh an ill cause had need of many helps,
Much art, and many friends, I, and those mighty,
Or else it sets in shame. A Faith once lost,
Requires great cunning, er't be entertained
Into the Breast of a belief again.
There Is no condition so unfortunate,
Poor, miserable, to any Creature given,
As hers that breaks in vow, she breaks with Heaven:

Increase of health, and a redoubled courage
To Chasteties great Soldier: what so sad Madam?
The memory of her seven years deceased Lord
Springs yet into her eyes, as fresh and full
As at the seventh hour after his departure:
What a perpetual Fountain is her virtue?
Too much to afflict your self with ancient sorrow
Is not so strictly for your strength requird:
Your vow is charge enough, believe me it is Madam,
You need no waightier task.

Religious Sir,
You heard the last words of my dying Lord.

Which I shall never forget.


May I entreat
Your goodness but to speake'em over to me
As near as memory can be friend your utterance,
That I may think a while I stand in presence
Of my departing Husband.

What Is your meaning?
In this most virtuous Madam?

It Is a courtesy
I stand in need of Sir, at this time specially,
Urge it no further yet; as it proves to me,
You shall hear from me, only I desire it
Effectually from you Sir, that is my request.

I wonder, yet I Will spare to question farther.
You shall have your desire.

I thank you Sir.
A blessing come along with it.

You see my Lords, what all Earths glory is
Rightly defined in me, uncertain breath;
A dream of threescore years to the long sleeper,
To most not half the time. Beware Ambition,
Heaven is not reached with Pride, but with submission.
And you Lord Gardinal labor to perfect
Good purposes begun, be what you seem,
Steadfast, and incorrupt, your actions noble,
Your goodness simple, without gain or art,
And not in vesture hollier then in heart.
But it is a pain, more then the pangs of death,
To think that we must part, Fellows of life,
Thou richness of my joys, kind and deer Princess.
Death had no sting, but for our separation,
It Would come more calm then an ev'nings peace,
That brings on rest to labors: Thou art so precious,
I should depart in everlasting envy
Unto the man, that ever should enjoy thee:
Oh a new torment strikes his force into me,
When I but think on it, I am racked and torn,
Pity me in thy virtues.

My loved Lord,
Let you confirmed opinion of my life,
My love, my faithful love, seal an assurance
Of quiet to your spirit, that no forgetfulness
Can cast a sleep so deadly on my Senses,
To draw my affections to a second liking.

'Tas ever been the promise, and the spring
Of my great love to thee. For once to marry
Is honorable in woman, and her ignorance
Stands for a virtue, coming new and fresh;
But second marriage shows desires in flesh:
Thence lust, and heat, and common custom grows,
But she is part Virgin, who but one man knows.
I here expect a work of thy great Faith,
At my last parting, I can crave no more,
And with thy vow, I rest my self for ever,
My soul and it shall fly to Heaven together:
Seal to my spirit, that quiet satisfaction,
And I go hence in Peace.

Then here I vow, never.


Why Madam?


I can go no further.


What have you forgot your vow?


I have, too certainly.


Your vow? that cannot be; it follows now,
Just where I left.

My frailty gets before it,
Nothing prevails but ill.

What ail you Madam?


Sir, I Am in love.


Oh all you powers of Chastity,
Look to this woman, let her not faint now
For honor of your selves: If she be lost,
I know not where to seek my hope in woman.
Madam, Oh Madam.

My desires are sickned
Beyond recovery of good counsel Sir.

What mischief owed a malice to the Sex,
To work this spightful ill; better the man
Had never known Creation, then to live
Th'unlucky ruin of so fair a Temple;
Yet think upon your vow, revive in Faith,
Those are eternal things. What are all pleasures,
Flatteries of men, and Follies upon Earth
To your most excellent goodness? Oh she is dead,
Stark cold to any virtuous claim within her.
What now is heat, is sins. Have I approved
Your constancy for this, called your Faith noble,
Writ volumes of your victories and virtues?
I have undone my judgment, lost my praises,
Blemished the truth of my opinion.
Give me the man, that I may pour him out
To all contempt and curses.

The man's innocent,
Full of desert and grace, his name Lactantio.

How?


Your Nephew.


My Nephew!


Beshrew the sight of him; he lives not Sir,
That could have conquered me, himself excepted.

He that I loved so dearly, does he wear
Such killing poison in his eye to sanctity?
He has undone himself for ever by it,
Has lost a friend of me, and a more sure one.
Farewell all natural pity, though my affection
Could hardly spare him from my sight an hour,
I Will lose him now eternally, and strive
To live without him; he shall straight to Rome.

Not if you love my health, or life, my Lord.


This day he shall set forth:


Dispatch me rather.


I Will send him far enough.


Send me to death first.


No Basilisk that strikes dead pure affection
With venomous eye, lives under my protection.

Now my conditions worse then ever 'twas yet,
My cunning takes not with him: Has broke through
The Net, that with all art was set for him,
And left the snarer here herself entangled
With her own toils. Oh what are we poor souls,
When our dissembling fails us? Surely Creatures
As full of want, as any Nation can be
That scarce have food to keep bare life about 'em:
Had this but took effect, what a fair way
Had I made for my love to the General,
And cut of all suspect, all reprehension?
My hopes are killed in the blossom.

Let me think upon it,
Set holy anger by a while, there is time
Allowed for natural argument: It Is she
That loves my Nephew, she that loves, loves first;
What cause have I to lay a blame on him then?
He Is in no fault in this; say 'twas his fortune
At the free entertainment of the General,
Amongst others the deserts and hopes of Milan,
To come into her sight, where is the offense yet?
What sin was that in him? man's sight and presence
Are free to public view: She might as well
Have fixed her hearts love then upon some other,
I would t'had lighted any where but there,
Yet I may err to wished, since it appears
The hand of Heaven, that only picked him out
To reward virtue in him by this Fortune,
And through affection I Am half conquered now,
I love his good, as dearly as her vow,
Yet there my credit lives in works and praises:
I never found a harder fight within me,
Since zeal first taught me war, say I should labor
To quench this love, and so quench life and all;
As by all likelihood it would prove her death:
For it must needs be granted, she affects him
As dearly, as the power of love can force,
Since her vow aws her not, that was her Saint.
What right could that be to Religion
To be her end, and disposes my Kinsman;
No I will bear in pity to her heart,
The rest commend to Fortune, and my Art.

I like him passing well:


He Is a tall fellow.


A couple of tall wits: I have seen some service Sir.


Nay so it seems by thy discourse goodfellow.


Good Fellow, calls me theif familiarly:
I could show many marks of resolution,
But modesty could wish'em rather hidden:
I fetched home three and twenty wounds together
In one set battle, where I was defeated
At the same time of the third part of my Nose,
But meeting with a skilful Surgeon;
Took order for my snuffling.

And a Nose
Well healed, is counted a good cure in these days,
It saves many a man's honesty, which else
Is quickly drawn into suspicion.
This night shall bring you acquainted with your charge;
In the mean time you and your valors welcome.
Would we had more store of you, although they come
With fewer marks about 'em.

So wish I Sir.


I was about to call her; and she stays
Of her own gift, as if she knew my mind;
Certain she knows me not, not possible.

What if I left my token, and my Letter
With this strange fellow, so to be conveyed
Without suspicion to Lactantio's servant:
Not so, I Will trust no fresh-man with such secrets;
His ignorance may mistake, and giv't to one
That may belong to th'General; for I know
He sets some spies about me, but all he gets
Shall not be worth his pains. I would Lactantio
Would seek some means to free me from this place,
It Is prisonment enough to be a Maid;
But to be mewed up too, that case is hard,
As if a Toy were kept, by a double guard.

Away she steals again, not minding me.
'Twas not at me she offered: Hark you Gentletwoman.

With me Sir?


I could call you by your name;
But Gentle's the best attribute to woman.

Andrugio, Oh as welcome to my Lips,
As morning Dew to Roses: My first love.

Why have you more then?


What a word was there?
More then thy self, what woman could desire
If reason had a part of her Creation?
For loving you, you see Sir I Am a prisoner;
There Is all the cause they have against me Sir.
A happy persecution, I so count on it.
If any thing be done to me for your sake,
It Is pleasing to me.

Are you not abused,
Either through force, or by your own consent;
Hold you your honor perfect and unstained;
Are you the same still, that at my departure,
My honest thoughts maintained you to my heart?

The same most just.


Swear 't.


By my hope of fruitfulness,
Love, and agreement, the three joys of marriage:

I am confirmed, and in requital on it,
Ere long expect your freedom.

Oh you flatter me,
It is a wrong to make a wretch too happy,
So suddenly upon affliction.
Beshrew me, if I be not sick upon it;
It Is like a surfeit after a great feast.
My freedom said you?

Do o'rcome you so?


Temptation never overcame a sinner
More pleasingly, then this sweet news my heart.
Here Is secret joy can witness, I am proud on it.

Violence I will not use, I come a friend,
'Twere madness to force that, which wit can end:

Most virtuously delivered:


Thou art in raptures:


My love, my love.


Most virtuously delivered,
Spoke like the sister of a Puritan Midwife:
Will you embrace the means that I have thought on,
With all the speed you can?

Sir any thing.
You cannot name't too dangerous, or too homely.

Fie, you over-act your happiness,
You drive slight things to wonders.

Blame me not Sir,
You know not my affection:

Will you hear me,
There are a sect of pilfring juggling people,
The vulgar tongue call Gipseys.

True, the same Sir.
I saw the like this morning: Say no more Sir;
I apprehend you fully:

What, you do not?


No: Hark you Sir.


Now by this light it is true:
Sure if you prove as quick as your conceit,
You Will be an exc'lent breeder.

I should do reason by the Mothers side Sir,
If Fortune do her part, in a good Getter.

That Is not to do now (sweet) the man stands near thee.

Long may he stand most fortunately Sir,
Whom her kind goodness has appointed for me

A while I Will take my leave to avoid suspicion:


I do commend your course; good Sir forget me not.


All comforts sooner.


Liberty is sweet, Sir.


I know there is nothing sweeter, next to love,
But health it self, which is the Prince of life.

Your knowledge raise you Sir.


Farewell till evening.


And after that, farewell sweet Sir for ever.
A good kind Gentleman to serve our turn with,
But not for lasting: I have chose a Stuff
Will wear out two of him, and one finer too:
I like not him that has two Mistresses;
War, and his sweetheart, he can never please both:
And War's a soaker, she is no friend to us,
Turns a man home sometimes to his Mistress,
Some forty ounces poorer then he went.
All his discourse out of the Book of Surgery,
Seer-cloth, and Salve, and lies you, all in Tents,
Like your Camp-Victlers: Out upon it, I smile
To think how I have fitted him with an office;
His love takes pains to bring our loves together,
Much like your man that labors to get treasure,
To keep his wife high for another pleasure.

THink of your shame and mine.


I prithee peace,
Thou art th'unfortunat'st piece of taking business,
That ever man repented, when day peeped;
I Will never keep such a piece of Touch-wood again,
And I we re rid of thee once. Welfare those
That never shamed their Master, I have had such,
And I may live to see the time again;
I do not doubt on it:

If my too much kindness
Receive your anger only for reward,
The harder is my fortune, I must tell you Sir,
To stir your care up to prevention,
(Misfortunes must be told as well as blessings)
When I left all my friends in Mantua,
For your loves sake alone, then with strange oaths
You promised present marriage.

With strange oaths quoth' a,
They Are not so strange to me, I have sworn the same things,
I am sure forty times over; not so little.
I may be perfect in 'em, for my standing.

You see it is high time now Sir.


Yes, yes, yes,
Marriage is nothing with you; a toy till death.
If I should marry all those I have promised,
'Twould make one Vicar hoarse, ere he could dispatch us:
I must devise some shift, when she grows big,
Those Masculine Hose will shortly prove too little:
What if she were conveyed to Nurses house;
A good sure old Wench; and she'ld love the child well,
Because she suckl'd the Father: No ill course
By my Mortality, I may hit worse.
Now Dondolo, the news.


The news:


How does she.


Soft, soft Sir, you think it is nothing to get news out of the Castle;
I was there.

Well Sir.


As you know a merry fellow may pass any where.


So Sir.


Never in better fooling in my life.


What Is this to the purpose?


Nay 'twas nothing to the purpose, that is certain.


How Wretched this slave makes me! Did not see her?


I saw her.


Well, what said she then?


Not a word Sir.


How, not a word?


Proves her the better Maid;
For Virgins should be seen more then they are heard.

Exceeding good Sir; you are no sweet villain.


No Faith Sir; for you keep me in foul Linen.


Turned scurvy rimer are you?


Not scurvy neither,
Though I be somewhat itchy in the profession;
If you could hear me out with patience, I know her mind
As well as if I were in her belly:

Thou said even now, she never spoke a word:


But she gave certain signs, and that is as good.


Can thou conceive by signs?


Oh passing well Sir,
Even from an Infant; did you never know that?
I was the happiest child in all our Country,
I was born of a dumb woman.

How?


Stark dumb Sir: My Father had a rare bargain of her, a rich peniworth; there
would have been but too much money given for her. A Justice of Peace was about
her, but my Father being then Constable, carried her before him


Well since we are entered into these dumb shows,
What were the signs she gave you?

Many and good, Sir.
Imprimis, she first gaped, but that I ghess'd
Was done for want of air, cause she is kept close;
But had she been abroad, and gapt as much,
T'had been another case; then cast she up
Her pretty eye, and wink't; the word me thought was then
Come not till twitter light: Next, thus her fingers went,
As who should say, I Would fain have a hole broke to 'scape away.
Then looked upon her watch, and twice she nodded,
As who should say, The hour will come Sweetheart
That I shall make two Noddies of my Keepers.

A third of thee. Is this your Mother tongue?
My hopes are much the wiser for this Language,
There is no such curse in love to an arrant Ass.

O yes, Sir, yes, an arrant whore's far worse* You never lin railing on me,
from one weeks end to another: But you can keep a little Tit-mouse Page there,
that is good for nothing, but to carry Toothpicks, put up your Pipe or so,
that is all he is good for: he cannot make him ready as he should do, I am fain
to truss his points every morning. Yet the proud scornful Ape, when all the
lodgings were taken up with strangers the other night, he would not suffer me to
come to Bed to him, but kicked and pricked, and pinched me, like an Urchin;
there is no good quality in him. Oh my Conscience* I think he scarce knows how
to stride a Horse; I saw him with a little hunting Nag, but thus high the other
day, and he was fain to lead him to a high rail, and get up like a
Butter-wench; there is no good Fellowship in this Dandiprat, this Dive-dapper,
as is in other Pages; they would go a swimming with no familiarly in the heat of
Summer, and clap what you call 'ems: But I could never get that little Monkey
yet to put off his Breeches. A tender, puling, nice, chitty faced Squal 'cis


Is this the good you do me? his love's wretched,
And most distressed, that must make use of Fools.

Fool to my face still! that is unreasonable;
I will be a knave one day for this trick,
Or it shall cost me a fall, though it be from a Gibbet,
It has been many a proper man's last leap.
Nay sure I Will be quite out of the precincts of a Fool, if I live but two days
to an end: I will turn Gipsey presently, and that is the highway to the
dantiest knave that ever Mothers Son took journey too. Oh those dear Gipseys,
they live the merriest lives, eat sweet stolen Hens, plucked over Pales or Hedges
by a twitch; they are never without a plump and lovely Goose, or beautiful
Sow-pig; those things I saw with mine own eyes to day; they call those
vanities, and triffing pilfries: But if a privy search were made amongst 'em,
they should find other manner of ware about 'em; Cups, Rings, and Silver
Spoons, by'r Lady, Bracelets, Pearl Neck-laces, and Chains of Gold sometimes;
they are the wittiest thieves: I Will stay no longer, but even go look what I can
steal, now presently, and so begin to bring my self acquainted with 'em


Nothing I fear so much, as in this time
Of my dull absence, her first love, the General
Will wind himself into her affection,
By secret gifts and Letters; there is the mischief;
I have no enemy like him, though my policy
Dissembled him a welcome, no man's hate
Can stick more close unto a loathed disease,
Then mine to him.

What ails this pretty Boy to weep so often?
Tell me the cause child; how his eyes stand full!
Beshrew you Nephew, you're too bitter to him;
He is so soft, th'unkindness of a word
Melts him into a woman; 'lass poor Boy,
Thou shall not serve him longer; 'twere great pity
That thou should wait upon an angry Master.
I have promised thee to one will make much of thee,
And hold thy weak youth in most deer respect.

Oh I beseech your Grace, that I may serve
No Master else.

Thou shall not: Mine Is a Mistress,
The greatest Mistress in all Milan, Boy;
The Duchess self.

Nor her, nor any:


Cease Boy,
Thou know not thine own happiness, through fondness,
And therefore must be learned; go dry thine eyes.

This rather is the way to make 'em moister.


Now Nephew, Nephew.


Oh you have snatched my spirit Sir*
From the divinest Meditation
That ever made Soul happy.

I am afraid
I shall have as much toil to bring him on now,
As I had pains to keep her off from him*
I have thought it fit Nephew, considering
The present barrenness of our name and house,
(The only Famine of succeeding honor)
To move the ripeness of your time to marriage.

How Sir, to marriage?


Yes, to a fruitful life;
We must not all be strict so generation
Would lose her right; you are young, it is my desire
To see thee bestowed happily in my life time.

Does your Grace well remember who I am,
When you speak this?

Yes, very perfectly;
You Are a young man, full in the grace of life,
And made to do love credit; proper, handsome,
And for affection, pregnant.

I beseech you Sir,
Take off your praises, rather then bestow 'em
Upon so frail a use, alas you know Sir,
I know not what love is, or what you speak of;
If woman be amongst it, I shall swoun; take her away
For contemplation's sake; most serious Uncle,
Name no such thing to me.

Come, come you are fond:
Prove but so strict and obstinate in age,
And you are well to pass. There Is honest love
Allowed you now for recreation;
The years will come when all delights must leave you.
Stick close to Virtue then; in the mean time
There Is honorable joys to keep youth company;
And if death take you there, dying no adulterer,
You Are out of his eternal reach, defy him.
List hither, come to me, and with great thankfulness,
Welcome thy Fortunes; it is the Duchess loves thee.

The Duchess!


Dotes on thee: Will die for thee,
Unless she may enjoy thee.

She must die then.


How?


Alas, do you think she ever means to do it Sir?
I Will sooner believe all a woman speaks,
Then that she will die for love: She has a vow my Lord,
That will keep life in her.

Believe me then,
That should have bounteous interest in thy Faith,
She Is thine, and not her vows, the more my sorrow,
My toil, and my destruction.

My blood dances.


And though that bashful Maiden virtue in thee,
That never held familiar league with woman,
Binds fast all pity to her heart that loves thee.
Let me prevail, my counsel stands up to thee;
Embrace it as the fullness of thy Fortunes,
As if all blessings upon Earth were closed
Within one happiness; for such an other
Whole life could never meet with; go and present
Your service, and your love, but on your hopes
Do it religiously: What need I doubt him,
Whom Chastity locks up?

Oh Envy, had thou no other means to come by virtue,
But by such treachery! The Duchess love!
Thou would be sure to aim it high enough,
Thou knew'st full well 'twas no prevailing else.
Sir, what your will commands, mine shall fulfill:
I Will teach my heart in all to obey your will.

A thing you shall not lose by. Here come the Lords,
Go follow you the course that I advised you;
The comfort of thy presence is expected;
Away with speed to Court, she languishes
For one deer sight of thee. For life's sake haste,
You lose my favor if you let her perish.

And art thou come brave Fortune, the reward
Of neat hypocrisy, that ever book't it,
Or turned up transitory white of the eye
After the Feminine rapture: Duchess and I
Were a fit match, can be denied of no man;
The best dissembler lights on the best woman;
'Twere sin to part us.

You Lights of State, Truths Friends, much honored Lords,
Faithful admirers of our Duchess virtues,
And firm Believers; it appears as plain
As knowledge to the eyes of industry,
That neither private motion, which holds counsel
Often with woman's frailty, and her blood,
Nor public sight, the lightning of temptations,
Which from the eye strikes sparks into the bosom,
And sets whole hearts on fire, has power to raise
A heat in her 'bove that which feeds chaste life,
And gives that cherishing means; she is the same still,
And seems so seriously employed in soul,
As if she could not tend to cast an eye
Upon deserts so low as those in man.
It merits famous memory I confess;
Yet many times when I behold her youth,
And think upon the lost hopes of posterity,
Succession, and the royal fruits of Beauty,
All by the rashness of one vow made desperate,
It goes so near my heart, I feel it painful,
And wakes me into pity oftentimes,
When others sleep unmoved.

I speak it faithfully,
For it is poor fame to boast of a disease,
Your Grace has not endu ed that pain alone;
T'has been a grief of mine, but where is the remedy?

True, there your Lordship spoke enough in little;
There Is nothing to be hoped for but repulses;
She Is not to seek for armor against love,
That has bid battle to his powers so long;
He that should try her now, had need come strong,
And with more force then his own Arguments,
Or he may part disgraced, being put to flight;
That Soldier's tough, has been in seven ^ars fight,
Her vow's invincible; for you must grant this,
If those desires trained up in flesh and blood
To war continually against good intents,
Prove all too weak for her, having advantage
Both of her sex, and her unskilfulness
At a Spiritual weapon, wanting knowledge
To manage resolution, and yet win;
What force can a poor Argument bring in?
The Books that I have published in her praise,
Commend her constancy, and that is Fame-worthy;
But if you read me o'r with eyes of enemies,
You cannot justly, and with honor tax me,
That I dissuade her life from marriage there:
Now Heaven, and fruitfulness forbid, not I:
She may be constant there, and the hard war
Of Chastity, is held a virtuous strife,
As rare in marriage, as in single life;
Nay, by some writers rarer: hear their reasons,
And you will approve 'em fairly. She that is single,
Either in Maid or Widow, oftentimes
The fear of shame, more then the fear of Heaven,
Keeps chaste, and constant; when the tempest comes
She knows she has no shelter for her sin,
It must endure the weathers of all censure:
Nothing but Sea and Air, that poor Bark feels,
When she in wedlock is like a safe vessel
That lies at anchor; come what weathers can,
She has her Harbor: At her great unlading*
Much may be stolen, and little waste; the Master
Thinks himself rich enough with what he has,
And holds content by that. How think you now Lords*
If she that might offend safe, does not err,
What Is chaste in others, is most rare in her.

What wisdom but approves it?


But my Lord,
This should be told to her it concerns most;
Pity such good things should be spoke and lost.

That were the way to lose 'em utterly,
You quite forget her vow; yet now I think on it,
What is that vow? 'Twas but a thing enforced,
Was it not Lords?

Merely compelled indeed.


Only to please the Duke, and forced virtue
Fails in her merit, there is no crown prepared for it:
What have we done, my Lords? I fear we have sinned
In too much strictness to uphold her in it,
In cherishing her will; for woman's goodness
Takes counsel of that first, and then determines.
She cannot truly be called constant now,
If she persever; rather obstinate,
The Vow appearing forced, as it proves,
Tried by our purer thoughts: The grace and triumph
Of all her victories, are but idle glories;
She wilful, and we enemies to succession.
I will not take rest, till I tell her soul
As freely as I talk to those I keep.

And we'll all second you, my Lord.


Agreed.
We'll knit such knots of Arguments so fast,
All wit in her shall not undo in have.

Nay sure, I think all we shall be too hard for her,
Else she is a huge wild Creature.

If we win,
And she yield marriage, then will I strike in.

Thou tell me happy things, if they be certain,
To bring my wishes about wondrous strangely.
Lactantio Nephew to the Cardinal,
The Generals secret enemy?

Most true Madam,
I had it from a Gentleman, my Kinsman,
That knows the best part of Lactantio's bosom.

It happens passing fortunately, to save
Employment in another; he will 'come now
A necessary property; he may thank
The need and use we have of him for his welcome.
Now who is that knocks?

Madam, it is he, with speed.
I thought he had brought his horse to the Chamber door,
He made such haste and noise.

Admit him prithee,
And have a care your heart be true and secret:

Take life away from't, when it fails you Madam.


Enough; I know thee wise.
He comes with haste indeed: Are you come now Sir?
You should have staid yet longer, and have found me
Dead, to requite your haste.

Love bless you better Madam.


Must I bid welcome to the man undoes me,
The cause of my vows breach, my honor's enemy;
One that does all the mischief to my fame,
And mocks my seven years conquest with his name?
This is a force of Love was never felt;
But I Will not grudge at Fortune, I will take
Captivity cheerfully: Here, seize upon me,
And if thy heart can be so pitiless
To chain me up for ever in those arms,
I Will take it mildly, I, and thank my Stars,
For we are all subject to the chance of wars.

We are so, yet take comfort vanquished Duchess,
I Will use you like an honorable prisoner,
You shall be entreated; day shall be
Free for all sports to you, the night for me;
That Is all I challenge, all the rest is thine;
And for your fare 't' shall be no worse then mine.

Nay then I Am heartily pleasant, and as merry
As one that ows no malice, and that is well Sir;
You cannot say so much for your part, can you?

Faith all that I ow, is to one man, Madam,
And so can few men say: Marry that malice
Wears no dead flesh about it, it is a stinger.

What is he that shall dare to be your enemy,
Having our friendship, if he be a servant
And subject to our Law?

Yes, trust me Madam,
Of a vilde fellow, I hold him a true subject;
There Is many arrant knaves, that are good subjects,
Some for their livings sakes, some for their lives,
That will unseen, eat men, and drink their wives.

They are as much in fault that know such people,
And yet conceal 'em from the whips of Justice.
For love's sake give me in your foe betimes,
Before he vex you further; I will order him
To your hearts wishes, load him with disgraces,
That your revenge shall rather pity him,
Then wish more weight upon him.

Say you so Madam!
Here Is a blessed hour, that feeds both love and hate;
Then take thy time brave malice: Virtuous Princess,
The only enemy that my vengeance points to,
Lives in Andrugio.

What the General?


That Is the man, Madam.


Are you serious Sir?


As at my prayers.


We meet happily then
In both our wishes; he is the only man
My will has had a longing to disgrace,
For diverse capital contempts; my memory
Shall call 'em all together now; nay Sir,
I Will bring his faith in War, now into question,
And his late conference with the enemy.

By'r Lady a shrewd business, and a dangerous.
Seignior, your neck's a cracking.

Stay, stay Sir, take Pen and Ink.


Here Is both, and Paper, Madam.


I Will take him in a fine trap.


That were exc'llent.


A Letter so writ, would abuse him strangely.


Good Madam, let me understand your mind,
And then take you no care for his abusing,
I serve for nothing else. I can write fast and fair
Most true Orthography, and observe my stops.

Stay, stay a while,
You do not know his hand.

A bastard Roman,
Much like mine own I could go near it Madam.

Marry and shall.


We were once great together,
And writ Spanish Epistles one to another,
To exercise the Language.

Did you so?
It shall be a bold Letter of temptation
With his name to it, as writ, and sent to me.

Can be no better Lady; stick there Madam,
Ank never seek further.

Begin thus: Fair Duchess, say:
We must use flattery, if we imitate man,
'Twill never be thought his Pen else.

Most fair Duchess.


What need you have put in most, yet since it is in,
Let 't even go on, few women would find fault with it;
We all love to be best, but seldom mend:
Go on Sir.

Most fair Duchess! Here Is an admiration point.


The report of your vow shall not fear me.


Fear me: Two stops at fear me.


I know you are but a woman.


But a woman; a comma at woman.


And what a woman is, a wiseman knows.


Wiseman knows: A Full-prick there.


Perhaps my condition may seem blunt to you.


Blunt to you: A comma here again.


But no man's love can be more sharp set.


Sharp set, there a colon; for colon is sharp set oftentimes.


And I know desires in both sexes have skill at that weapon.


Skill at that weapon: A Full-prick here, at weapon.


So, that will be enough: Subscribe it thus now.
One that vows service to your affections: Seignior such a one.

Seignior Andrugio: G. that stands for General.


And you shall stand for Goose cap: Give me that,
Betake you to your business; speedily Sir,
We give you full authority from our person,
In right of Reputation, Truth, and Honor,
To take a strong Guard, and attach his body.
That done, to bring him presently before us,
Then we know what to do.

My hate finds wings,
Man's spirit flies swift to all revengeful things.

Why here is the happiness of my desires,
The means safe, unsuspected, far from thought;
His state is like the world's condition right,
Greedy of gain, either by fraud or stealth;
And whilst one toils, another gets the wealth.

NOw Fortune show thy self the Friend of Love,
Make her way plain, and safe; cast all their eyes
That guard the Castle, into a thicker blindness then thine own,
Darker then Ignorance or Idolatry,
That in that shape, my love may pass unknown,
And by her freedom, set my comforts free.
This is the place appointed for our meeting,
Yet comes she, I am coveteous of her sight;
That Gipsey habit alters her so far
From knowledge that our purpose cannot err;
She might have been here now, by this time largely
And much to spare: I would not miss her now
In this plight, for the loss of a years joy.
She Is ignorant of this house, nor knows she where,
Or which way to bestow her self through fear.

Close with him Gentlemen. In the Duchess name
We do attach your body.

How, my body!
What means this rudeness?

You add to your offenses,
Calling that rudeness, that is fair command,
Immaculate Justice, and the Duchess pleasure.*

Seignior Lactantio, Oh are you the Speaker?


I am what I am made.


Show me my crime.


I fear you will have too many shown you Sir.


The Father of untruths possesses thy spirit,
As he commands thy tongue: I defy fear,
But in my love, it only settles there.

Bring him along.


Let Laws severest browe
Bend at my deeds, my innocence shall rise
A shame to thee, and all my enemies:

You Are much the happier man.


Oh my hard crosses;
Grant me the third part of one hours stay.

Sir, not a minute.


Oh she is lost.


Away.


I Am happily escaped, not one pursues me,
This shape's too cunning for 'em; all the sport was
The Porter would needs know his fortune of me
As I past by him: 'Twas such a plunge to me,
I knew not how to bear my self; at last
I did resolve of somewhat, looked in's hand,
Then shook my head, bad him make much on's eyes,
He would lose his sight clean, long before he dies,
And so away went I, he lost the sight of me quickly.
I told him his fortune truer for nothing, then some
Of my Complexion, that would have cozened him of his money.
This is the place of meeting; where is this man now,
That has took all this care and pains for nothing?
The use of him is at the last cast now,
Shall only bring me to my former face again,
And see me somewhat cleanlier at his cost,
And then farewell Andrugio; when I am handsome
I Am for another straight: I wonder troth
That he would miss me thus, I could have took
Many occasions besides this, to have left him,
I Am not in want, he need not give me any;
A woman's will has still enough to spare
To help her friends, and need be: What, not yet?
What will become of me in this shape then?
If I know where to go, I Am no dissembler;
And I Will not lose my part in one woman so,
For such a triffle, to forswear my self*
But comes he not indeed?

Oh ex'lent, by this light here is one of them. I thank my Stars: I learnt that
phrase in the Half Moon Tavern. By your leave good Gipsey, I pray how far off
is your company


Oh happiness! This is the merry Fellow
My love Seignior Lactantio takes delight in;
I Will send him away speedily, with the news
Of my so strange and fortunate escape,
And he will provide my safety at an instant.
My friend, thou serv'st Seignior Lactantio.

Who I serve? Gipsey, I scorn your motion; and if the rest of your company give
me no better words, I will hinder 'em the stealing of more Pully then fifty
Poulterers were ever worth, and prove a heavier enemy to all their Pig-booties;
they shall travel like Jews, that hate Swines flesh, and never get a Sow by
th'ear all their life time. I serve Lactantio? I scorn to serve any Body, I am
more Gipsey-minded then so; though my face look of a Christian color, if my
belly were ripped up, you shall find my heart as black as any patch about you.
The truth is, I am as arrant a theif, as the proudest of your company, I Will
except none: I am run away from my Master in the state of a Fool, and till I be
a perfect knave, I never mean to return again


I Am never the happier for this Fortune now,
It did but mock me.

Here they come: Here they come.


Come my dainty Doxes,
My Dells, my Dells most deer.
We have neither House nor Land,
Yet never want good cheer.

We never want good cheer*


We take no care for Candle, Rents,

We lie.

We snort.

We sport in Tents.
Then rouse betimes, and steal our dinners.
Our store is never taken
Without Pigs, Hens, or Bacon,
And that is good meat for sinners*
At Wakes and Fairs we cozen,
Poor Country folks by dozen*
If one have money, be disburses,
Whilst some tell fortunes, some pick purses*
Rather then be out of use
We'll steal Garters, Hose, or Shoes,
Boots, or Spurs with gingling Rowels,
Shirts or Napkins, Smocks or Towels.
Come live with us, come live with us,
All you that love your eases;
He that is a Gipsey,
May be drunk or tipsey,
At what hour he pleases.

We laugh, we quaff, we roar, we scuffle.
We cheat, we drab, we filtch, we shuffle.

Oh sweet! they deserve to be hanged for ravishing of me.


What will become of me, if I seem fearful now,
Or offer sudden flight? then I betray my self;
I must do neither.

Ousabel, camcheteroon, puscatelion, hows-drows.

Rumbos stragadelion
Alla piskitch in Sows-clows.
Oh, Oh!

Piskitch in howse-clout.

I shall never keep a good tongue in my head, till I get this Language.


Umbra fill kevolliden, magro-pye.


He calls her Magot of pie.


I love your Language well, but understand it not.


Hah.


I am but lately turned to your profession,
Yet from my youth, I ever loved it deerly,
But never could attain to it: Steal I can;
It was a thing I ever was brought up to,
My Father was a Miller, and my Mother
A Tailors widow.

She Is a theif on both sides.


Give me thy hand, thou art no Bastard born,
We have not a more true bred theif amongst us.

Not any Captain.


I pray take me into some grace amongst you too, for though I claim no goodness
from my parents to help me forward into your Society, I had two Uncles that
were both hanged for robberies, if that will serve your turn, and a brave
cutpurse to my Cozen-german: If kindred will be taken, I am as near a kin to a
theif as any of you that had Fathers and Mothers


What is it thou requirest, noble Cozen?


Cozen! nay, and we be so near a kin already, now we are sober, we shall be
sworn Brothers when we are drunk: The naked truth is Sir, I would be made a
Gipsey as fast as you could devise


A Gipsey!


I with all the speed you can Sir; the very sight of those stolen Hens, eggs me
forward horribl


Here Is dainty Ducks too Boy.


I see 'em but too well; I would they were all rotten roasted, and stuffed with
Onions


Love thou the common food of Eygpt, Onions?


I, and Garlic too: I have smelt out many a Knave by it; but I could never
smell mine own breath yet, and that is many a man's fault; he can smell out a
Knave in another sometimes three yards off, yet his Nose standing so nigh his
mouth, he can never smell out himself


A pregnant Gipsey.


A most witty sinner.


Stretch forth thy hand Coz; art thou fortunate?


How? fortunate! nay, I cannot tell that my self; wherefore do I come to you
but to learn that? I have sometimes found money in old shoes, but if I had not
stolen more then I have found, I had had but a scurvy thin-cheek'd fortune on it


Here Is a fair Table.


I, so has many a man, that has given over housekeeping, a fair Table, when
there is neither cloth, nor meat upon it


What a brave line of life's here, look you Gipseys.


I have known as brave a live end in a halter.


But thou art born to precious fortune.


The Devil I am.


Bette, Bucketto.


How, to beat Bucks?


Stealee Bacono.


Oh, to steal Bacon, that is the better fortune of the two indeed.


Thou will be shortly Captain of the Gipseys.


I would you would make me Corporal in the mean time;
Or Standard Bearer to the Women's Regiment.

Much may be done for love.


Nay here is some money: I know an Office comes not all for love; a Pox of your
Limetwigs, you hav't all already


It lies but here in cash for thine own use Boy.


Nay an't lie there once, I shall hardly come to the fingring on it in haste;
yet make me an apt Scholar, and I care not: Teach me but so much Gipsey, to
steal as much more from another, and the Devil do you good of that


Thou shall have all thy heart requires:
First, here is a Girl for thy desires,
This Doxey fresh, this new come Dell
Shall lie by thy sweet side and swell:
Get me Gipseys brave and tauny;
With Cheek full plump, and Hip full brauny.
Look you prove industrious dealers
To serve the Commonwealth with stealers,
That th'unhous'd race of Fortune Tellers
May never fail to cheat Town-dwellers;
Or to our universal grief,
Leave Country Fairs without a Theif.
This is all you have to do,
Save every hour a filch or two,
Be it money, cloth or pullen,
When the ev'nings browe looks sullen.
Loose no time, for then it is precious,
Let your sleights be fine, facetious;
Which hoping you will observe, to try thee
With rusty Bacon, thus I Gipsifie thee.

Do you use to do it with Bacon.


Evermore:


By this light, the Rats will take me now for some Hogs Cheek, and eat up my
face when I am asleep; I shall have never a bit left by to morrow morning; and
lying open mouthed as I use to do, I shall look for all the world like a
Mouse-trap baited with Bacon


Why here is a face like thine, so done,
Only grained in by the Sun, and this, and these.

Faith, then there is a company of Bacon faces of you, and I am one now to make
up the number: We are a kind of conscionable people, and 'twere well thought
upon for to steal Bacon, and black our faces with it; It Is like one that commits
sin, and writes his faults in his forehead


Wit whether will thou?


Marry to the next pocket I can come at; and if it be a Gentleman's, I wish a
whole quarters rent in it: Is this my in dock, out nettle. What Is Gipsey for her


Your doxey she.


Oh right, are you my doxey sir.


I Will be thy doxey, and thy dell.
With thee I Will live, for thee I Will steal:
From Fair to Fair, from Wake to Wake,
I Will ramble still for thy sweet sake.

Oh dainty fine doxey; she speaks the Language as familiarly already, as if
sh'ad been begot of a Canter. I pray Captain, what is gipsey for the hind
quarter of a Woman


Nosario.


Nosario: Why what is gipsey for my Nose then?


Why Arsinio.


Arsinio? Faith 'me thinks you might have devised a sweeter word for it.


Stop, stop, fresh booties, Gentle folks, Seignioroes,
Calavario, Fulkadelio.

La gnambrol a tumbrel.


How: Give me one word amongst you, that I may be doing too.


Yonder they are again, Oh guiltiness,
Thou put'st more trembling fear into a Maid
Then the first wedding night. Take courage wench
Thy face cannot betray thee with a blush now.

Which way she took her flight Sir, none can ghess,
Or how she escaped:

Out at some Window certainly.


Oh it is a bold daring Baggage.


See good fortune Sir,
The Gipseys, they are the cunningst people living.

They cunning? what a confidence have you Sir,
No wiseman's faith was ever set in fortunes.

You are the wilfulst man against all learning still:
I will be hanged now, if I hear not news of her amongst this company.

You are a Gentleman of the flatt'ring'st hopes
That ever lost woman yet.

Come hither Gipsey.


Luck now, or I Am undone, -- What says my Master,
Bless me with a silver cross,
And I will tell you all your loss.

Lo you there Sir, all my loss, at first word too,
There is no cunning in these Gipseys now.

Sure I Will hear more of this.


Here Is silver for you.


Now attend your fortunes story,
You loved a Maid.

Right.


She never loved you.
You shall find my words are true.

'Mass I am afraid so.


You were about
To keep her in, but could not do it.
Alas the while she would not stay
The cough of the Lungs blew her away;
And which is worse, you will be so crossed,
You Will never find the thing that is lost;
Yet oftentimes your sight will fear her,
She Will be near you, and yet you never the nearer.
Let her go, and be the gladder;
She'ld but shame you, if you had her.
Ten Counselors could never school her,
She'is so wild, you could not rule her.

In troth I am of thy mind, yet Il'ld fain find her.


Soonest then, when you least mind her;
But if you mean to take her tripping,
Make but haste, she is now a shipping.

I ever dreamed so much.


Hie to the Key,
We'll mar your voyage, you shall brook no Sea.

Cheteroon: High Gulleroon*


Filcheroon, pursse-fulleroon: I can say somewhat too.


Excellent Gipsey, witty rare Doxey:


I would not change my Dell for a dozen of black Bell-weathers.


Our wealth swells high my Boys.


Our wealth swells high my Boys.


Let every Gipsey
Dance with his Doxey,
And then drink, drink for joy.

Let every Gipsey
Dance with his Doxey,
And then drink, drink for joy:

And then drink, drink for joy.


That which is merely called a will in woman,
I cannot always title it with a virtue.

Oh good Sir spare me.


Spare your self, good Madam.
Extremest Justice is not so severe
To great offenders, as your own forced strictness
To beauty, youth and time; you will answer for it.

Sir settle your own peace, let me make mine.


But here is a heart must pity it, when it thinks on it,
I find compassion, though the smart be yours.

None here but does the like.


Believe it Madam,
You have much wronged your time.

Nay, let your Grace
But think upon the barrenness of succession.

Nay more, a Vow enforced.


What do you all
Forsake me then, and take part with you man;
Not one friend have I left I do they all fight
Under th'inglorious banner of his censure,
Serve under his opinion?

So will all Madam,
Whose judgments can but taste a rightful cause,
I look for more force yet; nay, your own women
Will shortly rise against you, when they know
The war to be so just and honorable
As marriage is: You cannot name that woman,
Will not come ready armed for such a cause:
Can Chastity be any whit impaired
By that which makes it perfect? Answer Madam,
Do you profess constancy, and yet live alone?
How can that hold! you are constant then to none.
That Is a dead virtue, goodness must have practice,
Or else it ceases; then is woman said
To be love chaste, knowing but one man's bed:
A mighty virtue; beside, fruitfulness
Is part of the salvation of your sex;
And the true use of Wedlocks time and space,
Is woman's exercise for Faith and Grace.

Oh what have you done my Lord?


Laid the way plain
To knowledge of your self and your Creation,
Unbound a forced Vow, that was but knit
By the strange jealousy of your dying Lord,
Sinful in the fastening.

All the powers of Constancy
Will curse you for this deed.

You speak in pain Madam,
And so I take your words, like one in sickness
That rails at his best friend: I know a change
Of disposition has a violent working
In all of us; it is fit it should have time
And council with it self: May you be fruitful Madam
In all the blessings of an honored love.

In all your wishes fortunate, and I
The chief of 'em my self.

Peace be at your heart Lady.


And love, say I.


We'll leave good thoughts now, to bring in themselves.


O there is no art like a religious cunning,
It carries away all things smooth before it.
How subtly has his wit dealt with the Lords
To fetch in their persuasions, to a business
That stands in need of none, yields of it self
As most we women do, when we seem farthest?
But little thinks the Cardinal he is requited
After the same proportion of deceit
As he sets down for others.
Oh here is the pretty Boy, he preferred to me,
I never saw a meeker, gentler youth
Yet made for man's beginning: How unfit
Was that poor fool, to be Lactantio's Page,
He would have spoiled him quite, in one year utterly,
There had been no hope of him. Come hither child,
I have forgot thy name.

Antonio, Madam.


Antonio! so thou toldst me; I must chide thee,
Why did thou weep, when thou came first to serve me?

At the distrust of mine own merits Madam,
Knowing I was not born to those deserts
To please so great a Mistress.

Alas poor Boy,
That Is nothing in thee, but thy modest fear
Which makes amends faster then thou can err:
It shall be my care to have him well brought up
As a youth apt for good things. Celia --

Madam.


Has he bestowed his hour to day for Music?


Yes, he has Madam.


How do you find his voice?


A pretty womanish faint sprawling voice Madam,
But 'twill grow strong in time, if he take care
To keep it when he has it from fond exercises.

Give order to the dancing Schoolmaster,
Observe an hour with him:

It shall be done Lady;
He is well made for dancing, thick in the Chest Madam,
He will turn long and strongly.

He shall not be behind a quality,
That aptness in him or our cost can purchase,
And see he lose no time.

I Will take that order Madam.


Singing and dancing! alas my case is worse,
I rather need a Midwife, and a Nurse.

Lactantio, my procurer not returned yet?
His malice, I have fitted with an office,
Which he takes pleasure to discharge with rigor:
He comes, and with him, my hearts Conqueror,
My pleasing thraldom's near.

Not know the cause?


Yes, you shall soon do that now, to the ruin
Of your neck-part, or some nine years imprisonment,
You meet with mercy, and you escape with that;
Beside your Lands all begged and seized upon;
That Is admirable favor. Here Is the Duchess.

Oh Sir you are welcome.


Marry bless me still
From such a welcome.

You are hard to come by,
It seems Sir by the guilt of your long stay.

My guilt good Madam.


Sure you had much a do
To take him, had you not? speak truth Lactantio,
And leave all favor, were you not in danger?

Faith something near it Madam: He grew headstrong,
Furious and fierce; but it is not my condition
To speak the worst things of mine enemy Madam,
Therein I hold mine honor: But had fury
Burst into all the violent storms that ever
Played over anger in tempestuous man.
I would have brought him to your Graces presence,
Dead or alive.

You would not Sir?


What pride
Of pampered blood has mounted up to this puckfoist?
If any way uncounsel'd of my judgment,
My ignorance has stepped into some error,
(Which I could heart'ly curse) and so brought on me
Your great displeasure, let me feel my sin
In the full weight of Justice, virtuous Madam,
And let it wake me thoroughly. But chaste Lady,
Out of the bounty of your Grace, permit not
This perfumed parcel of curled powdered hair
To cast me in the poor relish of his censure.

It shall not need good Sir; we are our self
Of power sufficient to judge you, never doubt it Sir.
Withdraw Lactantio; carefully place your Guard
In The next Room.

You Will but fare the worse;
You see your niceness spoils you; you will go nigh now
To feel your sin indeed.

Hell-mouth be with thee.
Was ever malice seen yet to gape wider
For man's misfortunes?

First Sir, I should think
You could not be so impudent to deny,
What your own knowledge proves to you.

That were a sin Madam,
More gross then flattery spent upon a villain.

Your own confession dooms you Sir.


Why Madam.


Do not you know I made a serious vow
At my Lords death, never to marry more?

That Is a truth Madam, I Am a witness to.


Is It so Sir? you will be taken presently,
This man needs no accuser. Knowing so much,
How durst you then attempt so bold a business
As to solicit me (so strictly settled)
With tempting Letters, and loose lines of love?

Who I do it Madam?


Sure the man will shortly
Deny he lives, although he walks and breath.

Better destruction snatch me quick from sight
Of humane eyes, then I should sin so boldly.

'Twas well I kept it then from rage or fire,
For my truths credit: Look you Sir, read out,
You know the hand and name:

Andrugio!


And if such things be fit, the world shall judge!


Madam.


Pish; that is not so; it begins otherwise
Pray look again Sir; how you would slight your knowledge.

By all the reputation I late won.


Nay, and you dare not read Sir, I am gone.


Read? most fair Duchess.


Oh, have you found it now?
There Is a sweet flattering phrase for a beginning,
You thought belike, that would o'rcome me.

I Madam?


Nay on Sir, you are slothful*


The report of your Vow shall not fear me.


No? are you so resolute? It Is well for you Sir:


I know you are but a woman.


Well, what then Sir?


And what a woman is, a wiseman knows.


Let him know what he can, he is glad to get us.


Perhaps my condition may seem blunt to you.


Well; we find no fault with your bluntness.


But no man's love can be more sharp set.


I there is good stuff now.


And I know desires in both sexes have skill at that weapon.


Weapon! You begin like a Flatterer, and end like a Fencer.
Are these fit lines now to be sent to us?

Now by the honor of a man, his truth Madam,
My name's abused.

Fie, fie, deny your hand!
I will not deny mine; here take it freely Sir,
And with it my true constant heart for ever.
I never disgraced man that sought my favor.

What mean you Madam?


To requite you Sir
By courtesy, I hold my reputation,
And you shall taste it: Sir, in as plain truth
As the old time walked in, when love was simple
And knew no art, nor guile, I affect you;
My heart has made her choice. I love you Sir
Above my vow; the frown that met you first,
Wore not the livery of anger Sir,
But of deep policy: I made your enemy
The Instrument for all; there you may praise me,
And 'twill not be ill given.

Here Is a strange Language!
The constancy of love bless me from learning on it,
Although ambition would soon teach it others.
Madam, the service of whole life is yours. But --

Enough; you are mine for ever. Within there.


Madam.


Lay hands upon him, bear him hence,
See he be kept close prisoner in our Palace,
The time's not yet ripe for our Nuptial Sollace.

This you could clear your self.


There Is a voice that wearies me
More then mine own distractions.

You are innocent?


I have not a time idle enough from passion,
To give this Devil an answer: Oh she is lost!
Cursed be that love, by which a better's crossed.
There my heart's settled.

How is he disgraced,
And I advanced in love? Faith he that can
Wish more to his enemy, is a spightful man,
And worthy to be punished.

SIr I Am of that opinion, being kept hard to it, In troth I think he will take his
prick-song well


G, sol, re ut; you ghess not right y'saith.
Mistress, you will find you are in an error straight:
Come on Sir, lay the Books down; you shall see now.

Would I Would an honest Caudle next my heart,
Let whose would Sol Fa, I Would give them my part.
In troth methinks I have a great longing in me
To bite a piece of the Musicians Nose off;
But I Will rather lose my longing, then spoil the poor man's
Singing; the very tip will serve my turn, methinks if I
Could get it, that he might well spare; his Nose is of
The longest -- Oh my back.

You shall hear that; rehearse your Gamot Boy:


Who'ld be thus toild for love, and want the joy?


Why when? begin Sir: I must stay your leisure.


Gamot, a re, b me, etc.


Ee la: Aloft, above the clouds my Boy.


It must be a better note then Ela Sir,
That brings Musicians thither; they are too hasty,
The most part of 'em, to take such a journey,
And must needs fall by the way.

How many Cliffs be there?


One Cliff Sir.


Oh intolerable heretic
To voice and music! Do you know but one Cliff?

No more; indeed I Sir, and at this time,
I know too much of that.

How many Notes be there?


Eight Sir, I fear me I shall find nine shortly,
To my great shame and sorrow: -- Oh my stomach!

Will you repeat your notes then? I must Sol Fa you, why when Sir?


A large, a long, a brief, a semibrief, a minom, a crotchet,
A quaver, a semiquaver:

Oh, have you found the way?


Never trust me
If I have not lost my wind with naming of 'em.

Come Boy, your minds upon some other thing now:
Set to your Song.

Was ever Wench so punished?


Ut. Come begin.


Ut me re fa sol la.


Keep time you foolish Boy -- (Here they sing Pricksong)
How like you this Madova?

Pretty,
He will do well in time being kept under.

I Will make his ears sore, and his knuckles ache else.


And that is the way to bring a Boy to goodness Sir.


There Is many now waxt proper Gentlemen.
Whom I have nipt i'ch' ear Wench, that is my comfort.
Come sing me over the last song I taught you:
You Are perfect in that sure, look you keep time well,
Or here I Will notch your faults up. Sol, Sol, begin Boy.

So you have done well Sir.
Here comes the dancing Master now, you are discharged.

Oh Seignior Crotchet, Oh.


A minom rest, two cliffs, and a semibrief. In the name
Of Alamire, what is the matter Sir?

The horriblest disaster that ever disgraced the lofty cunning of a dancer.


Be fa beme: Heaven forbid man.


Oh -- oo -- the most cruel Fortune!


That smiquaver is no friend to you,
That I must tell you; it is not for a Dancer
To put his voice so hard to it, every workman
Must use his own tools Sir, de fa sol man, dilate
The matter to me.

Faith riding upon my Foot-cloth, as I use to do, coming through a crowd by
chance, I let fall my Fiddle


De sol re. Your Fiddle Sir?


Oh that such an instrument should be made to betray a poor Gentleman! nay,
which is more lamentable, whose luck should it be to take up this unfortunate
Fiddle, but a Barbers Prentice, who cried out presently, according to his
nature; You trim Gentleman on Horsback, you have lost your Fiddle, your worships
Fiddle; seeing me upon my Footcloth, the mannerly Cockscomb could say no less.
But away rid I Sir, put my horse to a caranto pace, and left my Fiddle behind
me


De la sol re.


I, was it not a strange fortune, an excellent Treble-vial, by my Troth 'twas my
Masters, when I was but a pumper, that is a puller on of Gentlemen's Pumps


C, c, sol fa: I knew you then Sir.


But I make no question, but I shall hear on it shortly at one Brokers or
another, for I know the Barber will scourse it away for some old Cittron


Ela me, my life for yours on that Sir; I must to my other
Scholars, my hour calls me away: I leave you to your
Practice, Fa sol la. Fare you well Sir:

The Lavolto's of a merry heart be with you Sir; and a merry heart makes a good
singing man; a man may love to hear himself talk, when he carries pith in's
mouth -- Metereza Celia


Seignior Sinquapace, the welcom'st Gentleman alive of
A Dancer. This is the youth, he can do little yet;
It Is Pricksong very poorly; he is one
Must have it put into him; somewhat dull Sir.

As you are all at first. You know 'twas long
Ere you could learn your doubles*

I that is true Sir,
But I can tickl't now. Fa, la, la, etc.
Lo you, how like you me now Sir?

Marry pray for the Founder, here he stands; long may he live to receive
quartridges, go brave, and pay his Mercer wondrous duly, I, and his jealous
Laundress, that for the love she bears him starches yellow, poor Soul; my own
flesh knows I wrong her not. Come Metereza, once more shake your great hips,
and your little heels, since you begin to fall in of your self, and dance over
the end of the caranto I taught you last night


The tune's clear out of my head Sir.


A Pox of my little Usher, how long he stays too with the second part of the
former Fiddle! Come, I Will Sol fa it, in the mean time, Fa, la, la, la, etc.
perfectly excellent. I will make you fit to dance with the best Christian
Gentleman in Europe, and keep time with him for his heart, ere I give you over


Nay, I know I shall do well Sir, and I am somewhat proud on it,
But 'twas my Mothers fault, when she danced with the Duke of Florence.

Why you will never dance well, while you live, if you be not proud. I know that
by my self; I may teach my heart out, if you have not the grace to follow me


I warrant you for that Sir:


Gentlewomen that are good Scholars Will come as near their Masters, as they
can; I have known some lie with 'em for their better understanding, I speak not
this to draw you on forsooth; use your pleasure, if you come you are welcome, you
shall see a fine lodging, a dish of Comfits, Music, and sweet Linen


And trust me Sir, no woman can wish more in this world,
Unless it be ten pound in the Chamber window,
Laid ready in good gold against she rises.

Those things are got in a morning Wench with me.


Indeed, I hold the morning the best time of getting;
So says my Sister; she is a Lawyers wife Sir,
And should know what belongs to cases best:
A fitter time for this; I must not talk
Too long of women's matters before Boys.
He Is very raw, you must take pains with him,
It is the Duchess mind it should be so; she loves him
Well I tell you --

How, love him? he is too little for any woman's love in the Town, by three
handfuls: I wonder of a great woman, sh' as no more wit in faith; one of my
pitch were somewhat tolerable

Oh are you come! who would be thus plagued with a Dandiprat Usher! how many
kicks do you deserve in conscience


Your Horse is safe Sir.


Now I talked of kicking, 'twas well remembered, is not the Footcloth stolen yet?


More by good hap then any cunning Sir: Would any Gentleman but you, get a
Tailors son to walk his Horse, in this dear time of black Velvet


Troth thou say true; thy care has got thy pardon; I Will venture so no more.
Come my young Scholar, I am ready for you now


Alas 'twill kill me,
I Am even as full of qualms as heart can bear:
How shall I do to hold up? Alas Sir
I can dance nothing but ill-favor'dly,
A strain or two of Passa-Measures Galliard.

Marry you are forwarder then I conceived you,
A toward Stripling; enter him Nicholao,
For the fool's bashful, as they are all at first
Till they be once well entered.

Passa-Measures Sir?


I Sir, I hope you hear me; mark him now Boy. (Dance.)
Ha well done, exc'llent Boys -- Dainty fine Springals;
The glory of Dancers Hall, if they had any;
And of all Professions, they had most need of one
For room to practice in, yet they have none.
O times! O manners! you have very little.
Why should the leaden heel'd Plumber have his Hall,
And the light-footed Dancer none at all?
But Fortune de la guardo, things must be:
W're born to teach in Back-houses and Nooks,
Garrets sometimes, where't rains upon our Books.
Come on Sir, are you ready? first your honor.

I Will wish no fo, a greater cross upon her:


Curtsey, heiday! Run to him Nicholao, by this light he will shame me; he makes
curtsey like a Chambermaid


Why what do you mean Page! are you mad? did you ever see a Boy begin a Dance,
and make curtsey like a Wench before


Troth I was thinking of another thing; And quite forgot my self, I pray
forgive me Sir


Come make amends then now with a good leg, and dance it sprightly: What a
beastly leg has he made there now, 'twould vex ones heart out: Now begin Boy,
Oh, oh, oh, oh, etc. open thy Knees, wider, wider, wider, wider; did you ever
see a Boy dance clencht up, he needs a pick-lock; out upon thee for an arrant
Ass, an arrant Ass, I shall lose my credit by thee, a pest'lence on thee. Here
Boy hold the Vial, let me come to him, I shall get more disgrace by this little
Monkey now, then by all the Ladies that ever I taught. Come on Sir now; cast
thy leg out from thee, lift it up aloft Boy; a Pox, his knees are soader'd
together, they are sowed together; can not stride? Oh I could eat thee up, I
could eat thee up, and begin upon thy hinder quarter, thy hinder quarter: I
shall never teach this Boy without a skrew, his knees must be opened with a
Vice, or there is no good to be done upon him -- Who taught you to dance Boy


It is but little Sir that I can do.


No; I Will be sworn for you.


And that Seignior Laurentio taught me Sir:


Seignior Laurentio was an arrant Cockscomb,
And fit to teach none but White-bakers children
To knead their knees together. You can turn above ground Boy?

Not I Sir; my turns rather underground.


We'll see what you can do, I love to try
What Is in my Scholars, the first hour I teach them:
Show him a close trick now Nicholao.
Ha, dainty Stripling! come Boy.

'Lass not I Sir,
I am not for losty tricks, indeed I am not Sir:

How; such another word, down goes your Hose Boy.


Alas it is time for me to do any thing then.


Heyday he is down; is this your lofty trick Boy?


O Master, the Boy swoons; he is dead I fear me.


Dead! I never knew one die with a lofty trick before.
Up Sirrah, up.

A Midwife, run for a Midwife.


A Midwife! By this light the Boy's with child.
A miracle! Some Woman is the Father.
The World's turned upside down, sure if Men breed,
Women must get, one never could do both yet.
No marv'l you danced close-knee'd the Sinquapace:
Put up my Fiddle, here is a stranger case --

That it is I Will swear; 'twill make the Duchess wonder.
I fear me 'twill bring dancing out of request,
And hinder our profession for a time:
Your Women that are closely got with child,
Will put themselves clean out of exercise,
And will not venture now for fear of meeting
Their shames in a Caranto, specially
If they be near their time: Well in my knowledge,
If that should happen, we are sure to lose
Many a good Waiting Woman, that is now over shoes.
Alas the while --

Thou tell me things are enemies to reason,
I cannot get my Faith to entertain 'em,
And I hope never shall.

It Is too true Madam.


I say it is false: 'Twere better thou had been dumb,
Then spoke a truth s'unpleasing; thou shall get
But little praise by it: He whom we affect
To place his love upon so base a Creature!

Nay ugliness it self, you would say so Madam,
If you but saw her once, a strowling Gipsey,
No Christian that is born a Hind could love her,
She Is the Suns Masterpiece for tawniness;
Yet have I seen Andrugio's arms about her,
Perceived his hollow whisprings in her ear,
His joys at meeting her.

What joy could that be?


Such Madam, I have seldom seen it equaled;
He kissed her with that greediness of affection,
As if his lips had been as red as yours.
I looked still when he would be black in mouth,
Like Boys with eating Hedg-berries: Nay, more Madam,
He bribed one of his Keepers with ten Ducats
To find her out amongst a flight of Gipseys.

I Will have that Keeper hanged, and you for malice,
She cannot be so bad as you report,
Whom he so firmly loves, you're false in much,
And I will have you tried; go fetch her to us:
He cannot be himself, and appear guilty
Of such gross folly, has an eye of judgment,
And that will overlook him: This Wench fails
In understanding service; she must home,
Live at her house in the Country, she decays
In beauty and discretion: Who has't brought there?

This is she Madam.


Youth and whiteness bless me,
It is not possible: He talked sensibly
Within this hour, this cannot be: How does he?
I fear me my restraint has made him mad.

His health is perfect, Madam.


You are perfect
In falsehood still, he is certainly distracted:
Though I Would be loath to foul my words upon her,
She looks so beastly, yet I Will ask the question,
Are you beloved (sweet face) of Andrugio?

Yes showr'ly Mistress, he done love me
'Bove all the Girls that shine above me.
Full often has he sweetly kissed me,
And wept as often when he mist me:
Swore he was to marry none,
But me alone.

Out on thee; marry thee? away with her.
Clear mine eyes of her:
A Curat that has got his place by Simony,
Is not half black enough to marry thee.
Surely the man's far spent, how ere he carries it,
He Is without question mad; but I never knew
Man bear it better before company.
The love of Woman wears so thick a blindness,
It sees no fault, but only man's unkindness;
And that is so gross, it may be felt: Here Celia
Take this; with speed command Andrugio to us,
And his guard from him.

It shall strait be done Madam.


I Will look into his carriage more judiciously,
When I next get him. A wrong done to Beauty,
Is greater then an injury done to Love,
And we'll less pardon it; for had it been
A creature whose perfection had out-shin'd me,
It had been honorable judgment in him,
And to my peace a noble satisfaction:
But as it is, it is monstrous above folly!
Look he be mad indeed, and thoroughly gone,
Or he pays deerly for it: It Is not
The ordinary madness of a Gentleman,
That shall excuse him here; 'had better lose
His wits eternally, then lose my Grace:
So strange is the condition of his fall,
He Is safe in nothing, but in loss of all.
He comes: Now by the Fruits of all my hopes,
A man that has his wits, cannot look better;
It likes me well enough, there is life in's eye,
And civil health in's Cheek; he stands with judgment,
And bears his body well: What ails this man?
Sure I durst venture him amongst a thousand Ladies.
Let 'em shoot all their scoffs, which makes none laugh
But their own Waiting-women, and they dare do no otherwise.
Come nearer Sir: I pray keep further off,
Now I remember you.

What new trick's in this now?


How long have you been mad Sir?


Mad! a great time Lady;
Since I first knew I should not sin* yet sinned;
That Is now some thirty years; By'r Lady upwards.

This man speaks reason, wondrous feelingly,
Enough to teach the rudest Soul good manners.
You cannot be excused with lightness now,
Or frantic fits; y're able to instruct Sir,
And be a light to men. If you have errors,
They be not ignorant in you, but wilful,
And in that state I seize on 'em. Did I
Bring thee acquainted lately with my heart!
And when thou thought a storm of anger took thee,
It in a moment cleared up all to love,
To the abusing of thy spiteful enemy
That sought to fix his malice upon thee,
And could thou so requite me?

How! good Madam.


To wrong all worth in man, to deal so basely
Upon contempt it self, disdain and loathsomness;
A thing whose face through ugliness frights children;
A straggling Gipsey!

See how you may err, Madam,
Through wrongful information; by my hopes
Of truth and mercy, there is no such love
Bestowed upon a creature so unworthy.

No, then you cannot fly me; fetch her back:
And though the sight of her displease mine eye
Worse then th'offensiv'st object, Earth and Nature
Can present to us; yet for truths probation,
We will endur't contentfully: What now
Art thou returned without her?

No Madam: This is she my peace dwells in,
If here be either baseness of descent,
Rudeness of manners or deformity
In face or fashion, I have lost, I Will yield it;
Tax me severely Madam.

How thou standst,
As dumb as the Salt-pillar; where is this Gipsey?
What no? I cannot blame thee then for silence.
Now I Am confounded too, and take part with thee.

Your pardon, and your pity, virtuous Madam.
Cruel restraint joined with the power of love,
Taught me that art, in that disguise I'scap'd
The hardness of my Fortunes; you that see
What loves force is, good Madam pity me.

Your Grace has ever been the friend of truth;
And here it is set before you.

I confess
I have no wrong at all; she is younger, fairer.
He has not now dishonored me in choice,
I much commend his noble care and judgment.
'Twas a just cross led in by a temptation,
For offering but to part from my dear Vow,
And I Will embrace it cheerfully: Rise both,
The joys of faithful marriage bless your souls,
I will not part you.

Virtues crown be yours Madam.


Oh there appears the life of all my wishes;
Is your Grace pleased out of your bounteous goodness
To a poor Virgins comforts, I shall freely
Enjoy whom my heart loves.

Our word is past,
Enjoy without disturbance.

There Lactantio
Spread thy arms open wide, to welcome her
That has wrought all this means to rest in thee.

Death of my joys; how is this?


Prithee away fond Fool, hast' no shame in thee,
Thou Art bold and ignorant, what ere thou art.

What ere I am, do not you know me then?


Yes for some Waiting-vessel, but the times
Are changed with me, if you had the grace to know 'em.
I looked for more respect, I am not spoke withal
After this rate I tell you; learn hereafter
To know what belongs to me, you shall see
All the Court teach you shortly. Farewell Manners.

I Will mark the event of this.


I'have undone my self two ways at once; lost a great deal of time,
And now I am like to lose more. O my fortune!
I was nineteen yesterday, and partly vowed
To have a child by twenty, if not twain:
To see how Maids are crossed! but I Am plagued justly:
And she that makes a fool of her first love,
Let her never look to prosper, Sir.

Oh falsehood!


Have you forgiveness in you? There Is more hope of me
Then of a Maid that never yet offended.

Make me your property?


I Will promise you,
I Will never make you worse: And Sir you know
There are worse things for women to make men.
But by my hope of children, (and all lawful)
I Will be as true for ever to your Bed
As she, in thought or deed, that never erred:

I Will once believe a woman, be it but to strengthen
Weak faith in other men: I have a love
That covers all thy faults.

Nephew, prepare thy self
With meekness and thanksgiving to receive
Thy reverend fortune: Amongst all the Lords,
Her close affection now makes choice of thee:

Alas I Am not to learn to know that now.
Where could she make choice here, if I were missing?
'Twould trouble the whole State, and puzzle 'em all
To find out such another.

It Is high time Madam,
If your Grace please, to make election now.
Behold, they are all assembled!

What election?
You speak things strange to me Sir.

How! good Madam.


Give me your meaning plainly like a Father.
You are too religious Sir to deal in Riddles.

Is there a plainer way then leads to marriage, Madam,
And the man set before you?

O Blasphemy
To Sanctimonious Faith! comes it from you Sir!
An ill example; know you what you speak,
Or who you are? Is not my Vow in place?
How dare you be so bold Sir? Say a woman
Were tempt with a temptation, must you presently
Take all the advantage on it?

Is this in earnest, Madam?


Heaven pardon you; if you do not think so Sir,
You Have much to answer for: But I will leave you;
Return I humbly now from whence I fell.
All you blessed powers that Register the Vows
Of Virgins and chaste Matrons, look on me
With eyes of mercy; seal forgiveness to me
By signs of inward peace; and to be surer,
That I will never fail your good hopes of me,
I bind my self more strictly. All my riches
I Will speedily commend to holy uses;
This Temple unto some religious Sanctuary,
Where all my time to come I will allow
For fruitful thoughts; so knit I up my Vow.

This is to hawk at Eagles: Pox of pride,
It lays a man in the mire still, like a Jade
That has too many tricks, and never a good one.
I must gape high, I Am in a sweet case now,
I was sure of one, and now I have lost her too.

I know, my Lord, all that great studious care
Is for your Kinsman; he is provided for
According to his merits.

How Is that! good Madam?


Upon the firmness of my Faith it is true Sir;
See here is the Gentlewoman; the match was made
Near forty weeks ago: He knows the time Sir,
Better then I can tell him, and the poor Gentlewoman
Better then he: But being Religious Sir, and fearing you,
He durst not own her for his wife till now,
Only contracted with her in man's apparel,
For the more modesty, because he was bashful,
And never could endure the sight of woman,
For fear that you should see her: This was he
Chose for my love; this Page preferred to me.

I Am paid with mine own money.


Dare hypocrisy,
For fear of vengeance, sit so close to Virtue.
Steal'st thou a holy vestment from Religion,
To cloth forbidden Lust with? the open villainy
Goes before thee to mercy, and his Penitency
Is blessed with a more sweet and quick return.
I utterly disclaim all blood in thee.
I Will sooner make a Parracide my heir,
Then such a monster. O forgive me Madam!
Th'apprehension of the wrong to you
Has a sins wait at it. I forget all Charity,
When I but think upon him.

Nay, my Lord,
At our request, since we are pleased to pardon,
And send remission to all former errors,
Which conscionable Justice now sets right,
From you we expect patience; h'as had punishment
Enough in his false hopes; trust me he has Sir;
They have requited his dissembling largely.
And to erect your falling-goodness to him,
We'll begin first our self: Ten thousand Ducats
The Gentlewoman shall bring out of our Treasure,
To make her dowry.

None has the true way
Of overcoming anger with meek virtue,
Like your compassionate Grace.

Curse of this fortune*
This it is to meddle with taking stuff, whose Belly
cannot be confined in a Waste-band: Pray what have
you done with the Breeches, we shall have need of
'em shortly; and we get children so fast, they are too
good to be cast away. My Son and Heir need not
scorn to wear what his Mother has left off: I had
my fortune told me by a Gipsey seven years ago, she
said then I should be the spoil of many a Maid, and
at seven years end marry a Queen for my labor;
which falls out wicked and true.

We all have faults; look not so much on his.
Who lives in the world that never did amiss?
For you Aurelia, I commend your choice,
You Have one after our heart: And though your Father
Be not in presence, we'll assure his voice;
Doubt not his liking, his o'r* joying rather:
You Sir embrace your own, it is your full due;
No Page serves me more, that once dwells with you.
Oh they that search out man's intents, shall find
There Is more Dissemblers then of Women kind.


