WOMEN BEWARE WOMEN.

A TRAGEDY, BY Tho, Middleton, Gent.



LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, 1657.

The Scaen. FLORENCE.

THy sight was never yet more precious to me;
Welcome with all the affection of a Mother,
That comfort can express from natural love:
Since thy birth-joy, a Mothers chiefest gladness.
After she has undergone her curse of sorrows,
Thou was it not more dear to me, then this hour
Presents thee to my heart. Welcome again.

Alas poor affectionate Soul, how her joys speak to me!
I have observed it often, and I know it is
The fortune commonly of knavish Children
To have the lovingst Mothers.

What Is this Gentlewoman?


Speak low sweet Mother; you are able to spoil as many
As come within the hearing: If it be not
Your fortune to mar all, I have much marvel.
I pray do not you teach her to rebel,
When she is in a good way to obedience,
To rise with other women in commotion
Against their husbands, for six Gowns a year,
And so maintain their cause, when they are once up,
In all things else that require cost enough.
They are all of 'em a kind of spirits soon raised,
But not so soon laid (Mother) As for example,
A woman's belly is got up in a trice,
A simple charge ere it be laid down again:
So ever in all their quarrels, and their courses,
And I Am a proud man, I hear nothing of 'em,
They Are very still, I thank my happiness,
And sound asleep; pray let not your tongue wake 'em.
If you can but rest quiet, she is contented
With all conditions, that my fortunes bring her to;
To keep close as a wise that loves her husband;
To go after the rate of my ability,
Not the licentious swindg of her own will,
Like some of her old school-fellows, she intends
To take out other works in a new Sampler,
And frame the fashion of an honest love,
Which knows no wants; but mocking poverty
Brings forth more children, to make rich men wonder
At divine Providence, that feeds mouths of Infants,
And sends them none to feed, but stuffs their rooms
With fruitful bags, their beds with barren wombs.
Good Mother, make not you things worse then they are,
Out of your too much openness; pray take heed on it;
Nor imitate the envy of old people,
That strive to mar good sport, because they are perfect.
I would have you^ more pitiful to youth,
Especially to your own flesh and blood.
I Will prove an excellent husband, here is my hand,
Lay in provision, follow my business roundly,
And make you a Grandmother in forty weeks.
Go, pray salute her, bid her welcome cheerfully.

Gentlewoman, thus much is a debt of courtesy
Which fashionable strangers pay each other
At a kind meeting; then there is more then one
Due to the knowledge I have of your neerness:
I am bold to come again, and now salute you
By th'name of daughter, which may challenge more
Then ordinary respect.

Why this is well now,
And I think few Mothers of threescore will mend it.

What I can bid you welcome to, is mean;
But make it all your own; we are full of wants,
And cannot welcome worth.

Now this is scurvy,
And spoke as if a woman lacked her teeth.
These old folks talk of nothing but defects,
Because they grow so full of 'em themselves.

Kind Mother, there is nothing can be wanting
To her that does enjoy all her desires.
Heaven send a quiet peace with this man's love,
And I am as rich, as Virtue can be poor;
Which were enough after the rate of mind,
To erect Temples for content placed here;
I have forsook Friends, Fortunes, and my Country,
And hourly I rejoice in it. Here Is my Friends,
And few is the good number; thy successes
How ere they look, I will still name my fortunes,
Hopeful or spightful, they shall all be welcome:
Who invites many guests, has of all sorts,
As he that trafficks much, drinks of all fortunes,
Yet they must all be welcome, and used well.
I Will call this place the place of my birth now,
And rightly too; for here my love was born,
And that is the birthday of a woman's joys.
You have not bid me welcome since I came.

That I did questionless.


No sure, how was it?
I have quite forgot it.

Thus.


Oh Sir, it is true;
Now I remember well: I have done thee wrong,
Pray take it again Sir.

How many of these wrongs
Could I put up in an hour? and turn up the Glass
For twice as many more.

Wilt please you to walk in daughter?


Thanks sweet Mother;
The voice of her that bare me, is not more pleasing.

Though my own care, and my rich Masters trust,
Lay their commands both on my Factorship,
This day and night, I Will know no other business
But her and her dear welcome. It Is a bitterness
To think upon to morrow, that I must leave her
Still to the sweet hopes of the weeks end,
That pleasure should be so restrained and curbed
After the course of a rich Work-master,
That never pays till Saturday night.
Marry it comes together in a round sum then,
And does more good you will say: Oh fair eyed Florence!
Did thou but know, what a most matchless Jewel
Thou now art Mistress of, a pride would take thee,
Able to shoot destruction through the bloods
Of all thy youthful Sons; but it is great policy
To keep choice treasures in obscurest places:
Should we show Thieves our wealth, 'twould make 'em bolder;
Temptation is a Devil will not stick
To fasten upon a Saint; take heed of that;
The Jewel is cased up from all men's eyes.
Who could imagine now a Gem were kept,
Of that great value under this plain roof?
But how in times of absence? what assurance
Of this restraint then; yes, yes? there is one with her.
Old Mothers know the world; and such as these,
When Sons lock Chests, are good to look to Keys.

What has your daughter seen him yet? know you that?


No matter, she shall love him.


Nay let us have fair play,
He has been now my Ward some fifteen year,
And it is my purpose (as time calls upon me)
By custom seconded, and such moral virtues,
To tender him a wife; now Sir, this wife
I Would fain elect out of a daughter of yours.
You see my meaning's fair; if now this daughter
So tendered (let me come to your own phrase Sir)
Should offer to refuse him, I were hansell'd.
Thus am I fain to calculate all my words,
For the Meridian of a foolish old man,
To take his understanding: What do you answer Sir?

I say still she shall love him.


Yet again?
And shall she have no reason for this love?

Why do you think that women love with reason?


I perceive Fools are not at all hours foolish,
No more then wisemen wise.

I had a wife,
She ran mad for me; she had no reason for it,
For ought I could perceive: What think you Lady Sister?

'Twas a fit match that,
Being both out of their wits: A loving wife, it seemed
She strove to come as near you as she could.

And if her daughter prove not mad for love too,
She takes not after her, nor after me;
If she prefer reason before my pleasure,
Your an experienced widow. Lady Sister,
I pray let your opinion come amongst us.

I must offend you then, if truth will do it,
And take my Neeces part, and called injustice
To force her love to one she never saw.
Maids should both see, and like; all little enough;
If they love truly after that, it is well.
Connting the time, she takes one man till death,
That Is hard task, I tell you; but one may
Enquire at three years end, amongst young wives,
And mark how the game goes.

Why, is not man
Tide to the same observance, Lady Sister,
And in one woman?

It Is enough for him;
Besides he tastes of many sundry dishes
That we poor wretches never lay our lips to;
As Obedience forsooth, Subjection, Duty, and such Kickshaws,
All of our making, but served in to them;
And if we lick a finger, then sometimes
We are not too blame: Your best Cooks use it*

Thou Art a sweet Lady, Sister, and a witty --


A witty! Oh the bud of commendation
Fit for a Girl of sixteen; I am blown man,
I should be wise by this time; and for instance,
I have buried my two husbands in good fashion,
And never mean more to marry.

No, why so Lady?


Because the third shall never bury me:
I think I am more then witty; how think you Sir?

I have paid often fees to a Counselor
Has had a weaker brain.

Then I must tell you,
Your money was soon parted.

Light her now Brother.


Where is my Niece? let her be sent for straight.
If you have any hope, 'twill prove a wedding;
It Is fit in faith she should have one sight of him,
And stop upon it, and not be joined in haste,
As if they went to stock a new found Land.

Look out her Uncle, and you are sure of her,
Those two are never asunder, they have been heard
In Argument at midnight, Moonshine nights
Are Noon days with them; they walk out their sleeps;
Or rather at those hours, appear like those
That walk in 'em, for so they did to me.
Look you, I told you truth; they are like a chain,
Draw but one link, all follows.

Oh affinity,
What piece of excellent workmanship art thou?
It Is work clean wrought, for there is no lust, but love in it,
And that abundantly: when in stranger things,
There is no love at all, but what lust brings.

On with your Mask, for it is your part to see now,
And not be seen: Go too, make use of your time;
See what you mean to like; nay, and I charge you,
Like what you see: Do you hear me? there is no dallying:
The Gentleman's almost twenty, and it is time
He were getting lawful heirs, and you a breeding on 'em.

Good Father!


Tell not me of tongues and rumors.
You Will say the Gentleman is somewhat simple,
The better for a husband, were you wise;
For those that marry fools, live Ladies lives.
On with the Mask, I Will hear no more, he is rich;
The fool's hid under Bushels.

Not so hid neither;
But here is a foul great piece of him methinks;
What will he be, when he comes altogether?

Beat him?
I beat him out of the field with his own Cat-stick,
Yet gave him the first hand.

Oh strange!


I did it,
Then he set Jacks on me.

What, my Ladies Tailor?


I, and I beat him too.


Nay that is no wonder,
He Is used to beating.

Nay, I tickel'd him
When I came once to my tippings.

Now you talk on 'em;

There was a Poulterers wife made a great complaint of you last night to your
Gardianer, that you struck a bump in her childs head, as big as an Egg


An Egg may prove a Chicken then in time; the Poulterers wife will get by it.
When I am in game, I am furious; came my Mothers eyes in my way, I would not
lose a fair end: No, were she alive, but with one tooth in her head, I should
venture the striking out of that. I think of no body, when I am in play. I am
so earnest. Coads-me, my Gardianer! Prithee lay up my Cat and Cat-stick safe


Where Sir, in the Chimney-corner?


Chimney Corner!


Yes Sir, your Cats are always safe in the Chimney Corner,
Unless they burn their Coats.

Marry, that I am afraid on*


Why, then I will bestow your Cat in the Gutter,
And there she is safe I am sure.

If I but live
To keep a house, I Will make thee a great man,
If meat and drink can do it. I can stoop gallantly,
And pitch out when I list: I Am dog at a hole,
I mar'l my Guardianer does not seek a wife for me;
I protest I Will have a bout with the Maids else,
Or contract my self at midnight to the Larder-woman,
In presence of a Fool, or a Sack-posset.

Ward.


I feel my self after any exercise
Horribly prone: Let me but ride, I Am lusty,
A Cock-horse straight in faith.

Why Ward. I say.


I Will forswear eating Eggs in Moonshine nights;
There Is never a one I eat, but turns into a Cock
In four and twenty hours, if my hot blood
Be not took down in time, sure 'twill crow shortly.

Do you hear Sir? follow me, I must new School you.


School me? I scorn that now, I am past schooling.
I am not so base to learn to write and read;
I was born to better fortunes in my Cradle.

How do you like him Girl? this is your husband.
Like him, or like him not wench, you shall have him,
And you shall love him.

Oh soft there Brother! though you be a Justice,
Your Warrant cannot be served out of your liberty,
You may compel out of the power of Father,
Things merely harsh to a Maids flesh and blood;
But when you come to love, there the soil alters;
You Are in an other Country, where your Laws
Are no more set by, then the cacklings
Of Geese in Romes great Capitol.

Marry him she shall then.
Let her agree upon love afterward.

You speak now Brother like an honest mortal
That walks upon the earth with a staff;
You were up in the Clouds before, you would command love,
And so do most old folks that go without it.
My best and dearest Brother, I could dwell here;
There is not such another seat on earth,
Where all good parts better express themselves.

You Will make me blush anon.


It Is but like saying grace before a Feast then,
And that is most comely; thou art all a Feast,
And she that has thee, a most happy guest.
Prithee cheer up that Niece with special Counsel*

I would 'twere fit to speak to her what I would; but
'Twas not a thing ordained, Heaven has forbid it,
And it is most meet, that I should rather perish
Then the Decree Divine receive least blemish:
Feed inward you my sorrows, make no noise,
Consume me silent, let me be stark dead
Ere the world know I Am sick. You see my honesty,
If you befriend me, so.

Marry a Fool!
Can there be greater misery to a woman
That means to keep her days true to her husband,
And know no other man! so virtue wills it.
Why; how can I obey and honor him,
But I must needs commit Idolatry?
A Fool is but the Image of a man,
And that but ill made neither: Oh the heart-breakings
Of miserable Maids, where love's enforced!
The best condition is but bad enough;
When women have their choices, commonly
They do but buy their thraldoms, and bring great portions
To men to keep 'em in subjection,
As if a fearful prisoner should bribe
The Keeper to be good to him, yet lies in still,
And glad of a good usage, a good look
Sometimes by'r Lady; no misery surmounts a woman's.
Men buy their slaves, but women buy their masters;
Yet honesty and love makes all this happy,
And next to Angels, the most blessed estate.
That Providence, that h'as made every poison
Good for some use, and sets four warring Elements
At peace in man, can make a harmony
In things that are most strange to humane reason.
Oh but this marriage! What are you sad too Uncle?
Faith then there is a whole household down together:
Where shall I go to seek my comfort now
When my best friend's distressed? what is it afflicts you Sir?

Faith nothing but one grief that will not leave me,
And now it is welcome; every man has something
To bring him to his end, and this will serve
Joined with your fathers cruelty to you,
That helps it forward.

Oh be cheered sweet Uncle!
How long has't been upon you, I never spied it:
What a dull sight have I, how long I pray Sir?

Since I first saw you Niece, and left Bologna


And could you deal so unkindly with my heart,
To keep it up so long hid from my pity?
Alas, how shall I trust your love hereafter?
Have we past through so many arguments,
And missed of that still, the most needful one?
Walked out whole nights together in discourses,
And the main point forgot? We are too blame both;
This is an obstinate wilful forgetfulness,
And faulty on both parts: Let Us lose no time now,
Begin good Uncle, you that feel't; what is it?

You of all creatures Niece must never hear on it,
It Is not a thing ordained for you to know.

Not I Sir! all my joys that word cuts off;
You made profession once you loved me best;
'Twas but profession!

Yes, I do it too truly,
And fear I shall be chid for it: Know the worst then:
I love thee dearlier then an Uncle can.

Why so you ever said, and I believed it.


So simple is the goodness of her thoughts,
They understand not yet th'unhallowed language
Of a near sinner: I must yet be forced
(Though blushes be my venture) to come nearer.
As a man love's his wife, so love I thee.

What Is that?
Methought I heard ill news come toward me,
Which commonly we understand too soon,
Then over-quick at hearing, I Will prevent it,
Though my joys fare the harder; welcome it:
It shall never come so near mine ear again.
Farewell all friendly solaces and discourses,
I Will learn to live without ye, for your dangers
Are greater then your comforts; what is become
Of truth in love, if such we cannot trust,
When blood that should be love, is mixed with lust.

The worst can be but death, and let it come,
He that lives joyless, every day's his doom.

Methinks I Am even as dull now at departure,
As men observe great Gallants the next day
After a Revels; you shall see 'em look
Much of my fashion, if you mark 'em well.
It Is even a second Hell to part from pleasure,
When man has got a smack on it: As many holidays
Coming together makes your poor heads idle
A great while after, and are said to stick
Fast in their fingers ends; even so does game
In a new married couple for the time,
It spoils all thrift, and indeed lies a Bed
To invent all the new ways for great expenses.
See, and she be not got on purpose now
Into the Window to look after me
I have no power to go now, and I should be hanged:
Farewell all business, I desire no more
Then I see yonder; let the goods at Key
Look to themselves; why should I toil my youth out?
It is but begging two or three year sooner,
And stay with her continually; is it a match?
O fie, what a Religion have I leaped into!
Get out again for shame, the man loves best
When his care's most, that shows his zeal to love.
Fondness is but the Idiot to Affection,
That plays at Hot-cockles with rich Merchants wives;
Good to make sport withal when the Chest's full,
And the long Ware house cracks. It Is time of day
For us to be more wise; it is early with us,
And if they lose the morning of their affairs,
They commonly lose the best part of the day,
Those that are wealthy, and have got enough:
It Is after Sunset with 'em, they may rest,
Grow fat with ease, banquet, and toy and play,
When such as I enter the heat of the day,
And I Will do it cheerfully.

I perceive Sir
You Are not gone yet, I have good hope you will stay now.

Farewell, I must not.


Come, come, pray return
To morrow; adding but a little care more,
Will dispatch all as well; believe me 'twill Sir.

I could well wish my self where you would have me;
But love that is wanton, must be ruled a while
By that that is careful, or all goes to ruin,
As fitting is a Government in Love,
As in a Kingdom; where it is all mere Lust,
It Is like an insurrection in the people
That raised in Self-wil, wars against all Reason:
But Love that is respective for increase,
Is like a good King, that keeps all in peace.
Once more farewell.

But this one night I prithee.


Alas I Am in for twenty, if I stay,
And then for forty more, I have such luck to flesh:
I never bought a horse, but he bore double*
If I stay any longer, I shall turn
An everlasting spend-thrift; as you love
To be maintained well, do not call me again,
For then I shall not care which end goes forward:
Again farewell to thee.

Since it must, farewell too.


'Faith daughter, you are too blame, you take the course
To make him an ill husband, troth you do,
And that disease is catching, I can tell you,
^, and soon taken by a yongmans blood,
And that with little urging: Nay fie, see now,
What cause have you to weep? would I had no more,
That have lived threescore years; there were a cause
And 'twere well thought on; trust me you are too blame,
His absence cannot last five days at utmost.
Why should those tears be fetched forth? cannot love
Be even as well expressed in a good look,
But it must see her face still in a Fountain,
It shows like a Country Maid dressing her head
By a dish of water: Come it is an old custom
To weep for love.

Now they come, now they come.


The Duke.


The State.


How near Boy?


In The next street Sir, hard at hand.


You sir, get a standing for your Mistress,
The best in all the City.

I hav't for her Sir,
'Twas a thing I provided for her over night,
It Is ready at her pleasure.

Fetch her to it then, away Sir.


What Is the meaning of this hurry,
Can you tell Mother.

What a memory
Have I! I see by that years come upon me.
Why it is a yearly custom and solemnity,
Religiously observed by th'Duke and State
To St. Marks Temple, the fifteenth of April.
See if my dull brains had not quite forgot it,
'Twas happily questioned of thee, I had gone down else,
Sat like a drone below, and never thought on it.
I would not to be ten years younger again,
That you had lost the sight; now you shall see
Our Duke, a goodly Gentleman of his years.

Is he old then?


About some fifty five.


That Is no great age in man, he is then at best
For wisdom, and for judgment.

The Lord Cardinal
His noble Brother, there is a comely Gentleman,
And greater in devotion then in blood.

He Is worthy to be marked.


You shall behold
All our chief states of Florence, you came fortunately
Against this solemn day.

I hope so always:


I hear 'em near us now, do you stand easily?


Exceeding well, good Mother.


Take this stool.


I need it not I thank you.


Use your will then.


How like you Daughter?


It Is a Noble State.
Methinks my soul could dwell upon the reverence
Of such a solemn and most worthy custom.
Did not the Duke look up? me-thought he saw us.

That Is every one's conceit that sees a Duke,
If he look steadfastly, he looks strait at them,
When he perhaps, good careful Gentleman,
Never minds any; but the look he casts,
Is at his own intentions, and his object
Only the public good.

Most likely so.


Come, come, we'll end this Argument below.


A Strange affection (Brother) when I think on it!
I wonder how thou came by it.

Even as easily,
As man comes by destruction, which oft-times
He wears in his own bosom.

Is the world
So populous in Women, and Creation,
So prodigal in Beauty, and so various?
Yet does love turn thy point to thine own blood?
It Is somewhat too unkindly; must thy eye
Dwell evilly on the fairness of thy kindred,
And seek not where it should? it is confined
Now in a narrower prison then was made for it?
It is allowed a stranger, and where bounty
Is made the great man's honor, it is ill husbandry
To spare, and servants shall have small thanks for it.
So he Heavens bounty seems to scorn and mock,
That spares free means, and spends of his own stock.

Never was man's misery so soon sowed up,
Counting how truly.

Nay, I love you so,
That I shall venture much to keep a change from you
So fearful as this grief will bring upon you.
Faith it even kills me, when I see you faint
Under a reprehension, and I Will leave it,
Though I know nothing can be better for you:
Prithee (sweet Brother) let not passion waste
The goodness of thy time, and of thy fortune:
Thou keep'st the treasure of that life I love,
As dearly as mine own; and if you think
My former words too bitter, which were ministered
By truth and zeal; it is but a hazarding
Of grace and virtue, and I can bring forth
As pleasant Fruits, as Sensuality wishes
In all her teeming longings: This I can do.

Oh nothing that can make my wishes perfect!


I would that love of yours were pawned to it Brother,
And as soon lost that way, as I could win.
Sir I could give as shreud a lift to Chastity,
As any she that wears a tongue in Florence.
Sh'ad need be a good horse-woman, and sit fast,
Whom my strong argument could not fling at last.
Prithee take courage man; though I should counsel
Another to despair, yet I am pitiful
To thy afflictions, and will venture hard;
I will not name for what, it is not handsome;
Find you the proof, and praise me.

Then I fear me,
I shall not praise you in haste.

This is the comfort,
You are not the first (Brother) has attempted
Things more forbidden, then this seems to be:
I Will minister all Cordials now to you,
Because I Will cheer you up Sir.

I am past hope.


Love, thou shall see me do a strange cure then,
As ever was wrought on a disease so mortal,
And near akin to shame; when shall you see her?

Never in comfort more.


You Are so impatient too.


Will you believe death, sh'has forsworn my company,
And sealed it with a blush.

So, I perceive
All lies upon my hands then; well, the more glory
When theworks finished -- How now Sir, the news!

Madam, your Niece, the virtuous Isabela,
Is lighted now to see you.

That Is great fortune
Sir, your Stars bless; you simple, lead her in.

What Is this to me?


Your absence gentle Brother,
I must bestir my wits for you.

I, to great purpose.


Beshrew you, would I loved you not so well:
I Will go to Bed, and leave this deed undone:
I am the fondest where I once affect;
The carefull'st of their healths, and of their ease forsooth,
That I look still but slenderly to mine own.
I take a course to pity him so much now,
That I have none left for modesty and my self.
This it is to grow so liberal; you have few sisters
That love their Brothers ease 'bove their own honesties:
But if you question my affections,
That will be found my fault. Niece, your love's welcome.
Alas what draws that paleness to thy cheeks,
This enforced marriage toward?

It helps good Aunt
Amongst some other griefs; but those I Will keep
Locked up in modest silence; for they are sorrows
Would shame the Tongue, more then they grieve the thought:

Indeed the Ward is simple.


Simple! that were well:
Why one might make good shift with such a husband.
But he is a fool entailed, he halts downright in it:

And knowing this, I hope it is at your choice
To take or refuse Niece.

You see it is not.
I loath him more then beauty can hate death
Or age her spightful neighbor.

Let Us appear then.


How can I being born with that obedience,
That must submit unto a fathers will?
If he command, I must of force consent.

Alas poor soul! be not offended prithee,
If I set by the name of Niece a while,
And bring in pity in a stranger fashion:
It lies here in this Breast, would cross this match.

How, cross it Aunt?


I, and give thee more liberty
Then thou have reason yet to apprehend.

Sweet Aunt, in goodness keep not hid from me
What may befriend my life.

Yes, yes, I must,
When I return to reputation,
And think upon the solemn Vow I made
To your dead Mother, my most loving Sister;
As long as I have her memory 'twixt mine eye lids,
Look for no pity now.

Kind, sweet, dear Aunt.


No, 'twas a secret, I have took special care of,
Delivered by your Mother on her death bed,
That Is nine years now, and I Will not part from't yet,
Though never was fitter time, nor greater cause for it.

As you desire the praises of a Virgin:


Good sorrow! I would do thee any kindness,
Not wronging Secrecy, or Reputation.

Neither of which (as I have hope of fruitness)
Shall receive wrong from me.

Nay 'twould be your own wrong,
As much as any's, should it come to that once.

I need no better means to work persuasion then.


Let it suffice, you may refuse this fool,
Or you may take him, as you see occasion
For your advantage; the best wits will do it;
You Have liberty enough in your own will,
You cannot be enforced; there grows the flower
If you could pick it out, makes whole life sweet to you.
That which you call your Fathers command's nothing;
Then your obedience must needs be as little.
If you can make shift here to taste your happiness,
Or pick out ought that likes you, much good do you:
You see your cheer, I Will make you no set dinner.

And trust me, I may starve for all the good
I can find yet in this: Sweet Aunt, deal plainlier.

Say I should trust you now upon an oath,
And give you in a secret that would start you,
How am I sure of you, in faith and silence?

Equal assurance may I find in mercy,
As you for that in me.

It shall suffice.
Then know, how ever custom h'as made good
For reputations sake, the names of Niece
And Aunt, 'twixt you and I, we are nothing less.

How Is that?


I told you I should start your blood.
You are no more allied to any of us,
Save what the courtesy of opinion casts
Upon your Mothers memory, and your name,
Then the meer'st stranger is, or one begot
At Naples, when the husband lies at Rome;
There Is so much odds betwixt us. Since your knowledge
Wished more instruction, and I have your oath
In pledge for silence; it makes me talk the freelier.
Did never the report of that famed Spaniard,
Marquess of Coria, since your time was ripe
For understanding, fill your ear with wonder?

Yes, what of him? I have heard his deeds of honor
Often related when we lived in Naples.

You heard the praises of your Father then.


My Father!


That was he: But all the business
So carefully and so discreetly carried,
That Fame received no spot by it, not a blemish;
Your Mother was so wary to her end,
None knew it, but her Conscience, and her friend,
Till penitent confession made it mine,
And now my pity, yours: It had been long else,
And I hope care and love alike in you,
Made good by oath, will see it take no wrong now:
How weak his commands now, whom you call Father?
How vain all his inforcements, your obedience?
And what a largeness in your will and liberty,
To take, or to reject, or to do both?
For fools will serve to father wisemens children:
All this you have time to think on. O my Wench!
Nothing o'rthrows our Sex but indiscretion,
We might do well else of a brittle people,
As any under the great Canopy:
I pray forget not but to call me Aunt still;
Take heed of that, it may be marked in time else,
But keep your thoughts to your self, from all the world,
Kindred, or dearest friend, nay, I entreat you,
From him that all this while you have called Uncle;
And though you love him dearly, as I know
His deserts claim as much even from a stranger,
Yet let not him know this, I prithee do not,
As ever thou have hope of second pity,
If thou should stand in need on it, do not do it.

Believe my oath, I will not.


Why well said:
Who shows more craft t'undo a Maidenhead,
I Will resign my part to her; she is thine own, go.

Alas, fair flattery cannot cure my sorrows:


Have I past so much time in ignorance,
And never had the means to know my self
Till this blessed hour? Thanks to her virtuous pity
That brought it now to light; would I had known it
But one day sooner, he had then received
In favors, what (poor Gentleman) he took
In bitter words; a slight and ha^^^ reward
For one of his deserts.

There seems to me now
More anger and distraction in her looks.
I Am gone, I Will not endure a second storm;
The memory of the first, is not past yet.

Are you returned, you comforts of my life?
In this man's presence, I will keep you fast now,
And sooner part eternally from the world,
Then my good joys in you: Pret he forgive me,
I did but chide in jest; the best loves use it
Sometimes, it sets an edge upon affection.
When we invite our best friends to a feast,
It Is not all sweetmeats that we set before them,
There Is somewhat sharp and salt, both to whet Appetite,
And make 'em taste their Wine well: So me thinks
After a friendly, sharp and favory chiding,
A kiss tastes wondrous well; and full of the Grape.
How think thou, do not?

It Is so excellent,
I know not how to praise it, what to say to it:

This marriage shall go forward.


With the Ward,
Are you in earnest?

'Twould be ill for us else


For us? how means she that?


Troth I begin
To be so well me thinks, within this hour,
For all this match able to kill ones heart.
Nothing can pull me down now; should my Father
Provide a worse fool yet (which I should think
Were a hard thing to compass) I Would have him either;
The worse the better, none can come amiss now,
If he want wit enough: So Discretion love me,
Desert and Judgment, I have content sufficient.
She that comes once to be a housekeeper,
Must not look every day to fare well Sir,
Like a young waiting Gentlewoman in service,
For she feeds commonly as her Lady does;
No good bit passes her, but she gets a taste on it;
But when she comes to keep house for her self,
She Is glad of some choice Cates then once a week,
Or twice at most, and glad if she can get 'em:
So must Affection learn to fare with thankfulness.
Pray make your Love no stranger Sir; that is all,
Though you be, one your self, and know not on it,
And I have sworn you must not.

This is beyond me!
Never came joys so unexpectedly
To meet desires in man; how came she thus?
What has she done to her can any tell?
It Is beyond Sorcery this, Drugs, or Love-powders;
Some Art that has no name sure, strange to me
Of all the wonders I ere met withal
Throughout my ten years travels, but I Am thankful for it.
This marriage now must of necessity forward;
It is the only vail Wit can devise
To keep our acts hid from sin-peircing eyes.

How Sir, a Gentlewoman, so young, so fair,
As you set forth, spied from the Widows window!

She!


Our Sunday-dinner woman?


And thursday Supper-woman, the same still.
I know not how she came by her, but I Will swear
She Is the prime gallant for a face, in Florence;
And no doubt other parts follow their Leader:
The Duke himself first spied her at the window;
Then in a rapture, as if admiration
Were poor when it were single, beck'ned me,
And pointed to the wonder warily,
As one that feared she would draw in her splendour
Too soon, if too much gazed at: I never knew him
So infinitely taken with a woman,
Nor can I blame his Appetite, or tax
His Raptures of slight folly; she is a Creature
Able to draw a State from serious business,
And make it their best piece to do her service:
What course shall we devise? h'as spoke twice now.

Twice?


It Is beyond your apprehension.
How strangly that one look has caught his heart!
'Twould prove but too much worth in wealth and savor
To those should work his peace.

And if I do it not,
Or at least come as near it, (if your Art
Will take a little pains, and second me)
As any wench in Florence of my standing.
I Will quite give o'r, and shut up shop in cunning.

It Is for the Duke, and if I fail your purpose,
All means to come, by riches or advancement,
Miss me, and skip me over.

Let the old woman then
Be sent for with all speed, then I Will begin.

A good conclusion follow, and a sweet one
After this stale beginning with old ware. Within there!

Sir, do you call?


Come near, list hither.


I long my self to see this absolute Creature.
That wins the heart of love, and praise so much.

Go Sir, make haste.


Say I entreat her company;
Do you hear Sir?

Yes Madam.


That brings her quickly.


I would 'twere done, the Duke waits the good hour,
And I wait the good Fortune that may spring form't.
I have had a lucky hand these fifteen year
At such Court Passage with theee Dice in a Dish. Seignior Fabritio!

Oh Sir, I bring an alteration in my mouth now.


An alteration! no wise Speech I hope;
He means not to talk wisely, does he trow?
Good! what is the change I pray Sir?

A new change.


Another yet! faith there is enough already.


My daughter loves him now.


What does she Sir?


Affects him beyond thought, who but the Ward forsooth!
No talk but of the Ward; she would have him
To choose 'bove all the men she ever saw.
My Will goes not so fast, as her consent now;
Her duty gets before my command still.

Why then Sir, if you will have me speak my thoughts,
I smell 'twill be a match.

I, and a sweet young couple,
If I have any judgment.

Faith that is little:
Let her be sent to morrow before noon,
And handsomely tricked up; for 'bout that time
I mean to bring her in, and tender her to him.

I warrant you for handsome, I will see
Her things laid ready, every one in order,
And have some part of her tricked up to night.

Why well said.


'Twas a use her Mother had,
When she was invited to an early wedding;
She'ld dress her head o'r night, sponge up her self,
And give her neck three lathers.

Never a halter?


On with her chain of Pearl, her ruby Bracelets,
Lay ready all her tricks, and Jiggam-bobs.

So must your daughter.


I Will about it straight Sir.


How he sweats in the foolish zeal of Fatherhood,
After six ounces an hour, and seems
To toil as much as if his cares were wise ones!

You Have let his folly blood in the right vein, Lady.


And here comes his sweet Son-in-law that shall be;
They Are both allied in wit before the marriage;
What will they be hereafter, when they are nearer?
Yet they can go no further then the Fool:
There Is the worlds end in both of 'em.

Now young heir!


What Is the next business after Shittlecock now?


To morrow you shall see the Gentlewoman
Must be your wife.

There Is even an other thing too
Must be kept up with a pair of Battledoors.
My wife! what can she do?

Nay that is a question you should ask your self, Ward,
When you are alone together.

That Is as I list.

A wife's to be ask anywhere I hope;

I Will ask her in a Congregation, if I have a mind to it, and so save a License:
My Guardiner has no more wit then an Herb-woman that sells away all her sweet
Herbs and Nose-gays, and keeps a stinking breath for her own Pottage


Let me be at the choosing of your beloved,
If you desire a woman of good parts.

Thou shall sweet Sordido.


I have a plaguey ghess, let me alone to see what she is; if I but look upon her
-- way, I know all the faults to a hair, that you may refuse her for


Do thou! I prithee let me hear 'em Sordido:


Well, mark 'em then; I have 'em all in rhyme.
The wife your Guardiner ought to tender,
Should be pretty, straight and slender;
Heir hair not short, her foot not long,
Her hand not huge, nor too too loud her tongue:
No pearl in eye, nor ruby in her nose,
No burn or cut, but what the Catalogue shows.
She must have teeth, and that no black ones,
And kiss most sweet when she does smack once:
Her skin must be both white and plump,
Her body straight, not hopper rumpt,
Or wriggle side-ways like a Crab;
She must be neither Slut nor Drab,
Nor go too splay-foot with her shoes,
To make her Smock lick up the dews.
And two things more, which I forgot to tell ye
She neither must have bump in back, nor belly:
These are the faults that will not make her pass.

And if I spy not these, I am a rank Ass.


Nay more; by right Sir, you should see her naked,
For that is the ancient order.

See her naked?
That were good sport in faith: I Will have the Books turned over;
And if I find her naked on Record,
She shall not have a rag on: But stay, stay,
How if she should desire to see me so too,
I were in a sweet case then, such a fowl skin:

But you have a clean shirt, and that makes amends Sir.


I will not see her naked for that trick though.


Then take her with all faults, with her clothes on!
And they may hide a number with a bum-roll.
Faith choosing of a Wench in a huge Farthingale,
Is like the buying of ware under a great Pent-house,
What with the deceit of one,
And the false light of the other, mark my Speeches,
He may have a diseased Wench in's Bed,
And rotten stuff in's Breeches.

It may take handsomely:


I see small hind'rance:
How now, so soon returned?

She Is come.


That Is well.
Widow, come, come, I have a great quarrel to you,
Faith I must chide you, that you must be sent for!
You make your self so strange, never come at us;
And yet so near a neighbor, and so unkind;
Troth you are too blame, you cannot be more welcome
To any house in Florence, that I Will tell you.

My thanks must needs acknowledge so much Madam:


How can you be so strange then? I sit here
Sometime whole days together without company,
When business draws this Gentleman from home,
And should be happy in society,
Which I so well affect, as that of yours.
I know you are alone too; why should not we
Like two kind neighbors, then supply the wants
Of one another, having tongue discourse,
Experience in the world, and such kind helps
To laugh down time, and meet age merely?

Age (Madam) you speak mirth; it is at my door,
But a long journey from your Ladyship yet.

My faith I Am nine and thirty, every stroke Wench,
And it is a general observation
Among Knights, Wives, or Widows, we account
Our selves then old, when young men's eyes leave looking at's:
It Is a true rule amongst us, and never failed yet
In any but in one, that I remember;
Indeed she had a friend at nine and forty;
Marry she paid well for him, and in the end
He kept a Queen or two with her own money,
That robbed her of her plate, and cut her throat.

She had her punishment in this world (Madam)
And a fair warning to all other women,
That they live chaste at fifty.

I, or never Wench:
Come, now I have thy company I Will not part with it
Till after supper.

Yes, I must crave pardon (Madam)


I swear you shall stay supper; we have no strangers, woman,
None but my sojourners and I; this Gentleman
And the young heir his Ward; you know our company.

Some other time, I will make bold with you Madam.


Nay pray stay Widow,


'Faith, she shall not go;
Do you think I Will be forsworn?

It Is a great while
Till supper time; I Will take my leave then now (Madam)
And come again in the evening! since your Ladyship
Will have it so.

In The evening by my troth Wench,
I Will keep you while I have you; you have great business sure,
To sit alone at home; I wonder strangely
What pleasure you take in it! were it to me now
I should be ever at one Neighbors house
Or other all day long; having no charge.
Or none to chide you, if you go, or stay,
Who may live merrier, I, or more at hearts-ease?
Come, we'll to Chess, or Draughts; there are an hundred tricks
To drive out time till Supper, never fear't Wench.

I Will but make one step home, and return straight (Madam)


Come, I Will not trust you; you use more excuses
To your kind friends then ever I knew any.
What business can you have, if you be sure
You Have locked the doors? and that being all you have
I know you are careful on it: one afternoon
So much to spend here! say I should entreat you now
To lie a night or two, or a week with me,
Or leave your own house for a month together,
It were a kindness that long Neighborhood
And friendship might well hope to prevail in:
Would you deny such a request? in faith,
Speak truth, and freely:

I were then uncivil Madam.


Go too then, set your men; we'll have whole nights
Of mirth together, ere we be much older, Wench*

As good now tell her then, for she will know it;
I have always found her a most friendly Lady.

Why Widow, where is your mind?


Troth even at home Madam.
To tell you truth, I left a Gentlewoman
Even sitting all alone, which is uncomfortable,
Especially to young bloods.

Another excuse!


No, as I hope for health, Madam, that is a truth;
Please you to send and see:

What Gentlewoman? pish.


Wife to my son indeed, but not known (Madam)
To any but yourself.

Now I beshrew you;
Could you be so unkind to her and me,
To come and not bring her? Faith it is not friendly.

I feared to be too bold.


Too bold? Oh what is become
Of the true hearty love was wont to be
Amongst Neighbors in old time?

And she is a stranger (Madam).


The more should be her welcome; when is courtesy
In better practice, then when it is employed
In entertaining strangers? I could chide In Faith.
Leave her behind, poor Gentlewoman, alone too!
Make some amends, and send for her betimes, go.

Please you command one of your Servants Madam.


Within there.


Madam.


Attend the Gentlewoman.


It must be carried wondrous privately
From my Sons knowledge, he will break out in storms else.
Hark you Sir.

Now comes in the heat of your part.


True, I know it (Lady) and if I be out,
May the Duke banish me from all employments,
Wanton, or serious.

So, have you sent Widow?


Yes (Madam) he is almost at home by this.


And 'faith let me entreat you, that hence forward,
All such unkind faults may be swept from friendship,
Which does but dim the luster; and think thus much
It is a wrong to me, that have ability
To bid friends welcome, when you keep 'em from me,
You cannot set greater dishonor near me;
For Bounty is the credit and the glory
Of those that have enough: I see you are sorry,
And the good mends is made by it.

Here she is Madam:


I wonder how she comes to send for me now?


Gentlewoman, you are most welcome, trust me you are,
As courtesy can make one, or respect
Due to the presence of you.

I give you thanks, Lady.


I heard you were alone, and 't had appeared
An ill condition in me, though I knew you not,
Nor ever saw you, (yet humanity
Thinks every case her own) to have kept your company
Here from you, and left you all solitary:
I rather ventured upon boldness then
As the least fault, and wished your presence here;
A thing most happily motion'd of that Gentleman,
Whom I request you, for his care and pity
To honor and reward with your acquaintance,
A Gentleman that Ladies rights stands for,
That Is his profession.

It Is a noble one, and honors my acquaintance.


All my intentions are servants to such Mistresses.


It Is your modesty
It seems, that makes your deserts speak so low Sir.

Come Widow, look you Lady, here is our business;
Are we not well employed think you! an old quarrel
Between us, that will never be at an end.

No, and methinks there is men enough to part you (Lady):


Ho! but they set us on, let us come off
As well as we can, poor souls, men care no farther.
I pray sit down forfooth, if you have the patience
To look upon two weak and tedious Gamesters.

Faith Madam, set these by till evening,
You Will have enough on it then; the Gentlewoman
Being a stranger, would take more delight
To see your rooms and pictures:

Marry, good Sir,
And well remembered, I beseech you show 'em her;
That will beguile time well; pray heartily do Sir,
I Will do as much for you; here take these keys,
Show her the Monument too, and that is a thing
Every one sees not; you can witness that Widow.

And that is worth sight indeed, Madam.


Kind Lady,
I fear I came to be a trouble to you.

Oh nothing less forsooth.


And to this courteous Gentleman,
That wears a kindness in his Breast so noble
And bounteous to the welcome of a stranger.

If you but give acceptance to my service,
You do the greatest grace and honor to me
That courtesy can merit.

I were too blame else,
And out of fashion much. I pray you lead Sir.

After a game or two, we are for you Gentle folks:


We wish no better seconds in Society
Then your discourses, Madam, and your partners there.

I thank your praise, I listened to you Sir;
Though when you spoke, there came a paltry Rook
Full in my way, and choaks up all my game:

Alas poor Widow, I shall be too hard for thee.


You Are cunning at the game, I Will be sworn (Madam).


It will be found so, ere I give you over:
She that can place her man well,

As you do (Madam):


As I shall (Wench) can never lose her game;
Nay, nay, the black King's mine.

Cry you mercy (Madam).


And this my Queen.


I see it now.


Here Is a Duke
Will strike a sure stroke for the game anon;
Your pawn cannot come back to relieve it self.

I know that (Madam.)


You play well the whilst;
How she belies her skill* I hold two ducats,
I give you Check and Mate to your white King:
Simplicity it self, your Saintish King there.

Well, ere now Lady
I have seen the fall of Subtilty: Jest on.

I but Simplicity receives two for one.


What remedy but patience!


Trust me Sir,
Mine eye never met with fairer Ornaments.

Nay, livelier, I Am persuaded, neither Florence
Nor Venice can produce.

Sir, my opinion
Takes your part highly.

There Is a better piece
Yet then all these:

Not possible Sir!


Believe it
You Will say so when you see it: Turn but your eye now
You Are upon it presently.

Oh Sir.


He Is gone Beauty!
Pish, look not after him: He Is but a vapor,
That when the Sun appears, is seen no more.

Oh treachery to honor!


Prithee tremble not;
I feel thy breast shake like a Turtle panting
Under a loving hand that makes much on it;
Why art so fearful? as I Am friend to brightness,
There Is nothing but respect and honor near thee:
You know me, you have seen me; here is a heart
Can witness I have seen thee:

The more's my danger.


The more's thy happiness: Pish strive not Sweet;
This strength were excellent employed in love now,
But here is it is spent amiss; strive not to seek
Thy liberty, and keep me still in prison.
'Y faith you shall not out, till I Am releast now;
We'll be both freed together, or stay still by it;
So is captivity pleasant.

Oh my Lord.


I am not here in vain; have but the leisure
To think on that, and thou wilt be soon resolved:
The lifting of thy voice, is but like one
That does exalt his enemy, who proving high,
Lays all the plots to confound him that raised him.
Take warning I beseech thee; thou seem to me
A creature so composed of gentleness,
And delicate meekness; such as bless the faces
Of figures that are drawn for Goddesses,
And makes Art proud to look upon her work:
I should be sorry the least force should lay
An unkind touch upon thee.

Oh my extremity!
My Lord, what seek you?

Love.


It Is gone already,
I have a husband.

That Is a single comfort,
Take a friend to him.

That Is a double mischief,
Or else there is no Religion.

Do not tremble
At fears of thine own making.

Nor great Lord,
Make me not bold with death and deeds of ruin
Because they fear not you; me they must fright;
Then am I best in health: Should thunder speak,
And none regard it, it had lost the name,
And were as good be still* I Am not like those
That take their soundest sleeps in greatest tempests,
Then wake I most, the weather fearfullest,
And call for strength to virtue.

Sure I think
Thou know the way to please me. I affect
A passionate pleading, 'bove an easy yiedling,
But never pitied any, they deserve none
That will not pity me: I can command,
Think upon that; yet if thou truly knew
The infinite pleasure my affection takes
In gentle, fair entreatings, when loves businesses
Are carried courteously 'twixt heart and heart,
You Would make more haste to please me.

Why should you seek Sir,
To take away that you can never give?

But I give better in exchange; wealth, honor:
She that is fortunate in a Dukes favor,
Lights on a Tree that bears all women's wishes:
If your own Mother saw you pluck fruit there,
She would commend your wit, and praise the time
Of your Nativity, take hold of glory.
Do not I know you have cast away your life
Upon necessities, means merely doubtful
To keep you in indifferent health and fashion.
(A thing I heard too lately, and soon pitied)
And can you be so much your Beauties enemy,
To kiss away a month or two in wedlock,
And weep whole years in wants for ever after?
Come play the wife wench, and provide for ever;
Let storms come when they list, they find thee sheltered:
Should any doubt arise, let nothing trouble thee;
Put trust in our love for the managing
Of all to thy hearts peace. We'll walk together,
And show a thankful joy for both our fortunes.

Did not I say my Duke would fetch you over (Widow)?


I think you spoke in earnest when you said it (Madam).


And my black King makes all the haste he can too.


Well (Madam) we may meet with him in time yet.


I have given thee blind mate twice.


You may see (Madam)
My eyes begin to fail.

I Will swear they do, Wench.


I can but smile as often as I think on it,
How prettily the poor fool was beguild:
How unexpectedly; it is a witty age,
Never were finer snares for women's honesties
Then are devised in these days; no Spiders web
Made of a daintier thread, then are now practiced
To catch loves flesh-flie by the silver wing:
Yet to prepare her stomach by degrees
To Cupids feast, because I saw 'twas quezy,
I showed her naked pictures by the way;
A bit to stay the appetite. Well, Advancement!
I venture hard to find thee; if thou come
With a greater title set upon thy Crest,
I Will take that first cross patiently, and wait
Until some other comes greater then that.
I Will endure all.

The game's even at the best now; you may see Widow
How all things draw to an end.

Even so do I Madam.


I pray take some of your neighbors along with you.


They must be those are almost twice your years then,
If they be chose fit matches for my time, Madam.

Has not my Duke bestir'd himself?


Yes faith Madam; h'as done me all the mischief in this Game.


H'as showed himself in's kind.


In's kind, call you it?
I may swear that.

Yes faith, and keep your oath.


Hark, list, there is some body coming down; it is she.


Now bless me from a blasting; I saw that now,
Fearful for any woman's eye to look on:
Infectious mists, and mill-dews hang at's eyes:
The weather of a doomsday dwells upon him.
Yet since mine honors Leprous, who should I
Preserve that fair that caused the Leprosy?
Come poison all at once: Thou in whose baseness
The bane of Virtue broods, I Am bound in Soul
Eternally to curse thy smooth brow'd treachery,
That wore the fair vail of a friendly welcome,
And I a stranger; think upon it, it is worth it.
Murders pil'd up upon a guilty spirit,
At his last breath will not lie heavier
Then this betraying Act upon thy Conscience:
Beware of offering the first fruits to sin;
His weight is deadly, who commits with strumpets,
After they have been abas'd, and made for use;
If they offend to th'death, as wise men know,
How much more they then that first make 'em so?
I give thee that to feed on; I Am made bold now,
I thank thy treachery; sin and I Am acquainted,
No couple greater; and I Am like that great one,
Who making politic use of a base villain,
He likes the Treason well, but hates the Traitor;
So I hate thee slave.

Well, so the Duke love me,
I fare not much amiss then; two great Feasts
Do seldom come together in one day;
We must not look for 'em.

What at it still Mother?


You see we sit by it; are you so soon returned?


So lively, and so cheerful, a good sign that.


You have not seen all since sure?


That have I Mother,
The Monument and all: I Am so beholding
To this kind, honest, courteous Gentleman,
You Would little think it (Mother) showed me all,
Had me from place to place, so fashionably;
The kindness of some people, how't exceeds?
'Faith, I have seen that I little thought to see,
In The morning when I rose.

Nay, so I told you
Before you saw't, it would prove worth your sight.
I give you great thanks for my daughter Sir,
And all your kindness toward her.

O good Widow!
Much good may do her; forty weeks hence, in faith.

Now Sir.


May't please you Madam to walk in,
Supper's upon the Table?

Yes, we come;
Wilt please you Gentlewoman?

Thanks virtuous Lady,
(You Are a damned Baud) I Will follow you forsooth,
Pray take my Mother in, an old Ass go with you;
This Gentleman and I vow not to part.

Then get you both before.


There lies his art.


Widow I Will follow you; is it so, Damned Baud?
Are you so bitter? It Is but want of use;
Her tender modesty is Sea-sick a little,
Being not accustomed to the breaking billow
Of Woman's wavering Faith, blown with temptations.
It Is but a qualm of honor, 'twill away,
A little bitter for the time, but lasts not.
Sin tastes at the first draught like Wormwood Water,
But drunk again, it is Nectar ever after.

I Would my Son would either keep at home,
Or I were in my grave; she was but one day abroad, but ever since
She Is grown so cutted, there is no speaking to her:
Whether the sight of great cheer at my Ladies,
And such mean fare at home, work discontent in her,
I know not; but I Am sure she is strangely altered.
I Will never keep daughter-in-law in the house with me
Again, if I had an hundred: When read I of any
That agreed long together, but she and her mother
Fell out in the first quarter! nay, sometime
A grudging of a scolding the first week by'r Lady;
So takes the new disease methinks in my house;
I Am weary of my part, there is nothing likes her;
I know not how to please her, here a-late;
And here she comes.

This is the strangest house
For all defects, as ever Gentlewoman
Made shift withal, to pass away her love in*
Why is there not a Cushion-cloth of Drawn work,
Or some fair Cut-work pined up in my Bedchamber*
A silver and gilt-casting Bottle hung by it?
Nay, since I am content to be so kind to you,
To spare you for a silver Basin and Ewre,
Which one of my fashion looks for of duty;
She Is never offered under, where she sleeps:

She talks of things here my whole state's not worth.


Never a green silk quilt is there in the house Mother,
To cast upon my Bed?

No by troth is there,
Nor orange tawny neither.

Here Is a house
For a young Gentlewoman to be got with child in.

Yes, simple though you make it, there has been three
Got in a year in it, since you move me to it;
And all as sweet faced children, and as lovely,
As you will be Mother of; I will not spare you*
What cannot children be begot think you,
Without gilt casting Bottles? Yes, and as sweet ones.
The Millers daughter brings forth as white boys,
As she that bathes her self with Milk and Bean flower.
It Is an old saying, One may keep gook cheer
In a mean house; so may true love affect
After the rate of Princes in a Cottage.

Troth you speak wondrous well for your old house here;
'Twill shortly fall down at your feet to thank you,
Or stoop when you go to Bed, like a good child
To ask you blessing. Must I live in want,
Because my fortune matched me with your Son?
Wives do not give away themselves to husbands,
To the end to be quite cast away; they look
To be the better used, and tendered rather,
Highlier respected, and maintained the richer;
They Are well rewarded else for the free gift
Of their whole life to a husband. I ask less now
Then what I had at home when I was a Maid,
And at my Fathers house, kept short of that
Which a wife knows she must have, nay, and will;
Will Mother, if she be not a fool born;
And report went of me, that I could wrangle
For what I wanted when I was two hours old,
And by that copy, this Land still I hold.
You hear me Mother.

I too plain methinks;
And were I somewhat deafer when you spoke,
'Twere never awhit the worse for my quietness:
It Is the most sudden'st, strangest alteration,
And the most subtilest that ever wit at threescore
Was puzzled to find out: I know no cause for it; but
She Is no more like the Gentlewoman at first,
Then I am like her that never lay with man yet,
And she is a very young thing where ere she be;
When she first lighted here, I told her then
How mean she should find all things; she was pleased forsooth,
None better: I laid open all defects to her,
She was contented still; but the Devil's in her,
Nothing contents her now: To night my Son
Promisd to be at home, would he were come once,
For I Am weary of my charge, and life too:
She'ld be served all in silver by her good will,
By night and day; she hates the name of Pewterer,
More then sickmen the noise, or diseased bones
That quake at fall of the Hammer, seeming to have
A fellow-feeling with it at every blow:
What course shall I think on? she frets me so.

How near am I now to a happiness,
That Earth exceeds not? not another like it;
The treasures of the deep are not so precious,
As are the concealed comforts of a man,
Locked up in woman's love. I sent the air
Of Blessings when I come but near the house;
What a delicious breath Marriage sends forth!
The Violet-beds not sweeter. Honest wedlock
Is like a Banqueting House built in a Garden,
On which the Springs chaste flowers take delight
To cast their modest odors; when base Lust
With all her powders, paintings, and best pride,
Is but a fair house built by a Ditch side.
When I behold a glorious dangerous Strumpet,
Sparkling in Beauty and Destruction too,
Both at a twinkling, I do liken straight
Her beautified body to a goodly Temple
That Is built on Vaults where Carcasses lie rotting,
And so by little and little I shrink back again,
And quench desire with a cool Meditation,
And I Am as well methinks: Now for a welcome
Able to draw men's envies upon man:
A kiss now that will hang upon my lip,
As sweet as morning dew upon a Rose,
And full as long; after a five days fast
She Will be so greedy now, and cling about me;
I take care how I shall be rid of her,
And here't begins.

Oh Sir, you are welcome home.


Oh is he come, I am glad on it.


Is that all?
Why this? as dreadful now as sudden death
To some rich man, that flatters all his sins
With promise of Repentance, when he is old,
And dies in the midway before he comes to it.
Sure you are not well, Brancha! How do prithee?

I have been better then I am at this time.


Alas, I thought so.


Nay, I have been worse too,
Then now you see me Sir.

I Am glad thou mendst yet,
I feel my heart mend too: How came it to thee?
Has any thing disliked thee in my absence?

No certain, I have had the best content
That Florence can afford.

Thou make the best on it,
Speak Mother, what is the cause? you must needs know.

Troth I know none Son, let her speak her self;
Unless it be the same 'gave Lucifer a tumbling cast; that is pride.

Methinks this house stands nothing to my mind;
I Would have some pleasant lodging in the high street Sir,
Or if 'twere near the Court Sir, that were much better;
It Is a sweet recreation for a Gentlewoman,
To stand in a Bay-window, and see gallants.

Now I have another temper, a mere stranger
To that of yours, it seems; I should delight
To see none but your self.

I praise not that:
Too fond is as unseemly as too churlish;
I would not have a husband of that proneness,
To kiss me before company, for a world:
Beside it is tedious to see one thing still (Sir)
Be it the best that ever heart affected;
Nay, were your self, whose love had power you know
To bring me from my friends, I would not stand thus,
And gaze upon you always: Troth I could not Sir;
As good be blind, and have no use of sight
As look on one thing still: What Is the eyes treasure,
But change of objects? You are learned Sir,
And know I speak not ill; 'till full as virtuous
For woman's eye to look on several men,
As for her heart (Sir) to be fixed on one.

Now thou come home to me; a kiss for that word.


No matter for a kiss Sir, let it pass,
It Is but a toy, we'll not so much as mind it,
Let Us talk of other business, and forget it.
What news now of the Pirates, any stirring?
Prithee discourse a little:

I am glad he is here yet
To see her tricks himself; I had lied monst'rously,
If I had told 'em first.

Speak what is the humor (Sweet)
You make your lip so strange? this was not wont.

Is there no kindness betwixt man and wife,
Unless they make a Pigeon-house of friendship,
And be still billing; it is the idlest fondness.
That ever was invented, and it is pity
Its grown a fashion for poor Gentlewomen;
There Is many a disease kissed in a year by it,
And a French cursie made to it: Alas Sir,
Think of the world, how we shall live, grow serious;
We have been married a whole fortnight now.

How? a whole fortnight! why is that so long?


It Is time to leave off dalliance; it is a doctrine
Of your own teaching, if you be remembered,
And I was bound to obey it.

Here Is one fits him;
This was well caught in faith Son, like a fellow
That rids another Country of a Plague,
And brings it home with him to his own house
Who knocks?

Who Is there now? withdraw you Brancha,
Thou art a Jem no strangers eye must see,
How ever thou pleased now to look dull on me.
You Are welcome Sir; to whom your business, pray?

To one I see not here now.


Who should that be Sir?


A young Gentlewoman, I was sent to.


A young Gentlewoman?


I Sir, about sixteen; why look you wildly Sir?


At your strange error: You Have mistook the house Sir.
There Is none such here, I assure you.

I assure you too.
The man that sent me, cannot be mistook.

Why, who is it sent you Sir?


The Duke.


The Duke?


Yes, he entreates her company at a Banquet
At Lady Livia's house.

Troth shall I tell you Sir,
It is the most erroneous business
That ere your honest pains was abused with;
I pray forgive me, if I smile a little,
I cannot choose in faith Sir, at an error
So Comical as this (I mean no harm though)
His grace has been most wondrous ill informed,
Pray so return it (Sir). What should her name be?

That I shall tell you straight too, Brancha Capella.


How Sir, Brancha? What do you call the other.


Capella; Sir, it seems you know no such then?


Who should this be? I never heard of the name.


Then it is a sure mistake.


What if you inquired
In the next street Sir? I saw Gallants there
In the new houses that are built of late.
Ten to one, there you find her.

Nay no matter,
I will return the mistake, and seek no further.

Use your own will and pleasure Sir, you are welcome.

What shall I think of first? Come forth Brancha,
Thou art betrayed I fear me.

Betrayed, how Sir?


The Duke knows thee*


Knows me! how know you that Sir?


Has got thy name.


I, and my good name too,
That Is worse of the twain.

How comes this work about?


How should the Duke know me? can you ghess Mother?


Not I with all my wits, sure we kept house close.


Kept close! not all the Locks in Italy
Can keep you women so; you have been gadding,
And ventured out at twilight, to the Court-green yonder,
And met the gallant Bowlers coming home;
Without your Masks too, both of you, I Will be hanged else;
Thou have been seen Brancha by some stranger;
Never excuse it.

I Will not seek the way Sir;
Do you think you have married me to mew me up
Not to be seen; what would you make of me?

A good wife, nothing else:


Why, so are some
That are seen every day, else the Devil take 'em.

No more then I believe all virtuous in thee,
Without an argument; 'twas but thy hard chance
To be seen somewhere, there lies all the mischief;
But I have devised a rid dance.

Now I can tell you Son,
The time and place.

When, where?


What wits have I?
When you last took your leave, if you remember,
You left us both at Window.

Right, I know that.


And not the third part of an hour after,
The Duke past by in a great solemnity,
To St. Marks Temple, and to my apprehension
He looked up twice to the Window.

Oh there quick'ned
The mischief of this hour!

If you called mischief,
It is a thing I fear I am conceived with:

Looked he up twice, and could you take no warning!


Why once may do as much harm Son, as a thousand;
Do not you know one spark has fired an house,
As well as a whole Furnace?

My heart flames for it,
Yet let us be wise, and keep all smothered closely;
I have bethought a means; is the door fast?

I locked it my self after him.


You know Mother,
At the end of the dark Parlor there is a place
So artificially contrived for a Conveyance,
No search could ever find it: When my Father
Kept in for manslaughter, it was his Sanctuary;
There will I lock my life's best treasure up.
Brancha?

Would you keep me closer yet?
Have you the conscience? you are best even choke me up Sir?
You make me fearful of your health and wits,
You cleave to such wild courses, what is the matter?

Why, are you so insensible of your danger
To ask that now? the Duke himself has sent for you
To Lady Livia's, to a Banquet forsooth.

Now I beshrew you heartily, has he so!
And you the man would never yet vouchsafe
To tell me on it till now: You show your loyalty
And honesty at once, and so farewell Sir.

Brancha, whether now?


Why to the Duke Sir.
You say he sent for me.

But thou do not mean to go, I hope.


No? I shall prove unmannerly,
Rude, and uncivil, mad, and imitate you.
Come Mother come, follow his humor no longer,
We shall be all executed for treason shortly.

Not I in faith; I Will first obey the Duke,
And taste of a good Banquet, I Am of thy mind.
I Will step but up, and fetch two Handerchiefs
To pocket up some Sweetmeats, and o'r take thee;

Why here is an old Wench would trot into a Baud now,
For some dry Sucket, or a Colt in March-pain.

Oh thou the ripe time of man's misery, wedlock;
When all his thoughts like over laden Trees,
Crack with the Fruits they bear, in cares, in jealousies.
Oh that is a fruit that ripens hastily,
After it is knit to marriage; it begins
As soon as the Sun shines upon the Bride
A little to show color. Blessed Powers!
Whence comes this alteration! the distractions,
The fears and doubts it brings are numberless,
And yet the cause I know not: What a peace
Has he that never marries! if he knew
The benefit he enjoyed, or had the fortune
To come and speak with me, he should know then
The infinite wealth he had, and discern rightly
The greatness of his treasure by my loss:
Nay, what a quietness has he 'bove mine,
That wears his youth out in a strumpets arms,
And never spends more care upon a woman,
Then at the time of Lust; but walks away,
And if he find her dead at his return,
His pity is soon done, he breaks a sigh
In many parts, and gives her but a piece on it!
But all the fears, shames, jealousies, costs and troubles,
And still renewed cares of a marriage Bed,
Live in the issue, when the wife is dead.

A good perfection to your thoughts.


The news Sir?


Though you were pleased of late to pin an error on me,
You must not shift another in your stead too:
The Duke has sent me for you.

How for me Sir?
I see then it is my theft; we are both betrayed:
Well, I Am not the first h'as stolen away a Maid,
My Countrymen have used it: I Will along with you Sir.

Take you especial note of such a Gentlewoman,
She Is here on purpose, I have invited her,
Her Father, and her Uncle, to this Banquet;
Mark her behavior well, it does concern you;
And what her good parts are, as far as time
And place can modestly require a knowledge of,
Shall be laid open to your understanding.
You know I Am both your Guardian, and your Uncle,
My care of you is double, Ward and Nephew,
And I Will express it here.

Faith, I should know her
Now by her mark among a thousand women:
A lettle pretty deft and tidy thing you say:

Right.


With a lusty sprouting sprig in her hair.


Thou go the right way still; take one mark more,
Thou shall never find her hand out of her Uncles,
Or else his out of hers, if she be near him:
The love of kindred, never yet stuck closer
Then their's to one another; he that weds her,
Marries her Uncles heart too.

Say you so Sir,
Then I Will be asked in the Church to both of them:

Fall back, here comes the Duke.


He brings a Gentlewoman,
I should fall forward rather.

Come Brancha,
Of purpose sent into the world to show
Perfection once in woman; I Will believe
Hence forward they have every one a Soul too
Against all the uncurteous opinions
That man's uncivil rudeness ever held of 'em:
Glory of Florence light into mine arms!

Yon comes a grudging man will chide you Sir;
The storm is now in's heart, and would get nearer,
And fall here if it durst, it powers down yonder,

If that be he, the weather shall soon clear.
List, and I Will tell thee how.

A kissing too?
I see it is plain Lust now; Adultery boldned;
What will it prove anon, when it is stufft full
Of Wine and Sweetmeats, being so impudent Fasting?

We have heard of your good parts Sir, which we honor
With our embrace and love; is not the Captainship
Of Rouans Citadel, since the late deceased,
Suppli' by any yet?

By none my Lord.


Take it, the place is yours then, and as faithfulness
And desert grows, our favor shall grow with it:
Rise now the Captain of our Fort at Rouans.

The service of whole life give your Grace thanks.


Come sit Brancha.


This is some good yet,
And more then ever I looked for, a fine bit
To stay a Cuckolds stomach: All preferment
That springs from sin and lust, it shoots up quickly,
As Gardiners crops do in the rotten'st grounds;
So is all means raised from base prostitution,
Even like a Sallet growing upon a dunghill:
I Am like a thing that never was yet heard of,
Half merry, and half mad, much like a fellow
That eats his meat with a good appetite,
And wears a plague sore that would fright a Country;
Or rather like the barren hardened Ass,
That feeds on Thistles till he bleeds again;
And such is the condition of my misery.

Is that your Son widow?


Yes, did your Ladyship never know that till now?


No trust me did I,
Nor ever truly felt the power of love,
And pity to a man, till now I knew him;
I have enough to buy me my desires,
And yet to spare; that is one good comfort. Hark you?
Pray let me speak with you Sir, before you go.

With me Lady? you shall, I am at your service:
What will she say now trow, more goodness yet?

I see her now I Am sure; the Ape's so little,
I shall scarce feel her; I have seen almost
As tall as she, sold in the Fair for ten pence.
See how she simpers it, as if Marmalad
Would not melt in her mouth; she might have the kindness in faith
To send me a gilded Bull from her own Trencher,
A Ram, a Goat, or somewhat to be nibling*
These women when they come to sweet things once,
They forget all their friends, they grow so greedy;
Nay, oftentimes their husbands.

Here Is a health now Gallants,
To the best beauty at this day in Florence.

Who ere she be, she shall not go unpledg'd Sir.


Nay, your excused for this.


Who I my Lord?


Yes by the Law of Bacchus; plead your benefit,
You are not bound to pledge your own health Lady.

That Is a good way my Lord to keep me dry.


Nay, then I will not offend Venus so much,
Let Bacchus seek his mends in another Court,
Here Is to thy self Brancha.

Nothing comes
More welcome to that name then your Grace.

So, so;
Here stands the poor theif now that stole the treasure,
And he is not thought on, ours is near kin now
To a twin-misery born into the world.
First the hard conscienc'd*worldling, he hoords wealth up,
Then comes the next, and he feasts all upon it;
One's damned for getting, the other for spending on it.
Oh equal Justice, thou has't met my sin
With a full weight, I Am rightly now oppressed,
All her friends heavy hearts lie in my Breast.

Methinks there is no spirit amongst us Gallants,
But what divinely sparkles from the eyes
Of bright Brancha; we sat all in darkness,
But for that Splendour: Who was it told us lately
Of a match making right, a marriage tender?

'Twas I my Lord.


'Twas you indeed: Where is she?


This is the Gentlewoman.


My Lord, my Daughter.


Why here is some stirring yet.


She Is a dear child to me.


That must needs be; you say she is your Daughter.


Nay, my good Lord, dear to my purse I mean
Beside my person, I never reckoned that.
She has the full qualities of a Gentlewoman;
I have brought her up to Music, Dancing, what not,
That may commend her Sex, and stir her husband?

And which is he now?


This young Heir, my Lord.


What is he brought up too?


To Cat and Trap.


My Lord, he is a great Ward, wealthy, but simple;
His parts consist in Acres.

Oh Wise-acres.


You Have spoke him in a word Sir:


'Lass poor Gentlewoman,
She Is ill bestead, unless she has dealt the wiselier,
And laid in more provision for her youth*
Fools will not keep in Summer.

No, nor such wives
From whores in winter.

Yea, the voice too Sir!


I, and a sweet Breast too my Lord, I hope,
Or I have cast away my money wisely;
She took her pricksong earlier, my Lord,
Then any of her kindred ever did:
A rare child, though I say it, but I Would not have
The Baggage hear so much, 'twould make her swell straight:
And Maids of all things must not be puffed up.

Let Us turn us to a better Banquet then,
For Music bids the soul of a man to a Feast,
And that is indeed, a noble entertainment,
Worthy Brancha's self; you shall perceive Beauty,
Our Florentine Damsels are not brought up idly.

They'are wiser of themselves, it seems my Lord,
And can take gifts, when goodness offers 'em.

True, and damnation has taught you that wisdom,
You can take gifts too. Oh that Music mocks me!

I am as dumb to any language now*
But Loves, as one that never learned to speak:
I am not yet so old, but he may think of me;
My own fault, I have been idle a long time;
But I Will begin the week, and paint to morrow,
So follow my true labor day by day.
I never thrived so well, as when I used it.

WHat harder chance can fall to woman,
Who was born to cleave to someman*
Then to bestow her time, youth, beauty,
Life's observance, honor, duty,
On a thing for no use good,
But to make Physic work, or blood force fresh
In an old Ladies cheek, she that would be
Mother of fools, let her compound with me*

Here Is a tune indeed; Pish I had rather hear one Ballad sung in the Nose now,
of the lamentable drowning of fat Sheep and Oxen, then all these simpering
tunes played upon Cats-guts, and sung by little Kitlings


How like you her Breast now my Lord?


Her Breast?
He talks as if his daughter had given suck
Before she were married, as her betters have;
The next he praises sure, will be her Nipples.

Methinks now, such a voice to such a husband,
Is like a Jewel of unvalued worth,
Hung at a Fools ear

May it please your Grace
To give her leave to show another Quality.

Marry as many good ones as you will Sir,
The more the better welcome.

But the less
The better practiced: That soul's black indeed
That cannot commend Virtue; but who keeps it!
The Extortioner will say to a sick beggar,
Heaven comfort thee, though he give none himself:
This good is common.

Will it please you now Sir,
To entreat your Ward to take her by the hand,
And lead her in a dance before the Duke?

That will I Sir, it is needful; hark you Nephew*


Nay, you shall see young heir, what you have for your money,
Without fraud or imposture.

Dance with her!
Not I sweet Gardener, do not urge my heart to it,
It Is clean against my Blood; dance with a stranger!
Let who is will do it, I Will not begin first with her.

No fear't not fool, she has took a better order.


Why who shall take her then?


Some other Gentleman;
Look, there is her Uncle, a fine timber'd Reveller,
Perhaps he knows the manner of her dancing too,
I Will have him do it before me, I have sworn Gardener,
Then may I learn the better.

Thou Wilt be an ass still.


I, all that Uncle, shall not fool me out.
Pish, I stick closer to my self then so.

I must entreat you Sir, to take your Niece
And dance with her; my Ward's a little wilful,
He would have you show him the way.

Me Sir?
He shall command it at all hours, pray tell him so.

I thank you for him, he has not wit himself Sir.


Come my life's peace, I have a strange office on it here,
It Is some man's luck to keep the joys he likes
Concealed for his own bosom; but my fortune
To set 'em out now, for another liking,
Like the mad misery of necessitous man,
That parts from his good horse with many praises,
And goes on foot himself; need must be obeyed
In every action, it mars man and maid.

Signior Fabritio, you are a happy Father,
Your cares and pains are fortunate you see,
Your cost bears noble fruits. Hippolito thanks.

Here Is some amends for all my charges yet. She wins both prick and praise,
where ere she comes


How like Brancha?


All things well, my Lord:
But this poor Gentlewomans fortune, that is the worst.

There is no doubt Brancha, she will find leisure
To make that good enough; he is rich and simple.

She has the better hope of the upper hand indeed,
Which women strive for most.

Do It when I bid you Sir.


I Will venture but a Horn-pipe with her Gardener,
Or some such married man's dance.

We'll venture something Sir.


I have time for what I do.


But little reason, I think.


Plain men dance the Measures, the Sinquapace, the Gay:
Cuckolds dance the Horn-pipe; and Farmers dance the Hay:
Your Soldiers dance the Round, and Maidens that grow big:
You Drunkards, the Canaries; you Whore and Baud, the Jigg.
Here Is your eight kind of Dancers, he that finds the nineth, let him
Pay the Minstrels.

Oh here he appears once in his own person;
I thought he would have married her by Attorney,
And lain with her so too.

Nay, my kind Lord,
There Is very seldom any found so foolish
To give away his part there.

Bitter scoff;
Yet I must do it; with what a cruel pride!
The glory of her sin strikes by my afflictions.

This thing will make shift (Sirs) to make a husband,
For ought I see in him; how thinks't Brancha?

'Faith an ill-favored shift my Lord, methinks;
If he would take some voyage when he is married,
Dangerous, or long enough, and scarce be seen
Once in nine year together, a wife then
Might make indifferent shift to be content with him.

A kiss; that wit deserves to be made much on:
Come, our Caroch.

Stands ready for your Grace.


My thanks to all your loves: Come fair Brancha,
We have took special care of you, and provided
Your lodging near us now.

Your love is great, my Lord.


Once more our thanks to all.


All blessed Honors guard you.


Oh have thou left me then Brancha, utterly!
Brancha! now I miss thee; Oh return!
And save the faith of woman; I never felt
The loss of thee till now; it is an affliction
Of greater weight, then youth was made to bear;
As if a punishment of after-life
Were fallen upon man here; so new it is
To flesh and blood, so strange, so insupportable
A torment, even mistook, as if a body
Whose death were drowning, must needs therefore suffer it in scalding oil.

Sweet Sir!


As long as mine eye saw thee,
I half enjoyed thee.

Sir?


Can thou forget
The dear pains my love took, how it has watch't
Whole nights together, in all weathers for thee,
Yet stood in heart more merry then the tempests
That sung about mine ears, like dangerous flatterers
That can set all their mischief to sweet tunes;
And then received thee from thy fathers window,
Into these arms at midnight, when we embraced
As if we had been Statues only made for it,
To show arts life, so silent were our comforts,
And kissed as if our lips had grown together!

This makes me madder to enjoy him now.


Can thou forget all this? And better joys
That we met after this, which then new kisses
Took pride to praise.

I shall grow madder yet, Sir:


This cannot be but of some close Bauds working:
Cry mercy Lady. What would you say to me?
My sorrow makes me so unmannerly,
So comfort bless me, I had quite forgot you.

Nothing but even in pity too, that passion
Would give your grief good counsel.

Marry, and welcome Lady,
It never could come better.

Then first Sir,
To make away all your good thoughts at once of her,
Know most assuredly, she is a strumpet.

Ha: Most assuredly! Speak not a thing
So vilde so certainly, leave it more doubtful.

Then I must leave all truth, and spare my knowledge,
A sin which I too lately found and wept for.

Found you it?


I with wet eyes.


Oh perjurious friendship!


You missed your fortunes when you met with her Sir.
Young Gentlemen, that only love for beauty,
They love not wisely; such a marriage rather
Proves the destruction of affection;
It brings on want, and want's the Key of whoredom.
I think you had small means with her.

Oh not any Lady.


Alas poor Gentleman, what meant'st thou Sir,
Quite to undo thy self with thine own kind heart?
Thou art too good and pitiful to woman:
Marry Sir, thank thy Stars for this blessed fortune
That rids the Summer of thy youth so well
From many Beggars that had lain a sunning
In thy beams only else, till thou had wasted
The whole days of thy life in heat and labor.
What would you say now to a Creature found
As pitiful to you, and as it were
Even sent on purpose from the whole Sex general,
To requite all that kindness you have shown to it?

What Is that Madam?


Nay, a Gentlewoman, and one able
To reward good things, I, and bears a conscience to it;
Could thou love such a one, that (blow all fortunes)
Would never see thee want?
Nay more, maintain thee to thine enemies envy,
And shall not spend a care for it, stir a thought,
Nor break a sleep, unless loves music waked thee;
No storm of fortune should look upon me,
And know that woman:

Oh my life's wealth Brancha!


Still with her name? will nothing wear it out?
That deep sigh went but for a strumpet Sir.

It can go for no other that loves me.


He Is vexed in mind; I came too soon to him;
Where Is my discretion now, my skill, my judgment?
I Am cunning in all arts but my own, love:
It Is as unseasonable to tempt him now
So soon, as a widow to be courted
Following her husbands coarse, or to make bargain
By the grave side, and take a young man there:
Her strange departure stands like a hearse yet
Before his eyes; which time will take down shortly:

Is she my wife till death? yet no more mine;
That Is a hard measure; then what is marriage good for?
Me thinks by right, I should not now be living,
And then 'twere all well: What a happiness
Had I been made of, had I never seen her;
For nothing makes man's loss grievous to him,
But knowledge of the worth of what he loses;
For what he never had, he never misses:
She Is gone for ever; utterly there is
As much redemption of a soul from Hell,
As a fair woman's body from his palace.
Why should my love last longer then her truth?
What is there good in woman to be loved,
When only that which makes her so, has left her?
I cannot love her now, but I must like
Her sin, and my own shame too, and be guilty
Of Laws breach with her, and mine own abusing;
All which were monstrous: Then my safest course
For health of mind and body, is to turn
My heart, and hate her, most extremely hate her;
I have no other way: Those virtuous powers
Which were chaste witnesses of both our troths,
Can witness she breaks first, and I Am rewarded
With Captainship of the Fort; a place of credit
I must confess, but poor; my Factorship
Shall not exchange means with it: He that di'd last in it,
He was no drunkard, yet he di'd a beggar
For all his thrift; besides the place not fits me;
It suits my resolution, not my breeding:

I have tried all ways I can, and have not power*
To keep from sight of him: How are you now Sir?

I feel a better ease Madam.


Thanks to blessedness.
You will do well I warrant you, fear it not Sir;
Join but your own good will to it; he is not wise
That loves his pain or sickness, or grows fond
Of a disease, whose property is to vex him,
And spightfully drink his blood up: Out upon it Sir,
Youth knows no greater loss; I pray let us walk Sir.
You never saw the beauty of my house yet,
Nor how abundantfy Fortune has blessed me
In worldly treasure; trust me I have enough Sir
To make my friend a rich man in my life,
A great man at my death; your self will say so
If you want any thing, and spare to speak,
Troth I Will condemn you for a wilful man Sir.

Why sure this can be but the flattery of some dream.


Now by this kiss, my love, my soul and riches,
It Is all true substance.
Come you shall see my wealth, take what you list,
The gallanter you go, the more you please me:
I will allow you too, your Page and Footman,
Your race horses, or any various pleasure
Exercised youth delights in; but to me
Only Sir wear your heart of constant stuff:
Do but you love enough, I Will give enough.

Troth then, I Will love enough, and take enough.


Then we are both pleased enough.


Now Nephew, here is the Gentlewoman again.


Mass here she is come again; mark her now Sordido.


This is the Maid, my love and care has chose
Out for your wife, and so I tender her to you;
Your self has been eye witness of some qualities
That speak a courtly breeding, and are costly.
I bring you both to talk together now,
It Is time you grew familiar in your tongues;
To morrow you join hands, and one Ring ties you,
And one Bed holds you (if you like the choice)
Her Father and her friends are in the next room,
And stay to see the contract ere they part;
Therefore dispatch good Ward, be sweet and short;
Like her, or like her not, there is but two ways;
And one your body, the other your purse pays.

I warrant you Gardener, I Will not stand all day thruming,
But quickly shoot my bolt at your next coming.

Well said: Good fortune to your birding then.


I never missed mark yet.


Troth I think Master, if the truth were known,
You never shot at any but the Kitchin-wench,
And that was a she-woodcock, a mere innocent,
That was often lost, and cried at eight and twenty.

No more of that meat Sordido, here is Eggs of the spit now,
We must turn gingerly, draw out the Catalogue
Of all the faults of women.

How, all the faults! have you so little reason to think so much Paper will lie
in my breeches? why ten carts will not carry it, if you set down but the Bauds;
all the faults? pray let us be content with a few of 'em; and if they were less,
you would find 'em enough I warrant you: Look you Sir


But that I have the advantage of the fool,
As much as woman's heart can wish and joy at,
What an infernal torment 'twere to be
Thus bought and sold, and turned and pri'd into; when alas
The worst bit is too good for him? and the comfort is
H'as but a Caters place on it, and provides
All for another table; yet how curious
The Ass is, like some nice professor on it,
That buys up all the daintiest food in the Markets,
And seldom licks his lips after a taste on it!

Now to her, now you have scand all her parts over.


But at end shall I begin now Sordido?


Oh ever at a woman's lip, while you live Sir, do you ask that question?


Methinks Sordido, she has but a crabbed face to begin with.


A crabbed face? that will save money.


How! save money Sordido?


I Sir: For having a crabbed face of her own, she will eat the less Verjuyce with
her Mutton; 'twill save Verjuyce at years end Sir


Nay and your jests begin to be saucy once,
I Will make you eat your meat without Mustard.

And that in some kind is a punishment.


Gentlewoman, they say it is your pleasure to be my wife, and you shall know
shortly whether it be mine or no, to be your husband; and thereupon thus I
first enter upon you. Oh most delicious scent! Methinks it tasted as if a man
had stepped into a Comfit-makers shop to let a Cart go by; all the while I kissed
her: It is reported Gentlewoman you will run mad for me, if you have me not


I should be in great danger of my wits Sir,
For being so forward, should this Ass kick backward now.

Alas poor Soul! And is that hair your own?


Mine own, yes sure Sir, I ow nothing for it.


It Is a good hearing, I shall have the less to pay when I have married you:
Look, does her eyes stand well


They cannot stand better
Then in her head, I think, where would you have them?
And for her Nose, it is of a very good last.

I have known as good as that has not lasted a year though.


That Is in the using of a thing; will not any strong bridge fall down in time,
if we do nothing but beat at the bottom: A Nose of Buff would not last always
Sir, especially if it came in to th'Camp once


But Sordido, how shall we do to make her laugh, that I may see what Teeth she
has; for I Will not bate her a tooth, nor take a black one into the bargain


Why do but you fall in talk with her, you cannot choose but one time or other,
make her laugh Sir


It shall go hard, but I will: Pray what qualities have you beside singing and
dancing, can you play at Shittlecock forsooth


I, and at Stool-ball too Sir; I have great luck at it:


Why can you catch a Ball well?


I have caught two in my lap at one game.


What have you woman? I must have you learn
To play at trap too, then you are full and whole:

Any thing that you please to bring me up too,
I shall take pains to practice.

'Twill not do Sordido, we shall never get her mouth opened wide enough.


No Sir; that is strange! then here is a trick for your learning.
Look now, look now; quick, quick there.

Pox of that scurvy mannerly trick with Handkercheif,
It hindered me a little, but I am satisfied.
When a fair woman gapes, and stops her mouth so,
It shows like a Cloth-stopple in a Cream-pot,
I have fair hope of her Teeth now Sordido.

Why then you have all well Sir, for ought I see
She Is right and straight enough, now as she stands;
They Will commonly lie crooked, that is no matter: Wise Gamesters
Never find fault with that, let 'em lie still so.

I Would fain mark how she goes, and then I have all: For of all creatures I
cannot abide a splayfooted Woman, she is an unlucky thing to meet in a morning;
her heels keep together so, as if she were beginning an Irish dance still; and
he wrigling of her Bum, playing the tune to it: But I have bethought a cleanly
shift to find it; dab down as you see me, and peep of one side, when her
back's toward you; I Will show you the way


And you shall find me apt enough to peeping,
I have been one of them has seen mad sights
Under your Scaffolds.

Will it please you walk forsooth,
A turn or two by your self? you are so pleasing to me,
I take delight to view you on both sides.

I shall be glad to fetch a walk to your love Sir;
'Twill get Affection, a good stomach Sir,
Which I had need have, to fall to such course victuals.

Now go thy ways for a clean treading Wench,
As ever man in modesty peep't under:

I see the sweetest sight to please my Master.
Never went Frenchman righter upon ropes
Then she on Florentine rushes.

It Is enough forsooth.


And how do you like me now Sir?


Faith so well, I never mean to part with thee Sweetheart,
Under some sixteen children, and all Boys.

You Will be at simple pains, if you prove kind,
And breed 'em all in your teeth.

Nay by my Faith, what serves your belly for? 'twould make my cheeks look like
blown Bagpipes


How now Ward and Nephew,
Gentlewoman and Niece! speak, is it so or not?

It Is so, we are both agreed Sir.


Into your kindred then;
There Is friends, and Wine, and Music waits to welcome you.

Then I Will be drunk for joy.


And I for company,
I cannot break my Nose in a better action.

HOw go^^* your Watches Ladies? what is a clock now?


By mine full nine.


By mine a quarter past:


I set mine by St. Marks.


St. Anthonies they say goes truer.


That Is but your opinion Madam,
Because you love a Gentleman of the name.

He Is a true Gentleman then.


So may he be
That comes to me to night, for ought you know:

I Will end this strife straight: I set mine by the Sun,
I love to set by the best, one shall not then
Be troubled to set often:

You do wisely in it.


If I should set my Watch as some Girls do
By every clock in the Town, 'twould never go true;
And too much turning of the Dials point,
Or tampring with the Spring, might in small time
Spoil the whole work too, here it wants of nine now.

It does indeed forsooth; mine is nearest truth yet.


Yet I have found her lying with an Advocate, which showed
Like two false clocks together in one Parish.

So now I thank you Ladies, I desire
A while to be alone.

And I am no body,
Methinks, unless I have one or other with me.
Faith my desire and hers, will never be sisters.

How strangely woman's fortune comes about,
This was the farthest way to come to me,
All would have judged, that knew me born in Venice
And there with many jealous eyes brought up,
That never thought they had me sure enough;
But when they were upon me, yet my hap
To meet it here, so far off from my birthplace,
My friends, or kindred, it is not good in sadness,
To keep a maid so strict in her young days,
Restraint breeds wandering thoughts, as many fasting days
A great desire to see flesh stirring again:
I Will never use any Girl of mine so strictly,
How ever they are kept, their fortunes find 'em out,
I see it in me, if they be got in Court,
I Will never forbid 'em the Country, nor the Court,
Though they be born i'ch' Country, they will come to it,
And fetch their falls a thousand mile about,
Where one would little think on it.

I long to see how my despiser looks,
Now she is come here to Court; these are her lodgings,
She Is simply now advanced: I took her out
Of no such window, I remember first,
That was a great deal lower, and less carved.

How now? What Silk worm's this, i'ch' name of pride,
What, is it he?

A bow in the ham to your greatness;
You must have now three legs, I take it, must you not?

Then I must take another, I shall want else
The service I should have; you have but two there.

You Are richly placed.


Methinks you are wondrous brave Sir.


A sumptuous lodging.


You Have an excellent Suit there.


A Chair of Velvet.


Is your cloak lined through Sir.


You Are very stately here.


Faith something proud Sir.


Stay, stay, let us see your Cloth of silver Slippers?


Who Is your Shoemaker, h'as made you a neat Boot.


Will you have a pair,
The Duke will lend you Spurs.

Yes, when I ride.


It Is a brave life you lead.


I could never see you
In such good clothes in my time.

In your time?


Sure I think Sir
We both thrive best asunder.

You Are a whore.


Fear nothing Sir.


An impudent spightful strumpet.


Oh Sir, you give me thanks for your Captainship;
I thought you had forgot all your good manners.

And to spite thee as much, look there, there read,
Vex, gnaw, thou shall find there I am not lovestarv'd.
The world was never yet so cold, or pitiless,
But there was ever still more charity found out,
Then at one proud fools door; and 'twere hard 'faith,
If I could not pass that: Read to thy shame there;
A cheerful and a beauteous Benefactor too,
As ever erected the good works of love.

Lady Livia!
Is It possible? Her worship was my Pandress,
She dote, and send and give, and all to him!
Why here is a Baud plagued home; you are simply happy Sir,
Yet I Will not envy you.

No Court-Saint, not thou!
You keep some friend of a new fashion;
There Is no harm in your Devil, he is a suckling,
But he will breed teeth shortly, will he not?

Take heed you play not then too long with him.


Yes, and the great one too: I shall find time
To play a hot religious bout with some of you,
And perhaps drive you and your course of sins
To their eternal Kennels; I speak softly now,
It Is manners in a noble Woman's lodgings,
And I well knew all my degrees of duty.
But come I to your everlasting parting once,
Thunder shall seem soft music to that tempest.

'Twas said last week there would be change of weather,
When the Moon hung so, and belike you heard it?

Why here is sin made, and never a conscience put to it;
A Monster with all Forehead, and no Eyes.
Why do I talk to thee of Sense or Virtue,
That art as dark as death? and as much madness
To set light before thee, as to lead blind folks
To see the Monuments, which they may smell as soon
As they behold; Marry oft-times their heads
For want of light, may feel the hardness of 'em.
So shall thy blind pride my revenge and anger,
That can not see it now; and it may fall
At such an hour, when thou least see of all;
So to an ignorance darker then thy womb,
I leave thy perjured soul: A plague will come.

Get you gone first, and then I fear no greater,
Nor thee will I fear long; I Will have this sauciness
Soon banished from these lodgings, and the rooms
Perfumed well after the corrupt air it leaves:
His breath has made me almost sick in troth,
A poor base start up! Life! because has got
Fair clothes by foul means, comes to rail, and show 'em.

Who Is that?


Cry you mercy Sir.


Prithee who is that?


The former thing my Lord, to whom you gave
The Captainship; he eats his meat with grudging still.

Still!


He comes vaunting here of his new love,
And the new clothes she gave him; Lady Livia.
Who but she now his Mistress?

Lady Livia?
Be sure of what you say.

He showed me her name Sir,
In perfumed Paper, her Vows, her Letter,
With an intent to spite me; so his heart said,
And his threats made it good; they were as spightful
As ever malice uttered, and as dangerous,
Should his hand follow the copy.

But that must not;
Do not you vex your mind, prithee to Bed, go
All shall be well and quiet.

I love peace Sir.


And so do all that love; take you no care for it,
It shall be still provided to your hand: Who Is near us there.

My Lord.


Seek out Hippolito,
Brother to Lady Livia, with all speed.

He was the last man I saw, my Lord.


Make haste.
He is a blood soon stirred, and as he is quick
To apprehend a wrong, he is bold, and sudden
In bringing forth a ruin: I know likewise
The reputation of his Sisters honor:
As dear to him as lifeblood to his heart;
Beside I Will flatter him with a goodness to her,
Which I now thought on, but never meant to practice.
(Because I know her base) and that wind drives him.
The ulcerous reputation feels the poyse,
If lightest wrongs, as sores are vexed with flies:
He comes, Hippolito welcome.

My loved Lord.


How does that lusty Widow, thy kind Sister*;
Is she not sped yet of a second husband?
A bedfellow she has, I ask not that,
I know she is sped of him.

Of him my Lord:


Yes of a bedfellow; is the news so strange to you?


I hope it is so to all.


I wish it were Sir;
But it is confessed too fast, her ignorant pleasures
Only by Lust instructed, have received
Into their services, an impudent Boaster,
One that does raise his glory from her shame,
And tells the midday Sun, what is done in darkness;
Yet blinded with her appetite, wastes her wealth,
Buys her disgraces at a dearer rate,
Then bounteous housekeepers purchase their honor.
Nothing sads me so much, as that in love
To thee, and to thy blood, I had picked out*
A worthy match for her, the great Vincentio,
High in our favor, and in all men's thoughts.

Oh thou destruction of all happy fortunes,
Unsated blood! know you the name my Lord
Of her abuser?

One Leantio.


He Is a Factor.


He never made so brave a voyage by his own talk.


The poor old widows son;
I humbly take my leave.

I see it is done:
Give her good counsel, make her see her error,
I know she will hearken to you.

Yes my Lord,
I make no doubt, as I shall take the course,
Which she shall never know till it be acted;
And when she wakes to honor, then she will thank me for it.
I Will imitate the pities of old Surgeons.
To this lost limb, who ere they show their art,
Cast one asleep, then cut the diseased part.
So out of love to her I pity most,
She shall not feel him going till he is lost,
Then she will commend the cure.

The great cure's past;
I count this done already; his wrath's sure,
And speaks an injury deep; farewell Leantio.
This place will never hear thee murmur more.
Our noble Brother welcome!

Set those lights down:
Depart till you be called.

There Is serious business
Fixed in his look, nay, it enclines a little
To the dark color of a coffeehouse.
Brother, what is it commands your eye so powerfully?
Speak, you seem lost.

The thing I look on seems so
To my eyes lost for ever.

You look on me.


What a grief it is to a religious feeling,
To think a man should have a friend so goodly,
So wise, so noble, nay, a Duke, a Brother,
And all this certainly damned?

How!


It Is no wonder,
If your great sin can do it; dare you look up
For thinking of a vengeance? dare you sleep
For fear of never waking, but to death,
And dedicate unto a strumpets love
The strength of your affections, zeal and health?
Here you stand now; can you assure your pleasures,
You shall once more enjoy her, but once more?
Alas you cannot; what a misery it is then
To be more certain of eternal death,
Then of a next embrace? nay, shall I show you
How more unfortunate you stand in sin,
Then the love private man; all his offenses,
Like enclosed grounds, keep but about himself,
And seldom stretch beyond his own souls bounds;
And when a man grows miserable, it is some comfort
When he is no further charged, then with himself;
It Is a sweet ease to wretchedness: But great man,
Every sin thou commit'st, shows like a flame
Upon a Mountain, it is seen far about,
And with a big wind made of popular breath,
The sparkles fly through Cities: Here one takes,
Another catches there, and in short time
Waste all to cinders: But remember still
What burnt the Valleys first, came from the Hill;
Every offense draws his particular pain,
But it is example proves the great man's bane.
The sins of mean men, lie like scattered parcels
Of an unperfect bill; but when such fall,
Then comes example, and that sums up all:
And this your reason grants, if men of good lives,
Who by their virtuous actions stir up others
To noble and religious imitation,
Receive the greater glory after death,
As sin must needs confess; what may they feel
In height of torments, and in weight of vengeance,
Not only they themselves, not doing well,
But sets a light up to show men to Hell?

If you have done, I have, no more sweet Brother.


I know time spent in goodness, is too tedious;
This had not been a moments space in Lust now;
How dare you venture on eternal pain,
That cannot bear a minutes reprehension?
Methinks you should endure to hear that talked of
Which you so strive to suffer. Oh my Brother!
What were you, if you were taken now,
My heart weeps blood to think on it, it is a work
Of infinite mercy, (you can never merit)
That yet you are not death-struck, no not yet:
I dare not stay you long, for fear you should not
Have time enough allowed you to repent in.
There Is but this Wall betwixt you and destruction,
When you are at strongest, and but poor thin clay.
Think upon it Brother, can you come so near it,
For a fair strumpets love, and fall into
A torment that knows neither end nor bottom
For beauty; but the deepness of a skin,
And that not of their own neither: Is she a thing
Whom sickness dare not visit, or age look on,
Or death resist, does the worm shun her grave?
If not (as your soul knows it) why should Lust
Bring man to lasting pain, for rotten dust?

Brother of spotless honor, let me weep
The first of my repentance in thy bosom,
And show the blessed fruits of a thankful spirit;
And if I ere keep woman more unlawfully,
May I want penitence, at my greatest need.
And wisemen know there is no barren place,
Threatens more famine, then a dearth in grace.

Why here is a conversion, is at this time Brother
Sung for a Himn in Heaven; and at this instant
The powers of darkness groan, makes all Hell sorry.
First, I praise Heaven, then in my work I glory.
Who Is there attends without?

My Lord:


Take up those lights; there was a thicker darkness,
When they came first: The peace of a fair Soul
Keep with my noble Brother.

Joys be with you Sir:
She lies alone to night for it, and must still,
Though it be hard to conquer, but I have vowed
Never to know her as a strumpet more,
And I must save my oath; if Fury fail not,
Her husband dies to night, or at the most,
Lives not to see the morning spent to morrow;
Then will I make her lawfully mine own,
Without this sin and horror. Now I Am chidden,
For what I shall enjoy then unforbidden,
And I Will not freeze in Stoves; it is but a while,
Live like a hopeful Bridegroom, chaste from flesh;
And pleasure then will seem new, fair and fresh.

The morning so far wasted, yet his baseness
So impudent? See if the very Sun do not blush at him!
Dare he do thus much, and know me alive!
Put case one must be vicious, as I know my self
Monstrously guilty, there is a blind time made for it,
He might use only that, 'twere conscionable:
Art, silence, closeness, subtlety, and darkness,
Are fit for such a business; but there is no pity
To be bestowed on an apparent sinner,
An impudent daylight Leacher; the great zeal
I bear to her advancement in this match
With Lord Vincentio, as the Duke has wrought it,
To the perpetual honor of our house,
Puts fire into my blood, to purge the air
Of this corruption, fear it spread too far,
And poison the whole hopes of this fair fortune.
I love her good so dearly, that no Brother
Shall venture farther for a Sisters glory,
Then I for her preferment.

Once again
I Will see that glistring Whore, shines like a Serpent,
Now the Court Sun's upon her: Page!

Anon Sir!
I Will go in state too; see the Coach be ready.

I Will hurry away presently.


Yes you shall hurry,
And the Devil after you; take that at setting forth.
Now, and you will draw, we are upon equal terms Sir.
Thou took'st advantage of my name in honor,
Upon my Sister* I never saw the stroke
Come, till I found my reputation bleeding;
And therefore count it I no sin to valor
To serve thy lust so: Now we are of even hand,
Take your best course against me. You must die.

How close sticks Envy to man's happiness?
When I was poor, and little cared for life,
I had no such means offered me to die,
No man's wrath minded me: Slave, I turn this to thee,
To call thee to account, for a wound lately
Of a base stamp upon me.

'T was most fit
For a base mettle. Come and fetch one now
More noble then, for I will use thee sairer
Then thou have done thine soul, or our honor;
And there I think it is for thee.

Help, help, Oh part 'em.


False wife! I feel now thou have praid heartily for me;
Rise Strumpet by my fall, thy Lust may reign now;
My heart-string, and the marriage knot that tied thee,
Breaks both together.

There I heard the sound on it,
And never like'd string better.

It Is my Brother,
Are you hurt Sir?

Not any thing.


Blessed fortune,
Shift for thy self; what is he thou have killed?

Our honors enemy.


Know you this man Lady?


Leantio? My loves joy? wounds stick upon thee
As deadly as thy sins; art thou not hurt?
The Devil take that fortune, and he dead,
Drop plagues into thy bowels without voice,
Secret, and fearful: Run for Officers,
Let him be apprehended with all speed,
For fear he escape away; lay hands on him.
We cannot be too sure, it is wilful murder;
You do Heavens vengeance, and the Law just service.
You know him not as I do, he is a villain,
As monstrous as a prodigy, and as dreadful:

Will you but entertain a noble patience,
Till you but hear the reason worthy Sister!

The reason! that is a jest Hell falls a laughing at:
Is there a reason found for the destruction
Of our more lawful loves? and was there none
To kill the black Lust twixt thy Niece and thee,
That has kept close so long?

How Is that good Madam?


Too true Sir, there she stands, let her deny't;
The deed cries shortly in the Midwifes arms,
Unless the parents sins strike it still-born;
And if you be not deaf, and ignorant,
You Will hear strange notes ere long: Look upon me Wench!
'Twas I betrayed thy honor subtly to him
Under a false tale; it lights upon me now;
His arm has paid me home upon thy breast,
My sweet beloved Leantio!

Was my judgment
And care in choice, so dev'llishly abused,
So beyond shamefully -- All the world will grin at me.

Oh Sordido, Sordido, I Am damned, I Am damned!


Damned, why Sir!


One of the wicked; do not see it, a Cuckold, a plain rebrobate Cuckold.


Nay; and you be damned for that! be of good cheer Sir,
You Have gallant company of all professions; I Will have a wife
Next Sunday too, because I Will along with you my self.

That will be some comfort yet.


You Sir, that bear your load of injuries,
As I of sorrows, lend me your grieved strength
To this sad burden; who in life wore actions,
Flames were not nimbler: We will talk of things*
May have the luck to break our hearts together.

I Will list to nothing, but revenge and anger,
Whose counsels I will follow.

A wife quoth'a!
Here Is a sweet Plumb-tree of your Gardiner's graffing!

Nay there is a worse name belongs to this fruit yet, and you could hit on it, a
more open one: For he that marries a whore, looks like a fellow bound all his
life time to a Medler-tree, and that is good stuff; it is no sooner ripe, but it
looks rotten; and so do some Queans at nineteen. A pox on it, I thought there
was some knavery a broach, for something stirred in her belly, the first night I
lay with her


What, what Sir!


This is she brought up so courtly, can sing, and dance, and tumble too,
methinks, I Will never marry wife again, that has so many qualities


Indeed they are seldom good Master; for likely when they are taught so many,
they will have one trick more of their own finding out. Well, give me a wench
but with one good quality, to lie with none but her husband, and that is
bringing up enough for any woman breathing


This was the fault, when she was tend'red to me; you never looked to this.


Alas, how would you have me see through a great Farthingal Sir! I cannot peep
through a Millstone, or in the going, to see what is done in the bottom


Her father praised her Breast, sh'ad the voice forsooth;
I marvell'd she sung so small indeed, being no Maid.
Now I perceive there is a young Querister in her Belly:
This breeds a singing in my head I Am sure.

It Is but the tune of your wives Sinquapace, Danced in a Fetherbed; Faith, go
lie down Master -- but take heed your Horns do not make holes in the
Pillowbers. -- I would not batter brows with him for a Hogshead of Angels, he
would prick my skull as full of holes as a Scriveners Sand-Box


Was ever Maid so cruelly beguiled
To the confusion of life, soul, and honor,
All of one woman's murdering! I Would fain bring
Her name no nearer to my blood. then woman,
And it is too much of that; Oh shame and horror!
In that small distance from you man to me,
Lies sin enough to make a whole world perish.
It Is time we parted Sir, and left the sight
Of one another, nothing can be worse
To hurt repentance; for our very eyes
Are far more poisonous to Religion,
Then Basilisks to them; if any goodness
Rest in you, hope of comforts, fear of judgments,
My request is, I never may see you more;
And so I turn me from you everlastingly,
So is my hope to miss you; but for her,
That durst so dally with a sin so dangerous,
And lay a snare so spightfully for my youth,
If the least means but favor my revenge,
That I may practice the like cruel cunning
Upon her life, as she has on mine honor,
I Will act it without pity.

Here Is a care
Of reputation, and a Sisters fortune
Sweetly rewarded by her: Would a silence,
As great as that which keeps among the graves,
Had everlastingly chained up her tongue;
My love to her has made mine miserable.

If you can but dissemble your hearts griefs now,
Be but a woman so far.

Peace! I Will strive Sir:


As I can wear my injuries in a smile;
Here Is an occasion offered, that gives anger
Both liberty and safety to perform
Things worth the fire it holds, without the fear
Of danger, or of Law; for mischief's acted
Under the privilege of a marriage-triumph
At the Dukes hasty Nuptial's, will be thought
Things merely accidental; all is by chance,
Not got of their own natures.

I conceive you Sir,
Even to a longing for performance on it;
And here behold some fruits. Forgive me both,
What I am now returned to Sense and Judgment.
Is not the same Rage and distraction
Presented lately to you? that rude form
Is gone for ever. I am now my self,
That speaks all peace, and friendship; and these tears
Are the true springs of hearty penitent sorrow*
For those foul wrongs, which my forgetful fury
Sland'red your virtues with: This Gentleman
Is well resolved now.

I was never otherways,
I knew (alas) 'twas but your anger spoke it,
And I never thought on it more.

Pray rise good Sister.


Here Is even as sweet amends made for a wrong now,
As one that gives a wound, and pays the Surgeon;
All the smart's nothing, the great loss of blood,
Or time of hind'rance: Well, I had a Mother,
I can dissemble too: What wrongs have slipped
Through angers ignorance (Aunt) my heart forgives.

Why thus tuneful now!


And what I did Sister,
Was all for honors cause, which time to come
Will approve to you.

Being awaked to goodness,
I understand so much Sir, and praise now
The fortune of your arm, and of your safety;
For by his death you have rid me of a sin
As costly as ever woman doted on:
T'has pleased the Duke so well too, that (behold Sir)
Has sent you here your pardon, which I kissed
With most affectionate comfort; when 'twas brought,
Then was my fit just past, it came so well me thought
To glad my heart.

I see his Grace thinks on me.


There Is no talk now but of the preparation
For the great marriage.

Does he marry her then?


With all speed, suddenly, as fast as cost
Can be laid on with many thousand hands.
This Gentleman and I, had once a purpose
To have honored the first marriage of the Duke
With an invention of his own; 'twas ready
The pains well past, most of the charge bestowed on it;
Then came the death of your good Mother (Niece)
And turned the glory of it all to black:
It Is a device would fit these times so well too,
Art's treasury not better; if you will join
It shall be done, the cost shall all be mine:

You Have my voice first, 'twill well approve my thankfulness
For the Dukes love and favor.

What say you Niece?


I am content to make one.


The plot's full then;
Your pages Madam, will make shift for Cupids.

That will they Sir.


You Will play your old part still.


What, is it good? troth I have even forgot it.


Why Juno Pronuba, the Marriage-Goddess.


It Is right indeed.


And you shall play the Nymph,
That offers sacrifice to appease her wrath.

Sacrifice good Sir?


Must I be appeased then?


That Is as you list your self, as you see cause.


Methinks 'twould show the more state in her diety,
To be Incenst*

'Twould, but my Sacrifice
Shall take a course to appease you, or I Will fail in it,
And teach a sinful Baud to play a Goddess.

For our parts, we'll not be ambitious Sir;
Please you walk in, and see the project drawn,
Then take your choice.

I weigh not, so I have one.


How much ado have I to restrain fury
From breaking into curses! Oh how painful it is
To keep great sorrow smothered! sure I think
It Is harder to dissemble Grief, then Love:
Leantio, here the weight of thy loss lies,
Which nothing but destruction can suffice.

Cease, cease; Religious Honors done to sin,
Disparage Virtues reverence, and will pull
Heavens thunder upon Florence; holy Ceremonies
Were made for sacred uses, not for sinful.
Are these the fruits of your Repentance Brother?
Better it had been you had never sorrow'd,
Then to abuse the benefit, and return
To worse then where sin left you.
Vowed you then never to keep Strumpet more,
And are you now so swift in your desires,
To knit your honors, and your life fast to her!
Is not sin sure enough to wretched man,
But he must bind himself in chains to it? Worse!
Must marriage, that immaculate robe of honor,
That renders Virtue glorious, fair, and fruitful
To her great Master, be now made the Garment
Of Leprousie and Foulness? is this Penitence
To sanctify hot Lust? what is it otherways
Then worship done to Devils? is this the best
Amends that sin can make after her riots?
As if a Drunkard, to appease Heavens wrath,
Should offer up his surfeit for a Sacrifice:
If that be comely, then Lust's offerings are
On Wedlocks sacred Altar.

Here you are bitter
Without cause Brother: what I vowed I keep,
As safe as you your Conscience, and this needs not;
I taste more wrath in it, then I do Religion;
And envy more then goodness; the path now
I tread, is honest, leads to lawful love,
Which virtue in her strictness would not check:
I vowed no more to keep a sensual woman:
It Is done, I mean to make a lawful wife of her.

He that taught you that craft,
Call him not Master long, he will undo you.
Grow not too cunning for your soul good Brother,
Is it enough to use adulterous thefts,
And then take sanctuary in marriage?
I grant, so long as an offender keeps
Close in a privileged Temple, his life's safe;
But if he ever venture to come out,
And so be taken, then he surely dies for it:
So now you are safe; but when you leave this body,
Man's only priviledg'd Temple upon Earth,
In which the guilty soul takes sanctuary,
Then you will perceive what wrongs chaste vows endure,
When Lust usurps the Bed that should be pure.

Sir, I have read you over all this while
In silence, and I find great knowledge in you,
And severe learning, yet amongst all your virtues
I see not charity written, which some call
The firstborn of Religion, and I wonder
I cannot see it in yours* Believe it Sir,
There is no virtue can be sooner missed,
Or later welcomed; it begins the rest,
And sets 'em all in order; Heaven and Angels
Take great delight in a converted sinner.
Why should you then a Servant and Professor,
Differ so much from them? If every woman
That commits evil, should be therefore kept
Back in desires of goodness, how should virtue
Be known and honored? From a man that is blind,
To take a burning Taper, it is no wrong,
He never misses it: But to take light
From one that see's, that is injury and spite.
Pray whether is Religion better served,
When lives that are licentious are made honest,
Then when they still run through a sinful blood.
It Is nothing Virtues Temples to deface;
But build the ruins, there is a work of Grace.

I kiss thee for that spirit; thou have praised thy wit
A modest way: On, on there.

Lust is bold,
And will have vengeance speak, er't be controld.

SPeak, have thou any sense of thy abuse?
Do thou know what wrong's done thee?

I wear an Ass else.
I cannot wash my face, but I am feeling on it.

Here take this Galtrop, then convey it secretly
Into the place I showed you; look you Sir,
This is the trap-door to it.

I know it of old Uncle, since the last triumph; here rose up a Devil with one
eye I remember, with a company of fireworks at's tail


Prithee leave squibbing now, mark me, and fail not; but when thou hear'st me
give a stamp, down with it: The villain's caught then


If I miss you, hang me; I love to catch a villain, and your stamp shall go
current I warrant you: But how shall I rise up, and let him down too? All at
one hole! that will be a horrible puzzle. You know I have a part in it, I play
Slander


True, but never make you ready for it.


No, my clothes are bought and all, and a foul Fiends head with a long
contumelious tongue in the chaps on it, a very fit shape for Slander in the
out-parishes


It shall not come so far, thou understandst it not.


Oh, oh!


He shall lie deep enough ere that time,
And stick first upon those*

Now I conceive you Gardener.


Away, list to the privy stamp, that is all thy part:


Stamp my Horns in a Mortar if I miss you, and give the powder in White Wind to
sick Cuckolds, a very present remedy for the headache


If this should any way miscarry now,
As if the fool be nimble enough, it is certain,
The Pages that present the swift winged Cupids,
Are taught to hit him with their shafts of love,
Fitting his part, which I have cunningly poisoned;
He cannot 'scape my fury; and those ills
Will be laid all on Fortune, not our Wills,
That Is all the sport on it; for who will imagine,
That at the celebration of this night
Any mischance that hap's, can flow from spite?

Now our fair Duchess, your delight shall witness,
How you are beloved and honored; all the glories
Bestowed upon the gladness of this night,
Are done for your bright sake.

I am the more
In debt my Lord, to loves and courtesies,
That offer up themselves so bounteously
To do me honored Grace, without my merit.

A goodness set in greatness; how it sparkles
Afar off like pure Diamonds set in Gold!
How perfect my desires were, might I witness
But a fair noble peace, 'twixt your two spirits!
The reconcilement would be more sweet to me,
Then longer life to him that fears to die.
Good Sir!

I profess Peace, and am content:


I Will see the Seal upon it, and then it is firm.


You shall have all you wish.


I have all indeed now.


But I have made surer work; this shall not blind me;
He that begins so early to reprove,
Quickly rid him, or look for little love;
Beware a Brothers envy, he is next heir too*
Cardinal you die this night, the plot's laid surely:
In time of sports Death may steal in securely; then it is least thought on*
For he that is most religious, holy Friend,
Does not at all hours think upon his end;
He has his times of frailty, and his thoughts
Their transportations too, through flesh and blood,
For all his zeal, his learning, and his light,
As well as we, poor soul, that sin by night.

What Is this Fabritio?


Marry, my Lord, the model
Of what is presented.

Oh we thank their loves;
Sweet Duchess take your seat, list to the Argument.
THere is a Nymph that haunts the Woods and Springs,
In love with two at once, and they with her;
Equal it runs; but to decide these things,
The cause to mighty Juno they refer,
She being the Marriage-Goddess; the two Lovers
They offer sighs, the Nymph a Sacrifice,
All to please Juno, who by signs discovers,
How the event shall be, so that strife dies:
Then springs a second; for the man refused
Grows discontent, and out of love abused,
He raises Slander up, like a black Fiend,
To disgrace the other, which pays him in the end.

In troth, my Lord, a pretty pleasing Argument,
And fits the occasion well; Envy and Slander
Are things soon raised against two faithful Lovers;
But comfort is, they are not long unrewarded.

This music shows they are upon entrance now.


Then enter all my wishes:


To thee fair Bride Hymen offers up
Of nuptial joys this the Celestial Cup.
Taste it, and thou shall ever find
Love in thy Bed, peace in thy mind.

We'll taste you sure, 'twere pity to disgrace
So pretty a beginning.

'Twas spoke nobly.


Two Cups of Nectar have we begged from Jove;
Hebe give that to Innocence, I this to love.
Take heed of stumbling more, look to your way;
Remember still the Via Lactea.

Well Ganymed, you have more faults, though not so known;
I spil'd one Cup, but you have filtch'd many a one.

No more, forbear for Hymen's sake;
In love we met, and so let us part*

But soft! here is no such persons in the Argument,
As these three, Hymen, Hebe, Ganymed.
The Actors that this model here discovers,
Are only four, Juno, a Nymph, two Lovers.

This is some Antemask belike, my Lord,
To entertain time; now my peace is perfect.
Let sports come on a pace, now is their time, my Lord.
Hark you, you hear from 'em!

The Nymph indeed.


Juno Nuptial-Goddess, thou that rul'st o'r coupled bodies,
Ty'st man to woman, never to forsake her, thou only powerful marriage-maker,
Pity this amazed affection; I love both, and both love me,
Nor know I where to give rejection, my heart likes so equally,
Till thou set'st right my Peace of life,
And with thy power conclude this strife.

Now with my thanks depart you to the Springs;
I to these Wells of Love: Thou sacred Goddess,
And Queen of Nuptials, Daughter to great Saturn,
Sister and Wife to Jove, Imperial Juno,
Pity this passionate conflict in my Breast,
This tedious War, 'twixt two Affections;
Crown me with victory, and my heart's at peace.

Make me that happy man, thou mighty Goddess.


But I live most in hope, if truest love
Merit the greatest comfort.

I love both
With such an even and fair affection,
I know not which to speak for, which to wish for,
Till thou great Arbitress, 'twixt lovers hearts,
By thy auspicious Grace, design the man;
Which pity I implore.

We all implore it.


And after sighs, contritions, truest odors,
I offer to thy powerful Deity,
This precious Incense, may it ascend peacefully;
And if it keep true touch, my good Aunt Juno,
'Twill try your immortality er't belong:
I fear you will never get so nigh Heaven again,
When you're once down.

Though you and your affections
Seem all as dark to our illustrious brightness
As nights inheritance Hell, we pity you,
And your requests are granted: You ask signs;
They shall be given you, we'll be gracious to you.
He of those twain which we determine for you,
Loves Arrows shall wound twice, the later wound
Betokens love in age; for so are all
Whose love continues firmly all their life time,
Twice wounded at their marriage; else affection
Dies when youth ends: This favor overcomes me.
Now for a sign of wealth and golden days,
Bright-ey'd Prosperity, which all couples love,
I, and makes love take that: Our Brother Jove
Never denies us of his burning treasure,
T'express bounty.

She falls down upon it,
Whas's the conceit of that?

As overjoyed be like:
Too much prosperity overjoyes us all,
And she has her lapful, it seems my Lord.

This swerves a little from the Argument though: Look you my Lords.


All Is fast; now comes my part to toll him hither;
Then with a stamp given, he is dispatched as cunningly.

Stark dead: Oh treachery! cruelly made away! how is that?


Look, there is one of the Lovers dropped away too.


Why sure this plot's drawn false, here is no such thing.


Oh I am sick to the death, let me down quickly;
This fume is deadly: Oh 't'has poisoned me!
My subtilty is sped, her art h'as quitted me;
My own ambition pulls me down to ruin.

Nay, then I kiss thy cold lips, and applaud
This thy revenge in death.

Look, Juno's down too:
What makes she there? her pride should keep aloft.
She was wont to scorn the Earth in other shows:
Methinks her Peacocks Feathers are much pulled:

Oh death runs through my blood; in a wild flame too:
Plague of those Cupids; some lay hold on 'em.
Let 'em not 'scape, they have spoiled me; the shaft's deadly.

I have lost my self in this quite.


My great Lords, we are all confounded.


How?


Dead; and I worse.


Dead? my Girl dead? I hope
My Sister Juno has not served me so.

Lust, and forgetfulness has been amongst us,
And we are brought to nothing: Some blessed Charity
Lend me the speeding Pity of his Sword
To quench this fire in blood. Leantio's death
Has brought all this upon us; now I taste it,
And made us lay plots to confound each other;
The event so proves it, and man's understanding
Is riper at his fall, then all his life time.
She in a madness for her lovers death,
Revealed a fearful Lust in our near bloods,
For which I am punished dreadfully and unlooked for;
Proved her own ruin too, Vengeance met Vengeance,
Like a set match; as if the plague of sin
Had been agreed to meet here altogether.
But how her fawning partner fell, I reach not,
Unless caught by some spring of his own setting:
(For on my pain, he never dreamed of dying)
The plot was all his own, and he had cunning
Enough to save himself; but it is the property
Of guilty deeds to draw your wisemen downward.
Therefore the wonder ceases. -- Oh this torment!

Our Guard below there!


My Lord*


Run and meet death then,
And cut off time and pain.

Behold my Lord, h'as run his Breast upon a weapons point.


Upon the first night of our nuptial honors,
Destruction play her triumph, and great mischiefs
Mask in expected pleasures, it is prodigious!
They Are things most fearfully ominous: I like 'em not.
Remove these ruined bodies from our eyes.

Not yet, no change? when falls he to the Earth?


Please but your Excellence to peruse that Paper,
Which is a brief confession from the heart
Of him that fell first, ere his soul departed;
And there the darkness of these deeds speaks plainly.
It Is the full scope, the manner, and intent;
His Ward, that ignorantly let him down,
Fear put to present flight at the voice of him.

Nor yet?


Read, read; for I am lost in sight and strength.


My noble Brother!


Oh the curse of wretchedness!
My deadly hand is saln upon my Lord:
Destruction take me to thee, give me way;
The pains and plagues of a lost soul upon him,
That hinders me a moment.

My heart swells bigger yet; help here, break't open,
My breast flies open next.

Oh with the poison,
That was prepared for thee, thee, Cardinal!
'Twas meant for thee.

Poor Prince!


Accursed Error!
Give me thy last breath, thou infected bosom,
And wrap two spirits, in one poisoned vapor.
Thus, thus, reward thy murderer, and turn death
Into a parting kiss: My soul stands ready at my lips,
Even vexed to stay one minute after thee.

The greatest sorrow and astonishment
That ever struck the general peace of Florence;
Dwells in this hour.

So my desires are satisfied,
I feel deaths power within me.
Thou have prevailed in something (cursed poison)
Though thy chief force was spent in my Lords bosom;
But my deformity in spirit's more foul;
A blemished face best fits a leprous soul.
What make I here? these are all strangers to me,
Not known but by their malice; now thou art gone;
Nor do I seek their pities.

O restrain
Her ignorant wilful hand!

Now do; it is done.


Now I feel the breach of marriage
At my heartbreaking: Oh the deadly snares
That Women set for Women, without pity
Either to soul or honor! Learn by me
To know your foes: In this belief I die;
Like our own Sex, we have no Enemy, no Enemy!

See my Lord
What shift she has made to be her own destruction.

Pride, Greatness, Honors, Beauty, Youth, Ambition,
You must all down together, there is no help for it:
Yet this my gladness is, that I remove,
Tasting the same death in a cup of love.

Sin, what thou art, these ruins show too piteously.
Two Kings on one Throne cannot sit together,
But one must needs down, for his Titles wrong;
So where lust raigns, that Prince cannot reign long.


