Gentlemen, I am sent to acquaint you, that, by reason of an Accident, there
can be no Prologue spoke to day; but the Play will begin immediately


How Is that? No Prologue? go, this must not be;
I Will rather speak one now extempore.

How shall I begin? -- I have it now --
Gallants! -- Hold! I forgot to make my Bow.
Gallants, Our Author -- Ay, that is well begun,
Our Author -- To -- For -- hold, I cannot go on:
This Modesty does strangely balk a Man.
Why should I strive to help these Tragic Actors?
Hang 'em, they make you dull, like any Doctors.
Well, if for nothing but grave Stuff you're all,
I too will rant, and toss my awful Head,
Till from the Battlements of yon' high Wall
The Mob look pale to see me look so red.
But what shall I say next? -- O! Stay, I Have got
The Epilogue; I Will speak it now. Why not?
More Poet-Bays than one, when all things fail,
Turn thus the Tail to Head, and Head to Tail.
I hate to sneak in, and be hist away,
Begging for Mercy, when you have damned the Play*
Prompter, take the Epilogue, and prompt me right;
We Are always damned imperfect the first night.

You Have seen the Play.

How Is that?

You Have seen the Play*

You Have seen the Play! Why, that will not do? But stay.
We Will let that pass; if you have not seen't, you may.
What Is next?

You think --

You think your time misspent;
But know, 'twas studied to be played in Lent;
A time when some of you so nice were grown,
Y' abstained from every kind of Flesh, but one.
You Topers, leaving Wine, to grow devout,
Got only drunk in Darby, Punch and Stout.
Nay even we Players, not over-godly neither,
Fasted the week, that none of you came hither.
But that is no Fast to what poor Poets fear.
If his Play's damned, he keeps Lent all the year.
Now you, instead of fasting, went to spark it,
To race, cock, bet, and lose by Stiff-Dick at New Market;
While drooping here we did your Loss condole,
Tugging with Viva viva Barbacole.
So we laid this Play by, when you were gone,
For you Sparks now to mortify upon;
You know a Reformation's coming on.
Then bear these moral Scenes with Resignation,
T'inure you to be ween'd from darling Fornication.


AH! poor Vincentio, altered more by Passions
Than by this new Disguise, who now could know thee?
You Are grown a Stranger to thy very self.
It Is scarce a Year since I fled hence to Afric;
But oh! how Sorrow, Sickness, and Fatigue,
And most my anxious Love, since that, have changed me.
I doubt I wear this borrowed Black and Dress
Rather to try Placentia, thus unknown,
Than to reclaim and save my wicked Brother.

You're but too kind to him, my Lord. I hear,
That when a fatal Duel forced you hence,
He stabbed the Friend who strove to get your Pardon,
To hinder your Return.

With what unnat'ral Joy, he, in the Morning,
Heard us confirm the Tidings of my Death!

My Lord, if he is as wicked as he is thought,
'Twou'd have been ill in him to have done better.
Bad Men still act themselves in every thing that is bad,
And are not to be blamed for barbarous Actions,
More than the Beasts of Prey for Cruelty:
Nor is it for their Vices, but their Natures,
We should destroy 'em both.

Yes, he is my Shame;
But still my Brother; therefore yet a while
Let Lisbon think me dead, as I Am reported.
In this Disguise I thought fit to confirm it;
For, should they think I live, the King would never
Grant him his Pardon for Don Carlo's Murder.

It seems he is sure of it, for he has left
The Sanctuary, and lords it in your House.

Upon the confirmation of my Death,
The King has signed the Warrant for his Pardon;
So to prevent the Extinction of our Name,
Which Royal Gratitude still makes him value.
Then let him revel, till the Seals are past,
As a sole Brother in my large Estate;
That done, I will revive, a severe check
On all his future Life.

I wish yours be secure, my Lord!
Tools of Destruction still stand ready pressed
To a bad hand, and Murder watches sure.
Then, give me leave to fear.

I Will keep Prevention's Eye upon the Watch;
But I disdain to fear. For Death must come,
And it is no matter when: Once in the Grave,
Long Life and short are both become the same.
Death levels all: Age, Beauty, Wealth, and Titles,
Lie undistinguished, huddled up together,
And none complain of what, or when, or how.
Oh! I could wish my Dust with thy dead Parents
Lay blended in one Urn on Africk's Shore,
Rather than languish thus in hopeless Love,
And see my Father's Glory
Turn rusly in this Brother.

Ah! my Lord,
That rusts not, since it shines so bright in you.

Zemet, no more. I here expect Placentia;
This is her way from Chapel --
See, she comes. -- Withdraw.
She comes, and weeps for me,
For the false News I brought her. Cruel Fate,
Deal me less Pity, and some Love --

I shiver --
How my Heart beats! Even through this hue, I fear,
She Will read my Soul's Disorder -- Now I burn.
Let Love be drawn no more with golden Darts,
But armed with Fires: I feel him in my Veins.
How shall I speak?

Oh! generous Don Vincentio,
As soon shall I forget my self as thee.

Now, by my Love, there is Life in that kind Sorrow;
It bids me hope, and speak.
Why, Madam, will you lavish thus your Tears
On my dead Friend? He never could gain your Love;
Yet, if departed Souls see things on Earth,
Placentia is Vincentio's present Object,
And not one Tear she sheds but he must prize
At a much greater Value than his Life.

Can I do less than weep for that brave Lord?
Oh! Sir, you were a Stranger to his worth.

No, Madam; none could know Vincentio better
Than did Morat; and you will think so too,
When I relate some Passages he told me.
He said, you were the Cause of all those Sighs
He had betrayed so often, and I pitied;
He said, such Beauty and such Cruelty
Never met in one before; and yet methinks
Your Tears and Sorrow contradict his Words --
If I talk long, I shall betray my self.

Since my best Lord (for so I always called him)
Made you no Stranger to those humble Thoughts,
The only Blemish of his noble Life,
I will a little clear that passage to you --
His Virtuous Mother, for what Cause I know not,
Took me from humble Birth, to breed me as her Child.

Madam, he told me this, and that his Mother
Had made your Fortune equal to her Daughters;
Commanding him to see you nobly married, or a Nun.
But Love, he said, doubled that Pious Charge,
And he never wished for any Wife but you.
Oh! why did you refuse to make him happy?

To clear my self to you, I Will tell you that
Which should not be revealed, were he still living.

Now I begin to tremble.

His Mother found out that unhappy Love;
And, lest it should dishonor his great Name,
Taught me to obey him, as my Lord and Brother;
But charged me, as I tendered Heaven, my Soul,
Her Memory, or any Thing that is Sacred,
I never should marry him.

Oh! Patience Heaven!

This was her daily, and her last Request;
And, that I might Religiously perform it,
Resolving with my self a single Life,
I solemnly did swear, Never to wed above my humble Birth.

'Twill be in vain to live after this Story.
Oh! Mother -- you mixed the worst of Curses with that Breath
That gave your wretched Son his latest Blessing.

You're strangely moved! -- But see Ricardo!
I would shun him.

You were my Brother's Servants; I dismiss you --
Placentia, stay.

My Lord, our Wages.

Do Men like me pay Wages?

My Lord --

Talk with my Steward! hence! Be gone!
Well, Madam?

My Lord.

So scornful still! I will no longer bear it.

How I dread his vile Love, since now he is Master here!

How now, Morat? What, you have been talking now
Of my dead Brother, and the Creature weeps.
It Is true, the humble Fop indulged her Pride
With honorable Love, though still she scorned him.

Hold! Patience yet! Thus most Heirs treat the Dead.
My Lord, I was your Brother's worthless Friend,
And know how much he did esteem this Lady,
As I believe, not without due defert.

Oh, dull Morat! thou do not know this Trifle;
Thou art a Moor, and look on outward Toys,
Fine Clothes and Jewels; why, these Things are mine;
I Will strip her of 'em all, if she consents not
To yield to my Embraces.

My Lord, I fancy it is not in your Power.

Hark you, Morat; I suffered you my House
For the good News this Morning you confirmed.
But never believe I made you of my Council.

No; if you had, I should advise you better
Than thus to forfeit all your House's Honor
By most ignoble Actions.

How Is this, Slave?

By all my former Honor, that Name Slave,
Did not you share your noble Brother's Blood,
Should cost the dearest Drop about your Heart.

Sure, he is run mad -- Out of my House, thou Frenzy.

I will not stir.
Your Brother made me Joynt-Executor
With this fair Lady; I Will soon prove his Will,
And till I Have seen it all performed, I Will stay.

You mean, till the Inquisition seizes you.
Do you not, Moor? you two Executors!

Laugh not too fast, my Lord: Your Inquisition
Cannot fright me; for though my Complection's black,
My Soul is white and Christian, which, I fear,
The Holy Font has not made yours.

Insolent Slave! who waits! what hoa! not one
Of my new Train to rid me of this Moor?
Nay, then I Will do it my self.

Inhospitable Wretch!

Hold! help! help!

Here, take your Sword, and put it up, proud Lord,
But oh! insult no further, if you would live.

Disarmed! and by a Moor! But he is not worth
A second Danger. I Have some trusty Bravo's,
Who safely shall correct his Insolence.
Hence, Slaves! there is now no need of you.

My Lord, yet think from what great Stock you sprung,
And how a Nobleman should keep that Name:
It Is not to be preserved by dead Men's Actions;
You must have living Virtues, or it is lost --
Come, I perceive that you attend with shame
My too severe Reproof, and I repent it;
I Will leave you to repent too for the Cause.
Madam, some other Time I Will wait on you.

A brave good Man, well worth Vincentio's Friendship!

Stay, scornful Thing.

I must not.

Must not?

No -- you have forfeited at last all the Respect I owed you.

Yes, you shall stay: I Will know what you have been hatching,
That I Am thus braved with a forged Will. It Is vain:
Your Reign is out; The Fool my Brother's dead,
And I Will command what hitherto I begged.
You're now my Ward, my Prisoner if I please:
You're not in those cold Climes, where Maids and Wives
Rove where they please, as shameless as unquestioned,
To wrong the dull contented Herd of Men.
If you will be paid my Mother's Legacy,
That lavish Gift, a Portion for a Princess,
Your proud pretended Virtue laid aside,
Meet my Embraces willingly to morrow,
Or soon by Force you shall. Till then think of it.

I Will think on Daggers for the Ravisher,
To cool his Fires, or save my self from shame.
Yes, even the famed Lucretia I Will out-vye;
Not let the Tarquin force the brutal Joy,
But kill him first, or with my Honor dye.

Thou fir'st me so, that for Revenge
I could -- I could even marry thee, young Fury.
But at a cheaper Rate I Will ease my Rage:
She and my Sisters harden one another
In rigid Coyness, and in hate of me,
But they shall Wed, and leave this House to morrow;
Then by Wiles, Threats, or Force, I Will deal with the other.
Who waits?

My Lord!

Call both my Sisters.

Yes, my Lord.

I must prepare 'em to receive new Lovers;
Though now few Women need such Preparations.

Still weeping!
D' you grieve at my good Fortune? Come, I Have got
Young Husbands for you: That, I take to be
The surest way to dry a Virgin's Tears.
To morrow Don Fabiano shall be yours,
Morella; and Don Paulo yours, Melinda.

His lewd Friend Paulo!

Fabiano! poor Placentia's Lover!

What, Dumb? Are they not Noble, Rich, and Young?

Oh! Let us hear of nothing, Sir, but Grief.
Alas! we cannot even think of those
My Brother's Choice designed us once for Husbands.

You need not: For, their hopes, like him, must dye.
No more -- Compose your Looks to meet my Friends.

Don Ferdinand, My Lord, is just a lighting

The Governor! He brings his Son Fabiano!
I Will meet him -- Sisters stay till I return.

Oh! dismal News! now we indeed are wretched.
Completely wretched. Alas poor Vincentio!
How soon we feel thy Loss, thou best of Brothers!

Dear Orphan Ladies, let us mingle Sorrows.
Alas, I Am an unhappy Orphan too.
Like you, methinks, I mourn a Brother's Loss,
And what is yet more, a Friend's.

A Friend's indeed! alas, my Dear, I doubt
Your Tears, like ours, will flow from several Springs.
I Am bid to wed to morrow your Fabiano.

Hah! But why am I startled and disordered?
Though, to my Soul's eternal dear Disquiet,
We love each other, even to mere Distraction,
My hopes are lost, for I must keep my Vow.
I wish a mutual Love might link your Fates.

Oh! wish not this, my Dear, my Heart is fixed:
Don Philip, or a Cloister.

Fabiano, with his Father! Oh my Heart!
I must not stay; yet I am rooted here.

Sister Morella, let my Lord be used
As his great Merit, and my Choice deserve.

Son, scorn Ignoble Love! See there your better Fate.

Let Us not seem to observe 'em, while he whispers
His first Love-Complement. All Infancies are bashful,
And that of Love is most.

Amazement! sure he loves her! how they whisper!
What do I feel? it is more than Love; it is Jealousy, I fear.
Am I then Jealous? What, of him I Would lose?
I will not: Sure he came in hopes to see me.
Away, cursed Jealousy! Thou needless Physic,
That turn'st our Health to voluntary Sickness,
I dash thee from me like a Poison -- yet I will look.

My Dear, you're Jealous?

Not at all -- yet I must gaze -- I Am racked -- I cannot bear it.

I must follow her.

What Is that bright Vision which now shot from hence, Swift as a Star?

A falling one, a glaring fatal Meteor,
The worthless Creature of my Mother's Favor,
Her Fortune ample, but her Birth unknown.

It Is a fair Destruction!
I blush to own I Have heard my Son was dazzled
By her deluding Beams. This made me hasten
To fix him quickly in a nobler choice:
Which was my Motive to demand your Sister
When I engaged to get your Pardon signed.

Madam, you know the tie upon my Heart,
The longings of my Soul, Placentia's Love:
My Trust in your kind Pity brought me hither,
Which all my Father's Threats could scarce have done.
Then let us retire, since by your generous Suff'rance
I may see her once more: For, if I stay,
I shall act Love so ill, it will betray us.

She Is his, My Lord: The Conqu'ror leads his Prize.

Now, as I love bright Honor, this sight charms me,
And makes my Age, in spite of Time, run back.
It Is true, this Lord has dimmed his House's Glory;
But now I hope 'twill clear. High Birth, though clouded
With fashionable Vices, will at last
Exert it self and shine.

My Lord, a Lady in a Veil desires to speak with your Lordship.

My Lord, I Will leave you, and in an Hour return.

Your Lordship's Servant --
Conduct the Lady in --
I fear it is Laura -- But why should I fear?
She Is kind, she is fair -- But oh! I Am bound to wed her:
I on that score, was trusted with her Fortune,
And lost it all at Play. She Is heard the News,
And comes prepared to share my Joys -- I dread her:
Let me wed nothing but variety.
But I Will dissemble yet; for though when pleased
She Is smiling as the Morn, cool as the Evening,
And calm as is the Night, when urged, she rages
Like the Meridian Sun's collected Beams;
Proud of her Charms, though lavish of her Love;
Generous, and free, and daring, like a Man;
But Jealous and Revengeful, like a Woman --
It Is she --
Now help me, Cunning, once to feign
A Joy as great as hers -- My Laura!

Fly off my Veil! Oh! let me rush at once
Into his Heart, into his very Soul.

My Life, my all!

Oh let me gaze -- I cannot speak for Joy-Oh happy Change!
When the Profuseness of my Love had left me
Nothing to give to save thy Life, but mine,
To see thee raised at once to Honor, Wealth, and Freedom,
From Shame, from Death, and Ruin,
It Is Rapture, it is Delight transcending Words,
Too vast for Thought, and even too strong for Souls,
It Is perfect Joy, and Pleasure in extreme.

Oh! do not talk of Honor, Wealth, and Freedom:
Your self, your self's the greatest, dearest Blessing.

In being so to thee, thy Laura's blessed,
Life of my Life, and Genius of my Soul;
Thy very Shadow brings me more delight
Than all the Substance of the World besides;
For I Have no Being, when I Am torn from thee;
Or, if I find I Have one, it is only by my Pains.

Oh! sympathy of Hearts! My only Joy!
'Twas not less Pain to me to be forced from thee,
Than now it is Pleasure thus to meet thee kind.

Oh! now I hope we are met to part no more.
Let me no longer hear nor think of Absence.
Absence to some gives Relish to their Joy,
A breathing to their Pleasures; but to me
'Twas Death, when to the Monast'ry you fled,
And to be safe lay hid.

Ah! Madam --

Madam! Fie, leave this dull Formality.
Does it suit Love of such a Growth as ours?
I should abhor it, came it not from thee.

Oh! stop this Torrent of unbounded Love.
Joy came before but like a quickening Shower
On a parched Soil, and greedily I drunk it;
But now I Am overwhelmed, and drowned in Joy --
Thus now all Lovers lie to one another.

Dear Man, you are doubly pleased
Now thou can raise me
As I would thee, were but thy Fortune mine;
For you are no needy younger Brother now,
Thy Laura shall no longer have the Pleasure
Of lavishing her Wealth on Love, and thee.
Indeed she could not.

Extravagance of Goodness!

Alas! I feared that Lisbon would have seen me
With those two little Orphans, my poor Children,
A forced Dependant on the cold loathed Alms
Of proud upbraiding Friends: For all I Have left
Is threatened to be seized. The Thought on it damps my Joy; Wealth
But let it dye with all our former Sorrows.
I Am rich enough, since I Have thy Love, that can command thy
Soon as the Priest has ratified our Contract,
Which now now your Brother's dead, and my first Year
Of Widowhood expired, need be no Secret.
We'll live like Gods. Say, shall we not? Methinks
Thou art not glad enough.

Excess of Joy, like that of Grief, is dumb;
" And, like vast Streams, too deep for Noise, flows silent,
" While shallow Torrents roar, then cease to be.
I fear she will find me out.

" But tell me, when shall be the happy Day?

" Soon as some short Formalities of Law
" Have given me full Possession of the Estate,
" The best Artificers shall strain, to hasten
" The wished for Time, and make our Nuptials sumptuous.

" Then, like a Palace, we'll this House adorn.
" The Walls shall scorn with Arras to be clothed,
" Unless the Gold shames there the shading Silk.
" Amazing Wonders that dissemble Life
" In each Apartment, shall beguile the Gazers.
" The Spoils of India, and more distant Climes
" Shall crowd, and rear their Fronts on rival Rarities,
" In antique Order, various as their Make;
" And even the fragrant Wood, which in Compartments
" Floors the vast Rooms, seem proud to bear the Load.

" Oh! Elegance in Luxury! Oh! Sex resin'd in Fancy --
" To undo the other.

Oh! now methinks we solemnize our Nuptials,
A numerous Train with all melodious Sounds
Salute us and the Morn. Then we, far brighter,
Ascend our Coach, or Love's Triumphal Chariot.
Garlands and Arches grace and roof our way,
And flowery Sweets, profusely strow'd, perfume it.
Joy in each Face, and Blessings in each Mouth.

Oh! Theme for ever charming -- To a Widow.

Then, my Ricardo, then --

Oh! then my Laura --

The crowded Board shall tempt our numerous Guests
With all that can indulge Luxuriant Taste.
" Conduits shall lavish Wine, and richer Liquors,
And all the Muses labor to Inchant us.

And then at Night my Goddess --

Ten thousand Tapers shall revive the Day,
While at a solemn Ball, the Pride of Lisbon
Shall shine and revel --

And tired at last with all these smaller Joys,
Leave us to perfect Pleasure. Thus, my Goddess,
Thus will Ricardo ravish all thy Senses;
Unpeople the Elements to Feast thy Taste,
To charm thy Ears, rob even the Spheres of Music,
Tire Art and Nature to regale thy Sight,
Inform thy Brain with every grateful Odor,
Thy Touch with Bliss, and ravish every Power,
Till in one sense we lose the other four.

My Lord.

What mean these Monks?

My Lord, We Have weighty Business,
That claims your private Ear with utmost speed.

Some dead Man's Alms --

Hear us this Moment, if you love your self.

Then follow me -- pray pardon me, dear Madam.
I Will strive to meet you here again this Moment --
Or at your own House rather.

'Twas well dissembled: But I Am glad I Am eased.
How loathed a thing must a fond Woman be!
Even Monks are welcome, when from her they free.

Cursed be the Holy Duns! Those bold Intruders
Into the Privacies of blinded Mortals,
Self-privileg'd to break-in on the Great!
Those craving Idlers, who preach Charity,
Yet never had one Spark for one another!
Presumptuous Beggars, who with Saint-like Mein,
With proud Humility, and saucy Meekness
Can seem at best but impudently good.
The Doatards know (for well they know our Sex)
That what a Woman never will forgive
Is an Intruder, whose preventing Words
Force from her Arms her Lover to remove,
In the wild Sallies of unfinished Love.

WHy do we leave Fabiano with Placentia?
I dare trust all his Virtues, but his Prudence.
He loves -- he will stay too long, and be discovered.

Fear not, my Brother's busy with two Fathers;
And though Placentia loves, she shuns her Lover;
Like him she languishes, unhappy Maid;
But her Discretion, and yet more her Vow,
Force that despairing Lord for ever from her --
And see, she comes; he follows; -- both in Tears!
In pity let us avoid 'em.

Stay, cruel Maid! Oh turn, and cast one look!
One look, though 'twere a Frown, and but to see me dye.

Alas, I dare not, must not meet your Eyes:
They must not see how mine partake their Sorrows.
Fly, fly, my Lord, where equal Greatness calls
Leave poor Placentia to her humble Fate.

Not hear me!

I dread those Words that make even ruin please,
The tempting Music of your Siren Love.

Can it bring ruin to be matched to Greatness?

When by the Match that Greatness is debased.

Why will you still urge this, too humble fair?
Oh! wrong not thus your Merit, and my Love.

Witness, ye sacred Powers that read my Soul!
Witness, my Blushes, and these grateful Tears,
How much I prize you, generous, dear Fabiano!
For every Sigh you breath, I Sigh another.
Oh! had our Births been equal as our Passions,
We might have loved on still.
I see the Heaven of Joy, your Love, would give me;
But, like a Wretch condemned to endless Torments,
The vast abyss between, adds to my Pain:
I wish, I sigh, I grieve, I rage in vain;
I would ascend, but cannot break my Chain.

Love equals all, and you're most sure of mine.

I still should fear to lose what I deserve not,
Still dread my Equal's Envy, and the Scorn of yours:
And thus should live more wretched yet than now,
This fatal now, that sees me tear my Heart,
While thus I tear my self for ever from you.

You tear my Heart, but shall not tear me from you.
Thus you shall drag me, while I suffer Life;
And when I Have eased my wretched Soul with this,
'Twill hover over you still, to wait for yours.
For sure in Death we are equal, and may join.

Oh! hold! and rise! fright me not with your Danger,
Nor humble me yet more with your Submissions.

Raise then at once a Wretch to Love and You.
To rise thus, I Will descend, and mix with humble Swains,
In lowly Cottages, and rustic Weeds,
And there forget that fatal thing called Greatness.

Oh! rise, degrade it not by kneeling thus.

No, let your Answer make me rise or fall.

Alas! my Lord, I know this would but prove
A Dream, that might a while indulge your Fancy,
While Memory would lie locked in the first sleep
That Love might lull it too; but too too soon
You Would wake to hatred of your self and me.

My Son!
Base Man! I thought to have found you with Morella!
But hear me swear; By my great Ancestors!
That Hour Fabiano weds below his Rank
Makes him a Stranger to my Blood for ever.

You might have spared that just, but rigid Doom,
And left my Love the Glory of our parting.
For, Sir, I love your Son; so well I love him,
That rather than I Will curse his generous Passion,
By suffering him to bless me with himself,
I Will leave my Wealth, Friends, nay, the dear Man for ever.
Bear witness, you whose Breasts confess the Pangs
Of truest, te nd'rest, fondest, fiercest Love!
Bear witness, Heaven! and all that hear me swear!
I leave even him, even all that is kind and dear,
For endless Grief, a Cloister and Despair.

My Love! -- my Father! -- both conspire my Ruin!
Some Angel stop her, and recall your Vows!
No pity -- yes, you're kind, at once you kill me,
And thus will quickly end the worst of Pains.

Unequal Nuptials show not Love, but Madness.
If you're my Son, leave this ignoble Creature.

Leave her! ignoble! give me Patience, Heaven!
And Duty check my Rage! a Father said it.
Oh! that you knew her, Sir! you would see in her,
That Worth, whence true Nobility began:
She claims a Birth immediately from Heaven.

No more. She never shall be yours.
Haste to Morella, Noble, and more Charming.

Ah Sir! I can love nothing but Placentia.
Rather take back the wretched Life you gave me!
Draw, draw your Sword, rip up my panting Bosom;
You Will find a Heart where that sad Truth is written.
Pity my Youth! pity your Son! --

It Is vain -- Reason and Time will bring you to your self.

Oh stay!

Away -- comply, or never see me more.

Yes, cruel Father; yes, unkind Placentia,
I Will never see you more --
You shall not see how wretched you have made me.
I Have one Friend yet, I hope; his Ship shall cast me
On some abandoned Shore: There I will dye;
Pitied, perhaps, by Beasts more kind than Man.
More wise, more happy Brutes, I envy you!
With you it is Will and Beauty make the choice,
Never crossed by the loved Female, nor your Syres.
No dream of Greatness bars your amorous Joys.
Cursed be the first who made the vain distinction,
Taught to boast borrowed Fame from ancient Dust,
That fancied Distance between equal Emmets!
Cursed be the poisonous Notion, and may he
That slights true Merit for a vain Degree,
Love humble Worth, be scorned, or cursed like me.
And that the Vice an ampler Curse may find,
Cursed be the Ambitious, which is all Mankind.

His busy Grief usurped his very Sight.
He Is gone, and could not see me; would he had!
Alas! I should, I would have called, but could not.
Who will protect me now? -- Oh! noble Moor,
Assist me to preserve my threatened Honor.

Can worth, like yours, want a Protector, Madam?
My best Friend used me so to echo back his Sighs,
When he repeated dying Tales of you,
That he has filled my Breast with the like Zeal
Of serving you: That Zeal may look like Love;
But, fear not, Madam, rarely Love gets in
But at some Chink where Hope had crept in first,
And I who know how you used Don Vincentio
Can never hope this Figure could prevail.
Then give me leave to serve you, and my Actions
Shall never oppose the Dictates of your Will.

It were a Sin to doubt your Honor, Sir.
Let your Man wait -- and I will tell you Things
That are yet Secrets to all Souls but mine.

Zemet observe who comes, and give us notice.

Let guilty Persons blush: I have no Cause:
The Passion I must own admits no Shame;
Though I confess, I Love: Oh Noble Moor!
You will have Cause to pity me as much
As e're you did Vincentio.

Do I live? --
Or have I changed my Being with my Form?

What should surprise the Moor? -- Sir, though I want
Your help, or such a Friend's, yet let not that
Divert your Thoughts from your own great Concerns.

No, Madam, these are Fits that sometimes shake me:
My Soul and Body are by turns at odds,
And fain would part;
Yet, like false Friends, each strives not to be thought
To give most Cause for such a Separation:
But now I Am well again -- you say you Love, Madam,
And that I shall have Cause to pity you.
Sure, he that is the Cause, is Deaf and Blind;
Else either Sense, and You, might teach him Love.

Nay, I Am so miserable, worthy Moor,
That 'twas his Passion that gave birth to mine:
But, as Fate orders it, all I Have to beg,
Is that you would convey me to some Cloister,
Where I may ever weep and pray for him.

Sure it is for me, it is for the poor Vincentio
She thus would weep and pray. Oh would it were!
Madam, I Am bound to wait on your Commands;
But can there be a Cause for such Despair?

Too many, Sir, for had not Fate contrived
To snatch him, and all Hopes, for ever from me,
Yet I too well regard his future Glory,
E're to have fullied it with my mean Blood.

It Is my self --
It can be no Man else she thus despairs for.
First she shall name me, then I Will own my self.
Madam, you may well trust me with his Name,
That can be happy thus in spite of Fate.

I will not hide his Name, from one that knows
So much of his Concerns: It Is --

Ricardo's coming.

Heaven guard me from his sight! --

I Will strive to meet you here again with speed.
Curse on his coming! But why am I troubled?
By what she said, it is plain it is me she means.
Revive, Vincentio! Doubts and Fears remove!
She must be mine, since she confesses Love.
The Man that is loved, of Conquest never fails:
Love pleads, and bribes, and forces, and prevails.

Ricardo seemed dejected; I Will observe him.

This Mine brings Instant ruin when it is sprung;
It rends the main Foundation of my Greatness.

Ha! thou black Imp, what do thou here?
Hence vanish!
They and their Papers will so prove the Thing,
There will be no out-facing it -- Oh cursed Discovery!
This Morning in the Sanctuary I trembled.
E're Noon I revel'd as sole Master here:
Yet now, e're Six at Night, these Monks have rung
A fatal Knell to all my newborn Joys.
With this Day's Sun my Fortune rose and falls.
But with the next may it not rise again?
They Have given me time to get my Pardon sealed,
E're they divulge the Truth -- I Will have them killed --
But how? by this they are in their Cells at Prayers.
No, I must think again -- assist me, Hell, -- I have it.
At Night for Africa I Will Ship the Sisters,
Where I will marry one, and then return.
But why not get Placentia? There I Will fix:
Placentia shall be mine.

Hah! --

Does your Guilt make you start?

Art thou Immortal, Moor?

Yes, Ravisher, all good Men are Immortal.
Death is entailed on none but such as you,
Who wear him still about you in your Crimes,
Yet justly fear him as the greatest Evil.

Placentia has informed him of my Threats.

Base Man, with Giant Blood, and Pigmy Honor,
I hear thou talk of Ravishing Placentia,
But if thou dare but wish it, that bad Soul,
That Soul of thine, hard and impenetrable
To every thing that is good, shall be let out
To seek its place among relentless Devils.

Sleep my Resentments! now my Fortune's changed.
I loath the Thought, though once I threatened it,
To try her Virtue; but, since that, my Doubts
Are changed to admiration of her Worth.

Oh that there were but hopes you yet would mend!
I Am bound, and strive to love you, as you're called
Vincentio's Brother, and his Father's Son.
In War's brave School, your Father was my Master;
Who bad me dare, and taught me how to Fight.
He rushed like Lightning on firm Troops of Foes,
Unnerv'd their Ranks, and shattered them to Ruin,
And floor'd the Field with honorable Slaughter:
But after Conquest, mild as tender Virgins,
Protected Virtue in his very Foes --
If you will be Noble, learn to act like him.

I Will learn of you, brave Moor, if you will teach me,
Your words can shame and charm us into Virtue.
Methinks your Tongue, like glorious Victory,
Instills a Soul of Valor through my Veins,
And all my Nerves seem knit with double force.
I Am now engaged, but in an Hour,
I shall be proud of being taught by you,
And fixing you my Friend.

Till then, farewell.
Love truly, and I ll give you leave to hope;
For as your Love increases, Virtue will.
'Twas Love alone first Civilized Mankind,
And dull Instinct to sprightly sense refined.
In Savage Nakedness Man lived and toiled,
Uglier than Brutes, more wretched, and as wild;
Till Emulation to be liked and loved,
Started Invention, and the Man improved:
But it is not Love, weak Bodies to control,
Love only triumphs over the stronger Soul.

I Will strive to work thee to my purpose, Moor.
You Are brave, but free and credulous to a Fault --
For ruined Laura's good, and more for mine,
I wish Placentia may with equal ease
Be wheadled into Marriage! startling change!
She little thinks she is great, and I am nothing;
Oh! I could rave and bellow Execrations.
Hell curse these Monks, emphatically curse 'em --

My Bravoes!

Your Lordship's Servants.

I sent for you to punish a rude Moor,
But I Will suspend a while my just Revenge:
I Have business of more Moment. There Is Gold for you.

Thanks, my good Lord, whose Throat must we cut now?

There Is milder mischief Brooding.
Hire me a Ship, that by use of Oars
As well as Sails, may put to Sea this Night.
At any rate, by any means I must
Have it to Night, and you shall go with me.
Succeed, and your Reward shall be so great
You shall no longer skulk disguised; but live
At large, above the scandal of your Lives.

Conclude this done, my Lord; our Friends will help us.
If by fair means we cannot get a Ship, we'll seize on one.

Success wait on my Friends!

What Letter's this?

My Lord, it is for Placentia.

Go, I Will deliver it -- ha! from Fabiano! --
How? leaving Portugal for ever! Embark this Moment!
By my hopes it is well!

Hah! -- my Soul's Joy, I did not expect you here.

I read that in your Eyes, my Lord, but I
Expected you, though 'twas in vain, I fear.
What Letter were you reading?

It Is private business.

I desire to see it.

Would you be made uneasy with my Cares?

Unless I see it, I shall be more uneasy.

Trust me, my Love, you need not, nay you shall not,
Though even from you I must a while conceal it.

From me! Can you conceal it then from me?

Suppose it were a Challenge from a Foe,
Or a more dangerous Secret from a Friend?

Say rather from a Mistress: false Ricardo.

Will you still chide, and without Reason still?

False and Ingrate, I have but too much reason;
Yet if I chide, I chide but like a Dove,
In gentle Murmurs. But urge me no longer.
Give me the Letter, for I rave to see it.

What, will you still control me like a Slave?
Will you still claim so insolent a Right?

Traitor to Gratitude, to Love, and me,
What is it I claim, but leave to be assured
Of thy Heart's Truth, or of its Falsehood rather?
For now I Have too much Cause to think thee false.

Your Jealousy, that Jaundice of your Mind,
Perverts all Objects to it is sickly Color.

What, are my Charms then vanished with my Fortune? --
'Twas otherwise when this base Rebel languish'd at my Feet,
Trembling as Guilt, humble as begging Want;
Charmed with a Look, transported with a smile,
And extasied with a reviving Word.
Love gently racked all Secrets from his Breast,
Made him live more in me than in himself,
Prevent my very Wish, and open all his Soul.
Did it not Traitor?

It did, it shall, my Life, then pray be calmer.

And have I made thee Lord of all my Wishes,
Given thee my Wealth, and my more valued Love,
To be denied a Triste?
Base Man, dare but be false, dare but deny me,
I Will Sacrifice thee to my injured Charms,
Though thou were kneeling at the very Altar --
Give me the Letter.

Since nothing else will satisfy you, take it.
It Is only from Fabiano to Placentia;
For whom he is leaving Portugal by stealth.
You see, he begs this may not yet be known --

And feared -- it might incline you -- to misconstrue
My Caution in thus opening a Love-Letter
To one that is a Dependant on my House.

Hah! sure you love her, or your guilty Mind,
Which so long labored for a faint Excuse,
Had never suggested such prepost'rous Doubts.
You seemed surpised too at my sight; your Face
Had scarce the Power to shape a gay Disguise.

To clear at once my Innocence, permit me
To send for her -- Who waits?

My Lord --

Acquaint Placentia, that I Am here, and have a Letter for her.
My Life, from yonder Closet if you please,
You may behold unseen
Our mutual hatred in her looks and mine.

She Is here! This news will strangely grieve her --
You're well attended.

So we should be to come to you, my Lord.
Your Pleasure?

Here Is a Letter from Fabiano, -- who is fled by Sea.

Oh killing News!

Poor parted Lovers! how I pity them!

Is he then fled? fled without seeing me?
Fled my Fabiano? Oh! 'twas too too cruel.
Thy last farewell would pain me worse than Death;
Yet I would suffer more for one dear parting look --
But sure I wrong thee; we could never have born it.
How my Soul mourns, Some Dream or Angel tell thee!
My Soul! oh no! it is fled with thee, and Grief
Alone informs this Widdow'd falling Body.

Rise, rise, my Dear.

Sink not beneath your Sorrows.

Let me dye here; for I Have outlived my self.
Break, throbbing Heart! break now! break! what, not yet!
Well, stubborn Life, I Will punish thee for lasting,
Melt thee away in Tears, and breathe thee out in Sighs;
'Till I Am grown of one Substance with my Grave.
I Will drag thee where thou shall converse with nothing
But Walls, and Heaven, and Sorrow, and his Image.
Off then, gay Dress! vain Pageantry, away!
Thou once loved House, where my Years rolled so smoothly,
Adieu for ever! -- adieu, my dear, my only Friends!
Adieu to all but Grief, and the dear thoughts of him.
He Is lost, he is lost, and Pleasure is no more.

Let Us follow her, and strive to calm her Mind.

Prevent her going out.

I will, my Lord.

You see the Love between us.

Did I not dread her, I could pity her,

Grieve not for her, my Love.
A Widowed Nymph of Course a while Despairs,
But nothing dries so soon as Woman's Tears.
Clouds dull the Sun, then fall apace in Rain,
And sprightlier Smiles adorn his Face again.
Such, now your doubts are cleared, you should appear,
And with kind Looks your Injured Lover cheer.

Were those Doubts cleared --

Unkind! now I must chide. What, Jealous still?

Still Jealous, since still Loving.

But I Have a sure way left to ease your Mind.

How? --

Let to Morrow be our Nuptial Day.

To Morrow!

Yes, we'll wave tedious State. Hymen shall bless us.
Oh! let me seal that Promise on your Lips;
Thus, thus your Doubts shall all be lost in Joys,
And kissed away as often as they return.

Shall I still doubt -- no, though I still had Cause,
I must believe thy dear bewitching Tongue.
Conduct me home, and oh! forgive me, my Ricardo.
I cannot bear a Rival in your Heart.
While Woman must to one confine her Love,
Why should Man claim the Privilege to rove?
We could dispense with Change as well as you:
Women lose more than Men by being true.
Yet though you blame our Sex, yours most deceives;
Man leaves us often, but Woman seldom leaves.
Be just then, urge us not to change of Mind!
Or give us leave to rove, or be your selves confined.

WHy am I thus detained? Now in this Dress
I Am fitted for a Cloister: Oh! Fabiano!
Thou leave the Land, I Will leave the World for thee.

Oh! grieve us not, by grieving thus your self.
Society in Woes will make them lighter,
But ours grow heavier while we share your Load.

I Would silence my rude Grief, would it be silenced;
But tender Love, Love newly weaned, and hopeless
Will, like all other Infants, pine and rage,
Though checked by Reason that denies the Food.

Where, where is the Chaste Placentia? Sisters, tell her
I Will crown at last the Virtue which I tried.
What, all in Tears? She too in this mean Dress?
You feed her Grief. Away! I say, be gone.
Leave Tears and Cloisters, Madam, to those Wretches
Whom the World leaves, and who must leave the World;
Who surfeit first, then practice Abstinence,
Turn Nuns, and then repent their rash Repentance.
It Is true, my Brother's dead, Fabiano's gone;
But I am left more charmed with your Perfections.

I pray you, leave me.

Look not on me as being still the same;
Behold your Convert, Madam, 'twas impossible
To love you, and love Vice, which you detest.
You, and my change of Fortune, have at last,
Made me reflect, and roused me into Virtue.
My Threats were but to try you.

I shall rejoice, my Lord, to find the Change,
Though it is ill jesting in the shape of Vice;
" For 'twill be long before I shall shake off,
" The horror that surprise stamped on my Soul.
In the mean time, I beg you will give me leave
In some Retirement to compose my Mind.

Oh! leave me not, blessed Maid, " You're my good Angel,
" That bear me upwards, govern my best Thoughts,
" And bid me think of Heaven, and view it in you.
" But, if you leave me, e're my Callow Virtue
" Grows fledged, and strong to soar with outstretch'd Wings,
" Too soon my dead habitual weight of Vice
" Will make me flag, and fall to worse Perdition.
" Take me now, save a Soul, confirm me yours.
" O save me, lest you answer it to Heaven.
A Priest, a known Priest, waits to join our Hands.
Oh come! I will not leave you till you have blessed me.

What means my Lord! Oh Heavens! what shall I say!
Yes, I will bless you -- if you will let me go.
But as for marrying you, forbid it Love!
Forbid it Honor! and forbid it Heaven!
" This would be cursing you, and then my self.
" Change, rather change this dreadful Love to Hatred!

I Have played the Tyrant, but I know you're mild
As a forgiving Saint. Here on my Knees,
(But that is too proud a Posture) thus then falling
With prostrate Body, and more humbled Mind,
Repentant, changed Ricardo, begs your Pardon.

Oh rise, my Lord! 'twas granted e're you asked it.

Oh! add your Love, or let me sink for ever.

My Lord* I must not, cannot hear you thus.

Thus have I sworn to kiss your Steps, and dye,
Unless this Day, this very Day you're kind,
Stoop to be mine, and condescend to rise.

Alas! I too have sworn, this never shall be.

I Will beg so earnestly, so humbly, --

My Lord, I thought you knew Placentia better.
Spare this affected Cringing! 'twou'd be vain,
Though 'twere not feigned; for such a whirl of Humor,
So quick a fall from one extreme to the other,
Betrays less Love than a Distempered Mind.

It Is true, I Am crazed, I Am mad, mad as wild Frenzy,
To starve my noble Pride, to glut a Slave's.
Why, cruel Stars, why do I court this Creature,
This Infect, born to crawl and lick the Dust,
Till fostered here, ungratefully to sting me?
Oh! I could burst, and tear my Flesh with Rage.
But why do I not rather crush it dead?

Murder! Oh save me! --

None but your self can save, or you or me.
You shall be wretched, if you will make me so:
" For, good or bad, you now must share my Fate.
This Steel, or else this Juice, shall end us both.
It Is like the poisonous Love I sucked from thee;
No Antidote can stop the Bane's Progression;
It creeps through every Vein, preys on the Blood,
And lingering gives a sure, though lazy Death.
Relent, or now I drink, and thou shall pledge me.

Oh Horror! hold! let us parley over our Fate.
Give me some time, my Lord, I beg it on my Knees,
A Month, a Week, a Day; Oh Mercy! Mercy! --

No, it must be this Instant now.

What shall I say? I dye with Terror.
O hold! oh think of Hell, my Lord --

Hell's mild to what I feel.

I can but dye

I Have drank the Liquid Death. Now choose thy Fate.

Oh lost! lost!

Choose quickly, or --

Oh! give me time to pray.

The Poison will do that.

I thought 'twas but to try me.
But give it me. It Is the only welcome present
You could have made me, and I thank you for it.
I only wish my dear, my lost Fabiano,
Thou coud'st have seen these Tears, the best return,
My niggard Fate would suffer me to make thee.
Oh! if a helpless, friendless, dying Maid
May form a wish! oh hear me, hear me Heaven!
Let all the dear Man's Sorrows dye with me.
And, if another e're can love so well,
Let some chaste noble Beauty love him thus,
And make him happier than I Have made him wretched.

Hence! Slaves! she is here.

Hah! --

Returned!

Yes, here to dye. Look up, my Life, my Soul,
Placentia, see it is I, it is thy Fabiano,

It Is he; some Angel brings him -- my loved Lord --

My Fate --

Oh! I forget my Fears, my Grief, my very self,
At this dear sight.

Senses awake! and thou my wandering Soul,
Unwind thy self out of this maze of Joy.
Art thou at large, or in Placentia's Arms?

Must I bear this? my Lord, what do you mean?

To kill you, if you dare once more disturb me.

You're in my House, but --

What?

I Will say no more -- I fear his Greatness now, though not
His Sword

Though Love had not betrayed me into Fondness,
Revenge it self had don't, to plague this Monster;
To make his Eyes drink Jealousies worst Poison,
More gnawing than the Draught he swallowed now,
Or that which he designed me.

How! --

No Poison, Madam, nothing but a Philtre,
A Lover's harmless Trick to fright and win you.
To ease your Mind, I Will send for her that made it. --
And for some others too --

I dread his coming back.

Fear nothing, Madam,
I Have a Friend waits without with some choice Men.

I thought I never should have seen you more.
Where have you been? Why did you write that Letter?
Was it to break my Heart? 'twas too unkind, yet I prayed for you.
I would have died, but pitying Heaven reserved me
For this blessed Moment, e're we part for ever,
For we must part.

Part! no, first let the Monarch part with Crowns,
The Brave with Honor, and the Saint with Heaven.

Oh Reason, Honor, Duty! --

Oh Love! Love! Love! great Love against them all.

I Have sworn to leave you; nor must I examine
Whether I shall outlive the killing loss.

No, you will not leave me: I will never believe it:
Placentia loves me -- Placentia will not let me dye.

Sure Heaven will forgive this Sally of a Heart,
Startled and wild with Joy, this Riot of starved Love,
Though rigid Honor dares not warrant it.
Oh! lead me quickly to the Convent, that --

She whom I sent for, Madam, will soon tell you --

Nothing that can deserve our stay -- farewell --

Stay, do not lead my beauteous Charge to Ruin.

She Is led from Ruin, when she is led from you.

Hold! hear me! for I Will here dispute my Right.

Then somewhere else, and not with Words dispute it.

Though now with Words, some fitter time with this.
I claim her as my due. I best deserve her.

Who e're pretends Desert, deserves her least.

She Is obliged to my Family.

But I Am obliged to her.

You Have nothing; but I Have an Estate to give her.

I choose to lose one for her. But that is little;
I Would give the Globe to bribe her to a Smile.

Oh! cease so needless a Debate, my Lords;
Nor rate so high a worthless Maid's Esteem.
Know both, I Would sworn, before I knew your Love,
Never to wed above my Rank -- I Am going to a Cloister.
Then, if you love me, show it now, my Lords.
Be pleased to leave me there.

No, Madam, I Will sooner leave the World.

Let me conduct you, Madam.

Hold!

Forbear, or in your very House I Will kill you.

Hah! Will you break the Laws of Hospitality?

Talk thou of Hospitality, and dare
Detain her there? it is Sacrilege and Death.
Draw, Fight, and Dye.

Oh hold!

Though I dare fight, why should I leave to Chance
What Prudence can secure?
The shortness of my Sword makes you insult, but --

Give it me, and take mine.

Take it, and use it if you can. --

Oh! hold, my Lords!

A broken Sword! hah! Villain!

Stir not, be silent, hear me, and you're safe.
Live happy with my Sister, I with her;
But dye, if you persist t'obstruct my Bliss.

Oh! wed her, wed her, though I dye my Lord.

I Will yet disarm thee, Traitor.

I would not kill thee! Who waits! --

Seize that Madman.

What, hoa! my Friends!

Help, Murder! help! --

Courage, my Lord, we are here! Slaves! Villains! dye.

Hold! or my Guards shall fire among you.

It Is well you're come at last, my Lord, your Son
Was forcing his way out with this ungrateful Maid,
To wed her, and leave Portugal by Sea.

I scarce believed the Messenger you sent me:
Nay, now I scarce believe my very Eyes.
What, my Reproof, my Counsel, my Commands,
My Prayers, my Threats, my Oaths, all unregarded?
It cannot be; Fabiano is my Son:
My Son would not at once lose Wealth, lose Honor,
Lose my Love, lose my Blessing,
A Father's Love, and Blessing, for a Trifle;
For all this he must lose, or leave this Maid,
To wed my nobler choice, the fair Morella.

Thus, as to Heaven, to you, Sir, kneels your Son;
And that Heaven knows, I scarce can reverence it,
More than I do my Father. Oh! I Would lose
The Life you gave me, rather than your Blessing.
But Love, like mine, is deaf Necessity;
It Is Fate it self, and who can alter Fate?
If Love's a Crime in me, it is its own Punishment:
For hope, that softened all its Pains, is lost.
Then curse me not yet more: alas! your Blessing
Is all your wretched Son has left to lose.
For soon he will take his everlasting leave
Of Friends, of you, of her, and Life, I hope.

Rise, hear Age speak! Fabiana! Wisdom's old.

My Lord, my Father,
Oh! let me kneeling thus attend your Will.

Rise, rise, my Son, nor let thy poor old Father
Lose the sole Comfort of his widowed Years.
Thou art my only Child. Alas! I lived
But by the hopes of seeing thee renew
The ^^^ries of our Race, by equal Marriage.
Have I for this declined a second Choice,
And lived in solitary Widowhood?
Oh! do not hurry thus thy self and me
To the dark Grave, and worse Oblivion's Death.
I beg it, it is thy Father begs it. See these Tears,
They Are the last drops, the dying hand of Age
Has left to dew this drooping withering Plant -- Oh speak!

Can Nature plead against it self?
I cannot speak: my throbbing Heart's too full.

Then kill me, cruel Son; that Parricide
Will be less barbarous than the other -- speak!

Then with obedient boldness I must own, I cannot wed Morella.

Just Heaven! what have I done? what are my Crimes?
That I must thus be punished with this Son? --
But sure he is not my Son: Such Disobedience,
Such Meanness, must and shall be Strangers to my Blood.
Now, as I hate base Thoughts, he is roused my Rage.
Degenerate Boy, thou scandal to my Race,
Retract thy words, consent, lest, in my Fury,
I wrong the dead, and even suspect thy Mother.

Oh! use me as you please; but spare my Mother!
For your own sake, for hers, tread gently on her Grave.

No, she was Virtue's self, but sure some Peasant
Imposed thee on me, and displaced the Heir.
Be banished then my House, my Heart, my Thoughts!
Be stripped of all --

But my Placentia's Love:
You cannot take that from me.

Tortures and Daggers! Wretch, lose all but that.

My Lord, let him rave on.
He Is lost all use of Reason in this Fit
Of Love's high Fever; but it cannot last.
Leave him with me, I Will watch its Crisis and Declension.
First, I Will remove the Cause, this fatal Charmer,
Then soon my Sister shall restore his Reason.

It Is well advised -- Guards stay -- obey my Lord.
Cursed be this Frantic Love, that rashly hurries
Unequal Pairs into the Nuptial Noose!
How bitter proves the fair forbidden Fruit!
How lost, how naked Man then finds himself!
How short, how false the Bliss, how long the Woe;
A few good Nights, a thousand dismal Days.
Then the fierce Lover grows a tame dull Husband,
And the kind Mistress a vexatious Wife.
How like an Ass, how like himself he looks,
Wishing to part, more than he did to join;
While Wife and Husband curse the unequal state,
Wedded for Love, then Cuckolded for Hate.

Retire you tempting Mischief to your Chamber.

Oh! rather to a Cell.

Leave that to me.

Oh! once more let me see him.

You shall not see him more.

See me no more? then I Am poor indeed;
Yes, I will see her, though her sight were Death.

Hold! my Lord.

Forbear! Despair is frantic; play not with it;
I Have lost all hopes but of one parting look;
Rob me not of that last, that cruel pleasure.

Oh rigid Fate, why must I thus undo him*
" But I my self shall soon be more than punished,
" Lonesome, self-banish'd, buried to the World,
" My Life shall be a kind of lingering Death.
" Course Weeds my Clothing, a poor Cell my Lodging,
" Bare Walls my only prospect, the cold Ground,
" Or harder Floor, my Bed; and Grief my End.

" Oh! why did I come back! why would I see her!

" Then, if at dead at Night you chance to wake,
" Oh! think of me, and say, now poor Placentia
" Is risen in the Dark, and in the Cold,
" To pray for me, to pray for her Fabiano:
" For then will I be praying on my Knees,
" That Heaven may bless you and your future Bride.

Too generous Fair, Oh! spare your Grief's Profusion;
Show me less Love, be cruel out of Pity;
Tell me you hate me, I shall be less wretched.

I cannot; Oh! then leave me, quickly leave me;
Fly my Contagious Grief. Oh! 'twill infect you.
I merit not your Care, much less your Love.
And yet forgive, and let me Love you still.
As for your Grief, impose it on me, Heaven!
For I am grown familiar with Affliction.
But live, and think your Death my greatest dread.

Then I must strive to live: But oh! Placentia,
'Twill cost my Love much dearer than to dye.
If one Hour's Absence made me wild with Sorrow,
How shall I live, for ever parted from you,
By Hills and Seas, and the more fatal Cloister?
How bear the Sun should rise, the Sun should set,
And I never blessed with my Placentia's sight?
Yet fear not, my Complaints should reach your Cell.
No, not so much as the Tidings of my Death
Shall give you cause to think there lived on Earth
So lost a Wretch as I.

Take her away, she heightens his Distraction.

Oh! stay one moment more, then tear me from my self,
Here let me seal my everlasting Leave.
Farewell, thou Innocent, thou blessed Destruction!
Kind Cruelty, sweet Torment of my Soul;
All that is Delight and Pain transcending Thought;
My Soul, my Blessing, and my earthly Heaven.

Farewell.

Part them.

Oh! let me take another parting Look.

Force 'em asunder.

I cannot bear --

Hold, stir not, on your Lives.

Hold, impious, sacrilegious Villains, hold!
Pull, hale, drag, cut, part, tear me Limb from Limb,
Yet still I Will hold -- she is gone.

Farewell, thou dear unhappy Man, farewell.

Wolves, Tigers, Fiends, you shall not 'scape unpunished.

He Will but obstruct me, if he stays -- I Will free him.
My Lord, 'twas needful Cruelty to force you from her.
But I Will yet prove your Friend, and free you instantly.
Go travel when you please; I Will not impose
My Sister on you, though your Father would.
This private way you may get out unseen.

Though I cannot thank you, I accept the offer.
Captain, once more I Will try to see Placentia;
Then I Will aboard your Brigantine again.

My Lord, part of my Men ashore keep close together,
The rest aboard wait for us: All the Slaves
Sit ready at their Oars.

Alas! poor Men!
Though they are not half so wretched as my self.

Guards I dismiss you.
He Is gone, and she is secured -- so far it is well --
Page, tell Placentia, that Fabiano's here,
And has prevailed with me to let him see her.
This may decoy her hither -- my Time's short,
Yet I will fetch thee back, and tug with thee,
Thou shifting Fortune -- E're thou part'st from me,
Resolve to leave some of the spoils I hold;
I will not be left naked --

Hah! deceived --

Nay, start not back, he is gone for ever now.

And do you think to keep me here by force?

Yes, force must act, when kinder usage fails:
I Will give you still an hour: But then resolve
To wed me, or appease my amorous Rage.

Were thou as great, as Lawless Power could make thee,
And I as poor as Nature first designed me,
Know, rather than I Would serve thy horrid pleasures,
I Would Fly to Deserts, to the Land of Sorrow,
Bear with the want of freedom, light and food.
Nay, I would plunge in Seas, and even in Hell,
But that, I know, thou would torment me there.
Such is my hate, I Will desperately dare,
And, to shun Thee, all other Curses bear.

Then hear thy Doom. Out of mere Spite I love thee,
Love thee with most inveterate bent of mind.
And thus will hate thee worse; yes worse I Will hate thee,
When force has gained what thou deny'st my Love.
That which will quench my Flame, shall kindle thine;
Then for the Pleasing Cure to me thou wilt run,
Still close thou wilt follow, but as fast I Will shun:
From wealth, from me, I Will calmly see thee torn,
And leave thee nothing but thy naked scorn.

Hear thou, the surer fate attends thy Crimes;
In sudden wealth, as sudden a decay:
Then universal hate, in pressing want;
And, in that want, sickness without Relief.
Thus lingering, thou shall envy starving beggars;
Shame and Reproach clogging thy heavy hours.
Then, guilty conscience hurrying on despair,
Hang between Heaven and Earth, as fit for neither;
And none Endeav'ring thy cursed life to save,
Dye without Tears or Prayers, and want a Grave.

It Is well you are gone, proud Thing. I Am urged so far,
I scarce could hold from making good my Threats.
It Is yet too soon, but if my plot succeeds
Thou shall be mine, or bear thy share of Ruin.
If I Am left hopeless, hope not to be spared.
No, when I fall unpittied, perish Nature;
Dye all that is humane in me but Revenge;
Like a fallen spright to desperation driven,
I Would be more damned to keep my Foes from heaven;
With powerful spite I Will all their hopes destroy,
And drag 'em downwards with a dismal Joy.

THe Day's grown old, and almost lost in night:
Work in each Street gives way to soft amusements:
All Nature's business seems now to be Love.
The wind with stronger sighs salutes the Flowers,
Descending Clouds embrace and kiss the Earth.
And, while the Sun on the Sea's bosom Rests,
The officious Moon, who winks, with half a face,
Lends a securer light to meeting Lovers.
For now they meet; The impatient happy youth
Sees his kind Nymph come tripping over the Plain:
They fly, they rush into each others arms,
The Lover's Blessed and rifles all her Charms.
Thus eager, but less certain, here I come
To seek my better Fate, my loved Placentia.
Make haste, O night, extend thy sable Wings!
Let Nature wear a blacker Face than mine,
When the Fair owns her Love, and I my self,
When with kind Rudeness, I force willing Kisses,
Hide, hide Placentia's blushes from my Eyes,
Or with Excess of joy, the blessed Vincentio dies.

But are you sure the Ship's at your disposal.

The Brigantine is ours, my Lord; we could not
Get one sor any hire; but seized on this with ease.
Most of the men were gone ashore. Besides
The Captain is a new revolted Pyrate,
Who was as glad of us as we of him.
Hush! here is the Moor! -- In half an hour attend me.

Whispering and Bravoes! sure there is mischief hatching.
For once I Will force my self to seem a Villain,
To sift out, and prevent it --

You're punctual, worthy Moor, but why so thoughtful?

I was but thinking
Why men, who know each other to be Cheats,
Should to their prejudice strive to seem honest.

What, do you think I now dissemble with you?

Why not, my Lord? since I my self dissembled.

How! you? plain-dealing blunt Morat dissemble?

We all for Love, Revenge, or Interest feign,
And all, for different ends, seem different men,
Then shift like Play'rs, and are ourselves again.
Even the most wise, with studied labor, hide,
When flattered, Joy; and when exalted, Pride.
Old Maids, if such there be, dissemble youth;
Young Widows, sorrow; Wives and Husbands, truth.
The heir feigns Joy, if his sick friends revive,
Yet almost dies for grief that they are alive;
The Trader rails at Thieves who Forests range,
Cants, prays, yet cheats, and shakes a whole Exchange.
The Common Jilt, with face and passion feigned,
Hugs some rich fool, nor leaves him, till he is drained.
Dissembling's all Mankind's Prerogative
We know it is used by all, yet still believe,
And thus are all deceived, and all alike deceive.

I Have been deceived indeed. What, would you tempt
Your Convert to relapse?

Come, come, unmask my Lord, I Am barefaced now,
And know you; know me too; I Am left Executor,
And the Will gives your Sisters and Placentia
Most of the Estate. I Have nothing but my Sword;
Command it, and my Power, so I may share
Some of the gain you by my means may reap.

Shall I believe thee true?

Like all mankind, true to my Interest.

Then thou wilt be true to me --
Come to my arms, thou surest, best of friends.
With feeble Oaths we'll not each other bind;
No Tie but Interest strongly links mankind.

You love Placentia?

I love no Woman, but I lust for all;
And her above the rest; tho hopeless yet:
But now I Have a design, you soon shall know --
Hark, Music! -- sure this Serenade's for her;
It Is given so near her Window; let us put out
The lights; perhaps we may know more.

Placentia! hah! I find I am not proof
Against th'intruding Monster Jealousy.
Out of my heart, thou gnawing envious passion!
Tho look so like a Vice, I will not lodge Thee.

What wretch has chos'n this night for Serenades?
Alas! my only Charmer's gone for ever,
And with him all the Joys these Notes would summon.
They might as well before Church-windows revel,
And with unheeded Numbers tempt the Dead.
Yet have my hopeless wishes drawn me hither,
Where I unseen may best inform my self,
Whether, as I suspect, these are not this Musicians.
Perhaps he is not gone yet, but stays to free me.
Time was I should have trembled thus alone,
But Grief and Fear itself have made me bold.
Ha! who are these?

She Is here; fear not, my Soul. It Is your adorer.

Ha!

Stir not yet.

Take this, thou friendly guide, with my best Thanks,
And watch to let us out.

Oh! I am all surprise. Why would you venture thus?
Why, with this Music? Is It to punish me?

Think not those accents meant to move the Soul.
Oh! lovely Maid, more Musick's in your name;
They Are but the mournful Prelude to my Dirge;
And serve t'amuse observing Spies one way,
That we more safely may escape another:
For I am come once more to see and free you,
Then go, where my despair shall near torment you.

Oh I must share your grief where e're you go;
You never can be absent from my heart.

I hope, I dream.
Is this the love I blessed my self withal!

Sighs stop my words.

And Tears obstruct my sight.

Oh! if you loved!

I love you but too well,
For my Soul's quiet, dear unhappy man.

Oh cursed sound! he is loved! he is but too happy.

Go prosecute your generous Design,
See foreign Lands, and visit distant Courts!

Since you will have me go, I will Placentia:
But not to Courts. No, I will find some Desert:
There will I linger out a wretched Being,
Till grief that nurse of Sighs, can yield no more,
And with your name upon my Lips, I dye.

Alas, my Wishes contradict themselves;
I wish you would loved me still, I wish you would forget me.
Yet love me, love me still, where e're you go.

Racks, Wheels, and Vultures! --

Stay, but one moment, I will fetch some Jewels;
" To pay my Portion to the Monastry,
" Then I Will fly thither under your conduct,
For there is no safety here, now brave Vincentio's Dead.

Oh! that he were! -- ( aside.) I can forbear no longer.
Who are you there, that with false Lights and Vows
Seek to dishonor noble families,
By ravishing young Virgins from their Houses?

Whoever thou art, I justly fling the lie back in thy face.

Our quarrel's just of both sides, if 't be so:
Then let not odds on mine e're make it less.
How many are you armed?

We Are only two, yet dare defy you all;
Tho, if the Moon's faint light deceives me not, you're three.

That shall not be; Ricardo, now stand by. Draw, Zemet*

No, I Will get lights -- I hope they will rid me of a Rival.

Whoever thou art, tho thy Reproach was base,
Yet this proceeding's noble. Would we had
The Sun to light us to each other's face. I would see thine
Let Us to some fitter place to sight this quarrel,
For which I know no motive but thy Rudeness.

Yes, there are many; but my face would show
By light but little otherwise than now.
I am the Moor, deceased Vincentio's friend.

I ever loved him;
And, for his sake, I would not kill thee, Moor.

But he would thee, if he were in my place,
For stealing thus from him Placentia's love.
But I Will revenge at once his wrongs and mine.

Were he alive. I Would not invade his right;
And as for thee, how can thou say I wronged thee?

Oh! ye immortal Powers! What, have I got
A talking syllogistick Enemy?
And for a prize great as Placentia's heart?
Know, whosoever thou art, I love Placentia.
Will that yet rouse thy Courage?

Hah! Thou love her!
Vile Black! I Will free her from that shame, or dye.

Disarmed! Cursed Chance! Help! Help!

Unlucky Wound! he has hurt me in the Thigh,
And now I Am useless.

Oh! hold! or know you kill a harmless Maid.

Madam, retire.

Leave us a while, dear Madam.

No, here I Will take my death, or hinder yours.

Oh! fly! while this Moor lives, I cannot free you.

Ah! why so cruel, Moor!

I love and will not lose you.

The name of love is posion'd on thy Tongue.
Oh! sully not my Virtue with thy passion.
Can you now think me worth your care, my Lord?

Heaven can receive no spots from Blasphemy;
But, spite of that, the pious pay their duty,
And mine is to dye or free you.

Oh! stay! hold! if you love your selves or me,
Who first desists, I Will think the truest lover.

Must I not punish him?

Yes in my arms -- Thus punish him more safely.
Now, Moor, if thou would kill him, kill me too.

Fabiano!

How does my worthy friend?

Oh! never worse.

Where are you wounded, Sir?

Oh! at the heart -- by killing jealousy.

Madam, till morning I must leave you here,
And then I Will wait on you.

Oh that is too long, where honor is unsafe.

Let him protect you there, if I am grown
So feared a Ravisher.

Madam, we will: my wounded friend wants help,
The Moor is brave, and thus we must be safe.

Zemet, While I retire, stay and observe 'em.

O do not fear me, Madam: what I threatened
Is far from my intent, 'twas but to fright you
Into complying. I adore your virtue.
Oh pardon me, be blessed, and make me so.

Confusion!

Hah!

Ruined!

Both, if you stay.
You found me begging here a reconcilement
Of this fair Enemy, who is wedded to a Cloister;
But I Will withdraw with you, to know what fit
Usurps your patience, Madam.

No, learn that here.

Oh hold! retire, or we are undone.

No, perjured man. All here shall known my wrongs.
Despair disclaims Reserves: it is as I feared;
Impatient Creditors drive me from home,
Just now my goods were seized, and here thy heart.
All, all, I find, is lost* of what the fondness
Of my late Husband left me when he died,
I Have nothing now, but these his helpless Infants;
These Innocents, deprived like their poor Mother,
Even of a place to lay their little heads.

Oh sad! have we then never another home?
I Am hungry, cold, and tired, indeed I am.

Oh wretched Children, but more wretched Mother!

This Scene adds grief to grief, yet tempts to stay:

I share your sorrows, Madam: Let Us withdraw,
You may expect to find a friend in me.

A friend! how cold, how unlike one he talks!
And looks, as if I were his Wife already.
I Am lost, he is false! I saw it. This confirms it.
I can no longer doubt the dreadful truth.
But if Revenge --

I dare no longer stay.

Stay, thou invader of my right.

Hold, Madam.

Stay, I Am all patience yet!
Let me peruse you, Madam --
Thou vulgar thing, thou Face mean as thy Birth,
How durst thou tempt the Creature of my Love?
I Am now convinced that nothing but a Philtre
Could thus divert his choice from me to thee.
But were thou Beauty's Queen, thy charms are vain,
I Would blast them all, my conquest to maintain.
Dare but to hope my slave to disengage,
Not heaven it self shall shield thee from my Rage.

If Don Ricardo's yours, pray keep him, Madam.
I could even hate my self for pleasing him;
Then think not I Will e're court his odious Love,
Sooner shall freedom dote on Tyranny,
Sooner will I be perjured, or he true.

By her Disdain, it should be so. -- Just Powers!
Should he shun me, to dote on one who shuns him,
'Twou'd be Revenge, yet heighten my Disgrace.
Am I then fallen so low to seek him whom she scorns?

I still am true -- But hear me.

No, thou can only be thy self, and false.
I Have heard too much, I Am cured at once and loath thee.
I thought not, I so tamely could have born
Thy change; but it is so poor, I scorn thee now.
Raise my fortunes
High as they stood, our contract shall be void.

Can you mean this?

Witness it, all that hear me!

Then be it so.

Do you consent?

I do.

First perish she, thou, I and all the World.
Persidious Fool! cou'd'st thou presume to think
I Would give thee leave to live and be another's?

I was a fool, -- for I believed a Woman!

And I a greater, I believed a Man --

What shall I do? out of mere pity I must use her ill.
Cursed be your Love, and your assuming Pride,
Still thus Vexatious, but most cursed your Cunning!
Thus do too many of your Sex deceive us;
For they can feign and lie and weep at will. --
Reserv'dness is a Bawd to their stolen pleasures.
For, as some wear fine Clothes with empty purses,
They 've but the dress of virtue, not the substance.
Their modesty's as thin, as are their Veils,
Worn alike every where, but in their Chambers.
Their Reason is a Slave to their wild Passions,
Their honesty to the Desires of Men,
And their best virtue's damned Hypocrisy*

And what is your Sexe's who thus rail at ours,
To hide your worse dissembling, which all ours
Is but to Counterplot; while all the faults,
For which you blame us, are still caused by you?
You, who all promise, and who all betray;
Who use your stronger sense to ruin our weakness:
And take a greater freedom to be bad,
Nay, boast even of more vice than you can act;
Force us to feign, and live recluse like Slaves,
Yet damn us for a slip, of which you glory.
You, proud, deluding, treacherous Tyrant -- Men:
Your very Heroes are but bold Destroyers,
Your good Companions are but Libertines,
And your fond Lovers but designing Traitors.

I find it is vain to think t'outrail a Woman.
I must try softer means.
Trust me, were both undone, if you rave on;
But if you're calm, I Will double your Estate.

Cruel, how durst thou thus affront my Love?
What did I ever wish for, but thy heart?
Did I desire thy wealth? Did I not give thee
All I possessed and beggar these young wretches,
Whose sight now fills my drooping Soul with Grief,
And sinks my spirits to the lowest ebb;
For, with our Wealth, our Spirits sink, I find.

Oh check that Love -- You know not what you ask.
Whatever I seem, I scorn to undo you more.
I am -- Oh! I shall say too much! I swear,
The dismal truth was on my lips -- Farewell --

Stay! Oh! I dye with shame, but cannot leave him.
Heavens, is this he who swore eternal truth!

Do, rail on, curse me, hate me, scorn me, spurn me,
That I may dare to wrong you, or we are ruined!
Heaven knows it is fate, more than my falsehood, parts us --

Oh racks! oh pangs! oh that we could but deal
With love, when slighted, as we can with friendship,
Part company, and love and friendship too.
But 'twill not be -- I burst with grief and rage.
Must I bear this? Is there no way to ease?
My Rival -- I Will find her out, and give her instant death.

Hold Madam --

Let me go.

You must not.

Prevented! and by thee? Oh my heart breaks!
My Rage works inwards -- help; I faint -- I dye!

Oh help my Lady!

Run to my Closet! I Have rich Cordials there --
By heavens I pity her!
Yes, from my Soul I do. Her Charms, her Love
Deserve a better fate! Oh! I could kill my self,
My most unhappy fickle self! but hold!
Would that relieve her? No: Then live, Ricardo,
Live to supply her wants out of Placentia's fortune*
But how? while Laura lives, she will still obstruct thee.
" Oh! whither am I driven? Thoughts not so far!
" But if she lives we are ruined both! a dreadful truth!
" I feel a strange Remorse.
Stay, Life's to her a greater pain than Death.
Then let her dye --
" Down checking scruples. Let me tell my Soul
" It Is a kind act, and necessary mischief.
Few drops of this will soon restore her senses --
And in few hours give her eternal rest.

How your hand shakes, my Lord.

Alas! I Am much concerned for her, poor Lady --
See, she revives.

More cruelly to dye.
For, to the wretched, Life's a punishment,
And most to me, lost, hopeless, yet still loving.
Oh women, women, boast your power no more.
How soon our pride is humbled! first we triumph,
But oh it is only with more weight to feel
The insulting scorn of our Rebellious Slaves.
Weep, Laura weep! Think how with this false Charmer
(Checking thy native haughtiness of Soul)
Thou could have lived an humble Cottage mate,
A pattern to all Wives. Yet now he slights thee;
Tho ruined for his sake, and unpossest.
Oh let me rave, be mad, tear, tear my hair,
My face, my eyes, curse their weak Charms,
Groan on the ground, and grovel till at last
It hides me in a Grave.

Pray, Madam, rise.
There Is an apartment ready to receive you.

Away! -- Think not I Will stay in this ungrateful House*
No, let me lie exposed to the bleak Air,
On the cold pavement, in some lonesome street;
A Lodging fit for my forlorn condition;
While my poor Children, freezing, tired, half famisht,
With tears and moans pierce the most cruel hearts,
And with cold scraps feed miserable life.
Oh dismal, dismal thought! But 'twill not long torment me:
I shall run mad, I hope. Yet then, I fear,
As on my Straw I rave, a doleful spectacle,
Still with a sigh to all my Sex I Will cry,
Thus, thus, poor Laura fares for being true.

Oh! how this shakes my Soul! she shall not dye.
Run, fetch Physicians -- But hold, I Am mad too.
How will that help her? -- Gently raise her up,
Then lead her hence to rest.

It must be to the Grave then. Would it were,
So my cursed Rival were but there with me!
Oh how the thoughts of her inflame my Soul!
May a wronged woman's Curses soon overtake her,
Wrinkles, Deformity, Desires, and Scorn,
Detracting blast her fame, worst plagues her Charms,
Eternal Disappointments, Grief, Disquiet,
Confusion Shame, and Misery like mine
Pursue her, and the cause of my Despair.

How my Soul's rackt; shame combating with pity!
Methinks I see her still, and the Bane's working --
I feel her Pangs, I hear her Groans -- Oh horror!

My Lord --

It shall not be; I Will save her, tho I perish --

My Lord! He Is lost in thought.

But will that ease her?

My Lord --

Hah! --

I Have brought the Captain of the Ship: our friends
Wait with his men without.

I thank thee, Hell! thou have determined me.
Plate, Money, Jewels, and the chief, the Women,
This very night shall all be shipped for Afric.
Come, let us make all things ready for our flight;
Then in Placentia's Lodgings seize Fabiano;
He Will be an Hostage for our future Pardon,
Oh Laura! -- But I cannot help thy Fall.
Necessity makes. Villains of us all.

OH haste, let us fly, my Lord! -- Ricardo's Threats,
His busy gloomy Looks, his odd Expressions,
That Lady's wrongs, her Rage, and all things here,
Must have convinced you, it is unsafe to stay.

But oh my Captain?

The danger cannot reach him.

Ha! Villains! by whose orders am I seized?

By Don Ricardo's hedesigns no hurt:
As for you, Madam, you must now deliver
Your Money, Plate, and Jewels; else we have orders
To take 'em all by force.

Assist me then, Despair!
If there is no Remedy, go with me yonder;
You Will find much more than e're your hearts could wish:

Search every where, while I attend Ricardo.

By happy Chance I Have locked the Villains in,
While eagerly they rushed to seize their Prey --
I must unbind you, but I tremble so,
I scarce have power to do it.

Hold!

Hah!

Attempt to free him, and he dies.

Thus Robbers steal our wealth, then leave us bound.

You're robbed of nothing since she would be a Nun;
Neither shall you be left, but go with us.

She shall not go.

Villain, I will not go;
And rather would be wedded to the Plague.

Oh! how that blush of Rage, that sullen Grace,
That scornful smile, now blended with a frown,
That soft Emotion, and that wild of Beauty
Fire my hot blood! It mantles, bubbles, boyls!
My full Veins swell, and the revulsive Red
Whirls flushing over my face. Oh I Am all transport!
I must, I will be blessed, The coy Placentia,
Since she will not be my Wife, shall be my Mistress.
Come, quickly yield! for I Will this very moment.
Secure my bliss, lest my design should fail.

If you are a man, unbind and kill me first.

Rave on, and like the damned now feel a hell,
To see me seize the Heaven of love by force.

Oh save me, heaven! Ricardo, think of heaven.

Hold! Is the man lost in the lustful Brute?
Thou lookst a man, then bear thee now like one,

So I intend -- Come, with me, or I Will force you.

Can fruit while immature indulge the Taste?
Oh! stay! do not profane the unyielding Tree;
Kind usage and necessity at last
May ripen crabbed hate to generous Love.

I scorn the fruit which of itself does fall,
I love a pleasure I must struggle for.

Your appetite's depraved, your Love distempered.

If it is depraved, and the other a disease,
Then, sweet or sour, the Physic must be taken;
Besides, Resistance will enhaunce the blessing;
Insatiate in the Riot of my Joys,
I Will bribe, or teach, or force you to be pleased.
I Will grasp the trembling, panting, struggling Maid,
Graced with variety of new disorder;
Her dress, her tresses loose, and in her face
Roses, and Lillies in alternate chase.
I Will see her beg, and beg, to be denied,
With heaving breasts, soft looks, short balmy Sighs,
Kind broken words, and trickling pearly Tears,
While my proud Rival by, sees, rages, and despairs.

Racks, Wheels, and Fires, must I be still restrained!

Comply!

I must not.

Marry me then.

Hope.

I hate long Sieges -- It Is Soldier-like to Storm.

But not to storm weak woman! Oh! forbear!

I Will stab thee then.

I Will thank you.

When it is done -- thou charming stubborn Folly.
Thou Foe to thy own Pleasure -- what still foolish? --
Sure I can grapple with you.

Oh Heaven! Crush, crush us both with Thunder! oh! my Lord!

Cursed Sight! Death to my Eyes! Hell to my Soul!
I cannot bear it
Blast, Thunder, striek, burn, tear me or my bands! --
Ha! -- Now, Fate, I half forgive thee --
Turn, Monster!

Away! fly instant Fate! it is in my hand.
" Thou may more safely tempt the greedy Lion,
" When with contracted Paws he grumbles over his prey.
Be gone! I never threaten twice.
Villain, stab, or desist.

Fond, rash fool, take thy wish!

Hah! What means Placentia?

To rob you of that blow; I want it most.

Restraint, your danger, check, distract, unman me --
Oh! my Placentia! Oh Ricardo spare her!

Oh! my Fabiano! Oh Ricardo, spare him!

Too long I Have trifl'd -- stand out of Death's way.

No, strike, strike through my Heart! still thus I Will stand,
Between the dear unhappy Man and Fate.

The dearer he is, the sooner he shall dye.

Oh! take the wealth I now was leaving! kill me!
" Alas my Death will mend my wretched state,
" And I, instead of burying my self living
" Within the lonesom Walls of some poor Cloister,
" Will lie more quiet in the silent Grave,
" Forgot among the solitary Tombs.
But on my knees, which fear has scarce left able
To bear my Trembling body, by your Love,
By the remaining Tears of this sad day,
By your best hopes, and by your future safety,
Let me adjure you, spare him, spare my honor,
Nor act a Crime you would wish undone too late.

Down Stubborn Heart! bend knees!
A Goddess kneels; but see a greater wonder,
Ricardo! see thy Rival at thy Feet!
Not to beg life! ah no! I wish to dye:
Spare her! oh spare her! Let my blood atone.

Something I feel like Pity; but I Will hide it --
Or yield, or wed me now, or both shall dye.
Let go your hold --

Oh do no drag me thus!

Bound as I am, I Will strive to snatch thy Dagger.

Hah!

" Now, Villain, tremble! Stir, and thou dy'st.

" Oh do not kill me -- I Am not fit to dye --

" Nor ever wilt; therefore unfit to live:
" What should thou fear, you are all a Devil already.
" Thy lowest fall can be but into Hell.

" Oh, that is uncharitable!

" Then that is like thee:
" Infection's busy where you breathe! Dye --

" Hold, dear Placentia, let me interpose:
" I Will shield him, but to punish him my self.

" No, his Sword must let out his tainted blood.

" Let not blood stain your Innocence.

" A Monster's blood never stains the hand that sheds it.

" Can a Virgin do this?

" A Virgin wronged can more.

" It Is not her office to be cruel.

" But it is every one's office to do justice.

" Oh! you are pious, and you must forgive.

" Now you can preach that pity you denied.

" Oh! 'twas excess of Love that urged my Crime.

" Thou never had that goodness as to love.
Dye, Virtue strikes, not I.

Hold, Madam, free my hands; I Will kill him then.

Why venture twice your life against a Villain?

What can I have to lose, when you are lost?

aside. I hate this lingering -- Thus I Will escape or dye.

Ha! now he is escaped, and it is our turn to fear.

I Will fly for help, unbind me.

We Have heard a dismal noise -- Fabiano bound!

It Is now no time to talk; secure that door.
Theft, Rape and Murder are at hand --
Some of you, ring the Bell, it may bring help.

Quick, call the Captain: now his wound is bound,
Tho lame, he may assist.

without. Open the door.

No, not to Thieves and Ravishers.

without. We'll break 'em open then.

Heaven send us succor first.

I fear it much.

Why, then I can but dye for you, Placentia.

Talk not of dying, Sir, but of defense.
Let Us keep close by the passage,
There we shall better make our party good.

Fall on!

Our Captain's here! fall on the Rogues.

My men are here, beyond my expectation.

Betrayed by cursed Pirates!

Lieutenant, what is the matter?

Our Brigantine, Sir, was o're-pow'r'd by Villains;
So many of our men being on shore.
They came upon us so at unawares,
There was no other help but joining with them.
I told them I was a revolted Pyrate,
Who would be glad of such good company;
And thus, since that, I Have traced them in their mischiefs,
Being resolved to seize 'em, when my men
Were got together, as they are now.

Where is the Moor?

We cannot find him yet.

Bind all the Villains, and confine Ricardo.

Forbear, presumptuous Lord!

How! Don Vincentio living!

Hah! it is my Brother's Ghost!

Risen from the Grave;

Why d' you all shun me? But perhaps you ought.
Yet, tho much changed, I am Vincentio still.

Alive! oh grant it heaven.

You Have been imposed upon, I find.

Oh my dear Brother, how I mourned for you!

" Come I Will believe he lives, tho 'twere a Dream,
" That I may know one joyful Moment more.

Spare Compliments! It is your love I Would have;
When I am sure of that, the rest is needless.

My Lord, your Ear a moment.

I find, there have been strange disorders here.
Placentia, as for you, I hear you're grown
An absolute disposer of your self.

Ah can your Soul more than your face be changed!
You did not use to meet our joys this way.
Oh! my best Lord! upon my knees I beg
That Calumny may not possess your Soul!

How am I changed indeed; I can stand by,
And see Placentia kneel. Oh! jealousy,
Thou have perverted all my noble nature:
Thou drov'st out flattering hope when most secure,
And all my Generous passions followed it.

Does it become Placentia thus to kneel, my Lord?

If you dislike her low Condition, raise her!

So, I can, Sir, and to as high a pitch
As yours, tho mounted thus in all its pride.

My Lord, you have in my absence stolen a Jewel
I prized above my life, my very being.
Restore it me again on your Sword's point;
And by the Grove where I killed rash Don John.

to him.] I Will meet you; say no more -- Rise, noble Maid.

No, I will grow to Earth, except my Lord
Turns merciful again, and hears me speak!

aside. Hopes of Revenge have beat out jealousy,
And I Am my self again -- Ah lovely Maid,
To what but Heaven should so much Beauty kneel?
Oh! I was mad, Placentia! quickly rise,
Or I shall sink into the Earth for shame:
His words made no impression on my Mind.

My Lord, pray keep your Temper, nor suspect me;
For I have proofs, I wish the Moor were here!
He first betrayed their ill designs to me.

Why then, ye equal judges, hear him speak!
I am the Moor -- do you start, base Traducer?
But you are below my Thoughts? It Is you, Placentia,
I now must chide.
" Why, Cruel fair,
" Why will you thus shut out your lovely self
" From all the World? I prize no other Wealth,
" And would you, would you steal your self from him
" Who without you must dye? for oh Placentia,
" None can divide the Body from the Soul.
" Yet make that Body live.

" Alas! Vows firm as fate for ever part us.

" Yet stay, That I may see you shine at Court.

" Ah no! my Lord, virtue shines best in Cloisters.

" But oh! if you're resolved to live recluse,
" And make your fond Vincentio miserable,
" Why must another offer you to Heaven?

" You shall dispose of me,
My Lord, my heart
Is by a secret charm bound to Fabiano,
But yet, its Duty must be wholly yours.

Oh! break that cursed charm, or else deny
All thoughts that prompt a friendship or respect.
Respect was welcome from you, when I thought
None had a stronger Tie upon your Soul.
But that respect* is now below contempt.

Oh! tho I love him --

Oh unspeak those words.
Ten thousand Vipers stung me at the sound;
Ten thousand thoughts, all wild, all black, all dismal,
Work my mad Brain. Oh, say you love him not.
You weep -- you are dumb -- you will not? Cruel Maid!
Teach me, yet Powers to move her -- Oh I would invoke
Men, Angels, Friends, to wrest him from her heart:
But 'twill be vain: how long have I not su'd?
Hours, Days, Months, Years, are past; yet still she is Marble.
I Will dye then -- yes; but first my Rival shall.
I Am ripe for ruin, like some battered wall,
But haughty Foe, I Will crush thee with my fall.

Kill me, I Will thank you; for I Am hopeless too.
But live, my Lord, and think me not your foe.
Nothing but barbarous wrong done to Placentia
Could make me draw my Sword against my friend.

Must I be wicked e're I can be eased?
Take, take your friendship back. Oh why am I thus cursed.
My Brother a base wretch, my Friend my Rival,
And what is yet worse, a Rival loved! Oh Tortures!
But what most racks my Soul, this very evening
I thought my self the happy'st man on earth.
From such a hope, in full career to bliss,
Thus to be hurried down a precipice
To dash on deep despair! It kills my reason,
Confounds my Brains, my Heart, and tears my very Soul.

Compose his mind, good Heaven!

Rise, my dear Brother.

Oh why will you lie thus?

Oh why indeed indeed! my sword, my sword should end me and my pain.

Hold! are you mad?
Let Reason end 'em, and preserve your Life.

Away; Life's my worst foe, and you the next;
Think not t'impose it on me. Reason's self,
Nay Patience, says my ills are past her cure.
Oh harship! I Am even denied the privilege of dying.
Then hear, thou heaven! why sleeps thy thunder? end me!
Delay not thus my wished for Dissolution.
Oh rid me of Intolerable Life.

Forgive your Friends, and live my Lord.

My Friends! would you be thought my Friend?

Yes, from my Soul.

Then dare be such, and rid me now of Life.

Would that be like a Friend? Reflect, my Lord:
Exert your Soul, and bear like your great self.

Will you not kill me then?

Were every door to ease shut up but Death,
Unwillingly I would.

There Is no other.

Then I must be cruelly kind.

My Lord --

Madam forbear? Let one friend ease another.

Well said?
Come, take your Sword my Friend, and lay its point close to my Breast?
That when I do you the same hated Office,
We both may fall at once.

What, both! forbid it friendship!
I dare not buy my ease at your Life's Cost.

See, whither passion hurried you, my Lord!
Were wilful Death an ease, should you deny it him
That gives it you? for I too am most wretched.
But Life's the Gift of Heaven, and we must wait
Till heaven commands it back, to gain a better.

Oh! you have touched my Soul! Come to my Arms!
I Am reconciled to wretchedness, to Life,
Nay, even to you: Tho Rivals we'll agree:
Let Us all three join as partners in affliction.
Till heaven be moved, while nature mourns to find
Three hearts so wretched, yet so truly kind.

My Ld, Don Ferdinand, with guards was forcing Entrance,
But, hearing you're returned, would only kiss your hand.

My Lord conceal me, lest I be detained.



Welcome, my Lord, to Portugal, that mourned
The brave Vincentio's loss! The King himself
Has worn a noble sorrow for your Death;
And doubtless will rejoice, to see you contradict
That most unwelcome news.

I must employ my Friends, my Lord, for a new pardon,
'Twas I that caused the Rumor to be spread;
But 'twas to save a Brother.

He Is no Brother.

My Lord, he is but an ill one, I confess:
Yet, nature still will work.

I Will say no more, till I have got your promise, of one thing.

Name it, my Lord; a gift that you can ask
Must needs be too well placed to be denied.

I had a Son, and hope once more to have him,
If this fair Lady will restore him to me,
Once I despised her, but admire her now.
I ask her for his Wife, my Lord, that is all.

All! -- ask me my Lord, to rip my breast my self,
And give you thence my heart. Ask any thing,
Rather than ask Placentia for your Son.
She must be mine, or no man's in the World.

My Lord, she is your Sister.

Hah! my Sister.

Nay then it is time to fly: These perjured Monks,
Tho he is not dead have made the secret known.

Lay hold on him! --
This Villain, shall no longer be your plague.

No, he is a peasants Son, and she your Sister.

Can Heaven and Earth conspire to make me wretched?
Sister, that word never sounded ill till now.
Sister brings in it eternal separation.
Fathers, you should be Messengers of joy.

I hope, My Lord, we shall, if you will but hear.

Let me hear any thing but Sister from you.
That fatal sound will murder me at once;
I dare not understand you.
But since I Am doomed to hear some dreadful story;
It Is fit I should possess my Soul with Thoughts
Of the most dismal kind! -- I need not study.
Placentia Loves another -- That Is enough.
Alas! what Racks, what tortures can be worse!
Now tell the rest -- yet on the Ground I Will lie
Lest I drop down, when she is proved my Sister.'
There, wretched Lover, measure out thy Grave.
Now strike the blow that must cut off all hopes.

Read that, my Lord! It is a declaration
Under his Parents hands.

This is enough -- Placentia is my Sister. Oh! my heart!
Turn, turn thy self about, that I may ask
Why this was done?

My Lord, you have heard your sickly Infancy
Gave but a doubtful promise of your Life.
This made your Father wish another Son.
But Daughters still deceived him. Now your Mother
Then big with Child, had heard him rashly say,
If that too proved a Daughter, he should wish
She never had been his.
This made such an impression on her mind,
That to preserve his Love, he being absent,
Seeing it proved a Girl, she changed the Child.
This fault her youth committed, and her age repented.
So she with us deposited this Trust,
To be revealed, if you died without Issue.
If not, to be kept secret. But just heaven
Has brought the secret out before its time.
Yet with no breach of trust on our-side neither,
Since we believed you dead, when we revealed it.

Have I not patience, fathers, thus to hear
Such killing news, yet lie here without raving?
But I Will do something too.

Look to my Lord!

Alas! he is much disturbed -- As for these Villains,
To dungeons with them. But for this mock-Lord --
Degrade him first. Strip of this rich garb,
Then Cloth him as befits his state and Birth.
That thus my Lord may see him dragged to prison.

Oh Sister; it is more joy to find you thus,
Than it is to lose that wretch.

This doubles the delight I took in Friendship,
But my Love for you was so great before, it cannot now increase.

Now, Fortune, Nature,
I owe you nothing but a wretched Being.
Take back the thankless gift, and then we are even,
" Nor rack my Soul with dread of endless Flames.
There Is Hell enough on Earth in guilty minds.
" To lose at once the heaven of Love and Greatness,
" Then be condemned to Life, or dye a branded Villain!
" Cursed Thought! a branded Villain. Ha! I feel
" A warmth new to my heart, thaw the hard lump,
" And shake my shudd'ring frame.
Oh my past Life, thou make me doubt the future.
Alas, I dare not hope I may repent*

Oh run, for pities sake! she is poisoned.
Get Antidotes! But tell her not, I did it.

Run, help the Lady.

Oh! lead me from her Sight, to Chains and Galleys,
To toil, to shame, to want, to pinching cold,
To scorching heat, to stripes, to worse Remorse,
And ever-new variety of Woes.
All, all these pains are slight, to those I bear,
Struggling for hope with horror and despair.
Stay! Poys'ner Fiend,! take this and this.

Hold, Madam.

More horrors yet! oh let us avoid that Sight.

Why do you hold me? let me end that Monster!

Strike, injured Goodness; strike again; I Will thank you.
" Complete the work of Death, that moves too slow.
" But oh! first hear me, take some Antidote.

Must I be held, and punished with his sight?
" Free me, or take him hence, for horror shakes me
Even at the thoughts that he is of humane form.

Oh stay; look on the most undone of Creatures,
A Devil in guilt, but a repenting Devil.
Oh! could but heaven and you forgive.

Avaunt -- Devils cannot repent, nor be forgiven.

But even the worst of Men, thus prostrate trembling,
Not daring to look up, near death, will sigh to heaven.
" Oh! you're so much its likeness,
" Sure its best attribute, Divine forgiveness
" May yet be show'r'd even on a wretch like me.
" A Wretch, more, more than a wretch, there is not a name
" That can express my miserable state.

Let go my Robes.

Oh never, never,
The drowning wretch cannot forego his hold;
That lost, I sink for ever.

" I Would sink with thee, that thou might sink yet lower.
" Think on my wrongs, thou Fiend, thy breach of Vows,
" Ingratitude, that even thy Sex must startle,
" Poison thy kind return for all my wealth,
" For all my Love, and what cries most for Vengeance,
" Those poor young Orphans! Oh my ruined Children.

Oh! take some Antidote!

No, I would dye: what should I live for now?
see behind me nothing left in Life
^ut misery, terrible misery.

Oh Laura --

Will It thou still plague me? Dye, and let me dye.

" Oh! had you heard me, but an hour ago,
" We might have lived. Alas you little know
" What Is now divulged; I Am not Vincentio's Brother.
Death to a wretch like me has lost its horror;
Death should have snatched me in my fancied greatness;
But now my base original, my Crimes,
My shame call for severer punishments.
The Rack should stretch my Limbs, and show me death in view,
Then pull the blessing back, that I might long be tortured.
Then let me starve with those poor helpless Orphans,
Whom I have robbed of the support their dying Father left.

" Oh now thou'st touched my Soul,
" And laid my Crimes as well as thine in view.
" I, I, was left entrusted with the Care.
" How shall I meet my Husbands shade? methinks
" I see his angry Ghost! he frowns -- oh hide me.
" Forgive, blessed soul; forgive a poor deluded Woman! --
" But oh! my Children, how can you forgive me? --
" Yet once more let me see 'em -- stay; I dare not, --
" Oh dismal f^^e; a dying mother dreads to see her Children.

" Oh not to you, to me they owe their Ruin;
" Oh me, on me alone should Vengeance fall.
" Add to my torments, heaven, so they have ease.
" Oh! though she cursed me still, though she never knew
" 'Twas for their good I strove to wed Placentia,
I Would bear an age of Hell to mend your fates.

Amazement! his guilt lessens. Can it be?
He pities me, pities my Children too.
Take back thy pity, take it back, Ricardo.
It gains so much upon my easy heart
That I shall wrong my self, and give thee mine.

Pitied! am I then pityd? oh! thou goodness,
If thou can pity, sure thou can forgive, --
But oh the poison! That must wake Heavens Vengeance,
And seal the ears of mercy;

It Was Charity to kill me: but thy falsehood
Was a worse poison to my doting heart --
Yet we have all faults. Alas, we all want mercy --
We must forgive, -- heaven pardon thee, and me!

What do I hear?

But fly! my Children's sight may force forgiveness back.

Is that forgiveness? see, I bleed apace.
Oh pardon, e're I dye.

Oh! I Have a vice of mercy in me.

Let me Embrace your Knees, breath out my Soul.

My Children! off, away.

I dare not see 'em, and I cannot leave her!

" Away, you dearfond wretches. Why d' you cling?
" I Have ruined you; but oh! I Am ruined worse.
" Poor Innocents, they little know their misery,
" I feel it double for them, wretched Mother.
Oh had my Woes fallen only on my self,
I Would think 'em gentle, but this worse affliction
Entailed on you, poor helpless guiltless Orphans,
It turns my Brains, distracts me -- It Is too much.
Oh dreadful change! oh vanity of life!
Death is the only blessing a fond Mother
Can wish her dearest Children -- ha! the Dagger.
Does not Fate hint by this, I ought to ease 'em?
Must they be left, to want? to beg? to starve?
I Will do it; but oh what Arm can hurt such sweetness?
I cannot strike -- I cannot bear their Looks --
But must they live to curse me, shame their name,
And dye perhaps an ignominious Death?
No, I must strike --

Pray, mother, don't look so, indeed it frights me
Oh pray ben't angry! oh I Will hug and kiss you.

Away, we are ruined, and we ought to dye.

Oh my dear Mother, live; We'll beg for you.

Beg! could you Beg?

Yes, for our dearest mother.

Oh this disarms me. Live, my dearest Children --
Live and be happier, you instruct your Mother,
And I too ought to Live -- If there be means -- but oh the poison
It works, hah! it shoots Hell into my Blood!
I am all wound. My head; my breast! I burn!
Heart, I cleave my sides! Brains, burst my skull! help! help!
Oh gently, gently! --

" Oh horror! Curse thy sufferings off on me,
" Thou martyred Goodness -- hurl your Bolts, you Powers!
" Grind, grind me into dust,
" And on each atom double all her pains.
" So Laura's eased, Ricardo will not murmur!

Oh! give me ease! where is Death?
The Coward dares not come, affrighted at my torments.
My Br^^th's a fire. Help! Water, Ice! Heaven, pity me.
Give (...) some of the cold my Children are to suffer.

Take hence these innocents, too much they move.

Oh pity them -- I called on Death, and lo, he is come at last.
But oh the thoughts of them, makes me now welcome him
With that sad heaviness that sinks despairing Sinners.
Oh Heaven! -- Oh my Children! --

She Is dead, she is dead.

" Hah! and do I still live?
" Be dry my Eyes, and you, my Wounds, weep faster.
" Oh let me look, and sigh my last at once.
Oh killing sight when shall I overtake thee,
Thou only fair? Oh! never, never, never.
It Is not for guilt like mine to mount with thee:
I feel my self in Hell, and mercy's self
Can never stoop so low.
" Fain would I pray -- ha! a Grim Vision frights me.
" Oh heaven! oh save me! hah! a hand is stretched
" To raise me up to heaven, let me get hold --
" But oh! dark vapors rise between -- I cannot see it
No News yet of Vincentio? -- Oh most dismal sight!

Remove that Scene of Grief -- force off that wretch.

Oh you shall never part us -- No, I will, I will
Be joined with her at least in Death! -- Oh Laura! Laura,

A doleful Scene! but where is my Lord Vincentio.
I dread some greater mischief from his Stay.

Run, find Placentia? Don Vincentio's coming,
A Conqu'ror over his noble self at last.
He brings my Lord Fabiano to be blessed.

My Son!

Love's sacrificed at last to Reason, Take her,
She Is yours, my Lord.

Oh it is too much at once -- oh rapture -- oh Placentia.

Oh my loved Lord! --

My Life! my Soul! oh I am lost in Bliss, and suffer with delight.
Thou kind omnipotence, forgive my doubts,
I thought thou could not thus have blessed a mortal --
My Lord, my Father!

Oh my dear Son, be blessed, and let my tears
Now speak my Joy as once they did my Grief.

Thus Providence has wrought my desperate cure.
Oh! you, no more my Mistress nor my Rival,
Live happy. Long be crowned
With blessings which no single state can give.
My heart has fed so long on hopeless Love
That it would surfeit, should it feed on other.
Glory shall be my Darling Mistress now.
Off then, soft frenzy! let me rouse my Soul.
In martial Fields let Fame possess it whole:
While all who know, whence sprung these dangers here,
Learn from small Crimes great mischiefs to beware.


