WHEN Britain welcomes her Returning Lord,
For Peace, for Freedom, for Himself Restored:
Our Joy's should, like our Blessings, be extreme,
And Praise should wanton in its boundless Theme:
The King has found so many Ways to Bless,
What Muse can even her private Debt express?
Let joyful Throngs then sing their Gain's Increase,
Since Britain's Soul on War engendered Peace;
Peace given the World her Parent to Adorn,
Got in his Camp, and in his Palace Born.
Let others sing how He his Thunder hurled,
And proved, like Jove, the Umpire of the World;
How, even opposing Foes, his Fame advance,
France shook the Globe, but William humbl'd France:
How wondering Kings from distant Empires came,
And found the Hero greater than his Fame;
Even when remote, like the Sun's active Ball,
Seeing, enlivening, and Controuling all;
King over Kings, by their free Choice assigned,
Lord of his Fate, yet Master of his Mind;
By wise Delays, even Master of his Foes,
Yet to the World's Command, preferring its Repose.
In Wonder lost, the Muses humble Train,
Wished but to sing how by his Toils they gain:
But how can Words our grateful Thoughts display?
Or what are Thoughts, such Blessings to repay?
Born to give Liberty to each Degree;
He even the Stage from Slav'ry's Yoke did free.
In an expensive War, with wondering Eyes,
The Muses saw New Theaters arise.
Wit from the Generous, large Supplies received,
And even the Play'rs, nay, even the Poets lived:
Nor did the Sound of War disturb our Sports,
While he, for hard Campains, disclaimed the Ease of Courts.
Oh! Now our Rest and Freedom are ensur'd,
May he enjoy the Pleasures he secured!
Taught by the Virtuous Ruler of our Isle,
The Stage, Reformed, has learnt a Chaster Style.
Even with the Pious, 'twill at last be famed,
For Virtue cherisht, and for Vice reclaimed:
Such Deeds in Peace, will prove the Monarch's Care,
Who, Boldly Wise, reformed the Coin in War.
Britain, it self a World, was first designed
To free the Greater, then adorn Mankind:
Ease (Freedom's best Attendant) here will raise
In heightened Souls, the Noble Lust of Praise.
Royal Academies shall grace the Age,
And many Dorsets Patronize the Stage.
To William's Court, all Noble Arts will run;
The Muses move still Westward like the Sun.
His Fame by them, and They by him shall live,
He who gave Peace, will every Blessing give.

ARm, Britons! hark! how from afar
Alarming Drums and Trumpets call to War.
" France, whose exerted Powers decrease,
"Collects them for a last Effort;
"But when she cannot fright, will court
"And bribe us into Peace.

See how all the Brave assemble!
How they hurry
All to Glory!
William Thunders, Armies tremble.
Death or Conquest is the Cry.
Now we sally,
Now they fly;
Now they rally,
Charge, and dye.
Cannons roaring,
Squadrons pouring;
Shouting,
Routing,
We pursue 'em,
We Subdue 'em.
Rage and Horror, Groans and Fear,
Blood and Slaughter every where.

Peace! Peace! Peace tunes the World: Harmonious Peace Bids War and Discord
cease

Thus does it Heaven and William please,
William whom nothing can oppose,
Who can like Neptune calm the Seas,
And bless, like Jove, his very Foes.
Advance, happy Nations, to praise him, advance,
From Britain, from Spain, from Belgia, from France;
Sing William, and Peace, sing, revel, and dance.

Hold Neighbors; since our Country has set you all a Dancing, you shall eene
dance after our Country Fashion: As for my Brother Hans the Dutchman, his
Hopping, (Dancing I should have said) agrees well enough with mine; As well, I
cot, as the Fiddle and the Dancing Bear


Yaw varacktick Broeder.


But this Outlandish Spaniard; And you, Master Monsieur, don't foot it a whit
like unto us; why, you wriggle and frisk about like the Hobby Horse in a
Morris; but that is no wonder, for they say the very Dogs, Heaven bless us!
dance in your Country. Then there is he there bristles like one of our Turkeys;
stalks about like a Boy on a pair of Stilts, and snaps his Fingers like Roger
our Barber, or like the Puppet in the Recreation of the orld


Come Husband we will e'ne change Partners; let me alone for teaching one of the
Gentlefolks


Odszooks, you're in woundy haste to be doing with Gentlefolks, goody
Nimble-hips: These Wives are always plaguey ready to change Partners, and shake
their Tails with Strangers: Well no matter, there is the French Monsieur, go
bestir your Stumps together: Let Jack Spaniard take Hans the Dutch-mans Vroe;
And let her be sure to put him in when he is out: Come Master Signior, As my
Dame says, We Will change Wives; Odszooks, that is all the Fashion with us now
adays; were not for changing now and then, there would not be half the Dancing
that there is among us -- Hey-day! I fancy this same Spaniard is like most
other folks, he does not care any Body should dance with his Wife; But he is for
dancing with every body's Wife but his own. Od's niggs, it is all a Case; for
once it shall be as I say: Come Cuckolds all arow. -- Play me an English
Horn-pipe


Madame, me be, de tout Mon Coeur,
Your very humble Serviteur.
Begar me wish to have de Peace,
Only to come embrace your Knees.
Your Roy Guillaume is brave en Diable;
Me saw him take Namur dat's impregnable.
'We all looked on, for we had den
'But hundra twenty tousan Men.
Your Soldier can do Wonders too*
And love to Fight as we to Dance*
But had day all been such as you,
Begar, dey would have Conquer France.

Still the same I find you are,
Skilled alike in Love and War.
Gallantry in both you show,
But a little Falsehood too;
And with Strong deluding Art,
Win a Fort, or bribe a Heart;
Though it is like Inconstant Men,
But to give 'em up again.

We be like all de Vorld indeed,
And give up vat we cannot keep;
But if me get Possession here,
Me never give you up, Begar.

Forbear, forbear!


Ma Chere! My Dear!


It Is all in vain.


Is It all in vain?


It Is all in vain.


Is It all in vain? Jer'nie! me then -- -
me, -- Begar, me go home again.

Adieu, adieu, go home again.

'Oh! Vat do I see?
'Will dis Ingrat still vanton be,
'And to gain oders Ruin me?

'Let roving Thoughts and wandering cease,
'And sigh no more for Foreign Charms:
'At Home enjoy the sweets of Peace,
'In your fond faithful Consorts Arms.

'Now, my Dear the War is over,
'And I can be wholly thine.
'Come be kind: Yield to your Lover,
'And no Flame shall last like mine.

'Hold, Sir Bully! who'd surrender
'When the Siege is hardly laid?
''Tis not every bold Pretender,
'Whose first Summons is obeyed.

''Tis our way now to be daring,
'And at once to come and take;
'Pressing, storming, without caring,
'What Resistance you can make.

'Feeble Towns may thus be taken,
'Chiefly when surpised or sold;
'Then they are plundered, and forsaken;
'But I can defend my Hold.

'You'll be used as ill, if early
'On good Terms you do not yield.

'I'm ashamed to beat a Parley,
'But you're Master of the Field.

'You shall be well treated; fear not:
'Let the Fortress be resigned.

'Oh! Your Servant, Sir, I dare not,
''Till the Articles are Signed.

'Come, it is just it should be so,
'Since, like Foes, all Lovers deal:
'Here's my Hand, now let us go,
'And within we'll Sign and Seal.

'Come Neighbors, now there is Peace let us Sing:
'Troth I love those that love the King.
'To see his Liege, I came alone,
'And left the Parson with my Joane.
*Jog Joggy, jog on; drive, drive on the Wagon:
'Go Gaffer, jog on, go, get us a Flaggon.
'Our Landlords thought the Taxes deep;
'But we must Sow e're we can Reap.
'What Clown can grudge his Money now?
'Odsnigs, not I; and so, God speed the Plow.
'Jog, Joggy, jog on; drive, drive on the Wagon,
'Go, Gaffer, jog on; go get us a Flaggon.
Hub, ub ub, booh
Dish cannot be true:
The War does cease,
But there is no Peace.
I know, and find
It Is Sealed and Signed,
But will not believe it is true.
Hubub, ub, booh.
A hohne! a hohne!
Poor Teague's undone.
I dare not be
A Raparee:
I never shall see,
Magrawmacree,
Nor my more dear Garon.
A hohne! a hohne.
Away, away!
I must huzzah:
'Twill hide my Fears,
And save my Ears;
The Mob appears.
Here Is to Nassau,
Dear Joys it is Usquebaugh.
Huzzah! Huzzah!
Come Girls, let us be merry; the War's at an end;
We all shall get Husbands: The times now will mend:
There Is I and our Mary,
Black Susan and Sarah,
Were Woundily Weary,
With living Unwed;
In a woeful quandary,
How we should do to tarry.
None asked me to Marry,
Or part with my Maidenhead.
Our best Lads to the Wars went so fast,
And the rest were most of them such Loobies,
E Cod, I feared we at last
Must have suiter'd the Lubberly Boobies.
Dear Joany,
My Honey.
What have thou forgot me? O -- How the Wench Stares!
I Am Thomas the Thresher, just come from the Wars.
I Am still thy Swee^-heart; and by Cannons and Mortars,
I Will take thee by Storm; and I Will beat up thy Quarters.
By Cannons and Mortars,
I Will beat up thy Quarters.

Hold, Thomas! you may not
Nay, Thomas you sha' not.

Go, I hate you, I vow;
You look, and you talk like a Gentleman now:
Come, off with this Geer,
And d'on the Reparel, that once you did wear.
Go, I hate you, I vow.
You look, and you talk like a Gentleman now.

Well since the War's over, my Brav'ry shall down.
Off goes the brave Soldier, on goes the plain Clown.

Oh now* how I like thee! Oh now I Am thy own!
Thou art Handsomer now,
And finer, I vow,
Than all the spruce Gentry and Boars in our Town.

Thus now we agree.
Let all do like me, She, Like thee.
To keep their Necks free.
Leave threshing of Jackets, and get 'em all Wives;
Then thresh in their Barns, with a thump, thump, thump;
Then thresh in their Barns, and lead all merry Lives.
O Rareeshow! brave Show*
Who see my fine Show?
Here be d' Inglish and French to eatch oder most civil,
Shaka Hand, and be Friends, and hug like de Deevel*
O Rareeshow etc.
Here be de Savoyards a trudgin tro France,
To sweep a de Shimny, to sing and to dance.
O Rareeshow, etc.
Here be de Great Turk, and de Great King of no Land;
And dear be some gallop from Hungary and Poland.
O Rareeshow, etc.
Here Is de brave English Beau for de Packet Bot tarries,
To go make his Campain, with his Tailor at Paris.
O Rareeshow, etc.
Here be d'honest Capitain a cursing de Peace.
Here Is anoder disbanding his Coach and his Miss.
O Rareeshow, etc.
Here be d' English Ship fetch Plenty and Riches.
And dear de French Caper a mending his Breeches.
O Rareeshow, etc.
Here be de Grumbler set out Lights and dissemble,
And dear be de Mob make 'um squitter and tremble.
O Raree Show, etc.
Here be de Sea Capitain a reeling ashore,
Here Is one spend all his Pay, and boarding a Whore.
O Raree Show, etc.
Here be de brave Trainband a drinking Carouses,
And dear be de Soldiers a storming deir Spouses.
O Rara Show! brave Show!
Who see my fina Show?
Rejoice, rejoice, the World has Rest,
William returns, and all are blessed.
He comes, he comes, the best of Kings;
More welcome than the Peace he brings.
Run to meet him,
Haste to greet him.
In lofty Notes sound William's Praise!
Sing gentle Peace in softest Lays!
Hail! Ye great Blessings of Mankind!
Glorious William! gentle Peace!
Live and reign for ever joined.

Come, let us revel, drink, and sing,
We have a Peace, we have our King,
Now, Britain, you are a happy Nation.
Thy Lord, whose Toyls the World have freed,
That like a Chaos disagreed,
May rest, and view his new Creation.
There Is nothing left for thee to do,
But to thy self, thy self be true,
And joyful homage pay him.
You Are loved, admird, and feared abroad;
Rebellion's quelled, and Faction's awed:
Command the World while you obey him!
See! Britain's happy Sons rejoyee!
Now Heaven and Peace confirm our Choice.
We Are happy all,
The great, the Small,
The Old, the Young,
The Weak, the Strong,
The Poor who wants,
The Rich who grants,
The Saint who cants,
The Rake who rants,
The thoughtless Squire, the thinking Wit,
The trusted Beau, the trusting Cit;
The Clown, the Lawyer, the Tarpawlin,
And every Sect, and every Calling.
All think of new Blessings, new Plenty will reign,
The Richer will save, and the poorer will gain.
The Toper in Claret will find all his Wants,
And the Clown in right Nants,
Will whip off his Noggin;
The Matron her cold Tea will sip,
The Saylor his Punch and his Flip,
And the Bawd her flaming Snapdragon.
Thus all hearts are eased,
And new Joys on us call;
For his own private Good each of us is pleased,
And the King for the good of us all.

