WHat Harmony alarms my Ears?

It is the Music of the Spheres.

Oh let me, let me dye,
And my transported Spirits fly
To yonder ecchoing Sky,
Where Love with Music keeps eternal Harmony.

Nay Strephon, stay,
With mortal Ears
Beneath the Spheres
You may partake, and hear them Play.

Do then the Gods such joys to Mortals lend?

The God of Music, Goddess of the Arts,
Such joy imparts,
And in a Chorus often do descend.

And in a Chorus,
And in a Chorus often do descend.

From Mansions of Joy, and from Regions of Bliss,
Where Eternity flows with such measures as this,
Invoked by your Music the AEtherial Spheres,
Here Pallas descends in a Chariot of Airs.
In such a sweet Consort our Empire does move,
While we join in a Chorus of Music and Love.
May not Mortals then aspire!

By the same Scale
They Heaven assail,
And join in the Celestial Quire.

On Musicks soft Scale you to Heaven do aspire,
And call from his Throne great Jove to admire;
Whilst all the bright Goddesses join in a Ring,
To make up a Consort, and help you to Sing:
In such a sweet Consort our Empire does move,
While we join in a Chorus of Music and Love.

Do these Celestial Joys on Music tend?

Bright Pallas to confirm it does descend.

E're raised to Immortality!

The Airy Cherubin, the Soul is free:
On Love and Musicks wings,

Aloft, aloft she flying sings
The Glories of Eternity.

By Love and by Music our Kingdom does stand;
By Love and by Music we rule and command;
While in Love we descend, you by Music aspire,
Till our Souls do unite in a general Quire.
In such a sweet Consort our Empire does move,
While we join in a Chorus of Music and Love.

Oh stay, bright Goddess, stay;
We Will ever Sing, and ever Play,
If you vouchsafe to agree
To make one general Harmony.

Alexis, in this Universal Choir,
Where mighty Phoebus does with Orpheus meet,
With all his Votaries at his feet,
How many various sorts there be
Of Instruments in this joint Harmony,
You in amazement leave me to admire.

Reckon the Creatures in their kind,
None can their endless number find.

And yet these too
May be reduced to few.

Or Men, or Trees, or Birds, or Beasts; nay all
That motion have, or live,
Are Vegitives, or Sensitive,
Or highest Rational,
Of Music thus three sorts we do allow.

Such as by Breath or Wind inspired do speak,
Do into joyful numbers break.

But quickn'd by the active Bow,
In sweeter measures flow.

Or by the Fingers smoother touch, or Quill,
Their gentler Notes distill.

And all uniting will partake,
And one profound Pair-Royal make.

This Trinity of Consorts I admire.

And I, dear Strephon, love.

But are they so united in their Quire,
That for the Test
Who does the best,
We may not yet more fully hear them move?

The next Debatement shall apart their several Virtues prove.

The Harp, the Harpsicons, Guittar and Lute,
Is my pretense.

Mine the Wind-Musicks Excellence.

And for the charming Bow I Will hold dispute.
Strephon, with you we will first engage.

And with the Conqueror we will the Combat wage.

We Will draw on each side,
And our Forces divide,
To merit, to merit the praise;
And he that does best,
Shall be owned by the rest,
With Laurel, with Laurel and Bays.

STrephon, while we with you incorporate,
We labor in a mortal state;
Like Soul and Body we unite,
Your grosser parts retard our glorious flight:
But from your grosser Numbers free,
We, like the Soul, put on a kind of Immortality.

In us alone
The whole Composure of the Universe is shown.
In Counterpoint that comprehends each part
Of our mysterious Art
Which in us dwell,
We do excel,
Whilst every part an Element
Does represent

To weighty Earth what part can you compare?
We are all Air.

The Bass as the foundation of the frame:
The Tenor does the Watery Orb proclaim:
The Mean, to Air; and to the Treble, Fire.

But we the Composition do inspire
With active Breath, and true Promethean flame,
Without whose aid
Your measures fade,
Wanting a Spirit to inform the Frame.

The fire which he stole,
Was but the Harmony oth' Soul;
Which we with well-proportion'd parts disposed
For a Reception have in the parts infused, or else enclosed.
Thus with intrinsic fire
The Treble, we our selves inspire;
We animate the Heart, inform the Ear,
And every Finger's a Prometheus here.

This Virtue best is shown,
When you display your parts alone.

You powerful Minstrels, you whose charms do flow
From Fingers skillful touch, in spite of Bow,
Now show your power Divine,
And in one Consort all your Virtue join.

If Music with all its Allurements can move,
We in a full Consort its Virtues can prove;
Whilst others in Singles but faintly do squeak,
We through a Concordance of Compounds do break.
Each in a full Chorus supplies every part,
And like to Loves Monarch does pierce through the heart.
Through Tenor and Bass to Treble we rise,
And make the Pair-Royal but one in the Skies.
Let others in simple Debates disagree,
While we make a Synod of joint Harmony;
And whilst our Assembly the Audience does awe,
We Will give Rules to the World, and to Music give Law.
Oh Divine!
Hark! hark! how sweet
The lofty Numbers meet,
As if Heaven did design
No other use of hand or sense,
In all its greatest, greatest Excellence,

In all its greatest, greatest Excellence.

Move on all you that owe
Your Beings to the quickening Bow;
Your Force together call,
And in one Consort all,
The aemulating Discord overthrow.

Now merrily, merrily Boys,
Add spirit to every String,
A single Voice
Yields a better noise
Then a clamorous Gossipping.
Their Consort is dull to the Crowd,
While our single Notes agree,
A Billings-gate noise is far more loud,
But not half so good Harmony.
Let them boast of their various Parts,
That jumble like Cramboes in Rhyme,
And cry up their Arts,
If we win their hearts,
We Will Rival them all in time.
The Women for us give their votes,
Then merrily let us play,
With Treble and Bass let us join our Notes,
We Are Consort as well as they.
Are you convinced by this transporting Air?

It Is fine; and yet, Alexis, not so rare,
Nor dare you yet with us compare.

Where lies your chiefest Excellence?

With every Part in pleasing every Sense.

But we those Senses do inspire
With sprightly Air, and active Fire.

We, we command Apollo's Lyre.

We Spirit yield to Musicks deepest sounds.

We taught you first the grounds.

But we a lofty structure did from that foundation rise,
And Airy Pyramids whose tops aspiring pierce the Skies.

Since we cannot agree while our Notes we compare,
Let Us join in a Chorus,

Let Us join in a Chorus

Of melodious, of melodious Air.

Of melodious, of melodious Air.

IN what blessed Region do these Consorts move?

They are begot below, but rule above.

From whence do they arise?

From Air and Earth
They take their Birth,
And keep their Center in the Skies.

How do they rule, how are they nourisht there?

In the Harmomous Sphere:
Music Camelion-like does fare,
By Fancy its begot, and lives by Air.

But whence this mixed variety of Sounds?
And yet the different Notes in Numbers soft,
Unite in one and fly aloft, aloft,
As if they owned no Measure, knew no Bounds.

The Heathens never worshipped more
Famed Gods in former time,
Than in this Consort we adore
Divinities sublime;
To various Notes each Instrument is free.

And every Note invokes a Deity.

In yonder Sky what Star appears?

Pallas descending from the Spheres,
And with a Train of Starry Nymphs to crown
Our mutual Harmony comes singing down.

Music, the bounteous gift of Heaven,
Was to the world a Present given,
Whilst Apollo and I
Do command in the Sky,
To keep the sweet Composure even.
Natures whole frame did from Sympathy flow,
From hence she took motion, and hence she took Law.

Hence Orpheus with Harmonious Lyre,
Brought Trees to dance, Beasts to admire;
While witty Amphion,
Whom Thebes did rely on,
By Music raised their City higher:
The Harmonious Scepter over Nations did sway,
Made Savages tame, and the Satyrs obey.

It moves to Courage, yields Delight,
And still to Virtue does invite;
Then let us all follow
Our Master Apollo,
Who made the World grow civil by it:
It inspireth the mind, and delights the Ears,
And flies to its Center above in the Spheres.
Strephon, in this mixed Symphony I find
Something more sweet, more charming in our wind,
Then all your vaunted Parts of warbling Air.

And yet with Corydon we dare compare.

This task we must perform alone;
Let us divide,
And draw our Forces on each side,
Your Consort does disturb our Unisons.

We are a Legion in one,
And mighty Phoebus is our General.

Great Pan did our Authority install:
The Pipes and Tabrets into Squadrons drew;
On Martial Troops we did attend,
And Courage often did lend,
Before whose Sound whole Armies, Armies flew.

You boast the Terror of your Sound,
Yet our inclusive Parts are more profound;
In a pacifick strain
We on victorious Princes wait
In their Triumphal, their Triumphal State.

While we the Victory do gain,
And do the Combats heat maintain.

We late a mighty Monarch did subdue.

And we the Conqueror Conquest will pursue.

Now try for the Conquest the chiefest of Arts,
And let every Finger a Harmony prove:
In a triple of Parts we cherish sad hearts,
And in a Pair-Royal of Descants we move.
With Treble we raise
Mean, Tenor, and Base,
And keep a due distance of measure and space.

In a Broadside of Consorts that reaches the Spheres,
Which every Minstrel discharges alone,
We pierce through the Fancy, and tickle the Ears,
And three to their one but we board them anon.
With Treble we raise, etc.
Then stand to your Tackling, and handle your Cords,
Let the Pipes and Recorders grow hoarse in the throat;
They are but our Tenants, while we rule like Lords,
And make all the Rabble agree in a Note.
With Treble we raise
Mean, Tenor, and Base,
And keep a due distance of measure and space.
These are our Creatures all that do obey
The immediate Fingers motion, or the Quill.

And yet in this vast Sea
Of Musicks boundless Law,
Where Consorts like whole Rivers flow,
In clearer Streams our single Notes distill.

Consort, the Soul of Music and of play,
The Depth and Ground of our mysterious Arts,
Flows through our veins whilst each of us does sway,
In a Triumvirat of breathing Parts.

Your various Parts, like three great Tides that meet
In The Ocean, roar, and serve to make a noise;
While we in gentle Breases greet,
And flow in one sweet Current of soft Joys.
Your Single parts by us embraced,

Like Rivulets in the vast Ocean,
Lose both their relish and their taste;
We are a Harmony in one.

As from the Spring and Fountainhead we should
Fresh Currents still dispense,
And if we lose our Excellence,
It Is cause we mingle with the Flood:
Or if you labor to outdo,
Because a Consort full you share;
We Will join our Pipes, and then we are
A Harmony as well as you.

Let Strephon boast loud,
With Theorboe and Crowd,
Whilst we do prevail
In a merry brisk Gale,
And conquer by force of our Sallies;
Till it spread like the Air,
Of which it does share,
And fills all the Groves and the Valleys.
Then from the low Vail
With a following gale
We Will hollow and rise
Through the ecchoing Skies,
And still we mount higher and higher;
While those by the way
Do faintly decay,
And weaker, and weaker expire.
The Theorboes and Lutes
To the Pipes are but Mutes;
They are Creatures, and live
By the Breath which we give,
And we by that Breath were inspired;
Whilst they are outworn
As soon as they are born,
Like Orphans untimely retired.
In this abstracted Symphony
Of well-digested Air,
There is an inward Harmony,
Which your mixed Discord did impair.

Yet from our various Notes proceeds
A more Harmonious sound.

As Showers which the Tempest breeds,
Lie scattered on the ground,
Or into swelling Vapors rise,
While like bright Meteors we approach the Skies.

Pallas her Lute, and Orpheus his Lyre,
Borrowed from us to make a Quire.

And both do on our wings aspire:
In such a Chariot mighty Jove
His universal Triumph first designed,
When on the Cherubins he moved,
And flew upon the wings, the wings oth' Wind.

You boast the Glory of your flight,
And yet our Parts are more profound.

But to your scattered Parts we add a Sp'rit.

Then let us mix and make one great Compound.

Like Birds we will engender and bill in the Air,
The Gods never envied so happy a pair.
Then let us unite, and merrily play,
We Will sport all the Night, and we will sing all the Day;
In Consorts of Love
Each Couple shall move,
Then the new-marry'd Bride more cheerful and gay.
Like Birds we will engender, etc.
In a various Chorus of Musical Lays,
Our Fancies shall meet, and our Spirits embrace;
While the Goddess of Love
Our mirth shall approve,
And the Nymphs in a Row our Nuptials shall grace.
Like Birds we will engender and bill in the Air,
The Gods never envied so happy a pair.


