THe first Adventurer for her fame I stand,
The Curtain's drawn now by a Lady's Hand,
The very Name you will cry boads Impotence,
To Fringe and Tea they should confine their Sense,
And not outstrip the bounds of Providence.
I hope then Critics, since the Case is so,
You Will scorn to Arm against a Worthless Foe,
But curb your spleen and gall, and trial make,
How our fair Warrior gives her first Attack.
Now all ye chattering Insects straight be dumb,
The Men of Wit and Sense are hither come,
Ask not this Mask to Sup, nor that to show
Some Face more ugly than a Fifty Beau,
Who, if our Play succeeds, will surely say,
Some private Lover helped her on her way,
As Female Wit were barren like the Moon,
That borrows all her influence from the Sun.
The Sparks and Beaus will surely prove our Friends,
For their good Breeding must make them commend
What Billet Deux so e're a Lady sends.
She knew old Threadbare Topics would not do,
But Beaus a Species thinks it self still new,
And therefore she resolved to Copy you.

I Will stay here till Mr. Wilmore comes in; do you go and see what is to be done
at Old Smyrna's; Deliver this Letter to Mrs. Phebe, for her Lady: Ready, thou
do not want Arguments to corrupt a Waiting Woman's Fidelity, all the
difficulty lies in Olivia's nicety, but I should have reason to have an ill
Opinion of my self if I don't prevail, when I Have a Friend in her Bosom that
speaks for me, and only an old jealous Husband to oppose me


Mrs. Phebe says Madam Olivia has the same kindness for you as before she was
Married; but her Husband is so Jealous of her, he will not suffer her out of his
sight Day nor Night


Poor Olivia; Thy Beauty nor Merit could not make thee happy, since Fortune was
wanting in her favors: Thy Father buried thee in a Rich Old Merchant's arms,
and it is my part to try to revive thee in mine


Without repeating further Welcome to you: My Dear Marina, How have you spent
your time in the Country


'Twas rough cast, and hung heavily upon every Spoke; neither Park, Play, nor
Basset-Table, to call rugged Time along; sometimes indeed, when disburthen'd
London, wanted new Air and Complexion for her Female inhabitants, I had the
Diversion of seeing how well they could relish Country Sparks, after being
cloyd with Town Beaux


Nature is no Idler; the Fruitful Dame loves Employment; but pray what could
she find out in your part of the World, for nice, well-dress'd distinguishing
Town-Ladies


The thing with all the World, is being pleased, not who pleases; my pretty
young Lady Made, her Lord leaving her in a Barren, wild unfurnished World of
Sparks, cast her Eyes upon so near a Relation of his, that she mistook the West
Country for Flanders; when undistinguishing Night had reduced the Sense of
Seeing, into that of Touching


Doubtless some believe it a Satisfaction, to prove the Difference between
Town-Art, and Country-Nature; but how does Mrs. Conceit


I sent a handsome Footman of mine, to make her a Compliment, and she
interrupted him in the midst, to tell him he had a Pretty Mouth, which could be
better employed, than in delivering his Ladies Message


But what of that Ill natured, False, pretended piece of Virtue, my Lord
Rural's second Daughter


Married, long since; found a Fool to uphold her ill Nature, in railing at
Mankind, and cloak her Pleasure in using them


She did my Brother the Honor of taking that foolish Toy a Maiden head from
him; he courted her for a Wife, and she wantonly asked him, if they could not
love without Marrying


Since that, she granted her favors in an open Calash, whilst her Husband
drove it


'Twas the boldest bravest Lover I ever heard of.


The Glory is due to her; for when he objected her Husband, she said his back
had been turned a thousand Minutes, and 'twas hard if Fortune would not take
care securely to allow her one of them


Yet none pretends more to Virtue, nor will sooner swear her Neighbors wants
in Uncharitableness to others; and count it as a certain (...) of Defect in our
selves


^ut all this time I forget; where is my Mother.


(...) to an Indian-House with young Wilmore, her Spouse that (...) for new
Furniture, she means every thing (...) Gay and I^^^^ng as her Lover


(...) it enter into a Woman's head of fifty, to look back (...) ^ellow of
Twenty, whose first contrivance will be how to ge^ (...), her Money excepted,
and that once secured she may (...), what separate maintenance he is pleased
to allow her, and he contented to starve all her life after, for having once
made too la^^e a ^^ast


If I mistake not, she intrudes a little upon your right; you have not (...)
all your inclination for Mr. Wilmore


They indeed prepare me toward making him a very Obedient Dutiful
Daughter-in-Law


Well, We'll spare your Modesty a farther Confession, and let you know to
morrow is the Wedding day; but there is a Misfortune untold to you, nor could
your imagination guess at it, Sir Rustic Goodheart has got my Lady Young Loves
consent for Marrying you


I see absence has not made my Mother better natured; but i^ she plays the
Fool, I shall be wiser than to imitate her; besides, mine would be so much
worse, as an Old Man is always less inviting than a Young


Mr. Wilmore has showed himself so generous, that till you were sent for he
refused to Marry your Mother, and then too but conditionally she should secure
your Fortune to your self


It Is surprising in a Father-in-Law; but is he in Love with her, (for I can
wonder at nothing) or the Match imposed by his Father, for his Age scarce
allows him to know the Value of Money enough to part with his darling Liberty
for it


She has made advances to him beyond belief; his good breeding received them
Civily; whereupon she has forgot nothing that could make her less Ugly, though
Age did not fail to o'er-top it all; Nature here was so unkind a Mistress, as
to prevail in spite of Art


I should never have guessed other; for when we are once arrived to a certain
Point of time, we may even lay aside Pig-water, Patches and Curls, and be
contented with less Admiration, so we meet but with more Esteem; but if he
loves her not, what can provoke him to Marry her


Gratitude and a Necessitous Fortune; besides, she has almost pucrhased him
with rich presents, which has more Eloquence in them than all the Old Women's
Tongues in England


Presents! Sure you forget your self.


I know what I say; besides, where have you lived not to know, Money speaks for
an Old Woman, when her Eyes no longer can: But to entertain you till my Lady
Young-Love comes in, my Page shall sing you the last new Song


AH Dangerous Swains, tell me no more,
Thy Happy Nymph you Worship and Adore;
When thy filled Eyes are sparkling at her Name,
I raving wish that mine had caused the Flame.
If by your fire to her you can impart
Diffusive heat to warm another's heart:
Ah dangerous Swain, what would the ruin be,
Should you but once persuade you burn for me.
Bid the Coach set up, and let the things be brought in here My Daughter come!
God bless you


I am over joy'd to see your Ladyship, and to see you look so well.


Your Ladyships most humble Servant.


Belira, How do you like these figured Velvets; this I design for the Bed and
Hangings; this Violet color suits agreeably with this Buff


Most extremely well, Madam; does your Ladyship design a Mixture?


I had thoughts of Paining and Bordering it with this Crimson and Green; but
that sort of Furniture has been my aversion, ever since I saw my odious Lady
Junkers Appartment set forth with Scotch Plad and Damask


Confusion! How his Eyes are fixed on her, as if his Soul received her Charms,
and wanted power to hide it


I don't look well to day, Mr. Wilmore.


Your Ladyship can never look other.


Belira, thou will not flatter me; I have not red enough have I?


But from the Eyes to the Chin, and looks like the Raddle upon a Sheep's Back.


Your Ladyship is mistaken, I never saw you look better; there is a Curl indeed
out of order with the motion of the Coach; Hold, incline your Head: So, very
well, that Pink-colour'd Riband suits agreeably with your Complexion


But do you really think, Mr. Wilmore, I look so well to Day.


He has reason to hope, Madam, that your Ladyship may look better to morrow
Night


Have you caught hold of that report, who made you so wise?


Him that is to make your Ladyship so happy.


Indeed, indeed, Mr. Wilmore, it derogates from you to talk with Girls. When I
had a Mother, I durst never think of approaching her without Fear and
Trembling. Now a Young thing as soon as ever she has bid farewell to Bibs and
Aprons, is ready for a Love, and thinks her self with Noise and Impudence,
better to be liked, than her Mother with all her Experience


Sir Rustic Goodheart desires to know if your Ladyship be at leisure.


Always to him; I shall be glad of his Company Daughter, I have taken that care
of your Fortune, as deceives not the Trust my late Lord reposed in me, Sir
Rustic Good hear: and I, have agreed upon your Marriage; my Authority secures
your Consent


Marriage, Madam, is a thing I have not thought on, y^^ it is a Journey for
Life, and that once considered, we ought to do every thing to make it as easy
to us as possible


Sir Rustic. your Servant; where have you been since dinner?


Be Dad, taking a Glass to this pretty Lady's health, Madam your Servant.


Your most humble Servant.


a very pretty Lady.


I could think so to, if 'twere not of the latest.


Give me thy Hand sweet heart, you are welcome to Town, be Dad with all my
heart


What think you of a Walk in the Garden; the Lovers are engaged, and we would
leave them together


We wait upon you.


Which do thou like best, my dear, the Town, or Country.


The Town, Sir, beyond Comparison, all good Judges are of my Opinion, I hope
you are one of them


Before George not I, yet if it had not been for me you had been there still; I
persuaded my Lady to send for you up, and have provided a Husband for thee,
Girl, what say thou to a Husband, heigh


It Is a sort of Creature, has not yet fallen under my Consideration.


All in good time, Child; I like thee never the worse for that. You don't look
like the forward things of the Town, that Marries a Man only to Cuckold him,
Ods bobs thou will not do that, I hope, Child


I don't understand you, Sir.


Come, we will be better acquainted, and then thou shale understand me, heigh:
to say truth, the way of making Cuckolds is soon understood


Pray, Sir, at once forgive, and satisfy my curiosity; have you spent your
time mostly in the Town or Country


Be dad, Child, the Country; I never came to London but in times of Parliament,
which thank Heaven were not very frequent in our late Reigns; do I look Wine
your Sickly Londoners, the dregs of nothing but Pox and Wine, Hemh, -- Hemb, --
show me any young Fellow of them all, that can match me in Health and Vigor;
neither Stone, nor Gout, nor the relicts of any Distemper, but love of thee,
Child


Love of me, sure you mistake your self, one would have imagined it, any other
under the Sun at your Age


Why there, be-dad you are out, there is none Lovers but us old Fellows, the Young
ones don't think it worth their time; show me such another as Old Sir Fair-Love
Fondling; why Child he does nothing but look Babies in her Eyes all day, but
bedad I believe he sees but in Imagination, unless he borrows the assistance of
Spectacles: He sets her, before George, in a great Chair in the very middle of
a Chamber, and himself for hours together at her Feet, upon a Footstool, in
admiration of her; there is encouragement now


My Lady Young-Love and her Counsel are in the Parlor, Sir, looking over the
Writings, she desires your Company


I come, I come; Sweet Mistress your Servant, till I see thee again.


I came Marina to your deliverance, I imagined how you were teiz'd.


O hideous! Belira, did I think in Nature, there had been such an ill bred,
awkard thing; why he is so great a Mouster already, Horns cannot make him worse


And yet my Lady Young-Love says you must Marry him.


What with twelve thousand Pound, a great deal of Youth, no contemptible stock
of Beauty, besides an untainted Reputation, that out-weighs them all; believe
me, Belirs, I Am not so far ignorant of my own worth, to bury it in him


I wish you don't ruin your self by the Refusal.


That Marriage is the greatest, and you must use all your Interest with my
Mother to prevent it; or resolve to make me the most unhappy Creature breathing


All aids that are in my power you may command: But has not your Journey tired
you, you will not be for the Park this Evening


The Name has unwearied me; I Will but change my Cloahts and be ready for you.


My Lady Young-Lous has tired poor Wilmore; he has left her to her Bonds and
Conveyances, and is gone to the Park before; would not you wish to meet him
there


Why thy question? He is my Mothers, and never can be mine; but we trifle: will
you favor me with your Company, whilst I am Dreffing


I Will follow you.

Yes, Marina, my Interest pulls too strong against you, to leave you a Moment
to your self till I have put it out of Fortunes power to injure me

Who trusts the fawning Jilt, must first believe,
I trust her not, and cannot be deceived.

PRay, Gentlewoman be pleased to wear your Mask, till we are got out of this
Road of Foppery; I had better have gone Ten Miles about


Lord, Mr. Smyrna, it is so hot, my Mask stisles me; but where are you going? I
am sure Walking is not your Business, especially in this place


Yes, Wife, to choose, that you may have the pleasure of comparing your old
damned Jealous Husband, to these Gay fluttering Fops, that sail along by us;
Here Is your Gallant, Mr. Wildman, coming, put on your Mask, I say; Not for the
World, I warrant you


It Is too late, he has seen me, Husband, 'twill be uncivil.


Mr. Smyrna, your Servant; The fair Olivia here! Since when is it, Sir, you
have been for far reconciled to our Lewd end of the World, to trust this Lady
amongst us


Hum, Sir, not too much of trusting neither, but yet, as you say, it is a
dangerous place, for an old Fellow, that has an Handsome Wife; Have not you that
Opinion of her, Mr. Wildman


All the World must allow her that Character, but Faith, my Friendship to you,
hinders me to think of her, as I would, if she were not thy Wife


And you, forsooth, Have not you a just Esteem of Mr. Wildman's Merit?


As I ought, I know my Duty to you, Husband, and never had a thought against it.


Why, very well, since you are both so indifferent, 'twere no great harm, if
you never see one another again. As to you, Gentlewoman, it is Mortifying you
too much, to suffer the Visits of a Man, who has not Sense to know your Worth;
And, let me tell you, Mr. Wildman, I Love my Wife, and don't like People that
slight her Charms, and prefer my Friendship to her Beauty, therefore till you
come better prepared to do her justice, your Visits will be but offensive, and
if ever you make another, I shall conclude you have taken a Friends Advice.
Come, wife


Go thy ways, for an old Jealour, I wish be-gad, I could say, Cuckold, but my
honest Endeavors shall not be wanting to make thee, that thou believe thy
self


Thank God for my deliverance, I Am got into the open Air again, without the
encumbrance of an old Woman, who is not satisfied, unless you confine year Eyes
to the Curse of meeting none but hers


If thou art weary already, what will thou be when the Noose is fixed, and no
kind relieving Hand can do thee the curtesy of unslipping it


I confess, I have given the Town reason to believe, I could allow May and
December the two ends of time, to meet in our expected Wedlock


The Opinion of thy Sense was not forfeited by that, we always believed, thou
had enough to distinguish between the glittering Metal and the Allay; But are
you not resolved to Marry my Lady Young-Love


So far from it, that I would run my self into any other Noose in Christendom,
to avoid hers; Marina is the Goddess here; You have doubtless heard her Father
left her a Fortune of 12000 l. on Condition she Married with my Lady
Young-Love's Consent, else Shame and Beggary to be her Portion


That any Man should be so far wedded to the Follies of his Wife to desire the
entailing of them upon his Posterity


I have held a long Age of Dissimulation with her Mother to permit her return
to Town, and get her Fortune secured, engaged my Father with the hopes of
Marrying her, and doubtless I should prevail over the old Lady, if it were not
for another; but this is the hardest part of my Confession, for I think,
whatsoever Custom can persuade, that Man's a Villain, who boasts a Lady's
Favor


Begad if our Town Ladies come to know how well thou art principled, thou
may even make thy own Markets amongst them, it is not to be matched in thy
green years, which commonly reckons the pleasure of telling as the foremost
delight in an Amor


I am not Beaux enough for that yet. To be short then, Beliria who you know
lives with, and governs my Lady Young-Love, did me the honor to like me, and I
had reason to believe my self Master of her first Favors, I could not shake
off her fondness, though all mine was secretly addressed to Marina, for whose sake
I was forced to dissemble with Belire


Begad that was slavery enough, for the trouble of getting hand somly rid of a
Mistress, is ten times more than what it costs to make her such


She caught the discovery from my Eyes, and unknown to Marina persuaded lier
Mother to send her into the Country, then to confound me further, the old Lady
grew fond of me, Belira putting it into her Head, that it would Marry her, by
which means, she constantly secured her self of seeing me, being in the same
House, and reasonably thought, the interest she had in my Heart, ran no hazard,
by bestowing my Person upon an old Woman


Then how comes in, she has suffered Marina to return, for I perceive she
manages at pleasure


'Twas conditionally, I Married my Lady Young-Love to morrow, and consented
that Marina should be bestowed upon my Father


And how do you think to evade either.


It Is for that reason I make this discovery to engage your assistance, Belira
will not suffer her to sign for her Daughters Portion, till the moment of
Execution, but my present uneasiness is to entertain Marina, I have ordered
Music and Dancing after Supper, if possible engage Belira in your Affairs,
that she may not concern her self with mine


You have ordered your own without considering my applications to Belira may
ruin me with Orinda


Quite contrary, that Coquet never likes a Man so well as when he does not seem
to be fond of her, trust my Opinion; besides 'twere no Obligation if you did
not run a little hazard for your Friend


You shall command me, and now I consider, I Will bring Sir Amorous Courtall, who
is Fop e^ough, to think all Women that have fine Clothes Beauties; him I design
for the old Lady, if she should happen to like him 'twere no ill way of getting
rid of her


That will be admirable, but be sure ply Beliria close, she is handsome enough to
reward your pains, and because of her interest with my Lady Young-Love, the
only Enemy I can apprehend, -- They are come into the Walk, we'll meet them at
the next turn


Your Lad'ships most joyful humble Servant, you are welcome to Town; how long
have you done it the honor to grace it with your presence


But to day, Madam, I Am pleased at the good fortune of meeting you so soon.


Beliria your Servant, O Good I Have been at the Playhouse, where there has been
the odiousest Play, so dull, that of my Conscience, I shall not abide to set my
foot in it again this Twelve Month


I believe there was very little Company there this Weather; how come you to
prefer that Diversion to Hide-Park


O Good, you may very well ask Beliria, for 'twas no choice of mine, an
Alderman's Wife and Daughter did me the displeasure to Dine with me, and
pressed me beyond decency to go with them; O Jesu, what a vexation it is to be
with those precise sort of People, that would not go out of their Road, though to
be less odious


They were famously set out, I warrant you.


O most unsuitably, the very sight of their Trappings would have made you died
of heat, of all things I hate Winter Clothes in Summer; what say you Beliria


That there are a sort of People that think Finery never out of season.


Lard, Marina, I finished a Copy of Verses last night, which I have sent to
half a score of my Friends for their approbation, I bestowed the last upon
admirable Sir Amorous Courtal, but I Will send you one of them


You Will not fail.


Lard, Madam, what do you take me for? Beliria must come in too for a Judge.


Pray, what was the Subject?


I know none so Entertaining as her self.


O, Madam, your most grateful Servant, 'twas upon the different Addresses I
have had made to me of late; O Jesu, such a glut of Foppery and Mankind; I long
to breath a little of the Country Air, that I may get rid of this Town Lumber,
and entertain my Muse alone with the reflections of what she has left behind


But, who is that Sir Amorous Courtall, he is sprung up since my reign.


O Good, a very pretty Gentleman, Marina, so Airy, so well Dressed, so Handsome.


See how Opinions differ, if you will take mine, Marina, he is the most outcast
Fop in Nature, he once made the Campaign, but all he remembers of it, is
running to Breda, which has given him fears enough to keep at home all his life
after


Orinda, Will you favor me with your Company to night, we have Music and
Dancing


I Will wait upon you anon, it is my Lady Junket's Visiting day, and she will never
pardon me, if I omit my Devoir


O, that old Gossipping thing, she will never have lost the relish of youth, but
wishes so well to it, she will bring young loving things together in spite of
their Hearts


Fie Beliria, Good I hate you, for being so censorious, because she allows the
freedom of her Apartment to Quality of both Sexes; A Lady of her age cannot be
friendly or so, but presently she is thought procurish


O, very friendly, and then so grateful, one Treat shall make her yours all her
life after


Ladies, your humble Servant, it is a delicate Evening.


Sir, your Servant, see Beliria, Orinda is stealing away, go after, and bring
her back


I have ill Nature enough to break an Appointment, and I fancy here is one.


To Mar. I have that to say which it concerns you to know, favor me but with
an opportunity after Supper, and let Beliria know nothing of it


In the Garden l'le expect you.


Ten thousand ages, till then, O Marina, do not fail me, my Heart will suffer
unspeakably if you should


No more, take my word I Will be there.


O Jesu, sure Beliria you have lost your senses, who would be seized thus.


Together, and so thoughtful, I see the growing evil.


Let me be nothing, Madam, if ever I saw any thing so killing as your Eyes,
they have Charms, my Heart never understood before


Yours is a general gallantry to the whole Sex, Sir Amorous.


Lard, Sir. Amorous, what a loss should we have had, if you had made the
Campaign


I must confess I staid in pure Charity to the fair Sex, to expose them, by my
absence, was an inhumanity my Heart could not agree to


I fancy, Sir Amorous, you are very fortunate in Amors.


Let me expire, Madam, if I have any reason to complain, but those fair Eyes,
makes me forget, every thing but themselves


I swear Mrs. Wildman, you talk pleasantly, come Marina, shall we not be going?


When you please; Orinda we must not leave you behind.


You Will give me leave to wait on you to your Coach, Ladies.


Sir Amorous, not so fast, come back,


Pax on you, let me go, I must wait upon the Ladies, it is such an omission,
that I shall never be pardoned, nor deserve the Esteem of a Gentleman amongst
them


You may appologize for that anon, I called you back, to give you a little
Advice


Be sudden then, I cannot live, divided from Marina.


The old fire, that flames upon sight of every new Face, but I design you for
another, who exceeds her in advantages, as much as you do all the Playhouse
Beaus in Dress and Gallantry


No ill Comparison; who is it? I dye to know.


First then, she is prodigious rich, wears extravagant fine Clothes, and has the
best way of putting them on


O, of all things, I love a Lady well Dressed, let me be nothing, if one that is
other, does not look mean, and as if she were to be loved according


Then she is Amorous, and will no doubt be presently taken with you.


'Pshaw, Pax, so they all tell me, I could have bated her that part of the
Character, it is surfeiting


Her Fortune however is enviting, if you apply your self to her, she is rich
enough to reward your labor


Let me expire, if thou do not talk scandalously, I hope it is not Matrimony
thou hint'st at


Why, you're too much a Man of Mode, to make the burden uneasy to you; a
Civil Husband, and so forth, is all that a Wife can rationally expect from you


Gad, now I think on it, Cold Civility to a Wife, gives one a good air, let me
dye, if I could be fond of an Angel that I was once Married to, but to be seen
abroad with her, were an extravagance, I should never forgive my self for


Or if it should happen, once in an Age, I fancy, you you would make just such
mien, as my Lord Stately, and his Lady, when they are together in one Coach at
Hyde-Park


Just for all the World, or let me expire, let me never breath, if I have not
been passionately in love with her uneasy Frowns, and even ravished to find
during the whole Park time she had not bestowed one word, nor look, upon her
Lord, one would have sworn, but by her Frowns, she had not known him to be so
near her


Gad, I think he matches her, his lolling back in his Coach, without glance or
motion, speaks as much mortification as her sulleness, the best we can conclude
is, that they are heartily weary of one another


Show me that Married Couple who are not, but then there is good Management in
those Affairs, as in all others; Is it reasonable to disgust one self with a
Wives Company, only to oblige the Town with Matter for remark, let her take her
Coach, and leave me the freedom of my Chariot, I Will give her the Ceremony of
the Glass as we meet, pass on and make no uneasy reflections of the heavy load
entailed upon Mortal life


Besides, my Widow will set all uneasiness aside, and repair the breach you
have made in your Estate


The Campaign, the Campaign Charles, let me be nothing, if I did not loose
Baggage to the value of 1500 l. all my Dressing Plate, Wardrobe, and Military
Accoutrements, and was glad to secure my self at Breda, with only the days
Provision upon my Back, thou art my Friend, to whom I may own such a
Misfortune, let me expire, if ever I was in such a Consternation since I was
born into the World


It Is now Eight a Clock; do you know my Lady Young-Loves here in the Square,
any body will tell you the House, I Will meet you there at Nine


Adieu; I Will walk over the Park to my Lodgings, write an Excuse to an Expecting
Lady, who does my Company the Honor to sigh for it, and then I Will be certain
to wait upon you


WHy truly Tim. we have had but a sorry Day on it.


Indifferent, Master, besides those that came to inquire after Stolen Goods;
the Party that would know the Cause why she did not conceive, paid us notably


Look out some body knocks, Tim.


O Gemini, Master! It Is Mr. Smyrna, the Turkey Merchant, and Madam Olivia his
Wife; I am very well acquainted with her Maid, Mrs. Phaebe


Peace, we must not pretend to know them till the Stars have been consulted:
I Will to my Study, mind your hits, Tim. and get what intelligence you can


Where Is your Master, Friend, I hope it is not too late to speak with him.


In his Study, Sir; I Will go and acquaint him with your being here; He does not
use to appear after Sun


Lord, Husband, you are the strangest Man in the World, what will People think
of you


What, Mistress, you are afraid the Devil should speak Truth, and discover your
Abominations


The Devil's the Father of Liars, how should he speak Truth.


You are the Mother of Liars, and that Cuckold maker Wild-man, one of your vile
Disciples


Because you heard he courted me before I was Married, you think I must needs
be naught with him


No, no, very Good in your sense, I warrant; Naught, why thou art not a
Citizen's Wife for nothing; thou have more grace I trust in the Lord, than not
to think Cuckolding thy Husband a good honest practicable Thing; those are
naught who do it so awkardly that the World is acquainted with it; nay their
very Husbands, who are always the last in knowing the Favors that are done
them


But sure, you don't believe, that an ignorant block-head of a Fortune Tellers,
should speak any thing like Truth


I Will tell you what I believe though, Mistress, in my case of Enquiry your
Ladyship can exceed all the Cunning men in England, and read our Fortunes to a
Tittle; but the Devil's in it, you will not make me as wise as your self, but put
me here upon unlawful means, the Sin will lie at your door, Wife, you would as good
confess, and save charges into the Bargain


If I should, I Am sure you would not believe me.


The Devil take me then; Come be quick, before Master Astrologer comes.


Lord, Husband, what do you take me for? Why, if it were so, do you think I Would
be such a Fool to confess


No; You Are wiser of my Conscience, but be sure you are as trusty to other
Folks; you Women have she Friends that you discover your failings to, and that
way the Secret comes about; it is for your Interest, as well as mine, to keep
the matter private, if 'twere but for the sake of preserving your Lovers; they
are squeamish amongst such a glut of Women's Flesh, and are disgusted by that
which has been blown upon; but see the Devil appears to decide our Controversy


Is your business with me, Friend.


Yes, Mr. Knowlittle, I Have a doubtful Question to be resolved, therefore
there is something by way of Encouragement, only whether my Wife do me Justice,
you understand me Friend; I Am plaguily afraid of being a Cuckold, an ignorant
Cuckold, Sir, for that is all; Pray consult the Stars, that I may come to the
knowledge of my good Fortune


We'll erect a Scheme, or as the Vulgar term it, cast a Figure, and give you
the Opinion of the Stars thereupon


He Is Conjuring; we shall immediately see the Devil in the Circle.


Are you so silly to believe it, he seems to be a sorry ignorant Knave, that
has more Will than Power to do Evil


They say a Woman can out-wit the Devil, and I believe Outface him too --
Well, Mr Knowlittle, have you done? What do the Stars say, am I represented
with Horns like Capricorn, with a certain Tall-young Gentleman in my Figure,
who does my Wife the Honor to Love her, better than she can her Husband


Your Wife, Sir, looks like a good Virtuous Lady, and your Figure speaks you to
be a mighty dissatisfied Person, a little troubled in your Brain with
Jealousy; but either my Skill deceives me, or you have no occasion for it


How say you Master Knowlittle, do you like my Wife too? does the Stars denote
me for further Cuckoldom, what encouragement do they give you, to take her part
for she is so bad, not one Devil in Hell dares do it without a Bribe


Is that one question all you would have resolved.


Ay Friend, and I see it is more than thou can do, thou art going to convince
me of the Vanity and Folly of all those who have helped thee to deceive
themselves


How, Sir, do you undervalue my Profession?


O no, Sir, Your Profession is a very Learned Profession; but I much doubt the
Skill of the Professor


Were it not for this Virtuous, Good Lady, I could show you a Proof of my Art
would make you tremble; yet verily it may be a means to acquit her; how say
you, Sir, if you dare stand it, I Will raise a Familiar to convince you, and
protect your Wife near me


Would you frighten me into an Opinion of your Art, you that cannot tell a Man
whether, or no, he is a Cuckold; I have no Faith in you, and therefore dare
stand the Worst


From Hell's deep Center, hither am I come,
To warn thee, Mortal of thy heavy doom;
Thy Wife is Chaste, yet shall thou not believe,
Thy Visionary Doubts, thy Mind deceive;
Therefore remain accursed, and may thou find,
Thy constant plague, in thy suspicious Mind.

Mr. Knowlittle, accept of this Gratuity; my Husband faints! Lord, I wish his
fears have not taken away his use of Hearing, He Will never remember what the
Devil said to him


Sir, Sir; How fares it with you?


Lord! How do you do, dear Husband? I Am frighted out of my Wits; I Will never
venture to the Devil again with you, you shall even go by your self, next time
for me


Ay poor Wife; as thou say thou will, I believe, for sake me in all Perils;
but is he gone are you sure


Gone; Yes, Sir, what do you think; by virtue of my Art I can lay as well as
raise -- This 'twas to be incredulous, and undervalue the Mysteries of
Knowledge; I was sorced to use extraordinary means to convince you: O the
Blindness snd Stony-heartedness of the Ignorant


Pray let a Coach be called -- I Am very ill -- but Master Fortune Tellers, your
Skill in the Black-Art, shall not make me believe my Wife the Fairer


It Is the Capricio of all Old Men, Jealous of every thing that is Younger than
themselves


Ay, poor Lady; Heaven endow you with Patience* -- There Is a Coach, Sir.


Is there, come Wife; good Night Friend.


Sir, your Servant; Madam your Servant: Tim. wait upon the Gentry to the Coach.

Verily this Evening has helped the Morning, and both together made a good Day,
few better. --

Now, Tim. thou did it admirably.


Ay, Master, did not I; He little thinks, that from my hiding place, I
overheard all he said; but how did the Habit set upon me


As like as the Devil could be, every one in there way, Tim. all Trades have
their Cheats, and this is to be said for ours, we do it with their own consents


Ay, Master, better this than worse, every thing would fain live, and we do but
our honest endeavors thereto


Come, let us go in and pray, to morrow may but prove as good a Day.


TO Morrow, Sir Rustic is the happy day.

Sir Rus. Be-gad, I long for the Sack-posset, and throwing the Stocking; that
was the Fashion when I was Married, and a good Sociable one too; I mean to make
use of it still. He, he, he! I have bin telling her, how eager all the young
Fellows will be of hitting the Bride in the Face; but be-dad, I hope I shall
hit her better somewhere else; before George, I Will try to get a Nap in this
Chair, and Dream of to Morrow, before to Morrow comes


Sir Rustic is falling asleep over his Wooing. When we force Nature beyond her
self, she must return for a recruit


Be-gad Madam! You don't know what an Insipid Fellow I am this way; I never
Love taking fruitless pains: If I had not a real Inclination for you; the Devil
take me, I if would pretend it: For where is the satisfaction of dissembling;
when that, which should be a reward to our endeavors, disgusts our
Inclinations


You Men of the Town, never value a Woman for her self; it is only to increase
the Wretched number, though your selves are never the better for it


That Is only seen amongst the Loose, Idle part of Mankind; who not setting a
value upon their own Reputations, think it no fault to Expose a Lady


Well, not disputing any further your Talent of Secrecy, what Security can you
give of your Sincerity


Your Charms, and the opinion the World has of my Sense: Be-gad, would you have
a more undoubted one? If a Woman be very handsome, and meets with a Man who has
Wit enough to know and value it; the Consequence speaks it self, and needs no
Corroborating Evidence


Well, enough of this to Night; I receive you for my Lover, and as such, you
must do me what Service I desire. Wilmore and you, are mighty Friends. Has he
told you nothing of his concern for Marina


He Is to Marry her Mother -- Besides Child! I never care to hear those sort of
secrets, for fear they should expect mine in return


However indifferent your are, I Will tell you one; though the Report runs of to
Morrow. Wilmore, must Marry my Lady Young Love privately this Night, and if you
please, you shall have the Honor of bestowing her upon him


Your Commands would make greater difficulties easy; but Pox, why this haste,
to bring a young Fellow into slavery? Does he know the Design


She carried him hence to tell him: I cannot imagine how she will bring it about;
for I fancy, one must be a good deal out of Countenance, to let a young Fellow
know, one has a mind to lie with him, one Night sooner than he designed


Ay, or desired; for if I were to be Mr. Bridgroom, that would be my Case
always with an old Woman: But where is he now


Shut up with her in her Closet; if you will stay a Moment, I Will go see what is
become of 'em


If we don't take care, this Gipsey will be too cunning for us all; Pox take
Sir Amorous; Where can he stay


Is Madam Belira here? My Lady Enquires for her.


No Child, she is just gone; but here is a Friend of yours, would be glad to see
you at my Lodgings


I assure you Mr. Wildman, you are mistaken in me; I would not be a Whore, if
you would keep me a Coach and Six Horses, to tend me all days of my Life


Nay, now I Am sure you lie.


Pox take all old Amorous Women; I stinck of Petter as bad as her self: I fancy
it to be like our Perriwiggs, that retain the scent of Tobacco, after being in
a City Coffee-House. Belira has told you


Yes, yes -- Have you seen Marina?


Where should I see her, in her Mother's Closet? Be-gad, you would have laughed
your self to Death, to hear her break the business to me. She was in so good a
Humor, that had I not wanted Witnesses, she would have signed, without
consulting her Oracle, Belira


It Is pity, the Poor Lady should be disappointed of a Husband; Sir Amorous
shall Marry her


But how? I don't think it feasible.


We'll try to turn our Modern Comedy-Plots into good, sober, earnest, and make
her Marry one for another


Impossible! Belira is her shadow, and not to be deceived. They stay Supper for
us; my appointment holds with Marina; the Music will amuse the rest of the
Company; if possible, don't let Belira follow us


If she follows you, I Will follow her, I assure you, for I Have talked my self,
into a kind of liking of her; but we must not leave the old Gentleman behind
us. Sir, Sir! How sound he sleeps? He Is taking up his Rents beforehand, and
providing for to Morrow Night, which he Fancies will be no good one of rest to
him: They stay Supper for you Sir Rustic


Supper, why, what is a Clock?


Near ten, Sir: Shall we wait upon you down?


I had rather you should wait upon me up, Sir, a good Bed in my Country is
worth ten Suppers; but be-dad, I must not tell my Mistress so till I am her
Master. Come along


We wait upon you Sir.


Where Is Sir Rustic, that he has not honored us with his Company?


I left him taking a Grace-Cup with your Ladyships Chaplain. Mr. Priestcraft
will be too hard for him, they are so used to their Sanctified Wine they can
swallow a large share of our unhallowed Juice of the Grape. Be pleased to know
my Friend, Sir Amorous Courtall


As such I must ever value and esteem him.


Your Ladyship 's most Obedient Servant; let me Expire, if ever I saw any thing
so taking as your Ladyship 's Civility


Lard Sir Amorous! Do you consider whose in the Company? These young Ladies
will have reason to Quarrel at your Judgment, or rather I should be displeased
at your insincerity


Let me expire Madam, if ever I saw any thing so engaging as your Air. O that
Dress, that Dress Madam! The Devil take me if the Drawing Room in all its
Birth-night finery, can show us any thing equal to it


I wish I had but as good a Title to the rest of your Commendations; but time
was, when they might have passed upon me with less injustice


Be-gad Madam, no time like the present: The Sun is not in his glory till he is
mounted to the Meridian, let me dye; if I can imagine your self, could ever
exceed your self


Lard, Sir Amorous, your'e extreme Courtly! How unfortunate have I bin till
now, in wanting your Acquaintance! I never had so sudden an esteem for any one.
O! I Love a well bred Man, in my Soul -- Good Breeding -- There Is no Charm
exceeds it. Pray Sir Amorous have you not bin abroad


Yes Madam, I have fetched the Tour of all the Courts in Italy, made some small
residence in Spain, but their Gravity disgusted me, and therefore made haste to
pass into France, which had every thing that a well bred Gentleman could
desire, either to Instruct or Entertain


Lard, it is strange! I durst have sworn that very thing by your Air, your
janty, way of Dress, your Perriwig. Oh Jesu! How ravishing the Curls fall to
cover your Face, and leave us almost nothing besides to Contemplate. Ah! how
far you exceed all that ever I saw in the Art of Powdering. Belira, don't you
think Sir Amorous Dresses extremely well


Undoubtedly, Sir Amorous, I beg your Pardon I did not see you sooner -- Heigh,
this is Gallantry indeed! What a new Dress


The Devil take thy Foppery; was it for this, thou made us stay for thee?


I had a Misfortune, just as I was crossing to my Lodging, a filthy Carman
dash't me most intolerably, a just reward for being on foot in the dirty
Street; I was forced to change my Clothes before I was fit for this shining
Assembly


Sir Amorous, your most devoted, Admirer -- Lard, my Lady Young Love, did you
ever see any Steenkirk have that Air? Never could Madam, the Princess de Conty,
have hoped a Copy, so transce^^^ng the Original


It Is all of a Piece, all Sir Amorous, in a word; all that can be named, the
fine Gentleman, the Courtier, the Something beyond all, the Modern expressive
word of Beau


Let me expire, if your Ladyship has not the best Judgment. is not my
Sword-knot extremely fine and just


O, of a most ravishing length -- What is Fashion, for well bred People, If, as
Mr. Bays says, we don't top our parts


Your Ladyship 's unacquainted with one Sir of Amorou's Excellencies; he Dances
to a Miracle, and carried it from all the Quality at the last Court Ball


A Corant or Minuet, Madam, I am no higher Dancer: Will your Ladyship do me the
Honor of a Minuet


Sir Amorous, I must beg your Pardon, if I share the Dance, I shall lose the
entire Prospect of your Person; Belira, if she pleases shall oblige us


Nay, be-gad Madam, you shall not go till Sir Amorous has done with you.


Eternal Impertinence, they are both missing, and undoubtedly together. Sir
Amorous, I Am not in Humor, and shall make but an ill Figure, Orinda will do
much better


Let my be nothing, Madam, if she has not ten times more Chagrin in her Looks
than your Ladyship. I must not be refused


Sir Amorous Dances in Perfection.


I told your Ladyship his Talent, I was sure you would not find me in a mistake.


So slighting, she has Debauched him from me. O I cannot hold my Muse! Muse go
Lament the Misfortune

For to Love is Noble frailty; but Poor sin,
When once we fall to Love, unlov'd again.

O your Ladyship flatters me, or let me dye! But to say what has bin said
before, Blows from hands so soft, who would not bear


Sir Amorous, you are a Judge of Decorum and Decency; what say you to walking
in, and seeing the Bridal Bed


I Will follow your Ladyship through the World; but I shall expire in seeing the
place where my Happiness is to be Sacrificed


O Jesu! It Is a thousand pities so pretty a young Gentleman should have an
uneasy Moment


GRant, I dispense with that one Form of our Sex, disbelieving a Lover, when he
first tells us he is such; how can you avoid my Mother, or delay her
expectations? Belira, whose reasons I could not comprehend before; will do all
that is necessary to ruin our intelligence


If nothing else can secure me, your Denial must.


Twelve Thousand Pounds is a Forfeiture too great to oblige an Enemy with. I
hear Belira's voice, she must not see us together


But why do you follow me?


But why do you fly me?


Marina shot that way. I see VVilmore at the bottom of the Walk, I have
business with him; oblige me, and leave us together


You Command me.


Here so late Belira?


I come in search of you, the Bride expects you.


To Night! It must not be.


The same thing as to Morrow, the sooner it is over the better; for in these
cases our fears are the worst part of our punishment. Was not Marina with you?
she is wanted. Sir Rustic has drank himself into a Matrimonial Temper, and Mr.
Priestcraft Swears twelve at Night, is as Canonical as that at Noon


Belira, have you Loved me!


Has not my Ruin told you?


Then do you Love me?


Yes, to see you happy -- But the Mask is off, and thou can Cheat no more,
and I no more believe


You never Loved, but now abhor me.


You reproach me with what I would be; do not, do not rouse the Woman in me, I
would be Calm to Night and see you Married


Rather see me Buried.


Perhaps so -- Could the remembrance of my Wrongs but sleep with thee, I would
not Envy thee a quiet Grave


Farewell, we part for ever, I Will leave the Town this Minute.


At least, Sir, if you will not Marry your self, but unkindly leave your Bride
thus in the longing Moment; do your Father the honor to grace his Marriage


What have I done, that you should wish to make me Wretch'd?


What have thou left undone to make me such?


Your Reputation yet stands fair, and uless your own Indiscretion betrays you
the Secret shall be such, with me for ever


But thy heart, Traitor, thy perjured Heart; tell me, how shall I get it back?


Never this way, I assure you.


It Is given for gone then -- Go -- Live as Wretch'd as I can make you, I Will
think no more upon you


Where, Madam, are you going?


To a Wedding, Sir, Marina's Wedding; you say we must not Dance at yours.


Rather of the two Belira, but why to Night?


All Bridgrooms are not as backward as your self; your Father has the start of
you, in desire as well as years, he is impatient of his Happiness


You are Peevish Belira; does your Love make you Jealous?


I have none, the Moor has taught me better; no longer doubting, away at once
with Love and Jealousy


Then it is Spite disturbs you: In what have I deserved it?


Look in thy false perfidious Heart, and take my Answer thence.


That speaks of nothing you can quarrel with.


Then I will stay and argue with thee, how often have thou told, thou coud'st
for ever Love me


I told you that I could, not that I would.


Poor Caviller, those who can jest with Oaths, can play with Words -- You Will
come after and wish the Bride Joy


We must not part thus, you were not used to fly my Arms.


By all that is good, he has got the sorry cunning of our Sex; just so does a
Wife when her Husband has caught her false, the gilting Creature cries, Do you
believe it Spouse? you do not use to be so unkind -- Ha, ha, ha -- Let me
Laugh, though it is maliciously; go on, I Am in the Vein of Audience; let me hear
some disagreeable Truths, and how well thou can turn Woman; Marina is at
stake before you, do it handsomely; I would be fortified in my Aversion, and
have my hate implacable


It Is Barbarous to insult, where you should rather pity.


I do, let all the World be judge else; nay, do more than Pity, I would prevent
your Ruin, and stop the Passage up to your undoing, would save you from the
Ills, nay, Scorns of Poverty, keep your Friends such, and put it in your Power
to be one by still Preserving you: The Worlds opinion, who judge of Merit but
by Fortunes Favors


We know the Extent of your Generosity: But serve me as I would be served,
Belira


I thought this was your way: I mistook you for him that was to Marry my Lady
Young Love -- But I Will go look for certainties within


Come back Belira, it is my last Call: I would satisfy thy Womanish Revenge,
and let thee see me Cursed by any other way than Fatal Marriage -- Take my Sword
-- Thy Malice can supply thy want of use, despite can furnish strength, and
too often thou have found the way to my unhappy Heart to miss it now


Ha, ha, ha, in Love to dying! By all that is good, turned Hero: Your Mistress,
Sir, is much obliged -- Keep your Sword, it may be a Fortune better worth than
all your Fathers Lands; there is Wars abroad, you may employ it in, 'twill keep
your Wife from wanting here at Home


Am I indeed your Scorn, Proud, Fantastic Woman; thy liking was foul Lust; not
Love: That gentle Name brings Happiness, but thou -- Let me not think upon
thee, for fear it force my Tongue to something worse, than should be said of
Ladies; I Have served it seems, as long as you could like, and now you choose
another


Would it were come to that, I would exchange thee, for the last of Men, and
think the Bargain Cheap, would part with all that goodly Form, for honest
Ugliness, and think it fairer; thy Youth for Age, and Dote upon his Doatage --
So in return I found but Truth, mark well that word, that word has Charms thou
never knew, and which out-weighs thine


Belira, thou have power to read my Soul; thy Magic Spells are irresistible.
How have thou found this Failing in my Virtue, which I not knowing of, my Wants
could never miss till now


Thank my Wit, Natures best Gift -- I Have seen your shunting poor designing
Arts, to wave this Marriage and promote another. Your care too, of Marina's
Fortune falsely gilded with the weak pretense of Generosity; 'twas not doubled
thick enough for me: But because Doubts never should condemn the Man I Loved, I
would not seem to doubt till I was certain; therefore no more dissembling, it is
vain, Marina never shall be yours; and if you could not think it an
unhappiness, I fain would keep you mine


Give me this Night to think in, I Will promise nothing, but this: I Am Grateful
where I am obliged


To show your Power, I will; my Lady Young Love through my persuasion designed
this the Marriage Night; I Will excuse you to her, but not one word or thought of
Marina, for in that Moment she shall be bestowed upon another; I would divide
the World, rather than you should meet; I hope to Morrow, we may give you joy;
this Night I find but little


Less thou have left behind, O the curse of Lewdness! What Woman 's Fair after
we find her Faulty? What Lady Innocent, when no longer Chaste? Or who so vain
to hope for Honor, or for Pity from that Soul who wants it for her self


What I hear it is deferrd, there is no hopes of Posset. Be^ria has dissmiss'd me
till to Morrow, she is gone to your Bride; by this time Sir Amorous has
supplanted you, he is shut up with her, and has impudence enough to bid fair
for it


They talk of Eating against ones Stomach, but no Surfeit is so nauseous, as
what I Am in danger of, Belira caught me in the A^^ion; and Faith, a sinner
must have more impudence than I, who (...) deny matter of Fact


Be gad, I have Pimpt to a fair end: What to let a Woman outwit thee? How could
you once think of being sincere to one, whose Interest runs counter to yours? I
would have dissembled as much Love as I had Aversion; nay Counterfeited my
first desires, and suffered her, to believe she had preserved the Conquest of
me now, that I might have Triumphed over her all my life after


Very well, I am railed at on all sides.


Thou have this Moment in thy Face, all the Mortification of poor Lenten
Penitents, and lookst more akin to the Spirit than the Flesh. I believe thou
art not in the condition of Wedlock. Confess your Misfortune to my Lady
Young-Love, I know no reason, why a Man should pretend false Courage, when by
it he runs himself into an inconveniency, he might have otherways avoided


Faith, if lying, dissembling and flattering, can deserve her, I have done it.
After we parted, I underwent the Mortification of an Arrest, which has the
better fitted me for that of Matrimony; 'twas necessary for me, to have just
got out of the Baliffs hands, to be able to go through with her, or else let me
expire, if I could have done it


But what is the Consequence, Sir Amorous?


No more, than deferring the Marriage. The Duce take me if I don't think it
Exceeds all Hercules's Labors, to be able to persuade a Widow to lie alone,
when she is resolved to have a Bedfellow


The next Affair shall be resolved in your Chamber, where I Will wait Sir Amorous
and you in a Minute


Nay if you would be private, I Am discreet.


Let me be nothing, if he has not some melting Billet, I know it by his very
Air. Good Fortune to thee Charles


Reads, Hum! to Morrow Morning like a Phisician. Ready, where had you this
Letter


Mrs. Phoebe brought it to your Lodgings. She says her Master has bin at the
Fortune Tellers, to Enquire, whether your Honor had made him a Cuckold


I am sorry, the Devil could not answer him in the Affirmative: She writes me
word that Symrna's sick with his fright, and that I may pass upon him for a
Physician; however, I believe my skill lies most Olivias way. Ready, go and
knock up my Apothecary; borrow his Velvet Coat with the great Gold Buttons. A
few hard words, of Plebotomy, Purgative, Laxative, and I shall be set up in my
Profession, and look like any Collegiate Doctor of them all -- Why then, the
Devil take me if I don't go -- Now the matter's brought to Perfection, I Will not
fall asleep over the Brazen Head, when it should answer me. Yes

I Will watch the falling of the Golden Shower,
And reap my Harvest in the shining Hour.

BY my Troth, Madam, if all Ladies should follow your Example, Solitude would
make them soon turn honest; and then where were the Employment for Wit and
Scandal? You need not be in such a Terror of my Master, he sleeps as sound as a
Top; and should Mr. Wildman come in the Interim, we might introduce him to your
Ladyship without his being the wiser


I hear knocking at the Gate; go see if your Master be awake. Why do I tremble
thus? I neither distrust my Virtue, nor his Care of it. Yet a secret Guilt
condemns me, because I exceed in Form. If the Shadow of an Injury gives such
Uneasiness, what do they suffer by Remorse who actually offend


My Life! my charming, bright Olivia!


Alas, Mr. Wildman, these Transports are not my Due; you know I am honest;
neither my Husband nor you can make me otherwise: Therefore urged by your
Thousand Importunities, I have indeed sent for you, but it is to forbid any more
Billet Douxes, not one Love Letter more, as you hope to have all those kindly
received which you shall dispatch to your next Mistress


You amaze me, Madam!


Secondly, no Corrupting Presents to my Woman; no attempting her weak Virtue,
in hopes to prevail upon her Ladies; for the first moment I suspect it, I shall
be offended at you, and send her packing, to carry you the News of it


I was afraid I should suffer as an Accomplice.


Thirdly, no extravagant Civilities to Mr. Smyrna; no returning cold Affronts
with fond Caresses; no carrying him to the Tavern, and paying his Club there,
as if that were to be the Price of his Wife at home; nor vain Hopes of having
the Proverb of your side, That Cuckolds are kind to those who make them so


'Twas something indeed, he was always so damned jealous of me; had he had but
the Title, I would not have questioned the Benefit of the Proverb, his Horns
would have blinded him


Madam, a good Morning to you.


My Husband's Physician unsent for! What Is to be done?


I have been at Mr. Simpler's your Apothecary, who told me Mr. Smyrna was taken
dangerously ill; whereupon I thought it my Duty to visit him: But, blessed be
God, he is in a fine breathing Sweat: When he has taken what I shall prescribe,
I hope he may be better


Indeed, Dr. Pulse, he has had a very bad Night.


By his Habit, I should guess this Gentleman to be of the Faculty. Pray, Sir,
if it may be without Offense, what are you called? I do not believe you to be
of the College; I never saw your Face before, to my knowledge


My Business, Sir, is with my Patients, and not to answer impertinent Questions.


Cry you mercy, good Mr. Mountebank; a Stage, I suppose, is your Occupation.
Madam, since you have employed this Quack, even make use of him for good and
all. A lawful Consultation I should not have refused; and so much good may do
you with your Merry Andrew


I Am glad he is gone. Mr. Wildman, you know your Doom; we must part upon it.


Prithee, dear Olivia, have more good Nature: Do I deserve no Reward for all my
unwearied Hours of Love? No soft Compassion due for all I have suffered? This
is mortifying one beyond any thing


They say Revenge is natural. For your Comfort then, you have yours upon me,
since I cannot punish you, but I must share in it my self


Were that true, Olivia, you could not use me thus. That Kindness you once
flattered me with, though it were but a Name, has now lost that. You tell me, I
am to be sacrificed to your Virtue -- but I Am afraid it is to some more happy
Lover


Why, I have never enjoyed you. If Love were my Business, might I not find it
with you? I never heard before, that any thing besides Possession brought
Satiety


Did you never stay so long for your Dinner, that your A petite was lost when
you came to it? methinks I see you reasoning with it, then surveying me -- And
crying 'twon't do, it this the Treat I longed for


Your comparison might hold indeed, if you could prove I had stayed my Stomach
before I came to Dinner: But my Husband 's no such inviting Dish, and I can
assure you, too provident, to allow me much variety


He Is a mere Quack, and so you will say when you see him; if you make use of him,
he will certainly be the Death of you


Ay Doctor Pulse, not unlikely.


Oh Heavens defend me, here is my Husband! Lord, Mr. Smyrna you have affrighted
me out of my Wits, my very Heart beats in my Body. Doctor Pulse said, you were
all in a Sweat, and I Am afraid you will catch your Death, by rising in the Cold


'Twill be very well Mistress, if I find your Heart agree with your Tongue. But
what Quack have you brought me here -- Nay, face about Doctor, I don't doubt
your Experience, nor Murdering by the Rules of Art -- Mercy on us -- Ay marry
Sir, this is like a Wife indeed -- What, Mr. Wildman turned Physician! Friend
Pulse, you need never have troubled your head about this business, my Wife
meant to keep this able Doctor to her self; this Gentleman's design lay in
supplanting me, not you


Impudence must carry me through,


If I am mad, it is horn mad; you would carry me to my Chamber, that you might Iye
with my Wife in hers -- Pray Doctor Wildman be pleased to march, I shall be
able to wait upon you down, and secure the Doors after you. Be pleased to lead
the way without further Ceremony -- I must own it is uncivil, but I make bold by
your own example, for I fear, you have bin more so than welcome, with a certain
Acquaintance of yours


It Is as I say, Doctor, retrieve your blunder, or I am lost.


Never fear it, Madam.


Brother Doctor, will not you assist me? The Gentleman's unruly, see how he
struggles. O Sir, if you did but understand your own good you would to go Bed, else
you're a lost Man


Pulse, Pulse, Friend Pulse, I say, will you let me be murdered by this Rogue,
this Villain Wildman -- I Am almost strangled, help, help there, I say, I will not
be carried from my Wife -- Wife -- Wife -- Where are you? Pray Sir be
satisfied, and think me Cuckold enough for the first time


O dear Husband, be persuaded and go to Bed, you look strangely wild.


Ay Master, if you did but see your self, what an altered Man your are; bless
me one would not know you again


Thanks to honest Whoring, Mr. Wildman -- I always thought Horns would bring a
strange Alteration


Good Lord, what a Frenzy is this, to mistake a Physician for a Lover -- To bed
with him, by all means, and let him have some Cooling Tysans, and refreshing
Juleps to allay the heat of the Distemper, perhaps a little sleep may restore
him -- Your Hand, Master Doctor


Nay, if you are in the same Song too, I must be mad indeed -- When a man is to
be made a Cuckold, nothing can prevent it -- But pray, let Master Doctor with
the Whoring Countenance be dismissed


He has never bin well since that Rogue of a Fortune Tellers bewitched him.


Nay, if that be his case, it may be beyond our Art, Brother; best send for
some godly Divine to Pray over him


That shall be my Care -- God restore him, Doctor Pulse. Phoebe, lend your
Hand, he will struggle: But we must prevail, it is for his good


What Is the Devil in you all? I am no more mad than any of you; only a Cuckold,
and a little troubled at that Calamity; no further Frantic I profess


That Is enough, of all Conscience. In, in with him.


Murder, help, Murder, Murder.


I have enough of the sport, and had much rather see Olivia return.


My Lady Sir, desires you would please to be gone; she is resolved to stay by my
Master for the better quieting of him -- But don't let this dishearten you,
your affairs shall go better than they have done, or I Will lose my Place, and my
Reputation too


No, I Am at length convinced, Olivias Virtue should be rather Cherished than
Seduced, though I see whose ever Title we have to it, we can be no more sure of
Love, than Money; it is not ours till we have it in Possession


TO Love and all its Sweets adieu,
To glittering Hopes, and glowing Fires;
To Eyes that Swore she would be true,
And yield Philander his Desires.
Those Dear, those faithless persur'd Eyes,
Those Fatal, sweet deluding things,
The Shepherd now forgiving Dies,
And dying, mournfully he Sings.
Kinder Death, than Cruel she,
Haste, oh haste to set me free.
They have given us but a Melancholy Song Daughter upon our Wedding day. None
here but Sir Amorous! Lord Sir, what can be the reason of this disorder? Jesu
forbid, that so handsome a young Gentleman, should have as much despair in his
Heart as Person -- Marina, go and bid Isabel be sure to mind what I told her


Yes Madam.

Well done Mother, get as large a share of the Sex as you can, I Will not stay to
dispute your Title


What don't you know me Sir. Amorous -- Bless me, what not answer me?


Too well Madam -- I know you as the cause of all my ills, the glorious cause
of my undoing


Lord, my mind misgave me when I heard that mournful Song.


I must confess 'twas dull, unfit for Brides, and could but dead your thoughts.


But Sir Amorous, what is the real occasion of this Sadness?


Let me dye, Madam, if your Ladyship does not ridicule my sufferings. Have you
forgot what I told you last Night; that and a thousand times more lies heavy on
my Heart to day; and unless you resolve to see me dead, you must not marry Mr.
Wilmore --

He a Wretch insensible of all your Charms,
And who seeks his Happiness in another Arms.

He Lord, he is the Modestest Gentleman; so Civil he never pressed for the least
Favor, no not for a Kiss; and that you will says but a small one; but when he
could not decently avoid it


A Wretch, is it possible Madam, that the Transports of a Man, when alone, with
so fine a Woman -- Oh Madam! Were it but permitted me -- But why do I vainly
meditate on any thing but Death


Death, Heaven forbid: Indeed I am very sorry, I was not acquainted with you,
before things came to this extremity -- But as to Mr. Wilmore, he is so
bashful, and so modest, Lord, you would not believe any thing else in him


All that a Rival can say, will be suspected: But say I cleared it to you, what
then shall be my reward


Indeed I should be furiously angry to find him so cold only to me.


If your Ladyship will let me wait upon you to the Garden, I Will clear the
matter to you


DO you remember, our last Discourse Belira?


Can I ever forget any thing where you are concerned.


Then I must tell you, I Am resolved to Marry where I best can like, not for
convenience alone, it is sinful, and you, and I, and all must live to dye


So godly, one would think your Time were come: You have forgot sure, Marina is
to marry your Father


She never will Belira, therefore if you have Loved, show it in this only
proof, I ever ask't, and let me marry her


How dare you think the question, much less to ask it? I only live for you, in
hopes of you; and when those hopes are gone, I Have done with life, the heavy
load will not be worth the bearing, the very thought has loosn'd it, and I want
power to answer


No Tears Belira, we will be always Friends, your Honor shall be safe, and you
my chiefest care


What can pay Love, but Love? Marinas Arms will make you cold to mine; nor can
I stoop, to share your hurt. O yet consider! e're it be too late, think on the
Wreck, the ruin of your Fortune, the flowing Tides of Poverty, that ruins all
it covers; and lastly, think on an unhappy Wretch, whose only fault is
desperate Love of you


I Have thought on all, and nicely weighed the Sense; the consequence is this, I
Love Marina, and rather than not marry her, would be undone; therefore if you
can save me 'twill be Noble, and like the Love you promised


What Generosity can thou hope to find, where only injuries are given? what
suffering, tame, deluded Monster do thou think me? My Wrongs have waked that
Rage, which Wonder had be-calm'd, and I am now prepared to dash thy hopes, and
prove thee Traitor to thy Vows and me


Be wise Belira! We live not now in those Romantic constant days, where their
first Mistress was their last. I liked you once, and still esteem you, but Vows
that are made in Love, are writ in sand: It Is impossible to recall a Lovers
Heart, when once it is made a Present to another; should it return, 'twou'd
sooner Love a third


Thou needst not seek for Arguments to kill my Hopes; thus I blow them from me:
Farewell for ever, both to thy Love and them; thou have Loved me little, but
thou know me less: Vengeance is due to thy mistake; I only live to wish, and
hope to see it take your Minion: Love her as long as you are used to Love a
Woman, and then let want of Wealth and Liberty pursue you: Be poorly Wretched,
and Wretched Poor; and may you hate the cause as bad as I do Curse for her
sake, the very name of Woman; yet think on me and sigh for such a Friend -- But
may no Friend be found, till scorned at home thou seek abroad, some Wretched
Death unknown


What have I heard and seen Belira? Is it possible it should be you?


Villain, have thou betrayed me -- Madam, I warn you from that Traitor Wilmore,


Mr. Wilmore, I am sorry I was so long your pretense, Sir Amorous. This
discovery has done me mighty Service, and I am sorry I cannot express my
Gratitude to you


I have too justly offended your Ladyship, ever to hope Forgiveness: I only beg
your Anger may not fall upon Marina, she is an Innocent cause


The Age is quite Debauched, Jesu! who shall we trust after this? Belira
naught, and with modest Mr. Wilmore, I am in such amaze, I cannot recover my
self


What Is the matter? I met Belira in a mighty rage, she ran to this Ladies
Chamber with a drawn Sword? 'twas lucky I was in the way, else she had murdered
her


I shall not recover the fright this month! Mr. Wildman has saved my life.


He shall always command mine for it, but what is become of her?


When she saw her self Defeated, she sent for a Chair, and went away in it; I
have not yet troubled my self to know where


No it is no matter, since my House is rid of her. I shall take care who I
entertain a good opinion of again


Prithee Wilmore, no Chagrin. This was my Plot, I durst not trust thee with it;
and therefore advised thee to meet her in the Garden, I knew thy soft Nature,
would not suffer thee, to Expose an ill Woman, though to make thy self happy in a
good


If you had, 'twou'd never have come to this; my Pity is due to an unhappy
Woman, who had never bin such, if She had not known me


You Will make Marina Jealous,


I hope not, she would not have me Barbarous:


Where are ye all? Before George the Canonical hour will be past; yonder is the
other Young Gentlewoman gone away Distracted


Sir Rustic, here is a new Scene of Affairs; Marina Swears, She has more mind
to be your Daughter, than your Wife; and that it is better to Drink Caudle by a
young Fellow, than be obliged to make it for an Old


Be-gad, I don't believe a word of this: You are not of his mind Sweetheart,
Mr. Priestcraft is ready to spoil your sport Sir, and begin ours


Indeed Sir Amorous, you have convinced me of the reality of your Passion, and
were it not for the talk of the Town, you should find me, not so insensible as
you imagine


Let me be nothing Madam, if this unexpected Marriage will not put them all out
of Countenance, and baulk their Spleen; they are prepared by Mr. Wilmore's
concern for your Daughter, to laugh at your Ladyship. No Wedding -- Let me
expire, if it would not be a good way, to prevent his refusal by yours, and
before he asks you to make him happy with Marina, to make me so in your self


'Twere a good Jest indeed, I think we must not spoil the Conceit -- But then,
Sir Amorous, will you be constant


As your own Charms, which can never admit of a Decay.


Indeed, Sir Amorous, I have Compassion upon your Sufferings, and a just
Resentment of Mr. Wilmore's Ingratitude: Therefore, Sir Amorous -- but Lord!
what was I going to say? -- Jesu! -- will not you think me quickly won? -- But
indeed, my Charity to you is the chief Inducement; therefore to morrow, Sir
Amorous, if you please --


To morrow will not prevent Mr. Wilmore: Give me leave to declare my Happiness,
and to hope you will immediately confirm it within


Lard, Sir Amorous, you overcome me every way; I leave it to your Discretion.


Before George, not I. Good Mr. Son, no coguing nor dissembling with me: I love
the Lady my self, and have her I will, or some shall smart for it. My Lady
Young Love, here is Felony, Conspiracy, and Treason against you; they would
cheat me of my Wife, and you of your Husband


That they will hardly be able to do; I have made my Choice, Sir Amorous can
tell you


Hey day! Here Is fine juggling indeed! Before George, I don't understand these
London Contrivances. Shall I have your Daughter


Sir Amorous, you rule me. Marina, I have too long, won by Bellaria's
Pretenses, denied you the Affection of a Mother; but I Will make amends for all,
and leave you the Liberty of your Choice


Nay then, before George, it is still well enough -- Give me thy Hand, sweet
Mistress, it is a Match, Bedad


I am afraid, Sir, you will find me good for little, but to bring the Addition of
Jealousy to the rest of your Distempers


That is in plain English, Madam, that you would make me a Cuckold -- Would you
so? -- Nay, like enough Bedad -- Your Eyes have a plaguey Lear that way -- Hey!
Ralph saddle the Horses, and bring my Boots; I Will not stay to see the end on it


No matter, let him go; as I take it, he has Signed. Wilmore, thou have nothing
to do now, but to make thy Claim


I have so true a Sense of my Villainy to this Lady, that I dare not address for
Pardon, much more the unvaluable Blessing of her Daughter


Sir Amorous has prevailed for you, Sir. I forgive you, and have left Marina
the Liberty of her Choice. But might I persuade her, it should not be Belira's
Lover, he has too many Faults


I Will take them all upon my self; and if your Ladyship would consent, I should
not think my self unhappy with Mr. Wilmore


'Twill be generous, like your self, Madam; and show the Town, the little
Concern you have for Mr. Wilmore


Let me expire, Madam, if I can cease my Entreaties.


You command me, Sir Amorous. Take her, Mr. Wilmore; and if possible, make
amends for your Faults to me


This Goodness confounds me more -- My whole Life shall be one constant Study
to deserve your Generosity, and Marina's Kindness


Why so? matters are brought to Perfection. I find I am a Master in the Art.
But, Begad, Pimping here, I have ruined my own Affairs with Orinda. Will she
not be at the Wedding


She keeps her Bed very ill, and has sent an Excuse; but I believe, Belira's
Absence will be the best Spell to draw her thence


That shall be my business, after the Chaplain has done his: I Will visit, and
persuade her to come and wish you Joy


I am impatient till you have the occasion. Sir Amorous, lead the way with your
Bride


I think Fortune has not one other Trick to disappoint you with; but it is best
to take her when she is obliging, for such all People that are going to be
married think her


But Time will show the Cheat, and you shall find
The Goddess is as fickle as she is kind.
HAles's Contemplations in three Parts, the third Part never before Printed; to
which is added his Life, by Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum

The whole Works of that Excellent Practical Physician, Dr. Thomas Sydenham;
wherein, not only the History and Cure of Acute Diseases are Treated of, after
a new and Accurate Method, but also the shortest and safest way of Curing most
Chronical Diseases. Translated from the Original Latin; by John Pechey, at the
College of Physicians

Mrs. Behns Novels, are this day Published.

All three are Sold by R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard.

THE Artificial Clock-maker. A Treatise of Watch, and Clock-work: Wherein the
Art of Calculating Numbers for most sorts of Movements, is explained to the
capacity of the Unlearned. Also the History of Clock-work, both Ancient and
Modern. With other useful matters never before Published. By W. D. M. A.
Printed for James Knapton at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696


