AS Orange-Plants that by the Gard'ner's Care
TO rive by degrees, and spread abroad in Air,
Expand their Branches, and extend their Roots,
As through their Veins prolifick moisture shoots:
No^ growing fertile gratefully produce
Blossoms and Fruit for their Preserver's Use.
So the young Writer of the following Scenes,
To his good Friends, on whose Support he leans,
Presents his very Blossom of a Play,
Which if you will have the Patience but to stay,
May ripen the generous Fruit one Day.
His humble Muse a tender Plant is found,
Which the first Year with Buds alone is crowned.
But if mild Seasons nurse its spreading Root,
Succeeding years may bring forth grateful Fruit.
Would to kind Heaven That Harvest were in view,
For at our Lung's Expense We daily show,
There never was such a Dearth of Wit as now.
Yet were it so that Plenty at this time
With her full Horn enriched our peaceful Clime,
Now to produce our Stores would be a Crime.
For our Wise Stage-Reclaimers would resent
The Offense and bid us mortify in Lent.
Thus might we hope there is Color to excuse
This Author's first Attempt, and dawning Muse.
Sooth then his Pain and make his Sentence easy,
Methinks in Lent some Charity should seize you;
If you Judge nicely, he despairs to Please you.

WEll, Bernardo, thou will never leave thy old courses, I see, till Age or
Distempers have made thee Impotent. The good old Count at home might, indeed,
expect more Sobriety from the Tour thou have made abroad. But alas! poor
Gentleman, he will be as much deceived in thy Manners, as thou art in following
the wickedness of the Flesh


Prithee, Frederick, no more of this Gravity: I am not so keen a sportsman as
you make me. Indeed, if a very handsome Woman bolts out upon me unawares, I may,
perhaps, course her now and then for a breathing: But I don't love beating the
bushes for game


Well, I see, thou art incorrigible, therefore I have done. Methinks, Bernardo,
the Air grows cool: Sure the night must be far advanced


No matter; even let us ramble for once, we shall find some Adventure or other
that is diverting I warrant thee


What, you are again at your old Trade: No, no, I Will home, I assure you. I have
no mind to be mistaken for another in the dark, and so have my Throat cut, or,
if I escape that way, to be seized upon by the Watch for a Night-walker, that
has some ill design on foot


You Will excuse me then, for not going with you, since I have some Commands to
obey to night, of one that expects a readier Compliance than any Grandee of
Spain: It Is one Don Cupid, Seignor, if you have heard of him


Don Lucifer, you mean.


Call him what you will. But, Frederick, to be plain with you, the business is
this; you must know, Sir, I have had a private Intrigue upon my hands with a
very lovely Woman almost ever since we arrived at Valencia, and this very hour
am I to meet her, by Assignation in the mean time you are brawling with our old
Host at home, it is the better Engagement of the two


It Is less dangerous, that is certain; besides, you say your Intrigue is private.


It is so, indeed: But I Will tell you what I Will do for you, if I succeed in my
Amor to night, and taste of this Circe's Cup, I Will undertake you shall be made
the next Swine, Frederick


A pox of your Swine's Jest: Farewell.


Ha, ha, ha! good night Don Frederick. When I had told him of my Amor, I had
no other way to be rid of him, for whatsoever he pretends, I know he is stanch,
though a sly Gamester

Now for the Coast of Love, on wings I Am born
To reach that Axis, on which all things turn.

Come, Dorila, let us take a walk before the door, this cool Evening.


I Will wait upon you, Madam.


I wonder Don Sebastian is not come yet: Sure somewhat of importance keeps him
away, for he does not use to be so tardy


He is a Man, Madam, and may forget that he has been kindly used by a fair Lady.


I would not willingly believe any such Ingratitude of him, because I have long
entertained an opinion of his faithfulness; and though the expectation he has
given me of being his Wife after the death of his Mother (if the solemnest
Oaths and Protestations avail any thing) makes me a little uneasy under a
disappointment: yet he has so much Goodness in his Nature, and such Charms
about his Person, that I cannot soon give way to interpret any thing amiss of
him


And so had Don Philip, when you were first acquainted with him at Madrid. He
had such another Art of Charming too, that he soon gained a passage into your
yielding heart, and when he had made the Conquest, left and despised you


And now he shall pay for his Villainy; for know, Dorila, that he no sooner left
me to night, but I sent some Ruffians after him to dispatch him, lest he should
hinder my design upon Sabastian, as well as to punish him for his Ingratitude.
I wonder he could have the Impudence to inquire me out here, after the Contempt
he used me with at Madrid. How do I long to hear the Fact is committed


For my part I cannot pity him.


Pity him, no; but I Will be revenged on him, Wench. He goes to Hell this night:
There let him scorn a poor deluded Maid, that sacrificed her Honor to oblige
him; trusted to all his flattering promises, and saw her self forsaken,
blasted, ruined. O Woman! Woman! How eager have thou always been to know what
brings ruin as soon as known! Could thou but spare thy Curiosity, and give no
Ear to the alluring Tongues of Men, how might thou live in Triumph, and see
proud Man beneath thee


But, Madam, you would soon have the World dispeopled at this rate.


Were it a drowning a second time, 'twere no matter. It Is a vile World that is
not worth keeping above Water. What is there to be found in it, but specious
promises and certain falsehood. Two such Contagions, like North-East Winds in
the Spring, are enough to blast Mankind, as those do the Fruits of the Earth


Alas, poor World, what a condition art thou in!


Never in a worse: But however, my meaning at first was, that I would have our
Sex hold out, till they could obtain Men by Lawful means; but even then, how
much discontent does often follow


Why there is the business: You would deprive poor Women of their pleasure every
way. Come, come, Madam, Venus has been more indulgent to you, than you imagine,
for, though one Lover has forsaken you, yet, thanks to fortune, you have found a
Friend here that may hereafter be your Husband. Or, if you mistrust him there is
the handsome stranger Don Bernardo, who has made some Addresses of Love to you


'Dslife, Dorila, he was to be here to night, this very hour, by appointment,
when I did not think of Sebastian's coming. As I live I had quite forgot it.
Dorila, come, let us go and contrive some way to avoid meeting both


Why, this it is, not to Communicate your Affairs to me. I hope by this time
you see how necessary a Confidente is in your Affairs; you may have undone your
self now, for ought I know


Come, for Venus sake, let us go. Hark! some body's coming

Ha! Bernardo, as I live. Dorila, make haste in, and after a little while call
me, and I Will pretend it is my Aunt that calls, and so get away; for I would not
be observed to shun him neither


By your leave, Ladies, I hope to find an Acquaintance here. Nay, never strive
to conceal your self, Madam. Could the fair Eleonora think to be so disguised,
that a Lover should not be able to distinguish her


I might have expected some assistance from the darkness of the night, if I had
not been inclined to disclose my self to you


Were the night much darker than it is, and you had kept back the goodness you
show me, yet those Eyes would have dispersed the darkness, and left me certain
of my happiness


You are skilled in Complements, I see; but let me entreat you to speak lower,
for my Aunt is yet awake, and is apt to hear the least noise


Let us walk further off then, that it may not be in her power either to hear
us, or see us


O no, not for the World: If I should not be within call, she would certainly rise,
and suspect I was away upon some bad account. 'Twould ruin me, Sir, for she is
very passionate, and would surely make another Will, and give away Forty
Thousand Crowns from me


Ha! Forty Thousand Crowns: Can it be true?

But, Madam, when will you grant some pity to a Man that so infinitely adores
you? Were we not by Appointment to meet to night


Are we not met, Sir?


But not as I could wish: I would convince you of my unspeakable Affection.


O, Sir, then you and I must meet no more. Is it possible you should entertain
any such unlawful hopes


'Sdeath, she would hook me into Marriage!


Pray let me go: My Aunt calls within, and I shall be undone for staying.


A pox of this Aunt for me.

Madam, give me leave to assure you, that I have no ill design: All that I
intended was to give you most undeniable proofs of my Love. I entreat you to
believe my sincerity


You talked just now at such a mad rate, that 'twill be some difficulty to
retrieve the good opinion I had of you

O I shall be ruined, if I stay longer.


When shall I have an opportunity to bring you to a better understanding?


O never, never. You sha'n't catch me here again to morrow night, I warrant you.


A Pox of all Aunts, I say: You sha'n't catch me here again to morrow night I
warrant you. A good direction however for to morrow; but what have I to do with
to morrow? I may be less inclined for a Woman then, and less at leisure. A
Curse on this Accident! Well, I Will take the other walk, and if the Stars decree
me no Adventure to night, I Will even home, and take Counsel of my Pillow about
this last Affair


Let me see; this must be the House. Well, this Love has a strange power: It Is
so diffused through the Composition of Man, that all his other Faculties are like
so many useless Wheels, till that spring be put in motion. What is there
agreeable in Life, without Love? That Poet had a true taste of the World, who
said, Let me die, ye Powers, when I am no longer able to relish the Blessings
of Love. But I amuse my self too long


Who is it that knocks at this late hour?


It Is I; good Dorila, make no noise, but let me in.


I fly, Seignor, to obey you.


I Am glad they are so cautions whom to admit, though it may be nothing but
disguise to cheat me, for Women have their Arts, I know


O Seignor, we have expected you so long, that we began to despair of seeing
you to night


I hope I am not come too soon. Where Is my Eleonora?


In her Chamber, impatient for your arrival, to be sure.


Did you not tell her I was at the door?


I thought 'twould be more agreeable for you to surprise her with your coming.


You have obliged me. Come, let us go in.


A Plague upon that Sreech-owl that called in my Eleonora from me: For besides
my ill fortune in losing her, she has presaged me no luck all this night, I am
afraid. Well, if I must go home without any Adventure to boast of, or to
justify my absence to Don Frederick, I must even be content to bear with his
dull Encomiums on Regularity and Example; though he, like the rest of the Men of
Zeal for severity of Manners, is better pleased with the formality of advising,
than the difficulty of the practice


Custom, alas! does partial prove,
Nor gives us even measure:
To Maids it is a Pain to Love,
But it is to Men a pleasure.
They freely can their Thoughts explain,
Whilst ours must burn within:
We have got Eyes and Tongues in vain,
And Truth from us is sin.
Men to new Joys and Conquests fly,
And yet no hazard run:
Poor we are left, if we deny,
Or if we yield, undone.
Then equal Laws let Custom find,
Nor either Sex oppress:
More freedom give to Womankind,
Or give to Mankind less.
By your leave, whoever you are, I mean to interrupt your Singing, though I like
it well. This may prove some lucky check to my rising inclination to go home.
I Will follow the voice, whatever may ensue


From Alcantara, did he say?


I tell you, Sir, from Alcantara, and when he knew that, I had the Honor to be
your Valet de Chamber


You are pleasant, Sir.


Why, Sir, I hope it is not an Employment above me, for the Heralds have
distinguished us in France


So they will a Fiddler, if he has money to purchase a Coat of Arms.


I hope, Sir, you don't speak of that Profession by way of Contempt.


What does it deserve else?


I am sorry for your Judgment, for we were always esteemed in our Country.


O, I find you were your self an Instrument Scraper there once: But no more of
this. What request did this stranger make to you


That I should let you know, upon your coming home, that he was very earnest to
speak with you alone


So privately: Who can it be? Come, lead me to him; I long to know who it is.


What a Capricious Deity is Love, and how repugnant often to Nature it self! So
true are those Lines of the Divine English Poet

In Love the Victors from the Vanquished fly,
They fly that wound, and they pursue that die.

Seignor, my Master, Don Frederick, if you are disposed to receive his visit,
would wait on you


With all my heart; I shall esteem his Company as a favor.

Now must I unfold my self to him, and if he has that Generosity the World
gives him, he will both secure me from my Brother's indignation, and assist me
toward the success of my design


Sir, I was made believe upon my coming home, that you had some Commands for
me. I should be glad to have it in my power to obey a Stranger, especially one
whose Aspect can even so soon prevail on my Inclinations


Sir, your Language and Behavour speak you Generous: I did indeed make it my
request to your Servant, who had informed me of yours and Don Bernardo's Loding
here, to give you private notice that a Stranger was earnest to speak with you.
Be not surprised, Sir, but oblige me so far as to sit down, and hear my Story


Sir, I am ready to give all attention.


I presume, Sir, by the Description you may have had of me, and the Garb you
see me in, you take me for one of your own Sex

Be not amazed, Sir, for I am but a Woman, a most unhappy Woman, no other than
the Sister of your Friend Don Bernardo


You astonish me, Donna Gornelia!


The same: Pray how long is it since you and my Brother arrived here from Italy?


We have been in Spain about four days, and only wait for the passing of to
morrow's Festival, before we go for Alcantara. It Is the great Feast of St.
Jago, at whose Church to morrow is to be seen all the Magnificence of this
Place


It Is possible then you may have seen Don Philip de Monasco, in this Town.


I have only heard of him, Madam, I never had the honor to know him.


Alas, Sir, it is he that is the cause of this disguise, this Journey to
Valencia, and of all the misfortunes that have yet befaln me. Not to detain
you, you must know that Don Philip making use of the Acquaintance of our
Friends, came frequently to our House, and was always entertained with that
welcome that was due to the Son of a Man of Quality, and a particular Friend. I
must confess, that from the first moment I saw him, I had a more than ordinary
Joy to think we were under the same Roof, and an unusual heaviness when he went
away. How soon does Love find entrance into a weak Woman's heart! I fancied
whenever he appeared before me, that there was not a Man in Spain of such
Beauty, Grace, and Proportion; but when he spoke, sure Music hung upon his
Tongue, and all he said I thought Oraculous


Nay, now you are far gone indeed.


You Will excuse my weakness, Sir. After many discourses we had together full of
Complaisance and Gallantry, He at last made some advances of Love. You may
imagine I was not displeased to find a mutual concern. This humor he continued
for many days, and at last after a Thousand Solicitations attended with Oaths
and Promises of Marriage: I was Fool enough to yield


Heavens! Can it be?


To an agreement to meet him such a day.


Your discretion may be yet safe. But pray, Madam, why did you not give your
Father notice of your mutual Inclinations, that he might have procured Don
Philip for your Husband


Because I knew he had given his word to another Gentleman, and had commanded
me to prepare to accept him for my Husband, though I told him I could never love
him


Well, Madam, when the day came?


I met him at the appointed place, but had the prudence to resolve beforehand
not to yield till he should actually have Married me. He used many
importunities to persuade me, but, I thank Heaven, I had so much reason left,
as to consider, that he who refused to send for a Priest, when I gave him an
opportunity, by being absent from my Father's House, would scarce agree to do
it when he had once enjoyed me


'Twas wisely reasoned, Madam; so you broke off.


We did from what he proposed, but not from a Contract we had made before.


Ha! Contracted?


A Solemn Contract had passed between us.


I am sorry for it. Pray, what has induced you to come hither in disguise?


Two days after our Adventure, I was informed that Don Philip was privately
gone to this Place, in order to take Shipping for Naples, and had carried with
him a beautiful young Lady, whom he had newly married, or designed to marry.
This News put me into such a fit of melancholy, that I could not conceal it
from the Family, which was very earnest to know the Cause, but in vain. After a
day or two I took a resolution to disguise my self, and to come directly to
Valencia to find out this ungrateful Philip, who is my Husband before Heaven,
though another has the happiness to live with him. If I can find them, I Will
either pull her by force out of his Arms, and let the World know the claim I
have to him, or if he refuses to own me for his Wife, he shall experience the
Revenge of a Neglected Woman


Madam, if I might advise you, things being not yet gone so far as to
necessitate your pursuit of him at this rate, you should even despise him in
your turn, and make choice of another that should be more worthy of your Love


Alas, Sir, if we could Love whom we would, your Counsel might be chosen: But
Love, you know, has Fate in it, and therefore cannot be withstood


You may be Wedded to a false opinion of Love; there is no such Astrology in the
matter


However, it is impossible I can ever forget Don Philip.


Few things are impossible, Madam, they only appear so to us for want of
putting them in practice: However, let us refer this business, if you please,
till the morning; you must needs want rest after the fatigue of a Journey. To
morrow you may Command me as far as I have any Power


But, Sir, I must entreat one Favor of you, which is, that you give my Brother
no Intelligence of my being here, for I fear his Anger as much as the neglect
of Philip


Madam, I shall be careful to obey your Commands. Good rest to the fair
Cornelia


Alas! I can have no rest: This ungrateful Man will keep me for ever waking. To
go to Bed is only to toss from side to side, to be tormented with Sighs, and
inflamed with Jealousy

O Love, in Notion so transporting Fair,
Once Felt, what Wreks and Tortures do Thou bear
Between the Flames of Hope and Coldness of Despair.

THe relation you have made me, Madam, of this ungrateful Philip, as it makes
me look upon you with the tenderest Compassion, so it gives me reason to detest
the Author of your misfortune. You say he promised you Marriage first with all
the marks of sincerity


He wished a thousand times that Heaven might pour down Vengeance on his head,
if he proved false


What a Villain is he then for leaving you thus!


He is so, and yet I love this Villain. O! Bernardo, do but frame to your self
the softest delights that ever any Loved Woman has yet raised in your Soul:
Fancy how transported you should be with the full possession of her Charms:
Think what a pain 'twould be to live deprived of such a happiness; and then
conclude what I have lost in Philip


Amazement! Can there be so much felicity in our Sex? I thought all we had on
Earth was to be found in yours


I find you think me vain, Sir, in giving such a Character of a Man, with whom
I have had some understanding: But it is my infirmity, pray pass it by


Pardon me, Madam, I am well pleased than any of our Sex can be so very
acceptable. I Will recant the name of Villain I called him too, if 'twould oblige
you


His leaving me looks unkind enough, indeed, but could I meet him here, I
should not doubt the recovery of his heart, I know it was nothing but a
youthful sally to make me sensible of the want of his dear Company, that I
might receive him at his return with more than usual Ardour


How ready the fond thing is to excuse this treacherous Fellow!


But whatever be the cause, I must entreat you, since the Accident of my voice
brought you to discover my passion, that you would give me your assistance, as
soon as it is day, to find out this Rambler, if he be in Valencia; if not, O
misfortune! Whither shall I go to seek him


You may command my faithfulest service.


Another Request I have to make to you, which is, that you conceal my being
here from Don Frederick's knowledge for the present


I shall obey you. You Will give me leave to wait on you to your Lodging, and, as
soon as it is day, I shall not fail to send to know your Commands


You maintain the Character the World is full of.


Sure I must be near Don Sebastian's: Anthony, don't you know the Street?


If 'twere not quite so dark, possibly I might, Sir.


As far as I remember, we should pass by this Church.


Ay, Sir, you were always for passing by the Church, I Will say that for you; but
if you live at this rate, the Church will not pass You by very long


Why how now, Sir, you are Witty to night: What, you have been punning in
Donna Eleonora's Kitchen, servile Rogue


Faith, Sir, it is a mistake, with your pardon; for there was Mrs. Pert, her
Maid, who has so unreasonable a Tongue, that set it once a going, it is a very
Laram for an hour together, so that no body can be heard but she. Will you give
me leave, Sir, to tell you something she said


Barring all Smut, and so forth, which thou can no more forbear interlarding
in thy discourse, than an Old Maid when she is past hopes of Matrimony


Smut, Sir, I scorn your Words; I Will have you to know we Frenchmen have more
good Breeding


Nay, your Nation has the Character for good Manners.


Ay, and for good Courage, good Politics, and good Subjects, Begar.


How do you make your Courage out, pray, my Understanding Valet?


Why, we always get the better of our Enemies by our Numbers, and so our
Courage is not disputed. Then as for Politics, don't you know a Nation, Sir,
that has had cunning enough to get a Peace concluded, when 'twas Six to four
that it had been undone in another Campaign


I Am afraid that condition regarded more than one Nation. Well, and how are you
good Subjects


In troth, I think we are very good, easy Subjects, to suffer all to be
restored in one Day that we had been getting for half an Age


Admirable Pasquil! Well, but thou have rambled all this while from thy Theme:
Thou art a true Frenchman in thy Tongue at least, which is ever running a swift
Course without any Goal before it. I thought I was to have had a decent Account
of your late Conversation


Sir, I beg your Pardon, with all my heart: Why, Sir, what do you think this
wicked Jade told me


Come, out with it.


Why, Sir, as sure as you're alive, this Water-wagtail told me, that the whole
business of this wicked Town was Love


Say thou so, my little Anthony?


Nay, I knew 'twould please you, for you are such a Hawk at the Sex, that the
very name of an Intrigue, though you were to cross the Sea for it, would be a Lure
to you. But, pray, Sir, let me entreat you to set me a better Example, that we
may both leave this pernicious way; for, to tell you the truth, I have so great
a respect for you, that I can no more forbear following all your steps like a
true Serving man, than an old Sharper can those of a young Heir


Leave off your Canting, Sir, for thou love. Woman's flesh as naturally as
Spaniards love Constancy, or Englishmen Change


But, Sir, how can you so soon forget the Beautiful Cornelia? I dare swear
she is pining and languishing for her Contracted Husband


Let her languish on: A foolish Wench, she might have had what she languish'd
for, but Virtue, forsooth, flew in her face, and made her resolve to starve her
Love. Now for a Woman, commend me to Olivia, that no sooner loved but nourished
her desire, leaving the dull fantastic notion of Fame and Honor, for the
lively substantial Enjoyment of Man and Happiness


And yet you could forsake her too.


Yes, because she began to trouble me, like the other, with my promise of
Marriage: They would have had me worn a very strait Shoe that galls and
pinches one even to Lameness. To marry is to open Pandora's Box, which is no
sooner done, but all kinds of miseries flutter about your Ears


And have you no qualms of Conscience for these things?


Not I, fool; Pleasure is my Employment, and my Conscience is subservient to it.


It must be he by what we have heard: Courage, Friends, prepare.


I Will have his head at the first stroke, an ungrateful Villain.


I hear a noise, Sir: Let us jog on and find the House, if it be possible.


Stay. Who Is there? What Is your business?


We come to send a Villain to the Devil.


I am Thunderstruck, I Am Dead; did not I tell you, Sir, that the injuries you
have done to those Gentlewomen would come home to you, and now you have
involved me too


Anthony, stand up close to me, do you hear, or, by the Mass, I Will give you into
their hands, whoever they are


I will stand close, Sir. A pox confound them for me.


Well, who is this Villain you talk of? If you expect to find him here, you are
deceived


We know you are a Villain, as sure as you are Don Philip, therefore fall on,
Friends


Nay, then it is time to defend our selves: Anthony, keep close to me, or do you
hear, I shall thrust you before me to be first slain


Poor Anthony! how hard it is that other Men's sins should fall upon thy head!


Will you hear me? I am not the Man you take me for: I am a stranger here.


No, no; fall on, fall on.


Courage, Lads, remember the Reward: It Is to kill a Villain, so it is no murder.


If he were an honest Man 'twere all one to me. What, every Man must live in
his way


O bloody-minded Rogues! I wish I do not swoon before the fight begins.


Since no entreaties will prevail, come on: I shall send some of you, blood
hounds, to Hell, before you murder me, I shall


Take Courage, Sir; you have one by your side that would stand by you, were the
number of your Adversaries double


Whoever you are, you are very generous.


Nay, then I Will even steal away, and save my self.


The Watch! The Watch! Let us shift for our selves!


Sir, I am extremely in your debt for your timely assistance and should be glad
to know of whom I have received so important a service


I have done no more, Sir, than the duty of a Gentleman obliged me to; you were
overpowered by Numbers, and Humanity forced me to take your part. My name is
of little moment to you, since I am a stranger in this Place


You are my preserver, however: Let me entreat you then to be seen to morrow.
The Watch, I find, is alarmed, and will be every where; Their rudeness is to be
avoided


You may Command me any where in the morning.


Let it be then near the great Church, at Ten.


You Will please to give me Your name.


You must excuse me, Sir, for some private reasons, but if you will please to
wear this Sword, whose Hilt is of a remarkable Frame, and of no ordinary Value,
I shall have the pleasure of knowing you again at the time and place


The satisfaction you promise me, makes me willing to exchange Swords, which I
should otherwise be ashamed to do, since mine is of no value

Good night, Sir.


Fortune ever attend you. Anthony: Where the Devil is he? Sure he is not dropped
in the Fray: I never missed him till now; but let him be where he will I must
avoid this Watch


Here this way they went. Let Us after them.


Follow, follow!


I can go no way but these damned Constables, and their guard of Watchmen are
upon the hunt. How to escape them, I don't well know

The dogs are upon full scent, and I shall be finely mumbled if I stay here.
Ha! a door open; nay, then there needs no pausing for a resolution what to do


Here Is one of the Rogues.


Come, bring him before our Prince of Darkness here, to be examined.


Prince of Darkness, hum! then am I in Hell it seems.


Come, Sir, in the first place, Who are you, that has had the Impudence to
disturb the King's Peace, and the Quiet of our Government


Truly, Sir, the King's Peace, and your Government put together, have made me
forget my self in the Wonder


Sir, I Will have you to know, I am the King's Image, and Viceroy of his
Nocturnal hours in Valencia


Nay, Sir, I beg your pardon now you have explained your self, and to give you
no further trouble, my name is honest Anthony


Honest Anthony! here is a Rogue now, when, as I am an Assistant to his
Majesty's Image here, I found him crammed in a Cellar Window


Nay, it is very suspicions, let me tell you, Friends; for if he had not been
upon some Wicked Design he would never have hid himself


Plain, plain: Some House-breaker.


I warrant he is a Cendary in his heart, and came to set fire to the City.


Like enough, truly, for though we have a Peace do you see, we ought to be upon our
guard; else what our Enemies could not bring to pass by the Sword, they may try
to do by Fire


Pauvre Antoine!


Do You hear, Mr. Constable, what Gibberish the Rogue speaks: I warrant that is
Treason, if we knew what 'twas. I say, let him be hanged without any more a-doe


What, do you talk of hanging only: I humbly move, Mr. Constable, that he may be
first hanged and then drowned


Nay, hold a little, my hearts of Steel: The Law takes notice of Life and
Death, do you see. Let us proceed regular, do you mind. If upon further
Examination, that is -- we find him a Vagabond -- That is to say -- a Fellow,
that -- you know my meaning


Ay, ay: One that cannot answer for himself.


Ay, that is it, Tom, the very thing I would have said: But as I was saying, if
he can give no 'count of himself, that is -- We'll put him in the Stocks till
morning, do you mind, and then carry him before a Magistrate. This is a
Constable's duty


Ay, ay, it is so, Mr. Constable: I had forgot my self.


Well, Friend, since the Question of Who are you is answered, the next is
always, What are you


Ay, Sir, what are you? ha!


Why truly, Sir, I am a stranger here, I must own. But --


He has Condemned himself: A mischievous Rogue, I warrant him. What say you,
Gentlemen, shall we proceed to Sentence


Ay, ay, to Sentence, to Sentence.


And then to Execution with him.


Nay, good Gentlemen, do but hear me: I am not --


Stop his mouth for him; he is Convicted.


Ay, ay; it is not the custom for a Criminal to speak after Conviction. Be
silent, you had best, and harken to your Sentence


Well then, since we have, upon a full Hearing and a clear Evidence, found him
to be a Rogue, the next thing is, to proceed to Sentence, which I pronounce
thus. You are, Sir, to sit in the Stocks till morning, and then you must
expect to go to Prison, and from thence to be hanged at least, if not impaled
alive


O malheureux que Je suis!


Come, away with him; away with him.


Away! Away!


What, in the name of wonder, ail'st thou, Frederick, that thou can not go to
sleep? Is it not the time when Men forget their daily cares, and lay themselves
to rest? All are at Peace within these Walls, but Thou. As I passed by
Cornelia's Room, methought I could have craved admittance there, but that I
recollected she was tired with her Journey, and 'twould be barbarous to wake
her. Ha! wake her! What pretense have I to wake her? Wake whom, Cornelia, for
what? Have a care, Frederick, this Woman runs in thy head so much, that there
is no reason either in thy actions, or thy talk. Why then I am in Love, it
seems: Speed you, Sir. In Love! with whom? Why, Cornelia. There it is again:
With one, that has left a kind Father, to run a gadding after an Ungrateful
Lover. O well placed Affection

If I must feel your power, cruel Cupid,
Why have you made me fix my thoughts on one
From whom I can expect no kind return?
But the blind Boy delights in Tyranny.
Well, since I cannot sleep, I Will even walk out, and try if I can meet Don
Bernardo

How fast the Rascal is! Stretched upon the Floor he sleeps as hea^^^ly as if
he had taken Opium. Thou have no cares to keep thee waking, much happier than
thy Master. Why Anthony

Make no noise, but come hither.


What would your Worship have, Sir? you waked me out of the most extraordinary
Dream


What was your Dream, you sleepy sot? here, take the Candle.


Why, Sir, methought the World was turned Topsie-turvy; Integrity was come in
fashion at Court, and Modesty the road to Preferment there. Great Ministers no
longer wracked Attendance, and advanced Men of Worth, without putting them to
the blush to ask. Lawyers forbore taking Fees on both sides, and Physicians
after their Patients were dead. The Clergy were in esteem for not going from
their Text, and Tradesmen were grown Conscientions. Right and Wrong were no
more the Subjects of Dispute, and Men of Sense valued Things more than Words.
Envy and Ostentation were no longer known among Wits and Critics, nor
Controversies among Divines


Why, this was a Golden Age.


Ay, Sir, would it were more than a Dream. But to pursue it, methought all
Women were grown Virtuous; Balls and Masquerades were quite laid aside; Vails
and Vizards were out of doors, they were not suffered even at the Playhouses;
City Ladies no longer affected to outshine Quality, nor Court Lords joynd
issue with the City. In a Word, Sir, Honesty, Discretion and good Breeding went
hand in hand together


But how will you Interpret this Dream?


Nay, Sir, if once you come to that, I know what 'twill come to --


What?


Even nothing, Sir; for the rule of interpreting dreams is by their contraries.


Therefore you're out, for if you pursue that rule, you have the very World we
live in. But no more; I have a mind to walk out to try if I can meet Don
Bernardo. Make no answer, but follow me


Hold, let me see; It must be hereabouts that I was set upon by Ruffians, and
relieved by a strange Gentleman, when I missed my Man Anthony. Pray let us look
about for him: It Is possible he may have fain in the Encounter; if he did, he
shall have a decent Funeral for the Service he has done me. Yet I would not
lose the Rogue neither, if I could help it, because he used to divert me often
with his Country raillery

You say Don Sebastian is not at home to night.


No, Seignor, begs you would excuse him till morning.


With all my heart.

Ha! who are these that come this way? One of your Lights, that I may view them.


Good Evening, Seignor.


Seignor, the like to you.

Ha! is not that Anthony?


As I live, Anthony risen from the dead.


Yes, Sirs, my name is Anthony, but I was never dead yet, I thank Heaven: If
you will not believe me, my Master, who is gone before, will confirm, that I
have been alive at least these two years


How, Slave! have you forsaken me then, and, not only so soon found another
Master, but do you banter me too


Ha! what mean you, Friends? Forsaken whom? Whom has he banter'd? Pray give him
leave to do his duty in following me


Hey day! Pray do you give your opinions of him?

Is not this Anthony, that came with me to your Master's House; and has been
with me ever since, till within this half hour


Why, what a Rogue are you, Anthony, to deny your self to your Master?


It Is either Anthony, or the Devil in his shape, that is certain.


Now, Sir, are you convinced yet?


Of your mistake, I am sure you are all bewitched to talk thus. I tell you, he
has lived with me these two years in Italy, and we are newly arrived here from
thence


Nay, Sir, since you are so positive, and he is such a Rascal to deny me, I have
done: You shall keep your Man, and much good may he do you; only spare me one
word, which is this, it is very certain, that one and the self-same Person,
could not have lived with me in Spain, and with you in Italy, at the same time;
though one of our Modern Virtuosi has boldly undertaken to prove the possibility
of such a thing. But, Sir, it is as certain, that this very individual Fellow
that you have taken into your Service, has been my Man every day for these six
months, or it must be the Devil in his Person


Sir, we are all subject to be deceived; it is likely your Man might bear some
resemblance to him; that you are mistaken in him, I Will wager my Estate; for, I
repeat it to you again, he has lived with me these two years


Truly, Sir, I should be sorry to offend you, or any Genleman, but, upon my
honest Word, Sir, I never saw your Face before


Be damned, Sir. Come, let us go: I Am weary of this illusion.


Ay, Sir, pray let us go, for fear it should be the Devil in good earnest.


Speed you, Sir, with your new servant.


What a Whimsical Adventure have I met with? I wonder what time of the Moon
it is? Sure these Men have lost their Wits, they could never have been so
mistaken else. Well, the morning may discover more of this. I Will take the other
walk, and see what I can meet with next


I Believe I surprised you, but I had no other way to escape the rude Watch,
neither did I know whose door it was I so seasonably found open, though at an
unseasonable hour


My Lady was horribly frightened, when I told her first of it, but when she was
a little recovered, she called me to her Bedside, and whispering, least her
Aunt, whom she lay with, should hear her, charged me to beg your Excuse for her
not seeing you; and that you might be convinced, 'twas nothing but the fear of
her Aunt, if she should attempt to rise, that hindered it: She commanded me to
present you with this Ring, as a Testimony of her Favor


Nay then, Mrs. Dorila, you must oblige me so far as to accept of this.

Pray tell your Lady, I Will ever wear it for her sake, and to morrow I hope to
acknowledge to her in Person, this generous Favor. In the mean time, pray do
you make my Excuse to her for this Accident, and the disturbance I have
unhappily caused her. Good morrow, Mrs. Dorila


I shall obey your Commands, Seignor.

I am glad he is gone, for if Don Sebastian and he should have met here, there
would have been fine Work. Now does this Amorist believe he has received a
signal favor from his Mistress, when in truth she knows nothing of the matter.
The Ring's but a Trifle, and was given her formerly by Don Philip, and she gave
it me: However, as soon as her Lover Sebastian goes, I must acquaint her with
it to prepare her against the next time she sees Bernardo. Well, let the Men
say what they will, our Wits are quickest, that is certain


Poor Anthony! This Punishment is certainly a Judgment upon thee for serving so
debauched a Master. Well, Don Philip, you have been met with too: If you are
slain by those Ruffians I left you engaged with, why then my Cowardice has got
the advantage of your Courage. If you have escaped them, I hope the danger will
be a warming for you to reform your Life. O my Legs, my Legs! Now am I just for
all the World as if I were Married. Ha! who comes here


It Is yet too early to go home for one of my wakeful Constitution. I Will even
saunter about, and if nothing happens worthy my humble attention here below,
I Will erect my face, and please my self with the observation of the growing day:
Nor is it an unprofitable Amusement to view the separation of Light and
Darkness, to see day and night struggle for Empire. For by this reflection may
one learn the nature of humane passions, that at first make wild contention
with our Reason, which rising by degrees like the Lights force, disperses all
their gloom, and brings forth Day to the Understanding


This must be some Philosopher, or Star-gazer.


Ha! One so near me. Who are you, speak?


No Dancing Master -- for I want Legs.


Sure it is Anthony's voice.

Why, how now, Anthony, how came you here, and in this humility?


Sir, if you will vouchsafe to let me know how you came so well acquainted with
me, I Will soon answer you


What, is your Preferment so great, that you have forgot me? I could hardly
have expected to have found the Quality of a Great Man in the Stocks


You are a very pleasant Gentleman. But, Sir, it is an unseasonable time for
mirth; and take this from me, I never saw you in my Life before


Sure he is distracted. Pray, who are you, Friend?


I am a Native of that Country that you scorn, though it has made you tremble. I
have the honor to be a Subject of the Grand Monarque, who, in time of War,
knew how to turn a Skirmish into a great Fight; the reduction of a Village into
that of an invincible Castle, and the loss of a Battle into an absolute
Victory, and sung Te Deum for them all


A very Politic Person! And where do you live, my notable Statesman?


In the Stocks.


Good. But where, before you were thus exalted?


I served a Spaniard.


All this agrees mighty well. Pray, what is his name?


Person. Il u'en a point.


Now his fit returns; poor fellow.


Was it not enough I told you that I served a Spaniard. By all my wrongs 'twas
too much; 'twas adding to the disgrace I am under. Those of our Country should
Command, not Serve; at least not serve a thing so stupid as a Spaniard: One
that prefers a lazy Luxury before an active Frugality, and would not lose a
formal Ceremony, or part with an Inch of his Grandeur to save his Country from
Ruin


This is notorious Truth, tho it come from the mouth of a Madman. Farewell,
Anthony. I Will send you relief in the morning


You Will do more than I expect then.

Who should this Man be? I never saw him in my Life before, and yet he will
needs be acquainted with me. Well, if he should send to release me, according
to his promise, I shall be obliged to him, that is certain. So I were out of
this noose, I should not care if I were to be converted into a Spaniard, or an
Englishman, tho they are as much extremes as Fire and Water: For as one by his
Violence always shoots beyond the Mark, so the other by his Laziness ever falls
short of his Distance


Ha! I don't like these Fellows. still as I go on, they follow me. I turned
down this Street on purpose to avoid them, and yet they are here. I Will make
what have I can homewards, or try to lose them by the way


It must be Don Philip by the glittering of his Sword-hilt. I took particular
notice of that before


So did I. Sure it must be set with Diamonds.


So much the better still, Boys, it is lucky we have found him again. Come, we
may dispatch him yet


Away, away. We lose time.


Nay, if you follow me still, I may well suspect your design. So, I am met with
for my Curiosity. But hold, sure I am come round again to Eleonora's. By my
surprise I am. I Will strive to get in here before they come up to me. St.
Eleonora, Dorila, Hem


Who calls Eleonora at this early hour?


It Is I, Bernardo. For Heavens sake, dear Creature, let me in this moment, for
I am pursued by Ruffians. Use no delay or objection, for if you do I am a Dead
Man


Pho, this is one of the Artifices of you young Fellows, to seduce a tender
Maid. You must excuse me, Seignor. Besides, if I had an inclination, my Aunt is
yet stirring, and it concerns my Honor, and Well-being with her not to admit
you


Come you are designed to preserve me, for let me go which way I will to night,
still I meet with your House. 'Twill be now the second time my shelter this
night from imminent Danger


Indeed, Sir! you talk strangely. My doors are never opened at late hours to
any one


'Sdeath, Madam, what do you mean? the Ring, the Ring.


What of a Ring? I don't know your sign, Sir, It Is plain you are mistaken in
the House, therefore Adieu


Mistaken in the House, that is impossible. Neither can I be in that deluding
Voice. Is it not cruel to trifle with me thus at such a time? Alas! she is gone
indeed. Discourteous Eleonora! Well, if they do assault me, I must even defend
my self as well as I can


There he is like a Rat caught in a Trap. He can retire no further.


But hold, hold. Let us be sure it is he before we send him to Lucifer's
Dominions. I would not kill a wrong man neither


What do you talk of a wrong man? don't you see how his Sword glitters? it must
be he by that


Ay, but if I thought he were not the right-man I would not be concerned.


Why it is he, what a pox do you ail? I Will swear it upon any Mass Book in Spain.
What do you flinch now? you have forgot the Reward sure


The reward, let me see. Mass, and so I had. A hundred Crowns, Mass, it is
enough to slay an Emperor. Come, he dies


Come on then, let us move toward him.


Ay, ay, it must be he: It Is the very Sword he had before.


What Is your design, Friends, in following me thus?


Nay, you are mistaken, we are none of your friends, and for our design, that
you may guess at by your own Villanys


Villanys? you amaze me. I am a Stranger here, and have done wrong to none.


We'll soon try if we are mistaken. Know we are resolute, and will trifle no
longer


Nay, if you are so bent to murder me, I Will sell my Life as dear as I can.


The noise of Swords brings Don Frederick that way.

Ha! three against one, Cowardly Villains! it is Bernardo, as I live.

Courage, my Friend.


You were never more welcome.


Nay, if you are there abouts, I Will wait here for the Issue of the Engagement.


Dogs, Villains.


Blood-sucking Sons of Whores.


So, here is one of them rewarded.


O spare my Life, and I Will confess all.


Ha! not dead: then we may learn this Mystery.


O Seignor, is not your name Don Philip de Monasco?


No, you are deceived.


Truly, Sir, I was in some doubt of it before, but my Companions said they knew
you by the glittering of your Sword


Ha! Don Philip, by the glittering of my Sword! but suppose it had been Philip,
how were you induced to commit violence upon him


We were hired to it by one Donna Eleonora that lives hard by.


My barbarous Mistress, as I live!

Well, what was it for, come, out with all, or the Watch shall have you.


She only told us he had wronged her so heinously, that it was not to be
forgiven, and we were to have a hundred Crowns for our Reward


Well, you may go. But, do you hear, if you are wise, This mercy that I show to
you, will be a means to make you change your Life


Seignor, you have so work't upon me with your generosity, that I here make a
solemn protestation to become another Man


'Twill be the better for you.

Come to my Arms, my much loved Frederick. You have preserved me. who is that
with you, Anthony


What, my service was taken no notice of. I am sure you had not been alive but
for me. My Arm aches plaguely with hacking and hewing your enemies


Yes, you make vast havoc always, when you are half a mile from the Battle.


I have ever your good word. O my Arm!


Don't your Legs ache too, Anthony?


Nay my Legs are mauled too, that is the truth on it, by thrusting in among you.


But I mean by the Fetters I found you in but now.


Fetters, Sir!


How the Devil came he in the Stocks to night, Frederick?


In the Stocks, you amaze me.


I in the Stocks! sure the Danger you have been in has distracted you, Sir.


Sure you are both in a Conspiracy to banter me.


Can you be serious, Bernardo? prithee no more of this.


Nay, by St. Jago I saw him there, fixed to the Stocks like any Vagabond within
this half hour


Mere Banter. We are but newly come from the Lodging to seek you.


Why then I have seen the Devil to night, that is all. 'Twas one so like him in
Voice, Person, and Raillery after his way, that I am amazed to hear you thus
deny 'twas He


Sure the Devil does walk to night, for since I came out I have met with much
such another accident, which you shall hear anon. But prithee what else has thy
curiosity discovered


This night has been lavish of her Adventures, I Will assure you, For besides
this Mystery of Anthony, I have rescued a man from Villains, who, I have reason
to believe was Don Philip de Monasco, and he has appointed to meet me this
morning near the Great Church. Some other things I have met with too, but they
are secrets


Well, Sir, I have a secret for your secret. This night has indeed been lavish
of her Adventures


Keep it close, Don Frederick.


That you may depend on.

Nothing can Wrest it from me, but the obligation of being trusted with yours
first


O Devil, are you thereabouts? but this insinuation will never prevail to extort
a secret, that I am enjoined to keep particularly from thee


Ha! that I must own, whetts my curiosity. Prithee, Don Bernardo, come, you
shall have a secret for your secret. In good faith, I have one in my keeping


That you are impatient to get rid of, I thank you, Sir. no, no, hold there. I
can be trusted with a secret even among the Women. I have not the vanity of
most young Fellows of the Town, who think the Pleasure of Telling the principal
part of their Happiness with Ladys


Then it is with a Lady, it seems.


Nay that does not directly follow: But, faith, to be ingenuous with you, there
is a Lady in the Case


Then there are two Ladys in the case, Boy. And One of such a matchless form,
so Graceful, so surprising Fair, so infinitely Charming, that as she can have
no equal upon Earth, so she is above all Human Description


Ha! Where is this Goddess to be seen? will thou not tell me, Frederick? shall not
your dear friend have a sight of her


Oh, I knew I should be even with you. A Sight of her! You must excuse me, Sir.
Goddesses are invisible to Mortal Eyes


Well, I see when once a Man has indulged the Humor of bantering, it is as hard
for him to leave it, as it is for a Poet to cease Writing, when he has once
begun


Or as it is for you to avoid wishing to go to Bed to every Description of a
fine Woman that you hear


Well, you have surpised me. But prithee, put me in Mind, as we Walk, and I Will
disclose something to you that was a Secret, but is no longer worthy to be so


I knew he could not hold.

Come on then, let us Walk.


First give me leave, Frederick, for my Satisfaction, to order your Man Anthony
to place himself near those Lodgings, to bring me Word if any Man comes out,
when it grows Lighter


Heyday, what is to do now!


You shall know as we Walk.


This is some Jealousy about a Wench, I Will lay my Life.


She Is a handsome one at least then, and you know Venus is predominant over me.


Yes, yes. It Is a Superstition much in fashion with young Fellows. You will be
wiser, Don Bernardo


You shall know presently that I have begun at least already, by throwing off
this Woman, near whose Lodgings your Man is to watch. And the Wise say, That a
Good Beginning is half a Cure. But come, let us walk homewards. Anthony, be
sure you place your self somewhere about that Door, that you may discover who
comes out this Morning, and bring an exact account home to us


I shall do my best, Sir, to satisfy you.


Now, let us walk.


Come on, my trusty Adventurer.


WAS there ever such a Cormorant at Whoring as this Don Bernardo? no Place, no
Time, nor no Woman almost can be free from his Persecutions. A Pox of these
Night-doings, and what else can be the end of them! Hark, the Door opens


Well, and must Nelly part with her dear Don then?


It Is for your Service I go so soon, my Dear.


For your own rather.


You might have stayed with me all day, my Love, for once.


How unreasonable a Creature is Woman!


And though I have been nicely careful of my Reputation, yet for your Company I
could venture all things


A very civil Person!


Thou know, my Eleonora, there is no Ingratitude on my side. Thou know
the Promises I have made thee, and may rely on the Performance of them. Nor
should I now want Entreaties to stay with thee, but that I have a Guest at
home, whose Goodness, though a Friend, I must not trespass on too far. Besides,
to leave him any l^nger would not only seem like forgetfulness, but ill manners


I hope the Ruffians too have remembered him before this time.


Madam, good morrow. We may be seen, if I stay longer.


Well, if you must go, Don Sebastian.


Don Sebastian, good!


You are unkind not to understand me.


What do thou mean, Child?


Psha, you cannot tell a Woman's meaning, I warrant you.


What can she drive at?


You keep me in the Dark, my Dear.


I swear I could chide you, you are so dull.


My Angel, thou shall have twenty of them presently.


A Pox on them, how they make my Chops Water!


Nay now you take my Breath away.


Good morrow to my Joy.


Adieu.

But stay, I had forgot one thing.

When will you come and see poor Nelly again?


You Will send me your Commands.


Well, adieu.


Sebastian goes cross the Stage muffled, and meets Anthony passing.


There goes Anthony Don Philip's Man, but I must not discover my self to him.


Don Sebastian, your Servant. Now will I go home and disclose what I have seen
to Don Bernardo. Let me see, their names are Eleonora and Sebastian, and the
Scene between them at parting will make Bernardo cursedly jealous, I know.
Well, he shall have it all, that is certain; who knows but it may cure him of
his frenzy? Especially when it is improved with some of my heightning Colors.
Et bien, allez Monsieur Antoine


Will Not you go and lie down, Madam? you must needs want rest, for 'twas morning
when Don Sebastian came


No, no. I have other things to mind, before I can take any true rest. We Will
Sleep hereafter, Dorila, when we have brought our Designs about


How stand affairs with him? does he hold kind?


In all appearance he does. The same indearments passed between us as usual,
and when he parted, he gave me more assurances of his Resolution to marry me.
But still to be in expectation only is not to be so easy as I could wish: I
hope Bernardo got off safe, for if the Men I hired to dispatch Philip should
have mistaken him in the Dark for the other, there is a part of my Design
confounded


Or grant he be come off, your denying to admit him at such a dangerous time
may provoke him to think no more of you


'Twas very unlucky that he should call again before you had acquainted me with
the business of the Ring. But since such an Accident has happened, I confess I
don't disapprove of the Stratagem you devised to get him away. Well, Dorila,
you shall be no Loser by the Ring


I thank you, Madam. We never want invention at a Shift, you know. But how will
you do to excuse your self to him


I Will go and write to him this minute, and endeavor that way to make him
forget the usage of last Night, and if I can but insinuate my self into his
forgiveness, and find him so much a Lover as I think him, who knows what it may
end in


Articles of Matrimony perchance, if you hold the Fort out well.


I warrant thee, girl. It Is not all the Artillery of his Arguments, that can
persuade me to another surrender without honorable Terms. I was always averse
to this way of Living, and am now resov'd to take up with the first likely
Husband I can get, with Schastian, or Bernarde, or any Body else, I am
indifferent who it is, so it is a Husband. But come, I Will go and Write


I had not presumed to disturb you, Madam, but that I heard you were stirring.
This Philip, whom you ought to forger, will not let you Sleep, I find


You rally me, Sir, perhaps justly enough. But alas! when it is our Fate, we can
no more help. Loving, than we can Dying


Ay, but when a Man abuses Love, and counterfeits a Passion to delude a Woman,
methinks the force of Reason should make her despise him after the Discovery of
the Cheat


You argue very well, Sir, and according to reason: But don't you know that
Love and Reason are inconsistent

But, Sir, is there any News of him in Valencia? your obliging promise makes me
hope you have made some enquiry after him


Madam, I have: and can inform you that I hope to find him in this Town.


Where, Where? O tell me quickly, that I may fly to see him.


Amazement! That so ungrateful a Wretch should be loved by so beautiful a
Creature, whom he has abused beyond all patience


Don Frederick, my Friend, for I dare call you so. Where is this Rambler to be
found


Madam, you honor me very much, but I had rather be thought to deserve another
Name


What other Name? are not you called Don Frederick? Or is Friend too little for
you? I thought it comprehended the utmost Esteem


Esteem alone's a trifle, Madam, to that which I would merit. It Is your Love,
fair Excellence, that I aspire to raise. You have so wounded me with your
resistless Beauty, that nothing but the Possession of those Charms that made
the mischief, can effect the Cure


Sir, I took you to be more generous than to triumph over a distressed Maid.


By all that is sacred I am sincere. Don Philip may abuse you, but not
Frederick. I have a Heart unpracticed in Deceit: A Heart that never was
tortured with the pangs of Love, till now


I do confess I thought you very honest.


I thank my Stars I can boast of it. O do not refuse so passionate, and yet so
true a Lover


I do entreat you, Sir, forbear. You know I am engaged to one I love.


But to one you ought to loath. A Man that has scorned and abused you.


And yet I love him, Frederick.


The more's the Pity. What can you propose by following such a treacherous
Fellow


To reclaim him, or to be revenged.


The first you will find impracticable. It Is like besieging a very strong Town
with a small Force. You will but expose your self to Contempt and Ruin


Why then I Will be revenged.


That you may by indulging my Suit. Come, let it not be said that the heavenly
Cornelia was inexorable. Give me but Hopes, and you set me in the way to
Paradise


Revenge is so sweet, that upon Condition you let me see Philip, and he denies
to own me for his Wife, I could almost be persuaded to believe you


I accept the Condition with as much Transport of Bliss, as e're Condemned
Criminal received his pardon. Now will I go and search my Doom. Life or Death
depends on a few hours. But, Madam, I must entreat you to consent that I may
acquaint your Brother with your Circumstance, that we may be the Stronger for
the Execution of our Design


I resign my self to your Conduct.


I Will wait on you again, when I have prepared Don Bernardo.


If I can trust my Eyes, the more I look the more I am amazed. This very Ring,
or my Sight is not my own, I gave my Sister Cornelia, when I departed last from
Alcamara. That it should be found in Valencia gives me Wonder, but that it
should be sent me from Donna Eleonora pats me into Confusion. Well, things have
been strangely carried to night in Valencia


Seignor, a Young Gentleman without desires to be admitted.


Admit him. This Ring will not out of my Head. When I consider the Accident by
which I obtained it, and the succeeding one, wherein the same Eleonora that
sent it, seemed to know nothing of the matter, I must own I cannot but fancy
it is all a Dream


Am I not bold, Sir, to venture within the Roof where an angry Brother might be
found, that would kill me if he knew me


You are both safe and welcome here.

I have fastened the Door, lest Don Frederick should chance to fall in.


Well, Sir, have you heard any thing of Don Philip, since I saw you?


O, I find I am obliged to your Impatience to hear of Him for this Visit.


Good Sir, Torture me not with Supence: If you have not, I am come to claim
your Promise to assist me in searching after him


Sure there is Enchantment in Love, that it can make People thus eager to
pursue their Ruin


Alas! your Reflections are now out of Season. I beseech you answer me to the
purpose


I am deceived, or I saved his Life last Night, when he was encountered by
Ruffians


A thousand Blessings attend you for it. But are you sure 'twas he.


By several Circumstances I am almost assured. But this Morning at Ten I am to
meet the Man I rescued. He would not give me his Name, but desired me to
exchange Swords with him, that he might know me again by that. Here Is that I
had of him


O, it is he. It Is Don Philip. It Is the very Sword I have seen him wear. I know
it from a thousand


Well, since it is so, if you please, we'll go together to the Great Church,
where I have appointed to meet him


With all my Heart. O lucky Discovery!


But one thing will be necessary first. It Is fit Don Frederick should be
acquainted with your affairs


Be it as you please. I trust to you.


In the mean time pray use my Apartment. You Will see no Body to disturb you.


Thanks, Fortune, that this Dear, false Man is found.
Oh, how I long to chide him for his Absence!
Sure when he sees me thus disguised, thus bold
In my pursuit of him, he will recant
His Sex's Levity, and fix his Soul
On me, on virtuous Love, and mutual Vows.

Ha! either my Eyes deceive me, or there is his Servant Anthony. Hold, Friend,
be not in such have. Where Is thy Master

Seignor, I want to find him.


What, did you expect to find him in this House.


It Is most likely to find him at home, for He Is no Gadder ab^^ad. I Will assure
you


What, does Don Philip then lie in this House?


No, Sir, who said he did?


Why, did not thou this moment?


Not I, by St. Jago.


Prithee leave off thy old fooling.


It seems you know me then.


Alas! but too well.


Truly, Sir, I have not the good Fortune to remember you.


That may very well be. But prithee tell me, how long has Don Philip lodg*d
here


Why, Sir, he does not lodge here; nor ever did, that I know of; and more than
that, Sir, I know no such Person. Now, Sir* I must beg your leave to go through
to that Apartment, to see if my Master be there, that I may discharge my Errand


What*s the meaning of this?


You seem, Sir, to have been moved to some Surprise about that Fellow. Pray,
Who do you take him for


Have I not Reason, Sir, if I Am alive it is he.


Pray, who?


Why Don Philip de Monas^o's Man.


Do you know that Don Philip, Sir?


I have some Cause, Sir.


Then you know a Villain.


You shock me, Sir; for he is my Friend, and I must not hear him wronged.


How long has he been your Friend?


A great while. He is my Bosom-Friend.


Those Bosom-Friends prove often our worst Foes.


But I have tried him.


He may deeeive you still. If you were a Woman, he would certainly.


Ha! Sure he does not know me.

Why do you think so?


Because he is a Man.


Your Satyr's too extensive. We are not all false.


I fear all.


You have accused your self.


No, I accused the Men.


Are not you one?


Yes, yes, Sir; but I meant such Men as Don Philip. Alas! I had like to have
discovered my self

Sir, I beg you would excuse me. I am a little thoughtful, and know not what I
say. If you lodge here, I shall be glad of your Acquaintance


I do but visit here, Sir. But if you have any Justice to demand of Philip,
I Will let him know it


The World shall know it soon. This Morning I expect my self to see him.


Pray how long has he he been in Valencia?


That I know not; but that he is here, I have had some Information. Good
morrow, Sir


Who can this be? He seems to have some Resentment against Don Philip,
therefore it must be my Care to prevent its bursting out into a Flame. I Will
enquire about him

Strange Power of Love, that makes us court even Pain,
To fly true Passion, and pursue Disdain.

For Don Bernardio. It Is a Woman's Hand by the over-spelling.


Sure no Jesuit ever confessed more Women, than thou have brought to the Altar
of Venus. See her

Oh it is from Eleonora. She would excuse her Behavior to me last-Night. But I
despise her now as much as e're I loved her. I hope her Barbarity will make me
forget the whole Sex


A wholesome Resolution, if you could keep it. I suppose I may read the Letter.


Yes, and visit the Lady if you please.


Nay then you are indifferent indeed.

I Am sorry my Circumstances with my Aunt obliged me to use you as I did last
Night, but my Well-being so depends upon her Opinion of me, that I am sometimes
forced to do things against my inclination. I hope this will find you safe, and
enjoying the same good Humor, that has so often engaged my Thoughts in your
behalf. Assure your self I am impatient to hear of your Welfare, and should not
be displeased to see you come in the Afternoon, not so much to give me a
Relation of the Affair of the Ring, as to convince me that you are well, and
inclined to forgive the seeming fault o

Eleonora.


A Jilt! with what a face she carrys it on! Well, you will Visit her in the
Afternoon, I suppose


No, Frederick, but you shall in my Room, if you think good. For my part, her
usage last night has so provoked me, that I have not so much as Indifference
left for her. Besides, this fawning trick of a Letter persuades me that she is a
Jilt


I am glad you are of my mind. That she is so, I Will venture the reversion of my
Father's Estate. What, don't I know their subtle, coy, dissembling, fond,
alluring, false Designs? Proteus himself had fewer Shapes, than one of these
jilting Whores. They are like Aristotle's first matter, capable of any Form


Let her be what she will, I Will send her an answer, but it shall be an honester
Letter: For I Will tell her in plain Terms it is my Inclination to forget her


But hold, here is Anthony returned, whom we left upon the Watch.

Well, Sir, what has your Curiosity discovered?


No miracle, Seignor, for I have seen a Fornicator come out of a Whore's
Lodgings


Have a care whom you asperse, Sir.


I hope I may trust my sight; but if that alone will not do, I have another sense
to back it. I heard as well as saw


Well, what was it you heard?


I heard one Eleonora take her leave of one Sebastian.


Sebastian! Are you sure 'twas such a Name?


I think I am not deaf. And when he was going, she came out with him, and there
was such Ceremony at parting, such Unwillingness to let him go, so many soft
things, such Kissing and such Dying on her side, and such a cold Civility and
Backwardness to understand her on his, that for my part --


You wondered he could leave the Banquet so soon, and wished your self in his
Place


What, when the Soup was palled, and had lost its Gusto. No, I thank you.


Why could not you have had prtience till it had been cooked up again?


It Is somewhat a la Francoise indeed. But truly I have more Nicety. It Is not a
mon gout


Enough, enough; leave us.

What, think you now, my Amorist?


That Women are no more to be believed than Courtiers. They differ only in
this, Women deceive us by Nature, Courtiers by Art


Nay, this imposition does not want Art, I Will assure you.


Ay, but I mean Women*s Inclinations to deceive us are born with them Are they
not continually forging Plots to make some Traffic or other of us? Sure they
are our evil Genius's, for there is scarce a false Path in Life that we are not
led into by their foolish Conduct. And yet we follow on, as if they were the
Leading-strings of Fate, and we were doomed in this World to the punishment of
being miguised by the weaker Sex


Nay, now you are unreasonably severe, but it is too much an Extremity to last
long. This is only the hot Fit of the Ague


But you know the Cold one succeeds it, and that is still a greater Mark of
Contempt


It Is granted. But for my part, I cannot commend Extremes in any thing. And yet
I am grown since last Night, will thou believe it, my Friend? A most passionate
Lover


Prithee know thy self a little better.


All other knowledge but that of the unparalleled Cornelia, is like the
Comparison of the Stars with the Sun


You amaze me, what Cornelia. do you mean!


Don Bernardo, prepare your self for something that will furprize you.


Speak out. I am ready.


Should you not wonder to find your Sister in this Place?


Very much, Sir. Pray, what mean you?


Disguised too in Man's Clothes, I saw her.


Are you distracted, Frederick?


No, Don Bernardo, unless it be with Joy. I have hopes, my Friend if Don Philip
prove but false


Don Philip too! What is all this?


I knew you would be surpised. But pray compose your self, and I Will disclose a
Secret, which it is convenient you should know


Speak it aloud, if it concern my Honor.


It does indeed. And to let you know it in a Word, Don Philip, whom you so
lately rescued, once made pretensions to your Sister, but they were such as
Virtue could not hear, and yet she loved him


That is, she had a Mind to be undone, but a little of her Sex's Pride saved
her


You shall hear. He soon perceived her seeming Weakness, and laid his Batteries
against that part, but bravely she repulsed him. In short they both engaged
again, till having made Trial of each others Force, they drew off and parred.
Some Articles, it seems, had been agreed to on both sides, but he refusing to
perform his part your Sister grew incensed, and in disguise pursued him to this
Place


You would imply they were contracted, and after he refused to marry her, but
sought only to abuse her


You have it. Yet she loves him.


Base Villain! but you shall do her Justice, you shall, or by Heaven I Will root
out your perfidious Tongue. Now Ring, your Mystery is out. An unlick'd Brute,
to throw away a Lady's Favor, which any one else would have esteemed
invaluable

But hold. Don Frederick, you gave me Caution to be prep ar'd to hear what has
indeed astonished me


I believe so.


Now do you guard your self against a worse Event


Ha! speak out.


Are you prepared against surprise?


Speak. I defy surprise.


Why then the same perfidious Dog has whor'd thy Sister, and forsaken her.


Have a care, I charge thee. My Sister, and a Whore by the same Don Philip.
Sure you want sleep, Bernardo


I wonder not at your Amazement, but so it is.


It Is a rank Falsehood. Bernardo, you have suggested this to abuse me. Now by
the untainted Honor of our House, Olivia must be honest


The Contradiction was unmannerly. But Thou art Angry, and I consider Rashness
is the Birth of Anger, or by the King of Spain I would not bear it


I do confess my Fault, and ask your Pardon. But, prithee tell me, What do
thou mean about Olivia


That I have met with her to Night in Valencia, and have heard her Story, which
acquainted me with his villainous Desertion after he had obtained her


If this be so, by all that is Great and Powerful, this Day's his Last, if he
refuse to Wed her


Nay there I am for you. But hold, let me see! How shall I do Justice then for
Cornelia


It Is true; Cornelia must be righted, though Olivia suffer.


Not so neither. Let Justice have its Course. It seems, you know her Story.


I do, which you shall have anon.


Which done, we'll refer all to Philip at the time of Appointment this Morning;
and if he refuse to marry Her whom it shall appear he has most wronged, he must
have speedy Punishment


Agreed; and though I love your Sister most passionately, if she appears most
wronged, I Will force him to receive her for his Wife, or Die in the Attempt


It Is generously resolved. Though for your sake I wish it on Olivia's side, that
we may be more than Friends, Brothers


If Providence so orders it, I shall be supreamly blessed on Earth. Such a Wife
and such a Brother would set me above a Throne


We must leave all to Fate. But come, I Will go write to this barbarous Eleonora,
and then for our meeting with Don Philip at the Church


With all my Heart.

Now, Love, if for a God thou would be known,
And art determined to support thy Throne:
Display thy Power, and vindicate thy Fame,
Reward true Love, Revenge thy injured Name.

ARe you sure you saw him so early, and alone?


'Twas he, or my Eyes deceived me much. But I am amazed to hear how you lost
him; sure he is distracted


Hang him, to deny me to my Face, and to follow another Master without any
cause of Disgust -- I know not what to think


It Is a Riddle indeed beyond my Ability to solve.


And beneath your Care. It Is but a Fool lost.


I wonder who 'twas came to your assistance last Night.


'Twas then too dark to distinguish him, but I promised to meet him at Ten this
Morning near the Great Church. Let me see

It Is within half an hour on it.


I believe it may.

Ha! What Is that she has dropped?

Methought 'twas Dorila, that went into her Mistress's. For Donna Eleonora.
Unsealed too, then 'twill be no ill Manners to open it

Now who art thou from? Bernardo. It Is from a Man it seems. Let me see.


Nay, nay, you will let me share in the Accident, I hope.


I beg you would excuse me. It happens to be a Secret wherein I am more than
ordinarily concerned


Then I am no longer curious.

WHat Satisfaction soever you could take in not sheltering me last Night from
almost inevitable Destruction: Yet know, Cruel. Woman, that I have escaped, nay
doubly escaped both from the Villains you your self employed for Murder, and
from the Sanres of a Designing and perfidrous Jili. Neither am I ignorant who
it was that hindered my admittance; and to give you a just Correction for your
Treachery, I shall find a Way to let Don Sebastian know how false you are to
him. Alas! Your invitations have now lost their Force. I despise you and your
Letters. Your trifling Present too, which is not worth returning. And to finish
your mortification, know, that the Inclinations I had for you are turned into
Revenge

Bernardo.


Now I have a very fair occasion to get rid of an old Mistress, that I have
long suspected to play me false. This Letter is convincing* The Obligation I
was under of my promise to marry her, joined with the Charms I still found in
her, kept me to my usual Complaisance, and Heaven knows how far two such
powerful Advocates as Honor and Beauty might have prevailed but for this
fortunate Accident. Marry her! Forbid it all ye Powers. Now by St. Jago, I Would
sooner Wed Infection. Hateful Eleonora! I Will go to her this Moment, and declare
my Resolutio

My dear Friend, I beg your Excuse. I have found somewhat of much Import to me,
that requires my immediate absence for a few Moments. I Will meet you near the
Church forthwith; do you wait upon Don Philip


Some Amor of his at bottom, I Will lay my Life. This Love is as infectious as
the Plague, and diffuses it self as hastily, but is not quite so mortal, Heaven
be praised. Whatever Darts and Flames some People find in it, I thank my Stars
I am yet Heart-whole Languishing and Dying for a Woman's Toy is such a Jest
with all my Heatt. Sir, pray sing the Song I so much admire

BEauty is not what I pray,
I ask no shining Graces;
Celia has another way,
Without the Tricks of Faces.
So our Humors still agree,
Kind Heaven, it is enough for me.
Mere Fruition is a Joy
But of a Moment's lasting:
Fruit, that does so quickly Cloy,
It surfeits but with Tasting.
No true Bliss in Love we find,
Unless two Bodies share one Mind.
Here Is something for your Trouble. Now toward the Church.


Dorila, where is your Mistress?


She Is in her Chamber, Seignor.


Let her know I am here.


I shall, Sir, and she will be o'erjoy'd to see you here again so soon.

I don't like this sudden return though. I wish it does not presage some
extraordinary event


Her Joy will be soon abated, when she sees me depart again so soon, at least
upon such an Occasion. Now must I resolve to be Flint, or she with her damned,
alluring, female Wiles will melt me to forgiveness. But -- I have thought on a
Way to countermine her


O my Dear Sebastian.

This is unexpectedly kind to return so soon. Believe me, I am so full of Joy,
I want Words to express it


Avaunt, thou fawning Strumpet. Thou Spirit of Delusion. See here this Letter.
Have I not fostered thee in my Bosom most tenderly, and Thou, like an
ungrateful Viper, have set thy Teeth against thy Preserver


You are soon offended, Seignor, at nothing. It Is true, I did receive this
Letter. But pray, Sir, how am I to blame if Men will be so impertinent as to
write to me. Besides, you see he confesses that I used him ill


Yes, you have your Arts to show your seeming Frowns sometimes, to provoke Men
to study how to reconcile you. This is your Sex's Method to draw us on to our
Ruin. Go, you are perfidious, and remember 'twas your own inconstancy not
mine, that caused our Separation


Shall it then be said that Don Sebastian did but seem to be a Man of Honor,
and good Nature, not easily possessed with Fancies, slow of Belief, a Lover of
his Friend, soon provoked, but soon returning to himself? you see, this is the
trick of a malicious Fellow to ruin me. For that is the Consequence, when my
Sebastian thinks me false


So. This I expected.

Madam, You need not be so much concerned. The World is wide enough, and Fools
are plenty


What, will you go without hearing me? The vilest Criminal is allowed his
Defense. I am not guilty, do but hear me


No, that is playing at hazard. Why should I attempt to throw again, when I have
nicked you already? Farewell


and Dorila hold him.] Do but hear us, let us both entreat you.


You are both as false as Hell.

So. Farewell. I*ll never fee you more.


Devil, you are the cause of all this. Now may I go and hang my self.


I am as much concerned, Madam, as it is possible. You cannot believe I dropped the
Letter on purpose


How do I know but you did! I believe you and Bernardo are in a Conspiracy to
undo me


You reward me liberally for all my Services. I thought I had given you
sufficient Proofs of my Fidelity


How could thou drop that Letter so unhappily? Or what had you to do to
meddle with it


I thought I had taken more than ordinary Care of it; for I put it into my
Bosom when I went to make Enquiry after the Ruffians, and how I dropped it by the
way, or where, I cannot imagine


A greater Misfortune sure could not have happened to me: For now my
Expectations are all crossed, my springing Hopes are blasted in the Bud, and
naught remains but withered Disappointment, and a fruitless Wast of Despair


Have Patience, Madam, they have but served you like Men, which may be a
Warning to you hereafter not to trust any of the Sex


Trusted! No; they shall be despised by me for ever. Certainly there is not in
the Creation so vile a Monster as Man, and yet we Women are such Fools to liken
him to an Angel


That Is before we know him. As soon as Curiosity has brought us acquainted with
him, we see the Devil lurking under that Angel's Form


O that I could recover my stolen Honor, and those Golden days of innocence
which I enjoyed, but knew not how to prize, before I listened to false Man.
Curse upon the Sex, they are all dissembling Villains, Curse on my Ears for
harkening to their Arguments, and doubly cursed be my Credulity for trusting
them beyond the bounds of Virtue


Restrain your passion, Madam.


Yes, I will, you shall see I will.

Trust them no more, forget them, there lies your happiness. Ha! But how forget
them to be happy. I have it. I thank you, friendly Powers, that have so soon
spread forth your Providence. I Will turn Nun, and spend the remainder of my Days
in penitence for my past Offenses


Are you in your Wits? good Venus, how you talk?


Somewhat disagreeably to your Taste, it seems. But, know, I am determined, and
most fortunately this very Day is the great Festival of St. Jago, a proper Day
to enter into my year of Probation


Why then you are another Magdalen. But truly if I might advise you, you are
now in the Flower of your Age, and may propose to spend many a happy Year in
the enjoyment of the World: Why should you seek Death, when Life is yet so well
worth preserving


Thou art deceived in Life. What is it but a Succession of Troubles? A mere
Quotidian Ague, which by the constant supply of Hopes and Fears, knows little
intermission as long as Nature lasts


Use your Pleasure, Madam. I thank my Stars, I am not yet weary of the World.


However, let us retire together, that I may take my last leave of you, when I
am prepared for my Heavenly Journey


I Will wait on you, Madam, to the Threshold of Death, but you must excuse me
from going over it


I wish your happiness, but cannot compel it.


Come, this way with him. This way leads to Don Sebastian's


Hold, Friends, don't be so very hasty, do you see. Pray, let us consider a
little, dy'e mind me, what we shall say to the Magistrate


Why, that is very true, Neighbor. We ought to lay our story well, do you see me?


My Man Anthony, as I live! How the Devil came he among that fry of Leaches?
But it is what he deserves: Yet I Will ask them, to amuse my self, till Don
Sebastian's return


Enough, enough; come away with him.


Hold, Gentlemen. Pray, whither are you conducting that Fellow?


But that you promise for a Person of Note, we should not have time to answer
any Man's questions: We are carrying him to Don Sebastian's to be committed for
a House-breaker


O Sir, I Am glad I have found you again. I have been baited, Sir, no Tiger was
ever so baited, as I have been by these Spanish Dogs


You are come in good time, Seignior, to do a piece of justice


What Is the matter, Mr. Constable?


Matter, Seignior? An please your Worship, we have brought a Stranger here,
that we found hid to Night in a Cellar Window, just ready to set the City a
Fire about our Ears, I warrant him


Is not this your Man, Don Philip?


If I have Eyes it is he, pray examine him.


How now, Anthony? How come you under the guard of the Constable and the Watch?


Your Worship knows as well as I. One thing I know, which is, that I have been
abused most disgracefully


It Is no more than you deserve, ungrateful Villain! Did you not forsake me last
Night when I was assaulted in the Street, and did I not meet you afterward
following another Master? And more than that, when I claimed you for my
Servant, did you not utterly disown that you knew me, or had ever seen me
before


Sure, this is but a Dream, Sir: For this Lifeguard of mine here, (Pox choke
them) can answer to my disgrace, that I have sat in the Stocks all Night


That he has indeed, I Will witness it, for he was put in by my order.


Hey-day! Sure I Dream still, or I Will be sworn I met him Early to Day.


He was safe locked down from one a Clock till within this half hour, I Will pass
my Word


Nay now I can disprove you; for if I have Eyes, I saw him pass by me very
early to Day


An'please your Worship, what the Watchman said must needs be true, for he
stood near him all the time till he was releas'


Then will I be Sacrificed: Go, you are all a pack of Rascals, Release him,
I Will answer for him


There Is Don Sebastian, and he with him should be Don Philip.


Bernardo, 'twere fit they withdraw a while, till we have prepared him for the
Interview


By all means. Ladies, will you oblige us by retiring a step or two, till we
have had some conference with those Gentlemen


Another Woman disguised?


We will.


Sir, by that Sword you wear, I should be much your Debtor, sure you releiv'd
me last Night, when I was assaulted by Villains


I did indeed attempt a Gentleman's relief last Night, who exchanged Swords
with me, and it is very likely you are he


The same. And believe, Sir, that as I am bound to you for my preservation, so
shall I be always ready to serve you with my Life


Serve your self first, Don Philip, and be honest.


Ha! what means this odd, familiar Counsel?


Have you not abused Cornelia, my Sister? Now if thou art a Man, speak truth.


Olivia's wronged too, Philip, think of that, and know her Brother's here to do
her justice


You have somewhat surpised me, Gentlemen, with your accusations.


Do you deny the facts?


What if I do?


Then we must try the cause this way, Draw,


You may be sure of that.


Hold, Gentlemen, Don Philip is my Friend, and I must take his part.


With all my Heart. We are two and two.


Come on thou Poison to our Families


Nay then at you, Sir.


Now, Sir, I hope You're satisfied.


But not I, Sir, I have the same advantage over your Friend, and you have
vvrong'd my Sister


Take Your satisfaction too, whilst my Sword holds, it shall deny none that ask
it


Your fortune is Superior, whatever your Justice be.


You owe me both your Lives. And now what I have to beg of you is, that you
would stifle your Resentments: And if you will favor me with your company's to
Don Sebastian's, I here give you my Honor to do you Justice too, as far as in
me lies before we part


Nay now you are truly brave.


Ha! What art thou, that in the very shape of Anthony, come hither to perplex
us


Why I think my Name is Anthony, by the singular favor of chance both
Frenchman and Spaniard, that is to say, a mixture of all the Contrarieties in
Nature


His very Voice, Person, and Raillery.


The Seal and the Print are not more perfectly alike.


It Is something mavelous, I must own: if this should prove my own Apparition
now, which they say People often see a little before their Death, how many Sins
have thou to answer for, pauvre Antoine! What art thou that here usurp'st my
Name and Shape


O Gentlemen. shield me, shield me from this Fiend, -- it is certainly -- the
Devil, he could never be so like me else


This is surprising. From hence came the mistakes of last Night, Don Frederick.


And ours, Don Sebastian.


If 'twere not for one cursed Objection, that is not to be got over without a
Miracle, I could-soon resolve this Riddle


Try what you can do.


It Is impossible Seignior, for the Man I should take him for was drowned many
Years ago


Examine him however.


Pray, Monsieur Antoine, are you a native of Caen in Normandy?


Yes, -- indeed, Seignior Devil.


The Devil you are. Was not Monsieur your Father called Pierre le Menetrier,
that is to be understood, Peter the Fiddler


He was indeed Sir.


Ha! Sure I Dream.

What will this come to? Did not you follow his Trade after his Death?


I commenced Joueur de Violon that Year the great Turn in England happened in
88


Impossible! Thou art some Magician, and art resolved to deceive me into
madness. -- One thing more. We^^ not you pressed abord Monsieur Tourville with
a Twin-Brother, that was so perfectly your likeness, that you were the
Amazement of all that saw you


I was, and should have taken you for him but that he was blown up in one of
those Twenty Ships that were Burnt by the English, after the Sea Fight between
the French and the English Fleets


Then art thou my Brother, Anthony? How I was preserved and where, after my
misfortune you shall know another time


My Brother restored from the Dead! This is such excess of joy to me. Come to
my Arms, I will embrace thee, as I would a Woman


So let them embrace. Now the Mystery is over, and you have your Mares again.


Though they are Brothers, so exact a likeness was surely never seen.


It Is very strange. But come, let us walk. Don Bernardo; we forget our Friends
hard by


With Don Philip's and this Gentleman's leave well' call for them, and take
them with us


With all our Hearts.


With all our Hearts.


Your Friends too are welcome, Gentlemen, to such poor entertainment as my
House can afford


You are very obliging.


I scorn to deny my self upon such an occasion. I own I am a Woman, and Married
to Don Philip before Heaven, though he has left me: Yet will I pursue him, till I
have either found the faithless wanderer, or spent my Days in the vain Search


You will, you say. Alas! I pity thee, for Thy search will be vain indeed.
Know, fond Woman, that he is mine by legal contract, not to be revoked but by
mutal consent: So much he is mine, that I Will not spare him a look to throw away
upon thee


Impotent Avarice! I pity thee, undone as thou art, as well as deserted; for
he is mine by yet a stronger tie than any contrac


It Is false: He never was, nor shall be. If thou do offer any farther claim,
thy Life's in danger


I Laugh at thy rage, unthinking Creature, and to let you see how much I value
Philip, I here renounce the weakness of my Sex, and dare you to the combat for
his Love


Now by great Hymen's Torch, 'twas nobly offered, and though a Rival spoke it, I
applaud it

Come on. Now for Don Philip.


She who survives is happy.


Ha! at Wars? What new adventure's this? We left you but now unaccquainted with
each other, as we thought


And are returned too soon. You have hindered the effect of a noble contention.
Don Philip there! Then am I satisfied, for sure he will do me justice


Ha! Do I see my Love again? But hold, fond Heart, keep up thy usual Pride,
least the false wretch insult and scorn thy weakness


Sir, I am yet a stranger to you: How can I do you justice?


It Is but acknowledging Olivia for your Wife.


Olivia her self. This is beyond my hopes. I will acknowledge thee, thou
Miracle of Love


Villain, hold. See Cornelia too, disguised as she is. See your contracted Wife.


Ha!


What, does he demur upon it?

Die then, ungrateful wretch.


Stop thy mad Hand, or sheath thy Blade within this Breast, so it may save Don
Philip


My dear Olivia, I Blush to see this kindness from thee.

Madam, you might have been less outrageous. I must own I have been to blame,
but am now resolved --


To marry Olivia, I suppose.


I was a going to say Madam --


That thou art perjured. Enough, thou have my consent to be so. Be thy Perjury
thy Punishment: For my part I freely discharge thee


I am obliged to your Passion then, for it has made you consent to clear me of
such an imputation. You have revoked your contract, and so do I before these
witnesses. Donna Olivia, here is my Hand, take it, and my Heart along with it,
I doubt not but this Action will restore me to my true happiness. Gentlemen, I
hope you own my justice


I cannot deny your obligation here to be superior.


This fortunate Event transports me beyond expression.


May I presume, Madam, to remind you of your late conditions?


Are you not a Man, Sir?


I hope so, Madam.


How then are you to be trusted? The only one I ever yet confided in has
deceived me. But


Madam, you have made me entirely happy. You have not only blessed me with your
self, but made a worthy Friend my Brother


But hold, one thing more. Cornelia, do you know this Ring?


Yes, sure. 'Twas your gift, which I could have parted with to no one, but Don
Philip


I know it too and Blush. But how came you by it?


Think where you disposed of it, then ask no more.


I was mad when I parted with it, but I find where you have been.


I fell in my accident, as you shall know another time. In the mean while we
are all satisfied. Joy to you all. I could almost wish my self in the same
condition, but not with Eleonora, Don Fredrick


You once wished it with her, Don Bernardo.


Eleonora, and Bernardo! This must be he who writ that Letter.

Sir, I believe we are both delivered from the same perfidious Woman. Did not
you write lately to one Eleonora


I dare confess it. She used me ill, and I let her know it. Possibly your
understanding with her brought you to know it


That she has been of my acquaintance, I don't disown: But 'twas pure accident
made me see the Letter. It served to confirm me in what I before suspected, and
I have since broke of all correspondence with her


I am glad on it, for she is a very Jilt. But what had Don Philip done to her,
that she should hire Ruffians to Murder him


Was it she then that set those Villains on to Murder me, when I was so
seasonably releiv'd by you


So I afterward discovered by one of the same Ruffians, whom I had wounded and
seized, after they had attacked me by mistake of the Sword you gave me at
parting, and it seems Eleonora had hired them for a hundred Crowns to Murder
you


What a She-Devil is this! I knew her formerly at Madrid, a Woman of a light
Character, who would fain have persuaded me to marry her. When she could not
prevail, she removed from thence hither as I had been informed. Wherefore when
I came to this Town, I recollected what I had heard, and enquiring her out, I
last Night made a visit to her, and it seems by the story, when I went from
her, she sent Villains after me to dispatch me


What, did she entertain You too?


O, she was my old acquaintance, and I suppose would have been revenged on me
for the slight I had put upon her


What a rare Wife I should have had! Fortune thou deserve all things from me.


Well she is going to be revenged upon you all. For I was told but now, that
she is resolved to leave the seducing World, and end her Days in a Nunnery


That would be strange.


But the best Action of her Life.


Ay, ay, to a Nunnery let her go. In the mean time let Us think a little of
this World, and since you are all agreed, let the Ladies retire, and shift
themselves into their own habits, and we will see you joined together, before
Noon is past


With all my Soul. Come, my Cornelia, have to make me happy.


Be it as you please.


Though Marriage is accounted by some a kind of servitude, yet I hope, my Olivia,
we shall have no repenting before the Year is out at least


I shall make it my endeavor to give no cause on my side.


Come on then, let us hasten to the Trial: One pleasure at least I am before
hand sure of, and that is in the thought of making satisfaction for the wrong I
have done

For whatsoever delight Bad Men can find
In doing wrong, it is the unblemished mind,
That makes our Lives most sweet, our Pleasures most refined.

THere is newly Published the History of Lewis XII. King of France and Navarre,
containing the most remarkable Occurrences in France and Europe, during the
Minority of that Prince. By Monsieur Michelle Vasser, Price 5 s

A Collection of Novels, in two Volumes, viz. The secret History of the Earl of
Essex and Queen Elizabeth. The Happy Slave, and the Double Cuckold. To which is
added the Art of Pleasing in Conversation. By Cardinal Richlieu. Vol. II. The
Heroine Musqueteer. In Four parts: Or, Love and Duty Reconciled. By Mr.
Congreve. The Pilgrim in two parts. Price of the two Volumes 10 s. Each Volumes
may be had singly

There is in the Press the Elements of History, from the Creation of the World
to the Monarchy of Constantine the Great; being an Abridgment of Howel's
History of the World. Done by himself Containing the affairs of the Empires, in
a new order and method: With a description of the Kingdoms and Republics
Contempory with them: And a brief account of their Magistrates and Political
Governments: Written Originally in Latin. By William Howel, L L. D. for the use
of the Universities, and now Translated into English. Price 5 s

Where Gentlemen and Ladies may be furnished with all sorts of Novels and Plays.

This Day is Published the last New Tragedy called, Richard the Third. Written
by Mr. Cibber


