WHat? have our City Wits be^n ^uelt? that the y
Of late a'n'^able to beget a Play?
Or rather (troubl^d with Fears Quaking Fits)
Is London frighted out of all its Wits*
By the Phanatick Crews late Insurrection?
Or have they been molested with the infection
Of the dull City air? with which the^r brains
Perhaps do sympathize, and take more pains
Now to produce a Play, then Randolphs Quill
Would have required the Theater to fill;
Have London wits drank down some deadly pot^on?
Are only Academick Wits in motion?
Must Genus, Species, which of you were will not
To trudge a foot, at last be forced to mount
The Muses' Paegasus? then I Will spur on
And ride a Scholars pace from Helicon
To the City Theater, and humbly beg
Your courteous audience with a scrape, or leg,
(Though It be but Scholar-like performed,) and dare
My wants in the hearing of you all declare,
I Will tell you, that I hope you are not so
Cruel, as to let Wit a begging go,
And that, if you will grant me your approbation
I shall be richer then the Indian Nation.

HOw now Pege, do not think I was possessed
With a Prophetic spirit, and spoke as infallibly
As an Oracle? When I told thee
That were I never so exact a Chemist,
I could not extract one grain of gold out of
My fathers coffers: he graspes his coin as fast
As drowning men do those on whom they fix their clutches
When they are the third time sinking:
Thy aid I prithee; what Engine? what stratagem
Shall I use t'open the floodgates of his Liberality?
For (as I am a Scholar and a poor one)
My empty pockets no less require a flash
From the golden Tagus of his wealth,
Then the most heavy-loaded Barge at
Lowest water; there is no danger that my pockets
Should prodigally overflow their bancks,
I having not wherewithal I may procure
A competency of liquor to fill an Arch
Of my least hollow tooth, or wet my whistle.

What will thy aged father neither vouchsafe
To shine upon thee with a golden ray,
Or water thee with a golden shower?
What neither rain nor sunshine?
Then certainly thou can not but be barren:
And thy pockets must necessarily be as dry
As thy old fathers quite-exhausted bones:
What does he sordidly engross all his revenues
To himself? if so, he does deserve
To have's gray beard puckt for its silver hairs,
As geese are plucked by schoolboys for their quills.

O Pege; there is thunder in the name of Father:
He trembled less that stole Joves golden Scepter,
And scraped the ivory thigh of Hercules
Armed with his club, then I, when I but spend
A thought on so unnatural an act, as to profane
The silver shrine of those gray hairs,
Whose very age gives them a title to respect and reverence.

If you will stand forsooth, upon nice points
Of Religion, you may still continue as poor
As one o'th Mendicant Friars, and like an Anchorite
Live and die under a ruined and demolisht-wal;
And for want of coin to pay the Sexton,
Be forced to dig your grave with (Natures Mathookes)
Your long nails.

Ah Pege, I Would rather dye in some remote
And solitary desert; and have no other grave,
Then what the pitiful and tender hearted bird
(With the red Stomacher) is wont to give us;
(Which is no other then a mass of leaves heaped
On a carkase) then bury the remembrance of
Reverence and Duty to a Father.

Thou have a noble spirit (Eugenes) and I Am
Induced to think, that (like Jove on Danae)
Some noble Deity descended on thy mother,
And having given earnest for thy birth in drams
Of heavenly pleasure, retired again to the spangled
Canopy; could such a noble branch as thy brave self
Spring from (that root of evil) Avarice?
So open and liberal a hand as thine, consist of
The same flesh and blood, as thy close-fisted and
Tenacious father? it seems to me a Prodigy in nature.

Father? -- sighs
I dare as soon (like those accursed sons of
Earth the giants) plot and imagine treason
Against heaven, as let the smallest ventricle of my
Heart conceive one thought of disobedience to my
Father! let me conjure thee therefore by the sacred tie
Of our unfeigned amity and friendship, never for the future
To mention my dearest fathers sacred name
But with some swelling titles of dignity and honor.

As he is thy father (Noble Eugenes)
He Is worthy to be deify'd and adored, I could not
Safer err in any Labyrinth, then when I lost
My self in his deserved Encomiums, but if's
Relation to thee be forgotten, I must and will
Forget to tender him respect and reverence:
But we must cut the thread of this discourse,
For here comes merry Eutrapelus; let us indulge
Our selves in jovial mirth, and make enquiry
What entertainment Eugeneia was pleased to afford
His courtship. God save you
Merry Eutrapelus.

Your servant Pege; your vassal also noble Eugenes,
I have been laying close siege to the noble Eugeneia,
But (by Venus'es happy Region the Middle) all
The flashes of my sparkling wit cannot burn the fort of her
Strong resolutions against Marriage; she takes of nothing
Else but Nunneries, of Vestaes sacred order, and wishes
That all men (like Cybele's priests) were
Castrated and guelt, she is another Lucretia
For her squeamish coyness, and I Am afraid
She Will sooner stab her self then let me
Pass a thrust upon her.

Why? are you so well armed and accoustr'd
Eutrapelus, that you talk of passing a thrust?

I have as good a mettall'd dagger as that
Which youthful Paris used to stab his Helena,
When Venus promised him her best assistance;
And (like Achille's Spear) it does no sooner
Wound a Lady, but 't can as speedily perform the cure;
I have obtained a license to wound young Ladies
(As Mountebanckes do their servants)
To make experiment of my art, of curing
Them again with my so famous Weapon-salve.

Now you talk of Mountebankes, I shrowdly suspect
You're a Mountebank, and promise greater cures
Then your abilities will suffer you to perform.

I am not a Mountebank in your sense (Pege,)
But I wish I were in another; and that I
Might Mount the Banks of Eugenia's pleasant
River, and yet I think were I upon the banks
I quickly should fall in, and were I but well in,
She could not fall out with me, were she
More squeamish then she is.

Well, since you must needs be riding,
I Will back your mare, I Will make her pliant
And gentle for your turn; I Will muster up
All the inducements and arguments I can,
To make her grant you a fair
And courteous audience, I Will sound the trumpet
Of your loud merits in her ear, and so
Blazon the coat of your noble extraction and descent,
That she (as Bucephalus would admit of
No rider but Alexander) shall suffer none
To ride her but your self.

Prithee then be speedy, for I Am in such have
That I could willingly rid Post upon her,
Which till you have accomplished, farewell.

Being he talks of riding Post, I hope my
Sister (if he marry her) will create him a
Cuckold, and give him a Horn or two to blow.
But here comes my uncle with my tutour;
Be you gone Pege.
And I Will retire behind the hangings, and hear
What commentaries they will write upon my actions.

DId ever Africa produce so strange a monster
As my ungrateful Nephew? he is ingratitude
In the abstract; I brought him to the College
Thinking withal to bring him to my lure,
And that he would readily perform what I enjoined him;
But since his most unfortunate arrival,
Obedience to me is his smallest care;
He performs my commands with the same willingness
As heavy Bodies move from their own center,
Or malefactors go to execution.

I am dissolved in admiration at this news,
For unto my commands he has been all obedience;
I never read to Pupil yet which did receive the
Dictates I instilled into him with a more facile
Promptness; what? has a got a pair of faces?
Does one frown upon you with a contracted
Supercilious brow? the other smile on me
With a benign and more placid aspect?
Is he made up of contradictions? this surfets
My weak faith; I cannot digest and thoroughly
Concoct into a firm belief such strange impossibilities as these.

Impossibilities? you will then maintain him in's
Rebellion, will you?

You must remember (Sir) that youthful blood
Is hot and fiery, and if you will be peevish
And morose, and (Touch wood-like) receive ill
Sparks of discontent it offers, you will quickly be
Reduced (to the worst of ills) Annihilation,
And burnt to dust and ashes.

Though youthful blood be hot,
Yet it must be allayed and cooled by snowy age;
And those of elder years ought to restrain
It Is violent and impetuous course.

I, but with this caution and proviso,
That the restraint be not unseasonable:
It Is a received opinion among Anatomists,
That the ligature and binding of a member
If seasonably applied, preserves the heart
From violent influxes of the blood;
But if the application be untimely, it causes
Gangrenes and Haemorrhagies;
So youthful blood if checked unseasonably,
Becomes more insolent and impetuous, more vitiated and
Corrupt, then if its natural course had not been hindered;
The age of youth is the strong Rein of
Passion, and vice does ride in triumph
Upon the wheels of vehement desire,
Which run with infinite celerity
When the Boy drives the chariot,
They cannot be stopped on a sudden,
Art and deliberation must be used.

I think you have entered a league with
Your pupil to abet him in debauchery,
And cloak his lewdness and wild rogueries;
I am resolved to acquaint his father that
You rescue and protect him from my just
Rage, you are his sanctuary and Asylum.

Could you but view your self now in
A glass, and see how you're transformed into
A horrid monster, how your lips shake and
Tremble, your veins and arteries swell
With the inflammations of your furious blood,
And your eyes sparkle as if they were
The only seat of fire, and at each glance
Would start a Salamander by their
Excessive heat; you would not (like Narcissus)
Be in the least transported with the love
Of your own person, but rather (like Actaeon)
Stand amazed, when you perceive your self
Transformed into a beast by Passion;
You would I Am sure abhor and hate your
Self, worse then you do or can your
Nephew, pray then by patient.

I Will make patience as great a stranger
To my breast a a a as. --

To your breast a, a, a, as goodness
For I never discovered any in it yet:

O, now I have recovered my lost senses;
I mean I Will make patience as great a stranger
To my breast, as I resolve to make my Nephew to my love.

A Pox choke you, have you hit it at last?

O groundless and inveterate Hatred!

Groundless? Groundless? are these the praecepts
Of morality you instill into him? to teach him
How to be rebellious? I Am sorry I so much
Disparaged my own judgment as to commit him
To your care and charge: could you by
The clue of truth dive into all his winding
Labyrinths of impiety, you would think him a worse
Monster then the inhumane Minotaur,
And hire another Theseus to destroy him;
You Would wish your self all arm and weapon
To cut him off: Ha you rogue!
What? a secret auditor of our
Discourse? an Evesdropper? you see my Shorthand
Can sufficiently write your Character,
You Have heard your own.

Reverend and worthy Sir,
It may perhaps seem strange to you that
Having a relation so near (I wish I could say
Dear) unto me as an uncle present, I should
Address my self first unto you;
But (Sir) he is so deformed and strangely altered
By his brutish passion, that I forget he is my
Uncle, he makes me of Pythagoras'es Sect,
And firmly to believe the souls of Brutes
Do by a transmigration animate and inform
Our human bodies, as often as I reflect upon
His fierce and savage nature.

But I should have entertained better thoughts
Of you, my Eugenes, had you first attempted
To pacify your uncle, it may be though you now
Stinck in his thoughts worse then your excrement
Would do in's nose, and your memorial be to him
As odious as swines flesh to a Jew, yet by
Your flowers of Rhetoric you might have
Seemed sweet again and pleasant.

I had as good go court the air, or plow the sand,
Sweet smells will make his head ache,
And flowers of Rhetoric would to him be
As offensive as perfumes are to those who are
Affected with fits of the Mother.

Sirrah, for this your malepert and saucy
Language, I Will make you troubled with fits
Of the father, I Will lay your close and secret
Vices as open to him as is the Sun in's high
Meridian at Noonday.

Young Eugenes, I plainly see that you're become
So odious to your Uncle, that if you do but speak
Or breath in's presence, you will kindle and inflame
His hottest fury, wherefore avoid the room.

I willingly submit to your commands.

Could one blast of your mouth blow him away?
I might have spent my lungs and sworn at him
These two hours to be gone, and all in vain;
And at one small entreaty from your lips
He vanishes, and flies like lightning.

My charity prompts me (Sir) to think that
He so far resembles heaven, as rather to be
Conquered by prayers then full-mouthed oaths,
You must use soft and downy words, if you
Would break his flinty heart; I know him well.

I wish he would know himself so well, or if he wont,
That I had never known him.

Well, I Will go and sift him thoroughly,
I Will refine him I warrant you, and new mold him.

Pray use your best endeavors, and adieu.

I Wonder Anaiskuntia, that Eugenes has been
So great a stranger to us.

Madam, you must think, that Scholars are as
Fickle and unconstant in reading Ladies faces,
As their books, they scarce have half perused one
But they make scrutiny and enquiry after others,
They seldom write one style, one language, long.
They court Variety (the mother of Delight)
As travelers that resolve to put a girdle about
The world, after they have viewed one fair
And amiable place, pass to another: So Scholars after they have
cast a slight and transparent glance on some transcendent face
And orient Beauty, pass on unto another;
They would have as many Ladies to exercise
Their Courtship on, as there are months; nay
Weeks in the Almanac; and if a Lady would
Give them content and satisfaction, she must be forced
To change her face, as often as the Moon does hers;
They are delighted with the newest books,
And chiefly, when they are in Sheets,
And till they first write in them, they will never
Bind 'um to themselves in Matrimony (that excellent Cover)
For Lusts deep characters and impressions.

Fie upon you! does this discourse
Become one of your Sex?

Of my Sex Madam? that is a frivolous question:
I know all Scholars humors as well as the
Best Laundress of 'um all, I know 'um as well
As woman can know a man.

How Impudence? you will confess your self
A common prostitute presently? why wa'nt
To purge the Students reins?

Nay Madam, hold me excused there,
Your Commentaries on my words transgress the bounds of
Charity: for where I say I know 'um; I mean this only,
That they will take cognizance and notice of me,
Salute, embrace me when I meet 'um.

You're in your old Bawdy tune again.

You are too waggish Madam, and by too foul
Interpretations of my words, stain my unspotted innocence;
When I vaunt, they will embrace me
My meaning's this, they will kiss, and a-la-mode
Take me by the hand: and if a sorry kiss be
Thought sufficient to christen women whores,
They Would curse their Destinies; and (as I Have
Heard some Scholars curse Augustius for
Publishing an Edict against kissi^g
So should I those who dare denominate all
As common strumpets, who will kiss as closs as
Cockles: you justly therefore may be taxed
With indiscretion for catching at my words,
For words they are but wind, and those that
Think to grasp the wind, you know the
Proverb nominates indiscreet.

I Am sure the Sages of the world thought otherwise,
When they prescribed us this experienced Axiom:
A Bird is known by the tune, a Beagle by
His mouth, Man by his words;
A stinking breath is not a surer symptom
Of putred lungs, then an obscene tongue of an
Impure heart, 'twere better that clock (thy tongue)
Would never strike, except it were to better purpose,
Then to excite and raise thy lusts; 'twere more
Expedient that clapper should stand still, then
Echo forth such sounds, which grate
All neighboring ears; I prithee let it rather (like the
Curfew Bell) warn thee to smother all the
Sparks of fiery lust; be silent, here is Eugenes,
Sure it is his tread: how now Eugenes!
What new object have you found out of late to fix your
Eyes upon, that you so seldom deign to visit us?

Madam, I thank my stars I am not yet so barren,
But I can coin in the mintage of my brain a plausible
Excuse, and make it pass for current, by stamping
It with the impress of your divine Effigies;
I thought my self not Eagle-ey'd enough often to
Contemplate so bright a Sun; and though I often
Threatened you many visits, I was too much a
Coward in my own thoughts to stand to what I had
Determined, and not prove an apostate from my resolutions.

Fie Eugenes I you speak too Scholar-like,
I mean, you use too high Hyperbole's, to which
My merits can bear no proportion:
This too much favors of complement and flattery.

Madam, your merits are too high for me to
Take their true and exact Altitude,
I Am not Astronomer good enough to do it.

But Eugenes, pray' give me leave to turn Critic,
And carp at your expressions; your plea you made
For your long absence from me was thus ushered in;
You did pretend you dared not frequently
Contemplate me, because I was too bright a Sun;
It Is strange methinkes; for had you thought me so,
You would have supplicated and humbly requested
Me to shine upon you with a benign smiling
Influence, and if I should be maskt or hooded,
You Would pray me to disperse those sable clouds
With my bright rays, that you might see your long
Desired Sun, and then you would solemnly protest,
That I create bright days when I appear
With beams displayed in your Hemisphere.

Madam, since you are pleased to censure me
As a delinquent, I am content to stand to
Your determinations; but yet my error is so
Sweet and pleasing to me, that I must court it
And continue in it, and as before I nominated
You my Bright and glorious Sun, now (Persian-like)
I will adore your beauties orient splendor:
And as those Persians did consecrate and sacrifice
A horse unto their Sun. --

(You Will consecrate an ass? your self? will you?)

As a true Emblem, of their devotion's winged
Speed and swiftness, so will I sacrifice my
Paegasus (the Muses horse) unto your service,
I Will compose Panegyrickes on your praise,
And make my Muse your Waiting woman,
As here I do my self your humble and devoted servant.

Sir, I had rather you would make any thing
The subject of your discourse, then my commendation.

Now Madam, I Am your vassal more then
Ever, you have captivated all my faculties,
And made me wholly yours. I cannot but
Highly applaud this your so politic stratagem
To level my too rowring and aspiring thoughts,
In daring to make you the subject of my weak
And faint Encomiums, who are Queen Regent
Of Beauty, Virtue, and other excellent
Perfections, which (though but scattered and
Dispersed to other Ladies) are all united and combined in you,

Well Eugenes, give a Supersedeas to complements,
The clock has spoke nine times, to advertise you
That you must retire to College, it stands
Not with my reputation or with yours
That you should be detained here
At so unseasonable an hour as this, and therefore I must
Crave your pardon, as well for this my own abrupt
Departure, as for desiring yours.

Guard her you Powers above,
Let no distracting ghastly dream dare to
Assault or discompose her divine soul;
Let her bed seem as soft as any summers
Cloud, that it may ease her softer limbs,
And if (as the Heliotrope her leaves unto the Sun)
She open and displayes them in her dreams;
O let her be quite ravished with delight,
And plunged into a gentle ecstasy of pleasant
Raptures; that when she wakes from that
Sweet Antepast of heavenly bliss, she
May desire real fruitions of that pleasure
Which she but in a dream enjoyed.

BUt Aphobus, is she such a merry jeering
Lass as thou proclaim'st her?

Jeering! Her jeers like Aquafortis, will
Eat thorough any thing, they will penetrate
Your very heart: she will never show her
Teeth and laugh at you, but she will be sure
To bite, and that is as bad, as when thou art
Besieged with all thy troops of vermin
Mustered together and united: she is a
Very Badger in the Art of jereing, and never
Bites, but she will make her grinders meet:
Take heed you don't provoke her till she falls foul upon you.

She shall fall foul upon me, if she will but
Let me fall foul upon her, nay if she will.
But permit me to give her a fair fall

If thou should once fall upon her, though
Never so fairly, thou would come but foully off,
Thou Would scarce get up again, thy nerves
Would be so empty and invalid;
Faith here she comes; now you Rogues quake
And run like London Train-bands when the
Phanaticks were in arms.

What gibbet have you robbed Aphobos, for these
Gentlemen of the ragged regiment? they are as maigre
As if they had been hung six months at Tiburn,
Turned round with every puff of wind, and then cut
Down to be hung up again for Skeletons;
How their rags hang about 'um, deliberating
Whether they should drop off or no; what have
They robbed some Papermils lately? confess ingenously,
There Is no danger of their being hanged for it,
For both their cloths and joints are now so rotten,
They cannot hang together; they look as if
They were out of joint, seem as pellucid as glass,
And no less brittle; and fall would break 'um all to pieces.

If you please Lady, I Will venture a fall with you.
Me thinks I can as well endure one, as your cracked
Chamber-maid-ship.

Sir, I believe you would recant your challenge,
And (as you may well for Hunger) eat your
Words, if that you fell not soft and upon me,
Nay, and then too, I believe you would if not break all
Your bones, yet break your back:
But I pray' Aphobos upon what adventure
Are you come? you are Night Rablers I suppose,
Or (in better terms) you're a knight Errant,
And these two your Squires.

True Lady.

Methinkes they are in a mean Livery.

Their old rags (Lady) are badges of Honor:
A Coat of Arms the older it is and plainer,
It Is the more honorable; their habit does
Declare unto the world that they have been
In hot and furious skirmishes, they are so
Slasht and cut.

I suspect Aphobos, that (like degenerate Cowards
Which rob themselves and falsely sue the country)
They pretend to have 'ought invincibly,
When they dared as soon run into a scabberd
As draw a sword: they looked as if they' had
Broken prison, and being eagerly persu'd,
By the assistance of their rotten clothes, made
Their escape, leaving a sleeve in one man's hand,
And a remnant of their breeches in another,
There Is not a Tenter-hook (I Will warrant) in the
Street, but wears their Livery.

I must confess Lady, they are the stoutest
Combatants in Cupids camp, they vaunt
That then they are invincible.

Invincible? I Will undertake that one weak
Silly woman shall cool their courage.

No Lady, Women are rather apt to heat
Then cool us, they are as hot as Hecuba
Who (as the Poets tell us) was delivered
Of a Firebrand: these Helenaes are hot enough
To burn all Troy; they don't (like glowworms)
Carry a seeming heat, nor are so cool as Cynthia
Was when she embraced Endymion;
But they that touch 'um, find that entertainment
The Satyr did, who kiss't the fiery coal,
They Are soundly burnt for it.

Nay, and we are cool too Sir, but then
(Like snow) though cool at first, we burn
More vehemently with an after Clap.

Though you burn n'ere so much, yet I Am
As cool as any Salamander, and love to dwell
In your hot flames, I can and dare
By your permission and leave,
Inhabit your most Torrid Zone.

I Am not as yet disposed to make it habitable,
I will not yet untye my virgin Zone.

You unty it? No Lady, I Will save you that labor,
I Will (as Alexander did the Gordion knot) either unty, or cut it.

Are you so sharp set in faith, then I leave you, I dare not meddle with
Edge-tooles


That Is huge pity, you're good flesh, and fit to be cut up, I Will warrant you as
tender as a London Pullet, and no less full of juice and gravey


If you intend to make me your Pullet, and cut me up, you must not be a Capon
in performance


Lady, I Will tread you as well as ever Cock trod Hen, I Will make you quickly big
with egg


Then you must first eat eggs your self to make you vigorous and active.


I am a too high mettall'd nag to need such helps and spurs, or want such
incitements


But Gentlemen, the day appears, and (the Suns Harbinger) the morning Star
twinckles, and winks upon me to retire unto my Ladies chamber, lest this my
absence be discovered to her, for this time therefore I Will bid you Adieu


Come my Boys, we will scale the College walls, take an hours Nap upon our Beds,
and then to Chapel, where

That our vagaries be concealed, we will pray,
Whilst we by Night do ramble, sleep by Day.

I AM plunged in amazement at the Relation of my rebellious sons behavior; he
stands eternally obliged to you for making him a member of that College
whereof you're Head and President, what dares he scratch his head? or make it
ache, by his ill qualities and corrupted humors? I should extremly doubt
whether he were my lawful issue, or some ignoble spurious By-Blow, were I not
well assured of's Mother obstinate and invincible Chastity, who though she was
in her young days, a beautiful and comely Venus, and therefore might excite ill
motions in all her Beholders, yet was she too chaste a Diana, and awfully
cooled and discountenanced 'um; no sooner, were they raised, but she standing
in the circle of her many virtues, conjured 'um down again


To open my mind plainly to you; he is an useless, nay a dangerous member, and
if he be'n't lopt off, it is to be feared he will corrupt others of the Body of our
Society; he is turned a Rambler; I Am in suspense, whether I shall expel him, or
try him further


Pray' Brother bee'nt so far transported with your Passion, as to proceed to
that extremity of rigor


I summoned him to appear in's own defense, and advertised him too, that you would
be here; O here he is.


Ha thou ungracious villain! what? turned Night-bird? and, when you should be
in your nest, or (which I Would rather) at your study, must you be flying after
Ladybirds? I Will clip your wings IN faith: I Will put a-ne-plus-ultra to your
rambles, I know of 'um all


I believe (Sir) you know of more then I do.


That Is very probable; for, your too liberally quafft off bowls of liquor
(like Lethe water) have washed their memory out off your head; your
understanding's light is clouded and obscured by your black deeds, and works of
Darkness; you have eclipsed its wonted splendor: on what night I pray' sir,
held you your last Rendezvous


It Is so long since sir, I have quite forgot it.


What? your Travels and rambles were so long? that (as Sir Francis Drake in's
travels lost a day) so you have lost a night? you have forgot it (forsooth?


Sir, should I steep these words in crocodiles and a tificial tears scru'd from
my eyes, they could not challenge your belief, and so I should be in despair
first of your audience, and then of pardon; but (Sir) my innocence, which is as
pure as that of Babes, when newly washed from their original stain, keeps me
from sinking in this deluge of profound misery


O Sir, you are he that stickl'd not to say, Sweet smells would make my head
ache, but I think now, I Have made your heart ache for it. These tears of yours I
hope will make some seeds of virtue but forth apace, and cause you to grow
better as well as bigger, like April showers they may produce those flowers (of
Rhetoric) which you lately told me, would be offensive to me; I hope your
tears will not (like those drops of rain which fall near the Line,) leave a
corrupt steam behind 'um: now whilst they are in motion, and trickle down your
rosy cheeks, they are sweeter then Rose Water to my sense; O that it rained
thus sweetly all the year! then, then, it may be some seeds of obedience, might
grow with your rebellious weeds


Know sir, that though a fathers awful anger can open all the floodgates of my
eyes, yet I like April can look clear and merrily,


O horrid! I cannot hear this, and bear it, farewell brother for a while


Do you see sir, how you have frighted away your father with your rebellious
practices


No sir, it is rather you have don't; he took you for some savage beast, some mad
and furious dog, and thought you would worry him, as y' have done me


Sirrah, if you intend to keep still in the College, keep in your tongue.


I will not, cannot do it; should you serve me as the tyrant Tereus served
Philomel, and cut it out, I Would use some other art to vent my fury, I Would write
it in your blood; I should be happier, were I out of the College, as long as
you are in it: If you continue in, out I must go, (...) I cannot cohabit with a
mortal foe


Oh! how I burn with raging fury! how sharp a Paroxysm of feverish Passion
does affect me? it cannot be cured but by (that cooling Remedy) Moderation,
which yet has never dwelt within this so hot Climate of my Breast; when
Hercules was clad with the Centaures coat, he could not feel such vehement
flames; I have a Hell within me, and the heat of my Passion's as unquenchable;
my strong affections have (like Phaetons wild Coursers) enflamed my little
world of Man, my Microcosm; my soul must change her lodging, and leave this
earthly Vehicle my Body, to cool her self in the blessed Elysian shades; like
flame-eructing Aetna, I belch forch fire: well, I Will retire and read a Lecture
of Philosophy to conjure down this Devil, Passion


YOu acted indiscreetly (Philos) thus to betray young Eugenes rambles to his
uncle; you know there ever have been private feuds and discontents betwixt
'um; thorough's unckles means, his father has with drawn most of 's allowance,
he watered him before with small and inconsiderable drops, from's golden river;
and they came from him, like so many drops of blood; and if he should (as
certainly he will) hear once of this miscarriage, he will utterly discard him


I acted (I Will assure you) on good an a honest principles, not out of malice to
his Nephew; I only ascertained him in general, that his nephew frequented
Ladies company, and was no less brought up in Cupids Academy, then in ours;
that he loved to taste the Marmala de of a Ladies lips, was equally delighted
with the roses of their cheeks, and with the Lillies of their hands, he loved
to rob the pleasant Garden of a Ladies face, gather the cherries of her lips,
the blushing red-cheekt apples of her cheeks, handle her azure veins like
violets, or that he would walk about with a she-Hawk on's fist, and loved to bring
her to his lure: what harm was there in this


If it had been to one, not biased with Passion and prejudice, there had been
none; but in betraying it to such a one, as he is, you have betrayed your
weakness: had you acquainted me alone with his defects and errors, I would
with greater lenity, and to better effect, have attempted to reform 'um


Well Demosthenes, words have wings, and, as soon as (their Cage) the mouth is
opened, out they fly, and mount beyond our reach and past recovery; like
lightning, they cannot be stopped, but break their passage th'rough the smallest
cranies, and penetrate sometimes the thickest walls; their nature's as
expansive as the Light, like Sun beams they are darted many miles from their
first source; but I Will assure you, for the future if I obtain more cognizance
of his actions, before his uncle I Will be as silent, secret, as the Night, and
cloak his actions with obscurity; but to you, I Will open and reveal 'um all, I Will
be as clear as day; I Will draw them in a line from the Circumference of my mouth
unto your ear, as to their center, where I am sure they will rest, and go no
further. I know old Eugenes is presently incensed at every petty peccadilio,
I Will always therefore make him stranger to my thoughts, in matters of this
importance


Be sure you're constant to your words, in the interim I Will go in and give him
some good counsel


It Is true, I cannot deny, but I love old Eugenes unfeignedly; but I shall be a
torment to him, if I discover his Nephews vices to him any more; a whisperer,
and informer, is an odious creature, I shall abhor my self, if I don't
speedily forsake these practices, all whispering winds are usually forerunners
of a storm, I Will not (like a Fly) be always buzzing in old Eugenes ears, I
shall corrupt 'um; I Will seek him out, and unravel all that I have done, I Will
make his nephew master again of his affections


BRother, I wonder you should be so importunate in the suit of that same
Cock-brain'd fellow Eutrapelus, he is composed of levity, I dare not speak a
syllable, but he will convert it to his own advantage, he will sometimes make such
use of all my answers, that I shall seem rather to court his fool-ship, then he
to offer's Courtship unto me


Sister, though he is light himself, yet he has store of heavy gold; which is
as sparkling as his wit; I Will warrant, he will protract, and certainly produce
your life's small thread to the duration of seven years longer; he will tickle
your ears with wit, as well as something else with genial pleasures: besides,
he does derive his pedigree from many anicent and noble families


Yes I believe he can derive it as far, as from Will. Summers King Henry the
8ths fool, Scoggin the Jester, or the wise men of Goatam, I believe his
pedigree is ancient, for his coat he wears, is old, and plain enough, and may
be blazoned with 12 Lice Rampant in the field Or of his yellow skin, his crest,
is a Cocks-comb, for if there be one in the world, it is he


Dy' hear how admirably she blazons his Coat?


Hang her jade, because she wears an ugly vizard her self, and frights men from
being her servants, and is constrained to walk alone, whispering her self away,
she would draw other proselites to her religion, she would have all turn Nuns, and be
confined to a Cloister, and (with her Ladyships Apes face) lead apes in hell


But Brother, I Have heard you often talk how the Romans conferred certain
dignities on vestal virgins, who kept their virgin fruits pure and ^ngather'd


But yet the number of those vestals was but small, the dignities and
privileges which they enjoyed, were only these, that they in state were
rendered equal to married wives


But, what if I have solemnly protested to live and dye a virgin?


Then you must as solemnly break that oath; such temerarious and imprudent vows
are better broke then kept; for none can by an ordinary way perceive, whether
they have that special gift of continency, as to be able to live and die
unmarri'd; what woman has so sailed about the world of her own heart, sounded
each creek, surveyed each corner, but that still there may remain much Terra
Incognita to her self; besides concupiscences too much restrained, will swell
the more, had Danae not been kept b'a brazen door, sh' had died a harmless
Virgin, not a whore


Madam, I hope you will not be guilty of foul perjury, what you have vowed,
perform; never be confined to one man's humors. Be still as free as your
unlimited thoughts


Out! you lascivious queen; because you're not your self content to be confined
to one man, would you dissuade her from it? would you have your mistress like
your self? as common as the Sea, as Air, and no less light; would you have her
let all Night-birds build their nests in her thick Bush? and make her self a
Warehouse for all sorts of Commodities? a Publican to receive all Tribute she
can get? you would have as many men (it may be) to gratify (I cannot say) satisfy
your lust, as the great Turk has women in's Seraglio; you cannot feed upon one
sort of flesh, you must be pampered with variety


You Are mistaken Sir in me; I Am not so weary of my life, or so well prepared to
die, as to desire yet to be press't to death by any man, I Will first be hanged


Hang y'u Jade, but then you will choose your gallows. The door is open and
invites you to go out, your absence at this time will be to us more acceptable
then your presence, for here comes merry Eutrapelus. You Will spoil his sport if
you stay here


I Will make no longer stay then, but yet I am resolved to make my Mistress (
Penelope-like) unravel all by night Eutrapelus does by day. I Will make men know
(let 'um do what they can) A woman can persist to hate a man


You Are welcome to me my Eutrapelus, your company makes me happy.


Thanks Noble Eugenes; but yet I should be swelled with bigger, and more large
conceptions of my worth, if I were thought so by the fair Eugeneia; could I but
merit one smile of hers, I Would wrack my brains, and cause each ventricle
thereof to be in labor for a jest, and they should first conceive, and then
bring forth all their conceits


Sir, your merits sound so loud in each expression of my brothers, that they
require that portion of respect which otherwise I should deny you


Madam, I should be bless't for ever, if their sound should prove harmonious,
and make good music in your ears; or, like the pleasant lays of Orpheus,
attract all things and sexes after 'um, and (more peculiarly) your sacred self


Sir, now you are a Note too high, you will overstrain your voice in canting forth
your own deserts, this is the way to raise a discord between you, and your best
friends


T'has been observed that discord makes the sweetest Harmony: but yet because I
may not seem a Schismatic in love, I Am for a perfect union, we will (if you
please) concorporate, we will make up a complete Hermaphrodite, and be
inseparably glu'd together, and when we are met we'el stick so close, that
nothing but omnipotence it self shall ever Divorce us from our nuptial
pleasures


Rome was not built (Sir) in a day, and things of so great consequence as
marriage, are not to be resolved on in a minute, this ordinance (like the laws
of the Medes and Persians) is unchangeable, what is once done here and concluded
on, can never be unravelled or undone


Fear not undoing Madam, for we'el be always doing, when we are married; I Will
always be in Action; and if this suite prevail with you, I Will then clap action
upon you after action, I Will first arrest you in your bed, and n'ere be nonsuited
in Cupids Court, till my endeavors for an heir obtain a happy issue; pray give
your verdict (Madam) in this case


My verdict sir is this, that you are nonsuited in the court of my affections,
your plea cannot any more be heard, you have lost your suite, your Rights and
titles, to make me your Tenement, are forfeited


Then, Madam, I Will renew my suite, and make your Brother my advocate in this
cause


He Will take Bribes Sir, and therefore (like a common Barreter) he shall obtain
no audience, I Will therefore now adjourn Great Cupids Court, and put a period to
your amorous sport


Don't I look simply Eugenes? and seem in as deplorable a state, as a young
heir beset with Sergeants? When the large sails of's Debts are ready to sink
and over-whelm the small Bark of his poor estate; Marsy as (after Apollo flead
him) never looked so simply, if he did, I Will be flead; I Will undertake a whole
Nights lodging, and hard Jobb-Journey-workes of darkness, would not have cooled
my courage, as this repulse has done; sh' has made my eyes as hollow as her
heart


I took thee not (Eutrapelus) for so notorious a Coward, as to be daunted with
the first denial

Take thou but Courage, and be bold, my Boy,
And all thy grief shall terminate in joy,
Coward never won fair Lady, stand this shock,
And thou shall have her in a surer Lock.

I wish I had her in so sure a Lock, as to give her a fall, and then, I Would make
her belly rise before her


Take heed that (like Antaeus) she grow not stronger by her fall, and getting
up before you, throw you off for ever. But I must crave your absence for a
while, each minute I expect my tutour


I Will be gone then I faith, least if he find us here together, he should read
us a Juniper or Crabtree lecture


ODs' so, here he comes. April shower, as soon ended as begun, or (if he
thunder) God send that (like the air) he be the better cleared from Angers
fumes and fiery exhalations: for otherwise, he will blast me with his breath; but
(now I think on it) he shall find me reading.


I Am glad to see you thus studiously employed, your actions in some measure
contradict that flying rumor which proclaimed you remiss and negligent; you do
well to defeat black-mouthed obloquy, and vindicate your reputation from those
aspersions, with which it has been blended and defaced, I pray continue it in
its proper luster, and suffer't not to be eclipsed by any spots of a debaucht
and vicious conversation


Pray' God he does not change his tune presently, this is too sweet to last
long


Though other men may cherish in their bosoms sinister thoughts of all your
actions, yet I Will be charitable in my constructions on 'um, But --


Nay 'faith, if he talks of Butting, then 'war Horns; I Am the But he'el shoot
at


Well, I must display my thoughts unto you, I must not, dare not flatter you
too much, for such a fawning spaniel is worse then a dumb dog, I Will bark to
fright you, although I bite the less


I Would rather heat a Dog bark, then him speak now.


I am informed that you give frequent visits to your Ladies, and though, (as
it is confess't) your stipend and allowance be but small, you spend it vainly in
their company; it is now no wonder, your complaints of poverty are so loud; for
they who keep such costly and expensive mares as women, (like those that kept
Sejanus' horse) will soon decay in their estates and fortunes


Sir, you may easily accusea man, though never so innocent; I would request you
therefore to produce that man who dares be so maliciously bold and wicked, as
to accuse me face to face; there is none I know dare do it, my looks would prove
as fatal to him, as a Basiliskes, or as Medusaes snaky locks to her Beholders
who e're he be, he can as soon with open and undazl'd eyes look on the Sun, as
upon me, with this false accusation in his mouth; if there are gods above and
divine justice, his inquinated breath will rot his teeth, his tongue will leap
out of his mouth, before he can give birth to so prodigious an untruth as this;
besides, you may be pleased sir to consider, how it is improbable that I, who
cannot disburse enough for Necessaries, and have been always pincht by extreme
want, should gain admittance into Ladies company


Sometimes a golden tongue may be as prevalent as a golden shower of money; you
have perhaps some winning complements, and they will pass more current with
young Ladies then the coin of some Gallants, whose heads are empty, though their
pockets full


You cannot expect that they should be Great Wits, who have small purses, they
usually sympathize together, Wit is expensive, it must be dieted with
delicaties, it must be suckl'd with the richest wines, or else it will grow
flat and dull


I don't like these principles in you, I now suspect you more then ever, and be
assured, my eye shall be always over you: I Will make the friends I have as so
many prospectives, to take a perfect view of your deportment, and as I am
informed, I Will act


I hope then your friends will look th'rough the wrong end of the Prospective,
and all my faults will seem but Peccadilios and Venial slips. But here comes
Pege


WHat? poor still, Eugenes? are not thy fathers coffers open yet? Have not
with the herb Lunaria picked his locks? Does he (like Nero) still delight to
wallow on his flloores covered, and (as 'twere) paved with money? wont he allow
thy pockets a guard of tutelar angels to keep the devil out


Not one; the devil has so long possess't 'um, he will never be cast out, but by
the omnipotent aid of sacred Gold, of which I Am destitute: I dare not go to
Church for fear of being encountered by a Brief, and if I am admitted into
company unknown to me, my first complement is this, Prithee lend me six pence:
in sum, my head's as full of care for money, as my pocket's empty of it.
Let Us put our heads together, and by the conjunction of our Brains beget a
plot, let us endeavor to undermine my father


Is that your last refuge then? Have you no books to sell? cannot you live by
your learning


No faith, not one, that is worth the selling, necessity forced me to look gold
in my Dictionary as I used to do Latin, and I chose rather to make it yield me
money, then only give me good words; my Greek Lexicon I parted with for the
procuring of one Greek word called Krusos (Gold:) Blind Homer, because he was a
poor Poet, and brought me nothing, I turned out of doors for a small bribe of
twelve pence, and as the Song goes

My Euclids Elements did pack
For the better element of Sack.
My Ovids Metamorphosis is Metamorphos'd into silver, and of my Grammar, which
should teach me to make true Latin, I have made true and lawful money. My
Metaphysics are abstracted from my study, and it is no matter, because they do
abitract (all they treat of) from matter; my Astronomy books are all exposed to
sale, for liquor, only to make experiment of the Earth's motion when my Brains
(like my blood) perform their circulation: and now I am so good a Philosopher
as to carry all I have about me, and my sole study is how to get more


I Am big with plot, of which when I am once delivered, I question not but you
will be delivered from your poverty for a time, you will get a truce with it


Let Us hear't I pri'thee.


Thus you must steer your course, step to a Booksellers, and give him this
angel, l. out of purse for those large volumes


But Pege, my shelves which heretofore were crammed like Capons, are now empty,
I Have sold almost all my books


I Will lend thee as many books of mine as shall fill up their room.


Well thought of my politic Headpiece, my Matchiavel, my Richlieu, my
Mazarine

I Will to the Booksellers, and when I Have got
The Books, I Will laugh, and say, God speed the plot.

Unto what sordid and ignoble shift do parents put their children? when they
prefer their pelf before 'um, and love it more; they will not allow 'um one
small creek of all their wealth to sail in; and therefore (after their long
wished for death) they sail top and top Gallant in the large Ocean of their
wealth, till they make Shipwreck of their fortunes, and split against that
dangerous rock of Prodigality; they will sput out whole cellars of wine, as fast
as their old parents could swallow and concoct their gains got by extortoin, or
any indirect unlawful means; they will not be-Tantaliz'd; they will drink their
liquour when it is at their nose; they will make their golden apples (like those of
Sodom) molter away if they can come to touch 'um; and open all their Locks of
golden water so often, till they are quite exhausted. But what is the matter
with Aphobos? he comes thus puffing and sweating.


O Pege, I Am undone!


Why, what is the matter?


The matter! why, I Will tell thee, with some others of my acquaintance I Have been
to night upon the watch


How upon the watch? I thought you had rather been a peace breaker, then a
keeper of the peace


You Are in the right; for when I say, we were upon the watch, I mean, we fell upon
'um and beat 'um roundly: and whilst we were deeply engaged in the skirmish, I,
that I might bestir my self the nimbler, threw of my gown, and being at length
overpowered, by a fresh supply of their Assistants, I was forced to leave my
gown behind me, and think a pair of heels worth two pair of hands; the damned
rogues persued me closer then my other company, and observing me to scale our
College walls, this morning brought my gown to the president, and he is
resolved to make a diligent search after the owner; thou have (I hear) two
gowns, I pri'thee lend me one, and I will ever style thee my grand Deliverer
and Protector; fetch it quickly for fear he should surprise me, thus unarmed
and, unprovided


I Will out, and fetch one for you.


Under what dismal and unfortunate planet was I born? that when (in imitation
of the Planets) I wandered up and down, from sign to sign, from house to house,
all my irregular motions should be so perfectly discovered: one of the
watchman, that saw me come from Anaiskuntiaes house, was (as I think) a
Blacksmith; but yet I hope this Vulcan, will not divulge't abroad, that I,
like Mars, was in conjunction with my Venus; if he does, I Will blame him, and
make him a right Vulcan; I Will give him a worse fall, then Jove gave that other
Vulcan, whom (as Poets tell us) he flung from heaven to earth. But I wish this
Pege were come with his gown, I think though I hear him coming.


You Rogue you, put it on quickly; the President have called a congregation of
Fellows, and 's a searching all the students chambers, to find which of 'um
it is has shed his skin; they will instantly be here


I Will on with 't then.


It Is well it is on, for here they are all.


WHat skabby sheep is it that has dropped this rotten Fleece? who e're he be, he
must be taken notice of left he spoil the whole flock: do you know this gown,
Aphobos


A'n't please you sir, I never saw't before; and


What Is that you mumble to your self, you would not do?


I said Sir, that I never saw't before, and if I had, I would not conceal the
owner


What say you Pege? do you know it?


Not I sir, I never thought so torn a gown as this worth taking notice of: it
seems to have been stolen out of a Beggars Wardrobe


The Watchmen took it up in the street, and brought it to me, assuring me that it
was a young Scholar's of our College


The watch take it up? it is not worth taking up in the high away; but if we knew
the owner, we'd take him down to the butterie, and give him due correction


Under correction sir, if you're for the butteries with me, I Will lie as close as
Diogenes in Dolio, I Will creep in at the Bung-hole before I Will mount a Barrel,
and have my hole bung'd; if they catch me now, I must expect to be whipped like a
brewers horse


What Is that you mutter, sir?


I say sir, if 't be mine I shall desire no more favor then to be whipped like a
brewers horse


Certainly, I Have seen this robe worn by some of our Undergraduates, I Have seen't
on some body's back, that belongs to our College


I had better (like Hercules) have worn the Centaures poisoned coat, then have
it proved, that I e're wore it: if it be known this robe was mine, they will make
me wear a scarlet robe; they will dye my skin in my own blood, and mangle it as
bad, as that gown is torn


Sure Aphobos you're a conjuring, you make such motions with your lips, and yet
speak not a word that can be heard; but Aphobos, I will not say absolutely it is
your gown, but I am confident, I Have seen you wear it


Sir you will as difficultly make it sit me, as Mercury's garment did the Moor,
who was always either waxing or waning, and so the garment was either too
little or too big


You're something like the Moon, your self, you are as pale (with fear) as she
is; and we will try whether 'twill sit you or no, come put off that gown you wear


I had rather put you off with an excuse, if I had a good one.


What is it you say?


I say sir, I had rather put it off then not.


Off with it then, and put on this.


It fits him, as if it were his own.


A pox take you, you have fitted me with a witness.


Aphobos, This gown was made for you.


I thank my good wit for it, I have hit upon a pretty excuse now.


What say you sir?


I say sir, that I have no excuse for my self, and must ingeniously confess
that once it was my gown, but having another, and urged by want of money, I
sold it to one of another College, who since has left the College, and (as I
conceive) sold it another, and that other may have left it where 'twas found


What a brave subtle rogue it is; faith, this excuse will stand him in noble
stead; 'twill hold water, and keep him from sinking


What witness can you produce you sold it to that party?


'S'lid I hope that the rogue Pege will be true to me if I cite him.


Who do you say?


I commend thee for thy wit, Boy; I Will rescue thee now.


Can you witness this Pege?


Yes sir.


This will be tried (Sir) presently, let one of us examine Pege apart, another,
Aphobus, for how many shillings he sold it


I have the price, Sir, at my fingers ends.


I know his meaning; I must say as many shillings as he has fingers.


Whisper softly, and tell me Aphobos.


I had ten shillings for it sir.


What say you, Pege?


He sold it for an Angel sir.


O my good Angel; well said.


They both concur, sir, in the same price don't, they?


Yes, they do sir.


Well, Gentlemen, we will make a further search when time permits us; I have
urgent occasions call me away, let us depart


Now, my Boy, you are out of gunshot; you are excellent at coining excuses
in the mintage of thy brain, and by stamping 'um with the counterfeit impress of
truth; know how to make 'um pass for current; thou can hammer out a lie in
the forge of thy brain (the best that ever I knew) thou have a good extempore
Wit that way


I had need then have had my wits about me, for had I been once in the
Butteries, they would have their rods about me. But Pege, let us, for joy that I Am
escaped, go to the three Tuns, and drink a pint of wine, and laugh away our
cares

We Will carouse in Bacchus's fountains, hang your Beer and muddly Ale:
It Is only Sack infuses courage, when our spirits droop and fail;
It Is drinking at the Tuns, that keeps, us from ascending Buttery Barrels;
It Is this that safely brings us off, when we are engaged in feuds and quarrels.

Come away Boy.


I Thank my stars I have recruited my decayed Library, and I hope that it will
recruit my empty pockets: Twelve pounds! It Is a sum my pockets were never before
guilty of, and had not been so now, had not my father proved a golden Ass; now
me thinks I could venture the other fit of my angry uncle, to see my Morphe;
What care I though he frowns, so she but smiles; let him show himself a fierce
and angry Mars, so she will but prove a smiling Venus; If he thunders, she is my
Daphne, my Laurel, that can protect me from being thunderstruck; I Will never
prove a coward in this my Amorous War; And though my uncle should discharge
whole volleys of peircing words against me, he could not change my countenance
with pale-faced fear, much less my resolutions; but I think I see Anaiskuntia
coming

Pri'thee sweet heart let me detain you a little, how does your Mistress, the
fair and virtuous Morphe? Is she so much at leisure, as to vouchsafe me a small
conference with her; I should be very proud if I could merit the noble title of
her servant


Sir, I presume that she is never so much employed, but your company may make
her put a period to all her other business


Now thou transport'st me into a pleasant ecstasy of joy; thou make me be all
ear, whilst you distill these words which so much savor of blandishment and
sweet delights; now I Am as light as Air, and am resolved to make all troubles
strangers to my breast


I cannot, sir, but admire this your immovable and undaunted spirit, that you
can (like the Weather) sing in tempests, and those so great ones, which your
uncle raised, after he heard you did frequent my Mistriss's, house


Why Anaiskuntia? Has fame with her swift pinions divulged it thus far?


It Is as I tell you sir.


Let me tell thee then Anaiskuntia, that though wave after wave of misery
should fall upon me, by those storms my uncle raises; though all adversitie's
most blustering winds should be united and conspire against me, like AEolus,
I Would quell 'um all; or if I could not, I Would laugh at 'um, and dare 'um to do
their worst


I see there is something in the wind now, and that he loves my mistress.


They should not put an end unto my voyage, the attractive and magnetic virtue
of her beauty's so strong and potent; by her as by my Polar Star, I Will so
direct my course, that though I were invelop'd with Nights black sable mantle,
I Would safely stear my course, till my designs arrive to her as to their wished for
Haven


Sir, you have now rendered me yours, more then ever; before, I entertained but
low and abject thoughts of your deserts, now, on the contrary, I am become a
great adorer of your worth, and promise you my best assistance, toward the
purchase of your desired ends, what e're they be


Thanks for thy love my Anaiskuntia, Here Is a small gratuity, as an
acknowledgement that I think my self Morphe? I think it is: assist me now you
Muses


WHat? are you here Eugenes? I thought you had been barricado'd up in your
study, cloysterd up like a Monk, and condemned to a twelve months penance by
your uncle, to expiate that crime you committed lately in giving me a visit


Madam, I am confined I must confess, but it is only to your self; I am your
vassal, and not a little ambitious to do you any service, that is within the
Sphere of my small power: I am not yet, and never will be cloistered up, or
lead a Monkish life: I am resolved (if possible) to enter the sacred bonds of
Marriage


What? then will you be clogged to a silly woman? that is the worst sort of
confinement, and I believe will not prove agreeable to your nature


Madam, I Am now a Captive, and am desirous that my thoughts may have the
benefit of a Jail-delivery


How? a Captive Eugenes?


I Am your Captive, Madam, and shall never think my self at liberty, till you
bind me in the fetters of your arms; that bondage to me will seem liberty


You speak Riddles, and Mysteries, Eugenes, which are beyond the Sphere of my
low capacity; I want an interpreter


We women are such silly Asses, we don't know when we are well offered; we will not
understand what is good for us, until its too late: any one that is not (like an
Ass) void of all Reason, may know that you're the mark he shoots at, and that,
if he might, he would stick his Arrow in the middle of you


You saucy slut, be silent, we must not take your salfe inter pretations on
men's words


What modesty would have forced me fondly to conceal, she has revealed unto
you: I Am glad I had so eloquent a speaker to express my vast affections to
you: Sh'has made an excellent Commentary on my words


Truly, Sir, her Commentary seems obscurer to me, then the Text on which she
made it


Then Sir, go to your Application, and (as an Application ought to be) let it
be plain and practical


Madam, I Will now no longer use vain Circumlocutions: I Will not be always
conversant about those outward circumstances, of that action Marriage, called
Complements; I Will take the shortest Cut, and tell you plainly, that I Am so
much enamored both to the beauty of your Mind and Body, that I must utterly
despair of any happiness, unless you will please to perfect and complete my wishes
in yielding your consent to Marriage


Now, Sir, you speak (Soldier like) plainly and boldly: I Will warrant you a
special Striker in Cupids Camp


Though, Sir, I am so much a woman, as that I cannot conceal those high respects
I have reserved for you, yet I Would not have you think, they are prevalent enough
to terminate in Nuptial Love; I shall desire you therefore to desist from
importuning me with such vain motions


Vain motions! I should think 'um good motions, were they directed to me, as to
their proper Center; but we women forsooth, are all for Circular motions: first
we will, and then we will not

We will not, we will; we will, we will not again,
Until at last our Coyness prove our bain.

Well, Madam, your repulse has kept me off for a time, but it will make me come
on again a fresh, with doubled vigor: All happiness dwell with you


Come, Anaiskuntia, Let us go dispatch the business I spoke to you of.


Madam, I Will wait upon you.


I Think I was born to succor and relieve distressed persons: Aphobos, had it
not been for me, had been severly punished; and young Eugenes would have been
in as poor a condition, as a wandering Pilgrim: His pockets would have been
sufficient Arguments to prove a Vacuum in Nature: I Am glad that I can be so
instrumental to my friends; it is no small satisfaction to me. But here comes
Eugenes, I believe, with his heart as light, as his pockets are heavy. What
has my plot thrived Eugenes


Thrived! Thou art fit to be Privy Councellor to a King, my Boy; thou have so
many winding Labyrinths in thy brain, that none will ever track thy grand
designs: Joves secrets may as easily be discovered, as thine: Omnipotence it
self would be fore puzzled to dive into the depths of all thy stratagems


Well, I Am glad I Have pleasurd you, and if it lie within the Sphere of my weak
power to help you, you may command me. But no more of this; here comes
Eutrapelus, he will make us merry after our plotting


HOw is it Gentlemen? Jovial, and blithe?


How can we be otherwise in your company, Eutrapelus; you are the Genius of the
place in which you are, and inspire your company with a spirit of mirth: Your
presence (like the Suns) clears us from Melancholy's dismal clouds: you banish
Grief (that Traitor to all mirth) from our breasts: you calm the rugged waters
of adverse Fortune, and make their surface smooth and even: in short, you are
the soul of the Company, and animate us with your lively presence


I could wish, Eugenes, that I might (as it were) animate, and infuse a soul
into your sister, by the Act of Propagation


Fear not, my Eutrapelus, but that thou (like her soul) shall dwell within her:
thou shall take up the best part in her body, for thy lodging


I could dwell there willingly, all my life: I'se swear she is a Palace for a
King to dwell in: she is such good meat, that, were she set before a King,
he would have no taster; he would venture on her first himself


Pri'thee Eutrapelus don't talk off these enameled bubbles, these painted
pieces of clay called women; who, were they not over curiously expensive on
themselves, they would resemble that misshapen clay ( Prometheus used) before it
was informed and animated; they have no beauty but what we please either out of
poetry'or complement to give 'um, these dim Cynthiaes would be very obscure if
they borrowed not that light they have from the Sun of men's favor


O Pege, do not say they have no beauty, it is high treason, for I have a Lady in
chase; of that Royal beauty, that in her cheeks the White and Red Roses of
York and Lancaster, and Lilies of France are combined, I prithee then let not
thy sharp and thorny words be felt among these Roses


Suppose Eutrapelus we should be so civil, and ingenuous as to grant them
beautiful, yet we may by experience see, that their beauty is like a much
desired banquet, which is no sooner tasted, but its delicious luxury is
swallowed up by oblivion: besides, there is no conformation of linements, no
composition of features, no simmetry of parts so well compacted in a woman, but
a judicious eye may perceive some imperfection: fair Helena when in a
Lookingglass she saw her own deformity, was forced to weep: pale Cynthia has
her Spots, and Venus her Moles and Warts


Because fair Ladies have their spots

Are they less beautiful? those beauty spots,
Will set 'um off with the more glorious Luster; But here comes Aphobos
smiling. What makes you look so merrily about the guils Aphobos? You are very
pleasant me thinks


I Have had a miraculous deliverance lately, and have reason to rejoice at it,
I cannot but smile how I cheated the President with Pege's gown


It Was well thou scapedst his clutches, for had thou owned the gown, he would
have made thee ride (like Bacchus) on a barrel, and made you show your fat
cheeks; he would have made you a Montelions dial, and looked on your backside,
what a Clock it was when your gown was found, and (like the Sun on a Dial)
he would have dwelt upon it a whole day, and soundly heated it


But I thank my good fortune, my actions did not come so much to light, and
shine so clear, as to let him look what 'twas a Clock in my Postern Dial


I believe had you been taken Aphobos, your clock would have struck above once
an hour; the President would have laid about him courageously; he would have
struck you every minute, and made use of his time


Yet he could not have much time to torture me; for he could not have taken
time by the forelock whilst he was on my backside; time's bald behind


I, but (like Musicians) he might have kept time with his hands.


That would have been very unpleasant Music to my senses; 'twould have made me
squeek like the small strings of a Treble Viol


Eutrapelus, if you intend to see my sister, retire quickly, lest she be gone
abroad upon a visit; my business calls me away


I Will use the greatest speed I can to meet with her.


If you go to your wenches, I Will to my study; I shall at last reap the greatest
benefie


I AM glad they are gone, for here is my Anaiskuntia; how does my dearest soul?

Who holds all my affections as fast
Have, Taste, Cast, Last, Wast
As I do her about the slender wast.

Take heed sir, you will loose presently your sense in this great crowd of words.


Never fear it sweeting;
Thou Wilt see my sense and all my words,
Stick close together as Cheese-curds.

Where Is the cream of the jest there?


It lies in the milky way betwixt those pleasant fontinels, your breasts.


What? Then your turned child? and must be suckl'd with breast-milk?


I could hang upon those snowy Alps to eternity: if those were the two topt
Parnassus, Poets speak off, I Would turn a drolling Poet, and court thee in Rhym
that I might lie and sleep there


Come, let me hear how you would Rhym?


As often as at your breasts I nibble,
Methinks I am grown big with quibble;
Here Heaven must be, for most do say,
That there is in Heaven a milky way.

Well Aphobos. I Am in have now, and must be gone; but I Will assure you, that if
ever I marry any, your are the man designed by me


I Have hopes enough now to enjoy her: well, I Will go and contrive how to effect
this business with secrecy and security


It Is true, I once resolved to conceal young Eugenes's rambles from his Uncle,
but now they are so frequently Echoed and noised abroad, I cannot, dare not do
it: should I cloud 'um in obscurity for a time, they would (like thunderbolts
too long Imprisoned in a cloud) break forth with more impetuous violence; I
therefore am resolved t'unload my breast, and make old Eugenes bear his share
of the news of's Nephews vitiousness: and here he comes most opportunely for it

Your servant Mr. President
I have a fresh supply of news concerning your wild Nephew;
His vices now are grown so great and loud,
That secrecy can them no longer cloud,

Why Philos? What vices has Fame of late proclaimed him guilty of.


Before, she only in general declared him a notorious Rambler, but now
descends to particulars, and dilates her self more largely on his actions; she
reports that he is a continual visiter of Morphe, who, though a Gentlewoman,
yet of mean fortunes; besides, her maid is noted for a light and wanton slut,
she is a common Hackney; and may be hired at the same rate as Hackney Horses
are; Twelve pence a side makes her your own: for that price a man may up, and
ride her; She (like the Roman Curtizan Sempronia) If men refuse to Court her,
will not abstain from Courting them: she is somewhat fair indeed; but though
this beautiful Cyren have a woman's face, she ends in the Serpents Tail; stings
to the purpose. Though this unsatiable Harpy has a Virgins face, yet has she
cruel Talons too under her wings: she is one, whom neither Argus with his
hundred eyes, nor brazen walls, nor the most vigilant Guards, can e^re secure
from her incontinency: she tricks her self up with such variety of gauderies,
as if she exposed her body as a bait to bring the devil to her lure, and tempt
the very Tempter to embrace her


My blood is curdl'd at this dismal news; the Rascal will be here presently, to
fetch some Books I promised to lend him: me thinks he makes a long and tedious
stay. O, here he comes


I Am come to wait upon you, Sir, to fetch those
Books you promised to lend me.

Books! What Books I pray, would you have? Ovids Amorum, or De Art Amandi:
there I believe lies the sum of your Studies, or in some other obscene
Drollist, as Martials Bawdy Epigrams, Propetius's Effeminate strains, ot
Petronius Arbiter's Whoreing Verses


I am amazed at this discourse: whither it tends, I cannot conjecture: to me it
is a Riddle


If it be (though I Am sure it is not) I believe your own Conscience is a
sufficient Oedipus to unriddle it


My own Conscience! My Conscience is as incapable of wracking gripes and fears,
as heaven it self; it never yet was guilty of any foul enormity; and therefore
cannot be the Receptacle of Panick fears


I see your impudence is so strong and daring, that of your self you will confess
nothing: Pri' thee Philos step into the Town, and fetch my Brother, and then
I Will vent my thoughts more freely


I Will go with winged speed.


It Is not a Fathers presence can affright my pure and virgin innocence.


Well, Sirrah, I have not patience to contain my self: I must unbutton my
breast to you, and tell you all. You are, I hear, a constant visitant of one
Morphe, a person of low Fortunes; and, if you do'nt pretend Courtship to her, I
fear you are guilty of a worse crime, and are too well acquainted with that Whore
her Maid


As for her Maid, I ever scornd her as a base, abject, inferior wench; but for
her Mistress, the fair and virtuous Morphe, I have Altars, and Temples in my
heart, erected for her merits: her! I do, I will, maugre both men and devils,
love


Well, Sir, we will cool your courage, as hot as you are-here's your father, with
Philos; I Will tell him all


I Have brought your Brother, Sir.


I thank you Sir; but yet could wish his coming might be welcomed with better
news: I shall disturb, and discompose his thoughts with a Narration of his sons
debaucheries


Speak quickly, Brother, lest by your too long silence, I be induced to think
his vices are beyond expression, and fancy him a worse Monster, then you will (it
may be) represent him to me: I Am already persuaded, that he is a burden to the
earth he treads on: Wracks, I believe, and Halters cannot extort more from him,
then is guilty Conscience; he being conscious to himself, that were his close
breast glazed and pellucid, (according unto Momuses desire) twould be a poor
and idle sin, of which it had not been a Receptacle. He looks like one
surpised in a shameful act of Lust, or Theft: he knows not what to say, or
think, or do: his Spirits huddle consusedly together, and would go somewhither,
but know not where; do something, but they know not what: were he to be
arraigned before a Judge, his countenance would prove his Executioner, and hang
him. O! that I should e're give give birth to so Prodigious a Rogue, who is
forfeited so far to vice, as that no virtue can redeem him; his heart, when it is
besieged by a temptation, though never so small, (like Rome when it was
besieged) is always taken


Sure, Sir, I could never be such a Monster as you represent me, unless some of
your vices were entailed upon me; because you (by uncharitableness) have forgot
you are my father, I must forget that I Am your son, and speak my mind more
plainly


Nay, now I see he is arrived to the height of wickedness: he that forgets his
duty to a father, will not start back from the commission of the most horrid
crime: he will swallow smaller Gnats, that does not boggle at a greater matter:
his nature's so inured to wickedness, that (like poisons to some bodies which
are accustomed to 'um) it does become his food and nourishment


I beseech you, Brother, send for his Tutor, that we may all consu^t how to
restrain his wickedness


Let me entreat you, Philos, to accept of the trouble of fetching Demosthenes;
his chamber is not far: desire him to vouchsafe us his presence here


I shall be proud to serve you, Sir.




Me thinks, Sir, that the sense of your vices should make you tap your eyes,
and drop a tear or two, which (as Mercury water does a Rock) might dissolve
your hard, your rocky heart, into a penitent confession of your faults

But when of sinning we have lost a sense,
We must expect final impenitence.

It Is very true, Brother; the villain is hardened in's wickedness; he assumes
confidence from his crimes, and (like your common prostitutes) sinning's become
his trade, he is not ashamed to glory of his shame, but his Tutour is come now,
he shall hear all, I made bold to trouble you Demosthenes; here is a Pupil of
yours has miscarried, and I fear, lost for ever


LOst for ever? I Am almost lost in admiration at this fatal news; I pray
deliver me of that Timpany of expectation to hear his vices, with which I Am big


He has commenced an acquaintance with that beggarly gentlewoman called Morphe,
who though she has a little skindeep beauty, yet she is desperately poor and
indigent, her beauties colors, like those in the Rainbow, paesage a barrenness
of Rain; no golden showers can come from her; she may (it may be) like the Sun
in the warm Summer, guild and refresh him with some few golden rays, but
they are so few and small, that in the Winter of adversity, they will all be spent
and quite exhausted; her estate (I fear) like Tholosanus's gold, will ruin and
undo those that enjoy it; it is too small to last long


I thought young Eugenes, I had sufficiently Catechis'd you about these idle
courses, will you never wear your virile gown, and be a man? Is this a fit
qualification for a student in Philosophy, to be a visitant of wenches? If you
would exercise your courtship, do it on that excellent Lady, Philosophy? she is
not coy, but with expanded hands, and open arms will entertain you: her
discourses are not (like other Lady's) only frothy and pleasing, but
profitable too; she is a fit object for your love


Sir, your so tender, and father-like expressions have melted my before
congealed senses into tears, Morphe; in whom nature has out-work't her self,
and far transcended her own Idea's; she cannot be paralle'ld by any art, much
less by nature: she would baffle Painters to decypher her exactly, as bad as Agues
puzle Doctors; and you must know, that your restraining me from her company
will prove as fatal to me, as letting blood does usually to those that are
affected with the small pox, or as the small pox to a fair face: I love her,
and though I loose my fortune, nay, my life for it, I will have her


Consider, Eugenes, that Cupid's blind, and be not so imprudent as to follow a
blind guide. Show your self a Philosopher: and get the mastery over that fond
Pastion, Love


Love cannot be mastered, Sir:
As soon as mastery comes, sweet Love anon
Takes his nimble wings, and soon is gone.

Whip that fond Boy, Cupid, and that will make him, like a little child, run
away from you: then indeed, he will take's wings, and be gone


Sir, he is armed with arrows, and for each blow, he will wou^d me to the heart,
as he has done already


Well, Sir, if you will not hearken to your Tutors safe advice, know, that before
this company, I declare you disinherited, and leave you heir to no more then
twelve pence of my estate: and so farewell


And that I may be no small assistant in reclaiming you from your lewd courses,
I Will command your chamber door key to be brought to me, your door to be double
locked: your chamber shall serve you both for Banqueting house, and Bog-house;
Parlour, and Privy-house. You shall be fed like a Caged Bird: your victuals
shall be given you through Grates, and thus I Will leave you: come let us go
Demosthenes


WEll, Madam, be advised by me, never marry if you're wise: these men (when
once married) are always licking their wives lips, and by too frequent
breathing on those Red Roses, make 'um at last as blew as their own noses in a
winter morning. Consider, That for a few drams of Bestial pleasure, you must be
wrack't to a confession that you have been at your sport, by the untollerable
Pangs of Childbed: your body, will once in nine months, be unjoynted, after
you have been glu'd unto a man: these men (like Tinkers) will stop up one Hole
in us, but make three for it, by weakening our bodies: they will go abroad and drink
o'th best, and vex their wives at home, till they are drunk with their own
tears. We women are the ships in which men sail in the Ocean of this world;
they will leap into us wislingly at first, and come aboard, but when we leak, by
reason of th'infirmities of age, they will let us sink and perish, and leap as
fast out of us the're trust, 'um Mistress


You wan't my brother again to rattle you for these invectives against
marriage, pray hold your tongue


Well Madam, I am silent, and it is high time, for Eutrapelus is coming.


I hope now noble Madam, I have a lience to plead again gain in Cupids Count,
which lately you adjourned: it is not the long vacation yet; let me request you
therefore Madam to end my suit* let it not last as long, as Law suites do in
Chancery; one word of yours, whereby I may be well assured of your affection,
will set me out of miseries reach, I shall be more invulnerable then Achilles,
for he was wounded in the heel; but I shall be armed Cap a Pee against all
danger with one word of encouragement from you


What power I have over my self, I willingly resign to you Eutrapelus, but yet
there wants the main wheel to put your designs in motion, I mean my fathers
consent; and he has resolved to keep me in my Virgin state these two years: How
shall I extricate my self from these great difficulties


Go but along with me and I Will secure you: I Will tell you what to do.


Well, I Will commit my self unto your trust.


COme my Anaiskuntia, when shall we make a conjunction Copulative? What will it
always be nibbling at my fleshly Bait, and never take it in


Your hook appears too much, Sir, to make me taste the Bait; I Am afraid you come
upon the catch, only to try whether I Will bite or no; and if I do, you will only
tear open my mouth, make it bleed, and then leave me


Leave thee? give me but thy consent,
And I Will stick so close to thee, that every one
That see's us, shall swear we are but one;
Leave thee, Leave thee, I Will not leave thee,
O how loath am I to leave thee!

I scarce know how to trust you, you men are so accustomed to make your
thoughts strangers unto your words


Not how to trust me! Why, I Will give thee earnest my girl, I Will make the cock
sure


Come, stay your stomach a little with that kiss, you will fall too the more
heartily presently for it: as soon as the Priest has coupl'd us, do your best
and worst


Well, my Anaiskuntia, accompany me to my chamber, and we will contrive the
business there, there is another couple will be Married with us


WHat would they have made me live immured, and cag'd up in my chamber? This
was (like a Nun that has had a Clap) to be buried alive in a Coffin of a larger
Volume, must I have walked up and down in my Chamber like a pale Ghost, and
(as't were be Magic Charms) be limited and confined to walk no further? I Will
make'um know, that it would prove as easy, to manacle Omnipotence, or confine
a Spirit, as me; although I could not, like Dadalus, make me wings, and take my
flight out of my cage, yet I could file a Bar, and break my passage out of the
chamber window; they should not have left me an eye of light, had they intended
to secure my person, I can creep th'rough a window, eat Iron Bars thorough like
Aquafortis, break th'rough the gaping jaws of danger, for to obtain the sight
of my dear Morphe; had they dispersed serpents teeth, and sown 'um in my way,
and ( Cadnius like) made them to spring up armed men, I Would have encountered
with 'um all; my breast already is too much possess't with Love, to harbor
slavish fear; I Will presently post to Morphe, and give her the relation of all
my travels, but whilst I talk, methinks I see my glorious Sun appear, she comes
and shines upon me sweetly, her countenance wears a lovely smile; What makes
the fairest Morphe so neatly dress her countenance into a smile? May I presume
to know the cause


TWo things there were that moved my laughter, first to see you, who (as I
heard) were kept close personer in your Chamber, secondly, that I have lost
(the precious jewel) my maid, some body has robbed me of her, much good may't
do 'um


Madam, you have sufficient grounds of smiling, but as smiling is but a
Prologue to perfect laughter, so coutship is to Marriage joys, let me desire
you therefore to make me leave off all vain Prologues, and fall to the sport,
and let me act Marriag'es merry Comedy with you; Ladies act Plays sometimes as
well as men


But I Am afraid (my dearst Eugenes,) (for now that Epithete thou do deserve)
our Comedy will prove a Tragedy to you, 'ith' Epilogue


Never fear it Madam, but if it do, my strains (like those in Tragedies) shall
be high and lofty, I Will not cringe to the best of 'um all, but talk as high as
they, till at last, it prove but a Tragi Comedy at most, beginning in sadness
and ending in mirth


Well, my Eugenes, thy constancy has overcome me, I Am now your own; but who
shall marry us


Why thus, my uncle you know is a Clergyman, we will go to him in a disguise,
and make him marry us, then, we'el laugh at him, and vex him as much as he has
done us


Let Us go then and accoustre our selves accordingly,
The world shall know that it is a thing above,
All human Power to over master Love.

DEmost henes, how does your Pupil resent his confinement? You hear nothing of
s repining at it, do you


Not a word, but I fear 'twil make him more desperate and resolute, his nature
will never brook it


You are too tender of him Demosthenes, he must be curbed and bridled in, if
ever you intend he should be stopped in the full career of his debauchery


But sir, some horses the more you curb 'um in, will run the faster.


Sir, he is a rebellious Son, and (like Rebels) must undergo a sharp
confinement, before he will be reduced to 's due obedience


You say true brother, he must have his wings clipped, and be cooped up, if ever
you expect to came him


Who is it you would speak with good people? What Is your pleasure?

We come an't pleaze your Vorship to be Morried, I con love this fine lass, and
zhe provesses, zhe con do zo to me; will you zir, be pleased to yoke us together


These are right country Bump-kins: they talk in a broad language, much like
the Dorick Dialect in Greek: they don't clip their words; but give large London
measure in their talk: enough for money


What Is your name, I pray, honest man?


I am cleped, Sir, Villip Lovelass.


And do you love this lass?


I, by my vaith Sir, do I.


What Is your name, fair Maid?


My name is Mary Allcock, an't please your worship.


That Is a fit name for a Maid that is to be Married: here is a couple will make a
Philip and Mary coin

But who have we here?

Come hither Sir, come hither: What have you under your Gown?


A Saddle, an't please you, which I borrowed to ride out of Town on.


A Saddle, Sir!
And these are the Sirrups, are they?

Sirrah, What? must you be riding upon a Flesh Saddle? Are these fit courses
for a Scholar

Well, get you to your Chamber,

Tomorrow we will take a course with you.


But d'y' hear Maiden, can you love this man?


Yes forzooth can I, and none body else.


It Is a pretty Peat, to do the Feat; she heats my marrow: methinks I could be
young again, that I might enjoy her


You Would best marry 'um quickly, Mr. President, I believe they are impatient of
delay


Well Gentlemen, accompany me to our Chapel to th'marrying these people.


THese women are always wilful; she would not put on the clothes I prepared
for her; but it is no matter, we were married before they took us: they cannot
spoil our sport now: my name too is cut out of the College butteries; and I
have now no title to the honor of mounting a Barrel: but I wonder my
Anaiskuntia states thus long: sure she is dressed in her man's apparel by this
time

What, no appearance yet? it is strange!

O, now she is come.


I cannot endure to wear men's clothes thus, methinks it is ugly to see a woman
wear the Breeches


I wonder whether Eugeneia and Eutrapelus are married yet or no, they should be
by this time, or else the Parson made not so quick dispatch with 'um as he did
with us; nay, now I conclude they 're married, for here they come

How like you marriage joys Eutrapelus?


O, they are an Antepast of Heaven: Mahomet I see was no fool, for making his
paradise a place for the fruition of Genial pleasures; He knew what it was to
be truly happy: But don't our wives look like fine smooth-faced Lads in this
man-like habit? I wonder Jupiter comes not from Heaven to make one of 'um his
Cup Bearer, as he did Ganymed? come, lets sing a little


Come let us sing the time invites, our joys are now completed,
All oppositions are blasted and defeated.
Come let us kiss, my spirit's high, and fain would be in action,
Now we will laugh, and those defis, in Love who breed a Faction;
We will not fear an ill-look'd Dean, nor mirth-disturbing Proctor,
We Will now carouze, and sing and bouze, before the gravest Doctor.
WHat? are you all mad, you make such a disturbance in the College? as for you
two Eutrapelus. and Aphobos, we know you for notorious Rogues, but these two
pretty young lads, I believe were seduc't by you

Were you not Sweet-hearts?


Yes Sir, we were led hither by 'um.


Well, go your ways for this time, and come no more into this lewd company.

As for your part Aphobos, you were caught lately with a wench, and one (who by
report) was light enough either for you to bear her, or her to bear you: she is
in plain terms a common whore, and not fit company for a Student


Sir, either give her a better Character, or I Will give her one written in your
warmest blood; she is my lawful wife, and he that blemishes her reputation with
the smallest scandal, I Will rip him up alive, and sacrifice him to her honor,
which ever was untainted and immaculate


The other also was my wife, although invested in a Scholastic habit.


If you are married, you have forfeited your places.


It is confessed, we have; nor do we now desire to keep 'um longer: our names are
out o'th Butteries, and our persons out of your dominions


Here Is mad doings: but (I believe) my sons too fast for ever getting out to
marry


But tell me true, were those your wives?


They were Sir, and here they are again in their own habit and attire.


I wish you joy then, O my Niece, Eutrapelus.


Well, 'twas happy that my son was kept close prisoner; although my daughter
has broke loose, he, I believe, is far from thoughts of marriage

Oh! what a sad object do my eyes behold? I Would rather have been deprived of the
light, then e're have seen this sight: How now, sir? How broke you loose, and
got that wench


I Got her, Sir, by my Unckles means.

How, Sirrah! by my means? I never saw her in my life before; and would sooner
have seen you both hanged together: What? Do You make me your Pimp


Nay, Sir, we are hanged together so fast, that there is no cutting the rope now.
Marriage cannot be dissolved until death


What wicked wretch was it married you?


My Uncle, Sir.


It Is a notorious lie;
I never saw this woman before.

Yes, Sir, but you have: I was the Mary Allcock you married.


And I the Philip Lovelass, whom you asked whether I could love this Lass or no,
and then married us


Well, Brother, I see now we are outwitted, and that young people may see more
with their eyes in their heads, then old men with their eyes hanging at their
girdle. We Will go in now, and seeing they are married, prepare a feast for'um: I
have a living at my disposal that I Will bequeath to Aphobos, because he is poor:
And as for you, Eugenes, because you have contrived your Plot so well, I
declare you my sole Heir: I Will not vex my self in vain


To vex when mischiefs are quite past and gone,
Is the next way to bring more mischiefs on.
BEfore you all, my Father does declare,
That he intends me for his lawful Heir.
My Poverty henceforth I Will not bewail,
For now I may, Top and Top gallant sail
In The Ocean of his wealth, not will I fear
The Shipwreck of my Fortunes, whilst I stear
My course, so you, like the Laplanders, will sell
A Gale of your Applause, my Sails to swell.

