It Is hard adventuring in this giddy Age,
To make a Pope or Friar grace a Stage.
When many partial Eyes with Anger stares,
And Pens are fallen together by the Ears.
Fie, this is impious, says a Popish Sire,
Thus to abuse a Churches Holy Friar.
You Cursed Poet, by what Godly Rule,
Do thou Religion turn to Ridicule?
The truly Ancient Doctrine too below,
Which from the first to the present Age did flow.
But says the Poet then, tho no Divine,
Clouds muffle up that Sun which once did shine.
Such Poisonous Damps of Error deck it round,
Whose stifling Follies does the World confound.
To soil what is sacred, he is not such an Elf,
He writes of what has ridiculed it self.
And thus in Comedy he deals, while he,
Might have depicted Rome in Tragedy.
With Streams of Blood, running through every Street,
And Bleeding Martyrs at their Murth'rers Feet.
But that which now will be the pretty'st Jigg,
He will, like some of you, be thought a Whigg.
In Conscience tho, I Will clear him here before ye,
He Is known for neither Papist, Whigg nor Tory.
Oh monstrous strange cry you, What is he then?
And what the Devil must we make of the Man?
Even what you will, he is at your Mercy now,
And tho you are Critical some kindness show.
He Is Plotter also turned, have pity on him,
If's Plot takes not, the Pope has near undone him.
It Is true, here are no Scaenes to Grace our Show,
No middle Gallery, nor Pit below.
What if our Stage thus nakedly appears.
If not your Eyes, we'll strive to please your Ears.

BUT are you in earnest Isabella? Do you think that old, impotent Picture of
December would cloth himself with Blooming Flowers of cheerful May? Ridiculous
Fool! Does he think that cold, sapless, shrivelled Age, can agree with the
warmth of tender Youth? Marry me? let him Marry a Winding Sheet, that is fitter
for him


I Am only suspicious Madam, for he never sees you at Mass, but he looks on you
as if he would eat you: if he chance to be at too great a distance from you, he
claps his Spectacles on his Nose; and makes the whole Congregation stare at
him, for his staring at you. Come, I believe it must be a Match at last, though a
very unequal one; especially if he asks your Father's consent; for you know the
old, rotten piece of Flesh is Rich, and Riches are tempting


You say right in that, my Father not being much beholding to Fortune, I must
expect no great matters from him; the old Fool's Riches therefore may be the
only persuasive Argument to make me consent at last


I don't know, were it my case, I should not need much urging.


But how I Am frighted when I consider, I must be Bedded to Diseases, and clammy
Clay: in lieu of tasting the Spicy Varieties of Love, I shall have my Sense of
Smelling disturbed with an infectious, poisonous Air, fuming from his foggy
Lungs; in lieu of being charmed with Harmonious Sounds of Love, I shall have no
other entertainment for my Ears, than tedious Coughings, and unwholesome
Gruntings all the Night long, and in a Morning, when my Sight should be pleased
in viewing the gallant Object that entertained my Love all night, I shall have
the prospect of Death in a Slumber, his bloodless Visage withered, and his
hollow eyes, distilling Rheum down the furrows of his Face; As in a thaw the
Snow melts down in Drop
Into the Kennels from the houses tops



Yet were I you, all this I could bear, and patiently too, especially when I
considered Madam; how greatly my Fortunes would improve by it


Nay if I Am importuned, I Will not be obstinate, tho I know the ill consequence
of such a match in several other respects: horrible. Jealous I Am sure he will be,
for Jealousy, and Old age are inseparable Companions: he will be pevish too, and
perhaps coveteous; Judge then what a prospect of mischief I have before my
View, If I hazard my self thus. As for his Jealousy perhaps I may give him
cause as his impotency may justly deserve


I vow Madam I think you speak but reason: I'im sure Nature never made us women
for useless men; but here comes your father


Well, how now, how is it with you daughter?


Just as it is with most Virgins of my years Father, that would know more of
the world than we do


So, so, very well; you will never leave your old triks, you are very pert me
thinks: what think you of swallowing the vow of Chastity, and liveing in a
Monastery? that was my design, once


Why, I think I should have lived and been holy both together.


That Is, odd indeed, what is your meaning?


Why, the resemblance of a Nun, shut up in a Monastery makes me appear Holy,
and the Vow that I should make would be a sin to countervail with it: for I
should tell Nature a lie to her Face: besides my Faith is a little wavering in
that particular that our Mother Church enjoins us to believe; for I can scarce
think her Capable of bestowing on us the gift of Chastity; how can she give
that Blessing to others which she wants her self


Daughter you talk as if you were mad; for heaven sake say no more, we shall
have you clapped into the Inquisition. But to wave this discourse what think you
of a Husband now


Why, if he be, sound, wind and limb, I think he may do good Service.


Yes, that may be, that may be truly. But what think you of a rich Husband that
shall raise the honor of our Family


What, Father you mean an Husband whose Riches hides all other defects? why I
may (not to be ungrateful) endeavor to raise the honor of his Family too


Well I have an Husband for you: truly he is something stricken in years, but
he is a bonny tuff Blade, and he is rich enough; It is Marforio the
Neapolitan-Doctor, he will come to see you by and by: I charge you to entertain
him and encourage him in his Addresses to you; I promise you he is a good
Honest, Sober, well-meaning Gentleman


The only Character given to most Fools and Cuckolds.


And he will love you not with a lascivious hair-brained Love, like Giddy,
foolish youth, but his love will be solid; and he will instruct you in the
Rudiments of Virtue; he will reach you sobriety, and wisdom, which affords more
solid pleasure, in Love than ever frothy, flashy youth did taste


This is the right discourse of all Superannuated Coxcombs, when they are past
loving like Vigorous youth; then they exclaim against the true pleasures of
love, only because they want power to taste'em


Well Daughter, I say no more, I say no more; be wise and dutiful, or the
frowns of a father will fall heavy upon you: remember what I told you be sure
you; behave yor self well before him


Sir, I shall perform my duty; fough! what pleasant Discourse has here been in
praise of gray hairs, and wrinkles, to induce youth to dally with them? I see
thy suspicions were not for nothing Isabella, for I find he has been already
with my Father, and has gained his Consent, and I believe the old fool will be
here shortly to ask mine too


He has trimmed himself up of late like any youthful spark, which becomes him
as a Cardinal's Cap would a Cow, he exercises his limbs at a more Nimble rate
too, and is indeed mighty modish and spruce; you think you shall be Courted by
a piece of cold, living Ice, and I, on the Contrary, fancy he will meet you like
a Will in the Wisp, all Fire and Flame


Yes I believe so too, for I expect all Vapor and no Substance. I believe I
shall be forced to use other measures when I am yoked to him


Alas he will ly so loveingly by your side Madam; give you sometimes a snowy
kiss; hit you a pat or two on the Cheek, and call you little Rogue, and then
make you play with his beard so prettily, that it will be apleasure to your
thoughts ever after


You're a fleering slut; well but it is no matter, his Gold will cover me all
over with patience to endure the worst: but stay here he comes I think


Lady your humble servant.


Ha! Senior Marforio me thinks you look as if you were growing young again; you
are very spruce, and trim


Dad I don't look so old, do I Isabella?

I Am as sound as a Roach, girl, and I can play at leap-frog now as well as I
could at twenty


Say you so? me thinks then you grow very odly; you grow contrary to the Course
of Nature, all the rest of the World when Age approaches, grow weak and feeble
for want of radical moisture: to prop up Nature, but you, you say, grow strong
and Vigorous with your age


Prop up Nature did thou say child? my Nature needs no proping up, I thank my
Stars* besides, the very sight of thee is enough to prop up my Nature. Let me
feel thy Pulse, let me feel thy Pulse. Oh you are a little twinkling Rogue


You are pleasant, Senior.


How can I be otherwise? I am come a wooing to you, you little Rogue you, will
you deny me? Do but see; I can Leap, and Skip, and Trip and Hop, and Dance, and
Prance as nimbly as any Grasshopper

Tell me do you like me or no?


Bless me, what is here, a living Autumn? Nothing but withered Follies? Truly,
your comely gray Hairs, together with the obliging Humor and Carriage you have
to please our Sex with, can do no other than raise in me, and every one, a
Reverend Respect for you


But I mean, how do you like me for a Husband?


Why, do you speak in earnest Senior?


Yes, by'r Lady do I Girl.


Then I like you as well as Youth can do brisk comely Age, when it shall have
the Joyful Diversion to play with Silver Hairs, and to refresh it self in Beds
of Snow, when overheated with the Summers warmth: in fine, I like you well
enough, but the Will of my Parents is a Law to me, cut of that Track of
Obedience, I must not wander


Come then if you please, I Will go with you to your Father presently. Oh I could
so -- but it is no matter now, come, come let us go, let us go


What tho to sleepy drowsy Age I Am sold, Since those Defects are filled with
Charms of Gold


Truly brother I do intend to treasure up some thing by this Holy cheat.


In truth Brother you do very wisely, we must be every one for our selves, for
all the Church is our Mother. But indeed have you been at Jerusalem or no


No more than thou have been in purgatory.


Then the Relics that you brought over and have showed to his Holiness are
even of your own ma^eing and contriveing; and was there ever such a Saint as
Saint Allivergot


Of my own making! why you seem to be very ignorant, thou fool thou, why all
the miracles that are booked upon with such Reverence and Devotion by our
Proselytes in the Golden Legend, are mere Shams and Inventions: ^o are all
those that have been broached ever since the Donation of Constantine to the
Pope: And in that there is a Juggle too, for that was the first Plot the Devil
and our holy Church invented to make the Papal Chair great and durable

I don't know that ever there was such a Saint; but that is all one, I hope my
arrival is not divulged yet, is it


No, no body knows that you are come yet. But prithee if thou have not been at
Jerusalem where have thou been then


I have been at three other Holy places, and one damnable, wicked Heretical
place I have been to visit our Lady of the Rosario, our Lady Del Carmine and
our Lady del Popolo: And I have been among the plagnyest Heretics this day in
Christendom, I have been in England


Oh Wonderful! pray how goes our holy design there forward?


Forward man! Why the Heriticks have almost broke it all to pieces, and they
have made nothing of Cutting off the Champions of our Church, pray heaven they
don't make his Holiness reel in his Chair, and then we are safe enough


Have you acquainted his Holiness with any particulars?


Not one word yet, I intend to do it. But I cannot forbear telling you a
passage, that happened between an heretic and I at Tavern in London with some
other Company. I was telling him Brother, what wonderful miracles were wrought
by my Saint Allivergot. and how he was martyred for the truth: I told him too,
how Saint Denis, after he was beheaded did most miraculously walk three miles
with his head in his hand, and then let it fall: upon which ground I told him
was built a Town that bears his name, three miles distant from Paris


Well what said the Heretic to these wonders of our Church?


Why he was ready to choke himself with laughing; Pish said he (at last when he
could speak) these miracles were wrought a great many years ago: but for all
their scarcity I can tell you of one in our age, and an English true one; and
you know, said he, miracles are not usual among Heretics. There was a
gentleman, said he, was of good quality, who being troubled with a deep
melancholy, went into a place called Sommerset house, there strangled himself
to death: after he was dead he takes a walk near three miles, a walk almost as
long as your Saint Denis's and there he runs himself through with his own
rapier, and killed himself again for spite


Mum, not a word more of this, as the learned observes: Sure this Heretic told
an Impudent lie


No for the rest of the Company confirmed what he said: But come I must get you
to help me to put things in a readyness against I dazzle the peoples eyes with
the Luster of my Relics

Thus we the giddy world pretend to guide
While in our sleeves its weakness we deride.
And thus what with devotion we expose.
Is but to lead the Vulgar by the nose.

Come we have done the work now my Duck, my Love, my Chuck, my Lamb, my Honey,
my Dear, my -- prithee one kiss now you little Rogue you, so -- Dad I am Mighty
-- Mighty -- But Come prithee my Dove we want nothing now but going to the
Priest, let us hasten away then


I must be guided by the Golden Rule of your Wisdom now Sir,

Let me look upon his Head a little,
Oh ho! He Will become Horns very well.

Come then, dad I Am all mirth, I Am all mirth.

Let Us guide our eager steps then let us fly,
That I the sooner Loves soft charms may try,

To me are all men subject I to none,
I am Divine tho molded into flesh:
I Am Heavens deputy, to me Kings bow,
Emperors implore my favor, and the world
I save, or damn according as I please.
They that to heaven will climb, must ask me leave:
Without my keys no Entrance can be had:
Monarchs may thank me if I am so kind
To let them keep those kingdoms they possess;
And think that I advance their fame if I
Give'm the Title of my servile Page.
To me alone the world obedience owes
All those the honor have to be my slaves
That Adoration to my footstool pay;
Had I my Will I would be greater yet
And far exceed the holy crowd of heaven
In lieu that I to heaven worship pay
I would make heaven pay it back to me.

Most holy father your great power we own,
And tremble when we think what you can do.
Your God-like power over all extends:
A Temp'ral too, as due you likewise claim
Which tho you have it not as yet entire;
Yet is your Empire and Dominions great
Three hundred miles the Church's state extends
Within the limits of fair Italy.
Spoleto's Duchy to is your Just due;
So's Benevent, a fair Town in Naples
To Naples kingdom too you lay a claim;
But rather than your Champion you will offend
The Spaniard, who your cause so long has fought,
You only once a year as due receive
A white Mule with a purse about his neck,
Filled up with Golden Pistols; and to show,
What they to Heavens mighty Vicar ow.

The Spaniards e're were Zealous in our Cause,
And are true Sons of their indulgent Mother.

Sicily, Vrbin, Parma, Masseran,
With Norway, should pay Homage to your Throne.
England and Ireland too, you long have claimed,
E're since Pandulpho in that Land arrived,
And came as Legate when King John did lay
The Imperial Crown as due beneath his Feet.

My Spirtu'l Power too, them Kingdoms claim;
But name that Cursed, stiff-neck'd Land no more;
I Am out of Breath with pouring Curses on it.
It Is that damned Land that mortifies me thus,
And turns my Glories into dirt and dregs.
The Saints I Have there are few, but full of Zeal;
They Will leave no stone unturned to make us great:
They Will Plot, Destroy, and Towns to Ashes turn;
Try to kill Kings, then piously deny it,
And damn their weak Souls with their latest Breath,
With hopes of being Sainted after Death.

It Is so, but then the Heretics rejoice,
And say there is none but Libertines and Fools
That live and die such mighty Champions,
To People Hell, to please proud Rome and you.

Is then my God-like Power thus debased
By sullen Heretics, the World's foul Scums?
Shall I, whose Breath can darken humane Fate,
Be thus the Scorn of every saucy worm?
Angels and Saints are pretty things that please
The wiser sort of Fools that pray to Heaven;
But it is fitting for the Churches good
And honor too, my only Mark and Aim;
That first they Pray to me and then to Heaven.
It Is I that Heaven must thank for all its Saints:
I make 'em here, and they recieve 'em there,
So the pre-eminence is due to me,
And Heaven shall worshipped be at second hand.
But for the Heretics in the British Isle,
I Will make 'em know that I at last have power,
To Crush them with these circl'd Arms to Air.

But they are obstinate, and will not be Crushed.

Then will I damn and blast 'em with my Breath.
But is your Skill yet ready to perform
What my Commands so lately did enjoin?
Will not those Airy Beings yet appear?
Sure they grow bold and know not who commands.

Most Holy Father, yes they shall appear,
And tell you what is done beyond the Moon.
The work is great, and asks longer time;
The mighty Charm is yet not half wound up.
Besides, they have a tedious way to come
Through Regions, Foggy, Moist, Dry, Warm and Cold.

How many shall there from the Shades ascend?

My Negromantick Power shall bring up.
Just four, to answer what your Will commands.

Then we will wait till the Charm be complete,
Let Diligence the while your Duty show.
But now let us to the Chapel guide our way,
That we a Debt may to Devotion pay.

Did not I tell thee Isabella, what I should endure by marrying this old Cuff?
to be penned up thus all day like a mouse in a Trap, to suffer penance thus by
an old Clumpish, Feeble Jealous coxcomb, And I must be enjoined fasting
forsooth; and to mortify the pride of the flesh as he pretends; here he has
left me Beads, Crucifixes, Prayer-books, and a lusty Cord to scourge my self
with, where as I think he ought to undergo the Penance of being well scourged
himself for his own insufficiency: and oh that I were to inflict it on him my
self, I Would make him skip after another manner than he did when he Courted me;
and then all the Comfort I have is but looking out of that window upon the
Cloisters


I did not expect it would have been altogether so bad neither, but now you
must have patience till the rotten, fleshy building is fallen


I believe his Jealousy will scarce leave him when he is dead.


You would Joyfully know the Contrary were it so, but he is too old to stay in
the world much longer; I wonder what business he has in it at all, at his
years


His only business now is to torment me, but I warrant you, I Will Conquer him,
and engraft the Trophyes of my Victory on his head too

How d'y like the Friar that is made so famous by his Relics; he says his
Holiness has caused them to be newly Registered in the Roman Calendar


I like him very well, for he is looked upon as a mighty upright, holy man, I
believe he will be Cannonized for a Saint at his Death: and when he walks the
streets how the people flock about to recieve his Blessing and kiss the hem of
his Garment


He Is but young, it is much he should be so much admired; it is asign my husband
was extremely pleased with him, or else he would never have had me to Church to
hear him preach


His Relics have a strange power they say: for it is reported they will make
women breed without the help of their husbands, turn old age into youth, heal
Diseases and increase Love


Oh strange! I Am glad my husband has ordered him to come and Confess me, for I
have a good opinion of him, my meaning is I respect him above other Men; he was
very obliging to me too, for when he went out of the Church, he saluted me from
all the rest of the Ladies


Nay then, I believe he begins to know that you deserve some respect from him
too; And all the time he was preaching I took notice his eye was for the most
part steadfastly fixed upon you


If this should increase now to a Flame?


It would be but an holy flame at most.


For my part I believe the worst of his Actions are pure and holy.


Ay, ay, so they are; don't holy mother Church tell us we must believe what the
Church believes: besides, if the sins of the Flesh do corrupt us his Absolution
cleanses us again, even as Fire purifies Air


You are in the Right.


I Am sure I am in the Right when I follow the pious rules, of the Church, which
give us, maxims to sin, and sanctifies'um when we have done. I vow I begin to
have as good an opinion of father Lupin as you have of father Turbin


Say thou so girl? Nay then I have a Plot in my head in which I hope Saint
Venus will asist me. If she does, my dry bon'd bed fellow shall be preferred to
his due deserts


Truly with a cold Icy withered body he has a grave dull Politic head fit for
a Satyrs ornament


Faith girl my good Nature will make me be so kind to him at last. ha, ha, ha.


What, laughing? is this the mortification of the flesh? is this deying the
devil and all his works? out ye daughter of Satan

But there is some thing more then ordinary in the wind I Am a fraid: I believe
the sneeringsluts laughed at me --

Go get you gone into your Closset that is fitter for you than to sit and sneere
and mock


Why husband cannot we be cheerful and devout too.


Not a word, make haste in and follow me.


Damned may she be, nay doubly damned that first
For Interest wedded Age, may she be Cursed
With all the Plagues a woman's Rage can vent,
And when we Curse, I Am sure they are well meant.
May she be lewd t'excess, proud and yet poor,
May none supply her lust when she would turn whore.
Then may she pine to death at her ill luck,
Because youth will not and Age her cannot --

Apyes take it I don't know what I ail, but I Am horribly tormented in my mind,
I cannot be at quiet in the day time, neither can I sleep in the night, for
thinking and dreaming of horns, yet I keep her safe enough, there is no body
comes near her, And endeavor to mortify her with Devotion, that the members of
her body, may not rise up in rebellion against me their Chief head and
Governor, but still for all this it is Horns, horns, horns, that will not let me
alone. And horns are such things that the very thoughts of 'um do half kill me

For though they grace the brows that they adorn,
Still they are pointed at by all with Scorn.

Now my fame begins to spread, now do the common People begin to worship me,
and cry me up for holy; and therefore now I begin to fill my coffers and thrive


His Holiness encourages the Cheat too I find.


What will not his Holiness do for Lucre to advance the Interest of the Church;
he shall cause Kings to be deposed and murdered, Heretics to be destroyed
with the severest Torments; in fine, he shall set all the world together by the
ears provided he may make but a pious gain, for himself and his hopeful Nephews


Indeed! are they so kind to their Nephews?


I find you are but a Novice in our Church, or else experience would have made
you wiser: our most Holy fathers fancy they give Kings one half of Heaven (for
you must know that is at their disposing) and another half of Earth when they
stile'um their Sons: and the Kings that are true to our cause think they merit
the other half of Heaven in most humbly stiling them Father


Say you so? me thinks these are very pious things, and tend much to mutual
Love and Unity


You are mistaken there Lupin, theres' more of Policy than Religion in it, as
indeed there is in all our principles. Know then that this only serves to
enslave Princes to the Grandeur and Loftiness of Heavens most humble Vicar


But I wonder that Princes who have commonly wise Counselors to advise with,
should be thus led by the Nose. And I wonder to at another thing, that the Pope
should bear a more entire affection to his Nephews then to his Sons the Kings;
for my part I should reckon my Children both nearer and dearer to me than my
Nephews


Our Popes are governed by contrary Maxims, for what ever they scrape together
from the church when they die they they leave to their Nephews as their heirs;
not affording so much as a small legacy to their Sons; Witness Pope Urban the
Eighth, Innocent the tenth, and Alexander the seventh; who left above seven
Hundred Thousand pistols to his Nephews and only the Title of Son to the poor
Emperor who had all his life time been at great charge and trouble in defending
him against the Infidels


Some People would take this for Ingratitude; but for my part I think Kings and
Emperors should believe themselves Rich enough, and Highly Honored in
enjoying only the Title of his Sons, without expection of any thing else


You speak like a True soldier of his Holiness, I commend you. It Is a main
point of our Religion to procure Riches to the Church, no matter how nor which
way: the other day one comes to me to be absolved for defiling himself with a
goat; I had four Pistols for giving him Absolution: And for one more I would
have undertook to procure a dispensation from his Holiness for him to marry the
beast


Nay I know the Pope has power: But now let us wave this discourse till
another time


Ay, ay, let us wave it, let us wave it, I have business of greater concernment
in my head; I long to go to Confess Madam Florimel, the time seems tedious


Just so it always seems to eager lovers; It Is but waiting till the morrow, and
by'r Lady I must with you too, for I have a loving desire to be father
Confessor to -- It Is no matter whether I tell you or no


You need not keep it so close you mean to Isabella; come, come, then we are
well enough

And that our desires in pleasure may end
Let Us make our Religion our Plottings befriend.

I Know Father Turbin you are a Man for a Religious Life, without Spot or
Blemish; and that as you are jogging on toward Heaven with a zealous pace, so
you will not think your Pains much, to direct others the same Road: here is my
Wife wants some of your holy Instructions whereby she may build a Groundwork by
her Edification, to be thoroughly versed in the Art of Mortification: I would
have you make her Religious and Virtuous, and Holy, and Prudent, and Wise, and
Humble, and Meek, and Obedient, that she may mind the Commands of me her Lord
and Husband, and not the Kickshaw Vanities of the Flesh


Heaven does seem to have molded our Daughter here, on purpose for Edification
Sir; and therefore I don't question but to find her endued with a Religious and
Spiritual Sanctity, and what blessing Heaven has bestowed on me, she shall
enjoy her self. I don't doubt but a little private discourse with her may work
a soft and gentle impression in her

Therefore pray Sir do you stand at a distance,

Daughter I must give you the trouble to kneel.


O pious, most Holy man!

Sir I have obeyed your Commands.


Daughter we have a saying in Philosophy, that Nature made nothing in vain; all
things were made for some use, and if we follow not the Law of Nature when she
presses us to be guided by her rules, we sin both against her and Heaven; for
there she recieved Being, and here it is our duty to Cherish her. Beauty the
most excellent thing that ever Nature framed; Beauty that gives life to the
Heavens as well as the Earth, shall she continue among us to be only poorly
admired at a distance, as some Nations do the Sun? no, she was made for Love,
Love, without which the most illustrious beautyes would shine but meanly,
neither could they raise Trophyes to illustrate their worth: can you hear the
name of Love daughter pronounced by me without a frown


Yes Sir I am not so barbarous yet to find any thing in that name so terrible.


And can your tender breast receive that soft impression do you think? I speak in
a Religious way, for I would by no means have you offend Heaven


Well I Will leave you together; pray father Turbin, bring down the Pride of her
Flesh a little.


I warrant you Senior; leave that to me. Come Daughter, indeed I cannot see you
Kneel any longer


Father I am generally good natured; and I know not but I may be capable enough
of receiving the holy Flame


Well Daughter, you speak like a Saint: if there were not a great deal of
Religion in Love, I would not entertain you with this Discourse: But, to go
farther can you settle an harmless, innocent Love upon me, and think no more on
Age, and Impotence? Beauty, as I said, before, was not made for nothing, much
less for insufficient Age, but for the Embraces of Love and Youth. Do not Sin
then Daughter thus, against our Handmaid Nature; employ your blooming Youth to
advantage, before Age shall wither those beauteous Features and fill those
Veins with Ice, in lieu of Blood. Consider the Religious Advice I give you;
here is a Breast filled with a Love as warm as the Sunbeams in summer, take it
and use it as your own


You make me Blush, and I Am overcome; for I vow I can deny you nothing, you are
such a pious Man: but I Am considering what measures we must use: you know my
old Husband is very Jealous of me, therefore we must go prudently to work; stay
-- I think I have almost found out a way whereby we may taste the Pleasures of
Love without interruption: I Will pretend, very shortly, to fall sick, and then
do you leave the rest to me


I vow Daughter thou art one of a thousand, thou art a good Heavenly woman:
Come, one Kiss the holiness of my Coat claims from you; the Piety of my Order
requires another, and the third is due to Love.


You see Isabella what a sweet and pleasant Concordance there is with Religion
and Love, Love which is the Life of Religion; nay the Soul of every individu a
thing else; can you swallow this part of our Doctrine? Come I know as thou art
a good Christian, thou do understand the Theory, which if you do, the
Practick part will follow of Consequence


Ay, but you name a dangerous sort of Love; a Love full of Sin.


Believe me Isabella there can be no sin in the Divine thing called Love, the
most unsensible things in Nature are subject to that Excellent, and I may say,
Religious passion. Does not the Sun Court his Mistress the Earth with his
Glorious smiles, and the Earth again display her content, by her Checker-work
and embroydery in her Summer pride? Does not the Sun again, with the rest of
his Glorious Train move continually round for Love of perfection? Nothing
without some feeling of Love* Does not the stone move eagerly to his Center
fire upwards? And do not the sportling streams in many pretty Meanders glide to
the Sea? can these inanimate Beings be inclinable to that Noble passion, and
you whom Heaven has endued with sense and reason be without that very Sense
and Reason Heaven has bestowed on you purposely to know how to Love


You plead too well Father Lupin to be denied, and since it is an harmless
passion, I believe I can digest it: But who is it you would have me Love


My self that Love you more than our strongest Zealots do heaven. And to
Confirm this holy Flame, permit me to seal the Contract on those bloomy rosy
leaves your Love-Enchanting Lips.


Oh I shall die, come no more that is enough for once.


Thus will I take my Brother Turbin's measures.


And I will follow my Lady Florimels.


Do so, and let Love prosper us.


Alas it is time to part, Farewell and now,
Let Us not forget what we to Love did ow.
Another meeting shall our Joye renew,
And pay that Debt which to our flame is due.

So -- Now since I have begin to set my engineering brains to work, I Am
resolved to bring my plotings to perfection: and when all, comes to all, it is
but to pay a debt, my Husband's age and humor claims. I like the Friar well
enough; he will serve my Turn -- But let me see -- when would you advise me to
fall sick Isabella? for Indeed I must be sick, and very sick too, or else I
shall have no opportunity to accomplish my design; besides there is no better
way to blind my Husband's eyes and to keep neighbors from having an ill
Opinion of me


My Master you know was talking of going out of Town to morrow, or next day: I
think it would be necessary for you to fall sick a little before he goes


You give good Advice, I Will follow it.

Let Us then retire, and hasten to prepare,
Each thing in Order, for Loves gentle War.

How do you like our Love Intrigue; now is not this better than to say Mass for
the deliverance of five thousand Souls out of Purgatory


It goes forward as we could wish; under the happy Mask of Religion and Zeal;
and the Truth on it is, there is no design whatsoever, tho, contrived by the very
Prince of Hell himself but may find entertainment, as well in the meanest
Cloister as at the Vatican in our Holy City of Rome here


You speak like an understanding Man, I could not think you had gained so much
experience for the small time you have been in Orders; but to confirm what you
say, I Will tell you of a passage wherein I was the chief Actor: It is a
Love-Intrigue too; It was in the City of Ricanati, not far from our Lady of
Lorettoes Chapel, where I lived when I went in Pilgrimage thither: and I was
looked upon (as I am here) to be a very Religious Man


Was this in your pretended Return from Jerusalem with the supposed Relics?


Even so, for I happened to be Father-Confessor to a Lady there, who
notwithstanding the violent endeavors of her Husband to the contrary, proved
Barren: they were both equally desirous of Children, which made her Husband
request her to have recourse to my Prayers: she, in the mean time, with my
blessed Assistance used all natural means to obtain this Grace: in short, after
two years Prayers with her in private, evident signs of a great Belly appeared;
at which I and the Lady seemed mightily to rejoice, possessing the good Husband
that it proceeded from a Vow his Wife had made to Saint Gaeten, upon which the
good man caused a Statue of Silver to be founded, for his Wife to offer to this
Saint: and I pleasantly made 'um kneel before the Altar of the Saint, while I
gave 'um my Blessing; the rest of the Monks standing at that instant; most
Religiously jocund at the Devotion


This was certainly your Masterpiece. But your speaking of our Lady of
Loretto's Chapel makes me desire to understand how it came to be so often
removed, that I may know how this Story is contrived that has shamed so many
people: for tho I am in Orders, I could never yet learn the story right


Know then that this was our Ladies habitation in the city of Nazareth; and in
the time of Pope Nicholas, the fourth it happened to be Miraculously loosned
from the foundation and carried away in the Night (by a company of Angels) as
far as Sclavonia, to a place called Tersalto; adjoining to the Adriatic Sea;
which was a removeal of more than four thousand miles, at the arival whereof
the Inhabitants, in the morning were wonderfully surpised


And in my mind they had a great deal of Reason; for doubtless none but Devils
or better Beings could be capable of acting such a Prodigy


This house however continued there not long; for the Angels were willing to
play the porters once more; so hoysting it on their shoulders again, away
through the air they trudge with it as far as a place called Ricanati, where
they planted it in a wood adjoining to the Sea: and because it may be the
sooner believed we pretend to tell you the day of the month and year that this
second removeal happened in which we say to be the tenth of December one
thousand two hundred ninety four. And though the wood was very dark, the Virtue
of this Chapel spread a light all over it, brighter than the Sun in Summer,
when no clouds casts shadows from the middle Region


I know the fame of this Miraculous house is spread all over the world, and the
story of it has gained a considerable belief in most People


You speak right, but this was not all; for the Inhabitants of the place having
there Christened this house and given it the name it now bears; the Angels, for
a very good reason thought fit not to let it remain there any longer, because
that place being the retreat of a great many thieves and murderers that did
abuse and molest pilgrims that came thither, they gave it a third removeal to
the top of a little hill, the ground were of was divided between two brothers,
as their Inheritance, who quarelling one day for who should enjoy the proffit
of this house, the night following it was carried by the same Angels out of
their possession, and planted it in the great Road that goes to the City of
Ricanati, where it still is, frequented with as much Zeal as Mahomets Tomb at
Mecha, and works more miracles than any other of our Ladies chapels in the
world


I Honor his memory that first made this miracle, there is no question but it
has been almost as beneficial to our Clergy as the invention of purgatory, and
praying for the dead


I Am afraid I have been too tedious in telling you this story. But come let us
not talk now of that, nor praying for the dead; I am for thinking on the
liveing Florimel, my Lady Saint


And Isabella mine.


To keep out care, and dull thoughts to remove
Let Us gaze upon beauty with eyes full of Love.

Alas it is a strange distemper, I am almost sick to death; I am Sensible of
the smart in every Vein


Nay good Dear wife, oh law! I would not loose my precious Duck, for the world.


Nay Sir I fear it the more because all the Arts the Doctors have used cannot
discover what the distemper is


Nay good Neighbors what shall we do? alas my poor Chick. Nay I beseeeh you
Neighbors, is there no remedy? how do thou do my Dear Spouse


I am well enough to receive the cold impression of a death that will prove
unwelcome to me because I must part from thee; I must go to bed again I fear,
but pray Heaven I may rise once again to enjoy thy company


Oh my poor wife, my poor wife! Neighbors what shall I do what shall I do?


Truly Neighbor if you would take our advice I believe the only way to save
her life will be to Implore the assistance of Saint Allivergot


Indeed Neighbor I Am of your mind, for nothing can cure her now without a
miracle, and to have recourse to that Saints Relics is the best means I think:
for with the help of Heaven, and that holy man father Turbin they have done a
wonderful many good things


Ah thou blessed Saint, St. Allivergot have pity on me or I am undone.


Did not I tell you so, pray Neighbor cause father Turbin to come and bring
his Relics with him


Isabella, go run, make haste, quickly, loose no time tell him my wife's dead
and has sent for him to be curd by the help of those Holy Relics, go be gone I
say


Come Neighbor Florimel the power of this Holy man's Relics are great, and I
dare secure your health under the virtue of them


Say thou so Neighbor? dad you have very much revived my heart, dad you
have Neighbor, for I would not have my none Pigs nyes dye here, for the Popes
Revenue, how do thou do Chick, hum


Truly my Dear not well.


Have patience my Duck and thou shall recieve ease presently.


Your Blessing good Father.


Oh it is a pious man.


It Is a man of a most devout life and conversation.


Have you a firm and steadfast belief daughter in the Rellicks of this good
Saint


Alas Father you need not have put that question to me since I am sensible I
cannot be cured but by their help, and methinks from the first moment of your
arrival here, I have al-ready found a Cheerful alteration in me, which none but
your Holy presence could have caused


Well Dear daughter I find the strength of your faith has effected this: how
ever it will be necessary to begin, by confession, to the end that the soul
being purged the body may the sooner obtain its pristine health


You say well Father, therefore if my advice may be taken we should leave 'um
together, that he may with the greater wisdom dispose of her conscience


My Neighbor here is in the Right, what say you senior Marforio?


Ay so she is, therefore let us disturb' um as little as we can, and be gone, my
Dear, my sweet, my Choice, my precious Sugar Candy, fare well for a day or two,
because business calls me into the Country, at my return I hope to find thee as
pert as ever thou were


Farewell my Love.


But hark you Father Turbin, pray be as careful of disposing her Conscience, as
of restoring her health; do you mind me? for that I love to take considerable care
of too, my Chick once more adieu


Adieu my Dear.


Well Father, we recommend her to your prayers, and the virtue of those Blessed
Relics, Neighbor Adieu.


Now let me feed on the Heavenly, moisture of thy breath, and gather Roses from
the Gardens of thy Cheeks: Now that Religion has played her part let Love,
gentle Love, display his soft ravishing treasures to Eager and Intranced
Lovers: Now let him revel and furfit as with pleasures: No time so fit as when
Lovers private are; let us no advantage loose, nor suffer beauty to be vainly
wasted; let us Closely retire to partake of truer pleasures than the gilded
flowery spring produces


Shames treacherous livery in my face appears,


Let nothing cause your blushes nor your fears.
Naught here can tell what that kind blush did mean,
So now we may blush sport, and toy unseen.

Now Daughter let us (not to lose our pleasures) to Isabella
Follow my Brothers and your Mistress Measure.
Let us then eagerly our Footsteps move,
To undisturbed Bowers of Flowery Love.

HArk! methinks Love commands us once more to close retirement, where we may
again die in the Fields of Love and Beauty, where silent shades shall hide thy
blushes, and pleasure dissolve thy fears


It Is Love must bear the blame, not I, where he prevails, resistance is in
vain; when he commands I must submit, to pant under those sweet and bitter
pangs he gives me, till I die both with delight and pain


Let me conduct thee then where Love shall complete your wishes and heighten
our Bliss, let us every day during your Doctors absence pay what we owe to
Love: And while we are preparing to engage in Loves fierce harmless Lists, as a
seasoning to our Joys, I have ordered one of our Chapel Eunuchs to sing a
Song which Love Inspired me to write

Let Love the while direct our sense to try
Once more the pleasures of his Victory.

SInce love, youth, and beauty have raised the Allarms,
Go smother each other with lip-melting Charms,
And make no delay, least your hopes you deceive,
A Moment once over, is hard to retrieve;
Dissolve in moist Raptures, like fresh morning Dew,
And breath Love together, as Turtle Doves Woe.
In Loves painted Medows go Revel and Play,
But never
Give over
By Night nor by Day.
Over his rising Hillocks with cheerfulness move,
And pleasantly range in the Valley's of Love,
That Monarchs may envy the joys which you find,
Where cares are unknown, and where beauty proves kind.
O lamentable what shall we do? We are all undone; Madam rise, rise, yonder is
my Master at the door with two or three Neighbors


Ay, what shall I do Isabella? What shall I do? he will certainly make an
Eunuch of me


Curse upon him, was this obligingly done, to disturb us thus in the midst of
our Pleasures


Come we have no time to talk now, Isabella, give 'em the Key of the back Door,
and let 'em be gone. Adieu, adieu


I Am afraid I shall not


Isabella go let him in, here will I plant my self ready to receive him at his
entrance: I Am sure there is no apparent reason for his suspicion hitherto, and
truly the practical part of Hypocrisy is a fine smooth thing, had it not been
for that commendable Virtue; my Husband had missed being one of the Dubbed
Brotherhood. But here he comes


How does my dear Duck do? I vow Chicken I could not stay from thee any longer,
for the life of me, having left thee sick too; the thoughts of being from thee
at such a time has made me sob and cry my eyes out almost in the Country: but
Dad I had not left thee at all, but that I had very earnest business indeed.
And Cods-fish let me look upon thee a little, Dad methinks my Chicken looks
much better than she did before I went; how has she proved in my absence,
Isabella


Why Sir, she having put her confidence in those Holy Rellicks; the Virtues of
them were warmly applied to her every day, and have wrought (beyond our
expectations) a wonderful Miracle: For she is more than half cured, and is but
newly rose from paying a Devout Thanksgiving to the Blessed Saint that Cured
her


She speaks truth my Love, for it is to that Immortal Saint and that Pious
Mortal, Father Turbin, I owe my Life and Health; and your dear presence Husband
has indeed added something -- of sorrow.


We seeing your Husbands Arrival at the door Neighbor, could not forbear to
Visit you too; and are glad that Heaven and this Saint have been so kind to you


Nay now Neighbor let this be the only Saint you will pray to, for the good he
has done your Wife


Well! I Will give Father Turbin Three hundred Crowns to be employed for this
Saints use in the Church: But well Chicken, how is it now? Does she lie easy
and warm Isabella? I must satisfy my self in that, and see what Bolsters,
Pillows, Ruggs, Blankets and Bedding she has, or I shall enjoy no content,
come Isabella; come you along with me to her Bedside


Madam we are all undone, Father Turbin in the hurry just now has left his
Breeches on the Bed there, and my Master has found them


What, what have I got here? By'r Lady a piece of Man's Breeches: Is this your
private sickly devout life, you female Devil you? Pretend to fall sick to
cornute your Husband! Very Fine! Tell me whose Breeches these are, or by the
Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars, I Will cut off thy Legs, and stop every Hole about
thee


How unlucky is this? What shall I say? -- Stay, I think my brain has found
out something that may befriend me.

Husband why do you blame me thus without cause?


By'r Lady the Woman grows Diabollically Impudent. Without cause, quoth she! No
the finding your Gallants Breeches upon the Bed is no cause at all, nor no sign
that I am a Horned Animal, bear Witness Neighbors


Hear me Husband, and I will satisfy you.


May be she repents, and is going to confess the truth, I Will hear her.


You know Husband that being almost cured with so precious a Remedy, that to
fall into a relapse would put me into double danger of death, therefore by
Father Turbin's advice, I have kept the most powerful part of the Sacred Relick
near at hand; upon which I have offered up my Devotions every day

These are the very Breeches that Saint Allivergot wore, when he resided among
Mortals: Therefore pray Husband consider what they are, and use 'um more gently


Dad I Am almost persuaded she speaks truth. Well I Will lay 'um down upon this
Chair, Noli me tangere. Prithee my Duck excuse my passionate discourse just
now, come one Buss and be friends -- So


How could you be so cruel Love, to injure my Innocence and Fidelity to thee.


Come my Pigsny say no more, I was to blame, indeed I was to blame; therefore
prithee forgive me but this time


I am easily reconciled to so loving an Husband.


Now will I fly to inform Father Turbin


Indeed Neighbor you was very much overseen, in being so credulous to believe
things contrary to your Wives Virtuous Inclination


I dare swear she would neither injure Heaven, nor you, by so sinful and vile
an act; she is the truest Pattern of Piety, Modesty, and Virtue, in the whole
City of Rome; and I Am sure she loves her Husband as a good Wife should do


Poor Creature I am sorry I should be such a Rogue tho: Come my pretty Chick
one Buss more, and then we are thoroughly Friends again I hope


It was but a mistake Honey, and I am ready to forgive thee all.


Lack a day, what a good Wife have I godt Neighbors?


Such Wives are not to be found every where* I promise you that; had my Husband
served me, as you served her, I Would have made the House too hot to hold the Beast


Yonder Is Father Turbin coming in Procession with some more Friars, to fetch
away the Holy Relick, I must lay it on that Table on a White Table Cloth
against his Arrival


Here Senior, As you have received benefit by this Holy Relick, so it offers it
self first to you, to afford you the Blessing of a Kiss, and by it you gain
Pardons and Indulgences, a Pena and Culpa, for Fourscore thousand years


Now it offers it self to you, dear Daughter; by it you gain a perpetual
Pardon, it Absolves you from all your Sins, past, present, and to come. To the
rest of these good people to whom I likewise present it, it gains 'um Pardons
for Twenty years to come


In pace quiercat,
Sancte Allivergot
Ora pro Nobis.

Well Neighbor Adieu, I wish you all Health, Happiness, and long Life.


I wish the same to you both.


Well Honey I Will retire into my Closet to my Devotion.


Thou may do thy pleasure my Precious.


I must omit no opportunity of paying a Thanksgiving to this Blessed Saint:
Come you along with me Isabella


Dad for all my Wife is such a Virtuous Woman, I cannot forbear being jealous
yet, she is handome, and young, and skittish, and wanton, and witty, and good
natured, to all which an Old Man being Married are evident sign that he is, or
must be a Cuckold; did I once know the truth of it, I were out of my pain: But
they say, There are some sorts of Airs strong enough to breed Cuckolds in, and
this Roman Air is none of the best, for all it is under the Popes Nose:
Therefore I will prudently watch her hits, in order to which I caused another
Key to be privately made to my door, and I think to give out suddenly that I
intend to go out of Town, tho I design the contrary

Then I shall know if I have cause to be
Troubled with this uneasy Jealousy.

The noise of my Religious Life and Coat,
Was falling from the easy crowds belief.
When Florimel the Witty and the Fair,
Supported still my tottring State and Fame.

The Sham past unsuspected.


-- Nay she must
Doubtless her Pedigree from Angels fetch,
Her thoughts move in a far more Glorious Sphere,
Then like those shut in this Course Globe of Clay:
This worthy Object still I Will entertain,
And ever keep her in my Breast confined,
I Will be her Prisoner and she shall be mine,
And we will each other tie with Chains of Love,
Never to be loos'ned but by envious Death.
I must once more prepare with eager heat
To meet my Loves close, soft, dear, sweet Embrace,
And from her Lips I Will steal a Cherry Kiss.
Then gently die upon her Snowy Breasts.

The last bout I Will tell you tho would have spoiled
The good Opinion I had of the Brat.
I thought I should dislike his Bow and Dart.
I like no sower sauce with Loves sweet Viands.

For Loves sweet sake you all things should endure.


Not I, unless he would let me sport secure.


At present let us no more of Love discourse;
Our Actions shall do more then all our words.
What is the News at Court now? How Is the Pope?

He swells and frets at an immoderate rate,
That he cannot play his Game in Christendom.
And that which aggravates him much the more,
Is one that asks Counsel from the Stars;
Who has declared their Influences frown
Upon the ^^^e and all the Roman State:
That time draws nigh his Holiness must fall,
When he and his shall poorly be forgot,
And none shall more upon his Throne Ascend.

Then all our Holy Cheats will help no more.
But who is this great Student of the Stars?

A Stranger, who has had his just Reward,
For he is in the Inquisition shut.

Nay then his Holiness disliked the News.
I fear his Grandeur in the dust will lie,
When he who proudly did the World despise,
Shall be more scorned then e're he Princes did.
I mourn our Fate should thus be chained to his.
Innocent the Third first raised the Roman Throne
On Steps above the State of Temporal Crowns.
By his Decree he could Correction give
To all the Christian Princes in the World.

This very Power the Popes still proudly own.


Nay more, no Emperor could then be owned
E're he had paid Obedience first to him.

Nay then 'twas time for Princes to beware,
Tho this great power was no more than Air.
It Is like the humor o'th Tartarian Cham,
Who having Dined, commands by Trumpet sound
A Proclamation to be issued forth
That other Princes now have leave to Dine.
But Ha! Who Is here?

One glad to see you both, if you will once more be lulled a sleep with Loves
soft gentle Charms, if you will once more die,


Come let us this precious time not spend in waste,
But winged with Love let us move on with haste.

Now she thinks I am far enough off a dad, wherein she is mistaken: and I think
I am a Cuckold, and fear I am not mistaken; however I love to pry into the
Nature of things, that I may be certified in the truth of the business. I have
furnished my self with a Counterfeit Key to find out her Intrigue. If she has
a Gallant, I Will cause both her and him to be put into the Inquisition. I Will
take Two Neighbors with me for Witnesses, bring a Gentleman of the White Rod
with me, to carry him before his Holiness

And e're to morrow pass, or vanish over,
I Will know if I Am a Cuckold, she a Whore.

SO softly Neighbors, let us not walk too fast, for fear of giving them notice;
so, I Will peep into her Chamber, and if there be

Come Neighbors bear Witness what an undecent posture they are in. Oh it is
that Holy Devil Turbin that Cuckolds me thus, yonder is the other Friar a
squeezing Isabella too: I cannot endure this, my House is a rank Baudy-house,
and I the principal Ornament of the Family

Rush in Sir, and show the Staff of your Authority, and be sure Neighbors do
you help to secure 'um, for they may kill me you know


Do but hear me Husband.


No, not I, I think I have caught you and your Holy Stallion napping together
now: Nay you may hold down your head Father, there is never a Relick left now to
fetch away in Procession: And you Mrs. Minks, that have been


Neighbors you are to bear Witness here, how my Master has improved his
quality, he is one of no mean Rank now, I Will assure you


What do you jeer me? you shall have your due, you shall. Come away with 'um to
his Holiness, away with 'um

I Will trust no more a Pious outward shape,
That mimiks inwardly the Crafty Ape.

All Princes labor to support my State,
And it is their duty not to see me fall.
Nay 'th' Great Machine of Heaven, if I fall,
Must all come tumbling down upon its Ruins;
Angels and Saints, and all the Immortal Powers.
For I alone support and keep 'um up:
It Is Heavens Interest then to league with me,
And since my fall would the whole World confound,
Believe it cannot be, poor Star Informer,
Thy skill has now deceived thee: But yet know
Your Learning I Will encourage, I intend
To send him as my Nuncio, into Heaven,
To let St. Peter know some News from us.
Let him be Wracked to Death, go see it done.
But what have we here?

May it please your Holiness, I am come to have a very foul business decided
before you


Speak what it is, that I may Justice do.


And please your Holiness it was a very foul business. This Devil


Of your own self? Explain it more at large, That I may reach your meaning --


The meaning is, that I and my self are all one, and please your Holiness, and
this sense-seeking Priest has abused us both


If we must do you Right, then speak more plain, I understand you not.


my own dear Second-self, the Wife of my Body here, and please you, this
painted, juggling, self-pleasing Epicurean Priest, has seduced from the paths
of Heaven and Virtue, supplied my place, in performing that Act that none but I
should do: he has exceeded the Rules of his Office, for he both Confessed and
Absolved her as she was lying: he has likewise disfigured the curious
Workmanship of Nature, for he has made me, that was once a Man, and her Lord
and Master, a Monster, worse than a Satyr, a deformed Beast of the Horned Crew.
These honest Men, and please your Holiness, can bear Witness of what I say; for
they saw all: Now I beg Justice upon both these Friars (for the other was in
the mean time as eagerly busy with my Maid Isabella) and that my Wife and my
Maid may receive condign punishment


I Will do you Justice, Turbin thou did well,
But prithee have a care of Marriage sins.
To sin and have a Law to prove it just,
A Law contrived and forged by sinful Man,
To strain and force Nature that Generous Mistress,
I see no sin in what has yet been told:
Or if there be, it is less than Venial.

Oh Horrible! Nay then I see what redress I shall have.


Keep single Turbin, and obey the Church,
Or else Perdition shall pursue thee close.
Lie with what Women may your fancy please,
That Is greater honesty than is a Wife:
To have a Wive's a sin too great for Pardon.
Marforio your Wife is never the worse,
For so devout and glorious an Embrace:
For he has shown her now Celestial Joys,
And learned her to be wise and holy too.
So I command you, take her with you home,
Be kind to her and to this Reverend Priest:
Give him admittance too, when e're he please
To come to her Confession any more.
Marforio be sure you do our will.
The Inquisition else shall make you bend.
Now you unto your Convents may retire,
To live secure, warmed with Religious Fire.

I obey and please your Holiness in all.
Come Honey, come I love thee well enough tho still:
But it is because I dare not say otherwise.

Come Odcroff is the Conjuration fixed,
For I must know what those good Fathers did
For the Honor of the Church, and us Popes.
How 'twas they made themselves and us thus great.
What Ceremonies they patched together,
To paint and guild our Images and Shrines.
I Would likewise know the utmost of our Fate,
How kind Heaven is to us, our Church and State.
I Have Faith enough to think they can do more,
Than the poor Star gazer could do before,
Yet he has had his Loan --

-- Sir your commands,
I Am ready to perform with utmost Skill,
The Charm is wound up to its highest pitch.
Great Sir you may command when they appear
What things you would see, or what it is you would hear.

Haste then unto performance --

-- Sir I shall.
And thus I first begin to do your will.
Ye Fleeting Shades that whisk about the Air,
From East and West, from North and South repair
Through Icye Poles, thick Foggs, and Silver Light,
And pass the Twinkling Orb o'th milky white.
Let every Planet cheerfully Combine
To Favor your swift pace and our Design,
With Sextiles Smiles, and with a pleasing Trine.
Exalt no Star above his fame and worth,
Banish the Dragons Tail beneath the Earth.
From all bad Aspects let us too be free,
And ye o'th Fiery Triplicity.
Sordo, Heroth, Ventiloth and Arcto,
Your Cacodemons send with power below.
From the Four Regions, let 'um forthwith fly,
And fiercely penetrate the yielding Sky.
Let 'um in no affrighting Shapes appear,
But yield such Forms as may beget no fear.
Four Pristine Monarchs of the Papal Throne,
I summon to appear each with his Crown,
And by this Wan command ye to fulfill,
In all respects our Holy Fathers Will.
Move not beyond this Geomantick Trace,
Your power reaches not beyond this space.
Appear, appear now, without more delay,
And to his Holiness your duties pay.

Great Mortal God, we are come to do thy Will.
We once became that Seat as well as thee,
And did those things as might become a Pope.
Clement the First, they called me when I swayed,
And had that God-like power thou have now.
I first ordained that Crowns should subject be
To Romes great Church, and own no Head but me
In Temporal and Spiritual degree.

'Twas a brave Constitution, now worn old:
As we are great, it is fit we should be bold.
But who are you pray? --

-- Boniface the Eighth.
I in a Solemn Festival appeared,
In Glittering Pomp, as did my Grandeur suit.
The amazed Multitude upon me gazed,
As on some God dropped from his Crystal Heaven:
The Mortals did me on their Shoulders bear,
When I did beam my Blessing on them all,
Which by my Fingers Motion they perceived.
The next day in Imperial Robes being decked,
By my command I had before me bore
A Naked Sword, the Mule of's Rider proud,
Moved on in State, while I did loudly cry,
See here Two Swords, and Lord of all the World
As well in Spirit'al as Temp'ral things.
I am that mighty Pope, of whom Men say
I like Lion lived; and Fox bore sway:
And like a Dog my life consumed away.

All your Successors have obliged been
For the pious care you took to make 'um great.

Now give an Ear, and mark what I Am to say,
I am called Gregory of that Name the Third:
I made a Law that Images should be
In Churches not for Laymens Books alone,
But that Men should 'um honor and adore
With greater Reverence than they did before.
When I it lawful thought, all knew 'twas just.
For all to sin are subject, except Popes:
And whosoever did against this Law offend,
Was for an Heretic forthwith condemned.

Now he has spoke, pray Brother Pope hear me.
I Am Innocent the Third, an harmless Name,
'Twas I brought in Auricular Confession.
What Godly Plots have by that Art been made
To ruin and destroy poor Maiden Heads?
Besides I with Eight hundred Fry'rs and more,
Of The Romish Clergy first devised and made
The senseless knack Transubstantiation called.
Never no Pope was looked upon as Wife,
That did not some gay thing for th'Church devise;
Which like a Sunbeam dazles peoples Eyes.

Thou have done well, but now I would know more,
How long shall Rome's Head and Religion live?
Speak boldly, let me know my utmost Fate.

That task is mine, and none but I must do it.
Thy empty Glory's shortly shall decay:
A Star shall rise, whose Golden conquering Light,
Shall thy puffed Luciferial Pride be night.

Who ever thou art, the Charm reached not to thee.
Begone I say, or else thy misery,
Shall be greater. --

-- Foolish Conjurer, It Is more than thou can do, and the mighty Charm
extends to me sooner then unto these most Canonized, Tyrannizing Fops


I am Pope Joan ye Scoundrel Ragamuffins and pampered Swine, and ye have
blotted me out of your Kallender with a murrain to you, as if you were ashamed
to own a Woman Popes Infallibility. I Would have you to know for all that, you
Religious Baboons ye, that I was as Infallible as the best of you: I was
Infallibly made Pope by my great parts and learning, in which capacity I
remained Two years, a month, and four days; I afterward was infallibly got
with-child by my private Gallant, and I was infallibly delivered in the Street
of a fine Boy, when we both died: and ye forsooth are now so pampered up with
your Pride, that you have wilfully forgot me; nay your Holiness have ever since
been ashamed to pass through that Street wherein I was delivered; and moreover
you have endeavored to persuade people that my Story was a Fable, tho Platina
and some others of your old Friends and Cronies, have notwithstanding done me
Justice and told truth


Ghost the art impudent to disgrace us thus.
Thy presence needless is. --

Therefore be gone.


I will not, must not, cannot, till I Have spoke
My mind at large, ye fine Bauble-makers:
Your Trade is gulling, and your care is raking.
Without a Sale of Purgatorian Souls,
Your Tripple Crowns would never shine so bright,
Princes you make your Culleys: Boniface
The Eighth, that precious Ghost that is here,
He proudly writ to Philip King of France,
That he must be acknowledged Lord of all,
Temporal, as well as Spiritual:
And that therefore he ought to have received
His Kingdom France from his most holy hand;
Which since he had not done, the Monster Pope,
Did most unjustly Excommunicate
The mighty King, whose ill Fate I deplore,
And gave his Crown to Albert the Emperor.

'Twas holy Zeal that prompted me unto it.


No 'twas Pride and Interest made you do it.
And pray how have you all employed your time,
When you lived in the World, but in contriving
Such Fooleries as would make sorrow her self smile.
Some of you have spent your times in introducing
The Adoration of the Cross, commanding Prayers for the Dead, forbidding
Marriage to the Clergy, Blessing some Medal, forbidding the Eating of Flesh in
Lent, commanding Lamps to be burnt in Churches, placing among the number of
Saints, Men better qualified for Devils; permitting Hermitages in Forests,
that under that pretense Travelers may be more securely Robbed: Ordaining the
Relics of Saints to be Kissed and Adored, appointing Set Forms of Conjuring
Devils, commanding Incense to be offered to Images, granting Temporal and
perpetual Indulgences, and thus the whole Course of your Lives is inventing of
Toys and Fooleries, to cheat and gull the world with

But now the World will learn to be more wise,
And not be Choused with Romish Fopperies.

Thy restless Clack, I think will never have done,
You Are a true Woman's Ghost, yet will it be gone.

No still I Have something more to say to you.
Our Church is on such weak Foundations laid,
As long it cannot stand --
It Is built on Medals, and on Cowls of Monks,
Nuns-hoods, and Censers, Disciplining Whips,
Chains, Cords full of knots, and Images,
Bonnets of various Colors, Sandals, Cloggs,
Pantoffles, and Miters Pontifical,
Cardinals Hats, Vails Hypocritical,
Green Hats, and Girdles, Bulls, Relics of Saints,
Sophstry, and Books of Controversy.
All these, and many more which I could name,
Are the great Props t'uphold the mighty Frame.
It stands but shivering, and a solid Gale
From Albian, will make proud Rome bewail.

We have almost our time out-staid;
They wait for us beneath, among the Shades:
Say, mighty Negromancer, shall we go?

You shall, but first his Holiness divert
With some Infernal Dance.

We'll obey.


It is no matter what the World does know,
Although this Ghost has told us of our own,
Still we will be (as does become us) Great,
And Valiantly contemn both Heaven and Hell.
By Turkish Policy we'll still support
The trembling Fabric of the Roman State.
The weak and foolish Heretics I defy:
My God-like power never shall know decay,
The World no other Deity shall obey.
And since I thus my claim to the World make clear,
I will maintain it, tho it cost me dear.

GAllants with eager haste I Am to you come,
to know what rugged and ill favored Doom.
you have given the Poet, he knows what you will say,
That it is a damned notorious Whiggish Play.
For some of ye are wise in Folly yet,
And know no more what is Whiggish, than what is Wit.
For your Religion, which may want a Name,
You Are so, because your Mother was the same.
And tho to please ye, we have now t'ane care,
We know ye better liked the Pope in the Fair.
You Are Tory's Rampant, if as Whiggs you doom
All those that cannot Cajole the Pope of Rome.
He takes your Damming to be far more worse,
Than the severest proudest Roman Curse.
Because I tell you so, now Damn him do,
With as much honor ye may save him too.
Be as indifferent for the Roman Cause,
As I was fervent to obey Loves Laws,
Be kind to Love with as much heat as I,
Then I dare swear you will not let him die.
Look not a squint upon my Holy Friar,
Whose Zeal was Love, heightened with warm desire.
But think as I do, that he was a Saint,
Whose youthful Piety, made him my Gallant.
I know kind hearts, that for the sake of Love,
You Will slit your Tongues 'ere they to Damming move.
I fear the Men, the Ladies minds I know.
They Will grant our Pope a smile, he is not their Foe.
To Love, and you he never was yet unkind,
He Is the true Pattern of a Generous Mind.
He Will give ye Dispensations what ye please,
So ye to him your Consciences will ease.
But still Gallants, if you will a damning be,
Spare Pope and Poet; for their Crimes Damn me.

