IF any here dares cry My Prologue down,
Henceforth I Will not allow one Wit in the Town:
As Houses, haunted with Ill Spirits, are
All Noise and Lies, such is our Theater:
Ye talk of Wits, the Devil of Wit is here.
Wherefore, to let you know,
What Wit is not, I think cannot be amiss;
For no Man here, I Am sure, knows what it is.
First then,
Wit is no Scarf upon Fantastic Hips,
Nor an affected Cringe t'approach the Lips:
It Is not I-Gad! O Lord! or, Let me Die!
Nor is it, Dam me, ye Son of a Whore, ye Lie.
It Is not to tell how lewd ye were last Night,
What Watches, Wenches, Windows felt your Spite:
Nor is it an Abusive Epilogue,
Nor being Drunk, and cry, More Wine, ye Dog.
It Is not your Tradesman's Wit that makes him Great:
It Is a compendious way to Live, and Cheat:
'Nor is it Wit that makes your Lawyer prized,
His dagled Gown, his Knavery in Disguise,
To pluck down Honest Men, that he may rise.
Nor is it pert Phillis's Wit that does prevail;
It Is not her Tongue she lives by, it is her Tail.
It Is not your Scholar, Traveller, nor Mathematician,
Poet, nor Player, and Faith it is no Physician;
Were I now Clapped, I were in a sweet Condition.
It Is none of these, that singly Wit can be,
But all in one Man meeting 's Wit -- that Me.

OF all the Fates attend a Mortal State,
A Poet's sure the most unfortunate.
Vintners and Cooks the Advantage have of the Bays;
Wines and Ragousts as various for to please,
As are the Guests they treat: He but a Plate
Before a squeamish Theater to set.
What, though in that two grand Ingredients meet,
The Piquant duly mingled with the Sweet:
A Jest to Gravity is but a Clinch,
And the galled Asses touched never fail to winch:
Should he pursue the ends of those that write,
Instruct the Mind, the Senses to delight:
Yet to your Grand Engrossers of all Reason,
Mirth is but vile, and Morals out of Season.
If like a Load'n Be, amongst Mountain-tops he slies,
Like hers his Wings are snapt, like her oppressed he dies.
A creeping Style provokes Sarcastick Scorns,
Then poor Poetic Snail plucks in his Horns:
A moderate rate's insipid too, for then
The Poet moves but just like other Men.
Thus high or low, quick, slow, never out of sight,
Poor Poetaster seldom's in the right,
The Stragler's damned for wandering in the Night.
Led by you, Stars, the Poet bids me say,
He thinks h' has stumbled on the milk y way;
Disinteress'd Love, Sincere, Refined, and Pure,
From Sordid Selfishness, from Dross of Ore,
There for a space he hopes to find a Friend;
Few Nights conducts him to his Journey's end:
Then dart your Rays, the Poet's sure of this,
That Serpents Planet-struck want Power to hiss.

NAY, prithee, Girl, retire and leave me; thou even cloy'st me with thy
Kindness, by my Life


Hold, Sir; your Oaths are as unseasonable as your Words unnecessary; I can as
well believe you without the one, as by the Coldness of your Mien guess at the
other. But you Sparks of the Town use us as you do your Hacks, ride us till you
tire or gall, then turn us loose on the Common


And reason good, Girl; your true Punk, like your Bird of Prey, pines if
consigned; but at Liberty shifts for its self, and thrives on it


By my Injuries, rather than thus be the slighted Subject of your nauseous
Rallery, I Will trust to Chance, and venture on my own bottom


The Adventure's small, if any; for you Limberhamm'd Ladies have this of
certainty with the Dice, Cast ye as we please, Cube-like, you will be sure to
fall plum on your bottoms, as you call 'em. Well, Wench, Rallery apart then; it
shall go very hard, if I find not some Cully or other to top thee on: In the
Interim, I must go visit old Fickle, lest he should me; which if he does first,
he is eldest hand, and then ten to one but he beats me out of my little though
last remaining Stake


Sir, Here Is Sir Fickle Cheat desires to speak with you.


Sir Fickle?


Yes, Sir.


The Parthean Golden Cordial throttle him! Did tell him I was within?


Yes, Sir; you left no Orders to the contrary.


Pox of my Improvidence! But show him up.


Nay, I Will be sworn, they never want your good Word: I wonder at you thus to
abuse Men


Men! Monsters rather. Why, I tell thee, Girl, they are such Auimals, that were
Aristotle alive again, the Impossibility of comprehending their Natures, would
make him duck himself a second time in Fleet-ditch, as he did before in
Eurippus, for a far less Difficulty in my Mind, Faith


So that I must not ask you to --


Define 'em! No. To describe 'em you may, and that too's intricate enough: For
you must know there is as great a difference 'twixt heard and heard in the City,
as there is in the Forest. But your common Breed are a sort of Stag-headed,
Hen-hearted, Harpy-claw'd Animals


A pretty kind of Description truly. But Sir Fickle, is he of this kind?


No, nor of any else, Faith; he is an unnatural kind of a Mongrel: For tho he be
a Calf of Sixty odd, he is not so much as Velvet-headed yet: If he had, it is
such a Rascal, he should have been fray'd, burnished, and full-summ'd In Faith,
before this: I would have taken that Care of his Advancement. So --


Sir Fickle Cheat! The welcomest Man alive! You Have spared me some Pains; for,
as you see, I Would just made ready to wait on you, that we might adjust Affairs
between us

Why truly, not to lie, as a Man may say, Sir, that was my Business, and the
main End of my Visit; for I should be very glad to make an end --

Of my Estate, I thank him.


For Money's so rare, and Occasions so pressing -- In a word, we have have paid
so much for our Religion and Liberty --


That, Thanks to our Fighting Peacemakers, or we'd been forced shortly to sell
both to preserve our Property


Right, Sir; and therefore I must desire you, with all speed, to pay back my
Money, your Indentures, scotcht, notcht, and in Statu quo, as a Man may say,
shall be forthcoming


Sir, you're the Winner, and so may please to jest; but my Necessities are so
earnest, that I must entreat a present Supply of a Thousand Pound more, and
then you may be in a fair way to see an end, as you desire


A Thousand Pound! A Thousand Pound! And ready Money too! O Lord, O Lord! Why,
it is more than Cathagena and the Spanish Flota can produce. Besides, Sir, upon
mature Consideration, I find that I have lent you more in Mortgage than the
Purchase of the Inheritance is worth; you have bit me, you Wag; you have, In Faith

Would I had, I Would have lost my Teeth before I Would have left my hold, damned Jew.


Will you so, you liquorish Whoreson, you? Would the Tongue of you were out --
Why, this is one of the Devil's ordinary Capricho's, rides us on the Spur to
Mischief, and flounce leaves us stuck in the Mire. What a Plot's here lost!
Broke like a Roost-Egg, just when 'twas going to be hatched. Hanged, I Will try
however: If it don't serve me this way, it may another: He Will think I love him,
and then I Am sure to trick him


How now? What, musing Man? Ha! --


A little, Sir; I was casting about to serve you.


Were your Will but equal to your Abilities, there would need no great musing
in the matter


O Lord, Sir, were but my Abilities equal to my Will, the matter should not so
long lag A-stern -- But to show you, Sir, how much I tender you Welfare, I Have a
Crotchet just now come into my Head, might possibly be as advantageous to you,
as what you just now was mentioning. But seeing --


Come, prithee, no Seeing in the Case, but Hearing: Come, quickly, dear Dog,
open


O never fear, Sir; he is a staunch Hound, I Will warrant him, and on a hot Scent
that you know


A little Patience, good Sir; let me but consider a while.


Pox of Consideration, that Cousin-German to Cowardice. Consideration, quotha!
Why, what Countryman are you


Countryman! Why, a Cockney.


A Cockney, and consider! Ha, ha, ha; come, quick, quick, mouth it Cit-like.


Why then, in three words: You know my Niece Lettice, take her and your Estate
back; and besides -- [ spying Eugenia] But I cry mercy; for I see, as you was
saying, you're already better provided

O Lord, Madam, I beg you a thousand Pardons for hindering you of your Chapman;
but in the City, Forestallers, as a Man may say, find but little Encouragement.
Once more a thousand Pardons, fair Lady, indeed la --


An unwilling and harmless Mistake needs none.


O Lord, Madam; O Lord, Mr. Wildman; what harm, pray now? What Mistake?


None of moment, Sir; for the Lady's too nearly related to me to be what you
imagine. Her Father lately dead, left her to my Charge, with Virtue the chief
part of her Fortune, which to preserve, as well as charm her Cares, not knowing
of a Family more honorable than yours, thither I was leading her, in order to
crave Admittance

Now Girl.


Is this the worthy Knight, in whose Praise you were speaking of, Cousin?


Yes, Madam; he is a Knight, worthy [aside] to be Shoulder-slipt, with a
Horse-pox


Yes, and please your Dainty Face, as a Man may say, I am a Knight, and
Common-Council-man of the City of London. I live in the City, where my House
would be very much honored and sweetened, as a Man may say, with your
double-refin'd Presence


Ah, were I but of your Years, I should tell her more of my Mind: But I Am old,
old --


Heart of Oak, I Will warrant thee.


Hum, hum.


In the Name of Emptiness, how like a rotten hollow Hogshead he sounds; would I
had the hooping of him


Well, Sir, your Proffer is so obliging, 'twere Incivility to refuse, and
inconvenient to defer it. Please to repose your self a moment, we'll wait on
you immediately

Now, Wench, what think of this same Beast? Would he not serve well enough
to wear the Horns? A pair of well-spread Antlers, methinks, would suit
incomparably well with his Jobbernol


Or if they will not, it is no great matter. Would I had him, he should have Choice
enough, if that would but content him


A very virtuous Resolution, truly.


Tell me not of Virtue; what is Virtue?


Hum; why, Faith, it has been laid aside so long by the Commonalty, that now
they scarce know what to make on it: But your Politicians use it now and then,
as a Stalking horse, to pop down your overgrown Court Bustards -- But your
well-manag'd Dissimulation --


Is a most fashionable Beast; that I grant.


And a most serviceable one too, as the World goes. Now, whoever thinks to rub
through without it, will be most plaguily harrass'd before he comes to his
Journey's end


Or will speed like a City-banker, with cracked Credit, and empty Coffers; ha,
ha. Now I hope I please you


Ay, any thing that displeases them does so: I Have such a Natural Antipathy
against 'em, that it extends even to their Wives, which makes me so seldom lay
in their Nests. But to the Point; (for I Am yet as far from it, as a Parson,
whose Text is Obedience, and Sermon an Invective against Nonresistance) I Would
have you reduce these same Speculative Notions you have of that same necessary
Implement Dissimulation into Practice; for I Am mistaken if you have not shortly
occasion to show your Arts of Dissimulation, the Rascal did so eye thee


O never fear: You will sooner find a Woman without Pride than Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation. Why, it is our Sexes Talent, our Inseparable Accident, our
Feminine Philosophers Stone, wherewith we convert you Men into Buzzards, from
Buzzards to Owls, from Owls to Cookoos, and from Cookoos to --


Hold, in the Name of Cerberus; by the Egyptian Catadupes, set but these Female
Clacks a-going, and, troll, they run like the Wise Man of Gotham's Cheeses down
hill


Now by my Hopes, you're as impertinent as a French Valet de Chamber.


And by my Wishes, the Vanity of Ten truly Virtuous Women, make not the tenth
part of one sole Punk's, in the way of Preferment


Nor do they, on the other side, possess the tenth part of those Perfections.


Prithee make that appear, and I Will retract.


You shall: Be you the Doughty Knight, I the Lady fair; muster up the whole
Cargo of your Common-plac'd Courtship, if I don't outdo 'em at their own
Weapon, may I lie Cross-legg'd, Toe-ty'd, and Bedridden all the Days of my Life


Seeing's believing. A Match, I faith. I begin.

Think not that Impudence, Divine Beauty, or rather most beauteous Divinity,
which is the Effect of All-conquering Love; that Love-which scorns to be tied
up to Time, but is no sooner born than adult


Ha, ha, ha.


How now? What out already.


Ay, out already! What, this the Preamble for a Citizen! Why, this is
Common-Garden Cant, tout peur


Why then in City Cant have at you.

Dainty-fac'd Lady, the Flames of your Beauty have so over-healed the yearning
Intrails of my Affection, that they already begin to simmer within my Belly, as
they were in a Stew Pan, whence through the Funnel of my Throat ascend more
Fumes, than from a Mash-fat through the Stoke-hole of a Brew House. Spare then
the Bellows of your Disdain, and use rather the Sprinkler of your
Condescension; for if you continue to puff thus scornfully upon me, I swear by
all the Stock in my Shop, Cellar, and Warehouse, my Heart, like a Shin of Beef
in a Porridge-pot, will, in the Poaching of an Egg; be hoil'd to Titters, la


Alas, Sir, what ails you? Methinks I pity your Condition, though I understand
not your meaning


Ah, my sweet Sugar Loaf, Words cannot express it: A Sign indeed I have would
soon make you conceive

Now do you?


Heaven knows, I wish I did.


Nor yet?


Nor yet.


Ah the Devil! She Would have him show it her downright.

Then thus and thus. There Is but one more that I know of, and its a pair of
Questions whether he can make it


Protect my Honor! A Man kiss me.


How now! What the Devil's the matter? You Will raise the House presently. Pox of
your cracked Treble. So, here is Sir Fickle come to lend you a Hand, I Will retire


O Lord! What Is the matter? What Is the matter?


Bless me, Sir, I Am so frightened. Oh --


For a handsome come off, and I Will cross the Cudgels: I Will interpose, and give
her a Breathing-while

How now, Cousin; what, at the old Trade? What Whim now? It Is the frightfullest
Creature --


Then why would you leave me alone so long?


Good.


But with what, in the the Name of Wonder?


Lord, Sir, methought -- Hem, hem.


Igad, I Will never believe that Miracles are ceased, when I see a Woman in
danger of being choked with a Lie

The ruffling of the Wind in your Window-Curtain; that is all, on my Life.

Sure I Am the first Man that ever helped Woman out with a Come-off.


Come, come, a Woman, and afraid of the ruffling of a Curtain.


Or of any thing else, and you were the Tom Bold that blew in at her Window.
She must cry out before she is hurt


Well, Madam, how is it now?


Somewhat better, Sir.


Then, if you please, we two'll lead on the way;
If Fortune hits, this is our Lucky Day.

True, you old Coxcomb; for if Fortune hit,
I Will settle Fickle, and cross-bite the Cheat.
Let Us in, and there consult the surest way
To trap this Fox; and, if I miss my Aim,
Let Fortune, not my Care, receive the Blame.

By all those Charms that captivate my Soul,
By the sweet Torture of my longing Mind,
Explain this Riddle that confounds my Senses:
Your Eyes, your Actions, nay, your Words speak Love;
Yet when I press to ratify our Vows,
You blush, and sigh, and weep me a Denial.
Can I give further Proofs of my Affection?

No, you're too generous to an injured Maid,
Whose only Portion's Misery and Ruin;
Misery so great, 't has left me void of means
To make you a return more suitable or just,
Than by refusal: Heaven knows how dear it costs me
To involve you in my Ruin.

Cruelly kind, I see, instead of valluing
The Generosity you seem so much to prize;
You tax me with base Avarice,
Avarice worse than Misers,
Who, if presented with a precious Jemm,
Would not stand gazing, if 'twere set in Gold,
But instantly with grateful thanks accepts it.

True, Sir; but mine is of so mean a Luster,
That by Possession, when you have viewed it well,
Without a Foil, you will scarce think it worth the wearing.

There you mistake me, Dear; for by my Love,
A Heart, like yours, shows fairest when unset;
There Is no Defect in that, no Fault, no Flaw,
No Blemish, that requires the Artists Hand to help it.

Thou more than Man,
Take all my Vows, with Heaven my Wishes share;
But till that Heaven I daily do implore
Betters my Fate, I beg you would press no more.

A lasting Shame on that Barbarians Hand,
Who from the Teeming Womb of's Mother Earth
First forced to light that glittering damning Pelf;
Money, the scorn of noble generous Minds,
The venomed Hook that strikes inglorious Souls,
The petty Grain, which put in the guilty Scales,
Turns 'em against Virtue, Loyalty, and Honor;
And an Eternal Curse on him that rates
His Love so low, to barter it for Gold:
No, generous Love is like a matchless Pearl,
Not to be purchased by the massy Toy:
The like alone can make the just Exchange,
And the true Price of Love is only Love:
Mine you possess, with yours I think I Am blessed;
Let not that Bliss destroy my Happiness.

Forbear to urge, but too too well beloved,
This needless, fruitless, dismal Argument,
Your Words, your Deeds, have such a glorious Luster,
They Have quite amazed and dazzled my weak Senses;
Yet while my Honor and Gratitude remain,
I Will still be just, still love, and still deny.

Oh Madam Honoria, I Have been seeking you all the House over: Here Is my Master
has been babbling for you this half hour: For my part, I believe he is running
Mad, he keeps such a Quarter


Why, what is the matter? Has he lost any Money lately?


Not that I know of, Madam; but I Am mightily mistaken, or he has got a
Mistress, and that may be as bad on all sides


A Mistress!


What disconsolate Scavingers Relict can this be?


I think so, Madam; she came with Mr. Wildman; he calls her Cousin Eugenia.


Eugenia and Wildman Cousins! I thought they had been nearer related.


Lately come out of the Country, I vow, Madam: I dare lay my Maidenhead, if my
Master holds on his rate, if she don't return very speedily, she is like to
leave hers behind her, and follow the Example of her Predecessors


Gamester-like, would slur that off in a Bett, she is afraid will not pass current
in a Bargain


Surely you surprise me?


Nay, Madam, that is not all; there is Mr. Wildman even as sweet upon your
Sister. I must confess she keeps him somewhat more at a distance, than the other
does my Master. Alas, these Country Ladies are the kindest Creatures --


Ha, ha, ha.


Bless me, Sir, whence this Alteration!


From that which will cause, if I mistake not, the like in you. But to your
Post, and take this Word of Advice: Our Fortunes may in all probability depend
on Eugenia; therefore use her with respect, promote your Uncle's Affection, and
leave me alone for the rest

For when a Miser once gives up his Heart,
With all the rest he easily does part.

My Obedience shall show my Love: So Prosperity and my best Wishes attend you.

And to encourage you, and end our Strife,
Find me a Fortune, I Will find you a Wife.

O Sister, I arrest you in the Name of Cupid: One moments Audience for Love's
sake. I come from this same Master mine to be; you know who I mean, I see;
prithee, what kind of Creature, what do think of him


Mr. Wildman, I suppose, you mean.


Ay, ay; who else coud'st imagine? But once more, What kind of Creature do
take him to be


Why, a Man; and if by the little Acquaintance I have with him I may guess,
bating some Flights which Youth may excuse, and Slander increase, except my
Trulove, inferior to few or none


Nay, as for that matter, I strongly suspect he is no Novice in the World. But,
'twixt you and I, I like a Journeyman never the worse, for having served a
Prentiship to his Trade, so he but mind my Business when I take him to me, I
shall never fall a reaping up of old Trespasses done in Strangers Enclosures.
As for your Comparison, Faith, you might have spared it; I think Mr. Wildman as
good a Man as your Trulove, as you call him


Prithee, why?


Prithee, why not?


Nay, no Passion, Sister; Sir Novelty says it is a Mortal Enemy to the
Complexion. Let Reason take place; I Will give you these: First, Whether he loves
you as my Trulove me, is a question --


Which is more than I can resolve. However, if a Man be to be believed by his
Words, he is not far short; and the hindmost Dog, you know, may chance to be
first in with the Hare. As for my part, I love Mr. Wildman as well as you your
Trulove; so you may tell him; if it be but neatly done, you will pleasure me.
However, I Am resolved to have a Course or two with him before he snaps me up,
an't be but to show him the difference 'twixt my self and I know who; though
perhaps he may have no great need of a Whet. But all is one, I Am resolved to
venture my Maidenhead with my Affection, and go Supercargo of my own Goods


Your Resolution shows your Discretion, and seems to me a happy Augury of our
better Fortunes

Fortune's a Goddess, scorns the limmed Slave,
But Loves, Caresses, Crowns the Soul that is brave.

The End of the First ACT.

AND so as you was saying, you love me as -- How was it? Lord, what a
treacherous Memory have I


Then I Will repeat it Myriads of times; I love Letitia more than herself she
loves, than Zealots Passion, or Court Upstarts Pride, than English --


Beef.


Dutch --


Brandy, or Wildman Flattery. Ha, ha, ha.


Now by your Beauteous Self, the greatest Oath,
By that which knows the Candor of my Vows,
My Heart's too nobly placed, to entertain
So mean a Vice:
Crushed as it is, and broken by your Scorn,
A truer yet never Homage paid to Beauty,
Which if you thus go on, though then too late,
Perhaps you will find to be but too too true:
Though Pardon dearest Angel if I wish,
Rather beloved, than for your Love to die:
Then when the Sand allotted for our Lives
Had been employed in Miracles of Love,
Wonders to most, Examples to the best,
With equal Pace we'll soar to the Seat of the blessed.
Our Souls thus linked, we'd both together fly,
Cut through the Clouds, and --

Hey boys up go we.

Ha, ha, ha. Why, what Gallymaufry Stuff's this! I Would undertake a Journeyman
Cobbler courts not his Doxy half so ridiculously -- Why, what Puddle-dock
Pettifogger gave you Advice thus to open your Case! Or how much Money and Time
have you spent in mustering up from the Refuse and Scraps of Auxiliary Penny
Pamphlets, this nauseous Hodg-podg of Banter and Bombast! -- Ecud, it turns my
Teeth an edge, worse than the Filing of a Saw


Madam, though my Deserts merit not your Favor, yet my Civility may justly claim
a Requital: Neither is my Person, if my Friends belly me not, so monstrous ugly,
as to turn the Stomach of a more queasie Person than I take your Ladyship to
be. Why, 'sfoot, Madam, I Am a Man


So Madam Eugenia has partly informed me, or in Truth your Chattering would
have made me somewhat dubious


A Whore! Foolish Whore! Fire and Brimstone, she lies!


Frost and Snow but she does not; for it is to your self I Am beholden for this
double Discovery; the most she gave me was indeed but a strong Suspicion, which
you have more strongly confirmed: But though a Town Spark's Cast-off be good
enough for a Citizens Lady; yet her Keeper, I suppose, is too modest, after a
Discovery, to intrude himself upon his Niece; which, as occasion presents, I
shall acquaint him with. So, leaving you to your more serious Consideration, I
remain in Expectation of a Second Meeting, yours, Letitia. Ha, ha, ha, ha


Meet thee again! I Would rather meet my Great Grandmother's Ghost at Midnight in
the bottom of a Cole-pit. What Wild-cats are these City Virginities! I Would
undertake to lick a Bears Cubb into Shape, sooner than to reclaim one of these
Haggerds from their Quirks and Freeks, into a competency of Sobriety and good
Manners. 'Sbud, is this the Quarry the Old Gentleman sent me to truss up! It Is
well, for all her Levity, an she been't too heavy for my Pounces. Or is not
this some Trick of his to stave me off my pretended Fortune, and in the Interim
to ruin what little Real yet remains. There Is it; confound his Macchiavillian
Curship: There Is it. Hum; here he comes; the Simile holds true


Soh, my Merchant-Venturer to the Land of Love: What Cheer, Man, hah! What, art
in the Road? Art making the Haven? Hey, boy


Softly, softly, Sir; though you may be ready to put into Port, I Am not put out
yet; for though the Moon be at Full, I cannot guess when the Tide will serve


Nay, Pox, an you will not weigh Anchor, whose Fault is it?


'Twas done, Sir; and Sails hoist, and just as I was launching into the Main, I
met with such a Vengeance Mackaril-gale, 'twas a Mercy I was not over-sett: Of
splitting I think there was no great Danger; I was kept too far off Shore for
that, Faith


You talk Riddles, Man; prithee explain.


Why then to be short; I made my Addresses with all possible Civility, she with
more Coolness, nay, Rallery, received 'em: I complained, and she, I thank her,
gave me some small Reason


As how, Man; as how?


As thus Man, as thus; and a Wonder too I escaped so: For my part, I expected no
less than a Black and Blew Suit of Second Mourning


A Suit of Second Mourning, quotha; ha, ha, ha. Pho, Pox; you know Women at
first are always shy of their Favors


Hum; it is not her Shyness I complain of.


Oh, oh, I thought --


The matter's not great; a Claw or two on the Nose, as I take it, and a broken
Pair of Shins


Ha, ha, ha; a broken pair of Shins, ha, ha. Why, what a Devil -- ha, ha? Have
you been at Football, ha, ha, ha


These are the Fruits of Hyperbolical Exaggeration; it creates Laughter where
we intend it to promote Pity

Grammercy Dad to be, I Am glad to see you in so good a Humor: I perceived you
were in a merry Vein, and was willing to promote it; for, in reality, things
were not quite so bad; but, Faith, 'twixt you and I, I despair of carrying the
Town; my Ogling Shots almost spent, and not one of 'em has so much as reached
the Outwarks; and the Train of Bombastick Similes and Protestations I brought
with me to the Siege is too weak to make any reasonable Breach; so that if you
don't reinforce, I must even pack up Bag and Baggage, and march off whilst I
may, lest she should fall upon my Rear and rout it, as she has already
disordered the Van


Heighty tity! What a Rise is here from breaking of Shins to taking of Towns!
Ha, ha. Come, Courage, Boy; the other Attack: If thou carry'st her not, I will
for thee, grate me like a Nutmeg, ha, ha. If thou succeedest not by Storm, I Will
cut off Provision, and shall do it by Famine, Wildman, or No Man 's the Word


Well, Sir, for once I Will venture to follow your Advice: Good Assurance boggles
not at the first Refusal; and, Thanks to my Stars, of that I Am pretty well
provided

Once more at all; and if she fails me twice,
Modesty's Virtue, Impudence a Vice.

Send thee good Luck, Boy, or somebody'll smart for it, I feel that already. Why
what a Gypsy Minks is this! She has wearied me out ever since she came into
her Teens; nay, even with Threats compelled me to procure a Husband for her;
and now I have don't, she flies off. What a Pox can be the Reason of it! 'Sbud,
he is handsome enough, and will be rich enough too for a Gentleman. What else
would she have? Unless the Devil has played Booty, and given her the other Item
of her concealed Fortune; which, if she ever gets into her Clutches, she will
mount and shine like a Kite, with a Paper Lanthorn at the Tail on it: But I Have a
Trick, I think, to cheat the Devil himself; for the Devil's in the Devil, if he
once imagins a Citizens Foreman should be true to his Master


Lord, Sir, what do you mean to tarry thus mumping and maundring to your self!
Why, here is my Lord Mayor's Music come this half hour; unless you will give 'em
Employment, they will get so drunk, they will be for playing on more Instruments
than you imagine. Then there is the Cook smoking like a Pasty, and swearing by
his Chopping-block, unless you make haste, the Dinner will not be worth a Fig, Sir


Let 'em drink and swear on; I Have more Care and Business than they.

Jonathan.


Right Renowned and thrice Honorable Sir Fickle,
The Prospect of Dinner does my Fancy so tickle;
That no more than a Calves-head shall I here what you say, Sir;
Therefore stay till I Have Dined, and therefore pray come away, Sir.

I see Hunger sharpens Wits as well as Appetites; the Fear of it has had the
same Effect on me


Fear of what! Your Mistress?


No, no.


Why, I know that well enough; never fear her, Sir; she loves you, in my
Conscience, I believe


Nay, prithee hear me; thou know how that Devil Lettice has been continually
at me for a Husband --


Pho! Why I know that too: And had I not been faithful Jonathan, she had been
fitted e're now. She knows how to choose, though I say it as should not. But --


Nay, prithee, Patience.


Quick, quick then, Sir; this same business is the damnd'st Enemy to a Hungry
Stomach --


Why then thou know with what Care I Have sought her out one; nay, with what
Cost --


Ay, ay, Cost enough; before I Would have ventured so much on e're a skittish Jades
Head in the Town, I Would see her both hanged and drowned


Hanged and drowned too! How Is that?


Why her Heels on a Hedge, and her Head in a Ditch. Come budge, budge, Sir; my
Gurs grumble most horribly for Ammunition: An I don't pacify 'em speedily,
they will be in an Uproar. Come pray, Sir, be jogging


Then, shortly, thus: Whence her Disdain to Wildman springs I cannot imagine,
unless she be in Scent of her Fortune


Ay, Pox, these Gilflirts have Noses like Northern Hounds: But if I was you,
I Would Law her -- She might hit on the Scent, but I Would spoil her for ever coming up
with the Game


That, were it feasible, would help little; for when Women are once in Scent of
their Fortunes or Gallants, cut off their Legs, they will hobble afrer 'em on
their Stumps. No, I Have a better Method for that; I Will make her beat Counter,
and then I shall be pretty safe: I Will commit the Writings to thy Charge, and
then I Will swear in all the Courts of Christendom, I know nothing of the matter;
if that will but content her


Ay, ay, Sir; that you may do both with Safety and Honor; for though downright
Perjury may cause loss of Leather and Reputation, yet a handsome Evasion was
always allowed of as a Mark of Ingenuity


Here, take my Keys. [Gives them.] And do hear? Be vigilant.


Oh, Sir, as the Dragon in the Story over the Golden Pippins. Vigilant! Why, I
shall not sleep a Wink while I have 'em [Aside.] for Joy


We'll remove all secretly and securely, whilst I in and make 'em pay the
Pipers

And to my lasting Praise it shall be said
A Man was once too many for two Maids.
Why now Sir Fickle, you would think it a plaguey Disaster,
If the Man should chance to be too hard for the Master.
There Is Rhyme for Rhyme; and if I don't show you Trick for Trick, may I be
thought as great an Ass as your Worship -- Why, what an Antichristian Dog is
this Master mine, to abuse poor Girls thus: Before George I could almost pity
'em my self. Nay, were I sure of a Recompense for my Honesty, I should most
certainly make a Scruple of Conscience to be accessory to this same piece of
Knavery. Well, I Will to Jinny, and feel her Pulse; let her sound her Mistresses
Inclinations; for I Have so much Sense of Honor, as not to turn Knave but upon a
Vantage. -- So, here they come, Fox and Pack, In Faith. O Fox, O Joler, O
Damsel, O Lightfoot; A Boy, a Boy, a Boy


Come Madam, come Nieces, Gentlemen Fiddlers, I beg your Pardon. Come, let us see
what Entertainment you have for this Lady. Madam Eugenia, you're Mistress of
all here. Pray do the Honors of the House, it may be your own another Day, or
to Night either; the sooner the better, say I


And I.


Come, hang Civility: Sit down, sit down.


Take your Places, take your Places, Gentiles; show, show there. Pray
Gentlemen, dispatch

Pox of this scraping before Dinner, it serves only to set People's Teeth an
edge, and spoil their Stomachs: Gout and Palsy light on their mangy Fingers!
Would they had done


Sweetly tweedled, In Faith. Now for a Song.


A Song! Oh my Guts.


Madam Eugenia, you, I know, are good at it.


Excuse me, Sir; our Country Breeding affords but homely Music; besides, my
Heart's too heavy to --


Ay, ay, these Maidenheads are great Burdens, Lettice. I know that by
Experience. I bore mine about me for Thirty Years and upwards, and when I got
quit on it, methought I was so light, so easy -- Well, Madam, since you refuse
us the Happiness of your Voice, I hope I may entreat that of your Company at
Dinner


There you hit the Point, Sir. The best way to lighten a poor Maidens Heart, is
to fill her Belly. Go, pray Gentlemen, walk in, walk in


Sir, we can furnish you with a very new one, so please you to hear it.


By all means. Come, tune your Trebles.

Toll, loll, loll.


Frogs and Ravens cram the croaking Windpipe of thee.

Who he! Why, the newest Song he has is the Children in the Wood, or the London
Prentice, or some such like Ditty, set to the new Modish Tune of Old Sir Simon
the King. But if you will compound for a Ketch, I Will sing you one of my Lord
Mayor's going to Pin-maker's- Hall, to hear a Sniveling Non-Con Separatist
Divide and Subdivide into the Two and Thirty Points of the Compass


For the Honor of the City let us hear it --

SHE that marries an Old Man, let this be her Care,
At Home as she can, but Abroad well to fare:
For at Home tho she chance to be but meanly blessed,
Yet Abroad she may find how to make up the rest.
If the Cuckold grow Jealous, let her never be dismayed,
But feign an Affection, that Passion is laid;
With him let her toy, kiss, chuck, play the Fool;
The Receipt is approved by the best Modern School.
If he still be perverse, and begin to contest,
Let her know that a surer yet lies in her Breast:
So sure, it never failed yet to give present Ease;
But kill him with Kindness then do as you please.

Damned shrewd Council this! It Is well it is but Modern. Now will I be pounded
to Pepper, if this ben't the Exhortation of some Badger-back'd Holder forth,
that used to help these ravenous Wild-cats to a Bit abroad, as the Song says,
they liked better than their ordinary Fare at home -- But enough and too much
of that. Now had we a Dance, 'twould perfect the Business


Hell take the Huntsman that --


Oh, Sir, we'll help you out --


Ah.


On these occasions we bring Instruments of all sorts and sexes, fit for this
or any other Employment you can desire


Hark you, Friend, have you ever a Black-pudding, Bacon-Hock, or any such
Instrument to employ my Grinders, my Belly most urgently desires it; it is as
empty as your Fiddle-case, by Famine


Ha, ha, ha.


Black-pudding! Why, do you take me for a Tripe-man?


Tripe-man! Why, what a pox, if you were a Gold-finder, you're good enough to
make his Lordship a Crowdero. Why, what a Pox Goodman Catsguts and Horse-hair
is the matter with you, ha


Ha, ha, ha. Prithee, Jonathan, three moments Patience, and then --


Here lies the Famished Object of your Inhuman Barbarity.

Three Moments.


Ha, ha, ha. Poor Jonathan! He was a very honest Fellow --


But of an insatiate Appetite. He should have been one of Marriot's Bastards by
his eating


Ha, ha, ha.


Insulting Dogs, thus to triumph over a Man in Misery! But if I ben't revenged
on you both, may I go to Bed fasting, and not so much as dream of Victuals till
to morrow after Dinner


So, so, curiously caper'd brave Boys, brave Boys all; adjourn to the Cellar or
Kitchen till further occasion


Ha! What Is that? Cellar and Kitchen.


Sir, they have served Dinner upon Table.


Where, where, where?

No pray, Sir; it is dangerous jesting with edged Tools.


Come then, Madam; come Mr. Wildman. Lettice, I think I need not desire you;
your late Exercise, I believe, has got you your Stomach

Advance, I Will lead you on to try your Teeth
Upon a portly piece of Powdered Beef.

Then there is some Hopes at last, as l'm a Sinner:
I thought he would made all Dancing, and no Dinner.

The End of the Second ACT.

NAY, nay, never hang back for the matter, but come along. What, do think it
reasonable we two should fast, when all the rest are a feasting? If this be the
Conscience of a Chambermaid --


And that the Fasting of a Foreman! Deliver us from a Conjunction! Bless me!
Why, what have you got there? A Shoulder of Mutton


Pho, pox, no; this is but a Sippit in the Pan to stay my Stomach, till that
Covey of Cormorants within will give me leave to feed to the purpose. But now I
have so relishing a Bit before me, I may venture to leave this --


Stand off, Greasie-chops, and find somewhat else to stay your Stomach with
then --


What? Then a Chop of Mutton? Why, it is the Staple Dish, the Cobbler feeds as
well on that as the Czar. Ah, a Hind-Quarter of Young Mutton for my Money


Ay, ay, for your Money, and enough too. I believe your whole Estate will
scarce purchase the Carcass; but if ever you have me for better for worse, such
course Fare as that will never serve turn


Sfoot, what would have? A Phoenix stewed in Nectar, Phenicoptero's Tongues,
Ortolan's Brains, or any such Kickshaw. Speak but the word there, thine


No, no; I have enough for one while, with your Chop of Mutton, as you call it.


A Chambermaid and satisfied! Nay, then Larks will be good cheap; but tho
you are so reasonable, yet I Am bound in honor to --


Stand off, I say, Pepper and Ginger, or I Will call my Master, and have you
infused in a Hog-trough, where you may cool your Courage as you feed to the
purpose


Why, you proud Minx; do you make a Bore of me?


Why truly, your Snout and Grunting would somewhat incline me, did not your
long Ears and shallow Brains convince me that you're of another Species


Y'abusive Jade, these Brains that you call shallow; shall, if you please,
produce a Masterpiece, and make thee shine in Silk and Satin, Jinny

I Have had a Crop this day, let that suffice:
You Are the poor Fool, I only rich and wise.

O rare Jonathan!


O true Woman! Who for two or three Nonsensical Bombastick gingling Rhimes,
will bestow on a grunting Swine-snouted, long-eard, shallow-brain'd Beast of a
Beau, the Epithet to Ben Johnson


Igad, an you go on at this rate, I shall rather esteem you a Downright Wit,
than a Citizen's Foreman


The Other such word, and Empires, they are thine. Hang petty Lordships, I Am for
Kingdoms vast. I say, within this Pouch lie Keys that lock more Riches up, than
Craesus e're possessed


Gad, the Rogue's elevated; there must be somewhat in this -- Pho, now you
think to make a mighty Secret of what I know as well as your self: But it is the
Trick of your Sex to whisper Proclamations


And of yours to proclaim Secrets. Now will I be dock'd, if there ever was, is,
or will be that Arcana in Nature, that you don't pretend to as full a Knowledge
of, as any --


Of you, and with as much Reason in my Mind.


Why there is the Business. Now will I work a Miracle, and convince you: Prithee
tell me but one thing; it belongs to your Trade; so far I Will assure you
paravance


Nay, if it belong to my Occupation, I can tell you twenty: What is it?


Why, the Shape and Size of Mother Eve's green Apron.


There, I must confess, you have puzzled me.


Thy Ingenuity would almost make a Man suspect thy Sex. Now will I show you a
Quaking Tailor here hard by, who, without Chalk or Yard, and only by his Inward
Light, shall give you the Dimensions of it with as great Expedition and
Exactness, as if 'twere lying on his Shop-board before him: Or as you would do
your own with your nimble Fingers and Picked Elbow there


Would I had a Glimpse on it, that I might prye into this Mystery you keep such
a Fuss withal


Confess and recant, and somewhat may be done.


Well, I do my Presumption; as for thy Secrecy, it is Woman-Proof, I
acknowledge it


Why then here stands honest Jonathan a Grocer's Foreman, that can boast of
more than the French King and his whole Cabinet Council, who are all led by the
Nose by a She Bearward


Ay, ay; but prithee unravel what it is?


That that shall make thy Mistresses to obtain,
Strive to outvie thy Master in their Gifts:
Thus fixed I Will stand, while they offer Gold by Pecks,
And unregarded slight 'em like --

A Fool in Folio; would you not?


Gad, so I should; the Jade's in the right on it. But this same High-flown
Language is so pretty, it makes a Man so Heroic, so like a Player. As for
Example now

Hussy, I say, your Mistresses would not dare
T'affront me thus as you do, for their Ears.

My Mistresses again! Igad I have it. Come, Faith, now I guess it; my Master
has entrusted thee with somewhat


With somewhat! Why, there are you as far out of the way again, as when you're
mumbling your Prayers, and meditating of Mischief -- With somewhat, quotha!
With all, I say; mark that: Once more I say, with all; and amongst the rest,
with your Mistresses Fortunes, their Father's Will and Testament, cum multis
aliis, enough to bulge a Wheelbarrow. What say now, my Prester Joan, shall I
make my Words good, ha -- Come, shall us to Pontack's


And fling the Sop to the Fiddlers


Agreed; there, Blind Harpers, take it among you. But the other Bite.


Ay, twenty. Now if this be true, I Am thine as fast as Love can make me.

It Is good striking now the Iron's hot.


A Match, I faith; there is one.


But, my dear Jonathan, thou must be honest though.


O never fear that is my way: If the Ladies do but outbid my Master a Teaster,
they shall even have 'em; I Will show 'em I can be just -- But here a comes with
a full Paunch, and empty Pate, the only two Distinctions 'twixt an Amsterdam
Burgher and a Citizen of London


Then let us away, and remember not a Word by our Loves.


Oh, never fear; I shall find other Employment for my Tongue than tattling.


Sir, the Nobleness of your Entertainment has so far exceeded Thanks, 'twere
vain to think of any other Return than that of admiring your Bounty


Poor Rogue! I warrant her Holiday Feast in the Country was but Bacon and
Bagpudding at the best

Madam, the least of your Favors is a sufficient Reward; but Thanks is more
than I deserve for this and better Entertainments I have in store for you


Sir, They are far too mean to offer to your Merits; I should think my self
much indebted to Fortune, had she lent me any thing more worthy your Acceptance


Good -- Let Women alone for taking old Occasions by the topping.


Bear Witness, Gentlemen -- Madam, you have that in the bottom of your Bag would
make an Emperor proud of accepting


Then name it, Sir, once more it is yours.


Why it is your self; your Love I ask, for all --


'Lass, Sir, my Heart's too full of Grief to harbor the least Thought of Love;
a grateful Acknowledgement is the little All I Am Mistress of; it is yours, if
you think it worth the receiving


Excellent Jade! How she drills him!


Nay, don't cry, Sugar Candy, don't cry; trust me, you will make me do so too.
Cheer up, Honey, I Will be thy Father, and Mother, and Sister, and Brother, and
all thy good Friends


Now for me


Alas! 'twas free, till first I saw those Eyes.


Hum, hum.


Then thus I give you to your Wishes, so you consent.


Witness these Blushes, let them supply my Speech.


Make room, make place, by your Leave there, Gentlemen, that I may receive my
Princess as I ought,


Then rise, my Lord, my Master, and my Husband.


Madam, you will kill me with Kindness, as the Song says in the new Opera: Ay, do
if you can; why, I Am happier than the Pope in the midst of his Seraglio


The Turk, Sir, the Turk.


The Pope, Mrs. Pert; the Pope, I say: Turk or Pope, pray where is the
difference, ha


Nay, Sir, I confess you are the better Historian, Holinshead, Stow, and Baker,
were Fools to you, I believe


Yes that they were, Mrs. Hammershine, Mrs. Puspaws; find me out ever a Stower
that ever stowed, ever a Baker that ever eat, or ever a Brewer that ever had
the first sup of so dainty a Firkin as this is

I beg your Pardon; but this same Madam Kicke-te-scratch there, with her
Bakers, and Stowers, and Hollingsheads, and the Devil and all, has put me so
besides my self, that I for got the best of my Friends. Pray, Sir, study how I
may requite you


There Is one, Sir, would over-rate the Service, if --


If what, Sir? If what? Sure I Am Master of my own. Come, Mrs. Nimble-toes, no
shall I? shall I? This, or none. I Have heard of your Pranks, you see. If I were
not in good Company, I should -- ay, that I should. Come, come


Forbear, or, as I live, I Will discover all.


Sir, your Good Will I esteem as a perfect Proof of your Affection; hers by
after-Services I shall endeavor to deserve, if possible


Nay, Sir, if you're for Consideration, pray take your own time.

Come, Pruine Eyes, let us not interrupt their Loves, nor our own.

And do you hear, Mrs. Fly-at-all, 'ware worrying, or I Will musle, chain, and to
Kennel with you, I will. Come, my Sugar-Plumb, my Mackaroon, come along


Now, fair Letitia, what is it yet remains?


Only to take your Labor for your Pains. -- Ha, ha, ha; what, a rhiming again?
I gad, I hate that worse than your Contrivance, for that was pretty tollerably
carried on for a Beginner


What Contrivance, Sister? what was it?


Why --


All will out. Now shall I, 'spight of my Modesty, have my good Qualities laid
open before my Face


But what was it, good Sister?


Why, only to make a small Swop of --


Ah! it is a coming.

Ladies, I beg Pardon for the Abruptness of my Departure; but, Business, Madam,
Business


Nay, pray, Sir.


Nay, Good Madam.


Nay, pray, good, dear, plotting, contriving, bantring, wenching Sir, hear but
your Indictment, Sentence shall immediately pass, and then you may go --


And be hanged, so I may, faith and troth; the Halter's all I have then left to
trust to: And by good Luck I Have just Money enough left to buy one


Bless me! how a Woman may be mistaken.


Mistaken Madam, what do you mean?


Why, I thought you had been a Beau?


Not I, Madam, by my Faith.


So I find by your Pocket, Three Half Pence! Why, I have heard of a Beau at a
Nonplus for a Half Penny worth of Ferretting to tie up his Breeches, till the
poor Punk, at the Expense of her Garter, had recruited the Damage he had
sustained in her Service, which he himself was not able to repair


Come, Sister, to the Contrivance.


Why, that was so small I Would almost forgot it, 'twas only to make an Exchange of
his Cousin

for himself -- As for the rest, the bloody Battery he complains of was caused
by his own Assault; he was for forcing me with him to the World in the Moon, I
think, to some Seat he has lately purchased there, as I take it. Was it not,
Sir


Rapture, Madam, Rapture.

I was most plaguily afraid of a full and true Discovery.


Nay, if you blame him for that, Sister, I must tell you now you're too cruel,
I protest, had I a Heart to dispose of --


As I have yet, thank my Stars; it would scarce be in his Favor: So, Sir, I
beg your Pardon for the abruptness of my Departure; but Business, Sir, Business


The first Woman that ever I knew leave her Pleasure for Business.


What, Pleasure! Sir, believe me, you're ill acquainted with our Sex's
Passions, they will laugh for Sorrow as well as cry for Joy


But in her Smiles I read a grating Scorn;
Heavens! In what cursed Minute was I born,
To be thus tortured with Disdain?
Malignant Planets!

Curse not your Stars, they are more auspicious to you
Than you imagine, or thine to me,
O, Trulove!

For Pity sake untie this Gordian Knot
That keeps my fettered Soul in dark Suspense:
The Virgin Bride, with eager trembling Joy
Never long to embrace the loved, and lovely he,
As I for some Relief to ease my Soul.

What Ease you can imagine I can give.


Oh no! your Trulove's kind, Letitia's coy,
Nay worse.

Nay better, Sir, if that her Love you prize.


Letitia!


Loves you, Sir, I Would almost said,
As I love Trulove, or as Trulove me;
In Tears I Have heard her sigh it to her self,
And make the Simily.

Amazement siezes me! Can this be true!
Yes, it is true, for Honoria speaks:
But pardon, Madam, if I ask for once
What means her Shiness, mingled with Disdain.

She doubts it is Int'rest-forces your Addresses;
She thinks your Heart has been enslaved before,
And then she well may fear you do not love.

Both true to Heaven and you, I both confess
To you, who, next that Heaven, I dare most trust;
Yet may I feel there all revenging Ire,
If, this Moment that I speak, my Heart's not free
From any Chains but hers,
As Infant Babes before they heard Love named.
From Fate and Want, it is true, first sprung my Love;
But by that aweful Deity I swear,
Her Coldness, by a Power well known to him,
Has so fomented, nay, increased my Flame,
I Would rather live upon some Desert Rock,
The Weeds for Food, Repentant-Tears my Drink,
Her only for my All,
Than 'midst the greatest Luxury and Pomp
This World, this nauseous World! can give without-her

Trust me, your Words and Actions are so full
Of true Repentance, and of generous Passion,
That had I Tears for any but my Trulove,
I could spare some for you.
But go, be prosperous in your matchless Flame,
Matchless indeed to any but my Trulove's;
Persuade her you're but what y'appear to me,
You Will find her kind, or force her to be Just.

You, as my better Genius, I obey,
I never can miss, while that points out the way.

And may you find it, though I miss my own,
Thou Mirror of a reclaimed repentant Lover;
Oh, Trulove! Could I wish the least of Ill.
To one whose Love so far surpasses mine?
Thus could I wish you, that I might, at least,
Merit you better, or you less deserve me.
Oh, Trulove! Trulove! Charmer of my Soul!
Thou dear Disturber of my Virgin Peace!
Thou Ever-present Object to my Mind!
Trulove! as constant.
As Honoria's kind.
Look up, thou drooping Cherubin! look up,
Thou noblest Compound of True Love and Honor!
Oh! why so pale? Why close you up those Eyes,
That cause my Adoration, sooth my Love?

And may the Powers be deaf unto my Prayers,
Now deaf, when most I need their piteous Help,
If I don't love you with an equal Flame,
Nay, greater, by my Soul, for it forebodes,
Should I our Ruins grant, join Want to Want,
And then you see the Products of our Loves,
The tender Sprouts of our engrafted Souls,
Nipp'd by the frozen Blasts of chilly need,
Those Flames you now think durable as mine
Would turn to Tears, your Love would pine to pity.
Bat yet if I, which Omen Heaven avert,
Should be reduced by Love to that sad State,
To see those grovelling Infants on my Lap,
Making with Tears their fruitless Signs for Bread,
For want of that expiring on my Breasts,
I Would hug the darling Cause of our Destruction,
And thus sigh out my unreproaching Soul.

So close! Nay, then I Am come before my cue.


More than enough, thou exquisitely good!
I must desist, for fear so great a Saint
Should bear within her a Prophetic Mind;
Yet, of you Heavens, that never deny what is Just,
My Heart, as humbl'd as my bended Knee,
I crave this mighty Boon:
Grant me but Means to show this generous Maid
How much I loved, how much my Soul adored,
But to requite this Seraphin of Love;
And then, as one, whose earthly Frame's too base
To rival those that twirle the spinning Spheres,
I Will grudging yield to your abstruse Decrees.

Your Sense seems unconnected, Actions wild;
O stem this raging Torrent of your Passion;
Call up your Reason, Srength, and Resolution,
With all those heavenly Gifts adorn your Mind:
Methinks I see through those condensed Mists,
Through this long, dismal, and afflicting Night,
A glorious Dawn that scatters all the Clouds,
And brings a welcome Daybreak to our Loves.
What if kind Heaven should at the last relent?

For you it may, for me it never can.


O shield him, all ye glorious Sprights above,
Whose Divine Talents are to Know and Love;
Kindly distill into my laboring Soul
Such Charms, as may his wandering Sense control;
Or by the Omniscient Deity I must
Be base, yet still methinks I would be just.
How fare you, Sir?

Very well, Madam, or he shall be so shortly; I bring that along with me will
cure all Distempers


It must be little less, I assure you, that can excuse this unseasonable
Intrusion


O! Madam, I bring that which will atone for this or any other Crime, yet with
Respect; I think I came most opportunely, for if ever Maid helped her Mistress
out at a dead Lift, 'twas my self; I gad, if I had not watched my Cue, you must
have fell to hugging again, for the speaking part was out I Am sure


Bless me! the Wench is mad.


I must have been, or worse, to have let you run on at this rate, when I had
that in my Eye to reconcile the Difference


Worse and worse still. What Difference? or with whom?


Why, with Mr. Trulove, as I take it: He doats on you, you dote on him, and yet
you will not marry him, because -- because -- I Have a Notion on it in my Head, but
that is such a new kind of a mad Whim, that there is neither Name nor Reason
for it. Pray, Sir, what do you call this same What-ye-call't


Dim-sighted Maid! I Will couch thy Cataract,
Rear thy Crystalline Eye Balls to the Skies;
Ay, there the -- Hah -- yet higher, higher yet,
Through that transparant watered tabby Veil,
Just by the Star-embroider'd Throne of Jove,
The Strife of Honor, Gratitude, and Love;
There Is the Name. Ask the Women the Reason they have monopoliz'd that to Quilt
Petticoats with, and it is Treason by the Laws of the Ladies for Men but to
tread on Pea-hens Trains


He raves! he raves! unpitying Powers! he raves!


I gad, I think ye both rave: This is the maddest Courtship I ever saw; I could
almost cry my self, to see what Fools they make of one another


Here, take this fatal, forced Restorative.


Ay, right; if the Operation of that don't fetch you both to your Senses before
to Morrow Morning we must proceed to Hellebore


What, yet unmoved!
No, Thanks to Heaven, he mends.

See the Distemper purging at his Eyes,
And the Sympathick Virtue moist'ning mine;
This sure, of all Extremes, must be most sad,
Both by Love perish, or for Love be mad.

There Is no Occasion for either, Madam, that I know; but one retire into the
next Room, if I don't give you an Antidote against both, may I not have the
licking of the Gallipot


Surely the Disease is catching, the Girl talks like --


Like an Apothecary, who has a Most Excellent Elixir Salutis within, I assure
you, Madam


Be plain, or I shall have fresh Straw and a dark Chamber provided -- What is it
you talk of --


Why, Lands, Lordships, Pounds by Thousands: Nay, Madam, I don't dream, nor is
there any Enchantment in the Case


Defend me! My Uncle turned honest!


No fear of that neither; but he is turned Fool, and that is as good for your
Purpose. In a word, you have heard, I suppose, of an Estate left you by your
Father, Sir Roger, your Uncle has: I Am sure Madam Letitia told him often enough
on it


And loud enough, that I know: But that was but Presumption, though violent
enough, I must confess


Then hear the Proof: Your Uncle, for what Reasons Jonathan will tell you, has
committed those very Writings to his Keeping, and he has them -- as fast as I
have him


Propitious Heavens! How can this be true?


Bless me! Madam, go in and see; there is Mr. Wildman capitulating with him, he
stands upon some small Consideration, 'twill make the Gift more valid, as he
says

Lord! how my Heart leaps to see this happy Hour!


Your Heels you mean.


Strike up, I have no Power --


Now, my Dear Trulove! Heavens, at last, you see
Have heard my Sighs, and melted at my Tears --
Honoria would be proud you would call her yours.

The Heavens are just, and I am proud to serve you.


Hah! did mind, Jenny, or am I deceived,
His Strangeness and his quick Departure hence?

For Love's sake, Madam, invent not ways to vex your self; nothing but Honor
harbors in his Breast


Nothing but Honor, say! Yes, Love does sure,
Or else --
But these, at best, are but superfluous Thoughts,
Or Grudgings of my late distempered Mind,
Which the vast Blessing of Trulove's being mine
Will soon disperse:
As when some anxious Pilot, all the Day,
Tossed by unconstant Winds, and angry Sea,
Would fain take shelter in some neighboring Port,
And tacks, and veers, but still is made their Sport;
At last some pitying God rewards his Pains
With welcome Safety, and more welcome Gains.

The End of the Third ACT.

OH, Mr. Trulove! you're as welcome as unexpected; I Have had you once or twice
in view, but I never, before this, could give you the Turn


Like enough; for I Have so cunning a Sportsman to deal with, that I am fain to
cross double, and use all the Subtilties I can imagine, least he should unearth
me, and cast me out to the Hounds. Nay lately, when (as I after heard) it was
you that was coming to assist me in capitulating with that same Rascal
Jonathan, your very Tread struck me into such a Pannick Fear, that in a manner,
nolens volens, I was fain to scamper and take to Covert --


In your Mistress's Apartment, I suppose.


You may; I need make no Secret on it to you. You unharbour'd a Do, I hear,
that is like to give you sufficient Sport without poaching in my Purlieus


Do, do call her? S'bud, had but seen her, when instead of flying
end-ways, with what Resolution she stood at bay, I gad, you would have rather taken
her for a Sangler -- But I expect that shortly will make her gentle, if any
thing can do it


Fie! it is unmanly, I Would almost said, dishonest, to win a Lady by Compulsion.


Nay, prithee, none of thy nice Moralities, and Punctilio's of Honor. Pox on
'em, they have undone more Gentlemen than Drinking, Dicing, Drabbing, and all
the other expencely Pastime of the Town together -- Take your own Conrse, leave
me to mine, it shall be as Honorable as Safety will permit. S'life! see here
they come; Fortune for me this once I beseech thee


Servant, Gentlemen. Come in, come in, Damsels, here are your Knight-Errants,

So lie thee there, my Charge. Pray, Masters, remember the Porter.


Ay, ay; here, here.


Gold! by the Cap of Maintenance -- Now to you Gentlemen, for I suppose you would
be the Joint-Purchasers; though, now I think on it, I Would best expose 'em by way of
Auction

Pray, Sir, do so much as give my Master a Call, perhaps he may have a mind to
some of 'em


Come, my Jonathan, prithee no Delays, slip not the Opportunity; for the Goods,
now they are once exposed to Sale, may perhaps not serve my Master's Turn so
well


I know that, you Jade; but I Have two Ends to tantalize him, Lucre and Revenge,
the two Idols of your Heathenish Sex

Well, Gentlemen, what say you to the Matter? --


What, unsight, unseen?


O, Madam, there is a whole Farrow of Pigs in the Poke, fat ones, IN faith, I Will
secure you that. Well, Sirs, some few Hundreds, or so, you may spare, for I
would be easy; I Am not for extorting, not I, upon Honor


Hundreds! Nay, then you are too reasonable, and I scorn to be outdone in that
-- S'foot! now I think on it, here is the Barbado's Fleet safely arrived, I Will
buy the whole Cargo at a Lump, and present thee with it; Would have any thing
else


No, no, that is enough in all Conscience; for you Sparks are large Promisers,
that I know, but bad Performers, or the Women foully belly you: But consider
on it, Gentlemen, a Thousand Pound a Man will be fair on all sides


That I Will give thee freely, for my part, if the Sale of my wretched Annuity
can raise it; here is my Hand, shall have all farther Security I can give thee


O Lack-a-day! Sir, you're a Man of Honor -- Come, Mr. Wild-man, what say you?
Will you follow your Leader, and leave the Merchants their Goods to solder up
their Cracks


Well, if it must be so, though I confess --


Nay, Sir, I Would have you make as cheap a Bargain as may be, especially for Goods
that may stand you, possibly, but in little stead. Women, you know, are
changeable


I hope so, Madam.

What Bear-like Entertainment is this! a snap of Comfort, and a polt on the
Pate


Come, Sir, come, I Am in pain till I have discharged my Trust.


Nay, prithee, Patience; What, give the Gentleman leave to consider a little.


That Is needless, Madam; for though I have felt the Severity of your Disdain, yet
your Honor I never called in question

Come, Trulove's my Security, if you question my own.


I am, I am; come, prithee, dispatch.


No, no, I Will --


No, no, but you shall not; fair and softly, by your Leave, Sir. Think not that a
trifling Sum, which here is one will share, has induced me to this: Know, Sir,
it is the Honor of the Deed, and that I Will reserve entire to my self; the
Honor and Danger shall be mine, and mine alone

By your Leave, Madam, let me peep into your Stomacher.

So, here a comes.


Let Us see it, let us see it.


Three moments Patience, Mr. Wildman, and then -- Hey toss! what have we got
here? Mynheer van dunc van dunc Vanduncart's Bond, I think -- Pho pox! it is a
Dutch Man's Bond, not worth a Butterom


Now! now!


Three Moments Patience, Gentlemen, and then -- Hum --

A Settlement upon my Man Jonathan of Twenty Pounds per Annum, after my
Decease. Griping Dog! What intended he to do with the rest? Sure he has some
Correspondence in Hell, that he designs to draw Bills upon

Faith, Sir, I see 'em on the right side of the Style, as it happens.


Nay, prithee, no more preaching; you will tire my Patience presently.


Come Jonathan.


Coming, coming, Sir. Roger's Settlement upon Niece Lettice. Ha! Sir, is this
it


Ay, honest Jonathan, this, or nothing.


Here, Sir.

And give you Joy, Madam.

And there is two; for when the Man has the Fortune, the Woman's his of Course.

Here, Sir, here is your Honoria's as close as --


Come, no more Similies, but to work; let us see what else.


Else! What in the the Name of Balzebub would you have else? You Would make the
Devil of a Farmer -- Crop and Gleanings too! Why, in the Name of Avarice, will not
a Thousand Pound


In all Conscience, but only Curiosity --


Nay, I must confess that is a plaguey itching Distemper. But if you want a Rasp,
a Rubber, or a Scratcher,


Ha, ha, ha.


To the Trunk, you Dog, and cease barking, or --


Sir, I Would have you to know I am none of your barking Currs: Indeed, I do bite
sometimes; I have Teeth, Sir, as shall appear when you will give me leave to
employ 'em


Sirrah!


Nay, prithee, make an end; for I see you will be the Disturber.


Ay, ay, Sir, you see I love to distribute my Favors.

Madam Letitia! cry your Mercy -- Pox on it, I thought it had been her by my
Nose and Shins


Hellhound! let me come at him.

Ha, ha, ha.


Sirrah, dispatch, or I Will be gone, and leave you to his Mercy.


Nay, then it is time to be serious.

I must dispatch before Afternoon's Luncheon-time, or he will have the whip hand
of me, and make me languish till Supper

And when I was a little Boy I washed my Mother's Dishes,
I put my Fingers in the Pail, and pulled out little Fishes.
Roger to --

S bud, you blind Mill Horse, cannot you see where you stumble?


Make off, Gentlemen, and Ladies, all of you; here is Sir Fickle coming this
way, and in a damned bad Humor, I can tell you so much


Nay, then, all Friends, come all Hands aloft.

Away, away there, here a comes, and in a plaguey Chafe I Will warrant him, or
else he wears no Socks to Day, I smell that alleady


Well, now Sir Fickle you're like to be fitted with a young, brisk, gallant
Lady -- Marry send you good Luck, for it is a shrewd Undertaking for one of your
Years and Constitution; and let me tell you so much, Sir, there are many in
better Circumstances than your self that would be plaguily afraid of sore Eyes
for all their Golden Thumb Rings. Well, Look before you leap, And what is done
cannot be recovered, are Proverbial Saws as old as Aldersgate, therefore,
methinks, 'twere worth Time to consider -- Hum! She Is young, I East India Stock
into a Pedlar's Pack. Hum, methinks our two Qualities agree like Dogs-Turd and
Honey; and I should be most plaguily deceived, if, instead of a Lenitive for
the Spleen, I should meet with a Caustic for a sore Throat. Well, I Will to
Council; two Heads are better than one, as Neighbor Wrangle says, and all the
City acknowledge him for the Pro-po-potatripes, I think they call him, of
Learning and Sense. Well, I Will to Graves's, this is the Hour of Audience; if I
can but meet with him in the Humor of talking Sense in English, he will dispatch
me in as few Words as a Lawyer his Client that comes to him in Forma Pauperis


Fool! Blockhead! Incomprehensible Dolt! Thou Ox in an Ass's Skin!


Oh here he is, and Neighbor Sobersides too! piping hot from the Coffee-House,
I Will warrant 'em, by the profoundness of their Talk


Get you gone to School again, and learn the Meaning of the Word Ratification
before you pretend to dispute the Legality or Essential Formality, requisite to
the Constitution thereof; for I tell you once more, thou impertinent
Headpiece, Ignoratis terminis, Ignoratur and ars


Oh, I understand this a little.

Ay, ay, Sir, so he is an ignorant termegant Ass, to pretend to argue with you
that can read, write, and Latin -- But I come, Sir, to advise with, not to
dispute, your Wisdom


Dilate energically, concisely, and uninaegmatically.

Oph.


Sir --

Pox! now his Learning has got the upper-hand of his Sense, there will be no
understanding of his cramp Language for Men of my Capacity -- Sir, I did not
understand --


Oh ye pellucid Stars! whose Influences are subservient to Sapience,
deconglommerate me from these unzodiacal, uncerebrated, circumambient Gemini


Nay, an he be got up to the Stars already, O Gemini too say I -- Save you,
Sir, and pray give me notice of the next Thunder; I have a Stock of Beer in my
Celler


Arrest!


With Grocers, Sir!


With their Inferiors far, with Milkmaids! Europa was one, Jove courted her in
the Shape of a Bull, and had Issue by her, a Proginy of Cuckolds,
autockthonical, aboriginal, demi-deify'd Cuckolds

O Felices nimium si sua bona norint!


A pretty Account, Faith, of the Rise of Cuckoldom, a Bull, and a Milk-maid!
Doubtless hence come the Proverb of sucking a Bull -- But, Sir, be pleased to
hear my Sense of --


Sir, I tell you both Sense or no Sense, Ratification is an Overt Subsequent
Act to a Precedent Covert Transaction


Overt! Covert! Precedent! and Subsequent! What Trade do these Terms of Art
belong to? What a Devil, do you banter? Or are you a conjuring


I Will be plain: For Example, I owe you a Grudge; that is a Covert, or Secret
Transaction in my Mind


Good.


Then


O most sensibly, Sir.

Pox on him! I could give him a Suit of Second Mourning too, as Wildman says,
for Example's sake, but that he is such a Royster


And you, I hope, have your Intellectuals meliorated when this --

This, what, Sir? This, what? I Would have you to know I Am in as fair a way both to
a Chain and a Clog as --


But I lose time amongst a Brace of Owls.


Owls! Pox, Owls! Owls in your Throat, Sir; Owls in your Belly, Sir; Owls in
your -- Pantiples, Sir. Pox! if hard Words, dry Blows, and Affronts, be all the
Counsel I must expect, Exit my Riddle-me-ree,





Bur-r-r, Buz-z-z, Gingiber and Lacer Cicer Pepper atque Papaver.


And Cimerian Tenebrosity.


Hey! here again with his Tenebrosity? Hey, Noun, Haec aquila, an Owl, both he
and she. This same passionate Puppy has so what-ye-call't my Intellectuals, I
protest, I overlooked you


That might be, Sir.


So it might, I vow, Sir. Now shall I be as much plagued with this Fellow's
formal Preciseness, as I was with the t'other's blustering Bombast -- Deliver
me but from this Piece of stiffn'd Tiffany, and if ever I go to Counsel to a
citizen again, may he take my Nose and Ears for his Fee

But Sir.


Sir.


Why, Sir, what I intended to have discoursed this same tasty, old, positive
Puppy about, was Matrimony; I Am a going to be married to a brisk, young Country
Virgin, her Fortune, it is true, is but small, but my Inclinations are great;
you know me, let me know your Opinion


That I believe I shall give you; but first, by way of Advice, reprehend not
that Positiveness in another, whereof you seem to be so well provided; for you
seem positively to affirm that you are going to be married, which, if you
consider the Mutability of sublunary things, I esteem that you might with more
Modesty say, that you conceive, or think, judge, or suppose your self upon the
Matrimonial Point


The Man's in the right on it there; for we are farthest off sometimes, when we
think our selves nearest to the Blank: And I remember, Neighbor Horner going
once to view a She-Tenement he was about purchasing, found a Copyholder making
forcible Entry into the capital Message of the Manor, and so flew off; and
Reason good, was it not, Sir


Not unlikely -- Then, Sir, as for her Briskness, it may possibly be Levity;
her Youth artificial, and her Virtue and Virginity as slender as her Fortune


How, Sir! No Virtue! No Virginity!


Possibly none; for I am of the Sect of the Scepticks, I think, I affirm
nothing


But I am not, and do positively say that Man's a Villain that dare call her
Honor in question; therefore, Sir Dubious, pick up your Awls, or, now my
Hand's in, I can promise you no better Entertainment than your Deconglomerating
Predecessor; the Example's fresh, my Passion rises; therefore once more walk
off, or I shall Overtly ratify upon your Morrion


Fortune I contemn, Examples I defy, and will maintain my Opinion, spite of
Passion or Ratification


Nay, Pox, if you begin to be positive, walk, walk, my Philosopher.


I Will have Satisfaction for this Affront done to my Person and Opinion; I Will be
revenged, look to it


No, no, you only conceive, think, suppose, or believe so: Ha, ha, what a pair
of Issaker's Asses have I turned out to Grass! That Men should be such Fools,
as to believe that a hard Word, or mysterial Nod, should be the only
Ingredients to the making up of a wise Man! Though, I must confess, this same
Scipstick Philosopher has put twenty Cunnundrums into my Head. Well, Time will
clear all; therefore Patience, say I


Nay, prithee, Wildman, whither would you draw me? Come, you will never forget
your old Tricks


Ha, old Tricks! and so familiar -- I Will retire, this Spark may inform me
better than Old Sir Grandsire Grey-beard, with his Scythe and Hourglass


No, never sear, I Have had enough of that same hoity toity Business; I come to
read you a far different Lesson, for you have been plaguily out of late; and
for all your Philosopher's Stone you brag of, Lettice has discovered you to be
but of base Allay: I gad, should the Old Man discover the Counterfeit, you may
e'n shift for your self; I have done my part every way, if you spoil all, your
Ruin be upon you; I wash my Hands of it and you: My Mind's changed with my
Fortune, and I Am resolved hereafter to feed upon one Dish; it is wholsomest, you
know


A good Beginning, truly! Where will this end, trow?


For that matter as you please; I believe you may find Employment enough at
Home. If my Cornuted Cully to be has too much, if his kind Neighbor will but
lend him a hand, they will find me both Reasonable and Civil


A very civil Resolution indeed! Oh, my Head! My Horns are cutting already.


That as you can agree, mean while be more circumspect; when you have spring'd
the Woodcock, why then cook him to your Palate; he is ready plumed to your Hand,
so much I can assure you


Plumed! What mean you?


Ay, that, that, my Heart misgives me most confoundedly.


No Questions, for Safety sake. Women ought to be trusted with Secrets, as Mad
Folks with Daggers; you may give 'em the Scabbard to please 'em, but be sure to
keep the Weapon close and fast. Vanduncart's Bond


Oh, Oh.


Left out for have, in the last Surprise; I wish there he no more: For though I Am
pretty sure of my Point, yet things are not yet ripe enough for a Discovery.
Let Us see.


Hem, hem; yours, Sir, yours.


Oh, Sir, you're a diligent Courtier. Indeed, were you not a truebred
Englishman; one would take this for Italian Jealousy, but it is too soon for
that Man, ha


Why, truly, Sir, I am somewhat of a different Opinion, as a Man may say; I
think it is rather of the latest; for --


Right too; for when things are so far advanced, Jealousie's as unseasonable as
a Song or Dance brought in Head and Shoulders, to lengthen out or set off a
scanty-witted Bear-Play


Gently, gently, Sir; not so neither. My Farce is but a Rehearsing, and I find
it so far below my Expectation, I Am afraid to venture it on the Theater, for
fear of being hissed off the Stage


The Devil's in him, sure -- Sir, you're mysterions; pray, be plain.


Why then most plainly thus: My Love, Thanks to my Years, has been so moderate
as to leave me some few of my Senses, with which I have considered, that at the
best it is but Folly, but in old Men mere Dotage. I find all other Passions
increasing, this only dwindl'd to nothing, which makes me judge my self unfit
for a Lady of her Qualities. These, and some other private ones, have abated
the Violence of my Frenzy, and inspired into me the Resolution of gaining in
Statu quo, as a Man may say, till I see better Reasons for a Change -- Now I
hope you're both satisfied


Oh my Heart!


Oh my Head a!


Satisfied! No, but I will expect it
For all th'Affronts you have put upon my Cousin,
Poor though in Fortune, yet in Virtue rich;
For all those Tears, thou stony-hearted Beast!
Your Barbarity now causes her to shed.
Her Presence now protects you from my Rage.
But set a better Price on Innocence,
Or Fell Revenge shall follow you with speed.
Come, Cousin.

Ay, ay, I Will prevent that; I Will swear the Peace against him: First, for
endeavoring to top his Whore upon me; and then for threatening to Fell me. If I
don't, believe her honest. Many a Man has cut a Caper, and never come down
alive again, for less than this, that is certain. I Will trounce the sly Dog; I Will
bind him to his good Behavior, I will a -- O plague of the Devil! now I talk
of binding, the Bond! the Bond! how come that there? I Am sure it was in the
Trunk I entrusted Jonathan with. I gad, if he gets the rest, I Am like to be
hampered my self. By Cheapside Conduit, I Am running mad; Horn-mad, by Bedlam
Weathercock. But Necessity has no Law. I must secure my Youngster and my self,
and take the best Order for the rest the little Brains I have will permit

And if I frustrate all their poisonous Arts,
Why then Sir Fickle is a Man of Parts.

The End of the Fourth ACT.

ONce more well met, I Have been getting the Writings. Oh! I see you're likewise
in Possession, you have lost no more time then my self


Not a minute. Delays in these Cases are as dangerous as Diligence necessary.
Had I not been assiduous, the Rogue might have relapsed into Villainy, and been
true to his Trust -- But now for my Spouse to be, methinks I would soon put an
end to this same Affair; for I shall never think her secure till I have her in
the Lash of Matrimony; besides, Faith, I long to give the poor Rogue some
hearty Proof of my Affection


Somewhat too I have resolved, which makes me uneasy till it be put in
Execution


How, you! -- Why, you have been so long used to dance Attendance, I dare have
sworn you would have served your full time, without repining, to have been made
Free of the Corporation


You're wide, Sir, you're wide.


Or rather short, I believe; for you Archers of the Honorable Confraternity of
blind Cupid, have such damned long marks, that we poor Bow-men cannot reach
within a Score of your Butts --


Troth, like enough.

But here comes my Snow-ball rouling to way. Would to Chance she would pick me up
in her Passage, I Would thaw her with a Vengence, or she should freeze me to her


Your Servant, Gentlemen, how is it with ye since the last Surprise?


Gentlemen, sure I Am deaf, or she is dim-sighted.

As with a hungry Guest, when Dinner's on the Table, that curses the grateless
Chaplain for being out of the way, Madam


O! Sir, it is but a short Collation of cold Meat; and there needs not so much
Ceremony for that


I know that, if I had but the Courage to fall on; but there is such a damned
many little Bones in the Pie, I Am afraid of being choked


Therefore chew well before you swallow for good and all, Sir; Ha, ha, ha.


Chew, what, Madam? Oons! I Am none of your Camelions, to feed upon the Cud of a
Wind-cholick Air


But, by way of Pastime, you might stand a little, and bite on the Bitt --


Like a Horse, and break my Teeth like an Ass -- Consolation and Preferment in
abundance! Trepan my Pericranium -- Madam, since you have no other Employment
for me, than as a Post to fix your Jests on, I think I may, without Incivility,
make bold to retire


Bless me, Sir, why so hasty? Why, this is Volunteer-like; serve till you're on
the Point of Promotion, and then quit your Post


That, Madam, you cannot blame me for, since the Fatigues I Have under gone have
disabled me for further Service


Nay, then indeed I must look out for a fresh Man; yet, through Compassion,
I Will not quite cast you off, but keep you by me. Let Us see,


Oons, a Nut-cracker! what do you take me for a Monkey, Madam?


What, still complain! Why, I Have known many a Woman has put her Husband to a
far worse Employment


Well, Madam, since you're in the vein, pray please your Fancy entirely; I have
done


And I, for this Bout.


I shall prevent the next.


How, Sir, Pensive! when your Happiness is so nigh. Sure, your overfasting has
spoiled your Stomach; if so, I Will give you a Cordial shall retrieve it -- Here,


HOpe, thou Friend to the Distressed,
Kind Reviver of the Mind;
None that Hopes, can be oppressed:
Though Fortune frowns, you are ever kind.
Hope, thou sovereign Ease to Grief,
Blessed Encreaser of our Joy,
Thou should have Proof, thou best Relief,
Against what would my Love destroy.
Welcome Hope, Adieu Despair,
The tottering Wheel at last will turn;
Though I languish for my Dear,
I Will not consume, but ever burn.
Though I languish, etc.

Well, Sir; this, I hope, has some Effect on you.


Medicines, Madam, are but at best cast away, where the Malady of the Patient
is misapprehended


Nay, Sir, I must confess your late Symptoms have been so strange, that I
cannot but guess your Distemper to be of the most unusual


True, Madam, in the Age we live, but I have reaped this Benefit by my
Misfortune, to find the strongest Passion too weak to withstand a generous
Resolution


Your Words, Sir, are as mysterious as ever; but here comes your Cathollicon:
If that does not work effectually, your Condition's deplorable indeed


O, my dear Trulove! thus let me embrace thee,
Thus let me clasp thee in my longing Arms,

Pardon, if Love overcome my Modesty;
For now I count you as my better Part.

Look down, ye Powers, and view this matchless Love.
Steal my faint Heart, direct my trembling Hand;
Assure my fault'ring Tongue, grant Strength of Mind
To act that which you only could inspire.
With these take back your Vows; and with them mine,
May you be happier in a nobler He,
As far 'bove me, as is your Love and Honor:
Nay, by the Pains I feel, if it might be,
I Would wish him so divine as to deserve you.
Then when I see you circl'd in his Arms,
Ravished with Joys, dissolved in Exstasie,
I Will send up Vows unenvious Vows to Heaven,
To make them infinite, your Loves eternal.

What can this mean! O my Prophetic Fears?


I mean you have trusted such a Stock of Love
With one so far unable to requite it,
That it were Baseness, beyond all Excuse,
Still to run on when so much is unpay'd:
I mean to teach the admiring Powers above,
My Gratitude's as great, more generous than your Love.

Hum -- Why, I must confess this is somewhat surprising. However, I shall
rather imitate than discommend it -- Here, Madam,


Nay, now you're serious somewhat may be done: But I feared Capitulations
before Surrender; which, if they had happened -- But no more, hope well; you
know I hear you're not indifferent to me, it is with Joy I own it


This is too much -- But see the fair Honoria
Bedewed, and silent, as a Summer's Night.

Come, cheer up, Sister: What, a-la-mort Woman, whining for a lost Lover, when
you have wherewithal to buy a Score of Husbands! But three Days Patience, and
on my Life you will have more Suitors than you will dispatch in three Months


No; may I live by all Mankind disdained,
And die a wretched Object of Despair,
If ever within this Heart I entertain
A second Thought for any but my True Love.
What though to you perchance he seem unkind,
Yet I, that view the Treasures of his Mind
Adore him still, as from the Powers above,
Take this Correction as a Sign of Love.
Nay, by my fleeting Lovesick Soul I swear,
Should he be cold, nay farther yet severe,
The little space then doomed me for to live,
To the pleasing Thoughts of our past Loves I Would give:
Then, when you would think that I forsaken lie,
You Would see my Trulove beg me not to die.

Cold Comfort, by my departing Maidenhead, Sister, if this be all; but I hope
there is warmer in store

You know, Sir, your Obligations to my Sister; I need not tell you the
Occasions present, to require them, and oblige me


Madam, I do as well as I am acquainted with his Temper. It Is honorable to
Obstinacy, but not perverse to Reason. So good a Cause can never want a happy
Issue -- I go with Confidence of good Success to serve you


Unhappy Maid! what Crimes have I committed,
Doubly to suffer by Excess of Love?
Whom shall I accuse? The Gods? Oh no,
They Are Just, and Trulove is in Honor next 'em;
No, it is my Self, my Frowardness, my Pride,
Nay worse,
My black Ingratitude to so much Love,
Has forced this unexampl'd Judgment on me.
Yet still, methinks, I did but that which he
So lately and so strictly did pursue,
As if h' had taken Copy from my Actions;
And he is too wise, nay, too divinely good,
To act or follow ought that is amiss.
Heavens! in what a Lab'rinth am I got,
Lend me the Clew, or kindly end my Pain.

I hope they have heard you, look back.


Thus stubborn Criminals that Grace refuse,
Trembling when late the proffered Mercy crave:
Sure 'twas some Evil Genius led me out
From Paradise, thus to run to my Destruction.
Yet you can pardon.

Unkind! thus to upbraid me with that Act,
That first was mine, by you but faintly traced;
Pardons for Crimes! You may command my Love;
If in Exchange you grant me yours, I Am blessed.

Then, ye propitious Powers, smile kindly on us,
And yet prepare your direst, worst, Revenge,
If ought, save you, I like Honoria prize,
If next to you I do not her adore;
If her, whilst Life, nay, after Death, I love not
With the same Passion that now fills my Breast.
And dart it down; nay worse, be she unkind.

So much for that. Now, Madam, it is my turn;
If I perform it not with so much Zeal,
It Is want of Words, not Passion, pleads Excuse.
Besides: Faith, to tell you neatly my Mind, these far-fatch'd Expressions, and
new-fangl'd ways of Courtship, become a Stage far better than a Lady's
Bedchamber


Well, that I expect not, but this you must,
If I catch you in the old Haunt, or any where else.
But --

Ay, ay, if I elope, bar me of my Thirds. I Am content, as to that Point, to
reinverse the Law, and become Baron-Covert


Of your Thirds! Don't so much as expect a bare Allimony.


And, Faith, I Will say so much for my self; if we are once joined, I shall never
hope for a separate Maintenance -- Come, agreed, agreed


As for the rest, I bring you a plentiful Fortune; and, as Jonathan says, a
tite, neat, and convenient Tenement. Use me like a Gectleman, I entirely trust
in you


Come, give me your Hand --


And Heart are yours, from this Breath to my last.


So, now the Storm's blown over, Sky's serene.


Come, no more Words, but produce.


Not yet, Faith, I hear a grumbling thereaway; and I have a plaguey Opinion the
Clap will fall somewhere hereabouts -- Oh, here it comes with a Vengeance.
Retire Trulove


Tell me not of safe Custody, or honest Hands; mine are the safest and
honestest too for my purpose. Therefore once more produce, or -- Wildman? I
hope your Passion's over; How is it, ha


Well, as my Wishes, but you seem somewhat troubled.


Ay, ay, a little, not much neither. But this same Rogue, Dog, of a Jonathan
would move a Saint -- Your Mortgage, Sir, I Will resign you up, as soon as that
-- will give me leave. Swine's Snout, be gone, and fetch it; no more grunting


Sir, I shall receive it with Thanks. One more Request I must repeat; I Am sure
you have too much Good Nature to deny me.


Oh, the Devil! she here! -- Why, Sir, and you know mine; you will find me no
Changeling, though you designed me for an aboriginal Cuckold, as Neighbor
Wrangle calls it


Nor me so tame a Coward to put up such Affronts both to my Cousin and my self!
I Will wash 'em off in thy degenerate Blood.


Oh! spare my Love, or let us die together!


Die together! No, nor lie together: If ye do, it may be in Bridewell, or
Little-ease --


Come, Sir, resolve to --


Why so quick, Sir? If I must be executed, methinks you might grant me a
Reprieve. Pray, Sir, consider; were it your own Case, you would not be so hasty


Nay, if Time be all you ask, take it, provided it be Reasonable.


O, as for that matter, Sir, I only desire just as much as to --


I Will cut your bellowing Bull's Throat.


laying hold on Wild. O! hold your Hand; for if he bleeds, I die.


You Lie, you jilting Whore! you Lie.


Hold, Sir! What ever it be, it cannot be brave, thus to assault a naked Man: If
his Cause be Just, he shall not want one to defend it


Ay, ay, Trulove, he is a Rogue, if not a Coward; here I Have given him my Niece,
and his mortgaged Estate back, and he in Recompense would stick me like a Pig


Then hear me too, since you will needs be Judge:
This Flattering villain! For he is no better,
With Gifts, Oaths, Courtships, has allured my Cousin;
And now he finds she loves, he slights her.

Nay, there I leave your Cause, it is so unjust,
My Life I never will venture to assert it;
Yet, that you may not die defenseless,
I Will lend you this.

Lend me your Sword! I Would as lieve you would lend me a Halter. Sir, I Would have you to
know I Am a good Christian, and will keep the King's Peace. I fight! I Will be
hanged, nay, marry as soon


Nay, then, thou Cheat! thou ignominious Knave!
Know I have found you out, and am possessed
Of all Sir Roger's Papers, and my Mortgage.

Ruined! undone! like a Bundle of Licorish.


Not all, Sir, by your Leave: I have my share, and perusing 'em over, I find an
Account to be made, some Arrears of Inrerest, and so forth, you know; and look
to it, for I shall be severe


Accounts to you! Why, what are you?


Honoria's Husband; and consequently, as I take it, your Nephew.


Over-reached again!


Not yet; but I think I shall, before I Have done, come in there.

Now do your Offices.


Sir, I arrest you in an Action of Account, at the Suit of Mr. Trulove.


Oh!


And I, Sir, in the same, at the Suit of Mr. Wildman.


Mine! What means this?


Rum dun done! Broke like a Barrel of Figs! For Pity sake, hear me but a Word.


Be short, Sir, I lose time, and I Have half a score of your Neighbors to arrest
upon Change. Come, quick, Sir


Why then, Gentlemen, I acknowledge my self a Villain to my Nieces, and not
much better to Madam Eugenia: You have made your self, in part, Satisfaction;
but a little Patience, I Will endeavor to complete it. Here, Honey, Honey; Why,
Lettice? Lettice

Pray, give 'em a Call.


And to me to share in 'em as I have done in your Prosperity. This, Sir, I
hope, will convince you that I love

Better half a Loaf, than no Bread.


I believe it, my Cinnamon-stick, though my Seeing and Hearing would be so
impertinent as to convince me to the contrary


Oh, Sir, in matters of Faith and Love, we ought never to trust too much to the
Senses. Curiosity and Jealousy are good for nothing but to promote Herisie and
Cuckoldom


Then, Sir, let the Simplicity of my Belief show the vehemence of my Affection.
Come, my All-spice, come.

If she ben't as chaste as her Neighbors, she must feed upon Cantharides, and
spend her Pinmoney in Chocolate


And my Liberality be the mark of my Affection: In Consideration of your
Complaisance, and of Eugenia's Fortune, I freely forgive what Accounts may be
between us; you shall have a Release upon Demand, so my Letitia consent


With Pleasure, Sir; and not only that, but I Will join with my Sister to
mollify Trulove


Your Entreaties, Ladies, would be needless; his Consent is all I shall desire
in Requital


Sir, you have it as freely as I can give it.


And there is Four: What bloody Doings will there be to Night!


So this is pretty well, if it were not for those Rogues the Bailiffs, that
will blaze all about


Who I, Sir?


Yes, you, Sir.


Not I, Sir.


Nor I, Sir.

You lie, Sir.


Nor I, Sir; by the Sky, Sir; let me die, Sir, if I lie, Sir: Why, Sir, I am
no Mag-pye, Sir

Jonathan and Lurcher!


The same; I fearing Mr. Wildman would have been in earnest, took this Course,
both to surprise you agreeably, and prevent further mischief


Nay, I must confess your Fate would have been somewhat severe, had you not
been reasonable -- But I Am glad all is ended so fairly. As for them, a small
Spell will stop their Mouths, I don't doubt: Or at worst, it is no stranger a
thing for a Citizen to be a Cheat than a Cuckold


Gibing!


Ay, ay, Sir, Forgiveness and the Twenty Pound a Year, is all I ask; you shall
find me hereafter so faithful to deserve it -- But as for this slip, I protest,
Sir, what with Over care and Over-fasting, Idea's of Stocks, Pillories,
Whipping-posts, and Qualms of Conscience, I was so tormented in the Spirit,
that it run me almost mad. Blanch me like an Almond, Sir, if I remember any
thing of the matter, but the Twenty Pound a Year aforesaid


And the Civility-Money, Jonathan.


Sir, I have been told since, that I raved mightily of the Barbados Fleet, and
Bird in Hand

Ha, ha, ha.


Well, Friends of all sides, I have yet Ten Thousand Pound left me, out of
which I Will allow you as I had determined, and put thee in present Possession.
Hang Dirt, I was almost choked with it, and now I Am eased, methinks I Am as
brisk as --


Bottle-All, all Froth and Settlings.


We shall see that presently; I Will put your Agility to the Test for once.
Strike up there


Nay, pray Gentlemen, not so hasty, I want a Companion: I Will out and lure her,
she will come to Fist in a trice, and there will be no sport till I come, as the
Man said when he was going to be hanged


That Is but reasonable, the have been so instrumental in the last Comedy,
'twere Ingratitude to leave thee out, now its come to a Conclusion


And prithee do you in and hasten Supper: I never could work well on an empty
Stomach


Mean time, if you please, I Will entertain you with a Song I lately composed,
which is both instructive, and suitable to this present occasion. Her

here, sing this.


By all means come; one Hawk, two Hums, and start fair.


WHY so cruel to your Lover?
Oh, the hidden Cause declare!

'Twou'd be more cruel to discover
What must bring you to Despair
Men, like Salvage Beast's, Love ranging,
Here to day, and there at night;
All our Fears are in your changing
That your darling chief Delight

All our Fears, etc.

But so fresh a blooming Pasture.
Me for ever will enclose;
You need fear no such Disaster
When I change, I Am sure to lose.
He for ever will be kind,
Who in Love his profit finds.

He for ever, etc.

But when Envious Age at lost
Has made all my Beauties bare;
Then, like Land, that lies at wast,
You Will not judge me worth your Care,
No man thinks that worth his Pains,
Where Is all Labor and no Gains.

No man thinks, etc.

To convince you I Will be kind,
I love where Time has no Control,
It Is the Beauty of your Mind
That has Charmed my doting Soul:
As frail Beauty does decline,
Worth and Virtue briter shine.

As frail Beauty, etc.

Come, once more all Friends; and to show you how light what is past lies on my
Heart, we'll have a Dance, and then --


Et caetera.

Sbud, Sir, what do you mean! Let Us Sup orofs the Water, and Consummate, or we
shall set your Prentices so agog, they will go out in a Party, and plunder all
they meet, or run away from their. Aprons, and forfeit their Indentures


Briskly performed! Honest Sir Fickle, Igad, you are twenty Years younger than
thou was it an Hour ago. Ah! this same Honesty is Sovereign Geer! It Is the Best
Hearts-Ease in Nature


True.


Then let those that gluttle with their Store,
Strained from the Tears of Orphan's Blood of the Poor,
Suck on, and Leeches like, when over crammed --

Crack in this World, and in the next be damned.


And those that would be just, may Learn by thee,
That Honesty's the surest Policy


