THIS season with what Arts both Houses strive,
By your kind presence, to be kept alive!
W' have still new things, or old ones we revive;
We plot, and strive to bring them first of the Stage,
Like wary Pilot for his Weather-gage.
W' have Every Act, and every week a Play;
Nay, w' have had new ones studied for one Day;
W' have double Duty, and w' have but half Pay.
VV' have scaling Monkies, and w' have dancing Swans,
To match our nimble cap'ring Chairs and Stands:
There Opera's with, and here without Machines:
Here, Scenes well wrought, and there, well painted Scenes;
Castles and Men in the Air, the World l'th' Moon,
Where you, like Swallows fly, but soon you are gone.
W've something every different Taste to hit,
I gad, I think, w' have every thing but Wit;
For w' have full Scenes, and w' have an empty Pit.
Faith, Sirs, we scarce could hope, you here would be
So numerous, though we have a new Comedy.
For there is in Plays, you know, a Reformation
(A thing to which y' have no great inclination)
I fear you will seek some loser Occupation.
From those Lewd Poets all these mischiefs flow;
They, like Drawcansirs, mauled both Friend and Foe.
Would they would been served like their Plays long ago!
All cautious Dons and Matrons hence they scared,
And all this did they do, because they dared.
Yet, that you're hardn'd Sinners they may boast,
The more they lashed you, you seemed tickled most.
But now no Luscious Scenes must lard their Plays:
No Lady now will need to hide her face;
But I Will be hanged if one in the Gallery stays.
To hear ill-natured Truths no more you will sit,
But mortify an inoffensive Wit;
Lord! how still we shall have you in the Pit!
For I dare say, of what m^st pleased our Guests,
Nine parts in Ten were still sheer Bawdy Jests.
Methinks I see some here who seem to say
Gad, e're the Curtain's drawn I Will slip away;
No Bawdy, this cannot be a Women's Play.
Nay, I confess there is Cause enough to doubt,
But, Faith, they say there was a deal cut out,
Then stay and use it gently, some of you,
Since to be maimed you are somewhat subject too.
Spare it, you who for harmless sports declare,
Show that this age a modest Play can bear.
Twice has our Poetess kind usage found;
Change not her Fortune, though she cang'd her Ground,

SEarchwell!


-- Sir.


Get me some Small Beer, and dash a little Langoone in it; else 'twill go down
my burning Stomach ten degrees colder than Ice: I should have met my old Friend
and Collegian Beaumont, who came to Town last night, but Wine and Women drove
it clear out of my Head


Sir, he is here.


Welcome dear Friend, I prithee pardon my omission, faith 'twas business that
could not be left to other hands


Women I suppose, and that excuse I know a Man of your kidney thinks almighty.


Even so well by my Life, I am heartily glad to see you, why thou have been an
age consigned to barren Fields and senceless Groves, or Conversation stupid and
dull as they: How can thou waste thy Youth, happy Youth, the very
Quintessence of Life from London, this dear Epitome of pleasure


Because excess of drinking cloys my Stomach, and Impudence in Women absolutely
turns it; then I hate the vanity of Dress and Fluttering, where eternal Noise
and Nonsense reigns; this considered, what should I do here


Not much in troth.


But you, my Friend, run the Career your appetite directs, taste all those
pleasures I despise, you can inform me what humour's most in fashion, what
ruling whim, and how the Ladies are


Why faith there is no great alteration, the Money is indeed very much scarcer,
yet what perhaps you will think a wonder, dressing and debauchery increases; as
for the Damsels, three sorts make a Bushel, and will be uppermost: First,
there is your common Jilts will oblige every body


These are Monsters sure.


You may call (...) what you please, but they are very plentiful, I promise
you: The next is your kept Mistress, she is a degree modester, if not kind to
each, appears in her dress like Quality, whilst her ogling eyes, and too
frequent Debauches discovers her the younger Sister only to the first


This I should hate for Ingratitude.


The third is, not a Whore, but a brisk airy, noisy Coquette, that lives upon
treating, one Spark has her to the Play, another to the Park, a third to
Windsor, a fourth to some other place of Diversion; She has not the heart to
grant 'em all favors, for that is their design at the bottom of the Treats, and
they have not the heart to marry her, for that is her design too Poor Creature.
So perhaps a year, or it may be two, the gaudy Butterfly slutters round the
Kingdom, then if a foolish Citt does not take compassion, sneaks into a Corner,
dies an Old Maid, despised and forgotten. The Men that sit those Ladies are
your Rake, your Cully, and your Beaux


I hope Sir Fra. Wildlove has more honor than to find a Mistress amongst such
Creatures


Gad honest honorable Ned, I must own I have a fling at all, sometimes I think
it worth my while to make a Keeper Jealous, frequently treat the Coquette,
'till either she grows upon me, or I grow weary of her; then it is but saying a
rude thing, she quarrels, I fly to the next Bottle, and there for ever drown
her remembrance


It Is pity that the most noblest Seeds of Nature are most prone to Vice.


Such another grave Speech would give me a sit of the Colic.


Well I find it is in vain to tell you my Story, without I have a desire to be
swingingly laughed at


Nay, Nay, why so, I Would sacrifice my life to serve my friend.


To confess the truth, I Am in Love.


Is that such a wonder why I have been so a thousand times? old boy.


Ay, but desperately, virtuously!


There the Case differs, I doubt friend you have applied your self to a wrong
Man


Are not you acquainted with Sir Charles Beauclair?


Yes, intimately.


Then, in short, his Lady and a Booby Brother of here is have got my Mistress in
their power; she was the Daughter of an Eminent Merchant, one Sir George
Venturewell, who dying left her to the care of my Lady Beauclair's Father; he
proved like most Guardians, a great Knave, forged a Will, which gave my
Arabella nothing, unless she married this two-leg'd thing his Son; some of her
friends contested with 'em, but the Lawyers roguery, through the Guardians
wealth prevailed, and she is again in their possession; the old Fellow is dead,
but the Sister and Brother pretend to manage her


Your case is desperate, and I fear Sir Charles can do you but little service
in it


Why, he lives with his Wife.


Yes, modestly, he knows nothing of her concerns, and desires she should know
nothing of his: did you never hear of her Character


No.


She is certainly the most disagreeable of the whol^ Sex, has neither Sense,
Beauty or good Manners; then her humor is so implacable, the hunted her first
Husband into the Indies, where he died, Heaven knows when or how


What the Devil made Sir Charles Marry her?


Even that tempting Devil Interest, she was vastly Rich, he a younger Brother,
since the Estate and Title of his Family is fallen to him, and I dare swear
he would willingly give a Leg or an Arm to be freed from the intolerable Plague of
a Wife, whom no Mortal can please


Sir Charles Beauclair is coming to wait upon your Honor.


I am glad on it, I fancy there is a sympathy in your humors, that will soon
excite a friendship, for he notwithstanding the provocation of an ugly Scolding
Wife at home, and the Temptation of a good Estate, and a handsome Fellow into
the bargain, instead of making his life easy with jolly Bona-robars, dotes on
a Platonic Mistress, who never allows him greater favors then to read Plays
to her, kiss her hand, and fetch Heartbreaking Sighs at her Feet; with her he
has obliged his charming Neice to be, almost always; Faith nothing but the
horrible fear of Matrimony before my eyes keeps me from loving Mrs. Beauclair,
she is pretty without affectation, has but just pride enough to become her, and
gravity enough to secure her from Scandal: to all this add twelve thousand
Pounds in ready Money


And is not that last the most prevailing Argument, ha, Frank?


No, Sir Charles, Chains of Gold wont tempt my freedom from me, but here is a
Gentleman, sixth in the dull matrimonial rode, uneasy if he meets with
interruption, though it throws him on the flowery fields of liberty, he is my
particular friend, and labors under the pangs of disappointed Love, it is in
your power to assist him in his delivery; I know you are compassionate in these
cases


You may promise for me to the utmost, I am ready.


Fame reports you a true English Gentleman.


You may Command me, Sir.


Dear Sir Charles, lend me one Guinea more, the Estate's Entailed, my Father
will die, and I shall get an Hei^ess


Here take it, and leave lying:


I Will be with you again at Dinner.


I don't question it.


Searchwell, has there been no Letters for me, this Morning?


No, Sir.


Stay you at home, and if there come one, find me out with it.


I will Sir.


Come Sir Charles, shall we to the Chocolate-house, there you shall here Mr.
Beaumont's Story


With all my heart; hark you Sir Francis, I have an Entertainment of excellent
Music promised me this afternoon, you know I cannot have it at home, so I have
borrowed some Apartments of obliging Mrs. Bantum, the Indian Woman, and will
try to prevail with the Ladies to come


Dear Sir Charles Introduce me.


You Will think your hours thrown away in the Company of civil Women.


Faith I scarce dare trust your Neices eyes, they gain too much upon my heart.
I am always forced, after I have seen her, to have recourse to the Glass, to
secure my self from Romantic Constancy


Now you talk of Romances, In Troth I think I Am a perfect Knight Errant, for
besides my own Lady, I Am in quest of another fair Fugitive, by the des^e of her
Father: Have you not heard of the Death of my Lord Belmour's Heir, and absence
of his only Daughter Mariamne


Yes, yes.


The old Lord has given me her Picture, with an earnest Petition, that I would
endeavor to find her; he pressed me so, I could not refuse it, though I have
small probability of my side


She Is now a prodigious Heiress, what could be the meaning of running from all
her Friends


Too Studious for her Sex, and sell upon the Seducers of the Women, Plays, and
Romances, from thence she formed her self a Hero, a Cavilier, that could Love
and talk like them; whilst her Father without consulting her, provided a
Husband, Rich, but wanting all Scudries Accomplishments, this Man she called
Monster, and finding the Marriage unavoidable, took her Jewels and what Money
was in her Power, and in the Stage-Coach fled to this Populous Wilderness, if
that can be proper, for here we are in Crowds concealed, as well as in a Desert


'Twas strange.


I pity her, for I hate an Innocent inclination crossed.


Sir, your Coach is ready.


Allons Gentlemen.


In vain I fly to Books, the tuneful Numbers give me not a moments ease: In
vain I Have strove to walk in Virtues high, unerring Paths; blind, rash
inconsiderate Love, has pusht me from the blissfull state, and sixth me
struggling 'midst ten thousand dangers: Here sweet Bard, thou suites me well

My anxious hou^s roll heavily away;
D^priv'd of Sleep by Night or Peace by Day.

Poor disconsolate Damosel, come leave this soft melancholy Poetry, it nurses
your Disease


You indeed, like a bright Ray of comfort, shoot through my endlessnight;
where is my dear destruction


Mr Spendall said he would be here at noon.


He Is ever here, I feel himbusie at my Heart, and when the wished minute of his
approach comes on, every Artery catches the Convulsive Joy: Do not thou think
me mad


A little crais'd or so, my dear.


Bedlam, over this, had been my proper mansion if your sweet Company had not
composed my jarring thoughts, and given the warring Torments Intervals of rest


I must confess, tho I am wild to the very verge that Innocence allows, yet
when my Uncle, that dear good man, told me, if ever I meant to oblige him I
must be a Companion, Friend, and Lover of his Mistress. The proposition
startled me, but then I did not think there had been such a Mistress as my
Bellinda, nor Platonic Love in real practice


True, my dear Friend, our Love is to the Modern Age, unpractic'd and unknown;
yet so strict and so severe, are rigid Honor's Laws, that though not grossly, yet
we still offend: had not Fate fixed a bar unpassable between us, how should
I'have blessed the accident that brought us first acquainted


You never told me the Story.


In short, 'twas thus; coming from the Play, masked with a Young Lady, a
fluttering Fellow seized me, and spite of my entreaties grew rudely
troublesome; I was never used to such Behavior, and it thoroughly frighted me;
Sir Charles being near, saw my unfeigned concern, and generously made the Brute
desist, then led me safely to a Coach, observing where I bid the Coachman
drive, he came to wait upon me, my fair Friend again was with me and 'twas by
her persuasions that I saw him: we found his conversation nicely civil and full
of Innocent delight, I blushed, and fondly thought this man my Amorous Stars in
kindness destined for my happiness, but oh! --


But Oh, he was married, and that spoiled all.


Therein I only can accuse him of deceit: He kept his marriage a satal Secret
till I had lost the power to banish him


I prithee dear Bedinda where were thou bred; I Am sure this Lewd Town never
gave you such nice notions of honor


My Friendship bars you of nothing but enquiring who I am.


It Is true I beg your Pardon and am silent.


Only this I Will tell you, Madam, and as a warning never resolve, although you
think it fully in your power, to keep your resolution. Mark it in me, I that
thought to have stood the fairest pattern of my Sex; and would have blotted all
the annals of guilty Love, yet now am lost fonder of my Beauclair than of
Family or Fame, yet know him married, and Divine and humane Laws against me


For Humane Laws, I know not what to say, but sure Heaven had no concern, 'twas
a detested match. Ruling Friends and Cursed A arice joined this unthinking youth
to the worst of Women: But no more of this how dye like your new Lodgings? The
House is very large, have you no good Neighbors


You know it is not my way to be acquainted; my impertinet maid sometimes teases
me with a relation of a Merchant and pretty Lady; who came from the Indies and
Lodge here


What are they, Mrs. Betty?


Nay, my Lady will never hear me out; but I Am sure they are worth any Bodies
observation, he looks like a Surly, Old, Rich Cuff, and she like an Intriguing
Beautiful Jilt, as sine as a Queen covered with Jewels


Have done with your Description, I Am sick of 'em both.


Lord, you are so peevish, pray give me leave to ask Mrs ^etty little more
Questions about 'em, what is his name


An odd one Madam, they call him Mr. Flywife.


An odd one indeed, and contradicting his Actions when (...) a fine Dame
belongs to him


Thou art a little Gossip to trouble thy head with other peoples Affairs; I
heard news of yoh, Madam, the other day, they say you are in Love, for all your
seeming indifference


Yes, in troth I am a little that way inclined; but my Spark is indeed too far
from your Cassandra rules, his Mistresses are neither Angels nor Godesses;
truly Sr Francis Wildlove is too mad even for me; though the Devil's in it, I
cannot forbear thinking of the Rambler


Your Virtue and Beauty may reclaim him.


It may be so; but I doubt he don't like Reforming Enter Sir so well as to try
it. Ha, see who appears comely as rising day Charles. amidst ten thousand
eminently known Bellinda this Heroic is designed for you, though somewhat barren
of Invention, I was forced to borrow it


Cheerful, and thy mind at ease, happy Girl.


(taking Bell's hand) My Blessing.


My Fate, which I should, but cannot curse.


Cousin I Am glad to find you here, you shall help persuade Bellinda to go
abroad; I have promised to bring you both to Mrs. Bantums, I have provided a
trifle of a Dinner, and Excellent Music for digestion; there is only a Country
Gentleman and Sir Francis, I know you love Sir Francis Neice


You may be mistaken Sir; grant I did, would you have me meet him? dear Uncle,
don't make me so ridiculous


I thought Neice you durst have trusted me with your Conduct, my Friends are no
Brainless Beaux, no Lady Libellers, that extend innocent Favors, and bespatter
the Reputations they cannot ruin


Then you think your Friend Sir Francis a very modest man.


No, my Dear, but your mildest men, if they have sense, as I am sure he has,
know how to treat Women of Honor


Nay, I Am soon convinced, what say you, Madam?


I will go; for perhaps, Sir Charles, you think I Have only invented Fears of
being known, but you will surely find, if any Accident discovers me, I shall be
seen by you no more


See thee no more! yes, I would see thee, though barred by foreign or domestic
Foes; set on thy side Father or Husband, on mine Wife and Children, I Would rush
through all Nature's Ties to gaze on thee, to satisfy the longings of my Soul,
and please my fond desiring Eyes


Chide him Beauclair, let him not talk thus.


Before he came you were at it; what can I say to two mad Folks?


Your Servant Ladies. Sir Charles, is it not Dinnertime? I am as hungry as a
--


Horse, I know the old expression; were I my Uncle, I Would as soon build an
Hospital for the lazy, as undertake to satissie thy voracious Appetite


How have thou of late disobliged my Neice, that she is so severe upon thee?


Only told her Ladyship a Truth she could not bear.


A Truth from thee, I rather think I could not hear it.


I said, a she Wit was as great a Wonder as a Blazing-star, and as certainly
foretold the World's turning upside down; yet 'spight of that the Lady will
write


Brute! what did I ever write, unless it was thy Character, and that was so
adroit, you had like to hanged your self


For my sake, Cousin, for bear.


Let him take pett and not come to Dinner to day, if he thinks fit, it is not I
that care


No, I will come.


That I would have sworn.


To give occasion, that you may draw this shining weapon Wit; it will dazzle
the Assembly; if it pierces only me, no matter


Stuff, pshaw, will you come, Madam, and put on your things?


Dear Spendall, I must beg of you to step to our House, I made my Wife a kind
of Promise to dine with her to day


What shall I say?


Say I am gone to Court, she loves the Thoughts of being great, though most unfit
for it


But you know you promised to carry her Daughter Miss Peggy with you next time
you went thither


True; say I Am gone to the Tower: I Am called, say any thing the Devil puts into
your Head

Bellinda within, Are you ready?


Yes, I shall say what the Devil puts into my Head, but not what you expect: Am
I not then ungrateful? Has he not for several months fed, clothed and
supported me? But what for, to be a mere Letter-carrier, an honorable Pimp for
Platonic Love? He shall find I can employ my Parts better; he trusts me for
his pleasure, and I Will betray him for mine

Ha, Lyewell! why come you hither?


Phough, I saw Sir Charles and the Ladies go out: besides, I want Money; I did
not serve you so, when I was in my Lord Worthy's Family


Prithee don't be so surly, here is a Crown for thee, but I expect some Service
for it: Is there ever a Strumpet in your Catalogue so well bred as to write


All the Whores in Town can scrawl if that will do.


Let one of 'em send immediately a nameless Letter to my Lady Beauclair, and
inform her, That Sir Charles will be to day at Mrs. Bantums with a Whore,
between three and four, by that hour, lest she come too soon and disturb our
Dinner. Well, the Heiress is coming, I shall make thee amends


Ay, when you marry Mrs. Beauclair.


Hang her; I hinted Love but once, and she has abused me ever since. I have no
luck with the Wits, now I have better Chase in view, a wealthy Fool, a Fool the
Perquisite of a Sharper. Come with me, and I Will instruct you further



O how happy am I, to breath again my native London Air! I vow the Smoke of
this dear Town delights me more than all the Indian Groves: happy too in
meeting with one like thee; thou understand'st Intrigues, art cunning, subtle,
as all our Sex ought to be, who deal with those deluders Men


Then your Ladyship liked not the Indies.


How was it possible I should? Our Beaux was the Refuse of N^gate, and our
Merchants the Offspring of foolish plodding Cits


Why went you, Madam?


So great is my Opinion of your Faith, I dare trust you with all my past life:
My Friends bred me at a Boarding-school, and died when I was but fourteen,
leaving me nothing for my Portion but Pride and a few tawdry Clothes; I was a
forward Girl, and bartering what I had not the W^t to prize, a never to be
rec^ver'd Fame was soon maintained in Finery, Idleness, and darling Pleasure,
but the deceitful Town grew weary of me sooner than I expected, and I sick of
that, seeing-other new Faces preferred before me; so picking up some Moneys,
and a handsome Garb, I ventured to Jamaica


Madam, I hear my Master unlock his Study.


Oh Heavens! and this f^olish Story put Sir Francis Wildlove's Letter quite out
of my Mind. Have you writ as I directed


Yes, Madam.


Give me the Letter and be gone, I would not have him think us great.

Come Fubby, will you go into the Dining Room the Chocolate is ready.


And you, methinks, are ready too, Madam; beyond Sea 'twas a courted Favor,
dressed seldom, and careless; but since arrived at this damned Town, no cost,
nor pains is spared; Curse upon my doting Folly, that listened to your
Prayers, and s^ight of my Oath and strong Aversion, brought you back to the
high road of Hell


Is then my tried Constancy suspected? Did I f^r this deny the richest Planters
of the place, who courted me in an honest lawful way, and would have parted
with their Wealth, dearer than their Souls, to have called me Wise, whilst I,
slighting all their Offers, gave up my unsullied Bloom to you, only on your
protested Love leaving Jamaica, fled with you to a remoter World, because you
said your Circumstance was such, that if you lived with me, your English
Friends must believe you dead


Well, and what was my Return to all this boasted kindness? You may remember,
Madam, your Cargo was sunk so low, 'twould scarce afford at the next Ships
approach another London Topping; when I without a hated ^ock for Life poured on
ye more Riches than all your Husband-pretenders joined together could aim at,
gave you such a separate Fortune, that indeed I was forced to obey your Desires
in coming into England, lest you should do it without my Leave


Well, well, thou art a good Boy, prithee no more wrangling Fubby; I vow and
swear to morrow I Will be as great a Slattern as ever was, if that will please
you, so I will


Ay, and want to go out to day, for all the gazing Fops to admire, though I have
told you, I cannot appear till I have inquired into my affairs, then to morrow,
if you stay at home with me, Sackcloth will serve turn


Lord, you are so froppish, if I was your Wife, sure Fubby, you would not be so
jealous


My Wife quotha! no, no, I was once bewitched, but I found such a Plague, that
-- No more Wives, I say


Well, I Will be any thing to please Fubby; Will you go in? Our Breakfast will be
cold


(takes up the Letter) I Will follow you.

Ha! what is here? a Sonnet, I Will warrant; her gaping abroad has brought this: A
Letter of her own, only the Hand is scrawl'd to disguise it. If I were
convinced your Passion was real, perhaps you might have no cause to complain:
(fine advancing Devil) be constant and discreet, you ll find none of our Sex
ungrateful. By thy burning Lust that is a damned Lie, for thou art thy self a
most ungrateful Jilt: I Will catch her now, e're the Devil can be at her Elbow to
invent a Lie, and if one wheedling Tongue does not destroy all my Senses, she
shall feel my Rage


Sir, the Captain comes to bring you News your Ship is safe in the River.


Be damned, there let it sink.


Shall I tell him so, Sir?


Jackanapes, I Will come to him. Is it impossible in Nature to be happy with or
without a Woman? If they are virtuous they are peevish, illnatur'd, proud and
coy

If fair and complaisant, they please as well:
For then, by Heaven, they are as false as Hell.

HA, ha, ha! I cannot forbear laughing at your great concern. Jenn. O madam, if
you did but see what a passion my master was in, you would not be so merry; he
was like to beat the Sea Captain, though he brought him the good news of his
Ships arrival


Pho, mind what I say, and fear not; I warrant you shall have the Letter again,
and liberty to find Sir Francis Wildlove with it


Madam, he comes.


Well, well, be sure you do it handsomely.

Never, never let her be your Wife.

That was loud that he might think me merry; speak hussy.


(crying) Pray, madam, search again; I have been a month of writing on it, and
took it out of a Book too; the man has sent me forty, before I could make shift
to answer one till now: Oh! oh


Prithee don't tease me, I dropped it, it is gone, I Will write another for you,
since you say the man is for a Husband, and can so well maintain you; be quiet


What Is this? faith not improbable, it is not my Damsels hand, now I have
considered on it again


I had rather have lost my best Pe^t coat by half.


Cease your noise, or leave the Room.


What Is the matter? having no occasion for a Quarrel, will be Money in my
Pocket, I am sure


Why Fubby, this foolish Wench, it seems, has a Country Lover, and beg^d of me
to direct a Letter to him, which in troth I have lost, so she howls, that is
all, Fubby


And I have found it: Come Jenny, to make amends for your Sor^ow, I Will write
the Superscription; Whither is it to go


(aside to her Mistress) Madam, Madam.


O, I think I remember; -- to Jeoffrey Scatterlove, at the Bull-Inn in
Ca^bridge: so seal it and carry it, for these silly Girls never think it safe,
unless they give it into the Post House themselves, but make haste


Have I got thee again, my dear sweet Letter?


A very raw foolish Girl this, my Dear.


Faith Puggy, there had like to have bin a Quarrel; I was almost afraid that
Letter was a piece of Gallantry of yours


Ay, ay, you are always suspecting me, when Heaven knows I am such a poor
constant Fool, I never so much as dream of any man but my own dear Fubby:
Fubby, let I go


No, no, I Will run away, I will not hear you, I will not hear you.


Then I ll follow, and I am sure prevail. Oh, had my Sex but half my Cunning,
the deceivers would find themselves deceived; from my Gallants I never found,
but gave 'em killing Charms

Fools! when we love, our Liberties we lose;
But when beloved, with ease we pick and choose.

Brother, I say you're a Fool.


Fool in your Face. -- -- I Am no more a fool than your self. -- What would you
have a man do? -- Must I ravish her? Don't I know Accessories have bin hanged!
and here you would have me Principal! what, I understand Law, -- I will not hang for
your pleasure


Yes, you understand Law -- Do You understand parting with a good Estate, which
you must do if you have not this Arabella? Don't tell me of Ne -- Ne --
Necessaries, I say you shall marry her


Ay, but the Craft will be in catching, as the Saying is: why, I went but even
now to take her by the Lilly-white H^nd, as the Poet h^s it, and she threw a
whole dish of scalding-hot Tea full in my Face, Dish and all Cousin Peggy saw
her; she called her all the names in Chris^ndom; she will tell ye the same


Ah poor Peggy! ay, she don't love to see you abused; -- were that Minks like
Peggy, you were but too happy. Well -- when will you give Peggy that Diamond
Necklace? The Sparks are almost mad for her, -- she has the Lord knows how many
Sweethearts; there is Squire -- what do you call him


(aside) So, now she is got upon her Daughter's Sweethearts -- she will never have
done


There Is Sir John Empty, and Mr. Flutter, and Capt. Noisy, say the finest
things to her, but the Wench is so coy, and my Rogue of a Husband will let none
of 'em come home to her, but calls 'em Fops, and Boars, and the Lord knows what


O Lord, Boars! Beaux you mean. -- O Lord, Boars!


Well, she has of all sorts, -- and if there be twenty Women in company, all
the rout is made about her; and the Girl does so blush -- I vow and swear it
makes her look woundy handsome


Ay, you called me fool, but I Will be hanged if ye dan't make a fool of her,
mark the end on it; marry her to some honest Tradesman, that is fittest for her


Pray don't you trouble your musty Pate about her: No, she scorns a Citizen,
she would not have my Lord Mayor's Son; she is a Girl of discretion: I was
married young too, and I looked after all my first Husband's Affairs


(aside) True, till he went the Lord knows whither to be quiet.


Indeed this young fellow is not worthy the Name of a Husband; I have a good
mind to let the World know what a deceitful piece it is


Mother! mother!


What Is the matter Child?


Here Is Mrs. Arabella does nothing but jeer and abuse me; she says eating
between meals will spoil my Shape, and I snatched a Book out of her hand, and
she said a Primmer was sitter for me


I Will never endure this, how dare she affront my Daughter?


So, I Am like to have a fine life, nothing but scolding and noise; f^r my part,
I Would rather not marry at all: if she is thus randy beforehand what will she be
afterward? In a short time I shall be made Ballads on, and my Picture set
before 'em just like the Summons to Horn-sair


Yes, yes, you shall marry her; and we'll tame her too, I Will warrant you.


Here she comes, here she comes, as mad as a Turky-cock.


Why am I used thus? Your Servants are forbid to call me either Coach or Chair;
Are you my Jailer? You, Oaf, I speak to


Mistress, 'twould be better for you if you had other words in your mouth, I Will
tell you that


You shall not gallop your --


Hold ^eggy, let me speak -- What Is the reason, Mrs. Arabella, you take this
Privilege here? -- You know your Fortune is at our dispose, so shall your
Person be, else you must expect nothing


Had I but heard your Characters, I Would sooner have been exposed a Beggar in this
inhospitable World, than ever set my Feet within your Doors


I Would have you to know our Corecters are honest Corecters; I wish yours prove so.


Don't provoke me, I say, don't.


Why? you will not beat me, -- I hear there is a sensible Man amongst ye, I Will
appeal to him, if you would let me see him


That Is my Husband you mean; -- No, you shall not see him, nor such as you are, if
I can help it


What I would you see my Vather-in-law, to tell Lies and Stories to him? No,
no, don't mistake your self


Away, you smell of Aqua Mirabilis.


Oh Impudence! She smell of strong Waters! She hates it. -- Come hither Peggy,
let me smell, thy Breath used to be as sweet as any Cows


(aside) What shall I do? I Have been at my Mother's Bottle; I will not come to
satisfy her nor you neither. What ails ye, -- do you know


No, don't, Miss. -- Well, since I must have neither Attendance nor (...), I Will
go a-foot


Hold ye, hold ye, you are not gone yet, as the Saying is.


Was ever Usage like this?


Your Usage has been but too good, let me tell you that; I Will show you such
Usage as you deserve. Hug -- Uggun, -- what a Devil is your Name? I hate a
Wench with a hard Name

Here, lock up Mrs. Flippant in the dark Room.


(jumping about) Ay, lock her up, lock her up, I say.


(grinning in her Face) Yet, Mrs. Bella, be ruled by me, -- give me one sweet
look, and let me take a Honey Kiss, and you shall not be locked up; -- No, you
shall not be locked up, -- but go abroad with me, and have your Bellyful of Cakes
and Custards. -- Shall I? -- Shall I


There Is the Kiss; and for a Look, I wish my Eyes were Basilisks.


O Lord, Mother, how she swears!


Oh my Chops, my Chops! lock her up; hang her, she is a Fury.


Abominable! come hither, has she hurt ye?


Oh Eugenia! last night, when you heard my Story, you, in gentle pity, wept; --
Assist me now, or I Am lost


Have Patience, Madam, and believe me yours.


(aside to her Brother) I say, keep the Key your self, I don't like her
greatness with the Maid


It Is locking up, I fear it is against Law, Sister.


Pho, I fear nothing; -- Are not you a Squire, and rich? -- you're above the
Leaw


Ay; but Knights ha'been hanged, -- I dread hanging -- I tremble always when I
think on it


Hanged! there is no danger of being hanged; what, -- ha'ye no Courage?


Yes, I have Courage, and that she shall find; my Injuries, as I have read it,
steel my Eyes. Mrs Arabella, -- I could swear the Peace against you, and have
you before a Justice; -- but I will spare you the Shame; and punish you my
self: -- Come along


Resistance is in vain, -- but I will be revenged, or kill my self.


Ay, ay, kill your self, and then I shall have your Estate, without being
troubled with your Person. -- I Will humble you


And Heaven punish thee.


Don't trouble your musty Pate about Heaven, (as my Sister says) but come along.


Away with her, away with her.


I take Heaven and Earth to witness, I believe you design to murder me.


There Is no such Design; besides your Witnesses are not valid, -- I never heard
their Evidence go in any Trial in all my life


No, it is not to murder ye, but make ye better: No more words, but let it be
done


I Am glad she is to be locked up, -- for had any Gentlemen come to see me, she is
so pert, her Tongue would have bin running


Here I have her double locked, in faith neither Window nor Mousehole in the
Room: Gentil, -- fetch my Cloak, -- I Will to my Lawyer Mr. Cobblecase, for my
Mind misgives me plaguily


Shall I wait on you, Sir?


No, no, stay at home, and if any one asks for Mrs. Arabella, say, She does not
lodge here


Yes.


B'w'y Sister.


Your Journey is needless, but you may go if you will; and, do you hear, ask Mr.
Cobblecase to come and dine here, he is a Bachelor. -- You should always be
thinking of Peggy


Well, well.


O Mother, yonder is Mr. Spendall a coming, -- he is grown very fine of late.


Ay, if he would leave your Vather's Company, and make out what he says about
his entailed Estate, the man is not to be despised


My Lady Beauclair, your most humble. Dear pretty Creature, yours.


Lord, Mr. Spendall, what do you do? -- well, I wonder Peg endures it. -- I Will
vow and swear, Mr. Spendall, Knights presume no farther than to kiss the tip of
my Daughters little Finger, and you make nothing of her Lips


How! make nothing of 'em! pardon me, Madam, I put 'em to the use Nature
designed: -- They are as sweet as -- and as soft as -- Gad, I must taste 'em
again to raise my Fancy


Be quiet, let me alone, Mr. Spendall.


Oh, give your sweet Temptations over,
I Will taste those dangerous Lips no more.

You're a strange man, -- but come -- sing us a Song of your own -- Husband
says you can make Varses


But let it be as like that as you can, for methinks that is very pretty.


(aside) Does the Fool think I shall make it ex tempore? -- however, I have one
pretty near it, as it happens. I Will rather expose myself, than not endeavor to
divert you, Madam

AT dead of Night, when wrapped in Sleep
The Peaceful Cottage lay,
Pastora left her folded Sheep,
Her Garland, Crook, and needless Scrip,
Love led the Nymph astray.
Loose and Undrest she takes her flight
To a near Myrtle-shade:
The conscious Moon gave splendid light,
To Bless the Ravished Lover's sight,
And gain the Loving Maid.
His eager Arms the Nymph Embrace,
And, to assuage the Pain,
His restless Passion he obeys:
At such an hour, in su^ a place,
What Lover could contain?
In vain she called the conscious Moon,
The Moon no succor gave;
The cruel Stars, unmoved, looked on,
And seemed to wink at what was done,
Nor would her humor save.
Vanquished at last by powerful Love,
The Nymph explring lay;
No more she sighed, no more she strove,
Since no kind Stars were found above,
She blushed, and died away.
Yet Blessed the Grove, her happy Flight,
And Youth that did betray
And panting, dying with Delight,
She Blessed the kind transporting Night,
And Cursed approaching Day.

Thank ye, it is very sine, I Will vow and swear.


So it is indeed Mother.


Now, to leave fooling, where is my Husband?


I know not, I have not seen him these two days. -- Here my Father writes to me,
if I will take up, (that is the old man's Expression) and find a virtuous Woman
with a Fortune, he will give me Threethousand pounds down, and settle Eight
hundred a year, -- and, faith, I am trying to obey' the rich Cuff, and wean my
self from my old Friends and the dear Bottle


Ay, you do very well, Mr. Spendall; I should be overjoyed to see you take up,
and perhaps a Fortune may be found: -- I Will say no more -- but a through
Reformation will produce strange matters, matters I little thought of; -- but
I Will say no more


Your Ladyship must not say a word of this to Sir Charles, for then he will
forbid me the sight of this dear Creature, whose Charms alone have power to
work the mentioned Reformation


No, no, fear not that, I have not so many Friends, to go the ready way to lose
'em


For my part, I don't love Vather so well, to tell him any thing of us.


Madam, here is a Penny-post Letter to your Ladyship.


To me!


I warrant it is to me, from some Spark.


Stand away Hussy, it is durracted to my -- my Lady Beauclair, -- What Is this
Banter's the Indian House? -- Read it, Mr. Spendall, some mischief, I believe.
Though unknown, I cannot forbear, in Justice to your Ladyships Merit, informing
you, that Sir Charles, at four a clock, will be with a Mistress, at Mrs.
Bantam's; use your Discretion, but assure your self it is a Truth


O the Villain, the Rogue! the confounded Whore! I Will tear his and her Eyes
out; always at home he is sick, his Head aches, and he must lie alone: Ah, Mr.
Spendall, if I should tell you the naked Truth, you would say, he was a Viilain
too; I Have often told him his own with Tears, and the brazenfac'd Villain has
forswore it. My Husband with a Whore! I have no Patience; I Will go there
immediately, and stay till he comes


Ay, do mother, and I Will go with you, and help to pull their Eyes out.


Are you both mad? Why all there love Sir Charles to that degree they would watch
and turn him back, -- you would never conceal your Passion, -- your only way is to
come after the hour, and then you will certainly surprise 'em


That Is true; well, good Mr. Spendall stay and comfort me, -- I fear I shall
have my Fits, and then no two men can hold me


I would with all my Heart, and esteem my self happy to serve you, but my
Father has sent me twenty Guineas for a Token, and if I don't go this minute,
the man will be gone out of Town, and carry 'em back with him


Nay, that is not to be neglected. -- Come Child, we will go to my Cousin
Prattle's, and tell her this News: my Husband with a Whore! -- I cannot bear it


I must seize a Kiss, else I shall faint before I see you again.


Pish, pish, I think the man's distracted.


Is this a time. -- and my Husband with a Whore! I wish my Nails were twice as
long for her sake. -- Ah Child, thy Vather was anotherguess man than this, though
he had Faults too. Come away: Your Servant Mr. Spendall


Your Servant Sir.


My Husband with a Whore!


Ladies, your most obedient Slave. -- Thus far Affairs go on as I could wish.
Now if my Lady does but abuse Bellinda, till it come to parting between Sir
Charles and she, then my Miss being out of his Tuition, I fear not her falling
into mine: -- She Is damned silly, I am forced to let all Courtship lie in
Kissing, for she understands a Complement no more than Algebra. -- Well -- her
Wealth makes it up. -- Now for Dinner



This Walk in the Park has done me good.


'Twas very refreshing.


Is not this better now dear Bellinda, than reading and sighing away every
beauteous Morning


Yes, if at each gazer the conscious Blushes would forbear to rise, if I could
look upon this object of my Love and Virtue, not shrink back, it were true
happiness


My lovely Charmer, let me call this day mine, and oblige you to be cheerful.


I warrant ye, by and by we'll be as merry as the -- you know the title that
sticks ahand, Uncle, -- ha, yonder is Sir Francis Wildlove, for Heaven's sake
step behind the Trees, whilst I clap on my Mask, and prole toward Rosamends
Pond, and he, no doubt, pursues


You will not sure.


Indeed, my dear Gravity, I will; that is, with your leave, Sir.


Well thou art a mad Girl, but I dare trust thee, come this way, Madam.


What Is there, a Woman well Shaped, well Dressed, Masked and alone! how many
Temptations has the Devil tacked together for a poor frail Mortal, that scarce
needed half a one^ the Handkercheif dropped, a fair invitation, a duce take her
agility, she has been too nimble for me, however I Will venture, -- Madam, by
your remaining, when the whole Army of Beauties are retired, I should guess you
Picceer for a particular prize


Then I suppose you have vanity enough to think your well-rigg'd Pinnace worth
securing


Faith, Child, I hope you would not find the freight disagrecable.


Now I could not have thought such a hopeful proper Gentleman, would have been
straggling in the Park this Hour; what, no Lady of Quality, nor Miss that
appears like one to lead out to day, no Assignation? or is 'the plague upon
your fine Cloths, Credit out, and Pocket empty


Shall I tell you the truth.


Yes, if you can find in your heart.


Why then, Faith, I have an Appointment, and that with Ladys, nay, and Music;
yet if you will be kind, my dear Chicken, they shall wait for me in vain. By
Heaven, a charming side face


Stand off, or I vanish, but tell me what makes you so indifferent to your
first engagement? the Women are Old I suppose


Alas, very Buds, my Dear.


Ugly then.


Beautiful as Angels.


What can be the matter?


Don't you guess? why they are Virtuous. I have a Mistress there, confound me
if I am not damnably in Love with her, and yet could never get my self in a
vein serious enough to say o^e dull, fo^lish, modest thing to her


Poor Gentleman, suppose you practiced before you went, and fancied me the Lady.


A Match.


With Arms across.


And the looks of an Ass, I begin, ah Madam! -- how was that sigh?


Pretty well.


Behold the humblest of your Slaves: see the Martyr of your Frowns; those Arms
must heal the Wounds your Eyes have made, or else I dye; they must, they must


Hold, hold! -- Sir Charles, Sir Charles, here I shall be ravished in the open
Park


O Heavens! Mrs. Beauclair!


Why how now Frank, in Raptures before the face of the World and the Sun!


Pshaw, I do confess I am caught.


If you had come to any harm, Madam, you might have thanked your self.


(aside) No great harm neither, to have a hearty Hug from the man one loves.


Madam, I humbly ask your Pardon.


It is easily granted, 'twas a Frolic of my own beginning.


This Generosity wholly subdues my wandering Heart.


Have a care of getting into the dull, foolish, modest Road, Sir Francis.


No more of that, dear madam.


Come, I believe Dinner stays; where is your Friend Mr. Beaumont?


He Will be there before us.


Let Us to our Chairs, I dare say the Ladies are tired.


Truly I am.


Sir, the Lady that came lately from the Indies, whom you have seen at the
Play, sends you this; the odness of the Superscription she will explain to you


O the charming Angel! dear Girl, accept my Acknowledgment, and step behind
those Trees whilst I lead my Mother and my Aunt into their Chairs, I Will be with
you in a moment


O the wretched Libertine! but to take notice on it would show too much Concern.


Sir Francis, where are you?


Here, at your Elbow, Sir Charles: Madam, may I presume to lead you to your
Chair


Yes Sir, though I believe, as your Affairs stand, you could ^bate the Ceremony.


The greatest Affairs in Christendom should not hinder me from waiting on your
Ladyship


No faith, they are not of the Shape of motherly and elderly Aunts: I Will not
stay here, but watch where they go, and tell my Lady what a Rambler she has
chose


So with much coaksing I have got my jealous Fellow to let me go out this
afternoon, on the pretense of buying things, and seeing an old Aunt, If this
Wench would come and tell me where the mad Spark will be, I Will venture to give
him the meeting; have you found him


Yes, Madam, but I perceive he is a sad wild man, he was engaged with two Masks,
and would fain have flamm'd me off 'twas his Mother, but I saw by their Mien
and Dress they were young


What said he to you?


Seemed much pleased, but shie: Bid me stay, and promised to return presently;
I thought I should do your Ladyship more service in seeing where they went, so
I dogged 'em to Mrs. Bantam's our Neighbor and housed 'em all there


Very good, and by and by, I Will to Locket's, and send for him, I fancy I know
the Gentleman s humors so well, that he will certainly forsake old acquaintance
for those of a newer date, though he ventures changing for the worse: he seemed
eager and pleased, fierce and fond, and swore my Charms were unequalled. His
swearing indeed signifies but little, the Banquet over

Yet sure he will meet when Love and I invite,
For Love's his God, and leads him to delight.

WHither so fast. Mrs. Eugenia?


Stop me not, I am upon an Act of Charity, trying to free the Immured Lady; --
-- I have been picking up all the Rusty Keys in the house, in hopes to
accomplish it


Why you will loose your place.


Hang my place, -- There Is not one in the Family understands a Grain of
Civility, except Sir Charles; and if he speaks to me my Lady pulls my
Head-cloaths off -- Come I know you don't love that Lubberly. Coxcomb, your
Master -- Even join with me, assist in Arabella's Liberty, and recover her
Fortune, and I dare engage she ll make ours. Besides, to tell you the Truth, I
have received ten Guineas to day, from one Mr. Beaumont, to endeavor her
freedom


That Is a most prevailing Argument, I confess. What I do is for your sake Mrs.
Eugeni


In hopes to go snacks with the Gold. Ha, Gentil! Well, well, stay here I Will
return immediately

It Is done, it is done, is this a Bird to be concealed in such a dark and Dismal
Cage


Well thou art a rare Girl. O if thou could but conjure now, and get the
Writings of my Estate for me, sive hundred Pound should be thy own next moment,
Wench


Say you so, Madam, Gad I Will turn Devil but it shall be done.


Why what would that signify to you Fool?


Well, mind the Ladies business, and let me alone to take care of yours.


First let us take care of the 'Squire, Gad if I don't manage that Booby, ^ll
give you leave to cut my Apron, and make a slobering Bibon't


Well, what is your contrivance?


Why, I Will go in again, pour down a Bottle of Red-Ink I know of, make all fast,
and swear he has murdered ye. A Cross Old Woman lately, to whom he wou^d give
nothing, told him, she read it in his Phys, That he wou^d come to be hanged;
which the superstitious Fool has ever since been afraid of; very indifferent
Circumstances will Confirm that Fear, and bring him to a Compliance


My better Angel! It has a Lucky face -- It looks like thee -- but how must I
be disposed of


If you please to go to Mrs. Beauclairs, Sir Charles's Neice, she is a Woman
Cheerful, Witty, and Good, and will assist you in every Thing


^e heard so well of her, I dare venture to be obliged to her, come let us make
haste


Gentil, get the back door open, and let none of the Servants see us go out;
I Am sure we shall be lucky, because my Termagant Lady will not be at home to day
to disturb us


Come then, I long to quit the House I have been so ill used in.


A Duse of all ill luck, I have lost my little Ambassadress from my dear Indian
Queen, 'twas a Charmer: how can an old Cu^mudgeon have the I^dence to hope he
should keep such a lovely Creature to himself? For a Husband or Cully, I find
by her discourse, she has, and by the Description, she hates him, which is a
good step for me


Sir, all the Company is coming into this Room, to hear the Music.


Gad so, a^e they? then I must wait upon Mrs. Beauclair down. Sirrah, you are a
purblind Dog, not to find the pretty Letter-Carrier


I think I see a Woman as soon as another, else I Am sure I were not fit for
your Honor's Service. I Will swear she was not in the Park: I searched it three
times over as carefully as I had been to look a Needle in a Bottle of Hay, and
hanged if I did not find it


What a Comparison the Puppy has! Do You hear, if you do not find her out, I
shall Discard you for an Insignificant Blockhead, for I am Damnably and
Desperately in Love with her Mistress


Ah Lard, Ah Lard, Desperately and Damnably in Love with her, and never saw her
but twice at a Play, and then she was in a Mask. Well my Master wou^d be the
best of men if 'twere not for these Whores I am harassed off my Legs after 'em;
the Pox, the Plague, that belongs to 'em, consume 'em all I say


Ladies, how do you like your small Regalio?


Extremely; for ought I know, Sir Charles, you may rep^t showing me the way to
gad abroad


What Opinion, Madam, do you think this Gentleman will have of us, for I
presume the young Ladies in the Country are not so free of their Company


No, poor Gentlewomen -- They are Condemned to the Government of some Toothless
Aunt or Grannum, visit but once a year, and that in the Summer season, when the
heat covers the Ruddy Lasses with sweat and dust. The Winter they divert
themselves with Blindman's Buff among the serving men; where, too often, one
sprucer than the rest, whispers Love to Miss Jenny, and seduces even the Eldest
Daughter


Though some have been guilty of those weaknesses, you must not accuse all.


All who are confined there, never suffered to see the World -- for granting
one more thinking than the rest, who has power and obeys her Father, in
suffering the Addresses of the next adjacent 'Squire, she either dies of a
Consumption (Pi^ng after pleasures more refined) or else overcome with Vapors,
runs melancholy mad


(to Bell.) Madam you sighed at this pretty Description.


Did I?


Both her deportment and face confirm my suspicions.


You are thoughtfull, Frank.


Would you have him brisker, Uncle? it is but my clapping on a Mask, and it is
done. Sir Francis, do I wrong you, have I not seen you at a Play slighting all
the barefaced Peauties, hunting a Trollop in a Mask with pains and pleasure;
Nay, more for her gaping Nonsensical Banters, neglecting immortal Dryden's
Eloquence, or Congreve's unequalled Wit


I own sometimes I divert myself with the little Gypsies.


Ay, and disturb the Audience.


Faith, Madam, I must speak freely, though you are a Woman of Quality, and my
Friend's Neice, you talk so prettily, it is pity you should not do it often in a
Mask: But then again, you are so pretty, it is pity you should ever wear one


I did not design by railing to beg a Compliment; Sir Charles, where is the
Music

WHen I languish'd, and wished you would something bestow,
You bad me to give it a Name;
But, by Heaven, I know it as little as you,
Though my Ignorance passes for Shame:
You take for Devotion each passionate Glance,
And think the dull Fool is sincere,
But never believe that I speak in Romance
On purpose to tickle your Ear.
To please me then more, think still I am true,
And hug each Apocryphal Text:
Though I practice a thousand false Doctrines on you,
I shall still have enough for the next.

HOw long must I the hours employ
To see, be loved, yet never enjoy?
Though to curb loose desires I try,
Sure I may wish at least to die?
Dye then, Poor Strephon, wretched Swain;
Nor only live to love in vain,

Live, hopeless Lover, while Igrieve
Much for thy Fate, but more for mine;
For mine, my Dear, Condemned to live,
To Love, be Loved, yet never be thine.

Oh, See me, Love me, Grieve me still,
Till Love's excess, or Sorrow's kill,
It Is not my self I Love, but thee,
Then I must dye to set thee free.

No, Live and Love, though hope is dead;
For it is a Virtue so to Love:
The Gold's refined, the Dross is fled,
The Martyrs thus in Flames improve.

Then let us Love on, and never Complain,
But Fan the kind Fire, and Bless the dear Pain.
For why to Despair should true Lovers be driven?
Since Love has his Martyrs, he must have his Heaven.

My Lady Beauclair will be here strait, I Will even march off.


What, desert us, Jack! though the Ladies will not drink, you may.


I beg your Pardon, Sir Charles, -- I have made an Assignation with some Women
of Quality of my Acquaintance


Women of Quality! what, your Landresses Daughter, or some pert, fleering,
tawdry Thing of a Shop, vain, and proud to lose what she understands not, her
Reputation; she also brags, she is coming to Quality when she meets you


I shall not expose their Names, to convince your Ladyship of their Rank.


O, by no means debar the Gentleman of his Quality.


You see the Ladies are willing to dismiss you, Jack.


I Am their very humble servant.


Ye lie, ye damned Queen, he is here, -- ha! -- and his Minion with him! -- let
me come at her --


Hell and Furies! my Wife! -- Madam, why all this Rage? Don't you see my Neice?
the other is a Friend of hers, a Woman of Honor


Your Neice is a Pimp, and she is a Whore! I Will mark her -- Sirrah -- Villain!
Oh, oh my Fits! my Fits


Fly, my Bellinda, from her brutal Rage, whilst I Wedlocks slave stay and
appease this hateful storm


It Is but what I ought to have expected; it is just I should be punished, to
prevent my being g^ilty


Dear Beaumont, carry this injured Lady off, whilst we bear the brunt.


Go to my Lodgings, Child.


Any where, to Death or Hell, if there can be a greater Hell than what this
Bosom feels


O Lo. O Lo. I believe my Mother's dead.


You know the contrary; these Fits are a new Trick Nature has furnished the Sex
with. -- Heretofore Tears and Smiles were the highest part their Dissimulation
could attain


Give her some Water.


Give her some Wine, else you will disoblige her more, to my Knowledge, than the
Fits


(aside) And well thought on, -- I Will steal behind and drink a Glass of Wine,
-- my stomach's a cold


(starting up) No, Villain, Devil! I Will drink none of your Wine, -- it may be
poisoned


Oh, you had not lost all your Senses, you could hear, I find.


Rogue, and I Will make thee seel, I Will tear thy Linen, Hair, thy cursed Eyes.


Hold, Madam, as I Am a Gentleman, use me like one.


Sir Francis, here is an excellent Argument on your side, here is Matrimony in
its true colors


No, Madam, her Carriage is not a Satyr on the whole Sex, -- it but sets off
better Wives


Yes, you were a Gentleman, and that was all, when I married ye, the poor third
Brother of a Knight, 'twas I brought your Estate; if since by your Friends
death one has fell, must I be abused, sit rah


Madam, you have not been abused; you know that I was in my Nonage married, saw
not with my own Eyes, nor chose for my unhappy self; e're I lived with ye, I
possessed an Estate nobler, a larger far than yours, which you have still
commanded; nay, I have often ^g'd ye to Diversions, in hopes it would have
altered that unquiet m^nd, but all in vain


Divartions! what Divartions? Yes, you had me to the Playhouse, and the first
thing I saw was an ugly black Devil kill his Wife, for nothing; then your
M^idate King of the Potecari^, your Timon the Atheist, the Man in the Moon, and
all the rest -- N^nsence, Stuff, I hate 'em


I need say no more, -- Now, Madam, you have shown your self.


Shown, what have I shown? send for your Gilflurt to show: I have shown nothing
but a vartuous Face


All Virtue does not lie in Chastity, though that is a great one.


Well Cousin, I Am sorry to see you take such Courses, I would not have my Peg
like you for the Varsal World. Peg, what a Color this Child has got! fretting
for me, I Am afraid, has put her into a Fever


Come, Madam, let us compose these Differences; your Anger is groundless -- upon
my Word. Not well, pretty miss! will you drink a Glass of Wine


No, I thank you, -- I cannot abide it.


Poor Girl, she never drinks any thing strong, except she is very sick indeed.


And she is very often sick, poor Creature! -- about some five or six times a
day. -- Madam, shall I wait on you home? I think we may quit this place with
Shame enough


(to her Mother, aside) Don't be Friends, for Mr. Spendall sent me word, he would
meet us in the Park, and if Vather goes with us, how shall that be


I dan't intend it; -- No, Hypocrite, you shall not stir a step with me, if thou
do, I^ll make a bigger noise below, and raise the House about thy Ears. Come
Peg


My Aunt's Noise is her Guard, none dare approach her.


Her going out cannot be more ridiculous than her coming in.


Sir Charles, Let not your noble Courage be cast down.


Outrageous Clamours are no News to me; b^ I dread how my Bellinda may resent
it


I wonder, Sir Charles, you have Patience to live with this violent Woman.


It Is for my Fair one's sake, who, nicely jealous the World would say she had
occasioned our parting, has sworn never to see me more, if I attempt it


(aside to Sir Fran.) Sir, Sir, the Lady you are so damnably in love with sends
word, if you disengage your self from your Company, she will be at Locket's in
half an hour


Is it so, i faith?


(to him) Coxcomb, what need you have spoke so loud? Tell him I Will not fail to
wait on him. Well, Sir Charles, you will to Bellinda


No, I Will first go home, and try to stop the farther Fury of my Wife.


Madam, I had Hopes you would have done me the Honor to let me wait on you
this Afternoon, but it has happened so unluckily, that an old Uncle of mine, to
whom I am much obliged, --


(aside to him) Oh, I Am your Uncle's Servant. Sir, there needs no Excuse, your
Company being at this time a Favor I neither expect nor desire


Will you go in a Chair, Neice, or in my Coach?


A Chair if you please, Sir.


To that give us both leave to wait on you.


Pray give me leave to speak a word to my Boy first.. Will.


Madam.


Run to my Woman, and bid her come to her Aunts immediately, and bring me the
Suit Sir Charles made for the last Ball, and left at my Lodgings: make haste,
fly


I will, Madam.


Hang it, it is but one ridiculous thing, I Am resolved to do it, I Will find these
Pleasures out, that charm this Reprobate; Money will make all the Drawers mine


I Am ready to go.


Madam, be pleased to accept my Hand.


Now, Madam, you're safe in the Lodgings of your Friend, forget the Rudeness
past


Forget it! impossible; her Words, like Poisonous Shafts, have pierced my Soul,
and will for ever dwell upon my Memory with endless painful Wracks; yet look
not on me as that vise Creature she has represented, but believe me, Sir, I
engaged my Heart too far, before I knew Sir Charles was married. When I found
my Love unjust, how exquisite the Torment proved, chilled, with Watchings,
Sighs, and Tears, yet 'spight of my Distractions, spite of the rising Damps
and falling Dews, 'twas grown too great to be extinguished, 'till this last
storm has torn it by the Roots to spring no more


Her every word and looks confirms my Thoughts. Madam, this I dare presume to
say, both from his Character and my small Acquaintance, Sir Charles Beauclair
has moral Virtues, to our late English Hero's unpracticed and unknown; yet if I
might advise, you should never see him more, or only to take an everlasting
Leave


Your Freedom, I confess, is strange, and your Advice is what I had resolved on
before


None but the lovely Mariamne could with such becoming Majesty have checked a
Stranger's boldness. View well these Lines, and then confess if they do not the
resemblance bear of a soft charming Face you have often by reflection seen


Ha! my own Picture, one of the effects of my dear Mothers fondness, which she,
dying, left in my Father's Hands; he named me too; then let everlasting
darkness shrond me; let me no more behold the Sun or human kind, forget the
World, as I would be of that forgotten


Turn, Madam, and look upon me as your Friend; if you would still remain
unknown, my Breast shall keep this Discovery silent and safe as Secrets buried
with the dead: Your Father gave me that Picture, with Desires so tender for
your return, that, I confess, they moved me: I undertook the enquiry,
tho'scarce could hope to have succeeded. Since your absence your Brother's
dead; so that your Father, hopeless and childless, mourns, and says your sight
would revive him more than when he first blessed Heaven for your happy birth
and Mothers safety


My Brother dead! -- loved Youth! I grieve thy untimely Fate, but thou art gone
to rest' and Peace, whilst I am left upon the wrack: Sir, I read in all your
words a piercing Truth and an unbiased Honor, they have set my Errors full
before me, my fled Duty returns as swift as I will do to this wronged Parent,
hang on his aged Knees, nor ^ise till I have found Forgiveness and my Blessing
there


Though much I wish your Honor and your Fame secure, yet to part such Lovers,
whom this lewd Age will scarce believe there ever were, g^ates my very Nature


Oh! let me not look back that way, but generously assist me on, till that dear
man, who, witness my Disgraces, I value more than all Earth's richest
Treasures. Tell him, lest he should take it ill of you, that I have confessed
my Birth, and have resolved to fly from him and all the World, and in my
Father's House remain as in a Cloister


How will he brook the Message?


Oh! tell him, Sir, that the pangs of parting will scarce excel those my
struggling Virtue gave at every guilty meeting, for there was Guilt: tell him I
have sworn to die if he pursues. I blush to impose all this on you; but if a
Lover, sure you will forgive my Follies


I Will tell him all, but I must send him too, a parting Kiss, at least, which
must be allowed to such unequaled Love


Not till all is fixed for my remove, then I once more will see him, tho my
Heart Strings crack, I Will conquer all these criminal Fires; I have the Goal in
view, bright Honor leads me on, the part is glorious, but, oh! it is painful
too: Let me retire, and tear him from my doting Thoughts, or in the bitter
Conflict lose the use of Thought


How strong are the Efforts of Honor where a good Education grounds the Mind
in Virtue! this unexpected hurry has for some moments banished my dear Arabella
from my Thoughts. O, here comes my Implyment! well, how goes Affairs


Rarely, Sir; the Chambermaid swallowed the Guineas as glibly as a Lawyer a
double Fee from his Client's Antagonist; she is bringing the young Lady hither.
Eugenia talks of a Contrivance, that ^ou should instantly appear like a
Tarpaulin, pretend to be related to the Lady, and fright the 'Squire into a
compliance


Any thing to serve my Arabella, we will meet 'em, and receive their Instructions.


WEll, this is a strange mad thing, but my old cross F^llow will never let me
take a mouthful of Air; I am sure you will have an ill Opinion of me


A kind one you mean, Madam; I think you generous, lovely, and all my Heart
desires


My Maid is gone the Lord knows where for Fruit; I swear I tremble, coming into
a Tavern alone


A Glass of Wine will recall the fled Roses, but here is the Nectar thirsty Love
requires


O pardon and protect me; I Am pursued by Hell Hounds, Bailiffs, and if taken,
inevitably ruined


The Devil take thee and the Bailiffs together, for an interrupting young Dog.


You look with a Face cruel as they, but sure in those fair Eyes I read some
Pity


[aside] A very handsome Fellow, how came you in Trouble, Sir? (to him.


Alas, Madam, I was put to an Attorney, but longing to turn Beau, have
half-ruin'd my Master, wholly lost my Friends, and now am followed by the
several Actions of my Tailor, Sempstress, Perruke-maker, Hosier, and a long Et
c^tera; besides, the swingingst Debt my Perfumer; Essence and sweet Powder has
completed my Ruin


It Is monstrous to cheat honest Tradesmen in dressing up a Fop; therefore,
unwelcoming Intruder, I desire you would seek your Protection elsewhere


Nay, now you are too severe; the young Gentleman in Liberty may mend his
Fortunes, and live to pay his Debts; he has a promising Face


Your Pity, Madam; but hastens absence.


(aside) Will this Fellow, I thought I had so well instructed, never come?


Sir Francis, a man out of breath says he must speak with you, on what concerns
your Friend's Life


The Devil's in the Dice to day; where is he? what is the matter?


(aside) Now Impudence and Eloquence assist me, what have I done? in seeking to
preserve my Liberty, I have for ever lost it; my unexperienced Youth never
viewed such Charms before, and, without Compassion, this Bondage may be worse
than what I avoided


(laughing) Meaning me, sir?


Nay, I m a Fool, for Bankrupt in Wealth how can I hope to thrive in Love,
since scarce any of your fair sex, though merit was thrown into the scales, value
a man on whom Fortune frowns


(aside) I think it is the prettiest Youth I ever saw, I have Wealth enough to
supply his wants, what should then debar me


So; she eyes me kindly I Am sure.


Your Looks, sweet Youth, plead powerful as your Language; and to let you see I
value not Riches, the want of which makes you miserable, accept this Ring,
'twill stop a Creditor's mouth, and pay two or three Ordinaries at the blue
Posts


Oh wondrous Bounty! thus encouraged, shall I beg another Favor, that you
would fly from hence before that angry man returns, lest I fall a sacrifice to
his Jealousy, and see those charming Eyes no more


If my maid would come, -- ha! here she is; sure you have flown.


I beg your Pardon, Madam, I never went, Sir Francis's Gentleman and I were
solacing our selves below, and sent a Porter for the Fruit till hearing. Sir
Francis was gone in a great hurry, he ran after his Master, and I came up to
see what was the matter


A hopeful Mistress and Maid! deliver me from these Town-Ladies.


Ungrateful man, on any Pretense to leave me!


Ungrateful! monstrous; had a thousand Friends been dying, they ought all to
have expired e're you have suffered a moments neglect


This Flattery's too gross, young Courtier, you must treat me with Truth.


All is Truth, my Heart, my Life is yours.


(aside) Another Spark! sure the Devil's in my Mistress.


Well Sir, I Will consent to your Desires, and we will go from hence at the Door
toward the Park, there is no danger


If you are kind, I fear none, Madam.


Let me find you what you seem, and you shall brave the World, and scorn your
Debts: Jenny, get me a Chair, and show this Gentleman the House where we lodge,
then come in, let him ask for you, if you can prevent your Master's seeing him
do, if not, say it is one you waited upon in his Infancy, the disparity of
Years between you considered, that may pass


(aside) Humph, I shall never like him for this Affront. Yes, Madam, it shall
be done


Your Hand, dear obliging Creature, I hear a noise.


^uick, this way: run you before, and pay one of the Drawers for this Flask of
Champaign


Ha! gone! so I thought; eternal Dog, you have been helping in this
Contrivance; Did you take me for a Cully, Spawn of Hell? Have I known this
damned Town so long, at last to be caught with such a gross Banter? speak
Sirrah; who was that Impostor that told me my Friend Mr. Beaumont was taken up
for a Jacobite, and the Mobb was pulling him to pieces


As I ever hope to outlive your Anger, and taste again your noble Bounty, I knew
nothing of him


Shut the Door, you careless Blockhead, whom I charged to watch and let no body
come up to me: Now sirrah confess, or I Will make that Rogue help me kick thee
into Mummy, for though my Sword's drawn, I scorn to hurt thee that way


If I should confess you will kill me, Sir.


No.


Truly then, Sir, the young Spark gave me a Guinea to show him the Room where
your Honor was; but for the Fellow that seemed so much concerned, I wish I may
be hanged if I knew of him any thing at all Sir, any thing at all Sir. Good
your Honor break my Head, and forgive me


I will not touch thee; Could I expect more from thy sordid Soul? Gold corrupts
Mankind; be gone

This unaccountable Jilt has so abused me, I could find in my Heart to forsake
the Gang, and lay a penitential Dunce at the feet of Virtue, fair Mrs.
Beauclair


I pray Heaven keep you in that good mind.


Good lack, canting sot, I suppose you was shut up with a Whore, Rascal, whilst
you ought to have been Pimping for me


Trim Tram, Sir.


How, Impudence!


I meant the Rhyme should be, Like Mistress like Maid; for indeed I was
employed with my Ladies waiting Gentlewoman


Was ye so, Rascal? could I but find the young stripling, 'twould be some
satisfaction: Hanged, if I am balked both in Love and Revenge, the cross
Adventures shall be drowned in brisk Champaign

It Is the dear Glass which cases every smart,
And presently does cure the taking Heart.

Oh Dresswell! I Am glad I Have met with thee.


Lord, Madam, I have been in a sad fright for ye; and hunted up and down this
hour


All Is well, let us in there, I Will tell you my adventures.


Then I hope your Frolic has been to your Ladyships satisfaction.


Yes, yes, I got Sir Francis's Mistress from him, and faith I was pursuing my
Conquest, and venturing to her Lodging, when coming to the House, it proved
that where Bellinda Lodged and the Lady, I suppose, the Merchant's Wife. I
feared I should meet with my Uncle there, and fairly gave the Maid the drop.
Come, I long to change my Clothes, I Am quite tired with wearing the Breeches;
this way


Ha! is not that the young Devil that abused me? he has entered the House, and
I Will be with him presently, walk hereabouts till I come out


Yes, Sir.


Are my things ready and a good fire in the Room.


Madam, they are?


Peep out and see who knocks;


Madam, it is Sir Francis Wildlove, and he seems in a fury.


Let him in, I Will do well enough with him; now get you gone and fear nothing.


So, Sir, I suppose you think matters have gone swingingly on your side, and
have laughed immoderately at the reflection how those green years have made a
Fool of me; but Chance has thrown me on thee once again, and now for those
Feasts of Joy an after reckoning (Dr^s) must be paid young Gentleman, you
understand my meaning


Yes, and will answer it, but hear me first, it is to provoke you I speak: know
then, your Mistress was my easy Conquest, I scarce had time to say one soft
thing before she cried, Let Us fly, sweet youth, ever that rough man returns,
and in thy arms forget him


She Is a Jilt and for a well-drest Fop would quit a man that saved her life.


Then this Ring was presented, I suppose you may have seen it; adorn thy fair
hand, and with ten thousand kisses 'twas whispered, you shall not want for Gold


Though I value her no more than I do thee, yet I will have thy life for
harboring so damned a thought, that I was fitter for your sport. Come on


Hold, hold, Sir Francis I Will not pretend to take your Sword, though I could your
Mistress from ye, see my Credentials for my Cowardice


Mrs. Beauclair -- What a blind Puppey am I, twice in one day, that is hard I
faith


Pray return your Lady back her favor.


Madam --


Nay, look not concerned, upon my word I Will never interrupt you more: Hug in
your Bosom the plastered mischiefs, their blotted Souls and spotted
Reputations, no Varnish can cover over, pursue, overtake, possess, the unenvied
amongst the Painted Tribe most worthily bestow your heart


Think ye so meanly of me, my heart bestowed amongst your Sexes shame! No,
Madam, Glorious Virtue alone can reach at that, my loving is a diversion I can
soon ^ake off


That Is hard to believe, but I must beg your pardon, I Am in haste to unrig.


Hear me a moment, you have seen my frailties, if like Heaven you can forgive,
a truer penitent or a more constant votary no cruel Virgin ever found


Have a care of the dull road: Sir Francis, Farewell.


Go thy ways for a pretty witty agreeable Creature, but if I should seduce her
into Matrimony, I fear the common fate will attend her Beauty, quickly tarnish
and good humor vanish


Ha, Lywell! I am the happiest man alive, almost out of Fortune's Power.


What is it transports you so? some whim, some Chemical delusion, that will fail
in the projection, and vanish into Air


Hear me and then with admiration, be dumb; nor dare to contradict my wit, or
Plots again: In short, my Lady Beauclair and Miss, are in open Rebellion by my
persuasion, and to Complete my good Fortune, I have borrowed ten Guineas of Sir
Charles, with the help of which, I Will be married to his Daughter in-Law, within
these two hours


Ha! I begin to think the Devil has left playing at Legerdemain with thee:
and having secured thee, resolves to bestow some of this World's wealth upon
thee


Can not thou procure a Templer's Chamber for an hour or two; and appear with
the Gravity of a long Robe


With ease, I know a young Spark that has sine Lodgings there; but by his old
^ather is kept at short allowance; a Treat or a very small sum will engage
that, and all his habiliments


Can thou not put on the grave look of a starcht Councellor.


Hum! hum! (...) I Will speak with you immediately -- you se^, Friend, I Am busy
-- How was that --


Pretty well. Come; about it presently, and I Will bring the Ladies to you, as my
Father's chief Lawyer. Be sure you tell 'em, you have the settlement of his
Estate upon me in your hands, and seem very desirous I should do well


I warrant ye, and sh^n't we have lusty treats, old Boy?


I thought your Conscience had scrupled the proceedings.


O'Pox, my Conscience never tsoubles me, but when Affairs go ill.


Well, make haste, and doubt not feasting: I must to my Charge, lest they cool
(...) Fools are seldom long resolved, and I know a finer Fellow would get both
Mother and Daughters heart; They Are now in a kindly growing warmth, and the old
one^s Imagination tickled as much with thoughts of darling ^eggy's Marriage, as
ever 'twas with her own, Farewell! be sine you observe your directions


It shall be done, dear lucky Devil


Hold! f^r I had forgot -- Whereabouts is this Chamber? for I guess your
Worship's Name is not so famous to direct


Come, as we go along I Will tell you.


So my dear deliverer, how have you succeeded?


Oh, Madam, the poor 'Squire's frighted out of the little wit he had, one Scene
more, and the Day's our own


(...) become of Mr. (...)?


He Is about some earnest business of Sir Charles Beauclair's, I know not what
it is, but there is a heavy Clutter amongst 'e


Well, you brought me to the Ladies Lodging, but I believe that is the only
place she is not to be found at, for I have waited in vain with much i^patience
to see her


Her Footman's below, and says she will be here immediately.


Prithee let us into the Chamber first, and you shall give an Account of the
'Squire's fright


I follow you, Madam.


Sure the World's all running mad; or else resolved to make me so; at home I
cannot meet with a sensible Answer; but -- Oh, what touches nearest, the Dear,
the cruel, the charming Maid; Bellinda will not see me how shall I appease the
(...) fair, my Wife too not returned; where will this end? -- Gentil! Eugenia!
James

Within. Sir.


Sir; -- Where, ye everlasting Dormice? will none come near me?


Gadzooks! This Councellor Cobblecase has talked Law, and drank Claret with me,
till my brains are turned topsy-turvy. Gad, I would not have my Lady-Sister see
me now for a King's Ransom, Though -- udsbores! I know not why she should,
because she is a little older, set her eternal Clack a running upon all my
Actions


Sir, my Lady and Miss are both abroad.


That Is well! -- Why, Gentil! here Cobblecase advises me not to look up the
young woman, but to use her kindly, and, Gadzooks! I Am in a plaguey loving
humor -- I Will try her good nature once again -- Hold -- yonder comes Sir
Charles -- My Sister will never forgive me, if I let him see her; He Is a well
spoken man, if I durst trust him, he should solicit for me, but then he is so
woundy handsome, and so amorous, I doubt he would speak one word for me, and two
for himself; as the saying is


You say -- you will not injure the 'Squire.


No, not in the least-she has sworn never to marry him, and the Law will in
time recover her right: Only this way is sooner and cheaper


The Lady's free, and I Will neither oppose or assist it further -- Ha^ there he
stands, how is it Brother


Very well, I thank you, Sir Charles.


Your Servant.


Brother, you never care for my Company! you take me for a Nump-Scull; a
half-witted Fellow, and, udsb^res, would you but have me to the Tavern, you
should find, I could Drink my G'ass, Break my Jest, Kiss my Mistress with the
best of ye -- Flesh! Try old Barnaby Cheatall, at your next Jo^ial meeting


You're merry, Sir -- But I Am in haste.


Udsbores! Women and Wine (both Unwholsom) Pun^sh ye -- There Is a Taste of my
Wit in my ^ursing, as the whole Cargo of the Bullies lies in swearing -- There
it is again, I faith! Am not I damnable Ingenions, Gentil? Live and Learn,
Sirrah, and be Hanged, and forget all, as the saying is -- what a Dickins ails
me! Hanging never comes in my Mouth, but a Qua^m comes over my Stomach -- That
cursed old Woman! Did observe how she looked like the Witch, before the last
new Ballad


She had indeed, a v^ry Prophetic Face.


Who would you speak with, Sir?


With Mrs. Arabella Venturewell.


She Is not here.


Now, by the Cannon's Fire, it is false -- I have come ten Thousand L^gues to
see her -- and will not be so answered


A terrible Fellow! Gadzooks, -- Pray, Sir, what is your business with her?


She Is my Sister; that is sufficient for your Impertinence.


You, the Lawful Begotten Son of Sir George Venturewell, begging your Pardon,
I believe you are mistaken, Friend, in your Father, as many a man may be; for
Sir George had never any but this Daughter


No, ^'m not his Lawful begotten Son, not the weak offspring of --


O Lard! what pains he takes to tell me he is the Son of a Whore?


Born in India; Bred a Bucanier: Sword and Fire have been my play-Fellows, and
Ravishing my Pleasure -- In far distant Worlds I have scattered my rough Image,
and as my Sword has cut off their dull Breed, so my vigorous youth has left a
Race of future Hero's


A very terrible Fellow, as I hope for mercy?


Rich with the spoils of long successful War, I have visited this Climate in
search of Arabella, whom I have often heard my Father mention with much
tenderness, I am directed hither -- Therefore do not raise my Fury with delays
For Cause, or not Cause, if I am Angry, Blood must appease it


O Lard! O Lard! what shall I do? He Will fright me into a Kentish Ague: I must
speak him fair -- Good Sir, all your desires shall be fulfilled, have but a
minute's patience. Come along, Gentil, come along, and help me, entreat her to
speak him fair, or I Am a lost man

-- I Will wait upon ye in a Twinkling, Sir.


It works as I could wish, it goes against me to terrify this Fool so much, but
he deserves it


Oh! Gentil! what shall I say.


The Lord knows, I don't.


Well, Sir, where is my Sister?


Alas! I think she is vanished.


How! do you trifle with my Anger, bring me stories sit for a Baby! Blood and
Thunder! if I Unsheath my Sword, it finds a Scabbard in your Guts! Confess --
or by the Cannons fire. --


I do confess, that thinking of your coming, and knowing her to be a little
wild, lest she should have been out of the way, I locked her up -- But what is
now become of her, by the Cannons fire, the dreadfullest Oath I ever heard! I
cannot tell


(aside) I shall never hold laughing.


Oh! my Conscience! -- My tortured Conscience! -- I cannot keep it!


What Is the matter?


Oh! I went into the Room, where the Lady was locked up: And there is at least a
Pail full of blood -- all the Water in the Sea will never wash the stains out
-- I believe 'Squire Barnaby and Gentil have killed her, cut her to pieces, and
carried her away under their Cloaks


Oh! Impudence! O Lard! O Lard! Sir, I have not the heart to kill a Chicken! I
always swoon at the sight of my own Blood: speak Gentil, why thou have never a
Cloak -- That Is a strong proof, Sir -- Gentil has never a Cloak


Why then it went all under yours -- Besides, Gentil has a large pair of
Trowsers; that I Will swear -- For you made him bring my Lady home half a Venison
Pasty in 'em, (Shrieks out.) Ah! look of their Shoes, they have Padled in it


Ay, it is so, and so I Will be Revenged -- Cut thee small as the first Atoms that
huddled up thy senseless Carcass -- nor will I be troubled to bear thee hence,
but stamp thy vile Clay to it is kindred Dust, and leave thee here for Rubbish


Oh, Sir, upon my knees I beg you would hear me.


(interposing) Hold, Sir, don't kill the Miscreant, that will bring your self
into trouble; Our Law will hang him, I warrant ye. What made him order her
(being here) to be denied


Ay, Good Sir, let me be hanged! That Is my Destiny! I see there is no avoiding
it -- Gentil -- Beg I may be hanged


Pray, Sir, let my Master be hang^d.


Well, I Will try your Law -- if that fails, this, I Am sure never will. How must
we proceed, Madam


I Will go with ye for a Man, with the Staff of Authority, he shall order him --
The very ^tones in the Street would turn Constables, to seize such a Monster --
Kill a pretty Lady -- and cut her to pieces -- oh horrid


You are a lying Whore! if I durst tell you so?


You Fellow! come hither.


Run, Gentil, run -- Proffer him all I Am worth.


(aside to Gentil) When we are gone; carry him to my Lodgings; I have told my
Landlady the story, and she is provided for him


It shall be done -- Is there no mercy?


Ah, Lord, no mercy.


Well! we'll be with you immediately -- Come, Madam.


Ay, ay, repent and pray, do 'Squire, do.


Oh Gentill! That ever I was born! That ever I was born! -- What did he say to
thee, Gentil


He would have had me turned evidence against your Worship, and confess -- But
I Will be hanged first


I Would confess, if I thought 'twou'd do me any good?


What! Confess you murdered her!


Ay, any thing! any thing! any thing -- Oh Gentil! it must be this Witch -- she
has carried her away, and spilt the blood, that her Prophecy might come to pass


Not unlikely, -- Sir, Sir, I have thought of a thing. --


What is it, dear Gentil?


Suppose you and I run away, before the Constable come, I know a Friend will
conceal you, and then we may hope to make it up, or hear of her -- I cannot
think she is murdered


Nor I neither, except the Devil has don't? But let us away, good Gentil --
methinks I hear this Magistrates paw, -- this Constable just behind me, his
voice hoarse with Watching, and swallowing Claret Bribes -- Oh, Gentil! if I
should fall into his Gripe


Therefore let us hasten to avoid it -- Ah, Sir, this is no time for Jesting.


Too true, Gentil, but wit will overflow! I fear I shall quibble in my Prayers,
and die with a Jest in my mouth -- Come, come! Hanged! O Lard, any of the
Family of the Cheatalls hanged! O Lard, and I the only branch on it? Oh, Gentil,
it is unsupportable


Away, away, Sir.


Oh that over I should live to see my self hanged.


So! I Am equipped: the young Lawyer snapp'd at the Guineas, and has furnished
me throughout, nay, left his Boy to boot; Gad, I believe he will be famous in his
Generation, he encourages Mischief so readily. Pox! -- would they would come --
I Am weary of Cook upon Littleton


Sir, Sir, -- a Gentleman and two Ladies are coming up.


It Is they -- you know your Cue.


Young Man, is Councellor Smart within?


Sir, he is dispatching some half a score Clients, but he will do that with a wet
Finger, and wait on you immediately


A witty Whoreson; what, a wet Finger to lick up the Gold, ha! -- Well, tell
him I Am here


Yes, Sir.


Fine Chambers, Mother! and a sine place, I Will swear! (...) Vather would never
let me walk here, zed, 'twan't sit for young Ladies. -- I Will vaw, I like it
waundily


Here were Counselors not unsit for you, but Husband was never free you should
be seen


Now I Am, by Promise, the happy man: my charming Dear, let me beg you would
entertain no other Thoughts. -- Where Is this Lawyer? -- a Moments delay seems
an Age


Well, Daughter, feel how my Heart beats; I Am almost afraid to venture on him
for thee


Don't tell me of your Fears, -- now you have put a Husband in my Head, I will be
married, so I will


Ah! send thee good Luck! I shall fall in a Fit, I believe, whilst thou art
marrying


I fear not marrying, not I.


Well, Sir, I understand the business. -- Your Father, considering your
Extravagance, has done more than I thought sit to tell ye; but after such a
Proposal, you may hear it all -- What! this is the pretty Creature, I suppose,
you are about marrying


Yes, Sir.


Lord, Peggy, you're too forward! I wonder on ye now: -- Sir, she is my
Daughter, and she will be worth Eight thousand pounds, and a better Penny; I
would not have her cast away, Sir


To be thrown into a young Gentleman's Arms with a great Estate, will be a good
Cast, I take it, Madam


If I were satisfied in that!


Look ye, Madam, I am a man of business, and many words are but supersluous. --
Hum! hogh! Do You see, here is the Settlement of his Father's Estate -- Eight
hundred pounds a Year, and some Thousands in Money, a well-made Fellow into the
bargain: Let me tell ye, Madam, such Offers don't stick of hand now adays; you
may read the Writings if you please; if you dislike 'em -- look ye, I have a
Match in my Eye for the Gentleman beyond your Daughters; though, I must own, this
young Lady is much handsomer


(aside to her Mother) Do You hear what he says now! you will never leave your
Impartinence, as Vather calls it, -- Pray be quiet; I Am satisfied, so I am


Will you read 'em, Madam?


(reads) Noverint, etc. -- Nay, Sir, I don't understand lay, -- But you look
like a good honest man, Sir, and I dare take your Word; I wish you had seen my
Daughter sooner


(aside) Well said, Mother-in-law -- that is to be in love with every new Face.
-- I must secure the young one, lest she is of the same mind


I Would willingly have him keep his Coach and six -- I think the young Woman's
Face will bear it -- and their Estates, I hope


No doubt on it, Madam, -- a handsome Wife, and a Coach and six, How it attracts
all Eyes, -- the Envy or the Wonder of the Park


Well, you may do what you please, but the dear one and I are agreed. -- we will
to Church without ye, if ye dispute it any longer


Ay, and so we will, I vow and swear, Mr. Spendall.


For shame, what do you talk on! why, it is past the Cannick hour.


Madam, all People of Quality marry at Night.


That they may be sure to go to Bed, before they repent; a day's consideration
might take off their Appetite


Nay, if People of Quality do it, I Am for ye.


And so I am, I vow and swear.


First, Ladies, be pleased to visit my withdrawing Room, I have Sweetmeats and
Trinkets there fit for the Fair sex, which secures me Female Visitants


Agreed, we will plunder him.


Then we will seek to join this amorous Pair,
And drown in Pleasure Thoughts of future Care.


Come, prithee Puggy, do. --


I Am not in humor.


What, don't you love none, Fubby?


I hate Mankind, would they were in one consuming blaze, tho'I were in the
midst of 'em


Hum, a consuming blaze; what is the matter now? this is some damned Intrigue
has gone cross: I heard her bid Jenny come into this Room, and she would be with
her: That Is a Queen, I dare swear, at the bottom; I Will creep behind the
Hangings and hear their Discourse


To be tricked thus by a Boy, a Booby; sure this will humble the damned Opinion
I have of my own Wi^, and make me confess to my self, at least, I am a Fool


Ay, your Ladyship was pleased to say, I might pass for his Nurse. Indeed I
believe he has had as good Instructors, for I find he is old enough to be too
cunning for his Benefactress


What did he say when you parted?


Madam, I have told you several times; I no sooner showed him the House, but he
leaped back and seemed surpised; then recovering himself, he said, he would
follow me in: I, according to your Directions, watched carefully, but no pretty
Master came: Nothing vexes me so much, as that the little dissembling Sharper
should get the Ring


Pish, I don't value the Trifle three farthings; what is my doting Keeper good
for, unless it be to give me more? But to lose the tempting Youth


Pray add Sir Francis Wildlove's Loss to it:


Peace, Fool; I Am thinking why the House should startle him; ha! is not here a
sine Woman lodges, much retired, that seems of Quality


Yes, Madam; I never saw her but once, she is a perfect Charmer.


It must be so; this is some perdu Devil of hers, that durst not venture in,
for fear his Constancy should be suspected: Pray watch who comes to her, dog
'em, do something for my ease


Madam, I will.


Get me a Hackney-coach, I Will range the Town over, but I Will find Sir Francis
Wildlove


My Master will be mad.


Then he may be sober again, better he mad than I; if he be angry, it is but
dissembling a little nauseous fondness, and all is well again


Is it so, thou worst Offspring of thy Grannam Eve? but I Will stifle my Rage,
lest without further Proof she wheedles me into a Reconciliation, take another
Coach and follow her, catch her amongst her Comrades, without the possibility
of an Excuse, cut her Windpipe, and send her to Hell, without the possibility
of a Reprieve: Damn her, damn her



The little hurry of my quick Remove has took up all my Thoughts, and I have
not considered what I am about. See him no more, him whom I could not live a
day, an hour, without! No more behold his Eye Balls, tremble with respectful
passion! -- Hear no more the soft falling Accents of his charming Tongue! view
him dying at my feet no more! -- O Virtue! take me to thee; chase from my
struggling Soul all this fond tenderness: Secure me now, and I Am thy Votary for
ever


Madam, neglecting even my Love, I come to wait on your Commands.


Such Thanks as an indiscreet and wretched Woman can return are yours: What
said Sir Charles


He received the Message as Wretches that are afraid to dye, hear the
condemning Voice, or as the Brave the loss of Victory, or the Ambitious that of
Crowns: He begs, that he may haste to plead his Cause, and seems to live alone
upon the Hopes his Love and Innocence may alter your Resolves


O stop him, Sir, some moments longer, till I am just ready to be gone. He has
a Friend too powerful within, and I must fly, or I shall never overcome


I Will prevent his coming till you send. Your Servant, Madam.


Honor and Love, oh the torture to think they are domestic foes, that must
destroy the Heart that harbors 'em! Had my Glass but been my Idol, my Mind
loose, unconstant, wavering, like my Sex, then I might have 'scap'd these
pangs; Love, as passing Meteors, with several fires just warms their Breasts,
and vanishes, leaving no killing Pain behind, it is only foolish: I have made a
God of my Desire greater than ever the Poets feigned: My Eyes received no
Pleasure but what his sight gave me; no Music charmed my Ears, but his dear
Voice: Wracks, Gibbets, and Dungeons, can they equal losing all my Soul
admires? Why named I them? Can there be greater Wrack

Than what despairing parting Lovers find,
To part when both are true, both would be kind?

HE comes, keep back, full Eyes, the springing Tears! -- and thou poor
trembling Heart! now be manned with all thy strongest stoutest Resolutions;
there will be need


Ah! whither shall I throw me? what shall I say? -- Mariamne hangs like
Ic^icles upon my Tongue, but Bellinda flows: Oh Bellinda! -- I charge thee by
that dear Name, hear and pity me


(coldly) What would you say?


Why nothing; I do not know that Voice, it has stopped the rising words, and I
must only answer with my sighs


Sir Charles, we have both been punished with unwarrantable Love.


Punished! Have we been punished? -- Now, by all my Woes to come, by all my
Transports past, all thought of my Bellinda, there is not a Pang, a Groan, but
brought: its pleasure with it: Oh! it is happier far to sigh for thee, than to
have enjoyed another


You interrupt me when I just begin, -- Grant it true, -- we might have lived
till weary grown of one another, till you, perhaps, might coldly say, I had a
Mistress. -- Now to part, when at the mention of each other's Name ou^ Hearts
will rise, our Eyes run over, it is better much than living to indifferency,
which Time and Age would certainly have brought


Oh, never, never; though the Bauble gaudy Beauty die, yet Sense and Humor still
remain -- on that I should have doated


You cannot guess your future by your present Thoughts; or, if you could, I am
not to be moved forsaking thee; and when I have said that, I need not add all
Pleasures, -- in remote and unfrequented shades I Will pass my solitary hours,
and like a Recluse, waste the remalnder of my wretched days


And am I the Cause of this melancholy penance? Must my unhappy Love rob the
World of its fairest Ornament? No, Madam, stay and enjoin me what you please;
condemn my Tongue to everlasting silence; let me now and then but gaze, and
tell you with my Eyes what is acting in my Heart; or -- if you will retire,
permit me to follow, under the pretense of hunting; the Air, a thousand things
I can invent, create new Friendship, caress the whole Country over, to have an
opportunity of seeing you, though at a hateful distance, and surrounded by
severost Friends


Ha! is this the awful Love, I thought possessed ye? How fatally I was
mistaken! What! pursue me to my Father's House! fix on my Name a lasting Blot,
a Deathless Infamy, pollute my Native Air with unhallowed Love, where all my
Ancestors have, for Ages, flourished, and left an honest Fragrancy behind! Mark
me, Sir, you know I do not use to break my word. -- If by Letters, Messages, or
the least appearance (though cautiously, as Treasons plotted against the State)
you approach me, I Will fly the Kingdom, or, if that is too little, the World


No, it is I have been mistaken. -- Now, by all the Wracks I feel, not worth a
Sigh, a parting drop; no Regard of Tenderness, no Beam of Pity, from those dear
Eyes, nor sidelong Glance to view my sad Distraction! Methinks you have already
left me, and I am got amongst my Fellow Madmen, tearing my Hair, chained to the
Ground, foaming, and digging up the Earth, yet in every smallest Interval of
Sense calling on Bellinda


A noble Birth, a censorious World, a mourning Father, all plead against thee.
Oh, talk no more, lest you force my Hand to some desperate Act; and yet your
Words pierce my Bosom with greater pain than pointed Steel


I see you are resolved on my Undoing, fixed like my relentless Fate; therefore
I Will not urge another syllable, but quietly, as dying Men when Hope's all past,
quit Life and their dearest Friends, for ever, ever leave thee


That sad silent Look discovers such inward Worlds of Woe, it strikes me
through, staggers my best Resolves, removes the Props I have been raising for
my sinking Fame, and, blind with passion, I could reel into thy Arms. -- Tell
me, on what are thy Thoughts employed


On the Curse of Life, imposed on us without our Choice, and almost always
attended with tormenting Plagues


Yet we may meet again, in Peace and Joy, when this Gigantick Honor appears no
Bugbear, and our Desires lawfully be crowned. -- It is a guilty Thought; nor
shall I ever dare to form it to a Wish


^ut do thou think we may?

What! uncontrolled clasp thee thus! Oh, Ecstasy! with wild Fury run over each
trembling beauteous Limb, and grasp thee as drowning Men the dear Bark from
whence they were thrown


Away, away! What are we doing? Divide him, Heaven, from my fond guilty Eyes;
set Seas, and Earth, and Worlds of Fire between us, for Virtue, Fate, and
Honor, with an united Cry, have doomed, that we must meet no more


To raging Seas, Sieges, and Fields of Battle will I fly, Pleasures and
Pastimes to the Woes I feel. Oh, Bellinda



I could laugh my Heart sore, to see what a condition the Fool my Master's in;
every knocking at the Door is as good as a Dose of Rubarb, and every Noise
makes him leap like a Vaulter. Ha! he is coming, the poor Baby dares not be
alone


Gentil! Is the Coast clear?


Yes, Sir.


Oh Gentil!


What Is the matter? You look worse frighted than you were.


Ay, and well I may; you leave me alone, and I shall grow distracted: I have I
have seen a Ghost


A Ghost! what, Mrs. Arabella's Ghost?


Nay, I did not stay to examine that; for, as soon as ever I perceived the
Glympse on it, I shut up my Eyes, and felt my way out of the Chamber


Where was this Ghost, Sir?


Oh! behind the Bed, behind the Bed, Gentil.


Lord, Sir, 'twas nothing but the Cloak; I hung it there.


Was it not? OF my Conscience, I thought it had been a Giant of a Ghost. --
Hark, hark! what is that


A full and true Relation of a horrid and bloody Murder, committed on the Body
of Mrs. Arabella (...), a young Lady, by one 'Squire Barnaby Cheatall and his
Man Gentil; showing how they locked her up in the dark, then cut her to pieces,
and carried the pieces away under their Cloaks, and threw 'em into
Chelsey-Reach, where, at low Water, they were f^d


O Lard! O Lard! the pieces found, Gentil!


So it seems, Sir.


(s^eming farther off) A full and true Relation of a, etc.


Nay, now we shall be hanged for certain; not the least Hopes: Oh! oh! oh!


Come, Sir, have a little Courage.


To confess the truth to thee, I never had any Courage in my Life; and this
would make the stoutest man tremble: Oh


I am thinking, Sir, -- why -- we was not at Chelsey-Reach that day.


No, no; but, may be, they will swear we was.


My Lady and Miss hated her, -- sure they have not been so barbarous.


Like enough, -- pin-up Petticoats are as convenient as Cloaks, -- besides, my
Sister is a Fury; I Have heard her threaten pulling Folks a pieces a hundred
times, and now she has don't. -- We Will even peach


What, your own Sister!


Ay, my own Mother, to save my self: -- I say, we will peach.


That Is not so good, for if they prove themselves innocent, 'twill fall upon us
again. -- Hark ye, Sir, there is only Eugenia can witness against us, -- suppose
we tried to stifle her Evidence with a swindging B^ibe; I never knew a
Chambermaid refuse greasing in the Fist upon any Account


My dear Gentil, -- if she inclines, my Offers shall be so large, that for the
rest of her Life she shall have nothing to do, but stu^y to ^ake her Hands
white, that she may burn all her Frippery, and be able to spa^ it with Quality


Sir, I ll send her Propositions.


(half draws his Sword) Do, but if the stubborn Jade will not compl^, appoint a
private meeting, and stop her Mouth with this -- (...) you understand me


Yes, Sir.

I find his Conscience would swallow a real Murder. -- Sir, if you please,
we'll go in and write what you design to offer her


Let us. If you meet her, Gentil, and she is surly, -- Remember, -- ugh, -- ugh.


Sir Charles sends you word, he is ba^e ordering his Affairs, designing with
all speed to travel, and says, he shall never see you more, only to take his
leave


Hey day! OF my Conscience, this charming little Beaucl^ir has me under a
Spell, and I shall meet with nothing but Disappointments till I submit to her


Ay, Sir, you would soon find the true Pleasures of virtuous Love, and a
satisfaction in denying your Appetite


Preaching Fool, hold you your Peace.


Sir, a Gentlewoman below desires to speak with you.


(aside) So, there is no great danger my (...) should Reform, when the Devil is
always at hand with a Temptation in Petticoats


Searchwell, wait on the Lady up.


Ah Lord!


Sirrah, I shall break your Head, if you don't leave this canting trade.


I am gone, Sir.


(aside) This is a mad Message my Lady has sent me with to her Lover; I Am
afraid he will kick me for my News; hanged, he is a Gentleman, and I Will venture


Ha! pretty Mrs. Dreswell, this is a favor I never received from you before;
Must I own the Blessing only to your Good Will, or is my Happiness greater? Did
your Lady send


I came from my Lady, Sir, but what Happiness you will find I know not; methinks
she has done a strange mad thing


What Is the matter?


She Is married, sir.


The Devil she is.


Even so: she said, those that she fancied cared not for her, therefore she
resolved to bestow her self and Fortunes on a secret Lover, whom indeed her
Ladyship owns she never valued, a Gentleman you know, sir, the worthy Mr.
Sp^ndall


(walks about enraged) Damnation! that Rake, Bully, Sharper! damn it, damn it.


Here Is a Note where they are; she desires to see you.


Tell her I esteem her so much, I Will cut the Rascal's Throat she has thought
sit to call Husband; I Will do it, Madam, though I Am hanged at the Door; it is the
only wa^ I can express my Love to her now


Would I were well gone; I Will tell her, sir.


Married! and to Sp^ndall! Oh, that I could despise her: Ha! I find it is worse
with me than I thought, what makes this gnaw my Heart so else? My
fellow-Libertines will laugh to see m^ play the fool and kill my self: Oh, I
could tear in piecemeal the Villain that betrayed her to endless Ruin


Sir, there is another Lady, out of a Coach, coming up stairs.


Blockhead, tell her I desire she would break her Neck down again, and oblige me
in riding post to the Devil. My Coach there


O my Nose, my Nose; why what is the matter now? I thought I should have had a
Reward for my News; and so I have, I think. O, my Nose


Where Is ^ir Francis? Did you tell him I was coming up?


Yes, and he says, you may go to the Devil, he has spoiled the Ornament of my
face, and flung into his Coach sta^k mad


Much of Passion shows much of Love, my Coach shall follow his, I Will not leave
him so


I must confess I am Fool enough to be pleased with Sir Francis's concern? But,
Oh, my Uncle's troubles draws a vail upon my rising Joys, and damps all Mirth:
Poor Bellinda! she sent a Note to tell me her Disorder was such, she could not
see me; with much ado I have persuaded Sir Charles to come hither, for half an
hour, and look into this unlucky piece of Matrimony


Madam, they are coming.


In, in, then?


Here give me a Glass of Wine, Mrs. Bride's long life, and lasting happiness.


Thank ye, Sir, give me a Glass, you.


To me, my Love?


Yes.


Yours, for ever.


Lard, Child, you will drink too much Wine.


Pray be quiet, I Will drink what I please; I am Married now, why sure, I Will have
none of your Tutoring, I Cod, I Will long for every thing I see, shall not I, you


I, and have it too, my dear.


I Cod, I Will long for Green Pease at Christmas, so I will.


My heart aches, this great concern has made me sick, give me a Glass.


I am Mothers own Daughter, feth I dare confess it now, I always used to be
sick for a Glass of Wine, ho, ho


Sure the Wench is mad


Ha, dear Ladies go in, it is some body from Sir Charles, I believe, I would
willingly speak with 'em first


Ay, ay, let us go in, there is more Wine within.


Be sure you make your Estate out plain.


Yes, yes, hark ye, ^ywell, carry 'em out of Ear-shot, lest it should prove a
Dunner


I warrant; Come Ladies, we'll in, and take a Bumper.


O la, you make me so blush --


Boy, open the door?


What, grown so great already, that I must wait half an hour for admittance.


(aside.) He is come from Sir Charles, I ll speak him fair: Sir Francis
Wildlove, your very humble servant, I beg ten thousand Pardons


Keep your fawning, and bestow it on Fools; it is lost on me, and will be grossly
answered. I tell ye, you are a Rascal


Poverty makes many a man so, Sir


A presuming Rascal do I not know thee for the dreg of humane kind, and shall
thy detested Arms receive her Virgin Beauties; life of goodness, Soul of
Honor, Wit, and Sweetness, the only Woman upon Earth I could have loved


Sure you design to banter me: Soul of Wit, and Sweetness; the Devil might had
her Sweetness for me. 'Twas her Money I married; faith, Sir Francis, I always
took her for a Fool


Prophaner! this last action only calls her Judgment in question, thy Death is
Justice, first to deceive, and then abuse her, draw


I will draw, though, Gad, I would have sworn, never to have fought on this
occasion


Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha.


Nay, Madam, I Will not disturb your mirth, but be so calm to wish it may
continue


What Is the meaning of all this? how came Mrs. Beauclair here?


Are you not married to this Lady?


No su^ Honor was e^r designed for me: Lard, Sir, I am married to Miss (...),
Lady Beaucla^'s Daughter, my ^ool's within, now I hope I may call he


I (...), Sir Francis, you Counterplotted me, knew the truth, and only acte^
this concern


No, by (...), nor perfe^ly my own heart, till this severe Trial searched it;
did I dissemble, Madam, your sense would soon discover it, but by my Soul, I
love you truly, and if you dare venture on me, my future life shall show how
much I honor you


Can you then leave all the pretty City Wives, which a Man of your Parts and
(...), in a (...) of an hours seige, could overcome? In fine, all the charming
variety of what was pretty, or agreeable in the whole Sex, and he confined? Oh,
that is a hard word to me


With more delight than those surfc^ing Joys (that always left a sting behind
'em) afforded


Well, Sir, if you can give me your heart, I can allow you great (...): but
when we have played the Fool and married, don't you when y^u have been pleased
abroad, come (...) surly: let your looks be kind, your Conversation easy, and
tho I sho^d know you have been with a Mistress, I Would meet you with a smile


When I forsake such Charms, for senseless mercenary Creatures, you shall
correct me with the greatest punishment upon Earth, a frown


You Will fall into the Romantic style, Sir Francis: Mr. Spendall, shall not we see
your Bride


Yes, Madam, and I hope your Ladyship will prove my Friend to Sir Charles.


Ay, ay, we'll all speak for ye; had she mist ye, there was no great
likelihood, as the case was, she would have done better


Where is the pretty Miss? pray conduct us to her.


Sir Charles will be here (...), I long to hear my Aunt set out the greatness
of the match


This way, Sir.


Is this the House, Enge^ia?


Yes, Madam.


Well, thou art a lucky Girl, to recover my Writings with such speed.


Madam, the 'Squire would have parted with a limb, if I had required it.


Madam, it was your promise, whenever you possessed your Fortune, (though I Am sure
I never insisted on it) you would be mine


I have no occasion to break my word, Mr. Beaumont.


Then I am happy.


Mrs. Eugenia, will you enquire where these Bride-folks are?


See, Madam, they are coming.


Will the 'Squire be here?


Yes, Madam, I told him of his Cousin's Marriage, and he seems pleased his
Sister has been tricked


Lard, you, what do you bring one to these folks, they will do nothing but jeer us?


Oh, my dear, carry your self civily, and every body will love ye.


Sir Charles will be here presently to wish you Joy, Madam?


So, then we shall have noise enough, but I Will be as loud as he, I Will warrant
him


And louder too, or I Am mistaken.


Neice, why have you dragged me to this unwilling Penance, if the Girl is
ruined what is it to me? my thoughts are full of something else


My Uncle, my Father, and my Friend, yet these names do not express half my
tenderness: The best of Guardians and of Men: pray change your thoughts of
Travel, I Will study ten thousand things for your Diversion


Not Angels Eloquence should alter me; I Will act the uneasy part no longer,
that Woman, the bar to all my Happiness, by Heaven, she is not my Wife: it is
true, the Ceremony of the Church has passed between us, but she knows I went no
further


Stay then, and live asunder.


No; so, Madam, you have married your Daughter.


Yes, what then? he has a good Estate, when his Father dies, beside the present
settlement, and ready Money


Poor deluded Women! he has no Estate, nor Relation worth owning, Mr. Spendall,
generous Charity induced me to relieve your wants, you have betrayed this young
woman, but use her well -- I have not much to say -- I suppose they were both
so willing, a very little pains effected the matter


How, Rascal! Devil! have ye married my Daughter -- and have ye nothing, Sirrah?


Ask Mrs. Peggy that.


You make one laugh, I vow and swear.


Beast! I don't mean so -- But have ye no Estate, Sirrah?


No, faith, Madam, not I; my Wife has enough for us both, and what is matter.


Oh, Dog! Come away, Peggy, we'll go to Doctors Commons, and thou shall be
Divorced


I will not be Divorced, I Have got a Husband, and I don't care, I Will stay with him.


That Is kindly said, and I engage you shall not repent it.


Why Counselor Smart, why Counselor Smart, did not ye tell me --


Hey day, Counselor Smart! why this is a Fellow many degrees worse than your
new Son in-Law. Hearkye Friend, leave this Counterfeiting Trade -- or you will
lose your Ears; Reform, as your Friend has done, and Marry


Hang him, Rogue: He Is a Smock-fac'd Fellow, and Handsome: I shall do no good
with the Women


(aside) Go, be gone, Devil, don't disgrace me, I Will meet you at the old place.


Look what a p^ff the old Lady's in -- Aunt, you always said you would match your
Daughter your self, you did not desire a cunninger head than your own


Well, Mrs. Flippant! I hope your mad tricks will bring you a Bastard home at
last, and that will be worse


Nay, Madam, spare my Neice: she ever was most repectful to you, till you
abused her beyond all bearing


Mind not a mad Woman.


Your Servant Gentiles! -- O La! Sister, I hear strange news, Cousin Peggy's
married to a Sharper, a Rake, a Bully, they say! I told you so, I told you so!
Gadzooks! you would not be warned


Well, Booby! what is that to you, (...) underhead.


Pox take your nasty Fist! you love sighting plaguily.


Well, 'twas passion, you may excuse it, when you consider my afflictions -- To
make ye amends, I Will come live with you, and take care of your Estate, and Mrs.
Arabella's


No, no, don't mistake your self, I Will be a stingy Cur no longer, but drink my
Bottle freely, nor sneak out of the Company without paying my Club, for fear of
having my Pocket examined by you

O Lard! the Ghost! the Ghost.


What, is the man mad?


You don't understand the whim.


Come gi' me thy hand, old Boy, we'll be Friends; I am no Ghost, I assure ye.


And -- is not that the Hectoring Spark your Brother, with his monsterous
whiskers pared


Not her Brother, Sir, but one who hopes to pretend to the Lady, by another
Title


Oh! I find how matters ha'been carried -- Much good may do you with her --
Gadzooks, she wa'n't sit for me, -- I Am a Fool, you know, Sister


You must grant me one Request.


What Is that?


To forgive Gentil; he is going to be married to Eugenia, but shall have no Joys
without your Pardon


Ay, ay, I forgive him, and leave his Wife to punish him; she has a Fruitful
Invention, let him take care it does not one day fall upon his own head --
Gentil! I am Friends; and will give thee something toward Housekeeping


I thank you, Sir.


I Am sure, it went to my very heart to fright your Worship so.


You are a wheedling Baggage; but it is all well, I Am contented.


O save me! save me! I Am pursued by a bloody-minded Monster.


What Is the matter? is it your Husband, Madam?


It Is my Tyrant, the Devil it is.


Nay, hold ye, Mistress, don't ye run behind me; udsbores, so I may have the
sword in my Guts by mistake


We'll all protect the Lady.


Protect! damnation; do but hear how vile a thing it is.


Hear! what do I hear, and see! why, sure this is our Brother Allen, my
Sister's first Husband, we thought dead in the Indies


What Is that? speak again, but speak a loud, lest I should only catch the sound
of Happiness, and be deceived


Has my damned Jilt brought me to a greater plague, my Wife? but I Will own it to
punish her, though I suffer an abominable torment till next fair wind, the Sea's
my Element; once there, I Am free. Well, I confess I have found a Wife here. Why
stare you so? I am not the first has thought the sight unpleasing


No, no, talk on; all are hushed, as if a midnight silence re^gned.


Who Is this? Are you my first Husband Allen? And did you pretend you was dead,
rather than come home to me, Sirrah


Here Is a sine greeting.


How! your Husband! he is mine before Heaven: Mr. Flywise, will not vou own me.
Fubby


In troth, I think there is scarce a Pi^ to choose; but you have disobliged me
last, therefore avaunt, Strumpet, come hither, thou natural noisie Spouse


That Shape and Face preferred to me?


I Will be revenged of her, I Am resolved.


I Am all Amazement, Sir Francis; save the Lady, because she was my Friend;
return her Ring, that may help console her


(parting 'em) Hold, Ladies, Ladies: March off, here is the bountiful Present;
come, come, I doubt not but you have a private Pocket


The Devil take you all.


What Miracle is this? Madam, leave your passion, and explain it.


Is my own Vather come again? O La.


Your own Vather come again! O La! Then, I fear, your Portion is not at your own
dispose, Miss


Good Lord! does that disturb ye?


Gentlemen, now your Wonder is a little over, pray let me ask why all this
Company, and why that Gentleman, whom I know not, appears transported


I Will tell you, Sir; 'twas my hard Fate to marry your Lady, before your death
was well confirmed, that kept it some time private, when, before we came
together, a Quarrel, from her uneasy Temper, arose, and I swore never to bed
her; yet, for our Friends and Conveniency's sake, we seemed to live like Man
and Wife. Speak; Madam, is not this true


Yes, yes, it is true, the more shame for ye.


Here, Sir, receive her, and with her a new Date of Happiness.


I guess my future Happiness by the past; but since it must be so --


Dear Neice, go to my House, and deliver up whatever is that Lady's.


You Will send to Bellinda?


My self, my self shall be the Messenger;
In my eager Mind I Am already there:
Methinks the Earth's enchanted, and I tread on Air.

So, there is one pleased, I Am sure.


Well, Brother, you're welcome home, as I may say: Why, here is Cousin Peggy
grown up and married since you went


What! Is that Bud come to the Blossom of Matrimony? all by the Mother's
Contrivance; a wise business, I Believe. Sir, I shall make bold to examine into
your Estate before I give my Daughter any


Say ye so? and if you give your Daughter none, I shall prove a second Mr.
Flywife


What Is that, Bold-face?


Nothing, Child.


Ay, that is a hopeful Match; I could find in my Heart to lock my self up, and
never see your ugly Faces again


Let Us follow, and appease her.


And as we go, you shall tell me what makes Sir Charles thus overjoyed:


I will; and when we have done what he desired, we'll go all to Bellinda's,
there we shall find my Uncle


Come, Beaumont, let us see the end of this surprising Accident.


How like a Dog a Man looks once escaped!
Forced back into the Matrimonial Noose;
It Is a damned Joy to find the Wife I Would loose.
Sure some unseen Power holds me a moment longer; ah! it is no Power, but
foolish Love, that shows the paths which carries me from Beauclair, leading to
Death, or, what is worse, Despair


Madam, the Coach is ready.


I Am coming, be sure you let none have admittance.


I will not, Madam.


Oh, Sir! my Lady charged you should not enter.


Away, you Trifler; where is my Bellinda?


This is unmanly; not conquer your Desires, nor obey my positive Commands!


Oh, stay and hear me; let me hang upon your Knees, for I am out of breath,
clasp and prattle over thee, like a glad Mother when she hugs her firstborn
Blessing after the pangs of Death; mine, like hers, is Folly all, but full of
Fondness


Oh:


Sigh not, my Fair; by Heaven I am free from any Chains but thine, free as thy
own clear Soul's from Vice


How! what mean ye? oh, rise, and stop my growing Fears, Where Is your Wife? is
she well


Think not so basely of me, she is well, and in her Husband's Arms, oh, my
Bellinda! in her Husband's Arms; her first and only Husband, All^n, is returned


Forgetting all colder nicer forms, in thy faithful Bosom let me receive such
News


My Life.


My Soul. (embracing.


Ha! the transporting Joy has caught her Ros^e Breath, and those bright Eyes
are in their snowy Lids retired: Oh, this is more, much more than ten thousand
words could have expressed. 'Wake, my Bellinda, it is thy Beauclair calls


Do not view my blushing Face, I fear I have offended that Virgin Modesty by me
still practiced and adored; now we must stand on forms, till time and decency
shall crown our Wishes


My Goddess, Conqueress, by thee for ever I am directed.


I know thy honest Heart so well, I do not scruple the truth of what you have
said


You need not, Dearest; see, all our Friends come to confirm it.


Joy to my dear Bellinda.


Permit a stranger to rejoice at the Reward of Virtue and constant Love.


Pardon my Answers, Ladies, when I confess I scarce know where I am.


Now I can mind the Affairs of my Friend; Sir Francis, I observe you very
assiduous to my Neice, has she received you for her servant? and are you
resolved on the truest Happiness, Constancy


Yes faith, Sir Charles, I am the Lady's Dog in a string, and have violent
pantings toward the delicious Charmer; I hope she will not long deferr my
Desires: But let that black Gentleman I Have so long dreaded do his worst, he
shall not spoil my stomach


Ah! those pantings, Sir Francis, I doubt they have moved your stomach so
often, till they have quite took it away


A little forbearance, and such a tempting meal --


[to Mr. Beaumont] You, Sir, too are blessed; I read it in your Eyes, and see the
Lady with ye


I fear no danger now, but dying of that pleasing Fever called Rapture.


To any man's thinking, these now are going to Heaven ding dong: but hear me,
Ladies; 'faith, all young handsome fellows talk just so before Matrimony: seven
Years hence let me bear of Pantings, Heavings, and Raptures; no, Gadzooks,
scarce Risings then: I shall live a jolly Bachelor, and laugh at your
Indifference, Gadzooks, I shall --


Well said 'Squire; we would bring him along, Sir Charles, I think him very
good-humored to this Lady, and believe his Sister only made him otherwise


I read in every Face a pleasing Joy, but you must give me leave to think that
mine exceeds, raised to unexpected Worlds of Bl^ss, when sunk in Sorrows and
Despair

Kind Fate, beyond my Hopes, the Weight removed,
And gave me all, in giving her I loved.

BY a mistake in the Copy, which was false Folio'd, the Scene in Sir Charles
Beauclair's House, Page 32, should have came in, in the latter part of the
third Act, which ends with

Cheat. Oh, that ever I should live to see my self hanged.


