EPIDICUS.

SCENE, Athens, in the Street. On one Side of the Stage, stands Periphanes' s
and Apecides' s Houses; on the other, Cheribulus' s House

TIME, About Five or Six Hours, beginning at Six or Seven a Clock in the
Morning

STay, young Man.


Who Is that pulls me by the Cloak, when I Am in such haste.


A Friend.


So it seems. But you're a plaguey impertinent one.


Open your Eyes, Thesprion.


Bless me! Epidicus, is it you?


You may trust your Eyes for once.


O, good morrow to ye.


And a good Day to you. Well-come home with all my Heart.


Well, and what next?


Why next, Boy, I Will present ye with a Treat, according to th'usual Custom.


Upon Honor then --


What?


-- I Will accept often, if you do.


Well but how do you? How fares your Corpse?


My Face is a Sample o'that.


Now I have ye, rare Rogue! you are got to be fatter, and in better plight than
ever


Ay, Thanks to this thriving Hand --


-- Which ought t'ha' been cut off long since.


Pshaw, I Am grown more honest than formerly.


How so?


Because I steal more openly.


A duce on ye, for setting such plaguey large Strides. As soon as I laid Eye on
ye at the Port, I ran like a Race-Horse, but could n't come up wi'ye for my
Guts, till now


Po, you're a puny Town-Chitterlin.


You're a hectoring Camp-Bully, I know.


It Is a little scurrilous, but speak your Pleasure.


Ha'ye been well e're since you went, what say ye?


Off and on --


-- The Wooden Horse, you mean. O, I hate that damned Variety most mortally.


Why, I told ye nothing but Truth.


Come, answer me me sincerely. -- What Is become of our Master's Son? How does
he do


Lusty, and strong as Hercules.


Now you have told me the joyfullest News in the World: But where is he?


He came along wi'me.


How so? unless you brought him home in your Knapsack, or else in your Pocket.


O hang ye.


Or you: -- I must examine you; hear me, and you shall be heard in your turn.


The very Words of a Judge, in truth.


It becomes my Gravity.


You don't pretend to be Lord Chief Justice, do you?


Why, do you know a more honorable Person in Town than I?


But, Old Boy, you want one Accoutrement to your Office.


Prithee what is that?


Your Beadles, with their Staffs for your Honor's Pate.


You're a damned Rogue. -- But what is your Answer?


To what Question, pray?


What Is become of my Master Stratippocles's Arms?


Faith, fallen into the Enemy's Hands.


His Arms?


They went away with a Whip.


Don't ye banter now?


Troth, I Am in earnest. They have 'em in possession.


Mary, 'twas a plaguey Business.


Po, Achilles, and others ha'done the same before him. I Will warrant ye 'twill
redound to his Honor


As how, I beseech ye?


For following such noble Examples.


Troth, I believe Vulcan made his Arms for him; they were so plaguey quick in
going over to The Enemy. If our Son o'Thetis has lost his, the kind Nereads will
bring him more. But then he must be sure to supply th'Armorers wi'Stuff and
Materials, if ever he hopes to be plundered every Campaign


Come, adone wi'this Discourse.


That Is as your Worship pleases.


Leave impertinant Questions.


But tell me, where is my Master Stratippocles?


There Is a certain reason why he daren't come wi'me.


Prithee what is it?


He has no desire to be seen of his Father.


Why so?


I Will tell ye. -- He has brought out of the Plunder, a young Captive Lass, fair
and sprightly, who seems of a good Family


What Is this I hear?


The same that comes from my Mouth,


What did he buy her for?


Because he had a mind to her.


And how many Minds has this Creature got? I Am sure, before he went to the
Campaign, he left me in charge to buy him a Musick-Girl, he loved, of a certain
Slave-Merchant, and I Have executed his Orders. --


Just as the Wind blows, my Friend, so you must furl your Sails.


Alas! I Am broke all in pieces!


How; why so?


But -- what did this Lass cost?


Little enough.


That Is none of my Question.


What then?


How many Pounds?


So many


What, a hundred Pounds?


Which he took up of a Banker at Thebes, and gives him above a Groat in the
Pound Interest for every Day he has it


Lamentable!


The Banker's come over with him, and demands the Money.


Bless me? I Am ruined to the Devil and all.


How so? What Is the matter, my Friend?


He has lost me.


Who has.


The Gentleman who lost his Arms.


But why so?


Why, he was continually dunning me wi' Letters from The Army, to --


Troth, I cannot imagine why you tremble so. Poor Epidicus, you are in a sad
pickle: guilty of some damnable business i'my Absence, and thy very looks
betray thee


Prithee, don't tease me so.


I Will be gone then.


Stay, you shall not go yet.


Why, not yet?


But is he really in love with the Girl he bought?


A pretty Question! -- up to the Ears, Man.


Then my poor Back must smart for it.


He loves her better than ever he did you.


And let the Devil love you.


Prithee leave that subject, -- He charged me not to go home to his Fathers,
but directly to Cherib^lus's here, till he came there himself


Why so?


Because he would n't so much as meet, or see his Father, till he had cleared
all with his Banker


This is Hell upon Earth!


Now let me go and meet him.


What will the old Man say, when he comes to know of this? However, let us fall
nobly, with our Swords in our Hands


Fall how you please, what is that to me?


I Will not fall singly; I shall desire the same Civility o'you too, as one
Friend would of another


Would Old Nick had you and your Projects too.


Go then, if you be in such plaguey haste.


If it be so, I never met with a more easy parting.


He Is gone, and now you are alone: thou see in what a sweet Condition you are
in, Mr. Epidicus; and without speedy Relief, you are undoubtedly blown up. So
many tottering Ruins, and such vast Loads of Mischiefs come tumbling upo' my
^ead, that it is impossible to subsist without a thousand Props. And yet I cannot
find one to help to sustain this confounded Shock. -- What a Rogue was I
t'impose upo'th' Old Man wi'my damned Tricks, and make him believe he had
redeemed his Daughter, when 'twas only a Musick-Girl, his Son's Miss, whom he
ordered to buy when he went to the Camp. But now my Gentleman, to please his
Humor, has picked up another there, and my Skin must pay the purchase: For
when our old Fox comes once to smell out the Roguery, I shall be flayed alive.
Therefore have all your Wits about ye. -- Projecting's to no purpose; for my
Brains are all Confusion. -- Epidicus, you are an errant Ass. -- But why so
scurrilous, my Friend! -- Because, Fool, thou'st left thy self to the wide
Word. -- Why, what would y' have me do? -- Why that Question to me? -- Because
formerly y' use to be so plaguey cunning at advising. -- What? -- What, I say?
-- I must to work upon something. -- But I Am too backward in meeting my
Gentleman, to know how matters stand. -- Cheribulus. -- I Will move on one side,
to hear their Discourse wi'more ease.


Thus I Have told ye the whole Story, Cheribulus; and given ye a full Account of
my Troubles and Love


Sure, Stratippocles, thour't very childish for one of thy Age and Courage.
What, ashamed of thy Bargan, Man, when she is one of a good Family? Who a duce
can blame thee for this


All those who envied me, have declared themselves m' Enemies upo' this Account;
though truly to her Chastity, I never offered the least Violence or Incivility


This is a Virtue, in my Opinion, a degree above any common moderation in Love.


Po, Words will give no ease to a Man in pain: He Is the Friend, whose Actions
supply one in a puzling Case, and at a pinch


How would y' have me help ye?


By lending me a hundred Pounds, to pay off the Banker I had it of.


Really if I had it, you shou'dn't ask me twice.


What am I the better, when your Liberality lies wholly in Words, and nothing
at all in Deed^


Why, Faith, every day I Am teased, and worried to death with a parcel of Duns.


I Would sooner see such Friends starve in Prison than live in a Palace. -- Well,
I must borrow Epidicus's help, though I pay dearly for the use of 't; but I shall
send him to Bridewel with his Skin stripped over his Ears, if he does not procure
the hundred Pounds as soon as the last Word's pronounced


I Am in a hopeful Condition: He promises well, and I don't question his
performance in the least. So then, my Back shall be nobly treated, and all at
free Cost. -- I Will e'n board 'em. -- Epidicus


Where Is he?


Here, Sir -- I Am glad to see you well in Town again.


I don't question but you are, as much as my self.


Have ye been well all this time, Sir.


In Body, but not in Mind.


Why, Sir, I performed my Duty, and observed your Commands, to a tittle. I Have
bought up the Girl you sent so many Letters about


You Have lost your Labor in that.


Lost, how, Sir?


Because at present, she neither charms, nor pleases me.


Then what occasion was there for so many repeated Commands, and Letters?


I loved her then, but now my Heart's otherwise engaged.


Faith it is very hard, to have one's Services so ill rewarded. My best
Endeavors are turned against me, by the fickleness of your Passion


I was not Compos mentis, when I writ those Letters.


Must I atone for your crazy Tricks; and my Back pay the price of your
Indiscretion


What Is all this prating? I Have occasion for a hundred Pounds down of the Nail,
which must be paid to the Banker with all Expedition


Pray, where shall I have it? Of what Banker should I take it up?


Where you please. But if I have not the Money before Sunset, never expect to see
home again, but strait to Bridewell you go


You, Sir, can talk of these things unmoved, without dread or danger. I Am right
sensible of m' Executioners, and the pain of a good Beating


How then? Would you see your Master make way with himself?


Not so neither. -- I Will first run the hazard, as bold as it is.


Now I like ye: Thour't a brave Fellow in troth.


I Am resolved to undergo what you would have me.


What will ye do with the Musick-Girl you bought then?


I Will warrant ye, I Will have some Invention, some Expedient, or some Trick to
save all at last


Faith thous't a fruitful Noddle, to my Knowledge.


I know a rich Euboan Captain, with Money at Command, who when he comes to know
of your buying of this, and your bringing home the other, he will earn estly be
at ye, to take her off your Hands. -- But where is the Girl you brought wi'ye


She shall be forthcoming.


What stay we here for?


Let Us to yours, and there make a jolly Day on it.


Go in. The mean time, in these Brains must I have a Committee of the whole
House, to consider of Ways and Means for the raising of Supplies to carry on
this vigorous War. -- Well, Friend Epidicus, look well to thy hits; for this is
a plaguey sudden Business. The De'el a bit of time's here for dozing, or
delaying; for a swinging Battery must be raised against the old Man's Pockets.
-- In then, Epidicus, and keep thy young Master from straggling here, least his
old Father should chance to snap him up.


It Is a common failing in most People, to use Modesty when there is no occasion
for it; and when there is most of all, they lay't aside. What need ye be ashamed
of marrying one of a good Family, though of mean Fortune; especially one, as you
believe, you had your Daughter by, that is now at home


I dread my Son's Reproaches.


Edod, I thought the Remembrance of your last Wife, had frighted you from
Matrimony; for you never can look upon her Grave, but y' offer Thanks for her
Departure: And truly you have reason, since y' had the good luck t'out-live that
cross Piece


O, I was a second Hercules in the time of her Reign. His Combat with the
Amazonian Queen, was nothing to what I endured


Troth, the Money did well however.


Ay marry, if I could have had it alone.


St' St'! Silence! Courage, my Lads. Nothing but signs of good luck. Then I Have
a plaguey sharp Lancet to breath the best Vein in the old Man's Purse. --
Apecides's Door. Now will I turn Horse-leech, and suck out the Hearts Blood of
these old Fools, who pass for the prime Pillars of the State


Marry him as soon as you can.


I like your Advice.


I heard he was intangl'd with a Musick-Girl, but who I cannot tell.


Ay, that goes to the Heart of me.


In good Faith, I Have the Assistance, Bounty and Love of all the Gods. For the
old Men have now opened a Passage for my Tricks to make Incursions, and snub 'em
of their Money. -- About it then, Friend Epidicus, wrap thy short Cloak about
thee, and pretend t'ha' been looking the whole Town for the old Man: Do all
with a jerk. -- Peraphanes at home. I Am tired off my Legs, wi' searching all
the Town over for him, at the Surgeons, the Barbers, the Race-Ground, the
Market, the Perfumers, the Armorers, and all the Bankers in the Town. -- I Am
quite hoarse with asking, and was nigh breaking my Neck a hundred times for
haste


Epidicus!


Who calls Epidicus?


I Am Periphanes.


And I, Apecides.


And, troth, I Am Epidicus. -- O, Sir, I Have met ye both in the best time in the
World


What Is the matter?


Hold. -- Pray give me a little time to breath in --


Well, take time then.


O my Heart! -- Let me take breath --


Come, rest your self.


Now observe. -- All the Troops that were marching to Thebes, are discharged,
and sent home. --


Who told you so?


I affirm it to be true.


On your own Knowledge?


Yes, Sir.


How came you to know it?


Because I saw the Streets as full of Soldiers as they could pack, with all the
Arms, and Horses. --


This is extreordinary indeed.


Then they had a mort of Prisoners, with Boys and Girls, some two, some three,
and others five a piece. The People they all came thronging about 'em; every
Body crowding to see their own Sons


I faith, nothing could be better.


Then I believe the whole Corporation of Courtizans in the City came in all in
their Finery, to meet their Gallants, and charm 'em with their presence: And,
what was most observable, a great many of 'em wore Nets under their Scarfs.
When I had got to the Haven, there I found her, attended by four several
Musicians playing --


Who, Epidicus?


She who your Son so many Years loved, and died for; and is in a fair way to
ruin his Riches and Reputation, his own self, and your Worship's self. She
stood waiting for him at the Haven


Damned Jilt!


She was richly dressed in her gold Lace, so neatly! so trimly! so modish!


How a duce was she dressed then? With a Cloak, or a Robe, or had she a
Milliner's Shop upon her back? There Is variety enough


A Woman carry a whole Shop upon her back?


Where Is the Wonder? You may daily meet these Creatures in the Streets with
Houses and Lands upo' their backs. When their Sparks are assess'd for the
Taxes, they have no Money; but freely pay their Contributions when they are taxed
by their Whores. What a confounded Jargon of names do these Jades rake up every
Year for their Habits? There Is your light Mant plated, your Stiff-bodied-Gown,
your Loose-Gown, your Nightgown, your Riding-Gown, your Imbroider'd, and
Speckl'd Gowns, Pane'd Works, and Plumed Works, Petticoats, Hoods, Scarfs,
Tours and Top-knots, Fingle-Fangles, and Gold-Bobs, with all the Colors of the
Rainbow, and Figures of all the Flowers, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Flies, and
Monsters, in the Universe. Nay some of their Dresses make 'em look like Monkeys


What are those, Sir?


Your damned Night-Rails. -- This plaguey Catalogue of Names, often make their
poor Cullies Pockets smoke for it. -- But on wi' your Story


There stood two Women behind me, discoursing to themselves; upo' which, I gave
way a little, and made as though I took no notice of what they said. I could not
hear every word perfectly, yet I Am sure I cannot be mistaken in the main


I Would fain know what it was.


Said one of these Women to the other, --


What?


Patience, Sir, and you will hear all. -- After they had cast their Eyes upo'
your Son's Mistress. Good now, said one, What strange luck has this Creature,
to have her Gallant immediately pay her Ransom? Her Gallant, said the other, why
who is he? At that she named young Stratippocles. rich Periphanes's Son


As I live, I must run my Country. --


Nothing but the truth, Sir. -- Upon hearing of this Discourse, I began to
creep nigher, and nigher to 'em, by degrees, as though I had been forced that way
by the crowd


Very well.


But, said the other again, how know ye this? Who told ye so? Why, said she,
there came a Letter to day from Stratippocles to her, to let her know he had
taken up the Money of a Banker at Thebes, had it in his Hands, and was bringing
it home for that purpose


So then. -- All Is lost.


She said, she had it from her own Mouth, and saw the Letter.


How shall I do in this case? I must have your advice, Neighbor.


We must find out some effectual, and cunning Expedient; for, troth, I verily
believe, he will be here shortly, if he ben't already


Might I presume, to instruct ye, I Would show ye such a clever way as you would both
approve of, or I Am much mistaken. --


And what is that, honest Epidicus!


And you will say it is pat for the purpose.


Why do you keep us in suspense then?


Because you, who are wisest, ought to be heard first; I, afterward.


Po, let us hear't.


No, you will laugh at me.


Faith, but we will not.


If ye like this Project, you may follow't; if not, another may be sought for.
For my part, I Am neither Inventor, nor Promoter often, any further than to serve
you


I thank ye for that -- Prithee let us hear your Contrivance.


It Is to choose a Wife for your Son immediately, and take a swinging Revenge
upo' this Musick-Wench he is now upon freeing, and so strangely debauches him:
Then to order Matters so as to make her a Slave as long as he lives


That Is right as can be.


I Would do any thing to have it speedily brought about.


Why, truly, now is the time to do it, before he comes home: 'Twill be to Morrow
before he comes to Town, and not to day


How know ye that?


Very well, Sir. I saw one that came from him, who said he would be here to
Morrow Morning


Well, but go on: What must we do next?


This is my Opinion; that you ransom this Musick-Girl, as though you had a mind
to her, and was mightily stricken with her your self


And what of all that?


What? You may buy her out of your Son's Hands, before he returns, and pretend
it is to give her her Freedom


Well, I understand ye.


When you have once got her into your Hands, you may remove her to any by Place
from the City, if you think it so convenient


I Am clearly of that mind.


What say you, Sir!


What should I? It Is a notable cunning Contrivance, I think.


By this means, you will cut off all your Sons hopes of marrying her; and bring
him to compliance at pleasure


Thour't a cunning Rogue, and please me strangely.


Sir, what you're about, requires expedition.


Very true, indeed.


I Have a Trick too, that the Merchant shall not smell your Designs.


Let Us hear't.


So you shall. -- Observe.


This is the craftiest Son of a Whore.


I Am afraid we shall want one to pay the Money for this Wench. For 'twon't be
so convenient for you to go your self


Why so?


Lest the Merchant suspect you buy her upo' your Sons account, --


Very right.


-- To hinder him of his Mistress; and so his Suspicions may chance to cross
your Designs


Where shall we find one proper to manage this Business?


This Gentleman is the fittest in the World. He understands a Bargain to a
Tittle, and has the Law at his Fingers ends


Epidicus, I gi' ye Thanks.


And I Will endeavor to deserve 'em: I Will find out the Master of the
Musick-Girl, carry the Money with the Gentleman, and bring her to ye


What Is the lowest price of her?


The lowest price? Perhaps you may get her for a hundred Pounds. But if you
send too much, it shall be returned faithfully. There can be no Cheat in it; and
your Money will not lie dead ten days, I Am sure


How so?


Because there is another young Spark has a Months mind to this Wench, a Rhodian
Captain, vastly rich, a stout Soldier, a terrible Fellow, and a grand
Braggadocio. He Will certainly take her off your Hands, and pay ye ready Money
with all his Heart. Do but venture upon her, and you may gain the Lord knows
what by the Bargain


Heavens grant I may.


Don't question it.


Will you go in, Sir, and bring out the Money? I Will away to the Piazza; and be
sure, Epidicus, do you meet me there


Don't ye go from thence, before I come.


I Will stay for ye there.


Come in, Epidicus.


Go in, Sir, and draw over your Money, I shall not make 'ye stay.


Hang me, if I believe there is ever a piece of Ground in all our Country yields
half so well as this old Fellows Bags. For though they be never so well secured
and sealed up, sweep says my Worship with as much Money as he pleases. But,
Faith, I Have a plaguey Scruple that the old Man should find out the Roguery on it,
and stick as close to my Back as an old Rook to a rich Cully. One thing puts me
to my last Trumps; that is, to know which Musick-Girl I had best show Apecides.
-- O I have it in my Head. -- The old Man ordered me this Morning to find up a
Musick-Girl to sing for him at his Sacrifice. I Will soon produce one, and teach
her her Lesson, how to carry on the Cheat handsomely to our old Gentleman. --
Now I Will in, and receive the Money of this old silly Put.


S Death, I Am torn asunder, and eaten up with th'Expectation of all Epidicus's
fine Promises. -- It torments me strangely; and I Would gi' the World to know
whether there be any Hopes or not


For all Epidicus's great Helps, y'ought to seek out elsewhere: For I could have
told ye beforehand, you weren't to expect any thing from his Brain


I Am a miserable Man, in earnest.


It Is childish i'you, to vex your self so.


As I Am a living Soul, if I once lay hands on him, 'tshall never be said that a
pitiful Slave abused his Master without Punishment. -- But what would ye have
him do, who has no Money; when you, who has so much at command, will not part with
a Penny, to keep a Friend from sinking


Upo' my Word, if I had it, I would with all my Heart. However you needn't
fear, but you will meet wi' something, by some ways, some means, from some Place,
or from some Body; and you have still some hopes o'sharing i'my good Fortune,
when I meet with it my self


Po, hang such sneaking Fellows.


What Is your Fancy in giving me this Language?


Because your Tongue ran all upo' your silly somethings, your some means, your
some Places, and your some Bodies, which are all nothing to the purpose. I Will
not weary out m'ears any longer wi'this Stuff; nor expect any more Help from
ye, than from one that is never thought of.


Well, Sir, you have performed your Part; now must I mine. After this care's
over, you may set your Heart at rest. -- Cheribulus. -- Well, what now? --
Here, Sir, take it, if you like it.


How much is there?


Enough, and more than enough; something overplus. I Have got above twenty
Guinea's more than you owe to your Banker. You see, Sir, as long as I can
please, and oblige you, I Am sufficiently prodigal of m'own Back


Your Back, why so?


By making your Father guilty o'Bag-slaughter.


What a duce is that?


Nay, I don't mind your old and common Phrase, Hold up his Hand at the Bar, but
I make him hold up his Hand at the Bags. For I Have already paid off the
Slave-Merchant, wi' m' own Hands, for that Girl who goes for your Sister, Now
I Have hit upon a way, to put another Trick upo' your Father, and do you a good
turn into the Bargain. I had this Discourse wi^th' old Man, and persuaded him
all I could, to hinder you from getting this Musick-Girl, when you came home, *
by buying her himself, beforehand; and so to remove her to some by-place. Now
will I top another upon him, that shall do his business as well every jot.


Rare Rogue!


She shall be here in a Moment, and pass for your Mistress.


I understand ye.


Your Father has commissioned Apecides to act in this Business, to see the
Bargain be secure. He now stays for me at the Piazza


Well enough.


Now you see, the Wit's outwitted; for your Father has trusted his Money to my
Discretion. He Is making Preparations for your Wedding, as soon as you come home


Nothing can persuade me to that, but the Death of the dear Creature I brought
wi'me


I Have another piece of Policy on foot too. -- I Will to the Slave-Merchant's
privately, and desire him, if any Enquiry be made whether he had received the
Money for a Musick-Girl, to say, Yes; and, instead of the threescore and fifteen
Pounds, to name six score Guineas: For the first Sum I had, but three days
before, paid him wi' m'own Hands for that Girl who goes for your Sister. Then
will this old Rogue ignorantly swear that he received the Money for the same
Girl who came along wi' you


Y'out-do Matchivel, for Policy.


I Will go get some plaguey cunning Baggage, and grease her well in the Fist; she
shall pretend to be the same Party that is bought, and so make admirable Sport
wi' both the old Fools. Apecides himself shall conduct her to your Father


Excellently contrived.


Well, I Will teach her how t'act her Part to a tittle, and send her full-fraight
wi'my Tricks -- Hold I Am a little too tardy; y' have made me lose Time. Ye both
know the Management of the business; now I Will be marching.


Good luck attend ye.


It Is a plaguey Dog at doing Mischief.


I Am sure his Contrivances have brought me off at a deadly Pinch.


Now let us go in again.


Ay, and with a much lighter Heart than I came out. By the Courage and Conduct
of Epidicus, I Am safely arrived at the Camp wi'this rich Booty.


There Is no such need for a Man to have a Glass to see the Features of his Face
in, as t'observe the very depth of his Discretion, and the Passions of his
Mind. The well viewing o'these, will bring him to reflect how he passed away
his Time in his young Days. My self experience it, by this fretting for my Son,
as though his Crimes were so heinous, and not the Sin of my Youth as great. Faith,
we old Men do dote sometimes; and certainly this Mirror would be of excellent
use. -- But here comes my Friend Apecides, wi' my Son's Prize


O, welcome home wi' your Merchandise. -- How is it?


You see the Heavens smile on ye.


They Have a promising Countenance.


Ay, all things promise well, and succeed too. -- Y' had best order some Body
to carry her in


So ho! within there. --


Conduct this Woman in. --


What Is your Pleasure, Sir?


Have a special care she ben't coupled wi'my Daughter, nor let her be seen by
her. Do You mind me? I Will have her into that little Room by her self. -- There Is
vast difference between th'Education of a young Maid, and a Curtizan.


Spoken like a Man of Skill and Prudence. One cannot be too careful of his
Daughter's Honesty. -- Faith, we nicked the time for snapping this Girl out of
your Son's Clutches


Why so?


Because I heard one say, he saw him but just now.


I dare swear, he was just ready for his Bargain.


Ay, Faith, sure enough. -- Without doubt you have an admitable Servant, of great
Value, and worth his weight in Gold. The poor Musick-Wench never so much as
dreamt of being sold to you, he carried off the business wi'so much Mirth and
Gayety


I wonder i'my Heart how he did it.


He flamm'd her off with a pretense o'your making a Sacrifice for your Son's
safe arrival


That was well carried on.


He made her believe he brought her only to serve at The Office, you was to have
at home. All the while, I did as though I was a silly Clod-pated Ass, that
could not say Bo to a Goose.


You could do no otherwise.


I Have a business of Importance at the Court: I must go and assist a Friend
there


Prithee, let us ha'your Company as soon as you're at leisure.


I shall be back in a little Time.


There Is nothing like a good Friend always at ones Elbow. Then all your
business is done for ye, with holding up your Finger. Now had I trusted the
management of this business to a Man o'less skill, and fewer Brains, I should
ha'been finely bob'd, and my Son might well ha'made me his laughing Diversion.
--


Have a care, Sirrah, you don't slip one House without enquiring for Periphanes
the Platean; and presume not to come i'my presence before you have sped


Suppose, Spark, I show you the Person you want, what Thanks shall I deserve at
your Hands


I Have achieved that by my great and mighty Valor, that all Mankind ought to
gi'me Thanks


But, young Soldier, this is no proper place to publish your Achievements in,
as you intend. For when a Man comes to brag of his Exploits before his Betters,
they make but a poor shabby Figure. -- But if you want Periphanes the Platean,
I Am he


What he, so famed in his Youth at Kings Courts, who purchased an Estate with
his single Sword


The same, the bare naming of whose Exploits, would make you take ye to your
Heels, and run like a Devil


By Hercules, I more want a Man to relate mine to, than one to tell me his.


I tell ye, Spark, this is no fit Place; therefore you would best pitch upon
another Man, to pack off your Trumpery to


By your leave then; to let you know what I come for, I understand you have
bought my Mistress


Ho, ho! Now I know my Gentleman; the very Captain Epidicus told m'of. --


Then I Have a Word or two to say to ye, if it be no trouble to ye.


Faith, I cannot tell that, till I hear what it is.


Then it is to let me have her, and I Will pay ye honestly for her.


A Bargain.


But why should I mince the matter? I intend to give her her Freedom, and make
her Partner i'my Bed


I Will make but two Words wi'ye. She cost me above sixscore Pounds, and for an
hundred and fifty, you shall have her, and do what you please with her;
provided you will take her away wi ye, and rid the Country of her


Will ye sign, in good earnest?


To those Articles, I will.


You Have made an excellent Campaign on it.


So ho, there! bring out this last Musick-Girl. -- You shall have all her
instruments into the Bargain


Here, Sir, take her, if you please.


What a strange Frolic is this? Why these under hand Tricks tho? Why don't
y'order the Musick-Girl to be brought out


Why, this is she; i have no other.


Po, you cannot put Tricks upo' Travelers. Why don't ye produce her that is
called Acropolistis


I profess, this is she.


But I profess, it is not: P'shaw, do you think I don't know m'own Mistress?


I declare this is the very same that my Son was so much stricken with.


But it is not the same.


How! not the same?


No.


Where a Devil did she come from then? As I hope to live, it is the same I
bought and paid for


'Twas foolishly bestowed, and a plaguey blunder this.


Certainly it must be she; for I sent m'own Servant to buy her, one who is
acquainted wi'my Son's Amors


Hah! then, Old Gentleman, your own Servant has bubl'd ye confoundedly.


What! bubl'd me?


Nothing, but only a suspicion. I see this Musick-girl is topp'd upon ye for
the other. Poor Old Fellow, you are notoriously and damnably gulled


I Will find her out where ere she be. -- Farewell Bluff.


So, so! thour't a brave Fellow, Epidicus, a brave Fellow, in troth; and have
got the day. Thour't a Man every inch of thee; and have led me by the Nose, as
if I had been the meerest Nicompoop in the World. -- Apecides buy ye to day, of
the Slave-Merchant


I never heard of the Man till now; besides, I Am past being sold, and have had
my Freedom above this five Years


Why came ye hither then?


I Will tell ye, Sir. -- I was brought hither to sing at a Sacrifice, an old
Gentleman was to offer


I must own my self the poorest Sot in all the Town and Country. --
Acropolistis, the Musick-Girl


As well as my self.


Where dwells she?


I cannot tell at present, since she had her Freedom given her.


How, her Freedom? Who gav't her? I Would fain know that, if you could tell me.


Sir, what I know my self, I Will tell ye. -- I heard young Stratippocles, rich
Periphanes's Son, took care to get her freed in his absence


'Sdeath, I must run my Country if all this be true. -- It Is notorious now,
that Epidicus has squeas'd my Pockets most intollerably.


This is what I was told. -- Please ye to command me any further?


Yes, to get ye to the Devil as fast as you can, or out of my sight.


You Will gi' me my Instrument first?


No, neither your Fiddle nor Bagpipes neither. --


Well, I Will go; but I Will make the Devil to do, when I come back.


What Is to be done now? Shall I who have signed so many Warrants and Edicts,
suffer this Rascal to go unpunished? Were I to lose as much more, I Would sooner
do it than pardon this palpable Affront, and notorious Villainy. They Have exposed
me t'all the World. -- But I was a Fool to think my self inferior to Apecides,
who bares the reputation of inventing of Laws, and settling of Rights. He highly
applauds his own Discretion; but without doubt the Axe must be preferred to the
handle.


Sure there is no sort of Affliction, or Misery in this World, but what I Have
undergone; so many Troubles fall upo' me at once, which overwhelm, and tear me
all in pieces. Poverty, and Fears possess my Soul, and I Have no ground for
hopes. -- My poor Girl's fallen into the Enemies Hands; and I can hear no tale
or tidings of her


What Stranger can that be, who is so mightily full of Fears, and heavy
Complaints?


They said, Periphanes dwelt somewhere hereabouts.


She talks of me: I fancy she wants Lodgings.


I Would willingly hire a Porter, to show me either the Man or his House.


Certainly I must know her. I Have seen that Face before, but I cannot tell where.
-- Is It she, that I imagine or no?


Bless me! I must have seen that Man before now.


Sure enough it is the poor Woman of Epidaurus, I had formerly to do with, --


The Case is plain, it is he that first enjoyed me at Epidaurus.


-- And there had that Daughter by her, who is now at home wi' me.


What if I go up to him?


I don't well know whether I had best go see if it be she or no.


If it shou'dn't be he, as so many Years make me suspect, --


Length of time makes me doubt of the Person, and fills my Head wi' Scruples.
For fear it should prove otherwise, I must go cunningly to work.


-- Then I must use all a Woman's Shifts.


I Will e'n up to her.


I Will fall into Discourse with him.


Good morrow to ye, Mistress.


I thank ye, Sir, both for me and mine.


How then, Mistress?


A good day to you, Sir. There Is your Compliment returned, you entrusted me
withal


I don't blame your Fidelity. Or indeed have I any Acquaintance wi' ye?


If I ben't mistaken in the Person, Sir, I can rub up your memory of former
Acquaintance


Where did I ever see you?


That Is an unreasonable Question.


Why so, Mistress?


Because you would have me put a Gloss upo' your Memory.


You're very sharp.


No wonder for a Woman.


I dad, better and better? -- D' ye remember me?


Very well.


In Epidaurus, --


Ah, that Word has brought me to life again.


-- In your young days, how I relieved yours and your Mother's Wants.


Are you he, whose Love brought me so much Sorrow?


I am. -- How do thou do?


Very well, and the better to see you so.


Your Hand, my dear.


Take it; and with it, the most sorrowful, and miserable Woman alive.


What makes ye so sad?


My poor Daughter, I had by you, --


What of her?


-- -- -- Since she is grown up, is lost: Fallen into the Enemies Hands.


Cheer up and be satisfied, I have her at home, safe and sound. As soon as my
Servant told me she was taken Prisoner, I immediately produced the Money, and
redeemed her. He acquitted himself well and wisely i'this business; though he is a
damnable Rogue in other things


Pray let me have a sight of her, if you would ha'me live.


Ho Canthara! Bid my Daughter Thelestis come out; for here is her Mother.


Now my Spirits begin to revive.


Why did you send for me out, Sir Father?


To see thy nown Mother, Child. -- Go and meet her, and give her a Kiss.


What Mother?


She there, that is ready to dye for want of ye.


Who Is that you would ha'me kiss?


Your Daughter.


What this?


Yes.


What kiss this Creature?


Why not, since she is your own Daughter?


Sure you have lost your Senses.


I?


Yes you, Sir.


Why so?


Because I neither know this Creature, have had any Acquaintance, or so much as
laid Eye on her till now


I know whence comes your Mistake; she has got other Clothes and Dresses, since
you had her


All Creatures ha'their several ways of knowing their Young. But I declare I
never knew this


Heavens bless us all! What strange thing is this? Have I made my House a
Bawdy House? have I brought Strangers into it, who have sucked up my Mon^? --
Pray why did you kiss me, and call me Father? Why stand ye like a Mum-chance?
What are ye tonguety'd?


What would y' have me say?


She declares she is none o'your Mother.


If she will not, she may let it alone. By Iago, I Will be my Mother's Daughter in
spite of her Teeth. It Is n't fair Play to force her to be my Mother, whether
she will or no


But why a plague did ye call me Father?


That Is your Fault, not mine. Did I ever call you Father, till you called me
Daughter? And if she called me Daughter, I Would give her the Title of Mother: But
she disowns me for a Daughter, and I Will cast her off for a Mother. In short,
I Am not to blame; I Have only said as my Master Epidicus taught me


Undone! I Have pulled an old House upo' my Head.


Have I offended ye in any thing?


By Cocks nowns, call me Father again, and I Will break your Neck, you damned
Bitch Whore


I Will obey ye, Sir. When ever you have a Mind to be my Father, you may; if not, do
as you please


What? Did you buy her, thinking she had been your Daughter? What tokens had
you for it


None.


What made ye believe her to be our Child?


I had it from my Rogue Epidicus.


Tho your Servant has been mistaken, I hope you know her again.


Know her, how should I? when I never saw her but once since she came into the
World


I Am in a wretched condition


Prithee, Woman, leave weeping; go in and cheer up. I Will warrant ye find her
out somewhere or other


'Twas a young Athenian Gentleman that bought her.


I Will find him out: Be satisfied. Go in, and guard this young Shipton, the
Devil's Grandchild. -- I Will leave all Works to go hunt out this Dog Epidicus.
If I catch him, I Will put him past playing any more Rogues Tricks.


THis Banker vexes me strangly, that he dosn't come for his Money, nor bring the
Girl I bought at the Army. -- But hold, yonder comes Epidicus. What Is the
matter with him, that he looks so damnable sowrly on it


If Jove should come down, he and his eleven Gods together, they could n't save
poor Pilgarlick from going to Pot. I saw m' old Master, at a distance, buying
some Manicles, and Apecides with him. Now I more than Fancy, that these Fellows
are searching for my Rogueship. They Have certainly smelt out the business, and
discovered all my damned Tricks


How do thou, m'old Implement?


Wretchedly, Jove knows.


What Is befallen ye?


Prithee, gi'me something, and equip me for a March, before I be snap'd up. For
the two old Cullies are just at my heels, with their swinging great Kill-Devils
for Execution


Pshaw, never flinch, Man.


Troth, no more I should n't, had I any hopes of relief.


I Will secure thee, my Lad.


Faith, these old Dogs will secure me better by half, if they catch me. -- But
what young Lass comes yonder, with that reverend old Gentleman


It Is the Banker, wi'the Girl I bought at the Army.


Is yon she?


Is n't she just as I told ye? Mind her.


Is It indeed?


View her well, Epidicus: Nothing but Charms from Top to Toe. -- Is n't she?
Observe, look: There Is a delicate piece of Painting for ye


You foretell as delicate a Piece upo' my Back; which old Apelles and Zeuxes
will both draw with their birching Pencils


Strange! I admire at your coming so slowly: a Fellow wi'wooden Legs would
ha'been here in half the Time


Why, truly, I staid all this Time for her.


Nay, if 'twas her Pleasure, you came fast enough of Conscience.


Come, come; dispatch me, and tell m' out the Money, that I may not make my
Company stay for me


It Is told already.


Take this Bag, and put it in


Wisely contrived! Stay a Minute, and I Will bring y' out the Money.


Pray be quick.


It Is within here.


Do my Eyes fail me, or not? Is Not this Thelestis, Periphanes's and Philippa's
Daughter, begot at Epidaurus, and brought up at Thebes?


over-hearing him] Who can this be, that knows mine and my Parents Name?


Don't ye know me?


Not for the present.


Can ye call to mind, how one Birthday o'yours, I brought ye some Golden
Bracelets


I do, Friend.


Besides, a Crescent, and a Gold Ring?


Art thou he?


Yes indeed; and yon Gentleman's your Brother, by the same Father, tho by
another Mother


Pray, is my Father alive?


Yes, and now you may set your Heart at rest.


If all this be true, the Gods have done for me beyond m'Expectation.


Nay, it is no advantage for me to deceive ye.


Here Is your Money, Mr. Banker: Just an hundred Pounds. If you find any bad Money
in it, I Will change it


Very well, Sir. -- Your Servant, Sir.


Now, my Dear, you are mine.


Thy Sister, on good troth, as you will soon find -- Brother you're happily met.


Has she lost her Senses?


Not for calling you Brother.


What a shame, am I transformed into a Brother, the Time I could go and come
back


Be thankful, and receive your good Fortune without any Noise.


O Sister, you have lost me as soon as found me.


Hold your Tongue, Child. By my Art, I Have secured your Mistress, the
Musick-Girl, for ye at home; and by the same Art and Contrivance, have ransomed
your Sister


It Is true, Epidicus.


Go in then, and order a Bath to be got ready. I Will tell ye the whole Story at
more leisure


Come this way, Sister.


I Will send Thesprion over to ye. -- But pray remember, if the old Man be in
wrath, for you and your Sister to be of my Side, and sweeten him up all what
you're able


That will be easy to do.


Good Thesprion, get the back way to our House, and help to plead for me. It Is
a plaguey Business, tho I Am less afraid of the Old Fellows than before. --
Stratippocles all I know of this business. I Will not flee for the matter, but am
resolved to stay at home. The Old Man shall never say, I had th'impudence to
challenge my Master at running. -- I Will enter then; I Have stayed too long
already.


-- Has n't this Rascal damnably imposed upon us, for Men of our gravity?


'Sbudikins, you have almost walked me off my Legs tho.


'St, silence! Let me alone to catch the Rogue.


I tell ye, Neighbor, you would ten times better pitch upon another to go wi'ye,
instead of me: For by hobling after ye so long, I Have got such horrible Swellings
of my Knees that I Am quite foundered


What a devilish Company of Tricks has this Rogue played us to day? I Am sure he
has squeas'd out the Heart, Blood, and Guts of my Purse


A Curse on him, for me; troth, I believe he is the Devil's Match-Lighter, who
burns all that touch him, and Scorches all that come nigh him


Pshaw, I Have a dozen Gods at command more than Heaven will afford one, to stand
up, and fight for me. I Have got my Guards and Supplies within doors, for all my
Rogueries. I laugh at m'Enemies Preparations


Where, a Duce, shall I find this Rascal?


Excuse my Attenda^e, and seek him in the bottom of the Sea, for me.


Why do you look for me, Sir? Why all these Pains? or why should ye weary the
Gentleman? Here I am. Do You think I was running away; leaving the House; or so
much as avoiding your presence? I don't beg ye to spare me. Would ye fetter me?
I Am ready for ye. You Have got your Instruments; I saw ye buy 'em. What stay ye
for? About it, Sir


Strange! the Fellow calls for Punishment first.


Why don't ye bind me, Sir?


Faith, this is the most inveterate Rogue!


Truly, good Mr. Apecides, I don't desire you to interceed for me; you needn't
trouble your self


That Is easily granted, Mr. Epidicus.


Why stay ye, Sir?


For your advice, good Sir.


It Is my advice, not yours, that you bind me presently.


That Is not my desire.


No, Sir? -- Bind me.


I Would rather examine ye without it.


You Will get nothing out of me.


The Dog is preparing some back stroke for ye: What new Engine he has set a
going I cannot tell


Po, you lose Time, as long as I Am at Liberty. Tie me up, I say, and bind me as
hard as you can


I tell ye, I Would rather examine ye as you are.


And I tell ye, you will get nothing out of me.


What shall I do wi'this Fellow?


What should ye? Humor him for once.


You Are a rare Man, Mr. Apecides.


Let Us see your Hands


Ay, with all my Heart. -- Come, bind 'em strait; and don't spare me a


Now judge ye, if they ben't done well.


Very well. -- Now, Sir, examine me. Ask me what Questions you please.


Imprimis, Rogue, upo' what Assurance did you say that Slave was my Daughter,
that was bought three Days ago


My Pleasure, Sir: that Assurance.


How? upo' your Pleasure, Sirrah?


Yes; and I Will lay any Wager wi'ye that she is --


My Daughter, when her Mother disowns her?


If you be sure she is none of her Mother's Daughter, lay your Guinea against my
Penny


That Is all Trick. -- But who is this same Woman?


Not to mince the matter, she is your Son's Mistress.


Didn't I gi'ye threescore and fifteen Pounds, to redeem my Daughter?


I own it, Sir; and wi'that Money I bought this Musick-girl, your Son's
Mistress, instead of her. -- In that Business, I fingered away threescore and
fifteen Pounds


But what made ye top this last Musick-girl upo' me?


Truly, Sir, I confess it; and found it proper for my Design.


Then what is become of the Money I delivered to ye?


I Will tell ye, Sir, -- I gav't neither to a Miser, nor a Prodigal, but e'n to
your own Son Stratippocles


How dare ye do that?


'Twas my pleasure, Sir.


What a cursed impudent Dog is this?


You insult over me as though I were your Slave.


I shall be glad when y' have got your Freedom.


And I deserve it now.


You deserve it, sirrah?


Go in, and see; I Will soon convince ye that I do.


What Is the meaning of this?


You Will see in a Minute: do but go in.


Hah! Here must be something more than ordinary. -- Good Neighbor have an Eye
to the Rogue.


Prithee, Epidicus, what is this business?


Faith it is a damned unreasonable thing that I should stand bound, for helping
of him to a lost Daughter.


Ha'ye found his Daughter, say ye?


Yes indeed, and she is within too. How plaguey hard it is t'ha' my good Services
so ill rewarded


We have been seeking ye all the Town over, till we are as weary as Dogs.


Faith, I Am as weary wi'your finding, as you wi' your seeking.


You need n't beg so heartily: I Am satisfied of his Innocence, that he deserves
to be let go. --


Let m' alone.


Let him unbind ye.


No.


That Is not fair.


Faith, I Will not suffer't, till you have given me satisfaction.


That Is nothing but just and reasonable. -- Come, I Will give ye a new pair
o'Shoes, a good Coat, and a Cloak


What else?


Your Freedom.


But after that; when a Man's Time's just out, he ought to have some good thing
to be nibling on


You shall. -- I Will provide a supper.


Troth, if you will not ask me forgiveness, I Will not agree.


Well, I do, honest Epidicus, and beg your pardon, if any of my foolish
Mistakes have done y' an Injury. But in recompense, here take your Freedom


Troth, I Am loath to pardon ye; but I cannot tell how to help it. -- Come, undo
my Hands, as soon as you please.


Here Is a rare Rogue then, one who has gained his Freedom by his Cunning. Up
with your Clo^ks, Gallants, and vail your Caps
Farewell: We beg your Favor, and your Claps.



THis Play, Plautus was always very fond of, and reckons it his best; but as
for the general Deserts of it, I shall determine nothing. The Subject of it, is
the Discovery of Thelestis, and all the Lines of the Play tend to that Center,
tho there is no manner of appearance of it till the Fifth Act, which makes the
Poet's Art the more fine and excellent. Tho the Subject is not perfectly
single, for Stratippocles loses a Mistress as he finds a Sister, yet there is
perfectly an Unity of Action, and, like the rest of his Plays, without any
Under-Plots. This Play is very short, yet there is great Variety in the Plot
and Incidents, and an excellent Management through the whole: So close it is,
tho perfectly clear, that it requires some Attention to comprehend all exactly,
at the first Reading. Besides this, it is very remarkable, That Plautus has
truly drawn the People of his Age, as the Distrust of Old Men, the Eagerness of
Young, the Vanity of Soldiers, the Impudence of Courtizans, and the Treachery
of Slaves

THis First Scene explains the very same to the Audience, that Plautus's
Prologues generally used to do, which is far more natural than to do it in a
Prologue. This Scene, in the Original, is also very remarkable for an unusual
Air of Wit and Sharpness; and there are not many Scenes in this Author that
come up to it in its Fineness and Neatness of Railery

Page 84. l. 11. You're a puny Town-Chitterlin] Scurra es. The Word, Scurra,
signifies properly, a Buffoon, or Parisite; but since these sort of People for
the most part seek after the softness and Luxury of Courts and Cities, and
abhor the Hardships of Camps, it here signifies, Urbanus, and is opposed to
Militaris; so that this Translation is the true sense, tho it may appear
otherwise at the first sight

Ibid. l. 17, etc. Off and on -- Epi. The Wooden Horse, you mean. O, I hate
that damned Variety most mortally.] Vary. Ep. Qui vary valent, caprigenam
hominem non placet mihi, neque pantherinum genus. That Word, Varius, was often
used by the Slaves of those Times in a jocose sense, to signify the streaks of
ones Back, after he was whipped, which was of Various Colors, as in the first
Act of Pseudolus, Ita ego vostra latera loris faciam ut valide varia sint.
Thesprion, by Vary, meant nothing but, Sometimes well and sometimes ill, or,
Off and on, as I have translated it; but Epidicus took it in this last sense,
and takes an occasion presently to call those who vary valent, those Laced
People, Caprigenam, ac pantherinum genus, that is, of the Race of Wild Beasts,
such as, Goats, and Panthers, whose Skins were of various Colors. A close
Translation here, would have lost much of the Beauty of the Original; therefore
I have taken a little more Liberty, and by that means, the Force of the
Repartee, is in a great Measure preserved

Ibid. l. 30, etc. Hear me, and you shall be heard in your turn. These. The very
Words of a Judge, in truth.] Operam da: opera redibitur tibi. Th. Ius dicis.
The Phrases, Operam da, and, Opera redibitur, are proper Terms used in their
Courts by their Judges upon all occasions; and this made Thesprion answer him,
Ius dicis. If the Beauty of it be any ways lost in our Tongue, it is more
because it will not be so readily perceived, than for any other Reason I can
assign

Page 85. l. 4. Your Beadles, with their Staffs for your Honor's Pate.]
Lictores duo, duo viminei fasces virgarum. It (...) customary for the Pretors
(which were much the same with our Lord Chief-Iustices) to have Rods carried
before them, and upon this Custom consists all the sharpness of the Jest, these
Rods being the most usual Punishment for Slaves. This is much lost in our
Tongue

Ibid. l. 9. What Is become of my Master Stratippocles' s Arms.] This Question
would have been impertinent upon our Stage; but Thesprion being Stratippocles's
Armor-bearer, who ought to have had 'em with him at that Time, the Question
was very proper

Ibid. l. 22. Troth, I believe Vulcan made his Arms for him, etc.] This, and a
good deal more, is an allusion to the Story of Achilles, and the sharpness of
it appeared more among the Romans, than it does to us; because they were far
better acquainted with this Story than we are

Ibid. l. 31. Where Is my Master Stratippocles? etc] Here begins a Narration of
what passed before the opening of the Stage. It is very short, and extreme
lively; and the Poet most ingeniously manages it by the Mouths of two several
Persons, who both have a part in it; and this still makes it more diverting,
and more natural. But nothing can seem with less Design or Affectation than
Epidicus's part of it

Page 88. l. 8, etc. What a Rogue was I t'impose upo' the Old Man, etc.] Here
Epidicus goes on with the Narration of what happened before the Action began upo'
the Stage, and that in so few Words, and so accidentally, that nothing could
appear more proper, and more Natural; and indeed scarce any thing seems more
difficult than making Narrations in Monologues appear necessary, and natural

Page 89. l. 1, etc. Thus I Have told ye the whole Story, Cheribulus; and given
ye a full account of my Troubles and Love.] It is to be supposed that
Stratippocles had told his Friend Cheribulus, all what Thesprion had told
Epidicus in the first Scene. Thus the Poet ingeniously contrives to make
Stratippocles go on just where Thesprion had left off; for if he had told the
whole Story upon the Stage, the Spectators would have been palled and tired out
with Repetitions

Ibid. l. 9. Tho truly, to her Chastity, I never offered the least Violence or
Incivility.] This is an extraordinary material Passage, which ought not to be
forgot by the Spectators, especially when they come to know this Woman, he
talks of, to be his Sister. What is still more remarkable, is, the Poet's
finding such an ingenious Pretext for bringing it in

Ibid. l. 23. I Would sooner see such Friends starve in a Prison than live in a
Palace.] Malim hujusmodi mihi amicos furno mersos, quam foro. This Passage is a
little difficult. Stratippocles's saying, He had rather see such Friends as
Cheribulus, in an Oven rather than the Market, was as much as to say, he had
rather have him dead than alive; or at least, he would have him in a miserable
confined Condition, rather than in a happy and free State; so that the Liberty
I have taken here, is a nigher Imitation of the Latin, than a close Translation
could have been

Page 91. l. 26, etc. In these Brains must I have a Committee of the whole
House, to consider of Ways and Means for the raising of Supplies to carry on
this vigorous War.] Ego de re argentaria jam Senatum convocabo in cord
consiliarium, cui potissimum judicatur bellum, unde argentum auferam. Here
Epidicus pleasantly alludes to the Senates Custom of raising Money for any Wars,
or the like; therefore I think it most properly translated in the Phrases, and
Terms, generally used in our Parliament House

THE first Interval is filled up with Epidicus's Preparations to cheat
Periphanes, and with Stratippocles's waiting at his Friend's House for the
Success of 'em

Page 92. l. 8, etc. What need ye be ashamed of marrying one of a good Family,
though of mean Fortune; especially one, as you believe, you had your Daughter by,
that is now at home.] This is a very good Preparation for to make way for the
tenth Scene of the fourth Act

Ibid. l 14, etc. For ye never can look upon her Grave, but y'offer Thanks for
her Departure.] Cujus quoties sepulcrum vides, sacrificas illico Orco hostiis.
It was a common Custom in those Days, when a Man has got rid of an ill Wife,
that makes way for another, to offer a Sacrifice to Pluto for his good Fortune.
But this was more than a Translation need to take notice of

Page 93. l. 11, etc. I heard he was intangl'd with a Musick-Girl, but who I
cannot tell. Per. Ay, that goes to the Heart of me.] This is all designed by the
Poet, to help forward Epidicus's Cheat, and to make it seem more likely, and
probable

Ibid. l. 15, etc. The old Men ha'now opened a Passage for my Tricks to make
Incursions, and snub 'em o'their Money.] Ipsi hi quidem mihi dant viam, quo
pacto ab se argentum auferam. The Original is a Metaphor taken from the
Magistrates, who, when they appear in public, have their Officers to go before
'em to clear the way. The Translation, is a Metaphor taken from the Campaign,
which, in our Language, is more intelligible, and comical, than perhaps the
other would have been

Page 94. l. 10, etc. All the Troops that were marching to Thebes, are
discharged, and sent home.] Here begins Epidicus's Story, by which he designed
to cheat the Old Man. Though there appears something of Grosness in it, yet it is
very ingeniously, and cunningly managed, and the Discourse very natural and
diverting. The Truth of the Peace, Epidicus's have, Apecides's surprise, and
Periphanes's concern for his Son, are sufficient Circumstances to have made it
pass with wiser Men. But what is most remarkable, is, the Poet's Design in
helping out the main Incident to it, Thelestis's Discovery, when Epidicus only
thought of obliging his young Master. This the Spectators could never foresee,
and is the chief cunning of a Dramatick Poet

Ibid. l. 30. There I found her, attended by four several Musicians playing.]
Epidicus said this, to fright Periphanes with the great Pride and Costliness of
his Son's Mistress, and to bring about his cheating Designs the easier

Ibid. l. antepenult. etc. And is in a fair way to ruin his Riches and
Reputation, his own self, and your Worships self.] Ubi fidemque, remque, seque,
teque properat perdere. The Imitations of Rhimes and Gingles, are often
dangerous to Translators; for, besides their being often affected, they as many
times come short of the Original. How far this is applicable to my self in this
Passage, I leave to every one to judge

Page 95. l. 4, etc. How a duce was she dressed then? with a Cloak or a Robe,
or had she a Milliner's Shop upon her Back? There Is variety enough. Epi. A
Woman carry a whole Shop upon her Back? Per. Where Is the wonder? You may daily
meet these Creatures in the Sreets with Houses and Lands upo' their Backs.] Quid
erat induta? an regillam induculam, an mendiculam, an impluviatam? ut istae
faciunt vestimentis nomina. Ep. Utin' impluvium induta eat! Pe. Quid istuc est
mirabile? quasi non fundis exornatae multae incedant per vias. The Liberty I
have taken in this Passage, was to endeavor to preserve the force of the Jest,
which consists in the playing upon the Word, Impluviatam. To make it clear, the
Word, Impluvium, signifies a^ square open Place, which the Romans often had in
their Houses to let in Rain for their use; or a square Courtyard, that
received the Rain in at four Water Spouts; from whence, a Habit they had which
was made with four sides, or four Pieces, was called Vestimentum impluviatum.
Here Epidicus takes an occasion from this word to admire at a Woman's being able
to wear a Courtyard upon her back: Periphanes, carrying on the Humor, tells
him it is no wonder, since they frequently wear whole Houses and Lands, meaning
the value of 'em, which their Prodigal Sparks had bestowed on 'em. As for the
liberty I Have taken, where a Jest is lost in the Translation, another ought to
be invented, which comes nighest the Force and Design of the Original

Ibid. l. 14. etc. There Is your light Mant plated, your Stiff-bodied-Gown, your
Loose-Gown, your Nightgown, your Riding-Gown, your Imbroider'd, and Speckl'd
Gowns, Pane'd Works, and Plumed Works, Petticoats, Hoods, Scarfs, Tours and
Top-knots, Fingle-Fangles, and Gold-Bobs, with all the Colors of the Rainbow,
and Figures of all the Flowers, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Flies, and Monsters in
the Universe.] Tunicam rullam, tunicam spicam, linteolum caesicium, indusiatam,
patagiatam, caltulam, aut crocutulam, supparum, aut subminiam, ricam,
basilicum, aut exoticum, cumatile aut plumatile, cerinum aut melinum. Gerrae
maximae! I have been forced to take a more than ordinary liberty in this
Passage, because we want Words to answer those in the Original, though three or
four of the first may do tolerably well. In such a place as this, if the Humor
and Design of the Raillery be but carried on as in the rest of the Translation,
it is as much as I aim at. The explanation of these Latin words, can be of
little use in respect of the Beauties of the Play (the main thing which I aim
at in my Remarks) therefore I shall not trouble the Reader, nor my self, so
much as that comes to

Ibid. l. 22, etc. Nay some of their Dresses make 'em look like Monkeys. Epi.
What are those, Sir? Per. Your damned Night-Rails.] Cani quoque etiam ademptum
'st nomen. Ep. Qui? Pe. Vocant Laconicum. The Women, it seems, had a sort of
Dresses called Laconicks, and since many of their Dogs had the very same Name;
Periphanes satirically reprehends the Women of his time, as borrowing their
Dresses Names from Dogs. This is lost in our Language, therefore I have
attempted to preserve the sharpness of it another way, and for that Liberty,
see the last Sentence of the Remark before the last

Pa. 98. l. 3. I Have a trick too, that the Merchant shall not smell your Designs.]
This new Trick was a cunning Contrivance of Epidicus's, to keep Periphanes out
of the way, not doubting but to manage Apecides with ease

Ibid. l. 23. Epidicus, I gi' ye Thanks.] Epidice, habeas gratiam. As Madam
Dacier observes, this is spoken by Periphanes, and not by Apecides, as it is in
all the common Books

Page 99. l. 18, etc. And stick as close to my Back, as an old Rook to a rich
Cully.] Ne ulmos parasitos faciet, quae usque attondeant. That is, Lest his
Elming Parasites should eat me up, or, devour me to the Bone. This is a
pleasant Thought, but will not do in our Language, to have done it, His Rods
should stick to my Skin, as a Parasite to a Lord's Table, would have been no
more Liberty than was necessary to make the Thought clear in our Tongue

Ibid. l. 24, etc. I Will soon produce one, and teach her her Lesson, how to
carry on the Cheat handsomely to our old Gentleman.] This Trick of Epidicus's,
is an excellent Preparation by the Poet, for what happened in the seventh and
eighth Scenes of the fourth Act; not only for the pleasant Diversion to the
Spectators, but chiefly for the Discovery of Epidicus's Rogueries, and
consequently by bringing about the main Plot more dexterously. This neither
Epidicus or the Spectators could foresee, but the Poet had it in his Eye all
the time

Ibid. l. ult. OF this old silly Put.] Ab damnoso seen. The word Damnosus, is
an excellent word in this Case, being both Active and Passive, and signifies,
One who has spent much, or, One who has suffered much. We have nothing to
answer it fully in our Tongue, that I know of, except those of Cully, Bubble,
or Put, will; and the true meaning of these, especially the two latter, seem
not yet well fixed

THE second Interval is filled up with Epidicus's receiving the Money of
Periphanes; and with Stratippocles's waiting for him at Cheribulus's House

Page 100. l. 3, etc. I Would gi' the World to know whether there be any Hopes or
not.] It is very remarkable that throughout this Play, Stratippocles never met
with his Father on the Stage; and further, he endeavors to avoid him till the
latter end of the last Act, when Epidicus has brought about his Design,
therefore lies incognito at his Friend Cheribulus's House: Yet notwithstanding
all these Inconveniences which attend Stratippocles, the Poet has ingeniously
found very probable Pretexts for his appearing those four times he does, of
which this is a remarkable one

Ibid. l. 17, etc. You Will meet wi' something, by some ways, some means, from
some Place, or from some Body, etc.] Here Cheribulus is hard put to it by
Stratippocles, therefore he is forced to talk a little obscurely, and with
hesitation; for the more clear discovery of which to the Reader, there ought to
have been Breaks, or Dashes at each Comma, in this Translation, but that defect
I did not discover time enough

Epidicus came exactly in the right time to make up the breach between the
young Gentlemen; and here Plautus's Conduct is very remarkable in ordering his
Business so within Doors, that is, his receiving the Money and Instructions, so
that he must of necessity come at that time and no other

Page 101. l. 20, etc. You see, Sir, as long as I can please, and oblidge you,
I Am sufficiently prodigal of m' own Back.] This is made use of by the Poet as a
fair Pretext for Epidicus's bringing in his new Tricks and Devices without any
affectation, or seeming Design of instructing the Audience; a piece of Art
which few of our Poets seem to observe, but Mr. Dryden. Another thing is very
remarkable, that is, Plautus's excellent Management in relating Epidicus's
Cheats by piece meal, some in this Scene, and others elsewhere, when the
relating all together, would have so much over-charg'd the Audiences Memory, as
to have dulled a great part of their Pleasure, a Fault too common in many of
our Comedies, than which nothing can be more dangerous to the ruining of the
whole Success

Ibid. l. 24. By making your Father guilty of Bag-slaught^r.] Quia ego tuum
patrem faciam perenticidam. The Joke of this Passage consists in the sound of
the words, Perenticida, a Cutpurse, and Parenticida, a Paricide; therefore so
nigh as the sound of Bag-slaughter and Manslaughter, is to Perenticida and
Parenticida; and as much as Paricide is greater than Manslaughter, so much is
the difference between the Original and Translation

Ibid. l. 26. Hold up his Hand at the Bar, but I make him hold up his Hand at
his Bags.] Peratim ductare: at ego follatim ductitabo. The whole Beauty of this
Passage, I believe, cannot be preserved in our Tongue. Epidicus here carries on
the fancy of Perenticida and Parenticida, and the Poet has luckily hit upon a
Line that exactly agrees with either. For the common punishment of Paricides,
was to put 'em into a Sack, with a Cock, Serpent, and Ape, and then throw 'em
into the River. Now the word, Ductare, signifies equally, To bring a Man to
punishment, or, to cheat him; so that the Phrase, Peratim ductare, agreed with
both cases, because Pera was either the Sack for the Paricide, or the old Man's
Purse. Follatim ductare, is the same thing, only Follis was a much larger Sack
than Pera. So that the natural sense of this, without any quibling, is, I don't
cheat him by dribling Purses, but by large Bags; but I would not do it that
way, for then I must have lost more of the design of the Original than now I
have. Madam Dacier has made no Translation at all for this and the last Passage

Page 102. l. 4, etc. * By buying her himself, beforehand; and so to remove her
to some by-place. Now will I top another upon him, that shall do his Business
as well every jot.] None of this Passage is in the Original; but it is most
certain that there are some Lines lost, by what follows; therefore, I have been
forced to add this to make up the sense. The words are none of my own
Invention, but almost a just Translation of what Madam Dacier had filled up
this Place withal, to wit, Ut enim praestinet argento, priusquam veniat filius
Ubi erit empta, ut aliquo ex urbe amoveat venificam.
Nunc ostendam ei fidicinam aliqua conductitiam.


Ibid. l. 25, etc. Instead of the threescore and fifteen Pounds, to name
sixscore Guinea's.] Argenti minas se habere quinquaginta. This Plot was well
laid, and ingeniously contrived, but this Passage has made it so obscure in the
Original, that several Interpreters have quite mistaken the sense; so that I
was forced to add above half a Line in the Translation to clear all

Ibid. l. 32. Y' outdo Matchiavil for Policy.] Vorsutior es quam rota
figularis. That is, You're more crafty than a Potter's Wheel. But this does
poorly in our Language, therefore I have turned it. If I had translated it,
You Have as many turns as a Whirligig, it would have been nigher the Original,
and might have done tolerably enough in the Mouth of Epidicus, but not in
Stratippocles

Page 103. l. ult. I Am safely arrived at the Camp wi' this rich Booty.] Cum
praeda in castras redeo Here ends the the third Act, as plainly appears from
the Cessation of Action upon the Stage, and other Circumstances. The Common
Books are all false in this Point, who make the third Act to end about 140
Verses further, where there is no clearing the Stage, nor no manner of Grounds
for it

THE third Interval is filled up with Epidicus's going to the Slave-merchants,
and procuring the Musick-woman for Apecides: And also with Cheribulus's waiting
for his Mistress at his Friend's House

This short Scene is very moral, and very natural for a considering cool-headed
Old Man to speak. It is observable that the Ancients were full of these sort of
grave Passages in their Comedies, as well as Tragedies, and our Author was not
much behind-hand, notwithstanding his Inclination to Merryment upon every
slight and trivial occasion

Page 105. l. 7. There Is vast difference between the Education of a young Maid,
and a Curtizan.] The ancient Athenians, and Romans were rather more careful of
their Daughters Honesty than we; and to attempt the Chastity of a Virgin, was
no less than a Capital Crime

Ibid. l. 17, 18. Without doubt you have an admirable Servant, etc.] Here begins
a very pleasant short Narration of what was done off the Stage; the very Plot
and Subject makes it so, and not the Style. But the chief Design of it is for a
Preparation to make the Seventh, but. especially the Eighth Scene of this Act,
more diverting. See more of that Preparation, in the second Remark in the third
Scene of the Second Act

Page 106. l. 3, etc. All the while, I did as though I was a silly clod-pated
Ass, that could not say Bo to a Goose. Per. You could do no otherwise.] Ego
illic me autem sic assimulabam quasi stolidum, cum bardum me faeciebam. Per.
Imo ita decet. This, Imo ita decet, is an equivocal Answer to the foregoing
Sentence; as is, You could do no otherwise, the same; it being taken either in
a good or bad Sense. This is very pleasant when rightly apprehended

Ibid. l. 18, etc. What silly Fellow's yon, who comes, tossing and brandishing
his Cloak so?] Sed hic quis est quem advenientem conspicor, suam qui undantem
chlamydem quassando facit? These two Verses are misplaced in all the Editions
of Plautus that I ever saw; they placing them the last in the Scene, whereas
they should go immediately before Atque haec stultitia'st, etc. Five Lines
before. And this has made many Interpreters force a Sense out of the Verse,
Atque haec stultitia'st, me illi vitio vortere, which the Author never intended

That such a considerable Incident as the Rhodian Captain's coming, might not
seem to be made only to serve the Poet's Design, he has wisely taken care to
prepare it beforehand, in the latter end of the Second Scene of the Second
Act, so that here can be nothing precipitated, or any thing unnatural. This is
a Rule that ought to be carefully observed by all Dramatick Poets

Page 107. l. 7, etc. I Have achieved that by my great and mighty Valor, that
all Mankind ought to gi'me Thanks.] It is observable, that Plautus seldom
brings a Soldier upon the Stage, but he is a blundring, rough-hewn, swaggering
Fellow. Terences's Thraso is just of the same Character, but more moderatly
drawn than Plautus's Soldier

Page 108. l. 5, etc. I intend to give her her Freedom, and make her Partner
i'my Bed.] Here our noble Captain's Character is hansomly carried on, for he
does not only want Politeness and Civility, but you see he wants common
Discretion too

Page 110. l. 9, etc. I heard young Stratippocles, rich Periphanes' s Son, took
care to get her freed in his absence. Per. 'S death, I must run my Country if
all this be true.] This was Acropolistis the Musick-girl, whom Periphanes
himself had freed, taking her all this while for his Daughter Thelestis, and
knew nothing to the contrary; which much startled him to hear that his Son had
freed, Acropolistis, one he knew nothing of. Periphanes's Complaints, were all
for Epidicus's last Cheats; for as yet he did not so much as suspect the first,
to wit his imposing upon him with Acropolistis instead of his Daughter. So that
here is an excellent Contrivance of the Poet's to raise new Troubles, and add
new Pleasure to the Spectators in the last Scene of this Act, and make it the
most diverting of all, by causing Periphanes Troubles to come one after
another, and such too as he thought himself most secure from

Ibid. l. 25, etc. Shall I, who ha'signed so many Warrants and Edicts, suffer
this Rascal to go unpunished?] Qui in tantis positus sum sententiis, eamne ego
sinam impune? This is a very hard Passage, and Interpreters have explained it a
great many several ways; but here I have followed Madam Daciers Explanation,
which seems much more probable, and natural, than any other I have seen

Page 111. l. 10, etc. My poor Girl's fallen into the Enemies Hands; and I can
hear no Tale or Tidings of her.] Here the Poet gives a very good reason for
Philippa's coming to Athens; so that this Incident is no ways forced or
unnatural. What is remarkable still, is, that though her Daughter had been fallen
into the Enemies Hands a considerable time; yet she, coming from Thebes, could
not arrive before this Time, because the Peace was but just now concluded on
and ratified. For more of the Preparations of this Interview, see the first
Remark in the second Act

Page 113. l. 24. Bid my Daughter Thelestis come out.] Iube Acropolistidem
prodire filiam ante aedis meam. This Passage is undoubtedly false in all the
Editions of this Author, and instead of Acropolistidem, it ought to be
Thelestidem; for though her name was really Acropolistis, yet Periphanes took her
for his Daughter Thelestis. I suppose it was altered by some Person not well
acquained with the Plot

Page 114. l. 16. All Creatures have their several ways of knowing their Young.]
Aliter catuli long olent, aliter sues, That is to say, Puppies, and Hogs have
better Noses. It is a Proverb taken from nature, but too gross and base for the
refin'dness of our Conversation, therefore I have altered it a little

Page 115. l. 1. I Have pulled an old House upo' my Head.] Plaustrum Perculi.
This is a Proverb borrowed from Husbandmen; who seldom knew a greater
Misfortune than the overthrowing of a Cart after it was well laden. It seems
mo^e expressive in this Place than our English Proverb

THE Fourth Interval is filled up with Periphanes's searching for Epidicus, to
punish him; and likewise with Stratippocles's waiting for the Banker and his
Mistress

Page 116. l. 6, etc. If Jove should come down, he and his eleven Gods
together, they could not save poor Pilgarlick from going to Pot.] Here Epidicus
was really in a very sad Condition, and the Stage embarrass'd with all the
Difficulties that could be; yet soon after, our Poet finds a way to bring all
off, even when the Spectators were almost brought to Despair. The doing of this
well, does not only show the greatest Art of a Poet, but gives the Spectators
the greatest pleasure too; and this is the most taking part of a Play, and
indeed, there is nothing like Surprises, if they be natural

Ibid. l. 17. The two old Cullies.] Duo defloccati senes. The word,
Defloccatus, signifies, Worn out, or, Bald; Epidicus called 'em so, because he
had fleeced 'em, and consequently, Cully is the proper Term in our Language

Page 117. l. 16. A Fellow wi' wooden Legs would have been here in half the
time.] Pedibus pulmoneis qul perhibetur, prius venisset, quam tu advenisti
mihi. Madam Dacier says, That this Passage relates to some Man, brought into a
Proverb by reason of his slowness. The word, Pulmoneus, signifies, Soft, or
Swelled, but that would not have done so well in our Language, especially in
this Place

In this short Scene is the Discovery, or the Unravelling of the Plot, which
seemed to have fallen out purely by accident, and all the Preparations to it
make it appear the most probable in the World. One cunning piece of Art of the
Poet's, is, his adjusting all Circumstances so as she must necessarily come
upon the Stage at this time and no other; and then to make Stratippocles advice
Epidicus to view her well, upon pretense of her Beauty, whereas it was designed
for her Discovery, for there was a necessity for that, since Epidicus had
almost forgot her. Many Observations might be made upon the Preparations to
this Discovery, which I want room to insert

Page 120. l. 1. Good Thesprion, get the back way to our House, and help to
plead for me.] It is observable that Thesprion appears but once in the whole
Play, and that in the beginning. But in this case, our modern Poets would not
so soon have lost such a remarkable Character, but have carried it on through
the Play; and this, when it dos not confound the Plot, is an excellency of our
Stage above the Ancients. Plautus is guilty of this Defect in the more
remarkable Character of Artotrogus, in his Miles Gloriosus

Ibid. l. 12. For Men of our Gravity.] Nos vetulos decrepitos duos. The word,
Decrepo, signifies to be at the, last gasp, and is a Metaphor taken from a
Candle just a going out, which makes some small Creekings; for this reason, old
Men were often called Decrepites, because as long as they had life, they were
in some condition of making a Noise, that is, of doing some good, either by
their Purses, or their Actions. Our word, Decrepit, being usually taken in a
reproachful sense, would not have well answered it, therefore I have
endeavored to preserve the comical part of the meaning

Page 121. l. 7, etc. I Have got my Guards and Supplies within doors, for all my
Rogueries.] Epidicus's Supplies were Stratippocles, Thelestis, Philappa, and
Thesprion, whom he had got ready to plead for him; and since such a lucky
Discovery had been made, and the Girls Redemption too, both from Slavery and
the danger of Incest, all by his means, he knew they could not fail of
succeeding; and this made him so very insolent to the two old Men, to their
great Surprise, and the Spectators satisfaction

Ibid l. 9. I laugh at my Enemies Preparations.] Apolactizo inimicos omnes. The
word, (...), is Greek, and signifies Calce summoveo, or Calce repello; but this
was not necessary to be taken notice of in a Translation

Page 121. l. 15, etc. D' ye think I was running away; leaving the House; or so
much as avoiding your presence?] Number te fugi? number ab domo absum? number oculis
concessi tuis? Here are three Sentences signifying almost the same thing; and I
believe many Translators would have contented themselves with doing two, or
perhaps but one of 'em; but I always choose exactness when I can do it without
very much Injury to the English. For this see the second Remark on the second
Scene of the third Act of Amphitryon

Page 122. l. 15. Lay your Guinea against my Penny.] In meum nummum, in tuum
talentum pignus da. That is to say, Lay your Talent against my Sesterce, 187
Pounds to nigh two Pence; this was to show the difference between Masters and
Slaves. This Translation keeps to the Design and Pleasantry of Epidicus e'n as
well as the other

Page 124. l. 1. You needn't beg so heartily, etc.] Periphanes speaks this to
the Persons within, whom Epidicus had employed to plead for him. If any of our
modern Poets had had the management of this Place, they would undoubtedly have
brought Stratippocles, Thelestis, Philippa, and Thesprion on to the Stage; but
the Ancients had another taste, and were wonderful careful to avoid any thing
that looked like Confusion, sometimes too scrupulously in this case, as ours
too often offend the other way. Therefore a just Medium ought to be exactly
observed

Page 125. l. 1. Here Is a rare Rogue then, one who has gained his Freedom by
his Cunning.] Hic is homo est, qui libertatem malitia invenit sua.] Here,
perhaps, it may be thought, that Vice appears triumphant. I grant it would upon
our Stage if this were acted; but the Romans were of another Opinion in these
Cases, and they took a peculiar pleasure in seeing a witty Slave cheat a
covetous old Fellow, and the Ingenuity of the Action was often thought
sufficient amends for the Knavery of it

I shall conclude all with this Remark upon the whole: That the Acts could
never have been more naturally divided. The First, contains the Arrival of
Stratippocles, and the opening of the Subject; the second, Epidicus's
Knaveries; the third, his success in his Knaveries; the fourth, the discovery
of 'em; and the fifth, the knowledge of Thelestis, and his recovery from the
danger of 'em. And in the management of all this, not one Actor appears upon
the Stage without a necessary Pretext of Business there


