THis Play was pretty once for ought we know,
When 'twas first writ, a dozen years ago.
But Gallants what-e're 'twas when it was young;
You know that Beauty seldom holds so long.
But though it has not like kind Misses done,
Who act so briskly, and begin so soon,
That their o'relighted Beauties set e're Noon:
Yet it is guilty of a greater Crime.
A dozen years ago, and in its prime;
And never launcht out till now! Pox, cries a Wit,
So long in this kind Town, and never tried yet!
If this Play take, my sense and judgment fail.
It Is an ill Face keeps Maidenhead so stale.
But grant 'twas Modest, and kept off till now,
A Miracle in Wit, and Woman too.
No, that will not pass, refuse so long t'engage,
And stoop at last t'appear upon this Stage,
In a damned House, and in as damned a Dress*
Like Wench debaucht in Paragon; you would guess
It had a very longing mind before,
That yields at last on such an easy score.
But, Faith, without fine Scenes once like a Play:
You like kind Women when their Paint's away.
Plays heightened by gay Clothes, and gaudy Scenes,
Are but like Spanish Beauties in Iappeens.

LEd on by your Example and Command,
No Force could the Indaean Arms withstand;
This Victory is to your Valor due;
Your Conquering Arm the Arabian Powers or'e-threw.
You the Kings Brother at his feet laid Dead;
A Homage to a King severely paid.

Your great Examples made my Duty bold;
None could a Coward be, and You behold:
Nor is there any thing more Triumph draws
Then Loyalty linked to a Monarch's Cause.

Well Valiant Conqu'rors, cease this generous strife:
The Justice of our Cause gave us all life.
Whilst thus our selves we Conquer, and thus Knit;
The fierce Arabians to our Swords submit.

Lead to Jerusalem! the King I Will meet,
And lay my Wreaths at my great Masters feet.

Not all the Laurels Tyridates wears,
Nor Honors growing faster than his years;
Nor Fame that swells a young Man's Spirit high
Do yet clear up my Princes Cloudy Eye:
A misty Melancholy on his brow
Does some more deep, and silent Sorrow show:
Can you Arsanes guess the Cause?

So little, that in all the search I make,
The more I judge, the farther I mistake.
All the Disasters which his House befell,
Did never past a Moderation swell;
His juster Griefs, and those so well-known Woes,
He with a manly Courage did oppose.

How then are now his sorrows greater grown?
Can Herod's Interest move more than his own?

That grief which inward burns must needs consume, --
But 'twill more Airy grow by vent and room.
You then his Governors may better move,
To know the Cause: He cannot disapprove
That Care in you, nor will your love neglect;
For he has always born you great respect.

On all occasions then we must lay hold,
Love prompted by necessity grows bold.

I find it is not Business can reclaim
My laboring thoughts from an invading flame;
Nor can the great Employment of the War,
Intruding Loves more fierce assaults deter:
Whilst I for Herod with my Sword overcome,
The Image of his Queen Kills me at Home.
Not all Phraates Cruelties did move
So much my Breast, as does this Tyrant, Love.
Nor all the Knowledge, which I gained at Rome
From Stoics, this one Passion can or'ecome.
How little I a Generals name respect,
Whilst I my Office, and my Fame neglect.
Oh Gods, who now an Heretic can be
Against the power of gentle Love or Thee.
My panting heart, I hold no longer dear
Than whilst I find Mariamne's Image here.
It is my glory nothing could subdue
That Heart ( not force of Gods or Men) but You.

Sir, it is our Love which makes us thus intrude,
With busy Care upon your Solitude.

In Melancholy Characters we read
Some gloomy mist has your great Heart o're-spread.
Your Air, and Meine, and Looks more Cloudy grown,
Though you take care to Hide it, make it Known.

We hitherto have shared your woes and bliss,
And shall we now both Strangers be to this?
Are we mistrusted now? --

Polites, hold --
To you, and only you, I dare unfold
That Secret which I here locked up till now;
And did disclose to none, no not to you;
Because it is what your Council cannot remove:
It Is -- O that I live to tell it -- Sir, it is Love! --
Look not so strange, you will be surpised much more
When you shall see her shadow I adore.

Oh Gods! What see I here? -- It cannot be!

Is Homage strange to such Divinity?

Sir, Then it is Herod's Queen whom you adore.

You tell me what I Knew too well before:
I through your Eyes Polites see your fear;
And it is but just those Dubious thoughts I clear.
You fear that Noble Virtue is Betrayed
Which ruled my Actions whilst your Precepts swa'yd:
But though I Love, it is with so pure a flame,
As w^ll not Innocence, nor Virtue shame!
To say, I Love her more than Life, is poor,
But I love Mine, and Her bright Honor more.

In Love you to rewards of Love pretend.

No, no: My Love has neither Hopes nor End;
She is a Virtue that no Mortal dares
Pretend to Love; unless he Virtue wears.
Could I transform to any shape; yet she
Cannot be tempted by a Deity.
Lock up this Secret closely in your Breast.

Without your Leave it never shall be expressed.

But Sir, does Mariamne know your flame?

My Tongue as yet durst never giv't a name.

Sir, since I doubt, it were in vain to try
To reason you into a remedy:
That which I cannot remove, I will defend:
Yet many dangers may your Love attend.
Herod, a Man is of that Temper known,
As Jealous of his Wife as of his Crown.
He spares no blood, that He may this secure,
Think not in Love, a Rival He Will endure.

You cannot say more than Tyridates knows,
But for her sake I will my life expose.

And we with you will the same Hazard share.

But in discourse I do my Joys defer.
It Is the highest Triumph that my Arms obtain,
Ending the War to see the Queen again.

Mother, the force wherewith you me Invade,
To a Rebellious Thought can never persuade.
Though I no Passion for that Tyrant know,
Nor Obligation to his Merits owe;
I by the Sacred Law of Heaven am taught,
To harbor against Herod, no ill thought.

He is a Monster, and deserves that ill.

But yet that Monster is my Husband still.

He then did forfeit both the Name and Place;
When He began to Murder all your Race:
It Is He that Murdered the Asmonean Seed;
And the last Relics of that Race made bleed.
And now He has Imprisoned You and Me,
For what; unless He does our Deaths decree?

Death is the last of ills that he can do.

But I would first that Monsters death pursue;
And have the Pride before my life depart,
To strike my Dagger to the Tyrants Heart.

May Heaven defend my Innocence from guilt:
His blood alone should by just Heaven be spilt.
I Will neither act, nor wish so great a Crime.

Who ever saw a Virtue more sublime?

Now He is gone to Rhodes, it is not hard
For you to gain to our just side the Guard.
You in the Peoples Love so great are grown,
That for your sake they Herod would Dethrone:
Besides, We may by speedy Letters send
For Valiant Tyridates, who is our Friend.
The Army we will call home, and all those Powers
Will be as well as Tyridates, Yours.

The very hearing this in me's a Crime.

Why then you dote on him, and wish his good?
Can you love Tyrants stained with your own blood?

What now I do; you did at first command,
When forced by You, to him I gave my Hand.
Whilst that you urged no Crime, I did obey:
With me, to Him, you gave your Power away.
These Tears I shed, to Murdered Friends I owe;
This to weak Nature I must needs allow.

Those Tears the Asmonians-Valiant-Race disown,
And Mariamne is a Coward grown.
Sit down so tamely with your Sexes fears?
No marks of Courage are those foolish Tears.

Though hateful Crimes I like a Coward fly,
I have a Heart that is not afraid to dye.
Where I may Honor, and my Duty save,
I have a Courage dares the Tyrant brave.

See Madam, one of your Gardians, Sohemus come.

Perhaps he is come to let us know our Doom.

Madam, dry up those Tears, and Weep no more,
Put this Imprisonment on safety's score:
The King a Passion has so great and just;
He dares to none but Us your safety trust.
His Jealousy the issue is of Love.

What act of mine did that base humor move?

Lovers have often without cause Jealous been.

He might have yet remembered me his Queen.

Madam, you nothing want, but Liberty.

Denying that, what does he not deny?

From guilty Souls, such Jealousies arise;
Herod cannot live unless he Tyrannize.

Sohemus knows my Husbands foul intent,
When he his Voyage to Antonius went.
And now he is to great Augustus gone,
If he miscarries -- must he go alone?

Your Pardon Madam, if I tell you more;
And it is a Warrant which he Signed before.
He must enjoy you in another World,
Thus into Crimes, by Jealousy he is hurld?

This Jealousy from Malice springs, not Love --

It is your Virtue makes me thus your Friend:
And that you may suppose my Friendship true,
The power of my Head I give to you.
For if this Secret from your Lips does come,
Herod will make me sharer in your Doom.

I weigh your kindness, you shall find me true.

Herod does not mistrust the Queen, nor You.

Why are we Prisoners then? --

It is his Care.
'Twill not be long e're Herod will return,
You Will then no longer your lost Freedom mourn.

Philon, thy looks speak News; what is it?

They say
The Valiant Prince of Parthia comes this Day,
Into Jerusalem* --
The City and the Court their Joys express,
To see him come Crowned with so great success.
With swifter wings arrived his greater Fame,
And told his glorious acts before he came.

What are they Philon? --

He has such conduct, and such valor shown;
Those Storms which threatened us are all o're-blown:
The Arabians are out of Indea fled;
But left behind them 13 thousand dead.
Twice by his Valor, He the Battle won;
And twice unhors'd the King, and once his Son.
He brake their Troops like lightening as he flew;
Where e're he went with him, He Conquest drew.
The Arabian King from place to place he chased,
Till to his Country He returned disgraced.

I have already heard of his great Name.

And yet I speak it lesser then his ^ame.

That Princes Virtues I did ever prize,
And his praise now with my own Interest lies:
If to the K^ngdoms Interest I am true,
I must his Virtues Love, and praise 'em too.

Oh Gods! how can you thus unmoved behold
The best piece ever made of humane mold;
The work of your own hands, given up to be
A subject for a Monsters Cruelty.
She to whose eyes, my freedom I resign:
And she has right to all the Worlds, as mine.
Can she a Captive be? --

Call in your Passion Sir, and give it Law.

Of Thee Mariamne it is I stand in awe.
Great Queen! it is thy Virtue makes me fear --

Sir stop your Passion till Arsanes come.
His news may calm't, or give it farther room.

Now Herod is her Persecutor grown,
I him no longer my Protector own;
His Cruelties my Brothers have outdone;
I from one mischief to another run;
From Parthia bring my Life to lose it here:
And that which is a thousand times more dear.

Herod in your distress has given you aid.

My Conquests have that Obligation paid.
I in Mariamne's wrongs am injured more
Then e're his Kindness had obliged before.
My thoughts no longer shall my mind divide:
Both against him, and the whole World beside,
I Will draw this Sword in the Queens just defense:
And succor Virtue and wronged Innocence.

These thoughts disclosed, would Sir your self undo,
Bring certain Ruin to Mariamne too.
But see Arsanes is returned again --

Quick, dear Arsanes, ease me of my pain.
What says Sohemes, is he still our Friend?

I judge him so, for so he does pretend.
He quickly granted part of your Request;
But a long time he did debate the rest:
He on Mariamnes anger did demur,
Not on the Dangers that she might incur.
At last the Friendship that he had for you
Prevailed; and overcome that scruple too.
Now Night has spread her Sables, he does wait
Alone your coming at the Castle Gate.

This is a Kindness I can never requite;
Assist me Darkness! Loves best Friend, is Night.

Put on this Soldiers Casque for your Disguise;
Thus Habited, you need not fear surprise.
Philon is now to his Apartment gone,
And I have newly set the Watch alone.
We Will shun the Main-Guard lest your Face be spied,
At this back Gate you will enter undiscry'd.
You two without, for our return must wait,
But at a little distance from the Gate.

What Tumult's this within my Breast appears!
There is a struggling 'twixt my Joys and Fears.
That Heart which Death and Horror did not daunt,
At its approaching Bliss begins to faint.

Let Us find some shelter, that is not out of Call.

See where She is! how her affections move!
She thinks on nothing but the Gods above.
What force of Men can such a Power withstand,
Whose Piety does Gods themselves Command:

Defend me Heaven; what is this I here behold!
One of my Guard so Impudent and Bold!
Tyridates, ha! what does your rashness mean?
Do not you know it is Death to see the Queen?

Madam, I do: but dangers I defy,
And I could with them far mo^e great, and nigh.
I no occasion had till now to show
How little I do value Life for you.

Rise Tyridates; I and Herod know,
How great a Debt we to your Valor owe.
But the Kings Cruel humor gives me fear:
Would your Compassion had not brought you here.

That temper your Misfortunes do Create;
I neither with his Love, nor fear his Hate.
He gave me shelter in his Court -- it is true;
But Murders now the Life he saved in You.

I know Compassion moves you to be kind:
It Is the Effect of every generous mind.

Give me but leave, this Sword shall set you Free.

My Thoughts you cannot to Revenge incline;
That is the business of the Gods, Not mine.

To do you Justice You may me permit.

I Act Revenge, when I shall suffer it.

In Your Misfortunes I a share do Claim.

I beg You will not that Dangerous Claim pursue;
Lest generous pity Fatal prove to You.

Ah would the Gods! that Tyridates could
Buy off Your Sufferings Madam with his Blood:
Or end Your Troubles with his Punishment,
By all the Deaths that Herod could Invent.
How fair would be my Fate to pay to You
My L^fe; to whom all Hearts, all Lives, are due:

Sure this from Passion, not from Pity flows.
I would not know what now I but suppose.
Sir, Do you well consider what You Say?

If my rash Tongue my Passion does betray;
And unawares the Secret has Confessed
Which has so long bin locked within my Breast.
Madam, do you adjudg what pains are Due:
I Will gladly suffer what is Imposed by You.
Yes, Tyridates does as guilty Plead,
Since in your clouded Brows I Anger read.

You Would not have licensed thus your self to tell
Your Folly, had you Known Mariamne well:
I Herod's bloody Injuries forgive;
Yet scarce can pardon this Offense -- yet -- Live

Stay Mariamne! Gods! What have I done?
Tortures! To what Confusion am I Run!
She pardons me! And yet pronounced my Death!
She bid me Live, Yet Killed me with that Breath.
Herod, who blushes with her Kindred's Gore,
With all his Injuries never moved Her more.
And is it not hard that the oversights of Love,
To Anger more then Cruelties should move?
My Rashness has my blasted Joys over thrown,
And my distempered Soul melts at her Frown.

LEt it Pheroras, be your chiefest Care,
That Noble Sosius be respected here
With the same Homage that is due to Me.

I have no Title to such Dignity.

Sir, of my Friendship I would give you Proof.

The Glory of your Service is enough.
It is my Duty, that I you Obey:
To whom Augustus such respect did pay.

I will not be, Kind Sir, ashamed to own;
It was your Friendship did support my Crown.
I great Augustus's Anger did subdue,
Not so much by my Merit, as by You.

My Acts, great Sir, you praise too much.

But see, another Guardian of my Throne,
Valiant defender of Iudea's Crown.
The Arabians dread great Tyridates name,
And Rome has heard already of thy Fame.
The Laurels always must adorn that Brow:
And you participate his Glories too.

The Obligations you have on me laid,
Can never by such Services be paid,

Your Worth by Modesty does higher grow.

Sir, I my Life did to your Bounty owe.

This Prince begins to make my Envy boil;
For to his Luster we seem all a Foil.

Let us no more thus Modestly contend;
You are my Crowns Protector, and my Friend.

You must command
And cunningly disguises his black Crimes?
Like him I Am forced to Flatter with my Tongue,
Whilst my wrackt Heart resents Mariamnes Wrong.

How does Your Charge?

Great Sir, She Is safe, and well.

Does not Restraint make all her Passions swell*
And do not Curses sit upon her Tongue
Against my Life?

You do her Virtues Wrong.

By Heaven I think you are Enamored too.

Because I Have Acted what you bid me do.

It is my Passion, Philon, I forget.
But with what Words did Alexandra Threat?

She took it Sir as Women use to do,
An angry Tear, and a sharp Word or two.

Affairs of State have smothered up my Love,
But now warm Sparks about my Heart Strings move.
Spite of my Fury and my short-lived Rage,
Mariamnes Eyes those Passions soon assuage.
To her that hates I Am kind: They Generous prove
Who without hopes of Loves reward can Love;

What is become of all that Beauty now
Which once made my Alexas Heart to bow:
But sure these Eyes have lost their powerful fires,
And now my o're-blown Beauty none Admires:
Else had those Snares, I there so often spread,
Caught that great Heart, I would my Prisoner lead.
False Glass -- I am not what I was before.
Thou Lie, and thou shall flatter me no more.
Else could not Tyridates so despise
The Charms, this Face once had, the Power these Eyes.
So Ignorant, Alas! thou can not be
As not to understand both Love and Me.
What various, Thoughts now wrestle in my Breast,
Loves Pleasure never equals its Unrest.
The busy Contest does like Billows roll,
Beats this way now, and that way then my Soul.
Like Duellists, who struggle for their Fate,
Now strive with various Chance my Love, and Hate.
The Prince must know it, if then my aims I miss,
What my Eyes cannot obtain, I Will gain by This.
Thus I will go an Arbiter of Fate --
Life I dispense -- if Love -- Death -- if I hate.

Madam, thus Low I to your Empire bow:
I, who have Conquered Caesar* stoop to You:
Though I that gain the whole Worlds Love beside,
Am yours (to which I have most Right) denied:
Yet see my Passion: Let this Action prove
All Passions else stoop to the greater, Love.

Sir, I Am your Prisoner, and must you Obey.

O no Mariamne; here you still bear sway:
Oh do not at this small restraint repine.
Thou art no Prisoner; but it is I am thine.
I now have nothing else I can subdue:
Fortune bows down to me; yet I, to you. --
And in the greatest glory of my Pride
Can Love -- and see my self of Love denied.

We do believe you Herod, it is enough.
That you are kind, this Prison is the proof.

Your words too lavish were, when I was by,
For me to trust you, when I was not nigh.
I here secured you in my absence; true.
But it was done in Courtesy to you.
Lest a Temptation to Assault my Crown
Might make you, on your Head, pull Vengeance down.

Then our Imprisonment's a trick of State.

Wisemen foresee, and often Master Fate.

I Am glad I know that Herod is so Wise.

But you the Jewel that I only prize,
Above my Life or Crown, locked safely here,
Trusted to those, you had no need to Fear;
Have yet less Cause to Murmur or Repine,
Knowing my Life depended upon Thine.

You may with me do what to you seems good;
But you might yet have spared Hircanus Blood:
Sure your affection's built on a strange gr^und,
Which on my Kindreds Graves it self does found.

From that old Root, such Branches would have sprung,
Who from my hands my Scepter would have wrung.
And I should both my Life and Crown Betray,
Had I not pared th^^ dangerous Root away.
Necessity thus forces Kings sometimes
Crimes to commit, to hinder greater Crimes:
And Murder a^^, that they may Mu^thers save*
Pity does Ru^^ Kings, and Lands Enslave.

I never knew Foundations laid in blood,
Whose Superstructure ^^e continued good!

Let us Mariamne leave those things to Fate,
And to our Council, all Affairs of State:
We will retire -- my heart brooks no delay:
I fain would Homage at Loves Altar pay;
Where amorous Flame the Heart of Herod burns.

And my sad Heart with hidden sorrow Mourns.

What cloudy Blacks my Heart and Visage wear,
And Love it self's scarce greater than my Fear.
To mighty Love all Passions else submit,
Grow calm, and are to Tempests raised by it.
So it Usurps the Empire of the mind
And Governs there, as over the Seas the Wind.
Whilst it blows gently, Seas as Gently lie;
But when it Storms, they Storm and Rave as high.

He Is there --
I will not lose the occasion now --
Stay -- I Will advise, first what I have to do.
Oh Heavens, must then this great Heart stoop so low;
And must he from my Mouth my Passion know.
Virtue, where art thou? -- or where art thou Shame?
Tush -- Shame's for Maids -- Vertu's an empty name.
I Love, and I am scorched so with the fire,
That all things now must yield to my desire.
-- Virtue, and Honor, all things else lie by.
It Is Love o'recomes, and I must speak, or dye. --

My Passions did disturb enough before.
Thy Company will yet disturb me more.
I cannot shun her.

Tyridates here!
I did not think such happiness so near!
I doubt I on your Privacy intrude.

I am not busy, Madam!

But I am Rude.
What were your Thoughts?

On nothing?

Is that all?

I viewed those Artfull Pictures on the Wall.

Their Story, Sir, you may not understand:
I will Interpret them -- Lend me your hand;
Such a Commanding awe hangs on his brow
It daunts me, and my Tongue does faulter now.
The World here Tyridates found its Grave,
And none escaped, but what that Ark did save.

We by our Stories, Madam, understood
The World once suffered by a general Flood.

Here is the man, who did our Nation Free
By Miracles from Aegypts Slavery:
See there what Vengeance he on Pharaoh throws;
Though all his great Magicians do oppose --
See where the King pursues him in his Pride.
Here, at his Word the Seas themselves divide:
Here Pharaoh still pursues them with his Host. --
Look there -- the King, and all his Army's lost. --
Has not the Painter here expres't his skill?
How well in Death he Frowns, and Threatens still.

Madam! I doubt I too much trouble you --

I take delight in it -- Sir, in Truth I do. --
When I look on him, all my Courage fails:
And over my Resolutions fear prevails.
Your Eyes a little on this Captain lend:
He Conquered first this Land, you now Defend.
The Sun stood still, and did his Word obey;
And gave the World a most Prodigious Day.

Will none come hither to Release me yet? --
'Twill take up too much time to view'em all.

One or two more; you needs must see -- you shall --
Oh that I had my Story once begun!
See here two Kings, the Father and the Son:
That Is David, the best Captain of his Time:
This Solomon, whose Wisdom was sublime.
Wise, as he was; yet that Wise Solomon
Did not disdayn to put Love's Fetters on:
And to that Queen which hangs close by his side,
No coldness showed, nor Love, for Love denied:
His Fame far off had kindled amorous fires;
He Loved, and satisfied her warm desires.

It was but just; and to so Fair a Queen,
He would have otherwise ungrateful been.

Whilst thus you pass your judgment Sir on them;
Consider that your self you do Condemn.
You to a Princess have appeared too Rude,
And for true Love returned ingratitude.
Though she has left no Realms to visit you,
Yet that which is more hard, she does pursue.
She treads on Dangers, and for you she dies,
And Liberty more dear then Empire flies.

I may believe my Miseries might move
In tender Breasts some Pity -- but not Love --
I am an Exile, no Retreat do know
But what I to your Brothers Bounty owe.
That Princess then in Herod's Court may see
Objects more worthy of her self than Me.

With willful blindness You Obligements slight;
That you may shun occasions to requite.

My great Misfortunes Madam, make me blind.

No Tyridates, it is Disdayn I find:
And you are too clear-sighted not to know,
That you are Loved, and who it is Loves you too.
No Soul, but Hers, could have endured that pain,
Caused by the Tyranny of your Disdain.

Such worth I dare not to my self apply,
Nor look up at a Fortune that is so high;
And though your glorious Beauty should descend,
To grant me all the Charms that Love can lend:
My mind does under such misfortunes bow,
I could not have the power to taste them now.

You for your coldness have a fine pretext;
You Will be no more with such Discourses vexed.
And since you with affection are oppressed,
That Importunity shall be redres't:
Fury's the steps of incensed Lovers guide;
And Love converts to Hate, with scorn denied.

Thy Love and Hate are both alike to me.
What difference 'twixt Mariamne is, and Thee?
I her denial better do approve:
Which less torments me than thy proffered Love.
Her Anger looks with so much Innocence;
That though it kills, it cannot give offense.
And were not Love by Virtue cleared in Me,
I Would hate the name of Love, as I do Thee.
Would you had come sooner --
All that Misfortune that I so much feared,
Just now with Impudence enough appeared.
For Salome her self, the secret told.

But I perceive your Answer was but cold.

That Coldness has incensed Her; for but now,
We saw a raging scorn inflame her brow;
With all the marks that do on Fury wait.

It is not Love, but Lust that turns to hate.

The King's returned, and will this Night be seen
In public t'entertain his welcome Queen.

What, then the Queen's Releas't?

Yes Sir; it is true.
And Herod ^eems enamored now anew.
He gazes on her with Affection still:
You Would think against her he never dreamed an ill.

Thanks Fate! I Will be my self a Guest to Night:
And at her Eyes direct my wondering sight.
What Nobler Object to exalt my Joy?
Unless my Envy does my Joys destroy:
Of what I wish that Tyrant is possessed?
I can but gaze on Banquets where he Feasts.

It Is done -- I am resolved -- I Will Love no more --
But Hate as much as e're I Loved before.
With what kind warmth does now my Anger move?
And dear Revenge tastes sweeter far then Love.
The Poets say that Love in Heaven does dwell;
If so, then there more Pleasure is in Hell.
For though the Furies whip and lash my mind;
Yet in that Rage I secret Pleasure find.
Thou at my Feet shall unregarded lie,
Who with disdain a Princess ^ould'st deny.
I Tyridates, will pluck down thy Pride:
Let Hell and all its Furies be my guide.

Madam, The King and Queen's already sat,
They and the Revels do your presence wait.
Your place stands Empty --

Revels are a sport
For Loving Fools: Blood is the Mirth I Will Court:
I Will follow; -- Rage has so posses't my mind,
I no Diversion but in that can Find.

IMportant Business calls me now away;
But You may longer in the Garden stay.
Prince Tyridates opportunely met,
May on my Queen with your permission wait.
Kind Tyridates, here, whilst I go in,
Try to divert my Melancholy Queen.

In Storms at Sea, when Death and Danger's nigh
Men wish for Land, and yet from Land they fly:
Whilst Trembling at the Object, I admire,
Fear keeps me from the Blessing I desire.

Had Herod known, you did my Love pursue,
He would not now have given my hand to you.
And since you did to me your Thoughts commit,
I ought my self too, to have hindered it.
But that I judged I might without offense;
Either to yours, or my own Innocence.
Did I believe you harbor in your Breast
A thought to my Dishonor, I Would Detest
You as a Monster, and my Mortal Foe.

And I am willing that you should do so.

Think not, because, I not for Herod burn,
I Will my affections on another Turn:
Not the Remembrance of his Wrongs to Me,
Shall make me of his Crimes partaker be.
Could I be false so to my self and him;
I were unworthy then of your esteem.

That generous Bounty flowing in your Breast,
Has Me great Queen with Confidence posses't:
To speak, and to believe you will hear me now.

Speak; but what strictest Virtue may allow.

If my rude Passion harbors a Design
Against Your spotless Innocence and Mine.
You then may justly Me and that Despise,
And hate without a Crime what Virtue flies;
Use then your Thunders; let the higher Powers,
To make me Wretched, join their frowns to yours.

Look on this Passion as an Enemy
That will at last destroy both You and Me.

Not if that flame which does inhabit here
Inspires my mind with what from stains is clear:
All Worshipers at distance may admire --

Oh call the Greatness of your Courage home,
Let Tyridates now himself o're-come. --

Madam, the highest favor I dare Crave,
Is leave to bear your Image to my Grave:
Thus on my Knees I beg --

I cannot consent
Although your Love were yet more Innocent.
Rise Tyridates! Salome is near --
I fear she saw you Kneel, let us withdraw.

That Woman's sight I hate --

Why Sir?

Madam, that Secret I Will relate.

Was it not Tyridates that I saw
Kneel to the Queen?
Oh Heaven! this Chance unseals my blinded eyes,
And plucks from them their so long close disguise.
Slighted I thought was a sufficient Curse;
But slighted for another is yet worse;
Swell high the Tide of Rage; boil up my Blood,
Be to my Vengeance an eternal Food.
Is it for this that Mariamne flies,
The Kings Embrace? and does his Love despise!
I have a Rival on an equal score,
The Queen a Husband has, and I no more.
I Will watch each motion and each look they throw,
That rage and Jealousy may higher grow:
Their hearts will shake when they shall understand
Like Fate, their Lives I carry in my Hand.

Are you so Cruel then to Ladys grown!

The Law of Love permits to Love but One.

And ought not I your Passion to decline,
When you despise another Love for mine?
That sin which you in Salome condemn;
Would you Mariamne, should in you esteem?
Does not she Loving you betray her trust?
How can I yours permit then, and be just!

Oh Madam! You injurious are to join
That spightful Ladies Vicious Love with mine.
Mine is all Innocence!

But the World may not know your Innocence.

I by my silence keep it from their Sense.

Though that has kept it yet from Herod's Eye;
Yet it is what Salome will soon descry:

Wrapped in my Virtue, I my Fate despise:

But more then Life, at Stake, our Honor lies.

When that I injure, may --

The King is come!

And I unwillingly must give him room!

What to the Office of a King is due,
I Have soon dispatched to come, my Queen, to you: --
But such short Intervals of Absence prove
As blasts to fan the Ardent flames of Love.

Sir, Kings their Modesty are wont to show.

And Modest Queens not answer with disdain.

Herod, of that you ought not to complain.

Oh Heaven! and must my Passion thus be met,
And all my Kindness answered with regret?
Hence scornful Woman, from my Presence go:
Since not your Husband, you, your King shall Know:
Your Fathers Destinies you do forget.

No Herod! here they are all Written yet:

What Roman Courage in that Breast does lie?
And dauntless Power sparkles from her Eye!

Your Subjects Sir, may well cease to obey,
When your own Queen to Subjects shows the way.

What Tortures rack my Breast! must I be Dumb!
This is a Task too hard to overcome.

I now can tell what is black Envies Food,
Man's Heart's her Meat, her Drink his Vital Blood.
I feel the Viper gnawing in my Breast.

What, my Alexas, musing all alone.

No, I have Company, though you see none.

Where are they?

Salome! they are in my Breast.

What, with some busy thoughts you are possessed?

Yes, such they were.

Must I be Ignorant?

No Salome! I dare trust you --
Methinks that Stranger Parthian grows too tall.
I do not love him --

Nor would -- if you knew all --
I hate him too --

And have you Reasons too --

Some small ones; but no matter -- what have you?

Herod's too lavish of his favors there.

Now he has rid me of my Jealous fear,
I doabted lest He had my Passion found,
But he on Envy does his Anger ground.
And is that all? But I could tell you more --
But --

But what? Come tell the Truth --

But you shall Swear you never will disclose, --

I freely Swear all Oaths you shall impose.

Hark in your Ear -- he would have --

How my Wife! -- And can I hear such outrage!

Hold Sir! he in his Passion is unwise
Who does his Soul discover at his Eyes.
Cloth every thought in Darkness, wear a Cloud,
As may if possible Heaven's eye delude.

What if I should declare it to the King?
Into Disgrace this would the Parthian bring.

With your own mouth you would divulge your shame;
To Do and to be Tempted is the same.
We must be free from scandal as the fault.
Men judge the strength of Virtue by The Assault.
This would Men's thoughts divide; for amongst the Throng
Right seldom has more Voices than the Wrong.

Dearest I Am convinced: Thou art a Gem,
Which I can never sufficiently esteem.

Doubt not but I severe revenge will take,
Alexas, both for thine and honors sake.
Be Mute -- for I have thought a Stratagem --
Herod grows Jealous of the Queen and Him.

O my Wise Princess -- I your Wit adore --
See; there is the King! --

Alexas! be you gone --
I Will take this time to talk with him alone.
That project's done, -- now to the King.
No man stands so secure, but he may fall,
When he has once stirred up a Woman's gall.
The King is bigg with something --

Salome!
How much I am disturbed you cannot see.

Your Soul with some great Passion struggles --

True;
And I to calm this Tempest come to you.
My Queen has met my Love with such disdayn,
That she has turned the Stream: My Passion grows
Enraged, and over the Banks of Reason flows.
Can She not Love?

No doubt Sir, but she can.

Why does she not?

She does! but who is the Man?

Oh Salome! you raise the Tempest; hold, --

You know not Woman, Sir, so well as I.

I know her Virtue, and she first would dye.

You know she Loves not you.

All that may be --
She Will Love no other though she Loves not me;
And that proud Heart which does a King oppose,
Can never with a meaner Object close.

Love, had it Eyes, might soon --

Oh I am racked.
Spoke Salome, and make my doubts more clear.

What makes the Parthian Prince to linger here,
Whom great Augustus does invite to Rome;
And offers Arms his Brother to overcome:
He slights not these great offers without Cause;
No, here is attraction Sir, that stronger draws.

Thy words have let ten thousand Furies in.

Sir! it is too plain -- now to be blind's a sin --

Thy words have cleared the mist before my eyes;
Before Truth's Son the foggy umbrage flies.

See with what draughts he sucks the Poison up! --
The Quiet of your Court made me Conceal
What now I only to your self reveal.

That Mariamne Loves the Parthian Prince,
Her hate of me my Reason does convince --

It Is not her Kindreds Blood moves thus her mind,
No; her disdayn is of another kind.
To you a Rock she unrelenting stands,
Yet Tyridates's Love, her heart commands.
Alas! He Loves with better luck then you:
An Exile does more than a King can do.
But first their glances, looks, and actions weigh;
Perhaps I may have erred in what I say.

Oh my dear Salome! it is too plain!
A Thousand things to my remembrance fly
Which I before had passed too slightly by:

It bravely works! -- good Sir, have farther proof:

What needs there more? alas, I have enough.

He is indeed ungrateful

-- To require,
The refuge that I gave him in his flight;
He flies a Cruel Brothers rage; -- I guess
He will not find a Jealous Husband's less.
My Anger shall like frightful Thunder move,
He pays his head for his presumptuous Love.

Stay Sir -- let reason in this great affair
As well as Rage and Jealous Passion share.
I would not have you Tyridates save;
Your resolution is both just and brave.
Yet for his Life, pray venture not your Crown,
Nor hazard for his wicked head your own.
Augustus Sir, is Tyridates Friend,
It Is dangerous Augustus to offend.
And lose the favor which you gained so late;
Act not in Fury, let your Rage abate --

What, shall he live then?

No: he still shall dye.
But it is not you shall strike the blow -- but I*
Leave it to me --

But give your Justice wings:
Revenge that brooks delays too mean for Kings.
At my Queens head shall my next Thunder fly,
Who could not live and Love by Hate shall dye:
Her forfeit-head, and her declining Crown
Shall feel the rage of Monarchs when they frown.

Boast not Proud King of what your frowns design;
A Woman's Rage shall be as great as Thine:
Tyridates Fall shall be an Act of mine.
(...) Vengeance is all a Kings Rage can do,
A jealous Woman is a Monarch too --.

You had been freed durst you my Council use.

Such Council, Madam, I again refuse.

Your Dagger in his Heart had eased your fears.

Such Crimes are stains my Innocence never wears.

Woman thou art --

What I will ever be
From all the guilt of your Reproaches free.

I that with horrid thoughts of Rigor came,
Am on a sudden, how I know not, Tame.
Sure it is not I -- I am no Lion now --
The Furies humbly to that Sweetness bow --
I am not Angry now -- I will renew --

I will accept no Kindness Sir from you --

I will not be denied --

But Sir, you must.
For my Resentments they are great and just.
This Heart cannot Dissemble King like You --

Will neither Anger nor my Kindness do?
So now I feel the Floods of Rage return,
And I anew inflamed with Anger burn.
Thou to thy Husbands Kindness false art grown,
And Love, my due, is on a Stranger thrown.
Has Tyridates --
Are you Surpised! has Guilt locked up your Tongue?

No Herod, it is the greatness of the Wrong.

Traytress, it is false --
But to my Wrath he shall a Victim fall;
And you shall quickly follow too -- you shall! --

Herod, believe all that you please; the worst
I Have born already by thy Kindness Cursed.

Perfidious Woman --
His Ruin shall begin your Punishment.

If you on Blood and Murder thus are bent:
If Rage no otherwise appeased can be,
Seek out no other Sacrifice but Me.
Resolve my Murder, but his Ruin spare,
Who has in my Imputed Crimes no share:

To such a height it seems your Love is flown,
His Life you value, though you slight your own;
In Tyridates thou shall tortured be,
Before thou know what I resolve on Thee.

Death thou art Welcome: come when e're thou will,
Those Souls fear not thy Dart who feel no Guilt:
Yet Tyridates, Thee I wish removed,
Because your greatest Crime is that you Loved.

Fill my Bowl full; I the Kings health begin!

What is it that makes thee shake! have, give me mine!
Long live the King, and whilst the Health goes round,
Command without that the loud Trumpets sound.

Pardon my have, Sir, and vouchsafe your ear.

It Is prevented!

Discovered too I fear.
Let us not stay --

The King will Orders give,
Though this Plot has not took, he shall not live!

That Rudeness Sir I acted with my will.
For it was Poison that I made you spill!
Philon by chance behind the Arras got,
Heard Salome and Alexas lay this Plot.
He told the Queen, whose Kindness sent him strait
With this, to let you know your Threatened Fate.
Pheroras and Alexas Sir are gone,
And they by this themselves have Guilty shown.
Leave us --

See here Arsanes what the Queen has Writ, --
She bids me quickly save my self by flight.
Nay, instantly I must be gone -- to Night:
Or else so closely they my Life pursue;
The Sword will act what Poison cannot do.
I know not which more Joy or Grief does bring,
This Favor, or the baseness of the King.

Sir, do not trifle thus away your time,
To make her Warning useless were a Crime:

What would you have me do?

O Sir, be gone!

That thought's too hard.

Sir; if you stay, her Kindness you neglect,
And pay to her Commands but small respect.

'Twas her compassion of my Life took Care,
She did not know her Presence is more dear.
Must I my Life, or Mariamne quit?

Yes Sir, it is but too certain, and your Flight
Must speedy be, or else you both will lose.
Consult no further, Her Commands obey:
For know that her you Ruin, if you stay --
Therefore no longer on your stay demur;
This rising storm does rather threaten Her.
But She in your Escape, Preserved may be
When you remove the Cause of Jealousy.

O Sir be speedy in your flight -- I hear
Alexas, and the Kings Lifeguard are near.

Good Sir, make haste.

There Is hardly time for Flight.

But we may now be favored by the Night.

Well! must I go? -- Oh Queen, when I obey,
I Am only by your safety forced away.

The Traitors gone! but yet he cannot be far;
You soon his passage in the Streets may bar:
Go light some Torches, search out every where:
Who finds him first, shall of my bounty share:
This Sword then Tyridates shall pursue
Thy Life, and take what Poison could not do.

Yield Tyridates, or thy Life is lost!

That thou took'st it away, thou shall not boast!
Take that for thy Wives Treachery.

Though I am wounded! Soudiers follow still.
You dye, if him you neither Take nor Kill.

Farewell, thy Friendship does my Love out-vye;
Thou have the Honor in her Cause to dye.
Arsanes come! Let us Revenge his Blood,
And take the Fate which cannot be with-stood.

I Will think that Heaven does join against me too,
If neither Poison, nor the Sword will do.

It was but chance, or he had drunk his last.

I hope by this time that his Life is past.
I bid Pheroras bring the welcome News,
But his long stay my Patience does abuse.

What Devil was it moved Arsanes so,
The Bowl, the Wine, and Poison to overthrow. --
Between that Draught and Death he should have known,
I raised that storm which hence his Life had blown.
It Is not Revenge, at least not half so sweet,
Unless he knows that I the Conquest get.
And if he Falls now by Alexas hand,
My fatal Anger he will understand:
But here is Pheroras now --

How died he! say?

His Valor Sir has rather won the day --

Hah! What -- not brought with thee the Traitors Head!
How durst thou say to me he is not dead!
What Legions had he to defend his Life?
Or fought my Subjects for him in the strife?

I saw Alexas Sir, his Life pursue!
But what is it Valor in Distress cannot do?
Surrounded by the Guard he bravely fought,
And to the ground Alexas bleeding brought.

What said you of Alexas?

Peace; go on!

At him the Guard with all their fury run.
But like a Hero so unmoved he stood,
That all around the place he stayn'd with blood.
Polites Slain, with noble Anger stung,
He flung himself to dye amid'st the Throng.
There he such Prodigies of Valor showed,
The Guard not him, but he the Guard pursued.
Pressed with their number, he at last had died,
But that Arsanes an advantage spied.
The Sacred Temple being nigh, --
To that Asylum both yet fighting, fly.
And spite of all those Swords which did oppose,
There they escaped the Fury of their Foes.

O Heavens! escaped me thus. --
Thy Blood yet Tyridates must assuage
The vehement Tempest of my Jealous Rage:
I Will to the Temple, and my Wrath shall make
The great Foundations of that Structure shake.

What Stars Protect this Man?
His Valor moves me so, I love him still:
But he Dispises me; that thought is Hell.
Yes, thou shall dye!
My hand shall more then his, thy Life pursue,
And show what Woman in Despair can do.

We do not Sir enquire of your offense,
No Criminal is ever forced from hence.

You are both safe and welcome --

Thanks are due
Both to the God you Worship, and to you.

Sir, Though a King, keep back: it is just that you
Bring that respect which to this Place is due.

Give me that Traitor then; this Place nor you
Cannot protection to such Crimes allow.

O Sir! you know the Privilege of this place.
We should our Honor and our Laws disgrace --

Then I will force him hence.

Your Passion sway.
Great Sir, let Rage to Reason once obey:
All the whole race of Priests would rather dye,
And you, although their King, to death defy,
E're they would suffer this, -- besides the Jews
Would run into Rebellion at the News.
Try if you can persuade, but do not force.

I must -- but yet I first will try that course;
Put forth that Traitor, and you will do well;
You ought not to protect an Infidel.
His very presence does the place abuse;
It is a Refuge only to the Jews.

We dare not Sir, they would us Pa^tial call.
This Temple does a Refuge yield to all.

But that Barbarian durst violate
The Rights of Hospitality and Faith;
Ancient as Fanes themselves. --
Return him fairly forth whilst I entreat,
Else I will execute more than I threat.

First for his safety we our Lives will pay.

Rather then you shall suffer, I Will not stay:
No: let me fall a Victim to the King
Rather then Ruin to your Altars bring.

O Sir! what do you mean.

You will do worse,
You on our Altars will pluck down a Curse.
Let the King raze our Fane: our Bloods be spilt.
'Twere better to fall Pure, then stand with Guilt.

Let me speak to the King. --

I Will not refuse
So you no further go.

King of the Jews,
I am a Prince, and meet you without odds,
For I know no Superior but the Gods;
I scorn to justify my self to you,
Who thus ignobly do my life pursue.
A Life which from thy Sword and Poison flies,
Here at the Altar thou would Sacrifice,
Against all R^ght, both Humane and Divine.

Yes, I will have thy Life, though I lose mine.

Not the most faulty of my thoughts e're meant
Mariamne or thy wrong, thy Innocent
And injured Queen I as the Gods esteem,
Can that wear any Title to a Crime?

In idle words I Will lose not breath nor time*

I speak not this thy Fury to assuage,
Or with design t'escape thy bloody rage;
Or to delay the Death thou threaten'st here.
No Herod; I can dye, but cannot fear.

No, no, false man! thy artificial words
The Temple nor 100000 Swords,
Shall shield thy Life from my armed Anger now.
Thee and that Traytress both to death I Vow.

Involve not yet in my imputed Crime,
An Innocence which wholly is sublime:
If thou before these Reverend Flamines here.
Wilt Solemnly at the high Altar Swear,
I shall thy only mark of Fury be,
And thy blind Rage extend to none but me:
I Will leave this place to which I now am fled,
And to thy Vengeance render up my head.

O Heavens, for him she would have Life resigned,
And he again for her has Life declined:
They Love -- Oh Rage --
No Traitor, thou shall me no Council give;
Nor you, nor She -- whom thou would save shall live.

Hold Herod, hold, I in Augustus name,
Do for the Parthian Prince a freedom claim;
He not thy Subject hither fled for aid,
Must not by thy blind Fury be betrayed:
In this I Justice, -- Honor, Friendship show
To Tyridates Virtues, and to you --

Friend! hear me first --

I am by Honor swayd;
And in great Caesar's name must be obeyed.

You are a Friend to me, and I to you.

I for no Friendship will injustice do:
I bear a Romans Virtue in my Breast,
Friendship not linck'd with Virtue, I detest.
And Tyridates you must ye^ld to me --

Where I find so much Virtue, I agree.

Herod! your unjust Fury now assuage:
I here my Honor for you both engage;
Herod your Life by no Plots shall betray;
And you to increase his Fury shall not stay.
You from Jerusalem this Night shall go,
And leave within 6 days Judea too:
Who breaks his Word, begets a Foe of me,
Makes Rome and Caesar too his Enemy.

I will comply, though death I Would ki`ndlier choose.

Sosius alone could my just Vows oppose:
I see my Fear is greater then my Rage;
I in this quarrel dare not Rome engage:
Nor dare to my yet tottering Fortune trust,
But I must rule by seeming to be just.

THen Heaven has heard my prayers, and now I find,
Though I deserved it not, He has been kind.
If Heaven permits me but to fall alone,
My Breast shall not emit one sigh, or groan:
Now Tyridates is from Danger free,
I do not care what he decrees of Me:
Fly Prince from hence into a kinder clime,
Where to be good, and Virtuous is no Crime:

Prince Tyridates by the Roman Legate freed
And by him safe without the City led,
From his friend Sosius has made escape,
And is come hither in a borrowed shape.

Just Heaven forbid: I cannot see him: Go,
And tell him so. --
His Folly would his Certain Ruin bring;
His Death would now be Justice in the King.

Madam; all my persuasions cannot prevail,
He only beggs to take his last farewell.

This may some blemish to my Honor give --

Madam, his Thoughts from such pure Fountains flow;
They on your Innocence no spots can throw;

Without your leave he durst no nigher come,
But stays without, and there expects his Doom.

Well call him in -- and pardon me this time:
For he shall never more repeat the Crime.
Philon and you Sohemus watch hard by
And give us warning when that danger's nigh.
Ah Prince! consider what you make me do
Hazard my Life and Reputation too!
Have I thus long my life with Caution led
The very shadow of all Courtship fled.
Now at the last to make my Honor bow!
By Night, and in disguise, to talk with You!

Though my Intents with Innocence are clad,
The ills You suffer by them make em bad.

Your business?

Can I fly and leave you here,
Exposed to Herod's Rage, and jealous fear?
I Will break those Chains my heedless Passions drew --
With such a black Ingratitude on You.
Herod, by Sword and Poison sets me free
From all the Ties of Hospitality!
I this without Ingratitude can do
I owe not now my Life to Him, but You.
Reject not then the succor I propose,
Whence to You freedom, to me, Glory Flows.

I will no longer these Discourses hear.
Urge me no more. This Answer take for all!
Virtue shall never be blemished by my fall.

Then give me leave to Die -- I cannot see
You still have Fetters on whilst I am free.

But whilst I thus my Innocence keep white;
Methinks I feel as yet my Chains too light.

But I can never go.

I for one boon must sue,
And sure I cannot be denied by you?

'Twere impious to disobey that breath,
Though the Commands were to meet Wracks, or Death.

But this performance must be bound by Vow

By all the powers to which men kneel, and bow.
And what is as Sacred, by your self I swear --

She craves one boon who never begged before:
Sir, I entreat you never to see me more.
Call your Obedience and your Courage up,
And the Carrere of your blind passion stop:
My Life and Honor both at Stake do lie,
And suffer, if you either stay, or dye.

Can you condemn me, most Unfortunate,
To Banishment for ever, and not hate?

Perhaps the affection that I'ave shown to you,
Has not been such as you pretended to.
I to your Merits always gave their due,
As far as my Condition would allow.
Had I been free, and at my own dispose,
I before all had Tyridates chose.

Oh all ye Gods! how dubious is my Fate!
At once how Glorious, and how Desolate!
I have now, it is true! no Reason to complain;
Yet in my former Wretchedness remain.
Those eyes must never more upon me shine,
Yet I can neither murmur, nor repine.

Pity begins too much to move my heart,
I find by these it is high time to part!
I, Tyridates have some weakness shown;
And your Misfortunes move more than my own.
Let Mariamne your Example be,
Do you assume your Courage now like me:
Insensibly I do not part with you,
Yet dauntless act what I resolve to do.
If over your Spirit any power I have,
Let it be shown -- be patient and be brave:
And let this act of your obedience prove
The Candor, and the Greatness of your Love.
Take now my last Farewell.
-- One kindness yet --
When you remember me, this fault forget.

Oh Gods! is there no other way to prove
The pureness and the greatness of my Love.
Must I to this hard Doom subjected be?
Yet it is a Just and Virtuous Cruelty!
Yes to remember Thee, I Will take this way,
I Will dye for Debts I cannot live to pay.

What sting is this to an Imperial mind,
Thus in his will and power to be confined?

Herod's a King, and does Judea sway --
But he is no King, who others does obey.

Though many Passions grow within your Breast,
I see Ambition's greater then the rest.
And fear to lose your new acquired Crown
The aspiring boldness of the rest pulls down!
This made a Monarch to a Roman stoop,
When the whole Forces of his Rage were up.

It Is Wisdom to submit to greater Powers:

None should be greater in your Realm then Yours;
You this affront in Wisdom may put by,
Sit tamely down -- But King so will not I!
For he shall fall my Victim, and in this
I will perform what Kings but faintly wish --
But How,
Do You proceed with your ungrateful Queen?

I Have sent for Her.

To ask her Pardon.

No.
But that her Doom she from my Breath may Know.
What says our Haughty Queen?

She Will wait on You,
When she has first paid to her God his due.
She Is busy yet.

At Prayers: Yes, and it is time.
But Heaven may stay, her absence is a Crime:
Bid her make have, and let her Understand
I now no more entreat Her, but Command.

I Shall.

This was like Herod and a King;
But yet I fear her Eyes such Forces bring,
Which she still manages with such an Art,
They will regain your undefended Heart.

No, Though tame Love did once my Heart engage,
I have now resigned this Royal Seat to rage!

She Is here I must retire.
Thy Lover Queen shall share thy Sufferings,
My Jealousy can kill as well as Kings.

See with what Noble Pride she steps? That State
So like a Queen, as yet I cannot hate!
Not all the marks of Anger that I bear
Can shake this Woman's Soul into a fear!
I must no longer pause --
You had obeyed us straight,
Had you not been retarded by your hate.

Any to hate the Laws of Heaven forbid!
Else 'twere but Justice Herod if I did.

You Queen have yet no Reason to complain,
My Love it is that proves your greatest pain.

What are those Signalls of your Love you boast?

The World the Greatness of my Love can Read,
In that you still proud Queen do wear your Head,
After your Love to Tyridates shown,
And his to you so publicly made Known.

My Innocence still wears a Robe so White,
That I esteem Your Accusations light.

I say that you still Live shows Love enough.

But of your Love I have another proof:
You cannot forget the Compliment you sent
When You to Antony and Caesar went.
You sent me Word, with Grief you left me -- true --
For had you Died I must have followed too.
Was this the Effect either of Love or Hate,
That both our Lives must have an Equal Date?

I am Betrayed! Undone!
Those who my Trust into my Bosom drew,
Forsake me and betray my Secrets too.
To what Extremities am I reduced,
By Slaves and a Disloyal Wise abused:

I by Imprudence now have raised a storm,
I doubt my Philon and Sohemus harm.

I my Intentions never will deny;
I did intend -- if I did -- you should dye.
It was excess of Love --

Of Jealousy and Hate! --

Those Traitors who my Secrets did relate,
Did not for nothing so great hazard run,
Expose themselves by m^ to be undone;
And buy your favor with their Lives expense,
If you had not proposed a Recompense:
Which seemed so great and glorious in their eyes,
They to obtain it, me, and life despise.

What recompense had I to give?

I know
No gifts could ever undermine them so:
Such mean things never could their Faith surprise!
No Traytress; by the Charms of those false eyes,
They were seduced --

I will acquit them, they are Innocent:
'Twas Heaven revealed to me thy black intent.

Thou usest thus thy Lovers to excuse,
And do thy Husbands Love and Bed abuse!

Believe what e're thou will against me now,
The baseness of your Soul and Birth you show.
I scorn thee now so much -- that I disdain --
To stoop so low, to speak to thee again:
Or any more my Innocence defend
Against th'unworthy Crime which you pretend.

'Twould be in vain -- I now will Justice do,
Yes! you shall suffer, and your Lovers too!
If all the Torments of the Rack will do?
Truth by that Trial quickly will appear;
What do you smile? my Guard without there
Here!
Safely the Queen to the great Prison bear.
On pain of Death, away.

Touch not my hand,
I willingly obey his kind command.

Still the same Queen! still the same port she bears,
And not one look of fear nor horror wears!
My Fatal Love thus long has made me blind,
And with false Errors preposses't my mind;
But her high Pride shall feel: Pheroras haste!
And make you Joseph and Sohemus fast.
Let them be Racked till they the truth declare.

They shall --

Hold! Joseph from the Rack we spare:
We will some method in our Anger take;
He Is Married to our Aunt, and for her sake,
Let him escape the Rack, but Strangled be;
Be gone -- let it be done immediately. --

Sir, seize on Philon, he knows her Intrigues;
A great Contriver in her amorous Leagues.

See He be tortured too --
And forced by pains the hidden Truth to tell:
I to the utmost will my Wrath pursue.
After they are Racked -- let them be strangled too.
Away: let it be done before you sleep.

O Sir! I see it is difficult to keep
Our selves with all the helps of humane Art,
From those misfortunes Heaven will still impart*
Appearances delude a humane sight,
But Treason cannot always walk in Night.

This Woman to my mind distraction brings;
And on the Rack my tortured Soul she flings.

It Is plain! no small things could their Faiths remove,
They could not stoop at ought below her Love.
But were this Amorous League a dubious thing;
It is enough! she dares affront her King*
In that unlawful Love which she dares own
To Tyridates. --
But where is that height of Pride she did pretend,
When she can to a Subjects Love descend.

What shall I do?

It Is fatal Love, your troubles does Create:
O Sir, but strip your Princely Soul from that
Which with dark shaddows over-hangs your mind,
And makes you to your chiefest Interest blind;
You soon will be from all Vexations freed,
When Traitors justly for their Treason bleed.

Yes, Mariamne soon should lose her head,
But that I Caesar and the People dread.

Never let that keep your great Soul in awe,
Salve it with Justice; let her dye by Law:
Let there some Process be against her framed:
Some Reverend Judges in Commission named.

I am resolved now -- and the way is good,
It is the Law, not Herod, spills her blood.
She, who reduced me to this shame and fear,
Shall as a Subject at the Bar appear!

But here comes one! though often Proud and High,
Falls down as poorly in Adversity.
You Will not be moved with Tears! --

No, nor with Prayers.

But I Will be gone -- Their Lives my Joys debar:
Revenge to thee! to thee! I Will Altars rear.

O Sir! take pity, I your Grace implore;
Deny not one, who never Kneeled before.

Peace! it is in vain; nor Tears, nor Words shall do,
And you deserve to share her Ruin too!

I will not rise unless you grant her Life.

No more! She is a Disobedient Wife.

I Will grant it -- yet some mercy show.

Away.
No Tears; nor Prayers shall my armed Justice stay --

I Will follow you --

My Guard without there! -- here!
This Woman quickly to her Chamber bear,
And keep her safe.

O see: I beg again!
I do submit --

Have, quickly take her in.

O Jealous Husband! O thou wilful Wife!
It Is cruel Death I see must end this strife.
If thou had but Obedient been to me,
Herod had had that Death he gives to Thee.

Still! still Confusion in my breast does roll,
And I feel mighty struglings in my Soul.
The Queens Death only satisfies my mind:
And yet in that Reluctance I find.

Are the Kings Orders then obeyed?

They are!

This have bespeaks your Loyalty and Care.

Here Is their Confessions.
Tortures made them tell
What they before could by no force reveal.

Not the great danger which they ran could move,
No Obstacle could blunt their sharpened Love.
The Queen and Tyridates met this Night.
O here is Argument enough for spite.
This, this will do -- what though Mariamne dye,
It Cures not quite! the Prince must fall, or I:
Pheroras; it is late; the King possessed
with Rage, is gone to try if he can rest:
To morrow Morning I Will these Papers show,
And he by me your Diligence shall know.
But much of this must not be seen by him:
They justify her more then they condemn!
In midst of all their Torments they seem bold,
And have the Truth to her advantage told.
But say Pheroras, died they all like men?

They died as if they were to live again:
And did with so much Courage yield their breath,
As made me almost too in Love with Death:
If any sorrow in their Looks were shown,
'Twas for the Queens hard fate, and not their own.

TO Rome I now my wandering steps must lead;
I Have sworn, and my great Saint must be obeyed:
Doomed from her sight, he now Judea flies*
Who in Devotion to Mariamne's eyes,
Lived an Adorer, and a Pilgrim Dies.
But what high Bliss my Vows to me deny;
Have my Arsanes, to the City fly.
Enquire her health; I fear she is in distress,
The trembling of my Soul her ills express.
By secret Concord Lutes when tuned alike;
One trembling moves, if you the other strike.
Thus my tuned Heart by sympathy of Love
Does at those ills she feels, though distant, move.
Not Death, nor Herod's Cruelties I fear,
But the Queens last command that keeps me here.

I Will put on the Disguise I have within.

Here I will lie till you return again;
And with my own sad thoughts I will converse,
Whose Clouds the Queens Health only can disperse.

This is the place I Am sure; hither last Night,
I Am told he and Arsanes took their flight:
Blessed Chance! yonder he is! Revenge arise!
And make to thee and Love one Sacrifice.

What man is this? I Will ask him whence he came?

So, so! I have already roused the Game.

Sir, from the City came you?

Yes, to you!

Your pleasure!

It Is a business strange and new.
The Queen --

Oh that blessed name!

Has found too late --

You raise my fears.

A sense of her hard fate!
Though from her kindness you did once receive,
All that so strict a Virtue had to give.
Yet; --
With a Woman's kindness sh'has a Woman's fear,
And dreads her Dangers now she finds 'em near.
And though a while unmoved;
She stood the Tyrants first, and easier frowns,
Who floats above weak streams, in rougher, drowns.
Her nearer Ruin (though no doubt she still
Esteems ye) does her breast with horror fill.
She raves, and wishes that black hour accursed,
In which she saw, and knew, and loved you first.
And all that storm still falls on Cruel you,
Who her to these unjust Misfortunes drew. --
She wishes you --

Hold! here is enough to Kill.
Since I am cursed by my fair Queen! yet still
She Is just, were she more cruel --

Sir, the ill
She undergoes by you, has brought me here;
That since such Beauty suffers for your sake,
My Sword may of your Crimes expiation make:
Draw and defend your Life --

No, kind Sir, I
Have guilty lived, but will not guilty dye.
Should I defend that Life which she condemns,
I justify her sufferings, and my Crimes.
No, grant one Grace, the greatest man can give,
Here let my Breast that welcome guest receive.

This I expected --
Oh my hand does shake;
And foolish fear do my Souls fortress take!

Why are you slow? dear Sir make have --

Base fears be gone -- Well, now I am prepared!
Against Revenge in Love there is no guard.

Hold Villain! Murderer!

Why do you stop that hand that is so kind,
Sent by the Queen, who has this grace designed.

Oh Gods! your Passion Sir, has made you blind.
He Is some Impostor would your Life betray --
You nothing of the Queen in this ^an see,
Nor with her Virtue does this act agree.
I the Imposture quickly will explain.

Hold, hold! it is not by thee I will be slain.
I come not hither by the Queens command,
Yet still this Traitor falls by my just hand.
By Princess Salome I Am sent --
Her and her Brothers honor I must right:
It is in both their Causes that I fight.

Why from the Queen did you pretend before?

The Prince I knew did her so much adore,
That calmely then he would his life resign,
And so I might take his, not hazard mine.

Oh Monster --

Stay! the Cause is changed, and I Will dispute my Fate;
And give you what you ask; Herod I hate,
But Salome much more --

Hates he her more --
Then Herod? -- my Revenge swelled high before:
But now to kill or dye's an equal part:
False and Perfidious Traitor! at thy heart:

Ha! It Is her self.

Oh Curs't discovery! yes Sir! it is I,
And once again I thee to Death defy!

What Vision's this? you have disarmed me now.
Why, Madam, all this Cruelty from you?

Oh my false Heart! I feel my rage expire,
At one kind breath my new-blown Love takes fire.
Sir, I Will forgive, if you will return and Love,
I Herod's wrath, your dangers will remove,
And bring you back again to his esteem.

Yes, I will Love! --

How Sir!

My Charming Queen --

Your Charming Queen! your Charming Queen shall dye!
I instantly will to her Tyrant fly:
Accuse her of all Treasons, false, or true;
All is too little that Revenge can do:
She dies to Morrow, nay to Night, to Day:
I cannot soon enough her life betray.
And since no other way will do it, I will
Torment thy Heart through Mariamne still.
And thou shall live to hear this news Proclaimed,
She Is Dead: and if my power can do it, Damned.

Stay, Salome; dear Salome!

Your will.

If blood's your aim; here Tyridates kill,
Let her but live --

No, loving Fool, she dies.

Oh thou black malice! were thou but a man,
I by thy Death would my Queens safety gain.
But Curse she is a Woman! oh it is hard,
That Justice should by honor be debarred:
The greatest weakness is the strongest guard.

Sir, It Is not yet too late your Queen to save,
Could you but --

But -- what is it you would have?

Your Love!

Love, Madam, has Variety!
What Love is it you would have? to what degree:

I Would have you -- Oh your blindness and my shame!
Can you not guess the thing without the name?

Ah, Madam! if you Lawless thoughts pursue,
The ills you save her from will fall on you --
Horrors will haunt ye! --

You do not understand
A Lovers sense. In Love we are not pained
With th'ills we have acted, but in those we miss.
Repentance there is less Torment, then a wish.
Try but to Love me, it is an easy grant:
Speak some kind things; or if new words you want
T'express a Passion by; oblige my Ear,
And repeat something that you said to her.

Madam! what would your abused fancy get
If I that do not Love should Counterfeit.
The first I cannot, and the last I scorn:
My thoughts are never in Disguises worn.
I cannot tell ye --

No, nor can I hear?
I Have said too much for a return so small:
But here once more my Fury I recall.
Since Plots on Tyridates vain do prove,
To take away thy Life, or gain thy Love:
Thy heart I yet have one way left to break;
My Vengeance at the Queen its aim shall take:
There I will stab thee in a tender part,
And through her Breast strike thy ungrateful heart.

Thy kindness and thy threats I both despise;
But oh her rage at Mariamne flies.
I Will to the Court, and instantly inform
My Queen, and be her guard against this storm.
What if I Would sworn a thousand Oaths and broke
Them all, her certain Ruin to revoke?
Yet Perjury's no sin in such a Case;
Kind Salome! thy Malice is a Grace:
Thy Cruelty has done an act so brave,
It gives me power my Queen to see, and save.
By such a hand so great a Bounty given!
An Instrument of Hell has lent me Heaven.

See where she lies; her eyes chained up with sleep:
The Graces in her Face a Guard do keep:
With what serenity she does appear:
How calm her Soul is, not disturbed with fear.
While mine feels horrors! Oh my heart! I must
Withdraw, least to my self I prove unjust.
For those almighty Charms her Beauty wears,
Spread for my Anger, and my Justice snares.

O Cleophe! my Rest have pleasant been,
In sleep I have a blessed Vision seen!
Souls undisturbed when they lie down to rest,
Are often with such fair Idea's blessed.
I find Heaven may in Prisons be; whilst Hell,
And all its Furies in the Palace dwell!
Wipe off your Tears, and be not so unkind!
Your weakness Cleophe disturbs my mind.
Let Death and Fortune threaten if they will:
What though I fall? I am above'em still.

Oh thou Heroic mind! not startled yet?
See how she does unmoved, undaunted sit!

Madam! by this Commission we are sent,
In which we obey our Royal Kings Commands --
You are accused by Him --

Vain Rudeness! hold!
Methinks you are too insolent and bold!
A Princess of my Birth, your Lawful Queen,
Heir to the Crown, and stoop so low?
Can you be Subjects and my Judges too?

We from the King, Madam, this power receive!

The King himself has not so much to give.
For He can never make my Spirit bow
To such a base submission craved by you.

'Twill be your Glory if you're Innocent.

My Soul never knew what to be guilty meant!
Excepting Heaven I other Judges scorn:
But chiefly you, who are my Subjects born.
Therefore forbear --

Madam! we know
What to your Birth and quality we owe:
Which hitherto we with respect have paid.
The King on us has this Injunction laid:
To whom it is our Duty to obey;
And you as well as we should homage pay:
You Will guilty seem, if you do this refuse.
Queens ought to clear themselves when Kings accuse.

But I from his Authority, and yours,
Appeal to Higher and more Righteous Powers.

Our Conscience guides us, and the Law.

But why --
All these Formalities to make me dye?
My Friends to Death without these shows were sent.
May not I tread the Path my Kindred went?

Madam! of you the King has greater Care,
And by your Trial, hopes to find you clear.

Though his high Cruelties I must confess,
Have justly made the Wifes affection less:
Yet my firm Duty never can decrease.

I can no longer hold --
I Will not believe but you are Guiltless too!
No memory of my Banished rage shall stay,
All my suspicions Love has blown away.

Hold Cruel Man! let Justice have its course:
My Judges I dislike, but thee much worse;
Beyond the bounds of Cruelty they fly,
Who torment those, who are about to die.

Oh you mistake me, for I come to save --

Her Life who hates it, and desires a Grave.
But what is your right, to give or take my Life,
You know you are not King but by your Wife.

Thou try'st by all extremities to move
My long-kept Patience, and provoke my Love.
To that alone -- and that thou too well know
The Life thou yet enjoy'st! Proud Queen! thou ow'st.

Nor thy Caresses, nor thy Threats shall move,
Thy Threats are yet less hateful than thy Love.

Since you my Love with so much scorn deny,
Thou shall have thy desire -- yes, thou shall dye,
Perform that Charge I formerly did give,
And if you find her false, let her not live.
Let not the Name of Queen, keep you in awe:
Nor yet Divert the Justice of the Law.

You see your Champion's gone; you may withdraw;
I am your Queen, above you, and your Law.

She has a Soul no Power on Earth can tame.

We may return as useless as we came.

But why so weak! what shifting Passions move
His Soul? now mad with Rage, now fooled with Love*

But once again I am my self become,
And will an enraged Monarchs power assume.
Such high and lofty Pride swells her great heart,
That it is high time that and her head should part.
What now?

She treats us Sir with such disdain and scorn,
As if she were more than a Princess born.

She Is guilty then, who dares not thus be tried.

I doubt there is something in it more than Pride.

O Heaven! pull down your Thunders on my head,
Pluck up those roots of Love, or strike me dead.

Why make you thus your self unfortunate!
To rage for her that pays your Love with Hate.

I know she hates me, and I know it well;
And yet I cannot her Image hence expel.
But I will hear no more what Love can say:
Yes, yes, Mariamne, thou shall Dye to day.
I Will start not from what I resolve to do,
Though whilst I take her Life, I lose mine too.

Sir, you with Passions have so much been swayed,
You never asked whether you were Obeyed
In your commands last Night: but you will find
Something in these will satisfy your mind.

It Is true I had forgot.

See! how it works?
Poison I hope in their Confession Lurks!
See how he swells!
It will burst out anon:
He likes not what he Reads, yet must read on.

How! when I was to Caesar gone, the Queen
Was privately by Tyridates seen!
Oh Heavens!
Last Night for all the Danger he was in,
Returned and privately met her again.
Disguised -- alone -- by Night -- ah this does prove
The strength of his and her unlawful Love.
Are these men Dead? hah! --

They have received a just reward of Treachery --

Yes! here is enough to satisfy my mind.
Now Justice to my self, and thee, I am kind.
For she shall Dye, and like a Traytress too.
Do you my Orders instantly pursue.
Do it before my fit of Love return. --
If that get in, it will my Rage remove.
I must keep this Storm to keep out Love.

Leave weeping Cleophe, I pray forbear;
Is it the mark of sorrow, or of fear?

Madam, I doubt your spotless Innocence
Against the Tyrant will be small defense!
You know he spares no Life when Rage bears sway:
And now I fear least it take yours away. --

I prithee neither fear, nor weep for that,
It Is Death alone can make me fortunate.
That will my Soul from Chains of flesh unbind,
And give unbounded freedom to my mind.
This Soul that is fettered here, when I shall dye,
To an Eternal Liberty will fly:
And what is contracted in this Body now,
Shall like a mighty Circle endless grow.
How Cleophe, can I your tears approve,
Who weep the fate I both desire and love.
If thou love me, show an unclouded eye,
I am resolved, and am prepared to Die.
It Is guilt alone disturbs a Soul with fears,
And foolish weakness vents it self in Tears! --

Madam, I am sorry that it is I must bring
So sad a Message from an Angry King.

Speak it Pheroras, and I Will bless that breath,
That greets my Ear with the kind sound of Death.

Nothing can your unhappy Fate put by,
His resolution's fixed, that you shall dye --
And all things do without already wait,
Therefore prepare your self for this sad Fate.

Pheroras, called not sad; I never till now
Received a Message half so kind from you.
Let Herod know his present I receive
As the most precious thing he had to give.
And with my thanks Pheroras let him know
This to my memory, and my blood I owe:
I n'ere did derogate in all my Life
From The Honor and the Virtue of a Wife.

Oh would the King your Loyalty believed,
Or were by some kind Angel undeceived!

The blood of Philon and Sohemus shed,
Will pull down Vengeance on his guilty head:
And if my Death is stained by any guilt,
It Is 'cause imprudently their blood I spilt.
For Tyridates, I confess it is true,
I rendered what was to his Virtue due.
Acknowledgments and Innocent esteem,
And that was all I ever gave to him.
I shall not rack your Patience by delay,
However I a little beg your stay.
Whilst I retire to banish from my mind,
All those Ideas I must leave behind.
That my winged Soul prepared for her high flight,
May shake off Life and Crowns to mount more light.

All things are ready! where is the Prisoner gone.

She did desire some time to be alone.

But does her haughty mind continue still?

Death will affright her sure, or nothing will.

But how did she her Sentence Sir, receive?

She seemed not to Rejoice, nor yet to Grieve!
She heard me speak unmoved and without fears
When I my self could scarce refrain from tears.
She whom Friends Deaths has into Passions thrown,
Calmely receives the Knowledge of her own.
And as her tongue did from reproach refrain,
She showed it was below her to complain.
She spoke! would Herod had himself been by,
And unconcerned, prepared her self to dye:
But see she comes; her Eyes no grief betray:
She is Tryumphant on her dying-day.

Come Friends, let us go! conduct me to the place,
Whence I shall follow all my Noble Race.
What means that Cypress Scarce?

To blind your Eyes,
Death will be gentler when it does surprise!
Nature will start else in her own defense.
The stroke is suffered best, whilst in suspense.
You must not see the Blow!

Lay that Scarf by.
I am a Queen, and like my self will dye.
It is not Death can overcome my heart:
Nor at its blackest horrors make me start.
No, I Will look thus, thus Fate despised I Will meet:
It Is they smile best, who death thus kindly greet.

The Pulses of my trembling Soul beat high,
Mariamne's dead, or is about to dye.
Disturbing fancies aggravate my fears,
And Ignorance does but increase my Cares.
Such horrid Visions fright me from my rest,
My interrupted slumbers they molest.
In vain all day her safety I enquire,
For none will satisfy my just desire.
Minutes seem days, and every hour a year,
Whilst I am racked thus betwixt hope and fear.
O Cruel King! with Torments thou do kill:
The fear is always greater then the ill:
I once again to my rough guard will sue;
Gold may do more then Tears or Prayers could do.
What ails you Sir?

Did not you hear the Music? see, see, what is there?

Sir I see nothing that should cause this fear.
He is distracted sure?

See, see, what sight my Eyes invades*
See Aristobulus from the Nether shades!

Sir, I see nothing, it is your fancy sure.

Antigonus!
See the Queens Brother comes to fright me too.

Look calmer Sir! your fancy is disturbed!

See Old Hircanus risen from the Dead!
See Salome how he looks and shakes his head?
See Joseph, Sohemus, Philon! see where they go.
They are all risen from the shades below.

Sure it is Madness that disturbs you so!

Oh the Queen, the Queen, the Queen! Oh she is dead!
See Salome: stay, Mariamne -- stay: she is fled.

Pray Sir settle your disturbed mind! --

Stay Mariamne! dead, do fly from me too?
No Jealousy nor Rage can reach you now.

The general murmur which assaults my Ear,
Speaks the sad Truth of my unhappy fear.
I dare not ask, and yet I fain would know,
Suspense! alas! does but entangle woe.

Sir, here is Pheroras that can tell you more.

Tell me Pheroras, may it be believed
The Queen is dead! I hope I am deceived?

Yes Sir, she is dead, and all that glory's gone,
Which with such Luster in Judea shon.
Like a bright Star dropped from the Firmament;
She Is fallne, and with her all the light she lent.

O Cruel King! I wish! but it is too late!

I need not tell what brought her to this Fate.

That Is too well known; but tell me how she died.

O Sir, the Queen such manly Courage wore,
As you or Caesar could have shown no more.
Unmoved, and without sign of discontent,
Unvailed she to the Fatal Scaffold went.
There of us all she kindly took her leave,
Some Jewels then to Cleophe she gave:
And made the Guard to bear her Weeping thence,
Because her pious Tears gave her offense,
Whilst she discoursed, our Tears run trickling down,
And no Eyes there were Tearless, but her own.

The highest Virtue's fled that ever shined!
O Cruel Tyrant! to the World unkind!

O Sir! the King does want your pity now,
I left the Palace Sir to seek for you.

What then it seems he does repent too late.

Yes Sir! he now repents what he has done,
And calls on Mariamne, now she is gone.
The Furies sting his Soul with such remorse,
He now his Servants, now, himself does Curse.
He threatens Death and a Revenge on all.
But yet the storm seems on himself to fall:
Just now he is gone, and none did dare withstand
Wrath in his Eyes, a Dagger in his hand.
Distracted thus, he toward the Prison made,
Where her dead body back they have conveyed.
It Is you alone his Fury can assuage,
No other dares oppose his fatal Rage.

Come! let us go! lest we should come too late:
I must avert, though he deserves that Fate.

So much Confusion I meet every where,
I have no doubt for my increasing fear.
See there is the Cause. Alas! this dismal sight
O'rewhelms my sense with horrors dark as Night.
Nature's too strong,
And keeps my Soul in Prison here too long.
But I will give no Rest to my sad mind,
Till I a way to Death, or Vengeance find.
Tyrant, at thee, my just revenge shall fly;
And then contented with my Fate, I Will dye.

See where she lies Arsanes! see she is dead!
And my enfeebled Soul is with her fled.
Here I my grief will forfeit at the Eye,
And gazing thus upon this Object, dye.
I feel the little blaze of Life decrease,
And yet my mind enjoys no kind of Peace.
I would have time
With my own hands to tear his heart away,
Who could such Innocence to Death betray.
But ah my Soul is fluttering to be gone,
And leaves Revenge to the just Gods alone.

Oh Sir, your Courage should support you now.

My Life Arsanes to the Queen is due.
Was It not enough, (Oh aggravating thought!)
That the Queen dyed, and dyed too by my fault!
I caused the Cruelties she did sustain;
After all this, can I behind remain?
No, I would strike a Dagger to my heart,
Had not my kinder grief performed that part:
My juster sorrow sudden death affords,
Without the help of Poison, Wound, or Swords:
Arsanes help, remains of Life are small:
At my adored Queens feet direct my fall.

Shall grief thus overcome?

O yes, I find
Deaths kind embraces all my senses bind.
The world turns round, and by degrees I gain
A kind of Resurrection from my pain.
Farewell my kind Arsanes.

Oh Sir stay.

Accept dead Queen, this Homage which I pay.
At my approach be not offended now,
The strictest Virtue may this grace allow:
Thy Vow to Herod's Canceled here, and I
Now gain that Bliss you did in Life deny,
And we may now come nearer when we dye.

Where is the Queen! Oh she is dead; she is dead --
Thou lie -- it cannot be -- yet from me she is fled.
See there she lies, Murdered by my Command;
Here I alive, her Bloody Husband stand.

Thanks my kind heart! my blood new Vitals takes;
Roused by that form my drooping Spirit wakes.

Ha! Tyridates!

Tyrant, art thou here?

Usurper, how dare thou invade this place?
If Life thou love, take hence thy hated face.
So great a Passion none but she e're gave:
I Am Jealous of that Beauty in her Grave.

Monster, when by my hand thy blood is spilt,
To meet Damnation equal to thy Guilt;
At that blessed minute thy black Soul shall fly,
May Heaven but hate thee half so much as I.

Have at thy heart, thy fury I defy.
Two fiercer Foes, Fate on one Stage cannot bring;
A desperate Lover, and a Rival King.

Revenge, thou'st done thy part, now Love go on;
And finish what Mariamnes Eyes begun.
Though it grows dark, my Ghost shall rove about,
And never stop till it has found thine out.
To do thee Homage, when in Heaven we meet,
There as on Earth I Will fall before thy feet.

Ha! into what Confusion am I hurled,
He Will be my Rival in the other World.
If Souls can fight, I thee to Battle dare,
And mine shall hence only to meet thine there.
As my blood cooles, my frighted sense looks home
On my past deeds, and what I have to come.
Here stand my Crimes, and there Eternity;
Men take the largest prospect when they dye.
Just Souls may mount, but mine I fear descends,
There Love, there Jealousy, here Tyrant ends --

A Roman Courage in my breast I find,
And a disdainful scorn to stay behind:
But I must live in kindness to thy name,
And keep my hated life to speak thy same.

All dead! and all my Trophyes! work for Graves!
Ruin and Death, ye are obedient Slaves,
Stars boast no more, the rule of humane fate,
No threatening Planet like a Woman's hate.
I fround, and Ruin darted from my Eyes,
Doomed by my hate, this blasted greatness dies.
If Kings are next to Gods, what then are they,
Who at their feet such mighty Victimes lay!
Oh Jealousy! Oh Glorious Womankind!
But thy chief Conquest Salome is behind.
I know I for their deaths accused shall be;
And the dull Gown must of my head decree.
I scorn to such mean Judges to descend:
No, I began with this, with this I Will end --
They the best Courage show, who with a frown
Give others death, and smiling give their own --
Ha! must my death admit of Lookers on!
Dull Life make have, and tardy Soul be gone.
So, now it is done --
Death ends both scorn and pride:
And I may dye by Tyridates side.
Though love once made me fire, Fate sets me free,
And in the Grave makes me as cold as thee --

Come let us from this dismal place be gone,
Where Cruelty and Love so much have done.

Love, Jealousy, and Spite, conspired thy fall:
But thou, great Queen, have overcome them all.
Fair Innocence, how e're suppressed, will rise;
And Virtue, though she suffers, never dies.

I Who by Herod's Jealous Wrath was Slain,
Can by your Kindness be Revived again.
I, who Undaunted dyed, now Trembling come,
Fearing your Breath, more than a Tyrants Doom.
If you but smile, let him still rage, and frown:
Your Friendship 's valued more than Herod's Crown.
But if I cannot so much favor win,
Come but to Morrow, and I Will dye again.
PAge the First, line 9. read Iudaean. p. 2. l. 22. r. Governor. p. 7. l. 31.
read Judea p. 2^. l. 5. r. delay's


