THou should have brought half a dozen Boy, this will not wet, one Pot of
Ale is no more in our Bellies, then a man in Paul's


That Is right: I prithee fetch a couple more, for what we do, we must do
quickly, and not make a days work on it


I swear I can hardly spare another Pot, the House swarms with several
Companies, that we have scarce Pots enough to serve their turns; but drink as
fast as you will, I Will fill as fast, I Will warrant you


Away, away, a man may baul his heart out before thou will hear him: bring us
another Pot, and by that time this will be ready for thee to fill


Well I Will try my Skill.


Come, here is half this to thee, fear it not, 'twill warm us within man.


I know it, and will pledge thee and it were a whole one.


Passing good Ale, it goes down merrily.


I believe there is no Bones in it: I have heard of Cock-Ale, Lambeth-Ale,
China-Ale, Rosemary-Ale, Mint-Ale, Wormewood-Ale, Orange-Ale, Lemon-Ale. And I
know not how many sorts more that are the Gentlemen's drink as they call 'em;
All is but Ale still, made of Water that runs by Billingsgate. And for my part,
when all is done give me the plain wholesome Ale of England without welt or
guard as they say, or a deal of mixtures; but of all drinks I hate that of
Coffee, it dries Men's Brains and makes 'em write Hudibrasses a plaguey hard
Word, and jangles like the breech of a Drum.


Here Gentlemen I am provided for you.


Gentlemen! you Knave! we may be drunk as Lords if we fit by it, but soft and
fair, two words to a bargain, the Fiddler played no such matter


No, no, we are for a touch and begone, here fill us this to, and make have;
Presto.


With a high pass and a repass I am gone, can I be here and there to, I Am
coming.


Have at thee again.


Do thy worst Boy, come, to thee again, the Parish is but short Man.


'Twill be welcome when it comes, off with it and it were a mile to the bottom.


See, I am a clean Drinker; Super naculum: boy, I hate to spill good Liquor,
and throw away the bottom, a man may want it before he dies


I, so the Parson told us this morning in the Boat, we had a jolly Company of
Passengers, but what she should be that is gone with the Parson my Noddle
cannot imagine


A notable perrilous witty Wench I warrant her, let her alone for leading her
men


She Will lead the Parson besides his Text I Am afraid; how she handled him?


Nay, marry he would have handled Her, by your leave friend.


You say very right, but she was too cunning for him, She was Courted by better
Men in the Boat, but she was too hard for them all, I wonder the Parson should
carry Her away


Who would think that such a Yea and Nay man should carry so much wickedness in
his Hide


Oh hang 'em, there is no Whore-master, like the slye Whore-master: the zealous
old Scot Doctrin'd Whore-master of the Tribe of Henderson


What was he? what was he?


What, what was he? why he was the Pope of Scotland.


Of Rome thou mean Man?


I say of Scotland, I know what I say well enough, and Marshall and Calamy were
two of his Cardinals


Lord who would think it,
but thou will talk any thing in thy Ale.

Under the Rose I may, Oh art thou there Boy, thou art he that does the Liquor
bring, though not the Bottle


I promise you I made what have I could, but our house is so pestered. I Am
coming -- did you ever


Who told you we did not?


Well, will you hear me then, there is a Gentleman inquires for you without.


What is he for a Man?


I tell you he seems a Gentleman.


Though he be not what he seems, it is all one to us; if he has any Money he
shall be welcome, and so let him in


Well, I shall tell him what you say.
I come, and I come again Sir.

Now should I laugh if it were some good fellow come to pay our reckoning.


No, no, They are Fish too hard to catch; how e're drink about man.


That Is quickly done, here is toward thee.


The Other Pot, and away. --


Where are the Watermen.


They are there Sir.


How now honest Lads, closeat it, you seldom sleep I think.


Yes troth Master we were just thinking upon it, I think and't please you, you
came up with this Tide in our Boat


I did so.


We had a Company of merry Passengers, not to lie; truly, and worthy Ones, or
else I am very much mistake


You had so, but one especially.


If I do not know where he be now never trust me.


Why I am here.


I know that too, but I know where you would be.


That Is a hard matter my friend.


Do you not mean a Gentlewoman.


There were many.


But I do mean the Gentlewoman, she that sat next the Parson.


Now you hit me.


And would not you be with her now, with all your heart and a piece of your
Liver


I cannot tell, but I must give thee half a dozen of Beer for thy conceits sake.


Ale is the life of a Waterman Sir.


Why then Ale let it be.


You shall have it with all selerity Sir.


Will your Worship or Honor, or I don't know what, be pleased to sit down and
take part of our Cup


I came to that purpose.


Blessing on your heart, I do not love a proud Gentleman, methinks a right
Gentleman should not be proud by your favor Sir, here is even to you, and to
all our Company how ever dispersed now on Shore


I Will pledge you, but my honest friends cannot you tell me what is become of
that pretty thing


Pretty thing quoth a, she was worth ten pretty things; she was a thing to
thank God for


You say well.


Here Is your quickening Ale Gentlemen.


Set it down, and begone.


I come, I come presently.


My friends here is to you both.


One at once Sir, and we are for you.


Is there no way to find her out?


Way quoth a, it is a shame for you all, so many Gentlemen aboard her, and let
a dry bon'd Parson carry her away


Pox on it, I lost her in a mist; I know not how she whipped away.


You know not whether?


Very true, but I hope thou do?


We know nothing Sir, the Streets are wide and many.


Let this for once corrupt thy knowledge, she cannot be far off?


If I thought so. --


She must be some where?


That Is certain if she be any where Sir, as doubtless she is, and now I think
on it


I prithee then think on it.


London is a wide place Brother, have a care what you do.


I prithee hold thy prateing, I Will content thee too.


I say no more, but Brother have a care.


And now I think on it.


I, go on.


London is a wide place indeed, and a Man may as soon find a Needle in a Bottle
of Hay, as a woman-stranger in this City, yet I would advise you


To what?


To have her Cried in every Parish.


Pish, I see thou art but a baffling fellow; give me my money again.


Yes, when can you tell? did you ever know a Waterman guilty of that fault, to
part with money when he had got it in his clutches. I am sorry I cannot serve
you, and there is all, the time was you might have served your self


Thou say right, how cursedly was I mistaken! much good may do you with your
money


'Twill serve to pay the reckoning, Sir I wish you may find her.


Since you cannot inform me, my hopes, and search is ended, fare you well.


We Will drink a health to your good fortunes Sir.


So, it is an ill wind blows no body good, Boy take your reckoning, and now
we will


All Is paid in the Rose, and you are Welchmen Gentlemen.


Thou art a wag Sirrah.


In verity it is a cold bleak morning, a little of the Creature would do well:
a Glass of Malligo is very comfortable, yea, even unto the Spirits, with a
Toast; it does regenerate, and quicken much, and in a way does elevate, and
stir the blood to action; it does assuredly


I apprehend not that, (Sir) but I fear you give your self too great a trouble,
thus to follow me, I cannot reach your meaning


Verily it is sincerity of love I bear to strangers, as we are exhorted even so
to do by the most learned Authors; Yea, we are all but strangers here, and
therefore assuredly we should love one another, yea, so the Word is, even as
one another. And see, Oh see, indeed law, look ye yonder, there is a door open
to Comers surely, which we have not till now found in our way; I hope my
courtesy, your Gentleness, will not refuse, yea truly I hope not


I must house some where: feign I would be rid of this impertinent Coxcomb, yet
methinkes I Am chained unto him as some fate hung over me, he may prove
fortinate. --


How say you beauteous Creature?


In truth I say Sir you do so abound in Courtesy, I shall fall short in my
endeavors to requite it


It Is an easy, yea, even a very easy matter surely will do it if you so
please, -- where is the Man o'th house here?


What is your will?


Nay, is it your will, that we may have a special Glass of Malligo.


The best in all the Town I warrant you.
Where are you there?

We are but newly come off the Water in verity: and something that is warm is
not a miss truly; how say you Sir? with this fair Creatures good leave, I think
it is not assuredly


Show a Room presently do you hear, and draw a Pint of the best Malligo, that is
next -- do you hear, do you see, do you understand me.


I shall Sir -- will you please to walk into a Room.


Yea verily, how say you forsooth?


I am at your disposal Sir.


In verity I wish you were else, for ah --


A very pretty close convenient Room this is assuredly; how say you beauteous
Creature


Why truly Sir the closeness of it does not at all concern me; if it were ten
times wider I should like it a great deal better.


Assuredly I think not so; yea, I can give you many reasons for it, Divine, and
Morrall, Hyperbolicall, or Tropologicall, -- but here is the creature come,
that is the wine, now this should have a fellow, that is a Toast, where is the
other Creature


Even at the fire Sir,
To receive its Trial.

The fellow jeers him.


You answered well young man, yea verily; but let it not be burnt.


It shall not be a Martyr; he will turn first assuredly


Why this is excellent.


A good ingenious young man verily, I warrant him well notion'd, that is to say
in truth one that has something in him, yea certainly, but as I was about to
say; to draw my reasons to a head, that is to tell you what they are,
assuredly; and first. --


The Toast is ready Sir.


You assure me right.


Yea, and it has got a new Coat by turning.


Ha, ha, ha,


Assuredly your mirth is comfort to me, what might occasion it, I pray if that
--


A Toy came in my head.


Your Sex have many: but in so sweet a thing as you, they do appear (methinks)
commendable, yea verily


In that opinion you deceive your self, me you cannot Sir.


Not for Worlds on worlds! and yet the Weather may allow us to come nearer one
another, verily, without offense, or misconstruction; for it is raw and cold,
yea very cold.


The Room is warm, good Sir keep your seat.


Strangers I love, and strangers should love me, in verity they should la; else
we do deny the sense, bids us love one another; yea, verily we do, I Will try how
warm


Sir I understand you not.


I hope you will, an understanding Woman is a Jewel, yea, yea, a precious Jewel
in the Ears, and hearts of Princes and wise men assuredly, in sundry places we
do find it so, yea verily; ah, ah, ah, ah, this hand yea this same hand of
yours


And what of it Sir?


It melts like Butter against the Sun believe me, I would come nearer verily,
that is unto your Lip, in verity it would affourd me sweetness in abundance,
truly assuredly it would, I pray, I pray. --


I am a strainger to your sense and Person: keep farther off Sir, or indeed I
shall, --


Yea, yea,


Nay, nay, are you so rampant; 'Parson, I thought I knew your meaning


Ha -- ha -- ha -- ha -- ha. --


What Is your meaning Sir?


The Spirit boyles within me, ye


You are th'uncivill'st man that e're I met with, and undeserving of the Coat
and Title you do assume; hands off. --


A civil Gentlewoman I warrant her.


You rude fellow you.


Yea, as the Wise man said, a Woman's Tongue is Wormwood, yea verily Gaul and
bitterness


A man of your Coat do you see to do these things do you see, it is a shame do you
see, do you mark me, that


Assuredly I will pay for the Malligo and the Toast, yea I will.


I scorn your courtesy Sir.


In verity I will.


Let him Mistress do you see, he has sworn do you see.


Assuredly I will, what is it pray?


But Twelve-pence do you see.


Twelve-pence is just a Shilling verily, and there it is assuredly; fair one, I
greet you well; but will conclude with the wise Man, he that takes a Woman for
his friend takes a wrong Sow by the Ear; yea verily.


I do perceive do you see you are a stranger.


A very stranger to this Town indeed Sir.


And it is very likely do you see you have a charge about ye.


I have so Sir.


If you please do you see to make use of part of my House, do you see you need go
no farther, here you may be safe do you see, I see you are a civil Gentlewoman,
and it is pity do you see you should happen into a place that would abuse you,
there are some such in Town; do you see that will prey upon strangers do you see,
but you shall find no such thing here believe me


I do Sir, and kindly do embrace your proffer.


You shall want nothing in my house do you see, if you please to see your Chamber?


Sir you oblige me much for this civility.


SWeet Heart, I have a secret to impart to thee, and a very precious one, do you
see, it may be worth us pounds wench, nay, if I said hundreds I should not lie,
do you hear me? provided we order our matters well, and carry 'em in the right
way, do you see. And therefore I must conjure thee by all loves and nuptial
kindnesses that has or may pass between us at Bed or at Board, do you see. --


What is all this for?


For it is no petty ordinary common thing do you see, but a thing of profit do you
see, and credit do you see, and honor may come on it do you see


What is it? what is it?


If a man cannot reveal a thing to his own Flesh and blood, do you see, who
shall he do it to then do you see


I pray Sweetheart let me know your meaning?


Women's hearts are like Cullenders, do you see, or Loop-holes, do you see, but if a
man cannot trust his own wife, his second self! do you see, I know not what to
say do you see


Good Sweetheart let me understand you, do you doubt me Sweetheart?


I doubt no body do you see, but a secret is a secret, do you see, and ought to be
kept safe, tender as the Apple of ones eye, do you see, or the heart in ones
bosom, do you see


Lord, lord, how I long to know it.


Yes you may long do you see, and shorten again, do you see, but who pays for it
do you see


Nay, I prithee Sweetheart.


This it is do you see, to have a careful Husband do you see, that rises early
and sits up late, do you see, while you she things, you lazy drones, you heavy
eyed wives do you see, run to your roost e're it chymes tenn, do you see me, there
snug and snore till ten next morning, do you see; out upon such huswifes I cry


I, but Sweetheart, what needs all this? good, now let me know this secret,
this secret you talk of


He that goes to bed with a Cap of cares on his head is an early riser, do you
see, he takes time by the fore lock, do you see, and must thrive do you see, as it
is seen in Cynder women, and Small-cole men do you see, who have a penny in Purss
to spend when the sluggish man does want it do you see


You weary me, good Sweetheart to the purpose.


It is a secret do you see, that you must keep as close do you see, as you do your
sins, do you see, and reveal it to no body do you see, without my privity do you see


You have charmed me chuck, pray let me know it.


Why then, do you see? --


You know I do, dear heart you know I do, if you love me do not trifle thus,


Why then I must tell you and exhort you, do you see, not to lie so long a bed,
you may get Fleas do you see, but no wealth there; a stirring Wife is the only
woman do you see, when all is done, do you think my Brother Bloodworth would ever
have come to be an Alderman or a Knight if his wife do you see had not had a care
of the Kitchen, and been stirring


Well, well, I Will begone Sweetheart, I see you have a mind to mock me; prepare
me for a secret to no purpose


Yes, it shall be to a purpose do you see, and a good purpose too do you see, this
very morning e're the Crow had pist do you see, I got into my Bar do you hear, and
as good fortune would have it do you see, in comes a Parson and as sweet a thing
do you see, as modest and as comely as ever strod over Threshold do you see, with
him do you see, they drank a pint of Wine, and I found the Parson was ill
inclined do you see; and his Coat lined with letchery do you see


I pray Chuck by the way, where does that Parson preach?


That Is not to my matter do you see, I found her to be a virtuous Gentlewoman
do you see, a stranger, and a Person that had a charge about her do you see, yea
Jewels and Treasure do you see


And what then Chuck?


Why, then I discharged the Parson do you see, after he had discharged the
Reckoning do you see, as it was fit, but not before do you see


So then, and what became of the Gentlewoman?


Why she had a charge about her do you see, and you may think I would take care
of her do you see, she is forth comeing


Where, good Husband where?


In no worser place then our own house do you see.


Now blessing on thee Chuck I shall have a Companion.


Hold there child, do you see, we must go wisely to work do you see, and find out
what she is do you see, for certainly she is a Gentlewoman of some quality, and
therefore you must use her with all respect becoming her Person do you see; and
when we find how matters stand let us alone to make our Markets do you see, if we
don't hang me do you see


Sweetheart, believe me if there be any confidence to be put in Woman, your
secret is locked here in this Cabinet of which none keeps a key but your self;
and if you think I retain any thing of a mothers wit in me let me alone to sift
her out; were she as subtle as the great Grandmother of us all


Be wise do you see, keep things close do you see, and then I warrant ye do you see.


My Mistress will wait upon you immediately forsooth, and I am sent in the
mean time to know what you want


I return my equal thanks to your Master and Mistress, and tell them if they
can spare me a Glass


And Pen, and Ink forsooth?


No, I never am without one it is so necessary.


Do you want nothing else, forsooth.


Not at present,


I Will return withal speed forsooth.


Do so.


These People are highly officious, I have not met the like civility in any
place, what e're the reason is; if it continue thus, it will be wonderful: I
am a Stranger, and I must be so in my Deportment, as the sight of these draws
on respect, sour and surley is as bad, and argues want of breeding, to avoid
the censure of either, I Will walk between both, and as I find my Company, appear
neither too Jocand, nor yet too severe


I have brought the Glass, and the Paper forsooth.


You have done very well, set 'em down, I thank you.


My Mistress is just upon coming; forsooth.


She gives her self too great a trouble then, but she shall be most welcome.


I Will tell her so forsooth, God bless you forsooth.


I thank thee Wench,


Oh lack-a-day forsooth, no, no forsooth, but if it must be so forsooth I
humbly thank you


Farewell, this must be done; A grain


I fear I entrude forsooth; you are busy.


I cry you mercy Mistress, some Letters I am fitting for the Post, but no great
business; to let my friends know where I do reside, that I may hear from them,
that is all


And that is enough for me.


Will you please to seat your self?


I came indeed to invite you down to Dinner, goodness how these hangings look
for want of brushing, what an idle Wench is this, the Curtains and Vallance
too, and the Chaires and Stools too, what Windows are here, I dare say they
have not been well rubbed this week; the very Flore forsooth if you will believe
me have shined so, you might have seen your face in it, goodness my Husband is
such a man to put a Gentlewoman into a Room, -- Oh fie upon it, I fear forsooth
you are but ill pleased as you are ill fitted, but indeed I promise it shall be
amended


It needs not Mistress, methinks it is very well, and so long as I am
contented, you need not trouble your self


That is your goodness forsooth, but will you be pleased to walk down to
Dinner, or will you have a Dish of Meat brought up


No, Mistress I dare not take that State upon me as to dine by my self, if I
dine at all 'twill be with you, but truly I do not know how --


If your Letters be all the hinderance, you have time enough to dispatch them
forsooth


But I am all unready.


You need not fear Strangers, my Husband and my self are all.


Say you so Landlady, then I dare venture.


Will you please to lead the way forsooth.


No, I hope you will leave me in Possession of my Chamber.


Oh because of shutting of the door, it is very right, Lord how forgetful I am,
pray pardon me forsooth.


Where Is my Sister?


Who do you mean, my Mistress.


Prithee fool whom else?


Why then my Mistress your Sister is. --


What art thou drunk, where is she?


Drunk, what is that word drunk? did you ever know me drunk? let Cobblers and
Tinkers be drunk, did you ever know a Cellerman drunk


Leave this fooling, where is my Sister?


drunk! drunk! how can he tell any thing that is drunk? yes I know where your
Sister is


Come where is she.


You may go look, drunk! if I did know I would not tell you; drunk!


Go you are a Sot. --


A Sot! you Scriveners Boy, you Pen and Ink-horn, a Sot you Shittafritter.


Sirrah I shall box ye if you be thus saucy.


Box me, you cocaloach, you Tinder-box of a Clark, you Rump of a Lawyer, you
box me, come, boy come, come an thou dare


Very hardly, art not thou a base Rascal to abuse me thus I could kick thee
about like a Football thou dirty fellew thou


Who


Why how now, what is the matter? what down man? up again and take another.


Drunk, and sot, and a Football to be kicked very fare, come kick for kick,
I Will so toss thee


welfare a good friend, you had given your self the other toss else.


Come prithee get thee in.


He says I am drunk.


Why so thou art insufferably, cursedly drunk.


Thou lie in sober sadness, cursedly, to say so, though thou were my brother
ten times over


No more of this; go, go thy ways to sleep.


Sleep, Pox of sleep, I care not for sleep, I did not sleep ten wincks all last
night, I never sleep, am up early and late for my Masters profit, yes Carleton,
I am Carleton, what say you to that now Carleton, hah


Prithee go thy ways up Stares, or into some by Room I prithee brother do.


Yes, I shall but do you hear Carleton, if ever I meet you Carleton. --


Thou Wilt give him a Glass of Wine.


What then? it may be so I will, and the best Wine in the Celler too; Carleton
without being drunk Carleton, what say you to that Carleton, or a Sot,
Carleton, or a Football Carleton, how think you of that Carleton


Very well, prithee begone.


I will not tell I Have taken him by the hand.


Why that is well done.


Why you must think I cannot but love the man for the Woman's sake, I do so Mr.
Carleton, she is my Mistress Mr. Carleton, Carleton, Flesh and Blood Mr.
Carleton, is very near Mr. Carleton


Now his kindness overflowes: will thou go in?


I will have a pint of Canary first to drink to Mr. Carleton, I pray fetch it
Brother I Will pay for it, honest Mr. Carleton, my Mistresses Brother, but I am
not drunk Mr. Carleton, nor a Sot Mr. Carleton, nor a Football Mr. Carleton, I
may be a fool Mr. Carleton, but I love you Mr. Carleton


Thou art an honest fellow.


Yes, and ever was Mr. Carleton, yet I will creep on all four to do you good
Mr. Carleton, and yet I am not drunk Mr. Carleton


Thou art not, thou art not.


It may be I am so, so, as they say in a fair way, but drunk I hate to be drunk.


Will thou go into a Room.


I will not stir a foot, nor a leg, nor a finger, nor a thumb, unless Mr.
Carleton commands me, and says honest Rogue I love thee


Why honest Rogue I love thee.


Why so now; is not this better then to say you are drunk, a sot, and I Will kick
you like a Football: -- why now you are a Gentleman; and if you will go down
into the Cellar I will not wast your Brothers Goods but what you drink there
I Will pay for, a man can say no more


Another time Brother, another time.


Why what is that to thee, thou will be meddling with other men's matters.


No more quarrelling good brother: prithee go in.


Do you say I shall go in Mr. Carleton, if you say the Word I am gone.


I, honest Rogue prithee begone.


Why then I fly.


Hold there man.


A pox of these Tobacco Pipes, they lie in a man's way basely: do you hear
brother, if company come in you know where to find me.


Fast a sleep in the Cellar.


It Is a very honest fellow, did not this drink abuse him.


It Is wondered where he gets it; in Company he shuns it, unless the sent of the
Celler makes him drunk, no man can guess it, or drinks with his own shadow


Alas poor fellow; but where is my Sister?


At dinner Sir, or near upon it, with a most dainty Creature, a sweet modest
thing


What is she?


A mere stranger happened in here by chance; she is worth your seeing Sir.


Say thou so; I confess I Am something bashful, but I Will venture.


I would I durst.


Good lack John that you should be so simple to come so late, you know we dine
betims, especially when we have little Company; but if thou wilt take a snip such
as it is, thou know thou art welcome John


Pough, I care not for a dinner; I am vexed I mist the sight o'th Lady.


What Lady? John?


You think that I know nothing; what Lady was it that came in this morning
early, very early


Why John as I am a Woman. --


You know there was a Gentlewoman or Lady, stranger, came hither this morning
as I said before; fie Sister why do you make it so strange to me your natural
brother. --


Lord, how do thou know this.


What do I not know?


Well now it is out; I ever took thee for a Conjurer by the scrawles thou used
to make at home; nay in my conscience I think verily if thou would confess
John, thou make Almanacks John, and fortune Books John; Oh thou were
always a wag John


Away fool; But may not I see this stranger?


Well thou art a very Witch John, if I was not sworn to secrecy, yea by my own
Husband let me be hanged now, and thou by thy craft, thy wicked craft, (for so
it is) have found out all; but John thou can not see her now for all thy
cunning


Why so, Sister?


In troth she is despatching Letters to be sent by the Post John, but to morrow
John


What then Sister?


We shall feast our friends John, and cannot in civility do less then invite
her John, being a sojourner in our house John, and then thou shall have thy
belly full of seeing of her John, but no words John; if thou love me; she is
a well bred Woman, I perceive that John, already John; but no words as you love
me


Not a word I.


Be sure you come betimes, and be very neat John, 'twill be for your credit,
and you may find the benefit of it in time John


Well, well, you know Sister I can be as spruce and finicall as another when I
please


I know it John.


And so adue Sister.


fare you well brother John.


Sweet heart shall I trouble thee.


No trouble forsooth to serve you.


Only to get a trusty messenger to deliver these Letters for me at the Post
office, they are of concernment, and their miscarriage will much prejudice me;
and therefore good sweet heart get one you know, and are assured of


I Will carry them my self forsooth with my Mistresses leave.


That would do well indeed, but I fear thy mistress cannot spare thee.


Yes I warrant you forsooth.


shall I not be too troublesome.


Oh no forsooth.


I would not give her occasion of distaste.


You need not fear it forsooth, she is of a better disposition then so.


Well sweet heart I Will trust to your care then, there is money for 'em.


They shall be safe delivered forsooth.


I find these people's over kindness mixed;
With greyness of subtlety; their plausibility
Gives only Credit to their busy purpose:
My Landlady like to one Grandam Eve,
Covets to know more then she ever shall;
Yet I Will afford her to taste of the Apple,
And since she will needs trouble her self 'bout matters
That unconcernes her, I have fitted her,
My Letters which I know she will intercept,
And pry into, to satisfy her longing,
(Though it be most inhospitable and base,)
I Have framed accordingly there let her nibble,
Upon the bates I Have laid and please her self,
With thinking she knows all, when she knows nothing:
Whilst I Have seem still a stranger to her meaning,
The more respects she shows me, I will be
The more reserved which will draw greater on,
With some continuance, poor shallow thing
To hope to sift me out in my affairs,
My Education has not been so slender,
Nor my Wit left naked of Rudiments,
To be a Price for thee and thy designs;
All bold inquisitors ought thus to be
Deluded with some show of certainty.

The Letters are delivered forsooth.


Art sure on it?


Sure on it forsooth, I delivered 'em with my own hands I Am sure.


Say thou so, thou have made have then I Will promise thee.


Have you any more service to command me forsooth?


Not to night wench.


Shall I not help to undress you forsooth?


I was not dressed to day, and having nothing on but what I can cast off without
thy help wench, I acquit thy diligence


Good rest to your Ladyship.


Ladyship! so, now it begins to work,
Will it rest there! no, their conceits fly higher;
A foreign Princess, that for love of some
Brave Englishman, has left her Native Soil,
And privately is here Arrived, or so;
But that is too lame, I Would rather have it thus;
A Noble Person that to view the World
With an experienced eye, throws off her State,
And like to the late active Sweedish Queen,
Retires into a Hut without her Retinue.
This meets my fancy and comes nearest to
Their Wit (if they have any) here is a Field
For us to play in; as I see 'em move,
I Will poyse their admiration, and their love.

Good sweet heart do you see, I would not have you so busy do you see, sweet heart
a body does not know what may come on it do you see sweet heart


Prithee chuck hold thy tongue she is a brave Woman, nay, she must be a gallant
Woman, I know what I intend well enough, take you no care, the business is mine
chuck


Nay, do you see, I will not cross you sweet heart do you see, I wish all may go
well, but you know she is but a stranger do you see, and a body may be deceived
do you see, of what you hope for do you see


Let the fault lie on me then chuck, look here is my brother John.


Brother you are very heartily welcome do you see, indeed you are do you see, I
cannot dissemble do you see, in truth I cannot


I know it, what needs all this brother?


You are very early John, and very smug John.


I came just from the Barbers, but where is the Lady?


What Lady? I know no Lady I protest do you see, but my own Wife your Sister do you
see, who is the only Lady and Mistress of the house do you see


Oh fie chuck, fie, you know, you know.


True, there is a strange Gentlewoman sojournes here do you see for some time,
but I know no more on it do you see


Why then a Gentlewoman let her be, so I can but see her.


I think thou long'st for it John, hearken and thou may hear her John, it is
her


It Is a sweet one, -- hold good Sister hold, I love a good voice as I love my
life


A way, away, flatter no more
My easy Faith, for now I see
What thou in me seemed to adore
Thou make thy pleasures property;
No more, no more will I believe
The man that can so soon deceive;

Excellent, excellent, -- Oh good
Sister listen a little.

Nor was it flattery that did,
Betray my heart, but that I loved,
For which my Reason has been chid,
And I the said effects have proved;
Then go, and I no more will see
The man that has abused me.

Incomparable! the Voice of Nightengales are hoarse to hers: shall I see her
Sister


Yes brother John you shall see her, but I must prepare her first, you will not
know her else, she will not be seen till Dinner time


Would it were ready, I shall be starved till then.


Rather then so do you see, we have a bye Bit for ye.


You do not understand me brother.


No, no, John, heaken to me, she that I shall call Cousen when we are at Dinner
is the Party; and by that word John you may know her, but let none else take
notice of it


If her person be answerable to her voice, she will be taken notice of, whether
I will or no


He says right Wife do you see, the truth is I would not have my brother do you
see, take any notice of her more then as a stranger


That is my meaning chuck.


for she may be a person of Quality do you see, and she may not do you see, all is
not Gold that glisters


Good brother do not forstall the Market, when I know not how to carry my self
you shall instruct me


Nay, brother I do not speak for your carriage do you see, but for your good do you
see, I would not have you ensnared do you see


Ensnared Love! do thou think that I, who am his natural born Sister, flesh,
blood, and bone, would bring him into a snare love


No chuck, but thou may be mistaken in the thing it self do you see chuck.


I perceive my Brother is not minded I should see the Gentlewoman, fare you
well Sister, I Will not be troublesome


Good lord do you see, my own heart is not welcomer to my Bosom then you are to
it do you see, but I speak by way of caution do you see, because I love you


Certainly I Am neither fool nor madman, I have my Wits about me.


I John that thou have John to my knowledge, more wit then twenty of 'em, and I
am no fool neither John, thou know it, and I know more John then I will
speak; be ruled by me John, let me alone I Will order the business if thou have a
mind to her


When I have seen her I will tell you more.


And that thou shall John for all his pettishness.


Nay, I have done do you see, I Will meddle no more in it.


Are the Guess all come.


Now you are come Gentlemen.


Are we the last Couple in Hell then.


I believe not; is Jack Carleton come?


Yes Sir.


Nay then I fear we are tardy in point of time, for he used to be always the
last man born


Today he came sooner then was exspected indeed, but you are not too late, in
very good time Gentlemen; will you please to walk up


What else.


Here am I placed to attend the noice above Stairs; I fill and fill, all
manner of Vessels from the Gallon to the Gill Pot, and they bawle and call, and
take 'em away as fast, but the devil of drop they give me; none has the heart
to say honest Wat here is to thee, and God-a mercy it is good Wine, hang their
money, I respect their love, but thou art not beloved Wat, therefore love thy
self Wat, the Poets say thou art Prince of the Spiggot and art in thy Kingdom
when thou art in the Celler, if so then all these are my Subjects, the French,
the Dutch, and the Spanish, nay I dare say if need be I can command the Welsh,
the Irish, the Scottish, and the English; then Wat do like a Prince make use of
thy Subjects as they make use of thee, for they would be musty else. -- Wat
thou art called upon, thou must make have they say hum, -- so be it, by, and
by, this must be filled with Sherry, this with Canary brisk, this with old
Malligo, but do you hear me Sherry, Canary Wat, since no body else will, I Will
drink to thee my self, it is a cup of pure Sherry, Wat, why gra-mercy -- this is
something now, here is good fellowship, and no body sees! they say thou have a
good Pallat Wat, VVat, and now what say thou to a Cup of old Malligo VVat?
it cannot but be good, the best in Town VVat I approve it, off with it man;
doubtest thou me VVat? now are we Company for Poets VVat, but hold -- will thou
let thy French and Dutch Subjects go free VVat? No thou will be an unjust
Prince then, as for the English, Welsh, Irish, and Scottish, they are poor,
acquit 'em, acquit 'em, then here is to thee in a Cup of Rhenish it is cleansing
drink VVat; off with it, art thou now for a Cup of spruce Claret, or White
VVat? both; thou shall have 'em entire boy, entire boy; rich Wine VVat, huge
rich Wine VVat, damnable searching VVat; yea


Here he is with all his Artillery about him, dormant as a Mouse.


Does he not sleep Dogs sleep.


No you may hear him to Hogesden.


I Will waken him.


By no means, he sat up late last night, come help up


Now Dinner's done, while they are merry John let you and I consider of the
matter; how do you like the Person, John


Exceeding well; good at discourse, and of a modest countenance.


Why law ye now, did not I tell you this John? and you would not believe me, my
Husband like a fool was of the same faith too


Pough I did believe you Sister, but has she that estate you talk of too?


What do you doubt me there too John? yes she has an Estate and a glorious
Estate John, but what it is I do not know John, yet I can shrewdly guess John
and if need be. --


Is it in her own hands.


Why now I see thou art not so wise as I thought thee to be John, in whose
hands should it be else John


Where lies it.


Between Heaven and Earth John, does not all peoples Estates lie there you fool.


I would not be made one of good Sister.


Nay, if you be there abouts John I have done.


I must confess I never saw a person I ever fancied better; Pray Heaven my
flames consume me not, they take so soon, and are so fierce


Fear not John, I am her bosom John, and if she were not for your turn, you
should not have her John, but you must be ruled John


In any thing dear Sister thou will have me.


Then put your self John into an Equipage beyond your self John, appear as I
would have you like a Lord John, with your Coach and Foot-boyes, the sooner
John the better; were it to morrow, and treat her nobly John, were I a man, John
I could do it to the life John, I know you want not friends to furnish you, let
it be so John, for she is a Lady, and none but him is recommended for a Lord
will carry her John


It shall be done dear Sister; I know where to be provided both with money and
Clothes


And then let me alone to manage things for thy advancement John.


I, dear Sister prithee use thy Interest.


If we should not do well for one another John, how would the World look on us
John? I love thee heartily John


I know thou do, and there is no love lost on either side.


I Will lordifie thee John, I Will be thy HERALD: thou shall no more be plain
John, nor poor John, nor honest Jack as thy friends call thee; but my Lord
John, I will have it in my thought, and will dream upon it, for man, I must not
call you brother, nor you me Sister, observe that John, yet I would not have
you to forget John, that I am your Sister


Do think I will? but come, our friends do stay.


Then my Lord John I pray lead on the way.


Yesterday was a hot day, a wicked hot day.


No, 'twas a very cool day; how can thou call it a hot day when thou were in
the Celler all the while


Why goodman puppy the Celler is the hotest place in the house.


To thee sometimes it may be so.


I know not what it was to him or you, but to me I Am sure it was a very sultry
hot day


I, thou art a Wench that deals in fire, but he is for the other Element.


You, ly you Logerhead I hate Water.


But thou art quarrelsome in thy Ale.


I hate that too.


Small Beer can never stir thee.


I do not much affect that neither, it rots my Guts.


Some secret Liquor, some Nepenthe as the Poets call it, inspires thee now and
then abominably: but I am taught to tell you Brother mine, and Sister Eke, that
if you chance to see this day a Lord in shape as like Mr. John Carleton as Puss
to Cat, you must not think it him


What him, what him?


Even him, I spoke off Mr. John Carlet, yea though you know the Nose upon his
face you must not think it him, but. --


But what?


A Lord.


A Lord, ha, ha, ha,.


I shall laugh too, prithee what Lord.


The Lord knows what, but hear me it is no laughing matter mums the word.


May not one winck and laugh?


yea winck you may but laugh ye may not.


Where did thou get this Tone thou wicked elder.


Even of a Parson truly, yea verily it was, that brought the Lady to this place
assuredly


Hold there is a Coach at door, no feasting I hope this day.


It Is he.


It Is not he.


But I say it is he.


And I am sure it is he.


What he?


My Lord.


You do well. there, --


Never go now if he ben't


And generous.


It Is pity he is not a Lord indeed, now my trouble comes on.


Or mine rather.


No I dare assure you the day will not be so hot to either of you as yesterday
was


Then I shall be plagued with night work.


Why all times and seasons are alike to thee so thou do drink and sleep.


Hang ye Raskal I never was a drinker, a thorough drinker in my life.


Not to speak of.


Nay truly, VVat is as sober a man when he is not drunk, as any of us all.


Ha, ha, ha, come, come, let us about our business.


Boys.


Ny Lord?


Get you down Stairs, take a Room there.


Yes my Lord.


And when I call be ready.


We shall my Lord.


And one of you bid one of my men bring up some Wine, shall it be so my Lord?


I come not to be idle, 'twas well thought on.


These boys are as bad as young Coach-horses, they


You may remedy it as they say my Lord, and have those that are prepared to
your hand my Lord


I may so indeed, but many of them have practiced sawcyness and become surley.

Oh art thou come; where are my Foot-boyes?


Below, my Lord.


Do I dream? a Lord


Fellow fill some Wine.


Yes my Lord.


Can this be real?


Madam my hearty service to you.


You do too much eclips you title in it Sir.


Not a whit Madam, Honor's bound to serve a person of your virtue and your
Presence: will you be pleased to take the air to day, my Coach is ready


Were I disposed, I could cammand one Sir.


So you may mine Madam.


Not I Sir.


Why will not your Ladyship accept his proffer?


You put strange Titles upon people Mistress.


A smart wit; would you would honor me so much Madam.


As how Sir?


As to walk with me over the green.


No my Lord, I should be wet shod then, April's dew is deep.


And therefore sweet.


Your Lordship makes that up a vulgar Error.


Well Sister. --


Art mad or


Both; I am not right.


I do believe so.


His Lordship is not well.


A-lack good Gentleman.


I beg your pardon; I am forced to leave you.


No force Sir, in good time.


She would be rid of me.


How do you my Lord.


His Lordship would to Coach.


Again.


Will your Lordship have any Comfortable thing?


No I Will to Coach, the Lady has directed me.


In the right way I hope Sir.


Again? I will not stay, call my Boys fellow.


Why Children, -- I forgot my self, -- Boys, -- I Will send 'em up an't please
your Lordship


No, tell 'em I Am a going, and it is enough.


I shall my Lord.


Madam give me leave to kiss your hand, -- your servant, your servant Mistress.


His Lordship will be hard put to it, to serve us both.


Me he cannot, you he may Madam.


Good Cousen, or Landlady, the last is the truest, be not so prodigal of your
favors in confering Titles of Honor at this rate


Why do you think I do not know you to be a Lady Madam.


I should be so were I a Madam really; but you are free in the bestowing it as
I suppose upon any person, because the word is common, and therefore Landlady I
do abhor it


Indeed you mist my meaning Madam, I never apply Titles to any person but such
as I know deserves 'em, as on your self, my Lord, or so


But is he, that was here, a Lord really descended.


A very Lord I do assure you Madam.


Since yesterday translated! for then he dined with us or my memory deceives me.


He did so, but then he was disguised.


Not with drink I Am sure.


No, but in his freikes as they call 'em, and he has many, some times he will
go in the Street as he went for a wager, with his Collor all unbutton'd,
swetting like a Bull, his Cloak hanging behind him, in one hand his Gloves, the
other full of Papers, that one would take him for all the World to be some
young Clerk, or one that had Relation to the Law. At another time when he has a
mind to be privately merry he throws his Cloak over his Nose, and in he
steals, and is as good Company! --


For a mad Lord.


Nay he is not mad, in truth he has some whymseys but they are huge becoming
I Will assure you Madam, if you were acquainted with 'em; then he has been
bravely bred Madam


So a Lord should be.


He Is a good Latiness they say, and writes a very good Hand.


Those are very good commendations for a Clerk indeed.


Or for a Lord or a Gentleman or any body else believe me Madam; and then he is
as sober, as virtuous, and as hansome a young Lord though I say it as any is
within a hundred miles of his head, and of as sweet a disposition


Methinkes you dwell too long upon his praises.


If you were but well acquainted with him Madam. --


I must to my Chamber.


And I Will wait on you Madam.


How now, did these come from your Lord.


Yes to the Lady.


Where did thy Lord pick thee up?


What Is that to you Jack-a-napes I Will tell your Mistress Sirrah.


Why how now little impudence will you be lug'd by the Ears Sirrah, does your
Lord teach you no beeter manners you Arss-worme


I cannot tell -- I must speak with your Mistress.


Who Is there?


My Lord presents his love to you forsooth, and desires you would present his
service with this Box of sweet Meats to the Lady


Thou shall see it delivered thy self, Boy come in with me.


Your man is so unlucky he will not let me alone.


fie, fie, meddle with a Child.


There Is a young Pimp now, he will be a stewed Rogue in time if his Lords Trade
continues.


He bid me tell your Ladyship he will wait upon you in the afternoon, and have you
abroad


Will he, but it is a question whether I shall give my self that leisure or not.


By all means good madam.


How ever boy prithee present my service and thanks to him,


Your humble servant madam.


Do You observe Landlady, the word madam is so out of fashion it is a Foot-boyes
Complement


What shall I call you then? Princess.


Away, away, I abandone flattery as I do Titles that are misapplied.


Why directly your Presence and excellent parts cannot speak you less, -- but
saving my tale forsooth, odds so I cry your Ladyships mercy


Nay let it go on so.


Why then an't please you how do you like my Lord? is he not as I told you a
sweet conditioned Gentleman


He begines well.


And so He Will continue to the end I warrant ye.


That Is more then you know Landlady.


My life on it.


It Is a hard venture in my opinion Landlady.


Let the Coach wait, and stay you there.


We shall my Lord.


Jack let thee and I crack a Pint together.


I have no money.


Hanged, I have, the Lady was generous to me this morning.


Would she had been so to me.


It Is all one between thee and I, let us call the Coachman in and see if he will
join


The more the merrier.


Dear Madam.


Good my Lord do not deceive your self.


My Lord an't please your honor, the word Madam grates her ears she says,
because it is so common


Why then my Princess, for so you are asserted in my thoughts, I will assure
you most accomplished Lady


I, this sounds well, how can you find in your heart to deny his Lordship? most
accomplished Lady


My Lord, though young, I do perceive has been trained up in Complements, they
are indeed the Courtiers prayers


Then they should prevail.


With Fools, but not with such have understanding.


Most accomplished Lady, even for my sake.


How will my Credit stand that am a stranger, to be Coach'd out by one, and so
soon too, upon so slender an account


My heart shall stand betwixt you and all calumny; it shall return the filth
into their face that spits at yours


You speak Nobly, my Lord.


My Actions shall second my words most singular Lady.


Most accomplished, most singular John thou deserve her.


You do so powerfully importune me, my Lord, I have no fence left for my self,
especially your honor being obliged to all Civilities


Count me a Tartar, most horrid Villain if I infringe, or trespass in the least
upon your virtue


Is it granted? most accomplished, most singular Lady.


For your sake Landlady, you see I can deny nothing that is virtuous and civil,
as you say my Lord is


As the innocent Babe, most accomplished, and most singular Lady.


Will you vouchsafe your hand most gracious Lady.


Most gracious Lady, that is


To me this honor is received above rules of comparison unexpressible.


George you are privy to your brothers secrets, how does he find the Ladies
pulse to beat? has he hopes of her


Doubtless Sir he has.


He bussels strangely do think her worth his charge and toil?


If he were not assured of that (as I believe he is) he would not certainly
pursue with so much eagerness his suit, that is my belief Sir


So it is mine, George thy brother is no fool.


That the Town knows, and if he should miscarry 'twould be strange, I know not
what the power of love may do


Do think she is the person that he speaks her?


Seriously Sir her breeding and her habit does denote her a person of no small
repute and quality, they say she speaks the Languages


Believe me that is rare in a Woman.


I Am in a manner a stranger to her person, (for she is very shy, and takes
state on her) but so I Have heard Sir


Perhaps by some that do not understand her.


I know not that Sir.


Gibberish you know startles the ignorant


Let her be what she will I Will see her.


I prithee do, and what then?


Marry I Will know what she is and from whence she came.


Do so, 'twill appear well in thee, I Will not be seen in it.


And know what she has too I Will warrant you before my Son shall Bed her.


My Sister King and my Brother (as I am informed) can saaisfie you in that
point forsooth


And so they shall, I Will thither presently.


Good now, be not so importunate, I Will not see 'em.


Why how comes this do you see, I thought that all had been right and sure do you
see


What has he done that has displeased you most accomplished, most singular and
most gracious Lady


I Will not be blown upon by every person he brings with him, become the Town
talk, have my Credit stale, and buz'd in the ears of every idle fellow


Indeed la if you will believe me, most accomplished, most singular and most
gracious Lady as his Lordship calls you; there is no body with him but his Lady
mother and a Banquet of Sweet-meates


My Lord (though in himself a nobler person) had never been admitted to my
present but for your mighty importunities; I love to be retired, not to be
shown like to a piece of Dutch-work, newly brought over to all sorts of people;
pray let my Lord know where his error lies


And reason good do you see.


If we durst be so bold chuck, but his Lady mother waits most accomplished,
most singular and most gracious Lady


I cry you mercy and excuse me to her.


This is my mother and your servant Lady.


Your Lordship has obliged my service to her, your faithful servant Lady.


Will you vouchsafe to grace this


My Lord you know I am no Chaplain, nor needs there a preludiam to a Banquet.


My meaning is most precicious Lady you would add a sweetness to the meats by
tasting them


Coming from you my Lord composed of sweetness they need no more addition.


Words are but wind, you seem to be a Gentlewoman, pray what are you?


More then I seem.


Where were you born?


At Billinsgate.


Oh, dear Lady.


Why, should I tell her I was born at Rome what is she the nearer.


Have you an estate,


I hope I have.


Where lies it pray.


Where you shall never find it Lady, -- why thus inquisitive.


Have you the Languages, as they say you have?


Let your Son try me.


Oh most precious Lady I am a stranger to the most of them.


So am I to your Mothers scrutiny, I could giv't a worse Title, but hereafter
if you intend to stock up precious time, pray spare your Visits, for they will
be fruitless


Oh mother your too indulgence has undone


Why so Child?


She has prohibited me the sight of her, which is as precious to me as my Being.


It Is very strange, let her be never so high in Birth and breeding, methinks
she should not blame the Parents care, for that will be, and must be


That Is the point I must insist upon; and that no more obstruction may happen
to my happiness, my Sister will inform my Father and your self the state of
her affairs, which may be mine


Do so and you shall find me Instrumental for thy advancement.


And dear Sister prithee use all thy wit and interest with her.


Do ye doubt it brother John, no Lord but when she is present.


They have not carried away all I see.


No, they have left the Voyders, and something more.


What do you do here, get you to your Garrison the Celler.


Prithee prate not, this is my Garrison or any other place where I am safe,


These will spoil thy drinking.


My drinking Jack Sprat, I could box thee sirrah.


No, I dare say you wrong him, he is no drinker.


Who I? never in my life thou know it.


The very stem oth' Celler now and then besots thee, Brother does it not?


That may be, for the Wine fumes and flies into a man's head most plaguely --
but now stand off -- let me speak the sense of the Poet to the Auditory

I Am not the Person that I seemed to be,
Although a Cellerman, I am not he.

GLory depends on Conquest, I have brought
(After so many Trials of my Wit,)
My amorous Lord, and his averse Allies
Upon their knees to supplicate my love;
This very minute I expect his Lordship
To hurry me into the Arms of Hymen.
For that is their drift I know, let their pretense
Be what it will; and i will embrace it.

My dearest Lady are you ready.


You see I am, but for what end my Lord.


To hear the Music.


I have reason to love it my Lord.


You are the Empress of it.


Well they are gone d' ye see, and blessings follow both of 'em d' ye see.


I, now you say so Chuck, but the time has been.


What has the time been honey? you know d' ye see, 'twas my care at first d'
ye see to preserve her here do you see


I but you never meant her for my Brother John, and that my Father takes
unkindly Chuck


Who not I sweet heart? I never meant any man else do you see, as I am here
do you see, why you know I love my Brother John do you see, with all my heart
do you see, I only did express my care of him, being but a young man do you see,
and I knew not how things stood do you see, which it seems you knew better
do you see


Well chuck, what an honor will it be to my Father in his age to have a
Prince, or Princess to his Grandchild


How Is that sweet heart?


Nay, I say no more Windows have ears.


A Wedding and no Music.


They are in the house Sir.


Prithee let us have'em; and now most gracious Lady as you have given spirit to
my Clay, and made my soul to caper in its Cottage by this blessed Conjunction;
know I Am still your servant


My Lord I think all Complements ridiculous after this Ceremony.


Come here is a good divertion, what Songs have you?


A hundred and fifty, two hundred if need be, I furnish all the Faires and
markets with 'em; I keep a Poet in pay on purpose Gentlemen, which is no shall
charge to me you must think, it is true the Poet is a pretty wit, but what is wit
or good lines, nothing, unless well Humored and well Sung, I sing 'em all my
self, though the lines be never so bad I make 'em twang, which sets off a Poet
mainly you know


Pox take you for a puppy, leave praising your self and let us hear a Song.


What Song will you have Gentlemen?


Any, any.


What say you to that of the love between a Kitchen Wench and a Chimney Swifter.


Sirrah do you know where you are.


I cry you mercy Sir, I Will fit you with a rare one.


Hold your howling and behang'd, what a mouth he makes, how he grates the words
and tears the sense


He Is good for nothing; can thou tumble?


Tumble? I don't understand ye Sir.


Come, come, a Dance or two, and so good Night Mr. Fiddler.


It Is pity to


There, are you pleased?


Very nobly, we thank your Honor.


Now Gentlemen I must crave your pardon, Lady your hand.


A good Night to you Both.


News, news, news, Boys.


What News, what news?


Wonderful, strange and true news, newly Printed and newly come forth.


Of the downfall of Grantham Steeple; the miraculous discovery of old Braziel
by a Ship-Carpenter at Namptwich, or the horrid murder of Tom Thumb, some such
paltry stuff


You are wide of the matter: Mr. John Carleton is married.


Prithee to whom?


To no less then a Princess, a German Princess believe me.


Why then it must be no more Mr. John Carleton, but my Lord John Carleton.


Pough, I don't believe it.


Thou art an incredulous Coxcomb, I tell thee they keep their Court and State
at Durham House 'ith Strand, there you may see his Lordship if you have a mind
to it


If I thought he would not take too much State upon him, I Would put my Holy Day
Habit on, and take a day to visit him


Set thy time and we will go with thee.


Two days hence.


Agreed, agreed.


What happy Instruments have we been Chuck in this business, they talk of
giving hundreds of pounds to others, and I Am sure we deserve thousands


That Is very rightly said do you see, but for my part do you see, I look not for a
penny do you see


In Troth Chuck if thou do not, I do, there is the short and the long on it, my
Father's gone to see if she will settle her Estate upon my Brother John


And a great deal of reason there is in it, do you see Sweetheart, for he has
been at a vast charge do you see


Her Estate will make amends for all, and though he is a false Lord now, her
Estate will make him current; money will buy Honor at any time Chuck


I if, it hit right, but there are so many cheates abroad do you see.


Why I hope thou wavering faith'd man thou do not think the Princess my
Sister one


If she be such a person, and have such an Estate do you see, my Brother may
bless the time he ever see us do you see, but if she be not the person and has no
Estate, why then it is a mere cheat do you see, and we shall suffer in our credit
cruelly do you see


Lord help thy simple head; I warrant thee man.


Unfortunate boy, thou art undone for ever.


Bless me, Sir, you do amaze me wonderfully.


After thy loss of time, thy vast expenses in riotous Banquettings, perpetual
Visits, what have thou purchased


A reward above my merit Sir; a virtuous Princess of high Endowments, and of
ample fortunes, rich in her self, her parts speak her a Dowre, sufficient for a
person of my quality had she no other Riches to adorn her


A very Pusscat, a subtle Carrion, and a cursed cheat.


With pardon, Sir, I partly do imagine the cause of this your sudden
discomposure, you pressed her in my absence (like a Father) to settle her Estate
on me, which she unwilling to consent to, has raised this storm within your
quiet Bosom


An Estate, where lies it? at the Brick-hills, foolish boy; she is not worth a
groat, but what thou have out of thy prodigal affection given her, her Jewels
are but counterfeit, and she a base imposture


Good Father let not your passion so deceive your reason, she cannot be so Sir.


Boy, she is a Strumpet, a vagrant, a wandering Baggage that has two Husbands
beside thy self; a paltry Shoemaker is one of them, this I Will make out


You have thrown Daggers to my heart Sir.


Be not troubled Boy, I Will hamper her, I warrant thee, come along with me.


I do expect a storm, and suddenly, by my bad dreams; which tell me I must
wade through mud and Water; signifying troubles dangerous ones: yet I shall
pass them all, clear as a sheet that has been whitened by the whitsters hand


That Is the Strumpet.


Who do you handle, you unreveren'd Raskalls? why Father, Husband, what do you
mean


To hang you Whore for having of two Husbands


Is that all? Ha, ha, ha.


Sure she is innocent, her courage speaks her so.


Away with her Mr. Constable.


Oh Chuck, Chuck thou have defiled our Nest, and thrown a speck upon our
Family; the Princess is a Whore, a double Whore, she has two Husbands: has your
early rising come to this


Why honey it is true, I took her for a civil Gentlewoman, and so I entertained
her do you see; now you took her for a Princess do you see, and there is the
mistake do you see: alas I would not have done such a thing do you see for a
thousand pound do you see; nay and more too as poor a man as I am do you see


I wish it from my heart thou had been sick a Bed chuck when thou did
what thou did; but it is no matter, I hope to see her hanged


Why that will make amends for all do you see.


I wished I had had your place Sir, you sat near the Bench.


In Troth I was weary on it, I did not like the Scaene.


How does the Princess carry her self I pray Sir?


I understand you not Sir, unless you mean a Princess that derives her Title
from the powdering Tub


Your pardon Sir, I mean the person now is at her Trial.


You may assure your self she wanted not Confidence, I might say impudence.


They say her Husband is a hopeful Gentleman.


A sweet lad, my heart earnes for him; a man well bred of a good Family, and in
a hansome way, thus to be caught argues a weakness some where; a gross
oversight; a pituous shallow conception


How do you think 'twill go with him Sir.


Not with him Sir, 'twill rather go against him, the Evidence is


Hark, -- I dare say she is quit.


A hard fate has followed thee friend Carleton.


I pity the Gentleman though a stranger to me: this business was not managed
well I fear, but there is away to bring't about again if she be the same person


I believe Grimalkin, or mother Gurtons Cat 'ith Colehole.


Is that she Sir?


Yes it is she Sir, for want of a better.


Your servant Sir.


I Am yours Sir.


I Have past one Trial; but it is my fear
I shall receive a rigid sentence here;
You think me a bold Cheat, put case 'twere so,
Which of you are not? now you would swear I know;
But do not least that you deserve to be
Censured worse then you yet can censure me.
The Worlds a Cheat, and we that move in it
In our degrees do exercise our Wit:
And better it is to get a glorious Name
However got; then live by common Fame.


