WAke, wake Augusta! Thamesis awake!
Leave of your mourning for your absent Lord:
From the bright Court of Love, I Am hither sent,
To cheer your Drooping Spirits, and inform you,
The Guardian of this once Unhappy Island,
Returns with Safety from his Gallick Foes.

Oh thou Bright Vision! Thus we kneel before thee;
Thus pay our Thanks to those Almighty Powers,
That have Preserved the Great, the God-like Brutus.

O send our Albion, send him quickly to us:
Guard him, good Heaven, Preserve him from his Foes;
For when he falls, Augusta is no more.

Once more I charge you, to dismiss your Fears,
For Heaven has made him its peculiar Care.
See here the Guardian Heaven has appointed
Still to Attend, and to Preserve his Person.

And Hermes too appears, to cheer your Sorrows.

Thou Glorious Fabric stand, for ever stand,
Well worthy thou to Entertain
The God of Traffic, and of Gain,
To draw the Concourse of the Land,
And Wealth of all the Main.
O Hermes, pity take
Of her, who Europe's Pride was seen,
And this fair Isle's Imperial Queen.
Albion's Darling Bride adorned,
Till my Absent Lord I mourned.
And whilst my Turtle-moans I make,
Oh Hermes, pity take.
And I the Noble Flood, who pour
My Plenteous Vrn on her Rich Shore,
No more the Prince of Fields, I Reign,
Nor she the Queen of Albion's Fame.
Oh Hermes, pity take.

Oh Hermes, pity take.

To thee for pity now we call,
O! God-like Hermes; pity all.

Cease, fair Augusta, cease thy Sorrow,
And though to Day thou mourn'st, thou wilt smile to Morrow.
Thy Morning Prayer, and Evening Dreams,
Thy Albion with his smiling Beams,
Returns so Glorious, Bright and Gay,
He Rivals the Great God of Day.

Our Albion with his smiling Beams,

While Gallick Foes which Envy see
Your Monarch's happy Victory.
Augusta, ought not to Despair,
For Albion's Heavens peculiar Care.

Since our Albion is returning
All our blazing Bonfires Burning,
Ioyn each Loyal Heart and Hand,
Each Attending
All Knees Bending
Triton's Sounding
Shores Rebounding,
Send my Jolly Neptunes Sons to Land.

Now, Seraphina, to perform your Charge,
Locrindus Son to this Victorious King,
Is on his march, and will be here this Night.
The false Arsaracus that was left in Charge
Of this blessed Island, and fair Amarante
Who is by Contract joined to the Young Prince,
Tries by all Arts he can, to gain her Love:
The Cursed Magician Coreb does attend him,
And Calls the Powers of Hell to his Assistance;
Therefore you must be Watchful, Seraphino.

Fear not my Angel lo but see he comes,
His working Brain, I know Presages Mischief,
But he shall find that all the Power of Hell
Will prove too Poor and Weak, to Combat Heaven.

Why am I thus perplexed? She Is in my Power;
But Oh! What Power can stand against her Beauty?
Am I to blame to Court the smiles of her,
Who Captivates the Heart of Royal Brutus
That mighty Conqueror submits to her.
He that is Born the certain Scourge of Gaul:
He that with Conquest still comes Ushered Home,
Our Second Mars yields to this Lovely Venus.
Behold she comes; Oh! would our Artists draw
A Scene of Heaven; there is the lovely Pattern*

Surpised by him alone, Oh! my just Fea^s.

Why do ye sly me then, my beauteous Charge?

Why do ye Haunt me thus, Deceitful Guardian?

Can you Condemn the wretch who ventures Life
To obtain Food, when Famine has oppressed him;
When the poor Slave tuggs at the Laboring Oar,
His Body Gash'd with Stripes, and Parched by the Sun;
His Eyelids shrowding in their drowzie Balls,
His Joints quite Numbed, and yet Compelled to Toil;
Is he to blame to beg of Heaven for Ease?

They that Request of Heaven what is unjust should
Not alone denial meet, but Punishment,
When our Great Master left his drooping Kingdom,
Left the soft Joys of Peace for dangerous War,
When he had Conquered his resistless Love
And left me to the Prince his Royal Son;
He then, my Lord, bequeathed me to the Care;
And sure he thought your Virtue was so firm,
You would not Ruin, what you should Protect.

If Kneeling thus with humble Adoration,
Begging of you my only Heaven, for Mercy;
If Sighs and gushing Tears, and broken Slumbers
With all the Racks of a despairing Lover.
If these speak Ruin, sure they speak to me.

What would you have me do?

Give me your Love.

I cannot.

Why?

It is the Princes Right.
The Prince, the Noble Prince, the Prince that raised you;
Royal Locrinus, that bestowed all Favors
That you could Ask, or he had power to give.

What Titles, Power, or Wealth can he bestow,
To equal the bright Jewel he takes from me
Empires and Worlds, would be too mean a prize
To Purchase the vast Treasure of your Love.

Empires and Worlds, can never change my Heart*
Oh! No it is sixth, it is rooted to my Lord's.
Here on my Knees, to Heaven and you I swear,
If you persist on this ungrateful Subject,
The King and Prince shall know how faithfully
You have Discharged the Trust they laid upon you.

Yet stay and hear me.

No, I never will,
Till you have found some other Theme to talk of.

Farewell then, scornful Beauty; now by Love!
That Love which thou so Ill repay'st; I Will have thee
At last, thy Body shall be mine; thy Mind,
Dispose on as thou will, it is Proud and Vain.
O Coreb!

How now my Lord, still plagued with hopeless Love,
Still in pursuit of one, who flies with scorn,
Still asking Heaven, for what it will not grant.
Why do ye not Command your Faithful Coreb
That has the power, as well as will, to serve you:
My Art has yet never been known to fail;
Pluto, Allecto, all have owned my Charms:
The Infernal Court has waited my Command,
And shall again, to serve Arsaracus.

O Coreb! could I purchase Amarante
But for a Night, for that one happy Night,
I Would be content to bear Eternal Pain;
All Pains, all Torments, but the Wracks of Love.

Be Cool, my Lord, and take Advice from me,
The King has over the Gauls a Victory gained,
Locrinus too, his Son has won much Honor.
Who privately this Night comes to the Court;
The King is likewise Landed, and will be
At London in two Days, and on the third,
The Marriage 'twixt Amarante and the Prince,
Will be with splendor Solemnized.

Their Marriage!
Is this the Comfort, that you made me hope;
O you have struck a Fire into my Veins,
That must be quenched with Blood.

I, now y've hit it.
It Is Blood, and Royal-blood, must work your Cure;
You shall not find me poor in my Assistance,
For I will give you Beauty, and a Crown;
A Crown, my brave Arsaracus, think on that,
Open thy Heart, and let Ambition in,
That glorious Ornament, to Valiant Soul.

A Crown, and her I Love; Oh! thou have roused me,
But say, my better Self, say thou great Artist;
Thou that have Hell at thy command; say, how,
How shall I grasp the substance of those shadows
That Dance about in glittering Forms before me.

Be still and silent; silent as the Grave,
And what so e're you see or hear, be constant;
Now you shall find, whatever it is I promise,
The whole Infernal Court shall ratify.
You great Commanders of the Stygian Lake,
To whose known Power your Votary thus bows.
Honor his Art, (and grace it with your Presence,)
Whose Soul and Body is at your dispose.

FRom Hills of Ice, and Heaps of rolling Snow,
From Lakes of Fire, that neither Ebb nor Flow;
From Sulphurous Flames, and from Pestiferous Mists,
From Terrors Infinite, where howling Guests,
Almost Affect there Torturers with their Cries,
Where Souls for ever Burn, and never Die;
Where Misery is always but begun,
And only Wretched certainties are known,
Come we to know, what Coreb would Demand.
Great Prince, whose Faithful Subject I have been,
I do not now demand, but do implore,
That you would grant your Aid to this young Lord;
Love and Ambition both possess his breast,
Valiant he is, and has a daring Soul
Fit to command the Empire of the World.

What would you have me do?

Most mighty Prince,
I have with strictest Care assisted him;
But all my Magic Powers too weak alone;
For by my Art I find some Heavenly Being,
Some Guardian Angels has the Charge of Brutus,
That still prevents his and Augusta's Ruin,
Therefore once more, I do implore your Aid,

OF all my whole Infernal Brood,
I Will give you one well Nursed in Blood;
The Eldest Child of black Perdition,
One that is fit to serve Ambition.
See Noble Prince, how ready he stands
With Bloodshed Eyes, and Crimson Hands!
He the glorious Work will do,
For Mischiefs his Delight,
The Bloody Business then pursue;
And shrowed his Glories in Eternal Night.
He was for mighty Mischief made.
Mischief is his Darling Trade.
Great Prince, I am at hand,
To Obey thy great Command,
And Fear not me,
For you shall see
His great Renown
I Will soon pull down,
From its towering Eagles Flight,
That soared high as the Poles,
To Creak with the Bat
And Hoot, Hoot, Hoot, with the Owls.
Then you Furies advance,
Lead, lead up a Dance,
All shall be well
And we'll frolic in Hell
For our Enemy now we are humbling,
Make his Subjects Rebel
We shall soon fill up Hell,
And rejoice, while the Wretches are Tumbling.
Now brave Arsaracus, is there now a prospect
That your vast wishes are to be obtained.

I am a Man, a Man not used to fear.
But at this fight each Artery is numbed,
My Blood is chilled, and has not power to flow:
Say, I should now desist, and go no farther;
Then may his Magic be employed on me,
To make me worse then Damned; to make me see
Despair in all its Forms, to make me Mad,
And feel Hell here, and a worse Hell hereafter.

What is it, my Lord, you pause on.

Oh, I Will tell thee,
The Image of those miserable Wretches
In all their different, yet Eternal Tortures
Has quite Un manned me, blown out all that Fire,
Love and Ambition, kindled in my Breast.

You would desist then.

Yes, I would' my Coreb.

And quit the glorious Game, you would so long Hunted.

Ha.

See the bright Amarante made your Rival's
Her Beauteous Treasures Rifled by another,
Close locked within Locrinus's longing Arms,
Feasting on Pleasures, while you feed on Pains;
And when he knows, as he will surely know
Your Treacherous Design to undermine him;
Oh what a grateful fight it must be to you,
To see your Honors all at once, stripped off;
And he that might have been a Monarch here,
Thrust out a poor Discarded Wanderer.

No more, O Coreb! Thou have fixed me now
Firm as a Rock to our great resolution;
Methinks I see my self already Crowned,
The trembling Fair, brought blushing to the Temple;
The Priest prepared for the wished Ceremony;
The Night come on, the Bridal Bed Adorned,
While I Transported with her powerful Charms,
Do to the height of all my bliss make haste.
And for that happy Hour,
Forgive whose Ages of my Torments past.

Go on, deluded Wretch, thou shall not cool
Nor our great Masters Empire want for Subjects,
While Coreb rules on Earth.
Since Coreb, by Heavens wrath is dashed to Hell;
Since all my hopes of future bliss are gone,
I Will make more Fools into destruction run,
For it is some pleasure not to fall alone.

WHere is the pretty Talking Boy, Ragusa.
I entertained this Morning?

He followed you into the Garden Madam.

And have you seen him Clothed?

As you commanded.
I think you have well bestowed your Charity.

'Twas pity he should have remained a Beggar;
Each word he speaks, methinks gives Harmony,
Pray call him hither, for I love to see him.

He Is coming this way, Madam.

Come hither, Seraphino.

Most honored Lady, I attend your pleasure

Thy voice sends forth such Music, that I never
Was Ravished with a more Celestial Sound,
Were every Servant in the World like thee,
So full of Goodness, Angels would come down
To dwell with us; in this short day thou'st given me,
More pleasure then my Life produced before;
But it grows late, I Would have thee go to rest,
I fear thy Youth cannot dispense with watching.

O my dear Lady; I could weary Stars;
And force the wake full Moon to lose her Eyes,
To watch and wait by you, I Am blessed, when with you,
Therefore my most loved Lady, do not bid
Your Boy that loves you to depart from you,
For then you will break his heart.

Be nigh me still then,
In Golden Letters I Will set down this day
Which gave thee to me; little did I think
To meet such Worlds of comfort in a Child,
When I beheld my little Beggar boy
Craving an Alms, which I with Joy bestowed!
I did believe thou'sd prove my chief delight.

I shall be proud if my poor weak endeavors
Can please so good a Mistress.

I have offered
Handfuls of Gold but to behold thy Parents,
I prithee, my dearboy, let me but see 'em,
Come, be not ashamed.

I am not. I did never
Know who my Mother was, but by yon Palace
Tilled with Celestial Courtiers, I dare assure you
My Father is in Heaven, and, Noble Mistress,
If your Bright hour Glass do spend its sand
No worse then it does now, upon my life
You and I both shall meet my Father there,
And he shall bid us welcome.

Pretty Child, how Charming is his Language.
Now, Sirs, have you disposed my Charity as I ordered.

Disposed it, yes Madam, we have disposed it;
For my part, Madam, I Am amazed at your Ladyships
Bounty, here have you out of your own Pocket
To day, relieved at least half a dozen Prisoners,
And this you think is Charity, when to my knowledge
Half of 'em eat well from the Basket before,
And now they are out they cannot tell where to get a dinner.

Ay ay, Madam, my Fellow Spungius says
True, here do you Fast, and Pray, and give to
The Poor to save their Souls, while they are
Cursing, Swearing, Eating and Drinking, to
Preserve their Bodies.

How dare you call my Charity in question?

My fellow servants, I would have you all
Pity the Poor, think of the many Blessings
That wait upon the Charitable hand,
The riches that you will enjoy hereafter.
For a small mite bestowed upon the needy.

'This well said, Seraphim, and be sure
You follow his good counsel.

Hark'e Brother Spungius, who is this whipster?

Peace, peace, it is my Lady's Page, she found
Him mumping at the Temple door this Morning,
And out of his patches of Canvas and Buckham,
She has put him into Silks and Satin.

Ay ay, Brother, she is a Charitable Woman, rest her Soul, She took us from the
Gallows as I take it, and instead of a Brace of Halters about our necks,
bestowed a brace of Gold Liveries upon our Backs


We must have a great care Hercius how we talk,
For that is a Develish religious young spark,
He has entertained my Lady all this morning
With nothing but discourses of Elysium.

Elysium, Prithee what is that?

Nay, Faith I cannot tell, he says he will give us
An account of it one time or other.

Come, Dear Augusta, the Air methinks grows cold,
Let Us in.

Walk this way, Madam, for if I mistake not,
I see my Lord Arsaracus coming yonder.
His looks are full of Joy, I hope, Ragusa,
He brings some News of my dear Lord's return.

Pray Heaven he may, for I am still in fear
His ^lighted love at last may turn to hate.

Madam, I beg you would pardon this intrusion,
But I have news will give you double Joy.
The dazzling Virtues that enrich your mind.
Has turned the Love which was by you despised
To true repentance, for my great presumption.

O, could I but believe your words were real,
Could I but think you had Mastered your wild passion,
I should with Joy, not Anger, look upon you.

Then on my Knees, behold me a true Convert,
My straggling thoughts of honor all called back,
My Duty and Alleigance fizt so firm,
That Heaven it self applauds, and Hell cant change it.

Heaven knows thy heart, but Hell commands thy actions.

Now, Madam, since I have with humblest duty
Expressed my sorrow for my bold presumption,
I hope you will recall your wonted goodness.
And tho I have erred, make not my error known
To my much iujur'd Prince, and Royal Friend,
Who is Arrived, and with impatience Lost,
Directs his steps this way.

Ha! What said you?
Is my dear Lord in safety then returned?
Oh! for thy News be all thy faults forgotten;
For what thou have said, brings to my heart more Joy
Then thy ten welcome Love, before brought horror.

The Shouts and Trumpets do proclaim him near;
May you be still a blessed and happy pair
While life does last, and Hell make have to part you.

Enough good Heaven, You'ave recompensed my pains.
The Toils, the Hardships and the many dangers
I have passed through* you now have well rewarded.
So when the Soul is from the body fled,
Driven by Convulsive torments from its mansion,
Is of a sudden snatched to endless bliss,
And all the wounds that it received on Earth,
Healed at last by the sweet balm of Heaven.

Oh! My dear Prince, my ever honored Lord,
Your sight brings joys to great to be expressed.
Now Farewell all my fears, all my disquiets.
You like the Sun have chased those Clouds away,
That hung between my happiness and me.

Durst any saucy fear invade thy breast,
A Mansion fit for Angels to inhabit.
O let no Cares ever approach my fair one,
The burden of thy sorrows lay on me.
And all the blessings of the World be thine.

Ten Thousand welcomes to my much loved Lord,
And may success still wait upon his Arms,
May he continue still the pride of Europe,
And Love and Conquest Crown his Youthful brows.

Arsaracus, my best and truest Friend,
Thou faithful Guardian of this most loved Treasure.
Were I the Monarch of this Glorious Island,
Nay, were the Universe at my dispose
I could not in that vast extent of Riches
Find out a Recompense for all thy care.

I am, my Lord, sufficiently rewarded,
The Joy of seeing you so safe returned
Brings double blessings to your faithful Servant.

Dissembling Hypocrite.

My dearest Lord, the night comes fast upon us,
And the bleak Air compels us to withdraw.

We will, my fairest; let me have one look more,
Here could I grow, gaze upon thee ever,
For all the Beauties of thy Sex are in thee.
Devouring Cankers gnaw upon her Beauty,
Till she is despised, and scorned, as I am by her.

Before the Sun has finished twice his course
I shall have full possession of my wishes.
The King my love, the King my Royal Father
Has given his Consent to make me happy,
And Crown my Joys with thy desired embraces.
Oh, the distracting hours that are to come,
Till Hymen's Torch light to our Nuptial bed.
Impatience makes me angry with the Sun,
Who has so little care of longing Lovers,
As not to change his constant lazy course;
Were he a pitying God, he would Lash his Steeds,
And drive his fiery Chariot with such have,
That the Circumference of the mighty Globe
In one short hour should be encompassed round.

Oh that your love would keep thus firm for ever.
Forgive me, my dear Lord, forgive my fears,
I do not doubt your Faith, but my own Merits.

Thou Shall not doubt, I Am suce thou need'st not doubt,
For the Poles are not firmer fixed then I am;
Heaven, tho it cast our Bodies in two moulds,
Gave but one Soul, which cannot be divided.
We, my Ioanna, the decrees of Fate
Shall first be blotted from their Sacred Roules.
Bright Phebas round the World refuse to move,
And cease to Shine, ever I can cease to Love.

The Curse of Jealousy infect your minds,
But wherefore does the knawing Worm despair,
Posses me now, now when my hopes stnnd fair
To ruin him, both in his Love and Fortune,
Coreb.

My Lord.

My ever faithful Friend
Now is the time, now if thou would assist me
Lend me thy speedy Counsel what to do

My Lord, I have followed hitherto your fortunes,
And cannot rest till I have shown my self
What I profes, your true and faithful Servant.
I see the Princes Love is desperate, but withal,
I see a way to quench his violent flame,
As thus;
We must infect his mind with Jealousy.

That be your task; the rest let me perform.

What do thou mean? Which way can he be jealous
That has the heart of one chaste as Diana.

The Young Lord Soizinus is an instrument
the fittest we can work on. I will find
A means to bribe her Servant, in the mean time
Do you endeavor to Possess the Prince,
And nothing shall be wanting to your wishes.

I will consider ont.

It does not need.
Why are you melancholy, come, my Lord,
Sir down, I will divert your restless mind;
Where are my Damons, let me have Music there.
Still him if possible in spite of Love,
And let him nod into forgetfulness.

OH! Turn and be kind, my dear Nymph of the Flood
I burn in cold Water, Love's fire's in my blood.
At the bate of your Face some but nimble and look,
But I gaped like a Gudgeon, and swallowed the hook;
I was Jolly and Fat as a Porpus before,
But now no Red Herring's more shotten and poor;
Yet while I pursue you, you coldly cry pish,
Then Flounce, and away swim as mine as a Fish.

It Is hard to swim against the stream,
Yet we must fly, though we esteem,
For, Triton, when a Nymph's your own
You wind your shelf, and then you're gone
To shun that ill, from you I Will keep,
And hide my blushes in the deep.

Hold, hold, I Am a Pyrate, and make you my Prize,
Charmed with those green Tresses, bright Scales, and blue Eyes,
Yet trust me, I Am constant, and hot as the Sun,
Each night to thy Bosom to cool me I Will run.

In the Evening hot, but cold next dawn,
You go, and leave us swelled with spawn,
To keep you long none can prevail,
Your Slippery Eeles held by the tail.
To shun that fate from you i will keep,
And hide my Blushes in the Deep.

On a Bed of green Oose, Let me show you a prize,
A Branch of rough Coral, and Pearls of huge size,
Go with me my dear, and this Coyness give over,
They Are yours as a pledge of the warmth of your Lover.

Oh do not leave struggling, I Will never give over.

Nay prithee leave struggling, I Will never give over.



I thank thee, honest Coreb, for thy care,
How pass the hours.

My Lord, it is almost Midnight,

This is a time of rest for all but me,
Now the Day-labouring Souls are all refresht,
Pride, Pomp and Luxury are all withdrawn,
And Vanity a full cesation makes.
Lewdness it self at this time Lazy grows,
And the tired senses dose upon their pleasures;
The Atheist now grows Palled in wickedness,
And Slumbers over the scandal of his Spleen.
Even Murder's hushed, Adultery secure
The Veil of Heaven to the utmost verge is stretched,
And the high noon of Darkness lulls the World.
O Love! When art thou hushed, or when art hid,
Arts utmost subtilty is lost on thee,
And spite of all descretion, in thy Eyes
Ten Thousand Tel-tales bark in thy hot beams,
But I Will no more indulge the vanity
of this proud fair, she shall be mine or die.
If I find she is not for me decreed,
I Will Court Revenge, and smile to see her bleed.

TUrn Religious! I would I had his Conscience in a Cloven Stick, that made me
first think of Religion


It was that Ape in White, that Boy Seraphino, made us turn Religious.


Ay, a dissembling little Hypocrite, he told us the finest Tales of Paradise,
and what fine Lives we should lead when we came there, that, I'gad, 'twou'd
have made a Turk turned Toper, to have heard him; and now all our promised
Pleasures are turned to Tears and Grimmaces


And Sighing and Sobbing.


And Knocking your Breast, and Thumping your hard Heart, to know whether
Goodman Frailty be within, or no: If these be the Pleasures of Religion, I'gad,
I Will be Hanged before I Will follow 'em; I have led such a Life of Sorrow,
Brother, since yesterday, that a Dog is not able to endure the Fasting and
Praying I have undergone


I wonder, Brother Hersius, what the Pleasures of Elysium are?


Why, I fancied you must know that in every Corner there, I should have found a
Young Handsome Wench ready to have devoured me; but there is no such Pleasure in
Religion as I can find


And I fancied we should have had all the brave Drinks and Eatables, as Nectar
and Ambrosia, as the Poet calls it, and such like


Nectar and Ambrosia, prithee, Brother Spungius, what is that?


Why it is a Liquor the God's drink when they mean to make Merry; and when their
Hands are in* they make no more of Dusting of a Tub of Nectar, then we do of a
Tub of Greek Wine: But when shall I come to those Delicious Pleasures? If I
could but tell that I should be satisfied


Ay, marry, I believe the best of 'em all would be glad to be secured that; in
the mean time they are glad to be secured with fat Livings, whose Trade it is
to tell us of Elysium; for I observe, they are much more afraid of Dying, than
we Whorers and Drinkers, Brother Spungius


But hark ye Hersius; Why do they impose such Duties and Penalties upon us?


That is to make us Obedient, and them Rich; that what Pleasures they doubt of
in the other World, they may take in this before they go (...)


I wonder whether or no, Bacchus be Religious? For if he be not Elysium, we
shall have but a dry time on it


Barobus; yes, yes, Baccusus is head Butler there: But see who comes here,
Brother Spungius


It is the Lord Arsaraous's Secretary; a rare Fellow they say, Hercius.


Well met; my honest Friends.


We thank you, Sir.


What; are you in Consultations about your new Resolutions of leading your
Lives Religious and Soberty


Soberly; yes, we have lived, indeed, very Soberly since Yesterday.


Ay truly, Sir, and very Chastely too; we have abstained both from the Grape and
the Flesh


Why who would live in Service of a Lady, that will debar them of their
Choicest Pleasures? What Diversion do you find in Prayings? What good do you
get by wearing out your Feet to run on Scurvy Errands to the Poor, and to bear
Money to a sort of Rogues, and Lousy Prisoners


Pox on 'em, I never prosper'd since I did it.


You are rightly served, before that Lady had to do with you, Women, Wine and
Money, flowed in abundance to you, Did it not


O those Days, those Days!


Come, beat not your Breasts, nor tear your Hair in Madness: Be ruled by me,
those Days shall come again; and better, mark me, better


As I take it, Sir, you belong to his Grace Arsaracus?


Yes, yes, in show, his Servant; but hark hither; take heed no Body listens.


Not a Mouse stirs.


I am a Prince disguised.


Disguised how Drunk?


Why faith, my Boys, I Will Drink too, and be Drunk: I am a Prince, and any Man
by me, (let him but keep my Rules) shall soon be Rich, exceeding Rich, most
infinitely Rich; if you will serve me, ye shall not be starved from Pleasures, as
other* poor Rogues are, but take your fill


Serve you, I'gad I Would serve you before any Prince under the Zodiac.


Ay, by Jove, or above it either.


and you will quit your Mistress?


Quit her, hang her; a Man, cannot thrive worse, if he served the Devil.


How! the Devil? I Will tell ye what now of the Devil; he is no such horrid
Creature, Cloven-Footed, Black SaweerEy'd his Nostrils breathing Fire; as these
Lying Religious Fools would make you believe


No!


No, no, he is more Loving to Man, than Man to Man is.


Alack, good Gentleman, how is he wronged?


Would we two could come acquainted with him.


You shall; he is a wondrous Good Fellow, Loves a Cup of Wine, a Whore, or any
thing


Does he love a Whore, say you?

Oh mightily!

'Gad I Will help him to one then; she is not very handsome, but she is well
enough; she offered her self to the Playhouses, and they refused her; and if
once the Players refuse her, I Am sure she is fit for no Body but the Devil


Well said my Lad; it is ten to one in a short time I bring him to the Tavern to
you


'Gad I Will bespeak the best Room in the House for him: But pray, Sir, Does the
Devil pay Two Shillings a Flask for his Wine


Oh always.

Then I find he has some Relation to us Britans, he would never suffer himself to
be made such a Bubble else: But pray, does the Devil love Dancing, Sir


O yes, extremely! Loves Dances; but of a different sort to what you have here:
I Will show you, to divert you, the Fashion of his Country


O Lord, Sir, you will oblige us woundily.

Now what think ye?

Think? Why I think I shall never be at quiet till I Am with the Devil.


If you knew him so well as I do, you would be more impatient: Why there is nothing
you can ask him for, but immediately it is brought ye: Ask for a handsome Whore,
you have her presently


And will the Devil keep the Door, Sir.


No, no, that is below his Dignity; but he has those ready at hand that will.


But pray, Sir, when shall we enter into Service, for I Am impatient?


To morrow Morning; but one Piece of Service you must do me first.


Any thing: Pray be pleased to Command us; I Will not scruple any thing that may
be serviceable to you, upon my Word


Nor I, though 'twere to hang my Mother, and Ravish her afterward. Pray, Sir,
what is it


It Is this: the Prince, and the young Lord Sozimon, this Day Feast with your
Lady; I Would have you put this into her Drink: and you, be mindful to Spice the
Lord Sozimon's Bowl with this; and when your Feasting's over, let me privately
into your Lady's Chamber


Into her Chamber! Ay, Sir, into her Bed, if your Worship pleases.


Well said: Do this, and you shall both be happy.


Never fear us, Sir; I gad, I Will Pepper my Lady's Bowl, I Will warrant you.


And I, my Lords, as I hope to be acquainted with the Devil.


Poor helpless Fools; How greedily for Gold
Would these vain Wretches, sacrifice their God.
Now, proud Augusta, is thy Ruin near:
Nor will I let my Art be bassled longer;
But I must watch a Time, when Seraphino
Is absent from the Mighty Charge he holds,
See where Augusta comes, with Thamesis.
Now were a Time to check her Towering Pride,
And lay her Lofty Palaces in Dust.
I Will do it: But ha! my Ancient Enemy
Is still at hand, to vanquish my Designs:
But though I now am of Revenge debarred,
If Hell have Power, thou shall not long escape me.

It Is false, malicious Fiend: No, poor Augusta,
Thou art the Care of Heaven, by whose Command,
Hermes, and I, do hover still about thee.
Iris, by Juno, is already sent
To Guard thy Most-Lov'd Monarch safe to Land,
And bless his Country with his Wished for Presence.

SEE the opening Clouds divide asunder,
And see, see, yonder,
The Angry Wife of Jove, descending from Above,
More loud than all Jove's Thunder.
No, Hermes, no, all Quarrels cease,
In Heaven, as well as Earth, it is Peace,
Jove by the Stygian Lake has swore,
His Wandering Love shall Rove no more.

Great Queen, who shin'st with those bright Beams,
Whose Glory gilds my Streams,
See what Bending Knees we pay Thee,
Thus Adore Thee, thus Obey Thee.
Bright Queen of Hymen's hallowed Fires,
The Sovereign of all Chaste Desires,
That with true Joy the Genial Bed inspires;
See what Bending Knees we Pay Thee,
Thus Adore Thee, thus Obey Thee.
Great Queen, etc.
Say Iris say, from the Battavian Strand,
What News have thou brought over?
Have thou Obeyed my Great Command,
And brought Great Albion safe to Shore.

Neptune, his Brother, Lord of the Ocean,
And his Sea-Nymphs whole Devotion;
Venus in her Sholl attends him,
Her Fair Hand, and Smiles, she lends him,
Thousand Prayers to ^aft him over,
And carefully has brought him safe to Shore.
See, see, the Crowds, and Ioys all round,
Welcome Thunders all before,
Till the Gods Ioyn in the Chorus,
Welcome, Heaven and Earth resound.

If Mortals Laugh and Sing,
It Is time we Gods take Wing,
To mount and send her down,
The Guardian of his Crown;
Astrea who from Earth was driven,
Till Albion called her back from Heaven.

Then all prepare to Sing his Fame,
Sing all, Sing all, Great Albion's Name:
For 'twas by Mighty Jove Decreed,
This Island should by him be freed.

Come, Thamesis, prepare to meet our Lord,
Let him glide gently on these Silver Streams,
While I with all my stately Towers prepare
To welcome him from his long Toyls of War.

Hear me but out, my Lord.

Forbear to tempt me
With the least sound against her Constant Virtue;
I should as soon believe the Queen of Night
Would mount the Fiery Chariot of the Day,
And to that God resign her Chastity,
As my dear Aramante injure me.

My Lord, I bear the same Belief with you;
But when I hear so many busy Tongues
With Private, Public Whisperings, proclaiming
The Great Dishonor of my Much-loved Prince,
My Duty and Allegiance both start up,
And bid me show my self your Real Friend.

Why? do thou think she is false?

Not I, by Heaven:
But the poor Lady, armed with Innocence,
May pour forth Favors to Unthinking Men,
Whose Vanity may make her Virtuous Freedom
Seem to the World, a Blemish of her Mind.

By Heaven, and thou say right; our Foolish Youth
Cannot be Judges of a Real Virtue;
Their Folly is the only Glass they look in,
And what to Noble Minds should Beauteous seem,
To them appears Deformed. Arsaracus, I thank thee;
And though I know her Soul is clear as Day,
Yet in her Conduct she may chance to err.

It Is true, my Lord, clear Souls, still take most Freedom.

I Will instantly Attend upon my Love,
And with my strictest Care contrive a way
To stop the Censure of Unknowing Fools,
Whose Judgment Indiscretion overrules.

Now Coreb, now, if thou but keep thy Promise,
How many Wrecks will tear his hated Soul?
But should his swelling Rage burst forth on her,
And Passion thrust him on her Innocent Life,
Then what I have with Care strove to obtain,
Must be fast locked in the Cold Arms of Death:
I cannot bear the thought on it. O my Coreb,
If thou have News of Joy, declare it quickly.

It Is done, it is done, my Lord* I left the Prince
Tearing the Ground like an entangled Lion.

Have thou succeeded then?

Beyond my Hopes.
Soon as the Potion had its wished Effects,
Amarante did retire into her Chamber,
Where on her Couch she laid her self to rest,
The young Lord Sozismond, whom I had before
Drawn from the Company, on pretense of Business,
Sat himself down, and in a little time
The drowsy God of Sleep o'repower'd him;
In which, I, by the Assistance of two Knaves
That I had bought by Gold and Promises,
I laid him gently by the Countess's side;
And in that Posture has the Prince surpised 'em.

And what is become of So^ismond?

I heard the Prince
Give Order to the Guards for his Confinement;
And had not they stepped in, he had murdered him.
But see, he comes, my Lord, we had best retire.

Yes, I will go, and hug my self, to think
How easy it is to make a Great Man wretched.

Yet stay and hear me, Oh, my honored Lord:
Thus, on my Knees, I beg you would give me Hearing.

How can thou dare to be within my Presence?
Or think of living, after thou have wronged me?

When I do wrong you, may I cease to live.

Nay, prithee, add not to thy impious Crime,
And varnish over thy Whoredom with a Lie:
Had I but only heard, not seen thy Falsehood,
I could not have believed, though Heaven had spoke it:
But to behold ye clung like 'twisted Adders,
Tired and doz'd over your vicious Sin,
Let me not think on it: Get thee from my Sight;
Madness is busy Working in my Brain,
And all my Thoughts are bent on Blood and Murder.

Let it be so; I Am prepared for Death:
And though I Am sure 'twas the cursed Power of Magic
That cast this Darkning Mist over my Fame,
Yet I will kneel, and grow beneath your Feet,
Till I have made you sensible you wrong me.

I beg thou would not tempt my Justice long,
For I do love thee, though I know thee false:
And, O, bear Witness, you Immortal Powers,
I throw thee from my Sight with greater Pain
Than our first Parents left their Paradise:
For though thy Cankered Soul is Spotted over,
Thy Face is still enriched with all its Beauties.

What shall I say, or how shall I convince you?

There Is not a Possibility in Nature;
And all the Pleasure thou can give me now,
Is to retire, and never see me more!

Since it will please my Lord, I will be gone;
But when I Am dead, as I shall quickly be,
For long I cannot bear this Separation,
May Heaven, that sees how I Am with Wrongs oppressed,
Make my Truth known, and I shall be at rest.

You swelling Mountains, that o're-view the Earth,
Fall now, make me eternally unseen;
Philosophy, contract thy Meek Sage Brow,
Let Patience be no more thy Saint, as soon
Give Medicines to the Dead, bid Statues walk,
And Angry Winds sleep Quiet in the North;
As soon bid empty Lions play with Kids,
And bid the shaggy Scythian Mourn and Weep
As Virgins do when they Interr their Loves;
The blind and shuffled Elements, that first
In Chaos strove, were not so opposite
As this Religious Frost is to my Heat.
Patience, thou art more fond than Teeming Wives,
Tamer then Sleep. Divinity, which calls
Our Anger, Sin, and Courage, Pride, has sent
This silly Cherubim to Earth, this Patience
The Coward's Sword, that only does Disarm
Dull Sleep, that neither can, nor would do harm.

COme on Brother Spungius, good Times are come again:
See what we have got by being in the Fashion,
And kicking that troublesome Companion, Religion,
Out of our Consciences.

Ay, ay, Brother Hertius, happy is he, I say, that can get into the Service of
the Devil. Page


Monsieur.

What Answer did the Lady make to my Letter.


A Garzoone, me was never so much put to it before, Jerne, me have Pimp, for all
de Noblemen of France, and receive much Lar-Ion; but by Gar, me have met wid
nothing for my Good Inclination of Pimping for you, but Kicks, Buffets, a
Broken Pate, Morbleu


Why, Sirrah, Sirrah, do ye intend to Serve in the Honorable Post of Page, to
our Worships, and Grumble at a Broken Pate


No, Garzoone, me should no have Grumble, if you had de Lady; but by Gar, she
speak no much Love of him, she put up my toder Matters Money in her Pocket. And
then, Jerne, she bid her Footman kick me down Stan's


Well, well, I Will deal well enough with her.


It had been well vor Monsieur a moy, if her Footman had dealt well a by me.


Peace, Sir, here is the Devil's Privy Counselor, we must have a great Care
of Grumbling in his Company


Well, my good Boys, How de you find your selves, since your new Service


Why, as the Devil would have it, we are mighty well Contented.


We are only afraid, we shall not have the Power to deserve these Mighty Favors,
the Right Worshipful Mr. Lucifer is pleased to Confer upon us


Fear not, it is in your Power to serve him now:
Who is that with you?

That, Sir, it is our Page: We are resolved to live as great as we can, that the
Devil may not loose any Credit by us


Well said, I Am come to Dine with you.


'Faith, Sir, you shall be very welcome.


Nay, you ought to bid me welcome, since I bring my Fare with me.


In your Pocket, Sir?


That you shall see:


You see how very kind I have been to you; which Kindness I Will continue, if
you're Faithful


Faithful; Pray, Sir, don't be so unkind, as to doubt us? Command us to Hang
our selves; and to show how Zealous we are, we will not stay for Ropes, but do it
in our own Garters


Then hear me, Friends: The Prince this Morning goes to meet the King: Now I
would have you two, with others that I have employed already, to intercept him;
and when you behold the Lord Arsaracas, in private Conference with him, strike
this into his Heart.


We'll do it.


Fear not, we'll open his Belly, and Hang him in his own Guts.


Come on then, be but firm, and you shall prosper.


Never doubt us, Sir: Come, Page, Alon.


HAil Royal Albion! Hail to thee!
Sent from the Gods, to set us free
From Bondage, and from Slavery.

Hark, I am called; old Father Ocean
Calls my Tide;
Come away.
On the Mounting Billows dancing,
See the Royal Bark advancing;
The Waves, the Wind and Sea,
Are all at Albion's dear Devotion.

See the Merry Boatswain too,
Has called his Iolley Crew,

Come, come, come, etc.

See, see, the Sea Gods trim thy Sails,
Every Nymph in all her Pride.

Wafted by the Calmer Gales,
Over thy own Main Triumphant Ride.

Each Neried does her Locks adorn,
And every Triion minds his Horn:
The Lovely Mermaid too, behold
How she Combs her flowing Gold:
Without a Snare, or Charm, she sings,
Welcome to the best of Kings.

Welcome, etc.

Albion all Hail! Thou Sacred Head!
Heavens Darling Care, no Danger dread:
For Walls of Fate, thy Life Enclose,
The Plots of thy Malicious Foes,
Abhorred above, Exposed below,
Their own dull Light shall show
Treason, which her Infernal Train
Work in her Hellish Mines in vain.

Albion, all Hail, etc.

My Oracles declare, When he has done
His finished Work of Fate,
And broke the Universal Yoke,
A Smiling Race of Years, his Reign shall Crown.

AT Albion's Return, this Happy Isle,
Dries up her Widows Tears;
And with a Smile, Plumes like a Bride,
With Joy and Pride.
The Meadows smile, the Groves and Flowers are Gay,
All Nature chears up at this Great and Glorious Day.
Cho. At Albion's Return, etc.
How different is the Clime, to what I left it?
My Kingdom sure, is by Enchantment Governed?
Music attends us both by Sea and Land:
Eccho's of Joy still hover round about us;
But for what Cause, Heaven only can be Judge.

It shows that Heaven rejoices at your Safety.

I hope I have with strictest Care performed
The Charge, which Heaven, and you, have laid upon me;
But blame me not, if I appear Concerned
At the Unusual and Surprising Accidents.

I must confess, my Liege, it is most amazing.

Thou seemst in have; Quickly declare thy Message.

My Liege, the Prince your Son with a small Guard
Was hasting to your Majesty,
While Treacherous Arsaracus who bore him Company.
Did with a band of Ruffins fall upon 'em;
But a strong Party of your Guards approaching,
The Villains fled, but were soon overtaken,
And Arsaracus with the rest are bringing hither.

Is It possible? Could Arsaracus play the Villain?
And to my Son, a Prince that made his Fortunes,
From a mean State raised him to Power and Greatness!
Where is there Truth or Honor to be found,
If those whom we have fostered in our Bosoms
Should like ungrateful Snakes sting to our Hearts?

Angels be Guardians to my Royal Father;
And Heaven with Blessings Crown his Virtuous Reign.
May Treason be a Stranger to his Realms,
And all the Plots of his Malicious Foes
Fall doably on the Cursed Contrivers Heads.

Thank thee, my Son; Rise; let me look a little,
To see where Villain's writ upon that Man:
Not in his Face that bears a show of Honesty;
His Person too cast in a Noble Form,
No it is within, and his Ignoble Soul
All over does the stamp of Villain bear.

Sir, on my Knees I beg you would calm your Anger,
For he has made me ample satisfaction.
And by his free Confession cleared the Fame
Of my adored, my best loved Amarante.

Could any Villain dare to blast her Virtue?


The Story, Royal Sir's too long to tell.
But give me leave Sir, to perform my Promise,
Which was to spare his Life; and on my Knees
I beg that you will grant it.

I will my Son.
But never more appear within my Kingdom:
Go, wander through the World, like the first Murderer;
Thou needst no Mark, thy Crimes will speak themselves.

I go, and Noble Prince, the Life you give,
I Will wear in hopes that it may do you Service.
My banishment, I do Embrace with Joy, and
I have now no farther use for Life,
But to repent I ever wronged such Virtue.

Now Villain, what can thou say?

Why, I am sorry I have taken such pains to do so little mischief.

Drag him to the Gibbet.

I defy ye, Laugh at ye.
And when you see me next take care of me.

Amazing.

What is he gone and left us. Why Bro. Hersius, we shall never be able to find
the way to the Devil without him


Now, what can you expect? ungrateful Villains!

Why we expect to be hanged, and I dare Swear you will not let us go without our
Expectations


To Prison with 'em. Leave 'em to the Law;
They are not worth our Anger: Come my Son,
I thought by mildness to have ruled my Subjects,
But I perceive they will rowze the sleeping Sword,
And force Revenge from their Offended Lord.

ALbion, beloved of Earth and Heaven,
Bid rough War and Battle cease;
Return with Fame when thou have driven
The hunted Tyrant down, and given
Europe a Universal Peace.

Albion beloved, etc.



Albion! Albion! Heaven attends him;
Heaven its Guardian-Angels lends him:
Nor wonder Heaven's best smile defends him,
When for Heaven his Sword he draws,
His Standard's Heaven, and Heaven's his Cause.

You great all-knowing Powers, that rule the World,
Who still to sure Success have guided me;
Thus on my Knees I pay, with humble Duty,
Submissive Thanks for all these wondrous Blessings.
And you my faithful Subjects still shall find,
Your Liberties and Laws I will maintain;
And not with Terror, but with Mercy reign.

Can thou, my Fair One, be so charitable,
So kind, so full of Goodness to forgive me?
Can thou into thy Bosom take the Wretch,
Whose base Injustice banished thee his Sight?

My Lord! I do with greater Joy receive ye,
Than I with Grief did leave ye. Oh, my Lord!
Did you but know the racking Pains I Have suffered
For every moment you were absent from me,
Had I been guilty, you would have pitied me.

My best beloved, I have sympathiz'd with thee:
Nor can I speak the Torments I Have endured.
Prometheus Vulture gnawing at his Heart
Was a Delight to that which fed on me.
But laying thus my Head upon thy Bosom,
I find a sovereign Balm for all my Sorrows.

Rise, rise, you greatest Blessings of my Age;
You great and virtuous Patterns of all Goodness.

Welcome, my Royal Lord, Ten thousand Welcomes.
Your drooping Kingdom now will raise her Head,
And gaze with Joy upon her great Deliverer.

Come hither Son, and from my Hand receive
The greatest Gift that I have Power to give.
May you be happy both, and Hymen wait,
With all the Marriage-Joys, about your Bed.

Eternal Blessings Crown your Royal Head.

Ha! Behold my Son,
The Heavenly power, that unseen was with us,
Now shows its dazzling Form, and wondrous Beauty.

Thou Glorious Minister of those Powers we serve:
For thou art more than Mortal; Is It for us
That thou have left thy Heavenly Habitation?
And vouchsat'st, tho Glorified, to take my Servants habit,
For put off thy Divinity. So looked
My lovely Seraphino.

Know I am the same,
And still the Servant to your Piety:
Your Zealous Prayers and Pious Deeds first won me,
To Guide your Steps. I tried your Charity,
When in a Beggars shape you took me up
And clothed my naked Limbs; and after fed me.
O let the world by your example learn
To look upon the poor with gentle Eyes:
I never left you yet, nor will I now;
But will be still a Guard to you and Albion,
Blessings shall wait on him, where e're he goes;
And Great Augusta Triumph over her Foes.

From the Imperial Court of Jove,
From the great Divan above,
I come to bid the Conquering Albion reign,
Sovereign Lord of Land and Main:
Albion, nursed in Honor's School,
Shall with Heroic Virtues rule.

The God of Love, with all his Train,
Shall wait great Albion over the Main;
My Mother Venus shall attend him*
And great Mars in War befriend him:
Mars, Venus, and Cupid shall all be at hand
To wait your great Hero's Command.

Why how' now Youngster! now I find
It is by your kind Aid
My Virtuous Wife to Mars is joined,
And I a God-like Cuckold made.
O Cupid!

O Vulcan!

Is this like a Son,
To see your poor Daddy abused?

And was it like a wise God to marry with one
That to Cuckolding was so much used?

Come, come, young God, since it is so,
I Will break your Arrows and your Bow.

No, pray now, Father, spare 'em, and I Will take care to be


As great a Knave to others as thou'st been to me.

Cease Vulcan, cease, or strait prepare
To feel the angry God of War:
Thy Son against all thy Force I will maintain,
And soon will,

Cuckold me again.
Then repine not you Mortals, but lead merry Lives;
For a God can be Bully'd you see:
Then lose not your Blood in defense of your Wives;
But he Cuckolds, tame Cuckolds, like me.

Then repine not, you Mortals, but lead merry lives;
For a God can be Bully'd you see:
Then lose not your Blood in defense of your Wives;
For a Cuckold great Vulcan must be.

IT IS vain to tell me I am deceived;
For Celia seems so kind,
'Twere Sin she should not be believed,
Since I no Cheat can find.
If Flattery with Falsehood lie
In her soft Youth concealed,
A thousand times I Would rather dye,
Than have the Truth revealed.
Let busy Fools in Libels rail,
Their Malice I Will outbrave;
O^r me no Scandal shall prevail,
So she the Appearance save:
For if I think I have her Heart,
My own for hers is due;
Let her but act the tender part,
I Will think the Joy is true.
See where Triumphant Fame prepares to sing
The Glories of your King.

You Nymphs that attend the Sovereign Barge,
Guard, guard your Royal Charge;
And let your loyal Hands the Bark support,
With all the Glory of your Watery Court.

Then let your Royal, etc.

Pleasure and Joy shall waft him over,
And Triumph echo round from Shore to Shore.

Pleasure and Joy, etc.

WHy do thou fly me, pretty Maid?
Though old, I feel Loves Fires,
Which cannot be quenched without thy Aid.
Then prithee, Fair One, be not cold;
For though, it is true, I Am very old,
I still have young Desires.

Nay, prithee dear Nestor, cease, cease this Discourse
For I have often been told,
That for a young Virgin there is nothing worse,
Than to Bed with a Man that is old.

You much mistake, my pretty Fair,
For Old Men always constant are.

I do not doubt your Constancy,
For Age, of course, must constant be:
Your Youthful Vigor being gone,
You scarce can think of more than One.

Is there nothing then can gain ye?

Yes, yes, there is.

Here Is Gold; will that obtain ye?

O sie, pish, pish.

See, here is store of Gold.

O fie, fie, fie! you are Old.

No matter, Child, here is Gold.

Well, I Will take it for once, but I must have more,
For this is too little to win me.

Nay, rather than so, thou shall have all my store,
And if that fail, the Devil is in thee.

I thank you, and now I must go.

And I will go with thee.

O no, no, no, no.

Why sure, Child, you will not serve me so.

Indeed, but I must.

Then give me my Gold.

No; I never make Presents to Men that are Old.



Now Fame's loudest Trumpet sound;
Albion from Pole to Pole rebound:
Let all, let all his Titles rattle,
Founder of Peace, and God of Battle.

Let Us haste to pay, or Sacrifice to Heaven,
And then to War I will again return:
Our Foes, I hear, already take the Field,
Therefore, my Son, to you I leave the Charge
Of this my Kingdom, with full Power to act
As you shall best think fit.

Which Power, my Lord,
I hope I shall discharge with Care and Justice.
Now Amarante, now the time is come
That I so long have with Impatience wished for.
Yet, though I Am blessed with Love, I still shall mourn,
And find no Joy till your most-wish'd Return.


