Critics, now boast your power, for you have made
A Tragic muse run mad in masquerade.
All Poets before him the Laws did slight
Of such as only railed, but could not Write.
But he submits so far, that you will swear
His first was writ in blood, but this in the Air.
'Twas nine day's work: but truly there might be
As good a Play just spoke Ex tempore.
For Whip and Spur, it is A-la-mode de France;
A thing made up of Fiddle, Song, and Dance.
All three your dear Delights, no matter then
Whether of sense there be one line in ten:
This Age is not for that, it is much too wise,
What Poets teach, you dull moralities;
That was their business in that humble Age,
When Hedges were their Scenes, and Fields their Stage,
When the poor simple World strove to be good;
Thank time, things now are better understood.
But yet he could not leave, you will see him now
Have a slight pass or two at some of you;
He thinks there is Bullys dare not fight, in the Pit
As well as Critics, that he is sure want wit.
One may be both -- They that make most ado,
Do oftnest want both wit and courage too.
But fear no common place, nor sober saws,
By some late Plays he partly knows your Laws.
At a quaint Dance, or a Grimace that takes,
The Theater with loud applauses shakes.
But if true thought be with good Language dressed,
You slightly cry, 'twas well enough expressed.
Then as you have used some Plays, so do by this,
Clap but that part which wild and senseless is,
And for what is wise we give you leave to hiss.

NO drawing back, Townlove, I Am engaged, and am resolved to make a Night on it.


Prithee, Will Merry, let us part; thou know I never use that word to thee
but when I have extraordinary business


Business! what business can thou have? I Will warrant you you're to be up
betimes in the Morning to sell a parcel of fat Sheep or Oxen, new come from your
Estate in the Country, or else to instruct Counsel in a Cause of yours
depending I know not where. Business, quoth a, that ever a well-bred Gentleman
should suffer the word to come into his Mouth


I tell thee, Will, I have business, serious business, and business fit for a
Gentleman; let that satisfy you: and so farewell


Stay, Stay, this shan'not do, Townlove, I smell you out; You fear I Will carry
you to some lewd House now that abounds in Burgundy, and there top up with
'tother half dozen Bottles; then the dreadful Head-ake comes and keeps you in
two days to be the disappointment of Lord knows how many she-friends


And do you think such fears are not very reasonable? A Man indeed has so much
time allowed him in this World, that he should neglect the Living two days for
the delight of two hours: Prithee think, would any Man of sense part with his
time at that rate


Faith, Townlove, thou art mad, distracted, gone, and I Am afraid, beyond
recovery; thou can not consider things I see


If want of consideration be a sign of madness, Will, thou have been a little
crazed ever since I knew thee. But prithee, what have NOT I considered in this
matter


Living, Townlove, Living: thou have not so much as considered what business
thou was sent into the World about -- It Is Living, Man


Why, I know it is Living, and therefore I strive to Live as much of the time I
have allowed me as I can


Thou Live, and yet speak against Drinking, the very thing that distinguishes
the Life of Man from that of a Beast! Why, it is the only Spur of Wit and
Reason; I have heard more new thoughts in Drinking three hours, then the best
Modern Play can furnish you with; Therefore if thou would Live, that is,
truly enjoy thy self, Drink, I say, Drink


Well, I can neither stay to do it, nor talk of it now; and therefore good bu'y.


Nay, faith, thou shall stay till I give a serenade to my Mistress now, I am
under the Window; strike up, Boys


Hold; sure Will, you are mad -- Do not know her Brother is a serious
Gentleman, and not used to City frolicks; it is the only way to lose her for
ever


Why, this it is, not to understand Drinking, it makes one as dull and
thoughtless as a Country Curate, that lives upon six pounds, and a cast
Cassock two and fifty Sundays; do thou think I would Marry her, if I did not
intend to reclaim both her and her Brother from dull sobriety


Why, thou would not have thy Wife Drink, would thou?


No, but I would have her be as mad, and love those that do, Women are fine
thin things, the breath of a Man that is merry is sufficient to inspire them
with wit enough for a Woman, and therefore here I declare that I will serenade
her, and if she shows the least dislike to the frolic, I will, in spite of
Love and all his little tricks, disclaim her for ever. And therefore, Boys, to
our business; come, the Song I made


Well, I Will stay to see thee a poor discarded, melancholy, disconsolate Lover,
and then I Will leave thee, and go to my Mistress

FRom Friends just inspired with brisk Burgundy Wine,
Speaking raptures of Reason, and sayings Divine.
I come -- I come -- from this Heaven I come,
And through dirt and darkness I willingly roam,
To follow a Boy that confesses he is blind,
He tells me of hope, but leads me through fear,
Nay, sometimes I Am just on the brink of despair;
Yet on I follow, I follow still, leaving behind
The two mighty Blessings, my Bottle and Friend.
He tells me of Bliss,
Beyond this,
Yet will not declare where my Journey shall end.
Ah, what Charms have those Eyes!
That a Love so strong can inspire,
It Mirth, Wit, and Friendship defies,
And Wine cannot slacken its fire.
Then spite of my self I must follow him still,
A Devil, or a God, let him be which he will,
I cannot, nay, would not retire,
No, though I were sure to be burnt in the fire.

For Heavens sake, Mr. Merry, be gone; my Mistress knows who you are, but
should her Brother do so, we should be sent into the Country immediately


Rose, Rose, I tell thee, Rose, I would follow with this noise of Fiddles at my
heels, and drive him back to Town, or never let him sleep but in shelter of as
many Night-Caps as Morose in the Silent Woman has


I am very serious, Sir, my Lady begs you to be gone before you wake her
Brother


Come, Rose, confess, confess; I know thou art acquainted with a touch of thy
Mistresses secrets: Tell me, is there no other seat but of being sent into the
Country


Oh, yes, no doubt on it, the Mistress is highly concerned for fear of losing
the hopes of so sober a Husband


Marry, and I thought so. --


One, that if a Body has occasion for at night may be heard of either in a
Tavern, French-house, Constables hands, or the Counter


Well; and is not that better then to be troubled with a formal fopp of
business, who lodges his wife in the Country, to prescribe for the Agne, then
scratches his empty Noddle, cries, I protest I must post to London, I shall be
undone else; there stays a whole Term a doing nothing, or what is as bad, that
which comes at last to nothing


And thinks he performs his Duty very well to his Wife, if he gives her a bout
every post with a long formal Letter of Excuses for not coming


Which must beget another on her full of Complaints, for his absence.


Then when he returns in the Spirit of Beef and Ale, Will, it may beget a Male
Child


Which proves like the Ingredients it is Compounded of, a fit Companion for
Clowns, and of no use but to have his Name inserted in long Indentures,
Tripartite for Intaling, specially that Earth that is near as sensible as it is
Clod-pate owner


The drawing of this deed too is a new excuse for coming to London, and seeing,
as the learned have it, his Uncle


So, that in fine your man of business loves to be thought to love business,
Courts business, lies with business, and begets nothing but business, or things
as dull as business; and, Lady, will you slight a Man that loves Wit, Mirth,
and Burgundy, for this Animal, nonrationale


I pray, Sir, where is the necessity for marrying either, do you think there is
none but such as cannot stay at home for their business, or will not, for their
Wine and Wenches


Lady, have a care; that is my Province: Wenches! if you speak irreverently of
Wenches I am bound to stand up for them, and shall soon be provoked to say,
that if my friend here, and some few others like him, could but relish the
pleasure of Wenching, you, and all the ill-bred honest Women in the Town might
sleep quietly, or waking, gnaw your Sheets without the help of a Song and
Fiddle at your windows. VVenching, quoth a


Well, Mr. Merry, I see you, for your Wine, and your Friend for Wenches, are so
well met, 'twould be pity to part you, and I am resolved not to be so cruel;
therefore assuring you I am not in have for a Husband, but can stay till a
soberer grow; if there be none yet ripe, I leave you to your further Adventures


Faith, no parting so. Strike up, and sing the Chorus, Chor. Ah, what Charms
have those Eyes, etc


Pray hold, my Brothers coming.


I am glad of it, since I cannot reclaim the Sister from doting on Sobriety.
I Will see what can be done on the Brother; go on

Sings.

Then spite of my self, etc.


Ah, Mr. Merry, you're upon the Ramble, I see; what time of Night is it?


About two, and fair Weather; who would lie spending this pleasant time in a
lazy Bed, and then rise to fry all day in the Sun


Why, did not Nature intend the Night for Rest, seeming to draw Curtains about
us, and the Day for Action, displaying the great producer of it, Light


This Philosophy may serve well enough for one not in Love, but 'faith my Body
is too combustible to endure two fires at once; Love, and the Sun: and
therefore I drink at Night to slacken than within, and sleep in the Day to
avoid that without


I see you would seem a Philosopher too, to justify the drinking as caused by
your Love, but my Sister will scarce believe you in that


Yes, Brother, but I will; for I do believe it is Love; Love of drinking, I
mean, that causes the fire within he complains of, and so he drinks on to
quench it


Well, Gentlemen, the street may prove scandalous: Rose, go, let 'em in.


Scandalous! if you mean to them, it is impossible; for they are as well known in
the street as the Bell-man, and as duly expected by the Neighborhood to their
Lodgings punctually to come home at break of day


You say right, Madam; the Smiths, Shoo-makers, Pewterers, and Sadlers in our
street have no measure to call up their Prentices by, but the noise of my
Fiddles playing me to my Lodging


He tells you true, Madam; for they heard once he was going to remove, and in
great fright called a Vestry the next Lord's Day, where it was proposed to make
a Collection amongst them to pay for his Lodging, on Condition he would stay


Yes, faith, and a solemn present of saffron Cakes and Sack given to Townlove,
to move me to it


Come, Gallants, you may enter; but Mr. Muchland is not of my mind, to suffer
it


Prithee why, Rose; I know thou art not so cruel, but thou could find in thy
heart sometimes to let in a Friend later than this


Sir, it must be with greater expectation of a sober demeanor when they come
in, then I could hope from you now


Townlove, Rose is a Person I much rely on, therefore prithee manage the
controversy begun with her, whilst I go and excuse my self to her Mistress


No, Sir, Arguments are in vain to me, I Am so possessed that Love and Wine are
inconsistent together, that I think I could die rather then recant my Opinion


And, Rose, it may be in doing so, would be as solid a Martyr as many of thy
Sex, who have, as they say, witnessed with their Death, truths they no ways
understood, nor indeed lay half so obvious to their Reason


Well, Sir, will you please to come in; the noise that these Fiddles keep will
allure more of you wandering Knights to enter, except the Door be shut


No, Rose, thou and I will stand and guard the passage to this Enchanted
Castle, where vil'd Matrimonical Love is pursued in these days of clearer
light


Why then, Sir, you dare not enter into any House, it seems, that is defiled
with Honesty; if those be your principles, you and I are not proper Sentinels
for one place, being Soldiers of two opposite parties


Why, Rose, are you for no Love that is not bound by the spell of, To have and
to hold, and the little Magic Circle of Gold, that Fools say, makes one of two
Persons as inconsistent, and different in their Natures, as the Stars that
govern 'em; and as far asunder in their inclinations, as they are from one
another in place


Truly, Sir, I am altogether for being particular in Love, or for not being in
Love at all, though I confess it is no great matter, I think, for any other tie
than mutual consent


Divine Rose! if thou art not now, or have not been particular, as thou call'st
it, already, then this free humor I Am afraid will make me thine in spite of
all resistance, and therefore dear Rose, admit of a Treaty, in order to a
stricter League


Which will begin on your part with a breach of Articles concerning some former
commerce; that Amity is like to continue long, whose first Foundation is broken
Faith


No doubts, Rose, but must be explained on both sides, to prevent future
mistakes, I must know whether I am the first discoverer of your Territories,
that I may the better rate the curiosity, you shall know the true cause of my
leaving my former Traffic, and seeking out new Countries


Well, Sir, I am not so fond of the Alliance, as to spend time in the Treaty;
and so farewell, if you will not come in


Come in, say thou! I am so taken with thy humor, that I would follow thee,
though it was to Church


Well, I Will go and dress my self, and then Ramble with you.


Do so; this Brother of yours, Madam, is a very honest Gentleman, and I have
greater hopes of him then I have of you


Indeed, Sir, you have a great deal of Reason.


Why, good Madam, can you show a just exception against my manner of Living?


Yes, indeed, Sir, a thousand, if it concerned me, but I shall not need to take
pains in particulars about a thing so remote


Madam, I must tell you, there is more thanks due to me for this Visit, then
you seem to bestow by your cold indifferency


Thanks for breaking my sleep!


For breaking your sleep, say you; marry, I hope to have your thanks for doing
it before I dye, notwithstanding your seeming sober dislikes of it now


For hope, it is an Estate entailed upon Lovers and Fools. There is no
dispossessing them of it, and though I cannot certainly define by which of the
Titles you hold, yet this for your comfort I can tell you, Fiddles, and crying
Fire are much the same to me about two in the morning, and were I married, I
cannot certainly tell which I should sooner wish my Husband should waken me
with


Faith, Madam, let your Servant wake you with Fiddles, and your Husband with
Fire; the first provokes Dancing, the Emblem of Love, that never lets a man
rest, and the other is hot, and therefore requires a -- Cooler


Townlove, I thank thee for that -- it is the first time I e're heard thee speak
for sitting up late; sure thou have been drinking since I left thee without,
thou art so thoughtful, nothing but Wine would have made thee arrived to the
tenth part of this good Nature


No, truly, Sir, I have been loving, and loving a great deal for so little time.


The fire of thy Love is like that of Gunpowder, flash, noise, smoke, and
Exit. Mine is kindled in heart of Oak, where it is lasting and useful


And which to preserve the Block the longer, you quench every Night by
drenching it in Liquor, and then with a great deal of pussing and blowing you
kindle it again by Noon


And is not that well, when you can have half the day to warm your self by it?
an't would but hold out at that rate I should prove the best Husband in Town;
but faith, Madam, take me before I waste too much, for this keeping the
fire-light all Night will consume fuel monstrously


And it is two to one we shall sit blowing our fingers half the long Winter of
Marriage, for that is a cold time, I have heard many of you Gallants say


Ay, such as Townlove here, that know no other way to heat themselves but at
the main fire. But we that practice the warm Exercise of Drinking, never go
cold to Bed, and a warm Bed-fellows Arms is a pleasant place I can tell you


Come, Gentlemen, I am ready for your commands now, let us whither you please.


Why then, let us to your Mistress, and serenade her, and call Ned Rosh her
Brother up, and go to the Rose Tavern for a Bottle of Burgundy


With all my heart.


I Will bring you on your way, till you go embarque for drinking, and then I Will
take leave, being not willing to grow Sea-sick to Night


Brother Muchland, that must be, for so I know the Destinies have decreed; this
Townlove is a very honest fellow, did he not delight in lewd Company


One good turn is, the faults of my Company are not so visible, nor do not make
such a noise as yours do


If thou understoodst noise, thou would not say so, for is it not the whole
noise of the Town; who is such a ones Mistress, what he allows her, and whether
she has any certainty settled on her, or must upon dislike be cast off, and
according to the answers of these Queries she is more or less respected, and
makes the greater noise at her Lodgings in the Park, and at the Play House


And good reason too; it is not the drinking of Wine, but your ability to pay
for it makes you welcome to the drowsy Vintner at two in the Morning; and let
the precise say what they will, it is plain they never complain of the sins they
themselves get by, or delight in


Faith, Sir, you are in the right, I never heard of a Vintner or Bawd that
complained of Drinkers or Wenchers, except they broke Windows, or built
Sconces, and I Will assure you I have known very devout People of both those
Employments


No doubt on it, People that would not have failed being at Church before the
Psalm was sung for their Sundays Dinner


Truly it is the same in more warrantable Employments, for you shall never hear
the Parson speak against the sin his Patron is notoriously guilty of, or if he
is forced to Name it, it is in such a whisper, that few, except the Reader, can
hear him


Your Lawyer never speaks against the forgery he is retained for; your Doctor,
never against the cause of the Pox, nor will a Soldier be persuaded there is
any hurt in plundering


Nor will all the Rhetoric a man has be enough to Convince a Tradesman that he
does ill when he over-reaches them most that trust him most


Then since no Action, be it good or bad, but has it is vouchers, I am for
letting every one have his humor, and only beg that I may have mine, which
terminates always in the consent of the parties I deal with, and the Devils
in it if there can be harm in that, to which all Persons concerned give their
approbation


Why, you are in the right, Townlove, and therefore let us by mutual consent
pursue our intentions


What, call up a Lady with a noise of Fiddles at two in the morning, for no
other purpose but to break her sleep; it shall never be said Townlove was
partaker in such a Crime; therefore you that can Dance, shall; and you that
cannot, shall try; for I will have my frolic


And good reason you have for it, Sir, for it is a shame that those who are so
used to Dance about the streets all Night should be able to do nothing tending
to the same stirring faculty within Doors


Then to your business; first, the Catch in commendation of the Liberal Art of
Wenching, and then a Dance, to show the methodical motion of Reeling

1. Boy, call the Coach; come, Jack, let us away:
It Is tedious to sit out this Tragical Play.
A Plague o'their pletting and dying in Rhyme,
Let Us drive to the Park
Before it be dark,
There we will better dispose of our Time.
2. Stay, who is that so dressed like a Queen?
1. It Is the fine Lady Lofty, but let us not be seen:
For her Husband is surely gone out.
-- She searches to find
If a Friend will be kind,
And treat her abroad with a Supper and 'bout.
2. Why should she want that? Her Lords a brave Man.
1. Ay, Jack, but they are married.
2. Then what two are you?
1. It Is Will Lovewell and his pretty Miss,
He has kept her this seven year, yet prithee, Jack, see
How jocund and merry they be,
How Crowned, and incircl'd with Bliss.
Love Revels, and Feasts in hearts that are free,
But languishing starves if restrained he be.
1. See, yonder sits Well-born with his pretty Wife.
2. They look as they would never seen each other before.
1. She seeks for her Gallant, and he of my Lise
Has a mind to be feaguing you Vizor-Mask-Whore.
But stay, let me see; by Heavens it is so,
That Mask hides a Lady I know,
Who seems for to dote on Husband and Honor,
But look there, Ned Ranter has just fixed upon her.
2. She has yielded, and see they do go.
1. If Wives will do this,
Give me the true Miss,
She Would be hanged e're she would serve a Man so.
They Are Fools then that Marry, and strive to consine
In politic Chains what still will be free;
No Fetters can hold a power that is Divine,
Nor Shackles restrain great Loves Deity.

What would I give, Rose, to be a man but one Night, to see what pleasure there
is in the inside of a Tavern; for sure, it must be something extraordinary maks
Mre. Merry so continually delight in being there


Faith, Madam, it is not hard to compass your wish.


What, to be a man for a Night?


Ay, to be a man as far as amounts to carry on the design of going to a Tavern;
for I believe these honest good fellows never examine the inside of every man's
Breeches that keep 'em Company


Rose, you are a little too wanton.


Madam, you are a little too precise; why, it is the business of a Chambermaid
to give hints of delight to her Lady when they are alone, and there is not one
in ten, let them say what they will, but are pleased to hear something to the
purpose sometimes


Now out upon thee; I am afraid Mr. Townlove and you have had a conference
lately, you are so apt to change my innocent discourse of a Tavern to matters
nearer his purpose, in which I Will assure you I am not at all curious


Well then, Madam, let that alone, and as to your observing the delights of a
Tavern, I can put you in a way immediately to do it


What, without being known!


Yes, Madam; for the Suits, Perriwiggs, Hats, and Swotds that are to go to your
younger Brothers into the Country, came home last Night, and your Brother has
not seen them I am confident, if you and I put them on, we shall never be
suspected for any other then a couple of tight Bully Bocks


But should we in this Habit intrude into their Company, I am afraid they will
make us drink, and I am not able to do that


But I am, Madam, I Will warrant you as far as a Bottle or two, and you may put
on Mr. Townlove's humor, at which I Will Quarrel, and that shall be our Excuse
for leaving them before they agree to part


Well, faith, I Will venture, for I long to satisfy my Curiosity.


Come, let us make haste to dress our selves.


STrike up, Boys, sound Alarm to the sleepy Sentinels of this Fortification.

Ah, what Charms have those Eyes, etc.


What, sober Mr. Muchland! I little suspected to have seen you at the head of a
Troop of Fiddles and Torches, scowring of the Streets, and beating up of
Quarters at such a time of Night


You see how powerful Example is, yet considering these honest Gentlemen, my
Companions, I think this may be as becoming an Exercise, as the following a
pack of Dogs all day so hard, to kill my Horses, and the Quarry only a rank
Fox, for the noise of those we Hunt, which now is much more Musical


Come, come, dress, dress, we are in great haste, and have much business to do
before that great makebate, the Sun, who lights your Lawyers, Usurers,
Scriveners, Merchants, and other formal fopps to go together by the Ears, do
rise


I am afraid we have disturbed your Sister with our noise.


Prithee, dear Muchland no fears, for let her be disturbed as much as she will,
she will take it for a sign of Love, to see that when her Servant is Rambling, he
cannot choose but take her in his way, and let them never so much dislike the
man that does it, there was never one of them yet that was displeased at being
beloved


I am of your mind, Mr. Merry, they are the same in Lovers as they are in
Footmen, so they have but enough to wear the Livery, they desire but one to do
the business, and glory more in the Manies constant attendance, then they do in
the ones ability for performing their How de's


Faith, Rash, thou art in the right; for till this way came up of keeping Misses,
a Woman counted it a scandal to have but one Servant; it is true, they admitted
them under the Name of Platonicks, Friends, or Admirers, but would oblige them
at the charge of their Lovers or Husbands, rather then lose their Visits; but
since this impropriating of Women's Flesh without Matrimony came in request,
it is counted a greater disgrace amongst themselves to admit of two Gallants,
then e're it was for a married Woman to Cuckold her Husband. And Opinion being
the sole Governor of men's Actions; I believe this to be the only way to
introduce Chastity into the Female Sex again, and to secure men in the
knowledge of their own Children


I never knew you want an Argument to justify Wenching in my Life. But come
in, and I Will Dress me


Sound a Charge, and Enter.


Sir, never tell me o'that, Sir, you're (...) of Cheats, and I Will have my money
again, or I Will so swinge you


Good Mr. Ruffle consider this Gentleman as a mere Stranger to me, and that
money I have won of you, I have it fairly, and will keep it too in spite of
your coun^^rf^it Courage


Conspiracy; a mere Conspiracy, what t^^ Devil, is not here a Dye has nothing
but fives upon it: here another with two sixes, and there a third with two
Quaters, and two ^^e's? I tell you it is a plain Conspiracy, and I will have my
money again


Sir, you know I am a mere Stranger to him, and met you at the Coffee-House by
chance, and truly, considering I have lost all my money I might ju^^ suspect


Suspect, ha, what would you suspect? ha!


Suspect, Sir, look you, if you go to that, Sir, I might suspect, (...) that
you drew me hither, and conspired together to get my (...), Sir, (...) ^^^eting
those Dice I see there, that I might suspect, Sir


Sirrah, thou Varlet, dare thou talk thus to a Gentleman of my Quality, that
can spend a thousand pounds per annum, and be never the worse, that ever I
should light into the Company of a Slave that spunges at Ordinaries upon the
winning hands for his Bread: begs to go six pence upon 7, to 5, and being broke
by paying Laundress, or Lodging, sets up again with a new borrowed half-Crown


Good Mr. Ruffle, be more civil; you know I brought you into the House a
Guinney, sixteen shillings in silver, and a studdle Watch-Case, and Chain, and
have lost them all; then methinks you might give me leave to speak for my
money


Oh, Impudence! Drawer, what is to pay?


Three pounds, Sir.


Lok you there, Rascal! is it likely you should be set by us to get the value
you speak of; when the Reckoning comes to more. Thou Dog, I have lost fifty
Guinneys, besides three pounds in silver; and you come in with your studdle
Watch-Case and Chain, and we should design upon you in the Devil's name; very
likely


Sir, I have more money somewhere, and I believe all this heat is because I had
no more about me to lose


Damned Rascal, do provoke me? I Will kick thee up the Chimney.


Lord, Sir, pray, Sir, (...), what de'e mean, Sir? we shall talk about this
anon


Hold, Mr. Ruffle, this is not fair, nor must be here; we will have no
Quatrelling, if I can help it


I vow to Gad, Mr. Fullam, you are a civil Gentleman, but there is no enduring
of this Rogue; therefore, prithee give me leave to kick him out of the Company


No, Sir, that need not, Sir; on Condition you will threw those Dice out of the
Window, I Will borrow five Guinneys of the Drawer, and lose them too, if it be my
ill Fortune; but I Will assure you I Will look to the Dice we play with


Well then; Drawer, go to your master, and bid him send me twenty Guinneys.


I shall, Sir.


And do you hear? bring me five.


It shall be done, Sir.


I protest, Mr. Ruffle, I am sorry I have offended you; for you know it is not
my custom to Quarrel at the Ordinary, or any where else, but lose my money as
quietly as men of better Estates do


Then this Fullam is a Rogue; but 'sore Heaven, if I take him at his tricks,
I Will cut's Ears off, or have my money again


You have reason; but Gad, I have some Tools here about me, as good Lows and
Highs as e're ran on smooth Table; Gad, you might, and you would serve him a
trick for his trick


And will, by Heaven; lend me them then.


There, Sir, these are Lows, and these are High runners; you will never find more
than threes run on these, nor less than fours on these


Then we will to passage.


Come, Sir, let us into our Room, and seem angry still.


What advantage have men of Courage over Cowards; how tame this Rogue is with
his beating? I have got some Reputation for my money in huffing this Rogue


Madam, you see the Excellencies of these Fellows: Was not the Sport you have
had worth waking for


Yes, truly, Sir.


Faith, Madam, I never do worse than this; my Bottle, Fiddle, and Friend, are
the Delights of my Life, and had not Cupid watch't a time when I was sober, and
shot me as I stood musing on this Gentleman's Sister, I think I should never
have thought of other pleasures; but now spend at least two hours in the twenty
four, in musing, sighing, hoping, wishing, and fearing


A grievous affliction I Will assure you, Sir; and if I were able to persuade the
Lady that has this interest in your heart two hours of the day, she should even
release her part for altogether; for I think the twelfth part of a Man's heart
is no more worth keeping then the twelfth part of a shilling, a sum too little
to be bestowed on the meanest Beggar


Ay, Madam, you speak of a heart that can be divided; but alas, it is not so in
mine; she has right of common in the whole, every part is as much hers as any
part, and she can enclose it when she pleases, being Lady of the Manor


But I am afraid you would soon break down the Fences, and plead a prescription of
Liberty, especially to that part that lies nearest the Watercourse


What, a Lover! and in the presence of his Mistress, yet plead for the Adverse
party! O, Monstrum Horrendum


Ay, Sir, a whole Lover may have Liberty to speak against the twelfth part of
one, there is no proportion between them


Sir, it is possible the twelfth part of one heart may be more then the whole of
another


Faith, Brother Mushland, I think there you are met with.


I should be loath to think the Lady meant a comparison between your heart and
mine; but if she did, I would be glad she would take the trouble of surveying
both before she gave final Judgment in so difficult a cause


Since I pretend a Title to neither, nor know any body that does, you shall
pardon me if I concern not my self about the Buts, Bounds, Quantity, or Quality
of the premises


Madam, you that command so many hearts, you think to descend to the
observation of particulars is below you; but since you will at last find it
convenient to Build, you ought to survey well the place you intend to sit down
upon


Sir, you say well; and when I begin to think of that, I shall not fail to be
very circumspect in my Choice


But do it quickly, Madam, Life's short, and if you intend to enjoy the fruit
your self, you must plant betimes


Madam, this Brother of yours is more circumspect in dressing himself for the
Tavern, then Mr. Muchland was to come to his Mistress


It is a sign he has a greater respect for the one, then Mr. Muchland has for
the other


Nay rather, Madam, impute it to the excess of my desires, which prompted me to
such haste, as I regarded nothing but the hopes of seeing you


Come, let us away to the Rose, for it is almost Day; and it is more scandalous to
enter a Tavern, then come out of one in a Morning


It Is true, had not we the laudable excuse of Fiddles and Link-Boys, which are
infallible signs of no early Risers


Well, all the Good Fellows we meet in the Street, and all that are in the
Tavern are part of our Company, know them, or know them not


Provided, they carry good Testimony that they rise not thus early about
business, for if we meet any such, they or we must change sides of the way


Never fear it, Gentlemen, such, if they meet you, will give you the way
without Quarrelling; for if you look on them as Fools, they think as sure that
you are Madmen


And with very good reason; and therefore, desiring I may be suspected for one
of these foolish Men of business, I beg Liberty to give way to you Men of the
Moonlight


Be but a Madman to the Tavern, Townlove, and then go away like a Fool if thou will


Well, come on then; I will endure worse denominations then these, so I may but
have my humor


Come, Rogues, Rascals; come away, and sound a retreat to Mr. Muchland, who
scarce marches off with flying Colors as I did from my Mistress


Sir, I dare say he is no more without nopes then you are without Confidence.


No, Madam, in spite of Mr. Merry, I will not believe my self so miserable, as
to be past all hopes


Faith, Mr. Muchland, nor need not, if it be'nt your own fault.


Fie, Brother.


Fie, Sister; I Will tell thee, Muchland, she is more afraid of being forsaken,
then you are of being slighted


I dare not think my self so happy.


You are a Fool then, let her deny what I said, if she can.


Brother, this is unsufferable.


Come, come, prithee come away, there is such fooling and dissembling with
these Women


This Brother of mine has so thoroughly vexed me, by discovering my inclination,
that I shall not be able to sleep for thoughts of it


Why should you be troubled, Madam, since methinks it is well he knows it,
'twill put an end to the business quickly


But if he should slight me, I believe I should dye.


Never fear that, Madam, you have him too fast.


Come, I will to bed; no more this Morning.


Stand, who goes there?


Ah, Rose, it is they!


No matter; what are you that question who we are in such high Terms?


Are you men of business? For if you be, you must leave this side of the Street
clear to us


Gentlemen, do you think we look like persons that are sent to fetch Doctors,
Apothecaries, or Midwives thus early; or, that we rise this Morning not to fail
meeting at some zealous brothers, for the Spiritual comforts of a morning
Lecture; no faith, we are men of no more business then your selves


Are you Good Fellows, or Wenchers, that you are upon the Ramble so late?


Partly the one, partly to'ther, like most of Mankind; but by what Authority do
you examine us thus


We have a Commission to take up all stragglers we meet, and carry them to the
Rose Tavern


Where, after Drinking all Night, you intend to take your Mornings Draughts;
is it not so


It Is true, that is the scope of our Commission.


We are for you then, though my friend here never Drinks; he is for pleasures of
another Nature


I have Commission to Dispense him as well as my self, he being I find of our
Brigade


Fall into your places then.


But not so easily I believe, you will think we did not design to play the
Philosophers: No, we are for mirth and madness, frolicks of some noise must
tempt us to engage in your Company, else we are going to those that know truly
how to be merry; men of mettle, that though they will not break Laws, have an
Art of stretching of them as far as the best pleading Case Lawyer that wears a
Coif --


And that is further by half then any Shoo-maker can his Leather; for they can
fit Law to every Last


Therefore in plain terms, Gentlemen, we must see some frolic performed that
will convince we are not like to lose precious time in your Company, or we
shall take you for some Constables, Churchwardens, Sides-men, and Overseers
in Disguise, a going to Ferret, and set Toils for the tame Game of Whetstone's
Park


Your scruples of Conscience are so weighty, there ought to be much care taken
to solve the doubts


Your Company seems so good, that let the Conditions be but possible on which
we are to gain your acquaintance they shall be performed: What say we, shall we
break Windows, pull down Signs, beat Constables, or fire the Church --


Hold! Fire Coven-Garden Church; Heaven forbid! If that should once be done,
then should I be condemned never to hear Common Prayer again


And what a loss would that be to the Church, to have such a Pillar removed?


Coven-Garden Church! It is the Theater of Beauty, and Rendevouz of Misses and
Gallants. I dare avow it is a greater Advantage to Love's Empire then both the
Play Houses are. No, I Will have no firing of Coven-Garden Church in my Company;
any other Church in the Kingdom I think may be spared


No, Gentlemen, these sort of frolicks we are not for; there is no venturing
upon such without the security of as many Lives as a Cat; besides, we hate to
be giving the lie to Reverend Men of the long Robe, in crying not guilty, my
Lord


Invent, invent then! What is it we must do?


Can you Dance all of you? The place is convenient here within the Piazza.


We can do something like it, most of us.


I wish we had but a Bell then; we would wake all the People of the Piazza, and
show them by our mirth, the difference between Living as we do, and dying; that
is, Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and Melancholy moving to no purpose, as they do


We shall but lose time in looking for a Bell-man, and I have a Trumpet here
will make a greater noise; I carry it always with me, to sound at some
particular Healths


That will do much better, the rarity of it will beget more attention.


Come then, a Levite; my Man here has a Speech to go round with: I use it at my
Friends Windows as I Ramble to my Lodgings a Mornings

Come, I Will speak it first at this Corner my self, and then he shall about with
it, whilst we fall to our Dance

GRave sober Sots rise from your Beds,
And just thrust out your Logger-heads,
With Eyes half shut, and senses dulled
You Will see a little how you're gulled,
And kept from pleasures of the Dark,
By precepts wise of Lamb and Lark.
But learn by us your Lives to mend,
For Life is short, and time will end:
And when you're dead, for what you do,
Your merry Heirs will laugh at you.
Morrow Mr. Scrape, Morrow Mrs. Scrape, Morrow Mr. Save-all, Morrow my Lord
Sober, Morrow my Lady Pensive, Morrow Mr. Catch-good: Morrow, you Sleepers all,
good Morrow


Stand upon your Guard, Gentlemen, the Constable and Watch are coming.


Let them come, I have a sure way to keep such Dogs from Barking, as can be; if
our party be two strong, they fly off course; but if not, I take him by the
hand, and cry good Mr. Constable don't you know me? Strait with the help of
their horns they peep in my face, whilst he has time to consider that he is
richer by half a Crown then he was; then, as in an ecstasy of Joy, he cries, ha,
Sir, is it you? Will you have any of my Watch wait on you? Which I denying, we
part with as many farewells, and good wishes to one another, as if we had
tumbled together in one Belly, though it may be we never saw one another faces
before


Stand, who goes there?


No body.


What, are all you no body?


I say, no body goes here, for we are all standing.


You are merry Gentlemen, but I shall alter your humor presently; come before
the Constable one of you, keep the Peace in the Kings Name, keep the Peace, I
am his Majesty's Constable. Oh, I shall be killed, I am a dead Man: Oh, my Wife
and Children: I Will have you all hanged if I be killed: I say, keep the Peace;
in the King's Name, keep the Peace


What, Mr. Last, is it you?


Ay, an't please your Worship, your Worships own Shoemaker; good Sir, don't use
me ill, your Worships shoes are ready for you


Use thee ill! What, my man of midnight! Do think we will use thee ill? How
does thy Wife and Daughter Joan? they are pretty Rogues both


Ay, Mr. Townlove, you are pleased to say so, but it is your goodness more then
their desert truly; though indeed they always talk of your Worship, and are
near falling out sometimes about you, in arguing which loves you best, but I to
keep the Peace part them, and take my Daughters part, because poor thing! My
Wife is her Mother in Law, I hope your Worship will not be angry at it --


No, no, Mr. Constable, by any means keep the Kings Peace within doors, it will
keep it self without


Come, Mr. Last, how many Prisoners have you that are not able to pay Ransom? I
am resolved to Act the Justice, and set all at Liberty after due Examination


Why truly, Sir, we have only took four Gentlewomen, which we were carrying to
the Round-house; I Will make the Watch bring them before your Worship -- Bring the
Prisoners


Come, Madam, turn up your head, and let us see your face very well! What is
your employment


Prithee Merry, be not impertiennt, what should a pretty Woman's employment be?
Let me speak to her; Come, Madam! fear nothing if you tell Truth: Are you a
Park, Playhouse, or Street-plyer? Do you Live upon Industry, or are you kept


I am kept, Sir.


What makes you out at this time of Night?

This may be my own case.


I am kept by one that allows me but forty shillings a week, and makes at least
ten Guinneys of me; for he bargained I should admit any Friend of his, and he
brings almost every day a new one, and sometimes two or three, with whom he
keeps so good Intelligence, that whatsoever they give me, I can never sink a
single shilling for Coach-hire; he sometimes lets me out too, as it happened
this Night, to a Country Parson, whose Land-lady suspecting the matter, and
Jealous of losing any thing her self, turned me out of doors without a penny of
Money, so I fell into the Watches hands, and I hope, since you seem a civil
Gentleman, you will redeem me, for it will be very injurious to my Honor to go
to the Round-house


Thy Honor shall be as safe as a Thief in a Mill, never fear it; Come, Madam!
Your Quality


My business lies altogether in the City, Sir; for I find them the best
Customers


But how struck you into that Trade?


Truly, by mere chance, Sir; for sitting one day in Masque at the Playhouse,
in the middle Gallery, some Clerks began to talk wildly to me, till an Ancient,
Grave Man, who proved since to be a Packer to Merchants, rebuked them, and
said, their Discourse was sinful; then giving me a tread on the Toe, and a
pinch on my Arm, went out; I followed him, hoping he would prove lucky, and so he
did, for besides his own bounty, he has brought me acquainted with so many
Rich Citizens, that I have more work then I can turn to, though I confess they
being most Old, I have dispatched half a score sometimes in a day


But after your abundance of Trading at that, how came you to this end of the
Town


Truly, Sir, I Love a Young Gentleman that I keep, whom I came to see, and
having given him all the money I had, I was going back to turn the penny


A very honest, industrious Woman this, she shall have no harm: Come, let us
see, what is your business


You shall not see my Face, I Will go to Prison sooner:


Ay, ay, she is a stubborn Jade, and called me Cuckold.


And so you are one, to use poor Women thus: Mr. Town-love, let me speak with
you -- It Is I --


Truly, Mr. Last, I think she speaks to the purpose in calling of you Cuckold,
for this usage she shall not show her Face. Will Merry, it is his Wife


The Devil it is; 'twas lucky then we met, or how would she have got off.


She Would have said it was to watch his haunts she came abroad, or some such thing
-- she would have tamed him quickly, for it is a very Devil of her Tongue, and
Cuckolds him almost before his Face


Well, who are you?


A very good Gentlewoman both born and bred; I am a Presbyterian Ministers
Daughter


A substantial Title to Gentility, who will say after this the Crown is the
Fountain of Honor, when they that pulled it down can make Gentlewomen


It Is possible her own Employment does mote entitle her to it, therefore let us
know that


Sir, I have had a great mind to be a Player, and have offered my self to both
Houses, and truly most of the sharers have had me severally at their Chambers
to try me, and they all say, I do very well; but it is the Envy of the Women
already there, that fearing I should outdo them, keep me out, as I was told by
two or three of the hired men of the Duke's House, with whom I have been to
Night, and spent all my money, but I do not doubt to find Friends to bring it
about, for there are two or three Persons of Quality have undertaken it


Nay, then there is no fear of succeeding.


No, I hope not; alas, I desire little or nothing for my pains, I would only
show my self on the Stage, and then, perhaps, I may get a good Husband, or at
least, some Fool that will keep me


Honest good Women all; and are not you hard-hearted to disturb the Lawful
endeavors of such well-minded People, Mr. Constable -- Well, there are
Resolutions taken by some Gentlemen of my Acquaintance to make you keep closer
to your Lawful business -- which is indeed to cry Fire, prevent House-breaking,
and snore on Stalls according to your primitive institution, and not to set to
Ransom, or Imprison People industriously improving the two great works of
Whoring and Drinking. War is declared, and shall be carried on against all the
Obstructions of Trade, as you shall hear in a Song lately published, in which
all must bear their parts

1. THe Trade of wine is much decayed of late;
The Vintners complain, and the Customs abate,
For Pickaroon Bill-man in every Street,
Like Capers make prize of all Traders they meet.
2. Come then, it is time to scowr along the Coast;
To re-take good Fellows, who else may be lost:
'I is Lawful those Foes to invade,
Who rob us of Honor, and hinder our Trade;
And a damned Zealous Constable 'midst of his Watchmen
Does Trading more harm, then a Squadron of Dutchmen;
1. Weigh Anchor then, and hoist up Sail;
Nore and by West it blows a merry Gale.
2. The Glass is run, ho, star-board, Watch, turn out;
Hark, did you hear, that Gun was from a Scout.
Run to the top,
3. Hey Boys, I see a Fleet,
They bear hard up to us; we quickly shall meet.
1. All hands to prayers, and make ready to fight,
2. You need not, their Flags are all white;
That Color denotes them for Wine or a Wench;
All Half-shirts are for us, as sure as the French.
They hale our Scouts, methinks I hear them call,
1. Whence your Fleet?
3. From White Hall.
1. Whence your Fleet?
3. From White Hall.
1. We are Friends to them, then cry, Huzza.
2. Once again, Huzza.
1. And again, Huzza.
3. They are Friends to us, then cry, Huzza.
3. Once again, Huzza.
3. Once again, Huzza.
4. And again, Huzza, huzza, huzza.
Now we are all met, let us draw into a Line;
Charge every man his Glass of Wine,
It Is our Royal high Admirals Health,
Whilst we drink all Night,
He does Hero-like Fight,
To rescue the Kingdoms Honor and Wealth.
Let Trumpets sound, and all at once give Fire,
If the Enemy comes, we will soon make them Retire.
1. Let Us Charge them again, for a Health to the King.
2. They come, they come, their Bell-man does Ring.
3. Their Caps, Staves, and Lanthorns I spy,
They Have horns in their Flags, and they bear them on high.
4. Fall on then, fall on, tan tara rara, etc.
1. They fly, they fly.
2. Then give a Broadside, and cry, Vive le Roy, Vive le Roy.
2. Give the Broadside, etc.

Now these four Gentlewomen will make our Dance the better.


Come, to every Lady a Link and a Watchman for safeguard to their Lodgings.


Except me, Sir, mine is not far off.


It Is true, you shall only have one of my Links; Mr. Constable, no more
Prisoners to Night, as you tender my good Grace; and there is a Crown to Drink


We Will know no other Justice hereafter but your, Sir.


Now every one to their several abidings, and we for the Rose, sound a Charge,
and let us assault the place


COme, come, Sir, these are no Jesting matters, I Will not be cheated of all my
Money thus


How do you mean cheated, Mr. Ruffle?


How do I mean? Did I not find a Dye with all Sinks, and others of the like
Nature


I love you for that, In Faith, Mr. Ruffle, I hope you don't take me for a Cully.


Nor shall you make me one, if I can help it, and therefore, say, was there not
such Dice here? we will find afterward who brought them in


I saw no such Dice, not I.


Nor I, I Will assure you.


Hey day, here is fine Rogues; Drawer, did not you see the Dice I speak of?


No, Sir, not I; it is true, I heard you say some such thing, but I could not
believe Gentlemen would put false Dice upon one another


No, but Cheats will.


How do you mean, Sir, I say? Cheat again! war the third time, Mr. Ruffle.


I say, this Gentleman and I are Cheated, and by you, that is plain, and if
he will be ruled by me, you shan'not carry it off so


I can endure no longer: Come, come, come, draw, raw, Sir, for I will have
satisfaction for this abuse


I Will bear no witness.


Are you for that sport?
We Will swinge you:
Do you think to carry it off so?
This is brave in faith.
First, Cheated, and then Hectored;
Suffer this, and suffer all.
Come, Sir, why don't you prepare? Do you see how he braves us?


What do you mean, Sir?


We Will beat him, take out money again, and then have him tossed in a Blanket.


I shall not stain my Honor in being two against one.


I am cross bit I see.

Nay, I can as well spare what I lost, as you can yours, and it shall never be
said, I fought to recover another money, that would do nothing for it himself;
give me your hand, Mr. Fullam, I am very glad 'twas your Fortune to get it,
since it is mine to lose it


This is but trivial satisfaction, Sir, for the abuses you have put upon me.


Hanged, Man, Passion, mere Passion; give losers leave to speak, I would take
twice as much for half the money, and I think I value my Honor as much as
another (if I can but get off with Credit now.


Well, Sir, I think you speak Reason, therefore, pay the Reckoning, and we are
Friends


How do you mean, Mr. Fullam? Have not you got all the money?


And will keep it, Sir; therefore resolve to pay the Reckoning, or --


Plague on it, I never value three or four pounds; and it may be thou have
particular occasion for this sum of money at present, then we will never stand
upon small matters, I Will do it. But for you, Sir, I Will talk with you for your
Highs and Lows


Very pretty, in faith, a well framed Dialogue: Good Mr. Ruffle, it is too plain;
do you think your counterfeit Quatrels shall carry it off so? I shall stand by,
and see my self cheated of my meney, and take it kindly I have lost it, because
you can Rally one another


What do you mean by this, Sir?


Sir, you are a stranger to me, and I cannot blame you for what you have done;
but to be set and bubled by Mr. Ruffle, on pretense of Friendship, is
unsufferable


What the Devil, is not one kicking enough for you in one Night? Must I be
bound to wear out my shoes upon you


Come, come, Sir, I know when to take a kicking, and when not. I bore with it
then, in hopes you would have so managed the Dice I lent you, as to have won
money for me, but on the contrary, you placed them upon our selves: therefore,
Sir, refund, refund, I Will not lose a groat of the money I lost


But sure you don't hope to carry it off so: Have I any of your money?


But your Friend has for your use, and I Will look no further then your self for
it; therefore, my money, or Draw


Before Heaven this is pretty; then it seems you both designed upon me.


Come, Sir, will you repay me?


Mr. Ruffle, here is a great many Gentlemen with Fiddles, hearing you were
here, are resov'd to come up to you


What shall I do? Gentlemen, step into another Room, I Will come and give you
full satisfaction presently


Well, Sir, I am content to wait a little.


The Devils in my luck, I never get a little Reputation by beating a Man, but
presently some body or other huffs me out of it again, and then all my Honor
flies in Fumo. It Is true, I am a Coward, but no body need e're a known it but
my self, if I had not a foolish desire to be thought valiant, and so must still
be picking Quarrels with all I think like my self. And I gad, it is not once in
twenty times, but I miss my Man and get a beating


What, Ruffle alone in a Tavern at four in a Morning, that is a thing I never
was guilty of


Come, come, Table and Chairs.


Faith, Will Merry, to tell thee the truth, I have been bubling a couple of
Culleys to Night, and the poor things having lost all their money are staying
for more in another Room


Faith, that does not use to be thy way, for I have known thee ostner a Bublee
then a Bubler


That Is true, but when I grant out my Letters of Mart to my Highs and Lows,
there is no Man sooner takes in reprisal then I; and In Faith, they have been all
at work to Night


What have you won?


Let me see; fifty Guinneys, three pounds in silver, and twenty Guinneys more
they borrowed of the Master of the House


And did they not smoke you, as their term is?


Yes, a little; but one of them beginning to prate, I kicked him soundly.


Thou Boy; now I believe nothing of the whole matter: Thou venture to kick a
Man, it is impossible


Why, this it is, because I am a little complisant sometimes, and put up
injuries from Gentlemen, therefore, you, it seems, have mean thoughts of me,
but you shall hear; come hither, Stephen


Your pleasure, Sir.


Did not you see me kick a Gentleman soundly to Night for talking to me of
Cheating


Yes, Sir, I Will assure you, I was afraid you would hurt him.


And was not there twenty Guinneys borrowed of your Master?


Yes, Sir; and five of me.


That Is true (go thy ways) law you now, I had forgot that five Guinneys.


Miracles, Miracles, Miracles, give us Wine there; Miracles are not ceast:
Here Is a Health to Ruffle's Conversion, Townlove; thou shall pledge this, if
thou never drink'st more


Faith, Sir, you must pardon me, if I don't know some great cause for it.


Thy Ear.


Come, Gentlemen, you know he is a merry Man every way, let him have his
frolic: La, la, la, la, la, Sir, my Service to you, Will Merry's Health


Sir, I drink no Wine.


Damme, not pledge me, Sir, before Heaven but you must, or I shall throw it in
your face


Good Sir, be not rude, the Gentleman has our word to excuse him.


If he has your word, let him pass it. la, la, la, la.


Sir, I commend it to you.


I never drink by Commendations, Sir.


Well done, Boy; here is another milk-sop: What, cannot he drink neither?


Yes, Sir, or any thing else with you that you dare.


Before Heaven a Lad of mettle; give me thy hand: Here Is a health to all that
dare, and a fig for men that dare not do any thing


Sir, I Will pledge it.


Some Wine, there; give every one of the Music a glass in his hand


Mr. Ruffle, I congratulate the change, and if I have any interest in my Lady
Turnup, she shall be yours, since the only obstacle is removed


Faith, Mr. Townlove, you see men will show themselves such one time or other.
Alas, the stoutest Bully Rock of them all never went to single Rapier in
swaddling Clothes, they had all a time to begin: La, la, la, la


You are in the right, Mr. Ruffle; come, the Catch.

1. BOy, bring a Glass without marks, to confine
The Ebbs and the Floods of our Drinking;
Our Cups shall be heaped with a full-tide of Wine,
Till our Tongues do speak wit without thinking.
2. We will with Wines, Aetherial fire,
Like subtle Chemists, Bodies change;
That without words each man's desire
Shall through the others fancy range.
1. Wine shall wash off our Earthly parts,
And to new Creatures mold us;
2. We Will take off our Bouls,
Till we mingle our Souls,
And the World grows too little to hold us.
We Will, etc.
1. All hands to work then, time slides away,
Night chides our sloth, and hastens on the day;
2. Then the Sun will bring heat
For our Limbeck so high,
And make our Elixar in fumo to fly.
1. Hark, do you hear, the Men cry Chimney sweep;
Fanatic Wives will now no longer sleep;
Strange Dreams of Religion have waked them by this:
In heat of their zeal
They Will presently rail
At every thing is, and is not amiss.
2. Be sure if they see us, of Custom they will say,
We turn Day into Night, and Night into Day;
1. In this they are right;
We'd turn Day into Night;
But they lie, if they say,
That we would e're wish to turn Night into Day.
In this, etc.

Bravely done, Boys; now to a little silent drinking: Townlove, you keep a good
man from us


I Will release him presently.

Faith, Sir, you see I have opened my heart to you, in hopes to make you my
Friend, for there is something in your face pleases me extremely


I am obliged to you by it, and shall as much seek to deserve it; but methinks
three hundred pounds a year is considerable to allow you Mistress, if you pay
it constantly


I never fail you may be sure, whosoever stays, she must not. A dun between a
pair of Sheets makes a man more impotent then a Witches tying of a Country
Fellows Cod-piece-point


Well, Sir, for my own part, I never understood the pleasure of keeping Misses,
I Am for othermens, if for any


I believe your Friend is not of your mind; he, I perceive by his refusing to
drink, is for his Miss; can you let me know who she is


Truly, Sir, I know of none he has, he is Young, and rather talks of Marriage
then Misses


Why, there is the mischief on 't; he is new come from the University, or I Will be
hanged; there is more of our hopeful Youth spoiled by Schools and Universities
then is imaginable; they learn nothing but to tread the dull paths of our
Forefathers, to bury themselves alive in Marriage-Beds, to arise Monsters with
huge Horns on their heads; if you have any kindness for him reclaim him from
such a design


I have used my endeavors, and find him a little inclining to be kind to one
Rose, that waits on Mr. Muchland's Sister


Gad, Sir, I had rather he had a mind to be kind, as you call it, to my Sister,
and sooner should forgive him for i


Why, Sir, what is she to you?


She Is one I have a mind to, and am resolved if three hundred pounds a Year
will tempt her, she shall be mine; provided, he, nor no other smock-fac'd
Fellow has been Quartered upon her before hand


How'l you know that, if it is so?


P'shaw, never ask questions of an Old Gamester; and I Am resolved, since my
present Miss is to be married, I Will pursue my design upon Rose, to prevent yon
smock-fac'd Fellow, of whom I have dreadful apprehensions


Well, Sir, trouble not your self, I Will take care he shall remove his Siege.


Townlove, thou think we have nothing else to do but to talk; release our
man there, that you have taken Prisoner by the Ears


Well, take him, but it is a thousand pities he should be spoiled by you.


I Will warrant you, Sir, I am past their spoiling.


Gentlemen, I have performed my word with you; and so farewell.


Farewell; you have returned us a better man for our present purpose.


Sir, you're in a rear, and since you allow drinking to be your profession, you
must balance Accounts, and pay down what you owe


I Will assure you, Sir, I am but just begun to be a professor in the Mystery,
therefore, if you call for Debs too soon, you will break me, and I shall never be
able to follow the Trade, then let us now go on, I Will run in a rear no further,
and the next time I meet you I Will balance Accounts


Come, the Gentleman says well, it is not our business to be drunk, but to be
merry; therefore, let us not break Methods at the present for any thing past


But, Mr. Muchland, by your leave I desire no man to be a sober observer of my
drunken behavior, therefore, if he and his Friend will not drink equally, I
should be glad of their rooms


Sir, as I take it, it was your own fault you had our Companies, and the terms
we met on were agreed to before


Not by me, I Am sure.


Nor by me, therefore if you will not drink, turn out of the Company.


Sir, I must tell you this is rude, and no ways becoming a Gentleman.


How, Sir, what is that, Rude? La, la, la.


It Is strange to see how men can see others faults, and be blind to their own;
you tell Mr. Ruffle he is Rude for speaking in his own Room, into which you
intrude to control him


Alas, alas, the Gentleman's lately come out of the Country, he does not
understand good breeding; la, la, la, poor thing


Mr. Rash, I can take more from you; but --


But what; out with it, I Am your man, never look at him, and I must again tell
you, that I believe you want good manners so to control; here I say, these
Gentlemen shall drink, or quit the Room


And will, Sir, no fear; we do not at all hold our selves obliged by Quarrelsom
Company: Drawer, what is to pay


Gentlemen, nothing for you; I am sorry to have engaged you thus
inconveniently, I Will assure you it is rare for me to see these things,
especially amongst Friends


We thank you, Sir, and all others from whom we have received Civility.


Damme, what is that, Civility? They deserve to be kicked.


What, by you?


I, by him; and it is not you can hinder it.


No, by Heavens is it not, nor two such, dear heart.


Sir, if I should tell you you lie, I Am afraid Mr. Rash would call me rude, but
I cannot forbear thinking so


Sir, you provoke me to tell you, you're fit Company for Dogs and Horses, and
not for men, except it is your own Grooms, over whom you had best go and
domineer in the Country


Sir, you know my Obligations, or else --


Or else what?


Or else what? Poor thing: Or else what prithee? La, la, la.


Or else that.


Damme, Blood, that; death and wounds, let me alone, nothing shall save him.


Gad, Sir, be as Valiant as you will, I Will swinge you if you be not quiet.


Mr. Ruffle, the affront was meant to me; be quiet, Sir, we desire no Quarrels
here, and therefore you or I will quit the Room


You pretend a right to it by the interest of your huffing Friend, therefore
I Will quit it, And the World too, rather then take this


-- Sir, I Will see you at Home presently. Mr. Ruffle, have you no body to
Exercise your setting out toward Valor upon but my Friends


Friend me no Friends, I know no Friends in point of Honor, that is it I Will
stick to


Then I must tell you, Sir, you and I must not part before I carry my Friend
satisfaction in your Blood, or lose my own


Will Merry, thou pretend'st to be a man of Honor, and place these things upon
me, it is very well, In Faith, thou think now that I am not Valiant, and
therefore pick'st a Quarrel, but it shannot pass, no, it shannot, for do what
thou will, I will not fight with thee


Then thou art a Coward still, as rank a one as ever, and I lose time to talk
to thee


Ay, think so, do; I a Coward, it is likely, dear heart.


Mr. Rash, I hope to see you and Mr. Muchland Friends soon.


I shall take little thought about it, so let us part; Good Morrow, Mr. Ruffle.


I, good Morrow; Huff me -- Good Morrow, Mr. Merry, la, la, la, huff me.


Never tell me on it, I Am confident some unlucky thing will happen, for I never
perceived my Brother more angry in my Life; I wish we had not gone


I am rather glad we were there; for, knowing of the Quarrel, we can take care
to prevent the effects of it


But we were the occasions of it, you know.


Faith, Madam, I think not, for Mr. Rash was in such'a Quarrelsom humor, and
that vapouring Gentleman did so push it on, that I am confident had not we been
there the same thing would have happened


Who Is there?


within. Sister, I would speak with you.


Immediately. It Is my Brother, what shall we do?


I Will stepped into the Closet, and hearken, and then go down the back-stairs.


Sister, since I left you, I have had more cause to consider the consequence of
your marrying Mr. Merry then ever I had before, therefore I desire to know what
thoughts you have of him


Truly, Brother, I cannot pretend an aversion to a Gentleman you commanded me
to favor as your Friend, and one you designed I should marry, though further I
am no ways engaged


I am glad to see your indifferency, for by this morning's work I find you can
no ways hope for that happiness I once thought you might expect in being his;
the Company he keeps is bad, and the consequences will attend it must be worse,
therefore admit of no further addresses from him, which the better to prevent,
you shall toward Yorkshire to morrow


To morrow, Sir?


If so, it is time for me to bestir my self.


I, Sister, 'twill save you some blushes for so abrupt a breaking with him, and
I have hopes to live to give you full satisfaction for this change, and to
bestow you on one may more deserve you


The manner of your Discourse does much surprise me, and seems very mysterious;
I hope there is no cause those hopes you speak of should prove doubtful ones


Sister, I cannot tell, but I desire, let things go how they will, that you would
prepare your self for all may happen


Sir, a Gentleman without desires to speak with you.


Admit him in.


Sir, your Noble proceedings in so Generously defending strangers has bound me
for ever to your Service. And fearing lest your Generosity has too far engaged
you in our behalfs, I am come to offer you the assistance of my Sword, thinking
I should but ill become the wearing it, if any other should be drawn, and not
it in my own Quarrel


Sir, you are truly Noble, and I have just occasion to give thanks to that
unlucky Accident, since it produced me the Acquaintance of so worthy a Person


Sir, your own demeanor is enough to inspire worth into a Person that
Naturally wants it, and if I have any, I shall impute it to the Example I
received this day from you; but to avoid Complements, of which I am a bad
returner, I beg you would employ me


Sir, if I do, it shall be in an Office in which there shall on your part, be
no hazard: Sister, I desire you would entertain this Gentleman, whilst I step
into your Closet to write a Letter


Madam, you can no ways believe the great Obligations I have received this day
from your Noble Brother

But, Madam, not to lose time, I will so mix my self amongst them, it shall be
impossible, but I Will prevent all mischief


I, but the Country, and to leave Mr. Merry, Rose, I am grown desperate with
the thoughts of it


Prepare your self to go abroad, and leave the rest to me.

Madam, I dare assure your Lady-ship it is no such matter; and upon my Honor,
there is no man in the World shall be more careful of Mr. Muchland's safety,
then my self


You seem a Gentleman to be relied on.

But, Rose, if Mr. Merry should be concerned in the Quarrel after our leaving
them, what then


I Will warrant you, Madam, as I Will contrive the matter, he shall be better
Friends with Mr. Merry, then ever

For truly, Madam, I observed nothing but a little heat about mine, and my
Friends Intrution, that was all; and --


Sir, I desire you to deliver this Paper for me where it is directed; I beg your
pardon for it is being Sealed, since it is rather to rectify some mistakes
between that Gentleman and I, then to pursue them further, though, I confess,
if he continues his resentments, I had rather you were witness of them then any
other Person wholly a stranger to their first beginnings


Sir, I am proud that you are pleased to employ me any way: Your Lady-ships
Servant


But dear Brother, let me beg you, if any thing has happened between Mr. Merry
and you, that causes this sudden avertion, let me know it, that I may with
Justice root out of my mind that little esteem your Friendship to him, and his
merit has planted there


There is nothing, upon my word, Sister, but my consideration of this happiness
has begot the change I have expressed


Sir, here is a Letter, a Porter brought, he says, from the Rose Tavern.

SIR, THE Injuries I received from you are unsupportable, nor can a man of
Honor, as I profess, and shall ever testify my self to be, put them up;
therefore, I desire you would meet me singly with your Sword in your hand, at
the lower side of Hide-Park, at six this morning, where I doubt not to make you
know what it is to Injure the Valiant, and place abuses upon the Worthy, in the
first Rank of which I shall always be ambitious, to have the Name subscribed o

Ruffle.

It Is damned unlucky this, I wish I had not sent my Letter to be Challenged to
the same place whither I desired Mr. Sharp to come; but stay, six of the Clock,
this is an hour sooner then I appointed, that is well; for if I be killed by
this first, I shall dye the more contentedly, in not having fought my
Mistresses Brother, and if I survive, I shall be in a condition to make good my
word to him. Sister, prepare for your Journey, and if you have any kindness for
your self, think not on Mr. Merry


Not think of him, that is impossible; should my Father's Soul rise from the
Grave, and bid me to forget him, I could not do it. No, Brother, his worth has
placed him here too fast to be by small dislikes of yours removed


Gentlemen, you have had your design upon me, what would you more? We all know
one another too. I believe that is not to place approbrious Names upon our own
Qualities. I take you two to be men that will live, if Dice and Cards will do
it; and I am confident you take me to be one that have no mind to leave a
thousand pounds a Year before. I must needs, and therefore am something
backwards in fighting matters


To speak the truth, Mr. Ruffle, I believe you.


And I.


Now I dare swear, if you would confess, there is neither of you love fighting
any more then I do


I Will assure you, Sir, my Reputation was never questioned.


That I believe, for like the subtle Squirrel, you foresee where the Wind will
be, and change your Nest accordingly; but I have a plaguey damned humor of
desiring to be thought Valiant, which makes me provoke the beatings, I else
might go without


Then you deserve them, Mr. Ruffle; but I am so wise, never to regard a beating
I get by


Well, Gentlemen, to continue the good correspondence our mutual knowing one
another has begun, I have a business to employ you in, which you effecting
dexterously, will deserve I should make the sum you have got from me already, a
complete hundred pounds


Name it, Mr. Ruffle.


And doubt us not.


I have sent a Challenge to Mr. Muchland, who, I fear, will meet me: Now, if
you two will watch him into the Field


And kill him for you, you will give us twenty pounds.


A very modest request to begin Friendship with.


Troth, Sir, I have no mind to sing doleful Ditties through a slip knot, not I.


Nor have I any ambition to attain the Title of a proper Gentleman, as I Ride
in Triumph on a two wheeled Chariot


No, Sir, as long as the Town is full of Gallants like you, that dare venture
their thousands against our nothings, we shall not be so distressed, as to turn
Bravoes


Gentlemen, you run on apace, but it is all upon a false scent; why, I never
desired the Death of any Man in my Life, and wonder at those they call Men of
true Honor, that make no more of killing a Man for refusing a Health, then I
do to eat my Breakfast: Yet, since the Town praises these hare-brains as Men
of worth, I have a huge ambition to be thought one of them, so I could but
obtain it without the danger of my self or Antagonist


Nay, if your design be bounded within the compass of human safety, I Am for you.


And ten pounds shall never be slighted by me, coming with the hazard only of
a walk into the Fields


Then Gentlemen, as I said, dog him thither, and when we are both drawn, appear
as taking his part against me, place it upon him, as if he had hired you; thus
our Quarrel will end, and you shall have your money


If this be all, come away, we are agreed, I warrant you.


But carry it discreetly.


Never, never fear us; alone, alone, alone, come.


SIster, I protest his behavior was unsupportable, he took upon him, as if he
had had a right to domineer over the whole Company


It Is strange, I never observed his tempet much to incline to Pride.


Not before you, but these Country Gentlemen are so used to control by the
virtue of being Justices, that what with their positiveness on one side, and
their want of Breeding on the other, a Man had as good keep Company with a
Constable in midst of his Bill-men, as with one of them


Sir, I am come to wait on you, a thing I should not have omitted on my own
account, though I now am here but as a Messenger

Madam, I beg your Ladyship's pardon for my interruption. Take that.


What should this be? But I perceive it requires secrecy.


Sir, I Will assure you for some reasons, I had rather you had been the sender
then the bringer of this Letter, but however I shall perform it is Contents at
the hour appointed


Sir, I hope I am concerned more then barely as a Letter Carrier, and since I
know the most material business of it, I desire you would satisfy my further
Curiosity, I yet believing it is intended I should make one at the meeting


Not at all, I Will assure you, Sir.


It Is strange, but I shall inquire the cause of it elsewhere. Your Ladyships
most humble Servant


What Paper's this? For Mrs. Elizabeth Rash.

MAdam, the Letter I delivered your Brother contains a Challenge to meet a
Gentleman in Hide Park this Morning at eight of the Clock, I confess I must
needs appear Treacherous, as well for opening the Letter, as for betraying the
business, but when you shall know the true motives that made me do both, I am
confident you will not only absolve me, but allow a place in your esteem for
one who does all he can to preserve to you two friends; the loss of either of
which would be a perpetual trouble to you, and real grief to your unknow

Servant.

This requires care and Expedition to prevent, for the other Friend he means
can be none but Mr. Muchland, I Will make a Visit to his Sister, and enquire out
the matter


Sir, you are well met; I was going to your Lodging to look for you.


Troth, Sir, I am sorry I am prevented the happiness of meeting you there, we
would have cracked a Bottle e're we had parted


It troubles me a little that I must tell you my business would scarce have
provoked Drinking


But, Sir, let your business have been what it would, we would have drunk upon
it: For if it had been good, 'twould have deserved a Bottle; and if bad, needed
one; and I tell you, Sir, I never saw any thing yet in my Life could put me
past consideration of a Bottle


Sir, the pleasantness of your temper, with your Civilities to me and my
Friend, makes me sorry to tell you I am a Messenger from a Gentleman, to invite
you with your Friend into the (...) at Nine this Morning, to meet him that sent
me, and my self; I need not name on what score


No, no, it is to Fence for a Breakfast of Honor, I guess the business well;
let him be whom he will, he shall not fail of my Company, though I confess it
seems very odd to be invited to a Banquet of Man's flesh, without knowing a
cause for the Treat. Pray Sir, the Name of this obliging Friend of mine


Muchland, Sir.


How! Marry now I find a kind of a Qualm coming over my stomach, which makes me
wish I could be excused on any terms, less then loss of Reputation; yet faith I
cannot believe but you mistake your Man, for I was just going to his Lodging to
take up a Quarrel I feared might proceed too far between him and another


No, Sir, if your Name be Merry, you are the Man. He imputes the
misunderstanding between his Mistresses Brother and him, to the Ill Company
you drew him into, and therefore is resolved his Sister shall into the Country
from you to Morrow; and and he will have satisfaction for the injuries he
received in the Tavern from none but your self


A Compendious cause for a Quarrel, and much as significant as most Duels now a
days are fought upon: He receives the abuses from others, and requires
satisfaction from me, God's Death, he might as well have placed it on the Vintner
for keeping the House, the Link-Boys for lighting him to it; or indeed on his
Horse that brought him his last Journey to Town, this Capriciousness of his
Temper with his design to take from me my Mistress makes me wish he was here to
begin presently. Where Is the place he designs for this dilicate Trial of Skill


In Hide-Park, Sir.


Well, Sir, I shall bring a Friend that has as much cause of malice to you as
this Man of Punctillioes has to me, and therefore if you have no more wit, you
may fight too


Sir, I am not afraid to say I shall scarce be idle when I see you once engaged.


My dear Townlove, thou art the goodest Rogue for not Drinking, I could even
bite thee to pieces for it. But faith I Will tell Mr. Merry on it soundly when I
see him for keeping thee up all Night; come, prithee, shall we to Bed


I presently; but first you shall sing me the new Scotch Song.


No, prithee don't; I am so hoarse with sitting up for thee, that I shall never
make any Music of it now, and I do so long to be in Bed, dear Townlove come,
let us go


I must have my Song first, time enough for Bed, we will not Rise till Dinner
time, and that shall not be ready till three, that we may have time to go to the
Play


And will you stay with me after the Play, and engage with no Body?


Come, my Song, and I will not.

WIllie was so blithe a Lad,
Nene like was in the Town;
At Wake and Wassel Willie had
For Dancing chief Renown.
He picked the Bar, and hurled a stean,
Nea Man would him out-gang;
And if he strave with any ean,
He guard them lig alang.
But Willie needs would Wedded be,
He liked so we will a Lass
That bonny was, and full of glee,
And mickle all did pass.
Yet Willie was no sooner Wed,
But he full sear did pine;
He crossed his Arms, hanged down his Head,
And still had watery Eyne.
Ah, wea is me, would Willie say,
That I am thus forlorn;
I now can neither Dance nor Play,
Nor ought but wind a Horn.
The Lads and Lasses all do laugh,
And scorn me as I gang;
They do me all a Cuckold knowgh,
And gibe me with this Sang.
Willie soon must gang to work,
Or Noone scodes him sear;
Mass Johnne e're he wends to Kirk
Mun con a point we her.
Then Jocky, Sawny, Hugh, and Kit,
Ralph, Wat, and many mere,
Gang when they please, and take a bit,
Whilst Willie keeps the Whore.

Madam, here is Mr. Ruffle will not be satisfied without he can speak with you;
I told him you were asleep, he said, I must wake you, for it may be it is the
last time he shall trouble you


What does the Coxcomb mean, to trouble me thus early? Tell him I value my
Honor more, then to admit of a Man's Visit at this time of Day; and say, I
wonder at his Insolence: Tell him any thing, rather then let him come up to
disturb my dear Townlove and I now


I Will hanged if the Fool has not run himself into some Quarrel last Night, and
now comes to boast of his Valor; Will Merry was talking something of it to me,
but I scarce regarded what I did not believe


What a pox is his Valor to me?


But his thousand pounds a year is; don't slight that.


I, Townlove, you are weary of me, or else you would never put me upon Marrying
that Fool


Don't you prove your self a worse, in refusing such a Fortune; you know my
Estate is entailed upon my Younger Brother, then should I dye, what would you
do for a maintenance? Besides, cannot I Visit you then as I do now


But will you, dear Townlove?


Madam, he will not be satisfied without seeing you; he says, he had rather be
so unhappy to dye in your displeasure, then without taking his leave; I think
he is mad, for he talks of nothing but Honor, Death, Victory, and the like


Go, bring him up; Townlove, step into the Closet, we will see what his mighty
concerns are


Mr. Rufflle, I Will assure you your proceedings, in forcing your self thus into
my Chamber, has given me high dissatisfaction; you use me like one of the
common things of the Town, that admit of Visits in their Beds; but I Will assure
you I am none of those: My Honor is dearer to me then my Life, and I Will not
hazard the loss of my Reputation for the satisfaction of any Person Living


It cannot be helped, Madam, the Case is altered -- I am not the Man you think me
-- no -- The World's changed -- Tempore Mutantur --


The World's changed indeed; you have not dared to use me in this slight manner
formerly, therefore, good Sir, your business quickly, that you may be gone, and
never see my face more


There Is it, you will prove a true Prophetess I fear; but hanged, it is no matter,
a Man must dye, and as good at first as at last. Honor; I, there is it, to dye,
and lie in the Bed of Honor; who would desire more


Good Sir, be careful of my Honor, and if your business be only to disturb me,
I command your speedy absence


Command your Maids absence, I shall tell you all.


My Maid! Heavens forbid! A Man in the Room, and my Maid go out, not for the
World! I believe you have some design upon me, and have set your Companions to
watch their opportunity to enter when no body's here but us, so to force me to
Marry you for safety of my Reputation; but I Will assure you I shall be more
cautious


Madam, your fears are vain -- I adore you -- And I dare tell you, I merit you
now -- since I am Valiant. You said, you found my want of Valor the greatest
bar to my happiness. Alas, alas, Madam, Cowardice was A humor I only put on
for a time; but you shall hear suddenly such things -- la, la, la, -- will you
let your Maid withdraw? Upon my Honor, and by my budding Glory, I have no
design, but to let you know I merit you -- I merit you, that is a bold word, I
gad, but I dare say it, la, la, la


Peg, go down, but be sure to be within hearing, should I call.

Sir, you see what hazzards I run to give you satisfaction; I Am afraid you will
Interpret this to too much inclination in me, and I would not that for the
World


Madam, you need not fear censure for your favoring me, I tell you I deserve
it, for I am Valiant. You know Townlove, don't you


Yes, Sir, what then?


A very brave Fellow that -- And Will Merry too; I have seen them both Visit you
-- And brave Fellows both; by Heavens, Madam, they are, as any walks the
streets


I never heard otherways: But what then?


What then? I say, damme, blood, should any Bully Rock of them all but say, or
think Townlove or Merry are not as brave Men as Live, I would send the lie down
their Throats with my double fists, that I would; Townlove or Merry not brave!
I laugh at that, la, la, la


But good Sir, to the business.


Why, that is to the business, Madam, I tell you they are Gallant, Brave
Fellows, and they know one shall be nameless, that is my self, as brave as
either of them, ask them when you see them, how I swing'd a couple of Bullys last
Night; la, la, la. Ask them, I say, they will tell you how I dusted them about when
they were both drawn upon me at once; I feag'd them in faith, they both saw it;
two on them at a time, Madam, won their Money, made mere bubles of them, and when
I had done, kicked them, and turned them down stairs; la, la, la, at the Rose
Tavern: How like you that, Madam


Truly, Sir, I am glad you got no hurt, for I Love a Valiant Man and should be
sorry he should get hurt by his Courage. But, Sir, if this be all the business,
you might have staid telling it till after Dinner


All, Madam, it is not half; this is only what Townlove and Merry saw: All, all,
say you? Alas, alas, I am to Fight a Duel this Morning in Hide-Park, at six of
the Clock, with a Man as Valiant as twenty such as they, that is it: I tell you,
Madam, this is truth, and therefore, not knowing how Fate will dispose of this
Body, I come to assure you my Soul is yours, go where it will


I find I Am overcome by your worth, it must not be, do not Fight; you say your
Soul is mine, then do not take it from me, I will not let you Fight


Alas, Madam, it cannot be helped -- My Honor, my Honor, think of the that; la,
la, la, I tell you my Honor is dearer to me than my Life


Or mine either I see; O cruel Man, was it with design to kill me you came this
Morning? Alas, it is five a Clock already, and six, you says, the hour. Oh, do
not go, stay here with me, I Will say I locked you up


Madam, it is all in vain, your tears are all in vain; my Honor calls me forth,
if I be slain, as chance of War is doubtful, think sometimes of poor Ruffle


Ah, do not think of dying yet, do not go.


Honor, Madam, Honor; think of that: Farewell.


What the Devil does the Rogue mean? Not one word of all his beating of two Men
in our Company is true; he lay vapouring of his having kicked a Man, to Will
Merry, and he believed it, but could not persuade me to be of his Faith, though
I believe there may be something in the latter part of the Story


Let him be hanged, he is not worth concerning our selves about him, prithee
Dear, let us to Bed


Nay, I am confident he will secure himself from any danger but dry beating, or
kicking, and therefore he shall be no part of my care


Sir, Mr. Merry must speak with you.


Bid him come up; what is his business, I wonder?


Good Morrow, Madam. What, have not you been in Bed yet, Tow nlove? I see you
mighty mannagers of Misses, that seem so industrious and eager to be at them are
as long a getting into the Saddle when you have the Bridle in your hand, as Men
less professed in the vaulting Trade


Troth, Mr. Merry, I could chide you heartily for keeping Mr. Townlove out all
Night, when he had promised me he would come


Faith, you will have greater Reason to chide, when I must take him from you
presently: Come, prithee Townlove, dress, I have business with you, your Ear --


I wish, Mr. Merry, you were Married once, then I hope you will be tamed, and
let Mr. Townlove sleep in his Bed quietly


I Am sorry for it, I Will slip on my Coat; (help me, Peg,) and go with you.


Faith, Madam, I don't believe you wish his business should be to sleep quietly
in Bed


Troth, Sir, one good turn is, you scarce know what Women wish.


But, Will Merry, here has been Ruffle, and told such damned lies to Turnup of
his Valor, that you never heard the like; and quotes you and I for Vouchers


Dam him, for an unreclaimable Coward, he did nothing but huff when you were
gone, because Ned Rash seemed to take his part; and when I believing him
Valiant, would have took him to task, he proved the same sneaking thing he
always was


He tells me he is to fight this Morning at six.


Faith, may be he might mistake a Man, and give a Challenge, but I Will secure
him from fighting


There Is something comes in my Head; where are your Fiddles, Merry?


At the Rose I left them, and bid them stay for me.


Turnup, we will send them to you, and give them such Instructions, that it is ten to
one they shall play up your Wedding Dinner to Day


Faith, dear Townlove, I had rather Live as I do.


Gad, Girl, I like thee for this; refuse a thousand pounds a year for Love of
a Rascal, that will never Marry thee


I Love Mr. Townlove too well, to desire to Marry him, if he was such a Fool to
have me; now all our pleasures come freely, but when they once are our Duties,
'twou'd go so against the hair; no, I Will never marry a Man I Love


This is the prettiest sort of new Philosophy in Love; right Descartes, it
depends all upon motion. Why, what would Lucrece, Cornelie, and the rest of the
Ancient Husband Lovers say; did they see these days


Why, Merry, no doubt but they would be converted to Love for delight, and
Marry for convenience, as Turnup here shall do, therefore I charge you manage
your business so, as I may salute you the next time I see you, by the Name of
Ruffle


Well, Townlove, I did not think you would have left me so soon; but I will do
what you bid me, to show you that I can Love better than you in disposing of my
self, that you may get a new Mistress, for I know there is your aim


A gallant Trade, let me be hanged else.


Come, let us away.


Was e're so cross a mischief known? I Am confident Mr. Merry meant nothing but
mirth


'Twas that untimely mirth, to which we owe all this distraction; Curse on his
Revels, and may he be condemned never to take Rest that has by this Nights
waking, robbed me, I fear, of quiet during Life


Madam, methinks you are too passionate, and something like your Brother, to
whom in Justice you should impute all mischief that shall happen; for I Am sure
it was his only fault these Quarrels ris


It Is you are passionate, and blinded too by your concerns for Merry; he, I
say, who, could he keep his Bed, and leave his Fooling, would not be Author of
so many broyls his drunkenness must daily now occasion


This Language, Madam, better would beseem your Land-Lady, when in a high
concern for the other farthing Candle, she would rate your Footman for the evil
hours he keeps. To tax a Gentleman with Drunkenness, is proper for no mouth but
such a one as makes the loudest noise in crying Oysters


Oh, that we both were Men but for an hour, and all the Quarrel ours, though
bound to end it with our Lives


I cannot wish to leave the World so soon, since there is something in it I
must like, in spite of all detraction. But truly, Madam, I could hazard much
against the Sister of that Man I know attempts my Brother's Life


Your Brother (Oh, that I live to say it) caused that Quarrel, as you do this;
it was he that sent the Challenge


It Is likely then, he had occasion for it.


Oh, yes, occasion; he could not sure want that, since I Am his Mistress; one he
fain would break with, and wants a fit pretense; but sure he need not have gone
so far about, for I believe he never had mighty cause to think I doted


No, Madam, to deal freely, I Have observed your Pride still strugled with your
Inclination; yet had he not been blinded by his Passion, he might have seen
through all your scorns a likeing


Ill-temper'd Maid, thus to abuse my Patience: Oh, for two Swords, that Women,
though we are, we yet might try whether our feeble Arms were wholly wanting to
our Active spleens


Your wish so hearty seems, it would be pity you should not have it granted;
and I find your braves have so dispersed all fear in me, that I as much do long
to try this fighting, as you can seem to do; stay but a little, I soon can find
two Swords


Do It then, and if I don't soon make you feel the effects of Anger, though by
weakness backed, then let me be despised by all that Love me


Here are the Swords.


Come, give me one, I long to see it drawn.


Nay, stay, you shannot have the longest; there, take that.


Let me feel the point -- it is sharp, I warrant you I Will make it enter.


Enter where? I hope you do not mean to kill me.


Come, come, lets fight; what, Weapons in our hands, and spend our time in
talking


Hey day, what is here, two Women-Duellers? Some fighting Planet Reigns to day
sure: Ladies, it is very pretty, you that should be Active in making Peace
between your Brothers, are practicing the Art to be their Seconds. Methinks a
naked Weapon, with so sharp a point, is not very proper for your Ladyships
hand, pray let me take it from you


I beg your pardon, Sir, it is not so easy to take a Sword from me, as you
imagine


But I Will assure you, Lady, I must prevent all fighting, it is my business;
therefore relate the Quarrel, that I may make you Friends


No Relations, Sir; our Quarrels Love and Honor, that is enough.


Enough, say you? I, to set the whole World together by the Ears, or to make
them Friends again either: Love and Honor are the two great Wheels, on which
all business moves. The Tradesman Cheats you upon his Honor, and like a Lord
swears by that, but that he particularly loves you, you should not have it so.
No Tragedy, Comedy, Farse, Demi-Farse, or Song now adays, but is full of Love
and Honor: Your Coffe-drinking-Crop-ear'd-Little Banded-Secretary, that
pretends not to know more of Honor than it is Name, will out of abundance of
Love be still sighing and groaning for the Honor of the Nation. Nay, the Lady,
that for Impudence sake hides her Face behind a Vizzard, will protest in taking
the mollifying Guinney, that it is not that, but the confidence she has that
the Gallant will be careful of her Honor, and because she loves him, that
makes her bestow so considerable a Pox upon him: And therefore, Ladies, if Love
and Honor be the motive of your unusual Valor, it is ten to one you may do
wonders with your Weapons without going to Fencing Schools


Come, prithee, Rose, leave Fooling, and tell us in what posture our unlucky
affairs are, for I am more for that, then for fighting


Rose, said you?


Yes, the very same, at your Ladyships Service, though very unable, you will say,
to do much


Prithee, how comes this Disguise?


To play the part of a right Town Gallant, raise Quarrels, and then prevent
them by Discovery, this is the way most Men find to Honor now adays; the
Quarrel is begun with Son of a Whore, you Lie, or a box on the Ear, slight
matters, not able to provoke heat of Blood enough to fight presently, but the
formal Challenge must follow, the Seconds must confer, and the Swords be
measured in order to a meeting the next Morning in the Field; which none of the
four but thinks himself bound by the Religious Rules of self-preservation to
prevent, and therefore each whispers the matter to one of his best Friends at
least, and the Devil's in it, if none of them will find one that loves him so
well to rise a little earlier, to fetch a Guard to prevent all. And you must
think they are soon made Friends, their meek Dove-like Honor being safe


I never discovered talking to be the Crime of our Sex before: I thought it had
been a scandal placed upon us, but I see now it is true; for I never heard so
many words to so little purpose from one that wore a pair of Breeches in my
Life. Prithee, Rose, leave this talkative humor, and tell me how matters stand


Why, Ladies both, they stand as you would have them stand; therefore do but
prepare your selves to go whither I will conduct you, if you are not thoroughly
pleased with their standing before to Morrow Morning, let Rose be condemned
never to have to do with any thing within a pair of Breeches again


Well, Rose, I will believe it is thy Morning's draught makes thy Tongue run
thus wildly, pray heaven it be'nt before thy wit


No fears, Madam, though I must tell you Mr. Merry has received a Challenge
this morning as well as the rest


He Challenged! By whom, dear Rose, tell me.


No, I should talk too much, should I tell you; I will have a care of running
into that error again


Cruel Wench, to put me in a fright thus.


I am glad to see you punished with your fears for Merry's safety, methinks
through all your scorns, was he but hear, he might discern a liking


It Is true, I did deserve your Anger, Madam, for urging that of which my self
was guilty; but pardon me, I hope this falling out will but confirm our
Friendships


I doubt it not, if Rose makes good her word.


Why brave, in faith, you're Bully Rocks exactly, and know to the splinter of a
hair when to draw, and when to put up with Honor; Masquerading must needs go
on, when Women practice the substantial'st part of Man, that is drawing Naked
Weapons. But come, a Coach waits at the Door to convey you where you may have
opportunity to try your Courages a safer way, though I will not affirm without
Bloodshed


Thou art run stark mad, Rose.


And we, I fear, are as mad, to believe any thing she says.


But if you believe not me, go where you may trust your senses, I hope hearing
and seeing, or at least, the most excellent sense feeling will be trusted by
you


He is not come, I see; faith two to one he dares not: For I have seen many man
with as fighting a Face, and as apt to throw a Tobacco-pipe too, that has been
as backwards when matters have come to the push as men of easier fleam; I, gad,
I hope this will prove a lucky Adventure, but then I might have saved the money
I am to give Breef and Fullam for prevention; a plague on it, that we heartless
men cannot know one another by sympathy, it is true, by experience on my self, I
can give a pretty near guess, and therefore I never hear a man that is apt to
speak ill of others behind their backs under the Seal of secrecy, or that
enquires for men's Names that are Cowards, to report them so in all Companies
they come in, or that is always drawing a Sword, to talk of fancying a pass,
or that never sees a pale, young, or sickly Face, but he makes it red with
blushing at the abuses he puts upon it, or indeed one that seems always so big
with Valor, that by Hectoring, huffing, talking of Duels, and breaking Drawers
pates, does, as it were, cry out to be delivered of this Tympany of Courage --
S'blood, what is that comes yonder? By heavens my man -- And no sight of my
hirelings -- No where to get out of sight till they appear -- No, it is
impossible but he sees me: What the Devil shall I do -- I think I had best fall
to Queries about the Quarrel -- a way many a Young Gallant has prevented the
pinking his Doublet by -- Never stir, methinks the danger makes me think I
dare fight; I, gad, I Will do it; hang it, it is but dying, and that I must do at
last in spite of my teeth


Sir, I see your Anger has made you get the start, both of the hour and me;
it is hardly six


Your provocation made it seem so to me an hour agone -- and I do wonder --


Let Us not lose more time in talking then, the dispatch I intend with my Sword
shall make amends for the time you lost by staying


Sir, I Am ignorant who is your Tailor, and therefore might enquire with what he
lines your Clothes


You have reason, Sir, I think our Shirts an't proof.


I think we had best to strip then, not that I doubt your Honor, Sir.


That Is as you please, Sir, it must rely on proof.


Sure I dare fight -- the Spirit comes upon me: And this Gentleman seems so
careless of it, that I believe there is not that danger in sighting I once
thought -- but would the Rogues would come thought


Sir, are you ready?


Almost, Sir, a cursed Band-string hampers my Button so, I cannot undo't.


Shall I help you?


No, Sir -- Gad, they are coming --

I Have done it, come, Sir; but what two men are yonder?


Some to prevent us, I dare lay my Life, they run so fast; but let us make
haste, we may outdo their diligence


I hope we may.


Hold, Mr. Ruffle, you are a dead Man else.


Sir, we beg your pardon, we came no sooner to your Rescue.


But we are glad our Swords were not wholly prevented from serving you.


Gentlemen, what mean you to excuse your absence so long, since I could wish
the courtesy had still continued


We cannot blame you to be a little Angry, since we were not so diligent in
performing our words as we promised


What words? What promise? Gentlemen, I never saw you before in my Life, as I
know of


What, Sir, not at the Rose Tavern this morning, when we engaged our words to
do you Service against this Gentleman, as we are ready, then let us use no
time, for yonder is Company


Sir, give me leave to tell you, you are both Villains, that would contrive the
murder of my Honor, a thing much dearer to me than my Life; therefore, Sir, as
you are a Gentleman, join, but and drive these Rascals from our sight, or from
the World, and then we will fight in quiet


Your Dialogue is too mysterious, Sir, for me to mix with; therefore stand off,
if I Am ordained to dye now, none shall say I did not sell my Life at Honors
utmost rate, then do your worst, this Tree shall guard my Back, and this my
Face


Come, Sir, fall on, and let us dispatch him quickly.


I Am here against you both: If you be Thieves, come, kill me first, then do the
like by him, and take our plunder; but I am resolved no fear shall let you take
my Honor from me


Sir, what do you mean? You carry things too far.


Come, do your worst; why so long a joining?


Oh heavens, what Fate is this?


Put up your Swords, and come along with us; must we be always plagued with
your rash Quarrels


Sir, as you're a Gentleman.


No talking, Sir, to us; our Captain, perhaps, will hear you speak.


SInce we are met, I see there is a necessity of opening our minds one to
another before we can part: Faith, say, is not your business fighting


I Am afraid it will prove so e're we go home, though considering every thing, I
had much rather have walked abroad so early a Simpling, to gather herbs for a
Dyet-drink, and took it when I had done, though it be the Liquor of all others
I most abhor


I must confess I am here on the like Errand, and should be loath to be
prevented, though how we shall save our Reputations to our several Adversaries
when they find us together, I am to seek; nor is it reason for either to desire
the Field, should be cleared by the other


I Will make a proposition; you shall declare to each other the men you are to
meet, then I will be upon the Scout, and give notice who approaches first, on
which the other shall withdraw


I like the proposition well; what say you, Merry?


The Gentleman I am to deal with, is one I would rather compose then fight
with, and having little or no occasion for the Quarrel, I hope to give Reasons
may end the business without noise, and therefore would be glad to spare Names


There can be little occasion for that caution, since, I suppose, we are all
too much Gentlemen, to be thought bablers; and to show I have reserves,
notwithstanding I know your pretenses; Mr. Merry, I dare tell you, it is Mr.
Muchland I stay for


Mr. Muchland! By what motives do you stay for him?


Moved by a formal Challenge, sent in writing, to meet him singly here: But
who is your Man


I beg your pardon, I have reasons force me to conceal his Name. But you
surprise me much, and though I know that words went high between you, I never
thought they could have moved a Challenge: Pray, Sir, who brought it


Your cautious dealing teaches me the same, though, I confess, too late.


I Have no such Obligations; and since I see there is something foul in this, I
will not spare to say, it is by Mr. Muchland's appointment we are likewise here
now; and I am sorry to see, that Challenging two Men together to one place, his
Courage dare meet neither


Townlove, don't wrong a Man you never tried.


He that seeks further trial let him find it, I Am satisfied, if words will
fright a Man, he shall not want them from him; but prithee tell, what Man did
bring thy Challenge


One of those Gentlemen we met in the street; he that durst drink.


The same that came to me; it is plain, they do but Jest, and sent us hither
only to laugh at us


My Temper's not so pleasant to find out Jests in formal Challenges.


Nor mine so sour, but I can take for Jest all that is meant so.


All that occurs to me on the whole matter, is this, that we may all go back
again, and wait his Explanation of the Riddle


Come, Gentlemen, deliver up your Swords, you will have no use of them, it seems,
to day


I pray Sir, what is the matter?


We are sent to prevent the Duel you are come about.


It seem we came about no Duel, Sir, and you may spare your pains.


You are merry, Sir, but we must do our Duty; then give us up your Swords.


Where is it we must go?


The back way to the Mulberry-Garden; they who employed us wait our coming
thither: But we want another, they said we should find four


It was a needless caution in them, be who they will; for that fourth man you
speak of is as good as forty Guards at preventing Duels


Come, go on, we will be your Peaceful Prisoners, though you permit our Swords.


Sir, it is enough; march on.


I am surpised extremely, here is a Guard has brought in four Gentlemen
already they took Actively fighting, as they say, and Mr. Muchland's one, I saw
him through the Door


This is your diligence, good Mrs. Rose, you have undone us, for if they have
fought, they then will never be Friends


What a Fool was I to trust so weighty a concern to the conduct of a wanton,
hare-brain'd Wench


Never stir, Rose, compose all matters, as you promised, or you shall find what
it is to raise my expectation high, and then to fool me


It Is not your wanton Jests shall bring you off, I Will swear you shall not Live
with me a day longer, if you fail your promise


Hey day, will you but give me leave to speak; you're as pettish both of you as
two Puritan Sisters, condemned to dye Maids, the greatest Curse accounted by
the Saints of our Reformation that can be


What can you say? Flam us off with some untoward Jest; no, forsooth, that
shall not serve your turn


I don't intend it shall, have but patience, that I may go and mix in Company
with these same Duellers, if I don't set all things right again, let me be
discarded by your Ladyship, and bound to fight a Duel with yours


Let Us see the effects of your promises quickly, or the Duel you speak of may
prove a sharper then you believe


If the Guard I have sent out catch any Quarry, let them keep them close in some
Room till I return


It shall be done, but let us have no more failings on your part.


By a Woman's directions, it seems, you surpised us, and she is a Friend of
Ruffle's


Yes, Sir, and they are together; I believe they will Marry, for a Parson is
sent for


You seem a Man of Reason; your Ear.


This Ruffle will cheat us of what he promised, for he told me just now we came
too late, and that the danger was past, he being forced to fight e're we
Relieved him


He cursed and swore when I but spoke to him, and told me he would have me tossed
in a Blanket if I but mentioned money to him. Nay, he swore damn him, if in the
humor he was in, he could not have beat us all three. And I believe he is
Valiant, for we, you know, found him stripped and fighting


But he parryed and traverst damnably fast, and I Am convinced by Experience,
that all Men who draw Swords are not Valiant; and that the Disease of
Cowardice, when once proof against the Physic of beating, as his often has
been, is incurable


I cannot tell, but if we were once well off with what we got to Night, I would
forgive him my Mornings hire


I Am of your mind for that, I could admit of an easy excuse to be going.


Sir, you have satisfied me, and it is but reason; I Will take care you shannot be
disturbed


Gentlemen, my Old Acquaintance, and very good Friends that I never saw before,
what motives had you to use me as you did in the Field just now


Use you, how did we use you? Were not we civil in taking of your part? Damme,
what would you be at


No hussing, Rascals, that will not do with me, I Am none of those -- Come, tell
me presently what mad

you interest your selves in my concerns with such a lie to back it, as if I
had employed you? Come, Sir, speak


Very pretty: Breef, did ever see the like? The Gallant knows us both for men
of Honor, he durst not else provoke two of us thus


Men of Honor in the Devils Name: A pair of Curs in couples are not more tame,
nor readier for a beating; you huffing Rascal, answer, what made you do it


This is unsufferable, I am a Gentleman, and therefore do require satisfaction
for this abuse; meet me singly with your Sword then to morrow morning at the
place where I saved your Life and Honor both to day


Town tricks right; I Will try you first how far a Cudgel will provoke your
passion


What shall we do, he has locked the Door, or else we might have got Ruffle to
take our parts


Gad, let us both draw, and try to keep him off till the Guard hears.


Hanged, that will not do; I see he is one of those that count their Honor dearer
then their Lives; and Hell, Damnation, the Devil and all are not able to fright
them from fighting when they are set on it. And though by my manner of Living I
should fear Hell as little as any Man, yet I could never persuade my self to be
ready to dye, neither by Sword nor Hanging, one of which usually follows the
fighting of Men that Live in public fame as I do


Why then let us resolve to suffer bravely, it is but a beating he will give us, and
he will soon give over the Cudgel, if he be a Man of Honor as thou think he is


I, but he is a Man of Country Honor, and they go a great way farther in
beating a Man then your City Man of Honor does. Alas, I know them both, the one
is contented to give the single Battoon of disgrace, but the the other never
thinks it enough till he makes your skin of the color of your hair. I am for
downright confessing all


That Is worse by half, for then we fall under the Revenge of Ruffle, and
nothing like being in the power of an enraged Coward


He comes, oh, heart, heart, hold breaking.


Come, Gallants, I should be loath to make use of these edgeless Weapons,
therefore confess, and save me and your selves the trouble


God's Death, Sir, I hope you do not intend to be rude to Gentlemen in Custody; you
know we are Prisoners, or else --


Or else you would run away, therefore I Will begin with you.


What do you mean, Sir -- Damme, this must not pass -- Revenge must follow --
assure your self it must --


I do consider that, and will give you a little thinking time, whilst I
exercise your Comerade


Good Sir, be civil, you know I have not gave you a word to displease you.


Confess, Sir, then; confess.


Hold, good Sir, and I will.


Cowardly Rascal; what, do fear a beating?


Pray valiant Sir, stand by: Come, Sir, your story.


Sir, we were hired by Mr. Ruffle to come into the Field, and seem to take your
part, to get him Honor


What say you, Sir? Is this story true?


Yes, it is a truth, but I Would have sooner died then told it you. Out, you
hen-hearted Coward


Go, Sirrah, and kick him for calling you Coward.


Gad, I would he durst.


Do It, or I Will Bastinado you again.


Gad, I Will teach you to strike me, you Cowardly Rogue.


So, well done; now we shall soon be Friends.


Friends, Sir; no, Gad, I Will no Friendship with you.


This Gentleman's importunity has forced me to introduce him to you.


He Is truly welcome.


Sir, I am much surprised to find you here.


You have reason for your wonder, but will not have so long, when I shall tell
you the cause of my surprisal, but now I have not time, I must desire you to
haste into the Park to find out Mr. Sharp, and bring him hither, my Honor else
may suffer


I shall obey you, and return presently.


Come, my most excellent brace of Spanniels, you must go and witness what
you have said


I Will witness nothing, not I.


Come, Sir, no muttering, march.


The Gentlemen we have taken, call themselves Rash, Merry, and Townlove.


You have done well; keep them upon your Lives.


Never fear it, Madam, they are safe enough.


We Are sure by this it is none of them that fought with Mr. Muchland.


No, that matter's plain, and I begin to guess the Man; but here comes Rose
will tell all. Oh, excellent Rose, thy Guard of new made Red-Coats have done
their business bravely; they have brought in Merry, Rash, and Townlove


I, now it is excellent Rose; but by and by you will call me longtong'd,
shallow-pate again: I am so elevated with the success of my business, that like
a new-made Bishop, I could appear extremely grave and moody


Nay, Rose, no stop of thy Industry for this favor of Fortune, for should she
frown again, thy condition, like a disgraced Favorites, would be more subject
to oppression, then if never she had smiled upon thee


In Faith, I believe you, for it is not the well-contriv'd project, but the
successful one is commended; and therefore I Will go on to projection. Step into
that Closet there

Officer, bring in your Prisoners.


Gentlemen, you are welcome to the Mulberry-Garden.

You Will have our thanks, Sir, as we find our usage.


It cannot well be worse then what I suffered at our first meeting, Sir.


Come, to the business, Sir; what would you with us?


By your demand you almost make me think I am your Prisoner, but I must have
other Language from you e're we part


Sir, you need use little ceremony in what you mean to do; your Soldiers, if
you command them, took us in the Field, you know as well as we why we were
there


And there may come a time you may account for it.


No threatening, Sir, for you are least concerned, and since I am resolved to
examine you apart, you shall be the first I Will talk with. Officer, put that
Gentleman into that Room

take that along with you, and leave this angry Man for me to talk with.


Well, Sir, and what is all this for?


You told me once to day, you wished my Friendship.


I did so, when I took you for a Man of Honor, but now I see you're none, I
slight your Friendship


In what don't I appear the same Man still?


You carry Challenges basely intermixed, and yet prevent all sighting by making
us Prisoners, and use us too as't 'twere for Crimes of State we were Committed


High accusations, and with much Anger urged; but suppose Rose should like the
proposition you made her to day, and that I had been the main Instrument to
bring it about, would you not be pleased with me then


No, says, should I not; for I believe if so, she is but your leavings, and I d
be loath to keep her on those terms


I will not say, but I know whether Rose be a M^n or a Woman: But what then? I
dare be sworn for her ^o Man else does; then why so coy? I do believe you have
kept (...) Commendations


That Is no matter, I took them from better Friends then; but to the business,
Sir, and then dismiss me


You're at the business now; I Am Rose her self.


The Devil thou art; but now I look on thee better, it is thee; but what Gallant
was he with you, Rose? I Am afraid you are pre-ingaged


It was a Woman too; no mote of that, I Will tell you all anon: Why an't you
suricus, appoint the place to meet in for our Duel? I know you will Challenge me


I, to a Bed, dear Rose; that, that is the place we will meet in.


Soft and fair, two words more to that bargain; your present business is to
take up Quarrels, for Mr. Merry's is ended I do believe by this; don't seem to
know me, not nothing of the frolic to my Lady, as you love me; she is here, and
Rashes Sister with her


Upon my Honor all they say is false, and you may think so by what they have
done: Take beaten Rascals words, they speak for fear


I would be glad to think so.


And I Will convince you presently; lend me your Cudgel.


What do you mean, Mr. Ruffle? As I Am a Gentleman, do what he could, I never
would confess


Then was it you that said it, Villain?


I must confess my frailty; it was I.


Oh, was it so?


But he confirmed it too.


Then he shall have it too.


Hold, hold, good Sir, hold.


Did I then hire you to it?


No, Sir, I say, and swore it too before.


What say you, Rascal?


Truly I cannot tell; I think you did not.


You see what Rogues are here.


I Am satisfied, and therefore let them go.


What do you mean, Sir?


To end this matter now, and since these Rogues have placed a scandal on you,
wipe it off; come, to your Sword


Sir, I Am new Married, and will not fight to day.


Oh, the multitude of several sorts of Cowards there are in the World! Come,
without more ado, confess your self one


Confess my self a Coward, that is pretty, in faith; have not you seen me meet
you in the Field, Fight you, beat these Rascals for traducing me, and yet
confess my selt a Coward, because I don't think it proper to fight on my
Wedding Day? A very modest proposition. No, Sir, I Would have you know, this is a
day of Joy, I have Married a Lady worth thousands, besides, for Beauty, Virtue,
and good Breeding, I Will defy you to match her between the Tower and
Westminster Hall. She it was, that hearing of our Quarrel, sent the Guard to
surprise us; and shall I wrong the Love of so Excellent a Lady for your humor?
Damme, Blood, you make me mad that you do


I wish I could see the effects of it, but not to spend time in words, the case
is this; either confess you hired those Fellows to come into the Field, that
you likewise told your Wife that now is, of the Quarrel on purpose to be
surpised, and that you are a Coward, and dare not fight. And all this to be
openly done before as many as I shall appoint to hear it, or prepare your self
to dye, for that must be your Fate or mine before we part this Room


Tell me, Sir, do you think you Act now like a Man of Honor -- Heavens, how
Men mistake themselves; would you place this upon a Man that you thought durst
fight? Tell me that, would you


No, Sir, I should not.


there is it, and yet you hope to be counted a brave Man for this -- Damme,
Blood, if I could not find in my heart to break my Resolution of not Fighting
to day, rather then suffer you to go away with it thus. But since my word was
past before for not fighting (and it is the greatest part of Honor to keep
that) I will humor you in the other: But, Sir, let it be done so, that it may not
grieve my Wife; and write down the words that I must say, that there may be no
new occasion for breach of Friendship between you and I


Well, Sir, I shall do it. Who waits there?

Bring a Pen and Ink to the next Room.


Sir, I have performed your Commands; the Gentleman is in another Room.


He shall soon see the occasion of my failing him.


Sir, your most obedient Servant, you are a Friend of Mr. Muchland's here; upon
my Life a worthy Man he is: He and I have been merry together this Morning


By the Guard that waits, I thought it had been otherways.


You mean, you thought us fighting; but that hinders no mirth, Men of Honor
never fall out about that -- though I could tell you, as a Friend of his, I was
once desperately afraid I had killed him


Why, did you Wound him, Sir?


No, but I Will tell you, he stood upon his Guard, as't might be thus; and to
speak truth, would not budge one foot, I Will say that for him; I made a pass or
two, as't might be thus; he parryed, but I resolved to make an end on it
quickly, seeing some People coming, therefore I made a through pass, and run my
Sword to'th' hilts


In what?


In's shirt, it proved to be in's shirt; but I, Gad, I was upon flying, if the
Guard had not come and took us


It seems there was no cause, having done him no hurt.


I knew not that; but I Gad, he is your Friend, preserve him so, for there
breaths not a braver fellow, take that from me. But, Sir, upon your Honor
speak not a word of this, I know he will have you Spectator of a frolic we have
agreed on; it is that I will not have confidence to speak some words openly that
he shall write, but I Gad, let them be as bad as they will, I Will speak them, let
who will be by


There are the words, look them over, I Will tell you when to speak them.


Then if I do it not, take me and hang me.


Yes truly, Sir, the Gentleman that brought you the Challenge gave me notice of
it, and had I not Reason to take the best care I could to prevent it


They took care enough themselves, it seems.


Faith, Rash, I had once as ill an Opinion of their proceedings as you, but now
I am fully satisfied in every particular


I am glad I out-went you both in true considering, for you know it would never
out of my head, but that Muchland was all worth. Oh, the Excellent Advantages
Men have by Wine! it leaves a certain Spirit in ones head, like that of
Prophecy


Like it indeed; Prophecy being a sort of madness, that fills the head, and
intoxicates the Understanding, making Men speak abundance of things they
neither believe themselves, nor any Body else, till something comes to pass by
chance that they seemed to foretell. And then oh, the wonder, as if they that
foretold what could not be prevented, were not altogether as useless Members
to a Commonwealth, as a sick Passenger at Sea is to a sinking Ship, when he
bellows out between Praying and Swearing; God, we are all lost


Prithee leave, I Am for no Morals, or long-winded simelies. Here comes the Lad
I am for

One that understands his Glass, and makes himself and his Company merry
without detracting from his absent, or satirising on his present Friend


Well, our little Projecter, how go matters? I could for thy sake turn Woodcock
in the Play, and always be kissing


If you stop my mouth thus, how shall I tell what you would know: But are you
all agreed upon the matter


Only Ned Rash has a little grumbling discontent toward you still.


I shall soon Cure that; come, you must go all of you to the Balcony, and there
you shall see what Heroes Mr. Muchland has been engaged withal this Morning.
And, Mr. Rash, if your Sister do not make Mr. Muchland and you, and I too
Friends, before we part, I Will be condemned to sing Fortune my Foe in a Nunnery
all days of my Life


In a Nunnery! What have you to do with a Nunnery?


You say right indeed, for if the bargain go on you wot on, I should have
little to do with a Nunnery, though I were condemned to wear Petticoats; but no
more of those mistakes, but away


Gad, Mr. Muchland, the words are too severe, there is no enduring of them --
let me leave out this Sentence: And like a Cowardly Son of a Whore as I am:
Look you, Sir, this is abusing of my Mother, and she had not the least hand in
the Quarrel. What say you, Sir, is not this Reason


Gad, Sir, I would sooner dye then say it.


You Will sooner be hanged then dye, like a Cowardly Rascal as you are.


You may say what you will, but there are them in Town know me for another sort
of Man I dare assure you


Then the Song, Mr. Muchland, you know that goes beyond the bargain.

What, all them, and my own dear Wife too. By Heavens I Will dye ten thousand
Deaths before I Will do it. Your Servant, Gentlemen; your Servant, Ladies. A merry
Crash has happened between Mr. Muchland and I; we are here Drolling one upon
another: Gad, Mr. Muchland, if you had not the ill Nature of all the Justices
in your whole Country, you would never urge me to it, I never will consent to
read the Paper, and sing the Song too, that is flat


Well, on condition, you will all of you sing, and Act the Song to the Life, I am
contented you shall only deliver the Paper to Mr. Rash, and confess it to be
all a truth


I Will do it, here is my hand on it; Mr. Rash is a worthy Gentleman, and knows me
well enough: Come down, come down, I and these Gentlemen are to sing a mad Song
to you


He that spares, either in kicking or cuffing, shall find me upon his back with
this


Damme, if either of you kick, or strike me hard, I Will swinge you when we have
done


I Will warrant you, Sir.


I Will do as I see cause: Breef, have you a care of my Boil you had best, or
look to it


Sir, I hope this Gentleman has informed you with what resentments I intended
to repair my Reputation, which I looked upon as too deeply wounded for your
self to excuse my silence in it, and likewise by what unlucky Accident I was
prevented performing my appointment


Sir, I Have no cause left to doubt in the least your Honor, and do confess I was
to blame in pressing you too far; for which I beg your pardon


Could I but hope this Ladies, you have mine.


Never fear it, Brother, we are both come thus far to be Married, if we had
your consent, for I confess I am loath to go into the Country, and leave Mr.
Merry unreclaim'd, for fear he should be occasion of some further Quarrel
between you two


What say you, Madam, will you make good her word?


I to my Brother, Sir, refer the matter.


Then you are his; take, Sir, this Bond of Friendship.


A Chain so strong, I hope can never break. Sister, I wish you happy in your
Choice


Friends all, Friends all; why, this is fine in faith: Now, Muchland, hang the
Catch; come, pass it by


Not for the World: Come, the Wine there, and begin.


WE are Gallants of the Town;
Men of sprightly Breeding:
If Oaths will do it, we run them down,
But never come to Bleeding.

We measure Swords, appoint the place, and thither do repair too;
But Drink, Huff, Kick, Cuff; this is all we dare do.

At Playhouse we do count it brave
To have the Masks Acquaintance;
Against Wit and Sense we always rave,
And called inspid Nonsense.

We measure Swords, appoint the place, and thither do repair too;
But Drink, Huff, Kick, Cuff; this is all we dare do.

In Coffee-House we Battles fight,
And censure men of Honor;
We swear that such a Ladies right,
And has a Clap upon her.

We measure Swords, appoint the place, and thither do repair too;
But Drink, Huff, Kick, Cuff; this is all we dare do.

That Is done like Men of Valor.


Nay, Gad, I defy him that can say I fear.


Now you are all Friends, know, the Guard I made use of to secure you, are all
Mr. Merry's Fiddles


I Am glad I did not know so much before, I should have broke their Prison, or
their pates


My Guard are something a Kin to yours, Men very expert in handling their Feet,
if a Man may say so


All this I see is a mere contrivance for a Dance; let us, without any more ado,
have it then


Come, Gallants, you think your business is done, but where is Rose's thanks?


Rose, I, Gad, I never dreamed o'that; faith, Rose, thou and I Will empty a
Bottle sometimes when thy Mistress is in Bed, since you are so good at Drinking


No, good Sir, Rose is to set up in a better Employment; for now Ruffle has
got my Old Mistress, Rose shall succeed in her place


I got his Mistress, don't believe him, Dear, I never kept Miss in my Life.


Sir, it is even so, but I give her to you freely; she was true to me, and may
prove so to you


How, Married to a Wench.


Joy be with you, Valiant Sir; ha, ha.


Send you comfort of your Virtuous Lady; ha, ha.


Shall these Rogues laugh they cheated me of above threescore pounds to Night
already? Make them repay me that sum, I Will forgive all


We Will Dine together, and they shall pay the Reckoning.


Good Sir, las, it is all we have to trust to.


No grumbling, Rascals, if you do, I Will swinge you: But, Gentlemen, be tender
of my Honor, and I Will take all; say nothing, I Will to my Estate in the
Country, where I shall pass for as Valiant a Squire, and my Wife for as
Virtuous a Lady as the best there


Well resolved on, and I assure you I Will not Visit your Lady when you are from
Home, Rose and I will keep close together


But, Rose, I hope you don't mean to take such courses.


No, Madam, you may be sure on it, Mr. Townlove's merry, and talks wildly,
that is all; if he and I keep Company, it shall be merely in Friendship; I would
not for the World lose my Reputation with him, I hope you have all better
thoughts of me


No, Rose, I Will warrant them thee and I will secure one another Reputations.

For want of Custom wonder does produce,

And ills do lose that Name by frequent use.


POets we justly may Wit's Babbles call;
For they to almost nothing venture all.
They with each Play their Reputations stake,
And ten to one, if good, it does not take.
In those that do, that part you only praise,
Which Comedians mimickry does raise;
So he, and not the Poet, gets the Bays.
But if by Chance some Writer does Extort
From the World's Vogue a pretty good Report,
It Is so allayed by but why that or this,
That he might justly wish 'twas none of his.
Hard Fate! Have they alone! All men beside
Some Curtain still, their faults to hide.
Statesmen their Errors on their Agents lay;
It Is Chance of War makes Soldiers lose a Day:
And your Physicians shame Death wipes away;
But every Fool finds faults in every Play.
Things being so, it cannot be denied,
But to be Poet is a man's blind side.
This is the cause why Active times produce
The fewest Writers for the Stages Use.
The World is busy now; and some dare say
We have not seen of late one good New Play.
And such believe Shakespeare, long since in's Grave,
In Choicest Lybraries a place will have.
When not a modern Play will escape the fire:
I beg their pardons who themselves admire.
Not but this Age has many men as Wise,
But wisely they this begging Art despise.
And two to one, was he alive this Day,
He Would have more wit, then e're to write a Play.
His Fruitful Brain would find Employment now,
Which Times of drowsy Peace did not allow;
Then that you write not too, pray think your Eat,
Good lucky Poets, of your Sword and State:
And be not too severe on those that do,
For all you Play has it is Spectators too.
Amongst which there is some are Fools enough to blame
Our present War, the greatest Scene of Fame.
The best contrived, best lead, and bravest fought
Of all, in which England has Glory sought.
Yet if Cross Winds, or Storms do make you miss
One Action, strait Fanatic Critics hiss.
An Envious sort of Sots, like ours in the Pit;
Who having none, still rail at all have Wit.
Our Author, though, is safe, and fears them not,
His Play pretends neither to Wit nor Plot;
But should you Damn it with your utmost spite,
When next he is idle, he again will Write.

