BEfore I entered, I was told what now
I see decypher'd upon every brovv;
A sullen sadness, and close murmurs say,
"The Title is enough to damn the Play
"The Bill condemns before the Action, Pox
"Upon the Poet with his Paradox,
"Noble Ingratitude, o barbarous sound!
"Virtue will die to see that Monster crovvn'd:
Strange voices these, strange censures from the wits,
For such he take you, every one that sits
Sp^ctat^ur here usurps a privilege,
Which is unjust, before he hears, to judge,
Wise, and just Iuries, who in every cause
Strictly observe the custom of the Laws,
The bottom sound, and never their verdicts bring
Upon the superficies of a thing;
They weigh the ground of matters well, and never
Proceed to sentence till they see all clear;
Have patience then a little, and suspend
Your judgments till you see us at the end
Of the fifth Act; three hours will soon be passed,
In Sceans and Songs the minutes fly too fast;
Then if we do'nt maintain our Paradox,
Let me be shamed, and sit three hours in the stocks
For punishing your patience; if the crime
Deserves more rigor, let a longer time
Of penance be prescribed me there; but I
Hope from your judgments, justice, clemency,
A nobler sentence, and that you will allow
Me next a Lavvrell vvreath to crown my brovv.

CHarming abode, delightful solitude,
Fair places where I first received my life
And love, old trees, clear brooks, whose shade and murmur
Speak pity for my sorrowful adventure,
Sweet Zephirs, Echo, nocks, and silent forests,
Be witnesses all of my secret griefs:
I am no more now that Zelinda sometime
Adored by the worthiest Lovers of
The country round about; alas! I serve
Under the habit of a Slave, a traitor
With an unparraleld'd fidelity,
Traitor in Love, I mean, not otherwise,
A Hero, but ungrateful, one who slatters me
In my extreme misfortune, yet would hate me,
If he knew that I Love him. Gentle trees,
Happy are you, although the rigourous Winter
Uses you hardly, for when the fair Spring
Makes the cold to cease, you suddenly
Resume your anciet verdure, and at harvest,
Upon your branches we see fruits, where formerly
Hung Isicles: my fortune's not so good;
Each of the seasons have 'twice chaung'd, since Love
Resolved to afflict me, all which time
I Have languished continually, and could not
Pretend to the repose my heart has lost:
He whom I love with so much constancy
Is false and fleeting; o Gods! here he comet.
Ormin, I sought thee.


Sir, I sought you also.


Know that to morrow we will depart hence.


What! will you leave so soon your native country,
These cottages, these woods and these fair meadows?

I have not hid from thee that in those places
I love the sweet Fatima, a rich Master-peice
Of Heaven, and hoped to see that Beauty here
So cherished and adored; but I have learned
That she is now at Tunis with her Father;
And though this happy residence may be said
To be a second Paradise, I cannot
See any fair thing here, since she is absent.

How happy is Fatima, and how miserable
Am I! --

How grievous is her absence to
My amourous soul! to render me by her,
To morrow by the break of day we'll take
Our way for Tunis, I shall be too happy,
If I may see her, and I do believe
That she will bear some part too in my joy;
She had no little trouble, I perceived,
For my departure last, and without doubt
I Am not indifferent to her.

Certainly
Her flame will not be quenched.

That Is all my hope.


And that is all my fear --


Cheer up, cheer up,
Smother your sighs, I have a counter poison
For all your sorrows.

Speak it then without
Holding us long in trouble.

Give me leave.
First, if you please, to take a little breath.

Speak then?


I Am not disposed yet.


Oh thou make me.
Suffer too much? tell it unto us quickly.

You might die with it.


Is It then some misfortune
Sent me by destiny?

I say agiane.
You might die with it, but it would be with joy;
Fatima yesterday late in the evening
Arrived in these quarters.

Is it possible,
Fatima?

Yes, assure you, I have seen her.


Perhaps thou art deceived.


I am no ass.
I did observe her well, and knew her perfectly.
Her Slave, who was my Mistress formerly,
Entered just now with her into that wood.

Good Gods? do I not see her?


Yes, that is she
Which passes by.

What luster has her eye,
What grace her gate?

Alas?


I see a thousand new charms there.


Are you besotted? will you not salute her?


No, to perform that complement, I Will give her
A visit, when I shall have without doubt
My soul less in disorder.

For m^ part,
Who do not love so daintily, I will,
Without deferring it, make my address.

Without discovering our selves, we may
From hence know by the usage of the servant,
In what esteem the Master is at present.

SWeet Beauties welcome, from what quarters come you?


What means this insolent? Go on your way


How Is this? instead of kisses and embraces,
As I expected, I am quarrel*d with:
Charifa, whence this change?

Begone, and leave us.


Thou actest well the scornful.


What Is that follow
Which follows us?

It Is an impertinent,
Whom I know not.

I am much changed then
Since this last voyage; but thy soul is chag'd
And not my visage, without doubt thy Mistress
Has better eyes, and more wit; she will know
An old, and a familiar acquaintance.

who are you then?


My Masters Slave.


What Master?


Should you not know him neither?
Is his name razed out of your memory?

Assuredly, Charifa, this man's mad.


How, Madam, is it possible you can
Forget the valiant Zegry?

Zegry?


Heaven?
What strange inconstancy is this? who ever
Could have imagined it? --

That noble and illustrious successor
Of those brave warriers who even in Spain
Have gathered Lawrells, and brought home fair spoils,
Madam, your faithful Lover, Zaida's brother.

Oh! I remember him.


False, and Ungrateful!


You ask not how he does.


What interest
Have I in his sweet person? happily
He Is dead.

He is indeed.


We are all mortal;
The Prophet has his soul.

A faithful servant
Would have accompanied his Master; why
Art thou not dead too?

Only to enrage thee.
Zegry discovering himself.

The Prophet has his soul, o false Fatima!
Is It thus you do express your goodness to me?
Deceitful object, my return, I see,
Displeases you, who would despise me dead,
Must hate me living, I disturb with pleasure
That faithless joy which the delightful news
Of my feigned death procured you: I live still
Ungrateful, but I live no more for you:
My passion is transformed all into fury:
As much as I loved you, I now despise you:
My heart shakes of so rigourous a yoke:
Love raises no more sighs, nor fires within me,
Only I sigh that I used so much care
To please you, and if I burn yet, it is
With anger, not with love.

Oh this success
Answers my wishes fully? --

This confession
Surpriseth, but no way afflicts me;
My first discourse should make you understand
That I Am not very tender hearted to you,
And, me thinks, after such a clear contempt
As was expressed there you might believe
Nothing should trouble me that comes from you,
Unless your amourous address: I have
A thousand other Lovers braver far
Then you, and therefore I daign not to put you
In the rank of my conquests.

Sure, your pride
Is greater then your beauty, the charm is
Dissolved wherein I formerly was held;
It Is true, I sometime thought you beautiful;
But I was amourous, and therefore not
To be believed, having now my spirit
No more disordered, you cease to be fair
And I to be abused, whereas you
Pleased me formerly, it was because
It is impossible for me, when I
Am loved, to be insensible.

I love you?
Heaven! what a strange opinion is this?
I never had but strong aversion for you.
All your endeavors served but to displease me;
But though I hated you, I loved your Sister,
And t* was for her sake that I feigned to have
Some pity for your passions; her prayer
A hundred times restain'd my hate, you swear
That your days did depend upon my sight,
And yielding unto her desites I did
Enforce mine eyes to smile, when my heart frowned,
To the end not to be cause of your death.

Your eyes have never made a mortal wound.


Take heed that your do not revive again,
One Only of my looks darted more gently,
Can change this violent anger into love;
But I am very nice of such a look,
It is too rich a price, Sir, for your conquest
I limit my desires to see you never,
Adieu, become wise, and leave me in peace.

YEs false Fatima, I will become wise,
Thy contempt is unjust, but mine is lawful:
Since thou pretendest but to make thee hated,
I will obey thee, thy unworthy trophy,
My heart shall be no more, his charms are broken,
His flames are quenched; Alabez, follow her
Close at the heels, even unto her house;
But have a care not to discover thee.

Her pride's unjust, and not to be endured;
Your change herein is but too equitable,
O how well should you do to free your heart
From the imperious captivity
Of such a cruel conqueror, you are
Born with too many fair advantages,
To obtain nothing but eternal wrongs;
There are Sir, other beauties in the world
Which would be glad to share their flame with yours,
To imitate your sighs, and which would tell you
That the resplendent honor of a crown
Is beneath that to be beloved of
An object that one loves Contempt in love
Deserves to be repayed with contempt,
And who refuses, is not worthy of,
For the most part, the person that is refused.

How great my griefs are, and how grievous is
This proud contempt? o light, and wavering Sex!
O black ingratitude! since love began
To trouble Lovers, was there ever torment
Equal to mine? I feel my heart infected
With all imaginary griefs.

Oh? Sir,
Believe me, I know some that are much more
To be lamented, and if what I know
Were reveald to you, you should have great cause
Of comfort by it.

Oh speak, and divert
The grief which does oppress me. oftentimes
A wretch is pleased in his misery
When he sees that he suffers not alone.

O love, I pray thee make his heart grow tender
At the recital of the evil which he
Has caused me, oh make him Sensible
Of my sad sufferings? --
A young Beauty, Sir,
Whose name and birth, if you please I Will conceal
Through decency, only thus much I Will tell you,
That she was near to me and loved me deerly,
Scarce yet attained to the fifteenth year,
When love and marriage was proposed to her,
And she commanded to expect for husband
A man too lovely, and to much beloved;
And who for his part was so far from being
Warmed with a mutual flame, that he unlawfully
Took an affection for another object:
His faithful Lover with grief understood it
But yet a worse misfortune afterward
Surprised her, the ungrateful brak the accord
Of the approaching marriage, and departed
For a long voyage without seeing her;
I can assure you that her grief was quick,
And anger ardent after this affront;
But yet her anger was less then her love:
Although, the inconstant left her, she retained him
Still in her soul, and valuing not her sex,
Nor fearing death, i* the habit of a man
She followed his steps.

O barbarous rigor!
O lamentable passion!

You will be
More touched when you shall know the rest: scarce was she
Embarked on the sea, when by a new,
And worse misfortune certain infamous rovers
Surprised her vessel, and not long time after
They sold her unto that ungrateful man,
Who falsely and unworthly forsook her:
And so at last it hapened that Fortune
As Well as Love would put her into chains:
But she still without changing heart, or habit,
Found sweetness in this double slavery;
Far from desiring to be free, she followed
Her faithles friend into his native country,
And fearing not to be discovered,
Served this deceitful Master without hope,
Endeavored to please him, and therein
Prosper'd so well, that he esteemed her zeal,
And concealed nothing from her; but this kindness
Was not a cure, but corsive to her grief,
Because it made her privy to the happiness
Her Rival did enjoy in the affection
Of him she loved, who every day protested
Unto her, that rather then lose her love,
He Would lose his life.

Vnparalel'd punishment!
Cruel injustice!

Gods! he grows tender,
Love be propitious to me, --
Sir, what say you,
Is not she more then you to be lamented?
Compared to her torments, your afflictions
Are sweet. You answer not.

Yes, yes, I grant it
I ought to hate her, but I Have too much weakness:
Oh fair Fatima!

Oh my hard misfortune!


Ormin, what charms she has?


You answer nothing
To what I said.

What spak'st thou to me of?


Of a young maid
Oppressed and injured in love.

My thoughts
Were otherwise employed, and troubled,
I heard thee not, at least I have forgotten.

You seemed to compassionate her grief,
And her misfortune very much.

Alas!
I only thought upon my proper grief.

What! shall the ungrateful and cruel Fatima
Although she quits your heart thus, have the glory
To live still in your memory? oh no,
Banish her thence; but if you will think of her,
To ease your evils a little, employ your thought
Only to think of her defects; remember
That she is too proud, and fancy to your self
That she is not fair enough, to hold so noble
And such a faithful Lover as you are,
That there is nothing charming in her eyes,
Nor in her cheeks, that her proportion,
Her posture, stature, gate, and carriage
Have nothing commendable, that her wit --

Ormin, no more, I cannot suffer yet
She should be injured; that ungrateful Beauty,
Who laughs with scorn at my sad languishment,
Has no defect at all but her fierce rigor;
And I fear that in spite of this defect,
My violent love will triumph o'r mine anger.

What, shall Fatima be so proud, and you
So humble? shall she be composed of Ice,
And you of fire? must you persist to love her,
When she despises you? oh fall no more
Into that fatal error. It belongs, Sir
But to low spirits to suffer without hate,
Such a contempt; to leave what flies us,
Is little trouble, and when hope is quenched,
Love should be querched also.

What thou say,
Ormin, is very true, I should indeed
Follow Fatima in her lightness to me,
I should in her unkindnes trace her steps,
I should be as insensible as she is
Severe and rigourous, my flam'es an error,
I do confess it, but I love this error,
Thy faithful counsels are not seasonable,
Love has not yet given place unto my reason,
I Am born to languish, and to die for her;
Although she be ungrateful she is not
The less fair for it.

The false hope that flattered me
Fled in a moment; miserable Lover,
And too unjust! --

FRiend, I am very joyful
To meet thee.

My content is still complete,
When I behold thy face, as in thy absence,
Nothing seems sweet unto me: Now I see
Thou Art habited like us, this garment is
Well made.

I took it just now in th'apartment
I have in thy abode.

This Shepherds habit
Becomes thee rarely; but for an Almansor,
It is too much abasement.

Sure the habit
Takes nothing from the luster of the merit,
In imitating thee, I cannot err;
Thee, whose heart is as noble as thy race,
And unto whose aid in an eminent danger
I owe my life.

The Shepherds of this wood
And fair Campania, are descended from
Those Heroes, who in time passed conquered Spain
From those renowned Moors, whose great exploits
Made the Kings of a hundred Christian people
Tremble for fear, and who seeing Tunis conquered
By Charles the fifth, conserve here in these places
Their glory and their freedom, secretly
Dispose the hearts of the most Zealous Kings
To drive the Christias from this desolate country,
And are in readiness to join themselves,
And to increase the first fair levies which
Shall be employed on such an expedition.

I know that this fair desert's like a Court:
But have thou heard yet that Gomella is
Returned here? suffer me at present, Zegry,
To leave thee, he is my familiar friend,
And I owe him a visit.

Then thou know
Fatima.

Yes, that Beauty has received
The light from brave Gomella; friend adieu,
I will return to thee with speed, excuse me
At present, I must speak with him upon
A business of importance. --

A business of importance? oh that word
Redoubleth my affliction; to marry
Fatima, without doubt, is his design:
Oh Heave? have thou ordained that, to make up
The full proportion of my misery,
My dearest friend should rob me of my Mistress?
Alas! if this be true, grief, fure will kill me;
Dear Ormin, let us use our best endeavor
To hinder this misfortune; I expect
My only remedy from thy advise.
The most resplendent wit yeildeth to thine
In point of knowledge, I have observed in thee
Something that's great, and extraordinary;
Thy judgment charms me, and thy care surpriseth me.

Sir, I Am your Slave, and glory to be so.


No, no, I make thee free, henceforth be thou
Thy Masters friend.

The sweetest liberty
Pleases my fancy less then the chains which
I bear for you.

This zeal so little common,
Makes me grow tender, and amazeth me.
Quit, quit thy fetters, Ormin, I commmand it,
Be free.

Since it is your pleasure, I obey;
Alas! what have I said, Love, can I be
At liberty, when my heart is not free?

ENter again, sweet Zaida, ceremony
Between us should be banished, wherefore will you
Trouble your self unnecessarily?

Since you will have it so, I Will go no further.


I may assure my self then ere we part,
That Adibar shall have no free admittance
To your society, I have already
Told you, that formerly he loved me;
But now I know that you give laws to him
And I have cause to hope that, if you scorn him,
He may return unto his first subjection.

Fatima, be assured that he shall be
Repulsed, his love will be but troublesome;
But if you love me, forget not to feign
Some kindness for my brother; I beseech you
For my sake give him cause to hope a little.

Adieu, I promise you that at next meeting
I will receive him better. --

WHat think thou
Of fair Fatima, and of her request?

I think that Adibar is not a person
To be despised.

True, but I am too proud
T'accept a heart that has been conquered
By any other, and would now be mine
Trough an inconstancy, but if I durst
To love --

Why stop you, Madam?


Oh Medina!
I must not speak the rest.

But I divine it;
You are in love, and I have cause to judge
That it is with Almansor, that fair stranger

Who, I in love with him?


Why not, I pray you,
Is that a crime?

Oh do not name that love,
Which is no other but a fair esteem.

There is so little difference between
Esteem and love, that often times we take then
One for the other, and are so deceived.

I cannot but remember that my brother
In his last voyage did conclude my marriage
In Argier, that he who is designed to be
My husband, is here shortly to arrive,
And that my heart ought to reserve it self
Wholly for him. Besides in thy opinion.
Would it not argue a great weakness in me
To love this stranger, though my brothers friend.
Who has not been above a month among u^
And whose desert as yet's unknown unto me

Seeing this Stranger, who is not of the vulgate,
Deserves to be caressed of your brother,
There Is reason to believe that he deserves
To be your Lover, and I cannot conceive
Why your mouth will conceal the flame which is
So clearly for him in your eyes and countenance.
As often as he comes with your brother
To visit you, your looks seem to be fixed
Wholly one him, and at the same time also
I observed often that the stranger eyed you
With the same ardour.

Prithee, speak in earnest,
Did see him to behold me oftentimes?

You ask it me with very much impressement:
I do believe in less time then an howr,
That you have questioned me upon this point
More then a hundred times; your curiosity
Gives me a full assurance that his looks
Displease you not, nor wound your modesty

Alas! can one in justice be offended,
To be beloved?

If his love pleases you, I think his person
Will please you equally.

I consider him
Without interpreter; but perhaps, he loves
Elsewhere, and I may be unpleasing to him.

Madam, although you fain would cover it,
This fond suspicion publishes your flame,
Iealousy always is daughter of love.

would it pleased Heaven, that he were free, and that
He thought me fair, But I see him come forth
Gomella's house, I Will satisfy my self
In sounding of his soul, upon this bank
I will repose my self, and feign to sleep.

What Is your design? I cannot comprehend it.


Withdraw, anon thou't understand it better.


Gomella is expecting his return.
In visit, here I may conveniently
Dream of my new love: Heaven! do I not see
Under that flourishing shade the beauteous subject
Of my sad sufferings? Love in this encounter
Seems to flatter me sufficiently;
It is the lovely Zaida without doubt:
How sweetly, and with what tranquillity
Does that fair one repose, whilst wretched I
Languish with the disease which she procures me?
Surely she cannot hear me now, I may
Speak at this present unto her of love,
And not offend her; but alas! the rigor
Of my sad destiny is great, when I
Presume to speak, I fear that she may hear me.
You that have taught me the true use of sighs,
Dear object of my joy and of my griefs;
Suffer my amorous and silent soul.
T* express its secret passion before you,
And to complain here of a thousand evils
Which you have made me suffer, yet unkrown
Unto your self: and you resplendent sources
Of all my fires, from whence I have derived
Such violent heats, fair charming eyes, the authors
Of my captivity, enjoy the rest,
Which your have taken from me: If I see
The poppies which shut up your lids, be not
Offended that you lose your lights, the Sun
Is subject to the same eclipse, and can
No more then you, dispense himself thereof.

Almansor.


Sure, she dreams.


Oh! rigourous torment!
To burn, to languish, and not dare to speak it,
Alas!

O Heaven! what hear I?


We resent
One and the same heat.

Oh! that it were true!


My modesty, excuse me.


O favorable sleep!


Cruel constraints!
When shall we be content, when shall our plaints
Have end?

In this great ecstasy of joy,
All my respects are vain; to give her thanks.
I Will kiss her fair hands. --

Hold, insolent; whence does proceed this boldness? --


What have I done? --
I came to give you thanks.

For what?


It Is for your goodness.


Now, I know not:
I Am sure I never gave you any matter
For this acknowledgment, who ever will
Consult the appearance of the thing, shall find
That I have much indifference for you;
But though I had less, was it fit to trouble
My rest, in making your acknowledgement?

Excuse my transport, beauteous Shepherdess,
If I had less loved, I had been less guilty;
In this occasion a Wary Lover
Would have expressed little love in showing
Too much respect; and whatsoer my crime be,
It would be pardoned, if you slept still;
But, alas! my good fortune is soon changed,
I find that you awake but to afflict me,
Your eyes in taking unto them again
Their grace and luster, take unto them also
At the same time their usual cruelty.
And that most charming hope which I so little
Enjoyed, vanished with your sleep.

This is
An ill expression of your self, that word
Of hope gives me astonishment, I never
Gave it, nor took it yet from any person.

If I might dare to credit your discourse,
At least you had not an aversion for me,
Nothing would be equal to my good fortune,
You would not find my presence trouble some,
I should be used better, I should be
Esteemed and possibly --

Proceed.


I might be
Beloved.

Beloved! of whom; if you magine
Of me, you are mistaken.

Notwithstanding
You honored me so much to tell me so:
If I may but believe your voice, I have
Place in your heart, you are my witness and
My judge both at one time; oh disavow not
That favorable sentence, that fair Oracle
Proceeding from an adorable mouth,
Those words so full of charms pronounced in sleep,
Which promised me blessings sosoon vanished

I dreamt, Almansor, and you are not ignorant
That a dream oftentimes is a deceiver,
And still a lie.

True, a dream is my glory;
But I have passions which are real truths,
The flame with in mine eyes has appeared to you
Too clear, to be concealed, and the coldness
Which you express unto me, quenches not
My love, altbough it ruineth my hope.

This love comes very late, and really
I Am troubled at it, you know well that I
Am otherwise engaged.

Alas! I cannot
Deny but I have heard say that a Lover
Favored of Heaven is to come shortly here
To take you from mine eyes, I know you love him
Before you see him, therefore I Will not trouble
Your pleasures, nor his joy: how great soever
His happiness be, I do intend to suffer it
Without complaining of you, but withal
I do intend to die. As soon as you
Shall depart hence upon the fatal voyage
Ordained, where your happy marriage
Must be accomplished, Know, at the same time,
That you shall see me in my griefs excess
Depart to go unto the grave, where those
Remains of fire which sparkle in my bosom,
Atter my death shall still yet warm my ashes.
ZAID; Fortune does ow you, Sir, a happier lot
ALM: My good or evil lot depends on you.
All other favors would be troublesome:
Lastly I do adore you, and not fortune.

What expect you from me in the condition
Wherein I am?

Immortal heats and torments;
I still must love without hope to be loved.

Who loves much, may hope to be loved likewise.


What may I hope one day for better usage?


Consult with your fidelity upon it.
ALM: Your soul appears too insensible
To love.
ZAID: A constant Lover may do much;
The first refusal ought not to astonish
Any one that has love enough to give it.

Oh this is plain enough to my glad sense!


The blood strikes up unto my brow; alas!
I Have said too much, and now I blush for shame on it.
ALM: This glorious confession rendereth me
Too happy and content.
ZAID: Dreams sometimes are not
Without effect; but the Sun has already
Finished his career, let us go in
Yet further to discourse upon this matter
I fear that troublesome.

Without too much ambition may I hope
The honor to take you by the fair hand
The one is free, may I presume to kiss it?

I have no need, Sir, of your services.


They may be worth a Strangers, notwithstanding
Your scorn of me.

In thinking to oblige me,
You may displease me, by this odd expression.

The Prophet, who knows how I reverence you,
Knows also how far forth I fear your anger,
And the cares which I take, should well assure you,
That I come here but for to honor you:
May I aside declare a secret to you?
Of some importance?

Nothing is so important
As decency, which in the opinion
Of every one, allows we not the Liberty
To hear the secrets of such as you are.

I desire nothing of you what another
Does not obtain.

His discourse pleases me,
And yours I hate.

You take an unfit time
To tell your secrets, to the indiscreet
Love seldom is propitious; the incivility
Which your pride does express, is an ill mea^s
To gain esteem.

I am not here to take
Lessons from you.

I give them to your equals
To all intents and purposes.

This passion.
Which carries you away, convicteth you,
And does excuse me of the incivility
Wherewith your error charge me; a man
Better instructed, to avoid suspicion,
Would have retired himself out of respect;
You are too gross; but as you are a Stranger,
I ought to bear a little with your ignorance.

You have the faults which you co^demn in him;
This Stranger does oblige me, and you trouble me.

Yet you should take away your hand from him -- to Zaida.


If she should do it, you would be in danger.


In quitting her, you might run to your death.


I respect Zaida, you I do despise.


If by the same respect I were not stopped,
In my revenge, your punishment should soon
Follow your insolence.

These hasty motions
Are sorry passtimes for me; by this violence
I know that neither of you does respect me,
But both offend me.

Do you take
Your hand from me to answer his desires?
My Rival will become too proud at this:
Should you affro^t me wit design to please him?

By what right also am I bound to give
You satisfaction?

Madam, I beseech you,
Use no constraint to your free inclination
In my behalf, I know which of us two
Pleases you best, I yield to him in fortune,
And perhaps too in merit, his discourse
Is acceptable, mine is hateful to you;
Of this truth I cannot be ignorant;
Therefore to the end I may not trouble you,
I will retire me, my respect for you
Is stronger then the jealousy, wherewith
My amourous soul is justly seized now,
And I will force all my resentiments for you,
Yea eve^ to hate my self, if you should hate me.
Let here my happy Rival without trouble
Discourse with you, establish, if you please,
His happiness at the expense of mine;
But take this into your consideration
That Adibar, who quits you with regret,
Though the least loved, is not the least discreet.

Where go you Adibar? come back again.


My absence will oblige you.


No, once more
I say come back again; if you esteem me,
You will return, to take away suspicions
Opposed to my glory, lend me, pray you,
Your hand, and lead me back. --

Oh! I cannot
Suffer this cruel injury.

Almansor,
Stay I command you, on pain of my hate.

Hear me a word or two,


I cannot be moved.
Reason I hear, and duty is my guide.

What unexpected cl^^ (...) thunder's this,
Which ruineth my joy thus with my hope?
Reason I hear, and duty is my guide;
My constancy, at these words gives place
To my despair; and duty is my guide
No, cruel Zaida in following Adibar,
It Is Love that guides you: but what! I may be
Too rash in censuring her so; perhaps
She does enforce herself in quitting me,
And does prefer my Rival here before me,
To take off all suspicion of our love.
She loves, she loves me; oh! what say I, fool?
without doubt she has left me through contempt.
Love, like to fickle Fortune is inconstant,
His Empire, does resemble his who does
Command the sea, where nothing is secure,
To day a calm, to morrow a sad storm,
And every minute, the most fortunate
Upon that element, may fear a change.
Even in the Port, We often suffer Shipwreck:
These are sad truths, whereof I need not doubt:
But what makes my Slave so hastily
T'addresse his steps unto me?

Have thou found
Gomella?

Yes, Sir. and I think that he
Adva^ceth here with large steps to embrace yo^*

It Is that which my care should prevent.


Must I
Withdraw whilst you discourse?

Yes, and be sure
Thou fail not to prepare for me a consort
Of Music.

How a consort, Sir, so late?


Go quickly, and without reply.


Oh! Sir,
How glad am I to see you here again?

My joy in seeing you is no less great:
But speak we of my mother.

Stay her coming;
To morrow without fail she arrives here
Unknown.

Unknown! and why dares she not to be see^*


The secret only you must know from her,


Comes not my Sister?


You must not expect her.


Where is her residence?


I cannot tell you.


How Is this, Gomella, what can I imagine
In the uncertainty wherein you leave me?
I am astonished at this proceeding;
Your obscure language is a clear presage
Of a concealed misfortune: Oh! my Sister
Is dead, I need not doubt it.

Her death is not
The evil which should attrist you.

What, is it then
Happened unto her?

No, but something worse.


That word is not sufficient to clear me:
Shall I not know why I received an order
To depart from Tremissa where I was
Brought up, to come with all speed to these quarters,
T'addresse my self to you with confidence,
To change my true name of Abencerage
Into that of Almansor, and to have
A care not to reveal my family?

Upon this point I must shut up my mouth;
I Am not allowed to say more unto you.
It is you Mothers absolute injunction,
And request to me; have but patience
Until to morrow, when you shall be satisfied
From her own mouth; but the Sun, I perceive
Already grows pale before the Moon.
Enter into my cot, and take with me
A poor repast.

I do desire to be
Dispensed thereof now, if it pleases you.

Where will you go?


Zegry expects me
On my engagement at his house to night.

Zegry, what say you, what charm does oblige you
To answer so ill to Abencerage name,
To that debate, which for a thousand reason
Is, between your two houses, as it were,
Hereditary?

A far juster duty
Inviteth me to love him: but for him,
I Would lost my life in Cairo, treacherous enemies
Encompassed me round, and had he not
Succored me speedily, I had been murdered
His name, which I knew well without discovering
Mine own, disturbed my new born amity;
But his, goodness for me, his cares, his kindnes^
Soon dissipated all those old resentements;
And so in order to the friendship which
Conjoined us, at last we came together
Into this country, where I was obliged
By the same frienship to lodge no where else
But at home with him.
GOM: Oh Heaven! but proceed.

You know his Sister: at first sight of her,
I was her servant: by a powerful charm
Whose art she only knows, her fair eyes paid
But one look for the purchase of my heart;
And if the God of marriage. --

Soft, hold there.
Take heed you flatter not your self with such
A fatal hope, destroy your passions,
Or you destroy your honor.

How, my honor?


Yes, Sir, your honor, what! does this discourse
Surprise and trouble you?

I fear the name
Of an ungrateful person.

Fear that also
Of a low spirited one; these shameful motion
Do wound your duty.

May I not know how?


To morrow, when you see your Mother here,
You shall be satisfied, in the mean time,
Hate both the Sister, and the brother.
ALM: Hate them?
I who have been so much obliged unto them?
No, no, I swear --
GOM: Swear not but let us enter;
Your mind will change, when you have heard th'adventure.

THe night approaches, it is time to put
This letter with my hope into thy hands:
Work on her Slave, and act discreetly, that
She take this diamond from thee, afterward
Use all the skill thou have to know the secrets
Of her disdainful Mistress, and consider
That I expect at thy return to hear
The sentence of my life, or of my death.

Cruel commandment, whereunto I see
My self reduced! --
One word, Sir, ere I go.
Think well upon it yet, what hope have you?
Your importunities will increase her anger,
And you should do much better, If I durst
To tell you so, henceforth to free your self
Of this unworthy Empire; as love is
The price of love, so hate should always be
The recompense of hate, and of contempt.
Your soul's are too ill suited to unite,
Love loses his power in Antipathies,
And it is an equal crime, Sir, in a contrary
Effect, to hate who Loves us, or to love
Who hates us.

Oh! speak no more on 't unto me:
My evill's invincible, and my soul feels
Too sensibly the charms which do destroy me;
To overcome my griefs, which have no equals
I seek some gentle succor, and not counsel,
My chain, alas! is too strong, and my heart
Too weak, as not to yield unto the torrent
which carries me away.

O rigorous Fate! --
But if all your endeavors ate in vain,
If fierce Fatima still persist in her
Former disdains --

what pleasure do thou take
To Increase my troubles? hide her rigours to me
And speak but of her charms: my heart is tried
By torments great enough, it need not be
afflicted with an evil not yet arrived.
flatter my weakness, though therein thou show
Thy self less faithful, if thou do desire
To interest thy self in my misfortunes.

Sir, if your eyes could penetrate into
The secrets of my heart, you would soon find
How great an interest I take in them,
And that if your lot lay within my power.
Your pleasures should soon pass your hope, I call
The Prophet, so much honored amongst us,
To witness, that I feel the counterstroaks
Of all your troubles, that I Am grieved for them
As Much as you, and tremble in like manner,
Lastly that you are dearer to me far
Then you imagine, that my happiness
Depends on the success of your amors,
And that it is for you alone my heart
Makes its devotions.

Grant it gracious Heaven
That thy zeal happily succeed in touching
In my behalf the soul of that ungrateful:
My sister has already been with her,
And I believe she has not failed to speak
To her for me, their friendship flatters me;
And gives me leave to hope that who esteems
The sister, may in time cherish the brother.
Adieu, perform thy duty, and return
With speed to calm the tempests of my spirit.

I will endeavor with permission of
The holy Prophet, to hear such success
As I desire.

WHereto shall I resolve me in this sad
Extremity? shall I solicit now
My Rival against my self in the behalf
Of an ingratfull Master that does wrong me?
And though he appears blind to my disadvantage,
Shall I approve my self so more then he?
What shall I press the effect of what I fear?
Shall I give him content at my sad cost,
By a constraint so cruel? and shall I
Become my self the faithful Minister
Of the injustices which he does do me?
No, no, let us not serve with so much heat
To trouble us yet with a new misfortune,
A person who cost me so many tears:
If I must die, at least let me not give
Arms for to pierce my heart; o'th contrary,
Let me act so, that he may hope for nothing
From fair Fatima, let me without scruple
Betray this false one, and deprive him of
A good which would become so fa'tal to me.
I should ground all the hope that's left unto me
Upon the loss of his. But how is this,
That at these words I tremble with affright?
I find my heart already rises up
Against me in behalf of this false Master.
Alas! how cruel and perfidious
Soer he be, I cannot fail of faith
To wards him, but must love, and serve him truly.
It Is so resolved, my anger must give place
Unto the love that reigns in my bosom:
An ill example never justisies
A crime: let us deliberate no more;
But what is the noise I hear? it is Fatima
That passes, and Charifa follows her.
THis foul contemps which Zaida offers me
Provokes me highly, fo far was this false one
From hindering Adibar to visit her,
(As she engaged herself in promise to me)
That she accepted kindly of his hand,
To disoblige me; it is an injury
Of such a nature as requires reveng.

The affront is known unto your self, you saw it
With your own eyes, and to speak truly Madame,
The injustice is extreme.

Know that my anget
Is so too; let us enter, it is late,
This night shall give us counsel.

I Will go one,
And stay no longer, las! I dare not open
My mouth, nor keep it shut. Love, I beseech thee,
Mingle at least some good in the great mass.
Of my misfortunes, grant that in demanding
All things of her, she grant me nothing for
him. --
Madame, shall I find so much goodness from you
As to allow me the sweet liberty
To leave this letter here in your fair hands?
It comes from a Lover the most passionate
Of all those which the Luster of your eyes.
Has made slaves; and who, not withstanding all
The love where with his soul is seized, has griven you
Some cause of plaint.

Of plaint list Adibar
That writes unto me? Softly to Charifa.

Without doubt it is he,
My heart does tell me so.

What would that false one
Desire of me?

How cruel is this sweetness
To me? --
The end of his desires is to
Appear before you, highly to detest
His insole^t crime, he would express the trouble
Wherewith his soul is pressed, to the Divinity
Justly offended, and receive in making
His fault worthy to be forgot, a pardon.
Or death at your fair feet.

I desire not
His death; but I would have him live and hope;
How late soever his repentance comes,
I love it, and 't is welcome. My heart is
Already pacified by thy discourse.

I have for my misfortune, too well sped. --


Lets see with what, air, in this letter he
Vtters his thought, we will go in to read it,
And to give answer; since he is no longer
Obstinate in his coldness, I will send
His pardon signed and sealed.

How full of joy
Will Zegry be at my return?

What say you?


It Is he that sends me, he will kiss
The words where with you have flattered him.

This is
My answer, go, and carry it unto him. --

THis in equality astonisheth
And puzleth me, -- Charifa!

No, good night.


Hear me, I pray thee.


I take no delight
To talk with fools

Stay yet a little.


I have not the leisure.
Adieu, fair prater!

Be not so ungentle.
My hand shall speak gould, to supply my mouth

I do'nt believe thee.


Believe the event.
From Zegry take this diamond.

To betraye,
And sell my Mistress? God defend, I will not
Receive it.

Be not such a simple creature.


I take it then to please thee, but accept it
Unto a good intent: the stone's not false,
At least I think so:

Thou may be assured on it,
It Is very fair, and perfect.

Pardon me,
My words might seem t'imply a doubt, that I
Suspected thee, but I am innocent.

Will thou not tell me by what fatal error
Thy mistress humor changed so suddenly?
And how it came, that only at the name
Of Zegry her heart presently grew cold,
Although enflamed with my discourse before?

I love thee but too well; and if thou will
Be secret, I Will discover unto thee
This secret of importance, this hid mystery.

Thou will oblige me much, speak, I Am discreet.
And will concea'lt as closely as thy self.

Fatima then loves Adibar as much
As she does hate thy Master; but for her,
Adibar by a pleasant fair return
Has no, less coldness then thy master love.
Thou know that thou art not yet known of her,
And that love oftentimes troubles the brain:
Hence was it, that at first she did believe
That Adibar sent thee to speak to her;
But since she knew her error, she was mad;
I hear a noise, let us speak soft I fear
We should be heard.

THe Devil! where thinks my Master
That I should meet with Ormin? it is night
And I cannot find my way.

Prithee be still.


Let me alone, thy honor is not much
In danger with me.

Foh! my diamond
Is fallen from my singer.

Without doubt
The grass conceals it from our sight.

We may
Seek it a good while ere we find it here.

Yes in this manner, I Will go fetch a light,


Return I Have found it. --


I should know that voice;
It is Charifa, strange! what might she do
So late here in these woods? I will approach
A little nearer. --

Thou but jests with me,
Kiss me no more, if thou do, I Will retire.

A rare piece this! I must hear all.


Yes really,
Promise me to be quiet, or I Will leave thee.
This is a little too much liberty
At first, I am a maid that stands upon
My reputation, and fear evil tongues,
I hold my honor very precious to me.

Thou seek'st to lose it, and invitest him
To take it from thee. --

What thon speak not
A word unto me.

Excellent adventure!


How does thy heart sigh, and thy close mouth murmur?
Those liberties, for all what I have said,
May be excused, if thou will marry me;
Thou know that one must marry, to love well
And if I please thee. --

Oh? what impudence?


What say thou?


I am much surprised, by Heaven.


What! answerest thou nothing? should this be
Through a contempt? I think that I Am not yet
So torn by time, as not to be thought worthy
To be considered; thou know well
Alabez, if I would have had that fellow.
My marriage with him had been already
Concluded, but that is a lowt, and has not
The art to please me as thou have, his faults
Are more considered by me, then his services.

The impudent jeers at me to my face.


That troublesome never did any thing
Which pleased me, he has a sottish spirit,
And silly carriage; if the fool should marry me
I would not pass my word that he should not
Be one of those which every one points at
With finger, which permit their neighbors to
Think their wives fair, and which we commonly
Call cuckoulds.

SEe here, I have brought you light.


What have I done? this is a gross mistake.


What think thou; have not I much cause to be

Well satisfied? I have done nothing then
That ever pleased thee, I Have a sottish spirit
And silly carriage. Thou should die with shame.

Why? prithee? I have utteted but a truth.


But a truth, traitresse, o thou brazen face!
What! If I married thee, thou dangerous beast
I should be of the number of those people
Which we call cuckoulds? thy impertinent tongue
Lied a hundred times, I Would rather choose
A rope then such a bed fellow:

Whence springs
Your quarrel?

Peace a while, I shall in good time
Talk with you, friend, companion of ill luck

We must be gone, there is nothing to be gotten
But blows here by a fool. --

Go see whence comes this noise.

Oh have I met thee, --
precious Apostle?

How base traitor!


Pardon me,
I took thee for another, in good faith:
I sought a ras kal that escaped me,
To whom I did intend that injury
But I shall soon o'r take him without running.

Have learnt the cause of those co^fused rumors?


No, but I have been beaten by a person,
Who afterward made me excuses for it.

The house is not far of, give order to
The voices to advance, and bid them sing
Near to that Little wood.

See, friends, the place
Where Zasda dwells, if you are ready now.
Begin immediately.

YE deserts, and dark cells
Where night and silence dwells
You whom I trust with my sad cares.
This voice belongs not to our company.


This Stanza finished, let us be prepared
To sing forthwith the air which I composed.
Ye deserts and dark cells,
Where night and silence dwells,
You whom I trust with my sad cares,
With all my deaths, and my despairs,
Rocks, forests, and thick Shades,
Which the Sun never invades,
You in whose bosoms I enclose
My love, my sighs, my plaints, and wees:
Alas! when will you be
Keepers of my felicity?

Ye brooks, and Zephirs sweet,
Which here in Springtime meet
To water and perfume these plains
What insole^t voice troubles our confort here.?
Th'affront shall not pass without punishment
Ye Brooks, and Zephirs sweet,
Which here in Springtime meet
To water and perfume these plains
Frequented by the amorous Swains
Favor me not to flow
Oblige me not to blow,
Until my tears their course have spent,
And my sighs given my greess fult vent,
Then in your Channells glide,
And winds breathe, as before, in pride.

Who art thou that dare here to trouble me?


My name is too well known to be conce^l'd.
I Am called Almansor.

Fear, fear then mine anger.
I Am Adibar, thy greatest Enemy
Who to meet thee, have made some weary steps
Unto no purpose; now when least sought (...)
I Have found thee; tell me, how comes it (...)
Take a license to besiege my Mistress
With so much insolence? do visit her,
As friend unto her brother, or as Lover
And servant unto her?

Content thy self
To understand that as the brothers friend,
The Sister does accept my setvices,
And that I reverence her: assure thy self
That if I were so happy as to be
Her Lover, I should be discret enough,
Not to acquaint thee with it.

These refinings,
And juglings which thou usest to defend thee,
Cannot withdraw thee from my just revenge,
Thou shall die. --

Rather fear that my sword here --
Peircing thy heart, quench thy love in thy blood.

FOr bear, and moderate this barbarous fury,
What means this, friends?

Nothing, since we are parted.


Oh, is it you Adibar?


This is not the Song
Which I desire.

Zegry, thou do me wrong.


What cause, dear friend, could animate thee so?
Permit me, I beseech you having parted you,
To reconcile you too at the same time:
I take an interest in your debats:
Let me know therefore what your differnce is.

Zegry in vain you interpose your self
To hinder the proceeding, my revengt
Is just, and your cares but prolong his life
For some few minures. --

Dear Almansor tell me
Whence comes so strong a hate between you two?
Relate the cause on it,

It Is not worth the labor;
This petty difference which troubles thee,
Should be determined ere known.

In vain
Thon do persist to hide this secret from me:
Almansor, I guess at it; sure, some Beauty
Embroils you; I Have heard here two different consorts.
The rest I do divine.

Friend, I confess it;
We both at one time gave our Evering Music
To one and the same Mistress.

May not I
Know her name, Friend?

Heavens how am I put to *t?
Should I tell him that I adore his sister? --

Friend, this reservednes suits not that name,
I did not hide my amors for Fatima
From thee.

He has already promised
His sister; I Am confounded; if I dare
To name her, what will he not say? --

This confused silence should sufficiently
Instruct me that he does adore Fatima,
And dares not tell it me --
What! shall I not
Know then what object has subjected thee?

Her fair name uttered would make us enemies,
Instead of doing thee a courtesy
I should do thee an injur^; adieu;
Dispense me to say more on it.

How is this!
Will thou not go unto my house?

Exouse me,
This night I am engaged by promise to
Lodge at Gomella's.

How! Gomella's, say thou?


Yes, I fear that he stays for me, adieu,
I Have promised him, and I cannot fail my word.

The traitor Loves Fatima: and intends
To marry her: to judge on it otherwise,
Is to abuse my self; yes owing me,
His life, he makes use of it to destroy me;
But he that could save it, can also ruin it;
And his death loudly shall proclaim to all
That the same arm which serves the innocent,
Can punish the ungrateful insolent.

YOu shall not go alone to meet my mother,
I *l follow you, Gomella.

That needs not
Her order does oblige you to expect her
Here at my house.

But nature does impose
A stronger law upon me.

Sir she has not
Understood of your coming yet, your sight
Will be too sudden a surprise, for bear
Till I acquaint her with it.

I expect
No blame in this encounter; If I should
Surprise her, it would be delightfully:

Seeing you will, let us go together then.


I do but what I ought.


I speak my thoughts.


Zegry comes forth his house; before I go,
I must embrace him.

Stay, you may not do it.


Constraint's unjust, as much as it is cruel:
Ought I to fly a friend so dear, so faithful?
Suffer me to speak to him, and I Will follow you
Immediately.

I cannot, for I have an express order
Unto the contrary. --

ORmin, did thou observe how carefully
That traitor shunned me as soon as he saw me?
Did mark how he was troubled at first,
How he advanced, a step or two to Wards me,
And then went back again, how he resigned
The place unto me in confusion,
Pressed with the stings of his ingratitude?

What ever I observed, it can never
Enter into my thought Almansor should
Be guilty of so base and black a crime;
And though in show I find him culpable,
I esteem him incapable to commit
Any base act; he still appeared unto me
A person of much honor, and too jealous
Thereof, so ill t'imploy the life which he
Holds of you: besides I find within me
A certain secret instinct which I
Cannot comprehend, that when I should accuse him,
Forces me to defend him.

Seeing me
To cheris'h that too much beloved Ungrateful,
Thou art accustomed also to caresse him.
I cannot believe, neither that he betrays me,
Nor can I doubt ont, that is my punishment.
And those sweet motions, which I scarce can banish,
Aggravate his offense, instead of lessening it:
Judge then how much I am to be lamented
In this condition, the only good
That rests to me, is to fear nothing more.
Fortune would not afflict me here by halfs;
I lose a Mistress, and a friend together:
Both injure me, and I have so much weakness,
That I cannot hate the Mistress, nor the Friend;
But could thou yesterday learn from Charifa
Why fair Fatima has so much contempt
Within her bosom for me? thou have told me
That Adibar does charm her, but thou have not
Told me from whence her hatred does proceed.

Fatima, if I may believe what has
Been told me, always did abhore you for
Vnfaithfullnes, she has some reason to
Believe you false, and this is that as far
As I can understand, which does oblige her
To be so cruel to you.

False, say thou?
I never was so.

She has understood though,
That a maid called Zelinda, fair enough,
Very young, and of an illustrious family,
And who received sometime many services
From you, being almost on the point to see you
Her husband, and when all things were disposed
And ready for the marriage was foully
For saken by you and despised; it seems
That this example touches, and does teach her
That who can once, can change a thousand times.

Ormin, this change is no inconstancy.


It would be very hard to prove it innocent:


Without doubt this pretended marriage
Made a great noise; but I will tell thee all

What will th'ing ratefull say? --

Before that marriage was concluded which
Was to unite us to Abencerage blood,
And by that means at last to quench the heat
Of an old hatred, fair Fatima was
Already Mistress of my heart; to make me
Take a new chain, Zelinda, who^ they offered me
In my opinion, was not fair enough:
So that I saw her without loving her:
Her feeble Beauty could not shake the fetters
Which tied me, yet I endeavored
To have some kindness for her, but her eyes
Or my heart were not strong enoug to work it;
And if I did her any services,
It was but in design to please my parents:
Fatima there fore is to blame to think
That I am false: since I had never love
For any but for her.

Alas! I need not
Doubt more of his contempt! I was inquisitive
To know too much, and now I do repent it. --

This is a truth, which easily can be ptov'd?
But how comes it my sister, sup so soon?

Brother, have you received the intelligence
Is given me of the death of him which was
Designed for my husband?

Yes, I Have heard it;
It is too true, he died in Argier
O'th spotted fever.

I Am unhappy by it;
But you are near your joy, and may discourse
Of marriage and love.

Oh, Sister, rather
Say that I must no longer now discourse
Of love nor Marriage: say that I must punish
A base and an ungrateful spirit with death
One that has wickedly betrayed my frie^dship:
Fury alone presides now in my soul,
And I must think nor speak of any thing
But of destroying a perfidious wretch.

Who is that traitor? let me know, I pray you,
What signal crime provokes you so highly.

Thou know too well the Author of my injury
His name's Almansor, his love is his crime,

His love! what hear I?


Sister, it is too true.
His insolent love has stirred up mine anger.

He knows that Almansor loves me,
And that is it enrageth him. --

His death,
Is just, add he shall die, base, and ungrateful!

Brother, you should examine without passion
All that which might be of a friend suspected,
And we should never judge of his offense
But with much care and much indulgence: always
Almansor htth appeared too generous
To mingle any foul or unjust thing
In his affections; and he owes you
Too much, to have a thought to wrong a friend
That saved his life.

Sister, thou do oblige me;
Thy arguments with little contradiction
Disarm all my resentments quite; Almansor
Is so dear to me, that how ere he wrongs me,
Thou will do me a couttesie, to stop
My anger.

Perhaps, you have accused him unjustly.


Would that it pleased Heaven I were abused!
But alas! my suspicion is too just,
I Will tell't thee now; he loves

Who?


Fatima:


How! should he love Fatima? really
That crime is black:

The better to assure thee on it, it is best
Thou go to vissit her, I do believe
Thou Wilt understand from her that he adores her,
And that he is false to me.

Tra^itor! Inconstant!
Pernicious Spirit!

But, Sister, Why appear you
So troubled in your eyes and countenance?

The trouble of mine eyes clearly denotes
That my heart feels the evils which your friend does you,
Your friend, what hay I said? that name suits ill
With his condition, if he be your Rival,
He Is not your friend. Go persently to quench
His life and Love, and wash away the crimes
Of his soul in his blood.

No, Sister, no;
We should examine without passion
All that which might be of a friend suspected,
And one should never judge of his offense
But with much care and much indulgence; always
Almansor has appeared too generous,
To mingle any foul, or unjust thing
In his affections; and he owes me
Too much, to have a thought to wrong a friend
That saved his life.

In what an error are you?


If I am in an error, I received it
From you: these were your sentiments, good Sister,
And shall be mine.

Then knew I not his crime;
But now that it is plain, take your revenge,
I will no more restrain you.

Stop me rather;
Condemn my anger, not my amity.
In favor of Almansor I would be
Abused; I will accuse him, but I would
That others should excuse him, I speak of
Revenge, but seek it not, and threaten only
But to the end to have my arm restrained.
His passion, perhaps, may be condemn*d
Unjustly: possibly i^ might be born.
Before our friendship, and, perhaps Fatima
Answers unto it, and that to unite them,
Gomellas orders do invite him here;
If it be so, to free my self from crime,
Sister, it is just I yield Fatima to him:
I Will break my chains, and with a settled heart
Will make the pleasures of my friend mine own.

what strange abuse, what seeret charm thus softens
Your heart in the behalf of an Ungrateful:
He owes his life unto you: ought he not
T'acquit him self to wards you by all possible
Endeavors? if he be our Rival, can you
Without much weakness tamely give him up
Your Mistress? if he be your friend, as you
Esteem him, ought he not to give you up
The object which you love.

Without reply
Go presently to visit fair Fatima:
And fail not fully to inform your self
Of their intelligence. --

YOu astonish me;
I cannot conceive how one can love a man,
And press his death.

Oh! say not that I love
Such an ungrateful and inconstant wretch:
Believe that if I have fires, they are fires
Of rage, and that my heart will never be qui^^
Till this perfidious Lover be a sacrifice
To my just anger.

But you weep, Madam.


True, I weep, Medina:
If that false one should perish, I should die;
I feel that rage and tenderness, hate and love
Triumph by Turns within me: I Am his Enemy
And yet I am his Lover, when my anger
Increases, the other Kinder passion springs:
And though that he be lovely, and has falsely
Betrayed me, I can neither love, nor hate him

Madam, speak softer, you will elce be heard.
Adibar comes to wards us.

I Will not stay.


Zaida, where go you with my heart?


I pray you,
Leave me alone, and do not trouble me,
Adieu.

^eceive my services.


^ have
^o need of them.

^ do beseech you, hear me.


You must excuse me, I have other business.


With a look only, consolate my griefs;
^is you I seek.

And it is you that I fly.


How! treat you such a faithful I over so?


Fatima there will be less cruel to you.


Mock not at her, Fatima is as fair,
Although less proud then you.

What Adibar
Still with this scornful? my revenge is just.
It Is time that it break forth. Zaida, I find you
In such a black and heavy melancholy,
That I lose the design which brought me hither:
Shall I dare speak of dances, revels, feasts,
And of a marriage in the condition
Wherein you are?

What say you, of a marriage?


Since you press me,
You shall know all; know that my Father ha^
Provided one for me.

For you, Fatima?


Yes, Zaida, and she bufimes is well forwar^


In your contents I claim an interest:
I should be glad to know your Lovers name.

He Is an accomplish*d man, noble, and bra^^
And of a charming presence, and rare meri^*
I doubt not but you will approve the choice
My Father has made of him.

How she makes me
Languish to meet death? --
Well, who is the man?

You know him very well;
He made long time his ordinary residence
At home with you; your brother Zegrys frie^^
Have I yet said enough?

Tell me his name too.


Divine you not that he is called Almansor!


I can no more, but faint and die. --


How she
Is chang*d, she feels my pain, and I Am revenged

I have much interest in this event.


This match without doubt cannot choose but please you.


True, I am not of those who through a maxim
Of I know not, what modesty, blush at marriage
As if it were a crime, feign to sigh at it,
And yet in secret are sad at the heart,
If it should not be consummate. I assure you.
Upon this point I not dissemble with you:
I no way hate the Lover that*s designed me,
I prize his love, his services, his merit
At a high rate, and if he loves me much,
He is no less beloved.

It seems then,
He loves you very much.

I cannot express it:
He lives but for me, breaths but for me:
I am the sole original of his good
Or evil fortune when he sees me not,
He is in torments, and when hazard bring me
Unto his sight, again, I have great cause
To fear that he might die with sudden joy;
Lastly if any truth be in his oaths,
All other beauties are contemptible to him.

Oh Heaven! what hear I, where am I? oh traitor!
Ungrateful wretch! --
But could you so soon love him
Before you knew him?

I cannot be blam*d
For this quick love, I saw in him at first
All things that might induce a maid to love
Besides herein I execute the order
My Father does ordain, I willingly
Obey his will; and since he has chosen him
For son in law and for support, I think
That he is worthy of it, and conform
My self unto him.

But what are your thoughts
Of Adibar?

I dare not to pretend
To her passed goodness more.

He deserved not
The honor of my love; he changed first,
And I change at my turn.

He was not always
Unworthy to please you; can you forget him.

Yes, and with much justice, and reason too,
He is to me the most ungrateful person
Upon the earth; his contempt was unjust,
But mine is not so. Let us cease to speak
Of that inconstant Lover; I will pay him
Hatred for hatred, contempt for contempt.
Let us again talk of our marriage,
And let me know if I may have the honor
To see you there,

Excuse me, I Am oppress*d
With a great pain, which is redoubled
Since your discourse, so that I Am rendered
Incapable to be present there, and am
Enforced to quit you at this very instant.

I wait you; suffer me to pay the service
I owe you. --

I am forced through my weakness
To accept your support. --

ZAida feels my discase, but Adibar
Flies me: herein my revenge is complete,
Though my hope be destroyed.

You have lost nothing
By that, Almansor's worth a thousand of him

Judge better of my plaint, what I have said
Is but a fiction; I perceive Medina
And thou are intimate, she could not choose
But tell thee that Almansor's very dear
To the ungrateful Zaida, this I heard
From thy own mouth.

Well.


This devise of mine,
In feigning that Almansor was to marry me,
Is to revenge me of her for admitting,
Contrary to her promise, my false Lover
To address courtship to her, and to punish her
For the evils which she has procured me.

How cunning are you! this deceit is notable.


HOw! quit so soon the object of your heart?


I studied more her rest then my content.


You appear seized with an extreme sadness.

I cannot see that suffer which I love
Without grief.

Zaida sure, repulsed you.


My respect only put me of, and not
Her cruelty,

If she were just, or generous
She would despise a lover that is unsaithfull.

I were to blame, if I should complain of her.


Almansers fortune is more sweet with me.


I Am to well satisfied, to be jealous of it.


You do but flatter you with a vain hope,
Zaida has but disdain, and hate for you.

Her hate and her disdain are ended now;
And our hearts speedily shall be united
By marriage.

But Sir, you may be mistaken
In your account, and hope; do you not know
That Zaida's promised?

Rather you may be
Deceived in this point: perhaps you know not
That he who was to marry her, is dead.

How is he dead?


Yes Madam, and fair Zaida
Propitious at last, will render justice
To my devout affection, and did
Assure me when I took my leave of her
That she would marry me, if I could get
Her brother to consent unto't; adieu;
To obtain this so dear and precious Beauty,
I must address me to her brother, and
Solicit my best friends. --

WHat have I done?
Alas! my fiction has only serv*d
To dispose Zaida to deprive me of
My Lover.

Madam. --


Leave me; in a fate
So sad as this, every thing hurts, destroys,
And makes me desperate.

Will you not hear me?


No, I hear nothing but the fury which
Raigns in my confef'd spirits, grief seiseth me
And anger does transport me.

Madam, comfort you.


Oh that I were dead! cease to comfort me
In such a just despair put me to bed,
Or in my grave there to lie buried.

YOu see the cote where I make my abode.

Sir, if you please, I shall defire to be
Private a while here with my son, and presently
I Am yours.

Oh Madam, oh dear Mother,
In this blessed time shall I obtain the honor
Of your embracements?

Stay, Abencerage,
Know our dishonor first, and show thy self
My son before I embrace thee, I was mother
Of two fair children, when a Ravisher
Stole away both my Daughter, and thy Sister.

Good God! what do you tell me?


That thy Sister
Is ravished.

Name but the Ravisher,
And he is dead.

Come, now embrace me, Son, this saying makes me
Believe that Heaven has given thee me for to
Revenge me.

Let me know his name, I swear
By the holy Prophet, that his blood shall wash
The injury, and that this arm of mine
Shall sacrifice him in stautly unto you.

Thou shall know all, hearken, and let me speak:
Thou art not ignorant of the enmity.
which reigned for many ages twixt the houses
Of The Zegries, and of the Abencerages:
Now thou must know that on the opinion
Conceived that a marriage would put end
To this contention, my daughter was
Designed for wife to Zegry; every thing
Was ready, and the day appointed, when
Through an aversion, or rather through
Contempt, the treacherous Zegry flying our
Alliance, hastily embark'ed himself
For Argser: and to add unto our griefs,
As Soon as this report was spread, my daughter
Was seen no more.

O Heaven! who should be cause
Of this misfortune?

Read this letter here,
It will inform thee fully

YOu, from whom, I received my breath,
Know that a sad fate worse then death
Is hapened to me, all our name
In my loss bear an equal shame:
The false and cruel Zegry is
The Author of my miseries;
For he it it that by his charms
Has taken me out of your arms.
Zelinda.


What have I heard!


Abominable truths.


Zegry her ravisher! oh fatal news!


In this misfortune I had so much judgment
To hide this our dishonor, and her rape:
By the advice of the illustrious.
And wise Gomella, I spread every where
The rumor of her death, and sent thee order
At the same time to depart from Tremissa
And to come here: lastly in Tunis staying
Thy coming, I passed an unknown life
In tears and lamentation: and seeing
The time of thy return to be at hand,
I came here to this fatal residence:
I find thee, and my grief is charmed already,
To see my just rage in thy soul imprinted,
And thy brave arm disposed to take revenge,
And to deprive that wretch of life, who has
Deprived us of honor.

Oh how many
Afflictions seize! my heart!

It Is time to punish,
Not to deplore, in such a fatal fortune
Express thy grief by bloody brave effects
Of rage and courage, vain regrets, and sighs
Suit with my sex, revenge belongs to thee.
Thou know the offender, go repair
Th offense: I would not have reserved for thee
Th Employment, if I could revenge my self
Without thee; and I had already seen
The punishment of Zegry, If I would
Have us*d Gomellas service; thy arm only
Must wash the stam of from tby brow; take all
The revenge to thee, as the affront's all thine:
See me no more until thou have revenged
Thy Sister, Go, seek, find and punish fully
Her barbarous ravisher; adieu, perform
Thy duty, and make thy self to appear
A worthy branch of that ill strions stock
Of Heroes, from whose loins thou art descended;
To end our common miseries and fears,
Go thou to shed blood, I go to shed tears. --

OH heard extremities! oh cruel violence!
Alas! the friend that does oblige me, is
The enemy that wrongs me; I owe then
My safety unto him that robs me of
My honor, and the man that saved the brother
Has ruined the Sister! in this case
What counsel should I take? shall I become
Ungrateful, or be infamous, shall I
Break the bond of a holy amity?
Shall I let forth the blood which preserved mine,
That blood in which love will that I have Interest?
And to say all, the blood of my fair Mistress?
She comes forth, and without doubt aymeth here
Honor will that I fly, but Love restrains me:

HE dares not to advance, his crime intimidates him.
We will pass by the traitor, without speaking
A word.

Dear object of all my affections,
Charm of my Spirits!

Surely, you are mistaken.
You would speak to some other.

Suffer me
To Express my passion unto your fair eyes,
Love, --

You take me without doubt for Fatima.


How for Fatima; this wotd does acquaint me
Confusedly with the unjust suspicion
From whence this chang springs: possibly you have
Believed that I seck to please her, seeing
The league that it between me, and her Father;
But Heaven, and Love my conqueror, be witness,
That your fair Image wholly does possess
My heart, that to remove you thence, Fatima
Is altogether incapable, that I look on
All that is lovely in her without love
And that as sensible only of the darts
Of your rare beauties, I confine my thoughts
And actions to civilities for her.

How do you look upon Fatima then
With an indifference? -- Let me see how far
His impudence will go --

Can you doubt of it? you that have tied all
My senses with such sweet and pressing bonds?
Can you suspect with any justice, Madam
My heart of treachery, my oaths of falls hood,
And believe that my soul has so much blacknes,
As to betray my Mistress, my friend,
And my Deliverer? could you imagine,
Without being deceiv*d, that having once
Beheld you, one could love elsewhere? oh no:
For me to be inflamed with a new fire
You are too charming, and I Am too much charmed.

Too much charmed, monster of perfidiousnes?
Will thou abuse me then after thou have
Betrayed me, and with an unworthy love
Carried away, will thou join impudence
To infidelity?

To insidelity,
What say you, Zaida? this discourse confounds me.

I see it plainly, wretch; were thou less wicked,
Thou would be less confounded; an ungrateful
Still blusheth at reproaches.

An ungrateful?


Does that word trouble thee? and fear thou
The name of an ungrateful person more
Then foul ingratitude it self?

I know not
The cause of this your anger, should I never
So much examine me, I still should find
My conscience innocent.

In thy account then
It Is nothing to deceive a maid, to wrong
Thy friend, to fail thy faith, to love Fatima,
Lastly

I, say you?


Yes, thee


Oh! believe me,
I love her not.

Dare thou to say it yet?
Do thou not love her when thou do adore her?
Thy false equivocations cannot here
Abuse me, I know that thou art to morrow
To marry her.

To matry her! o Heaven, believe it not,
I swear.

No, no, forbear, I believe not
The oaths of one that is perjured, every one,
Knows of this marriage,

Who told it you?


A certain person.


Whosoe'r it be,
That certain person ly'd. Tell me his name,
And my just anger presently shall carry him
The reward of his false intelligence.

Go punish then Fatima, it was she
Her self that told it me.

Oh give less credit,
Ador able Wonder, to such false discourses.

Good God! who ever saw such impudence?


The marriage which she has forged, is
A falsity; bear witness thou dread Master
Of Heaven that this I speak is truth; but if
I lie, let thy hand with a thunderbolt
Strike me unto the center of the earth:
Let my name be forever odious,
If the fire which I feel proceeds not
wholly from your fair eyes, and if my heart
Ever conceived for Fatima any thing
Beyond a weak esteem.

I must sift yet
This brazen face more thoroughly. --
How will thou prove
The truth of thy assertion?

I can produce.
A hundred proofs to disabuse you presently.

I Will have but one, and that too very easy;
To put an end to the suspicions,
Which I ve co^ceiv'd of thee, give me forthwith
Both thy hand and thy faith.

I give it you
With an excess of yoy. -- but what would I,
Give her a hand that must destroy her brother,
And plung it self in his most noble blood? --

What do thou answer me so ill for such
Rare bounties? do thou murmur to thy self,
Grow pale and study, as if thou resent'st ill
What I propose.

Madam, clean contrary
I was raped with th'unexpected honor,
And happiness wherewith I saw me filled,
And the excess of my joy transported me:
I fear through my obedience to betray you,
To make detraction to speak against you,
And to treat Zegry too unciviliy
In giving without his consent my hand
And faith; but this weak fear yields to my flame
Duty prevails not now upon my soul,
And cannot take from me the glorious purpose
Of giving you my heart and hand together.

Thou think on it too late, my mind is changed,
And never shall change again, know that I feigned,
Only to try thee, that excess of goodness,
And thy fires for Fatima presently
Burst forth.

Oh! I had never any for her!


Thy deceit 's plain enough, I Am very well
Assured of this fatal matiage:
When I pressed thee to pass thy faith unto me,
I faw that thy remorses for Fatima
Accused thee, and thy confusion
Confirmed me in my belieft that she
Received the faith which I demanded of thee.

I offer it unto you.


No thou caust not
Dispose of it. Thou have already given it,
And wilt abuse me.

You abuse your self
Wiih too much warines.

Have thou the boldness
To reply yet? Go, go to thy Fatima,
To morrow is your marriage day, I know it.
She has affections for thee, since thou have
Refused me.

Hear me, I do beseech you.


No, no? that were too great a weakness in me:
Know that I leave thee, never too see thee more.
A secret poison's hid in the discourse
Of an Ungrateful person, and each word
Atraitor speaks, destroys worse then the sword.

STrange success, this! How is my soul possessed
Still with new troubles? must I suffer then
The punishment of a fault which I have not
Committed? when revenge does press me to
Destroy a friend, must I at the same time
Destroy a Mistress too? must I lose Zaida?
Yes my heart, I must loose her presently,
Since in depriving her of a dear brother,
My arm will draw her hate and anger on me:
I should hence forth no longer be so soft,
It Is time to think of Zegrys death, he must
Pay his blood to repair the honout which
He robs me of. This Enemy so dear
Must die, and I must sacrifice him to me;
He comes: at his approach some tender motions
Oppose my just resentments, and indeed
Render them weak, my friendship combateth
The anger that possesses me, my tenderness
Is less weak, and my fury is less strong.
He saved my life, he ravished my Sister;
Shall I go to embrace him, or to kill him?

AT last I Have met with him that wro^geth me.
Ormin leave us alone.

I will retire me.
Into this thicket secretly to see
What passes, I doubt there will be a quarrel: --

You appear troubled.


I Have much cause to be so.


What troubles you so much?


A wretch, a Traitor,
Whose crime gives me an infinite regret,
And does deserve more then a single death
To punish it.

May I serve you herem?


Yes, I cannot finish my revenge without thee.


Zegry, you can dispose of all my blood.


It is an offer which I can*t refuse.


Who is the affronter?


Thou art extreme bold:
Know thou not, traitor, that it is thy self?

I?


Thou; never seem to wonder at the thing.
Only defend thy felf.

How much am I.
Indebted to thee for this sudden passion,
It Is now the chief point of thy amity:
Thy anger does oblige me, though it wro^gs me.
I had already in my heart resolu*d
The design of thy death, and justly too:
My arm was ready for it, when inspight
Of all my fury, at thy first approach
My heart grew tender, and had been reduced
To balance the fierce darts which I had levelled
Against thee, if thy furious transport
Had not called home my choler unto me,
And banished my tenderness.

I Will hear
No more discourse, once again guard thy felf

So fierce a fight cannot but be sweet unto me
Honor solicits me more justly to it
Then thee, but let me know at least the cause
That does provoke thee; I will make it plainly
appear that thou complainest wrongfully,
And justify my self in Killing thee.

How! feignst thou to be ignorant, and instead
Of making a confession, do thou threaten me?
Thy base crime grows greater by thy boldness.

Let me at Iast know what that base crime is.


Consult thy conscience, and thou shall know it,
It will instruct thee that with a false heart
In recompense of all my kindness to thee
Thou rob st me of my Mistress, and that
Through treacheries which cannot be excused,
Thou art to marry her to morrow privately.

If I am criminal, assure thy self,
It is not in this point: I never did
Look on Fatima with desires of love;
Only thou may reproach my heart for having
Sight for thy Sister without thy consent.

How! do thou love her?


No, no, it would be
An extreme error, I say, I adore her,
I dare not say I love her. That which I
Resent now for her beauties does surpass
The thing that is called Love.

By this confession,
Dear friend, thou have restored life unto me.
My griefs and troubles now are waited on
By an excess of pleasure; Zaida is
Too happy, and her thoughts could never hope
A more illustrious husband: she is free.
The Lover unto whom I gave my word,
Has seen his destiny determined
By death, and my repose shall fully be
Settled to meet a brother in the person
Of my most dear friend.

What thou offerest me
Should be most dear unto me; but do thou
Know him whom thou mak^st choice of for thy brother?

I think, I do; thy country is Tremissa,
Thy name, Almansor, and thy family
Is noble and illustrious; and if I
May believe thee, thy greatest glory is
To be my friend.

Thou know st me but by half yet;
I was born here, and born thy enemy,
More then one just and honest motive does
Engage me to thy ruin; not to hold thee
Long in suspense, I am Abencerage.

Abencerage.


O Heaven! --


That wotd does tell thee.
Our difference, and my duty.

I as well
Know as thy self the mutual hatred which
In our two houses seems almost as twere
To be immortal; but thy blood which now
Thou owe to my succor, should for me
Stop the course of it in thy soul; and though
My friendship seems to stagger on this point,
I will content my self to hate thy name,
And love thy person. Yes, pursue thy love
Unto my Sister; by a marriage
We may be tied with new knots, and by
That holy flame, the irreligious heat
Of that so old, and fatal enmity,
Will be extinct.

This marriage would be sweet,
But I cannot think of it till by thy death
I have revenged my self upon thee.

How!


It is not that which thou believ'st provoke me,
Thy name I hate not, but I hate thy person,
And I cannot but in thy blood repair
The wrong which ^hou have done me.

I?


Yes, Thou.
How ill thou actest the astonished,
Thy base crime grows greater by thy boldness.

Let me at last know what that base crime is.


Consult this letter, read, and thou sha^ know it.


YOu, from whom I derive my birth,
Know that a sad fate worse then death
Is happened to me; all our name
In my loss bear an equal shame;
The false and cruel Zegry is
The Author of my miseries,
For he it is that by his charms
Has taken me out of your arms.
Zelinda.


Without doubt they will both mistake themselves.


I cannot comprehend this dark Aenigma.


It is too plain to me here that my sister
Zelinda gives us to understand
That thou art her base ravisher.

Can thou
Suspect me of so foul an action?

Can thou deny it, traitor? and can I Believe it?


Hear me but a word or two.


It would be to no purpose, guard thy self,
I Will hear no more.

How! dares the man that ows me
His life, to assault mine?

That obligation
Cannot divert me from my just reveng:
Thou wronght'st my safety, and my sisters rape,
And so much as life is less dear then honor,
So much an affront which reflects upon it,
Carries it in my soul upon a benefit,
And I am less afraid to be ungrateful,
Then to be infamous; but let us leave
Discourse, and come to action.

Stay, Ungrateful,
Stay yet a little.

Help, Oh help;


WHat noife
Is this I hear?

what rumor is raised up?


Hold, hold!


No, no, go on,
My son, finish thy work.

Their quarrel, Adibar,
Cannot be taken up, therefore let us leave it
To be decided.

No, such a third person
As I, shall never suffer them to fight,
And to look on.

Well then, defend your self.
We't fight all four.

Oh! brother rather lift
Your arm up against me, I'in guilty only,
Zegry is innocent,

Whom do I see?


you see Zelinda your unfortunate Daughter,
Who left your family to follow Zegry;
And who in changing fate and habit only,
Could not enforce her soul to the least change:
My heart which was pleased in slavery
By him, forgot it self in following.
Somewhat too constantly this fleeting Lover;
But having known him to be taken with
Another Object. I feared in discovering
My self, to draw upon me his contempt,
And would still suffer the same violence,
If his own interest brake not my silence.

Oh, Daughter!


Oh! my Sister!


Fair Zelinda,
Revenge your self, I mourn you, I accuse
My self, and yield my bosom to your stroke.

Zegry, You need not to fear any thing
From my resentments, if you pity me,
I am not to be pitied

I blush
That after so much goodness as you have
Expressed to me, I have but one soul
Too give you; and if the consent of your
Parents and friends will be propitious to us,
There Is nothing can impede our marriage.

This marriage is the chief of all my wishes.


Friend, thou can make me happy too, thy Sister
Depends on thee, thou know, I adore her.

I offered her unto thee, a while since,
And now I do again with height of joy.

All my suspicions are extinguished,
And you must know that following my duty,
I follow my desires; but Adibar
Will complain of it.

Madam, you are deceiv*d,
When I lose all hope, I lose all my flame:
And to express unto you that I do not
Resent it, I will sacrifice my heart
In flames of love to that fair Saint, for whom
I burned formerly; Gomella. may I
Hope your incomparable Daughter?

Adibar,
My family is honored by your choice.
Fatima, take your husband from my hand.

Such pleasing orders I shall willingly
Obey.

Come, let us go unto the Mosque
Together, to give thanks unto the goodness
Of Heaven that set an end to our misfortunes,
And made appear by this happy success,
That one may be ingrate, yet generous.

THe Prologue promised something for the Play
Under a penalty, I come to pay
What he engaged for, not to beg applause,
But, if we have transgressed the Comic laws,
To suffer punishment; Beauties, to you
First I address me for the Poets due;
He seeks but justice from your Ivorie hands,
As you like or dislike he falls or stands:
Smile on the piece, and no man dares to frown,
Your vote swayes both the Cavaleer and Clown:
Yours are the leading voices, in your looks
We read our fortune better then in books;
Y* are pleased, for Heaven's displaid in smiles, so thi^*
I need say nothing to you,, Gentlemen.
Page the 8. last Line, for comet, read comes. Page the 13. Line the 2. for
follow, read fellow. Page the 21 Line the 7. for unworthly. read unworthyly.
Page the 24. Line the 11th, for querched, read quenched. Page the 29. Line the
8. for trough read through. Page the 39. Line the 16. for wit read with. Page
the 74 Line the 6. for she, read the


